NANO-BIOSORBENTS FOR
DECONTAMINATION OF WATER, AIR,
AND SOIL POLLUTIONThis page intentionally left blankNANO-BIOSORBENTS FOR
DECONTAMINATION OF WATER, AIR,
AND SOIL POLLUTION
Edited by
ADIL DENIZLI
Professor, Hacettepe University, Department of Chemistry, Ankara, Turkey
NISAR ALI
Professor, School of Chemistry Chemical Engineering, at Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, China
MUHAMMAD BILAL
School of Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, China
ADNAN KHAN
Professor, Institute of Chemical Sciences, at the University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan
TUAN ANH NGUYEN
Principal Research Scientist, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Viet NamElsevier
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, Netherlands
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, United Kingdom
50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our
understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become
necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using
any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods
they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a
professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability
for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or
from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-323-90912-9
For information on all Elsevier publications
visit our website at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals
Publisher: Matthew Deans
Acquisitions Editor: Edward Payne
Editorial Project Manager: Rafael G. Trombaco
Production Project Manager: Prem Kumar Kaliamoorthi
Cover Designer: Matthew Limbert
Typeset by STRAIVE, IndiaDedication
This book has been prepared during the second year of the Covid-19 pandemic with many
efforts and contributions from authors across the globe.
During the writing stage, many authors/editors were in lockdown or infected by
SARS-CoV-2.
The book is dedicated to those authors we have lost to coronavirus.This page intentionally left blankContents
Contributors xiii
I
Basics principles
1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant
removal: An introduction
Duygu C¸ imen, Ilgım G€okt€urk, Merve C¸ alı¸sır, Fatma Yılmaz, and
Adil Denizli
1.1 Introduction 3
1.2 Nanobiopolymers 4
1.3 Nanobiopolymer fabrication techniques 8
1.4 Environmental applications of
nanobiopolymers 18
1.5 Conclusion 19
1.6 Future outlook 20
References 21
2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
Adnan Khan, Sumeet Malik, Nisar Ali, Yong Yang,
Mohammed Salim Akhter, and Muhammad Bilal
2.1 Introduction 29
2.2 Concept of biosorption 31
2.3 Incorporation of nanotechnology with
biosorption 32
2.4 Green approach for contaminants removal using
nano-biosorbents 34
2.5 Conclusion 38
References 38
3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles,
synthesis, and application for contaminants
removal
Adnan Khan, Sumeet Malik, Nisar Ali, Muhammad Bilal, Yong Yang,
Mohammed Salim Akhter, Cao Zhou, Ye Wenjie, and
Hafiz M.N. Iqbal
3.1 Introduction 45
3.2 Fundamentals of nanobiosorption 46
3.3 General preparation of nanobiosorbents 47
3.4 Common natural biopolymers based
nanobiosorbents 49
3.5 Applications of nanobiosorbents in contaminants
removal 52
3.6 Conclusion 52
Acknowledgment 54
Conflict of interests 54
References 54
4. Methods for the synthesis of nano￾biosorbents for the contaminant removal
Harshal Dabhane, Swati Chatur, Suresh Ghotekar,
Dnyaneshwar Sanap, Ghanshyam Jadhav, Muhammad Bilal, and
Vijay Medhane
4.1 Introduction 61
4.2 Types of nano-biosorbents 62
4.3 Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents and
their applications 63
4.4 Conclusion 71
References 71
5. An insight into the potential
contaminants, their effects, and removal
means
Fatma Gurbuz and Mehmet Odabas¸ı
5.1 Contaminants of concern 75
5.2 Understanding the major contaminants and
sources 76
5.3 Metals, metalloids, organometals 78
5.4 Contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) 80
5.5 Removal of emerging contaminants 85
5.6 Conclusion 95
Acknowledgments 95
References 96
vii6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents,
biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for
contaminant removal
Bahareh Kamyab Moghadas, Hossein Esmaeili, Sajad Tamjidi, and
Alipasha Geramifard
6.1 Introduction 105
6.2 Types of contaminants 106
6.3 Different methods for wastewater
treatment 110
6.4 Biosorption 113
6.5 Factors affecting the biosorption process 114
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in
wastewater treatment 116
6.7 Conclusion 129
References 129
7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy
metals from wastewater
Fahmeeda Kausar, Ahmad Reza Bagheri, Tahir Rasheed,
Muhammad Bilal, Komal Rizwan, Tuan Anh Nguyen, and
Hafiz M.N. Iqbal
7.1 Introduction 135
7.2 Pollution sources and treatment
strategies 137
7.3 Metal based-nanomaterials 139
7.4 Metal oxide-based nanomaterials 140
7.5 Biochar-supported NMs 146
7.6 Biochar-supported nanoparticles heavy metals
treatment 149
7.7 Heavy metals elimination via
adsorption 150
7.8 Heavy metals removal through
photocatalysis 151
7.9 Photo-Fenton and Fenton reactions 152
7.10 Conclusions and future perspectives 153
References 154
8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals
removal
Tahir Rasheed, Fahmeeda Kausar, Sameera Shafi, and
Muhammad Bilal
8.1 Introduction 163
8.2 Inorganic NMs 165
8.3 Polymer-organic NMs 175
8.4 Polymer-supported organic NCs 176
8.5 Conclusions and perspectives 178
References 178
9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents as
a positive approach toward green
environment
Sabir Khan, Shakeel Zeb, Jaime Vega-Chaco´n, Sergio Espinoza Torres,
Sandra Quispe Martı´nez, Rosario Lo´pez, Ily Marilu´ Maza Mejı´a,
Christian Ronald Jacinto Herna´ndez, Javier Lobaton Vila,
Eduardo Jara Cornejo, Charles Pizan Aquino, Bianca Mortari,
Luis Fernando Tavares Borges, Gerson A. Ruiz-Co´rdova,
Fredy Lucho Rondinel Carhuas, Maria Del Pilar Taboada Sotomayor,
and Gino Picasso
9.1 Introduction 187
9.2 Nano-biosorbents surface modification for
environmental remediation 189
9.3 Magnetic nanoparticles immobilized as
nano-biosorbent 197
9.4 Application in heavy metal removal 201
9.5 Application emerging contaminant 206
9.6 Application classic contaminant 211
9.7 Advantages of nano-engineered adsorbent and
future prospects 216
References 217
10. Nanoadsorbents for environmental
remediation of polluting agents
Katya M. Aguilar-Perez, Gustavo Ruiz-Pulido, Dora I. Medina,
Roberto Parra-Saldivar, Nadia Nazish, Muhammad Bilal, and
Hafiz M.N. Iqbal
10.1 Introduction 227
10.2 Nanoadsorbents and their useful aspects 228
10.3 Carbon-based nanoadsorbents 228
10.4 Nanoparticles-based nanoadsorbent
materials 232
10.5 Concluding remarks and outlook 235
Acknowledgments 235
Conflicts of interest 236
References 236
II
Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for
decontamination of environmental
matrices
11. Risk assessment of nanocellulose
exposure
Minashree Kumari
11.1 Introduction 243
11.2 Risk assessment framework 244
viii Contents11.3 Guidelines and regulations 248
11.4 Conclusions and implications of the study 248
References 249
12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents:
An insight
Ilgım G€okt€urk, Duygu C¸ imen, Merve Asena Ozbek, €
Fatma Yılmaz, and Adil Denizli
12.1 Introduction 251
12.2 Nanocellulose and its sources 254
12.3 Types of nanocellulose 256
12.4 Environmental and agricultural applications of
nanocellulose 259
12.5 Conclusion and future outlook 265
References 267
13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose￾based nanobiosorbents
Anindita De, Mridula Guin, and N.B. Singh
13.1 Introduction 275
13.2 Nanocellulose 276
13.3 Isolation of nanocellulose from various
sources 278
13.4 Properties of nanocellulose 283
13.5 Characterization of nanocellulose 288
13.6 Surface modification of nanocellulose 289
13.7 Nanocellulose-based nanocomposites 293
13.8 Bacterial nanocellulose 293
13.9 Properties of BNC 294
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 295
13.11 Challenges and future perspectives 310
13.12 Conclusions 311
References 311
14. Introduction to cellulose-based
nanobiosorbents
Cassamo Ussemane Mussagy and Agnes Magri
14.1 Contextualization 317
14.2 Classification and preparation of CN
structures 318
14.3 Adsorption/desorption process 321
14.4 Final remarks and future perspectives 327
References 327
15. Cellulose composites as
nanobiosorbents for ecological
remediation
Zari Fallah, Ehsan Nazarzadeh Zare, Mahmood Tajbakhsh,
and Vinod V.T. Padil
15.1 Introduction 333
15.2 Ecological remediation by cellulose
nanocomposites 334
15.3 Conclusion 352
References 353
16. Modification and derivatization
of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents and
their utilization in environmental
remediation
Sajjad Ullah, Elias Paiva Ferreira-Neto, Saima Sohni,
Akbar Ali, and Rashida Parveen
16.1 Cellulose-based nanomaterials as
biosorbents 359
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based
materials 364
16.3 Inorganic nanostructures modified
cellulose: Improved multifunctional
adsorbents 379
16.4 Adsorbents with photocatalytic/antibacterial
functions 384
16.5 Conclusions 387
References 387
17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents
in water purification
Oluwaseun J. Ajala, A. Khadir, Joshua O. Ighalo,
and Great C. Umenweke
17.1 Introduction 395
17.2 Cellulose and its application 396
17.3 Cellulose-based composites for the
removal of dyes 399
17.4 Cellulose-based composites for the
removal of heavy metals 402
17.5 Cellulose-based composites for the
removal of pharmaceuticals 404
17.6 Conclusion 410
References 410
Contents ixIII
Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for
deterioration of environmental
matrices
18. Toxic metals adsorption from water
using chitosan nanoderivatives
F.J. Alguacil and J.I. Robla
18.1 Introduction 419
18.2 Arsenic 420
18.3 Cadmium 423
18.4 Chromium 427
18.5 Mercury 428
18.6 Lead 429
18.7 Conclusions 432
Acknowledgments 433
References 433
19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive
removal of triclosan from water bodies
using chitosan and carbon-based
nano-architectures
Tahir Rasheed, Muhammad Bilal, and Hafiz M.N. Iqbal
19.1 Introduction 437
19.2 Occurrence, persistence, and ecological
impacts of triclosan 438
19.3 Toxicity and ecological effects of TCS 439
19.4 Treatment technologies for removing TCS 442
19.5 Removal of TCS by adsorption techniques 443
19.6 Conclusions and perspectives 448
Acknowledgment 448
Conflict of interest 448
References 449
IV
Multifarious biopolymers as
nanobiosorbents for
decontamination of environmental
matrices
20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste
for wastewater treatment
Vesna Krstic, Tamara Urosˇevic, Marina Ud¯ilanovic, Andrija Ciri  c,
and Snezˇana Milic
20.1 Introduction 455
20.2 Characteristics of citrus peel waste 456
20.3 Conversion of citrus fruit waste to activated
carbon 459
20.4 Electrochemical properties of active carbon
materials based on citrus fruits 467
20.5 Regeneration of active carbon material 469
20.6 Discussions 471
20.7 Conclusion and future perspectives 473
Acknowledgments 474
References 474
21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for
bioremediation of environmental pollutants
Komal Rizwan, Tahir Rasheed, and Muhammad Bilal
21.1 Introduction 479
21.2 Synthesis of alginate-based composites 480
21.3 Role of alginate-based composites for removal
of heavy metals 483
21.4 Role of alginate-based composites for removal
of dyes 485
21.5 Removal of radionuclides 492
21.6 Removal of pharmaceutical
contaminants 494
21.7 Conclusion and future perspectives 496
Acknowledgment 496
References 496
22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for
the effective removal of Pb2+ and Zn2+
ions—Adsorption, equilibrium, modeling,
and optimization studies
B. Uma Maheswari, V.M. Sivakumar, and M. Thirumarimurugan
22.1 Introduction 504
22.2 Materials and methods 505
22.3 Results and discussion 508
22.4 Conclusion 526
Acknowledgment 526
References 526
23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder:
Synthesis, characterization and emerging
applications
Bhagaban Kisan, Ranjan K. Bhuyan, and Ranjan K. Mohapatra
23.1 Introduction 529
23.2 Methods for synthesis and characterization of
NiO powder 530
23.3 Structures and properties of nanocrystalline
NiO powders 532
23.4 Emerging applications 543
23.5 Summary 546
x ContentsAcknowledgment 547
Conflict of interest 547
References 547
24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation
methods and performance of novel magnetic
biochars for water and wastewater treatment
Yasmin Vieira, Eder C. Lima, and Guilherme L. Dotto
24.1 Introduction 551
24.2 Synthesis and preparation methods 553
24.3 Magnetic properties 555
24.4 Adsorption applications 555
24.5 Conclusion 565
Acknowledgments 565
References 566
25. Biomass-derived
nanocomposites: A critical evaluation
of their performance toward the
capture of inorganic pollutants
Konstantinos Simeonidis, Evgenios Kokkinos, Efthimia Kaprara, and
Anastasios Zouboulis
25.1 Introduction 569
25.2 Biomass-derived adsorbents 570
25.3 Synthesis of nanocomposites 575
25.4 Active phases 579
25.5 Adsorbents for aqueous pollutants 582
25.6 Adsorbents for pollutants in gaseous
forms 590
25.7 Adsorbents for soil remediation 596
25.8 Conclusions-perspectives 598
Acknowledgments 600
References 600
26. Magnetic nanomaterials-based
biosorbents
Suresh Ghotekar, H.C. Ananda Murthy, Arpita Roy,
Muhammad Bilal, and Rajeshwari Oza
26.1 Introduction 605
26.2 Fabrication of efficient magnetic
nanomaterial biosorbents 606
26.3 Surface modification of the selective
magnetic nanoparticles 608
26.4 Applications 608
26.5 Determined the cost of MB 610
26.6 Discard and exploitation of MBs from
wastewater 610
26.7 Conclusion 611
References 611
Index 615
Contents xiThis page intentionally left blankContributors
Katya M. Aguilar-Perez Tecnologico de
Monterrey, School of Engineering and
Sciences, Atizapan de Zaragoza, Mexico
Oluwaseun J. Ajala Department of Industrial
Chemistry, University of Ilorin, Ilorin;
Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry,
Ladoke Akintola University of Technology
Ogbomoso, Ogbomoso, Nigeria
Mohammed Salim Akhter Department of
Chemistry, College of Science, University of
Bahrain, Zallaq, Bahrain
F.J. Alguacil National Center for Metallurgical
Research (CSIC), Madrid, Spain
Akbar Ali Government College University
Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Nisar Ali Key Laboratory of Regional Resource
Exploitation and Medicinal Research, Faculty
of Chemical Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of
Technology, Huaian, Jiangsu Province, China
Charles Pizan Aquino Laboratory of Physical
Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences,
National University of Engineering, Lima, Peru
Ahmad Reza Bagheri Department of
Chemistry, Yasouj University, Yasouj, Iran
Ranjan K. Bhuyan P.G. Department of Physics,
Government (Autonomous) College, Angul,
Odisha, India
Muhammad Bilal School of Life Science and
Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of
Technology, Huaian, China
Luis Fernando Tavares Borges Institute of
Chemistry, UNESP-Sa˜o Paulo State
University; National Institute for Alternative
Technologies of Detection, Toxicological
Evaluation & Removal of Micropollutants and
Radioactives (INCT-DATREM), Araraquara,
SP, Brazil
Merve C¸ alıs¸ır Department of Chemistry,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
Fredy Lucho Rondinel Carhuas Laboratory of
Physical Chemistry Research, Faculty of
Sciences, National University of Engineering,
Lima, Peru
Swati Chatur Department of Chemistry, G.M.D
Arts, B.W Commerce and Science College,
Savitribai Phule Pune University, Nashik,
Maharashtra, India
Duygu C¸ imen Department of Chemistry,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
Andrija Ciri  c Faculty of Science, Chemistry
Department, University of Kragujevac,
Kragujevac, Serbia
Eduardo Jara Cornejo Laboratory of Physical
Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences,
National University of Engineering, Lima, Peru
Harshal Dabhane Department of Chemistry, G.
M.D Arts, B.W Commerce and Science College;
Department of Chemistry, K.R.T. Arts, B.H.
Commerce and A.M. Science College,
Savitribai Phule Pune University, Nashik,
Maharashtra, India
Anindita De Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Sharda University, Greater
Noida, India
Adil Denizli Department of Chemistry,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
Guilherme L. Dotto Department of Chemical
Engineering, Federal University of
Santa Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil
Hossein Esmaeili Department of Chemical
Engineering, Bushehr Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Bushehr, Iran
Zari Fallah Faculty of Chemistry, University of
Mazandaran, Babolsar, Iran
xiiiElias Paiva Ferreira-Neto Institute of Chemistry￾Sa~o Paulo State University (UNESP),
Araraquara, Brazil
Alipasha Geramifard Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Shiraz Branch,
Islamic Azad University, Shiraz, Iran
Suresh Ghotekar Department of Chemistry,
Smt. Devkiba Mohansinhji Chauhan College
of Commerce and Science, University of
Mumbai, Silvassa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
(UT), India
Ilgım Gokt € urk € Department of Chemistry,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
Mridula Guin Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Sharda University, Greater
Noida, India
Fatma Gurbuz Department of Environmental
Engineering, University of Aksaray, Aksaray,
Turkey
Christian Ronald JacintoHerna´ndez Laboratory
of Physical Chemistry Research, Faculty of
Sciences, National University of Engineering,
Lima, Peru
Joshua O. Ighalo Department of Chemical
Engineering, University of Ilorin, Ilorin;
Department of Chemical Engineering,
Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka, Nigeria
Hafiz M.N. Iqbal Tecnologico de Monterrey,
School of Engineering and Sciences,
Monterrey, Mexico
Ghanshyam Jadhav Department of Chemistry,
K.R.T. Arts, B.H. Commerce and A.M. Science
College, Savitribai Phule Pune University,
Nashik, Maharashtra, India
Efthimia Kaprara Department of Chemical
Engineering, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
Fahmeeda Kausar School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China
A. Khadir Young Researcher and Elite Club,
Yadegar-e-Imam Khomeini (RAH) Shahre
Rey Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran
Adnan Khan Institute of Chemical Sciences,
University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan
Sabir Khan Laboratory of Physical Chemistry
Research, Faculty of Sciences, National
University of Engineering, Lima, Peru;
Institute of Chemistry, UNESP-Sa˜o Paulo
State University, Araraquara, SP, Brazil
Bhagaban Kisan Post Graduate Department of
Physics, Utkal University, Bhubaneswar,
Odisha, India
Evgenios Kokkinos Department of Chemistry,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece
Vesna Krstic Mining and Metallurgy Institute
Bor; University of Belgrade, Technical Faculty
Bor, Bor, Serbia
Minashree Kumari Department of Civil
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Delhi, Hauz Khas, Delhi, India
Eder C. Lima Institute of Chemistry, Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS),
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
Rosario Lo´pez Laboratory of Physical
Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences,
National University of Engineering, Lima, Peru
Agnes Magri Fundac¸ao Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz￾Ceara, Eusebio, Brazil
Sumeet Malik Institute of Chemical Sciences,
University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan
Sandra QuispeMartı´nez Laboratory of Physical
Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences,
National University of Engineering, Lima, Peru
Vijay Medhane Department of Chemistry, K.R.
T. Arts, B.H. Commerce and A.M. Science
College, Savitribai Phule Pune University,
Nashik, Maharashtra, India
Dora I. Medina Tecnologico de Monterrey,
School of Engineering and Sciences,
Atizapan de Zaragoza, Mexico
Ily Marilu´ Maza Mejı´a Laboratory of Physical
Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences,
National University of Engineering, Lima, Peru
xiv ContributorsSnezˇana Milic University of Belgrade,
Technical Faculty Bor, Bor, Serbia
Bahareh Kamyab Moghadas Department of
Chemical Engineering, Shiraz Branch, Islamic
Azad University, Shiraz, Iran
Ranjan K.Mohapatra Department of Chemistry,
Government College of Engineering, Keonjhar,
Odisha, India
Bianca Mortari Institute of Chemistry,
UNESP-Sa˜o Paulo State University; National
Institute for Alternative Technologies of
Detection, Toxicological Evaluation &
Removal of Micropollutants and Radioactives
(INCT-DATREM), Araraquara, SP, Brazil
H.C. Ananda Murthy Department of Applied
Chemistry, School of Applied Natural
Sciences, Adama Science and Technology
University, Adama, Ethiopia
Cassamo Ussemane Mussagy Department of
Engineering of Bioprocesses and
Biotechnology, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sa˜o Paulo State University (UNESP),
Araraquara, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil
Nadia Nazish Department of Zoology,
University of Sialkot, Sialkot, Pakistan
Tuan Anh Nguyen Institute for Tropical
Technology, Vietnam Academy of Science
and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam
Mehmet Odabas¸ı Department of Chemistry,
Faculty of Science, Aksaray University,
Aksaray, Turkey
Rajeshwari Oza Department of Chemistry, S.N.
Arts, D.J.M. Commerce and B.N.S. Science
College, Savitribai Phule Pune University,
Sangamner, Maharashtra, India
Merve Asena Ozbek € Department of Chemistry,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
Vinod V.T. Padil Institute for Nanomaterials,
Advanced Technologies and Innovation
(CXI), Technical University of Liberec (TUL),
Liberec, Czech Republic
Roberto Parra-Saldivar Tecnologico de
Monterrey, School of Engineering and
Sciences, Monterrey, Mexico
Rashida Parveen Government Girls Degree
College Dabgari, Peshawar, Pakistan
Gino Picasso Laboratory of Physical Chemistry
Research, Faculty of Sciences, National
University of Engineering, Lima, Peru
Tahir Rasheed Interdisciplinary Research
Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd
University of Petroleum and Minerals
(KFUPM), Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
Komal Rizwan Department of Chemistry,
University of Sahiwal, Sahiwal, Pakistan
J.I. Robla National Center for Metallurgical
Research (CSIC), Madrid, Spain
Arpita Roy Department of Biotechnology,
School of Engineering & Technology, Sharda
University, Greater Noida, India
Gerson A. Ruiz-Co´rdova Laboratory of
Physical Chemistry Research, Faculty of
Sciences, National University of Engineering,
Lima, Peru
Gustavo Ruiz-Pulido Tecnologico de
Monterrey, School of Engineering and
Sciences, Atizapan de Zaragoza, Mexico
Dnyaneshwar Sanap Department of
Chemistry, G.M.D Arts, B.W Commerce and
Science College, Savitribai Phule Pune
University, Nashik, Maharashtra, India
Sameera Shafi Institute of Chemistry, The
Islamia University of Bahawalpur,
Bahawalpur, Pakistan
Konstantinos Simeonidis Department of
Chemical Engineering, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
N.B. Singh Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry; Research Development Cell,
Sharda University, Greater Noida, India
V.M. Sivakumar Department of Chemical
Engineering, Coimbatore Institute of
Technology, Coimbatore, India
Saima Sohni Institute of Chemical Sciences,
University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan
Maria Del Pilar Taboada Sotomayor Institute of
Chemistry, UNESP-Sa˜o Paulo State University;
National Institute for Alternative Technologies
of Detection, Toxicological Evaluation &
Removal of Micropollutants and Radioactives
(INCT-DATREM), Araraquara, SP, Brazil
Contributors xvMahmood Tajbakhsh Faculty of Chemistry,
University of Mazandaran, Babolsar, Iran
Sajad Tamjidi Department of Chemical
Engineering, Shiraz Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Shiraz, Iran
M. Thirumarimurugan Department of
Chemical Engineering, Coimbatore Institute
of Technology, Coimbatore, India
Sergio Espinoza Torres Laboratory of Physical
Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences,
National University of Engineering, Lima,
Peru
Marina Uđilanovic Faculty of Science,
Chemistry Department, University of
Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia
Sajjad Ullah Institute of Chemical Sciences,
University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan
B. Uma Maheswari Department of Chemical
Engineering, Coimbatore Institute of
Technology, Coimbatore, India
Great C. Umenweke Department of Chemistry,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United
States
Tamara Urosˇevic Mining and Metallurgy
Institute Bor, Bor, Serbia
Jaime Vega-Chaco´n Laboratory of Physical
Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences,
National University of Engineering, Lima,
Peru
Yasmin Vieira Graduate Program of Chemistry,
Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM),
Santa Maria, RS, Brazil
Javier Lobaton Vila Institute of Chemistry,
UNESP-Sa˜o Paulo State University; National
Institute for Alternative Technologies of
Detection, Toxicological Evaluation &
Removal of Micropollutants and Radioactives
(INCT-DATREM), Araraquara, SP, Brazil
Ye Wenjie Key Laboratory of Regional Resource
Exploitation and Medicinal Research, Faculty
of Chemical Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of
Technology, Huaian, Jiangsu Province, China
Yong Yang Key Laboratory of Regional
Resource Exploitation and Medicinal
Research, Faculty of Chemical Engineering,
Huaiyin Institute of Technology,
Huaian, Jiangsu Province, China
Fatma Yılmaz Vocational School of Gerede,
Department of Chemistry Technology, Bolu
Abant Izzet Baysal University, Bolu, Turkey
Ehsan Nazarzadeh Zare School of Chemistry,
Damghan University, Damghan, Iran
Shakeel Zeb Institute of Chemistry, UNESP-Sa˜o
Paulo State University; National Institute for
Alternative Technologies of Detection,
Toxicological Evaluation & Removal of
Micropollutants and Radioactives (INCT￾DATREM), Araraquara, SP, Brazil
Cao Zhou Key Laboratory of Regional Resource
Exploitation and Medicinal Research, Faculty
of Chemical Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of
Technology, Huaian, Jiangsu Province, China
Anastasios Zouboulis Department of
Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
xvi ContributorsPART I
Basics principlesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
1
Nano-biosorbents for contaminant
removal: An introduction
Duygu C¸ imena
, Ilgım Gokt € urk € a
, Merve C¸ alı¸sır
a
,
Fatma Yılmazb
, and Adil Denizlia
a
Department of Chemistry, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey b
Vocational School of Gerede,
Department of Chemistry Technology, Bolu Abant Izzet Baysal University, Bolu, Turkey
1.1 Introduction
Nanotechnology focuses on the production of nanoscale materials for commercial use to
obtain new structural and functional materials (Whitesides, 2005). One of the nanoscale ma￾terials used in many fields is nanobiopolymers. Nanobiopolymers, one of the nanoscale ma￾terials used in many fields, have attracted great attention in recent years due to their
biodegradability, sustainability and biocompatibility (Yang et al., 2019). Nanobiopolymers
such as nanochitin, nanostarch, nanocellulose, and nanosilk are produced from renewable
sources and living organisms. In addition, they are sustainable natural nanoscale materials
with their structural features, biocompatibility, non-toxicity, abundant availability, and easy
of modification (Hassan et al., 2019; Sahana and Rekha, 2018).
The most abundant, biodegradable and renewable natural polymer in the world is cellu￾lose. Recently, cellulose in a nanoscale form (i.e., nanobiocellulose) has been recognized as a
reliable green substrate for use in a wide variety of applications. Because nanobiocellulose
contains many hydroxyl groups, it is an important nanobiopolymer of choice for surface mod￾ifications. Moreover, besides being a renewable and good mechanical property and being a
low-cost material, nanobiocellulose has very low toxicity, biodegradability, biocompatibility,
and antimicrobial effects (Nascimento et al., 2016; Prasad Reddy and Rhim, 2014).
Nanochitin, one of the bio-based nanomaterials, has recently been of great interest due to
its similar properties to the structure of nanocellulose (Facchine et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2016).
Nanochitins are preferred to reduce adverse environmental impacts such as dependence on
fossil fuels and the use of reagents/hard solvents to increase the use of bio-based components.
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 3 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00001-0In addition, these materials have advantages due to tunable surface chemistry and morphol￾ogy that they can be used in many different applications. Therefore, it is frequently used in
medical uses, water treatment, emulsion stabilization, and many other fields (Bai et al., 2018;
Salaberria et al., 2014; Zeng et al., 2011).
In many recent studies, it is becoming widespread to investigate the biomedical properties
of silk at the nanoscale (Keten and Buehler, 2010; Melke et al., 2016). Nanosilk is a natural
glycoprotein polymer produced from spider and silkworm and is suitable for use in many
areas with its high biocompatibility, non-toxicity, and easy degradation. Silk-based
nanomaterials (nanoparticles, nanofibers, nanocomposites) are used in a variety of applica￾tions (Kundu et al., 2013; Vepari and Kaplan, 2007). In addition to all these, microbial
nanobiopolymers have begun to attract the attention of scientists as an interesting alternative.
Among biocompatible nanobiopolymers, starch is used as suitable biological supports for the
development of green and heterogeneous catalysts with its low cost, efficient selectivity,
structure diversity, high reactivity, non-toxicity, and environmentally friendly nature
(Shaabani et al., 2008; Zarnegar et al., 2019).
In addition, as a natural and renewable polymer, starch is used for catalytic processes in
chemical synthesis. These natural nanobiopolymers are often used for the biomedical fields,
food industry, water treatment agent, composite filler, and catalytic nano-systems (Chen
et al., 2015; Safari and Sadeghi, 2017). Nanobiopolymers are generally produced from forestry
and agricultural products such as silk, coconut, wood, cotton, and crab/shrimp shell (Moon
et al., 2011). Nanobiopolymers are biodegradable compared to petroleum-based polymers
and are produced by various mechanical, chemical, and synthetic biological techniques
(Omenetto and Kaplan, 2010). High energy consumption is required in the production tech￾niques of nanobiopolymers, chemical modification, and mechanical isolation methods.
Balancing the efficiency and sustainability of the isolation methods (enzymatic, chemical,
and/or mechanical isolation approaches) is very important in nanobiopolymer isolation. En￾zyme isolations are one of the most environmentally friendly isolation approaches. Generally,
chemical and mechanical methods are used together (Yang et al., 2019).
In this chapter, after giving information about nanobiopolymer types and production tech￾nologies, information from recent studies of nanobiopolymers for decontamination of envi￾ronmental pollutants in recent years is shared in detail.
1.2 Nanobiopolymers
Nanobiopolymers are organic molecules that can be obtained from renewable natural re￾sources. They are established by chain reactions of biological monomers and found abun￾dantly in nature. Biopolymers have remarkable physical properties (Crini, 2005). They are
used in environmentally sensitive applications and also one of the most popular focuses of
researchers as cheap and easily produced substances and their nano-sized (1–100 nm) ver￾sions are promising for many fields. These nanobiopolymers are a set of chemicals synthe￾sized by living organisms throughout their lives and can have different monomer types
and structures ( Jancar et al., 2010; Kumar et al., 2010). The most common biopolymers in nat￾ural systems are generally polysaccharides, accompanied by some protein structures. Sugar
4 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesmonomers linked together by glycosidic bonds form the structure of polysaccharides (Klemm
et al., 2011). They have many important roles in living beings such as structure support, en￾ergy source, and enabling selective transition between cells. Cellulose, starch, chitin, and silk
can be counted among these nanobiopolymers that can be synthesized in metabolism (Torres
et al., 2019).
1.2.1 Nanocellulose
One of the most common polysaccharides encountered in nature is cellulose. The first use
of cellulose goes back to ancient times. Cellulose, which is mostly used in the paper industry
today, was similarly preferred as the raw material of papyrus in Ancient Egypt. In addition to
writing, it has been utilized in different ways in daily-use gadgets such as baskets and ropes.
The elucidation of the structure of cellulose, which is utilized in most of human life, has only
been found in the nineteenth century. Cellulose is the primary material of the plant wall and
also forms half of the biomass of photosynthetic organisms (Heinze, 2015). Cellulose is a re￾newable resource, therefore it is an exceptional option for the production of biopolymer￾based materials. The fibrillated structure of cellulose draws attention when it comes down
to the nano-level. Cellulose synthesis is based on the interaction between Van der Waals
and hydrogen bonds and reaches its final structure by stacking the fibrils. These fibrils can
have a size of 3 to 5 nm and have a square cross-section (Moon et al., 2011). The polymeric
structure of cellulose can be suitable for different fields. Many forms such as fibril, whisker,
crystalline have already begun to be investigated in different research areas. It is possible to
obtain cellulose not only from plants but also from bacteria and fungi as well.
Wood pulp can also be a source for nanocellulose and different types of nanocellulose have
been produced. Micro-fibrillated cellulose (MFC) is produced using sugar-beet, potato tu￾bers, hemp, flax as a source and is about 5–60 nm in diameter. Nano-crystalline cellulose
(NCC) is produced from woods, cotton, hemp, linseed, cereal plants, cellulose from algae
sources and is obtained by acid hydrolysis method. The size range is between 5 and 70 nm
in diameter. Sources of bacterial nano-cellulose (BNC) include alcohols, low molecular and
weight sugars and are obtained by bacterial synthesis. Their diameter is between 20 and
100 nm (Lindstrom et al., 2014 € ). Types of nanocellulose and their promising examples for fu￾ture studies will be mentioned in the scope of the chapter.
1.2.2 Nanochitin
Chitin is another natural polymer found quite abundantly in nature just like cellulose. Chi￾tin is a polysaccharide that forms the exoskeleton of many terrestrial arthropod animals such
as insects and spiders (Olatunji, 2015). Crab and shrimp shells from seafood consumption are
the source of the chitin trade. Chitin molecule (C8H13O5N) shows a long chain structure
formed by repeating two N-acetylglucosamine units linked by β-1,4 bonds and is a long-chain
polymer of N-acetylglucosamine, a glucose derivative. The structure of chitin is also com￾posed of nanofibers like cellulose. These nanofibers are protein embedded and their sizes
are 2–5 nm in diameter and 300 nm in length, and also the most common forms are α-chitin
1.2 Nanobiopolymers 5
I. Basics principlesand β-chitin (Faria et al., 2016; Raabe et al., 2006). Chitin, a hydrophobic material, is insoluble
in most organic solvents, which limits its use. At this point, chitosan, the acetylated derivative
of chitin, meets the demands. Unlike chitin, chitosan dissolves in weakly acidic solutions. Chi￾tin and chitosan are widely used in areas such as environmental sanitation applications, nat￾ural packaging materials, food preservatives, and beauty products (Morin-Crini et al., 2019).
The reduced degree of acetylation of chitosan makes it a great candidate for use in biomedical
fields and increases the range of use. It can also be integrated into drug delivery systems,
thanks to its solubility in acidic environments (Prabaharan, 2012). There are also
nanocomposite materials in which chitin and chitosan are used together. Chitosan fortified
with chitin whiskers is a good example of these ingredients. Providing the combination of
their unique advantages, this material has improved tensile strength and water absorption
resistance (Sriupayo et al., 2005). Chitosan, can be combined with other natural polymers
and integrated into different systems as well.
1.2.3 Nanosilk
Silk fibroin (SF) is a natural glycoprotein polymer that contains H-chain and L-chain. It is
produced from silkworms and spiders. SF forms can be quite versatile such as films, scaffolds,
hydrogels, microspheres, and nanofibers. This protein-based nanomaterial is very suitable for
use in medical research due to its high biocompatibility, non-toxicity, easily degradable and
non-inflammatory characteristics (Fei et al., 2013). In addition, silk fibroins have properties
such as reducing metal ions in aqueous solutions and being antibacterial (Duan et al.,
2018; Sakabe et al., 1989). Pure silk fibroins have the disadvantage that they dissolve easily
in water and this limits the study range of the material. However, this obstacle can be over￾come by combining nano-silk with other materials. Silk fibroin contains a glue-like protein
called sericin, and the removal of this component is important for the use of silk fibroins be￾cause it has been reported that this protein is responsible for allergic reactions to silk
(Zaoming et al., 1996). Later, this information lost its validity after the sericin protein could
be used as a biocompatible material. It was soon proven that the main allergic reaction was
caused by the combination of sericin and fibroin (Chirila et al., 2013). Fibroin and sericin pro￾tein are separated from each other in a thermochemical way and this process is called
degumming. Silk nanofibroins contain high amounts of glycine and their tight binding gives
silk fibroin highly stable β-sheet nanocrystals (Hayashi et al., 1999). The main molecular in￾teractions in these crystalline β-layers are hydrogen bonds. Although hydrogen bonds are
known as weak bonds, it is these bonds that underlie the rigidity and tensile strength of silk.
Weak hydrogen bonds give silk nanofibroins amazing advantages such as self-assembly and
self-heal (Keten et al., 2010).
1.2.4 Nanostarch
Starch, a biopolymer of plant origin, is most often derived from wheat, corn, potatoes, and
rice. Its granular structure can be quite large (up to 100 μm) and its size can vary depending on
the amorphous and crystallinity containing form (Zobel, 1988). Its shape-related properties
6 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesalso vary according to the obtained plant, for example, the crystallinity can be changed
between 15% and 45% (Tan et al., 2007). Starch is a polysaccharide just like cellulose and
chitin. Starch, which has two macromolecules called amylose and amylopectin, consists
of D-glucose units. Amylose is a sparsely branched chain and has an average weight of
370,350 Da, making it one of the largest natural polymers on earth (Suortti et al., 1998).
Amylopectin, on the other hand, has α (1–4) binding and makes a branch at every
22–77 glucose unit, and these branches determine the crystal structure of starch. The crys￾tal structure of starch forms the basis of its biological and physical properties (Vamadevan
et al., 2018). According to the botanical source from which it was obtained, starch may also
contain lipids and phosphorus and these components can change the characteristics of
starch by Maillard reaction (Rizzi, 2004). Down to the nanoscale we first encounter starch
nanoparticles with sizes in the range of 50–200 nm. The abundance of starch in nature is
directly related to being able to produce starch nanoparticles economically. In addition,
nano-sized starch has many uses with its biocompatible and degradable properties that
do not leave toxic waste (Dufresne, 2006). Starch nanoparticles have a high specific surface
area and strength. The starch surface is rich in hydroxyl groups; therefore it is open to a
variety of chemical reactions associated with the positive surface (Angellier et al., 2005a,b).
This feature provides the advantage of being able to use starch nanoparticles in various
composites. Nano-sized starch is classified as starch nanoparticles and different methods
are used to prepare starch nanocrystals, its subclass. Starch nanocrystals are a popular
research subject in recent years with their easy degradation and regenerative properties.
Its dimensions are 5–7 nm thick and 20–40 nm long and 15–30 nm wide (Putaux et al.,
2003). Both starch nanoparticles and starch nanocrystals have attracted great attention
in a wide variety of applications and due to their potential making the combination with
different materials.
1.2.5 Microbial nanobiopolymers
Microbial nanopolymers are a great discovery for the “green” based polymers that today’s
world acutely needs. These polymers have a biotechnology-based nano-production process
and have begun to take their place in studies as promising alternatives. Microbial strains of
bacteria, yeast, or molds can be used for microbial nanopolymer synthesis (Fang et al., 2017;
Khan et al., 2018; Li et al., 2011). It is possible to synthesize these nanostructures not only using
these organisms but also with other microorganisms as well (Gatenholm et al., 2016). Micro￾bial nanobiopolymers have favorable properties. One of them is that their chemical compo￾sition can be determined and the size and shape can be adjusted as desired. Besides, the
environment in which these syntheses take place does not require heavy physicochemical
conditions. Another advantage is that microbial cells are relatively easy to grow and can
be formed in desired quantities (Prasad et al., 2016). In order to surpass traditional methods,
there are obstacles to be overcome in microbial nanobiopolymer synthesis. The successful ap￾plications of microbial nanobiopolymers will increase when the deficiencies in nanomaterial
purification, some problems related to the functions of biocoating agents and economic
imbalances in production are eliminated.
1.2 Nanobiopolymers 7
I. Basics principles1.3 Nanobiopolymer fabrication techniques
Synthetic polymer-based materials, which have become the most widely used materials in
the last decade, have caused serious problems affecting the environment and human health.
These problems arise from both material applications and their production processes. In
addition, since most synthetic polymer-based products do not naturally degrade, they create
environmental, social, and financial burdens, causing additional problems (Zhu et al., 2016).
Biopolymers such as cellulose, chitin, silk, starch, and bacterial polysaccharides have found
widespread use area in recent years due to their extensive availability, sustainability, biocom￾patibility, and biodegradability (Balakrishnan et al., 2017; Bamba et al., 2017; Kargarzadeh
et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2019). These natural nanobiopolymers as starting materials are used
when creating new structural and functional materials. While structural advantages are
retained in these approaches (e.g., complex hierarchical structure (Naleway et al., 2015)
and nano-environment ( Jancar et al., 2010; Klemm et al., 2011; Kumar et al., 2010), additional
functions resulting from unique nanosized effects (e.g., optical transparency, structural color,
and extracellular matrix-like porous networks) (Giesa et al., 2014) are earned.
In recent years, while nanobiopolymers are obtained from biological materials such as
wood and cotton, various mechanical, chemical, and bacterial-derived methods have been
created. The resulting nanobiopolymers have been used in various high-tech fields such as
transparent display panels, ultrafiltration membranes, energy storage devices, and catalytic
supports (Ling et al., 2017, 2018). Herein, we focused on the green industrial production of
nanobiopolymers that can have lower environmental impact and have less toxicity to human
health. High energy and toxic reagent consumption is required in nanobiopolymer produc￾tion techniques using mechanical isolation and chemical modification methods
(Dufresne, 2017).
1.3.1 Nanocellulose isolation
Nanocellulose consists of two groups classified as cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) and cellu￾lose nanocrystal (CNC or cellulose nanofibers), depending on their morphological structure.
Cellulose-based materials in nature, which have a complex hierarchical structure, are in scale
ranging from angstrom level to macroscopic levels. According to their sources, nanocellulose
is divided into three classes as wood nanocellulose, cotton nanocellulose, and bacterial cel￾lulose. Chirayil et al. performed extraction of cellulose nanofibrils from isora fiber using
the steam blast method as shown in Fig. 1.1 (Chirayil et al., 2014a,b).
The most common sources of cellulose are wood and plant fibers, but the isolation of cotton
celluloses is relatively difficult due to the strong hydrogen bonds between CNFs. The
nanocellulose isolation can be done by the degradation of cellulose fibers in colloidal suspen￾sions of cellulose catalyzed by sulfuric acid (H2SO4). Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) have so
far been obtained by isolating them from a variety of natural cellulose sources. CNCs are a
good alternative for producing advanced materials from biopolymer as they have outstand￾ing chemical, mechanical, thermal, and optical properties. The processes used in the extrac￾tion of CNCs from various sources (non-edible biomass and agro-industrial wastes) were
tabulated by Owoyokun et al. (Trache et al., 2020). Some critical aspects of the classical
8 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesapproach (acid hydrolysis) and innovative methodologies for obtaining CNC are discussed in
this review.
Acid hydrolysis is the classical production methodology for obtaining CNCs, using sulfu￾ric acid by heating to 80°C for 40–60 min and widely exploited for the production of CNC
from diverse sources of cellulose. Parameters such as acid concentration, reaction time,
and reaction temperature are effective in controlling acid hydrolysis of wood pulp. Time
and temperature not only affect the properties of nanocellulose, but also change the acid–pulp
ratio by affecting the acid concentration. Although H2SO4 is the most commonly used acid in
nanocellulose preparation, it is also possible to use other acids such as hydrochloric acid
(HCl), hydrobromic acid (HBr), and phosphoric acid (H3PO4) to prepare CNC. But,
hydrochloric acid, and hydrobromic acid will not have any surface charges and a stable col￾loidal dispersion is, therefore, harder to form when compared to sulfuric acids (Borjesson and €
Westman, 2015).
Nanocellulose source agricultural residues are the most used materials. Acid hydrolysis of
soy hulls for 30 min resulted in needle-like KKK formation with high crystallinity (Flauzino
Neto et al., 2013). Nanocellulose was extracted by Rashid and Dutta from the husks of short,
medium and long rice grains. A schematic representation of the process used to extract cel￾lulose and nanocellulose from rice husk is shown in Fig. 1.2 (Rashid and Dutta, 2020).
The extraction of CNCs from pinewood through sulfuric acid hydrolysis yielded about
70%. Acid concentration and temperature are reported to be the strongest determinants
for CNC yield. Crystallinity index, surface charge, particle size, and relatively uniform
dispersity are consistent with the quality of CNCs obtained via acid hydrolysis (Kandhola
et al., 2020). CNCs have been extracted from rice husks through by three-step process: alkaline
hydrolysis, subsequent bleaching, and final grinding process (Fathi et al., 2018). Fabrication of
CNCs from the walnut shell through alkali/acidic hydrolysis has been achieved with a high
yield (92%) and medium crystallinity degree (49%) (Hemmati et al., 2018). Enzymatic hydro￾lysis does not require the use of highly corrosive reagents and an enormous quantity of water
to obtain CNCs. However, the yield obtained is generally lower than that obtained from
physical–chemical processes. Enzymatic hydrolysis and high pressure have been used to
Helicteres isora plant Delignified isora
Acid treatment
Homogenization
Alkali treatment
& bleaching
Cellulose nanofibrils Cellulose microfibrils
FIG. 1.1 Extraction procedure from isora nanofibrils (Chirayil et al., 2014a,b).
1.3 Nanobiopolymer fabrication techniques 9
I. Basics principlesproduce CNCs from rice and oat husk-based cellulose. Rice and oat husks-based CNCs and
the respective aerogels were reported to have a uniform structure, a high-water absorption
capacity, and a large pore size (de Oliveira et al., 2019).
CNFs are about 10–100 nm in width and 0.5–10 mm in length and composed of several to
dozens of elementary fibrils. CNFs can be produced using higher plants, tunics, algae, and
LP
MS
SM
Short Grain
(Mushkbudij)
Medium Grain
(SR1)
Dehulling
Rice husk
HYDROLYSIS
DELIGNIFICATION RAW MATERIAL
PREPARATION
Long Grain
(P10)
a
b
Rice husk Alkali
treatment
Initial and final bleaching
treatment
Nanocrystalline
cellulose
Rice husk
Washing
Drying (65 C, 6 h)
Grinding
Sieved (100-2420 µm)
Solvent extraction (benzene: methanol, 2:1, 9h)
Residue
Alkali treatment (3% NaOH, 8 h)
Autoclaving (121 C, 15 psi, 9 h)
Bleaching (65% acetic acid, 20% H2O2)
Acid treatment (65% H2SO4, 90 min, 45 C)
Sonication (300 W, 15 min)
Freeze Drying (–40 C, 84 h)
Washing
Washing
Cellulose
Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC)
FIG. 1.2 (A) Extraction process of cellulose and nanocellulose from rice husk. (B) Visual states of the material for
the different extraction process stages (Rashid and Dutta, 2020).
10 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesother organisms (Moon et al., 2011). In general, CNF isolation is provided by the mechanical
processing that enables high shear-induced longitudinal splitting of cellulose fibers (W. Chen
et al., 2018). Another mechanical process commonly used in cellulose isolation is
ultrasonication. In order to reduce the particle size of cellulose pulps, mechanical treatments
are often applied in combination (Li et al., 2011). However, a major problem with these me￾chanical methods is their limited size reduction capabilities. Accordingly, various mechanical,
chemical, and enzymatic pre-treatments have been used to produce smaller CNFs. Berto et al.
combined the enzymatic pre-treatment of cellulose fibers with mechanical defibrillation to
obtain cellulose nanofibrils (CNF). Fig. 1.3 shows the morphology of nanofibrils isolated
from bleached eucalyptus kraft pulp (BEKP) (Berto et al., 2021).
The steam explosion causes the pulp to be steamed under pressure for a certain period of
time, followed by a rapid pressure relief, causing the fiber cell wall to rupture. Steam explo￾sion is a widely used pre-treatment method for CNF isolation. The steam explosion causes the
hemicelluloses hydrolysis resulting in cleavage of hemicellulose–lignin bands (Berto
et al., 2021).
Lignin and hemicellulose were removed from wood powder with acidified sodium
chloride (NaCl) and potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution, and CNFs of 15–20, 12–35, and
12–55 nm in width were successfully isolated (Taer et al., 2020). Kentaro weakened the
FIG. 1.3 Morphology of nanofibrils isolated from BEKP via defibrillation (A) without and (B) with EG pre￾treatment (Berto et al., 2021).
1.3 Nanobiopolymer fabrication techniques 11
I. Basics principleshydrogen bonds of cellulose pulps using NaOH and fabricated 12–20 nm in width CNFs from
dried cellulose pulps (Abe, 2016).
Enzyme pretreatment technique is used as another strategy to improve the degree of iso￾lation. Recently the endoglucanases have been used to separate wood cellulose pulps. Hideno
et al. investigated the effects of celluloses for nanofibrillation of cotton ball and dried cotton
fibers (Hideno et al., 2016). Thus, after the mechanical isolation of pre-treated cotton fibers,
10–50 nm wide CNFs were produced.
Mechanical, chemical, and enzymatic pre-treatments are used to significantly improve the
isolation degree of cellulose sources, but these approaches still cannot exfoliate cellulose
fibers into elemental fibrils with a width of 3–4 nm. Oxidation of cellulose pulp mediated
by 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical (TEMPO) was carried out to improve the
degree of isolation. TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibril film preparation using nano￾structured bacterial cellulose was performed by Chitbanyong et al. (2020). Typical
TEMPO-mediated oxidation route used for chemical modification of cellulose pulps is sum￾marized by Chirayil et al. (2014a).
1.3.2 Nanochitin isolation
Chitin is isolated primarily from the crustacean exoskeleton and is the most versatile and
promising biomaterial after cellulose. Chitin has recently gained attention due to the progress
of chitin nanofiber (ChNF) isolation, although it is difficult to process because it is not soluble
in water. Nanokitins are often exfoliated from crab, shrimp (α-chitin), or squid pens (β-chitin).
Sources of this chitin consist of chitin (20–30%) as well as a mixture of non-chitin, proteins,
inorganic salts, and lipids (0–14%). Therefore, before the chitin is isolated, it must undergo
a series of pre-treatments to remove impurities (Ilyas et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021).
The isolation of nanochitin is carried out in all four critical steps which are: (i) removal of
residual proteins by alkaline or enzymatic hydrolysis application (ii) removal of inorganic
salts by HCl aqueous solution application (iii) extraction of astaxanthin pigments and lipids
by organic solvents application (iv) white chitin products obtaining through residues treat￾ment. In this section, information about the four typical methods used in the isolation of
nanochitin, acid hydrolysis, TEMPO mediated oxidation, partial deacetylation, and mechan￾ical isolation will be summarized.
Selective isolation methods for the preparation of chitin nanocrystals (ChNCs) were
reviewed by Yang et al. (2019). A series of acid hydrolysis approaches developed to prepare
a suspension of chitin crystallite particles were evaluated. At present, for the isolation of chi￾tin nanocrystals, mineral acids (H2SO4, HCl, HBr) are usually used primarily. Estimation of
the strength of single chitin nanofibrils via sonication-induced fragmentation by HCI acid
hydrolysis was performed by Bamba et al. (2017). Using HCl solution, Narkevicius et al. pre￾pared the ChNCs pre-treated with NaOH solution leading to the yield of ChNCs of around
79 wt% (Narkevicius et al., 2019). In Fig. 1.4, five different acidic deep eutectic solvents (DESs)
composed of choline chloride and organic acids (oxalic acid dihydrate, lactic acid, malonic
acid, citric acid monohydrate or DL-malic acid) were applied to fabricate chitin nanocrystals
(ChNCs) by Narkevicius et al. (2019).
12 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesFIG. 1.4 Overview of chitin nanocrystal preparation. (A) prawn shell chitin powder (B) purification to yield chitin microfibrils (C) acid hydrolysis to
form chitin nanocrystals (D) self-assembly of the colloidal chitin nanocrystal suspension to form chiral nematic phase (E), transparent film that retains
helicoidal nanoarchitecture (Narkevicius et al., 2019).Chitin microfibers separation was performed by mechanical action application to form
slender filaments by disrupting the bonds connecting fibrils via hydrogen bonds. Under
acidic or neutral conditions, mechanical processes such as ultrasonication, grinding, high￾pressure waterjet system application, and high-pressure homogenization are often used sep￾arately or simultaneously (Yang et al., 2020b). Ultrasound produces high energy, which
destroys the hydrogen bond between polymer chains. Ultrasound both converts chitin pow￾ders into chitin fibers and converts chitin gels to nanofiber dimension (Gopi et al., 2018;
Huang et al., 2015; Jung et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017). By applying simple
mechanical grinding, the nanofibers of the purified chitin can be separated. The produced
shear force can refine the fibers at a nanometer scale (Missoum et al., 2013). Ifuku et al. pu￾rified five kinds of mushrooms by applying chemical method. Separation of chitin nanofibers
from the cell wall of mushrooms was performed by putting dried chitin and acetic acid into a
grinding machine for grinding (Ifuku et al., 2011). High-pressure system is also a commonly
used for the fine treatment of fibers, and the diameter of treated fibers can reach nanometer
level (Wu et al., 2014). Peng et al. successfully formed chitin nanowhiskers with a diameter of
10–50 nm and a length of about 800 nm using a high-pressure homogenization system (Peng
et al., 2019). Salaberria et al. reported a friendly environmental method for processing chitin
nanofibers using dynamic high-pressure homogenization (Salaberria et al., 2015).
TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxide)-mediated oxidation and partial dea￾cetylation system enables ultrahigh length–diameter ratio features. The actual oxidant used
in TEMPO/Co-oxidation system is nitrosonium ion and can be synthesized from TEMPO.
Fan et al. extracted β-chitin from tubeworm by oxidation with TEMPO/NaClO/NaBr system
and chitin nanofibers having a width of about 20–50 nm were obtained (Fan et al., 2009).
TEMPO/NaClO/NaBr system oxidizes the chitin only under alkaline conditions. Pang
et al. produced for the first time 5–10 nm sized chitin nanofibers using the TEMPO/
NaClO2/NaClO system under weakly acidic conditions (Pang et al., 2017). Chitin
nanocrystals with a width of 6–15 nm by using the same system at pH 6.8 were prepared
by Jiang et al. (2018). The yield of ChNCs can be as high as 90% by TEMPO-mediated oxida￾tion, while the traditional acid hydrolysis method can only reach 60%.
The partial deacetylation method can be used as another method for αChNFs isolation.
NaOH used as an agent for partial deacetylation influences the degree of N-acetylation. Par￾tial deacetylation of chitin to obtain uniform anisotropic zwitterionic ChNCs by alkaline
periodate oxidation was reported by Liu et al. (2021). Isolation of chitin from Omani shrimp
shells by deacetylation with 50% NaOH was evaluated by Hoqani et al. (Said Al Hoqani et al.,
2020). Optimization of chitin extraction procedure from shrimp waste using deacetylation
method was examined by Pa˘durețu et al. (2019). Va´zquez et al. optimized acetylation condi￾tions by combining the enzymatic and chemical processes for high purity chitin and chitosan
production from Illexargentinus pens (Va´zquez et al., 2017).
1.3.3 Nanosilk isolation
The methods of producing nanosilk are still in their infancy compared to the isolation of
nanocellulose and nanoscide. Silk nanofibrils (SNFs) were formed from the B. mori silk fibers
with the developed formic acid/CaCl2 solvent system by Zhang et al. (2014). Fabrication of
14 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesfibrils by shear-induced self-assembly of native silk proteins was examined by Greving et al.
(2012). An effective, low-cost and eco-friendly method for preparing UV resistant silk fabric
was developed by Cai et al. (2021). Mehdi et al. produced submicron silk particles by milling
process. Nanosilk particles was produced from the silkfibers by applying bead milling. The
effect of various processing parameters such as milling speed, milling time, bead load, and
pH on particle size was investigated in a bead mill (Kazemimostaghim et al., 2013). Ling
et al. reported ultrathin filtration membrane preparation from SNFs exfoliated from natural
B. mori silk fibers. The appearance and characterization of the SNF dispersion and membranes
were shown in Fig. 1.5 (Ling et al., 2016).
FIG. 1.5 Visual appearance and structural characterization of the SNF dispersion and membranes. (A) SEM image
of SNFs (B) Image of SNF membrane (C) FTIR spectra of SNF membrane and degummed silk fibers. (D–F) SEM im￾ages of SNF membranes. (E) Top view and (F) cross-sectional SEM images of membranes, respectively. (G) Pore size
distribution of the SNF membranes (thicknesses: 40, 60, and 120 nm) (Ling et al., 2016).
1.3 Nanobiopolymer fabrication techniques 15
I. Basics principles1.3.4 Nanostarch isolation
The interest in the production of nanomaterials from renewable sources increases with the
increase of environmental awareness in the society. The past years have witnessed the isola￾tion of so-called nanopolysaccharides from renewable materials such as cellulose, chitin, and
starch. Lavoine et al. introduced a chapter emphasizing the different routes used to prepare
nanopolysaccharides from cellulose, chitin, and starch (Lavoine et al., 2019). Nanostarch con￾sists of two categories called starch nanocrystal (SNC) and starch nanoparticle (SNP), which
show different crystallinity properties. Acid hydrolysis, where acids enter the amorphous re￾gion and break the glycosidic bonds, is the most useful method used to isolate nanostarch. In
this method, crystal regions are preserved due to their compact structure. Until now, acids
such as H2SO4, HNO3, HCl, and H3PO4 have been used in the extraction process of
nanostarch. Among these acids, HCl and HNO3 have stronger hydrolysis ability than
H2SO4 and H3PO4. Starch nanocrystals were obtained by aqueous suspension of waxy maize
starch granules followed by hydrolysis with sulfuric acid (Angellier et al., 2005a). Xiao et al.
produced broken rice starch nanoparticles in the 100, 200, 400, and 800 nm mean particle
diameters by applying the H2SO4 hydrolysis method (Xiao et al., 2020). SNCs were produced
from different sources (waxy maize starch, NWS; regular maize starch, NCS) by H2SO4
treatment (Wang et al., 2020).
Efficiency increases when acid hydrolysis is used in combination with physical/mechan￾ical approaches. Kim et al. combined the acid hydrolysis with ultrasonication and reported
the yield of starch nanoparticles (SNP’s) as 15% for acid hydrolysis alone and 78% for the
combined process. Fig. 1.6 shows FE-SEM images of starch nanoparticles produced by acid
hydrolysis treatment at 4°C or 4/40°C for 6 days and then followed by ultrasonication appli￾cation (Kim et al., 2013). Pineda and coworkers combined ultrasound application with acid
hydrolysis treatment to obtain potato SNP’s (Rodrigez Pineda, 2018).
FIG. 1.6 FE-SEM images of starch nanoparticles (SNP’s) (Kim et al., 2013).
16 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesAfter enzymatic pretreatment, acid hydrolysis of natural starch granules increases the rate
of hydrolysis. Natural starch was used for the production of SNP’s by recrystallizing linear
glucans after debranching by hydrolysis with enzymatic way (David Chena et al., 2018).
SNP’s are prepared by subjecting starch granules to mechanical and thermal processes
such as high-pressure homogenization and reactive extrusion. In the extrusion technique,
starch granules undergo significant structural changes under the influence of relatively high
temperature, pressure, and shear forces. SNP’s were prepared from corn starch, either by
adding crosslinkers or by reactive extrusion without the addition (Song et al., 2011).
High-pressure homogenization causes partial or complete disruption of the crystal struc￾ture as in the case of ultrasonication. Ding and Kan used high-pressure homogenization as an
effective method for SNP’s production with an average size of 300 nm (Ding and Kan, 2017).
Ahmad et al. reported a new fabrication method for “green” starch nanoparticles (SNP’s)
from local sago (Metroxylon sagu) starch granules by employing a high-pressure homogeni￾zation procedure (Ahmad et al., 2020).
Gamma irradiation is one of the methods used to reduce the size of starch. Ling and
coworkers discussed the mechanism of enhancing dehydration performance based on parti￾cle size analysis (Ling et al., 2017, 2018).
Nano-sized starch particles were produced by the addition of organic solvents causing the
starch dispersions to precipitate. Anti-solvent nanoprecipitation can be used for controlling
nanoparticle properties such as size and morphology (Qin et al., 2016). Nanoprecipitation can
be used in combination with other techniques to improve efficiency. Sana et al. investigated
SNP’s (corn starch) production by a solvent–antisolvent precipitation method using a spin￾ning disc reactor (SDR) (Sana et al., 2019).
Nanoparticles from different biopolymers (starch, alginate, gelatine, chitosan, agar, etc.)
can be produced by the electrospraying method. SNP’s have been prepared from maize, am￾ylose, and amylopectin with a size of 97 nm, 98 nm, and 113 nm, respectively. Nanoparticles
produced by maize starch were developed by Ghaeb et al. (2015). Synthesis and modification
approaches for starch nanoparticles were reviewed by Kumari and coworkers (Kumari
et al., 2020).
1.3.5 Microbial nanobiopolymers
Microbial nanobiopolymers with excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability are inter￾esting alternatives to petroleum-based polymers. Nanobiopolymers can be isolated from nat￾ural materials and can be synthesized directly from microorganisms. Biopolymers are
produced by living organisms by means of enzymes.
Bacteria are used in the production of a diverse variety of biopolymers such as polyamides
(amino acids linked by peptide bonds), polysaccharides (sugars or sugar acids linked by gly￾cosidic bonds), polyphosphates (inorganic phosphates connected by anhydride bonds), and
polyesters (hydroxyl fatty acids connected by ester bonds) (Ghosh et al., 2021). Microbial ap￾proaches, which have a short production cycle, are not restricted by climatic and geographic
environments compared to chemical synthesis methods.
Microbial polysaccharides are a class of biopolymers and produced during metabolic
processes by microorganisms such as bacteria, fungi, and blue-green algae. Microbial
1.3 Nanobiopolymer fabrication techniques 17
I. Basics principlespolysaccharides are classified according to their biological functions as (a) intracellular stor￾age polysaccharides (glycogen) (b) capsular polysaccharides closely linked to the cell surface
(e.g., K30 O-Antigen) and (c) extracellular bacterial polysaccharides important for biofilm for￾mation and pathogenicity (for example, xanthan, sphingan, alginate, cellulose, etc.). After se￾cretion into the surrounding medium, they can be harvested from the cell-free culture
supernatant in a continuous production process. There are 76 types of microorganisms that
produce extracellular polysaccharides. Some of these polysaccharides are xanthan gum,
gellan gum, welan gum, chitosan, trehalose, hyaluron, curdlan, dextran, pullulan, and bac￾terial cellulose, etc. (Schmid et al., 2015). An agitated or static fermentation process can be
applied under suitable conditions to produce bacterial cellulose (BC). Microorganisms
groups such as fungi, bacteria, and algae are used to synthesize BC. Bacterial cellulose pro￾duced by different Komagataeibacter xylinus strains was evaluated by Singhsa et al. (2018). Mi￾crobial polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are biopolyesters produced by microorganisms as
intracellular granules under nutrient stress. Microbial synthesis occurs by converting carbon
sources directly into PHA during fermentation (Muneer et al., 2020). Green synthesis of
polyhydroxyalkanoatepolymer by Bacillus iocasae was performed by Ammar et al. (2021).
1.4 Environmental applications of nanobiopolymers
In recent years, nanobiopolymers have become an important subject for various research
fields due to their features such as renewability, usability, and biocompatibility. Due to the
high availability and renewable character of lignocellulosic biomass, research on nano￾cellulose is increasing day by day with the use of different cellulosic residues and wastes
produced from agricultural and industrial activities (Garcı´a et al., 2016).
Nanocellulose, which has a wide application potential, emerges as a new-generation bio￾based adsorbent. The availability of various surface modifications in terms of functionality,
surface charge density, processability, and reactivity increases the use of bio-based adsor￾bents for a broad family of pollutants. Nano-sized cellulose adsorbents offer many advan￾tages over inorganic nanoparticles in terms of cost-effectiveness, sustainability, high aspect
ratio, proper surface functionalization, and high adsorbent capacity. Because nanocellulose
can be classified as a non-toxic material and 100% biodegradable, it makes them environmen￾tally friendly adsorbent for bioremediation (Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017).
As an enzymatic synthesis of cellulose, bacterial cellulose (BC) was also used as an adsor￾bent for metal ions after surface modifications. Because the functionalization of the uncharged
surface of nanofibres is often required to increase the adsorption capacity (Mahfoudhi and
Boufi, 2017). Tamahkar et al. prepared Cibacron Blue F3GA-attached bacterial cellulose
nanofibers for selective removal of Hg2+ with an adsorption capacity of 928 mg/g, while
the Hg2+ adsorption capacity of unmodified bacterial cellulose nanofibers was 0.62 mg/g
(Tamahkar et al., 2018). Derazshamshir et al. prepared molecularly imprinted bacterial cellu￾lose nanofibers for selective and efficient removal of phenol from wastewaters, because phe￾nols are toxic in the aquatic environment and lead to the death of aquatic organisms, and also
carcinogenic to humans (Derazshamshir et al., 2020).
Nanocellulose, which is also used as an adsorbent for organic oils, was reported by Gu et al.
(2020). They functionalized CNF with oleic acid (hydrophobic agent) and nano magnetite
(Fe3O4). The adsorption capacities of the functionalized CNF towards ethyl acetate,
18 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlescyclohexane, and vacuum pump oil were 56.32, 68.06, and 33.24 g/g, accordingly. Luo et al.
prepared a hybrid film. Firstly, celery cellulose nanofibrils (CCNF) were separated after
oxalic acid hydrolysis followed by microfluidization. Then, lignin/hemicellulose solution
containing CCNF was cast into film structures which showed a high methylene blue removal
efficiency ranged from 192.1–429.9 mg/g (Luo et al., 2020).
Chitin is an important structural polysaccharide after cellulose and is the most abundant
polymer in nature. Chitin and its derivatives used for environmental applications include the
bioremediation of inorganic and organic pollutants from water and soil, as well as the biocon￾version of chitinous waste into unicellular proteins, bioethanol, and biofertilizers (Singh
et al., 2020).
Rajak et al. prepared a novel and eco-friendly chitin functionalized iron-enriched hydroxy￾apatite nanocomposite (HAP-Fe0
-Ct) which can be used for Cr (VI) removal from chromite
ore processing residues (COPR) contaminated complex groundwater matrices (Rajak et al.,
2021). COPR are real environmental threats leading to leaching of Cr (VI) into ground-water.
Cr (VI) has proven to be carcinogenic.
Naeimi et al. modified nanochitosan, which is extracted from shrimp wastes, via Schiff
base ligand. Then, graphene oxide was added to obtain a nanohybrid material to be a poten￾tial bioadsorbent for Pb(II) and Cu(II) biosorption from aqueous solutions (Naeimi et al.,
2021). A reduction precipitation method was used to synthesize magnetic chitosan graphene
oxide nanocomposites (EDTA-MCS/GO) for the removal of heavy metals, such as Pb2+, Cu2+,
and As3+, from aqueous solutions by Shahzad et al. (2017). Functionalized nanocellulose,
chitosan, and other modified chitosan adsorbents are not only limited to heavy metal removal
but also extended to a wide application in textile industries such as removal of dye (Faiz
Norrrahim et al., 2021; Pal et al., 2021).
Carneiro et al. investigated the use of biopolymeric membranes prepared with chitosan
(CS), alginate (AG), and a chitosan/alginate combination (CS/AG) for the adsorption of
glyphosate, which is a non-selective herbicide, present in water samples. The alginate mem￾brane was unable to adsorb the herbicide, while CS and CS/AG membranes presented an
adsorption capacity of 10.88 mg/g, and 8.70 mg/g, respectively (Carneiro et al., 2015).
In another study, polypyrrole (PPy) nanosilk, nanowire array and nanorod array films
were synthesized on carbon cloth substrate through electrochemical polymerization by Ki
et al. The synthesized films were further applied in an efficient dual rotating disk photo fuel
cell to treat real textile wastewater, which was also employed as fuel to be purified to generate
electricity simultaneously with nanostructured PPy disks (Li et al., 2019). Several biopolymer
adsorbents for various types of inorganic and organic pollutants were listed in Table 1.1 (Faiz
Norrrahim et al., 2021; Pal et al., 2021).
1.5 Conclusion
Demand for renewable energy, renewable energy sources, and environmentally friendly
materials is increasing day by day. In recent years, with the development of nanotechnology,
the production and use of nanobiopolymers in different fields have become more important.
Nanobiopolymers such as nanocellulose, nanochitin, nanosilk, and nanostarch are natural,
non-toxic, low-cost, sustainable materials that can be produced from living organisms, with
ease of modification and biocompatibility. How to create manufacturing techniques to
1.5 Conclusion 19
I. Basics principlesoptimize these nanobiopolymers and how and where to use these nanobiopolymers to pro￾duce better materials are thought to be important in the future. Therefore, it is necessary to
ensure the usability and feasibility of the final materials obtained by transitioning from lab￾oratory studies to commercial or industrial production. Even though nanocellulose is a prom￾ising material for environmental remediation, until now, most research on its production has
only been done on a laboratory scale. The challenges in nanocellulose production are scalabil￾ity, environmental impact, and cost of treatment pathways. The biggest obstacle to environ￾mental remediation that will affect the application and marketability of nanocellulose
material may be economic problems arising from its toxicology. Generally, chemical, mechan￾ical, and synthetic biological methods such as chemical and enzymatic treatment, acid hydro￾lysis, and different isolation are used in the production of nanobiopolymers. In this chapter,
after giving information about nanobiopolymer types and production techniques, some stud￾ies on decontamination of environmental pollutants in the literature are summarized for
nanobiopolymers.
1.6 Future outlook
In recent years, nanobiopolymers have become an important subject for various research
fields due to their features such as renewability, usability, and biocompatibility.
TABLE 1.1 Biopolymer adsorbents for various types of inorganic and organic pollutants.
Biopolymer adsorbent Pollutants
Adsorption capacity
(mg/g) Ref.
BC–CB nanofibers Hg2+ 928 Tamahkar et al. (2018)
BC-MIP nanofibers Phenol 146 Derazshamshir et al. (2020)
Oleic acid and Fe3O4 functionalized
CNF
Cyclohexane
Ethyl acetate
Vacuum pump oil
68
56
33
Gu et al. (2020)
CCNF Methylene blue 192–430 Luo et al. (2020)
HAP-Fe0
-Ct Cr(IV) 13.9  0.46 Rajak et al. (2021)
Chit–Schiff–GO nanopolymer Pb(II)
Cu(II)
466
698.8
Naeimi et al. (2021)
EDTA-MCS/GO Pb2+
Cu2+
As3+
206.52
207.26
42.75
Shahzad et al. (2017)
Chitosan
Chitosan/alginate membranes
Glyphosate 10.88
8.70
Carneiro et al. (2015)
Surfactant modified chitosan
(SMCS) beads
Cd(II) 115 Pal and Pal (2017)
Chi-APTES As(V) 2.576 Lalhmunsiama et al. (2016)
20 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesNanobiopolymers have demonstrated many advantages suited for environmental remedia￾tion in terms of heavy metal, dye, pesticide, herbicide, and organic oils removal. The main
challenges are the energy consumption and yield in preparation, as well as the toxicity of
the final product (Shak et al., 2018). As a result, it is thought that the use of natural, biocom￾patible, sustainable, low-cost, and non-toxic nanobiopolymers in different areas will expand
and their applicability in wider areas will increase in the upcoming years. The discovery of
cellulose nanomaterial is a milestone in materials science and engineering. Due to the high
availability and renewable character of lignocellulosic biomass, research on nanocellulose
will increase day by day with the use of different cellulosic residues and wastes produced
from agricultural and industrial activities. Because renewable nanocellulose shows low
toxicity and has a large surface area, and also it can be easily functionalized, these features
make it a potential candidate for various applications, including optoelectronics, tissue
regeneration, bio-based food packaging, and especially environmental applications such as
wastewater and water treatment.
References
Abe, K., 2016. Nanofibrillation of dried pulp in NaOH solutions using bead milling. Cellulose 23 (2), 1257–1261.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-016-0891-4.
Ahmad, A.N., Lim, S.A., Navaranjan, N., Hsu, Y.I., Uyama, H., 2020. Green sago starch nanoparticles as reinforcing
material for green composites. Polymer 202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2020.122646.
Ammar, E.M., El-Sheshtawy, H.S., El-Shatoury, E.H., Amer, S.K., 2021. Green synthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoate
polymer by Bacillus iocasae. Polym. Int. https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.6219.
Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Belgacem, M.N., Dufresne, A., 2005a. Surface chemical modification of waxy maize
starch nanocrystals. Langmuir 21 (6), 2425–2433. https://doi.org/10.1021/la047530j.
Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Lebrun, L., Dufresne, A., 2005b. Processing and structural properties of waxy
maize starch nanocrystals reinforced natural rubber. Macromolecules 38 (9), 3783–3792. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ma050054z.
Bai, L., Huan, S., Xiang, W., Rojas, O.J., 2018. Pickering emulsions by combining cellulose nanofibrils and
nanocrystals: phase behavior and depletion stabilization. Green Chem. 20 (7), 1571–1582. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c8gc00134k.
Balakrishnan, P., Sreekala, M.S., Kunaver, M., Huskic, M., Thomas, S., 2017. Morphology, transport characteristics
and viscoelastic polymer chain confinement in nanocomposites based on thermoplastic potato starch and cellu￾lose nanofibers from pineapple leaf. Carbohydr. Polym. 169, 176–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2017.04.017.
Bamba, Y., Ogawa, Y., Saito, T., Berglund, L.A., Isogai, A., 2017. Estimating the strength of single chitin nanofibrils via
sonication-induced fragmentation. Biomacromolecules 18 (12), 4405–4410. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
biomac.7b01467.
Berto, G.L., Mattos, B.D., Rojas, O.J., Arantes, V., 2021. Single-step fiber pretreatment with monocomponent
endoglucanase: defibrillation energy and cellulose nanofibril quality. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 9 (5),
2260–2270. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c08162.
Borjesson, M., Westman, G., 2015. Crystalline nanocellulose—preparation, modification, and properties. In: €
Cellulose – Fundamental Aspects and Current Trends. IntechOpen.
Cai, H., Gao, L., Chen, L., Chen, X., Liu, Z., Li, Z., Dai, F., 2021. An effective, low-cost and eco-friendly method for
preparing UV resistant silk fabric. J. Nat. Fibers, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/15440478.2021.1875362.
Carneiro, R.T.A., Taketa, T.B., Gomes Neto, R.J., Oliveira, J.L., Campos, E.V.R., de Moraes, M.A., da Silva, C.M.G.,
Beppu, M.M., Fraceto, L.F., 2015. Removal of glyphosate herbicide from water using biopolymer membranes.
J. Environ. Manag. 151, 353–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.01.005.
References 21
I. Basics principlesChen, Q., Yu, H., Wang, L., Ul Abdin, Z., Chen, Y., Wang, J., Zhou, W., Yang, X., Khan, R.U., Zhang, H., Chen, X., 2015.
Recent progress in chemical modification of starch and its applications. RSC Adv. 5 (83), 67459–67474. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c5ra10849g.
Chen, W., Yu, H., Lee, S.Y., Wei, T., Li, J., Fan, Z., 2018. Nanocellulose: a promising nanomaterial for advanced elec￾trochemical energy storage. Chem. Soc. Rev. 47 (8), 2837–2872. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7cs00790f.
Chirayil, C.J., Joy, J., Mathew, L., Mozetic, M., Koetz, J., Thomas, S., 2014a. Isolation and characterization of cellulose
nanofibrils from Helicteres isora plant. Ind. Crop. Prod. 59, 27–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2014.04.020.
Chirayil, C.J., Mathew, L., Thomas, S., 2014b. Review of recent research in nano cellulose preparation from different
lignocellulosic fibers. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 37 (1–2), 20–28. http://www.ipme.ru/e-journals/RAMS/no_
13714/03_13714_cintil.pdf.
Chirila, T.V., Suzuki, S., Bray, L.J., Barnett, N.L., Harkin, D.G., 2013. Evaluation of silk sericin as a biomaterial: in vitro
growth of human corneal limbal epithelial cells on Bombyx mori sericin membranes. Prog. Biomater. 14. https://
doi.org/10.1186/2194-0517-2-14.
Chitbanyong, K., Pisutpiched, S., Khantayanuwong, S., Theeragool, G., Puangsin, B., 2020. TEMPO-oxidized cellulose
nanofibril film from nano-structured bacterial cellulose derived from the recently developed thermotolerant
Komagataeibacter xylinus C30 and Komagataeibacter oboediens R37–9 strains. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 163,
1908–1914. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.09.124.
Crini, G., 2005. Recent developments in polysaccharide-based materials used as adsorbents in wastewater treatment.
Prog. Polym. Sci. 30 (1), 38–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2004.11.002.
David Chena, A., Evzˇen, Sˇ., Pavel, U., Eva, M., 2018. Starch nanoparticles – two ways of their preparation. Czech J.
Food Sci., 133–138. https://doi.org/10.17221/371/2017-cjfs.
de Oliveira, J.P., Bruni, G.P., el Halal, S.L.M., Bertoldi, F.C., Dias, A.R.G., Zavareze, E.D.R., 2019. Cellulose
nanocrystals from rice and oat husks and their application in aerogels for food packaging. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
124, 175–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.205.
Derazshamshir, A., Gokt € urk, I., Tamahkar, E., Y € ılmaz, F., Saglam, N., Denizli, A., 2020. Phenol removal from waste- 
water by surface imprinted bacterial cellulose nanofibres. Environ. Technol. 41 (24), 3134–3145. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09593330.2019.1600043.
Ding, Y., Kan, J., 2017. Optimization and characterization of high pressure homogenization produced chemically
modified starch nanoparticles. J. Food Sci. Technol. 54 (13), 4501–4509. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-017-
2934-8.
Duan, Y., Chen, X., Shao, Z.Z., 2018. The silk textile embedded in silk fibroin composite: preparation and properties.
Chin. J. Polym. Sci. 36 (9), 1043–1046. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10118-018-2117-8.
Dufresne, A., 2006. Comparing the mechanical properties of high performances polymer nanocomposites from bio￾logical sources. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 6 (2), 322–330. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.2006.906.
Dufresne, A., 2017. Nanocellulose: From Nature to High Performance Tailored Materials. De Gruyter.
Facchine, E.G., Bai, L., Rojas, O.J., Khan, S.A., 2021. Associative structures formed from cellulose nanofibrils and
nanochitins are pH-responsive and exhibit tunable rheology. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 588, 232–241. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.12.041.
Faiz Norrrahim, M.N., Mohd Kasim, N.A., Knight, V.F., Mohamad Misenan, M.S., Janudin, N., Ahmad Shah, N.A.,
Kasim, N., Wan Yusoff, W.Y., Mohd Noor, S.A., Jamal, S.H., Ong, K.K., Zin Wan Yunus, W.M., 2021.
Nanocellulose: a bioadsorbent for chemical contaminant remediation. RSC Adv. 11 (13), 7347–7368. https://
doi.org/10.1039/d0ra08005e.
Fan, Y., Saito, T., Isogai, A., 2009. TEMPO-mediated oxidation of β-chitin to prepare individual nanofibrils.
Carbohydr. Polym. 77 (4), 832–838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2009.03.008.
Fang, F.Z., Zhang, X.D., Gao, W., Guo, Y.B., Byrne, G., Hansen, H.N., 2017. Nanomanufacturing—perspective and
applications. CIRP Ann. 66 (2), 683–705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2017.05.004.
Faria, R.R., Guerra, R.F., De Sousa Neto, L.R., Motta, L.F., Franca, E.D.F., 2016. Computational study of polymorphic
structures of α- and β-chitin and chitosan in aqueous solution. J. Mol. Graph. Model. 63, 78–84. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmgm.2015.11.001.
Fathi, H.I., El-Shazly, A.H., El-Kady, M.F., Madih, K., 2018. Assessment of new technique for production cellulose
nanocrystals from agricultural waste. Mater. Sci. Forum 928, 83–88. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.
net/MSF.928.83.
22 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesFei, X., Jia, M., Du, X., Yang, Y., Zhang, R., Shao, Z., Zhao, X., Chen, X., 2013. Green synthesis of silk fibroin-silver
nanoparticle composites with effective antibacterial and biofilm-disrupting properties. Biomacromolecules
14 (12), 4483–4488. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm4014149.
Flauzino Neto, W.P., Silverio, H.A., Dantas, N.O., Pasquini, D., 2013. Extraction and characterization of cellulose
nanocrystals from agro-industrial residue – soy hulls. Ind. Crop. Prod. 42 (1), 480–488. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.indcrop.2012.06.041.
Garcı´a, A., Gandini, A., Labidi, J., Belgacem, N., Bras, J., 2016. Industrial and crop wastes: a new source for
nanocellulose biorefinery. Ind. Crop. Prod. 93, 26–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2016.06.004.
Gatenholm, P., Berry, J., Rojas, A., Sano, M.B., Davalos, R.V., Johnson, K., O’Rourke, L., 2016. Bacterial nanocellulose
biomaterials with controlled architecture for tissue engineering scaffolds and customizable implants. In: Bacterial
NanoCellulose: A Sophisticated Multifunctional Material. CRC Press, pp. 197–216. https://www.crcpress.com/
Bacterial-NanoCellulose-A-Sophisticated-Multifunctional-Material/Gama-Gatenholm-Klemm/p/book/
9781138073166.
Ghaeb, M., Tavanai, H., Kadivar, M., 2015. Electrosprayed maize starch and its constituents (amylose and amylopec￾tin) nanoparticles. Polym. Adv. Technol. 26 (8), 917–923. https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.3501.
Ghosh, S., Lahiri, D., Nag, M., Dey, A., Sarkar, T., Pathak, S.K., Edinur, H.A., Pati, S., Ray, R.R., 2021. Bacterial bio￾polymer: its role in pathogenesis to effective biomaterials. Polymers 13 (8). https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym13081242.
Giesa, T., Pugno, N.M., Wong, J.Y., Kaplan, D.L., Buehler, M.J., 2014. What’s inside the box? – length-scales that gov￾ern fracture processes of polymer fibers. Adv. Mater. 26 (3), 412–417. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201303323.
Gopi, S., Kargl, R., Kleinschek, K.S., Pius, A., Thomas, S., 2018. Chitin nanowhisker – inspired electrospun PVDF
membrane for enhanced oil-water separation. J. Environ. Manag. 228, 249–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2018.09.039.
Greving, I., Cai, M., Vollrath, F., Schniepp, H.C., 2012. Shear-induced self-assembly of native silk proteins into fibrils
studied by atomic force microscopy. Biomacromolecules 13 (3), 676–682. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm201509b.
Gu, H., Zhou, X., Lyu, S., Pan, D., Dong, M., Wu, S., Ding, T., Wei, X., Seok, I., Wei, S., Guo, Z., 2020. Magnetic
nanocellulose-magnetite aerogel for easy oil adsorption. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 560, 849–856. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcis.2019.10.084.
Hassan, M.E., Bai, J., Dou, D.Q., 2019. Biopolymers; definition, classification and applications. Egypt. J. Chem. 62 (9),
1725–1737. https://doi.org/10.21608/EJCHEM.2019.6967.1580.
Hayashi, C.Y., Shipley, N.H., Lewis, R.V., 1999. Hypotheses that correlate the sequence, structure, and mechanical
properties of spider silk proteins. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 24 (2–3), 271–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-8130
(98)00089-0.
Heinze, T., 2015. Cellulose: structure and properties. Adv. Polym. Sci. 271, 1–52. https://doi.org/
10.1007/12_2015_319.
Hemmati, F., Jafari, S.M., Kashaninejad, M., Barani Motlagh, M., 2018. Synthesis and characterization of cellulose
nanocrystals derived from walnut shell agricultural residues. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 120, 1216–1224. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.09.012.
Hideno, A., Abe, K., Uchimura, H., Yano, H., 2016. Preparation by combined enzymatic and mechanical treatment
and characterization of nanofibrillated cotton fibers. Cellulose 23 (6), 3639–3651. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-
016-1075-y.
Huang, Y., Yao, M., Zheng, X., Liang, X., Su, X., Zhang, Y., Lu, A., Zhang, L., 2015. Effects of chitin whiskers on phys￾ical properties and osteoblast culture of alginate based nanocomposite hydrogels. Biomacromolecules 16 (11),
3499–3507. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biomac.5b00928.
Ifuku, S., Nomura, R., Morimoto, M., Saimoto, H., 2011. Preparation of chitin nanofibers from mushrooms. Materials 4
(8), 1417–1425. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma4081417.
Ilyas, H.N., Zia, K.M., Rehman, S., Ilyas, R., Sultana, S., 2021. Utilization of shellfish industrial waste for isolation,
purification, and characterizations of chitin from Crustacean’s sources in Pakistan. J. Polym. Environ. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10924-020-02037-7.
Jancar, J., Douglas, J.F., Starr, F.W., Kumar, S.K., Cassagnau, P., Lesser, A.J., Sternstein, S.S., Buehler, M.J., 2010. Cur￾rent issues in research on structure-property relationships in polymer nanocomposites. Polymer 51 (15),
3321–3343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2010.04.074.
References 23
I. Basics principlesJiang, J., Yu, J., Liu, L., Wang, Z., Fan, Y., Satio, T., Isogai, A., 2018. Preparation and hydrogel properties of
pH-sensitive amphoteric chitin nanocrystals. J. Agric. Food Chem. 66 (43), 11372–11379. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jafc.8b02899.
Jung, H.S., Kim, M.H., Park, W.H., 2019. Preparation and structural investigation of novel β-chitin nanocrystals from
cuttlefish bone. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 5 (4), 1744–1752. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b01652.
Kandhola, G., Djioleu, A., Rajan, K., Labbe, N., Sakon, J., Carrier, D.J., Kim, J.W., 2020. Maximizing production of
cellulose nanocrystals and nanofibers from pre-extracted loblolly pine Kraft pulp: a response surface approach.
Bioresour. Bioprocess. 7 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40643-020-00302-0.
Kargarzadeh, H., Mariano, M., Huang, J., Lin, N., Ahmad, I., Dufresne, A., Thomas, S., 2017. Recent developments on
nanocellulose reinforced polymer nanocomposites: a review. Polymer 132, 368–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2017.09.043.
Kazemimostaghim, M., Rajkhowa, R., Tsuzuki, T., Wang, X., 2013. Production of submicron silk particles by milling.
Powder Technol. 241, 230–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2013.03.004.
Keten, S., Buehler, M.J., 2010. Nanostructure and molecular mechanics of spider dragline silk protein assemblies. J. R.
Soc. Interface 7 (53), 1709–1721. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2010.0149.
Keten, S., Xu, Z., Ihle, B., Buehler, M.J., 2010. Nanoconfinement controls stiffness, strength and mechanical toughness
of Β-sheet crystals in silk. Nat. Mater. 9 (4), 359–367. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2704.
Khan, T., Abbas, S., Fariq, A., Yasmin, A., 2018. Microbes: nature’s cell factories of nanoparticles synthesis. In: Nano￾technology in the Life Sciences. Springer Science and Business Media B.V, pp. 25–50, https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-99570-0_2.
Kim, H.Y., Park, D.J., Kim, J.Y., Lim, S.T., 2013. Preparation of crystalline starch nanoparticles using cold acid hydro￾lysis and ultrasonication. Carbohydr. Polym. 98 (1), 295–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.05.085.
Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindstroem, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D., Dorris, A., 2011. ChemInform abstract:
nanocelluloses: a new family of nature-based materials. ChemInform 42 (38). https://doi.org/10.1002/
chin.201138271.
Kumar, P., Sandeep, K., Alavi, S., Truong, V., 2010. A review of experimental and modeling techniques to determine
properties of biopolymer-based nanocomposites. J. Food Sci. 76 (1), E2–E14.
Kumari, S., Yadav, B.S., Yadav, R.B., 2020. Synthesis and modification approaches for starch nanoparticles for their
emerging food industrial applications: a review. Food Res. Int. 128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2019.108765.
Kundu, B., Rajkhowa, R., Kundu, S.C., Wang, X., 2013. Silk fibroin biomaterials for tissue regenerations. Adv. Drug
Deliv. Rev. 65 (4), 457–470. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2012.09.043.
Lalhmunsiama, Lee, S.M., Lalchhingpuii, Tiwari, D., 2016. Functionalized hybrid material precursor to chitosan in the
efficient remediation of aqueous solutions contaminated with As(V). J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 4 (2), 1537–1544.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2016.02.015.
Lavoine, N., Durmaz, E., Trovagunta, R., 2019. Preparation and Properties of Nanopolysaccharides. Springer Science
and Business Media LLC, pp. 1–54, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-0913-1_1.
Li, X., Xu, H., Chen, Z.-S., Chen, G., 2011. Biosynthesis of nanoparticles by microorganisms and their applications. J.
Nanomater., 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/270974.
Li, K., Zhang, H., Ma, Y., Sun, T., Jia, J., 2019. Nanostructured polypyrrole cathode based dual rotating disk photo fuel
cell for textile wastewater purification and electricity generation. Electrochim. Acta 303, 329–340. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.electacta.2019.02.102.
Lindstrom, T., Aulin, C., Naderi, A., Ankerfors, M., 2014. Microfibrillated Cellulose. Wiley, pp. 1 € –34, https://doi.org/
10.1002/0471440264.pst614.
Ling, S., Jin, K., Kaplan, D.L., Buehler, M.J., 2016. Ultrathin free-standing bombyx mori silk nanofibril membranes.
Nano Lett. 16 (6), 3795–3800. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01195.
Ling, S., Qin, Z., Huang, W., Cao, S., Kaplan, D.L., Buehler, M.J., 2017. Design and function of biomimetic multilayer
water purification membranes. Sci. Adv. 3 (4). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1601939.
Ling, S., Wang, Q., Zhang, D., Zhang, Y., Mu, X., Kaplan, D.L., Buehler, M.J., 2018. Integration of stiff graphene and
tough silk for the design and fabrication of versatile electronic materials. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28 (9). https://doi.
org/10.1002/adfm.201705291.
Liu, P., Liu, H., Sch€afer, T., Gutmann, T., Gibhardt, H., Qi, H., Tian, L., Zhang, X.C., Buntkowsky, G., Zhang, K., 2021.
Unexpected selective alkaline periodate oxidation of chitin for the isolation of chitin nanocrystals. Green Chem.
23 (2), 745–751. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0gc04054a.
24 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesLu, Y., Sun, Q., She, X., Xia, Y., Liu, Y., Li, J., Yang, D., 2013. Fabrication and characterisation of α-chitin nanofibers and
highly transparent chitin films by pulsed ultrasonication. Carbohydr. Polym. 98 (2), 1497–1504. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.07.038.
Luo, J., Huang, K., Zhou, X., Xu, Y., 2020. Hybrid films based on holistic celery nanocellulose and lignin/hemicellu￾lose with enhanced mechanical properties and dye removal. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 147, 699–705. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.102.
Mahfoudhi, N., Boufi, S., 2017. Nanocellulose as a novel nanostructured adsorbent for environmental remediation: a
review. Cellulose 24 (3), 1171–1197. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1194-0.
Melke, J., Midha, S., Ghosh, S., Ito, K., Hofmann, S., 2016. Silk fibroin as biomaterial for bone tissue engineering. Acta
Biomater. 31, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2015.09.005.
Missoum, K., Belgacem, M., Bras, J. (2013). Nanofibrillated cellulose surface modification. A review. Materials 6(5),
1745–1766.
Moon, R.J., Martini, A., Nairn, J., Simonsen, J., Youngblood, J., 2011. Cellulose nanomaterials review: structure, prop￾erties and nanocomposites. Chem. Soc. Rev. 3941. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0cs00108b.
Morin-Crini, N., Lichtfouse, E., Torri, G., Crini, G. 2019. Applications of chitosan in food, pharmaceuticals, medicine,
cosmetics, agriculture, textiles, pulp and paper, biotechnology, and environmental chemistry. Environ. Chem.
Lett. 17, 1667–1692. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-019-00904-x.
Muneer, F., Rasul, I., Azeem, F., Siddique, M.H., Zubair, M., Nadeem, H., 2020. Microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates
(PHAs): efficient replacement of synthetic polymers. J. Polym. Environ. 28 (9), 2301–2323. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10924-020-01772-1.
Naeimi, A., Amini, M., Okati, N., 2021. Removal of heavy metals from wastewaters using an effective and natural
bionanopolymer based on Schiff base chitosan/graphene oxide. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s13762-021-03247-9.
Naleway, S.E., Porter, M.M., McKittrick, J., Meyers, M.A., 2015. Structural design elements in biological materials:
application to bioinspiration. Adv. Mater. 27 (37), 5455–5476. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201502403.
Narkevicius, A., Steiner, L.M., Parker, R.M., Ogawa, Y., Frka-Petesic, B., Vignolini, S., 2019. Controlling the self￾assembly behavior of aqueous chitin nanocrystal suspensions. Biomacromolecules 20 (7), 2830–2838. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.biomac.9b00589.
Nascimento, P., Marim, R., Carvalho, G., Mali, S., 2016. Nanocellulose produced from rice hulls and its effect on the
properties of biodegradable starch films. Mater. Res. 19 (1), 167–174. https://doi.org/10.1590/1980-5373-
MR-2015-0423.
Olatunji, O., 2015. Classification of natural polymers. In: Natural Polymers: Industry Techniques and Applications.
Springer International Publishing, pp. 1–17, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-26414-1_1.
Omenetto, F.G., Kaplan, D.L., 2010. New opportunities for an ancient material. Science 329 (5991), 528–531. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1188936.
Pa˘durețu, C.C., Isopescu, R.D., Gıˆjiu, C.L., Ra˘u, I., Apetroaei, M.R., Schroder, V., 2019. Optimization of chitin extrac- €
tion procedure from shrimp waste using Taguchi method and chitosan characterization. Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst.
695 (1), 19–28. https://doi.org/10.1080/15421406.2020.1723902.
Pal, P., Pal, A., 2017. Surfactant-modified chitosan beads for cadmium ion adsorption. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 104,
1548–1555. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.02.042.
Pal, P., Pal, A., Nakashima, K., Yadav, B.K., 2021. Applications of chitosan in environmental remediation: a review.
Chemosphere 266, 128934. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128934.
Pang, K., Ding, B., Liu, X., Wu, H., Duan, Y., Zhang, J., 2017. High-yield preparation of a zwitterionically charged
chitin nanofiber and its application in a doubly pH-responsive pickering emulsion. Green Chem. 19 (15),
3665–3670. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7gc01592e.
Peng, C., Xu, J., Chen, G., Tian, J., He, M., 2019. The preparation of α-chitin nanowhiskers-poly (vinyl alcohol)
hydrogels for drug release. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 131, 336–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.015.
Prabaharan, M., 2012. Advantages of chitosan as drug delivery sistems. In: Chitosan and Its Derivatives as Promisng
Drug Delivery Carriers. ASME Press, pp. 4–8.
Prasad Reddy, J., Rhim, J.W., 2014. Isolation and characterization of cellulose nanocrystals from garlic skin. Mater.
Lett. 129, 20–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2014.05.019.
Prasad, R., Pandey, R., Barman, I., 2016. Engineering tailored nanoparticles with microbes: quo vadis? Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 8 (2), 316–330. https://doi.org/10.1002/wnan.1363.
References 25
I. Basics principlesPutaux, J.L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Momaur, T., Dufresne, A., 2003. Platelet nanocrystals resulting from the disruption
of waxy maize starch granules by acid hydrolysis. Biomacromolecules 4 (5), 1198–1202. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bm0340422.
Qin, Y., Liu, C., Jiang, S., Xiong, L., Sun, Q., 2016. Characterization of starch nanoparticles prepared by nanopreci￾pitation: influence of amylose content and starch type. Ind. Crop. Prod. 87, 182–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.indcrop.2016.04.038.
Raabe, D., Romano, P., Sachs, C., Fabritius, H., Al-Sawalmih, A., Yi, S.B., Servos, G., Hartwig, H.G., 2006. Microstruc￾ture and crystallographic texture of the chitin-protein network in the biological composite material of the exoskel￾eton of the lobster Homarus americanus. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 421 (1–2), 143–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
msea.2005.09.115.
Rajak, J.K., Khandelwal, N., Behera, M.P., Tiwari, E., Singh, N., Ganie, Z.A., Darbha, G.K., Abdolahpur Monikh, F.,
Sch€afer, T., 2021. Removal of chromate ions from leachate-contaminated groundwater samples of Khan
Chandpur, India, using chitin modified iron-enriched hydroxyapatite nanocomposite. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-13549-7.
Rashid, S., Dutta, H., 2020. Characterization of nanocellulose extracted from short, medium and long grain rice husks.
Ind. Crop. Prod. 154, 112627. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112627.
Rizzi, G.P., 2004. Role of phosphate and carboxylate ions in maillard browning. J. Agric. Food Chem. 52 (4), 953–957.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jf030691t.
Rodrigez Pineda, L., 2018. Preparation and characterization of potato starch nanoparticles with acrylamide by micro￾wave radiation. Cien. Desarrollo 9 (2), 149–159.
Safari, J., Sadeghi, M., 2017. Nanostarch: a novel and green catalyst for synthesis of 2-aminothiazoles. Monatsh. Chem.
148 (4), 745–749. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00706-016-1805-8.
Sahana, T.G., Rekha, P.D., 2018. Biopolymers: applications in wound healing and skin tissue engineering. Mol. Biol.
Rep. 45 (6), 2857–2867. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033-018-4296-3.
Said Al Hoqani, H.A., Al-Shaqsi, N., Hossain, M.A., Al Sibani, M.A., 2020. Isolation and optimization of the method
for industrial production of chitin and chitosan from Omani shrimp shell. Carbohydr. Res. 492. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.carres.2020.108001.
Sakabe, H., Ito, H., Miyamoto, T., Noishiki, Y., Ha, W.S., 1989. In vivo blood compatibility of regenerated silk fibroin.
Sen’i Gakkaishi 45 (11), 487–490. https://doi.org/10.2115/fiber.45.11_487.
Salaberria, A.M., Labidi, J., Fernandes, S.C.M., 2014. Chitin nanocrystals and nanofibers as nano-sized fillers into ther￾moplastic starch-based biocomposites processed by melt-mixing. Chem. Eng. J. 256, 356–364. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2014.07.009.
Salaberria, A.M., Fernandes, S.C.M., Diaz, R.H., Labidi, J., 2015. Processing of α-chitin nanofibers by dynamic high
pressure homogenization: characterization and antifungal activity against A. niger. Carbohydr. Polym. 116,
286–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.04.047.
Sana, S., Boodhoo, K., Zivkovic, V., 2019. Production of starch nanoparticles through solvent-antisolvent precipitation
in a spinning disc reactor. Green Process. Synth. 8 (1), 507–515. https://doi.org/10.1515/gps-2019-0019.
Schmid, J., Sieber, V., Rehm, B., 2015. Bacterial exopolysaccharides: biosynthesis pathways and engineering strate￾gies. Front. Microbiol. 6 (May). https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2015.00496.
Shaabani, A., Rahmati, A., Badri, Z., 2008. Sulfonated cellulose and starch: new biodegradable and renewable solid
acid catalysts for efficient synthesis of quinolines. Catal. Commun. 9 (1), 13–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
catcom.2007.05.021.
Shahzad, A., Miran, W., Rasool, K., Nawaz, M., Jang, J., Lim, S.R., Lee, D.S., 2017. Heavy metals removal by EDTA￾functionalized chitosan graphene oxide nanocomposites. RSC Adv. 7 (16), 9764–9771. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c6ra28406j.
Shak, K.P.Y., Pang, Y.L., Mah, S.K., 2018. Nanocellulose: recent advances and its prospects in environmental reme￾diation. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 9 (1), 2479–2498. https://doi.org/10.3762/bjnano.9.232.
Shen, X., Shamshina, J.L., Berton, P., Gurau, G., Rogers, R.D., 2016. Hydrogels based on cellulose and chitin: fabrica￾tion, properties, and applications. Green Chem., 53–75. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5GC02396C.
Singh, R., Upadhyay, S.K., Singh, M., Sharma, I., Sharma, P., Kamboj, P., Saini, A., Voraha, R., Sharma, A.K.,
Upadhyay, T.K., Khan, F., 2020. Chitin, chitinases and chitin derivatives in biopharmaceutical, agricultural
and environmental perspective. Biointerface Res. Appl. Chem. 11 (3), 9985–10005. https://doi.org/10.33263/
BRIAC113.998510005.
26 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesSinghsa, P., Narain, R., Manuspiya, H., 2018. Physical structure variations of bacterial cellulose produced by different
Komagataeibacter xylinus strains and carbon sources in static and agitated conditions. Cellulose 25 (3), 1571–1581.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-1699-1.
Song, D., Thio, Y.S., Deng, Y., 2011. Starch nanoparticle formation via reactive extrusion and related mechanism
study. Carbohydr. Polym. 85 (1), 208–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.02.016.
Sriupayo, J., Supaphol, P., Blackwell, J., Rujiravanit, R., 2005. Preparation and characterization of α-chitin whisker￾reinforced chitosan nanocomposite films with or without heat treatment. Carbohydr. Polym. 62 (2), 130–136.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2005.07.013.
Suortti, T., Gorenstein, M.V., Roger, P., 1998. Determination of the molecular mass of amylose. J. Chromatogr. A 828
(1–2), 515–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9673(98)00831-0.
Taer, E., Febriyanti, F., Mustika, W.S., Taslim, R., Agustino, A., Apriwandi, A., 2020. Enhancing the performance of
supercapacitor electrode from chemical activation of carbon nanofibers derived Areca catechu husk via one-stage
integrated pyrolysis. Carbon Lett. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42823-020-00191-5.
Tamahkar, E., Turkmen, D., Akg € on€ ull € u, S., Qureshi, T., Denizli, A., 2018. Bacterial cellulose nanofibers for efficient €
removal of Hg 2+ from aqueous solutions. In: Nanotechnology for Sustainable Water Resources. Wiley Blackwell,
pp. 501–522, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119323655.ch16.
Tan, I., Flanagan, B.M., Halley, P.J., Whittaker, A.K., Gidley, M.J., 2007. A method for estimating the nature and rel￾ative proportions of amorphous, single, and doubled-helical components in starch granules by 13C CP/MAS
NMR. Biomacromolecules 8 (3), 885–891. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm060988a.
Torres, F.G., Troncoso, O.P., Pisani, A., Gatto, F., Bardi, G., 2019. Natural polysaccharide nanomaterials: an overview
of their immunological properties. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 (20). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20205092.
Trache, D., Thakur, V.K., Boukherroub, R., 2020. Cellulose nanocrystals/graphene hybrids—a promising new class of
materials for advanced applications. Nano 10, 1523.
Vamadevan, V., Blennow, A., Buleon, A., Goldstein, A., Bertoft, E., 2018. Distinct properties and structures among
B-crystalline starch granules. Starch-St€arke 70 (3–4), 1700240. https://doi.org/10.1002/star.201700240.
Va´zquez, J.A., Noriega, D., Ramos, P., Valcarcel, J., Novoa-Carballal, R., Pastrana, L., Reis, R.L., Perez-Martı´n, R.I.,
2017. Optimization of high purity chitin and chitosan production from Illex argentinus pens by a combination
of enzymatic and chemical processes. Carbohydr. Polym. 174, 262–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2017.06.070.
Vepari, C., Kaplan, D.L., 2007. Silk as a biomaterial. Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (8–9), 991–1007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
progpolymsci.2007.05.013.
Wang, Q., Chen, S., Chen, D., 2017. Preparation and characterization of chitosan based injectable hydrogels enhanced
by chitin nano-whiskers. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 65, 466–477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmbbm.2016.09.009.
Wang, K., Hong, Y., Gu, Z., Cheng, L., Li, Z., Li, C. (2020). Stabilization of Pickering emulsions using starch
nanocrystals treated with alkaline solution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 155, 273–285.
Whitesides, G.M., 2005. Nanoscience, nanotechnology, and chemistry. Small 1 (2), 172–179. https://doi.org/10.1002/
smll.200400130.
Wu, J., Zhang, K., Girouard, N., Meredith, J.C., 2014. Facile route to produce chitin nanofibers as precursors for flex￾ible and transparent gas barrier materials. Biomacromolecules 15 (12), 4614–4620. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bm501416q.
Xiao, H., Yang, F., Lin, Q., Zhang, Q., Zhang, L., Sun, S., Han, W., Liu, G.Q., 2020. Preparation and characterization of
broken-rice starch nanoparticles with different sizes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 160, 437–445. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.05.182.
Yang, N., Zhang, W., Ye, C., Chen, X., Ling, S., 2019. Nanobiopolymers fabrication and their life cycle assessments.
Biotechnol. J. 14 (1). https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201700754.
Yang, T., Qi, H., Liu, P., Zhang, K., 2020b. Selective isolation methods for cellulose and chitin nanocrystals.
ChemPlusChem 85 (5), 1081–1088.
Zaoming, W., Codina, R., Fernandezcaldas, E., Lockey, R., Bukanz, S., 1996. 109 partial characterization of the silk
allergens in mulberry silk extract. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol., 210. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0091-6749(96)
80327-7.
References 27
I. Basics principlesZarnegar, Z., Monjezi, H.R., Safari, J., 2019. Arginine-based surface modification of nanostarch, a catalytic carbohy￾drates in synthesis of heteroaryl sulfides. J. Mol. Struct. 1193, 14–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molstruc.2019.05.017.
Zeng, J.-B., He, Y.-S., Li, S.-L., Wang, Y.-Z., 2011. Chitin whiskers: an overview. Biomacromolecules 13 (1), 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1021/bm201564a.
Zhang, F., Lu, Q., Ming, J., Dou, H., Liu, Z., Zuo, B., Qin, M., Li, F., Kaplan, D.L., Zhang, X., 2014. Silk dissolution and
regeneration at the nanofibril scale. J. Mater. Chem. B 2 (24), 3879–3885. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3tb21582b.
Zhu, Y., Romain, C., Williams, C.K., 2016. Sustainable polymers from renewable resources. Nature 540 (7633),
354–362. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21001.
Zobel, H.F., 1988. Molecules to granules: a comprehensive starch review. Starch-St€arke 40 (2), 44–50. https://doi.org/
10.1002/star.19880400203.
28 1. Nano-biosorbents for contaminant removal: An introduction
I. Basics principlesCHAPTER
2
Introduction to nano-biosorbents
Adnan Khana
, Sumeet Malika
, Nisar Alib
, Yong Yangb
,
Mohammed Salim Akhterc
, and Muhammad Bilald
a
Institute of Chemical Sciences, University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Pakistan b
Key Laboratory of Regional Resource Exploitation and Medicinal Research, Faculty of
Chemical Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, Jiangsu Province, China c
Department of Chemistry, College of Science, University of Bahrain, Zallaq, Bahrain d
School of
Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, China
2.1 Introduction
The increasing world pollution has also increased the demands of the people for a better
living. To cope with the demands of the people, a rush in industrialization has been noticed
since last decade. Although modern technology and a rising number of industries have a pos￾itive impact on the lives of people (Sahu et al., 2021; M. Khan et al., 2021; S. Khan et al., 2021).
At the same time, the rising pollution due to the discharges of these industries has caused
hazardous effects. Multiple types of industries have been set up across the world, which is
working continually to meet public demands (Karri et al., 2019; Ali et al., 2021). The
worth-mentioning ones are the food industries, fiber and textile industries, pharmaceuticals,
oil refineries, construction industries, nuclear power plant, canning industries, tanneries, pa￾per, and pulp mills, breweries, etc. (Werkneh and Rene, 2019; Yang et al., 2021) (Fig. 2.1).
The running of these industries also has some demerits like the production of contami￾nants, byproducts, secondary pollutants, which are discharged out with the wastewater. This
highly contaminated wastewater reaches out to the living organisms through multifarious
sources and causes precarious damages (Agarwal et al., 2019; Nawaz et al., 2020). The regular
contaminants found in the drainages of the industries may be organic or inorganic in nature.
Both the categories of contaminants include food additives, synthetic pesticides, insecticides,
detergents, solvents, paints, plastics, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, mineral acids, inor￾ganic salts, heavy metals, sulfates, phosphates, nitrates, radioactive pollutants, etc. (Vishnu
and Dhandapani, 2021; Ali et al., 2020a) (Fig. 2.2). The mentioned contaminants are
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 29 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00002-2non-biodegradable in nature and have obstructive effects on living organisms including
humans, flora, and fauna (Garba et al., 2019; Ali et al., 2020b). Commonly, the contaminated
wastewater in plants causes the retarded growth, poor production of products (fruits or veg￾etables), ultimate death of the plants, etc. In animals also, the contaminated industrial water
causes various diseases putting a negative impact on the animal stock (Vidal and Moraes,
2019; Ali et al., 2020c). Similarly, in humans the contaminants obtained from wastewater bod￾ies have mutagenic and carcinogenic effects. The common diseases caused by industrial con￾taminants include cholera, diarrhea, kidney diseases, skin irritations, asthma, etc. (Prabakar
et al., 2018; Khan et al., 2020). Considering the jeopardizing nature of the industrial effluents
and the ailments caused by them, researchers are trying to discover efficient methods for the
decontamination of the wastewater. Among the most commonly used methods are coagula￾tion/flocculation (Dotto et al., 2019), precipitation (Kartic et al., 2018), membrane filtration
(Konvensional, 2017), solvent extraction (Ying et al., 2020), electrolytic processes (Aquino
et al., 2017), reverse osmosis (Thac¸i and Gashi, 2019), photocatalytic degradation (M. Khan
et al., 2021), advanced electrochemical processes (Zazou et al., 2019), etc. Although the stated
FIG. 2.1 Various industries releasing emerging pollutants.
FIG. 2.2 Different organic and inorganic emerging pollutants.
30 2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesmethods have greatly been used, there are certain limitations associated with them. The most
commonly faced problems while following these methods are the production of secondary
pollutants, high-cost consumption, time-taking, inefficiency. To cope with these problems,
efforts are being made by scientists to develop more environmentally friendly and green pro￾cesses for the decontamination of the wastewater (Collivignarelli et al., 2019; Ali et al., 2020d).
Recently, nanobiosorption has grabbed the attention of scientists due to its environment￾friendly and cost-effective nature.
2.2 Concept of biosorption
The quest for efficient removal of contaminants from the wastewater bodies using a green
approach has led the researchers to exploit the biosorption process (Corral-Bobadilla et al.,
2021; Ali et al., 2020e). This method can generally be described as the bulk transfer process
of substances from liquid to the solid phase via the biological medium. The most commonly
employed biological medium may comprise living/nonliving biomass and cellular products
(Sheth et al., 2021). The biosorption could be categorized as a metabolically independent and
physicochemical process (Kanamarlapudi et al., 2018). The mechanisms generally involved in
this process might be adsorption (Li et al., 2020a, b), absorption (Feng et al., 2020), precipita￾tion (Peng et al., 2020), ion exchange (Han et al., 2020), or surface complexation (Li et al.,
2020a, b) (Fig. 2.3). While performing the process of biosorption for the removal of contam￾inants from the wastewater bodies, the contaminant (sorbate), which is in the fluid phase,
FIG. 2.3 About methods used for treatment of waste water.
2.2 Concept of biosorption 31
I. Basics principlesinterlinks with the solid phase (biosorbent) through mass-transfer (Escudero et al., 2019; Ali
et al., 2020f). The process of biosorption can further be subdivided into two categories, batch
process or continuous phase system. Batch process consists of stirred systems and is used for
little quantities, where equilibrium distribution depends on the contact time (Ubando et al.,
2021; Aziz et al., 2020). While in the case of a continuous phase system, fixed-bed columns are
required. The process of biosorption is completed in three steps, the first being the transfer of
sorbate to the biosorbent surface, commonly known as film diffusion. The second step follows
the movement of sorbate into the biosorbent pores, which falls under the intraparticle diffu￾sion. The third and last step refers to sorbate fixing onto biosorbent surface through surface
bonding. The first two steps are the rate-determining steps, while the third step is a fast step
(Vendruscolo et al., 2017; Sartaj et al., 2020). The process of biosorption has greatly been
employed for the removal of contaminants at different levels. The biosorption process is pre￾ferred over other classical methods due to its biocompatibility, feasibility, and efficiency. The
process of biosorption does not produce any secondary contaminants and the biosorbent can
be regenerated for further usage (Eletta and Ighalo, 2019; Ali et al., 2020g). Another prime
factor for the biosorption being a favorite decontamination technique is that a number of bi￾ological components as biosorbents like industrial wastes, agricultural wastes, bacteria, algae,
etc. This ensures the economic efficiency of the process (Castro et al., 2017; Ali et al., 2020h).
The biosorbents, being biological in nature, contain plenty of functional groups, which en￾hances the hydrophobic interactions. The process of biosorption is also affected by the oper￾ating environmental factors like pH, time, temperature, the surface area of sorbent, sorbent
activation, pressure, etc. ( Jobby et al., 2018; Ali et al., 2020i). Although biosorbents have a
number of advantages associated with them, the use of pristine biosorbents (without treat￾ment or modification) also has some demerits. The untreated biosorbents have been found
to produce high biological oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), and total
organic carbon (TOC), which ultimately leads to depletion of water oxygen content (Ibisi and
Asoluka, 2018; Ali et al., 2020j). Hence, it is necessary to further treat the biosorbents for im￾proving their ability in the removal of wastewater contaminants. This idea leads the re￾searchers towards applying the principles of nanotechnology upon the biosorbents to
produce nano-biosorbents (Bilal et al., 2018; Ali et al. 2020k).
2.3 Incorporation of nanotechnology with biosorption
Recently, nanotechnology has emerged as an advanced discipline of science and technol￾ogy in the forthcoming years. The nanoparticles are defined to have a nano-size range of
1–100 nm, which lies between the molecular size regime and the macroscopic bulk matter
(Mahamadi, 2019; Khan et al., 2019a). The nanoparticles tend to have unique physical, chem￾ical, and electronic properties. Keeping into consideration these properties of nanomaterials,
the performance of biosorption can be improved by incorporating with the nanomaterials by
trapping the profitable properties of nanomaterials like extremely small size, large surface-to￾volume ratio, large surface areas, high reactivity, and better sorption capacity (Yadav et al.,
2020; Ali et al., 2019). The production of nano-biosorbents has emerged as promising materials
compared to conventional biosorbents for the removal of contaminants. The nano-biosorbents
32 2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlescan be defined as biological components with a structural analysis of having at least one
dimension and a size range of less than 100 nm (Taka et al., 2020; Khan et al., 2019b). The
properties of the nano-biosorbents include nontoxicity; high sorption capacity, high sensitiv￾ity even at lower concentrations (ppb), and feasibility in desorption, which strengthens the
reusability of the material (Daneshvar and Hosseini, 2018; Khan et al., 2019c). Other factors
that improve the performance of the nano-biosorbents include economic efficiency, selectiv￾ity, and capacity of functionalization. Considering the useful aspects of the nano-biosorbents,
they have greatly been employed for the removal of different contaminants from the waste￾water bodies (Rama, 2019; Ali et al., 2018a). The different methods employed for the synthesis
of nano-biosorbents include biosorbent material immobilization onto the inorganic nano￾particles, magnetic modification of natural biosorbents, modification with organic matter,
and modification of metal oxides with organic matter, etc. Apart from the unique properties
associated with the nano-biosorbents, the properties of the nano-biosorbents can further be
improved by applying some advanced technologies (Giese et al., 2020; Sohni et al., 2018).
These innovative approaches for treating the nano-biosorbents are discussed as follows.
2.3.1 Magnetic modification of the nano-biosorbents
The magnetic modification of the nano-biosorbents is based on the idea of incorporating
magnetic nanoparticles with the biosorbents. This type of nano-biosorbent, once it captures
the sorbate particles from the fluid, can be separated by using a magnetic field with lower
gradients (Peralta et al., 2021; Ali et al., 2018b) (Fig. 2.4). This separation technique has many
FIG. 2.4 Schematic illustration for the adsorptive removal applications of magnetic mesostructured (MMST) and
MMST-Ph nanoadsorbents (Peralta et al., 2021).
2.3 Incorporation of nanotechnology with biosorption 33
I. Basics principlesadvantages over the conventional separation techniques like filtration or centrifugation. Due
to this reason, the magnetic modification approach has greatly been employed ( Ji et al., 2019;
Khan et al., 2017). The most magnetically modified nano-biosorbents include chitosan
nanoparticles (Salehi et al., 2020), algal biomass (Boubakri et al., 2017), fruit-waste extracts
(Allafchian et al., 2019), stabilization of magnetic nanoparticles with adipic acid-crosslinked
pectin (Rakhshaee and Panahandeh, 2011), etc.
2.3.2 Immobilization onto solid surface
Another advanced technique for the treatment of the nano-biosorbents is the immobiliza￾tion method. The immobilization either follows biosorbent immobilization onto the
nanoparticles surface or nanoparticle immobilization on the polymer matrix (e.g., alginate
matrix). A number of reports have been presented to date for the immobilization of the
nano-biosorbents (Alayli et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2016). The nano-biosorbents obtained from
the immobilization of the nanomaterials with the biological component have greatly been uti￾lized in the removal of contaminants from the wastewater bodies (Shakya et al., 2018).
2.3.3 Engineering of nanoscale zero-valent metals
The third type of nano-biosorbents fall under the category of engineered nanoscale zero￾valent metals (NZVMs). The NZVMs have greatly been used for the purposes of contami￾nants removal due to their large surface areas and high reproducibility, which offers a great
sorption potential (Phenrat and Lowry, 2019; Khan et al., 2015a). This group of nano￾biosorbents shows improved efficiency using less toxic materials and biological components.
Also, the magnetic property of these nano-biosorbents enables the removal of contaminants
like heavy metals more easily (Li et al., 2020a, b; Khan et al., 2015b).
2.4 Green approach for contaminants removal using nano-biosorbents
The nano-biosorbents have been utilized for the removal of contaminants from wastewater
bodies for a long time. Some of the environmental remediation applications of nano￾biosrobents have been discussed in detail in this section;
2.4.1 Removal of organic pollutants
A number of contaminants obtained from industries are organic in nature, which includes
dyes, pharmaceutical products, pesticides, insecticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, oil-based
hydrocarbons, etc. These contaminants are obtained from different types of industries.
Shirania et al. (2020) evaluated the performance of a novel nano-biosorbent, Curdled milk,
for the ultrasound-assisted removal of eosin blue and aniline blue dyes from the aqueous so￾lution. The nano-biosorbent showed an excellent efficiency for the removal of eosin blue and
aniline blue dyes with a maximum sorption capacity of 147.1 and 131.6 mg/g respectively.
The obtained results were further analyzed by applying the sorption isotherms and
34 2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesthermodynamic studies. The system tends to follow Langmuir model and pseudo-second￾order kinetics. Tarhan et al., 2019 also studied the sorptive efficiency of magnetic nano￾biosorbent for the removal of binary dyes metanil yellow (MY) and reactive black 5 (RB5).
The nano-biosorbent was first prepared by cross-linking glutaraldehyde with magnetic
chitosan nanoparticles. The biosorption of both MY and RB5 was performed at optimized
conditions and a maximum sorption capacity of 620 and 2549 mg/g was obtained for both
dyes, respectively (Fig. 2.5). The reaction followed the pseudo-second-order kinetics. Taka
et al. (2020) synthesized a polymeric nano-biosorbent by combining the amidation reaction,
sol-gel process, and cross-polymerization. The obtained insoluble nanosponge β-cyclodextrin
(β-CD) polyurethane modified with phosphorylated multiwalled carbon nanotubes
(pMWCNTs) and further decorated with titanium dioxide and silver nanoparticles were then
used for the removal of dyes. The obtained nano-biosorbent showed a good efficiency to￾wards the removal of trichloroethylene (TCE) and Congo red (CR) dye with a sorption capac￾ity of 275.05 and 146.96 mg/g, respectively.
Mahmoud et al. (2020a, b, c, d) studied the sorption of negatively charged food dyes,
tartrazine, and sunset yellow dye onto the positively charged triethylenetetramine biochar.
Firstly, the corncob nanobiochar was prepared through pyrolysis followed by its modification
with triethylenetetramine. The modified nanobiochar showed excellent performance for the
removal of tartrazine and sunset yellow dye with an efficiency of 93.31% and 92.06% for both
respectively. The removal of organic pollutants using different nanobiosorbents has been
displayed in Table 2.1.
FIG. 2.5 Mechanism for the biosorption of the RB5 and MY onto the GMCNs surface (Tarhan et al., 2019).
2.4 Green approach for contaminants removal using nano-biosorbents 35
I. Basics principles2.4.2 Removal of inorganic pollutants
The nano-biosorbents have also been greatly employed for the removal of inorganic con￾taminants like heavy metals, phosphates, nitrates, sulfates, cyanides, etc. Salehi et al. (2020)
TABLE 2.1 Removal of organic contaminants using nano-biosorbents.
Contaminants Nano-biosorbents
Removal
efficiency
Studied conditions References
pH Time Temp.
Methylene blue poly-m-phenylenediamine grafted
dextrin
76.33 mg/g 8 120 25 Zare et al.
(2018)
Methylene blue magnetic polydopamine (PDA)
and chitosan (CS) hybrid
nanobiosorbent
204 mg/g 8 120 30 Wang et al.
(2016) Malachite
green
61 mg/g
Methylene blue Immobilized Agrobacterium fabrum
biomass
91 mg/g 11 60 25 Sharma et al.
(2018)
Acid red nylon
57
Calcined eggshell modified with
titanium oxide nanoparticles
222 mg/g 1–8 40 El-Kemary
et al. (2018)
Methylene blue cress seed musilage magnetic
nanocomposites
44.6 mg/g 80 Allafchian
et al. (2019)
Indigo carmine Chitosan (CS)—Cerium oxide
(CeO2) nano-biosorbent
198 mg/g 3 25 Kekes et al.
(2021)
Metformin Nanoniochar 97% 45 Mahmoud
et al. (2020a, b,
c, d)
Ciprofloxacin Magnetic biosorbents 527.93 mg/g 6 25 Zheng et al.
(2020)
Polycyclic
aromatic
hydrocarbons
Nanoparticle-supported lipid
bilayers
Wang et al.
(2015)
Chlorpyrifos Nanoscale Moringa olivera seeds
waste (nMSW)
25 mg/g 7 30 Hamadeen
et al. (2021)
Nitro toluene
derivatives
Polyamide thin-film composite
layered on polysulfone-GO/TiO2
90% Gharehbakhsh
et al. (2020)
Rice husk 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid 96.87% 60 30 Chidambaram
(2016)
Methyl orange Modified Fe3O4 nano-particles
with the extracted pectin
0.446 mmol/g Rakhshaee
et al. (2011)
Methylene blue Cellulose-clay nanocomposite
hydrogels
98% Peng et al.
(2016)
Congo red Nanobiocomposite 127.2 mg/g Azin et al.
(2017)
36 2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesprepared a novel nano-biosorbent by cross-linking chitosan magnetic beads and modifying
them with methionine-glutaraldehyde Schiff’s base. The obtained (MG-Chi/Fe3O4) was then
used for the removal of heavy metals. At the optimized operating conditions the nano￾biosorbent showed a removal efficiency of 172.4, 175.4, and 163.9 mg/g for Cu(II), Pb(II),
and Cd(II), respectively. Further analysis of the results showed that the system followed
the pseudo-second-order kinetics. Daneshvar and Hosseini (2018) also studied the
biosorption of Cr (VI) using a magnetic biosorbent. Firstly, the magnetic nanoparticles were
synthesized by the chemical co-precipitation method. The obtained magnetic nanoparticles
were then incorporated with dead and alkaline activated biomass of Aspergillus niger. The fi￾nally obtained nano-biosorbent showed a good performance for the removal of Cr (VI) with a
removal efficiency of 92%. The analysis of the results showed that the sorption process
followed the Temkin model. Mahmoud et al. (2020a, b, c, d) also studied the preparation
of a nano-biosorbent through the functionalized graphene quantum dots from rice husk with
barium hydroxide. The obtained GQDOs-Ba nano-biosorbent was then used for the removal
of Pb(II) and La(III) ions. The nano-biosorbent showed an excellent efficiency for the removal
of Pb(II) and La(III) ions with removal percentages of 98.5%–99.8% for lead and 94.6%–96.2%
for lanthanum. Esmaeili and Khoshnevisan (2016) also studied the preparation of alginate￾coated chitosan nanoparticles (Alg-CS-NPs) and then checked their efficiency for the removal
of nickel ions. The obtained nano-biosorbent showed a good removal performance towards
nickel removal with a removal efficiency of 94.48%. The obtained results best fitted the
Freundlich isotherm model and pseudo-second-order kinetics. The removal inorganic con￾taminants removal using nano-biosorbing are shown in Table 2.2.
TABLE 2.2 Removal of inorganic contaminants using nano-biosorbents.
Contaminants Nano-biosorbents
Removal
efficiency
Studied conditions References
pH Time
(min)
Temp.
(°C)
Cu (II) Carboxymethylchitosan covalently
linked to silica-coated core-shell
magnetic nanoparticles
350 mg/g 6 60 25 Plohl et al.
(2019)
Cr (VI) Ethylenediamine-modified amyloid
fibrils (nanofibers)
0.68 mg/g 7 60 Leung et al.
(2016)
As (III) Cerium modified chitosan ultrafine
nano-biosorbent
57.5 mg/g 8 120 25 Zhang et al.
(2016)
Cr (VI) Amyloid fibrils 7 Leung, 2017
Zn (II) Zinc imprinted nano-biosorbent 275.48 mg/g Basak et al.
(2014)
Cd (II) Nanoscale zero-valent iron
functionalized Posidonia oceanica
320.52 mg/g 7 120 Boubakri
et al. (2017) Pb (II) 411.40 mg/g
Cu (II) 460.25 mg/g
Continued
2.4 Green approach for contaminants removal using nano-biosorbents 37
I. Basics principles2.5 Conclusion
The ever-rising pollution has triggered researchers and scientists to explore new, cost￾effective, and environmentally green opportunities for the removal of contaminants. This
has led to the deployment of nano-biosorbents for the removal of various contaminants from
wastewater bodies. The presented chapter gives an introduction to the nano-biosorbents and
their capabilities towards the removal of contaminants from the wastewater bodies.
References
Abo Markeb, A., Alonso, A., Dorado, A.D., Sa´nchez, A., Font, X., 2016. Phosphate removal and recovery from water
using nanocomposite of immobilized magnetite nanoparticles on cationic polymer. Environ. Technol. 37 (16),
2099–2112.
TABLE 2.2 Removal of inorganic contaminants using nano-biosorbents—cont’d
Contaminants Nano-biosorbents
Removal
efficiency
Studied conditions References
pH Time
(min)
Temp.
(°C)
U(VI) Carbon quantum dots loaded on
polymer matrix
97.3% 5 70 Mahmoud
et al. (2020a,
b, c, d)
Cr (VI) Modified biopolymer chitosan 78.12 mg/g 1.5 Khalil et al.
(2021)
Cr (VI) Nanoscale Pisum sativum pods
biochar encapsulated starch
hydrogel
420.13 mg/g Mohamed
and
Mahmoud
(2020)
Pb (II) Amyloid lysozyme fibrils
conjugated with polyethyleneimine
(PEI)
493 mg/g 25 Liu et al.
(2020)
Phosphate Modified magnetite nanoparticles 4.9 mg/g 7 Abo Markeb
et al. (2016)
Phosphate Lanthanum molybdate/magnetite 66% 7 1440 25 Luo et al.
(2021)
Cd (II) Porous anion-exchanger chelating
fibers (PP-g-AA-Am)
125.34 mg/g Liu et al.
(2016)
Nitrate Functionalized chitosan￾clinoptilolite nanocomposites
277.7 mg/g Yazdi et al.
(2019)
Nitrate Biochar composites with nano zero￾valent iron
148.1 mg/g Ahmad et al.
(2018)
Nitrate Polydopamine coated zeolite 3 10 Gouran￾Orimi et al.
(2018)
38 2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesAgarwal, P., Gupta, R., Agarwal, N., 2019. Advances in synthesis and applications of microalgal nanoparticles for
wastewater treatment. J. Nanotechnol. 2019, 1–9.
Ahmad, M., Ahmad, M., Usman, A.R., Al-Faraj, A.S., Abduljabbar, A.S., Al-Wabel, M.I., 2018. Biochar composites
with nano zerovalent iron and eggshell powder for nitrate removal from aqueous solution with coexisting chlo￾ride ions. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25 (26), 25757–25771.
Alayli, A., Nadaroglu, H., Turgut, E., 2021. Nanobiocatalyst beds with Fenton process for removal of methylene blue.
Appl Water Sci 11 (2), 1–8.
Ali, N., Kamal, T., Ul-Islam, M., Khan, A., Shah, S.J., Zada, A., 2018a. Chitosan-coated cotton cloth supported copper
nanoparticles for toxic dye reduction. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 111, 832–838.
Ali, N., Ismail, M., Khan, A., Khan, H., Haider, S., Kamal, T., 2018b. Spectrophotometric methods for the determina￾tion of urea in real samples using silver nanoparticles by standard addition and 2nd order derivative methods.
Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 189, 110–115.
Ali, N., Zada, A., Zahid, M., Ismail, A., Rafiq, M., Riaz, A., Khan, A., 2019. Enhanced photodegradation of methylene
blue with alkaline and transition-metal ferrite nanophotocatalysts under direct sun light irradiation. J. Chin.
Chem. Soc. 66 (4), 402–408.
Ali, N., Uddin, S., Khan, A., Khan, S., Khan, S., Ali, N., Bilal, M., 2020a. Regenerable chitosan-bismuth cobalt selenide
hybrid microspheres for mitigation of organic pollutants in an aqueous environment. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 161,
1305–1317.
Ali, N., Ahmad, S., Khan, A., Khan, S., Bilal, M., Ud Din, S., Khan, H., 2020b. Selenide-chitosan as high-performance
nanophotocatalyst for accelerated degradation of pollutants. Chem. Asian J. 15 (17), 2660–2673.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Khan, A., Ali, F., Yang, Y., Khan, M., Iqbal, H.M., 2020c. Dynamics of oil-water interface
demulsification using multifunctional magnetic hybrid and assembly materials. J. Mol. Liq. 312, 113434.
Ali, N., Khan, A., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.M., 2020d. Chitosan-based green sorbent material for cat￾ions removal from an aqueous environment. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8, 104064.
Ali, N., Khan, A., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Iqbal, H., 2020e. Chitosan-based bio-composite modified with
thiocarbamate moiety for decontamination of cations from the aqueous media. Molecules 25 (1), 226.
Ali, N., Khan, A., Nawaz, S., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Iqbal, H.M., 2020f. Characterization and deployment of
surface-engineered chitosan-triethylenetetramine nanocomposite hybrid nano-adsorbent for divalent cations de￾contamination. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 152, 663–671.
Ali, N., Naz, N., Shah, Z., Khan, A., Nawaz, R., 2020g. Selective transportation of molybdenum from model and ore
through poly inclusion membrane. Bull. Chem. Soc. Ethiop. 34 (1), 93–104.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Nazir, M.S., Khan, A., Ali, F., Iqbal, H.M., 2020h. Thermochemical and electrochemical aspects of
carbon dioxide methanation: a sustainable approach to generate fuel via waste to energy theme. Sci. Total Environ.
712, 136482.
Ali, N., Azeem, S., Khan, A., Khan, H., Kamal, T., Asiri, A.M., 2020i. Experimental studies on removal of
arsenites from industrial effluents using tridodecylamine supported liquid membrane. Environ. Sci. Pollut.
Res. 27, 1–12.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Khan, A., Ali, F., Iqbal, H.M., 2020j. Design, engineering and analytical perspectives of membrane
materials with smart surfaces for efficient oil/water separation. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 127, 115902.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Khan, A., Ali, F., Yang, Y., Malik, S., Iqbal, H.M., 2021. Deployment of metal-organic frameworks as
robust materials for sustainable catalysis and remediation of pollutants in environmental settings. Chemosphere
272, 129605.
Allafchian, A., Mousavi, Z.S., Hosseini, S.S., 2019. Application of cress seed musilage magnetic nanocomposites for
removal of methylene blue dye from water. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 136, 199–208.
Aquino, J.M., Miwa, D.W., Rodrigo, M.A., Motheo, A.J., 2017. Treatment of actual effluents produced in the
manufacturing of atrazine by a photo-electrolytic process. Chemosphere 172, 185–192.
Azin, E., Moghimi, H., Taheri, R.A., 2017. Development of carbon nanotube-mycosorbent for effective Congo red re￾moval: optimization, isotherm and kinetic studies. Desalin. Water Treat. 94, 30–222.
Aziz, A., Ali, N., Khan, A., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Ali, N., Khan, H., 2020. Chitosanzinc sulfide nanoparticles, character￾ization and their photocatalytic degradation efficiency for azo dyes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 153, 502–512.
Basak, G., Das, D., Das, N., 2014. Enhanced Zn (II) uptake using zinc imprinted form of novel nano-biosorbent and its
application as an antimicrobial agent. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 31 (5), 812–820.
Bilal, M., Rasheed, T., Sosa-Herna´ndez, J.E., Raza, A., Nabeel, F., Iqbal, H., 2018. Biosorption: an interplay between
marine algae and potentially toxic elements—a review. Mar. Drugs 16 (2), 65.
References 39
I. Basics principlesBoubakri, S., Djebbi, M.A., Bouaziz, Z., Namour, P., Amara, A.B.H., Ghorbel-Abid, I., Kalfat, R., 2017. Nanoscale zero￾valent iron functionalized Posidonia oceanica marine biomass for heavy metal removal from water. Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res. 24 (36), 27879–27896.
Castro, L., Bla´zquez, M.L., Gonza´lez, F., Mun˜oz, J.A., Ballester, A., 2017. Biosorption of Zn (II) from industrial efflu￾ents using sugar beet pulp and F. vesiculosus: from laboratory tests to a pilot approach. Sci. Total Environ. 598,
856–866.
Chidambaram, R., 2016. Rice husk as a low cost nanosorbent for 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid removal from aque￾ous solutions. Ecol. Eng. 92, 97–105.
Collivignarelli, M.C., Abba`, A., Miino, M.C., Damiani, S., 2019. Treatments for color removal from wastewater: state of
the art. J. Environ. Manag. 236, 727–745.
Corral-Bobadilla, M., Lostado-Lorza, R., Somovilla-Go´mez, F., Escribano-Garcı´a, R., 2021. Effective use of activated
carbon from olive stone waste in the biosorption removal of Fe (III) ions from aqueous solutions. J. Clean. Prod.
294, 126332.
Daneshvar, M., Hosseini, M.R., 2018. Kinetics, isotherm, and optimization of the hexavalent chromium removal from
aqueous solution by a magnetic nano-biosorbent. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25 (28), 28654–28666.
Dotto, J., Fagundes-Klen, M.R., Veit, M.T., Palacio, S.M., Bergamasco, R., 2019. Performance of different coagulants in
the coagulation/flocculation process of textile wastewater. J. Clean. Prod. 208, 656–665.
Eletta, O.A., Ighalo, J.O., 2019. A review of fish scales as a source of biosorbent for the removal of pollutants from
industrial effluents. J. Res. Inf. Civ. Eng. 16 (1), 2479–2510.
El-Kemary, M.A., El-mehasseb, I.M., Shoueir, K.R., El-Shafey, S.E., El-Shafey, O.I., Aljohani, H.A., Fouad, R.R., 2018.
Sol-gel TiO2 decorated on eggshell nanocrystal as engineered adsorbents for removal of acid dye. J. Dispers. Sci.
Technol. 39 (6), 911–921.
Escudero, L.B., Quintas, P.Y., Wuilloud, R.G., Dotto, G.L., 2019. Recent advances on elemental biosorption. Environ.
Chem. Lett. 17 (1), 409–427.
Esmaeili, A., Khoshnevisan, N., 2016. Optimization of process parameters for removal of heavy metals by biomass of
cu and co-doped alginate-coated chitosan nanoparticles. Bioresour. Technol. 218, 650–658.
Feng, Y., Liu, P., Wang, Y., Finfrock, Y.Z., Xie, X., Su, C., Xu, Y., 2020. Distribution and speciation of iron in
Fe-modified biochars and its application in removal of As (V), As (III), Cr (VI), and Hg (II): an X-ray absorption
study. J. Hazard. Mater. 384, 121342.
Garba, Z.N., Zhou, W., Lawan, I., Xiao, W., Zhang, M., Wang, L., Yuan, Z., 2019. An overview of chlorophenols as
contaminants and their removal from wastewater by adsorption: a review. J. Environ. Manag. 241, 59–75.
Gharehbakhsh, H., Panahi, H.A., Toosi, M.R., Hassani, A.H., Moniri, E., 2020. Application of polyamide thin-film
composite layered on polysulfone-GO/TiO 2 mixed matrix membranes for removal of nitrotoluene derivatives
from petrochemical wastewaters. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (34), 42481–42494.
Giese, E.C., Silva, D.D., Costa, A.F., Almeida, S.G., Dussa´n, K.J., 2020. Immobilized microbial nanoparticles for
biosorption. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 40 (5), 653–666.
Gouran-Orimi, R., Mirzayi, B., Nematollahzadeh, A., Tardast, A., 2018. Competitive adsorption of nitrate in fixed-bed
column packed with bio-inspired polydopamine coated zeolite. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 6 (2), 2232–2240.
Hamadeen, H.M., Elkhatib, E.A., Badawy, M.E., Abdelgaleil, S.A., 2021. Green low cost nanomaterial produced from
Moringa oleifera seed waste for enhanced removal of chlorpyrifos from wastewater: Mechanism and sorption stud￾ies. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9, 105376.
Han, S., Zang, Y., Gao, Y., Yue, Q., Zhang, P., Kong, W., Gao, B., 2020. Co-monomer polymer anion exchange resin for
removing Cr (VI) contaminants: adsorption kinetics, mechanism and performance. Sci. Total Environ. 709, 136002.
Ibisi, N.E., Asoluka, C.A., 2018. Use of agro-waste (Musa paradisiaca peels) as a sustainable biosorbent for toxic metal
ions removal from contaminated water. Chem. Int. 4 (1), 52.
Ji, J., Chen, G., Zhao, J., 2019. Preparation and characterization of amino/thiol bifunctionalized magnetic
nanoadsorbent and its application in rapid removal of Pb (II) from aqueous system. J. Hazard. Mater. 368, 255–263.
Jobby, R., Jha, P., Yadav, A.K., Desai, N., 2018. Biosorption and biotransformation of hexavalent chromium [Cr (VI)]: a
comprehensive review. Chemosphere 207, 255–266.
Kanamarlapudi, S.L.R.K., Chintalpudi, V.K., Muddada, S., 2018. Application of biosorption for removal of heavy
metals from wastewater. Biosorption 18, 69–116.
Karri, R.R., Shams, S., Sahu, J.N., 2019. Overview of potential applications of nano-biotechnology in wastewater and
effluent treatment. In: Ahsan, A., Ismail, A.F. (Eds.), Nanotechnology in Water and Wastewater Treatment. Micro
and Nano Technologies. Elsevier, pp. 87–100.
40 2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesKartic, D.N., Narayana, B.C.A., Arivazhagan, M., 2018. Removal of high concentration of sulfate from pigment indus￾try effluent by chemical precipitation using barium chloride: RSM and ANN modeling approach. J. Environ.
Manag. 206, 69–76.
Kekes, T., Tsakanika, L.A., Kolliopoulos, G., Tzia, C., 2021. Adsorption of indigo carmine onto chitosan-cerium oxide
Nano-biosorbent: adsorption isotherms, kinetics, and thermodynamics. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 690 (1),
012048. IOP Publishing.
Khalil, T.E., Elhusseiny, A.F., Ibrahim, N.M., El-Dissouky, A., 2021. Unexpected effect of magnetic nanoparticles on
the performance of aqueous removal of toxic Cr (VI) using modified biopolymer chitosan. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
170, 768–779.
Khan, A., Badshah, S., Airoldi, C., 2015a. Environmentally benign modified biodegradable chitosan for cation re￾moval. Polym. Bull. 72 (2), 353–370.
Khan, A., Wahid, F., Ali, N., Badshah, S., Airoldi, C., 2015b. Single-step modification of chitosan for toxic cations re￾mediation from aqueous solution. Desalin. Water Treat. 56 (4), 1099–1109.
Khan, S.U., Khan, F.U., Khan, I.U., Muhammad, N., Badshah, S., Khan, A., Nasrullah, A., 2016. Biosorption of nickel
(II) and copper (II) ions from aqueous solution using novel biomass derived from Nannorrhops ritchiana (Mazri
palm). Desalin. Water Treat. 57 (9), 3964–3974.
Khan, A., Begum, S., Ali, N., Khan, S., Hussain, S., Sotomayor, M.D.P.T., 2017. Preparation of crosslinked chitosan
magnetic membrane for cations sorption from aqueous solution. Water Sci. Technol. 75 (9), 2034–2046.
Khan, A., Ali, N., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Iqbal, H., 2019a. Engineering functionalized chitosan-based sorbent
material: characterization and sorption of toxic elements. Appl. Sci. 9 (23), 5138.
Khan, A., Shah, S.J., Mehmood, K., Ali, N., Khan, H., 2019b. Synthesis of potent chitosan beads a suitable alternative
for textile dye reduction in sunlight. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 30 (1), 406–414.
Khan, H., Khalil, A.K., Khan, A., 2019c. Photocatalytic degradation of alizarin yellow in aqueous medium and real
samples using chitosan conjugated tin magnetic nanocomposites. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 30 (24),
21332–21342.
Khan, H., Gul, K., Ara, B., Khan, A., Ali, N., Ali, N., Bilal, M., 2020. Adsorptive removal of acrylic acid from the aque￾ous environment using raw and chemically modified alumina: batch adsorption, kinetic, equilibrium and ther￾modynamic studies. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8, 103927.
Khan, M., Khan, A., Khan, H., Ali, N., Sartaj, S., Malik, S., Bilal, M., 2021. Development and characterization of re￾generable chitosan-coated nickel selenide nano-photocatalytic system for decontamination of toxic azo dyes.
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 182, 866–878.
Khan, S., Khan, A., Ali, N., Ahmad, S., Ahmad, W., Malik, S., Bilal, M., 2021. Degradation of carcinogenic Congo red
dye using ternary metal selenide-chitosan microspheres as robust and reusable catalysts. Environ. Technol. Innov.
22, 101402.
Konvensional, B.T., 2017. A review of oilfield wastewater treatment using membrane filtration over conventional
technology. Malays. J. Anal. Sci 21, 643–658.
Leung, W.H., 2017. Development of a Colorimetric Nanosensor and Nano-Biosorbents from Amyloid Fibrils of Hen
Lysozyme for Rapid Detection of Chromium (VI) and Removal of Dye and Chromium (VI) Pollutants. Department
of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, Hong Kong Polytechnic University – Dissertations Chromium –
Toxicology Water – Purification.
Leung, W.H., So, P.K., Wong, W.T., Lo, W.H., Chan, P.H., 2016. Ethylenediamine-modified amyloid fibrils of hen
lysozyme with stronger adsorption capacity as rapid nano-biosorbents for removal of chromium (VI) ions.
RSC Adv. 6 (108), 106837–106846.
Li, Z., Liu, Y., Zou, S., Lu, C., Bai, H., Mu, H., Duan, J., 2020a. Removal and adsorption mechanism of tetracycline and
cefotaxime contaminants in water by NiFe2O4-COF-chitosan-terephthalaldehyde nanocomposites film. Chem.
Eng. J. 382, 123008.
Li, Z., Sun, Y., Yang, Y., Han, Y., Wang, T., Chen, J., Tsang, D.C., 2020b. Biochar-supported nanoscale zero-valent iron
as an efficient catalyst for organic degradation in groundwater. J. Hazard. Mater. 383, 121240.
Liu, M., Tao, Z., Wang, H., Zhao, F., Sun, Q., 2016. Preparation and characterization of a series of porous anion￾exchanger chelating fibers and their adsorption behavior with respect to removal of cadmium (II). RSC Adv. 6
(116), 115222–115237.
Liu, M., Jia, L., Zhao, Z., Han, Y., Li, Y., Peng, Q., Zhang, Q., 2020. Fast and robust lead (II) removal from
water by bioinspired amyloid lysozyme fibrils conjugated with polyethyleneimine (PEI). Chem. Eng. J. 390,
124667.
References 41
I. Basics principlesLuo, F., Feng, X., Jiang, X., Zhou, A., Xie, P., Wang, Z., Wan, J., 2021. Lanthanum molybdate/magnetite for selective
phosphate removal from wastewater: characterization, performance, and sorption mechanisms. Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res. 28 (4), 4342–4351.
Mahamadi, C., 2019. Will nano-biosorbents break the Achilles’ heel of biosorption technology? Environ. Chem. Lett.
17 (4), 1753–1768.
Mahmoud, M.E., Abdelfattah, A.M., Tharwat, R.M., Nabil, G.M., 2020a. Adsorption of negatively charged food
tartrazine and sunset yellow dyes onto positively charged triethylenetetramine biochar: optimization, kinetics
and thermodynamic study. J. Mol. Liq. 318, 114297.
Mahmoud, M.E., El-Ghanam, A.M., Saad, S.R., Mohamed, R.H.A., 2020b. Promoted removal of metformin hydrochlo￾ride anti-diabetic drug from water by fabricated and modified nanobiochar from artichoke leaves. Sustain. Chem.
Pharm. 18, 100336.
Mahmoud, M.E., Fekry, N.A., Abdelfattah, A.M., 2020c. A novel nano-biosorbent of functionalized graphene quan￾tum dots from rice husk with barium hydroxide for microwave enhanced removal of lead (II) and lanthanum (III).
Bioresour. Technol. 298, 122514.
Mahmoud, M.E., Fekry, N.A., Abdelfattah, A.M., 2020d. Removal of uranium (VI) from water by the action of
microwave-rapid green synthesized carbon quantum dots from starch-water system and supported onto poly￾meric matrix. J. Hazard. Mater. 397, 122770.
Mohamed, A.K., Mahmoud, M.E., 2020. Nanoscale Pisum sativum pods biochar encapsulated starch hydrogel: a
novel nanosorbent for efficient chromium (VI) ions and naproxen drug removal. Bioresour. Technol. 308, 123263.
Nawaz, A., Khan, A., Ali, N., Ali, N., Bilal, M., 2020. Fabrication and characterization of new ternary ferrites-chitosan
nanocomposite for solar-light driven photocatalytic degradation of a model textile dye. Environ. Technol. Innov.
20, 101079.
Peng, N., Hu, D., Zeng, J., Li, Y., Liang, L., Chang, C., 2016. Superabsorbent cellulose–clay nanocomposite hydrogels
for highly efficient removal of dye in water. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4 (12), 7217–7224.
Peng, D., Qiao, S., Luo, Y., Ma, H., Zhang, L., Hou, S., Xu, H., 2020. Performance of microbial induced carbonate pre￾cipitation for immobilizing cd in water and soil. J. Hazard. Mater. 400, 123116.
Peralta, M.E., Ma´rtire, D.O., Moreno, M.S., Parolo, M.E., Carlos, L., 2021. Versatile nanoadsorbents based on magnetic
mesostructured silica nanoparticles with tailored surface properties for organic pollutants removal. J. Environ.
Chem. Eng. 9 (1), 104841.
Phenrat, T., Lowry, G.V., 2019. Nanoscale zerovalent iron particles for environmental restoration. In: From Funda￾mental Science to Field Scale Engineering Applications. Springer Link.
Plohl, O., Ajdnik, U., Gyergyek, S., Ban, I., Vesel, A., Glaser, T.K., Zemljic, L.F., 2019. Superior stability and high
biosorbent efficiency of carboxymethylchitosan covalently linked to silica-coated core-shell magnetic
nanoparticles for application in copper removal. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 7 (1), 102913.
Prabakar, D., Manimudi, V.T., Mathimani, T., Kumar, G., Rene, E.R., Pugazhendhi, A., 2018. Pretreatment technol￾ogies for industrial effluents: critical review on bioenergy production and environmental concerns. J. Environ.
Manag. 218, 165–180.
Rakhshaee, R., Panahandeh, M., 2011. Stabilization of a magnetic nano-adsorbent by extracted pectin to remove meth￾ylene blue from aqueous solution: a comparative studying between two kinds of cross-likened pectin. J. Hazard.
Mater. 189 (1–2), 158–166.
Rakhshaee, R., Giahi, M., Pourahmad, A., 2011. Removal of methyl orange from aqueous solution by Azolla
filicoloides: synthesis of Fe3O4 nano-particles and its surface modification by the extracted pectin of Azolla. Chin.
Chem. Lett. 22 (4), 501–504.
Rama, H., 2019. Tracing Heavy Metals in Tomato Plants Watered with Synthetic Wastewater Treated with a Bacterial
Coated Calcium Alginate Nanobiosorbent. (Doctoral Dissertation).
Sahu, J.N., Karri, R.R., Zabed, H.M., Shams, S., Qi, X., 2021. Current perspectives and future prospects of nano￾biotechnology in wastewater treatment. Sep. Purif. Rev. 50 (2), 139–158.
Salehi, N., Moghimi, A., Shahbazi, H., 2020. Preparation of cross-linked magnetic chitosan with methionine￾glutaraldehyde for removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1–17.
Sartaj, S., Ali, N., Khan, A., Malik, S., Bilal, M., Khan, M., Khan, S., 2020. Performance evaluation of photolytic and
electrochemical oxidation processes for enhanced degradation of food dyes laden wastewater. Water Sci. Technol.
81 (5), 971–984.
Shakya, M., Rene, E.R., Nancharaiah, Y.V., Lens, P.N., 2018. Fungal-based nanotechnology for heavy metal removal.
In: Nanotechnology, Food Security and Water Treatment. Springer Link, pp. 229–253.
42 2. Introduction to nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesSharma, S., Hasan, A., Kumar, N., Pandey, L.M., 2018. Removal of methylene blue dye from aqueous solution using
immobilized Agrobacterium fabrum biomass along with iron oxide nanoparticles as biosorbent. Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res. 25 (22), 21605–21615.
Sheth, Y., Dharaskar, S., Khalid, M., Sonawane, S., 2021. An environment friendly approach for heavy metal removal
from industrial wastewater using chitosan based biosorbent: a review. Sustainable Energy Technol. Assess. 43,
100951.
Shirania, M., Akbaria, A., Golib, A., 2020. Application of a novel high-performance nano biosorbent for removal of
anionic dyes from aqueous solutions using shuffled frog leaping algorithm: isotherm, kinetic and thermodynamic
studies. Desalin. Water Treat. 203, 388–402.
Sohni, S., Gul, K., Ahmad, F., Ahmad, I., Khan, A., Khan, N., Bahadar Khan, S., 2018. Highly efficient removal of acid
red-17 and bromophenol blue dyes from industrial wastewater using graphene oxide functionalized magnetic
chitosan composite. Polym. Compos. 39 (9), 3317–3328.
Taka, A.L., Fosso-Kankeu, E., Pillay, K., Mbianda, X.Y., 2020. Metal nanoparticles decorated phosphorylated carbon
nanotube/cyclodextrin nanosponge for trichloroethylene and Congo red dye adsorption from wastewater. J. En￾viron. Chem. Eng. 8 (3), 103602.
Tarhan, T., Tural, B., Boga, K., Tural, S., 2019. Adsorptive performance of magnetic nano-biosorbent for binary dyes
and investigation of comparative biosorption. SN Appl. Sci. 1 (1), 1–11.
Thac¸i, B.S., Gashi, S.T., 2019. Reverse osmosis removal of heavy metals from wastewater effluents using biowaste
materials pretreatment. Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 28 (1), 337–341.
Ubando, A.T., Africa, A.D.M., Maniquiz-Redillas, M.C., Culaba, A.B., Chen, W.H., Chang, J.S., 2021. Microalgal
biosorption of heavy metals: a comprehensive bibliometric review. J. Hazard. Mater. 402, 123431.
Vendruscolo, F., da Rocha Ferreira, G.L., Antoniosi Filho, N.R., 2017. Biosorption of hexavalent chromium by micro￾organisms. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation 119, 87–95.
Vidal, R.R.L., Moraes, J.S., 2019. Removal of organic pollutants from wastewater using chitosan: a literature review.
Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 16 (3), 1741–1754.
Vishnu, D., Dhandapani, B., 2021. A review on the synergetic effect of plant extracts on nanomaterials for the removal
of metals in industrial effluents. Curr. Anal. Chem. 17 (2), 260–271.
Wang, H., Kim, B., Wunder, S.L., 2015. Nanoparticle-supported lipid bilayers as an in situ remediation strategy for
hydrophobic organic contaminants in soils. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49 (1), 529–536.
Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Hou, C., Liu, M., 2016. Mussel-inspired synthesis of magnetic polydopamine–chitosan
nanoparticles as biosorbent for dyes and metals removal. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 61, 292–298.
Werkneh, A.A., Rene, E.R., 2019. Applications of nanotechnology and biotechnology for sustainable water and waste￾water treatment. In: Bui, X.T., Chiemchaisri, C., Fujioka, T., Varjani, S. (Eds.), Water and Wastewater Treatment
Technologies. Energy, Environment, and Sustainability. Springer, Singapore, pp. 405–430.
Yadav, V.K., Choudhary, N., Khan, S.H., Malik, P., Inwati, G.K., Suriyaprabha, R., Ravi, R.K., 2020. Synthesis and
characterisation of nano-biosorbents and their applications for waste water treatment. In: Duca, G.,
Vaseashta, A. (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Emerging Developments and Environmental Impacts of Ecological
Chemistry. IGI Global, pp. 252–290.
Yang, Y., Ali, N., Khan, A., Khan, S., Khan, S., Khan, H., Bilal, M., 2021. Chitosan-capped ternary metal selenide
nanocatalysts for efficient degradation of Congo red dye in sunlight irradiation. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 167,
169–181.
Yazdi, F., Anbia, M., Salehi, S., 2019. Characterization of functionalized chitosan-clinoptilolite nanocomposites for
nitrate removal from aqueous media. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 130, 545–555.
Ying, Z., Ren, X., Li, J., Wu, G., Wei, Q., 2020. Recovery of chromium (VI) in wastewater using solvent extraction with
amide. Hydrometallurgy 196, 105440.
Zare, E.N., Lakouraj, M.M., Kasirian, N., 2018. Development of effective nano-biosorbent based on poly
m-phenylenediamine grafted dextrin for removal of Pb (II) and methylene blue from water. Carbohydr. Polym.
201, 539–548.
Zazou, H., Afanga, H., Akhouairi, S., Ouchtak, H., Addi, A.A., Akbour, R.A., Hamdani, M., 2019. Treatment of textile
industry wastewater by electrocoagulation coupled with electrochemical advanced oxidation process. J. Water
Process. Eng. 28, 214–221.
Zhang, L., Zhu, T., Liu, X., Zhang, W., 2016. Simultaneous oxidation and adsorption of As (III) from water by cerium
modified chitosan ultrafine nano-biosorbent. J. Hazard. Mater. 308, 1–10.
Zheng, C., Zheng, H., Hu, C., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Zhao, C., Sun, Q., 2020. Structural design of magnetic biosorbents
for the removal of ciprofloxacin from water. Bioresour. Technol. 296, 122288.
References 43
I. Basics principlesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
3
Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles,
synthesis, and application for
contaminants removal
Adnan Khana
, Sumeet Malika
, Nisar Alib
, Muhammad Bilalc
,
Yong Yangb
, Mohammed Salim Akhterd
, Cao Zhoub
,
Ye Wenjieb
, and Hafiz M.N. Iqbale
a
Institute of Chemical Sciences, University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Pakistan b
Key Laboratory of Regional Resource Exploitation and Medicinal Research, Faculty of
Chemical Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, Jiangsu Province, China c
School
of Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, China
d
Department of Chemistry, College of Science, University of Bahrain, Zallaq, Bahrain
e
Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey, Mexico
3.1 Introduction
Clean and fresh water is one of the necessities for living organisms. The rising world pol￾lution has made the supply of freshwater very difficult and challenging (Saxena et al., 2020;
Khan et al., 2021b). The contaminants polluting the water sources and the industrial effluents
being discharged out in the form of wastewater have stirred a great concern for the supply of
pure water. The guarantee to supply clean and pure water for the earth and its occupants has
become the topmost task for researchers and scientists (Tshikovhi et al., 2020; Ali et al., 2021).
Considering the very limited freshwater assets and their rapid downturn is alarming, which
requires proper measures for the treatment. Scientists have taken major steps for the treat￾ment of wastewater bodies to make sure the removal of contaminants (Kennedy et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2021). Some of the conventional methods applied for the removal of the con￾taminants include coagulation/flocculation (Bruno et al., 2020), reverse osmosis ( Jamil et al.,
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 45 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00003-42020), sedimentation (Wang et al., 2020a, b), ultra-filtration (Ran et al., 2020), electrolytic treat￾ment (Yan et al., 2020), electrodialysis (Yang et al., 2020), membrane separation (Naddeo et al.,
2020), oxidation (Top et al., 2020), degradation (Khan et al., 2021a), sorption (Khan et al.,
2020a), etc. (Fig. 3.1). Each of the mentioned techniques could be applied for the decontam￾ination of the wastewater bodies depending upon the available resources and conditions. Al￾though many applications of these techniques are available for the decontamination of the
wastewater, certain limitations are also associated with them (Ijanu et al., 2020; Nawaz
et al., 2020).
Some of the mentioned technologies are incompetent and cannot perform the complete re￾moval of the contaminants. In some cases, the production of secondary contaminants has
been observed, which requires additional treatment. Another concern while using the men￾tioned removal techniques is the high costs and requirement of the advanced equipment
(Kumar and Deswal, 2021; Ali et al., 2020a). Keeping in view these issues, researchers ought
to design such a methodology that is cost-effective, proficient, multifunctional, modular, and
flexible in system configuration and size. Among the many used techniques to date, sorption
tends to possess a better capability towards contaminants removal (Saidulu et al., 2021; Ali
et al., 2020b). The highly selective nature of the sorption process and simple operation have
made it a better process compared to others (Bhanot et al., 2020; Ali et al., 2020c). While con￾sidering the sorption process for the removal of contaminants, the focus has been given to the
use of low-cost sorbents. The best choice is the biosorbents, which are low-cost, renewable,
and easily available sources. To further enhance the activity and properties of the biosorbents,
they are incorporated with nanotechnology to design nanobiosorbents for efficient removal of
contaminants (Dutta and Charingia, 2020; Ali et al., 2020d). The nanobiosorbents have paved
the way for the removal of contaminants with a green approach.
3.2 Fundamentals of nanobiosorption
The concept of nanobiosorption commences with designing nanobiosorbents, which can
be defined as biomaterials made up of nanometer-scale components. At the nanoscale levels,
some significant changes could be observed in the properties of the nanobiosorbents (Yadav
et al., 2020; Ali et al., 2020e). The nanobiosorbents possess greater surface-to-volume ratios
FIG. 3.1 Conventional methods for contaminants removal.
46 3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles, synthesis, and application for contaminants removal
I. Basics principlescompared to the micron-sized ones (Mahamadi, 2019; Ali et al., 2020f). The nanobiosorbents
indulge the beneficial aspects of the nanotechnology with the process of biosorption. The
nanobiosorbents have a defined ability to attach with the contaminants (heavy metals, dyes,
pesticides, inorganic ions, etc.) from the wastewater bodies. The plus point of using
biosorption as a method of contaminants removal rather than other methods is that it offers
easy availability of low-cost sorbents. Several naturally occurring biomasses of biological na￾ture obtained from industrial byproducts can be used as proficient sorbents (Verma et al.,
2021; Aziz et al., 2020). The worth-mentioning biological materials include starch, cellulose,
alginate, lignin, chitin, chitosan, glycan, sugarcane bagasse, rice husk, etc. The biosorption
process offers tremendous removal of suspended materials from dilute aqueous solutions
with high proficiency and rapid kinetics (Kumar et al., 2021; Sartaj et al., 2020). The exception￾ally high sensitivity of this process guarantees the removal of contaminants at ppm to ppb
levels. The mechanism of biosorption tends to follow a combination of mechanisms like elec￾trostatic interaction, ion exchange, micro-precipitation, complexation, chelation, coordina￾tion, absorption, etc. The properties of biosorption can further be enhanced by applying
the nanotechnology features (Wang et al., 2019; Ali et al., 2019). The obtained nanobiosorbents
thus possess enhanced ability for the removal of multiple contaminants. The nanobiosorbents
have extraordinary features like high surface-area-to-volume ratios, renewability, biocompat￾ibility, high natural abundance, better mechanical properties, optical transparency, sustain￾ability, adaptable surface chemistry, inherent environmental inertness, optical transparency,
etc. (Bayuo, 2021; Ali et al., 2020g) (Fig. 3.2). Considering these useful features of the
nanobiosorbents, they are massively being used for the decontamination of wastewater en￾suring the pure supply of water and a green environment.
3.3 General preparation of nanobiosorbents
An important aspect while studying the nanobiosorbents is the methods used for prepar￾ing them. The nanobiomaterials are synthesized via different techniques and can be further
functionalized to enhance their surface properties (Khan et al., 2020b). The obtained
nanobiosorbents thus efficiently remove the contaminants from wastewater bodies. The
sorbed inorganic contaminants and ions can be extracted out from the metal surface by wash￾ing with acids, while in case of organic contamination, evaporation or submersion in organic
solvents is preferred (Channegowda, 2020; Ali et al., 2020h). This section is going to discuss
the preparatory techniques of the nanobiosorbents in general. The general idea of synthesiz￾ing the bionanocomposites is based on the fact that the material must possess a single-phase
having one dimension with less than 100 nm size while the other phase being a biological
component (Zare et al., 2018; Ali et al., 2020i). This can also be explained as one of the phases
of material consists of the natural polymeric matrix while the other being organic/inorganic
filler in the nanoscale range (Fig. 3.3). The most commonly used natural polymeric materials
include starches, proteins, pectin, polysaccharides, etc. (Thamer et al., 2021; Ali et al., 2020j).
While the inorganic nanofiller additive part may consist of carbon tubes, polymer
nanowhiskers, synthetic polymer nanofibers, solid layered clays, etc. (Nik Abdul Ghani
3.3 General preparation of nanobiosorbents 47
I. Basics principleset al., 2021; Ali et al. 2020k). The synthesis of the nanobiocomposites normally follows the gen￾eral existing strategies considering the requirements and conditions of the operation. The
techniques are discussed as follows.
3.3.1 Mechanical mixing of the components
This is the simplest and most commonly used method for the nanobiocomposites synthe￾sis. It operates with the mixing of biopolymer hydrogels and the particles in the solution
phase, followed by gelation. The gelation is induced either by changing the temperature (gel￾atin), or pH (chitosan and collagen) or by the addition of a cross-linking agent (carrageenan or
alginate) (Moharrami and Motamedi, 2020; Khan et al., 2019a). This process defines prereq￾uisite surface properties of the inorganic colloids. The conditions for the synthesis process
could also be defined so as to obtain products with better properties and well-preserved prod￾ucts (Bao et al., 2017).
FIG. 3.2 Some of the extraordinary features of nanobiosorbents.
48 3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles, synthesis, and application for contaminants removal
I. Basics principles3.3.2 In situ particles synthesis
This type of nanocomposite synthesis follows utilizing the biopolymers as the template
molecules. The process begins with the inorganic nanoparticle precursor species conversion
into solids by a second reaction sequence (Sahoo et al., 2019; Khan et al., 2019b). Firstly, the
inorganic precursor is added to the polymer solution followed by gelation. The precursor im￾pregnation can also be performed after the hydrogel is formed. The next step is the mineral￾ization, which is performed by modifying the pH, carbonation, addition of a reducing agent,
supplementation, etc. (Pu et al., 2018; Khan et al., 2019c).
3.4 Common natural biopolymers based nanobiosorbents
The horizon of nanobiosorbents is quite broad due to the fact that a number of naturally
occurring materials, polymers, biopolymers, etc., can be used in wastewater remediation. The
abundance of natural materials and products is one of the reasons for the massive exploitation
FIG. 3.3 Proposed mechanism of pollutants adsorption by the PANI/PANI derivatives-based nanocomposites.
Reprinted from Zare, E.N., Motahari, A., Sillanpa
€a, M., 2018. Nanoadsorbents based on conducting polymer nanocomposites €
with main focus on polyaniline and its derivatives for removal of heavy metal ions/dyes: a review. Environ. Res. 162, 173–195,
with permission from Elsevier. License Number: 5078040907051.
3.4 Common natural biopolymers based nanobiosorbents 49
I. Basics principlesof the nanobiomaterials as prospective sorbents for contaminants removal. This section of the
chapter is going to discuss some of the most commonly occurring natural biopolymers which
have many applications in the field of nanobiosorption for removal of the contaminants
(Asere et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2018).
3.4.1 Nanobiosorbents based on cellulosic material
The nanomaterials obtained from cellulosic origin have gained massive attention due to
their applications in various fields along with the wastewater remediation area. The cellulosic
nanomaterials in the form of cellulose nanocrystals and cellulose nanofibrils have gotten great
features attractive to be used as nanobiosorbents for contaminants removal (Herna´ndez￾Francisco et al., 2020; Saeed et al., 2018). Although cellulose-based nanobiosorbents have pos￾sessed unique applications, which are necessary for the sorption of contaminants, certain
environmental factors must also be assessed before using them. The evaluation of costs, bio￾degradability, non-toxicity, stability, ease of access, life-span, are some of the key points to be
considered. The cellulose-based nanobiosorbents have found great applications in the field of
sorption of contaminants due to their greater abundance and low costs (Hasan et al., 2021;
Neelofar et al., 2017). The pristine cellulose may have some limitations, which can be over￾come by chemical modification or through functionalization. The additional treatment of
cellulose-based material further enhances its affinity towards the contaminants. The
cellulose-based nanobiosorbents thus offer high selectivity, hydrophilicity, biocompatibility,
and eco-friendly features towards contaminants removal (Varghese et al., 2019; Khan
et al., 2017).
3.4.2 Nanobiosorbents based on chitin/chitosan
Another abundantly found natural biopolymers are chitin and chitosan. Chitosan can be
described as a biodegradable and renewable carbohydrate, which can be synthesized by
N-deacetylation of chitin. Chitosan is commonly found in crustacean’s shells and cuticles
of insects (Karimi-Maleh et al., 2021a, b; Hussain et al., 2016). The constituents of the chitosan
consist of linear amino polysaccharide of glucosamine. The surface of chitosan contains hy￾drophilic functional groups like amino and hydroxyl groups. The high natural abundance of
chitin/chitosan, feasibility of modification, and high sorption capacity makes them excellent
materials to be used as nanobiosorbents for the removal of contaminants from the wastewater
bodies (Vunain et al., 2016; Khan et al., 2016a, b). The physico-chemical properties of
nanobiosorbents include chelating and complexing, hydrophilicity, bio-adhesive nature,
crystallinity, solubility in dilute acidic solutions, etc. The low-cost, sustainable, renewable,
and eco-friendly nature of the chitosan-based nanobiosorbents has elevated their usage as
nanobiosorbents (da Silva Alves et al., 2021; Ali et al., 2018a).
3.4.3 Nanobiosorbents based on starch
Another naturally abundant biopolymer is starch having biodegradable and biocompati￾ble properties. The reserves of starch carbohydrates are commonly found in sundry plants.
50 3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles, synthesis, and application for contaminants removal
I. Basics principlesThe common starch sources include wheat, maize, rice, cassava, etc. (Nasrollahzadeh et al.,
2020; Ali et al., 2018b). The structural evaluation of starch shows that it consists of a 3D struc￾ture with 15%–45% crystalline range and components of D-glucose units. The hydrolysis of
starch produces crystallites, nanocrystals, and microcrystalline starches. The attractive fea￾tures of the starch-based nanobiosorbents like high abundance, high surface area, biocompat￾ibility, renewability, and low costs (Rigueto et al., 2021; Sohni et al., 2018).
3.4.4 Nanobiosorbents based on gums
Gums are also a class of natural and green biopolymers in the form of polysaccharides and
the derivatives of gums have found great applications in the field of wastewater remediation.
A common example of gums is guar gum, which is a mucoadhesive polysaccharide (Saya
et al., 2021; Wahid et al., 2017). The Guar gum is commonly obtained from the guar beans
endosperm and it consists of D-gal-actopyranosyl and D-mannopyranosyl units. Another
commonly found example of gums is the gum Arabic or acacia gum. This type of gum consists
of D-galactopyranosyl units. The common sources of acacia gum are the branched heteropo￾lysaccharide and a complex exudate of Acacia seyal and Acacia senegal trees (Ramakrishnan
et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2016a, b). The nanobiosorbents obtained from gums have also found
applications in the removal of contaminants from the wastewater bodies due to multiple func￾tionalities associated with them.
3.4.5 Nanobiosorbents based on alginate
Alginates can be described as the linear block copolymers, which consist of two uronic acid
residues, i.e., α-L-guluronic acid and β-D-mannuronic linked by the β-1,4-glycosidic bonds
(Thakur, 2021). The nanobiosorbents based on alginate biopolymers possess unique features
like biodegradability, stability, high water permeability, non-toxic nature, etc. These proper￾ties make alginate-based nanobiosorbents an excellent choice for the removal of contaminants
from the wastewater bodies (Al-Sakkari et al., 2020).
3.4.6 Nanobiosorbents based on pectin
Another worth-mentioning natural polysaccharide is the anionic pectin which can be
obtained from the higher plants cell wall. The structure of pectin can be described as a linear
polysaccharide present in the intercellular layer of the cell wall of adjacent cells (Mohamed
et al., 2020). It mainly consists of D-galacturonic acid units joined together via α-(1–4) glyco￾sidic linkage in the form of chains rich in carboxyl/hydroxyl groups and neutral sugars pre￾sent. The carboxyl groups present in the chains of pectin are sometimes in the form of methyl
esters while in other cases, they can be converted to carboxamide groups by treating with am￾monia (Solangi et al., 2021). The nanobiosorbents obtained from the pectin-based materials
are biocompatible, non-toxic, flexible, and high molecular weight substances that possess ex￾cellent sorption capacity for the removal of different contaminants from the wastewater bod￾ies (Shakibi et al., 2020; Khan et al., 2015a).
3.4 Common natural biopolymers based nanobiosorbents 51
I. Basics principles3.5 Applications of nanobiosorbents in contaminants removal
The natural abundance of biological entities like biopolymers and the unique characteris￾tics of nanotechnology have been harnessed to obtain nanobiosorbents. These
nanobiosorbents have been very helpful towards the removal of multiple contaminants from
the wastewater bodies. The employment of nanobiosorbents for the removal of contaminants
is a step forward towards a green and clean environment with minimal input and highly ef￾ficient results (Khan et al., 2015b). The eco-friendly and greener approach for environmental
remediation has grabbed the attention of scientists to utilize natural yet advanced materials,
like nanobiosorbents. Table 3.1 summarizes nanobiosorbents efficiency in the removal of var￾ious contaminants. Eltaweil et al. (2021) has prepared a zero-valent iron-loaded nano￾bentonite intercalated carboxymethyl chitosan (nZVI@nBent-CMC) composite. The obtained
composite was then used for the successful removal of an anionic dye Congo red and a cat￾ionic dye Crystal violet. The results were evaluated and the nanobiosorbent showed an ex￾cellent efficiency towards the dye removal with a sorption capacity of 884.95 and
505.05 mg/g for CR and CV, respectively. The sorption process tends to follow the
pseudo-second-order kinetics model and the Langmuir sorption isotherm, and the process
was thermodynamically spontaneous. Yildirim et al. (2020) synthesized a bio-composite ma￾terial for the successful removal of heavy metals. The fungal-extract-based nanobiosorbent
prepared was then used for the removal of Ni(II) and Cu(II) metals from the aqueous solution.
The results showed that removal efficiency of FE-CB was 7.18 and 8.50 mg/g for Cu(II) and
Ni(II), respectively. The evaluation of the results showed that the process tends to follow
pseudo-second-order kinetics and is spontaneous, endothermic, and favorable. Naeimi
et al. (2021) studied the extraction of nano-chitosan from wastes of shrimps followed by its
modification with Schiff base ligand and graphene oxide (Fig. 3.4). The obtained
nanobiosorbent was used for the removal of Cu(II) and Pb(II) from the aqueous solution.
The nano-polymer biomass showed an excellent removal efficiency with the sorption capacity
of 698.8 and 466 mg/g for copper and lead ions, respectively. Karimi-Maleh et al. (2021a, b)
prepared a novel 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (BmImBr) impregnated chitosan
beads-based nanobiosorbent for the removal of methylene blue dye. The obtained
nanobiosorbent showed excellent efficiency for the removal of the cationic model dye with
a percentage of 86%. The environmental conditions of the sorption process were also opti￾mized, and the sorption tends to follow pseudo-first-order kinetics with intrinsic penetration.
3.6 Conclusion
The day-by-day increasing world pollution has forced the scientists and researchers to
develop such strategies which are helpful towards a clean and green environment. In light
of this fact, naturally abundant biological materials have grabbed the attention because of
their unique physico-chemical features. The abundance of presence, non-toxic nature, bio￾compatibility, renewability, ease of modification, are some of the many useful properties
of the bio-based components. Taking advantage of the useful properties of these materials,
they are further applied with nanotechnological aspects to obtain nanobiosorbents.
52 3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles, synthesis, and application for contaminants removal
I. Basics principlesTABLE 3.1 Nanobiosorbents efficiency in the removal of various contaminants.
Nanobiosorbent Contaminants
Removal
efficiency
Studied conditions
pH Reference
Time
(min)
Temp.
(°C)
Pectin hydrogel from mandarin peel-based metal-organic
frameworks composite
Cr(VI) 825.97 mg/g 1 400 25 Mahmoud and
Mohamed (2020) Pb(II) 913.88 mg/g 5
Graphene oxide modified persimmon tannin (PT-GO) Methylene
blue
256.58 mg/g 50 Wang et al. (2020a, b)
Ethylenediamine-modified pectins (EPs) Pb(II) 94% 5 60 25 Liang et al. (2020)
β-Cyclodextrin-Chitosan-based cross-linked sorbent Hg(II) 178.3 mg/g 120 Usman et al. (2021)
Methylene
blue
162.6 mg/g
Methyl orange 132.5 mg/g
Magnetic graphene/chitosan nanocomposite 2-naphthol 99.8% 2 Rebekah et al. (2020)
Chitosan cross linked with SBA-15 nanofibers Direct yellow
12
40 mg/g 2 30 Masoudnia et al. (2020)
Direct black
ANBN
200 mg/g
Acid blue 43.47 mg/g
Nano-chitin Cr(VI) 238 mg/g 6 60 25 Sheikhi and Rezaei
(2021)
Guar gum/magnetic layered double hydroxide Methylene
blue
85% 9 120 Tabatabaeian et al.
(2021)
Cellulosic sisal fiber modified with polypyrrole-polyaniline
nanoparticles
Ibuprofen 88% 5 60 30 Khadir et al. (2020)
Gum tragacanth carbohydrate biopolymer NO3 21 mg/g 7 20 25 Shojaipour et al. (2020)
Magnetic sodium alginate polyelectrolyte nanosphere Pb(II) 105.8 mg/g 90 Wang et al. (2021)
Agro-industrial waste-based bioadsorbents Zn(II) 97% 120 Castro et al. (2021)
Nano-magnetite-modified biochar Cr(VI) 9.92 mg/g Song et al. (2021)
Polyvinyl alcohol/alginate/zeolite nanohybrid Ni(II)
Co(II)
81.51 mg/g
79.58 mg/g
Tabatabaeefar et al.
(2020)The nanobiosorbents have been used in the removal of a variety of contaminants to date from
the wastewater bodies and have emerged as promising tools towards clean and green
environment.
Acknowledgment
Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı´a (MX) is thankfully acknowledged for partially supporting this work under
Sistema Nacional de Investigadores (SNI) program awarded to Hafiz M.N. Iqbal (CVU: 735340).
Conflict of interests
The author(s) declare no conflicting interests.
References
Ali, N., Kamal, T., Ul-Islam, M., Khan, A., Shah, S.J., Zada, A., 2018a. Chitosan-coated cotton cloth supported copper
nanoparticles for toxic dye reduction. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 111, 832–838.
Ali, N., Ismail, M., Khan, A., Khan, H., Haider, S., Kamal, T., 2018b. Spectrophotometric methods for the determina￾tion of urea in real samples using silver nanoparticles by standard addition and 2nd order derivative methods.
Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 189, 110–115.
FIG. 3.4 Schematic illustration of chitosan/graphene oxide biosorbent for the removal of heavy metals from
wastewaters. Reprinted from Naeimi, A., Amini, M., Okati, N., 2021. Removal of heavy metals from wastewaters using an
effective and natural bionanopolymer based on Schiff base chitosan/graphene oxide. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1–12, with
permission from Springer Nature. License Number: 5078041222658.
54 3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles, synthesis, and application for contaminants removal
I. Basics principlesAli, N., Zada, A., Zahid, M., Ismail, A., Rafiq, M., Riaz, A., Khan, A., 2019. Enhanced photodegradation of methylene
blue with alkaline and transition-metal ferrite nanophotocatalysts under direct sun light irradiation. J. Chin.
Chem. Soc. 66 (4), 402–408.
Ali, N., Uddin, S., Khan, A., Khan, S., Khan, S., Ali, N., Bilal, M., 2020a. Regenerable chitosan-bismuth cobalt selenide
hybrid microspheres for mitigation of organic pollutants in an aqueous environment. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 161,
1305–1317.
Ali, N., Ahmad, S., Khan, A., Khan, S., Bilal, M., Ud Din, S., Khan, H., 2020b. Selenide-chitosan as high-performance
nanophotocatalyst for accelerated degradation of pollutants. Chem. Asian J. 15 (17), 2660–2673.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Khan, A., Ali, F., Yang, Y., Khan, M., Iqbal, H.M., 2020c. Dynamics of oil-water interface
demulsification using multifunctional magnetic hybrid and assembly materials. J. Mol. Liq. 312, 113434.
Ali, N., Khan, A., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.M., 2020d. Chitosan-based green sorbent material for cat￾ions removal from an aqueous environment. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8, 104064.
Ali, N., Khan, A., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Iqbal, H., 2020e. Chitosan-based bio-composite modified with
thiocarbamate moiety for decontamination of cations from the aqueous media. Molecules 25 (1), 226.
Ali, N., Khan, A., Nawaz, S., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Iqbal, H.M., 2020f. Characterization and deployment of
surface-engineered chitosan-triethylenetetramine nanocomposite hybrid nano-adsorbent for divalent cations de￾contamination. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 152, 663–671.
Ali, N., Naz, N., Shah, Z., Khan, A., Nawaz, R., 2020g. Selective transportation of molybdenum from model and ore
through poly inclusion membrane. Bull. Chem. Soc. Ethiop. 34 (1), 93–104.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Nazir, M.S., Khan, A., Ali, F., Iqbal, H.M., 2020h. Thermochemical and electrochemical aspects of
carbon dioxide methanation: a sustainable approach to generate fuel via waste to energy theme. Sci. Total Environ.
712, 136482.
Ali, N., Azeem, S., Khan, A., Khan, H., Kamal, T., Asiri, A.M., 2020i. Experimental studies on removal of arsenites
from industrial effluents using tridodecylamine supported liquid membrane. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 1–12.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Khan, A., Ali, F., Iqbal, H.M., 2020j. Design, engineering and analytical perspectives of membrane
materials with smart surfaces for efficient oil/water separation. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 127, 115902.
Ali, N., Bilal, M., Khan, A., Ali, F., Yang, Y., Malik, S., Iqbal, H.M., 2021. Deployment of metal-organic frameworks as
robust materials for sustainable catalysis and remediation of pollutants in environmental settings. Chemosphere
272, 129605.
Al-Sakkari, E.G., Abdeldayem, O.M., Genina, E.E., Amin, L., Bahgat, N.T., Rene, E.R., El-Sherbiny, I.M., 2020. New
alginate-based interpenetrating polymer networks for water treatment: a response surface methodology based
optimization study. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 155, 772–785.
Asere, T.G., Stevens, C.V., Du Laing, G., 2019. Use of (modified) natural adsorbents for arsenic remediation: a review.
Sci. Total Environ. 676, 706–720.
Aziz, A., Ali, N., Khan, A., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Ali, N., Khan, H., 2020. Chitosanzinc sulfide nanoparticles, character￾ization and their photocatalytic degradation efficiency for azo dyes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 153, 502–512.
Bao, S., Li, K., Ning, P., Peng, J., Jin, X., Tang, L., 2017. Highly effective removal of mercury and lead ions from waste￾water by mercaptoamine-functionalised silica-coated magnetic nano-adsorbents: behaviours and mechanisms.
Appl. Surf. Sci. 393, 457–466.
Bayuo, J., 2021. An extensive review on chromium (vi) removal using natural and agricultural wastes materials as
alternative biosorbents. J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng. 19, 1–15.
Bhanot, P., Celin, S.M., Sreekrishnan, T.R., Kalsi, A., Sahai, S.K., Sharma, P., 2020. Application of integrated treatment
strategies for explosive industry wastewater—a critical review. J. Water Process Eng. 35, 101232.
Bruno, P., Campo, R., Giustra, M.G., De Marchis, M., Di Bella, G., 2020. Bench scale continuous coagulation￾flocculation of saline industrial wastewater contaminated by hydrocarbons. J. Water Process Eng. 34, 101156.
Castro, D., Rosas-Laverde, N.M., Alda´s, M.B., Almeida-Naranjo, C.E., Guerrero, V.H., Pruna, A.I., 2021. Chemical
modification of agro-industrial waste-based bioadsorbents for enhanced removal of Zn (II) ions from aqueous
solutions. Materials 14 (9), 2134.
Channegowda, M., 2020. Recent advances in environmentally benign hierarchical inorganic nano-adsorbents for the
removal of poisonous metal ions in water: a review with mechanistic insight into toxicity and adsorption. Nano￾scale Adv. 2 (12), 5529–5554.
Dutta, M.M., Charingia, A., 2020. Nanotechnology-based nano-biosorbents. In: Handbook of Research on Emerging
Developments and Environmental Impacts of Ecological Chemistry. IGI Global, pp. 386–408.
References 55
I. Basics principlesEltaweil, A.S., El-Tawil, A.M., Abd El-Monaem, E.M., El-Subruiti, G.M., 2021. Zero valent iron nanoparticle-loaded
nanobentonite intercalated carboxymethyl chitosan for efficient removal of both anionic and cationic dyes. ACS
Omega 6 (9), 6348–6360.
Hasan, M.N., Shenashen, M.A., Hasan, M.M., Znad, H., Awual, M.R., 2021. Assessing of cesium removal from waste￾water using functionalized wood cellulosic adsorbent. Chemosphere 270, 128668.
Herna´ndez-Francisco, E., Bonilla-Cruz, J., Ma´rquez-Lamas, U., Sua´rez-Jacobo, A´ ., Longoria-Rodrı´guez, F., Rivera￾Haro, J., Lara-Ceniceros, T.E., 2020. Entangled cellulose nanofibrils/nanosheets derived from native mexican
agave for lead (II) ion removal. Cellulose 27 (15), 8785–8798.
Hussain, S., Ullah, Z., Gul, S., Khattak, R., Kazmi, N., Rehman, F., Khan, A., 2016. Adsorption characteristics of
magnesium-modified bentonite clay with respect to acid blue 129 in aqueous media. Pol. J. Environ. Stud.
25 (5), 1947–1953.
Ijanu, E.M., Kamaruddin, M.A., Norashiddin, F.A., 2020. Coffee processing wastewater treatment: a critical review on
current treatment technologies with a proposed alternative. Appl. Water Sci. 10 (1), 1–11.
Jamil, S., Loganathan, P., Kandasamy, J., Listowski, A., McDonald, J.A., Khan, S.J., Vigneswaran, S., 2020. Removal of
organic matter from wastewater reverse osmosis concentrate using granular activated carbon and anion exchange
resin adsorbent columns in sequence. Chemosphere 261, 127549.
Karimi-Maleh, H., Ayati, A., Davoodi, R., Tanhaei, B., Karimi, F., Malekmohammadi, S., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2021a. Recent
advances in using of chitosan-based adsorbents for removal of pharmaceutical contaminants: a review. J. Clean.
Prod. 291, 125880.
Karimi-Maleh, H., Ranjbari, S., Tanhaei, B., Ayati, A., Orooji, Y., Alizadeh, M., Sen, F., 2021b. Novel
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide impregnated chitosan hydrogel beads nanostructure as an efficient
nanobio-adsorbent for cationic dye removal: kinetic study. Environ. Res. 195, 110809.
Kennedy, K.K., Maseka, K.J., Mbulo, M., 2018. Selected adsorbents for removal of contaminants from wastewater:
towards engineering clay minerals. Open J. Appl. Sci. 8 (8), 355–369.
Khadir, A., Motamedi, M., Negarestani, M., Sillanp€a€a, M., Sasani, M., 2020. Preparation of a nano bio-composite based
on cellulosic biomass and conducting polymeric nanoparticles for ibuprofen removal: kinetics, isotherms, and en￾ergy site distribution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 162, 663–677.
Khan, A., Badshah, S., Airoldi, C., 2015a. Environmentally benign modified biodegradable chitosan for cation re￾moval. Polym. Bull. 72 (2), 353–370.
Khan, A., Wahid, F., Ali, N., Badshah, S., Airoldi, C., 2015b. Single-step modification of chitosan for toxic cations re￾mediation from aqueous solution. Desalin. Water Treat. 56 (4), 1099–1109.
Khan, H., Khalil, A.K., Khan, A., Saeed, K., Ali, N., 2016a. Photocatalytic degradation of bromophenol blue in aqueous
medium using chitosan conjugated magnetic nanoparticles. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 33 (10), 2802–2807.
Khan, S.U., Khan, F.U., Khan, I.U., Muhammad, N., Badshah, S., Khan, A., Nasrullah, A., 2016b. Biosorption of nickel
(II) and copper (II) ions from aqueous solution using novel biomass derived from Nannorrhops ritchiana (Mazri
palm). Desalin. Water Treat. 57 (9), 3964–3974.
Khan, A., Begum, S., Ali, N., Khan, S., Hussain, S., Sotomayor, M.D.P.T., 2017. Preparation of crosslinked chitosan
magnetic membrane for cations sorption from aqueous solution. Water Sci. Technol. 75 (9), 2034–2046.
Khan, A., Ali, N., Bilal, M., Malik, S., Badshah, S., Iqbal, H., 2019a. Engineering functionalized chitosan-based sorbent
material: characterization and sorption of toxic elements. Appl. Sci. 9 (23), 5138.
Khan, A., Shah, S.J., Mehmood, K., Ali, N., Khan, H., 2019b. Synthesis of potent chitosan beads a suitable alternative
for textile dye reduction in sunlight. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 30 (1), 406–414.
Khan, H., Khalil, A.K., Khan, A., 2019c. Photocatalytic degradation of alizarin yellow in aqueous medium and real
samples using chitosan conjugated tin magnetic nanocomposites. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 30 (24),
21332–21342.
Khan, H., Gul, K., Ara, B., Khan, A., Ali, N., Ali, N., Bilal, M., 2020a. Adsorptive removal of acrylic acid from the
aqueous environment using raw and chemically modified alumina: batch adsorption, kinetic, equilibrium and
thermodynamic studies. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8, 103927.
Khan, F.S.A., Mubarak, N.M., Khalid, M., Walvekar, R., Abdullah, E.C., Mazari, S.A., Karri, R.R., 2020b. Magnetic
nanoadsorbents’ potential route for heavy metals removal—a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (19),
24342–24356.
Khan, M., Khan, A., Khan, H., Ali, N., Sartaj, S., Malik, S., Bilal, M., 2021a. Development and characterization of re￾generable chitosan-coated nickel selenide nano-photocatalytic system for decontamination of toxic azo dyes. Int. J.
Biol. Macromol. 182, 866–878.
56 3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles, synthesis, and application for contaminants removal
I. Basics principlesKhan, S., Khan, A., Ali, N., Ahmad, S., Ahmad, W., Malik, S., Bilal, M., 2021b. Degradation of carcinogenic Congo red
dye using ternary metal selenide-chitosan microspheres as robust and reusable catalysts. Environ. Technol. Innov.
22, 101402.
Kumar, S., Deswal, S., 2021. A review on current techniques used in India for rice mill wastewater treatment and
emerging techniques with valuable by-products. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 28, 1–17.
Kumar, A., Singh, R., Upadhyay, S.K., Kumar, S., Charaya, M.U., 2021. Biosorption: the removal of toxic dyes from
industrial effluent using phytobiomass—a review. Plant Arch. 21 (1), 1320–1325.
Liang, R.H., Li, Y., Huang, L., Wang, X.D., Hu, X.X., Liu, C.M., Chen, J., 2020. Pb2+ adsorption by ethylenediamine￾modified pectins and their adsorption mechanisms. Carbohydr. Polym. 234, 115911.
Mahamadi, C., 2019. Will nano-biosorbents break the Achilles’ heel of biosorption technology? Environ. Chem. Lett.
17 (4), 1753–1768.
Mahmoud, M.E., Mohamed, A.K., 2020. Novel derived pectin hydrogel from mandarin peel based metal-organic
frameworks composite for enhanced Cr (VI) and Pb (II) ions removal. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 164, 920–931.
Masoudnia, S., Juybari, M.H., Mehrabian, R.Z., Ebadi, M., Kaveh, F., 2020. Efficient dye removal from wastewater by
functionalized macromolecule chitosan-SBA-15 nanofibers for biological approaches. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 165,
118–130.
Mohamed, S.K., Alazhary, A.M., Al-Zaqri, N., Alsalme, A., Alharthi, F.A., Hamdy, M.S., 2020. Cost-effective adsor￾bent from arabinogalactan and pectin of cactus pear peels: kinetics and thermodynamics studies. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 150, 941–947.
Moharrami, P., Motamedi, E., 2020. Application of cellulose nanocrystals prepared from agricultural wastes for syn￾thesis of starch-based hydrogel nanocomposites: efficient and selective nanoadsorbent for removal of cationic
dyes from water. Bioresour. Technol. 313, 123661.
Naddeo, V., Secondes, M.F.N., Borea, L., Hasan, S.W., Ballesteros Jr., F., Belgiorno, V., 2020. Removal of contaminants
of emerging concern from real wastewater by an innovative hybrid membrane process—UltraSound, adsorption,
and membrane ultrafiltration (USAMe®). Ultrason. Sonochem. 68, 105237.
Naeimi, A., Amini, M., Okati, N., 2021. Removal of heavy metals from wastewaters using an effective and natural
bionanopolymer based on Schiff base chitosan/graphene oxide. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1–12.
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Sajjadi, M., Iravani, S., Varma, R.S., 2020. Starch, cellulose, pectin, gum, alginate, chitin
and chitosan derived (nano) materials for sustainable water treatment: a review. Carbohydr. Polym. 251,
116986.
Nawaz, A., Khan, A., Ali, N., Ali, N., Bilal, M., 2020. Fabrication and characterization of new ternary ferrites-chitosan
nanocomposite for solar-light driven photocatalytic degradation of a model textile dye. Environ. Technol. Innov.
20, 101079.
Neelofar, N., Ali, N., Khan, A., Amir, S., Khan, N.A., Bilal, M., 2017. Synthesis of Schiff bases derived from
2-hydroxy-1-naphth-aldehyde and their tin (II) complexes for antimicribial and antioxidant activities. Bull. Chem.
Soc. Ethiop. 31 (3), 445–456.
Nik Abdul Ghani, N.R., Jami, M.S., Alam, M.Z., 2021. The role of nanoadsorbents and nanocomposite adsorbents in
the removal of heavy metals from wastewater: a review and prospect. Pollution 7 (1), 153–179.
Pu, S., Hou, Y., Yan, C., Ma, H., Huang, H., Shi, Q., Chu, W., 2018. In situ coprecipitation formed highly water￾dispersible magnetic chitosan nanopowder for removal of heavy metals and its adsorption mechanism. ACS Sus￾tain. Chem. Eng. 6 (12), 16754–16765.
Ramakrishnan, R.K., Padil, V.V., Wacławek, S., Cernı  ´k, M., Varma, R.S., 2021. Eco-friendly and economic, adsorptive
removal of cationic and anionic dyes by bio-based Karaya gum—chitosan sponge. Polymers 13 (2), 251.
Ran, Z., Yao, M., He, W., Wang, G., 2020. Efficiency analysis of enhanced Sb (V) removal via dynamic preloaded floc in
coordination with ultrafiltration. Sep. Purif. Technol. 249, 117115.
Rebekah, A., Bharath, G., Naushad, M., Viswanathan, C., Ponpandian, N., 2020. Magnetic graphene/chitosan
nanocomposite: a promising nano-adsorbent for the removal of 2-naphthol from aqueous solution and their ki￾netic studies. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 159, 530–538.
Rigueto, C.V.T., Nazari, M.T., Massuda, L.A´ ., Ostwald, B.E.P., Piccin, J.S., Dettmer, A., 2021. Production and environ￾mental applications of gelatin-based composite adsorbents for contaminants removal: a review. Environ. Chem.
Lett. 19, 1–22.
Saeed, K., Sadiq, M., Khan, I., Ullah, S., Ali, N., Khan, A., 2018. Synthesis, characterization, and photocatalytic appli￾cation of Pd/ZrO2 and Pt/ZrO2. Appl. Water Sci. 8 (2), 60.
References 57
I. Basics principlesSahoo, S.K., Tripathy, M., Hota, G., 2019. In-situ functionalization of GO sheets with AlOOH-FeOOH composite
nanorods: an eco-friendly nanoadsorbent for removal of toxic arsenate ions from water. J. Environ. Chem.
Eng. 7 (5), 103357.
Saidulu, D., Gupta, B., Gupta, A.K., Ghosal, P.S., 2021. A review on occurrences, eco-toxic effects, and remediation of
emerging contaminants from wastewater: special emphasis on biological treatment based hybrid systems. J. En￾viron. Chem. Eng. 9, 105282.
Sartaj, S., Ali, N., Khan, A., Malik, S., Bilal, M., Khan, M., Khan, S., 2020. Performance evaluation of photolytic and
electrochemical oxidation processes for enhanced degradation of food dyes laden wastewater. Water Sci. Technol.
81 (5), 971–984.
Saxena, R., Saxena, M., Lochab, A., 2020. Recent progress in nanomaterials for adsorptive removal of organic contam￾inants from wastewater. ChemistrySelect 5 (1), 335–353.
Saya, L., Malik, V., Singh, A., Singh, S., Gambhir, G., Singh, W.R., Hooda, S., 2021. Guar gum based nanocomposites:
role in water purification through efficient removal of dyes and metal ions. Carbohydr. Polym. 261, 117851.
Shah, S., ud Din, S., Khan, A., & Shah, S. A., 2018. Green synthesis and antioxidant study of silver nanoparticles of root
extract of Sageretia thea and its role in oxidation protection technology. J. Polym. Environ. 26 (6), 2323–2332.
Shakibi, S., Hemmatinejad, N., Bashari, A., 2020. Sorbent textiles for colored wastewater made from orange based
pectin nano-hydrogel. Fibers Polym. 21 (6), 1275–1282.
Sheikhi, M., Rezaei, H., 2021. Adsorption of hexavalent chromium ions from aqueous solutions using nano-chitin:
kinetic, isotherms and thermodynamic studies. Water Pract. Technol. 16 (2), 436–451.
Shojaipour, M., Ghaemy, M., Amininasab, S.M., 2020. Removal of NO3 ions from water using bioadsorbent based
on gum tragacanth carbohydrate biopolymer. Carbohydr. Polym. 227, 115367.
da Silva Alves, D.C., Healy, B., Pinto, L.A., Cadaval, T.R., Breslin, C.B., 2021. Recent developments in chitosan-based
adsorbents for the removal of pollutants from aqueous environments. Molecules 26 (3), 594.
Sohni, S., Gul, K., Ahmad, F., Ahmad, I., Khan, A., Khan, N., Bahadar Khan, S., 2018. Highly efficient removal of acid
red-17 and bromophenol blue dyes from industrial wastewater using graphene oxide functionalized magnetic
chitosan composite. Polym. Compos. 39 (9), 3317–3328.
Solangi, N.H., Kumar, J., Mazari, S.A., Ahmed, S., Fatima, N., Mujawar, N.M., 2021. Development of fruit waste de￾rived bio-adsorbents for wastewater treatment: a review. J. Hazard. Mater. 416, 125848.
Song, X., Zhang, Y., Cao, N., Sun, D., Zhang, Z., Wang, Y., Lyu, T., 2021. Sustainable chromium (VI) removal from
contaminated groundwater using nano-magnetite-modified biochar via rapid microwave synthesis. Molecules
26 (1), 103.
Tabatabaeefar, A., Keshtkar, A.R., Talebi, M., Abolghasemi, H., 2020. Polyvinyl alcohol/alginate/zeolite nanohybrid
for removal of metals. Chem. Eng. Technol. 43 (2), 343–354.
Tabatabaeian, R., Dinari, M., Aliabadi, H.M., 2021. Cross-linked bionanocomposites of hydrolyzed guar gum/mag￾netic layered double hydroxide as an effective sorbent for methylene blue removal. Carbohydr. Polym. 257,
117628.
Thakur, S., 2021. An overview on alginate based bio-composite materials for wastewater remedial. Mater. Today Proc.
37 (Part 2), 3305–3309.
Thamer, B.M., Aldalbahi, A., Moydeen, A.M., Rahaman, M., El-Newehy, M.H., 2021. Modified electrospun polymeric
nanofibers and their nanocomposites as nanoadsorbents for toxic dye removal from contaminated waters: a re￾view. Polymers 13 (1), 20.
Top, S., Akgun, M., K € ıpc¸ak, E., Bilgili, M.S., 2020. Treatment of hospital wastewater by supercritical water oxidation
process. Water Res. 185, 116279.
Tshikovhi, A., Mishra, S.B., Mishra, A.K., 2020. Nanocellulose-based composites for the removal of contaminants
from wastewater. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 152, 616–632.
Usman, M., Ahmed, A., Yu, B., Wang, S., Shen, Y., Cong, H., 2021. Simultaneous adsorption of heavy metals and or￾ganic dyes by β-cyclodextrin-chitosan based cross-linked adsorbent. Carbohydr. Polym. 255, 117486.
Varghese, A.G., Paul, S.A., Latha, M.S., 2019. Remediation of heavy metals and dyes from wastewater using cellulose￾based adsorbents. Environ. Chem. Lett. 17 (2), 867–877.
Verma, S., Bhatt, P., Verma, A., Mudila, H., Prasher, P., Rene, E.R., 2021. Microbial technologies for heavy metal re￾mediation: effect of process conditions and current practices. Clean Techn. Environ. Policy, 1–23.
Vunain, E., Mishra, A.K., Mamba, B.B., 2016. Dendrimers, mesoporous silicas and chitosan-based nanosorbents for
the removal of heavy-metal ions: a review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 86, 570–586.
58 3. Nanobiosorbents: Basic principles, synthesis, and application for contaminants removal
I. Basics principlesWahid, F., Mohammadzai, I.U., Khan, A., Shah, Z., Hassan, W., Ali, N., 2017. Removal of toxic metals with activated
carbon prepared from Salvadora persica. Arab. J. Chem. 10, S2205–S2212.
Wang, B., Sun, Y.C., Sun, R.C., 2019. Fractionational and structural characterization of lignin and its modification as
biosorbents for efficient removal of chromium from wastewater: a review. J. Leather Sci. Eng. 1 (1), 1–25.
Wang, Z., Chen, Y., Chen, L., Xi, S., Liu, Y., Dong, Y., Miao, L., 2020a. Ex-situ treatment of sediment from a black-odor
water body using activated sludge. Sci. Total Environ. 713, 136651.
Wang, Z., Gao, M., Li, X., Ning, J., Zhou, Z., Li, G., 2020b. Efficient adsorption of methylene blue from aqueous so￾lution by graphene oxide modified persimmon tannins. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 108, 110196.
Wang, J., Guo, M., Luo, Y., Shao, D., Ge, S., Cai, L., Lam, S.S., 2021. Production of magnetic sodium alginate polyelec￾trolyte nanospheres for lead ions removal from wastewater. J. Environ. Manag. 289, 112506.
Yadav, V.K., Choudhary, N., Khan, S.H., Malik, P., Inwati, G.K., Suriyaprabha, R., Ravi, R.K., 2020. Synthesis and
characterisation of nano-biosorbents and their applications for waste water treatment. In: Handbook of Research
on Emerging Developments and Environmental Impacts of Ecological Chemistry. IGI Global, pp. 252–290.
Yan, C., Wang, M., Ma, T., Yang, S., Kong, M., Shen, J., Gao, Y., 2020. Study on the experimental performance by
electrolysis-integrated ecological floating bed for nitrogen and phosphorus removal in eutrophic water. Sci.
Rep. 10 (1), 1–10.
Yang, B.M., Li, J.M., You, Z.Y., Lai, W.L., Kao, C.M., 2020. Using integrated electrodialysis and RO hybrid system to
remediate and reclaim perchlorate-contaminated groundwater. Desalination 480, 114377.
Yang, Y., Ali, N., Khan, A., Khan, S., Khan, S., Khan, H., Bilal, M., 2021. Chitosan-capped ternary metal selenide
nanocatalysts for efficient degradation of Congo red dye in sunlight irradiation. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 167,
169–181.
Yildirim, A., Baran, M.F., Acay, H., 2020. Kinetic and isotherm investigation into the removal of heavy metals using a
fungal-extract-based bio-nanosorbent. Environ. Technol. Innov. 20, 101076.
Zare, E.N., Motahari, A., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2018. Nanoadsorbents based on conducting polymer nanocomposites with
main focus on polyaniline and its derivatives for removal of heavy metal ions/dyes: a review. Environ. Res.
162, 173–195.
References 59
I. Basics principlesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
4
Methods for the synthesis of
nano-biosorbents for the contaminant
removal
Harshal Dabhanea,b
, Swati Chatura
, Suresh Ghotekarc
,
Dnyaneshwar Sanapa
, Ghanshyam Jadhavb
, Muhammad Bilald
,
and Vijay Medhaneb
a
Department of Chemistry, G.M.D Arts, B.W Commerce and Science College, Savitribai Phule
Pune University, Nashik, Maharashtra, India b
Department of Chemistry, K.R.T. Arts, B.H.
Commerce and A.M. Science College, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Nashik, Maharashtra,
India c
Department of Chemistry, Smt. Devkiba Mohansinhji Chauhan College of Commerce and
Science, University of Mumbai, Silvassa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli (UT), India d
School of Life
Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, China
4.1 Introduction
The essential thing to all living things on earth’s surface is water, also called a universal
solvent due to its versatility used in every field. Water serves a crucial role in the human body
which involve in many metabolism processes which are taking place in our body (Sharma and
Bhattacharya, 2016). Though about 70% of the area on earth is covered by water, but drinking
water is not enough for living things, another problem is nothing but the contamination of
drinking water sources. Human as well as natural activity responsible for the discharge of
unlike things called as contaminants, there are several types of contaminant reported by re￾searchers like a pathogenic organism, plant nutrients, oxygen demanding waste, sediments,
synthetic organic chemicals, micro-plastics, oil, radioactive substances, inorganic chemicals,
and heavy metals. Several methods were used for the purification of water by removing the
contaminants present in water mainly classified into chemical and physical approaches, such
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 61 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00004-6as chemical oxidation, filtration, precipitation, biological treatments, and coagulations (Tran
et al., 2019). The degree of purification of water and operational cost is the main factor of dis￾cussion, some methods are cost-effective and can be used at high concentration but always
question mark about the accuracy, precipitation method is much effective related to the high
concentration in which contaminants allow to settle down at the bottom in the form of pre￾cipitate and filter off it. The biological contaminants are biodegradable, by using this principle
biological waste can be removed from water sources (Kanamarlapudi et al., 2018). Nowadays,
nanotechnology is the best tool to obtain multifunctional nano-material having fantastic ap￾plications in biomedicine, pharmaceuticals, industries, electronics, electrical devices, and en￾vironment, etc. The nan-omaterial’s prepared using Top-Down and Bottom-up concepts,
several methods were reported for the synthesis of nan-omaterial such as physical, chemical,
and biological methods. Recently, nano-material prepared via biological or green methods is
the first choice of the researcher because of their merits over known physical and chemical
approaches, as the biological method is cost-effective, eco-friendly, quick, and one pot. Hence,
biologically synthesized nano-range material having different morphology like nano-wire,
nano-tube, nano-flower, nano-spheres, and nano-clusters, used as nano-biosorbent in the
treatment of wastewater (Dabhane et al., 2020).
In present days, nano-biosorbent plays a key role in the purification of contaminated water
with high efficiency and at low cost, nano-biosorbent can be synthesized using agriculture
waste, biomass, biological waste, bacteria, fungus, algae, metal nanoparticles, and character￾ization was done with help of spectroscopic and microscopic techniques such as UV-DRS,
FT-IR, Photo Luminescence, BET, FE-SEM, HR-TEM, EDX, XRD, DLS, AFM which gives in￾formation about bandgap, functional group, porosity, size, morphology, elemental composi￾tion, crystal plane, etc. Numbers of methods were reported by several researchers by which
nano-biosorbent material was synthesized, Chemical method, Physical method, Microwave￾assisted, Ball mill, Precipitation method, Sol-Gel method, Green Synthesis, Hammer mill,
biological synthesis and used for the efficient removal of pollutants like synthetic dyes, haz￾ardous chemicals, heavy metals, biological waste from water sources (Dabhane et al., 2021;
Crini et al., 2019; El-Sayed and El-Sayed, 2014; Mahamadi, 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Tara
et al., 2019; Srivastava et al., 2020; Beni and Esmaeili, 2019; Ali, 2012; Amin et al., 2014).
4.2 Types of nano-biosorbents
The synthesis or preparation of nano-biosorbent design is based on the concept of green
chemistry, the classification of nano-biosorbent depends on the precursor from which it ob￾tains. The different types of precursors were used for the synthesis of nano-biosorbent as
shown below.
1. Agriculture waste.
2. Forest waste.
3. Extract of different parts of plant.
4. Biological precursor.
5. Chemical precursor.
6. Other
62 4. Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents for the contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesThe various agriculture waste such as sawdust, sugarcane, DSP, peels of different fruits
was used as reducing, and stabilizing agents for the fabrication of nano-biosorbent, similarly
forest waste like Chestnut bur used for the same purpose. In most of the research articles, the
synthesis of nano-biosorbent was reported using extract and waste of several parts of plants
like flowers, roots, latex, leaves, etc. Along with that, biological precursors such as algae, fun￾gus, bacteria were also reported for the biological synthesis of biosorbent which effectively
remove the contaminants from water sources. The effective chemical synthesis of nano￾biosorbent using a variety of chemical precursors such as chitosan, dextrin, etc., reported
by some researchers, the nano-biosorbent synthesized by another precursor also like oil
obtained from different natural sources.
4.3 Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents and their applications
Several attempts were made for the synthesis of nano-biosorbent using different precur￾sors from nature, the activity of nano-biosorbent depends on their morphology as well active
sites. Table 4.1 summarized the reported synthesis of nano-biosorbent from a variety of
sources.
Agriculture waste is the chief and best precursor which is easily available in nature for the
synthesis of nano-biosorbent. It shows excellent adsorption activity towards contaminates
present in water sources. Garima Mahajan and Dhiraj Sud reported the synthesis of nano car￾bonized biomass from Dalbergia sissoo pods (DSP) which contain lignocellulosic, nitrogenous
agricultural waste biomass by calcination method. Initially, the biomass was collected and
wash well to remove organic impurity from it, afterword it was dry at 120°C in the oven
for 24 h, dried biomass was crush into the nano-size powder and further calcinated at 800°
C in furness to obtained DSPC. The morphology of synthesized DSPC was investigated using
spectroscopic and microscopic techniques like FTIR, XRD, and SEM. FTIR spectra confirm the
presence of different anionic and cationic functional groups which coming from lignin, XRD
techniques show the porous spacing and porous size of synthesized DSPC, and finally, SEM
image confirms the nano-size of DSPC with regular morphology.
The author, study the application of DSPC for the remediation of Cd (II), Ni (II), and Pb (II),
metal ions from water solutions. The batch experiment was conducted to carry out the re￾moval of the above metal ions in aqua media, due to the presence of anionic sites in DSPC
it effectively interacted with metal ions and self-undergo oxidation by doing the reduction
of the metal. The interaction and reaction between metal and DSPC in aqueous media were
confirmed by FTIR techniques which shows the conversion of anionic sites of DSPC into their
oxidized form. The author also studied the effects of several parameters on the extraction of
metal ions such as pH, adsorption dose, initial metal ion concentration, contact time, and stir￾ring speed. pH is the main factor that influences the rate of adsorption or removal of metal, the
present experiment was carried out at pH 1–7 and it was found that maximum adsorptions of
Ni (II), Cd (II), and Pb (II) was 95%, 95%, and 98%, respectively. Another main factor is the
adsorbent dose which is directly proportional to the rate of adsorption, the rate of adsorption
also relies upon the initial concentration of a metal ion in an aqueous solution, when it is
presented in higher concentration, the adsorbent dose must be increased for better result,
4.3 Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents and their applications 63
I. Basics principlesTABLE 4.1 Summarized the reported synthesis of nano-biosorbent from a variety of sources.
Sr.
No.
Nano￾biosorbent Method Precursor Condition Characterization Product description Contaminant removal References
1 Carbonized
waste biomass
Calcination Delbergia sisso
pods (DSP)
Calcination
at 800 oC
FT-IR, XRD, SEM Nano-Flaks Cd (II), Pb (II) and
Ni (II) metal ions
Mahajan and
Sud (2014)
2 Chitosan￾sunflower
(CS), chitosan￾sunflower￾nanoiron
(CSN)
Described
procedure
by
Nadaroglu 
et al., and
Turgut.
chitosan and
sunflower waste,
an agro￾industrial waste
and modified
using iron
nanoparticles
– FTIR, SEM￾EDAX, TEM,
XRD, and
Nano-sheet Methylene Blue
dye
Turgut et al.
(2020)
3 Sawdust – Sawdust and
sodium dodecyl
sulfate
Dried at of
about 60C
for 5 h
temperature
SEM Heterogeneous
and porous
structure
Removal of
methylene blue
Ansari et al.
(2012)
4 Nanomodified
sugarcane
bagasse
biosorbent
– sugarcane
bagasse (SB) and
ferromagnetic
nanoparticles
(Fe3O4)
Dried at 50°C
for 6 h where
it was later
milled in a
rotor mill
and stored
FTIR, XRD, and
SEM/EDS
Flaks Cu(II) removal Carvalho
et al. (2020)
5 FNPSA and
FNPSOPR
Precipitation Fe3O4, sodium
alginate matrix
and saponified
orange peel
residue
Ultrasound FTIR, XRD, SEM￾EDS DLS and
VSM
Spherical Fluoride from
water
Christina and
Viswanathan
(2015)
6 Sugar beet
pulp
Hammer
mill
Sugar beet pulp Air-dried at
40°C
– sizes of
0.25–0.50 mm
Removal of Pb2+,
Cu2+, Zn2+,
Cd2+, and Ni2+
cations
Reddad et al.
(2002)
7 GQDOs-Ba
nano￾biosorbent
A bottom-up
method
Rice husk Treated with
N2
atmosphere
at 700oC for
2 h
FT-IR, SEM,
TEM,TGA, and
XRD.
Regular
aglomerzation
Removal of lead
(II) and lanthanum
(III)
Sharma et al.
(2018)8 Algal – Ulva fasciata and
Sargassum
dentifolium
Dried at
60 oC for
24H.
FT-IR, TEM,
ZETA SIZER
0.220 and
0.309 μm
Cu2+ El-Wakeel
et al. (2019)
9 Brown algae
and chitosan/
PVA nano￾fiber
membrane
planetary
ball mi;;
Sargassum
glaucescens
Planetary
ball mill
(Fara
Pajouhesh
Isfahan FP2)
at 600 rpm
for 1 h
SEM Nanowire and
spherical
30–300 nm
Removal of Nickel Ozdemir
et al. (2020)
10 Amberlite
XAD-4 loaded
with
Anoxybacillus
kestanboliensis
Biological
Method
Anoxybacillus
kestanboliensis,
XAD-4.
120 rpm and
55°C for
1 day on a
rotary shaker
SEM and FT-IR. Aglomerization Preconcentrations
of Co(II) and
Hg(II) in
Leung et al.
(2016)
11 Amyloid fibrils Biological
Method
Hen lysozyme Stirred for
4 h at 50°C
and then
centrifuged
at
14,000 rpm
for 4 min
TEM, PL and ZP Irregular Removal of dye
pollutants
Arshadi et al.
(2015)
12 Ostrich bone
waste (OBW)
– Ostrich bone
waste (OBW)
Dried oven
for 24 h at
70C,
FTIR, XRD, TEM Aggregation Phosphate
removal
Jain et al.
(2017)
13 Nano-cellulose Precipitation Aniline and
persulfate
Stirred for
26H.
FT-IR, XRD, SEM rod-like in
shape, 60 nm
in size
Chromium Pipı´sˇka et al.
(2020)
14 Magnetically
functionalized
moss biomass
Microwave Rhytidiadelphus
squarrosus
Dried at 60°C
for 24 h
(FTIR), XRD,
SEM, and EDX
moss leaves Co2+ Ions and
thioflavin T
Zare et al.
(2018)the analysis of adsorption studies done based on Freundlich isotherm and Langmuir isotherm
models (Mahajan and Sud, 2014).
Synthetic dye is the major constituent of water pollution, different types of dyes were used
for several purposes in industrial sectors. The unused dye was present in wastewater dump
into water bodies causes many side effects on living things, such type of problem-solving
using the nano-biosorbent. The author Esra Turgut and co-workers reported the synthesis
of two nano-biosorbent chitosan-sunflower (CS) and chitosan-sunflower-nanoiron (CSN)
from chitosan, sunflower waste and modified using iron nanoparticles. The author used
reported methods (Gungor et al., 2015; Karaduman et al., 2017; Nadaroglu et al., 2015) for
the green synthesis of iron nanoparticles using plant extract of ficus carica and FeCl2-FeCl3,
the chitosan-sunflower (CS) and chitosan-sunflower-nanoiron (CSN) was prepared using
chitosan, pre-dried powder of sunflower waste and green synthesized iron nanoparticles
via the reported procedure of Turgut et al. (2020). The synthesized nano-biosorbents was a
characterized using FT-IR, UV–Vis, SEM, and TEM technique which shows the low crystal
structure and a highly porous surface. The FT-IR spectra of CS and CSN explain the interac￾tion between chitosan-sunflower waste and chitosan-sunflower-nanoiron, respectively, XRD
peaks of chitosan-sunflower (CS) at 19.20°
, 27.49°
, and 32.43° gives the CS structure peaks
while the structure of the NPs connected to the peaks of the CS structure in addition to
32.28°
, 32.17°
, and 37.82° in the presence of peaks of Fe3O4 NPs were determined and confirm.
The SEM, and TEM images of CS and CSN explain the nearly equal distribution of Fe NPs
over the surface of CS which appears as cluster and aggregation due to the magnetic nature
of Fe3O4 NPs. The author successively used synthesized CS and CSN for the removal of syn￾thetic dyes; he chose Methylene Blue as a reference dye, and analysis was explored according
to Langmuir and Freundlich’s adsorption isotherm model. The various parameters which af￾fect the rate of adsorption like biosorbent dosage, treating agent, contact time, initial dye con￾centration, solution pH, and temperature, the interaction during the reaction of methylene
blue dye and biosorbent was also studied by UV–Vis, FT-IR, whereas the change in morphol￾ogy of biosorbent after the adsorption of methylene blue was tested using SEM, and TEM im￾age. It was found that the following optimum condition (pH 5, 30°C, and 60 min) give 80% of
CS and 88% of CSN removed MB from aqueous media (Turgut et al., 2020).
Similarly, the author R. Ansari et al. also reported the synthesis of nano-biosorbent utiliz￾ing sawdust assisted with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS/SD) for the degradation of methylene
blue dye. Sawdust is an agricultural waste that is easily available used as the precursor for the
synthesis of SDS/SD biosorbent, initially sawdust was washed well and dried at 60°C for 5 h
in the oven, then dried sawdust 35 g treat with 500 mL SDS and stirred at ambient temper￾ature for 12 h then dried at 50°C to obtain biosorbent. The morphology of nanostructured
SDS/SD was confirmed by SEM technique, SEM image showed the porous and heteroge￾neous structure of sawdust. Adsorption studies were carried out via two different methods
like batch and fixed-bed column systems, and Thomas and the bed-depth service time model
(BDST) were employed for study of sorption data, and determining of sorption ability. The
analysis and result of biosorption of methylene blue were obtained using Langmuir and
Freundlich isotherm equations, the effect of several factors such as initial dye concentration,
pH, flow rate, and bed depth on the sorption of MB dye have been reported. The result of
biosorption of methylene blue over surfactant-modified sawdust is much efficient than the
untreated SD biosorbent (Ansari et al., 2012).
66 4. Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents for the contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesSugarcane is the main agricultural product in Maharashtra state which is used for the pro￾duction of sugar whereas sugarcane bagasse is used for the production of alcohol. The sug￾arcane bagasse was found to be a good biosorbent for the extraction of the pollutants in water,
the author Juliana Tosta Theodoro Carvalho and co-workers synthesized nano-modified sug￾arcane bagasse biosorbent for the extraction of Cu (II) ions in the aqueous medium. The nano￾modified sugarcane bagasse was prepared using sugarcane bagasse and ferromagnetic Fe3O4
nanoparticles by coprecipitation technique (Labuto et al., 2018; Mascolo et al., 2013;
Panneerselvam et al., 2011) in which synthesized Fe3O4 nanoparticles mixed with SB at
80°C for 30 min. The synthesized SB/ Fe3O4 and MSB/ Fe3O4 were explored by FT-IR,
XRD, SEM/EDS techniques, FT-IR spectra explain the presence of different functional groups
like hydroxyl (O-H), hydrocarbons (C-H), carbonyl (C¼O), C-O, ether (C-O-C), and Fe-O, the
above functional group also enlighten the binding sites present in biosorbent. The structural
information about the SB/Fe3O4 and MSB/Fe3O4 obtained from the XRD spectrum confirms
the cubic structure, the SEM image also confirms the unequal morphology of SB/Fe3O4 and
MSB/Fe3O4 biosorbent. To determine the charge on the biosorbent surface, it was treated with
anionic and cationic such as amaranth red (AM) and methylene blue (MB) dyes. The cationic
dye like methylene blue (MB) shows excellent interaction with the anionic surface of
biosorbent and vice versa, then after kinetic study for the removal of Cu (II) was investigated
at 25°C, pH 6.2 condition and different concentration of Cu (II) ion (Carvalho et al., 2020).
The synthesis of Fe3O4 nanoparticles (NPs) and saponified orange peel residue
immobilized in sodium alginate matrix (FNPSOPR) as well as Fe3O4 NPs immobilized in so￾dium alginate matrix (FNPSA) as sorbents for fluoride extraction from polluted water
reported by author Evangeline Christina, and Pragasam Viswanathan. Initially, Fe3O4 NPs
were prepared by co-precipitation technique adapted by Thapa et al., further, the synthesized
Fe3O4 NPs were ultrasonicated with 1.5% sodium alginate solution to obtained magnetic al￾ginate nanoparticles, and to enhance the activity of the catalyst, the surface modification was
done in three steps by cross-linking with glutaraldehyde for 20 h, carboxylation with
chloroacetic acid for 20 h, and final step is loading with FeCl3 for 24 h. The synthesized
surface-modified nanoparticles were analyzed with help of FTIR, SEM-EDX, XRD, DLS,
and VSM techniques, the size of Fe3O4 NPs was confirmed by SEM, EDX, and DLS techniques,
the SEM image confirmed the agglomeration with a mean size of 21 nm was as the hydrody￾namic size of the particles was found to be approximately 140 nm by DLS techniques. The
XRD data confirmed the cubic morphology with high purity of Fe3O4 nanoparticles, also
the VSM study shows that synthesized Fe3O4 nanoparticles are superparamagnetic with a
coercivity of 70.541 Oe.
The adsorption capacity of synthesized nan-omaterial was found by batch methods with
the help of sorption isotherm and reaction kinetics study, for this purpose the uniform bed of
FNPSA and FNPSOPR was prepared and sorption study of chlorine ions was studied. The
maximum sorption ability of FNPSA and FNPSOPR were found to be 58.24 and 80.33 mgg1
respectively. Five sorption-desorption cycles exhibited 100%, 97.56%, 94.53%, 83.21%, and
76.53% of regeneration of FNPSOPR (Christina and Viswanathan, 2015). Agriculture waste
also has a marvelous capacity to adsorbed heavy metal present in water sources, sugar beet
pulp is one of the most popular examples, which is used as bioadsorbent, the author Zacaria
Reddad et al. reported the adsorption of several metal ions using cost-effective bioadsorbent.
In the present study, the commercially available sugar beet pulp was crushed by hammer mill
4.3 Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents and their applications 67
I. Basics principlesand get milled particle having size 0.25–0.50 mm which was used for further process. The
obtained particles were washed well with help of distilled water to remove the impurity
as well different ions, further, they are dried at 40°C and used for adsorption study of metals.
The author tested the kinetic study of beet pulp particles by adsorption test, 2 g of beet pulp
was dissolved in 800 mL of distilled water stir on a magnetic stirrer and initial concentration
of metal chloride 0.0004 M allow to adsorbed on it, the extent of adsorption was recorded by
atomic absorption spectrometer. Similarly, the sorption study of nano-biosorbent was carried
out, in the same manner, using Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherm (Reddad
et al., 2002).
Methylene blue is an important dye used in different industries for several purposes,
they also have some side effects on aquatic and human life, hence the need to remove it from
water bodies. Several methods were reported and adapted for the removal of methylene
blue dye, but one of the best and effective ways is the adsorption of methylene blue dye
on the matter. The author Swati Sharma and co-workers reported the synthesis of nano￾bioadsorbent using iron oxide nanoparticles and biomass. In the present paper, the author
prepares nano-bioadsorbents by the combination of previously synthesized iron oxide NPs
and Agrobacterium fabrum biomass in sodium alginate solution over calcium chloride. The
morphological study of synthesized nano-bioadsorbent was done with help of the FESEM
technique, the elemental composition was determined by EDX technique, and the involve￾ment of functional group was understood by FTIR technique. The batch-wise adsorption
study was carried out by determining the optical density of the resultant solution at various
parameters like initial dye concentration, temperature, contact time, and pH. In the present
study, 1 g of synthesized nano-bioadsorbent was added to different methylene blue
concentrations of 25, 50, 100, and 200 mg/L with constant stirring at 160 rpm and 50°C.
The amount of adsorption was studied by calculating the optical density of the resultant
solution (Sharma et al., 2018).
The biological microorganism also plays the role of nano-bioadsorbent, the author Shaimaa
T. El-Wakeel and et al. reported the algal bioadsorbent for the extraction of heavy metal from
water medium. In the present study, the author collected the two macro-algal biomasses Ulva
fasciata and Sargassum dentifolium, washed well, dried, and ground them in a ball mill to
micro-size powder. The micro-size powder was characterized using FTIR, TEM, and DLS
techniques, after the morphological analysis of nanobioadsorbent was used for the removal
of Cu (II) ion from aqueous medium. The adsorption efficiency of nano-bioadsorbent was de￾termined by batch experiment, where the 1 g adsorbent was added in 1lit solution of Cu (II)
ion, the efficiency of adsorption was investigated by considering the vital parameter like pH,
initial due concentration, temperature, adsorbent dose, and contact time. Finally, the resultant
concentration of a metal ion in solution was investigated by inductively coupled plasma￾Optical Emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES), and analysis were done with help of Langmuir,
Freundlich, and Dubinin–Radush kevich models (Mahamadi, 2019). Similarly, the author
A. Esmaeili and A. Aghababai Beni reported the use of brown algae and chitosan/PVA
nano-fiber for the removal of nickel.
The preparation of chitosan/VPA nano-fiber and biomass using brown algae was made by
the previous procedure given in Esmaeili and Aghababai Beni (2015a, b), the synthesized
nano-bioadsorbent was subjected to the characterization using different spectroscopic, and
microscopic techniques, FTIR technique confirms the presence functional groups imparted
68 4. Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents for the contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesby chitosan/PVA nano-fiber and S. glaucescens. The morphology and surface area of nano￾bioadsorbent was investigated with help of SEM and BET techniques. The continuous system
was formed by the combination of two reactors which contain three parts, two membranes,
and a reactor. In the reactor, the nano-bioadsorbent containing ligand sides bind with the
nickel-metal ions and adsorb on its surface, where the biosorption was nickel ion on the sur￾face of adsorbent explained by the mechanisms of electrostatics, ion exchange, complexation,
covalent force adsorption, and micro-sized deposition (El-Wakeel et al., 2019).
A novel nano-bioadsorbent composed of Amberlite XAD-4 and Anoxybacillus
kestanboliensis was reported by author Sadin Ozdemir and et al., the Anoxybacillus
kestanboliensis was isolated from Turkey, were as the morphological and biological analysis
was done. The fabrication of dried dead Anoxybacillus kestanboliensis and loaded biomass
were prepared according to Ozademir et al. with some modifications. After the preparation of
the nano-biosorbent, characterization was done with help of techniques like FTIR, SEM, and
EDX mapping. The author also studied the effect of flow rate, amounts of nano-bioadsorbent
and resin, influence of eluent type, concentration and volume, the influence of matrix ions on
retention of Co(II) and Hg(II), the effect of sample volume and determination of enrichment
factor on the efficiency adsorption. Finally, the author reported the maximum biosorption ca￾pacity of novel biosorbent as 24.3 and 27.8 mg g1 respectively (Ozdemir et al., 2020). The
author reported the synthesis and use of Amyloid Fibrils as a rapid and efficient nano￾biosorbent for the removal of dye. In the present study, the Amyloid fibril of hen lysozyme,
which is an excellent source of protein nano-fiber considered as nano-biosorbent, this protein
nano-fiber was synthesized in one step using the green route. The zeta-potential analysis con￾firms the positive/negative charges on nano-biosorbent and the hydrophobic region as well,
the presence of active charge sides in nano-biosorbent make them more reactive and can form
interaction with organic dye and it explains the process of biosorption of organic dye present
in aqueous media. The author reported the maximum sorption capacity of biosorbent is 60%
in 15 min (Leung and Lo, 2016).
A new nano-biosorbent was reported for the removal of phosphate in synthetic and real
water sample synthesized by the combination of Ostrich bone waste and nanoscale zero￾valent iron, the author M. Arshadi et al. collected the Ostrich bone waste from the local store,
washed well several times using distilled water to remove the unwanted fat and flash, then
after put in the oven for 24 h at 70°C, the selected size of particles 305 μ were collected and
reflux with the 0.1 M HNO3 for 2 h to enhance the sorption efficiency towards phosphate.
The nano zero-valent iron was synthesized using FeSO4.4H2O dissolved in 4/1 (v/v) etha￾nol/water, then OBW-HNO3 solution was added dropwise and ultrasonicated for 25 min
to result from homogeneous solution. Finally, the resultant black color nano-biosorbent
was obtained by adding dropwise NaBH4 solution. The morphology of synthesized nano￾biosorbent was investigated using TEM, and EDX techniques, where the surface area was
known with help of BET techniques, and chemical composition was understood using chem￾ical analysis and ICP-AES techniques. The adsorption study was carried out using batch ex￾periments, were the 0.5 g of synthesized nano-biosorbent shaken with 50 mL solution having
a concentration between 0.75 and 1000 mg/L (Arshadi et al., 2015). The author Priyanka Jain
and co-workers reported the synthesis of difunctionalized-polyaniline-modified
nanocellulose composite sorbent (PANINCC) has been used for the removal of trivalent
and hexavalent chromium from water bodies. The polyaniline was synthesized by adding
4.3 Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents and their applications 69
I. Basics principles15 mL ammonium persulfate solution into aniline-HCl solution, into that 10 g of
nanocellulose was mixed at ambient temperature with constant stirring for 10 h result in
nano-biosorbent. The morphology of the resultant nano-biosorbent was investigated using
SEM, TEM, XRD, and confirm the rod-like structure with size 60 nm, where the elemental
analysis was done with the help of EDX techniques. The sorption study of chromium chloride
over synthesized nano-sorbent was done through batch experiment, in which known concen￾tration of chromium chloride with the variable dosage of nano-sorbent, at different pH, dif￾ferent volume, and at different temperature stirred at 40 min, was the maximum capacity of
sorbent was found to be 96% ( Jain et al., 2017).
The author Martin Pipı´sˇka and co-workers reported the microwave-assisted synthesis of
iron oxide nanoparticles and microparticles and they are used in the preparation of Moss bio￾mass from Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus moss. The magnetical moss biomass was prepared
according to the procedure of Safarik and Safarikova, in which 1 g of FeSO4.7H2O was
dissolved in 200 mL distilled water and 1 mol/L of NaOH was slowly added with constant
stirring to reach the 12 pH of the solution, the resultant suspension was treated in the domes￾tic microwave for 10 min. Finally, suspension mix with the 1 g of R. squarrosus biomass in wa￾ter to get magnetically moss biomass after 60°C for 24 h. The surface characterization of
magnetical biomass was done with the help of SEM-EDX, and XRD before and after sorption
of Co2+ and thioflavin. The adsorption mechanism involves the active sides of nano￾biosorbent, the oxygen functionality present in biomass form electrostatic interaction with
Co2+ and thioflavin (Pipı´sˇka et al., 2020). The author reported the development of an effective
nano-biosorbent based on poly-m-phenylenediammine grafted dextrin for the removal of
Pb(II) and methylene blue dye in aqueous media. The synthesis of the present nano￾biosorbent is carried out in three steps, first step involves the chemical synthesis of
dextrin-g-poly-m-phenylenediamine (DgPmPDA), in which 1.25 g Dex was taken in 50 mL
of distilled water in 100 three-naked flasks with constant stirring for 30 min at 50°C, after
cooling 3.75 mL of HCl (1 M) was added to the same solution and again stir for 30 min at
0–5°C in an inert atmosphere. Then successive addition was taken place of APS solution in
30 min and mPDA solution in 2 min dropwise in an inert atmosphere, finally the resulting
precipitate was with water, ammonia, and acetone to remove unreacted chemicals from so￾lution. In the second step, the synthesis of graphene oxide was carried out according to mod￾ified hummer’s procedure (Marcano et al., 2010). In this procedure the mixture of
concentrated H2SO4/H3PO4 was added to a mixture of graphite flask and KMnO4, the mix￾ture was stirred for 12 h at 50°C. Finally, the reaction mixture was poured into an H2O2 so￾lution, and obtained black powder was dried at 90°C for 24 h. Finally, the preparation of Dex￾g-PmPDA@GO (DgPmPDA@GO) nano-biosorbent was done using the solution blending
technique (Lago et al., 2016). In this procedure, both components dispersed in chloroform sep￾arately and then were mixed in an ultrasonic bath for 2 h at 25°C.
The characterization of each part of nano-biosorbent was done with help of FTIR, CHN,
XRD, FESEM, AFM, and TGA techniques, which confirm the slight agglomeration present
in synthesized nano-biosorbent. The adsorption study was carried out considering the effect
of pH of the solution, adsorbent dosage, contact time, initial concentration of Pb(II) and meth￾ylene blue dye, and experimental data put forth in terms of Langmuir isotherm which is
found to good (Zare et al., 2018).
70 4. Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents for the contaminant removal
I. Basics principles4.4 Conclusion
The numerous techniques of synthesis of nano-biosorbents are discussed in this chapter, as
well as their significant application in environmental remediation. The goal is to classify di￾verse raw materials and assess their uses in diverse environmental uses. The research
presented here reveals minute data about the size, shape, characteristics, and uses of
nano-biosorbents. For the preparation of nano-biosorbents, several biocompatible reagents
and sources, as well as energy-efficient procedures, have been discussed in detail. This chap￾ter explored many roles of nano-biosorbents as catalysts, adsorbents, and their toxicological
effects. Furthermore, the synthesis of nano-biosorbents using a green approach, which is cur￾rently being developed, has been highlighted. Furthermore, the several green synthesis path￾ways were assessed critically in terms of their stability, size distribution, and various other
aspects. In conclusion, diverse nanotechnology protocols have been investigated in this chap￾ter, which will be useful in future research as a guide to study and use for further improve￾ments in developing better nano-biosorbents to deal with real-world sewage and polluted
solutions with the least risk of toxicological effects on the ecosystem. This chapter may be in￾teresting to readers who want to learn more about the synthesis of nano-biosorbents and their
remarkable effectiveness in diverse environmental applications.
References
Ali, I., 2012. New generation adsorbents for water treatment. Chem. Rev. 112 (10), 5073–5091. https://doi.org/
10.1021/cr300133d.
Amin, M.T., Alazba, A.A., Manzoor, U., 2014. A review of removal of pollutants from water/wastewater using dif￾ferent types of nanomaterials. Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2014, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/825910.
Ansari, R., Seyghali, B., Mohammad-khah, A., Zanjanchi, M.A., 2012. Application of nano surfactant modified
biosorbent as an efficient adsorbent for dye removal. Sep. Sci. Technol. 47 (12), 1802–1812. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01496395.2012.658485.
Arshadi, M., Gholtash, J.E., Zandi, H., Foroughifard, S., 2015. Phosphate removal by a nano-biosorbent from the syn￾thetic and real (Persian gulf ) water samples. RSC Adv. 5 (54), 43290–43302. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ra03191e.
Beni, A.A., Esmaeili, A., 2019. Biosorption, an efficient method for removing heavy metals from industrial effluents: a
review. Environ. Technol. Innov. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2019.100503.
Carvalho, J.T.T., Milani, P.A., Consonni, J.L., Labuto, G., Martins Carrilho, E.N.V., 2020. Nanomodified sugarcane
bagasse biosorbent: synthesis, characterization, and application for Cu(II) removal from aqueous medium. Envi￾ron. Sci. Pollut. Res. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-11345-3.
Christina, E., Viswanathan, P., 2015. Development of a novel nano-biosorbent for the removal of fluoride from water.
Chin. J. Chem. Eng. 23 (6), 924–933. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjche.2014.05.024.
Crini, G., Torri, G., Lichtfouse, E., Kyzas, G., Wilson, L., et al., 2019. Dye removal by biosorption using cross-linked
chitosan-based hydrogels. Environ. Chem. Lett. 17 (4), 1645–1666. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-019-00903-y.
Dabhane, H., Ghotekar, S., Tambade, P., Medhane, V., 2020. Plant mediated green synthesis of lanthanum oxide
(La2O3) nanoparticles: a review. Asian J. Nanosci. Mater. 3 (4), 291–299. https://doi.org/10.26655/
AJNANOMAT.2020.4.3.
Dabhane, H., Ghotekar, S., Tambade, P., Pansambal, S., Ananda Murthy, H.C., Oza, R., Medhane, V., 2021. Cow urine
mediated green synthesis of nanomaterial and their applications: a state-of-the-art review. J. Water Environ.
Nanotechnol. 6 (1), 81–91. https://doi.org/10.22090/jwent.2021.01.008.
El-Sayed, H.E.M., El-Sayed, M.M.H., 2014. Assessment of food processing and pharmaceutical industrial wastes as
potential biosorbents: a review. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/146769.
References 71
I. Basics principlesEl-Wakeel, S.T., Moghazy, R.M., Labena, A., Husien, S., 2019. Algal biosorbent as a basic tool for heavy metals re￾moval: the first step for further applications. J. Mater. Environ. Sci. 10 (1), 75–87.
Esmaeili, A., Aghababai Beni, A., 2015a. Biosorption of nickel and cobalt from plant effluent by Sargassum glaucescens
nanoparticles at new membrane reactor. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 12, 2055–2064. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13762-014-0744-3.
Esmaeili, A., Aghababai Beni, A., 2015b. Novel membrane reactor design for heavy-metal removal by alginate
nanoparticles. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 26, 122–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2014.11.023.
Gungor, A.A., Celebi, N., Nadaroglu, H., 2015. Removal of basic red 9 in wastewater using green Fenton reaction.
Fresenius Environ. Bull. 24 (5B), 1947–1957.
Huang, D., Li, B., Ou, J., Xue, W., Li, J., Li, Z., Guo, X., 2020. Megamerger of biosorbents and catalytic technologies for
the removal of heavy metals from wastewater: preparation, final disposal, mechanism and influencing factors. J.
Environ. Manag. 261, 109879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109879.
Jain, P., Varshney, S., Srivastava, S., 2017. Synthetically modified nano-cellulose for the removal of chromium: a green
nanotech perspective. IET Nanobiotechnol. 11 (1), 45–51. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-nbt.2016.0036.
Kanamarlapudi, S.L.R.K., Chintalpudi, V.K., Muddada, S., 2018. Application of biosorption for removal of heavy
metals from wastewater. In: Biosorption. IntechOpen, https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.77315.
Karaduman, I., Gungor, A.A., Nadaroglu, H., Altundas, A., Acar, S., 2017. Green synthesis of y-Fe2O3 nanoparticles
for methane gas sensing. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 28 (21), 16094–16105. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10854-017-
7510-5.
Labuto, G., Cardona, D.S., Debs, K.B., Imamura, A.R., Bezerra, K.C.H., Carrilho, E.N.V.M., Ferreira, P.S.H., 2018. Low
cost agroindustrial biomasses and ferromagnetic bionanocomposites to cleanup textile effluents. Desalin. Water
Treat. 12, 80–89. https://doi.org/10.5004/dwt.2018.21914v.
Lago, E., Toth, P.S., Pugliese, G., Pellegrini, V., Bonaccorso, F., 2016. Solution blending preparation of polycarbonate/
graphene composite: boosting the mechanical and electrical properties. RSC Adv 6 (100), 97931–97940. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C6RA21962D.
Leung, W.-H., Lo, W.-H., Chan, P.H., 2016. Amyloid fibrils as rapid and efficient nano-biosorbents for removal of dye
pollutants. RSC Adv. 6, 58363–58364.
Mahajan, G., Sud, D., 2014. Nano sized carbonized waste biomass for heavy metal ion remediation. Pol. J. Chem.
Technol. 16 (4), 6–13.
Mahamadi, C., 2019. On the dominance of Pb during competitive biosorption from multi-metal systems: a review.
Cogent Environ. Sci. 5, 1635335. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311843.2019.1635335.
Marcano, D.C., Kosynkin, D.V., Berlin, J.M., Sinitskii, A., Sun, Z., Slesarev, A., Tour, J.M., 2010. Improved synthesis of
graphene oxide. ACS Nano 4 (8), 4806–4814. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn1006368.
Mascolo, M., Pei, Y., Ring, T., 2013. Room temperature co-precipitation synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles in a large
pH window with different bases. Materials 6 (12), 5549–5567. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma6125549.
Nadaroglu, H., Gungor, A.A., Celebi, N., 2015. Removal of basic red 9 (BR9) in aqueous solution by using silica with
nano-magnetite by enzymatic with Fenton process. Int. J. Environ. Res. 9 (3), 991–1000. https://doi.org/10.22059/
IJER.2015.987.
Ozdemir, S., Kılınc¸, E., Fatih, S., 2020. A novel biosorbent for preconcentrations of Co(II) and Hg(II) in real samples.
Sci. Rep. 10 (1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-57401-y.
Panneerselvam, P., Morad, N., Tan, K.A., 2011. Magnetic nanoparticle (Fe3O4) impregnated onto tea waste for the
removal of nickel (II) from aqueous solution. J. Hazard. Mater. 186 (1), 160–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2010.10.102.
Pipı´sˇka, M., Zarodnˇanska´, S., Hornı´k, M., Dˇ urisˇka, L., Holub, M., Sˇafarı´k, I., 2020. Magnetically functionalized moss
biomass as biosorbent for efficient Co2+ ions and thioflavin T removal. Materials 13 (16), 3619. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ma13163619.
Reddad, Z., Gerente, C., Andres, Y., Le Cloirec, P., 2002. Adsorption of several metal ions onto a low-cost biosorbent:
kinetic and equilibrium studies. Environ. Sci. Technol. 36 (9), 2067–2073. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0102989.
Sharma, S., Bhattacharya, A., 2016. Drinking water contamination and treatment techniques. Appl. Water Sci. 7 (3),
1043–1067. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13201-016-0455-7.
Sharma, S., Hasan, A., Kumar, N., Pandey, L.M., 2018. Removal of methylene blue dye from aqueous solution using
immobilized Agrobacterium fabrum biomass along with iron oxide nanoparticles as biosorbent. Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res. 25 (22), 21605–21615. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018-2280-z.
72 4. Methods for the synthesis of nano-biosorbents for the contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesSrivastava, V., Zare, E.N., Makvandi, P., Zheng, X., Iftekhar, S., Wu, A., Sillanpaa, M., 2020. Cytotoxic aquatic pollut￾ants and their removal by nanocomposite-based sorbents. Chemosphere 258, 127324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2020.127324.
Tara, N., Siddiqui, S.I., Rathi, G., Chaudhry, S.A., Inamuddin, Asiri, A.M., 2019. Nano-engineered adsorbent for re￾moval of dyes from water: a review. Curr. Anal. Chem. 15. https://doi.org/10.2174/1573411015666190117124344.
Tran, H.N., Nguyen, H.C., Woo, S.H., Nguyen, T.V., Vigneswaran, S., Hosseini-Bandegharaei, A., Chao, H.-P., 2019.
Removal of various contaminants from water by renewable lignocellulose-derived biosorbents: a comprehensive
and critical review. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1–65. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2019.1607442.
Turgut, E., Alayli, A., Nadaroglu, H., 2020. Preparation of chitosan, sunflower and nano-iron based core shell and its
use in dye removal. Adv. Environ. Res. 9 (2), 135–150. https://doi.org/10.12989/aer.2020.9.2.135.
Zare, E.N., Lakouraj, M.M., Kasirian, N., 2018. Development of effective nano-biosorbent based on poly
m-phenylenediamine grafted dextrin for removal of Pb (II) and methylene blue from water. Carbohydr. Polym.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.08.091.
References 73
I. Basics principlesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
5
An insight into the potential
contaminants, their effects, and
removal means
Fatma Gurbuza and Mehmet Odabas¸ı
b
a
Department of Environmental Engineering, University of Aksaray, Aksaray, Turkey
b
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Aksaray University, Aksaray, Turkey
5.1 Contaminants of concern
A substance that has an adverse effect on the receiving environment at higher than normal
concentration as a result of human activity may be a reasonable definition for pollutants. On
the other hand, contaminants according to the European legislation, as substances that are
toxic, persistent, and liable to bioaccumulate are the presence of elevated concentrations in
the environment above the natural background level for the area and for the organism
(DIRECTIVES, 2013). Hence, contaminants are not defined as pollutants unless they have
some harmful effect on living and change the normal composition of an environment
(Schultz, 2014). Contaminants can be chemical, microbiological, physical, or radiological
substance that are hazardous to environmental compartments and living organisms, even
humans.
Major contaminant groups, their effect and removal processes are given here. Important
chemical contaminants, such as metals, chlorinated pesticides, halogenated aliphatic hydro￾carbons, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), are
discussed. Other contaminants which are not fully realized, however, linked to environmen￾tal and human health risks related issues, and are a growing concern of the scientific commu￾nity over the last decade, are defined as emerging contaminants (ECs) (Lopez et al., 2015). ECs
including pharmaceuticals, personal care products, etc. are also summarized in this chapter.
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 75 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00005-85.2 Understanding the major contaminants and sources
A wide group of chemicals can contaminate and impact the environment we live in greatly,
and adversely affecting human health. Contaminants can arise from numerous anthropo￾genic sources such as land-based industrial activities, oil and chemical spills; non-point
sources such as storm drains; runoff from agricultural lands, wastewater treatment plants
and sewage systems, atmospheric deposition, mineral exploration and exploitation, and riv￾erine inputs. Environmental contamination such as certain metals, pesticides, pharmaceuti￾cals, polyaromatic hydrocarbons solvents, polyhalogenated biphenyls, etc., can occur and
represent one of the main challenges driven by anthropogenic activity (Global Chemicals
Outlook, 2013; Stuart et al., 2012).
Since aquatic environments receive contaminants due to industrial wastes, inadequate
wastewater treatments and leaks, freshwater resources are increasingly polluted worldwide
(Bhat et al., 2017; Hampel et al., 2015). A lack of access to safe water supplies is a major concern
for public and community health (WHO, Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 2017). To
protect human beings from getting exposed to chemicals, under the Water Pollution Control
Act (EPA), toxic and priority pollutants are listed in Table 5.1, and codified at 40 CFR 401.15
(Protection of Environment, 2021, 2021) which has reached the number of 129 pollutants.
These high number of chemicals did not include all emerging contaminants (ECs) such as
endocrine disruptors (EDs), pesticides, pharmaceuticals, personal care products, hormones,
plasticizers, etc. However, some of the ECs are listed in the Contaminant Candidate List 4
(CCL4) which contains 97 chemicals or chemical groups and 12 microbial contaminants
(Federal Register, 2016). These are chemicals used in industries, pesticides, disinfection by
products, pharmaceuticals, biological toxins (cyanotoxins), and waterborne pathogens.
ECs of high concern are broadly distributed in places such as surface and groundwater
and have been reported by numerous researchers over the last decade (Lopez et al., 2015).
TABLE 5.1 Major chemical contaminant list summarized.
Types Contaminants Sources
Metals, metalloids,
organometals
Cadmium, copper, zinc, and iron; lead,
mercury, silver; and arsenic asbestos and
cyanide
Household effluents, mining, and
associated industries, fertilizers, fuels,
and well water
Pesticides (carbamates,
organophosphates,
pyrethroids,
organochlorines)
Alachlor, atrazine, 2,4-D, chlorpyrifos
Clopyralid, Dinoseb, Diquat Diuron, 1,2-
Dibromo-3-chloropropane (DBCP),
Endothall epichlorohydrin Heptachlor,
Heptachlor epoxide lindane, malathione,
and methoxychlor, Oxamyl (Vydate),
Picloram, Simazine, Toxaphene
Runoff from herbicides, insecticides, and
fungicides, used on row crops
Fertilizers Nitrates, ammonium nitrogen and
phosphates
Effluents from household, agriculture,
and aquaculture, Runoff from fertilizer
use; leaching from septic tanks, sewage;
erosion of natural deposits
76 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesHundreds of millions of people are dangerously contaminated, or chemically polluted by
consuming drinking water, because of inadequate treatments of urban, industrial, and
agricultural wastewaters. The vast number of chemical in water system poses a significant
challenge to policy regulators, engineers, and scientific community (Benotti et al., 2009;
Matthiessen et al., 2018).
TABLE 5.1 Major chemical contaminant list summarized—cont’d
Types Contaminants Sources
Pharmaceuticals and
personal care products
(PCPP)
Fluoxetine (Prozac), Carbamazepine,
Diphenhydramine, Antibiotics
(Tetracycline, Erythromycin, Analgesics
and anti-inflammatories (Ibuprofen,
diclofenac, paracetamol etc.) Nitro,
polycyclic and phthalates Detergent
metabolites (Nonylphenol) Para￾hydroxybenzoate, Antiseptics (Triclosan,
chlorophane)
Released due to insufficient wastewater
treatment, discharge from households
and factories
Endocrine-disrupting
Compounds (EDCs)
Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate,
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) several
organochlorine insecticides, Benzo(a)
pyrene (PAHs)
Hormones, steroids in water cycle,
wastewater, due to insufficient
wastewater and water treatments
Hydrocarbons Benzene ethylbenzene,
trimethylbenzenes, hexachlorobenzene,
hexachloro-cyclopentadiene toluene,
xylenes, naphthalene, polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) (fluorene, benzo(a)
pyrene, anthracene, phenanthrene etc.)
Mainly distillation products of
petroleum, discharge from factories;
leaching from gas storage tanks and
landfills
Halogenated compounds polychlorinated biphenyls, (PCBs),
dioxins (e.g., TCDD), polychloro
dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and
organochlorine insecticides, 1,2-
dichloropropane, 1,1,2-trichlorethane,
tetrachloroethylene, carbon tetrachloride,
chloroform
These hydrocarbons arise mostly from
industrial (Emissions from waste
incineration and other combustion) and
household solvents
Hormones and Steroids Estrone, estradiol dihydrotestosterone
(DHT), progesterone cholesterol,
coprostanol
Pharmaceuticals, personal care products,
industrial additives etc.
Pathogens Pathogens, Escherichia coli, Helicobacter
pylori, Legionella pneumophila,
Mycobacterium avium, Naegleria fowleri,
Salmonella enterica, Shigella sonnei
Viruses Adenovirus, Caliciviruses,
Campylobacter jejuni, Enterovirus, Hepatitis
A virus
Radionuclides Radium-226-228, uranium, thorium,
gross alpha and gross beta emissions
Sources are natural deposits, mill tailings,
from oil and gas deposits during their
process, mining activities, military waste,
coal-fired power plants
5.2 Understanding the major contaminants and sources 77
I. Basics principlesThe contaminants are implicated in outbreaks of diseases or endocrine effects, and have an
impact on fresh water and on nontarget plants and animals in agricultural and urban land￾scapes and human. Some studies have shown that even extremely low exposure to certain
pollutants can have impacts on biological systems (Matthiessen et al., 2018).
The most frequently detected chemicals in the streams were found as caffeine, cholesterol
coprostanol, N-Ndiethyltoluamide, triclosan, tri (2-chloroethyl), phosphate, and
4-nonylphenol according to the study by Kolpin et al. (2002). The representative cycle of
contaminants in ecological environment is given in Fig. 5.1.
5.3 Metals, metalloids, organometals
Soil, as natural buffer, controls the transport of heavy metals to air, water, and earth
(Kabata-Pendias, 2010). Anthropogenic activities build up the concentration of metals partic￾ularly in urban soils (Guagliardi et al., 2013). Globally, more people prefer living in urban
areas than in rural areas, up until 2018 with 55% of the world’s population residing in urban
areas and it is projected to increase to 68% by 2050 (2018 Revision of World Urbanization
Prospects, 2018).
FIG. 5.1 Cycle of contaminants.
78 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesMetals reach the aqueous environment through effluents of mining and smeltery, leachates
from waste dumps, domestic and agricultural use of metals and metal-containing compounds
(Nikinmaa, 2014). Metals dissolved in the water environment are more mobile and biologi￾cally available compared to the environment in which they are in particulate form. Metals with
known toxic effects include lead, mercury, arsenic, cadmium, and chromium. These elements
are of great public health significance due to their high degree of toxicity (Kumar et al., 2017;
WHO, Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 2017). Radioactive metals due to their ionizing
emissions as well as their chemical toxicity, may be potentially hazardous in both cases. Hence
the tolerated concentration limits of heavy metals in natural waters have been suggested to be
between 0.01 and 0.05 mg/L by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA)
and the World Health Organization (WHO), (National Primary Drinking Water Regulations,
2009; WHO, Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 2017). Moreover, heavy metals are toxic
chemicals, since they are generally harmful for the fauna and flora.
Metal exposure may cause various cardiovascular problems (Myong et al., 2014), repro￾ductive damage (Al-Gubory, 2014), kidney problems ( Johri et al., 2010), neurological disor￾ders (Mason et al., 2014), and cancer (Zhang et al., 2014).
5.3.1 Arsenic
Arsenic is a naturally occurring toxic metalloid element that is found ubiquitously in the
environment throughout the earth’s crust and groundwater; it is also found in the air and
food products, especially, crustaceans and seafood. The release of arsenic into the environ￾ment proliferates through weathering and mining processes, also by a volcanic activity. Ar￾senic is a by-product in smelting processes for many ores including cobalt, gold, lead, nickel,
and zinc (Olsen and Mørland, 2004). Various arsenic forms with different toxicities appear in
three major forms: inorganic (As(0), As(III) and As(V)., organic (monomethyl arsenic), and
arsine gas. Inorganic arsenic is particularly arsenite that is considered to be more toxic than
organic form, yet arsine is the most toxic form and inhalation of arsine over 10 ppm is lethal
(Kuivenhoven and Mason, 2021).
Arsenic pollution in water resources is a major concern due to its presence at high concen￾tration and associated adverse health effects (Gurbuz et al., 2019), as exposure to humans can
be lead through consuming of contaminated water and food (Talukder et al., 2012). Notably,
in some developing countries, contaminated groundwater appears to be the major source of
drinking water (Duker et al., 2005). The World Health Organization (WHO) recommended
the maximum acceptable limits for safe drinking water as 10 μg/L (WHO, 2011). Organic ar￾senic is considered to be insignificant in aquatic environments where crustaceans and other
fish are a known source of organic arsenic exposure.
5.3.2 Lead
Lead is poison, a potent neurotoxin, which have deadly effects, have been known for
nearly 3000 years. It is possibly first larger scale aquatic environmental issue resulted from
lead water pipes that were used by Romans (Retief and Cilliers, 2006). From a drinking-water
5.3 Metals, metalloids, organometals 79
I. Basics principlesperspective, use of lead compounds in older water distribution systems and plumbing is an
important issue for human exposure (WHO, Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 2017).
Lead in water piping systems is a challenging problem that several countries in the E.U., Aus￾tralasia, Asia, and USA are still facing; (Harvey et al., 2016; Roy and Edwards, 2019) in addi￾tion to this, in most countries where no regulations are in order to restrict the use of lead in
paints (Global Report, 2017). Lead from exhaust fumes mainly caused air pollution, so the
exposure of lead can occur from inhalation of lead fumes and particles.
Lead is an odorless, colorless, and tasteless chemical unlike other contaminants such car￾cinogens and killers as pesticides, and even radioactive materials, does not break down over
time, not vaporize, and it never disappears. Pb can harm the nervous system, liver, and kid￾ney, resulting in gastrointestinal damage, cause Alzheimer’s disease, and even child amentia
(Silver et al., 2016). Acute toxicity of lead occurring at high levels and related to occupational
exposure is quite uncommon. It has some symptoms, i.e., blindness, brain damage, kidney
disease, and convulsions.
5.3.3 Mercury
Mercury (Hg) is highly toxic that is found naturally in the earth’s crust however introduced
to environment by human activities such as mining, fossil fuel combustion, chlor-alkali indus￾try, paint production, metallurgical processes, and dental residues. It also occurs through nat￾ural causes, like weathering, atmospheric volcano emanations, and degasification. It is
emitted into air, transported and deposited to terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Three forms
of mercury are found in nature— elemental mercury (HgO), inorganic mercuric salts (i.e.,
HgCl2, HgS, Hg2Cl2), and organic forms (i.e., ethyl (C2H5Hg+
), methylmercury (CH3Hg+
))
(Azevedo et al., 2011; Bjørklund et al., 2017). Mercury poisoning can induce changes in the
nervous system of humans, especially in the case of young children (Ralston and Raymond,
2018). Under the vapor form it affects the kidneys, the brain, and the nervous system, and
interacts negatively with dopamine. Mercury is toxic to all known living species; especially
aquatic organisms are highly exposed to dissolved Methylmercury (Tan et al., 2009). MeHg is
quickly absorbed, rapidly distributed to all tissues of fish, and accumulates mainly in their
muscle tissue, and slowly metabolized to inorganic form (Arcagni et al., 2018; Ruus
et al., 2017).
5.4 Contaminants of emerging concern (CECs)
Contaminants of emerging concern is a phrase used to broadly classify chemicals which do
not fall under standard monitoring in the environment and regulatory programs but have the
potential to enter the environment and cause known or suspected adverse ecological and/or
human health effects (Glassmeyer et al., 2008). Antimicrobials detergent metabolites disinfec￾tants, disinfection by-products, fire retardants, industrial additives, life-style products
(Caffeine, Nicotine), PAHs (poly-aromatic hydrocarbons), pharmaceuticals, personal care
products, plasticizers, reproductive hormones, solvents, steroids, surfactants are categorized
80 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesas emerging contaminants found mainly in municipal sewage (Raghav et al., 2013; Rodil et al.,
2012). Chemical formula of some common contaminants of emerging concern are given in
Fig. 5.2.
The removal efficiencies showed that many wastewater treatments plants (WWTPs) are
not ideally designed to remove contaminants at trace level such as pharmaceuticals and pes￾ticides due to the failure of conventional wastewater treatment technologies. They have been
detected in wastewater, surface water, groundwater, and even treated drinking water at con￾centrations ranging from a few nanograms per liter (ng/L) to microgram per liter (μg/L)
(Grung et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2017). Major groups of EDCs including alkylphenols (APs),
bisphenol A (BPA), pharmaceuticals, and personal care products (PPCPs), perfluoroalkyl
and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs), phthalates and microplastics (MPs) have been
detected in bottled water and have brought potential health risks to humans (Akhbarizadeh
et al., 2020). Over 3000 substances were used as pharmaceutical ingredients including
antibiotics, antidiabetics, antidepressant drugs, beta-blockers, painkillers, contraceptives,
lipids regulators, and X-ray contrast media (Lambert and Skelly, 2016; McGrane, 2016).
The antibiotic ciprofloxacin at the concentration of up to a 6.5 mg/L have been
documented alongside over 200 diverse pharmaceuticals in river waters worldwide (aus
der Beek et al., 2016; Hughes et al., 2013). Seven antibiotics have been shown to be present
in surface waters in the city of Fez, Morocco, in which amoxicillin was present at the highest
FIG. 5.2 Common contaminants of emerging concern.
5.4 Contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) 81
I. Basics principlesconcentrations among other antibiotics such as sulfamethoxazole and erythromycin (Oualid
et al., 2019). There are many reports about pharmaceuticals and their derivatives in surface
water, ground water, and rivers where they can induce acute or chronic toxicity through the
food chain with adverse effects on aquatic ecosystems and human health, especially when
treated wastewater is reused as reclaimed water (Maniakova et al., 2020; Su et al., 2020).
For example, Godoy et al. show that antihypertensive drugs cause growth inhibition in fish,
algae, and larval mortality (Godoy et al., 2015). Various (eco)toxicological effects of CECs also
have shown by many studies (Saari et al., 2017).
Antibiotics disturb bacterial community structures and change bacterial ecology, and these
have led to the development of resistant bacterial strains; this may cause major global public
health issue (Grenni et al., 2018). Pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) are
persistent in water bodies and soil. So these substances lead to multi-drug-resistance mi￾crobes, antibiotic-resistant bacteria (ARB), and antibiotic-resistant genes (ARGs)
(Chaturvedi et al., 2021). For example, Klebsiella pneumoniae resistant to carbapenems and
cephalosporin; E. coli resistant to fluroquinolones and cephalosporin; Salmonella resistant
to fluoroquinolones; Mycobacterium tuberculosis, resistant to rifampicin (MTB) Staphylococcus
aureus resistant to methicillin (Tanwar et al., 2014). According to a review, antimicrobial re￾sistance can cause 10 million deaths per year by 2050 (de Kraker et al., 2016). Heavy metals
such as arsenic and cadmium has been associated that have influence on antibiotic resistance
in paddy soils (Zhao et al., 2020).
There are many CECs that act as so-called endocrine disruptors (EDCs) (EPA, Water Qual￾ity Criteria, 2008). So, these two categories can overlap with one or two differences by means
of chemical contaminants. Endocrine-disrupting chemicals, EDCs strongly bind to estrogen
or androgen receptors and interfere with natural hormones, and bind to activate various hor￾mone receptors such as Androgen Receptor (AR), estrogen receptors (ER), aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR), Pregnane X Receptor (PXR), Constitutive Androstane Receptor (CAR),
Estrogen-Related Receptor (ERR) and then imitating the natural hormone’s action (agonist
action). EDCs may also inhibit the pathways of hormones’ production (Mnif et al., 2011).
EDCs are including pesticides (Combarnous, 2017) mentioned above, antibiotics, disinfec￾tants, fire retardants, industrial additives, lifestyle products (Caffeine, Nicotine), pharmaceu￾ticals, personal care products, plasticizers (BPA), reproductive hormones, solvents, steroids.
In human epidemiologic studies, chemicals such as bisphenols, phthalates, and parabens
are associated with endocrine system disorders and linked to them causing a series of changes
in menstrual and ovarian function endocrine system (Benjamin et al., 2017). Elevated expo￾sure to phthalates has been associated with female genital tumors, endometriosis, precocious
puberty, and ovulation disorders (Smarr et al., 2016). Their presence in PCPs such as, cos￾metics, perfumes, deodorants, nail polishes, and skin and hair care products have been
reported in literature widely (Gao and Kannan, 2020). Even many species phthalates such
as di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, di-n-butyl phthalate, butyl-benzyl phthalate, and diethyl
phthalate were quantified in drinking water ranging between 0.02 and 0.6 μg/L (Cizmas
et al., 2015).
Parabens are also found to be strong estrogen agonists, and their exposure was linked to
breast cancer ( Jagne et al., 2016) and is designated as endocrine disrupting chemical (Błedzka
et al., 2014). They are produced for about 100 years and are considered high production￾volume chemicals in Europe, the U.S., and Asia. They are used in cosmetics, as a preservative
82 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesin pharmaceuticals due to their chemical stability, low cost, broad-spectrum antimicrobial
effect, and as food additives which is authorized in the European Union (Regulation (EC)
No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on food
additives (Text with EEA relevance), 2008), and later approved as food additives in China
(Petric et al., 2021), hence distributed and detected in many environments. They have been
detected in air, dust, soils, and aqueous environment. For example, propylparaben
(3142 ng/L), methylparaben (1062 ng/L) in Chinese river (Błedzka et al., 2014); in European
rivers, methylparaben was detected up to 400 ng/L (Kasprzyk-Hordern et al., 2009) and
propylparaben was quantified as 69 ng/L (Gonza´lez-Marin˜o et al., 2009). Even methyl-ethyl￾propyl parabens were found in non-processed seafood and fish samples (Wang et al., 2019).
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a chemical which is used to produce polycarbonate plastics and the
epoxy resin to add strength and resilience (Rosenfeld and Feng, 2011). It is one of the most
widely used EDCs in many consumer products such as in plastic containers, food packaging,
and beverage bottles including baby bottles. BPA can slowly leach into the contained mate￾rials and then impact reproductive health (Bondesson et al., 2009; Nriagu, 2019). BPA is also
utilized in products such as toys, water supply pipes, and medical tubing (Rosenfeld and
Feng, 2011). EPA estimates that each year over half million ton of BPA is released into the
environment (USEPA, 2010). A specific migration limit of BPA from packaging into food
was established as 3 mg/kg by the European Union (EU). The EPA has established a maxi￾mum acceptable dose for BPA of 50 μg/kg of body weight per day (Rosenfeld and Feng,
2011). Ingestion of canned food continues being the highest route for human exposure
concerning bisphenol and derivatives, however exposure-chlorinated derivatives of
bisphenols occur primarily through the consumption of tap water (Caballero-Casero et al.,
2016; Guart et al., 2014).
5.4.1 Pesticides
Historically, the awareness on pesticides had emerged and attributed to Rachel Carsons;
book “Silent Spring”; she raised a question about widespread use of pesticide Dikloro Difenil
Trikloroetan (DDT) and other pests which had led to deterioration of environment and death
of many birds (Mnif et al., 2011). The World Health Organization (WHO) has reported annual
pesticide poisonings of three million, resulting in 20,000 deaths worldwide (Boedeker et al.,
2020). The average annual pesticide use reported for the countries during 2010–2014 for kg
per ha; the greatest use was in Japan (18.94), followed by China (10.45), Mexico (7.87), Brazil
(6.166), and by the countries, i.e., Germany, France, UK, USA in decreasing orders (W. L.
Zhang et al., 2014). Pesticides can cause acute toxic effects in both target and non-target or￾ganisms. Many pesticides are persistent to break down in the environment and
bioaccumulate in fatty tissues of living organisms and human. The use of pesticides and their
detrimental effect on health has drawn attention to their safe level use. Exposure to pesticides
can be through contact with the skin, ingestion, or inhalation, and cause many severe health
effects and disorders in the reproductive, nervous, and immune systems. Long-term pesticide
exposure can cause cancer (Kim et al., 2017; Ritter et al., 2002). The major chemical classes of
pesticides include organochlorine compounds, carbamates, organophosphates, and
chlorophenoxy compounds (Ritter et al., 2002).
5.4 Contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) 83
I. Basics principlesMost of the disorders are induced by notably organophosphorus, organochlorines,
phenoxyacetic acids, and triazine compounds (Mostafalou and Abdollahi, 2017). The most
widely used pesticides worldwide are DDT, DDE, lindane, atrazine, simazine, triclosan,
and chlorpyriphos (Arlos et al., 2015) which have been associated with the antiandrogenic ac￾tivity and classified as “endocrine disrupting chemicals” (EDCs) (Rostkowski et al., 2011). Cit￾rus fruits, which are widely consumed in Europe, have been found to contain high amounts of
EPDs. Of these, 46%–57% EPDs residues were observed in mandarin, orange, and grapefruit.
17%–40% of vegetables also were found to contain EDPs, most importantly several fruit and
vegetables contained not just one pesticide, but an actual mixed up to eight EDPs per sample
and cumulative toxic potential effects are not assessed (PAN, Pesticide Action Network, 2017).
5.4.2 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are organic pollutants, formed either through
various industrial or natural activities (Qiao et al., 2018). Natural sources of PAHs mainly in￾clude combustion sources (Forest fires) and volcanic eruptions, as well as biological origin
(Itoh et al., 2017). Anthropogenic sources of PAHs are pyrolysis, which include incomplete
combustion of coal, petroleum, wood, polymers (Abdel-Shafy and Mansour, 2016), discharge
of crude oil, coal tar, asphalt, etc., and mineral oils and petroleum leakage (Goudarzi et al.,
2018). Other sources are food cooking processes and municipal waste incineration (Grung
et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2017). Incomplete combustion of organic substances gives out about
100 different polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) which are notably persistent pollut￾ants with various structures and toxicity.
PAHs mostly exist colorless, white or pale-yellow powder comprising of two or more ben￾zene rings. To date, over 400 kinds of PAHs and their health effects have been detected (Pan
et al., 2006). Many PAHs, about 16 of them have been categorized as priority contaminants
based on their toxicity and frequency of occurrence at hazardous waste sites by the USEPA
(Bojes and Pope, 2007). PAHs are a typical class of substances that are carcinogenic, terato￾genic, and mutagenic (Yiming et al., 2015).
PAHs have been identified in water sources, sediments, wastewaters, and aquatic organ￾isms, for example, in mussels often occurring in complex chemical mixtures with other con￾taminants. It was reported that four-ring and five-ring of PAHs such as chrysene and benzo[a]
pyrene are almost insoluble in water (Adeniji et al., 2018). PAHs are found in different envi￾ronmental media, in air, water, sediment, bind to the surface of particles, in particle-phase,
transport from air to land and to aquatic systems (Vagge et al., 2018). Studies proved that
microplastics (MPs) play an important role in the cycling and accumulation of PAHs due
to their strong adsorption capacity for lipophilic compounds (Fisner et al., 2017). Hence
microplastics (MPs) are listed as emerging threats considering the increasing amount in
marine environment (Eriksson et al., 2016). PAH attached MPs easily accumulate aquatic
organisms, causing toxic effects stronger than those taken up alone (N. Wang et al., 2019).
PAHs in aquatic environments reported to be detected in various concentrations, for ex￾ample, from 1.33 ng/L in treated drinking water in Iran to 139,000 ng/L in untreated drinking
water in Nigeria. The concentrations of the PAHs were found between 0.5 ng/L and
1,138,000 ng/L in lakes and rivers of various countries. In seawater and groundwater, PAHs
84 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principleswere detected differently—0.02 ng/L in Gulf; 46,600 ng/L in Indonesian Sea; 0.1 ng/L in
North China and 739.1 ng/L in Huai River in China (Mojiri et al., 2019). They are also present
at levels varying from 1 μg to 300 g/kg soil, depending on the sources of contamination
(Rodrigues et al., 2018).
5.5 Removal of emerging contaminants
With the beginning of modern life, daily use as well as many chemicals originated from
medical and industrial media (i.e., endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs), pharmaceuti￾cals, and personal care products (PPCPs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), hor￾mones existing as synthetic and natural, chemicals used for household and industry, some
disinfection by-products (DBPs), alternation product of ECs) threaten the health of living
things and our environment (Esplugas et al., 2007; Farre et al., 2008). These chemicals, in par￾ticular, have serious damage on the ecological balance, which directly or indirectly affects liv￾ing life such as seas, lakes, rivers, and groundwater. Since it is not possible to purify all
emerging contaminants with a single method, different methods are used for different con￾taminants. Therefore, the method to be chosen to remove emerging contaminants is also
related to the environment and amount of contaminants. The cost of treatment should also
be kept in mind as well (Kang, 2014). As a consequence, effective removal methods for emerg￾ing contaminants of concern are needed as ever (Kummerer, 2009 € ).
The methods used for the removal of emerging contaminants can be grouped under three
main headings as physical, chemical, and biological methods together with subheadings as
shown in Fig. 5.3. Although many of these methods can be applicable successfully, some of
them have some constraints such as high energy necessity and maintenance costs. Due to
these negative effects, important studies have recently been carried out with hybrid methods,
which consist of a mixture of the basic methods described above. Important parts of the
methods used to remove organic- and inorganic-based emerging contaminants of concerns
(ECs) are summarized below as basic information.
FIG. 5.3 General processes used for treatment of ECs.
5.5 Removal of emerging contaminants 85
I. Basics principles5.5.1 ECs removal methods based on physical interaction
Lately, ECs have been indicated as important water pollutants which have adverse impacts
on human and wildlife endocrine systems. Due to the chemical structures they contain, ECs
are water soluble and can pose a threat to aquatic organisms and humans (Rodriguez￾Narvaez et al., 2017). Physical interaction for ECs removal can be classified under two sub￾titles as adsorption applications and membrane processes.
Adsorption applications
Adsorption is a mass transfer process, and occurs between different phases. These phases
can generally be liquid–solid, gas–solid, gas–liquid, or liquid–liquid media. Interactions in
adsorption are based on physical or chemical interactions. If some interactions, i.e., weak ionic
or van der Waals forces are predominate in the process, this one is defined as physical adsorp￾tion, and interactions are reversible. Physical interactions can be single- or multi-layered, and
they can be explained by isotherms such as Langmuir or Freundlich, and different mecha￾nisms. Temperature is an important parameter in adsorption. And, low temperature often
provides an advantage in physical interactions. Chemisorption process concerns the chemical
bonding between adsorbates and solid surfaces. It happens as a monolayer with power inter￾actions. Chemisorption process concerns the chemical bonding between adsorbates and solid
surfaces. Both chemisorption and physisorption may be formed simultaneously depending
on the conditions (Tareq et al., 2018). Adsorbents are utilized to adsorb any particular con￾taminant from waste water thanks to intermolecular forces (De Gisi et al., 2016). Adsorption
applications utilizing natural, synthetic, and waste substances have been the subject of dis￾cussion in recent years for the removal of ECs (Dhangar and Kumar, 2020). The material kind
is one of the most significant properties to be considered when opting adsorption as the re￾moval operation. And also, the sustainability of the manufacturing of adsorbent materials is
an important matter. The usage of some natural substances can demonstrate to be
unsustainable in the long term (Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017).
Activated carbon (AC) is one of the most-used adsorbents due to its high self-exclusive
surface area and porosity. It represents encouraging potential for removing the specific
ECs. Nevertheless, the raw substances opted for AC importantly impacts the removal perfor￾mance of ECs (Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017). Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), single-walled or
multi-walled nanotubes are another group of adsorbents. It is available in the literature that
the opted ECs demonstrate perfect removal performance. Even if CNTs displayed perfect per￾formance in some studies, it has been known that CNTs have weak performance for some
other ECs at the same experimental situations (Dhangar and Kumar, 2020).
Biochar is a charcoal-origin substance extensively utilized as a soil amendment. Lately,
biochar has been researched for the adsorption of ECs. An important knowledge gap in
the usage of biochar is about sustainability of the production process. The scaling of the
biochar manufacturing procedure is another important knowledge gap. Biochar manufactur￾ing is overtaken in unproductive small-scale ovens requiring big energy entry. Therefore, cor￾rect evaluation of the carbon footprint regarding biochar manufacturing procedure and
recognition of cleaner manufacturing operations is mandatory to provide its sustainable
usage (Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017).
86 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesOther adsorbents for removing of ECs are clay minerals, zeolites, aluminum oxides,
graphene oxides, and some polymers (Dhangar and Kumar, 2020). Substances containing dif￾ferent functional groups such as carbohydrate-based structures (i.e., lignin, starch, cellulose,
and simple sugars), lipids, proteins, and water are among the basic components of agricul￾tural waste materials. Some previous reports have indicated that agricultural substances in￾cluding cellulose have a high adsorption performance of different contaminants. Their
implementations as adsorbents can be improved via some modifications (De Gisi et al., 2016).
Available adsorbents are limited for selectively removing of ECs. Therefore, various ad￾sorption processes can be integrated with other treatment processes in order to efficiently re￾move the various ECs (Dhangar and Kumar, 2020). Processes based on low-cost and easily
available adsorbents will make them suitable and as alternative for ECs removing. Relying
on the adsorbent and adsorbate properties used, a suitable adsorbent option should not be
forgotten to ensure the highest level of removal of various types of contaminants.
Membrane process
Membrane process technologies are recently extensively utilized for different applications.
Basically, membrane technology is a process based on another physical process in which so￾lutions are filtered by trapping contaminants on the membrane. Membrane process technol￾ogy has some troubles due to the different physicochemical features of materials and the large
range of parameters to be combined for separation enhancement. The convenient separation
mechanisms and target contaminants narrow the membrane options.
Membranes for removal of emerging contaminants from water: Which kind of
membranes should we use?
The characteristics of membranes such as pore size, hydrophobicity, and surface charge
determine the removal of contaminants (Sch€afer et al., 2011; Simmons et al., 2011). The impor￾tant point here is that membrane processes can be classified according to pore sizes and mem￾brane types. In addition, it should not be forgotten that decreasing the pore sizes of the
membranes will increase the removal efficiency.
In fact, membrane technology uses biological and non-biological processes together. Non￾biological processes are reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, and nanofiltration, whereas biologi￾cal processes are membrane bioreactors (MB). MBs are combining membrane-based filtration
processes with microfiltration or ultrafiltration systems. Today, MBs are the most reliable and
approved systems to obtain clean water from wastewater via the unification of membrane
and biological processes (Iorhemen et al., 2016; Nofiana et al., 2019).
Non-biological processes such as reverse osmosis, nanofiltration, microfiltration, ultrafil￾tration, or pressure-based membrane technologies apply high pressures across membranes
used to filter pollutants from the produced water (Abdel-Fatah, 2018). These systems are
the most common membrane method in water treatment. And also, membranes should be
constantly modified for better performance and use.
Even though membrane-based methods are appropriate for eliminating turbidity and mi￾crobiological pollutants, high costs still restrict its fully utilization. Membranes are easily af￾fected by contamination problems by causing unexpected interruptions due to aqueous
pollutants (Maddah et al., 2018).
5.5 Removal of emerging contaminants 87
I. Basics principlesPhysical treatment processes containing adsorption and membrane techniques have been
shown good performance to eliminate some ECs. There is also a need for methods combining
physical and chemical methods for sustainable methods in which ECs will be reduced or de￾teriorated (Dhangar and Kumar, 2020).
ECs removal by hybrid systems
The combination of some treatment techniques can offer the best solution in point of sep￾aration performance and cost. The approaches of conventional techniques for the removal of
various ECs are incapable of destroying them fully (Molinari et al., 2020). ECs cause global
concerns because of their possible toxicity (Saidulu et al., 2021). The high-quality knowledge
required for ECs investigation has requested technological advancements (Perez-Parada
et al., 2012).
Systems, where traditional methods were used alone, were insufficient to remove many
ECs types. In this regard, hybrid treatment systems have been the subject of research in
the recent years due to their performance in removing different impurities. Various advanced
and conventional chemical oxidation processes are extremely demanding and expensive, and
their high energy requirement is the drawback and weakness of these methods. Lately, hybrid
methods have been developed to cope with the disadvantages of traditional process to elim￾inate differences of ECs. Hybrid methods, combining chemical, physical and/or biological
processes, can be used effectively to remove different types of ECs (Dhangar and
Kumar, 2020).
Hybrid systems for removing of ECs consist of biological-physical, biological-chemical,
biological-physical-chemical treatment processes. Especially, the unification of the superior￾ities of three different types of treatment methods, the implementation of these kinds of hy￾brid methods for ECs removal is very promising. Hybrid treatment methods generally
promote as cost effectiveness and sustainability of biological operation for eliminating biode￾gradable organic substances from wastewater (Saidulu et al., 2021).
In the literature, various hybrid treatment systems have been made about the develop￾ments in preventing the spread of ECs to the aquatic environment in wastewater treatment
applications (Ahmed et al., 2017). In fact, it is obvious that no single technology can address all
troubles. The world of science exists for combinations suitable for needs (Sharma and
Bhattacharya, 2017).
Physical removal, chemical oxidation or disinfection and biological transformation are the
methods for water or wastewater treatment (Liu et al., 2009). Each of these technologies can be
appropriate and cost-effective for a specific purpose. For instance, chlorination is a cost￾effective technique for disinfection of drinking water via the distribution system. On the other
hand, reverse osmosis is an effective technique for desalination process of seawater. How￾ever, one-step method will not be sufficient to achieve the quality required for water manage￾ment in a wastewater treatment with a matrix containing complex substances (Anastasi et al.,
2012). As a result, hybridizing or combining various methods can result in higher quality
(Taheran et al., 2018).
The membrane bioreactor is a very useful model for explaining the hybrid treatment
method. In this method, hybrid systems in which a membrane is added to a conventional
activated sludge system, can increase the quality of the wastewater (Taheran et al., 2016).
88 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesHybrid membrane operation system is a strong key for eliminating ECs from wastewater. By
using these processes, a satisfactory operational water quality can be achieved by reducing
both environmental and economic impacts while ensuring sustainable reuse in the hydrolog￾ical circuit (Molinari et al., 2020).
Some hybrid forms were advanced and some of these systems have been controlled at pilot
scale in EU countries. However, these methods are costly and prevent them from finding
wide application area (Grandclement et al., 2017). Thus, convenient research is required to
discover more green and low-cost techniques. Both society and decision-makers must be per￾suaded to pay for the next generation of wastewater treatment systems based on hybrid
technologies.
5.5.2 Chemical operations
Biological wastewater treatment technologies (such as β-blockers, one of the pollutants
from pharmaceuticals and personal care products, are subjected to different biological treat￾ments to sweep) can be effective in removing the EC class based on wastewater characteristics
and operational parameters. In addition, new advanced treatment techniques in the form of
chemical processes are being developed in order to increase the efficiency in cleaning and to
further remove ECs. These technologies are called chemical oxidation or aqueous phase
oxidation (Comninellis et al., 2008).
Chemical operations aim to convert pollutants in water to inorganic structures such as
water, carbon dioxide and nitrogen, or to other minerals by making them less harmful. Chem￾ical operations also aim to convert pollutants into biodegradable compounds (Ahmed et al.,
2017). In other words, this technology has been used to reinforce conventional systems and to
further the EC removal process (Balcioglu and  Otker, 2003 € ).
In accordance with this purpose, the combination of some oxidants including metal oxides
and metal oxide-based catalysts, as well as chemical agents such as ozone, hydrogen perox￾ide, chlorine are used for the aqueous phase oxidation of ECs from wastewater (Ikehata et al.,
2008). In addition, some energy sources such as electric current, gamma, sun and
UV-radiation can be used in this process (Ikehata et al., 2006). These chemical operations
are classified as conventional oxidation processes and advanced oxidation processes
(AOPs) (Dhangar and Kumar, 2020). Oxidation of ECs in AOPs is based on hydroxyl radicals
that facilitate the conversion of pollutants into more biodegradable structures (Ikehata et al.,
2006). The rate constants of the reactions of hydroxyl radicals in aqueous solutions are around
106–109 M/s (Malato et al., 2012). All data for chemical-based treatment systems (Ahmed
et al., 2017; Klamerth et al., 2012; Prieto-Rodrı´guez et al., 2013) are listed in Table 5.2.
Chlorination
Most of the chemical oxidation processes have high efficiency in the degradation of less
toxic and easily biodegradable ECs in wastewater systems. In the treatment of wastewater,
less reactive types such as chlorine (chlorine gas and hypochlorite) and bromine are some￾times used (Noutsopoulos et al., 2014). However, this method is not widely used due to
the possibility of formation of high sub-products and less mineralization of ECs in the use
of chlorine and chlorine dioxide during treatment (Rivera-Utrilla et al., 2013).
5.5 Removal of emerging contaminants 89
I. Basics principlesTABLE 5.2 Removal efficiency of ECs with conventional and AOP-based treatment technologies.
Category ECs ECs source
Chemical
treatment
technology Removal (%)
Beta blockers Metoprolol, Atenolol,
Metoprolol tartrate,
Propranolol
hydrochloride
Water,
Wastewater
treatment
plants,
Hospital
wastewater
Gamma radiation
Bi electro-Fenton
Solar
photoelectron￾Fenton
90–100 (Metoprolol) 85–88
(Atenolol) 90 (Metoprolol
tartrate) 93 (Propranolol
hydrochloride)
Analgesics Carbazepine, Diclofenac,
Ibuprofen, Naproxen
Water,
Wastewater
treatment
plants,
Distilled
water
Gamma radiation,
Solar photo￾Fenton, Solar
photocatalysis,
Ultrasonic
irradiation/TiO2
90–100 (Carbazepine) 90–100
(Diclofenac) 90 (Ibuprofen)
98 (Naproxen)
Non-steroidal
anti￾inflammatory
drugs
Ketoprofen, Melenamic
acid, Ketoralac
Water,
Wastewater
treatment
plants
Gamma radiation,
Solar photo￾Fenton, Anodic
oxidation
100 (Ketoprofen) 100
(Melenamic acid)
90 (Ketoralac)
Lipit
regulators
Clofibric acid,
Gemfibrozil
Water,
Wastewater
treatment
plants
Gamma radiation,
Solar
photocatalysis
100 (Clofibric acid)
85 (Gemfibrozil)
Antibiotics Amoxicillin, Cefaclor,
Chloramphenicol
Penicillin G, Penicillin V,
Sulfamethoxazole,
Cefalexin,
Sulfamethazine,
Flumequine, Ofloxacin,
Ampicillin, Cloxacillin,
Ofoxacin, Trimethoprim,
Tetracycline
Water,
Hospital
wastewater,
Wastewater
treatment
plants
Electro-Fenton,
Solar photo￾Fenton,
Photocatalysis/
H2O2, Solar
photocatalysis,
Anodic oxidation,
Gamma radiation
95–100 (Amoxicillin) 100
(Cefaclor) 100
(Chloramphenicol)
92 (Penicillin G) 81 (Penicillin
V) 53–100 (Sulfamethoxazole)
100 (Cefalexin)
85 (Sulfamethazine)
90 (Flumequine)
90 (Ofloxacin) 100 (Ampicillin)
100 (Cloxacillin) 85 (Ofoxacin)
85 (Trimethoprim)
86 (Tetracycline)
Contrast
agent
Iopromide Water Gamma radiation 100 (Iopromide)
Pesticides Atenolol, Metoprolol,
Propranolol, Triclosan,
Triclocarban, Atrazine,
Aldrin, Diazinon,
Malathion, 3-Indole
butyric acid, Diurin
Water,
Hospital
wastewater,
Wastewater
treatment
plants
Electro-Fenton,
Solar photo￾Fenton,
Photocatalysis/
H2O2, Solar
photocatalysis
95 (Atenolol) 95 (Metoprolol)
95 (Propranolol) 90–100
(Triclosan) 100 (Triclocarban)
60 (Atrazine) 90 (Aldrin)
99 (Diazinon) 99 (Malathion)
90 (3-Indole butyric acid)
85 (Diurin)
Pain relievers Acetaminophen,
Hydroxybiphenyl,
Isobroturum
Wastewater
treatment
plants
Solar photo￾Fenton, Electro￾Fenton
90–98 (Acetaminophen)
85 (Hydroxybiphenyl)
90 (Isobroturum)
90 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesOzonation
It is the most basic process used in wastewater treatment plants to accelerate bio￾degradability and increase the efficiency of subsequent treatment processes. (Acero
et al., 2010). Because ozone has a high electron density and is a very powerful oxidant
that selectively reacts with EC’s double bonds and aromatic rings (Acero et al., 2015).
Since ozone is a strong oxidant, almost all types of ECs can be effectively removed in
this way.
Ozone production is costly because it is an energy-intensive process. In other
words, the ozone treatment system can increase the energy demand by 40%–50% com￾pared to the conventional wastewater treatment plants (Ahmed et al., 2017). Another
problem with ozonation is the formation of some oxidative by-products and the inter￾ference of radical scavengers (Benner et al., 2013; Luo et al., 2014). In summary, high
costs, interference and possible by-products should not be ignored in ozonation
studies.
Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs)
Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have been developed to eliminate the disadvan￾tages experienced in oxidation processes. These processes can be listed as Ferrate process,
photocatalysis, solar-Fenton process, electro-Fenton process, and ultrasound irradiation
(Salimi et al., 2017). Ferrate (FeO4
2), an excellent oxidizing agent, has a strong disinfecting
effect. It can form Fe(OH)3 gel that can precipitate and remove other ions from the
TABLE 5.2 Removal efficiency of ECs with conventional and AOP-based treatment technologies—cont’d
Category ECs ECs source
Chemical
treatment
technology Removal (%)
Endocrine
disrupting
compounds
Progesterone, Bisphenol
A
Wastewater
treatment
plants,
Aqueous
solutions
Solar photo￾Fenton, Solar
photocatalysis,
Ultrasound
UV/Fe2+
90 (Progesterone) 80–85
(Bisphenol A)
Anti￾inflammatory
4-Aminoantipyrine
4-Asetilaminoantipyrine
4-Formilaminoantipyrine
4-metilaminoantipyrine
Wastewater
treatment
plants
Solar photo￾Fenton, Solar
photocatalysis
89 (Antipyrine)
85 (4-Aminoantipyrine)
60 (4-Asetilaminoantipyrine)
85 (4-Formilaminoantipyrine)
85 (4-metilaminoantipyrine)
Stimulants Caffeine, Paraxanthine Wastewater
treatment
plants
Solar photo￾Fenton Solar
photocatalysis
55–90 (Caffeine)
85 (Paraxanthine)
Diuretics Hydrochlorothiazide Wastewater
treatment
plants
Solar
photocatalysis
85 (Hydrochloro-thiazide)
5.5 Removal of emerging contaminants 91
I. Basics principlesenvironment. In addition, it is seen that it is used in the removal of arsenic and some ECs due
to its high oxidation property (Ghernaout and Naceur, 2011). The main mechanism used in
treatment is oxidation/disinfection with Fe6+ and coagulation/flocculation with Fe3+ ( Jiang,
2007). It is not widely used due to its limited application area, high preparation cost, and poor
stability (Roth et al., 2016).
The Electro-Fenton process has been used to eliminate the disadvantages that occur with
the traditional Fenton process. In this process, electrochemical production takes place in a
controlled manner instead of H2O2 (Roth et al., 2016). In the Electro-Fenton process, UVA
light is used to allow the rapid degradation of pollutants and to increase the regeneration
of Fe2+ by producing more OH• radicals (De Luna et al., 2012). Such AOPs provide excellent
removal even at concentrations much higher than the optimum limits of pesticides and an￾tibiotics (Adriana et al., 2012). However, high operating and maintenance costs are the biggest
factor limiting its widespread use.
In the Solar-Fenton process, another advanced oxidation processes, UV light or natural
sunlight is used to generate hydroxyl radical from the H2O2 reaction in the presence of Fe.
The biggest advantage of this method is that it works under optimum pH conditions
(Adriana et al., 2012). Photocatalysis is a process in which chemicals are transformed by ac￾tivating catalysts with the help of light energy in order to eliminate the disadvantages of slow
degradation in photolysis (MacWan et al., 2011; Sornalingam et al., 2016). Semiconductors
such as titania and ZnO are frequently used catalysts in the photocatalysis process (Gaya
and Abdullah, 2008). It has a wide range of uses in EC decomposition due to its strong
oxidation properties, but challenges such as high operating and maintenance costs, energy
consumption, and potential toxicity of oxidation byproducts are alarming. In addition, it
has been developed in hybrid systems where advanced oxidation processes are used together
with biological and physical processes to ensure more effective removal of various ECs.
Fenton process
Fenton process is a suitable option for wastewater treatment, as iron is abundant and does
not have toxic effects. Hydroxy radicals are produced by the reaction of hydrogen peroxide in
the presence of iron in the Fenton process (Shemer et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2018b).
Chain reaction happens as follows:
Fe2+ + H2O2 ! Fe3+OH + OH (5.1)
Fe3+ + H2O2 !Fe2+ + HO2
 + H+ (5.2)
The Fe2 + ion can be reproduced from Fe(III) by reaction (5.2). However, since reaction (5.2)
is much slower than reaction (5.1), Fe (III) will accumulate in solution (De Luna et al., 2012).
For this reason, removing of Fe from solution will adversely affect productivity. It will also
require a substantial amount of reagent, which will increase process costs. The undesired con￾sumption of the hydroxyl radical formed by iron ions and hydrogen peroxide is another dis￾advantage of the conventional Fenton process.
OH + Fe2+ !Fe3+ + OH (5.3)
OH + H2O2 ! H2O + HO2
 (5.4)
92 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesBecause the HO2
% radical formed in reaction (5.4) is a weaker oxidant than the OH% radical,
this undesired reaction will reduce the process efficiency. Due to these negativities, catalyst,
solar energy or any light source should be used together with the Fenton process to ensure
effective removal of ECs from waste water (Ahmed et al., 2017).
Photolysis
Decomposition of ECs by photolysis process is a process that occurs by absorption of light
(usually UV) or radiation (Yan et al., 2015). Disinfection of water using UV is the most widely
used photolysis technique. Two types of photolysis are used to separate ECs; the first is direct
photolysis by direct absorption of photons, and the second is indirect photolysis in the pres￾ence of photosensitizers such as hydrogen peroxide (Nguyen et al., 2013). Although both
types of photolysis are effective in removing many kinds of ECs such as pesticides, analgesics,
beta blockers, EDCs and antibiotics, indirect photolysis is more effective than direct photol￾ysis (Ahmed et al., 2017). In addition, gamma radiations have been effectively applied in the
separation of ECs. Gamma radiation-based oxidation process achieved 100% success in re￾moving of ECs such as metoprolol, carbazepine, diclofenac, ketoprofen, mefenamic acid,
clofibric acid, cefaclor, and chloramphenicol (Slegers and Tilquin, 2006; Song et al., 2008).
With the fact that the gamma radiation method can be used successfully in the removal of
ECs, it should be kept in mind that the production of gamma radiation will incur a serious
cost for the removal of impurities.
5.5.3 Biological applications
Many researches have represented that the great extent removal of ECs was conducted
through both biodegradation and adsorption in the course of biological treatment (secondary
treatment) (Ismail and Mokhtar, 2020). Adsorption is an effective and convenient process and
has been a large-scale research subject as a good method compared to other waste disposal
methods due to its lower cost, compatibility, and easy design (Rasalingam et al., 2014). On the
other hand, biological degradation is the method of reduction of large molecular weight ECs
into smaller molecules by bacteria, microorganisms (such as algae and fungi) (Garcia￾Rodrı´guez et al., 2014) and even biomineralization into basic inorganic substances such as
water and carbon dioxide.
Some parameters such as conducted treatment system, operation conditions, physico￾chemical features of Ecs, and their biological permanence impact the removal ratio or degra￾dation level of the ECs. The biological treatments are often classed as conventional and
non-conventional treatments, whose categorization primarily relies on the wastewater prop￾erties (Dhangar and Kumar, 2020). We will explain these two systems with two subheadings.
Conventional processes
Biological transformations and mineralization processes are the leading cleaning processes
in conventional wastewater treatment operations (Kanaujiya et al., 2019). For the conven￾tional method of biological degradation, microorganisms take advantage of organic com￾pounds for their growth as major substance. And also, organic compounds excite enzymes
for digestion. Many types of ECs that have toxic effects on plants resist microbial growth
5.5 Removal of emerging contaminants 93
I. Basics principlesand inhibit biodegradation. In response to this process, microbial growth must continue in
order for the biodegradation process. And this requires a growth substrate. This process is
called as cometabolism (Tran et al., 2013).
Removal and degradation performance of ECs rely on the chemical and biological perma￾nency of ECs, and also physicochemical features, the methods utilized, and treatment condi￾tions of them. The removal of extremely polar substances such as pharmaceuticals is the most
significant operation made by microorganisms. The removal ratios mainly depend on
connected treatment methods, operation circumstances and target pollutants. The determina￾tion of degradation materials in environmental samples is a hard duty. Because they are not
only exist at low concentrations but also in complicated matrices that can amalgamate with
detection samples (Zhou et al., 2009).
The conventional treatment processes contain activated sludge processes (ASP), trickling
filters (TF), moving bed biofilm reactors, nitrification, microalgae/fungi origin treatments, bi￾ological activated carbon, and some another aerobic, anaerobic, facultative microbiological
treatments.
It has been reported that the treatments of microalgae/fungus origin can effectively
remove ECs with the help of phytoremediation and degradation mechanism (de Wilt
et al., 2016; Garcia-Rodrı´guez et al., 2014; Matamoros et al., 2016). These operations displayed
effective removal of many ECs. Microbiological processes (such as aerobic, anaerobic, and
facultative) are mostly used for excess sludge removal in sewage treatment plants where
ECs are adsorbed to suspended particles up to a point. The most intensely applied process
all around the world to get rid of many ECs is the activated sludge method. In this process,
the mechanism acting for removal process is biodegradation which is conducted by microor￾ganisms in ventilation tank (Braga et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2009). The removal yield of ECs via
active sludge processes can be combined with other processes (i.e., biological or advanced
oxidation).
Trickling biofilters systems have not been literally investigated for ECs eliminating, but
they have been explored by combining with active sludge process for the removal of 55 phar￾maceutical and personal care products in South Wales, UK (Kasprzyk-Hordern et al., 2009;
Svenson et al., 2003).
Non-conventional processes
Nowadays, even if some biological and physicochemical treatment techniques have been
searched to get rid of ECs in wastewater, biologically based methods for wastewater treat￾ment are not suitable for all wastewater components, and the treatment efficiency is affected
on a large scale by environmental parameters (Molinari et al., 2020). Some removal operations
such as oxidation, adsorption, etc., are used in non-conventional treatment ones (regardless of
whether the conventional processes are present). For non-conventional processes used to re￾move ECs, methods such as biosorption, constructed wetlands and membrane bioreactor can
be mentioned.
Biosorption is the biological refinement method in which sorption and bio-oxidation tech￾niques (there is no biodegradation event) are more preponderant because of microorganisms’
immobilization onto adsorbent material (Pidlisnyuk et al., 2003). The biosorption method can
be used for the removal of different EC types. However, this method needs to be further
developed in order to remove more and more different EC types successfully.
94 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesMembrane bioreactor is the applied biological treatment method to obtain good quality
effluents versus some ECs. In membrane reactor, ECs are eliminated by the system of physical
holding and microbial biodegradation at the surface of the membrane which limits the move￾ment of heavy molecules. Membrane bioreactor has the ability to successfully get rid of the
ECs that are robust even in activated sludge process and constructed wetlands because of
these double mechanism of adsorption and biodegradation (Luo et al., 2014; Radjenovic
et al., 2009; Westerhoff et al., 2005).
Membrane bioreactor method owns some troubles such as occlusion and becoming of foul￾ing of membrane, operational insufficiency matters, high expense than the constructed wet￾lands and other set up methods and weak elimination of specific ECs (Buttiglieri and
Knepper, 2008; Yang et al., 2006). These troubles may be diminished by utilizing the mem￾brane bioreactor method in combination with some physicochemical techniques.
Analogous of natural wetland operations, constructed wetlands are reproduced under
control environmental circumstances, to improve the wastewater utilizing the combining
methods such as oxidation, biodegradation, and sorption (Anawar et al., 2019).
Plants, microbes, the porous structure of the soil due to its nature, the chemical structure of
the soil are liable for the processes of biological degradation, absorption, and oxidation, respec￾tively. On the other hand, constructed wetlands techniques could be only implemented for
lesser wastewater load because it requires large fields to conduct successfully (Matamoros
and Bayona, 2008). Additionally, this cost-effective technique withits profits of various specific
methods could be utilized to combine with other treatment techniques (i.e., oxidation process,
membrane technology method) to obtain higher performance for a widespread range of ECs.
The conventional and non-conventional biological treatment methods have high capacity
and are considered operative for the removing of many ECs. However, most of the methods
fulfill specifically for the selected groups of ECs. Therefore, to reach higher efficiency for ECs
removal, these biological methods could be combined with other physical and chemical treat￾ment methods such as membrane processes (e.g., ultrafiltration, reverse osmosis, nano￾filtration regarding), ozonation, and other improved oxidation processes (Dhangar and
Kumar, 2020).
5.6 Conclusion
In parallel with the population growth rate and economic development, the improvement
in the desired quality of life and the protection of the environment are indispensable compo￾nents for a good and sustainable future. We understand from the experiences we have gained
that, with the transition to modern life the demand for natural resources increases with the
increase in population. As a result, with increasing consumption, a successful waste manage￾ment plan for a green future needs to be made.
Acknowledgments
Prof. Odabas¸ı acknowledges Dr. Om€ ur Acet (Tarsus University, Tarsus, Turkey), pH.D. students, Burcu € Onal Acet €
and Emrah Dikici (Aksaray Universitesi, Aksaray, Turkey) for their help during the preparation of some parts of this €
chapter.
Acknowledgments 95
I. Basics principlesReferences
2018 Revision of World Urbanization Prospects, 2018. https://www.un.org/development/desa/publications/2018-
revision-of-world-urbanization-prospects.html.
Abdel-Fatah, M.A., 2018. Nanofiltration systems and applications in wastewater treatment: review article. Ain Shams
Eng. J. 9 (4), 3077–3092. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2018.08.001.
Abdel-Shafy, H.I., Mansour, M.S.M., 2016. A review on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: source, environmental im￾pact, effect on human health and remediation. Egypt. J. Pet. 25 (1), 107–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejpe.2015.03.011.
Acero, J.L., Benitez, F.J., Teva, F., Leal, A.I., 2010. Retention of emerging micropollutants from UP water and a mu￾nicipal secondary effluent by ultrafiltration and nanofiltration. Chem. Eng. J. 163 (3), 264–272. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2010.07.060.
Acero, J.L., Benitez, F.J., Real, F.J., Rodriguez, E., 2015. Elimination of selected emerging contaminants by the com￾bination of membrane filtration and chemical oxidation processes. Water Air Soil Pollut. 226 (5). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11270-015-2404-8.
Adeniji, A.O., Okoh, O.O., Okoh, A.I., 2018. Analytical methods for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and their global
trend of distribution in water and sediment. In: Zoveidavianpoor, M. (Ed.), Recent Insights in Petroleum Science
and Engineering. Intech, https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.71163.
Adriana, L.E., Yu-You, L., Aimin, W., 2012. Biodegradability enhancement of wastewater containing cefalexin by
means of the electro-Fenton oxidation process. J. Hazard. Mater., 41–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2012.04.079.
Ahmed, M.B., Zhou, J.L., Ngo, H.H., Guo, W., Thomaidis, N.S., Xu, J., 2017. Progress in the biological and chemical
treatment technologies for emerging contaminant removal from wastewater: a critical review. J. Hazard. Mater.
323, 274–298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.04.045.
Akhbarizadeh, R., Dobaradaran, S., Schmidt, T.C., Nabipour, I., Spitz, J., 2020. Worldwide bottled water occurrence of
emerging contaminants: a review of the recent scientific literature. J. Hazard. Mater. 392. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122271.
Al-Gubory, K.H., 2014. Environmental pollutants and lifestyle factors induce oxidative stress and poor prenatal de￾velopment. Reprod. BioMed. Online 29 (1), 17–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbmo.2014.03.002.
Anastasi, A., Spina, F., Romagnolo, A., Tigini, V., Prigione, V., Varese, G.C., 2012. Integrated fungal biomass and ac￾tivated sludge treatment for textile wastewaters bioremediation. Bioresour. Technol. 123, 106–111. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.07.026.
Anawar, H.M., Ahmed, G., Strezov, V., 2019. Long-term performance and feasibility of using constructed wetlands
for treatment of emerging and nanomaterial contaminants in municipal and industrial wastewater. In: Emerging
and Nanomaterial Contaminants in Wastewater: Advanced Treatment Technologies. Elsevier, pp. 63–81, https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814673-6.00003-6.
Arcagni, M., Juncos, R., Rizzo, A., Pavlin, M., Fajon, V., Arribere, M.A., Horvat, M., Ribeiro Guevara, S., 2018. Species￾and habitat-specific bioaccumulation of total mercury and methylmercury in the food web of a deep oligotrophic
lake. Sci. Total Environ. 612, 1311–1319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.08.260.
Arlos, M.J., Bragg, L.M., Parker, W.J., Servos, M.R., 2015. Distribution of selected antiandrogens and pharmaceuticals
in a highly impacted watershed. Water Res. 72, 40–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.11.008.
aus der Beek, T., Weber, F.A., Bergmann, A., Hickmann, S., Ebert, I., Hein, A., Kuster, A., 2016. Pharmaceuticals in the €
environment-global occurrences and perspectives. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 35 (4), 823–835. https://doi.org/
10.1002/etc.3339.
Azevedo, J.S., Braga, E.S., Favaro, D.T., Perretti, A.R., Rezende, C.E., Souza, C.M.M., 2011. Total mercury in sediments
and in Brazilian Ariidae catfish from two estuaries under different anthropogenic influence. Mar. Pollut. Bull.
62 (12), 2724–2731. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.09.015.
Balcioglu, I.A.,  Otker, M., 2003. Treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater containing antibiotics by O € 3 and O3/H2O2
processes. Chemosphere 50 (1), 85–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0045-6535(02)00534-9.
Benjamin, S., Masai, E., Kamimura, N., Takahashi, K., Anderson, R.C., Faisal, P.A., 2017. Phthalates impact human
health: epidemiological evidences and plausible mechanism of action. J. Hazard. Mater. 340, 360–383. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.06.036.
Benner, J., Helbling, D.E., Kohler, H.P.E., Wittebol, J., Kaiser, E., Prasse, C., Ternes, T.A., Albers, C.N., Aamand, J.,
Horemans, B., Springael, D., Walravens, E., Boon, N., 2013. Is biological treatment a viable alternative for
96 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesmicropollutant removal in drinking water treatment processes? Water Res. 47 (16), 5955–5976. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.watres.2013.07.015.
Benotti, M.J., Trenholm, R.A., Vanderford, B.J., Holady, J.C., Stanford, B.D., Snyder, S.A., 2009. Pharmaceuticals and
endocrine disrupting compounds in U.S. drinking water. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43 (3), 597–603. https://doi.org/
10.1021/es801845a.
Bhat, R.A., Shafiq-ur-Rehman, M.M.A., Dervash, M.A., Mushtaq, N., Bhat, J.I.A., Dar, G.H., 2017. Current status of
nutrient load in dal Lake of Kashmir Himalaya. J. Pharmacogn. Phytochem. 6, 165–169.
Bjørklund, G., Dadar, M., Mutter, J., Aaseth, J., 2017. The toxicology of mercury: current research and emerging
trends. Environ. Res. 159, 545–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.08.051.
Błedzka, D., Gromadzinska, J., Wasowicz, W., 2014. Parabens. From environmental studies to human health. Environ. 
Int. 67, 27–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.02.007.
Boedeker, W., Watts, M., Clausing, P., Marquez, E., 2020. The global distribution of acute unintentional pesticide poi￾soning: estimations based on a systematic review. BMC Public Health 20 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-
09939-0.
Bojes, H.K., Pope, P.G., 2007. Characterization of EPA’s 16 priority pollutant polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) in tank bottom solids and associated contaminated soils at oil exploration and production sites in Texas.
Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 47 (3), 288–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2006.11.007.
Bondesson, M., Jonsson, J., Pongratz, I., Olea, N., Cravedi, J.P., Zalko, D., Ha € ˚kansson, H., Halldin, K., Di Lorenzo, D.,
Behl, C., Manthey, D., Balaguer, P., Demeneix, B., Fini, J.B., Laudet, V., Gustafsson, J.A., 2009. A CASCADE of
effects of bisphenol A. Reprod. Toxicol. 28 (4), 563–567. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2009.06.014.
Braga, O., Smythe, G.A., Sch€afer, A.I., Feitz, A.J., 2005. Fate of steroid estrogens in Australian inland and coastal
wastewater treatment plants. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39 (9), 3351–3358. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0501767.
Buttiglieri, G., Knepper, T.P., 2008. Removal of emerging contaminants in wastewater treatment: conventional acti￾vated sludge treatment. In: Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, volume 5: Water Pollution. 5. Springer, pp.
1–35, https://doi.org/10.1007/698_5_098.
Caballero-Casero, N., Lunar, L., Rubio, S., 2016. Analytical methods for the determination of mixtures of bisphenols
and derivatives in human and environmental exposure sources and biological fluids. A review. Anal. Chim. Acta
908, 22–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2015.12.034.
Chaturvedi, P., Singh, A., Chowdhary, P., Pandey, A., Gupta, P., 2021. Occurrence of emerging sulfonamide resis￾tance (sul1 and sul2) associated with mobile integrons-integrase (intI1 and intI2) in riverine systems. Sci. Total
Environ. 751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142217.
Cizmas, L., Sharma, V.K., Gray, C.M., McDonald, T.J., 2015. Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in waters:
occurrence, toxicity, and risk. Environ. Chem. Lett. 13 (4), 381–394. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-015-0524-4.
Combarnous, Y., 2017. Endocrine disruptor compounds (EDCs) and agriculture: the case of pesticides. C. R. Biol. 340
(9–10), 406–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crvi.2017.07.009.
Comninellis, C., Kapalka, A., Malato, S., Parsons, S.A., Poulios, I., Mantzavinos, D., 2008. Advanced oxidation pro￾cesses for water treatment: advances and trends for R&D. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 83 (6), 769–776. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jctb.1873.
De Gisi, S., Lofrano, G., Grassi, M., Notarnicola, M., 2016. Characteristics and adsorption capacities of low-cost sor￾bents for wastewater treatment: a review. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 9, 10–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
susmat.2016.06.002.
de Kraker, M.E.A., Stewardson, A.J., Harbarth, S., 2016. Will 10 million people die a year due to antimicrobial resis￾tance by 2050? PLoS Med. 13 (11). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002184.
De Luna, M.D.G., Veciana, M.L., Su, C.C., Lu, M.C., 2012. Acetaminophen degradation by electro-Fenton and
photoelectro-Fenton using a double cathode electrochemical cell. J. Hazard. Mater. 217–218, 200–207. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.03.018.
de Wilt, A., Butkovskyi, A., Tuantet, K., Leal, L.H., Fernandes, T.V., Langenhoff, A., Zeeman, G., 2016. Micropollutant
removal in an algal treatment system fed with source separated wastewater streams. J. Hazard. Mater. 304, 84–92.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.10.033.
Dhangar, K., Kumar, M., 2020. Tricks and tracks in removal of emerging contaminants from the wastewater through
hybrid treatment systems: a review. Sci. Total Environ. 738. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140320.
DIRECTIVES, 2013. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri¼OJ:L:2013:226:0001:0017:EN:PDF.
Duker, A.A., Carranza, E.J.M., Hale, M., 2005. Arsenic geochemistry and health. Environ. Int. 31 (5), 631–641. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2004.10.020.
References 97
I. Basics principlesEPA, Water Quality Criteria, 2008. https://www.epa.gov/wqc/contaminants-emerging-concern-including￾pharmaceuticals-and-personal-care-products.
Eriksson, U., Roos, A., Lind, Y., Hope, K., Ekblad, A., K€arrman, A., 2016. Comparison of PFASs contamination in the
freshwater and terrestrial environments by analysis of eggs from osprey (Pandion haliaetus), tawny owl (Strix
aluco), and common kestrel (Falco tinnunculus). Environ. Res. 149, 40–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2016.04.038.
Esplugas, S., Bila, D.M., Krause, L.G.T., Dezotti, M., 2007. Ozonation and advanced oxidation technologies to remove
endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) and pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) in water efflu￾ents. J. Hazard. Mater. 149 (3), 631–642. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.07.073.
Farre, M.l., Perez, S., Kantiani, L., Barcelo´, D., 2008. Fate and toxicity of emerging pollutants, their metabolites and
transformation products in the aquatic environment. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 27 (11), 991–1007. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trac.2008.09.010.
Federal Register, 2016. https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/11/17/2016-27667/drinking-water￾contaminant-candidate-list-4-final.
Fisner, M., Majer, A., Taniguchi, S., Bı´cego, M., Turra, A., Gorman, D., 2017. Colour spectrum and resin-type deter￾mine the concentration and composition of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in plastic pellets. Mar.
Pollut. Bull. 122 (1–2), 323–330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.06.072.
Gao, C.J., Kannan, K., 2020. Phthalates, bisphenols, parabens, and triclocarban in feminine hygiene products from the
United States and their implications for human exposure. Environ. Int. 136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2020.105465.
Garcia-Rodrı´guez, A., Matamoros, V., Fonta`s, C., Salvado´, V., 2014. The ability of biologically based wastewater treat￾ment systems to remove emerging organic contaminants—a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 21 (20), 11708–11728.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-013-2448-5.
Gaya, U.I., Abdullah, A.H., 2008. Heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation of organic contaminants over titanium
dioxide: a review of fundamentals, progress and problems. J Photochem Photobiol C: Photochem Rev 9 (1), 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotochemrev.2007.12.003.
Ghernaout, D., Naceur, M.W., 2011. Ferrate(VI): in situ generation and water treatment – a review. Desalin. Water
Treat. 30 (1–3), 319–332. https://doi.org/10.5004/dwt.2011.2217.
Glassmeyer, S.T., Koplin, D.W., Furlong, E.T., Focazio, M., 2008. Environmental presence and persistence of pharma￾ceuticals: an overview. In: Aga, D.S. (Ed.), Fate of Pharmaceuticals in the Environment and in Water Treatment
Systems. CRC Press, p. 3, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420052336.
Global chemicals outlook, 2013. https://sdgs.un.org/publications/global-chemicals-outlook-towards-sound￾management-chemicals-17941.
Global Report, 2017. https://ipen.org/sites/default/files/documents/ipen-global-lead-report-2017-v1_2-en.pdf.
Godoy, A.A., Kummrow, F., Pamplin, P.A.Z., 2015. Occurrence, ecotoxicological effects and risk assessment of anti￾hypertensive pharmaceutical residues in the aquatic environment – a review. Chemosphere 138, 281–291. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.06.024.
Gonza´lez-Marin˜o, I., Quintana, J.B., Rodrı´guez, I., Cela, R., 2009. Simultaneous determination of parabens, triclosan
and triclocarban in water by liquid chromatography/electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid
Commun. Mass Spectrom. 23 (12), 1756–1766. https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.4069.
Goudarzi, G., Geravandi, S., Alavi, N., Idani, E., Salmanzadeh, S., Yari, A.R., Jamshidi, F., Mohammadi, M.J.,
Ranjbarzadeh, A., Alamdari, F.A., Darabi, F., Rohban, A., 2018. Association between cancer risk and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons’ exposure in the ambient air of Ahvaz, southwest of Iran. Int. J. Biometeorol. 62 (8),
1461–1470. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-018-1543-1.
Grandclement, C., Seyssiecq, I., Piram, A., Wong-Wah-Chung, P., Vanot, G., Tiliacos, N., Roche, N., Doumenq, P.,
2017. From the conventional biological wastewater treatment to hybrid processes, the evaluation of organic
micropollutant removal: a review. Water Res. 111, 297–317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.01.005.
Grenni, P., Ancona, V., Barra Caracciolo, A., 2018. Ecological effects of antibiotics on natural ecosystems: a review.
Microchem. J. 136, 25–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2017.02.006.
Grung, M., Lin, Y., Zhang, H., Steen, A.O., Huang, J., Zhang, G., Larssen, T., 2015. Pesticide levels and environmental
risk in aquatic environments in China – a review. Environ. Int. 81, 87–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2015.04.013.
Guagliardi, I., Buttafuoco, G., Cicchella, D., De Rosa, R., 2013. A multivariate approach for anomaly separation of
potentially toxic trace elements in urban and peri-urban soils: an application in a southern Italy area. J. Soils Sed￾iments 13 (1), 117–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11368-012-0583-0.
98 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesGuart, A., Bono-Blay, F., Borrell, A., Lacorte, S., 2014. Effect of bottling and storage on the migration of plastic con￾stituents in Spanish bottled waters. Food Chem. 156, 73–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.01.075.
Gurbuz, F., Akpınar, Ş., Ozcan, S., Acet, O., Odabas € ¸ı, M., 2019. Reducing arsenic and groundwater contaminants
down to safe level for drinking purposes via Fe3+attached hybrid column. Environ. Monit. Assess. 191 (12).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7862-9.
Hampel, M., Blasco, J., Segner, H., 2015. Molecular and cellular effects of contamination in aquatic ecosystems. En￾viron. Sci. Pollut. Res. 22 (22), 17261–17266. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-015-5565-5.
Harvey, P.J., Handley, H.K., Taylor, M.P., 2016. Widespread copper and lead contamination of household drinking
water, New South Wales, Australia. Environ. Res. 151, 275–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2016.07.041.
Hughes, S.R., Kay, P., Brown, L.E., 2013. Global synthesis and critical evaluation of pharmaceutical data sets collected
from river systems. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (2), 661–677. https://doi.org/10.1021/es3030148.
Ikehata, K., Jodeiri Naghashkar, N., Gamal El-Din, M., 2006. Degradation of aqueous pharmaceuticals by ozonation
and advanced oxidation processes: a review. Ozone Sci. Eng. 28 (6), 353–414. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01919510600985937.
Ikehata, K., El-Din, M.G., Snyder, S.A., 2008. Ozonation and advanced oxidation treatment of emerging organic pol￾lutants in water and wastewater. Ozone Sci. Eng. 30 (1), 21–26. https://doi.org/10.1080/01919510701728970.
Iorhemen, O.T., Hamza, R.A., Tay, J.H., 2016. Membrane bioreactor (Mbr) technology for wastewater treatment and
reclamation: membrane fouling. Membranes 6 (2). https://doi.org/10.3390/membranes6020033.
Ismail, W.N.W., Mokhtar, S.U., 2020. Various methods for removal, treatment, and detection of emerging water con￾taminants. In: Nuro, A. (Ed.), Emerging Contaminants. Intech, https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.93375.
Itoh, N., Naya, T., Kanai, Y., Kumon, F., Amano, K., 2017. Historical changes in the aquatic environment and input of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons over 1000 years in Lake Kitaura, Japan. Limnology 18 (1), 51–62. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10201-016-0488-5.
Jagne, J., White, D., Jefferson, F., 2016. Endocrine-disrupting chemicals: adverse effects of bisphenol A and parabens
to Women’s health. Water Air Soil Pollut. 227 (6). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-016-2785-3.
Jiang, J.Q., 2007. Research progress in the use of ferrate(VI) for the environmental remediation. J. Hazard. Mater. 146
(3), 617–623. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.04.075.
Johri, N., Jacquillet, G., Unwin, R., 2010. Heavy metal poisoning: the effects of cadmium on the kidney. Biometals
23 (5), 783–792. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10534-010-9328-y.
Kabata-Pendias, A., 2010. Trace Elements in Soils and Plants. Springer.
Kanaujiya, D.K., Paul, T., Sinharoy, A., Pakshirajan, K., 2019. Biological treatment processes for the removal of organic
micropollutants from wastewater: a review. Curr. Pollut. Rep. 5 (3), 112–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40726-
019-00110-x.
Kang, J.W., 2014. Removing environmental organic pollutants with bioremediation and phytoremediation.
Biotechnol. Lett. 36 (6), 1129–1139. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10529-014-1466-9.
Kasprzyk-Hordern, B., Dinsdale, R.M., Guwy, A.J., 2009. The removal of pharmaceuticals, personal care products,
endocrine disruptors and illicit drugs during wastewater treatment and its impact on the quality of receiving wa￾ters. Water Res. 43 (2), 363–380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2008.10.047.
Kim, K.H., Kabir, E., Jahan, S.A., 2017. Exposure to pesticides and the associated human health effects. Sci. Total En￾viron. 575, 525–535. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.09.009.
Klamerth, N., Malato, S., Aguera, A., Ferna € ´ndez-Alba, A., Mailhot, G., 2012. Treatment of municipal wastewater treat￾ment plant effluents with modified photo-Fenton as a tertiary treatment for the degradation of micro pollutants
and disinfection. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46 (5), 2885–2892. https://doi.org/10.1021/es204112d.
Kolpin, D.W., Furlong, E.T., Meyer, M.T., Thurman, E.M., Zaugg, S.D., Barber, L.B., Buxton, H.T., 2002. Pharmaceu￾ticals, hormones, and other organic wastewater contaminants in U.S. streams, 1999-2000: a national reconnais￾sance. Environ. Sci. Technol. 36 (6), 1202–1211. https://doi.org/10.1021/es011055j.
Kuivenhoven, Mason, K., 2021. Arsenic toxicity. In: StatPearls. SteatPearls Publishing. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/31082169.
Kumar, M., Gogoi, A., Kumari, D., Borah, R., Das, P., Mazumder, P., Tyagi, V.K., 2017. Review of perspective, prob￾lems, challenges, and future scenario of metal contamination in the urban environment. J. Hazard. Tox. Radioact.
Waste 21 (4). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)HZ.2153-5515.0000351.
Kummerer, K., 2009. The presence of pharmaceuticals in the environment due to human use € – present knowledge and
future challenges. J. Environ. Manag. 90 (8), 2354–2366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2009.01.023.
Lambert, M.R., Skelly, D.K., 2016. Diverse sources for endocrine disruption in the wild. Endocr. Disruptors. https://
doi.org/10.1080/23273747.2016.1148803, e1148803.
References 99
I. Basics principlesLiu, Z.h., Kanjo, Y., Mizutani, S., 2009. Removal mechanisms for endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs) in waste￾water treatment – physical means, biodegradation, and chemical advanced oxidation: a review. Sci. Total Environ.
407 (2), 731–748. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2008.08.039.
Lopez, B., Ollivier, P., Togola, A., Baran, N., Ghestem, J.P., 2015. Screening of French groundwater for regulated and
emerging contaminants. Sci. Total Environ. 518–519, 562–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.01.110.
Luo, Y., Guo, W., Ngo, H.H., Nghiem, L.D., Hai, F.I., Zhang, J., Liang, S., Wang, X.C., 2014. A review on the occurrence
of micropollutants in the aquatic environment and their fate and removal during wastewater treatment. Sci. Total
Environ. 473–474, 619–641. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.12.065.
MacWan, D.P., Dave, P.N., Chaturvedi, S., 2011. A review on nano-TiO2 sol-gel type syntheses and its applications. J.
Mater. Sci. 46 (11), 3669–3686. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-011-5378-y.
Maddah, H.A., Alzhrani, A.S., Bassyouni, M., Abdel-Aziz, M.H., Zoromba, M., Almalki, A.M., 2018. Evaluation of
various membrane filtration modules for the treatment of seawater. Appl Water Sci. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13201-018-0793-8.
Malato, S., Maldonado, M.I., Oller, I., Zapata, A., 2012. Removal of Pesticides from water and wastewater by solar￾driven photocatalysis. In: Lofrano, G. (Ed.), Emerging Compounds Removal from Wastewater. Springer,
Dordrecht, p. 59, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-3916-1_4.
Maniakova, G., Kowalska, K., Murgolo, S., Mascolo, G., Libralato, G., Lofrano, G., Sacco, O., Guida, M., Rizzo, L., 2020.
Comparison between heterogeneous and homogeneous solar driven advanced oxidation processes for urban
wastewater treatment: pharmaceuticals removal and toxicity. Sep. Purif. Technol., 116249. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.seppur.2019.116249.
Mason, L.H., Harp, J.P., Han, D.Y., 2014. Pb neurotoxicity: neuropsychological effects of Lead toxicity. Biomed. Res.
Int., 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/840547.
Matamoros, V., Bayona, J.M., 2008. Behavior of emerging pollutants in constructed wetlands. In: Barcelo´, D.,
Petrovic, M. (Eds.), Emerging Contaminants from Industrial and Municipal Waste. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, p. 199, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-79210-9_6.
Matamoros, V., Uggetti, E., Garcı´a, J., Bayona, J.M., 2016. Assessment of the mechanisms involved in the removal of
emerging contaminants by microalgae from wastewater: a laboratory scale study. J. Hazard. Mater. 301, 197–205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.08.050.
Matthiessen, P., Wheeler, J.R., Weltje, L., 2018. A review of the evidence for endocrine disrupting effects of current-use
chemicals on wildlife populations. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 48 (3), 195–216. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10408444.2017.1397099.
McGrane, S.J., 2016. Impacts of urbanisation on hydrological and water quality dynamics, and urban water manage￾ment: a review. Hydrol. Sci. J. 61 (13), 2295–2311. https://doi.org/10.1080/02626667.2015.1128084.
Mnif, W., Hassine, A.I.H., Bouaziz, A., Bartegi, A., Thomas, O., Roig, B., 2011. Effect of endocrine disruptor pesticides:
a review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 8 (6), 2265–2303. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph8062265.
Mojiri, A., Zhou, J.L., Ohashi, A., Ozaki, N., Kindaichi, T., 2019. Comprehensive review of polycyclic aromatic hydro￾carbons in water sources, their effects and treatments. Sci. Total Environ. 696. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.133971.
Molinari, R., Lavorato, C., Argurio, P., 2020. Application of hybrid membrane processes coupling separation and bi￾ological or chemical reaction in advanced wastewater treatment. Membranes 10 (10), 1–30. https://doi.org/
10.3390/membranes10100281.
Mostafalou, S., Abdollahi, M., 2017. Pesticides: an update of human exposure and toxicity. Arch. Toxicol. 91 (2),
549–599. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-016-1849-x.
Myong, J.-P., Kim, H.-R., Jang, T.-W., Lee, H.E., Koo, J.-W., 2014. Association between blood cadmium levels and
10-year coronary heart disease risk in the general Korean population: the Korean National Health and nutrition
examination survey 2008–2010. PLoS One 9 (11). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0111909, e111909.
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 2009. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-06/
documents/npwdr_complete_table.pdf.
Nguyen, L.N., Hai, F.I., Kang, J., Price, W.E., Nghiem, L.D., 2013. Removal of emerging trace organic contaminants by
MBR-based hybrid treatment processes. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 85, 474–482. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ibiod.2013.03.014.
Nikinmaa, M., 2014. What causes aquatic contamination. In: An Introduction to Aquatic Toxicology. Elsevier Inc, pp.
1–240.
100 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesNofiana, Raharjo, S.H., Istirokhatun, T., Susanto, H., 2019. Reuse of domestic wastewater by membrane technologies
towards sustainable city development. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 248 (1). https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-
1315/248/1/012053.
Noutsopoulos, C., Mamais, D., Mpouras, T., Kokkinidou, D., Samaras, V., Antoniou, K., Gioldasi, M., 2014. The role of
activated carbon and disinfection on the removal of endocrine disrupting chemicals and non-steroidal anti￾inflammatory drugs from wastewater. Environ. Technol. 35 (6), 698–708. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09593330.2013.846923.
Nriagu, J., 2019. Pollution sources and human health. In: Encyclopedia of Environmental Health. Elsevier, pp. 1–508.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/book/9780444639523.
Olsen, V., Mørland, J., 2004. Forgiftning med arsen. Tidsskr. Nor. Laegeforen. 124 (21), 2750–2753.
Oualid, C., Btissam, A., Sanae, A., Elodie, M.-G., Fabrice, A., Marc, C., Samira, E.F., Ilham, E.A., Bouchra, O., 2019.
Occurrence and seasonal variation of antibiotics in Fez-Morocco surface water. Am. J. Environ. Sci., 127–136.
https://doi.org/10.3844/ajessp.2019.127.136.
PAN, Pesticide Action Network, 2017. https://www.pan-europe.info/sites/pan-europe.info/files/public/
resources/reports/Report_ED%20pesticides%20in%20EU%20food_PAN%20Europe.pdf.
Pan, L.Q., Ren, J., Liu, J., 2006. Responses of antioxidant systems and LPO level to benzo(a)pyrene and benzo(k)
fluoranthene in the haemolymph of the scallop Chlamys ferrari. Environ. Pollut. 141 (3), 443–451. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2005.08.069.
Perez-Parada, A., Go´mez-Ramos, M.d.M., Bueno, M.J.M., Ucles, S., Ucles, A., Ferna´ndez-Alba, A.R., 2012. Analytical
improvements of hybrid LC-MS/MS techniques for the efficient evaluation of emerging contaminants in river
waters: a case study of the Henares River (Madrid, Spain). Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 19 (2), 467–481. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11356-011-0585-2.
Petric, Z., Ruzic, J., Zuntar, I., 2021. The controversies of parabens – an overview nowadays. Acta Pharma. 71 (1),
17–32. https://doi.org/10.2478/acph-2021-0001.
Pidlisnyuk, V.V., Marutovsky, R.M., Radeke, K.-H., Klimenko, N.A., 2003. Biosorption processes for natural and
waste water treatment–part II: experimental studies and theoretical model of a biosorption fixed bed. Eng. Life
Sci., 439–445. https://doi.org/10.1002/elsc.200301858.
Prieto-Rodrı´guez, L., Oller, I., Klamerth, N., Aguera, A., Rodrı € ´guez, E.M., Malato, S., 2013. Application of solar AOPs
and ozonation for elimination of micropollutants in municipal wastewater treatment plant effluents. Water Res.
47 (4), 1521–1528. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.11.002.
Protection of Environment. (2021). https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID¼15e352a79a295dd3e0f1699119
f82c04&mc¼ true&node¼se40.31.401_115&rgn¼div8.
Qiao, M., Bai, Y., Cao, W., Huo, Y., Zhao, X., Liu, D., Li, Z., 2018. Impact of secondary effluent from wastewater treat￾ment plants on urban rivers: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and derivatives. Chemosphere 211, 185–191.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.07.167.
Radjenovic, J., Petrovic, M., Barcelo´, D., 2009. Fate and distribution of pharmaceuticals in wastewater and sewage
sludge of the conventional activated sludge (CAS) and advanced membrane bioreactor (MBR) treatment. Water
Res. 43 (3), 831–841. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2008.11.043.
Raghav, M., Eden, S., Mitchell, K., Witte, B., 2013. Contaminants of Emerging Concern in Water. The Arroyo, Water
Resources Research.
Ralston, N.V.C., Raymond, L.J., 2018. Mercury’s neurotoxicity is characterized by its disruption of selenium
biochemistry. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 1862 (11), 2405–2416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bbagen.2018.05.009.
Rasalingam, S., Peng, R., Koodali, R.T., 2014. Removal of hazardous pollutants from wastewaters: applications of
TiO2-SiO2 mixed oxide materials. J. Nanomater. 2014. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/617405.
Anon., 2008. Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on
food additives (Text with EEA relevance). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2008/1333/oj.
Retief, F., Cilliers, L., 2006. Lead poisoning in ancient Rome. Acta Theriol. 26 (2), 147. https://doi.org/10.4314/actat.
v26i2.52570.
Ritter, L., Solomon, K., Sibley, P., Hall, K., Keen, P., Mattu, G., Linton, B., 2002. Sources, pathways, and relative risks of
contaminants in surface water and groundwater: a perspective prepared for the Walkerton inquiry. J. Toxicol.
Environ. Health A 65 (1), 1–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/152873902753338572.
References 101
I. Basics principlesRivera-Utrilla, J., Sa´nchez-Polo, M., Ferro-Garcı´a, M.A., Prados-Joya, G., Ocampo-Perez, R., 2013. Pharmaceuticals as
emerging contaminants and their removal from water. A review. Chemosphere 93 (7), 1268–1287. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.07.059.
Rodil, R., Quintana, J.B., Concha-Gran˜a, E., Lo´pez-Mahı´a, P., Muniategui-Lorenzo, S., Prada-Rodrı´guez, D., 2012.
Emerging pollutants in sewage, surface and drinking water in Galicia (NW Spain). Chemosphere 86 (10),
1040–1049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.11.053.
Rodrigues, M.O., Abrantes, N., Gonc¸alves, F.J.M., Nogueira, H., Marques, J.C., Gonc¸alves, A.M.M., 2018. Spatial and
temporal distribution of microplastics in water and sediments of a freshwater system (Antua˜ River, Portugal). Sci.
Total Environ. 633, 1549–1559. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.03.233.
Rodriguez-Narvaez, O.M., Peralta-Hernandez, J.M., Goonetilleke, A., Bandala, E.R., 2017. Treatment technologies for
emerging contaminants in water: a review. Chem. Eng. J. 323, 361–380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.04.106.
Rosenfeld, P.E., Feng, L., 2011. The Environmental Protection Agency’s regulatory definition. In: Risks of Hazardous
Wastes. Elsevier Inc.
Rostkowski, P., Horwood, J., Shears, J.A., Lange, A., Oladapo, F.O., Besselink, H.T., Tyler, C.R., Hill, E.M., 2011.
Bioassay-directed identification of novel antiandrogenic compounds in bile of fish exposed to wastewater efflu￾ents. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45 (24), 10660–10667. https://doi.org/10.1021/es202966c.
Roth, H., Gendel, Y., Buzatu, P., David, O., Wessling, M., 2016. Tubular carbon nanotube-based gas diffusion elec￾trode removes persistent organic pollutants by a cyclic adsorption - electro-Fenton process. J. Hazard. Mater.
307, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.12.066.
Roy, S., Edwards, M.A., 2019. Preventing another lead (Pb) in drinking water crisis: lessons from the Washington D.C.
and Flint MI contamination events. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 7, 34–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
coesh.2018.10.002.
Ruus, A., Hjermann, D., Beylich, B., Schøyen, M., Øxnevad, S., Green, N.W., 2017. Mercury concentration trend as a
possible result of changes in cod population demography. Mar. Environ. Res. 130, 85–92. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.marenvres.2017.07.018.
Saari, G.N., Scott, W.C., Brooks, B.W., 2017. Global scanning assessment of calcium channel blockers in the environ￾ment: review and analysis of occurrence, ecotoxicology and hazards in aquatic systems. Chemosphere 189,
466–478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.09.058.
Saidulu, D., Gupta, B., Gupta, A.K., Ghosal, P.S., 2021. A review on occurrences, eco-toxic effects, and remediation of
emerging contaminants from wastewater: special emphasis on biological treatment based hybrid systems. J. En￾viron. Chem. Eng. 9 (4). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.105282.
Salimi, M., Esrafili, A., Gholami, M., Jonidi Jafari, A., Rezaei Kalantary, R., Farzadkia, M., Kermani, M., Sobhi, H.R.,
2017. Contaminants of emerging concern: a review of new approach in AOP technologies. Environ. Monit. Assess.
189 (8). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-017-6097-x.
Sch€afer, A.I., Akanyeti, I., Semia˜o, A.J.C., 2011. Micropollutant sorption to membrane polymers: a review of mech￾anisms for estrogens. Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. 164 (1–2), 100–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2010.09.006.
Schultz, M.M., 2014. Chemicals of environmental concern. In: Encyclopedia of Toxicology, third ed. Elsevier, pp.
805–809, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-386454-3.01004-6.
Sharma, S., Bhattacharya, A., 2017. Drinking water contamination and treatment techniques. Appl Water Sci,
1043–1067. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13201-016-0455-7.
Shemer, H., Kunukcu, Y.K., Linden, K.G., 2006. Degradation of the pharmaceutical metronidazole via UV, Fenton and
photo-Fenton processes. Chemosphere 63 (2), 269–276. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2005.07.029.
Silver, M.K., Li, X., Liu, Y., Li, M., Mai, X., Kaciroti, N., Kileny, P., Tardif, T., Meeker, J.D., Lozoff, B., 2016. Low-level
prenatal lead exposure and infant sensory function. Environ. Health 15 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-016-
0148-6.
Simmons, F.J., Kuo, D.H.W., Xagoraraki, I., 2011. Removal of human enteric viruses by a full-scale membrane biore￾actor during municipal wastewater processing. Water Res. 45 (9), 2739–2750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2011.02.001.
Slegers, C., Tilquin, B., 2006. Final product analysis in the e-beam and gamma radiolysis of aqueous solutions of met￾oprolol tartrate. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 75 (9), 1006–1017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2005.12.020.
Smarr, M.M., Kannan, K., Buck Louis, G.M., 2016. Endocrine disrupting chemicals and endometriosis. Fertil. Steril.
106 (4), 959–966. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2016.06.034.
Song, W., Chen, W., Cooper, W.J., Greaves, J., Miller, G.E., 2008. Free-radical destruction of β-lactam antibiotics in
aqueous solution. J. Phys. Chem. A 112 (32), 7411–7417. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp803229a.
102 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesSornalingam, K., McDonagh, A., Zhou, J.L., 2016. Photodegradation of estrogenic endocrine disrupting steroidal hor￾mones in aqueous systems: progress and future challenges. Sci. Total Environ. 550, 209–224. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.086.
Stuart, M., Lapworth, D., Crane, E., Hart, A., 2012. Review of risk from potential emerging contaminants in UK
groundwater. Sci. Total Environ. 416, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.11.072.
Su, D., Ben, W., Strobel, B.W., Qiang, Z., 2020. Occurrence, source estimation and risk assessment of pharmaceuticals
in the Chaobai River characterized by adjacent land use. Sci. Total Environ. 712. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.134525.
Svenson, A., Allard, A.S., Ek, M., 2003. Removal of estrogenicity in Swedish municipal sewage treatment plants. Wa￾ter Res. 37 (18), 4433–4443. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(03)00395-6.
Taheran, M., Brar, S.K., Verma, M., Surampalli, R.Y., Zhang, T.C., Valero, J.R., 2016. Membrane processes for
removal of pharmaceutically active compounds (PhACs) from water and wastewaters. Sci. Total Environ. 547,
60–77.
Taheran, M., Naghdi, M., Brar, S.K., Verma, M., Surampalli, R.Y., 2018. Emerging contaminants: here today, there
tomorrow! Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 10, 122–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enmm.2018.05.010.
Talukder, A.S.M.H.M., Meisner, C.A., Sarkar, M.A.R., Islam, M.S., Sayre, K.D., Duxbury, J.M., Lauren, J.G., 2012. Ef￾fect of water management, arsenic and phosphorus levels on rice in a high-arsenic soil-water system: II. Arsenic
uptake. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 80, 145–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2012.02.020.
Tan, S.W., Meiller, J.C., Mahaffey, K.R., 2009. The endocrine effects of mercury in humans and wildlife. Crit. Rev.
Toxicol. 39 (3), 228–269. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408440802233259.
Tanwar, J., Das, S., Fatima, Z., Hameed, S., 2014. Multidrug resistance: an emerging crisis. Interdiscip. Perspect. Infect.
Dis. 2014. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/541340.
Tareq, R., Akter, N., Azam, M.S., 2018. Biochars and biochar composites: low-cost adsorbents for environmental re￾mediation. In: Biochar from Biomass and Waste: Fundamentals and Applications. Elsevier, pp. 169–209, https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811729-3.00010-8.
Tran, N.H., Urase, T., Ngo, H.H., Hu, J., Ong, S.L., 2013. Insight into metabolic and cometabolic activities of autotro￾phic and heterotrophic microorganisms in the biodegradation of emerging trace organic contaminants. Bioresour.
Technol. 146, 721–731. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.07.083.
USEPA, 2010. Bisphenol A Action Plan. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-09/documents/bpa_
action_plan.pdf.
Vagge, G., Cutroneo, L., Castellano, M., Canepa, G., Bertolotto, R.M., Capello, M., 2018. The effects of dredging and
environmental conditions on concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the water column. Mar.
Pollut. Bull. 135, 704–713. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.08.006.
Wang, Y., Wang, X., Li, M., Dong, J., Sun, C., Chen, G., 2018b. Removal of pharmaceutical and personal care products
(PPCPs) from municipalwaste water with integrated membrane systems, MBR-RO/NF. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health 15 (2). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15020269.
Wang, N., Hu, X., Lu, S., Ma, S., Kang, L., Liao, S., Yu, Y., 2019. Interrelationship of anthropogenic activity and
parabens in fish from Taihu Lake during 2009–2017. Environ. Pollut. 252, 1002–1009. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.envpol.2019.06.041.
Westerhoff, P., Yoon, Y., Snyder, S., Wert, E., 2005. Fate of endocrine-disruptor, pharmaceutical, and personal care
product chemicals during simulated drinking water treatment processes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39 (17),
6649–6663. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0484799.
WHO, 2011. Arsenic in Drinking-Water. https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/arsenic/en.
WHO, Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 2017. https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/
gdwq4-with-add1-chapters/en/.
Yan, C., Nie, M., Yang, Y., Zhou, J., Liu, M., Baalousha, M., Lead, J.R., 2015. Effect of colloids on the occurrence, dis￾tribution and photolysis of emerging organic contaminants in wastewaters. J. Hazard. Mater. 299, 241–248.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.06.022.
Yang, W., Cicek, N., Ilg, J., 2006. State-of-the-art of membrane bioreactors: worldwide research and commercial
applications in North America. J. Membr. Sci. 270 (1–2), 201–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.
2005.07.010.
Yang, Y., Ok, Y.S., Kim, K.H., Kwon, E.E., Tsang, Y.F., 2017. Occurrences and removal of pharmaceuticals and per￾sonal care products (PPCPs) in drinking water and water/sewage treatment plants: a review. Sci. Total Environ.
596–597, 303–320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.04.102.
References 103
I. Basics principlesYiming, J., Haiying, H., Mengru, W., Xuan, Y., Yong, C., Pu, L., Xiangkai, L., 2015. Pseudomonas sp. LZ-Q continu￾ously degrades phenanthrene under hypersaline and hyperalkaline condition in a membrane bioreactor system.
Biophys. Rep., 156–167. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41048-016-0018-3.
Zhang, W.L., Du, Y., Zhai, M.M., Shang, Q., 2014. Cadmium exposure and its health effects: a 19-year follow-up study
of a polluted area in China. Sci. Total Environ. 470–471, 224–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.09.070.
Zhao, X., Shen, J.P., Zhang, L.M., Du, S., Hu, H.W., He, J.Z., 2020. Arsenic and cadmium as predominant factors shap￾ing the distribution patterns of antibiotic resistance genes in polluted paddy soils. J. Hazard. Mater., 389. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121838.
Zhou, J.L., Zhang, Z.L., Banks, E., Grover, D., Jiang, J.Q., 2009. Pharmaceutical residues in wastewater treatment
works effluents and their impact on receiving river water. J. Hazard. Mater. 166 (2–3), 655–661. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2008.11.070.
104 5. An insight into the potential contaminants
I. Basics principlesCHAPTER
6
Advantages of nanoadsorbents,
biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents
for contaminant removal
Bahareh Kamyab Moghadasa
, Hossein Esmaeilib
,
Sajad Tamjidia
, and Alipasha Geramifardc
a
Department of Chemical Engineering, Shiraz Branch, Islamic Azad University, Shiraz, Iran
b
Department of Chemical Engineering, Bushehr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Bushehr, Iran
c
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Shiraz Branch, Islamic Azad University, Shiraz, Iran
6.1 Introduction
Water is one of the most critical natural sources in the world and is necessary for the sur￾vival of all creatures. The global population is regularly growing, and releasing pollutants in
industrial and surface wastewater is raising. Agricultural wastes, industrial and human res￾idues play crucial factors in sewage pollution. These items produce different contaminants,
changed the water cycle, and increased global concerns, which their final impact is on human
health and wildlife (Khatri and Tyagi, 2015; Abedpour et al., 2020). Several kinds of contam￾inants in wastewater, including metals, radionuclides, rare earth elements, dyes, phenolic
and aromatic derivatives, pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and drugs, have been examined
widely (Crini et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019). In the past few decades, different techniques
have been developed for treating wastewater, including ion exchange, micro, and ultra￾filtration, reverse osmosis, evaporation, solvent extraction, coagulation, precipitation, sedi￾mentation, gravity, flotation, oxidation, electrolysis, electrodialysis, distillation, adsorption,
etc. From the techniques mentioned above, adsorption is a considerable technique for treating
wastewater because of its easy operation, inexpensive, and abundance of adsorbents. Adsor￾bents can remove soluble and insoluble materials (e.g., organic and inorganic) and biological
pollutants (Santhosh et al., 2016; El Hefnawy et al., 2020).
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 105 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00006-XIn this method, the adsorbed contaminants should be recovered from the adsorbent sur￾face. Among various treatments, biosorption is recognized as an environmentally friendly
method to eliminate contaminants from wastewater because of using natural materials
and renewable biomass as sorbents (Dev et al., 2020; Tamjidi et al., 2021a). Over the years,
the use of bioadsorbents has received much attention. Most bioadsorbents are usually cate￾gorized into five groups, including (1) agricultural waste, (2) marine material, (3) microbial
biosorbents, (4) industrial by-products, and (5) minerals. The advantages of these biomate￾rials are high biosorption capacity, availability in large quantities, low cost, simple desorption
of the adsorbed contaminant, and high reusability of the biosorbent (Kanamarlapudi et al.,
2018; Hussain et al., 2018). Generally, there are many organic and inorganic bioadsorbents
with high sorption capacity, including cottonseed shell, fungal biomass, algae biomass,
shrimp shell and chitin, bagasse, eggshell waste, agricultural wastes-derived activated carbon
(AC) generated from, plant waste, vegetable wastes, chitosan, cellulose, bone ash, Turkish
coffee, coal ash, resins, silica gel, zeolite, clay, sawdust, oil-extracted soybean, tea waste, used
coffee, brewery seed residue, walnut shell, almond, etc., have been applied as biosorbents in
the treatment of wastewater containing different types of contaminants (Dev et al., 2020;
Hussain et al., 2018).
The main purpose of this chapter is a comprehensive review of the application of
biosorbents, nanosorbents, and nanobiosorbents as low-cost and efficient adsorbents to re￾move contaminants from water and wastewater. To do so, different types of contaminants,
their characteristics, different types of biosorbents, nanosorbents, and nanobiosorbents and
their performance, and the impact of effective factors on the sorption process have been thor￾oughly studied.
6.2 Types of contaminants
There is very little freshwater on the planet, which is polluted due to improper discharge of
waste into rivers. The rapid growth of technology and industrialization is the main reason for
adding contaminants to water. Drinking contaminated water causes many diseases that kill
many people every year. The polluted water is harmful to human beings and has adverse
impacts on the entire ecosystem. Marine life is very disturbed because of the dumping of
waste in the sea. There are two types of pollutants in the effluent, including inorganic and
organic materials. Inorganic pollutants contain toxic metal ions, while organic pollutants con￾tain dyes, pharmaceutical drugs, pesticides, volatile organic compounds, and aromatic hy￾drocarbons. Both organic and inorganic pollutants affect the environment. Even at low
concentrations, the presence of toxic metal ions can lead to many harmful diseases for living
organisms. Organic contaminants like dyes used in many industries as coloring material are
very toxic and carcinogenic.
Other organic contaminants like pesticides have significant toxic impacts on living organ￾isms. Since contaminants in water have a bad influence on all organisms and the environ￾ment, their elimination is critical (Saxena et al., 2020; Akpor et al., 2014). A summary of
the most critical contaminants in wastewater is described below.
106 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principles6.2.1 Dyes
Dyes can be made naturally or synthetically, which is applied for painting, printing, leather,
paper, and other materials. The annual generation of dyes in different industries is estimated
to be more than seven. Annually, about 100 tons of dye is discharged as residue into waste￾water. Dye is a dangerous class of organic contaminants that are directly and indirectly
released into water resources. Therefore, removing dyes from wastewater and water is a major
concern for the environment. Dyes also have acute impacts on organisms, depending on the
contact duration and dye concentration (Bello et al., 2021). Therefore, these cases pose a serious
threat to water quality and human health, thereby becoming a vital concern. Due to the need to
remove the dye, the relevant industries must treat the colored effluents before discharging
them into the water. Therefore, the scientific community has a great responsibility to treat
wastewater by developing efficient methods. Dyes can cause skin irritation, allergic dermati￾tis, mutation, cancer, etc. They are categorized as cationic (basic dyes), anionic (acid and
reactive dyes), and non-ionic dyes (dispersive dyes) (Bharathi and Ramesh, 2013).
Cationic dyes
Cationic dyes are extensively used in nylon, wool, acrylic, and silk dyeing. These dyes con￾tain various chemical structures. Also, they are considered toxic colorants and cause harmful
impacts like skin irritation, allergic dermatitis, mutations, and cancer. Moreover, these dyes
are called basic dyes and have positive charges on their structure.
Furthermore, cationic dyes are water-soluble and produce colored cations in water. Basic
dyes are more visible and have high brightness and color intensity. Methylene blue, methyl
violet, rhodamine 6G, malachite green, and basic yellow are the most important cationic dyes
(Corda and Kini, 2018). All of these dyes are toxic, mutagenic, and carcinogenic. They are
harmful to human health and contagious for aquatic life. The high dosage of these dyes in
seawater inhibits light penetration and affects aquatic plants’ photosynthesis process. The
azo dyes are toxic as they contain toxic metal ions and aromatic amines, which are non￾biodegradable in the water for a long time (Saxena et al., 2020).
Anionic dyes
Anionic dyes have negative charges on their structure. They contain different combina￾tions of the most diverse color classes with characteristic differences in structure as a common
feature (for example, triphenylmethane, anthraquinone, azoic, and nitro dyes). Also, direct
dyes are anionic dyes, and the group of anionic azo dyes consists of a large part of reactive
dyes. Most reactive dyes interact with some materials such as wool and cotton to form cova￾lent forms (Bharathi and Ramesh, 2013). Direct red 23, Congo red, Reactive Black 5, and
Methyl orange are the most common anionic dyes. The application of each dye depends
on its structure and ability to connect (Bello et al., 2021).
Non-ionic dyes
Non-ionic dyes include dispersing dyes, mainly used to generate colored plastics, polyam￾ide, polyester, etc. The dispersed dyes can lead to allergies. Direct Green 97 is a sample of non￾ionic dyes (Bello et al., 2021).
6.2 Types of contaminants 107
I. Basics principles6.2.2 Heavy metal
Heavy metals are natural substances in the environment. Human works like agricultural,
coal mills, mining, coal power plants, casting factories, and metallurgy would change the geo￾chemical cycle of the atmosphere and biochemical equilibrium. These human activities result
in the excessive release of heavy metals like lead, mercury, chromium, copper, cadmium,
nickel, zinc, and iron (Wuana and Okieimen, 2011).
Heavy metals are a class of materials with an atomic density above 5 g/cm3
. Density is re￾lated to the chemical features of heavy metals. Heavy metals are classified into three groups
according to the periodic table, including lanthanide series (e.g., La), actinide series (e.g., Ac),
and some metallic elements of group P. Generally, these metals are in groups 3–16 in period 4
onwards in the periodic table (Bello et al., 2021). Heavy metals can be found directly or indi￾rectly. With the development of industries and human activities, heavy metal ions are increas￾ingly released into the environment, especially in developing countries. These contaminants
are produced in the wastewaters generated by industries such as mining operations, indus￾trial and agricultural chemicals, plating industry, paper production, battery manufacturing,
and animal waste. International authorities regularly monitor these metals’ impacts on hu￾man and animal health like FAO, EPA, and WHO. Should the concentration of heavy metals
like nickel, arsenic, zinc, chromium, mercury, lead, selenium, and cadmium exceeds the per￾missible limits set by WHO, those can lead to acute and chronic intoxication and damage cen￾tral nerve function, cardiovascular and digestive systems, liver, kidneys, lungs, and
endocrines (Tamjidi et al., 2019). Fig. 6.1 illustrates the sources and impacts of heavy metals
on the health of humans, animals, and other organisms.
6.2.3 Pharmaceutical drugs
Pharmaceutical drugs are the materials used to save human and animal life. But when
these drugs are discharged into the water in large amounts, they are considered a threat to
all living organisms’ lives. Prolonged exposure to drugs causes many problems for vital hu￾man organs. The reason for the toxicity of drugs is their bioaccumulation. Medications used
regularly, such as analgesics, antibiotics, chemical products used in chemotherapy, and even
some antidepressants, are the main ingredients of pharmaceutical waste. The presence of per￾sistent antibiotics such as sulfonamides and chloramphenicol in wastewater is a serious con￾cern (Saxena et al., 2020).
6.2.4 Pesticides/insecticides
Pesticides are extensively used in agricultural production to protect plants against weeds,
fungi, and pests. Residues of pesticides are widely dispersed in groundwaters and soils.
There are different ways for environmental pollution by pesticides, including runoff from ag￾ricultural land, industrial effluents, and direct entry through spray and dust. Also, residues of
pesticides have important environmental effects on aquatic ecosystems (Taghizade Firozjaee
et al., 2018).
Pesticides became a serious concern for environmental sustainability. Also, pesticide pol￾lution has long-term impacts on the environment. Pesticides such as atrazine interfere with
108 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesFIG. 6.1 Sources and impacts of heavy metals.
6.2 Types of contaminants 109
I. Basics principlesthe hormonal activity of humans and animals. Even in trace amounts, some pesticides are
very harmful that can lead to death, and that’s why removing the pesticide from aqueous me￾dia is critical to saving humans and other creatures (Saxena et al., 2020).
6.2.5 Other contaminants
The other organic pollutants include volatile organic compounds, polyaromatic hydrocar￾bons, toluene, humic acid, phenol, aromatic amines, etc. These organic contaminants have an
adverse impact on the environment. Organic compounds like toluene and benzene directly
affect the human nervous system. Prolonged exposure can damage the kidneys, liver, and
lungs. The aromatic compounds are also utilized in industries for the synthesis of chemicals.
These polyaromatic hydrocarbons are toxic as they cause cataracts, nausea, kidney, vomiting,
eye irritation, and liver damage. Due to the high toxicity of these contaminants, they should
be removed (Saxena et al., 2020).
6.3 Different methods for wastewater treatment
Various physical, chemical, and biological procedures like ion exchange, electrochemical,
chemical deposition, flocculation, coagulation, membrane process, and sorption are applied
to recover and separate heavy metals from aqueous wastewater solution (Sobhanardakani
et al., 2018; Duman and Ayranci, 2010; Chen et al., 2011; Pamukoglu and Kargi, 2006).
Fig. 6.2 illustrates different types of conventional methods to eliminate pollutants. Along with
the advantages and disadvantages of each, knowing these factors is beneficial for selecting
and using these methods to eliminate pollution (Renu et al., 2017; Gunatilake, 2015).
6.3.1 Electrochemical method
The electrochemical method can be an efficient alternative to traditional methods. The
most critical procedures in this field are electrocoagulation, electroflotation, and electrodepo￾sition. The mechanism of decomposition of organic material in the electrochemical process is
because of the electrons transfer between electrodes and organic materials. This technology
relatively needs high-cost equipment and high investments, which has limited this method.
Other disadvantages of this technology are sludge disposal and effluent neutralization
(Sillanp€a€a and Shestakova, 2017; Fernandes et al., 2015).
6.3.2 Coagulation and flocculation
Flocculation or coagulation followed by filtration and sedimentation are used to eliminate
heavy metals from wastewater. Coagulation is destabilizing colloids by neutralizing the
forces that keep them apart. Many coagulants are used for wastewater treatment, including
aluminum, ferric chloride, and ferrous sulfate, leading to the effective elimination of pollut￾ants from wastewater. Coagulation is one of the most critical wastewater treatment proce￾dures, but only suspended particles and colloids are the main coagulation objects.
110 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesFIG. 6.2 Different procedures and their advantages and disadvantages.
6.3 Different methods for wastewater treatment 111
I. Basics principlesFlocculation is polymers’ action to create bridges between the flocs and attach particles to
large agglomerates. However, it is almost impossible to eliminate heavy metals from waste￾water directly by these clots. Generally, coagulation-flocculation cannot completely treat the
heavy metal wastewater. Therefore, coagulation-flocculation should be followed using other
treatment methods (Fu and Wang, 2011; Teh et al., 2016).
6.3.3 Ion-exchange process
The ion-exchange process has been extensively used for removing heavy metals from wa￾ter because of its many advantages like high removal efficiency, high treatment capacity, and
fast kinetics. Ion-exchange resins are found in both synthetic and natural forms and have a
special ability to exchange metal cations with metals in the effluent. Among the materials ap￾plied in the ion-exchange process, synthetic resins are commonly preferred as they effectively
separate heavy metals from water (Fu and Wang, 2011).
6.3.4 Membrane filtration
Membrane technology is another promising technology for the high removal of micro￾pollutants from water. In this process, both biological (membrane bioreactors) and non￾biological processes (e.g., reverse osmosis, nanofiltration, and ultrafiltration) are used.
A membrane bioreactor is a combination of membrane system (e.g., micro- and ultra￾filtration) and biological reactor. Membrane bioreactors are the most important and promi￾nent process these days to attain relatively clean water from sewage. Non-biological process
or pressurized membrane technology such as nanofiltration, microfiltration, ultrafiltration,
and reverse osmosis processes utilize high pressures along the membrane to remove pollut￾ants from the water.
Consequently, membrane processes are very useful for eliminating turbidity and microbial
contaminants. However, the high cost of operation still limits its use. Membranes easily suffer
from fouling problems, leading to unexpected interruptions during the treatment of pollut￾ants (Ismail and Mokhtar, 2020; Obotey Ezugbe and Rathilal, 2020).
6.3.5 Chemical precipitation
The precipitation method is an effective technique in which pollutants are removed from
the solution as sediment. Then, the sediments can be centrifuged or filtered to separate from
the liquid solution. Also, this technology is a simple and cheap method. Moreover, it can be
used for water softening, removing heavy metals from metal plating waste, removing hydro￾carbon compounds from emulsified solutions, and removing phosphate and nitrate from
wastewater. The obtained precipitate is separated from the solution by sedimentation or fil￾tration in the technological system, and the treated water is then decanted and respectively
discharged or re-used (Pohl, 2020; Mavhungu et al., 2021).
112 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principles6.3.6 Sorption method
The sorption process is a cost-effective and effective method to treat effluent. The sorption
process results in flexibility in the use, design, and treatment of high-quality wastewaters.
Also, adsorption is an efficient and reversible process. Suitable adsorbents can be reused sev￾eral times, and this is one of the most important properties of adsorbents. Sorption is a result
of a reaction between the surface of the sorbent and adsorbed pollutants. This method could
be applied even at low concentrations (1 mg/L). Selecting a suitable sorbent is one of the most
critical factors in the sorption process (Bello et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2019a). There are two
types of sorption process, which include physical and chemical sorption.
Physical sorption occurs when the sorbent and sorbate are subjected to weak van der Waals
forces, polarity, hydrogen bonding, and dipole-dipole interaction. In the physical sorption,
metal ions adsorb electrostatically on the sorbent surface. Also, chemical sorption between
the adsorbate (contaminant) and the sorbent surface occurs by chemical bonding. Unlike
physical sorption, the chemical sorption process is irreversible and requires high activation
energy. Fig. 6.3 illustrates physical and chemical sorption mechanisms between the sorbent
and sorbate (Mavhungu et al., 2021). The sorption process has three stages. In the first stage,
the contaminant is transferred from the bulk phase to the outer surface of the adsorbent. In the
second stage, the contaminant diffuses from the outer surface of the adsorbent into the adsor￾bent pores, including macropores, transitional pores, and micropores. In the last stage, the
contaminant is adsorbed on the pores of the adsorbent surface. Fig. 6.4 demonstrates these
three stages of the sorption process (Sirocki et al., 2013)
6.4 Biosorption
Removal of contaminants and tiny particles from wastewater using biological sorbents is
called as biosorption. Fungus biomass, bacteria biomass, industrial wastes, agricultural
wastes, algae, and other polysaccharide materials are some important biosorbents, which
can be effectively used in the sorption process (Mathew et al., 2016). All biomaterials can
be used as bioadsorbent for separating dyes, heavy metals, pharmaceuticals, pesticides,
FIG. 6.3 The mechanisms of physical (A) and chemical sorption (B).
6.4 Biosorption 113
I. Basics principlesand other pollutants (Khoo et al., 2021). However, selecting a suitable bioadsorbent for a par￾ticular contaminant is a challenge and requires an experimental work. Different mechanisms
of the biosorption process are demonstrated in Fig. 6.5. As shown, different functional groups
of biosorbents and various mechanisms have been indicated (Mathew et al., 2016). The
biosorption process over other contaminants removal methods has several advantages, in￾cluding cheaper producing biomass (fungi or bacteria), large volumes treatment of wastewa￾ter, sorption of numerous heavy metal ions at a time, good performance under a wide range of
conditions (e.g., pH and temperature), simple and high reusability and reduced amounts of
waste production (Khoo et al., 2021).
6.5 Factors affecting the biosorption process
Different factors affect the biosorption process, including pH, temperature, initial concen￾tration of the pollutant, and biosorbent dosage, which are described below:
6.5.1 Effect of pH
The initial pH of the solution has a key role in altering the surface charge of the adsorbent
and the degree of ionization of the adsorbed ions during the sorption process. The solution
pH is one of the most critical variables in the adsorption process. In general, in strong acidic
conditions, the adsorbent’s functional groups are surrounded by hydrogen ion (H+
). This
phenomenon results in the active sites’ occupation by H+ ions, and the number of active sites
on the sorbent surface to adsorb metal ions is reduced. Also, an electrostatic repulsion force is
created because of the like charge of H+ and metal ions, which prevents the interaction be￾tween the adsorbent’s metal ions and active sites. Moreover, the concentration of hydroxide
FIG. 6.4 Three steps of the sorption process.
114 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesions (OH) at high pH values is more elevated. Therefore, there is no competition between
metal cations and OH- ions, resulting in increased sorption efficiency (Thanki et al., 2021).
6.5.2 Effect of temperature
Temperature is a critical factor in the sorption process because of the sorption process at
ambient temperature (25°C). In endothermic reactions, the uptake capacity and uptake effi￾ciency increase with increasing temperature because of the increase in surface activity and the
availability of more active sites. Also, the uptake efficiency for exothermic processes increases
with decreasing temperature. Both phenomena follow the Arrhenius equation (El-Sayed and
El-Sayed, 2014).
FIG. 6.5 Biosorbent mechanisms.
6.5 Factors affecting the biosorption process 115
I. Basics principles6.5.3 Effect of initial pollutions concentration
The initial concentration of the contaminant in aquatic solution plays an important role in
the mass transfer between the solute and the sorbent. In initial concentrations, the graph’s
slope is high, and the uptake efficiency is the highest value. Therefore, the uptake efficiency
decreases with increasing ion concentration. The increase in uptake rate at low concentrations
is because of the low proportion of ions to active sites on the surface of the adsorbent. Besides,
the proportion of ions to active sites increases at a high concentration of ions, leading to a
decrease in sorption efficiency (Tamjidi et al., 2021b).
6.5.4 Effect of biosorbent dose
The adsorbent dosage plays an essential role to transfer the contaminant from aqueous me￾dia to the adsorbent surface. Also, it determines the capacity of an adsorbent to adsorb the
contaminant. The sorption rate of a solute (contaminant) increases the sorbent dosage because
the active sites on the sorbent surface increase with increasing the sorbent dosage, resulting in
adsorbing more contaminants. Moreover, the highest sorption capacity of the adsorbent can
be determined by investigating the impact of this factor (Iftekhar et al., 2018).
6.5.5 Effect of contact time
Contact time is another critical factor in the sorption process. This parameter determines
the minimum time required for the adsorption of a specific contaminant concentration using
the adsorbent. Also, the equilibrium state can be determined by the investigation of contact
time. After reaching a specific time, the adsorption becomes constant or slow, which shows
that all adsorbent sites are filled, and no vacant sites are there to adsorb more pollutants
(Saxena et al., 2020).
6.5.6 Effect of agitation rate
Agitation rate is another important factor in the sorption process because it determines the
energy required to stir the solution and minimize mass transfer resistance. The sorption ca￾pacity increases with increasing the agitation rate. While turbulence increases the uptake of
contaminants, it may degrade the structure of the bioadsorbent. A moderate rate creates the
best homogeneity for an aqueous solution with a high sorption capacity. High agitation rates
result in a vortex phenomenon that results in the loss of the suspension’s homogenous nature.
Also, excessive turbulence reduces the interaction time between the adsorbate and adsorbent,
reducing the sorption rate (El-Sayed and El-Sayed, 2014; Zahoor, 2011).
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in wastewater treatment
Identifying the adsorbent for the adsorption process is a major challenge. The production
of efficient adsorbents for the sorption of metal ions is one of the most important goals. An
extensive range of materials in nature can be utilized as bioadsorbent to remove contaminants
116 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesfrom water. Any plant, microbial biomasses, agriculture wastes, and by-products discharged
into the effluent from different industries can be used as biosorbents. Therefore, it is critical to
choose a bioadsorbent from a large spectrum of materials (Kanamarlapudi et al., 2018a). Fig.
6.6 shows a wide range of materials used as bioadsorbents.
6.6.1 Agricultural waste materials
Agricultural wastes are abundant, low cost, and environmentally friendly resources,
which can be used as very effective adsorbents. Coconut shells, pistachio peel, banana peel,
pomegranate peel, orange peel, pomelo peel, garlic peel, tea waste, rice hulls ash, and peat
bagasse are the most common types of agricultural wastes, which have been extensively used
to remove dyes and heavy metal ions. The main compounds in agricultural wastes are hemi￾celluloses, cellulose, lipids, lignin, proteins, simple sugars, and starches. These compounds
include various kinds of functional groups, which are appropriate for the adsorption of pol￾lutants. Previous studies confirm agricultural waste’s effectiveness in removing contami￾nants from effluents (Kumar et al., 2019a). Table 6.1 illustrates the utmost sorption
capacity and the optimal sorption conditions for eliminating contaminants from effluent
using agricultural wastes. As shown in Table 6.1, pistachio peels, garlic peels, and pomegran￾ate peels have shown high sorption efficiencies of pollutants. Also, pistachio peels and rice
hulls ash have shown excellent sorption capacities.
6.6.2 Industrial by-products
Nowadays, industrial activities produce a huge amount of solid wastes. Some of these
solid wastes are reused, and others are sent to landfills. The ability to use these materials
in the sorption process is an interesting and attractive issue because these industrial wastes
FIG. 6.6 General classification of various types of bioadsorbents.
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in wastewater treatment 117
I. Basics principlesTABLE 6.1 Capacity and optimal conditions of various agricultural wastes in the removal of pollutants from
water and wastewater.
Bio￾adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion
conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/g) References
Orange peel Cd(II) 6 0.001 0.025 3 93.72 – Li et al. (2008)
Orange peel Ni (II) 6 0.001 0.025 3 80.11 – Li et al. (2008)
Orange peel Zn(II) 6 0.001 0.025 3 87.23 – Li et al. (2008)
Orange peel Co(II) 6 0.001 0.025 3 81.06 – Li et al. (2008)
Pomegranate
peel
Ni(II) 6.5 50 10 7 – 50 Bhatnagar and
Minocha (2010)
Pomegranate
peel
Cu(II) 5.8 20 0.25 2 – 55 El-Ashtoukhy
et al. (2008)
Pomegranate
peel
Pb(II) 5.6 50 0.25 2 – 64 El-Ashtoukhy
et al. (2008)
Banana peel Cd(II) 8 10 0.1 0.5 97 35.52 Memon et al.
(2008)
Tea waste Cu(II) 5.5 100 1.5 1.5 64 48 Amarasinghe and
Williams (2007)
Tea waste Pb(II) 5.5 200 1.5 1.5 92 65 Amarasinghe and
Williams (2007)
Pistachio
peels
Methylene
blue
8 100 0.15 1 99 602 Vucurovic et al.
(2014)
Rice hulls ash Methylene
blue
6.8 50 3 2 95 690 Chandrasekhar
and Pramada
(2006)
Rice hulls ash Indigo
carmine
6.5 50 10 8 96 65.9 Lakshmi et al.
(2009)
Coffee
powder
Rhodamine
B
2 15 0.05 3 – 5.255 Shen and Gondal
(2017)
Coffee
powder
Rhodamine
6G
2 15 0.05 3 – 17.369 Shen and Gondal
(2017)
Pomelo peel Reactive
blue 114
2 100 20 1.5 85 16 Argun et al. (2014)
Garlic peel Direct red
12B
2 50 0.3 0.4 99 37.96 Asfaram et al.
(2014)
Pomegranate
peel
Congo red 7 30 20 0.5 98 55 Ghaedi et al. (2012)
118 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesare almost available and free of cost and pose a major problem in their disposal. Industrial
wastes include fly ash, steel, fertilizer, aluminum, leather, and paper industry wastes. Fly
ash is a substance produced by combustion processes. The high content of alumina and silica
in fly ash makes it an appropriate option for utilization as a low-cost adsorbent. Also, blast
furnace slag, dust, and sludge are examples of steel industry wastes, which can be used in the
uptake process.
Moreover, red mud is a waste material produced in the aluminum industry when the
bauxite ores are scorched. Red mud contains various minerals, which can be used as a novel
source of adsorbent (De Gisi et al., 2016). Table 6.2 illustrates the maximum sorption capacity
TABLE 6.2 Capacity and optimal conditions of various industrial by-products in the removal of pollutants from
water and wastewater.
Bio-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion
conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/g) References
Fly ash Fe (II) 6 11.78 0.06 2 86.7 – Hegazi
(2013)
Fly ash Pb (II) 6 1.17 0.06 2 76.06 – Hegazi
(2013)
Fly ash Cu(II) 6 5.43 0.06 2 98.54 – Hegazi
(2013)
Marble Powder As (v) 6 1000 – 1 >90 – Bibi et al.
(2015)
Basic oxygen furnace slag Cu(II) 6 1200 0.5 2 – 380 Xue et al.
(2013)
Solid waste from the leather industry As (v) 1 40–60 – 24 – 26.4 Oliveira
et al. (2008)
Solid waste from the leather industry Cr(VI) 1 700 – 24 133.3 Oliveira
et al. (2008)
Blast furnace dust Basic
blue 6
6.5 0.0005 1 2 – 34 Jain et al.
(2003)
Blast furnace sludge Basic
blue 6
6.5 0.0005 1 2 – 67 Jain et al.
(2003)
Carbonaceous adsorbent prepared
from carbon slurry of the fertilizer
industry
Basic
violet 3
6.5–7.5 0.0005 1 2 – 161 Jain et al.
(2003)
Carbonaceous adsorbent prepared
from carbon slurry of the fertilizer
industry
Basic
orange 2
6.5–7.5 0.0005 1 2 – 75 Jain et al.
(2003)
Carbonaceous adsorbent prepared
from carbon slurry of the fertilizer
industry
Basic
blue 9
6.5–7.5 0.0005 1 2 – 92 Bhatnagar
et al. (2003)
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in wastewater treatment 119
I. Basics principlesand the optimal adsorption conditions to remove pollutants from water using industrial
by-products. As demonstrated, some materials such as fly ash, basic oxygen furnace slag,
and carbonaceous materials produced by carbon slurry of the fertilizer industry showed
the high capability to remove contaminants from wastewater.
6.6.3 Marine materials
Marine materials are a class of bioadsorbents, which have received many attractions due to
their low cost, biocompatibility, availability, and containing chitin and chitosan. Due to the
high price of AC, producing chitosan and chitin sorbents has received much attention. Chitin
is more attractive as an adsorbent due to its abundance in nature. Chitin can be found in the
exoskeleton of crabs. A large quantity of chitin can be generated from the canned crab indus￾try. Chitosan is produced from chitin and found in some fungi’ cell walls, such as Mucorales
strains, which can be employed as an efficient bioadsorbent. Also, peat moss is available as a
cheap bioadsorbent with a high sorption capacity for various pollutants. Lignin and cellulose
are the two main compounds of peat. These components contain polar functional groups,
which can play a role in chemical bonding. Due to these features, peat moss has a high cationic
capacity and can be used as an efficient biosorbent to remove various pollutants (Dev et al.,
2020; Ali et al., 2012). Table 6.3 illustrates the maximum adsorption capacity and the optimal
adsorption conditions to remove wastewater’s pollutants using marine material. As shown,
chitosan–alkali lignin composite, Oreochromis niloticus fish scales have shown high sorption
capacities among other biosorbents for removing contaminants from aqueous solution.
6.6.4 Microbial biosorbents
Microorganisms have a high capability to remove contaminants from water and wastewa￾ter. Many studies have been performed from a toxicological point of view. Research has
shown that dead microbial biomass can bind contaminants through different chemical mech￾anisms (Vijayaraghavan and Yun, 2008). Most microorganisms can tolerate undesirable con￾ditions. Fig. 6.7 shows various microorganisms that can be used as biosorbent. These
microorganisms include algae, bacteria, and fungi. For using microorganisms to remove pol￾lutants from wastewater, they can be as dead or living microorganisms. However, using dead
microbial biomass to eliminate contaminants is preferred to live microbial biomass due to the
absence of nutrients in effluents. Therefore, the dead microbial biomass is more economically
viable and is considered ideal candidates for treating complex effluents with a low pollutant
concentration. Many microbial origin materials have been widely investigated as
bioadsorbents for eliminating metal ions. Most microbial biomass comprises many functional
groups that indicate their high potential as bioadsorbents (Kanamarlapudi et al., 2018b).
Bacteria as biosorbent
Bacteria are a group of single-celled living organisms that belong to the group of prokary￾otes. They are found in soil and water and as other organisms’ symbionts. Also, they are
found in an extensive variety of forms, including rods (e.g., Bacillus), cocci (e.g., Streptococcus),
spiral (e.g., Rhodospirillum), and filamentous (e.g., Sphaerotilus). Eubacteria have a simple cell
120 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesstructure, which lacks cell nuclei but possesses cell walls. The bacterial cell wall provides
structural integrity to the cell but differs from all other organisms because of the presence
of peptidoglycan (N-acetylmuramic acid and poly-N-acetylglucosamine). The cell wall com￾position of bacteria is one of the most critical factors in detecting bacterial species. Accord￾ingly, there are two kinds of bacteria, including Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria. In the structure of these bacteria, some membranes are useful to eliminate pollutants
from wastewater (Saravanan et al., 2021). Biosorption of various pollutants by different
TABLE 6.3 Capacity and optimal conditions of various marine material in the removal of pollutants from water
and wastewater.
Bio-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion
conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
Efficiency
(%)
qmax
(m/g) References
Calcined Solamen
vaillantisnail shell
Cu(II) 5 2 10 1 96.70 26.04 Esmaeili et al.
(2020)
Calcined Solamen
vaillantisnail shel
Co (II) 6 2 10 1 96.54 29.41 Esmaeili et al.
(2020)
Calcined Solamen
vaillantisnail shel
pb (II) 5 2 10 1 94.4 33.5 Esmaeili et al.
(2020)
Calcined bicolor
oyster shell
As(III) 7 2 10 1.33 96.88 60.98 Teimouri
et al. (2018)
Calcined bicolor
oyster shell
Hg(II) 6 2 10 1.33 95.72 42.02 Teimouri
et al. (2018)
shrimp peel
species of Vanam
Pb(II) 6 5 60 2.1 98 24.43 Foroutan
et al. (2015)
Garden grass Cu(II) 6 60 5 7 – 58.34 Hossain et al.
(2012)
Ulva onoi alkali￾pretreated
Cd(II) 7.8 10 1 12 – 90.7 Suzuki et al.
(2005)
Ulva onoi
untreated
Cd(II) 7.8 10 1 12 – 61.9 Suzuki et al.
(2005)
Peat moss pb(II) – 500 1 2 – 40 McLellan
and Rock
(1988)
Chitosan–alkali
lignin composite
Remazol
brilliant
blue R
2 10 2 1 – 111.11 Nair et al.
(2014)
Oreochromis
niloticus fish scales
Reactive
blue 5G
2 100 0.1 24 – 241.2 Ribeiro et al.
(2015)
shells of Rapana
gastropod
Brilliant red
HE-3B
1.2 50 6 24 96 65.9 Suteu et al.
(2012)
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in wastewater treatment 121
I. Basics principlesbacteria is given in Table 6.4. As demonstrated, Desulfovibrio desulfuricans has shown signif￾icant biosorption capacity compared to other bacteria in removing contaminants.
Algae as biosorbent
Algae is one of the earliest plant life species that include about 40,000 different species. Al￾gae can annually produce 52 billion tons of organic carbon, which is 50% of the world’s total
organic carbon generation. The structure of algae consists of many pores, which have created
high active sites. Also, their structure is divided into two groups, including eukaryotes
(brown, red, green, and diatoms) and prokaryotes (blue-green algae or cyanobacteria). Algae
are also categorized into micro- and macro. Moreover, species of seaweed have porous cell
wall structures. Furthermore, the cell wall of algae consists of remarkable amounts of starch,
cellulose, hemicellulose, glycogen, and polysaccharides. These compounds contain several
active groups like amino, carboxyl, hydroxyl, sulfate, etc., which can form chemical bonds
with metal ions, indicating the sorption potential of microalgae. The binding groups in the
algae surface, such as NO3
, COO, OH, RS, PO3 4
, SH, and RO have a critical role
in the uptake of pollutants. Essentially, the most prominent feature of algae is its diverse
colors. Based on this property, the algae can be divided into four classes: brown, green,
red, and green-blue algae, as illustrated in Fig. 6.8 (Thanki et al., 2021). Table 6.5 illustrates
the utmost sorption capacity and the optimal sorption conditions to remove pollutants from
wastewater using different types of algae. According to previous studies, some algae, such as
Sargassum dentifolium and Spirulina platensis with sorption capacities of 250 and 482.2 mg/g,
respectively, showed the highest sorption capacity compared to other algae.
Fungi as biosorbent
Fungus is another type of biosorbent, which has significant features. The cell wall in fungi
is composed of acid polysaccharides like chitin and chitosan. The presence of several com￾pounds in their structure, such as phosphate, amine, and hydroxyl groups, help them to
FIG. 6.7 Various microorganisms as biosorbents.
122 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesTABLE 6.4 Biosorption of various pollutants by different bacteria.
Bio-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion
conc.
(mg/L)
dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/
g) References
Enterobacter cloacae Cd(II) 5 – 0.1 2 58.9 – Saravanan
et al. (2021)
Desulfovibrio
desulfuricans
Pd (II) 2 25 0.15 96 >90 128.2 De Vargas
et al. (2004)
Desulfovibrio
fructosivorans
Pd (II) 2 25 0.15 96 >90 119.8 De Vargas
et al. (2004)
Desulfovibrio vulgaris Pd (II) 2 25 0.15 96 >90 106.3 De Vargas
et al. (2004)
D. desulfuricans Pt(IV) 2 25 0.15 96 >90 62.5 De Vargas
et al. (2004)
D. fructosivorans Pt(IV) 2 25 0.15 96 >90 32.3 De Vargas
et al. (2004)
D. vulgaris Pt(IV) 2 25 0.15 96 >90 40.1 De Vargas
et al. (2004)
Arthrobacter
nicotianae IAM 12342
Th 3.5 0.05 0.1 1 – 75.9 Nakajima and
Tsuruta (2004)
Bacillus subtilis IAM
1026
Th 3.5 0.05 0.1 1 – 71.9 Nakajima and
Tsuruta (2004)
Bacillus licheniformis
IAM 111054
U 3.5 0.05 0.1 1 – 45.9 Nakajima and
Tsuruta (2004)
B. subtilis IAM 1026 U 3.5 0.05 0.1 1 – 52.4 Nakajima and
Tsuruta (2004)
Lactobacillus
delbrueckii
Reactive
orange 16
6 10 0.1 72 63 – Zuraida et al.
(2013)
L. delbrueckii Reactive
black 5
6 10 0.1 72 55 – Zuraida et al.
(2013)
FIG. 6.8 General classifications of algae.
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in wastewater treatment 123
I. Basics principlesadsorb heavy metals, dyes, and other contaminants. Table 6.6 indicates different types of
fungi and their characteristics.
Various types of fungi as biosorbents can be used to eliminate contaminants from the efflu￾ent, including mycelium, fungal pellets, and dead fungi. The fungus can survive at a high con￾centration of metal ions; thus, they can remove metal ions from wastewater. The uptake of
metal ions by fungus occurs because of compounds such as chitin, chitosan, phosphate,
glucuronic acid, and polysaccharides on the cell walls of fungi. Also, there are different func￾tional groups in the structure of fungi, such as carboxyl, phosphate, hydroxyl, amine, and sulf￾hydryl, which have an essential role in the uptake of pollutants. Fungi and their enzymes, such
as laccase and lignin peroxidase, can bioremediate various wastewaters (Kumar et al., 2019b).
Biosorption of various contaminants by different fungi is given in Table 6.7. According to pre￾vious research, Aspergillus sp. TS-A CGMCC could remove mordant Yellow 1 with a removal
efficiency of 98.6%, which showed the highest removal efficiency among various fungi.
TABLE 6.5 Capacity and optimal conditions of different algae in the removal of contaminants from
wastewater.
Bio-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion
Conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/
g) References
Ulva fasciata Cu(II) 4.5 10 0.5 0.5 88 125 Bahaa et al. (2019)
Sargassum
dentifolium
Cu (II) 4.5 10 0.5 1 71 250 Bahaa et al. (2019)
Sargassum
oligocystum
NH4+ 8 100 5 1.33 96.2 7.46 Yeganeh et al. (2019)
Cladophora Cu (II) 5.2 10 1 2 70 – Jaafari and
Yaghmaeian (2019)
Cladophora Cr(III) 5 10 1 2 80 – Jaafari and
Yaghmaeian (2019)
Cladophora Cd (II) 7 10 1 2 85 – Jaafari and
Yaghmaeian (2019)
Padina
sanctaecrucis
Co (II) 6 20 4 1.3 96.68 13.96 Foroutan et al. (2018)
P. sanctaecrucis Cu (II) 6 20 4 1.3 94.51 13.73 Foroutan et al. (2018)
Ulva lactuca Methylene
blue
8 25 1.25 1.8 91.92 – Pratiwi et al. (2019)
Sargassum sp. Acid black
1
4.2 40 6 0.5 96.8 – Vijayaraghavan and
Shanthakumar
(2018)
Cyanobacterium Reactive
red 198
2 100 0.15 1 94 – Axelsson et al. (2006)
Spirulina
platensis
Reactive
red 120
2 50 1 1 97.1 482.2 Cardoso et al. (2012)
124 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesTABLE 6.6 Characteristics of major fungal divisions.
Division Characteristics
Chytridiomycota The fungi produce zoospores capable of moving on their own through a liquid medium by
simple flagella
Zygomycola The hyphae do not have one nucleus per cell but rather have long multinucleate, haploid hyphae
that comprise their mycelia. A sexual reproduction is by spores produced in stalked sporangia
Ascomycota They contain more than 30,000 species of unicellular (yeasts) to multicellular fungi. Yeasts
reproduce asexually by budding and sexually by forming a sac/ascus
Basidiomycota Mushrooms, toadstools, and puffballs arc commonly encountered basidiomycetes. These
conspicuous features of the fungi are their productive structures. Sexual reproduction involves
the formation of basidiospores on club-shaped cells known as basidia
Deuteromycota A group of fungi that either lack the perfect stage (i.e., sexual reproduction) or whose perfect
stage is as yet undiscovered. They are produced most frequently by conidia or conidia-like
spores. Many forms of deuteromycota are pathogenic, affecting man, animals, or plants
TABLE 6.7 Sorption capacity, removal efficiency, and optimal conditions for the removal of pollutants from
water and wastewater using various fungi.
Bio-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/
g) References
Trichoderma sp.
BSCR0
Cr(VI) 5 200 1.6 2 96.5 – Smily and
Sumithra (2017)
Bacillus subtilis Cr (III) 4 100 0.5 6 90 23.9 Aravindhan
et al. (2012)
M. rouxii (IM￾80)
Hg (II) 5.5 100 10 24 95.3 – Martinez-Juarez
et al. (2012)
M. rouxii mutant Hg (II) 5.5 100 10 24 88.7 – Martinez-Juarez
et al. (2012)
Mucor sp1 Hg (II) 5.5 100 10 24 80.4 – Martinez-Juarez
et al. (2012)
Mucor sp1 Hg (II) 5.5 100 10 24 78.3 – Martinez-Juarez
et al. (2012)
Aspergillus niger F(I) 6 10 1 24 83 – Acosta￾Rodrı´guez et al.
(2018)
A. niger Co(II) 5 100 1 24 71.4 – Acosta￾Rodrı´guez et al.
(2018)
A. niger Silver (I) 6 100 1 24 48 – Acosta￾Rodrı´guez et al.
(2018)
Continued
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in wastewater treatment 125
I. Basics principles6.6.5 Soil and ore materials
Soil, clays, zeolites, and ore fall into this group. The sorption capability of clay is related
to the negative charges on the fine grain silicate minerals structure. Negative charges can be
neutralized by the sorption of positively charged cations like dyes. Also, clays have shown
high specific surface area (about 800 m2
/g), which are effective in the uptake process. There
are various kinds of clays, but montmorillonite clay is expected to have the maximum sorp￾tion capacity compared to others. Moreover, clays can be modified by various materials to
increase its performance in removing pollutants from wastewater. Furthermore, zeolites
contain silicate minerals and are applied at commercial scales. Clinoptilolite is probably
the most abundant species of natural zeolite. The uptake features of zeolites depend on their
ion-exchange capability. Besides, sand, soil, sediment, and ore minerals can be used to elim￾inate organic contaminants from water. Soils are used to remove environmental contami￾nants by sorption. Many studies have shown high sorption efficiency of soils in
removing pesticides, glyphosate, and phenolic compounds (De Gisi et al., 2016). The sorp￾tion capacity, sorption efficiency, and optimal conditions for various adsorbents in remov￾ing pollutants from water are reported in Table 6.8. Among the various adsorbents,
bentonite showed high sorption capacity (1667 mg/g) of methylene blue, which is a remark￾able value.
6.6.6 Nanoadsorbent
Nanoadsorbents are effective materials for removing contaminants from wastewater due
to the high surface area, a large number of active sites, high sorption capacity, and tunable
TABLE 6.7 Sorption capacity, removal efficiency, and optimal conditions for the removal of pollutants from
water and wastewater using various fungi—Cont’d
Bio-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/
g) References
A. foetidus Reactive
black 5
2 100 2 24 – 65 Kaushik and
Malik, 2009)
Pleurotus
ostreatus
Disperse
orange 3
5 200 0.1 120 57 – Kaushik and
Malik, 2009)
Trametes
versicolor
Grey
lanaset G
4.5 210 1.8 144 >80 – Kaushik and
Malik (2009)
T. versicolor Grey
lanaset G
4.5 150 3.2 18 >80 – Kaushik and
Malik (2009)
Ganoderma sp.
WR-1
Cibacron
brilliant
– 100 0.02 8 96 – Revankar and
Lele (2007)
Aspergillus sp.
TS-A CGMCC
Mordant
Yellow 1
6 50 1 120 98.6 – Kang et al. (2018)
126 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlespore size. Also, the morphology and shape of nanosorbents play a critical role in their prop￾erties and performance. Synthesis of nanoadsorbents is performed using bottom-up and
top-down processes. The top-down process can synthesize nanobiosorbents via various
methods such as ball milling, reactive milling, and mechanical alloying. Also, the
bottom-up process is a modern process to produce nanoparticles. Sol-gel, molecular self￾assembly, and physical/chemical vapor deposition are the most important bottom-up
processes to produce nanoadsorbents. Several novel nanosorbents have been recently syn￾thesized and used to remove contaminants from sewage like silica/Fe3O4 nanoparticles
(NPs), nanometals, and nanometal oxides zeolites, magnetic NPs like AC/Fe3O4
nanoparticles and bentonite/CuFe2O4 nanocomposite, carbon nanotubes, etc. Table 6.9
shows sorption capacity, sorption efficiency, and optimal conditions for different
nanoadsorbents in removing pollutants from wastewater (El-Sayed, 2020). As reported in
Table 6.9, some nanoadsorbents such as CaO/Fe3O4/SDS, Fe3O4/tetrasulfide
nanocomposite, CaO/Fe3O4, MgO nanoparticles, and clay/starch/Fe3O4 have shown excel￾lent performance for removing pollutants from effluents.
TABLE 6.8 Sorption capacity, sorption efficiency, and optimal conditions of various soil and ore materials in
the removal of pollutants from water and wastewater.
Bio￾adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency (%)
qmax
(mg/g) References
Bentonite Sb(III) 6 0.05 25 24 – 0.5 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
Bentonite Sb(V) 6 0.05 25 24 – 0.5 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
Bentonite
clay
Cr(III) 6 10 1 1.5 95.21 151.5 Ahmadi
et al. (2020)
Bentonite
clay
Cr(VI) 3 10 1 1.5 95.74 161.3 Ahmadi
et al. (2020)
Bentonite Methylene
blue
7.9 100 1 3 – 1667 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
Bentonite Basic red 2 11 10 1.5 1 – 274 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
Calcined
alunite
Acid blue 40 2 25 1.25 1.5 – 212.8 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
Clay Basic blue 9 6.3 30 0.25 2 – 300 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
Modified
sepiolite
Reactive
yellow 176
– 25 50 2 – 169.1 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
Modified
zeolite
Reactive
black 5
– 25 50 2 – 45.8 De Gisi et al.
(2016)
6.6 Types of adsorbents and their properties in wastewater treatment 127
I. Basics principlesTABLE 6.9 Capacity and optimal conditions of various nanoadsorbents in the removal of pollutants from water
and wastewater.
Nano-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion
conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/g) References
CaO/Fe3O4/SDS Cr(III) 5 5 2 0.83 98.7 5.9 Tamjidi and
Esmaeili (2019)
Fe3O4/tetrasulfide
nanocomposite
Hg(II) 4 50 50 0.33 98.8 303 Vojoudi et al.
(2017)
Fe3O4/tetrasulfide
nanocomposite
Pb(II) 4 50 50 0.33 95.7 270.27 Vojoudi et al.
(2017)
Fe3O4/tetrasulfide
nanocomposite
Pd(II) 4 50 50 0.33 96.4 256.41 Vojoudi et al.
(2017)
CaO/Fe3O4 Co(II) 6 5 2 0.5 94.32 227.27 Shakerian and
Esmaeili (2018)
CaO/Fe3O4 Pb(II) 6 5 2 0.5 97.24 217.39 Shakerian and
Esmaeili (2018)
Natural
clay/Fe3O4/
graphene oxide
Cr (VI) 3 10 1 1 98.84 71.41 Esmaeili and
Tamjidi (2020)
Bentonite clay@
MnFe2O4
Cr(III) 6 10 1.5 2 97.37 175.4 Ahmadi et al.
(2020)
Bentonite clay@
MnFe2O4
Cr(VI) 3 10 1.5 2 98.65 178.6 Ahmadi et al.
(2020)
Chitosan
conjugated
magnetite
nanoparticle
Pb(II) 6.1 – 1.04 0.99 92.15 192.308 Cheraghipour
and Pakshir
(2020)
Zeolite/Fe3O4 Methylene
blue
7 2 2.8 3 97.5 2.57 Nyankson et al.
(2019)
Nano zerovalent
iron
Acidic dye
36
5.5 30 0.5 0.025 94.29 125.8 Delnavaz and
Kazemimofrad
(2020)
AC/bentonite/
Fe3O4
Reactive
red 198
8 5 2 0.83 94.87 4.86 Mirzapour et al.
(2020)
Clay/starch/Fe3O4 Methyl
violet
9 10 1.5 2.5 99.73 29.67 Ansari Mojarad
et al. (2020)
Zinc (II) oxide
nanorods loaded on
AC
Crystal
violet
– 14 0.025 0.085 98.66 81.6 Dil et al. (2017)
Zinc (II) oxide
nanorods loaded on
AC
Methylene
blue
– 18 0.025 0.085 99.46 83.9 Dil et al. (2017)
128 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principles6.7 Conclusion
The biosorption process has attracted much attention in recent years because they have
several environmentally friendly, high-performance, and low-cost benefits. Many studies
have been performed during the last decade, which gives useful information about different
types of biosorbents and their performance in removing contaminants from wastewater. Also,
biosorbents have shown that they have high reusability, which is a critical factor in the
process’s economics. Another type of material is nanoadsorbents, which have been exten￾sively used in previous studies. Nanoadsorbents have several advantages, which the most
important property of them is their high specific surface area. Recently, a combination of
bioadsorbent and nanoadsorbent has been used, which have been indicated as high ability
and capacity to eliminate contaminants from wastewater. Sawdust, AC produced from leaves
of trees, eggshell waste, agricultural wastes, and shrimp peel are examples of effective
biosorbents, which have been widely used in previous works. Also, Fe3O4/CaO NPs, benton￾ite/Fe3O4 NPs, MgO NPs, bentonite/CuFe2O4 NPs, and AC/Fe3O4 NPs are several examples
of efficient nanoadsorbents. In this book chapter, characteristics, advantages, various types of
nanoadsorbents and bioadsorbents, capacity and efficiency of nano- and bio-adsorbents, dif￾ferent types of contaminants in wastewater, different methods for the removal of contami￾nants, and impact of effective factors on the sorption process were thoroughly discussed.
References
Abedpour, M., Kamyab, B., Tamjidi, S., 2020. Equilibrium and kinetic study of simultaneous removal of cd (II) and Ni
(II) by acrylamide-based polymer as effective adsorbent: optimization by response surface methodology (RSM).
Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1–8.
Acosta-Rodrı´guez, I., Ca´rdenas-Gonza´lez, J.F., Rodrı´guez Perez, A.S., Oviedo, J.T., Martı´nez-Jua´rez, V.M., 2018.
Bioremoval of different heavy metals by the resistant fungal strain Aspergillus niger. Bioinorg. Chem. Appl.
2018, 1–7.
Ahmadi, A., Foroutan, R., Esmaeili, H., Tamjidi, S., 2020. The role of bentonite clay and bentonite clay@ MnFe2O4
composite and their physico-chemical properties on the removal of Cr (III) and Cr (VI) from aqueous media. En￾viron. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 1–4.
Akpor, O.B., Otohinoyi, D.A., Olaolu, D.T., Aderiye, B.I., 2014. Pollutants in wastewater effluents: impacts and reme￾diation processes. Int. J. Environ. Res. Earth Sci. 3 (3), 050–059.
Hussain, S., Anjali, K.P., Hassan, S.T., Dwivedi, P.B., 2018. Waste tea as a novel adsorbent: a review. Appl. Water Sci. 8
(6), 1–16.
TABLE 6.9 Capacity and optimal conditions of various nanoadsorbents in the removal of pollutants from water
and wastewater—Cont’d
Nano-adsorbent Pollutant pH
Ion
conc.
(mg/L)
Dose
(g/L)
Time
(h)
Removal
efficiency
(%)
qmax
(mg/g) References
MgO NPs Reactive
black 5
10 100 0.025 0.833 99.26 500 Jamil et al.
(2015)
MgO NPs Reactive
orange 122
2 100 0.03 1.16 99.53 333.34 Jamil et al.
(2015)
References 129
I. Basics principlesAli, I., Asim, M., Khan, T.A., 2012. Low cost adsorbents for the removal of organic pollutants from wastewater. J.
Environ. Manag. 113, 170–183.
Amarasinghe, B.M., Williams, R.A., 2007. Tea waste as a low cost adsorbent for the removal of Cu and Pb from waste￾water. Chem. Eng. J. 132 (1–3), 299–309.
Ansari Mojarad, A., Tamjidi, S., Esmaeili, H., 2020. Clay/starch/Fe3O4 nanocomposite as an efficient adsorbent for
the removal of methyl violet dye from aqueous media. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1–22.
Aravindhan, R., Fathima, A., Selvamurugan, M., Rao, J.R., Balachandran, U.N., 2012. Adsorption, desorption, and
kinetic study on Cr (III) removal from aqueous solution using Bacillus subtilis biomass. Clean Techn. Environ. Pol￾icy 14 (4), 727–735.
Argun, M.E., Gucl € u, D., Karatas, M., 2014. Adsorption of reactive blue 114 dye by using a new adsorbent: pomelo peel. €
J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 20 (3), 1079–1084.
Asfaram, A., Fathi, M.R., Khodadoust, S., Naraki, M., 2014. Removal of direct red 12B by garlic peel as a cheap ad￾sorbent: kinetics, thermodynamic and equilibrium isotherms study of removal. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol.
Spectrosc. 127, 415–421.
Axelsson, J., Nilsson, U., Terrazas, E., Aliaga, T.A., Welander, U., 2006. Decolorization of the textile dyes reactive red 2
and reactive blue 4 using Bjerkandera sp. strain BOL 13 in a continuous rotating biological contactor reactor.
Enzym. Microb. Technol. 39 (1), 32–37.
Bahaa, S., Al-Baldawi, I.A., Yaseen, S.R., Abdullah, S.R., 2019. Biosorption of heavy metals from synthetic wastewater
by using macro algae collected from Iraqi Marshlands. J. Ecol. Eng. 20 (11), 18–22.
Bello, O.S., Alao, O.C., Alagbada, T.C., Agboola, O.S., Omotoba, O.T., Abikoye, O.R., 2021. A renewable, sustainable
and low-cost adsorbent for ibuprofen removal. Water Sci. Technol. 83 (1), 111–122.
Bharathi, K.S., Ramesh, S.T., 2013. Removal of dyes using agricultural waste as low-cost adsorbents: a review. Appl
Water Sci 3 (4), 773–790.
Bhatnagar, A., Minocha, A.K., 2010. Biosorption optimization of nickel removal from water using Punica granatum
peel waste. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 76 (2), 544–548.
Bhatnagar, A., Jain, A.K., Gupta, V.K., Jain, S., Suhas, S., 2003. A comparative assessment of adsorbents prepared from
industrial wastes for the removal of cationic dye. J. Indian Chem. Soc. 80, 267–270.
Bibi, S., Farooqi, A., Hussain, K., Haider, N., 2015. Evaluation of industrial based adsorbents for simultaneous re￾moval of arsenic and fluoride from drinking water. J. Clean. Prod. 87, 882–896.
Cardoso, N.F., Lima, E.C., Royer, B., Bach, M.V., Dotto, G.L., Pinto, L.A., Calvete, T., 2012. Comparison of Spirulina
platensis microalgae and commercial activated carbon as adsorbents for the removal of reactive red 120 dye from
aqueous effluents. J. Hazard. Mater. 241, 146–153.
Chandrasekhar, S., Pramada, P.N., 2006. Rice husk ash as an adsorbent for methylene blue—effect of ashing temper￾ature. Adsorption 12 (1), 27–43.
Chen, X., Lam, K.F., Yeung, K.L., 2011. Selective removal of chromium from different aqueous systems using mag￾netic MCM-41 nanosorbents. Chem. Eng. J. 172 (2–3), 728–734.
Cheraghipour, E., Pakshir, M., 2020. Process optimization and modeling of Pb (II) ions adsorption on chitosan￾conjugated magnetite nano-biocomposite using response surface methodology. Chemosphere 260, 127560.
Corda, N.C., Kini, M.S., 2018. A review on adsorption of cationic dyes using activated carbon. In: MATEC Web of
Conferences. vol. 144. EDP Sciences, p. 02022.
Crini, G., Lichtfouse, E., Wilson, L.D., Morin-Crini, N., 2019. Conventional and non-conventional adsorbents for
wastewater treatment. Environ. Chem. Lett. 17 (1), 195–213.
De Gisi, S., Lofrano, G., Grassi, M., Notarnicola, M., 2016. Characteristics and adsorption capacities of low-cost sor￾bents for wastewater treatment: a review. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 9, 10–40.
De Vargas, I., Macaskie, L.E., Guibal, E., 2004. Biosorption of palladium and platinum by sulfate-reducing bacteria. J.
Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 79 (1), 49–56.
Delnavaz, M., Kazemimofrad, Z., 2020. Nano zerovalent iron (NZVI) adsorption performance on acidic dye 36 re￾moval: optimization of effective factors, isotherm and kinetic study. Environ. Prog. Sustain. Energy 39 (4), e13349.
Dev, V.V., Baburaj, G., Antony, S., Arun, V., Krishnan, K.A., 2020. Zwitterion-chitosan bed for the simultaneous im￾mobilization of Zn (II), Cd (II), Pb (II) and Cu (II) from multi-metal aqueous systems. J. Clean. Prod. 255, 120309.
Dil, E.A., Ghaedi, M., Asfaram, A., 2017. The performance of nanorods material as adsorbent for removal of azo dyes
and heavy metal ions: application of ultrasound wave, optimization, and modeling. Ultrason. Sonochem. 34,
792–802.
130 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesDuman, O., Ayranci, E., 2010. Attachment of benzo-crown ethers onto activated carbon cloth to enhance the removal
of chromium, cobalt and nickel ions from aqueous solutions by adsorption. J. Hazard. Mater. 176 (1–3), 231–238.
El Hefnawy, M., Shaaban, A.F., ElKhawaga, H.A., 2020. Effective removal of Pb (II), Cd (II) and Zn (II) from aqueous
solution by a novel hyper cross-linked nanometer-sized chelating resin. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (3), 103788.
El-Ashtoukhy, E.S., Amin, N.K., Abdelwahab, O., 2008. Removal of lead (II) and copper (II) from aqueous solution
using pomegranate peel as a new adsorbent. Desalination 223 (1–3), 162–173.
El-Sayed, M.E., 2020. Nanoadsorbents for water and wastewater remediation. Sci. Total Environ. 739, 139903.
El-Sayed, H.E., El-Sayed, M.M., 2014. Assessment of food processing and pharmaceutical industrial wastes as poten￾tial biosorbents: a review. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014, 146769.
Esmaeili, H., Tamjidi, S., 2020. Ultrasonic-assisted synthesis of natural clay/Fe3O4/graphene oxide for enhance re￾moval of Cr (VI) from aqueous media. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (25), 31652–31664.
Esmaeili, H., Tamjidi, S., Abed, M., 2020. Removal of Cu (II), Co (II) and Pb (II) from synthetic and real wastewater
using calcified Solamen Vaillanti snail shell. Desalin. Water Treat. 174, 324–335.
Fernandes, A., Pacheco, M.J., Cirı´aco, L., Lopes, A., 2015. Review on the electrochemical processes for the treatment of
sanitary landfill leachates: present and future. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 176, 183–200.
Foroutan, R., Esmaeili, H., Fard, M.K., 2015. Equilibrium and kinetic studies of Pb (II) biosorption from aqueous so￾lution using shrimp peel. Int. Res. J. Appl. Basic Sci. 9 (11), 1954–1965.
Foroutan, R., Esmaeili, H., Abbasi, M., Rezakazemi, M., Mesbah, M., 2018. Adsorption behavior of Cu (II) and Co (II)
using chemically modified marine algae. Environ. Technol. 39 (21), 2792–2800.
Fu, F., Wang, Q., 2011. Removal of heavy metal ions from wastewaters: a review. J. Environ. Manag. 92 (3), 407–418.
Ghaedi, M., Tavallali, H., Sharifi, M., Kokhdan, S.N., Asghari, A., 2012. Preparation of low cost activated carbon from
Myrtus communis and pomegranate and their efficient application for removal of Congo red from aqueous solu￾tion. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 86, 107–114.
Gunatilake, S.K., 2015. Methods of removing heavy metals from industrial wastewater. Methods 1 (1), 14.
Hegazi, H.A., 2013. Removal of heavy metals from wastewater using agricultural and industrial wastes as adsorbents.
HBRC J. 9 (3), 276–282.
Hossain, M.A., Ngo, H.H., Guo, W.S., Setiadi, T., 2012. Adsorption and desorption of copper (II) ions onto garden
grass. Bioresour. Technol. 121, 386–395.
Huang, Q., Song, S., Chen, Z., Hu, B., Chen, J., Wang, X., 2019. Biochar-based materials and their applications in re￾moval of organic contaminants from wastewater: state-of-the-art review. Biochar 1 (1), 45–73.
Iftekhar, S., Ramasamy, D.L., Srivastava, V., Asif, M.B., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2018. Understanding the factors affecting the
adsorption of lanthanum using different adsorbents: a critical review. Chemosphere 204, 413–430.
Ismail, W.N., Mokhtar, S.U., 2020. Various methods for removal, treatment, and detection of emerging water contam￾inants. In: Emerging Contaminants. IntechOpen.
Jaafari, J., Yaghmaeian, K., 2019. Optimization of heavy metal biosorption onto freshwater algae (Chlorella coloniales)
using response surface methodology (RSM). Chemosphere 217, 447–455.
Jain, A.K., Gupta, V.K., Bhatnagar, A., Suhas, 2003. A comparative study of adsorbents prepared from industrial
wastes for removal of dyes. Sep. Sci. Technol. 38 (2), 463–481.
Jamil, N., Mehmood, M., Lateef, A., Nazir, R., Ahsan, N., 2015. MgO nanoparticles for the removal of reactive dyes
from wastewater. Adv. Mater. TechConnect Briefs 1, 353–356.
Kanamarlapudi, S.L., Chintalpudi, V.K., Muddada, S., 2018. Application of biosorption for removal of heavy metals
from wastewater. In: Biosorption. 18. IntechOpen, pp. 69–116. Waste tea as a novel adsorbent: a review.
Kang, Y., Xu, X., Pan, H., Tian, J., Tang, W., Liu, S., 2018. Decolorization of mordant yellow 1 using Aspergillus sp.
TS-A CGMCC 12964 by biosorption and biodegradation. Bioengineered 9 (1), 222–232.
Kaushik, P., Malik, A., 2009. Fungal dye decolourization: recent advances and future potential. Environ. Int. 35 (1),
127–141.
Khatri, N., Tyagi, S., 2015. Influences of natural and anthropogenic factors on surface and groundwater quality in
rural and urban areas. Front. Life Sci. 8 (1), 23–39.
Khoo, K.S., Chia, W.Y., Chew, K.W., Show, P.L., 2021. Microalgal-bacterial consortia as future prospect in wastewater
bioremediation, environmental management and bioenergy production. Indian J. Microbiol. 61, 1–8.
Kumar, K.V., Gadipelli, S., Wood, B., Ramisetty, K.A., Stewart, A.A., Howard, C.A., Brett, D.J., Rodriguez-Reinoso, F.,
2019a. Characterization of the adsorption site energies and heterogeneous surfaces of porous materials. J. Mater.
Chem. A 7 (17), 10104–10137.
References 131
I. Basics principlesKumar, A., Kumar, V., Singh, J., 2019b. Role of Fungi in the removal of heavy metals and dyes from wastewater by
biosorption processes. In: Recent Advancement in White Biotechnology Through Fungi. Springer, pp. 397–418.
Champions.
Lakshmi, U.R., Srivastava, V.C., Mall, I.D., Lataye, D.H., 2009. Rice husk ash as an effective adsorbent: evaluation of
adsorptive characteristics for indigo carmine dye. J. Environ. Manag. 90 (2), 710–720.
Li, X., Tang, Y., Cao, X., Lu, D., Luo, F., Shao, W., 2008. Preparation and evaluation of orange peel cellulose adsorbents
for effective removal of cadmium, zinc, cobalt and nickel. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 317 (1–3),
512–521.
Martinez-Juarez, V.M., Ca´rdenas-Gonza´lez, J.F., Torre-Bouscoulet, M.E., Acosta-Rodrı´guez, I., 2012. Biosorption of
mercury (II) from aqueous solutions onto fungal biomass. Bioinorg. Chem. Appl. 2012, 156190.
Mathew, B.B., Jaishankar, M., Biju, V.G., Beeregowda, K.N., 2016. Role of bioadsorbents in reducing toxic metals. J.
Toxicol. 2016, 4369604.
Mavhungu, A., Foteinis, S., Mbaya, R., Masindi, V., Kortidis, I., Mpenyana-Monyatsi, L., Chatzisymeon, E., 2021. En￾vironmental sustainability of municipal wastewater treatment through struvite precipitation: influence of oper￾ational parameters. J. Clean. Prod. 285, 124856.
McLellan, J.K., Rock, C.A., 1988. Pretreating landfill leachate with peat to remove metals. Water Air Soil Pollut. 37 (1),
203–215.
Memon, J.R., Memon, S.Q., Bhanger, M.I., Memon, G.Z., El-Turki, A., Allen, G.C., 2008. Characterization of banana
peel by scanning electron microscopy and FT-IR spectroscopy and its use for cadmium removal. Colloids Surf. B:
Biointerfaces 66 (2), 260–265.
Mirzapour, P., Kamyab Moghadas, B., Tamjidi, S., Esmaeili, H., 2020. Activated carbon/bentonite/Fe3O4
nanocomposite for treatment of wastewater containing reactive red 198. Sep. Sci. Technol. 56, 1–5.
Nair, V., Panigrahy, A., Vinu, R., 2014. Development of novel chitosan–lignin composites for adsorption of dyes and
metal ions from wastewater. Chem. Eng. J. 254, 491–502.
Nakajima, A., Tsuruta, T., 2004. Competitive biosorption of thorium and uranium by Micrococcus luteus. J. Radio￾anal. Nucl. Chem. 260 (1), 13–18.
Nyankson, E., Adjasoo, J., Efavi, J.K., Amedalor, R., Yaya, A., Manu, G.P., Asare, K., Amartey, N.A., 2019. Charac￾terization and evaluation of zeolite A/Fe3O4 nanocomposite as a potential adsorbent for removal of organic mol￾ecules from wastewater. J. Chem. 2019, 8090756.
Obotey Ezugbe, E., Rathilal, S., 2020. Membrane technologies in wastewater treatment: a review. Membranes 10 (5),
89.
Oliveira, D.Q., Gonc¸alves, M., Oliveira, L.C., Guilherme, L.R., 2008. Removal of As (V) and Cr (VI) from aqueous so￾lutions using solid waste from leather industry. J. Hazard. Mater. 151 (1), 280–284.
Pamukoglu, M.Y., Kargi, F., 2006. Removal of copper (II) ions from aqueous medium by biosorption onto powdered
waste sludge. Process Biochem. 41 (5), 1047–1054.
Pohl, A., 2020. Removal of heavy metal ions from water and wastewaters by sulfur-containing precipitation agents.
Water Air Soil Pollut. 231 (10), 1–7.
Pratiwi, D., Prasetyo, D.J., Poeloengasih, C.D., 2019. Adsorption of methylene blue dye using marine algae Ulva
lactuca. IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 251 (1), 012012. IOP Publishing.
Renu, Agarwal, M., Singh, K., 2017. Methodologies for removal of heavy metal ions from wastewater: an overview.
Interdiscip. Environ. Rev. 18 (2), 124–142.
Revankar, M.S., Lele, S.S., 2007. Synthetic dye decolorization by white rot fungus, Ganoderma sp. WR-1. Bioresour.
Technol. 98 (4), 775–780.
Ribeiro, C., Scheufele, F.B., Espinoza-Quinones, F.R., Mo´denes, A.N., da Silva, M.G., Vieira, M.G., Borba, C.E., 2015.
Characterization of Oreochromis niloticus fish scales and assessment of their potential on the adsorption of reac￾tive blue 5G dye. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 482, 693–701.
Santhosh, C., Velmurugan, V., Jacob, G., Jeong, S.K., Grace, A.N., Bhatnagar, A., 2016. Role of nanomaterials in water
treatment applications: a review. Chem. Eng. J. 306, 1116–1137.
Saravanan, A., Kumar, P.S., Yaashikaa, P.R., Karishma, S., Jeevanantham, S., Swetha, S., 2021. Mixed biosorbent of
agro waste and bacterial biomass for the separation of Pb (II) ions from water system. Chemosphere 277, 130236.
Saxena, R., Saxena, M., Lochab, A., 2020. Recent progress in nanomaterials for adsorptive removal of organic contam￾inants from wastewater. ChemistrySelect 5 (1), 335–353.
Shakerian, K.F., Esmaeili, H., 2018. Synthesis of CaO/Fe3O4 magnetic composite for the removal of Pb (II) and Co (II)
from synthetic wastewater. J. Serb. Chem. Soc. 83 (2), 237–249.
132 6. Advantages of nanoadsorbents, biosorbents, and nanobiosorbents for contaminant removal
I. Basics principlesShen, K., Gondal, M.A., 2017. Removal of hazardous rhodamine dye from water by adsorption onto exhausted coffee
ground. J. Saudi Chem. Soc. 21, S120–S127.
Sillanp€a€a, M., Shestakova, M., 2017 June 19. Electrochemical Water Treatment Methods: Fundamentals, Methods and
Full Scale Applications. Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 47–130.
Sirocki, A.R., Lanza, R.A., Connors, S.C., 2013. Removal of Ibuprofen from Drinking Water using Adsorption.
Smily, J.R., Sumithra, P.A., 2017. Optimization of chromium biosorption by fungal adsorbent, Trichoderma sp.
BSCR02 and its desorption studies. HAYATI J. Biosci. 24 (2), 65–71.
Sobhanardakani, S., Jafari, A., Zandipak, R., Meidanchi, A., 2018. Removal of heavy metal (Hg (II) and Cr (VI)) ions
from aqueous solutions using Fe2O3@ SiO2 thin films as a novel adsorbent. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot. 120,
348–357.
Suteu, D., Bilba, D., Aflori, M., Doroftei, F., Lisa, G., Badeanu, M., Malutan, T., 2012. The seashell wastes as biosorbent
for reactive dye removal from textile effluents. Clean: Soil, Air, Water 40 (2), 198–205.
Suzuki, Y., Kametani, T., Maruyama, T., 2005. Removal of heavy metals from aqueous solution by nonliving Ulva
seaweed as biosorbent. Water Res. 39 (9), 1803–1808.
Taghizade Firozjaee, T., Mehrdadi, N., Baghdadi, M., Nabi Bidhendi, G.R., 2018. Application of nanotechnology in
pesticides removal from aqueous solutions-a review. Int. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 14 (1), 43–56.
Tamjidi, S., Esmaeili, H., 2019. Chemically modified CaO/Fe3O4 nanocomposite by sodium dodecyl sulfate for Cr (III)
removal from water. Chem. Eng. Technol. 42 (3), 607–616.
Tamjidi, S., Esmaeili, H., Moghadas, B.K., 2019. Application of magnetic adsorbents for removal of heavy metals from
wastewater: a review study. Mater. Res. Express 6 (10), 102004.
Tamjidi, S., Esmaeili, H., Moghadas, B.K., 2021a. Performance of functionalized magnetic nanocatalysts and feed￾stocks on biodiesel production: a review study. J. Clean. Prod. 305, 127200.
Tamjidi, S., Moghadas, B.K., Esmaeili, H., Khoo, F.S., Gholami, G., Ghasemi, M., 2021b. Improving the surface prop￾erties of adsorbents by surfactants and their role in the removal of toxic metals from wastewater: a review study.
Process. Saf. Environ. Prot. 148, 775–795.
Teh, C.Y., Budiman, P.M., Shak, K.P., Wu, T.Y., 2016. Recent advancement of coagulation–flocculation and its appli￾cation in wastewater treatment. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 55 (16), 4363–4389.
Teimouri, A., Esmaeili, H., Foroutan, R., Ramavandi, B., 2018. Adsorptive performance of calcined Cardita bicolor for
attenuating Hg (II) and As (III) from synthetic and real wastewaters. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 35 (2), 479–488.
Thanki, A., Thanki, A., Singh, R., Sohal, K.S., 2021. The application of low-cost natural bio-adsorbents for the removal
of heavy metals—a review. In: Sustainable Development Through Engineering Innovations: Select Proceedings of
SDEI 2020. Springer, Singapore, pp. 355–371.
Vijayaraghavan, G., Shanthakumar, S., 2018. Effective removal of acid black 1 dye in textile effluent using alginate
from brown algae as a coagulant. Iran. J. Chem. Chem. Eng. 37 (4), 145–151.
Vijayaraghavan, K., Yun, Y.S., 2008. Bacterial biosorbents and biosorption. Biotechnol. Adv. 26 (3), 266–291.
Vojoudi, H., Badiei, A., Bahar, S., Ziarani, G.M., Faridbod, F., Ganjali, M.R., 2017. A new nano-sorbent for fast and
efficient removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions based on modification of magnetic mesoporous silica
nanospheres. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 441, 193–203.
Vucurovic, V.M., Razmovski, R.N., Miljic, U.D., Pusˇkasˇ, V.S., 2014. Removal of cationic and anionic azo dyes from
aqueous solutions by adsorption on maize stem tissue. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 45 (4), 1700–1708.
Wuana, R.A., Okieimen, F.E., 2011. Heavy metals in contaminated soils: a review of sources, chemistry, risks and best
available strategies for remediation. Int. Sch. Res. Not. 2011, 402647.
Xue, Y., Wu, S., Zhou, M., 2013. Adsorption characterization of Cu (II) from aqueous solution onto basic oxygen fur￾nace slag. Chem. Eng. J. 231, 355–364.
Yeganeh, G., Ramavandi, B., Esmaeili, H., Tamjidi, S., 2019. Dataset of the aqueous solution and petrochemical waste￾water treatment containing ammonia using low cost and efficient bio-adsorbents. Data Brief 26, 104308.
Zahoor, M., 2011. Effect of agitation speed on adsorption of imidacloprid on activated carbon. J. Chem. Soc. Pak. 33 (6),
305.
Zuraida, M.S., Nurhaslina, C.R., Ku Halim, K.H., 2013. Removal of synthetic dyes from wastewater by using bacteria,
Lactobacillus delbruckii. Int. Refereed J. Eng. Sci. 2 (5), 1–7.
References 133
I. Basics principlesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
7
Nanomaterials for removal of heavy
metals from wastewater
Fahmeeda Kausara
, Ahmad Reza Bagherib
, Tahir Rasheedc
,
Muhammad Bilald
, Komal Rizwane
, Tuan Anh Nguyenf
,
and Hafiz M.N. Iqbalg
a
School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
b
Department of Chemistry, Yasouj University, Yasouj, Iran c
Interdisciplinary Research Center for
Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM), Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia d
School of Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian,
China e
Department of Chemistry, University of Sahiwal, Sahiwal, Pakistan f
Institute for Tropical
Technology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam g
Tecnologico de
Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey, Mexico
7.1 Introduction
There are three classes of waste and natural water residing pollutants which are named as
poisonous inorganic and organic materials, and micro-pathogens. Normally, 30% of sewage￾water residing contaminants are polyatomic compounds and heavy metals from inorganic
origin that exist in different water resources were reported by Bora and Dutta in 2014
(Bora and Dutta, 2014). Numerous industries act as source of pollution addition to water bod￾ies and surroundings, for example, agriculture, petroleum, steel and pulp construction, and
fabric refinery (Inglezakis et al., 2002). Several diseases in human body like skeletal disorders
and heart malfunctioning are the consequences of natural abundance of polyatomic￾compounds and heavy elements (Kemp et al., 2013; Rasheed et al., 2019a,c; Rasheed and
Nabeel, 2019). Fig. 7.1 illustrates major consequences and adverse health effects of potentially
toxic elements, e.g., chromium, manganese, and cobalt (Rasheed et al., 2018b).
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 135 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00007-1Environmental hazards are generated from farming, medicinal, dyeing, printing, and fab￾ric industries which are organic origin and are poisonous in nature. Sewage-water residing
organic substances comprise 70% of contaminants (Bora and Dutta, 2014; Rasheed et al.,
2019d,e,f). Predominantly, industries throw out bio-degradable substances, rather
bioaccumulation could occur because of slower degeneration (Rasheed et al., 2018c, 2019g;
Vickers, 2017). The removal of organic/inorganic pollutants from drinkable water, specifi￾cally medicinal compounds and heavy metals, is important because of their viable impacts
owing to long-time vulnerability, however, their small quantity showed no threat to public
health ( Jelic et al., 2012; Rasheed et al., 2018d,e). Cancer/mutagenicity, genotoxicity, and
malfunctioning of endocrine hormones are noticed due to contact with considerable quantity
of organic/inorganic pollutants like herbicidal compounds, heavy metals, and dyes (Bilal
et al., 2020; Rasheed et al., 2019b, 2020b; Tang et al., 2012). Protozoa, viruses, and bacteria
are the most common microscopic water contaminants. Fecal pollution and soil
impurification are the frequent factors responsible for addition in water resources
FIG. 7.1 Major consequences and adverse health effects of potentially toxic elements including chromium, man￾ganese, cobalt, nickel, copper, and zinc as target elements. Reprinted from Rasheed, T., Li, C., Bilal, M., Yu, C., Iqbal, H.M.,
2018b. Potentially toxic elements and environmentally-related pollutants recognition using colorimetric and ratiometric fluo￾rescent probes. Sci. Total Environ. 640, 174–193 with permission from Elsevier.
136 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principles(Ishii et al., 2006; Rasheed et al., 2020a; Zvizdic et al., 2005). Apart from water purity, general
human health and surrounding protection are at risk due to presence of microscopic organ￾isms (Herna´ndez et al., 2015).
7.2 Pollution sources and treatment strategies
Water pollution is greatly specified through ornamental problems. Numerous pollutants
could be estimated by varying the standard characteristics of water like aroma, color, turbid￾ity, and lucidity. Herein, some of the pollutants are described that distinctively influence ap￾pearance and quality of water. Algae and suspended microorganisms impart blue green algae
and cyanobacteria while deep green color, zooplankton and dinoflagellates red color, and di￾atom yellowish brown color to water (Shin et al., 2017). In 2015, Chaussemier et al. reported
that red and green color in water is due to Fe and CaCO3 minerals (Chaussemier et al., 2015).
Modern industries utilize diverse dyes that produce stain in water like methylene-blue,
debuted by Yagub et al. in 2014 (Yagub et al., 2014). In 2012, Goel and Kaur reported
cloud/mist formation in water owing to the presence of variant foam-producing detergents.
Mostly, different types of pollutants can generate an offensive smell in water due to contagion
(Goel and Kaur, 2012). Achudume (2009) and Wing et al. (2014) reported the relation of of￾fensive aroma with oils, petrochemicals, sewage, and degenerating organic matter. By follow￾ing traditional techniques, diverse health problems are sorted out by purifying wastewater
produced on the grounds of industrial, commercial, and household zones (Achudume,
2009; Wing et al., 2014). Lofrano and Brown (2010) introduced the categorization of major
kinds of traditional wastewater remediation which includes: (1) physical dissociation (2) bio￾degradation (3) chemical decaying method. Generally, centrifugal separation or gravity sep￾aration are adopted as the easiest techniques as physical separation for wastewater to
recuperate unmixed and dispersed contaminants (Lofrano and Brown, 2010). Even though
it is a feasible method for wastewater remediation, but still not ultimate because emission pa￾rameters are hard to achieve owing to low and variable reaction rate. Biodegradation neces￾sitates microbes which act on organic dispersed/suspended contaminants in sewage and mix
or convert them into secure and non-dangerous compounds (Lofrano and Brown, 2010). Op￾erational inefficacy in winter, hard to remove heavy metal ions, operational expensiveness,
and apparatus provision are the major issues of treatment through biotechniques, however,
emission parameters were smoothly obtained (Oller et al., 2011). On the contrary, chemical
decaying method includes water purifiers such as coagulation agents (Sarkar et al., 2006),
flocculation agents (Lee et al., 2014) resistors for corrosion (Weiss et al., 2006). These agents
are applied for depolluting, standardizing, and softening of water by removing undissolved
poisonous and suspended particles, decreasing lather, inhibiting corrosion by reducing water
exposure and modulating sludge and scale production (Hayat et al., 2015). Apart from advan￾tages, chlorination has disadvantages too like incompetency in separating pollutants, e.g., in￾organic/organic substances and heavy metals from water (Sedlak and von Gunten, 2011).
Various sources of potentially toxic elements including lead, cadmium, and mercury are
shown in Fig. 7.2 (Rasheed et al., 2018a). Furthermore, detrimental by-products can evolve
after reaction of chlorine and water-existing inorganic/organic materials (Gopal et al.,
7.2 Pollution sources and treatment strategies 137
I. Basics principles2007) causing several kinds of cancer (Richardson et al., 2007). All-inclusive, the intricacy of
the wastewater and sewage remediation methodologies and nature of chemicals injected can
change the appearance and constitution of water resulting in longer time with greater de￾mand for chemicals which leads to dearness and thus practically unfavorable (Unuabonah
et al., 2018). Moreover, many compounds applied chemically can engender secondary con￾tamination, reduce recycling capacity, residual production, unwanted treatment results
and complicated synthetic techniques (Yu et al., 2017). Therefore, these constraints proved
above-mentioned categories iniquitous for proficient applications.
FIG. 7.2 Various sources of potentially toxic elements including lead, cadmium, and mercury. Reprinted from
Rasheed, T., Bilal, M., Nabeel, F., Iqbal, H. M., Li, C., Zhou, Y., 2018a. Fluorescent sensor based models for the detection of
environmentally-related toxic heavy metals. Sci. Total Environ. 615, 476–485 with permission from Elsevier.
138 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principles7.3 Metal based-nanomaterials
During recent decades, the metal-based nanoparticles played significant role in water re￾mediation. For instance, silver-based nanoparticles are reported to have antimicrobial poten￾tial so they are employed to disinfect water (Srinivasan et al., 2013). Zinc-based nano-scale
materials have potent degradation capability toward the dioxins (Bokare et al., 2013).
Nanosized-zero valent iron (nZVI) is comprised of iron (0) and coating of ferric oxide
(O’Carroll et al., 2013). It gained attention as an adsorbent to adsorb different heavy metals
including mercury (II), chromium (VI), copper (II), nickel (II), cadmium (II) (Liu et al., 2015;
Seyedi et al., 2017). Iron (0) offers reducing capability and shell of ferric oxide provides reac￾tive sites and electrostatic linkage with heavy metal particles. Their surface has abundant
reactive sites (Cundy et al., 2008). Great reducing potential and huge surface area made nZVI
eligible for great performance for remediation of heavy metals from water (Huang et al.,
2013). Mechanism of nZVI is variable for different metals and it depends on the standard
potential (E0) of different metals (Huang et al., 2013). For instance, Pb (II) has slightly higher
E0 in comparison of iron (II) and removal mechanism comprised of reduction and sorption.
While in case of chromium (VI) that has greater E0 in comparison of iron (II) an observed
mechanism of removal was reduction and precipitation. There are some advantages and dis￾advantages associated with employment of nZVI for heavy metal removal. According to re￾ports, nZVI oxidized in oxygen environment, and aqueous media which may cause hindrance
to reduction phenomena of heavy metals (Tratnyek et al., 2009). Easily aggregation of nZVI
may reduce the surface area for reaction and also diminish mobility (O’Carroll et al., 2013).
Isolation of nZVI is complex from wastewater. Different modification and alteration methods
have been introduced to enhance the nZVI performance through doping nZVI with various
metals (copper, nickel, platinum, and lead) and modification of surface chemical (Fu et al.,
2014). Unique-modified nZVI material was synthesized through combining of nZVI along
with sodium dodecyl sulfate that is kind of an ionic surfactant and contains great capability
of migration and dispersion (Huang et al., 2015a). This novel material exhibited great removal
potential (253.68 mg/g) toward chromium (VI) elucidating it as potent adsorbent with en￾hanced adsorption potential and reduced aggregation. Adsorption phenomena obeyed the
Freundlich model and also pseudo-second-order kinetics. Various factors as dosage, starting
concentration, pH, and contact time were examined and great removal efficiency (approx.
98.919%) obtained. Removal of cadmium (II) and nitrate was carried out by employing nZVI
and gold-doped nZVI nanoparticles (Su et al., 2014). By employing gold-doped nZVI, the
yield of nitrite decreased from the nitrates in comparison of bare nZVI while removal ratio
of cadmium (II) stayed at high level. It is indicated from the results that gold-doped nZVI
may be employed for wastewater treatment having cadmium (II) and nitrate.
Nanocomposites based on nZVI are also attaining great attention. By utilizing the economical
bentonites, the nZVI-based nano-composites were synthesized and then these were utilized
to remove lead (II), cobalt (II), nickel (II), zinc (II), cadmium (II), copper (II) from wastewater
(Zarime et al., 2018). Aggregation of nZVI could be reduced by incorporation of bentonite in it
and this gives nZVI more sites for adsorbing of heavy metals. Composite of bentonite-nZVI
showed great removal potential toward heavy metals in comparison of only bentonite. These
are also employed to treat ground water (Zhang, 2003). Reports on different metallic
7.3 Metal based-nanomaterials 139
I. Basics principlesnanoparticles are not sufficiently available for heavy metal removal. Few reports are available
regarding interaction between mercury (II) and silver nanoparticles (Fan et al., 2009). Though
the reactivity is not great between the mercury (II) and bulk silver. Silver nanoparticles
showed great reactivity due to decrease in reduction potential of silver with decrease in size
of particles (Pradhan et al., 2002). By coordinating the silver with mercaptosuccinic acid, sil￾ver nanoparticle based adsorbent was synthesized (Sumesh et al., 2011). By employing differ￾ent ratios of silver to mercaptosuccinic acid (MSA), two materials were synthesized and
results showed that 1:6 Ag and MSA exhibited greater removal potential toward mercury
(II) (approx. 800 mg/g) in comparison of common adsorbents. Further it was demonstrated
that cost value was competitive for removal of mercury (II) by utilizing the Ag and MSA.
Thereof the Ag-MSA could be a potential source to remove mercury (II). The mercury affinity
toward gold was familiar because they may form Au3Hg AuHg and AuHg3 (Zhang et al.,
2016). Lisha and co-workers demonstrated the employment of gold-based nanoparticles
which were aluminum supported to remove the mercury (II) (Lisha and Pradeep, 2009). So￾dium borohydride was employed for reduction of mercury (II) to mercury (0) and removal
efficacy of gold nanoparticles extended to 4.065 g/g which was found greater in comparison
of ordinary adsorbents. Employment of gold nanoparticles to remove mercury (II) was found
low and these gold nanoparticles can be recovered easily and this exhibited the implemen￾tation of gold-based nanoparticles (aluminum-supported) for treatment of wastewater.
Citrate-coated gold nanoparticles were synthesized to remove mercury (II) from wastewater
(Ojea-Jimenez et al., 2012). The ions of citrate played the role of weak reducing agent which
can reduce mercury (II) to mercury (0) thus eliminating the use of sodium borohydride and
experiments revealed that mercury concentration reduced from 65 to 1–5 ppb values. The last
product obtained was Au3Hg alloy which on treatment at high temperature and pressure re￾covers the gold (Sneed et al., 1956).
7.4 Metal oxide-based nanomaterials
Metal oxide-based nanomaterials are considered as a versatile type of materials from both
a scientific and technological viewpoint (Sengul and Asmatulu, 2020). Metal oxides are an
interesting class of materials intensively investigated nowadays, and displaying unique prop￾erties in terms of mechanical stress tolerance, high optical transparency, exceptional carrier
mobilities, high surface area, high adsorption capacity, etc. (Medhi et al., 2020). It is worth
mentioning that the surface of metal oxides plays critical role for effective interaction with
different molecules and ions. The exceptional attributes of metal oxide-based nanomaterials
and their recent progresses and development have opened new possibilities and opportunity
for applications of these materials in different area and especially for removal of heavy metals
as one of the main and hazardous environmental pollutants (Sawan et al., 2020). Metal oxide￾based nanomaterials can be synthesized using different synthesis approaches like physical,
chemical, and biological methods and also can be in different forms. These amazing features
make these materials as applicable and attractive adsorbents for treatment and removal of
140 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesharmful heavy metals. In the following, some of the well-known metal oxide-based
nanomaterials and their application for removal of heavy metals will be investigated and
discussed.
7.4.1 Iron oxide-based nanomaterials
In spite of common advantages of metal oxide-based nanomaterials mentioned above, iron
oxide-based nanomaterials also have other distinguished property, in terms of magnetic
property, which makes these materials an excellent candidate for removal of heavy metals
(Bagheri and Ghaedi, 2020). After adsorption of heavy metals by target adsorbents, it is es￾sential to separate applied sorbents from sample solution or medial. Filtration, precipitation
as well as centrifugation are considered as routine methods for separation of sorbents used
(Bagheri et al., 2019). Although these methods are useful, they are faced with main limitations.
For instance, using these methods, some of the adsorbents may retain in the sample solution
which can reduce the performance and applicability of method. Most importantly, these
methods are time-consuming (Gholami et al., 2019). To address these drawbacks, application
of magnetic adsorbents can be an ideal and an alternative method. Using magnetic adsor￾bents, applied adsorbents can be separated easily using an external magnet which not only
can address the limitations of common separation methods, but also can reduce separation
time and also improve performance of the proposed method (Bagheri et al., 2017). To this
end, synthesis and application of iron oxide-based nanomaterials as kind of magnetic
nanomaterials have been in the hotspot. Up to date, many efforts have been performed for
construction of iron oxide-based nanomaterials and their utilization for removal of heavy
metals. For example, Mahanty and co-workers synthesized iron oxide nanoparticles based
on biological method and used them for removal of Pb (II), Ni (II), Cu (II), and Zn (II)
(Mahanty et al., 2020). In this work, manglicolous fungi Aspergillus tubingensis (STSP25)
obtained from rhizospheric sediment samples of Avicennia officinalis were used for prepara￾tion of monodispersed, spherical, and crystalline iron oxide nanoparticles. The fabricated
nanoparticles had diameter of 73.05  15.47 nm. RSM and ANN methods were used to inves￾tigate and optimize the effective parameters. The removal percentage of Pb (II), Ni (II), Cu (II),
and Zn (II) were achieved to be 98.0037%, 96.4502%, 92.1984%, and 93.9913%, respectively.
Based on the results, the adsorption process was endothermic. The adsorption process was
followed by Langmuir isotherm model and pseudo-second-order kinetics. Moreover, the
maximum adsorption capacities for Pb (II), Ni (II), Cu (II), and Zn (II) were 206 mg/g,
9.666 mg/g, 8.335 mg/g, and 9.106 mg/g, respectively. Regeneration of applied sorbent as
one of the most practical aspect was also investigated and according to results, proposed sor￾bent was useful for at least five cycles.
To improve the performance of iron oxide nanomaterials, their combination with other ma￾terials and production of their composites can be an ideal method. The composites of iron
oxide nanomaterials can have more functional groups, surface area, stability, and adsorption
capacity compared to iron oxide nanomaterials. To this end, sodium alginate was cross-linked
with iron oxide nanoparticles and fabricated composite was sued for removal of lead, copper,
and cadmium (Mahmoud et al., 2020). Based on the SEM analysis, prepared sorbent had size
7.4 Metal oxide-based nanomaterials 141
I. Basics principlesin the range between 150 and 260 nm. The aggregate particles showed good distribution and
homogeneity along the examined sample. The other main property of sorbent was its thermal
stability which was proved by TGA analysis. BET analysis showed that surface area of iron
oxide nanoparticles and fabricated composite were achieved to be 3.7551 and 5.4339 m2 g1
.
Based on the results, the addition of sodium alginate increased the surface area of proposed
composite. This fact can be due to the presence of different functional groups in sodium
alginate structure which can increase interaction of sorbent and heavy metals. The effect of
various parameters on removal process was investigated and they were optimized. Under
optimum conditions, applied process was followed by pseudo-second order kinetic model.
Also, the maximum adsorption capacities for lead, copper, and cadmium were 564, 158,
and 102.2 mg/g, respectively.
7.4.2 Manganese oxide based nanomaterials
Manganese oxide (MnOx) is one of the popular metal oxides nanomaterials that has
attracted a lot of attention (Soejima et al., 2018). MnOx has unique properties like its magnetic
nature, catalytic activity, and high energy density. MnO2 is one of the metal oxide-based
nanoparticles which is cheap and eco-friendly (Yabuuchi and Komaba, 2014). The other main
properties of MnOx-based nanomaterials are their high surface area and also high adsorption
capacity. These exceptional features make these materials excellent candidate for application
in different areas like catalysts, gas sensor, energy storage, and removal of different contam￾inates (Kumar et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2008; Subramanian et al., 2014). For instance, Su et al.
fabricated hydrous manganese dioxide (HMO) and sued it as effective adsorbent for removal
of lead, cadmium, and zinc ions from water (Su et al., 2010). The prepared HMO had amor￾phous structure with surface area of 100.5 m2 g1
. In this work, effect of different factors on
removal process was investigated and then they were optimized. Tamura et al. (Tamura et al.,
1996) suggested that the adsorption of metal ion (M) by HMO can be occurred by below
mechanism:
MnOH + M2+ , MnOM+ + H+ (7.1)
MnOH + M2+ , ð Þ MnO 2 M+ + 2H+ (7.2)
Both reactions can be classified as typical ion-exchange processes. Based on the reactions,
lower pH is not suitable for adsorption of target ions. FT-IR proved that the adsorption mech￾anism of Ca(II) by HMO was based on the outer sphere complexation, while adsorption
mechanism of lead, cadmium, and zinc ions was according to inner sphere complex forma￾tion. Different isotherm models were used to evaluate the adsorption mechanism. Results
confirmed that Langmuir model was more suitable than other models which was due to
its higher R2
. Langmuir model assumes the monolayer adsorption of target ions on the ho￾mogeneous surface of sorbent. In addition, HMO prefers metal sorption in the sequence
Pb2+ > Cd2+ > Zn2+, which might rest on the different softness of these metals.
In other study, manganese oxide was supported on a macro-mesoporous biochar and
obtained composite was applied for removal of cadmium and lead from water (Wan et al.,
2020). In this work, at first, a biochar with enlarged pore channel was fabricated using pyrol￾ysis process. Then, the fabricated biochar was used as support for modification of manganese
142 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesoxide on it. SEM analysis showed that manganese oxide nanoparticles were deposited on the
surface of biochar. The surface area and pore volume of prepared composite were
561.4 m2 g1 and 0.39 cm3 g1
, respectively. Moreover, TGA analysis proved the high stabil￾ity of used composite. FTIR and XPS were applied to assess the adsorption mechanism of
heavy metals by composite. After adsorption of Pb(II) by composite, the peak intensity of
Mn-OH was dramatically decreased which may be related to the exchange of Pb(II) to the
protons combined with O atoms in Mn-OH groups. In addition, the peak of Mn-OH was
shifted to higher frequency which may be attributed to interaction of Pb and O (Pb-O) based
on the inner sphere complexation (two atoms share a pair of electrons, and one atom affords
the lone electron pair and the other one provides the empty orbit).
7.4.3 TiO2-/ZnO-based nanomaterials
One of the other useful metal-based nanoparticles is TiO2 which have been used in differ￾ent fields especially industries (Gebru and Das, 2018). TiO2 nanoparticles have exceptional
properties like self-cleaning properties and the ability to remove air pollutants. Moreover,
due to catalyst feature of these nanoparticles, they are also applicable as catalyst for degra￾dation of various pollutants (Bian et al., 2018). The other distinguished attributes of TiO2
nanoparticles are their mechanical and antibacterial properties which make them excellent
materials for utilization in different areas (Wang et al., 2019b). In 2018, Lajayer and
co-workers used TiO2 nanoparticles for removal of Cu2+ and Cd2+ from effluent (Lajayer
et al., 2018). The removal process of heavy metals was done using combination of gamma
irradiation, methanol, and TiO2 nanoparticles under different pH values. Applied
nanoparticles had surface area and average particle about 50 m2 g1 and 21 nm, respectively.
SEM and TEM analysis showed that used nanoparticles were homogeneously distributed and
had spherical shape. TiO2 nanoparticles were able to adsorb heavy metals. The radiation pro￾cess is an emerging treatment method in which the target ions can change to insoluble forms
and remove from sample solution or media. Gamma irradiation can generate hydroxyl rad￾ical (OH•
). In the following, these radicals can attack ions and then degrade or reduce them
and finally remove them. pH is the most effective factor on removal of heavy metals in this
process. In this regard, pH was investigated and optimized. pH can control the generation of
OH• and subsequently can improve the removal percentage of heavy metals. This study
proved that only 50 kGy irradiation doses with combination of TiO2 nanoparticles was
enough for removing Cu2+ and Cd2+ more than 90% from the acidic wastewater.
ZnO is another useful nanomaterial for heavy metal treatment. ZnO is an FDA approved
food additive and is generally recognized as safe and non-toxic in low concentrations
(Sharifan et al., 2020). ZnO nanoparticles have high photo catalytic activity and are believed
to be more biocompatible than TiO2 (Iannone et al., 2017). These nanomaterials have been ex￾tensively applied in food industries to preserve colors and prevent spoilage through their
antimicrobial activity (Sun et al., 2018). The antimicrobial properties of ZnO nanoparticles
are attributed to their ability to damage the cell wall of bacteria and disruption of DNA rep￾lication (Khatami et al., 2018). Due to these unique properties, ZnO nanoparticles are consid￾ered as one of the versatile materials for removal of heavy metals. For example, Salem and
co-workers constructed ZnO nanoparticles for efficient removal of heavy metals (Cr3+, Ni2
+
, and Co2+) (Salem et al., 2017). XRD analysis proved the crystalline structure of nanoparticles
7.4 Metal oxide-based nanomaterials 143
I. Basics principleswith average diameter of 28, 25, 73, and 130 nm. SEM analysis confirmed that the shape of
ZnO nanoparticles was greatly changed after capturing Cr3+ and Co2+ ions, while they little
changed after adsorption of Ni2+. This fact was due to low ability of ZnO nanoparticles for
adsorption of Ni2+ ions. The effects of different factors on removal process like ZnO amount,
pH, foreign salt ions, activation parameters, and metal ions initial concentration were inves￾tigated and optimized. The kinetic of reaction was also evaluated and according to results the
adsorption of heavy metals was followed by pseudo-second-order kinetic model. Moreover,
adsorption of heavy metals was followed by Langmuir isotherm model.
7.4.4 Aluminum oxide-based nanomaterials
Among various metal oxide nanoparticles, aluminum oxide-based nanomaterials have
cheap construction cost and high decontamination efficiency (Giles et al., 2011). Most impor￾tantly, United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP) agency reported that aluminum ox￾ide nanomaterials are the best available technologies for arsenic removal from water (Sorg,
2000). So, due to these amazing properties, these materials have been broadly applied for re￾moval of heavy metals and particularly arsenic. With respect to this properties, Prabhakar
and Samadder fabricated aluminum oxide nanoparticles using low-cost and easy method
and used them for removal of arsenite from groundwater (Prabhakar and Samadder,
2018). Proposed nanoparticles are synthesized by solution combustion method. This method
is not only easy and cheap, but also is time-saving and also eco-friendly. Based on the DRS
analysis, Al2O3 nanoparticles had size of 52–85 nm. SEM analysis proved the spherical shape
of nanoparticles. At first, the nanoparticles were agglomerated which may be related to the
moisture in storing chamber. XRD analysis showed the crystalline structure of particles. In
this work, equilibrium time as one of the main factors in application of Al2O3 nanoparticles
at large and industrial scales was investigated in range of 15–180 min. Results showed that
180 min was efficient for removal of arsenite more than 90%. Other factors like initial concen￾tration, stirring speed, sorbent dosage, temperature, and pH were also investigated and
optimized. Evaluation of different isotherm models shoed that Langmuir model was more
suitable than other models that shows the monolayer adsorption of arsenite onions onto
homogenous surface of sorbent. The maximum adsorption capacities (Qm) were determined
as 500.0, 510.2, 526.3, and 555.5 μg g1 at 298, 308, 318, and 328 K correspondingly. Moreover,
kinetic studies showed that adsorption of arsenite onions was followed by pseudo-second￾order kinetic model. Thermodynamic studies proved that the adsorption of arsenite onions
onto Al2O3 nanoparticles was exothermic in nature. The value of ΔHo lower than 40 kJ mol1
is the indicator of physical adsorption process. The ΔHo value for this study was obtained to
be 26.09 kJ mol1 which confirmed physical adsorption was the prevailing mechanism for
removal of arsenite onions by Al2O3 nanoparticles. The reusability investigation showed that
used nanoparticles were applicable at least for three cycles. The cost of preparation of nano
alumina was estimated to be US$ 67/kg. This property makes nano alumina materials as ex￾cellent materials for synthesis and application as adsorbent.
In other work, mesoporous bismuth-impregnated aluminum oxide was fabricated and ap￾plied as sorbent for removal of arsenic (Zhu et al., 2018b). In this work, adsorption mechanism
and application of used sorbent to a lab-scale column were also assessed. The effect of different
parameters on removal process was investigated and optimized. Investigation of isotherm
144 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesmodels proved that the maximum adsorption capacity was 26.8 mg/g and the adsorption pro￾cess was followed by Freundlich model. This model assumes that the adsorption of target
analyte/s is multilayer and also it is occurred on the heterogeneous surface of sorbent. The
adsorption mechanism is based on the complexation of As (III) onto the surface of sorbent.
It is worth mentioning that impregnation of bismuth reduces the specific surface area of alu￾minum oxide and affected its pore size distribution. However, because of its abundant and
well-proportioned mesoporous character, bismuth can complex with As (III) onions and
remove them.
7.4.5 MgO based nanomaterials
MgO nanoparticles are non-toxic and used in crucibles, additives in flame-retardant
materials, refractory materials, and coating materials (Vesali-Kermani et al., 2020). The size
and morphology of oxide particles can be modified using parameters such as pH, ionic
strength, and different calcination temperature (Silva et al., 2020). MgO nanoparticles can
be fabricated using different synthesis approaches and have been used in different fields
(Nguyen et al., 2020). One of the interesting areas for utilizing these materials is pollutants
treatment which is due to extensive attributes of MgO nanoparticles such as high surface area
and high adsorption capacity. Cai et al. constructed highly active MgO nanoparticles and
used them for simultaneous bacterial inactivation and heavy metals (Cd2+ and Pb2+) removal
from aqueous solution (Cai et al., 2017). The proposed nanoparticles were synthesized using
sol–gel and calcination method. The prepared nanoparticles had uniform structure with di￾ameter of 20–30 nm. According to BET analysis, MgO nanoparticles had surface area of 47.85
and 5.26 m2 g1
. The other interesting property of MgO nanoparticles was their ability for
inactivation of Escherichia coli (E. coli). Results proved that addition of Cd2+ improved the in￾activation of MgO nanoparticles. After damaging bacterial cells, Cd2+ ions can enter to the
bacterial cell and thus accelerated bacterial inactivation.
In the other study, MgO and NiO nanoparticles were embedded into silica and obtained
composite was applied for removal of Zn2+, Cu2+, and Cr3+ (Abuhatab et al., 2020). The effect
of different factors was investigated, and they were optimized. The applied sorbent was ap￾plicable for removal of ions in short time. The maximum adsorption capacities were achieved
to be 37.69, 69.68, 209.51 mg/g for Zn2+, Cu2+, and Cr3+, respectively. These results proved
that applied composite is useful for application in large and industrial scales. The thermody￾namic studies confirmed that the adsorption of Zn2+, Cu2+, and Cr3+ was spontaneous, endo￾thermic, and physical for Cu2+ and Cr3+, while exothermic and chemical for Zn2+.
7.4.6 Cerium/zirconium oxide-based nanomaterials
One of the other applicable metal oxides is cerium oxide nanoparticle which have unique
properties like antioxidant attributes both in vitro and in vivo (Singh et al., 2020). The anti￾oxidant attributes of cerium oxide nanoparticles is due to redox-cycling between its states
(3+ and 4+
) ( Justeau et al., 2018). Cerium oxide nanoparticles are useful in different fields
due to its amazing properties like redox activity, free radical scavenging property, biofilm
inhibition, etc. (Rossi et al., 2019). Different synthesis methods like physical, chemical, and
biological methods have been sued for fabrication of these materials. Due to these features,
7.4 Metal oxide-based nanomaterials 145
I. Basics principlesTong and co-workers decorated ultrathin molybdenum disulfide nanosheets with cerium ox￾ide nanoparticles and applied proposed composite (MoS2/CeO2) for removal of lead (II) ions
(Tong et al., 2018). TEM analysis showed the nanosheets structure of MoS2. Also, TEM anal￾ysis proved that the CeO2 nanoparticles with size of 3–5 nm and good distribution were uni￾formly distributed on the MoS2. TGA analysis showed the good thermal stability of fabricated
composite. Effect of different factors like sorbent dosage, contact time, pH, and ionic strength
on removal process was investigated and optimized. The adsorption of Pb2+ was followed by
Langmuir isotherms model. The maximum adsorption capacity of Pb2+ was 333 mg/g at
pH 2.0. Results showed that the applied composite was also useful for adsorption of other
heavy metals. For example, adsorption capacities of Cd2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Mn2+
and Cr3+ were 3.24, 5.3, 3, 1.8, 1.3, 2.1, and 1.76 mg/g.
Zirconium oxide nanoparticles are another type of metal oxide nanoparticles which have
brilliant properties like high surface area that makes them excellent materials for adsorption
of heavy metals and removal of them (Ibrahim et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2018). Mahdavi and
co-workers synthesized bare and modified nano-zirconium oxide (ZrO2) and applied them
for removal of Cd2+, Cu2+, and Ni2+ (Mahdavi et al., 2017). SEM analysis showed that fabri￾cated ZrO2 nanoparticles had diameter of 137.8 nm with heterogeneous shapes and sizes.
According to XRD analysis, nanoparticles had crystalline structure. In this study, effective
parameters on removal process were evaluated and optimized. Results proved that the ad￾sorption process of heavy metals was followed by pseudo-second-order rate model
(R2 > 0.97) and Freundlich isotherm model. The maximum adsorption capacities of Cd2+,
Cu2+, and Ni2+ using ZrO2 nanoparticles and modified ZrO2 nanoparticles were obtained
to be 46.2, 59.7, 39.5, 29.7, 9.2, and 16.7 mg/g, respectively.
7.5 Biochar-supported NMs
Wellbeing of human community and atmosphere are facing threat from heavy metal con￾tamination. Because of ion exchange capability, wide surface area, excellent reactiveness
MNPs@BC have developed remarkable interest. Consequently, water is purified from lead,
cadmium, chromium, mercury, and arsenic using MNPs@BC (He et al., 2019). Foremost, as￾sessment of MNPs@BC functioning is achieved through its implication in wastewater for
heavy metal separation. Furthermore, removing performance of MNPs@BC for heavy metals
affected experimental factors, e.g., pH of solution, starting quantity heavy metals, concurrent
ions, and dosage. Moreover, oxidation, ion-exchange, coprecipitation, reduction, and adsorp￾tion via surface complexation and electrostatic attraction are the mechanistic techniques
followed by MNPs@BC action. In order to have a fine apprehension of mechanistic study,
elemental mapping, FT-IR, XRD, TEM, SEM, and XPS are the experimental techniques
adopted to confirm heavy metals elimination. Herein, the mechanistic approach of
MNPs@BC, result of different factors upon heavy-metals elimination and separation capabil￾ity are described. MNPs@BC is reported enormously for purifying water from heavy metals
and its capability for removing is also assessed. The obtained experimental data is examined
by employing Sips, Temkin, Langmuir-Freundlich, and Freundlich prototypes. To evaluate
the removing tendency of heavy metals second-order kinetics, intraparticle-diffusion
146 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesprototype, Elovich and first-order kinetics has been administered. Arsenic, for instance, could
be adsorbed in wastewater using biochar infused with iron-manganese-lanthanum (Lin et al.,
2019b). By utilizing chemical adsorption, arsenic has been adsorbed from compound through
second-order kinetics. A comparatively quick reaction is observed for arsenic adsorption on
composite material, i.e., equilibrium achieved in 1 h. Single-layered adsorption is detected for
arsenic on composite’s surface following Langmuir model. Arsenic demonstrated 14.9 mg/g
optimum composite’s adsorption capability. Hence, arsenic is efficiently adsorbed via com￾posite. Aqueous solutions were purified by introducing exotic nZVI and n-α-OH-Fe@BC for
cadmium elimination (Zhu et al., 2019). Chemisorption controls cadmium-adsorption on
composite and greatly elaborated via pseudo-first-order kinetics. Cadmium (II) adsorbed
quickly on composite at the rate of 2.54 and 1.17 mg/g per hour. In addition, Langmuir model
proved to be the best match for experimental results and 22.37 mg/g and 26.43 mg/g of cad￾mium (II) are the optimal adsorbing capacities of composite. Cadmium (II) elimination is an
excellent predominantly using composites in comparison to other substances. Coexisting
bisphenol A (BPA) and cuprous ions are removed from water when treated with biochar￾based Fe (0), prepared by Liu et al. in 2018 (Liu et al., 2018). On account of S2O8
2 and
bichar-based Fe (0) implying BPA and cuprous ion, the elimination capacity increased to
98% and 96%, accordingly. Biochar-based ZVI and S2O8
2 compounds were employed to pro￾ficiently clean hydrosphere from organic contaminants and heavy metals (Sun et al., 2019)
remove hetero-chloride ions, poisonous materials, instinct cations by introducing
Fe-biochar and utilizing afterwards in wastewater from damaged hydromechanical systems.
Original wastewater is treated with Fe-biochar to eliminate coexistent dissolved pollutants
with extraordinary accomplishment. Simultaneously occurring ions, dosage, quantity of
heavy metals, pH of solution in particular, and temperature are diverse operational factors
that affect elimination of heavy metals from wastewater. Rate of reaction, substances charge,
and dissolution of metal NPs are controlled by essential parameter, i.e., solution pH.
nFeS@BC, for example, has been synthesized and applied in water to eliminate chromium
(VI) (Lyu et al., 2017). Acidic environment is beneficial for removing chromium since elimi￾nation rate improved with decreased pH. In order to reduce chromium (VI), ferrous and sul￾fide ions are sufficiently provided in acidic environment through dissociation of iron sulfide.
Moreover, repulsion between composites and positively charged chromium declined in
acidic environment. Aqueous solutions were purified from copper and cadmium by synthe￾sizing and using ferromanganese oxide biochar (Zhou et al., 2018a). pH of solution has direct
relation with composite’s adsorbing capacity for copper and cadmium. Elevated pH is
demanded for adsorption of copper and cadmium because positive charge was noticed at
9.2 pH on composite’s surface. In contrast, copper and cadmium fight with H+ for adsorption
sites at lower pH value. In addition, engineering implication has dosage as the major ingre￾dient. Owing to increment in adsorption sites, for instance, separation capability improved
accordingly while increased dosage had an opposite impact on adsorbability of copper (II)
compounds of biochar/Mn-Al double-layered OH (Wang et al., 2019c). Additionally, reac￾tiveness and movement of ions are largely influenced by temperature and suggested as key
element for separation of heavy metals. Elevated temperature increased the chance of contact
between chromium (VI) and the compound, which is attributable to enhanced collision fre￾quency and hence biochar-supported nZVI effectively removed Cr (VI). Furthermore, chro￾mium (VI) is reduced to chromium (III) at elevated temperature (Zhu et al., 2018a). Lastly, the
7.5 Biochar-supported NMs 147
I. Basics principlesfunctioning of adsorbing agents is disturbed due to concurrence of ions in solutions of heavy
metals and water resources. Separation of chromium (VI) is transformed owing to concurrent
sulfate, chloride, and bicarbonate anions processed through biochar-supported Fe (0) and
was examined by Shang et al. (2017). HCO3
 can decrease distinctively the elimination pro￾ficiency of chromium (VI). In this scenario, adsorption locks have attraction not only for chro￾mium (VI) but also HCO3
 on compound’s exterior covering. Sulfate ions efficiently
expanded reactive sites over Fe (0) and initiated its corrosiveness, so its existence also
discriminatively enhanced removal of chromium (VI) while chloride ion displayed no re￾markable impact. The general mechanism of removal of various contaminants has been illus￾trated in Fig. 7.3 (Liu et al., 2020).
FIG. 7.3 The removal mechanism of the contaminants in water by MNPs@BC (Liu et al., 2020).
148 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principles7.6 Biochar-supported nanoparticles heavy metals treatment
Adsorption, stabilizing chemicals, frothing, soil corrosion, electro-kinetic treatment, and
phyto-treatment are the techniques being utilized for reducing portability of heavy metals
in biosphere (Zhai et al., 2018). Out of above given methodologies, toxic effect, biodiversity,
and portability of heavy metals have been decreased in soil using harmless MNPs@BC in soil
modification to stop heavy metals transference (Lu et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019). Moreover,
soil’s physical and chemical characteristics like pH, enzymatic functions, groups micro￾organisms, redox-potential, and organic texture get transmuted when soil is polluted with
heavy metals locally treated with MNPs@BC. Adsorption, ion exchange, precipitating com￾pounds, surface complexation, reducing chemically are the adapted pathways for
immobilizing soil residing heavy metals (Beiyuan et al., 2017). MNPs@BC functioning as im￾mobilizer was estimated and also soil remediation for heavy metals pollution was illustrated
in many research reports. Recently (Su et al., 2016a) reported that with the addition of 8 g/kg
zerovalent iron-biochar for 15 days, for instance, 100% and 92.9% were the estimated
immobilizing capacities in soil for chromium (VI) and chromium (0), respectively. Further￾more, cabbage-mustard was subjected to vessel experiment to check developing improve￾ment with the outcome of decreased phyto-toxicity of Cr (II). Transportation of soil
occupying cadmium was restricted through encouraging Fe-Mn oxide and organic-matter
generation with replaceable cadmium which was achieved by S-Fe-improved biochar treat￾ment of Cd (II) contaminated soil, synthesized by Rajendran et al. (2019), resulting reduced
aggregation of Cd (II) in rice. To revivify soil polluted with arsenic, Fe-Mn oxide infused
biochar-composites (FMBC) have been prepared and applied on rice to analyze arsenic stor￾age (Lin et al., 2017). By using Fe-Mn oxide, arsenic (III) oxidized to arsenic (V) resulting in
bigger ferromanganese panel sheet hindered the mobility of arsenic toward rice from soil,
reduced accessibility, and ultimately its aggregation and the remediation was achieved using
FMBC. Natural abundance of antimony and cadmium was decreased in plants and amelio￾rated different soil characteristics such as nutrient components, enzymatic action, pH, and
organic texture when cadmium and antimony were inactivated with iron-manganese biochar
and was presented by Wang et al. (2019a). In addition, the bioavailability of replaceable an￾timony and cadmium decreased succeeding improvement through iron-manganese￾improved biochar. Organic structure, combination of heavy metals, enzymatic performance
in soil, style of microorganism grouping, redox potential, and pH of soil are heavily
influenced by implementing MNPs@BC for depolluting heavy metals occupying soil. Plant
development, treatment, and upgradation of soil indispensably require such parameters.
Plant’s development and dissolution of heavy metals necessitate redox-potential and pH
of soil. Variation in soil’s pH could be acquired after modification with iron-manganese￾improved biochar, i.e., pH decreased with alteration and was debuted by Lin et al.
(2019a). Therefore, evolution and character of arsenic exist in soil greatly influenced by
iron-manganese-improved biochar. Further, performance of soil inhabiting microbes was
detected to be disturbed owing to soil’s elevated redox potential. With the administration
of iron-manganese-improved biochar, organic texture, leftover constituents, and iron￾manganese oxides were originated from replaceable arsenic. A betterment in enzymatic per￾formance was noticed with iron-manganese-improved biochar implication. Bioavailability of
Proteobacteria and Firmicutes increased and of Bacteroidetes diminished when arsenic
7.6 Biochar-supported nanoparticles heavy metals treatment 149
I. Basics principlespolluted soil was indemnified with iron-manganese-improved biochar. Zhou et al. (2018b)
demonstrated aggregated-biomass owing to higher accumulation of amino acids in rice after
modification with FMBC. Mobility and transference of cadmium were agitated with elevation
of pH value from 0.2 to 1.0 by means of FMBC adaptation. Furthermore, replaceable cadmium
could be decreased by implying FMBC alteration and modifying unconsumed scrap after￾wards. Rice roots were observed with ferromanganese panel after remediation by means
of FMBC. Soil-evolving chromium was remarkably disturbed after indemnification with
nZVI@BC and was introduced by Su et al. (2016b). Following alteration, harmless and secure
products, e.g., iron-manganese-oxide-tied and organic-matter-tied chromium are generated
from replaceable and CO3
2-bound chromium. Corrosion of Fe (0) and chromium (VI) are
reduced with nZVI@BC implication resulting in increment in pH of soil. Besides, bioavail￾ability of cabbage and soil prolificacy has raised after restitution with nZVI@BC. Currently,
biochar-based NPs of FePO4 application to crops increase profit and enhanced fertility
through soil renovation from cadmium pollution resulting in its diminished toxic effect
(Qiao et al., 2017). Moreover, mustard and cabbage encounter less cadmium bio-aggregation
after indemnification. Following regular variation in redox properties (Beiyuan et al., 2017)
applied dust of pine-wood-biochar to soil for analyzing phyto-availability and transportation
of arsenic in order to treat paddy fields. In paddy fields, phyto-availability and transportation
of arsenic was influenced by means of alteration in redox-potential (EH). Arsenic portability
is promoted at lower EH environment.
7.7 Heavy metals elimination via adsorption
First of all, nano-SiO2NCsimproved with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine were the compounds
utilized for adsorbing heavy metal ions simultaneously (Afkhami et al., 2010). Mn (II), Ni (II),
Co (II), Cr (III), Cd (II) and Pb (II) metal ions were analyzed for their adsorbing capacities. Al￾though, just three metal ions were detected to have maximum adsorption abilities, i.e., lead
showed 100.0 mg/g, cadmium had 83.3 mg/g and chromium exhibited 100.0 mg/g and were
calculated by Afkhami et al. (2010). NPs of MgO displayed optimum adsorbing capability, for
example, lead exhibited 2614 mg/g and cadmium showed 2294 mg/g (Xiong et al., 2015).
Moreover, improved adsorbing capacity was demonstrated by 2,4-dinitrophenylhydeazine
without any modification in the structure (Afkhami et al., 2010; Xiong et al., 2015). However
(Afkhami et al., 2010), perceived lower adsorbabilities in contrast to MgO together with
nano-SiO2-improved 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine. A combative attraction order for ions of
cadmium and lead is: Pb(II) > Cd(II), and was presented by Xiong et al. (2015). In 2014, Wang
et al. implied NPs of Fe3O4 and presented combative adsorbability of metal ions like chromium
(III) and lead (II). Lead (II) elimination was predominantly reduced to 41.4% from 80.6% in
chromium (III) environment. In particular, existence of lead (II), chromium (III) experiences
minute decrement from 42.4% to 38.5% (Wang et al., 2014). On the whole, cadmium (II) showed
less attraction for NPs than lead (II). Reusable NPs of chitosan-CH3CH(CH2)CH(O)CH2OH,
for instance, were administered for concurrent removal of nickel (II), cadmium (II), and lea
(II), and their relevant affinity sequence is: Pb > Cd > Ni (Heidari et al., 2013). Nevertheless,
150 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principleslower adsobabilities have been observed in comparison to pre-described reports for nickel,
cadmium, and lead which are calculated to be 0.87 mg/g, 1.84 mg/g, and 11.30 mg/g, respec￾tively (Heidari et al., 2013). Sepiolitewas dispensed for promptly adsorbing cadmium (II) using
uranium (V) and radio-nuclide with the collective help of framework and operation research
(Huang et al., 2015b). 16.32 mg/g of uranium (V) and 27.78 mg/g of cadmium (II) sorped ef￾ficiently through Sepiolite that is relatively high. NMs are also used in aqueous solutions to
eliminate bivalent arsenate ions having oxidation states of (III) and (V) (Luo et al., 2013). Al￾though, comparatively little variability was noticed in adsorbing capability values of arsenate
(III) and (V). NPs of graphene oxi-dehydrated ZrO2 were operated in purification of drinking
water from arsenic (III) and (V) while their respective adsobabilities were 95.15 mg/g and
84.89 mg/g (Luo et al., 2013). Adsorbing agents as NPs engenders lower adsorbability distinc￾tion for simultaneously occurring anions with superior anti-intervention. Besides extraordi￾nary recycling efficiency, 0.002 mg/L thickness was achieved using graphene oxi￾dehydrated ZrO2 NCs which is fairly lesser than 10 mg/L, the desired value of Maximum￾Contaminant-Level (MCL), reported by Luo et al. (2013). Drinkable water resources frequently
coexist AsO4
3 and Cr2O7
2 as vital poly-atomic pollutants. Cu2(CO3)(OH)2 NPs were
employed to inhibit and check AsO4
3 and Cr2O7
2 simultaneously (Saikia et al., 2011), with
57.1 mg/g and 82.2 mg/g, correspondingly, as optimal adsorbing capability. By way of com￾parative research study, in contrast to Cr2O7
2, lower adsorption was noticed on exterior of NP
of Cu2(CO3)(OH)2 with AsO4
3. Altogether adsorption-efficiencies (%) for uni-systems are
detected higher, i.e., AsO4
3 approximately 66% and Cr2O7
2 75% as compared to binary
compounds, i.e., AsO4
3 approximately 61% and Cr2O7
2 70% on account of hydrophilic
Cu2(CO3)(OH)2-supported NPs having comparative attachment of AsO4
3 and Cr2O7
2 an￾ions (Saikia et al., 2011). In 2014, Su et al. scrutinized nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) was
for application in groundwater to eliminate Cd and NO3
 pollutants. NO2 environment
denoted for 188 mg/g increment in Cd separation capability of nZVI from 40 mg/g. In addi￾tion, nZVI showed increased separation capacity for NO2 to 100% from 30% in cadmium en￾vironment. Although, there is inverse concentration relation of Cd2+ and NO2. The yield of
NO2
 is decreased from 20% to just 3% after 1 wt% gold doping of nZVI (Su et al., 2016b).
7.8 Heavy metals removal through photocatalysis
Following photocatalytic mechanism, rate and penetration of contaminant’s degradability
could be remarkably enhanced (Prihod’ko and Soboleva, 2013). Light-initiated and aided
degeneration of contaminants is termed as photocatalysis (Bora and Dutta, 2014). Reactive￾radicals production associated with photo-instigated or photo-aided degeneration of pollutants
is the backbone of fundamental oxidation-reactionmethodology (Sillanp€a€a et al., 2018). Inwater,
the basic-chemistry and procedureinvolvedin contaminants removal byway of photo-decaying
or solar-energy is well described and apprehended in various review reports (Bora and Dutta,
2014; Sillanp€a€a et al., 2018). Thus, this discussion does not include duplication. Different photo￾chemical reactions and methodologies are packed in indiscriminate title of advanced oxidation
processes (AOPs). Cleaning and remediation of water are being achieved by NPs-supported
7.8 Heavy metals removal through photocatalysis 151
I. Basics principlesAOPs to control water dearth (Bora and Dutta, 2014; Sillanp€a€a et al., 2018). Consequently, many
enhanced oxidation processes (EOPs) and advanced oxidation technologies (AOTs) supported
on AOP-related NPs were fabricated for elimination of contaminants. Herein, a brief classifica￾tion of EOPs and AOTs based on NPs has been described, relying on the nature of reactive￾radicals production, for remediation of wastewater:
1. Wastewater remediation via ultraviolet and heterogeneous-semiconductors,
2. Catalysis using light,
3. Ozonation through photocatalysis,
4. Photo-Fenton and Fenton reactions,
5. AOP technique in the absence of light; consisting electro-Fenton reaction and
SO4
2-supported AOPs.
Many endeavors are in practice applying NCs and NMs for making degeneration of con￾current contaminants better through photocatalysis, however, a number of reports are al￾ready mentioned in literature.
7.9 Photo-Fenton and Fenton reactions
Solar/light radiance along with acidic environment are required to produce OH-radicals
in the presence of catalytic Fe2+-ions and hydrogen peroxide as oxidizing agent constitute
photo-Fenton process which is a kind of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs). Fenton￾reaction is above reaction in the absence of solar radiance (Sillanp€a€a et al., 2018). Assorted
research collections distinctly indicated elimination of independent contaminants, e.g., 2,4-
dichlorophenol, enacting NPs being catalyzing agents of miscellaneous photo-Fenton or/
and Fenton (Guo et al., 2017), C8H14ClN5 (Benzaquen et al., 2017), methylene-blue (Chen
et al., 2016), methyl orange (Xu et al., 2018), pentachlorophenol (ThanhThuy et al., 2013),
rhodamine-B (Chen et al., 2013), and TBBPA (An et al., 2013a). Currently, separation of mul￾tiple contaminants by NPs with miscellaneous photo Fenton or/and Fenton was explained
tremendously. Nonetheless, there is no perfect apprehension of multiple contaminants
remediated “simultaneously” in the given literature. There is ambiguity in execution of single
constituent procedure and synchronous elimination for multiple contaminants, however,
NPs’ degrading proficiency and miscellaneous catalytic ability of photo-Fenton or/and
Fenton of NPs have been well elaborated in research reviews(An et al., 2013b), for instance,
reported decaying efficacy of 3 mmol per liter at 2.01  102 per minute, 10 μmol per liter at
5.56  102 per minute, and 30 μmol per liter at 2.21  102 per minute by introducing NPs of
bismuth ferrite for excellent degeneration. Visible-light and UV radiance exposure were dis￾pensed for phenol and methyl-orange degradation using triple-heterojunctioned NMs of
TiO2/Fe2TiO5/Fe2O3 as photo-Fenton catalyst (Deng et al., 2017). Photocatalytic and adsorp￾tive capabilities twain independently and unified form have gained noticeable interest for
purification of wastewater/water (Pi et al., 2018). The execution speed of eliminating/
degrading contaminants has been improved by collective implication of photocatalytic and
adsorptive effects (Pi et al., 2018). In-depth analysis put constraint of water refinement of
152 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesmono-contaminant instead of combined contaminants (Mu et al., 2017). Nevertheless, simul￾taneous remediation of wastewater/water for not only mono-contaminant administration
but also multi-contaminant modulation, photocatalytic and adsorptive properties have been
combinedly imposed, e.g., (1) organic contaminants and heavy metals (Benjwal and Kar,
2015), and (2) poly-organic contaminants (Chen et al., 2017). Integrating the adsorptive effect
of NCs of titania-activated carbon-carbonized epoxy (TiO2/AC/CE) in water, methylene￾blue as organic-dye, lead (II) and inorganic heavy metals adsorbed or decayed concomitantly
(Benjwal and Kar, 2015). Pristine-titanium oxide adsorbed approximately 2% while titanium
oxide/AC/CE adsorbed 26% of methylene-blue. Generally, water has been purified from
methylene-blue (approx.-90%) and lead (II) (approx.-97%) by implementing NCs of titanium
oxide/AC/CE rather using sole titanium oxide which displayed lower efficiency (Benjwal
and Kar, 2015). In addition, As (poisonous metal) and ibuprofen (medicinal) were removed
utilizing NCs of zinc-iron combined metal oxide while adsorptive and photocatalytic effects
were applied for efficient synchronous elimination of organic contaminants and metal ions
(Di et al., 2017). Ibuprofen showed degradation efficiency of 95.7% and As exhibited
176.3 mg/g optimal adsorbability when exposed to NCs of zinc-iron combined metal oxide
in single constituent approach, while solar-source radiance was used during estimation of
elimination capabilities for coexistent multi-contaminants. In comparison to As moieties, ibu￾profen degeneration is lower, however, removing efficiency of As was not changed with any
obvious effect (Di et al., 2017). However, water occupying poisonous and medicinal coetane￾ous contaminants were simultaneously eliminated by applying NCs of zinc-iron metal oxide
as NMs with N 85% performance (Di et al., 2017). In 2017, NCs of ZnO and oligoaniline were
applied by Chen et al. (2017). In synchronous degeneration of congo red, rhodamine B, and
methylene-blue for estimating degeneration through photocatalysis affected by adsorption.
Following photocatalytic approach succeeding concurrent adsorption, NPs constituting
ZnO lacking oligoaniline showed lower catalysis degeneration rate in comparison to NCs
comprising ZnO along with oligoaniline in degeneration of dye. A harmony has observed
betwixt photocatalytic constituent and adsorbent constituent existing in NCs. In addition, cat￾alyst is noticed with a complementary aid of adsorbent. Nonetheless, in the course of coex￾istent photocatalytic and adsorptive reaction, owing to decrement in degradability for Congo￾red, zinc oxide-oligoaniline NCs specification was not favorable for estimating photocatalytic
activity on account of adsorptive activity (Chen et al., 2017).
7.10 Conclusions and future perspectives
Advancement in nanotechnology provides new horizons for development of cost￾effective, efficient, and environment friendly nanomaterials. Different nanomaterials have
been comprehensively exploited for removal of heavy metals from wastewater.
Nanomaterials have excellent features as novel structural and surface characteristics which
made them valuable for purification of wastewater. Nanomaterials are excellent sorbents
and they have capability to remove ions of heavy metals even at low concentration with high
specificity, great selectivity, and high adsorption potential. In this review different
7.10 Conclusions and future perspectives 153
I. Basics principlesnanomaterials including metal-based nanomaterials, metal oxide-based nanomaterials,
biochar-based nanomaterials, and their significant applications in removal of heavy metals
from wastewater have been discussed in detail. Still there exist few bottlenecks that direly
needed to be overcome to make them excellent in wastewater purification. Most of the
nanomaterials tend to aggregate and this decreases their removal potential and their separa￾tion from aqueous media is difficult due to nano-size. The nanocomposite seems potent to
solve this issue. Still there is a need to pay attention to commercialize the employment of
nanomaterials on industrial scale for wastewater purification. Nanomaterials are not avail￾able in market so efforts should be paid to develop nanomaterials which can be easily avail￾able in market. Attention should be paid to synthesize nanomaterials by employing green
chemistry and their cost should be effective. The impact of nanomaterials and toxicities
should be taken into consideration by keeping in view the human health and environment.
It is also important to synthesize recyclable, cost-effective nanomaterials for their wide appli￾cations in daily life. Additionally, different technologies should be developed for water treat￾ment to meet the environmental pollution.
References
Abuhatab, S., El-Qanni, A., Al-Qalaq, H., Hmoudah, M., Al-Zerei, W., 2020. Effective adsorptive removal of Zn2+,
Cu2+, and Cr3+ heavy metals from aqueous solutions using silica-based embedded with NiO and MgO
nanoparticles. J. Environ. Manag. 268, 110713. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110713.
Achudume, A.C., 2009. The effect of petrochemical effluent on the water quality of Ubeji Creek in Niger Delta of Ni￾geria. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 83 (3), 410–415. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-009-9736-2.
Afkhami, A., Saber-Tehrani, M., Bagheri, H., 2010. Simultaneous removal of heavy-metal ions in wastewater samples
using nano-alumina modified with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine. J. Hazard. Mater. 181 (1), 836–844. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.05.089.
An, J., Zhu, L., Wang, N., Song, Z., Yang, Z., Du, D., Tang, H., 2013a. Photo-Fenton like degradation of tetrabromo￾bisphenol A with grapheneBiFeO3 composite as a catalyst. Chem. Eng. J. 219, 225–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2013.01.013.
An, J., Zhu, L., Zhang, Y., Tang, H., 2013b. Efficient visible light photo-Fenton-like degradation of organic pollutants
using in situ surface-modified BiFeO3 as a catalyst. J. Environ. Sci. 25 (6), 1213–1225. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1001-0742(12)60172-7.
Bagheri, A.R., Ghaedi, M., 2020. Green preparation of dual-template chitosan-based magnetic water-compatible mo￾lecularly imprinted biopolymer. Carbohydr. Polym., 116102.
Bagheri, A.R., Ghaedi, M., Asfaram, A., Bazrafshan, A.A., Jannesar, R., 2017. Comparative study on ultrasonic
assisted adsorption of dyes from single system onto Fe3O4 magnetite nanoparticles loaded on activated carbon:
experimental design methodology. Ultrason. Sonochem. 34, 294–304.
Bagheri, A.R., Arabi, M., Ghaedi, M., Ostovan, A., Wang, X., Li, J., Chen, L., 2019. Dummy molecularly imprinted
polymers based on a green synthesis strategy for magnetic solid-phase extraction of acrylamide in food samples.
Talanta 195, 390–400.
Beiyuan, J., Awad, Y.M., Beckers, F., Tsang, D.C.W., Ok, Y.S., Rinklebe, J., 2017. Mobility and phytoavailability of As
and Pb in a contaminated soil using pine sawdust biochar under systematic change of redox conditions.
Chemosphere 178, 110–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.03.022.
Benjwal, P., Kar, K.K., 2015. Simultaneous photocatalysis and adsorption based removal of inorganic and organic
impurities from water by titania/activated carbon/carbonized epoxy nanocomposite. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 3
(3), 2076–2083. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2015.07.009.
Benzaquen, T.B., Cuello, N.I., Alfano, O.M., Eimer, G.A., 2017. Degradation of atrazine over a heterogeneous photo￾fenton process with iron modified MCM-41 materials. Catal. Today 296, 51–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cattod.2017.04.021.
154 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesBian, L., Nie, J., Jiang, X., Song, M., Dong, F., Li, W., Xu, B., 2018. Selective removal of uranyl from aqueous solutions
containing a mix of toxic metal ions using core–shell MFe2O4–TiO2 nanoparticles of montmorillonite edge sites.
ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6 (12), 16267–16278.
Bilal, M., Rasheed, T., Mehmood, S., Tang, H., Ferreira, L.F.R., Bharagava, R.N., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2020. Mitigation of
environmentally-related hazardous pollutants from water matrices using nanostructured materials – a review.
Chemosphere 253, 126770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126770.
Bokare, V., Jung, J.-l., Chang, Y.-Y., Chang, Y.-S., 2013. Reductive dechlorination of octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin by
nanosized zero-valent zinc: modeling of rate kinetics and congener profile. J. Hazard. Mater. 250, 397–402.
Bora, T., Dutta, J., 2014. Applications of nanotechnology in wastewater treatment: a review. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol.
14 (1), 613–626. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.2014.8898.
Cai, Y., Li, C., Wu, D., Wang, W., Tan, F., Wang, X., Qiao, X., 2017. Highly active MgO nanoparticles for simultaneous
bacterial inactivation and heavy metal removal from aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J. 312, 158–166. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2016.11.134.
Chaussemier, M., Pourmohtasham, E., Gelus, D., Pecoul, N., Perrot, H., Ledion, J., Horner, O., 2015. State of art of
natural inhibitors of calcium carbonate scaling. A review article. Desalination 356, 47–55. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.desal.2014.10.014.
Chen, Q., Ji, F., Liu, T., Yan, P., Guan, W., Xu, X., 2013. Synergistic effect of bifunctional Co–TiO2 catalyst on degra￾dation of rhodamine B: Fenton-photo hybrid process. Chem. Eng. J. 229, 57–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2013.04.024.
Chen, W., Yang, X., Huang, J., Zhu, Y., Zhou, Y., Yao, Y., Li, C., 2016. Iron oxide containing graphene/carbon nano￾tube based carbon aerogel as an efficient E-Fenton cathode for the degradation of methyl blue. Electrochim. Acta
200, 75–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2016.03.044.
Chen, M., Bao, C., Cun, T., Huang, Q., 2017. One-pot synthesis of ZnO/oligoaniline nanocomposites with improved
removal of organic dyes in water: effect of adsorption on photocatalytic degradation. Mater. Res. Bull. 95, 459–467.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.materresbull.2017.08.017.
Cundy, A.B., Hopkinson, L., Whitby, R.L., 2008. Use of iron-based technologies in contaminated land and ground￾water remediation: a review. Sci. Total Environ. 400 (1–3), 42–51.
Deng, Y., Xing, M., Zhang, J., 2017. An advanced TiO2/Fe2TiO5/Fe2O3 triple-heterojunction with enhanced and sta￾ble visible-light-driven Fenton reaction for the removal of organic pollutants. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 211, 157–166.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.04.037.
Di, G., Zhu, Z., Zhang, H., Zhu, J., Lu, H., Zhang, W., Kuppers, S., 2017. Simultaneous removal of several pharma- €
ceuticals and arsenic on Zn-Fe mixed metal oxides: combination of photocatalysis and adsorption. Chem. Eng. J.
328, 141–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.06.112.
Fan, Y., Liu, Z., Zhan, J., 2009. Synthesis of starch-stabilized Ag nanoparticles and Hg 2+ recognition in aqueous me￾dia. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 4 (10), 1230.
Fu, F., Dionysiou, D.D., Liu, H., 2014. The use of zero-valent iron for groundwater remediation and wastewater treat￾ment: a review. J. Hazard. Mater. 267, 194–205.
Gebru, K.A., Das, C., 2018. Removal of chromium (VI) ions from aqueous solutions using amine-impregnated TiO2
nanoparticles modified cellulose acetate membranes. Chemosphere 191, 673–684.
Gholami, H., Arabi, M., Ghaedi, M., Ostovan, A., Bagheri, A.R., 2019. Column packing elimination in matrix solid
phase dispersion by using water compatible magnetic molecularly imprinted polymer for recognition of mela￾mine from milk samples. J. Chromatogr. A 1594, 13–22.
Giles, D.E., Mohapatra, M., Issa, T.B., Anand, S., Singh, P., 2011. Iron and aluminium based adsorption strategies for
removing arsenic from water. J. Environ. Manag. 92 (12), 3011–3022.
Goel, G., Kaur, S., 2012. A study on chemical contamination of water due to household laundry detergents. J. Hum.
Ecol. 38 (1), 65–69. https://doi.org/10.1080/09709274.2012.11906475.
Gopal, K., Tripathy, S.S., Bersillon, J.L., Dubey, S.P., 2007. Chlorination byproducts, their toxicodynamics and re￾moval from drinking water. J. Hazard. Mater. 140 (1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2006.10.063.
Guo, M., Weng, X., Wang, T., Chen, Z., 2017. Biosynthesized iron-based nanoparticles used as a heterogeneous cat￾alyst for the removal of 2,4-dichlorophenol. Sep. Purif. Technol. 175, 222–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
seppur.2016.11.042.
Hayat, H., Mahmood, Q., Pervez, A., Bhatti, Z.A., Baig, S.A., 2015. Comparative decolorization of dyes in textile
wastewater using biological and chemical treatment. Sep. Purif. Technol. 154, 149–153. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.seppur.2015.09.025.
References 155
I. Basics principlesHe, R., Yuan, X., Huang, Z., Wang, H., Jiang, L., Huang, J., Li, H., 2019. Activated biochar with iron-loading and its
application in removing Cr (VI) from aqueous solution. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 579, 123642.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2019.123642.
Heidari, A., Younesi, H., Mehraban, Z., Heikkinen, H., 2013. Selective adsorption of Pb(II), Cd(II), and Ni(II) ions from
aqueous solution using chitosan–MAA nanoparticles. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 61, 251–263. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2013.06.032.
Herna´ndez, F., Iba´n˜ ez, M., Portoles, T., Cervera, M.I., Sancho, J.V., Lo´pez, F.J., 2015. Advancing towards universal
screening for organic pollutants in waters. J. Hazard. Mater. 282, 86–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2014.08.006.
Huang, P., Ye, Z., Xie, W., Chen, Q., Li, J., Xu, Z., Yao, M., 2013. Rapid magnetic removal of aqueous heavy metals and
their relevant mechanisms using nanoscale zero valent iron (nZVI) particles. Water Res. 47 (12), 4050–4058.
Huang, D.-L., Chen, G.-M., Zeng, G.-M., Xu, P., Yan, M., Lai, C., He, X.-X., 2015a. Synthesis and application of mod￾ified zero-valent iron nanoparticles for removal of hexavalent chromium from wastewater. Water Air Soil Pollut.
226 (11), 375.
Huang, J., Wu, Z., Chen, L., Sun, Y., 2015b. The sorption of Cd(II) and U(VI) on sepiolite: a combined experimental and
modeling studies. J. Mol. Liq. 209, 706–712. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2015.05.047.
Iannone, F., Casiello, M., Monopoli, A., Cotugno, P., Sportelli, M.C., Picca, R.A., Nacci, A., 2017. Ionic liquids/ZnO
nanoparticles as recyclable catalyst for polycarbonate depolymerization. J. Mol. Catal. A Chem. 426, 107–116.
Ibrahim, Y., Abdulkarem, E., Naddeo, V., Banat, F., Hasan, S.W., 2019. Synthesis of super hydrophilic cellulose-alpha
zirconium phosphate ion exchange membrane via surface coating for the removal of heavy metals from waste￾water. Sci. Total Environ. 690, 167–180.
Inglezakis, V.J., Loizidou, M.D., Grigoropoulou, H.P., 2002. Equilibrium and kinetic ion exchange studies of Pb2+,
Cr3+, Fe3+ and Cu2+ on natural clinoptilolite. Water Res. 36 (11), 2784–2792. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-
1354(01)00504-8.
Ishii, S., Ksoll, W.B., Hicks, R.E., Sadowsky, M.J., 2006. Presence and growth of naturalized Escherichia coli in temper￾ate soils from Lake Superior watersheds. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72 (1), 612–621. https://doi.org/10.1128/
aem.72.1.612-621.2006.
Jelic, A., Petrovic, M., Barcelo´, D., 2012. Pharmaceuticals in drinking water. In: Barcelo´, D. (Ed.), Emerging Organic
Contaminants and Human Health. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 47–70.
Justeau, C., Vela-Gonzalez, A.V., Jourdan, A., Riess, J.G., Krafft, M.P., 2018. Adsorption of cerium salts and cerium
oxide nanoparticles on microbubbles can be induced by a fluorocarbon gas. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6 (9),
11450–11456.
Kemp, K., Griffiths, J., Campbell, S., Lovell, K., 2013. An exploration of the follow-up up needs of patients with in￾flammatory bowel disease. J. Crohn’s Colitis 7 (9), e386–e395. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crohns.2013.03.001.
Khatami, M., Varma, R.S., Zafarnia, N., Yaghoobi, H., Sarani, M., Kumar, V.G., 2018. Applications of green synthe￾sized Ag, ZnO and Ag/ZnO nanoparticles for making clinical antimicrobial wound-healing bandages. Sustain.
Chem. Pharm. 10, 9–15.
Kumar, R., Kumar, R., Kushwaha, N., Mittal, J., 2016. Ammonia gas sensing using thin film of MnO2 nanofibers. IEEE
Sensors J. 16 (12), 4691–4695.
Lajayer, B.A., Najafi, N., Moghiseh, E., Mosaferi, M., Hadian, J., 2018. Removal of heavy metals (Cu 2+ and Cd 2+)
from effluent using gamma irradiation, titanium dioxide nanoparticles and methanol. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 8 (4),
483–496.
Lee, C.S., Robinson, J., Chong, M.F., 2014. A review on application of flocculants in wastewater treatment. Process Saf.
Environ. Prot. 92 (6), 489–508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2014.04.010.
Lin, L., Gao, M., Qiu, W., Wang, D., Huang, Q., Song, Z., 2017. Reduced arsenic accumulation in indica rice (Oryza
sativa L.) cultivar with ferromanganese oxide impregnated biochar composites amendments. Environ. Pollut. 231,
479–486. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.08.001.
Lin, L., Li, Z., Liu, X., Qiu, W., Song, Z., 2019a. Effects of Fe-Mn modified biochar composite treatment on the prop￾erties of As-polluted paddy soil. Environ. Pollut. 244, 600–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.10.011.
Lin, L., Song, Z., Khan, Z.H., Liu, X., Qiu, W., 2019b. Enhanced As(III) removal from aqueous solution by Fe-Mn-La￾impregnated biochar composites. Sci. Total Environ. 686, 1185–1193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.05.480.
Lisha, K., Pradeep, T., 2009. Towards a practical solution for removing inorganic mercury from drinking water using
gold nanoparticles. Gold Bull. 42 (2), 144–152.
156 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesLiu, T., Wang, Z.-L., Sun, Y., 2015. Manipulating the morphology of nanoscale zero-valent iron on pumice for removal
of heavy metals from wastewater. Chem. Eng. J. 263, 55–61.
Liu, C.-M., Diao, Z.-H., Huo, W.-Y., Kong, L.-J., Du, J.-J., 2018. Simultaneous removal of Cu2+ and bisphenol A by a
novel biochar-supported zero valent iron from aqueous solution: synthesis, reactivity and mechanism. Environ.
Pollut. 239, 698–705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.04.084.
Liu, J., Jiang, J., Meng, Y., Aihemaiti, A., Xu, Y., Xiang, H., Chen, X., 2020. Preparation, environmental application and
prospect of biochar-supported metal nanoparticles: a review. J. Hazard. Mater. 388, 122026.
Lofrano, G., Brown, J., 2010. Wastewater management through the ages: a history of mankind. Sci. Total Environ. 408
(22), 5254–5264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2010.07.062.
Lu, L., Shan, R., Shi, Y., Wang, S., Yuan, H., 2019. A novel TiO2/biochar composite catalysts for photocatalytic deg￾radation of methyl orange. Chemosphere 222, 391–398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.01.132.
Luo, J., Zhang, Q., Garcia-Martinez, J., Suib, S.L., 2008. Adsorptive and acidic properties, reversible lattice oxygen
evolution, and catalytic mechanism of cryptomelane-type manganese oxides as oxidation catalysts. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 130 (10), 3198–3207.
Luo, X., Wang, C., Wang, L., Deng, F., Luo, S., Tu, X., Au, C., 2013. Nanocomposites of graphene oxide-hydrated zir￾conium oxide for simultaneous removal of As(III) and As(V) from water. Chem. Eng. J. 220, 98–106. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.01.017.
Lyu, H., Tang, J., Huang, Y., Gai, L., Zeng, E.Y., Liber, K., Gong, Y., 2017. Removal of hexavalent chromium from
aqueous solutions by a novel biochar supported nanoscale iron sulfide composite. Chem. Eng. J. 322, 516–524.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.04.058.
Mahanty, S., Chatterjee, S., Ghosh, S., Tudu, P., Gaine, T., Bakshi, M., Chaudhuri, P., 2020. Synergistic approach to￾wards the sustainable management of heavy metals in wastewater using mycosynthesized iron oxide
nanoparticles: biofabrication, adsorptive dynamics and chemometric modeling study. J. Water Process Eng. 37,
101426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101426.
Mahdavi, S., Amini, N., Merrikhpour, H., Akhzari, D., 2017. Characterization of bare and modified nano-zirconium
oxide (ZrO2) and their applications as adsorbents for the removal of bivalent heavy metals. Korean J. Chem. Eng.
34 (1), 234–244. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11814-016-0259-3.
Mahmoud, M.E., Saleh, M.M., Zaki, M.M., Nabil, G.M., 2020. A sustainable nanocomposite for removal of heavy
metals from water based on crosslinked sodium alginate with iron oxide waste material from steel industry. J.
Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (4), 104015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104015.
Medhi, R., Marquez, M.D., Lee, T.R., 2020. Visible-light-active doped metal oxide nanoparticles: review of their syn￾thesis, properties, and applications. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 3 (7), 6156–6185. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsanm.0c01035.
Mu, C., Zhang, Y., Cui, W., Liang, Y., Zhu, Y., 2017. Removal of bisphenol A over a separation free 3D Ag3PO4-
graphene hydrogel via an adsorption-photocatalysis synergy. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 212, 41–49. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.04.018.
Nguyen, D.T.C., Dang, H.H., Vo, D.-V.N., Bach, L.G., Nguyen, T.D., Van Tran, T., 2020. Biogenic synthesis of MgO
nanoparticles from different extracts (flower, bark, leaf ) of Tecoma stans (L.) and their utilization in selected or￾ganic dyes treatment. J. Hazard. Mater. 404, 124146.
O’Carroll, D., Sleep, B., Krol, M., Boparai, H., Kocur, C., 2013. Nanoscale zero valent iron and bimetallic particles for
contaminated site remediation. Adv. Water Resour. 51, 104–122.
Ojea-Jimenez, I., Lo´pez, X., Arbiol, J., Puntes, V., 2012. Citrate-coated gold nanoparticles as smart scavengers for mer￾cury (II) removal from polluted waters. ACS Nano 6 (3), 2253–2260.
Oller, I., Malato, S., Sa´nchez-Perez, J.A., 2011. Combination of advanced oxidation processes and biological treatments
for wastewater decontamination—a review. Sci. Total Environ. 409 (20), 4141–4166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2010.08.061.
Pi, Y., Li, X., Xia, Q., Wu, J., Li, Y., Xiao, J., Li, Z., 2018. Adsorptive and photocatalytic removal of persistent organic
pollutants (POPs) in water by metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Chem. Eng. J. 337, 351–371. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2017.12.092.
Prabhakar, R., Samadder, S.R., 2018. Low cost and easy synthesis of aluminium oxide nanoparticles for arsenite re￾moval from groundwater: a complete batch study. J. Mol. Liq. 250, 192–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2017.11.173.
Pradhan, N., Pal, A., Pal, T., 2002. Silver nanoparticle catalyzed reduction of aromatic nitro compounds. Colloids Surf.
A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 196 (2–3), 247–257.
References 157
I. Basics principlesPrihod’ko, R.V., Soboleva, N.M., 2013. Photocatalysis: oxidative processes in water treatment. J. Chem. 2013, 168701.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/168701.
Qiao, Y., Wu, J., Xu, Y., Fang, Z., Zheng, L., Cheng, W., Zhao, D., 2017. Remediation of cadmium in soil by
biochar-supported iron phosphate nanoparticles. Ecol. Eng. 106, 515–522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoleng.2017.06.023.
Rajendran, M., Shi, L., Wu, C., Li, W., An, W., Liu, Z., Xue, S., 2019. Effect of sulfur and sulfur-iron modified biochar on
cadmium availability and transfer in the soil–rice system. Chemosphere 222, 314–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2019.01.149.
Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., 2019. Luminescent metal-organic frameworks as potential sensory materials for various en￾vironmental toxic agents. Coord. Chem. Rev. 401, 213065. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2019.213065.
Rasheed, T., Bilal, M., Nabeel, F., Iqbal, H.M., Li, C., Zhou, Y., 2018a. Fluorescent sensor based models for the detec￾tion of environmentally-related toxic heavy metals. Sci. Total Environ. 615, 476–485.
Rasheed, T., Li, C., Bilal, M., Yu, C., Iqbal, H.M., 2018b. Potentially toxic elements and environmentally-related pol￾lutants recognition using colorimetric and ratiometric fluorescent probes. Sci. Total Environ. 640, 174–193.
Rasheed, T., Li, C., Fu, L., Nabeel, F., Yu, C., Gong, L., Zhou, Y., 2018c. Development and characterization of newly
engineered chemosensor with intracellular monitoring potentialities and lowest detection of toxic elements. J.
Mol. Liq. 272, 440–449. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2018.09.112.
Rasheed, T., Li, C., Nabeel, F., Qi, M., Zhang, Y., Yu, C., 2018d. Real-time probing of mercury using an efficient “turn￾on” strategy with potential as in-field mapping kit and in live cell imaging. New J. Chem. 42 (13), 10940–10946.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C8NJ01746H.
Rasheed, T., Li, C., Zhang, Y., Nabeel, F., Peng, J., Qi, J., Yu, C., 2018e. Rhodamine-based multianalyte colorimetric
probe with potentialities as on-site assay kit and in biological systems. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 258, 115–124.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2017.11.100.
Rasheed, T., Li, C., Nabeel, F., Huang, W., Zhou, Y., 2019a. Self-assembly of alternating copolymer vesicles for the
highly selective, sensitive and visual detection and quantification of aqueous Hg2+. Chem. Eng. J. 358,
101–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.09.216.
Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., Adeel, M., Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2019b. “Turn-on” fluorescent sensor-based probing of
toxic Hg(II) and Cu(II) with potential intracellular monitoring. Biocatal. Agric. Biotechnol. 17, 696–701.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcab.2019.01.032.
Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., Adeel, M., Rizwan, K., Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2019c. Carbon nanotubes-based cues: a path￾way to future sensing and detection of hazardous pollutants. J. Mol. Liq. 292, 111425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2019.111425.
Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., Li, C., Bilal, M., 2019d. Rhodamine-assisted fluorescent strategy for the sensitive and selective
in-field mapping of environmental pollutant Hg(II) with potential bioimaging. J. Lumin. 208, 519–526. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jlumin.2019.01.032.
Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., Li, C., Zhang, Y., 2019e. Rhodol assisted alternating copolymer based chromogenic vesicles for
the aqueous detection and quantification of hydrazine via switch-on strategy. J. Mol. Liq. 274, 461–469. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2018.11.014.
Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., Shafi, S., 2019f. Chromogenic vesicles for aqueous detection and quantification of Hg2+/Cu2
+ in real water samples. J. Mol. Liq. 282, 489–498. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.03.048.
Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., Shafi, S., Bilal, M., Rizwan, K., 2019g. Block copolymer self-assembly mediated aggregation
induced emission for selective recognition of picric acid. J. Mol. Liq. 296, 111966. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2019.111966.
Rasheed, T., Hassan, A.A., Bilal, M., Hussain, T., Rizwan, K., 2020a. Metal-organic frameworks based adsorbents: a
review from removal perspective of various environmental contaminants from wastewater. Chemosphere 259,
127369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127369.
Rasheed, T., Rizwan, K., Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2020b. Metal-organic framework-based engineered materials—
fundamentals and applications. Molecules 25 (7). https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules25071598.
Richardson, S.D., Plewa, M.J., Wagner, E.D., Schoeny, R., DeMarini, D.M., 2007. Occurrence, genotoxicity, and car￾cinogenicity of regulated and emerging disinfection by-products in drinking water: a review and roadmap for
research. Mutat. Res. Rev. Mutat. Res. 636 (1), 178–242. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2007.09.001.
Rossi, L., Bagheri, M., Zhang, W., Chen, Z., Burken, J.G., Ma, X., 2019. Using artificial neural network to investigate
physiological changes and cerium oxide nanoparticles and cadmium uptake by Brassica napus plants. Environ.
Pollut. 246, 381–389.
158 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesSaikia, J., Saha, B., Das, G., 2011. Efficient removal of chromate and arsenate from individual and mixed system by
malachite nanoparticles. J. Hazard. Mater. 186 (1), 575–582. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.11.036.
Salem, I.A., Salem, M.A., El-Ghobashy, M.A., 2017. The dual role of ZnO nanoparticles for efficient capture of heavy
metals and acid blue 92 from water. J. Mol. Liq. 248, 527–538. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2017.10.060.
Sarkar, B., Chakrabarti, P.P., Vijaykumar, A., Kale, V., 2006. Wastewater treatment in dairy industries—possibility of
reuse. Desalination 195 (1), 141–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2005.11.015.
Sawan, S., Maalouf, R., Errachid, A., Jaffrezic-Renault, N., 2020. Metal and metal oxide nanoparticles in the
voltammetric detection of heavy metals: a review. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 131, 116014. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.trac.2020.116014.
Sedlak, D.L., von Gunten, U., 2011. The chlorine dilemma. Science 331 (6013), 42. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1196397.
Sengul, A.B., Asmatulu, E., 2020. Toxicity of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles: a review. Environ. Chem. Lett.,
1–25.
Seyedi, S.M., Rabiee, H., Shahabadi, S.M.S., Borghei, S.M., 2017. Synthesis of zero-valent iron nanoparticles via elec￾trical wire explosion for efficient removal of heavy metals. CLEAN–Soil Air Water 45 (3), 1600139.
Shang, J., Zong, M., Yu, Y., Kong, X., Du, Q., Liao, Q., 2017. Removal of chromium (VI) from water using nanoscale
zerovalent iron particles supported on herb-residue biochar. J. Environ. Manag. 197, 331–337. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.03.085.
Sharifan, H., Moore, J., Ma, X., 2020. Zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles elevated iron and copper contents and mitigated
the bioavailability of lead and cadmium in different leafy greens. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 191, 110177.
Shin, M., Lee, H.-J., Kim, M.S., Park, N.-B., Lee, C., 2017. Control of the red tide dinoflagellate Cochlodinium
polykrikoides by ozone in seawater. Water Res. 109, 237–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.11.050.
Sillanp€a€a, M., Ncibi, M.C., Matilainen, A., 2018. Advanced oxidation processes for the removal of natural organic
matter from drinking water sources: a comprehensive review. J. Environ. Manag. 208, 56–76. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.12.009.
Silva, M., Murzin, V., Zhang, L., Baltrus, J., Baltrusaitis, J., 2020. Transition metal-doped MgO nanoparticles for nu￾trient recycling: an alternate Mg source for struvite synthesis from wastewater. Environ. Sci.: Nano 7 (11),
3482–3496.
Singh, K.R.B., Nayak, V., Sarkar, T., Singh, R.P., 2020. Cerium oxide nanoparticles: properties, biosynthesis and bio￾medical application. RSC Adv. 10 (45), 27194–27214. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0RA04736H.
Sneed, M.C., Brasted, R.C., King, C., 1956. Comprehensive inorganic chemistry. J. Electrochem. Soc. 103 (3), 83C.
Soejima, T., Nishizawa, K., Isoda, R., 2018. Monodisperse manganese oxide nanoparticles: synthesis, characterization,
and chemical reactivity. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 510, 272–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2017.09.082.
Sorg, T.J., 2000. Regulations on the Disposal of Arsenic Residuals from Drinking Water Treatment Plants. Science
Applications International Corporation Reston, Virginia.
Srinivasan, N., Shankar, P., Bandyopadhyaya, R., 2013. Plasma treated activated carbon impregnated with silver
nanoparticles for improved antibacterial effect in water disinfection. Carbon 57, 1–10.
Su, Q., Pan, B., Wan, S., Zhang, W., Lv, L., 2010. Use of hydrous manganese dioxide as a potential sorbent for selective
removal of lead, cadmium, and zinc ions from water. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 349 (2), 607–612. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcis.2010.05.052.
Su, Y., Adeleye, A.S., Huang, Y., Sun, X., Dai, C., Zhou, X., Keller, A.A., 2014. Simultaneous removal of cadmium and
nitrate in aqueous media by nanoscale zerovalent iron (nZVI) and Au doped nZVI particles. Water Res. 63,
102–111.
Su, H., Fang, Z., Tsang, P.E., Fang, J., Zhao, D., 2016a. Stabilisation of nanoscale zero-valent iron with biochar for en￾hanced transport and in-situ remediation of hexavalent chromium in soil. Environ. Pollut. 214, 94–100. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.03.072.
Su, H., Fang, Z., Tsang, P.E., Zheng, L., Cheng, W., Fang, J., Zhao, D., 2016b. Remediation of hexavalent chromium
contaminated soil by biochar-supported zero-valent iron nanoparticles. J. Hazard. Mater. 318, 533–540. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.07.039.
Subramanian, N., Viswanathan, B., Varadarajan, T.K., 2014. A facile, morphology-controlled synthesis of potassium￾containing manganese oxide nanostructures for electrochemical supercapacitor application. RSC Adv. 4 (64),
33911–33922.
Sumesh, E., Bootharaju, M., Pradeep, T., 2011. A practical silver nanoparticle-based adsorbent for the removal of Hg2
+ from water. J. Hazard. Mater. 189 (1–2), 450–457.
References 159
I. Basics principlesSun, Q., Li, J., Le, T., 2018. Zinc oxide nanoparticle as a novel class of antifungal agents: current advances and future
perspectives. J. Agric. Food Chem. 66 (43), 11209–11220.
Sun, Y., Yu, I.K.M., Tsang, D.C.W., Cao, X., Lin, D., Wang, L., Li, X.-D., 2019. Multifunctional iron-biochar composites
for the removal of potentially toxic elements, inherent cations, and hetero-chloride from hydraulic fracturing
wastewater. Environ. Int. 124, 521–532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.01.047.
Tamura, H., Katayama, N., Furuichi, R., 1996. Modeling of ion-exchange reactions on metal oxides with the frumkin
isotherm. 1. Acid–base and charge characteristics of MnO2, TiO2, Fe3O4, and Al2O3 surfaces and adsorption af￾finity of alkali metal ions. Environ. Sci. Technol. 30 (4), 1198–1204.
Tang, W.-W., Zeng, G.-M., Gong, J.-L., Liu, Y., Wang, X.-Y., Liu, Y.-Y., Tu, D.-Z., 2012. Simultaneous adsorption of
atrazine and Cu(II) from wastewater by magnetic multi-walled carbon nanotube. Chem. Eng. J. 211-212,
470–478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2012.09.102.
ThanhThuy, T.T., Feng, H., Cai, Q., 2013. Photocatalytic degradation of pentachlorophenol on ZnSe/TiO2 supported
by photo-Fenton system. Chem. Eng. J. 223, 379–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.03.025.
Tong, S., Deng, H., Wang, L., Huang, T., Liu, S., Wang, J., 2018. Multi-functional nanohybrid of ultrathin molybdenum
disulfide nanosheets decorated with cerium oxide nanoparticles for preferential uptake of lead (II) ions. Chem.
Eng. J. 335, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.10.056.
Tratnyek, P.G., Sarathy, V., Nurmi, J.T., 2009. Aging of Iron Nanoparticles in Water: Effects on Structure and
Reactivity.
Unuabonah, E.I., Ugwuja, C.G., Omorogie, M.O., Adewuyi, A., Oladoja, N.A., 2018. Clays for efficient disinfection of
bacteria in water. Appl. Clay Sci. 151, 211–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clay.2017.10.005.
Vesali-Kermani, E., Habibi-Yangjeh, A., Ghosh, S., 2020. Visible-light-induced nitrogen photofixation ability of
g-C3N4 nanosheets decorated with MgO nanoparticles. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 84, 185–195.
Vickers, N.J., 2017. Animal communication: when I’m calling you, will you answer too? Curr. Biol. 27 (14), R713–R715.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.05.064.
Wan, S., Qiu, L., Tang, G., Chen, W., Li, Y., Gao, B., He, F., 2020. Ultrafast sequestration of cadmium and lead from
water by manganese oxide supported on a macro-mesoporous biochar. Chem. Eng. J. 387, 124095. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.124095.
Wang, T., Jin, X., Chen, Z., Megharaj, M., Naidu, R., 2014. Simultaneous removal of Pb(II) and Cr(III) by magnetite
nanoparticles using various synthesis conditions. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 20 (5), 3543–3549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jiec.2013.12.047.
Wang, Y.-Y., Ji, H.-Y., Lyu, H.-H., Liu, Y.-X., He, L.-L., You, L.-C., Yang, S.-M., 2019a. Simultaneous alleviation of Sb
and cd availability in contaminated soil and accumulation in Lolium multiflorum lam. After amendment with Fe–
Mn-Modified biochar. J. Clean. Prod. 231, 556–564. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.407.
Wang, D., Wang, P., Wang, C., Ao, Y., 2019b. Effects of interactions between humic acid and heavy metal ions on the
aggregation of TiO2 nanoparticles in water environment. Environ. Pollut. 248, 834–844.
Wang, S., Zhao, M., Zhou, M., Li, Y.C., Wang, J., Gao, B., Ok, Y.S., 2019c. Biochar-supported nZVI (nZVI/BC) for
contaminant removal from soil and water: a critical review. J. Hazard. Mater. 373, 820–834. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.03.080.
Wei, G., Qi, J., Lin, P., Pan, S., Sun, X., Shen, J., Li, J., 2018. Polyethersulfone enwrapped hydrous zirconium oxide
nanoparticles for efficient removal of Pb (II) from aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J. 349, 500–508.
Weiss, S., Jakobs, J., Reemtsma, T., 2006. Discharge of three Benzotriazole corrosion inhibitors with municipal waste￾water and improvements by membrane bioreactor treatment and ozonation. Environ. Sci. Technol. 40 (23),
7193–7199. https://doi.org/10.1021/es061434i.
Wing, S., Lowman, A., Keil, A., Marshall, S.W., 2014. Odors from sewage sludge and livestock: associations with self￾reported health. Public Health Rep. 129 (6), 505–515. https://doi.org/10.1177/003335491412900609.
Xiong, C., Wang, W., Tan, F., Luo, F., Chen, J., Qiao, X., 2015. Investigation on the efficiency and mechanism of Cd(II)
and Pb(II) removal from aqueous solutions using MgO nanoparticles. J. Hazard. Mater. 299, 664–674. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.08.008.
Xu, H.-Y., Li, B., Shi, T.-N., Wang, Y., Komarneni, S., 2018. Nanoparticles of magnetite anchored onto few-layer
graphene: a highly efficient Fenton-like nanocomposite catalyst. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 532, 161–170. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2018.07.128.
Yabuuchi, N., Komaba, S., 2014. Recent research progress on iron-and manganese-based positive electrode materials
for rechargeable sodium batteries. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 15 (4), 043501.
160 7. Nanomaterials for removal of heavy metals from wastewater
I. Basics principlesYagub, M.T., Sen, T.K., Afroze, S., Ang, H.M., 2014. Dye and its removal from aqueous solution by adsorption: a re￾view. Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. 209, 172–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2014.04.002.
Yu, L., Han, M., He, F., 2017. A review of treating oily wastewater. Arab. J. Chem. 10, S1913–S1922. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.arabjc.2013.07.020.
Yu, H., Zou, W., Chen, J., Chen, H., Yu, Z., Huang, J., Gao, B., 2019. Biochar amendment improves crop production in
problem soils: a review. J. Environ. Manag. 232, 8–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.10.117.
Zarime, N.A., Yaacob, W.Z.W., Jamil, H., 2018. Removal of heavy metals using bentonite supported nano-zero valent
iron particles. In: Paper Presented at the AIP Conference Proceedings.
Zhai, X., Li, Z., Huang, B., Luo, N., Huang, M., Zhang, Q., Zeng, G., 2018. Remediation of multiple heavy metal￾contaminated soil through the combination of soil washing and in situ immobilization. Sci. Total Environ. 635,
92–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.119.
Zhang, W.-x., 2003. Nanoscale iron particles for environmental remediation: an overview. J. Nanopart. Res. 5 (3–4),
323–332.
Zhang, Y., Wu, B., Xu, H., Liu, H., Wang, M., He, Y., Pan, B., 2016. Nanomaterials-enabled water and wastewater
treatment. NanoImpact 3, 22–39.
Zhou, Q., Liao, B., Lin, L., Qiu, W., Song, Z., 2018a. Adsorption of Cu(II) and Cd(II) from aqueous solutions by fer￾romanganese binary oxide–biochar composites. Sci. Total Environ. 615, 115–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.09.220.
Zhou, Q., Lin, L., Qiu, W., Song, Z., Liao, B., 2018b. Supplementation with ferromanganese oxide–impregnated
biochar composite reduces cadmium uptake by indica rice (Oryza sativa L.). J. Clean. Prod. 184, 1052–1059.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.02.248.
Zhu, S., Huang, X., Wang, D., Wang, L., Ma, F., 2018a. Enhanced hexavalent chromium removal performance and
stabilization by magnetic iron nanoparticles assisted biochar in aqueous solution: mechanisms and application
potential. Chemosphere 207, 50–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.05.046.
Zhu, N., Qiao, J., Ye, Y., Yan, T., 2018b. Synthesis of mesoporous bismuth-impregnated aluminum oxide for arsenic
removal: adsorption mechanism study and application to a lab-scale column. J. Environ. Manag. 211, 73–82.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.01.049.
Zhu, L., Tong, L., Zhao, N., Li, J., Lv, Y., 2019. Coupling interaction between porous biochar and nano zero valent
iron/nano α-hydroxyl iron oxide improves the remediation efficiency of cadmium in aqueous solution.
Chemosphere 219, 493–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.12.013.
Zvizdic, S., Rodinis-Pejic, I., Avdic-Kamberovic, F., Mujkic, A., Hamzic, S., Puvacic, S., Kudumovic, M., 2005. Viruses
in water. Med. Arh. 59 (6), 378–381.
References 161
I. Basics principlesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
8
Nanosorbents for heavy metals
removal
Tahir Rasheeda
, Fahmeeda Kausarb
, Sameera Shafic
,
and Muhammad Bilald
a
Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum
and Minerals (KFUPM), Dhahran, Saudi Arabia b
School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China c
Institute of Chemistry, The Islamia University
of Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur, Pakistan d
School of Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin
Institute of Technology, Huaian, China
8.1 Introduction
Environmental pollution got great concern encircling not only industrialized countries, but
also developing countries through industrial revolution. It is already well apprehended that
soil, water, and air are the principal abundant factors for human beings, nevertheless, the fun￾damental necessity for life on earth for all creatures is water. Although, the health of humans
is severely affected by environmental pollution. For developing countries, noteworthy, envi￾ronmental sanitation of soil, air, and water and strategies for their protection is of keen atten￾tion around the globe. Unluckily, the recyclability, efficiency, cost, and environmental benign
persist as challenges for remediation of pollution. Organic materials like pesticides, deter￾gents, biomaterials and pharmaceuticals, and inorganic pollutants suchlike arsenic ions
and heavy metals (metals with atomic numbers higher than 20) are the major contaminants
that exist in water that includes tape, ground and surface water. Usually, arsenic exists as an￾ions mostly in the form of arsenite AsO3
3, arsenate AsO4
3, etc., while heavy metals are
generally found as cations for example Hg2+, Pb2+, Cd2+, Cr(VI) ions, As(V), As3+, Co2+,
Ni2+, Cu2+, Ag+
, and Zn2+ ions. The human body can develop fatal diseases due to non￾biodegradable heavy metal accumulation, therefore, water pollution owing to heavy metals
has become a critical issue for public health.
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 163 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00008-3Water is purified from biomaterials, organic contaminants, and toxic elements by follow￾ing physical, biological, and chemical strategies. The old methodologies (Fu and Wang, 2011)
implied for heavy metal remediation relating water mainly include precipitation of
chemicals, adsorption (Srivastava et al., 2011), ion-exchange, filtration through membranes,
reverse-osmosis, flocculation and coagulation, extraction and flotation, excitation, electro￾chemical remediation methods, modern oxidation reactions and biosorption technique. For
the remediation, two to many strategies operate synergistically in most of the cases. Out of
these methods, bacterial pathogens and heavy metals are removed proficiently from water
through adsorption, a conventional and basic purpose technique. For instance, activated￾carbons minerals from clay, compounds for chelation, and natural zeolite like chitosan are
commonly implied in water for heavy metal adsorption. The specialized reagents make pre￾cipitates after reactions with heavy metals through chemical precipitation method. Generally,
the inorganic precipitants, organic polymers, and organic chelating reagents are the three
kinds of reagents that have been utilized.
Conventionally, precipitants of inorganic origin incorporate either hydroxides, e.g., CaO,
NaOH, Ca(OH)2, or sulfide. Ad interim, diverse freshwater treatment is in practice via organic
chelating reagents like N,N-bis(carboxymethyl)glutamic acid, citric acid, ammonium
diethyldithiocarbamate, ethylenediamine-N,N-disuccinic acid (Race et al., 2016),
diethylenetriamine-pentaacetic acid and ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid, derivatives of
thiosemicarbazone (Koduru and Lee, 2014). Heavy metals could also be removed by chelating
employing nanomaterials whose surface has been modified proficiently through the above￾mentioned organic chelating reagents. Concurrently, biosensors fabricated with organic and
bioorganicmolecules could be advantageous for the separation of heavymetals fromwastewater
such as cryptophane (Tassali et al., 2014) and derivatives of oligonucleotide (Li et al., 2016). Be￾sides, multi-functional groups like –OH, –NH2 and –COOH constituting organic polymers such
as polyaniline, polystyrene, also work in water for heavy metal extraction. The treatment effi￾ciency greatly enhanced on the ground of advancement in nanotechnology, a proficient alterna￾tive for the cause.
NMs having the standard size of 1–100 nm, bear peculiar chemical and physical character￾istics namely specific affinity, surface activity, and large surface area. Nevertheless, NMs have
fascinated distinctive attentiveness regarding probing and removing organic, inorganic con￾taminants, and inorganic heavy metals from water. Consequently, the modern development
of NMs and nanotechnology present mind-blowing opportunities for environmental sustain￾ability and water treatment. Currently, carbon-based NMs prepared with transfiguration of
agricultural junk, for instance, crap shell, sawdust and bark have engrossed a fair deal of atten￾tion for the treatment ofwater.Remarkable endeavors have beenmade for bench-scale research
study and in-field implications, for example, magnetic NMs (Iram et al., 2010), nanotubes of
carbon (Upadhyayula et al., 2009), activated-carbon, NMs of transition metals with zero
valency. Organic polymers or organic small molecules have been practiced to embellish
core/shell structures of nanoparticles (NPs). The NMs have precedence owing to efficiency
and elevated adsorption ability. There are some limitations too such as eco-concern, poor re￾cyclability, and expensiveness. Currently, the threat for health is under strict inspection yet.
To date, numerous works have been reported in different published reviews comprising
graphene/graphene oxide (G/GO), carbon nanotubes and metal-oxide NMs, etc. (Kyzas and
Matis, 2015). This chapter particularly limelight NMs for heavy metal removal from water
164 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlescovering wastewater, groundwater, and tape water. Herein, the NMs focuses on two classes:
(1) Organic NMs and (2) Inorganic NMs. Although, the earlier contains carbon/silicon￾based NMs and transition metal/sulfide/oxide NPs. The composition of the latter is
polymer-based organic nanocomposites and polymer organic NMs. Moreover, organic poly￾mers utilized as nanocomposites provide sustenance for cores of inorganic NPs, an overlap
between polymer-based organic NMs and inorganic NMs is noticed to some expanse. More￾over, the elaborated procedure for manufacturing and analysis of NMs, including treatments
for organic contaminants, together with the implication of biomass as biosorbents are far off of
this research topic. Also, the fabrication of NMs acting as nanofiltration-membranes, is not
described in this chapter.
8.2 Inorganic NMs
Generally, inorganic NMs are classified as sulfide/oxide/metal NMs, inorganic NMs are
divided into transition metal/sulfides/oxides NMs, silica-architectured NMs, carbon-rooted
NMs like graphene and other similar nanocomposites. On the ground of distinctive attributes,
nanoparticles (NPs) composed of transition metal oxides and metals are widely implied to
wastewater for heavy metal ions removal, though, there is grave concern NPs aggregation.
In the consequence, these materials vitally advocate NPs regarding recyclability and durabil￾ity (Astruc et al., 2005). These materials involve inorganic frameworks, organic polymers and
small organic molecules. Normally, the nature of organic polymers is synthetic like biopoly￾mers, e.g., chitosan and cellulose, polyaniline, or polystyrene. Therefore, the supports made
of organometallic or inorganic polymers have not been implied for such a motive. Magnetic
NPs such as Fe3O4@-SiO2, Ni@SiO2, Fe3O4 and Fe3C have been competently investigated as
one of the distant inorganic NMs. Shells and elements with magnetic core are utilized in mag￾netic NPs are fabrication of NPs. Fig. 8.1 portrays the functionalization of NPs with EDTA
FIG. 8.1 EDTA functionalized magnetic nanoparticle sorbents for cadmium and lead contaminated water treat￾ment. Reproduced with permission from Huang, Y., & Keller, A.A., EDTA functionalized magnetic nanoparticle sorbents
for cadmium and lead contaminated water treatment. Water Res. 80 (2015) 159–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.
05.011. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.
8.2 Inorganic NMs 165
I. Basics principles(Huang and Keller, 2015), while the magnetic core is likely nickel, iron, cobalt, or relevant al￾loys and oxides residing superparamagnetic/ferromagnetic characteristics, instead, the con￾stituents of shells are inorganic like SiO2 (Mashhadizadeh and Amoli-Diva, 2013), surfactants,
and organic polymers. The magnetic NPs in inorganic–organic hybrid form, which could be
separated comfortably by an external magnetic field, remove toxic elements from water in a
selective manner. Water is purified from Cd2+, Cu2+ and Pb2+ by applying magnetic
nanocomposites which furnish feasible proficient, and fast aid.
8.2.1 Transition metal oxide NMs
Iron oxide NMs
Three forms of iron oxide NMs (maghemite (c-Fe2O3), magnetite (Fe3O4), and hematite
(a-Fe2O3) NPs act efficiently as photocatalysts and nanosorbents for removing organic and
inorganic pollutants along with lethal heavy metal ions from water. Iron-oxide NMs have
photolytic properties and implications regarding organic contaminants photodecomposition
is not the interest of present topic. In addition, biomass could be capably immobilized by iron￾oxide nanomaterials (S
ˇulek et al., 2010).
Magnetic (Fe3O4) NMs
Numerous supports of organic and inorganic origin for magnetic Fe3O4 NPs stabilization
have been broadly scrutinized to remove pollutants out of water. Mostly, NPs are stabilized
by organic polymers. Heavy metals such as Cd2+, Zn2+, and Cu2+ could efficiently be
adsorbed by utilizing, for instance, magnetic Fe3O4 implanted with polyethyleneimine
(PEI) (Pang et al., 2011). As III and As V could be adsorbed by NPs of polystyrene-based
hydrated Fe2O3 (Cumbal and SenGupta, 2005). Coating of magnetic Fe3O4 NPs
was achieved through Poly(glycidylmethacrylate) (PGMA) by way of general radical poly￾merization, following linking of the surface of NPs with b-cyclodextrin (b-CD). The attained
magnetic NPs proved to have satisfactory interaction with a few environmental pollutants,
e.g., copper ions and bisphenol A (Wang et al., 2014). Following the carbodiimide method in
aqueous solutions, the magnetic surface of Fe3O4 NPs modified with carboxymethyl-b￾CD grafted with carboxymethyl-b-CD, efficaciously extracted Cu ions (Badruddoza et al.,
2011). To modify Fe3O4 NPs, copolymers of crotonic acid and acrylic acid, and
3-Aminopropyltriethoxysilane were utilized to remove ions of Cu2+, Pb2+, Zn2+ and Cd2+
(F. Ge et al., 2012).
NPs stand on amine-functionalized Fe3O4, magnetic-chitosan NCs are fabricated through
biopolymer, i.e., naturally occurring chitosan. Additionally, NPs are broadly balanced by im￾plying small molecules of organic origin (Zargoosh et al., 2013). Heavy metal ions, for in￾stance, as well as Co2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, and Pb2+ ions could be taken out of the
industrial waste possibly through improving the surface of Fe3O4 NPs with thiosalicyl￾hydrazide by covalent immobilization. NPs of Fe3O4 showed increased sensitivity and selec￾tivity for Al3+ ion rather than general metal ions in water solutions, when the Schiff base of
rhodamine 6G was used for its embellishment (Zhi et al., 2013). For the treatment of heavy
metals in aqueous solution, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) immobilization on the
surface of amine-terminated NPs of Fe3O4 ceased with amine are topped with immobilized
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (Zhang et al., 2011).
166 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesZn2+ and Cd2+ ions can be adsorbed from the aqueous solutions effectively by NPs with
magnetic hydroxyapatite ((Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2, HAP) (Feng et al., 2010). Moreover, the mag￾netic core is painted with silica oxide and oxides of metals. Pb2+ ion, let suppose, was sepa￾rated through spherical and mono-scattered Fe3O4@SiO2-NH2 nanomaterials with
size ¼ 200 nm (Zhang et al., 2013a, 2013b). Notably, an elevated adsorption capability of po￾rous c-AlOOH (boehmite)@SiO2/Fe3O4 magnetic microspheres is perceived for heavy metal
ions Hg2+, Cu2+, Pb2+, Cd2+, and Zn2+ for consumable water (Wei et al., 2011). Surface of
chitosan/SiO2/Fe3O4Magnetic modified with EDTA to act as an adsorbent for Cu2+ ions ac￾tively in a selective manner, while for buffer solution, water-soluble carbodiimide was uti￾lized being crosslinker (Fig. 8.2) (Ren et al., 2013). Magnetic nano-iron oxide (nano-Fe3O4)
is infused with nano-silicon oxide (nano-SiO2) via its surface to act as a sorbent (nano￾Fe3O4–SiO2 sorbent), and employed effectively on samples of water to separate heavy metals
like Pb2+ and Cu2+ ions batch equilibrium and micro-column techniques (Kim et al., 2013).
Maghemite (c-Fe2O3) nanoparticles
To date, the organic polymer-supported maghemite NPs have been reported abundantly.
Single-step polymerization through chemical-oxidation, for instance, was implied for synthe￾sizing maghemite (c-Fe2O3) nanoparticles laminated with polyhodanine utilized in aqueous
solutions for removing Hg2+ ions, given in Fig. 8.3 (Song et al., 2011). Maghemite (c-Fe2O3)
displayed a sensitive attachment with divalent metal ions when grafted using poly(1-
vinylimidazole), while Cu2+ > Ni2+ > Co2+ is their attachment strength order (Takafuji
et al., 2004). Poly-I-cysteine laminated NPs of magnetic (c-Fe2O3) were used for chelation
of Zn2+, Pb2+, Ni2+, Cd2+, Cu2+ and As2+ ions (White et al., 2009). Also, Cu2+ ions are treated
in aqueous solution using NPs of magnetic (c-Fe2O3) with chitosan coating, a biopolymer, and
further adjusted with a-ketoglutaric acid (Zhou et al., 2009b).
Fe3O4 SiO2/Fe3O4
EDTA anion
Coated with
silica layer
Chitosan
EDCMS
NH
HNH2 NH2
NH2
NH2
CO
CMS
Formation of amide bond
by using EDAC
Adsorption
of EDTA
as cross-linker
OOC
OOC
Dispersed in
chitosan solution
Cross-linked with
glutaraldehyde
FIG. 8.2 Procedure for the preparation of CMS and EDCMS. Reproduced with permission from Ren, Y., Abbood, H.A.,
He, F., Peng, H., Huang, K., Magnetic EDTA-modified chitosan/SiO2/Fe3O4 adsorbent: preparation, characterization, and ap￾plication in heavy metal adsorption. Chem. Eng. J. 226 (2013) 300–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.04.059. Copyright
2013, Elsevier.
8.2 Inorganic NMs 167
I. Basics principlesHematite (a-Fe2O3) NPs
a-Fe2O3 nanostructures doped with manganese and possessing three-dimensional porous
structure can excellently remove As III, Cr VI and Pb2+ ions, facile through magnetic separa￾tion from the fresh water and was introduced by Fu et al. (Cui et al., 2014). A mixture of he￾matite and magnetite NPs were implied in water to sorbate Cr3+, Cd2+ and Pb2+ ions (Ahmed
et al., 2013). Additionally, a mixture of Al2O3 and Fe2O3 nanocomposite fiber can also adsorb
ions like Hg2+, Ni2+, Cu2+and Pb2+ (Mahapatra et al., 2013).
Superparamagnetic nanoparticles
Superparamagnetic particles are generated with magnetic particles residing no permanent
magnetic moment and with reduced size. Heavy metals were also removed through sorption
by superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs modified with organic ligand (Warner et al., 2010). The
surface of dimercapto-succinic acid was functionalized with NPs of supermagnetic iron oxide
(Fe3O4) exhibited effectively as a sorbent for different ions such as ions of Tl, Cd, Pb, Ag, and
Hg (Yantasee et al., 2007). Poisonous elements were separated through NPs fabricated with
super-paramagnetic Fe-oxide NP (SPION) and poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) and
discriminatively improved surface, while the magnetic-field was employed externally
(Wanna et al., 2016).
FIG. 8.3 Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of polyrhodanine-encapsulated magnetic nanoparticles.
Reproduced with permission from Song, J., Kong, H., Jang, J., Adsorption of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution by
polyrhodanine-encapsulated magnetic nanoparticles. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 359(2) (2011) 505–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcis.2011.04.034. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.
168 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesTitanium oxide NPs and titanate nanostructures
Usually, organic contaminants are photodegraded by employing photocatalytic-TiO2 NPs
(Anandan et al., 2009). Cd2+ ions, for instance, could be removed from water by using NPs of
titanium dioxide modified through thiolactic acid (Skubal et al., 2002). The sol–gel strategy
was applied to synthesize silica gel immobilized TiO2 NPs which work quantitatively in
4–7 pH range to adhere trace lead in water (Liu and Liang, 2008). Nickel and cadmium ions
are rarely preconcentrated by applying TiO2-nanotubes owing to its notorious extracting ca￾pability in solid form (Zhou et al., 2009a). Ions of CrV could be separated with the help of
TiO2, also termed as anatase, NMs after doping with carbon (Mani et al., 2015). For the remov￾ing purpose of copper and cadmium ions, different concentrations of NaOH, i.e., 4–15 mol/L,
were utilized to prepare titanate-NMs by means of hydrothermal pathway and applied to
aqueous-solutions.
Miscellaneous
Provisionally in water, versatile NPs of metal oxide are applied for removing pollutants
apart from titanium oxide and ferric oxide NPs. For example, in order to preconcentrate
and selectively extract solid-state minute quantities of Pb2+ and Cd2+ ions, alumina
(Al2O3) was chemically improved (Ezoddin et al., 2010). Cr VI and AsV ions were remarkably
adsorbed by using CeO2 NPs (Albadarin et al., 2014). Pb2+ and As ions were effectually
adsorbed in aqueous solutions by applying copper oxide nanostructures (Farghali et al.,
2013). For concurrent ultrasound-aided removal of Pb2+ from water, activated carbon loaded
with CuO NP was efficiently applied (Dil et al., 2017b). Furthermore, they also presented that
Co2+ and Cd2+ ions could be concurrently adsorbed by using ZnO nanorods loaded-activated
carbon (Dil et al., 2017a).
Cd2+ and Pb2+ ions were also removed from aqueous solutions by utilizing the mesoporous
stratified ZnO nanorods with pore volume of 0.038 cm3 and 15.75 m2 g1 specific surface area
(Kumar et al., 2013). In contrast to undoped-ZnO NPs, Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions were competently
removed from water assets by La-doped ZnO NPs (Wu et al., 2013). Even though both ZnO
and MgO are functional for Cu2+ extraction from industrial waste up to 98%, however, MgO
nano-sorbents demonstrated more capability for its adsorption (Rafiq et al., 2014). For Cr
V and Cr III on Mn3O4 NMs, the validity of thermodynamics, pH, activation energy and ki￾netics were also investigated (Cantu et al., 2014). Pb2+ and Cd2+ were adsorbed by Ni (OH)2
and NiO nanostructures from aqueous solution (Behnoudnia and Dehghani, 2014). Moreover,
As III/As V were also removed extraordinarily by ZrO2 nanostructured and greatly porous
spheres. In addition, for purification of freshwater NPs of binary metal-oxides are being syn￾thesized, analyzed, and practiced. In groundwater and soil, for example, As III is immobilized
by applying Fe-Mn oxide NPs stabilized with polysaccharide (An and Zhao, 2012).
8.2.2 Transition metal NPs
Gold NPs
For extracting heavy metal ions from water, pH proved to be a key factor for Au-shielded
NPs of 4-aminothiophenol in the maintenance of limiting factors (Chauhan et al., 2011). To
remove Pb2+ and Hg2+ from solutions, Au-shielded NPs are fabricated from albumin’s serum
8.2 Inorganic NMs 169
I. Basics principles(BSA) and agarose-gel-membrane, shortly called Au-NPs@BSA/AGM (Y.-F. Lee et al., 2012).
Hg2+ ions were detected within the range of 0.1–1000 nM with NPs of magnetic-silica-sphere
(MSS)@Au which were functionalized with oligonucleotide. On the other hand, it showed
response Ag+ less than Hg2+, i.e., within the range of Mn from 10 to 1000 (Liu et al., 2014a,b).
Silver NPs
Instead of eliminating heavy metals, Ag NPs have been famous in treating microbes from
biomaterials (Rai et al., 2009). There is limitation regarding heavy metals, e.g., Hg2+ relevant
to silver-NPs in the reported literature (Sumesh et al., 2011). Currently, Pb2+ ions, for instance,
are selectively permeated through NCs of polyaniline-tungstophosphate inserted in silver
NPs (Khan et al., 2013). For probing low-concentrated (1 ppb) arsenite and arsenate, silver
NPs laminated with poly(vinylpyrrolidone) were reported by Yang and coworkers
(Mulvihill et al., 2008).
Iron NPs
Notwithstanding the aerobic responsiveness of Fe (0) NPs, they have been extensively im￾plied to water for removing heavy metals. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results
exposed the usefulness of zero-valent iron NPs participates in either all the situations or its
modified oxidized forms which could also be in demand. For eliminating AsIII-ions from
groundwater, iron nanoparticles with size 1–120 nm were applied by Choi et al. (Kanel
et al., 2005) Architectured core/shell iron NPs sequestrated nickel with 0.13 g nickel per gram
iron adsorbing range and was presented by Li et al. (Li and Zhang, 2006). Biodegradable and
nontoxic chitosan was applied as a stabilizer to synthesize NPs of chitosan-stabilized-Fe for
adsorbing preliminary CrVI-ions (Geng et al., 2009).
In the permeable reactive barriers, heavy metals CrVI and ions Pb2+, Cd2+, Cu2+ were
discriminatively removed from electroplating wastewater by upgraded chitosan bead￾supported Fe NPs, whereas concentration and pH performed an important function (Liu
et al., 2013). CrVI was removed successfully from industrial wastewater by Fe NPs having
adsorption strength of cellulose (Lo´pez-Tellez et al., 2011). Cu2+ ions were effectively re￾moved by immobilized polyvinyl alcohol/polyacrylic acid hybrid nanofibrous mats of Fe
NPs (Xiao et al., 2011). Industrial effluents bearing Cr VI were purified through nanosized
bentonite-based Fe-NPs (Shi et al., 2011). Majestically, industrial waste containing uranium
pollutants are treated through Fe-NPs (Dickinson and Scott, 2010). Noteworthy, studying
branch involving toxicity and implication regarding Fe-NPs necessitates enhanced explora￾tion chiefly the grasping problems regarding zero-valent iron.
8.2.3 Transition metal-sulfide NPs
Currently, Aluru et al. introduced a novel nanopore membrane made of MoS2, which can
work 70% more efficiently than graphene nanopores for desalination of water (Heiranian
et al., 2015). For heavy metals removal present in water, this study furnishes a remarkable
substitute. In addition, Ghosh et al. also delineated that ZnS quantum dots (Q-dots) stabilized
by chitosan could be implemented not only for heavy metal ions (Pb2+, Ag+ and Hg2+) in wa￾ter but also as cation exchanger ( Jaiswal et al., 2012). To investigate the biosynthesis of
170 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesnanocrystalline ZnS in feigned wastewater, Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 was administered
which is also a metal reducing agent (Xiao et al., 2015). For purifying industrial wastewater,
Ag2S NPs are employed as ultimate-slush matter (Kim et al., 2010). WS2 layered two￾dimensional nano-thickened membranes demonstrated two to five times multiple penetra￾tion capability in comparison to membranes fabricated with GO (Sun et al., 2014).
8.2.4 Carbon-based NMs
Carbon-based NMs are extensively used for heavy metal removal on the ground of their
upraised sorption extent and non-toxicity (Smith and Rodrigues, 2015). For decades, acti￾vated carbon worked for the purification of water and air acting as the foremost famous sor￾bent. Zhou et al., for example, evaluated the adsorption capacity of cadmium, lead, zinc, and
copper ions by carbon black and hydroxyapatite (Chen et al., 2010). Nevertheless, this phe￾nomenon is restricted in tape water for the rare heavy metals at ppb levels. In consequence,
fullerenes, graphene materials, and CNTs were fabricated for applications. CNTs demand im￾provements in their exteriors owing to little metal-adsorbing capability of pristine (Hadavifar
et al., 2014). CNTs show enhanced particular surface area and disposability when its surface is
loaded with P, N, and O functional groups (Adeleye and Keller, 2014). The anisotropic con￾struction of hydroxide nanocrystal@carbon in double-layer nanosphere, is an excellent exam￾ple of Cu2+ ions removal (Gong et al., 2011). For effective adsorption of heavy metals from
water, the surface of nanofibers and nanotubes are grafted with numerous polymers and or￾ganic ligands (Kosa et al., 2012).
Carbon-NTs and surface modified NTs
As long as 1991, Iijima brought light to extraordinary properties and implications of carbon
nanotubes, CNTs of twain single wall and multiwall are substantially scrutinized involving
heavy metals removal from contaminated water (Mubarak et al., 2014). Interestingly, CNTs
are synthesized through the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. The adsorption capa￾bility of CNTs changes owing to surface administration by oxidants such as organic mole￾cules, HNO3, and KMnO4. Surface modification and oxidation have been largely
investigated (Datsyuk et al., 2008). Electrochemical probing and extraction of heavy metals
is achieved by CNT-based NMs (Musameh et al., 2011). The metals ions show adsorption
aversion order for CNTs at pH ¼ 9, for example, is Mn2+ < Zn2+ < Co2+ < Pb2+ < Cu2+ using
carbon nanotubes (Stafiej and Pyrzynska, 2007).
Multi-wall CTNs were utilized in greater amounts of aqueous-solutions by Wang and co￾workers to remove scarce earth-metals like Eu (III) and Sr(II) (Chen et al., 2009). Chitosan in￾corporated multi-wall CNTs excellently adsorbed metal ions like Ni2+, Zn2+, Cu2+,and Cd2+
(Salam et al., 2011). Cd2+ ions were removed using surface ethylene diamine functionalized
multilayered CNTs from aqueous solutions (Vukovic et al., 2010). Michael’s addition reaction
and mussel-influenced chemistry were combined to prepare polydopamine-functionalized
CNTs, were employed to remove Cu2+ ions. There is a deep inspection of numerous param￾eters like temperature, pH, adsorbent concentration and initial Cu2+ concentration (Zhang
et al., 2015). Cd2+ and Pb2+ ions are efficiently sorbed through GOs NCs and biochar￾supported CNTs owing to their amplified surface-area (Liu et al., 2016a). Functionalization
8.2 Inorganic NMs 171
I. Basics principlesof CNTs through polyethylenimine is reported to investigate adsorbility of Cu2+ ions (Xie
et al., 2015). Alternative to adsorption, heavy metal-ions removal through architectured￾NMs encompassing nanooxides and CNTs removed heavy metal ions that are highly ascrib￾able to foaming hydroxide precipitation, suggestive of lower quality architectured NMs as
adsorbing-agents (Yang et al., 2014).
Graphene and GO nanomaterials
Since the recognition of graphene, both graphene (G) and graphene oxide (GO) have
attracted remarkable attentiveness. Water contaminants (e.g., organic-compounds and metal
ions) are proficiently eliminated through NMs synthesized with graphene and graphene
alone (Yusuf et al., 2015). Yuan and coworker, for instance, examined GO absorbability for
Zn2+regarding absorbable quantity, contact time, effect of pH, temperature, and foreign ions
(Wang et al., 2013). The graphene nanosheets demonstrated remarkable application in
preconcentration and removal of gases, in adsorption as adsorbents, removal of metal ions
like Pb2+ and organic compounds (Yu et al., 2015). Polymer-improved graphene and
graphene oxide together with organic compounds are investigated as well (Ma et al.,
2012). Heavy metals ions are detected through improved graphene and modified with en￾hanced sensitivity. Functionalization of magnetic graphene oxide is achieved, for example,
with EDTA for removing copper, mercury, and lead ions from water. GO principally
imparted to effective adsorption by appealing ample functional groups and metal chelation
with EDTA (Cui et al., 2015). The GO N-(trimethoxysilylpropyl)-silanized was assessed as
adsorbent for Pb2+ and Cu2+ ions, different contact time and pH, and antimicrobial implica￾tion with varying concentration (Mejias Carpio et al., 2014). Magnetic graphene
nanocomposites which are water-soluble and modified using polyacrylic acid GO/Fe3O4
exhibited exceptional capability for Pb2+, Cd2+, and Cu2+ ions removal (Zhang et al.,
2013a, 2013b). GO nanocomposites blended with poly(N-vinylcarbazole) were implemented
to adsorb Pb2+ ion out of aqueous solutions (Musico et al., 2013).
Keeping in view the catechol chemistry, Wang et al. applied controlled self-polymerization
for synthesizing GO composites with poly(dopamine) along with functional group coating
and further employed for excellent depolluting the waste effluents (Dong et al., 2014). Also,
heavy metals are separated effectively by transition metal-oxides functionalization of
graphene and graphene oxide like ZnO, TiO2, MnO2, and Fe3O4 (Zhang et al., 2012) and
peculiarly by magnetic-cored graphene and graphene oxide. Aqueous solutions of Hg2+ and
Pb2+, for instance, were decontaminated using NCs of cobalt-ferrite (CoFe2O4)-reduced-GO
(rGO), collectively as CoFe2O4-rGO (Zhang et al., 2014).
Aqueous solutions were also treated effectively with magnetic graphene-materials
(Fe3O4-GS) for eliminating Ni2+, Cd2+, Hg2+, Pb2+, and Cr(VI) ions (Guo et al., 2014). Pb2+ ions
could also be adsorbed proficiently by implementing magnetic graphene oxide compounds
with Fe3O4 center and grafted with chitosan (Fan et al., 2013). Cr(VI) ions are effectively
cleared magnetic GNCs sandwiched between bilayered iron oxide exterior and Fe central in￾terior. Ferrocene and GO irradiated with microwaves to produce magnetic graphene residing
improved adsorption capability towards aqueous Pb2+, CrVI and AsV ions, whereas their re￾moval efficiencies was detected 99% up to 1 ppb level (Gollavelli et al., 2013). Ions like Pb2+,
Hg2+, and CrVI were proficiently eliminated using graphene-anchored spongy Fe-Fe2O3 ma￾trix (Bhunia et al., 2012).
172 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesCr(VI) ions were removed in extraordinarily quick manner by applying NCs of chitosan￾cyclodextrin functionalized with GO (Li et al., 2013). Moreover, Cr(VI) ions were also re￾moved swiftly through nanocomposite prepared with magnetic bicyclodextrin and GO
(Fan et al., 2012). Meanwhile, reduced-GO (rGO) and self-assembly strategies were adminis￾tered to construct aerogels by implementing d-MnO2 and 3D G succeeding extremely thin
d-MnO2 coating in solution state with nano-thickness and was reported by Zhang et al., while
the calculated adsorbing capability for copper ion was 228.46 mg/gram, for cadmium ion
250.31 mg/gram and for lead ion 643.62 mg/gram (Liu et al., 2016a, 2016b). In addition,
GO is also applied in aqueous solution located in fixed-bed SiO2 column for adsorbing copper
and lead ions in form of thin sheet (Ding et al., 2014). Although, graphene oxide nano-sorbents
entirely eliminate lead(+2) and chromium(VI) ions from pharmaceutical industrial wastes,
but small amount of nickel(+2) ion subsidized uniformly with increase in graphene oxide
(Gopalakrishnan et al., 2015). GO-based microbots (GOx-microbots) were introduced by
San et al. which comprised of platinum, nickel, and nanosized multilayers of GO, and was
utilized for removal, transference and capturing of Hg2+ as an automotive systems (Vilela
et al., 2016). Nonetheless, G/GO are exorbitant so patch a difficulty towards its usage in re￾alistic implications.
8.2.5 SiO2-supported NMs
SiO2 deployed nanomaterials have been classified as SiO2-nanotubes, SiO2-nanofibers, SiO2
with nano pore size, silica-laminated magnetic nanoparticles and SiO2 nanofibers. Biological
systems eliminated heavy metals through functionalized nano-porous silica (Yantasee et al.,
2010). For developing magnetic SiO2-NMs and succeeding in collecting heavy metal-ions,
-SH containing organic-thiol molecules have been in ample practice as chelating group and
support. Following a batch technique, a conjugate NM was produced by immobilizing sulfur￾residing organic-ligand named ammonium(4-chloro-2-mercaptophenyl) carbamodithioate
(ACMPC) over mesoporous-SiO2 that probed and removed Hg2+ ions instantly (Awual et al.,
2016). For the adsorption of cobalt ions in trace concentration from water resources, mesop￾orous SiO2-NMs affixed with an organic-ligand named N,N-di(3-carboxysalicylidene)-3,4-
diamino-5-hydroxypyrazole have been debuted (Shahat et al., 2015).
Hg2+ ions could also be removed from contaminated water, with an absorptive capability
of 57.5 mg per gram, by silica nanofibers after its surface modification with zonal thiol (–SH)
groups. The sol–gel polymerization is followed over electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN)
nanofibers with 3-mercaptopopyl trimethoxysilane to fabricate such NMs, succeeding de￾tachment of PAN and application of dimethylformamide (DMF) afterwards as shown in
Fig. 8.4 (Li et al., 2011a). Calcination and electro-spinning methods were applied by Du
et al. for fabricating SiO2-nanotubes (SNTs). Owing to chelation among Pb2+ and imino
groups, remarkably improves adsorbability after applying symdiphenylcarbazide (SD-SNTs)
to surface of SNTs (Wang et al., 2015).
The magnetic-NPs laminated with silica have been classified as silicon-based
nanomaterials and magnetic inorganic nanomaterials. In water, for instance, magnetic
SiO2-NPs functionalized with 4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a, 4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIP), acting
like fluorescence-probe, demonstrated elevated attraction and discriminativeness for lead
8.2 Inorganic NMs 173
I. Basics principlesions in comparison to contrasting metal-ions involving Hg2+, Cd2+, Ag+
, Zn2+, Cu2+, Ca2+, K+
,
Mg2+, Na+ and Li+ and also clears human blood from lead ions successfully (Lee et al., 2009).
Hg2+ ions could also be probed with high sensitivity succeeding adsorption by means of NPs
having core of naphthalimide and core of Fe3O4@SiO2 (Zhu et al., 2013). For diagnosis and
micro-extraction of minute quantities of ions such as Mn2+, Pb2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cu2+,
cationic-surfactant laminated SiO2-supported Fe3O4 NPs were applied to ambient water as
adsorbing agent (Karatapanis et al., 2011).
Lead and mercury ions were removed by magnetic SiO2 nanomaterials with mesoscaled
pores and -SH functionalization, collectively termed as SHmSi@Fe3O4 (Li et al., 2011b). In
water, Hg2+ ions were easily located and reprecipitated through –SH-functionalized
Fe3O4-nanoparticles having mesoscaled pores and laminated with SiO2 (Hakami et al.,
2012). Ions in small quantities such as Pb2+, Hg2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, discriminatively and expedi￾tiously removed using c-s-propyltrimethoxy-silane-improved Fe3O4-nanoparticles sheeted
with SiO2 (Huang and Hu, 2008). For adsorbing heavy metals from water, e.g., chitosan
and cellulose residing polyfunctional groups like –COOH, –OH, –NH2, etc., dithizone was
employed by Hu et al. to improve artificially prepared organic polymer-based NCs and
bio-polymers (Kangoa et al., 2013). For chelating heavy metals, the slow adsorption rate
and little surface area restrict their implication, however, carbon NMs and transition metal
NPs in the absence of functional groups and having broader surface area are widely applied.
The fabrication and implication of polymer-based nanocomposites and NMs furnished a
substitute chance for removing water-inhabiting heavy metals. In contrast to organic poly￾mers, activated carbon and metal/oxide NPs, nanosorbents in the form of polymer￾supported nanocomposites and polymer NMs have multifunctional groups and larger
surface areas. Heavy metal ions like Cr (3, 4), Hg2+ and Pb2+ have also been adsorbed using
ion-exchange and chelation of functional groups (Bhatnagar and Sillanp€a€a, 2009). Polymer￾matrix encompasses inorganic nanoparticles following varied classes of polymeric NCs.
Polymer-nanorods, polymer-nanocrystals, polymer-nanofibers are different kinds of poly￾meric nanomaterials. For eliminating poisonous compounds from water, NCs are employed
which are prepared using alginate for supporting biopolymer (Ngomsik et al., 2009).
MPTMS
PAN fiber HS-SiO2
swelling of PAN HS-SiO2
wrapping layer break
DMF
DMF
Dissolve
FIG. 8.4 Procedure for the fabrication of zonal mercaptopropyl silica nanofibers obtained by dissolution of the
PAN nanofiber templates with DMF. Reproduced with permission from Li, S., Yue, X., Jing, Y., Bai, S., Dai, Z., Fabrication
of zonal thiol-functionalized silica nanofibers for removal of heavy metal ions from wastewater. Colloids Surf. A: Physicochem.
Eng. Aspects 380(1) (2011) 229–233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.02.027. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.
174 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principles8.3 Polymer-organic NMs
Notwithstanding, the organic polymers are extensively studied/implied for eliminating
heavy-metals from contaminated water, while proficient fabrication of polymer NMs is still
an issue of debate. For the adsorption of Hg2+, Huang and coworkers, for example, utilized
m-sulfophenylenediamine (SP) and aniline (AN) in hydrochloric acid through oxidative
precipitation polymerization in the absence of any external stabilizer for synthesizing co￾polymer sulfophenylenediamine-NPs. The 30:70 ratio of SP/AN demonstrated pivotal
character as proficient Hg2+ adsorbent and detected with 98.8% absorbability of
497.7 mg/g (Lu et al., 2007 € ). Poly(5-sulfo-1-aminoanthraquinone) NPs can eliminate Hg2+
and Pb2+ ions with elevated percentages and be revealed by Huang et al. (2011). Specifically,
for the purification of water, the fabrication and implications of biopolymer celluloses
(Olivera et al., 2016), nanocomposites, and chitosan-founded NMs have captivated
curiosity.
Usually, cellulose nanofibers are synthesized by way of steam explosion and
electrospinning. H2SO4 or HCl hydrolysis of indigenous cellulosic fibers to fabricate cellulose
nanowhiskers and nanocrystals (Fung et al., 2011). The adsorption capability of cellulose NMs
for the ions of heavy metal alters with chemical tempering of its surface functional groups
(Man et al., 2011), for example, carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals (Hokkanen et al., 2014).
To separate Ag+ ions from polluted water, chitin-nanocrystals, cellulose nanocrystals and cel￾lulose nanofibers were introduced by Liu et al. (2014a, 2014b). Above 90% sorbability of Pb2+,
Cd2+, Ni2+, and Cr3+ has been increased by treating nanocellulose fibers, grafted on copoly￾mer, with CH2 ¼ CHSO3H (Kardam et al., 2012). Nanoscaled cellulose fibers (NCFs) were
applied to aqueous solutions for removing Cd2+, Pb2+ and Ni2+ ions, while the standard
diameter was 6 nm (Kardam et al., 2014). The depositing capability of copper and ferric ions
is enhanced via functional-groups, developed by phosphorylating nanosized precipitates of
cellulose (Liu et al., 2015). Owing to the biophosphonate’s complexation strength of V5+ ion
residing groups, biophosphonated nanocellulose can adsorb efficiently vanadium ions from
aqueous solutions (Sirvio et al., 2016 € ).
Carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals were noticed by Tong, et al. for adsorbing heavy metal
ions from aqueous solutions (Yu et al., 2013). For adsorbing Co2+ ions, nuclear-industrial ef￾fluent is treated with multi-carboxylic groups containing nanobentonite or nanocellulose NCs
grafted with poly(itaconic acid) or poly(methacrylic acid) (Anirudhan et al., 2016). In compar￾ison to μ-chitosans, nano-chitosans are found to show rapid adsorbing capabilities with effi￾cient performance (Dyal et al., 2003). For adsorbing ions like Zn2+, Co2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Pb2+, and
Hg2+, poly(maleic acid) was grafted onto chitosan followed by glutaraldehyde crosslinking
resulting in chitosan-supported poly(maleic acid) nanomaterials with 400–900 nm in size
(Ge and Hua, 2016). In particular, chitosan NPs are synthesized through ionic gelation
(Du et al., 2008).
The wastewater was also treated by chitosan nanorods, synthesized by using polyanion
tripolyphosphate crosslinked with lower Mw chitosan (Sivakami et al., 2013). Pb2+ and
Cu2+ ions were also adsorbed through electrospun-constructed chitosan nanofibers
(Haider and Park, 2009). Nickel ions are also removed through nanoparticles of chitosan￾poly(acrylic acid) (Wang and Kuo, 2008). For adsorbing heavy metals, nano-fibered
8.3 Polymer-organic NMs 175
I. Basics principlesmembranes with polyethylene oxide and chitosan architecture were employed with priority:
Ni2+ > Cu2+ > Cd2+ > Pb2+ (Aliabadi et al., 2013). In water, Cd2+, Cu2+, and CrVI ions were
removed by utilizing chitosan and nano-hydroxypatite combination.
To adsorb heavy metals, many strategies are followed by nano-cellulose and nanochitosan,
for example, complex-formation, ion pair pore/surface arrangement, chelation with metals,
ion-exchange and electrostatic-interactions (Kwok et al., 2014). Nanochitosan-chromium(VI)
interactions, for instance, were ascribed to the electrostatic attraction (Kwok et al., 2014). Fol￾lowing an ion-exchange mechanism, Cu2+ ions were removed by applying chitosan/chitin
nano-hydroxyapatite composite (Kwok et al., 2014). Heavy metals were investigated mech￾anistically regarding ion exchange and complexation methodologies via sorption by nano￾crystals of cellulose improved with succinic acid (Kaleem et al., 2013). Ion exchange and
complexation mechanism were exhibited by sulfonated wheat pulp nanocelluloses to remove
Pb2+ ion (Bhatnagar and Sillanp€a€a, 2009). Concurrently, adsorption of ester functional group
incorporating functional groups of OH and Na ions together with heavy metals was achieved
via chemisorption using succinic anhydride-modified nano-cellulose after mercerization
(Sivakami et al., 2013). By applying nano-cellulosic fibrillated C-painted electrode, concentra￾tions of Cd2+ and Pb2+ ions were standardized through electrochemical investigations. For
adsorption, nano-cellulosic threads encompassed hydroxyl, carboxylate and ionized￾aldehyde and was demonstrated in presented strategy (Rajiv Gandhi et al., 2011). Anionic
complexation could be responsible for adsorbing nanomagnetic cellulose mercury ions.
8.4 Polymer-supported organic NCs
Since polymer-supported nanocomposites class have been synthesized by applying organic
polymers as a support for the preparation of inorganic NPs, for instance, magnetic Fe/TiO2/
Fe3O4, also termed as inorganic NMs. Normally, organic polymer-based NCs have been cate￾gorized as: (1) biopolymer-supported NMs, and (2) synthetic organic polymer-based NMs.
Latter category comprises polystyrene, polyaniline (PAN), poly(tetrafluoroethylene),
polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), nafion and polyethylene (PE). The former one covers chitosan,
cellulose, and resin or alginate. The latter polymer-supported nanocomposites are utilized
in water for the removal of biomaterials, organic contaminants, and heavy metals (Pan
et al., 2009). Cu2+, Ag+ and Hg2+ ions, for specimen, could be removed using
tetraethylenepentamine-functionalized magnetic cellulose composite (Klemm et al., 2011).
Ni2+, Cu2+, and Cd2+ ions are proficiently adsorbed through nanoframed micro-threaded
amino-transformed cellulose (Zhao et al., 2011). Arsenate ions (AsV) are being efficiently
adsorbed using amine-modified (1,6-hexanediamine) NCs of cellulose-rooted bacterial
Fe3O4 (Donia et al., 2012). Cellulose NCs of itaconic acid implanted Fe3O4 transformed
through 2-mercaptobenzamide are successfully applied on wastewater of factories residing
chlor-alkali to efficiently remove Hg2+ ions, and was presented by Anirudhan and Shainy
(2015). Recently, NPs of magnetic-chitosan have gained a great deal of interest for removing
metal-ions like Pt2+, Co2+ and Cu2+, as demonstrated in Fig. 8.5 (Anirudhan and Shainy, 2015).
For the removal of Cu2+ ions from aqueous solutions, microspheres are in practice (Chang
et al., 2006). Ren et al. implied Fe3O4 and chitosan NPs in combination with metal adsorbed
176 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesFIG. 8.5 Synthesis of P(MB-IA)-g-MNCC. Reproduced with permission from Anirudhan, T.S., Shainy, F., Effective removal of mercury(II) ions from chlor-alkali
industrial wastewater using 2-mercaptobenzamide modified itaconic acid-grafted-magnetite nanocellulose composite. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 456 (2015) 22–31. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2015.05.052. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.organic pollutants and heavy metals from aqueous solution, like hydroxypatites, amination,
and carboxylation (Ren et al., 2008). Cu2+ ions, for instance, are biosorbed by exterior of
chitosan-laminated magnetic NPs that are grafted with biomass of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Hg2+ and Pb2+ ions could also be removed from polluted water through the implementation
of nanocrystals (NCs) of ZnSe colloidal surface-decorated polydimethylsiloxane foams, a
very active constituent.
8.5 Conclusions and perspectives
Pollution created by human beings is increasing day by day, causing alarming health is￾sues and decreasing availability of clean water for use. The conventional methods and tech￾nologies used for wastewater treatment are not efficient enough to remove microbial, organic,
inorganic contaminants and this impelled the scientists to follow nanotechnology keeping in
view the environmental needs. Nanomaterials take the privilege over bulk materials due to
high porosity, great surface area, and excellent reactivity. Because of these exceptional prop￾erties, nanomaterials have been extensively used to treat wastewater for removal of heavy
metals. This review focused on various nanomaterials including metal oxides, carbon-based
nanomaterials, nanocomposites and their potential to remove heavy metals from wastewater.
Nanomaterials efficiently adsorb heavy metals but still there are few limitations associated
with the use of nanomaterials as they are unstable and have tendency to aggregate which
reduces their efficiency. Due to their nanosize, sometimes it becomes difficult to separate
them from water. Nanocomposites may be potential candidates to solving these issues. There
is need to develop nanomaterials at large scale for market availability and also operating cost
should be optimized from economical point of view. Nanomaterials should be synthesized by
green chemistry to save environment and eliminate toxicity. The emerging nanomaterials
provided potential alternative to conventional adsorbents for removal of heavy metals, but
there are few risks and impacts associated with them that cannot be ignored as well. There
is still need to put efforts to further elaborate on the capability, synthesis, development, sep￾aration, reusability, and cost of nanomaterials.
References
Adeleye, A.S., Keller, A.A., 2014. Long-term colloidal stability and metal leaching of single wall carbon nanotubes:
effect of temperature and extracellular polymeric substances. Water Res. 49, 236–250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2013.11.032.
Ahmed, M.A., Ali, S.M., El-Dek, S.I., Galal, A., 2013. Magnetite–hematite nanoparticles prepared by green methods
for heavy metal ions removal from water. Mater. Sci. Eng. B 178 (10), 744–751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mseb.2013.03.011.
Albadarin, A.B., Yang, Z., Mangwandi, C., Glocheux, Y., Walker, G., Ahmad, M.N.M., 2014. Experimental design and
batch experiments for optimization of Cr(VI) removal from aqueous solutions by hydrous cerium oxide
nanoparticles. Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 92 (7), 1354–1362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2013.10.015.
Aliabadi, M., Irani, M., Ismaeili, J., Piri, H., Parnian, M.J., 2013. Electrospun nanofiber membrane of PEO/Chitosan for
the adsorption of nickel, cadmium, lead and copper ions from aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J. 220, 237–243.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.01.021.
178 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesAn, B., Zhao, D., 2012. Immobilization of As(III) in soil and groundwater using a new class of polysaccharide stabi￾lized Fe–Mn oxide nanoparticles. J. Hazard. Mater. 211-212, 332–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2011.10.062.
Anandan, S., Kathiravan, K., Murugesan, V., Ikuma, Y., 2009. Anionic (IO3-) non-metal doped TiO2 nanoparticles for
the photocatalytic degradation of hazardous pollutant in water. Catal. Commun. 10 (6), 1014–1019. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.catcom.2008.12.054.
Anirudhan, T.S., Shainy, F., 2015. Effective removal of mercury(II) ions from chlor-alkali industrial wastewater using
2-mercaptobenzamide modified itaconic acid-grafted-magnetite nanocellulose composite. J. Colloid Interface Sci.
456, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2015.05.052.
Anirudhan, T.S., Deepa, J.R., Christa, J., 2016. Nanocellulose/nanobentonite composite anchored with multi-carboxyl
functional groups as an adsorbent for the effective removal of cobalt(II) from nuclear industry wastewater sam￾ples. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 467, 307–320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2016.01.023.
Astruc, D., Lu, F., Aranzaes, J.R., 2005. Nanoparticles as recyclable catalysts: the frontier between homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 44 (48), 7852–7872. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200500766.
Awual, M.R., Hasan, M.M., Eldesoky, G.E., Khaleque, M.A., Rahman, M.M., Naushad, M., 2016. Facile mercury de￾tection and removal from aqueous media involving ligand impregnated conjugate nanomaterials. Chem. Eng. J.
290, 243–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2016.01.038.
Badruddoza, A.Z.M., Tay, A.S.H., Tan, P.Y., Hidajat, K., Uddin, M.S., 2011. Carboxymethyl-β-cyclodextrin conjugated
magnetic nanoparticles as nano-adsorbents for removal of copper ions: synthesis and adsorption studies. J. Haz￾ard. Mater. 185 (2), 1177–1186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.10.029.
Behnoudnia, F., Dehghani, H., 2014. Anion effect on the control of morphology for NiC2O42H2O nanostructures as
precursors for synthesis of Ni(OH)2 and NiO nanostructures and their application for removing heavy metal ions
of cadmium(ii) and lead(ii). Dalton Trans. 43 (9), 3471–3478. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3DT52049H.
Bhatnagar, A., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2009. Applications of chitin- and chitosan-derivatives for the detoxification of water and
wastewater — a short review. Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. 152 (1), 26–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2009.09.003.
Bhunia, P., Kim, G., Baik, C., Lee, H., 2012. A strategically designed porous iron–iron oxide matrix on graphene for
heavy metal adsorption. Chem. Commun. 48 (79), 9888–9890. https://doi.org/10.1039/C2CC35120J.
Cantu, Y., Remes, A., Reyna, A., Martinez, D., Villarreal, J., Ramos, H., Parsons, J.G., 2014. Thermodynamics, kinetics,
and activation energy studies of the sorption of chromium(III) and chromium(VI) to a Mn3O4 nanomaterial.
Chem. Eng. J. 254, 374–383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.05.110.
Chang, Y.-C., Chang, S.-W., Chen, D.-H., 2006. Magnetic chitosan nanoparticles: studies on chitosan binding and ad￾sorption of Co(II) ions. React. Funct. Polym. 66 (3), 335–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2005.08.006.
Chauhan, N., Gupta, S., Singh, N., Singh, S., Islam, S.S., Sood, K.N., Pasricha, R., 2011. Aligned nanogold assisted one
step sensing and removal of heavy metal ions. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 363 (1), 42–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcis.2011.07.018.
Chen, C.L., Wang, X.K., Nagatsu, M., 2009. Europium adsorption on multiwall carbon nanotube/Iron oxide magnetic
composite in the presence of polyacrylic acid. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43 (7), 2362–2367. https://doi.org/10.1021/
es803018a.
Chen, J., Li, X.Y., Dong, H., 2010. Formation and characterisations of S phase in plasma carburised high carbon Stellite
21 CoCr alloy. Surf. Eng. 26 (4), 233–241. https://doi.org/10.1179/026708409X12490360426007.
Cui, H.-J., Cai, J.-K., Shi, J.-W., Yuan, B., Ai, C.-L., Fu, M.-L., 2014. Fabrication of 3D porous Mn doped α-Fe2O3
nanostructures for the removal of heavy metals from wastewater. RSC Adv. 4 (20), 10176–10179. https://doi.
org/10.1039/C3RA46348F.
Cui, L., Wang, Y., Gao, L., Hu, L., Yan, L., Wei, Q., Du, B., 2015. EDTA functionalized magnetic graphene oxide for
removal of Pb(II), Hg(II) and Cu(II) in water treatment: adsorption mechanism and separation property. Chem.
Eng. J. 281, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2015.06.043.
Cumbal, L., SenGupta, A.K., 2005. Arsenic removal using polymer-supported hydrated Iron(III) oxide nanoparticles:
role of Donnan membrane effect. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39 (17), 6508–6515. https://doi.org/10.1021/es050175e.
Datsyuk, V., Kalyva, M., Papagelis, K., Parthenios, J., Tasis, D., Siokou, A., Galiotis, C., 2008. Chemical oxidation of
multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Carbon 46 (6), 833–840. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2008.02.012.
Dickinson, M., Scott, T.B., 2010. The application of zero-valent iron nanoparticles for the remediation of a
uranium-contaminated waste effluent. J. Hazard. Mater. 178 (1), 171–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.
2010.01.060.
References 179
I. Basics principlesDil, E.A., Ghaedi, M., Asfaram, A., 2017a. The performance of nanorods material as adsorbent for removal of azo dyes
and heavy metal ions: application of ultrasound wave, optimization and modeling. Ultrason. Sonochem. 34,
792–802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2016.07.015.
Dil, E.A., Ghaedi, M., Asfaram, A., Hajati, S., Mehrabi, F., Goudarzi, A., 2017b. Preparation of nanomaterials for the
ultrasound-enhanced removal of Pb2+ ions and malachite green dye: Chemometric optimization and modeling.
Ultrason. Sonochem. 34, 677–691. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2016.07.001.
Ding, Z., Hu, X., Morales, V.L., Gao, B., 2014. Filtration and transport of heavy metals in graphene oxide enabled sand
columns. Chem. Eng. J. 257, 248–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.07.034.
Dong, Z., Wang, D., Liu, X., Pei, X., Chen, L., Jin, J., 2014. Bio-inspired surface-functionalization of graphene oxide for
the adsorption of organic dyes and heavy metal ions with a superhigh capacity. J. Mater. Chem. A 2 (14),
5034–5040. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ta14751g.
Donia, A.M., Atia, A.A., Abouzayed, F.I., 2012. Preparation and characterization of nano-magnetic cellulose with fast
kinetic properties towards the adsorption of some metal ions. Chem. Eng. J. 191, 22–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2011.08.034.
Du, W.L., Xu, Z.R., Han, X.Y., Xu, Y.L., Miao, Z.G., 2008. Preparation, characterization and adsorption properties of
chitosan nanoparticles for eosin Y as a model anionic dye. J. Hazard. Mater. 153 (1), 152–156. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.08.040.
Dyal, A., Loos, K., Noto, M., Chang, S.W., Spagnoli, C., Shafi, K.V.P.M., Gross, R.A., 2003. Activity of Candida rugosa
lipase immobilized on γ-Fe2O3 magnetic nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (7), 1684–1685. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ja021223n.
Ezoddin, M., Shemirani, F., Abdi, K., Saghezchi, M.K., Jamali, M.R., 2010. Application of modified nano-alumina as a
solid phase extraction sorbent for the preconcentration of cd and Pb in water and herbal samples prior to flame
atomic absorption spectrometry determination. J. Hazard. Mater. 178 (1), 900–905. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2010.02.023.
Fan, L., Luo, C., Sun, M., Qiu, H., 2012. Synthesis of graphene oxide decorated with magnetic cyclodextrin for fast
chromium removal. J. Mater. Chem. 22 (47), 24577–24583. https://doi.org/10.1039/C2JM35378D.
Fan, L., Luo, C., Sun, M., Li, X., Qiu, H., 2013. Highly selective adsorption of lead ions by water-dispersible magnetic
chitosan/graphene oxide composites. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 103, 523–529. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
colsurfb.2012.11.006.
Farghali, A.A., Bahgat, M., Enaiet Allah, A., Khedr, M.H., 2013. Adsorption of Pb(II) ions from aqueous solutions
using copper oxide nanostructures. Beni-Suef Univ. J. Basic Appl. Sci. 2 (2), 61–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bjbas.2013.01.001.
Feng, Y., Gong, J.-L., Zeng, G.-M., Niu, Q.-Y., Zhang, H.-Y., Niu, C.-G., Yan, M., 2010. Adsorption of cd (II) and Zn (II)
from aqueous solutions using magnetic hydroxyapatite nanoparticles as adsorbents. Chem. Eng. J. 162 (2),
487–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2010.05.049.
Fu, F., Wang, Q., 2011. Removal of heavy metal ions from wastewaters: a review. J. Environ. Manag. 92 (3), 407–418.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.11.011.
Fung, W.-Y., Yuen, K.-H., Liong, M.-T., 2011. Agrowaste-based nanofibers as a probiotic Encapsulant: fabrication and
characterization. J. Agric. Food Chem. 59 (15), 8140–8147. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf2009342.
Ge, H., Hua, T., 2016. Synthesis and characterization of poly(maleic acid)-grafted crosslinked chitosan nanomaterial
with high uptake and selectivity for Hg(II) sorption. Carbohydr. Polym. 153, 246–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2016.07.110.
Ge, F., Li, M.-M., Ye, H., Zhao, B.-X., 2012. Effective removal of heavy metal ions Cd2+, Zn2+, Pb2+, Cu2+ from aque￾ous solution by polymer-modified magnetic nanoparticles. J. Hazard. Mater. 211-212, 366–372. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.12.013.
Geng, B., Jin, Z., Li, T., Qi, X., 2009. Kinetics of hexavalent chromium removal from water by chitosan-Fe0
nanoparticles. Chemosphere 75 (6), 825–830. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2009.01.009.
Gollavelli, G., Chang, C.-C., Ling, Y.-C., 2013. Facile synthesis of smart magnetic graphene for safe drinking water:
heavy metal removal and disinfection control. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 1 (5), 462–472. https://doi.org/10.1021/
sc300112z.
Gong, J., Liu, T., Wang, X., Hu, X., Zhang, L., 2011. Efficient removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous systems with
the assembly of anisotropic layered double hydroxide nanocrystals@carbon Nanosphere. Environ. Sci. Technol.
45 (14), 6181–6187. https://doi.org/10.1021/es200668q.
180 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesGopalakrishnan, A., Krishnan, R., Thangavel, S., Venugopal, G., Kim, S.-J., 2015. Removal of heavy metal ions from
pharma-effluents using graphene-oxide nanosorbents and study of their adsorption kinetics. J. Ind. Eng. Chem.
30, 14–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2015.06.005.
Guo, X., Du, B., Wei, Q., Yang, J., Hu, L., Yan, L., Xu, W., 2014. Synthesis of amino functionalized magnetic graphenes
composite material and its application to remove Cr(VI), Pb(II), Hg(II), Cd(II) and Ni(II) from contaminated water.
J. Hazard. Mater. 278, 211–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.05.075.
Hadavifar, M., Bahramifar, N., Younesi, H., Li, Q., 2014. Adsorption of mercury ions from synthetic and real waste￾water aqueous solution by functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotube with both amino and thiolated groups.
Chem. Eng. J. 237, 217–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.10.014.
Haider, S., Park, S.-Y., 2009. Preparation of the electrospun chitosan nanofibers and their applications to the adsorp￾tion of Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions from an aqueous solution. J. Membr. Sci. 328 (1), 90–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2008.11.046.
Hakami, O., Zhang, Y., Banks, C.J., 2012. Thiol-functionalised mesoporous silica-coated magnetite nanoparticles for
high efficiency removal and recovery of hg from water. Water Res. 46 (12), 3913–3922. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2012.04.032.
Heiranian, M., Farimani, A.B., Aluru, N.R., 2015. Water desalination with a single-layer MoS 2 nanopore. Nat.
Commun. 6 (1), 1–6.
Hokkanen, S., Repo, E., Suopaj€arvi, T., Liimatainen, H., Niinimaa, J., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2014. Adsorption of Ni(II), Cu(II)
and Cd(II) from aqueous solutions by amino modified nanostructured microfibrillated cellulose. Cellulose 21 (3),
1471–1487. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-014-0240-4.
Huang, C., Hu, B., 2008. Silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles modified with γ-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane for
fast and selective solid phase extraction of trace amounts of Cd, Cu, Hg, and Pb in environmental and biological
samples prior to their determination by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Spectrochim. Acta B At.
Spectrosc. 63 (3), 437–444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sab.2007.12.010.
Huang, Y., Keller, A.A., 2015. EDTA functionalized magnetic nanoparticle sorbents for cadmium and lead contam￾inated water treatment. Water Res. 80, 159–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.05.011.
Huang, M.-R., Huang, S.-J., Li, X.-G., 2011. Facile synthesis of polysulfoaminoanthraquinone nanosorbents for rapid
removal and ultrasensitive fluorescent detection of heavy metal ions. J. Phys. Chem. C 115 (13), 5301–5315.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp1099706.
Iram, M., Guo, C., Guan, Y., Ishfaq, A., Liu, H., 2010. Adsorption and magnetic removal of neutral red dye from aque￾ous solution using Fe3O4 hollow nanospheres. J. Hazard. Mater. 181 (1), 1039–1050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2010.05.119.
Jaiswal, A., Ghsoh, S.S., Chattopadhyay, A., 2012. Quantum dot impregnated-chitosan film for heavy metal ion sens￾ing and removal. Langmuir 28 (44), 15687–15696. https://doi.org/10.1021/la3027573.
Kaleem, W.A., Muhammad, N., Qayum, M., Khan, H., Khan, A., Aliberti, L., De, F.V., 2013. Antinociceptive activity of
cyclopeptide alkaloids isolated from Ziziphus oxyphylla Edgew (Rhamnaceae). Fitoterapia 91, 154–158.
Kanel, S.R., Manning, B., Charlet, L., Choi, H., 2005. Removal of arsenic(III) from groundwater by nanoscale zero￾valent Iron. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39 (5), 1291–1298. https://doi.org/10.1021/es048991u.
Kangoa, S., Kaliab, S., Cellib, A., 2013. Prog. Polym. Sci. 38 (8), 1232.
Karatapanis, A.E., Fiamegos, Y., Stalikas, C.D., 2011. Silica-modified magnetic nanoparticles functionalized with
cetylpyridinium bromide for the preconcentration of metals after complexation with 8-hydroxyquinoline. Talanta
84 (3), 834–839. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2011.02.013.
Kardam, A., Raj, K.R., Arora, J.K., Srivastava, S., 2012. Artificial neural network modeling for biosorption of Pb(II) ions
on nanocellulose fibers. BioNanoScience 2 (3), 153–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12668-012-0045-6.
Kardam, A., Raj, K.R., Srivastava, S., Srivastava, M.M., 2014. Nanocellulose fibers for biosorption of cadmium, nickel,
and lead ions from aqueous solution. Clean Techn. Environ. Policy 16 (2), 385–393. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10098-013-0634-2.
Khan, A., Asiri, A.M., Rub, M.A., Azum, N., Khan, A.A.P., Khan, S.B., Khan, I., 2013. Synthesis, characterization of
silver nanoparticle embedded polyaniline tungstophosphate-nanocomposite cation exchanger and its application
for heavy metal selective membrane. Compos. Part B 45 (1), 1486–1492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compositesb.2012.09.023.
Kim, B., Park, C.-S., Murayama, M., Hochella, M.F., 2010. Discovery and characterization of silver sulfide
nanoparticles in final sewage sludge products. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 (19), 7509–7514. https://doi.org/
10.1021/es101565j.
References 181
I. Basics principlesKim, E.-J., Lee, C.-S., Chang, Y.-Y., Chang, Y.-S., 2013. Hierarchically structured manganese oxide-coated magnetic
nanocomposites for the efficient removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous systems. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
5 (19), 9628–9634. https://doi.org/10.1021/am402615m.
Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindstrom, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D., Dorris, A., 2011. Nanocelluloses: a new €
family of nature-based materials. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (24), 5438–5466. https://doi.org/10.1002/
anie.201001273.
Koduru, J.R., Lee, K.D., 2014. Evaluation of thiosemicarbazone derivative as chelating agent for the simultaneous re￾moval and trace determination of Cd(II) and Pb(II) in food and water samples. Food Chem. 150, 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.10.104.
Kosa, S.A., Al-Zhrani, G., Abdel Salam, M., 2012. Removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions by multi-walled
carbon nanotubes modified with 8-hydroxyquinoline. Chem. Eng. J. 181-182, 159–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2011.11.044.
Kumar, K.Y., Muralidhara, H.B., Nayaka, Y.A., Balasubramanyam, J., Hanumanthappa, H., 2013. Hierarchically as￾sembled mesoporous ZnO nanorods for the removal of lead and cadmium by using differential pulse anodic strip￾ping voltammetric method. Powder Technol. 239, 208–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2013.02.009.
Kwok, K.C.M., Koong, L.F., Chen, G., McKay, G., 2014. Mechanism of arsenic removal using chitosan and
nanochitosan. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 416, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2013.10.031.
Kyzas, G.Z., Matis, K.A., 2015. Nanoadsorbents for pollutants removal: a review. J. Mol. Liq. 203, 159–168. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2015.01.004.
Lee, H.Y., Bae, D.R., Park, J.C., Song, H., Han, W.S., Jung, J.H., 2009. A selective Fluoroionophore based on BODIPY￾functionalized magnetic silica nanoparticles: removal of Pb2+ from human blood. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48 (7),
1239–1243. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200804714.
Lee, Y.-F., Nan, F.-H., Chen, M.-J., Wu, H.-Y., Ho, C.-W., Chen, Y.-Y., Huang, C.-C., 2012. Detection and removal of
mercury and lead ions by using gold nanoparticle-based gel membrane. Anal. Methods 4 (6), 1709–1717. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C2AY05872C.
Li, X.-q., Zhang, W.-x., 2006. Iron nanoparticles: the coreshell structure and unique properties for Ni(II) sequestra￾tion. Langmuir 22 (10), 4638–4642. https://doi.org/10.1021/la060057k.
Li, S., Yue, X., Jing, Y., Bai, S., Dai, Z., 2011a. Fabrication of zonal thiol-functionalized silica nanofibers for removal of
heavy metal ions from wastewater. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 380 (1), 229–233. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.02.027.
Li, G., Zhao, Z., Liu, J., Jiang, G., 2011b. Effective heavy metal removal from aqueous systems by thiol functionalized
magnetic mesoporous silica. J. Hazard. Mater. 192 (1), 277–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.05.015.
Li, L., Fan, L., Sun, M., Qiu, H., Li, X., Duan, H., Luo, C., 2013. Adsorbent for chromium removal based on graphene
oxide functionalized with magnetic cyclodextrin–chitosan. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 107, 76–83. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.01.074.
Li, L., Wen, Y., Xu, L., Xu, Q., Song, S., Zuo, X., Liu, G., 2016. Development of mercury(II) ion biosensors based on
mercury-specific oligonucleotide probes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 75, 433–445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bios.2015.09.003.
Liu, R., Liang, P., 2008. Determination of trace lead in water samples by graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrom￾etry after preconcentration with nanometer titanium dioxide immobilized on silica gel. J. Hazard. Mater. 152 (1),
166–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.06.081.
Liu, T., Yang, X., Wang, Z.-L., Yan, X., 2013. Enhanced chitosan beads-supported Fe0-nanoparticles for removal of
heavy metals from electroplating wastewater in permeable reactive barriers. Water Res. 47 (17), 6691–6700.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2013.09.006.
Liu, P., Sehaqui, H., Tingaut, P., Wichser, A., Oksman, K., Mathew, A.P., 2014a. Cellulose and chitin nanomaterials for
capturing silver ions (Ag+) from water via surface adsorption. Cellulose 21 (1), 449–461. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10570-013-0139-5.
Liu, M., Wang, Z., Zong, S., Chen, H., Zhu, D., Wu, L., Cui, Y., 2014b. SERS detection and removal of mercury(II)/
silver(I) using oligonucleotide-functionalized Core/Shell magnetic silica sphere@au nanoparticles. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 6 (10), 7371–7379. https://doi.org/10.1021/am5006282.
Liu, P., Borrell, P.F., Bozˇic, M., Kokol, V., Oksman, K., Mathew, A.P., 2015. Nanocelluloses and their phosphorylated
derivatives for selective adsorption of Ag+, Cu2+ and Fe3+ from industrial effluents. J. Hazard. Mater. 294,
177–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.04.001.
182 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesLiu, T., Gao, B., Fang, J., Wang, B., Cao, X., 2016a. Biochar-supported carbon nanotube and graphene oxide
nanocomposites for Pb(ii) and Cd(ii) removal. RSC Adv. 6 (29), 24314–24319. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C6RA01895E.
Liu, J., Ge, X., Ye, X., Wang, G., Zhang, H., Zhou, H., Zhao, H., 2016b. 3D graphene/δ-MnO2 aerogels for highly ef￾ficient and reversible removal of heavy metal ions. J. Mater. Chem. A 4 (5), 1970–1979. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C5TA08106H.
Lo´pez-Tellez, G., Barrera-Dı´az, C.E., Balderas-Herna´ndez, P., Roa-Morales, G., Bilyeu, B., 2011. Removal of
hexavalent chromium in aquatic solutions by iron nanoparticles embedded in orange peel pith. Chem. Eng. J.
173 (2), 480–485. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.08.018.
Lu, Q.-F., Huang, M.-R., Li, X.-G., 2007. Synthesis and heavy-metal-ion sorption of pure Sulfophenylenediamine co- €
polymer nanoparticles with intrinsic conductivity and stability. Chem. Eur. J. 13 (21), 6009–6018. https://doi.org/
10.1002/chem.200700233.
Ma, H.-L., Zhang, Y., Hu, Q.-H., Yan, D., Yu, Z.-Z., Zhai, M., 2012. Chemical reduction and removal of Cr(vi) from
acidic aqueous solution by ethylenediamine-reduced graphene oxide. J. Mater. Chem. 22 (13), 5914–5916. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C2JM00145D.
Mahapatra, A., Mishra, B.G., Hota, G., 2013. Electrospun Fe2O3–Al2O3 nanocomposite fibers as efficient adsorbent
for removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution. J. Hazard. Mater. 258-259, 116–123. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2013.04.045.
Man, Z., Muhammad, N., Sarwono, A., Bustam, M.A., Vignesh Kumar, M., Rafiq, S., 2011. Preparation of cellulose
nanocrystals using an ionic liquid. J. Polym. Environ. 19 (3), 726–731. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-011-0323-3.
Mani, A.D., Reddy, P.M.K., Srinivaas, M., Ghosal, P., Xanthopoulos, N., Subrahmanyam, C., 2015. Facile synthesis of
efficient visible active C-doped TiO2 nanomaterials with high surface area for the simultaneous removal of phenol
and Cr(VI). Mater. Res. Bull. 61, 391–399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.materresbull.2014.10.051.
Mashhadizadeh, M.H., Amoli-Diva, M., 2013. Atomic absorption spectrometric determination of Al3+ and Cr3+ after
preconcentration and separation on 3-mercaptopropionic acid modified silica coated-Fe3O4 nanoparticles. J.
Anal. At. Spectrom. 28 (2), 251–258. https://doi.org/10.1039/C2JA30286A.
Mejias Carpio, I.E., Mangadlao, J.D., Nguyen, H.N., Advincula, R.C., Rodrigues, D.F., 2014. Graphene oxide
functionalized with ethylenediamine triacetic acid for heavy metal adsorption and anti-microbial applications.
Carbon 77, 289–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2014.05.032.
Mubarak, N.M., Sahu, J.N., Abdullah, E.C., Jayakumar, N.S., 2014. Removal of heavy metals from wastewater using
carbon nanotubes. Sep. Purif. Rev. 43 (4), 311–338. https://doi.org/10.1080/15422119.2013.821996.
Mulvihill, M., Tao, A., Benjauthrit, K., Arnold, J., Yang, P., 2008. Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy for trace ar￾senic detection in contaminated water. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 47 (34), 6456–6460. https://doi.org/10.1002/
anie.200800776.
Musameh, M.M., Hickey, M., Kyratzis, I.L., 2011. Carbon nanotube-based extraction and electrochemical detection of
heavy metals. Res. Chem. Intermed. 37 (7), 675–689. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11164-011-0307-x.
Musico, Y.L.F., Santos, C.M., Dalida, M.L.P., Rodrigues, D.F., 2013. Improved removal of lead(ii) from water using a
polymer-based graphene oxide nanocomposite. J. Mater. Chem. A 1 (11), 3789–3796. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C3TA01616A.
Ngomsik, A.-F., Bee, A., Siaugue, J.-M., Talbot, D., Cabuil, V., Cote, G., 2009. Co(II) removal by magnetic alginate
beads containing Cyanex 272®. J. Hazard. Mater. 166 (2), 1043–1049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.
2008.11.109.
Olivera, S., Muralidhara, H.B., Venkatesh, K., Guna, V.K., Gopalakrishna, K., Kumar, K., Y., 2016. Potential applica￾tions of cellulose and chitosan nanoparticles/composites in wastewater treatment: a review. Carbohydr. Polym.
153, 600–618. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.08.017.
Pan, B., Wu, J., Pan, B., Lv, L., Zhang, W., Xiao, L., Zheng, S., 2009. Development of polymer-based nanosized hy￾drated ferric oxides (HFOs) for enhanced phosphate removal from waste effluents. Water Res. 43 (17),
4421–4429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.06.055.
Pang, Y., Zeng, G., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., Liu, Y., Lei, X., Xie, G., 2011. PEI-grafted magnetic porous powder for
highly effective adsorption of heavy metal ions. Desalination 281, 278–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.
2011.08.001.
Race, M., Marotta, R., Fabbricino, M., Pirozzi, F., Andreozzi, R., Cortese, L., Giudicianni, P., 2016. Copper and zinc
removal from contaminated soils through soil washing process using ethylenediaminedisuccinic acid as a
References 183
I. Basics principleschelating agent: a modeling investigation. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 4 (3), 2878–2891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jece.2016.05.031.
Rafiq, Z., Nazir, R., Durr-e-Shahwar, Shah, M.R., Ali, S., 2014. Utilization of magnesium and zinc oxide nano￾adsorbents as potential materials for treatment of copper electroplating industry wastewater. J. Environ. Chem.
Eng. 2 (1), 642–651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2013.11.004.
Rai, M., Yadav, A., Gade, A., 2009. Silver nanoparticles as a new generation of antimicrobials. Biotechnol. Adv. 27 (1),
76–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2008.09.002.
Rajiv Gandhi, M., Kousalya, G.N., Meenakshi, S., 2011. Removal of copper(II) using chitin/chitosan nano￾hydroxyapatite composite. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 48 (1), 119–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2010.10.009.
Ren, Y., Zhang, M., Zhao, D., 2008. Synthesis and properties of magnetic Cu(II) ion imprinted composite adsorbent for
selective removal of copper. Desalination 228 (1), 135–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2007.08.013.
Ren, Y., Abbood, H.A., He, F., Peng, H., Huang, K., 2013. Magnetic EDTA-modified chitosan/SiO2/Fe3O4 adsorbent:
preparation, characterization, and application in heavy metal adsorption. Chem. Eng. J. 226, 300–311. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.04.059.
Salam, M.A., Makki, M.S.I., Abdelaal, M.Y.A., 2011. Preparation and characterization of multi-walled carbon
nanotubes/chitosan nanocomposite and its application for the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solution.
J. Alloys Compd. 509 (5), 2582–2587. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.11.094.
Shahat, A., Awual, M.R., Naushad, M., 2015. Functional ligand anchored nanomaterial based facial adsorbent for
cobalt(II) detection and removal from water samples. Chem. Eng. J. 271, 155–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2015.02.097.
Shi, L.-n., Zhang, X., Chen, Z.-l., 2011. Removal of chromium (VI) from wastewater using bentonite-supported nano￾scale zero-valent iron. Water Res. 45 (2), 886–892. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.09.025.
Sirvio, J.A., Hasa, T., Leivisk € €a, T., Liimatainen, H., Hormi, O., 2016. Bisphosphonate nanocellulose in the removal of
vanadium(V) from water. Cellulose 23 (1), 689–697. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-015-0819-4.
Sivakami, M.S., Gomathi, T., Venkatesan, J., Jeong, H.-S., Kim, S.-K., Sudha, P.N., 2013. Preparation and characteri￾zation of nano chitosan for treatment wastewaters. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 57, 204–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2013.03.005.
Skubal, L.R., Meshkov, N.K., Rajh, T., Thurnauer, M., 2002. Cadmium removal from water using thiolactic acid￾modified titanium dioxide nanoparticles. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A Chem. 148 (1), 393–397. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S1010-6030(02)00069-2.
Smith, S.C., Rodrigues, D.F., 2015. Carbon-based nanomaterials for removal of chemical and biological contaminants
from water: a review of mechanisms and applications. Carbon 91, 122–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbon.2015.04.043.
Song, J., Kong, H., Jang, J., 2011. Adsorption of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution by polyrhodanine￾encapsulated magnetic nanoparticles. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 359 (2), 505–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcis.2011.04.034.
Srivastava, V., Weng, C.H., Singh, V.K., Sharma, Y.C., 2011. Adsorption of nickel ions from aqueous solutions by nano
alumina: kinetic, mass transfer, and equilibrium studies. J. Chem. Eng. Data 56 (4), 1414–1422. https://doi.org/
10.1021/je101152b.
Stafiej, A., Pyrzynska, K., 2007. Adsorption of heavy metal ions with carbon nanotubes. Sep. Purif. Technol. 58 (1),
49–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2007.07.008.
S
ˇulek, F., Drofenik, M., Habulin, M., Knez, Zˇ., 2010. Surface functionalization of silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles
for covalent attachment of cholesterol oxidase. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 322 (2), 179–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmmm.2009.07.075.
Sumesh, E., Bootharaju, M.S., Anshup, & Pradeep, T., 2011. A practical silver nanoparticle-based adsorbent for the
removal of Hg2+ from water. J. Hazard. Mater. 189 (1), 450–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.02.061.
Sun, L., Ying, Y., Huang, H., Song, Z., Mao, Y., Xu, Z., Peng, X., 2014. Ultrafast molecule separation through layered
WS2 Nanosheet membranes. ACS Nano 8 (6), 6304–6311. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn501786m.
Takafuji, M., Ide, S., Ihara, H., Xu, Z., 2004. Preparation of poly(1-vinylimidazole)-grafted magnetic nanoparticles and
their application for removal of metal ions. Chem. Mater. 16 (10), 1977–1983. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm030334y.
Tassali, N., Kotera, N., Boutin, C., Leonce, E., Boulard, Y., Rousseau, B., Berthault, P., 2014. Smart detection of toxic
metal ions, Pb2+ and Cd2+, using a 129Xe NMR-based sensor. Anal. Chem. 86 (3), 1783–1788. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ac403669p.
184 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesUpadhyayula, V.K.K., Deng, S., Mitchell, M.C., Smith, G.B., 2009. Application of carbon nanotube technology for re￾moval of contaminants in drinking water: a review. Sci. Total Environ. 408 (1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2009.09.027.
Vilela, D., Parmar, J., Zeng, Y., Zhao, Y., Sa´nchez, S., 2016. Graphene-based microbots for toxic heavy metal removal
and recovery from water. Nano Lett. 16 (4), 2860–2866. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b00768.
Vukovic, G.D., Marinkovic, A.D., Coli  c, M., Ristic, M.Đ., Aleksic, R., Peric-Grujic, A.A., Uskokovic, P.S., 2010. Re￾moval of cadmium from aqueous solutions by oxidized and ethylenediamine-functionalized multi-walled carbon
nanotubes. Chem. Eng. J. 157 (1), 238–248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2009.11.026.
Wang, J.-W., Kuo, Y.-M., 2008. Preparation and adsorption properties of chitosan–poly(acrylic acid) nanoparticles for
the removal of nickel ions. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 107 (4), 2333–2342. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.27247.
Wang, H., Yuan, X., Wu, Y., Huang, H., Zeng, G., Liu, Y., Qi, Y., 2013. Adsorption characteristics and behaviors of
graphene oxide for Zn(II) removal from aqueous solution. Appl. Surf. Sci. 279, 432–440. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apsusc.2013.04.133.
Wang, N., Zhou, L., Guo, J., Ye, Q., Lin, J.-M., Yuan, J., 2014. Adsorption of environmental pollutants using magnetic
hybrid nanoparticles modified with β-cyclodextrin. Appl. Surf. Sci. 305, 267–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apsusc.2014.03.054.
Wang, P., Du, M., Zhu, H., Bao, S., Yang, T., Zou, M., 2015. Structure regulation of silica nanotubes and their adsorp￾tion behaviors for heavy metal ions: pH effect, kinetics, isotherms and mechanism. J. Hazard. Mater. 286, 533–544.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.12.034.
Wanna, Y., Chindaduang, A., Tumcharern, G., Phromyothin, D., Porntheerapat, S., Nukeaw, J., Pratontep, S., 2016.
Efficiency of SPIONs functionalized with polyethylene glycol bis(amine) for heavy metal removal. J. Magn. Magn.
Mater. 414, 32–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2016.04.064.
Warner, C.L., Addleman, R.S., Cinson, A.D., Droubay, T.C., Engelhard, M.H., Nash, M.A., Warner, M.G., 2010. High￾performance, superparamagnetic, nanoparticle-based heavy metal sorbents for removal of contaminants from
natural waters. ChemSusChem 3 (6), 749–757. https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.201000027.
Wei, Y., Yang, R., Zhang, Y.-X., Wang, L., Liu, J.-H., Huang, X.-J., 2011. High adsorptive γ-AlOOH(boehmite)@SiO2/
Fe3O4 porous magnetic microspheres for detection of toxic metal ions in drinking water. Chem. Commun. 47 (39),
11062–11064. https://doi.org/10.1039/C1CC14215A.
White, B.R., Stackhouse, B.T., Holcombe, J.A., 2009. Magnetic γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles coated with poly-l-cysteine for
chelation of As(III), Cu(II), Cd(II), Ni(II), Pb(II) and Zn(II). J. Hazard. Mater. 161 (2), 848–853. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2008.04.105.
Wu, T., Ni, Y., Ma, X., Hong, J., 2013. La-doped ZnO nanoparticles: simple solution-combusting preparation and ap￾plications in the wastewater treatment. Mater. Res. Bull. 48 (11), 4754–4758. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
materresbull.2013.08.018.
Xiao, S., Ma, H., Shen, M., Wang, S., Huang, Q., Shi, X., 2011. Excellent copper(II) removal using zero-valent iron
nanoparticle-immobilized hybrid electrospun polymer nanofibrous mats. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng.
Asp. 381 (1), 48–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.03.005.
Xiao, X., Ma, X.-B., Yuan, H., Liu, P.-C., Lei, Y.-B., Xu, H., Feng, Y.-J., 2015. Photocatalytic properties of zinc sulfide
nanocrystals biofabricated by metal-reducing bacterium Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. J. Hazard. Mater. 288,
134–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.02.009.
Xie, Y., Huang, Q., Liu, M., Wang, K., Wan, Q., Deng, F., Wei, Y., 2015. Mussel inspired functionalization of carbon
nanotubes for heavy metal ion removal. RSC Adv. 5 (84), 68430–68438. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA08908E.
Yang, K., Wei, W., Qi, L., Wu, W., Jing, Q., Lin, D., 2014. Are engineered nanomaterials superior adsorbents for re￾moval and pre-concentration of heavy metal cations from water? RSC Adv. 4 (86), 46122–46125. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C4RA09375E.
Yantasee, W., Warner, C.L., Sangvanich, T., Addleman, R.S., Carter, T.G., Wiacek, R.J., Warner, M.G., 2007. Removal
of heavy metals from aqueous systems with thiol functionalized superparamagnetic nanoparticles. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 41 (14), 5114–5119. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0705238.
Yantasee, W., Rutledge, R.D., Chouyyok, W., Sukwarotwat, V., Orr, G., Warner, C.L., Addleman, R.S., 2010.
Functionalized Nanoporous silica for the removal of heavy metals from biological systems: adsorption and ap￾plication. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2 (10), 2749–2758. https://doi.org/10.1021/am100616b.
Yu, X., Tong, S., Ge, M., Wu, L., Zuo, J., Cao, C., Song, W., 2013. Adsorption of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution
by carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals. J. Environ. Sci. 25 (5), 933–943. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1001-0742(12)
60145-4.
References 185
I. Basics principlesYu, J.-G., Yu, L.-Y., Yang, H., Liu, Q., Chen, X.-H., Jiang, X.-Y., Jiao, F.-P., 2015. Graphene nanosheets as novel adsor￾bents in adsorption, preconcentration and removal of gases, organic compounds and metal ions. Sci. Total Envi￾ron. 502, 70–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.08.077.
Yusuf, M., Elfghi, F.M., Zaidi, S.A., Abdullah, E.C., Khan, M.A., 2015. Applications of graphene and its derivatives as
an adsorbent for heavy metal and dye removal: a systematic and comprehensive overview. RSC Adv. 5 (62),
50392–50420. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ra07223a.
Zargoosh, K., Abedini, H., Abdolmaleki, A., Molavian, M.R., 2013. Effective removal of heavy metal ions from indus￾trial wastes using Thiosalicylhydrazide-modified magnetic nanoparticles. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 52 (42),
14944–14954. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie401971w.
Zhang, F., Zhu, Z., Dong, Z., Cui, Z., Wang, H., Hu, W., Ma, J., 2011. Magnetically recoverable facile nanomaterials:
synthesis, characterization and application in remediation of heavy metals. Microchem. J. 98 (2), 328–333. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2011.03.005.
Zhang, K., Kemp, K.C., Chandra, V., 2012. Homogeneous anchoring of TiO2 nanoparticles on graphene sheets for
waste water treatment. Mater. Lett. 81, 127–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2012.05.002.
Zhang, W., Shi, X., Zhang, Y., Gu, W., Li, B., Xian, Y., 2013a. Synthesis of water-soluble magnetic graphene
nanocomposites for recyclable removal of heavy metal ions. J. Mater. Chem. A 1 (5), 1745–1753. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c2ta00294a.
Zhang, J., Zhai, S., Li, S., Xiao, Z., Song, Y., An, Q., Tian, G., 2013b. Pb(II) removal of Fe3O4@SiO2–NH2 core–shell
nanomaterials prepared via a controllable sol–gel process. Chem. Eng. J. 215-216, 461–471. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2012.11.043.
Zhang, Y., Yan, L., Xu, W., Guo, X., Cui, L., Gao, L., Du, B., 2014. Adsorption of Pb(II) and Hg(II) from aqueous so￾lution using magnetic CoFe2O4-reduced graphene oxide. J. Mol. Liq. 191, 177–182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2013.12.015.
Zhang, X., Huang, Q., Liu, M., Tian, J., Zeng, G., Li, Z., Wei, Y., 2015. Preparation of amine functionalized carbon
nanotubes via a bioinspired strategy and their application in Cu2+ removal. Appl. Surf. Sci. 343, 19–27.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.03.081.
Zhao, X., Lv, L., Pan, B., Zhang, W., Zhang, S., Zhang, Q., 2011. Polymer-supported nanocomposites for environmen￾tal application: a review. Chem. Eng. J. 170 (2), 381–394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.02.071.
Zhi, L., Liu, J., Wang, Y., Zhang, W., Wang, B., Xu, Z., Li, G., 2013. Multifunctional Fe3O4 nanoparticles for highly
sensitive detection and removal of Al(iii) in aqueous solution. Nanoscale 5 (4), 1552–1556. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C2NR33200K.
Zhou, Q.-x., Zhao, X.-n., Xiao, J.-p., 2009a. Preconcentration of nickel and cadmium by TiO2 nanotubes as solid-phase
extraction adsorbents coupled with flame atomic absorption spectrometry. Talanta 77 (5), 1774–1777. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.talanta.2008.10.018.
Zhou, Y.-T., Nie, H.-L., Branford-White, C., He, Z.-Y., Zhu, L.-M., 2009b. Removal of Cu2+ from aqueous solution by
chitosan-coated magnetic nanoparticles modified with α-ketoglutaric acid. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 330 (1), 29–37.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2008.10.026.
Zhu, B., Zhao, J., Yu, H., Yan, L., Wei, Q., Du, B., 2013. Naphthalimide-functionalized Fe3O4@SiO2 core/shell
nanoparticles for selective and sensitive adsorption and detection of Hg2+. Chem. Eng. J. 219, 411–418.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2012.12.068.
186 8. Nanosorbents for heavy metals removal
I. Basics principlesCHAPTER
9
Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
as a positive approach toward green
environment
Sabir Khana,b
, Shakeel Zebb,c
, Jaime Vega-Chaco´n
a
, Sergio
Espinoza Torresa
, Sandra Quispe Martı´nez
a
, Rosario Lo´peza
,
Ily Marilu´ Maza Mejı´aa
, Christian Ronald Jacinto Herna´ndeza
,
Javier Lobaton Vilab,c
, Eduardo Jara Cornejoa
, Charles Pizan
Aquinoa
, Bianca Mortarib,c
, Luis Fernando Tavares Borgesb,c
,
Gerson A. Ruiz-Co´rdovaa
, Fredy Lucho Rondinel Carhuasa
,
Maria Del Pilar Taboada Sotomayorb,c
, and Gino Picassoa
a
Laboratory of Physical Chemistry Research, Faculty of Sciences, National University of
Engineering, Lima, Peru b
Institute of Chemistry, UNESP-Sa˜o Paulo State University, Araraquara,
SP, Brazil c
National Institute for Alternative Technologies of Detection, Toxicological
Evaluation & Removal of Micropollutants and Radioactives (INCT-DATREM), Araraquara,
SP, Brazil
9.1 Introduction
The world’s freshwater reservoirs become suffering being of developing populations and
large-scale agricultural and industrial activities. A massive number of people on the planet
are going through the impacts of water and water-borne diseases (Devanathan, 2017). On
the large-scale, the color is given to make the products attractive, which causes many colors
to go into lakes and rivers, and water becomes dirty (Foguel et al., 2017). A significant number
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 187 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00009-5of manufacturing industries directly discharge several major hazardous organic compounds
in the water resources, causing water-living organisms to be affected (Zeb, 2018). Some pol￾lution is caused by farming activities, which we call indirect water pollution. For example:
spraying chemical fertilizers and pesticides on crops. These chemicals enter through the soil
and contaminate water resources (Barbera and McConnell, 1990). The consequences of direct
and indirect water pollution are still the same, it can cause disease and possibly the death of
any living organism that is in or out of the water. Water pollution is divided into two cate￾gories includes direct and indirect contaminations. Direct water pollution can include
processing industries such as electronics, electroplating, rubber products, and food and bev￾erage while farming activities, agricultural waste, and untreated sewage can cause indirect
water pollution (Singh et al., 2020). In addition to water pollution, different types of pollution
were also classified such as Organic (Ekevwe et al., 2018), Inorganic (Rekha Kathal et al.,
2016), Radioactive (Bonavigo et al., 2009), Suspended Solid (Dwivedi, 2017), Pathogens
(Dwivedi, 2017), Nutrients and Agricultural (Savci, 2012), and Thermal Pollution (Rao,
2017). It has been reported that organic dyes are more toxic and carcinogenic (Villegas￾Navarro et al., 2001). The presence of heavy metals such as mercury (Hg), cadmium (Cd), ar￾senic (As), chromium (Cr), thallium (Tl), and lead (Pb) in organic dyes, being of these heavy
metals cause destructive consequences on the life of living creatures. The utilization of colors
in different food items causes some destructive infections like tumors and a few different dis￾eases in living creatures (Hameed and El-Khaiary, 2008). Besides, the use of dyes can cause
skin and eye sicknesses and yield short breathing problems (Merouani et al., 2010). Therefore
it’s important to treat the wastewater and make them clean-up for living organisms. Environ￾mental protection agencies and other legislative associations in the world have a distinct
fascination with boosting the water worth standard via pollutants elimination and wastewa￾ter treatment. Overtime, many technologies have been practiced to harness wastewater
namely the physical approach, biological methods, advance oxidation, and electrochemical
technologies (Ghoreishi and Haghighi, 2003). Among them, adsorption has gotten broad con￾sideration because of its operational simplicity, high proficiency, cost-adequacy, and its ca￾pacity to eliminate a wide scope of impurities (Gupta et al., 2012; Khan et al., 2018; Sophia
and Lima, 2018). According to an approximation, the cost of utilizing adsorption innovation
to remedy the water contain hazardous materials is about 5.0–200 US dollars/m3 of water
(Gupta et al., 2012). The absorption process has a greater ability to eliminate up to 99.9%
of pollution and extensive organic effluents from water have been eliminated via adsorption
including pesticides, hydrocarbons, plasticizers, phenols, detergents, biphenyls, and phar￾maceutical products (Zeb et al., 2020; Kundu et al., 2018; Klumpp et al., 2003). The term
bio-sorption may be defined as the sticking of effluents (heavy metals, dyes, and pharmaceu￾tical products in an aqueous phase) to the solid surface of biological material (bio-sorbent) via
different mechanisms. At the moment, being of extensive advantages such as simple, low
cost, and harmless to the ecosystem, the researchers consider the bio-sorption method has
become the axis of attention (Torres, 2020). Numerous biomaterials have been examined
and considered as bio-sorbents to remedy the fluid environment and their names are indus￾trial waste materials (Carvalho Costa et al., 2020), sludge (Kulkarni et al., 2019; Taki et al.,
2019), polysaccharides (Hussein et al., 2019), agriculture waste products (Franco et al.,
2020; Wang and Huang, 2020), and biopolymers (Zhang et al., 2020). A wide range of waste￾water treatment has been reported in the literature but this book chapter only focuses on the
basic information and benefits of bio-sorption treatment while also discuss the biological
188 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesmaterial which has been considered efficient bio-sorbents and frequently eliminated the con￾taminations from an aqueous environment.
9.2 Nano-biosorbents surface modification for environmental
remediation
Bio-sorbent materials have been considered a keen axis for the removal of pollutants from
wastewater because for many aspects including accessible in enormous quantity, affordable,
exhibit high adsorption capacity, and simple to control. Bio-sorbent materials are generally
classified into four types like plant products, microbes, peat, and bark. Plant products consist
of mostly agricultural waste such as bagasse, husk, banana pith, soybean hulls, maize cob,
cork biomass, and waste tea, while microbes have been observed as excellent potential
bio-sorbents being of their cell composition and stability (Dhankhar and Hooda, 2011).
The microbial bio-sorbent is divided into three main categories including bacteria, fungi,
and algae. The term peat might be defined as is a collection of partly rotting vegetable matter
or natural matter. Peat is another bio-sorbent that has been counted as a promising candidate
because of many benefits such as enormous surface area, porosity, low price, and effective
accessibility (Robalds, 2015). Out of the different tree parts, tree bark has the most elevated
ability to be utilized as a bio-sorbent. The tree bark materials were tested for the removal of
pollutants in a fluid environment. Various barks exhibited excellent capability for the removal
of heavy metals (Robertson, 1989). The waste from the food industry has occupied a very im￾portant place due to its adequate treatment to solve environmental problems, thus we have
natural biopolymers that come from living organisms and/or renewable resources. These
materials are considered environmentally friendly and sustainable but the most beneficial
property of nano-biosorbents is the green nature of the particles and specials physical chem￾istry properties which allows them to offer a wide variety of applications.
The most abundant biopolymer after cellulose is chitosan and alginate is another important
natural biopolymer, all of them are much utilized in wastewater remediation.
9.2.1 Chitosan
Chitosan is a copolymer composed of D-glucosamine (deacetylated unit) and N-acetyl-D￾glucosamine (acetylated unit) units linked by β-1,4-glycosidic bonds. This linear cationic
polysaccharide occurs as a white flake or powdery solid (Nasrollahzadeh et al., 2021).
A source like a prawn has been considered most encouraging for the preparation of chitosan.
The various sources of a prawn have been investigated in the reported studied such as Penaeus
monodon commonly known as Giant Tiger prawn and Indian prawn (Biswas and Tarafdar,
2013), and a fenneropenaeus indicus (Paul et al., 2014), while all of these sources are consid￾ered as a good extractors for chitosan. The varieties like Penaeus carinatus and Penaeus monodon
are also used to get the chitosan (Puvvada et al., 2012), these specimens have been known
from a common name such as shrimps. Sesarma plicatum is a species of crab that is considered
to be an excellent candidate for the extraction of chitosan (Khaleda Firdous, 2017). Different
types of microbial Aspergillus niger MTCC, some of which are Aspergillus niger MTCC 2208,
Aspergillus niger Mtcc 1785, and Aspergillus niger Mtcc 872, preceded in the preparation of
9.2 Nano-biosorbents surface modification for environmental remediation 189
I. Basics principleschitosan (Kumaresapillai et al., 2010). Most of the bacteria and fungus species are used in the
production of chitosan because these are promising sources of chitin while these kinds of
sources are also used in the industries for the preparation of chitosan. Much information
has been based on the chemical synthesis of chitosan, for example Abhrajyoti et al.
(Tarafdar and Biswas, 2013) demonstrated the synthesis of chitosan using 10 mg of prawn
shell waste and washed with deionized water. After washing the prawn shell waste further
used in the demineralization reaction using hydrogen chloride (HCl) at 25°C for 1 h. In the
second step, the deproteinization reaction proceeds with 0.5% NaOH at 100°C for a half-hour
(30 min). To obtained the chitin slurry and elimination more protein from the sample (shell)
repeated the deproteinization process with 3% sodium hydroxide at a temperature of 100°C
for a half-hour (30 min). The deacetylation of chitin yielded chitosan washed and dried. Sim￾ilarly, the same group adopted the second methodology for the preparation of chitosan using
5 g of biomass of shrimp. The deproteinization step achieved using sample biomass of shrimp
in aqueous NaOH (4%) at 25 °C for 21 h, for the demineralization the reaction proceeds with
4% hydrochloride acid (HCl) at room temperature for 12 h. The synthesized chitin was dried
at normal temperature. The aqueous NaOH (50%) was used to treat chitin at 40 °C for 3 days
as result, obtained chitosan and dried the chitosan at room temperature. The use of microbial
was reported in the literature for the production of chitosan. Zhang et al. (2012) was used the
fermentation process to treat the Lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 8014 and Serratia marcescens
B742. The L. plantarum ATCC 8014 bacteria was used with specific conditions such as 2%
SSP, 2 days of culture time, 10% incubation level, and 15% glucose. Two steps fermentation
treatment of bacteria produced an 18.9% chitin in the presence of a deproteinization rate of
94.5% and a demineralization rate of 93.0%. The advantage of this technique is to use fewer
chemicals in the preparation of chitosan.
The uses of prawn shells for the extraction of chitosan (Sumathi et al., 2012). The prawn
shell was washed with deionized water to remove the waste particles and dried in an oven
at a temperature of 60°C for 24 h. In the next step, the shell is treated with deproteinization
and demineralization and as a result, chitin was synthesized. For the extraction of chitosan
the reaction is followed by the deacetylation process. Its outcomes demonstrated the
antimicrobial.
Action exhibited by the examples on test living organism
The application of chitosan is wide due to the drug-biological, bacteriostatic, antioxidant,
antitumor (Pal et al., 2021), But its application extends further, and currently, chitosan is used
to purify water, in pollutant removal processes and can act as a flocculant and coagulant, as an
adsorbent to remove contaminants such as heavy and highly toxic metals such as arsenic,
mercury, and chromium as well also dyes, pesticides, antibiotics, biological pollutants from
wastewater. Among other applications, chitosan is required in the administration of drugs,
food additives, tissue engineering, and treatment of agricultural soils (Pal et al., 2021).
Overall, chitin and chitosan consist of various functional groups, like hydroxyl (–OH) and
amide (R–CO–NH2) or amine (R–NH2). Chitin comprises N acetylglucosamine with >40%
amide groups, though chitosan is for the most part glucosamine with >60% amine groups
(GAF, 1992). The chitosan molecules can form hydrogen and other non-specific interactions
because of –NH2 and –OH groups. Chitosan has more ability to solve in the acidic medium as
compare to chitin because a positive charge arranges to form an amine group (–NH3
+
). Thus,
the positively charged chitosan particles are isolated via repulsion force power and become
190 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlessuspended in an acidic medium. The chitosan properties depend on the synthesis process be￾cause these processes play an important role to control the level of acetylation, i.e., free amino
groups that allow it to bind with negatively charged molecules (Bhardwaj and Kundu, 2010;
Hudson and Jenkins, 2001). Chitosan has many attractive properties in the field of wastewater
treatment and medical such as biodegradability, low toxicity, good water adsorption effi￾ciency, and anti-fungal effects (Şenel and McClure, 2004; Di Martino et al., 2005).
Chitosan got a greater prevalence in agriculture applications with high accessibility, non￾harmful nature, and biodegradability (Di Martino et al., 2005). Chitosan has unique properties
being of functional groups and natural chelating which allow it to use in the wastewater treat￾ment for the elimination of different organic compounds and heavy metals (Di Martino et al.,
2005) because –OH and –NH2 groups has high flexibility in the structure of chitosan. The che￾lating properties of chitosan allow them to use in various food applications for example elim￾ination of specific components, particles, and materials such as dyes and fats from food
sources (Khor and Lim, 2003; Li et al., 1992). Because of chitosan’s capacity to work in numer￾ous structures, it has numerous spaces of interest inside the clinical industry comprising tis￾sue designing (Di Martino et al., 2005; Li et al., 1992; Bhattarai et al., 2005), orthopedic and
periodontal applications (Şenel and McClure, 2004; Di Martino et al., 2005), wound healing
(Ueno et al., 2001; Ma et al., 2005), and drug delivery ( Jayakumar et al., 2005).
Chitosan facing some difficulties in environmental applications like maintaining its stabil￾ity and removal efficiency. Numerous scientists contemplated the chitosan to treat the waste￾water containing Cr(VI) (Elmizadeh et al., 2013), Pb(II), Hg(II) (Nematidil and Sadeghi, 2019),
Cr(VI) (Samuel et al., 2019), Zn(II), Cd(II), Pb(II), Cu(II) (Dev et al., 2020), Pb(II) (Li et al.,
2019a), and Cu(II) (Liu et al., 2016). The chitosan molecule can form a helical structure around
metal ions (Ogawa et al., 1993) because their molecules are appropriately flexible which can
interact via coordination bonds with each ion (Wu et al., 2010). Chitosan has been considered
an economical sorbent for the treatment of wastewater (Coughlin et al., 1990). Soil and waste￾water that contain organic pollutants can be removed with chitosan, although success de￾pends to some extent characteristics of effluents. In addition to removing a heavy metal, it
can eliminate organic pollutants such as acid dyes (Wong et al., 2004), reactive dyes
(UZUN, 2006), methyl parathion (Yoshizuka et al., 2000), and permethrin pesticide
(Moradi Dehaghi et al., 2014). All these pollutants are given in below Table 9.1.
To solve the problems of some chitosan restrictions, there are two types of modifications.
The chemical modifications involve modifying amino, hydroxyl, or both groups at the same
time and on the other hand, we have the physical modifications that modify the body of the
chitosan particles forming sponges, nanoparticles, gel particles through metallic grinding,
ionization, or ultrasonic treatment.
Through chemical modification, it is possible to improve the solubility of chitosan, as well
as some physical-chemical properties such as thermal stability, rheological properties, resis￾tance to oxidation, and antibacterial properties (Azmy et al., 2019). These chemical modifica￾tions consider three active groups that are shown in the order of reactivity: the amino group
with the highest reactivity, followed by the primary hydroxyl group, and then the secondary
hydroxyl group, from these modifications the applications of chitosan are expanded much
more (Dimassi et al., 2018).
On the other hand, water pollution has always been a major concern nationally and glob￾ally. In this sense, chitosan and cellulose are low-cost adsorbents and present interesting op￾tions in this context (Olivera et al., 2016). On the other hand, the properties of materials at the
9.2 Nano-biosorbents surface modification for environmental remediation 191
I. Basics principlesnanoscale are investigated, considering that the larger the materials have constant properties
but as the size decreases the percentage of atoms on the surface increases, and this causes a
change in the properties of the nanoparticles. In this sense, the present review study focuses
on and analyzes the suitability of chitosan as a nano-adsorbent for the removal of heavy
metals because chitosan nanoparticles have great properties as an effect of increasing the
surface area.
Due to the enormous potential of chitosan nanoparticles, the structural characteristics of
chitosan and the different preparation methods are explored, with special emphasis on the
application of nanoparticles as metal nano-adsorbents in aqueous solutions.
For more than 10 years, nanochitosan has been tested effectively for the adsorption of
metals in an aqueous medium, for example, to evaluate the sorption capacity Cd(II)
(Seyedi et al., 2013), arsenate (Kwok et al., 2014). Also, chitosan nanofibers were tested due
to their high porosity, large surface area per unit mass, and they are possible adsorbents
to remove Pb(II) and Cu(II) (Haider and Park, 2009). Generally, chitosan is used as a modified
material, through grafts, obtaining it as a nanoparticle and imparting magnetic properties to
apply it as a metal adsorbent through its functional groups that can behave as active sites for
the adsorption of contaminants and thus be a bio-adsorbent low cost.
TABLE 9.1 Sorption capacity and sorption removal of metals by chitosan nanoparticles.
Ion
Modified chitosan
adsorbent Morphology
Functional groups
involved in adsorption
Adsorption
capacity References
Cr (VI) Citric acid // NP NH3
+
, COOH 106.15 Elmizadeh et al.
(2013)
Pb(II), Hg(II) Glu/3-aminopropyl
triethoxysilane/
NP –OH (Majority)-NH2
(Few)
38.461 Nematidil and
Sadeghi (2019)
Cr(VI) /Graphene oxide/ NP –OH; –NH 104.16 Samuel et al.
(2019)
Zn(II), Cd(II),
Pb(II), Cu(II)
GMA/MAA/ NP –NH2 92.27 Dev et al. (2020)
Pb(II) –/Cucurbit (Bonavigo
et al., 2009)/
NP C]O, N–C–N, –NH2 873.6 Li et al. (2019a)
Cu(II) –/CS2, GO/Fe3O4 NP –COO–, –NH2, –CS2 442.48 Liu et al. (2016)
Acid dyes Chitosan –– – Wong et al.
(2004)
Reactive dyes Chitosan –– – UZUN (2006)
Methyl
parathion
Chitosan
microparticles/silver￾complexes
–– – Yoshizuka et al.
(2000)
Permethrin
pesticide
Chitosan–ZnO NP – 49%–99%
for 25 mL
Moradi Dehaghi
et al. (2014)
192 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principles9.2.2 Alginate nano-biosorbents
Sodium alginate is a natural biopolymer extracted from brown algae, it has been used as a
bio-sorbents for the purification of wastewater due to its favorable properties that include
biocompatibility, low toxicity, and relatively low cost (Lakouraj et al., 2014). The abundant
carboxyl and hydroxyl group in the lattice makes alginate an effective candidate for heavy
metal removal (Emmerichs et al., 2004). Furthermore, excess hydroxyl and carboxyl func￾tional groups are available throughout the alginate backbone structure, making it an ideal
biopolymer to bind with different species in water (Ding et al., 2019).
Alginates were first found in the late nineteenth century to turn into a valuable normal
biopolymer (Yadav and Ahmadi, 2019). The brown sea algae are used to synthesized the al￾ginates while brown seaweed has the ability to produced alginates commercially. There are
mostly two main sources of alginates: algal sources and bacterial sources (Smidsrod and
Skjakbrk, 1990). Recently, researchers used marine macroalgae to extract the alginates. After
80 years, a bacterial source, the mucoid strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, was discovered
from which bacterial alginates were produced (Linker and Jones, 1966).
The acidic medium allows the polysaccharides to go through hydrolytic cleavage. The
mechanism of acid hydrolysis of the glycosidic bond has been reported in the previous liter￾ature (Pawar and Edgar, 2012). It includes three stages (1) protonation of the glycosidic ox￾ygen to give the conjugate acid; (2) heterolysis of the conjugate acid forming a non-reducing
end group and a carbonium-oxonium ion; and (3) rapid addition of water to the carbonium￾oxonium ion, forming a reducing end group. Dry powders such as sodium alginate can be
kept in a cool, dry place and away from sunlight for a few months. A cold environment such
as a freezer can increase the shelf life while Alginic acid easily degrades than the sodium salt
form. Alginate is not only degraded being of acid and base but also at pH 7 value in the ex￾istence of decreasing compounds.
Despite these remarkable characteristics of alginate, it presents some limitations that affect
the practical application of bio-sorption technology, they tend to be weak in sturdiness and
lack mechanical stability, which limits its practical applications; they lack specificity due to
the presence of several functional groups, which limits their selectivity; suffer from early sat￾uration due to the occupation of sorption sites, which may require desorption before reuse
(Abdi and Kazemi, 2015). Furthermore, for conventional bio-sorbents to have a high surface
area, they must be very porous, which has the problem of limiting their adsorption capacity
and the speed of the adsorption process due to intraparticle diffusion (Stephen Inbaraj and
Chen, 2011).
The nano-biosorbents offer the possibility of developing new materials that overcome
these restrictions. Recent publications show these modifications as magnetic modification,
immobilization and the development of zero valence metals at the nanoscale level have been
considerable interest for the removal of contaminants from a solution (Mahamadi, 2019).
Magnetic modification
The magnetic modification allows the sorbate in the magnetic alginate nano-biosorbent to
be separated with a magnet, which is more efficient than filtration or centrifugation. Some of
the studies carried out on alginate nano-biosorbents with magnetic modification to remove
9.2 Nano-biosorbents surface modification for environmental remediation 193
I. Basics principlesmetals (Kloster et al., 2017; Verma et al., 2017), dyes (Kazemi and Javanbakht, 2020; Yadav
et al., 2020), and organic compounds (Phiri et al., 2019).
Immobilization
The immobilization consists mainly of the immobilization of nanoparticles in the alginate
matrix as alginate beads. Some immobilized materials to remove fluoride are Fe3O4
nanoparticles immobilized in sodium alginate matrix and Fe3O4 nanoparticles and saponified
orange peel residue immobilized in sodium alginate matrix (Christina and
Viswanathan, 2015).
Nanoscale zero-valent metals
The zero-valent metals prepared at the nanoscale have the advantage of an increase in ad￾sorption capacity, they are relatively less toxic substances and that in certain cases allow rapid
magnetic removal (Devatha et al., 2018; Fazlzadeh et al., 2017). The main zero-valent metal
used is Fe in a matrix of alginate using to remove heavy metals such as Cr(VI) (Wen et al.,
2020), Cu(II) (Kuang et al., 2015), and organic pollutants as PAHs (Abdel-Gawad et al., 2016).
Others works related to the application of alginate-based nano-biosorbent, according to the
application and the contaminant, are shown in Table 9.2.
9.2.3 Nanocelullose
Cellulose is a natural biopolymer that can be extracted from wood or cotton and different
parts of plants and other sources such as seeds, leaves, stems, pits, and shells (Suhas et al.,
2016), also it can be obtained from algae, tunicates, and bacteria (Vazquez et al., 2015). Cel￾lulose shows many characteristics properties such as hydrophilicity, adsorption capacity,
non-toxicity, facile chemical modification to improve the low adsorption, crystallinity, good
mechanical properties, renewable and biodegradable (Klemm et al., 1998).
Nanocellulose is a natural fiber obtained by defibration of cellulose for different methods
and it shows extraordinary properties such as size (1–100 nm), very large surface area, high
strength, low thermal expansion, high aspect ratio, and lightweight; additionally, to this
properties, nanocellulose has low cost, biocompatibility, functional ability and sustainable
source (Carpenter et al., 2015). Nanocellulose has been considered to be one of the most
important green materials (Trache et al., 2020).
According to Miyashiro et al. (2020) and Farooq et al. (2020), nanocellulose is usually clas￾sified into:
• Cellulose nanofiber (CNF) is a longer and wide nanofibers with 20–100 nm in width and
>10,000 nm in length and it is produced by mechanical treatment, is semi-crystalline
(Trache et al., 2020).
• Cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) is a crystalline nano-rod with 3–50 nm in width and
50–500 nm in length and it is produced by acid hydrolysis from many sources (Habibi
et al., 2010).
• Bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) is a hydrogel (99% water) and is composed of a nanofiber
network with 20–200 nm it is synthesized by certain aerobic bacteria and then excreted as
exopolysaccharide (Klemm et al., 2011).
194 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesNanocellulose composites
Nanocellulose usually is applied in passive nanoremediation, here nanocellulose acts as a
support or particle stabilizer for reactive nanoparticles that could be previously modified
with polymers. Nasrollahzadeh et al. (2021) and Nata et al. (2011) studied CNF composite
with magnetite nanoparticles with a surface functionalized amine group (1,6-hexanediamine)
for arsenate removal and this composite adsorbed 90 mg per gram of material. Photocatalytic
degradation of mefanamic acid, an emerging pollutant, from aqueous media has been inves￾tigated by (Rathod et al., 2018) using nanocellulose/TiO2 composite, nanocellulose provide a
TABLE 9.2 Some removal of contaminants using alginate-based nonabsorbent.
Class of nano￾biosorbents Nano-biosorbent
Experimental parameters
(optimum)
Maximum
adsorption
capacity or
% removal Contaminant References
Magnetic
modification
AO-γ￾Fe2O3-OMWCNTs
Adsorption over pH
(4–10) and reusability
(87%–82%)
905.5 mg g1 Methylene
blue
Boukhalfa
et al. (2019)
(CA/CMC/
Ni0.2Zn0.2Fe2.6O4)
Contact time of 40 min,
pH of 5.5, and initial
concentration 0.8 g L1
97.75%,
96.83%, and
97.85% for
Nd+3, Tb+3,
and Dy+3
Nd (III), Tb
(III), and Dy
(III)
Javadian
et al. (2020)
POD-PPO￾enzymes on
alginate-coated
magnetic
nanocatalysts
Opimum at T ¼ 20 °C, pH
8, glutehydrie 1.6%, and
enzyme to nanoparticles
ratio of 1:200
98.1% Phenol Marjani
et al. (2021)
Immobilization Fe3O4@n-HAp￾Alg
SC raised from pH 3 to 11.
The reusability and
regeneration upto five
successive cycles
29.14 mg g1 Cr(VI) Periyasamy
et al. (2018)
Iron oxide
nanoparticles
embedded in
barium alginate
beads
Concentration of
immobilized
1500 mg L1
, contact
time ¼ 240 min, and
initial concentration of
10 mg L1
bRMINP
98.75% and
cRMINP
88.88%
Reactive Blue
235
Natarajan
and
Ponnaiah
(2017)
Zero-valent
metals
nZVI-SA 20 min of reaction at pH
6.0
96.4% Cr(VI) Li et al.
(2019b)
AC/nZVCu/
HAp-Alg
Reaction time of 120 min,
pH 5.8
39.06 mg g1 As(III) Iqbal et al.
(2019)
AO, alginate beads; OMWCNTs, oxidized multiwalled carbon nanotubes; CA, calcium alginate; CMC, carboxymethyl chitosan; POD,
peroxidases, PPO, polyphenol oxidase; HAp, hydroxyapatite; Alg, alginate; SC, sorption capacity; bRMINP, biologically synthesized
iron nanoparticles; cRMINP, chemically synthesized iron nanoparticles; nZVI, nano zero-valent iron; SA, sodium alginate; AC,
activated carbon; nZVCu, nano-zerovalent copper.
9.2 Nano-biosorbents surface modification for environmental remediation 195
I. Basics principleslarge surface area to the TiO2 nanoparticles but also enhance the electron distribution and
transfer to the TiO2 surface, leading to higher photocatalytic activity (Nasrollahzadeh
et al., 2021).
Nanocellulose modification
On the other hand, nanocellulose is applied in active nanoremediation, as it acts directly as
a pollutant adsorbent material. Nanocellulose contains many reactive hydroxyl groups in its
chemical structure (hydrophilic) which allow an easy functionalized since by incorporating
chemical molecules into its structure, the efficiency of the binding of many pollutants im￾prove its mechanical properties and allows to offer different applications, among the main
surface modifications we have:
• Silylation introduces a substituted silyl group, from alkoxysilane, on the surface of
nanocellulose achievement to improve wettability of nanocellulose.
• Sulfonation introduces negative charges (sulfate groups) to the surface of nanocellulose, it
improves the dispersion capacity in water.
• Oxidation with 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) converts alcohol functions
of the glucose unit to a carboxylic acid, these negative charges (carboxylate groups)
increase electrostatic repulsion and improves dispersion in water.
• Carboxymethylation introduces negative charges (carboxymethyl groups) to the surface of
nanocellulose, the electrostatic repulsions facilitate the degradation of biomass into
nanosized particles.
• Acetylation uses acetic anhydride and dry acetic acid with a mineral acid as catalyst, this
modification increases hydrophobicity.
• Phosphorylation introduces phosphate ester groups into the nanocellulose.
• Grafted nanocellulose (Bagheri and Julkapli, 2018) is a good method to modify the
chemical and physical properties of the nanocellulose with another polymer Table 9.3
shows examples of the principals surface modification techniques to nanocellulose
(Sharma et al., 2019).
TABLE 9.3 Some examples of surface modification.
Method Technique
Reactive for
modification Contaminant
Adsorption
capacity or %
removal References
Chemical Silylation Methyltrimethoxysilane Oil from water Up to 102 g g1 Zhang et al.
(2014)
Acetylation Acetic anhydride and
acetic acid (1.5:1, v/v)
Oil from water 25 g g1 Zimmermann
et al. (2019)
Phosphorylation Adenosine-50
-
triphosphate (ATP) and
MgCl2
Ag1+, Cu2+,
and
Fe3+ from
industrial
effluents
99% Liu et al.
(2015)
196 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principles9.3 Magnetic nanoparticles immobilized as nano-biosorbent
Since the surface area to volume ratio increases as the particle size decreases, nanoparticles
present higher adsorption capacity than bulk materials owing to the large surface area to vol￾ume ratio (Amiri et al., 2019; Sarma et al., 2019). Moreover, magnetic nanoparticles can be
manipulated by the application of an external magnetic field gradient allowing the separation
of magnetic nanoparticles dispersed in a solution (Avval et al., 2019). This process, usually
known as magnetic separation, avoids further steps as filtration or centrifugation, which re￾duces the cost and the time of effective removal of adsorbates (Hora´k et al., 2007; Aguilar￾Arteaga et al., 2010). Due to these features, magnetic nanoparticles have been employed
for the development of efficient nano-adsorbents of pollutants as metals, dyes, drugs, pesti￾cides, among others, which could be easily removed by magnetic separation. Furthermore,
after adequate treatment of desorption, the nano-adsorbents could be used newly in several
cycles of adsorption-desorption, reducing the unnecessary production of nano-adsorbents
(Wang et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2021; Hola et al., 2015). The magnetic separation performance
is related to the physicochemical characteristics of the adsorbent such as the proportion of
magnetic material, the type of magnetic material, the average particle size, the size distribu￾tion, the aggregation degree, the specific surface area, the chemical species present on the sur￾face and the surface charge (Hora´k et al., 2007; Ko et al., 2017; Arsalani et al., 2021). Magnetic
nanoparticles with high saturation magnetization are preferred to achieve a rapid magnetic
separation (Shi et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2018). Although the decrease in the size of the nano￾particle could enhance the adsorption capacity, it also produces a depletion in the saturation
magnetization (Vega-Chaco´n et al., 2016). Then it is important to consider these features when
a magnetic nano-adsorbent is designed. The adsorption capacity depends on the interactions
between adsorbate and the surface of the adsorbent. Some molecules have a low affinity for
the surface of magnetic nanoparticles, and it is not useful to employ these nanoparticles with￾out any modification for an efficient adsorption. However, magnetic nanoparticles mixed
with a suitable material (as activated carbon, silica, polymers, among others) which have high
affinity for the adsorbate produce effective adsorbent which can be magnetically separated
(Sarma et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021). Magnetic nanoparticles are mainly composed of iron,
nickel, cobalt, their respective oxides and alloys. However, iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles,
such as magnetite (Fe3O4) and maghemite (γ-Fe2O3), are preferred for most of the technolog￾ical applications due to their strong magnetic responsiveness, low toxicity (compared with
other magnetic nanoparticles), facile surface modification and easy preparation methods with
low environmental impact (Kaur et al., 2014).
Yadav and Fulekar (2018) prepared maghemite nanoparticles using the extract of the leaf of
the Tridax plant by a sonochemical process. Showing a particle size between 20 and 40 nm
and a spherical shape. 1258 emu magnetization. For adsorption studies, by the shake flask
method in an incubator of a solution of 20% concentration of heavy metals, shaken at 150
RPM, 30 °C, at a dose of 0.3 mg/100 mL of nanoparticles, sample 85% Pb removal in 2 h
and in 24 h reaches 90.85%. The Cd was in a lower proportion, so that after 1 h it reached
levels below the detection level, after 1 h it reached 67.8% removal. Maghemite nanoparticles
9.3 Magnetic nanoparticles immobilized as nano-biosorbent 197
I. Basics principleshave limited adsorption sites that, being in a solution with various metals, the components
compete with each other to be adsorbed by these sites.
Magnetite nanoparticles were synthesized by Chen et al. (2020) for effective boron re￾moval and isotopic separation in an aqueous solution for the first time. Studies on the ther￾modynamics of the adsorption process showed that it has a high entropic effect and it was
the main driving force leading to negative enthalpy. The adsorption study was developed in
the range of pH 2–12, reaching its highest efficiency at pH 7. The studies suggest that an
increase in the temperature reduces the boron adsorption capacity of the nanoparticle.
Moreover, the nanoparticles could be reused for three adsorption-desorption cycles. The
equilibrium and maximum adsorption point was reached after 90 min with an adsorption
capacity of 4.57 mmol g at pH 7 at 45 °C. The kinetic of adsorption is described by the quasi￾second order model. The nanoparticles show greater separation of the 10B isotope, at pH 6
and 15 °C.
Iconaru et al. (2016) developed magnetite nanoparticles with activity to trace elements for
possible environmental applications as adsorbents. The nanoparticles were obtained by the
co-precipitation method at room temperature. The nanoparticles exhibited a wide specific
surface area (100.52 m2 g1
) with a pore size of about 24 nm. The equilibrium adsorption
experiments were conducted at room temperature and with aqueous solutions containing
As(V) and Cu(II) at a concentration range of 0.1–150 mg L1
. The maximum adsorption ca￾pacities of the nanoparticles were 66.53 and 9.06 mg g1 for As(V) and for Cu(II),
respectively.
Stan et al. (2017) evaluated the effectiveness of three types of green synthesis of magnetite
nanoparticles for the removal of antibiotics piperacillin, tazobactam, sulfamethoxazole, tetra￾cycline, trimethoprim, ampicillin, and erythromycin. The particles were synthesized
employing extracts of lemon, grape, and cucumber peel. The particles size varies between
8 and 11 nm and areas from 90.5 to 137.4 m2 g1
. It was found that magnetite synthesized
using cucumber peel extract was the most efficient in removing antibiotics from aqueous me￾dia. Except for sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, a high level of elimination (>90%) of all
the other antibiotics was achieved.
Bagbi et al. (2016) evaluates the adsorption of Pb(II) by magnetite nanoparticles synthe￾sized by chemical co-precipitation using ferrous chloride and ferric chloride (molar ratio
1:2, respectively) as precursor iron salts (Nedkov et al., 2006). The magnetite nanoparticles
obtained were used to remove Pb(II) ions from aqueous solutions at different initial pH
(2.0–7.0), equilibrium time (5–30 min), temperature (5–45 °C), lead concentrations
(10–50 mg L) and magnetite dose (0.1 g L1
). After stirring at 200 rpm, adjust the pH with
0.1 M NaOH or HCl and filter the suspensions; Pb (2+) was measured using atomic absorp￾tion spectrometry (AAS). The TEM analysis performed on the magnetic material showed
monodispersity and uniform size between 8 and 13 nm, spherical shape, without agglomer￾ation. DLS analysis showed hydrodynamic radius values of 45 nm for nanoparticles dis￾persed in water. On the other hand, SEM analysis showed the particle size of around
50 nm, also spherical and monodisperse. BET surface analysis indicates that magnetite is a
mesoporous solid with a BET surface area of 73 m2 g1
, a pore size of 10.4 nm, and a pore
volume of 0.22 cm3 g1
. FTIR characterizations of lead-adsorbed NPs show two new peaks
198 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesdue to the Fe–O–Pb bond formed on the surface. TEM micrographs show Pb2 + uniformly
distributed on the surface of the NPs. It was observed that the adsorption of Pb2+ increased
with increasing pH. About 100% of Pb2+ was removed under the optimal parameter condi￾tions (adsorbent dose: 20 mg L1
, Pb(II) concentration: 50 mg L1
, equilibrium time: 25 min).
The magnetite nanoparticles were recovered after being used for adsorption. For this, a HNO3
diluted solution was used. A 20 mL aliquot of HNO3 recovers about 80% of the total lead, the
rest is recovered by desorption of the nanoparticles.
Rajput et al. (2016) also studied the adsorption capacity of magnetite; in this case, it was
for Pb2+ and Cr6+ in water and wastewater. The NPs were also synthesized by chemical
co-precipitation. TEM analysis showed spherical particles of size between 15 and 30 nm
in diameter. Meanwhile, VSM analysis exhibited superparamagnetism and magnetic satu￾ration values (Ms) 77.5 emu g1 at 300 K. The BET surface area was 12.7 m2 g1 and the pore
volume was 0.05 cm3 g1
. The adsorption study was carried out in the range of pH 2.0–10.0,
solutions of metal ions between 2 and 100 mg L1 at temperatures between 25 and 45 °C for
maximum times of 24 h. The final concentrations of Cr(VI) and Pb(II) were determined by
atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). As a result, the maximum removal of Cr6+ of 58.4%
was obtained at pH 2.0, which decreases to values of 10% with increasing pH. On the other
hand, the maximum Pb2+ adsorption was obtained at pH 5.0. The adsorption capacities
according to the Langmuir model were 34.87 mg g1 for Cr(VI) and 53.11 mg g1 for
Pb(II) at 45 °C.
Ren et al. (2018) proposes a synthesis of maghemite nanoparticles from glass waste for the
adsorption of arsenite. These nanoparticles were prepared from green vitriol and pyrite
through a solid-phase redox reaction under N2 atmosphere.
8FeSO4 + FeS2 !
N2
3Fe3O4 + 10SO2 g
 
4FeSO4 + O2 !6Fe2O3
As(III) adsorption tests were performed by adding maghemite nanoparticles in As(III)
solutions of 10 mg L1
. Adsorption isotherms were obtained by varying As(III) concentra￾tions from 5.0 to 70.0 mg L1 at pH 11.0 at different temperatures between 25 and 55 °C.
As(III) concentrations were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spec￾troscopy. The TEM images showed an average particle diameter around 35 nm and the cu￾bic shape of the NPs. The BET surface area found was 14.63 m2 g1
, pore volume
0.068 cm3 g1
, and pore size 11.6 nm. The maximum adsorption capacity of the maghemite
NPs was 14.4 mg g1 at 55 °C obtained from the Langmuir isotherm. Furthermore, it indi￾cates that the adsorption kinetics follows a pseudo-second-order kinetic model.
A thermodynamic analysis carried out confirmed that the adsorption of As(III) in
maghemite NPs is a spontaneous and endothermic process, and can have great application
in As(III) adsorption processes.
Observing the superparamagnetism properties of magnetite nanoparticles, Germanos
et al. (2020) evaluated the impact of said nanoparticles on the adsorption properties of
magnetite alginate beds (MABs). For this, a comparative study of alginate beds (ABs) and
9.3 Magnetic nanoparticles immobilized as nano-biosorbent 199
I. Basics principlesmagnetic alginate beds (MABs) in the removal of copper (II) from wastewater was carried
out. The first changes obtained in the MABs were in their thermal stability due to the pres￾ence of magnetic NPs; MABs also retain the superparamagnetism of magnetite NPS. In ad￾dition, the intensity of the XRD peaks of MABs is lower than that of magnetite, which
confirms that the magnetite has been correctly incorporated into the polymer matrix. Ad￾sorption capacity values of 54.9 and 66.7 mg g1 were obtained for MABs and ABs respec￾tively. However, the MABs have 80% by weight of alginate and 20% of magnetite, so when
normalizing the adsorption capacity with respect to the weight of alginate we obtain
68.6 mg g1 for the MABs. The adsorption kinetics follows a pseudo-second-order kinetic
model, where the adsorption equilibrium rate constant (k2
) is 3.8  104 g mg1 min1
for MABs and 1.98  104 g mg1 min1 for ABs, showing that the adsorption of Cu(II) ions
is faster with MABs. This clearly shows the improvement in terms of adsorption when using
superparamagnetic nanoparticles.
A comparative study of adsorption between magnetic and superparamagnetic
nanoparticles was carried out by Damasceno et al. (2020). In this study, the adsorptions
of indigo carmin dye were compared using superparamagnetic magnetite nanoparticles
prepared by chemical co-precipitation and commercial magnetite nanoparticles. The ad￾sorption tests were carried out using 0.01 g of NPs and 10 mL of a 20 mg L1 solution of
IC dye. After the interaction, the NPs were separated with an external magnetic field and
the remaining solution was measured by UV–visible spectrophotometry in the visible
region. The BET surface area of NP-synthetized was 127.19  4.94 m2 g1
, and the aver￾age pore diameter was 11.3 nm. Also, NP-SYN showed superparamagnetic behavior, and
NP-COM showed ferromagnetic behavior. The maximum removal value of IC dye was
between 27% and 38% for synthesized magnetite and between 21% and 29% for commer￾cial magnetite. The removal efficiency and adsorption capacity of NP-SYN were 87% and
17.45 mg g1
, respectively, compared to NP-COM, which presented 33% and
6.12 mg g1
. Therefore, it is recommended to use NP-SYN as they present better adsorp￾tion results.
Kulal and Badalamoole (2020) evaluated the effect of magnetite on the hydrogel pectin￾graft-poly (Nhydroxyethylacrylamide) as an adsorbent for dyes and heavy metals from
wastewater. A method for the in situ preparation of magnetite NPs within the gel network
was followed for the formation of this magnetic hydrogel (Reddy et al., 2011). The adsorption
behavior was evaluated in the R6G dye and in the Cu(II) and Hg(II) ions using solutions with
concentrations between 10 and 500 mg L1 and 20 and 1000 mg L1
, respectively, at a temper￾ature of 30 °C. The amount of dye remaining was calculated by UV–visible spectrophotom￾etry, while the concentrations of the remaining metals were measured by atomic absorption
spectroscopy. The BET surface analysis showed a higher surface area for the magnetic hydro￾gel (0.1466 m2 g1
) and a lower pore volume (0.00379 cm3 g1
) and pore diameter (103.4 nm).
This decrease in porosity is due to the increase in volume due to the presence of the magnetite
NPs that cover the empty spaces of the hydrogel network. The kinetic study showed pseudo￾first-order adsorption kinetics for R6G and pseudo-second order for Cu (II) and Hg (II) and
the absorption capacity obtained by the magnetic hydrogel was higher compared to the non￾magnetic hydrogel for the R6G dye, and the Cu(II) and Hg(II) ions. The values obtained with
PHEAA/Fe3O4 were 57.2, 248.6, and 240.2 mg g1 for R6G, Cu(II), and Hg(II), respectively, as
given in Table 9.4.
200 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principles9.4 Application in heavy metal removal
Numerous literature detailed the name “heavy metals” is used for a group of metals and
semi-metals that have been associated with contamination, potential toxicity, and eco￾toxicity. According to IUPAC, the term “heavy metals” has received several definitions by
different authors, but none of them was considered valid. This is because the term
“heavy,” which refers to the density of the metal, is not precisely related to the toxicity or
eco-toxicity of these elements. Additionally, this classification does not take into account
the different physical-chemical and toxicological properties that the metal has according to
the compound in which it is found, the amount, or oxidation state. Thanks to this, this term
has never been defined by any authorized body like IUPAC and has been used inconsistently.
This has led to confusion as to the meaning of the term, leading to the assumption that all
so-called “heavy metals” have highly toxic or eco-toxic properties, when in fact, depends
on the quantity, the way the metal is found, and the organism to which it refers (Duffus,
2002). With these implications made by IUPAC, it is evident that the definition of the term
“heavy metals” is still a controversial subject and is in a stage of evolution, despite being fre￾quently used in several scientific publications. Thus, when it comes to heavy metals, defini￾tions can be based on atomic number, atomic mass, density, toxicity, or other chemical
properties. Taking into account that there are different definitions for the group, the elements
commonly called “heavy metals” are those most used in industry and are generally toxic to
animals, for aerobic and anaerobic processes, but not all are dense or entirely metallic.
Includes As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Pb, Hg, Ni, Se, Zn (Duffus, 2002; Sarkar, 2002).
TABLE 9.4 Determination of different metals were measured by different adsorbent.
Analyte Detection Adsorbent References
Pb2+ AAS Magnetite (Fe3O4) Q¼ Linker and Jones
(1966) SBET ¼ 73 m2 g1
Cr6+ AAS Magnetite (Fe3O4) QCr ¼ 34.9 mg g1 Abdi and Kazemi
(2015) QPb ¼ 53.11 mg g1
Pb2+ SBET ¼ 12.7 m2 g1
As3+ ICP-OES Maghemite Q ¼ 14.4 mg g1 Stephen Inbaraj and
Chen (2011) SBET ¼ 14.63 m2 g1
Cu2+ AAS Magnetite alginate beds (MABs) Q ¼ 68.6 mg g1 Mahamadi (2019)
Indigo
carmine dye
UV–vis Magnetite (Fe3O4) Q ¼ 17.45 mg g1 Kloster et al. (2017)
Rhodamine
6G
UV–vis Nanocomposite with Fe3O4 (Pec-g￾PHEAA/Fe3O4)
Q ¼ 57.2 mg g1 Verma et al. (2017)
Cu2+ AAS Q ¼ 248.6 mg g1
Hg2+ Q ¼ 240.2 mg g1
9.4 Application in heavy metal removal 201
I. Basics principlesAmong these metals, some such as copper and zinc, are necessary for the performance of
vital functions of organisms, but in excessive amounts they become toxic. Other metals such
as mercury, lead, and cadmium do not have any biological function necessary for the organ￾ism and their accumulation can generate serious diseases, being identified as priority hazard￾ous substances. Heavy metals are not biodegradable and are easily bio-accumulated along
food chains (Zhang et al., 2019). This class of inorganic contaminants can be released into na￾ture through natural processes such as weathering rocks for example. However, human ac￾tivities have been increasing the levels of these pollutants in the environment, raising
concerns about the disposal of solid waste and effluents without pre-treatment in river sys￾tems. Factors such as the increase in urbanization and industrialization, contribute signifi￾cantly to the increase in the concentration of heavy metals in soil, water, and air. As an
example, we can mention agriculture, where fertilizers, pesticides, and fungicides are used,
which are potentially toxic to nature. Mining and smelting industries are also important
sources of contamination of rivers and lakes since they produce considerable proportions
of heavy metal-containing debris such as arsenic, cadmium, lead, and mercury (Sarkar,
2002; Zhang et al., 2019).
Thus, when “heavy metals” are improperly discarded in the environment, these elements
can be absorbed by the plants and animals in the vicinity, causing serious poisoning in the
organisms that inhabit the region. To achieve environmental protection, the need arises to
develop efficient and low-cost methods for the removal of contaminated waste in the water.
The conventional techniques currently available, such as evaporation and incineration, have a
high cost and their use is not justified when the volume of waste is not large. Therefore, var￾ious studies have been carried out looking for innovative solutions that use materials of low
cost to treat the toxic aquatic system. Accordingly, bio-sorption appears as an attractive alter￾native technique for removing toxic metals from contaminated water or at least reducing their
effluent level. The technique involves a solid phase of biological origin (bio-sorbent) and a
liquid phase (solvent, usually water) containing residues of the species to be adsorbed (sor￾bate, metal ion; dye). The sorbate is attracted and captured by the solid by different mecha￾nisms and the process continues until reaching equilibrium, allowing its extraction. The
advantages of bio-sorption as compare to conventional methods are (i) low cost (associated
with the use of naturally abundant renewable biomaterials that can be produced at low cost),
(ii) high efficiency (ability to reduce waste metals to less than one part per billion (ppb),
(iii) bio-sorbent regeneration, and (iv) the possibility of metal recovery after adsorption
(Mahamadi, 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). Bio-sorbents materials are made up of cellulose, lignin,
carbohydrates, lipids, starch, hydrocarbons, and proteins (SUD et al., 2008). The bio-sorbent
materials which are used to remove the toxic substances from aquatic solution are chitin,
chitosan, raw agriculture solids, plant waste, bacterial biomass, and fungi (CRINI, 2006) while
numerous agriculture waste materials have been reported in the literature for instance: peel of
potato (Aman et al., 2008), the removal of copper (II) utilized sawdust (Ajmal et al., 1998), peel
of citrus utilized as an adsorbent for the elimination of heavy metals (Schiewer and Patil, 2008)
and mango peel (Iqbal et al., 2009a; Iqbal et al., 2009b). The definition of nano-biosorbent has
resembled nanoparticles, the size of biological material at least less than 100 nm (Amin
et al., 2014).
The biological nanoparticles have been considered to be predominant over other adsor￾bents toward the green environment due to their non-toxic nature. The advantage of using
202 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesadsorbents on the nanometer scale is that they have a high surface area, which increases
chemical activity, adsorption capacity, and reduces resistance to internal diffusion. Classifi￾cation of nano-biosorbent can be ordered into many categories. According to Mahamadi
(2019) the categorization is depending on how they are prepared or synthesized. The removal
affinity of biological nanoparticles improved with various modifications, for example, mod￾ification with magnetic particles, immobilization of bio-sorbent material on inorganic
nanoparticles, a combination of organic materials with nano-biosorbents nanoparticles,
and organic materials modified with metal oxides (Mahamadi, 2019).
Biological material like chitosan has stood out enough to be noticed in wastewater treat￾ment because of its low cost, environmentally friendly, and high removal efficiency. Wang
et al. (2016)reported the synthesis of magnetic polydopamine-chitosan nanoparticles for the
removal of heavy metals. The present study explores the novel hybrid nano-biosorbent that
was prepared to employ one-pot synthesis utilizing polydopamine (PDA) and chitosan onto
magnetic nanoparticles. The nano-biosorbent material has a greater removal potential of
98.4%, 92%, 95.8% for Hg(II), Pb(II), and Cr(VI), respectively. The nano-biosorbent with su￾perb outcomes could be utilized as a potential applicant for the removal of target pollutant
compounds from the fluid medium. The monodisperse magnetic functional chitosan nano￾biosorbent has been used for the elimination of Hg(II) from an aqueous environment (Hou
et al., 2018). The synthesized chitosan and amine-functionalized magnetite nanoparticle
(NH2-Fe3O4) via covalently attached with glutaraldehyde and their adsorption ability
enhanced via the functionalized amino-thiourea group. The elimination ability is 98.7%
at a preliminary amount of 10 mg L1
. The investigation of novel poly
m-phenylenediamine grafted dextrin for the removal of Pb(II) has been reported in the lit￾erature (Zare et al., 2018). The blending method was used to synthesize poly
m-phenylenediamine grafted dextrinand graphene oxide. The heavy metal Pb(II) adheres
to nano-biosorbent material (DgPmPDA@GO) via electrostatic force. Some researchers
have utilized polymer-containing graphene oxide nanocomposite for the elimination of
two different kinds of heavy metals including cationic and anionic (Perez et al., 2017).
The nanocomposite material comprises graphene oxide (GO), polyethyleneimine (PEI),
and chitosan (CS) which were employed for the evacuation of chromium (VI) and copper
(II). Response surface approach was planned to use for the optimization synthesis of
polymer-containing graphene oxide nanocomposite (CS–PEI–GO).
The optimized nanocomposite consists of 2.0% PEI, 1500 ppm GO, and 2.08% GLA, and
showed greater elimination efficiency to 91.10% and 78.18% for Cr(VI) and Cu(II), respec￾tively. The multi-cyanoguanidine modified magnetic chitosan nano-absorbent was applied
for the evacuation of Hg(II) in the aqueous system (Wang et al., 2013). The removal affinity
of modified chitosan has been enhanced via a cross-linking agent with cyanoguanidine group
at the same time. The removal percentage has been reached up to 96% at a low amount of
model pollutants. The valuable elimination confirmed the tremendous consequences of the
nano-biosorbent material (CG-MCS). Pillai et al. (2013) studied the elimination of Cd(II) from
the liquid phase on the surface of xanthated nano-banana cellulose. The surface of nano￾biosorbent material having sulfur-bearing groups which show more removal affinity toward
heavy metal. The bio-sorption competence of the material has been evaluated using different
kinds of parameters including time, concentration, pH, and bio-sorbent dosage. The second￾order model was used to explain the adsorption kinetics. The nano-biosorbent material has
9.4 Application in heavy metal removal 203
I. Basics principlesenough potential and proficient for the elimination of heavy metal contaminate from an aque￾ous environment. The researchers have been examined the synthesis and application of ce￾rium modified chitosan ultrafine nano-biosorbent for the removal of As(III) (Zhang et al.,
2016). The influence of various parameters on the removal capability of nano-biosorbent ma￾terial (Ce-CNB) was investigated via a batch process. The adsorption phenomena come about
through the formation of monodentate and bidentate complexes between hydroxyl groups
and arsenite while partial As(III) oxidized to As(V) followed by concurrently adsorbed on
the surface of nano-biosorbent (Ce-CNB). The adsorption process was explained using Lang￾muir isotherm while the pseudo-second-order kinetics was fitted to isotherm. Fig. 9.1 dem￾onstrated the adsorption mechanism on the surface of nano-biosorbent (Ce-CNB) material.
The outcome of the particle with an average size of 3.5 nm proposes that nano-biosorbent
(Ce-CNB) has high elimination affinity for the model contamination As(III) from an aqueous
phase. Table. 9.5, shows the adsorption of heavy metal on the surface of nano-biosorbent ma￾terials while Table. 9.6, summaries of other articles about the adsorption capacity, kinetics,
and removal of heavy metals. According to Mahamadi and Almomani (2019), nano￾biosorbent provide high adsorption capacity (357 mg g1 for the Pb(II)) while conventional
bio-sorbents have less adsorption capacity <200 mg g1 for Pb(II). It has been clear from
the mentioned literature that nano-biosorbents have a high potential for the elimination of
targeted pollutants from the aqueous phase as compare to conventional bio-sorbents because
of their enough mechanical stability, large surface area, selectivity, and easily synthesized.
The magnetic microalgae nano-biosorbent was showed a high removal rate and stability to￾ward Cr as compared to a conventional approach (suspended microalgae) (Chen et al., 2019).
The green methods which are used for the synthesis of nano-biosorbent are cost-effective and
sufficient for the elimination of contaminated substances such as heavy metals from an
aquatic phase. Additionally, the removal efficiency of the nano-biosorbent materials is en￾hanced via immobilization in various kinds of materials including alginate polymeric matrix,
chemical and biological modification of the biomass.
FIG. 9.1 The interaction of As(III) on the surface of nano-biosorbent (Ce-CNB) material adapted from Zhang et al.
(2016) with permission from Elsevier.
204 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesTABLE 9.5 Description of nano-biosorbents their adsorption capacity and kinetic for heavy metal.
S. no. Nano-biosorbent Pollutant
Capacity
(mg g21
) Kinetics Source
1 Magnetic polydopamine-chitosan Hg(II), Pb(II),
and Cr(VI)
245.6, 47,
151.6
Pseudo￾second-order
Wang et al.
(2016)
2 Monodisperse magnetic functional
chitosan
Hg(II) 246 Pseudo￾second-order
Hou et al.
(2018)
3 Poly m-phenylenediamine grafted
dextrin
Pb(II) 80 Pseudo-first￾order
Zare et al.
(2018)
4 Polymer-based graphene oxide
nanocomposite
Cr(VI) and Cu(II) – – Perez et al.
(2017)
5 Multicyanoguanidine modified
magnetic chitosan
Hg(II) 285 Pseudo￾second-order
Wang et al.
(2013)
6 Xanthatednano banana cellulose Cd(II) 154.26 Second-order Pillai et al.
(2013)
7 Cerium modified chitosan As(III) 57.5 Pseudo￾second-order
Zhang et al.
(2016)
TABLE 9.6 Nano-biosorbents their adsorption capacity and kinetic for heavy metal.
S. no. Nano-biosorbent Pollutant
Capacity
(mg g21
) Kinetics Source
8 Pleurotusostreatus nanoparticles
(PONP)
Mn(II) 130.625 Pseudo-second￾order
Ma et al. (2013)
9 Magnetic Aspergillus niger composite Cr(VI) – Pseudo-first–
pseudo-second
order
Daneshvar and
Hosseini (2018)
10 Chitosan/magnetite composite
beads
Pb(II)
and
Ni(II)
63.33 and
52.55
– Tran et al. (2010)
11 Electrospun poly-ethylene oxide
(PEO)/chitosan nanofiber
membrane
Ni, Cu,
Cd, and
Pb
175.1, 163.7,
143.8, and
135.4
Pseudo-first–
pseudo-second
order
Aliabadi et al.
(2013)
12 Alginate-coated chitosan
nanoparticles
Ni 33.33 Pseudo-second￾order
Esmaeili and
Khoshnevisan
(2016)
13 Nano zero-valent iron (NZVI) on a
modified aquatic plant, Azolla
filiculoides
Pb(II)
and
Hg(II)
– Pseudo-first
Pseudo-second
order
Arshadi et al.
(2017)
14 Nanomagnetite-immobilized￾baker’s yeast composite
Hg(II) 714.3 – Mahmoud et al.
(2015)
9.4 Application in heavy metal removal 205
I. Basics principles9.5 Application emerging contaminant
The approach about emerging contaminants has attracted the attention of researchers in
recent years, consisting of various compounds found in water, soil, and air, being of anthropic
origin (industrial, domestic, hospital, or agricultural waste) or from natural sources like some
species of plants (Lei et al., 2015). These pollutants can have a harmful effect on the ecosystem,
but they are not included in control and treatment programs, in other words, they do not have
any type of regulation and legislation, that’s why they are called emerging contaminants
(ECs) (Stuart et al., 2012). Therefore, they will be studied and, depending on the results
obtained such as toxicity in the environment, adverse effects on human health,
bioaccumulation, amount dispersed in the environment, among others, there will be a future
regulation and control of these pollutants (Reichert et al., 2019).
The study of ECs is very important and involves several areas of science, knowing the risk
associated with their exposure allows avoiding several problems that would occur in future
generations (Bunke et al., 2019). Most of these substances are relatively new and with little
known effects (Stuart et al., 2012), but there are also some cases of older and studied contam￾inants that, even though they were dumped in low concentrations and considered “safe,” also
had effects that until then were not known (Arguello-Perez et al., 2019). An example of this
happened during the 90s in Florida, where there was a reduction of the alligator’s population
in the swamps, scientists found that the fertility of these animals was being impaired and the
reason was the effect of chlorinated pesticides used in plantations in that region, in which,
they affected their endocrine system. American law applied a limit on these pesticides based
on their toxicity, but not on the hormonal effects they caused because they were unknown
(Guillette et al., 1994).
As previously explained, even though many compounds already have some type of reg￾ulation, it is still observed that they may have environmental risks that are still unknown. Due
to the low concentration present in the environment, ECs often end up becoming more com￾plex to detect (Relyea, 2009). Currently, with the expansion of industrialization and the
growth of consumption, there has been a significant increase in substances classified as
ECs (Velez et al., 2019). And with the increase in this number of substances, there was also
greater attention from scientists and researchers and, therefore, resulting in a large increase
in published journals, theses, books, and articles, as shown in the following Fig. 9.2, whose
data by a specific magazine.
These substances have a variety of classifications, such as pharmaceuticals and personal
care products (PPCPs), pesticides, surfactants, plasticizers, flame retardants, among others
(Yan et al., 2010).
Pharmaceuticals and personal care products are common and with a wide variety of com￾pounds, with some examples such as synthetic hormones, analgesics, anti-inflammatories,
fragrances, cosmetics, among others (Bisognin et al., 2018). They are dumped into the envi￾ronment through city sewage and animal waste on farms (Derksen et al., 2004) and, even
though they are found in low concentrations, it is important to study their capacity to harm
the environment and human or animal health, as they have bioaccumulative and endocrine
disruptive potential, affecting the growth and reproduction of living beings (Terzic
et al., 2008).
206 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesPesticides are compounds very common in agriculture, being used to protect plants against
pests and to preserve food. These substances end up contaminating the soil, groundwater,
lakes, and rivers, but they can also generate residues in food that will be consumed by the
population. Many of these compounds have carcinogenic potential and, even in low amounts,
can affect the endocrine system (Gilden et al., 2010).
Surfactants are organic substances that have polar and nonpolar groups in their molecules,
which allows a better affinity between water and other liquids, the most common examples
being detergents, soaps, and shampoos. They are generally not completely removed by the
treatment systems and end up being discharged into the effluents through the sewers, being
very toxic to aquatic organisms (Ying, 2006).
Plasticizers are low molecular weight substances used in the production of plastic mate￾rials, which consist of several products, whether industrial or in common use. The most
well-known compound is bisphenol A (BPA), which is present in several plastic products
and packaging and, according to some research, has the capacity to harm the endocrine sys￾tem of living beings, affecting their fertility, in addition to the immune and nervous systems
(Oehlmann et al., 2009).
Flame retardants are brominated compounds that are applied to various objects and elec￾tronic products. They are classified as emerging contaminants due to their bioaccumulative
capacity, especially in fatty tissue because of their lipophilic characteristics causing several
health problems (Smital, 2008).
0
2000
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Year of publication
Number of publications
4000
6000
8000
10000
FIG. 9.2 Number of publications referring to ECs in the last 20 years.
9.5 Application emerging contaminant 207
I. Basics principlesAs mentioned earlier, there is a great diversity of substances considered to be emerging
contaminants in addition to those that have been exemplified previously. It is important that
health and environmental protection organizations are on the alert about the effects that they
can cause, even in very small concentrations, they can present effects that are still unknown
that end up affecting the local ecosystem and health of the population.
Within the group of drugs, the detection and quantification of several of these compounds
have been studied, for example, Amoxicillin can be found in pharmaceuticals, biological
fluids (Hrioua et al., 2021), environmental samples (Lima et al., 2019), and foodstuffs samples
(Essousi et al., 2020), this drug has received major interest to analyze and synthesize sensor,
biosensors, and nanosorbentes for its detection. An eco-friendly alternative is the use of elec￾trochemical sensors, which can be prepared based on modified electrodes, nanomaterials,
and polymers. Essousi et al. have used polymer-based modified electrodes for the detection
of amoxicillin. The glassy carbon electrode (GCE) surface was modified with reduced
graphene oxide (RGO) and electropolymerized pyrrole in the presence of amoxicillin and
the extraction of the template has been carried out by overoxidation of polypyrrole. Results
obtained for the %recovery of amoxicillin in milk and serum were 97.6% and 99.7%, respec￾tively (Essousi et al., 2020). Another interesting study is the adsorption of diclofenac in waste￾water (Cantarella et al., 2019) is being widely studied due to its high selectivity and its high
adsorption affinity toward the polymer (Madikizela and Chimuka, 2016). Cantarella et al.
were able to remove 90% of diclofenac from an aqueous solution. In addition, the use of hy￾drophilic monomer (methacrylic acid) provides excellent material compatibility in water and
high selectivity (Cantarella et al., 2019), overcoming limits of the traditional MIP (Bhadra
et al., 2016; de Oliveira et al., 2019; Liang et al., 2019). Madikizela et al. investigated the selec￾tive removal of naproxen, ibuprofen, and diclofenac from aqueous media using a multi￾template molecular imprinting polymer (MIP) which was synthesized by bulk polymeriza￾tion consisting of a mixture of toluene and acetonitrile, 2-vinylpyridine, ethylene glycol
dimethacrylate, naproxen, ibuprofen, and diclofenac as porogenic solvent, functional mono￾mer, structural monomer and analytes, respectively. The order of selectivity of the reported
polymer was Diclofenac > Ibuprofen > Naproxen and the %recovery of analytes in samples
of wastewater effluents were 38% naproxen, 69% ibuprofen, and 87% diclofenac. Mohiuddin
et al. synthesized a porous molecular imprinting polymer (PMIP) as adsorbents for the solid￾phase extraction of diclofenac, using HPLC as a quantification instrument. The synthesis
consisted of two stages; The first consisted of preparing polystyrene spheres (PS) from the
polymerization reaction of polyvinyl pyrrolidine and styrene in aqueous medium, using po￾tassium persulfate as radical initiator at a temperature of 70 °C. Then, the spheres obtained
from PS were wrapped with a layer of silica (SiO2) through the sol-gel process with a mod￾ification that consisted in adding a surfactant such as CTAB, the washes with a solution of
ammonium nitrate and THF had the purpose to eliminate the CTAB and the PS, respectively,
obtaining the porous silica shells (PSS). The second stage was to support the polymer in the
PSS, for this, diclofenac and 4-vinyl pyridine were mixed in acetonitrile. EDGMA and initiator
AIBN were then added to initiate polymerization. Finally, the polymers obtained reported
high% recovery in aqueous solutions between 95.41% and 124.14%, being an effective method
for the quantification of diclofenac (Mohiuddin et al., 2020).
208 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesSome of the emerging pollutants classified as alkaloids are caffeine (Teixeira et al., 2020)
and nicotine (Cennamo et al., 2014). The advantage of using the packed sorbent
microextraction (MEPS) technique for the detection of caffeine is the reduction of the amount
of reagent used between 10 and 100 times, that is, from mL to μL (Atarodi and Faghihian,
2019). MEPS uses a microcolumn filled with 1–4 mg of nano-adsorbent material, which pro￾vides different extraction mechanisms, such as adsorption or partition, however, the variety
of commercially available extractive phases for MEPS is still less than the phase variation of
conventional solid-phase extraction (Munyati et al., 2017). While nicotine detection uses a
fiber optic sensor taking advantage of the signal provided by surface plasmon resonance.
The thin gold film was sputtered by using a sputtering machine. The pre-polymeric mixture
for MIP was prepared with l-nicotine as a template, methacrylic acid as functional monomer,
DVB as cross-linker, and AIBN as the radical initiator. The polymeric film was prepared by
dropping 100 μL of pre-polymeric mixture on the gold layer and spinning at 1000 rpm for
35 s. The polymerization was then carried out at 70°C for about 16 h, achieving a MIP layer
with a thickness of about 150 nm (Cennamo et al., 2014).
On the other hand, some researchers analyzed nano-biosorbent of pesticides, Atarodi et al.
synthesized a chitosan-based molecular imprinting polymer material impregnated in ZnO
photocatalysts for the selective degradation of atrazine in aqueous solutions. The degradation
of atrazine was attributed to the action of the polymer obtained and it was evaluated by high￾performance liquid chromatography and gas chromatography, showing a selective degrada￾tion of atrazine in 80.29% (Atarodi and Faghihian, 2019). Fig. 9.3 shows the polymerization of
MICN. Munyati et al. Aldrin-selective alinyl-based molecular imprinting polymers were pre￾pared by reverse emulsion polymerization. The synthesis consisted of the formation of a
milky emulsion of surfactant sodium lauryl sulfate, water, benzoyl peroxide, and chloroform.
Subsequently, the milky white emulsion was added dropwise to a stirring mixture of aniline
monomer and aldrin template in a chloroform solution. The formed product was washed
FIG. 9.3 Polymerization of molecularly imprinted chitosan nanocatalysts (MICN) (Atarodi and Faghihian, 2019).
9.5 Application emerging contaminant 209
I. Basics principleswith acetone to break the emulsion and precipitate the molecularly imprinted polyaniline
nanoparticles.
Finally, the adsorption characteristics of aldrin and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
(DDT) were investigated. The selectivity of the printed nanoparticles was quantitatively an￾alyzed by gas chromatography-time of flight mass spectrometry (GC-TOFMS). Being the dis￾tribution coefficients for DDT and aldrin are 0.76 and 1.31 ng μL1
, respectively, indicating that
the printed nanoparticles had a stronger affinity for aldrin than for DDT (Munyati et al., 2017).
Fig. 9.4 shows the polyaniline polymer synthesis scheme. In the area of personal care products.
Lu et al. developed a polymeric material with a core@shell structure with convenient magnetic
properties to efficiently remove triclosan (TCS)in aquatic environments. The synthesis consisted
of the modification of the magnetic nanoparticles of Fe3O4 with sodium citrate to improve the
dispersibility in the solution. Then, using the sol-gel method, the Fe3O4 nanoparticles were
coated with SiO2, using an isopropanol-water mixture for hydrolysis and condensation, ammo￾nia as a catalyst, and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as a precursor to the formation of the SiO2
layer. Then the Fe3O4 nanoparticles coated with SiO2 (Fe3O4@SiO2) were superficially modified
by adding 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane (MPS) in a methanol solution in an inert at￾mosphere for 24 h. Obtaining vinyl groups on the surface of the material (Fe3O4@SiO2-C]C).
Then, for the polymerization, Fe3O4@SiO2-C]C, acetonyrtrile, TCS, MAA, EDGMA, and AIBN
were mixed as support material, porogenic solvent, analyte or template, functional monomer,
cross-linking monomer, and radical initiator respectively obtained (TMIP) was evaluated using
HPLC with a UV detector. The recovery results obtained were 96%–106% with a selectivity of
6.321 of TCS with respect to the interferents 2,4,6-trichlorophenol; 2,4-dichlorophenol;
4-chlorophenol and diuron, showing high potential to be convenient absorbents in the applica￾tion of TCS removal from the aquatic environment (Lu et al., 2020). Fig. 9.5 shows the scheme for
obtaining the TMIP synthesis.
A summary Table 9.7 shows some of the nanosorbents currently used for the detection of
emerging pollutants, in addition to their method linearity, variety of synthesis processes, and
analyte quantification, which is interpreted as a great contribution by these nanosorbent
materials in different types of sample matrices.
SDS micelle
Chloroform
Rebinding,
shake,
hexane, 20 h Extraction,
CHCl3, 8 h
Polymerization
24 h
HCl
Acetone
Aldrin imprinted, cavity
Cl Cl
Cl Cl
Cl Cl
Cl
Cl Cl
Cl Cl
Cl
Cl Cl
Cl Cl
Cl Cl NH2
Benzoyl
peroxide
FIG. 9.4 Scheme showing the preparation of molecularly imprinted polyaniline nanoparticles (Munyati et al.,
2017).
210 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principles9.6 Application classic contaminant
There are many researches on the use of nano-biosorbents to remove many harmful com￾poses as the ones described in previous segments of this chapter. There is also some inves￾tigation for these materials in order to remove classic contaminants such as fluorides and
phosphates.
Fluoride is a very common element in nature, it accounts for about 0.3 g kg1 of the earth’s
crust and it has been found in many minerals, such as fluorspar, cryolite, fluorite, and
fluorapatite. What is more, fluoride is one of the most abundant anions present in drinking
water and may be beneficial to human health at low concentrations, for example, the ingestion
of 0.8–1.0 mg L1 can protect teeth and promote the development of strong bones. However,
ingestion of higher concentrations of fluoride can be harmful to human health. For example,
some diseases are dental fluorosis, skeletal fluorosis, brain damage, Alzheimer’s syndrome,
thyroid disorder, and cancer. Hence, it is necessary for the removal of the excess fluorides
from contaminant water to improve the quality of life. For this purpose, many investigations
were developed using nano-biosorbents as described in Fig. 9.6 (Christina and Viswanathan,
2015; Cai et al., 2015).
Cai et al. (2015) proposed the use of tea leaf wastes loaded with Al and Fe. Three solutions
of ferric chloride, aluminum nitrate, and a mixed solution were prepared in hydrochloric
acid. Tea leaf waste and the solutions were added to a beaker and were stirred at 60 °C.
The adsorbent dosage, initial fluoride concentration, contact time, and pH were studied in
TEOS+NH3H2O
Absorbing
Removal TCS
Rebinding TCS
O
O
O O
O
O
O
O HCl
HCl
Cl
TCS+MAA+AIBN+EGDMA
Ploymerization
S
N
+MPS
SiO2-coated vinyl-modification
The removal of TCS from aquatic environments
Citrate-modified Fe3O4 Fe3O4@SiO2 MPS-modified Fe3O4@SiO2
FIG. 9.5 Scheme for the triclosan-MMIP and the application of adsorption, separation, and elimination of triclosan
from the aquatic environment.
9.6 Application classic contaminant 211
I. Basics principlesTABLE 9.7 Some nanosorbents used for the detection of emerging pollutants, with their method of linearity, variety of synthesis, and analyte
quantification.
Type CCE Analyte Nanosorbent
Method
synthesis
Type
samples
Linear
range
(μmol L21) Method detection References
Pharmaceuticals Amoxicillin
(Amx)
MIP-rGO/
OPPy/AuNps
Electro
polymerization
Serum 1–1000 CV Essousi et al.
(2020)
Diclofenac DICLO/MAA/
EGDMA
Bulk
polymerization
Waste water Remove
90%
UV–vis Cantarella
et al. (2019)
Alkaloids Caffeine CAF/MAA/ Bulk
polymerization
Energy
drink
1–50 HPLC–UV detection Teixeira et al.
(2020)
Nicotine Nicotine/MAA/
DVB
Bulk
polymerization
Wastewater 0–104 UV-vis Cennamo et al.
(2014)
Pesticides Tyramine MIP/CNNS/
rGO-COOH/
GCE
Electro
polymerization
Food 0.01–1000 Electrochemiluminescence Liu et al.
(2020a)
2-Chloro
acetamide
MMIP butachlor:
MBA: 4-VP:
AGG
Bulk
polymerization
Agriculture
water
1.1  103–
2.14
MMISPE-HPLC Ji et al. (2017)
Phenol 2-Chloro
phenol
Chloroxylenol/
4-VBA/EGDMA
UV photo
polymerization
River water
and sewage
0.04–0.93 MIP-UHPLCPDA Abu-Alsoud
and Bottaro
(2021)
Illicit drugs Cocaine Cocaine/MAA/
EDMA
Bulk
polymerization
Oral fluid 3–10 Ion mobility spectrometry Sorribes￾Soriano et al.
(2020)
Heroin Ru(bpy)32+/GCE Ultrasonic Urine and
saliva
108–104 Electrochemiluminescence Shang et al.
(2014)a 50 mL centrifuge tube to which 50 mg bio-sorbent was added to a 25 mL fluoride solution of
known concentration. The centrifuge tubes were mixed for 120 min at room temperature in a
vapor-bathing constant temperature vibrator. The solution was separated through filtration
and the F-conductance was measured.
The study concluded that Tea-Al-Fe and Tea-Al were desirable bio-sorbents for the treat￾ment of drinking water contaminated by fluoride as both showed a strong adsorption ability.
What is more, these materials were compared with others in the literature and only orange
waste loaded with Sn or Al presented a stronger adsorption ability but it is active at acid pH,
which would restrict further application. Furthermore, the contact time of Tea-Al and Tea-Al￾Fe is lower than the orange bio-sorbents, which would contribute to a rapid treatment of
drinking waters (Table 9.8).
In addition, Christina and Viswanathan (2015) developed an orange-peel-based material.
Fe3O4 nanoparticles immobilized in sodium alginate matrix (FNPSA) and Fe3O4 nanoparticles
and saponified orange peel residue immobilized in sodium alginate matrix (FNPSOPR) as sor￾bents for fluoride removal from contaminated water. The surfaces of the nano-biosorbents
were functionalizedin order to enable them to adsorb fluorideionsmore efficiently from water.
In an Erlenmeyer were performed the studies, 50 mL of a solution of known concentration of
FIG. 9.6 Procedure of the removal of fluoride using the Tea-Al-Fe nano-biosorbent (Cai et al., 2015).
9.6 Application classic contaminant 213
I. Basics principlesfluoride was added in order to evaluated parameters like contact time, pH, sorbent dosage, ini￾tial concentration of fluoride, and temperature. To determinate the fluoride that was not
adsorbed, the flasks were stirred at 120 rpm and every 10 min with a fluoride ion-selective elec￾trode, the concentration of fluoride was determined as shown in Fig. 9.7 (Christina and
Viswanathan, 2015).
FNPSA and FNPSOPR presented maximum adsorption of 58.24 and 80.33 mg g1
, respec￾tively, both described the Langmuir model of isotherm that suggests monolayer adsorption
mechanism of fluoride. FNPSA offered a high fluoride sorption capacity than orange residues
materials and calcium alginate matrices. However, FNPSOPR developed a higher sorption
capacity, and what is more, it showed good reusability of 76.53% after 5 cycles of alternative
adsorption-desorption. Hence, Christina et al. concluded that FNPSOPR could be used as an
effective sorbent to remove fluoride from water and improve its quality to obtain permissible
limits for its usage (Christina and Viswanathan, 2015).
Phosphorus is an essential element in plant life and its phosphate form, they are necessary
for the formation of seeds. Plants absorb phosphates, which is why they are found in plant
tissue in a variable concentration, providing a healthy life with greater resistance to disease
and damage caused by frost (Navarro Garcia et al., 2013). However, excess phosphorus in the
water causes eutrophication, leading to uncontrolled algal blooms that can threaten public
safety and environmental safety (Conley et al., 2009). Therefore, it is necessary to develop ef￾fective methods to remove excess phosphate before pouring it into the water. Nano￾biosorbents are a very promising alternative.
FIG. 9.7 Procedure of fluoride removal using FNPSA or FNPSOPR (Christina and Viswanathan, 2015).
TABLE 9.8 Comparison of fluoride adsorption capacity between loaded tea waste and loaded orange wasted.
Bio-sorbent q0 (mg g21
) pH Contact time (h) References
Orange-Sn 22.24 3.0 4 Paudyal et al. (2011)
Orange-Al 19.57 6.0 4
Tea 3.83 2.0–9.0 2 Cai et al. (2015)
Tea-Fe 10.47 2.0 2
Tea-Al 13.79 4.0–8.0 2
Tea-Al-Fe 18.52 4.0–8.0 2
214 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesA nano-biosorbents based on ostrich bone waste treated and activated with HNO3, FeCl2 y
HBO4. In the synthesis, process nanoparticles of Fe0 were formed and adhere to the surface of
the treated ostrich bone waste. The biomaterial serves as a support for the nanoparticles of Fe0
.
The treated ostrich bone suppresses the oxidation and aggregation of the nanoparticles of Fe0
which gives it greater capacity to capture phosphates from the aqueous medium, even in real
samples. The contact time to reach 99% equilibrium for the maximum adsorption of phosphate
ions was 5 min, after 5 min the adsorption of phosphate ions increased slowly reaching max￾imum adsorption in 30 min. The adsorption was 326 mg of phosphate ions per gram of the bio￾material, this result was compared with other bio-sorbents was better by presenting a high
adsorption capacity. The synthesis of the biomaterial is promising because it is inexpensive,
easy to synthesize in large quantities, and chemically and thermally stable (Arshadi et al.,
2015). With this information, the material proposed by Arshadi et al. (2015), could be used
as a good nano-biosorbents for the removal of phosphate in the Persian Gulf.
Liu et al. (2020a, b) proposed a nano-biosorbent of cerium oxide functionalized lignin. Very
briefly, L-NH2 was mixed with CeCl3 7H2O for 2 h, in order to absorb Ce3+ on the
L-NH2 surface, then a solution of NaOH was slowly added until the pH was 10. Then, the
mixture was put in a water bath for 2 h and later reacted at 25 °C for 24 h. Finally, the resulting
product was washed with distilled water, filtered by vacuum, and dried at 60 °C for 24 h
(Fig. 9.8). The aminated lignin supported on cerium oxide nanoparticles (L-NH2@Ce)
obtained presented an average size of 15 nm, it has a BET surface area of 89.8 m2 g1 of
L-NH2@Ce, which is three times greater than that of lignin, and pore volume is 0.23 cm3 g1
of L-NH2@Ce. The nano-biosorbent efficiently captures phosphates in an aqueous medium in
the pH range of 5–8. By the Langmuir model, it was determined that the adsorption of phos￾phate ions is 27.86 mg g1 of the bio-sorbent. Using the in situ precipitation method, phos￾phate was removed efficiently. The synthesis of the nano-biosorbent is promising because
it is inexpensive, the preparation process is simple, the synthesized compound is stable,
and the nano-biosorbent can be reused (Liu et al., 2020b).
FIG. 9.8 Schematic diagram for the preparation of biosorbent L-NH2@Ce nanohybrid by In situ precipitation
method.
9.6 Application classic contaminant 215
I. Basics principles9.7 Advantages of nano-engineered adsorbent and future prospects
Nanocomposites have several properties related to the size of the compositional units that
give them a particular characteristic. The high surface:volume ratio gives to nanocomposites
special physical and chemical properties and for this reason gained particular attention from
engineering researchers, trying to combine the physicochemical advantages with the treat￾ment of waste materials and the possibility of regenerating technological properties with
the least possible environmental risk.
Chitosan is one the most abundant biopolymer after cellulose with a wide functionality in
its structure, which has a direct relation to biomedical applications and related sciences.
Chitosan exhibits a large list of biological activities leading to antitumor activity,
immunoadjuvant activity, hypodermic activity, hemostatic activity, antimicrobial activity,
biodegradability, among others (Mutreja et al., 2020). Chitosan and its derivatives have
attracted attention as nano-adsorbent thanks to their particular physicochemical properties.
One of the advantages of chitosan-based materials is the presence of hydroxyl and amino
groups in the polymer structure allows the formation of inter-/intramolecular hydrogen
bonds between linear structures of chitin, extending their interactions with other materials
or polymeric groups to be removed (Nasrollahzadeh et al., 2021). Owing to these properties,
chitosan-based materials display outstanding adsorbent performance in the adsorption of
heavy metal ions dyes, pesticides, pollutants from wastewater, as aforementioned in this re￾view. Another advantage chitosan-based materials is the ease of modification that involves
cross-linking agents (Parastar et al., 2021), grafting (Wang et al., 2020; Banisheykholeslami
et al., 2021), mixed with other adsorbents (Safie and Zahrim, 2021; Zhao et al., 2021) among
others. Moreover, treatments oriented to improve surface properties and porosity via texture
modification of chitosan into new material form as hydrogels (Mittal et al., 2021; Jamali and
Akbari, 2021), nanofibers (Bayat et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2020), carbon nanotube (Kavousi and
Chavoshi, 2020; Hsan et al., 2020), as well as carbon quantum nanodots (Hammi et al., 2021;
Siddique et al., 2020). The combination of surface physical-chemical properties of chitosan as
nano-adsorbent with intrinsically inner properties of biopolymer as biocompatibility, biodeg￾radation, non-toxic activation, and a high degree of reuse has shown the versatile and the
wide extended innovation of chitosan-based material in science engineering, massive pro￾duction of ecological products and food packing separation hydrogels.
Alginates are another interesting nanostructured biopolymer with a lot of applications as
nano-adsorbent related to the presence of hydroxyl and carboxylate groups in their inner
structure. The easy formation of anionic groups allows cationic groups or positive polar or￾ganic species from wastewater to be removed with high efficiency via electrostatic interac￾tions (Asadi et al., 2018). The main advantages of this biopolymer are associated with
some properties and characteristics as stability,permeability, biodegradability, non-toxic na￾ture (Gao et al., 2020). In addition, the alginates form biohydrogels platforms over which an
active component could be supported, improving the surface contact and network structure
as well as the functionality of the framework structure ( Jiang et al., 2020; Godiya et al., 2019).
Cellulose is another interesting biopolymer material based on specific properties of the
structure in the form of nanotubes, nanofibrils (Yu et al., 2020), nanocrystals (Park et al.,
2020), with outstanding sorption and catalytic properties usually demanding for water
216 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlestreatment processes. The applications of cellulose have grown dramatically in recent years
due to its versatile properties as environmentally friendly material, low cost, biodegradabil￾ity, the feasibility of access, stability, and a high degree of reuse as well as the wide ability of
integration with other materials particularly as nano and microfibers to synthesize mem￾branes leading to water clean management (Ao et al., 2020). The modified cellulosic-based
membranes have shown good performance for the removal of heavy (Ao et al., 2020).
The applications of chitosan, alginates, and celluloses as nano-adsorbents on material en￾gineering, biomedicine, pharmaceutical delivery platforms, biological systems related to bio￾degradability, and their antioxidant properties have played a substantial role in green
chemistry. These applications are associated with the outstanding performance of low-cost
nano-adsorbents, accessible, renewable, with very few discharges, therefore, fully in agree￾ment with the needs of society and its inhabitants and the future generations.
References
Abdel-Gawad, S.A., Baraka, A.M., El-Shafei, M.M., Mahmoud, A.S., 2016. Effects of nano zero valent iron and
entrapped nano zero valent iron in alginate polymer on poly aromatic hydrocarbons removal ABSTRACT. J. En￾viron. Biotechnol. Res. 5 (1), 18–28.
Abdi, O., Kazemi, M., 2015. A review study of biosorption of heavy metals and comparison between different
biosorbents. J. Mater. Environ. Sci. 6 (5), 1386–1399.
Abu-Alsoud, G.F., Bottaro, C.S., 2021. Porous thin-film molecularly imprinted polymer device for simultaneous de￾termination of phenol, alkylphenol and chlorophenol compounds in water. Talanta 223, 121727.
Aguilar-Arteaga, K., Rodriguez, J.A., Barrado, E., 2010. Magnetic solids in analytical chemistry: a review. Anal. Chim.
Acta 674 (2), 157–165.
Ajmal, M., Hussain Khan, A., Ahmad, S., Ahmad, A., 1998. Role of sawdust in the removal of copper(II) from indus￾trial wastes. Water Res. 32 (10), 3085–3091.
Aliabadi, M., Irani, M., Ismaeili, J., Piri, H., Parnian, M.J., 2013. Electrospun nanofiber membrane of PEO/chitosan
for the adsorption of nickel, cadmium, lead and copper ions from aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J. 220,
237–243.
Aman, T., Kazi, A.A., Sabri, M.U., Bano, Q., 2008. Potato peels as solid waste for the removal of heavy metal copper(II)
from waste water/industrial effluent. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 63 (1), 116–121.
Amin, M.T., Alazba, A.A., Manzoor, U., 2014. A review of removal of pollutants from water/wastewater using dif￾ferent types of nanomaterials. Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2014, 1–24.
Amiri, M., Salavati-Niasari, M., Akbari, A., 2019. Magnetic nanocarriers: evolution of spinel ferrites for medical ap￾plications. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 265, 29–44.
Ao, C., et al., 2020. Biodegradable all-cellulose composite membranes for simultaneous oil/water separation and dye
removal from water. Carbohydr. Polym. 250, 116872.
Arguello-Perez, M.A´ ., Mendoza-Perez, J.A., Tintos-Go´mez, A., Ramı´rez-Ayala, E., Godı´nez-Domı´nguez, E., de Asis
Silva-Ba´tiz, F., 2019. Ecotoxicological analysis of emerging contaminants from wastewater discharges in the
coastal zone of Cihuatla´n (Jalisco, Mexico). Water 11 (7), 1386.
Arsalani, S., Lowa, N., Kosch, O., Radon, P., Baffa, O., Wiekhorst, F., 2021. Magnetic separation of iron oxide €
nanoparticles to improve their application for magnetic particle imaging magnetic separation of iron oxide
nanoparticles to improve their application for magnetic particle imaging. Phys. Med. Biol. 66, 015002.
Arshadi, M., Gholtash, J.E., Zandi, H., Foroughifard, S., 2015. Phosphate removal by a nano-biosorbent from the syn￾thetic and real (Persian Gulf ) water samples. RSC Adv. 5 (54), 43290–43302.
Arshadi, M., Abdolmaleki, M.K., Mousavinia, F., Foroughifard, S., Karimzadeh, A., 2017. Nano modification of NZVI
with an aquatic plant Azolla filiculoides to remove Pb(II) and Hg(II) from water: aging time and mechanism study.
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 486, 296–308.
Asadi, S., Eris, S., Azizian, S., 2018. Alginate-based hydrogel beads as a biocompatible and efficient adsorbent for dye
removal from aqueous solutions. ACS Omega 3 (11), 15140–15148.
References 217
I. Basics principlesAtarodi, H., Faghihian, H., 2019. Selective photodegradation of atrazine by a novel molecularly imprinted nanophoto￾catalyst prepared on the basis of chitosan. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A Chem. 382, 111892.
Avval, Z.M., et al., 2019. Introduction of magnetic and supermagnetic nanoparticles in new approach of targeting
drug delivery and cancer therapy application. Drug Metab. Rev., 1–28.
Azmy, E.A.M., Hashem, H.E., Mohamed, E.A., Negm, N.A., 2019. Synthesis, characterization, swelling and antimi￾crobial efficacies of chemically modified chitosan biopolymer. J. Mol. Liq. 284, 748–754.
Bagbi, Y., Sarswat, A., Mohan, D., Pandey, A., Solanki, P.R., 2016. Lead (Pb2+) adsorption by monodispersed mag￾netite nanoparticles: surface analysis and effects of solution chemistry. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 4 (4), 4237–4247.
Bagheri, S., Julkapli, N.M., 2018. Grafted Nanocellulose as an Advanced Smart Biopolymer. Elsevier Inc.
Banisheykholeslami, F., Hosseini, M., Najafpour Darzi, G., 2021. Design of PAMAM grafted chitosan dendrimers
biosorbent for removal of anionic dyes: adsorption isotherms, kinetics and thermodynamics studies. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 177, 306–316.
Barbera, A.J., McConnell, V.D., 1990. The impact of environmental regulations on industry productivity: direct and
indirect effects. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 18 (1), 50–65.
Bayat, A., Tati, A., Ahmadipouya, S., Haddadi, S.A., Arjmand, M., 2021. Electrospun chitosan/polyvinyl alcohol
nanocomposite holding polyaniline/silica hybrid nanostructures: an efficient adsorbent of dye from aqueous so￾lutions. J. Mol. Liq. 331, 115734.
Bhadra, B.N., Seo, P.W., Jhung, S.H., 2016. Adsorption of diclofenac sodium from water using oxidized activated car￾bon. Chem. Eng. J. 301, 27–34.
Bhardwaj, N., Kundu, S.C., 2010. Electrospinning: a fascinating fiber fabrication technique. Biotechnol. Adv. 28 (3),
325–347.
Bhattarai, N., Edmondson, D., Veiseh, O., Matsen, F.A., Zhang, M., 2005. Electrospun chitosan-based nanofibers and
their cellular compatibility. Biomaterials 26 (31), 6176–6184.
Bisognin, R.P., Wolff, D.B., Carissimi, E., 2018. Revisa˜o sobre fa´rmacos no ambiente. Rev. DAE 66 (210), 78–95.
Biswas, G., Tarafdar, A., 2013. Extraction of chitosan from prawn shell wastes and examination of its viable commer￾cial applications. Int. J. Theor. Appl. Res. Mech. Eng. 2, 17–24.
Bonavigo, H., Zucchetti, L., Mankolli, M., 2009. Water radioactive pollution and related environmental aspects. J. Int.
Environ. Appl. Sci. 4, 357–363.
Boukhalfa, N., Boutahala, M., Djebri, N., Idris, A., 2019. Kinetics, thermodynamics, equilibrium isotherms, and reus￾ability studies of cationic dye adsorption by magnetic alginate/oxidized multiwalled carbon nanotubes compos￾ites. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 123, 539–548.
Bunke, D., Moritz, S., Brack, W., Herra´ez, D.L., Posthuma, L., Nuss, M., 2019. Developments in society and implica￾tions for emerging pollutants in the aquatic environment. Environ. Sci. Eur. 31 (1), 32.
Cai, H., et al., 2015. Removal of fluoride from drinking water using tea waste loaded with Al/Fe oxides: a novel, safe
and efficient biosorbent. Appl. Surf. Sci. 328, 34–44.
Cantarella, M., et al., 2019. Molecularly imprinted polymer for selective adsorption of diclofenac from contaminated
water. Chem. Eng. J. 367, 180–188.
Carpenter, A.W., De Lannoy, C.F., Wiesner, M.R., 2015. Cellulose nanomaterials in water treatment technologies. En￾viron. Sci. Tech. 49 (9), 5277–5287.
Carvalho Costa, A.W.M., et al., 2020. Biosorption of Cr(VI) using coconut fibers from agro-industrial waste magne￾tized using magnetite nanoparticles. Environ. Technol., 1–12.
Cennamo, N., D’Agostino, G., Pesavento, M., Zeni, L., 2014. High selectivity and sensitivity sensor based on MIP and
SPR in tapered plastic optical fibers for the detection of l-nicotine. Sens. Actuators B 191, 529–536.
Chen L, Feng G, Huiqiao H, Jiawei K, Yezi H, Magnetic microalgae biosorption flocculating agent and method for
adsorbing chromium in waste water. Patent No. CN109174025, 2019.
Chen, T., Wang, Q., Lyu, J., Bai, P., Guo, X., 2020. Boron removal and reclamation by magnetic magnetite (Fe3O4)
nanoparticle: an adsorption and isotopic separation study. Sep. Purif. Technol. 231 (August 2019), 115930.
Christina, E., Viswanathan, P., 2015. Development of a novel nano-biosorbent for the removal of fluoride from water.
Chin. J. Chem. Eng. 23 (6), 924–933.
Conley, D.J., et al., 2009. Ecology: controlling eutrophication: nitrogen and phosphorus. Science 323 (5917), 1014–1015.
Coughlin, R.W., Deshaies, M.R., Davis, E.M., 1990. Chitosan in crab shell wastes purifies electroplating wastewater.
Environ. Prog. 9 (1), 35–39.
CRINI, G., 2006. Non-conventional low-cost adsorbents for dye removal: a review. Bioresour. Technol. 97 (9),
1061–1085.
218 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesDamasceno, B.S., Da Silva, A.F.V., De Arau´jo, A.C.V., 2020. Dye adsorption onto magnetic and superparamagnetic
Fe3O4 nanoparticles: a detailed comparative study. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (5), 103994.
Daneshvar, M., Hosseini, M.R., 2018. Kinetics, isotherm, and optimization of the hexavalent chromium removal from
aqueous solution by a magnetic nanobiosorbent. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25 (28), 28654–28666.
de Oliveira, H.L., Teixeira, L.S., Dinali, L.A.F., Pires, B.C., Simo˜es, N.S., Borges, K.B., 2019. Microextraction by packed
sorbent using a new restricted molecularly imprinted polymer for the determination of estrogens from human
urine samples. Microchem. J. 150, 104162.
Derksen, J.G.M., Rijs, G.B.J., Jongbloed, R.H., 2004. Diffuse pollution of surface water by pharmaceutical products.
Water Sci. Technol. 49 (3), 213–221.
Dev, V.V., Baburaj, G., Antony, S., Arun, V., Krishnan, K.A., 2020. Zwitterion-chitosan bed for the simultaneous
immobilization of Zn(II), Cd(II), Pb(II) and Cu(II) from multi-metal aqueous systems. J. Clean. Prod. 255, 120309.
Devanathan, R., 2017. Energy penalty for excess baggage. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 500–501. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nnano.2017.53.
Devatha, C.P., Jagadeesh, K., Patil, M., 2018. Effect of green synthesized iron nanoparticles by Azardirachta indica in
different proportions on antibacterial activity. Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 9, 85–94.
Dhankhar, R., Hooda, A., 2011. Fungal biosorption—an alternative to meet the challenges of heavy metal pollution in
aqueous solutions. Environ. Technol. 32 (5), 467–491.
Di Martino, A., Sittinger, M., Risbud, M.V., 2005. Chitosan: a versatile biopolymer for orthopaedic tissue-engineering.
Biomaterials 26 (30), 5983–5990.
Dimassi, S., Tabary, N., Chai, F., Blanchemain, N., Martel, B., 2018. Sulfonated and sulfated chitosan derivatives for
biomedical applications: a review. Carbohydr. Polym. 202, 382–396. Elsevier Ltd.
Ding, J., Huang, D., Wang, W., Wang, Q., Wang, A., 2019. Effect of removing coloring metal ions from the natural
brick-red palygorskite on properties of alginate/palygorskite nanocomposite film. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 122,
684–694.
Duffus, J.H., 2002. ‘Heavy metals’ a meaningless term? (IUPAC Technical Report). Pure Appl. Chem. 74 (5), 793–807.
Dwivedi, A.K., 2017. Researches in water pollution: a review. J. Nat. Appl. Sci. 4, 118–142.
Ekevwe, A.E., Isaac, G.B.A., Aroh, A.O., 2018. Review of organic pollutants in wastewater along the Course of River
Gwagwarwa and River Rafin Malam in Kano State-Nigeria. J. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2, 36–39.
Elmizadeh, H., Khanmohammadi, M., Ghasemi, K., Hassanzadeh, G., Nassiri-Asl, M., Garmarudi, A.B., 2013. Prep￾aration and optimization of chitosan nanoparticles and magnetic chitosan nanoparticles as delivery systems using
Box–Behnken statistical design. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 80, 141–146.
Emmerichs, N., Wingender, J., Flemming, H.-C., Mayer, C., 2004. Interaction between alginates and manganese cat￾ions: identification of preferred cation binding sites. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 34, 73–79.
Esmaeili, A., Khoshnevisan, N., 2016. Optimization of process parameters for removal of heavy metals by biomass of
Cu and Co-doped alginate-coated chitosan nanoparticles. Bioresour. Technol. 218, 650–658.
Essousi, H., Barhoumi, H., Karastogianni, S., Girousi, S.T., 2020. An electrochemical sensor based on reduced
graphene oxide, gold nanoparticles and molecular imprinted over-oxidized polypyrrole for amoxicillin determi￾nation. Electroanalysis 32 (7), 1546–1558.
Farooq, A., et al., 2020. Cellulose from sources to nanocellulose and an overview of synthesis and properties of
nanocellulose/zinc oxide nanocomposite materials. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 154, 1050–1073.
Fazlzadeh, M., Rahmani, K., Zarei, A., Abdoallahzadeh, H., Nasiri, F., Khosravi, R., 2017. A novel green synthesis of
zero valent iron nanoparticles (NZVI) using three plant extracts and their efficient application for removal of
Cr(VI) from aqueous solutions. Adv. Powder Technol. 28 (1), 122–130.
Foguel, M.V., Pedro, N.T.B., Wong, A., Khan, S., Zanoni, M.V.B., del Pilar Taboada Sotomayor, M., 2017. Synthesis
and evaluation of a molecularly imprinted polymer for selective adsorption and quantification of Acid Green
16 textile dye in water samples. Talanta 170, 244–251.
Franco, D.S.P., et al., 2020. Araticum (Annona crassiflora) seed powder (ASP) for the treatment of colored effluents by
biosorption. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (10), 11184–11194.
GAF, R., 1992. Chitin Chemistry. Macmillan.
Gao, X., Guo, C., Hao, J., Zhao, Z., Long, H., Li, M., 2020. Adsorption of heavy metal ions by sodium alginate based
adsorbent—a review and new perspectives. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 164, 4423–4434.
Germanos, G., Youssef, S., Farah, W., Lescop, B., Rioual, S., Abboud, M., 2020. The impact of magnetite nanoparticles
on the physicochemical and adsorption properties of magnetic. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (5), 104223.
References 219
I. Basics principlesGhoreishi, S.M., Haghighi, R., 2003. Chemical catalytic reaction and biological oxidation for treatment of non￾biodegradable textile effluent. Chem. Eng. J. 95 (1–3), 163–169.
Gilden, R.C., Huffling, K., Sattler, B., 2010. Pesticides and health risks. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 39 (1), 103–110.
Godiya, C.B., Liang, M., Sayed, S.M., Li, D., Lu, X., 2019. Novel alginate/polyethyleneimine hydrogel adsorbent for
cascaded removal and utilization of Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions. J. Environ. Manage. 232, 829–841.
Guillette, L.J., Gross, T.S., Masson, G.R., Matter, J.M., Percival, H.F., Woodward, A.R., 1994. Developmental abnor￾malities of the gonad and abnormal sex hormone concentrations in juvenile alligators from contaminated and con￾trol lakes in Florida. Environ. Health Perspect. 102 (8), 680–688.
Gupta, V.K., Ali, I., Saleh, T.A., Nayak, A., Agarwal, S., 2012. Chemical treatment technologies for waste-water
recycling—an overview. RSC Adv. 2 (16), 6380.
Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., Rojas, O.J., 2010. Cellulose nanocrystals: chemistry, self-assembly, and applications. Chem.
Rev. 110 (6), 3479–3500.
Haider, S., Park, S.Y., 2009. Preparation of the electrospun chitosan nanofibers and their applications to the adsorption
of Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions from an aqueous solution. J. Membr. Sci. 328 (1–2), 90–96.
Hameed, B.H., El-Khaiary, M.I., 2008. Kinetics and equilibrium studies of malachite green adsorption on rice straw￾derived char. J. Hazard. Mater. 153 (1–2), 701–708.
Hammi, N., Marcotte, N., Marinova, M., Draoui, K., Royer, S., El Kadib, A., 2021. Nanostructured metal
oxide@carbon dots through sequential chitosan templating and carbonisation route. Carbohydr. Polym. Technol.
Appl. 2, 100043.
Hola, K., Markova, Z., Zoppellaro, G., Tucek, J., Zboril, R., 2015. Tailored functionalization of iron oxide nanoparticles
for MRI, drug delivery, magnetic separation and immobilization of biosubstances. Biotechnol. Adv. 33 (6),
1162–1176.
Hora´k, D., Babic, M., Mackova´, H., Benes, M.J., 2007. Preparation and properties of magnetic nano- and microsized
particles for biological and environmental separations. J. Sep. Sci. 30 (11), 1751–1772.
Hou, C., Zhao, D., Zhang, S., Wang, Y., 2018. Highly selective adsorption of Hg(II) by the monodisperse magnetic
functional chitosan nano-biosorbent. Colloid Polym. Sci. 296 (3), 547–555.
Hrioua, A., et al., 2021. Recent advances in electrochemical sensors for amoxicillin detection in biological and envi￾ronmental samples. Bioelectrochemistry 137, 107687.
Hsan, N., Dutta, P.K., Kumar, S., Das, N., Koh, J., 2020. Capture and chemical fixation of carbon dioxide by chitosan
grafted multi-walled carbon nanotubes. J. CO₂ Util. 41, 101237.
Hudson, S.M., Jenkins, D.W., 2001. Chitin and Chitosan, Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology. Wiley
Interscience, NJ.
Hussein, M.H., Hamouda, R.A., Elhadary, A.M.A., Abuelmagd, M.A., Ali, S., Rizwan, M., 2019. Characterization and
chromium biosorption potential of extruded polymeric substances from Synechococcus mundulus induced by
acute dose of gamma irradiation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26 (31), 31998–32012.
Iconaru, S.L., Guegan, R., Popa, C.L., Motelica-Heino, M., Ciobanu, C.S., Predoi, D., 2016. Magnetite (Fe3O4)
nanoparticles as adsorbents for As and Cu removal. Appl. Clay Sci. 134, 128–135.
Iqbal, M., Saeed, A., Zafar, S.I., 2009a. FTIR spectrophotometry, kinetics and adsorption isotherms modeling, ion ex￾change, and EDX analysis for understanding the mechanism of Cd2+ and Pb2+ removal by mango peel waste. J.
Hazard. Mater. 164 (1), 161–171.
Iqbal, M., Saeed, A., Kalim, I., 2009b. Characterization of adsorptive capacity and investigation of mechanism of Cu 2
+, Ni 2+ and Zn 2+ adsorption on mango peel waste from constituted metal solution and genuine electroplating
effluent. Sep. Sci. Technol. 44 (15), 3770–3791.
Iqbal, J., et al., 2019. Synergistic effects of activated carbon and nano-zerovalent copper on the performance of
hydroxyapatite-alginate beads for the removal of As3+ from aqueous solution. J. Clean. Prod. 235, 875–886.
Jamali, M., Akbari, A., 2021. Facile fabrication of magnetic chitosan hydrogel beads and modified by interfacial po￾lymerization method and study of adsorption of cationic/anionic dyes from aqueous solution. J. Environ. Chem.
Eng. 9 (3), 105175.
Javadian, H., Ruiz, M., Saleh, T.A., Sastre, A.M., 2020. Ca-alginate/carboxymethyl chitosan/Ni0.2Zn0.2Fe2.6O4 mag￾netic bionanocomposite: synthesis, characterization and application for single adsorption of Nd+ 3, Tb+ 3, and Dy
+ 3 rare earth elements from aqueous media. J. Mol. Liq. 306, 112760.
Jayakumar, R., Prabaharan, M., Reis, R.L., Mano, J.F., 2005. Graft copolymerized chitosan—present status and appli￾cations. Carbohydr. Polym. 62 (2), 142–158.
220 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesJi, W., et al., 2017. Selective solid phase extraction of chloroacetamide herbicides from environmental water samples
by amphiphilic magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers. Talanta 170, 111–118.
Jiang, H., et al., 2020. Preparation of a novel bio-adsorbent of sodium alginate grafted polyacrylamide/graphene ox￾ide hydrogel for the adsorption of heavy metal ion. Sci. Total Environ. 744, 140653.
Kaur, R., Hasan, A., Iqbal, N., Alam, S., Saini, M.K., Raza, S.K., 2014. Synthesis and surface engineering of magnetic
nanoparticles for environmental cleanup and pesticide residue analysis: a review. J. Sep. Sci. 37 (14), 1805–1825.
Kavousi, M., Chavoshi, M.S., 2020. Effect of coated carbon nanotubes with chitosan and cover of flaxseed in the in￾duction of MDA-MB-231 apoptosis by analyzing the expression of Bax and Bcl-2. Meta Gene 26, 100807.
Kazemi, J., Javanbakht, V., 2020. Alginate beads impregnated with magnetic Chitosan@Zeolite nanocomposite for
cationic methylene blue dye removal from aqueous solution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 154, 1426–1437.
Khaleda Firdous, S.C., 2017. A review: naturally available sources of chitosan and analysis of chitosan derivatives for
its antimicrobial activity. Int. J. Recent Sci. Res. 8 (3), 15773–15776.
Khan, S., et al., 2018. Synthesis and characterization of magnetic-molecularly imprinted polymers for the HPLC-UV
analysis of ametryn. React. Funct. Polym. 122, 175–182.
Khor, E., Lim, L.Y., 2003. Implantable applications of chitin and chitosan. Biomaterials 24 (13), 2339–2349.
Klemm, D., Philipp, B., Heinze, T., Heinze, U., Wagenknecht, W., 1998. Comprehensive cellulose chemistry: volume I.
In: Fundamentals and Analytical Methods. vol. l.
Klemm, D., et al., 2011. Nanocelluloses: a new family of nature-based materials. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (24),
5438–5466.
Kloster, G.A., Muraca, D., Mosiewicki, M.A., Marcovich, N.E., 2017. Magnetic composite films based on alginate and
nano-iron oxide particles obtained by synthesis ‘in situ’. Eur. Polym. J. 94, 43–55.
Klumpp, E., et al., 2003. Sorption of 2,4-dichlorophenol on modified hydrotalcites. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng.
Asp. 230 (1–3), 111–116.
Ko, S., Kim, E.S., Park, S., Daigle, H., Milner, T.E., Huh, C., 2017. Amine functionalized magnetic nanoparticles for
removal of oil droplets from produced water and accelerated magnetic separation. J. Nanopart. Res. 19, 132.
Kuang, Y., Du, J., Zhou, R., Chen, Z., Megharaj, M., Naidu, R., 2015. Calcium alginate encapsulated Ni/Fe
nanoparticles beads for simultaneous removal of Cu (II) and monochlorobenzene. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 447, 85–91.
Kulal, P., Badalamoole, V., 2020. Magnetite nanoparticle embedded Pectin-graft-poly(N-hydroxyethylacrylamide)
hydrogel: evaluation as adsorbent for dyes and heavy metal ions from waste water. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 156,
1408–1417.
Kulkarni, R.M., Vidya Shetty, K., Srinikethan, G., 2019. Kinetic and equilibrium modeling of biosorption of nickel (II)
and cadmium (II) on brewery sludge. Water Sci. Technol. 79 (5), 888–894.
Kumaresapillai, N., Bashab, R.A., Sathish, R., 2010. Production and evaluation of chitosan from Aspergillus niger
MTCC strains. Iran. J. Pharm. Res. 10 (3), 553–558.
Kundu, S., Chowdhury, I.H., Naskar, M.K., 2018. Nitrogen-doped nanoporous carbon nanospheroids for selective
dye adsorption and Pb(II) Ion removal from waste water. ACS Omega 3 (8), 9888–9898.
Kwok, K.C.M., Koong, L.F., Chen, G., McKay, G., 2014. Mechanism of arsenic removal using chitosan and
nanochitosan. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 416, 1–10.
Lakouraj, M.M., Mojerlou, F., Zare, E.N., 2014. Nanogel and superparamagnetic nanocomposite based on sodium
alginate for sorption of heavy metal ions. Carbohydr. Polym. 106 (1), 34–41.
Lei, M., et al., 2015. Overview of emerging contaminants and associated human health effects. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015,
1–12.
Li, Q., Dunn, E.T., Grandmaison, E.W., Goosen, M.F.A., 1992. Applications and properties of chitosan. J. Bioact.
Compat. Polym. 7 (4), 370–397.
Li, Z., et al., 2019a. Efficient removal of heavy metal ions and organic dyes with cucurbit [8] uril-functionalized
chitosan. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 539, 400–413.
Li, Z., Xu, S., Xiao, G., Qian, L., Song, Y., 2019b. Removal of hexavalent chromium from groundwater using sodium
alginate dispersed nano zero-valent iron. J. Environ. Manage. 244, 33–39.
Liang, X.X., Omer, A.M., Hu, Z., Wang, Y., Yu, D., Ouyang, X., 2019. Efficient adsorption of diclofenac sodium from
aqueous solutions using magnetic amine-functionalized chitosan. Chemosphere 217, 270–278.
Lima, D.R., et al., 2019. Removal of amoxicillin from simulated hospital effluents by adsorption using activated car￾bons prepared from capsules of cashew of Para. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26 (16), 16396–16408.
Linker, A., Jones, R.S., 1966. A new polysaccharide resembling alginic acid isolated from pseudomonads. J. Biol.
Chem. 241 (16), 3845–3851.
References 221
I. Basics principlesLiu, P., Borrell, P.F., Bozˇic, M., Kokol, V., Oksman, K., Mathew, A.P., 2015. Nanocelluloses and their phosphorylated
derivatives for selective adsorption of Ag(+), Cu(2+) and Fe(3+) from industrial effluents. J. Hazard. Mater. 294,
177–185.
Liu, J., Liu, W., Wang, Y., Xu, M., Wang, B., 2016. A novel reusable nanocomposite adsorbent, xanthated Fe3O4-
chitosan grafted onto graphene oxide, for removing Cu(II) from aqueous solutions. Appl. Surf. Sci. 367, 327–334.
Liu, M., et al., 2020a. A dual-recognition molecularly imprinted electrochemiluminescence sensor based on g-C3N4
nanosheets sensitized by electrodeposited rGO-COOH for sensitive and selective detection of tyramine. Sens. Ac￾tuators B 311, 127901.
Liu, X., et al., 2020b. Cerium oxide nanoparticle functionalized lignin as a nano-biosorbent for efficient phosphate
removal. RSC Adv. 10 (3), 1249–1260.
Lu, Y.C., et al., 2020. A novel strategy for selective removal and rapid collection of triclosan from aquatic environment
using magnetic molecularly imprinted nano-polymers. Chemosphere 238, 124640.
Ma, Z., Kotaki, M., Inai, R., Ramakrishna, S., 2005. Potential of nanofiber matrix as tissue-engineering scaffolds. Tissue
Eng. 11 (1–2), 101–109.
Ma, L., Peng, Y., Wu, B., Lei, D., Xu, H., 2013. Pleurotus ostreatus nanoparticles as a new nano-biosorbent for removal
of Mn(II) from aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J. 225, 59–67.
Madikizela, L.M., Chimuka, L., 2016. Synthesis, adsorption and selectivity studies of a polymer imprinted with
naproxen, ibuprofen and diclofenac. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 4 (4), 4029–4037.
Mahamadi, C., 2019. Will nano-biosorbents break the Achilles’ heel of biosorption technology? Environ. Chem. Lett.
17 (4), 1753–1768.
Mahamadi, C., Almomani, F., 2019. On the dominance of Pb during competitive biosorption from multi-metal sys￾tems: a review. Cogent Environ. Sci. 5 (1), 1635335.
Mahmoud, M.E., Ahmed, S.B., Osman, M.M., Abdel-Fattah, T.M., 2015. A novel composite of nanomagnetite￾immobilized-baker’s yeast on the surface of activated carbon for magnetic solid phase extraction of Hg(II). Fuel
139, 614–621.
Marjani, A., Zare, M.H., Sadeghi, M.H., Shirazian, S., Ghadiri, M., 2021. Synthesis of alginate-coated magnetic
nanocatalyst containing high-performance integrated enzyme for phenol removal. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9 (1),
104884.
Merouani, S., Hamdaoui, O., Saoudi, F., Chiha, M., Petrier, C., 2010. Influence of bicarbonate and carbonate ions on
sonochemical degradation of Rhodamine B in aqueous phase. J. Hazard. Mater. 175 (1–3), 593–599.
Mittal, H., Al Alili, A., Morajkar, P.P., Alhassan, S.M., 2021. GO crosslinked hydrogel nanocomposites of chitosan/
carboxymethyl cellulose—a versatile adsorbent for the treatment of dyes contaminated wastewater. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 167, 1248–1261.
Miyashiro, D., Hamano, R., Umemura, K., 2020. A review of applications using mixed materials of cellulose,
nanocellulose and carbon nanotubes. Nanomaterials 10 (2), 1–23.
Mohiuddin, I., Grover, A., Aulakh, J.S., Lee, S.-S., Malik, A.K., Kim, K.-H., 2020. Porous molecularly-imprinted poly￾mer for detecting diclofenac in aqueous pharmaceutical compounds. Chem. Eng. J. 382, 123002.
Moradi Dehaghi, S., Rahmanifar, B., Moradi, A.M., Azar, P.A., 2014. Removal of permethrin pesticide from water by
chitosan–zinc oxide nanoparticles composite as an adsorbent. J. Saudi Chem. Soc. 18 (4), 348–355.
Munyati, M.O., Mbozi, A., Siamwiza, M.N., Diale, M.M., 2017. Polyaniline nanoparticles for the selective recognition
of aldrin: synthesis, characterization, and adsorption properties. Synth. Met. 233, 79–85.
Mutreja, R., Thakur, A., Goyal, A., 2020. Chitin and chitosan: current status and future opportunities. In: Handbook of
Chitin and Chitosan. Elsevier, pp. 401–417.
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Sajjadi, M., Iravani, S., Varma, R.S., 2021. Starch, cellulose, pectin, gum, alginate, chitin and
chitosan derived (nano)materials for sustainable water treatment: a review. Carbohydr. Polym. 251, 116986.
Nata, I.F., Sureshkumar, M., Lee, C.K., 2011. One-pot preparation of amine-rich magnetite/bacterial cellulose
nanocomposite and its application for arsenate removal. RSC Adv. 1 (4), 625–631.
Natarajan, E., Ponnaiah, G.P., 2017. Optimization of process parameters for the decolorization of Reactive Blue 235
dye by barium alginate immobilized iron nanoparticles synthesized from aluminum industry waste. Environ.
Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 7, 73–88.
Navarro Garcia, S., Gines, Garcia, N., 2013. Agricultural Chemistry: Chemistry of the Soil and Essential Nutrients for
Plants, third ed. Mundi-Press Printing Company, Madrid, Spain, p. 492.
Nedkov, I., Merodiiska, T., Slavov, L., Vandenberghe, R.E., Kusano, Y., Takada, J., 2006. Surface oxidation, size and
shape of nano-sized magnetite obtained by co-precipitation. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 300 (2), 358–367.
222 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesNematidil, N., Sadeghi, M., 2019. Fabrication and characterization of a novel biosorbent and its evaluation as adsor￾bent for heavy metal ions. Polym. Bull. 76 (10), 5103–5127.
Oehlmann, J., et al., 2009. A critical analysis of the biological impacts of plasticizers on wildlife. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
B 364 (1526), 2047–2062.
Ogawa, K., Oka, K., Yui, T., 1993. X-ray study of chitosan-transition metal complexes. Chem. Mater. 5 (5),
726–728.
Olivera, S., Muralidhara, H.B., Venkatesh, K., Guna, V.K., Gopalakrishna, K., Kumar K, Y., 2016. Potential applica￾tions of cellulose and chitosan nanoparticles/composites in wastewater treatment: a review. Carbohydr. Polym.
153, 600–618. Elsevier Ltd.
Pal, P., Pal, A., Nakashima, K., Yadav, B.K., 2021. Applications of chitosan in environmental remediation: a review.
Chemosphere 266, 128934. Elsevier Ltd.
Parastar, M., Sheshmani, S., Shokrollahzadeh, S., 2021. Cross-linked chitosan into graphene oxide-iron(III) oxide hy￾droxide as nano-biosorbent for Pd(II) and Cd(II) removal. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 166, 229–237.
Park, S.-H., et al., 2020. Poly(acryloyl hydrazide)-grafted cellulose nanocrystal adsorbents with an excellent Cr(VI)
adsorption capacity. J. Hazard. Mater. 394, 122512.
Paudyal, H., et al., 2011. Adsorptive removal of fluoride from aqueous solution using orange waste loaded with multi￾valent metal ions. J. Hazard. Mater. 192 (2), 676–682.
Paul, S., Jayan, A., Sasikumar, C.S., 2014. Extraction and purification of chitosan from chitin isolated from sea prawn
(Fenneropenaeus indicus). Asian J. Pharm. Clin. Res. 7, 201–204.
Pawar, S.N., Edgar, K.J., 2012. Alginate derivatization: a review of chemistry, properties and applications. Biomate￾rials 33 (11), 3279–3305.
Perez, J.V.D., Nadres, E.T., Nguyen, H.N., Dalida, M.L.P., Rodrigues, D.F., 2017. Response surface methodology as a
powerful tool to optimize the synthesis of polymer-based graphene oxide nanocomposites for simultaneous re￾moval of cationic and anionic heavy metal contaminants. RSC Adv. 7 (30), 18480–18490.
Periyasamy, S., Gopalakannan, V., Viswanathan, N., 2018. Hydrothermal assisted magnetic nano-hydroxyapatite en￾capsulated alginate beads for efficient Cr(VI) uptake from water. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 6 (1), 1443–1454.
Phiri, I., et al., 2019. Simultaneous removal of cationic, anionic and organic pollutants in highly acidic water using
magnetic nanocomposite alginate beads. J. Water Process Eng. 31, 100884.
Pillai, S.S., et al., 2013. Biosorption of Cd(II) from aqueous solution using xanthated nano banana cellulose: equilib￾rium and kinetic studies. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 98, 352–360.
Puvvada, Y.S., Vankayalapati, S., Sukhavasi, S., 2012. Extraction of chitin from chitosan from exoskeleton of shrimp
for application in the pharmaceutical industry. Int. Curr. Pharm. J. 1 (9), 258–263.
Rajput, S., Pittman, C.U., Mohan, D., 2016. Magnetic magnetite (Fe3O4) nanoparticle synthesis and applications for
lead (Pb2+) and chromium (Cr6+) removal from water. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 468, 334–346.
Rao, D.S., 2017. Thermal pollution—impact on living organisms. Int. Res. J. Nat. Appl. Sci. 4, 1. ISSN: 2349-4077.
Rathod, M., Moradeeya, P.G., Haldar, S., Basha, S., 2018. Nanocellulose/TiO2 composites: preparation{,} character￾ization and application in the photocatalytic degradation of a potential endocrine disruptor{,} mefenamic acid{,} in
aqueous media. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 17 (10), 1301–1309.
Reddy, N.N., Mohan, Y.M., Varaprasad, K., Ravindra, S., Joy, P.A., Raju, K.M., 2011. Magnetic and electric responsive
hydrogel-magnetic nanocomposites for drug-delivery application. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 122 (2), 1364–1375.
Reichert, G., Hilgert, S., Fuchs, S., Azevedo, J.C.R., 2019. Emerging contaminants and antibiotic resistance in the dif￾ferent environmental matrices of Latin America. Environ. Pollut. 255, 113140.
Rekha Kathal, P.L., Kumar, V.C., Puri, L., Baishya, A., Uniyal, R., 2016. Pollution Status of Yamuna River, India—a
national concern. Int. Res. J. Environ. Sci. 5, 1–6.
Relyea, R.A., 2009. A cocktail of contaminants: how mixtures of pesticides at low concentrations affect aquatic com￾munities. Oecologia 159 (2), 363–376.
Ren, G., et al., 2018. Facile synthesis of maghemite nanoparticle from waste green vitriol as adsorbent for adsorption of
arsenite. J. Mol. Liq. 259 (2017), 32–39.
Ren, J., Zhu, Z., Qiu, Y., Yu, F., Ma, J., Zhao, J., 2021. Magnetic field assisted adsorption of pollutants from an aqueous
solution: a review. J. Hazard. Mater. 408 (December 2020), 124846.
Robalds, A., 2015. The Use of Bio Sorbents in the Treatment of Polluted Waters. Department of Environmental
Science.
Robertson, F.N., 1989. Arsenic in ground water under oxidizing conditions, southwest United States. Environ.
Geochem. Health 11, 171–176.
References 223
I. Basics principlesSafie, N.N., Zahrim, A., 2021. Recovery of nutrients from sewage using zeolite-chitosan-biochar adsorbent: current
practices and perspectives. J. Water Process Eng. 40, 101845.
Samuel, M.S., Bhattacharya, J., Raj, S., Santhanam, N., Singh, H., Pradeep Singh, N.D., 2019. Efficient removal of
Chromium(VI) from aqueous solution using chitosan grafted graphene oxide (CS-GO) nanocomposite. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 121, 285–292.
Sarkar, B., 2002. Heavy Metals in the Environment. CRC Press. ISBN: 0-8247-0630-7.
Sarma, G.K., Sen Gupta, S., Bhattacharyya, K.G., 2019. Nanomaterials as versatile adsorbents for heavy metal ions in
water: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26, 6245–6278.
Savci, S., 2012. An agricultural pollutant: chemical fertilizer. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Dev. 3, 73.
Schiewer, S., Patil, S.B., 2008. Modeling the effect of pH on biosorption of heavy metals by citrus peels. J. Hazard.
Mater. 157 (1), 8–17.
Şenel, S., McClure, S.J., 2004. Potential applications of chitosan in veterinary medicine. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 56 (10),
1467–1480.
Seyedi, S.M., Anvaripour, B., Motavassel, M., Jadidi, N., 2013. Comparative cadmium adsorption from water by
nanochitosan and chitosan. Int. J. Eng. Innov. Technol. 2 (9), 145–148.
Shang, Z.-Y., Han, C.-F., Song, Q.-J., 2014. An electrochemiluminescence sensor with molecularly imprinted polymer
for heroin detection. Chin. J. Anal. Chem. 42 (6), 904–908.
Sharma, A., Thakur, M., Bhattacharya, M., Mandal, T., Goswami, S., 2019. Commercial application of cellulose nano￾composites—a review. Biotechnol. Rep. 21 (2018), e00316.
Shi, S., et al., 2021. High saturation magnetization MnO2/PDA/Fe3O4 fibers for efficient Pb(II) adsorption and rapid
magnetic separation. Appl. Surf. Sci. 541 (August 2020), 148379.
Siddique, A.B., Singh, V.P., Pramanick, A.K., Ray, M., 2020. Amorphous carbon dot and chitosan based composites as
fluorescent inks and luminescent films. Mater. Chem. Phys. 249, 122984.
Singh, J., Yadav, P., Pal, A.K., Mishra, V., 2020. Water pollutants: origin and status. In: Pooja, D., Kumar, P., Singh, P.,
Patil, S. (Eds.), Sensors in Water Pollutants Monitoring: Role of Material. Advanced Functional Materials and
Sensors. Springer, Singapore, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-0671-0_2.
Smidsrod, O., Skjakbrk, G., 1990. Alginate as immobilization matrix for cells. Trends Biotechnol. 8, 71–78.
Smital, T., 2008. Acute and chronic effects of emerging contaminants. In: Emerging Contaminants From Industrial
and Municipal Waste. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 105–142, https://doi.org/10.1007/
698_5_105.
Sophia, C.A., Lima, E.C., 2018. Removal of emerging contaminants from the environment by adsorption. Ecotoxicol.
Environ. Saf. 150, 1–17.
Sorribes-Soriano, A., Herrero-Martı´nez, J.M., Esteve-Turrillas, F.A., Armenta, S., 2020. Molecularly imprinted
polymer-based device for field collection of oral fluid samples for cocaine identification. J. Chromatogr.
A 1633, 461629.
Stan, M., et al., 2017. Removal of antibiotics from aqueous solutions by green synthesized magnetite nanoparticles
with selected agro-waste extracts. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot. 107, 357–372.
Stephen Inbaraj, B., Chen, B.H., 2011. Dye adsorption characteristics of magnetite nanoparticles coated with a biopoly￾mer poly(γ-glutamic acid). Bioresour. Technol. 102 (19), 8868–8876.
Stuart, M., Lapworth, D., Crane, E., Hart, A., 2012. Review of risk from potential emerging contaminants in UK
groundwater. Sci. Total Environ. 416, 1–21.
SUD, D., MAHAJAN, G., KAUR, M., 2008. Agricultural waste material as potential adsorbent for sequestering heavy
metal ions from aqueous solutions—a review. Bioresour. Technol. 99 (14), 6017–6027.
Suhas, V., Gupta, K., Carrott, P.J.M., Singh, R., Chaudhary, M., Kushwaha, S., 2016. Cellulose: a review as natural,
modified and activated carbon adsorbent. Bioresour. Technol. 216, 1066–1076.
Sumathi, S., Hamsa, D., Dharani, B., Sivaprabha, J., Malathy, N., Radha, P., Padma, P.R., 2012. Isolation and charac￾terization of chitin from prawn shell waste and incorporation into medical textiles. Int. J. Recent Sci. Res. 3 (8),
676–680.
Taki, K., Gogoi, A., Mazumder, P., Bhattacharya, S.S., Kumar, M., 2019. Efficacy of vermitechnology integration with
Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and activated sludge for metal stabilization: a compliance study on
fractionation and biosorption. J. Environ. Manage. 236, 603–612.
Tan, P., Zheng, Y., Hu, Y., 2020. Efficient removal of arsenate from water by lanthanum immobilized electrospun
chitosan nanofiber. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 589, 124417.
224 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesTarafdar, A., Biswas, G., 2013. Extraction of chitosan from prawn shell wastes and examination of its viable commer￾cial applications. Int. J. Theor. Appl. Res. Mech. Eng. 2, 3. ISSN: 2319-3182.
Teixeira, L.S., Silva, C.F., de Oliveira, H.L., Dinali, L.A.F., Nascimento, C.S., Borges, K.B., 2020. Microextraction by
packed molecularly imprinted polymer to selectively determine caffeine in soft and energy drinks. Microchem.
J. 158, 105252.
Terzic, S., et al., 2008. Occurrence and fate of emerging wastewater contaminants in Western Balkan Region. Sci. Total
Environ. 399 (1–3), 66–77.
Torres, E., 2020. Biosorption: a review of the latest advances. Processes 8 (12), 1584.
Trache, D., et al., 2020. Nanocellulose: from fundamentals to advanced applications. Front. Chem. 8 (May). https://
doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2020.00392.
Tran, H.V., Tran, L.D., Nguyen, T.N., 2010. Preparation of chitosan/magnetite composite beads and their application
for removal of Pb(II) and Ni(II) from aqueous solution. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 30 (2), 304–310.
Ueno, H., Mori, T., Fujinaga, T., 2001. Topical formulations and wound healing applications of chitosan. Adv. Drug
Deliv. Rev. 52 (2), 105–115.
UZUN, I., 2006. Kinetics of the adsorption of reactive dyes by chitosan. Dyes Pigments 70 (2), 76–83.
Vazquez, A., Foresti, M.L., Moran, J.I., Cyras, V.P., 2015. Extraction and production of cellulose nanofibers BT—
handbook of polymer nanocomposites. In: Pandey, J.K., Takagi, H., Nakagaito, A.N., Kim, H.-J. (Eds.), Processing,
Performance and Application: Volume C: Polymer Nanocomposites of Cellulose Nanoparticles. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 81–118.
Vega-Chaco´n, J., Picasso, G., Aviles-Felix, L., Jafelicci, M., 2016. Influence of synthesis experimental parameters on the
formation of magnetite nanoparticles prepared by polyol method. Adv. Nat. Sci. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 7 (1).
Velez, V.P.P., et al., 2019. Emerging contaminants in trans-american waters. Ambiente e Agua 14 (6), 1.
Verma, R., Asthana, A., Singh, A.K., Prasad, S., Susan, M.A.B.H., 2017. Novel glycine-functionalized magnetic
nanoparticles entrapped calcium alginate beads for effective removal of lead. Microchem. J. 130, 168–178.
Villegas-Navarro, A., Ramirez-M, Y., Salvador-S. B., M.S., Gallardo, J.M., 2001. Determination of wastewater LC50 of
the different process stages of the textile industry. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 48 (1), 56–61.
Wang, Y., Huang, K., 2020. Biosorption of tungstate onto garlic peel loaded with Fe(III), Ce(III), and Ti(IV). Environ.
Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (27), 33692–33702.
Wang, Y., et al., 2013. Preparation and characterization of a novel nano-absorbent based on multi-cyanoguanidine
modified magnetic chitosan and its highly effective recovery for Hg(II) in aqueous phase. J. Hazard. Mater.
260, 9–15.
Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Hou, C., Liu, M., 2016. Mussel-inspired synthesis of magnetic polydopamine–chitosan
nanoparticles as biosorbent for dyes and metals removal. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 61, 292–298.
Wang, K., et al., 2018. Polydopamine-coated magnetic nanochains as efficient dye adsorbent with good recyclability
and magnetic separability. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 516, 263–273.
Wang, J., Yang, L., Gu, P., 2020. Synthesis and characterization of chitosan grafted molybdenum disulfide composites
as an adsorbent for graphene oxide removal. J. Phys. Chem. Solid 143, 109471.
Wang, Y., et al., 2021. Application of magnetic fields to wastewater treatment and its mechanisms: a review. Sci. Total
Environ. 773, 145476.
Wen, R., Tu, B., Guo, X., Hao, X., Wu, X., Tao, H., 2020. An ion release controlled Cr(VI) treatment agent: Nano zero￾valent iron/carbon/alginate composite gel. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 146, 692–704.
Wong, Y.C., Szeto, Y.S., Cheung, W.H., McKay, G., 2004. Adsorption of acid dyes on chitosan—equilibrium isotherm
analyses. Process Biochem. 39 (6), 695–704.
Wu, F.-C., Tseng, R.-L., Juang, R.-S., 2010. A review and experimental verification of using chitosan and its derivatives
as adsorbents for selected heavy metals. J. Environ. Manage. 91 (4), 798–806.
Yadav, M., Ahmadi, Y., 2019. Alginates: source, chemistry, and properties. In: Hasnain, M.S., Nayak, A.K. (Eds.), Algin￾ate: Versatile Polymer in Biomedical Applications and Therapeutics Palm Bay. Apple Academic Press, FL, pp. 1–24.
Yadav, V.K., Fulekar, M.H., 2018. Biogenic synthesis of maghemite nanoparticles (γ-Fe2O3) using Tridax leaf extract
and its application for removal of fly ash heavy metals (Pb, Cd). Mater. Today: Proc. 5 (9), 20704–20710.
Yadav, S., et al., 2020. Cationic dye removal using novel magnetic/activated charcoal/β-cyclodextrin/alginate poly￾mer nanocomposite. Nanomaterials 10 (1), 170.
Yan, S., Subramanian, S.B., Tyagi, R.D., Surampalli, R.Y., Zhang, T.C., 2010. Emerging contaminants of environmental
concern: source, transport, fate, and treatment. Pract. Period. Hazard. Toxic Radioact. Waste Manage. 14 (1), 2–20.
References 225
I. Basics principlesYing, G.-G., 2006. Fate, behavior and effects of surfactants and their degradation products in the environment.
Environ. Int. 32 (3), 417–431.
Yoshizuka, K., Lou, Z., Inoue, K., 2000. Silver-complexed chitosan microparticles for pesticide removal. React. Funct.
Polym. 44 (1), 47–54.
Yu, H., Hong, H.-J., Kim, S.M., Ko, H.C., Jeong, H.S., 2020. Mechanically enhanced graphene oxide/carboxymethyl
cellulose nanofibril composite fiber as a scalable adsorbent for heavy metal removal. Carbohydr. Polym. 240,
116348.
Zare, E.N., Lakouraj, M.M., Kasirian, N., 2018. Development of effective nano-biosorbent based on poly
m-phenylenediamine grafted dextrin for removal of Pb(II) and methylene blue from water. Carbohydr. Polym.
201, 539–548.
Zeb, S., 2018. Electrochemical oxidation of acid brown 98 using Ti/Ru0.3Ti0.7O2 composite anode. Int. J. Electrochem.
Sci., 9428–9440.
Zeb, S., et al., 2020. Silica-based nanomaterials as designer adsorbents to mitigate emerging organic contaminants
from water matrices. J. Water Process Eng. 38, 101675.
Zhang, H., Jin, Y., Deng, Y., Wang, D., Zhao, Y., 2012. Production of chitin from shrimp shell powders using Serratia
marcescens B742 and Lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 8014 successive two-step fermentation. Carbohydr. Res. 362,
13–20.
Zhang, Z., Se`be, G., Rentsch, D., Zimmermann, T., Tingaut, P., 2014. Ultralightweight and flexible silylated
nanocellulose sponges for the selective removal of oil from water. Chem. Mater. 26, 2659–2668.
Zhang, L., Zhu, T., Liu, X., Zhang, W., 2016. Simultaneous oxidation and adsorption of As(III) from water by cerium
modified chitosan ultrafine nanobiosorbent. J. Hazard. Mater. 308, 1–10.
Zhang, F., Tang, X., Huang, Y., Keller, A.A., Lan, J., 2019. Competitive removal of Pb2+ and malachite green from
water by magnetic phosphate nanocomposites. Water Res. 150, 442–451.
Zhang, J., Wang, P., Zhang, Z., Xiang, P., Xia, S., 2020. Biosorption characteristics of Hg(II) from aqueous solution by
the biopolymer from waste activated sludge. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17 (5), 1488.
Zhao, M., Li, X., Huang, Z., Wang, S., Zhang, L., 2021. Facile cross-link method to synthesize chitosan-based adsorbent
with superior selectivity toward gold ions: batch and column studies. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 172, 210–222.
Zimmermann, M.V.G., Zattera, A.J., Santana, R.M.C., 2019. Sorbent system based on acetylated microfibrillated cel￾lulose for remediation of oil aquatic environments. Rev. Mater. 24 (2).
226 9. Non-toxic nature of nano-biosorbents
I. Basics principlesCHAPTER
10
Nanoadsorbents for environmental
remediation of polluting agents
Katya M. Aguilar-Perez
a
, Gustavo Ruiz-Pulidoa
,
Dora I. Medinaa
, Roberto Parra-Saldivarb
, Nadia Nazishc
,
Muhammad Bilald
, and Hafiz M.N. Iqbalb
a
Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Atizapan de Zaragoza, Mexico
b
Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey, Mexico c
Department
of Zoology, University of Sialkot, Sialkot, Pakistan d
School of Life Science and Food Engineering,
Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, China
10.1 Introduction
Over the last few years, the increasing number of pollutants and ecological risk substances
in water has gained considerable attention. Several research groups have focused on the de￾velopment of new technologies and methods to control water pollution associated to the
unmanageable discharge of these materials (Hu et al., 2021). The current demand of clean
and freshwater needs to be fulfill worldwide. However, as a result of urbanization, accessi￾bility to enough and high-quality drinking water has become a global challenge (Ahmadi
et al., 2020). The unproper assessment and lack of regulation related to discharge of pollutants
such as dyes, antibiotics, cosmetic, and some other PPCPs from domestic and industrial
sources not only affects human health but also aquatic ecosystems, biodiversity, and entail
a high economic impact, especially in not developed countries (Hu et al., 2021). The increasing
detection of such contaminants on water has potentiated their classification as “Emerging
Contaminants” (Asif et al., 2021). Influencing factors such as strong polarity, refractory
volatilization, and bacteriostasis lead to the accumulation of PPCPs in aquatic environment
(Yin et al., 2020). Therefore, cost-effective technologies to remove PPCPs in aquatic environ￾ment are broadly needed. Advances in nanotechnology have enabled the fabrication of novel
nanoadsorbent materials. Nanomaterials are defined as structures with size within 1 and
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 227 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00010-1100 nm at least in one dimension (Kreyling et al., 2010) with characteristic physical, chemical,
and biological properties due to their small size and high surface area-to-volume ratio
(Srivastava et al., 2021). Nanomaterials are suitable for water treatment, given their unique
features, specifically large surface area and tunable morphologies, they display great adsorp￾tion capacity and efficient degradation of wastewater effluents (Aguilar-Perez et al., 2021).
Among the most widely used nano-adsorbents for water treatment include magnetic
nanoparticles, clay-based nanomaterials, zeolites and silica-based nanomaterials, zero-valent
metal nanoparticles, metal oxides nanoparticles, carbon-based nanomaterials, and
nanocomposites (Aguilar-Perez et al., 2020a, b).
This chapter presents a compilation of nanoadsorbent materials with special focus on
carbon-based and nanoparticle-based materials for wastewater treatment. This was also
aimed at providing recent advances in the development of carbon nanotubes, graphene, me￾tallic and biogenic nanoparticles, and to give an overview regarding novel literature reports
related to nanoadsorbents for water remediation. Additionally, physiochemical features of
nanoadsorbents and their mechanism of action for pollutant’s removal in aqueous media
are discussed with brief examples.
10.2 Nanoadsorbents and their useful aspects
Nanotechnology offers new alternatives for wastewater remediation through the study
and design of novel methods, and materials. Since adsorption is considered as one of the best
strategies for pollutants removal in water because of its simple design and highly efficient
percentage of removal, the use of nanoadsorbents has displayed a considerable attention
(Dhiman and Kondal, 2021). Nanoadsorbents and their mechanism of action provide numer￾ous advantages for their utilization in wastewater treatment (Santhosh et al., 2016). These
structures have unique physicochemical features, including nanosize, large surface area
and strong solution mobility, high reactivity and enhanced redox and photocatalytic proper￾ties (Mohmood et al., 2013; Santhosh et al., 2016; Yaqoob et al., 2020). Moreover, these features
allow nanoadsorbents to remove pollutants according to their molecular size, hydrophobic￾ity, and speciation behavior (Nik Abdul Ghani et al., 2021) (Fig. 10.1).
10.3 Carbon-based nanoadsorbents
Nowadays, research in carbon-based nanoadsorbents, comprised by graphene, carbon
nanotubes, and activated carbon, and their byproducts has been conducted and employed
in wastewater treatment (Gul et al., 2021). Carbon-based nanomaterials (CBNs) are com￾posed entirely or mainly by carbon atoms (Keller et al., 2017; Nasrollahzadeh et al., 2021)
and they are characterized by their useful properties for water treatment, including supe￾rior chemical stability, high water flux with minimum energy, ease operation, and low
energy consumption (Ali et al., 2019). The majority of investigations in CBNs has focused
on carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, graphene, fullerenes, and carbon-based compos￾ites (Piaskowski and Zarzycki, 2020). Despite their acceptable reputation to remove water
228 10. Nanoadsorbents for environmental remediation of polluting agents
I. Basics principlescontaminants, CBNs production and functionalization at large scale is still very expensive.
Moreover, the use of strategies such as surface modification has been proposed to address
this problem (Gul et al., 2021). Development of carbon-based nanocomposites has demon￾strated powerful absorption capacity and potential selectivity (Huang et al., 2021; Lee et al.,
2018). Several other carbon-based nanomaterials for wastewater treatment are summarized
in Table 10.1.
10.3.1 Carbon nanotubes-based nanoadsorbent materials
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have gradually become emerging materials for organic pollut￾ant removal. They can be used as adsorbents to remove contaminants in wastewater (Peng
et al., 2021). CNTs are carbon’s allotropes formed in a cylinder-shaped structure. These
FIG. 10.1 Environmental remediation of various types of polluting wastes using carbon-based nanoadsorbents.
TABLE 10.1 Carbon-based nanomaterials for wastewater treatment.
Nanomaterial
Synthesis
process Contaminant
Characterization
techniques
Percentage
removal Reference
Activated
carbon
Chemical
activation/
calcination
Methylene blue
Crystal violet
Astrazon blue
Indigo carmine
FT-IR
TGA
SEM
TEM
XRD
 99.9% Herrera-Gonza´lez
et al. (2019)
Activated
carbon
Chemical
activation/
calcination
Triclosan FESEM
FT-IR
 80.77% Mohd Khori et al.
(2018)
Continued
10.3 Carbon-based nanoadsorbents 229
I. Basics principlesTABLE 10.1 Carbon-based nanomaterials for wastewater treatment—cont’d
Nanomaterial
Synthesis
process Contaminant
Characterization
techniques
Percentage
removal Reference
Single-walled
carbon
nanotubes
Chemical vapor
deposition
technique
Acid Blue 92 SEM
TE
FT-IR
 99.1% Balarak et al.
(2021)
Multi-walled
carbon
nanotubes
Chemical vapor
deposition
technique
Acetamoniphen
Naproxen
Ibuprofen,
Ketoprofen,
Aniline
Cephalexin
Tetracycline
SEM
TEM
TGA
EDS
XRD
FT-IR
 100%
 70%
 70%
 40%
 98.9%
 96.83%
 99.8%
Balarak et al.
(2017), Dahane
et al. (2013), Jafari
and Aghamiri
(2011), Zhang et al.
(2011)
Multi-walled
carbon
nanotubes
Chemical vapor
deposition
technique
Diazinon
(pesticide)
SEM
TEM
BET
FT-IR
 100% Dehghani et al.
(2019)
Magnetic
multi-walled
carbon
nanotubes
Co-precipitation
method
Naproxen XRD TGA SEM
FT-IR
 62.2% _
Ilbay et al. (2015)
Polyvinyl
amine
functionalized
GO—
(MWCNTs)—
Fe3O4
nanocomposite
Modified
Hummers’
method/
chemical
co-precipitation
method
Hydroquinone FT-IR
XRD
TGA
BET
AFM
SEM
EDS
 85.3% Zhou et al. (2020b)
Graphene/
titanium
dioxide
nanotubes
Hydrothermal
method
Acetaminophen FT-IR
UV–Vis
XRD
TGA
 96% Tao et al. (2015)
Graphene
oxide
membranes
Layer-by-layer
assembly
procedure
Methylene blue
Rhodamine WT
Triclosan
Triclocarban
SEM
QCM-D
 97%
100% 
37% 100%
Oh et al. (2017)
Graphene
oxide
Modified
Hummers
method
Metformin SEM
TEM
FT-IR
XPS
XRD
 80% Zhu et al. (2017)
Graphene
oxide
Modified
Hummers
method
Malathion
Chlorpyrifos
FT-IR
XRD
FE-SEM
TEM

89.03% 
88.17%
Yadav et al. (2019)
230 10. Nanoadsorbents for environmental remediation of polluting agents
I. Basics principlesmaterials are composed by a hexagonal lattice of carbon atoms in sp2 hybridization (Lee et al.,
2018; Mohmood et al., 2013). CNTs can present either a single-walled (SWCNTs) or a multi￾walled shape (MWCNTs) (Ali et al., 2019; Cincinelli et al., 2015). SWCNTs diameter size os￾cillates around 0 and 3 nm, while MWCNTs can exhibit up to 100 nm size (Thines et al., 2017).
Some of the most representative advantages of CTNs include high and rapid absorption, ther￾mal stability, flexibility, and significant storage capacity.(Lee et al., 2018; Santhosh et al.,
2016). Moreover, morphology of CNTs is important to determine their properties as nano￾adsorbents, for instance, it has been reported that rough surfaces have larger surface area
compared to the smooth ones, thus, greater absorption capacity ( Jain et al., 2021). Addition￾ally, the study and enhancement of this parameters during fabrication of CNTs are useful in
achieving prompt equilibrium time, better adsorption capacity and high selectivity.
Unfortunately, CNTs potentialities may be diminished due to their high hydrophobicity,
low dispersion in aqueous medium, and reduced interfacial interaction. Therefore, agglom￾eration and reduction of their adsorption efficiency (Ali et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2018) may lead
potential toxicity to aquatic organisms even at low concentrations (Freixa et al., 2018). Some
papers report that CNTs are used for water remediation and can reduce the toxicity of pol￾lutants in one side, but in the other side, CNTs may act as a collectors and carriers of potential
pollutants and hazardous materials leading to increased persistence in aquatic environments
(Zhang et al., 2020). Overall, since their discovery, CNTs have been extensively used as effec￾tive adsorbents, but its application is limited due to its high synthesis and purification cost,
compared with absorbents such as activated carbon (Santhosh et al., 2016). CNTs perfor￾mance can be enhanced through surface modification, for instance, functionalization of CNTs
allow them to interact with organic contaminants through hydrophobic interaction, π–π bind￾ing and formation of chemical bonds with surface functionalities (Sargin et al., 2020). Finally,
it is also important to test novel nanocomposites based on CNTs for wastewater treatment
and remediation technologies, to understand the interaction between pollutant and
nanomaterial, as well as toxicity and fate of such compounds.
10.3.2 Graphene-based nanoadsorbent materials
Due to the remarkable properties of graphene-based nanomaterials such as porous struc￾ture, extraordinary specific surface area, great mechanical and thermal stability, suitable ac￾tive sites and manageable surface properties, have gained substantial research interests
recently (Huang et al., 2021).
Graphene has been utilized as nanoadsorbent for pollution remediation in water bodies
(Yaqoob et al., 2020). Its structure basically consist of one-atom-thick planar sheets of
sp2
-hybridized carbon atoms packed compactly in six-membered rings (Kim et al., 2018).
Graphene and its oxidized derivative (graphene oxide (GO)) can be functionalized with di￾verse materials, resulting in nanocomposites with significant advantages (e.g., high extraction
recovery and improved selectivity) (Huang et al., 2021). Nevertheless, graphene oxide pre￾sents some limitations, for example, its absorption capacity may be affected when it interacts
with the treated solution due to changes in pH and temperature, ionic strength, or surfactant
concentrations (Rienzie et al., 2019). Furthermore, graphene structures have several draw￾backs, firstly because bulk graphene tends to agglomerate and restack to procedure graphite
10.3 Carbon-based nanoadsorbents 231
I. Basics principlesduring liquid processing, and secondly, inadequate collection and separation of graphene
and its derivatives from treated water, can lead significant recontamination (Choi et al.,
2018). Moreover, fabrication of graphene nanocomposites and hybrids has been attracted
research interest to use as effective absorbents for the removal of harmful dyes such as
methylene blue (Calimli et al., 2020) given their easy dispersion and high availability of ab￾sorption sites, thus displaying a better absorption capacity. It is apparent from the vast liter￾ature reports related to water remediation that graphene-based materials are suitable
nanoadsorbents to remove various water contaminants. However, the research conducted
outside laboratory scale is still at a very early stage. More emphasis in investigation with real
industrial effluents and in vivo toxicity studies must be performed.
10.4 Nanoparticles-based nanoadsorbent materials
Among nanoadsorbent materials diverse types of nanoparticles have gained attention as
convenient strategies for water remediation purposes. Nanoparticles are zero-dimension
nanosized materials with size in the range of 1 and 100 nm (Wang et al., 2019). Easy and
sustainable synthesis processes, enhanced bioavailability, stability, high surface area, associ￾ated sorption sites and high removal percentage are some of the advantages of this
nanoadsorbents (Gutierrez et al., 2019; Hu and Cao, 2019; Zhou et al., 2020a). In this chapter,
nanoparticle-based materials for wastewater treatment are discussed. On one hand, imple￾mentation of conventional metallic nanoparticles (MNPs) and, on the other side, MNPs
fabricated through green approaches (biogenic nanoparticles) as nanoadsorbents for contam￾inants removal in water.
10.4.1 Metallic nanoparticles-based nanoadsorbent materials
MNPs have been explored for diverse applications in electronics, biomedical engineering,
optics, among others. Currently, a different option in the environmental sector has opened the
possibility to use MNPs for heavy metals and dye removal in water (Vinosha et al., 2019).
Silver, copper, and iron figure as some of the most common metals used for fabrication of
MNPs. Regarding the mechanism of action, for instance, antimicrobial activities of MNPs
to their high size-to-surface ratio. The nanoparticles hamper cellular processes once entering
the microbes. Therefore, the nanoparticles surface adhesion with the microbial cell surface
leads to its immobilization. For the case of zero-valent iron nanoparticles-based reduction
process of contaminants is a redox process, here the metal acts as an electron donor for the
reduction of oxidized species. Another mechanism when using silver nanoparticles is amal￾gamation on the surface of MNPs for sequestration of mercury (Mishra, 2014).
Moreover, influencing factors in the performance of MNPs such as size, stability, and sur￾face modification must be considered prior their application in water treatment. Also, fate
and risk models are relevant for a proper management. A study performed in a pilot waste￾water treatment plant (WWTP) investigated the behavior of metallic silver nanoparticles
(Ag-NPs), the study suggested (Kaegi et al., 2011) that fate and risk models for Ag-NP, col￾loidal and chemical transformation reactions must be consider on the basis of experiments
232 10. Nanoadsorbents for environmental remediation of polluting agents
I. Basics principlesconducted at realistic and pertinent NPs concentration levels. Functionalization it is a useful
tool to confer better physicochemical properties, however, nature of the surface coating may
affect colloidal and chemical behavior of Ag-NPs in aquatic environment. Furthermore, it is
vital to approach functionalization toward enhancement of stability of Ag-NPs and other NPs
to avoid flocculation and undesirable chemical transformation in water domains. Under
(Faraji et al., 2010). Under these circumstances, a significant fragment of NPs may pass the
WWTPs and be delivered to the aquatic environment in their original form.
Another study investigated how morphology of FeCu bimetallic nanoparticles (FeCu
BMNPs) affected adsorption capacity, rate, and intensity in the removal of
As(V) (Sepu´lveda et al., 2018). The study was performed at different mass ratios and it
was found that at low proportion of Cu in the BMNPs (Fe0.9 Cu0.1) favors the core shell struc￾ture (discontinuous shell) and enhances the removal of arsenate (As(V)) relative to the Fe0.5
Cu0.5 material (segregated structure), while the adsorption studies demonstrated that As
could be removed by sorption on the FeCu BMNPs, and the best results were observed for
an Fe:Cu mass ratio of 0.9:0.1 (Fe0.9 Cu0.1), which exhibited a nonhomogeneous core shell
morphology.
10.4.2 Biogenic nanoparticles-based nanoadsorbent materials
In recent years, products based on natural compounds have attracted great attention due to
the worldwide development of maintaining good health and minimizing potential risk to the
environment. Therefore, biological methods to produce green, reusable, and efficient metallic
nanoparticles have made possible to involve the use of biological mass from either plant or
microbial as reductant agent via extracellularly or intracellularly (Sebeia et al., 2020). For
instance, the use of peptides, enzymes, vitamins, alkaloids and phenolics originally present
in plant extracts, bacteria fungi, etc., have enabled the development of cheaper, eco-friendly,
and efficient nanoadsorbents such as biogenic nanoparticles. Fabrication of biogenic
nanoparticles is possible due to the presence of bioactive molecules. These compounds are
mixed with a metal salt solution under specific conditions based on the nature of precursor
materials and the final purpose of nanoparticles. (Aguilar-Perez et al., 2020a, b). Thus,
nanoadsorbents-based biogenic nanoparticles have been applied successfully for dye re￾moval from water, reaching adsorption capacity around 704.7 mg/g (Sharbaf Moghadas
et al., 2020). In the same way, biologic fabrication of Fe0 NPs coated with β-Cyclodextrin
(βCD) was reported by Nasiri et al. (2019) and successfully utilized for crystal-violet dye re￾moval, reaching adsorption capacity up to 454.5 mg/g. Moreover, green synthesis of ( Jain
et al., 2021) Fe2O3 NPs was performed and compared with calcined Fe2O3 NPs to inquire
the effect of plant extract on the adsorption performance, both Fe2O3 NPs and c-Fe2O3 NPs
were examined for their use in the removal of methylene blue dye from aqueous solution.
The biogenic Fe2O3 NPs showed better removal percentage (92%) as compared to c-Fe2O3
(88%) toward methylene blue. In summary, nanoadsorbents-based biogenic nanoparticles
may present a sustainable and efficient strategy for wastewater treatment, however, further
studies need to be performed to improve their yield and cost-effectiveness. Additionally, sta￾bility tests must be addressed to evaluate the performance of biogenic NPs under different
conditions throughout the time. Table 10.2 summarizes literature related to MNPs for waste￾water treatment.
10.4 Nanoparticles-based nanoadsorbent materials 233
I. Basics principlesTABLE 10.2 Literature related to MNPs for wastewater treatment.
Nanomaterial
Synthesis
process Contaminant
Characterization
techniques
Percentage
removal Reference
Zero-Valent Cu NPs Chemical
reduction
Ceftriaxone
Cefadroxil
TEM
EDS
HPLC
UV–Vis
 97%
 85%
Oliveira et al.
(2018)
Pd-doped ZnO
nanostars
Microwave￾hydrothermal
method
Methyl parathion
Pendimethalin
Trifluralin
XRD
FT-IR
TGA
FE-SEM
FE-TEM
EDS
XPS
UV–Vis
> 92% Veerakumar et al.
(2021)
CuO NPs with
Psidium guajava leaf
extract
Green
synthesis
method
Nile blue Reactive
yellow 160
FE-SEM
TEM
UV–Vis
EDX
BET
 93%
 81%
Singh et al. (2019a)
ZnO NPs CuO NPs
NiO NPs Mn3O4 NPs
CeO2 NPs SnO2 NPs
Precipitation
method
Methyl orange
Methylene blue
FE-SEM
TEM
XRD
EDS
UV–ViS
BET
 93%/ 98%
 12%/ 15%
 49%/ 55%
 20%/ 26%
 78%/ 83%
 93%/ 98%
Gnanasekaran
et al. (2017)
ZnO NPs Precipitation
method
Ibuprofen
Ephedrine
Propranolol
XRD
SEM
TEM
DLS
EDAX
 99.8%
 99%
 99.8%
Hassan et al. (2019)
Bimetallic Ni/Fe NPs Chemical
reduction
DDT TEM  90% Tian et al. (2009)
ZrO2 NPs with
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bacteria
Extracellular
microbial
synthesis
Tetracycline DLS
FE-TEM
EDX
XRD
FT-IR
 98.73% Debnath et al.
(2020)
Pt and Pd NPs with
Desulfovibrio vulgaris
Extracellular
microbial
synthesis
Sulfamethoxazole
Ciprofloxacin
17-estradiol
TEM
UV–Vis
 85%
 70%
 94%
Martins et al.
(2017)
SnO2 NPs with Piper
betle leaves
Hydrothermal
route
Reactive yellow
186
FT-IR
XRD
SEM
EDX
TEM
 92.17% Singh et al. (2018)
234 10. Nanoadsorbents for environmental remediation of polluting agents
I. Basics principles10.5 Concluding remarks and outlook
Advances in nanotechnology have made possible the development of new materials for
wastewater treatment. Nanoadsorbents possess unique physiochemical properties that are
useful to counteract the increased amounts of hazardous pollutants in water. The irrational
use of antibiotics, dyes, and PPCPs represents one of the most relevant sources of water pol￾lution. The current strategies for remediation of water bodies involve numerous drawbacks
such as generation of toxic byproducts, use of hazardous solvents, and poor absorption effi￾ciency. To overcome these issues, nanoadsorbent materials have been developed and tested to
remove organic, inorganic, and biological pollutants in water. The use of carbon-based
nanoadsorbents for this purpose has displayed excellent results. However, their use has been
limited due to their processing still is not cost-effective, also possible toxicity to the environ￾ment and lack of regulations for their risk assessment. On the other hand, research groups
have put efforts to develop more eco-friendly materials. For instance, the use of green chem￾istry to fabricate MNPs (biogenic nanoparticles), allows the use of precursors recovered from
waste bio sources. Nevertheless, the use of controlled environments to test their efficiency and
performance is required and may be time-consuming. Despite the significant advances in ma￾terial science for environmental purposes and knowledge about nanomaterials’ capability to
remove and degrade hazardous compounds and contaminants, there is still the challenge of
recycling these nanomaterials and to be aware of their fate after utilization. Additionally, suit￾able evaluation of interaction of nanoadsorbents with living organisms must be performed,
specially before the transfer from laboratory scale to industrial application.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı´a (CONACYT) Mexico, under Sistema
Nacional de Investigadores (SNI) program awarded to H.M.N.I (CVU: 735340) and R.P.-S. (CVU: 35753). The listed
author(s) are much obliged to their representative institutes and universities for providing the literature services.
TABLE 10.2 Literature related to MNPs for wastewater treatment—cont’d
Nanomaterial
Synthesis
process Contaminant
Characterization
techniques
Percentage
removal Reference
Ag NPs with
Trigonella foenum￾graecum leaf extract
Chemical
reduction
Reactive blue
19 Reactive yellow
186
XRD
EDX
FT-IR
FE-SEM
TEM
 88%
 86%
Singh et al. (2019b)
ZnO colloidal NPs of
Cyanometra ramiflora
Chemical
reduction
Rhodamine B UV–Vis
SEM
EDS
XRD
BET
FT-IR
 98% Varadavenkatesan
et al. (2019)
Se NPs with
S. griseobrunneus
Extracellular
microbial
synthesis
Diclofenac
sodium
HPLC
GC–MS
 97.43% Ameri et al. (2020)
Acknowledgments 235
I. Basics principlesConflicts of interest
The listed author(s) declare that no competing, conflicting, and financial interests exist in this work.
References
Aguilar-Perez, K.M., Aviles-Castrillo, J.I., Ruiz-Pulido, G., 2020a. Nano-sorbent materials for pharmaceutical-based
wastewater effluents—an overview. Case Stud. Chem. Environ. Eng., 100028. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cscee.2020.100028.
Aguilar-Perez, K.M., Aviles-Castrillo, J.I., Ruiz-Pulido, G., Medina, D.I., Parra-Saldivar, R., Iqbal, H.M., 2021.
Nanoadsorbents in focus for the remediation of environmentally-related contaminants with rising toxicity con￾cerns. Sci. Total Environ. 779, 146465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146465.
Aguilar-Perez, K.M., Heya, M.S., Parra-Saldı´var, R., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2020b. Nano-biomaterials in-focus as sensing/de￾tection cues for environmental pollutants. Case Stud. Chem. Environ. Eng. 2 (September). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cscee.2020.100055, 100055.
Ahmadi, M.S., Susˇnik, J., Veerbeek, W., Zevenbergen, C., 2020. Towards a global day zero? Assessment of current and
future water supply and demand in 12 rapidly developing megacities. Sustain. Cities Soc. 61 (June). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102295.
Ali, S., Rehman, S.A.U., Luan, H.-Y., Farid, M.U., Huang, H., 2019. Challenges and opportunities in functional carbon
nanotubes for membrane-based water treatment and desalination. Sci. Total Environ. 646, 1126–1139. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.07.348.
Ameri, A., Shakibaie, M., Pournamdari, M., Ameri, A., Foroutanfar, A., Doostmohammadi, M., Forootanfar, H., 2020.
Degradation of diclofenac sodium using UV/biogenic selenium nanoparticles/H2O2: optimization of process pa￾rameters. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A Chem. 392 (January), 112382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphotochem.2020.112382.
Asif, A.H., Wang, S., Sun, H., 2021. Hematite-based nanomaterials for photocatalytic degradation of pharmaceuticals
and personal care products (PPCPs): a short review. Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
COGSC.2021.100447, 100447.
Balarak, D., Mostafapour, F.K., Joghataei, A., 2017. Application of single-walled carbon nanotubes for removal of an￾iline from industrial waste water. Biosci. Biotechnol. Res. Commun. 10 (2), 311–318. https://doi.org/10.21786/
bbrc/10.2/50.
Balarak, D., Zafariyan, M., Igwegbe, C.A., Onyechi, K.K., Ighalo, J.O., 2021. Adsorption of acid blue 92 dye from aque￾ous solutions by single-walled carbon nanotubes: isothermal, kinetic, and thermodynamic studies. Environ. Pro￾cess. 8 (2), 869–888. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40710-021-00505-3.
Calimli, M.H., Nas, M.S., Burhan, H., Mustafov, S.D., Demirbas, O., Sen, F., 2020. Preparation, characterization and €
adsorption kinetics of methylene blue dye in reduced-graphene oxide supported nanoadsorbents. J. Mol. Liq. 309.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2020.113171.
Choi, S.W., Oak, M.H., Yi, E., Kim, H.J., Park, J.W., 2018. Preparation and in vitro evaluation of elastic nanoliposomes
for topical delivery of highly skin-permeable growth factors. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 18 (2), 887–892. https://doi.
org/10.1166/jnn.2018.14863.
Cincinelli, A., Martellini, T., Coppini, E., Fibbi, D., Katsoyiannis, A., 2015. Nanotechnologies for removal of pharma￾ceuticals and personal care products from water and wastewater. A review. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 15 (5),
3333–3347. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.2015.10036.
Dahane, S., Gil Garcı´a, M.D., Martı´nez Bueno, M.J., Ucles Moreno, A., Martı´nez Galera, M., Derdour, A., 2013. De￾termination of drugs in river and wastewaters using solid-phase extraction by packed multi-walled carbon
nanotubes and liquid chromatography–quadrupole-linear ion trap-mass spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. A 1297,
17–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2013.05.002.
Debnath, B., Majumdar, M., Bhowmik, M., Bhowmik, K.L., Debnath, A., Roy, D.N., 2020. The effective adsorption of
tetracycline onto zirconia nanoparticles synthesized by novel microbial green technology. J. Environ. Manag. 261
(September 2019), 110235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110235.
Dehghani, M.H., Kamalian, S., Shayeghi, M., Yousefi, M., Heidarinejad, Z., Agarwal, S., Gupta, V.K., 2019. High￾performance removal of diazinon pesticide from water using multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Microchem. J.
145, 486–491. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2018.10.053.
236 10. Nanoadsorbents for environmental remediation of polluting agents
I. Basics principlesDhiman, V., Kondal, N., 2021. ZnO Nanoadsorbents: a potent material for removal of heavy metal ions from waste￾water. Colloids Interface Sci. Commun. 41 (October 2020), 100380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colcom.2021.100380.
Faraji, M., Yamini, Y., Rezaee, M., 2010. Iranian chemical society magnetic nanoparticles: synthesis, stabilization,
functionalization, characterization, and applications. J. Iran. Chem. Soc. 7 (1), 1–37.
Freixa, A., Acun˜a, V., Sanchı´s, J., Farre, M., Barcelo´, D., Sabater, S., 2018. Ecotoxicological effects of carbon based
nanomaterials in aquatic organisms. Sci. Total Environ. 619–620, 328–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.11.095.
Gnanasekaran, L., Hemamalini, R., Saravanan, R., Ravichandran, K., Gracia, F., Agarwal, S., Gupta, V.K., 2017. Syn￾thesis and characterization of metal oxides (CeO2, CuO, NiO, Mn3O4, SnO2 and ZnO) nanoparticles as photo cat￾alysts for degradation of textile dyes. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 173, 43–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphotobiol.2017.05.027.
Gul, A., Khaligh, N.G., Julkapli, N.M., 2021. Surface modification of carbon-based nanoadsorbents for the advanced
wastewater treatment. J. Mol. Struct. 1235, 130148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.130148.
Gutierrez, A.M., Bhandari, R., Weng, J., Stromberg, A., Dziubla, T.D., Hilt, J.Z., 2019. Novel magnetic core-shell
nanoparticles for the removal of polychlorinated biphenyls from contaminated water sources. Mater. Chem. Phys.
223 (March 2018), 68–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2018.10.045.
Hassan, S.S.M., Abdel-Shafy, H.I., Mansour, M.S.M., 2019. Removal of pharmaceutical compounds from urine via
chemical coagulation by green synthesized ZnO-nanoparticles followed by microfiltration for safe reuse. Arab.
J. Chem. 12 (8), 4074–4083. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2016.04.009.
Herrera-Gonza´lez, A.M., Caldera-Villalobos, M., Pela´ez-Cid, A.-A., 2019. Adsorption of textile dyes using an acti￾vated carbon and crosslinked polyvinyl phosphonic acid composite. J. Environ. Manag. 234, 237–244. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.01.012.
Hu, G., Cao, J., 2019. Metal-containing nanoparticles derived from concealed metal deposits: an important source of
toxic nanoparticles in aquatic environments. Chemosphere 224, 726–733. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2019.02.183.
Hu, X., Xie, H., Zhuang, L., Zhang, J., Hu, Z., Liang, S., Feng, K., 2021. A review on the role of plant in pharmaceuticals
and personal care products (PPCPs) removal in constructed wetlands. Sci. Total Environ. 780, 146637. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146637.
Huang, T., Tang, X., Luo, K., Wu, Y., Hou, X., Tang, S., 2021. An overview of graphene-based nanoadsorbent materials
for environmental contaminants detection. Trends Anal. Chem. 139, 116255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trac.2021.116255. _
Ilbay, Z., Şahin, S., Kerkez, O., Bayazit, € Ş.S., 2015. Isolation of naproxen from wastewater using carbon-based mag￾netic adsorbents. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 12 (11), 3541–3550. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13762-015-0775-4.
Jafari, M., Aghamiri, S.F., 2011. Evaluation of carbon nanotubes as solid-phase extraction sorbent for the removal of
cephalexin from aqueous solution. Desalin. Water Treat. 28 (1–3), 55–58. https://doi.org/10.5004/dwt.2011.2200.
Jain, A., Wadhawan, S., Mehta, S.K., 2021. Biogenic synthesis of non-toxic iron oxide NPs via Syzygium aromaticum for
the removal of methylene blue. Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manage. 16 (March). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enmm.2021.100464, 100464.
Kaegi, R., Voegelin, A., Sinnet, B., Zuleeg, S., Hagendorfer, H., Burkhardt, M., Siegrist, H., 2011. Behavior of metallic
silver nanoparticles in a pilot wastewater treatment plant. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45 (9), 3902–3908. https://doi.
org/10.1021/es1041892.
Keller, A.A., Adeleye, A.S., Conway, J.R., Garner, K.L., Zhao, L., Cherr, G.N., Zuverza-Mena, N., 2017. Comparative
environmental fate and toxicity of copper nanomaterials. NanoImpact 7 (May), 28–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
impact.2017.05.003.
Kim, S., Park, C.M., Jang, M., Son, A., Her, N., Yu, M., Yoon, Y., 2018. Aqueous removal of inorganic and organic
contaminants by graphene-based nanoadsorbents: a review. Chemosphere 212, 1104–1124. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.09.033.
Kreyling, W.G., Semmler-Behnke, M., Chaudhry, Q., 2010. A complementary definition of nanomaterial. Nano Today
5 (3), 165–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2010.03.004.
Lee, K.M., Wong, C.P.P., Tan, T.L., Lai, C.W., 2018. Functionalized carbon nanotubes for adsorptive removal of water
pollutants. Mater. Sci. Eng. B 236–237, 61–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mseb.2018.12.004.
Martins, M., Mourato, C., Sanches, S., Noronha, J.P., Crespo, M.T.B., Pereira, I.A.C., 2017. Biogenic platinum and pal￾ladium nanoparticles as new catalysts for the removal of pharmaceutical compounds. Water Res. 108, 160–168.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.10.071.
References 237
I. Basics principlesMishra, A.K., 2014. Application of Nanotechnology in Water Research. 9781118496 Wiley, https://doi.org/
10.1002/9781118939314.
Mohd Khori, N.K.E., Hadibarata, T., Elshikh, M.S., Al-Ghamdi, A.A., Salmiati, Yusop, Z., 2018. Triclosan removal by
adsorption using activated carbon derived from waste biomass: isotherms and kinetic studies. J. Chin. Chem. Soc.
65 (8), 951–959. https://doi.org/10.1002/jccs.201700427.
Mohmood, I., Lopes, C.B., Lopes, I., Ahmad, I., Duarte, Armando, C., Pereira, E., 2013. Nanoscale materials and their
use in water contaminants removal—a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 20, 1239–1260. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-012-1415-x.
Nasiri, J., Motamedi, E., Naghavi, M.R., Ghafoori, M., 2019. Removal of crystal violet from water using Β-cyclodextrin
functionalized biogenic zero-valent iron nanoadsorbents synthesized via aqueous root extracts of Ferula persica. J.
Hazard. Mater. 367 (December 2018), 325–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.12.079.
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Sajjadi, M., Iravani, S., Varma, R.S., 2021. Carbon-based sustainable nanomaterials for water
treatment: state-of-art and future perspectives. Chemosphere 263, 128005. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2020.128005.
Nik Abdul Ghani, N., Jami, M., Alam, M., 2021. The role of nanoadsorbents and nanocomposite adsorbents in the
removal of heavy metals from wastewater: a review and prospect. Pollution 7 (1), 153–179. https://doi.org/
10.22059/poll.2020.307069.859.
Oh, Y., Armstrong, D.L., Finnerty, C., Zheng, S., Hu, M., Torrents, A., Mi, B., 2017. Understanding the pH-responsive
behavior of graphene oxide membrane in removing ions and organic micropollulants. J. Membr. Sci. 541, 235–243.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2017.07.005.
Oliveira, L., Nascimento, M., Guimara˜es, Y., Oliveira, A., Silva, A., Lopes, R., 2018. Removal of beta-lactams antibi￾otics through zero-valent copper nanoparticles. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. https://doi.org/10.21577/0103-
5053.20180034.
Peng, J., He, Y., Zhou, C., Su, S., Lai, B., 2021. The carbon nanotubes-based materials and their applications for organic
pollutant removal: a critical review. Chin. Chem. Lett. 32 (5), 1626–1636. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cclet.2020.10.026.
Piaskowski, K., Zarzycki, P.K., 2020. Carbon-based nanomaterials as promising material for wastewater treatment
processes. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17 (16), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17165862.
Rienzie, R., Ramanayaka, S., Adassooriya, N.M., 2019. Nanotechnology applications for the removal of environmental
contaminants from pharmaceuticals and personal care products. In: Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products:
Waste Management and Treatment Technology Emerging Contaminants and Micro Pollutants. Elsevier, pp.
279–296, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816189-0.00012-3.
Santhosh, C., Velmurugan, V., Jacob, G., Jeong, S.K., Grace, A.N., Bhatnagar, A., 2016. Role of nanomaterials in water
treatment applications: a review. Chem. Eng. J. 306, 1116–1137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2016.08.053.
Sargin, I., Baran, T., Arslan, G., 2020. Environmental remediation by chitosan-carbon nanotube supported palladium
nanoparticles: conversion of toxic nitroarenes into aromatic amines, degradation of dye pollutants and green syn￾thesis of biaryls. Sep. Purif. Technol. 247 (December 2019), 116987. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.116987.
Sebeia, N., Jabli, M., Ghith, A., Saleh, T.A., 2020. Eco-friendly synthesis of Cynomorium coccineum extract for con￾trolled production of copper nanoparticles for sorption of methylene blue dye. Arab. J. Chem. 13 (2), 4263–4274.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2019.07.007.
Sepu´lveda, P., Rubio, M.A., Baltazar, S.E., Rojas-Nunez, J., Sa´nchez Llamazares, J.L., Garcia, A.G., Arancibia-Miranda,
N., 2018. As(V) removal capacity of FeCu bimetallic nanoparticles in aqueous solutions: the influence of cu content
and morphologic changes in bimetallic nanoparticles. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 524, 177–187. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcis.2018.03.113.
Sharbaf Moghadas, M.R., Motamedi, E., Nasiri, J., Naghavi, M.R., Sabokdast, M., 2020. Proficient dye removal from
water using biogenic silver nanoparticles prepared through solid-state synthetic route. Heliyon 6 (8). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04730, e04730.
Singh, J., Kaur, N., Kaur, P., Kaur, S., Kaur, J., Kukkar, P., Rawat, M., 2018. Piper betle leaves mediated synthesis of
biogenic SnO2 nanoparticles for photocatalytic degradation of reactive yellow 186 dye under direct sunlight. En￾viron. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manage. 10, 331–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enmm.2018.07.001.
Singh, J., Kumar, V., Kim, K.-H., Rawat, M., 2019a. Biogenic synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles using plant ex￾tract and its prodigious potential for photocatalytic degradation of dyes. Environ. Res. 177, 108569. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.108569.
238 10. Nanoadsorbents for environmental remediation of polluting agents
I. Basics principlesSingh, J., Kumar, V., Singh Jolly, S., Kim, K.-H., Rawat, M., Kukkar, D., Tsang, Y.F., 2019b. Biogenic synthesis of silver
nanoparticles and its photocatalytic applications for removal of organic pollutants in water. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 80,
247–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2019.08.002.
Srivastava, M., Srivastava, N., Saeed, M., Mishra, P.K., Saeed, A., Gupta, V.K., Malhotra, B.D., 2021. Bioinspired syn￾thesis of iron-based nanomaterials for application in biofuels production: a new in-sight. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev.
147 (May), 111206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111206.
Tao, H., Liang, X., Zhang, Q., Chang, C.-T., 2015. Enhanced photoactivity of graphene/titanium dioxide nanotubes for
removal of acetaminophen. Appl. Surf. Sci. 324, 258–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2014.10.129.
Thines, R.K., Mubarak, N.M., Nizamuddin, S., Sahu, J.N., Abdullah, E.C., Ganesan, P., 2017. Application potential of
carbon nanomaterials in water and wastewater treatment: a review. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 72, 116–133.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtice.2017.01.018.
Tian, H., Li, J., Mu, Z., Li, L., Hao, Z., 2009. Effect of pH on DDT degradation in aqueous solution using bimetallic Ni/
Fe nanoparticles. Sep. Purif. Technol. 66 (1), 84–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2008.11.018.
Varadavenkatesan, T., Lyubchik, E., Pai, S., Pugazhendhi, A., Vinayagam, R., Selvaraj, R., 2019. Photocatalytic deg￾radation of rhodamine B by zinc oxide nanoparticles synthesized using the leaf extract of Cyanometra ramiflora. J.
Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 199 (September), 111621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2019.111621.
Veerakumar, P., Sangili, A., Saranya, K., Pandikumar, A., Lin, K.-C., 2021. Palladium and silver nanoparticles embed￾ded on zinc oxide nanostars for photocatalytic degradation of pesticides and herbicides. Chem. Eng. J. 410, 128434.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.128434.
Vinosha, M., Palanisamy, S., Muthukrishnan, R., Selvam, S., Kannapiran, E., You, S.G., Prabhu, N.M., 2019. Biogenic
synthesis of gold nanoparticles from Halymenia dilatata for pharmaceutical applications: antioxidant, anti-cancer
and antibacterial activities. Process Biochem. 85, 219–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2019.07.013.
Wang, C.Y., Zeng, W.J., Jiang, T.T., Chen, X., Zhang, X.-L., 2019. Incorporating attapulgite nanorods into graphene
oxide nanofiltration membranes for efficient dyes wastewater treatment. Sep. Purif. Technol. 214, 21–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2018.04.079.
Yadav, S., Goel, N., Kumar, V., Singhal, S., 2019. Graphene oxide as proficient adsorbent for the removal of harmful
pesticides: comprehensive experimental cum DFT investigations. Anal. Chem. Lett. 9 (3), 291–310. https://doi.
org/10.1080/22297928.2019.1629999.
Yaqoob, A.A., Parveen, T., Umar, K., Mohamad Ibrahim, M.N., 2020. Role of nanomaterials in the treatment of waste￾water: a review. Water 12 (2). https://doi.org/10.3390/w12020495.
Yin, Y., Shi, M., Ren, Y., Wang, S., Hua, M., Lu, J., Lv, L., 2020. Wrinkle structure on multifunctional MOFs to facilitate
PPCPs adsorption in wastewater. Chem. Eng. J. 387 (January). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.124196.
Zhang, L., Song, X., Liu, X., Yang, L., Pan, F., Lv, J., 2011. Studies on the removal of tetracycline by multi-walled carbon
nanotubes. Chem. Eng. J. 178, 26–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.09.127.
Zhang, W., Zeng, Z., Liu, Z., Huang, J., Xiao, R., Shao, B., He, Q., 2020. Effects of carbon nanotubes on biodegradation
of pollutants: positive or negative? Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 189 (June 2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoenv.2019.109914.
Zhou, Q., Liu, L., Liu, N., He, B., Hu, L., Wang, L., 2020a. Determination and characterization of metal nanoparticles in
clams and oysters. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 198, 110670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110670.
Zhou, K., Zhang, J., Xiao, Y., Zhao, Z., Zhang, M., Wang, L., Zhou, C., 2020b. High-efficiency adsorption of and com￾petition between phenol and hydroquinone in aqueous solution on highly cationic amino-poly(vinylamine)-
functionalized GO-(o-MWCNTs) magnetic nanohybrids. Chem. Eng. J. 389, 124223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2020.124223.
Zhu, S., Liu, Y., Liu, S., Zeng, G., Jiang, L., Tan, X., Yang, C., 2017. Adsorption of emerging contaminant metformin
using graphene oxide. Chemosphere 179, 20–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.03.071.
References 239
I. Basics principlesThis page intentionally left blankPART II
Cellulose-based
nanobiosorbents
for decontamination
of environmental matricesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
11
Risk assessment of nanocellulose
exposure
Minashree Kumari
Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, Delhi, India
11.1 Introduction
Over the past few years, cellulose-based-nanobioadsorbents (CNB) or nanocellulose (NC)
has been gaining increasing attention from both research and industry. Physico-chemical
properties such as high tensile strength, biocompatibility, and high aspect ratio make it more
alluring to a wide range of sectors, spanning from medical to construction. The substance can
be extracted from vast variety of available cellulosic biomass materials for instance, wood
pulp, agricultural crops, organic waste, and also from bacteria (Xue et al., 2017).
Nanocellulose are basically categorized into three different types, i.e., nanocrystalline
cellulose, nanofibrillated cellulose, and bacterial nanocellulose ones (Phanthong et al.,
2018). However, all of them have similar chemical compositions but they usually differ in
morphology, particle size, crystallinity, and some modification caused due to the difference
of source from which they are extracted and also the extraction methods used (Roman, 2015;
Shatkin and Kim, 2015).
Increased use of nanocellulose in extensive industrial applications have amplified the pos￾sibility of human exposure to this substance during the various life stages of NC-containing
products (Gottschalk and Nowack, 2011). Due to their widespread use, serious questions are
being raised about the health and environmental consequences of manufactured
nanomaterials for consumers and also for industrial applications. The usage of these bio￾based nanofibers increases a greater understanding of human exposure addressing their po￾tential health issues should be gained (Camarero-Espinosa et al., 2016).
There is the possibility of exposure to humans, eventually after nanocellulose is released
from the product and through a number of environments and scenarios. In each of these there
are different modes of human exposure, which include the respiratory tract (inhalation), skin
contact, eye contact, ingestion and possible interaction with the bloodstream (i.e., via direct
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 243 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00011-3injection through medical application, or via translocation from the lung following inhalation
(Nowack et al., 2012; Losert et al., 2014) resulting in possible secondary organ exposure, i.e.,
liver, heart, brain, and/or kidney.
Exposure to nanocellulose can occur through inhalation, ingestion or dermal routes
(Martinez et al., 2013). The major route of exposure can be through inhalation of small par￾ticles which might get entrapped within the tissues and lungs in the workplace however, the
long-term effects are essentially unidentified. As many as 10,000 studies on nanomaterial tox￾icity has been reported, but till date the key contributing properties to toxicity of
nanocellulose have not been predicted. The surface properties of nanocellulose, including
size and size distribution, surface charge, stability, and reactivity are vital elements of toxicity
and effects.
Looking into the exposure aspects of nanocellulose, studies suggest that the inhalation of
raw NCs would be the main exposure route for humans, however little information is avail￾able on the exposure concentrations or doses (Donaldson et al., 2013). The value of these vari￾ables will mainly depend on the scenario considered, for instance, exposure concentrations
during occupational events are expected to be on the higher side than those in consumer ap￾plications. Apart from inhalation exposure, studies were also conducted to assess the toxicity
of nanocellulose through oral and dermal routes of exposure.
Very few studies consider the longer term life-cycle impacts of novel materials, yet we have
learned from decades of public health and environmental research that these considerations
must be made early in the development cycle.
Limited studies have been reported on the environmental risk of nanocellulose
(Stoudmann et al., 2019, 2020). None of the reported studies have considered the human
health-related aspect of nanocellulose exposure as per the author’s best knowledge. It is im￾portant to address this issue as humans are the most affected by nanocellulose exposure.
However, lack of information data makes the whole process quite difficult.
11.2 Risk assessment framework
As exposure is a main part of risk assessment process, understanding and mitigating risk
requires identifying potential points of exposure. A relatively recent addition to the risk as￾sessment toolbox is the use of Life Cycle Risk Assessment (LCRA), which evaluates scenarios
within a product life-cycle on the basis of potential exposure to a material, as well as the avail￾ability of safety information (Ede et al., 2019). The methodology of risk assessment involves
four different steps comprising of hazard identification, exposure assessment, risk estimation
and risk characterization as mentioned in Fig. 11.1 (Kumari and Kumar, 2020a).
11.2.1 Hazard identification
Hazard identification is the first and foremost step in risk assessment process. It is essential
to identify the possible sources through which exposure can take place. It is important to de￾termine whether, and under what conditions, exposure to CN particles might occur, whether
244 11. Risk assessment of nanocellulose exposure
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesthese exposures include nanoscale particles, and whether to conduct measurements to de￾velop exposure estimates. The probable sources through which exposure can occur include
(i) exposure via occupational inhalation and (ii) exposure from environment. Table 11.1 lists
the possible sources of risk exposure for the two pathways mentioned (i) under occupational
inhalation, the possible exposure may happen during spilling of nanocellulose fibers with
polymer or breakage or leakage of the pipe material. Accidental ingestion of processed
raw material or inhalation of air-borne nanocellulose particles are one of the leading source
of exposure. Spillage during winding, cutting, or sanding might lead to human health effects
via inhalation exposure. Literature report suggests that inhalation of pure, dried
nanocellulose material during commercial production and manufacturing are the primary
concerns for an occupational user (Shatkin and Kim, 2017); (ii) exposure from environment:
There are abundant sources of nanomaterials in the environment and it becomes tough to rec￾ognize and measure (Bierkandt et al., 2018). These can be released into the ambient air by
FIG. 11.1 Steps for evaluating risk of nanocellulose exposure.
TABLE 11.1 Possible source of nanocellulose exposure.
Type of hazard/
exposure Scenario Stage
Occupational/
inhalation
Accidental ingestion of processed material Production
Use to dry nanocellulose to create material for film coating Manufacturing
Accidental ingestion of air borne nanocellulose particles
Environmental Primarily at phases downstream to the production, such as particle recovery,
spray drying or milling/accidental released into ambient air during the
handling and transport of particles (Bierkandt et al., 2018)
Production
Leakage during the production may introduce particles into the environment
( John et al., 2017)
Production
Untreated discharge into wastewater End of life
Spillage due to landfill degradation
11.2 Risk assessment framework 245
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricessimilar processes as in occupational or daily-life scenarios ( John et al., 2017). Incessant dis￾charge of wastewater in surrounding water bodies. Leakage from landfills or their degrada￾tion also adds to the existing pollution load.
11.2.2 Exposure assessment
Exposure assessment deals with identifying the possible source of risk exposures to con￾taminants under study. The exposure scenarios include environmental impacts of the receiv￾ing waters at end-of-life disposal (e.g., to aquatic wildlife and through biodegradation), the
ingestion of CN particles by consumers’ accidental ingestion, and the potential for dermal
contact during manufacturing and consumer application. Toxicological investigation esti￾mates the possible toxicity based on exposure routes plus those arising from ingestion (oral
toxicity), skin contact (dermal toxicity), eye contact (ocular toxicity), and breathing (inhalation
toxicity). Literature studies suggest that cellulose dust may cause irritation (Cullen et al.,
2000) in the respiratory system when inhaled. Since nanocellulose is extracted from bulk cel￾lulose, studies on whether nanocellulose induce a similar reaction when inhaled from the air
are essential. Though, the size, scale, and differential chemistries of CN forms can complicate
experimental efforts. Smaller the particle is, deeper the impact will be as they are able to mi￾grate into the inner surface of lung, affecting them.
There are three major routes (Inhalation, dermal, and oral ingestion) through which expo￾sure can occur, of which inhalation has been identified as the major pathway of risk exposure
to human health for nanocellulose (Stoudmann et al., 2020). In order to determine the poten￾tial for health effects with inhalation exposure to nanocellulose, it is necessary to understand
whether in reality exposure is occurring, to what size particles, and to what concentrations
(Camarero-Espinosa et al., 2016). The size of nanocellulose fibers is one of the major param￾eter which governs the risk assessment. Since, inhalation is a key exposure route in occupa￾tional scenarios, toxicological studies, both in vivo and in vitro, often focus on physiological
responses by inhalation and inform us of the potential deleterious human health effects from
breathing in aerosolized NMs (Kargarzadeh et al., 2017). Much of the currently available tox￾icological data for CN evaluate inhalation exposures, implicating the pulmonary and inflam￾matory systems. Although long-term exposures are more realistic, most studies were acute or
shorter term, reflecting more immediate effects, rather than delayed or chronic. A review of
the toxicity of CNC found that although the small number of in vivo studies on oral and der￾mal toxicity showed no signs of adverse effects, the results from both pulmonary (inhalation
in vivo) and cytotoxicity studies showed inconsistent results (Roman, 2015).
11.2.3 Risk estimation
LCRA has been designated as a possible tool for determining risk due to occupational in￾halation exposure. It involves five different stages: (i) production of raw materials,
(ii) manufacture, (iii) transportation, (iv) consumer use, and (v) disposal (Shatkin and
Kim, 2015).
Nanomaterials influence on the environment have been assessed for some nano￾compounds, but nanocellulose has not been investigated extensively. Most studies showed
246 11. Risk assessment of nanocellulose exposure
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesthat the impacts of environmental exposure to nanomaterials are acute (single dose) rather
than chronic. In real-life situations, though, chronic and longer term research investigations
would more suitably divulge realistic exposure durations, as production, use, and disposal of
NC-containing materials would more likely result in continuous emissions to environmental
media (Shatkin and Kim, 2017).
For determining environmental risk assessment (ERA), risk characterization ratio (RCR) of
nanocellulose is estimated by using the predicted environmental concentrations (PECs). PECs
are compared with predicted no effect concentrations (PNECs), which are derived from in
vivo and in vitro ecotoxicological studies (European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), 2008).
RCR is carried out in accordance with REACH guideline as mentioned below (Eq. 11.1).
PNECs represent the level of nanocellulose below which no adverse effects are expected to
occur.
RCR ¼ PEC=PNEC (11.1)
where RCR is the risk characterization ratio; PEC is the predicted environmental concentra￾tion; PNEC is the predicted no-effect concentration level. A RCR < 1 would indicate that no
risk is expected for the particular environmental compartment and conditions. A RCR > 1
would mean the predicted environmental concentrations are high enough to cause adverse
effects on the organisms and could show the need to implement additional risk management
measures (Kumari and Kumar, 2020b). This simple approach was applied to engineered
nanomaterials where the first risk characterization ratios were obtained and discussed by
Mueller and Nowack (2008) and subsequently by Gottschalk et al. (2009). In the previous
work by Gottschalk and Nowack (2013), the risk was assessed as a percentage of overlap be￾tween the PEC and the pSSD. Similar approach used by Coll et al. (2015) to delineate the risk
of engineered nanomaterials. Stoudmann et al. (2019) showed an RCR of 6.9  105 2015, and
7.1  104 in 2025, indicating that under the chosen assumptions there is no present or future
environmental risk surrounding nanocellulose within the surface water compartment, even
assuming a compound annual growth rate of 19% for nanocellulose production in upcoming
years.
11.2.4 Risk management
When the potential source of exposure is identified, it is somehow easy to control and re￾duce the risk associated. As per a report published by Vireo Advisors, LLC (2019), an Expo￾sure Control Hierarchy is proposed to manage the exposure. The Exposure Control Hierarchy
includes (i) Hazard reduction which includes the use of materials in accordance with good
manufacturing practice for reducing risk exposure, (ii) adopting controlled engineered work
environments, (iii) understanding the potential hazards associated with equipment’s, pro￾cesses, and materials employed, and (iv) protection for workers in terms of garments and
equipment to reduce risk exposure. The best approach to control potential releases can be
made by using engineering control methods, for example, local exhaust ventilation or hoods
and use of PPE kits during handling of dry product. Since the nanocellulose risk exposure
occurs through occupational inhalation as well, expertise of industrial hygiene professionals,
who are trained in conducting sampling in workplaces and have access to specialized
11.2 Risk assessment framework 247
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesequipment for measuring exposure is required to reduce the risk, if any. It is advisable to seek
expert’s assistance for your workplace exposure assessment. For example, agencies like the
US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) conducts free, private of￾fice surveys in the United States, with specified sampling equipment, and offers recommen￾dations and suggestions for handling workplace exposures. Besides, there are also some
private organizations that perform similar services internationally. Shatkin and Kim (2015)
applied lifecycle risk assessment to determine health risks of nanocellulose materials and ob￾served that occupational inhalation is a major safety concern for mankind. This analysis,
when combined with the potential hazards of a material, helps professionals characterize
the safety landscape and develop risk management practices.
11.3 Guidelines and regulations
Looking into the potential adverse effects of nanocellulose, standards, guideline limits and
exposure limits has been formulated by regulatory agencies like Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA), National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
(National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2013), etc. However, the Occupational
Exposure Limits Value (OEL) of NC by inhalation or dermal exposure are rare owing to the
limited amount of data availability about their potential risk. As a precautionary measure,
the OEL value of 0.01 fibers/cm3 (similar to those of carbon nano-fibers) has been
recommended in view of the potential bio-persistence of NC when inhaled (Stockmann-Juvala
et al., 2014). Though the health risk effects ofinhaling nanocellulose have not been well studied,
numerous OEL have been established for bulk cellulose particles based on a gravimetric
analysis. The OSHA recommended permissible exposure limit for total dust (15 mg/m3
)
and for respirable dust (5 mg/m3
), expressed in time-weighted averages (TWA) (Martinez
et al., 2013). The NIOSH recommended exposure limits (REL) are TWA 10 mg/m3 and
TWA 5 mg/m3 respirable, and the ACGIH Threshold Limit Value® (TLV) is TWA
10 mg/m3 (CDC). There is currently no immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) level
available for cellulose exposure. These limits are primarily based on the potential for irritation
of cellulose particles to eyes, skin, or mucous membranes.
11.4 Conclusions and implications of the study
NC exposure is the least investigated route with reference to exposure estimation and
assessment and pose question because of its comparably low concentrations and limited
analytical methods. Risk assessment of nanocellulose is essential in understanding the ad￾verse effects on to ecological as well as on human health. Framework has been developed to
determine LCRA and ecological health risks however research investigations and studies
on human health is still scarce which makes it overall process difficult, for example, lack
of environmental occurrence data on nanocellulose, dose response data on toxicity of
nanocellulose are some of the knowledge gaps which need to be look upon for human health
risk assessment. Similar to HHRA, LCRA of NC also suffers due to lack of data on long-term
248 11. Risk assessment of nanocellulose exposure
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesexposures, realistic concentrations values including studies on certain common human
health endpoints such as carcinogenicity, neurotoxicity and reproductive effects (Shatkin
and Kim, 2015). Besides, some studies have also shown diverging results. These knowledge
gaps make it challenging to suggest appropriate exposure controls and therefore inhibit a
clear conclusion regarding the human health impacts of nanocellulose to be made. No stud￾ies are available in the literature that have assessed the suitability of current control tech￾nologies for nanocellulose. Furthermore, no evidence or guidance specific to personal
protection from nanocellulose were found. Currently, no standardized or validated mea￾surements for nanocellulose in air is available, a crucial need for assessing inhalation expo￾sure. Analytical and technical boundaries limit our understanding of determining actual
potential occupational exposures. Reproducibility of measurement methods is also an area
which needs further improvement, since materials and occupational surroundings for
nanocellulose and NC-enabled products will vary greatly. As typical for risk assessment,
exposure during the production steps and hazard related to the materials should be eval￾uated case-by-case. Currently there are no occupational exposure limits specific to
engineered cellulose nanomaterials. As with many nanomaterials, the size and surface area
of the CNC nanoparticles may be a critical factor with respect to toxicological risks and bi￾ological effects. Therefore, it is good practice to keep exposures to new and uncharacterized
materials as low as possible.
There is a need to better assess the effects of inhalation exposure in the workplace than the
currently available studies based on short-term, high-dose exposures that create lung
overload conditions. Further, additional endpoints should be studied to demonstrate overall
safety in a breadth of uses. Long-term exposure studies are needed. Increasing knowledge of
hazardous properties and behavior of nanomaterials calls for continual review of the risk as￾sessment and management measures. Until reliable methods are developed to predict the tox￾icity of a nanomaterial, thorough safety testing must be completed.
References
Bierkandt, F.S., Leibrock, L., Wagener, S., Laux, P., Luch, A., 2018. The impact of nanomaterial characteristics on in￾halation toxicity. Toxicol. Res. (Camb.) 7 (3), 321–346.
Camarero-Espinosa, S., Endes, C., Mueller, S., Petri-Fink, A., Rothen-Rutishauser, B., Weder, C., Clift, M.J.D.,
Foster, E.J., 2016. Elucidating the potential biological impact of cellulose nanocrystals. Fibers 4, 21. https://doi.
org/10.3390/fib4030021.
Coll, C., Notter, D., Gottschalk, F., Sun, T., Som, C., Nowack, B., 2015. Probabilistic environmental risk assessment of
five nanomaterials (nano-TiO2, nano-Ag, nano-ZnO, CNT, and fullerenes). Nanotechnology 10 (4), 436–444.
Cullen, R.T., Searl, A., Miller, B.G., Davis, J.M.G., Jones, A.D., 2000. Pulmonary and intraperitoneal inflammation in￾duced by cellulose fibres. J. Appl. Toxicol. 20 (1), 49–60.
Donaldson, K., Schinwald, A., Murphy, F., Cho, W.-S., Duffin, R., Lang, T., et al., 2013. The biologically effective dose
in inhalation nanotoxicology. Acc. Chem. Res. 46 (3), 723–732. https://doi.org/10.1021/ar300092y.
Ede, J.D., Ong, K.J., Goergen, M., Rudie, A., Pomeroy-Carter, C.A., Shatkin, J.A., 2019. Risk analysis of cellulose
nanomaterials by inhalation: current state of science. Nano 9, 337. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano9030337.
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), 2008. Guidance on Information Requirements and Chemical Safety Assess￾ment Appendix to Part F CSR Template With Explanation.
Gottschalk, F., Nowack, B., 2011. The release of engineered nanomaterials to the environment. J. Environ. Monit.
13 (5), 1145–1155. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0em00547a.
References 249
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesGottschalk, F., Nowack, B., 2013. A probabilistic method for species sensitivity distributions taking into account the
inherent uncertainty and variability of effects to estimate environmental risk. Integr. Environ. Assess. Manag. 9
(1), 79–86.
Gottschalk, F., Sondere, T., Schols, R., Nowack, B., 2009. Modeled environmental concentrations of engineered
nanomaterials for different regions. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43 (24), 9216–9222.
John, A.C., Kupper, M., Manders-Groot, A.M.M., Debray, B., Lacome, J.M., Kuhlbusch, T.A.J., 2017. Emissions and
possible environmental implication of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) in the atmosphere. Atmosphere 8 (5), 84.
Kargarzadeh, H., Loelovich, M., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Dufresne, A., 2017. Methods for extraction of nanocellulose
from various sources. In: Kargarzadeh, H., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Dufresne, A. (Eds.), Handbook of Nanocellulose
and Cellulose Nanocomposites. vol. 1. Wiley, ISBN: 9783527338665, pp. 1–49, https://doi.org/
10.1002/9783527689972 (Chapter 1).
Kumari, M., Kumar, A., 2020a. Human health risk assessment of antibiotics in binary mixtures for finished drinking
water. Chemosphere 240, 124864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124864.
Kumari, M., Kumar, A., 2020b. Identification of component-based approach for prediction of joint chemical mixture
toxicity risk assessment with respect to human health: a critical review. Food Chem. Toxicol. 143, 111458. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2020.111458.
Losert, S., von Goetz, N., Bekker, C., Fransman, W., Wijnhoven, S.W.P., Delmaar, C., Hungerbuhler, K., Ulrich, A.,
2014. Human exposure to conventional and nanoparticle-containing sprays—a critical review. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 48, 5366–5378.
Martinez, K.F., Eastlake, A., Rudie, A., Geraci, C., 2013. Occupational exposure characterization during the manufac￾ture of cellulose nanomaterials. In: Postek, M.T., Moon, R.J., Rudie, A.W., Bilodeau, M.A. (Eds.), Production and
Applications of Cellulose Nanomaterials. TAPPI Press, ISBN: 978-1-59510-224-9.
Mueller, N.C., Nowack, B., 2008. Exposure modeling of engineered nanoparticles in the environment. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 42, 4447–4453.
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2013. Current Intelligence Bulletin 65-occupational Exposure
to Carbon Nanotubes and Nanofibers. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, NIOSH Pub. No, Cincinnati, pp. 2013–2145.
Nowack, B., Brouwer, C., Geertsma, R.E., Heugens, E.H.W., Ross, B.L., Toufektsian, M.-C., Wijnhoven, S.W.P.,
Aitken, R.J., 2012. Analysis of the occupational, consumer and environmental exposure to engineered
nanomaterials used in 10 technology sectors. Nanotoxicology 7, 1152–1156.
Phanthong, P., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Xu, G., Abudula, A., Guan, G., 2018. Nanocellulose: extraction and ap￾plication. Carbon Resour. Convers. 1, 32–43.
Roman, M., 2015. Toxicity of cellulose nanocrystals: a review. Ind. Biotechnol. 11 (1), 25–33.
Shatkin, J.A., Kim, B., 2015. Cellulose nanomaterials: life cycle risk assessment, and environmental health and safety
roadmap. Environ. Sci. Nano 2 (5), 477–499.
Shatkin, J.A., Kim, B., 2017. Environmental health and safety of cellulose nanomaterials and composites. In:
Kargarzadeh, H., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Dufresne, A. (Eds.), Handbook of Nanocellulose and Cellulose
Nanocomposites, first ed. Wiley.
Stockmann-Juvala, H., Taxell, P., Santonen, T., 2014. Formulating Occupational Exposure Limits Values (OELs)
(Inhalation & Dermal). Scaffold, Helsinki.
Stoudmann, N., Nowack, B., Som, C., 2019. Prospective environmental risk assessment of nanocellulose for Europe.
Environ. Sci. Nano 6 (8), 2520–2531. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9EN00472F.
Stoudmann, N., Schmutz, M., Hirsch, C., Nowack, B., Som, C., 2020. Human hazard potential of nanocellulose: quan￾titative insights from the literature. Nanotoxicology 14 (9), 1241–1257. https://doi.org/
10.1080/17435390.2020.1814440.
Vireo Advisors, LLC, 2019. Cellulose Nanomaterials, A Practical Handling Guide. Vireo Advisors, LLC, Boston, MA.
http://www.vireoadvisors.com/resources.
Xue, Y., Mou, Z., Xiao, H., 2017. Nanocellulose as a sustainable biomass material: structure, properties, present status
and future prospects in biomedical applications. Nanoscale 9 (39), 14758–14781.
250 11. Risk assessment of nanocellulose exposure
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
12
Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents:
An insight
Ilgım Gokt € urk € a
, Duygu C¸ imena
, Merve Asena Ozbek € a
,
Fatma Yılmazb
, and Adil Denizlia
a
Department of Chemistry, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey b
Vocational School
of Gerede, Department of Chemistry Technology, Bolu Abant Izzet Baysal University,
Bolu, Turkey
12.1 Introduction
In recent years, nanotechnology, which is used in the production of effective, easy-to-use, and
inexpensive materials in every field, plays an important role in the development of new gener￾ation and environmentally friendly materials in materials science studies. In recent new studies,
green chemistry and new generation material production gain importance, and more environ￾mentally friendly polymers are produced by polymer production from natural materials. These
types are polymers that do not harm the environment, are easily degradable, and are completely
organic. A significant part of natural polymers are generally found in the structure of living
things and one of the most important examples of this is cellulose (Buzea et al., 2007).
Cellulose is a natural, environmentally friendly polymer that can be effectively degraded
by many microorganisms, is self-renewable, non-toxic, inexpensive, has high power, and
heat resistance. Cellulose is present in the wood cell wall along with lignin and other
polysaccharides ( Johar et al., 2012; Stenstad et al., 2008). This structure is considered as a
bio-nanocomposite resulting from the interaction between the nanoscale areas of cellulose,
hemicellulose, and lignin. Cellulose is a natural polymer with a straight and long-chain
chemical structure formed by bonding a certain number of glucose molecules with an ether
bridge as shown in Fig. 12.1 (Klemm et al., 2005).
Cellulosic materials with a particle size of less than 100 nm are called nanocellulose. Major
cellulose sources are wood materials, plants, tulips, algae, and bacteria and frequently used
for nanocellulose production. The wood material is one of the most abundant sources for
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 251 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00012-5nanocellulose, which can be obtained from many natural sources, and the extraction of cel￾lulose nanoparticles is performed by purifying lignin and hemicellulose (Keenan et al., 2015).
Plants are one of the main sources of cellulose, and sources such as sugar beet, cotton,
potato tubers, and wheat straw can be used for the extraction of cellulose nanoparticles
(Xue et al., 2017). Various algae species (green, gray, red, etc.) produce cellulose microfibers
in their cell walls (Chen et al., 2016). Due to the species-specific biosynthesis process, there can
be significant differences in the cellulose microfiber structures produced. Other algae species
used are Micrasterias rotate, Valonia, Micrasterias denticulata, and Boergesenia. One of the bac￾teria that can produce cellulose is Gluconacetobacter xylinus ( Jozala et al., 2016).
The bacterias developed under special culture conditions, secrete cellulose microfiber by
producing a fine gel consisting of 97% water and microfiber cellulose. The most important
feature of these bacteria is that the cultivation conditions can be adjusted to alter microfiber
formation and crystallization. Processes such as isolation of cellulose particles, mechanical
treatment, and acid hydrolysis are frequently performed in nanocellulose production.
Isolation of cellulose particles from various cellulose sources involves the purification and
homogenization of the source materials and then the separation of purified (pre-treated) cel￾lulose materials into microfiber, nanofibrils, or crystalline components (Li et al., 2015;
Meyabadi and Dadashian, 2012; Moon et al., 2011). In mechanical processes such as grinding
in the longitudinal and transverse splitting of cellulose fibrils, refining producing high-shear
gradients, cold comminution, high-pressure homogenization, and high density ultrasonic are
applied (Rebouillat and Pla, 2013). Acid hydrolysis is used to obtain crystalline particles from
cellulose sources (plant fibril, wood fibril, algae, and bacteria). This process can be briefly
explained as the hydrolysis (separation) of amorphous regions within cellulose micro/
nanofibrils (De Souza Lima and Borsali, 2004).
Cellulose-based nanomaterials are divided into three classes as cellulose nanofibrils, cel￾lulose nanocrystals, and bacterial cellulose according to the cellulose source, extraction
method, and fibril size ( Jonoobi et al., 2015; Nascimento et al., 2016). The types of cellulose,
the source from which it is obtained, the processes in the production stage, and their average
sizes are explained in Table 12.1 (Klemm et al., 2011).
In addition to being organic and natural, nanocellulose polymer has less density com￾pared to other materials. However, their high resistance has a wide range of uses compared
to other materials (Fig. 12.2). Today, nanocellulose materials with their natural polymeric
structure are frequently used in sectors such as automotive, electronics, construction, pack￾aging, and industry.
FIG. 12.1 Molecular structure of cellulose.
252 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesBesides, nanocellulose-based materials have significant use in forest products, especially
in recent years, and they are used in papermaking (Campano et al., 2018), panel material
(Yildirim et al., 2014), foam material (Svagan et al., 2008), fireproof insulation materials
(Yildirim, 2018), artificial organs in medicine (Nimeskern et al., 2013) in the curative artificial
leather production (Mualla et al., 2016), and in the use of filtering against viruses (Metreveli
et al., 2014). In this chapter, the information about nanocellulose and its types and the recent
TABLE 12.1 Types of nanocellulose (Klemm et al., 2011).
Cellulose type Obtained source Process Property
Cellulose nanofibrils Sugar, wood, potato,
beet, linen, cannabis,
etc.
Degradation before/after
enzymatic chemical
treatment
Diameter: 5–60 nm
Length: a few μm
Cellulose
nanocrystals
Cotton, linen, wood,
cannabis, corn stalk,
etc.
Acid hydrolysis Diameter: 5–70 nm
Length: 100 nm or a few μm for
bacteria or algae-based cellulose
Length: 100–250 nm for plant
cellulose
Bacterial cellulose Low molecules such as
sugar, alcohol, etc.
Bacterial synthesis Diameter: 20–100 nm
FIG. 12.2 Potential nanocellulose applications.
12.1 Introduction 253
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesdevelopments of the cellulose-based nanobioadsorbents’s environmental applications are
comprehensively discussed.
12.2 Nanocellulose and its sources
Recently, the rapid development of nanotechnology and green chemistry increases the
need for materials used in these new generation areas. The most important factors in mate￾rials to be preferred in applications of these fields are to ensure eco-efficiency and sustainabil￾ity (Fardioui et al., 2017; Farooq et al., 2020). One of these, cellulose, is the most plentiful
biodegradable and renewable natural polymer in the world and is formed by repeating
β-D-glucose. Cellulose, which has been known for many years, is used in plenty of fields such
as paper, food, medicine, paint, textile industries as well as being considered as an energy
source (Nasir et al., 2017). It is found in some bacteria and marine animals (Tunicates) in
addition to the structural cell wall of various plants and certain algae (Keijsers et al., 2013).
Lately, cellulose in nanoscale form (i.e., nanocellulose) is considered to be a reliable green
substrate to be used to manufacture nanocomposites in a wide variety of biomedical appli￾cations. Nanocellulose is a promising candidate for surface modifications as it contains
many hydroxyl groups in large and specific surface areas. It also provides high strength
thanks to its good mechanical properties. In addition to being a renewable and low-cost ma￾terial, nanocellulose has no or very low toxicity, biodegradability, biocompatibility, and
anti-microbial effects, contributing to its preference in different applications (Coli  c et al.,
2020; Subhedar et al., 2021). In the following sections, sources of nanocellulose will be
explained.
12.2.1 Plant cellulose
Nowadays, researches are carried out on the efficient utilization of bio-wastes and their use
as raw materials for the creation of high-performance next-generation materials. In this con￾text, considering the great importance of developing low-cost, sustainable, and renewable re￾sources, it is valuable to produce cellulose and nano-cellulosic materials from agricultural
and food industrial wastes (Prasad Reddy and Rhim, 2014; Silverio et al., 2013). Agricultural
and industrial waste emerges as undeniable resources for cellulose biomass. Until now, many
wastes in the specified areas such as tomato peels ( Jiang and Hsieh, 2015), rice straw ( Jiang
et al., 2013; Reddy and Yang, 2006), corncob (Kang et al., 2017), potato peels (Chen et al., 2012),
fruits wastes (Hiasa et al., 2014), coconut husk (Rosa et al., 2010), cotton stalk (Rahbar
Shamskar et al., 2016), sugar beets (Montanari et al., 2005) and forest residues (Moriana
et al., 2016) have been evaluated for this purpose. In one of the studies conducted on this sub￾ject, it has been reported that garlic skin is an uncommon but promising candidate as a source
of cellulose (Prasad Reddy and Rhim, 2014).
Plant-based cellulose nanofibers exhibit the potential to be extracted into thinner fibers
according to bacterial cellulose. Therefore, several studies are conducted on the extraction
of nanofibers from plant fibers and wood. Cellulose chains are synthesized in plant cells.
Besides hemicellulose and lignin, highly organized and crystallized cellulose fibrils refer
254 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesto the major components of the plant cell wall (Abraham et al., 2011; Lu and Hsieh, 2012). One
of these components, hemicellulose, is a branched polysaccharide polymer containing vari￾ous species of sugars such as mannose, glucose, and galactose. Lignin refers to a highly cross￾linked phenolic polymer. When these three main components are compared, it is observed
that cellulose is a semi-crystalline polymer, while lignin and hemicellulose are amorphous
polymers (Sheltami et al., 2012).
The typical nanocellulose extraction process is achieved by removing impurities and amor￾phous regions, i.e., non-cellulosic components such as hemicellulose and lignin. For this pur￾pose, strategies including acid hydrolysis (Roman and Gray, 2005), enzymatic hydrolysis
(P€a€akko et al., 2007 € ), and mechanical degradation (Uetani and Yano, 2011) are applied for
nanocellulose isolation. In the process of acid hydrolysis with hydrochloric acid or sulfuric
acid, it becomes possible to reach the cellulose chains in less regular or amorphous regions
in an easier way, thus ensuring that the crystalline areas remain intact (Lu and Hsieh,
2012). The resulting nanocellulose is used in many areas such as paper production, packag￾ing, textile, and pharmaceutical industries. In addition, thanks to its strong mechanical
characteristics, it is also utilized as a reinforcement material in several polymer matrices
( Jasmani and Adnan, 2017).
12.2.2 Tunicates and algal cellulose (AC)
Tunicates from the ascidians are marine animals that live in the oceans and contain cellu￾lose in their skeletons. There are cellulose-synthesizing enzymes in the plasma membrane of
their epidermal cells. Cellulose obtained from tunicates has many excellent characteristics in￾cluding large surface area, high crystallinity, and strong mechanical properties. Thanks to its
high crystallinity, it has been employed in many studies to identify the molecular structure of
cellulose. Tunicates cellulose was applied in the preparation of many polymeric
nanocomposites and scaffolds produced in the field of tissue engineering (Perez and Samain,
2010; Samiee et al., 2019; Yadav et al., 2021).
Algae, a significant source of cellulose, contain crucial amounts of cellulose in their cell
walls. Different kinds of algae, namely red, green and yellow, refer to a wide variety of living
organisms, unicellular or multicellular. The reason algae are used in many industrial areas
today is that they can produce protein, polysaccharides, and fatty acids. While the inner cell
walls of green-colored algae are generally composed of cellulose, the outer cell walls consist of
pectin. Similarly, in brown algae, cell walls contain large amounts of cellulose and alginic
acid. Another species, red algae, have a low cellulose content but it contains sulfated galactan
polymers, agar, and carrageenan. Similarly, in brown algae, cell walls contain large amounts
of alginic acid and cellulose. It was determined by X-ray diffraction models that the D-glucose
monomers that create the cellulose in algae are similar to the cellulose content in terrestrial
plants ( Jung et al., 2013; Samiee et al., 2019).
In summary, algae’s cell walls are generally composed of microfibrillar (crystalline) phases
consisting of cellulose, mannan, or xylan. It is easier and relatively inexpensive to obtain cel￾lulose from algae compared to extracting cellulose from plants. This can be clarified by the
fact that cellulose is not related to lignin in most algae species given in the literature
(Samiee et al., 2019).
12.2 Nanocellulose and its sources 255
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices12.2.3 Bacterial cellulose
As mentioned in previous sections, cellulose is one of the main components of the plant cell
wall and it is in charge of the strength of the structure. However, plants contain lignin and
hemicellulose components as well as cellulose. To obtain pure cellulose and remove these
impurities, they are exposed to treatments with harsh chemicals. Due to these factors, an en￾vironmentally friendly approach has been sought to produce pure cellulose (Karim and
Afrin, 2017; Smith et al., 2017; Ul-Islam et al., 2019).
Bacterial cellulose represents a suitable candidate as a sustainable biopolymer with desired
properties in different fields since it was discovered. Bacterial cellulose, which has the same
chemical structure as plant cellulose (C6H10O5)n, is a structural carbohydrate produced by
microorganisms (Blanco Parte et al., 2020). It is produced extracellularly by Gram-negative
bacteria cultures such as Gluconacetobacter, Agrobacterium, Rhizobium, Salmonella, and
Pseudomonas. Celluloses produced by different bacteria differ in terms of their properties,
morphologies, and applications. Acetobacter xylinum, currently referred to as Gluconacetobacter
xylinus, is the most efficient bacterial cellulose producer thanks to its high productivity
(Picheth et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019).
There are differences between plant-derived cellulose and bacterial cellulose including
purity, macromolecular structure, physicochemical and mechanical properties. In bacterial
cellulose, there is no need for mechanical and thermochemical processes such as acid hydro￾lysis and the use of hazardous chemicals to remove impurities and extract cellulose, as in plant
cellulose (Karim and Afrin, 2017; Smith et al., 2017). High liquid absorption capacity, high crys￾tallinity index, high surface area, porous structure, and mechanical stability are some of the
advantages of bacterial cellulose. Bacterial cellulose is a biomaterial that draws attention in
many areas such as food, cosmetics, biomedical, pharmaceutical industry, textile, thanks to
its biocompatibility and high purity level due to its absence of contaminants (such as hemicel￾lulose and lignin). It is also very important in terms of biological implants, hemostatic agents,
and scaffolds developed in tissue engineering. In addition, bacterial cellulose nanocomposites
are used in the development of high-strength membranes and as a reinforcement for polymer
nanocomposites (Dugan et al., 2013; Khan et al., 2020; Troncoso and Torres, 2020).
12.3 Types of nanocellulose
Cellulose nanomaterials have at least one dimension in the nanometer range and are
derived from cellulosic biomass. Two main types of nanoscale particles can be identified.
The basic steps in the preparation of cellulose nanocrystals and microfibrillated cellulose
(MFC) called cellulose nanofibrils are shown in Fig. 12.3 (Lavoine et al., 2012). The rod-like,
CNCs (Angle`s and Dufresne, 2000; Fleming et al., 2000; Habibi et al., 2008; Kvien et al., 2005;
Samir et al., 2004; Siqueira et al., 2009) are obtained by acid hydrolysis and can disperse stably
in water. CNFs (Agoda-Tandjawa et al., 2010; Hassan et al., 2011; Saito et al., 2006), which are
produced successive high-shear mechanical treatment of the cellulosic source and still dis￾play both crystalline and disordered regions. Owing to their nanoscale dimension, semi￾crystalline nature, and renewable origin, CNFs have unique properties and are a more flexible
type of cellulose particles.
256 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 12.3 Production routes of CNCs and CNFs from cellulosic biomass (Lavoine et al., 2012). (A) Fleming et al. (2000), (B) Habibi et al. (2008), (C) Kvien
et al. (2005), (D) Samir et al. (2004), (E) Angle`s and Dufresne (2000), (F) Siqueira et al. (2009), (G) Hassan et al. (2011), (H) Saito et al. (2006), and (I) Agoda￾Tandjawa et al. (2010).12.3.1 Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs)
Nanocellulose can be classified based on its size and structure. The size range of the cel￾lulose microcrystal (CMC) and cellulose microfiber is between 10 and 100 μm, while the size
range of the nanostructured cellulose such as cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) and cellulose
nanofiber (CNF) is 1–50 nm (Kargarzadeh et al., 2017). A few other terms are also presented
for CNC such as cellulose nanowhisker (CNW) and nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC). CNC is
less flexible than CNF because of its higher crystallinity. This is because CNCs have a long
rod-like shape consisting of crystalline regions isolated from CNFs (Kargarzadeh et al.,
2017). Its assembly occurs through a series of modifications, starting with the excision of
amorphous regions in CNFs to isolate crystal regions that are today classified as CNC. Chem￾ical treatment is used as the main treatment method in CNC extraction. Traditionally, it is
carried out using concentrated acid through acid digestion before further processing methods
(Garcı´a et al., 2016). Unlike mechanical disintegration, acid hydrolysis destroys the non￾crystalline amorphous region in microfibrils, leaving the crystalline regions intact. Liu
et al. (2014) reported that CNC obtained through sulphuric acid hydrolysis by –SO3
2 func￾tional group has shown superior Ag(I) adsorption capacity than CNC obtained via mechan￾ical grinding. Acid hydrolysis is also widely used to produce bacterial nanocrystals from
bacterial cellulose microfibrils (Borjesson and Westman, 2015 € ).
12.3.2 Cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs)
Nanofibrillated cellulose, nanofibrillar cellulose, nanofibrous cellulose, and bacterial
nanocellulose (BC) are various terms that have been used alternatively with cellulose
nanofibrils (CNFs) which is comprised of stretched masses of elementary nanofibrils with al￾ternating crystalline and amorphous domains. The plant cell wall must be subjected to strong
mechanical disintegration before turning the fibers, whose diameter is within the range of
10–100 nm depending on the disintegration power, into CNF (Kargarzadeh et al., 2017).
BC, one of the purest forms of cellulose, is the only cellulose synthesized in a bottom-up
approach through enzymatic synthesis. BC is produced by non-photosynthetic organisms
through enzymatic polymerization of organic substrates (glycerol and sugar) (Gama et al.,
2012; Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017). BC is known for its high purity among the various types
of CNFs as well as its high water holding capacity and crystallinity (80%–90%). The main
difference between BC and CNFs derived from other plants is that BC does not have certain
functional groups (except alcohol) and polymers such as lignin, hemicellulose, and pectin
(Nechyporchuk et al., 2016).
The occurrence of fiber breakdown during the mechanical breakdown of dry cellulose pulp
tends to produce nanocellulose with poor mechanical properties. For better delamination of
nanofibrils, an aqueous medium is used during mechanical disintegration to loosen the hy￾drogen bonds between fibers and prevent reverse coalescence or fibril aggregation
(Nechyporchuk et al., 2016). Homogenization (Abdul Khalil et al., 2014), grinding
(He et al., 2018; Omran et al., 2021), and refining (Sacui et al., 2014) are examples of techniques
commonly used for efficient delamination of cellulosic fibers. Mechanically disintegrated
nanocellulose is aggregated with larger dimensions, unlike finely structured or short rod-like
nanocelluloses produced through chemical pretreatment (Sacui et al., 2014).
258 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesIn the next step of mechanical disintegration to aid in the delamination of nanofibrils,
chemical techniques such as acid hydrolysis (Vanderfleet et al., 2019), carboxylation
(Mendoza et al., 2019), carboxymethylation (Wei et al., 2021), quaternization (Chen et al.,
2017), sulfonation (Rocha et al., 2018), ionic liquid (Menezes et al., 2021) and reactive eutectic
media ( Jaekel et al., 2021) are used to prepare nanocellulose. These techniques (carboxylation,
carboxymethylation, sulfonation, and quaternization, etc.) based on the principle of electro￾static repulsion between similar charges are used to provide anionic functionality to assist
cellulose fibers defibrillation (Nechyporchuk et al., 2016).
12.4 Environmental and agricultural applications of nanocellulose
The shortage of drinking water and global pollution requires the development of highly
effective techniques for water purification. Since various pollutants such as dyes, heavy
metals, pesticides, herbicides, and other industrial and agricultural wastes cause adverse
effects on human health and the environment, their removal from wastewater is critical. To￾day, water contaminated with dye, which is a result of the widespread use of organic dyes in
different sectors such as textile, food, paper and pulp, cosmetics, paint, leather, and medicine,
has become a serious environmental problem (Hou et al., 2020). Because most of the dyes are
resistant to microbial degradation and are photolytic stable, their effective removal from wa￾ter is difficult compared to conventional water treatment methods (Ahmad et al., 2020).
Adsorption is one of the most effective traditional biological, chemical, and physical dye
removal methods (Ruan et al., 2019). Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) are the resulting crystal￾line portion of cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) after removing the amorphous region through
acid hydrolysis or depolymerization. High crystallinity CNCs have a large surface area
and exhibit excellent thermal stability and high strength (Tan et al., 2020). Since Auramine
O (AO), the organic cationic dye, is toxic, it is critical to remove it before discharging into
the environment. Anionic forms (sulfated and carboxylated) of colloidal CNCs have been
used as nanoadsorbents for effective removal of cationic toxic AO by Pinto et al. (2020).
Fig. 12.4 shows the adsorption of Auramine O, the cationic dye, on CNCs (Pinto et al., 2020).
Magnetically functionalized cellulose nanocrystal-based (MCNCs) hydrogels have been
used as nanoadsorbent with a great capacity for the selective removal of cationic dyes such
as crystal violet (CV), methylene blue, congo red, and methyl orange (Moharrami and
Motamedi, 2020). As a novel adsorbent, Oyewo et al. reported sawdust-based CNCs incorpo￾rated with ZnO which was used to remove methylene blue from water (Oyewo et al., 2020).
Using 0.15 g of the nanocomposite, methylene blue was removed with a maximum adsorp￾tion percentage of 97.5%. Chitosan-based composite membranes fabricated using CNCs for
water purification were successfully used to remove positively charged dyes such as Victoria
Blue 2B, Methyl Violet 2B, and Rhodamine 6G at 98%, 84%, and 70%, respectively, as shown in
Fig. 12.5 (Karim et al., 2014).
The difference of BC from CNF and CNC is that it does not contain components in ligno￾cellulose biomass other than cellulose and therefore can be produced with the highest purity
among different types of nanocellulose. BC, a renewable natural nanomaterial, has fascinat￾ing properties such as exceptional mechanical properties, porosity, water absorbency,
12.4 Environmental and agricultural applications of nanocellulose 259
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmoldability, biodegradability, and excellent biological affinity. BC’s application as an envi￾ronmentally friendly filter material is recommended. Recently, the selectivity and molecular
weight cutoff of BC have been enhanced by adding different components. The resulting
BC-based composites are water-stable and exhibit improved properties such as good mechan￾ical strength and selective ion permeability. These properties make BC-based composites a
promising material for water purification. Large quantities of highly toxic organic dyes pre￾sent in industrial wastewaters cause persistent challenges in wastewater treatment processes.
BC-GO composites containing palladium NPs used for wastewater filtration led to outstand￾ing efficiency by removing up to 99.3% of methylene orange dye and other contaminants,
such as methylene blue or 4-nitrophenol (Xu et al., 2018).
BC has a unique micro-nano-porous three-dimensional network that facilitates the pene￾tration of various metal ions (Hu et al., 2014). The in-situ preparation of BC nanocomposites
containing metal ions is shown in Fig. 12.6.
BC-CS composite has proven to be useful in removing up to 50% of heavy metal ion copper
from suspensions with a concentration of 50 mg/L. Fig. 12.7 shows the changes in the aspect
and color of the membranes before and after the Cu2+ absorption tests and even after the
EDTA treatment used for desorption (Urbina et al., 2018).
Denizli’s group prepared molecularly imprinted BC nanofibers for biomedical (Gokt € urk €
et al., 2018; Saylan et al., 2020; Tamahkar et al., 2019) and environmental (Derazshamshir
et al., 2020; Tamahkar et al., 2018) applications. Phenols are toxic in the aquatic environment
and lead to the death of aquatic organisms, and are also carcinogenic to humans.
Derazshamshir et al. prepared molecularly imprinted bacterial cellulose nanofibers for selec￾tive and efficient removal of phenol from wastewaters with an adsorption capacity of
146 mg/g (Derazshamshir et al., 2020). In another study, Tamahkar et al. selectively removed
Hg2+ by preparing Cibacron Blue F3GA attached BC nanofibers with an adsorption capacity
of 928 mg/g (Tamahkar et al., 2018).
Parameters affecting the adsorption capacities of Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions onto
diethylenetriamine-bacterial cellulose (EABC) such as contact time, solution pH, and initial
FIG. 12.4 Adsorption of Auramine O, the cationic dye, on CNCs (Pinto et al., 2020).
260 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 12.5 Efficiency of the cross-linked composite membrane in dye removal (A) Membrane photograph; water
before and after adsorption test for (B) Methyl Violet, (C) Rhodamine 6G, and (D) Victoria Blue (Karim et al., 2014).
12.4 Environmental and agricultural applications of nanocellulose 261
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmetal ions concentration were investigated by Shen et al. (2009). The main sources of Cr(VI),
which has high toxicity and carcinogenicity, are leather tanning, plating, water cooling, tex￾tile, metal, and other chemical industries (Geng et al., 2019). Cr(VI) is 500–1000 times more
toxic than Cr(III) (Ding et al., 2018), and the removal of Cr ions from aqueous environments
is performed by using techniques including chemical precipitation, flotation, reduction, ion
exchange, electrodialysis, solvent extraction, biosorption, membrane separation, and adsorp￾tion. Biomass-based adsorbents are widely accepted due to their biodegradability and envi￾ronmental friendliness. Cellulose having well-defined architectures with abundant hydroxyl
groups for chemical modifications is a perfect biological raw material and can be used as ma￾trix materials for adsorption studies (Vega et al., 2015). Xue designed a cellulose-based solid
amine adsorbent to remove Cr(VI) ions (Xue et al., 2019). Jamshaid et al. overviewed cellulose￾based materials to highlight cellulose’s role in wastewater treatment. They also discussed the
1 0
40
BC/Ch 0.75% in situ
A D
B E
C F
1) 2)
BC/Ch 1% ex situ
Membrane efficiency (reusability) (%) 80
50ppm 50ppm 250ppm 250ppm
BC/Ch 1% ex situ
BC/Ch 0.75% in situ
BC/Ch 0.75% in situ
BC/Ch 1% ex situ
23 123 123 123
FIG. 12.7 (A and D) Membranes before immersion, (B and E) membranes after 24 h immersion in 250 mg L1
Cu2+, and (C and F) membranes after 24 h immersion in EDTA solutions. (2) Efficiency of bionanocomposites
in removing Cu2+ ions after two regeneration cycles (Urbina et al., 2018).
FIG. 12.6 The in-situ preparation of nanoparticles/BC nanocomposites (Hu et al., 2014).
262 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescellulose modification effects (cellulose gels, cellulose composites, cellulose derivatives,
functionalized cellulose, and nanocrystalline cellulose) on the heavy metals adsorption capac￾ity ( Jamshaid et al., 2017).
Lead pollutes the environment as a result of activities such as the use of leaded gasoline,
lead-acid batteries, paints, and electronic devices, as well as refining and mining. If the per￾missible limit of 0.05 mg/L lead concentration in water is exceeded, adverse health effects
such as cognitive impairment, behavioral disorders, kidney damage, anemia, and toxicity
to the reproductive system will occur. Shoukat and coworkers prepared titanium oxide￾bacterial cellulose-based bioadsorbent and used it to remove lead ions from an aqueous
solution (Shoukat et al., 2019).
CNFs production from woody cellulosic materials of plants is carried out using mechanical
methods such as high-pressure homogenization, microfluidization, grinding, and
ultrasonication. CNFs coatings on the scaffold or the membrane are constructed to improve
the water permeability by increasing the hydrophilicity of the membrane and increasing the
surface area/volume ratio. They are used for pollutant removal by changing the surface
chemistry of the CNFs membrane through electrostatic interaction, size exclusion, or com￾bined mechanisms. Ao et al. reported graphene (GO) coated CNF membrane. The hybrid
membrane was capable of separating a variety of oily solutions even under harsh conditions
such as extreme acidity, alkalinity, and salinity. Fig. 12.8 shows the GO@CNF membrane
preparation and the separation basis for the oil/water mixtures (Ao et al., 2017). Liu et al.
coated the CNF membrane with an ultra-thin GO layer to create the negatively charged
matrix content and used it in the dye solution filtration (Liu et al., 2019).
Treatment of water containing low concentration levels of radioactive waste is critical and
challenging. BC membrane was used to remove Sr2+ by Cheng et al. (2019). Carbon dioxide
and methane, the most important greenhouse gases that are continuously released into the
atmosphere, must be captured and separated to reduce harmful effects. Ahmadi et al. fabri￾cated novel and low-cost nanoadsorbents successfully using cotton pulp, jute, and kenaf as
carbon fibrils. The carbonization process of cotton pulp, jute, and kenaf as carbon fibrils were
applied at 600 °C to obtain a micro-mesoporous structure for superior CO2 adsorption and
FIG. 12.8 GO@CNF membrane preparation and the separation basis of the oil/water mixtures (Ao et al., 2017).
12.4 Environmental and agricultural applications of nanocellulose 263
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCO2/CH4 separation (Ahmadi et al., 2020). Cellulose-based composite adsorbents recently
developed for wastewater treatment were listed in Table 12.2 (Abou-Zeid et al., 2021; Daniel
et al., 2021; Derazshamshir et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2020; Hokkanen et al., 2015; Luo et al., 2020;
Mohammed et al., 2016a, b; Tamahkar et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018).
The continuous increase of the population and global climate changes cause problems in
the quantity and quality of the food produced (Cheng et al., 2018; Di Martino et al., 2021),
together with the increase in the demand for food and water. The slow release of agrochem￾icals is important for the agricultural field and the environment to reduce the quantity of ag￾rochemical and its usage causing environmental pollution. Controlled-release fertilizers have
become a potential solution to synchronize nutrient release according to the needs of plants
(Lawrencia et al., 2021).
Nanocellulose can be used to produce superabsorbent hydrogels through chemical and/or
mechanical processes. Superabsorbent hydrogels act as water and nutrient reservoirs when
applied in agricultural fields as soil amendments. Recent developments in agricultural waste￾derived nanocellulose-based superabsorbent hydrogels considering their potentials
applications such as reducing irrigation, improving crop production, and enhancing nutrient
retention are reviewed by Li and Chen (2020).
Bortolin et al. synthesized PAAm/methylcellulose/montmorillonite hydrogel nano￾composite to be used as a carrier vehicle in the controlled release of urea fertilizer. They
TABLE 12.2 Cellulose-based adsorbents used for various types of inorganic and organic
pollutants.
Biopolymer adsorbent Pollutants Adsorption capacity References
BC-MIP nanofibers Phenol 146 mg/g Derazshamshir et al. (2020)
BC–CB nanofibers Hg2+ 928 mg/g Tamahkar et al. (2018)
Modified nanocellulose coir V(V)
Cr(III)
32.88 mg/g
114 mg/g
Daniel et al. (2021)
Au-CNC composite Hg(II) 0.13 mmol/g Mohammed et al. (2016a)
FeNP-modified CNF As(V) 2.46 mmol/g Hokkanen et al. (2015)
Alg-TPC-CNF Cu2+
Pb2+
Mg2+
Fe2+
62.4 mg/g
68.2 mg/g
82.9 mg/g
230.3 mg/g
Abou-Zeid et al. (2021)
CNC/alginate hydrogels Methylene blue 255.5 mg/g Mohammed et al. (2016b)
CCNF Methylene blue 192–430 mg/g Luo et al. (2020)
Oleic acid and Fe3O4
functionalized CNF
Cyclohexane
Ethyl acetate
Vacuum pump oil
68 g/g
56 g/g
33 g/g
Gu et al. (2020)
Silylated cellulose nanocrystals
and red mud aerogel
Cashew oil 33–36 mg/g Zhu et al. (2018)
264 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesreported that cellulose-based hydrogel nanocomposite was the first carrier vehicle to release
90 g of urea per gram of dry hydrolyzed hydrogel (Bortolin et al., 2013). Recently, Bauli et al.
reported CMC hydrogels which are produced via chemical crosslinking with citric acid and
then filled with nanocellulose, montmorillonite, and different amounts vermiculite as illus￾trated in Fig. 12.9 (Bauli et al., 2021). NPK fertilizer added to the formulations showed that the
NPK encapsulation was achieved successfully. Vermiculite presented slight water absor￾bency and fast nutrient release.
12.5 Conclusion and future outlook
Efforts to develop environmentally friendly materials have increased recently due to the
increasing need for renewable, sustainable, available, and non-toxic properties of adsor￾bents. The use of wood material to meet this need appears as a realistic and sustainable
solution. The use of nanocelluloses for the development and production of new generation
materials is an innovative solution. Nanocellulose-based materials are widely used in
areas such as food quality control, environment, and bioprocess control, biological de￾fense, and agriculture. In this chapter, studies conducted in the literature together with
nanocellulose and its types and their use in environmental and agricultural applications
are summarized.
The usefulness and characteristics of nanocellulose as an adsorbent in the remediation
of chemical pollutants are a promising and exciting area of current and future research.
Enhancing the adsorption capacity of nanocellulose against a wide range of chemical con￾taminants, including heavy metals, dyes, and organic oils, by functionalizing them using
various functional groups is a key factor for success. Nanocellulose-based adsorbents are
widely used for water recovery from dirty water sources. However, the available fabrica￾tion materials and additives limit their separation performance and strength. Biodegrad￾able and low-cost nanocellulose has been widely used in the last decade, so information on
nanocellulose and nanocellulose-based adsorbents synthesized in different ways is pro￾vided in this chapter.
Cellulose nanofibrils, cellulose nanocrystals, and bacterial nanocellulose have different
structures and properties. Nanocellulose can be chemically modified to increase surface affin￾ity and reactivity and be used as an adsorbent to effectively remove certain contaminants. The
incorporation of inorganic nanomaterials allows obtaining nanocellulose-based adsorbents
with more functionality. A growing number of research groups have reported their research
on the formation and use of fibril or crystalline celluloses within nanometer range widths.
Production of NCC is carried out by removing amorphous parts of crystalline cellulose by
acid hydrolysis. BC is the third variant of nanocellulose prepared from Gluconacetobacter
genus bacteria, unlike NCC prepared from cellulose sources. In situ BC fabrication provides
unique possibilities for shape control, nanofibril network, and composite formation.
The development rate of the areas where nanocellulose is used will increase even more.
Research and development groups aim to establish production facilities by creating new pilot
processes. Thus, larger-scale technical products can be produced and new medical devices
can be developed. Science and technology are moving toward the widespread use of renew￾able raw materials and environmentally friendly and sustainable resources and processes.
12.5 Conclusion and future outlook 265
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 12.9 Schematic representation CMC-nanocellulose, CMC-montmorillonite, and CMC-vermiculite with water
absorption results (Bauli et al., 2021).
266 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesReferences
Abdul Khalil, H.P.S., Davoudpour, Y., Islam, M.N., Mustapha, A., Sudesh, K., Dungani, R., Jawaid, M., 2014. Produc￾tion and modification of nanofibrillated cellulose using various mechanical processes: a review. Carbohydr.
Polym. 99, 649–665. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.08.069.
Abou-Zeid, R.E., Ali, K.A., Gawad, R.M.A., Kamal, K.H., Kamel, S., Khiari, R., 2021. Removal of cu(II), pb(II), mg(II),
and fe(II) by adsorption onto alginate/nanocellulose beads as bio-sorbent. J. Renew. Mater. 9 (4), 601–613. https://
doi.org/10.32604/jrm.2021.014005.
Abraham, E., Deepa, B., Pothan, L.A., Jacob, M., Thomas, S., Cvelbar, U., Anandjiwala, R., 2011. Extraction of
nanocellulose fibrils from lignocellulosic fibres: a novel approach. Carbohydr. Polym. 86 (4), 1468–1475.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.06.034.
Agoda-Tandjawa, G., Durand, S., Berot, S., Blassel, C., Gaillard, C., Garnier, C., Doublier, J.L., 2010. Rheological char￾acterization of microfibrillated cellulose suspensions after freezing. Carbohydr. Polym. 80 (3), 677–686. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2009.11.045.
Ahmad, A., Khan, N., Giri, B.S., Chowdhary, P., Chaturvedi, P., 2020. Removal of methylene blue dye using rice husk,
cow dung and sludge biochar: characterization, application, and kinetic studies. Bioresour. Technol. 306. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123202.
Ahmadi, R., Ardjmand, M., Rashidi, A., Rafizadeh, M., 2020. High performance novel nanoadsorbents derived—
natural cellulose fibers for superior CO2 adsorption and CO2/CH4 separation. Energy Sources Pt A, 1–19.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2020.1845878.
Angle`s, M.N., Dufresne, A., 2000. Plasticized starch/tunicin whiskers nanocomposites. 1. Structural analysis. Mac￾romolecules 33 (22), 8344–8353. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma0008701.
Ao, C., Yuan, W., Zhao, J., He, X., Zhang, X., Li, Q., Xia, T., Zhang, W., Lu, C., 2017. Superhydrophilic graphene
oxide@electrospun cellulose nanofiber hybrid membrane for high-efficiency oil/water separation. Carbohydr.
Polym. 175, 216–222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.07.085.
Bauli, C.R., Lima, G.F., de Souza, A.G., Ferreira, R.R., Rosa, D.S., 2021. Eco-friendly carboxymethyl cellulose
hydrogels filled with nanocellulose or nanoclays for agriculture applications as soil conditioning and nutrient car￾rier and their impact on cucumber growing. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 623, 126771. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2021.126771.
Blanco Parte, F.G., Santoso, S.P., Chou, C.C., Verma, V., Wang, H.T., Ismadji, S., Cheng, K.C., 2020. Current progress
on the production, modification, and applications of bacterial cellulose. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 40 (3), 397–414.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07388551.2020.1713721.
Borjesson, Westman, G., 2015. Crystalline nanocellulose—preparation, modification, and properties. In: Cellulose— €
Fundamental Aspects and Current Trends., https://doi.org/10.5772/61899.
Bortolin, A., Aouada, F.A., Mattoso, L.H.C., Ribeiro, C., 2013. Nanocomposite PAAm/methyl cellulose/montmoril￾lonite hydrogel: evidence of synergistic effects for the slow release of fertilizers. J. Agric. Food Chem. 61 (31),
7431–7439. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf401273n.
Buzea, C., Pacheco, I.I., Robbie, K., 2007. Nanomaterials and nanoparticles: sources and toxicity. Biointerphases,
MR17–MR71. https://doi.org/10.1116/1.2815690.
Campano, C., Merayo, N., Balea, A., Tarres, Q., Delgado-Aguilar, M., Mutje, P., Negro, C., Blanco, A´ ., 2018. Mechan￾ical and chemical dispersion of nanocelluloses to improve their reinforcing effect on recycled paper. Cellulose
25 (1), 269–280. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1552-y.
Chen, D., Lawton, D., Thompson, M.R., Liu, Q., 2012. Biocomposites reinforced with cellulose nanocrystals derived
from potato peel waste. Carbohydr. Polym. 90 (1), 709–716. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2012.06.002.
Chen, Y.W., Lee, H.V., Juan, J.C., Phang, S.M., 2016. Production of new cellulose nanomaterial from red algae marine
biomass Gelidium elegans. Carbohydr. Polym. 151, 1210–1219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.06.083.
Chen, Y., Liu, H., Geng, B., Ru, J., Cheng, C., Zhao, Y., Wang, L., 2017. A reusable surface-quaternized nanocellulose￾based hybrid cryogel loaded with N-doped TiO2 for self-integrated adsorption/photo-degradation of methyl or￾ange dye. RSC Adv. 7 (28), 17279–17288. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra00450h.
Cheng, D., Liu, Y., Yang, G., Zhang, A., 2018. Water- and fertilizer-integrated hydrogel derived from the polymer￾ization of acrylic acid and urea as a slow-release N fertilizer and water retention in agriculture. J. Agric. Food
Chem. 66 (23), 5762–5769. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.8b00872.
References 267
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCheng, R., Kang, M., Zhuang, S., Shi, L., Zheng, X., Wang, J., 2019. Adsorption of Sr(II) from water by mercerized
bacterial cellulose membrane modified with EDTA. J. Hazard. Mater. 364, 645–653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2018.10.083.
Coli  c, M., Tomic, S., Bekic, M., 2020. Immunological aspects of nanocellulose. Immunol. Lett. 222, 80–89. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.imlet.2020.04.004.
Daniel, A.B., Zahir, E., Asghar, M.A., 2021. Remediation of vanadium (V) and chromium (III) ions from aqueous me￾dia by modified nanocellulose obtained from coconut coir. J. Macromol. Sci., 1–21. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00222348.2020.1870300.
De Souza Lima, M.M., Borsali, R., 2004. Rodlike cellulose microcrystals: structure, properties, and applications.
Macromol. Rapid Commun. 25 (7), 771–787. https://doi.org/10.1002/marc.200300268.
Derazshamshir, A., Gokt € urk, I., Tamahkar, E., Y € ılmaz, F., Saglam, N., Denizli, A., 2020. Phenol removal from waste- 
water by surface imprinted bacterial cellulose nanofibres. Environ. Technol. 41 (24), 3134–3145. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09593330.2019.1600043.
Di Martino, A., Khan, Y.A., Durpekova, S., Sedlarik, V., Elich, O., Cechmankova, J., 2021. Ecofriendly renewable
hydrogels based on whey protein and for slow release of fertilizers and soil conditioning. J. Clean. Prod., 285.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124848.
Ding, J., Pu, L., Wang, Y., Wu, B., Yu, A., Zhang, X., Pan, B., Zhang, Q., Gao, G., 2018. Adsorption and reduction of
Cr(VI) together with Cr(III) sequestration by polyaniline confined in pores of polystyrene beads. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 52 (21), 12602–12611. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02566.
Dugan, J.M., Gough, J.E., Eichhorn, S.J., 2013. Bacterial cellulose scaffolds and cellulose nanowhiskers for tissue en￾gineering. Nanomedicine 8 (2), 287–298. https://doi.org/10.2217/nnm.12.211.
Fardioui, M., Qaiss, A.E.K., Bouhfid, R., 2017. Cellulose nanocrystal-based nanocomposites. In: Cellulose-Reinforced
Nanofibre Composites: Production, Properties and Applications. Elsevier Inc, pp. 373–389, https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-08-100957-4.00016-4.
Farooq, A., Patoary, M.K., Zhang, M., Mussana, H., Li, M., Naeem, M.A., Mushtaq, M., Farooq, A., Liu, L., 2020. Cel￾lulose from sources to nanocellulose and an overview of synthesis and properties of nanocellulose/zinc oxide
nanocomposite materials. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 154, 1050–1073. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.03.163.
Fleming, K., Gray, D., Prasannan, S., Matthews, S., 2000. Cellulose crystallites: a new and robust liquid crystalline
medium for the measurement of residual dipolar couplings. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122 (21), 5224–5225. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ja000764e.
Gama, M., Gatenholm, P., Klemm, D., 2012. Bacterial Nanocellulose: A Sophisticated Multifunctional Material. CRC
Press, pp. 1–304.
Garcı´a, A., Gandini, A., Labidi, J., Belgacem, N., Bras, J., 2016. Industrial and crop wastes: a new source for
nanocellulose biorefinery. Ind. Crop Prod. 93, 26–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2016.06.004.
Geng, J., Yin, Y., Liang, Q., Zhu, Z., Luo, H., 2019. Polyethyleneimine cross-linked graphene oxide for removing haz￾ardous hexavalent chromium: adsorption performance and mechanism. Chem. Eng. J. 361, 1497–1510. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.10.141.
Gokt € urk, I., Tamahkar, E., Y € ılmaz, F., Denizli, A., 2018. Protein depletion with bacterial cellulose nanofibers. J.
Chromatogr. B 1099, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchromb.2018.08.030.
Gu, H., Zhou, X., Lyu, S., Pan, D., Dong, M., Wu, S., Ding, T., Wei, X., Seok, I., Wei, S., Guo, Z., 2020. Magnetic
nanocellulose-magnetite aerogel for easy oil adsorption. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 560, 849–856. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcis.2019.10.084.
Habibi, Y., Goffin, A.L., Schiltz, N., Duquesne, E., Dubois, P., Dufresne, A., 2008. Bionanocomposites based on poly
(ε-caprolactone)-grafted cellulose nanocrystals by ring-opening polymerization. J. Mater. Chem. 18 (41),
5002–5010. https://doi.org/10.1039/b809212e.
Hassan, M.L., Hassan, E.A., Oksman, K.N., 2011. Effect of pretreatment of bagasse fibers on the properties of
chitosan/microfibrillated cellulose nanocomposites. J. Mater. Sci. 46 (6), 1732–1740. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10853-010-4992-4.
He, M., Yang, G., Chen, J., Ji, X., Wang, Q., 2018. Production and characterization of cellulose nanofibrils from dif￾ferent chemical and mechanical pulps. J. Wood Chem. Technol. 38 (2), 149–158. https://doi.org/
10.1080/02773813.2017.1411368.
Hiasa, S., Iwamoto, S., Endo, T., Edashige, Y., 2014. Isolation of cellulose nanofibrils from mandarin (Citrus unshiu)
peel waste. Ind. Crop Prod. 62, 280–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2014.08.007.
268 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesHokkanen, S., Repo, E., Lou, S., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2015. Removal of arsenic(V) by magnetic nanoparticle activated
microfibrillated cellulose. Chem. Eng. J. 260, 886–894. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.08.093.
Hou, Y., Yan, S., Huang, G., Yang, Q., Huang, S., Cai, J., 2020. Fabrication of N-doped carbons from waste bamboo
shoot shell with high removal efficiency of organic dyes from water. Bioresour. Technol., 303. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2020.122939.
Hu, W., Chen, S., Yang, J., Li, Z., Wang, H., 2014. Functionalized bacterial cellulose derivatives and nanocomposites.
Carbohydr. Polym. 101 (1), 1043–1060. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.09.102.
Jaekel, E.E., Sirvio, J.A., Antonietti, M., Filonenko, S., 2021. One-step method for the preparation of cationic €
nanocellulose in reactive eutectic media. Green Chem. 23 (6), 2317–2323. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0gc04282j.
Jamshaid, A., Hamid, A., Muhammad, N., Naseer, A., Ghauri, M., Iqbal, J., Rafiq, S., Shah, N.S., 2017. Cellulose-based
materials for the removal of heavy metals from wastewater—an overview. ChemBioEng. Rev. 4 (4), 240–256.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cben.201700002.
Jasmani, L., Adnan, S., 2017. Preparation and characterization of nanocrystalline cellulose from Acacia mangium and
its reinforcement potential. Carbohydr. Polym. 161, 166–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.12.061.
Jiang, F., Hsieh, Y.L., 2015. Cellulose nanocrystal isolation from tomato peels and assembled nanofibers. Carbohydr.
Polym. 122, 60–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.12.064.
Jiang, F., Han, S., Hsieh, Y.L., 2013. Controlled defibrillation of rice straw cellulose and self-assembly of cellulose
nanofibrils into highly crystalline fibrous materials. RSC Adv. 3 (30), 12366–12375. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c3ra41646a.
Johar, N., Ahmad, I., Dufresne, A., 2012. Extraction, preparation and characterization of cellulose fibres and
nanocrystals from rice husk. Ind. Crop Prod. 37 (1), 93–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2011.12.016.
Jonoobi, M., Oladi, R., Davoudpour, Y., Oksman, K., Dufresne, A., Hamzeh, Y., Davoodi, R., 2015. Different prepa￾ration methods and properties of nanostructured cellulose from various natural resources and residues: a review.
Cellulose 22 (2), 935–969. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-015-0551-0.
Jozala, A.F., de Lencastre-Novaes, L.C., Lopes, A.M., de Carvalho Santos-Ebinuma, V., Mazzola, P.G., Pessoa-Jr, A.,
Grotto, D., Gerenutti, M., Chaud, M.V., 2016. Bacterial nanocellulose production and application: a 10-year over￾view. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100 (5), 2063–2072. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-015-7243-4.
Jung, K.A., Lim, S.R., Kim, Y., Park, J.M., 2013. Potentials of macroalgae as feedstocks for biorefinery. Bioresour.
Technol. 135, 182–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.10.025.
Kang, X., Sun, P., Kuga, S., Wang, C., Zhao, Y., Wu, M., Huang, Y., 2017. Thin cellulose nanofiber from corncob cel￾lulose and its performance in transparent nanopaper. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5 (3), 2529–2534. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b02867.
Kargarzadeh, H., Ioelovich, M., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Dufresne, A., 2017. Methods for Extraction of Nanocellulose
From Various Sources. Wiley, pp. 1–49, https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527689972.ch1.
Karim, Z., Afrin, S., 2017. Bacterial cellulose: preparation and characterization. In: Cellulose-Reinforced Nanofibre
Composites: Production, Properties and Applications. Elsevier Inc, pp. 327–340, https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-08-100957-4.00014-0.
Karim, Z., Mathew, A.P., Grahn, M., Mouzon, J., Oksman, K., 2014. Nanoporous membranes with cellulose
nanocrystals as functional entity in chitosan: removal of dyes from water. Carbohydr. Polym. 112, 668–676.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.06.048.
Keenan, R.J., Reams, G.A., Achard, F., de Freitas, J.V., Grainger, A., Lindquist, E., 2015. Dynamics of global forest area:
results from the FAO global forest resources assessment 2015. For. Ecol. Manage. 352, 9–20. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.foreco.2015.06.014.
Keijsers, E.R.P., Yılmaz, G., van Dam, J.E.G., 2013. The cellulose resource matrix. Carbohydr. Polym. 93 (1), 9–21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2012.08.110.
Khan, H., Kadam, A., Dutt, D., 2020. Studies on bacterial cellulose produced by a novel strain of Lactobacillus genus.
Carbohydr. Polym. 229, 115513.
Klemm, D., Heublein, B., Fink, H.P., Bohn, A., 2005. Cellulose: fascinating biopolymer and sustainable raw material.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 44 (22), 3358–3393. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200460587.
Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindstrom, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D., Dorris, A., 2011. Nanocelluloses: a new €
family of nature-based materials. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (24), 5438–5466. https://doi.org/10.1002/
anie.201001273.
Kvien, I., Tanem, B.S., Oksman, K., 2005. Characterization of cellulose whiskers and their nanocomposites by atomic
force and electron microscopy. Biomacromolecules 6 (6), 3160–3165. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm050479t.
References 269
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesLavoine, N., Desloges, I., Dufresne, A., Bras, J., 2012. Microfibrillated cellulose—its barrier properties and applica￾tions in cellulosic materials: a review. Carbohydr. Polym. 90 (2), 735–764. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2012.05.026.
Lawrencia, D., Wong, S.K., Low, D.Y.S., Goh, B.H., Goh, J.K., Ruktanonchai, U.R., Soottitantawat, A., Lee, L.H.,
Tang, S.Y., 2021. Controlled release fertilizers: a review on coating materials and mechanism of release. Plan. The￾ory 10 (2), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10020238.
Li, S., Chen, G., 2020. Agricultural waste-derived superabsorbent hydrogels: preparation, performance, and socioeco￾nomic impacts. J. Clean. Prod. 251, 119669. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119669.
Li, F., Mascheroni, E., Piergiovanni, L., 2015. The potential of nanocellulose in the packaging field: a review. Packag.
Technol. Sci. 28 (6), 475–508. https://doi.org/10.1002/pts.2121.
Liu, P., Sehaqui, H., Tingaut, P., Wichser, A., Oksman, K., Mathew, A.P., 2014. Cellulose and chitin nanomaterials for
capturing silver ions (Ag+) from water via surface adsorption. Cellulose 21 (1), 449–461. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10570-013-0139-5.
Liu, P., Zhu, C., Mathew, A.P., 2019. Mechanically robust high flux graphene oxide—nanocellulose membranes for
dye removal from water. J. Hazard. Mater. 371, 484–493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.03.009.
Lu, P., Hsieh, Y.L., 2012. Preparation and characterization of cellulose nanocrystals from rice straw. Carbohydr.
Polym. 87 (1), 564–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.08.022.
Luo, J., Huang, K., Zhou, X., Xu, Y., 2020. Hybrid films based on holistic celery nanocellulose and lignin/hemicellu￾lose with enhanced mechanical properties and dye removal. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 147, 699–705. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.102.
Mahfoudhi, N., Boufi, S., 2017. Nanocellulose as a novel nanostructured adsorbent for environmental remediation: a
review. Cellulose 24 (3), 1171–1197. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1194-0.
Mendoza, L., Hossain, L., Downey, E., Scales, C., Batchelor, W., Garnier, G., 2019. Carboxylated nanocellulose foams
as superabsorbents. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 538, 433–439. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2018.11.112.
Menezes, D.B., Diz, F.M., Romanholo Ferreira, L.F., Corrales, Y., Baudrit, J.R.V., Costa, L.P., Herna´ndez-Macedo,
M.L., 2021. Starch-based biocomposite membrane reinforced by orange bagasse cellulose nanofibers extracted
from ionic liquid treatment. Cellulose 28 (7), 4137–4149. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-021-03814-w.
Metreveli, G., Wa˚gberg, L., Emmoth, E., Bela´k, S., Strømme, M., Mihranyan, A., 2014. A size-exclusion nanocellulose
filter paper for virus removal. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 3 (10), 1546–1550. https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201300641.
Meyabadi, T.F., Dadashian, F., 2012. Optimization of enzymatic hydrolysis of waste cotton fibers for nanoparticles
production using response surface methodology. Fibers Polym. 13 (3), 313–321. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12221-012-0313-7.
Mohammed, N., Baidya, A., Murugesan, V., Kumar, A.A., Ganayee, M.A., Mohanty, J.S., Tam, K.C., Pradeep, T.,
2016a. Diffusion-controlled simultaneous sensing and scavenging of heavy metal ions in water using atomically
precise cluster-cellulose nanocrystal composites. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4 (11), 6167–6176. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b01674.
Mohammed, N., Grishkewich, N., Waeijen, H.A., Berry, R.M., Tam, K.C., 2016b. Continuous flow adsorption of meth￾ylene blue by cellulose nanocrystal-alginate hydrogel beads in fixed bed columns. Carbohydr. Polym. 136,
1194–1202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.09.099.
Moharrami, P., Motamedi, E., 2020. Application of cellulose nanocrystals prepared from agricultural wastes for syn￾thesis of starch-based hydrogel nanocomposites: efficient and selective nanoadsorbent for removal of cationic
dyes from water. Bioresour. Technol., 313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123661.
Montanari, S., Roumani, M., Heux, L., Vignon, M.R., 2005. Topochemistry of carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals
resulting from TEMPO-mediated oxidation. Macromolecules 38 (5), 1665–1671. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ma048396c.
Moon, R.J., Martini, A., Nairn, J., Simonsen, J., Youngblood, J., 2011. Cellulose nanomaterials review: structure, prop￾erties and nanocomposites. Chem. Soc. Rev. 3941. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0cs00108b.
Moriana, R., Vilaplana, F., Ek, M., 2016. Cellulose nanocrystals from forest residues as reinforcing agents for compos￾ites: a study from macro- to nano-dimensions. Carbohydr. Polym. 139, 139–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2015.12.020.
Mualla, S.A., Farahat, R., Basmaji, P., de Olyveira, G.M., Costa, L.M.M., da Costa Oliveira, J.D., Francozo, G.B., 2016.
Study of nanoskin ECM-bacterial cellulose wound healing/United Arab Emirates. J. Biomater. Nanobiotechnol.,
109–117. https://doi.org/10.4236/jbnb.2016.72012.
270 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesNascimento, P., Marim, R., Carvalho, G., Mali, S., 2016. Nanocellulose produced from rice hulls and its effect on the
properties of biodegradable starch films. Mater. Res. 19 (1), 167–174. https://doi.org/10.1590/1980-5373-
MR-2015-0423.
Nasir, M., Hashim, R., Sulaiman, O., Asim, M., 2017. Nanocellulose: preparation methods and applications. In:
Cellulose-Reinforced Nanofibre Composites: Production, Properties and Applications. Elsevier Inc, pp.
261–276, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100957-4.00011-5.
Nechyporchuk, O., Belgacem, M.N., Bras, J., 2016. Production of cellulose nanofibrils: a review of recent advances.
Ind. Crop Prod. 93, 2–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2016.02.016.
Nimeskern, L., Martı´nez A´ vila, H., Sundberg, J., Gatenholm, P., Muller, R., Stok, K.S., 2013. Mechanical evaluation of €
bacterial nanocellulose as an implant material for ear cartilage replacement. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 22,
12–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2013.03.005.
Omran, A.A.B., Mohammed, A.A.B.A., Sapuan, S.M., Ilyas, R.A., Asyraf, M.R.M., Koloor, S.S.R., Petru˚, M., 2021.
Micro-and nanocellulose in polymer composite materials: a review. Polymers 13 (2), 1–30. https://doi.org/
10.3390/polym13020231.
Oyewo, O.A., Adeniyi, A., Sithole, B.B., Onyango, M.S., 2020. Sawdust-based cellulose nanocrystals incorporated
with ZnO nanoparticles as efficient adsorption media in the removal of methylene blue dye. ACS Omega 5
(30), 18798–18807. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c01924.
P€a€akko, M., Ankerfors, M., Kosonen, H., Nyk € €anen, A., Ahola, S., Osterberg, M., Ruokolainen, J., Laine, J., Larsson, P.T., €
Ikkala, O., Lindstrom, T., 2007. Enzymatic hydrolysis combined with mechanical shearing and high-pressure ho- €
mogenization for nanoscale cellulose fibrils and strong gels. Biomacromolecules 8 (6), 1934–1941. https://doi.
org/10.1021/bm061215p.
Perez, S., Samain, D., 2010. Structure and engineering of celluloses. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem. 64 (C), 25–116.
Academic Press Inc https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2318(10)64003-6.
Picheth, G.F., Pirich, C.L., Sierakowski, M.R., Woehl, M.A., Sakakibara, C.N., de Souza, C.F., Martin, A.A., da Silva, R.,
de Freitas, R.A., 2017. Bacterial cellulose in biomedical applications: a review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 104, 97–106.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.05.171.
Pinto, A.H., Taylor, J.K., Chandradat, R., Lam, E., Liu, Y., Leung, A.C.W., Keating, M., Sunasee, R., 2020. Wood-based
cellulose nanocrystals as adsorbent of cationic toxic dye, Auramine O, for water treatment. J. Environ. Chem. Eng.
8 (5). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104187.
Prasad Reddy, J., Rhim, J.W., 2014. Isolation and characterization of cellulose nanocrystals from garlic skin. Mater.
Lett. 129, 20–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2014.05.019.
Rahbar Shamskar, K., Heidari, H., Rashidi, A., 2016. Preparation and evaluation of nanocrystalline cellulose aerogels
from raw cotton and cotton stalk. Ind. Crop Prod. 93, 203–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2016.01.044.
Rebouillat, S., Pla, F., 2013. State of the art manufacturing and engineering of nanocellulose: a review of available data
and industrial applications. J. Biomater. Nanobiotechnol., 165–188. https://doi.org/10.4236/jbnb.2013.42022.
Reddy, N., Yang, Y., 2006. Properties of high-quality long natural cellulose fibers from rice straw. J. Agric. Food Chem.
54 (21), 8077–8081. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf0617723.
Rocha, I., Hattori, Y., Diniz, M., Mihranyan, A., Strømme, M., Lindh, J., 2018. Spectroscopic and physicochemical char￾acterization of sulfonated cladophora cellulose beads. Langmuir 34 (37), 11121–11125. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.langmuir.8b01704.
Roman, M., Gray, D.G., 2005. Parabolic focal conics in self-assembled solid films of cellulose nanocrystals. Langmuir
21 (12), 5555–5561. https://doi.org/10.1021/la046797f.
Rosa, M.F., Medeiros, E.S., Malmonge, J.A., Gregorski, K.S., Wood, D.F., Mattoso, L.H.C., Glenn, G., Orts, W.J.,
Imam, S.H., 2010. Cellulose nanowhiskers from coconut husk fibers: effect of preparation conditions on their ther￾mal and morphological behavior. Carbohydr. Polym. 81 (1), 83–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2010.01.059.
Ruan, W., Hu, J., Qi, J., Hou, Y., Zhou, C., Wei, X., 2019. Removal of dyes from wastewater by nanomaterials : a review.
Adv. Mater. Lett., 9–20. https://doi.org/10.5185/amlett.2019.2148.
Sacui, I.A., Nieuwendaal, R.C., Burnett, D.J., Stranick, S.J., Jorfi, M., Weder, C., Foster, E.J., Olsson, R.T., Gilman, J.W.,
2014. Comparison of the properties of cellulose nanocrystals and cellulose nanofibrils isolated from bacteria, tu￾nicate, and wood processed using acid, enzymatic, mechanical, and oxidative methods. ACS Appl. Mater. Inter￾faces 6 (9), 6127–6138. American Chemical Society https://doi.org/10.1021/am500359f.
References 271
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesSaito, T., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.L., Vignon, M., Isogai, A., 2006. Homogeneous suspensions of individualized mi￾crofibrils from TEMPO-catalyzed oxidation of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules 7 (6), 1687–1691. https://doi.
org/10.1021/bm060154s.
Samiee, S., Ahmadzadeh, H., Hosseini, M., Lyon, S., 2019. Algae as a source of microcrystalline cellulose. In: advanced
Bioprocessing for Alternative Fuels, Biobased Chemicals, and Bioproducts: Technologies and Approaches for
Scale-Up and Commercialization, pp. 331–350. Elsevier https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817941-3.00017-6.
Samir, M.A.S.A., Alloin, F., Paillet, M., Dufresne, A., 2004. Tangling effect in fibrillated cellulose reinforced
nanocomposites. Macromolecules 37 (11), 4313–4316. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma035939u.
Saylan, Y., Gokt € urk, L., Pospiskova, K., Safarik, I., Denizli, A., 2020. Magnetic bacterial cellulose nanofibers for nu- €
cleoside recognition. Cellulose 27 (16), 9479–9492. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-020-03425-x.
Sheltami, R.M., Abdullah, I., Ahmad, I., Dufresne, A., Kargarzadeh, H., 2012. Extraction of cellulose nanocrystals from
mengkuang leaves (Pandanus tectorius). Carbohydr. Polym. 88 (2), 772–779. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2012.01.062.
Shen, W., Chen, S., Shi, S., Li, X., Zhang, X., Hu, W., Wang, H., 2009. Adsorption of Cu(II) and Pb(II) onto
diethylenetriamine-bacterial cellulose. Carbohydr. Polym. 75 (1), 110–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2008.07.006.
Shoukat, A., Wahid, F., Khan, T., Siddique, M., Nasreen, S., Yang, G., Ullah, M.W., Khan, R., 2019. Titanium oxide￾bacterial cellulose bioadsorbent for the removal of lead ions from aqueous solution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 129,
965–971. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.02.032.
Silverio, H.A., Flauzino Neto, W.P., Dantas, N.O., Pasquini, D., 2013. Extraction and characterization of cellulose
nanocrystals from corncob for application as reinforcing agent in nanocomposites. Ind. Crop Prod. 44,
427–436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2012.10.014.
Siqueira, G., Bras, J., Dufresne, A., 2009. Cellulose whiskers versus microfibrils: influence of the nature of the nano￾particle and its surface functionalization on the thermal and mechanical properties of nanocomposites. Biomacro￾molecules 10 (2), 425–432. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm801193d.
Smith, C.J., Wagle, D.V., O’Neill, H.M., Evans, B.R., Baker, S.N., Baker, G.A., 2017. Bacterial cellulose ionogels as
chemosensory supports. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (43), 38042–38051. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.7b12543.
Stenstad, P., Andresen, M., Tanem, B.S., Stenius, P., 2008. Chemical surface modifications of microfibrillated cellulose.
Cellulose 15 (1), 35–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-007-9143-y.
Subhedar, A., Bhadauria, S., Ahankari, S., Kargarzadeh, H., 2021. Nanocellulose in biomedical and biosensing appli￾cations: a review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 166, 587–600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.10.217.
Svagan, A.J., Samir, M.A.S.A., Berglund, L.A., 2008. Biomimetic foams of high mechanical performance based on
nanostructured cell walls reinforced by native cellulose nanofibrils. Adv. Mater. 20 (7), 1263–1269. https://doi.
org/10.1002/adma.200701215.
Tamahkar, E., Turkmen, D., Akg € on€ ull € u, S., Qureshi, T., Denizli, A., 2018. Bacterial cellulose nanofibers for efficient €
removal of Hg 2+ from aqueous solutions. In: Nanotechnology for Sustainable Water Resources. Wiley Blackwell,
pp. 501–522, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119323655.ch16.
Tamahkar, E., Bakhshpour, M., Denizli, A., 2019. Molecularly imprinted composite bacterial cellulose nanofibers for
antibiotic release. J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 30 (6), 450–461. https://doi.org/10.1080/09205063.2019.1580665.
Tan, H.F., Ooi, B.S., Leo, C.P., 2020. Future perspectives of nanocellulose-based membrane for water treatment. J. Wa￾ter Process Eng., 37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101502.
Troncoso, O.P., Torres, F.G., 2020. Bacterial cellulose-graphene based nanocomposites. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21.
Uetani, K., Yano, H., 2011. Nanofibrillation of wood pulp using a high-speed blender. Biomacromolecules 12 (2),
348–353. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm101103p.
Ul-Islam, M., Khan, S., Ullah, M.W., Park, J.K., 2019. Comparative study of plant and bacterial cellulose pellicles
regenerated from dissolved states. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 137, 247–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2019.06.232.
Urbina, L., Guaresti, O., Requies, J., Gabilondo, N., Eceiza, A., Corcuera, M.A., Retegi, A., 2018. Design of reusable
novel membranes based on bacterial cellulose and chitosan for the filtration of copper in wastewaters. Carbohydr.
Polym. 193, 362–372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.04.007.
272 12. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents: An insight
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesVanderfleet, O.M., Reid, M.S., Bras, J., Heux, L., Godoy-Vargas, J., Panga, M.K.R., Cranston, E.D., 2019. Insight into
thermal stability of cellulose nanocrystals from new hydrolysis methods with acid blends. Cellulose 26 (1),
507–528. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-2175-7.
Vega, B., Wondraczek, H., Bretschneider, L., N€areoja, T., Fardim, P., Heinze, T., 2015. Preparation of reactive fibre
interfaces using multifunctional cellulose derivatives. Carbohydr. Polym. 132, 261–273. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.05.048.
Wang, J., Tavakoli, J., Tang, Y., 2019. Bacterial cellulose production, properties and applications with different culture
methods—a review. Carbohydr. Polym., 63–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.05.008.
Wei, J., Jia, S., Zhang, L., Zhou, Y., Lv, Y., Zhang, X., Shao, Z., 2021. Preparation of treelike and rodlike
carboxymethylated nanocellulose and their effect on carboxymethyl cellulose films. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 138
(13), 50092. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.50092.
Xu, T., Jiang, Q., Ghim, D., Liu, K.K., Sun, H., Derami, H.G., Wang, Z., Tadepalli, S., Jun, Y.S., Zhang, Q.,
Singamaneni, S., 2018. Catalytically active bacterial nanocellulose-based ultrafiltration membrane. Small
14 (15). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201704006.
Xue, Y., Mou, Z., Xiao, H., 2017. Nanocellulose as a sustainable biomass material: structure, properties, present status
and future prospects in biomedical applications. Nanoscale 9 (39), 14758–14781. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c7nr04994c.
Xue, F., He, H., Zhu, H., Huang, H., Wu, Q., Wang, S., 2019. Structural design of a cellulose-based solid amine ad￾sorbent for the complete removal and colorimetric detection of Cr(VI). Langmuir 35 (39), 12636–12646. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b01788.
Yadav, C., Saini, A., Zhang, W., You, X., Chauhan, I., Mohanty, P., Li, X., 2021. Plant-based nanocellulose: a review of
routine and recent preparation methods with current progress in its applications as rheology modifier and 3D
bioprinting. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 166, 1586–1616. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.11.038.
Yildirim, N., 2018. Developing fire-retardant and water-repellent bio-structural panels using nanocellulose. MRS
Commun. 8 (2), 257–265. https://doi.org/10.1557/mrc.2018.37.
Yildirim, N., Shaler, S.M., Gardner, D.J., Rice, R., Bousfield, D.W., 2014. Cellulose nanofibril (CNF) reinforced starch
insulating foams. Cellulose 21 (6), 4337–4347. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-014-0450-9.
Zhu, G., Xu, H., Dufresne, A., Lin, N., 2018. High-adsorption, self-extinguishing, thermal, and acoustic-resistance
aerogels based on organic and inorganic waste valorization from cellulose nanocrystals and red mud. ACS Sus￾tain. Chem. Eng. 6 (5), 7168–7180. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b01244.
References 273
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
13
Synthesis and properties of cellulose￾based nanobiosorbents
Anindita Dea
, Mridula Guina
, and N.B. Singha,b
a
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sharda University, Greater Noida, India b
Research
Development Cell, Sharda University, Greater Noida, India
13.1 Introduction
One of the most important naturally occurring polysaccharide is cellulose. This can be nat￾urally obtained from bacteria, algae, fungi, animals, and plants. Chemically cellulose is a lin￾ear, homo polysaccharide consisting of “β-D-glucopyranose units linked together by β-1,4-
glycosidic bonds.” The main constituents of cellulose are hydrogen (6.17%), carbon
44.44%), and oxygen (49.39%) and the formula is (C6H10O5)n (Fig. 13.1), where n is polymer￾ization degree and shows number of glucose units (Blanco et al., 2018).
Water insolubility, hydrophilic nature, crystallinity, biodegradability and high tensile
strengths are some of the physical properties of cellulose (Yu et al., 2020; Dhali et al.,
2021). Importance of cellulosic materials are due to abundant availability, sustainable, renew￾able resource with price stability, high strength and modulus, light weight, thermal stability,
recyclable, reusable, reduced carbon footprint (carbon neutral), compostable, non-toxic, bio￾compatible, thixotropic, dimensional stability, high optical transparency, high thermal con￾ductivity and low oxygen permeability. Generally repeating units, chain length, and
degree of polymerization control the properties of cellulose. All these depend on the source
and the extraction method. The cellulose fiber derived from plants consists of a mixture of
hemicellulose, lignin, pectin and other compounds and on the other hand the bacterial
cell-derived cellulose has much water content and longer chains (Fig. 13.2A). The cellulose
material maintains both amorphous and crystalline character and the amorphous region
on reaction with strong acids is converted to nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC) (Fig. 13.2B).
In recent years nanocellulose has emerged as an important material for different applica￾tions (Trache et al., 2020). Depending on their isolation methods, nanocellulose may be di￾vided into three categories: (1) cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), (2) cellulose nanofibers
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 275 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00013-7(CNFs/NFCs), (3) Another form of nanocellulose is bacterial nanocellulose (BNC), which re￾fers to nanostructured cellulose produced by some bacteria specifically belonging to the gen￾eral species category of Acetobacter, Pseudomonas, Agrobacterium and Rhizobium, etc. (Fig. 13.3)
(Dhali et al., 2021; Thomas et al., 2018; Gopakumar et al., 2019; Farooq et al., 2020).
Nanocellulose is used in different sectors but as an adsorbent, it is very effective for reme￾diation of water (Fig. 13.4) (Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017).
Considering the importance of nanocellulose, it’s synthesis (through plants and bacteria),
characterization, properties and applications have been discussed in this chapter. More atten￾tion is given toward biosorption.
13.2 Nanocellulose
Cellulose is a ubiquitous biopolymer commonly found in cell walls of plant tissue, bacteria,
algea, fungi, and even in some sea animals. This polysaccharide molecule contains long
chains of β-D-glucopyranose units. These glucose units then connect together by β-1,4 glyco￾sidic bonds to form a dimer which is known as cellobiose. This fundamental unit is then com￾bined to form cellulose which is an isotactic polymer of cellobiose (Gupta et al., 2016). The
polysaccharide chains are connected with each other through extensive inter- and intramo￾lecular hydrogen bonding forming a microfibril which conglomerate to form microfibers and
then fibers.
The nano-scale structure of cellulose, i.e., at least one dimension in nanosize (1–100 nm) is
known as nanocellulose. It can be further classified as (i) cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs)
(ii) cellulose nano nanofibrils (CNFs) and (ii) bacterial nanocellulose (BCN). CNCs have a
needle-like structure with width and length ranging from 10 to 20 nm and 100–250 nm respec￾tively. They have a highly ordered crystalline structure and are also known as nanowhiskers.
CNFs have more amorphous structure compared to the CNCs. They are composed of long
fibrous network with a typical fiber length of 0.1–2 μM and a diameter of 5–50 nm. Bacterial
cellulose is procured by bacterial action and have a typical cross-sectional diameter of
20–100 nm. Some other less common forms of nanocellulose are cellulose nanoyarn and
amorphous nanocellulose. A comparative study of these three types of cellulose is depicted
in Table 13.1.
HO HO
HO O O O
4
O 4
O
CH2OH
CH2OH
b-1,4 -Glycosidic bonds
CH2OH
HO
OH 1
OH 1
OH
OH
n–2
FIG. 13.1 Molecular structure of cellulose.
276 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 13.2 Cellulose, its source, nanocellulose and applications.13.3 Isolation of nanocellulose from various sources
In order to form nanocellulose, at least one of the dimension has to be broken down to
nano-scale. This hierarchical structural break down required several pretreatment steps
which include washing, drying, grinding, delignification and acid/base hydrolysis. During
these processing steps, non-cellulosic components such as lignin, hemicellulose and wax, sur￾rounding the cellulose structure is removed (Fig. 13.5). In addition to that amorphous regions
are eliminated during acid hydrolysis leading to the formation of crystalline CNCs. Grinding
of the raw material is followed by alkali treatment at high temperature and bleaching with an
oxidizing agent such as NaClO2 to remove lignin and hemicellulose (Brinchi et al., 2013).
Pretreatment with chemicals expand the gap between hydroxyl group, breaks the hydrogen
bonds and thus increase the surface area and reactivity. Pretreatment can also be done with
FIG. 13.3 Isolation of nanocellulose materials (Farooq et al., 2020).
278 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 13.4 Nanocellulose as adsorbent/biosorbent for water remediation.
TABLE 13.1 Comparative Study of different types of nanocellulose (Patel et al., 2019).
Type of
nanocellulose Advantages Source Average size
Nanofibrillated
cellulose
(CNFs)
Low density, high surface area, and
good mechanical strength
Wood, potato, sugar beet,
flax, etc.
5-60 nm
Cellulose
nanocrystals
(CNCs)
High surface area, excellent mechanical
properties, low density and low
coefficient of thermal expansion
Wheat straw,
ramie, mulberry bark, avicel,
tunicin, from algae and
bacteria
100-250 nm
Bacterial
nanocellulose(BNC)
Excellent mechanical strength, high
purity, and greater stability
sugars and alcohols of low
MW
20–100 nm
length up to
much finer
2–4 nm
Amorphous
nanocellulose
(ANC)
High content of functional groups and
high sorption ability
Cotton, wood pulp 20–120 nm in
width, and
50–120 nm in
length
Cellulose nanoyarn
(CNY)
High surface area, and high blotting
ability
Cellulose and cellulose
derivatives
100–1000 nm in
width, and
>10,000 nm in
length
13.3 Isolation of nanocellulose from various sources 279
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 13.5 Schematic diagram of nanocellulose preparation from various sources (Patel et al., 2019).enzymes where enzyme such as laccase carries out selective hydrolysis to degrade or modify
the lignin and hemicellulose contents without disturbing cellulose content (Patel et al., 2019).
Pretreatment step decreases the energy consumption during mechanical nanofibrillation and
also enhance the degree of nanofibrillation (Nasir et al., 2017).
Once the pretreatment is over, the cellulosic materials are subjected to mechanical
processing for defibrillation process. There are several mechanical methods notably grinding,
homogenization, high-intensity ultrasonication, microfluidization and cryocrushing (Nasir
et al., 2017).
13.3.1 Isolation of nanocellulose from forest residue
A large amount of forest residue is produced every year which include sawdust, plywood
waste, shavings and logging residues. This could be a useful feedstock for isolation of cellu￾lose. Typically, the extraction process can be divided into four categories: chemical, physical,
biological and a combination of any two aforesaid methods in order to have an added advan￾tage. Biological method to extract cellulose from forest residue has not been explored much
due to economic reasons. The most common method used to obtain nanocellulose is chemical
method. For example, CNCs are extracted from logging residues by alkaline treatment (4.5%
NaOH, 80°C, 2 h), bleaching treatment and acid hydrolysis (65% H2SO4, 45°C, 40 min). The
CNCs thus obtained have high degree of crystallinity and have high aspect ratio(>10)
(Moriana et al., 2016). However, this method has high energy consumption, requires longer
reaction time and corrosive chemical. Physical methods are also used in extraction of
nanocellulose. For example, Phanthong and coworkers could get 93% yield of nanocellulose
(10–25 nm diameter) by using a planetary ball mill (Phanthong et al., 2017). Viegle and co￾workers have used fibrillated pulped beech waste to generate nanocellulose in good yield
by following a high-pressure homogenizer treatment (Veigel et al., 2012). Physical methods
have disadvantage in terms of high energy consumption.
Nowadays a combination of physical and chemical method is also being employed for
preparation of nanocellulose. In one such example, Eucalyptus sawdust was first pretreated
to get rid of lignin and hemicellulose and to isolate cellulose. It is then oxidized by TEMPO
under alkaline condition followed by a gentle homogenization process to obtain
nanocellulose (Vallejos et al., 2016). Similar methods have also been employed to procure
CNFs from Birch and Spruce sawdust. Apart from that, ultrasound and screw extruding
methods are also used in combination with chemical treatment. Nano-fibers have been pre￾pared from pine needle by treatment with acidified sodium chlorite at 75°C for 1 h followed
by alkaline treatment (70°C) and acid hydrolysis by HCl at high temperature combined with
ultrasonic treatment at 60KHz for 30 mins (Xiao et al., 2015). The nanofibers thus produced
have good thermoplastic property.
Synthesis of nanocellulose film has been reported by Bufalino et al. from Amazon forest
wood waste by subjecting the raw material to bleaching and casting method (Bufalino
et al., 2016). A comprehensive list of various examples of nanocellulose extraction from forest
residue is listed in Table 13.1. A combined method is better in terms of efficiency compared to
both chemical and physical method. However, this method produces chemicals as secondary
waste.
13.3 Isolation of nanocellulose from various sources 281
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.3.2 Isolation of nanocellulose from agricultural residue
Crop residue such as rice and wheat straw, sugarcane bagasse, rice husk, corn cob, corn
stover, etc., is good source of cellulosic material. Typically cellulose content of agricultural
residue is similar to that of forest residue but lignin content is significantly higher. The fab￾rication method of nanocellulose from lignocellulosic agricultural residue is of four types as
mentioned in the previous section. A good example of chemical method is preparation of
nanowhishkers by acid hydrolysis from pea hull fibers having diameter and length of
12–7 nm and 400–240 nm respectively (Chen et al., 2009). Physical pathway involves use of
physical processing tools or methods such as homogenization, mechanical grinding,
ultrasonication, etc. Suopajarvi et al. have synthesized nanofibrillated cellulose gel by a
high-pressure homogenization technique. It is then functionalized with sulfonate functional
group to produce highly efficient nanoadsorbent for Pb(II) ions (Suopaj€arvi et al., 2015). Abra￾ham el al. prepared nanocellulose by a steam explosion method from pineapple leaves and
jute fibers and used it as polymer reinforcing agent (Abraham et al., 2011).
In biological method nanocellulose extraction involves use of microorganism or a specific
enzyme acting as a catalyst on the cellulosic substrate. The advantage of this method is that
the structural aspects of nanocellulose can be controlled easily, whereas long reaction time,
low yield and high cost are some of the drawbacks.
The combined method is often preferred by the modern researchers. Kang et al. have
followed a mechanochemical esterification method to obtain cellulose from corn cobs. The
nanocellulosic particles have particle diameter of 1.5–2.8 nm and possess excellent optical
property. Another example of this combined method is synthesis of CNCs from sugarcane
bagasse by a combined acid hydrolysis and ultrasonic treatment. The CNCs thus produced
have an extensive hydrogen bonding and resemble true synthetic polymer matrix and can be
used as reinforcing additives in food packaging industry (Slavutsky and Bertuzzi, 2014).
13.3.3 Isolation of nanocellulose from algae waste
Algae are enriched in protein and polysaccharide and thus can be a good source of
nanocellulose.
Some non-edible green algae species or invasive algae species such as Cladophorales, Ulva,
Chlorella, Spirogyra, and Chaetomorph have been reported to be very useful for
nanocellulose fabrication. Mostly chemical and combined methods have been adopted for
the fabrication process. Highly crystalline nanocellulose with high surface area has been iso￾lated from Cladophorales by acid hydrolysis (Hua et al., 2015). Crystalline nanocellulose from
Ulva lactuca is synthesized by methanol decolorization, bleaching followed by acid hydrolysis
(Rathod et al., 2015). One example of combined method is nanocellulose from Chaetomorpha
antennina by bleaching, acid hydrolysis and ultrasonic treatment (Yu et al., 2020).
13.3.4 Isolation of nanocellulose from industrial by-product
Various industrial waste products such as waste paper, fruit pulp, residues from food
processing, furniture manufacturing, printing and packaging contains lignocellulosic mass
from where nanocellulose can be extracted. The method for extraction depends on the source
282 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmaterial due to variation in structural and chemical composition. For example, to extract
nanocellulose from sugarcane bagasse a direct acid hydrolysis method has been employed.
However, solid waste from olive industry and paper and pulp industry waste requires
pretreatment of pulping and bleaching prior to acid hydrolysis. Furniture industry wastes
are subjected to pretreatment by steam explosion before acid hydrolysis (Yu et al., 2020). Pulp
and paper mill sludge can be converted to crystalline nanocellulose under oxidizing condi￾tion using ammonium persulfate (Gibril et al., 2018).
A comprehensive list of various sources of cellulose and the preparation method of
nanocellulose from them is listed in Table 13.2 (Yu et al., 2020).
13.4 Properties of nanocellulose
The properties of nanocellulose depend on the source material, the synthesis method and
type of nanocellulose surface transformation. The hydroxyl-rich nanocellulose surface can be
easily modified by various chemical reactions (discussed in the next section) and thereby pro￾ducing molecules with unique physical, rheological, mechanical, electrical, optical, thermal,
and biological properties.
13.4.1 Physical, mechanical, and rheological properties
One of the most important characteristic of nanocellulose is its crystallinity. Nanocellulose
obtained from microorganisms has greater crystallinity compared to that from plant biomass.
For example, Cladophora cellulose has crystallinity index of >90% while CNFs obtained from
wood are <70% crystalline. Moreover Cladophora cellulose is porous compared to wood￾based cellulose and have a higher surface area. Porosity and crystallinity also affect the me￾chanical resilience of the nanocellulose. However, there is no direct correlation between the
two properties. As for example, Young’s modulus of Cladophora cellulose (8 GPa) is half of
that of CNF (12 GPa) despite having a higher crystallinity (Sheikhi, 2019). Nenocellulose
also have a very high mechanical strength. The tensile strength depends on the fiber source
as well as on the surface modification. For example, dicarboxylic acid modified crystalline
nanocellulose form films with tensile strength of the order of 63–126 MPa and Young’s mod￾uli 2.8–4.7 GPa, regulated by the degree of substitution and acid/salt form (Sheikhi, 2019).
The rheological property of charged nanocellulose (sulfonate, carboxylate) depends on the
concentration ions present around it.
13.4.2 Chemical and thermal properties
As the surface of the nanocellulose is rich in hydroxyl group having good nucleophilic
properties, the surface functionalization can be done easily with suitable reagent in one or
multistep process. The most common methods are amidation, esterification, etherification,
and carbamation. Functionalization enhances or modifies the chemical property of the
nanocellulose. For example, dicarboxylated cellulose has more solubility in the functionalized
regions which furnish an efficient method to break down fibrils from their amorphous regions
13.4 Properties of nanocellulose 283
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 13.2 A list of various sources of nanocellulose, their properties and applications (Yu et al., 2020)
Sources Properties Extraction method Application
Forest
residue
Birch and Spruce Tensile strength:80e200 MPa;
Young’s modulus: 4.8e8.5 GPa
Sodium hydroxide and Soxhlet
extraction followed by acetic acid,
sodium acetate and sodium chlorite
treatment.
Papermaking
Logging residues High aspect ratio:>10; Good thermal
stability.
Alkaline treatment, bleaching
treatment and acid hydrolysis.
Reinforcing agents
Eucalyptus sawdust Surface area: 60 m2 g1; Average
diameter: 41.0 nm
TEMPO oxidation Papermaking
Medium density fiberboard Length: 164.7 nm; Width: 6.7 nm;
Crystallinity: 71%
Soxhlet extraction, sodium hydroxide
and repeated bleaching.
Nanocomposites or
papermaking
Beech wastes pulp Diameters: 20–65 nm Average:
35 nm
Fibrilization Adhesive
Pine needles treatments Narrow diameter:
30–70 nm; Cellulose I type;
Crystallinity: 66.19%; Highly
flexible, highly ultralight and good
thermal properties
Chemical pretreatments followed by
ultrasonic
Thermoplastic
composites
Pinecone biomass Tensile strength: 273 MPa;
Elastic modulus: 17 GPa;
Crystallinity: 70%; Diameter:
5e20 nm
Acidification, alkali treatment,
mechanical grinding.
Bionanocomposites
Cordia goeldiana veneer
wastes
Maximum processing temperatures:
300C
Alkali treatment, bleaching,
homogenization and casting.
E-papers, organic
electronic devices
and transparent
solar cells
Agricultural
residues
Waste sugarcane bagasse Cellulose II;
Diameters:18.17e32.84 nm;
Crystallinity: 93%
Alkali hydrolysis; bleaching treatment;
acid hydrolysis and ultrasonic
treatment.
Food packaging
Jute dried stalks Average diameter: 50 nm;
Higher crystallinity; Young’s
modulus: 138 GPa;
Good reinforcing properties
Alkali treatment followed by steam
explosion; sodium chlorite bleaching
and oxalic acid treatment followed by
steam explosion.
Reinforcing agentCoconut husk Average diameter: 5.6  1.5 nm;
Length: 150e350 nm; Good
mechanical properties and thermal
stability
Ultrasonic-assisted solvent immersion,
alkaline treatment, bleaching
treatment, milder TEMPO -mediated
oxidation (TEMPO/NaClO/NaClO2,
pH ¼ 4.8)
PVA composite
strength enhancer
Pea hull Length: 400–240 nm; Diameter:
7–12 nm; Good UV absorption,
transparency, tensile strength,
elongation at break and water
resistance
Acid hydrolysis nanocomposite
Wheat straw Good adsorption capacity Bleaching treatment, pressure sieve
and high-pressure homogenization;
Nanosorbent
Branch-barks of mulberry Diameter: 25–30 nm; Length:
400–500 nm; Crystallinity: 73.4%
Alkali treatment, bleaching treatment,
acid hydrolysis and ultrasonic
treatment
–
Raw apple stem Yield: 5.2%;
Higher crystallinity; Good thermal
stability
Acid hydrolysis –
Algae waste Cladophorales Width: 20–30 nm; Crystallinity:
100%;
Acid hydrolysis Biological field
Dealginate kelp residue High aspect ratio: 30:70;
Crystallinity: 74.55%
2 wt% Na2CO3 swelling treatment,
2 wt% NaOH extraction of residual
sodium alginate, ultrasonic smashing,
0.7 wt% NaClO2 buffer solution
bleaching treatment, delignification
and sulfuric acid hydrolysis
–
Industrial kelp (Laminaria
japonica) waste
Yield: 52.3%; Crystalline form:
cellulose I; Crystallinity: 69.4%;
Shape: rod-like;
Poor thermostability
Acid hydrolysis –
Ulva lactuca Good absorption Methanol decolorization, bleaching
and acid hydrolysis
Adsorbents
Chaetomorpha antennina Yield: 34  0.9%;
Crystallinity:85.02%; Good thermal
stability and tensile strength
Bleaching treatment, acid hydrolysis,
and ultrasonic assisted treatment
Environmentally
friendly products
ContinuedTABLE 13.2 A list of various sources of nanocellulose, their properties and applications (Yu et al., 2020)—Cont’d
Sources Properties Extraction method Application
Cystoseria myricaas algae Average crystallite’s grain size
(Fe3O4-Nanocellulose): 21 nm
Soxhlet pretreatment, 3% NaOH
treatment, NaClO2 bleaching
treatment and acid hydrolysis
Heavy metal
mercury adsorbent
Gelidium sesquipedale Crystallinity: 69.8%; Diameter:
6–40 nm; Length: 80e450 nm; High
aspect ratio: 40
Soxhlet extraction, bleaching
treatment, 5% KOH solution treatment
and acid hydrolysis
Food packaging
industry
Industrial
byproduct
Sweet lime pulp waste
Komagataeibacter europaeus
SGP37 incubation under static
intermittent fed-batch
cultivation
Bacterial nanocellulose Yield: 27.0–38 g/L –
Waste paper Crystallinity: 48.85%; Average size:
50 nm; Good thermal stability
Aqueous NaOH/thiourea Transistors and
batteries
Discarded cigarette filters Length: 143 nm;
Width: 8 nm; Crystallinity: 96.77%
Ethanol extraction, bleaching, alkali
treatment and acid hydrolysis
Biomedical
composites
Cotton linter waste Length: 177 nm;
Width: 12 nm; Crystallinity: 90.45%;
High hydrophilicity
Acid hydrolysis nanocomposites
Beer industrial residuals Average diameter: 73–145 nm;
Crystallinity:79%–89%; Yield: 25.8%;
Good thermal stability
Acid hydrolysis and ultrasound
assisted techniques
Packaging,
coatings,
pharmaceuticals,
cosmetics and
defense
Wood furniture industry
waste (Pinus elliotii)
Diameter: 18.0–40.5 nm Steam explosion and acid hydrolysis
process
Oil absorption
Recycled Tetra Pak Food
Packaging Wastes
Length: 258  54 nm; Aspect ratios:
>10
Alkaline purification, bleaching
treatment and acid hydrolysis
Bionanocomposites
Olive industry solid waste
Pulping,
Free-flowing porous bleaching and sulfuric acid hydrolysis Wastewater
treatment
Citrus Pulp of Floater (CPF) Crystallinity: 60%; Purity: 98% Enzymatic hydrolysis –into nanocrystals (Majoinen et al., 2012). Another common oxidizing agent is TEMPO and its
derivative. However, prolonged oxidation of nanocellulose may lead to loss of crystalline
property as it interferes with inter and intramolecular hydrogen bonding caused by hydroxyl
group. Hydrophobicity of the nanocellulose can be controlled by amination/amidation via
grafting amine group to cellulose chain length in various degrees (Yang et al., 2012).
Thermal conductivity is one of the most important properties to consider for successful
fabrication of electronic device (facile heat transfer may protect the device). The thermal prop￾erty of nanocellulose depends on crystallinity, particle morphology and orientation, thermal
resistance of particles, porosity and stiffness. Thermal conductivity of the nanocellulose can
be altered anisotropically by stretching. As for example, in nanopapers made from stretched
bacteriocellulose, thermal conductivity is regulated by fiber orientation. The conductivity in￾creases along the stretched plane while it decreases along the perpendicular plane. The
in-plane thermal conductivity of nanocellulose papers is higher than conventional polymer
film and aerogels albeit conductivity is significantly less compared to metal and ceramic ma￾terials (Sheikhi, 2019).
13.4.3 Electrical and optical properties of nanocellulose
Cellulose which is the building block of nanocellulose has very poor electrical conductivity
and hence often used as insulator. Nanocellulose can be used as template for synthesis of con￾ductive nanoparticles. They have also been used as capping agent during nanoparticle syn￾thesis and as binding agents to provide an efficient conductive layer coating.
CNC can form multilayer structure and the distance between the layers can be changed in
form of nematic or chiral nematic structure. On fast evaporation, nematic CNC films may be
obtained while chiral nematic films with hemical structure can be obtained on slow evapo￾ration. CNC dispersion can change from an aniosotropic state to anisotropic/ordered
biphasic separation depending on the concentration. The distance between chiral nematic do￾mains can be decreased by addition of salt to CNC dispersion (Fig. 13.6). These unique prop￾erties of nanocellulose can be exploited to fabricate optical devices (Sheikhi, 2019).
FIG. 13.6 (A) Helical arrangement of chiral left handed nematic CNCs (B) and (C) production of iridescent color
(Majoinen et al., 2012)
13.4 Properties of nanocellulose 287
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.4.4 Biological properties of nanocellulose
Cellulose is a biocompatible material. Its biological activity depends on morphology and
chemical functionality present. In vivo activity study of nanocellulose is not done much and it
has been reported to have mild inflammatory effect. In vitro cytotoxicity of nanocellulose has
been explored in several research works. Dong et al. reported MTT assays and lactate dehy￾drogenase assay to evaluate the cytotoxic behavior of nanocellulose up to 50 μg/mL (Dong
et al., 2012). No cytotoxicity against fibroblast has been found for CNFs up to a concentration
of 100 μg/mL. However, at higher concentration of CNFs (2–5 mg/mL) apopstasis and stress
to the cell is reported. Toxicological studies have been performed using different types of cells
through acute lethal tests, gene mutations, chromosomal test in vitro, multitropic assays and
bacterial tests for environmental toxicity. Among nanocellulose, BC is particularly preferred
for biomedical applications due to high purity and high crystallinity. Nevertheless, one of the
challenges of using nanocellulose is its non-degradable nature in vivo. Biodegradation of
nanocellulose has not been studied in details so far and it is understood that the degradation
depends on crystallinity, functional groups, and size and oxidized form of nanocelluloses are
more susceptible to hydrolysis in vivo (Sheikhi, 2019).
13.5 Characterization of nanocellulose
Nanocellulose can be characterized by various techniques for example nitro gas and water
adsorption isotherms, Helium pycnometry, X-ray diffraction and dielectric spectroscopy. The
most important property, i.e., crystallinity index is measured by using a X-ray Diffractometer
by observing the intensity of diffraction at 002 lattice peak which represent the crystalline re￾gion. On the other hand, diffraction intensity between (001) and (101) lattice peaks represent
amorphous region (Trache et al., 2020).
Size and morphological analysis of nanocellulosic material is done by Transmission Electron
Microscopy (TEM), Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM), and Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM).TEMimages of nanocellulose fromdifferent sources are depictedinFig. 13.7.
A helium pycnometer is used to measure the density and porosity of the nanocellulose. N2
gas adsorption analysis provides specific surface area and total pore volume data. The surface
change on the nanocellulose which dictates the dispersion stability is determined by using a
zeta potential analyzer. Another important technique is X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
which is used to find out elemental composition on the nanocellulose surface. Differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermogra￾vimetric (DTG) techniques are employed to investigate the thermal stability of the material
which are related to thermal decomposition temperature and purity of the nanocellulose
( Jordan et al., 2019).
A very advanced tool used for nanocellulose surface characterization is Dynamic Nuclear
Polarization (DNP)- enhanced NMR spectroscopy. This emerging technique can improve the
sensitivity of the conventional NMR methods by several orders of magnitude. For instance,
Kumar et al. has characterized the metronidazoledrug-functionalized TEMPO-oxidized cel￾lulose nanofibrils. The authors have grafted the drug onto the surface of CNF and DNP￾enhanced NMR spectroscopy is the only method which can distinguish between grafting
and adsorption (Kumar et al., 2020).
288 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.6 Surface modification of nanocellulose
The applicability of nanocellulose is limited due to its poor dispersibility in non-polar
solvent and its incompatibility with hydrophobic matrixes. To tackle this problem, chem￾ical modification of the surface hydroxyl groups (-CHOH) has been done. Surface modi￾fication can improve the mechanical properties and chemical properties such as
hydrophobicity which in turn enhances the dispersibility of nanocellulose in specific
solvent.
FIG. 13.7 TEM images of cellulose nanocrystals obtained from different sources (Sheikhi, 2019).
13.6 Surface modification of nanocellulose 289
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.6.1 Functionalization to impart ionic charge on nanocellulose
Nanocellulose surface can be made ionic by phosphorylation, carboxymethylation, oxida￾tion, and sulfonation routes (Scheme 13.1) (Patel et al., 2019).
Phosphorylation
In this method a phosphate group (PO4
3) is incorporated onto the nanocellulose surface. In
this process the free hydroxyl groups of the C2, C3, and C6 positions are converted to phos￾phate by reacting with phosphorylating agent such as POCl3 (phosphorus oxychloride), P2O5
(phosphorus pentoxide), (NH4)2HPO4 (diammonium hydrogenphosphate), H3PO4 (phos￾phoric acid), and organophosphates (Bozˇic et al., 2014). The degree of phosphorylation de￾pends on the reaction time, temperature and the molar ratio of nanocellulose and
phosphorylating agent. For instance, CNFs with phosphate group incorporated predomi￾nantly at the C6 position has been done using enzyme hexokinase with ATP and Mg(II) ions
(Thomas et al., 2018).
Carboxymethylation
Functionalization of nanocellulose surface with carboxymethyl group (–CH2–COOH) in￾creases the negative charge on the surface. Accumulation of negative charge increases the
electrostatic repulsion and thus helps to break down the cellulose into nanometer size.
Wagberg and coworkers have fabricated nanocellulose fiber of diameter 5–15 nm by
SCHEME 13.1 Some common surface modification methods of nanocellulose (clockwise from the top right side:
sufonation, acetylation, esterification, etherification, Urithenization, TEMPO oxidation, carbocymethylation,
silylation (Patel et al., 2019).
290 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescarboxymethylation of cellulose fibers and using a homogenizer (Wa˚gberg et al., 2008). Sim￾ilar methods have also been used by Siro ei al. to produce nanofibrillated cellulose from soft￾wood pulp (Siro´ et al., 2011).
Oxidation
Themost common oxidantis TEMPO (2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl) which helps to
isolate the nanofibers and at the same time makes the nanocellulose surface hydrophobic. In
this method stable nitroxyl radicals are generated from TEMPO and convert hydroxyl group
to aldehydes and eventually to carboxylic acid. This process generates high negative charge on
the nanocellulose surface and hence ensure better dispersibility in water. Isagai et al. converted
the surface functional groups on cellulose to carboxylate by TEMPO-mediated oxidation to
form nanofibers (Isogai et al., 2011) which was utilized by Saito et al. for removal of Pb(II),
La(III), and Ag(I) ions from aqueous solutions (Saito and Isogai, 2005).
Sulfonation
Sulfonation of nanocellulose surface can be carried out by using reagents such as H2SO4 or
NaHSO3 and like the two previously mentioned methods makes the nanocellulose surface
ionic. Concentrated H2SO4 which is used to catalyze the hydrolysis of source material can also
convert the hydroxyl groups to sulphate half ester. It displays high affinity toward multiple
metal ions which increases the rate of adsorption (Dong et al., 2016). In fact, the affinity of
sulfonic groups for metal ions is stronger than any other functional group like carboxyl
and hydroxyl due to larger degree of ionization (Fig. 13.8).
13.6.2 Functionalization to generate hydrophobic surface
Cellulose surface is hydrophilic in nature and hence it absorbs moisture. The affinity of cel￾lulose toward water can be altered by chemical modification techniques such as esterification,
etherification, silylation, amidation, and urethanization. The modification method is based on
the reaction of the chemical modifying agent with surface hydroxyl group of the nanocellulose.
Acetylation
Acetylation is carried out using acetic anhydride and dry acetic acid along with either
H2SO4 or HClO4 as catalyst. For instance, Butola et al. used acetic andride to acetylate the
CNFs which they then used for the reparation of acetylated CNF-polylactic acid
nanocomposite. These authors also reported that by acetylation process the contact angle
increased from 33o
–115o indicating great improvement in hydrophobic character (Bulota
et al., 2012). Acetylation can also be achieved using vinyl stearate, vinylacetate, and succinic
anhydride (Thomas et al., 2018).
OH
O O
O O
H
H
n
OH
O O
HO
Sulfonation
NaHSO3
O3 S SO3
OH
H
H
n
FIG. 13.8 Sulfonation of nanocellulose.
13.6 Surface modification of nanocellulose 291
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesEtherification
Etherification is a commonly used pretreatment method that facilitates the defibrillation
process to produce CNFs. In this process the cellulose fibers are treated with NaOH and then
hydroxyl groups are converted to carboxymethyl motiety with monochloroacetic acid or its
sodium salt. Drawback of this process is the use of hazardous halocarbon reagents and in￾crease in hydrophilicity of the nanocellulose surface (Thomas et al., 2018).
Silylation
Typically used substrate for silylation is alkyldimethylchlorosilane. The silanols formed by
the action of moisture on alkoxysilane react with cellulose fibers through the hydroxyl group,
forming stable covalent bonds and chemisorbed onto the fiber surface (Scheme 13.2) (Bezerra
et al., 2015).
Gousse and coworkers have used isopropyl dimethylchlorosilane to generated silylated
CNFs which have inherent flexibility and excellent rheological properties (Thomas
et al., 2018).
Amidation
In this route the carboxylic acid groups on nanocellulose surface are generated by
preoxidation of hydroxyl groups and then converted to amide functionality. The most com￾mon reagent used for this purpose is N-ethyl-N-(3-(dimethylamino)- propyl) carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDAC). The optimum pH range is between 7 and 10 for the amidation of
nanocellulose material.
Urithenization
The reactions between surface hydroxyl group and isocyanate gives rise to the formation of
urethane linkage (R–N¼C¼O). Other terms used for this process are carbanylation and
carbamation. For instance, Siqueira et al. have prepared surface-modified CNC and NFC
by n-octadecyl isocyanate with enhanced hydrophobicity and greater dispersibility in organic
solvent (Thomas et al., 2018).
SCHEME 13.2 Silylation reaction scheme of cellulose fibers (Bezerra et al., 2015).
292 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.7 Nanocellulose-based nanocomposites
A composite is a heterogeneous mixture of two or more components having significantly
different physicochemical properties.Nanocomposite contains a homogeneousmatrix of poly￾mer or biopolymer onto which a small amount of nanosize material (filler) of specific shape,
size and surface chemistry is reinforced (Nandi and Guha, 2018). Owing to their chemical re￾activity, high specific surface area, optical, thermal and mechanical properties, CNCs are very
useful as nanofillers. Development of nanocellulose-based composites can offer substantialim￾provements in supportive properties like strength and dimensional stability in order to create
high performance biomaterials. As for instance, it has been widely reported that CNC incor￾porated polymer matrix increases the tensile strength and decreases the elasticity. This is be￾cause of the existence of strong covalent bond, van der Waals forces, mechanical interlocking
and molecular entanglement between the CNCs and polymer matrix. Moreover, the biocom￾patibility of CNCs compared to other nanofillers such as carbon black, mica, silica, nanoclay,
metal oxides, etc., makes it a useful choice for biomedical application (Nandi and Guha, 2018).
There are several methods available for nanocellulose synthesis namely ballmilling, solution
casting, melt extrusion, compression molding, precipitation routes, injection molding, 3D
printing, layer-by-layer assembly, wet- and electorspinning, and micropattering techniques.
CNCs has been used to fabricate high quality, cost-effective nanocomposite material based
on thermoplastic and thermoset polymers. Different polymers such as polybutyl methacry￾late, polyvinylchloride, poly exo-ethylene, polymethyl methacrylate, ethylene oxide￾epichlorohydrin copolymers, polycarbonate, poly lactic acid, polyurethane, polyvinyl alcohol
and poly vinyl acetate based nanocomposites are reported (Trache et al., 2020). The mechanical
properties of such nanocomposite depend on interfacial interaction between CNCs and the
polymer chosen and can be further enhanced by making specific modification. Combination
of CNCs with thermosets such as unsaturated polyester, polyurethane, epoxy and phenolic
resin gives rise to improvement of physicochemical properties in a synergistic manner. Apart
from that, several natural polymer for instance gelatin, protein, chitosan, alginate, natural rub￾ber, Xanthine, starch, cyclodextric, etc., has been used to produce bionanocomposite. Also, ox￾idized CNCs (TEMPO oxidation or ammonium persulfate method) can be coupled with metal
or metal oxide nanoparticles such as Ag, ZnO, CuO, and Fe2O3 (Oun et al., 2020). Combination
of nanocellulose with nanocarbon such as carbon nano-tubes, nanodiamond, grapheme and
graphene oxide, etc., can lead to the formation of nanocomposite of wide range applicability.
For example, CNCs have been used to immobilize fullerene nanoparticles. The CNC-fullerene
composite showed a higher radical scavenging property in vitro compared to fullerene alone
(Awan et al., 2016). Nanocellulose-nanocarbon composites have interesting properties such as
flexibility, stretchability, high adsorption capacity, high mechanical strength, tunable optical,
electrical property, thermal conductivity as well as photothermal and photodynamic activity.
Thus, this composite material remains a key focus in the future research activities.
13.8 Bacterial nanocellulose
The technology for processing BC is different than that employed for either CNF or CNC.
In order to have different properties, BC production uses different steps. In general BC is hy￾drophilic with high purity with no hemicellulose or lignin with high molecular weight and
13.8 Bacterial nanocellulose 293
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceshigh crystallinity. The properties of BC are influenced by the culture conditions (Blanco et al.,
2018). The common fermentation method for production of BC is the static culture (SC). Shear
stress can convert cellulose producing bacterial strains into non-cellulose-producing mutants
(Blanco et al., 2018).
Number of bacteria can secrete cellulose microfibrils with nanometric widths as an extracel￾lular primary metabolite under proper conditions. Bacteria that are known to be able to
synthetize BNC are those belonging to the genera Acetobacter (now Gluconacetobacter),
Agrobacterium, Alcaligenes, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, Aerobacter, Achromobacter, Azoto￾bacter, Salmonella, and Sarcina (Foresti et al., 2015). Microbial cellulose production very much
depend on the composition of the culture medium, strain, oxygen supply, the fermentation
temperature and the implementation of static or agitated systems. Advantages and disadvan￾tages of static and agitated BNC production are given in Table 13.3 (Foresti et al., 2015).
In complex biological systems, a cell-free technique (Fig. 13.9) has been developed to un￾derstand the metabolism of several complex biological processes that can lead to increased
BNC production (Sharma and Bhardwaj, 2019).
13.9 Properties of BNC
Both BNC and plant cellulose have the same molecular formula but fundamentally differ￾ent because of nanofiber architecture (in BNC). Some of the important properties of BNC are
high polymerization degree, high crystallinity, very high liquid loading capacity, nanofiber
architecture, possibility of designing the shape of the membranes obtained, light density, bio￾degradability, nanofibers immobilized in a stable network, high stability, high chemical pu￾rity, biocompatibility, extensive surface area, high hydrophilicity, high degree of
conformability, high elasticity, high mechanical strength or non-toxicity, non-pyrogenicity,
high transparency, tunable porosity, renewability, indigestibility in the human tract, no
TABLE 13.3 Static and agitated BNC production—Advantages and disadvantages (Foresti et al., 2015).
Static production Agitated production
Advantages Disadvantages Advantages Disadvantages
Operation cost
low
Incubation Periods longer
(5–20 days)
Incubation periods
shorter (1–8 days)
Energy cost high for
generating the mechanical
power
Easy to perform High risk of contamination Strong mechanical
agitation prevents
heterogeneity
Occurrence of non￾producing mutant cells
Higher yields
reported
O2 diffusion limitations are met by
large surface area of the bioreactor
Smaller bioreactors Lower yields reported
More manpower is required Both continuous and Fed￾batch can be implemented
Increase of the viscosity
Higher
crystallinity
index reported
Measurements, are difficult to
perform.
Measurements, controls
can be easily
implemented
Pellets oramorphous
Highly branched BNC
294 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesfunctional group other than OH. Different methods for production of BNC and their appli￾cations are given in Fig. 13.10 (Sharma and Bhardwaj, 2019).
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose
Nanocellulose is used in various fields such as paper and packaging industry, electronic
industry, biomedical field and environmental remediation purpose. They have some excel￾lent properties which includes their lightweight and transparent nature, high thermal and
mechanical strength, biodegradability, etc. (Abitbol et al., 2016). Nanocellulose in the form
of nanocomposites have attracted several industries for making structural composites in con￾struction. Fig. 13.11 depicts various fields where nanocelluose are used extensively. Table 13.4
lists some important application areas of the nanocellulose industries.
13.10.1 Application in paper and packaging industry
The tensile strength of nanocellulose is eight times to that of steel. It is also found to be
stiffer than Kevlar. This makes nanocellulose as a good choice for packaging industry. The
sustainable and versatile nature of this material is an added advantage to the packaging in￾dustry. The available packaging materials are synthetic polymers based on petrochemical
products and thus they are non-renewable and are hardly biodegradable. To keep the envi￾ronment safe, efforts are made to develop biodegradable food packaging keeping the quality
and safety of food intact. The barrier properties of nanocellulose are utilized to develop
Inoculum + Media
Advantages of Cell-free System for BNC production
• Exogenous synthesis of glucose chain in
 medium, thereby surpassing complicated
 cellulose synthesizing machinery
• Can effectively operate anaerobically
• Eliminate byproducts formation that hinder
 BNC synthesis
• Easy production management; enhanced
 BNC yield
Centrifugation
Vortexing
Incubation
Pellet resuspended in supernatant (~5 mL)
to increase cell density
Cell Lysate (containing enzymatic machinery for BNC
synthesis) + Fresh Media
Formation of fibrils; subsequently self-assembly
of fibrils
Synthesis of high-quality BNC
FIG. 13.9 Cell-free strategy for extraction of BNC (Sharma and Bhardwaj, 2019).
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 295
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesnanocomposite films allowing specific penetrating molecules to transit. The size and shape of
the nanocellulose fibrils inhibit the passage of gas and water through the film (Nair et al.,
2014). In most cases these films are edible and act as protective coating on the food. As the
films are made from natural polymer cellulose, they are non-toxic and very much
economical for applications in food packaging. Trifol et al. have reported a composite made
Construction
Electronic
sensors
Biomedical
field
Paper and
pulp Hydrogel
Paints and
coatings
Packaging
Filtration
Nanocellulose
FIG. 13.11 Various fields of application
of nanocellulose.
FIG. 13.10 Production and applications of BNC.
296 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesfrom nanoclay and polylactic acid (PLA) reinforced with nanocellulose for applications in
packaging industry (Trifol et al., 2016). This nano-biocomposite film has excellent barrier
properties against water and oxygen gas. Similarly, use of Carboxymethyl guar (CMG),
poly(vinyl alcohol)/polyacrylamidepolymer network, etc., for making biocomposite films
reinforced with cellulose are under investigation for the improvement of barrier properties
for gas and moisture.
Surface-modified nanocellulose has important application in the fabrication of
amphiphobic surface for protecting both polar and non-polar liquids. These amphiphobic
surfaces have great application in synthesis of antibacterial, antirefelective, self-cleaning,
and corrosion-resistant material. An amphiphobic paper was synthesized by Phanthong
et al. by surface modification of nanocellulose (Phanthong et al., 2016). The fabrication process
involves surface coating of the filter paper with nanocellulose followed by silylation using
chemical vapor deposition. The fabricated paper was super hydrophobic and oleophobic.
Because of this it was repelled from both polar and non-polar environments. These special
properties of nanocellulose papers find application in self-cleaning and anti-corrosion pur￾poses (Si et al., 2016).
In addition to excellent mechanical properties, nanocellulose possesses some other fascinat￾ing properties such as transparency, optical clarity and flexibility. These nanocellulose papers
with novel properties are used in soar cells, electronic tools, flexible circuits, flexible displays
and many other areas. Transparent paper made from wood flour has been reported to exhibit
high optical transparency, high modulus and strength and nominal thermal expansion.
Because of its renewability, biodegradability and minimal toxicity the nanocellulose-based
materials will be more adapted by the paper and packaging industries in upcoming years.
13.10.2 Energy and electronics industry
Nanocellulose composites have excellent conductivity and flexibility. Recently, they are
gaining popularity as a potential candidate in energy and electronic sectors. In addition to
superior mechanical properties, they possess light weight, transparency, optical clarity,
TABLE 13.4 Application industries with selected application areas of nanocellulose.
Application
industries Areas of application
Paper and Packaging Smart packaging, see-through packaging, antimicrobial packaging, UV-screening
packaging
Composites Extension of shelf life, resistance to heat, dimensional stability
Biomedical Controlled release of drugs in drug delivery, antibacterial and antimicrobial activity,
scaffold in tissue engineering, cardiovascular implants
Energy and
Electronics
Digital display, Sensor and detector, time-temperature integrator, signal processor,
diaphragms
Environmental
remediation
Removal of heavy metals, organic pollutants, dyes, oil adsorption, removal of air pollutants
Aerogel Shelf healing products
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 297
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesand flexibility. They are widely used in electronic devices, photovoltaics, flexible circuits and
displays. The electronic charge conduction in many electronic systems and storage devices
happen via mineral or metallic substances. The concept of paper batteries are first evolved
in 2006 for advanced electrical storage devices. These systems are made up by stacking
one anode, absorbent paper, a cathode material and a current collector. This design enables
them to get activated quickly and supply enormous power. A lot of research is currently going
on for application of nanocellulose for making flexible electrode for Li-ion battery. There is
high chance that these materials will replace the conventional polymer films as separator
for Li-ion battery. A few important area of use nanocellulose in energy and electronics sector
is discussed below.
Flexible electronics
Nanofibrillar cellulose films have good mechanical properties, low thermal expansion co￾efficient and are transparent. Thus they have high potential in electronics sector for flexible
electronics devices. Silicon nanomembranes are used for the development of CNF films with
high-speed transistors. The schematic of the fabrication process is shown in Fig. 13.12 and the
process is explained in detail (Seo et al., 2015). In another work they have reported microwave
devicesmade from gallium arsenide on CNFmaterial ( Jung et al., 2015). In addition to that they
have fabricated Si-based complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) systems with
5 kHz frequency limit. Huang et al. have fabricated highly efficient flexible organic field effect
transistor (OFET) using softwood kraft pulp (Huang et al., 2013). The CNF film was coated with
conductive CNT and then with PMMA (polymethyl methacrylate). Another important appli￾cation of nanocellulose is in printed electronics. Application as antenna tags in radiofrequency
identification (RFID) has been demonstrated by printing of silver antennas on crosslinked CNF
films (Zhu et al., 2014). Although performance of these printed electronics are far behind the
conventional silicon-based electronics but their potential in this area cannot be neglected.
Digital display and light-emitting diodes (LED)
Nanocellulose has prime importance in display technology. The modern trend of dynamic
display technology is totally based on nanocellulose. CNFs are mostly used for making light￾emitting diodes for display purpose. Organic light-emitting diode (OLED) can be synthesized
FIG. 13.12 Schematic of production process for flexible electronics on CNF substrate (Seo et al., 2015).
298 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesfrom cellulose nanofibril by multistep process. Synthesis of OLEDs by depositing indium tin
oxide thin films on bacterial cellulose is also known. Printing of AgNPs on CNF to produce
illuminated LED has been reported (Yagyu et al., 2015). By varying the ratio of CNC/CNF, a
nanopaper was synthesized and then it was coated with silver nanowires for the fabrication of
flexible LED (Xu et al., 2016). A recent work by Ji et al. have shown a CNF-epoxy hybrid ma￾terial as LED with good mechanical strength and low thermal expansion coefficient suitable
for flexible display purpose ( Ji et al., 2016). Further research in this area will lead to the more
advancement in flexible, transparent LED.
Opto electronics
It has been observed that CNC suspension exhibit liquid crystal behavior. Under the action
of electric field CNCs can be aligned with particular arrangement. Thus CNC suspensions
have great potential in liquid crystal display techniques. Many electro-optical devices can
be fabricated by varying the electrical signal inside the CNC suspension to control the orien￾tation of CNC as well as the amount of transmitted light (Oulachgar et al., 2016). This area has
not been developed much because of availability of limited research but can have huge im￾pact on applications on opto-electronics industry.
Energy harvesting and storage
In the area of energy storage systems, nanocellulose composites are used as super￾capacitors, fuel cells, battery electrodes and any other electronic energy storage devices.
The performance of these materials in some cases was superior to the conventional energy
storage systems. Nanocellulose has shown promising results as photovoltaic for harvesting
solar energy. A large number of organic photovoltaics are fabricated from CNC and CNF
films with good power conversion efficiency (Fang et al., 2014; Luo et al., 2014; Zhou et al.,
2014). The optical haze and high transparency of CNF films play key role on enhancing
the photovoltaic properties. Moreover composite of CNCs and PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane)
has been reported for conversion of mechanical energy to electrical energy for energy
harvesting (Peng et al., 2017). Further research is going on for exploiting nanocellulose to har￾vest energy from movement of human, ocean waves, stream of air, etc.
Both CNC and CNF membranes are exploited for fuel cell applications (Bayer et al., 2016).
CNC nanopapers with more number of charge carriers exhibited higher conductivity than
CNF. A low temperature polymer electrolyte fuel cell was fabricated by Jiang et al. using a
composite membrane of nanocellulose and Nafion ( Jiang et al., 2015). The use of Nafion
has provided high ionic conductivity in fuel cell applications. A biopolymer electrolyte, fab￾ricated from the composite of bacterial cellulose with crosslinked poly(4-styrene sulfonic
acid) has shown excellent fuel cell performance (Gadim et al., 2017).
Nanocelluloses are also investigated for their role in super capacitor devices. The elec￾trodes in these devices are composites of nanocellulose with some conducting polymers, e.g.,
polypyrrole (PPy) or polyaniline (PANI). Zhang et al. have synthesized silver-coated CNF
aerogel/PANI supercapacitor. This flexible material displays very high specific capacitance
(176 mF/cm2
) (Zhang et al., 2014b). Flexible electrode fabricated from CNF aerogel with PPy
and RGO (reduced graphene oxide) have been reported with good energy density at various
bending situations (Zhang et al., 2019). CNF in the form of aerogels have high potential in
flexible energy storage devices because of their porous nature (Pottathara et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2017).
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 299
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.10.3 Applications in biomedical field
Nanocellulose has found immense application in biomedical field because of its excellent
properties. It exhibits outstanding biocompatibility and less toxicity which makes it a prom￾ising material for biomedical applications. Its unique geometry, high specific surface area,
rheology, remarkable surface chemistry, high chemical and mechanical strength and self￾assembly property are the major reasons behind high demand of nanocellulose in medical
field.
In the biomedical industry nanocellulose is used in drug delivery system, tissue engineer￾ing, blood vessel growth, stent covering, bones reconstruction, skin repairing after burns and
wounds, nerves, gum and dura mater reconstruction, etc. In Fig. 13.13 (Kalia et al., 2011) some
applications of nanocellulose in medical field are shown. Few specific areas of application of
nanocellulose in biomedical field are discussed in the following section.
Drug delivery system
The drug delivery system releases drugs to the specific target organism with specified
amount in an appropriate time. In pharmaceutical industry it is used as tablet coatings for
oral administration. The nanocellulose is blended with various excipients to form dense
matrices for controlled release of drugs. These formulations are flexible and provide repro￾ducible drug release profiles. Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), Cellulose nanofibers (CNFs),
bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) are among different types of nanocellulose which are exten￾sively used for drug loading as well as drug releasing systems. A hybrid bionanocomposite
is synthesized combining nanoparticles of poly(D,L lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) with cellu￾lose nanocrystals (CNCs) and finally loaded with bovine serum albumin fluorescein
isothiocynate conjugate (FITC-BSA) (Rescignano et al., 2014). This novel biocomposite is
FIG. 13.13 Biomedical applications of nanocellulose (A) and (B) never dried nanocellulose membrane; (C) and
(D) artificial blood vessels; (E) dura mater reconstruction (F) covering stents (Kalia et al., 2011).
300 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricessuccessfully used for bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell repairing. CNCs have the ability to
disrupt two membranes of different cell lines without any trace of cytotoxicity. CNC is
adopted as the most promising material as drug carrier because of its functionalized surface.
The high reactivity of the CNC surface allows the drugs or target molecules to bind strongly.
The hydrophobic drugs are water insoluble and are a major concern in drug delivery systems.
To overcome the issue, a multilayer thin films based on CNC is developed (Mohanta et al.,
2014). The drug delivery of this system happens via layer by layer. To improve the
compatibility issues chemical modification method is generally taken up by the researchers
and scientists. Drug release is a complex process in which a drug undergoes absorption, dis￾tribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) before it is showing pharmacological behavior.
A lot of research is still going on for further improvement in drug releasing method by con￾trolling the interaction of CNC and drug molecule.
Tissue engineering
Tissue engineering is another important area where nanocellulose provides innovative so￾lutions. This interdisciplinary field is associated with restoration, maintenance and improve￾ment of the malfunctioned tissues by substituting promising biological material. Similar
mechanical properties like natural tissues, formation of three dimensional network and
low cytotoxicity has put nanocellulose in forefront of tissue engineering. Among various
nanocellulose, BNC being highly porous and biocompatible is the most promising material
as biodegradable scaffolds mimicking extracellular matrix for culturing cells. Numerous
nanocellulose biomaterials in the form of hydrogels, sponges, composites, conductive poly￾mers, membranes, and electrospun nanofibres are used for various applications. The cell at￾tachment and proliferation are enhanced by surface modifications by protein coatings,
alteration of surface charge, and plasma treatment. Research on nanocrystalline cellulose
(CNC) suggested cell morphology and cell growth has been affected by CNC scaffolds.
The mechanical property and thermal stability of the scaffolds are improved by CNC.
NFC hydrogels have special place in tissue engineering scaffolds. A flexible 3D NFC
hydrogels scaffolds are developed to culture stem cell and hepatic cell. A metal crosslinked
NFC hydrogel scaffolds added with fibronectin is reported for the growth of fibroblast cells
(Zander et al., 2014). Nanocellulose reinforced hydrogel composites have attractive mechan￾ical properties in polymeric gel formulations (Mandal and Chakrabarty, 2017). Both the rein￾forcement phase and the host matrix phase have superior properties. A hydrogel based on
semi-interpenetrating polymer network of chitosan developed by (Sampath et al., 2017) is
used for gene delivery and other pharmaceutical applications. Electrospun poly(-
caprolactone)/nanocellulose composite fiber matrix for biomimetic scaffolds is reported
for applications in tissue engineering (Si et al., 2016).
Cardiovascular implant
Cardiovascular disease is one of the deadly diseases leading to thousands of heart bypass
surgery every year. During the surgery vessels are taken from the leg or thorax of patients to
replace arteries as the artificial bypass implants are unavailable. Commonly available bypass
implants are developed from various polymers e.g. polyethylene, polyurathane, polytetra￾fluoroethylene, poly(ethylene terephthalate), etc. These materials have blood clotting issues
and are ineffective in cardiovascular surgery. BNC-based implants have the advantage of
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 301
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesnanodimension, biocompatibility, and strength making it an ideal reinforcing material. These
are used for patching up of vascular grafts for injured and maligned blood vessels or sometimes
complete replacement of the segment. Klemm et al. have developed prototypes of BNC tubes in
the brand name of BASYC (bacterial synthesized cellulose) for application in artificial grafting
(Klemm et al., 2006; Schumann et al., 2009). These grafts have shown promising results in small
diameter arteries of cardiovascular transplant. Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC) reinforced com￾posite with fibrin has shown immense potential in vascular application (Brown et al., 2013). The
porous nature of the NCC allows permeability enhancing the growth of new tissues. Thus NCC
composites have a lot of potential in wound healing, bone repairing, vascular, and vascular re￾generation. A good matching of mechanical properties between implanted device and nearby
tissues in replacement applications is of prime importance. A mechanical mismatch will result
in graft failure. Anisotropic nanocomposite of PVA (polyvinyl alcohol) and BNC developed by
Millon et al. have close matching of mechanical properties (Millon et al., 2008). Thus, it can be
applied satisfactorily for cardiovascular tissue replacement. Furthermore a blend of chitosan
and cellulose has similar mechanical properties as that of coronary arteries of human
(Azevedo et al., 2013). Thus chitosan/cellulose blend are used to fabricate small diameter hollow
tube for application in coronary artery bypass grafting.
Antibacterial/antimicrobial activity
The healing process of the wounds gets delayed because of the infection caused by the bac￾teria. Thus development of an effective surface disinfectant with antibacterial properties is
getting a lot of attention. In this situation nanocrystalline cellulose with porous network struc￾ture is the most suitable candidate for transferring antibiotics in the wounded area. As such
pure nanocrystalline cellulose do not possesses any antibacterial/antimicrobial activity, but it
arises when it is blended with some antimicrobial agents. The nanocrystalline cellulose can be
blended with inorganic antimicrobial agents (e.g., Ag and ZnO) or organic antimicrobial
agents (e.g., lysozyme).
Numerous research work has been performed on Ag nanoparticle (NP) and nanocellulose￾based composite for their antimicrobial activity (Bober et al., (2014); Shi et al., 2015). An an￾timicrobial membrane synthesized by Barud et al. using a composite of AgNP/nanocellulose
has strong activity toward both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (Barud et al., 2011).
Cellulose nanocrystals mixed with AgNPs are used in antiseptic lotion or wound healing gels
for their exceptional antimicrobial ability. In addition to AgNPs, zinc oxide nanoparticles also
proven fruitful antimicrobial agent when combined with cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs)
(Azizi et al., 2013). Beside incorporation of N-halamine, nanocurcumin in the cellulose net￾work provides antimicrobial properties. Grafting of aminoalkyl groups, 2-benzyl￾4-chlorophenol, L-cysteine, diclofenac, etc., on cellulose surface creates antimicrobial activity.
13.10.4 Application as adsorbent for environmental remediation
Nanocellulose materials are currently in spotlight for environment remediation applica￾tions. Several good reviews are available on this topic (Sharma et al., 2019; Mahfoudhi and
Boufi, 2017). Numerous pollutants such as removal of dyes and heavy metals from water
using nanocellulose have been investigated by many scientists. In addition to water
302 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricestreatment, purification of air and removal of virus and microbes by nanocellulose is getting
importance. The separation of the contaminants happens through adsorption process.
Functionalizing the nanocellulose by SO3group, -COOgroup or -NH2 group improves
the binding of the contaminants through ionic or covalent bonding (Hokkanen et al.,
2016). The adsorption happens by physical, chemical, biological, acoustical, radiation, and
electrical mechanism.
Heavy metal removal
Removal of heavy metals such as Hg2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, Pb2+, Cd2+, Cr3+, etc., from water bodies
are performed by using composites of nanocellulose ( Jamshaid et al., 2017). Heavy metals are
extremely toxic for human body and other living organisms. Adsorptions of heavy metals are
not only dependent on large surface are but also directed by chemical complexation and ion
exchange process. Thus tailoring the surface of nanocellulose to introduce ionic or
complexing site is the most favored method. Cellulose nanofiber (CNF) are investigated
extensively as adsorbent for numerous metal ions while only limited reports are available
for cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs).
Kardam et al. has reported Pb2+, Cd2+ and Ni2+ ion adsorption over CNC synthesized using
rice straw (Kardam et al., 2014). Comparative investigation of pristine CNC and phosphate
functionalized CNC for adsorption of Ag+
, Cu2+, and Fe3+, is investigated by (Liu et al.,
2015). Their results indicate that surface functionalization with phosphate group enhances
the adsorption ability to two fold. The pictorial diagram of the result is sketched in
Fig. 13.14. Cellulose nanocrystals modified with succinic anhydride was examined by Yu
et al. for the adsorption of Pb2+ and Cd2+(Yu et al., 2013). In case of the modified CNS, the ad￾sorption rate improved tremendously. In spite of this exceptional ability to remove multitude
of metal ions, the main problem with CNCs is their aggregation which is limiting them for
large-scale applications.
Adsorption of metal ions by CNFs occurs through primarily by exchange mechanism.
CNFs are highly flexible materials and can be shaped into different compounds, e.g.,
aerogel, porous bead, and membrane. Functionalization of the surface of CNFs by -COOH,
-R3N+ or -SO4
2 are performed for specific adsorption purpose. Carboxylated CNFs have
high adsorption capability specifically for divalent metal ions (Pb2+, Cd2+, Ni2+, etc.)
FIG. 13.14 Comparison of Cu(II) adsorption of cellu￾lose with cellulose nanofibers (CNF), cellulose
nanocrystals (CNC), tempo-oxidized cellulose nanofibers
(TOCNF), and phosphoryl cellulose nanocrystals (P￾CNC) (Liu et al., 2015).
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 303
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesincluding radioactive UO2
2+ ion because of the presence of abundant negative charge on the
surface (Sehaqui et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2012). Highly carboxylated cellulose nanofibrils
(CNFs) are produced by esterification reaction reported for advanced application in heavy
metal removal. Integration of highly carboxylated CNFs with paper filters can effectively
remove lead metal from water. Removal of Pb2+ using a carboxylated CNC magentized with
Fe3O4 has been depicted in Fig. 13.15 (Lu et al., 2016). Hokkanen et al. reported
3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane (APS) modified CNFs displaying pH-dependent adsorption
of Pb2+, Cd2+ and Ni2+ ion (Hokkanen et al., 2014b). A composite membrane made from
polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/polyethylene terephtalate (PET) with cellulose nanofibrils have
been reported for efficient removal of Cr6+ and Pb2+ (Yang et al., 2014a, 2014b). The fibrous
structure, large surface area, and porous nature of the nanocellulose is the reason behind
their exceptional adsorption ability. The adsorption capacity of the cellulose nanofibrils
is enhanced by increasing the adsorption site by grafting polymers with nanocellulose.
For example, a highly porous aerogel made from poly(methacyclic acid-co-maleic acid)
grafted CNF is tested for adsorbing Pb2+, Cd2+, Ni2+, and Zn2+ and the results are three
times better than the pristine CNF (Maatar and Boufi, 2015). A similar kind of work by
Anirudhan et al. has reported Co2+ adsorption from nuclear industry waste water using
poly(itaconic acid)-poly(methacrylic acid) grafted nanocellulose/nanobentonite composite
(Anirudhan et al., 2016). Vipin et al. have investigate Prussian blue immobilized CNF for the
adsorption of radioactive Cs metal and the result was highly promising (Vipin et al., 2016).
Composite of nanocellulose with various organic compounds, e.g., chitin, chitosan, sodium
alginate are also investigated for adsorption purpose. Similarly inorganic composites with
sodium montmorillonite, titanium dioxide, ferric chloride, hydrogels, aerogels, etc., are
reported. Numerous carbon-based-reinforced composites with carbon nanotube, graphene
oxide, and activated carbon are reported by Tshikovhi et al. as excellent adsorbent for both
organic and inorganic pollutants (Tshikovhi et al., 2020). They also reviewed the metals,
non-metals, and ceramic composites for adsorption of contaminants for water remediation.
The nanocellulose composite materials and the contaminants interact through various
intermolecular forces such as electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, pi–pi stacking in￾teraction, and van der Waals forces.
FIG. 13.15 Adsorption process of Pb (II) by magnetic carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals (CCN/Fe3O4) (Lu et al.,
2016).
304 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesDye removal
Pollutions from the dyes are main concern from the textile, paints, paper and plastics and
cosmetics industries. Both CNCs and CNFs in their pristine form have high potential in
adsorbing cationic/anionic dyes. Sometimes they are also usedin the form of aerogel andmem￾brane for this purpose. Chan et al. has synthesized CNF from kenaf core for adsorbing meth￾ylene blue dye (Chan et al., 2015). The adsorption kinetics was quick (equilibrium reached
within 1 min), and the adsorbent was recyclable till six times. It is observed that the adsorption
capacity of dyes enhances when CNC is oxidized with TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperi￾dine-1-oxyl) (Batmaz et al., 2014). Mohammed et al. has reported cellulose nanocrystal
reinforced with alginate hydrogels for the removal of methylene blue dye (Mohammed
et al., 2015). The efficiency was as high as 97% even after five cycles. Highly carboxylated cel￾lulose synthesized byMeng et al. is recyclable up to 10 times with 86.83% efficiency for removal
of dyes (Meng et al., 2019). Oxidized CNC prepared by sodium periodate and modified using
ethylenedimine is reported by Jin et al. for effective adsorption of dyes congo red 4BS, acid red
andlight yellow K-4G ( Jin et al., 2015). Immobilization oflaccase enzyme on nanocelluloseis an
effective method for degradation of reactive dyes. Textile effluents that contains several dyes
and toxic salts can be treated by this laccase immobilized nanocellulose systems. Further they
also found applications in wound dressing as antimicrobial membrane.
Nanocellulose reinforced materials act as sustainable adsorbent in wastewater remedia￾tion purpose. Their large surface area, strong mechanical properties, thermal stability, hydro￾phobic nature, modifiable surface chemistry is the reason behind their exceptional adsorption
capability. Further nanocellulose-based membranes are getting immense importance for safer
and economically viable membrane applications. Ultrafiltration membrane prepared by
Karim et al. using nanocomposite of chitosan with CNC was tested for several dye removal
(Karim et al., 2014). These membranes are highly effective for removal of victoria blue, methyl
violet, and rhodamine 6G dye through electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interaction. These
membranes are sustainable and economical as they can be developed from abundantly avail￾able agricultural residues and biomass waste. In this case membrane separation cost is re￾duced as a wide range of pollutants are removed by a single step through adsorption or
size exclusion mechanism. This nanocellulose-based membrane technology has huge poten￾tial in water remediation with many modern filtration systems such as nanofiltration,
microfiltration, ultrafiltration, and reverse-osmosis-based methods. Still further research is
continuing for making it low cost and industrial scale with high performance quality.
Organic pollutant adsorption
Organic pollutants in water body constitute natural organic matter (NOM), pharmaceuti￾cals, pesticides, herbicides, petroleum products, and many other contaminants. Decomposi￾tion of biomass in environment creates humic acid and fulvic acid as NOM which are health
hazards. Amine group modified nanocellulose was used ( Jebali et al., 2015) for the removal of
humic acid from waste water. The adsorption of humic acid was electrostatic attraction be￾tween the carboxyl and hydroxyl functional groups of humic acid and amine group of the
functionalized nanocellulose. Similar kind of work is reported by Sehaqui et al. in which
the surface of cellulose nanofibers (CNF) was functionalized by quaternary ammonium
group (Sehaqui et al., 2016). This material shows increased flux of adsorption humic acid
by electrostatic interactions.
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 305
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAdsorption of various pharmaceuticals onto nanocellulose is gaining momentum in re￾cent times. Sulfated CNCs are used for adsorbing ionic drugs, e.g., doxorubicin hydrochlo￾ride (DOX), tetracycline hydrochloride (TC), and others (Rathod et al., 2015). To maximize
the adsorption ability, the nanocellulose surface is made hydrophobic by grafting surfactant
or by reaction with alkyl isocyanate. Carboxylated CNCs synthesized by TEMPO-mediated
oxidation reaction is studied for binding of cationic drugs (Akhlaghi et al., 2014). Removal
of potassium diclofenac (PD) drug is investigated by Pires et al. using composite of
polypyrrole with cellulose fibers (PPY/CF) (Pires et al., 2017). The presence of aromatic
ring, -NH2 group, -OH group, ether group and ester group on PPY/CF composite leads
to stronger adsorption through hydrogen bonding, dipole–dipole and pi–pi interactions.
An interesting result is reported by Hu et al. on adsorption of diclofenac sodium (DS) by
cellulose/chitosan composite functionalized with amino group (Hu et al., 2019). They ob￾served that at lower pH the adsorption was due to acid-base interaction while at higher pH
hydrogen bonding is the predominant interaction (Fig. 13.16). Chitosan/cellulose
nanocomposite in the form of microspheres embedded with activated carbon is used for
adsorption of tylosin (Luo et al., 2019). The hydroxyl and carbonyl functional groups inter￾act through various intermolecular forces.
Removal of six different triazine pesticides from water by using cellulose/graphene com￾posite (CGC) has been investigated by (Zhang et al., 2015). The pesticides they studied were
simeton, simazine, atrazine, cyprazine, ametryn, and prometryn which possess electronega￾tive atoms N, O, S, and Cl. The similar structural formula with N atoms exhibit similar kind of
acid–base interaction
Cl
Cl
NH2
NH
+
O
O
Cl
Cl
O
O–
–
hydrogen bond
DS CNC-ED@CS-ED
pH
7.0
4.5
NH3
+
NH3
+
H2N
H2N
FIG. 13.16 Adsorption of diclofenac sodium (DS) by cellulose/chitosan composite functionalized with amino
group. (Hu et al., 2019).
306 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesinteractions although the van der Waals force of interactions was different in all the six struc￾tures. Among the six pesticides, adsorption of prometryn was the weakest because of its
branched structure. They have performed a comparative study of CGC with another five dif￾ferent adsorbents. Their result indicates that the CG composite is more effective compared to
the other sorbents (Fig. 13.17).
A composite sensor made with cellulose and activated carbon is used for adsorption of
ethylene gas (Ummartyotin and Pechyen, 2016). The hydroxyl and carboxyl group of the com￾posite binds ethylene gas through chemical bonding. Yuan et al. synthesized a composite of
cellulose nanofiber by functionalizing with cyclodextrin (CD/RCNF) for adsorption of tolu￾ene from water (Yuan et al., 2017). The hydrophilic groups present at the outside of cyclodex￾trin helps to bind toluene effectively by forming a complex between the CD/RCNF composite
and toluene.
Oil adsorption
Pollution created by the release of oil from various industries is one of the major challenges
in environment remediation. The hydrophilic nature of nanocellulose hinder it to act as ad￾sorbent for hydrophobic oil. Thus the strategy is to modify the surface to make it highly hy￾drophobic to adsorb the hydrophobic oils from aquatic systems. Cellulose-based aerogels are
the emerging materials for oil adsorption in waste water treatment. In this direction Zhang
et al. have synthesized CNF based aerogel using methyltrimethoxy silane (MTMS) as
silylating agent in a freeze drying technique (Zhang et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2014a,
2014b). This material showed promising results for the removal of dodeacane and other or￾ganic solvents. In a similar kind of work, freeze drying of alkyl ketene dimer (AKD) with CNF
produced hydrophobic aerogel of CNF (Tarres et al., 2016). This AKD grafted CNF aerogel
has remarkable oil adsorption capacity. A hydrophobic aerogel was prepared from paper
wastes by Feng et al. by freeze-drying method (Feng et al., 2015). Treatment of this
nanocellulose with MTMS transforms it into hydrophobic material with strong adsorption
ability toward oil. A different approach was suggested by Korhonen for increasing the affinity
0
20
graphene
GCB
PSA
cellulose
graphic carbon
CGC
simeton
simazine
atrazine
cyprazine
ametryn
prometryn
40
60
80
100
120
adsorpon(%)
FIG. 13.17 Comparative study of CGC with graphene, GCB, PSA, Cellulose and Graphaitic carbon for adsorption
of six triazine based pesticides. (Zhang et al., 2015).
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 307
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesof CNFs for paraffin oil adsorption (Korhonen et al., 2011). They synthesized a superb hydro￾phobic material by creating a thin layer of titanium dioxide over CNF by sol-gel method. Jiang
et al. have modified CNF aerogels by vapor depositing hydrophobic triethoxyl (octyl) silane
for selective adsorption of organic solvents ( Jiang and Hsieh, 2014). Incorporation of silanes
onto CNF increases the hydrophobicity as well as the oleophilicity for strong adsorption oils
from water. A sponge-like highly porous nanocellulose-based carbon adsorbent was devel￾oped (Meng et al., 2015). Various type of oils, e.g., diesel oil, pump oil, paraffin oil and canola
oil are strongly adsorbed over this functionalized adsorbent. This adsorbent is reusable up to
10 desorption cycles. Chin et al. have reported magnetic and porous nanocellulose adsorbent
functionalized with magnetic Fe3O4 (Chin et al., 2014). This adsorbent exhibits strong adsorp￾tion efficiency and a fast adsorption kinetics for paraffin oil within 10 min. It has the advan￾tage of recoverability by using an external magnet. A similar kind of adsorbent is developed by
Gu et al. by functionalizing CNF with oleic acid and magnetic Fe3O4 (Gu et al., 2020). The ad￾dition of oleic acid and Fe3O4 imparts hydrophobic and magnetic nature respectively in the
adsorbent. This material is highly promising in removal of cyclohexane, ethyl acetate, and vac￾uum pump oil with good recyclability and easy magnetic separation. An interesting work by
Lu et al. have used magnetic and silanized ethyl nanocellulose for adsorption of a wide range of
oils such as n-hexane, petroleum ether, gasoline, diesel, dimethyl silicone oil, and soyabean oil
(Lu et al., 2017). This adsorbent shows excellent capacity and recyclability. A 3D nanocellose
having interconnected pores similar to honeycomb was developed (Zhang et al., 2016). This
materialis super adsorbent and highly selective for oils. This is reusable up to 30 cycles without
reducing the adsorbing capacity significantly. A highly hydrophobic and highly oleophilic ad￾sorbent based on CNF was prepared (Phanthong et al., 2018). They have used stearoyl chloride
functionalized CNF for the adsorption of dichloromethane, toluene, ethanol, acetone,
n-hexane, n-octane, silicon oil, vacuum pump oil, etc., for efficient separation. This spongy
nanocellulose adsorbent is easily recoverable by easy squeezing and reusable up to 10 times.
These results suggest that nanocellulose has immense potential as adsorbents for organic oils.
Removal of air pollutants
The growing industrialization leads to emission of poisonous gases to the environment.
The smoke from industrial and manufacturing units, automobiles, etc., contains CO2, CO,
H2S, SO2 and other gases. Thus separation of the toxic gases from mixtures is extremely im￾portant. For this purpose amine-derived adsorbents supported on inorganic materials are
used in CO2 capturing from air. Gebald et al. have developed a freeze-dried CNF-based ad￾sorbent modified by N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-amino-propyl-methyl-dimethoxy silane for CO2 gas
adsorption (Gebald et al., 2011). The adsorption capacity of this material was found to be
lower than silica-based adsorbents. Removal of H2S gas is also investigated using
nanofibrillar cellulose modified with specific functional groups. Hokkanen et al. have synthe￾sized aminopropyl triethoxy silane (APS) modified microfibrillated cellulose (APS/MFC) for
adsorbing H2S (Hokkanen et al., 2014a). They have reported another adsorbent (HAP/MFC)
originated from microfibrillated cellulose modified with hydroxy carbonated apatite (HAP)
in the same research paper. The uptake capacity of HAP/MFC (13.38 mg/g) was found to be
higher than APS/MFC (103.95 mg/g). Removals of volatile gases are also investigated using
CNF-based adsorbents. Keshavarazi et al. have developed composite of zeolite with CNF for
odor elimination of thiol gases (Keshavarzi et al., 2015). Promising results are obtained as the
adsorbent shows high efficiency of removal of propanethiol and ethanethiol with minute
308 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesconcentrations not detectable to human’s olfactory nerves. In a similar approach freeze-dried
TEMPO oxidized CNF in the form of aerogels are utilized as air filters (Nemoto et al., 2015).
Yet research in this area is not developed much. Beside these applications nanocellulose has
applications in many other fields such as filling agent in textile, thickener in cosmetics, wood
adhesives, pickering emulsifiers, texturing agent in food, etc.
13.10.5 Nanocellulose-based membrane for water treatment
There is only a limited amount of available drinking water and that too is polluted due to
number of industrial activities. Membrane filtration under pressure is a conventional tech￾nique for water purification. There are number of membranes as shown in Fig. 13.18
(Sharma et al., 2020).
Nanocellulose (CNF, CNC, or BNC) is converted to membrane by incorporating into other
membranes as an additive. This is simple and economical. Numbers of functional groups are
attached to nanocellulose to make surface charges and reactivity for strong interactions with
the pollutants in water. When incorporated with other organic or inorganic additives,
nanocellulose membranes worked better. Nanocellulose membranes have superhydro￾philicity/superhydrophobicity, high porosity, high mechanical strength, high chemical resis￾tance and antifouling properties. The nanocellulose membranes having high specific
functionality, remove effectively the pollutants from water. (Tan et al., 2020).
13.10.6 Nanocellulose for gas separation
Hydrogen and carbon dioxide separation has been carried out by membrane technologies.
Only limited studies have been made. Nanocellulose incorporating poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)
is found to be a very good membrane for gas separation (Ibrahim et al., 2020).
FIG. 13.18 Pressure driven membrane filtration.
13.10 Applications of nanocellulose 309
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.11 Challenges and future perspectives
There has always been a question whether BNC can replace or compete with the traditional
cellulose sources? This question is a challenge and has not been solved yet. Apart from issues
related to nanocellulose, there are number of challenges. Some challenges and future pros￾pects of nanocellulose are shown in Fig. 13.19 (Sharma and Bhardwaj, 2019).
Production Based Issues
Strain Based Issues Substrate Based Issues
Challenges
Associated
with BNC
Issues related to
Clinical/Marketing
Promotion of Products
• High production cost and low yield owing to
 conventional production strategies creates an
 utmost requirement for new or modified pilot
 processes/ novel bioprocess technologies for
 BNC production at industrial scale 
• Lack of studies on strains
 other then the dominant
 Acetobacter strain for BNC
 production
• Need for investigation of novel
 cost-effective substrates in
 combination with new/modified
 bioprocess technology and
 different strains
• Optimization of concentration of
 alternate substrates is needed
 to foster the BNC production
• Mandatory
 pharmacotoxicological
 studies/pharmacokinetics of
 BNC modified for applications
 such as drug targeting and
 carriers, is required before
 product approval
• More research efforts in
 specifically challenging areas
 like cancer, diabetes, vaccines
 and Alzheimer’s disease
• As a bioactive therapeutic
 agent, more clinical trials are
 needed to prove BNC’s
 superiority over already existing
 treatment options.
• Lack of understanding of
 dynamic interplay between
 microorganisms that
 facilitates BNC production
• Molecular mechanism of
 glucose polymerization by
 microorganisms for BNC
 formation requires more
 understanding
• Scaling up production and standardization is
 necessary to obtain control over porosity,
 biodegradability and quality of BNC obtained.
• Limited research on production and control of
 byproducts (mainly gluconic acid) that hinders
 BNC production
FIG. 13.19 Challenges and future prospects.
310 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices13.12 Conclusions
Cellulose is the most abundant sustainable resource on the earth. In 21st century, due to the
increasing severe environmental problems, biomass materials received more attention, which
substitute petrochemicals in all kinds of materials. Cellulose particularly nanocellulose have
been synthesized by number of methods and characterized using different techniques. Nano￾structured cellulose is advantageous because of renewable, sustainable, non-toxic, and bio￾compatible properties. There are many types of cellulose such as NFC, CNCs, BC, etc.
These cellulosic materials have special properties and can be functionalized. These have been
used in different sectors including water remediation.
References
Abitbol, T., Rivkin, A., Cao, Y., Nevo, Y., Abraham, E., Ben-Shalom, T., Lapidot, S., Shoseyov, O., 2016. Nanocellulose,
a tiny fiber with huge applications. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 39, 76–88.
Abraham, E., Deepa, B., Pothan, L.A., Jacob, M., Thomas, S., Cvelbar, U., Anandjiwala, R., 2011. Extraction of
nanocellulose fibrils from lignocellulosic fibres: a novel approach. Carbohydr. Polym. 86 (4), 1468–1475.
Akhlaghi, S.P., Tiong, D., Berry, R.M., Tam, K.C., 2014. Comparative release studies of two cationic model drugs from
different cellulose nanocrystal derivatives. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 88 (1), 207–215.
Anirudhan, T.S., Deepa, J.R., Christa, J., 2016. Nanocellulose/nanobentonite composite anchored with multi-carboxyl
functional groups as an adsorbent for the effective removal of cobalt (II) from nuclear industry wastewater sam￾ples. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 467, 307–320.
Awan, F., Bulger, E., Berry, R.M., Tam, K.C., 2016. Enhanced radical scavenging activity of polyhydroxylated
C 60 functionalized cellulose nanocrystals. Cellulose 23 (6), 3589–3599.
Azevedo, E.P., Retarekar, R., Raghavan, M.L., Kumar, V., 2013. Mechanical properties of cellulose: chitosan blends for
potential use as a coronary artery bypass graft. J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 24 (3), 239–252.
Azizi, S., Ahmad, M., Mahdavi, M., Abdolmohammadi, S., 2013. Preparation, characterization, and antimicrobial ac￾tivities of ZnO nanoparticles/cellulose nanocrystal nanocomposites. Bioresources 8 (2), 1841–1851.
Barud, H.S., Regiani, T., Marques, R.F., Lustri, W.R., Messaddeq, Y., Ribeiro, S.J., 2011. Antimicrobial bacterial
cellulose-silver nanoparticles composite membranes. J. Nanomater. 2011.
Batmaz, R., Mohammed, N., Zaman, M., Minhas, G., Berry, R.M., Tam, K.C., 2014. Cellulose nanocrystals as prom￾ising adsorbents for the removal of cationic dyes. Cellulose 21 (3), 1655–1665.
Bayer, T., Cunning, B.V., Selyanchyn, R., Nishihara, M., Fujikawa, S., Sasaki, K., Lyth, S.M., 2016. High temperature
proton conduction in nanocellulose membranes: paper fuel cells. Chem. Mater. 28 (13), 4805–4814.
Bezerra, R.D., Teixeira, P.R., Teixeira, A.S.N.M., Eiras, C., Osajima, J.A., Silva Filho, E.C., 2015. Chemical functiona￾lization of cellulosic materials—Main reactions and applications in the contaminants removal of aqueous me￾dium. In: Cellulose–Fundamental Aspects and Current Trends. InTech, pp. 93–113.
Blanco, A., Monte, M.C., Campano, C., Balea, A., Merayo, N., Negro, C., 2018. Nanocellulose for industrial use: cel￾lulose nanofibers (CNF), cellulose nanocrystals (CNC), and bacterial cellulose (BC). In: Handbook of
Nanomaterials for Industrial Applications. Elsevier, pp. 74–126.
Bober, P., Liu, J., Mikkonen, K.S., Ihalainen, P., Pesonen, M., Plumed-Ferrer, C., von Wright, A., Lindfors, T., Xu, C.,
Latonen, R.M., 2014. Biocomposites of nanofibrillated cellulose, polypyrrole, and silver nanoparticles with
electroconductive and antimicrobial properties. Biomacromolecules 15 (10), 3655–3663.
Bozˇic, M., Liu, P., Mathew, A.P., Kokol, V., 2014. Enzymatic phosphorylation of cellulose nanofibers to new highly￾ions adsorbing, flame-retardant and hydroxyapatite-growth induced natural nanoparticles. Cellulose 21 (4),
2713–2726.
Brinchi, L., Cotana, F., Fortunati, E., Kenny, J.M., 2013. Production of nanocrystalline cellulose from lignocellulosic
biomass: technology and applications. Carbohydr. Polym. 94 (1), 154–169.
Brown, E.E., Hu, D., Abu Lail, N., Zhang, X., 2013. Potential of nanocrystalline cellulose–fibrin nanocomposites for
artificial vascular graft applications. Biomacromolecules 14 (4), 1063–1071.
References 311
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesBufalino, L., Tonoli, G.H.D., Costa, T.G., Prota´sio, T.D.P., Sena Neto, A.R., Marconcini, J.M., Guimara˜es Junior, M.,
Mendes, L.M., 2016. Nanocellulose films from Amazon forest wood wastes: structural and thermal properties. In:
Key Engineering Materials. vol. 668. Trans Tech Publications Ltd, pp. 110–117.
Bulota, M., Kreitsmann, K., Hughes, M., Paltakari, J., 2012. Acetylated microfibrillated cellulose as a toughening agent
in poly (lactic acid). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 126 (S1), E449–E458.
Chan, C.H., Chia, C.H., Zakaria, S., Sajab, M.S., Chin, S.X., 2015. Cellulose nanofibrils: a rapid adsorbent for the re￾moval of methylene blue. RSC Adv. 5 (24), 18204–18212.
Chen, Y., Liu, C., Chang, P.R., Cao, X., Anderson, D.P., 2009. Bionanocomposites based on pea starch and cellulose
nanowhiskers hydrolyzed from pea hull fibre: effect of hydrolysis time. Carbohydr. Polym. 76 (4), 607–615.
Chin, S.F., Romainor, A.N.B., Pang, S.C., 2014. Fabrication of hydrophobic and magnetic cellulose aerogel with high
oil absorption capacity. Mater. Lett. 115, 241–243.
Dhali, K., Ghasemlou, M., Daver, F., Cass, P., Adhikari, B., 2021. A review of nanocellulose as a new material toward
environmental sustainability. Sci. Total Environ. 145871.
Dong, S., Hirani, A.A., Colacino, K.R., Lee, Y.W., Roman, M., 2012. Cytotoxicity and cellular uptake of cellulose
nanocrystals. Nano Life 2 (03), 1241006.
Dong, C., Zhang, F., Pang, Z., Yang, G., 2016. Efficient and selective adsorption of multi-metal ions using sulfonated
cellulose as adsorbent. Carbohydr. Polym. 151, 230–236.
Fang, Z., Zhu, H., Yuan, Y., Ha, D., Zhu, S., Preston, C., Chen, Q., Li, Y., Han, X., Lee, S., Chen, G., 2014. Novel nano￾structured paper with ultrahigh transparency and ultrahigh haze for solar cells. Nano Lett. 14 (2), 765–773.
Farooq, A., Patoary, M.K., Zhang, M., Mussana, H., Li, M., Naeem, M.A., Mushtaq, M., Farooq, A., Liu, L., 2020. Cel￾lulose from sources to nanocellulose and an overview of synthesis and properties of nanocellulose/zinc oxide
nanocomposite materials. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 154, 1050–1073.
Feng, J., Nguyen, S.T., Fan, Z., Duong, H.M., 2015. Advanced fabrication and oil absorption properties of super￾hydrophobic recycled cellulose aerogels. Chem. Eng. J. 270, 168–175.
Foresti, M.L., Cerrutti, P., Vazquez, A., 2015. Bacterial nanocellulose: synthesis, properties and applications.
Chapter 2, In: Mohanty, S., et al. (Eds.), Polymer Nanocomposites Based on Inorganic and Organic Nanomaterials.
Scrivener Publishing LLC, pp. 39–62.
Gadim, T.D., Loureiro, F.J., Vilela, C., Rosero-Navarro, N., Silvestre, A.J., Freire, C.S., Figueiredo, F.M., 2017. Protonic
conductivity and fuel cell tests of nanocomposite membranes based on bacterial cellulose. Electrochim. Acta 233,
52–61.
Gebald, C., Wurzbacher, J.A., Tingaut, P., Zimmermann, T., Steinfeld, A., 2011. Amine-based nanofibrillated cellulose
as adsorbent for CO2 capture from air. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45 (20), 9101–9108.
Gibril, M.E., Lekha, P., Andrew, J., Sithole, B., Tesfaye, T., Ramjugernath, D., 2018. Beneficiation of pulp and paper
mill sludge: production and characterisation of functionalised crystalline nanocellulose. Clean Techn. Environ.
Policy 20 (8), 1835–1845.
Gopakumar, D.A., Arumughan, V., Pasquini, D., Leu, S.Y.B., HPS, A.K., Thomas, S., 2019. Nanocellulose-based mem￾branes for water purification. In: Nanoscale Materials in Water Purification. Elsevier, pp. 59–85.
Gu, H., Zhou, X., Lyu, S., Pan, D., Dong, M., Wu, S., Ding, T., Wei, X., Seok, I., Wei, S., Guo, Z., 2020. Magnetic
nanocellulose-magnetite aerogel for easy oil adsorption. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 560, 849–856.
Hokkanen, S., Repo, E., Bhatnagar, A., Tang, W.Z., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2014a. Adsorption of hydrogen sulphide from aque￾ous solutions using modified nano/micro fibrillated cellulose. Environ. Technol. 35 (18), 2334–2346.
Hokkanen, S., Repo, E., Suopaj€arvi, T., Liimatainen, H., Niinimaa, J., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2014b. Adsorption of Ni (II), Cu (II)
and Cd (II) from aqueous solutions by amino modified nanostructured microfibrillated cellulose. Cellulose 21 (3),
1471–1487.
Gupta, V.K., Carrott, P.J.M., Singh, R., Chaudhary, M., Kushwaha, S., 2016. Cellulose: a review as natural, modified
and activated carbon adsorbent. Bioresour. Technol. 216, 1066–1076.
Hokkanen, S., Bhatnagar, A., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2016. A review on modification methods to cellulose-based adsorbents to
improve adsorption capacity. Water Res. 91, 156–173.
Hu, D., Jiang, R., Wang, N., Xu, H., Wang, Y.G., Ouyang, X.K., 2019. Adsorption of diclofenac sodium on bilayer
amino-functionalized cellulose nanocrystals/chitosan composite. J. Hazard. Mater. 369, 483–493.
Hua, K., Strømme, M., Mihranyan, A., Ferraz, N., 2015. Nanocellulose from green algae modulates the in vitro inflam￾matory response of monocytes/macrophages. Cellulose 22 (6), 3673–3688.
Huang, J., Zhu, H., Chen, Y., Preston, C., Rohrbach, K., Cumings, J., Hu, L., 2013. Highly transparent and flexible
nanopaper transistors. ACS Nano 7 (3), 2106–2113.
312 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesIbrahim, H., Sazali, N., Salleh, W.N.W., Abidin, M.N.Z., 2020. A short review on recent utilization of nanocellulose for
wastewater remediation and gas separation. Mater. Today Proc. 42, 45–49.
Isogai, A., Saito, T., Fukuzumi, H., 2011. TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibers. Nanoscale 3 (1), 71–85.
Jamshaid, A., Hamid, A., Muhammad, N., Naseer, A., Ghauri, M., Iqbal, J., Rafiq, S., Shah, N.S., 2017. Cellulose-based
materials for the removal of heavy metals from wastewater–an overview. ChemBioEng Rev. 4 (4), 240–256.
Jebali, A., Behzadi, A., Rezapor, I., Jasemizad, T., Hekmatimoghaddam, S.H., Halvani, G.H., Sedighi, N., 2015. Ad￾sorption of humic acid by amine-modified nanocellulose: an experimental and simulation study. Int. J. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 12 (1), 45–52.
Ji, S., Hyun, B.G., Kim, K., Lee, S.Y., Kim, S.H., Kim, J.Y., Song, M.H., Park, J.U., 2016. Photo-patternable and trans￾parent films using cellulose nanofibers for stretchable origami electronics. NPG Asia Mater. 8 (8), e299.
Jiang, F., Hsieh, Y.L., 2014. Amphiphilic superabsorbent cellulose nanofibril aerogels. J. Mater. Chem. A 2 (18),
6337–6342.
Jiang, G.P., Zhang, J., Qiao, J.L., Jiang, Y.M., Zarrin, H., Chen, Z., Hong, F., 2015. Bacterial nanocellulose/nafion com￾posite membranes for low temperature polymer electrolyte fuel cells. J. Power Sources 273, 697–706.
Jin, L., Li, W., Xu, Q., Sun, Q., 2015. Amino-functionalized nanocrystalline cellulose as an adsorbent for anionic dyes.
Cellulose 22 (4), 2443–2456.
Jordan, J.H., Easson, M.W., Dien, B., Thompson, S., Condon, B.D., 2019. Extraction and characterization of
nanocellulose crystals from cotton gin motes and cotton gin waste. Cellulose 26 (10), 5959–5979.
Jung, Y.H., Chang, T.H., Zhang, H., Yao, C., Zheng, Q., Yang, V.W., Mi, H., Kim, M., Cho, S.J., Park, D.W., Jiang, H.,
2015. High-performance green flexible electronics based on biodegradable cellulose nanofibril paper. Nat.
Commun. 6 (1), 1–11.
Kalia, S., Dufresne, A., Cherian, B.M., Kaith, B.S., Averous, L., Njuguna, J., Nassiopoulos, E., 2011. Cellulose-based
bio-and nanocomposites: a review. Int. J. Polym. Sci. 2011.
Kardam, A., Raj, K.R., Srivastava, S., Srivastava, M.M., 2014. Nanocellulose fibers for biosorption of cadmium, nickel,
and lead ions from aqueous solution. Clean Techn. Environ. Policy 16 (2), 385–393.
Karim, Z., Mathew, A.P., Grahn, M., Mouzon, J., Oksman, K., 2014. Nanoporous membranes with cellulose
nanocrystals as functional entity in chitosan: removal of dyes from water. Carbohydr. Polym. 112, 668–676.
Keshavarzi, N., Rad, F.M., Mace, A.K., Ansari, F., Akhtar, F., Nilsson, U., Berglund, L.A., Bergstrom, L., 2015. €
Nanocellulose-zeolite composite films for odor elimination. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7 (26), 14254–14262.
Klemm, D., Schumann, D., Kramer, F., Heßler, N., Hornung, M., Schmauder, H.P., Marsch, S., 2006. Nanocelluloses as
innovative polymers in research and application. In: Polysaccharides II. Springer, pp. 49–96.
Korhonen, J.T., Kettunen, M., Ras, R.H., Ikkala, O., 2011. Hydrophobic nanocellulose aerogels as floating, sustainable,
reusable, and recyclable oil absorbents. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 3 (6), 1813–1816.
Kumar, V., Pathak, P., Bhardwaj, N.K., 2020. Waste paper: an underutilized but promising source for nanocellulose
mining. Waste Manag. 102, 281–303.
Liu, P., Borrell, P.F., Bozˇic, M., Kokol, V., Oksman, K., Mathew, A.P., 2015. Nanocelluloses and their phosphorylated
derivatives for selective adsorption of Ag+, Cu2+ and Fe3+ from industrial effluents. J. Hazard. Mater. 294,
177–185.
Lu, J., Jin, R.N., Liu, C., Wang, Y.F., Ouyang, X.K., 2016. Magnetic carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals as adsorbent for
the removal of Pb (II) from aqueous solution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 93, 547–556.
Lu, Y., Wang, Y., Liu, L., Yuan, W., 2017. Environmental-friendly and magnetic/silanized ethyl cellulose sponges as
effective and recyclable oil-absorption materials. Carbohydr. Polym. 173, 422–430.
Luo, Y., Zhang, J., Li, X., Liao, C., Li, X., 2014. The cellulose nanofibers for optoelectronic conversion and energy stor￾age. J. Nanomater. 2014.
Luo, X., Liu, L., Wang, L., Liu, X., Cai, Y., 2019. Facile synthesis and low concentration tylosin adsorption performance
of chitosan/cellulose nanocomposite microspheres. Carbohydr. Polym. 206, 633–640.
Ma, H., Hsiao, B.S., Chu, B., 2012. Ultrafine cellulose nanofibers as efficient adsorbents for removal of UO22+ in water.
ACS Macro Lett. 1 (1), 213–216.
Maatar, W., Boufi, S., 2015. Poly(methacylic acid-co-maleic acid) grafted nanofibrillated cellulose as a reusable novel
heavy metal ions adsorbent. Carbohydr. Polym. 126, 99–207.
Mahfoudhi, N., Boufi, S., 2017. Nanocellulose as a novel nanostructured adsorbent for environmental remediation: a
review. Cellulose 24 (3), 1171–1197.
Majoinen, J., Kontturi, E., Ikkala, O., Gray, D.G., 2012. SEM imaging of chiral nematic films cast from cellulose nano￾crystal suspensions. Cellulose 19 (5), 1599–1605.
References 313
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesMandal, A., Chakrabarty, D., 2017. Synthesis and characterization of nanocellulose reinforced full-interpenetrating
polymer network based on poly (vinyl alcohol) and polyacrylamide (both crosslinked) composite films. Polym.
Compos. 38 (8), 1720–1731.
Meng, Y., Young, T.M., Liu, P., Contescu, C.I., Huang, B., Wang, S., 2015. Ultralight carbon aerogel from nanocellulose
as a highly selective oil absorption material. Cellulose 22 (1), 435–447.
Meng, R., Liu, L., Jin, Y., Luo, Z., Gao, H., Yao, J., 2019. Recyclable carboxylated cellulose beads with tunable pore
structure and size for highly efficient dye removal. Cellulose 26 (17), 8963–8969.
Millon, L.E., Guhados, G., Wan, W., 2008. Anisotropic polyvinyl alcohol—bacterial cellulose nanocomposite for bio￾medical applications. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomater. 86 (2), 444–452.
Mohammed, N., Grishkewich, N., Berry, R.M., Tam, K.C., 2015. Cellulose nanocrystal–alginate hydrogel beads as
novel adsorbents for organic dyes in aqueous solutions. Cellulose 22 (6), 3725–3738.
Mohanta, V., Madras, G., Patil, S., 2014. Layer-by-layer assembled thin films and microcapsules of nanocrystalline
cellulose for hydrophobic drug delivery. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 6 (22), 20093–20101.
Moriana, R., Vilaplana, F., Ek, M., 2016. Cellulose nanocrystals from forest residues as reinforcing agents for compos￾ites: a study from macro-to nano-dimensions. Carbohydr. Polym. 139, 139–149.
Nair, S.S., Zhu, J.Y., Deng, Y., Ragauskas, A.J., 2014. High performance green barriers based on nanocellulose. Sustain.
Chem. Process. 2 (1), 1–7.
Nandi, S., Guha, P., 2018. A review on preparation and properties of cellulose nanocrystal-incorporated natural bio￾polymer. J. Packag. Technol. Res. 2 (2), 149–166.
Nasir, M., Hashim, R., Sulaiman, O., Asim, M., 2017. Nanocellulose: preparation methods and applications. In:
Cellulose-Reinforced Nanofibre Composites. Woodhead Publishing, pp. 261–276.
Nemoto, J., Saito, T., Isogai, A., 2015. Simple freeze-drying procedure for producing nanocellulose aerogel-containing,
high-performance air filters. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7 (35), 19809–19815.
Oulachgar, H., Bolduc, M., Chauve, G., Desroches, Y., Beaupre, P., Bouchard, J., Galarneau, P., 2016. Fabrication and
electro-optical characterization of a nanocellulose-based spatial light modulator. MRS Adv. 1 (10), 631–637.
Oun, A.A., Shankar, S., Rhim, J.W., 2020. Multifunctional nanocellulose/metal and metal oxide nanoparticle hybrid
nanomaterials. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 60 (3), 435–460.
Patel, D.K., Dutta, S.D., Lim, K.T., 2019. Nanocellulose-based polymer hybrids and their emerging applications in
biomedical engineering and water purification. RSC Adv. 9 (33), 19143–19162.
Peng, J., Zhang, H., Zheng, Q., Clemons, C.M., Sabo, R.C., Gong, S., Ma, Z., Turng, L.S., 2017. A composite generator
film impregnated with cellulose nanocrystals for enhanced triboelectric performance. Nanoscale 9 (4), 1428–1433.
Phanthong, P., Guan, G., Karnjanakom, S., Hao, X., Wang, Z., Kusakabe, K., Abudula, A., 2016. Amphiphobic
nanocellulose-modified paper: fabrication and evaluation. RSC Adv. 6 (16), 13328–13334.
Phanthong, P., Karnjanakom, S., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Abudula, A., Guan, G., 2017. A facile one-step way for
extraction of nanocellulose with high yield by ball milling with ionic liquid. Cellulose 24 (5), 2083–2093.
Phanthong, P., Reubroycharoen, P., Kongparakul, S., Samart, C., Wang, Z., Hao, X., Abudula, A., Guan, G., 2018. Fab￾rication and evaluation of nanocellulose sponge for oil/water separation. Carbohydr. Polym. 190, 184–189.
Pires, B.C., Dutra, F.V.A., Nascimento, T.A., Borges, K.B., 2017. Preparation of PPy/cellulose fibre as an effective po￾tassium diclofenac adsorbent. React. Funct. Polym. 113, 40–49.
Pottathara, Y.B., Bobnar, V., Finsˇgar, M., Grohens, Y., Thomas, S., Kokol, V., 2018. Cellulose nanofibrils-reduced
graphene oxide xerogels and cryogels for dielectric and electrochemical storage applications. Polymer 147,
260–270.
Rathod, M., Haldar, S., Basha, S., 2015. Nanocrystalline cellulose for removal of tetracycline hydrochloride from water
via biosorption: equilibrium, kinetic and thermodynamic studies. Ecol. Eng. 84, 240–249.
Rescignano, N., Fortunati, E., Montesano, S., Emiliani, C., Kenny, J.M., Martino, S., Armentano, I., 2014. PVA bio￾nanocomposites: a new take-off using cellulose nanocrystals and PLGA nanoparticles. Carbohydr. Polym. 99,
47–58.
Saito, T., Isogai, A., 2005. Ion-exchange behavior of carboxylate groups in fibrous cellulose oxidized by the TEMPO￾mediated system. Carbohydr. Polym. 61 (2), 183–190.
Sampath, U.T.M., Ching, Y.C., Chuah, C.H., Singh, R., Lin, P.C., 2017. Preparation and characterization of
nanocellulose reinforced semi-interpenetrating polymer network of chitosan hydrogel. Cellulose 24 (5),
2215–2228.
Schumann, D.A., Wippermann, J., Klemm, D.O., Kramer, F., Koth, D., Kosmehl, H., Wahlers, T., Salehi-Gelani, S.,
2009. Artificial vascular implants from bacterial cellulose: preliminary results of small arterial substitutes. Cellu￾lose 16 (5), 877–885.
314 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesSehaqui, H., de Larraya, U.P., Liu, P., Pfenninger, N., Mathew, A.P., Zimmermann, T., Tingaut, P., 2014. Enhancing
adsorption of heavy metal ions onto biobased nanofibers from waste pulp residues for application in wastewater
treatment. Cellulose 21 (4), 2831–2844.
Sehaqui, H., Michen, B., Marty, E., Schaufelberger, L., Zimmermann, T., 2016. Functional cellulose nanofiber filters
with enhanced flux for the removal of humic acid by adsorption. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4 (9), 4582–4590.
Seo, J.H., Chang, T.H., Lee, J., Sabo, R., Zhou, W., Cai, Z., Gong, S., Ma, Z., 2015. Microwave flexible transistors on
cellulose nanofibrillated fiber substrates. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 (26), 262101.
Sharma, C., Bhardwaj, N.K., 2019. Bacterial nanocellulose: present status, biomedical applications and future perspec￾tives. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 104, 109963.
Sharma, A., Thakur, M., Bhattacharya, M., Mandal, T., Goswami, S., 2019. Commercial application of cellulose nano￾composites—a review. Biotechnol. Rep. 21, e00316.
Sharma, P., Sharma, S.K., Lindstrom, T., Hsiao, B.S., 2020. Nanocellulose-enabled membranes for water purification: €
perspectives. Adv. Sustain. Syst., 1900114.
Sheikhi, A., 2019. Emerging cellulose-based nanomaterials and nanocomposites. In: Nanomaterials and Polymer
Nanocomposites. Elsevier, pp. 307–351.
Shi, Z., Tang, J., Chen, L., Yan, C., Tanvir, S., Anderson, W.A., Berry, R.M., Tam, K.C., 2015. Enhanced colloidal sta￾bility and antibacterial performance of silver nanoparticles/cellulose nanocrystal hybrids. J. Mater. Chem. B 3 (4),
603–611.
Si, J., Cui, Z., Wang, Q., Liu, Q., Liu, C., 2016. Biomimetic composite scaffolds based on mineralization of hydroxy￾apatite on electrospun poly (ε-caprolactone)/nanocellulose fibers. Carbohydr. Polym. 143, 270–278.
Siro´, I., Plackett, D., Hedenqvist, M., Ankerfors, M., Lindstrom, T., 2011. Highly transparent films from €
carboxymethylated microfibrillated cellulose: the effect of multiple homogenization steps on key properties. J.
Appl. Polym. Sci. 119 (5), 2652–2660.
Slavutsky, A.M., Bertuzzi, M.A., 2014. Water barrier properties of starch films reinforced with cellulose nanocrystals
obtained from sugarcane bagasse. Carbohydr. Polym. 110, 53–61.
Suopaj€arvi, T., Liimatainen, H., Karjalainen, M., Upola, H., Niinim€aki, J., 2015. Lead adsorption with sulfonated
wheat pulp nanocelluloses. J. Water Process Eng. 5, 136–142.
Tan, H.-F., Ooi, B.S., Leo, C.P., 2020. Future perspectives of nanocellulose-based membrane for water treatment. J.
Water Process Eng. 37, 101502.
Tarres, Q., Oliver-Ortega, H., Llop, M., Pe`lach, M.A` ., Delgado-Aguilar, M., Mutje, P., 2016. Effective and simple meth￾odology to produce nanocellulose-based aerogels for selective oil removal. Cellulose 23 (5), 3077–3088.
Thomas, B., Raj, M.C., Joy, J., Moores, A., Drisko, G.L., Sanchez, C., 2018. Nanocellulose, a versatile green platform:
from biosources to materials and their applications. Chem. Rev. 118 (24), 11575–11625.
Trache, D., Tarchoun, A.F., Derradji, M., Hamidon, T.S., Masruchin, N., Brosse, N., Hussin, M.H., 2020.
Nanocellulose: from fundamentals to advanced applications. Front. Chem. 8.
Trifol, J., Plackett, D., Sillard, C., Szabo, P., Bras, J., Daugaard, A.E., 2016. Hybrid poly(lactic acid)/nanocellulose/
nanoclay composites with synergistically enhanced barrier properties and improved thermomechanical resis￾tance. Polym. Int. 65 (8), 988–995.
Tshikovhi, A., Mishra, S.B., Mishra, A.K., 2020. Nanocellulose-based composites for the removal of contaminants
from wastewater. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 120, 616–632.
Ummartyotin, S., Pechyen, C., 2016. Waste composite sensor designed by cellulose and activated carbon as ethylene
absorber. Int. J. Polym. Sci. 2016.
Vallejos, M.E., Felissia, F.E., Area, M.C., Ehman, N.V., Tarres, Q., Mutje, P., 2016. Nanofibrillated cellulose (CNF)
from eucalyptus sawdust as a dry strength agent of unrefined eucalyptus handsheets. Carbohydr. Polym. 139,
99–105.
Veigel, S., Rathke, J., Weigl, M., Gindl-Altmutter, W., 2012. Particle board and oriented strand board prepared with
nanocellulose-reinforced adhesive. J. Nanomater. 2012.
Vipin, A.K., Fugetsu, B., Sakata, I., Isogai, A., Endo, M., Li, M., Dresselhaus, M.S., 2016. Cellulose nanofiber backboned
Prussian blue nanoparticles as powerful adsorbents for the selective elimination of radioactive cesium. Sci. Rep. 6
(1), 1–14.
Wa˚gberg, L., Decher, G., Norgren, M., Lindstrom, T., Ankerfors, M., Axn € €as, K., 2008. The build-up of polyelectrolyte
multilayers of microfibrillated cellulose and cationic polyelectrolytes. Langmuir 24 (3), 784–795.
Wang, J., Ran, R., Sunarso, J., Yin, C., Zou, H., Feng, Y., Li, X., Zheng, X., Yao, J., 2017. Nanocellulose-assisted low￾temperature synthesis and supercapacitor performance of reduced graphene oxide aerogels. J. Power Sources 347,
259–269.
References 315
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesXiao, S., Gao, R., Lu, Y., Li, J., Sun, Q., 2015. Fabrication and characterization of nanofibrillated cellulose and its
aerogels from natural pine needles. Carbohydr. Polym. 119, 202–209.
Xu, X., Zhou, J., Jiang, L., Lubineau, G., Ng, T., Ooi, B.S., Liao, H.Y., Shen, C., Chen, L., Zhu, J.Y., 2016. Highly trans￾parent, low-haze, hybrid cellulose nanopaper as electrodes for flexible electronics. Nanoscale 8 (24), 12294–12306.
Yagyu, H., Saito, T., Isogai, A., Koga, H., Nogi, M., 2015. Chemical modification of cellulose nanofibers for the pro￾duction of highly thermal resistant and optically transparent nanopaper for paper devices. ACS Appl. Mater. In￾terfaces 7 (39), 22012–22017.
Yang, H., Tejado, A., Alam, N., Antal, M., van de Ven, T.G., 2012. Films prepared from electrosterically stabilized
nanocrystalline cellulose. Langmuir 28 (20), 7834–7842.
Yang, R., Aubrecht, K.B., Ma, H., Wang, R., Grubbs, R.B., Hsiao, B.S., Chu, B., 2014a. Thiol-modified cellulose
nanofibrous composite membranes for chromium (VI) and lead (II) adsorption. Polymer 55 (5), 1167–1176.
Yang, G., Tang, L., Lei, X., Zeng, G., Cai, Y., Wei, X., Zhou, Y., Li, S., Fang, Y., Zhang, Y., 2014b. Cd (II) removal from
aqueous solution by adsorption on α-ketoglutaric acid-modified magnetic chitosan. Appl. Surf. Sci. 292, 710–716.
Yu, X., Tong, S., Ge, M., Wu, L., Zuo, J., Cao, C., Song, W., 2013. Adsorption of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution
by carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals. J. Environ. Sci. 25 (5), 933–943.
Yu, S., Sun, J., Shi, Y., Wang, Q., Wu, J., Liu, J., 2020. Nanocellulose from various biomass wastes: its preparation and
potential usages toward the high value-added products. Environ. Sci. Ecotechnol., 100077.
Yuan, G., Prabakaran, M., Qilong, S., Lee, J.S., Chung, I.M., Gopiraman, M., Song, K.H., Kim, I.S., 2017. Cyclodextrin
functionalized cellulose nanofiber composites for the faster adsorption of toluene from aqueous solution. J. Tai￾wan Inst. Chem. Eng. 70, 352–358.
Zander, N.E., Dong, H., Steele, J., Grant, J.T., 2014. Metal cation cross-linked nanocellulose hydrogels as tissue engi￾neering substrates. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 6 (21), 18502–18510.
Zhang, Z., Se`be, G., Rentsch, D., Zimmermann, T., Tingaut, P., 2014a. Ultralightweight and flexible silylated
nanocellulose sponges for the selective removal of oil from water. Chem. Mater. 26 (8), 2659–2668.
Zhang, X., Lin, Z., Chen, B., Zhang, W., Sharma, S., Gu, W., Deng, Y., 2014b. Solid-state flexible polyaniline/silver
cellulose nanofibrils aerogel supercapacitors. J. Power Sources 246, 283–289.
Zhang, C., Zhang, R.Z., Ma, Y.Q., Guan, W.B., Wu, X.L., Liu, X., Li, H., Du, Y.L., Pan, C.P., 2015. Preparation of cel￾lulose/graphene composite and its applications for triazine pesticides adsorption from water. ACS Sustain.
Chem. Eng. 3 (3), 396–405.
Zhang, H., Li, Y., Xu, Y., Lu, Z., Chen, L., Huang, L., Fan, M., 2016. Versatile fabrication of a superhydrophobic and
ultralight cellulose-based aerogel for oil spillage clean-up. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18 (40), 28297–28306.
Zhang, Y., Shang, Z., Shen, M., Chowdhury, S.P., Ignaszak, A., Sun, S., Ni, Y., 2019. Cellulose nanofibers/reduced
graphene oxide/polypyrrole aerogel electrodes for high-capacitance flexible all-solid-state supercapacitors.
ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7 (13), 11175–11185.
Zhou, Y., Khan, T.M., Liu, J.C., Fuentes-Hernandez, C., Shim, J.W., Najafabadi, E., Youngblood, J.P., Moon, R.J.,
Kippelen, B., 2014. Efficient recyclable organic solar cells on cellulose nanocrystal substrates with a conducting
polymer top electrode deposited by film-transfer lamination. Org. Electron. 15 (3), 661–666.
Zhu, H., Narakathu, B.B., Fang, Z., Aijazi, A.T., Joyce, M., Atashbar, M., Hu, L., 2014. A gravure printed antenna on
shape-stable transparent nanopaper. Nanoscale 6 (15), 9110–9115.
316 13. Synthesis and properties of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
14
Introduction to cellulose-based
nanobiosorbents
Cassamo Ussemane Mussagya and Agnes Magrib
a
Department of Engineering of Bioprocesses and Biotechnology, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sa˜o Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil b
Fundac¸ao Oswaldo
Cruz, Fiocruz-Ceara, Eusebio, Brazil
14.1 Contextualization
Currently, the common absorbent materials available in the market are derived from non￾renewable petrochemicals sources which exhibit poor environmental biocompatibility
(Mendoza et al., 2019). This lack of sustainability has driven research towards developing
more biocompatible and eco-friendly alternatives natural bio-based materials (Mussagy
et al., 2021a) for wastewater treatment, environmental remediation, food processing, medi￾cine, nanosensors among others (Mussagy et al., 2021b) with low cost, and with no harmful
by-products generation (Putri et al., 2020). As shown in this book, nanomaterials, as absor￾bents, offer several advantages over the conventional; due to the low-cost, high absorption
capacities, less sludge regeneration and the availability of these compounds in the world
(Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017a, b). Among these, lignocellulosic biomass have attracted the at￾tention of several industries due to the promising applications as absorbent (Putro et al.,
2017). The main component of lignocellulosic material, namely: cellulose (natural polymer),
has been applied directly as bio-sorbent in its natural form obtained from agri-food wastes
(cassava bagasse, rice straw banana peel, corncob, among others) (Blanco et al., 2018; Spinella
et al., 2016). However, the chemically counterpart can be obtained and classified into two
main groups: (i) direct modification, in which esterification, halogenation, oxidation, alkaline
treatment are the principal routes to obtain the cellulose-based materials (Hokkanen et al.,
2016a, b) and (ii) graft copolymerization, where a branched copolymer is obtained when the side
chain grafts are attached to the main chain of a polymer backbone using several procedures
such as, photografting, high energy radiation grafting as well as the chemical initiation
grafting (Hokkanen et al., 2016b). The expression “nanocellulose” usually refers to
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 317 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00014-9cellulose-based materials that present at least one dimension in the nanometer range, and as a
result of the wide application, the recovery of nanocellulose-based materials as cellulose
nanofibers (CNF), cellulose nanocrystals (CNC), and bacterial cellulose (BC), that differ in
their dimensions, functions, and preparation methods has been investigated (Putro et al.,
2017). However, due to the great surface reactivity of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents, they
can be modified or mixed with other compounds to find synergistic properties that can fit the
needs of the specific applications (Blanco et al., 2018). Despite these advantages, the main pur￾pose of this chapter is to provide readers a briefly knowledge on the classification and prep￾aration of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents (CN) and the mechanisms behind the CN
absorption process.
14.2 Classification and preparation of CN structures
Several types of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents can be classified into different groups
based on their dimension, function, shape, and production/preparation method, that de￾pends on the source as well as the processing conditions (Kargarzadeh et al., 2017). In the last
years, many terms have been used to describe different types of CN; due to this, in this chap￾ter CN were categorized in three main groups: cellulose nanofibers (CNF), nanocrystalline
cellulose (CNC), and bacterial cellulose (BC) (Blanco et al., 2018). The CN production process
from hardwood and softwood and its characterization have been extensively described in lit￾erature (Amiralian et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2020a, b), the high costs related with the use of these
raw materials is prompting a move towards to replace them, due to their high demand from
pulp, paper, and furniture industries (Blanco et al., 2018). The new developments are focused
on the use of agro-wastes, water plants, among others, considered as an effective alternatives
sources of cellulose to produce CNF and CNC (Chen et al., 2015). On the other side, another
important source is BC, mainly produced by several strains of the genus Aerobacter, Azotobac￾ter, Agrobacterium, Achromobacter, Alcaligenes, Escherichia, Komagataeibacter, Pseudomonas, Rhi￾zobium, Sarcina, Salmonella and Zoogloea (Campano et al., 2016), thus due to the large amount
of culture media nutrients required for cellulose production, researchers have focused their
studies on the use of low-cost materials, such as carbon and nitrogensources from agro￾wastes (Hong and Qiu, 2008), that not only decrease significantly the cost of nutrients, but
also improve the BC yields. Several authors have reported comparative studies regarding
the preparation techniques of several types of CN (Valentini et al., 2019a, b; Wang et al.,
2017) (Table 14.1). CNF can be produced using numerous mechanical processes, cf., high￾pressure homogenization (Garusinghe et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2021),
microfluidization (Bai et al., 2019; Blanco et al., 2018; Pardesi et al., 2020), grinding (Yang
et al., 2020), or other less used such as, ultrasonication (Valentini et al., 2019a; Wang et al.,
2017) and cryocrushing (Gopakumar et al., 2018; Thakur et al., 2017); however the main draw￾back of these mechanical processes are directly related to the high energy requirement
(Kargarzadeh et al., 2017). It is important to highlight that CNF properties depend not only
on the production process or raw material used but also on the fiber description (Kargarzadeh
et al., 2017). The CNC have been frequently obtained by acid hydrolysis, in which the crys￾talline domains are first solubilized, leaving behind the crystalline region or CNC, which
318 14. Introduction to cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 14.1 Preparation techniques of several types of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents.
Type Operational conditions Advantages Drawbacks References
Cellulose nanofibers
High-pressure
homogenization
High pressure
(30–150 MPa)
Cellulose fiber size reduction
achieved through interparticle
collisions. The higher the pressure,
higher is the efficiency of the
disruption
Insufficient disintegration of the
material. Mechanical
pretreatments are needed before
homogenization. High energy
consumption
Kargarzadeh et al.
(2017), Wang et al.
(2017), Wu et al. (2021),
Garusinghe et al. (2018),
Ni et al. (2020)
Microfluidization Very high pressure
(>100 MPa)
High shear forces inside the
capillary tube ensured cellulose
fibrillation. Size distribution of
nanofibers is homogenous
To improve the degree of
fibrillation is necessary to repeat
the process several times.
Nanofibrillar bundles after
20 cycles led to agglomeration of
CNF
Blanco et al. (2018), Bai
et al. (2019), Pardesi
et al. (2020)
Grinding High pressure Additional mechanical
pretreatments are not required.
Easy scale-up for industrial
applications: simply and low-cost
technology
Many steps are required to
generate the fibrillated cellulose.
Need for disk stone maintenance
and replacement
Yang et al. (2020),
Pyrgiotakis et al. (2018),
Franco et al. (2017)
Cryocrushing Low temperature (N2
liquid is frequently used)
Nanofibers displays superior
dispersion ability in acrylic
emulsion
Low-volume manufacturing and
expensive. High energy
consumption
Gopakumar et al.
(2018), Thakur et al.
(2017), Nasir et al.
(2017)
High-intensity
ultrasonication
Low-pressure and high￾pressure waves Fibrillation efficiency can vary according to power, temperature,
time, fiber size and concentration
Low productivity. Low consistency
of the cellulose suspension is
required
Yang et al. (2017),
Valentini et al. (2019a,
b), Syafri et al. (2019)
Cellulose nanocrystals
Acid hydrolysis Different mineral acids can
be used: sulfuric,
hydrochloric, phosphoric,
maleic, hydrobromic,
nitric, and formic acids
CNC obtained from sulfuric or
phosphoric acid hydrolysis
dispersed readily in water.
Crystallinity and dimensions of
the nanocrystalline particles
depend on the origin of the
cellulose feedstock
CNC produced from hydrochloric
or hydrobromic acid hydrolysis are
not as easy to disperse since their
aqueous suspensions tend to
flocculate. Acidic sulfate groups
compromise the thermostability of
the NC
Guo et al. (2020a, b, Niu
et al. (2017), Maciel et al.
(2019), Theivasanthi
et al. (2018)
ContinuedTABLE 14.1 Preparation techniques of several types of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents.—cont’d
Type Operational conditions Advantages Drawbacks References
Hydrolysis with
solid acids
Sulfonated metal oxides
such as sulfonated TiO2
and ZrO2 and their
complexes
Higher thermal stability. Solid
acids are easily recovered and
recycled through extraction with
diethyl ether
High consumption of energy and
chemicals. Acidic corrosion of
equipment, health and
environmental hazards
Zhao et al. (2020), Chen
et al. (2018a, b)
Hydrolysis with
gaseous acids
Several types of gaseous
acids can be used in this
procedure, such as nitric
acid and trifluoroacetic
acid
Need low amount of water. Simple
acid recycling. High yields
Further techniques are required to
isolate CNC
Dufresne (2013)
Hydrolysis with
metal salt catalyst
Trivalent, divalent and
monovalent metal
inorganic salts are used
Feasible and controllable
hydrolysis process. Inorganic salt
can selectively control the
hydrolysis
Health and environmental
hazards. Difficulty to control the
hydrolysis degree of cellulose
Li et al. (2015), Ziaul
et al. (2014), Brinchi
et al. (2013)
Green solvents Ionic liquids (ILs) and deep
eutectic solvents (DES)
Simple and effective hydrolysis
process. Possible reuse of ILs and
DES
Reaction temperature and time can
affect the yield and thermal
properties
Atikah et al. (2017),
Pinkert et al. (2009),
Zhu et al. (2006)
Bacterial cellulose
Static culture Culture media inoculated
with bacteria and kept for a
long period
Homogeneous pellicle. Low-cost Long times. Large space required Ha et al. (2008), Czaja
et al. (2004)
Agitated culture
in shakers
Culture’s agitation:
100–500 rpm
Low-cost. Economic scale-up BC usually sticks to the wall being
difficult the recovery
Czaja et al. (2004)
Agitated culture
in Bioreactors
Agitated culture with the
use of different types of
impellers, and controlling
of aeration and agitation
conditions
Higher oxygen availability. High
productivity. Low production
time
Lower crystallinity. Adhesion of
BC to the top of the reactor. BC with
low mechanical strength
Ha et al. (2008), Lin
et al. (2013), Song et al.
(2009), Lin et al. (2013)
Adapted from Blanco, A., Monte, M.C., Campano, C., Balea, A., Merayo, N., Negro, C., Mustansar Hussain, C., 2018. Chapter 5—Nanocellulose for industrial use: cellulose nanofibers (CNF),
cellulose nanocrystals (CNC), and bacterial cellulose (BC). In Micro and Nano Technologies. Elsevier, pp. 74–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813351-4.00005-5 and Kargarzadeh, H.,
Ioelovich, M., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Dufresne, A., 2017. Methods for extraction of nanocellulose from various sources. In Handbook of Nanocellulose and Cellulose Nanocomposites. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9783527689972.ch1.present a higher resistance to acid solvent. For that, sulfuric, hydrochloric, phosphoric,
maleic, hydrobromic, nitric, and formic acids (Amiralian et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2020a) have
been the most used for this purpose (Habibi et al., 2002). In addition, several methods to pro￾duce CNC were reported, i.e., hydrolysis with solid acids (Chen et al., 2015), hydrolysis with
gaseous acids (Dufresne, 2013), hydrolysis with metal salt catalyst (Li et al., 2015; Lu et al.,
2014) and the use of green solvents (Atikah et al., 2017; Pinkert et al., 2009; Zhu et al.,
2006). As noted above, the non-biocompatible conventional method to obtain CNC is often
accomplished using different solvents considered harmful to the environment, and due to
this, it is fundamental to search for more biocompatible and ecofriendly treatments using
“green” solvents such as, ionic liquids (ILs), biosolvents and eutectic solvents (ES)
(Mussagy et al., 2020), which can allow not only the sustainability of processes but also
the biocompatibility of the materials. In the process to produce CN, some problems (aggre￾gation and high energy consumption) can occur during the mechanical fibrillation of cellu￾lose, in this cases, an efficient pretreatment can help to reduce these issues, however the
selection of pretreatment method differs on the cellulose source as well as the required mor￾phology of the initial material (Kargarzadeh et al., 2017). The suitable pretreatment also pro￾motes accessibility, modify crystallinity and boosts the reactivity; decreasing the energy
consumption and simplifies the NC production process (S
ˇturcova´ et al., 2005). The proce￾dures employed to process BC is completely different from that used for CNF and CNC
(Kargarzadeh et al., 2017). The first step for BC production is the cell growth, where the cel￾lular high yields production is the main objective (Czaja et al., 2004; Ha et al., 2008). To in￾crease the production, several factors must be taking into account, cf., optimization of
nutrient media, fermentation time, pH media, temperature and the selection of the appropri￾ate bacterial strain (Ana et al., 2018). The traditional method that produce high yields of BC is
the fermentation in static culture (Czaja et al., 2004; Ha et al., 2008), however the main draw￾back remains in the fact that BC usually sticks to the wall being difficult the recovery (Czaja
et al., 2004; Ha et al., 2008). In addition, envisioning the large-scale production, submerged
cultures in shakers and bioreactors (Calvar et al., 2005; Ha et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2013; Song
et al., 2009) are also used for BC production to decrease the production time due to the en￾hancement of mass transfer and oxygen transfer rate.
As absorbents, NC brings higher absorption aptitudes and enhanced binding affinities
than their equivalents at the macroscale (Zhou et al., 2011). Over the last years, due to their
particular properties, NC have emerged as potential absorbents for environmental remedia￾tion and wastewater treatment that aroused increasing attention to solve some environmental
issues (Savage and Diallo, 2005), and due to that, in this chapter the mechanisms behind the
adsorption process are extensively discussed in the subsequent section.
14.3 Adsorption/desorption process
14.3.1 Types and regeneration process
Among different methods used for the remediation of contaminants, adsorption is one of
the simplest process, in terms of operation and conception (Ali and Gupta, 2007). The ad￾sorption process is widely used in the treatment of drinking water and industrial effluents,
14.3 Adsorption/desorption process 321
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesfor the removal of non-degradable organic compounds (Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017a). Ad￾sorption is commonly defined as process of molecules adhesion of a gas or liquid on a solid
surface (adsorbent); and the adsorbed material are usually liquid, solid, or gaseous mole￾cules. Adsorption is a superficial process, therefore particles (adsorbate) are retained on the
solid surface, and the adsorbate can diffuse inside the particle, according to Fick’s law, also
known as the diffusion model homogeneous in the particle (Ruthven, 1984), which leads to
an increase in the loading capacity of the solid adsorbent until the adsorption equilibrium is
attained. The efficiency of the adsorption process is intrinsically linked to the surface prop￾erties, cf., chemical composition, charge and porosity degree (Nor et al., 2021). These char￾acteristics are extremely important to increase the efficiency of the adsorption process, i.e.,
the more porous is the solid used as adsorbent, the greater the adsorption capacity of con￾taminants. In addition to these factors, the degree of adsorption also depends on the surface
area, pore size distribution (Nor et al., 2021), internal diffusion of the material (Kose et al., €
2020), mineral matter content and operational parameters such as temperature, pressure,
load capacity, pH conditions, and contact time (Nor et al., 2021). The contaminant molecules
(adsorbate) are usually attracted to the surface of an adsorbent by the chemical or physical
forces (Lombardo and Thielemans, 2019). Based on the forces involved in the attraction pro￾cess of adsorbates and the interaction with solid surface, the adsorption process can be clas￾sified into two different routes: (i) physisorption when involves physical forces such as van
der Waals forces and electrostatic attraction (Nor et al., 2021) that allows contaminant mol￾ecules to attach to the surface of an adsorbent configured by a low enthalpy due to the little
disturbance of the electronic environment of the two species in interaction (Lombardo and
Thielemans, 2019); and/or (ii) chemisorption where the adsorption occurs through the for￾mation of chemical bound (covalent or ionic) (Nor et al., 2021), between molecules charged
with opposite charges which causes a change in the electronic configuration of both
attracted structures, in addition to being characterized by a high exothermic enthalpy
(Atkins and De Paula, 2001; Lombardo and Thielemans, 2019). The adsorption efficiency
can be enhanced by surface modification, giving a wide range of possibilities for molecules
adsorption, which makes these structures tunable for each specific type of pollutants and
specific environments as water, soil or air. This possibility of adjustment according to
the adsorbate, allows the creation of a new material adapted for capture and remediation
of a wide range of compounds. In the literature, several contaminants could be adsorbed
by NC structures, including chemical contaminants, heavy metals, dissolved organic pol￾lutants, dyes, oil present in different substrates such as soil, air or water contaminated
(Ali and Gupta, 2007). In generally, materials with potential to be used as pollutant adsor￾bents must present (a) high efficiency and pollutant adsorption capacity, which is intrinsi￾cally linked to (b) the size and characteristics of the contact surface of the adsorbent material,
(c) structural integrity and mechanics to withstand the flow of water, and mainly, (d) inex￾pensive, (e) capacity to regenerate, which corroborates to the sustainability and cost-benefit
of the approaches, and finally (f ) easily separation from the effluent (Mahfoudhi and Boufi,
2017b; Yue et al., 2019). Usually, the industrial adsorbents employed are composed of
macro-sized pores, hence nanomaterials have an advantage with regard to the contact sur￾face available for adsorption (Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017b). The high surface area of NC
materials provide more active sites for the binding of adsorbate to the adsorbent, and also
contain hydroxyl groups in its structure that allow the surface modifications (Mahfoudhi
and Boufi, 2017b). Surface functionalization is the reason that provides the
322 14. Introduction to cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesnanocellulose-based adsorbents a wide range of applications, enhancing the adsorption ca￾pacity and can be tuned for specific class of pollutants, or association of several different
pollutants. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents are described in literature due to their adsorp￾tion capacity for heavy metals, organic pollutants, CO2, oils and viruses ( J€arup, 2003; Nor
et al., 2021). Different strategies of surface modification from the hydroxyl function can be
adopted, however each class of functionalization is chosen according to the type of pollut￾ant, that can be heavy metals, originating from volcanic eruptions, mining activities, several
types of industries, and agro-industrial activities ( J€arup, 2003; Nor et al., 2021); dyes, waste
material or byproducts from the food industries, agriculture, petroleum products and bev￾erage industry, cosmetics (Tkaczyk et al., 2020); acids from mine drainage water, industrial
waste disposal and/or acidified soils (Klamerus-iwan et al., 2015); organic contaminants
such as organophosphorus, found in effluents and discharges from industry linked to agricul￾ture as producers of herbicides and pesticides (Dar et al., 2020); organic oils such as silicone,
paraffin, petroleum ether, canola, oil from pumps and engines, diesel (Pichtel, 2016); phenols
from industrial effluents that are discharged into streams, atmosphere or on land (Kahru
et al., 2002); organochlorine compounds from waste incineration, toxic dumps, crop spraying
(Loganathan and Kannan, 1994); CO2 from atmosphere (Gebald et al., 2011; Valdebenito
et al., 2018); and virus from drink water (Mi et al., 2020). Based on the chemical composition,
concentration of the pollutant, matrix and considering the environmental conditions such
as air humidity, temperature, pressure and pH, the functionalization on the surface of NC
can be performed. The different modifications reported in the literature are through oxida￾tion, etherification, addition, silylation, esterification, and grafting. Other types of
functionalization in cellulose-based biosorbents such as succinic anhydride crosslinking,
cationic interaction, acetylation and coupling with isocyanate derivates are often applied
(Hokkanen et al., 2016b; Kose et al., 2020 € ). Thus, for each type of pollutant a modification
can be selected in order to obtain greater adsorption efficiency (Thomas et al., 2018). For
example, to increase the adsorption of hydrophobic compounds, as in the case of oils, a
strategy widely used is the addition of low energy hydrophobic groups in the nanostruc￾tured cellulose, by physical or chemical methods to increase the adsorption of the hydro￾phobic compounds via hydrophobic interactions, such as oils (Liao and Wang, 2019).
This process, known as hydrophobization method (Kose et al., 2020 € ) (Fig. 14.1), it is also
widely used to increase the adsorption of water-soluble organic molecules, providing spe￾cific affinity as in the case of mycotoxins (Hossein et al., 2015). These are adsorbed when the
NC surface is functionalized with fatty acids combined with specific anions, such as the sul￾phate groups (Hossein et al., 2015). This structure promotes the required hydrophobicity to
connect to the hydrophobic regions of mycotoxins, and then the hydrophobic groups are
added via esterification (Hossein et al., 2015). Silylation also can provide hydrophobicity
in nanocellulose, increasing flexibility and porosity (Thomas et al., 2018). The chemical used
for this process commonly is isopropyl dimethylchlorosilane, alkyldimethylchlorosilane,
chlorodimethyl isopropylsilane, and methyltrimethoxysilane (Chanzy et al., 2004), that con￾fer highly selectivity and recyclability of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents. Amidation mod￾ification, involves the addiction of amide functional group (pH from 7 to 10) by
carbodiimide chemistry, as N-ethyl-N-(3-(dimethylamino)-propyl) (EDAC) (Kose et al., €
2020). Finally, the last method to add hydrophobic groups is urethanization, mediated
by covalent bonds between the nanocellulose hydroxyl groups and isocyanate, a urethane
linkage (Siqueira et al., 2010).
14.3 Adsorption/desorption process 323
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesBesides that, if the target adsorbent contain heavy metals or dyes, it is well recommended
that the cellulose surface present ionic charged (Nor et al., 2021), in this way, if the adsorbent
is negatively charged, it will be effective in adsorbing the positive charge of heavy metals and
dyes due to the electrostatic interaction (Popescu et al., 2020). In case of CNC and dyes, the
hydrogen bonds command the strong interaction between the adsorbate and the
nanocellulose structure, through π–π interaction (Popescu et al., 2020). Different strategies
can be adopted for to impar ionic charges at cellulose nanostructures, such as oxidation, sul￾fonation, phosphorylation, and carboxymethylation (Thomas et al., 2018). Moreover, within
this classification, the modifications are divided into anionization and cationization,
according to the ability to add negatively or positively charged groups, respectively. The an￾ionic groups of nanocellulose induced by oxidizing agents, organic bases and organic acids,
and other organic compounds, are generally sensitive to pH due to the isoelectric point of the
anionic center (Kose et al., 2020 € ). Another alternative to modification of surface area of
cellulose-based biosorbents is grafting polymers onto cellulose. These cellulose-polymer
composites aim to confer certain characteristics already addressed such as hydrophobicity
FIG. 14.1 Hydrophobization strategies for the generation of hydrophobic surfaces in NC materials. Adapted from
Kose, K., Mavlan, M., Youngblood, J.P., 2020. Applications and impact of nanocellulose based adsorbents. Cellulose 27, €
2967–2990. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-020-03011-1. No permission required.
324 14. Introduction to cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesand hydrophilicity, as well as resistance to abrasion, elasticity, to become responsive, ther￾mally resistant, self-cleaning materials and also ion exchanger (Thomas et al., 2018). There
are three ways to obtain the polymer graft: grafting-to, grafting-from, and grafting-through,
and the graft reaction can occur with polymers or peptides Fig. 14.2.
Briefly, the main difference relies in the growth characteristics of polymer branches, cf.,
“grafting-to” when is bonded to cellulose directly, typically by coupling the reactive terminal
group of the polymer (or peptides) with the hydroxyl groups of the cellulose structure;
“grafting-from” process cellulose already functionalized with an initiator is linked to the
monomers, which are polymerized directly from the surface; and in “grafting-through,”
cellulose is first functionalized with polymerizable species, such as vinyl molecules. Thus,
the functionalized cellulose is mixed with a comonomer and polymerization begins
FIG. 14.2 Schematic illustration of different types of cellulose-grafting. Adapted from Thomas, B., Raj, M.C.,
Athira, K.B., Rubiyah, M.H., Joy, J., Moores, A., Drisko, G.L., 2018. Nanocellulose, a versatile green platform: from biosources
to materials and their applications. Chem. Rev. 118, 11575–11625. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00627. No permis￾sion required.
14.3 Adsorption/desorption process 325
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices(Minko, 2008; Thomas et al., 2018). There are different types of reactions that can occur, i.e.,
atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) grafting-to synthesis; free radical grafting-to
synthesis; reversible additionfragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) grafting-to synthesis;
ring-opening polymerization grafting-to synthesis and postpolymerization grafting from
(Thomas et al., 2018). There is an alternative option of non-specific functionalization, those
capable to act on a wide variety of pollutants, where generalist modifications can be added
for different types of substrates or more than one specific modification, that can operate si￾multaneously in the adsorption process.
14.3.2 Desorption/regeneration process
The possibility of contaminants desorption from the matrix, as well as the option of
regenerating cellulosic material, is one of the greatest advantages in relation to the use of
cellulose-based nanobiosorbents, that allow not only its complete reuse, but also decrease
the cost of the process. The regeneration of exhausted NC material represents an important
parameter in the economic analysis of the process to remove contaminants from wastes,
and, in some cases, if the process is expensive, but with the possibility of being reused
for numerous cycles, makes the cost-benefit of the process much higher. Another point that
deserves attention is the possibility of contaminants reuse, as for example, the heavy metals,
which can be reused in the original production process. Simple process, such as acidifica￾tion of the reaction medium, are the commonly procedure for the desorption of heavy
metals (Vijayalakshmi et al., 2017). However, as the NC materials are mostly functionalized,
the desorption and recovery process must be careful, to avoid degradation of the cellulose￾based adsorbents and preventing a significant decrease in the adsorption capacity in the
next cycle (Mo et al., 2021). Hence, it must be emphasized that cellulose regeneration pro￾cesses depend on the adsorbed pollutant and functionalized process (Hokkanen et al.,
2016b). Depending on the adsorbed species, several methods can be used for regeneration
process, such as ionic approaches (employing weak solutions of acids/bases); solvent ex￾change (varying the polarity of systems), or heating, which can be combined with the
two previous techniques. In generally, to desorb organic pollutants or oil–water separa￾tions, a simple change of organic solvent can solve the problem; always taking into account
the solvent affinity and adsorbed material characteristics, and taking care, to prevent the
use of solvents that can remove the functionalized groups linked to the NC. Acidic (e.g.,
diluted H2SO4, HCl, HNO3, acetic acid) or basic treatments are widely used for desorption
of dyes and heavy metals, as mentioned above (Vijayalakshmi et al., 2017). The use of acids/
bases for desorption, can be effective by changing the pH, and since the chelation mecha￾nism is extremely sensitive to pH, it becomes possible to recover the adsorbed contaminants
(Vijayalakshmi et al., 2017). Generally, heating processes can improve the efficiency and
speed of the reactions, using ionization strategy for the virus desorption (Pisharody
et al., 2021). To remove gases, such as CO2 or H2S, the thermal regeneration is the most
employed (Valentini et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2017). Another regeneration strategies for
gas adsorption is the use of supercritical fluid regeneration and vacuum-swing cycling tech￾niques (Gebald and Wurzbacher, 2013; Haimer et al., 2010).
326 14. Introduction to cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices14.4 Final remarks and future perspectives
Biodegradable nanomaterials such as NC are an excellent alternative for the “new” class of
biosorbents. Concerning to the economic cost of the process, when compared to the conven￾tional processes, as for example in water treatment, employing reverse osmosis or adsorptive
filtration by ion exchange resins, the environmental and economic advantage of NC as adsor￾bent is clear. The adsorbents are easily separated from the effluent, and mostly commercial￾ized in the form of granules, fibers or films wrapped in a filtration column, however using
nanomaterials (more efficient), the remotion capacity increase. In addition, NC has a number
of other properties that bring several advantages when compared to conventional waste treat￾ment systems. Among them, are the (1) possibility of surface functionalization; (2) possibility
of desorption and subsequent recovery for the reuse of material (adsorbent and adsorbate),
through simple processes that do not compromise the cellulose absorption capacity; (3) re￾newable devices, with a (4) good cost–benefit ratio when compared to other procedures;
(5) biodegradability, with a (6) high specificity of the surface area; (7) high mechanical per￾formance improved by a (8) high stiffness and cohesion of NC; (9) good surface tension prop￾erties which favor the wetting of cellulose in water, (10) stable in water, and finally (11) high
hydrophilicity and (12) high crystallinity that allows this type of nanobiosorbents to be resis￾tant to biological and/or chemical corrosion in water (Nor et al., 2021). Another bottleneck in
effluent treatments is the need to use different materials for the complete removal of contam￾inants. If they had more intelligent materials, which were multifunctional, it would certainly
bring great advances in the field. The efficiency of desorption/recovery is one of the key fac￾tors to drive the total cost of the waste’s treatment process and the loss of load capacity at each
reuse cycle represents a need for improvement in the processes. Likewise, concerning to the
recovery/desorption processes, these are impaired when the aggregation of the NC material
occurs. The aggregation process can greatly decrease the recovery of the material,
representing an overall loss in the treatment process. An important point is the biodegradabil￾ity of cellulose-based structures after the functionalization process, where the addition of
groups along the polymeric cellulose chain can create conditions that difficult their biodeg￾radation. That is the principal reason why the process of reusing these structures is so impor￾tant and should be one of the main focus of improvement going forward, considering that
there is already a lot of knowledge about the adsorption and functionalization mechanisms,
it is now necessary to focus on the economic and environmental efficiency issue of treatment
processes using cellulose-based biosorbents.
References
Ali, I., Gupta, V.K., 2007. Advances in water treatment by adsorption technology. Nat. Protoc. 1 (6), 2661–2667.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.370.
Amiralian, N., Annamalai, P.K., Garvey, C.J., Jiang, E., Memmott, P., Martin, D.J., 2017. High aspect ratio
nanocellulose from an extremophile spinifex grass by controlled acid hydrolysis. Cellul. 24 (9), 3753–3766.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1379-6.
Ana, C.C., Angeles, B., Carlos Negro, B., 2018. Enhancement of the fermentation process and properties of bacterial
cellulose: a review. Cellul. 23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-015-0802-0.
References 327
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAtikah, N., Nurhidayatullaili, M.I., Sharifah, M.J., Hamid, B.A., 2017. Understanding the effect of synthesis param￾eters on the catalytic ionic liquid hydrolysis process of cellulose nanocrystals. Cellul. 24. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10570-017-1273-2.
Atkins, P., De Paula, J., 2001. Process on solid surfaces. Atkins’ Physical chemistry. In: Atkins’ Physical Chemistry,
seventh ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 977–1005.
Bai, L., Lv, S., Xiang, W., Huan, S., McClements, D.J., Rojas, O.J., 2019. Oil-in-water Pickering emulsions via microflui￾dization with cellulose nanocrystals: 1. Formation and stability. Food Hydrocoll. 96, 699–708. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.foodhyd.2019.04.038.
Blanco, A., Monte, M.C., Campano, C., Balea, A., Merayo, N., Negro, C., Mustansar Hussain, C., 2018. Chapter 5—
Nanocellulose for industrial use: cellulose nanofibers (CNF), cellulose nanocrystals (CNC), and bacterial cellulose
(BC). In:Micro andNano Technologies. Elsevier, pp. 74–126,https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813351-4.00005-5.
Brinchi, L., Cotana, F., Fortunati, E., kenny, J., 2013. Production of nanocrystalline cellulose from lignocellulosic bio￾mass: technology and applications. Carbohydr. Polym. 94, 154–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2013.01.033.
Calvar, N., Domı´nguez, A., Tojo, J., 2005. Vapor-liquid equilibria for the quaternary reactive system ethyl acetate +
ethanol + water + acetic acid and some of the constituent binary systems at 101.3 kPa. Fluid Phase Equilib. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2005.07.010.
Campano, C., Balea, A., Blanco, A., Negro, C., 2016. Enhancement of the fermentation process and properties of bac￾terial cellulose: a review. Cellul. 23 (1), 57–91. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-015-0802-0.
Chanzy, H., Cerrada, M.L., Fleury, E., 2004. Surface silylation of cellulose microfibrils : preparation and rheological
properties. Polymer 45, 1569–1575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2003.12.028.
Chen, L., Wang, Q., Hirth, K., Baez, C., Agarwal, U.P., Zhu, J.Y., 2015. Tailoring the yield and characteristics of wood
cellulose nanocrystals (CNC) using concentrated acid hydrolysis. Cellul. 22 (3), 1753–1762. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10570-015-0615-1.
Chen, T., Peng, L., Yu, X., He, L., 2018a. Magnetically recyclable cellulose-derived carbonaceous solid acid catalyzed
the biofuel 5-ethoxymethylfurfural synthesis from renewable carbohydrates. Fuel 219, 344–352. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.01.129.
Chen, S.S., Wang, L., Yu, I.K.M., Tsang, D.C.W., Hunt, A.J., Jerome, F., Zhang, S., Ok, Y.S., Poon, C.S., 2018b. Valo- ^
rization of lignocellulosic fibres of paper waste into levulinic acid using solid and aqueous BrØnsted acid.
Bioresour. Technol. 247, 387–394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2017.09.110.
Czaja, W., Romanovicz, D., Brown, R.M., 2004. Structural Investigations of Microbial Cellulose Produced in Station￾ary and Agitated Culture., https://doi.org/10.1023/B:CELL.0000046412.11983.61.
Dar, M.A., Kaushik, G., Francisco, J., Chiu, V., 2020. Pollution status and biodegradation of organophosphate pesti￾cides in the environment. In: Abatement of Environmental Pollutants. Elsevier Inc, pp. 25–66, https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-818095-2.00002-3.
Dufresne, A., 2013. Nanocellulose: a new ageless bionanomaterial. Mater. Today 16 (6), 220–227. Elsevier B.V https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2013.06.004.
Franco, T., Viana, L., Potulski, D., et al., 2017. Nanocellulose obtained from residues of peach palm extraction (Bactris
gasipaes). Carbohydr. Polym. 218, 8–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.04.035.
Garusinghe, U.M., Varanasi, S., Raghuwanshi, V.S., Garnier, G., Batchelor, W., 2018. Nanocellulose-montmorillonite
composites of low water vapour permeability. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 540, 233–241. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2018.01.010.
Gebald, C., Wurzbacher, J.A., 2013. Stability of amine-functionalized cellulose during temperature-vacuum-swing
cycling for CO 2 capture from air. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (17), 10063–10070.
Gebald, C., Wurzbacher, J.A., Tingaut, P., Zimmermann, T., Steinfeld, A., 2011. Amine-based nanofibrillated cellulose
as adsorbent for CO2 capture from air. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45 (20), 9101–9108.
Gopakumar, D.A., Manna, S., Pasquini, D., Thomas, S., Grohens, Y., 2018. Nanocellulose: extraction and application
as a sustainable material for wastewater purification. In: New Polymer Nanocomposites for Environmental Re￾mediation. Elsevier Inc, pp. 469–486, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811033-1.00019-6.
Guo, Y., Zhang, Y., Zheng, D., Li, M., Yue, J., 2020a. Isolation and characterization of nanocellulose crystals via acid
hydrolysis from agricultural waste-tea stalk. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 163, 927–933. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.07.009.
328 14. Introduction to cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesGuo, Y., Zhang, Y., Zheng, D., Li, M., Yue, J., 2020b. Isolation and characterization of nanocellulose crystals via acid
hydrolysis from agricultural waste-tea stalk. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 163, 927–933. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.07.009.
Ha, J.H., Shehzad, O., Khan, S., Lee, Y., Won Park, J., Khan, T., Park, J.K., 2008. Production of bacterial cellulose by a
static cultivation using the waste from beer culture broth. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 25 (4), 812–815.
Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., Rojas, O.J., 2002. Cellulose Nanocrystals: Chemistry, Self-Assembly, and Applications.,
https://doi.org/10.1021/cr900339w.
Haimer, E., Wendland, M., Schlufter, K., Frankenfeld, K., Miethe, P., Potthast, A., Rosenau, T., Liebner, F., 2010. Load￾ing of Bacterial Cellulose Aerogels with Bioactive Compounds by Antisolvent Precipitation with Supercritical
Carbon Dioxide. pp. 64–74, https://doi.org/10.1002/masy.201000008.
Hokkanen, S., Bhatnagar, A., Repo, E., Lou, S., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2016a. Calcium hydroxyapatite microfibrillated cellulose
composite as a potential adsorbent for the removal of Cr(VI) from aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J. 283, 445–452.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2015.07.035.
Hokkanen, S., Bhatnagar, A., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2016b. A review on modification methods to cellulose-based adsorbents to
improve adsorption capacity. Water Res. 91, 156–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.01.008.
Hong, F., Qiu, K., 2008. An alternative carbon source from konjac powder for enhancing production of bacterial cel￾lulose in static cultures by a model strain Acetobacter aceti subsp. xylinus ATCC 23770. Carbohydr. Polym. 72 (3),
545–549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2007.09.015.
Hossein, M., Zadeh, B., Shahdadi, H., 2015. Nanocellulose coated with various free fatty acids can adsorb fumonisin
B1, and decrease its toxicity. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 134, 26–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
colsurfb.2015.06.037.
J€arup, L., 2003. Hazards of heavy metal contamination. Br. Med. Bull. 68, 167–182. https://doi.org/10.1093/bmb/
ldg032.
Kahru, A., Maloverjan, A., Sillak, H., Pumaa, L., 2002. The toxicity and fate of phenolic pollutants in the contaminated
soils associated with the OibShale industry. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 1 (1), 27–33.
Kargarzadeh, H., Ioelovich, M., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Dufresne, A., 2017. Methods for extraction of nanocellulose
from various sources. In: Handbook of Nanocellulose and Cellulose Nanocomposites., https://doi.org/
10.1002/9783527689972.ch1.
Klamerus-iwan, A., Blonska, E., Lasota, J., Kalandyk, A., Waligo´rski, P., 2015. Influence of oil contamination on phys￾ical and biological properties of forest soil after chainsaw use. Water Air Soil Pollut. 226, 389. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11270-015-2649-2.
Kose, K., Mavlan, M., Youngblood, J.P., 2020. Applications and impact of nanocellulose based adsorbents. Cellulose €
27, 2967–2990. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-020-03011-1.
Li, J., Zhang, X., Zhang, M., Xiu, H., He, H., 2015. Ultrasonic enhance acid hydrolysis selectivity of cellulose with HCl￾FeCl3 as catalyst. Carbohydr. Polym. 117, 917–922. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.10.028.
Liao, W., Wang, Y., 2019. Cellulose-based absorbents for oil contaminant removal. In: Mondal, M. (Ed.), Cellulose￾Based Superabsorbent Hydrogels. Polymers and Polymeric Composites: A Reference Series. Springer, Cham,
pp. 1–27.
Lin, S.-P., Hsieh, S.-C., Chen, K.-I., Demirci, A., Cheng, K.-C., 2013. Semi-continuous bacterial cellulose production in a
rotating disk bioreactor and its materials properties analysis. Cellul. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-013-0136-8.
Loganathan, B.G., Kannan, K., 1994. Global Organochiorine contamination trends: an overvievw. Ambio 23 (3),
187–191.
Lombardo, S., Thielemans, W., 2019. Thermodynamics of adsorption on nanocellulose surfaces. Cellul. 26 (1),
249–279. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-02239-2.
Lu, Q., Tang, L., Lin, F., Wang, S., Xuerong, C., Huang, B., 2014. Preparation and characterization of cellulose
nanocrystals via ultrasonication-assisted FeCl 3-catalyzed hydrolysis. Cellul. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-
014-0376-2.
Maciel, M.M.A´ .D., de Carvalho Benini, K.C.C., Voorwald, H.J.C., Cioffi, M.O.H., 2019. Obtainment and characteriza￾tion of nanocellulose from an unwoven industrial textile cotton waste: effect of acid hydrolysis conditions. Int. J.
Biol. Macromol. 126, 496–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.12.202.
Mahfoudhi, N., Boufi, S., 2017a. Nanocellulose as a novel nanostructured adsorbent for environmental remediation: a
review. Cellul. 24 (3), 1171–1197. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1194-0.
References 329
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesMahfoudhi, N., Boufi, S., 2017b. Nanocellulose as a novel nanostructured adsorbent for environmental remediation :
a review. Cellul. 24 (3), 1171–1197. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1194-0.
Mendoza, L., Hossain, L., Downey, E., Scales, C., Batchelor, W., Garnier, G., 2019. Carboxylated nanocellulose foams
as superabsorbents. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 538, 433–439. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2018.11.112.
Mi, X., Albukhari, S.M., Heldt, C.L., Heiden, P.A., 2020. Virus and chlorine adsorption onto guanidine modified cel￾lulose nanofibers using covalent and hydrogen bonding. Carbohydr. Res. 498, 108153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carres.2020.108153.
Minko, S., 2008. Chapter 11—Grafting on solid surfaces: “grafting to” and “grafting from” methods. In: Stamm, M.
(Ed.), Polymer Surfaces and Interfaces., https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73864-0.
Mo, L., Pang, H., Lu, Y., Li, Z., Kang, H., Wang, M., Zhang, S., Li, J., 2021. Wood-inspired nanocellulose aerogel ad￾sorbents with excellent selective pollutants capture, superfast adsorption, and easy regeneration. J. Hazard. Mater.
415 (February), 125612. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.125612.
Mussagy, C., Santos-Ebinuma, V.C., Kurnia, K.A., Dias, A.C.R.V., Carvalho, P., Coutinho, J.A.P., Pereira, J.F.B., 2020.
Integrative platform for the selective recovery of intracellular carotenoids and lipids from Rhodotorula glutinis
CCT-2186 yeast using mixtures of bio-based solvents. Green Chem. 22 (23), 8478–8494. https://doi.org/
10.1039/D0GC02992K.
Mussagy, C., Khan, S., Kot, A., 2021a. Current developments on the application of microbial carotenoids as an alter￾native to synthetic pigments. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2021.1908222.
Mussagy, C.U., Remonatto, D., Paula, A.V., Herculano, R.D., Santos-Ebinuma, V.C., Coutinho, J.A.P., Pereira, J.F.B.,
2021b. Selective recovery and purification of carotenoids and fatty acids from Rhodotorula glutinis using mixtures
of biosolvents. Sep. Purif. Technol. 266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2021.118548.
Nasir, M., Hashim, R., Sulaiman, O., Asim, M., 2017. Nanocellulose: preparation methods and applications. Cellulose￾Reinforced Nanofibre Composites: Production, Properties and Applications. Elsevier, pp. 261–276.
Ni, Y., Li, J., Fan, L., 2020. Production of nanocellulose with different length from ginkgo seed shells and applications
for oil in water Pickering emulsions. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 149, 617–626. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.01.263.
Niu, F., Li, M., Huang, Q., Zhang, X., Pan, W., Yang, J., Li, J., 2017. The characteristic and dispersion stability of
nanocellulose produced by mixed acid hydrolysis and ultrasonic assistance. Carbohydr. Polym. 165, 197–204.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.02.048.
Nor, M., Norrrahim, F., Mohd, A., Knight, F., 2021. Nanocellulose : a bioadsorbent for chemical contaminant reme￾diation. RSC Adv. 11, 7347–7368. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ra08005e.
Pardesi, K.R., Haldar, D., Jozala, A.F., Shukla, P., Gupta, G.K., 2020. Lignocellulosic biomass for the synthesis of
nanocellulose and its eco-friendly advanced applications. Front. Chem. 8, 601256. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fchem.2020.601256. Www.Frontiersin.Org.
Pichtel, J., 2016. Oil and gas production wastewater : soil contamination and. Appl. Environ. Soil Sci. 2016, 24.
Pinkert, A., Marsh, K.N., Pang, S., Staiger, M.P., 2009. Ionic liquids and their interaction with cellulose. Chem. Rev.
https://doi.org/10.1021/cr9001947.
Pisharody, L., Suresh, S., Mukherji, S., 2021. Evaluation of adsorbents and eluents for application in virus concentra￾tion and adsorption-desorption isotherms for coliphages. Chem. Eng. J. 403 (July 2020), 126267. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2020.126267.
Popescu, C., Jones, D., Schalnat, J., Segerholm, K., Henriksson, M., Westin, M., 2020. Structural characterization and
mechanical properties of wet-processed fibreboard based on chemo-thermomechanical pulp, furanic resin and
cellulose nanocrystals. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 145, 586–593. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.12.199.
Putri, K.N.A., Keereerak, A., Chinpa, W., 2020. Novel cellulose-based biosorbent from lemongrass leaf combined with
cellulose acetate for adsorption of crystal violet. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 156, 762–772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.04.100.
Putro, J.N., Kurniawan, A., Ismadji, S., Ju, Y.-H., 2017. Nanocellulose based biosorbents for wastewater treatment:
study of isotherm, kinetic, thermodynamic and reusability. Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 8, 134–149.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enmm.2017.07.002.
Pyrgiotakis, G., Luu, W., Zhang, Z., et al., 2018. Development of high throughput, high precision synthesis platforms
and characterization methodologies for toxicological studies of nanocellulose. Cellulose 25, 2303–2319. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10924-019-01438-7.
Ruthven, D.M., 1984. Principles of Adsorption and Adsorption Process. John Wiley & Sons, New York, p. 420.
330 14. Introduction to cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesSavage, N., Diallo, M.S., 2005. Nanomaterials and water purification: opportunities and challenges. J. Nanopart. Res.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-005-7523-5.
Siqueira, G., Bras, J., Dufresne, A., Papeterie, D., Martin, F.-S., 2010. New process of chemical grafting of cellulose
nanoparticles with a long chain isocyanate. Langmuir 26 (15), 402–411. https://doi.org/10.1021/la9028595.
Song, H.-J., Li, H., Seo, J.-H., Kim, M.-J., Kim, S.-J., 2009. Pilot-scale production of bacterial cellulose by a spherical type
bubble column bioreactor using saccharified food wastes. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 26 (1), 141–146.
Spinella, S., Maiorana, A., Qian, Q., Dawson, N.J., Hepworth, V., McCallum, S.A., Ganesh, M., Singer, K.D., Gross, R.-
A., 2016. Concurrent cellulose hydrolysis and esterification to prepare a surface-modified cellulose nanocrystal
decorated with carboxylic acid moieties. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4 (3), 1538–1550. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.5b01489.
S
ˇturcova´, A., Davies, G.R., Eichhorn, S.J., 2005. Elastic modulus and stress-transfer properties of tunicate cellulose
whiskers. Biomacromolecules 6 (2), 1055–1061. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm049291k.
Syafri, E., Sudirman, Mashadi, Yulianti, E., et al., 2019. Effect of sonication time on the thermal stability, moisture
absorption, and biodegradation of water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes) nanocellulose-filled bengkuang
(Pachyrhizus erosus) starch biocomposites. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 8, 6223–6231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmrt.2019.10.016.
Thakur, V., Guleria, A., Kumar, S., Sharma, S., Singh, K., 2017. Recent Advances in Nanocellulose Processing,
Functionalization and Applications: A Review., https://doi.org/10.1039/d1ma00049g.
Theivasanthi, T., Anne Christma, F.L., Toyin, A.J., Gopinath, S.C.B., Ravichandran, R., 2018. Synthesis and character￾ization of cotton fiber-based nanocellulose. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 109, 832–836. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2017.11.054.
Thomas, B., Raj, M.C., Athira, K.B., Rubiyah, M.H., Joy, J., Moores, A., Drisko, G.L., 2018. Nanocellulose, a versatile
green platform : from biosources to materials and their applications. Chem. Rev. 118, 11575–11625. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00627.
Tkaczyk, A., Mitrowska, K., Posyniak, A., 2020. Synthetic organic dyes as contaminants of the aquatic environment
and their implications for ecosystems : a review. Sci. Total Environ. 717, 137222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2020.137222.
Valdebenito, F., Alfredo, R., Lovera, G., Cruces, K., Ciudad, G., Chinga-carrasco, G., Habibi, Y., 2018. CO2 adsorption
of surface-modified cellulose nanofibril films derived from agricultural wastes CO2 adsorption of surface￾modified cellulose nanofibril films derived from agricultural wastes. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6 (10),
12603–12612. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b00771.
Valentini, F., Dorigato, A., Rigotti, D., Pegoretti, A., 2019a. Polyhydroxyalkanoates/fibrillated nanocellulose
composites for additive manufacturing. J. Polym. Environ. 27 (6), 1333–1341. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-
019-01429-8.
Valentini, F., Dorigato, A., Rigotti, D., Pegoretti, A., 2019b. Polyhydroxyalkanoates/fibrillated nanocellulose com￾posites for additive manufacturing. J. Polym. Environ. 27 (6), 1333–1341. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-019-
01429-8.
Vijayalakshmi, K., Devi, B.M., Latha, S., Gomathi, T., Sudha, P.N., Venkatesan, J., Anil, S., 2017. Batch adsorption and
desorption studies on the removal of lead (II) from aqueous solution using nanochitosan/sodium alginate/
microcrystalline cellulose beads. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 104, 1483–1494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2017.04.120.
Wang, Y., Wei, X., Li, J., Wang, F., Wang, Q., Zhang, Y., Kong, L., 2017. Homogeneous isolation of nanocellulose from
eucalyptus pulp by high pressure homogenization. Ind. Crop Prod. 104, 237–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indcrop.2017.04.032.
Wu, C., McClements, D.J., He, M., Zheng, L., Tian, T., Teng, F., Li, Y., 2021. Preparation and characterization of okara
nanocellulose fabricated using sonication or high-pressure homogenization treatments. Carbohydr. Polym. 255,
117364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.117364.
Yang, X., Han, F., Xu, C., Jiang, S., Huang, L., Liu, L., Xia, Z., 2017. Effects of preparation methods on the morphology
and properties of nanocellulose (NC) extracted from corn husk. Ind. Crop Prod. 109, 241–247. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.indcrop.2017.08.032.
Yang, Y., Liu, H., Wu, M., Ma, J., Lu, P., 2020. Bio-based antimicrobial packaging from sugarcane bagasse
nanocellulose/nisin hybrid films. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 161, 627–635. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.06.081.
References 331
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesYue, Y., Wang, X., Han, J., Yu, L., Chen, J., Wu, Q., 2019. Effects of nanocellulose on sodium alginate/polyacrylamide
hydrogel: mechanical properties and adsorption-desorption capacities. Carbohydr. Polym. 206 (August 2018),
289–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.10.105.
Zhao, Y., Lei, H., Liu, Y., Ruan, R., Qian, M., Huo, E., Zhang, Q., Huang, Z., Lin, X., Wang, C., Mateo, W., Villota, E.M.,
2020. Microwave-assisted synthesis of bifunctional magnetic solid acid for hydrolyzing cellulose to prepare
nanocellulose. Sci. Total Environ. 731, 138751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138751.
Zhou, Z.-Y., Tian, N., Li, J.-T., Broadwell, I., Sun, S.-G., 2011. Nanomaterials of high surface energy with exceptional
properties in catalysis and energy storage. Chem. Soc. Rev. 40, 4167–4185. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0cs00176g.
Zhu, S., Wu, Y., Chen, Q., Yu, Z., Wang, C., Jin, S., Ding, Y., Wu, G., 2006. Dissolution of cellulose with ionic liquids
and its application: a mini-review. Green Chem. https://doi.org/10.1039/b601395c.
Ziaul, M., Zaman, Z., Bee, H, et al., 2014. Statistical optimization for acid hydrolysis of microcrystalline cellulose and
its physiochemical characterization by using metal ion catalyst. Materials 7, 6982–6999. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ma7106982.
332 14. Introduction to cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
15
Cellulose composites as
nanobiosorbents for ecological
remediation
Zari Fallaha
, Ehsan Nazarzadeh Zareb
, Mahmood Tajbakhsha
,
and Vinod V.T. Padilc
a
Faculty of Chemistry, University of Mazandaran, Babolsar, Iran b
School of Chemistry, Damghan
University, Damghan, Iran c
Institute for Nanomaterials, Advanced Technologies and Innovation
(CXI), Technical University of Liberec (TUL), Liberec, Czech Republic
15.1 Introduction
The increasing human population and fast growth of industrialization have resulted in sig￾nificant destabilization of the ecosystem. The industrialization has resulted in the generation
of a number of pollutants which are found mixed in the air, water, and soil (Meteku et al.,
2020). Dyes, drugs, heavy metal ions, etc., are responsible for environmental contamination
and attracted considerable attention because of their potential dangers to human safety and
environmental stability (Zou et al., 2016). Consequently, with the aim of preserve ecological
stability, successfully separate of pollutants from the environment is still very important. Of
all the famous approaches in remediation, the adsorption method has been considered as a
simple and operative tool for remediation of pollutants (Hosseini et al., 2019). Particularly in
environmental remediation, the adsorption technique has been widely accepted to eliminate
contaminants.
The use of renewable materials from agriculture in environmental remediation not only
diminutions the carbon productions, but may also decrease the cost of remediation (Zare
et al., 2018a, b). Cellulose is a most abundant organic polymer with the formula (C6H10O5)
n, a polysaccharide involving a linear chain of some hundred to many thousands of
β(1!4) linked D-glucose units (Peng et al., 2020). Natural and modified types of cellulosic
materials are used to remove organic/inorganic pollutants from the environment (Ul-Islam
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 333 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00015-0et al., 2016). Cellulose-based nanocomposites showed well chemical, and physical properties
than cellulose; for example, they display improved mechanical, thermal, electrical, optical,
and magnetic properties, as well as have a broader range of selectivity for the remediation
of pollutions from the environment (Ul-Islam et al., 2016).
This book chapter aims at looking at different cellulose-based composites used for the
remediation of various pollutants found in the environment. The current challenges and
possible resolutions are discussed.
15.2 Ecological remediation by cellulose nanocomposites
In modern society, the development of industrialization and civilization has resulted in a
tremendous rise in organic and inorganic chemical wastes that are potentially dangerous in
numerous environmental matrices such as air, water, soil, and ecosystem. The increased
knowledge for using sustainable green resources for diminishing the global environmental
issues led to the focus of the scientist efforts on applying eco-friendly and biodegradable ad￾sorbents as a suitable alternative for petroleum-based compounds. Cellulose composites with
renewable resources, biocompatibility, high surface area, abundance functional groups, and
stability have prone to physical/chemical adsorption of contaminants from the environment
(Tshikovhi et al., 2020). Thus, the development of cellulose-based composites with innovative
design has emerged as a potential strategy to purify the ecosystem pollution caused by haz￾ardous pollutants.
15.2.1 Air filtration
Air pollution poses a drastic danger to climate, ecosystems, and human health. The air pol￾lution from atmospheric aerosols, volatile organic compounds, and greenhouse gases are the
major driving force of environmental effects, acid rains, ozone depletion, and global climate
changes. In addition, air pollution can aggravate climate change impacts on water shortage
and global warming (D’Amato and Akdis, 2020). Apart from the environmental conse￾quences, air pollution causes a wide range of health problems such as respiratory, cardiovas￾cular, mental diseases, and pregnancy outcomes at short-time exposure and even death at
long term exposure. Air pollution has the power to stymie human resource accumulation
by reducing children’s longevity, undermining their wellbeing, and limiting their opportu￾nity to benefit from education (Pandey et al., 2021). On the other hand, tiny particulate ma￾terials in polluted air may carry various viruses, bacteria, and fungi which can cause drastic
allergic, respiratory, and infectious diseases through airborne transmission (Kim et al., 2018).
To achieve clean air and mitigate pollution effects, the researchers urgently needed to focus
on designing and producing smart green filters capable of separation, adsorption, and decon￾tamination of air pollutants. In the following sections, the application of cellulose composites
is summarized for air filtration through the separation and adsorption of particulate matters,
volatile organic compounds, and hazardous gases.
The cellulose acetate/poly(ionic liquid) composite was prepared via macromolecular de￾sign and electrostatic spinning technique as an antimicrobial air filter with a removal rate of
334 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices99.65% for inhalable particulate materials of 10 nm (Zhu et al., 2020). These nano-filters pre￾served the outstanding antimicrobial effects against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus
bacteria. In another study, poly(vinyl alcohol)/cellulose nanocrystals (PVA/CNCs) compos￾ite was prepared using electrospinning technique (Zhang et al., 2019a). The PVA/CNCs
nanofibrous filter was applied as an air filter with low air resistance for particulate matter
(PM2.5) removal. The thinner electrospun fibers reduced significantly pressure drop and in￾creased the removal efficiency of PM2.5 (99.1%).
Thus, using environmentally friendly cellulosic fiber-based filters especially with antimi￾crobial effects for indoor air purification is a major issue to protect people from particular
pollutants.
In recent studies, cellulose-based nanocomposites were also applied for gas adsorption
that are reviewed in this section. The functional porous carboxymethyl cellulose/cellulose
acetate (CMC/CA) composite was prepared via the double emulsion solvent evaporation
technique (Sun et al., 2019). In the fabrication process of CMC/CA composite, cupric ions
were introduced in situ ion cross-link method. The macroporous CMC/CA with functional
cupric ions with high complexing ability toward hydrogen cyanide exhibited great potential
for selective removal of hydrogen cyanide (50% reduction) in the cigarette smoke.
In addition, the α-alumina ceramic tube supported cellulose triacetate-tributyl phosphate
(Shankar and Kandasamy, 2019) and ZIF-8@cellulose nanofibers ( Jia et al., 2020) composites
were recently synthesized as separation membranes for CO2 capturing from polluted air to
mitigate the greenhouse effect. The ZIF-8@cellulose nanofibers composite demonstrated the
CO2 permeability of 550 Barrer and CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 ideal selectivity of 36.2 and 45.5,
respectively. This study revealed that the gas separation behavior was related to the intrinsic
selectivity of ZIF-8. In another investigation, lightweight and porous zeolitic imidazolate
frameworks-8@cellulose nanofber@cellulose foam (ZIF-8@CNF@cellulose foam;
SBET ¼ 475.5 m2 g1
) was synthesized and applied for nitrogen gas adsorption (Ma et al.,
2019a). The nitrogen adsorption capacity of ZIF-8@CNF@cellulose foam was 30 times higher
than pure cellulose foam. Further, copper (II)/cellulose nanofibers/carbon nanotubes (CNT/
CNF-Cu2+, SBET ¼ 60 m2 g1
) aerogel was prepared from cellulose nanofiber and carbon
nanotube backbones and Cu2+ linker and utilized as a porous absorbent for effective and se￾lective removal of odorous toxic gases such as ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, methyl mercap￾tan, and trimethylamine from the air (Adavan Kiliyankil et al., 2021). The complete
adsorption of ammonia (200 ppm), hydrogen sulfide (100 ppm), methyl mercaptan
(100 ppm), and trimethylamine (70 ppm) was achieved onto 2 g of CNT/CNF-Cu2+ from
9 L of air.
For air purification through the removal of volatile organic compounds, cellulose acetate/
ultrahigh silica zeolites (CA/UHSZs) composites were synthesized from two types of UHSZs,
USY (modified Y zeolite) and silicalite prepared by hydrothermal crystallization, via single
needle and needle-less electrospinning systems (Ojstrsˇek et al., 2020). The electrospun
nanofibrous CA/UHSZs were applied to adsorb ammonia from polluted air. The obtained
results indicated that the presence of porous UHSZs in the electrospun CA nanofibers in￾creased the ammonia removal efficiency, and the CA/silicalite exhibited higher adsorption
capacity than CA/USY composite.
For geminate adsorption of toxic gases, volatile organic compounds, and particulate
matters from polluted air, few composite examples are introduced in the following section.
15.2 Ecological remediation by cellulose nanocomposites 335
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe cellulose fiber functionalized with zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (CFs@ZIF-8;
SBET ¼ 620.80 m2 g1 and pore volume ¼ 0.23 cm3 g1
) composite was fabricated as an air
filter for nitrogen gas and PM0.3 adsorption (Su et al., 2018). The good adsorption capability
of CFs@ZIF-8 was correlated to ZIF-8 incorporation that improved the surface area, created
abundant cavities and gas adsorption sites, thus, enhancing the stronger interactions with
PMs. In addition, cellulose nanofiber stringed HKUST-1 polyhedron membrane was
fabricated on stainless steel screen (CNFs/HKUST-1/SSS) and applied as a window screen
for formaldehyde and PM2.5 removal from the air (Zhao et al., 2019a). The CNFs/HKUST-1
with hierarchical porous structure generates extremely micrometer to nanometer pathways
for fast air transportation while blocking PM2.5 with a blocking efficiency of above 95%.
Also, the CNFs/HKUST-1 exhibited effective adsorption of formaldehyde
(qmax ¼ 47.71 mg g1
) due to the highly microporous cavities with open copper sites of
HKUST-1 in membrane structure. The results of air purification demonstrated that the
CNFs/HKUST-1/SSS has great potential for indoor air purification because it is highly
porous, hierarchical, and thin thickness (5 μm) with an air flow rate of 4.6 cm s1 under
200 Pa. In another study, multi-functional metal-organic frameworks@cellulose fibers
(MOFs@CF: ZIF-8@CF, MOF-199@CF, and Ag-MOFs@CF) composites were prepared
by an in situ deposition of ZIF-8, MOF-199, and Ag-MOFs crystals on cellulose matrix
(Ma et al., 2018). The removal efficiency of PM0.3 using Ag-MOFs@CF
(SBET ¼ 12.2 m2 g1
), MOF-199@CF (SBET ¼ 164.9 m2 g1
), and ZIF-8@CF
(SBET ¼ 308.0 m2 g1
) composites was reported to be 97.34, 98.28, and 98.36% under 126,
131, and 134 Pa pressure drop, respectively. The MOFs@CF efficacy, especially ZIF￾8@CF, for nitrogen gas adsorption was higher than pure cellulose which attributed to
the porous MOFs crystals with many metals and organic sites for gas adsorption. Also,
the MOFs@CF revealed antimicrobial effects against E. coli with the highest inhibition zone
diameter of 20.8 mm for Ag-MOFs@CF. Further, a double-component metal-organic frame￾work (Ag-MOFs@CNF@ZIF-8, SBET ¼ 344.9 m2 g1
) nanocomposite with multi-layer struc￾ture was fabricated through in situ generation process (Fig. 15.1A) (Ma et al., 2019b). The
Ag-MOFs@CNF@ZIF-8 air filter displayed good filtration performance for PM2.5
(94.3%) (Fig. 15.1B), the high ability for nitrogen gas adsorption (109 cm3 g1
) (Fig.
15.1C), and excellent antibacterial activity against E. coli (inhibition zone
diameter ¼ 18.1 mm) (Fig. 15.1D). The antibacterial activity was related to the presence
of Ag-MOFs, whereas filtration performance and gas adsorption were mainly attributed
to the ZIF-8, and further, the mechanical strength was associated with CNF.
15.2.2 Water treatment
The most important resource for a healthier life is water, and water contamination is a sig￾nificant environmental problem. The discharge of industrial effluents into waterways is the
primary source of water pollution (Oyewo et al., 2020b). Effluents containing pollutants such
as ions, dyes, drugs, pesticides, etc. are very disastrous on plants, animals and human health,
and the entire ecosystem. As a result, the removal of hazardous pollutants from aqueous me￾dia has become an urgent need, especially through adsorption techniques by efficient
cellulose-based adsorbent because of their advantages.
336 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 15.1 (A) The preparation of Ag-MOFs@CNF@ZIF-8 nanocomposite filter. (B) The filtration performance of
Ag-MOFs@CNF@ZIF-8 filter, and the comparison of Ag-MOFs@CNF@ZIF-8 efficacy with pure cellulose, ZIF￾8@CNF@CF, and Ag-MOFs@CNF@CF filter. (C) the filtration mechanism diagram of AgMOFs@CNF@ZIF-8 filter.
(D) The antibacterial activity of Ag-MOFs@CNF@ZIF-8 in comparison to CNF@CF, ZIF-8@CNF@CF, and
AgMOFs@CNF@CF filters against E. coli. Reproduced with permission from Ma, S., Zhang, M., Nie, J., Tan, J.,
Yang, B., Song, S., 2019b. Design of double-component metal–organic framework air filters with PM2.5 capture, gas adsorption
and antibacterial capacities. Carbohydr. Polym. 203, 415–422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.09.039.
15.2 Ecological remediation by cellulose nanocomposites 337
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesIons removal
Large amounts of toxic heavy metal ions are generated by industrial mining, agricultural
production, and human activities, that the majority of them ultimately harm the plant, animal,
and human health. In plants, the stress of metal ions at high concentrations causes the
degradation of leaf chlorophylls which then reduces the plant photosynthetic capacity, thus,
resulting in the photoinhibition and photo-oxidative damage of plant leaves (Huihui et al.,
2020). In animals, the non-biodegradability and accumulation of metal ions in organs can
create functional disturbances and structural lesions. Heavy metal ions considerably increase
the level of oxidants and decrease the antioxidants levels (Fan et al., 2020). Also, the heavy
metals ions toxicity induces changes in condition indices, biochemical disorders, and histo￾pathology of organisms. In humans, metal ions may generate reactive radicals, create oxida￾tive stress, produce reactive oxygen species, thus cause numerous human diseases including
cancer risk ( Jomova and Valko, 2011).
In addition, anions can be toxic and hazardous for the natural environment and people at
concentrations higher than their safe limit. For example, the safe limit for fluoride ions is
1.5 ppm in drinking water, thus, above this limit, it can cause dental and skeletal fluorosis
problems (Fallah et al., 2020). Arsenate, selenate, selenite, etc. are toxic and carcinogenic at
definite concentrations (Abukhadra et al., 2021). As it is clear from the above discussion,
cellulose-based composites are extensively used as efficient bio-sorbents of toxic ions in eco￾logical remediation.
Cations
A microfibrous nanocomposite was prepared through the binding of ZnO nanocrystals
with regenerated microfibrillated cellulose (R-MFC, SBET ¼ 10.74 m2 g1
) fabricated from jute
cellulose. The ZnO/R-MFC composite was applied as an effective adsorbent for As(V) ions
removal from water with a maximum adsorption capacity of 4421 mg g1 at neutral pH (7)
(Sharma et al., 2019). The ZnO crystallites were efficient adsorption sites in composite struc￾ture for As(V) ions removal. The ZnO nanocrystals were effectively anchored to the R-MFC
due to strong electrostatic interactions with cellulose II structure. The good binding stability
between the R-MFC and ZnO nanocrystals led to very low ZnO release during the
As(V) removal, demonstrating the viability of ZnO/R-MFC composite for water treatment.
Influencing factors on the adsorption capability of hydrothermal synthesized cellulose
nanocrystal/iron oxide nanorod (CNs/Fe2O3, pHPZC ¼ 6.8) composite were investigated
for arsenic adsorption from aqueous solution (Dong et al., 2020). The iron oxide nanorods,
prepared using cellulose nanocrystals as a template, were the effective adsorption sites for
arsenic removal. The CNs/Fe2O3 composite exhibited the maximum adsorption capacities
of 15.71 and 13.87 mg g1 for As(V) and As(III) removal at pH of 3 and 7, respectively.
The adsorption mechanism is consisting of electrostatic attraction between positively charged
composite surface and negative ionic form of As(V) (H2AsO4) at pH 3 (pH < pHPZC), and in￾teractions between the nonionic form of As(III) (H3AsO3) and active adsorption sites of com￾posite with zero charge at pH 7 (pH ¼ pHPZC).
The FeOOH/CuO@WBC composite was prepared from water bamboo shells waste￾derived cellulose and applied for arsenic adsorption (Liu et al., 2020). The adsorption studies
showed that the maximum adsorption capacity of FeOOH/CuO@WBC was 76.1 mg g1 at
338 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesoptimal conditions (pH 3.5 and arsenic initial concentration ¼ 150 mg L1 at room tempera￾ture). The good adsorption capacity of FeOOH/CuO@WBC for arsenic removal was related
to the synergistic influences of physical and chemical interactions, and also to the synergistic
effects of WBC, CuO, and FeOOH. The WBC with many hydroxyl groups is an essential sub￾strate for FeOOH and CuO to attain maximum efficacy. The trivalent arsenic could bind di￾rectly to the hydroxyl group of CuO and FeOOH, or it could oxidize to arsenic pentavalent by
copper oxide, and subsequently interact with hydroxyl groups of iron. The obtained results of
adsorption and recycling experiments expressed that the efficient removal of arsenic was oc￾curred onto FeOOH/CuO@WBC from aqueous media according to the idea of “treating
waste with waste.”
In hybrids structure, the formation of a chemical bond between the filler and substrate usu￾ally leads to a more stable composite, thus resulting to enhance the adsorption capability and
recyclability of composite, and decrease the leaching of metal oxide nanoparticles.
For example, cellulose-titania-based nanocomposite (Cell-Com, SBET ¼ 34.73 m2 g1
) was
synthesized via the click reaction between alkyne functionalized TiO2 NPs with azide micro￾crystalline cellulose (Fallah et al., 2018). The Cell-Com was investigated as a nano-biosorbent
for the removal of Zn2+, Cd2+, and Pb2+ ions from aqueous solutions. The maximum adsorp￾tion capacity of nanocomposite for Pb2+, Cd2+ and Zn2+ ions was found to be 120.48, 102.05
and 102.04 mg g1
, respectively. Isotherm, kinetic, and a thermodynamic assay of adsorption
process confirmed that the chemical adsorption of heavy metal ions has spontaneously oc￾curred onto Cell-Com with endothermic nature. The presence of triazole rings along with
many functional groups in TiO2, linkers, and microcrystalline cellulose moieties led to the
generation of high thermal resistance composite with selective adsorption ability to Pb2+ ions
and excellent recyclability.
In the construction of cellulose composites, carbon oxides such as graphene oxide can be
used instead of metal oxides. The GO-TETA-DAC composite was constructed from
dialdehyde cellulose (DAC) grafted graphene oxide (GO) using a triethylenetetramine
(TETA) cross-linker (Yao et al., 2019). The GO-TETA-DAC (SBET ¼ 762 m2 g1
) displayed
good performance for Pb(II) and Cu(II) removal through ion-exchange mechanism with max￾imum adsorption capacity of 80.9 and 65.0 mg g1
, respectively.
The carboxymethyl cellulose supported magnetic graphene oxide composite (CMC/
MGOs) was fabricated using low-temperature plasma technique and applied for uranium
ions removal from aqueous solutions (Zong et al., 2019). The adsorption mechanism illus￾trated that the U(VI) was attracted onto CMC/MGOs composite with qmax ¼ 7.94  104
mol g1 via the inner-sphere surface complexation. The easy and economical recycling of
magnetic cellulose composites is considered an important advantage in the water treatment
process.
The graphene oxide-terminated hyperbranched amino polymer-carboxymethyl cellulose
ternary nanocomposite (GO-HBP-NH2-CMC) was prepared for removing the Cu2+ and
Pb2+ ions with qmax ¼ 137.48 and 152.86 mg g1
, respectively (Kong et al., 2020). Complexa￾tion of metallic ions with N-containing functional groups, as well as, ion exchange with
O-containing functional groups determine the GO-HBP-NH-CMC adsorption performance
toward heavy metal ions.
Recently, metal-organic framework materials (MOFs) with porous structures and large
specific surface areas were combined with cellulose to form composite adsorbents. The
15.2 Ecological remediation by cellulose nanocomposites 339
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmetal-organic frameworks@cellulose aerogels composites were synthesized by loading UiO￾66 and UiO-66-NH2 MOFs onto the cellulose aerogels via in situ growth procedure and were
utilized for decontamination of Pb2+ and Cu2+ ions (Lei et al., 2019). Also, in situ synthesis and
lyophilization were used for constructing of zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 modified bac￾terial cellulose/chitosan composite (ZIF-67/BC/CH, SBET ¼ 268.7 m2 g1
) with qmax of 152.1
and 200.6 mg g1 for Cr6+ and Cu2+ ions adsorption (Li et al., 2020). Despite the good adsorp￾tion performance, the application of MOFs-based composite adsorbents was limited in waste￾water treatment due to the high cost and intricated synthesis, and their ecotoxicity potential.
The combination of carbohydrate polymers in composite construction is a suitable synthetic
method in accordance with the goals of green chemistry. The water-stable CSP-CMCP compos￾ite was manufactured from cross-linking of phosphorylated chitosan (CSP) and phosphate￾decorated carboxymethyl cellulose (CMCP) and used as an efficient adsorbent for U(VI)
removal (qmax ¼ 977.54 mg g1
) (Cai et al., 2019). The predominant adsorption mechanism
was found to be related to the inner-sphere surface complexation.
Anions
Nanocellulose coated flexible titanate-bismuth oxide (CH-TBM) composite was prepared
and applied for iodide removal from super-intricate anion/cation/oily-water (Xiong et al.,
2018). The CH-TBM revealed high adsorption capacity (qmax ¼ 225.9 mg g1
) for I ions be￾cause of synergistic effects of cellulose hydroxyl/carboxyl groups, layered titanate nanofibers
and oxygen vacancy occupied δ-Bi2O3.
Bamboo cellulose fibers constructed 3D graphene-formicary-like δ-Bi2O3 (FL-δ-Bi2O3,
SBET ¼ 206.2 m2 g1
) aerogels were synthesized through a one-pot hydrothermal method
and utilized for radioiodine removal with uptake capacity of 2.04 mmol g1 via insoluble
Bi4I2O5 phase formation (Xiong et al., 2017).
In recent years, research has been done to make innovative cellulose-based composites as
an effective adsorbent for the removal of fluoride anion from aqueous solutions. For example,
aluminum and lanthanum impregnated cellulose composite (ALIC), constructed by
co-precipitation (ALIC(P); SBET ¼ 130.93 m2 g1
, qmax ¼ 33.33 mg g1
) and ultrasound￾assisted (ALIC(U); SBET ¼ 196.91 m2 g1
, qmax ¼ 88.67 mg g1
) methods (Raghav et al.,
2019), zerovalent iron/zirconium(IV)-doped cellulose nanofibers (qmax ¼ 35.70 mg g1
)
(Sankararamakrishnan et al., 2019), multiple bimetallic (Al-La or Fe-La) hydroxides embedded
in cellulose/graphene composites (Al-La@CG: SBET ¼ 45.38 m2 g1
, qmax ¼ 51.54 mg g1
; and
Fe-La@CG: SBET ¼ 44.98 m2 g1
, qmax < 51 mg g1
) (Guo et al., 2019), cellulose nanofiber￾polyaniline-templated ferrihydrite nanocomposite (SBET ¼ 111.1 m2 g1
, qmax ¼ 50.8 mg g1
)
(Mukherjee et al., 2020), and Fe-Al-Mn@chitosan based metal oxides blended cellulose acetate
mixed matrix membrane (Chaudhary and Maiti, 2020).
The Zr-La-CC/GO nanocomposites were fabricated by embedding the bimetallic La and
Zr hydroxides onto the cotton cellulose/graphene oxide (CC/GO) hybrid (Fig. 15.2) (Shang
et al., 2019). This composite with SBET ¼ 49.486 m2 g1 was applied as a sorbent for selective
removal of fluoride through metal-ligand interaction.
The CMC-g-AMPS/Fe/Al/AC composite was synthesized from the impregnation of
CMC-g-AMPS/Fe/Al hydrogel with activated charcoal (Sinha and Chakma, 2020). The
CMC-g-AMPS/Fe/Al was fabricated from the creation of a three-dimensional cross-linked
network using CMC-g-AMPS hydrogel, prepared from free radical graft polymerization of
340 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescarboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) and 2-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid (AMPS), to
coordinate with the Al3+ and Fe3+ cations. The CMC-g-AMPS/Fe/Al/AC superabsorbent
exhibited a high affinity for F ions with qmax ¼ 67.114 mg g1 via ion exchange, coordina￾tion, and surface adsorption.
Selective removal of phosphate was investigated using SP-Zr-La bio-adsorbent prepared
from anchoring of dual Zr and La hydroxide onto shaddock peels derived cellulose (Du et al.,
2019). Phosphate ion adsorption onto SP-Zr-La was occurred via ligand exchange or metal￾ligand interactions.
The Zr/La-cell/GO composite was made up by embedding Zr and La hydroxides into the
3D self-assembled cellulose/graphene oxide (cell/GO) hybrid (Fig. 15.3) (Zhang et al., 2019b).
Phosphate removal and competitive adsorption in the presence of humic acid (HA) or various
anions (F, Cl, SiO3
2, SO4
2, HCO3 and NO3) were evaluated onto Zr/La-cell/GO
hybrid. Competitive adsorption studies demonstrated that phosphate uptake was reduced
at the co-existing HA/anions, especially fluoride. Also, the phosphate adsorption was
remarkably improved by Ca2+ loading onto the Zr/La-cell/GO because of the calcium
phosphate precipitation.
Adsorptive and selective mini-membrane (TiO2@cellulose) was prepared via in situ syn￾thesis of TiO2 filler into cellulose filter and applied for separation, determination, and speci￾ation of selenite and arsenate ions (Zawisza et al., 2020).
The exfoliated kaolinite sheets/cellulose fibers nanocomposite (EXK/CF,
SBET ¼ 104 m2 g1
) was manufactured and used for decontamination of selenite (SeO3
2)
and selenate (SeO4
2) ions with qmax of 137.5 and 161.4 mg g1
, respectively (Abukhadra
et al., 2021).
FIG. 15.2 The preparation of Zr-La-CC/GO nanocomposites, and the presentation of fluoride uptake by
Zr-La-CC/GO nanosorbent at various pH conditions. Reproduced with permission from Shang, Y., Wang, Z., Xu, X.,
Cheng, C., Gao, B., Yue, Q., Liu, S., Han, C., 2019. Enhanced fluoride uptake by bimetallic hydroxides anchored in cotton cel￾lulose/graphene oxide composites. J. Hazard. Mater. 376, 91–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.05.039.
15.2 Ecological remediation by cellulose nanocomposites 341
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesDyes removal
Aromatic and heterocyclic dyes with complicated and stable structures are very dangerous
for human health and the environment. The dyes meaningfully decrease the water quality,
increase the chemical and biochemical oxygen demand, hinder photosynthesis, prevent plant
growth, enter the food chain, and resulting in environmental imbalance. In addition, dyes
pollutants may afford bioaccumulation and can generate toxicity, mutagenicity, and carcino￾genicity (Lellis et al., 2019). The textile wastewater with severe health hazards to microorgan￾isms, animals, humans, as well as plants must be treated before their discharge. In recent
works, the cellulose composites with high adsorption capacity were reported as the most
commonly used adsorbents for the treatment of wastewater polluted with dyes pollutants.
For example, the Fe3O4 reinforced graphene oxide-carboxymethyl cellulose recyclable
composite was prepared via the co-precipitation method, and applied for adsorption of acid
red 1 (AR1), congo red (CR), and reactive red 2 (RR2) from aqueous solutions (Fig. 15.4)
(Sirajudheen et al., 2020b). Synthesized composite with high adsorption capacity and good
recyclability and reusability could be used as a potential adsorbent for the removal of dyes.
The good adsorption efficiency of the composite was related to the hydrogen bonding, π-π
stacking interaction, electrostatic attraction, and surface complexation. In addition, the
self-assembled complex of graphene oxide and nano-cellulose was formed in situ via the
modified Hummers’ method and utilized as an adsorbent with qmax ¼ 751.88 (mg g1
) for
enhanced methylene blue adsorption (Zaman et al., 2020). The combination of cellulose
and graphene moieties, with functional groups (–OH and –COOH), and the formation of hy￾drogen bonding between the negative functional groups on the edges of graphene oxide and
FIG. 15.3 The synthesis of Zr/La-cellulose/graphene oxide (Zr/La-cell/GO) nanocomposite, and the adsorption
mechanism of phosphate onto Zr/La-cell/GO at different pH conditions. Reproduced with permission from Zhang, L.,
Wang, Z., Xu, X., Chen, C., Gao, B., Xiao, X., 2019b. Insights into the phosphate adsorption behavior onto 3D self-assembled
cellulose/graphene hybrid nanomaterials embedded with bimetallic hydroxides. Sci. Total Environ. 653, 897–907. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.030.
342 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 15.4 (A) The schematic representation for preparing of Fe3O4 reinforced graphene oxide-carboxymethyl cel￾lulose (Fe3O4/GO-CMC) composite. (B) The plausible mechanism for adsorption of acid red 1 (AR1), congo red (CR),
and reactive red 2 (RR2) dyes onto Fe3O4/GO-CMC composite. Reproduced with permission from Sirajudheen, P.,
Nikitha, M.R., Karthikeyan, P., Meenakshi, S., 2020b. Perceptive removal of toxic azo dyes from water using magnetic
Fe3O4 reinforced graphene oxide–carboxymethyl cellulose recyclable composite: adsorption investigation of parametric studies
and their mechanisms. Surf. Interfaces 21, 100648. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfin.2020.100648.
15.2 Ecological remediation by cellulose nanocomposites 343
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesthe OH groups of cellulose led to the generation of composites with high surface area. Higher
adsorption efficiency is provided from composites with a higher surface area.
To access cellulosic composites with high surface areas, the research works were reported
based on the dispersion of metal-organic frameworks into the nanocellulose matrix. The UiO￾66/cellulose composite with high surface area (826 m2 g1
) was fabricated through a self￾crosslinking method and showed good adsorption efficacy toward both cationic methylene
blue (51.8 mg g1
) and anionic methyl orange (71.7 mg g1
) (Wang et al., 2019). Also, the
structural control of cellulosic composite membrane with ZIF-8 spacers was investigated
for highly selective removal of cationic dye in the presence of anionic dye (Song et al.,
2019). The ZIF-8/TOCN membrane, prepared from in situ growing of zeolitic imidazolate
frameworks (ZIF-8) in the presence of TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibers (TOCN),
exhibited a porous three-dimensional network with high durability without critical compac￾tion under pressure and superior water flux without critical flux drop. The selective removal
of cationic dyes was correlated to the strong interaction with negatively charged TOCN
networks.
More examples of cellulose-based composites that have been recently used for dyes ad￾sorption from aqueous solutions are summarized in Table 15.1.
Drugs removal
Pharmaceuticals are contaminants of emerging concern with the capability of ecological
contamination in trace concentrations, along with cytostatic, genotoxic, mutagenic, and
eco-toxicological effects on human health as well as on microorganisms present in soil and
aquatic environment. The formation of reactive oxygen species and free radicals by pharma￾ceuticals can be associated with immunotoxicity, genotoxicity, and carcinogenesis (Yadav
et al., 2021). The cellulose composites as environmentally friendly adsorbents have efficiently
applied for drug removal because of high surface area, a large number of active functional
groups, and low secondary pollution.
For example, soft foam-like UiO-66/polydopamine/bacterial cellulose (UiO-66/PDA/BC)
was synthesized using biomass bacterial cellulose as a scaffold and polydopamine layer
coating on the bacterial cellulose substrate (Fig. 15.5A) (Cui et al., 2020). The uniform coating
of UiO-66 nanoparticles with uniform size in the three-dimensional connected network of
composite structure guarantees high surface area (SBET ¼ 454 m2 g1
) as well as active sites
for the adsorption of aspirin (qmax ¼ 149 mg g1
) and tetracycline hydrochloride
(qmax ¼ 184 mg g1
) (Fig. 15.5B). The effective adsorption capability of UiO-66/PDA/BC
was mainly related to the synergetic effect of π-π interaction and chemisorption (Fig.
15.5C). The good stability as well as excellent reusability of synthesized composite exhibited
the great potential for pharmaceuticals removal from aqueous solutions.
Other examples of cellulose composites used in the removal of pharmaceuticals from
aqueous solutions in recent years are listed in Table 15.2.
Pesticides removal
Oxidative stress caused by pesticides with the ability of DNA damage can generate respi￾ratory and reproductive physiology disorders, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases, and
malignancies. The risk of cancers, leukemia, neuroblastoma, soft tissue sarcoma, Burkitt
344 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 15.1 Representation of recently synthesized cellulose composites for dyes removal from aqueous solutions.
Adsorbent Adsorbate
Adsorption
conditions
Adsorption
isotherm
Adsorption
kinetic
qmax
(mg g21)
Adsorption
mechanism References
Activated carbon/cellulose
biocomposite
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 6.9,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ mg,
T ¼ 308 K,
t ¼ 24 h
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 103.66 Physical and chemical adsorptions Somsesta et al. (2020)
Zr(IV) encapsulated
carboxymethyl cellulose￾montmorillonite composite
Acid
orange 7
pH ¼ 3,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 100 mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 40 min
Freundlich – 28.80 Electrostatic
attraction
Hydrogen
bonding Surface
complexation
Sirajudheen
et al. (2020a)
Zr(IV) encapsulated
carboxymethyl cellulose￾montmorillonite composite
Reactive
red 2
pH ¼ 3,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 100 mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 40 min
Freundlich – 35.90 Electrostatic
attraction
Hydrogen
bonding Surface
complexation
Sirajudheen
et al. (2020a)
Polypyrrole/carboxymethyl
cellulose nanocomposite
reactive
red 56
pH ¼ 4,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 0.09 mg,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 55 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 104.9 Hydrogen bonding Tanzifi et al. (2020)
Polypyrrole/carboxymethyl
cellulose nanocomposite
reactive
blue 160
pH ¼ 5,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 0.09 mg,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 52 min
Langmuir Bangham 120.7 Hydrogen
bonding
Tanzifi et al.
(2020)
ContinuedTABLE 15.1 Representation of recently synthesized cellulose composites for dyes removal from aqueous solutions—cont’d
Adsorbent Adsorbate
Adsorption
conditions
Adsorption
isotherm
Adsorption
kinetic
qmax
(mg g21)
Adsorption
mechanism References
Carboxymethyl cellulose/
carboxylated graphene oxide
composite
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 10,
C0 ¼ 200 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 50 mg,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 120 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 180.32 – Eltaweil et al. (2020)
Carboxymethyl cellulose/
alginate/polyvinyl alcohol/rice
husk composite
Direct
Orange-26
pH ¼ 12,
C0 ¼ mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 20 min
– Pseudo￾second￾order 25.19 – Bhatti et al. (2020a, b)
Carboxymethyl cellulose/
alginate/polyvinyl alcohol/rice
husk composite
Direct Red￾31 pH ¼ 12, C0 ¼ mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 20 min
– Pseudo￾second￾order 26.81 – Bhatti et al. (2020a, b)
Carboxymethyl cellulose/
alginate/polyvinyl alcohol/rice
husk composite
Direct
Blue-67
pH ¼ 12,
C0 ¼ mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 20 min
– Pseudo￾second￾order 20.45 – Bhatti et al. (2020a, b)
Carboxymethyl cellulose/
alginate/polyvinyl alcohol/rice
husk composite
Ever direct
Orange￾3GL
pH ¼ 12,
C0 ¼ mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 20 min
– Pseudo￾second￾order 26.67 – Bhatti et al. (2020a, b)
Graphene oxide-cellulose
nanocomposite
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 10,
C0 ¼ 10 mg L1,
V ¼ 70 mL,
m ¼ 30 mg L1,
T ¼ 313 K,
t ¼ 135 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 751.88 Electrostatic interaction Zaman et al. (2020)Deacetylated cellulose
acetate@polydopaminecomposite
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 6.5,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ mL,
m ¼ 10 mg,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 24 h
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 88.2 Electrostatic interaction π-π stacking Cheng et al. (2020)
NiFe2O4/multi-walled carbon
nanotubes functionalized
cellulose
Congo red pH ¼ 6.0,
C0 ¼ 5 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 50 mg,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 48 h
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 95.70 Physical and chemical adsorption Jiang et al. (2021)
Fe3O4 reinforced graphene oxide–
carboxymethyl cellulose
Congo red pH ¼ 6,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 100 mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 40 min
Freundlich Pseudo￾second￾order 45.09 Electrostatic interaction Hydrogen
bonding π-π
stacking Surface
complexation
Sirajudheen
et al. (2020b)
Fe3O4 reinforced graphene oxide–
carboxymethyl cellulose
Acid red 1 pH ¼ 6,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 100 mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 40 min
Freundlich Pseudo￾second￾order 47.32 Electrostatic interaction Hydrogen
bonding π-π
stacking Surface
complexation
Sirajudheen
et al. (2020b)
Fe3O4 reinforced graphene oxide–
carboxymethyl cellulose
Reactive
red 2
pH ¼ 6,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 100 mg,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 40 min
Freundlich Pseudo￾second￾order 46.21 Electrostatic interaction Hydrogen
bonding π-π
stacking Surface
complexation
Sirajudheen
et al. (2020b)
Exfoliated bentonite sheets
admixed with nano-cellulose
fibers
Safranin pH ¼ 8,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ 250 mL,
m ¼ 100 mg L1,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 240 min
Freundlich Pseudo￾first-order 341 Physisorption Abukhadra et al. (2020)
ContinuedTABLE 15.1 Representation of recently synthesized cellulose composites for dyes removal from aqueous solutions—cont’d
Adsorbent Adsorbate
Adsorption
conditions
Adsorption
isotherm
Adsorption
kinetic
qmax
(mg g21)
Adsorption
mechanism References
Sawdust-based cellulose
nanocrystals incorporated with
ZnO nanoparticles
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 4.0,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL,
m ¼ 100 mg,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 25 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 64.93 Electrostatic interaction Hydrogen
bonding π-π
stacking
Oyewo et al.
(2020a)
Carboxymethyl cellulose￾chitosan-montmorillonite
nanosheets
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 8.0,
C0 ¼ 20 mg L1,
V ¼ 500 mL,
m ¼ 200 mg L1,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 360 min
Sips Pseudo￾first-order
Pseudo￾second￾order
– Physical and
chemical
adsorption
Wang et al.
(2020a)
Electrospun cellulose acetate/
poly(dimethyldiallylammonium
chloride-acrylamide)
Acid black
172
pH ¼ 2.0,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 100 mL,
m ¼ 10 mg,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 24 h
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 290 Chemisorption Xu et al. (2020)
Cellulose mediated graphene
oxide magnetic aerogel composite
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 13.0,
C0 ¼ 200 mg L1,
V ¼ mL,
m ¼ 1gL1,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 240 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 346 Chemisorption Xiong et al. (2020)
Cellulose mediated graphene
oxide magnetic aerogel composite
Congo red pH ¼ 5.0,
C0 ¼ 200 mg L1,
V ¼ mL,
m ¼ 1gL1,
T ¼ 303 K,
t ¼ 240 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 282 Chemisorption Xiong et al. (2020)Graphene oxide/chitosan/
carboxymethyl cellulose
composite
Methylene
blue
pH ¼ 7.0,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ mL,
m ¼ 0.4 g L1,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 655.98 Chemisorption Ion exchange Mittal et al. (2021)
Graphene oxide/chitosan/
carboxymethyl cellulose
composite
Methyl
orange
pH ¼ 3.0,
C0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
V ¼ mL,
m ¼ 0.6 g L1,
T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 404.52 Chemisorption Ion exchange Mittal et al. (2021)FIG. 15.5 (A) The preparation of UiO-66/polydopamine/bacterial cellulose (UiO-66/PDA/BC) composite
aerogel. (B) SEM and TEM images of UiO-66/PDA/BC. (C) The adsorption mechanism of aspirin and tetracycline
hydrochloride onto UiO-66/PDA/BC. Reproduced with permission from Cui, J., Xu, X., Yang, L., Chen, C., Qian, J.,
Chen, X., Sun, D., 2020. Soft foam-like UiO-66/polydopamine/bacterial cellulose composite for the removal of aspirin and tet￾racycline hydrochloride. Chem. Eng. J. 395, 125174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125174).
350 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 15.2 The list of cellulose-based nanocomposites for drug adsorption from aqueous solutions.
Adsorbent Adsorbate Adsorption conditions
Adsorption
isotherm
Adsorption
kinetic
qmax
(mg g21)
Adsorption
mechanism References
Humic acid/cellulose
nanocomposite
Ciprofloxacin pH ¼ 5.0,
C0 ¼ 10 mg L1,
V ¼ 50 mL, m ¼ mg,
T ¼ 318 K, t ¼ min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 10.87 Ion exchange Wang et al. (2020b)
Mg-Al layered double
hydroxide/cellulose
nanocomposit
Amoxicillin pH ¼ 7.0,
C0 ¼ 60 mg L1,
V ¼ 300 mL, m ¼ 30 g,
T ¼ 318 K, t ¼ 90 min
Freundlich Pseudo￾second￾order 138.3 Physisorption Yang et al. (2020b)
Montmorillonite￾impregnated cellulose
acetate nanofiber
Ciprofloxacin pH ¼ 6.0,
C0 ¼ 10 mg L1,
V ¼ mL, m ¼ 4gL1,
T ¼ 300 K, t ¼ 60 min
Langmuir
and
Freundlich
Elovich 13.8 Physisorption
and
Chemisorption
Das et al.
(2020)
Cellulosic sisal fiber/
polypyrrole-polyaniline
composite
Ibuprofen pH ¼ 5.0,
C0 ¼ 30 mg L1,
V ¼ mL, m ¼ 300 mg,
T ¼ 313 K, t ¼ 60 min
Sips Pseudo￾second￾order 21.5 Physisorption and Chemisorption Khadir et al. (2020)
UiO-66/polydopamine/
bacterial cellulose
Aspirin pH ¼ 4.0,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 20 mL, m ¼ 10 mg,
T ¼ 298 K, t ¼ 90 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 149 Physisorption and Chemisorption Cui et al. (2020)
UiO-66/polydopamine/
bacterial cellulose
Tetracycline
hydrochloride
pH ¼ 3.0,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 20 mL, m ¼ 10 mg,
T ¼ 298 K, t ¼ 90 min
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 184 Physisorption and Chemisorption
Magnetic cellulose Tetracycline pH ¼ 4.0,
C0 ¼ 45 mg L1,
V ¼ 25 mL, m ¼ 1gL1,
T ¼ 298 K, t ¼ 48 h
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 44.86 Physisorption and Chemisorption Sun et al. (2021)
Carboxymethyl cellulose
and chitosan modified
magnetic alkaline
Ca-bentonite
Doxycycline pH ¼ 7.0,
C0 ¼ 100 mg L1,
V ¼ 100 mL,
m ¼ 1.2 g L1, T ¼ 298 K,
t ¼ 2 h
Langmuir Pseudo￾second￾order 643 Physisorption and Ion exchange Tang et al. (2021)lymphoma, ovarian, stomach, colon, bladder, rectum, and lung, was found to be greater in
people who are closely associated with pesticides exposure (Sabarwal et al., 2018).
In recent years, several studies have been conducted to remove pesticides using cellulosic
composites. The prometryn was removed by copper-modified microcrystalline cellulose
composite with qmax ¼ 97.80 mg g1 from synthetic wastewater (Garba et al., 2019). Also,
the study of chlorpyrifos adsorption was investigated onto polyvinylamine-modified
nanocellulose (SBET ¼ 32.17 m2 g1 and qmax ¼ 98.12 mg g1
), and the adsorption results
exhibited that the adsorption of chlorpyrifos was primarily dominated by chemisorption
(Yang et al., 2020a). In addition, nanocellulose-organic montmorillonite nanocomposite
(SBET ¼ 39.52 m2 g1
) was applied for diuron adsorption with qmax of 69.04 mg g1 from
aqueous solutions (Ma et al., 2020). In another work, the adsorption of 2,4-dichlorophenol
was assayed onto the composites of cellulosic biomass barley husk with sodium alginate,
polyaniline, and polypyrrole. The polyaniline/cellulose (qe ¼ 24.57 mg g1
) and sodium al￾ginate/cellulose (qe ¼ 7.55 mg g1
) composites were demonstrated the highest and lowest
adsorption capacity for 2,4-dichlorophenol, respectively (Bhatti et al., 2020a, b).
15.2.3 Soil remediation
Soil contamination can be dangerous as it is the foundation of organisms’ survival and af￾fects animal and human health through the food chain (Steffan et al., 2018). The versatility of
soil makes it more prone to pollution by organic and inorganic contaminants especially heavy
metals. Recently, few studies have been reported for soil remediation using cellulosic com￾posites via adsorption.
The remediation of Cu2+-contaminated soil was investigated using the carboxylated
graphene oxide/chitosan/cellulose (GCCSC) composite beads via the adsorption method
(Zhao et al., 2019b). The direct contact between the graphene surface and soil could block
by the porous structure of GCCSC beads, so, a high immobilization efficiency of Cu2+ was
attained by GCCSC beads applied to the soil. In another study, the efficacy of
montmorillonite-supported carboxymethyl cellulose-stabilized nanoscale iron sulfide
(CMC@MMT-FeS) composite, prepared via co-precipitation method, was assayed for reme￾diation of Cr(VI)-contaminated soils (Zhang et al., 2020). The adsorption capacity of
CMC@MMT-FeS for removal of Cr(VI) was improved with increasing FeS-particle loading.
In addition, amphoteric cellulose-montmorillonite composite beads, constructed from
regenerated bagasse cellulose and oxalic acid modified montmorillonite, were introduced
as a promising material for soil remediation because of porous structure (Xie et al., 2019).
Based on research in this field, the application of cellulose composites can be beneficial to
immobilize heavy metals in soil and elevate the soil quality.
15.3 Conclusion
Eco-friendly cellulose-based nanocomposites have shown excellent potential for the re￾moval of toxic gases, organic and inorganic contaminants from the environment because
of their great properties such as high specific surface area and presence of plentiful functional
352 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesgroups. In this book chapter, the synthesis and adsorption ability of diverse cellulosic bio￾sorbents have been investigated for the removal of pollutants from the air, water, and soil.
In addition, the types of interactions and the influence of interactions between adsorbents
and adsorbate are assayed on the adsorption efficiency of cellulosic nano-sorbents. According
to the destructive and deadly effects of pollution on living organisms, the design and fabri￾cation of smart cellulose-based composites with high adsorption capacity for pollutants and
decontamination of pathogens are a necessary need for a better life for human societies.
References
Abukhadra, M.R., Adlii, A., El-Sherbeeny, A.M., Ahmed Soliman, A.T., Abd Elgawad, A.E.E., 2020. Promoting the
decontamination of different types of water pollutants (Cd2+, safranin dye, and phosphate) using a novel structure
of exfoliated bentonite admixed with cellulose nanofiber. J. Environ. Manag. 273, 111130. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111130.
Abukhadra, M.R., AlHammadi, A., El-Sherbeeny, A.M., Salam, M.A., El-Meligy, M.A., Awwad, E.M., Luqman, M.,
2021. Enhancing the removal of organic and inorganic selenium ions using an exfoliated kaolinite/cellulose fibres
nanocomposite. Carbohydr. Polym. 252, 117163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.117163.
Adavan Kiliyankil, V., Fugetsu, B., Sakata, I., Wang, Z., Endo, M., 2021. Aerogels from copper (II)-cellulose nanofibers
and carbon nanotubes as absorbents for the elimination of toxic gases from air. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 582,
950–960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.08.100.
Bhatti, H.N., Mahmood, Z., Kausar, A., Yakout, S.M., Shair, O.H., Iqbal, M., 2020a. Biocomposites of polypyrrole,
polyaniline and sodium alginate with cellulosic biomass: adsorption-desorption, kinetics and thermodynamic
studies for the removal of 2,4-dichlorophenol. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 153, 146–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.02.306.
Bhatti, H.N., Safa, Y., Yakout, S.M., Shair, O.H., Iqbal, M., Nazir, A., 2020b. Efficient removal of dyes using
carboxymethyl cellulose/alginate/polyvinyl alcohol/rice husk composite: adsorption/desorption, kinetics and
recycling studies. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 150, 861–870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.02.093.
Cai, Y., Chen, L., Yang, S., Xu, L., Qin, H., Liu, Z., Chen, L., Wang, X., Wang, S., 2019. Rational synthesis of novel
phosphorylated chitosan-carboxymethyl cellulose composite for highly effective decontamination of U(VI).
ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 5393–5403. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b06416.
Chaudhary, M., Maiti, A., 2020. Fe–Al–Mn@chitosan based metal oxides blended cellulose acetate mixed matrix
membrane for fluoride decontamination from water: removal mechanisms and antibacterial behavior. J. Membr.
Sci. 611, 118372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2020.118372.
Cheng, J., Zhan, C., Wu, J., Cui, Z., Si, J., Wang, Q., Peng, X., Turng, L.-S., 2020. Highly efficient removal of methylene
blue dye from an aqueous solution using cellulose acetate nanofibrous membranes modified by polydopamine.
ACS Omega 5, 5389–5400. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.9b04425.
Cui, J., Xu, X., Yang, L., Chen, C., Qian, J., Chen, X., Sun, D., 2020. Soft foam-like UiO-66/polydopamine/bacterial
cellulose composite for the removal of aspirin and tetracycline hydrochloride. Chem. Eng. J. 395, 125174.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125174.
D’Amato, G., Akdis, C.A., 2020. Global warming, climate change, air pollution and allergies. Allergy 75, 2158–2160.
https://doi.org/10.1111/all.14527.
Das, S., Barui, A., Adak, A., 2020. Montmorillonite impregnated electrospun cellulose acetate nanofiber sorptive
membrane for ciprofloxacin removal from wastewater. J. Water Process. Eng. 37, 101497. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101497.
Dong, F., Xu, X., Shaghaleh, H., Guo, J., Guo, L., Qian, Y., Liu, H., Wang, S., 2020. Factors influencing the morphology
and adsorption performance of cellulose nanocrystal/iron oxide nanorod composites for the removal of arsenic
during water treatment. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 156, 1418–1424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.11.182.
Du, W., Li, Y., Xu, X., Shang, Y., Gao, B., Yue, Q., 2019. Selective removal of phosphate by dual Zr and La hydroxide/
cellulose-based bio-composites. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 533, 692–699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2018.09.002.
Eltaweil, A.S., Elgarhy, G.S., El-Subruiti, G.M., Omer, A.M., 2020. Carboxymethyl cellulose/carboxylated graphene
oxide composite microbeads for efficient adsorption of cationic methylene blue dye. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 154,
307–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.03.122.
References 353
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFallah, Z., Nasr Isfahani, H., Tajbakhsh, M., Tashakkorian, H., Amouei, A., 2018. TiO2-grafted cellulose via click re￾action: an efficient heavy metal ions bioadsorbent from aqueous solutions. Cellulose 25, 639–660. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10570-017-1563-8.
Fallah, Z., Nasr Isfahani, H., Tajbakhsh, M., 2020. Removal of fluoride ion from aqueous solutions by titania-grafted
β-cyclodextrin nanocomposite. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 3281–3294. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-06948-4.
Fan, Y., Zhao, X., Yu, J., Xie, J., Li, C., Liu, D., Tang, C., Wang, C., 2020. Lead-induced oxidative damage in rats/mice: a
meta-analysis. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 58, 126443. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtemb.2019.126443.
Garba, Z.N., Zhou, W., Lawan, I., Zhang, M., Yuan, Z., 2019. Enhanced removal of prometryn using copper modified
microcrystalline cellulose (Cu-MCC): optimization, isotherm, kinetics and regeneration studies. Cellulose 26,
6241–6258. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-019-02531-9.
Guo, Y., Xing, X., Shang, Y., Gao, B., Zhang, L., Yue, Q., Qian, L., Wang, Z., 2019. Multiple bimetallic (Al-La or Fe-La)
hydroxides embedded in cellulose/graphene hybrids for uptake of fluoride with phosphate surroundings. J. Haz￾ard. Mater. 379, 120634. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.05.027.
Hosseini, J., Zare, E.N., Ajloo, D., 2019. Experimental and theoretical calculation investigation on effective adsorption
of lead(II) onto poly(aniline-co-pyrrole) nanospheres. J. Mol. Liq. 296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2019.111789.
Huihui, Z., Xin, L., Zisong, X., Yue, W., Zhiyuan, T., Meijun, A., Yuehui, Z., Wenxu, Z., Nan, X., Guangyu, S., 2020.
Toxic effects of heavy metals Pb and Cd on mulberry (Morus alba L.) seedling leaves: photosynthetic function and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolism responses. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 195, 110469. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110469.
Jia, M., Zhang, X.F., Feng, Y., Zhou, Y., Yao, J., 2020. In-situ growing ZIF-8 on cellulose nanofibers to form gas sep￾aration membrane for CO2 separation. J. Membr. Sci. 595, 117579. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2019.117579.
Jiang, R., Zhu, H.Y., Fu, Y.Q., Zong, E.M., Jiang, S.T., Li, J.B., Zhu, J.Q., Zhu, Y.Y., 2021. Magnetic NiFe2O4/MWCNTs
functionalized cellulose bioadsorbent with enhanced adsorption property and rapid separation. Carbohydr.
Polym. 252, 117158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.117158.
Jomova, K., Valko, M., 2011. Advances in metal-induced oxidative stress and human disease. Toxicology 283, 65–87.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2011.03.001.
Khadir, A., Motamedi, M., Negarestani, M., Sillanp€a€a, M., Sasani, M., 2020. Preparation of a nano bio-composite based
on cellulosic biomass and conducting polymeric nanoparticles for ibuprofen removal: kinetics, isotherms, and en￾ergy site distribution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 162, 663–677. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.095.
Kim, K.H., Kabir, E., Jahan, S.A., 2018. Airborne bioaerosols and their impact on human health. J. Environ. Sci. 67,
23–35.
Kong, Q., Preis, S., Li, L., Luo, P., Hu, Y., Wei, C., 2020. Graphene oxide-terminated hyperbranched amino polymer￾carboxymethyl cellulose ternary nanocomposite for efficient removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions. Int.
J. Biol. Macromol. 149, 581–592. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.185.
Lei, C., Gao, J., Ren, W., Xie, Y., Abdalkarim, S.Y.H., Wang, S., Ni, Q., Yao, J., 2019. Fabrication of metal-organic
frameworks@cellulose aerogels composite materials for removal of heavy metal ions in water. Carbohydr. Polym.
205, 35–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.10.029.
Lellis, B., Fa´varo-Polonio, C.Z., Pamphile, J.A., Polonio, J.C., 2019. Effects of textile dyes on health and the environ￾ment and bioremediation potential of living organisms. Biotechnol. Res. Innov. 3, 275–290. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biori.2019.09.001.
Li, D., Tian, X., Wang, Z., Guan, Z., Li, X., Qiao, H., Ke, H., Luo, L., Wei, Q., 2020. Multifunctional adsorbent based on
metal-organic framework modified bacterial cellulose/chitosan composite aerogel for high efficient removal of
heavy metal ion and organic pollutant. Chem. Eng. J. 383, 123127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.123127.
Liu, H., Li, P., Qiu, F., Zhang, T., Xu, J., 2020. Controllable preparation of FeOOH/CuO@WBC composite based on
water bamboo cellulose applied for enhanced arsenic removal. Food Bioprod. Process. 123, 177–187. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fbp.2020.06.018.
Ma, S., Zhang, M., Nie, J., Yang, B., Song, S., Lu, P., 2018. Multifunctional cellulose-based air filters with high loadings
of metal–organic frameworks prepared by in situ growth method for gas adsorption and antibacterial applica￾tions. Cellulose 25, 5999–6010. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-1982-1.
Ma, S., Zhang, M., Nie, J., Tan, J., Song, S., Luo, Y., 2019a. Lightweight and porous cellulose-based foams with high
loadings of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks-8 for adsorption applications. Carbohydr. Polym. 208, 328–335.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.12.081.
354 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesMa, S., Zhang, M., Nie, J., Tan, J., Yang, B., Song, S., 2019b. Design of double-component metal–organic framework air
filters with PM2.5 capture, gas adsorption and antibacterial capacities. Carbohydr. Polym. 203, 415–422. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.09.039.
Ma, C., Yi, L., Yang, J., Tao, J., Li, J., 2020. Nanocellulose–organic montmorillonite nanocomposite adsorbent for di￾uron removal from aqueous solution: optimization using response surface methodology. RSC Adv. 10,
30734–30745. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0RA04853D.
Meteku, B.E., Huang, J., Zeng, J., Subhan, F., Feng, F., Zhang, Y., Qiu, Z., Aslam, S., Li, G., Yan, Z., 2020. Magnetic
metal–organic framework composites for environmental monitoring and remediation. Coord. Chem. Rev. 413,
213261.
Mittal, H., Al Alili, A., Morajkar, P.P., Alhassan, S.M., 2021. GO crosslinked hydrogel nanocomposites of chitosan/
carboxymethyl cellulose—a versatile adsorbent for the treatment of dyes contaminated wastewater. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 167, 1248–1261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.11.079.
Mukherjee, S., Ramireddy, H., Baidya, A., Amala, A.K., Sudhakar, C., Mondal, B., Philip, L., Pradeep, T., 2020.
Nanocellulose-reinforced organo-inorganic nanocomposite for synergistic and affordable defluoridation of water
and an evaluation of its sustainability metrics. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 8, 139–147. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.9b04822.
Ojstrsˇek, A., Fakin, D., Hribernik, S., Fakin, T., Bracic, M., Kurecic, M., 2020. Electrospun nanofibrous composites from
cellulose acetate/ultra-high silica zeolites and their potential for VOC adsorption from air. Carbohydr. Polym.
236, 116071. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116071.
Oyewo, O.A., Adeniyi, A., Sithole, B.B., Onyango, M.S., 2020a. Sawdust-based cellulose nanocrystals incorporated
with ZnO nanoparticles as efficient adsorption media in the removal of methylene blue dye. ACS Omega 5,
18798–18807. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c01924.
Oyewo, O.A., Elemike, E.E., Onwudiwe, D.C., Onyango, M.S., 2020b. Metal oxide-cellulose nanocomposites for the
removal of toxic metals and dyes from wastewater. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 164, 2477–2496. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.08.074.
Pandey, A., Brauer, M., Cropper, M.L., Balakrishnan, K., Mathur, P., Dey, S., Turkgulu, B., Kumar, G.A., Khare, M.,
Beig, G., Gupta, T., Krishnankutty, R.P., Causey, K., Cohen, A.J., Bhargava, S., Aggarwal, A.N., Agrawal, A.,
Awasthi, S., Bennitt, F., Bhagwat, S., Bhanumati, P., Burkart, K., Chakma, J.K., Chiles, T.C., Chowdhury, S.,
Christopher, D.J., Dey, S., Fisher, S., Fraumeni, B., Fuller, R., Ghoshal, A.G., Golechha, M.J., Gupta, P.C.,
Gupta, R., Gupta, R., Gupta, S., Guttikunda, S., Hanrahan, D., Harikrishnan, S., Jeemon, P., Joshi, T.K.,
Kant, R., Kant, S., Kaur, T., Koul, P.A., Kumar, P., Kumar, R., Larson, S.L., Lodha, R., Madhipatla, K.K., Mahesh, P.-
A., Malhotra, R., Managi, S., Martin, K., Mathai, M., Mathew, J.L., Mehrotra, R., Mohan, B.V.M., Mohan, V.,
Mukhopadhyay, S., Mutreja, P., Naik, N., Nair, S., Pandian, J.D., Pant, P., Perianayagam, A., Prabhakaran, D.,
Prabhakaran, P., Rath, G.K., Ravi, S., Roy, A., Sabde, Y.D., Salvi, S., Sambandam, S., Sharma, B., Sharma, M.,
Sharma, S., Sharma, R.S., Shrivastava, A., Singh, S., Singh, V., Smith, R., Stanaway, J.D., Taghian, G.,
Tandon, N., Thakur, J.S., Thomas, N.J., Toteja, G.S., Varghese, C.M., Venkataraman, C., Venugopal, K.N.,
Walker, K.D., Watson, A.Y., Wozniak, S., Xavier, D., Yadama, G.N., Yadav, G., Shukla, D.K., Bekedam, H.J.,
Reddy, K.S., Guleria, R., Vos, T., Lim, S.S., Dandona, R., Kumar, S., Kumar, P., Landrigan, P.J., Dandona, L.,
2021. Health and economic impact of air pollution in the states of India: the global burden of disease study
2019. Lancet Planet. Health 5, e25–e38. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30298-9.
Peng, B., Yao, Z., Wang, X., Crombeen, M., Sweeney, D.G., Tam, K.C., 2020. Cellulose-based materials in wastewater
treatment of petroleum industry. Green Energy Environ. 5, 37–49.
Raghav, S., Nehra, S., Kumar, D., 2019. Adsorptive removal studies of fluoride in aqueous system by bimetallic
oxide incorporated in cellulose. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot. 127, 211–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
psep.2019.05.028.
Sabarwal, A., Kumar, K., Singh, R.P., 2018. Hazardous effects of chemical pesticides on human health–cancer and
other associated disorders. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 63, 103–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etap.2018.08.018.
Sankararamakrishnan, N., Srivastava, I., Mishra, S., 2019. Studies on novel nano-bimetal doped cellulose nanofibers
derived from agrowaste towards deflouridation. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 128, 556–565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2019.01.153.
Shang, Y., Wang, Z., Xu, X., Cheng, C., Gao, B., Yue, Q., Liu, S., Han, C., 2019. Enhanced fluoride uptake by bimetallic
hydroxides anchored in cotton cellulose/graphene oxide composites. J. Hazard. Mater. 376, 91–101. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.05.039.
References 355
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesShankar, K., Kandasamy, P., 2019. Carbon dioxide separation using α-alumina ceramic tube supported cellulose
triacetate-tributyl phosphate composite membrane. Greenh. Gases Sci. Technol. 9, 287–305. https://doi.org/
10.1002/ghg.1845.
Sharma, P.R., Sharma, S.K., Antoine, R., Hsiao, B.S., 2019. Efficient removal of arsenic using zinc oxide nanocrystal￾decorated regenerated microfibrillated cellulose scaffolds. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 6140–6151. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b06356.
Sinha, V., Chakma, S., 2020. Synthesis and evaluation of CMC-g-AMPS/Fe/Al/AC composite hydrogel and their use
in fluoride removal from aqueous solution. Environ. Technol. Innov. 17, 100620. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eti.2020.100620.
Sirajudheen, P., Karthikeyan, P., Basheer, M.C., Meenakshi, S., 2020a. Adsorptive removal of anionic azo dyes from
effluent water using Zr(IV) encapsulated carboxymethyl cellulose-montmorillonite composite. Environ. Chem.
Ecotoxicol. 2, 73–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enceco.2020.04.002.
Sirajudheen, P., Nikitha, M.R., Karthikeyan, P., Meenakshi, S., 2020b. Perceptive removal of toxic azo dyes from water
using magnetic Fe3O4 reinforced graphene oxide–carboxymethyl cellulose recyclable composite: adsorption in￾vestigation of parametric studies and their mechanisms. Surf. Interfaces 21, 100648. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
surfin.2020.100648.
Somsesta, N., Sricharoenchaikul, V., Aht-Ong, D., 2020. Adsorption removal of methylene blue onto activated car￾bon/cellulose biocomposite films: equilibrium and kinetic studies. Mater. Chem. Phys. 240, 122221. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2019.122221.
Song, Y., Seo, J.Y., Kim, H., Beak, K.Y., 2019. Structural control of cellulose nanofibrous composite membrane with
metal organic framework (ZIF-8) for highly selective removal of cationic dye. Carbohydr. Polym. 222, 115018.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.115018.
Steffan, J.J., Brevik, E.C., Burgess, L.C., Cerda`, A., 2018. The effect of soil on human health: an overview. Eur. J. Soil Sci.
69, 159–171. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejss.12451.
Su, Z., Zhang, M., Lu, Z., Song, S., Zhao, Y., Hao, Y., 2018. Functionalization of cellulose fiber by in situ growth of
zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) nanocrystals for preparing a cellulose-based air filter with gas adsorp￾tion ability. Cellulose 25, 1997–2008. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-1696-4.
Sun, P., Yang, S., Sun, X., Wang, Y., Pan, L., Wang, H., Wang, X., Guo, J., Nie, C., 2019. Functional porous
carboxymethyl cellulose/cellulose acetate composite microspheres: preparation, characterization, and applica￾tion in the effective removal of HCN from cigarette smoke. Polymers. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11010181.
Sun, J., Cui, L., Gao, Y., He, Y., Liu, H., Huang, Z., 2021. Environmental application of magnetic cellulose derived from
Pennisetum sinese Roxb for efficient tetracycline removal. Carbohydr. Polym. 251, 117004. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.117004.
Tang, R., Wang, Z., Muhammad, Y., Shi, H., Liu, K., Ji, J., Zhu, Y., Tong, Z., Zhang, H., 2021. Fabrication of
carboxymethyl cellulose and chitosan modified magnetic alkaline ca-bentonite for the adsorption of hazardous
doxycycline. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 610, 125730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
colsurfa.2020.125730.
Tanzifi, M., Tavakkoli Yaraki, M., Beiramzadeh, Z., Heidarpoor Saremi, L., Najafifard, M., Moradi, H., Mansouri, M.,
Karami, M., Bazgir, H., 2020. Carboxymethyl cellulose improved adsorption capacity of polypyrrole/CMC com￾posite nanoparticles for removal of reactive dyes: experimental optimization and DFT calculation. Chemosphere
255, 127052. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127052.
Tshikovhi, A., Mishra, S.B., Mishra, A.K., 2020. Nanocellulose-based composites for the removal of contaminants
from wastewater. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 152, 616–632. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.02.221.
Ul-Islam, M., Wajid Ullah, M., Khan, S., Kamal, T., Ul-Islam, S., Shah, N., Kon Park, J., 2016. Recent advancement in
cellulose based nanocomposite for addressing environmental challenges. Recent Pat. Nanotechnol. 10, 169–180.
Wang, Z., Song, L., Wang, Y., Zhang, X.-F., Hao, D., Feng, Y., Yao, J., 2019. Lightweight UiO-66/cellulose aerogels
constructed through self-crosslinking strategy for adsorption applications. Chem. Eng. J. 371, 138–144. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.04.022.
Wang, W., Ni, J., Chen, L., Ai, Z., Zhao, Y., Song, S., 2020a. Synthesis of carboxymethyl cellulose-chitosan￾montmorillonite nanosheets composite hydrogel for dye effluent remediation. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 165, 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.09.154.
Wang, L., Yang, C., Lu, A., Liu, S., Pei, Y., Luo, X., 2020b. An easy and unique design strategy for insoluble humic
acid/cellulose nanocomposite beads with highly enhanced adsorption performance of low concentration cipro￾floxacin in water. Bioresour. Technol. 302, 122812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.122812.
356 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesXie, H., Pan, Y., Xiao, H., Liu, H., 2019. Preparation and characterization of amphoteric cellulose–montmorillonite
composite beads with a controllable porous structure. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 136, 47941. https://doi.org/
10.1002/app.47941.
Xiong, Y., Dang, B., Wang, C., Wang, H., Zhang, S., Sun, Q., Xu, X., 2017. Cellulose fibers constructed convenient re￾cyclable 3D graphene-formicary-like δ-Bi2O3 aerogels for the selective capture of iodide. ACS Appl. Mater. Inter￾faces 9, 20554–20560. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b03516.
Xiong, Y., Wang, C., Wang, H., Jin, C., Sun, Q., Xu, X., 2018. Nano-cellulose hydrogel coated flexible titanate-bismuth
oxide membrane for trinity synergistic treatment of super-intricate anion/cation/oily-water. Chem. Eng. J. 337,
143–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.12.080.
Xiong, J., Zhang, D., Lin, H., Chen, Y., 2020. Amphiprotic cellulose mediated graphene oxide magnetic aerogels for
water remediation. Chem. Eng. J. 400, 125890. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125890.
Xu, Q., Peng, J., Zhang, W., Wang, X., Lou, T., 2020. Electrospun cellulose acetate/P (DMDAAC-AM) nanofibrous
membranes for dye adsorption. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 137, 48565. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.48565.
Yadav, A., Rene, E.R., Mandal, M.K., Dubey, K.K., 2021. Threat and sustainable technological solution for antineo￾plastic drugs pollution: review on a persisting global issue. Chemosphere 263, 128285. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128285.
Yang, J., Ma, C., Tao, J., Li, J., Du, K., Wei, Z., Chen, C., Wang, Z., Zhao, C., Ma, M., 2020a. Optimization of
polyvinylamine-modified nanocellulose for chlorpyrifos adsorption by central composite design. Carbohydr.
Polym. 245, 116542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116542.
Yang, C., Wang, L., Yu, Y., Wu, P., Wang, F., Liu, S., Luo, X., 2020b. Highly efficient removal of amoxicillin from water
by Mg-Al layered double hydroxide/cellulose nanocomposite beads synthesized through in-situ coprecipitation
method. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 149, 93–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.096.
Yao, M., Wang, Z., Liu, Y., Yang, G., Chen, J., 2019. Preparation of dialdehyde cellulose graftead graphene oxide com￾posite and its adsorption behavior for heavy metals from aqueous solution. Carbohydr. Polym. 212, 345–351.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.02.052.
Zaman, A., Orasugh, J.T., Banerjee, P., Dutta, S., Ali, M.S., Das, D., Bhattacharya, A., Chattopadhyay, D., 2020. Facile
one-pot in-situ synthesis of novel graphene oxide-cellulose nanocomposite for enhanced azo dye adsorption at
optimized conditions. Carbohydr. Polym. 246, 116661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116661.
Zare, E.N., Lakouraj, M.M., Kasirian, N., 2018a. Development of effective nano-biosorbent based on poly m￾phenylenediamine grafted dextrin for removal of Pb (II) and methylene blue from water. Carbohydr. Polym.
201, 539–548.
Zare, E.N., Lakouraj, M.M., Masoumi, M., 2018b. Efficient removal of Pb (II) and Cd (II) from water by cross-linked
poly (N-vinylpyrrolidone-co-maleic anhydride)@ eggshell/Fe3O4 environmentally friendly nano. Desalin. Water
Treat. 106, 209–219. https://doi.org/10.5004/dwt.2018.22104.
Zawisza, B., Sitko, R., Queralt, I., Margui, E., Gagor, A., 2020. Cellulose mini-membranes modified with TiO2 for sep￾aration, determination, and speciation of arsenates and selenites. Microchim. Acta 187, 430. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00604-020-04387-4.
Zhang, Q., Li, Q., Young, T.M., Harper, D.P., Wang, S., 2019a. A novel method for fabricating an electrospun
poly(vinyl alcohol)/cellulose nanocrystals composite nanofibrous filter with low air resistance for high-efficiency
filtration of particulate matter. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 8706–8714. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.9b00605.
Zhang, L., Wang, Z., Xu, X., Chen, C., Gao, B., Xiao, X., 2019b. Insights into the phosphate adsorption behavior onto 3D
self-assembled cellulose/graphene hybrid nanomaterials embedded with bimetallic hydroxides. Sci. Total Envi￾ron. 653, 897–907. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.030.
Zhang, D., Xu, Y., Li, X., Liu, Z., Wang, L., Lu, C., He, X., Ma, Y., Zou, D., 2020. Immobilization of Cr(VI) in soil using a
montmorillonite-supported carboxymethyl cellulose-stabilized Iron sulfide composite: effectiveness and
biotoxicity assessment. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17176087.
Zhao, X., Chen, L., Guo, Y., Ma, X., Li, Z., Ying, W., Peng, X., 2019a. Porous cellulose nanofiber stringed HKUST-1
polyhedron membrane for air purification. Appl. Mater. Today 14, 96–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apmt.2018.11.012.
Zhao, L., Yang, S., Yilihamu, A., Ma, Q., Shi, M., Ouyang, B., Zhang, Q., Guan, X., Yang, S.-T., 2019b. Adsorptive de￾contamination of Cu2+-contaminated water and soil by carboxylated graphene oxide/chitosan/cellulose com￾posite beads. Environ. Res. 179, 108779. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.108779.
References 357
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesZhu, M., Cao, Q., Liu, B., Guo, H., Wang, X., Han, Y., Sun, G., Li, Y., Zhou, J., 2020. A novel cellulose acetate/poly
(ionic liquid) composite air filter. Cellulose 27, 3889–3902. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-020-03034-8.
Zong, P., Cao, D., Cheng, Y., Wang, S., Zhang, J., Guo, Z., Hayat, T., Alharbi, N.S., He, C., 2019. Carboxymethyl cel￾lulose supported magnetic graphene oxide composites by plasma induced technique and their highly efficient
removal of uranium ions. Cellulose 26, 4039–4060. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-019-02358-4.
Zou, Y., Wang, X., Khan, A., Wang, P., Liu, Y., Alsaedi, A., Hayat, T., Wang, X., 2016. Environmental remediation and
application of nanoscale zero-valent iron and its composites for the removal of heavy metal ions: a review. En￾viron. Sci. Technol. 50, 7290–7304.
358 15. Cellulose composites as nanobiosorbents for ecological remediation
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
16
Modification and derivatization
of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
and their utilization in environmental
remediation
Sajjad Ullaha
, Elias Paiva Ferreira-Netob
, Saima Sohnia
,
Akbar Alic
, and Rashida Parveend
a
Institute of Chemical Sciences, University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan b
Institute of
Chemistry-Sa˜o Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara, Brazil c
Government College
University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan d
Government Girls Degree College Dabgari,
Peshawar, Pakistan
16.1 Cellulose-based nanomaterials as biosorbents
Environmental pollution is one of the most serious problems associated with the rapid
pace of industrialization and explosive growth in the world population. Trends toward en￾vironmental sustainability perspective have augmented the interests of researchers in explor￾ing the low-cost bio-based materials of various origins (Sohni et al., 2019). Specifically, the
ever increasing problem of water pollution demands for the development of sustainable so￾lutions employing low-cost and environmental safe materials. Among the bio-based mate￾rials, cellulose, a natural, renewable, and most abundant polymer has been a subject of
incredible interest as a versatile, ageless, and attractive material for a wide array of applica￾tions in various fields such as textiles, packaging, energy, drug delivery, tissue engineering,
and wastewater treatment. The widespread use and incredibly vast potential of nanocellulose
for various applications can be attributed to its excellent physical, mechanical, and chemical
properties, as well as tailorable surface chemistry (Reshmy et al., 2020). Moreover,
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 359 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00016-2nanocellulose offers easy surface modification with a broad range of functional group and the
possibility of blending it with other materials to make efficient composite adsorbents for en￾hanced removal of pollutants. Research on the development of different materials derived
from cellulose such as hydrogels (Zhao et al., 2016), aerogels (Feng et al., 2015), cellulose com￾posites (Zhang et al., 2015; Ferreira-Neto et al., 2020), functionalized cellulose, and
nanocellulose (Mandal and Chakrabarty, 2011) has steadily intensified.
Over two decades now, the production of various kinds of innovative cellulose
nanomaterials has gained momentum for a spectrum of downstream utilizations.
Nanocellulose and/or its derivatives (hydrogels, composites, and beads) have demonstrated
tremendous potential in environmental remediation, for example, by adsorbing various con￾taminants (heavy metals, organic dyes, oils, and pharmaceuticals) from effluents. In the light
of the aforesaid perspective, this chapter is set to highlight the prospects of various cellulose￾based nanomaterials, both in pristine and modified form, in the removal of pollutants such as
dyes, phenols, and heavy metal ions from wastewater.
16.1.1 Structural properties of cellulose
Cellulose is a linear, semicrystalline polysaccharide and the macromolecules of natural cel￾lulose may include 1000–30,000 elementary units. In the case of wood and cotton, the degree
of polymerization (DP) is around 10,000 and 15,000 glucose units, respectively (Peng et al.,
2020). The origin of the hierarchical architecture of cellulose is due to the fact that linear mac￾romolecules are joined by hydrogen bonding, thus constituting a supramolecular structure of
elementary nanofibrils and their bundles (called microfibrils) in turn form layers of the cell
wall of cellulose fibers (Ioelovich, 2017). Chemically, it is a linear homopolymer composed of
several hundreds to thousands of linked glucose monomers as shown in Fig. 16.1. These
monomers are linked by hydrogen bonding with the hemicellulose component of the ligno￾cellulosic biomass. The arrangement of cellulose fibrils gives rise to two regions, namely, crys￾talline and amorphous regions (Fig. 16.1A) where the length of the crystalline domains may
range from 50 to 150 nm while that of the amorphous region may vary between 25 and 50 nm
( Johar et al., 2012). The cellulose fibrils furnish an ordered crystalline structure held via. Van
der Waals forces and intermolecular and intra-molecular hydrogen bonding. On the other
hand, the breakage and disruption of hydrogen bonds give rise to amorphous regions
(Sohni et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019a).
16.1.2 Classification of nanocellulose
Nanocellulose is a term for a range of materials with at least one dimension, either diameter
or length, in the nanoscale domain (1–100 nm) and are broadly classified into three categories,
namely cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs), cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), and bacterial
nanocellulose (BNC or BC). Although this family of nanocellulose materials shows chemical
composition similar to normal cellulose, they differ in morphology, structure, and crystallin￾ity. This, in principle, can be attributed to their origin and production method. Both CNFs and
CNCs are derived from lignocellulosic biomass, a highly heterogeneous material containing
cellulose (40%–80%), hemicellulose (15%–30%), and lignin (10%–25%) as its fundamental
360 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 16.1 (A) Ordered crystalline and disordered amorphous domains of cellulose and (B) basic components of lignocellulosic biomass showing the
structure of cellulose surrounded by hemicellulose and lignin.constituents (Fig. 16.1B). The CNFs (also known as nanofibrillated cellulose, cellulose micro￾fibril, microfibrillated cellulose, or nanofibrillar cellulose (Saba et al., 2017) consist of
nanosized thin and micrometer-long fibril shaped flexible nanocellulose with diameter
and length of 1–100 nm and 500–2000 nm, respectively (Li et al., 2014). The CNFs are charac￾terized by both crystalline and amorphous domains (Nagano et al., 2020). This material is
extracted from cellulose fibrils of lignocellulosic biomass by mechanical disintegration
(Fig. 16.2). This can be accomplished by high-pressure homogenization, microfluidization
or by high-intensity mechanical grinding.
On the other hand, CNCs, also called cellulose nanowhiskers, are short-needle, rod-like, or
whisker-shaped structures that are 2–20 nm in diameter and 80–500 nm in length (Mu et al.,
2019). An important characteristic related to CNCs is that, unlike CNFs, these are predomi￾nantly crystalline, while the amorphous regions are selectively removed by controlled acid
treatment using hydrochloric or sulfuric acid (Fig. 16.2). Bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) is
made of cellulose entangled nanoribbons of around 20–50 nm diameter and is produced
by certain types of bacteria (Komagataeibacter Xylinus, for instance) via biosynthesis involv￾ing polymerization of sugars or alcohols for a few days up to 2 weeks. An important feature
related to BNC is that compared to cellulose of plant origin, it is pure and devoid of any lignin,
pectin, and hemicellulose residues in its composition (Fu et al., 2013). Moreover, the ultra-fine
structure of BNC possesses a much higher crystallinity index, higher liquid absorption capac￾ity, higher degree of polymerization, higher specific surface area, and excellent mechanical
properties (Abol-Fotouh et al., 2020). In addition, greater ease for surface functionalization
renders BNC a much superior material as compared to plant-based cellulose (Ferreira-Neto
et al., 2020; Ullah et al., 2016).
Mechanical
Process
Acid 
Hydrolysis
CNCs CNFs
Cellulose Microfibrils Cellulose Microfibrils
Fermentation 
medium
BNC
Bacteria
Glucose
Microbial 
Fermentation
Glucose as Carbon Source
TOP-DOWN APPROACH BOTTOM-UP APPROACH
FIG. 16.2 Production of nanocellulose via. Top–down and Bottom–up approach.
362 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices16.1.3 Production of nanocellulose
Broadly speaking, there are two ways in which nanocellulose can be obtained, viz. top–
down and bottom–up approach, as summarized in Fig. 16.2. In the case of the former,
nanocellulose is derived from the naturally occurring sources of cellulose such as annual
plants, field and agro-industrial residues as well as sea plants. As mentioned earlier, cellulose
as fundamental constituent of lignocellulosic biomass residues is a promising resource of
nanocellulose because these are the most abundant, carbon-neutral, and low-cost materials
with no food vs. fuel competition (Sohni et al., 2018). A typical strategy to extract nanocellulose
using top-down approach encompasses (i) pulping and pre-treatment step to transform the
macrofibres into microfibers by mechanical disruption and for partially or completely remov￾ing lignin and hemicellulose, (ii) disintegrating and removing the amorphous portions by
chemicals (acids, oxidizing agents) or via enzymatic hydrolysis route, and (iii) mechanical fi￾brillation process to converts the microfibers into nanocellulose (CNF) using high-pressure ho￾mogenizer (Amiralian et al., 2017). On the other hand, nanocellulose can be directly produced
as nanofibers by the fermentation of low molecular weight sugars or alcohols by cellulose￾producing bacteria in the bottom–up approach (Fig. 16.2). The nanocellulose biosynthesized
this way by bacteria is more commonly referred to as BNC or BC (Kousheh et al., 2020).
16.1.4 Advantages of nanocellulose as biosorbents
The widespread applications of nanocellulose can be attributed to the fact that cellulose
possesses outstanding hydrophilicity, high mechanical performance, and the possibility of
functionalization. In general, an ideal material intended as an adsorptive platform should ful￾fill certain criteria: (i) good mechanical and structural integrity to withstand water flow over
an extended period, (ii) low cost, (iii) excellent adsorption capacity to remove pollutants,
(iv) large surface area, and (v) easy recovery and the possibility of reuse without significant
loss of adsorption capacity (Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017). Cellulose, especially after certain
modifications discussed below, meets most of these criteria and thus has been widely used
for the adsorptive removal of various pollutants from aqueous media. The salient features of
nanocellulose which were responsible for gathering a great deal of scientific attention in re￾cent years have been summarized in Table 16.1. Nanocellulose-based materials are essentially
carbon-neutral, renewable, non-hazardous, and biodegradable. Their excellent surface reac￾tivity, strong mechanical properties, and regeneration ability make nanocellulose a new class
of useful nanomaterials for high valued valorization, particularly in the field of environmen￾tal remediation. This is why nanocellulose-based materials have become the focus of much
consideration and their modification has gained prominence to further improve the proper￾ties of these materials (Ferreira-Neto et al., 2020; Tavakolian et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019b).
16.1.5 Limitations of nanocellulose production
There are significant scientific and technological challenges to tackle to make the overall
production of nanocellulose more competitive and to realize possible scale-up. The produc￾tion of nanocellulose is a multi-step, time-consuming, chemical as well as energy-intensive
process. In addition, the recovery or reuse of chemicals is also a big challenge (Liu et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2018). To deal with these problems, researchers have focused on the recovery
16.1 Cellulose-based nanomaterials as biosorbents 363
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesof acid/acid mixtures/other solvents after the hydrolysis step to improve the sustainability of
overall nanocellulose production process (Yu et al., 2019; Peretz et al., 2019). There has been a
dire need to develop facile green alternative routes instead of consuming hazardous
chemicals for preparing nanocellulose. For this purpose, eco-friendly approaches based on
enzymatic methods have been put forward to produce nanocellulose but the process lacks
efficiency (Ribeiro et al., 2019). In recent years, some reported studies for producing
nanocellulose, for instance, by ultrasonication, electrospinning, ionic liquids, and deep eutec￾tic solvents have shown great promise ( Jordan et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2019). In the case of
bottom-up approach for producing BNC, low productivity of the known strains and the
use of fine and expensive culture medium constituents are the major challenges in BNC
production (Skocaj, 2019). To deal with these drawbacks, biosynthesis of BNC using cheaper
carbon sources has been proposed to make the overall process economically feasible
(Abol-Fotouh et al., 2020; Ul-Islam et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2018).
Moreover, although cellulose shows reasonably good adsorptive properties, the pollutants
adsorption potential of pristine nanocellulose is not high enough to allow the removal of pol￾lutants with the efficiency required for practical applications. To address this limitation,
chemical modifications such as chemical grafting of chelating or metal-binding functionalities
and/or charge-bearing functional groups on the cellulose backbone have been devised as a
possible strategy to further enhance and tailor the adsorptive properties of cellulose for effec￾tive environmental remediation.
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials
As thoroughly discussed, cellulose is the most abundant biopolymer with potential
physiochemical properties to be used as an adsorbent for the removal of both organic and
TABLE 16.1 Properties of nanocellulose as an adsorptive platform in wastewater treatment.
Attribute Magnitude
Implication with regard to
adsorption References
Specific
surface area
High, 299 m2
/g Enhanced adsorption Zu et al. (2016)
Porosity Highly porous hydrogels and
aerogels
High permeability and adsorption Zhu et al. (2018)
Aspect ratio High, 144  410.1 for BC Strong mechanical properties, strong
and entangled networks
Amiralian et al. (2017) and
Zhao et al. (2019)
Crystallinity 60–90% (72–80 in BNC) Highly recalcitrant material,
restricted solubility
Man et al. (2011) and
Watanabe et al. (1998)
Mechanical
strength
Elastic modules of
100–160 GPa
Increased mechanical stiffness Kuo et al., (2017)
Surface
modification
Greater possibility due to
surface hydroxyl groups
Esterification, oxidation,
etherification, addition, among other
A´ vila Ramı´rez et al. (2017)
Stability Very stable Reduced biofouling and reusable Bai et al. (2019) and Goetz
et al. (2018)
364 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesinorganic pollutants from contaminated water (Mahfoudhi and Boufi, 2017; Faiz Norrrahim
et al. 2021; Jamshaid et al., 2017). Yet, its adsorptive properties toward heavy metal ions can be
tailored and further upgraded through chemical grafting of chelating or metal-binding func￾tionalities on the cellulose backbone. For instance, improved adsorption of organics and
heavy metals can be achieved via chemical modification of cellulose by incorporating the hy￾drophobic organic groups and sulfur-containing functionalities, respectively (Silva Filho
et al., 2013; Santana et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2014). In addition to better adsorptive properties
than pristine cellulose, chemically modified cellulose also shows other interesting properties
such as resistance toward microbial growth and heat or mechanical stress, controlled hydro￾phobicity or hydrophilicity, and better elasticity (McDowall et al., 1984).
Fortunately, cellulose has abundant hydroxyl (–OH) functionalities at the C-2, C-3, and C-6
atoms of the anhydroglucose unit that make it easier for chemical modification employing
various functional groups including (but not limited to) carboxylate (Zhang et al., 2016a;
Zhou et al., 2013; Anirudhan et al., 2015; Vieira et al., 2010), carboxymethyl (Lin et al.,
2015a; Zhang et al., 2011), amines (da Silva Filho et al., 2006; Jin et al., 2015), aminoethanethiol
(Silva et al., 2013), phosphate (Oshima et al., 2011; Kokol et al., 2015; Bezerra et al., 2014; Suflet
et al., 2006), and sulfur-containing groups including sulfides, thiol and sulfonic/sulfate func￾tionalities (Silva Filho et al., 2013; Santana et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2008;
Suopaj€arvi et al., 2015; Lin and Dufresne, 2014; Thiangtham et al., 2019) (Scheme 16.1). These
chemical modifications allow tailoring the cellulose-adsorbate interactions to enhance the cel￾lulose adsorptive capability of removing from aqueous media a variety of pollutants such as
heavy metals, organic dyes, and pharmaceuticals. It is important to mention that due to the
comparatively high reactivity of the hydroxyl group at the C6 position (encircled in Scheme
16.1) (Oshima et al., 2008), it is more susceptible to chemical modification. This chemical mod￾ification also allows further and better incorporation of functional components such as cat￾ionic and anionic surfactants or organo(chloro)silanes with long hydrocarbon chains that
render the cellulose substrate hydrophobic character which plays important role in the cap￾ture of organic molecules including oils and pesticides from aqueous media (Zhang et al.,
2014a; Aloulou et al., 2004a, b, c; Gong et al., 2019; Salajkova´ et al., 2012; Boufi and Belgacem,
2006; Alila and Boufi, 2009; Alila et al., 2007, 2010; Lin et al., 2015b; Zhao et al., 2020).
It is well known that the adsorption capacity of materials strongly depends on the pH of the
media which affects the adsorbents’ surface charge, the degree of ionization, and the adsor￾bate species existing in solution (Santana et al., 2010). The adsorbent materials get a positive or
negative surface charge at pH < pHPZC and pH > pHPZC, respectively, where pHPZC refers to
the pH corresponding to the point of zero charge (PZC) at which (pH) the net charge on ab￾sorbent’s surface is equal to zero. The optimum pH for metal adsorption on cellulose mod￾ified with anionic functional groups lies in the 4.0–6.0 pH range. In too acidic conditions
(pH < 4), the functional group is protonated and hence cannot adsorb the metal cations ef￾fectively. On the other hand, in too basic media, the metal ions tend to precipitate out as metal
hydroxides (Zhu et al., 2017).
The cellulose substrate-adsorbate interaction responsible for the adsorption of adsorbate
can be purely electrostatic (carboxylated cellulose–cationic dye) (Yan et al., 2011) or based
on complexation or ion-exchange (carboxylated cellulose–M2+ interaction) (Zhu et al.,
2017; de Melo et al., 2009) (see Fig. 16.3) and may occasionally follow multiple mechanisms,
simultaneously. For example, the sorption of methylene blue (MB), a cationic dye on
carboxymethyl cellulose has been reported to involve electrostatic interaction (Yan et al.,
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials 365
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices2011) (Fig. 16.3A). Similarly, amino-functionalized cellulose has been used as an adsorbent for
anionic dyes ( Jin et al., 2015). Another example is the adsorption of anionic dyes on the sur￾face of cationic cellulose nanocrystals-modified inorganic foam (Selk€al€a et al., 2020). Other
substrate-adsorbate interactions such as ion-exchange, microprecipitation, chelation, and/
or their combination can also be present. When more than one type of active functional groups
are present in the adsorbent, the chances are higher that a multifaceted cooperative mecha￾nism may be operative (Suopaj€arvi et al., 2015).
Here we focus on the main chemical modifications in cellulose, with particular emphasis
on hydrophobic modifications for organics capture and sulfur-based functionalization for
heavy metal capture from aqueous media. As shown in Scheme 16.1, most of the chemical
modifications in cellulose are based on the introduction of some anionic group (carboxylate
or phosphate, for instance) that under certain optimum pH (often moderately basic or slightly
acidic pH) carry a negative charge and can capture metal cations (Mn+ ¼ Pb2+, Cu2+, Ag+
,
SCHEME 16.1 Various synthetic approaches for the chemical modification of cellulose.
366 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 16.3 Possible adsorption mechanisms on carboxylated cellulose: (A) ion-exchange mechanism and electro￾static interaction between the –COO group and cationic methylene blue dye; (B) complexation/chelation of divalent
metal ions (M2+) by the carboxylate group with the three possible structures of the resulting complex; and
(C) activation of the carboxylated cellulose by treatment with NaHCO3 to convert the –COOH to –COONa, where
the Na+ in the later can be easily exchanged with the heavy metal ions more easily as compared to H+ ions in the
former. Panel A: Adapted from Yan, H., Zhang, W., Kan, X., Dong, L., Jiang, Z., Li, H., Yang, H., Cheng, R., 2011. Sorption
of methylene blue by carboxymethyl cellulose and reuse process in a secondary sorption. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp.
380, 143–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.02.045 with permission from Elsevier; panel B: de Melo, J.C.P., da Silva
Filho, E.C., Santana, S.A.A., Airoldi, C., 2009. Maleic anhydride incorporated onto cellulose and thermodynamics of cation￾exchange process at the solid/liquid interface. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 346, 138–145. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.colsurfa.2009.06.006 with permission from Elsevier; panel C: Zhu, Q., Wang, Y., Li, M., Liu, K., Hu, C., Yan, K.,
Sun, G., Wang, D., 2017. Activable carboxylic acid functionalized crystalline nanocellulose/PVA-co-PE composite nanofibrous
membrane with enhanced adsorption for heavy metal ions. Sep. Purif. Technol. 186, 70–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.
2017.05.050 with permission from Elsevier.
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials 367
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFe3+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Ni2+, Co2+, Sr2+ including lanthanides (La3+, Sm3+, Ho3+, Nd3+, Er3+) cations
(Silva Filho et al., 2013; Vieira et al., 2010; da Silva Filho et al., 2006; Suopaj€arvi et al., 2015;
Oshima et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016b)) as well as cationic organic molecules
such as dyes (Zhou et al., 2013; Jin et al., 2015; Yan et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2014b; Annadurai
et al., 2002) (see Table 16.2).
The main chemical methods used for the modification of cellulose include esterifications,
halogenations, etherification, oxidation, and grafting. A brief account of some of these mod￾ifications is presented below.
TABLE 16.2 Main chemical modifications in cellulose and their performance in the removal of different
pollutants.
Functionalized cellulose Adsorbate/pollutant
Adsorption or
absorption capacity References
Phosphorylated CNC Ag(I), Cu(II), and Fe(III) Ag(I) 136 mg g1
Cu(II) 117 mg g1
Fe(III) 115 mg g1
Liu et al. (2015)
Phosphorylated BNC Transition metal and
lanthanides ions
La(III)
116.7 mmol g1
Oshima et al.
(2008)
Phosphorylated microcrystalline
cellulose
Ranitidine drug 85.7 mg g1 Bezerra et al.
(2014)
Sulfonated CNF Pb(II) 248.6 mg g1 Suopaj€arvi
et al. (2015)
Sulfonated CNF Cu(II) and Pb(II) Cu(II) 158.9 mg g1
Pb(II) 331.5 mg g1
Sirvio and €
Visanko (2020)
Thiolated CNF membrane Cd(II), Cu(II), and Pb(II) Cd(II) 30.0 mg g1
Cu(II) 39.6 mg g1
Pb(II) 19.6 mg g1
Choi et al.
(2020)
Xanthate (organosulfur) modified rice
husk cellulose
Ni(II), Cd(II) and Pb(II) Ni(II) 49.8 mg g1
Cd(II) 133.8 mg g1
Pb(II) 139.9 mg g1
Qu et al. (2020)
Ethylene sulfide modified biomass Cu(II) Cu(II) 39.2 mg g1 Santana et al.
(2010)
Ethylene diamine modified
microcrystalline cellulose
Cu(II), Co(II), Ni(II), and
Zn(II)
Cu(II) 83.9 mg g1
Co(II) 112.6 mg g1
Ni(II) 63.4 mg g1
Zn(II) 85.6 mg g1
da Silva Filho
et al. (2006)
Ethylene sulfide aminated
microcrystalline cellulose
Pb(II), Cd(II) Cu(II), Co(II),
Ni(II), and Zn(II)
Pb(II) 1301.6 mg g1
Cd(II) 650.0 mg g1
Cu(II) 123.5 mg g1
Co(II) 276.6 mg g1
Ni(II) 326.4 mg g1
Zn(II) 113.2 mg g1
Silva Filho
et al. (2013)
Aminoethanothiol modified
microcrystalline cellulose
Reactive Red dye (pH 2) 78.0 mg g1
(pH 9) 26.0 mg g1
Silva et al.
(2013)
368 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices16.2.1 Carboxylate-based modification
Carboxylate (–COO) is an important negatively charged functional group that has been
widely used to modify cellulose and improve its adsorptive properties toward metal cation
and cationic organic molecules (Zhou et al., 2013; Anirudhan et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2015a; Zhu
et al., 2017; Yan et al., 2011; Qiao et al., 2015). As mentioned earlier, the mechanism of cationic
species adsorption on carboxylated cellulose involves an electrostatic interaction between the
carboxylate group attached to the cellulose structure and the cationic pollutants (such as MB)
(Zhou et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2011; Qiao et al., 2015) or complexation and/or ion-exchange of
the heavy metal cation by the carboxylate groups (Zhu et al., 2017; de Melo et al., 2009; Saito
and Isogai, 2005) (Fig. 16.3A and B). The carboxylic acid-functionalized crystalline
nanocellulose materials can be activated and their adsorption capacity improved by treat￾ment with NaHCO3 that converts the carboxyl group –COOH to carboxylate –COONa, as
the Na+ could exchange with the heavy metal ions more easily as compared to H+ ions
(Zhu et al., 2017) (Fig. 16.3C). Consequently, maximum adsorption capacity of heavy metal
ion (471.55 mg/g for Pb2+) could be achieved using activated 1,2,3,4-butanetetracarboxylic
acid-modified cellulose, higher than that of nonactivated carboxylated cellulose. Desorption
of the metal ions can also be achieved by decreasing the pH (treatment with acid solution),
making the reuse of the absorbent more convenient through pH-controlled adsorption￾TABLE 16.2 Main chemical modifications in cellulose and their performance in the removal of different
pollutants—cont’d
Functionalized cellulose Adsorbate/pollutant
Adsorption or
absorption capacity References
Amino-functionalized CNC Acid Red GR dye
Congo Red 4BS dye
Reactive Yellow K-4G dye
GR dye 137.1 mg g1
4BS dye
199.5 mg g1
K-4G dye
78.0 mg g1
Jin et al. (2015)
Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid￾modified microcrystalline cellulose
Hg(II) 476.2 mg g1 Li et al. (2019)
Carboxylated microcrystalline cellulose Co(II) and Ni(II) Co(II) 103.6 mg g1
Ni(II) 140.8 mg g1
de Melo et al.
(2009)
Carboxylated corn stalk cellulose Nd(III) 351.8 mg g1 Wang et al.
(2018)
Surfactant modified hydrophobic
cellulose
Organics 2-naphtol
Trichlorobenzene (TCB)
Nitrobenzene (NB)
Dichlorobenzene (DCB)
Chlorobenzene (CB)
2-Naphtol
165.8 mg g1
TCB 165.8 mg g1
NB 159.7 mg g1
DCB 73.5 mg g1
CB 52.9 mg g1
Alila et al.
(2007)
Silylated hydrophobic CNF aerogel Dodecane and several
organic solvents and oils
Dodecane 50 g g1
Other organics
49–102 g g1
Zhang et al.
(2014a)
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials 369
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesdesorption cycles (Zhu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016b). Similarly, desorption of organic dye
molecules can be achieved by dispersing the dye-loaded adsorbent in some suitable organic
solvent such as 50% ethanol solution and sonicating or stirring for sufficient time (Qiao
et al., 2015).
Cellulose modification with a carboxyl group is usually achieved by reacting it with a car￾boxylic acid or its carboxylate salt or anhydride (Zhou et al., 2013; Anirudhan et al., 2015;
Vieira et al., 2010; Qiao et al., 2015). The quasi solvent-free carboxylation of cellulose with acid
anhydride (e.g., anhydrides of maleic, succinic, or phthalic acid) at high temperature involves
the addition of pre-dried cellulose material to molten anhydride in a 1:10 ratio in a moisture
proof reaction flask immersed in an oil or sand bath at 115 °C while being kept under mag￾netic stirring for 6 h or lesser (Vieira et al., 2010; de Melo et al., 2009). This acylation reaction
with cyclic organic anhydrides is then stopped by the addition of dimethylacetamide (DMA).
The solid is then separated by filtration with a sintered filter, washed in sequence with ace￾tone and distilled water to remove the unreacted anhydride, DMA, and other by-products
and dried at 80 °C for 12 h. Chemical modification of cellulose with maleic anhydride as a
representative acid anhydride using this general procedure is shown in Scheme 16.1 (route
1) which allows up to 2.82  0.05 mmol g1 of maleic anhydride covalently bonded to the
back bone structure (Vieira et al., 2010; de Melo et al., 2009). The carboxylated polysaccharides
are able to adsorb cations from aqueous or aqueous-alcohol solutions (Vieira et al., 2010) with
a maximum adsorption capacity of 1.75  0.09 and 2.40  0.12 mmol g1 for Co2+ and Ni2+,
respectively (de Melo et al., 2009).
Another approach involves cellulose oxidation with suitable oxidizing agents such as
2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl-1-oxy radical (TEMPO) or ammonium persulfate (APS)
(Zhang et al., 2016a, 2016b) (Scheme 16.1, route 2). In the former case, pristine or acid￾hydrolyzed cellulose is catalytically oxidized with TEMPO/NaBr/NaClO under aqueous
conditions to introduce significant amounts of carboxylate groups on its surfaces without
any changes in crystallinity of cellulose I or in the original fibrous morphology (Zhang
et al., 2016a; Saito and Isogai, 2005). During this process, cellulose is suspended in water
(750 mL) containing 0.25 g NaBr and 0.025 g TEMPO and the TEMPO-mediated oxidation
of the cellulose slurry is started by adding sodium hypochlorite (NaClO) oxidant
(2.42 mmol g1 cellulose) at room temperature and 10.5 pH. After stirring the cellulose slurry
for 2–5 h (with ultrasonication) or 24 h (without ultrasonication), the oxidation process is
quenched by adding aqueous ethanol or methanol. The fibrous TEMPO-oxidized carboxyl￾ated cellulose (TO-CC) with a carboxyl content of 0.48 mmol g1 is then washed with water
by filtration and dried by freeze-drying (Saito and Isogai, 2005). Ultrasonic treatment may be
employed to assist the oxidation reaction and achieve a higher degree of carboxylation (car￾boxyl content ¼ 1.3–1.66 mmol g1 cellulose) in a shorter time (Zhang et al., 2016a, 2016b; Qin
et al., 2011). Alternatively, carboxylated CNCs can be prepared by a one-step APS oxidation
where cellulose materials are hydrolyzed in 200 mL APS solution (1–2 mol L1
) at 60 °C for
16 h. The resulting white suspension of APS-oxidized carboxylated cellulose (AO-CC) is
washed with water using the repeated suspension-centrifugation protocol and then freeze￾dried (Zhang et al., 2016a). The AO-CC containing carboxylate groups shows ion-exchange
properties and can capture a variety of metal ions from aqueous solution with certain selec￾tivity that follows the order Pb2+ > La3+ > Al3+ > Cu2+ > Ba2+ > Ni2+ > Co2+ > Cd2+, Sr2+,
Mn2+, Ca2+ > Mg2+ (Saito and Isogai, 2005).
370 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe freeze-dried TO-CC can be further modified by polyethyleneimine (PEI) grafting
via glutaraldehyde crosslinking procedure to produce TO-CC-PEI adsorbent containing
both carboxyl and amino group which possess better adsorption properties as compared
to TO-CC (Zhang et al., 2016b). For instance, incorporation of PEI into TO-CC led to an
increase in maximum Cu2+ adsorption capacity from 18.9 mg g1 (TO-CC) to 52.32 mg g1
(TO-CC-PEI). Similarly, the initial adsorption rate was higher (98.2 mg g1 h1
) for
TO-CC-PEI as compared to TO-CC (61.0 mg g1 h1
) (Zhang et al., 2016b). The procedure
for the preparation of TO-CC-PEI consists of adding 2 g of the TO-CC and 10 g PEI to 0.1 L
methanol, stirring the mixture for 24 h, followed by centrifugation at 8000 rpm to remove
the residual PEI. The precipitate obtained is dispersed in 100 mL water and 4 mL of glu￾taraldehyde solution (25%) is drop-wise added. After 1 h stirring at pH 8, cross-linking of
TO-CC and PEI results in the formation of TO-CC-PEI adsorbent (Zhang et al., 2016b).
The incorporation of carboxymethyl groups (–CH2–COOH) into cellulose backbone to
produce carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) is another interesting chemical modification that
enhances the sorption properties of cellulose-based materials toward cationic pollutants
species and organic molecules (Lin et al., 2015a; Yan et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2009). For
instance, the ion-exchange based sorption capacity toward MB increases from 50 mg g1
for unmodified cellulose to more than 300 mg g1 for the CMC, with the most favorable
sorption of MB observed under basic conditions (Yan et al., 2011). Interestingly, the
MB-adsorbed CMC (CMC-MB used sample) can be re-used as a new sorbent and employed
for the removal of methyl orange (MO) in a second sorption process under neutral or alkaline
conditions. The sorption of MO on CMC-MB is due to an electrostatic interaction between MO
and CMC-MB, with a maximum MO uptake of over 100 mg g1 (Yan et al., 2011). The gel ad￾sorbents based on CMC exhibit ion-exchange properties and can be employed to efficiently
remove metal cations (108.7 mg (Sr2+)g 1
), often through control of pH and ionic strength
during the ion-exchange process where the adsorption capacity increases with increasing
pH and decreasing ionic strength. Desorption of the adsorbed Sr2+ ions is achieved by im￾mersing the adsorbents in an acidic solution or solution of high ionic strength or heating
the adsorbents in a hot moist environment (Wang et al., 2009). Similarly, carboxymethyl mod￾ified bacterial nanocellulose (CM-BNC) efficiently adsorbs protein molecules (bovine serum
albumin) at pH lower than the pHPZC (4.5–6.0) of the protein, where the adsorbed quantity
increases with the increase in the degree of substation (DS) (Lin et al., 2015a). Studies of ad￾sorption of metal cations have also indicated an improved performance of CM-BNC than pris￾tine BNC at optimized pH 4.5, with the value of 9.67 mg(Cu) g1 and 22.56 mg(Pb) g1 for
pristine BC and 12.63 mg(Cu) g1 and 60.42 mg(Pb) g1 for CM-BNC, respectively (Chen
et al., 2009).
A two-step procedure is usually adopted for the carboxymethylation of cellulose by the
alkali-catalyzed reaction of cellulose with chloroacetic acid (Lin et al., 2015a; Zhang et al.,
2011; Yan et al., 2011), with a degree of substitution of 0.76 (Scheme 16.1, route 3). The first
step is alkalinization (reaction 16.1 below) where cellulose is added to an ethanol-aqueous
sodium hydroxide mixed solvent, followed by the etherification step (reaction 16.2) in which
sodium chloroacetate is added to the mixture to react at 80 °C for 2.5 h to produce
carboxymethyl group incorporated cellulose (Zhang et al., 2011; Yan et al., 2011). Microwave
heating can shorten the processing time from several hours to few minutes and increase the
degree of substitution (Zhang et al., 2011).
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials 371
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesC6H7O2ð Þ OH 3
 
n + nNaOH! C6H7O2ð Þ OH 2ONa  
n + nH2O (16.1)
C6H7O2ð Þ OH 2ONa  
n + nClCH2COONa ! C6H7O2ð Þ OH 2OCH2COONa  
n + nNaCl (16.2)
Before the preparation of CMC, the plant material is often pre-treated to remove hemicel￾lulose (by acid hydrolysis) and lignin (by thermo-mechanical treatment, ozone decomposi￾tion, or the sulfite process).
16.2.2 Sulfur-based modification
Many studies have reported the modification of cellulose with sulfur-containing groups
including sulfides, thiol, and sulfonic/sulfate functionalities (Silva Filho et al., 2013; Santana
et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2008; Suopaj€arvi et al., 2015; Lin and Dufresne, 2014; Thiangtham
et al., 2019) to improve the adsorption properties of cellulose. The covalent incorporation
of negatively charged surface sulfate groups into CNCs is a chemical modification which sig￾nificantly enhances the adsorptive properties of cellulose toward cationic species (Suopaj€arvi
et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2020; Sirvio and Visanko, 2020 € ). For instance, commercial mixed cellu￾lose ester membranes modified with sulfated nanocrystalline cellulose have been found to
efficiently remove the cationic antibiotic molecules (tetracycline hydrochloride containing
protonated amine) from aqueous media due to electrostatic interaction (Liu et al., 2020). Like￾wise, lignin-rich sulfated wood CNFs have been studied as high-performing adsorbents for
the removal of lead and copper from water, exhibiting a maximum adsorption capacity 2.50
and 1.60 mmol g1 for Cu and Pb, respectively (Sirvio and Visanko, 2020 € ). In addition to their
excellent adsorptive properties, cellulose sulfates also exhibit other important characteristics
such as improved solubility, rheological behavior, thermo reversible gel formation, enzy￾matic degradability as well as anticoagulant and antiviral activity (Hettrich et al., 2008).
Many routes have been developed to prepare sulfonated/sulfated cellulose using different
sulfating agents such as chlorosulfuric acid (ClSO3H), amidosulfuric acid (NH2SO3H), sulfur
trioxide DMF-complex (SO3 – DMF), sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and sulfuryl chloride (SO2Cl2)
(Zhang et al., 2008; Suopaj€arvi et al., 2015; Lin and Dufresne, 2014; Liu et al., 2020; Hettrich
et al., 2008; Sirvio et al., 2019 € ). For example, sulfated cellulose can be prepared using
chlorosulfonic acid (ClSO3H) in anhydrous DMF as a sulfation agent (Lin and Dufresne,
2014) (see Scheme 16.1, route 4a). Moreover, desulfation and/or control of sulfation degrees
can also be achieved in a basic medium using different concentrations of alkaline (NaOH)
solution as a desulfation agent.
Sulfated CNCs have also been prepared by sulfuric acid-hydrolysis of microcrystalline cel￾lulose under ultrasonic conditions (Liu et al., 2020). This process includes an esterification
reaction between acid and cellulose molecules, which induces the covalent coupling of sulfate
groups on the surface of prepared CNCs (Lin and Dufresne, 2014). Recently, deep eutectic
solvent (prepared by heating sulfamic acid and urea together at 80 °C) has been employed
both as solvent and sulfation reagent without any external solvent (Sirvio and Visanko, €
2020; Sirvio et al., 2019 € ). This process, however, also leads to the carbamation of cellulose
to some extent as a side-reaction due to the presence of urea in the reaction mixture.
372 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAcetosulfation of cellulose is another quasi-homogeneous synthesis approach to prepare
regioselectively C6 substituted cellulose sulfates (Hettrich et al., 2008). The process consists of
acetosulfation followed by deacetylation in a polar aprotic solvent such N,
N-dimethylacetamide (DMAC) or N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). For instance, the cellu￾lose suspended in DMF is reacted with a mixture of sulfating (chlorosulfonic acid or
H2SO4) and acetylating (acetic acid anhydride (Ac2O) or acetyl chloride (CH3COCl)) agents
to form cellulose acetate sulfates. After precipitation of the polymer, the acetyl groups are
cleaved in alkaline solution to obtain water-soluble cellulose sulfate (degree of substitution
> 0.25), with the sulfate group preferentially present at the C6 position (Hettrich et al., 2008).
Alternatively, sulfonated cellulose with higher water retention values can also be prepared
using an oxidation/sulfonation protocol where sodium periodate (NaIO4) is used to oxidize
cellulose in dark at pH 4 and 38 °C to yield the 2,3-dialdehyde products. The resulting
dialdehyde cellulose is subsequently treated with aqueous sodium bisulfite (NaHSO3) for
2 h at 22 °C to yield the corresponding C2/3 sulfonates (Zhang et al., 2008; Suopaj€arvi
et al., 2015) (see Scheme 16.1, route 4b). Such sulfonated nanofibrillar cellulose material,
containing the negatively charged deprotonated sulfonic binding sites at pH > 4 and
exhibiting negative zeta potential values (66.7 mV) (Liu et al., 2020), shows enhanced ad￾sorption capacity toward heavy metal ions (1.2 mmol/g for Pb2+ at pH 5 and contact time
20 h), comparable to those of commercial adsorbents (Suopaj€arvi et al., 2015).
Other sulfur-based modifications such as the incorporation of the thiol group have also
been studied to improve the adsorptive properties of cellulose (Silva Filho et al., 2013; Santana
et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2014). For example, incorporation of basic sulfur centers in the cellu￾lose structure with a higher tendency for coordinating divalent cations has been achieved
through the direct reaction of cellulosic material (5 g) with ethylenesulfide (7 mL) at 50 °C
for 3 h (Santana et al., 2010) (Scheme 16.1, route 4c). The final product is separated from
the reaction mixture by sintered filtration, followed by washing with distilled water and ac￾etone. This ethylenesulfide-immobilized cellulose shows a maximum sorption capacity
(39.2 mg g1
) toward Cu2+ ions from an aqueous solution at pH 6.
16.2.3 Chemical modification with amines
Amine-functionalization of cellulose has also been widely studied for the removal of both
organic and inorganic pollutants since the available basic nitrogen centers can act as chelating
centers for capturing metal cations (da Silva Filho et al., 2006). Moreover, these amine groups
remain protonated at suitable acidic pH and can act as positively charged adsorption sites for
adsorptive removal of anionic pollutant species ( Jin et al., 2015). For instance,
ethylenediamine-anchored cellulose containing the ethylene-1,2-diamine chelating groups
(basic nitrogen with a great affinity for cations) effectively adsorbs, via cation complexation,
divalent cations like Co2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, and Ni2+ from aqueous solutions under neutral pH con￾ditions, with adsorption capacities of 1.91  0.07, 1.32  0.07, 1.31  0.02, and
1.08  0.04 mmol g1
, respectively (da Silva Filho et al., 2006). The synthesis of
ethylenediamine-anchored cellulose consists of a prior chlorination reaction, substituting
the OH at C6 position with Cl (DS ¼ 0.99) using thionyl chloride (SOCl2) in DMF to form a
more reactive 6-chloro-6-deoxycellulose. The chlorinated cellulose is subsequently reacted
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials 373
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceswith ethylene-1,2-diamine to give 6-(20
-aminoethylamino)-6-deoxy-cellulose (da Silva Filho
et al., 2006) (Scheme 16.1, route 5a). Moreover, the aminated cellulose thus obtained can be
further modified by reacting it with ethylene sulfide (C2H4S) to form a derivative (shown
as end-product in route 5a) that contains –SH groups at the end of the side chains, in addition
to the NH groups (Silva Filho et al., 2013). Due to the presence of sulfur as an additional soft
binding center, this new derivate shows further improvement in adsorption toward divalent
metal ions in the order Pb2+ > Cd2+ > Ni2+ > Co2+ > Cu2+ > Zn2+, with the maximum ad￾sorption capacities of 6.282  0.023, 5.783  0.015, 5.561  0.017, 4.694  0.013,
1.944  0.062 and 1.733  0.020 mmol g1
, respectively (Silva Filho et al., 2013). Moreover,
the same synthetic route (route 5a) can be used to prepare another cellulose derivative with
mixed functional groups (aminothiol-functionalized cellulose) if the chlorinated cellulose (6-
chloro-6-deoxycellulose), obtained after chlorination of cellulose with SOCl2, is reacted with
aminoethanethiol hydrochloride (HS(CH2)2NH2 ∙HCl) (Silva et al., 2013). This
aminoethanethiol-functionalized cellulose, with a PZC value of around 6, showed good ad￾sorption of reactive red anionic dye from aqueous solution under both acidic (78 mg g1 at
pH 2) and basic conditions (26 mg g1 at pH 9). The adsorption mechanism involves a pos￾sible electrostatic interaction between the anionic dye molecules and protonated SH2
+ and
NH2
+ group in the side chain under acidic conditions leading to higher adsorption capacity
and H-bonding and/or covalent interactions between the modified cellulose and dye mole￾cules under basic condition (Silva et al., 2013).
Another route for the preparation of amino-functionalized nanocrystalline cellulose in￾volves oxidation of cellulose with NaIO4 to produce dialdehyde nanocrystalline cellulose,
as explained earlier, and then reacting it with ethylenediamine for 6 h, followed by in-situ re￾duction of the resulting imine intermediate with sodium borohydride (NaBH4) ( Jin et al.,
2015) (Scheme 16.1, route 5b). The resulting amino-functionalized cellulose exhibit a pHPZC
value of 8 and considering that the anionic dye adsorption is favored at pH < pHpzc, where
the surface became positively charged, high adsorption capacities were obtained under acidic
conditions (pH 4.5) for the anionic dyes Congo red 4BS, acid red GR and reactive light yellow
K-4G, with equilibrium adsorption amounts of 199.5, 137.1, and 183 mg g1
, respectively, and
with a maximum theoretical adsorption capacity of 555.6 mg g1 for acid red GR, as obtained
from Langmuir isotherm plot ( Jin et al., 2015).
16.2.4 Phosphorylation of cellulose
Phosphorylated nanocellulose has been found to be an efficient bioadsorbent for the ad￾sorptive removal of metal ions from industrial effluents (Oshima et al., 2008; Liu et al.,
2015). Vanja Kokol and co-workers presented an elegant modification of CNFs and CNCs
by converting them to the nano-sized cellulose ester building blocks having phosphoryl side
chains (Kokol et al., 2015). The hydroxyls groups positioned at C6 and C3 of both CNFs and
CNCs were efficiently modified to the dibasic phosphate and monobasic tautomeric phos￾phite groups via phosphorylation using heterogeneous and homogeneous approaches and
phosphoric acid as phosphoryl contributor (Scheme 16.1, route 6). Importantly, the homog￾enous conditions produce a higher surface charge density of 60-fold (1173 mmol kg1
) for
phosphorylated CNFs (p-CNFs) and 2-fold (1038 mmol kg1
) for phosphorylated CNCs
374 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices(p-CNCs) and high hydrolytic stability to water for p-CNCs at all pH was also observed. In￾terestingly, the extents of phosphate ions released from acidic to alkaline hydrolysis were
found to be marginal and safe beside the high surface phosphorylation under homogeneous
modification. Additionally, the treated solution after the heterogeneous process could be
recycled.
Modification of cellulose with phosphate groups significantly improves its sorption veloc￾ity and sorption capacity toward metal ions (Ag+
, Cu2+, and Fe3+), allowing nearly 100% ad￾sorptive removal of the metals from aqueous media (Liu et al., 2015). For instance, the
sorption capacity toward Ag+ ions was found to be 136 mg g1 for phosphorylated CNCs,
as compared to 56 mg g1 for pristine nanocellulose. Similarly, phosphorylated bacterial
nanocellulose (p-BC) is an excellent adsorbent material for a variety of transition metals ions
(Cu2+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Co2+, Fe3+) and lanthanide ions (La3+, Sm3+, Ho3+) (Oshima et al., 2008).
Although pristine BC does not adsorb metal/lanthanide ions, p-BC containing phosphoric
acid groups shows adsorption of these ions. Moreover, the pH dependence of the adsorption
process (% adsorption >90% at pH > 4.5) suggests a cation-exchange mechanism of adsorp￾tion (Oshima et al., 2008).
16.2.5 Hydrophobic nanocellulose
A very interesting strategy employed to capture organics dissolved in water using
cellulose-based adsorbents is to graft or add organic moieties bearing hydrocarbon chains
of different lengths which can act as hydrophobic reservoirs for accumulation of a wide va￾riety of organic compounds including pesticides and oils (Zhang et al., 2014a; Aloulou et al.,
2004a, b, c; Gong et al., 2019; Salajkova´ et al., 2012; Boufi and Belgacem, 2006; Alila and Boufi,
2009; Alila et al., 2007, 2010; Lin et al., 2015b; Zhao et al., 2020). One of the strategies involves
adsorbing cationic or anionic surfactants with different hydrophobic chain length (from C12
to C18) onto cellulose fibers in an aqueous medium whereby the adsorbed surfactant mole￾cules aggregate at the solid–liquid interface in the form of hydrophobic monolayer or bila￾yers. These hydrophobic layers can act as reservoirs to trap various slightly water-soluble
organic molecules through their partitioning or adsolubilization process between the bulk
aqueous phase and the adsorbed surfactant aggregates layer (Aloulou et al., 2004a, b, c). Other
studies on the solutes adsorption isotherms on cellulose/surfactant assemblies have
suggested coadsorption as the dominant solute uptake process (Aloulou et al., 2004b; Alila
et al., 2007). Moreover, the retention capacity of the cellulose/surfactant assembly toward or￾ganic solutes depends on (i) the hydrocarbon tail structure of the adsorbed surfactant, (ii) the
amount of surfactant adsorbed, and (iii) the solute solubility and functional groups. The re￾tention capacity generally increases with the number of carbon atoms in the surfactant chain
and with the increase in surfactant concentration up to critical micelle concentration (cmc)
(Boufi and Belgacem, 2006).
Some of the common cationic surfactant employed for this purpose include octadecyltri￾methylammonium bromide (C18), hexadecylpyridinium chloride (C16), tetradecyltrimethy￾lammonium bromide (C14) and dodecylpyridinium chloride (C12) with their cmcs at 25 °C
being 2.1  104
, 7.5  104
, 3.4  103
, and 1.2  102 mol L1
, respectively (Aloulou et al.,
2004a, c; Alila et al., 2007). Examples of the anionic surfactant include sodium
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials 375
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesoctadecyltrimethyl sulfate (C18), sodium hexadecylpyridinium sulfate (C16), sodium
tetradecyltrimethyl sulfate (C14), sodium dodecylpyridinium sulfate (C12), and sodium
dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBC) with their cmc being 1.5  104
, 6.1  104
, 2.4  103
,
102
, and 1.1  103 mol L1
, respectively (Aloulou et al., 2004b).
The adsorption of cationic surfactant onto cellulose substrate is enhanced if the –COOH
groups are pre-introduced, for example by the TEMPO-mediated oxidation of cellulose
discussed previously, thus obtaining a cationic surfactant/anionic cellulose assembly with
higher loading of adsorbed surfactant. The extent of cationic surfactant adsorption on anionic
cellulose increases with an increase in the degree of oxidation (Alila et al., 2007; Salajkova´
et al., 2012). CNCs with still higher carboxylate content (1.5 mmol g1
) can be prepared if
the TEMPO-oxidized cellulose is converted to CNCs by direct hydrochloric acid hydrolysis.
The resulting CNCs carrying abundant carboxylic acid groups can efficiently adsorb, via an
ionic-exchange process, a variety of quaternary ammonium cation surfactants bearing long
alkyl, phenyl, glycidyl, and diallyl groups, thus forming hydrophobic (contact angle ¼ 71
degree) cellulose/surfactant assemblies that can be redispersed and individualized in organic
solvents such as toluene and chloroform (Salajkova´ et al., 2012). Similarly, enhanced adsorp￾tion of anionic surfactant with different hydrophobic chain lengths onto cellulose fibers can
be achieved if the cellulose fibers are pre-treated with a cationic polyelectrolyte (such as
polydimethyldiallylammonium chloride (PDAC) or linear 3–6 ionene) (Aloulou et al.,
2004b). Such cationic polyelectrolyte-treated cellulose/anionic surfactant assembly acts as
an excellent adsorbent with enhanced capacity for the retention of a variety of organic com￾pounds (benzene, nitrobenzene, quinoline, and 2-naphthol) following a coadsorption process
where the accumulation of the organic solutes takes place in the hydrophobic surfactant ag￾gregates formed at the cellulose/water interface (Aloulou et al., 2004b). Likewise, the cationic
surfactant (C-18)/anionic cellulose assembly also showed good co-adsorption of 2-naphthol
and quinolone, with a maximum co-adsorbed amount of 1150 and 550 μmol g1
, respectively,
whereas the solute adsorption on pristine cellulose fibers did not exceed 80–140 μmol g1
(Alila et al., 2007).
Another interesting chemical modification of cellulose fibers to achieve efficient capture of
organic molecules dissolved in water and excellent recyclability involves grafting aliphatic
anhydrides having a long hydrocarbon chain (C6, C8, C12, and C16) through heterogeneous
esterification with an anhydride or carboxylic acid, employing a heterogeneous solvent ex￾change acylation procedure (Boufi and Belgacem, 2006). The process involves soaking of
water-swelled pre-washed fibers into a solution of toluene/triethylamine (TEA) (80/20,
w/w) and refluxing the resulting slurry until all the water contained inside the fibers is re￾moved by azeotropic distillation with the toluene/TEA mixture. Then required amount of
acid anhydride and catalyst (dimethylaminopyridine, 6% (w/w)) is added and the slurry
is kept under magnetic stirring, reflux, and dry nitrogen atmosphere for 12 h. The product
obtained is then purified by soxhlet extraction with THF/ethanol (50/50, v/v) for 48 h
and dried at 105 °C for 30 min. The prepared modified fibers exhibit an excellent capacity
to capture different organic molecules dissolved in water including chlorobenzene
(185 μmol g1
), nitrobenzene (146 μmol g1
), quinoline (330 μmol g1
) and 2-naphthol
(330 μmol g1
) (Boufi and Belgacem, 2006). Importantly, the saturated substrates can be
regenerated tens of times without losing their capacity of absorption of organic contaminants.
376 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesRemembering the Gulf of Mexico accidental marine oil spill in April 2010, which released
4.1 million barrels of oil into the deep waters of the Gulf of Mexico (Schrope, 2011) and con￾sidering the fact that oil transportation mainly involves sea transportation, the problem of oil
spill (Schrope, 2011) and other organic solvents is an ever-existing threat to both marine life as
well as human life. The preparation of hydrophobic cellulose-based adsorbents for the re￾moval of oils and other organic liquids from aqueous media has thus attracted particular at￾tention. Many efforts have been directed toward the development of greener and efficient
treatment methods for the removal or separation of oils and other organic solvents from aque￾ous media, most of which involve the development of hydrophobic solid adsorbents, prefer￾entially based on natural polymers such as cellulose (Zhang et al., 2014a; Lin et al., 2015b;
Zhao et al., 2020; Salajkova´ et al., 2012; Rong et al., 2021; Ermeng et al., 2017).
Silylation is another elegant way used for the chemical/hydrophobic modification of cel￾lulose (Klebe and Finkbeiner, 1969; Gousse et al., 2002). Most often, the cellulose polymer is
silylated with suitable organo(chloro)silanes containing a hydrocarbons chain that results in
hydrophobic silylated cellulose with enhanced oil capturing capacities (Zhang et al., 2014a;
Lin et al., 2015b; Rong et al., 2021). Various organo(chloro)silanes including hexamethyldi￾silazane (HMDS), thexyldimethylchlorosilane (TMSCl), trimethylsilyl chloride (TMSCl),
methyltrimethoxysilane, bis(trimethylsily1)-acetamide (BSA), 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane
(APTS), (2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl-trimethoxysilane (AETS), isopropyldimethyl￾chlorosilane (IDCS), n-butyldimethylchlorosilane (BDCS), n-octyldimethylchlorosilane
(ODCS) and n-dodecyldimethylchlorosilane (DDMS) have been used as silylating agents
to prepare silylated cellulose (Gousse et al., 2002; Petzold et al., 2003; Mormann and Wagner,
2000; Yin et al., 2018).
The silanes undergo hydrolysis and the hydrolyzed products then not only undergo
self-condensation to form an extended organosilica network (–O–Si(R)–O–) but also con￾dense with the surface –OH group of cellulose structure to form cellulose–O–Si bonds,
leading to the covalent grafting of the organosilica onto the cellulose fibers (Scheme
16.1, route 7). For example, hydrophobic, flexible, and ultralightweight (apparent
density  17.3 kg m3
) nanocellulose sponges (Fig. 16.4A) with high porosity (99%)
can be prepared by silylation of CNFs with methyltrimethoxysilane (CH3Si(OCH3)3) in
acidic media (pH 4) under the freeze-drying conditions (Zhang et al., 2014a). The proce￾dure consists of the drop-wise addition of an aqueous solution (pH 4) of methyltri￾methoxysilane (1.2–30.8 mmol/gNFC) to an aqueous suspension of NFC (14.16 g/97.72 g
H2O) of the same pH, stirring the reaction mixture for 2 h and then freeze-drying it with
liquid nitrogen. The resulting silylated NFC sponges combine both hydrophobic and
oleophilic properties (Fig. 16.4B), as demonstrated by its ability to efficiently capture
dodecane (50 g g1
) (Fig. 16.4C) and a wide range of other organic solvents (chloroform,
dichloromethane, toluene, acetone) and oils (mineral oil, motor oil, silicon oil) from aque￾ous media, with an excellent efficiency (absorption capacity ¼ 49–102 g g1
, depending on
the liquid) and recyclability (Zhang et al., 2014a).
A related procedure can be used to prepare superhydrophobic silylated composite aerogel
materials consisting of CNFs/polyvinyl alcohol/montmorillonite. These porous aerogels can
be prepared by directional freezing using CNFs as the base material, polyvinyl alcohol as the
cross-linking agent, and montmorillonite as the modifier and filler, followed by hydrophobic
16.2 Molecular functionalization of cellulose-based materials 377
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices1 cm
NFC
O
O Si
Me Me Me
O Si O
O
H
Si O
O
O
H
Unmodified Silylated (18.9 wt% Si)
Water
(A)
(B)
(C)
Dodecane
Dodecane
FIG. 16.4 (A) Photograph of the silylated NFC sponge along with a schematic representation of the possible in￾teractions between the polysiloxane sol and the NFC surface, where the polysiloxane sol is expected to condense or
form hydrogen bonds with the cellulosic substrate, as water is progressively removed; (B) demonstration of the com￾bined hydrophobic and oleophilic properties of the silylated NFC sponge. In comparison, the untreated NFC sponge
displayed an amphiphilic character. Dodecane and water were colored red (Sudan III dye) and blue (Neon Blue dye),
respectively; and (C) removal of a red-colored dodecane spill (0.02 g) from water with the silylated NFC sponge
(0.02 g). Reproduced from Zhang, Z., Se` be, G., Rentsch, D., Zimmermann, T., Tingaut, P., 2014a. Ultralightweight and flexible
silylated nanocellulose sponges for the selective removal of oil from water. Chem. Mater. 26, 2659–2668. https://doi.org/10.
1021/cm5004164 with permission from the American Chemical Society.
378 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricestreatment with methyltrimethoxysilane as a silylating agent using the chemical vapor depo￾sition method at 70 °C for 2 h (Rong et al., 2021). The resulting silylated aerogels exhibit ex￾cellent surface/physical properties (density ¼ 26.52 kg m3
, porosity ¼ 96.1%, contact
angle ¼ 140 degree) and hence good adsorption capacity toward different oils and organic
solutions, reaching 40–68 times of its initial weight (Rong et al., 2021). Similarly, hydrophobic
(contact angle ¼ 150 degree), light weight (19.6 kg m3
) cellulose aerogels can be prepared by
a rapid (<3 min) cold plasma process using trimethylchlorosilane ((CH3)3SiCl) as the plasma
(Lin et al., 2015b). These cellulose aerogels exhibit excellent adsorption properties (34.5 g
(peanut oil) g1
) and can be reused for up to 15 cycles. As another example, cellulose aerogels
can be coated with methyltrimethoxysilane by chemical vapor deposition method to obtain
superhydrophobic material (contact angle ¼ 153.5 degree) with excellent oil absorption ca￾pacities (95 g g1
) from seawater/oil suspensions (Feng et al., 2015).
Similarly, cellulose whiskers can be partially silylated with alkyldimethylchlorosilanes (al￾kyl group ¼ isopropyl, n-butyl, n-octyl or n-dodecyl) in dry toluene and the HCl produced as
a by-product could be trapped using imidazoles (Gousse et al., 2002). It is important to men￾tion that a control of the extent of substitution and regioselectivity is attributed to the reaction
pathway. Cellulose can be chemically modified to pure trimethylsilyl cellulose by reacting it
with trimethylsilyl chloride (TMSCl) in pyridine or NH3/DMF. A higher degree of silylation,
without degradation of the polymer chain, can be achieved if hexamethyldisilazane in liquid
ammonia at elevated temperature (80–100 °C) in an autoclave is used as silylating agent in the
presence of catalytic amount of saccharin (0.5 mol% relative to the hydroxy groups)
(Mormann and Wagner, 2000).
Acetylation of cellulose, which involves the substitution of the hydrophilic hydroxyl (OH)
groups of cellulose with less hydrophilic acetyl (CH₃CO) groups can also be employed to
impart hydrophobic and hence oil-sorbing properties to cellulose-based materials. For in￾stance, acetylated wheat straw cellulosic sorbent can be prepared by reacting pre-treated cel￾lulose (0.5 g) in dimethylacetamide (15 mL) with acetic anhydride (5 mL) as an acetylating
reagent in the presence of N-bromosuccinimide (55 mM) catalyst at 100 °C for 1.5 h. The
resulting acetylated cellulose possesses a hydrophobic and oleophilic surface and contains
abundant oil-absorbing sites and shows excellent oil absorbencies values of 24.21  0.76,
22.39  0.77, 25.61  2.13, and 24.73  1.19 g g1
, for diesel fuel, diesel oil slick, corn oil,
and corn oil slick treatments, respectively (Ermeng et al., 2017). Table 16.2 summarizes the
removal performance of the different chemically modified cellulose materials toward a vari￾ety of both organic and inorganic pollutants.
16.3 Inorganic nanostructures modified cellulose: Improved
multifunctional adsorbents
An interesting strategy to improve the adsorptive removal performance of cellulose-based
materials is their combination, at the molecular or nanoscale level, with inorganic
nanostructures such as layered clay minerals, metal oxides/sulfides-based semiconductors,
plasmonic metallic nanoparticles, among others. By combining the excellent structural prop￾erties, mechanical stability, and hydrophilicity of cellulose-based components with the
16.3 Inorganic nanostructures modified cellulose: Improved multifunctional adsorbents 379
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesunique surface, (photo)catalytic and electronic properties of inorganic nanostructures, this
strategy offers great versatility with respect to tailoring the properties of cellulose-based ad￾sorbents and the resulting hybrid organic-inorganic (nano)materials often exhibit highly im￾proved removal performance and/or selectivity for different inorganic and organic
contaminants. Additionally, modification with specific inorganic nanomaterials may imbue
the hybrid material with novel functions that contribute additively or even synergistically
with the adsorptive properties for water purification and environmental remediation appli￾cations (Islam et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2014; Wei et al., 2014; Figueiredo et al., 2014; Nadar et al.,
2019; Patel et al., 2019). Examples of such novel functions include (photo)catalytic, bacteri￾cidal, sensing, and magnetic properties. Table 16.3 summarizes important recent examples
of cellulose-based organic-inorganic hybrid adsorbents, highlighting their overall removal ef￾ficiency toward different types of contaminants and additional properties that modifications
instill into the material.
TABLE 16.3 A summary of the modification of cellulose with inorganic material and the properties and
applications of the resulting cellulose-based composites for environmental remediation.
Material
Functional
properties Form Pollutant Removal efficiency References
Cellulose/
amino-modified
carbon dots
hydrogel
Adsorbent,
sensor
Hydrogel
monolith
Cr(VI) Adsorption capacity
534.4 mg g1
Luo et al.
(2021)
Cellulose/MoS2 Adsorbent Membrane for
in-flow
adsorption
Hg(II) Adsorption capacity
160.4 mg g1
Haseen and
Ahmad
(2020)
Cellulose/Al2O3
aerogel
Absorbent Aerogel
monolith
Organic solvents Absorption capacity
64–118  103 mg g1
Zhou et al.
(2021)
Cellulose/(Co,
Fe)(pz)[Ni(CN)4]
MOF aerogel
Adsorbent Aerogel
monolith
Iodine Adsorption capacity
458.0 mg g1
Wu et al.
(2020)
Cellulose/ZIF￾67 /HKUST-1
MOFs
Adsorbent Aerogel beads Diclofenac
Methyl orange
(MO)
Adsorption capacity
Diclofenac
121.20 mg g1
Methyl orange
49.20 mg g1
KarzarJeddi
et al. (2020)
Fe-Cu alloy/
CNF membrane
Adsorbent,
bactericide
Membrane Pb(II) Adsorption capacity
Pb(II) 81.9 mg g1
Hou et al.
(2020)
Cellulose/Zn-Al
layered double
hydroxide
Adsorbent Powder As(III)As(V) Adsorption capacity
As(III) 30.2 mg g1
As(V) 42.0 mg g1
Bessaies
et al. (2020)
Cellulose/Mg￾Al layered
double
hydroxide
Adsorbent Beads Amoxicilin
antibiotic
Adsorption capacity
Amoxicilin
138.3 mg g1
Yang et al.
(2020a)
380 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 16.3 A summary of the modification of cellulose with inorganic material and the properties and
applications of the resulting cellulose-based composites for environmental remediation—cont’d
Material
Functional
properties Form Pollutant Removal efficiency References
Cellulose/γ￾Fe2O3 aerogels
Magnetic
adsorbent
Monoliths Cr(VI) Adsorption capacity
10.2 mg g1
Wan and Li
(2015)
Cellulose/SiO2/
Fe3O4
Magnetic
adsorbent
Powder Cr(VI) Adsorption capacity
17.1mg g1
Sun et al.
(2014)
Cellulose
acetate/MnO2/
FeOOH
Adsorbent,
oxidation
catalyst
Membrane As(III) Adsorption capacity
50.3 mg g1
Qiu et al.
(2020)
Cellulose/
kaolinite
Adsorbent Powder
nanofibers
Se(VI), Se(IV),
selenomethionine
(SeMt)
Adsorption capacity
Se(VI) 137.5 mg g1
Se(IV) 161.4 mg g1
SeMt 95.4 mg g1
Abukhadra
et al. (2021)
Cellulose/
montmorillonite
clay
Adsorbent Powder
nanofibers
Levofloxacin
antibiotic
Adsorption capacity
65.9 mg g1
Li et al.
(2020)
Cellulose/
montmorillonite
clay
Adsorbent Powder
nanofibers
Diuron antibiotic Adsorption capacity
64.0 mg g1
Ma et al.
(2020)
Cellulose/
montmorillonite
clay
Absorbent Hydrogel
monolith
Methylene blue
(MB) dye
Absorption capacity
782.9 mg g1
Peng et al.
(2016)
TiO2/Au￾cellulose
membranes
Adsorbent,
photocatalyst
Membrane Rhodamine B dye Degradation 95% in
5 h
Yu et al.
(2020)
BC/MoS2
aerogel
membrane
Adsorbent,
photocatalyst
Aerogel
in-flow
photocatalytic
membrane
Cr(VI)MB dye Adsorption efficiency
MB dye 50% in 30 min
Cr(VI) 22% in 30 min
Photo assisted
removal
MB dye 96% in
120 min
(kobs ¼ 0.026 min1
)
Cr(VI) 88% in 120 min
(kobs ¼ 0.012 min1
)
Ferreira￾Neto et al.
(2020)
BC/SiO2/TiO2
membrane
Photocatalyst/
self-cleaning,
antibacterial
Membrane Crystal violet 97% dye removal in
50 min, antibacterial
activity against
05 bacterial strains
Rahman
et al. (2021)
Continued
16.3 Inorganic nanostructures modified cellulose: Improved multifunctional adsorbents 381
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAs shown in Table 16.3, modification with a variety of inorganic nanostructures allows
cellulose-based adsorbents to be highly effective in the removal of different classes of contam￾inants including inorganic species (transition, alkaline, alkaline-earth, and metalloid cations
or toxic oxoanions (chromate and arsenates)) as well as organic pollutants such as dyes, sol￾vents, and pharmaceuticals. Enhancement of the adsorptive removal efficiency is often
assigned to both specific structural (e.g., pore structure, interlamellar spaces) and surface
traits (high surface charge, high specific surface area, complexation surface sites) of the
inorganic nanomaterials, allowing contaminants removal by both non-covalent/
electrostatic physisorption and/or covalent chemisorption. For instance, nanocomposites
prepared by combining cellulose biopolymer with layered inorganic nanomaterials such
as aluminosilicates clay minerals and layered double hydroxides (LDH) result in highly
increased adsorption capacity toward antibiotics, pesticides, dyes, and toxic heavy metals
TABLE 16.3 A summary of the modification of cellulose with inorganic material and the properties and
applications of the resulting cellulose-based composites for environmental remediation—cont’d
Material
Functional
properties Form Pollutant Removal efficiency References
BC/PDA/TiO2 Adsorbent,
photocatalyst
Membrane RhB, MO and MB
dyes
Adsorption capacity
RhB 13.4 mg g1
MO 11.8 mg g1
MB 28.9 mg g1
Photo-assisted
removal
RhB 100.0% in 60 min
MO 95.1% in 30 min
MB 99.5% in 20 min
Yang et al.
(2020b)
Bilayer BC/CuS
aerogel
membrane
Adsorbent,
photocatalyst
solar
evaporator
Aerogel
membrane
floating
membrane
MB dye Photo-assisted
removal
93.4% in 80 min
Zhang et al.
(2021)
Cellulose NFs/
BiOCl
Adsorbent,
photocatalyst
Powder Rhodamine B dye Adsorption
7% in 30 min
Photo-assisted
removal
100% in 16 min
Tian et al.
(2019)
β-FeOOH
cellulose
nanocomposite
hydrogels
Adsorbent,
photo￾fentoncatalyst
Hydrogel
monolith
MB dye Adsorption 11.5% in
30 min
Photodegradation
99.9% in 25 min
Wang et al.
(2020)
Cellulose–
bismuth
oxybromide
membrane
Adsorbent,
photocatalyst
Membrane RhB dye, Co(II),
and Ni(II)
Adsorption capacity
Co(II) 37.3 mg g1
Ni(II) 30.2 mg g1
Photo-assisted
removal
RhB 100% in
100 min
Onwumere
et al. (2020)
382 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesand oxoanions due to unique ion-exchange properties of these specific structures (Yang
et al., 2020a; Bessaies et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2016). Their
ion-exchange properties stem from the permanent negatively charged (in case of alumi￾nosilicates clays) and positively charged (in case of LDH) layers, resulting in high cation￾and anion-exchange capacities, respectively. An interesting example of LDH-cellulose
nanocomposites is Mg-Al LDH@CB adsorbents which are prepared by co-precipitation
of Mg-Al LDH inorganic phase on cellulose beads (CB). This composite shows high
adsorption capacity (138.3 mg g1
) toward amoxicillin antibiotic where the mechanism
of adsorption is through electrostatic interaction, as evidenced by zeta potential measure￾ments (Yang et al., 2020a). A similar approach can be followed to prepare Ca-Al LDH/
cellulose and Zn-Al LDH/cellulose positively charged adsorbents for enhanced removal
of toxic As(III) and As(V) oxoanions species from contaminated water (Bessaies
et al., 2020).
An example of the clay minerals-modified cellulose is nanocellulose/montmorillonite
composites for enhanced adsorption of diuron herbicide (adsorption capacity 64 mg g1
)
(Li et al., 2020) and levofloxacin hydrochloride antibiotic (65.9 mg g1
) (Ma et al., 2020).
A relevant advancement in this area is the preparation of clay-cellulose hydrogels with
ultra-high adsorption capacity toward methylene blue dye (782.9 mg g1
) and with the addi￾tional advantages of good mechanical stability, high water absorption, and monolithic nature
that facilitates handling and recovery of the adsorbent (Peng et al., 2016) (Fig. 16.5).
As an example of adsorption enhancement by chemisorption mechanism, the cellulose/
MoS2 material obtained by the hydrothermal growth of MoS2 nanostructures onto the surface
of a cellulose nanofiber mat exhibits excellent and selective Hg(II) sorption (160.4 mg g1
),
attributed to the soft–soft interaction of Hg(II) with the sulfide sites of MoS2 (Haseen and
Ahmad, 2020). Considering that immobilization of MoS2 onto solid support restricts sorbent
loss during the column operation, these MoS2 functionalized cellulose fiber mats have been
used as column packing material for pre-concentration of Hg(II) ions in environmental sam￾ples for ICP-OES analysis.
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs), consisting of crystalline assemblies of metal ions coor￾dinated to organic ligands, are another class of hybrid organic-inorganic nanomaterials with
unique structural and physicochemical properties including high surface area, high pore
volume, ordered pore structure, adjustable structure and pore size and abundance of chem￾ically active sites. These ideal features impart MOFs excellent adsorptive properties toward a
variety of pollutants. MOFs are thus excellent candidates for the preparation of cellulose￾supported nanocomposites adsorbents with improved stability, increased adsorption capac￾ity, and easier handling (Nadar et al., 2019; KarzarJeddi et al., 2020; Hou et al., 2020; Wu et al.,
2020). For instance, Wu et al. reported the preparation on monolithic hybrid cellulose/(Co,Fe)
(pz)[Ni(CN)4] MOF aerogel by doping or in-situ growth of Hoffman type bimetallic MOFs on
cellulose aerogel networks (Wu et al., 2020). The prepared materials, especially the hybrid
aerogels prepared by doping strategy, showed an excellent capacity for iodine capture
(458 mg g1
, approximately four times higher than pure cellulose aerogel), an application
of considerable interest for nuclear waste treatment plants. The adsorption mechanism in this
case probably involves the interaction of iodine with the pyrazine and cyanide functional
groups present in pore walls of Hoffman-type bimetallic MOF (Wu et al., 2020). Another in￾teresting example of cellulose/MOF nanocomposite adsorbent is the zwitterionic cellulosic
16.3 Inorganic nanostructures modified cellulose: Improved multifunctional adsorbents 383
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesaerogel bead containing both anionic (HKUST-1) and cationic (ZIF-67) MOFs (KarzarJeddi
et al., 2020). This highly porous (98.96%) and low density (0.015 g cm3
) material can be pre￾pared by incorporation of the cited MOFs in CNFs containing hydrogel networks, followed by
freeze-drying. The zwitterionic nature of the prepared MOFs@CNF aerobeads as well as the
different organic functionalities of MOFs allow excellent adsorptive removal of contaminants
(121.2 mg(diclofenac) g1 and 49.2 mg(MO) g1
) through different mechanisms including
electrostatic, π-π interactions and H-bonding (KarzarJeddi et al., 2020).
As previously mentioned, modification of cellulose-based substrates with inorganic
nanostructures not only enhances the adsorption properties but also imbues the final
nanocomposite with additional functional properties. For instance, cellulose-based adsor￾bents containing magnetic nanomaterials can be easily recovered from aqueous media
through the application of an external magnetic field. While the added inorganic compo￾nent often acts solely as a magnetic carrier, in certain cases it may additionally enhance
the adsorption properties of the composite material (Wan and Li, 2015; Sun et al., 2014).
In other cases, the added inorganic part may impart anti-bactericidal and/or anti-fungal
properties to the material, destroying the pathogenic agents in contaminated water, and
thus further corroborating with adsorptive/catalytic properties toward effective water pu￾rification applications (Hou et al., 2020; Kokilavani et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2021; Rahman
et al., 2021).
16.4 Adsorbents with photocatalytic/antibacterial functions
Based on the discussion presented above, it is clear that cellulose-based materials, espe￾cially after chemical modification or composite formation, have the potential to effectively
FIG. 16.5 Absorption of MB by cellulose–clay nanocomposite hydrogels. The Schematic representation of the
cellulose–clay nanocomposite hydrogels containing epoxidized/modified clay cross-linked in the hydrogel networks
is shown on the right hand side. The hydrogels are fabricated by chemical cross-linking cellulose (black fibers) and
carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC, blue fiber) with epichlorohydrin (ECH, red connecting line) in the presence of clay
nanosheets (clay blue disks). Reproduced from Peng, N., Hu, D., Zeng, J., Li, Y., Liang, L., Chang, C., 2016. Superabsorbent
cellulose-clay nanocomposite hydrogels for highly efficient removal of dye in water. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4, 7217–7224.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b02178 with Permission from the American Chemical Society.
384 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesadsorb a variety of both organic and inorganic pollutants from aqueous media and the used
adsorbents can be recovered by employing adequate strategies. The problem of disposal of
the pollutants-adsorbed cellulose materials, however, still remains. An effective strategy to
address this issue is to develop multifunctional materials that can efficiently adsorb/sorb
the pollutants on one hand and (photo)degrade them on the other. Table 16.3 summarizes
several examples of such multifunctional nanocomposites, especially highlighting
photocatalytic materials (Ferreira-Neto et al., 2020; Kokilavani et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2019; Qiu et al. (2019); Wang et al., 2020; Onwumere
et al., 2020). Semiconductors such as TiO2, ZnO, BiOBr, MoS2, CuS, all show photocatalytic
behavior and thus promote photo-assisted organic pollutants degradation and/or heavy
metal removal under UV–visible radiation. Combination of such photoactive behavior with
the inherent adsorption property of the material may act synergistically toward contaminant
removal and allow removal of a wider range of contaminants types (Ferreira-Neto et al., 2020;
Onwumere et al., 2020).
One excellent example of such multifunctional material is the BNC/MoS2 composite self￾supported hybrid aerogel membranes reported by Ferreira-Neto et al., that exhibit excellent
adsorption-cum-photocatalytic performance and thus high in-flow photo-assisted removal ef￾ficiency toward both organic (96% MB removal within 120 min, Kobs. ¼ 0.0267 min1
) and in￾organic species (88% Cr(VI) removal within 120 min, Kobs. ¼ 0.0122 min1
) when used as a
membranes filter (Fig. 16.6) (Ferreira-Neto et al., 2020). This highly porous aerogel membrane
can be prepared by the hydrothermal growth of quantum-confined photocatalytic MoS2
FIG. 16.6 Schematic representation of BNC/MoS2 hybrid aerogels membranes as bifunctional adsorbent/
photocatalyst for in-flow water decontamination under UV–visible illumination following adsorption-photocatalytic
mechanism. Adsorption and photooxidation of MB and photoreduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) have been shown as model
photocatalytic reactions. Reproduced from Ferreira-Neto, E.P., Ullah, S., da Silva, T.C.A., Domeneguetti, R.R.,
Perissinotto, A.P., de Vicente, F.S., Rodrigues-Filho, U.P., Ribeiro, S.J.L., 2020. Bacterial nanocellulose/MoS2 hybrid aerogels
as bifunctional adsorbent/photocatalyst membranes for in-flow water decontamination. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12,
41627–41643. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c14137 with permission from the American Chemical Society.
16.4 Adsorbents with photocatalytic/antibacterial functions 385
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesnanostructures (2–4 nm crystallite size) on BNC nanofibrils employing ammonium
heptamolybdate tetrahydrate ((NH4)6Mo7O244H2O)) and thiourea as the Mo and
S sources, respectively. In addition to the good adsorptive/photocatalytic properties, the ad￾equate anchoring of MoS2 onto BNC ensures excellent recyclability and photostability, mak￾ing such self-supported aerogel membranes ideal candidates for application in in-flow water
purification (Ferreira-Neto et al., 2020).
The preparation of multifunctional cellulose-based membranes containing both
photocatalytic and antibacterial components is another interesting research area with a broad
spectrum of applications. For instance, flexible bacterial cellulose-based BC-SiO2-TiO2-Ag
membranes have been found to exhibit the Ag-based antibacterial activity against five differ￾ent bacterial strains (in dark), in addition to the TiO2-based UV shielding and photocatalytic/
self-cleaning activity under UV illumination (Rahman et al., 2021) (Fig. 16.7). These hybrid
membranes were found to degrade 97% of the crystal violet (CV) dye deposited as an
over-layer on the surface of the membranes within 50 min of UV illumination. It turns out
that such hybrid membranes can be used in facemasks or wound dressing materials and then
safely disinfected by simply exposing them to UV or solar light, thus avoiding the risk of en￾vironmental contamination or disposal problems (Rahman et al., 2021).
FIG. 16.7 Schematic representation of the step-wise procedure for the preparation of BC-SiO2-TiO2 photoactive
hybrid membranes highlighting their photocatalytic/self-cleaning, UV shielding, and antibacterial activity. Reprinted
from Rahman, K.U., Ferreira-Neto, E.P., Rahman, G.U., Parveen, R., Monteiro, A.S., Rahman, G., Van Le, Q.,
Domeneguetti, R.R., Ribeiro, S.J.L., Ullah, S., 2021. Flexible bacterial cellulose-based BC-SiO2-TiO2-Ag membranes with
self-cleaning, photocatalytic, antibacterial and UV-shielding properties as a potential multifunctional material for combating
infections and environmental applications. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9, 104708. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104708 with
permission from Elsevier (2021).
386 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices16.5 Conclusions
Cellulose-based materials have been widely used as adsorbents for the removal of both
organic and inorganic pollutants from aqueous media. However, pristine cellulose shows
low adsorption efficiency toward pollutants, especially the metal ions, and this limitation
is easily overcome through chemical modifications of cellulose with a variety of metal￾binding/chelating functional groups, thanks to the presence of reactive OH groups on the
surface of cellulose that allow easily grafting of such functional groups. Often, negatively
charged functional groups (carboxylate, phosphate, and sulfate) are anchored to the surface
of cellulose that can efficiently sequester metal cations from aqueous media. Similarly,
enhanced capture of organic molecules and oils can be achieved by making the cellulose
hydrophobic through the incorporation of long-chain organic functional groups/molecules
such as surfactants and organosilanes. Finally, organic-inorganic hybrid/composite mate￾rials, prepared by adding various inorganic materials (magnetic, antibacterial, photocatalytic,
adsorbents) to the organic cellulose polymer, have been found to show superior properties
and enhanced adsorptive removal of a variety of contaminants from aqueous media, in
addition to assisting in the recovery and reusability of the adsorbents. Of particular interest
in this regard are the dual-function cellulose/semiconductor photocatalytic materials that not
only capture pollutants from aqueous media but also photocatalytically degrade them into
harmless or less toxic products. Moreover, antibacterial functions can be introduced into
cellulose-based materials, with the potential to be used in antimicrobial facemasks and water
filtration membranes. The low-cost, eco-friendly cellulose, especially after the modifications
mentioned above, thus offers a great potential for effective and sustainable environmental
remediation, with the possibility of upscaling and commercial applications.
References
Abol-Fotouh, D., Hassan, M.A., Shokry, H., Roig, A., Azab, M.S., Kashyout, A.E.H.B., 2020. Bacterial nanocellulose
from agro-industrial wastes: low-cost and enhanced production by Komagataeibacter saccharivorans MD1. Sci.
Rep. 10, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-60315-9.
Abukhadra, M.R., AlHammadi, A., El-Sherbeeny, A.M., Salam, M.A., El-Meligy, M.A., Awwad, E.M., Luqman, M.,
2021. Enhancing the removal of organic and inorganic selenium ions using an exfoliated kaolinite/cellulose fibres
nanocomposite. Carbohydr. Polym. 252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.117163.
Alila, S., Boufi, S., 2009. Removal of organic pollutants from water by modified cellulose fibres. Ind. Crop Prod. 30,
93–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2009.02.005.
Alila, S., Aloulou, F., Beneventi, D., Boufi, S., 2007. Self-aggregation of cationic surfactants onto oxidized cellulose
fibers and coadsorption of organic compounds. Langmuir 23, 3723–3731. https://doi.org/10.1021/la063118n.
Alila, S., Costa, A.I., Ferreira, L.F.V., Boufi, S., 2010. Modified biopolymer adsorbent for the removal of dissolved or￾ganic pollutants. Int. J. Environ. Technol. Manag. 12, 163–191. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJETM.2010.031526.
Aloulou, F., Boufi, S., Belgacem, N., Gandini, A., 2004a. Adsorption of cationic surfactants and subsequent adsolubi￾lization of organic compounds onto cellulose fibers. Colloid Polym. Sci. 283, 344–350. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00396-004-1143-y.
Aloulou, F., Boufi, S., Beneventi, D., 2004b. Adsorption of organic compounds onto polyelectrolyte immobilized￾surfactant aggregates on cellulosic fibers. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 280, 350–358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcis.2004.08.008.
Aloulou, F., Boufi, S., Chakchouk, M., 2004c. Adsorption of octadecyltrimethylammonium chloride and adsolubi￾lization on to cellulosic fibers. Colloid Polym. Sci. 282, 699–707. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00396-003-1000-4.
References 387
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAmiralian, N., Annamalai, P.K., Garvey, C.J., Jiang, E., Memmott, P., Martin, D.J., 2017. High aspect ratio
nanocellulose from an extremophile spinifex grass by controlled acid hydrolysis. Cellulose 24, 3753–3766.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1379-6.
Anirudhan, T.S., Deepa, J.R., Binusreejayan, 2015. Synthesis and characterization of multi-carboxyl-functionalized
nanocellulose/nanobentonite composite for the adsorption of uranium(VI) from aqueous solutions: kinetic and
equilibrium profiles. Chem. Eng. J. 273, 390–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2015.03.007.
Annadurai, G., Juang, R.S., Lee, D.J., 2002. Use of cellulose-based wastes for adsorption of dyes from aqueous solu￾tions. J. Hazard. Mater. 92, 263–274. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3894(02)00017-1.
A´ vila Ramı´rez, J.A., Fortunati, E., Kenny, J.M., Torre, L., Foresti, M.L., 2017. Simple citric acid-catalyzed surface es￾terification of cellulose nanocrystals. Carbohydr. Polym. 157, 1358–1364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2016.11.008.
Bai, L., Liu, Y., Ding, A., Ren, N., Li, G., Liang, H., 2019. Surface coating of UF membranes to improve antifouling
properties: a comparison study between cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) and cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs).
Chemosphere 217, 76–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.10.219.
Bessaies, H., Iftekhar, S., Doshi, B., Kheriji, J., Ncibi, M.C., Srivastava, V., Sillanp€a€a, M., Hamrouni, B., 2020. Synthesis
of novel adsorbent by intercalation of biopolymer in LDH for the removal of arsenic from synthetic and natural
water. J. Environ. Sci. (China) 91, 246–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jes.2020.01.028.
Bezerra, R., Silva, M., Morais, A., Osajima, J., Santos, M., Airoldi, C., Filho, E., 2014. Phosphated cellulose as an ef￾ficient biomaterial for aqueous drug ranitidine removal. Materials (Basel) 7, 7907–7924. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ma7127907.
Boufi, S., Belgacem, M.N., 2006. Modified cellulose fibres for adsorption of dissolved organic solutes. Cellulose 13,
81–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-005-9019-y.
Chen, S., Zou, Y., Yan, Z., Shen, W., Shi, S., Zhang, X., Wang, H., 2009. Carboxymethylated-bacterial cellulose for cop￾per and lead ion removal. J. Hazard. Mater. 161, 1355–1359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2008.04.098.
Cheng, Q., Li, Q., Yuan, Z., Li, S., Xin, J.H., Ye, D., 2021. Bifunctional regenerated cellulose/polyaniline/nanosilver
fibers as a catalyst/bactericide for water decontamination. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13, 4410–4418. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c20188.
Choi, H.Y., Bae, J.H., Hasegawa, Y., An, S., Kim, I.S., Lee, H., Kim, M., 2020. Thiol-functionalized cellulose nanofiber
membranes for the effective adsorption of heavy metal ions in water. Carbohydr. Polym. 234, 115881. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.115881.
da Silva Filho, E.C., de Melo, J.C.P., Airoldi, C., 2006. Preparation of ethylenediamine-anchored cellulose and deter￾mination of thermochemical data for the interaction between cations and basic centers at the solid/liquid inter￾face. Carbohydr. Res. 341, 2842–2850. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carres.2006.09.004.
de Melo, J.C.P., da Silva Filho, E.C., Santana, S.A.A., Airoldi, C., 2009. Maleic anhydride incorporated onto cellulose
and thermodynamics of cation-exchange process at the solid/liquid interface. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng.
Asp. 346, 138–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2009.06.006.
Ermeng, L., Wuyang, X., Mingxiao, T., Yuewu, P., 2017. Preparation of an efficient oil-spill adsorbent based on wheat
straw. Bioresources 12, 296–315.
Faiz Norrrahim, M.N., Mohd Kasim, N.A., Knight, V.F., Mohamad Misenan, M.S., Janudin, N., Ahmad Shah, N.A.,
Kasim, N., Wan Yusoff, W.Y., Mohd Noor, S.A., Jamal, S.H., Ong, K.K., Yunus, W.M.Z.W., 2021. Nanocellulose: a
bioadsorbent for chemical contaminant remediation. RSC Adv. 11, 7347–7368. https://doi.org/10.1039/
d0ra08005e.
Feng, J., Nguyen, S.T., Fan, Z., Duong, H.M., 2015. Advanced fabrication and oil absorption properties of
super-hydrophobic recycled cellulose aerogels. Chem. Eng. J. 270, 168–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2015.02.034.
Ferreira-Neto, E.P., Ullah, S., da Silva, T.C.A., Domeneguetti, R.R., Perissinotto, A.P., de Vicente, F.S., Rodrigues￾Filho, U.P., Ribeiro, S.J.L., 2020. bacterial nanocellulose/MoS 2 hybrid aerogels as bifunctional adsorbent/
photocatalyst membranes for in-flow water decontamination. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 41627–41643.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c14137.
Figueiredo, A.R.P., Vilela, C., Neto, C.P., Silvestre, A.J.D., Freire, C.S.R., 2014. Bacterial cellulose-based
nanocomposites: roadmap for innovative materials. Nanocellulose Polym. Nanocompos. Fundam. Appl.,
17–64. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118872246.ch2.
Fu, L., Zhou, P., Zhang, S., Yang, G., 2013. Evaluation of bacterial nanocellulose-based uniform wound dressing for
large area skin transplantation. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 33, 2995–3000. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2013.03.026.
388 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesGoetz, L.A., Naseri, N., Nair, S.S., Karim, Z., Mathew, A.P., 2018. All cellulose electrospun water purification mem￾branes nanotextured using cellulose nanocrystals. Cellulose 25, 3011–3023. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-
1751-1.
Gong, X., Wang, Y., Zeng, H., Betti, M., Chen, L., 2019. Highly porous, hydrophobic, and compressible cellulose
nanocrystals/poly(vinyl alcohol) aerogels as recyclable absorbents for oil-water separation. ACS Sustain. Chem.
Eng. 7, 11118–11128. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b00066.
Gousse, C., Chanzy, H., Excoffier, G., Soubeyrand, L., Fleury, E., 2002. Stable suspensions of partially silylated cel￾lulose whiskers dispersed in organic solvents. Polymer (Guildf ) 43, 2645–2651. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-
3861(02)00051-4.
Haseen, U., Ahmad, H., 2020. Preconcentration and determination of trace Hg(II) using a cellulose nanofiber mat
functionalized with MoS2 nanosheets. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 59, 3198–3204. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
iecr.9b06067.
Hettrich, K., Wagenknecht, W., Volkert, B., Fischer, S., 2008. New possibilities of the acetosulfation of cellulose.
Macromol. Symp. 262, 162–169. https://doi.org/10.1002/masy.200850216.
Hou, C., Chen, W., Fu, L., Zhang, S., Liang, C., Wang, Y., 2020. Facile synthesis of a Co/Fe bi-MOFs/CNF membrane
nanocomposite and its application in the degradation of tetrabromobisphenol A. Carbohydr. Polym. 247, 116731.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116731.
Hu, W., Chen, S., Yang, J., Li, Z., Wang, H., 2014. Functionalized bacterial cellulose derivatives and nanocomposites.
Carbohydr. Polym. 101, 1043–1060. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.09.102.
Ioelovich, M., 2017. Characterization of various kinds of nanocellulose. In: Handbook of Nanocellulose Cellulose
Nanocomposites, pp. 51–100, https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527689972.ch2.
Islam, M.S., Chen, L., Sisler, J., Tam, K.C., 2018. Cellulose nanocrystal (CNC)–inorganic hybrid systems: synthesis,
properties and applications. J. Mater. Chem. B 6, 864–883. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7TB03016A.
Jamshaid, A., Hamid, A., Muhammad, N., Naseer, A., Ghauri, M., Iqbal, J., Rafiq, S., Shah, N.S., 2017. Cellulose-based
materials for the removal of heavy metals from wastewater—an overview. ChemBioEng Rev. 4, 240–256. https://
doi.org/10.1002/cben.201700002.
Jin, L., Li, W., Xu, Q., Sun, Q., 2015. Amino-functionalized nanocrystalline cellulose as an adsorbent for anionic dyes.
Cellulose 22, 2443–2456. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-015-0649-4.
Johar, N., Ahmad, I., Dufresne, A., 2012. Extraction, preparation and characterization of cellulose fibres and
nanocrystals from rice husk. Ind. Crop Prod. 37, 93–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2011.12.016.
Jordan, J.H., Easson, M.W., Condon, B.D., 2020. Cellulose hydrolysis using ionic liquids and inorganic acids under
dilute conditions: morphological comparison of nanocellulose. RSC Adv. 10, 39413–39424. https://doi.org/
10.1039/d0ra05976e.
KarzarJeddi, M., Laitinen, O., Mahkam, M., Liimatainen, H., 2020. Zwitterionic hybrid aerobeads of binary metal or￾ganic frameworks and cellulose nanofibers for removal anionic pollutants. Mater. Des. 196, 109106. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.matdes.2020.109106.
Klebe, J.F., Finkbeiner, H.L., 1969. Silyl celluloses: a new class of soluble cellulose derivatives. J. Polym. Sci., Part A-1:
Polym. Chem. 7, 1947–1958. https://doi.org/10.1002/pol.1969.150070733.
Kokilavani, S., Syed, A., Thomas, A.M., Elgorban, A.M., Raju, L.L., Das, A., Khan, S.S., 2020. Facile synthesis of Ag/
Cu-cellulose nanocomposite for detection, photocatalysis and anti-microbial applications. Optik (Stuttg) 220,
165218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2020.165218.
Kokol, V., Bozˇic, M., Vogrincic, R., Mathew, A.P., 2015. Characterisation and properties of homo- and heterogenously
phosphorylated nanocellulose. Carbohydr. Polym. 125, 301–313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.02.056.
Kousheh, S.A., Moradi, M., Tajik, H., Molaei, R., 2020. Preparation of antimicrobial/ultraviolet protective bacterial
nanocellulose film with carbon dots synthesized from lactic acid bacteria. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 155, 216–225.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.03.230.
Kuo, P.Y., Barros, L.d.A., Yan, N., Sain, M., Qing, Y., Wu, Y., 2017. Nanocellulose composites with enhanced inter￾facial compatibility and mechanical properties using a hybrid-toughened epoxy matrix. Carbohydr. Polym. 177,
249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.08.091.
Li, J., Song, Z., Li, D., Shang, S., Guo, Y., 2014. Cotton cellulose nanofiber-reinforced high density polyethylene com￾posites prepared with two different pretreatment methods. Ind. Crop Prod. 59, 318–328. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.indcrop.2014.05.033.
Li, P., Sirvio, J.A., Asante, B., Liimatainen, H., 2018. Recyclable deep eutectic solvent for the production of cationic €
nanocelluloses. Carbohydr. Polym. 199, 219–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.07.024.
References 389
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesLi, B., Li, M., Zhang, J., Pan, Y., Huang, Z., Xiao, H., 2019. Adsorption of Hg (II) ions from aqueous solution by
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-modified cellulose. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 122, 149–156. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.10.162.
Li, J., Tao, J., Ma, C., Yang, J., Gu, T., Liu, J., 2020. Carboxylated cellulose nanofiber/montmorillonite nanocomposite
for the removal of levofloxacin hydrochloride antibiotic from aqueous solutions. RSC Adv. 10, 42038–42053.
https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ra08987g.
Lin, N., Dufresne, A., 2014. Surface chemistry, morphological analysis and properties of cellulose nanocrystals with
gradiented sulfation degrees. Nanoscale 6, 5384–5393. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3nr06761k.
Lin, Q., Zheng, Y., Wang, G., Shi, X., Zhang, T., Yu, J., Sun, J., 2015a. Protein adsorption behaviors of
carboxymethylated bacterial cellulose membranes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 73, 264–269. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.11.011.
Lin, R., Li, A., Zheng, T., Lu, L., Cao, Y., 2015b. Hydrophobic and flexible cellulose aerogel as an efficient, green and
reusable oil sorbent. RSC Adv. 5, 82027–82033. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ra15194e.
Liu, P., Borrell, P.F., Bozˇic, M., Kokol, V., Oksman, K., Mathew, A.P., 2015. Nanocelluloses and their phosphorylated
derivatives for selective adsorption of Ag+, Cu2+ and Fe3+ from industrial effluents. J. Hazard. Mater. 294,
177–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.04.001.
Liu, C., Li, B., Du, H., Lv, D., Zhang, Y., Yu, G., Mu, X., Peng, H., 2016. Properties of nanocellulose isolated from corn￾cob residue using sulfuric acid, formic acid, oxidative and mechanical methods. Carbohydr. Polym. 151, 716–724.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.06.025.
Liu, H., Chen, X., Ji, G., Yu, H., Gao, C., Han, L., Xiao, W., 2019a. Mechanochemical deconstruction of lignocellulosic
cell wall polymers with ball-milling. Bioresour. Technol. 286, 121364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2019.121364.
Liu, P., Zhu, C., Mathew, A.P., 2019b. Mechanically robust high flux graphene oxide—nanocellulose membranes for
dye removal from water. J. Hazard. Mater. 371, 484–493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.03.009.
Liu, J., Liu, D., Liu, S., Li, Z., Wei, X., Lin, S., Guo, M., 2020. Preparation and characterization of sulfated cellulose
nanocrystalline and its composite membrane for removal of tetracycline hydrochloride in water. Energy Environ.
Mater. 3, 209–215. https://doi.org/10.1002/eem2.12055.
Luo, Q., Yuan, H., Zhang, M., Jiang, P., Liu, M., Xu, D., Guo, X., Wu, Y., 2021. A 3D porous fluorescent hydrogel based
on amino-modified carbon dots with excellent sorption and sensing abilities for environmentally hazardous
Cr(VI). J. Hazard. Mater. 401, 123432. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123432.
Ma, Y., Xia, Q., Liu, Y., Chen, W., Liu, S., Wang, Q., Liu, Y., Li, J., Yu, H., 2019. Production of nanocellulose using
hydrated deep eutectic solvent combined with ultrasonic treatment. ACS Omega 4, 8539–8547. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsomega.9b00519.
Ma, C., Yi, L., Yang, J., Tao, J., Li, J., 2020. Nanocellulose-organic montmorillonite nanocomposite adsorbent for di￾uron removal from aqueous solution: optimization using response surface methodology. RSC Adv. 10,
30734–30745. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ra04853d.
Mahfoudhi, N., Boufi, S., 2017. Nanocellulose as a novel nanostructured adsorbent for environmental remediation: a
review. Cellulose 24, 1171–1197. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-017-1194-0.
Man, Z., Muhammad, N., Sarwono, A., Bustam, M.A., Kumar, M.V., Rafiq, S., 2011. Preparation of cellulose
nanocrystals using an ionic liquid. J. Polym. Environ. 19, 726–731. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-011-0323-3.
Mandal, A., Chakrabarty, D., 2011. Isolation of nanocellulose from waste sugarcane bagasse (SCB) and its character￾ization. Carbohydr. Polym. 86, 1291–1299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.06.030.
McDowall, D.J., Gupta, B.S., Stannett, V.T., 1984. Grafting of vinyl monomers to cellulose by ceric ion initiation. Prog.
Polym. Sci. 10, 1–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/0079-6700(84)90005-4.
Mormann, W., Wagner, T., 2000. Silylation of cellulose with hexamethyldisilazane in liquid ammonia. Carbohydr.
Polym. 43, 257–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0144-8617(00)00173-9.
Mu, R., Hong, X., Ni, Y., Li, Y., Pang, J., Wang, Q., Xiao, J., Zheng, Y., 2019. Recent trends and applications of cellulose
nanocrystals in food industry. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 93, 136–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2019.09.013.
Nadar, S.S., Vaidya, L., Maurya, S., Rathod, V.K., 2019. Polysaccharide based metal organic frameworks
(polysaccharide–MOF): a review. Coord. Chem. Rev. 396, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2019.05.011.
Nagano, T., Arai, Y., Yano, H., Aoki, T., Kurihara, S., Hirano, R., Nishinari, K., 2020. Improved physicochemical and
functional properties of okara, a soybean residue, by nanocellulose technologies for food development—a review.
Food Hydrocoll. 109, 105964. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2020.105964.
390 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesOnwumere, J., Pia˛ tek, J., Budnyak, T., Chen, J., Budnyk, S., Karim, Z., Thersleff, T., Kustrowski, P., Mathew, A.P.,
Slabon, A., 2020. CelluPhot: hybrid cellulose-bismuth oxybromide membrane for pollutant removal. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 12, 42891–42901. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c12739.
Oshima, T., Kondo, K., Ohto, K., Inoue, K., Baba, Y., 2008. Preparation of phosphorylated bacterial cellulose as an ad￾sorbent for metal ions. React. Funct. Polym. 68, 376–383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2007.07.046.
Oshima, T., Taguchi, S., Ohe, K., Baba, Y., 2011. Phosphorylated bacterial cellulose for adsorption of proteins.
Carbohydr. Polym. 83, 953–958. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2010.09.005.
Patel, D.K., Dutta, S.D., Lim, K.-T., 2019. Nanocellulose-based polymer hybrids and their emerging applications in
biomedical engineering and water purification. RSC Adv. 9, 19143–19162. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9RA03261D.
Peng, N., Hu, D., Zeng, J., Li, Y., Liang, L., Chang, C., 2016. Superabsorbent cellulose-clay nanocomposite hydrogels
for highly efficient removal of dye in water. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4, 7217–7224. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.6b02178.
Peng, B., Yao, Z., Wang, X., Crombeen, M., Sweeney, D.G., Tam, K.C., 2020. Cellulose-based materials in wastewater
treatment of petroleum industry. Green Energy Environ. 5, 37–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gee.2019.09.003.
Peretz, R., Sterenzon, E., Gerchman, Y., Kumar Vadivel, V., Luxbacher, T., Mamane, H., 2019. Nanocellulose produc￾tion from recycled paper mill sludge using ozonation pretreatment followed by recyclable maleic acid hydrolysis.
Carbohydr. Polym. 216, 343–351. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.04.003.
Petzold, K., Koschella, A., Klemm, D., Heublein, B., 2003. Silylation of cellulose and starch—selectivity, structure anal￾ysis, and subsequent reactions. Cellulose 10, 251–269. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025173900225.
Qiao, H., Zhou, Y., Yu, F., Wang, E., Min, Y., Huang, Q., Pang, L., Ma, T., 2015. Effective removal of cationic dyes using
carboxylate-functionalized cellulose nanocrystals. Chemosphere 141, 297–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2015.07.078.
Qin, Z.-Y., Tong, G.-L., Chin, Y.C.F., Zhou, J.-C., 2011. Preparation of ultrasonic-assisted high carboxylate content cel￾lulose nanocrystals by tempo oxidation. Bioresources 6, 1136–1146.
Qiu, J., Li, M., Yang, L., Yao, J., 2019. Facile construction of three-dimensional netted ZnIn2S4 by cellulose nanofibrils
for efficiently photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI). Chem. Eng. J. 375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.121990.
Qiu, Z., Chen, H., Wang, Z., Zhang, T., Yang, D., Qiu, F., 2020. Efficient removal of As(Ш) via the synergistic effect of
oxidation and absorption by FeOOH@MnO2@CAM nano-hybrid adsorption membrane. Chemosphere 258.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127329.
Qu, J., Tian, X., Jiang, Z., Cao, B., Akindolie, M.S., Hu, Q., Feng, C., Feng, Y., Meng, X., Zhang, Y., 2020. Multi￾component adsorption of Pb(II), Cd(II) and Ni(II) onto microwave-functionalized cellulose: kinetics, isotherms,
thermodynamics, mechanisms and application for electroplating wastewater purification. J. Hazard. Mater.
387, 121718. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121718.
Rahman, K.U., Ferreira-Neto, E.P., Rahman, G.U., Parveen, R., Monteiro, A.S., Rahman, G., Van Le, Q.,
Domeneguetti, R.R., Ribeiro, S.J.L., Ullah, S., 2021. Flexible bacterial cellulose-based BC-SiO2-TiO2-Ag mem￾branes with self-cleaning, photocatalytic, antibacterial and UV-shielding properties as a potential multifunctional
material for combating infections and environmental applications. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9, 104708. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104708.
Reshmy, R., Philip, E., Paul, S.A., Madhavan, A., Sindhu, R., Binod, P., Pandey, A., Sirohi, R., 2020. Nanocellulose￾based products for sustainable applications-recent trends and possibilities. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 19,
779–806. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11157-020-09551-z.
Ribeiro, R.S.A., Pohlmann, B.C., Calado, V., Bojorge, N., Pereira, N., 2019. Production of nanocellulose by enzymatic
hydrolysis: trends and challenges. Eng. Life Sci. 19, 279–291. https://doi.org/10.1002/elsc.201800158.
Rong, N., Xu, Z., Zhai, S., Zhou, L., Li, J., 2021. Directional, super-hydrophobic cellulose nanofiber/polyvinyl alcohol/
montmorillonite aerogels as green absorbents for oil/water separation. IET Nanobiotechnol. 15, 135–146. https://
doi.org/10.1049/nbt2.12008.
Saba, N., Mohammad, F., Pervaiz, M., Jawaid, M., Alothman, O.Y., Sain, M., 2017. Mechanical, morphological and
structural properties of cellulose nanofibers reinforced epoxy composites. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 97, 190–200.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.01.029.
Saito, T., Isogai, A., 2005. Ion-exchange behavior of carboxylate groups in fibrous cellulose oxidized by the TEMPO￾mediated system. Carbohydr. Polym. 61, 183–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2005.04.009.
Salajkova´, M., Berglund, L.A., Zhou, Q., 2012. Hydrophobic cellulose nanocrystals modified with quaternary ammo￾nium salts. J. Mater. Chem. 22, 19798–19805. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2jm34355j.
References 391
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesSantana, S.A.A., Vieira, A.P., da Silva Filho, E.C., Melo, J.C.P., Airoldi, C., 2010. Immobilization of ethylenesulfide on
babassu coconut epicarp and mesocarp for divalent cation sorption. J. Hazard. Mater. 174, 714–719. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.09.109.
Schrope, M., 2011. Oil spill: deep wounds. Nature 472, 152–154. https://doi.org/10.1038/472152a.
Selk€al€a, T., Suopaj€arvi, T., Sirvio, J.A., Luukkonen, T., Kinnunen, P., De Carvalho, A.L.C.B., Liimatainen, H., 2020. €
Surface modification of cured inorganic foams with cationic cellulose nanocrystals and their use as reactive filter
media for anionic dye removal. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 27745–27757. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.0c05927.
Silva Filho, E.C., Lima, L.C.B., Silva, F.C., Sousa, K.S., Fonseca, M.G., Santana, S.A.A., 2013. Immobilization of ethyl￾ene sulfide in aminated cellulose for removal of the divalent cations. Carbohydr. Polym. 92, 1203–1210. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2012.10.031.
Silva, L.S., Lima, L.C.B., Silva, F.C., Matos, J.M.E., Santos, M.R.M.C., Santos Ju´nior, L.S., Sousa, K.S., da Silva Filho, E.-
C., 2013. Dye anionic sorption in aqueous solution onto a cellulose surface chemically modified with
aminoethanethiol. Chem. Eng. J. 218, 89–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2012.11.118.
Sirvio, J.A., Visanko, M., 2020. Lignin-rich sulfated wood nanofibers as high-performing adsorbents for the removal of €
lead and copper from water. J. Hazard. Mater. 383, 121174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121174.
Sirvio, J.A., Ukkola, J., Liimatainen, H., 2019. Direct sulfation of cellulose fibers using a reactive deep eutectic solvent €
to produce highly charged cellulose nanofibers. Cellulose 26, 2303–2316. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-019-
02257-8.
Skocaj, M., 2019. Bacterial nanocellulose in papermaking. Cellulose 26, 6477–6488. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-
019-02566-y.
Sohni, S., Norulaini, N.A.N., Hashim, R., Khan, S.B., Fadhullah, W., Mohd Omar, A.K., 2018. Physicochemical char￾acterization of Malaysian crop and agro-industrial biomass residues as renewable energy resources. Ind. Crop
Prod. 111, 642–650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2017.11.031.
Sohni, S., Hashim, R., Nidaullah, H., Lamaming, J., Sulaiman, O., 2019. Chitosan/nano-lignin based composite as a
new sorbent for enhanced removal of dye pollution from aqueous solutions. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 132, 1304–1317.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.151.
Suflet, D.M., Chitanu, G.C., Popa, V.I., 2006. Phosphorylation of polysaccharides: new results on synthesis and char￾acterisation of phosphorylated cellulose. React. Funct. Polym. 66, 1240–1249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
reactfunctpolym.2006.03.006.
Sun, X., Yang, L., Li, Q., Zhao, J., Li, X., Wang, X., Liu, H., 2014. Amino-functionalized magnetic cellulose
nanocomposite as adsorbent for removal of Cr(VI): synthesis and adsorption studies. Chem. Eng. J. 241,
175–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.12.051.
Suopaj€arvi, T., Liimatainen, H., Karjalainen, M., Upola, H., Niinim€aki, J., 2015. Lead adsorption with sulfonated
wheat pulp nanocelluloses. J. Water Process Eng. 5, 136–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2014.06.003.
Tavakolian, M., Wiebe, H., Sadeghi, M.A., Van De Ven, T.G.M., 2020. Dye removal using hairy nanocellulose: exper￾imental and theoretical investigations. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 5040–5049. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.9b18679.
Thiangtham, S., Runt, J., Manuspiya, H., 2019. Sulfonation of dialdehyde cellulose extracted from sugarcane bagasse
for synergistically enhanced water solubility. Carbohydr. Polym. 208, 314–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2018.12.080.
Tian, C., Luo, S., She, J., Qing, Y., Yan, N., Wu, Y., Liu, Z., 2019. Cellulose nanofibrils enable flower-like BiOCl for high￾performance photocatalysis under visible-light irradiation. Appl. Surf. Sci. 464, 606–615. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.09.126.
Ul-Islam, M., Ullah, M.W., Khan, S., Park, J.K., 2020. Production of bacterial cellulose from alternative cheap and
waste resources: a step for cost reduction with positive environmental aspects. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 37,
925–937. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11814-020-0524-3.
Ullah, H., Wahid, F., Santos, H.A., Khan, T., 2016. Advances in biomedical and pharmaceutical applications of func￾tional bacterial cellulose-based nanocomposites. Carbohydr. Polym. 150, 330–352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2016.05.029.
Vieira, A.P., Santana, S.A.A., Bezerra, C.W.B., Silva, H.A.S., de Melo, J.C.P., da Silva Filho, E.C., Airoldi, C., 2010. Cop￾per sorption from aqueous solutions and sugar cane spirits by chemically modified babassu coconut (Orbignya
speciosa) mesocarp. Chem. Eng. J. 161, 99–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2010.04.036.
392 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesWan, C., Li, J., 2015. Facile synthesis of well-dispersed superparamagnetic γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles encapsulated in
three-dimensional architectures of cellulose aerogels and their applications for Cr(VI) removal from contaminated
water. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 3, 2142–2152. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.5b00384.
Wang, M., Xu, L., Peng, J., Zhai, M., Li, J., Wei, G., 2009. Adsorption and desorption of Sr(II) ions in the gels based on
polysaccharide derivates. J. Hazard. Mater. 171, 820–826. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.06.071.
Wang, F., Zhao, J., Liu, H., Luo, Y., Wang, W., 2018. Preparation of double carboxylic corn stalk gels and their adsorp￾tion properties towards rare earths (III). Waste Biomass Valoriz. 9, 1945–1954. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12649-
017-9954-5.
Wang, J., Li, X., Cheng, Q., Lv, F., Chang, C., Zhang, L., 2020. Construction of β-FeOOH@tunicate cellulose
nanocomposite hydrogels and their highly efficient photocatalytic properties. Carbohydr. Polym. 229, 115470.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.115470.
Watanabe, K., Tabuchi, M., Morinaga, Y., Yoshinaga, F., 1998. Structural features and properties of bacterial cellulose
produced in agitated culture. Cellulose 5, 187–200. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009272904582.
Wei, H., Rodriguez, K., Renneckar, S., Vikesland, P.J., 2014. Environmental science and engineering applications of
nanocellulose-based nanocomposites. Environ. Sci. Nano 1, 302–316. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4EN00059E.
Wu, Y., Xie, Y., Zhong, F., Gao, J., Yao, J., 2020. Fabrication of bimetallic Hofmann-type metal-organic
Frameworks@Cellulose aerogels for efficient iodine capture. Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 306, 110386.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micromeso.2020.110386.
Yan, H., Zhang, W., Kan, X., Dong, L., Jiang, Z., Li, H., Yang, H., Cheng, R., 2011. Sorption of methylene blue by
carboxymethyl cellulose and reuse process in a secondary sorption. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp.
380, 143–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.02.045.
Yang, R., Aubrecht, K.B., Ma, H., Wang, R., Grubbs, R.B., Hsiao, B.S., Chu, B., 2014. Thiol-modified cellulose
nanofibrous composite membranes for chromium (VI) and lead (II) adsorption. Polymer (Guildf ) 55,
1167–1176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.01.043.
Yang, C., Wang, L., Yu, Y., Wu, P., Wang, F., Liu, S., Luo, X., 2020a. Highly efficient removal of amoxicillin from water
by Mg-Al layered double hydroxide/cellulose nanocomposite beads synthesized through in-situ coprecipitation
method. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 149, 93–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.096.
Yang, L., Chen, C., Hu, Y., Wei, F., Cui, J., Zhao, Y., Xu, X., Chen, X., Sun, D., 2020b. Three-dimensional bacterial cel￾lulose/polydopamine/TiO2 nanocomposite membrane with enhanced adsorption and photocatalytic degrada￾tion for dyes under ultraviolet-visible irradiation. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 562, 21–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcis.2019.12.013.
Yin, Y., Ma, J., Tian, X., Jiang, X., Wang, H., Gao, W., 2018. Cellulose nanocrystals functionalized with amino-silane
and epoxy-poly(ethylene glycol) for reinforcement and flexibilization of poly(lactic acid): material preparation
and compatibility mechanism. Cellulose 25, 6447–6463. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-2033-7.
Yu, H., Abdalkarim, S.Y.H., Zhang, H., Wang, C., Tam, K.C., 2019. Simple process to produce high-yield cellulose
nanocrystals using recyclable citric/hydrochloric acids. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 4912–4923. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b05526.
Yu, Y., Zhu, X., Wang, L., Wu, F., Liu, S., Chang, C., Luo, X., 2020. A simple strategy to design 3-layered Au-TiO2 dual
nanoparticles immobilized cellulose membranes with enhanced photocatalytic activity. Carbohydr. Polym. 231,
115694. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.115694.
Zhang, J., Jiang, N., Dang, Z., Elder, T.J., Ragauskas, A.J., 2008. Oxidation and sulfonation of cellulosics. Cellulose 15,
489–496. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-007-9193-1.
Zhang, G., Zhang, L., Deng, H., Sun, P., 2011. Preparation and characterization of sodium carboxymethyl cellulose
from cotton stalk using microwave heating. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 86, 584–589. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jctb.2556.
Zhang, Z., Se`be, G., Rentsch, D., Zimmermann, T., Tingaut, P., 2014a. Ultralightweight and flexible silylated
nanocellulose sponges for the selective removal of oil from water. Chem. Mater. 26, 2659–2668. https://doi.
org/10.1021/cm5004164.
Zhang, G., Yi, L., Deng, H., Sun, P., 2014b. Dyes adsorption using a synthetic carboxymethyl cellulose-acrylic acid
adsorbent. J. Environ. Sci. (China) 26, 1203–1211. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1001-0742(13)60513-6.
Zhang, C., Zhang, R.Z., Ma, Y.Q., Guan, W.B., Wu, X.L., Liu, X., Li, H., Du, Y.L., Pan, C.P., 2015. Preparation of cel￾lulose/graphene composite and its applications for triazine pesticides adsorption from water. ACS Sustain.
Chem. Eng. 3, 396–405. https://doi.org/10.1021/sc500738k.
References 393
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesZhang, K., Sun, P., Liu, H., Shang, S., Song, J., Wang, D., 2016a. Extraction and comparison of carboxylated cellulose
nanocrystals from bleached sugarcane bagasse pulp using two different oxidation methods. Carbohydr. Polym.
138, 237–243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.11.038.
Zhang, N., Zang, G.L., Shi, C., Yu, H.Q., Sheng, G.P., 2016b. A novel adsorbent TEMPO-mediated oxidized cellulose
nanofibrils modified with PEI: preparation, characterization, and application for Cu(II) removal. J. Hazard. Mater.
316, 11–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.05.018.
Zhang, D., Zhang, M., Chen, S., Liang, Q., Sheng, N., Han, Z., Cai, Y., Wang, H., 2021. Scalable, self-cleaning and self￾floating bi-layered bacterial cellulose biofoam for efficient solar evaporator with photocatalytic purification. De￾salination 500, 114899. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2020.114899.
Zhao, D., Huang, J., Zhong, Y., Li, K., Zhang, L., Cai, J., 2016. High-strength and high-toughness double-cross-linked
cellulose hydrogels: a new strategy using sequential chemical and physical cross-linking. Adv. Funct. Mater. 26,
6279–6287. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201601645.
Zhao, H., Xia, J., Wang, J., Yan, X., Wang, C., Lei, T., Xian, M., Zhang, H., 2018. Production of bacterial cellulose using
polysaccharide fermentation wastewater as inexpensive nutrient sources. Biotechnol. Biotechnol. Equip. 32,
350–356. https://doi.org/10.1080/13102818.2017.1418673.
Zhao, W., Zhang, J., Zhu, F., Mu, F., Zhang, L., Dai, B., Xu, J., Zhu, A., Sun, C., Leung, D.Y.C., 2019. Study the
photocatalytic mechanism of the novel Ag/p-Ag2O/n-BiVO4 plasmonic photocatalyst for the simultaneous re￾moval of BPA and chromium(VI). Chem. Eng. J. 361, 1352–1362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.12.181.
Zhao, Y., Zhong, K., Liu, W., Cui, S., Zhong, Y., Jiang, S., 2020. Preparation and oil adsorption properties of hydro￾phobic microcrystalline cellulose aerogel. Cellulose 27, 7663–7675. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-020-03309-0.
Zhou, Y., Zhang, M., Hu, X., Wang, X., Niu, J., Ma, T., 2013. Adsorption of cationic dyes on a cellulose-based
multicarboxyl adsorbent. J. Chem. Eng. Data 58, 413–421. https://doi.org/10.1021/je301140c.
Zhou, X., Fu, Q., Liu, H., Gu, H., Guo, Z., 2021. Solvent-free nanoalumina loaded nanocellulose aerogel for efficient oil
and organic solvent adsorption. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 581, 299–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.099.
Zhu, Q., Wang, Y., Li, M., Liu, K., Hu, C., Yan, K., Sun, G., Wang, D., 2017. Activable carboxylic acid functionalized
crystalline nanocellulose/PVA-co-PE composite nanofibrous membrane with enhanced adsorption for heavy
metal ions. Sep. Purif. Technol. 186, 70–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2017.05.050.
Zhu, G., Xu, H., Dufresne, A., Lin, N., 2018. High-adsorption, self-extinguishing, thermal, and acoustic-resistance
aerogels based on organic and inorganic waste valorization from cellulose nanocrystals and red mud. ACS Sus￾tain. Chem. Eng. 6, 7168–7180. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b01244.
Zu, G., Shen, J., Zou, L., Wang, F., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Yao, X., 2016. Nanocellulose-derived highly porous carbon
aerogels for supercapacitors. Carbon NY 99, 203–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2015.11.079.
394 16. Modification and derivatization of cellulose-based nanobiosorbents
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
17
Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents
in water purification
Oluwaseun J. Ajalaa,b
, A. Khadirc
, Joshua O. Ighalod,e
,
and Great C. Umenwekef
a
Department of Industrial Chemistry, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria b
Department of Pure and
Applied Chemistry, Ladoke Akintola University of Technology Ogbomoso, Ogbomoso, Nigeria
c
Young Researcher and Elite Club, Yadegar-e-Imam Khomeini (RAH) Shahre Rey Branch, Islamic
Azad University, Tehran, Iran d
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Ilorin, Ilorin,
Nigeria e
Department of Chemical Engineering, Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka, Nigeria
f
Department of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States
17.1 Introduction
Water has always been regarded as a vital substance to life, not only for humans but also for
all ecosystems both living and non-living due to its usage in the industry, environmentally,
and domestically among others. According to the World Water Development Report 2015,
water availability is one of the core sustainable development goals due to various challenges
facing the system through different pollutants such as pesticides, acid mine drainage among
others (Adelodun et al., 2021; WHO, 2016). So, it is vitally important to manage the quantity
and quality of waters to witness a healthy ecosystem. Given this, it has been discovered that
water quantity is not equally distributed around the world; there are regions with high annual
precipitation while in desert areas, rainfall and precipitation, in general, is negligible. Apart
from quantity, water quality needs to be considered seriously (Ighalo et al., 2020a). In past
decades, the fate and transport of common elements such as nitrogen and phosphorus were
regularly studied; however, academia now is facing much more complicated areas. Modern￾ization and industrial life have introduced so many other new organic compounds to the en￾vironment that all are potent in reducing water quality and posing threats to human life such
as heavy metals (Ighalo and Adeniyi, 2020a), dyes (Hevira et al., 2020), pesticide (Ajala et al.,
2018; Nwosu et al., 2019), and pharmaceuticals (Tijani et al., 2016) among others.
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 395 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00017-4The use of heavy metals (elements having a specific gravity above 5 and atomic weights in
the range of 63.5–200.6) in many industries ranging from electroplating, battery manufactur￾ing, mining, and textile to ceramic, photography, and tannery industries have induced a huge
challenge for ecosystems and society (Abdullahi et al., 2020). The main concerns regarding
heavy metals are their stability, recalcitrance, accumulation in nature, and toxicity
(Wu et al., 2020). Some of the heavy metals health problems are nervous system damage, mus￾cular stiffness, cancer, hypertension, and liver disorder (Wang et al., 2019). Nickel, cadmium,
cobalt, zinc, lead, and chromium are common types of heavy metals. To remove these ions,
chemical precipitation, adsorption (Nwosu et al., 2018), electro-coagulation (Simate et al.,
2016), ion-exchange (Bratby, 2016), and photocatalysis (Solis-Casados et al., 2018) have been
extensively employed.
Dyes have greatly contributed to the attainment of colorful surroundings. In textile indus￾tries, pharmaceuticals, food, cosmetics, metallurgy, plastics, leather, and so many other sec￾tors, dyes are extensively used (Tavakolian et al., 2020). Apart from their benefits to human
beings, dyes have several environmental concerns, especially for water channels. Dyes are
known as persistent chemicals, stable, almost non-biodegradable, toxic, carcinogenic, and
recalcitrant (Cai et al., 2020). Note that even dye at a low concentration of 1 mg/L causes col￾oration and undesirable conditions for consumption. Dye molecules gather on the surface of
waters, hinder light penetration and induce photosynthesis disorder. Therefore, the treat￾ment of industrial effluents containing a large number of dye molecules is of the utmost
importance.
The development of pharmaceuticals has given hope to many people around the world.
Such discovery has been successful in treating disease, relieving pain, and granting long life
to many people. However, similar to many advances, it has its consequences in the environ￾ment (Aniagor et al., 2021). Uncontrolled consumption of pharmaceuticals because of their
availability (in many countries), improper waste management, expired drugs that are thrown
away in the sink, and not fully metabolized drugs excreted from a human via urine have led to
the detection of pharmaceuticals in rivers, lakes, drinking water and of course water and
wastewater treatment plants (Madikizela et al., 2020; Oba et al., 2021). Consider that pharma￾ceuticals even in μg/L are capable of posing threats to the ecosystem and environment (Zhang
et al., 2020). A wide range of treatment methodologies including adsorption, advanced oxi￾dation processes, aerobic and anaerobic process, and membrane separation has been
employed to test pharmaceutical removal from contaminated waters (Ighalo et al., 2021b).
The elimination of pharmaceuticals is of great concern since these compounds are prone
to spread bacterial that would be resistant to pharmaceutical (antibiotic), endangering the
lives of humans and animals (Shi et al., 2019).
17.2 Cellulose and its application
Even though there are countless methods and materials in water and wastewater remedi￾ation, scholars have always been looking for cost-effective and non-toxic materials. In general,
naturally—occurring polymers are preceded over synthetic polymers because of their intrin￾sic characteristics such as biocompatibility, bio-absorbable degradation products, and
396 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesnon-toxicity to the human body even at high concentrations (Shekar and Ramachandra, 2018;
Tayeb et al., 2018). These advantages prompt researchers to utilize bio-based materials in ex￾tensive works for water and wastewater decontamination (Tran et al., 2015; Zarei and Zarei,
2018). Cellulose is known as the most abundant natural straight-chain polysaccharide which
is produced by bacteria or plants forming out of D-glucopyranose residues linked by β-(1,4)-
glycosidic linkages (Kalia et al., 2011; Wang, 2019). This super-macromolecular structure en￾dows cellulose with an ultrahigh strength of 150 MPa. Cellulose fibrils divide two discrete
domains including highly ordered (i.e., crystalline) and disordered (i.e., amorphous) struc￾tures. Compared to bacterial cellulose which is almost composed of a pure phase, plant cel￾lulose associate with hemicelluloses, lignin, and pectin. Bacterial cellulose illustrates
significant hydrophilicity, permeability, water-uptake capacity, and tensile strength
(Naseri-Nosar and Ziora, 2018; Wang, 2019). Features such as environmental friendliness,
cost-effectiveness, availability, and safe nature have made cellulose a versatile promising
biomaterial.
The common derivatives of cellulose are containing carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC),
hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC), cellulose acetate (CA), methylcellulose (MC), (hydroxypropyl)
methylcellulose (HPMC), and so forth. CMC is an anionic water-soluble biopolymer that is
hydrophile, pH-sensitive, non-toxic, and can form a gel, so it can be able to use in drug de￾livery and other biomedical research. Based on carboxylate groups of CMC, it will be useful in
diverse applications such as water treatment, conductive films, reaction catalysis, protein im￾mobilization, lithium-sulphur batteries, and so on. Researches confirm that biopolymers en￾sure environmental health and safety. In this regard, nanocellulose has attracted many
researchers in the materials fields due to bearing availability, lightweight, renewability,
nanosized dimensionality, automotivity (for manufacturing parts based on micropatterns),
significant morphology, and unsurpassed quintessential chemical and physical properties
( Javanbakht and Shaabani, 2019; Li et al., 2018). The development of biocomposites using re￾newable resources can replace synthetic polymer-based composites. Several renewable bio￾polymers can be used to synthesize bio-nanocomposites such as poly-lactides; starch plastics;
cellulosic plastics; soy-based plastics, polyhydroxyalkanoates (bacterial polyesters). There are
two types of cellulose-based biocomposites; structural biocomposite which is used in the
building industry, manufacturing stairs, roof and load-bearing walls, subflooring structures;
and non-structural biocomposite which is developed for products such as tiles, ceiling, fur￾niture, doors, etc.
Cellulose-based composites are also aroused many applications in various fields. They
mostly use in the paper and packaging industry. We mention some of them here as follows:
– Composites and fillers
Nanocellulose can be exploited as reinforcing agents for the processing of bio￾nanocomposites including coatings, films, and foams, and so on. Enhanced performances
of tensile properties were reported for phenol-formaldehyde resin which was combined with
nanofiber cellulose previously.
– Paper and packaging industry
Instead of synthetic polymers derived from petrochemical resources which result in many
damages mentioned before, nanocellulose can be the best candidate for the paper and
17.2 Cellulose and its application 397
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricespackaging industries. Nanocellulose exhibits exceptional properties containing nanoscale di￾mension with gas and water barrier characteristics, due to its penetrated network for
preventing the passing of external molecules. Furthermore, it is achieved from the renewable
source of natural polymer cellulose, hence cost-effective and non-toxic. Carboxymethyl guar
(CMG), agar or semi-interpenetrating polymer network of poly(vinyl alcohol)/poly￾acrylamide is considered as reinforcing polymer with enhancing gas barrier and mechanical
features for the packaging aims.
– Biomedical applications
High surface area, volume ratio, high strength as well as modifiable surface chemistry
make nanocellulose a promising candidate for biomedical applications. Novel hydrogel with
semi-interpenetrating polymer network based on nanocellulose can arise pH sensitivity and
mechanical resistance resulting in novel drug and gene delivery performance.
– Ion exchange membrane
Proton-exchange membrane for fuel cell (PEMFC) and direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC)
using bacterial nanocellulose and Nafion composite films are some of the other applications
of nanocellulose which have been reported so far. Algal nanocellulose/polypyrrole compos￾ite exhibits a large surface area, produces large catalytic oxidation currents, and presents stor￾age of the charge. They are some of the successful examples of cellulose-based composites
which can be designed for reversible electrochemically control of ion exchange membrane.
– Coating applications
Nanocellulose based composites have the potential to be employed for coating applica￾tions as a result of their high optical transparency. Protective coating of mild steel by incor￾porating epoxy resin composite is one of their applications that illustrate significant
anti-corrosion properties. Furthermore, composites based on cellulose nanofiber are helpful
for paint coatings and adhesives with high shear tolerance properties (Sharma et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2017b).
17.2.1 Cellulose in water purification
Apart from the above–mentioned applications, cellulose-based composites have shown
promising results in the adsorption/removal of many pollutants, ranging from ions to mac￾romolecules. In view of heavy metals (Mirjavadi et al., 2019) developed new low-cost com￾posites based on cellulose namely Fe3O4/zeolite/cellulose nanofibers for the elimination of
zinc from synthetic and actual wastewater. The authors investigated the effect of various
parameters, including pH, contact time, zinc concentration, and temperature. Reaching
the maximum adsorption capacity of 9.45 mg/g was indicative of cellulose nanofibers com￾posite potential in heavy metal removal. In another study focusing on cellulose-based
aerogel, the authors prepared a new adsorbent, propylene glycol adipate-modified cellu￾lose aerogel, for the removal of Congo Red (Tang et al., 2020). Aerogel prepared from cel￾lulose mainly offers greater surface area and low density; however, difficulties in its
398 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesformation and low mechanical strength have forced its use in a composite to achieve better
performance. Cellulose aerogels/polypropylene glycol adipate showed the adsorption ca￾pacity of 120 mg/g toward Congo red dye as well as enhanced mechanical strength. The
substrate was prepared from wheat bran. The authors reported the importance of the initial
pH value in which complete and (more than) 80% removal of the antibiotic was occurred at
pH 6 and 4, respectively. Not only for cellulose-based composites but also many other ad￾sorbents pH plays a critical role in adsorbent and adsorbate interaction (Al-Zboon et al.,
2019; Khadir et al., 2020). Ligno-cellulosic substrate followed pseudo-second-order and Sips
assumptions for enrofloxacin removal. With the aim of facile separation and improved ef￾ficiency, Sun et al. (2021) extracted cellulose from Pennisetum sinese Roxb for tetracycline
elimination. Intra-particle diffusion, chemical ion exchange, hydrogen bonding, and elec￾trostatic interaction were deduced as the dominant mechanism involved in antibiotic re￾moval. Magnetic cellulose was found to be a perfect adsorbent and even its application
could be extended in real-world strategies.
The abovementioned studies demonstrate that in today’s world, scholars and academia are
seeking materials that could be readily found and extracted from nature. Cellulose-based
composites are known as successful groups of nature-based composites that exhibited out￾standing performance in water and wastewater purification. This chapter attempts to focus
on various composites of cellulose that have been prepared for the removal of environmental
pollutants.
17.3 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of dyes
The presence of several chemical dyes in the aqueous environment is a result of foreseeable
technological advancements (Iwuozor et al., 2021). The 21st century has experienced so much
technology and industrial increase, hence making the release of synthetic dye into the envi￾ronment greater (Go´es et al., 2016). This is of noble concern due to the toxicity of the chemical
substance, which is harmful to both humans and aquatic habitats and the environment as
large. Yet, dyes cannot be ignored because they are chiefly applied in the clothing and textile
industry, food, aesthetics, and more lately printing (Singh et al., 2017; Hevira et al., 2020).
Therefore, to address the issue of contaminating the water bodies and environmental pollu￾tion, the dyes released need to be removed to still ensure the relevance of technological ad￾vancements that aims toward environmental sustainability. According to Hevira et al. (2021),
several techniques have been adopted for the removal of synthetic dye from the environment.
As shown in Fig. 17.1, these methods range from chemical methods to biological and physical
methods, in some cases, the technique adopted could be hybrid (Das et al., 2019). From the
classification above, among the varied methods which includes the use of enzymes for re￾moval, ion exchange, ozonation, oxidation, and photolysis. The ion exchange technique is
widely applied in the use of cellulose-based material for the removal of dyes, but there are
some disadvantages encountered (Wang et al., 2016). For hybrid methods such as biosorption
and microbial electrochemistry, physicochemical biosorption is highly advantageous, less
complicated with equipment usage, and it is highly efficient (Hevira et al., 2020; Ighalo
17.3 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of dyes 399
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesand Adeniyi, 2020a). To consider the cost-effectiveness of (bio)-chemical dye removal, the re￾usability or recyclability of the cellulose-based composite bio-adsorbent needs to be consid￾ered. The report has shown the ability of cellulose-based composite bio-adsorbents are better
suited for bioremediation activities (Liu et al., 2015).
There are more than a thousand dyes and pigments in huge tonnages used industrially
(Go´es et al., 2016), and the larger the amount of dyes exposed to the environment, would re￾sult in greater the environmental damage. The use of cellulose as adsorbents is evident, due to
its vast ability to unite with varied dyes (Zhou et al., 2013). Go´es et al. (2016) used wood fur￾niture industrial wastes, specifically polyurethane foam that contains cellulose to remove
dyes. In their work, three different dyes were prepared and synthesized. They worked with
a chemically modified cellulose using 4,4-diphenylmethane diisocyanate (MDI) at molar ra￾tios 1OH:1NCO (cellulose 1:1) and 3OH:1NCO (cellulose 3:1), polyurethane with unmodified
cellulose, and a polyurethane without cellulose. Their result showed that with or without cel￾lulose, the use of polyurethane foam has a high sorption capacity, which can be applied in
water treatment. Lignin, which is the second most abundant organic polymer on earth
(Misra et al., 2011) followed by cellulose, is an excellent adsorbent, either in the modified
or single form (Huang et al., 2019). Lignin-cellulose composite hydrogels have wide applica￾bility. They are used in weathering materials, thermal insulation, water purification, food
packaging, and in the development of smart materials (Huang et al., 2019; Jiehong Guo
et al., 2016). Although it is evident from the above reports that lignin is a good adsorbent
for dye removal, Li et al. (2016) affirm that the saturated adsorption capacity for most bio￾organic dyes is not high enough for most lignin-cellulose-based adsorbents and cannot be
recycled after use ( Jiehong Guo et al., 2016).
Table 17.1 shows a summary of novel cellulose-based adsorbents involved in dye removal.
A report by Salama (2017) showed that due to the large production and low cost of cellulose
(thereby increasing its availability), cellulose has become widely applied in the removal of
dye, organic matter, and waste pollutants from wastewater. Here, cellulose grafted hydroxy￾apatite and soy protein isolate (SPI) hybrid was studied, to evaluate its use in the removal of
REMOVAL 
TECHNIQUES
BIOLOGICAL 
METHODS
i. Enzymes 
(Aerobic and 
Anaerobic 
degradation)
CHEMICAL 
METHODS
i. Ozonation
ii. Oxidation
iii. Photocatalytic 
reaction
PHYSICAL 
METHOD
i. Adsorption
ii. Filtration
iii. Ion-exchange
HYBRID
Biosorption
FIG. 17.1 Summary of dye removal techniques using cellulose-based biomaterials.
400 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 17.1 Dye removal conditions for cellulose-based bio-adsorbents.
Cellulose-based
composite bio￾adsorbents
Removal
technique/
Conditions
Bio-chemical
dyes
removed
(pollutants)
Adsorption
models
Dye percentage
removal
(adsorption
capacity mg/g) References
Cellulose modified
with glycidyl
methacrylate and
sulfosalicylic acid
Adsorption Crystal violet
(CV)
Langmuir
isothermal
model
70.8% Zhou et al.
(2014)
Hairy nanocellulose
(electrosterically
stabilized
nanocrystalline
cellulose (ENCC))
Adsorption Methylene
Blue
– 1250 mg/g Tavakolian
et al. (2020)
Polyurethane foam
chemically modified
with 4,4-
diphenylmethane
diisocyanate
Adsorption
(chemisorption)
Methylene
Blue, Procion
Yellow
HE-4R, and
Procion Red
HE-7B dyes
– 70% Go´es et al.
(2016)
Cellulose (CGD) was
prepared via
modifying with
glycidyl methacrylate
(GMA) and
diethylenetriamine
pentaacetic acid
(DTPA)
Adsorption Cationic
dyes—
Malachite
green (MG)
and basic
fuchsine (BF)
MG-Langmuir
BF—Freundlich
MG ˃ 90%
BF ˃ 85%
Zhou et al.
(2013)
Amino-terminated
hyperbranched
polymer (NH2-HBP)
and beta-cyclodextrin
(β-CD) grafted into
cotton fibers
Adsorption Congo Red
(CR) and
Methylene
Blue (MB)
CR and MB—
Freundlich
model
– Yue et al.
(2019)
Beta-cyclodextrin
(β-CD) and amino￾terminated
hyperbranched
polymer (NH2-HBP)
grafted into cotton
fibers
Adsorption Congo Red
(CR) and
Methylene
Blue (MB)
CR and
MB—Freundlich
model
CR and
MB ˃ 80%
Yue et al.
(2017)
Carboxymethyl
cellulose-acrylamide￾graphene oxide
(CMC-AM-GO)
hydrogels
Free radical
process
Acid Blue￾133
– 185.45 mg/g Varaprasad
et al. (2017)
Continued
17.3 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of dyes 401
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmethylene blue (MB) by adsorption. The result showed that methylene blue was removed up
to about 95%, after four cycles of adsorption and desorption. This not only presents cellulose￾based composite as promising for dye removal from wastewater but also showed how cost￾effective cellulose-based composites can be due to their high reusability (Salama, 2017). In
another study, a much novel adsorbent was prepared and utilized. The cellulosic adsorbent
used involved a cross-linked (dimethylaminoethyl) methacrylate (DMAEMA) with
carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) backbone, using ethylene glycol dimethacrylate and potas￾sium persulphate. This new adsorbent was used in the removal of methyl orange from an
aqueous solution. After about three experiments, the DMAEMA-CMC hydrogel showed a
promising result and the adsorption of 1825 mg/g (Salama et al., 2015).
17.4 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of heavy metals
Heavy metal has been identified as one of the greatest challenges of the ecosystem. In this
section, the research effort is reviewed and discussed on the successful application of cellulose
for the removal of heavy metals. Almost all heavy metals have been categorized as potentially
toxic depending on the duration and dose of exposure. The following elements were listed as
TABLE 17.1 Dye removal conditions for cellulose-based bio-adsorbents—cont’d
Cellulose-based
composite bio￾adsorbents
Removal
technique/
Conditions
Bio-chemical
dyes
removed
(pollutants)
Adsorption
models
Dye percentage
removal
(adsorption
capacity mg/g) References
CuS-functionalized
cellulose-based
aerogel (CBA)
Adsorption Methylene
Blue (MB)
– Photo￾degradation
rates: CuS/
CBA—94.1%,
pure CuS—
67.4%
Saeed et al.
(2019)
Fine aminated
cellulose/
montmorillonite
mesoporous
composite beads
(ACeMt)
Adsorption Auramine
O dye
Langmuir 1336.2 mg/g at
55 degree
Pan et al.
(2019)
Amide-functionalized
cellulose-based
porous adsorbent
Adsorption Acid Black 1,
Acid Red 18,
and copper
ions
– Desorption
rates: Acid Black
1–751.8, Acid
Red 18–417.9
and copper
ions—
51.3 mg/g
Pan et al.
(2019)
402 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesthe most commonly observed heavy metals; Mn, Cr, Ni, Cd, Zn, and Pb (based on atomic den￾sity greater than 5 g/cm3
) (Priya et al., 2020). This group is associated with severe contamina￾tion and ecotoxicity. There are different sources of heavy metals in the environments such as
Natural, Lithogenic, Geogenic, and anthropogenic sources. The natural or geological sources
of heavy metals in the environment include; weathering process of metal-bearing rocks and
the eruption of volcanoes. The global trends of urbanization and industrialization have led to
an increase in heavy metals from anthropogenic sources to the environment (Ighalo and
Adeniyi, 2020a). These heavy metals are highly toxic, non-biodegradable, and carcinogenic
in nature (Bamidele et al., 2020). Serious health effects caused by heavy metals exposure in￾clude cancer, organ damage, brain tumor, among others (Priya et al., 2020).
Due to several challenges associated with heavy metals, some conventional technology has
been employed for the treatment of these pollutants such as; ultrafiltration, membrane filtra￾tion, electro-coagulation, precipitation, co-precipitation (Zeman and Zydney, 2017), ozona￾tion (Tanatti et al., 2019), reverse osmosis (Xu et al., 2019), and activated carbon adsorption
(An et al., 2020). However, some of these methods are associated with different shortcomings.
For instance, reverse osmosis and ozonation are very expensive (Tanatti et al., 2019). Precip￾itation and co-precipitation also generate toxic sludge during the process (Peng and Guo,
2020) while others achieved low removal capacity due to all these shortcomings, removal
of heavy metals from wastewater has not been able to be achieved and these brought about
exploring other techniques like adsorption.
Adsorption is one of the techniques applied for the removal of pollutants or contaminants
from wastewater through a catalytic surface. Various types of adsorbents have been applied
through this method. The most commonly used adsorbents are activated carbon (Mahmood
and Abdulmajeed, 2017), agricultural wastes (Singh et al., 2017), bentonite clays (Abdullahi
et al., 2020), kaolinite clay (Nwosu et al., 2019), and cellulose (Tao et al., 2020) which have
successfully removed heavy metals concentrations (Ogunleye et al., 2014). In this process,
there are two approaches: dynamic technique and static technique.
In the dynamic technique, there is the passage of the wastewater via a mobile, fixed, or
fluidized absorbent layer with continuous flow. In the static technique, the adsorbent is
stirred with wastewater and further separated through filtration or centrifugation (Ighalo
et al., 2020b). Most chemical techniques used for the treatment of wastewater always generate
metallic sludge in large quantities which requires further treatment before release. When ap￾plied to dilute wastewater of lower concentrations of metal ions, these processes are either
inefficient or not cost-effective and require a high level of expertise.
Therefore, due to the good properties of cellulose-based materials, it has been proved to
have no significantly ecotoxicological concern. Also, studies have shown that it is good po￾tential material for adsorbent for the removal of heavy metals. Biswas et al. (2020) carried out
studies on the removal of gold and platinum from acidic waste effluents using cellulose-based
bio-adsorbent and the result was 99% maximum removal. Also, Kong et al. (2014) reported
the removal of Cu2+, Pb2+, and Cd2+ from an aqueous solution using acrylic-modified sugar￾cane bagasse-based cellulose. The results showed that the adsorption capacities of Cu2+, Pb2+,
and Cd2+ are 268, 700, and 320 mg/g, respectively. Wang et al. (2019)reported the preparation
and characterization of cellulose-based adsorbent and also applied it for the removal of Cu2+
and Ni2+ and found that for Cu2+, the adsorption capacity was 16.90 mg/g while for Ni2+ it
was 11.63 mg/g. Other previous studies are summarized in Table 17.2.
17.4 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of heavy metals 403
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices17.5 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of pharmaceuticals
In recent times, numerous types of composites materials have been developed from cellu￾lose by intricate modification techniques to remove pharmaceuticals from the aqueous phase.
In this section, the research efforts in this area are reviewed and discussed. Numerous
TABLE 17.2 A summary of research in which cellulose-based material was applied for the treatment of heavy
metals and their adsorption capacity.
Author(s) Title
Heavy
metals
Adsorption
capacity
Kong et al.
(2014)
Removal of Heavy metals from aqueous solution using acrylic-modified
sugarcane bagasse-based adsorbents: equilibrium and kinetic studies
Cu2+
Pb2+
Cd2+
268 mg/g
700 mg/g
320 mg/g
Dong et al.
(2016)
Recovery of Au(III) by radiation synthesized aminomethyl pyridine
functionalized adsorbents based on cellulose
Au3+ 90%–95%
Ge et al.
(2016)
Cellulose/poly(ethylene imine) composites as efficient and reusable
adsorbents for heavy metal ions
Cu2+ 285.7 mg/g
Li et al.
(2018)
Study on cellulose microfilaments based composite spheres: microwave￾assisted synthesis, characterization, and application in pollutant removal
Pb2+ 42.5 mg/g
Wang et al.
(2019)
Preparation and characterization of cellulose-based adsorbent and its
application in heavy metal ions removal
Cu2+
Ni2+
16.90 mg/g
11.63 mg/g
Xia et al.
(2018)
Bagasse cellulose grafted with an amino-terminated hyperbranched
polymer for the removal of Cr(VI) from aqueous solution
Cr6+ 74.4%
Li et al.
(2019)
Fluorescence-sensitive adsorbent based on cellulose using for mercury
detection and removal from aqueous solution with selective “on-off”
response
Hg2+ >96%
Cheng et al.
(2019)
Adsorption of Sr(II) from water by mercerized bacterial cellulose
membrane modified with EDTA
Sr2+ 44.86 mg/g
Biswas et al.
(2020)
Highly selective and straightforward recovery of gold and platinum
from acidic waste effluents using cellulose-based bio-adsorbent
Au3+
Pt4+
99%
Li et al.
(2020)
Dual responsive copolymers-grafted micro fibrillated cellulose
composites for removing lead ions from aqueous solution
Pb2+ 187.3 mg/g
Priya et al.
(2020)
Phytoremediation of banana leaf functionalization of mercaptan
cellulose and its utilization for the removal of heavy metals in an
aqueous environment
As3+ 70%–75%
Shi et al.
(2020)
Bio-adsorbent preparation based on Chinese Radix isatidis residue for
Pb(II) removal
Pb2+ 27.6 mg/g
Rahman
et al. (2020)
Polymer ligands derived from jute fiber for heavy metal removal from
electroplating wastewater
Cu2+ 352 mg/g
Jiang et al.
(2020)
Preparation of a novel bio-adsorbent of sodium alginate grafted
polyacrylamide/graphene oxide hydrogel for the adsorption of heavy
metal ion
Cu2+
Pb2+
68.76 mg/g
240.69 mg/g
404 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesadvantages can be derived from the utilization of cellulose-based composite materials for the
removal of pharmaceuticals. These are summarized in Fig. 17.2 and adapted from Abouzeid
et al. (2018) and Nasrollahzadeh et al. (2020). The material is biodegradable, renewable, and
sustainable. Hence after uptake of pharmaceuticals, it can be safely disposed of without any
significant ecotoxicological concerns. Due to the nature of the material, surface functiona￾lization is easily achieved given the targeted removal of specific pharmaceuticals. Other ad￾vantages are its high aspect ratio, chemical resistance, modulus, and surface area. Studies
have shown that the physical attributes of materials play a key role in the potential perfor￾mance as adsorbents for pollutant uptake (Ighalo et al., 2021a).
There are several areas in which cellulose-based composites can be applied for the removal
of pollutants. These application areas are summarized in Fig. 17.3 and adapted from Moham￾med et al. (2018). Cellulose-based composites can be used as adsorbents (Tursi et al., 2018).
Their excellent physical properties make them a good candidate in this regard (Hokkanen
et al., 2016). They can be used in membrane separation processes. This is especially important
because cellulose can be synthesized into the nanoparticle range (Kalia et al., 2011). At a nano￾particle size range (1–100 nm), they become extremely efficient in nano-filtration and ultra￾filtration membranes (Wang, 2019). They can also be used for other water pollution
High Modulus High aspect ratio
High chemical resistance
High surface area
Surface functionalization
Excellent crystallinity
Renewable
Biodegradability
Sustainable
Water stability
FIG. 17.2 Advantages of cellulose-based materials for the removal of pharmaceuticals.
17.5 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of pharmaceuticals 405
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesremediation technologies like absorption and flocculation (though these have not been inves￾tigated for dyes).
Cellulose for environmental applications is of four types: cellulose nanocrystals, cellulose
nano-fibrils, cellulose nanocomposite, and bacterial cellulose (Nasrollahzadeh et al., 2020).
The modification of cellulose for the removal of pharmaceuticals comes in two different di￾rections. A summary of modification techniques for cellulose-based materials for the removal
of pharmaceuticals is shown in Fig. 17.4. There is the grafting of monomers and direct chem￾ical modification (Hokkanen et al., 2016). Both methods have several types (also presented in
Fig. 17.4) and have been shown to lead to composite adsorbents with increased performance
for pollutant uptake. Grafting is a polymer engineering technique where a side-chain graft is
added to the cellulose backbone polymeric chain. Direct chemical modification on the other
hand involves the utilization of chemicals in pure or aqueous form for the modification of the
cellulose itself to adjust some of its functional properties. The major functional groups for the
direct chemical modification of cellulose-based materials are summarized in Fig. 17.5 and
discussed more extensively in Wang (2019).
An empirical review of recent research efforts on pharmaceuticals removal by cellulose￾based composites is important. This is because it helps to show the progress in research
and helps us identify trends and knowledge gaps. Table 17.3 presents a good summary in
this regard. Several studies have examined drugs like diclofenac, ciprofloxacin, tetracycline,
and aspirin. It can be observed that the most studied pollutant for cellulose-based composites
adsorbent is diclofenac. This is unsurprising as it has been frequently detected in wastewaters
and is effectively removed by the adsorption process (Ighalo and Adeniyi, 2020b). Besides
diclofenac, cellulose-based composites adsorbent needs to be studied for other very common
pharmaceutical compounds. Those common ones effectively removed by adsorption include
metronidazole (Ighalo et al., 2020c), penicillin (Ighalo et al., 2021b), clofibric acid (Ighalo et al.,
2020b), and ciprofloxacin (Igwegbe et al., 2020). Cellulose-based membranes have also been
FIG. 17.3 Key application areas of cellulose-based composites for pollutant removal.
406 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCellulose 
modification
Grafting of monomer
Photografting
High energy radiation 
grafting
Chemical initiaition 
grafting
Direct chemical 
modification methods
Esterification
Halogenation
Oxidation
Etherification
Alkaline treatment
Salination
FIG. 17.4 Summary of modification techniques for cellulose-based materials for the removal of pharmaceuticals.
FIG. 17.5 Major functional groups for the direct chemical modification of cellulose-based materials (Wang, 2019).TABLE 17.3 Summary of recent research efforts on pharmaceuticals removal by cellulose-based composites.
Material Pollutant Key findings References
Adsorption process
Cellulose/layered double
hydroxide
Diclofenac 268 mg/g uptake capacity (after just 2 min),
removal efficiency still at 88% after 3 cycles
Beyki et al.
(2017)
UiO-66/polydopamine/
bacterial cellulose
Aspirin 149 mg/g uptake capacity, >80% removal after
8 cycles
Cui et al.
(2020)
UiO-66/polydopamine/
bacterial cellulose
Tetracycline 184 mg/g uptake capacity, >80% removal after
8 cycles
Cui et al.
(2020)
Montmorillonite/
cellulose acetate
Ciprofloxacin 13.8 mg/g uptake capacity, good performance
both in batch and column set-up
Das et al.
(2020)
Sodium alginate/
cellulose/polyvinyl
alcohol
Diclofenac 418 mg/g uptake capacity, >90% removal after
5 cycles
Fan et al.
(2019)
Carbonized cellulose Diclofenac 59% removal efficiency (10 mg/L initial conc.)
after 1 h, π-π stacking, and hydrogen bonds were
the major mechanism
Feng et al.
(2018)
Quaternised cellulose
(from flax noil)
Amoxicillin 183 mg/g uptake capacity, endothermic and
spontaneous process
Hu and
Wang
(2016)
Cellulose/chitosan Diclofenac 444 mg/g uptake capacity, acid-base interactions,
and hydrogen bonds were the major mechanisms
Hu et al.
(2019)
Carboxymethyl
cellulose/carboxyalkyl￾chitosan/graphene oxide
Sulfamethoxazole 312 mg/g uptake capacity, removal efficiency
still at 87% after 5 cycles
Liu et al.
(2020)
Carboxymethyl
cellulose/carboxyalkyl￾chitosan/graphene oxide
Sulfapyridine 162 mg/g uptake capacity, removal efficiency
still at 87% after 5 cycles
Liu et al.
(2020)
Cellulose/chitosan Tylosin 59 mg/g uptake capacity, π-π stacking;
electrostatic attraction, and hydrogen bonds were
the major mechanism
Luo et al.
(2019)
Polypyrrole/cellulose Diclofenac 210 mg/g uptake capacity, high pH flexibility of
the adsorbent
Pires et al.
(2017)
Wood cellulose Salbutamol 196 mg/g uptake capacity, adsorbent
performance depended mainly on the charge and
colloidal stability of the anionic nano-fibril
Selk€al€a
et al. (2018)
Cellulose/graphene
oxide
Levofloxacin 80% removal efficiency at pH 4, factor effects
were analyzed by response surface methodology
(Box–Behnken design)
Tao et al.
(2020)
Cellulose/graphene
oxide
Fluoroquinolones The uptake process was ultra-fast (74 mg/g in
mins), could be reused for 7 cycles with only 13%
reduction in performance
Wang et al.
(2017a)
408 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesshown to have comparatively good mechanical and thermal properties for membranes
(Paralikar et al., 2008). It was observed that cellulose used for membranes was always in
the form of cellulose acetate. Based on this section, several gaps in knowledge have been
observed in the research area. Though the utilization of cellulose-based composites as a floc￾culent in water pollution has been extensively studied, it is quite interesting that it has rarely
been utilized for pharmaceuticals removal based on the authors’ exhaustive search. A similar
observation was also made for absorption.
TABLE 17.3 Summary of recent research efforts on pharmaceuticals removal by cellulose-based
composites—cont’d
Material Pollutant Key findings References
Membrane separation process
Cellulose acetate/nano￾diamond
Extracellular
polymeric
substances
>90% COD removal, reduced fouling due to
membrane architecture
Etemadi
et al. (2017)
Cellulose acetate Mixed liquor
suspended solids
Good anti-biofouling properties albeit at only
optimal conditions
Etemadi
and Yegani
(2019)
Cellulose acetate Effluent spiked
with
carbamazepine
23% removal at high feed concentration (69% for
commercial membrane)
Narbaitz
et al. (2013)
Cellulose acetate Effluent spiked
with
sulfamethazine
72% removal at high feed concentration (88% for
commercial membrane)
Narbaitz
et al. (2013)
Cellulose acetate Effluent spiked
with Ibuprofen
80% removal at high feed concentration (90% for
commercial membrane)
Narbaitz
et al. (2013)
Cellulose acetate/poly(4-
vinylpyridine-b-ethylene
oxide)
Sulfamethoxazole,
Sulfadiazine,
Omeprazole
Omeprazole > Sulfamethoxazole > Sulfadiazine
in terms of membrane performance
Penabad￾Pen˜a et al.
(2019)
Cellulose acetate/layered
double hydroxide
Diclofenac,
Tetracycline
Good thermal and physical stability of the
membrane, electrostatic attraction, and hydrogen
bonds were the major mechanism
Raicopol
et al. (2019)
Cellulose acetate Carbamazepine,
Ibuprofen,
Sulfamethazine
>50 pollutant removal after 1 h Rana et al.
(2012)
17.5 Cellulose-based composites for the removal of pharmaceuticals 409
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices17.6 Conclusion
The research efforts in cellulose-based composites for the removal of various pollutants
such as heavy metal, dyes and pharmaceuticals has been reviewed and discussed.
Cellulose-based composites can be used for the adsorption, membrane separation, floccula￾tion, and absorption of the listed pollutants. However, the latter two have not been exten￾sively investigated. The base cellulose material is usually modified by grafting of
monomers or direct chemical modification. It was observed that the most studied pollutant
for cellulose-based composites adsorbents are diclofenac, zinc, copper, and some dyes. This is
unsurprising as they have been frequently detected in wastewaters and are effectively re￾moved by the adsorption process. It was also observed that cellulose used for membranes
was always in the form of cellulose acetate.
References
Abdullahi, A., Ighalo, J., Ajala, O.J, Ayika, S., 2020. Physicochemical analysis and heavy metals remediation of phar￾maceutical industry effluent using bentonite clay modified by H2SO4 and HCl. Turk. J. Chem. 7 (3), 17. https://
doi.org/10.18596/jotcsa.703913.
Abouzeid, R.E., Khiari, R., El-Wakil, N., Dufresne, A., 2018. Current state and new trends in the use of cellulose
nanomaterials for wastewater treatment. Biomacromolecules 20 (2), 573–597.
Adelodun, B., Ajibade, F.O., Ighalo, J.O., Odey, G., Ibrahim, R.G., Kareem, Y.F., Choi, K.S., 2021. Assessment of so￾cioeconomic inequality based on virus-contaminated water usage in developing countries: a review. Environ. Res.
192, 110309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110309.
Ajala, O.J., Nwosu, F.O., Ahmed, R.K., 2018. Adsorption of atrazine from aqueous solution using unmodified and
modified bentonite clays. Appl. Water Sci. 8 (7), 214.
Al-Zboon, K., Al-Smadi, B., Al-Harahsheh, M., Al-Khawaldh, S., 2019. Adsorption modeling of Cr on volcanic tuff￾based geopolymer. JJEES 10, 35.
An, D., Sun, X., Cheng, X., Cui, L., Zhang, X., Zhao, Y., Dong, Y., 2020. Investigation on mercury removal and recovery
based on enhanced adsorption by activated coke. J. Hazard. Mater. 384, 121354.
Aniagor, C.O., Igwegbe, C.A., Ighalo, J.O., Oba, S.N., 2021. Adsorption of doxycycline from aqueous media: a review.
J. Mol. Liq. 334, 116124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.116124.
Bamidele, O., Boisa, N., Obunwo, C.C., 2020. Determination and risk assessment of heavy metals concentrations col￾lected from indoor houses at Lagos State of Nigeria. Int. J. Adv. Sci. Res. Eng. 6 (3), 77–94. https://doi.org/
10.31695/IJASRE.2020.33765.
Beyki, M.H., Mohammadirad, M., Shemirani, F., Saboury, A.A., 2017. Magnetic cellulose ionomer/layered double
hydroxide: an efficient anion exchange platform with enhanced diclofenac adsorption property. Carbohydr.
Polym. 157, 438–446.
Biswas, F.B., Rahman, I.M., Nakakubo, K., Endo, M., Nagai, K., Mashio, A.S., Hasegawa, H., 2020. Highly selective
and straightforward recovery of gold and platinum from acidic waste effluents using cellulose-based bio￾adsorbent. J. Hazard. Mater. 410, 124569.
Bratby, J., 2016. Coagulation and Flocculation in Water and Wastewater Treatment. IWA Publishing.
Cai, H., Liang, J., Ning, X.-A., Lai, X., Li, Y., 2020. Algal toxicity induced by effluents from textile-dyeing wastewater
treatment plants. J. Environ. Sci. 91, 199–208.
Cheng, R., Kang, M., Zhuang, S., Shi, L., Zheng, X., Wang, J., 2019. Adsorption of Sr (II) from water by mercerized
bacterial cellulose membrane modified with EDTA. J. Hazard. Mater. 364, 645–653.
Cui, J., Xu, X., Yang, L., Chen, C., Qian, J., Chen, X., Sun, D., 2020. Soft foam-like UiO-66/polydopamine/bacterial
cellulose composite for the removal of aspirin and tetracycline hydrochloride. Chem. Eng. J. 395, 125174.
410 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesDas, I., Das, S., Chakraborty, I., Ghangrekar, M., 2019. Bio-refractory pollutant removal using microbial electrochem￾ical technologies: a short review. J. Indian Chem. Soc. 96, 493–497.
Das, S., Barui, A., Adak, A., 2020. Montmorillonite impregnated electrospun cellulose acetate nanofiber sorptive
membrane for ciprofloxacin removal from wastewater. J. Water Process Eng. 37, 101497.
Dong, Z., Liu, J., Yuan, W., Yi, Y., Zhao, L., 2016. Recovery of Au (III) by radiation synthesized aminomethyl pyridine
functionalized adsorbents based on cellulose. Chem. Eng. J. 283, 504–513.
Etemadi, H., Yegani, R., 2019. Effect of aeration rate on the anti-biofouling properties of cellulose acetate
nanocomposite membranes in a membrane bioreactor system for the treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater.
Biofouling 35 (6), 618–630.
Etemadi, H., Yegani, R., Seyfollahi, M., Babaeipour, V., 2017. Preparation and performance evaluation of cellulose
acetate/nanodiamond nanocomposite membrane in the treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater by membrane
bioreactor. Desalin. Water Treat. 76, 98–111.
Fan, L., Lu, Y., Yang, L.-Y., Huang, F., Ouyang, X.-K., 2019. Fabrication of polyethylenimine-functionalized sodium
alginate/cellulose nanocrystal/polyvinyl alcohol core–shell microspheres ((PVA/SA/CNC)@ PEI) for diclofenac
sodium adsorption. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 554, 48–58.
Feng, Z., Odelius, K., Rajarao, G.K., Hakkarainen, M., 2018. Microwave carbonized cellulose for trace pharmaceutical
adsorption. Chem. Eng. J. 346, 557–566.
Ge, H., Huang, H., Xu, M., Chen, Q., 2016. Cellulose/poly (ethylene imine) composites as efficient and reusable ad￾sorbents for heavy metal ions. Cellulose 23 (4), 2527–2537.
Go´es, M.M., Keller, M., Oliveira, V.M., Villalobos, L.D.G., Moraes, J.C.G., Carvalho, G.M., 2016. Polyurethane foams
synthesized from cellulose-based wastes: kinetics studies of dye adsorption. Ind. Crop. Prod. 85, 149–158.
Hevira, L., Zilfa, R., Ighalo, J.O., Zein, R., 2020. Biosorption of indigo carmine from aqueous solution by Terminalia
catappa shell. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (5), 104290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104290.
Hevira, L., Zilfa, R., Ighalo, J.O., Aziz, H., Zein, R., 2021. Terminalia catappa shell as low-cost biosorbent for the
removal of methylene blue from aqueous solutions. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jiec.2021.01.028.
Hokkanen, S., Bhatnagar, A., Sillanp€a€a, M., 2016. A review on modification methods to cellulose-based adsorbents to
improve adsorption capacity. Water Res. 91, 156–173.
Hu, D., Wang, L., 2016. Adsorption of amoxicillin onto quaternized cellulose from flax noil: kinetic, equilibrium and
thermodynamic study. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 64, 227–234.
Hu, D., Jiang, R., Wang, N., Xu, H., Wang, Y.-G., Ouyang, X.-K., 2019. Adsorption of diclofenac sodium on bilayer
amino-functionalized cellulose nanocrystals/chitosan composite. J. Hazard. Mater. 369, 483–493.
Huang, S., Wu, L., Li, T., Xu, D., Lin, X., Wu, C., 2019. Facile preparation of biomass lignin-based hydroxyethyl cel￾lulose super-absorbent hydrogel for dye pollutant removal. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 137, 939–947.
Ighalo, J.O., Adeniyi, A.G., 2020a. Adsorption of pollutants by plant bark derived adsorbents: an empirical review. J.
Water Process Eng. 35, 101228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101228.
Ighalo, J.O., Adeniyi, A.G., 2020b. Mitigation of diclofenac pollution in aqueous media by adsorption. ChemBioEng
Rev. 7 (2), 50–64. https://doi.org/10.1002/cben.201900020.
Ighalo, J.O., Adeniyi, A.G., Marques, G., 2020a. Artificial intelligence for surface water quality monitoring and assess￾ment: a systematic literature analysis. Model. Earth Syst. Environ. 7 (2), 669–681. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40808-
020-01041-z.
Ighalo, J.O., Ajala, J.O., Umenweke, G., Ogunniyi, S., Adeyanju, C.A., Igwegbe, C.A., Adeniyi, A.G., 2020b. Mitigation
of clofibric acid pollution by adsorption: a review of recent developments. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (5), 104264.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104264.
Ighalo, J.O., Igwegbe, C.A., Adeniyi, A.G., Adeyanju, C.A., Ogunniyi, S., 2020c. Mitigation of metronidazole (Flagyl)
pollution in aqueous media by adsorption: a review. Environ. Technol. Rev. 9 (1), 137–148. https://doi.org/
10.1080/21622515.2020.1849409.
Ighalo, J.O., Adeniyi, A.G., Adelodun, A.A., 2021a. Recent advances on the adsorption of herbicides and pesticides
from polluted waters: performance evaluation via physical attributes. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 93, 117–137. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jiec.2020.10.011.
References 411
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesIghalo, J.O., Igwegbe, C.A., Aniagor, C.O., Oba, S.N., 2021b. A review of methods for the removal of penicillins from
water. J. Water Process Eng. 39, 101886. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101886.
Igwegbe, C.A., Oba, S.N., Aniagor, C.O., Adeniyi, A.G., Ighalo, J.O., 2020. Adsorption of ciprofloxacin from water: a
comprehensive review. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 93, 57–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2020.09.023.
Iwuozor, K.O., Ighalo, J.O., Ogunfowora, L.A., Adeniyi, A.G., Igwegbe, C.A., 2021. An empirical literature analysis of
adsorbent performance for methylene blue uptake from aqueous media. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jece.2021.105658, 105658.
Javanbakht, S., Shaabani, A., 2019. Carboxymethyl cellulose-based oral delivery systems. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 133,
21–29.
Jiang, H., Yang, Y., Lin, Z., Zhao, B., Wang, J., Xie, J., Zhang, A., 2020. Preparation of a novel bio-adsorbent of sodium
alginate grafted polyacrylamide/graphene oxide hydrogel for the adsorption of heavy metal ion. Sci. Total
Environ. 744, 140653.
Jiehong Guo, Z.L., Ranasinghe, P., Bonina, S., Hosseini, S., Corcoran, M.B., Smalley, C., Kaliappan, R., Wu, Y.,
Chen, D., Sandy, A.L., Wang, Y., Rockne, K.J., Sturchio, N.C., Giesy, J.P., Li, A., 2016. Occurrence of atrazine
and related compounds in sediments of upper great lakes. Enivron. Sci. Technol. 50, 7335–7343.
Kalia, S., Dufresne, A., Cherian, B.M., Kaith, B., Averous, L., Njuguna, J., Nassiopoulos, E., 2011. Cellulose-based bio￾and nanocomposites: a review. Int. J. Polym. Sci. 2011, 1–35.
Khadir, A., Negarestani, M., Mollahosseini, A., 2020. Sequestration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug from
aquatic media by lignocellulosic material (Luffa cylindrica) reinforced with polypyrrole: study of parameters, ki￾netics, and equilibrium. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (3), 103734.
Kong, W., Ren, J., Wang, S., Chen, Q., 2014. Removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions using acrylic-modified
sugarcane bagasse-based adsorbents: equilibrium and kinetic studies. Bioresources 9 (2), 3184–3196.
Li, W.-T., Jin, J., Li, Q., Wu, C.-F., Lu, H., Zhou, Q., Li, A.-M., 2016. Developing LED UV fluorescence sensors for online
monitoring DOM and predicting DBPs formation potential during water treatment. Water Res. 93, 1–9.
Li, Y., Xiao, H., Pan, Y., Zhang, M., Ni, S., Hou, X., Hu, E., 2018. Study on cellulose microfilaments based composite
spheres: microwave-assisted synthesis, characterization, and application in pollutant removal. J. Environ. Manag.
228, 85–92.
Li, M., Li, B., Zhou, L., Zhang, Y., Cao, Q., Wang, R., Xiao, H., 2019. Fluorescence-sensitive adsorbent based on cel￾lulose using for mercury detection and removal from aqueous solution with selective “on-off” response. Int. J.
Biol. Macromol. 132, 1185–1192.
Li, Y., Xie, D., Xiao, J., Wu, W., Zhang, L., Xiao, H., Chen, J., 2020. Dual responsive copolymers-grafted microfibrillated
cellulose composites for removing lead ions from aqueous solution. J. Clean. Prod. 258, 120867.
Liu, L., Gao, Z.Y., Su, X.P., Chen, X., Jiang, L., Yao, J.M., 2015. Adsorption removal of dyes from single and binary
solutions using a cellulose-based bioadsorbent. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 3 (3), 432–442.
Liu, Y., Nie, P., Yu, F., 2020. Enhanced adsorption of sulfonamides by a novel carboxymethyl cellulose and chitosan￾based composite with sulfonated graphene oxide. Bioresour. Technol. 320, 124373.
Luo, X., Liu, L., Wang, L., Liu, X., Cai, Y., 2019. Facile synthesis and low concentration tylosin adsorption performance
of chitosan/cellulose nanocomposite microspheres. Carbohydr. Polym. 206, 633–640.
Madikizela, L.M., Ncube, S., Tutu, H., Richards, H., Newman, B., Ndungu, K., Chimuka, L., 2020. Pharmaceuticals
and their metabolites in the marine environment: sources, analytical methods and occurrence. Trends Environ.
Anal. Chem., e00104.
Mahmood, N.A.-H.J., Abdulmajeed, Y.R., 2017. Adsorption of amoxicillin onto activated carbon from aqueous solu￾tion. Int. J. Curr. Eng. Technol. 7, 62–67.
Mirjavadi, E.S., Tehrani, R.M., Khadir, A., 2019. Effective adsorption of zinc on magnetic nanocomposite of Fe3O4/
zeolite/cellulose nanofibers: kinetic, equilibrium, and thermodynamic study. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26 (32),
33478–33493.
Misra, M., Vivekanandhan, S., Mohanty, A.K., Denault, J., 2011. 4.10—nanotechnologies for agricultural bioproducts.
In: Moo-Young, M. (Ed.), Comprehensive Biotechnology, third ed. Pergamon, Oxford, pp. 119–127.
Mohammed, N., Grishkewich, N., Tam, K.C., 2018. Cellulose nanomaterials: promising sustainable nanomaterials for
application in water/wastewater treatment processes. Environ. Sci. Nano 5 (3), 623–658.
412 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesNarbaitz, R.M., Rana, D., Dang, H.T., Morrissette, J., Matsuura, T., Jasim, S.Y., Yang, P., 2013. Pharmaceutical and
personal care products removal from drinking water by modified cellulose acetate membrane: field testing. Chem.
Eng. J. 225, 848–856.
Naseri-Nosar, M., Ziora, Z.M., 2018. Wound dressings from naturally-occurring polymers: a review on
homopolysaccharide-based composites. Carbohydr. Polym. 189, 379–398.
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Sajjadi, M., Iravani, S., Varma, R.S., 2020. Starch, cellulose, pectin, gum, alginate, chitin and
chitosan derived (nano) materials for sustainable water treatment: a review. Carbohydr. Polym. 251, 116986.
Nwosu, F.O., Ajala, O.J., Owoyemi, R.M., Raheem, B.G., 2018. Preparation and characterization of adsorbents derived
from bentonite and kaolin clays. Appl. Water Sci 8 (7), 195.
Nwosu, F.O., Ajala, O.J., Okeola, F.O., Adebayo, S.A., Olanlokun, O.K., Eletta, A.O., 2019. Adsorption of
chlorotriazine herbicide onto unmodified and modified kaolinite: equilibrium, kinetic and thermodynamic stud￾ies. Egypt. J. Aquat. Res. 45 (2), 99–107.
Oba, S.N., Ighalo, J.O., Aniagor, C.O., Igwegbe, C.A., 2021. Removal of ibuprofen from aqueous media by adsorption:
a comprehensive review. Sci. Total Environ. 780, 146608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146608.
Ogunleye, O.O., Ajala, M.A., Agarry, S.E., 2014. Evaluation of Biosorptive capacity of banana (Musa paradisiaca) stalk
for lead(II) removal from aqueous solution. J. Environ. Prot. 5, 1451–1465. https://doi.org/10.4236/
jep.2014.515138.
Pan, Y., Xie, H., Liu, H., Cai, P., Xiao, H., 2019. Novel cellulose/montmorillonite mesoporous composite beads for dye
removal in single and binary systems. Bioresour. Technol. 286, 121366.
Paralikar, S.A., Simonsen, J., Lombardi, J., 2008. Poly (vinyl alcohol)/cellulose nanocrystal barrier membranes. J.
Membr. Sci. 320 (1–2), 248–258.
Penabad-Pen˜ a, L., Herrera-Morales, J., Betancourt, M., Nicolau, E., 2019. Cellulose acetate/P4VP-b-PEO membranes
for the adsorption of electron-deficient pharmaceutical compounds. ACS Omega 4 (27), 22456–22463.
Peng, H., Guo, J., 2020. Removal of chromium from wastewater by membrane filtration, chemical precipitation, ion
exchange, adsorption electrocoagulation, electrochemical reduction, electrodialysis, electrodeionization,
photocatalysis and nanotechnology: a review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 18, 1–14.
Pires, B.C., Dutra, F.V.A., Nascimento, T.A., Borges, K.B., 2017. Preparation of PPy/cellulose fibre as an effective po￾tassium diclofenac adsorbent. React. Funct. Polym. 113, 40–49.
Priya, V., Shrama, P., Kumar, A., 2020. Phytoremediation of Banana leaf-functionalization of mercaptan-cellulose and
its utilization for the removal of heavy metals in aqueous environment. Asian J. Adv. Basic Sci. 8 (1), 26–38.
Rahman, M.L., Fui, C.J., Ting, T.X., Sarjadi, M.S., Arshad, S.E., Musta, B., 2020. Polymer ligands derived from jute fiber
for heavy metal removal from electroplating wastewater. Polymers 12 (11), 2521.
Raicopol, M.D., Andronescu, C., Voicu, S.I., Vasile, E., Pandele, A.M., 2019. Cellulose acetate/layered double hydrox￾ide adsorptive membranes for efficient removal of pharmaceutical environmental contaminants. Carbohydr.
Polym. 214, 204–212.
Rana, D., Scheier, B., Narbaitz, R.M., Matsuura, T., Tabe, S., Jasim, S.Y., Khulbe, K.C., 2012. Comparison of cellulose
acetate (CA) membrane and novel CA membranes containing surface modifying macromolecules to remove phar￾maceutical and personal care product micropollutants from drinking water. J. Membr. Sci. 409, 346–354.
Saeed, R.M.Y., Bano, Z., Sun, J., Wang, F., Ullah, N., Wang, Q., 2019. CuS-functionalized cellulose based aerogel as
biocatalyst for removal of organic dye. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 136 (15), 47404.
Salama, A., 2017. New sustainable hybrid material as adsorbent for dye removal from aqueous solutions. J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 487, 348–353.
Salama, A., Shukry, N., El-Sakhawy, M., 2015. Carboxymethyl cellulose-g-poly(2-(dimethylamino) ethyl methacry￾late) hydrogel as adsorbent for dye removal. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 73, 72–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2014.11.002.
Selk€al€a, T., Suopaj€arvi, T., Sirvio, J.A., Luukkonen, T., Lorite, G.S., Kalliola, S., Liimatainen, H., 2018. Rapid uptake of €
pharmaceutical salbutamol from aqueous solutions with anionic cellulose nanofibrils: the importance of pH and
colloidal stability in the interaction with ionizable pollutants. Chem. Eng. J. 350, 378–385.
Sharma, A., Thakur, M., Bhattacharya, M., Mandal, T., Goswami, S., 2019. Commercial application of cellulose nano￾composites—a review. Biotechnol. Rep. 21, e00316.
References 413
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesShekar, H.S., Ramachandra, M., 2018. Green composites: a review. Mater. Today Proc. 5 (1), 2518–2526.
Shi, W., Ji, S., Xu, Q., Duan, X., Song, Z., Xu, G., 2019. Treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater containing clofibric
acid by electron beam irradiation. J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 322 (2), 407–414.
Shi, Y.-Z., Yin, X.-C., Si, G.-H., Zhang, N.-D., Du, M.-X., Wang, X.-H., 2020. Bio-adsorbent preparation based on Chi￾nese Radix isatidis residue for Pb (II) removal. Water Pract. Technol. 15 (4), 1202–1212.
Simate, G.S., Maledi, N., Ochieng, A., Ndlovu, S., Zhang, J., Walubita, L.F., 2016. Coal-based adsorbents for water and
wastewater treatment. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 4 (2), 2291–2312.
Singh, H., Chauhan, G., Jain, A.K., Sharma, S.K., 2017. Adsorptive potential of agricultural wastes for removal of dyes
from aqueous solutions. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 5 (1), 122–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2016.11.030.
Solis-Casados, D., Escobar-Alarco´n, L., Natividad, R., Romero, R., 2018. Advanced oxidation processes II: removal of
pharmaceuticals by photocatalysis. In: Ecopharmacovigilance. Springer, pp. 143–155.
Sun, J., Liu, Y., Wu, Z., Xu, M., Lei, E., Ma, C., Liu, S., 2021. Compressible, anisotropic lamellar cellulose-based carbon
aerogels enhanced by carbon dots for superior energy storage and water deionization. Carbohydr. Polym. 252,
117209.
Tanatti, N.P., Mehmetbas¸oglu, M.,  Şengil, _
I.A., Aksu, H., Emin, E., 2019. Kinetics and thermodynamics of biodiesel
wastewater treatment by using ozonation process. Desalin. Water Treat. 161, 108–115.
Tang, C., Brodie, P., Li, Y., Grishkewich, N.J., Brunsting, M., Tam, K.C., 2020. Shape recoverable and mechanically
robust cellulose aerogel beads for efficient removal of copper ions. Chem. Eng. J. 392, 124821.
Tao, J., Yang, J., Ma, C., Li, J., Du, K., Wei, Z., Deng, X., 2020. Cellulose nanocrystals/graphene oxide composite for the
adsorption and removal of levofloxacin hydrochloride antibiotic from aqueous solution. R. Soc. Open Sci. 7 (10),
200857.
Tavakolian, M., Wiebe, H., Sadeghi, M.A., van de Ven, T.G.M., 2020. Dye removal using hairy nanocellulose: exper￾imental and theoretical investigations. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 (4), 5040–5049. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.9b18679.
Tayeb, A.H., Amini, E., Ghasemi, S., Tajvidi, M., 2018. Cellulose nanomaterials—binding properties and applications:
a review. Molecules 23 (10), 2684.
Tijani, J.O., Fatoba, O.O., Babajide, O.O., Petrik, L.F., 2016. Pharmaceuticals, endocrine disruptors, personal care prod￾ucts, nanomaterials and perfluorinated pollutants: a review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 14 (1), 27–49.
Tran, D., Bourdev, L., Fergus, R., Torresani, L., Paluri, M., 2015. Learning spatiotemporal features with 3d
convolutional networks. In: Paper Presented at the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Com￾puter Vision.
Tursi, A., Chatzisymeon, E., Chidichimo, F., Beneduci, A., Chidichimo, G., 2018. Removal of endocrine disrupting
chemicals from water: adsorption of bisphenol-a by biobased hydrophobic functionalized cellulose. Int. J. Envi￾ron. Res. Public Health 15 (11), 2419.
Varaprasad, K., Jayaramudu, T., Sadiku, E.R., 2017. Removal of dye by carboxymethyl cellulose, acrylamide and
graphene oxide via a free radical polymerization process. Carbohydr. Polym. 164, 186–194.
Wang, D., 2019. A critical review of cellulose-based nanomaterials for water purification in industrial processes. Cel￾lulose 26 (2), 687–701.
Wang, Y., Zhao, L., Peng, H., Wu, J., Liu, Z., Guo, X., 2016. Removal of anionic dyes from aqueous solutions by
cellulose-based adsorbents: equilibrium, kinetics, and thermodynamics. J. Chem. Eng. Data 61 (9), 3266–3276.
Wang, N., Wang, Y.-F., Omer, A.M., Ouyang, X.-K., 2017a. Fabrication of novel surface-imprinted magnetic graphene
oxide-grafted cellulose nanocrystals for selective extraction and fast adsorption of fluoroquinolones from water.
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 409 (28), 6643–6653.
Wang, X., Yao, C., Wang, F., Li, Z., 2017b. Cellulose-based nanomaterials for energy applications. Small 13 (42),
1702240.
Wang, J., Liu, M., Duan, C., Sun, J., Xu, Y., 2019. Preparation and characterization of cellulose-based adsorbent and its
application in heavy metal ions removal. Carbohydr. Polym. 206, 837–843.
WHO, 2016. World Health Statistics 2016: Monitoring Health for the SDGs Sustainable Development Goals. World
Health Organization.
414 17. Cellulose-based nano-biosorbents in water purification
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesWu, S., Shekhar, N., Biswas, S., Sahu, A.K., 2020. Determination of physicochemical parameters and levels of heavy
metals in food waste water with environmental effects. Bioinorg. Chem. Appl. 2020, 1–13.
Xia, L., Huang, Z., Zhong, L., Xie, F., Tang, C.Y., Tsui, C.P., 2018. Bagasse cellulose grafted with an amino-terminated
hyperbranched polymer for the removal of Cr (VI) from aqueous solution. Polymers 10 (8), 931.
Xu, C., Shao, F., Yi, Z., Dong, H., Zhang, Q., Yu, J., Yu, L., 2019. Highly chlorine resistance polyamide reverse osmosis
membranes with oxidized graphitic carbon nitride by ontology doping method. Sep. Purif. Technol. 223, 178–185.
Yue, X., Jiang, F., Zhang, D., Lin, H., Chen, Y., 2017. Preparation of adsorbent based on cotton fiber for removal of
dyes. Fibers Polym. 18 (11), 2102–2110. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-017-1211-9.
Yue, X., Huang, J., Jiang, F., Lin, H., Chen, Y., 2019. Synthesis and characterization of cellulose-based adsorbent for
removal of anionic and cationic dyes. J. Eng. Fibers Fabr. 14, 1558925019828194.
Zarei, M., Zarei, M., 2018. Self-propelled micro/nanomotors for sensing and environmental remediation. Small
14 (30), 1800912.
Zeman, L.J., Zydney, A., 2017. Microfiltration and Ultrafiltration: Principles and Applications. CRC Press.
Zhang, X., Yan, S., Chen, J., Tyagi, R., Li, J., 2020. Physical, chemical, and biological impact (hazard) of hospital waste￾water on environment: presence of pharmaceuticals, pathogens, and antibiotic-resistance genes. In: Current De￾velopments in Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Elsevier, pp. 79–102.
Zhou, Y., Zhang, M., Hu, X., Wang, X., Niu, J., Ma, T., 2013. Adsorption of cationic dyes on a cellulose-based
multicarboxyl adsorbent. J. Chem. Eng. Data 58 (2), 413–421. https://doi.org/10.1021/je301140c.
Zhou, Y., Zhang, M., Wang, X., Huang, Q., Min, Y., Ma, T., Niu, J., 2014. Removal of crystal violet by a novel cellulose￾based adsorbent: comparison with native cellulose. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 53 (13), 5498–5506.
References 415
II. Cellulose-based nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThis page intentionally left blankPART III
Chitosan-based
nanobiosorbents for
deterioration of environmental
matricesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
18
Toxic metals adsorption from water
using chitosan nanoderivatives
F.J. Alguacil and J.I. Robla
National Center for Metallurgical Research (CSIC), Madrid, Spain
18.1 Introduction
Though human development implies a better life, also it takes the risk of contamination
into the air, earth, and waters. One of such probable contaminations may be due to the pres￾ence of toxic metals in water. This presence can be caused by natural and anthropogenic
nature, but in any case the presence of these toxic metals, besides poisoning the environment,
and their intake for humans, can deliver a series of illnesses and even death.
Thus, under the fear of this risk and to decrease its probable environmental impact, several
technologies had been investigated or are under development in order to remove the presence
of these hazardous metals in water, and maintain their presence in the term zero or under the
acceptable levels for humans as declared by the corresponding health agencies.
From these available technologies, adsorption is probably one of the most popular meth￾odologies, developing a miriade of potential adsorbents, and having, as targets, toxic metals.
Among these adsorbents, chitosan and chitosan-bearing composites are very well
established in this role. It is well known that chitosan is derived from chitin, being a product
of the deacetylation of this natural bioconstituent. The importance of these chitosan adsor￾bents in the removal of heavy metals is reflected in a number of recently published reviews
(Bria˜o et al., 2020; Na et al., 2020; Pathan and Bose, 2020; Quesada et al., 2020; Tahoon
et al., 2020).
Taking into account the above, this work reviews very recent developments on the use of
chitosan, under the term of nano-chitosan itself or as a constituent of nanocomposites of var￾ious nature, in the treatment of aqueous solutions containing toxic metals. The toxic metals
considered here are arsenic, cadmium, chromium, mercury, and lead.
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 419 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00018-618.2 Arsenic
A new magnetic biosorbent was prepared from a matrix of chitosan and Fe3O4 (magnetite)
nanoparticles and used in the removal of As(III) and (V) from waters (Ayub et al., 2020). Best
adsorption results (exceeding 99%) were achieved in the pH range of 5–9 in the case of As(III),
and in the range 6–8 for As(V). In both cases, adsorption best responded to the Langmuir iso￾therm (r2 > 0.999):
1
½  As a,e
¼ 1
½  As a,m
+
1
KL½  As a,m
 1
½  As aq,e
(18.1)
where [A]a,e and [As]a,m were the arsenic concentrations in the adsorbent at the equilib￾rium and maximum, respectively, and [As]aq,e was the arsenic concentration at the equilib￾rium in the aqueous solution, being KL the Langmuir constant. The maximum monolayer
adsorption capacities were found as 73.69 and 79.49 mg/g for As(III) and As(V) species,
respectively. Optimum biosorbent dosages were 1.5 g/L (As(III)) and 2 g/L (As(V)). Also
in both cases, the removal of these species followed the pseudo-second-order kinetic model
(r2 > 0.999):
t
½  As a,e
¼ 1
Kp2½  As 2
a,e
+
1
½  As a,e
(18.2)
being Kp2 the corresponding rate constant. Desorption of both As(III) and (V) can be
performed using 0.1 M NaOH solutions, whereas, after 5 cycles of adsorption–desorption,
the adsorbent slightly lost its initial adsorption capacity: 99.5% (1st cycle) and 92.5% (5th cy￾cle) for As(III), and from 99.5% (1st cycle) to 95% in the case of As(V). NOTE: in the publication
Eq. (18.2) is poorly written since the correct equation is:
t
½  As a,t
¼ 1
Kp2½  As 2
a,e
+
t
½  As a,e
(18.2a)
A nanocomposite of chitosan-graphene oxide-gadolinium oxide (CGOdGd) was pre￾pared to be used in the adsorption of arsenic(V) from water (Choi et al., 2020). The character￾ization of the adsorbent showed that the 50 nm long rods presented a crystalline morphology
with highly active oxygenated functional groups (OH, COO, C–O–C, and Gd2O3), all con￾tributing to the removal of arsenic. The removal of this element was high in the pH range of
3–7, decreasing the adsorption of As(V) above pH 7. As (V) uptakes (pH 6) onto the
nanocomposite were 252.12, and 128.20 mg/g for 0.1 and 0.3 g/L of CGOdGd, respectively.
Adsorption data fitted well to the Langmuir isotherm (r2 > 0.999):
½  As aq,e
½  As a,e
¼ 1
KL½  As a,m
+
1
½  As a,m
½  As aq,e (18.3)
Arsenic (V) adsorption was negatively affected by the presence of 0.5 M calcium, sulfate,
carbonate, or phosphate in the aqueous solution. The adsorbent was used to treat real samples
from Nakdong mine (), containing 282 μg/L of As(V), after the treatment with the
nanoadsorbent this arsenic concentration was decreased until less than 10 μg/L as required
420 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesby regulatory standards of environmental agencies. Desorption can be achieved with 0.1 M
NaOH solution, however, the adsorption efficiency decreased from 98% (1st cycle) until 78%
(fifth cycle), this decrease was probable due to incomplete As(V) desorption and change of the
adsorbent surface morphology. NOTE: as it can be seen Langmuir isotherms presented in
Eqs. (18.1) and (18.3) are different; this is due to the variation in the linearization of the Lang￾muir equation.
Arsenate ions were removed from waters using films made from neat chitosan and
chitosan with magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) (Kloster et al., 2020), and whereas the adsorp￾tion of As (V) was explained (r2 ¼ 0.989) by the non-linear Freundlich isotherm for neat
chitosan film:
½  As a,e ¼ KF½  As 1=n
aq,e (18.4)
it was better fitted (r2 ¼ 0.992) to the non-linear Langmuir equation when the composite
adsorbent was used:
½  As a,e ¼ KL½  As a,m½  As aq,e
1 + KL½  As aq,e
(18.5)
Maximum arsenic uptake onto the nanocomposite ([As]a,m) was estimated as 15.2 mg/g.
Experimental data fitted well (r2 ¼ 0.999) with the pseudo-first-order reversible model. The
composite adsorbent presented higher adsorption capacity, i.e., 10.4 mg/g versus 1.6 mg/g
of the neat chitosan, which was attributable to the additional adsorbent capacity provided by
the nanoparticles and the irregular surface area that leads to an enhancement of the adsorp￾tion surface. Adsorption can be represented by the next reaction:
RNH+
3 + H2AsO
4 , RNH3  H2AsO4 (18.6)
NOTE: No desorption data are given in the publication.
Magnetic nanosorbent, chitosan-coated magnetic nanoparticles (cMNPs), was used in the
treatment of lignocellulosic bio-refinery wastewater (LBW) containing arsenic, chromium
and copper, and a series of phenolic compounds (Kumar et al., 2020). The magnetic property
of the adsorbent allows separation of the particles in the presence of an external magnetic
field. At pH 6.0, with optimized adsorbent dosage of 2.0 g/L and 90 min contact time, max￾imum removal of arsenic was 2.4%, value which was lower than the values yielded with the
different components of the wastewater (Table 18.1).
Arsenic adsorption can be represented by the Langmuir isotherm (Ayub et al., 2020) with
r
2 ¼ 0.955. Desorption was carried out at acidic conditions of pH 2, and the adsorbent was
reconstituted by the addition of a sodium hydroxide solution until pH 8, in order to entrap
again the magnetic nanoparticles. Reusability of the adsorbent was investigated for five
TABLE 18.1 Adsorption of the various components of the wastewater.
Arsenic Copper Chromium Phenols
% removal 2.4 42.2 18.7 46.2
18.2 Arsenic 421
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesconsecutive rounds of adsorption–desorption, and results indicated that the nanoadsorbent
only maintained a mere 10% of its initial adsorption capacity.
A goethite/graphene oxide/chitosan (α-FeO(OH)/GO/CS) nanocomposite was used in
the removal of As(III) from an aqueous solution (Shan et al., 2020). Results derived from
the investigation showed that As(III) adsorption increased with increasing initial concentra￾tion, contact time, and temperature (from 25 to 45 ºC), but decreased in the presence of sulfate,
phosphate, evidently due to competitive adsorption with the surface adsorption sites of the
nanocomposite. Also, the presence of Fe3+ in the solution decreases the adsorption of As(III),
in this case, this decrease was attributable to the formation of iron oxide and/or hydroxide in
solution which compete with the nanocomposite particle for the adsorbed As(III). As(III)
adsorption was high in the pH range of 3–10, and was well fitted to the pseudo-second-order
kinetic model (r2 ¼ 0.9982), and being endothermic and spontaneous. As(III) monolayer ad￾sorption fitted with the Sips model:
½  As a,e ¼ ½  As a,mKs½  As 1=n
aq,e
1 + Ks½  As 1=n
aq,e
(18.7)
and the maximum adsorption capacity was 289.42 mg/g, however, the experimental data
also fitted well with the non-linear Freundlich isotherm. The removal of As(III) from the
solution was attributed to the presence of -NHCO-, CdO, OdH, and FedO groups as well
as the complexation between As(III) ions and hydroxyl iron oxide, being the latter the major
contributor to this adsorption. Desorption can be performed with alkaline (NaOH) solutions.
After five adsorption–desorption cycles, the removal efficiency was maintained as 79.6%.
Using crab shells, chitosan was produced, via the three stages of deproteinization, demin￾eralization, and deacetylation, with sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid under different
temperatures and time (Sumaila et al., 2020). The produced chitosan presented –NH2 and –
OH functional groups, amorphous/crystalline phases (crystallinity index of 69.54%), and an
average particle size of 729 nm, 12.67 m2
/g surface area, and with the thermal stability of up
to 1430°C. The material was used in the removal of arsenic(III) and copper, from
electroplating wastewaters, under various operational conditions. The increment of the tem￾perature from 30°C to 60°C produced an increase in As(III) adsorption, resulting in an endo￾thermic process. Under the employed conditions, chitosan though has a low surface area,
displaying an acceptable capacity to adsorb arsenic. The results were best fitted
(r2 ¼ 0.999) to the Jovanovic isotherm:
½  As a,e ¼ ½  As a,m 1 exp KJ½  As aq,e
    (18.8)
with maximum arsenic uptake onto the adsorbent of 6.3 mg/g. This isotherm is considered
mechanical contact between the adsorbing and desorbing molecules. Experimental results
were fitted to the pseudo-second-order model (r2 ¼ 0.942). NOTE: desorption data were
not included in the manuscript.
An adsorbent (CSN-La) of lanthanum immobilized on electrospun chitosan
nanofiber(CSN) was used for arsenate removal (Tan et al., 2020). The experimental results
indicated that the arsenate adsorption by CSN-La was pH-dependent and fitted the
422 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricespseudo-second-order kinetic model (r2 ¼ 0.995) and non-linear Langmuir isotherm
(r2 ¼ 0.992). The saturated adsorption capacity of CSN-La was 83.6 mg/g, which was higher
than that of CSN, being the removal of arsenate preferable to that of co-existing anions (chlo￾ride, sulfate, nitrate, bicarbonate). The usefulness of CSN-La relies on its special structural
characteristics: the host material CSN favored the pre-concentration of arsenate via electro￾static attraction, and the immobilized lanthanum exhibited preferable arsenate removal
through specific interaction. Column experiments showed that CSN-La could effectively treat
near 2650 BV of feeding solution before breakthrough occurred, resulting in a decrease of ar￾senic concentration of 210 μg/L in the feeding solution to less than 10 μg/L in the exiting one,
however, the value decreased until 2310 BV at the third run, being these results attributable to
that a small amount of the bound sites present in the nanocomposite are irreversible. Desorp￾tion was carried out with sodium hydroxide solution.
Natural polysaccharide chitosan (CS) functionalized iron nanosheet was used to remove
toxic As(III) (and Sb(III)) from an aqueous solution (Zeng et al., 2020). The surface area of
the optimum material was 111.8 cm2
/g, this material also presented a good dispersion of
the iron nanocomposite. Adsorption results showed that 0.5% in weight CS functionalized
iron nanosheet had higher removal capacity, affinity, selectivity, and reusability for Sb(III)
than As(III). The optimum adsorption was achieved at the adsorbent dosage of 0.4 g/L at
wide pH values, and the maximum adsorption capacity was estimated as 108.6 mg/g for
As(III) from Langmuir non-linear fitting. As(III) removal was independent of pH values,
indicating that electrostatic attraction was not the dominant removal mechanism. The de￾tailed removal mechanism was confirmed by a synergetic interaction of AsdFe complexes
and hydrogen bonding. Silicate and phosphate ions decreased As(III) adsorption, but not sul￾fate or carbonate. Desorption was carried out with 0.5 M sodium hydroxide solution, and
after four continuous cycles, the adsorption decreased until 50%.
18.3 Cadmium
A combination of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) functionalized with metal oxides (MO ¼ ZnO,
TiO2) with a layer of chitosan (CS) produced bilayer nanofiber membranes (Alharbi et al.,
2020). The final material was prepared via consecutive electrospinning. The adsorption prop￾erties of this PAN/MO-CS nanofiber toward cadmium (and lead) ions were investigated. It
was demonstrated that the integration of a CS layer into PAN/MO nanofibers increased the
adsorption capacity of cadmium (Table 18.2).
The experimental data were best fitted to the pseudo-second-order kinetic model and
Langmuir isotherm (Choi et al., 2020). NOTE: desorption data were not included in the work.
Nano-chitosan was used to remove cadmium from water under different experimental
conditions (Alyasi et al., 2020). The capacity of this nanoadsorbent was found to be
220 mg/g, and the adsorption followed the SIPS model and the pseudo-second-order kinetic
equation. The SIPS model indicates that cadmium was loaded onto the nanoadsorbent via a
multiple adsorption mechanism, a second-order chemisorption mechanism indicated two
main complexation bonding methods: complexation with one amine functional group and
18.3 Cadmium 423
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesa second complexing type with two amine groups and two hydroxyl groups. NOTE: desorp￾tion data were absent in the manuscript.
Electrospun chitosan (CS) non-woven mats are useful at removing heavy metals from
aqueous solutions, but they suffered from low permeability and low-mechanical strength,
also, they had not good characteristics with respect to their selectivity in the removal of these
metals. To remediate these weaknesses, a bilayer adsorbent made of a porous phosphorylated
cellulose substrate covered by electrospun CS nanofibers was developed (Brandes et al.,
2021). In the case of Cd(II), results indicated that the experimental data fitted the pseudo￾second-order and non-linear Langmuir models, with a maximum adsorption capacity of
591 mg/g at 25°C, being the adsorption enhanced with the increase of the temperature
(25-60 ºC). After three cycles, the adsorbent lost near 16% of its initial adsorption capacity, this
was is explained by the degradation of functional groups caused by the regeneration step
with EDTA, also this complexing agent could form highly stable complexes with binding sites
of the nanoadsorbent. In multi-elemental solutions the adsorption order was Cu(II)
(1.17 mmol/g) > Cr(VI) (0.57 mmol/g) > Cd(II) (0.53 mmol/g) > Pb(II) (0.15 mmol/g).
Non-woven chitosan (CS) and phosphorylated microcellulose (PMC) CS/PMC
nanocomposite fiber mats (CS/PMC) were produced by electrospinning, and presenting
up to 50% by weight of PMC (Brandes et al., 2020). These mats were used in the adsorption
of Cd2+ from an aqueous medium. Results showed that experimental data best fitted to the
pseudo-second-order model and that Cd2+ removal from the solution was made via a chem￾isorption mechanism with a reaction (ion exchange) between Na+ from the adsorbent and Cd2
+ from the solution, and also chemical complexation between the amino group of chitosan and
the adsorbate. Equilibrium data best responded to the non-linear Langmuir isotherm, with a
maximum adsorption capacity of 283 mg/g at 60°C, being this capacity attributable to the
large amount of phosphate groups presented in the nanomaterial, which require less energy
to capture the metal cations. Metal uptake was a spontaneous and endothermic process.
Desorption was done in an EDTA-bearing acidic medium, after five cycles the adsorbent
maintained near 95% of its initial adsorption capacity.
Nano-chitosan coating nano-iron oxide (nano-CI was prepared and its surface was mod￾ified with two different compounds (crotonaldehyde (nano-CIC) and succinic anhydride
(nano-CIS)) (Hosain et al., 2020). The prepared nano-materials exhibit an average size
between 9.32 and 20.57 nm and they were used in the adsorption of Cd(II) (and Cu(II) and
Pb(II). In the case of cadmium, the maximum adsorption capacity was about 200 mg/g
Cd(II). Both Langmuir isotherm (Ayub et al., 2020) and the pseudo-second-order kinetic
TABLE 18.2 Approximate equilibrium cadmium
concentrations onto various PAN adsorbents.
Adsorbent [Cd]a,e, mg/g
PAN
PAN-TiO2
PAN-ZnO
PAN-CS
PAN-CS-TiO2
PAN-CS-ZnO
25
50
80
110
160
130
424 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesmodel responded well to the fitting of the Cd(II) adsorption experimental results, Cu(II) and
Pb(II) also did it. NOTE: the manuscript did not include desorption data.
Chitosan was modified with salicylaldehyde to prepare salicylaldehyde functionalized
chitosan nanoparticles (N-Ch-Sal) (Hussain et al., 2020). The as-prepared material presented
sizes of about 80 nm and was used in the removal of Cd(II) (also Cu(II), and Pb(II) ions) from
solutions. Under optimal conditions (pH 5) cadmium uptake was 63.71 mg/g. In the three
cases, the adsorption process fitted the pseudo-second-order kinetic model and the Langmuir
adsorption isotherm (Ayub et al., 2020). NOTE: desorption data were not included in the
published manuscript.
A process combining chitosan and dopamine self-polymerization, doped in sodium
carboxymethyl cellulose, and glutaraldehyde cross-linking was used to produce an
amino-functionalized material (Li et al., 2020). The carboxyl methylcellulose and
chitosan-derived nanostructured adsorbent were used to investigate its performance with
respect to the removal of Cd(II) (and Cr(VI)) from aqueous solutions. Experimental data
were fitted to the linear Freundlich isotherm and the pseudo-second-order kinetic model
(r2 ¼ 0.937), thus, chemical adsorption was the rate controlled step. The maximum adsorp￾tion capacity (pH 5) for Cd(II) was 470 mg/g. Cadmium was desorbed with 1 M nitric acid
solution, after five cycles, cadmium adsorption decreased from near 400 mg/g to
300 mg/g.
A nanoparticle-based mesoporous composite consisting of silicate-titanate nanotubes,
(STNTs), supported in hydrogel chitosan beads, (STNTs-Ch beads), was investigated for
Cd2+ adsorption (Quiroga-Flores et al., 2020). It was determined that the hollow STNTs were
highly dispersed in the walls of the hollow beads, being attributable this dispersion to the
effect of pH when the composite was prepared and it was observed a non-interaction between
STNTs and chitosan. The composite followed the non-linear Langmuir isotherm with a max￾imum loading capacity of 656  27 mg/g, and also (r2 ¼ 0.9604) the non-linear form of the
pseudo-second-order model:
½  Cd a,t ¼ ht
1 +Kp2½  Cd a,et (18.9)
with h being the initial adsorption rate, defined as:
h ¼ Kp2½  Cd 2
a,e (18.10)
Desorption was accomplished in acidic solutions (best in 0.1 M H2SO4). After seven cycles,
the adsorption rate decreased from 99% (1st cycle) to 54% (7th cycle).
Polylactic acid (PLA)/nano-chitosan (nCHS) composite fibers were produced by the
electrospinning method and used in the Cd2+ adsorption from water (Thomas et al., 2020).
The basic character of the composites had intensified with the increase in nCHS addition.
Experimental results indicated that the Cd2+ adsorption capacity of the composite was two
times faster (near 70%) with respect to that of neat PLA fibers. Both the increase in surface
area and the presence of nCHS improved the adsorption capacity of the electrospun mem￾brane. NOTE: desorption data were not included in the work.
A xanthate functionalized magnetic chitosan nanocomposite (XFMCN) was used for Cd(II)
adsorption from high salinity water samples (Vajdi et al., 2021). The nanomaterial showed a
18.3 Cadmium 425
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricessulfur content of 2.28% and a BET surface area of 44.79 m2
/g. This functionalization resulted
in a fitting to the linear form of the isotherm model (UT):
ln ½  Cd aq,e
½  Cd a,e
 Kd
½  Cd a,m
 ! ¼ ln D1b
½  Cd b
a,m
+ b ln½  Cd aq,e (18.11)
and to decrease the corresponding constant from 6.73 to 1.80  103
, showing an increased
affinity toward cadmium adsorption. In the above equation, Kd is the model constant, b is
a UT isotherm exponent, and D is the adsorbent dosage. Experimental data also fitted well
to the linear form of the Redlich–Peterson isotherm:
ln KR
½  Cd aq,e
½  Cd a,e
1
 ! ¼ ln αR + a ln½  Cd aq,e (18.12)
where KR is the model constant, αR is a value derived from the fitting, and a is also a value
between 0 and 1. A third good fitting of the experimental data is with the linear form of the
Radke–Prausnitz isotherm model:
ln ½  Cd aq,e
½  Cd a,e
 1
½  Cd a,mKRP ! ¼  ln½  Cd a,m + m ln Cdaq,e
  (18.13)
being KRP the corresponding model constant. A four fitting of the experimental data is with
the Freundlich isotherm. The results confirmed multilayer adsorption. Best adsorption results
were obtained after 60 min contact time and initial pH 7, being the maximum equilibrium
adsorption capacity of 55 mg/g. Experimental data were fitted to the intraparticle diffusion
and pseudo-second-order models., being cadmium uptake onto the adsorbent exothermic
and spontaneous. The adsorbed cadmium ion can be desorbed using 0.01 M HCl. Continuous
use of the adsorbent (five cycles) showed a slight decrease in the adsorbent performance
(90%). NOTE: it is worth mentioning here, that the results in this paper conformed well within
three unusual adsorption isotherms. Also, adsorption at pH 7 will imply some cadmium
precipitation.
An environmentally friendly shell-coated magnetic attapulgite, attapulgite/
CoFe2O4@SiO2-chitosan/EDTA (ATPCFS-CSEs), was prepared by solvothermal and sol￾gel process (Wang et al., 2020). Chitosan and EDTA were selected to functionalize the mag￾netic attapulgite to provide abundant amino groups and carboxyl groups. Sodium
tripolyphosphate was chosen as a non-toxic cross-linker in surface deposition-cross-linking,
and subsequently, an amidation reaction was taken for functionalization by chitosan and
EDTA. The nanomaterial presented a well-defined architecture and paramagnetic properties
and was used in the adsorption of Cd(II) from aqueous solutions. The adsorption data fitted
well with the Langmuir isotherm (Choi et al., 2020), and the adsorption capacity was
128 mg/g. Metal uptake onto the nanoadsorbent was attributed to electrostatic interaction,
complexation, and surface complexation. High concentration ionic competition experiments
showed that ATPCFS-CSEs performed with respect to cadmium adsorption, however, alumi￾num, nickel, and zinc were removed from the solution in percentages exceeding 50%. After
five adsorption–desorption cycles, the removal efficiency was above 88%.
426 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matrices18.4 Chromium
A study about the removal of Cr(VI) from aqueous solution was carried out using com￾posite adsorbents derived from chitosan (obtained from shrimp peels) and Cu(OH)2 or CuO
(prepared by alkaline precipitation of Cu(II) ions) to manufacture ChiCu(OH)2 and
ChiCuO, respectively, and both being characterized as nanocomposites (Almughamisi
et al., 2020). The removal of Cr(VI) from the solution was highly dependent on pH, temper￾ature, metal concentration, and adsorbent mass. Chromium(VI) was best removed from the
solution in the 5.5–6 pH range, with. Equilibrium data described by the Langmuir isotherm,
increasing the maximum uptake with the temperature, in the case of ChiCu(OH)2, and de￾creasing this maximum value, with the increase of this variable, in the case of using ChiCuO
adsorbent (Table 18.3), while the uptake kinetics was best fitted to the pseudo-second-order
equation.
The adsorption process was endothermic. Metal desorption was performed using alkaline
saline solutions, i.e. a NaOH solution of pH 12 which also contained 20 g/L NaCl. Up to five
adsorption–desorption cycles there was a slight decrease in their initial adsorption capacity.
NOTE: according to the data shown in Table 18.3, these adsorbents had different perfor￾mances with the temperature, but against the above, authors of the investigation claimed that
using both adsorbents, the adsorption process was endothermic, thus, some discrepancy, not
explained by the authors, appeared to rise here.
The adsorbent described in (Brandes et al., 2021), was used in the adsorption of
multielement-bearing solutions, being the adsorption order Cu(II) > Cr(VI) > Cd(II) > Pb
(II). NOTE: it was not described how Cr(VI) was removed from the loaded adsorbent.
Taking at a basis eggshell as biosource, various adsorbents: nanohydroxyapatite (NP),
cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide modified nanohydroxyapatite (NPB), and nanohydrox￾yapatite/chitosan composite either in acidic (NPS1) or alkaline media (NPS2) were prepared
and used in the removal of chromium(VI) from aqueous phases (Hassan et al., 2020). The var￾ious properties of nanohydroxyapatite/chitosan composite synthesized in the alkaline
medium were found to be better than the presented with the other three solid adsorbents.
The above nanocomposite has a surface area and pore radius of 152.5 m2
/g and 5.11 nm, re￾spectively. pHPZC for all the prepared solid samples was found to be in the 6.8–7.5 range.
With respect to the maximum adsorption capacities of Cr(VI) onto the different adsorbents,
these were obtained at pH 6 with concentrations of near 119 mg/g (NP), 132 mg/g (NPS1),
134 mg/g (NPS2), 85 mg/g (NPB). Within all the adsorbents, the adsorption of Cr(VI) was
spontaneous and endothermic, following the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. NOTE:
TABLE 18.3 Influence of the temperature on Cr(VI) uptake (mg/g)
onto the nanocomposites.
Adsorbent 26°C 36°C 46°C
ChiCu(OH)2
ChiCuO
74
136
78
132
83
129
Initial pH ¼ 4. Time: 3 h.
18.4 Chromium 427
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesAfter reading the accessible Abstract, apparently there was no adsorption data included in
the work.
An amino-functionalized bead described in (Li et al., 2020) was used in the adsorption of
Cr(VI) from aqueous solutions. Experimental data were fitted (r2 ¼ 0.951) to the linear form of
Freundlich isotherm and followed (r2 ¼ 0.850) the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. The
maximum adsorption capacity (pH 2) of Cr(VI) was 347 mg/g. The adsorbent, and under
these acidic conditions, showed a strong electrostatic affinity with respect Cr(VI). This ele￾ment was desorbed using a 0.2 M NaOH solution. After five cycles of adsorption–desorption
Cr(VI) uptake was maintained around 100 mg/g.
18.5 Mercury
A green nanocomposite based on the self-assembly of graphene oxide (GO) with chitosan
(CH) was used in the removal of Hg(II) from various water sources: ultrapure and natural
waters (tap water, river water, and seawater) (Bessa et al., 2020). Using ultrapure water with
initial mercury(II) concentration of 50 μg/L, the experimental results showed that GO–CH
nanocomposite had an excellent adsorption capacity of Hg (II) (97% metal removal after
2 h) even using very small adsorbent dosages, i.e., 10 mg/L. In the case of tap water, the re￾covery was 81.4% after 4 h of contact time. However, when the solution comes from river and
seawater, the GO–CH nanocomposite showed a limited performance probably attributed to
the high complexity of the water matrices, leading to low removal of Hg(II): 13% in the case of
river waters and 7% in the case of seawater. Further investigations concluded that the low
Hg(II) removal from seawater was due to the presence of chloride ions in the water, and
the subsequent formation of stable mercury-chloride complexes, having no affinity to be
adsorbed by the nanocomposite. The above was not the case in the presence of nitrate or so￾dium ions, because in this case the percentage of mercury(II) removal from the water exceed
90%. NOTE: there were no included desorption data.
A magnetic network polymer composite (MCTP) was synthesized by introducing the poly
(m-aminothiophenol) and chitosan onto the magnetic-mesoporous nanoparticle under tannic
acid as a cross-linking agent (Fu et al., 2021). The nanocomposite rocketed Hg(II) adsorption
in comparison with other adsorbents (Table 18.4):
Mercury(II) adsorption investigation indicated the percentage of metal removal increased
from pH 1 to 3.5, and adsorption capacity of the adsorbent was near 98% and 245 mg/g
within 15 min, respectively, with a maximum adsorption capacity of 515 mg/g. The
TABLE 18.4 Hg(II) uptake by different magnetic
composites.
Adsorbent % Uptake
Fe3O4
Fe3O4@SiO2
MMS (Fe3O4@SiO2@SiO2)
MMS-NH2
MCTP
2.5
11.3
18.9
35.0
98.8
428 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesadsorption of Hg(II) is mainly dominated by chemical adsorption and is due to the stronger
coordination bonds or Hg(II)-chelate complex between sulfur or nitrogen groups and Hg(II).
Desorption was performed by magnetic separation of the mercury-loaded adsorbent and
treatment with a mixture of HNO3 (0.1 M) and thiourea (0.1 M). After five cycles of contin￾uous use, the adsorption loading decreased from 250 mg/g (1st cycle) to 173 mg/g (5th cycle).
The toxic spent adsorbent was used as a catalyst for the synthesis of acetophenone, with 99%
yield, and most of the phenylacetylene derivatives were transformed to corresponding
acetophenone in excellent yields (exceeding 98%).
A polyethyleneimine functionalized chitosan-lignin (PEI-CS-L) composite sponge adsor￾bent with nanowall-network structures was synthesized by cross-linking and lyophilization
(Zhang et al., 2020). The as-prepared adsorbent can remove Hg(II) selectively from an aque￾ous solution with high efficiency (more than 83%) and a short reaction time (1 min). Following
the Langmuir and pseudo-second-order models, the maximum adsorption capacity was
663.5 mg/g at pH 5.5, being the adsorption increases with the increase of the temperature
(20–40°C). These results were attributed to the evenly interconnected porous structure of
the composite sponge with nanoscale-wall structures which increase the distribution of func￾tional groups and resulting in a fast complexation of Hg(II) with surface functional groups.
The PEI-CS-L sponge ha presented a decrease in Hg2+ adsorption from 663.5 mg/g (1st cycle)
to 504.7 mg/g (5th cycle), with the desorption step carried out with a 1 M HNO3 solution.
18.6 Lead
Using the adsorbent described in (Brandes et al., 2021), Pb2+ presented the worst loading
results from the mixture of this element and Cu2+, Cd2+, and HCrO4
 ions.
In situ construction of nanotentacles of (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane (APS) on the inner
wall of the porous structure of chitosan/graphene oxide composite gel (CGG) was investi￾gated (Cheng et al., 2020). The resulted material showed a very high affinity for Pb2+, being
the uptake capacity of 470 mg/g. The NT-CGG composite removes this toxic element from
0.01 g/L to levels of less than 0.02 ppb. The adsorption of Pb2+ followed the pseudo-second￾order and the Langmuir isotherm models. Despite its affinity to adsorb lead, in a solution
containing a mixture of elements, this lead(II) was co-adsorbed together with cadmium
and copper, whereas sodium, magnesium, and calcium were not adsorbed at all. The
Pb-loaded adsorbent was treated with a 0.05 M EDTA solution of pH 7 in order to remove
this metallic element from the adsorbent; under five consecutive adsorption–desorption cy￾cles, the adsorbent maintained an 88% of its original capacity. NOTE: this decrease followed a
continuous pattern, thus, probably it would expect a further decrease with subsequent cycles.
A magnetic nano-biocomposite, chitosan conjugated magnetite nanoparticle (CH-MNP)
was used for the removal of Pb2+ from solutions (Cheraghipour and Pakshir, 2020). The
CH-MNPs had a diameter of near 10 nm, with a saturation magnetization of 76.01 emu/g,
resulting in a superparamagnetic property. Being Pb2+ adsorption pH-dependant, the opti￾mum conditions to achieve 92% of Pb2+ adsorption were found to be at a pH of 6.1, using
a nanoadsorbent dosage of near 1 g/L, and a contact time of 1 h. Experimental data fitted well
with the non-linear Langmuir isotherm model, whereas the equilibrium data followed the
pseudo-second-order and intraparticle diffusion kinetic models. The maximum Pb(II)
18.6 Lead 429
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesadsorption capacity was 192 mg/g. Desorption was performed using a 0.1 M EDTA solution,
and the continuous use of the adsorbent demonstrated a continuous loss of adsorption effec￾tiveness (92.2% (1st cycle) and 80.3% (5th cycle)), also in the desorption step the
nanocomposite lost effectiveness under continuous use (90.1% (1st cycle) against 73.9%
(5th cycle)).
A Fe3O4-chitosan nanocomposite for removing lead(II) from industrial wastewater was
fabricated (Covaliu et al., 2020). The adsorbent was used in the removal of lead(II) from so￾lutions having a pH of 3 and metal concentrations in the 0.5–2 mg/L range. NOTE: this man￾uscript did not present desorption data.
A graphene oxide (GO)-derivative nanocomposite containing chitosan was synthesized
and investigated for Pb2+ adsorption from aqueous solutions (Foroughi and Azqhandi,
2020). The following optimum conditions were concluded as pH 8, the temperature of 50 °
C, and contact time of 22 min; in the above conditions, 94% were removed. The maximum
adsorption capacity of almost 667 mg/g was estimated from the Langmuir isotherm
(r2 ¼ 0.937) in an endothermic process. Experimental data followed the pseudo-second ki￾netic model (r2 ¼ 0.9437). The influence of co-existing ions (sodium, potassium, magnesium,
calcium, copper, zinc, chlorides, sulfate, and carbonate) on the adsorption of Pb (II) showed a
negative effect (from 93% to 75%) at a concentration of the companying elements around
6 mg/L. Under continuous use (Table 18.5) the adsorbent lost its initial adsorption capacity,
whereas this decrease followed a continuous pattern. NOTE: due to the high pH value used,
probably in this work not only adsorption but lead(II) precipitation occurred. Also, and
editing failure was found since in the Abstract section the values of ΔGº and ΔHº were
interchanged. Apparently, how the desorption step was carried out it was not indicated in
the manuscript.
The adsorbent described in (Hosain et al., 2020) was used in the adsorption of Pb2+ from
aqueous solutions. The maximum Pb2+ adsorption capacity was near 560 mg/g. Both Lang￾muir isotherm (Ayub et al., 2020) and the pseudo-second-order kinetic model responded well
to the fitting of Pb2+ adsorption experimental results. NOTE: desorption step was not consid￾ered by these authors.
An adsorbent containing phosphorylated chitosan-coated magnetic silica nanoparticles
(Fe3O4@SiO2@CS-P), was fabricated and used for the adsorption of lead (Huang et al.,
2021). Lead adsorption increased with the increase of the aqueous pH value from 1 to 6,
reaching a lead uptake of 120 mg/g. Adsorption was endothermic and spontaneous, follow￾ing the Langmuir isotherm and the pseudo-second-order equation. The maximum capacity
was 213 mg/g. Competitive experiments were conducted in a multi-elemental solution (zinc,
copper, silver, strontium, cadmium, and nickel) at pH 6.0, showing this adsorbent a good se￾lectively toward lead with the distribution coefficient (0.75 L/g) more than 10 times than the
TABLE 18.5 Loss of graphene oxide-chitosan nanocomposite adsorption efficiency.
Cycle % Pb(II) removal Cycle % Pb(II) removal
1
2
3
93.1
91.3
90.2
4
5
6
88.4
86.3
85.2
430 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesvalues presented for other metal, however, the adsorbent also performed well with respect to
silver adsorption. These results implied that phosphorylation of the adsorbent not only im￾proves the adsorption performance of lead, via its coordination with the phosphate groups on
the surface of the adsorbent but also changes the selective adsorption of metal types. Desorp￾tion was investigated using a 0.1 M EDTA solution, and after five cycles of continuous use,
lead adsorption decreased from 155 mg/g (1st cycle) to 98 mg/g (5th cycle). This decrease
was attributable to various causes: (i) loss of adsorbent, (ii) strong interaction between phos￾phate groups and Pb2+, which it was not desorbed, leading to the loss of adsorption sites
within the nanoadsorbent, and iii) the amount of iron leaching after each cycle, decreasing
adsorption efficiency.
An ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-functionalized magnetic chitosan oligosac￾charide and carboxymethyl cellulose (Fe3O4@CMCCOS-EDTA) nanocomposite adsorbent
was fabricated for Pb(II) adsorption (Lian et al., 2020). The batch adsorption experiment re￾sults indicated that the experimental data fitted both the pseudo-second-order model and the
Langmuir isotherm. Pb(II) uptake increased with the increase of the pH value (1 to 5) and then
remained constant. The maximum adsorption capacity for the monolayer chemical adsorp￾tion process was calculated as 432.34 mg/g at the pH of 5 and temperature of 35 ºC. Desorp￾tion was investigated using a 0.01 M EDTA solution, being 12 h the reaction time.
A continuous decrease in the adsorption efficiency was observed under continuous use
(130 mg/g (1st cycle) and 110 mg/g (5th cycle), also, the desorption efficiency decreased
under continuous use (100% in the first cycle and 78% in the fifth cycle).
Polypropylene (PP) and polypropylene grafted-maleic-anhydride (PP-g-MA) based
nanocomposites reinforced with chitosan (CS) and modified montmorillonite clay
nanofiller (CL120DT) were fabricated and used in the removal of lead(II) from aqueous
solutions (Moja et al., 2020). The uptake of Pb (II) by this nanocomposite followed the
non-linear Langmuir isotherm model (Ayub et al., 2020), with a removal yield of 91% at
pH 8, and the adsorption fitted the pseudo-second-order kinetic equation. Maximum metal
uptake was estimated as 74 mg/g. After five cycles of adsorption–desorption, there was a
decrease in the uptake capacity from 91% (1st cycle) to 77% (5th cycle). This decrease was
explained due to the presence of residual Pb(II) occupying adsorption sites. NOTE: again a
pH 8 should indicate that the removal is not only based on adsorption but also on precip￾itation. In the published manuscript, the desorption step was literally described as
“desorption; 25º C, pH 8.3, 1.0 NaNO 3 desorption solutions, 10 ppm initial Pb(II) concen￾tration, 30 min contact time”., which is an un-explicable continuous error from the authors,
reviewers, and Editorial Office.
Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid-modified chitosan/polyethylene oxide nanofibers
(CS-DTPA/PEO NFs) were developed to be tested in the adsorption of Pb2+ (and also Cu2+
and Ni2+) (Surgutskaia et al., 2020). The adsorption equilibrium was established after
90 min, and data were described using the Langmuir isotherm model. The maximum adsorp￾tion capacity of CS-DTPA/PEO NFs for Pb2+ was estimated as 142 mg/g (pH 5). Metal ad￾sorption was basically attributable to:
(i) electrostatic attraction with active groups of chitosan,
(ii) coordination with active groups of chitosan, and
(iii) leaching of sodium and potassium ions from DTPA fragments.
18.6 Lead 431
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesIn competitive solutions, the adsorption order was found to be Cu2+ > Ni2+ > Pb2+, thus, the
adsorbent was not selective with respect to Pb2+ adsorption. Lead (II) desorption was
performed using 0.01 M HNO3, followed by the use of 0.01 M NaOH solution, and washing
with deionized water until neutral pH. Under continuous use, the rate of lead adsorption onto
the fibers decreased progressively from 100% (first cycle) to 80% (fifth cycle), the decrease at￾tributable to the reduction in the number of available sites under repetitive use. NOTE: in the
Conclusion section, the authors claimed that adsorption followed the pseudo-first-order equa￾tion, whereas in the text they explained that kinetics followed the pseudo-second-order model.
A type of Pb(II) adsorbent was prepared via carboxylated chitosan (CYCS) and carboxyl￾ated nanocellulose (CNC). These were used to chelate and synthesize hydrogel spheres with
effective adsorption sites, in calcium chloride solution (Xu et al., 2021). This CYCS/CNC ad￾sorbent exhibited a maximum Pb(II) adsorption capacity of near 335 mg/g at pH 4, being the
experimental results well fitted to the non-linear Langmuir isotherm in the 24-61 ºC temper￾atures range, whereas the adsorption followed the pseudo-second-order model. The adsorp￾tion mechanism was identified as monolayer chemisorption on the surface of the beads,
whereas metal uptake occurred via electrostatic interaction between Pb2+ and the carboxyl
groups of the adsorbent, also chemical activity of hydroxyl and amino groups on the beads
took part in the adsorption process. Desorption was carried out at pH 2 (HCl medium), and
after four cycles only a small decrease in the adsorption capacity was observed.
18.7 Conclusions
The use of adsorption technology is of wide use in the scientific community in order to
achieve the removal of metal pollutants from aqueous media. Within these varieties of poten￾tial adsorbents, chitosan, chitosan derivatives, and nanoderivatives have found wide use in
this potential environmental issue. From the information derived from the present review,
some generalities can be found in the treatments of hazardous metals-bearing solutions with
nano-chitosan and chitosan-bearing nanocomposites: (i) most of the investigated systems obey
whatever form of the Langmuir isotherm model, (ii) also practically all of the experimental data
derived from these systems, fitted well with the pseudo-second-order kinetic equation, thus,
metal adsorption seemed to be chemical in nature, (iii) in the case of the adsorption of cations,
i.e., Cd2+, Hg2+ and Pb2+, most of these systems can not be used, for one or another reason, to
remove them from acidic pH medium. Though the experimental conditions varied, maximum
metal uptakes were found to be in the order of several hundreds of mg/g (Table 18.6).
Also, it is an unfortunate norm that the desorption step is not considered by some authors,
in the present case 30% of the reviewed articles, being this step as important, considering the
whole process, as the adsorption step is, and in the case that this desorption step is consid￾ered, many of the investigated nanoadsorbents are not reliable, upon continuous use, since
they suffered a degradation, in the form of loss of their initial adsorption and desorption
capacities, under these continuous adsorption–desorption cycles. It was also found two fea￾tures of the works reviewed here:
(i) in all the reviewed manuscripts, the authors take into consideration several variables
which may affect the metal’s adsorption, but they did not take into consideration a
432 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesfurther experimental variable that could affect this adsorption, and this is how the
metal-bearing solution and the adsorbent were mixed, in other words, the stirring speed
applied to the system, that may be also a key variable affecting metal uptake onto the
adsorbent (Alcaraz et al., 2021). Its effect on a given system can be only determined
experimentally,
(ii) also, the authors did not comment on what to do with the desorbed solution, which
could have a higher metal concentration than the initial feed solution to the
adsorption step, and thus, it would be of higher toxicity. The exception to this rule can
be found in Fu et al. (2021), where the authors find an use to the Hg(II)-loaded
adsorbent.
In any case, the presence of toxic metals in aqueous environments continues to be a poten￾tial risk for life, and surely, scientists around the world will continue their efforts to find good
adsorbents to resolve this toxicity problem.
Acknowledgments
To the CSIC (Spain) for support.
References
Alcaraz, L., Alguacil, F.J., Lo´pez, F.A., 2021. Microporous adsorbent from winemaking waste for the recovery of
Mn(VII) in liquid solutions. Can. J. Chem. Eng. 99, 447–457. https://doi.org/10.1002/cjce.23862.
Alharbi, H.F., Haddad, M.Y., Aijaz, M.O., Assaifan, A.K., Karim, M.R., 2020. Electrospun bilayer PAN/Chitosan
nanofiber membranes incorporated with metal oxide nanoparticles for heavy metal ion adsorption. Coatings
10, 285. https://doi.org/10.3390/coatings10030285.
Almughamisi, M.S., Khan, Z.A., Alshitari, W., Elwakeel, K.Z., 2020. Recovery of chromium(VI) oxyanions from aque￾ous solution using Cu(OH)2 and CuO embedded chitosan adsorbents. J. Polym. Environ. 28, 47–60. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10924-019-01575-z.
Alyasi, H., Mackey, H.R., McKay, G., 2020. Removal of cadmium from waters by adsorption using nanochitosan.
Energy Environ. 31, 517–534. https://doi.org/10.1177/0958305X19876191.
Ayub, A., Raza, Z.A., Majeed, M.I., Tariq, M.R., Irfan, A., 2020. Development of sustainable magnetic chitosan
biosorbent beads for kinetic remediation of arsenic contaminated water. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 163, 603–617.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.287.
Bessa, A., Gonc¸alves, G., Henriques, B., Domingues, E.M., Pereira, E., Marques, P.A.A.P., 2020. Green graphene–
chitosan sorbent materials for mercury water remediation. Nanomaterials 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/
nano10081474, 1474.
TABLE 18.6 Maximum metal uptakes onto
the reviewed nanoadsorbents.
Element Uptake, mg/g
As(III)
As(V)
Cd(II)
Cr(VI)
Hg(II)
Pb(II)
289
>200
650
347
664
667
References 433
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesBrandes, R., Brouillette, F., Chabot, B., 2020. Laboratory adsorption studies on cadmium (II) by nonwoven chitosan/
phosphorylated microcellulose nanocomposite. Water Air Soil Pollut. 231, 566. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-
020-04936-w.
Brandes, R., Brouillette, F., Chabot, B., 2021. Phosphorylated cellulose/electrospun chitosan nanofibers media for re￾moval of heavy metals from aqueous solutions. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 138. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.50021,
50021.
Bria˜o, G.V., de Andrade, J.R., da Silva, M.G.C., Vieira, M.G.A., 2020. Removal of toxic metals from water using
chitosan-based magnetic adsorbents. A review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 18, 1145–1168. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10311-020-01003-y.
Cheng, J., Gao, M., Yang, L., Zhang, L., Zhu, B., 2020. Coral-inspired “nanotentaclization” porous composite gel for
efficient removal of lead(II) from aqueous solution. Mater. Des. 195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matdes.2020.109072, 109072.
Cheraghipour, E., Pakshir, M., 2020. Process optimization and modeling of Pb(II) ions adsorption on chitosan￾conjugated magnetite nano-biocomposite using response surface methodology. Chemosphere 260. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127560, 127560.
Choi, J.-S., Lingamdinne, L.P., Yang, J.-K., Chang, Y.-Y., Koduru, J.R., 2020. Fabrication of chitosan/graphene oxide￾gadolinium nanorods as a novel nanocomposite for arsenic removal from aqueous solutions. J. Mol. Liq. 320.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2020.114410, 114410.
Covaliu, C.I., Matei, E., Stoia, O., Paraschiv, G., 2020. Magnetic nanocomposite material containing chitosan polymer
used in wastewater depollution processes. Mater. Plast. 57, 70–76. https://doi.org/10.37358/MP.20.4.5407.
Foroughi, M., Azqhandi, M.H.A., 2020. A biological-based adsorbent for a non-biodegradable pollutant: modeling
and optimization of Pb(II) remediation using GO-CS-Fe3O4-EDTA nanocomposite. J. Mol. Liq. 318. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2020.114077, 114077.
Fu, Y., Sun, Y., Zheng, Y., Jiang, J., Yang, C., Wang, J., Hu, J., 2021. New network polymer functionalized magnetic￾mesoporous nanoparticle for rapid adsorption of Hg(II) and sequential efficient reutilization as a catalyst. Sep.
Purif. Technol. 259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.118112, 118112.
Hassan, A.F., El-Naggar, G.A., Braish, A.G., Amira, M.F., Alshandoudi, L.M., 2020. Enhanced adsorption of
chromium(Vi) from aqueous medium by basic nanohydroxyapatite/chitosan composite based on egg shell.
Desalin. Water Treat. 206, 235–249. https://doi.org/10.5004/dwt.2020.26306.
Hosain, A.N.A., El Nemr, A., El Sikaily, A., Mahmoud, M.E., Amira, M.F., 2020. Surface modifications of
nanochitosan coated magnetic nanoparticles and their applications in Pb(II), Cu(II) and Cd(II) removal. J. Environ.
Chem. Eng. 8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104316, 104316.
Huang, Y., Hu, C., An, Y., Xiong, Z., Hu, X., Zhang, G., Zheng, H., 2021. Magnetic phosphorylated chitosan composite
as a novel adsorbent for highly effective and selective capture of lead from aqueous solution. J. Hazard. Mater. 405.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124195, 124195.
Hussain, M.S., Musharraf, S.G., Bhanger, M.I., Malik, M.I., 2020. Salicylaldehyde derivative of nano-chitosan as an
efficient adsorbent for lead(II), copper(II), and cadmium(II) ions. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 147, 643–652. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.091.
Kloster, G.A., Valiente, M., Marcovich, N.E.C., Mosiewicki, M.A., 2020. Adsorption of arsenic onto films based on
chitosan and chitosan/nano-iron oxide. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 165, 1286–1295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.09.244.
Kumar, A.K.R., Saikia, K., Neeraj, G., Cabana, H., Kumar, V.V., 2020. Remediation of bio-refinery wastewater
containing organic and inorganic toxic pollutants by adsorption onto chitosan-based magnetic nanosorbent. Wa￾ter Qual. Res. J. Can. 55, 36–51. https://doi.org/10.2166/WQRJ.2019.003.
Li, S.-S., Wang, X.-L., An, Q.-D., Xiao, Z.-Y., Zhai, S.-R., Cui, L., Li, Z.-C., 2020. Upon designing carboxyl methylcel￾lulose and chitosan-derived nanostructured sorbents for efficient removal of Cd(II) and Cr(VI) from water. Int. J.
Biol. Macromol. 143, 640–650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.12.053.
Lian, Z., Li, Y., Xian, H., Ouyang, X.-K., Lu, Y., Peng, X., Hu, D., 2020. EDTA-functionalized magnetic chitosan oli￾gosaccharide and carboxymethyl cellulose nanocomposite: synthesis, characterization, and Pb(II) adsorption per￾formance. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 165, 591–600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.09.156.
Moja, T.N., Bunekar, N., Mishra, S.B., Tsai, T.-Y., Hwang, S.S., Mishra, A.K., 2020. Melt processing of polypropylene￾grafted-maleic anhydride/chitosan polymer blend functionalized with montmorillonite for the removal of lead
ions from aqueous solutions. Sci. Rep. 10, 217. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-57079-2.
434 18. Toxic metals adsorption from chitosan nanoderivatives
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesNa, Y., Lee, J., Lee, S.H., Kumar, P., Kim, J.H., Patel, R., 2020. Removal of heavy metals by polysaccharide: a review.
Polym. Plast. Technol. Mater. 59, 1770–1790. https://doi.org/10.1080/25740881.2020.1768545.
Pathan, S., Bose, S., 2020. Biopolymer based hydrogels for arsenic removal. Curr. Sci. 118, 1540–1546. https://doi.org/
10.18520/cs/v118/i10/1540-1546.
Quesada, H.B., de Arau´jo, T.P., Vareschini, D.T., de Barros, M.A.S.D., Gomes, R.G., Bergamasco, R., 2020. Chitosan,
alginate and other macromolecules as activated carbon immobilizing agents: a review on composite adsorbents
for the removal of water contaminants. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 164, 2535–2549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.08.118.
Quiroga-Flores, R., Noshad, A., Wallenberg, R., Onnby, L., 2020. Adsorption of cadmium by a high-capacity adsor- €
bent composed of silicate-titanate nanotubes embedded in hydrogel chitosan beads. Environ. Technol. 41,
3043–3054. https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2019.1596167.
Shan, H., Peng, S., Zhao, C., Zhan, H., Zeng, C., 2020. Highly efficient removal of As(III) from aqueous solutions using
goethite/graphene oxide/chitosan nanocomposite. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 164, 13–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.07.108.
Sumaila, A., Ndamitso, M.M., Iyaka, Y.A., Abdulkareem, A.S., Tijani, J.O., Idris, M.O., 2020. Extraction and charac￾terization of chitosan from crab shells: kinetic and thermodynamic studies of arsenic and copper adsorption from
electroplating wastewater. Iraqi J. Sci. 61, 2156–2171. https://doi.org/10.24996/ijs.2020.61.9.2.
Surgutskaia, N.S., Martino, A.D., Zednik, J., Ozaltin, K., Lovecka´, L., Bergerova´, E.D., Kimmer, D., Svoboda, J.,
Sedlarik, V., 2020. Efficient Cu2+, Pb2+ and Ni2+ ion removal from wastewater using electrospun DTPA-modified
chitosan/polyethylene oxide nanofibers. Sep. Purif. Technol. 247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.116914,
116914.
Tahoon, M.A., Siddeeg, S.M., Mnif, W., Ben Rebah, F., 2020. Effective heavy metals removal from water using
nanomaterials: a review. Processes 8, 645. https://doi.org/10.3390/PR8060645.
Tan, P., Zheng, Y., Hu, Y., 2020. Efficient removal of arsenate from water by lanthanum immobilized electrospun
chitosan nanofiber. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 589. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2020.124417,
124417.
Thomas, M.S., Pillai, P.K.S., Faria, M., Cordeiro, N., Kailas, L., Kalarikkal, N., Thomas, S., Pothen, L.A., 2020. Polylactic
acid/nano chitosan composite fibers and their morphological, physical characterization for the removal of
cadmium(II) from water. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 137. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.48993, 48993.
Vajdi, R., Alvand, N., Baghdadi, M., Bidhendi, G.N., 2021. Increase of chitosan selectivity and affinity toward the
cadmium ions using xanthate functionalization: application for cadmium removal from saline solutions. J. Water
Process Eng. 40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101898, 101898.
Wang, Y., Zhou, R., Wang, C., Zhou, G., Hua, C., Cao, Y., Song, Z., 2020. Novel environmental-friendly nano￾composite magnetic attapulgite functionalized by chitosan and EDTA for cadmium (II) removal. J. Alloys Compd.
817. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2019.153286, 153286.
Xu, X., Ouyang, X.-K., Yang, L.-Y., 2021. Adsorption of Pb(II) from aqueous solutions using crosslinked carboxylated
chitosan/carboxylated nanocellulose hydrogel beads. J. Mol. Liq. 322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2020.114523, 114523.
Zeng, J., Qi, P., Shi, J., Pichler, T., Wang, F., Wang, Y., Sui, K., 2020. Chitosan functionalized iron nanosheet for en￾hanced removal of As(III) and Sb(III): Synergistic effect and mechanism. Chem. Eng. J. 382. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2019.122999, 122999.
Zhang, D., Wang, L., Zeng, H., Rhimi, B., Wang, C., 2020. Novel polyethyleneimine functionalized chitosan-lignin
composite sponge with nanowall-network structures for fast and efficient removal of Hg(II) ions from aqueous
solution. Environ. Sci. Nano 7, 793–802. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9en01368g.
References 435
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
19
Toxicological impact and adsorptive
removal of triclosan from water bodies
using chitosan and carbon-based
nano-architectures
Tahir Rasheeda
, Muhammad Bilalb
, and Hafiz M.N. Iqbalc
a
Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum
and Minerals (KFUPM), Dhahran, Saudi Arabia b
School of Life Science and Food Engineering,
Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huaian, China c
Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of
Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey, Mexico
19.1 Introduction
Recently, a new class of water contaminating agents, which are referred to as “emerging
pollutants (EPs)” has been identified and assimilated into the ecosystem. These emerging pol￾lutants involve a broad spectrum of biologically active compounds, including pharmaceuti￾cal, pesticides, cosmeceutical, insecticides, surfactants, industrial waste, flame-retardants,
and personal care products (Morsi et al., 2020). Triclosan (TCS) is among one of the widely
consumed active agents with bactericidal and fungicidal activities in health and personal care
stuff such as hand sanitizers, medical skin creams, soaps, deodorants, and toothpaste for over
the last 50 years (Adolfsson-Erici et al., 2002). Due to high consumption (uncontrolled or con￾trolled) and ubiquitous occurrence, triclosan has been identified in human samples such as
breast milk (Arbuckle et al., 2015). In addition, it has also been widely detected and monitored
in various water systems such as natural streams, rivers, drinking water tanks, and ground￾water bodies (Carmona et al., 2014). The potential risks of endocrine system disruption, irri￾tating mammalians organs, and active involvement in bacterial resistance to antibiotics at
environmentally relevant exposure levels are the most worrying concerns associated with
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 437 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00019-8the contamination of triclosan (Rasheed et al., 2020). Besides, it can also serve as a precursor of
an array of highly detrimental known human toxicants and carcinogenic metabolites such as
methyl triclosan, chlorinated dioxins, and phenols (Pycke et al., 2014). Due to the adverse en￾vironmental and potential health consequences, it has become the subject of significant
attention to introduce new approaches for effective and specific elimination of triclosan from
the contaminated environments and reducing its threatening effects in a green, cost-efficient,
and eco-responsive manner. Many methods have been attempted in the last few years for the
removal of triclosan, including adsorption, biodegradation, photolysis, and advanced
oxidation.
Recently, carbon-based nano-architectures have gained incredible interest as inspiring
solid adsorbents to mitigate environmentally relevant toxic pollutants in water and air ma￾trices owing to their exceptional characteristics such as substantial surface area, tailorable
pore sizes, framework compositional and structural versatility, and exposed catalytic regions
(Dou et al., 2017). The mechanism involving adsorptive removals of organic contaminants
using carbon-based nano-architectures follows electrostatic, acid-base, non-covalent, hydro￾gen bonding, and hydrophobic interactions (Hasan and Jhung, 2015). In this chapter, we pre￾sent the contemporary progress and exploration of carbon-based nano-architectures for the
adsorptive removal of triclosan from aqueous environments.
19.2 Occurrence, persistence, and ecological impacts of triclosan
Triclosan is a lipid-soluble antibacterial and fungicidal agent with wide application in a
variety of personal care and pharmaceutical compounds such as toothpaste, cosmetics, soap,
disinfectants, antiperspirants, sunscreens, deodorants, and dishwashing liquids (Bilal et al.,
2020). In addition, it can also be applied to many other consumer products, such as clothes,
textiles, kitchen utensils, packaging, toys, fabrics, trash bags, and bedding (Fig. 19.1) (Dhillon
et al., 2015). Nevertheless, its widespread utilization in washing and rinsing products results
in the discharge of domestic sewage, which is regarded as the most significant source of en￾vironmental contamination (Kralj et al., 2020). The release of enormous amounts of triclosan
along with inadequate removal in sewage treatment plants is the major cause for its extensive
existence in environments (Yueh et al., 2014; Yueh and Tukey, 2016). Studies have demon￾strated that triclosan is ubiquitously present in the aquatic environments and sediments with
a rampant buildup in sediments due to its lipophilic behavior (Olaniyan et al., 2016). It is
reported that triclosan is among the top 10 most widely detected organic wastewater contam￾inants in terms of concentration and frequency (Brausch and Rand, 2011)and has been
detected in surface water in South Korea, China, Europe, United Kingdom, and the United
States (Kasprzyk-Hordern et al., 2008). Acquaintance to triclosan can induce a multitude
of hostile consequences on human’s health and the environmental matrices, including
damaging of the endocrine and hormonal system, central nervous system depression
(Miller, 1983), contact dermatitis (Unit and Robertshaw, 2007), low sperm count and reduced
sperm quality (Kumar et al., 2009), chronic liver injury and carcinogenesis (Fig. 19.2) (Yueh
et al., 2014), tumor progression, oxidative stress, and weakening of thyroid functionalities
(Adolfsson-Erici et al., 2002). Taken into consideration all literature data regarding triclosan
438 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesand its transformation products and metabolites its associated human health impacts, this
chemical should be considered as a top priority concerning contaminant (Dhillon et al., 2015).
19.3 Toxicity and ecological effects of TCS
The introduction of triclosan into the environment from the effluent’s releases from the
sewage sludge and wastewater treatment plants, remains there due to its biological accumu￾lation nature, hydrophobicity, and durability. This results in enhanced toxicity exposure for
living organisms, particularly in animals (Heuer et al., 2019). Triclosan may change into dif￾ferent products including dioxin and methyl triclosan throughout its migration phase. Both
these transformation products have higher toxicity and are more resistant to degradation
compared to pristine triclosan (Pycke et al., 2014). Triclosan and its conversion products,
on the other hand, may have harmful ecological functions on living organisms and can harm
the ecosystem by disrupting biogeochemical cycles, community structure, and the
FIG. 19.1 Representation of general
distribution and fate of triclosan in water
matrices.
19.3 Toxicity and ecological effects of TCS 439
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesbiochemical effects of its inhabitants. Further, triclosan has been proven to interact with var￾ious contaminants, resulting in complicated harmful effects, exacerbating the problem
(Sanchı´s et al., 2016).
19.3.1 Genotoxicity
The genotoxic nature of triclosan can easily block the production of lipid in Escherichia coli by
affecting the fabI of genes (McMurry et al., 1998). Recently, Stenzel and coworkers (Vickers,
2017) exposed the Zebrafish to triclosan at its environmental concentration and discovered that
their reproductive and developmental abilities were compromised, as well as the pace of sur￾vival ability and development of their progeny. Similar effects were observed in amphibians
(Usal et al., 2019). Studies also reveal that the exposure of triclosan to pregnant women may
have effects on the behavioral attitudes of the male children ( Jackson-Browne et al., 2019).
FIG. 19.2 Schematic illustration of notable ecological- and biological-related adverse impacts of TCS.
440 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matrices19.3.2 Reproductive, endocrine disruption, and developmental toxicity
Triclosan is regarded as one of the hazardous endocrine disrupters accompanied by devel￾opmental and reproductive toxicities. As a result of absorption of triclosan by the water fleas
severely effects their reproductive and adaptive behavior (Chiaia-Hernandez et al., 2013). In
another study, the estrogen sulphonation level in ewe placenta was reduced to a level of
0.1 mg/kg per day on exposure to the triclosan ( Jackson et al., 2018). Further studies reveal
that triclosan adversely affects the human reproductive systems ( Jurewicz et al., 2019). In an
approach, Ashrap and coworkers investigated that the phase I transformation of triclosan has
lethal effects on estrogen disruption as compared to the pristine triclosan (Ashrap et al., 2017).
The group further investigated that the structure of triclosan is similar to the thyroidal hor￾mone which may be assumed that the triclosan can act as thyroid interferon. Further, triclosan
content in human urine was reported to be adversely linked with serum thyroid function in￾dicators by Skarha and coworkers (Skarha et al., 2019), indicating that triclosan may impair
thyroid homeostasis and autoimmune. Additionally, triclosan can impact the growth of
plants, particularly crops, in addition to disrupting development and animal reproductive
systems. Chlamydomonas and Asterococcus superbus reinhardtii exhibited complete cell
breakdown after exposure to 1000 μg/L of triclosan for 29 days (Xin et al., 2019). According
to Sun and coworkers (Ishii et al., 2007) triclosan might induce the generation of H2O2 in
wheat root cells, resulting in auxin peroxide and inhibiting root growth.
19.3.3 Neurotoxicity
Triclosan can be destructive to the nervous system either functionally or structurally.
A very short exposure of triclosan (75 μg/L) for even 1 day can have a significant effect on
the swimming behavior of Pimephales promelas (Fritsch et al., 2013). In another investigation,
the delayed development of the trunk in Zebrafish was reported by Ma and coworkers upon
exposure to triclosan. This may result because of the change in signaling channels of Ca2+
functioning (Ma et al., 2019). Recent reports recommend that both mammals and fish may
show noteworthy behavioral syndromes after exposure to triclosan (Khan et al., 2019).
19.3.4 Carcinogenicity and immunotoxicity
Triclosan is also a probable carcinogen and can produce severe oxidative stress reactions
(Gou et al., 2014). In an in vitro study of prostate cancerous cells, Kim and coworkers reveal
that triclosan can enhance the metastasis as well as the proliferation of cells (Kim et al., 2015).
The production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was investigated by Zhang and coworkers.
The group found increased production of ROS upon the interference of triclosan with both
amino acid and purine metabolisms (Zhang et al., 2019). These findings proved that the ox￾idative stress prompted by triclosan is among the important bases of hepatocellular disease.
19.3.5 Combined toxicity
Recently, it has been documented that the interaction of major pollutants with triclosan can
be harmful. The adsorptive capacity of micro-plastics toward triclosan is fairly high, therefore
19.3 Toxicity and ecological effects of TCS 441
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricestheir combined exposure enhances the bio-toxicity of triclosan (Zhu et al., 2019). The alga
Eremosphaera viridis present in freshwater can have increased oxidative stress toxicity toward
triclosan in the presence of Titanium dioxide (TiO2) having a particle size in the range of
25 nm (Xin et al., 2019). Similarly, Oliver and coworkers demonstrated the hazardous effects
of triclosan in liposomes in the presence of other personal care and pharmaceutical products
(Oliver et al., 2020).
19.3.6 Inducing microbial resistance
Triclosan can produce a variety of pressure in bacteria for antibiotic confrontation which
decreases the efficiency of bactericides (Westfall et al., 2019). The abundance of resistant
strains in environmental matrices and the somewhat triclosan content were discovered to
have a strong positive association by Hartmann and coworkers (Heuer et al., 2019). Triclosan
exposure can alter the microbial community structure in sludge and sediments, lowering di￾versity and promoting antibiotic resistance (Drury et al., 2013). Triclosan also encourages the
transfer of antibiotic resistance genes not just between bacteria, but also their surroundings
(Thomas et al., 2012).
19.3.7 Toxic effect of transformed products
A variety of chlorine derivatives are produced by triclosan in the presence of free chlorine
by undergoing electrophilic substitution reactions (Fiss et al., 2007). These pathways are con￾sidered to be the major contributor of dioxin in the environment (Buth et al., 2010). While
methyl triclosan (major metabolite) is considered to be more stable compared to triclosan hav￾ing biological toxicity. This toxicity can easily be detected in fish tissues residing in polluted
water (Fu et al., 2020).
19.3.8 Ecosystem impact
The function and structure of the soil biomes of sandy soils by the presence of triclosan, this
investigation was carried out by Waller and coworkers (Balmer et al., 2004). This results in the
disruption of the soil nitrogen cycle. In freshwater microcosm research, 1 ng/L TCS exposure
for 7 days was capable of lowering the richness and evenness of the microbial community,
suggesting that TCS may have a deleterious impact on aquatic environments (Clarke
et al., 2019).
19.4 Treatment technologies for removing TCS
The potential dangers of triclosan to human health and aquatic ecosystems necessitate its
removal from wastewater treatment plant’s effluents on emergency basis. A number of re￾moval strategies are being adopted for the removal of triclosan from wastewater. These meth￾odologies may include oxidation (e.g., electrochemical oxidation ozonation, chlorination,
Fenton and photo-Fenton, and photocatalysis/photolysis), adsorption, reduction-oxidation,
442 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricescombined processes, and biodegradation, etc. The selection criterion of the treatment tech￾nique depends on chemical properties and industrial source of the wastewater. Herein, we
will discuss the adsorptive approach for the removal of triclosan from the wastewater.
19.5 Removal of TCS by adsorption techniques
Adsorption approaches are commonly used alternatives for the removal of polluting
agents from wastewater (Sun et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2017). Adsorption of triclosan by a va￾riety of adsorbents, including TCS-CTS-Fe0-MIPs, activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, diat￾omite, magnetic activated carbon, and MOFs have been extensively explored.
19.5.1 Activated carbon
A well-established porous structure, larger surface area, and different functionalities pre￾sent at the surface of carbon activated make it an ideal nanomaterial for the remediation of
different types of small organic molecules (pollutants) from wastewater (Frascari et al.,
2016; Hu et al., 2017). The presence of hydroxyl group in the structure of triclosan makes
it hydrophilic in nature. Various factor such as nature of adsorbent and adsorbate as well
as conditions of solution dictates the adsorption capacity (in solution form) of the compounds
belonging to the phenolic family. While for the hydrophilic compounds the surface function￾ality plays an important role as compared to the porosity of the material. In a number of
documented reports, it has been presented that the functionalities, such as pyrrole and pyr￾idine play a significant part in the removal of phenolic pollutants and increases the adsorption
capacity of the activated carbon (Chen et al., 2015). On the surface of activated carbon, these
fundamental functional groups can be achieved by decreasing oxygen functional groups or
increasing nitrogen functional groups (Frascari et al., 2016). In an approach, Fang et al. (2010)
calculated the removal efficiency of triclosan with the help of activated carbon. The group
found that the activated carbon can remove the triclosan up to 75% from the wastewater
(Fang et al., 2010). Similarly, Behera et al. (2010) investigate the influence of pH on the removal
efficiency of activated carbon. The group found that the adsorption ability increased with in￾creasing ionic strength and increasing pH first increases the adsorption capacity and then de￾creases. Also, the increasing concentration of humic acid results in decreased adsorption
efficiency. A 48.5 mg of triclosan per gram of carbon was the maximum adsorption capacity
of the material. According to these investigations, an adsorption is a promising approach for
removing triclosan from wastewater (Behera et al., 2010).
19.5.2 Magnetic activated carbon
The hydrochar made from rice straw is a carbon material having a lot of functional groups
involving oxygen on its surface, but its low porosity and surface area might restrict its use in
environmental decontamination (Falco et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2014). The activation of this
hydrochar can be carried out by using K2CO3 and this material is regarded as activated car￾bon. This activated carbon can be converted into magnetic carbon material by hydrothermal
19.5 Removal of TCS by adsorption techniques 443
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesco-precipitation reaction (Falco et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2014). This chemical activation and mag￾netization results in increased porosity and adsorption capability of the hydrochar (Liu et al.,
2014). This magnetically activated hydrochar has a fast adsorption rate, high surface area, and
adsorption capacity of (5  104 g/(mg min)), 674 m2
/g (120.0–217.1 mg/g), respectively in
the removal of triclosan from wastewater. Further, the magnetic hydrochar can easily be re￾covered from the wastewater by the application of external magnetic field.
19.5.3 Chitosan/carbon nanotubes based adsorbents
Based on the unique electrical, chemical, and mechanical properties, carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) are an emerging class of nanomaterials that are widely employed as catalyst and elec￾trode materials in a number of applications (Guo et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019).
Furthermore, due to the wide range of delocalized π-electrons and length scale on hexagonal
arrays/of carbon atoms in the graphene sheets, CNTs are regarded as the prodigious adsor￾bent candidates. Due to Van der Waals interactions, CNTs can accumulate into bunches in
water, forming vast groove regions and exterior surfaces that can be used for adsorption
(Hu et al., 2017). The presence of various functionalities such as dOH, dCOOH, and
dC]O groups impart significant degradation efficiency and mechanism to the CNTs. The
documented reports reveal that the CNTs are more efficient materials for the adsorptive re￾moval of contaminants. The higher adsorptive character is imparted by the efficient regener￾ation, short equilibrium time, and high adsorptive capacity (Hu et al., 2017). Regardless of the
fact that CNTs are costlier than activated carbons, they have a longer lifespan in water treat￾ment systems due to their better regeneration capability and adsorption efficiency. Greater
adsorption efficiency of CNTs has already been reported in a number of reports (Guo
et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019). According to Guo et al. (2019), novel chitosan/
MWCNTs have a phenol adsorption capacity of 86.96 mg/g, which is higher than chitosan
(61.70 mg/g) (Fig. 19.3). Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) can be used to remove
triclosan from water because they have a greater tendency to adsorb different contaminants
(Guo et al., 2019).
Zhou and coworkers demonstrated the pH-based removal of triclosan using MWCNTs.
The group examined that the acidic conditions enhance the adsorption of triclosan by using
MWCNTs. This enhanced removal of triclosan is supported by the deprotonated molecules.
On the other hand, at higher pH values the adsorption efficiency has a negative impact on the
process. An increase in adsorption was calculated as the ionic strength increases 1  103 to
1  102 mol/L. While further increase results in the decrease of adsorption capacity of
MWCNTs. More research is needed to improve the ability of MWCNTs to regenerate and
lower their operational costs on pilot and column scales (Guo et al., 2019; Zhou et al.,
2013). A combined experimental study and density functional theory were used to analyze
the interactions of triclosan on (5,5) and (8,0) single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). The
results showed that triclosan adsorption changed the electronic characteristics of SWCNTs,
with the changes being depending on the triclosan adsorption location (Castro et al., 2017).
Because of their interactions with triclosan molecules, these SWCNTs could potentially be
employed in water filter devices, allowing them to be removed from triclosan molecules after
use (Castro et al., 2017).
444 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matrices19.5.4 Diatomite
Aluminosilicates, like kaolinite, bentonite, and diatomite, are an attractive class of absor￾bents to remediate wastewater. They possess low costs, folded structures, high dispersity,
hydrophilicity, better ion exchange attributes, and broad sources of raw materials (Fei and
Li, 2015; Sharipova et al., 2017). Diatomite (SiO2nH2O), one of the aluminosilicates, has a po￾rous structure with 80%–90% voids and is a potential material for removing organic contam￾inants from water (Siddiqa et al., 2015; Tong et al., 2016). Sharipova et al. (2017) explored the
triclosan adsorption by diatomite, using scanning electron microscopy to analyze the diato￾mite morphology and a mass balance to determine the triclosan amount adsorbed on the di￾atomite. Based on Sips and Langmuir models, the calculated Gibbs free energy (ΔG) values
were 9.6 and 9.9 kJ/mol and adsorption capacity of 140 mg/g, respectively. The negative
represented physical and spontaneous adsorption in nature (Sharipova et al., 2017).
19.5.5 TCS-CTS-Fe0-MIP
Recently, a molecularly imprinted magnetic material (TCS-CTS-Fe0-MIP) has been
presented for the removal of triclosan. The magnetic molecularly imprinted material was
FIG. 19.3 Carbon nanotube-grafted chitosan and its phenol adsorptive ability in aqueous media (Guo et al., 2019).
19.5 Removal of TCS by adsorption techniques 445
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricescomposed of iron (0) as magnetic material, chitosan as functional monomer, and crosslinking
agent glutaraldehyde (Chen et al., 2017). Various researchers use this material for the detec￾tion and removal of triclosan in aqueous environments (Marques et al., 2017; Wan et al., 2019).
The as-prepared material is environment friendlier having a large number of hydroxyl and
amino groups as well as low cost and biodegradability. Further, the presence of Fe0 imparts a
large surface area and high magnetic properties (Chen et al., 2017). In comparison to non￾printed nanocomposite, the TCS-CTS-Fe0-MIP exhibits excellent adsorption of 20.9 mg/g
for triclosan (Chen et al., 2017). The Scatchard and SEM investigation exposed high adsorp￾tion capacity and homogeneous disseminated adsorption sites in an extensive range of pH
(6.0–9.0) (Chen et al., 2017). Furthermore, in complicated water samples, the TCS-CTS-Fe0-
MIP exhibits a high enrichment factor and selectivity for triclosan. Overall, adsorption is a
good way of removing triclosan from wastewater, especially if contains extensive organic
matter and a lot of triclosan. Triclosan, on the other hand, can only pass from the liquid to
the solid phases via adsorption processes, which might result in the formation of a new solid
residue and the concentration of triclosan. Triclosan adsorption using low-cost renewable
sources and persistent systems warrants more study.
19.5.6 Combined processes for TCS removal
Combined methods are likely to be important in removing organic contaminants from
wastewater because they can have overwhelmed the inherent limits of distinct treatment
methods ( Ji et al., 2016; Xin et al., 2016). Triclosan remediation from wastewater has shown
promise using a combination of enzyme and adsorption technologies (Liu et al., 2014; Xu
et al., 2014). Triclosan removal effectiveness was improved by integrating the biocatalytic ef￾ficiency of laccase with the elevated adsorptive capacity of mesoporous materials, according
to Xu et al. (2014). Laccase immobilization onto a nano-fibrous vinyl-modified poly(acrylic
acid)/SiO2 membrane was carried out by using a covalent crosslinking methodology ( Ji
et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2014). Immobilized laccase had superior storage stability and resistance
to changes in temperature and pH than free laccase, resulting in a substantially higher triclo￾san removal efficiency (65% in 2 h) than free laccase (29% in 2 h) under ideal conditions
(Xu et al., 2014). To maximize the stability and performance of the adsorption treatment meth￾odology for triclosan on an industrial scale the investigations on the process integration must
be carried out on an extensive level. As a result, integrated methods may take full benefit of
individual treatment techniques and offer a lot of potential for eliminating refractory organics
like triclosan from wastewater in the future.
19.5.7 Triclosan removal by MOFs
The mechanism involving adsorptive removals of organic compounds using MOFs follows
electrostatic, acid-base, non-covalent, hydrogen bonding, and hydrophobic interactions
(Hasan and Jhung, 2015). Rocı´o-Bautista et al. (2018) researched the functioning of five differ￾ent MOFs, MIL-53(Al), UiO-64, HKUST-1, MOF-5(Zn), and MOF-74(Zn), for determining and
decontaminating organic pollutants in environmental water (tap water and wastewater) via
miniaturized dispersive mode solid-phase extraction (D-μSPE). In this study, the MOFs were
446 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesdetermined to have adequate analytical performance and detection limits of triclosan down to
0.040 μg L1 by high-performance liquid chromatography with a diode-array detector
(HPLC-DAD) which motivates the study of how MOFs interaction with water contaminates.
A second study of MOFs and triclosan interactions using UiO-66 (Universitetet i Oslo),
which is made up of [Zr6O4(OH)4] clusters with 1,4-benzodicarboxylic acid struts, gives
insight into why MOFs are such efficient adsorbers. Sarker et al. (2018) compared the effec￾tiveness UiO-66(Zr), UiO-66-NH2(Zr), and UiO-66-NH-CO-COOH(Zr), which is UiO-66
modified with NH (UiO-66-NH2(Zr)) and COOH groups. As with triclosan adsorption, the
modified MOFs had better adsorption than the unmodified versions. The performances of
the TCS adsorbents were as follows: UiO-66-NH-CO-COOH(Zr) > UiO-66-NH2(Zr) >
UiO-66(Zr) > AC with UiO-66-NH-CO-COOH(Zr) adsorbing 2.4 times TCS than (qt) AC after
12 h (q12 h). Fascinatingly, the adsorption of TCS does not depend on the surface areas of the
adsorbents. In general, the surface area is a significant parameter in adsorption assuming sim￾ple Van der Waals interactions. Therefore, there must be a special interaction between UiO￾66-NH-CO-COOH and TCS because the modified MOF (showing the highest adsorption) had
the lowest surface area and pore volume than earlier investigated adsorbents. In a recent
study, Bariki et al. (2020) synthesized UiO-66/CdIn2S4 heterostructure nanocomposite for
the decontamination study of water (Fig. 19.4). Hierarchical 3D structured Cdln2S4 was
fabricated by a simple hydrothermal synthesis method, which was later used to incorporate
UiO-66 nanoparticles. The representative pollutant-contaminant triclosan was degraded un￾der visible light over UiO-66/CdIn2S4 photocatalyst. CIS is considered active materials for
TCS degradation, but the overall efficiency reported is 15%, which is smaller due to the rapid
coalesce of photogenerated electrons. A significant improvement in the degradation of TCS
was observed when UiO-66 was incorporated into CIS. Significantly, efficiency was increased
from 15% to 92%, which is 6% higher. The plausible reason for high removal efficiency is
UiO-66. The composite surface area was increased, and n-n heterojunction favored by
UiO-66 MOF improves the separation and movement of photogenerated electrons. Reproduc￾ibility was confined by performing several runs, and a marginal decrease in degradation
activity was noticed. Overall, it remains highly stable and active for the entire duration.
Qian et al. (2013)also added that MIL-53(Al) withstands high pH ranges (212) which pro￾motes this MOF as a potential candidate for use in water decontamination. It is reported that
meso-MIL-53(Al) was used as the support due to its chemical stability and favorable water. It
FIG. 19.4 Facile synthesis and
photocatalytic efficacy of UiO-66/
CdIn2S4 nanocomposites for triclosan re￾moval and H2 evolution (Bariki et al.,
2020).
19.5 Removal of TCS by adsorption techniques 447
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matriceswas functionalized with terephthalic acid (PTA) as an organic ligand to furnish plentiful car￾boxyl groups as the sites for binding and attaching laccase. The removal efficacies of triclosan
were mediated by free as well as carrier supported laccase on meso-MIL-53(Al) (Lac-MIL-53
(Al)). Although the catalytic efficiency (Vmax/Km) moderately lessens from 785 to 607 min1
due to the mass transfer limitation resulting from immobilization. However, Lac-MIL-53(Al)
showed higher stability and activity recovery (93.8%) ( Jia et al., 2019). Immobilizing laccase
on to MIL-53(AI) to Lac-MIL-53(Al) for degrading of TCS catalytically was a great step. FT-IR
spectroscopy revealed that TCS adsorption on representative MOFs was mainly due to hy￾drogen bonding which assists hydrophobic interactions. Dou et al. (2017) also suggested
the advantages of MIL-53(Al)s and proposed for water purification. Hydrophobicity assisted
by hydrogen bonding has been considered as key factor for the extraction of triclosan from
water. High concentration (up to 400 mg/g) of triclosan has been extracted by MIL-53(Al).
MOF-driven carbons, with well-preserved pores, were also studied for removal of organic
contaminates (Dou et al., 2017). An et al. (2018) described that mesoporous carbon derived
from pyrolysis of MAF-6at 1000°C showed superior adsorptive efficacy for PPCS like ibupro￾fen (408 mg g1
) and DCF (503 mg g1
). Herein, the adsorption of ibuprofen resulted from the
hydrophobic and Van der Waals interactions. Therefore, carbons derived by pyrolysis using
MAF-6 template (particularly in the presence of a KOH activator) also emerge as a promising
candidate for triclosan and other organic contaminants (An et al., 2018).
19.6 Conclusions and perspectives
Carbon-based nano-architectures are promising materials that exhibit extensive potential
as novel adsorbents to remove triclosan from aqueous environments. In the recent decade, a
large number of research articles have reported the carbon-based nano-architectures-assisted
elimination of emerging contaminants that indicates an intensive researcher’s interest in this
arena. These nanoadsorbents have revealed invariably superior adsorptive performance for
triclosan over the classic counterparts. A set of unique textural attributes such as tunable po￾rosity, large surface area, and the ability to functionalization render nanomaterials as robust
and high-quality adsorption candidates for triclosan than previous adsorbents. The mecha￾nism for effective removals of triclosan involves electrostatic, acid-base, non-covalent,
hydrogen bonding, and hydrophobic interactions.
Acknowledgment
Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı´a (MX) is thankfully acknowledged for partially supporting this work under
Sistema Nacional de Investigadores (SNI) program awarded to Hafiz M.N. Iqbal (CVU: 735340).
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
448 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesReferences
Adolfsson-Erici, M., Pettersson, M., Parkkonen, J., Sturve, J., 2002. Triclosan, a commonly used bactericide found in
human milk and in the aquatic environment in Sweden. Chemosphere 46 (9–10), 1485–1489.
An, H.J., Bhadra, B.N., Khan, N.A., Jhung, S.H., 2018. Adsorptive removal of wide range of pharmaceutical and per￾sonal care products from water by using metal azolate framework-6-derived porous carbon. Chem. Eng. J. 343,
447–454.
Arbuckle, T.E., Weiss, L., Fisher, M., Hauser, R., Dumas, P., Berube, R., Ayotte, P., 2015. Maternal and infant exposure
to environmental phenols as measured in multiple biological matrices. Sci. Total Environ. 508, 575–584.
Ashrap, P., Zheng, G., Wan, Y., Li, T., Hu, W., Li, W., Hu, J., 2017. Discovery of a widespread metabolic pathway
within and among phenolic xenobiotics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114 (23), 6062–6067.
Balmer, M.E., Poiger, T., Droz, C., Romanin, K., Bergqvist, P.-A., Muller, M.D., Buser, H.-R., 2004. Occurrence of €
methyl triclosan, a transformation product of the bactericide triclosan, in fish from various lakes in Switzerland.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 38 (2), 390–395.
Bariki, R., Majhi, D., Das, K., Behera, A., Mishra, B., 2020. Facile synthesis and photocatalytic efficacy of UiO-66/
CdIn2S4 nanocomposites with flowerlike 3D-microspheres towards aqueous phase decontamination of triclosan
and H2 evolution. Appl. Catal. Environ. 270, 118882.
Behera, S.K., Oh, S.-Y., Park, H.-S., 2010. Sorption of triclosan onto activated carbon, kaolinite and montmorillonite:
effects of pH, ionic strength, and humic acid. J. Hazard. Mater. 179 (1–3), 684–691.
Bilal, M., Mehmood, S., Iqbal, H., 2020. The beast of beauty: environmental and health concerns of toxic components in
cosmetics. Cosmetics 7 (1), 13.
Brausch, J.M., Rand, G.M., 2011. A review of personal care products in the aquatic environment: environmental con￾centrations and toxicity. Chemosphere 82 (11), 1518–1532.
Buth, J.M., Steen, P.O., Sueper, C., Blumentritt, D., Vikesland, P.J., Arnold, W.A., McNeill, K., 2010. Dioxin photoprod￾ucts of triclosan and its chlorinated derivatives in sediment cores. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 (12), 4545–4551.
Carmona, E., Andreu, V., Pico´, Y., 2014. Occurrence of acidic pharmaceuticals and personal care products in Turia
River basin: from waste to drinking water. Sci. Total Environ. 484, 53–63.
Castro, S., Arau´jo, A., Nogueira, R., Guerini, S., 2017. Adsorption of triclosan on single wall carbon nanotubes: a first
principle approach. Appl. Surf. Sci. 403, 519–524.
Chen, K., Lyu, H., Hao, S., Luo, G., Zhang, S., Chen, J., 2015. Separation of phenolic compounds with modified ad￾sorption resin from aqueous phase products of hydrothermal liquefaction of rice straw. Bioresour. Technol. 182,
160–168.
Chen, Y., Lei, X., Dou, R., Chen, Y., Hu, Y., Zhang, Z., 2017. Selective removal and preconcentration of triclosan using a
water-compatible imprinted nano-magnetic chitosan particles. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24 (22), 18640–18650.
Chiaia-Hernandez, A.C., Ashauer, R., Moest, M., Hollingshaus, T., Jeon, J., Spaak, P., Hollender, J., 2013.
Bioconcentration of organic contaminants in Daphnia resting eggs. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (18), 10667–10675.
Clarke, A., Azulai, D., Dueker, M.E., Vos, M., Perron, G.G., 2019. Triclosan alters microbial communities in freshwater
microcosms. Water 11 (5), 961.
Dhillon, G.S., Kaur, S., Pulicharla, R., Brar, S.K., Cledo´n, M., Verma, M., Surampalli, R.Y., 2015. Triclosan: current
status, occurrence, environmental risks and bioaccumulation potential. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
12 (5), 5657–5684.
Dou, R., Zhang, J., Chen, Y., Feng, S., 2017. High efficiency removal of triclosan by structure-directing agent modified
mesoporous MIL-53 (Al). Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24 (9), 8778–8789.
Drury, B., Scott, J., Rosi-Marshall, E.J., Kelly, J.J., 2013. Triclosan exposure increases triclosan resistance and influences
taxonomic composition of benthic bacterial communities. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (15), 8923–8930.
Falco, C., Marco-Lozar, J.P., Salinas-Torres, D., Morallon, E., Cazorla-Amoro´s, D., Titirici, M.-M., Lozano-Castello, D.,
2013. Tailoring the porosity of chemically activated hydrothermal carbons: influence of the precursor and hydro￾thermal carbonization temperature. Carbon 62, 346–355.
Fang, J.-L., Stingley, R.L., Beland, F.A., Harrouk, W., Lumpkins, D.L., Howard, P., 2010. Occurrence, efficacy, metab￾olism, and toxicity of triclosan. J. Environ. Sci. Health C 28 (3), 147–171.
Fei, J., Li, J., 2015. Controlled preparation of porous TiO2–ag nanostructures through supramolecular assembly for
plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis. Adv. Mater. 27 (2), 314–319.
Fiss, E.M., Rule, K.L., Vikesland, P.J., 2007. Formation of chloroform and other chlorinated byproducts by chlorination
of triclosan-containing antibacterial products. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41 (7), 2387–2394.
References 449
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesFrascari, D., Bacca, A.E.M., Zama, F., Bertin, L., Fava, F., Pinelli, D., 2016. Olive mill wastewater valorisation through
phenolic compounds adsorption in a continuous flow column. Chem. Eng. J. 283, 293–303.
Fritsch, E.B., Connon, R.E., Werner, I., Davies, R.E., Beggel, S., Feng, W., Pessah, I.N., 2013. Triclosan impairs swim￾ming behavior and alters expression of excitation-contraction coupling proteins in fathead minnow (Pimephales
promelas). Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (4), 2008–2017.
Fu, J., Tan, Y.X.R., Gong, Z., Bae, S., 2020. The toxic effect of triclosan and methyl-triclosan on biological pathways
revealed by metabolomics and gene expression in zebrafish embryos. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 189, 110039.
Gou, N., Yuan, S., Lan, J., Gao, C., Alshawabkeh, A.N., Gu, A.Z., 2014. A quantitative toxicogenomics assay reveals the
evolution and nature of toxicity during the transformation of environmental pollutants. Environ. Sci. Technol.
48 (15), 8855–8863.
Guo, M., Wang, J., Wang, C., Strong, P., Jiang, P., Ok, Y.S., Wang, H., 2019. Carbon nanotube-grafted chitosan and its
adsorption capacity for phenol in aqueous solution. Sci. Total Environ. 682, 340–347.
Hasan, Z., Jhung, S.H., 2015. Removal of hazardous organics from water using metal-organic frameworks (MOFs):
plausible mechanisms for selective adsorptions. J. Hazard. Mater. 283, 329–339.
Heuer, R.M., Galli, G.L., Shiels, H.A., Fieber, L.A., Cox, G.K., Mager, E.M., Crossley II, D.A., 2019. Impacts of Deep￾water horizon crude oil on mahi-mahi (Coryphaena hippurus) heart cell function. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (16),
9895–9904.
Hu, X., Cheng, Z., Sun, Z., Zhu, H., 2017. Adsorption of diclofenac and Triclosan in aqueous solution by purified
multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 26 (1).
Ishii, S., Bell, J., Marshall, F., 2007. Phytotoxic risk assessment of ambient air pollution on agricultural crops in Se￾langor state, Malaysia. Environ. Pollut. 150 (2), 267–279.
Jackson, E.N., Rowland-Faux, L., James, M.O., Wood, C.E., 2018. Administration of low dose triclosan to pregnant
ewes results in placental uptake and reduced estradiol sulfotransferase activity in fetal liver and placenta. Toxicol.
Lett. 294, 116–121.
Jackson-Browne, M.S., Papandonatos, G.D., Chen, A., Yolton, K., Lanphear, B.P., Braun, J.M., 2019. Early-life triclosan
exposure and parent-reported behavior problems in 8-year-old children. Environ. Int. 128, 446–456.
Ji, C., Hou, J., Wang, K., Zhang, Y., Chen, V., 2016. Biocatalytic degradation of carbamazepine with immobilized
laccase-mediator membrane hybrid reactor. J. Membr. Sci. 502, 11–20.
Jia, Y., Chen, Y., Luo, J., Hu, Y., 2019. Immobilization of laccase onto meso-MIL-53 (Al) via physical adsorption for the
catalytic conversion of triclosan. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 184, 109670.
Jurewicz, J., Wielgomas, B., Radwan, M., Karwacka, A., Klimowska, A., Dziewirska, E., Hanke, W., 2019. Triclosan
exposure and ovarian reserve. Reprod. Toxicol. 89, 168–172.
Kasprzyk-Hordern, B., Dinsdale, R.M., Guwy, A.J., 2008. The occurrence of pharmaceuticals, personal care products,
endocrine disruptors and illicit drugs in surface water in South Wales, UK. Water Res. 42 (13), 3498–3518.
Khan, H., Zafar, M., Patel, S., Shah, S.M., Bishayee, A., 2019. Pharmacophore studies of 1, 3, 4-oxadiazole nucleus:
Lead compounds as α-glucosidase inhibitors. Food Chem. Toxicol. 130, 207–218.
Kim, S.-H., Hwang, K.-A., Shim, S.-M., Choi, K.-C., 2015. Growth and migration of LNCaP prostate cancer cells are
promoted by triclosan and benzophenone-1 via an androgen receptor signaling pathway. Environ. Toxicol.
Pharmacol. 39 (2), 568–576.
Kralj, M.B., Fortuna, A., Abram, A., Trebsˇe, P., 2020. Dish handwashing: an overlooked source of contamination. En￾viron. Chem. Lett. 18 (1), 181–185.
Kumar, V., Chakraborty, A., Kural, M.R., Roy, P., 2009. Alteration of testicular steroidogenesis and histopathology of
reproductive system in male rats treated with triclosan. Reprod. Toxicol. 27 (2), 177–185.
Li, H., Wei, C., Zhang, D., Pan, B., 2019. Adsorption of bisphenol a on dispersed carbon nanotubes: role of different
dispersing agents. Sci. Total Environ. 655, 807–813.
Liu, Y., Zhu, X., Qian, F., Zhang, S., Chen, J., 2014. Magnetic activated carbon prepared from rice straw-derived
hydrochar for triclosan removal. RSC Adv. 4 (109), 63620–63626.
Ma, Z., Liu, H., Yu, H., 2019. Triclosan affects Ca2+ regulatory module and musculature development in skeletal
myocyte during early life stages of zebrafish (Danio rerio). Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (20), 11988–11998.
Marques, I., Magalh^aes-Mota, G., Pires, F., Serio, S., Ribeiro, P.A., Raposo, M., 2017. Detection of traces of triclosan in
water. Appl. Surf. Sci. 421, 142–147.
McMurry, L.M., Oethinger, M., Levy, S.B., 1998. Triclosan targets lipid synthesis. Nature 394 (6693), 531–532.
Miller, W.R., 1983. Motivational interviewing with problem drinkers. Behav. Cogn. Psychother. 11 (2), 147–172.
450 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesMorsi, R., Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.M., Ashraf, S.S., 2020. Laccases and peroxidases: the smart, greener and futuristic bio￾catalytic tools to mitigate recalcitrant emerging pollutants. Sci. Total Environ. 714, 136572.
Olaniyan, L., Mkwetshana, N., Okoh, A., 2016. Triclosan in water, implications for human and environmental health.
Springerplus 5 (1), 1–17.
Oliver, M., Kudłak, B., Wieczerzak, M., Reis, S., Lima, S.A., Segundo, M.A., Miro´, M., 2020. Ecotoxicological equilibria
of triclosan in Microtox, XenoScreen YES/YAS, Caco2, HEPG2 and liposomal systems are affected by the occur￾rence of other pharmaceutical and personal care emerging contaminants. Sci. Total Environ. 719, 137358.
Pycke, B.F., Roll, I.B., Brownawell, B.J., Kinney, C.A., Furlong, E.T., Kolpin, D.W., Halden, R.U., 2014. Transformation
products and human metabolites of triclocarban and triclosan in sewage sludge across the United States. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 48 (14), 7881–7890.
Qian, X., Yadian, B., Wu, R., Long, Y., Zhou, K., Zhu, B., Huang, Y., 2013. Structure stability of metal-organic frame￾work MIL-53 (Al) in aqueous solutions. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 38 (36), 16710–16715.
Rasheed, T., Bilal, M., Hassan, A.A., Nabeel, F., Bharagava, R.N., Ferreira, L.F.R., Iqbal, H.M., 2020. Environmental
threatening concern and efficient removal of pharmaceutically active compounds using metal-organic frame￾works as adsorbents. Environ. Res. 185, 109436.
Rocı´o-Bautista, P., Pino, V., Pasa´n, J., Lo´pez-Herna´ndez, I., Ayala, J.H., Ruiz-Perez, C., Afonso, A.M., 2018. Insights in
the analytical performance of neat metal-organic frameworks in the determination of pollutants of different nature
from waters using dispersive miniaturized solid-phase extraction and liquid chromatography. Talanta 179,
775–783.
Sanchı´s, J., Olmos, M., Vincent, P., Farre, M., Barcelo´, D., 2016. New insights on the influence of organic
co-contaminants on the aquatic toxicology of carbon nanomaterials. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50 (2), 961–969.
Sarker, M., Song, J.Y., Jhung, S.H., 2018. Carboxylic-acid-functionalized UiO-66-NH2: a promising adsorbent for both
aqueous-and non-aqueous-phase adsorptions. Chem. Eng. J. 331, 124–131.
Sharipova, A.A., Aidarova, S.B., Bekturganova, N.Y., Tleuova, A., Kerimkulova, M., Yessimova, O., Miller, R., 2017.
Triclosan adsorption from model system by mineral sorbent diatomite. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp.
532, 97–101.
Siddiqa, A., Shahid, A., Gill, R., 2015. Silica decorated CNTs sponge for selective removal of toxic contaminants and oil
spills from water. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 3 (2), 892–897.
Skarha, J., Mı´nguez-Alarco´n, L., Williams, P.L., Korevaar, T.I., de Poortere, R.A., Broeren, M.A., Braun, J.M., 2019.
Cross-sectional associations between urinary triclosan and serum thyroid function biomarker concentrations in
women. Environ. Int. 122, 256–262.
Sun, Y., Iris, K., Tsang, D.C., Cao, X., Lin, D., Wang, L., Ok, Y.S., 2019. Multifunctional iron-biochar composites for the
removal of potentially toxic elements, inherent cations, and hetero-chloride from hydraulic fracturing wastewater.
Environ. Int. 124, 521–532.
Thomas, K.V., Bijlsma, L., Castiglioni, S., Covaci, A., Emke, E., Grabic, R., Lindberg, R.H., 2012. Comparing illicit drug
use in 19 European cities through sewage analysis. Sci. Total Environ. 432, 432–439.
Tong, Y., Mayer, B.K., McNamara, P.J., 2016. Triclosan adsorption using wastewater biosolids-derived biochar. En￾viron. Sci.: Water Res. Technol. 2 (4), 761–768.
Unit, D.R., Robertshaw, H., 2007. Contact dermatitis to triclosan in toothpaste. Contact Dermatitis 57 (6), 383–384.
Usal, M., Regnault, C., Veyrenc, S., Couturier, K., Batandier, C., Bulteau, A.-L., Raveton, M., 2019. Concomitant ex￾posure to benzo [a] pyrene and triclosan at environmentally relevant concentrations induces metabolic syndrome
with multigenerational consequences in Silurana (Xenopus) tropicalis. Sci. Total Environ. 689, 149–159.
Vickers, N.J., 2017. Animal communication: when i’m calling you, will you answer too? Curr. Biol. 27 (14), R713–R715.
Wan, Z., Cho, D.-W., Tsang, D.C., Li, M., Sun, T., Verpoort, F., 2019. Concurrent adsorption and micro-electrolysis of
Cr (VI) by nanoscale zerovalent iron/biochar/ca-alginate composite. Environ. Pollut. 247, 410–420.
Westfall, C., Flores-Mireles, A.L., Robinson, J.I., Lynch, A.J., Hultgren, S., Henderson, J.P., Levin, P.A., 2019. The
widely used antimicrobial triclosan induces high levels of antibiotic tolerance in vitro and reduces antibiotic ef￾ficacy up to 100-fold in vivo. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 63 (5), e02312–e02318.
Xin, L., Sun, Y., Feng, J., Wang, J., He, D., 2016. Degradation of triclosan in aqueous solution by dielectric barrier dis￾charge plasma combined with activated carbon fibers. Chemosphere 144, 855–863.
Xin, X., Huang, G., An, C., Feng, R., 2019. Interactive toxicity of triclosan and nano-TiO2 to green alga Eremosphaera
viridis in Lake Erie: a new perspective based on Fourier transform infrared spectromicroscopy and synchrotron￾based X-ray fluorescence imaging. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (16), 9884–9894.
References 451
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesXu, R., Si, Y., Wu, X., Li, F., Zhang, B., 2014. Triclosan removal by laccase immobilized on mesoporous nanofibers:
strong adsorption and efficient degradation. Chem. Eng. J. 255, 63–70.
Yueh, M.-F., Tukey, R.H., 2016. Triclosan: a widespread environmental toxicant with many biological effects. Annu.
Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 56, 251–272.
Yueh, M.-F., Taniguchi, K., Chen, S., Evans, R.M., Hammock, B.D., Karin, M., Tukey, R.H., 2014. The commonly used
antimicrobial additive triclosan is a liver tumor promoter. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111 (48), 17200–17205.
Zhang, H., Shao, X., Zhao, H., Li, X., Wei, J., Yang, C., Cai, Z., 2019. Integration of metabolomics and lipidomics reveals
metabolic mechanisms of triclosan-induced toxicity in human hepatocytes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (9),
5406–5415.
Zhou, S., Shao, Y., Gao, N., Deng, J., Tan, C., 2013. Equilibrium, kinetic, and thermodynamic studies on the adsorption
of Triclosan onto multi-walled carbon nanotubes. CLEAN–Soil, Air, Water 41 (6), 539–547.
Zhou, Y., Liu, X., Xiang, Y., Wang, P., Zhang, J., Zhang, F., Tang, L., 2017. Modification of biochar derived from saw￾dust and its application in removal of tetracycline and copper from aqueous solution: adsorption mechanism and
modelling. Bioresour. Technol. 245, 266–273.
Zhu, Z.-L., Wang, S.-C., Zhao, F.-F., Wang, S.-G., Liu, F.-F., Liu, G.-Z., 2019. Joint toxicity of microplastics with triclo￾san to marine microalgae Skeletonema costatum. Environ. Pollut. 246, 509–517.
452 19. Toxicological impact and adsorptive removal of triclosan
III. Chitosan-based nanobiosorbents for deterioration of environmental matricesPART IV
Multifarious biopolymers as
nanobiosorbents for
decontamination of
environmental matricesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
20
Sorbent based on citrus peel waste
for wastewater treatment
Vesna Krstic
a,b
, Tamara Urosˇevic
a
, Marina Ud¯ilanovic
c
,
Andrija Ciri  c
c
, and Snezˇana Milic
b
a
Mining and Metallurgy Institute Bor, Bor, Serbia b
University of Belgrade, Technical Faculty Bor,
Bor, Serbia c
Faculty of Science, Chemistry Department, University of Kragujevac,
Kragujevac, Serbia
20.1 Introduction
The principal challenges to sustainable development are environmental protection, effec￾tive wastewater treatment, energy conservation, and socioeconomic aspects (Loncar et al.,
2019; Foo and Hameed, 2012; Cazetta et al., 2011). Meeting the needs of the human popu￾lation with currently available resources poses a threat to the future. It is known that min￾ing is one of the biggest polluters, and environmental protection is fundamental to
development, the economy, and modern society (Loncar et al., 2019). Negative impacts
on the environment have been shown in numerous papers, of which we highlight several
interesting publications by Dimitrijevic et al. (2014, 2016a, 2016b). Therefore it is necessary
to develop new, nontoxic, and inexpensive functional materials and methods (Đord¯ievski
et al., 2017; Pesˇic et al.,2020a; Mihailovic et al., 2018; Sovrlic et al., 2020). These methods can
be used for various purposes and to meet the growing demands of the human population
and environmental protection (Pesˇic et al., 2020b). Today important work is being done on
the development of new methods of bio-sorbent modification and the importance of
biosorption. The use of biomaterials as sustainable alternatives against environmental pol￾lution has increased. Citrus fruit biowaste from the food industry, in the form of orange,
lemon, mandarin, and grapefruit peels, can be utilized as biosorbents for water purification.
Due to its specific properties, carbon has found applications in wastewater treatment and
energy conservation.
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 455 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00020-4Carbon obtained from biomass and other materials can be used as a raw material for the
production of active carbon and carbon nanostructures. Activated carbon is used for vari￾ous nanocomposites and applications in water treatment (Acharya and Pal, 2020; Danish
and Ahmad, 2018; Wong et al., 2018). However, conventional methods for obtaining carbon
nanostructures are expensive and energy demanding. Therefore it is desirable to develop
new low-energy and inexpensive carbon nanostructures with appropriate properties.
Due to their unique properties, carbon nanocomposites are used in energy devices and
wastewater treatment processes. Currently, numerous studies are geared toward the devel￾opment of new carbon nanostructured materials with well-controlled surface and morpho￾logical properties, to achieve the desired level of practical efficiency (Gehrke et al., 2015;
Acharya and Pal, 2020).Trumic et al. (2012, 2013, 2015, 2016, 2017) investigated the mechanical
properties of precious metal alloys at high temperatures that could be successfully applied in
environmental protection in extreme conditions. Also, the test results could be compared
with the results of the synthesis and application of AC at high temperatures in extreme
conditions.
A large amount of waste and by-products come from the food industry. Citrus peel is an
agro-industrial waste generated from fruit processing in the juice industry. Robles Gutierrez
et al. (2018) emphasized that large amounts of citrus waste pose risks to the environment and
instead could be used or transformed into carbon materials that could be used in water treat￾ment. Citrus waste is an organic substance consisting of several forms of cellulose, lignin, and
pectin. These molecules are rich in carbon that can be successfully converted to activated car￾bon (AC) (Wan et al., 2020; Arun et al., 2021). Liu et al. (2017) showed heteroatom-doped po￾rous carbon derived from hydrothermally treated sewage sludge and this material showed
good adsorption capacity to remove azo dye. Thus, hydrocarbon became an excellent precur￾sor for the activation of porous carbon with a developed pore structure and adsorption char￾acteristics of 440.53 mg/g. Sevilla et al. (2011) obtained a high specific surface area of over
2000 m2
/g. They used superactive carbons from hydrothermally carbonized eucalyptus.
Also, they used activated carbon for high-density hydrogen storage.
Since waste from agro-industrial production based on citrus peel has proven to be a suit￾able raw material for the production of AC, this chapter will consider the physicochemical
characteristics of these materials and their application in water treatment. Activated carbon
obtained from citrus fruit waste has a large specific surface area and a large sorption capacity
compared to other adsorbents used in the water purification process. AC from citrus fruit
waste is a good and sustainable alternative and a good alternative to obtaining AC from lig￾nite materials derived from nonrenewable energy sources.
20.2 Characteristics of citrus peel waste
Citrus fruit waste, mainly produced by the juice industry, based on orange, mandarin, grape￾fruit, lemon, and pomelo fruit peels, can lead to environmental problems due to the large produc￾tion and physicochemical characteristics of the waste. It is a pollutant of soil, air, and water
(Robles Gutierrez et al., 2018). Waste material in the citrus fruit industry consists of bark, seeds,
and capillary membranes, which have a high level of organic matter and a low pH value. Such
456 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesphysicochemical properties indicate citrus waste is a potential environmental pollutant. Re￾searchers have seen a solution to this problem in the valorization of citrus waste and its transfor￾mationinto profitable components, from which sorbent materials can be prepared to purify water
from pollutants (Pavithra et al., 2021; Krstic et al., 2018; Urosˇevic et al., 2016). Research has shown
that the composition of orange peelis a potentialresource that can be used as an added valuein the
production of animal feed, biomethanization, and heat sources (Tsouko et al., 2020; Miran et al.,
2016). In this way, it is possible to reduce the harmful impact on the environment.
The chemical composition, taking the example of orange peel, Table 20.1, makes citrus
waste a suitable ecological biomaterial, usable in various ecological and industrial processes
(Bicu and Mustata, 2013; Romero-Canoa et al., 2019). The peel of citrus fruits contains soluble
sugars that consist mainly of fructose, glucose, and sucrose. Organic acids present in the citrus
peel include citric, oxalic, and succinic acids. Pectin is found in the fibers of oranges that are
part of the shell. Pectins can be soluble and insoluble in the form of protopectin (Robles Gu￾tierrez et al., 2018).
20.2.1 Sorption properties of citrus fruit waste
The amount of carbon in the peel of citrus fruits is one of the indicators that this waste ma￾terial has the potential to be used as a source for AC. Miran et al. (2016) presented in Table 20.2
the physicochemical characteristics of orange peel waste. The authors obtained results for ele￾mentary analysis (also called CHNS analysis) of cellulose and pectin, and a protein sample of
TABLE 20.1 Composition of dried orange peel (w/w dry basis).
Compounds Value (%) Method
1 Liposoluble fraction (crude fats, essential oils, resins, coloring
matters)
4.22 Hexane–trichloromethane
azeotrope
2 Alcohol soluble fraction (sugars, pectin, flavonoids) 49.1 Water-ethyl alcohol-toluene
azeotr.
3 Alcohol insoluble fraction (holocellulose, lignin, insoluble
pectin, protein, ash)
46.7 By difference
4 Holocellulose 21.7 (46.47) Sodium chlorite
5 Cellulosea 12.9 (27.62) Kurschner
6 Hemicellulosea 8.8 (18.85) By difference
7 Lignin 1.3 72% sulfuric acid
8 Protein 6.1 From nitrogen content
9 Ash 2.9 ASTM D1102-84 (2021)
10 Other compounds (insoluble pectin) 14.7
a Holocellulose, cellulose, and hemicellulose content values determined by reference to the weight of double extracted OP are enclosed within
parentheses.
Reprinted with permission of Elsevier, Bicu, I., Mustata, F., 2013. Optimization of isolation of cellulose from orange peel using sodium hydroxide
and chelating agents. Carbohydr. Polym. 98, 341–348 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.06.009.
20.2 Characteristics of citrus peel waste 457
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesorange peel was first dried 24 h at 50°C, crushed and homogenized. Moisture and ash were
determined within the technical analysis, which gives us a complete picture of the dry matter
characteristics of the analyzed sample. The results in Table 20.2 from Miran et al. (2016) show
that the citrus waste has high carbon and cellulose products.
To make it easier to understand the sorption mechanism of citrus fruit waste, Brønsted and
Lewis active centers are considered for the example of cellulose molecules. In general,
Brønsted centers are one of the significant factors in the sorption properties of materials
(Krstic, 2021b; You et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019; Krstic et al., 2021), and
they can help us understand the structure and mechanism sorption of cellulose molecules,
as an integral part of citrus peel waste. The mechanism of cellulose molecules depicting
Brønsted acid centers is shown in Fig. 20.1. Hydrolysis of cellulose through Brønsted acid cen￾ters breaks down β-1,4-glucoside bonds, resulting in the formation of glucose molecules.
Fig. 20.2 shows the Lewis acid centers together with the hydroxyl ions present in the aque￾ous solution at 190°C so that the cellulose is easily transformed into soluble oligosaccharides.
TABLE 20.2 Characteristics of orange peel powder waste.
Parameter Value (%)
Moisture 7.7  0.20
Ash 4.4  0.50
C 40.3  0.02
H 5.8  0.08
N 1.1  0.20
S 0.1  0.03
Protein 6.73  1.26
Pectin 25.4
Cellulose 17.5
Hemicellulose 8.6
Reprinted with permission of Elsevier, from Miran, W., Nawaz, M., Jang, J., Lee,
D.S., 2016. Conversion of orange peel. Waste biomass to bioelectricity using a
mediator-less microbial fuel cell. Sci. Total Environ. 547, 197–205. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.004.
FIG. 20.1 Mechanism of Brønsted acid formations in cellulose. Partly reprinted with permission of Elsevier from
Chambon, F., Rataboul, F., Pinel, C., Cabiac, A., Guillon, E., Essayem, N., 2011. Cellulose hydrothermal conversion promoted
by heterogeneous Brønsted and Lewis acids: remarkable efficiency of solid Lewis acids to produce lactic acid. Appl. Catal. B En￾viron. 105, 171–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2011.04.009.
458 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesChambon et al. (2011) showed how Lewis centers coordinate hydroxyl groups at position 2,
leading to easy cleavage of protonated ether bonds. In this way, an accelerated transformation
of soluble oligosaccharides plays a role, leading to a shift in cellulose depolymerization.
The number of insoluble oligosaccharides and other soluble polymers decreases in Lewis
acid centers. The authors concluded that Lewis acid centers are responsible for the reduced
soluble polymers. The strength and balance of Brønsted - Lewis acid centers can affect both
the improvement of biosorbent adsorption and the selective transformation of cellulose
molecules.
20.3 Conversion of citrus fruit waste to activated carbon
20.3.1 Characteristics of activated carbon
Due to its good physicochemical characteristics and exceptional sorption abilities, AC can
be used as a sorbent in water treatment. Activated carbon can be obtained from materials
of organic origin rich in carbon, traditionally coals and wood (Ud¯ilanovic et al., 2021).
Although natural coal is the most commonly used material for producing activated carbon,
O O
OH
HO O O
HO
OH
OH
OH
cellulose n
O O
OH
HO O O
HO OH
OH
OH
n'<n
H+
L
soluble oligosaccharides
O O
OH
HO O OHO
OH
OH
OH
n'<n
soluble oligosaccharides
(water
autoprotolysis)
H+
H+: water autoprotolysis
L : solid Lewis acid site
O O
OH
HO
OH L
OH + O
HO
OH
OH
+
H+ H2O
O
HO
OH
OH
HO
L OH
O O
OH
HO OH + :
:
scissions
L
O
OH
OH
OH
O HO
O
H+
OH+
OH
O HO
O
O
scissions
L
L OH + H+ L + H2O
step A
step B
( (
lactic acid
FIG. 20.2 Proposed mechanism of cellulose transformation in hydrothermal conditions in the presence of Lewis
acid centers. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Chambon, F., Rataboul, F., Pinel, C., Cabiac, A., Guillon, E., Essayem,
N., 2011. Cellulose hydrothermal conversion promoted by heterogeneous Brønsted and Lewis acids: remarkable efficiency of solid
Lewis acids to produce lactic acid. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 105, 171–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2011.04.009.
20.3 Conversion of citrus fruit waste to activated carbon 459
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesagro-industrial waste has proven to be a suitable alternative for obtaining AC. Activated car￾bon produced from organic waste would decrease the use of forests for these purposes
(Prahas et al., 2008).
Activated carbon is a porous carbon material that is subject to a gaseous reaction, some￾times with chemical agents, during or after the carbonization process to increase its specific
surface area and thus its sorption properties (Shen, 2020; Khan et al., 2019).
Today, activated carbon is obtained from lignite, wood, or synthetic polymers (resins). The
classical carbonization process yields about 20%–30% of carbon. The number of active sites
increases by using an activating agent, which modifies the porosity of the obtained material.
Many laboratories and industrial applications use activated carbon based on the high sorp￾tion capacity of this material. This capacity depends on the physical properties and chemical
structure of the coal (Khan et al., 2019; Shen, 2020; Ud¯ilanovic et al., 2021).
20.3.2 Activated carbon production and physicochemical properties
The physicochemical properties of activated carbon depend on the source of the starting
material. The starting material is the material that determines the structural characteristics of
the newly formed activated carbon (Arun et al., 2021; Wan et al., 2020; Eeshwarasinghe et al.,
2019). Through the process of carbonization, it is possible to obtain a small specific surface,
because then oxygen and hydrogen are lost in an inert atmosphere, which is mainly nitrogen.
The obtained activated carbon is formed from compounds of elemental carbon microcrystals.
These microcrystals are usually clogged with tar and carbonation residues and this reduces
the sorption capacity of the carbon material. To increase the sorption capacity of the material,
it is necessary to apply one of the methods that enable the removal of tar. This can be achieved
with the help of some oxidizing agents to remove the tar, and the surface of the carbon ma￾terial would then be activated (Shen, 2020; Robles Gutierrez et al., 2018). Activation can be
physical or chemical.
Physical or thermal activation is oxidation at high temperatures above 700°C (Shen,
2020) in the presence of water vapor and carbon dioxide or air. Then, in the first phase,
all volatile organic materials burn. In the second phase, the pores that are blocked
open and new material forms with a high specific surface area due to the high porosity
(Khan et al., 2019). In this way, an active carbon material with an extremely large specific
surface area forms.
Chemical activation involves the carbonization of cellulose-based biomaterials. The pres￾ence of alkaline hydroxides (KOH, NaOH, and their combination) or inorganic acids (HNO3,
H3PO4, H2SO4) can contribute to chemical activation (Khan et al., 2019; Shen, 2020). Activated
carbon is obtained to a greater extent by chemical activation than by thermal activation. In
physical activation, pores are formed by the gasification process, while in chemical activation
dehydrogenation reactions take place with the help of activating agents in the initial
biomaterial, which affect the formation of bonds between carbon atoms. Chemical activation,
unlike physical, is performed in one phase, where the process of carbonization and activation
is carried out simultaneously at lower temperatures. Thus chemical activation creates pores
on the surface of the activated carbon material. This is achieved as a consequence of the par￾ticle size of the starting material, activation temperature, heating rate, chemical activating
agent, and carbonation duration (Prahas et al., 2008; Shen, 2020).
460 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe determination of iodine number according to ASTM D4607-14 (2021) provides
information on the ability of carbon to adsorb other atoms and molecules. The iodine number
can be used as an approximate determination of the active surface area of activated carbons.
This method determines the relative level of activation of residual reactivated carbon by
adsorption of iodine from aqueous solution by determining the amount of absorbed iodine
in mg in 1 g of carbon, according to the conditions given in standard ASTM D4607-14
(2021). The iodine number serves to determine the adsorption property of activated carbon
on the surface and is expressed in mg/g of carbon, as opposed to the BET specific surface area
that is in m2
/g of carbon.
The structure of activated carbon is arranged equally to the carbon rings in space. How￾ever, activated carbon also has a three-dimensional form of carbon atoms in the planes of hex￾agonal rings. The spaces between the graphite planes of the crystals create a microporous
structure with a high inner surface (Khan et al., 2019).
In addition to the porous structure, activated carbons also have a chemical structure be￾cause they contain a small number of heteroatoms. The presence of heteroatoms (O, N, H,
S) attached to the edges of graphene layers leads to different surface functional groups (Khan
et al., 2019), which allow polar substances to be poorly retained on the surface of activated
carbon. That is because the carbon atoms located on the edges of the plane have high available
activity, as they are not saturated with carbon atoms and have free electrons (Robles Gutierrez
et al., 2018).
Cui et al. (2017) designed nanocarbon materials with a large specific surface area with a
hierarchical porosity and 2D/3D morphology for energy storage purposes. The authors
published a new approach to adjusting the morphology and structure of nanocarbon based
on methylcellulose. Due to the different activating agents, as shown in Fig. 20.3 (KOH and
N2
R=H or CH3
RO
RO
RO
OR
OR
OR
OR
O O
O O R
n
NaHCO3:
KOH:
(1) KOH
(1) KOH + NaHCO3 (2) Washing
Nanocarbons
(1) NaHCO3
FIG. 20.3 Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for the MCCs. (1) Methylcellulose is carbonized/activated
by sodium bicarbonate and/or potassium hydroxide with different mass ratios. (2) The MCC materials are liberated
by washing. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Cui, Y., Wang, H., Mao, N., Yu, W., Shi, J., Huang, M., Liu, W., Chen,
S., Wang, X., 2017. Tuning the morphology and structure of nanocarbons with activating agents for ultrafast ionic liquid-based
supercapacitors. J. Power Sources 361, 182–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.06.087.
20.3 Conversion of citrus fruit waste to activated carbon 461
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesNaHCO3), interconnected sheet metal-like carbons can be obtained, for example, with a large
specific surface area, up to 2285 m2
g1 and a thickness up to about 4 nm. This approach to
obtaining activated carbon with very large specific areas could serve as an idea for activating
natural carbon materials based on citrus fruit waste to also be applied in water treatment.
The surface chemistry of activated carbon has an amphoteric nature. Activated carbon is
generally either acidic or basic, depending on the surface concentration of acid and other sur￾face groups, and also depends on the strength of the acidic or basic compounds (Robles
Gutierrez et al., 2018; Shen, 2020). Therefore oxidized surface groups are classified into a
few categories.
20.3.3 Possible surface groups on activated carbon materials
The elementary surface groups form when the oxidized surface is reduced in an inert or
hydrogen atmosphere at high temperatures. Degradation of acidic groups creates
active sites at the edges of graphene surfaces that attract oxygen during the cooling
phase in an inert atmosphere. After the process of reexposure to air, basic-functional
groups are formed.
Boehm (1994) gave an overview of the surface chemistry of carbon blacks and other car￾bons, particularly activated carbons. He considered surface oxides and chemical methods,
such as surface functional groups. Boehm (1994) concludes that reactions with free organic
radicals can be used to functionalize the carbon surface. Carboxyl groups, lactams and phe￾nolic groups are “acidic” surface oxides. Boehm (1994) identified these acidic groups by neu￾tralizing them with different bases. Acid groups were determined by the Boehm titration (BT)
method (Boehm, 2002; Schonherr et al., 2018 € ). Schonherr et al. (2018) found that BT can €
be applied to a wide range of carbon materials when a sufficient amount of sample is
provided and when the samples are sufficiently hydrophilic. In Table 20.3, Schonherr et al. €
(2018) provided advantages and disadvantages for the determination of surface groups of
carbon materials containing oxygen, using BT, Thermal Programmed Desorption (TPD-MS
Method) by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
and elemental analysis (EA).
When the surface of carbon materials is exposed to oxygen in the presence of oxidizing
agents, acidic surface groups are formed, both at room temperature and high temperatures,
both in gaseous media and in solutions. The parameters mentioned, together with the pH of
the solution, are responsible for the amphoteric characteristics of the activated carbons. The
presence of acidic surface functional groups, which are significantly present on the surface of
activated carbon materials, was determined by BT. The presence of carboxyl groups is com￾patible with the values obtained by Boehm titration.
Hydrogen atoms appear on the surface of active carbon materials in the composition of other
surface groups such as amines, carboxylic acids and phenols. Hydrogen atoms also occur as
chemisorbedwater or are directly attached to carbon atoms, as part of aliphatic or aromatic rings.
Phosphorus atoms in active carbon materials usually originate from phosphoric acid,
when the activation is performed with phosphoric acid, during the carbonization process
at low temperatures. Phosphorus can be bound in activated carbon, directly to carbon or
via oxygen, and is stable between 500°C and 1000°C.
462 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices20.3.4 Conversion of orange peel waste into activated carbon and its application
Tovar et al. (2019) in Table 20.4 show the collected literature data of various researchers
from 1993 to 2016, which relate to the conditions of preparation and chemical activation that
led to the carbonization of waste from orange peel. Table 20.4 also shows the specific areas
(SBET) of activated carbon obtained from orange peel waste and the degree of adsorption
(qe) for various pollutants of organic and inorganic origin.
Although all plants contain pectin, and its composition and quality vary depending on the
plant from which it is extracted, the method of its production, and the environmental condi￾tions. Pectins are used in the food industry as gelling agents. Depending on the origin and
extraction process, carboxyl groups are partially esterified with methanol, while in certain
pectins the hydroxyl groups are partially acetylated. Orange peel is a very good source of pec￾tin, which is also found in other fruits and vegetables, mainly from the juice industry. Given
TABLE 20.3 General characteristics, advantages, and disadvantages of methods for the characterization
of oxygen-containing surface groups.
Methods Characteristics/advantages Disadvantages
BT  probes the surfaces of the whole sample (outer and
inner surfaces) that are accessible to liquid reactants
 absolute values are received (short evaluation time)
 high precision
 sample can be recovered though not in its pristine state
 cost-effective
 quantification of acidic oxygen
groups only
 low robustness (results
sensitive to changes in the
experimental procedure)
 larger sample amounts might
be required
TPD-MS/
TGA
 pyrolysis of the sample
 probes the volume of nearly the
whole sample
 detection of nearly all existing oxygen
groups (outer and inner surfaces and
particle interior)
 low personal workload for measurement
 deconvolution required for
quantification of specific groups
 destructive method
XPS  probes the outer surface and subsurface on
top of the sample
 detection of nearly all existing oxygen groups
 very little sample amount needed
 nondestructive
 deconvolution required for
quantification of specific groups
 interference of different groups
at same binding energies
 relevant spectra influenced by
surface impurities
EA  burns the sample
 probes the volume of the whole sample
 fast method
 no quantification of specific
groups,
 delivers only total amounts of
elements
 destructive method
Reprinted without special permission; published by MDPI, Journal of Carbon Research C from Schonherr, J., Buchheim, J.R., Scholz, P., Adelhelm, €
P., 2018. Boehm titration revisited (part II): a comparison of Boehm titration with other analytical techniques on the quantification of oxygen￾containing surface groups for a variety of carbon materials. J. Carbon Res. C 4(2), 22. https://doi.org/10.3390/c4020022.
20.3 Conversion of citrus fruit waste to activated carbon 463
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricestheir composition pectins, can be defined as polymers that mainly consist of chains of poly-α￾D-galacturonic acid units linked by glycosidic bonds. Due to different properties, pectins can
be (a) high methoxyl pectin (HM), i.e., with more than 50% of carboxyl groups esterified with
methyl radicals, and (b) low methoxyl pectin (LM), which means with less than 50%
esterified.
TABLE 20.4 Review of properties, conditions, and carbonization process for orange peel.
Pretreatment Chemical activation Carbonization Properties
T
(°C)
Time
(h)
Part. Size
(mm) Agent
Conc.
(%)
Time
(h)
T
(°C) Atm.
T
(°C)
Time
(h)
SBET
(m2
g21
)
qe
(mg/g) Pollut.
–– – H3PO4 85 – Air 400 0.5 – 149.4 Methylene blue
400 1.5 149.8
800 0.5 149.9
70 2 – H3PO4 800 1.5 149.7
105 96 0.5 H2SO4 – –– Air 400 0.5 470.5 409.4 Methylene blue
105 96 0.5 H2SO4 98 6 – Air 150 12 – Direct blue-86
105 5 – H2SO4 98 10 – Air 120 24 – Direct blue N-106
– 72 – H3PO4 98 2 – Air 180 2 – Direct yellow 12
– – 2 H3PO4 85 24 120 Air 500 1 – Cane juice
32 2 100 N2 450 2 943 – Nitrogen
36 1032
40 1111
48 1203
120 24 – KOH 60 – – Ar 550 4 897 40 Cd (cadmium)
42 Cr (chrome)
69 Co (cobalt)
60 – 0.5–1 H3PO4 50 2 110 475 0.5 1090 320 Methylene blue
– 522 Rhodamine B
– – 2 H3PO4 40 24 80 N2 450 3 451 – Phenol
– 24 0.2 HCl – –– N2 500 2 754 – Fe (iron)
110 1 – HCl 1 N 12 – – 300 1 – 983 I (iodine)
80 24 – KOH 1 M – – N2 800 2.5 1892 680.2 Methyl orange
Symbols: T, temperature; Part. Size, particle size; Conc., concentration; Atm., atmosphere; SBET, specific surface; qe, degree of adsorption.
Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Tovar, A.K., Godı´nez, L.A., Espejel, F., Ramı´rez-Zamora, R.-M., Robles, I., 2019. Optimization of the
integral valorization process for orange peel waste using a design of experiments approach: production of high-quality pectin and activated carbon.
Waste Manag. 85, 202–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.12.029.
464 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTovar et al. (2019) analyzed AC prepared from pectin. Preparation of the AC depends
on the activating agent, the impregnation temperature, the time, and the carbonization
temperature, as shown in Table 20.4. The active materials for the preparation of activated
carbon, based on literature data, are as shown by Tovar et al. (2019) in Tables 20.4 and
20.5. The processes shown do not require additional activation means.
20.3.5 Preparation and characterization of activated carbon from citrus peel waste
Fig. 20.4 shows a comparison of the surface morphology of orange peel and activated car￾bon obtained from orange peel (Tovar et al., 2017, 2019). It can be seen that, after the carbon￾ization treatment, the surface is modified by a thermal process and an activating agent. The
carbonization process leads to the formation of new surface sites.
TABLE 20.5 Pectin extraction conditions for orange peel.
Extraction method Extracting agent
Conditions
Yield (%)a Time (h) Temperature (°C) pH l:s ratio
Acid hydrolysis C4H6O6 (0.1% w) 0.5 45 – – 0.98
Microwave H2O 0.25 150 2 100:8.2 1.6
Acid hydrolysis HCl 0.75 – 2.2 – 1.68
Soxhlet extraction H2O 6 100 4.5 200:16 3.6
Acid hydrolysis HCl (0.5 M) 1 80 2 – 5.1
Microwave Ethanol (0.05 M) 0.25 120 5.5 16:1 5.27
Soxhlet extraction H2O and EDTA 3 100 – 16:1 5.27
Acid hydrolysis HCl 1 90 2 – 6.08
Acid hydrolysis HCl 0.67 – 1.5–3 – 6.50
Acid hydrolysis HNO3 0.5 90–097 2.5 – 10.9
Acid hydrolysis – 8 95 4.2 – 13.24
Acid hydrolysis HCl (0.5 M) 1.5 80–82 1 50:1 15.47
Acid hydrolysis C6H8O7 0.5 90–97 2.5 – 17.75
Water extraction H2O 1.5 95 – 25:1 17.95
Acid hydrolysis HCl 1 85 1.6 60:1 19.3
Hydrolysis Resine MB-1 1 85 1.6 60:1 20.5
C.PC process HCl (0.1 M) 0.75 90 – – 21.8
Acid hydrolysis HCl (0.1 M) 2 95 1.6 6:1 29.37
a Dry basis (db).
Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Tovar, A.K., Godı´nez, L.A., Espejel, F., Ramı´rez-Zamora, R.-M., Robles, I., 2019. Optimization of the
integral valorization process for orange peel waste using a design of experiments approach: production of high-quality pectin and activated carbon.
Waste Manag. 85, 202–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.12.029.
20.3 Conversion of citrus fruit waste to activated carbon 465
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe Fourier transform with infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is one of the most commonly used
instrumental methods for determining the surface functional groups of activated carbon
obtained from orange peel, as shown in Fig. 20.5 (Dhelipan et al., 2017).
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is also used to characterize the functionality of car￾bon surfaces, as it provides useful information on the binding of photoelectron energies of
C1s, N1s, O1s, and S2p surface groups. XPS confirms the presence of different surface groups
on the carbon material, as well as the effect of local environments and the state of bonding of
neighboring atoms. To identify the functionality of oxygen it is more convenient to measure
the C1s signal, as shown in Fig. 20.6A. Carbon atoms differ in their energy, depending on the
number of oxygen atoms to which they are attached, and then the corresponding signal
appears in the main C1s spectrum of carbon bonds (C-C, C-N, C-O, C¼O, O-C¼O); see
Fig. 20.6 (Wan et al., 2020).
Activated carbon prepared from orange peel has a higher sorption capacity compared to
dried orange peel, which means that the modification of orange peel into carbon material
FIG. 20.4 SEM micrography comparison of samples: (A) precursor OP and (B) activated carbon. Reprinted with
permission of Elsevier from Tovar, A.K., Godı´nez, L.A., Espejel, F., Ramı´rez-Zamora, R.-M., Robles, I., 2019. Optimization
of the integral valorization process for orange peel waste using a design of experiments approach: production of high-quality pec￾tin and activated carbon. Waste Manag. 85, 202–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.12.029.
3500
92
94
96
98
100
92
94
96
98
100
3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500
3500
3858.21
3800.36
3722.49
3309.96
2920.66
2853.26
2406.36
2317.78
1600.50
1594.41
1434.07
1370.99
1264.96
973.40
884.30
496.00
3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500
Wave number (1/cm) Wave number (1/cm)
3900 3400 2900 2400 1900 1400 900 400
0
60
80
20
40
Orange peel 100
Orange peel Activated Carbon
Transmitance (%)
Transmitance (%)
FIG. 20.5 FTIR spectrum of (A) OP-AC and (B) orange peel and activated carbon. Modified after (Panel A) Journal of
Saudi Chemical Society from Dhelipan, M., Arunchander, A., Sahu, A.K., Kalpana, D., 2017. Activated carbon from orange peels
as supercapacitor electrode and catalyst support for oxygen reduction reaction in proton exchange membrane fuel cell. J. Saudi
Chem. Soc. 21, 487-494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jscs.2016.12.003 and (Panel B) Wastewater and Water Quality from Robles
Gutierrez, I., Tovar, A.K., Godı´nez, L.A., 2018. (Chapter 11): Sustainable sorbent materials obtained from orange peel as an
alternative for water treatment, ed. Wastewater and Water Quality. IntechOpen https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.76137
466 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceshas a great advantage. The obtained carbon material has the physicochemical ability and
capacity to be used in the process of treatment of water contaminated with various pollut￾ants. However, it is necessary to continue the examination of the possibilities and the con￾ditions under which carbon materials could be used to remove heavy metals,
organochloride compounds, pesticides, and paints, to provide greater efficiency and a good
alternative for environmental protection.
20.4 Electrochemical properties of active carbon materials based
on citrus fruits
The use of carbon based on citrus waste (e.g., grapefruit) as an electrode material is due to
its relatively low production costs and chemical stability in different solutions and its wide
temperature range. Romero-Canoa et al. (2019) used adequate methods for obtaining elec￾trode material with a large specific surface area, and a controlled pore distribution that de￾termines the electrode–electrolyte contact boundary at which electrochemical reactions take
place. Powdered carbon materials have been intensively studied as highly efficient catalysts,
electrode materials for electrochemical capacitors, electrocatalysts for fuel cells, and hydro￾gen storage materials (Alvarado Avila et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Niu et al., 2017) (Fig. 20.7).
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Raw
Background
C-C
C-C
C=O O-C=O OPC-900 C-O
C-N
C-C
C=O O-C=O OPC-800 C-O
C-N
C-C
C=O
-C=O
-COOH
-C-OH/-C-O-C
-C-S-C-
-C-SOx-C-
-C-SOx-C-
-C-SOx-C-
-C-SOx-C-
-C=S
-C-S-C-
-C-S-C-
-C-S-C-
-C=S
-C=S
-C=S
N-6
N-6
N-6
N-6
N-5
N-5
N-5
N-5
N-Q
N-Q
N-Q
N-Q
N-X
N-X
N-X
N-X
-C=O
-C=O
-C=O
-COOH
-COOH
-COOH
-C-OH/-C-O-C
-C-OH/-C-O-C
-C-OH/-C-O-C
O-C=O OPC-700
C-O
C-N
C-C
280 282 284 286
Binding energy (eV)
Binding energy (eV)
Intensity (a.u.) Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.) Intensity (a.u.)
288 290 292 394 396 398 400 402 404 406 408
C=O O-C=O OPC-0
OPC-900
OPC-800
OPC-700
OPC-0
OPC-900
OPC-800
OPC-700
Binding energy (eV)
Binding energy (eV)
OPC-0
OPC-900
OPC-800
OPC-700
OPC-0
C-O
C-N
Sum
Pyridone
Pyridone
Pyridone
Pyridone
526 528 530 532 534 536 538 540 160 162 164 166 168 170 172
Background
Raw
Sum Background
Raw
Sum
Background
Raw
Sum
FIG. 20.6 High-resolution XPS survey of (A) C1s, (B) N1s, (C) O1s and (D) S2p spectra of OPC-0, OPC-700, OPC￾800 and OPC-900. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Wan, L., Chen, D., Liu, J., Zhang, Y., Chen, J., Du, C., Xie, M.,
2020. Facile preparation of porous carbons derived from orange peel via basic copper carbonate activation for supercapacitors.
J. Alloys Compd. 823 153747. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.153747.
20.4 Electrochemical properties of active carbon materials based on citrus fruits 467
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 20.7 Modified carbon paste electrode prepared from waste grapefruit peels. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Romero-Canoa, L.A., Zarate￾Guzman, A.I., Carrasco-Marin, F., Gonzalez-Gutierrez, L.V., 2019. Electrochemical detection of copper in water using carbon paste electrodes prepared from bio-template
(grapefruit peels) functionalized with carboxyl groups. J. Electroanal. Chem. 837, 22–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2019.02.005.Carbon paste electrodes from modified grapefruit peel waste, which is functionalized with
carboxyl groups, provide excellent electrochemical response for the detection of copper ions
present in aqueous solutions. The prepared electrode provides a new and economical mate￾rial for the detection of Cu2+ ions with a detection limit of 2.5 mg L1
. The electrode proposed
by Romero-Canoa et al. (2019) has advantages in cheap electrode production material, ease of
operation, low cost, high sensitivity, and good repeatability.
Electrode performance and the area of application are mainly determined by textural
properties and surface groups, which depend on the conditions of carbon material synthesis
(Portet et al., 2007; Krstic et al., 2021). Storage of the charge in the form of a double electric
layer at the electrochemical capacitor implies electrostatic adsorption of electrolyte ions on
the oppositely charged electrode, without transfer of charge through the electrode/electro￾lyte boundary. The contribution of surface storage of charge in the total amount of stored
charge on a carbon material depends not only on the structure of pores and surface groups
on that material, but also on the nature of the electrolytic solution (Wei and Yushin, 2011;
Wang et al., 2015). Research is focused mainly on the development of carbon materials with
a large specific surface area to obtain adequate characteristics. Although the aim is to synthe￾size materials with the most developed specific surface, to get the largest possible amount of
stored charge, it has been shown that this is not always the rule. A group of authors showed
that the specific capacity at the electrode surface increases with increasing surface area
(Raymundo-Pin˜ ero et al., 2006). However, literature data also show the capacity increases
with decreasing specific surface area (Chen et al., 2008). Depending on the type of carbon,
both views can be accepted (Hulicova et al., 2009). This means that in addition to the specific
surface area, other parameters can determine the performance of a carbon capacitor. Elec￾trode properties are also affected by electrical conductivity, the presence of surface hetero￾atoms, and pore size (Largeot et al., 2008).
Dimensionally stable electrodes (DSEs) are successfully used in the wastewater treatment
process (Krstic and Pesˇovski, 2019, 2021; Krstic, 2021a), so attention could be paid to the con￾ditions under which activated carbon electrodes, based on citrus fruit waste, could be
adapted and applied in the process of wastewater treatment to remove organic and inorganic
pollutants.
20.5 Regeneration of active carbon material
Regeneration of saturated activated carbon material after use in various wastewater treat￾ment processes is one of the processes for the quality use of this material. McQuillan et al.
(2018) pointed out that the most commonly used method, regeneration of saturated activated
carbon, is based on physical (thermal), chemical, and biological treatments. The thermal
process involves treating saturated carbon at high temperatures in an inert atmosphere,
which leads to the decomposition or desorption of pollutants. During high-temperature
regeneration of saturated activated carbon from water purification, the very complex
physicochemical processes depend on several factors. The efficiency of regeneration of
activated carbon depends on the mechanism of these processes, and thus the possibility of
20.5 Regeneration of active carbon material 469
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesrestoring its adsorption capacity and its reapplication (El Gamal et al., 2018; McQuillan
et al., 2018).
The large number of chemical compounds that are adsorbed from wastewater and their
mutual influences during pyrolysis and carbonization, as well as different conditions of
production and origin of activated carbons, make it difficult to predict their behavior in
the process of high-temperature regeneration. The process itself is most often performed
in electric furnaces, while thermogravimetric analysis (TG), derived thermogravimetric
analysis (DTG), and differential thermal analysis (DTA) are most commonly used to
monitor the process. However, Salvador et al. (2015) highlight the shortcomings of this
technology. These include the high energy consumption, weight loss, and the possible
creation of hazardous by-products that pollute the environment. Also, reduction of
specific surface area and low adsorption capacity in an appropriate protective atmosphere
is not used.
In addition to commercial methods for AC regeneration physically at high temperatures
(McQuillan et al., 2018), alternative methods of oxidation by ultraviolet radiation,
gamma radiation, ozonation, electrochemical methods, and electro-Fenton reactions can
be used (Ferra´ndez-Go´mez et al., 2021a, b; Santos et al., 2020). According to Santos et al.
(2020), technologies based on advanced oxidative processes are a good alternative for
AC regeneration, as they are very effective in removing toxic pollutants from AC, are easy
to handle, and are inexpensive.
Berenguer et al. (2010) point out that the electrochemical process is one of the most
important substitutes for the thermal method due to its high efficiency, lower cost, low elec￾tricity consumption, and low CO2 emissions and it is an environmentally friendly technology.
Ferra´ndez-Go´meza et al. (2021b) examined the electrochemical regeneration of granular ac￾tivated carbon saturated with organic pollutants used in drinking water. A treatment reactor
at a pilot scale, as an alternative to thermal regeneration, was used. The authors observed two
cases of pilot plants (a) with parallel plate electrodes and (b) with concentric cylindrical elec￾trodes. Ferra´ndez-Go´meza et al. (2021b) used dimensionally stable anodes (DSAs) based on
platinum-group metals (PGMs), and the observed parameters were systematized and are
shown in Tables 20.6 and 20.7.
In both cases (a) with parallel plate electrodes and (b) with concentric cylindrical
electrodes, under certain experimental conditions, SBET can be renewed and AC regenerated
up to about 95%, which confirms that electrochemical methods can be a suitable
alternative to traditional thermal regeneration. Using electrodes designed in this way,
Ferra´ndez-Go´meza et al. (2021a, b) found satisfactory regeneration efficiencies with a drastic
reduction in electricity consumption compared to conventional electrochemical reactors.
According to the authors, both systems have advantages and disadvantages. A better restored
porous texture is due to the contact between the electrode and the AC, which is regenerated.
DSAs adapted for this purpose can be used for a better and cheaper electrolysis process and
more efficient regeneration of AC (Krstic and Pesˇovski, 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Krstic, 2021a;
Ferra´ndez-Go´meza et al., 2021b). However, efforts should be made to overcome the negative
phenomenon of this method, which refers to the additional oxidation of AC concerning the
spent carbon material. Further research should be focused on the use of electrochemical
methods with DSA and determination of operating conditions, as well as on the regeneration
of ACs used in wastewater treatment contaminated by heavy metals. The results that
470 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFerra´ndez-Go´meza et al. (2021a) presented indicate the sustainability of the electrochemical
method for AC regeneration on an industrial level.
20.6 Discussions
Using agro-industrial citrus fruit waste and its transformation into activated carbon pro￾vides an alternative with low material costs to enable wastewater treatment. Xiao et al. (2020)
TABLE 20.6 Physicochemical characterization of textural properties by N2 and CO2 adsorption-desorption
isotherms, TPD and pHPZC of pristine spent, washing and electrochemically regenerated AC in parallel plate
reactor configuration. All experiments were carried out with 15 kg of spent AC, under cathodic conditions,
applying 70 A during 4 h, using 0.5 M H2SO4 as electrolyte solution and a flow rate of 750 L/h.
Sample
SBET
(m2
/g)
VDR,N2
(cm3
/g)
VDR,
CO2 (cm3
/g)
Vmeso
(cm3
/g)
%
RPa
%
ARb
CO
(μmol/g)
CO2
(μmol/g)
O
(μmol/g)
pH
PZC
Pristine 995 0.36 0.30 0.04 566 178 922 10.4
Spent 790 0.32 0.24 0.03 2668 1462 5592 7.3
Washing 870 0.35 0.25 0.04 87 30 2275 1361 4997 2.1
PPR1 (Pt/Ti)
Reg-1h 910 0.34 0.27 0.04 92 59 2928 867 4663 2.2
Reg-2h 955 0.40 0.32 0.04 96 81 3095 791 4677 1.9
Reg-3h 1020 0.41 0.27 0.04 103 112 3294 820 4935 1.9
Reg-4h 970 0.39 0.25 0.04 98 88 3202 907 5015 1.8
PPR2 (RuO2/Ti)
Reg-1h 945 0.37 0.30 0.03 95 76 2892 839 4570 2.2
Reg-2h 900 0.36 0.29 0.03 91 54 2520 750 4020 1.9
Reg-3h 840 0.34 0.27 0.04 84 24 2889 1055 4998 1.9
Reg-4h 800 0.33 0.27 0.03 80 5 2960 874 4708 2.0
PPR3 (IrO2/Ti)
Reg-1h 910 0.37 0.28 0.04 92 59 3422 947 5315 2.1
Reg-2h 870 0.35 0.28 0.04 87 39 3725 989 5703 2.1
Reg-3h 910 0.37 0.28 0.04 92 59 3292 917 5127 1.9
Reg-4h 875 0.35 0.27 0.04 88 42 3149 866 4882 2.0
a %RP—recovery of porosity. b %AR—adsorption recovery.
Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Ferra´ndez-Go´meza, B., Cazorla-Amoro´sb, D., Morallo´n, E., 2021b. Feasibility of electrochemical
regeneration of activated carbon used in drinking water treatment plant. Reactor configuration design at a pilot scale. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot.
148, 846–857.
20.6 Discussions 471
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesdeveloped a new hydrothermal method by improving the physical and chemical properties
of orange peel waste and its ability to sorb pollutants from wastewater. This method involves
activation at 600–800˚C. Nitrogen-containing groups (pyridine-N, pyridone-N and graphi￾cally-N) with hydrocarbons and urea with K2CO3 and the KOH as activation intermediate
generated ammonia. Consequently, a more porous carbon structure with a high specific
surface area formed. The sample obtained in this way had a low nitrogen content and a
3053 m2
g1 specific area, extremely large. This specific surface area was 63% larger than the
specific surface area of porous carbon obtained by conventional methods. Xiao et al. (2020)
TABLE 20.7 Physicochemical characterization of textural properties by N2 and CO2 adsorption-desorption
isotherms, TPD and pHPZC of pristine spent, washing and electrochemically regenerated AC in concentric
cylindrical reactor configuration.
Sample
SBET
(m2
/g)
VDR,N2
(cm3
/g)
VDR,
CO2 (cm3
/g)
Vmeso
(cm3
/g)
%
RPa
%
ARb
CO
(μmol/g)
CO2
(μmol/g)
O
(μmol/g)
pH
PZC
Pristine 995 0.36 0.30 0.04 566 178 922 10.4
Spent 790 0.32 0.24 0.03 2668 1462 5592 7.3
Washing 870 0.35 0.25 0.04 87 39 2275 1361 4997 2.1
CCR1 (Pt/Ti)
Reg-1h 855 0.35 0.29 0.03 86 32 2421 1001 4424 2.0
Reg-2h 815 0.33 0.26 0.04 82 12 2336 864 4064 1.8
Reg-3h 950 0.38 0.27 0.04 96 78 2766 1068 4902 1.9
Reg-4h 830 0.34 0.26 0.03 83 20 3069 925 4919 1.9
CCR2 (RuO2/Ti)
Reg-1h 810 0.33 0.24 0.04 81 10 3252 1122 5496 2.2
Reg-2h 840 0.34 0.27 0.04 84 24 2773 997 4766 2.0
Reg-3h 820 0.33 0.26 0.04 82 15 2138 878 3895 2.0
Reg-4h 900 0.36 0.27 0.04 91 54 2814 1069 4952 2.0
CCR3 (IrO2/Ti)
Reg-1h 895 0.36 0.27 0.04 90 51 2595 986 4566 2.4
Reg-2h 880 0.35 0.27 0.04 88 44 2737 971 4680 2.4
Reg-3h 875 0.35 0.27 0.04 88 42 2742 966 4675 2.2
Reg-4h 935 0.37 0.27 0.04 94 71 2638 1025 4688 2.2
a %RP—recovery of porosity.
b %AR—adsorption recovery
All experiments were carried out with 10 kg of spent AC, under cathodic conditions, applying 27.5 A during 4 h, using 0.5 M H2SO4
as electrolyte solution and a flow rate of 750 L/h.
Reprinted with permission of Elsevier from Ferra´ndez-Go´meza, B., Cazorla-Amoro´sb, D., Morallo´n, E., 2021b. Feasibility of electrochemical
regeneration of activated carbon used in drinking water treatment plant. Reactor configuration design at a pilot scale. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot.
148, 846–857ron. Prot. 148, 846–857.
472 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesfound that there is a linear relationship between an increase in specific surface area and a
relative decrease in nitrogen content and porous carbon at the activation temperature. Thus
synthesized highly porous carbon in the presence of urea proved to be an excellent sorbent
for weakly polar pollutants such as toluene and iodine.
Reis et al. (2020) calculated the functional density theory to better understand the
adsorption mechanism of Cu2+, Cr2+ and Cd2+ in cellulose. Based on MEP (molecular elec￾trostatic potential), FMO (molecular limit orbitals), and reactivity index, Reis et al. (2020)
have shown that it is possible to predict the site of interaction of metal ions with cellulose.
Based on QTAIM (the quantum theory of atoms in molecules) analysis, the authors
showed that the cellulose interaction acetate and Cr2+, and cellulose and Cu2+, are electro￾static in nature and the interactions with Cd2+ were partially covalent. The researchers also
calculated the electron interaction energies of metal ions and cellulose, and Cr2+ ion binds
most efficiently to cellulose compared to Cu2+and Cd2+ ions. Menazea et al. (2020) inves￾tigated the theoretical possible interactions between pollutants (Ni, Cu, As, Cd, and Pb)
and adsorbers (cytosine and graphene oxide modified biopolymer) in the process of
wastewater treatment. They used functional density theory (DFT: B3LYP/LANL2DZ
model) to observe possible interactions between heavy metals and adsorbents. The pro￾posed model was applied to study the interaction between oxygen-containing adsorbent
and nitrogen-containing groups and their interactions with isolated heavy metals. The in￾teraction between the composite adsorber and the metal showed more selectivity for
metals than the base adsorber. These results theoretically obtained can be applied to
environmental pollution by removing heavy metals from industrial wastewater. In this
way, research can be directed toward the further application of environmentally friendly
methods in the future. Further experimental research can be conducted based on the
results obtained theoretically or their modification. It is possible to expect the result of
the reaction by using these and similar theoretical predictions. Also, it is possible to con￾duct experimental research so that the desired results can be achieved as soon as possible,
saving both time and resources in people and chemicals.
The connection between experimental research and theoretical calculations using the
semiempirical Multiple Minima Hypersurface methodology and Density Functional The￾ory is an essential element in new and more efficient activated carbon formed to develop
a method for wastewater treatment. Calculations in quantum chemistry and the study of
interactions at the level of molecules and pH of solutions in competitive adsorption can
be expected to be of great importance for future research (Melchor-Rodrı´gueza et al.,
2021; Marenich et al., 2009).
20.7 Conclusion and future perspectives
Sorption using citrus fruit waste is one of the alternatives for obtaining quality activated
carbon from cheap agro-industrial waste. Carbon materials are among the oldest materials
used and have proven to function well in water purification from pollutants. Even though
carbon materials are more expensive than other sorbents, they have proven to be very effec￾tive adsorbents for water purification due to their exceptional strength and porous texture,
20.7 Conclusion and future perspectives 473
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceswhich gives them a large specific surface area. The adsorption capacity of carbon materials
can be improved by their surface modification and by introducing organic functional groups
(-NH2, -COOH and -OH). Functional groups tend to increase the surface area and volume of
pores, responsible for the sorption of pollutants. In this way, the surface charge is reduced and
the surface adsorption is improved, which provides an opportunity to create a new genera￾tion of carbon-based adsorbents.
Theoretical predictions based on the application of quantum chemistry and possible the￾oretical calculations for the use of citrus fruit waste and its modification into activated carbon,
as a potential sorbent for wastewater treatment, would be an effective tool for testing citrus
material as a potential adsorbent. In this way, the course of future experimental research
could be assessed in advance and predicted, which would be of inestimable importance
for further investigations. Today we are working on developing new methods or improving
existing ones by modifying experimental conditions, together with quantum chemistry data,
to better understand the adsorption process in water treatment.
Investing efforts and connecting the knowledge and experience of researchers in theoret￾ical and experimental research could lead to faster, more efficient, and cheaper solutions in
the process of water purification from pollutants. A joint effort would also lead to a better
understanding of the adsorption mechanism as a significant factor in solving the problem
of wastewater treatment.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Serbia for the financial support of
Grant No 451-03-9/2021-14/200052 and No 451-03-9/2021-14/200131.
References
Acharya, A., Pal, P.K., 2020. Agriculture nanotechnology: translating research outcome to field applications by
influencing environmental sustainability. NanoImpact 19, 100232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.impact.2020.100232.
Alvarado Avila, M.I., Toledo-Carrillo, E., Dutta, J., 2020. Improved chlorate production with platinum nanoparticles
deposited on fluorinated activated carbon cloth electrodes. Clean. Eng. Technol. 1, 100016.
Arun, S., Uday Venkat Kiran, K., Mithin Kumar, S., Karnan, M., Sathish, M., Mayavan, S., 2021. Effect of orange peel
derived activated carbon as a negative additive for lead-acid battery under high rate discharge condition. J. Energy
Storage 34, 102225.
ASTM D1102-84, 2021. Standard Test Method for Ash in Wood.
ASTM D4607-14, 2021. Standard Test Method for Determination of Iodine Number of Activated Carbon.
Berenguer, R., Marco-Lozar, J.P., Quijada, C., Cazorla-Amoros, D., Morallon, E., 2010. Electrochemical regeneration
and porosity recovery of phenol-saturated granular activated carbon in an alkaline medium. Carbon 48 (10),
2734–2745.
Bicu, I., Mustata, F., 2013. Optimization of isolation of cellulose from orange peel using sodium hydroxide and che￾lating agents. Carbohydr. Polym. 98, 341–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.06.009.
Boehm, H.P., 1994. Some aspects of the surface chemistry of carbon blacks and other carbons. Carbon 32 (5), 759–769.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0008-6223(94)90031-0.
Boehm, H.P., 2002. Surface oxides on carbon and their analysis: a critical assessment. Carbon 40 (5), 145–149. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0008-6223(01)00165-8.
Cazetta, A.L., Vargas, A.M.M., Nogami, E.M., Kunita, M.H., Guilherme, M.R., Martins, A.C., Silva, T.L., Moraes, J.C.
G., Almeida, V.C., 2011. NaOH-activated carbon of high surface area produced from coconut shell: kinetics and
474 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesequilibrium studies from the methylene blue adsorption. Chem. Eng. J. 174, 117–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2011.08.058.
Chambon, F., Rataboul, F., Pinel, C., Cabiac, A., Guillon, E., Essayem, N., 2011. Cellulose hydrothermal conversion
promoted by heterogeneous Brønsted and Lewis acids: remarkable efficiency of solid Lewis acids to produce lactic
acid. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 105, 171–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2011.04.009.
Chen, X.L., Li, W.S., Tan, C.L., Li, W., Wu, Y.Z., 2008. Improvement in electrochemical capacitance of carbon materials
by nitric acid treatment. J. Power Sources 184 (2), 668. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.05.073.
Cui, Y., Wang, H., Mao, N., Yu, W., Shi, J., Huang, M., Liu, W., Chen, S., Wang, X., 2017. Tuning the morphology and
structure of nanocarbons with activating agents for ultrafast ionic liquid-based supercapacitors. J. Power Sources
361, 182–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.06.087.
Danish, M., Ahmad, T., 2018. A review on utilization of wood biomass as a sustainable precursor for activated carbon
production and application. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 87, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.02.003.
Dhelipan, M., Arunchander, A., Sahu, A.K., Kalpana, D., 2017. Activated carbon from orange peels as supercapacitor
electrode and catalyst support for oxygen reduction reaction in proton exchange membrane fuel cell. J. Saudi
Chem. Soc. 21, 487–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jscs.2016.12.003.
Dimitrijevic, M., Urosˇevic, D., Milic, S., Urosˇevic, T., 2014. Copper extraction from copper smelter slag with pyrite or
flotation tailings followed by waterleaching.Min.Metall. Eng. Bor 2334-8836. 4, 157–164. https://doi.org/10.5937/
MMEB1404157D. http://www.irmbor.co.rs/images/izdavastvo/casopisi/engineering/mmebor4_14.pdf.
Dimitrijevic, M.D., Urosˇevic, D.M., Jankovic, Z.D., Milic, S.M., 2016a. Recovery of copper from smelting slag by
sulphation roasting and water leaching. Physicochem. Probl. Miner. Process. 52 (1), 409–421. https://doi.org/
10.5277/ppmp160134.
Dimitrijevic, Nujkic, M.M., Alagic, S.C., Mili  c, S.M., Tosˇic, S.B., 2016b. Heavy metal contamination of topsoil and parts
of peach-tree growing at different distances from a smelting complex. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 13 (2), 615–
630. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13762-015-0905-z.
Đord¯ievski, S., Sovrlic, Z., Urosˇevic, T., Petrovic, J., Krstic, V., 2017. Preventing decomposition of 2-
mercaptobenzothiazole during gas chromatography analysis using programmable temperature vaporization in￾jection. J. Serb. Chem. Soc. 82 (10), 1147–1153. https://doi.org/10.2298/JSC161114041D.
Eeshwarasinghe, D., Loganathan, P., Vigneswaran, S., 2019. Simultaneous removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocar￾bons and heavy metals from water using granular activated carbon. Chemosphere 223, 616–627.
El Gamal, M., Mousa, H.A., El-Naas, M.H., Zacharia, R., Judd, S., 2018. Bio-regeneration of activated carbon: a com￾prehensive review. Sep. Purif. Technol. 197, 345–359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2018.01.015.
Fang, J., Zheng, W., Liu, K., Lia, H., Li, C., 2020. Molecular design and experimental study on the synergistic catalysis
of cellulose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural with Bronsted-Lewis acidic ionic liquids. Chem. Eng. J. 385,
123796. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.123796.
Ferra´ndez-Go´meza, B., Ruiz-Rosas, R., Beaumont, S., Cazorla-Amoros, D., Morallon, E., 2021a. Electrochemical regen￾eration of spent activated carbon from drinking water treatment plant at different scale reactors. Chemosphere
264, 128399.
Ferra´ndez-Go´meza, B., Cazorla-Amoro´sb, D., Morallo´n, E., 2021b. Feasibility of electrochemical regeneration of ac￾tivated carbon used in drinking water treatment plant. Reactor configuration design at a pilot scale. Process. Saf.
Environ. Prot. 148, 846–857.
Foo, K.Y., Hameed, B.H., 2012. Potential of jackfruit peel as precursor for activated carbon prepared by microwave
induced NaOH activation. Bioresour. Technol. 112, 143–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.01.178.
Gehrke, I., Geiser, A., Somborn-Schulz, A., 2015. Innovations in nanotechnology for water treatment. Nanotechnol.
Sci. Appl. 8, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.2147/NSA.S43773.
Hulicova, D., Seredych, M., Lu, G.Q., Bandosz, T.J., 2009. Combined effect of nitrogen- and oxygen-containing func￾tional groups of microporous activated carbon on its electrochemical performance in supercapacitors. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 19 (3), 438. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.200801236.
Khan, T.A., Sajidah Saud, A., Jamari, S.S., Ab Rahim, M.H., Park, J.-W., Kim, H.-J., 2019. Hydrothermal carbonization
of lignocellulosic biomass for carbon rich material preparation: a review. Biomass Bioenergy 130, 105384. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2019.105384.
Krstic, V., 2021a. Some effective methods for treatment of wastewater from Cu production. In: Inamuddin, Ahamed,
M.I., Lichtfouse, E. (Eds.), Water Pollution and Remediation: Heavy Metals. Environmental Chemistry for a Sus￾tainable World. 53. Springer, pp. 313–440, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52421-0_12.
References 475
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesKrstic, V., 2021b. Role of zeolite adsorbent in water treatment. In: Handbook of Nanomaterials for Wastewater Treat￾ment, Fundamentals and Scale Up Issues Micro and Nano Technologies. Elsevier, pp. 417–481, https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-821496-1.00024-6 (Chapter 14).
Krstic, V., Pesˇovski, B., 2019. Reviews the research on some dimensionally stable anodes (DSA) based on titanium.
Hydrometallurgy 185, 71–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hydromet.2019.01.018.
Krstic, V., Pesˇovski, B., 2021. Novel multifunctional two layer catalytic activated titanium electrodes for various tech￾nological and environmental processes. Arab. J. Chem. 14 (4), 103101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
arabjc.2021.103101.
Krstic, V., Urosˇevic, T., Pesˇovski, B., 2018. A review on adsorbents for treatment of water and wastewaters containing
copper ions. Chem. Eng. Sci. 192, 273–287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2018.07.022.
Krstic, V., Ud¯ilanovic, M., Urosˇevic, T., Simonovic, D., Milic, S., Ciri  c, A., Pesˇovski, B., 2021. The use of activated car￾bon from citrus fruit waste, as an alternative method in environmental protection. Copper 46 (2), 1–10 (in Serbian).
Largeot, C., Portet, C., Chmiola, J., Taberna, P.L., Gogotsi, Y., Simon, P., 2008. Relation between the ion size and pore
size for an electric double-layer capacitor. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 2730. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja7106178.
Liu, T., Li, Y., Peng, N., Lang, Q., Xia, Y., Gai, C., Zheng, Q., Liu, Z., 2017. Heteroatoms doped porous carbon derived
from hydrothermally treated sewage sludge: structural characterization and environmental application. J. Envi￾ron. Manag. 197, 151–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.03.082.
Liu, Z., Ren, B., Ding, H., He, H., Deng, H., Zhao, C., Wang, P., Dionysio, D.D., 2020. Simultaneous regeneration of
cathodic activated carbon fiber and mineralization of desorbed contaminations by electro-peroxydisulfate pro￾cess: advantages and limitations. Water Res. 171, 115456. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115456.
Loncar, D., Paunkovic, J., Jovanovic, V., Krstic, V., 2019. Environmental and social responsibility of companies across
European Union countries – panel data analysis. Sci. Total Environ. 657, 287–296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2018.11.482.
Marenich, A.V., Cramer, C.J., Truhlar, D.G., 2009. Universal solvation model based on solute electron density and on a
continuum model of the solvent defined by the bulk dielectric constant and atomic surface tensions. J. Phys.
Chem. B 113, 6378–6396. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp810292n.
McQuillan, R.V., Stevens, G.W., Mumford, K.A., 2018. The electrochemical regeneration of granular activated car￾bons: a review. J. Hazard. Mater. 355, 34–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.04.079.
Melchor-Rodrı´gueza, K., Gaspardb, S., Ja´uregui-Hazaa, U.J., 2021. Chlordecone adsorption on functionalized acti￾vated carbons: computational chemistry as a tool for understanding the adsorption process. Quim Nova 44
(2), 172–179.
Menazea, A.A., Ezzat, H.A., Omara, W., Basyouni, O.H., Ibrahim, S.A., Mohamed, A.A., Tawfik, W., Ibrahim, M.A.,
2020. Chitosan/graphene oxide composite as an effective removal of Ni, Cu, As, Cd and Pb from wastewater.
Comput. Theor. Chem. 1189, 112980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comptc.2020.112980.
Mihailovic, N.R., Mihailovic, V.B., Kreft, S., Ciri  ca, A.R., Joksovic, L.G., Đurd¯evic, P.T., 2018. Analysis of phenolics in
the peel and pulp of wild apples (Malus sylvestris (L.) Mill.). J. Food Compos. Anal. 67, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jfca.2017.11.007.
Miran, W., Nawaz, M., Jang, J., Lee, D.S., 2016. Conversion of orange peel. Waste biomass to bioelectricity using a
mediator-less microbial fuel cell. Sci. Total Environ. 547, 197–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2016.01.004.
Niu, Z., Wang, Y., Lin, H., Jin, F., Li, Y., Niu, J., 2017. Electrochemically enhanced removal of perfluorinated com￾pounds (PFCs) from aqueous solution by CNTs-graphene composite electrode. Chem. Eng. J. 328,
228–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.07.033.
Pavithra, S., Thandapani, G., Sugashini, S., Sudha, P.N., Alkhamis, H.H., Alrefaei, A.F., Almutairi, M.H., 2021. Batch
adsorption studies on surface tailored chitosan/orange peel hydrogel composite for the removal of Cr(VI) and
cu(II) ions from synthetic wastewater. Chemosphere 271, 129415.
Pesˇic, M., Milic, S., Nujkic, M., Maric, M., 2020a. Determination of heavy metal concentration and correlation analysis
of turbidity: a case study of the Zlot source (Bor, Serbia). Water Air Soil Pollut. 231 (3), 98. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11270-020-4453-x.
Pesˇic, M., Milic, S., Nujkic, M., Maric, M., 2020b. The impact of climatic parameters on the turbidity and natural or￾ganic matter content in drinking water in the City of Bor (eastern Serbia). Environ. Earth Sci. 79 (11), 267. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12665-020-09016-0.
Portet, C., Yushin, G., Gogotsi, Y., 2007. Electrochemical performance of carbon onions, nanodiamonds, carbon black
and multiwalled nanotubes in electrical double layer capacitors. Carbon 45 (13), 2511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbon.2007.08.024.
476 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesPrahas, D., Kartika, Y., Indraswati, N., Ismadji, S., 2008. Activated carbon from jackfruit peel waste by H3PO4 chem￾ical activation: pore structure and surface chemistry characterization. Chem. Eng. J. 140 (1–3), 32–42. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2007.08.032.
Raymundo-Pin˜ ero, E., Kierzek, K., Machnikowski, J., Beguin, F., 2006. Relationship between the nanoporous texture
of activated carbons and their capacitance properties in different electrolytes. Carbon 44 (12), 2498. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbon.2006.05.022.
Reis, D.T., Ribeiro, I.H.S., Pereira, D.H., 2020. DFT study of the application of polymers cellulose and cellulose acetate
for adsorption of metal ions (Cd2+, Cu2+ and Cr3+) potentially toxic. Polym. Bull. 77, 3443–3456. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00289-019-02926-5.
Robles Gutierrez, I., Tovar, A.K., Godı´nez, L.A., 2018. Sustainable sorbent materials obtained from orange peel as an
alternative for water treatment. In: Wastewater and Water Quality. IntechOpen, https://doi.org/10.5772/
intechopen.76137 (Chapter 11).
Romero-Canoa, L.A., Zarate-Guzman, A.I., Carrasco-Marin, F., Gonzalez-Gutierrez, L.V., 2019. Electrochemical de￾tection of copper in water using carbon paste electrodes prepared from bio-template (grapefruit peels)
functionalized with carboxyl groups. J. Electroanal. Chem. 837, 22–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jelechem.2019.02.005.
Salvador, F., Martin-Sanchez, N., Sanchez-Hernandez, R., Sanchez-Montero, M.J., Izquierdo, C., 2015. Regeneration of
carbonaceous adsorbents. Part I: thermalregeneration. Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 202, 259–276. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.micromeso.2014.02.045.
Santos, D.H.S., Duarte, J.L.S., Tonholo, J., Meili, L., Zanta, C.L.P.S., 2020. Saturated activated carbon regeneration by
UV-light, H2O2 and Fenton reaction. Sep. Purif. Technol. 250. 117112.
Schonherr, J., Buchheim, J.R., Scholz, P., Adelhelm, P., 2018. Boehm titration revisited (part II): a comparison of Boehm €
titration with other analytical techniques on the quantification of oxygen-containing surface groups for a variety of
carbon materials. J. Carbon Res. C 4 (2), 22. https://doi.org/10.3390/c4020022.
Sevilla, M., Fuertes, A.B., Mokaya, R., 2011. High density hydrogen storage in superactivated carbons from hydro￾thermally carbonized renewable organic materials. Energy Environ. Sci. 4, 1400. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c0ee00347f.
Shen, Y., 2020. A review on hydrothermal carbonization of biomass and plastic wastes to energy products. Biomass
Bioenergy 134, 105479. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2020.105479.
Sovrlic, Z., Urosˇevic, D., Mikic, M., Milivojevic, M., Krstic, V., Ud¯ilanovic, M., Vasiljevic, S., 2020. Determination of
chloride in soil by ionic chromatography. Copper 45 (1), 24–39 (in Serbian).
Tovar, A.K., Arano, M.J., Domı´nguez, O., Robles, I., 2017. Characterization and evaluation of sorbent materials
obtained from orange peel as an alternative of sustainable materials for water treatment. Int. J. Chem. React.
Eng. 15, 20170013. https://doi.org/10.1515/ijcre-2017-0013.
Tovar, A.K., Godı´nez, L.A., Espejel, F., Ramı´rez-Zamora, R.-M., Robles, I., 2019. Optimization of the integral valori￾zation process for orange peel waste using a design of experiments approach: production of high-quality pectin
and activated carbon. Waste Manag. 85, 202–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.12.029.
Trumic, B., Gomidzˇelovic, L., Trujic, V., Krstic, V., Stankovic, D., 2012. Comparative analysis of high temperature
strength of platinum and its binary alloys with low content of alloying element. Chem. Ind. 66 (3), 395–401 (in
Serbian) https://doi.org/10.2298/HEMIND110718106T.
Trumic, B., Gomidzˇelovic, L., Marjanovic, S., Krstic, V., Ivanovic, A., Dimitrijevic, S., 2013. Pt-Rh alloys: investigation
of creep rate and rupture time at high temperatures. Mater. Test. 55 (1), 38–42. https://doi.org/10.3139/
120.110406.
Trumic, B., Gomidzˇelovic, L., Marjanovic, S., Krstic, V., Ivanovic, A., Dimitrijevic, S., 2015. Pt-Rh alloys: investigation
of tensile strength and elongation at high temperatures. Arch. Metall. Mater. 2 (60), 643–647. https://doi.org/
10.1515/amm-2015-0186.
Trumic, B., Gomidzˇelovic, L., Marjanovic, S., Ivanovic, A., Krstic, V., Dimitrijevic, S., 2016. Pt-Pd system: investigation
of mechanical properties. Kovove Mater. 54, 139–145. https://doi.org/10.4149/km_2016_2_139.
Trumic, B., Gomidzˇelovic, L., Marjanovic, S., Ivanovic, A., Krstic, V., 2017. Platinum-based alloys: investigation of the
effect of impurities content on creep rate, rupture time and relative elongation at high temperatures. Mater. Res. 20
(1), 191–199. https://doi.org/10.1590/1980-5373-mr-2016-0240.
Tsouko, E., Maina, S., Ladakis, D., Kookos, I.K., Koutinas, A., 2020. Integrated biorefinery development for the ex￾traction of value-added components and bacterial cellulose production from orange peel waste streams. Renew.
Energy 160, 944–954. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.05.108.
References 477
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesUd¯ilanovic, M., Krstic, V., Ciri  c, A., Stanic, Z., 2021. Elementar composition and trace metal analysis of wood charcoal
samples. Copper 46 (2), 11–18 (in Serbian).
Urosˇevic, T., Sovrlic, Z., Milivojevic, M., Đord¯ievski, S., Jovanovic, M., Petrovic, J., Svrkota, I., 2016. Uticaj mase
biosorbenata – kora citrusnog voca na sorpciju tesˇkih metala. Bakar 41 (2), 19–27.
Wan, L., Chen, D., Liu, J., Zhang, Y., Chen, J., Du, C., Xie, M., 2020. Facile preparation of porous carbons derived from
orange peel via basic copper carbonate activation for supercapacitors. J. Alloys Compd. 823, 153747. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.153747.
Wang, D., Geng, Z., Li, B., Zhang, C., 2015. High performance electrode materials for electric double-layer capacitors
based on biomass-derived activated carbons. Electrochim. Acta 173 (10), 377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2015.05.080.
Wei, L., Yushin, G., 2011. Electrical double layer capacitors with activated sucrose- derived carbon electrodes. Carbon
49 (14), 4830. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2011.07.003.
Wong, S., Ngadi, N., Inuwa, I.M., Hassan, O., 2018. Recent advances in applications of activated carbon from biowaste
for wastewater treatment: a short review. J. Clean. Prod. 175, 361–375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2017.12.059.
Wu, D., Xu, L.H., Feng, H.J., Zhu, Y.W., Chen, X.Y., Cui, P., 2021. Design and theoretical study of novel deep eutectic
solvents: the effects of bromine and chloride anions on solvation structure and supercapacitor performance.
J. Power Sources 492, 229634. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.229634.
Xiao, K., Liua, H., Li, Y., Yang, G., Wang, Y., Yao, H., 2020. Excellent performance of porous carbon from urea-assisted
hydrochar of orange peel for toluene and iodine adsorption. Chem. Eng. J. 382, 122997. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2019.122997.
You, Y., Zhang, X., Li, P., Lei, F., Jiang, J., 2020. Co-production of xylooligosaccharides and activated carbons from
Camellia oleifera shell treated by the catalysis and activation of zinc chloride. Bioresour. Technol. 306,
123131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123131.
Zhang, X., Zhang, X., Sun, N., Wang, S., Wang, X., Jiang, Z., 2019. High production of levulinic acid from cellulosic
feedstocks being catalyzed by temperature-responsive transition metal substituted heteropolyacids. Renew. En￾ergy 141, 802–813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.04.058.
478 20. Sorbent based on citrus peel waste for wastewater treatment
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
21
Alginate-based nanobiosorbents
for bioremediation of environmental
pollutants
Komal Rizwana
, Tahir Rasheedb
, and Muhammad Bilalc
a
Department of Chemistry, University of Sahiwal, Sahiwal, Pakistan b
Interdisciplinary Research
Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM),
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia c
School of Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of
Technology, Huaian, China
21.1 Introduction
Environmental pollution is increasing day by day due to economic growth, industrial de￾velopment, and intensive domestic activities. Water is a basic need of life and the availability
of pure water has become a major concern now a day to all living things. There is a dire need
for innovative technologies for the bioremediation of environmental contaminants (dyes,
heavy metals, pesticides, etc.). During recent decades the different biomaterials have been in￾troduced with better adsorption efficacy, good environmental compatibility, and cost￾effective operational efficacy (Wan et al., 2018). Various biomaterials including alginate, cel￾lulose, chitosan, gums, etc., have been documented well for mitigation of environmental con￾taminants (Nasrollahzadeh et al., 2020). Alginate is a polysaccharide present in the outer wall
of brown algae. This polysaccharide has fascinating characteristics as bio-compatible, harm￾less, and easily biodegradable. Alginic acid is its major constituent and sodium alginate is
sodium salt of alginic acid which contains a bundle of hydroxyl and carboxylic moieties along
the polymer chain (Fig. 21.1) which made them highly efficient for adsorption of pollutants
from aqueous media (Sutirman et al., 2021). Alginate consisted of β-ᴅ-mannuronic acid (M￾block) and α-ʟ-guluronic acid (G-block) residues, linked through 1,4-glycosidic bonds. Algi￾nate has a high adsorption capacity and cost-friendly, so various alginate composites incor￾porating various nanomaterials, polymers, gels, and microorganisms have been studied for
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 479 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00021-6the removal of heavy metals, radionuclides, pharmaceuticals dyes, pesticides, and other con￾taminants (Sutirman et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). Heat resistance and mechanical stability
and elasticity of sodium alginate are not much high, so physical and chemicals modifications
are applied to improve its adsorption potential (Ates et al., 2020). Different strategies includ￾ing cross-linking, surface modification, composites formation by utilization of other
nanomaterials have been reported for modification of alginate-based nanosorbents
(Thakur et al., 2018). Surface grafting increases the selectivity and uptake capacity of contam￾inants while cross-linking changes the strength and formation of alginate-based composites
enhance the adsorption potential (Pan et al., 2019; Wen et al., 2020). The alginate-based com￾posites possess novel chemical properties and great compatibility. Sodium alginate is stable
and has the capability of complexing, gelation, and film formation. It can form thermally sta￾ble gels. Alginates have been used for the encapsulation of biological and chemical molecules
with many applications in cosmetics, textile industry, pharmaceuticals, food, chemical, and
environmental engineering. Functional moieties present on the surface of alginate have the
capability to capture cations through ion exchange between the cross-linking metallic cation
and pollutant (dyes, transition metals). In this chapter, the synthesis of alginate-based
nanocomposites their various functionalities and their role in the removal of various environ￾mental pollutants have been reported. Illustration of applications of alginate-based compos￾ites for removal of various environmental contaminants has been given in Fig. 21.2.
21.2 Synthesis of alginate-based composites
Alginate-based composites can be synthesized through various nanocomposites fabrica￾tion strategies and characteristics, applications depend greatly on synthetic approaches.
Few prominent methods have been elaborated in this section. Previously four methods in￾cluding crosslinking, self-assembly, emulsification, and complexation have been reported
for the synthesis of alginate composites (Akhtar et al., 2016). For the synthesis of physically
crosslinked hydrogels, the ionic interaction, hydrogen bonding crystallization, complex for￾mation, and protein interactions are used, while for chain growth, condensation, addition,
FIG. 21.1 General presentation of the structure of
sodium salt of alginic acid.
480 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 21.2 Illustration of applications of alginate-based composites for removal of various environmental contaminants.and electron beam polymerizations are employed. All synthetic methodologies have their
own pros and cons. Physically crosslinked sodium alginate-based hydrogels are simple
but their gel strength is not good while chemically crosslinked gels are good in strength. A
physical crosslinking method is simple and gentle but chemical crosslinking is complex
and also requires removal of unreacted. Functional moieties (–OH, –COONa) on the surface
of sodium alginate can be modified through chemical crosslinking, etherification, and ester￾ification. The basic process of gel formation involves coordination between sodium alginate
and divalent metallic cation/polymeric cation that proceeds through interaction between cat￾ion and G-blocks.
Thereof the alginates having great content of guluronate may lead to the synthesis of gels of
excellent strength. The confirmation of the junction zones in calcium-based alginate
hydrogels was explained through the known “Egg-box” model which was presented in
1973 (Grant et al., 1973). Alginate has different binding abilities for different multivalent cat￾ions. Various factors as pH, the concentration of a solution, the intensity of metallic cations are
responsible for the strength, stability, conformation, and shape of gel beads (Chan et al., 2002).
Controlled conditions should be used for the synthesis of calcium-based alginate hydrogels.
Bentonite supported zinc oxide NP encapsulated alginate-based nanocomposite was synthe￾sized through Ca+2 mediated gelification controlled process (Motshekga et al., 2018). The en￾capsulation strategy follows the introduction of alginate solution possessing the dispersion of
bentonite-supported zinc oxide NP to calcium cations solution. Beads were formed through
the continuous stirring of the medium. Beads agglomeration was reduced because of NPs dis￾persion on bent support. In another research work, the nanoshell carriers were fabricated
through encapsulation of drug-loaded Nps in Ca-alginate nanohydrogel (Zhang et al.,
2018b). This gelification strategy by using calcium cations is a simple and easy method for
implementation in comparison to other nanomaterials synthesis protocols.
Various nanomaterials including Graphene oxide (GO), activated carbon (AC),
nanoparticles, nanocomposites, carbon nanotubes (CNT) magnetic particles, and various mi￾crobes have been encapsulated into alginate-based hydrogels for improving the stability and
efficacy of alginate hydrogels for environmental applications (Hong et al., 2017; Rezaei et al.,
2017). For encapsulation purpose, the material selection depends on material functionalities
and planned applications so composite may provide intended benefits. Alginate-based com￾posites show improved characteristics (mechanical, physical) for various applications. Algi￾nate beads serve as a stable matrix for different absorbents (GO, AC, CNTs) (Robati et al.,
2016) which are fine particles and difficult to isolate from media. Encapsulation of carbon￾based nanomaterials into alginate-based hydrogels provides regeneration and easy separa￾tion for the treatment of wastewater (Wang et al., 2018, 2019). Synthesis of alginate-based
magnetic NPs brings together nano-effects and magnetic strategies in composite form and
providing great adsorption potential with a decrease in the risk of NPs for the environment.
Magnetic nanotechnology is widely employed for wastewater treatment (Saravanan et al.,
2021). Alginate can also help in optimizing microbial processes for various applications.
Alginate-based microorganism composites provide many advantages as strong resistance,
great metabolic activity. Immobilized microorganisms can be used various times without loss
of activity. Thereof alginate immobilized microbes are important for the treatment of waste￾water (Liu et al., 2012).
482 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices21.3 Role of alginate-based composites for removal of heavy metals
Heavy metals are polluting the water systems and recovery of toxic metals suffers from
high cost, energy consumption, incomplete removal, and generation of waste. Adsorption
strategy is the best process to remove heavy metals efficiently from aqueous media. Heavy
metal removal is generally an interaction between the metallic cation and functional moiety
present on the surface of the adsorbent which includes ion exchange, complexation, electro￾static force of interaction, etc. Hydroxyl, carboxyl, amino functionalities present on the sur￾face of adsorbents are generally responsible for such kinds of interactions (Won et al., 2014).
Alginate is endowed with carboxyl and hydroxyl moieties throughout the polymeric chain so
they can be utilized for decontamination. These function moieties can serve as active sites for
the adsorption of heavy metals. Alginates swell and dissolve in aqueous media so this can be
overcome by tuning alginates into hydrogels. Alginates undergo gelation in existence of me￾tallic cations as cross linking agent (Aguero et al., 2017 € ). Composites of alginates with carbo￾naceous nanomaterials, nanoparticles, and polymers have been synthesized to enhance the
adsorption potential of alginates for heavy metals.
21.3.1 Carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate composites
Biochar, CNTs and graphene oxides, polymers are carbonaceous materials and they pos￾sess high functionalities, high surface area, porosity, and high strength. Composites of these
carbon-based materials with alginates give more adsorption sites. GO encapsulated poly￾vinyl alcohol modified sodium alginate were synthesized and used to adsorb Cu (II)
and U (VI) from aqueous media with adsorption potential of 247.16 and 403.78 mg/g, respec￾tively (Yi et al., 2018). The addition of GO enhanced the hydrogel stability. In another study,
GO was blended with SA and composite membranes were synthesized and their adsorption
capacities were found to be 327.9 and 118.6 mg/g for Cr (III) and Pb (II), respectively. Adsorp￾tion occurs due to the chelation of –OH and –COOH moieties with metal ions and also ion
exchange with calcium ions (Bai et al., 2020). PVA/SA encapsulated biochar was synthesized
to adsorb Cu (II). Mechanistic studies exhibited that carbon-carbon double bond-containing
moieties were responsible for adsorption phenomena (Xiao et al., 2019). In the latest study,
biochar was prepared from Eichhornia crassipes. The alginate encapsulated biochar beads were
prepared and modified through ferric/ferrous sulfate and they efficiently adsorbed the Cd+2
from aqueous media at pH 6 and temp. 37 °C. This biochar can be recovered to re-use. Tem￾perature plays an efficient role while biochar generation (Liu et al., 2020). The process of
alginate-based biochar bead formation and its efficiency in the removal of Cadmium metal
ions is illustrated in Fig. 21.3.
Recently zero valent iron-AC Na alginate beads were synthesized and they showed excellent
adsorption potential against Pb, Cr, and Cd. Kinetic studies showed that the experiment
followed the pseudo-first-order kinetics which suggests a multi-layer adsorption uptake ap￾proach. Hydroxyl and carboxyl moieties were found responsible for metals adsorption
(Thakur and Kumar, 2021). Fe3O4/CD/AC/SA composite beads have been reported to remove
Cu (II) from aqueous media with an adsorption potential of 10.10 mg/g (Yadav et al., 2021).
21.3 Role of alginate-based composites for removal of heavy metals 483
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesPolymeric materials have a variety of functional moieties which made them affinitive to￾ward heavy metals. The blending of alginates with polymers enhances the active sites for
metal adsorption. Recently onto the melamine sponge, the sodium alginate was gelated
and this composite showed good efficacy to adsorb Cu (II). The synthesized blend showed
porosity, 3D networking. Chelation of Cu(II) occurs with nitrogen and oxygen-containing
moieties (Feng et al., 2018). Costa and his colleagues crosslinked the alginate with
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA). This composite was used for the adsorption of ytterbium (rare
earth metal) from the solution. Yttrium was recovered approximately 90% and analysis
revealed the involvement of –OH, –COOH functional groups for adsorption process
(Barcelos da Costa et al., 2021). Sodium alginate grafted polyacrylamide/GO (SA-PAM/
GO) hydrogel was synthesized via free-radical polymerization and this composite showed
adsorption potential of 68.76 and 240.69 mg/g for Cu2+ and Pb2+, respectively (Fig. 21.4).
Composite possessed the 60% adsorption potential even after five cycles of use ( Jiang
et al., 2020). Carbonaceous materials are porous possess large adsorption sites and excellent
mechanical strength so they favor the adsorption process (Verma et al., 2020). The formation
FIG. 21.3 Graphical presentation of alginate-based biochar formation and its efficiency to remove Cadmium (II)
(Liu et al., 2020).
FIG. 21.4 Synthesis of SA-PAM/GO
composite and its efficiency toward the
removal of Cu2+ and Pb2+ ( Jiang et al.,
2020).
484 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesof composites of carbonaceous materials with sodium alginate takes benefit of the properties
of materials and also made them cost-friendly.
21.3.2 Nanomaterials-based sodium alginate composites
Nanomaterials are small size materials possessing a large surface area, excellent strength
and can be functionalized easily. Compositing of nanomaterials with sodium alginate may
improve the structure and adsorption efficacy toward heavy metals. A group of researchers
incorporated the magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles into thiourea modified sodium alginate and
this composite was used for removal of Hg (II) from solution (Patin˜o-Ruiz et al., 2019). Toxic
metal ions form bond with electron donor moieties (–OH, –NH2) of composite. The
nanomagnetic particles provide paramagnetic features to composite and adsorbents can be
easily separated from media. In the latest study, magnetite manganese oxide-based
nanoparticles were immobilized onto alginate lead to the synthesis of xerogel. This
environment-friendly mesoporous and thermally stable composite was used to adsorb
Cr(VI) and Cd(II) with good adsorption potential of 3.86 mg/g and 3.95 mg/g (@ 120 min
of contact time)for metals, respectively. This synthesized composite showed reusability of ap￾proximately six times (Kumar et al., 2021). Nano-silica and nano-maghemite were encapsu￾lated in sodium alginate for adsorption of Pb (II) from solution (Idris et al., 2012; Soltani et al.,
2014). Recently magnetic nanosphere of 15–22 nm size was prepared through electrostatic in￾teraction between sodium alginate and amino-based magnetic nanoparticles. The synthe￾sized polyelectrolyte nanosphere showed an adsorption potential of 105.8 mg/g for Pb (II)
(Wang et al., 2021). The doping of MOFs with alginates has been reported recently. UiO-66
MOF was doped with alginate which leads to the synthesis of the UiO-66@Abs and this com￾posite showed effective adsorption of Cr (VI) (98%) @pH 6. And desorption (@ 2 M HCl) re￾generate the UiO-66@Abs composite (Daradmare et al., 2021). Sodium alginate composites
with nanomaterials enhance the surface area, oxygen having functional moieties and affinity
toward heavy metals. These green composites are great materials at nano-scale environmen￾tal remediation.
21.4 Role of alginate-based composites for removal of dyes
Dyes are colored organic molecules and in industries, they are extensively being used. The
release of wastewater from industries in our ecosystem is harmful to human health and other
living beings. Dyes are removed through the adsorption approach from wastewater through
the sorbent. Alginate is a potent adsorbent for the removal of dyes. Composites of alginate
with various nanomaterials enhance the efficacy for the removal of dyes. Removal of dyes
using various alginate composites has been presented in Table 21.1.
21.4.1 Carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate composites
According to studies activated carbon immobilized on alginates mitigated a good amount
of dyes from the solution. Three alginate composites, bentonite-alginate beads, activated
21.4 Role of alginate-based composites for removal of dyes 485
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 21.1 Alginate-based nanosorbents for removal of dyes and radionuclides from aqueous system.
S.
no. Adsorbant Adsorbate
Adsorption
potential (mg/g) References
Carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate composites for removal of dyes
1 Fe3O4/CD/AC/SA composite Methyl violet,
brilliant green
5.882, 2.283 Yadav et al. (2021)
2 Activated carbon (Ac) biopolymer
Alginate (Algn) on blue methylene
Methylene blue 51.75 Boucherdoud et al.
(2021)
3 Perlite-ca-alginate-activated carbon
(PCA) composite
Methylene blue,
methyl orange
1111, 909 Chegeni et al. (2021)
4 rGO@HAP-Alginate Reactive Blue 4,
Indigo Carmine,
Acid Blue 158
45.56, 47.16, 48.26 Sirajudheen et al. (2021)
5 NaA-cl-Aac/GP hydrogel Malachite green 628.93 Verma et al. (2020)
6 Acrylamide-based Na-alginate
(AM-SA) acrylamide/graphene
oxide-based sodium alginate
(AM-GO-SA) hydrogels
Crystal violet 62.07, 100.30 mg/g Pashaei-Fakhri et al.
(2021)
7 Alginate/f-CNT-CD-MFA hydrogel
beads
Methylene blue 11.76 Mallakpour et al. (2021)
8 Magnetic multi-walled carbon
nanotubes-loaded alginate
(CNT-Alg-Fe3O4
ADMI 138.97 ADMI/g Azari et al. (2021)
9 ZSM-5 zeolite/PVA/
Carboxymethyl cellulose/Na￾alginate (PVA/CNC/SA/ZSM-5)
Malachite green 5.95 Radoor et al. (2021)
10 Chitosan/Na-alginate composite Acid black,
methylene blue
817.0, 1488.1 Zhao et al. (2021)
11 Magnetic alginate/rice husk (m￾ALG/RH) beads
Methylene blue 274.9 Alver et al. (2020)
12 Na-alginate-Flax seed ash composite Methylene blue 333.3 Is¸ık and Ugras  ¸kan (2021)
13 Pectin-alginate/titania Methylene blue 435–637 Zamri et al. (2021)
14 Na-alginate modified
polyacrylamide hydrogel (PAAm/
SA)
Methylene blue 90.90 _
Ismail and Gokc € ¸e
Kocabay (2021)
15 Na-alginate/chitosan/poly
acrylamide/carbon quantum dots
(Na-Ala/Chit-cl-polyAAm/CQDs)
Biebrich scharlet 96% Priya et al. (2020)
16 Phytochemicals crosslinked￾Alginate biocomposite
Methylene blue 1442.0 Andreas et al. (2021)
17 Na-alginate-citric acid-k￾carrageenan (PEM)
Methylene blue 522.4 Ammar et al. (2021)
486 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 21.1 Alginate-based nanosorbents for removal of dyes and radionuclides from aqueous system—cont’d
S.
no. Adsorbant Adsorbate
Adsorption
potential (mg/g) References
18 Na-alginate grafted poly(N-vinyl
formamide-co-acrylic acid)-
bentonite clay hybrid hydrogel
Methylene green 2108 Subhan et al. (2021)
19 Alginate polymer modified with
pandan leaves
Methylene blue 61% Nordin et al. (2021)
20 Calcium alginate entrapped
sugarcane biochar composite
(CA-SB) dye
Methylene blue 95.47% Biswas et al. (2020)
21 Calcium alginate/basil seed
mucilage biobeads
Eriochrome
black T
2.80 Javanbakht and Shafiei
(2020)
22 Na-alginate – Oscillatoria de-oiled
biomass (Na-Alg-ODOB)
Basic blue-41 634.4 Maqbool et al. (2020)
23 Magnetic Zeolite/Chitosan/
Alginate (MZ/CS/AL) composite
Methylene blue 0.999 Kazemi and Javanbakht
(2020)
24 Alginate encapsulated peanut
derived activated carbon (PnsAC￾alginate)
Direct Blue-86 21.6 Garg et al. (2019)
25 GO/Ca-Al Methylene blue 1334 Gunes et al. (2020)
Nanomaterials-based alginate composites for removal of dyes
25 Na-alginate, Fe (III)/magnetic ferric
oxide biopolymer (Fe3O4@SA-Fe)
Congo red direct
red 23 dyes
3333, 1429 Lv and Li (2021)
26 Mxene/Na-alginate beads (Ti3C2Tx/
SA) beads
Methylene blue 92.17 Zhang et al. (2021)
27 Hematite (α-Fe2O3)/alginate (AG)
beads
Methylene blue 100% Dubey et al. (2020)
28 Encapsulated polyamidoamine￾functionalized halloysite/alginates
(Alg/Hal-PAMAM) beads
Methylene green,
Sunset yellow
62.20, 33.90 Kurczewska et al. (2019)
29 Na-alginate poly(acrylic acid) (SA￾poly(AA)), Na-alginate poly(acrylic
acid)/zinc oxide (SA-poly(AA)/
ZnO) hydrogel
Methylene blue 1129, 1529.6 Makhado et al. (2020)
30 Fe3O4-N-GO@Na-alginate (SA) gel
film
Congo Red, Acid
Orange 7, Amino
Black 10B
74.22%, 45.72%,
37.75%
Chen et al. (2021)
31 Acrylonitrile/Na-alginate (Alg-g￾An) copolymer
Methylene blue,
Safranin O
0.999, 0.998 Shelar-Lohar and Joshi
(2020)
Continued
21.4 Role of alginate-based composites for removal of dyes 487
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 21.1 Alginate-based nanosorbents for removal of dyes and radionuclides from aqueous system—cont’d
S.
no. Adsorbant Adsorbate
Adsorption
potential (mg/g) References
32 Cobalt ferrite-alginate
nanocomposite
Reactive red 195
(RR195), Reactive
yellow 145
(RY145)
6.75, 6.06 Jayalakshmi and
Jeyanthi (2019)
33 Ca-alginate/bentonite
nanocomposite beads
Methylene blue,
Congo red
1171, 95.55 mg/g Oussalah et al. (2019)
34 Activated carbon/copper ferrite/
alginate
Methylene blue 400.0 Othman et al. (2020)
35 Na-alginate-gelatin/ZnS
nanocomposite
Biebrich scarlet,
crystal Violet
Priya et al. (2019)
36 Alginate/carboxylated lignin Methylene blue 613.0 Kim et al. (2021)
37 GO/Ca-Al Methylene blue 1334 Gunes et al. (2020)
38 Na-Al/calcium silicate /
hydroxyapatite
Eriochrome blue
black R
76.80 You et al. (2019)
39 Oxidized alginate/gelatin/silver
NPs
Methylene blue 625 mg/g Abou-Zeid et al. (2019)
40 Nano AgCl/Na-Alg/composite
copolymer
Brilliant crystal
blue
>95% Bhangi and Ray (2020)
Removal of radionuclides
41 Bacillus subtilis immobilized
chistosan/alginate
U(VI) – Tong (2017)
42 Bentonite/alginate U(VI), Cs(I), Sr2+ 11.1, 11.75, 8.73 Abou-Lilah et al. (2020)
43 Go/PVA/alginate U(VI) 403.78 Yi et al. (2018)
44 Ca-alginate beads U(VI) 237.15 Yu et al. (2017)
45 Ca-alginate/carboxymethyl
chitosan/Ni0.2Zn0.2Fe2.6O4
Nd+3, Tb+3, Dy+3 97.75%, 96.83%,
97.85%
Javadian et al. (2020)
46 TiO2 microspheres/alginate matrix U(VI) 31.4 Basu et al. (2020)
47 Lithium-modified montmorillonit/
ca-alginate beads (MCA/Li)
Cs+ 100.25 Xia et al. (2018)
48 Titania coated silica sphere
functionalized with potassium
ferrocyanide/Ca-alginate
134+137Cs 23.55 Saha et al. (2017)
49 Alginate humic acid/Fe-aminoclay
composite
Sr+2 45.65 Choe et al. (2018)
50 Zeolite/alginate Sr+2 Hong et al. (2018)
488 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescarbon-alginate beads, and activated carbon-bentonite alginate beads, were synthesized
through fabrication strategy to mitigate methylene blue (MB) Dye. Activated carbon-benton￾ite-alginate beads showed a maximum adsorption potential of 756.8 mg/g @ 30 °C
(Benhouria et al., 2015). Recently a nanocomposite bead based on iron oxide (Fe3O4), activated
charcoal (AC) particles with β-cyclodextrin (CD), and sodium alginate (SA) was prepared
through an easy and cost-effective approach. The synthesized beads showed excellent adsor￾bent properties along with magnetic features. Fe3O4/CD/AC/SA composite polymeric beads
removed cationic dyes; methyl violet (MV) and brilliant green (BG) with adsorption potential
of 5.882 and 2.283 mg/g, respectively (Yadav et al., 2021). These polymeric composites pos￾sessed adsorption activities even after four cycles and proved capable of regeneration and
easy separation. Through co-precipitation strategy, alginate-based reduced graphene oxide
hydroxyapatite hybrid (rGO@HAP-Alg) was synthesized. The hybrid removed efficiently
three azo dyes; Reactive Blue 4 (RB4), Indigo Carmine (IC), and Acid Blue 158 (AB158) azo
dyes with adsorption potential of 45.56, 47.16, and 48.26 mg/g, respectively, from aqueous
media (@ pH 6–7). Hydrogen bonding, electrostatic force of interaction, and complexation
were found involved in the adsorption mechanism (Sirajudheen et al., 2021). Recently sodium
alginate cross-linked acrylic acid/graphite (NaA-cl-AAc/GP) hydrogel composite was syn￾thesized for removal of malachite green (MG) dye. The addition of graphite powder im￾proved the adsorption potential. MG was removed efficiently from the aqueous solution
with an adsorption efficiency of 628.93 mg/g. The composite exhibited 91% adsorption ca￾pacity even after three cycles. This composite proved promising due to its efficient swelling,
excellent adsorption potential eco-friendliness, regeneration capacity (Verma et al., 2020).
Fakhri and his colleagues synthesized acrylamide-based sodium alginate (AM-SA) and acryl￾amide/graphene oxide-based sodium alginate (AM-GO-SA) nanocomposite hydrogels for
removal of crystal violet (CV) dye with adsorption efficiency of 62.07 and 100.30 mg/g, re￾spectively (Pashaei-Fakhri et al., 2021). In the latest study, a hybrid of carboxyl functionalized
TABLE 21.1 Alginate-based nanosorbents for removal of dyes and radionuclides from aqueous system—cont’d
S.
no. Adsorbant Adsorbate
Adsorption
potential (mg/g) References
51 Alginate immobilized Aspergillus
nigar
Th (IV) 303.95 Ding et al. (2019)
52 Alginate/Haromyces cerevisiae
composite
241Am 4.38  107 mmol/g Araujo et al. (2020)
53 Hexadecyl pyridinium (HDPy)-
modified Mt (OMt)/alginate beads
ClO4
, Sr2+ 53.5, 29.6 mg/g Luo et al. (2020)
54 LDH/GO alginates beads 90Sr2+, 79SeO4
2 Guo et al. (2020)
55 CeO2-MoO3-SiO2 (CH2)3-(Alginate)2 56Mn, 51Cr 92.3, 97.4% Allam et al. (2021)
56 Ca-alginate/ Zinc ferrocyanide
(ZnFC)/Cyanex 272
137Cs, 60Co 71.7, 34.9 Lee et al. (2021)
21.4 Role of alginate-based composites for removal of dyes 489
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmulti-walled carbon nanotubes (f-CNTs) with carbon dots (CDs) and magnesium fluoro￾hydroxyapatite (MFA) nanoparticles was synthesized. The fabricated nano-hybrid
(f-CNT-CD-MFA) was incorporated into alginate to prepare a composite hydrogel bead
(alginate/f-CNT-CD-MFA) which was further used for removal of methylene blue (MB) from
solution (Fig. 21.5) (Mallakpour et al., 2021). The hydrogel significantly removed the dye.
Recently magnetic multi-walled carbon nanotubes-loaded alginate (CNT-Alg-Fe3O4) com￾posite was synthesized for removal of dye ADMI. The adsorption potential was found at
138.97 ADMI/g (@ pH 3, contact time 85.55 min). Adsorbent contained the reusability effi￾ciency of at least 10 cycles. The electrostatic force of interaction and π–π dispersive interactions
were found responsible for the interaction of surface functionalities (–OH and –COOH) with
dye (Azari et al., 2021). Adsorption potential of alginate for dyes increases with its composit￾ing with Graphenes, CNTs, AC also reduces the cost. But reusability of active carbon is still a
concern to solve. CNTs separation through centrifugation is a tedious process so the introduc￾tion of magnetic features in CNTs composites is fruitful effort.
Hydrogels have been proved efficient for the removal of dyes and this is documented well
by a group of researchers (Pereira et al., 2021). Recently sodium alginate-modified
polyacrylamide-sodium alginate (PAAm/SA) hydrogels were fabricated and this composite
hydrogel efficiently removed the methyl blue with the adsorptive potential of 90.09 mg/g (@
pH 7) (_
Ismail and Gokc € ¸e Kocabay, 2021).
Natural materials are attractive to fabricate eco-friendly, cost-effective, potential adsor￾bents. Chitosan- sodium alginate composite was synthesized through a lyophilization ap￾proach. This unique amphoteric adsorbent significantly adsorbed the Acid black and
methylene blue with adsorption efficacy of 817.0 mg/g and cationic Methylene Blue
1488.1 mg/g, respectively, over a wide range of pH. Both cationic and anionic dyes were
FIG. 21.5 Schematic illustration of alginate/f-CNT-CD-MFA hydrogel bead for removal of methylene blue
(Mallakpour et al., 2021).
490 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesadsorbed through chemisorption (Zhao et al., 2021). Recently, biocomposite of magnetic algi￾nate/rice husk (m-ALG/RH) beads were fabricated through gelation approach and employed
to remove dye methylene blue. The composite proved promising to remove MB with an ad￾sorption efficiency of 274.9 mg/g and it was found eco-friendly, cost-effective adsorbent
(Alver et al., 2020). Composite of Sodium alginate with Flaxseed ash was found promising
for removal of methylene blue with adsorption efficacy of 333.3 mg/g (@ pH 7, 50 °C) (Is¸ık
and Ugras  ¸kan, 2021). The adsorptive potential of pectin-alginate-titania (PAT) composites
for methylene blue was found to be in the range of 435–637 mg/g in an aqueous solution.
The adsorptive potential of themembrane increased with an increase in titanium nanoparticles
due to enhancementin surface area (Zamri et al., 2021). Phytochemicals extracted from cabbage
(phenolics, flavonoids, anthocyanins) were crosslinked with alginate through glutaraldehyde
to fabricate biocomposite hydrogel beads. The adsorption capacity for methylene blue was
found to be 1442.0 mg/g @pH 11.0 (Fig. 21.6) (Andreas et al., 2021). Calcium alginate
entrapped sugarcane biochar composite (CA-SB) was synthesized and employed for the ad￾sorption of methylene blue. The composite adsorbed the 95.47% dye (Biswas et al., 2020). Ac￾tivated carbon derived from peanut shells was encapsulated in alginate to fabricate the
nanobiosorbent (PnsAC-alginate). The nanomaterial removed the Direct Blue-86 from aque￾ous media with an adsorption efficacy of 21.6 mg/g. Alginate modified peanut shell activated
carbon showed a 7% improved adsorption potential in comparison to unmodified activated
carbon adsorbent (Garg et al., 2019). The use of natural materials for the production of adsor￾bents to mitigate environmental pollutants is ecofriendly and cost-effective.
21.4.2 Nanomaterials-based sodium alginate composites
Crosslinking of sodium alginate, Fe (III), and incorporation of magnetic ferric oxide lead to
the synthesis of alginate-based biopolymer Fe3O4@SA-Fe. The synthesized polymer
FIG. 21.6 Removal efficacy of cabbage photochemical-alginate biocomposite against methylene blue (Andreas
et al., 2021).
21.4 Role of alginate-based composites for removal of dyes 491
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesefficiently adsorb the congo red and direct red 23 dyes with adsorption efficiency of 3333 and
1429 mg/g, respectively. Polymer exhibited excellent adsorptive potential, stability at room
temperature. Analytical studies revealed that hydrogen bonding, complexation, and electro￾static force of interaction were responsible for the adsorption of dyes on Fe3O4@SA-Fe. The
magnetic property incorporated in polymer made it easily separable for media (Lv and Li,
2021) (Fig. 21.7). Mxenes are transition metal carbide/nitride nanomaterials and they possess
a large surface area, active site, hydrophilic nature and have excellent adsorptive potential
and it may play a great role in the adsorption of dyes from the environment (Zhang et al.,
2018a). In a recent study, through ionic crosslinking the mxene (Ti3C2Tx (T ¼ OH, O, F))
was immobilized on sodium alginate to form Ti3C2Tx/SA beads. Mxene was tightly bound
on SA so the loss of adsorbent was avoided and adsorption potential increased. The synthe￾sized composite adsorbed the methylene blue with an adsorption potential of 92.17 mg/g @
pH 7. After three cycles the material retained the adsorption efficacy (81.36%) (Zhang et al.,
2021). Hematite (α-Fe2O3)/alginate (AG) beads were fabricated for the removal of methylene
blue. At room temperature nanocomposite removed the 100% dye within 40 min (@ pH 9)
(Dubey et al., 2020). In another study, hybrid beads were fabricated by encapsulation of
polyamidoamine-functionalized halloysite into alginates (Alg/Hal-PAMAM). These beads
adsorbed the methyl green and sunset yellow with excellent adsorption efficacy of 62.20
and 33.90 mg/g, respectively. Hybrid beads showed higher efficacy in comparison of
pure-alginates (Kurczewska et al., 2019). Makhado and his colleagues fabricated sodium al￾ginate poly(acrylic acid) (SA-poly(AA)) and sodium alginate poly(acrylic acid)/zinc oxide
(SA-poly(AA)/ZnO) hydrogel nanocomposite through free-radical polymerization reaction
for removal of methylene blue. ZnO-based composite showed high swelling due to more wa￾ter up taking capacity so it adsorbed more methylene blue (adsorption
efficiency ¼ 1529.6 mg/g) from aqueous media (@pH 6) in comparison to the SA-poly
(AA) hydrogel (adsorption efficiency ¼ 1129 mg/g) (Makhado et al., 2020). Cobalt ferrite￾Alginate nanocomposite was fabricated by embedding cobalt ferrite nanoparticles into algi￾nate. This composite showed efficiency to remove Reactive red 195 (RR195) and Reactive yel￾low 145 (RY145) from textile effluent with adsorption potential of 6.75 and 6.06 mg/g,
respectively ( Jayalakshmi and Jeyanthi, 2019). This nanocomposite was easy to separate
due to magnetic properties and reused successfully until five consecutive cycles. Hybrid
gel beads are more efficient for the removal of dyes from aqueous media in comparison to
unloaded beads (Cavallaro et al., 2013) (Table 21.1).
21.5 Removal of radionuclides
Radionuclides are also called radioisotopes (uranium, radium, chromium, plutonium,
strontium, etc.) and they possess excess energy. These are produced during research activi￾ties, fission reaction, and explosions. They also undergo radioactively and cause environmen￾tal pollution, interact with the food chain and destroy human health. They may be removed
for various mediums through the adsorption mechanism. Alginate-based nano-composites
play a great role in the removal of radionuclides from the ecosystem (Sutirman et al.,
2021). Various alginate-based nanosorbents with their adsorption potential have been
492 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesdiscussed in Table 21.1. Bacillus subtilis was immobilized on chistosan/alginate and this com￾posite efficiently removed U(VI) from aqueous media (Tong, 2017). In another finding, Go
was embedded in PVA/alginate for adsorption of U(VI) with an efficiency of 403.78 mg/g
(Yi et al., 2018). Calcium Alginate beads adsorbed the U(VI) with the efficiency of
237.15 mg/g. This adsorption was found pH dependent (Yu et al., 2017). Lithium-modified
FIG. 21.7 Schematic illustration of adsorption of Congo red and direct red 23 dyes on Fe3O4@SA-Fe (Lv and Li,
2021).
21.5 Removal of radionuclides 493
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmontmorillonite encapsulated into ca-alginate beads was synthesized through an ion ex￾change strategy. This adsorbent (MCA/Li) removed Cesium (Cs+
) with an adsorption poten￾tial of 100.25 mg/g (Xia et al., 2018). This adsorbent was cost-effective and possessed an
excellent adsorptive potential for radioactive wastewater treatment. Titania coated silica
sphere functionalized with potassium ferrocyanide impregnated with calcium alginate
was synthesized by following the sol-gel method. The synthesized composite removed 134
+137Cs from drinking water with potential adsorption of 23.55 mg/g (Saha et al., 2017). Lee
and his group synthesized alginate humic acid/Fe-aminoclay composite to remove strontium
(Sr+2) from the aqueous media. Adsorption increased with an increase in ions concentration.
Maximum adsorption potential was found to be 45.65 mg/g (Choe et al., 2018). The adsorbent
was eco-friendly, cost-effective, and biocompatible. Alginates are efficient to remove stron￾tium ions from seawater but high sodium concentrations cause damage to hydrogel by over
swelling. To improve its strength, Hong and his colleagues fabricated the hybrid of alginate
with zeolite (Hong et al., 2018) to adsorb Sr ions from seawater. Zeolite enhanced the active
sites so adsorption potential was enhanced. 10% zeolite alginate form exhibited maximum
adsorption and it was found resistant to swelling with enhanced mechanical strength
(Hong et al., 2018). Recently alginate immobilized Aspergillus nigar adsorbent was fabricated
to remove Thorium. Biosorbent was rich in functional moieties and it formed a complex with
thorium to adsorb it. Th (IV) was adsorbed with an adsorption potential of 303.95 mg/g (@
pH 6, 40 °C) (Ding et al., 2019). Biomaterial possessed recyclability. Alginate immobilized
Haromyces cerevisiae composite was synthesized to remove americium (241Am) from an aque￾ous medium. Maximum adsorption of 241Am (4.38  107 mmol/g) was obtained at pH 4
(Araujo et al., 2020). Recently hexadecyl pyridinium (HDPy)-modified Mt (OMt) was encap￾sulated in alginate beads was synthesized and it was used to adsorb ClO4
 and Sr+2. Encap￾sulation of alginate reduced the release of organic components (HDPy) almost 78% times.
Composite adsorbed the ClO4
 and Sr2+ with adsorption potential of 53.5, 29.6 mg/g (Luo
et al., 2020). LDH/GO alginates beads were synthesized to remove both 90Sr2+ and
79SeO4
2 from water and soil and significant adsorption was obtained (Guo et al., 2020). Al￾ginate materials proved efficient in the removal of radionuclides so they should be used on an
industrial level to remove pollution.
21.6 Removal of pharmaceutical contaminants
Pharmaceutical-based contaminants are posing serious health issues. They are present in
low concentration in the ecosystem but they are destroying human health. Various reports are
available where alginate-based sorbents were used for the removal of pharmaceutical-based
pollutants from wastewater. Magnetic alginate beads have been used for the removal of an￾tibiotics. Kim and his colleagues used nZVI-immobilized alginate beads for adsorption of
trichloro-ethylene (>99.8%) (Kim et al., 2010). Konwar and his colleagues synthesized the
magnetic alginate-Fe3O4 hydrogel fibers for the effective removal of ciprofloxacin. There, an￾ion exchange mechanism was found responsible for adsorption efficiency (Konwar et al.,
2015). Magnetic alginate composites are cost-effective, show better adsorption and thermally
stable and easy to fabricate which made them a highly valuable adsorption strategy for
494 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesenvironmental pollutants. In another study GO/Ca-Al bio-composite was synthesized by wet
spinning to remove ciprofloxacin. The addition of GO enhanced the strength, porous active
sites in composite so adsorption potential was enhanced as well (Fei et al., 2016). Zhu and his
colleagues reported the adsorption of tetracycline through GO/Ca-Al composite. Tetracy￾cline was adsorbed with the potential of 131.6 mg/g. Hydrogen bonding and π-π were found
responsible for the adsorption of tetracycline onto composite (Zhu et al., 2018). In another re￾search, physical and chemical modifications were carried on alginate/graphene double net￾work hydrogel. The modified gel showed enhanced adsorption of tetracycline (290.70 mg/g)
and ciprofloxacin (344.83 mg/g) as compared to unmodified gel (Zhuang et al., 2017). Re￾cently copper alginate/GO composite was synthesized by freeze-drying method. Up to
98%, tetracycline was removed by using synthesized composite. After four cycles of usage
still composite retained 85% efficacy (Cui et al., 2021). Recently, double metal crosslinked al￾ginate/GO hydrogel was synthesized and it was used for the removal of tetracycline. The
composite showed excellent stability and retained activity even after four cycles of use
(Kong et al., 2020). Xue and his colleagues fabricated the biocatalyst by amassing co￾immobilization of encapsulating mediator 2,20
-Azino-bis-(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-
sulphonate) into the ca-alginate biocomposite beads by grafting glycidyl methacrylate and
dopamine and then immobilizing laccase covalently onto beads. The biocatalyst removed
100% acridine in 8 h (Xue et al., 2020). Ni-Fe was immobilized on alginate to fabricate the NiFe
nanocomposite beads. This ecofriendly composite removed the tetracycline with the capacity
of 487 mg/g (Ravikumar et al., 2020). Anti-depressant-related pollutants are toxic for
health. A group of researchers used the glutaraldehyde crosslinked alginate beads to remove
duloxetine hydrochloride (anti-depressant drug) from aqueous media. The maximum ad￾sorption capacity was found at 14.83 mg. The high adsorption was attributed to surface func￾tional moieties (Ertugrulo  glu et al., 2020  ). The removal of the anti-hypertensive drug
(propranolol HCl) has been removed through alginate beads. Alginate beads showed an ad￾sorption efficacy of 93%. Adsorption of the drug onto the surface of alginate was attributed to
the presence of carboxyl and hydroxyl functional moieties (Coelho et al., 2020). Guenes and
his colleagues synthesized the GO/Ca-Alg biocomposite (2 pH 4, in 0.1 M HCl) and
employed it for the removal of Famotidine and Diclofenac. The biocomposite showed adsorp￾tion capacity of 35.50 and 36.35 mg/g for Famotidine and Diclofenac, respectively (Gunes
et al., 2020). Al2O3/Chlorella vulgaris immobilized in sodium alginate beads were fabricated
to remove carbamazepine which is an anti-convulsant drug. The synthesized beads adsorbed
the drug with a rate of 89.6%. Alginate beads showed great CBZ removal after even three-time
recycling. This approach is approved effective for the removal of drugs (Yi-cheng et al., 2020).
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can also be removed by alginate-based composites.
Recently Activated carbon-based alginate beads removed naproxen from aqueous medium
through adsorption around 98%. Beads were regenerated by ethanol after seven cycles of
use (Ozcan and Saloglu, 2020). CNTs/L-cys@GO/SA hybrid composite has been used to ad￾sorb ciprofloxacin. Different adsorption capacity was achieved at different temperature. At
25 °C and 15 °C the ciprofloxacin was adsorbed with a potential of 181 and 200 mg/g, respec￾tively. At low temperature better adsorption was obtained. This multinetwork composite
showed good adsorption of the drug in weak acidic conditions at low temp and less salt con￾centration (Ma et al., 2020). So changing environmental conditions may promote drug adsorp￾tion on alginate-based composites.
21.6 Removal of pharmaceutical contaminants 495
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices21.7 Conclusion and future perspectives
Alginate composites were fabricated by encapsulation of an array of materials including
Graphene oxide, activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, microbes, nanomaterials into hydrogel
or beads with utilization as adsorbents of environmental contaminants. Hydrogen bonding,
chelation, ion exchange, electrostatic interaction were involved in the adsorption process of
contaminants on the surface of alginate composite which possess plenty of functional moie￾ties. Alginate-based composites offered great potential for the removal of heavy metals, dyes,
pharmaceutical-based contaminants and radionuclides from aqueous solutions. Alginate
composites exhibited improved stability, strength, and adsorption features in comparison
to pure alginates. The derived composites were easy to separate, can be regenerated after
use, less risk to the environment of encapsulated materials, and optimized strategies. Consid￾ering the future perspectives, the uptake mechanisms involved in contaminants by alginate
composites should be studied in detail. There is a need to optimize existing and novel new
engineered alginate-based composites with diverse features and functionalities for targeted
applications. New techniques should be developed to advance the designing of alginate com￾posites with a more effective combination with versatile materials to enhance adsorption, sta￾bility, and strength. Chemical modification of surface moieties of alginate may change the
features of alginate and this can be a future area of research to develop novel alginate com￾posites for targeted applications. Most studies regarding alginate composites have been car￾ried out in laboratories there is a need to scale up on an industrial scale.
Acknowledgment
The Author Dr. Komal Rizwan is highly thankful to Dr. Ahmad Shakeel, Faculty of Civil Engineering & Geosciences,
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands for helping to provide literature.
References
Abou-Lilah, R.A., Rizk, H.E., Elshorbagy, M.A., Gamal, A.M., Ali, A.M., Badawy, N.A., 2020. Efficiency of bentonite
in removing cesium, strontium, cobalt and uranium ions from aqueous solution: encapsulation with alginate for
column application. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1–24.
Abou-Zeid, R.E., Awwad, N.S., Nabil, S., Salama, A., Youssef, M.A., 2019. Oxidized alginate/gelatin decorated silver
nanoparticles as new nanocomposite for dye adsorption. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 141, 1280–1286. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.09.076.
Aguero, L., Zaldivar-Silva, D., Pen € ˜a, L., Dias, M.L., 2017. Alginate microparticles as oral colon drug delivery device: a
review. Carbohydr. Polym. 168, 32–43.
Akhtar, M.F., Hanif, M., Ranjha, N.M., 2016. Methods of synthesis of hydrogels … a review. Saudi Pharm. J. 24 (5),
554–559. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsps.2015.03.022.
Allam, E.A., El-Sharkawy, R.M., Gizawy, M.A., Mahmoud, M.E., 2021. Assembly of CeO2–MoO3–SiO2(CH2)3-(Al￾ginate)2 As a novel nanocomposite for removal of MnII/CrVI and 56Mn/51Cr radionuclides from water. Mater.
Chem. Phys. 262, 124278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2021.124278.
Alver, E., Metin, A.U., Brouers, F., 2020. Methylene blue adsorption on magnetic alginate/rice husk bio-composite. €
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 154, 104–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.02.330.
Ammar, C., Alminderej, F.M., EL-Ghoul, Y., Jabli, M., & Shafiquzzaman, M., 2021. Preparation and characterization of
a new polymeric multi-layered material based K-carrageenan and alginate for efficient bio-sorption of methylene
blue dye. Polymers 13 (3), 411.
496 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAndreas, A., Winata, Z.G., Santoso, S.P., Angkawijaya, A.E., Yuliana, M., Soetaredjo, F.E., Ju, Y.-H., 2021.
Biocomposite hydrogel beads from glutaraldehyde-crosslinked phytochemicals in alginate for effective removal
of methylene blue. J. Mol. Liq. 329, 115579. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.115579.
Araujo, L.G.D., Borba, T.R.D., Ferreira, R.V.D.P., Canevesi, R.L.S., Silva, E.A.D., Dellamano, J.C., Marumo, J.T., 2020.
Use of calcium alginate beads and Saccharomyces cerevisiae for biosorption of 241Am. J. Environ. Radioact.
223–224, 106399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2020.106399.
Ates, B., Koytepe, S., Ulu, A., Gurses, C., Thakur, V.K., 2020. Chemistry, structures, and advanced applications of
nanocomposites from biorenewable resources. Chem. Rev. 120 (17), 9304–9362. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
chemrev.9b00553.
Azari, A., Nabizadeh, R., Mahvi, A.H., Nasseri, S., 2021. Magnetic multi-walled carbon nanotubes-loaded alginate for
treatment of industrial dye manufacturing effluent: adsorption modelling and process optimisation by central
composite face-central design. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1–21.
Bai, C., Wang, L., Zhu, Z., 2020. Adsorption of Cr (III) and Pb (II) by graphene oxide/alginate hydrogel membrane:
characterization, adsorption kinetics, isotherm and thermodynamics studies. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 147, 898–910.
Barcelos da Costa, T., Carlos da Silva, M.G., Adeodato Vieira, M.G., 2021. Development of a natural polymeric
bioadsorbent based on sericin, alginate and poly(vinyl alcohol) for the recovery of ytterbium from aqueous solu￾tions. J. Clean. Prod. 279, 123555. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123555.
Basu, H., Pimple, M.V., Saha, S., Patel, A., Dansena, C., Singhal, R.K., 2020. TiO2 microsphere impregnated alginate: a
novel hybrid sorbent for uranium removal from aquatic bodies. New J. Chem. 44 (10), 3950–3960. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C9NJ06006E.
Benhouria, A., Islam, M.A., Zaghouane-Boudiaf, H., Boutahala, M., Hameed, B., 2015. Calcium alginate–
bentonite–activated carbon composite beads as highly effective adsorbent for methylene blue. Chem. Eng.
J. 270, 621–630.
Bhangi, B.K., Ray, S.K., 2020. Nano silver chloride and alginate incorporated composite copolymer adsorbent for ad￾sorption of a synthetic dye from water in a fixed bed column and its photocatalytic reduction. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 144, 801–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.09.070.
Biswas, S., Mohapatra, S.S., Kumari, U., Meikap, B.C., Sen, T.K., 2020. Batch and continuous closed circuit semi￾fluidized bed operation: removal of MB dye using sugarcane bagasse biochar and alginate composite adsorbents.
J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 8 (1), 103637. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2019.103637.
Boucherdoud, A., Kherroub, D., Bestani, B., Benderdouche, N., Douinat, O., 2021. Fixed-bed adsorption dynamics of
methylene blue from aqueous solution using alginate-activated carbon composites adsorbents. Alger. J. Environ.
Sci. Technol.
Cavallaro, G., Gianguzza, A., Lazzara, G., Milioto, S., Piazzese, D., 2013. Alginate gel beads filled with halloysite
nanotubes. Appl. Clay Sci. 72, 132–137.
Chan, L., Jin, Y., Heng, P., 2002. Cross-linking mechanisms of calcium and zinc in production of alginate micro￾spheres. Int. J. Pharm. 242 (1–2), 255–258.
Chegeni, M., Etemadpour, S., Fekri, M.H., 2021. The perlite-calcium alginate-activated carbon composite as an effi￾cient adsorbent for the removal of dyes from aqueous solutions. Phys. Chem. Res. 9 (1), 1–16.
Chen, J., Hu, H., Yang, J., Xue, H., Tian, Y., Fan, K., Liu, Y., 2021. Removal behaviors and mechanisms for series of azo
dye wastewater by novel nano constructed macro-architectures material. Bioresour. Technol. 322, 124556. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.124556.
Choe, S.R., Haldorai, Y., Jang, S.-C., Rethinasabapathy, M., Lee, Y.-C., Han, Y.-K., Huh, Y.S., 2018. Fabrication of al￾ginate/humic acid/Fe-aminoclay hydrogel composed of a grafted-network for the efficient removal of strontium
ions from aqueous solution. Environ. Technol. Innov. 9, 285–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2017.12.008.
Coelho, C.M., de Andrade, J.R., da Silva, M.G.C., Vieira, M.G.A., 2020. Removal of propranolol hydrochloride by
batch biosorption using remaining biomass of alginate extraction from Sargassum filipendula algae. Environ.
Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (14), 16599–16611. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-08109-4.
Cui, M., Li, Y., Sun, Y., Wang, H., Li, M., Li, L., Xu, W., 2021. Degradation of tetracycline in polluted wastewater by
persulfate over copper alginate/graphene oxide composites. J. Polym. Environ. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-
020-02038-6.
Daradmare, S., Xia, M., Le, V.N., Kim, J., Park, B.J., 2021. Metal–organic frameworks/alginate composite beads as
effective adsorbents for the removal of hexavalent chromium from aqueous solution. Chemosphere 270,
129487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.129487.
References 497
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesDing, H., Luo, X., Zhang, X., Yang, H., 2019. Alginate-immobilized Aspergillus niger: characterization and
biosorption removal of thorium ions from radioactive wastewater. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng.
Asp. 562, 186–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2018.11.032.
Dubey, M., Wadhwa, S., Kumar, R., 2020. Synthesis of hematite/alginate beads nanocomposite and its application in
organic dye removal. Mater. Today 28, 70–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.01.302.
Ertugrulo  glu, P., Gulcan, H.O., Ifebajo, A.O., Fallah, A., Sahin, M.F., Gazi, M., 2020. Removal of duloxetine from aque- 
ous solution by adsorption onto chemical crosslinked alginate beads. J. Dispers. Sci. Technol., 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1080/01932691.2020.1844013.
Fei, Y., Li, Y., Han, S., Ma, J., 2016. Adsorptive removal of ciprofloxacin by sodium alginate/graphene oxide compos￾ite beads from aqueous solution. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 484, 196–204.
Feng, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, X.-F., Yao, J., 2018. In-situ gelation of sodium alginate supported on melamine
sponge for efficient removal of copper ions. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 512, 7–13.
Garg, D., Majumder, C.B., Kumar, S., Sarkar, B., 2019. Removal of Direct Blue-86 dye from aqueous solution using
alginate encapsulated activated carbon (PnsAC-alginate) prepared from waste peanut shell. J. Environ. Chem.
Eng. 7 (5), 103365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2019.103365.
Grant, G.T., Morris, E.R., Rees, D.A., Smith, P.J., Thom, D., 1973. Biological interactions between polysaccharides and
divalent cations: the egg-box model. FEBS Lett. 32 (1), 195–198.
Gunes, B., Jaquet, Y., Sa´nchez, L., Carrocera, R., McGlade, D., Quilty, B., Lawler, J., 2020. Activated Graphene Oxide￾Calcium Alginate Beads for Adsorption of Methylene Blue and Pharmaceuticals. https://doi.org/10.20944/pre￾prints202009.0562.v1. Preprints 2020090562.
Guo, B., Kamura, Y., Koilraj, P., Sasaki, K., 2020. Co-sorption of Sr2+ and SeO42 as the surrogate of radionuclide by
alginate-encapsulated graphene oxide-layered double hydroxide beads. Environ. Res. 187, 109712.
Hong, H.-J., Kim, B.-G., Hong, J., Ryu, J., Ryu, T., Chung, K.-S., Park, I.-S., 2017. Enhanced Sr adsorption performance
of MnO2-alginate beads in seawater and evaluation of its mechanism. Chem. Eng. J. 319, 163–169.
Hong, H.-J., Kim, B.-G., Ryu, J., Park, I.-S., Chung, K.-S., Lee, S.M., Ryu, T., 2018. Preparation of highly stable zeolite￾alginate foam composite for strontium(90Sr) removal from seawater and evaluation of Sr adsorption performance.
J. Environ. Manage. 205, 192–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.09.072.
Idris, A., Ismail, N.S.M., Hassan, N., Misran, E., Ngomsik, A.-F., 2012. Synthesis of magnetic alginate beads based on
maghemite nanoparticles for Pb (II) removal in aqueous solution. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 18 (5), 1582–1589.
Is¸ık, B., Ugras  ¸kan, V., 2021. Adsorption of methylene blue on sodium alginate–flax seed ash beads: isotherm, kinetic
and thermodynamic studies. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 167, 1156–1167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.11.070. _
Ismail, O., Gokc € ¸e Kocabay, O., 2021. Absorption and adsorption studies of polyacrylamide/sodium alginate €
hydrogels. Colloid Polym. Sci. 299 (5), 783–796. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00396-020-04796-0.
Javadian, H., Ruiz, M., Saleh, T.A., Sastre, A.M., 2020. Ca-alginate/carboxymethyl chitosan/Ni0.2Zn0.2Fe2.6O4 mag￾netic bionanocomposite: synthesis, characterization and application for single adsorption of Nd+ 3, Tb+ 3, and Dy
+ 3 rare earth elements from aqueous media. J. Mol. Liq. 306, 112760. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2020.112760.
Javanbakht, V., Shafiei, R., 2020. Preparation and performance of alginate/basil seed mucilage biocomposite for re￾moval of eriochrome black T dye from aqueous solution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 152, 990–1001. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.10.185.
Jayalakshmi, R., Jeyanthi, J., 2019. Simultaneous removal of binary dye from textile effluent using cobalt ferrite￾alginate nanocomposite: performance and mechanism. Microchem. J. 145, 791–800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
microc.2018.11.047.
Jiang, H., Yang, Y., Lin, Z., Zhao, B., Wang, J., Xie, J., Zhang, A., 2020. Preparation of a novel bio-adsorbent of sodium
alginate grafted polyacrylamide/graphene oxide hydrogel for the adsorption of heavy metal ion. Sci. Total En￾viron. 744, 140653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140653.
Kazemi, J., Javanbakht, V., 2020. Alginate beads impregnated with magnetic Chitosan@Zeolite nanocomposite for
cationic methylene blue dye removal from aqueous solution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 154, 1426–1437. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.11.024.
Kim, H., Hong, H.-J., Jung, J., Kim, S.-H., Yang, J.-W., 2010. Degradation of trichloroethylene (TCE) by nanoscale zero￾valent iron (nZVI) immobilized in alginate bead. J. Hazard. Mater. 176 (1–3), 1038–1043.
498 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesKim, J.-C., Kim, J., Park, J., Oh, J.-K., Choi, I.-G., Kwak, H.W., 2021. Highly efficient and sustainable alginate/carbox￾ylated lignin hybrid beads as adsorbent for cationic dye removal. React. Funct. Polym. 161, 104839. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2021.104839.
Kong, Y., Zhuang, Y., Shi, B., 2020. Tetracycline removal by double-metal-crosslinked alginate/graphene hydrogels
through an enhanced Fenton reaction. J. Hazard. Mater. 382, 121060. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2019.121060.
Konwar, A., Gogoi, A., Chowdhury, D., 2015. Magnetic alginate–Fe3O4 hydrogel fiber capable of ciprofloxacin hy￾drochloride adsorption/separation in aqueous solution. RSC Adv. 5 (99), 81573–81582.
Kumar, A., Prasad, S., Saxena, P.N., Ansari, N.G., Patel, D.K., 2021. Synthesis of an alginate-based Fe3O4–MnO2
xerogel and its application for the concurrent elimination of Cr(VI) and cd(II) from aqueous solution. ACS Omega
6 (5), 3931–3945. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c05787.
Kurczewska, J., Cegłowski, M., Schroeder, G., 2019. Alginate/PAMAM dendrimer—halloysite beads for removal of
cationic and anionic dyes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 123, 398–408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.119.
Lee, H.-K., Choi, J.-W., Kim, J.-H., Kim, C.-R., Choi, S.-J., 2021. Simultaneous selective removal of cesium and cobalt
from water using calcium alginate-zinc ferrocyanide-Cyanex 272 composite beads. Environ. Sci. Pollut.
Res. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-13342-6.
Liu, H., Guo, L., Liao, S., Wang, G., 2012. Reutilization of immobilized fungus Rhizopus sp. LG04 to reduce toxic
chromate. J. Appl. Microbiol. 112 (4), 651–659.
Liu, C., Ye, J., Lin, Y., Wu, J., Price, G.W., Burton, D., Wang, Y., 2020. Removal of cadmium (II) using water hyacinth
(Eichhornia crassipes) biochar alginate beads in aqueous solutions. Environ. Pollut. 264, 114785. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114785.
Luo, W., Huang, Q., Antwi, P., Guo, B., Sasaki, K., 2020. Synergistic effect of ClO4 and Sr2+ adsorption on alginate￾encapsulated organo-montmorillonite beads: implication for radionuclide immobilization. J. Colloid Interface Sci.
560, 338–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2019.10.049.
Lv, T., Li, B., 2021. Preparation of novel magnetic sodium alginate-ferric (III) gel beads and their super-efficient re￾moval of direct dyes from water. J. Polym. Environ. 29 (5), 1576–1590.
Ma, J., Jiang, Z., Cao, J., Yu, F., 2020. Enhanced adsorption for the removal of antibiotics by carbon nanotubes/
graphene oxide/sodium alginate triple-network nanocomposite hydrogels in aqueous solutions. Chemosphere
242, 125188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125188.
Makhado, E., Pandey, S., Modibane, K.D., Kang, M., Hato, M.J., 2020. Sequestration of methylene blue dye using so￾dium alginate poly(acrylic acid)@ZnO hydrogel nanocomposite: kinetic, isotherm, and thermodynamic investi￾gations. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 162, 60–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.143.
Mallakpour, S., Behranvand, V., Mallakpour, F., 2021. Adsorptive performance of alginate/carbon nanotube-carbon
dot-magnesium fluorohydroxyapatite hydrogel for methylene blue-contaminated water. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9
(2), 105170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.105170.
Maqbool, M., Bhatti, H.N., Sadaf, S., Mana Al-Anazy, M., Iqbal, M., 2020. Biocomposite of polyaniline and sodium
alginate with Oscillatoria biomass: a potential adsorbent for the removal of basic blue 41. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 9
(6), 14729–14741. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2020.10.017.
Motshekga, S.C., Ray, S.S., Maity, A., 2018. Synthesis and characterization of alginate beads encapsulated zinc oxide
nanoparticles for bacteria disinfection in water. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 512, 686–692.
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Sajjadi, M., Iravani, S., Varma, R.S., 2020. Starch, cellulose, pectin, gum, alginate, chitin and
chitosan derived (nano) materials for sustainable water treatment: a review. Carbohydr. Polym., 116986.
Nordin, A.H., Ahmad, K., Kai Xin, L., Syieluing, W., Ngadi, N., 2021. Efficient adsorptive removal of methylene blue
from synthetic dye wastewater by green alginate modified with pandan. Mater. Today 39, 979–982. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.04.564.
Othman, I., Abu Haija, M., Kannan, P., Banat, F., 2020. Adsorptive removal of methylene blue from water using high￾performance alginate-based beads.WaterAir Soil Pollut. 231 (8), 396.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-020-04751-3.
Oussalah, A., Boukerroui, A., Aichour, A., Djellouli, B., 2019. Cationic and anionic dyes removal by low-cost hybrid
alginate/natural bentonite composite beads: adsorption and reusability studies. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 124,
854–862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.197.
Ozcan, N., Saloglu, D., 2020. Activated carbon embedded alginate beads for removing nonsteroidal anti￾inflammatory drug naproxen from wastewater: equilibrium, kinetics, thermodynamics, desorption, and reusabil￾ity. Water Sci. Technol. 81 (7), 1432–1444. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2020.196.
References 499
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesPan, L., Wang, Z., Zhao, X., He, H., 2019. Efficient removal of lead and copper ions from water by enhanced strength￾toughness alginate composite fibers. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 134, 223–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijbiomac.2019.05.022.
Pashaei-Fakhri, S., Peighambardoust, S.J., Foroutan, R., Arsalani, N., Ramavandi, B., 2021. Crystal violet dye sorption
over acrylamide/graphene oxide bonded sodium alginate nanocomposite hydrogel. Chemosphere 270,
129419. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.129419.
Patin˜o-Ruiz, D., Bonfante, H., De A´ vila, G., Herrera, A., 2019. Adsorption kinetics, isotherms and desorption studies
of mercury from aqueous solution at different temperatures on magnetic sodium alginate-thiourea microbeads.
Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 12, 100243.
Pereira, A.G.B., Rodrigues, F.H.A., Paulino, A.T., Martins, A.F., Fajardo, A.R., 2021. Recent advances on composite
hydrogels designed for the remediation of dye-contaminated water and wastewater: a review. J. Clean. Prod. 284,
124703. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124703.
Priya, Sharma, A.K., Kaith, B.S., Tanwar, V., Bhatia, J.K., Sharma, N., Panchal, S., 2019. RSM-CCD optimized sodium
alginate/gelatin based ZnS-nanocomposite hydrogel for the effective removal of biebrich scarlet and crystal violet
dyes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 129, 214–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.02.034.
Priya, Sharma, A.K., Kaith, B.S., Vipula, Chandel, K., Singh, A., Isha, 2020. Chemically modified chitosan-sodium
alginate as chemo-sensor adsorbent for the detection of picric acid and removal of biebrich scarlet. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 147, 582–594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.090.
Radoor, S., Karayil, J., Jayakumar, A., Parameswaranpillai, J., Siengchin, S., 2021. An efficient removal of malachite
green dye from aqueous environment using ZSM-5 zeolite/polyvinyl alcohol/carboxymethyl cellulose/sodium
alginate bio composite. J. Polym. Environ., 1–14.
Ravikumar, K.V.G., Kubendiran, H., Ramesh, K., Rani, S., Mandal, T.K., Pulimi, M., Mukherjee, A., 2020. Batch and
column study on tetracycline removal using green synthesized NiFe nanoparticles immobilized alginate beads.
Environ. Technol. Innov. 17, 100520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2019.100520.
Rezaei, H., Haghshenasfard, M., Moheb, A., 2017. Optimization of dye adsorption using Fe3O4 nanoparticles encap￾sulated with alginate beads by Taguchi method. Adsorpt. Sci. Technol. 35 (1–2), 55–71.
Robati, D., Mirza, B., Rajabi, M., Moradi, O., Tyagi, I., Agarwal, S., Gupta, V., 2016. Removal of hazardous dyes-BR 12
and methyl orange using graphene oxide as an adsorbent from aqueous phase. Chem. Eng. J. 284, 687–697.
Saha, S., Basu, H., Singhal, R.K., Pimple, M.V., 2017. Titania coated silica microsphere functionalized with potassium
ferrocyanide impregnated in calcium alginate for efficient removal of Cs from aquatic environment. J. Environ.
Chem. Eng. 5 (5), 5187–5195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2017.09.056.
Saravanan, A., Kumar, P.S., Govarthanan, M., George, C.S., Vaishnavi, S., Moulishwaran, B., Yaashikaa, P., 2021. Ad￾sorption characteristics of magnetic nanoparticles coated mixed fungal biomass for toxic Cr (VI) ions in aquatic
environment. Chemosphere 267, 129226.
Shelar-Lohar, G., Joshi, S., 2020. Amidoximated functionalized sodium alginate graft copolymer: an effective adsor￾bent for rapid removal of cationic dyes. Mater. Today 26, 3357–3362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matpr.2019.10.130.
Sirajudheen, P., Karthikeyan, P., Vigneshwaran, S., Basheer, M.C., Meenakshi, S., 2021. Complex interior and surface
modified alginate reinforced reduced graphene oxide-hydroxyapatite hybrids: removal of toxic azo dyes from the
aqueous solution. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 175, 361–371. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.02.024.
Soltani, R.D.C., Khorramabadi, G.S., Khataee, A., Jorfi, S., 2014. Silica nanopowders/alginate composite for adsorp￾tion of lead (II) ions in aqueous solutions. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 45 (3), 973–980.
Subhan, H., Alam, S., Shah, L.A., Ali, M.W., Farooq, M., 2021. Sodium alginate grafted poly(N-vinyl formamide-co￾acrylic acid)-bentonite clay hybrid hydrogel for sorptive removal of methylene green from wastewater. Colloids
Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 611, 125853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2020.125853.
Sutirman, Z.A., Sanagi, M.M., Ibrahim, W.A.W., 2021. Alginate-based adsorbents for removal of metal ions and ra￾dionuclides from aqueous solutions: a review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
Thakur, A.K., Kumar, M., 2021. Efficacy of green alginate beads for multi-metal removal from aqueous solution. Case
Stud. Chem. Environ. Eng. 3, 100100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cscee.2021.100100.
Thakur, S., Sharma, B., Verma, A., Chaudhary, J., Tamulevicius, S., Thakur, V.K., 2018. Recent progress in sodium
alginate based sustainable hydrogels for environmental applications. J. Clean. Prod. 198, 143–159. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.06.259.
500 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTong, K., 2017. Preparation and biosorption evaluation of Bacillus subtilis/alginate–chitosan microcapsule.
Nanotechnol. Sci. Appl. 10, 35.
Verma, A., Thakur, S., Mamba, G., Gupta, R.K., Thakur, P., Thakur, V.K., 2020. Graphite modified sodium alginate
hydrogel composite for efficient removal of malachite green dye. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 148, 1130–1139.
Wan, S., Wu, J., Zhou, S., Wang, R., Gao, B., He, F., 2018. Enhanced lead and cadmium removal using biochar￾supported hydrated manganese oxide (HMO) nanoparticles: behavior and mechanism. Sci. Total Environ. 616,
1298–1306.
Wang, B., Gao, B., Zimmerman, A.R., Lee, X., 2018. Impregnation of multiwall carbon nanotubes in alginate beads
dramatically enhances their adsorptive ability to aqueous methylene blue. Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 133, 235–242.
Wang, B., Gao, B., Wan, Y., 2019. Comparative study of calcium alginate, ball-milled biochar, and their composites on
aqueous methylene blue adsorption. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26 (12), 11535–11541.
Wang, J., Guo, M., Luo, Y., Shao, D., Ge, S., Cai, L., Lam, S.S., 2021. Production of magnetic sodium alginate polyelec￾trolyte nanospheres for lead ions removal from wastewater. J. Environ. Manage. 289, 112506. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112506.
Wen, R., Tu, B., Guo, X., Hao, X., Wu, X., Tao, H., 2020. An ion release controlled Cr(VI) treatment agent: nano zero￾valent iron/carbon/alginate composite gel. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 146, 692–704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2019.12.168.
Won, S.W., Kotte, P., Wei, W., Lim, A., Yun, Y.S., 2014. Biosorbents for recovery of precious metals. Bioresour.
Technol. 160, 203–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.01.121.
Xia, M., Zheng, X., Du, M., Wang, Y., Ding, A., Dou, J., 2018. The adsorption of Cs+ from wastewater using lithium￾modified montmorillonite caged in calcium alginate beads. Chemosphere 203, 271–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.chemosphere.2018.03.129.
Xiao, Z., Zhang, L., Wu, L., Chen, D., 2019. Adsorptive removal of Cu (II) from aqueous solutions using a novel
macroporous bead adsorbent based on poly (vinyl alcohol)/sodium alginate/KMnO4 modified biochar.
J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 102, 110–117.
Xue, P., Liu, X., Gu, Y., Zhang, W., Ma, L., Li, R., 2020. Laccase-mediator system assembling co-immobilized onto
functionalized calcium alginate beads and its high-efficiency catalytic degradation for acridine. Colloids
Surf. B Biointerfaces 196, 111348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2020.111348.
Yadav, S., Asthana, A., Singh, A.K., Chakraborty, R., Vidya, S.S., Susan, M.A.B.H., Carabineiro, S.A.C., 2021. Adsorp￾tion of cationic dyes, drugs and metal from aqueous solutions using a polymer composite of magnetic/β-cyclo￾dextrin/activated charcoal/Na alginate: isotherm, kinetics and regeneration studies. J. Hazard. Mater. 409,
124840. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124840.
Yi, X., Sun, F., Han, Z., Han, F., He, J., Ou, M., Xu, X., 2018. Graphene oxide encapsulated polyvinyl alcohol/sodium
alginate hydrogel microspheres for Cu (II) and U (VI) removal. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 158, 309–318.
Yi-cheng, W., Ai-li, Y., Wei, G., Hai-yan, F., Ze-jie, W., 2020. Al2O3 nanoparticles promote the removal of carbamaz￾epine in water by Chlorella vulgaris immobilized in sodium alginate gel beads. J. Chem. 2020, 8758432. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2020/8758432.
You, Y., KeqiQu, Huang, Z., Ma, R., Shi, C., Li, X., Guo, Z., 2019. Sodium alginate templated hydroxyapatite/calcium
silicate composite adsorbents for efficient dye removal from polluted water. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 141, 1035–
1043. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.09.082.
Yu, J., Wang, J., Jiang, Y., 2017. Removal of uranium from aqueous solution by alginate beads. Nucl. Eng. Technol. 49
(3), 534–540. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2016.09.004.
Zamri, N.I.I., Zulmajdi, S.L.N., Daud, N.Z.A., Mahadi, A.H., Kusrini, E., Usman, A., 2021. Insight into the adsorption
kinetics, mechanism, and thermodynamics of methylene blue from aqueous solution onto pectin-alginate-titania
composite microparticles. SN Appl. Sci. 3 (2), 222. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-021-04245-9.
Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Zhang, N., Zhou, Z., 2018a. Adsorptive environmental applications of MXene nanomaterials: a
review. RSC Adv. 8 (36), 19895–19905. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8RA03077D.
Zhang, H., Zhu, Y., Qu, L., Wu, H., Kong, H., Yang, Z., Santos, H.A., 2018b. Gold nanorods conjugated porous silicon
nanoparticles encapsulated in calcium alginate nano hydrogels using microemulsion templates. Nano Lett. 18 (2),
1448–1453.
Zhang, Z.-H., Xu, J.-Y., Yang, X.-L., 2021. MXene/sodium alginate gel beads for adsorption of methylene blue. Mater.
Chem. Phys. 260, 124123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2020.124123.
References 501
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesZhao, X., Wang, X., Lou, T., 2021. Preparation of fibrous chitosan/sodium alginate composite foams for the adsorp￾tion of cationic and anionic dyes. J. Hazard. Mater. 403, 124054. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124054.
Zhu, H., Chen, T., Liu, J., Li, D., 2018. Adsorption of tetracycline antibiotics from an aqueous solution onto graphene
oxide/calcium alginate composite fibers. RSC Adv. 8 (5), 2616–2621.
Zhuang, Y., Yu, F., Ma, J., Chen, J., 2017. Enhanced adsorption removal of antibiotics from aqueous solutions by mod￾ified alginate/graphene double network porous hydrogel. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 507, 250–259.
502 21. Alginate-based nanobiosorbents for bioremediation
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
22
Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent
for the effective removal of Pb2+ and
Zn2+ ions—Adsorption, equilibrium,
modeling, and optimization studies
B. Uma Maheswari, V.M. Sivakumar,
and M. Thirumarimurugan
Department of Chemical Engineering, Coimbatore Institute of Technology, Coimbatore, India
Nomenclature
AAS atomic absorption spectrometer
ANOVA analysis of variance
CC central composite design
Ce equilibrium concentration of adsorbate
EC Eichhornia crassipes
EDX energy dispersive X-ray
FTIR Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
k1 (min21
) first-order rate constant
k2 (gm/gmin) second-order rate constant
Kf (mg1–1/n g), n(g/L) Freundlich constants
kp (mg/gmin0.5) intra particle diffusion constant
LM Lemna minor
qe (mg/g) Amount adsorbed at equilibrium
qm (mg/g), KL (L/mg) Langmuir constants
qt (mg/g) amount of adsorbate species adsorbed at equilibrium and at any time
RSM response surface methodology
SEM scanning electron microscope
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 503 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00022-822.1 Introduction
Due to the increase in disposal of heavy metals into the environment, natural water bodies
have been contaminated. These contaminations are caused due to the rapid release of indus￾trial and urban waste out into the environment. The toxic effect of heavy metal ions beyond
the permissible level on living organisms is a serious environmental problem derived due to
environmental contamination (Fargasˇova´ et al., 2018). Heavy metals are non-degradable in
nature and possess high environmental perseverance (Flouty and Estephane, 2012). Promi￾nent sources of heavy metal discharge are from battery, electroplating, mining, metallurgy,
paint, and dying industry. Among the heavy metals, Zn2+ and Pb2+ are considered as dead￾liest toxic. Though the persistence of heavy metals is at the tracker level, they create an
adverse effect on human health. Inhalation of these heavy metals causes a severe impact
on human health such as kidney and nervous system damage, cancer, fever, vomiting, skin
inflammation, and anemia. Normally, industrial wastewater contains Pb2+ and Zn2+ metal
ions in the range of 5–15 mg/L, 0.03–133 mg/L, respectively. As per the US Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA) and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the limits of Pb2+, Zn2+
ions in drinking water are within the level of 0.05 mg/L– 0.1 mg/L, 0.1 mg/L– 1 mg/L,
respectively (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1990). Therefore, an essential and crucial
problem to be solved in the current scenario is the removal of the excess of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
before discharging to the aquatic systems.
Conventional treatment methods have been adopted for the removal of heavy metals from
aqueous systems such as chemical precipitation, adsorption, nanofiltration and electro dial￾ysis, membrane filtration, and revere osmosis (Fu and Wang, 2011; Marsˇa´lek and Navra´tilova´,
2011; Torma and Csefalvay, 2018; Pandey et al., 2015). However, most of these techniques re￾quire substantial financial input in the early stages and their usage is limited because of their
operating cost overriding the importance of water pollution control. They also have several
disadvantages that include incomplete metal removal, energy requirements, and generation
of toxic sludge that need proper disposal methodology. In the present day scenario, adsorp￾tion is proven to be a simple, most effective, and emerging technology for the removal of
heavy metals from wastewater (Burakov et al., 2018). Various natural elements such as peat
(Bulgariu et al., 2012), natural bentonite (Melichova´ and Hromada, 2012), chitosan and
graphene oxide composite (Najafabadi et al., 2015), activated carbon (Largitte and
Laminie, 2015), wheat pulp (Suopajarvi et al., 2015), ash (Harja et al., 2013), aloe vera leaves
and multi-walled carbon nanotubes(Moosa et al., 2015), marine algae (Bulgariu and Bulgariu,
2014), lemon and banana peels (Rajoriya and Balpreetkaur, 2014), peepal leaf (Anitha et al.,
2017), coal fly ash, and sawdust (Rachayyanavar, 2015) have been used to remove heavy
metals. Though many adsorbents have been addressed in the literature; they possess some
disadvantages such as low adsorption capacity and unsatisfactory metal ion removal at
low concentrations. Hence, researchers have focussed on the development of new adsorbents
with easy availability, high adsorption capacity, surface area, and regeneration at a low cost.
Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is a statistical tool for modeling, improving, and
optimizing the process (Mourabet et al., 2012). RSM can be utilized to determine the optimum
condition for the desired response, to determine the effects of the individual parameters as
well as their relative significance, and interaction between two or more variables
( Javanbakht and Ghoreishi, 2017). RSM comprises generally of two steps; the first step is
504 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesto model formulation and the second is to optimize the factor that influences the performance
of the response (Ahmadi et al., 2014). The application of RSM techniques in adsorption pro￾cess development can result in the enhancement product yield, reduced process variability,
closer confirmation of the output response to nominal and target requirements, and reduced
expansion time. The innovative aspect of the present research is to optimize the parameters
for the effective removal of Zn2+, Pb2+ions from battery effluent using the low-cost
nanobioadsorbent Eichhornia crassipes(EC) and Lemna minor(LM). Central Composite Design
(CCD) of RSM was applied to evaluate the effects of significant operating parameters such as
pH, contact time, adsorbent dosage, and concentration.
22.2 Materials and methods
22.2.1 Reagents
The stock solution of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions were prepared from analytical grade Pb(NO3)2,
ZnSO4.7H2O salts using double distilled water. A desired test solution (20 mg/L, 40 mg/L,
and 60 mg/L) of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ion solutions were prepared using stock solutions. All the
chemicals utilized were of analytical reagent (AR) grade purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
and Merck, used for the experimental purpose without any purification.
22.2.2 Nanobioadsorbent preparation
The aquatic weed EC and LM were collected from local ponds in and around Tamilnadu,
India. The weeds were washed with distilled water to remove dust and impurities. It is then
sun-dried for 2 days, crushed in a domestic blender, and sieved (BSS 230) to obtain a uniform
particle size. In order to prepare nanosorbent, sieved weed was added to the precursor (ac￾etone, HCl, and tetraethyl orthosilicate) stirred for about 2 h followed by sonication for about
an hour. Finally, it was dried to 120°C in a muffle furnace and powered using mortar and
pestle to obtain a fine powder. To analyze the characterization of the prepared adsorbent,
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed to detect different chemical
functional groups responsible for the adsorption of metal ions on the binding sites of the ad￾sorbents using Bruker spectrometer with the resolution of 4 cm1 in the range from 400 to
4000 cm1
. The surface texture and morphology of the nanosorbent were analyzed using
Scanning Electron Microscopy test using Philips - EEI-TEP, Holland and was carried out
followed by energy dispersive analysis.
22.2.3 Adsorption equilibrium experiments
Batch adsorption experiment was conducted to study the diverse parameters such as pH,
adsorbent dosage, metal ion concentration, and contact time for the removal of Pb2+ and Zn2+
ions. A known amount of adsorbent dosage was added to each conical flask which consists of
20 ml metal ion solution (Pb2+ and Zn2+) of different known initial concentrations
(20–60 mg/L) and was taken in a 250 mL capacity flask. During the process, the flask
containing mixture is agitated in an incubator shaker (Orbital Incubator Shaker, Royal Testing
22.2 Materials and methods 505
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesEquipment, Chennai, India) at 300 rpm for about 1–2 h. The samples were analyzed using an
atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS) (SA 172 model, Elico Limited, Chennai, India). The
data obtained from the batch adsorption studies were used to calculate the percentage re￾moval of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions by using the following Eq. (22.1):
Percentage removal of metal ions ð Þ¼ % Co Ce
C0
100 (22.1)
where C0 and Ce are initial and equilibrium concentration states (mg/L) respectively. The
number of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions absorbed at the equilibrium qe can be determined by using
Eq. (22.2)
qe ¼ ð Þ Co Ce V
W (22.2)
where qe is the equilibrium amount of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions absorbed per unit mass (mg/g) of
the adsorbent. V is the volume of the stock solution (L) and W is the mass of the adsorbent
used (g). Langmuir and Freundlich’s isotherms are the most commonly used isotherms for
determining the equilibrium characteristics in an adsorption process (Langmuir, 1918;
Freundlich, 1906). Langmuir isotherm is generally applicable to the monolayer adsorption
process. The calculation of these isotherms is to stimulate the experimental data that is greatly
affected by the sorbent–sorbent systems. Langmuir isotherm suits well with the monolayer
adsorption process and metal-binding sites. The Langmuir isotherm is given by Eq. (22.3):
Ce
qe
¼ 1
qmKL
+
Ce
qm
(22.3)
where qm(mg/g) and KL (L/mg) are Langmuir constants related to adsorption capacity and
rate of adsorption. RL is the dimensionless separation factor used to determine the character￾istic of the process. It is represented in Eq. (22.4):
RL ¼ 1
1 + KLC0
(22.4)
where C0 is the initial solute concentration. The value of RL determines the adsorption process
that is favorable (0 < RL < 1), unfavorable (RL > 1), or irreversible (RL ¼ 0). Freundlich model
determines the heterogeneous surface energies in the system and expressed by the following
Eq. (22.5):
qe ¼ KfC1=n e (22.5)
where Kf (mg1–1/n /g1
) and n (g/L) are Freundlich constant that corresponds to bonding
energy and the measure of the deviation from linearity of adsorption. If the value of n > 1,
the adsorption process is favorable.
22.2.4 Adsorption kinetics and mechanism experiments
The adsorption kinetic study was performed in a series of conical flasks with 100 mL of
known concentration of metal ion solutions by varying the contact time from 24 to 120 h.
506 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe adsorption mixtures were then agitated in an incubator shaker at 300 rpm. For every 24 h
time interval, the samples were drawn and it was analyzed for measurements of Pb2+ and Zn2+
ions using atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS). The pseudo-first and second order was gen￾erally used to fit the kinetic data (Lagergren, 1898; Ho andMcKay, 1999). The qt is the amount of
Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions adsorbed at the time t was calculated from Eq. (22.6):
qt ¼ ð Þ Co Ct V
W (22.6)
where Ct(mg/L) is the concentration of metal ions at any time t. In order to determine the
adsorption rate and feasibility of the adsorption process, the adsorption kinetic data were
modeled using pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order model. Pseudo-first-order rate in
Eq. (22.7) is given by:
logð Þ¼ qe qt logqe  k1
2:303t (22.7)
where qe and qt are the amounts of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions absorbed in mg/L at equilibrium and at
time t in hours. k1 (min1
) is the adsorption rate constant. Pseudo-second-order equation an￾alyzes the equilibrium adsorption. It is represented in Eq. (22.8):
t
qt
¼ 1
k2q2
e
+
1
qe
t (22.8)
where k2 (g/mg min) is the rate constant of second-order adsorption. The adsorption mech￾anism was determined by applying the values of kinetic data in the intraparticle diffusion
model (Weber and Morris, 1963). The intraparticle diffusion model is given by Eq. (22.9):
qt ¼ kpt
1=2 + C (22.9)
where kp is the intraparticle diffusion rate constant (mg/g min0.5), t is the time (min), and C is
the constant related to the thickness of the boundary layer.
22.2.5 Statistical analysis using response surface methodology
In the present study, Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is used to optimize different
parameters. In order to study the individual and synergistic effect of the four factors such as
pH, initial metal ion concentration, adsorbent dosage, and contact time towards the response,
Central Composite Design (CCD) was implemented using Design Expect Software 11.
Table 22.1 shows the range and levels of the sovereign variables selected for the adsorption
of Pb2+ and Zn2+ Fion. CCD provides more advantages than other designs because it is used to
fit the quadratic surface, optimize the parameters with the minimum number of experiments,
and also to analyze the interaction between the parameters. Based on the three basic princi￾ples of an ideal experimental design, CCD was designed in such a way that it comprises of no
center points (no 1), complete 2n factorial design (n is the number of parameters), and two
axial points in which the axis of the design parameters are at a distance 2n/4 from the design
center. The total number of design points is shown in Eq. (22.10):
N ¼ 2n + 2n + no (22.10)
22.2 Materials and methods 507
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe second-degree polynomial Eq. (22.11) is used to estimate the response of the depen￾dent variables.
Y ¼ bo + b1X1 + b2X2 + b3X3 + b4X4 + b11X2
1 + b22X2
2 + b33X2
3 + b44X2
4 + + b12X1X2 + b13X1X3
+ b14X1X4 + b23X2X3 + b24X2X4 + b34X3X4 (22.11)
where Y0 is predicted response, X1, X2, X3, X4 are independent parameters, b0 is the offset
term, b1, b2, b3, b4 are linear effects, b11, b22, b33, b44 are squared effects, and b12, b13, b14, b23,
b24, b24 are interaction terms.
22.3 Results and discussion
22.3.1 Characterization of adsorbents
The surface morphology and texture of EC and LM were analyzed and the results are
depicted in Figs. 22.1A and 22.2A, respectively. The shape of EC and LM appears as non￾aggregated morphology with small flakes and crumpled structures. The surface appears to
be irregular and has porous sites which indicate that the EC and LM have a more adequate
morphology for the adsorption of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions. The expanded layer of nano￾bioadsorbent favors more adsorption of metal ions onto interlayer surfaces. The occurrence
of white patches on the surface of the adsorbents (EC, LM) as shown in Figs. 22.1A and 22.2A
are the presence of non-clay minerals covering Cl, K. The synthesized EC and LM were further
analyzed using the EDX technique for the determination of the elemental composition of the
synthesized adsorbent. The weight percentage (weight %) of Si, O, C, K, Cl within the
compounds were depicted in Table 22.2. From the results, it is evident that the presence of
Si compounds in EC and LM is suitable for the adsorption of various organic pollutants
(Shirzad-Siboni et al., 2015).
The FTIR spectra of nanoadsorbent that correspond to EC and LM are shown in Fig. 22.3.
The peak of EC at 1639.02 cm1 and 3914.48 cm1 corresponds to OH-stretching vibration.
Carboxylic acid OdH is represented by the peaks at 2364.59 cm1
, respectively. The band
around 1065.94 cm1 is attributed to the asymmetric stretching vibration of Si-O-Si tetrahe￾dral with LM. Similarly, the peaks located at 2923.03 cm1 are characteristics of the carbonyl
TABLE 22.1 Levels and ranges of the independent variables.
Coded variable levels
Independent variables Code Unit 2α 210 1 α
pH X1 – 1 2 7 10 12
Adsorbent dosage X2 g 0.1 0.5 2 2.5 3.5
Initial concentration X3 mg/L 15 10 40 60 85
Time X4 h 12 24 72 120 168
508 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesgroup stretching in the nanoadsorbent. The corresponding peaks observed at 948 cm1 are
due to C]S thiocarbonyl stretching.
22.3.2 Effect of pH
The acidity of the solution is one of the most important parameters to be considered since it
affects the adsorption ofmetalions. The effect of pH on the adsorption ofmetalions ontoECand
FIG. 22.1 SEM image of Eichhornia crassipes (EC).
FIG. 22.2 SEM image of Lemna minor (LM).
22.3 Results and discussion 509
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 22.2 Elemental composition of Eichhornia crassipes (EC) and
Lemna minor (LM).
Weight percentage of elements
Elements EC (%) LM (%)
O 51.56 54.16
Si 26.63 34.66
C 21 10.50
Cl 0.81 –
K – 0.74
FIG. 22.3 FTIR images of Eichhornia crassipes (EC) and Lemna minor (LM).
510 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesLM was investigated by changing the solution pH range of 2–10, adsorbent dosage 1 g/L for an
initial concentration of 10 mg/L, and results are shown in Fig. 22.4. The experimental findings
clearly reveal that removal of Pb2+ ions increases with an increase in solution pH and reaches
the maximum value at a pH 5 for both EC and LM. An appreciable decrease in percentage re￾moval of Pb2+ was observed after pH 5. This variation is mainly because of the fact that at lower
pH values, the negative sites of the adsorbents taken by the H+ andH3O+ ionslead to the decline
in the vacant site, consequently causes a decrease in Pb2+ions adsorption. Though the metal ion
adsorption increases with an increase in solution pH, on further increment of pH a reduction in
adsorption due to the formation of metal hydroxides was observed.
Similarly, maximum removal of Zn2+ with respect to EC, LM is observed at pH 4 and pH 5,
thereafter there is a decline in the adsorption process. At higher pH values, Zn2+ ions react
with hydroxyl ions to yield zinc precipitates which automatically decreases the quantity of
free zinc ions available for adsorption and hence overall adsorptive capacity dropped. How￾ever, based on the experimental results, pH 5 was chosen as the optimum value for further
experimental studies for both Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions removal.
22.3.3 Effect of adsorbent dosage
The effect of adsorbent dosage is an important parameter to obtain the quantitative re￾moval of metal ions from battery effluent. Effect of EC and LM dosage on the removal of
Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions was studied at 10 mg/L metal ion concentration. Fig. 22.5 shows the effect
of adsorbent dosage (EC, LM) on Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions adsorption. The adsorbent dosage was
examined by varying EC and LM dosage from 0.5 to 3 g/L to optimize the adsorbent loading
to get maximum removal of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions. It can be seen from Fig. 22.5 that percentage
removal increases with an increase in adsorbent dosage, after which there is a negligible
FIG. 22.4 Effect of pH.
22.3 Results and discussion 511
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesincrease in removal percentage. Generally, on increase in the adsorbent dose more surface
area and adsorption sites will be created (Namdeti and Pulipati, 2013). Due to the agglomer￾ation of particles, there is a negligible increase in percentage removal of both Pb2+ and Zn2+
ions beyond the dosage level of 1 g/L, for both EC and LM.
22.3.4 Effect of initial concentration
The effect of the initial metal ion concentration on the removal of metal ions was analyzed
and represented in Fig. 22.6. It was observed that the removal of metal ions decreases with an
increase in metal ion concentration. It is mainly due to the fact that at lower concentrations,
the adsorption sites take up the available Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions rapidly owing to the less com￾petition among the metal ions for the adsorption sites of the available binding sites (Anzeze
et al., 2014). Similarly, the lesser removal of metal ions at higher concentrations maybe be￾cause of higher metal ion concentration to the available active sites. The percentage removal
of Pb2+ions decreases from 86% to 74% for EC and 89% to 80% for LM at an initial metal ion
concentration varying from 10 to 60 mg/L, respectively. Similarly, the decrease in percentage
removal of Zn2+ ion is observed in the range from 90% to 82% for EC and 93% to 82% for LM,
respectively.
22.3.5 Effect of contact time
The effect of adsorption of Zn2+ and Pb2+ with respect to EC and LM was studied by taking
20 mg/L of the metal solution with 1 g/L of adsorbent dosage at pH 5. The resulting mixture
FIG. 22.5 Effect of adsorbent dosage.
512 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceswas experimented at various time intervals ranging from 24 to 144 h. From the results in
Fig. 22.7, it is observed that the adsorption process of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions increased rapidly
in the beginning, followed by a slower phase approaching equilibrium condition. It is evident
from Fig. 22.7, LM possesses maximum removal with an increase in contact time up to 48 h for
both metal ions, thereafter it remains constant. Similarly, maximum removal (89%) was found
FIG. 22.7 Effect of contact time.
FIG. 22.6 Effect of initial concentration.
22.3 Results and discussion 513
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesat 120 h for Zn2+ ions and 96 h for Pb2+ ions removal (86%) by EC. At the beginning of the
adsorption process, the availability of more number of active binding sites of the EC and
LM larger surface area was formed thereby facilitates the binding of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions, ul￾timately lead to faster adsorption. Slower phase is observed in the later stage may be due to
the occupation of active adsorption sites by the Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions (Nithya et al., 2016).
22.3.6 Adsorption isotherms
The effect of initial concentration data was fitted to the two-parameter adsorption models
such as Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms and the graphical representation of these iso￾therms are given in Figs. 22.8 and 22.9, respectively. The Langmuir qm (mg/g), KL (L/mg),
RL with the R2 were estimated from the plot of Ce vs. Ce/qe, and the corresponding values
are listed in Table 22.3. The value of RL was found to be between 0 and 1 which indicates fa￾vorable adsorption (Hal et al., 1966). The Freundlich constants K (mg(1–1/n)
/g) and n (g/L)
value with the R2 are estimated from the plot of log Ce vs. log qe were listed in Table 22.3.
The observed n value lies between 1 and 10 that indicates the adsorption is a physical process
(McKay et al., 1981)
From the results, it is observed that adsorption isotherm data were best-fitted to the Lang￾muir adsorption based on high R2 values than the Freundlich model. The comparison of the
different monolayer adsorption capacity qm (mg/g) values for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions observed in
this study were compared well with some other adsorbents reported in the literature are men￾tioned in Table 22.4. The comparative studies on the adsorption capacity of Pb2+ and Zn2+
studied in this work indicate that EC and LM have higher adsorption capacity.
FIG. 22.8 Langmuir plot.
514 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices22.3.7 Adsorption kinetics
The kinetic parameters, adsorption capacity at equilibrium, and coefficient of determina￾tion (R2
) were found by plotting log(qeqt) vs. time for pseudo-first-order model and t/qt vs.
time for pseudo-second-order model, respectively. The corresponding results were tabulated
in Table 22.5 and pictorial representations of the models were shown in Figs. 22.10 and 22.11,
respectively. It can be seen from Table 22.5 that pseudo-second-order model posed a higher
FIG. 22.9 Freundlich plot.
TABLE 22.3 Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm for removal of Pb2+ and Zn2+ by Eichhornia crassipes (EC) and
Lemna minor (LM).
Pb2+ Zn2+
Isotherm Parameters Eichhornia crassipes Lemna minor Eichhornia crassipes Lemna minor
Langmuir qm 35.71 28.50 38.46 26.31
KL 4.08 8.75 3.71 7.60
RL 4  10–3 2  103 4  103 2  103
R2 0.97 0.98 0.93 0.95
Freundlich Kf 4.43 4.25 4.13 4.12
n 1.90 1.43 1.56 1.57
R2 0.90 0.82 0.91 0.95
22.3 Results and discussion 515
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescorrelation coefficient, and there exists a good agreement between the calculated and exper￾imental qe values than the pseudo-first-order model. Hence, the pseudo-second-order model
better represented the adsorption kinetics and supports the assumption (Lagergren, 1898)
that the rate-limiting step of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions onto EC and LM may be chemisorption.
From the obtained results, it is clear that the kinetic results are fitted well to a chemisorption
model. The intraparticle diffusion model was plotted to verify the influence of mass transfer
resistance for binding of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions to EC and LM. The intraparticle diffusion rate
constant kp and intercept C can be calculated from the slope and intercept of linear plot t
1/2
vs qt (Fig. 22.12). The plot does not pass through the origin which indicates that intraparticle
diffusion is not the sole rate-limiting step else, the rate-limiting step is governed by the bound￾ary layer up to some specific degrees. Hence, both adsorption as well as intraparticle diffusion
TABLE 22.4 Comparative studies on the adsorption capacity of Pb2+ and Zn2+ onto different adsorbents.
Adsorbates Adsorbents (mg/g) References
Pb2+ Eichhornia crassipes (EC) 35.71 Present work
Pb2+ Lemna minor (LM) 28.5 Present work
Pb2+ Van apple pulp 15.96 Depci et al. (2012)
Pb2+ Heartwood of Areca catechu powder 11.72 Chakravarty et al. (2010)
Pb2+ Chitoan blended poly vinyl alcohol 14.24 Anitha et al. (2015)
Zn2+ Eichhornia crassipes (EC) 38.46 Present work
Zn2+ Lemna minor (LM) 26.31 Present work
Zn2+ Red algae 18.51 Anilkumar et al. (2016)
Zn2+ Physical seed hull 12.29 Mohammad et al. (2010)
Zn2+ Xanthate modified magnetic chitosan 20.8 Zhu et al. (2012)
TABLE 22.5 Parameter of kinetic models for the adsorption of Pb2+ and Zn2+ by Eichhornia crassipes (EC) and
Lemna minor (LM).
Pseudo-first order Pseudo-second order
Intraparticle
diffusion
Adsorbates Adsorbents
qe,
exp k1∗10–3
qe,
cal R2 k2∗1023
qe,
cal R2 kp∗1023 C R2
Pb2+ Eichhornia crassipes
(EC)
39.0 3.2 3.1 0.95 4.3 41.6 0.97 8 1 0.94
Lemna minor (LM) 38.2 2.3 2.2 0.91 6.1 40.1 0.92 6 1 0.91
Zn2+ Eichhornia crassipes
(EC)
38.6 2.5 2.4 0.90 2.2 39.8 0.93 1 1.8 0.87
Lemna minor (LM) 37.2 1.6 2.1 0.80 6.5 38.4 0.95 2 2.4 0.90
516 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 22.11 Pseudo-second-order model.
FIG. 22.10 Pseudo-first-order model.
22.3 Results and discussion 517
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesdetermines the rate-limiting step. By the instantaneous operation, the adsorption of Pb2+ and
Zn2+ ions onto EC and LM occurs consecutively by surface adsorption and intraparticle dif￾fusion as indicated by two-liner portions in Fig. 22.12. The first linear position is affected by the
boundary layer followed by the intraparticle layer in the second linear position.
22.3.8 Central composite design model
The design matrix incorporating the preparation variables, their ranges, and the responses
in which are percentage removal of both Pb2+ and Zn2+ (YPb and YZn) are represented in
Tables 22.6 and 22.7. In order to evaluate and compare the responses, CCD was applied
for the development of polynomial regression equations which were all quadratic expres￾sions as suggested by the software (Garba et al., 2016a). Based on the polynomial’s highest
order, the model expression was selected in accordance with the sequential model sum of
squares where the model was not aliased and the additional terms were significant (Garba
and Rahim, 2015). The final empirical modeling equation for the percentage removal of
Pb2+ (YPb(EC), YPb(LM)) and Zn2+ ions (YZn(EC),YZn(LM)) responses are given from Eqs.
(22.12)–(22.15), respectively.
YPbEC ¼ 84:4826:39A1:76B + 5:51C + 18:84D6:09AB + 7:12AC + 9:55AD + 9:48BC
+ 2:49BD + 4:63CD13:76A2 4:27B2 + 1:15C2 11:93D2
(22.12)
YPbLM ¼ 89:1123:88A0:23B + 5:25C + 17:21D5:16AB + 5:89AC + 8:82AD + 8:71BC
+ 1:20BD + 4:27CD11:07A2 + 0:30B2 0:84C2 15D2
(22.13)
FIG. 22.12 Intraparticle diffussion model.
518 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesYZnEC ¼ 74:2327:70A + 2:51B5:40C + 15:88D + 4:22AB6:30AC + 0:15AD1:71BC
+ 2:03BD + 1:47CD21:75A2 + 2:64B2 10:74C2 + 1:62D2
(22.14)
YZnLM ¼ 87:8113:61A + 4:05B5:79C + 22:89D + 0:70AB + 1:33AC + 11:91AD1:38BC
1:99BD + 5:15CD + 0:056A2 4:26B2 9:28C2 13:02D2
(22.15)
The synergetic and antagonistic effects of the corresponding variables are indicated by the
positive and negative signs before the terms (Garba et al., 2016b) The appearance of one var￾iable in a term signified a uni-factor effect, two variables implies a double effect a second￾order term of variable appearance indicate the quadratic effect (Ahmad and Alrozi, 2010)
As presented in Figs. 22.13–22.16, the correlations of R2 between experimental and predicted
data of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions removal with respect to EC and LM are 0.961 (YPb),0.959(YPb),0.930
(YZn),0.920(YZn) that are within the desirability range. Multiple regression was developed
from the second-order polynomial equation. The experimental and predicted values are in
TABLE 22.6 ANOVA for response quadratic model of Pb2+ ions by Eichhornia crassipes (EC) and Lemna minor
(LM).
Sum of squares
Degrees of
freedom Mean square F value Prob>F
Source EC LM EC LM EC LM EC LM EC LM
Model 19,017.24 16,344.06 14 14 1358.37 1167.43 27.69 26.03 < 0.0001 < 0.0001
x1 4628.967 3790.22 1 1 4628.96 3790.22 94.37 84.52 < 0.0001 < 0.0001
x2 8.65 0.18 1 1 8.65 0.18 0.17 0.004 0.6804 0.9497
x3 349.10 316.33 1 1 349.10 316.33 7.11 7.054 0.0176 0.0180
x4 1044.97 872.35 1 1 1044.97 872.35 21.30 19.45 0.0003 0.0005
x1 x2 100.78 72.29 1 1 100.78 72.29 2.05 1.61 0.1722 0.2235
x1 x3 529.90 362.02 1 1 529.90 362.02 10.80 8.07 0.0050 0.0124
x1 x4 261.74 223.49 1 1 261.74 223.49 5.33 4.98 0.0355 0.0413
x2 x3 1076.48 843.40 1 1 1076.48 843.40 21.94 18.80 0.0003 0.0006
x2 x4 45.34 10.60 1 1 45.34 10.60 0.92 0.23 0.3515 0.6338
x3 x4 239.56 204.36 1 1 239.56 204.36 4.88 4.55 0.0431 0.0497
x1
2 82.64 53.42 1 1 82.64 53.42 1.68 1.19 0.2139 0.2923
x2
2 7.14 0.03 1 1 7.14 0.03 0.14 0.17 0.7080 0.9780
x3
2 2.00 1.04 1 1 2.00 1.04 0.04 0.02 0.8425 0.8805
x4
2 253.93 401.59 1 1 253.93 401.59 5.17 8.95 0.0380 0.0091
Residual 735.72 672.63 15 15 49.04 44.84
22.3 Results and discussion 519
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesTABLE 22.7 ANOVA for response quadratic model of Zn2+ions by Eichhornia crassipes (EC) and Lemna minor
(LM).
Sum of squares
Degree of
freedom Mean square F value Prob>F
Source EC LM EC LM EC LM EC LM EC LM
Model 13,468.51 12,251.25 14 14 962.03 875.08 14.86 14.52 <0.0001 <0.0001
x1 699.85 168.91 1 1 699.85 168.91 10.81 12.80 0.0050 0.1148
x2 62.35 161.94 1 1 62.356 161.94 0.96 2.68 0.3419 0.1219
x3 58.67 67.37 1 1 58.67 67.37 0.90 1.11 0.3561 0.3070
x4 671.06 1395.34 1 1 671.06 1395.34 10.36 23.16 0.0057 0.0002
x1 x2 75.63 2.05 1 1 75.63 2.05 1.168 0.03 0.2967 0.8561
x1 x3 105.47 4.72 1 1 105.47 4.72 1.62 0.07 0.2211 0.7832
x1 x4 0.06 390.13 1 1 0.06 390.13 8.93 6.47 0.9760 0.0224
x2 x3 19.68 12.84 1 1 19.68 12.84 5.30 0.21 0.5894 0.6509
x2 x4 31.31 29.87 1 1 31.31 29.87 2.48 0.49 0.4973 0.4921
x3 x4 15.30 187.90 1 1 15.30 187.90 11.02 3.11 0.6338 0.0977
x1
2 86.76 0.0005 1 1 86.76 0.0005 1.34 9.38E-06 0.2650 0.9976
x2
2 73.73 191.41 1 1 73.73 191.41 1.139 3.17 0.3026 0.0949
x3
2 70.67 52.75 1 1 70.67 52.75 5.09 0.87 0.3126 0.0364
x4
2 1.97 127.52 1 1 1.97 127.52 0.03 2.11 0.0008 0.1663
Residual 970.6917 903.71 15 15 64.71 60.24 –– – –
FIG. 22.13 Correlation between EXPERIMENTAL AND PREDICTED Experimental and Predicted data for Pb2+
ions removal for Eichhornia crassipes (EC).FIG. 22.14 Correlation between experimental and predicted data for Pb2+ ions removal for Lemna minor (LM).
FIG. 22.15 Correlation between experimental and predicted data for Zn2+ ions removal for Eichhornia crassipes
(EC)
22.3 Results and discussion 521
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesfine agreement with each other.The R2 values of all the four responses are high and in rea￾sonable agreement with Adj.R2 values of 0.928 (Pb2+), 0.870 (Zn2+) for EC and 0.923 (Pb2+),
0.901 (Zn2+) for LM, for the removal of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions indicating that the predicted value
is in agreement with the actual value.
22.3.9 Statistical analysis
ANOVA is required to validate the importance and how satisfactory the models are (Garba
and Rahim, 2014). The mean square values are calculated by dividing the sum of squares of
each variation sources, model, and error variance by the respective degrees of freedom. If the
value of Prob. > F is lesser than 0.5, the model is termed as significant. With respect to Pb2+
ions, percentage removal by the adsorbents EC and LM as can be seen from the Table 22.6, the
model F value is 27.69, 26.03, and the Prob. > F value of <0.0001 justifying that the model is
significant. From Table 22.7, F value 14.86, 14.52 as well as Prob. > F of <0.0001 indicated that
the model was significant with Zn2+ removal. From the statistical studies obtained, it was
clear that all the four models corresponding to Eqs. (22.12)–(22.14) were adequate to predict
the removal of Pb 2+, Zn 2+ ions within the range of variables studied. Figs. 22.13–22.16 show
the predicted values versus experimental values for percentage removal of Pb 2+ and Zn 2+
ions with respect to EC, LM. It is evident that the models developed were successful in cap￾turing the correlation between adsorption variables and response, when the theoretical value
obtained was quite close to the experimental values. Adequate precision measures the signal
to the noise ratio, a ratio greater than 1 is desirable (Garba et al., 2014). In this case, the ratio of
18.13, 18.19 for Pb2+ and 14.79, 15.5 for Zn2+ by EC and LM indicates an adequate signal which
infers that this model can be used to steer the design space.
FIG. 22.16 Correlation between experimental and predicted data for Zn2+ ions removal for Lemna minor (LM)
522 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFrom Table 22.6, it is clear that the individual effect inflicted by pH for the removal of Pb2+
was superior with the highest F values 94.3, 84.52 on both EC, LM. The quadratic effect was
more pronounced by time. pH of EC and LM are analogous with each other. Less effect is
observed in the case of pH with EC and LM. The interaction effects between pH and concen￾tration (F value - 10.83 (EC), 8.07 (LM)), dosage and concentration (F value - 21.9 (EC), 18.8
(LM)) is significant. The interaction effect between pH and dosage, pH, and time are analo￾gous with F values 2.05 (EC), 1.61 (LM), and 5.3 (EC), 4.9 (LM).
Figs. 22.17–22.20 demonstrate the effect of a three-dimensional response surface plot for
the studied variables. Fig. 22.17 shows the effect of pH and concentration with respect to
EC for Pb2+ ions removal. The effect of adsorbent dosage and time with respect to Pb2+ ions
removal for LM is presented in Fig. 22.18. From Table 22.7, it is obvious that the individual
effect of pH and time seems to be analogous with higher F values 10.81, 10.36 for EC. Simi￾larly, contact time is more significant with respect to the individual effect on both EC and LM
corresponding to F values 10.36, 23.16. Interaction effects corresponding to pH and time are
significant with F values 8.93, 6.47 for both the adsorbents. A quadratic effect is more pro￾nounced with respect to concentration and dosage for EC and LM.
A three-dimensional response surface constructed in Fig. 22.19 shows the combined effect
of pH and time for Zn2+removal with respect to EC. An upsurge in percentage removal of Zn2
FIG. 22.17 Three-dimensional response surface of Eichhornia crassipes (EC) for Pb2+ ions.
22.3 Results and discussion 523
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 22.18 Three-dimensional response surface of Lemna minor (LM) for Pb2+ ions.
FIG. 22.19 Three-dimensional response surface of Eichhornia crassipes (EC) for Zn2+ ions.
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices+ for LM can be observed by an increase in concentration from 10 to 60 mg/L and contact time
range from 24 to 120 h (Fig. 22.20).
22.3.10 Process optimization
The main purpose of this study is to find the optimum process parameters for the higher
percentage removal of Pb2+ ions and Zn2+ ions. In order to overcome the difficulty in optimiz￾ing the response under the same condition, the function of desirability was applied using De￾sign - Expert Software (version 11). By setting the target criterion as the maximum value for all
four responses. The model validation is shown in Table 22.8. The optimum adsorption
FIG. 22.20 Three-dimensional response surface of Lemna minor (LM) for Zn2+ ions.
TABLE 22.8 Model validation.
Adsorbent Desirability pH Dose gm Concentration mg/L Time h Expt. % RSM % Error %
EC-Pb2+ 1 5 0.5 20 96 86 85.0 1
LM-Pb2+ 1 5 0.5 20 48 90 88.5 1.5
EC-Zn2+ 1 5 0.5 20 120 89 89.0 –
LM-Zn2+ 1 5 0.5 20 48 93 91.3 1.7
22.3 Results and discussion 525
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescondition obtained is at an initial concentration of10 mg/L, adsorbent dosage 1 g at pH 5 with
desirability 1 for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions removal in case of both EC and LM. Experimental and
predicted values for removal of Pb2+ at optimum condition are 86% and 85%, 90%, and 88.5%
with relatively small errors of 1 and 1.9 for EC and LM, respectively. Similarly, for Zn2+
removal, EC and LM show 89% and 93% (experimental) and 89% and 91.3% (predicted)
results with the least error 1.7, respectively. From Table 22.8, it is evident that the results
are in conformity with response surface analysis results confirming that the RSM can be used
as a successful tool to optimize the process constraints.
22.4 Conclusion
The factorial design of experiments for the batch experimental study of Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
using EC and LM were studied. Four adsorption parameters such as pH, adsorbent dosage,
initial concentration, and time were optimized using CCD. The maximum percentage
removal (93%) was obtained at optimum condition pH (5), adsorbent dosage (1 g/L), initial
concentration (10 mg/L), time (48 h) for Zn2+ ions removal with respect to LM with desirabil￾ity 1. Equilibrium and kinetic data were analyzed and the results reveal that Langmuir iso￾therm and pseudo second order be the best-fitted model. The experimental values were in
good conformity with the simulated values from the response surface analysis and it con￾firmed that the RSM using the statistical design of experiments can be efficiently used to
optimize the process parameters. The results from the present adsorption experimental stud￾ies reported that the Lemna Minor (LM) can be utilized as an effective low-cost adsorbent for
the removal of Pb2+and Zn2+ ions from battery effluent.
Acknowledgment
The authors convey sincere thanks to the Management and Principal of Coimbatore Institute of Technology,
Coimbatore-641014 for their support through the Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme (TEQIP￾III) fund.
References
Ahmad, M.A., Alrozi, R., 2010. Optimization of preparation conditions for mangosteen peel-based activated carbons
for the removal of Remazol brilliant blue R using response surface methodology. Chem. Eng. J. 165, 883–890.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2010.10.049.
Ahmadi, A., Heidarzadeh, S., Aokhtari, A.R., Darezereshki, E., Harouni, H.S., 2014. Optimization of heavy metal
removal from aqueous solutions by maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) nanoparticles using response surface methodology.
J. Geochem. Explor. 147, 151–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gexplo.2014.10.005.
Anilkumar, B., Chitti Babu, N., Kavitha, G., 2016. Biosorption of zinc on to GracilariaCorticata (red algae) powder and
optimization using central composite design. J. Appl. Sci. Eng. Methods 2, 412–425.
Anitha, T., Senthil Kumar, P., Sathish Kumar, K., Sriram, K., Feroze Ahmed, J., 2015. Biosorption of lead(II) ions onto
nano-sized chitosan particle blended polyvinyl alcohol (PVA): adsorption isotherms, kinetics and equilibrium
studies. Desalin. Water Treat. 57, 13711–13721. https://doi.org/10.1080/19443994.2015.1061951.
Anitha, A., JinasMansura, M., Rajeswari, A., 2017. Adsorption and removal of zinc (II) from aqueous solution using
peepal (ficusreligiosa) leaf derived carbon. Int. J. Mod. Trend. Eng. Res. 4, 31–37. https://doi.org/10.21884/
IJMTER.2017.4149.O7NNV.
526 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAnzeze, D.A., Onyari, J.M., Shiundu, P.M., Gichuki, J.W., 2014. Adsorption of Pb (II) ions from aqueous solutions by
water hyacinth (Eichhornia Crassipes): equilibrium and kinetic studies. Int. J. Environ. Pollut. Remidiat. 2, 89–95.
https://doi.org/10.11159/ijepr.2014.013.
Bulgariu, L., Bulgariu, D., 2014. Enhancing biosorption characteristics of marine green algae (Ulva lactuca) for heavy
metals removal by alkaline treatment. J. Bioproc. Biotech. 4, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-9821.1000146.
Bulgariu, L., Bulgariu, D., Matei Macoveanu Melichova, Z., Hromaa, L., 2012. Characteristics of sorption of
uncomplexed and complexed Pb(II)from aqueous solutions onto peat. Chem. Pap. 66, 239–247. https://doi.
org/10.2478/s11696-012-0149-z.
Burakov, A.E., Galunin, E.V., Burakova, I.V., Kucherova, A.E., Agarwal, S., Tkachev, A.G., Gupta, V.K., 2018. Adsorp￾tion of heavy metals on conventional and nanostructured materials for wastewater treatment purposes: a review.
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 148, 702–712. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2017.11.034.
Chakravarty, P., Sarma, N.S., Sharma, H.P., 2010. Removal of lead(II) from aqueous solution using heartwood of Areca
catechu powder. Desalination 256, 16–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2010.02.029.
Depci, T., Kul, A.R., Onal, Y., 2012. Competitive adsorption of lead and zinc from aqueous solution on activated car￾bon prepared from Van apple pulp: study in single- and multi-solute systems. Chem. Eng. J. 200, 224–236. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2012.06.077.
Fargasˇova´, A., Filova´, A., Ondrejkovicova´, I., Mackulˇak, T., 2018. The effect of Cd(II) complexes with nicotinamide
(NA) on microalgae growth, production of chlorophylls, oxygen evolution and cd adsorption. Chem. Pap. 72,
2273–2281. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11696-018-0488-5.
Flouty, R., Estephane, G., 2012. Bioaccumulation and biosorption of copper and lead by unicellular algae
Chlamydomonas reinhardtiiin single and binary metal systems: a comparative study. J. Environ. Manag. 11,
106–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2012.06.042.
Freundlich, H.M., 1906. Over the adsorption in solution. J. Phys. Chem. 57, 385–471.
Fu, F., Wang, Q., 2011. Removal of heavy metal ions from wastewaters: a review. J. Environ. Manag. 92, 407–418.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvm an.2010.11.011.
Garba, Z.N., Rahim, A.A., 2014. Process optimization of K2Cr2O4-activated carbon from Prosopis africana seed hulls
using response surface methodology. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 107, 306–312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jaap.2014.03.016.
Garba, Z.N., Rahim, A.A., 2015. Optimization of activated carbon preparation conditions from Prosopis africana seed
hulls for the removal of 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol from aqueous solution. Desalin. Water Treat. 56, 2879–2889.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19443994.2014.963150.
Garba, Z.N., Rahim, A.A., Hamza, S.A., 2014. Potential of Borassus aethiopum shells as precursor for activated carbon
preparation by physico-chemical activation; optimization, equilibrium and kinetic studies. J. Environ. Chem. Eng.
2, 1423–1433. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2014.07.010.
Garba, Z.N., Bello, I., Galadima, A., Lawal, A.Y., 2016a. Optimization of adsorption conditions using central compos￾ite design for the removal of copper (II) and lead (II) by defatted papaya seed. Karbala Int. J. Mod. Sci. 2, 20–28.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kijoms.2015.12.002.
Garba, Z.N., Ugbaga, N.I., Abdullahi, A.K., 2016b. Evaluation of optimum adsorption conditions for Ni (II) and cd (II)
removal from aqueous solution by modified plantain peels (MPP). Beni-suef Univ. J. Basic Appl. Sci. 5, 170–179.
Hal, K.R., Eagleton, L.C., Acrivers, A., Vermenlem, T., 1966. Pore and solid diffusion kinetics in fixed adsorption con￾stant pattern conditions. Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam. 5, 212–223. https://doi.org/10.1021/i160018a011.
Harja, M., Buema, G., Sutiman, D.M., Cretescu, I., 2013. Removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solutions using
low-cost sorbents obtained from ash. Chem. Pap. 67, 497–508. https://doi.org/10.2478/s11696-012-0303-7.
Ho, Y.S., McKay, G., 1999. Pseudo-second order model for sorption processes. Process Biochem. 34, 451–465.
Javanbakht, V., Ghoreishi, S.M., 2017. Application of response surface methodology for optimization of lead removal
from an aqueous solution by novel superparamagnetic nanocomposite. Adsorpt. Sci. Technol. 35, 241–260.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0263617416674474.
Lagergren, S., 1898. About the theory of so-called adsorption of soluble substances. Kung Svenska Vetenska Handl 24,
1–39.
Langmuir, I., 1918. The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of glass, mica and platinum. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 40,
1361–1368.
Largitte, L., Laminie, J., 2015. Modelling the lead concentration decay in the adsorption of lead onto a granular ac￾tivated carbon. J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 3474–3481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2014.12.020.
Marsˇa´lek, R., Navra´tilova´, Z., 2011. Comparative study of CTAB adsorption on bituminous coal and clay mineral.
Chem. Pap. 65, 77–84. https://doi.org/10.2478/s11696-010-0076-9.
References 527
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesMcKay, G., Otterburn, M.S., Sweeney, A.G., 1981. The removal of colour from effluent using various adsorbents-III .
Silica: rate processes. Water Resour. 14, 15–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(80)90037-8.
Melichova´, Z., Hromada, L., 2012. Adsorption of Pb2+ and Cu2+ Ions from aqueous solutions on natural bentonite. Pol.
J. Environ. Stud. 22, 457–464.
Mohammad, M., Maitra, S., Ahmad, N., Bustam, N., Sen, T.K., Dutta, B.K., 2010. Metal ion removal from aqueous
solution using physic seed hull. J. Hazard. Mater. 179, 363–372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.03.014.
Moosa, A.A., RidhaA, M., HussienN, A., 2015. Removal of zinc ions from aqueous solution by bioadsorbents and
CNTs. Am. J. Mat. Sci. 6, 105–114. https://doi.org/10.5923/j.materials.20160604.04.
Mourabet, M., Rhilassi, E.L.A., Boujaady El, H., Bennani-Ziatni El, M., Hamri El, R., Taitai, A., 2012. Removal of fluo￾ride from aqueous solution by adsorption on hydroxyapatite (HAp) using response surface methodology. J. Saudi
Chem. Soc. 19, 603–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jscs.2012.03.003.
Najafabadi, H.H., Irani, M., Rad, L.R., Haratameh, A.H., Haririan, I., 2015. Removal of Cu2+, Pb2+ and Cr6+ from aque￾ous solutions using a chitosan/graphene oxide composite nanofibrous adsorbent. RSC Adv. 5, 16532–16539.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA01500F.
Namdeti, R., Pulipati, K., 2013. Response surface methodology for optimization of zinc biosorption by Grewia
Orbiculata L. Int. J. Stat. Math. 5, 6–15.
Nithya, K., Sathish, A., Senthil Kumar, P., Ramachandran, T., 2016. Biosorption of hexavalent chromium from aque￾ous solution using raw and acid-treated biosorbent prepared from Lantana camara fruit. Desalin. Water Treat. 5,
25097–25113. https://doi.org/10.1080/19443994.2016.1145605.
Pandey, P.K., Sharma, S.K., Sambi, S.S., 2015. Removal of lead(II) from waste water on zeolite-NaX. J. Environ. Chem.
Eng. 3, 2604–2610. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2015.09.008.
Rachayyanavar, S.V., 2015. Removal of zinc from aqueous solution using adsorption phenomena. Int. J. Sci. Eng. Res.
6, 227–232.
Rajoriya, S., Balpreetkaur, 2014. Adsorptive removal of zinc from waste water by natural biosorbents. Int. J. Eng. Sci.
Invent. 3, 60–80.
Shirzad-Siboni, M., Khataee, A., Hassani, A., Karaca, S., 2015. Preparation, characterization and application of a
CTAB-modified nanoclay for the adsorption of an herbicide from aqueous solutions: kinetic and equilibrium stud￾ies. C. R. Chim. 18, 204–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crci.2014.06.004.
Suopajarvi, T., Liimatainen, H., Karjalainen, M., Upola, H., Niinimaki, J., 2015. Lead adsorption with sulfonated
wheat pulp nano celluloses. J. Water Proc. Eng. 5, 136–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2014.06.003.
Torma, C.Z., Csefalvay, E., 2018. Nanofiltration and electrodialysis: alternatives in heavy metalcontaining high salin￾ity process water treatment. Chem. Pap. 72, 1115–1124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11696-018-0433-7.
US Environmental Protection agency (UEPA), 1990. Environmental Pollution Control Alternatives: Drinking Water
Treatment for Small Communities. USEPA, Washington, DC.
Weber, W.J., Morris, J.C., 1963. Kinetics of adsorption on carbon from solution. J. Sanit. Eng. Div. 89, 31–60.
Zhu, Y., Hu, J., Wang, J., 2012. Competitive adsorption of Pb(II), cu(II) and Zn(II) onto xanthate-modified magnetic
chitosan. J. Hazard. Mater. 221, 155–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.04.026.
528 22. Synthesis of novel nanobioadsorbent for Pb2+ and Zn2+ ions
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
23
Nanocrystalline NiO powder:
Synthesis, characterization and
emerging applications
Bhagaban Kisana
, Ranjan K. Bhuyanb
,
and Ranjan K. Mohapatrac
a
Post Graduate Department of Physics, Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India b
P.G.
Department of Physics, Government (Autonomous) College, Angul, Odisha, India c
Department
of Chemistry, Government College of Engineering, Keonjhar, Odisha, India
23.1 Introduction
The investigation on fine crystalline metal-oxide particles has become a growing interest in
research in many diverse fields such as magneto-optic, targeted drug delivery, gas sensors,
energy conversion, electrochromics, photo-catalysis (Hosokawa et al., 2012; Llandro et al.,
2010; Rungsawang et al., 2010; Azhagu Raj et al., 2017; Arif et al., 2018; Abbasa et al.,
2019). These nanoparticles lie between clusters whose properties are strongly dependent
on its size and submicron-sized particles which have almost the properties same as bulk ma￾terials. In particular, the study of magnetism in and their magnetic interactions in different
types of metal-oxide powders has yielded much consideration because of finite size and
defect-induced magnetic properties and applications in magneto-optic, magneto electronic,
energy storage, spintronics, etc. (Thanh, 2012; Pankhurst et al., 2009; Veiseh et al., 2010;
Darton et al., 2008; Haase and Nowak, 2012; Kita et al., 2010; Mohanty et al., 2020; Dormann
et al., 1997; Fiorani, 2005; Ferna´ndez-Garcı´a et al., 2004; Arico et al., 2005; Kuwa et al., 2020). In
addition, the large evolution of NiO nanocrystalline powders and thin films has been intense
to gain room temperature ferromagnetism (FM) which are applicable for spintronic devices
where both charge and spin are used to transport and store information in a new approach
(Fiorani, 2005; Kodama et al., 1999).
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 529 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00023-XRecently, there have been large works reported on the magnetic properties of nanosized
anti-ferromagnetic (AFM) system and many reports explain the presence of FM in
nanoparticles (Bhowmik et al., 2004; Khadar et al., 2003). This was mostly initiated from
Neel’s suggestion that fine nanocrystalline powders of AFM system ought to show a weak
FM or super paramagnetism (SPM) (Neel, 1962) properties. Richardson et al. (Richardson
and Milligan, 1956) primarily reported on room temperature magnetic properties in NiO sys￾tem with varying size. Eventually, the effect of size and its magnetic properties, exchange
bias, (Kodama et al., 1997; Thota and Kumar, 2007) was reported. Further, the correlation
between crystalline size and surface effects (Mandal et al., 2011) on the room temperature
magnetic properties were reported. Some theoretical calculation and experimental data have
shown that NiO nanoparticles ranging from 1 to 50 nm can have both AFM and FM couplings
(Yi et al., 2007). Recently non-magnetic like Gd, La doped in NiO also shows room temper￾ature ferromagnetism (Gokula et al., 2020; Siddique and Tripathi, 2020). It may be observed
that many of the reported research on NiO-based systems are bottom-to-top procedure with
varying size. Accordingly the correlation of the emerging magnetic properties in NiO is quite
complex because of interaction between finite size, and surface (interface) effects, etc. Further,
the top-to-bottom procedure with systematic varying size for studying the FM properties of
pure NiO is significantly absent. Hence, in this chapter we investigate a simple, reasonable
technique called ball milling process using planetary ball mill to prepare nanocrystalline
NiO powders with the following observations of (i) refinement of NiO powder with milling
time, (ii) the effects of finite size variation and stress induced during milling for the structural
and low temperature FM study under ZFC and FC condition of milled NiO powders,
(iii) correlation between the crystal structure, and FM of these pure and milled powders
and to explore the possibility to enhance their magnetic properties.
23.2 Methods for synthesis and characterization of NiO powder
23.2.1 Method for synthesis
In this wok, we have concentrated on the synthesis of pure NiO powders with high-energy
planetary ball milling techniques under argon atmosphere. Milling of pure NiO oxide pow￾ders was carried out by planetary high-energy ball milling in the presence of an argon (Ar) gas
atmospheric condition. The photographic view of the planetary ball comprising of a horizon￾tal support disc on which vials are mounted and the schematic view of milling process are
depicted in Fig. 23.1. The vials were mounted in such a way over the horizontal disc which
rotates opposite to the direction of that of the disc. Such a motion is termed as planetary-like
motion which produces tremendous outward force acting on the balls; as a result the balls
collide with each other as well on the wall of the vial with greater impact. During the process
of milling, the powders (oxide) undergo repeated cold welding and fracture leading to dis￾integration of the powders, causing in the refinement of crystallite size in to nanocrystalline
alloys (Soni, 2001; Suryanarayana, 2001, 2004; Koch, 2002). With the increase in milling dura￾tion, the alloys become amorphous. In order to get a desired nanocrystalline powder, suitable
milling parameters should be maintained as discussed below. Moreover, the synthesis of
530 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesnanocrystalline powders also depend on the nature of milling media, milling vial, and the
balls used during milling process (Bhuyan et al., 2020).
Pure NiO commercial powders (Sigma Aldrich) were taken in high energy planetary ball
mill and fill up with argon gas (99.8%). The milling procedure was being implemented for
pure NiO powders for various milling periods (tm ¼ 0.25–60 h). The grinding was performed
at 500 rpm and the ball-to-powder ratio of weight was done at 10:1. The grinding rate and
ball-to-powder ratio of weight was done primarily by optimizing and examining the modi￾fication in the structural and magnetic properties of the NiO powders. For the purpose of
preventing any heating during grinding and its effect on the attributing properties, the grind￾ing method was scheduled to stop for 15 min following each 15 min of operation. In addition,
the ground powders were gathered at periodic intervals. The evolutions of nanostructure/
fine particles of NiO powders were taken for characterizing its property.
23.2.2 Characterization techniques
The crystal structure of the pure and milled powders was studied from high-power X-Ray
diffractometer (18 kW). XRD data were measured at rate of 0.004°/s for studying the lattice
parameters as a function of tm. The surface morphology were observed with FE-SEM and
compositional analysis was done by using SEM/EDX unit. TEM technique was used to study
the microstructural properties of the powders and magnetic properties were analyzing by
VSM with room temperature M-H loops. Low temperature M-T measurements were also
done in the temperature range between 2 K and 400 K at different constant applied fields with
SQUID magnetometer under zero field ZFC and field cool (FC) conditions. Electron paramag￾netic resonance (EPR) measurement were studied with at X-band frequency (ν ¼ 9.4 GHz)
and 100 kHz magnetic field modulation in powder form.
FIG. 23.1 Image of ball mill (left) and schematic diagram (right) for the movement of balls inside the vials during
the process of ball milling.
23.2 Methods for synthesis and characterization of NiO powder 531
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices23.3 Structures and properties of nanocrystalline NiO powders
23.3.1 Structural studies
The un-milled NiO powder (Kisan et al., 2014) shows the face-centered cubic (fcc) structure
from its Bragg reflection. Similarly, the as-milled NiO powder (Kisan et al., 2014) also exhibits
fcc structure with no impurity phase. From the observation of the XRD peaks shows that the
sharp Bragg reflections observed in pure un-milled NiO powders broadens significantly and
considerable shift in peak position towards a lower angle. The broadening indicates the for￾mation of refined and strain in NiO powders and the peak shifting indicates a considerable
change in the lattice parameter during the milling process.
It is well known that broadening Bragg reflection peaks take place due to the reduction of
crystallite size (D), broadening due to instrument and strain (η) caused by the density of
dislocations (ρ) induced during ball milling process (Ding et al., 2001; Kisan et al., 2014). Sub￾sequently, to calculate the individual contribution from D and η, Bragg reflection peak were
examined by using Williamson-Hall Plot (WHP) method (Williamson and Hall, 1953) (Eq.
23.1).
Δθcosθ ¼ kλ
DWHP
+ 4ηsinθ (23.1)
where, Δθ is full width at half maximum (FWHM) of Bragg peaks (in radians) and eliminating
the broadening from instrumental contribution, θ is angle of peak position, λ(¼ 1.5406 A˚ ) is
the wavelength of the X-ray, DWHP is average crystallite size, k is constant value 0.9 by pre￾suming spherical nature of powders and η is lattice strain. In order to validate the WHP fit to
XRD data, the Eq. (23.1) is modified to.
ΔK ¼ k
DWHP
+Kη (23.2)
where, ΔK [¼ (Δθcosθ)/λ] and K ¼ 4sinθ/λ. Fig. 23.2 depicts the plot of ΔK versus K for the
30 h milled NiO powders and fit (linear) to the obtained data using Eq. (23.2). From fitting
observed that all data not fall into the straight line fit and hence not entirely obey the linear
fit to WHP method. The observed variation in the data can be correlated to the presence of
anisotropic difference due to the different excess strain during milling. So, some Bragg peaks
may exhibit large strain value than others peaks.
Ungar and coworkers suggested a modification to WHP method by including dislo￾cation contrast factor in order to consider the anisotropic distribution of dislocation ef￾fects on different Bragg peaks (Ungar and Tichy, 1999; Ungar et al., 1999). Hence, to
separate the size and strain effects effectively for the as-milled NiO oxide samples,
the XRD patterns were analyzed using modified Williamson-Hall Plot (MWHP) method.
Using this approach, the broadening corresponding to each contribution of reflections
can be given as.
ð Þ ΔK 2 ¼ 0:9
D
 2
+ πb2ρ
2B
 K2
C (23.3)
532 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceswhere, 4K [¼ (2cosθΔθ)/λ], K ¼ 2sinθ/λ, D is average crystal size, b is modulus of the Burgers
vector of dislocations taken as b ¼ ffiffiffi
3
p =2  a (Shen et al., 2005), ρ is average dislocation density
and B is a constant, taken as 10 for a wide range of dislocation distributions (Reves et al., 1996)
and C(¼Chkl ¼ Ch00(1  qH2
)) is dislocation contrast factor and for the elastically anisotropic
materials (Ungar et al., 1999; Shen et al., 2005; Reves et al., 1996; Kalita et al., 2008; Mhadhbi
et al., 2010), where the residual strains affect some Bragg reflections more than the others, q is
a constant and for cubic H2 ¼ (h2
k 2 + k 2
l
2 + l
2
h2
)/(h2 + k 2 + l
2
).
Fig. 23.3 depicted the typical plot of (ΔK)
2 versus K2
C and the linear fit using Eq. (23.3). It is
clear from the figure that all the XRD data almost fall into straight line and hence fitted using a
straight line. From the straight line fit, intercept and slope D and ρ values were calculated.
Note that the dislocation density is the important structural parameters (Hull and Bacon,
2001) affect sits microstructure and correlated to the induced strain and reduced crystal size
as η ¼ ρDb
2 ffiffi
3
p . The determined values of D and η for as-milled NiO powders are plotted as a func￾tion tm (Kisan et al., 2014).
With increasing tm, D decreases largely up to tm ¼ 10 h and then remains almost constant
upon subsequent milling. NiO powders milled more than 10 h exhibit fine nano-sized crystals
with the size of around 11 nm. On the other hand, the strain increases drastically for tm up to
10 h and then decreases slightly for above 10 h milling. The strain value is quiet high for
FIG. 23.2 The plot of ΔK versus K for the 30 h milled NiO powder. The straight line is the linear fit to Eq. (23.2).
23.3 Structures and properties of nanocrystalline NiO powders 533
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmilled as compared to pure NiO powders or NiO powders prepared by any other chemical
process (Proenca et al., 2011; Tajiri et al., 2015). The results suggest that the dislocations
formed by the high-energy ball mill is extremely influencing on the refinement of nanocrys￾talline microstructure. At small scale of crystal size, the longer period of milling does not cre￾ate further dislocations and it is not easy to generate additional dislocations in nano-scale
crystal. However, the existing dislocations will be rearranged and some dislocations may
be induced due to lengthen grinding and the strain values decreases moderately for 60 h
milled powders.
The morphology and evolution of nanocrystalline microstructures, the pure un-milled
NiO and as-milled NiO powders were characterized using FE-SEM and TEM measurement
respectively. Fig. 23.4 shows the typical FE-SEM images of un-milled NiO powders and
as-milled NiO powders for tm ¼ 1, 10, 20, 40, and 60 h. The average particle size of 1 to
3 μm is observed from particle morphology in un-milled NiO powders.
Further, with increasing milling time tm, the average crystallite size of the milled powders
decreases considerably less than 300 nm. At the same time, the tiny particles start to the ag￾glomerate to form accumulated particles and increases with tm. These accumulations of par￾ticles are due to frequent cold welding and breaking of powder during grinding process. Fig.
23.5 showed the typical plane-view bright-field TEM (BF-TEM) images, selected area electron
diffraction (SAED) patterns, HR-TEM images and i-FFT images of selected areas of HR-TEM
FIG. 23.3 The plot of (ΔK)
2 versus K2
C for the 30 h milled NiO powder. The straight line is the best linear fit to Eq.
(23.3).
534 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesimages of pure un-milled and as-milled NiO powders for 3, 10, and 30 h. BF-TEM image of the
un-milled powder shows clear morphology and size is around 40 and 70 nm. The diffraction
rings in the SAED pattern observed the evidence of polycrystalline nature. Further, as-milled
NiO powder shows the fine nano-crystalline micro-structure and non-uniform morphology
obtained from BF-TEM images. In addition, diffraction rings from SAED pattern, indexed to
fcc structure only and confirm polycrystalline in nature of the pure and milled NiO powders.
The average size of the crystals was calculated from BF-TEM and HR-TEM images; the
FIG. 23.4 FE-SEM images of (A) pure un-milled and as-milled NiO powders at tm ¼ (B) 1, (C) 10, (D) 20, (E) 40 and
(F) 60 h (Kisan et al., 2015).
23.3 Structures and properties of nanocrystalline NiO powders 535
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 23.5 BF-TEM, SAED,
HR-TEM and i-FET of selected areas
of high-resolution TEM of (A, B)
pure NiO and milled NiO at various
tm: 3 h (C, D), 10 h (E, F) and 30 h (G,
H), respectively (Kisan et al., 2015).
536 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesaverage crystal size was calculated at different position and value between 40 and 70 nm for
the un-milled NiO to about 14 nm and 11 nm for 3 h and 30 h milled powders, respectively.
From TEM images the crystallite size of NiO shows nearly a close to the XRD results. Though,
the nanoparticle powders show non-uniform shapes with wide ranging size distribution. The
lattice parameter was carefully calculated from high-resolution TEM images by i-FFT method
using a GATAN digital micrograph. The i-FFT method is easy to find the lattice fringes and
the calculated inter-planar space is about 0.24 nm which is assigned to NiO (111) lattice plane.
Thus, viewing the TEM and XRD results both are in good accord with each other and physical
properties changes must depend on crystal size of NiO powders.
23.3.2 Magnetic properties
The initial magnetization (IM) curves and magnetic hysteresis (M-H) loops and expanded
version of hysteresis loops near to origin for un-milled and as-milled NiO powders at various
tm measured at room temperature. From the figure, it is clearly shown that the un-milled NiO
powder indicates AFM nature because of weak response to field and hysteresis loop passing
through the origin (Kisan et al., 2014). Conversely, for the tm powder the magnetization in￾creases moderately at lower fields and a gradual increase in moment with increasing fields.
The amount of increase in the magnetization at low field increases progressively with increas￾ing tm below 30 h and then decreases slightly with increasing tm > 30 h. It is observed that
hysteresis loops are switched slightly to the negative axes and shift/move decreases with
increasing tm, which evidence the existing of exchange bias in as-milled NiO powders.
The observed results revealed two achievable magnetic elements related with the magne￾tization measurement. As the bulk NiO powder exhibits a clear AFM nature and the milling of
NiO powders produces defects and size reduction with the lattice expansion, the two￾component nature can be ascribed to low-field regions which is an easily magnetization
and a non-saturating part responsible for a linear change at the higher applied field. These
components can be extracted by fitting IM curves by Eq. (23.4).
M Hð Þ¼ MFMð Þ H + χAFMH (23.4)
where, M(H) is the magnetization variation as a function of applied field (H), MFM is the mag￾netization due to easily magnetizing component, χAFM is AFM susceptibility. The calculated
values of magnetic moment at 12 kOe (M12kOe), the maximum change in the magnetization
with applied field in low-field region (dM/dH), change in coercivity value(HC) with tm,
and the determined value of MFM from the Eq. (23.5) and the calculated values of exchange
bias, HE [¼ (jHC +jjHCj)/2] plotted as a function of average crystal size. M12kOe increases
regularly with increasing tm up to 30 h and then decreases slightly for tm > 30 h, resulting in a
maximum in the curve at around 30 h of milling. Similarly, the value of dM/dH also increases
up to 30 h and then above tm ¼ 30 h of milling decreases. On the other hand, HC of pure NiO is
AFM nature and value is zero, increased remarkably ( 290 Oe) after milling. Additionally,
HC value achieved 290 Oe for 20 h and then constant for above 20 h. In order to understand
any correlation between structural and magnetic parameters, the determined values of MFM
from Eq. (23.5) and the HE value plotted with NiO crystallite size (Kisan et al., 2014). Inter￾estingly, MFM increases gradually with decreasing crystal size up to 15 nm and exhibits a
23.3 Structures and properties of nanocrystalline NiO powders 537
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceshuge increase below 15 nm. The relationship between MFM and the crystal size has been
closely approximated by using three-parameter empirical model (Seber and Wild, 2003) as
given in Eq. (23.5).
MFMð Þ¼ D ð Þ x + y  D 1=z (23.5)
where, MFM(D) is the crystal size dependence of induced FM component, x, y, and z are
constants. The fitting of the experimental data yields the values of x, y and z as 31,
3.1, and 1.7, respectively. On the other hand, HE decreases almost linearly with decreasing
crystal size. This suggests that NiO powders change into induced FM from the pure AFM
nature. To obtain the effect of crystal size, the variation of HE with crystal size was fitted to
Eq. (23.6).
HEð Þ¼ D HEð Þ0 + m  D (23.6)
where, HE(D) is size-dependent exchange bias, HE(0) is size-independent exchange bias com￾ponent, and m is a constant. The fitting of the experimental data provides HE(0) ¼ 18.94 Oe
and m ¼ 2.66 Oe/nm.
The room temperature FM in the as-milled NiO powders, we correlated with crystallite
size. The un-milled NiO AFM nature, AFM spins coupled to (111) planes are compensated
and hence observed zero magnetic moment (Kodama et al., 1997; Thota and Kumar, 2007;
Ulmane et al., 2007; Winkler et al., 2008; Kisan et al., 2015; Ravikumar et al., 2016).
Therefore, the hysteresis loop of un-milled NiO powder exhibits small response to mag￾netic field and passes through origin. It is familiar that ball milling method generates refine￾ment of crystal size and huge imperfection with creation of vacancies. The values of D
decrease and, η and V increase with increasing tm confirm from the XRD analysis. In addition,
pure un-milled NiO pale green in color changed to dark green with increasing milling, which
is related to the development of non-stoichiometric in NiO powders induced by the imper￾fection, reduce in size, and oxidation state change from Ni2+ into Ni3+ (Kisan et al., 2015;
Ahmad et al., 2006). This influences a change in the magnetic properties as follows: With in￾creasing tm, the Ni2+-O2-Ni2+ super-exchange interaction diminishes due to defects and re￾finement of crystallites size as evidenced from Raman and XPS spectra results and increases
the number of surface spins with respect to particle core (Ravikumar et al., 2016; Peck et al.,
2011). This shows net magnetic moment due to spin alignment, in a relatively low magnetic
field. Under this circumstance, the exchange bias between the produce from uncompensated
FM at the surface and the spins of compensated AFM core. Furthermore, the development of
structural chaos because of the formation of imperfection like oxygen vacancies gives rise to
the finite magnetization. Therefore, the magnetization of nanostructured NiO increases as
expressed in Eq. (23.5) and the exchange bias effect decreases with decreasing crystal size
as seen through Eq. (23.6). Furthermore, the increase in lattice value can be explained based
on defects and broken bonds, and possible surface anisotropy to controlling the Ni2+-O2-Ni2
+ super exchange interaction and exchange bias effect. So, these results confirm a good rela￾tionship between finite crystallite size and magnetic properties of milled NiO powders. To
further confirm the origin of the induced FM and to rule out any expected impurities contri￾bution, chemical compositions were analyzed using EDS, respectively. No other impurities
are detected under the elemental analysis using EDS method (Fig. 23.6).
538 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFIG. 23.6 Low-temperature M-T data of milled NiO powders at different tm and measured under different applied magnetic fields.To understand the effect of temperature and magnetic field on the magnetic properties of
NiO powders as-milled at different tm, low-temperature M-T measurements in constant ap￾plied fields under ZFC and FC conditions were measured in between 2 K and 400 K temper￾ature range. In ZFC process, initially the sample was cooled down to 2 K under without any
applied magnetic field and magnetization was measured with temperature by applying con￾stant DC magnetic field during warming process up to 400 K. Subsequently, in FC condition
the same constant value of applied field was applied and cooled down to 2 K and then the
magnetization was measured heating to 400 K. Fig. 23.6 displays normalized magnetization
[M(T)/M300K]with temperature for the milled powders at 1, 5, 30, and 40 h done in ZFC
(MZFC) and FC (MFC) conditions in a various field of 0.1, 0.5, 2, and 5 kOe. A bifurcation
(Tbifur) between the MZFC and MFC was observed at around 390 K for all the samples measured
at low-applied magnetic fields. Interestingly, the value of Tbifur shifts to low temperature with
increasing applied field. It is generally accepted that the existence of Tbifur indicates large dis￾tribution of magnetic moment, which arises from the large size distribution of the crystals
(Zysler et al., 2000; De Biasi et al., 2002; Winkler et al., 2005; del Bianco et al., 2008). In addition,
MZFC curve shows two peaks: (i) a broad peak (Tbroad) below the Tbifur and (ii) another sharp
peak at very low temperature below 10 K. These peaks in the MZFC curve corresponds to two
types of blocking processes, i.e., Tbroad below Tbifur can be assigned to the thermal relaxation
comes from the surface spins, while the sharp peak at low temperature (Tfz) represents the
freezing of disordered surface spins. The earlier report revealed that Tfz depends on size
of the particles. Peck et al. (Peck et al., 2011) reported only the observation of paramagnetic
tail without any sharp Tfz at low temperature for the NiO nanoparticles of size around
18 nm. Duanet al (Duan et al., 2012) reported the values of Tfz as 10.4 K for 12.4 nm-sized
NiO. Meneses et al (Meneses et al., 2010) found the Tfz peak at 11 K for NiO powders for
5.8 nm. Similarly, Winkler et al. (Winkler et al., 2008) also reported a slightly higher Tfzpeak
at 17 K for NiO powder for 3 nm. On the other hand, Meneses et al. (Meneses et al., 2010) and
Tadic et al. (Tadic et al., 2011) reported a lower value of Tfz of 9 K and 6.5 K for 5.8 nm in NiO
powders dispersed in polyvinyl pyrrolidone and 3 nm NiO powder implant in silica matrix,
respectively. Fig. 23.6 shows the value of Tfz in 8.4 K, 9.7 K, 10.2 K, and 11.1 K for the NiO
powders milled at 1 h (14.4 nm), 5 h (11.5 nm), 30 h (11 nm), and 40 h (10.8 nm), respectively.
Results are close to what is reported in literature indicating that the size dependent surface
spins of the fine NiO powders have important results due to freezing of the surface spins, i.e.,
surface atoms of the powders increases with reducing crystallite size. This leads to an increase
in surface disorder with decreasing crystal size and accounts for increased value of Tfz with
decreasing size. The MFC data are found to increase gradually with decrease in temperature
down to about 35 K at different applied fields for all the measured samples and then exhibit
rapid increases in magnetization down to 4.2 K, which may be ascribed to the surface spin
freezing. Interestingly, none of the samples show any peak in MFC curves under FC process,
which is again concurrent with the literature (Peck et al., 2011; Meneses et al., 2010; Tadic
et al., 2011; Ghosh et al., 2006; Ulmane et al., 2011). With increasing the magnitude of applied
field, the difference between MZFC and MFC data decreases up to 2 kOe. On further increasing
the field to 5 kOe, both MZFC and MFC data follow almost a similar variation at low
temperature.
Similarly, to know the nature of magnetism with the freezing of particle magnetic mo￾ments, the field-dependent values of Tbifur and Tfz were plotted as a function of field with
540 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesde Almedia-Thouless (A-T) line shown in Fig. 23.7 (de Almeida and Thouless, 1978) as de￾scribed by Eq. (23.7).
HATð Þ T ∝ 1Tbifur=Tsg  1:5 (23.7)
It is clearly seen that Tbifur decreases with increasing applied field and compliance with the
A-T line. This is a supportive evidence of spin-glass phase in the presently investigated sam￾ples. For instance, if oxygen ion misses from the surface, the exchange bond would be broken
and the exchange interaction energy would be reduced. Furthermore, the coordination number
from surface of Ni2+ ions changes than the bulk, which results in a distribution of exchange
energies for the surface spins and color change of the powder due to non-stoichiometric in
NiO (Ahmad et al., 2006). This gives rise disorder surface in spin and leads to spin-glass phase
in the presently investigated samples (Kodama et al., 1997; Peck et al., 2011; Martinez et al.,
FIG. 23.7 Plots of (A) Tbifur versus H2/3 and
(B) Tfz versus H2/3 for NiO at different tm. The
solid lines (in (A)) show best linear fits using
Eq. (23.7) with R2 of 0.995, 0.9986, 0.9991, 0.9982
for tm ¼ 1, 5, 30 and 40 h, respectively.
23.3 Structures and properties of nanocrystalline NiO powders 541
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices1998). This could be attributed to the different rate of change of Tfz with field upon decreasing
the size of the NiO crystals (Thota and Kumar, 2007; Tiwari and Rajeev, 2005) with increasing
tm.
23.3.3 Electron paramagnetic studies
EPR spectroscopy is a useful technique to study the defects states. NiO powders reveal
high defects as prepared in ball milling process and to understand the effect of nanostructure,
room temperature EPR measurement was done and displayed in Fig. 23.8. Pure NiO and
milled NiO powders exhibit different nature of spectra. While the pure NiO displays spec￾trum with large broadening and reduced intensity due to AFM nature (Yi et al., 2007; Shim
et al., 2008; Lyu et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2016) associated with Ni2+-O2-Ni2+ super-exchange
interaction at larger D, the milled NiO powders exhibit resonant peaks at low fields. To un￾derstand the peak shift more in details, see the extracted value of peak position with D in the
inset of Fig. 23.8. As D decreases from 36 nm to 25 nm, the resonant peak position decreases
dramatically. With a further decrease in D, the resonant peak position varies sluggishly. The
large decrease in resonant peak position indicates possible FM signature of the materials
(Zhang et al., 2016; Srinivas et al., 2011). It may be noted that EPR signal of most bulk
FIG. 23.8 Room-temperature EPR spectra of pure and milled NiO powders at different tm. Inset: The variation of
resonant peak position versus D.
542 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAFM materials disappears due to the effect of very strong exchange bias and require reso￾nance frequency higher than EPR GHz region. Therefore, the appearance of EPR signal in
the currently investigated samples can be corresponded to the following mechanisms:
(i) generation of surface spins due to size reduction and defects (Proenca et al., 2011; Winkler
et al., 2008), (ii) formation of a SG like shell on the surface of the crystal (Tiwari and Rajeev,
2005; Kenning et al., 1987), (iii) refinement of crystal with change in Neel temperature (Neel,
1962; Kodama et al., 1997; del Bianco et al., 2008; Rinaldi-Montes et al., 2014; Makhlouf et al.,
2008), (iv) the development of a weak magnetic moment due to the canting of the magnetic
sub lattices (Kodama et al., 1997; Zysler et al., 1994). A comparison between EPR signal,
structural-, and temperature-dependent magnetic measurements suggests that the formation
of EPR signal could be assigned to the presence of surface spin of NiO crystals due to defects
and size reduction, which gives good description for both room temperature and magnetic
properties with field variation. Therefore, it has been established that EPR signals are affected
by the milling process and modifies the surface nature of the powders due to defects and size
effects.
23.4 Emerging applications
23.4.1 Environmental remediation
The presence of heavy metal inorganic pollutants such as Cd, Cu, Zn, Ni, Cr in surface
water is dangerous to the human health and also for the environment and hence, need to
eliminate from surface waters (Mahmood et al., 2011a; Sheel and Nayaka, 2012). Cr(VI) com￾pounds are largely used in several industrial purposes such as steel manufacturing, metal
plating, and tanning leather, etc. (Hu et al., 2005; Qamar et al., 2011). However, Cr(VI) causes
significant health issues such as respiratory problems, lung cancer, ulcers, kidney and liver
damage, and ultimate death (Oubagaranadin and Murthy, 2009; Baral et al., 2008; Naeem
et al., 2009). The techniques used for the removal of such metal ions from the aqueous solu￾tions are ion exchange, reverse osmosis, chemical precipitation, foam flotation, and adsorp￾tion. Due to high surface area, natural porosity and low production cost, the NiO NPs are the
suitable adsorbents for the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions (Mahmood et al.,
2011b; Song et al., 2009). It has been reported that NiO NPs prepared from precipitation
method were used for the removal of Cr(VI) from aqueous solutions (Behnajady and
Bimeghdar, 2014). The study concluded that the adsorption percentage increases by raising
the dosage of NiO adsorbent. Moreover, pH ¼ 4.7 is the suitable pH for the adsorption and
the adsorption percentage of Cr(VI) decreases by increasing the pH of the solution. Further,
the self-assembly of Ni and NiO NPs embedded in ordered MPC and polymer frameworks
shows excellent adsorption properties for dyes (Wang et al., 2011). The NiO self-assembly was
synthesized by evaporation of metal-containing liquid crystalline mesophases of lignin￾derived polymers and transition metal nitrate yields NiO@MPC nanostructures (Chen
et al., 2013a). Further, the pure NiO is a non-toxicant and has photostability properties
(Fernandes et al., 2009). This is used as photocatalyst for the degeneration of several organic
pollutants (Bahadur et al., 2008; He et al., 2010). The increasing environmental contamination
23.4 Emerging applications 543
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesreleased from many different industries may be absorbed by effective photocatalysts focused
on semiconductors (Alnarabiji et al., 2017; Lai et al., 2008). The photocatalysis of the semicon￾ductors caused by the electron–hole pairs and band-gap excitation, and finally results in a
positive hole in the valence band and can be written as the following equation (Ejhieh and
Khorsandi, 2010).
NiO !e

CB + h+
VB
The development of green solvent, ecofriendly, pollution-free, and less cost-effective green
methodology in chemical reactions is an essential requirement for sustainability of the bio￾system (Das et al., 2020a,b). Keeping in mind, Bashir and coworkers (Bashir et al., 2019) have
synthesized nickel oxide NPs in an environmentally friendly green method with Persea amer￾icana seed extract. These NPs were characterized by XRD, TEM, EDS, UV–Vis, and FTIR spec￾troscopy. As per the XRD results, the NiO NPs has a cubic-type structure with space group
Fm3m, No. (225). The investigated NPs performed well as a photocatalyst in the
photodegradation of free cyanide (FCN) under UV light. Fouladgar and Ahmadzadeh
(Fouladgar and Ahmadzadeh, 2016) have reported the modified carbon paste electrode with
NiO-NPs for the determination of methyldopa in presence of folic acid. As per the electro￾chemical studies, the oxidation current of methyldopa was enhanced and shifted to negative
potentials on the surface of modified electrode. Moreover, the sensitivity of the modified car￾bon paste electrode to methyldopa did not change in presence of folic acid. In another study,
Kwon and coworkers (Kwon et al., 2016) have reported the perovskite PV cells having
precrystallized NiO NPs. The reported sample has improved electron-blocking capability
as compared to the conventional devices. The photovoltaic cells achieved superior air stability
and negligible hysteresis.
Li and coworkers (Li et al., 2021) have reported a composite of NiO NPs on hexagonal
Ni-MOF (Ni-MOF@NiO), with improved electrical conductivity. The highly dispersed and
small-sized NiO NPs on hexagonal Ni-MOF facilitates the migration of electrolyte ions,
and hence the Ni-MOF@NiO composite act as an electrode material for supercapacitors.
The authors have also suggested that the reported method may be used to synthesize other
MOF@metal oxide materials for electrochemical energy storage and other related applica￾tions. Cheng and coworkers (Cheng et al., 2015) have reported the NiO NPs distributed in
the vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays (VACNTs) as a hybrid structure to be used
as promising electrodes for supercapacitor applications with ultrahigh power density and en￾ergy density. Due to the synergetic effects with nanoporous structures, the supercapacitors
exhibit a high capacitance. Boukhari and coworkers (Al Boukhari et al., 2019) have prepared
Sm-doped NiO nanoparticles via co-precipitation method. These samples were characterized
by XRD and TEM. The prepared samples have improved dielectric behavior. Moreover,
with increase in temperature the samples displayed greater dc conductivity. Amani-Beni
and Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh (Amani-Beni and Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh, 2018) have reported the
NiO NPs-modified carbon paste electrode (CPE) in electrocatalytic voltametric determina￾tion of sulfasalazine (SSZ). As per the study, the calcined NiO had the best and maximum
peak current at 200°C for the CPE electrode. Moreover, better crystallinity of NiO NPs were
achieved at higher temperatures up to 800°C. These NiO NPs may be used as suitable mod￾ifier of CPE in the voltametric determination of SSZ in complex matrixes at strong basic
solutions.
544 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices23.4.2 Biomedical application
These NPs also have good stability, electro-catalysis, super conductance properties, and
electron transfer capability (Sasi et al., 2003). It is an environmentally active material in the
adsorption of inorganic pollutants and hazardous dyes (Pandian et al., 2015). NiO
nanoparticles have significant biological activities such as anti-inflammatory, cytotoxicity,
and antibacterial properties which may be due to the large surface area and nowadays com￾monly used in biomedicine field (Sudhasree et al., 2014). It is also reported that NiO NPs pos￾sess toxic effects over microalgae and bacteria ( Joerger et al., 2000; Kaviyarasu et al., 2013),
which may be due to the release of Ni2+ inside the cell and inducing oxidative stress (Gong
et al., 2011; Abbracchio et al., 1982). Moreover, these NPs show cytotoxic effects, due to their
unique properties (surface area, metal ion releasing, and adsorbing ability). Various synthesis
methods such as sol–gel chemistry, electro-deposition, co-precipitation, and solvothermal
route were reported to prepare NiO NPs with longer reaction time strategies (Li et al.,
2006; Hosseini et al., 2012). Moringa oleifera is a tropical tree found in Indian subcontinent
and is highly recognized due to its nutritional, medicinal, and therapeutic properties
(Sutherland et al., 1994). The nickel oxide NPs have been synthesized by using M. oleifera plant
extract and their antibacterial and cytotoxic activity has been examined. The cytotoxicity ac￾tivity against the human cancer cell lines was confirmed from the distortion of the morphol￾ogy of cells (Chen et al., 2013b). The semiconducting photocatalysts are extensively used for
decontamination of waste water. Several methods were adopted for water treatment pur￾poses such as chlorination, adsorption, flocculation, coagulation, ultrafiltration, ozonation,
reverse osmosis, and biodegradation (microbial) etc. (Shanker et al., 2017; Kumar and Rao,
2017; Vinuth et al., 2015). As per the literature survey, some metal oxide NPs have superior
antibacterial, anticancer, and photocatalytic performances. Nickel oxide is a p-type semicon￾ductor (3.5 eV) with electronic and magnetic properties and hence commonly used in battery,
optoelectronics, sensors, etc. (Chen et al., 2013a). The synthesis of NiO NPs by using various
medicinal plants such as Agathosma betulina, Moringa Oleifera, Sageretia thea, Nephelium
lappaceum, Tamarix serotine, Callistemon viminalis, Aegle marmelos, and Azadirachta indica have
been reported with their photocatalytic and biological applications.
Ezhilarasi and coworkers (Ezhilarasi et al., 2018) have reported the cost effective green syn￾thesis of NiO NPs using Aegle marmelos. This plant is commonly used in India to cure dysen￾tery, chronic diarrhea, peptic ulcers, etc. The prepared NiO NPs showed super paramagnetic
behavior. The NPs were evaluated for their cytotoxic activity and found that the cell viability
of A549 cells was effectively reduced. It was an efficient and stable photocatalyst towards the
degradation of the endocrine disrupting chemical, 4-chlorophenol (4-CP). Furthermore, it
showed better antibacterial activity towards the gram-positive bacterial strains. Khalil and
coworkers (Khalil et al., 2017) have synthesized the NiO NPs with the aqueous leave extracts
of Sageretia thea (Osbeck.). The NPs were fully characterized through ATR-FTIR, EDS, SAED,
XRD, HR-SEM/TEM, and Raman spectroscopy. The as-prepared NPs were investigated for
their antibacterial activity against some gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial strains.
The cytotoxicity activity was performed which revealed significant percentage of inhibition
across the studied concentrations. The NiO nanoparticles were also found to have moderate
antioxidant potential. Sabouri and coworkers (Sabouri et al., 2019a) have synthesized NiO￾NPs through sol–gel method by using salvia macrosiphon Boiss plant extract. The NPs were
23.4 Emerging applications 545
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesfully characterized by FTIR, UV–Vis, XRD, FESEM, EDX, TGA/DTA, and VSM analyzes. The
photocatalytic activity of the NPs on methylene blue degradation was investigated. More￾over, the cytotoxicity activity on multiple tumor cell lines was observed to check non-toxic
effects for medicinal applications. In another independent study, Sabouri and his group
(Sabouri et al., 2019b) have also synthesized NiO-NPs through sol–gel approach having fcc
structure with space group “Fm3m”. These reported NPs have great potential as
photocatalysts under UV light. MTT assay was performed on human cancer U87MG cell lines
to analyze the safety of these NiO-NPs.
Kannan and coworkers (Kannan et al., 2020) have reported the bio-synthesis of NiO NPs in
a microwave-assisted route. The synthesized NPs were characterized by several spectroscopy
techniques. The XRD study revealed well crystalline nature of the NPs with a very fine crys￾tallite size of 20 nm and showed 91% photodegradation efficiency. The antibacterial activity
of the NPs was investigated by agar well diffusion technique, which showed significant cell
inhibition against various bacterial strains. Moringa olifera and neem extracts containing bi￾ologically active organic moieties such as tapenoids, flavonoids, tannins, etc., were reported
to synthesize NiO NPs with the reduction mechanism of Ni to NiO nanometallic material
(Mittal et al., 2013; Nogues et al., 2008). The as-prepared NiO NPs showed good anti￾inflammatory and antibacterial characteristics, and hence interesting for biomedicine field.
23.4.3 Catalytic application
The nanosized NiO has unique properties as compared to its bulk counterpart and hence,
extensively used as battery electrode, electrochromic films, sensors magnetic materials, cat￾alyzer, and diesel–fuel additive. In the past few decades, transition metal oxide semiconduc￾tor photocatalysts were used for the improvements in cocatalyst (Yoshida et al., 2009; Zong
et al., 2008; Maeda and Domen, 2010). The cocatalyst provides reaction sites and decreases the
activation energy for gas evolution. Also, cocatalysts are able to trap electrons or holes by re￾ducing the possibility of electron–hole recombination, and increase the photocatalytic activ￾ity. Maeda and Domen (Lin, 2006) have reported that NiOx and RuO2 metal oxides are
effective water splitting photocatalysts and NiO on lanthanum-doped NaTaO3 displayed
good hydrogen evolution activity. The catalytic activity depends on the available surface area
for the reaction and the degree of dispersion of the cocatalyst. Due to extremely high surface
area and excellent dispersion characteristics, graphene oxide is more suitable for the devel￾opment of high surface area catalytic systems but not efficient water splitting. Park et al. (Park
et al., 2005) have reported the dispersion of Ni and NiO NPs by using high-surface area
graphene oxide sheets to yield enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production. Intensive re￾search was carried out on the organization of NPs to form 2D and 3D supper lattices, which
exhibits novel properties and used in magnetic storage media and electric devices. Moreover,
the synthesis of Ni and NiO NPs has been reported recently with their catalytic applications.
23.5 Summary
Structure and properties of pure and milled NiO powders have been investigated system￾atically. The ball mill process produces face centered cubic nanocrystalline NiO powders
546 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices(with the crystallite size of 11 nm). The lattice volume increases almost linearly with the in￾verse of crystallite size. Microstructural studies reveal that the agglomeration of fine particles
increases with increasing tm and the nanocrystalline powders shows non-uniform shape with
different sizes. Magnetic study indicates that pure NiO powder exhibits AFM properties and
change into FM gradually upon milling due to defects and size reduction. The maximum
magnetization (1.08 emu/g) and coercivity value (160 Oe) are obtained at room temperature
when milling at 30 h. The observed exchange effect decreases with the decreasing NiO crystal
size. Low-temperature magnetization exhibits two peaks assigned to surface spin (due to
freezing) and spin-glass like phase. This fabricated nanocrystalline NiO powder is the prom￾ising candidate for applications in storage device, sensor, and spintronic device. Moreover,
NiO NPs have shown significant biological activities, and hence are undoubtably beneficial
to humankind. Due to their plethora of applications in diverse and promising areas, the study
will provide ample references for researchers working in this field.
Acknowledgment
The authors are thankful to the editor for his valuable suggestions to modify the manuscript. Authors are also thank￾ful to their respective institutions/universities for providing required facilities.
Conflict of interest
No conflicts to declare.
References
Abbasa, H., Nadeema, K., Hafeezb, A., Hassanc, A., Saeeda, N., Krennd, H., 2019. Ceram. Int. 45, 17289.
Abbracchio, M.P., Simmons-Hansen, J., Costa, M., 1982. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 9, 663–676.
Ahmad, T., Ramanujachary, K.V., Lofland, S.E., Ganguli, A.K., 2006. Solid State Sci. 8, 425.
Al Boukhari, J., Hassan, R.S., Awad, R., 2019. Mater. Res. Express 6, 115094.
Alnarabiji, M.S., Yahya, N., Hamed, Y., Ardakani, S.E.M., Azizi, K., Klemes, J.J., Abdullah, B., Tasfy, S.F.H., Abd
Hamid, S.H.B., Nashed, O., 2017. J. Clean. Prod. 162, 186.
Amani-Beni, Z., Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh, A., 2018. Anal. Chim. Acta. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2018.06.002.
Arico, A.S., Bruce, P., Scrosati, B., Tarascon, J.M., Schalkwijk, W.V., 2005. Nat. Mater. 4, 366.
Arif, M., Sanger, A., Singh, A., 2018. J. Electron. Mater. 47, 3451.
Azhagu Raj, R., AlSalhi, M.S., Devanesan, S., 2017. Materials 10, 460.
Bahadur, J., Sen, D., Mazumder, S., Ramanathan, S., 2008. J. Solid State Chem. 181 (5), 1227.
Baral, S.S., Das, S.N., Chaudhury, G.R., Swamy, Y.V., Rath, P., 2008. Chem. Eng. J. 139, 245–255.
Bashir, A.K.H., Razanamahandry, L.C., Nwanya, A.C., Kaviyarasu, K., Saban, W., Mohamed, H.E.A., Ntwampe, S.-
K.O., Ezema, F.I., Maaza, M., 2019. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 134, 133–140.
Behnajady, M.A., Bimeghdar, S., 2014. Chem. Eng. J. 239, 105–113.
Bhowmik, R.N., Nagarajan, R., Ranganathan, R., 2004. Phys. Rev. B 69, 054430.
Bhuyan, R.K., Mahapatra, R.K., Nath, G., Sahoo, B.K., Debadutta, D., Pamu, D., 2020. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 31,
628–636.
Chen, F., Zhou, W., Yao, H., Fan, P., Yang, J., Fei, Z.D., Zhong, M., 2013a. Green Chem. 15, 3057.
Chen, M., Zhang, Y., Huang, B., 2013b. J. Nanomater. 2013, 1–6.
Cheng, J., Zhao, B., Zhang, W., Shi, F., Zheng, G., Zhang, D., Yang, J., 2015. Adv. Funct. Mater. 25, 7381–7391.
Darton, N.J., Sederman, A.J., Ionescu, A., Ducati, C., Darton, R.C., Gladden, L.F., Slater, K.H., 2008. Nanotechnology
19, 395102.
Das, D., Sarangi, A.K., Mohapatra, R.K., Parhi, P.K., Mahal, A., Sahu, R., Zahan, K.-E., 2020a. J. Mol. Liq. 309, 113133.
References 547
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesDas, D., Mohapatra, R.K., Parhi, P.K., Sarangi, A.K., Sahu, R., Barik, S.R., 2020b. ACS Omega 5, 7716–7721.
de Almeida, J.R.L., Thouless, D.J., 1978. J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 11, 983–990.
De Biasi, E., Ramos, C.A., Zysler, R.D., Romero, H., 2002. Phys. Rev. B 65, 144416.
del Bianco, L., Boscherini, F., Fiorini, A.L., Tamisari, M., Spizzo, F., Antisari, M.V., Piscopiello, E., 2008. Phys. Rev.
B 77, 094408.
Ding, J., Li, Y., Chen, L.F., Deng, C.R., Shi, Y., Chow, Y.S., Gang, T.B., 2001. J. Alloys Compd. 314, 262.
Dormann, J.L., Fiorani, D., Tronc, E., 1997. Adv. Chem. Phys. 98, 283.
Duan, W.J., Lu, S.H., Wu, Z.L., Wang, Y.S., 2012. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 26043.
Ejhieh, A.N., Khorsandi, M., 2010. J. Hazard. Mater. 176 (1–3), 629.
Ezhilarasi, A.A., Vijaya, J.J., Kaviyarasu, K., Kennedy, L.J., Jothiramalingam, R., Al-Lohedan, H.A., 2018. J.
Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2018.01.023.
Fernandes, D.M., Hechenleitner, A.A.W., Silva, M.F., Lima, M.K., Bittencourt, P.R.S., Silva, R., Melo, M.A.C.,
Pineda, E.A.G., 2009. Mater. Chem. Phys. 118 (2–3), 447.
Ferna´ndez-Garcı´a, M., Martı´nez-Arias, A., Hanson, J.C., Rodriguez, J.A., 2004. Chem. Rev. 104, 4063.
Fiorani, D., 2005. Surface Effects in Magnetic Nanoparticles. Springer, New York, XIV USA, p. 300.
Fouladgar, M., Ahmadzadeh, S., 2016. Appl. Surf. Sci. 379, 150–155.
Ghosh, M., Biswas, K., Sundaresana, A., Rao, C.N.R., 2006. J. Mater. Chem. 16, 106.
Gokula, B., Saravanan, P., Matheswaran, P., Pandian, M., Sathyamoorthy, R., Asokan, K., Vinod, V.T.P., Cernı  ´k, M.,
2020. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 493, 165713.
Gong, N., Shao, K., Feng, W., Lin, Z., Liang, C., Sun, Y., 2011. Chemosphere 83, 510–516.
Haase, C., Nowak, U., 2012. Phys. Rev. B 85, 045435.
He, H., Yang, S., Yu, K., Ju, Y., Sun, C., Wang, L., 2010. J. Hazard. Mater. 173 (1), 393.
Hosokawa, M., Naito, M., Nogi, K., Yokoyama, T., 2012. Nanoparticle Technology Handbook, second ed. Elsevier,
UK.
Hosseini, S.A., Niaei, A., Salari, D., Nabavi, S.R., 2012. Ceram. Int. 38, 1655–1661.
Hu, J., Chen, G., Lo, I.M.C., 2005. Water Res. 39, 4528–4536.
Hull, D., Bacon, D.J., 2001. Introduction to Dislocations, fourth ed. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Joerger, R., Klaus, T., Granqvist, C.G., 2000. Adv. Mater. 12, 407–409.
Kalita, M.P.C., Perumal, A., Srinivasan, A., 2008. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 320, 2780.
Kannan, K., Radhika, D., Nikolova, M.P., Sadasivuni, K.K., Mahdizadeh, H., Verma, U., 2020. Inorg. Chem. Commun.
113, 107755.
Kaviyarasu, K., Sajan, D., Devarajan, P.A., 2013. Appl. Nanosci. 3, 529–533.
Kenning, G.G., Slaughter, J.M., Cowen, J.A., 1987. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2596–2599.
Khadar, M.A., Biju, V., Inoue, A., 2003. Mater. Res. Bull. 38, 1341.
Khalil, A.T., Ovais, M., Ullah, I., Ali, M., Khan, S.Z., Hassan, D., Maaza, M., 2017. Artif. Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2017.1345928.
Kisan, B., Shyni, P.C., Layek, S., Verma, H.C., Hesp, D., Dhanak, V., Krishnamurthy, S., Perumal, A., 2014. IEEE Trans.
Magn. 50, 1.
Kisan, B., Shyni, P.C., Layek, S., Verma, H.C., Hesp, D., Dhanak, V., Krishnamurthy, S., Perumal, A., 2015. J. Magn.
Magn. Mater. 384, 296.
Kita, E., Oda, T., Kayano, T., Sato, S., Minagawa, M., Yanagihara, H., Kishimoto, M., Mitsumata, C., Hashimoto, S.,
Yamada, K., et al., 2010. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 43, 474011.
Koch, C.C., 2002. Nanostructured Materials: Processing, Properties and Potential Applications. Noyes Publications,
New York.
Kodama, R.H., Makhlouf, S.A., Berkowitz, A.E., 1997. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1393.
Kodama, R.H., Makhlouf, S.A., Berkowitz, A.E., 1999. Phys. Rev. B 59, 6321.
Kumar, S.G., Rao, K.K., 2017. Appl. Surf. Sci. 391, 124.
Kuwa, M., Harada, M., Sato, R., Teranishi, T., 2020. ACS Appl. Nano. Mater. 3, 2745.
Kwon, U., Kim, B.-G., Nguyen, D.C., Park, J.-H., Ha, N.Y., Kim, S.-J., Ko, S.H., Lee, S., Lee, D., Park, H.J., 2016. Sci. Rep.
6, 30759.
Lai, T.L., Liu, J.Y., Yong, K.F., Shu, Y.Y., Wang, C.B., 2008. J. Hazard. Mater. 157 (2), 496.
Li, G., Hu, L., Hill, J.M., 2006. Appl. Catal. A Gen. 301, 16–24.
Li, N., Li, Y., Li, Q., Zhao, Y., Liu, C.-S., Pang, H., 2021. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 581, 709–718.
548 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesLin, W., 2006. Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 211904.
Llandro, J., Palfreyman, J.J., Ionescu, A., Barnes, C.H.W., 2010. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 48, 977.
Lyu, K.K., Phan, T.L., Yu, S.C., Oh, S.K., Dan, N.H., 2010. IEEE Trans. Magn. 46, 2028–2031.
Maeda, K., Domen, K., 2010. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 1, 2655.
Mahmood, T., Saddique, M.T., Naeem, A., Mustafa, S., Zeb, N., Shah, K.H., Waseem, M., 2011a. Chem. Eng. J. 171,
935–940.
Mahmood, T., Saddique, M.T., Naeem, A., Mustafa, S., Hussain, J., Dilara, B., 2011b. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 357,
1016–1020.
Makhlouf, S.A., Al-Attar, H., Kodama, R.H., 2008. Solid State Commun. 145, 1–4.
Mandal, S., Menon, K.S.R., Mahatha, S.K., Banerjee, S., 2011. Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 232507.
Martinez, B., Obradors, X., Balcells, L., Rouanet, A., Mgonty, C., 1998. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 181.
Meneses, C.T., Duque, J.G.S., de Biasi, E., Nunes, W.C., Sharma, S.K., Knobel, M., 2010. J. Appl. Phys. 108, 013909.
Mhadhbi, M., Khitouni, M., Escoda, L., Sunol, J.J., 2010. Mater. Lett. 64, 1802.
Mittal, A.K., Chisti, Y., Banerjee, U.C., 2013. Biotechnol. Adv. 31, 346–356.
Mohanty, D., Satpathy, S.K., Behera, B., Mohapatra, R.K., 2020. Mater. Today Proc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matpr.2020.02.944.
Naeem, A., Saddique, M.T., Mustafa, S., Kim, Y., Dilara, B., 2009. J. Hazard. Mater. 168, 364–368.
Neel, L., 1962. In: Dewitt, C., Dreyfus, B., de Gennes, P.D. (Eds.), Low Temperature Physics. Gordon and Breach, New
York, p. 413.
Nogues, J., Langlais, V., Sort, J., Doppiu, S., Surin˜ ach, S., Baro´, M.D., 2008. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 8, 2923–2928.
Oubagaranadin, J.U.K., Murthy, Z., 2009. Chem. Prod. Process. Model. 4, 32.
Pandian, C.J., Palanivel, R., Dhananasekaran, S., 2015. Chin. J. Chem. Eng. 23, 1307–1315.
Pankhurst, Q.A., Thanh, N.T.K., Jones, S.K., Dobson, J., 2009. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 42, 224001.
Park, J., Kang, E., Son, S.U., 2005. Adv. Mater. 17, 429.
Peck, M.A., Huh, Y., Skomski, R., Zhang, R., Kharel, P., Allison, M.D., Sellmyer, D.J., Langell, M.A., 2011. J. Appl.
Phys. 109, 07B518.
Proenca, M.P., Sousa, C.T., Pereira, A.M., Tavares, P.B., Ventura, J., Vazquez, M., Araujo, J.P., 2011. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 13, 9561.
Qamar, M., Gondal, M.A., Yamani, Z.H., 2011. J. Mol. Catal. A 341, 83–88.
Ravikumar, P., Kisan, B., Perumal, A., 2016. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 418, 86.
Reves, A., Ungar, T., Borbely, A., Lendvai, J., 1996. Nano Mater. 7, 779.
Richardson, J.T., Milligan, W.O., 1956. Phys. Rev. 102, 1289.
Rinaldi-Montes, N., Gorria, P., Martınez-Blanco, D., Fuertes, A.B., Fernandez, B.L., Rodrıguez Fernandez, J., et al.,
2014. Nanoscale 6, 457–465.
Rungsawang, R., da Silva, J., Wu, C.P., Sivaniah, E., Ionescu, A., Barnes, C.H.W., Darton, N.J., 2010. Phys. Rev. Lett.
104, 255703.
Sabouri, Z., Fereydouni, N., Akbari, A., Hosseini, H.A., Hashemzadeh, A., Amiri, M.S., Oskuee, R.K., Darroudi, M.,
2019a. Rare Metals. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12598-019-01333-z.
Sabouri, Z., Akbari, A., Hosseini, H.A., Hashemzadeh, A., Darroudi, M., 2019b. J. Mol. Struct. 1191, 101–109.
Sasi, B., Gopchandran, K.G., Manoj, P.K., 2003. Vacuum 68, 149–154.
Seber, G.A., Wild, C.J., 2003. Nonlinear Regression. John Wiler& Sons.
Shanker, U., Rani, M., Jassal, V., 2017. Environ. Chem. Lett. 15, 623.
Sheel, T., Nayaka, Y.A., 2012. Chem. Eng. J. 191, 123–131.
Shen, T.D., Schwarz, R.B., Thompson, J.D., 2005. Phys. Rev. B 72, 014431.
Shim, H., Dutta, P., Seehra, M.S., Bonevich, J., 2008. Solid State Commun. 145, 192–196.
Siddique, M.N., Tripathi, P., 2020. J. Alloys Compd. 825, 154071.
Song, Z., Chen, L., Hu, J., Richards, R., 2009. Nanotechnology 20, 275707.
Soni, P.R., 2001. Mechanical Alloying: Fundamental and Applications. Cambridge International Science Publishing,
UK.
Srinivas, K., Rao, S.M., Reddy, P.V., 2011. Nanoscale 3, 642–653.
Sudhasree, S., Banu, A.S., Brindha, P., Kurian, G.A., 2014. Toxicol. Environ. Chem. 95, 743–754.
Suryanarayana, C., 2001. Prog. Mater. Sci. 46, 1.
Suryanarayana, C., 2004. Mechanical Alloying and Milling. Marcel Dekker, New York.
References 549
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesSutherland J. P, Folkard G. K, Mtawali M. A, and Grant W. D, Proceedings of the Twentieth WEDC Conference in
Affordable Water Supply and Sanitation, Colombo, (1994) 297–299.
Tadic, M., Panjan, M., Markovi, D., Milosevi, I., Spasojevi, V., 2011. J. Alloys Compd. 509, 7134.
Tajiri, T., Saisho, S., Mito, M., Deguchi, H., Konishi, K., Kohno, A., 2015. J. Phys. Chem. C 119, 1194.
Thanh, N.T.K., 2012. Magnetic Nanoparticles: From Fabrication to Clinical Applications. Taylor and Francis.
Thota, S., Kumar, J., 2007. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 68, 1951.
Tiwari, S.D., Rajeev, K.P., 2005. Phys. Rev. B 72, 104433.
Ulmane, N.M., Kuzmin, A., Steins, I., Grabis, J., Sildos, I., P€ars, M., 2007. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 93, 012039.
Ulmane, N.M., Kuzmin, A., Grabis, J., Sildos, I., Voronin, V.I., Berger, I.F., Kazantsev, V.A., 2011. Solid State Phenom.
168–169, 341.
Ungar, T., Tichy, G., 1999. Phys. Status Solidi A 171, 425.
Ungar, T., Dragomir, I., Revesz, A., Borbely, A., 1999. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 32, 992.
Veiseh, O., Gunn, J.W., Zhang, M., 2010. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 62, 284.
Vinuth, M., Naik, H.S.B., Manjanna, J., 2015. Appl. Surf. Sci. 357, 1244.
Wang, W., Wang, H.Y., Wei, W., Xiao, Z.G., Wan, Y., 2011. Chem. Eur. J. 17, 13461.
Williamson, G.K., Hall, W.H., 1953. Acta Metall. 1, 22.
Winkler, E., Zysler, R.D., Vasquez Mansilla, M., Fiorani, D., 2005. Phys. Rev. B 72, 132409.
Winkler, E., Zysler, R.D., Mansilla, M.V., Fiorani, D., Rinaldi, D., Vasilakaki, M., Trohidou, K.N., 2008. Nanotechnol￾ogy 19, 185702.
Yi, J.B., Ding, J., Feng, Y.P., Peng, G.W., Chow, G.M., Kawazoe, Y., Liu, B.H., Yin, J.H., Thongmee, S., 2007. Phys. Rev.
B 76, 224402.
Yoshida, M., Takanabe, K., Maeda, K., Ishikawa, A., Kubota, J., Sakata, Y., Ikezawa, Y., Domen, K., 2009. J. Phys.
Chem. C 113, 10151.
Zhang, J., Zeng, D., Zhu, Q., Wu, J., Huang, Q., Xie, C., 2016. J. Phys. Chem. C 20, 3936–3945.
Zong, X., Yan, H., Wu, G., Ma, G., Wen, F., Wang, L., Li, C., 2008. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 7176.
Zysler, R., Fiorani, D., Dormann, J.L., Testa, A.M., 1994. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 133, 71–73.
Zysler, R.D., Ramos, C.A., De Biasi, E., Romero, H., Ortega, A., Fiorani, D., 2000. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 221, 37.
550 23. Nanocrystalline NiO powder
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
24
Attraction to adsorption: Preparation
methods and performance of novel
magnetic biochars for water and
wastewater treatment
Yasmin Vieiraa
, Eder C. Limab
, and Guilherme L. Dottoc
a
Graduate Program of Chemistry, Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria,
RS, Brazil b
Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS),
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil c
Department of Chemical Engineering, Federal University of
Santa Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil
24.1 Introduction
The increasing environmental pollution and ecological imbalance have made the need to
remove and separate pollutants from aqueous matrices a growing research field (Yu et al.,
2019). Inorganic and organic pollutants, such as metals, dyes, pharmaceuticals, and pesti￾cides, are widely distributed in air, water, soil, sediments, and ecological receptors, and
due to their mobility and persistency, they can cause harm to all forms of life, even at low
concentrations (Gavrilescu et al., 2015). Several techniques have been developed for contam￾inants remediation (Mao et al., 2021; Muga and Mihelcic, 2008; Rout et al., 2021). Among them,
because of its simple processing, low cost, and high efficiency, adsorption has been widely
applied and is considered very promising (Ahmed et al., 2016; Cheng et al., 2021; Tony, 2021).
To enhance the adsorption efficiency, the selection of suitable adsorbents must be taken
into consideration. Good adsorbent attributes are high surface area and pore volume, leading
to a fast adsorption rate requiring a short time to attain the equilibrium time (Da˛browski,
2001). In this aspect, biochar highlights from many new functional carbon materials and even
from activated carbons, typically used for environmental applications (Qiu et al., 2021).
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 551 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00024-1However, separating the powdered adsorbents from the aqueous phase after their contact
with the adsorbate solution in the adsorption process represents a drawback in implementing
this method, limiting its up-scale applications due to the need for centrifugation and filtration
steps. To overcome these difficulties, the preparation and impregnation of biochar with mag￾netic powders rise as a viable solution (Yi et al., 2019). It is possible to notice a dramatic in￾crease in the number of publications regarding magnetic adsorbents over the years. In Fig.
24.1, it is possible to see the number of studies per year between 2010 and 2020 and the pol￾lutants to which the adsorbents were employed for the removal. In addition, the interactions
between the target pollutants and biochar are be strengthened by the addition of magnetic
metals, due to the increase in the mechanisms responsible for adsorption, such as electrostatic
attraction, hydrogen bonding, π-π stackng, van der Waals force, hydrophobic force, and metal
ionic coordination (Da˛browski, 2001; Yu et al., 2019).
Loading magnetic particles, such as transition metals (Ni, Fe, Co) or nanoparticles of these
metals in different forms, on the surface of biochar, can effectively ease solid-liquid separation
and recycling through an external magnetic field. The methods of preparing or impregnating
biochar with magnetic compounds include pyrolysis, co-precipitation, and carbonization. In
addition to the aforementioned methods, coating and functionalization techniques can also be
employed to overcome certain limitations that may arise from conventional methods, such as
FIG. 24.1 Number of publications on Web of Science™ core collection by searching the terms “magnetic biochar”
and “biochar”—inserted is the percentage of each type of pollutant used in the studies.
552 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesweakened magnetism due to agglomeration. This chapter will present the main synthesis and
preparation methods for producing magnetic biochars, emphasizing their advantages and
disadvantages. The applications of these composites in environmental remediation are also
presented and discussed, focusing on their characterization and adsorption performance.
24.2 Synthesis and preparation methods
Biochar is defined as a carbon-rich solid prepared by biomass thermal decomposition in a
partial oxygen atmosphere or the absence of oxygen using an inert gas stream (Sohi et al.,
2010). Therefore, the three main carbonization techniques employed to fabricate high quality
and biochar with high magnetization are mainly impregnation pyrolysis, co-precipitation,
and hydrothermal carbonization. By controlling the general parameters of the synthesis, such
as pyrolysis temperature, heating furnace rate, time of residence in the pyrolysis, and gas at￾mosphere, it is possible to control specific morphological parameters and tailor the functiona￾lization surface groups. Furthermore, to reach the best possible yields, it is necessary to
analyze and characterize the starting biomass characteristics, such as its carbon, cellulose,
hemicellulose, and lignin contents, as well as its general chemical composition, humidity,
and pH (Zhang et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2019).
Pyrolysis is the chemical and thermal decomposition of organic material using tempera￾tures higher than 400 °C in a limited oxygen atmosphere, usually using an inert atmosphere
(Cha et al., 2016). In this process, the preparation of magnetic biochar is given by
impregnation-pyrolysis, where a solution containing metals is added and mixed to the bio￾mass, forming a paste (Thue et al., 2020). The formed past is dried and, subsequently, the ma￾terial is pyrolyzed (450–750 °C) under an inert atmosphere. For finalizing the production of
the material, leaching with dilute HCl solutions is performed to partially remove the excess of
inorganic compounds, resulting in carbon material with a higher surface area (Thue et al.,
2020). It is essential to highlight that the metallic ion is reduced during the impregnation py￾rolysis, forming elemental Fe, Ni, and Co, responsible for the magnetism. Even though the
impregnation pyrolysis is not commonly used to prepare magnetic biochar, this method al￾lows the use of ZnCl2 as a precursor for increasing surface area (Thue et al., 2020). Therefore,
pyrolysis and magnetization are a single-step process whose physicochemical properties and
adsorption capacity need to be assessed and ensured by controlling the operation steps.
The co-precipitation method for fabricating magnetic biochars regards the dispersion of a
previously prepared carbon material into a solution containing metal salts (Fe2+, Fe3+ Ni2+,
Co2+) with the subsequent addition of ammonium, sodium, or potassium hydroxide solution
to maintain the pH between 9 and 11, at a 75–85 °C for a period of about 2 h (Panneerselvam
et al., 2011). Most metal ions tend to precipitate as hydroxides or oxides at higher pH. After
resting, the supernatant is discarded, and the precipitate is washed with distilled water and
ethanol to remove impurities and obtain the magnetic carbon material. The final step consists
of oven drying to remove moisture and volatile residue (Panneerselvam et al., 2011).
In the co-precipitation method, the steps are planned to force the metal and the biochar
(already formed) to precipitate out from a slurry through a carrier, enabling it to bind as
one single composite (Thines et al., 2017). Even though this method requires more laborious
steps than the impregnation-pyrolysis, the morphological properties of the magnetic
24.2 Synthesis and preparation methods 553
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesadsorbent produced are more controllable, such as even distribution of magnetic
nanoparticles in the carbonaceous matrix (Yi et al., 2019). Conversely, the surface areas
and total pore volume of the biochar obtained by the co-precipitation method are lower when
compared to impregnation pyrolysis (Thue et al., 2020).
The mechanisms responsible for the efficiency of the co-precipitation process start to un￾ravel after a minor nucleation burst at critical supersaturation of the concentration of the spe￾cies, that kick-start a slow growth of an arrange of diffusion of the solutes to the surface of
crystal (Boistelle and Astier, 1988; Thines et al., 2017). The co-precipitation even allows the
magnetic particles or nanoparticles to be produced simultaneously in the same impregnation
vessel, using a mixture of Fe2+ and Fe3+ solutions (Ahn et al., 2012) commonly.
The morphology and textural parameters of the magnetic biochar produced by
co-precipitation can be designed by changing synthesis conditions such as the concentration
ratio of the salts Fe2+/Fe3+, the salts counterions, heating temperature, final pH for precipi￾tation. The particle size, for example, can be controlled by the addition of chelating ligands or
polymer surface complexing agents, as carboxylates such as oleic acid, gluconic, or citric, dex￾tran, carboxy-dextran, starch, or polyvinyl alcohol (Schwarzer and Peukert, 2004). Many pa￾pers have utilized this combination of chemicals for fabricating different magnetic materials,
such as magnetite (Fe3O4) and maghemite (γ-Fe2O3), which are widely and successfully pre￾pared by this route (Ahn et al., 2012).
Similarly, the co-precipitation method can be performed by the addition of reducing
agents, such as sodium borohydride or potassium borohydride, where it is then named re￾ductive co-deposition, another effective way for producing magnetic biochar. However,
the reductive co-deposition has some potential safety risks compared to simple
co-precipitation because hydrogen and other harmful gases are produced throughout the re￾action (Yi et al., 2019).
Hydrothermal carbonization and pyrolysis are thermal treatment processes in which ma￾terials are heated under a specific temperature. The method is relatively simple, employing
autoclave heating without the need for fusion to purge H2O, CO2, SO2, and other volatile con￾stituents from the biomass. The process occurs at a high temperature (180–300 °C), with the
water vapor at high pressures. An advantage of this process is producing carbon materials
with controlled size particles and having elevated magnetization because of strong solvent
boiling throughout the synthesis, which disperses the magnetic constituents homogeneously
on the surface of the biochar. The advantage of hydrothermal carbonization is not the need to
use an inert gas stream, such as Ar or N2, generally required to flush out air molecules during
the pyrolysis and avoid the ashes formation.
Furthermore, hydrothermal carbonization can also be employed to assemble hydrochar
and magnetic particles in solution in a reactor at 100–300 °C range, by pressure produced
by the solvent reaction vapors of the reaction. This method’s milder reaction conditions, as￾sociated with no need for alkali or a strong reductant, make the hydrothermal route attractive.
However, due to high moisture content, the final adsorbent’s pore sizes and surface area tend
to be much smaller than those obtained by other procedures (Cen et al., 2014; Schwarzer and
Peukert, 2004).
The main synthetic methods described have their own advantages and disadvantages.
Other preparation methods involving physical and chemical modifications have been devel￾oped over the years. Ball-milling, for example, was used as a solvent-free alternative, provid￾ing mechanical mixing of biochar and iron oxides, allowing that the electrostatic charges of
554 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesthe powder made up the binding themselves. Magnetic biochar has also been treated by
adding other metals, acids, and bases or functionalized with various chemical moieties to im￾prove its adsorption selectivity and capacity. The activation through strong acids, alkalis, or
oxidants changes the specific surface area and functional groups, thereby improving the bind￾ing force between the biochar and the magnetic particles. Strong acids, specifically, can react
with the mineral components of the biomass due to their oxidation potential—and
corrosiveness—allowing that non-magnetic minerals to be released, enrichening the void
structure of biochar richer, thus increasing its specific surface area (Peng et al., 2017;
Qiu et al., 2021).
Also, to understand the synthetic methods, understanding the relationship between the na￾ture of the biomass, the reactor conditions, and the operational parametersis crucial to predicting
the extra knowledge of the complex physics and chemistryinvolved. Due to the differencesin the
rawmaterials, biochar preparationmethods, andmodificationprocesses, biochar adsorbents can
be diversein structure, surface area, pore distribution, surface functional groups, elemental com￾position, cation exchange capacity, pHpzc, and other physical and chemical properties. In addi￾tion, biomasses varyinlignin, cellulose, hemicellulose contents; therefore, their degradation rate
and mechanisms vary, affecting the affinity, deposition, and binding of the metals to the char.
Furthermore, raw material ratio to magnetic material has severely affected carbonization yield
and adsorption capacity during the impregnation process.
24.3 Magnetic properties
The most critical parameter that needs to be observed in magnetic adsorbents’ obtention is
the curve of magnetization. The higher the value of saturation magnetization (Ms), the higher
is the capacity of an external magnet to promote the separation of the adsorbent from the
aqueous effluent after the adsorption process, which is precisely the reason why the adsor￾bents are magnetized. In Fig. 24.2, it is possible to observe the magnetization curve of biochar
prepared by impregnation of the biomass with NiCl2 followed by pyrolysis at 600 °C under
nitrogen flow.
Super-paramagnetic properties reckon that the materials present minimum remanence
magnetization (MR) and coercivity coefficient (Hc). When the super-paramagnetic adsorbents
are demagnetized and magnetized at ambient temperature, their MR and Hc trend to zero
values. Usually, it is not observed a hysteresis loop on the magnetization curves. Also, the
ratio MR/MS should be <25% (Cazetta et al., 2016). The super-paramagnetic property is cru￾cial for the reuse and regeneration of magnetic adsorbents. When the external magnetic field
is stopped, the biochar particles will no longer be attracted together, allowing their reuse as
magnetic materials after being recovered (Thue et al., 2020).
24.4 Adsorption applications
24.4.1 Inorganic pollutants
Several authors have studied the adsorption of copper ions by magnetic carbohydrate bio￾polymers. Yuwei and Jianlong (2011) prepared magnetic chitosan nano-biosorbent with
24.4 Adsorption applications 555
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricessuper-paramagnetic particles in the range of 8–40 nm were with MS of 36 emu g1
. The au￾thors reported that the nano-biosorbent could chelate metal ions strongly and still easily
be separated using a magnetic field after reaching maximum adsorption capacity of
35.5 mg g1 at 35 °C for Cu2+ (Yuwei and Jianlong, 2011). Gong et al. (2012) developed a mag￾netic nanocomposite (MS 59.2 emu g1
) by combining pectin and iron oxide, which reached
the maximum adsorption capacity of 48.99 mg g1 for Cu2+ at 25 °C and pH 5 (Gong et al.,
2012). Magnetic chitosan and Fe3O4 (MS 14.7 emu g1
) beads were prepared by a simple
one-step grafting method, and their maximum capacity was 129.6 mg g1 for Cu2+ (Liu
et al., 2012). In this context, the coating of cellulose- and chitosan by magnetic particles in￾creased the dispersion stability, preventing aggregation and oxidation, in addition to increas￾ing adsorption capacity (Liu et al., 2012).
Carboxylated chitosan-magnetic nanoparticles were proposed as a novel adsorbent to re￾move fluoride, nitrate, and phosphate anions from aqueous solutions (Mohammadi et al.,
2019). The material was prepared by a modified co-precipitation method assisted by ultra￾sound to improve the dispersion of the magnetic nanoparticles onto the char (Mohammadi
et al., 2019). However, in the paper described by Mohammadi et al. (2019), no MS values were
reported. Due to the surface charge of the adsorbent, it was possible to remove negatively
charged contaminants and still remove the produced material from the aqueous solution with
a magnet altogether. In a multi-component system, the optimum adsorbent dosage was
2gL1
. The maximum adsorption capacities were 0.247, 0288, and 4.604 mg g1 for nitrate,
fluoride, and phosphate—values obtained in acidic conditions for all anions at pH 3. The ad￾sorption isotherms followed the Langmuir model, and the kinetics analysis indicated that the
pseudo-second-order mechanism was predominant (Mohammadi et al., 2019). However, the
authors used linear fitting of the data, demonstrating that it is necessary to use nonlinear
fitting of the data for defining a kinetic model with accuracy (Lima et al., 2021a).
FIG. 24.2 Magnetization curve of biochar.
556 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesLima et al. (2021a) used 252 kinetic results and the data were plotted using linear and
nonlinear pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models. It was observed that when
linearization was done, 100% of the kinetic results were well-fitted using the pseudo-second￾order model. However, when nonlinear fitting was used, more than 50% of the kinetic results
were better fitted using the pseudo-first-order model. These results demonstrated that it is
impossible to infer the adsorption kinetic using the linear approach since, independent of
the kinetic data, the linear fitting will always better fit the pseudo-second-order model
(Lima et al., 2021a, b). Also, the values of k2 obtained using the linear approach are totally
different from the values obtained using nonlinear fitting. This observation precludes linear￾ization for obtaining accurate kinetic fitting (Lima et al., 2021a).
The cross-linking of chitosan with magnetic nanoparticles also proved to be an efficient
modification method for the preparation of magnetic biochar for the removal of Hg(II),
Cd(II), and Zn(II) from aqueous solutions (Monier and Abdel-Latif, 2012). The chitosan beads
were synthesized by alkaline co-precipitation, phenylthiourea addition was made through
reflux, and the magnetization was carried out with an Fe3O4 suspension by
co-precipitation (MS 30.5 emu g1
). The adsorption data indicated that the process is exother￾mic and that its evolution follows pseudo-second-order kinetics. Equilibrium data fit well to
the Langmuir model for all contaminants, of which the maximum adsorption capacities were
estimated to be 52  1, 120  1, 135  3, and mg g1 for Zn(II), Cd(II), and Hg(II), respectively
(Monier and Abdel-Latif, 2012). It is crucial to highlight that the thermodynamic results
obtained in the paper of Monier and Abdel-Latif, 2012 were not obtained using a correct equi￾librium constant. Lima et al. (2019, 2021b) have shown that the correct form of obtaining ac￾curate results is to obtain equilibrium isotherms using at least four temperatures (Lima et al.,
2021b), obtaining the equilibrium constants of a model (Langmuir, Sips, Liu, Redlich￾Peterson, etc.) and making some transformations to generate an a dimensional equilibrium
constant (Lima et al., 2019). It is also recommended to use nonlinear fitting to obtain the equi￾librium constant values used to estimate the thermodynamic parameters (Lima et al., 2019,
2021b).
Combining different kinds of cellulose (Cel), such as amphiprotic cellulose, to produce
novel carbon composite materials has been proposed as an effective way of promoting ad￾sorption efficiency without having surface area decrease (Xiong et al., 2020). In this context,
graphene oxide (GO) has been used as a support for linking it with amphiprotic cellulose and
Fe3O4, resulting in a magnetic aerogel (GO/Cel/Fe3O4; MS 8.61 emu g1
) with surface groups
able to adsorb both anionic and cationic pollutants. The maximum adsorption capacities of
(GO/Cel/Fe3O4 for the removal of Cu2+, Pb2+, Cd2+, and Cr3+ from aqueous solution were
222.2, 568.2, 185.5, and 122.2 mg g1
. The kinetics fit the pseudo-second-order kinetic model,
and the Langmuir isotherm model well depicts the prepared material’s adsorption behavior
for metal adsorption. In addition, the composite did not lose its magnetization either after
desorption by mild eluting. Contrarily to what would be expected of a gelatinous structure,
the composite also proved to be renewable and to have a stable structure, maintaining an ad￾sorption capacity up to >68% after five recycles (Xiong et al., 2020).
The synthesis of a thiourea-functionalized/Fe3O4@nanocellulose@ZnO composite was
also reported; however, the magnetization was done by co-precipitation of Fe3O4 into
nanocelulose (Alipour et al., 2020) using salts of Fe3+ and Fe2+ and NH4OH solution forming
Fe3O4@nanocellulose. Subsequently, this composite was mixed with Zn2+, followed by the
24.4 Adsorption applications 557
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesaddition of NaOH forming Fe3O4@nancellulose@ZnO. In a further step, the composite
Fe3O4@nancellulose@ZnO was grafted with thiourea (TU) utilizing epichlorohydrin as a
cross-linking reagent (Alipour et al., 2020), forming TU@nanocelulose@Fe3O4@ZnO (MS
24.6 emu g1
) (Alipour et al., 2020). The TU@nanocelulose@Fe3O4@ZnO composite was
tested for Pb(II) removal and reached a sorption capacity ranging from 548.3 (25 °C) up to
706.0 mg g1 (45 °C) under the optimum conditions found at pH 6.5, and 2.0 g L1 of adsor￾bent concentration. While the equilibrium followed the Langmuir isotherm, the kinetic stud￾ies suggested that the adsorption process obeyed the pseudo-second-order model. The
thermodynamic of the sorption process was feasible, spontaneous, and endothermic. The
TU@nanocelulose@Fe3O4@ZnO composite has a high potential for purification of contami￾nated wastewater, with high sorption capacities associated with a fast adsorption perfor￾mance recyclability easy magnetic separation (Alipour et al., 2020).
Similarly, one-pot synthesis simultaneously activates and magnetizes activated biochar
prepared from spent coffee grounds and natural clay (Le et al., 2019). The synthesized com￾posite (MS 43.05 emu g1
) was used as an adsorbent for Pb(II), Cu(II), and Ni(II) uptake from
water. The maximum adsorption capacities was Pb(II) > Cu(II) > Ni(II) as 143.56, 96.16, and
84.86 mg g1
, respectively. The optimal conditions for removing the metals were found at 25 °
C, pH 5.5, 2.0 g L1 adsorbent concentration, and the contact time between the adsorbent and
adsorbate of 60 min (Le et al., 2019).
In addition to the composites prepared with complex carbohydrates extracted from resi￾dues, raw and whole biomasses have been widely used for magnetic biochar production. Ap￾ple pomace, highly rich pectin biomass, was used to produce magnetic biochar through
pyrolysis at 600 °C under N2 flow, Fe2+/Fe3+ aqueous precipitation alkali-treated with NaOH
(Zhang et al., 2019b). The saturation magnetization and the specific surface area of the adsor￾bent prepared were 9.52 emu g1 and 102.18 m2 g1
, respectively. The magnetic biochar
presented a high Ag(I) adsorption, with a maximum adsorption capacity of 818.4 mg g1
in a multi-ionic system where Ag(I), Pb(II), Cu(II), Ni(II), and Zn(II) were present. The high
selectivity shown by the composite can be presumed as a consequence of the mechanisms
involving intra-particle diffusion, coordination, ion exchange, and reduction. The adsorption
kinetic study fit well to the pseudo-second-order kinetic model (R2 > 0.99), where the adsorp￾tion underwent rapid diffusion stage, limited intra-particle diffusion stage, and adsorption
equilibrium stage (Zhang et al., 2019b).
Low-cost corn straw and manganese ferrite particles (MnFe2O4) were mixed with egg
white, abundant in the functional groups –NH2 and –COOH, and submitted to a combined
sol-gel pyrolysis route (Zhang et al., 2019a). The obtained material showed high dispersion of
MnFe2O4 on the biochar surface, and it was found that the 5 h pyrolysis at 500 °C did not af￾fect the functional group’s insertion, nor the high surface area of the char negatively (Zhang
et al., 2019a) (MS 33.19 emu g1
). The experiments indicated that Pb(II) and Cd(II) removal
was highly dependent on pH, with the best efficiencies found at pH 5.0. Equilibrium was
attained within 2 h, and the adsorption isotherm fit better to the Sips (Freundlich–Langmuir)
model (R2 > 0.892), while the kinetics obeyed the pseudo-second-order model (R2 > 0.990).
Overall, the process is spontaneous and exothermic. Here, it should be highlighted that
the authors used the wrong equilibrium constant to obtain the thermodynamic parameters
(Lima et al., 2019, 2021a, b). The maximum adsorption capacity was 154.94 and 127.83 mg g1
for Pb(II) and Cd(II), respectively, in single-solute systems (Zhang et al., 2019a).
558 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesBesides Fe, Mn, and Ni oxides, rare earth elements can magnetize the biochars. The advan￾tages of using the latter elements over the conventional ones lie in their increased positive
charge addition due to their size. Biochar prepared from pineapple peel biomass through py￾rolysis was treated with a mixture of Fe3+ and Fe2+ co-precipitated into biochar. Subsequently,
the magnetic biochar was treated with nitrate of lanthanum, and the pH of the solution was
adjusted to 9. Lantanum hydroxides and the magnetic biochar formed a composite magnetic
material used for phosphate removal (Liao et al., 2018). The loading of different contents of
La(OH)3 formed the composites La0.63-MC, La1.25-MC, La2.5-MC, La5-MC, La10-MC, and
La15-MC, corresponding to the ratios between La and MC of 0.63, 1.25, 2.50, 5.00, 10.00, and
15 mmol g1 in the suspension, respectively. The saturation magnetization values were 12.83,
9.05, 6.44, 4.98, 4.16, and 2.74 emu g1 for La0.63-MC, La1.25-MC, La2.5-MC, La5-MC, La10-
MC, and La15-MC, respectively (Liao et al., 2018). It was observed that as the La content in￾creased, the adsorption capacity also increased; however, the magnetic property decreased.
The composite that exhibited the best adsorption performance was La10-MC, with a surface
area of 84.89 m2 g1 and a maximum adsorption capacity of 101.16 mg g1 of phosphate. Ad￾sorption isotherm and kinetics fitted well Langmuir (R2 > 0.99) and pseudo-second-order
(R2 > 0.98) models, respectively. Experiments were carried out to verify the effects of
co-existing anions in the phosphate removal efficiency, where it was possible to observe that
the presence of CO3
2, HCO3
, NO3
, SO4
2 and Cl was insignificant. The overall efficiency
was superior to 96.04%, indicating high selectivity to phosphate. Moreover, the composite
presented stability for cyclic reuse, with negligible leaching of La3+ (Liao et al., 2018).
Cerium (Ce), one of the most abundant and the least expensive rare earth metals, was used in
the coating of biochar obtained from Phragmites australis biomass for efficient Sb(V) adsorption.
The adsorbent was synthesized by two different methods (co-precipitation of Ce/
Fe3O4-biochar or solvothermal of Ce/Fe3O4-Biochar), which were compared, and the adsorp￾tion results indicated that the co-precipitation method was superior to the solvothermal method
(Wang et al., 2019a). The MS of the composites were 0.93 and 2.11 emu g1 for the
co-precipitation, and solvothermal methods, respectively. These magnetizations obtained were
not enough for magnetic separation since the authors utilized a membrane filtration to separate
the loaded adsorbent from the adsorbate solution after the batch contact. Although the authors
define that their research was using magnetic biochars, the main purpose of the scientific work
was not carried out. The Ce addition also played a key role in Sb(V) adsorption enhancement,
mostly due to the ligand exchange and Ce–O–Sb complex formation. The final composite was
still easily separated; however, magnetic performance disappeared. The maximum adsorption
capacity was 25.0 mg g1
, which was kept stable over a wide pH range and/or in the presence
of co-existing anions. The adsorption of Sb(V) was rapid in the first 160 min, with about 80% of
equilibrium adsorption capacity achieved because of the substantial binding sites and high con￾centration gradient. Then the adsorption rate gradually slowed, and equilibrium was reached
at 600 min (Wang et al., 2019a).
In addition to the applications for removing inorganic contaminants from aqueous media,
magnetic biochar composites have also been employed for soil remediation and industrial
purposes. Gong et al. (2021) produced magnetic sorbents using wheat straw to extract Cd
from the soil. Wheat straw chips were pyrolyzed at 300 and 700 °C and mixed with
Fe3+/Fe2+ solution for magnetization (Gong et al., 2021). The biochar at 300 °C and 700 °C
presented Ms. of 14.57 and 10.32 emu g1
, respectively. The adsorbents were tested in two
24.4 Adsorption applications 559
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCd-contaminated paddy soils during a 30-day experiment. The composites prepared at 300
and 700 °C reached Cd recovery from soils of 62%–100% and 36%–65% (Gong et al., 2021).
On the other hand, Altaf et al. (2021) prepared magnetic tea biochar through one-step py￾rolysis of Fe(NO3)3 laden waste tea leaves at 500 °C, which was efficient in removing Hg0 from
coal-syngas. The magnetic biochars presented MS ranging from about 4 to 20 emu g1
. At the
optimal loading of 0.46 mol L1
, the composite attained 95% of Hg0 removal efficiency at
180 °C under simulated syngas (10% CO, 10% H2, and 400 H2S). After six repeated adsorp￾tion/regeneration cycles, the removal efficiency was still above 90% (Altaf et al., 2021).
24.4.2 Organic pollutants
Organic pollutants can cause various environmental problems once released into the
aquatic ecosystem, adversely affecting aquatic biota and diverse life forms. There are several
different types of organic pollutants: organic dyes, phenols, biphenyls, pesticides, fertilizers,
hydrocarbons, plasticizers, detergents, oils, greases, pharmaceuticals, proteins, and carbohy￾drates, and others (Ali et al., 2012). The adsorption of indigotine blue dye was investigated by
applying a novel chitosan composite coated with cobalt ferrite (CoFe2O4). Crosslinking
chitosan polymer chains around CoFe2O4 by co-precipitation resulted in the obtained adsor￾bent (MS 16.45 emu g1
). Optimal adsorption conditions for indigotine blue dye onto the
CoFe2O4/chitosan composite were found at pH 3, and adsorbent dosage of 0.75 g L1
. The
process was fast, reaching equilibrium after 15 min, which the pseudo-first-order model well
represented. The equilibrium behavior was satisfactorily modeled by the Langmuir equa￾tions, where the maximum adsorption capacity was determined as 380.88 mg g1 at
328 K. The adsorption was spontaneous, favorable, and endothermic (dos Santos et al., 2019).
Chitosan is one of the most abundant natural biomass biopolymers obtained from the hy￾drolysis of chitin. Chitosan as adsorbents presents high sorption capacity due to the presence
of highly reactive amino and hydroxyl groups. Singh et al. (2019) incorporated iron oxide in
chitosan-graphene oxide hydrogel nanocomposites through in situ mineralization. The prep￾aration approach was shown to directly impact the morphological features and the structural
order of the nanocomposites, resulting in a more porous structure with a large surface area,
which was favorable for the rapid diffusion of the adsorbate. The prepared composites (MS
32.56–48.31 emu g1
) were tested to remove the cationic dye methylene blue (MB) from the
aqueous solution. The adsorption was influenced by pH and ionic strength of the medium,
indicating an electrostatic interaction between the adsorbent and MB molecules—which is the
only possible explanation for the adsorption efficiency, especially considering the relatively
small surface area of the nanocomposite (25 m2 g1
). The kinetics of adsorption followed a
pseudo-second-order model, and the Freundlich adsorption model described equilibrium ca￾pacity, with qe values attaining 74.93 mg g1 (Singh et al., 2019).
Lee and Ahmad Zaini (2020) prepared through a one-step synthesis ZnCl2/FeCl3 compos￾ites with activated carbon obtained from palm kernel shells. For comparison purposes, the
same composites were prepared by high-temperature impregnation and chemical
co-precipitation. The one-pot synthesis magnetic activated carbon endows a specific surface
area of 1775 m2 g1
, with 93.8% mesoporosity, leading to an excellent rhodamine
B adsorption of 371 mg g1
. However, practically the magnetism of this material is low
560 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices(MS 1.74 emu g1
). The surface areas of the magnetic activated carbon impregnated with iron
salts (FAC) and the magnetic composites prepared by high-temperature (HMAC) and
co-precipitation (CMAC) methods were lower, as 166, 502, and 370 m2 g1
, respectively.
The FAC, HMAC, and CMAC magnetic carbon materials presented MS of 14.5, 1.70, and
11.3 emu g1
, respectively. The maximum adsorption capacity of HMAC was 120 mg g1
,
which was lower than the adsorption capacity of CMAC 128 mg g1
; however, the capacity
of both composites was still less than half of the one-pot composite. The composite prepared
through the one-step process (FAC) displayed the highest saturation magnetization
(14.5 emu g1
) value among the other materials studied. The equilibrium data fitted well into
the Langmuir model, suggesting monolayer adsorption onto a homogeneous structure, while
the kinetic data obeyed the pseudo-second-order model (Lee and Ahmad Zaini, 2020).
Wang et al. (2017) proposed a one-step co-precipitation method to prepare magnetic
sludge-derived biochar (MS 8.49 emu g1
), which promoted both adsorption and
persulfate-based oxidation of acid orange 7 (RO-7) dye. The porous structure and large sur￾face area of the adsorbent benefit the RO-7 uptake, while abundant Fe3O4 magnetic entity and
biochar functional groups containing oxygen lead to oxidative radicals; thus, a high dye deg￾radation was attained. The contribution of adsorption to the overall efficiency of RO-7 dye
was calculated to be 45.5%, including the intrinsic process and the interactions throughout
the catalytic degradation reaction. The carbon composite material presented good resistance
to iron leaching in the experiments, which allowed its re-utilization (Wang et al., 2017). There￾fore, the findings justify the feasibility of one-step preparation, showing that activation and
magnetization in a single process can effectively enhance the adsorption properties of
biochar.
Simultaneous carbonization, activation, and magnetization were employed for producing
biochar tea waste. The synthesis consisted of hydrothermal pre-treatment, impregnation with
FeCl36H2O and KHCO3, and pyrolysis at 700 °C (Li et al., 2021). Its application was tested for
the removal of tetracycline, a widely used antibiotic. The results showed that the surface area
of the adsorbent was 1035.11 m2 g1
, with a total pore volume of 0.583 cm3 g1 and a micro￾pore volume of 0.344 cm3 g1 (MS of 7.28 emu g1
). The characterization of the samples
showed a significant increase in the functional groups containing carbon, nitrogen, and ox￾ygen after the modification. The equilibrium of the tetracycline adsorption onto the biochar
was well fit by Langmuir isotherm (R2 ¼ 0.96), while the kinetic data was better fitted using
Elovich kinetic model (R2 ¼ 0.96). The Langmuir Qmax was 236.93 mg g1
, which was 14.2
times greater than the Qmax value for the unmodified biochar (16.71 mg g1
). The adsorption
of tetracycline was shown to be effective for removing tetracycline over a wide pH range and
in the presence of co-existing ions. The dominant mechanisms were pore filling and π-π in￾teraction, followed by surface complexation and hydrogen bonding (Li et al., 2021).
Thue et al. (2020) prepared magnetic activated carbon from Astrocaryum aculeatum biomass
through single-step pyrolysis, with nickel(II) and zinc(II) chloride. The composite was tested
for the removal of nicotinamide and propranolol. The single-step procedure consisted of
mixing the Astrocaryum aculeatum seeds with the metal salts, introducing the mixture in a
quartz reactor under an N2 flow at 600 °C. ZnCl2 promoted an enlargement of pore size, lead￾ing to a high BET surface area, and the pore size was shifted to a larger mesoporous region.
The magnetic composite with the highest NiCl2 addition presented the higher surface area
among the composites, calculated as 1281 m2 g1
, with a saturation magnetization of 7.14.
24.4 Adsorption applications 561
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe carbon nanocomposite presented nanostructured metallic Ni° particles distributed in the
carbonaceous matrix with an average crystallite size of <33 nm and high thermal stability.
The adsorption data fitted well to Liu isotherm model (R2 ¼ 0.98–0.99), reaching maximum
adsorption capacities of 335.4 (propranolol) and 199.3 mg g1
(nicotinamide). The adsorption
thermodynamics was evaluated obtaining G° < 0 (spontaneous process) and H° < 0 (exother￾mic). The authors proposed that the main mechanisms responsible for the efficiency of the
process were pore filling, π-π interactions—between the aromatic rings of the adsorbates (pro￾pranolol and nicotinamide)—with the π.
The effects of pyrolysis temperature on characteristics adsorption behavior of magnetic
biochar were discussed by Li et al. (2017). The evaluations consisted of studying thermal py￾rolysis of Fe(NO3)3 and distillation residue derived from rice straw pyrolysis oil at 400
(MB400), 600 (MB600), and 800 °C (MB800). The degree of carbonization of the magnetic
biochars became higher as pyrolysis temperature increased. Surface area and pore volume
were also heavily influenced by temperature, reaching the highest values at 600 °C. The in￾crease of temperature up to 800 °C decreased the surface area, attributed to pores blocking
during the evaporation step of pyrolysis. The MS were 5.50, 7.50, 18.36 emu g1 for MB400,
MB600, and MB800, respectively. The composites efficiency was tested versus removing
the aromatic contaminants anisole, phenol, and guaiacol which were investigated carefully,
fitting well to Freundlich equations (R2 ¼ 0.97–0.98), and the maximum adsorption capacities
were 16.6, 9.27, and 1.45 mg g1
, respectively. The—electron and donor-acceptor interaction
was the dominant mechanism for guaiacol adsorption, while the phenol and anisole adsorp￾tion was controlled by pore-filling and hydrophobic effect (Li et al., 2017).
The removals of amoxicillin and paracetamol were investigated using nanocomposites
made by the mixture of activated carbon with CoFe2O4 prepared by a simple pyrolytic
method. In this study, instead of using pre-prepared CoFe2O4 for impregnation, the authors
added iron(III)/cobalt(II) benzoates (MAC-1; 3.07 emu g1
) and iron(III)/cobalt(II) oxalates
(MAC-2, 0.30 emu g1
) to the activated carbon prior to pyrolysis, which was conducted at
600 °C (Saucier et al., 2017). The equilibrium data were better modeled using the Liu isotherm
model (R2 ¼ 0.99) for amoxicillin and paracetamol. The maximum adsorption capacities
obtained were 280.9 and 444.2 mg g1 of amoxicillin for MAC-1 and MAC-2, respectively,
and 215.1 and 399.9 mg g1 of paracetamol using MAC-1 and MAC-2, respectively. Both ad￾sorbents were successfully employed to treat simulated hospital effluents (consisting of nine
pharmaceuticals with high concentrations of sugars, organic components, and saline concen￾trations), reaching an efficiency of 93.0%–96.8% for MAC-1 and MAC-2, respectively. The ef￾ficiency of the process was attributed to the interaction of the pharmaceuticals with MAC-1
and MAC-2 by hydrogen bonds, π–π interactions of aromatic rings of pharmaceuticals with
the aromatic rings of the carbon materials, and donor-acceptor interactions (Saucier et al.,
2017). After the adsorption process, the MAC-2 material was still shallow in magnetism,
and it was not possible to separate it from the aqueous solution.
The addition of clay minerals to improve magnetic biochar textural properties and adsorp￾tion efficiency has also been explored. Wang et al. (2019b) prepared an adsorbent with natural
attapulgite; cauliflower leaves biomass, and FeCl3 and tested its efficiency for the removal of
the antibiotic oxytetracycline (MS 31.46 emu g1
). The combination of attapulgite–biochar
composite had the largest surface area, well-developed pore structure, and more surface
oxygen-containing, functional groups which could interact with pharmaceutical by hydrogen
562 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesbonding, π–π interactions (aromatic rings of pharmaceutical with the aromatic rings of carbon
material), ion exchange and complexation. These characteristics suggest that the introduction
of attapulgite clay particles and iron nanoparticles played an essential function in oxytetra￾cycline uptake. The adsorption of oxytetracycline by the produced adsorbent was efficient
over a wide pH range, which increases applicability. The magnetic attapulgite biochar had
the highest adsorption ability and fastest adsorption speed when compared to the not￾magnetized composite and pristine biochar. The adsorption kinetics followed the pseudo￾second-order kinetic model, and the equilibrium data were better described by the Freundlich
isotherm model, reaching the maximum adsorption capacity of 33.31 mg g1 (Wang et al.,
2019b).
Besides batch adsorption experiments, magnetic biochars’ efficiency has also been inves￾tigated in column experiments. Li et al. (2020) used magnetic porous reduced graphene oxide
as column adsorbent, prepared through in situ chemical co-precipitation of Fe3+ and porous
graphene oxide. The surface area of the composite was calculated to be as high as 1070 m2 g1
.
The removal of triclosan was carried out with both pure water and wastewater effluent in the
continuous flow fixed column at low concentration levels of μg L1
. Fast adsorption equilib￾rium was reached within 20 s, fitting better to the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. The
maximum adsorption capacities of the pollutant were calculated from the Langmuir model,
where the composite reached 1105.8 and 935.3 mg g1 for pure water and wastewater efflu￾ent, respectively. According to the Thomas and Yoon-Nelson models fitting of the curve, the
breakthrough time was 50 days for the bed depth of 2.3 mm at the inlet triclosan concentra￾tion of 100 μg L1
. Compared to commercial activated carbon, the synthesized material
exhibited a much higher affinity to the pollutant, with a breakthrough time of 6.5 times longer
(Li et al., 2020). Although Li et al. (2020) published this paper as a magnetic adsorbent, no
value of saturation magnetization and curves of magnetization saturation were shown in
the paper, and no supplementary material was furnished showing that the adsorbent is ac￾tually magnetic. Also, it was not mentioned how the adsorbent was separated from the aque￾ous solution in the batch adsorption experiments. The experiments of column adsorption,
however, indeed did not need to have a magnetic adsorbent. Therefore, in this case, the mag￾netization of the biochar ended up as a strategy to enhance the adsorbent performance instead
of improving its separation.
The use of magnetic biochar as an effective trap for removing solid pollutants emerged as
the latest application trend, especially considering solving the emerging contamination prob￾lem by micro and nanoplastics in aquatic environments. In addition to the threat of contam￾ination by the plastic itself, these particles can serve as carriers for transporting substances,
increasing the mobility of other pollutants (Vieira et al., 2020).
Singh et al. (2021) assessed the performance of iron-modified biochar prepared at two dif￾ferent pyrolysis temperatures of 550 and 850 °C for the removal of nanoplastics of different
sizes. Experiments focused on the magnetic extractability of the composites, and the tests
were carried out with particles of sizes of 1000 and 30 nm and the surface functional groups
carboxyl and amine. The authors observed that all the pollutants were rapidly eliminated
from the system after 10 min. The reaction kinetics fitted a higher-order model (n > 2), and
the equilibrium data fitted well to the Sips isotherm, suggesting that the ultrafast nanoplastics
removal can be attributed to the heterogeneous nature of the composite surface. Maximum
removal capacities ranged between 206.46 and 225.11 mg g1 for the composite prepared
24.4 Adsorption applications 563
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesat 850 °C, while the composite prepared at 550 °C attained 290 mg g1
. The solution’s pH var￾iations did not significantly affect the adsorption, suggesting the probability of surface com￾plexation of NPs, which was confirmed by the spectroscopic analysis of reaction mixture,
where COO peak decreased, and FeOOH/Fe-O bands appeared. The minimal impact of
environmental parameters, reaction spontaneity, and efficient removal reported even in com￾plex aqueous matrices justify the high viability of composites for future environmental appli￾cability (Singh et al., 2021). No magnetic measurements were shown on the paper.
24.4.3 Complex mixtures
The treatment of complex mixtures can be challenging due to the high contents of the most
diverse types of pollutants present in wastewaters. Significant levels of total organic carbon,
chemical oxygen demand, color, fats, proteins, solids, or particulates can significantly de￾crease the efficiency of any treatment process. Therefore, investigations regarding the appli￾cation of novel adsorbents to the complex mixture are necessary. In this context, simultaneous
capture of trichloroethylene and Cr(VI) from complex wastewater by a magnetic composite
(Liu et al., 2019). Trichloroethylene and Cr(VI) are representative contaminants in groundwa￾ter, and their use gives their relation as chlorinated solvent and coating agent, respectively, in
the leather, electroplating, and dyeing industries. The adsorbent preparation consisted of the
single-step pyrolysis of FeCl3 solution impregnated into peanut hull biomass and subsequent
pyrolysis at 800 °C. The surface area of the composite was calculated to be 359.9 mg g1
. Com￾pared to the Freundlich model (R2 ¼ 0.549), the Langmuir isotherm exhibited a better fit for
Cr(VI) adsorption (R2 ¼ 0.999), with a maximum adsorption capacity of 222 mg g1
. The com￾plete adsorption of 0.07 mmol L1 of trichloroethylene was reached after 65 min. The authors
observed that the composite acted simultaneously as a catalyst for trichloroethylene degra￾dation throughout the process, identifying the formation of 1,1-dichloroethene and cis-1,2-
dichloroethane intermediates. No magnetic measurements were shown on the paper.
The adsorption of naphthalene, p-nitrotoluene, and phosphate was investigated under
simulated environmental conditions using 200 mg L1 NaN3 to inhibit sorbing species bio￾degradations and the addition of 0.01 mol L1 CaCl2 to simulate the ionic strength of environ￾mental water (Chen et al., 2011). Three novel magnetic biochars were prepared by chemical
co-precipitation of Fe3+/Fe2+ on orange peel powder, subsequently pyrolyzed under the dif￾ferent temperatures of 250, 400, and 700 °C, which resulted in the adsorbents named MOP250,
MOP400, and MOP700. The synthesis temperature was found to influence the adsorption ef￾ficiency of the composites, where the MOP400 exhibited better performance toward the re￾moval of the organic contaminants, while MOP250 was more efficient for phosphate
adsorption. The adsorption equilibrium data fitted better to the Freundlich model, with max￾imum adsorption capacities of 23.0 and 43.4 mg g1 for naphthalene and p-nitrotoluene and
0.512 mg g1 for phosphate. No significantly competitive effect between organic pollutants
and phosphate was observed; therefore, the adsorbent is prone to simultaneous pollutant re￾moval (Chen et al., 2011). No magnetic measurements were performed in the paper described
by Chen et al. (2011).
Besides the complex mixtures of pollutants in wastewaters, many pollutants can be present
in their organic and inorganic forms. Arsenic, for example, is an inorganic pollutant in its
564 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesionic form; however, it forms many complexes in aquatic environments, which are not readily
soluble and, instead, increased in mobility. As a way of solving the problem of organic and
inorganic arsenic species contamination in drinking water and/or wastewater, Wen et al.
(2021) proposed using a nanocomposite consisting of porous biochar-supported with
MnFe2O4. The biochar was prepared by typical pyrolysis of ginkgo leaves, and the magneti￾zation was done through the co-precipitation of KMnO4 and FeSO4. The surface area of the
synthesized material was found to be 79.29 mg g1 (MS 20.37 emu g1
). The adsorbent
presented good sorption capacities for As(V) and p-arsanilic acid removal at a pH range of
3–7. The maximum adsorption capacities of As(V) and p-arsanilic acid were approximately
90 and 105 mg g1
, which was well explained by the thermodynamic assessment, while
the kinetics obeyed pseudo-second-order equations. The proposed adsorption mechanism in￾dicated that surface complexation and electrostatic interaction influenced the uptake of both
pollutants, whereas π-π interactions and hydrogen bonding also contribute to the p-arsanilic
acid uptake. Besides, the tremendous uptake of the adsorbates in different water samples and
column adsorption experiments indicated that the produced adsorbent is an excellent adsor￾bent for simultaneous removal of organic and inorganic species in the treatment of wastewa￾ters (Wen et al., 2021).
24.5 Conclusion
This chapter presents the main synthetic methods of preparation of magnetic biochar and
the outcomes of each procedure in terms of textural properties and their respective saturation
magnetization (MS). Overall, the modifications of biochar by the addition of magnetic parti￾cles usually decreased the biochar specific surface area; however, the metallic species present
in the biochar can enhance the sorption capacity of the biochar. The porosity of the adsorbents
was highly dependent on the synthesis temperature employed, the addition of pore former
(ZnCl2) for impregnation pyrolysis, pyrolysis time, and temperature. The more relevant ap￾plications of magnetic composites for the removal of inorganic and organic pollutants have
been discussed, and the use of magnetic composites for complex wastewater treatment has
been presented. Overall, the composites present stable structures in acidic and alkaline envi￾ronments, making magnetic biochar suitable candidates for remediation purposes.
In conclusion, the development of synthetic procedures, such as one-pot synthesis, can
overwhelm the magnetization drawbacks, such as self-agglomeration and increase the mag￾netic adsorbent recycling, and further improve the removal of pollutants from water. It is also
important to highlight that several papers where the authors claim they have used magnetic
adsorbents lack the magnetization curves (see Fig. 24.2). Also, some papers reported MS
values <2.0 emu g1
, whose magnetization value cannot perform a magnetic separation of
the adsorbent from the liquid phase after the adsorption procedure, which should be the
aim of using magnetic adsorbents. Therefore, careful and critical reading is advised.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the funding agencies CAPES, CNPq, and FAPERGS for their financial support.
Acknowledgments 565
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesReferences
Ahmed, M.B., Zhou, J.L., Ngo, H.H., Guo, W., Chen, M., 2016. Progress in the preparation and application of modified
biochar for improved contaminant removal from water and wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2016.05.057.
Ahn, T., Kim, J.H., Yang, H.M., Lee, J.W., Kim, J.D., 2012. Formation pathways of magnetite nanoparticles by
co-precipitation method. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 6069–6076. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp211843g.
Ali, I., Asim, M., Khan, T.A., 2012. Low-cost adsorbents for the removal of organic pollutants from wastewater. J.
Environ. Manage. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2012.08.028.
Alipour, A., Zarinabadi, S., Azimi, A., Mirzaei, M., 2020. Adsorptive removal of Pb(II) ions from aqueous solutions by
thiourea-functionalized magnetic ZnO/nanocellulose composite: optimization by response surface methodology
(RSM). Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 151, 124–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.02.109.
Altaf, A.R., Teng, H., Zheng, M., Ashraf, I., Arsalan, M., Rehman, A.U., Gang, L., Pengjie, W., Yongqiang, R.,
Xiaoyu, L., 2021. One-step synthesis of renewable magnetic tea-biochar derived from waste tea leaves for the re￾moval of Hg0 from coal-syngas. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9, 105313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.105313.
Boistelle, R., Astier, J.P., 1988. Crystallization mechanisms in solution. J. Cryst. Growth 90, 14–30. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0022-0248(88)90294-1.
Cazetta, A.L., Pezoti, O., Bedin, K.C., Silva, T.L., Paesano Junior, A., Asefa, T., Almeida, V.C., 2016. Magnetic activated
carbon derived from biomass waste by concurrent synthesis: efficient adsorbent for toxic dyes. ACS Sustain.
Chem. Eng. 4, 1058–1068. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.5b01141.
Cen, W., Xiong, T., Tang, C., Yuan, S., Dong, F., 2014. Effects of morphology and crystallinity on the photocatalytic
activity of (BiO)2CO3 nano/microstructures. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 53, 15002–15011. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie502670n.
Cha, J.S., Park, S.H., Jung, S.C., Ryu, C., Jeon, J.K., Shin, M.C., Park, Y.K., 2016. Production and utilization of biochar: a
review. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2016.06.002.
Chen, B., Chen, Z., Lv, S., 2011. A novel magnetic biochar efficiently sorbs organic pollutants and phosphate.
Bioresour. Technol. 102, 716–723. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.08.067.
Cheng, N., Wang, B., Wu, P., Lee, X., Xing, Y., Chen, M., Gao, B., 2021. Adsorption of emerging contaminants from
water and wastewater by modified biochar: a review. Environ. Pollut. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2021.116448.
Da˛browski, A., 2001. Adsorption—from theory to practice. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0001-8686(00)00082-8.
dos Santos, J.M.N., Pereira, C.R., Pinto, L.A.A., Frantz, T., Lima, E.C., Foletto, E.L., Dotto, G.L., 2019. Synthesis of a 
novel CoFe2O4/chitosan magnetic composite for fast adsorption of indigotine blue dye. Carbohydr. Polym. 217,
6–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.04.054.
Gavrilescu, M., Demnerova´, K., Aamand, J., Agathos, S., Fava, F., 2015. Emerging pollutants in the environment: pre￾sent and future challenges in biomonitoring, ecological risks, and bioremediation. N. Biotechnol. 32, 147–156.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbt.2014.01.001.
Gong, J.L., Wang, X.Y., Zeng, G.M., Chen, L., Deng, J.H., Zhang, X.R., Niu, Q.Y., 2012. Copper (II) removal by pectin￾iron oxide magnetic nanocomposite adsorbent. Chem. Eng. J. 185–186, 100–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2012.01.050.
Gong, H., Huang, J., Ding, Z., Chi, J., 2021. A potential method using magnetically modified wheat straw biochars for
soil Cd extraction. Ecol. Eng. 166, 106240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2021.106240.
Le, V.T., Tran, T.K.N., Tran, D.L., Le, H.S., Doan, V.D., Bui, Q.D., Nguyen, H.T., 2019. One-pot synthesis of a novel
magnetic activated carbon/clay composite for removal of heavy metals from aqueous solution. J. Dispers. Sci.
Technol. 40, 1761–1776. https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2018.1541414.
Lee, L.Z., Ahmad Zaini, M.A., 2020. One-step ZnCl2/FeCl3 composites preparation of magnetic activated carbon for
effective adsorption of rhodamine B dye. Toxin Rev. https://doi.org/10.1080/15569543.2020.1837172.
Li, H., Mahyoub, S.A.A., Liao, W., Xia, S., Zhao, H., Guo, M., Ma, P., 2017. Effect of pyrolysis temperature on char￾acteristics and aromatic contaminants adsorption behavior of magnetic biochar derived from pyrolysis oil distil￾lation residue. Bioresour. Technol. 223, 20–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.10.033.
Li, Y., Liu, S., Wang, C., Ying, Z., Huo, M., Yang, W., 2020. Effective column adsorption of triclosan from pure water
and wastewater treatment plant effluent by using magnetic porous reduced graphene oxide. J. Hazard. Mater. 386,
121942. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121942.
566 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesLi, B., Zhang, Y., Xu, J., Xie, Z., Tang, J., Li, X., Fan, S., 2021. Simultaneous carbonization, activation, and magnetization
for producing tea waste biochar and its application in tetracycline removal from the aquatic environment. J. En￾viron. Chem. Eng. 9, 105324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.105324.
Liao, T., Li, T., Su, X., Yu, X., Song, H., Zhu, Y., Zhang, Y., 2018. La(OH)3-modified magnetic pineapple biochar as
novel adsorbents for efficient phosphate removal. Bioresour. Technol. 263, 207–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2018.04.108.
Lima, E.C., Hosseini-Bandegharaei, A., Moreno-Piraja´n, J.C., Anastopoulos, I., 2019. A critical review of the estima￾tion of the thermodynamic parameters on adsorption equilibria. Wrong use of equilibrium constant in the Van’t
Hoof equation for calculation of thermodynamic parameters of adsorption. J. Mol. Liq. 273, 425–434. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.molliq.2018.10.048.
Lima, E.C., Sher, F., Guleria, A., Saeb, M.R., Anastopoulos, I., Tran, H.N., Hosseini-Bandegharaei, A., 2021a. Is one
performing the treatment data of adsorption kinetics correctly? J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9, 104813. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jece.2020.104813.
Lima, E.C., Sher, F., Saeb, M.R., Abatal, M., Seliem, M.K., 2021b. Comments on “Reasonable calculation of the ther￾modynamic parameters from adsorption equilibrium constant, Journal of Molecular Liquids 322 (2021) 114980.”. J.
Mol. Liq. 334, 116542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.116542.
Liu, Z., Wang, H., Liu, C., Jiang, Y., Yu, G., Mu, X., Wang, X., 2012. Magnetic cellulose-chitosan hydrogels prepared
from ionic liquids as reusable adsorbents for removal of heavy metal ions. Chem. Commun. 48, 7350–7352.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c2cc17795a.
Liu, Y., Sohi, S.P., Liu, S., Guan, J., Zhou, J., Chen, J., 2019. Adsorption and reductive degradation of Cr(VI) and TCE by
a simply synthesized zero-valent iron magnetic biochar. J. Environ. Manage. 235, 276–281. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.01.045.
Mao, G., Hu, H., Liu, X., Crittenden, J., Huang, N., 2021. A bibliometric analysis of industrial wastewater treatments
from 1998 to 2019. Environ. Pollut. 275, 115785. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115785.
Mohammadi, E., Daraei, H., Ghanbari, R., Dehestani Athar, S., Zandsalimi, Y., Ziaee, A., Maleki, A., Yetilmezsoy, K.,
2019. Synthesis of carboxylated chitosan modified with ferromagnetic nanoparticles for adsorptive removal of
fluoride, nitrate, and phosphate anions from aqueous solutions. J. Mol. Liq. 273, 116–124. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.molliq.2018.10.019.
Monier, M., Abdel-Latif, D.A., 2012. Preparation of cross-linked magnetic chitosan-phenylthiourea resin for adsorp￾tion of Hg(II), Cd(II), and Zn(II) ions from aqueous solutions. J. Hazard. Mater. 209–210, 240–249. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.01.015.
Muga, H.E., Mihelcic, J.R., 2008. Sustainability of wastewater treatment technologies. J. Environ. Manage. 88, 437–447.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2007.03.008.
Panneerselvam, P., Morad, N., Tan, K.A., 2011. Magnetic nanoparticle (Fe3O4) impregnated onto tea waste for the
removal of nickel(II) from an aqueous solution. J. Hazard. Mater. 186, 160–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2010.10.102.
Peng, H., Gao, P., Chu, G., Pan, B., Peng, J., Xing, B., 2017. Enhanced adsorption of cu(II) and cd(II) by phosphoric acid￾modified biochars. Environ. Pollut. 229, 846–853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.07.004.
Qiu, B., Tao, X., Wang, H., Li, W., Ding, X., Chu, H., 2021. Biochar as a low-cost adsorbent for aqueous heavy metal
removal: a review. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaap.2021.105081.
Rout, P.R., Zhang, T.C., Bhunia, P., Surampalli, R.Y., 2021. Treatment technologies for emerging contaminants in
wastewater treatment plants: a review. Sci. Total Environ. 753, 141990. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2020.141990.
Saucier, C., Karthickeyan, P., Ranjithkumar, V., Lima, E.C., dos Reis, G.S., de Brum, I.A.S., 2017. Efficient removal of
amoxicillin and paracetamol from aqueous solutions using magnetic activated carbon. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
24, 5918–5932. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-8304-7.
Schwarzer, H.C., Peukert, W., 2004. Tailoring particle size through nanoparticle precipitation. Chem. Eng. Commun.
191, 580–606. https://doi.org/10.1080/00986440490270106.
Singh, N., Riyajuddin, S., Ghosh, K., Mehta, S.K., Dan, A., 2019. Chitosan-graphene oxide hydrogels with embedded
magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for dye removal. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2, 7379–7392. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsanm.9b01909.
Singh, N., Khandelwal, N., Ganie, Z.A., Tiwari, E., Darbha, G.K., 2021. Eco-friendly magnetic biochar: an effective trap
for nanoplastics of varying surface functionality and size in the aqueous environment. Chem. Eng. J. 418, 129405.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.129405.
References 567
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesSohi, S.P., Krull, E., Lopez-Capel, E., Bol, R., 2010. A review of biochar and its use and function in soil. In: Advances in
Agronomy. Academic Press Inc, pp. 47–82, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2113(10)05002-9.
Thines, K.R., Abdullah, E.C., Mubarak, N.M., Ruthiraan, M., 2017. Synthesis of magnetic biochar from agricultural
waste biomass to enhancing route for wastewater and polymer application: a review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.057.
Thue, P.S., Umpierres, C.S., Lima, E.C., Lima, D.R., Machado, F.M., dos Reis, G.S., da Silva, R.S., Pavan, F.A., Tran, H.-
N., 2020. Single-step pyrolysis for producing magnetic activated carbon from tucuma˜ (Astrocaryum aculeatum)
seed and nickel(II) chloride and zinc(II) chloride. Application for removal of nicotinamide and propanolol. J. Haz￾ard. Mater. 398, 122903. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122903.
Tony, M.A., 2021. Low-cost adsorbents for environmental pollution control: a concise, systematic review from the
prospective of principles, mechanism, and their applications. J. Dispers. Sci. Technol. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01932691.2021.1878037.
Vieira, Y., Lima, E.C., Foletto, E.L., Dotto, G.L., 2020. Microplastics physicochemical properties, specific adsorption
modeling, and their interaction with pharmaceuticals and other emerging contaminants. Sci. Total Environ.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141981, 141981.
Wang, J., Liao, Z., Ifthikar, J., Shi, L., Chen, Z., Chen, Z., 2017. One-step preparation and application of magnetic
sludge-derived biochar on acid orange 7 removal via both adsorption and persulfate-based oxidation. RSC
Adv. 7, 18696–18706. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra01425b.
Wang, L., Wang, J., Wang, Z., Feng, J., Li, S., Yan, W., 2019a. Synthesis of Ce-doped magnetic biochar for effective
Sb(V) removal: performance and mechanism. Powder Technol. 345, 501–508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
powtec.2019.01.022.
Wang, Z., Yang, X., Qin, T., Liang, G., Li, Y., Xie, X., 2019b. Efficient removal of oxytetracycline from aqueous solution
by a novel magnetic clay–biochar composite using natural attapulgite and cauliflower leaves. Environ. Sci. Pollut.
Res. 26, 7463–7475. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-04172-8.
Wen, Z., Xi, J., Lu, J., Zhang, Y., Cheng, G., Zhang, Y., Chen, R., 2021. Porous biochar-supported MnFe2O4 magnetic
nanocomposite as an excellent adsorbent for simultaneous and effective removal of organic/inorganic arsenic
from water. J. Hazard. Mater. 411, 124909. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124909.
Xiong, J., Zhang, D., Lin, H., Chen, Y., 2020. Amphiprotic cellulose mediated graphene oxide magnetic aerogels for
water remediation. Chem. Eng. J. 400, 125890. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125890.
Yi, Y., Huang, Z., Lu, B., Xian, J., Tsang, E.P., Cheng, W., Fang, J., Fang, Z., 2019. Magnetic biochar for environmental
remediation: a review. Bioresour. Technol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.122468.
Yu, M., Wang, L., Hu, L., Li, Y., Luo, D., Mei, S., 2019. Recent applications of magnetic composites as extraction ad￾sorbents for the determination of environmental pollutants. Trends Anal. Chem. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trac.2019.07.022.
Yuwei, C., Jianlong, W., 2011. Preparation and characterization of magnetic chitosan nanoparticles and their appli￾cation for Cu(II) removal. Chem. Eng. J. 168, 286–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.01.006.
Zhang, J., Liu, J., Liu, R., 2015. Effects of pyrolysis temperature and heating time on biochar obtained from the py￾rolysis of straw and lignosulfonate. Bioresour. Technol. 176, 288–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2014.11.011.
Zhang, L., Guo, J., Huang, X., Wang, W., Sun, P., Li, Y., Han, J., 2019a. Functionalized biochar-supported magnetic
MnFe2O4 nanocomposite for the removal of Pb(ii) and Cd(ii). RSC Adv. 9, 365–376. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c8ra09061k.
Zhang, S., Ji, Y., Dang, J., Zhao, J., Chen, S., 2019b. Magnetic apple pomace biochar: simple preparation, characteri￾zation, and application for enriching Ag(I) in effluents. Sci. Total Environ. 668, 115–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2019.02.318.
Zhou, R., Zhang, M., Zhou, J., Wang, J., 2019. Optimization of biochar preparation from the stem of Eichhornia
crassipes using response surface methodology on adsorption of Cd2+. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–17. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-019-54105-1.
568 24. Attraction to adsorption: Preparation methods and performance
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCHAPTER
25
Biomass-derived nanocomposites: A
critical evaluation of their performance
toward the capture of inorganic
pollutants
Konstantinos Simeonidisa
, Evgenios Kokkinosb
,
Efthimia Kapraraa
, and Anastasios Zouboulisb
a
Department of Chemical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
b
Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
25.1 Introduction
Environmental remediation practices have received great interest during the last decades
as a result of the continuously increasing concern of people on the direct and indirect conse￾quences of pollution in their everyday life and the future of the planet. The aim of developed
approaches is from the one hand, to minimize the impact of toxic substances appearing in the
air, water, and soil into human health and from the other hand, to reverse the effect of long￾term pollution in the ecosystems. To face the wide range of problems related to the release of
inorganic pollutants through anthropogenic and natural pathways, several removal methods
were experimentally tested and then, qualified in full-scale applications. Among them, ad￾sorption is recognized as the most preferable one since it combines flexible application
schemes and unattended operation. Commonly, it involves the placement of a granular solid
with chemical affinity to specific pollutants, in the flow of a polluted stream or at the site of the
contaminated area. Apart from the chemical activity of the adsorbent, a typical requirement
for good adsorption efficiency is the establishment of a high specific surface area which im￾plies that adsorption sites are multiplied.
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 569 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00025-3Accordingly, most of the studied adsorbents hold at least one of these two advantages. For
instance, activated carbons are known for the extremely high specific surface area values they
present while metal oxides and oxyhydroxides offer an excellent substrate for the chemisorp￾tion of inorganic pollutants. Some additional characteristics able to improve performance are
the surface charge and the porous structure of the adsorbent. Considering that environmental
remediation processes usually involve large volumes to be treated, demanding proportional
quantities of adsorbents, the cost of preparation should be kept as low as possible to charac￾terize the corresponding process as viable. In this concept, combining two phases that work
supplementary to obtain an optimum adsorbent and decrease the treatment cost has been in￾troduced as a very attractive strategy toward the purification of polluted areas and carriers.
In this chapter, the combination of chemically active phases, usually inorganic ones, with
carbon-based phases which succeed high specific surface areas, is discussed as a trending ap￾proach to obtain solids with improved adsorption capacity but at the same time minimize the
fraction of the active phase which generally defines the adsorbent’s cost. Particularly, this
study emphasizes the introduction of a renewable source such as biomass into the prepara￾tion of nanocomposites with adsorption active inorganic nanomaterials. Wood, food crops,
other residues from agriculture or forestry, algae, and municipal and industrial wastes are
referred to as the typical sources of biomass. The various pristine, modified, or treated prod￾ucts received by biomass are presented as possible substrates for the development of prom￾ising adsorbents with the potential to dominate remediation processes and assist the
valorization of large biomass residual quantities.
25.2 Biomass-derived adsorbents
In spite of biomass extended use as a renewable energy source, significant efforts have
been also performed toward the production of added-value technology materials, including
adsorbents based either on raw biomass or on relevant byproducts. The main advantage for
such applications is the natural polymeric structure of biomass, presenting a proper building
network to deliver high specific surface area, enhanced chemical activity, and also a good sub￾strate to host other phases, aiming to improve synergistically the desired sorption properties
and to enhance the possible functionalization of surfaces. On this concept, several approaches
have been examined to develop appropriate adsorbent materials, mainly based on mechan￾ically treated biomass, as well as on biomass-derived pristine or modified biochars, lignin,
and graphene.
25.2.1 Biosorbents
In the simplest case, biomass wastes can be used without any further modification treat￾ment as adsorbents (biosorbents). The main sources for biosorbents are virgin or waste bio￾masses, such as agriculture and forestry residues, seaweeds, sludges from wastewater
(biological) treatment plants, as well as several other industrial or landfill wastes. Their ap￾plication in environmental remediation processes is promoted by their high availability (prac￾tically inexhaustible), the minimum cost for collection and pre-treatment, together with the
570 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricespossibility to support waste valorization and green economy. The relatively easy disposal af￾ter treatment, or applying incineration to recover energy, is also referred to as a potential ad￾vantage of biosorbents. The obtained adsorption efficiency is mainly attributed to the affinity
of specific biomolecules, or to functional groups of biomass structure, able to bind with cer￾tain molecular or ionic pollutants, diluted in solid, aqueous, or gas forms. Since most biomass
sources are referring to not-living substances, the biosorbents are typically passivated and no
metabolic reaction with the pollutants is expected, apart from their physico-chemical inter￾actions. After excluding the presence of biological capture mechanisms, the adsorption of in￾organic pollutants by biosorbents takes place by means of ion exchange, complexation,
chelation, and precipitation. The lignocellulosic residuals, originating from plants, are consid￾ered as the largest feedstock for the preparation of biosorbents and accordingly, the typical
composition of relevant materials is mostly based on polysaccharides (cellulose and hemicel￾lulose) and lignin, an aromatic polymer.
Actually, the received biomass almost always requires a proper kind of pre-treatment to
remove the impurities from the harvesting field and to get the granule dimensions to the
proper size for the subsequent remediation application. The biomass wastes are generally
considered and treated as a zero-value byproduct during their collection and this implies
the presence of different inorganic and organic particulates from dust diameters up to the size
of small stones. Long-time storage outdoors under exposure to air, weather conditions, and
sunlight may strongly affect their purity and chemical composition. For this reason, prelim￾inary washing is a commonly applied pre-required task, which is typically fulfilled by the use
of plenty of tap water. The biomass feedstock is then ground or milled to produce a granular
or powdered form, while sieving is applied to homogenize the size, commonly in the range
0.1–4 mm. The granular biosorbents are washed once more at this stage typically using dis￾tilled water and sometimes, diluted HCl, or NaOH to remove the residual soluble impurities.
The product is finally dried at ambient temperatures.
25.2.2 Pristine biochar
High specific surface area is an essential characteristic for the development of an adsorbent
agent, oriented to succeed sufficient uptake performance for one or more pollutants.
Untreated or mechanically treated biomass may increase the specific surface area only by
the proportional size reduction, whereas only the outer surface of the materials’ structural
network is actually accessed for sorption purposes. A significant improvement can be
achieved by the pyrolysis of biomass, aiming to produce biochar, which results due to a car￾bonization process carried out in the absence of oxygen to prevent combustion. During py￾rolysis, lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose macromolecules gradually decompose, leaving a
structure with high pore volume and density of functional groups, which features a biochar￾based product with improved chemical activity and stability. The total procedure results in a
solid residue of around 15–35%wt. of biochar with the rest of the products received in the
resulting liquid (bio-oil) and the gas phase (synthetic gas).
The formation of biochar in the absence of oxygen involves several steps, the respective
control of which may define the conversion efficiency and the properties of the final product.
At the beginning of this process, the absorbed water content is removed just above 100°C.
25.2 Biomass-derived adsorbents 571
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThen, the breakdown of dried biomass initiates, when reaching 150°C, and proceeds with a
mild pyrolysis procedure called torrefaction up to around 300°C. At this temperature range,
the decomposition generates a mixture of gases, such as carbon monoxide and dioxide, meth￾ane, hydrogen, and also tars, signifying a step with exothermic effects. Heating at even higher
temperatures (up to 800o C) is required to decompose the high volatiles residuals and to in￾crease the carbon percentage of biochar through mainly endothermic reactions.
The exact composition in the output of the pyrolysis system depends on the type of bio￾mass feedstock, the temperature, the time of pyrolysis, and the heating rate. In general, mild
heating conditions and lower temperatures and heating rates would favor high biochar yields
(i.e., slow pyrolysis conditions). Slow pyrolysis is known to feature biochar production with a
negative surface charge, providing an ability to capture positively charged pollutants. How￾ever, biochar produced at higher temperatures indicates very high specific surface area and
porosity with the presence of longitudinal micro or macro-pores, though accompanied by
lower cation-exchange capacities. Biochar is considered as a mechanically and chemically
stable solid, owed to the presence of aromatic carbons atoms in condensed aromatic hydro￾carbons, existing at large proportions and with different crystalline forms, such as amor￾phous, turbostratic carbon, and/or graphite.
The physical and chemical properties of pristine biochars are defined mainly from the
characteristics of used feedstock and from the applied pyrolysis procedure. The percentages
of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin in the biomass structure may determine the whole re￾action progress, according to the respective temperature range for the degradation of each
component. Suggestively, cellulose and hemicellulose fully degrade below 400°C but lignin
may react in a wider temperature range, extended up to 700°C.
The potential of biochar for adsorption applications strongly depends on the atomic ratios
H/C and O/C, which are indicative of the important properties of aromaticity and polarity,
respectively, whereas the presence of mineral residuals (ash), such as calcium, potassium,
and phosphorous, is expected to improve the adsorption efficiency in several cases. In the
beginning, raw biomass possesses an aromaticity index above 1.5 and a polarity ratio of
0.6. The formation of biochar results in the decrease of both H/C and O/C ratios in the range
0.1–0.6 and 0–0.25, respectively, depending on the applied pyrolysis conditions. The applica￾tion of very high temperatures, or extended thermal treatment, may bring both ratios very
close to zero, indicating a carbonization process, where the carbon content easily exceeds
95%wt. and the aromaticity is maximized. Aromaticity is directly related to the stability of
biochar, formed after the removal of hydrogen and oxygen atoms from the functional groups
and the rearrangement of molecular structure. Such property is particularly favorable when
the biochar is prepared specifically for soil remediation uses. However, the application of
lower temperatures may generate biochars with lower carbon content, preserving some of
the initial polarity (i.e., higher O/C ratio) and resulting in acceptable aromaticity.
The complexity of biochar surface structure and chemistry often provide multiple possi￾bilities to act as an efficient adsorbent for different pollutants. Organic pollutants may be cap￾tured by physisorption mechanisms and chemical interactions with the functional groups,
such as carboxyls and hydroxyls. In the presence of a hydrophobic surface, organic pollutants
may be captured also by the non-polar attraction and π-π electron donor/acceptor mecha￾nisms, taking advantage of the porous biochar’s microstructure. When the biochar’s surface
retains ionic charge, or some ionic groups are embedded in the structure, then the organic
pollutants with polar groups may be easily attracted, or the degradation of organic molecules
572 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmay be promoted. The presence of functional groups, leading to positive or negative charg￾ing, as well as of exchangeable ions and/or adsorbed metals onto biochar surface, supports
also alternative routes for the uptake of inorganic pollutants, e.g., through the complexation
on oxygen bridges, anionic/cationic attraction, ion-exchange, or chemical precipitation.
25.2.3 Activated carbon
This term usually refers to a carbon-rich product, similar to biochar, which goes through
various activation treatment processes to improve its specific surface area and chemical ac￾tivity. The main difference between biochar and activated carbon stands on the applied pro￾duction temperature, i.e., biochar is usually produced at temperatures below 700°C under
anaerobic or inert conditions, while activated carbon is prepared above 700°C using a flow
of an activated gas. Another common consideration involves the type of carbonaceous source
required to prepare activated carbon, which is preferred to be wood or coal product with high
purity and limited presence of dirt.
The modification processes applied to produce activated carbon are commonly classified
in pre-treatment and post-treatment procedures. Pre-treatment is applied to the raw biomass
by its dispersion into or wetting by acids, bases, oxidizers, or other salt solutions. The contact
under these solutions is intending to specifically dissolve some compounds and to attach
metal/inorganic ions or oxygen radicals on the exposed surface sites. Therefore, the pre￾treatment contributes to the development of a porous network and to the chemical activation
by creating new adsorption sites. For instance, the acidic treatment (e.g., by phosphoric acid)
can remove some inorganic elements and enhance the hydrophilic character of the surface,
while the alkaline washing (e.g., by sodium hydroxide) can introduce a positive surface
charge and a significant improvement of the specific surface area.
The post-treatment modification normally includes the separate or sequential chemical
and/or thermal steps. Steam activation, which is applied in the pyrolyzed material at temper￾atures above 800°C, is a common procedure to improve the porous structure, to oxidize the
carbon surface and to introduce a high density of carboxylic, hydroxyl, phenolic, and car￾bonyl functional groups, and indirectly, to improve hydrophilicity. On the opposite, hydro￾phobicity can be favored after heating above 800°C under the flow of hydrogen or air, which
promotes the removal of oxygen-containing groups and stabilizes the CdH groups. The
formed activated carbons show better affinity with hydrocarbons. It should be noted that sev￾eral activation processes refer to the use of metal salts solutions (e.g., FeCl3, KCl, AlCl3) or
oxidizing agents, containing mineral elements (e.g., KMnO4), which can succeed an improve￾ment of physical and chemical properties of activated carbons after the separate formation of
inorganic oxides, able to be deposited on the carbon structure. In this chapter, the majority of
such cases are considered as approaches to produce carbon-based nanocomposites rather
than carbon activation procedures, and they are discussed more extensively in the following
sections.
25.2.4 Lignin
Another component of interest in the lignocellulosic biomass with potential application for
the capture of contaminants is lignin. Lignin is a natural amorphous phenolic polymer with a
25.2 Biomass-derived adsorbents 573
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceshigh degree of complexity, which occupies around 15–30%wt. of plant and wood-based bio￾mass, acting as a binding and protecting medium for cellulose. Therefore, lignin already com￾prises a significant part of biosorbents, originating from agricultural sources. A significant
quantity of lignin becomes available after the delignification of wood biomass to obtain paper.
The fractionation/separation of lignin from the lignocellulosic biomass becomes favorable,
due to its stable hydrophobic three-dimensional structure and the high density of functional
hydroxyl, methoxyl, carbonyl, carboxyl, and phenolic groups. Such heterogeneity and versa￾tility of lignin is the reason for the intense interest to develop adsorbents on its basis. The high
percentage of ash content (may reach up to 15%wt.), corresponding to silica, sodium, and cal￾cium compounds, is another characteristic of lignin that should be also considered for each
application.
The exact properties of lignin depend on the respective extraction procedure, as well as on
the specific biomass source. Its isolation from cellulose and hemicellulose, the other two major
components of biomass, is achieved mainly by the application of two approaches: (i) the dis￾solution or hydrolysis of cellulose to receive lignin as insoluble solid, and (ii) the dissolution
of lignin from the mixture followed by its recovery in a subsequent step. The alkaline frac￾tionation is the most common process to obtain lignin from the lignocellulosic biomass. It
is applied by the single addition of NaOH (soda pulping), or by the combination with sodium
sulfide (kraft pulping) at temperatures around 100–150°C. During this process, the bonds of
lignin with the other biomass constituents break down and lignin becomes soluble, resulting
in the formation of black liquor. It is finally received after acid washing and precipitation.
Kraft lignin has a much higher recovery yield, although it also contains an amount of sulfur.
The separation of lignin by the sulfite pulping process, which involves the addition of sul￾fur dioxide and sodium, magnesium, calcium, or ammonium hydroxide, is not
recommended, when aiming to produce adsorbents for water treatment, since the received
solid is highly soluble, while the sulfur content is very high. There are also other methods
to obtain lignin, promising high selectivity, minimum chemical modification, lower molecu￾lar weights, and no content of sulfur. Among them, the organosolv pulping is the most stud￾ied one, using alcohols (e.g., ethanol, propanediol) and organic acids (e.g., formic, acetic) in
combination with acids or bases, working as catalysts. Nevertheless, and despite the advan￾tages of organosolv lignin, the use of this procedure to develop adsorbents is rather limited,
due to the elevated production cost and to the toxicity issues, because of the organic
solvents use.
Beyond the direct use of pristine lignin as adsorbent, numerous chemical activation and
thermal transformation processes may be applied to obtain modified lignin structures, or
to produce chars and activated carbons. For this concept, the aforementioned methodologies,
already described in the previous sections, are followed.
25.2.5 Graphene
Graphene is a popular carbon form, due to its unique mechanical, physical, and chemical
properties, which became beneficial for various modern technology applications. Structur￾ally, graphene can be described as a single graphite layer with a honeycomb-like lattice,
which provides very high specific surface areas. High-quality graphene has been widely
574 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesproduced by the exfoliation of graphite (top-down approach), or by the chemical vapor de￾position (bottom-up approach). However, there are other graphene derivatives, which are
prepared by applying much easier and less expensive methods, such as graphene oxide
and the reduced graphene oxide. In particular, graphene oxide is the result of graphite’s
chemical oxidation by the addition of NaNO3 and KMnO4 in an acidic environment; it is neg￾atively charged and can be easily decorated by proper functional groups, thus, becoming
more favorable for adsorption uses. Reduced graphene, which is very similar to graphene
after the removal of functional groups, is produced by the reduction of graphene oxide, using
hydrazine, hydrides, or thiosulfate reagents.
The biomass-derived graphene forms require different synthetic approaches, which how￾ever can generally achieve lower product purity. However, the concept for the valorization of
a renewable carbon resource and the application in technological fields, such as environmen￾tal remediation, demanding high availability, rather than high quality, is still attractive. In the
first accessible method, a two-step pathway is followed to convert biomass into graphite and
then, exfoliate it to produce graphene. Biomass is subjected to thermal treatment, which in￾volves a carbonization process in the air or inert atmosphere at relatively low temperatures
(suggestively below 500°C). Then, the amorphous product is heated to higher temperatures
(above 850°C), aiming to initiate the graphitization process. The exfoliation of graphitized bio￾mass takes place using very high heating temperatures, or by the addition of oxidants,
attempting to receive graphene oxide.
The conversion yield of biomass to graphene mainly depends on the success of carboniza￾tion step. When formed, amorphous carbon shows the microporous structure (hard carbon)
and the graphitization becomes very difficult. Alternatively, the domination of “soft carbon,”
i.e., a disordered, but denser structure, makes the formation of graphite more possible. The
second method to transform biomass into graphene is the chemical vapor deposition of gases
produced during the pyrolysis of biomass. Graphene can be deposited onto a metal substrate,
ensuring a high-quality structure. It is obvious that the chemical vapor deposition approach
can only generate small amounts of graphene at a relatively high cost and for this reason bio￾mass is tested only as an alternative for the substitution of carbon gas feed.
These procedures are facilitated when special attention is given to the pre-treatment of bio￾mass, since plant and agriculture wastes are the main feed stocks in this case. Some of the pre￾treatment practices, used to promote the production of graphene from biomass, may include
acid washing, filtration, grain size reduction, proper drying, chemical treatment, desilication,
and delignification. The final product may also follow modification processes to improve
chemical activity. In spite of the difficulties to obtain graphene from biomass, the obtained
structure, the featured functional groups (for graphene oxide), and the potential for building
up sophisticated composites, may suggest a profitable perspective for the corresponding
adsorbents.
25.3 Synthesis of nanocomposites
The discussed class of adsorbents is composite materials, consisting of the carbonaceous
biomass-derived matrix and a second active phase in the form of nanoparticles distributed
25.3 Synthesis of nanocomposites 575
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matriceson this matrix. The biomass-based part of the composite originates from one of the previously
mentioned categories (i.e., as-obtained biomass, biochar, activated carbon, lignin, graphene),
assuming that the carbon source for their production is any kind of biomass, but still without
the addition of any chemical reagents or synthetic polymers. Since this chapter refers to
nanocomposites developed to capture specifically inorganic pollutants, the review will em￾phasize only the active phases capable to provide the affinity for efficient and non-reversible
capture. For this reason, several inorganic compounds, such as metals, metal, and alkaline
earth oxides or hydroxides, minerals, and magnetic phases, will be mostly mentioned. The
large quantity demand for adsorbents in applications, such as water treatment, or gas and
soil remediation, initiates also the need to promote preparation methodologies with mini￾mum cost, using inexpensive precursors or materials for the building-up of the active phase.
Biomass-based nanocomposites can be synthesized by the application of various approaches,
generally classified as (i) in-situ nanoparticles’ development, (ii) constituents’ blending, and
(iii) carbon-phase functionalization (Fig. 25.1).
25.3.1 In-situ development of nanoparticles
In this case, the inorganic phase is formed directly into the network of the high specific
surface carbon phase after the chemical reaction of a proper precursor. During this approach,
the thermal treatment of biomass is a separate preliminary step and then the inorganic pre￾cursor (e.g., a metal salt) is homogeneously dispersed, or adsorbed into its volume. This is
usually performed by contacting the biomass-based material with an aqueous solution of
metal salt under the influence of intense stirring or by sonication. The inorganic nanoparticles
are produced onto the active sites of the carbon phase, where ions can be adsorbed when the
reaction of the precursor is triggered by the modification of a chemical parameter or by the
application/change of other conditions. Commonly, the occurring reaction is a precipitation
process, where the solubility of metal ions is decreased under specific conditions (e.g., pH
modification). The desired destabilization can be caused by providing energy to the system
(e.g., by temperature, pressure, or supersonics), or by changing the pH value and/or the re￾dox potential. Depending on the precipitation parameter, the reaction can be characterized as
thermal decomposition, hydrothermal treatment, sonochemical, chemical precipitation, or
oxidative hydrolysis, respectively. These reaction types can result in the in-situ nucleation
of nanosized particles and their growth at the same active sites of the biomass-based matrix.
Very frequently, the thermal treatment of raw biomass can be combined with any of the afore￾mentioned reactions, aiming to the preparation of the inorganic phase. In the second approach,
the biomass is initially immersed in the precursor’s solution for sufficient time to adsorb the spe￾cific ions or molecules; then, it is subjected to drying and finally is pyrolyzed, forming the
nanocomposite. During the heating procedure, the volatile part of biomass is removed and
the product is enriched in carbon to become a biochar. At the same time, under the effect of high
temperatures, the adsorbed precursor is transformed to the corresponding oxide, also following
a solid-state reaction with the biochar’s structure. Alternatively, the mechanical mixing (e.g., by
ballmilling) of raw biomass with the precursor reagent (both existingin powdered forms) can be
applied sometimes combined with pressurization, forming bulk specimens. In this case, the
nanoparticles, typically consisting of metal oxides, are formed after a solid-state reaction at high
temperatures in the same levels as the carbonization process.
576 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesIn general, the in-situ synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles induces high homogeneity in the
obtained nanocomposites, since the precursors have good access to the whole volume of the
biomass phase. When performed using solutions, this methodology minimizes the aggrega￾tion effects between the particle units, implying the maximization of chemical activity with a
significant impact on the obtained adsorption efficiency. On the contrary, the simultaneous
FIG. 25.1 Available paths for the preparation of biomass-based nanocomposites.
25.3 Synthesis of nanocomposites 577
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescarbonization-precipitation does not provide such a control of dispersion procedure, regard￾ing the precursor option, but during the shrink of biomass structure, the nanoparticles may
occupy sites at the internal areas of the matrix.
25.3.2 Blending of constituents
An alternative preparation procedure can be also applied, aiming to obtain the final form
of inorganic nanomaterials, and then, their distribution to the biomass-derived substrate is
attempted by means of wet contact, or by solid-state mixing. The main advantage of this
approach is the possibility to perform any synthetic, modification, and purification step
for the nanoparticles in the absence of the carbonaceous phase. This provides the opportu￾nity of carrying out chemical processes, avoiding some non-desirable impacts in the func￾tional groups and in the structure of biomass, by removing the residuals and byproducts of
the preparation step, prior to the nanocomposite’s formation. For instance, bottom-up
super-saturation techniques (leading to precipitation or thermal decomposition) can be
performed under perfect tuning of the respective critical parameters, being able to succeed
in the complete purification of nanoparticles after washing away the non-reacted reagents
and the excess of ionic forms. In addition, simple nanomaterials production methods, with￾out the need for special conditions or instrumentation, but also high-pressure processes,
physical vapor condensation in vacuum systems, and organic solvent synthesis may be
applied.
On the other hand, the homogeneous distribution of nanoparticles in the biomass network
is not always guaranteed, unlike in the case of in-situ synthesis. The surface charges of the
carbon phase and of nanoparticles seem to be the dominant parameter to achieve high affinity
and the spontaneous tendency of particles to occupy surface active sites. Suggestively, the
participation of similarly charged phases inhibits the dispersion of nanoparticles, resulting
rather in a binary-phase material, instead of the expected nanocomposite. The extent of ag￾gregation, regarding the introduced nanoparticles, is the second source of inhomogeneity in
the nanocomposites’ phase. Depending on the preparation techniques and the potential ad￾dition of stabilizers, nanoparticles may present a high tendency for aggregation. Following
this possibility, the aggregates would behave as large particles and therefore, the degrees
of freedom in motion within the structural network of the biomass phase will be limited.
The blending approach can be also realized by mixing the phases in a liquid, wet or solid
form. The liquid blending includes the dispersion of carbon phase and of nanoparticles in
water, or other proper solvent, followed by the application of extended stirring or sonication,
aiming to facilitate the proper mixing and uptake of nanoparticles in the biomass matrix. The
wet mixing involves the addition of the nanoparticles in the sludge of the carbon phase and
then, their mixing by slow mechanical stirring. This method can load higher quantities of in￾organic nanoparticles, which are captured in the structure of the nanocomposite’s phase, dur￾ing the following drying procedure. Finally, the nanocomposite can be prepared using both
carbon phase and nanoparticles in powdered forms and their blending, using a high-energy
ball mill, or other mechanical treatment procedure. This type of process may provide suffi￾cient homogeneity, but the expected increase in temperature can induce undesired structural
modifications in the produced composite.
578 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices25.3.3 Functionalization of carbon phase
Another way to prepare biomass-based nanocomposites with inorganic particles is to at￾tach the nanoparticles in their final form onto the raw biomass and then, to apply subse￾quently a thermal carbonization treatment. In this case, the biomass transformation takes
place in the presence of the nanoparticles, which are impregnated into the new structure with￾out significant structural changes. The inorganic particles may be considered as functional
sites distributed both onto the carbon surface, as well as within its porous network. In some
cases, nanoparticles or their aggregates may act also as blockades to the porous part of
biochar, compensating the advantage of chemical activity by limited access to the carbon
surface.
Some chemical modification processes commonly carried out to prepare activated carbons
can be also classified in this category of biomass-based nanocomposite synthesis. These in￾clude the decoration/functionalization with metal ions after contacting proper aqueous so￾lutions of metal salts with the raw biomass, or with the pristine biochar, during a thermal
activation process. This procedure not only succeeds the increase of the specific surface area
and the improvement of porosity but additionally provides a high density of active sites by
metal ions with the potential to participate in adsorption or ion-exchange reactions.
25.4 Active phases
The efficiency of biomass-derived nanocomposites is generally defined by the properties
and the chemical activity of the distributed inorganic nanomaterials. Therefore, the proper
selection of impregnated phase, with respect to the targeted application, is the most critical
part of nanocomposites development. Following the current state-of-the-art on the synthesis
of engineered nanoparticles and the characteristic properties of each system, biomass and its
thermal modified derivatives are preferably featured with metals/alloys, metal oxides,
oxyhydroxides, and minerals to establish a functional adsorbent. Among these categories,
magnetically responsive components, such as zero-valent iron and iron oxide nanoparticles,
are distinguished, due to the extra possibility for remote magnetic handling they provide and
the easier separation options.
25.4.1 Metals and alloys
Zero-valent iron (ZVI) nanoparticles are the most frequently applied nanostructured ad￾sorbent agents, due to the numerous reaction possibilities introduced by the presence of iron
and their relatively low production cost. If properly stabilized against spontaneous oxidation
or agglomeration, ZVI nanoparticles (nZVI) may serve as effective reducing agents, able to
succeed modification in the valence states of nearby cations. In many cases, this mechanism
is the key to capture efficiently pollutants in aqueous solutions, by decreasing the solubility of
oxy-ions or by triggering the precipitation of hydroxides (Fig. 25.2). Apart from being an elec￾tron donor, ZVI shows also a direct high chemical affinity for some heavy metals oxy-ionic
forms, having the potential to bind them on the surface. Its activity is maintained, even after
their surface passivation by iron oxide or oxyhydroxide layer, since such phases indicate
25.4 Active phases 579
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricessimilar adsorption ability, as would be later presented. Importantly, ZVI nanoparticles pre￾sent the best-known magnetization properties, allowing easy separation from the purified
medium. Iron can be also combined with other metals, such as Ag, Pd, Ni, Al, Cu, Co, Zn,
in alloys or binary systems, being able to initiate a galvanic coupling mechanism to assist elec￾tron donation efficiency and surface corrosion inhibition with significant impact in the exten￾sion of operating lifetime of the adsorbent.
Despite their relatively higher cost, noble metal nanoparticles are known for their selectiv￾ity to capture specific pollutants. For instance, gold nanoparticles are very efficient for the
removal of mercury through the amalgamation process, while their optical properties may
be considered significant for some photocatalytic treatment processes. Similar properties
have been reported for the Ag and Pd nanoparticles, although such systems are widely
studied mainly for their anti-microbial properties. The use of noble metals for the uptake
of pollutants is obviously limited by their high cost; however, applications that may be
upgraded, or become very selective, due to their addition in very small concentrations, could
become affordable. In addition, nanocomposites based on noble metal nanoparticles are able
to support purification processes by acting as pollutant concentration sensors, or as guards
for other processes.
FIG. 25.2 Mechanisms of pollutants’ capture on various biomass-derived nanocomposites.
580 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices25.4.2 Metal oxides and oxyhydroxides
Nanomaterials consisting of oxides or oxyhydroxides of metals or alkaline earths are the
most studied category when referring to adsorbents for pollutants. This has to do with the
variety of available phases, their chemical stability against oxidation or passivation processes
taking place, the intensity of surface charges, and the tunable surface morphology and porous
structure. In addition, many oxides can be easily prepared in large quantities and rather low
cost. Much interest is attracted mainly by the iron oxide nanoparticles (Fe3O4, γ-Fe2O3,
α-Fe2O3), because of their high affinity to many different pollutants, which is connected with
the possibility of chemisorption through oxygen bridges. Different preparation or surface
modification approaches may be carried out in aqueous systems and determine the surface
charging of obtained nanoparticles as positive or negative. Such features provide the oppor￾tunity for the design of nanocomposites, specifically adapted to the characteristics of the pol￾lutant to be treated. Magnetite (Fe3O4) nanoparticles offer also reducing potential, due to the
presence of Fe2+ into its crystal structure. The appearance of hydroxyl groups and the typi￾cally lower degree of crystallinity in comparison to the case of oxides promote the use of iron
oxyhydroxide nanostructures (FeOOH), which are considered as one of the best pollutant’s
purifiers. The substitution of iron atoms by other metals in the iron oxides and oxyhydroxides
generates a wide class of nanoadsorbents with advanced characteristics. Suggestively, the in￾corporation of manganese in iron oxyhydroxides is known to offer an extra oxidizing step in
the adsorption mechanism, when dealing with mobile heavy/toxic metal forms, such as
As(III). In addition, ferrite nanoparticles (i.e., MFe2O4, where M ¼ Mg, Zn, Ni, Ti, Cu, Mn)
may be also tested for environmental remediation application.
Metal oxides able to support photocatalytic reactions are another major class of
nanomaterials, regarding the capture of inorganic pollutants. Titanium oxide and zinc oxide
are able to induce oxidation or reduction reactions, when exposed to UV radiation, by the
release of charge carriers. Other metal oxides, such as CeO2, ZrO2, and SiO2 in the form of
nanoparticles, are known for both direct and/or photoinduced activities toward the pollut￾ants’ uptake. The surface hydration of Al2O3, MgO, CaO, and MnO2 explains the intense in￾terest in water and soil remediation processes, while their stability at higher temperatures
enables their use even in flue gas treatment. Finally, tin oxides and oxyhydroxides, as well
as the layered double hydroxides with combinations of Mg, Al, and Zn, demonstrated high
potential for the removal of several inorganic pollutants, owed to electron donation and ion
exchange mechanisms and the available adsorption sites in the interlayer space.
25.4.3 Minerals
Modification of the adsorption properties for the biomass-derived products can be
achieved also by the employment of clays, which are known for their lamellar structure,
the high specific surface area, and the ion exchange potential. Such features imply their sig￾nificant efficiency for the capture of various pollutants, including the toxic metal forms.
Biochar-clays nanocomposites are prepared mainly by the application of two ways: (i) the
mixing of biomass and clay in slurry, which is then subjected to pyrolysis, and (ii) the addition
of the final carbon-rich product in clay slurry, followed by drying or by mechanical treatment
(e.g., ball milling). In the first case, the presence of clay minerals (e.g., kaolinite, bentonite,
25.4 Active phases 581
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmontmorillonite) during the carbonization process enhances the porosity of formed biochar,
while at the same time the composite is featured with a better affinity toward inorganic pol￾lutants. Another advantage of using minerals instead of synthetic phases is their chemical and
structural stability during the heating treatment.
The incorporation of clays after carbonization assists only the functionalization of the com￾posite; however, it facilitates their adoption in nanosized units. This is realized by the treat￾ment of clay in a high-energy ball milling process, prior to its dispersion in the slurry, or by
carrying out the solid-state blending of biochar with the clay into a ball mill. Mineral
nanocomposites with biochar are preferable when their use is oriented to soil remediation
in parallel to the sequestration and nutrition activity. In this application, the presence of clays
supports the improvement of ion exchange capacity and long-term mechanical resistance.
The lower production cost in comparison to other types of engineered nanocomposites is also
a critical advantage for this category of environmental remediation, which generally de￾mands very large quantities of the respective product.
25.4.4 Magnetic phases
Introducing magnetically responsive nanomaterials in biomass-derived adsorbents is fa￾vorable by many researchers as a way to prepare nanocomposites with high uptake capacity
for specific pollutants, combined with the possibility to effectively separate the solid by
means of an external magnetic field without the use of an interface, as in the filtration process.
Considering that due to their high toxicity, the magnetic compounds containing Co and Ni
are avoided for environmental applications, the magnetic nanoparticles used for the biomass￾based nanocomposites are almost exclusively belonging to different iron phases. More spe￾cifically, ZVI, γ-Fe2O3, Fe3O4, and the respective ferrite substitutions, are able to feature with
sufficient magnetic properties the whole nanocomposite after their successful distribution
into the biomass network.
The advantage of magnetization is utilized for several reasons. Firstly, the application of a
proper magnetic field during the deposition of nanoparticles in the carbon phase is able to
facilitate homogeneity and self-organization in symmetrical geometries, such as linear or
closed chains. The successful tuning of nanoparticles arrangement may improve further
the adsorption efficiency. Another possibility of magnetically activated biomass products
is their recovery, when the remediation process is completed, especially in aqueous purifica￾tion systems. This is generally fulfilled by placing permanent magnets or electromagnets in
the side of a flowing tube, or in a contact reactor tank, allowing the implementation of oper￾ational setups without the need to place the adsorbent in a fixed column bed. The magnetic
separation can also facilitate other procedures, maximizing the overall adsorption efficiency,
such as the recirculation of adsorbent until its saturation with the pollutant and the regener￾ation of used nanocomposite by means of appropriate acid or base washing strategies.
25.5 Adsorbents for aqueous pollutants
Water constitutes a fundamental component for the evolution of human civilization and
animal life; thus, the prevention and treatment of aquatic pollution have always been a critical
582 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesissue for intensive scientific research. Inorganic pollutants are a major class of contaminants
found in aquatic environments, originating either from geogenic contribution (e.g., weathering
of natural rocks and soil) or from uncontrolled anthropogenic activities. Several factors, such as
the waste discharges fromindustries, construction companies, sewerage systems, as well as the
extensive use of fertilizers, etc. have led to the increased concentration of various heavy metals
(e.g., Cd, Cr, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pb, Zn) and other inorganic pollutants in water resources, ranging
from trace elements (e.g., As, Mn, U) to nutrients (mainly PO4
3, NO3). These inorganic pol￾lutants are considered conservative pollutants, i.e., non-biodegradable, persisting in the sur￾rounding environment. Consuming water with concentrations over the maximum
permitted contaminant levels defined by legislation may cause a variety of hazardous effects
to humans, regardingliver, kidney, nervous system, circulatory system, blood, gastrointestinal
system, bones, or skin, depending on the inorganic contaminant and the level of exposure.
To protect human and animal life from that exposure and restore ecological balance in the
aquatic environment, several technologies have been developed for the removal of inorganic
pollutants from aqueous systems, including chemical reduction/precipitation, adsorption,
ion exchange, membrane separation, electro-dialysis, phytoremediation, and others. Among
them, adsorption has proven to be an effective water purification method for inorganic pol￾lutants, offering flexibility in design and operation, simplicity, lower cost, and the potential
recycle and reuse of spent material. Yet, the exploitation regarding the maximum capacity of
adsorbents has not be reached, due to limitations related mainly to the development of the
effective specific surface area. This limitation can be successfully overtaken by the combina￾tion of inorganic nanomaterials with carbonized phases in the form of nanocomposites,
presenting high specific surface area, enhanced chemical activity, and affinity for the efficient
and non-reversible capture of inorganic pollutants. Especially, recently numerous
nanocomposites have been synthesized and tested for the capture of inorganic pollutants
from the aqueous media. In many cases, these nanocomposites are composed of a
biomass-based part and an inorganic part, usually with nanoscale dimensions.
25.5.1 Hexavalent chromium
So far, the most studied pollutant, regarding its removal using biomass-derived
nanocomposite adsorbents, is chromium. The dominant form of chromium in aquatic systems
is the Cr(VI) species, due to its higher mobility in comparison with Cr(III) and its weak ten￾dency to be adsorbed (Kaprara et al., 2015). In view of its verified toxicity and carcinogenicity,
the recent EU directive on the quality of water intended for human consumption considers a
new maximum contaminant level for chromium at 25 μg/L with a tolerance for full adoption
of the new concentration limit by 2036 (EU, 2020). Redox-active solids are more favorable to
uptake Cr(VI) since they provide an intermediate reduction step toward the insoluble Cr(III)
hydrolysis products. In this direction, much research effort has been attributed to the devel￾opment of redox-active nanocomposites, being able to eliminate Cr(VI) concentration by the
reduction of Cr(VI), followed by the precipitation of Cr(III) as Cr(OH)3 (Fig. 25.3). Numerous
studies refer to biomass-derived nanocomposites, where the inorganic constituent is zero￾valent iron (ZVI) (Khosravi et al., 2018) or Fe3O4 (Liang et al., 2019) nanoparticles, due to their
potential to provide electrons for the reduction of Cr(VI) in combination to their magnetic be￾havior, which enables the easier subsequent separation.
25.5 Adsorbents for aqueous pollutants 583
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesMagnetic biochar was prepared by applying one-step pyrolysis, using sewage sludge and
nZVI as raw materials, and tested to remove Cr(VI) from simulated wastewater, reaching re￾moval capacities of 11.6 and 9.8 mg/g for Cr(VI) and total Cr, respectively (Liu et al., 2020).
The removal rates of Cr(VI) were always greater than that of total Cr under all controlled con￾ditions, indicating that Cr(VI) was firstly reduced to Cr(III), and then removed by adsorption.
The characterization of biochar before and after adsorption and the component analysis of
solution after adsorption showed that the electron donors for Cr(VI) reduction were Fe0
,
Fe2+ and organic compounds existing in biochar, and Cr(III) was very likely removed through
the generation of CrOOH. A different approach for the preparation of nanocomposites in￾volves a liquid phase method, where ZVI nanoparticles are synthesized via the reduction
of FeCl3 using sodium borohydride (NaBH4), and then, precipitated onto biochar surface
(Wan et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2020b). An additional step was introduced by entrapping
nZVI-impregnated biochar into Ca-alginate beads to enhance the Cr(VI) removal efficiency
and to reduce the side effect of Fe leaching into the aqueous environment, resulting in an over￾all uptake capacity of 86.4 mg/g (Wan et al., 2019). Another study reports the preparation of a
ZVI nanocomposite by impregnation of biochar with polyethylene glycol (PEG), a dispersing
agent, and an FeSO4 solution, followed by liquid-phase reduction using NaBH4 (Wu et al.,
2020). The experimental results revealed that when PEG was added, a large number of hy￾droxyl functional groups were introduced, and nZVI was effectively dispersed on the
biochar’s surface with a smaller particle size. The removal rate of this nanocomposite
(97.4%) was much better than that created by biochar-loaded nZVI (51.7%). In this case,
the main remediation mechanism of Cr(VI) was the reduction and co-precipitation of
Cr-containing metal deposits onto the adsorbent.
Biomass-derived nanocomposites with another magnetic inorganic phase, such as Fe3O4
nanoparticles, have also attracted significant interest during recent years. For instance, a facile
one-pot solvothermal method was applied to synthesize a magnetic biochar composite, using
phoenix tree leaves-derived biochar as the carbon matrix (Liang et al., 2019). The structure of
nanocomposite was optimized by varying the loading ratio and the particle sizes of Fe3O4
nanoparticles onto the biochar surface. The nanocomposite had an adsorption capacity of
55.0 mg Cr(VI)/g in an aqueous solution, which exceeds those of biochar (39.8 mg/g) and
Fe3O4 nanoparticles (26.5 mg/g) when applied separately. The adsorption mechanism study
revealed that biochar as a carbon skeleton can mainly provide binding sites for Cr(VI) and
electron-donor groups for the reduction of Cr(VI), while the Fe3O4 nanoparticles were in￾volved in the immobilization of newly formed Cr(III) through the formation of mixed
Fe(III)-Cr(III) hydroxides. In other works, the synthesis of Fe3O4/bio-composites proceeds
through a co-precipitation method, where the treated biomaterial (pine cones) is dispersed
in an iron-containing solution, composed of Fe3+/Fe2+ salts with a molar ratio of 2:1
(Pholosi et al., 2020; Touihri et al., 2021). In another case, the nanocomposite was subsequently
formed into gel beads and tested for both Cr(VI) and Cu(II) remediation, presenting
remarkably high adsorption capacity (132.5 mg/g for Cr(VI) and 69.8 mg/g for Cu(II))
(Touihri et al., 2021).
Other inorganic phases, studied as part of nanocomposite adsorbents for the removal of
chromium, include γ-Fe2O3 (also magnetic) (Zhang et al., 2015), CuO-ZnO (Prajapati and
Mondal, 2021), TiO2 (Choudhury et al., 2017), or even MoS2 (Chen et al., 2021a). In all cases,
determined adsorption capacity values were quite high, suggesting the successful application
584 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesof these inorganic/organic nanocomposites for the removal of chromium from aqueous so￾lutions. The proposed mechanisms mainly involved the electrostatic interactions between the
major anionic species of Cr (HCrO4
,CrO4
2) and the positively charged functional groups
on the surface of nanocomposites, the reduction of toxic/carcinogenic Cr(VI) to the nontoxic
Cr(III) species (reduction reaction) and the adsorption reaction of chromium ions (surface
complexation formation).
25.5.2 Lead
As one of the classified hazardous heavy metals with environmental risk, lead has also
attracted researcher’s attention. Lead is mainly released to water bodies as Pb2+ ions from
process industries, such as mining, smelting, printing, metal plating, and dying, while in
drinking water the dissolved Pb2+ is also correlated with the flow-through lead-containing
pipes, which stayed in use till recently. Even very low concentrations of Pb2+ ions in drinking
water can cause a wide range of health problems, such as renal failure, coma, nausea, cancer,
convulsions, and subtle effects on metabolism and intelligence. In this context, a strict para￾metric value of 5 μg/L shall be met for lead in potable water in the near future. The majority of
nanocomposites developed so far for Pb2+ removal contain magnetite (Fe3O4) as nanosized
inorganic phase (Alqadami et al., 2018; Mohubedu et al., 2019; Overah et al., 2019;
Lingamdinne et al., 2020; Pelalak et al., 2021). Different types of organic-containing phases
have been used, including pristine biomass, biochar, or graphene oxide. The followed synthe￾sis approaches are similar, i.e., chemical or hydrothermal co-precipitation of magnetite pre￾cursors in a suspension of the biomass-derived organic phase. The produced adsorbents
exhibit some common features, such as increased specific surface area, magnetic behavior,
crystalline structure, and cation exchange capacity. These characteristics favor the adsorption
of Pb2+ along with other bivalent heavy/toxic metals, such as Cd2+, Cu2+, and Ni2+ (Alqadami
et al., 2018; Mohubedu et al., 2019; Overah et al., 2019; Pelalak et al., 2021). Hydroxyapatite
(Wang et al., 2018), silica (Saini et al., 2020), and aluminum oxide (Fouda-Mbanga et al.,
2020) nanoparticles have also been reported to enhance the adsorption of Pb2+ when mixed
with pristine biomass or loaded on a biochar surface to form nanocomposites. The proposed
adsorption mechanisms include cation exchange reactions and electrostatic interactions be￾tween Pb2+ and functional binding sites of nanocomposites’ surfaces (Fig. 25.3).
25.5.3 Arsenic
Numerous studies on arsenic contamination and remediation have been extensively un￾dertaken, especially over the last three decades. The frequency of As appearance in ground
and surface waters, the significant decrease of regulation limit down to 10 μg/L from the be￾ginning of this century, and the remarkable chemistry and complexation of its aqueous spe￾cies are some of the reasons explaining such interest. Arsenic is released in the aquatic
environment from several sources, such as weathering of minerals, natural processes, anthro￾pogenic activities, and As-containing pesticides. In aqueous environments, arsenic is mainly
found in two inorganic forms, i.e., As(III) and As(V). Among several technologies and adsor￾bent materials, biomass-derived nanocomposites have also been tested for the capture of both
25.5 Adsorbents for aqueous pollutants 585
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesspecies. An early approach referred to the removal of arsenic by a biochar/AlOOH
nanocomposite with nanosized polycrystalline AlOOH flakes attached to biochar surfaces.
In this case, the authors obtained a remarkable high performance of examined nanocomposite
for the removal of arsenic that could be attributed to its unique carbon-nanoparticle structure,
which dramatically increased the reactive area and sites (Zhang and Gao, 2013). Biochar
seems to be the preferred organic phase in nanocomposites applied for arsenic adsorption
in subsequent studies, while inorganic phase materials may vary. ZVI (Shaikh et al., 2020),
vermiculite (Li et al., 2020), CuO, and MnO (Imran et al., 2021) nanocomposites were success￾fully prepared and used for arsenic removal, presenting increased adsorption capacity in
comparison to relevant counterparts. Assumptions regarding the mechanism of arsenic ad￾sorption, point to a monolayer process. Sawdust was also used as a precursor to develop an
activated carbon into the nanoporous surface of which SnO2 nanoparticles were incorporated
(Mohanta and Ahmaruzzaman, 2018). The produced adsorbent was applied for the efficient
removal of arsenic as well as of fluoride, from drinking water. The enhanced adsorption be￾havior was attributed to the physico-chemical interactions of arsenic and fluoride species
with the SnO2-activated carbon composite surface.
25.5.4 Copper
Copper is considered among the most persistent heavy metals, as well as a widely used
element for the manufacture of pesticides, paper, electronics, cables, automotive parts, and
fertilizers. The extensive demand for Cu and its widespread use has resulted in large amounts
of dissolved Cu2+, being continuously released into the aquatic environments. Although Cu is
an essential trace element for living organisms in natural ecosystems, the excess presence of
FIG. 25.3 Representative mechanisms of heavy metal capture occurring in the active sites of biomass-derived
nanocomposites.
586 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCu2+ has become a serious issue because it can lead to various adverse health effects for
humans. As for all heavy metals, numerous techniques have been developed for its removal
from water, including several novel adsorbent materials. Among them, biomass-derived
nanocomposites have also been recently tested. Nano-MnO2-biochar composites have been
reported to achieve maximum adsorption capacity for Cu2+ up to 142 mg/g, i.e., considerably
higher than the maximum adsorption capacities of biochar or nano-MnO2 when used
separately (Zhou et al., 2017). The process was considered endothermic, spontaneous, and
quite hardly influenced by ionic strength. The mechanism of Cu2+ adsorption on
nanocomposite mainly involved the formation of complexes between Cu2+ and oxygen￾containing groups. Several hydroxyapatite/biochar nanocomposites, synthesized through a
single-pot hydrothermal process, were also examined as adsorbents for the removal of Cu2+
from aqueous media, demonstrating sufficient maximum adsorption capacity (99 mg/g).
The proposed mechanisms involved mainly cation exchange and inner-sphere surface com￾plexation ( Jung et al., 2019). A series of magnetic nanocomposites were also synthesized
(mainly graphene- or chitosan-based), using a single-pot solvothermal carbonization/
co-precipitation route by functionalizing biomass with iron oxide nanoparticles (Siddiqui
et al., 2021). The produced nanocomposites showed excellent performance for the adsorption
of different heavy metals, including Ni, Cr, and Cd, and the obtained results revealed that the
presence of active groups, such as carbonyl and carboxylic in the magnetic carbon
nanocomposites, have assisted the adsorption process.
25.5.5 Cadmium
Cadmium, a main component of metallic impurities found in wastewater, is mainly re￾leased in the environment by anthropogenic activities, such as electroplating, battery
manufacturing, and metallurgical industries. Exposure even to low concentrations of cad￾mium is reported to cause harmful health effects in humans, e.g., renal failure, liver disorder,
and bone disorders. Particular bio-nanocomposites have been developed for the removal of
cadmium from aqueous solutions. A novel material, consisting of chitosan/activated carbon/
ZVI nanoparticles and synthesized by the sonochemical method, demonstrated notable ad￾sorption capacity toward Cd2+, reaching 344 mg/g. The removal efficiency was attributed
to successful interactions between the oxygen functional groups of activated carbon, the
amine groups of chitosan, and the iron ions (Sharififard et al., 2018). Another adsorbent tested
for Cd2+ removal is a macroporous nanocomposite biomass, synthesized by natural polymer
(xanthan gum) and silicate (Ma et al., 2015). This nanocomposite not only showed a specific
macroporous structure, but also a better cation exchange capacity, which assisted the retain of
cationic ions.
25.5.6 Uranium
Uranium is considered among the most hazardous pollutants, due to its chemical toxicity
in addition to potential natural radioactivity. Hopefully, the dissolved uranium is not consid￾ered as dangerous, when present in the metallic form. Nevertheless, when ingested in
humans (e.g., by drinking water), the hexavalent uranium can cause severe health damages,
25.5 Adsorbents for aqueous pollutants 587
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesespecially to the kidney. Mining activities are the main origin of groundwater pollution by
U(VI). In general, U(IV) originated from the minerals/ores may get oxidized upon exposure
to the atmosphere, producing dissolved U(VI), which is then released to water streams. The
studies in the relevant literature, regarding the U(VI) adsorption by the use of bio￾nanocomposites, refer mainly to materials with nanosilica as the inorganic phase. An
SiO2/carbon nanocomposite was synthesized using a simple, low-cost, industry scalable
method, starting from corn cob biowaste (Dutta and Nath, 2018). This treatment system
showed a maximum uptake capacity of 255 mg/g with a quite high adsorption efficiency
(94.2%). The high sorption efficiency of U(VI) was attributed to the large surface area and
the availability of excess protonation sites on the silanol groups. Nanosilica, added on biochar
using glutaraldehyde as an efficient crosslinking compound, was developed to form a novel
nanocomposite that presented very fast adsorptive removal of uranyl ions from aqueous so￾lutions in only 1 min contact time (Mahmoud et al., 2019). The respective adsorption process
was confirmed to rely principally on the solution pH and reached 86.3% at pH 4.
25.5.7 Other aqueous pollutants
A very interesting bio-nanocomposite was recently synthesized and employed as an ad￾sorbent to remove aqueous Mn2+ and Zn2+ cations (Bulin et al., 2021). It is a magnetic
graphene oxide nanocomposite, based on Fe3O4-GO framework, fabricated via one-pot
co-precipitation under mild experimental conditions. The material was reported to adsorb
400 mg/g of Mn2+ and 373 mg/g of Zn2+ within 4 and 6 min, respectively. In this case, the
adsorption was spontaneous, endothermic and entropy increasing, with a mechanism mainly
based on the chemical interaction of oxygen atoms in the C]O or CdO relevant groups with
Mn2+ and Zn2+.
Lately, the removal of nutrients, such as nitrate and phosphate, by adsorption onto bio￾nanocomposites has been also attempted by several researchers. A simple method was devel￾oped to synthesize MgO-biochar nanocomposites by crystallizing nano-MgO flakes in
biochar matrix through the slow pyrolysis of MgCl2-pretreated biomass (Zhang et al.,
2012). A variety of carbon-rich biomass and produced MgO-biochar nanocomposites with
highly nanoporous structures were used in both the MgO nanoflakes and the biochar matrix.
As a result, all the examined combinations showed excellent removal efficiencies toward
phosphate and nitrate from water. MgO-biochar nanocomposites were also prepared with
different crystal structures, using fallen leaves (Luo et al., 2021). The experimental results
showed that the nanocomposites with a higher degree of homogeneity between MgO and
biochar could change the normal crystal structure to the C-Mg-O phase and hence, achieve
improved adsorption rate and capacity for the adsorption of phosphates. The proposed mech￾anisms were hydrogen-bond interaction, inner-sphere complexation, and surface chemical
adsorption. In another study, a low-cost nanocomposite derived from aminated-agricultural
biomass and nano-sized Fe(III) oxides was fabricated, and examined for the removal of nu￾trients (Qiu et al., 2020a). The binary adsorption isotherms indicated that the adsorption af￾finity of bio-nanocomposite was greatly promoted after the encapsulation of Fe(III) oxides,
whereas phosphate was competitively adsorbed over nitrate. The authors suggested that
the replacement of hydroxyl groups by phosphate ions through ligand-exchange reactions
588 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescould be the major underlying adsorption mechanism for the preferred adsorption sites. In a
very recent work, TiO2/cellulose nanocomposites were prepared by a facile hydrolysis￾precipitation method and used as anti-bacterial bio-adsorbents for the removal of phosphate
from aqueous media (Zong et al., 2021). The prepared nanocomposites presented high spe￾cific surface area and pore volume, features that allowed them to exhibit high adsorption ca￾pacity for phosphate (Table 25.1).
TABLE 25.1 Summary of literature studies involving biomass-derived nanocomposites as adsorbents for
inorganic pollutants removal from aquatic media.
Pollutant Active phase Biochar source Reference
Cr(VI) nZVI Peganum harmala seed Khosravi et al. (2018)
Cr(VI) Fe3O4 Phoenix tree leave Liang et al. (2019)
Cr(VI) nZVI Sewage sludge Liu et al. (2020)
Cr(VI) nZVI Wheat bran Wan et al. (2019)
Cr(VI), Cr(III) nZVI Wheat straw Qiu et al. (2020b)
Cr(VI) nZVI Coconut shell Wu et al. (2020)
Cr(VI) Fe3O4 Pine cone Pholosi et al. (2020)
Cr(VI), Cu(II) Fe3O4 Pine cone Touihri et al. (2021)
Cr(VI) γ-Fe2O3 Eichornia crassipe Zhang et al. (2015)
Cr(VI) ZnO and CuO Marigold petal Prajapati and Mondal
(2021)
Cr(VI) TiO2 Dead yeast/S. cerevisae Choudhury et al.
(2017)
Cr(VI) MoS2 Lignin Chen et al. (2021a)
Pb2+, Cd2+, Co2+ Fe3O4 Waste camel bone Alqadami et al. (2018)
Pb2+, Cd2+ Fe3O4 Quercus robur fruit Mohubedu et al. (2019)
Pb2+, Zn2+, Cd2+,
Cu2+, Ni2+
Fe3O4 Raphia farinifera Overah et al. (2019)
Pb2+ Fe3O4 Tangerine peel Lingamdinne et al.
(2020)
Pb2+, Cd2+ Fe3O4 Oak wood ash Pelalak et al. (2021)
Pb2+, Cu2+, Zn2+ Hydroxyapatite Rice straw Wang et al. (2018)
Pb2+ SiO2 Orange peel Saini et al. (2020)
Pb2+ Al2O3 Banana peel Fouda-Mbanga et al.
(2020)
As(V), PO₄
3 AlOOH Cottonwood Zhang and Gao, 2013)
Continued
25.5 Adsorbents for aqueous pollutants 589
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices25.6 Adsorbents for pollutants in gaseous forms
The production of biomass-derived nanocomposites with improved efficiency, regarding
the capture of pollutants from gas phases, has found increased interest, especially during the
last years. The relevant efforts are usually focused on finding the solution in two major prob￾lems of industry, typically related to energy generation, i.e., the treatment of gas byproducts
from combustion processes and the purification of biogas from hydrogen sulfide. In partic￾ular, the stricter environmental restrictions require the uptake of heavy metals (but currently
also of CO2) from the flue/combustion gases, while the efficient cleaning of biogas is of high
importance to extend the lifetime of power generators.
25.6.1 Flue gases
The flue gases, resulting from the combustion of fossil fuels, solid wastes, etc., are consid￾ered as the most common form of gaseous waste streams. Despite the expected profits from
TABLE 25.1 Summary of literature studies involving biomass-derived nanocomposites as adsorbents for
inorganic pollutants removal from aquatic media—cont’d
Pollutant Active phase Biochar source Reference
As(III), As(V) nZVI Cassia fistula Shaikh et al. (2020)
As(V) Vermiculite Crushed hickory wood chip Li et al. (2020)
As(V) CuO, MnO Sesbania bispinosa Imran et al. (2021)
As(III), F SnO2 Sawdust Mohanta and
Ahmaruzzaman (2018)
Cu2+ MnO2 Corn stalks Zhou et al. (2017)
Cu2+ Hydroxyapatite Undaria pinnatifida root Jung et al. (2019)
Cu, Ni, Cr, Cd Fe oxide Rice husk Siddiqui et al. (2021)
Cd2+ Fe Shrimp shell and grape stalk Sharififard et al. (2018)
Cd2+, Hg2+,
As(V), Cr(VI)
Silicate Xanthan gum Ma et al. (2015)
U(VI), Cr(VI) SiO2 Corn cob Dutta and Nath (2018)
U(VI) Silica Liquidambar styraciflua fruit Mahmoud et al. (2019)
Mn2+, Zn2+ Fe3O4 Natural graphene oxide Bulin et al. (2021)
PO₄
3, NO3
 MgO Sugar beet tailings, sugarcane bagasse,
cottonwoods, pine woods, peanut shells
Zhang et al. (2012)
PO₄
3 MgO Fallen leaves Luo et al. (2021)
PO₄
3 Fe(III) oxides Wheat straw Qiu et al. (2020a)
PO₄
3 TiO2 Cellulose Zong et al. (2021)
590 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricessuch processes (calorific value, wastes degradation), the release of untreated byproducts into
the atmosphere is considered to be a major source of environmental pollution. Combustion
can cause the emission of several greenhouse gases, such as CO2, N2O, and CH4. In addition,
the flue gases can also be the carrier for significant amounts of toxic metals, being released to
the atmosphere, dispersed, transferred and eventually, deposited on the soil and the surface
of water bodies. Heavy metals emissions are not a direct product of combustion reactions;
however, the occurrence of very high temperatures during combustion contributes to their
atomization/volatilization from their compounds in the burnt solids and their transfer to
the gaseous phase mainly in elemental form.
Due to its simplicity, the adsorption process appears to be the most suitable technology to
apply in this field, when the used adsorbent is capable to decrease the residual concentration
of pollutants below their regulation limit as imposed by the environmental legislation. There
are two approaches for the implementation of adsorption in gas purification: the fixed-bed
reactor set-up and the direct injection of adsorption agents in the stack (either upstream or
downstream) and their subsequent retaining by the subsequent bag filters. The dust cake
obtained in these filters consists of an adsorbent-ash mixture, while the process of pollutants’
removal may take place mainly at this point, rather than in the stack. In both cases, it is worth
noting that the respective contact time is very short (i.e., in the range of milliseconds), due to
the high velocities of hot gases.
The qualification of a solid for the removal of pollutants in the gas phase should include
two main characteristics: (i) the dominant capture mechanism, which should be based on
chemisorption to ensure sufficient stability of the pollutant with the adsorbent surface,
and (ii) high maximum capacity, ensuring the minimization of material’s replacements fre￾quency, due to the saturation and aiming to minimize the treatment’s cost. However, a spe￾cific feature of the adsorption process in this case, strongly affecting the adsorption capacity,
is the occurrence of relatively high temperatures. The temperature of flue gases in the upper
zones of the stack usually lies in the range 120–200°C. Under these conditions, the mobility of
pollutant’s atoms or molecules is further increased, by introducing an extra kinetic limitation
to their uptake by the adsorbents’ surface, since the effective contact time between the adsor￾bent and the waste stream is significantly limited. The adsorbent itself may also underlie cer￾tain modifications of surface properties, due to the excess heating.
Another issue arises by the complexity of flue gases composition, because they are
byproducts of combustion processes from various raw materials. As aforementioned, the
main greenhouse gases are always the main component of them; thus, the applied adsorbent
should maintain a high selectivity for the targeted pollutants in the presence of the other
gases, which may act interfering or competitively to the same adsorption sites. In this case,
water vapors are the most interfering component, since they are easily absorbed on any
material, blocking its pores and significantly reducing the effective specific surface area.
However, under steady-state conditions of a continuous process, the effect is strongly affected
by the temperature level, which defines the equilibrium of water’s sorption-desorption
mechanism.
Composites of biochars with different inorganic phases have been tested as adsorbents to
mainly remove the carbon dioxide content, pointing to the observed better efficiency gain in
comparison to the pure biochar application, which is attributed to the activation of different
adsorption mechanisms, than the physisorption on the carbon phase. In addition, another
25.6 Adsorbents for pollutants in gaseous forms 591
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesadvantage is the easier regeneration and reuse, which becomes favorable under mild thermal
treatment (110–120°C), i.e., at temperatures much lower than those occurring during the py￾rolysis process. As a result, minor effects on their surface properties are expected to appear
and the materials can be used in several adsorption-regeneration cycles.
Biochars decorated with Al, Fe, and Mg oxides were tested as CO2 adsorbents (Creamer
et al., 2016). The nanocomposites were prepared by a single-step process after mixing the
raw cotton wood in a solution of hydrated metal chlorides (AlCl3, FeCl3, and MgCl2) and then
by pyrolyzing at 600°C. It was found that biochar composites presented a higher CO2 adsorp￾tion capacity with respect to the unmodified biochar. The introduction of aluminum oxide
was found to bring higher efficiency (71 mg/g at 25°C), although iron oxide composites
showed a higher specific surface area. Physisorption was reported as the dominant removal
mechanism, according to the conclusions derived from the regeneration experiments. The sat￾urated adsorbents may be easily subsequently regenerated by thermal treatment (99% rate,
when subjected to 120°C for 3 h).
In another research attempt, magnesium oxide/biochar nanocomposites were found to be
the best performing material, reaching a CO2 capacity of 81 mg/g at 25°C before saturation
(Lahijani et al., 2018). The system was synthesized by a similar single-step process, where metal
nitrate saltswere first attached to the surface ofwalnut shell biochar. The different results of this
study should be attributed to the role of biochar source, which in this case, presented higher
specific surface area and pore volume for the same metal-to-biochar ratio. It was also proven
that the pyrolysis temperature may define proportionally the value of specific surface area,
while the higher metal loadings on biochar may lead to increased micropore blockage.
Taking a step forward, the influence of various salts of the same metal during synthesis
was tested (Zubbri et al., 2020). Nitrate, sulfate, chloride, and acetate salts of magnesium were
examined as different sources for this metal during a single-step pyrolysis to feature a specific
biochar precursor, such as rambutan peel. The composite prepared by the addition of mag￾nesium nitrate was found to provide the highest capacity (i.e., 75.6 mg/g at 30°C). Further￾more, the exothermic behavior of adsorption and the high regeneration capacity of the
composite by applying relatively low temperatures indicated physisorption as the dominant
uptake mechanism. However, chemisorption was also suggested as a parallel capture proce￾dure, since magnesium oxide may react with CO2 and form magnesium carbonate. Regener￾ation continues to be a specific asset for these materials since after 25 operation cycles
(adsorption-regeneration) the efficiency remained quite intact.
In general, the increase of CO2 capture in biochar nanocomposites with metal phases can be
explained by the Hard-Soft Acid Base (HSAB) theory, which is frequently used for CO2 de￾tection and quantification. Hard acidic CO2 prefers to bond with a hard alkaline surface and
therefore, by introducing specific metal groups onto the biochar surface, the obtained alka￾linity results in higher adsorption efficiency (Dissanayake et al., 2020). Furthermore, the hard
alkaline sites increase the selectivity toward CO2, since other co-existing components in flue
gases are neutral (e.g., N2O), or alkaline (e.g., CH4). Unfortunately, so far, the available exper￾imental data that support this mechanism were obtained by adsorption tests taking place at
lower temperatures than those of the flue gases, i.e., at the levels of regeneration processes
(<70°C). This condition can turn into a serious drawback for the prepared biochar compos￾ites, when applied for CO2 adsorption/removal, since an extra cooling step for the flue gases
may be required before adsorption.
592 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesAssuming a very high probability of hazardous effects related to the dispersion of inorganic
pollutants by flue gases, the treatment of these streams has become obligatory. In this frame,
more strict regulationlimits, regarding themaximum permitted emission concentrations,were
set by authorities worldwide with remarkably high penalties applied when a user fails to com￾ply sufficiently with them. Therefore, the development of purification technologies, optimized
for the selective capture of inorganic pollutants in gas flows, has become a necessity.
The emission of mercury is the most frequent case of a toxic metal appearing in flue gases,
owed to its high volatility, which facilitates atomization even under relatively low tempera￾tures. The mercury speciation in the flue gases is dominated by the elemental form, which
shows low solubility and also, low tendency to react with other components at the commonly
applied temperature levels of the combustion process. However, if the flue gas is sufficiently
cooled in the upper parts of the stack, then the formed Hg0 may react with co-existing anions,
such as Cl, and get oxidized to its bivalent form. The oxidation mechanism is kinetically lim￾ited and depends on the nature of combustion raw material, e.g., coal, chloride content
(Kokkinos et al., 2017). The oxidized mercury can be removed easier using common air pol￾lution control devices, such as electrostatic filters, scrubbers, etc., but usually the obtained
removal represents only a small fraction of mercury’s total amount, while the not removed
quantity manages to pass through and emit to the atmosphere at relatively large quantities.
The removal of mercury from flue gas has been tested by various biochar-based composites
functionalized with different inorganic compounds. For instance, biochar obtained by rice
straws was combined with CaCO3 following a two-step thermal treatment process, in order
to be used as an adsorbent for Hg0 (Shi et al., 2020). For the production of this composite, the
temperature was first set at 300–500°C, allowing the biomass decarbonization and then, fur￾ther increased to 700–900°C, provoking the decomposition of CaCO3. The excess of CaO was
washed out by the addition of HCl solution, while the adsorbed (excess) Cl was also re￾moved by water. This procedure allowed the formation of a high pore volume in the
nanocomposite structure, assisting the physisorption of Hg0 on its surface. Particularly,
the uptake capacity at 80°C was determined as 155 μg/g. However, under the application
of more realistic flue gases temperatures, this value was significantly reduced, reaching al￾most half at 180°C. Such linear decrease of capacity is attributed to the elevated mobility
of mercury, which redefines the equilibrium, favoring desorption at higher temperatures.
Introducing the preliminary or con-current oxidation of mercury as part of the adsorption
process in the application of biochar nanocomposites is a very interesting approach since it is
accompanied by high uptake capacities when compared to the direct adsorption case.
A composite, consisting of biochar from date stone and iron oxyhydroxide, showed remark￾able capacity values, reaching 1405 μg/g (25°C) (Ebiad et al., 2020). The preparation of this
system involved the self-arrangement of used iron oxyhydroxide on the developed biochar
structure to avoid dehydration, if a single-step pyrolysis procedure was followed. The im￾proved performance was attributed to the oxidation of Hg0 by the presence of Fe3+. Never￾theless, a dramatic drop of the capacity is observed even at mild temperatures (70°C) where
values around 44 μg/g were measured. The efficiency loss can be explained by the relatively
lower specific surface area and pore volume of the used biochar, which inhibit large external
mass transfer and intraparticle diffusion mechanism and limit the successful implementation
of adsorption at higher temperatures. For this reason, the application of the material for the
removal of mercury from natural gas (at 30°C) is proposed as an alternative (Fig. 25.4).
25.6 Adsorbents for pollutants in gaseous forms 593
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesIn the same framework, walnut shell biochar was combined with iron and various other
metal salts (e.g., Co, Cu, Ce, Mn) to prepare nanocomposite mercury adsorbents ( Jia et al.,
2021). Although the evaluation of their efficiency was shown in terms of uptake percentage,
it is clear that the oxidation of Hg0 was successful, especially in the case of Fe/Mn oxides.
The same combination of binary Fe/Mn oxides attached on cotton straw biochar, appear as
the best performing materials for the capture of mercury (Shan et al., 2019). The maximum
capacity was found to be 532 μg/g at 120°C, which is a typical experimental temperature
within the range of flue gases. The high efficiency can be explained by the oxidation of
elemental mercury from the presence of both Mn4+ and Fe3+, which is supported by the in￾creased surface area and pore volume. The regeneration of saturated nanocomposite with
only slight loss of efficiency is possible by a two-step treatment process, which includes the
mercury release from the possible complex compounds at 400°C for 1 h under nitrogen
atmosphere and the activation of adsorbent surface sites by the oxidation of previously re￾duced Mn3+/Mn2+ and Fe2+ at 250°C in air. Moreover, it was observed that the presence of
oxygen in flue gas may increase efficiency, following the above-mentioned regeneration
mechanism.
25.6.2 Biogas
The desulfurization of biogas streams through the application of fixed-bed columns, as ap￾plied for the elimination of H2S or SO2 gases, is of critical importance for the protection of
power stations from corrosion and other operational problems, when using biogas as fuel.
To this end, the development of improved processes, based on optimized adsorbents, would
allow the safe and economically viable use of biogas, produced by the anaerobic treatment of
organic wastes. In particular, the removal of H2S anticipates the protection of engine and ex￾haust gas heat recovery equipment from severe corrosion problems. The removal of sulfur
compounds is commonly delivered by applying several inorganic phases and carbon-based
adsorbents, which aim to the neutralization of their acidic character, followed by oxidation to
FIG. 25.4 Application schemes for biomass-derived nanocomposites in flue gas purification. Introduction of
nanoadsorbent into the gas flow followed by filtration (left) and filtration of flue gas through a fixed-bed column filled
with the nanocomposite (right).
594 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesthe zero-valent form, or their capture into the formation of very stable metal sulfides. The po￾rosity and the high specific surface area are some other important requirements to extend the
lifetime of applied solid adsorbent.
Considering these points, the combination of carbon phases, providing proper porous
structure, and of nanosized inorganic components, supporting high chemical affinity toward
H2S, would be a very promising approach to improve desulphurization strategies. Although
the relevant research, dealing with the use of biomass-derive precursors to develop such
nanocomposites, is still in preliminary stages, there are still effective examples, which work
as a proof of this concept. In this case, activated carbons obtained from agricultural residues
were preferentially used to produce the nanocomposite materials. Microporous walnut shell￾based activated carbons impregnated with activating reagents (e.g., KOH, K2CO3, ZnCl2, and
H3PO4) were examined for the simultaneous removal of H2S, COS, and CS2 gases from yellow
phosphorus tail gas, showing potential interest for biogas purification (Li et al., 2018). The
high capacity against sulfur, which reached 45.25 mg/g, when KOH was applied, can be at￾tributed to the functionalization of activated carbon with hydroxyl groups, while the reaction
of K or Zn with the carbon phase can result in the decrease of surface tension and in the in￾crease of micropores’ number in the carbon network.
Nevertheless, the loading of metal oxides appears as a more representative case for the bi￾nary phase hydrogen sulfide adsorbents. Microporous palm shell-activated carbon was intro￾duced as a substrate for the dispersion of active cerium oxide (CeO2) in the presence of NaOH
and then evaluated for the H2S removal from biogas (Lau et al., 2018). The nanocomposite
combined the physisorption ability of activated carbon and together with the catalytic activity
of CeO2 under the set alkaline conditions as introduced by NaOH, delivered an improved H2S
uptake. The catalytic mechanism includes the conversion redox reaction of CeO2 to Ce2O3,
which provides oxygen species for the H2S oxidation, as well as functional groups to the car￾bon structure. The high H2S removal efficiency was also reported for the walnut shell-based
activated carbon combined with manganese oxides (Wang et al., 2015). In the later study, the
dispersion of the active phase in small nanoparticles is suggested as the main reason for the
enhancement of desulphurization performance (Table 25.2).
TABLE 25.2 Summary of literature studies involving biomass-derived nanocomposites as adsorbents for
pollutants removal from gaseous streams.
Pollutant Active phase Biochar Reference
CO2 Fe, Al, and Mg oxides Cottonwood Creamer et al. (2016)
CO2 MnO2 Walnut shell Lahijani et al. (2018)
CO2 MnO2 Rambutan peel Zubbri et al. (2020)
Hg0 CaO Rice straws Shi et al. (2020)
Hg0 FeOOH Date stone Ebiad et al. (2020)
Hg0 Fe/Mn oxides Walnut shell Jia et al. (2021)
H2S CeO2 Palm shell Lau et al. (2018)
H2S MnO2 Walnut shell Wang et al. (2015)
25.6 Adsorbents for pollutants in gaseous forms 595
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices25.7 Adsorbents for soil remediation
Long-term disregard, concerning the impact of agricultural and industrial processes in the
environment, has brought soil pollution into a very serious condition for which the scientific
community should find emergent and viable solutions. The main risks in this case are related
to food crops since different pollutants tend to be bioaccumulated by plants and indirectly,
through their consumption, pose a serious hazard to human health through the trophic chain.
Hopefully, this scenario is not directly related to anthropogenic activities, because the pol￾luted areas or areas with industrial activity are generally avoided for agriculture purposes,
while the authorities have set minimum distances from such regions, where agriculture
can be allowed. Therefore, the pollution of a productive soil commonly originates from gas￾eous pollutants settling on the soil’s surface (e.g., through rain), or from water-soluble pol￾lutants transported through the flow of aquatic bodies.
Soil pollution can be classified into two major categories: nutrients and toxic metals. Nu￾trients are essential in the food industry and they are used widely all over the world in order
to, qualitatively and quantitatively, enhance the production. The typical naturally occurring
ions, considered to be nutrients, are nitrates (NO3
), phosphates (PO4
3), and ammonium
(NH4
+
). In fertile soil, their content is sufficient enough for plant growth. However, the ma￾jority of agricultural areas are already degraded, due to over-cropping, and so the supple￾mentary addition of nutrients/fertilizers becomes mandatory. On the other hand, the
frequently applied practice of excessive use of fertilizer in low-quality soils (e.g., due to de￾graded physicochemical properties) implies the leaching and transfer of them outside the ap￾plication limits. Eutrophication, groundwater pollution, marine pollution, and human health
issues are some of the negative consequences. Regarding toxic metals, arsenic, chromium,
cadmium, and lead are the most commonly encountered pollutants in soil. Arsenic and chro￾mium may be also naturally occurring metals, e.g., due to ore erosion, through biotic and abi￾otic mechanisms, whereas the existence of cadmium and lead is attributed mainly to
anthropogenic activities, and partially to the previously mentioned cases.
As a facile method for this type of application, adsorption is often used for the restoration
of contaminated soils, offering a wide range of advantages. In this direction, biochar has
proven to be an important material, considering its relatively low-cost and high quantity
availability, when received after the utilization of byproducts. However, the improvement
of soil’s mechanical properties (e.g., strength) is the major advantage for the incorporation
of biochar in the relevant remediation procedures (Wang et al., 2020). There are two main ap￾proaches of application, either by mixing biochar with the topsoil or by local placement at
higher depths (in the presence of underground water streams). The expected mechanism
of its remediation activity is based on the immobilization of toxic metals and the reversible
uptake of nutrients that allow a desorption release. Up to date, the combination of biochar
with other functional inorganic nanostructures in the form of nanocomposites was demon￾strated as a way to increase the observed efficiency in the capture of the aforementioned pol￾lutants. Certain representative cases of biochar nanocomposites, examined for the
remediation of soil, are described in the following (Fig. 25.5).
A potassium-iron rice straw biochar composite was developed for the sorption of nitrate,
phosphate, and ammonium ions (Chandra et al., 2020). Initially, the iron-impregnated
596 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesbiochar was synthesized by adding biochar into an iron salt solution and then, by applying a
pyrolysis process at 400–600°C. Potassium impregnation was contacted in the second stage of
this process, performed under hydrothermal conditions. In particular, the iron-impregnated
biochar was mixed with KOH solution and placed in an autoclave setup, operating under
pressure. During the saturation experiments, it was observed that the nanocomposite has
a higher affinity for NO3
 and PO4
3 than for NH4
+
. This fact was attributed to the different
occurring sorption mechanism among these nutrients, since the surface diffusion-controlled
mechanism of ammonium sorption is limited, and not favored by the low specific surface area
of potassium-iron biochar composite. The examined adsorbents showed higher cation ex￾change capacity, which increased the soil fertilization index and assisted the controlled nu￾trients release.
An iron-based biochar composite was also synthesized and found capable to adsorb both
toxic metals and nutrients (Zhu et al., 2020). For this preparation, wheat straw was used as
raw material for biochar production, dispersed in an iron salt solution. The mixture was
heated at mild temperature (70°C), aiming to obtain an iron oxyhydroxide, identified as goe￾thite. The higher adsorption capacity was obtained for the removal of As(III) (65 mg/g) in
comparison to that of Cd (32 mg/g) and phosphate (42.6 mg/g). This behavior was attributed
to the formation of goethite, which increased the positive surface charge of biochar, and thus,
the sorption of anionic species became favorable. According to the characterization of satu￾rated material, an adsorption-oxidation mechanism was revealed through the preliminary
oxidation of As(III) to As(V). It should be also underlined that the iron-based adsorbents, de￾veloped for water treatment, present high affinities for the uptake of As(III) and
As(V) (Tresintsi et al., 2014). The exact removal mechanism depends on the oxidation of
As(III), which is normally achieved by Fe(III) and Mn(VI). Following the same concept, the
combination of mixed hydroxides with biochar was found quite efficient for soil restoration.
In the relevant studies, nanocomposites were developed, when the biochar was soaked in
FIG. 25.5 Application schemes for biomass-derived nanocomposites in soil remediation. Homogeneous mixing of
the nanocomposite powder in the soil (left) and formation of a filtration layer in higher depth (right).
25.7 Adsorbents for soil remediation 597
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesmetal ions solutions, and the mixture was then subjected to pyrolysis (Yu et al., 2015; Lin et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2020). An interesting fact is that rice straws were used as raw material for
the production of biochar, while paddy soil was the field of implementation, showing a sus￾tainable scenario for waste valorization.
Iron-based biochar composites were also examined for the removal of chromium and im￾mobilization from soil substrates. The pyrolysis of wheat straw biochar with iron sulfide (Lyu
et al., 2018) and the barley grass biochar dispersed in iron chloride solution (Chen et al., 2021b)
were examined for this purpose. In both cases, Cr(VI) was considered as the contaminant of
interest, due to its high toxicity and its frequent appearance in contaminated soil samples. The
main removal mechanism, imposed by the application of nanocomposites, was the initial
sorption-reduction of Cr(VI) and, afterwards, the surface precipitation of Cr(III) as hydroxide.
Regarding the immobilization of other metals in contaminated soils by biochar
nanocomposites, the cases of Cd and Pb were also examined. Firstly, the synthesis of FedMn
biochar composite for the adsorption of Cd was investigated (Zhou et al., 2019). Corn straw
biochar mixed with iron and manganese salts was dried and pyrolyzed at 600°C.With a similar
pyrolysis approach, an Fe-based biochar composite was prepared for the adsorption of Pb,
using cabbage mustard seeds as the source of biochar (Yang et al., 2016). However, the obtained
efficiency was limited, due to the intensive positive surface charge of composites, favoring the
repulsive force between the similarly (positive) charged pollutants, and suggesting that the de￾sign of such materials should result in the electrostatic interactions or complexation between
the negatively surface charged biochar for the removal of cationic pollutant (Table 25.3).
25.8 Conclusions-perspectives
The application of biomass-derived nanocomposites in environmental remediation strat￾egies appears as a very ambitious perspective to upgrade the role of engineered inorganic
TABLE 25.3 Summary of literature studies involving biomass-derived nanocomposites as adsorbents for
inorganic pollutants removal from soil.
Pollutant Active phase Biochar Reference
NO3
, PO4
3, NH4
+ Fe/K oxide Rice straw Chandra et al. (2020)
As(III), Cd2+, PO4
3 FeOOH Wheat straw Zhu et al. (2020)
As(III) Mn oxide Rice straw Yu et al. (2015)
As(III), As(V) Fe/Mn oxides Rice straw Lin et al. (2019)
As(III), As(V) Fe/Mn/Ce oxides Rice straw Zhang et al. (2020)
Cr(VI) FeS Wheat straw Lyu et al. (2018)
Cr(VI) Fe oxide Barley grass Chen et al. (2021b)
Cd2+ Fe/Mn oxides Corn straw Zhou et al. (2019)
Pb2+ Fe oxide Cabbage mustard seed Yang et al. (2016)
598 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesnanoparticles in large-scale processes. The successful distribution of nanoparticles into the
porous carbon structure indicates the major advantage of these materials referring to adsorp￾tion uses: the minimization of aggregation extent which is usually the limiting parameter for
the performance of single-phase nanoadsorbents. Therefore, the effective surface area of the
active phase dramatically increases adsorption capacity and importantly, less quantity of the
nanoparticles is required to bring the same efficiency. Considering that the biomass-obtained
phase has a very low cost, ideally, such nanocomposites contribute to simultaneous efficiency
improvement and cost reduction.
Nevertheless, there are important obstacles to overcome in the production and implemen￾tation procedures of biomass-derived nanocomposites before they turn into fully functional
agents for purification practices. One aspect is the mechanical and chemical stability of these
solids during their storage, application, and post-use disposal. For instance, if the carbon
phase is loose, a high possibility for the destruction of the microstructure appears causing
the nanocomposite to lose the improved efficiency of the hybrid adsorption contributions.
Similar effects may be the reason of failure when the adsorbent is applied in fixed-bed filtra￾tion systems or mixed as a soil substrate. Particularly, a decrease of grain size would be re￾sponsible for occlusion problems or rapid diffusion to higher depths, respectively for
each case.
Together with the chemical nature of the active phase, the mechanical properties of the
nanocomposite granules define the leaching behavior prior, or after the adsorption of the
targeted pollutants. Dissolution of metal ions from the active inorganic phase or secondary
release of captured pollutants is able to become a cause for the exclusion of developed tech￾nology from further investigation since the presented solution appears also as a source of pol￾lution. Unfortunately, only a few of the available research studies provide experimental
evidences on the leaching behavior of the demonstrated nanocomposites. A deeper examina￾tion of the pollutants’ uptake mechanisms would assist in better understanding and predic￾tion of dissolution possibility. As a more difficult task to work on, information about the
potential fate of the nanocomposites and their building components at the end of their oper￾ational lifetime in soil or aquatic systems are very rare. Multiple scenarios for the negative
effect of spent nanocomposites include the risks from their nanoscale dimensions and the dis￾tribution of loaded pollutants to the environment and other living forms.
A last but most fundamental point to evaluate the potential of a biomass-derived
nanocomposite to become a competitive product is the maximization of the efficiency-to-cost
ratio. This is another important parameter that cannot be extracted from existing literature
reports. On the one hand, most of the published works do not test the developed materials
under realistic conditions of their supposed use (water parameters, inter-references, compli￾cated environment) while uptake capacities are not representative for the maximum concen￾tration levels of the pollutants defined by the authorities. On the other hand, although the
major part of the nanocomposites is a biomass residual, the production may include proce￾dures with high energy requirements or the use of expensive reagents able to multiply
products cost.
Conclusively, an overview of the up-to-date research related to biomass-derived
nanocomposites developed for water, soil, and gas purification, indicates a rising but insuf￾ficient number of efforts toward realistic solutions with the ability to reach the market and
large-scale applications, in spite of the obvious advantages of this class of adsorbent. An
25.8 Conclusions-perspectives 599
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesexplanation for this gap could be the absence of an integrated approach to design optimized
nanomaterials keeping in mind to balance synthesis and evaluation aspects. What is usually
observed in literature is a tendency to promote the valorization of biomass byproducts while
the tuning of nanocomposites and the adsorption performance for pollutants come as a sec￾ondary feature. The adoption of interdisciplinary collaborations and universal evaluation
protocols together with the feedback from technical knowledge is suggested as the only valid
way to inspire the rapid incorporation of this category of adsorbents in a technology field with
increasing demand and direct impact on health and environmental protection.
Acknowledgments
The research project was supported by the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (H.F.R.I.) under the “2nd
Call for H.F.R.I. Research Projects to support Post-Doctoral Researchers” (Project Number: 00046 MagnoSorb).
References
Alqadami, A.A., Khan, M.A., Otero, M., et al., 2018. A magnetic nanocomposite produced from camel bones for an
efficient adsorption of toxic metals from water. J. Clean. Prod. 178, 293–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2018.01.023.
Bulin, C., Ma, Z., Guo, T., et al., 2021. Magnetic graphene oxide nanocomposite: one-pot preparation, adsorption per￾formance and mechanism for aqueous Mn(II) and Zn(II). J. Phys. Chem. Solid 156, 110130. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpcs.2021.110130.
Chandra, S., Medha, I., Bhattacharya, J., 2020. Potassium-iron rice straw biochar composite for sorption of nitrate,
phosphate, and ammonium ions in soil for timely and controlled release. Sci. Total Environ. 712, 136337.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.136337.
Chen, H., Zhang, Z., Zhong, X., et al., 2021a. Constructing MoS2/lignin-derived carbon nanocomposites for highly
efficient removal of Cr(VI) from aqueous environment. J. Hazard. Mater. 408, 124847. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2020.124847.
Chen, X., Dai, Y., Fan, J., et al., 2021b. Application of iron-biochar composite in topsoil for simultaneous remediation of
chromium-contaminated soil and groundwater: immobilization mechanism and long-term stability. J. Hazard.
Mater. 405, 124226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124226.
Choudhury, P.R., Bhattacharya, P., Ghosh, S., et al., 2017. Removal of Cr (VI) by synthesized titania embedded dead
yeast nanocomposite: optimization and modeling by response surface methodology. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 5,
214–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2016.11.041.
Creamer, A.E., Gao, B., Wang, S., 2016. Carbon dioxide capture using various metal oxyhydroxide-biochar compos￾ites. Chem. Eng. J. 283, 826–832. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2015.08.037.
Dissanayake, P.D., You, S., Igalavithana, A.D., et al., 2020. Biochar-based adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture: a
critical review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 119, 109582.
Dutta, D.P., Nath, S., 2018. Low cost synthesis of SiO2/C nanocomposite from corn cobs and its adsorption of ura￾nium (VI), chromium (VI) and cationic dyes from wastewater. J. Mol. Liq. 269, 140–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2018.08.028.
Ebiad, M.A., Abd El-Hafiz, D.R., Masod, M.B., 2020. β-FeOOH/C nanocomposite for elemental mercury removal as a
new approach to environmental and natural gas processes. J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 80, 103383. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jngse.2020.103383.
EU, 2020. Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2020 on the Quality
of Water Intended for Human Consumption. Off J Eur Union.
Fouda-Mbanga, B.G., Prabakaran, E., Pillay, K., 2020. Synthesis and characterization of CDs/Al2O3 nanofibers
nanocomposite for Pb2+ ions adsorption and reuse for latent fingerprint detection. Arab. J. Chem. 13,
6762–6781. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2020.06.030.
600 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesImran, M., Iqbal, M.M., Iqbal, J., et al., 2021. Synthesis, characterization and application of novel MnO and CuO im￾pregnated biochar composites to sequester arsenic (As) from water: modeling, thermodynamics and reusability. J.
Hazard. Mater. 401, 123338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123338.
Jia, L., Yu, Y., Li, Z.p., et al., 2021. Study on the Hg0 removal characteristics and synergistic mechanism of iron-based
modified biochar doped with multiple metals. Bioresour. Technol. 332, 125086. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2021.125086.
Jung, K.W., Lee, S.Y., Choi, J.W., Lee, Y.J., 2019. A facile one-pot hydrothermal synthesis of hydroxyapatite/biochar
nanocomposites: adsorption behavior and mechanisms for the removal of copper(II) from aqueous media. Chem.
Eng. J. 369, 529–541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.03.102.
Kaprara, E., Kazakis, N., Simeonidis, K., et al., 2015. Occurrence of Cr(VI) in drinking water of Greece and relation to
the geological background. J. Hazard. Mater. 281, 2–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.06.084.
Khosravi, R., Moussavi, G., Ghaneian, M.T., et al., 2018. Chromium adsorption from aqueous solution using novel
green nanocomposite: adsorbent characterization, isotherm, kinetic and thermodynamic investigation. J. Mol.
Liq. 256, 163–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2018.02.033.
Kokkinos, E., Kellartzis, I., Diamantopoulou, I., et al., 2017. Study of elemental mercury removal from flue gases using
tetravalent manganese Feroxyhyte. Chem. Eng. J. 315, 152–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.01.013.
Lahijani, P., Mohammadi, M., Mohamed, A.R., 2018. Metal incorporated biochar as a potential adsorbent for high
capacity CO2 capture at ambient condition. J. CO₂ Util. 26, 281–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2018.05.018.
Lau, L.C., Nor, N.M., Lee, K.T., Mohamed, A.R., 2018. Hydrogen sulfide removal using CeO2/NaOH/PSAC: effect of
preparation parameters. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 6, 386–394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2017.12.019.
Li, K., Ruan, H., Ning, P., et al., 2018. Preparation of walnut shell-based activated carbon and its properties for simul￾taneous removal of H2S, COS and CS2 from yellow phosphorus tail gas at low temperature. Res. Chem. Intermed.
44, 1209–1233. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11164-017-3162-6.
Li, F., Wan, Y., Chen, J., et al., 2020. Novel ball-milled biochar-vermiculite nanocomposites effectively adsorb aqueous
as(V). Chemosphere 260, 127566. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127566.
Liang, S., Shi, S., Zhang, H., et al., 2019. One-pot solvothermal synthesis of magnetic biochar from waste biomass:
formation mechanism and efficient adsorption of Cr(VI) in an aqueous solution. Sci. Total Environ. 695,
133886. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.133886.
Lin, L., Li, Z., Liu, X., et al., 2019. Effects of Fe-Mn modified biochar composite treatment on the properties of
as-polluted paddy soil. Environ. Pollut. 244, 600–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.10.011.
Lingamdinne, L.P., Vemula, K.R., Chang, Y.Y., et al., 2020. Process optimization and modeling of lead removal using
iron oxide nanocomposites generated from bio-waste mass. Chemosphere 243, 125257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2019.125257.
Liu, L., Liu, X., Wang, D., et al., 2020. Removal and reduction of Cr(VI) in simulated wastewater using magnetic
biochar prepared by co-pyrolysis of nano-zero-valent iron and sewage sludge. J. Clean. Prod. 257, 120562.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120562.
Luo, H., Wang, Y., Wen, X., et al., 2021. Key roles of the crystal structures of MgO-biochar nanocomposites for en￾hancing phosphate adsorption. Sci. Total Environ. 766, 142618. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142618.
Lyu, H., Zhao, H., Tang, J., et al., 2018. Immobilization of hexavalent chromium in contaminated soils using biochar
supported nanoscale iron sulfide composite. Chemosphere 194, 360–369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2017.11.182.
Ma, W., Meng, F., Cheng, Z., et al., 2015. Synthesis of macroporous silica biomass nanocomposite based on XG/
MgSiO3 for the removal of toxic ions. Bioresour. Technol. 186, 356–359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2015.03.133.
Mahmoud, M.E., Khalifa, M.A., El Wakeel, Y.M., et al., 2019. A novel nanocomposite of Liquidambar styraciflua fruit
biochar-crosslinked-nanosilica for uranyl removal from water. Bioresour. Technol. 278, 124–129. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2019.01.052.
Mohanta, D., Ahmaruzzaman, M., 2018. Bio-inspired adsorption of arsenite and fluoride from aqueous solutions
using activated carbon@SnO2 nanocomposites: isotherms, kinetics, thermodynamics, cost estimation and regen￾eration studies. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 6, 356–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2017.11.076.
Mohubedu, R.P., Diagboya, P.N.E., Abasi, C.Y., et al., 2019. Magnetic valorization of biomass and biochar of a typical
plant nuisance for toxic metals contaminated water treatment. J. Clean. Prod. 209, 1016–1024. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.10.215.
References 601
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesOverah, L.C., Iwegbue, C.M., Babalola, J.O., Martincigh, B.S., 2019. Fabrication and characterisation of a Fe[formula
presented]O[formula presented]/Raphia farinifera nanocomposite for application in heavy metal adsorption. En￾viron. Technol. Innov. 13, 11–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2018.09.007.
Pelalak, R., Heidari, Z., Khatami, S.M., et al., 2021. Oak wood ash/GO/Fe3O4 adsorption efficiencies for cadmium
and lead removal from aqueous solution: kinetics, equilibrium and thermodynamic evaluation. Arab. J. Chem. 14,
102991. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2021.102991.
Pholosi, A., Naidoo, E.B., Ofomaja, A.E., 2020. Intraparticle diffusion of Cr(VI) through biomass and magnetite coated
biomass: a comparative kinetic and diffusion study. S. Afr. J. Chem. Eng. 32, 39–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
sajce.2020.01.005.
Prajapati, A.K., Mondal, M.K., 2021. Novel green strategy for CuO–ZnO–C nanocomposites fabrication using mari￾gold (Tagetes spp.) flower petals extract with and without CTAB treatment for adsorption of Cr(VI) and Congo red
dye. J. Environ. Manage. 290, 112615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112615.
Qiu, H., Ni, W., Zhang, H., et al., 2020a. Fabrication and evaluation of a regenerable HFO-doped agricultural waste for
enhanced adsorption affinity towards phosphate. Sci. Total Environ. 703, 135493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.135493.
Qiu, Y., Zhang, Q., Gao, B., et al., 2020b. Removal mechanisms of Cr(VI) and Cr(III) by biochar supported nanosized
zero-valent iron: synergy of adsorption, reduction and transformation. Environ. Pollut. 265, 115018. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115018.
Saini, J., Garg, V.K., Gupta, R.K., 2020. Green synthesized SiO2@OPW nanocomposites for enhanced Lead (II) re￾moval from water. Arab. J. Chem. 13, 2496–2507. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2018.06.003.
Shaikh, W.A., Alam, M.A., Alam, M.O., et al., 2020. Enhanced aqueous phase arsenic removal by a biochar based iron
nanocomposite. Environ. Technol. Innov. 19, 100936. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2020.100936.
Shan, Y., Yang, W., Li, Y., et al., 2019. Preparation of microwave-activated magnetic bio-char adsorbent and study on
removal of elemental mercury from flue gas. Sci. Total Environ. 697, 134049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.134049.
Sharififard, H., Shahraki, Z.H., Rezvanpanah, E., Rad, S.H., 2018. A novel natural chitosan/activated carbon/iron bio￾nanocomposite: sonochemical synthesis, characterization, and application for cadmium removal in batch and con￾tinuous adsorption process. Bioresour. Technol. 270, 562–569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2018.09.094.
Shi, Q., Wang, Y., Zhang, X., et al., 2020. Hierarchically porous biochar synthesized with CaCO3 template for efficient
Hg0 adsorption from flue gas. Fuel Process. Technol. 199, 106247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2019.106247.
Siddiqui, M.T.H., Baloch, H.A., Nizamuddin, S., et al., 2021. Dual-application of novel magnetic carbon
nanocomposites as catalytic liquefaction for bio-oil synthesis and multi-heavy metal adsorption. Renew. Energy
172, 1103–1119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.02.157.
Touihri, M., Guesmi, F., Hannachi, C., et al., 2021. Single and simultaneous adsorption of Cr(VI) and Cu (II) on a novel
Fe3O4/pine cones gel beads nanocomposite: experiments, characterization and isotherms modeling. Chem. Eng.
J. 416, 129101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.129101.
Tresintsi, S., Simeonidis, K., Mitrakas, M., 2014. Mn-feroxyhyte: the role of synthesis conditions on As(III) and
As(V) removal capacity. Chem. Eng. J. 251, 192–198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.04.033.
Wan, Z., Cho, D.W., Tsang, D.C.W., et al., 2019. Concurrent adsorption and micro-electrolysis of Cr(VI) by nanoscale
zerovalent iron/biochar/Ca-alginate composite. Environ. Pollut. 247, 410–420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2019.01.047.
Wang, J., Ju, F., Han, L., et al., 2015. Effect of activated carbon supports on removing H2S from coal-based gases using
Mn-based sorbents. Energy Fuel 29, 488–495. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef501790e.
Wang, Y.Y., Liu, Y.X., Lu, H.H., et al., 2018. Competitive adsorption of Pb(II), Cu(II), and Zn(II) ions onto
hydroxyapatite-biochar nanocomposite in aqueous solutions. J. Solid State Chem. 261, 53–61. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jssc.2018.02.010.
Wang, Y., Wang, H.-S., Tang, C.-S., et al., 2020. Remediation of heavy-metal-contaminated soils by biochar: a review.
Environ. Geotech., 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1680/jenge.18.00091.
Wu, H., Wei, W., Xu, C., et al., 2020. Polyethylene glycol-stabilized nano zero-valent iron supported by biochar for
highly efficient removal of Cr(VI). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 188, 109902. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoenv.2019.109902.
Yang, Z., Fang, Z., Zheng, L., et al., 2016. Remediation of lead contaminated soil by biochar-supported nano￾hydroxyapatite. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 132, 224–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2016.06.008.
602 25. Biomass-derived nanocomposites
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesYu, Z., Zhou, L., Huang, Y., et al., 2015. Effects of a manganese oxide-modified biochar composite on adsorption of
arsenic in red soil. J. Environ. Manage. 163, 155–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.08.020.
Zhang, M., Gao, B., 2013. Removal of arsenic, methylene blue, and phosphate by biochar/AlOOH nanocomposite.
Chem. Eng. J. 226, 286–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.04.077.
Zhang, M., Gao, B., Yao, Y., et al., 2012. Synthesis of porous MgO-biochar nanocomposites for removal of phosphate
and nitrate from aqueous solutions. Chem. Eng. J. 210, 26–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2012.08.052.
Zhang, M.M., Liu, Y.G., Li, T.T., et al., 2015. Chitosan modification of magnetic biochar produced from Eichhornia
crassipes for enhanced sorption of Cr(vi) from aqueous solution. RSC Adv. 5, 46955–46964. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c5ra02388b.
Zhang, G., Liu, X., Gao, M., Song, Z., 2020. Effect of Fe–Mn–Ce modified biochar composite on microbial diversity and
properties of arsenic-contaminated paddy soils. Chemosphere 250, 126249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2020.126249.
Zhou, L., Huang, Y., Qiu, W., et al., 2017. Adsorption properties of nano-MnO2-biochar composites for copper in
aqueous solution. Molecules 22. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules22010173.
Zhou, Q., Liao, B., Lin, L., et al., 2019. Characteristic of adsorption cadmium of red soil amended with a ferroman￾ganese oxide-biochar composite. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26, 5155–5163. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018-
3942-6.
Zhu, S., Zhao, J., Zhao, N., et al., 2020. Goethite modified biochar as a multifunctional amendment for cationic Cd(II),
anionic As(III), roxarsone, and phosphorus in soil and water. J. Clean. Prod. 247, 119579. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2019.119579.
Zong, E., Wang, C., Yang, J., et al., 2021. Preparation of TiO2/cellulose nanocomposites as antibacterial bio-adsorbents
for effective phosphate removal from aqueous medium. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 182, 434–444. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.04.007.
Zubbri, N.A., Mohamed, A.R., Kamiuchi, N., Mohammadi, M., 2020. Enhancement of CO2 adsorption on biochar
sorbent modified by metal incorporation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 11809–11829. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-020-07734-3.
References 603
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThis page intentionally left blankCHAPTER
26
Magnetic nanomaterials-based
biosorbents
Suresh Ghotekara
, H.C. Ananda Murthyb
, Arpita Royc
,
Muhammad Bilald
, and Rajeshwari Ozae
a
Department of Chemistry, Smt. Devkiba Mohansinhji Chauhan College of Commerce and
Science, University of Mumbai, Silvassa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli (UT), India b
Department of
Applied Chemistry, School of Applied Natural Sciences, Adama Science and Technology
University, Adama, Ethiopia c
Department of Biotechnology, School of Engineering & Technology,
Sharda University, Greater Noida, India d
School of Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin
Institute of Technology, Huaian, China e
Department of Chemistry, S.N. Arts, D.J.M. Commerce
and B.N.S. Science College, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Sangamner, Maharashtra, India
26.1 Introduction
Metal-induced biosorbents may be a viable alternative to polymers, low-cost industrial
waste materials, minerals, and metal nanoparticles due to their good extraction capabilities
and magnetic characteristics (Charpentier et al., 2016; Khajeh et al., 2013; Nistico` et al., 2017;
Yang et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2014). Biosorbents, on the other hand, have been proved to be
unsuccessful at removing pollutants at low concentrations, whereas nanomaterials have
proven to be successful (Ali, 2012). Due to the clogging of binding sites by organic matters
and other particulates, metal nanoparticles’ direct utility for the practical treatment of waste￾water is restricted. Furthermore, nanomaterials agglomerate due to poor van-der-Waals pres￾sures, making their use for cleanup more difficult. It can be replaced by adsorbents (for
example, carbonaceous materials) to enhance metal particle dispersion and usage for waste￾water treatment (Zou et al., 2016). A long-term carrier material is needed to overcome these
obstacles. Metal-induced biosorbents are created by combining metal or metal nanoparticles
with biomass or biochar (a pyrolysis product) (Chen et al., 2011; Lunge et al., 2014; Mohan
et al., 2014; Nistico` et al., 2018; Reddy and Lee, 2014; Wang et al., 2018, 2015a, b). Magnetic
Nano-biosorbents for Decontamination of Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 605 Copyright # 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90912-9.00026-5biosorbents are made out of metal and/or metal oxide nanomaterials, as well as biosorbents.
Municipal, and low-cost agricultural wastes used to make biosorbents include pinewood,
sugarcane bagasse, sawdust, almond shells, peanut shells, olive bagasse, oak wood, grass,
and straw (Cledon et al., 2018; Fomina and Gadd, 2014; Hass and Lima, 2018; Liu et al.,
2017). Generally, biochar is a carbon-rich natural biomaterial made by pyrolysis biomass
method in a low-oxygen environment to ensure the materials in the sewage treatment system
are stable (Lehmann and Joseph, 2015). The temperature of pyrolysis, the feedstock of mate￾rials, and methods parameters, all of which have been well investigated (Kloss et al., 2012;
Zhao et al., 2018), have a significant key role in determining the characteristics of biochar.
Commonly used metals or metal nanoparticles include iron, zirconium, copper, titanium, co￾balt, zinc, nickel, and alloys, as well as carbonate, sulfate, nitrate, and their oxides (Hassan
et al., 2020). Magnetic biosorbents improve surface functionality and properties, which lead
to higher adsorption ability and simpler biosorbent recovery (Charpentier et al., 2016; Chen
and Pan, 2013; Hayashi et al., 2010; Yin et al., 2017).
Many studies have recently been published that show the efficiency of synthesized mag￾netic biosorbents in removing dyes, heavy metals, antibiotics, pesticides, and other develop￾ing pollutants (Gonza´lez Va´zquez et al., 2016; Hao et al., 2017; Karunanayake et al., 2016;
Meng et al., 2017; Noor et al., 2017). The adsorption capacity of feedstock nanomaterials/bio￾materials, their appropriate modification, generated functional groups, and the types of
pollutants are all important factors. Furthermore, magnetic biosorbents can be tweaked
and tuned to remove certain impurities. Because of its minimum manufacturing cost and re￾use for commercial applications, carbo-thermal degradation of transition-metal￾functionalized microporous carbon nanomaterials has gotten a lot of attention from scientists
(Shen, 2015). The effective interaction mechanism of zero-valent iron (nZVI)-assisted biochar
with selective heavy metals, organic compounds, and nitrates in water and soil systems were
reviewed, with a focus on the nZVI/BC fabrication conditions in terms of crystallite size, elec￾trical conductivity, and nZVI distribution on the surface of the biochar. The environmental
remediation of sewage sludge-derived biochar generated by the carbonation process was
investigated (Mian et al., 2019).
However, there is a scarcity of knowledge on the various production methods and utiliza￾tion of selective MBs for the mitigation of inorganic and organic contaminants. This chapter
discusses the various production methods for MB, as well as their benefits (Fig. 26.1) and
drawbacks. The data will aid in the comprehension and use of modification strategies for
the continued development of MB for the mitigation and/or removal of various contaminants
from sewage.
26.2 Fabrication of efficient magnetic nanomaterial biosorbents
The features of MBs are influenced by biomass qualities, metal nanomaterials, modifica￾tion techniques, and experimental parameters such as temperature, pyrolysis time, and
biosorbent size (Alizadeh et al., 2018; Dinari and Tabatabaeian, 2018; Reguyal et al., 2017).
Adsorbent yield, porosity, thermal stability, crystalline structure, and surface heterogeneity
are all improved by metal-doped biosorbents (Reddy and Lee, 2014).
606 26. Magnetic nanomaterials-based biosorbents
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesThe qualities of the biomass used to make MBs are crucial in displaying magnetic
biosorbent qualities. The compositions of various elements for biosorbents change greatly,
and Liu et al. (2017) address how these compositions alter as a result of the pyrolytic proce￾dures and biomass kinds. Diverse sorbent materials originate from differences in the key
elemental contents and decomposition routes of biomass sources. Due to the existence of
silicon-based reactive functional groups and structure, silicon-rich biosorbents such as rice
husk, sugarcane bagasse, and wheat husk can help boost adsorption capacity (Li et al.,
2019; Xiao et al., 2014; Xu and Chen, 2015). Similarly, manure-derived biochar comprises
N, K, P, Ca, Mg, and Fe, which, due to the availability of functional groups, can boost adsorp￾tion capability. While the presence of alkali metals reduces biochar output, oxidation of the
alkali metals can result in greater ash (Cabilovski et al., 2014; Nasir et al., 2014). The propor￾tion of nanomaterials to biomass must be optimized, as a maximum proportion may result in
nanomaterials encompassing many of the binding sites in biochar, lowering adsorption
capacity.
The formation of surface functional groups (Cha et al., 2016; Sharma et al., 2018) and chem￾ical compositions (Fagbayigbo et al., 2017; Jing et al., 2014; Ramalingam et al., 2018) of the
produced biosorbents can also be influenced by the quantity of hemicellulose, cellulose,
and lignin, and also the pyrolysis phase. The percentages of hemicellulose, lignin, and cellu￾lose in biomass can range from 20% to 40%, 20%–60%, and 20%–45%, respectively (Yang et al.,
2007). During pyrolysis, hemicellulose decomposes between 470 and 540 °C, whereas cellu￾lose and lignin begin to disintegrate around 500–600 °C and 550–800 °C, respectively (Yang
et al., 2007). However, depending on the various type of biosorbent and its chemical contents,
the temperature at which it decomposes may vary. The proportion of lignin in the biomass
feedstock is the key component to biochar output, whereas hemicellulose and cellulose, once
chemically and/or thermally processed, commonly introduce the reactive functional groups
on the surface of biosorbents (Yang et al., 2007, 2019). When the temperature hits 300–400 °C,
alkene and alkane bonds are converted to aldehyde, alcohol, and carboxylic acid, while alde￾hyde, hydroxyl groups, and a few aromatic substituents begin to develop at 500–600 °C. The
aromatic compounds and ash begin to develop at 600 °C (Liu et al., 2015). Pyrolysis, oxida￾tion, dehydration, and decarbonisation reactions generate functional groups on the surface of
biochar (Liu et al., 2015). When reducing agents are present, the hydration, reduction, and
Versality
Properes of
magnec
biosorbents
Low toxicity
Easy to handling
Biocompability
Rich in funconal group
Good catalyc reusability
Good stability
FIG. 26.1 Properties of magnetic
biosorbents.
26.2 Fabrication of efficient magnetic nanomaterial biosorbents 607
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricescarbonization methods can occur. When biosorbents treated with metal nanoparticles are bro￾ken, the COOH or CdO functional groups shift to C]C/C]O, indicating that CdOdFe
served as an electron acceptor throughout the reduction protocol (Zhu et al., 2017). Because
of the prevalence of oxygen-containing selective functional groups and generated surface
modifications, pyrolysis protocols are useful for removing ionic pollutants, but higher tem￾peratures of pyrolysis necessitate generating hydrophobic characteristics for removing or￾ganic pollutants. Metal and/or metal oxide assisted adsorbents, such as nZVI (zero-valent
iron), ZnFe2O4, CuFe2O4, Fe2O3, and Fe3O4 are commonly utilized and can form functional
groups such as MndO, FedO, and metaldOdmetald, which are accountable to adsorption
ability, particularly for selective ions (Senapati et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2018). Magnetic
biosorbents can also be tweaked to modify their sorption properties.
Magnetic biosorbents’ ferromagnetic features make it easy to separate them utilizing a
magnetic field following solid-phase extraction, highlighting their effectiveness for reuse
and recycling. When metal nanoparticles are combined with biosorbents, the magnetism
of the nanoparticles reduces, but the separation and regeneration processes are unaffected
(Huong et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2014). Magnetic biosorbents have a saturation magnetisation
(Ms), which is substantially the lowest than pure Fe3O4 nanoparticles (Wang et al., 2014). The
pyrolysis temperatures of the fabrication methods are positively associated with the magnetic
characteristics of the MBs (Han et al., 2015). As a result, higher temperatures should be used to
make responsive magnetic biosorbents. It is, however, dependent on the sorts of waste
biomaterials used and the types of impregnated metal nanoparticles used.
26.3 Surface modification of the selective magnetic nanoparticles
The synthetic processes for the synthesis of MBs via surface functionalization of magnetic
nanomaterials with biopolymers will be discussed here. It will be discussed how to make MBs
in the particulate form, such as microparticles, composite nanomaterials, and hydrogel beads.
Generally, several biopolymers derived from renewable resources have the following
benefits: biodegradability, minimal toxicity, and lowest cost. Also, coating magnetic
nanomaterials with selective biopolymers increases their oxidation resistance and creates
selective and reactive functional groups for capturing target contaminants in water
(Bohara et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2015). Furthermore, biopolymers improve magnetic nanopar￾ticle colloidal stability in aqua conditions and limit the development of magnetic aggregates,
which would otherwise reduce existed surface area and sorption efficiency (Wu et al., 2008;
Mehta et al., 2015). Colloidal stability is enhanced by steric interaction generated by biopoly￾mer links or electromagnetic repulsions among charged molecules in the biopolymer.
26.4 Applications
26.4.1 Removal/mitigation of heavy metals
Heavy metals such as arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr), lead (Pb), and mercury
(Hg) have been designated as emerging contaminants due to their well-known toxicity, as
they offer the greatest risk of human exposure (Bashir et al., 2019; Malik et al., 2019).
608 26. Magnetic nanomaterials-based biosorbents
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesFor the effective removal of Pb(II) ions from water under various operating circumstances,
a range of magnetic bionanocomposites (BNCs) has been developed (Charpentier et al., 2016;
Luo et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Sengupta et al., 2017; Sahraei et al., 2017). Pb(II) ion can have
a significant negative influence on human health, primarily due to increased oxidative stress,
with severe consequences for the hematological, renal, reproductive, and central neurological
systems (Flora et al., 2012). A chitosan/polyethylenimine-grafted magnetic composite mate￾rial with a remarkable higher adsorption ability of 341 mg g1 of Pb(II) ion and 321 mg g1 of
Cd(II) ion was recently reported (Li et al., 2017). The isotherm investigations revealed a better
concordance with the Langmuir isotherm for both metals, with the best performance in the
pH range 6–7. The adsorption process was endothermic and thermodynamically favorable.
The biopolymer on the surface of the nanomaterials, which resulted in a maximum number of
amino functional groups with improved absorption efficiency, may be to blame for the in￾creased removal efficiency. In addition, the chitosan/polyethylenimine-grafted magnetic
composite could be recycled five times without losing its performance or stability. Cu(II)
and Pb(II) have also been effectively removed from water using magnetic hydrogel beads
containing gum tragacanth (Sahraei et al., 2017), with maximal adsorption capacities of
81 and 69 mg g1
, respectively, at pH 6. The presence of numerous chelating carboxylic acid,
sulfonic acid, amino, and hydroxyl groups was attributed to the high removal capacity.
26.4.2 Removal/mitigation of organic compounds
Nowadays, various organic contaminants with the potential to pollute drinking water re￾sources are released. Dyes, medicines, insecticides, solvents, and a variety of other organic
by-products (Fig. 26.2) of industrial manufacturing are only a few examples (Dsikowitzky
and Schwarzbauer, 2014; Cizmas et al., 2015; Crini, 2005). There is now overwhelming evi￾dence that a wide range of dangerous organic contaminants is found in drinking water
sources, posing a challenging issue to human health and the aquatic ecology. Different forms
of BNCs have been developed for the adsorption of organic contaminants to address this is￾sue. Given their widespread use as molecular models for primary evaluation of material ef￾ficiency, numerous BNCs have been investigated for the uptake of various common less
hazardous dyes. Methylene blue is a well-known example of such a scenario. Our research
group recently investigated the potential of hybrid magnetic biosorbents with a siliceous shell
and covalently attached-carrageenan to absorb methylene blue from water (Soares et al.,
MagneƟc
biosorbents
Clean Water
Contaminated Water
• Heavy metals
• Dyes
• Microorganisms
• PharmaceuƟcal
 compounds
FIG. 26.2 Water treatment using magnetic
biosorbents.
26.4 Applications 609
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matrices2017). The material may also be recycled six times without losing its stability or efficiency.
Several biopolymers played a key role by supplying anionic ester sulfate functional groups
that could form electrostatic contacts with the cationic dye at the right pH. The authors the￾orized that the gelatin assisted cationic functional groups that can electrostatically eliminate
organic contaminants from water. Crystal violet, methylene blue, and malachite green ab￾sorption were observed using alginate beads containing scattered polydopamine CoFe2O4
particles (Li et al., 2016).
26.5 Determined the cost of MB
The budget of adsorbents is often disregarded, but it should be thoroughly examined to
guarantee that any adsorbents used for significant wastewater treatment are feasible. To re￾duce operational expenses, almost all of the desired characteristics of adsorbents should be
regained through recycling. Due to the ease with which magnetic fields can separate
biosorbents, they may be a viable choice. The costs of MB, on the other hand, are determined
by the availability of raw biomass, the cost of metal nanomaterials, and the process of mod￾ification. For biochar manufacturing, raw biomass is a cost-effective and widely available
feedstock. The price of biomass is determined by raw material availability, processing value,
and market demand. Biochar is substantially less expensive to make than activated carbon,
minerals, polymers, graphene, and carbon nanotubes. Metal nanomaterials, on the other
hand, are less expensive than graphene, carbon nanotubes, and other nanomaterials. The cost
of wastewater treatment is reduced by recycling and reusing MBs multiple times. The pore
size diameter determines the pricing of nanomaterials (Charpentier et al., 2016; Khajeh et al.,
2013; Nistico` et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2014; Ali, 2012; Zou et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2011; Lunge et al., 2014; Mohan et al., 2014).
Generally, carbon-based biomaterials, can be used since they have a huge capacity for cre￾ating diverse reactive functional groups on their surface at minimal or no cost. As a result,
biosorbents could be a viable alternative to graphene and carbon nanotubes. At the same time,
iron nanoparticles are one of the most affordable wastewater treatment alternatives Nonethe￾less, further research is needed to generate desired and cost-effective magnetic nanomaterials
that may be used in industrial settings. Minimizing production costs and creating or
expanding reusability restrictions will go a long way toward solving the world’s true water
dilemma (Meng et al., 2017; Noor et al., 2017; Shen, 2015; Mian et al., 2019; Alizadeh
et al., 2018).
26.6 Discard and exploitation of MBs from wastewater
More study is needed to ensure the safe disposal and management of MBs and adsorbed
contaminants. Magnetic sedimentation and centrifugal sedimentation can be used to separate
iron oxide/iron modified MBs for reuse. MBs recovery is time-consuming and difficult. The
recovered MBs might be utilized to make bricks and cement in the construction industry, but
high volumes could compromise the mechanical qualities of the finished products. Its usage
610 26. Magnetic nanomaterials-based biosorbents
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesin agriculture for soil aggregation and moisture retention may result in the accumulation of
pollutants in the soil, posing a major threat to aquatic and human life. The contaminants can
then be disposed of in a controlled setting after they have been isolated. Another viable al￾ternative is to bury the adsorbents in the soil and then utilize plants to phytoremediate the
pollutants. After that, such plants can be employed as feed components in the biochar
manufacturing process.
26.7 Conclusion
Magnetic bionanocomposite particles have emerged as a potential alternative to traditional
sorbents for the absorption of contaminants in the treatment of water. These biosorbents have
two distinct advantages: magnetic extraction and customized affinity for several number of
contaminants. The surface design of these selective materials must be acceptable in order to
achieve resilient and biosorbents with higher absorption strengths that could be reused. As a
consequence, a chapter of this work is devoted to the most important chemical approaches for
surface improvements of magnetic nanomaterials with biopolymers, with the goal of gener￾ating MBs that are tailored and specialized for the contaminants of interest. The use of tailored
biosorbents nanomaterials in sewage treatments minimizes the amount of solids required,
reducing the potential environmental consequences of discarded sorbents while also lower￾ing water remediation costs. The utilization of naturally existing biopolymers ensures the
magnetic biosorbents’ bio- and eco-compatibility.
More research on the use of MBs or their derivatives to remediate developing organic pol￾lutants. Magnetic biosorbents can be tailored or developed to generate specific features that
are beneficial for the removal of target contaminants. The presence of many functional groups
on the surface of MBs, and their chemistry, favors better adsorption capacity, which needs to
be investigated further. Only a few researches have looked at the field use of MBs so far,
indicating that further work is needed before MBs may be commercialized. Future research
efforts should focus on developing a more functional operating mechanism for the extraction
of adsorbents in modern sewage treatment plants. Environmental scientists, economics,
engineers, policymakers, and governments should collaborate in this scenario to optimize
the technology’s design, installation, and implementation.
References
Ali, I., 2012. New generation adsorbents for water treatment. Chem. Rev. 112 (10), 5073–5091.
Alizadeh, B., Delnavaz, M., Shakeri, A., 2018. Removal of Cd (II) and phenol using novel cross-linked magnetic
EDTA/chitosan/TiO2 nanocomposite. Carbohydr. Polym. 181, 675–683.
Bashir, A., Malik, L.A., Ahad, S., Manzoor, T., Bhat, M.A., Dar, G.N., Pandith, A.H., 2019. Removal of heavy metal ions
from aqueous system by ion-exchange and biosorption methods. Environ. Chem. Lett. 17 (2), 729–754.
Bohara, R.A., Thorat, N.D., Pawar, S.H., 2016. Role of functionalization: strategies to explore potential nano-bio ap￾plications of magnetic nanoparticles. RSC Adv. 6 (50), 43989–44012.
Cabilovski, R., Manojlovic, M., Bogdanovic, D., Magazin, N., Keserovic, Z., Sitaula, B.K., 2014. Mulch type and ap￾plication of manure and composts in strawberry (Fragaria  ananassa Duch.) production: impact on soil fertility
and yield. Zemdirbyste-Agriculture 101 (1), 67–74.
References 611
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesCha, J.S., Park, S.H., Jung, S.C., Ryu, C., Jeon, J.K., Shin, M.C., Park, Y.K., 2016. Production and utilization of biochar: a
review. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 40, 1–15.
Charpentier, T.V., Neville, A., Lanigan, J.L., Barker, R., Smith, M.J., Richardson, T., 2016. Preparation of magnetic
carboxymethylchitosan nanoparticles for adsorption of heavy metal ions. ACS Omega 1 (1), 77–83.
Chen, N., Pan, Q., 2013. Versatile fabrication of ultralight magnetic foams and application for oil–water separation.
ACS Nano 7 (8), 6875–6883.
Chen, B., Chen, Z., Lv, S., 2011. A novel magnetic biochar efficiently sorbs organic pollutants and phosphate.
Bioresour. Technol. 102 (2), 716–723.
Cizmas, L., Sharma, V.K., Gray, C.M., McDonald, T.J., 2015. Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in waters:
occurrence, toxicity, and risk. Environ. Chem. Lett. 13 (4), 381–394.
Cledon, M., Galvez, R., Vega-Baudrit, J.R., 2018. Using vegetal biomass for pollution adsorption. In: Cledon, M.,
Brar, S.K., Galvez, R., Oyanedel-Craver, V. (Eds.), Integrated and Sustainable Environmental Remediation. Amer￾ican Chemical Society, pp. 1–13.
Crini, G., 2005. Recent developments in polysaccharide-based materials used as adsorbents in wastewater treatment.
Prog. Polym. Sci. 30 (1), 38–70.
Dinari, M., Tabatabaeian, R., 2018. Ultra-fast and highly efficient removal of cadmium ions by magnetic layered dou￾ble hydroxide/guargum bionanocomposites. Carbohydr. Polym. 192, 317–326.
Dsikowitzky, L., Schwarzbauer, J., 2014. Industrial organic contaminants: identification, toxicity and fate in the en￾vironment. Environ. Chem. Lett. 12 (3), 371–386.
Fagbayigbo, B.O., Opeolu, B.O., Fatoki, O.S., Akenga, T.A., Olatunji, O.S., 2017. Removal of PFOA and PFOS from
aqueous solutions using activated carbon produced from Vitis vinifera leaf litter. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
24 (14), 13107–13120.
Flora, G., Gupta, D., Tiwari, A., 2012. Toxicity of lead: a review with recent updates. Interdiscip. Toxicol. 5 (2), 47–58.
Fomina, M., Gadd, G.M., 2014. Biosorption: current perspectives on concept, definition and application. Bioresour.
Technol. 160, 3–14.
Gonza´lez Va´zquez, O.F., Moreno Virgen, M.D.R., Herna´ndez Montoya, V., Tovar Go´mez, R., Alca´ntara Flores, J.L.,
Perez Cruz, M.A., Montes Mora´n, M.A., 2016. Adsorption of heavy metals in the presence of a magnetic field on
adsorbents with different magnetic properties. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 55 (34), 9323–9331.
Guo, W., Wang, S., Wang, Y., Lu, S., Gao, Y., 2018. Sorptive removal of phenanthrene from aqueous solutions using
magnetic and non-magnetic rice husk-derived biochars. R. Soc. Open Sci. 5 (5), 172382.
Han, L., Xue, S., Zhao, S., Yan, J., Qian, L., Chen, M., 2015. Biochar supported nanoscale iron particles for the efficient
removal of methyl orange dye in aqueous solutions. PLoS One 10 (7), e0132067.
Hao, W., Bjornerb € €ack, F., Trushkina, Y., Oregui Bengoechea, M., Salazar-Alvarez, G., Barth, T., Hedin, N., 2017. High￾performance magnetic activated carbon from solid waste from lignin conversion processes. 1. Their use as adsor￾bents for CO2. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5 (4), 3087–3095.
Hass, A., Lima, I.M., 2018. Effect of feed source and pyrolysis conditions on properties and metal sorption by sug￾arcane biochar. Environ. Technol. Innov. 10, 16–26.
Hassan, M., Naidu, R., Du, J., Liu, Y., Qi, F., 2020. Critical review of magnetic biosorbents: their preparation, appli￾cation, and regeneration for wastewater treatment. Sci. Total Environ. 702, 134893.
Hayashi, K., Ono, K., Suzuki, H., Sawada, M., Moriya, M., Sakamoto, W., Yogo, T., 2010. High-frequency, magnetic￾field-responsive drug release from magnetic nanoparticle/organic hybrid based on hyperthermic effect. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2 (7), 1903–1911.
Huong, P.T.L., Phan, V.N., Hoa, N.Q., Tuan, H.T., Nam, M.H., Le, A.T., 2018. Superparamagnetic iron oxide@ carbon
Core–Shell nanoparticles as advanced adsorbent for efficient removal of As (V) ions from wastewater. IEEE Trans.
Magn. 54 (6), 1–6.
Jing, X.R., Wang, Y.Y., Liu, W.J., Wang, Y.K., Jiang, H., 2014. Enhanced adsorption performance of tetracycline in
aqueous solutions by methanol-modified biochar. Chem. Eng. J. 248, 168–174.
Karunanayake, A.G., Bombuwala Dewage, N., Todd, O.A., Essandoh, M., Anderson, R., Mlsna, T., Mlsna, D., 2016.
Salicylic acid and 4-nitroaniline removal from water using magnetic biochar: an environmental and analytical ex￾periment for the undergraduate laboratory. J. Chem. Educ. 93 (11), 1935–1938.
Khajeh, M., Laurent, S., Dastafkan, K., 2013. Nanoadsorbents: classification, preparation, and applications (with em￾phasis on aqueous media). Chem. Rev. 113 (10), 7728–7768.
Kloss, S., Zehetner, F., Dellantonio, A., Hamid, R., Ottner, F., Liedtke, V., Soja, G., 2012. Characterization of slow py￾rolysis biochars: effects of feedstocks and pyrolysis temperature on biochar properties. J. Environ. Qual. 41 (4),
990–1000.
612 26. Magnetic nanomaterials-based biosorbents
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesLehmann, J., Joseph, S. (Eds.), 2015. Biochar for Environmental Management: Science, Technology and Implementa￾tion. Routledge.
Li, X., Lu, H., Zhang, Y., He, F., Jing, L., He, X., 2016. Fabrication of magnetic alginate beads with uniform dispersion of
CoFe2O4 by the polydopamine surface functionalization for organic pollutants removal. Appl. Surf. Sci. 389,
567–577.
Li, B., Zhou, F., Huang, K., Wang, Y., Mei, S., Zhou, Y., Jing, T., 2017. Environmentally friendly chitosan/PEI-grafted
magnetic gelatin for the highly effective removal of heavy metals from drinking water. Sci. Rep. 7 (1), 1–9.
Li, J., Zheng, L., Wang, S.L., Wu, Z., Wu, W., Niazi, N.K., Wang, H., 2019. Sorption mechanisms of lead on silicon-rich
biochar in aqueous solution: spectroscopic investigation. Sci. Total Environ. 672, 572–582.
Liu, W.J., Jiang, H., Yu, H.Q., 2015. Development of biochar-based functional materials: toward a sustainable platform
carbon material. Chem. Rev. 115 (22), 12251–12285.
Liu, W.J., Li, W.W., Jiang, H., Yu, H.Q., 2017. Fates of chemical elements in biomass during its pyrolysis. Chem. Rev.
117 (9), 6367–6398.
Lunge, S., Singh, S., Sinha, A., 2014. Magnetic iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles from tea waste for arsenic removal. J.
Magn. Magn. Mater. 356, 21–31.
Luo, X., Lei, X., Xie, X., Yu, B., Cai, N., Yu, F., 2016. Adsorptive removal of Lead from water by the effective and re￾usable magnetic cellulose nanocomposite beads entrapping activated bentonite. Carbohydr. Polym. 151, 640–648.
Malik, L.A., Bashir, A., Qureashi, A., Pandith, A.H., 2019. Detection and removal of heavy metal ions: a review. En￾viron. Chem. Lett. 17 (4), 1495–1521.
Mehta, D., Mazumdar, S., Singh, S.K., 2015. Magnetic adsorbents for the treatment of water/wastewater—a review. J.
Water Process Eng. 7, 244–265.
Meng, F., Yang, B., Wang, B., Duan, S., Chen, Z., Ma, W., 2017. Novel dendrimerlike magnetic biosorbent based on
modified orange peel waste: adsorption–reduction behavior of arsenic. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5 (11), 9692–9700.
Mian, M.M., Liu, G., Fu, B., 2019. Conversion of sewage sludge into environmental catalyst and microbial fuel cell
electrode material: a review. Sci. Total Environ. 666, 525–539.
Mohan, D., Kumar, H., Sarswat, A., Alexandre-Franco, M., Pittman Jr., C.U., 2014. Cadmium and lead remediation
using magnetic oak wood and oak bark fast pyrolysis bio-chars. Chem. Eng. J. 236, 513–528.
Nasir, I.M., Ghazi, T.I.M., Omar, R., Azlina, W., Ghani, W.A.K., 2014. Anaerobic batch digestion of cattle manure
using a novel oscillatory flow bioreactor. Int. J. Eng. Technol. 11 (2), 65–69.
Nistico`, R., Franzoso, F., Cesano, F., Scarano, D., Magnacca, G., Parolo, M.E., Carlos, L., 2017. Chitosan-derived iron
oxide systems for magnetically guided and efficient water purification processes from polycyclic aromatic hydro￾carbons. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5 (1), 793–801.
Nistico`, R., Cesano, F., Franzoso, F., Magnacca, G., Scarano, D., Funes, I.G., Parolo, M.E., 2018. From biowaste to
magnet-responsive materials for water remediation from polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Chemosphere 202,
686–693.
Noor, N.M., Othman, R., Mubarak, N.M., Abdullah, E.C., 2017. Agricultural biomass-derived magnetic adsorbents:
preparation and application for heavy metals removal. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 78, 168–177.
Ramalingam, B., Parandhaman, T., Choudhary, P., Das, S.K., 2018. Biomaterial functionalized graphene-magnetite
nanocomposite: a novel approach for simultaneous removal of anionic dyes and heavy-metal ions. ACS Sustain.
Chem. Eng. 6 (5), 6328–6341.
Reddy, D.H.K., Lee, S.M., 2014. Magnetic biochar composite: facile synthesis, characterization, and application for
heavy metal removal. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 454, 96–103.
Reguyal, F., Sarmah, A.K., Gao, W., 2017. Synthesis of magnetic biochar from pine sawdust via oxidative hydrolysis of
FeCl2 for the removal sulfamethoxazole from aqueous solution. J. Hazard. Mater. 321, 868–878.
Sahraei, R., Pour, Z.S., Ghaemy, M., 2017. Novel magnetic bio-sorbent hydrogel beads based on modified gum trag￾acanth/graphene oxide: removal of heavy metals and dyes from water. J. Clean. Prod. 142, 2973–2984.
Senapati, K.K., Borgohain, C., Sarma, K.C., Phukan, P., 2011. Photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue in water
using CoFe2O4–Cr2O3–SiO2 fluorescent magnetic nanocomposite. J. Mol. Catal. A Chem. 346 (1–2), 111–116.
Sengupta, A., Rao, R., Bahadur, D., 2017. Zn2+-silica modified cobalt ferrite magnetic nanostructured composite for
efficient adsorption of cationic pollutants from water. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5 (2), 1280–1286.
Sharma, M.O.N.I.K.A., Singh, J.O.G.I.N.D.E.R., Baskar, C.H.I.N.N.A.P.P.A.N., Kumar, A.J.A.Y., 2018.
A comprehensive review on biochar formation and its utilization for wastewater treatment. Pollut. Res. 37, S1–S18.
Shen, Y., 2015. Carbothermal synthesis of metal-functionalized nanostructures for energy and environmental appli￾cations. J. Mater. Chem. A 3 (25), 13114–13188.
References 613
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesSoares, S.F., Simoes, T.R., Trindade, T., Daniel-da-Silva, A.L., 2017. Highly efficient removal of dye from water using
magnetic carrageenan/silica hybrid nano-adsorbents. Water Air Soil Pollut. 228 (3), 1–11.
Wang, S.Y., Tang, Y.K., Li, K., Mo, Y.Y., Li, H.F., Gu, Z.Q., 2014. Combined performance of biochar sorption and mag￾netic separation processes for treatment of chromium-contained electroplating wastewater. Bioresour. Technol.
174, 67–73.
Wang, S., Gao, B., Li, Y., Mosa, A., Zimmerman, A.R., Ma, L.Q., Migliaccio, K.W., 2015a. Manganese oxide-modified
biochars: preparation, characterization, and sorption of arsenate and lead. Bioresour. Technol. 181, 13–17.
Wang, S., Gao, B., Zimmerman, A.R., Li, Y., Ma, L., Harris, W.G., Migliaccio, K.W., 2015b. Removal of arsenic by mag￾netic biochar prepared from pinewood and natural hematite. Bioresour. Technol. 175, 391–395.
Wang, Y., Li, L., Luo, C., Wang, X., Duan, H., 2016. Removal of Pb2+ from water environment using a novel magnetic
chitosan/graphene oxide imprinted Pb2+. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 86, 505–511.
Wang, H., Liu, Y., Ifthikar, J., Shi, L., Khan, A., Chen, Z., Chen, Z., 2018. Towards a better understanding on mercury
adsorption by magnetic bio-adsorbents with γ-Fe2O3 from pinewood sawdust derived hydrochar: influence of
atmosphere in heat treatment. Bioresour. Technol. 256, 269–276.
Wu, W., He, Q., Jiang, C., 2008. Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: synthesis and surface functionalization strategies.
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 3 (11), 397–415.
Wu, W., Wu, Z., Yu, T., Jiang, C., Kim, W.S., 2015. Recent progress on magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: synthesis,
surface functional strategies and biomedical applications. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 16 (2), 1–43.
Xiao, X., Chen, B., Zhu, L., 2014. Transformation, morphology, and dissolution of silicon and carbon in rice straw￾derived biochars under different pyrolytic temperatures. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48 (6), 3411–3419.
Xu, Y., Chen, B., 2015. Organic carbon and inorganic silicon speciation in rice-bran-derived biochars affect its capacity
to adsorb cadmium in solution. J. Soil. Sediment. 15 (1), 60–70.
Yang, H., Yan, R., Chen, H., Lee, D.H., Zheng, C., 2007. Characteristics of hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin pyrolysis.
Fuel 86 (1213), 1781–1788.
Yang, J., Zhao, Y., Ma, S., Zhu, B., Zhang, J., Zheng, C., 2016. Mercury removal by magnetic biochar derived from
simultaneous activation and magnetization of sawdust. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50 (21), 12040–12047.
Yang, X., Wan, Y., Zheng, Y., He, F., Yu, Z., Huang, J., Gao, B., 2019. Surface functional groups of carbon-based ad￾sorbents and their roles in the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions: a critical review. Chem. Eng. J. 366,
608–621.
Yin, X., Long, J., Xi, Y., Luo, X., 2017. Recovery of silver from wastewater using a new magnetic photocatalytic ion￾imprinted polymer. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5 (3), 2090–2097.
Zhao, B., O’Connor, D., Zhang, J., Peng, T., Shen, Z., Tsang, D.C., Hou, D., 2018. Effect of pyrolysis temperature,
heating rate, and residence time on rapeseed stem derived biochar. J. Clean. Prod. 174, 977–987.
Zhu, X., Liu, Y., Zhou, C., Zhang, S., Chen, J., 2014. Novel and high-performance magnetic carbon composite prepared
from waste hydrochar for dye removal. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2 (4), 969–977.
Zhu, S., Ho, S.H., Huang, X., Wang, D., Yang, F., Wang, L., Ma, F., 2017. Magnetic nanoscale zerovalent iron assisted
biochar: interfacial chemical behaviors and heavy metals remediation performance. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5
(11), 9673–9682.
Zou, Y., Wang, X., Khan, A., Wang, P., Liu, Y., Alsaedi, A., Wang, X., 2016. Environmental remediation and appli￾cation of nanoscale zero-valent iron and its composites for the removal of heavy metal ions: a review. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 50 (14), 7290–7304.
614 26. Magnetic nanomaterials-based biosorbents
IV. Multifarious biopolymers as nanobiosorbents for decontamination of environmental matricesIndex
Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate figures and t indicate tables.
A
Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion
(ADME), 300–301
Acacia senegal, 51
Acacia seyal, 51
Acetosulfation, 373
Acetylation, 291, 379
Acid hydrolysis, 9, 252
Acidic environment, 146–148
2-Acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid (AMPS),
340–341
Activated carbon (AC), 482, 573
Active carbon material regeneration, 469–471, 471–472t
Active phases, 579–582
magnetic phases, 582
metal oxides, 581
metals and alloys, 579–580, 580f
minerals, 581–582
oxyhydroxides, 581
Adsorbed contaminants, 106
Adsorbents
characterization, 508–509
dosage effect, 511–512
Adsorption, 259, 403
applications, 86–87
complex mixtures, 564–565
inorganic pollutants, 555–560
organic pollutants, 560–564
equilibrium experiments, 505–506
isotherms, 514
kinetics, 515–518
process
cellulose-grafting, 325f
desorption/regeneration process, 326
grafting polymers, 324–325
hydrophobization strategies, 324f
ionic charged cellulose surface, 324–325
regeneration process, 321–326
types, 321–326
techniques
activated carbon, 443
chitosan/carbon nanotubes based adsorbents, 444
diatomite, 445
magnetic activated carbon, 443–444
MOFs, removal by, 446–448
removal combined processes, 446
TCS-CTS-Fe0-MIP, 445–446
Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), 152–153
Agitation rate effect, 116
Ag nanoparticle, 302
Agricultural applications, 259–265
Agricultural residue, 282
Agriculture waste, 63, 67–68
Agrobacterium fabrum biomass, 68
Air pollutants, removal of, 308–309
Algae, 255
waste, 282
Algal cellulose (AC), 255
Alginate-based composites, 51
activated carbon (AC), 482
applications, 481f
Egg-box model, 482
future perspectives, 496
graphene oxide (GO), 482
removal of dyes, 486–489t
carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate
composites, 485–491
nanomaterials-based sodium alginate composites,
491–492, 493f
removal of heavy metals, 483–485
carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate
composites, 483–485, 484f
nanomaterials-based sodium alginate composites,
485
removal of pharmaceutical contaminants, 494–495
removal of radionuclides, 492–494
synthesis, 480–482
Aluminum and lanthanum impregnated cellulose
composite (ALIC), 340
Aluminum oxide-based nanomaterials, 144–145
Amidation, 292
Amine-functionalization, 373–374
Amino-functionalized bead, 428
Amino-functionalized cellulose, 365–366
615Aminopropyl triethoxy silane (APS), 308–309
Ammonium persulfate (APS), 370
Amoxicillin, 562
Amylopectin, 6–7
Anionic dyes, 107
Anoxybacillus kestanboliensis, 69
Antibacterial/antimicrobial activity, 302
Anti-ferromagnetic (AFM) system, 530
Aqueous pollutants adsorbents, 582–589
arsenic, 585–586
cadmium, 587
copper, 586–587
hexavalent chromium, 583–585
lead, 585
other aqueous pollutants, 588–589
uranium, 587–588
Aromatic/heterocyclic dyes, 342
Arsenic, 420–423
chitosan, 422
chitosan-coated magnetic nanoparticles (cMNPs), 421
crab shells, 422
goethite/graphene oxide/chitosan, 422
lignocellulosic bio-refinery wastewater (LBW), 421
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), 421
natural polysaccharide chitosan (CS), 423
Aspergillus niger, 36–37
Astrocaryum aculeatum, 561–562
Atomic force microscopy (AFM), 288
Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), 325–326
B
Bacteria, 17
Bacterial cellulose (BC), 17–18, 252, 256, 318–321
Bacterial nanocellulose (BNC), 5, 194, 293–294
applications, 296f
production, 296f
properties, 294–295, 295f
Bacterial synthesized cellulose (BASYC), 301–302
Basic yellow, 107
Bed-depth service time model (BDST), 66
Bio-based nanomaterials, 3–4
Biochar-supported nanoparticles heavy metals
treatment, 149–150
Biochar-supported NMs, 146–148
Biodegradable natural polymer, 3
Biogas, 594–595, 595t
Biogenic nanoparticles
nanoadsorbent materials, 233–234, 234–235t
fabrication, 233
Biological microorganism, 68
Biomass-derived adsorbents
activated carbon, 573
active phases, 579–582
magnetic phases, 582
metal oxides, 581
metals and alloys, 579–580, 580f
minerals, 581–582
oxyhydroxides, 581
aqueous pollutants adsorbents, 582–589
arsenic, 585–586
cadmium, 587
copper, 586–587
hexavalent chromium, 583–585
lead, 585
other aqueous pollutants, 588–589
uranium, 587–588
biosorbents, 570–571
blending of constituents, 578
carbon phase, functionalization of, 579
graphene, 574–575
lignin, 573–574
nanocomposites, synthesis of, 575–579
nanoparticles, in-situ development of, 576–578,
577f
pollutants in gaseous forms, adsorbents for, 590–595
biogas, 594–595, 595t
flue gases, 590–594, 594f
pristine biochar, 571–573
soil remediation adsorbents, 596–598, 597f, 598t
Biomedical application, 545–546
Biomedical field, nanocellulose application, 300–302,
300f
antibacterial/antimicrobial activity, 302
cardiovascular implant, 301–302
drug delivery system, 300–301
tissue engineering, 301
Biosorbents
biomass-derived adsorbents, 570–571
dose, 116
Biosorption, 31–32, 31f, 113–114
immobilization onto solid surface, 34
magnetic modification of, 33–34, 33f
nanoscale zerovalent metals (NZVMs), 34
nanotechnology with, 32–34
Bisphenol A (BPA), 146–148
Bleached eucalyptus kraft pulp (BEKP), 10–11, 11f
C
Cadmium, 423–426
electrospun chitosan (CS), 424
nano-chitosan, 423–424
nano-chitosan coating nano-iron oxide, 424–425
non-woven chitosan (CS), 424
phosphorylated microcellulose (PMC), 424
polyacrylonitrile (PAN), 423
polylactic acid (PLA), 425
xanthate functionalized magnetic chitosan
nanocomposite (XFMCN), 425–426
616 IndexCalcium alginate entrapped sugarcane biochar
composite (CA-SB), 490–491
Carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate
composites, 483–491, 484f
Carbon-based nanoadsorbents, 228–232, 229f
carbon nanotubes-based nanoadsorbent materials,
229–231
graphene-based nanoadsorbent materials, 231–232
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), 229–231
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), 229–231
wastewater treatment, 228–229, 229–230t
Carbon-based nano-architectures, 438
Carbon-based nanomaterials (CBNs), 171–173, 228–229
Carbon nanotubes-based nanoadsorbent materials,
171–172, 229–231
Carbon paste electrode (CPE), 544
Carbon phase, functionalization of, 579
Carboxylated chitosan (CYCS), 432
Carboxylated chitosan-magnetic nanoparticles, 556
Carboxylated nanocellulose (CNC), 432
Carboxyl groups, 51
cellulose modification with, 370
Carboxymethylation, 290–291
Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), 340–341, 371, 397
Carcinogenicity, 441
Cardiovascular implant, 301–302
Catalytic application, 546
Cationic dyes, 107
Celery cellulose nanofibrils (CCNF), 18–19
Cellulose, 396–399
Cellulose acetate/poly(ionic liquid) composite, 334–335
Cellulose-based composites, 397
removal of dyes, 399–402, 400f, 401–402t
removal of heavy metals, 402–403, 404t
removal of pharmaceuticals, 404–409, 405f, 408–409t
Cellulose-based-nanobioadsorbents (CNB), 50, 243
acid hydrolysis, 252
adsorption process
cellulose-grafting, 325f
desorption/regeneration process, 326
grafting polymers, 324–325
hydrophobization strategies for, 324f
ionic charged cellulose surface, 324–325
regeneration process, 321–326
types, 321–326
bacterial cellulose, 252
cellulose nanocrystals, 252
cellulose nanofibrils, 252
cellulose particles isolation, 252
classification, 318–321
contextualization, 317–318
deep eutectic solvents (DES), 318–321
future perspectives, 327
molecular structure, 252f
nanocellulose, 253t
adsorption, 259
agricultural applications, 259–265
algal cellulose (AC), 255
applications, 253f
bacterial cellulose, 256
cellulose nanocrystal (CNC), 258
cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs), 258–259
cross-linked composite membrane, dye removal,
261f
environmental applications, 259–265
immersion, 262f
magnetically functionalized cellulose nanocrystal￾based (MCNCs) hydrogels, 259
plant cellulose, 254–255
sources, 254–256
tunicates, 255
types, 256–259
preparation, 318–321, 319–320t
Cellulose-based nanomaterials, 252
acetylation of cellulose, 379
amines, chemical modification with, 373–374
as biosorbents
advantages, 363
bacterial nanocellulose (BNC), 362
limitations, 363–364
nanocellulose, 362f, 363
nanocellulose, classification of, 360–362
production, 362f
structural properties of cellulose, 360
carboxylate-based modification, 369–372
carboxylated cellulose, 367f
chemical modifications, 368–369t
hydrophobic nanocellulose, 375–379
inorganic nanostructures modified cellulose, 379–384,
380–382t, 384f
molecular functionalization, 364–379
multifunctional adsorbents, 379–384
phosphorylation, 374–375
photocatalytic/antibacterial functions, adsorbents
with, 384–386
sulfur-based modification, 372–373
Cellulose beads (CB), 379–380
Cellulose-grafting, 325f
Cellulose/graphene composite (CGC), 306–307
Cellulose nanocrystal (CNC), 8–9, 194, 252, 258, 276,
360–362
Cellulose nanofiber (CNF), 194, 305, 318–321
Cellulose nanofibrils (CNF), 8, 10–11, 252, 258–259, 276
Cellulose nanowhisker (CNW), 258
Cellulose particles isolation, 252
Cellulose substrate-adsorbate interaction, 365–366
Cellulose-titania-based nanocomposite, 339
Cellulosic material, 50
Index 617Central composite design model, 518–522, 519t
Cerium, 559
Cerium oxide-based nanomaterials, 145–146
Cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide modified
nanohydroxyapatite, 428
Chitin/chitosan, 50
Chitin microfibers, 14
Chitin molecule, 5–6
Chitin nanofiber (ChNF), 12
Chitosan, 50, 560
Chitosan/carbon nanotubes based adsorbents, 444
Chitosan-sunflower (CS), 66
Chitosan-sunflower-nanoiron (CSN), 66
4-Chlorophenol (4-CP), 545–546
Chromium, 146–148, 427–428
Citrus waste-based sorbent, wastewater treatment
activated carbon, 459–467
characterization, 465–467
electrochemical properties, 467–469
material regeneration, 469–471, 471–472t
orange peel waste conversion, 463–465
physicochemical properties, 460–462
possible surface groups on, 462
preparation, 465–467
production, 460–462
carbon paste electrodes, 469
characteristics, 456–459, 458t
future perspectives, 473–474
modified carbon paste electrode, 468f
pectin extraction conditions, 465t
sorption properties, 457–459
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 466, 467f
Cladophora cellulose, 283
Classic contaminant application, 211–215, 213–215f, 214t
Coated flexible titanate-bismuth oxide (CH-TBM), 340
Complex mixtures, 564–565
Components, mechanical mixing of, 48
Congo red (CR), 34–35
Contact time effect, 116, 512–514, 513f
Contaminants
agitation rate effect, 116
arsenic, 79
biosorbent dose, 116
biosorption, 113–114
chemical contaminant, 76–77t
of concern, 75
contact time effect, 116
contaminants of emerging concern (CECs), 80–85, 81f
alkylphenols (APs), 81
androgen receptor (AR), 82
antibiotic ciprofloxacin, 81–82
antibiotics disturb bacterial community, 82
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), 82
bisphenol A (BPA), 81, 83
constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), 82
endocrine disruptors (EDCs), 82
estrogen receptors (ER), 82
estrogen-related receptor (ERR), 82
European Union (EU), 83
microplastics (MPs), 81
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, resistant to rifampicin
(MTB), 82
parabens, 82–83
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFASs), 81
pesticides, 83–84
pharmaceuticals and personal care products
(PPCPs), 81–82
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 84–85
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs), 81
pregnane X receptor (PXR), 82
wastewater treatments plants (WWTPs), 81
cycle of, 78f
disinfection by-products (DBPs), 85
dyes
anionic dyes, 107
cationic dyes, 107
non-ionic dyes, 107
emerging contaminants (EC), removal of, 85–95
adsorption applications, 86–87
chemical operations, 89–93
hybrid systems, 88–89
membrane process, 87
membranes for removal, 87–88
factors, 114–116
heavy metal, 108, 109f
lead, 79–80
mercury, 80
metalloids, 78–80
metals, 78–80
organometals, 78–80
other contaminants, 110
pesticides/insecticides, 108–110
pharmaceutical drugs, 108
pH effect, 114–115
pollutions concentration, 116
sources, 76–78
temperature effect, 115
types, 106–110
wastewater treatment, 110–113, 111f
adsorbents, 116–128
agricultural waste materials, 117
chemical precipitation, 112
coagulation, 110–112
electrochemical method, 110
flocculation, 110–112
industrial by-products, 117–120
ion-exchange process, 112
618 Indexmarine materials, 120, 121t
membrane filtration, 112
microbial biosorbents, 120–125
nanoadsorbent, 126–128
soil and ore materials, 126
sorption method, 113, 113–114f
Contaminants of emerging concern (CECs), 80–85, 81f
alkylphenols (APs), 81
androgen receptor (AR), 82
antibiotic ciprofloxacin, 81–82
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), 82
bisphenol A (BPA), 81, 83
constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), 82
endocrine disruptors (EDCs), 82
estrogen receptors (ER), 82
estrogen-related receptor (ERR), 82
European Union (EU), 83
microplastics (MPs), 81
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, resistant to rifampicin
(MTB), 82
parabens, 82–83
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFASs), 81
pesticides, 83–84
pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs),
81–82
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 84–85
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs), 81
pregnane X receptor (PXR), 82
wastewater treatments plants (WWTPs), 81
Contaminants removal
applications, 52
green approach, 34–37
inorganic pollutants, removal of, 36–37, 37–38t
organic contaminants, 36t
organic pollutants removal, 34–35, 35f
Contextualization, 317–318
Cross-linked composite membrane, dye removal, 261f
D
Dalbergia sissoo pods (DSP), 63
Deep eutectic solvents (DES), 12, 318–321
Degree of polymerization (DP), 360
Degumming, 6
Desorption/regeneration process, 326
Diatomite, 445
Diclofenac sodium (DS), 306
Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid-modified chitosan/
polyethylene oxide nanofibers (CS-DTPA/PEO
NFs), 431–432
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), 288
Differential thermogravimetry (DTG), 288
Digital display, 298–299
N-Dimethylacetamide (DMAC), 373
Direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC), 398
Drug delivery system, 300–301
Dyes, 396
anionic dyes, 107
cationic dyes, 107
non-ionic dyes, 107
removal, 305
E
Ecological remediation, cellulose nanocomposites
air filtration, 334–336, 337f
soil remediation, 352
water treatment, 336–352
anions, 340–341, 341f
cations, 338–340
drugs removal, 344, 351t
dyes removal, 342–344, 345–349t
ions removal, 338–341
pesticides removal, 344–352
Egg-box model, 482
Eichhornia crassipes (EC), 509–510f, 521f,
523f, 525f
Electrical properties, 287
Electron paramagnetic studies, 542–543, 542f
Emerging contaminant (EC), 206–210, 207f, 209–211f,
212t, 227–228
adsorption applications, 86–87
biological applications, 93–95
conventional processes, 93–94
non-conventional processes, 94–95
chemical operations, 89–93, 90–91t
advanced oxidation processes (AOPs),
91–92
chlorination, 89–90
Fenton process, 92–93
ozonation, 91
photolysis, 93
hybrid systems, 88–89
membrane process, 87
membranes for removal, 87–88
Emerging pollutants (EPs), 437–438
Endocrine disruption, 441
Energy and electronics industry, nanocellulose
application, 297–299
digital display, 298–299
energy harvesting, 299
energy storage, 299
flexible electronics, 298
light-emitting diodes (LED), 298–299
opto electronics, 299
Energy harvesting, 299
Energy storage, 299
Environmental hazards, 136–137
Environmental pollution, 163
Index 619Environmental remediation, adsorbent
for, 302–309
air pollutants, removal of, 308–309
dye removal, 305
heavy metal removal, 303–304, 304f
oil adsorption, 307–308
organic pollutant adsorption, 305–307, 306f
Environmental remediation, surface modification for
alginate nano-biosorbents, 193–194
chitosan, 189–192
chitosan nanoparticles, 192t
immobilization, 194
magnetic modification, 193–194
nanoscale zero-valent metals, 194
test living organism, 190–192
Environmental risk assessment (ERA), 247
Enzymatic hydrolysis, 363
Enzyme pretreatment technique, 12
Etherification, 292
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 431
Exposure Control Hierarchy, 247–248
F
FeCu bimetallic nanoparticles (FeCu BMNPs), 233
Fenton reactions, 152–153
Ferromagnetism (FM), 529
Fibroin, 6
Field emission scanning electron microscopy
(FESEM), 288
Flexible electronics, 298
Flue gases, 590–594, 594f
Forest residue, 281
Free cyanide (FCN), 544
Freundlich plot, 515f
G
Gamma irradiation, 17
Gas separation, 309
Genotoxicity, 440
Gold, 169–170
GO nanomaterials, 172–173
Grafting polymers, 324–325
Graphene, 172–173, 574–575
Graphene-based nanoadsorbent materials, 231–232
Graphene oxide (GO), 231–232, 482
Graphene oxide-terminated hyperbranched amino
polymer-carboxymethyl cellulose, 339
Guar gum, 51
Gums, 51
H
Heavy metals, 108, 109f, 396
ions, 338
removal, 303–304, 304f, 608–609
acidic environment, 146–148
advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), 152–153
application, 201–205, 204f, 205t
biochar-supported nanoparticles, 149–150
biochar-supported NMs, 146–148
bisphenol A (BPA), 146–148
carbon-based nanomaterials (NM), 171–173
carbon-NTs, 171–172
chromium, 146–148
elimination via adsorption, 150–151
environmental hazards, 136–137
environmental pollution, 163
Fenton reactions, 152–153
future perspectives, 153–154
GO nanomaterials, 172–173
graphene, 172–173
inorganic nanomaterials (NMs), 165–174, 165f
metal based-nanomaterials, 139–140
metal oxide-based nanomaterials, 140–146
aluminum oxide-based nanomaterials, 144–145
cerium/zirconium oxide-based nanomaterials,
145–146
iron oxide-based nanomaterials, 141–142
manganese oxide based nanomaterials, 142–143
MgO based nanomaterials, 145
TiO2-/ZnO-based nanomaterials, 143–144
nanoparticles (NPs), 164
organic materials, 163
photocatalysis, 151–152
photo-Fenton, 152–153
pollution sources, 137–138
polymer-organic nanomaterials, 175–178
SiO2-supported nanomaterials, 173–174, 174f
surface modified-NTs, 171–172
transition metal nanoparticles
gold, 169–170
iron, 170
silver, 170
transition metal oxide nanomaterials, 166–169
hematite a-Fe3O4 nanoparticles, 168
iron oxide, 166–168
maghemite c-Fe3O4 nanoparticles, 167, 168f
magnetic Fe3O4 nanomaterials, 166–167
superparamagnetic nanoparticles, 168
titanate nanostructures, 169
titanium oxide nanoparticles, 169
transition metal-sulfide nanoparticles, 170–171
treatment strategies, 137–138
Hexadecylpyridinium chloride, 375–376
Hexadecyl pyridinium (HDPy)-modified Mt (OMt),
492–494
High-pressure homogenization, 17
High-pressure system, 14
Hybrid systems, 88–89
620 IndexHydrophobic surface, functionalization to, 291–292
acetylation, 291
amidation, 292
etherification, 292
silylation, 292
urithenization, 292
Hydrophobization method, 321–323
Hydrothermal carbonization, 554
Hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC), 397
I
Immobilization onto solid surface, 34
Immunotoxicity, 441
Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission
spectroscopy (ICP-OES), 68
Industrial by-product, 282–283, 284–286t
Initial concentration effect, 512
Inorganic nanomaterials, 165–174, 165f
Inorganic pollutants, 36–37, 555–560
removal of, 36–37, 37–38t
In situ particles synthesis, 49
Ion exchange membrane, 398
Ionic charged cellulose surface, 324–325
Ionic liquids (ILs), 318–321
Iron, 170
Iron oxide, 141–142, 166–168
L
Langmuir plot, 514f
Langmuir sorption isotherm, 52
Lead, 79–80, 429–432, 430t
Leaf chlorophylls, 338
Lemna minor (LM), 509–510f, 522f, 524–525f
Life cycle risk assessment (LCRA), 244
Light-emitting diodes (LED), 298–299
Lignin, 254–255, 573–574
Low-cost corn straw, 558
Low-cost sorbents, 46
M
Maghemite c-Fe3O4 nanoparticles, 167, 168f
Magnetic activated carbon, 443–444
Magnetically functionalized cellulose nanocrystal-based
(MCNCs) hydrogels, 259
Magnetic biochars
adsorption applications
complex mixtures, 564–565
inorganic pollutants, 555–560
organic pollutants, 560–564
magnetic properties, 555
preparation methods, 553–555
synthesis, 553–555
Magnetic Fe3O4 nanomaterials, 166–167
Magnetic graphene oxide, 339
Magnetic modification, 33–34, 33f
Magnetic nanomaterials-based biosorbents
applications
heavy metals, removal/mitigation of, 608–609
organic compounds, removal/mitigation of,
609–610, 609f
cost, 610
discard, 610–611
exploitation, 610–611
fabrication, 606–608
metal-induced biosorbents, 605–606
properties, 607f
surface modification, 608
Magnetic nanoparticles immobilized, 197–200, 201t
Magnetic network polymer composite (MCTP), 428
Magnetic properties, 555
Malachite green, 107
Manganese ferrite particles, 558
Manganese oxide based nanomaterials, 142–143
Mechanical properties, 283
Membrane process, 87
Mercury, 80, 428–429, 428t
Metal based-nanomaterials, 139–140
Metal-induced biosorbents, 605–606
Metallic nanoparticles (MNPs), 232–233
Metalloids, 78–80
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs), 339–340, 383–384
Metal oxide-based nanomaterials, 140–146
aluminum oxide-based nanomaterials, 144–145
cerium/zirconium oxide-based nanomaterials,
145–146
iron oxide-based nanomaterials, 141–142
manganese oxide based nanomaterials, 142–143
MgO based nanomaterials, 145
TiO2-/ZnO-based nanomaterials, 143–144
Metals, 78–80
Methionine-glutaraldehyde Schiff’s base, 36–37
Methylcellulose (MC), 397
Methylene blue, 68, 107
Methyltrimethoxy silane (MTMS), 307–308
Methyl violet, 107
MgO based nanomaterials, 145
Microbial biosorbents, 120–125
algae as biosorbent, 122, 124t
bacteria as biosorbent, 120–122
fungi as biosorbent, 122–125, 125t
Microbial nanobiopolymers, 7, 17–18
Microbial polysaccharides, 17–18
Micro-fibrillated cellulose (MFC), 5
Modified Williamson-Hall plot (MWHP) method,
532–533
Moringa oleifera, 545
Multifunctional cellulose-based membranes, 386
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), 229–231
Index 621N
Nanobioadsorbent preparation, 505
Nanobiopolymers, 3
environmental applications, 18–19
fabrication techniques, 8–18
bleached eucalyptus kraft pulp (BEKP), 10–11,
11f
cellulose nanofibrils (CNF), 10–11
chitin microfibers, 14
chitin nanofiber (ChNF), 12
environmental applications, 18–19
gamma irradiation, 17
high-pressure homogenization, 17
high-pressure system, 14
microbial nanobiopolymers, 17–18
nanocellulose isolation, 8–12, 9–10f
nanochitin isolation, 12–14, 13f
nanosilk isolation, 14–15
nanostarch isolation, 16–17, 16f
potassium hydroxide (KOH), 11–12
silk nanofibrils (SNFs), 14–15
sodium chloride (NaCl), 11–12
spinning disc reactor (SDR), 17
2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical
(TEMPO), 12
microbial nanobiopolymers, 7
nanocellulose, 5
nanochitin, 5–6
nanosilk, 6
nanostarch, 6–7
Nano-biosorbents
biosorption, 31–32, 31f
immobilization onto solid surface, 34
magnetic modification, 33–34, 33f
nanoscale zerovalent metals (NZVMs), 34
nanotechnology with, 32–34
contaminants removal, green approach, 34–37
inorganic pollutants, removal of, 36–37, 37–38t
organic contaminants, 36t
organic pollutants removal, 34–35, 35f
organic/inorganic emerging pollutants, 30f
synthesis
agriculture waste, 63, 67–68
agrobacterium fabrum biomass, 68
anoxybacillus kestanboliensis, 69
bed-depth service time model (BDST), 66
biological microorganism, 68
chitosan-sunflower (CS), 66
chitosan-sunflower-nanoiron (CSN), 66
Dalbergia sissoo pods (DSP), 63
inductively coupled plasma-optical emission
spectroscopy (ICP-OES), 68
methods, 63–70
methylene blue, 68
ostrich bone, 69–70
polyaniline-modified nanocellulose composite
sorbent (PANINCC), 69–70
Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus, 70
sugarcane, 67
synthesized nan-omaterial, 67–68
synthetic dye, 66
types, 62–63
zeta-potential analysis, 69
Nano-biosorbents, contaminant removal
bio-based nanomaterials, 3–4
biodegradable natural polymer, 3
nanobiopolymer fabrication techniques, 8–18
bleached eucalyptus kraft pulp (BEKP), 10–11,
11f
cellulose nanofibrils (CNF), 10–11
chitin microfibers, 14
chitin nanofiber (ChNF), 12
gamma irradiation, 17
high-pressure homogenization, 17
high-pressure system, 14
microbial nanobiopolymers, 17–18
nanocellulose isolation, 8–12, 9–10f
nanochitin isolation, 12–14, 13f
nanosilk isolation, 14–15
nanostarch isolation, 16–17, 16f
potassium hydroxide (KOH), 11–12
silk nanofibrils (SNFs), 14–15
sodium chloride (NaCl), 11–12
spinning disc reactor (SDR), 17
2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical
(TEMPO), 12
nanobiopolymers, 3–7
environmental applications of, 18–19
microbial nanobiopolymers, 7
nanocellulose, 5
nanochitin, 5–6
nanosilk, 6
nanostarch, 6–7
nanochitin, 3–4
nanotechnology, 3
renewable natural polymer, 3
silk-based nanomaterials, 4
Nanobiosorption
components, mechanical mixing of, 48
contaminants removal applications, 52
features of, 48f
fundamentals, 46–47
general preparation, 47–49
in situ particles synthesis, 49
natural biopolymers based, 49–51
alginate, 51
cellulosic material, 50
chitin/chitosan, 50
622 Indexgums, 51
pectin, 51
starch, 50–51
Nanocellulose (NC), 5, 9, 18, 253t
adsorption, 259
agricultural applications, 259–265
algal cellulose (AC), 255
applications, 253f, 295–309
bacterial cellulose, 256
bacterial nanocellulose (BNC), 194, 293–294
applications, 296f
production, 296f
properties, 294–295, 295f
biomedical field, 300–302, 300f
antibacterial/antimicrobial activity, 302
cardiovascular implant, 301–302
drug delivery system, 300–301
tissue engineering, 301
carboxymethylation, 290–291
cellulose-based-nanobioadsorbents (CNB), 243
cellulose nanocrystal (CNC), 194, 258, 276
cellulose nanofiber (CNF), 194
cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs), 258–259, 276
challenges, 310, 310f
characterization, 288
composites, 195–196
cross-linked composite membrane, dye removal, 261f
energy and electronics industry, 297–299
digital display, 298–299
energy harvesting, 299
energy storage, 299
flexible electronics, 298
light-emitting diodes (LED), 298–299
opto electronics, 299
environmental applications, 259–265
environmental remediation, adsorbent for, 302–309
air pollutants, removal of, 308–309
dye removal, 305
heavy metal removal, 303–304, 304f
oil adsorption, 307–308
organic pollutant adsorption, 305–307, 306f
future perspectives, 310, 310f
gas separation, 309
guidelines, 248
hydrophobic surface, functionalization to, 291–292
acetylation, 291
amidation, 292
etherification, 292
silylation, 292
urithenization, 292
immersion, 262f
isolation, 8–12, 9–10f, 278–283
magnetically functionalized cellulose nanocrystal￾based (MCNCs) hydrogels, 259
modification, 196, 196t
nanocellulose-based nanocomposites, 293
nanocellulose composites, 195–196
nanocellulose modification, 196, 196t
nanocomposites, 293
oxidation, 291
paper and packaging industry, 295–297, 296f, 297t
phosphorylation, 290
physico-chemical properties, 243
plant cellulose, 254–255
properties, 283–288
chemical properties, 283–287
electrical properties, 287
mechanical properties, 283
optical properties, 287
physical properties, 283
rheological properties, 283
thermal properties, 283–287
regulations, 248
risk assessment framework
exposure assessment, 246
hazard identification, 244–246
risk estimation, 246–247
risk management, 247–248
source, 245t
steps, 245f
sources, preparation from, 254–256, 280f
agricultural residue, 282
algae waste, 282
forest residue, 281
industrial by-product, 282–283, 284–286t
study implications, 248–249
sulfonation, 291, 291f
surface modification, 289–292
tunicates, 255
types, 256–259, 279t
water remediation, adsorbent/biosorbent for, 279f
water treatment, nanocellulose-based membrane for,
309, 309f
Nanochitin, 3–6
isolation, 12–14, 13f
Nanocomposites, synthesis of, 575–579
Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC), 5, 258, 275, 301–302,
318–321
Nanocrystalline NiO powder
anti-ferromagnetic (AFM) system, 530
characterization techniques, 531
electron paramagnetic studies, 542–543, 542f
emerging applications
biomedical application, 545–546
catalytic application, 546
environmental remediation, 543–544
ferromagnetism (FM), 529
method for synthesis, 530–531, 531f
Index 623Nanocrystalline NiO powder (Continued)
structural studies, 532–543, 533f
super paramagnetism (SPM), 530
Nano-engineered adsorbent, 216–217
Nanohydroxyapatite (NPB), 427–428
Nanomaterials, 227–228
Nanomaterials-based sodium alginate composites, 485,
491–492, 493f
Nanoparticles (NPs), 164
Nanoparticles-based nanoadsorbent materials, 232–234
biogenic, 233–234, 234–235t
metallic, 232–233
Nanoparticles, in-situ development of, 576–578, 577f
Nanoscale zerovalent metals (NZVMs), 34
Nanosilk, 6
isolation, 14–15
Nano-sized starch particles, 17
Nanosponge β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) polyurethane,
34–35
Nanostarch, 6–7
isolation, 16–17, 16f
Nanotechnology, 3, 32–34
Natural biopolymers, 49–51
alginate, 51
cellulosic material, 50
chitin/chitosan, 50
gums, 51
pectin, 51
starch, 50–51
Natural organic matter (NOM), 305
Neurotoxicity, 441
Non-ionic dyes, 107
Non-toxic nature, nano-biosorbents
classic contaminant application, 211–215, 213–215f,
214t
emerging contaminant (EC) application, 206–210, 207f,
209–211f, 212t
environmental remediation, surface modification for
alginate nano-biosorbents, 193–194
chitosan, 189–192, 192t
immobilization, 194
magnetic modification, 193–194
nanoscale zero-valent metals, 194
test living organism, 190–192
heavy metal removal application, 201–205, 204f, 205t
magnetic nanoparticles immobilized, 197–200, 201t
nanocelullose
bacterial nanocellulose (BNC), 194
cellulose nanocrystal (CNC), 194
cellulose nanofiber (CNF), 194
nanocellulose composites, 195–196
nanocellulose modification, 196, 196t
nano-engineered adsorbent, 216–217
O
Occupational exposure limits value (OEL), 248
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), 248
Octadecyltri-methylammonium bromide, 375–376
Oil adsorption, 307–308
Optical properties, 287
Opto electronics, 299
Orange peel
carbonization process, 464t
characterization, 465–467
conditions, 464t
preparation, 465–467
properties, 464t
Organic compounds, 110
removal/mitigation, 609–610, 609f
Organic contaminants, 36t
Organic field effect transistor (OFET), 298
Organic/inorganic emerging pollutants, 30f
Organic materials, 163
Organic pollutants, 560–564
adsorption, 305–307, 306f
removal, 34–35, 35f
Organometals, 78–80
Ostrich bone, 69–70
Oxidation, 291
P
Paper/packaging industry, 295–297, 296f, 297t
Paracetamol, 562
Partial deacetylation method, 14
Pb2+/Zn2+ ions
adsorbents
characterization, 508–509
dosage effect, 511–512
adsorption
equilibrium experiments, 505–506
isotherms, 514
kinetics, 515–518
central composite design model, 518–522, 519t
contact time effect, 512–514, 513f
Eichhornia crassipes (EC), 509–510f
Freundlich plot, 515f
initial concentration effect, 512
Langmuir plot, 514f
Lemna minor (LM), 509–510f
model validation, 525t
nanobioadsorbent preparation, 505
pH effect, 509–511
process optimization, 525–526
pseudo-first-order model, 517f
pseudo-second-order model, 517f
reagents, 505
624 Indexresponse surface methodology (RSM), 504–505
statistical analysis, 507–508, 522–525
Pectin, 51
Pectin-alginate-titania (PAT), 490–491
Pesticides, 108–110
Pharmaceutical drugs, 108
PH effect, 114–115, 509–511
Phosphate-decorated carboxymethyl cellulose (CMCP),
340
Phosphorylated chitosan (CSP), 340
Phosphorylated multiwalled carbon nanotubes
(pMWCNTs), 34–35
Phosphorylation, 290
Photocatalysis, 151–152
Photo-Fenton, 152–153
Physical properties, 283
Physico-chemical properties, 243
Plant-based cellulose nanofibers, 254–255
Plant cellulose, 254–255
Point of zero charge (PZC), 365
Polluting agents environmental remediation,
nanoadsorbents
carbon-based nanoadsorbents, 228–232, 229f
carbon nanotubes, 229–231
graphene, 231–232
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs),
229–231
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs),
229–231
wastewater treatment, 228–229, 229–230t
nanoparticles-based nanoadsorbent materials,
232–234
biogenic, 233–234, 234–235t
metallic, 232–233
nanotechnology advances, 235
useful aspects, 228
Pollutions concentration, 116
Polyacrylamide-sodium alginate (PAAm/SA), 490
Polyacrylonitrile (PAN), 303–304
Polyaniline-modified nanocellulose composite sorbent
(PANINCC), 69–70
Polyethyleneimine (PEI) grafting, 371
Polyethylene terephtalate (PET), 303–304
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), 17–18
Polylactic acid (PLA), 295–297
Polymeric materials, 484–485
Polymer-organic nanomaterials, 175–176
Polymer-supported organic nanomaterials, 176–178
Polypropylene (PP), 431
Polypropylene grafted-maleic-anhydride (PP-g-MA),
431
Polypyrrole (PPy) nanosilk, 19
Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), 309, 377–379
Poly(vinyl alcohol)/cellulose nanocrystals (PVA/
CNCs), 334–335
Potassium hydroxide (KOH), 11–12
Predicted environmental concentrations (PECs), 247
Predicted no effect concentrations (PNECs), 247
Pristine biochar, 571–573
Pristine cellulose, 50
Process optimization, 525–526
Proton-exchange membrane for fuel cell (PEMFC),
398
Pseudo-first-order model, 517f
Pseudo-second-order model, 517f
Pyrolysis, 553
temperature, 562
R
Radiofrequency identification (RFID), 298
Reactive red 195 (RR195), 491–492
Reagents, 505
Recommended exposure limits (REL), 248
Regeneration process, 321–326
Removal combined processes, 446
Removal of dyes, 399–402, 400f, 401–402t
alginate-based composites, 486–489t
carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate
composites, 485–491
nanomaterials-based sodium alginate composites,
491–492, 493f
Removal of heavy metals, 402–403, 404t
alginate-based composites, 483–485
carbonaceous/polymeric-based sodium alginate
composites, 483–485, 484f
nanomaterials-based sodium alginate composites,
485
Removal of pharmaceutical contaminants, 404–409,
408–409t, 484f, 494–495
Removal of radionuclides, 492–494
Renewable natural polymer, 3
Response surface methodology (RSM), 504–505
statistical analysis, 507–508
Reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT)
grafting-to synthesis, 325–326
Rheological properties, 283
Rhodamine 6G, 107
Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus, 70
Risk assessment framework
exposure assessment, 246
hazard identification, 244–246
risk estimation, 246–247
risk management, 247–248
source of, 245t
steps for, 245f
Risk characterization ratio (RCR), 247
Index 625S
Selected area electron diffraction (SAED), 534–537
Silk-based nanomaterials, 4
Silk fibroin (SF), 6
Silk nanofibrils (SNFs), 14–15
Silk nanofibroins, 6
Silver, 170
Silylation, 292, 377
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), 229–231
SiO2-supported nanomaterials (NMs), 173–174, 174f
Sodium chloride (NaCl), 11–12
Sodium hypochlorite (NaClO), 370
Soil remediation, 352
adsorbents, 596–598, 597f, 598t
Spinning disc reactor (SDR), 17
Starch, 50–51
nanoparticles, 6–7
Starch nanocrystal (SNC), 16
Starch nanoparticle (SNP), 16, 16f
Sugarcane, 67
Sulfonated cellulose, 373
Sulfonation, 291, 291f
Sulfur-based modification, 372–373
Superparamagnetic nanoparticles, 168
Super-paramagnetic properties, 555
Super paramagnetism (SPM), 530
Surface-modified nanocellulose, 297
Surface modified-NTs, 171–172
Synthetic dye, 66
Synthetic polymer-based materials, 8
T
TCS-CTS-Fe0-MIP, 445–446
Temperature effect, 115
TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibers (TOCN), 344
Tetracycline hydrochloride (TC), 306
Tetradecyltrimethylammonium bromide, 375–376
2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical (TEMPO),
12, 14, 283–287, 370
Thermal properties, 283–287
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), 288
Threshold limit value® (TLV), 248
Time-weighted averages (TWA), 248
TiO2-/ZnO-based nanomaterials, 143–144
Tissue engineering, 301
Titanate nanostructures, 169
Titanium oxide nanoparticles, 169
Toluene/triethylamine (TEA), 376
Toxicity, 439–442
Toxic metals adsorption, chitosan nanoderivatives
arsenic, 420–423
chitosan, 422
chitosan-coated magnetic nanoparticles (cMNPs),
421
crab shells, 422
goethite/graphene oxide/chitosan, 422
lignocellulosic bio-refinery wastewater (LBW), 421
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), 421
natural polysaccharide chitosan (CS), 423
cadmium, 423–426
electrospun chitosan (CS), 424
nano-chitosan, 423–424
nano-chitosan coating nano-iron oxide, 424–425
non-woven chitosan (CS), 424
phosphorylated microcellulose (PMC), 424
polyacrylonitrile (PAN), 423
polylactic acid (PLA), 425
xanthate functionalized magnetic chitosan
nanocomposite (XFMCN), 425–426
carboxylated chitosan (CYCS), 432
carboxylated nanocellulose (CNC), 432
chromium, 427–428
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid-modified
chitosan/polyethylene oxide nanofibers
(CS-DTPA/PEO NFs), 431–432
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 431
lead, 429–432, 430t
magnetic network polymer composite (MCTP), 428
mercury, 428–429, 428t
polypropylene (PP), 431
polypropylene grafted-maleic-anhydride (PP-g-MA),
431
Transition metal nanoparticles
gold, 169–170
iron, 170
silver, 170
Transition metal oxide nanomaterials, 166–169
hematite a-Fe3O4 nanoparticles, 168
iron oxide, 166–168
maghemite c-Fe3O4 nanoparticles, 167, 168f
magnetic Fe3O4 nanomaterials, 166–167
superparamagnetic nanoparticles, 168
titanate nanostructures, 169
titanium oxide nanoparticles, 169
Transition metal-sulfide nanoparticles, 170–171
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 288, 289f
Trichloroethylene (TCE), 34–35, 564
Triclosan (TCS)
adsorption techniques
activated carbon, 443
chitosan/carbon nanotubes based adsorbents, 444
diatomite, 445
magnetic activated carbon, 443–444
MOFs, removal by, 446–448
removal combined processes, 446
TCS-CTS-Fe0-MIP, 445–446
carbon-based nano-architectures, 438
carcinogenicity, 441
626 Indexcombined toxicity, 441–442
developmental toxicity, 441
ecological effects, 439–442, 440f
ecological impacts, 438–439
ecosystem impact, 442
emerging pollutants (EPs), 437–438
endocrine disruption, 441
genotoxicity, 440
immunotoxicity, 441
inducing microbial resistance, 442
neurotoxicity, 441
occurrence, 438–439
persistence, 438–439
perspectives, 448
removing, treatment technologies for, 442–443
reproductive, 441
toxicity, 439–442
transformed products, toxic effect of, 442
Triethylenetetramine (TETA), 339
Trimethylsilyl chloride (TMSCl), 379
Tunicates, 255
U
Urithenization, 292
V
Vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays (VACNTs),
544
W
Wastewater remediation, 50
Wastewater treatment, 110–113, 111f, 228–229, 229–230t
adsorbents, 116–128
agricultural waste materials, 117
chemical precipitation, 112
coagulation, 110–112
electrochemical method, 110
flocculation, 110–112
industrial by-products, 117–120
ion-exchange process, 112
marine materials, 120, 121t
membrane filtration, 112
microbial biosorbents, 120–125
nanoadsorbent, 126–128
soil and ore materials, 126
sorption method, 113, 113–114f
Waste-water treatment plant (WWTP), 232–233
Water purification
biomedical applications, 398
carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), 397
cellulose, 396–399
cellulose acetate (CA), 397
cellulose-based composites, 397
removal of dyes, 399–402, 400f, 401–402t
removal of heavy metals, 402–403, 404t
removal of pharmaceuticals, 404–409, 405f, 408–409t
coating applications, 398
composites and fillers, 397
direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC), 398
dyes, 396
heavy metals, 396
hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC), 397
ion exchange membrane, 398
methylcellulose, 397
paper and packaging industry, 397
pharmaceuticals development, 396
proton-exchange membrane for fuel cell
(PEMFC), 398
Water remediation, adsorbent/biosorbent for, 279f
Water treatment, 336–352
anions, 340–341, 341f
cations, 338–340
drugs removal, 344, 351t
dyes removal, 342–344, 345–349t
ions removal, 338–341
nanocellulose-based membrane for, 309, 309f
pesticides removal, 344–352
X
Xanthate functionalized magnetic chitosan
nanocomposite (XFMCN), 425–426
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 466, 467f
Z
Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIF-8), 344
Zeta-potential analysis, 69
Zirconium oxide-based nanomaterials, 145–146
Zr/La-cell/GO composite, 341, 341–342f
Index 627This page intentionally left blank
