Nanofabrication
Enr
Prodig
apturing C
al Applications
ues and 






Editors 
Kamal Prasad 
University Department of Physics


T.M. Bhagalpur University


Bhagalpur, India


Gajendra Prasad Singh 
Department of Nanotechnology


Central University of Jharkhand


Ranchi, India


Anal Kant Jha 
Department of Biotechnology


O.P. Jindal University 
Raigarh, Chhattisgarh, India


A SCIENCE PUBLISHERS BOOK First edition published 2025
by CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
and by CRC Press 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
© 2025 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and 
publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of 
their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material 
reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and 
let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact 
mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data (applied for) 
ISBN: 978-0-367-53785-2 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-367-53789-0 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-003-08335-1 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003083351 
Typeset in Times New Roman 
by Prime Publishing Services Preface


Nanotechnology is gaining vivid visibility among the scientific community due to 
its exponential promises and applications. People have been trying different novel 
green protocols using different means including carboxylic acids, biological cohorts, 
domestic and pharmaceutical wastes, etc. The sole purpose is to catch up with the 
worldwide emerging concept of circular economy and sustainability. 
The procedure of synthesis, irrespective of the source; banks primarily upon 
the promises of participating molecule/metabolite that helps to accomplish the 
synthesis through its decomposition/dissociation/tautomerization/resonance at a 
given or optimized temperature and pH leading to the availability of required free 
energy that leads to the phase transformation. Different methods, though looking 
simple in the first place, has many enchanting yet challenging cues. Irrespective of 
the method being pursued or a potential source being hired, a restrict discipline of 
thermodynamics is always obeyed and this adds promising prodigality. This book 
touches on different aspects of nanofabrication techniques and their applications.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface

 iii


1. Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: 1


A Thermodynamic Evaluation


Anal K. Jha and K. Prasad 
2. Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Leaf 19


Extracts Characteristics


Zygmunt Sadowski, Joanna Feder‑Kubis and Anna Wirwis 
3. Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts

 31


Shushay Hagos Gebre 
4. Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes: 56


An Approach Towards Sustainability and Circular Economy


Manisha Mishra, Anal K. Jha and K. Prasad 
5. Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods

 72


G.V.S. Subbaroy Sarma, Payal B. Joshi and Murthy Chavali 
6. Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and 93


Biological Applications


Mohamed S. Selim, Shimaa A. Higazy, Sherif A. El‑Safty, Ahmed A. Azzam, 
Notaila M. Nasser and Mohamed A. Shenashen 
7. Electrochemical Flaking of Graphene in Aqueous System 120


Kumar Anurag and S.R. Kumar 
8. Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, 132


and Applications


Sara Rahimzadeh, Mina Hosseini and Mohammad Hossein Yazdi 
9. Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese 147


Nanomaterials: A Present View


B. Panda, A. Lenka and S.K. Dash 
Contents

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Fabrication of Ceramic Nano Powder Processing Techniques 176 
by Solid State Synthesis 
Muhammad Salman Habib, Muhammad Asif Rafiq, Qaisar Khushi and 
Kiran Zahra 
11. Nanofabrication of Porous Structures: Solution Combustion 182 
Synthesis of Advanced Electrode Materials in Energy Storage Devices 
Parameshwar Kommu, Divya Velpula, Shilpa Chakra Chidurala, 
Shireesha Konda, Rakesh Kumar Thida, Vikash Kumar, Madhuri Sakaray, 
G.P. Singh and Arnab Shankar Bhattacharyya 
12. Physicochemical Dependency of Biochar-based Nano-phase 194 
Composites Derived through Ball Milling for Visionary Energy 
Storage Applications 
Benjamin Raj, P. Perumal, Arun Kumar Padhy, D. S. Rao and 
Mamata Mohapatra 
13. Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for

 209 
Biomedical Applications 
Prasanti Sharma, Neelima Sharma, Trishna Bal and Gayatri Thapa 
14. Structural and Mechanical Aspects of Nanocomposite Hard 229 
Thin Films for Device Fabrication at Nanoscale 
R. Dash, R. P. Kumar, A. K. Rajak, A. Kumari and A.S. Bhattacharyya 
15. Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings for

 241 
Extreme Tribological Environments 
Vikash Kumar, Rishi Sharma and Manish Roy 
Index

 265 
vi

 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 1


Unleashing the Cues of
Nanomaterials Synthesis


A Thermodynamic Evaluation


Anal K. Jha1
 and K. Prasad2,* 
1. Introduction
Mother Nature is the superlative culmination of interactions between inorganic and 
organic structures that led to the formation of many present day living or non-living 
assemblies obeying the principles of thermodynamics and supra-molecular chemistry. 
Recent times have witnessed an upsurge in the area of green synthetic protocols, 
which are broadly eco-amenable and economically viable cohering to the newly 
incepted principles of circular economy. The future is excitingly poised to witness 
more in this regard. There are many procedures through which the nanomaterials 
could be synthesized and a vast detail is available in literature. However, we hereby 
decipher and delineate the possible mechanisms through which a green synthesis is 
pursued whether it a bio-nanotechnological approach (in which we generally bank 
upon the natural cohorts) or a sustainable soft chemical approach. As evident in the 
past literatures, the major stake in synthesis is the availability of free energy for 
accomplishment of the procedure of phase transformation; this imperatively makes 
the thermodynamic cues a crux of the procedure. 
2. Non-pathogenic Prokaryote (Lactobacilli)
Green (non-pathogenic) microbes like Lactobacilli sp. are quite handy and safe 
source to be employed for the purpose. Lactobacilli, like most of the bacteria, 
carry a negative electro-kinetic potential, which readily attracts the cations and this 
1 Department of Biotechnology, O.P. Jindal University, Raigarh, Chhattisgarh 496109, India. 2 University Department of Physics, T.M. Bhagalpur University, Bhagalpur 812007, India. 
* Corresponding author: k.prasad65@gmail.com2 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
step probably acts as a crux of the procedure of biosynthesis. Addition of reducing 
agents like glucose renders lower the value of oxidation–reduction potential. The 
oxidation–reduction potential expresses the quantitative character of degree of 
aerobiosis having a designated unit expressed as rH2 (the negative logarithm 
of the partial pressure of gaseous hydrogen). Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are 
gram-positive, functionally related by their ability to produce lactic acid through 
homo and/or hetero-fermentative carbohydrate metabolism. They are constantly 
exposed to fluctuating environmental conditions which affect their physiological 
(metabolic) state and consequently their growth rate. Periods of slow-growth, and 
non-growing states are often followed by short periods of rapid growth. Most of the 
time, bacterial cells are in a non-growing sluggish state in order to escape cell death 
and lysis under limitation of nutrients (C, N, P, and metal ions) and energy source 
[1, 2]. During this time, Lactobacilli regulate their intracellular pH almost constantly 
and those that do not maintain this homeostasis tend to lose function and viability [3]. 
Metals and oxygen are chemically linked in biologic systems and they play important 
roles in enzymatic reactions, metabolism, and signal transduction. However, metals 
and oxygen react to form highly toxic oxygen-derived free radical species. Pyruvate, 
formed as a product of glycolysis (in culture), undergoes formation of lactate in the 
cytosol in a reversible reaction involving lactate dehydrogenase and NADH + H+
. 
The regeneration of NADH + H+ in the reduction of pyruvate to lactate sustains 
the continued operation of glycolysis under anaerobic conditions. This conversion 
involves an obligatory availability of 2H+
. Along with this, the conversion of unstable 
enol pyruvate to stereo chemically stable keto pyruvate also remains continuously 
operative in the cytosol thereby making H+
 available all the time. This availability of 
hydrogen atoms might facilitate the synthesis of n-Ag particles. There is a significant 
overlap between the functions of the glutathione (GSH) and thioredoxin (TRX) 
systems even though they do not exchange reductive equivalents. The major function 
of both systems is to maintain a cellular reducing environment and regulate activity 
of enzymes. This in addition provides an amenable environment for synthesis of a 
desired nanomaterial. The principal metabolic product of the bacteria, lactic acid, is 
a weak organic acid and one of the smallest molecules with an asymmetrical carbon 
in location α of the carboxylic function. 
C6H12O6 → CH3 − CO − COOH (Pyruvate) ⇔ CH3 · CH(OH) · COOH (Lactate) 
This feature allows its existence with two different stereo-isometric forms 
called L(+) and D(–). In addition to its optical activity, the lactic acid molecule 
has simultaneous carboxylic and hydroxyl groups allowing it to react either as an 
acid or as an alcohol. The dual functionality initiates the spontaneous formation on 
intermolecular esters (oligomers) with discharge of water leading to a thermodynamic 
equilibrium subject to the solution concentration and age. Thermodynamically, heat 
of dissociation (ΔH) amounts to 63 cal/mol (at 25°C) and the value of free energy 
of dissociation (ΔF) amounts to 5000 cal/mol for lactic acid. This probably ensures 
availability of energy in the culture solution along with other crux metabolic fluxes 
leading to a successful nano-transformation [4] (Fig. 1). operation of glycolysis under anaerobic conditions. This conversion involves an obligatory 
availability of 2H+
. Along with this, the conversion of unstable enol pyruvate to stereo
chemically stable keto pyruvate also remains continuously operative in the cytosol thereby
making H+ available all the time. This availability of hydrogen atoms might facilitate the
synthesis of n-Ag particles. There is a significant overlap between the functions of the
glutathione (GSH) and thioredoxin (TRX) systems even though they do not exchange reductive
equivalents. The major function of both systems is to maintain a cellular reducing environment
and regulate activity of enzymes. This in addition provides an amenable environment for
synthesis of a desired nanomaterial. The principal metabolic product of the bacteria, lactic acid,
is a weak organic acid and one of the smallest molecules with an asymmetrical carbon in location
α of the carboxylic function.
C6H12O6 → CH3 − CO − COOH (Pyruvate) ⇔ CH3 · CH(OH) · COOH
(Lactate)
Fig. 1.: Pattern of reaction of glucose and molecular orientation of lactic acid.
This feature allows its existence with two different stereo-isometric forms called L(+) and D(-).
In addition to its optical activity, the lactic acid molecule has simultaneous carboxylic and
hydroxyl groups allowing it to react either as an acid or as an alcohol. The dual functionality
initiates the spontaneous formation on intermolecular esters (oligomers) with discharge of water
leading to a thermodynamic equilibrium subject to the solution concentration and age.
Thermodynamically, heat of dissociation (ΔH) amounts to 63 cal/mol (at 25°C) and the value of
free energy of dissociation (ΔF) amounts to 5000 cal/mol for lactic acid. This probably ensures
availability of energy in the culture solution along with other crux metabolic fluxes leading to a
successful nano-transformation [4].
2. Fungi (Eukaryotes)
The ambience of living cohorts tends to fluctuate; therefore, resilience to the shears of the 
environment is a must for organisms to persist. Chemical-stress-inducing factors like pollutants
(organic or inorganic) might have different pattern of action but the annihilation remains the
same. Along with this, certain natural shearing factors like radiation are also associated with
oxidative damage in cells [5,6]. Encountered by metal/metalloid toxicity, fungal members trigger 
a response at multiple levels originating from cell wall to nuclei that can be perceived in detail
somewhere else [7]. The first line response of cellular defence is considered due to the quinones.
Also, the reduction of nanoparticles using filamentous fungi has some influence over other
organisms. Filamentous fungi are handy, want simple raw materials, and have high wall-binding
 
 
 
 
 
Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 3 
Fig. 1. Pattern of reaction of glucose and molecular orientation of lactic acid. 
3. Fungi (Eukaryotes) 
The ambience of living cohorts tends to fluctuate; therefore, resilience to the shears of 
the environment is a must for organisms to persist. Chemical-stress-inducing factors 
like pollutants (organic or inorganic) might have different pattern of action but the 
annihilation remains the same. Along with this, certain natural shearing factors like 
radiation are also associated with oxidative damage in cells [5, 6]. Encountered 
by metal/metalloid toxicity, fungal members trigger a response at multiple levels 
originating from cell wall to nuclei that can be perceived in detail somewhere else 
[7]. The first line response of cellular defence is considered due to the quinones. 
Also, the reduction of nanoparticles using filamentous fungi has some influence over 
other organisms. Filamentous fungi are handy, want simple raw materials, and have 
high wall-binding capacity [8]. Members of fungi also harbour a good number of 
hydroxyl/methoxy derivatives of quinones such as benzoquinones and toluquinones, 
which are secreted especially by the members of the lower fungi (e.g., in Penicillium 
and Aspergillus species) in response to a potential metallic stress. Occurrence of these 
metabolites may start a redox reaction due to tautomerization leading to synthesis of 
a nanomaterial [9]. Prototropic tautomerism, defined by one of its early investigators 
as ‘‘the addition of a proton at one molecular site and its removal from another’’ 
[10], and hence clearly distinguished from ionization, is one of the most important 
phenomena in organic chemistry despite the relatively small proportion of molecules 
in which it can occur. On the other hand, the small differences in free energy between 
the components make them very useful. In biological systems, delicate and subtle 
control is needed for the organization of chains of reactions. Life is the controlled 
motion of electrons and protons. The thermodynamics and kinetics of electrons are 
to a large extent governed by redox centres, and the equally important motion of 
protons can be viewed as an extended series of tautomerization reactions. DNA is 
built from bases all of which have a number of different tautomers. There are even 
a few enzymes, called tautomerazes, that enable rapid tautomerization between 
keto and enol forms of molecules [11]. Tautomers are interesting for many reasons, 
technological as well as fundamental. Their optical properties make them suitable 
as signalling molecules in sensors, as they can rapidly switch between states. Many 
biologically important molecules have several tautomers. Adenine, for instance, an 
important moiety in DNA and adenosine triphosphate (ATP), comes in three varieties, 
the main one—according to some people—chosen by nature to avoid fluorescence. 
One of the more interesting and complicating properties is that tautomeric equilibria 
in the ground state are often vastly different from those in the excited states. In 4 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
addition, tautomeric equilibria are easily shifted by the environment. Here, the pH 
modulation is the key factor that controls the procedure and leads to a successful and 
quick nanomaterial synthesis. 
4. Plant Systems 
Plants in different forms have proved their pivotal importance since inception of 
human life on this planet. While cyanobacteria are the pioneer oxygen generators, 
other cohorts irrespective of their systematic position have contributed towards 
our survival one way or the other. In the course of evolution, they have developed 
a plethora of promising metabolites in order to circumvent the environmental 
rigors and those metabolites have proven to be a boon for synthesizing different 
nanomaterials. An appreciably vast conglomerate of metabolites is synthesized and 
harboured among the different plant species such as flavones, ketones, aldehydes, 
amides terpenoids (citronellol and geraniol), and carboxylic acid. Water soluble 
compounds (metabolites) are really amenable in nanomaterials synthesis such as 
nano silver and the reduction is brought about by water soluble phytochemicals 
like flavones, quinones, soluble sugars, and organic acids (such as oxalic, malic, 
tartaric, protocatechuic, etc.). A long list of references is available on plant/plant 
part broth/extract mediated synthesis of silver, gold and platinum nanoparticles in 
which accountability lies over either the primary or the secondary metabolites and it 
continues to pour in. This in itself speaks of the scientific excitement being triggered 
among the workers. 
Phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin (lignan) adjudicated synthesis of Ag and 
gold (Au) nanoparticles has been noted [12]. The fabrication of Ag nanoparticles 
using Eclipta leaf extract was achieved and the key phytochemical were assay to 
be flavonoids [13]. Cycas leaves contain Amentoflavone and Hinokiflavone, and 
biflavonyls, which have been found to synthesize Ag nanoparticles [14]. Synthesis of 
Au nanoparticles negotiated by Bael (Aegle marmelos) leaves has been noted in the 
past [15, 16]. Higher plants belonging to the xerophyte, mesophyte, and hydrophyte 
categories were assayed for their nanotransformation potential and all were found 
suitable for promoting nanosynthesis because of their inherent phytochemicals 
[17]. Earlier, by using Geranium [18], Aloe vera [19], Neem (Azadirachta indica) 
[20], Emblica [21], and Avena [22] leaf broth, metallic Ag was synthesized. The 
fabrication of Ag nanoparticles in the above reports highlight the reductive properties 
of water-soluble phytochemicals such as flavones, quinines, and organic acids that 
are abundant in the parenchyma cells of leaves [23]. Synthesis of nanoscale Ag was 
reported using mature chili fruit (Capsicum annuum L.) [24, 25] and orange juice 
[26, 27]. Majorly, the fabrication of nanoscale Ag resulted by dint of redox reactions, 
involving various phytochemicals like polyphenols, ascorbic acid, capsaicinoids, etc. 
Dissociation of citric acid also effectively contributed to the procedure by ensuring the 
presence of required free energy for nanotransformation. This leads to the conclusion 
that microbes like bacteria or fungi require a comparatively longer incubation in 
the growth media for reducing a metal ion, whereas plant extracts by virtue of 
containing water soluble phytochemicals bring nano-transformation almost in a jiffy. 
Therefore, in comparison to microbes, cells of the plants are handy and amenable Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 5 
for biosynthesis of inorganic nanoparticles. Similarly, Ag and Au nanoparticles were 
synthesized using Cinnamommum camphora [28] leaf biomass and broth. Recently, 
coriander leaf extract [29] and Cinnamon zeylanicum bark extract and powder [30] 
and quite recently, Trianthema decandra root extract [31] were used to biosynthesize 
Ag nanoparticles. Both coriander and cinnamon are rich in aromatic phytochemicals 
such as terpenoids like coriantrol and cinnamomum along with cinnamic acid, 
vitamin C, tannin, and oxalic acid, which are quite labile in negotiating a 
nano-transformation as reported earlier [32], while the roots of Trianthema might 
contain a rich treasure of catechin and hydroxyflavones [31]. Earlier, nitrogenase 
rich Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) was also employed for preparing Ag nanoparticles 
[33]. A variety of functions recognized for the plant as secondary today were thought 
to be waste products earlier. 
The largest such classes are the N compounds (alkaloids + glycosides), 
terpenoids, and phenolics. Possibly over 250,000 secondary metabolites are present 
in plants. The most common roles for secondary compounds in plants are ecological 
roles that govern interactions between plants and other organisms. Many secondary 
compounds are brightly coloured pigments like anthocyanin that colour flowers 
red and blue. These attract pollinators and fruit and seed dispersers. Nicotine 
and other toxic compounds may protect the plant from herbivores and microbes. 
Other secondary compounds like rubber and tetra hydrocannabilin (THC) from 
Cannabis plants had no known function in plants until recent past. The medicinal 
effects of plants are due to metabolites especially secondary compounds produced 
by plant species. For example, Bacopa monera has a specific compound called 
Bacosides for memory enhancement. Similarly, Cannabis sativus (Bhang) has a 
treasure of secondary metabolites like cannabis acid, Cannabisin, etc. Along with 
this, electrostatic interactions of secondary metabolites can result in stabilizing 
of cell structures. Thus, positive charges in polyamines containing protonated 
amino- and imino groups allow electrostatic interactions with negatively charged 
loci in macromolecules and cellular substructures, with this exerting a stabilizing 
effect. There are evidences that polyamine interactions with phosphoric acid 
residues in DNA, uronic acid residues in cell wall matrix, and negative groups on 
membrane surfaces contribute to the maintaining of their functional and structural 
integrity. Covalent bonding of the above functional groups underlie polymerization, 
condensation and complexation events, occurring mainly at cell wall level. Thus, 
polymerization of phenolic alcohols (sinapyl-, coniferyl-, and p-coumaryl-) yields 
lignins, strengthening the wall structure. Presence of carboxy-, hydroxy-, amino-, 
mono-, o-diphenol-, and o-quinoid groups help in covalent bonding of the above 
functional groups, which underlie polymerization, condensation and complexation 
events, occurring mainly at cell wall level. Thus, polymerization of phenolic alcohols 
(sinapyl-, coniferyl-, and p-coumaryl-) yields lignins strengthening the wall structure. 
Ferulic acid, an unsaturated aromatic carbonic acid, is bound to polysaccharids 
chains in cell wall matrix by ester bonds; complexation (cross-linking) via diferulate 
bridges consolidates cell wall structure (Table 1). 
The presence of o-diphenol groups allows formation of o-quinoid grouping. 
Quinoid grouping can interact with thiol- and amino groups in proteins. These polymerization of phenolic alcohols (sinapyl-, coniferyl-, and p-coumaryl-) yields lignins,
strengthening the wall structure. Presence of carboxy-, hydroxy-, amino-, mono-, o-diphenol-,
and o-quinoid groups help in covalent bonding of the above functional groups, which underlie
polymerization, condensation and complexation events, occurring mainly at cell wall level. Thus,
polymerization of phenolic alcohols (sinapyl-, coniferyl-, and p-coumaryl-) yields lignins
strengthening the wall structure. Ferulic acid, an unsaturated aromatic carbonic acid, is bound to 
polysaccharids chains in cell wall matrix by ester bonds; complexation (cross-linking) via
diferulate bridges consolidates cell wall structure.
Table 1: Chemical structure, mode of action and function of different phytochemicals.
 
 
6 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Table 1. Chemical structure, mode of action and function of different phytochemicals. 
interactions of quinoid groupings with microbial proteins can underlie toxicity of 
secondary metabolites against fungi, bacteria and viruses, i.e., an antimicrobial 
activity, given that blocking of active sites and corresponding functions in proteins 
may occur (Fig. 2). 
The rationale of the photoprotective function is displayed by various chemical 
types of secondary metabolites. These include flavonoids, including anthocyanins, 
cinnamic acid derivatives, and xanthophylls. This can be due to the presence of 
conjugated double bonds, i.e., delocalized π-electrons. This electronic configuration 
allows absorbance in the visible light- and UV-spectrum and easy electron and energy 
transfers. π-electron configuration occurs in ring-closed, short side-chained and long 
chained-structures. Xanthophylls containing numerous conjugated double bonds 
in a long chain operate in the xanthophyll cycle, performing dissipation of excess 
light energy as harmless heat. An increasing number of evidences substantiates the The presence of o-diphenol groups allows formation of o-quinoid grouping. Quinoid grouping
can interact with thiol- and amino groups in proteins. These interactions of quinoid groupings
with microbial proteins can underlie toxicity of secondary metabolites against fungi, bacteria and
viruses, i.e. an antimicrobial activity, given that blocking of active sites and corresponding 
functions in proteins may occur. 
no rou ng Fig. 2. Pattern of quinonoid grouping for antimicrobial activities. 
Fig. 2.: Pattern of quinonoid grouping for antimicrobial activities.
The rationale of the photoprotective function is displayed by various chemical types of
secondary metabolites. These include flavonoids, including anthocyanins, cinnamic acid 
derivatives, and xanthophylls. This can be due to the presence of conjugated double bonds, i.e.
delocalized π-electrons. This electronic configuration allows absorbance in the visible light- and 
UV- spectrum and easy electron and energy transfers. π-electron configuration occurs in ring￾closed, short side-chained and long chained-structures. Xanthophylls containing numerous
conjugated double bonds in a long chain operate in the xanthophyll cycle, performing dissipation 
of excess light energy as harmless heat. An increasing number of evidences substantiates the
functioning of secondary metabolites as antioxidants and antiradicals, assisting the plants to cope
with oxidative stress arising in hostile environments. The list is ever growing, involving 
hydroxy- and thiol-group-containing compounds, such as ascorbic acid and lipoic acid, o￾dihydroxy group-containing flavonoids, such as quercetin, aliphatic and arylamines, unsaturated
fatty acids, and carotenoids. Chelation of transition metals (Fe) by flavonoids such as quercetin 
interferes with the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) via the Fenton reaction, thus
contributing to a powerful antioxidant/antiradical performance. In a few cases plants isoprene, a
gaseous secondary metabolite containing two conjugated double bonds, was shown to have an
antioxidant effect in ozone- and heat-induced stress situations. Formation of phenylamides and
dramatic accumulation of polyamines in bean and tobacco following abiotic stresses were
reported, thus suggesting an antioxidant role of these secondary metabolites. Colour and 
aromatic performance by secondary metabolites, such as flavonoids, terpenoids, and other
volatiles can underlie attraction or repelling of insects and herbivores, while toxins can be
involved in plant-plant allelopathic interactions. It is becoming increasingly clear that secondary
metabolites may play an important role as signal molecules. The best-known examples are
ethylene, salicylic acid and jasmonic acid. At a gross level, understanding Plant Polyphenols
from a different perspective is important. They are potential anti-oxidants due to presence
hydroxyl groups. They can help in making metal/oxide nanoparticles due to their molecular
structure and lability. They can attach themselves to other surrounding molecules and give a new
compound. They precipitate proteins, which may help in encapsulation during nano-synthetic
procedures. Coordination complexes constituted by metal ions and bio-ligands are often
Commented [A6]: In capitals?
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 7 
functioning of secondary metabolites as antioxidants and antiradicals, assisting the 
plants to cope with oxidative stress arising in hostile environments. The list is ever 
growing, involving hydroxy- and thiol-group-containing compounds, such as ascorbic 
acid and lipoic acid, o-dihydroxy group-containing flavonoids, such as quercetin, 
aliphatic and arylamines, unsaturated fatty acids, and carotenoids. Chelation of 
transition metals (Fe) by flavonoids such as quercetin interferes with the generation 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) via the Fenton reaction, thus contributing to a 
powerful antioxidant/antiradical performance. In a few cases plants isoprene, a 
gaseous secondary metabolite containing two conjugated double bonds, was shown 
to have an antioxidant effect in ozone- and heat-induced stress situations. Formation 
of phenylamides and dramatic accumulation of polyamines in bean and tobacco 
following abiotic stresses were reported, thus suggesting an antioxidant role of these 
secondary metabolites. Colour and aromatic performance by secondary metabolites, 
such as flavonoids, terpenoids, and other volatiles can underlie attraction or repelling 
of insects and herbivores, while toxins can be involved in plant-plant allelopathic 
interactions. It is becoming increasingly clear that secondary metabolites may play an 
important role as signal molecules. The best-known examples are ethylene, salicylic 
acid and jasmonic acid. At a gross level, understanding plant polyphenols from a 
different perspective is important. They are potential anti-oxidants due to presence 
hydroxyl groups. They can help in making metal/oxide nanoparticles due to their 
molecular structure and lability. They can attach themselves to other surrounding 
molecules and give a new compound. They precipitate proteins, which may help in 
encapsulation during nano-synthetic procedures. Coordination complexes constituted 
by metal ions and bio-ligands are often biologically relevant: metal ions are Lewis 
acid sites able to accept lone pairs coming from the ligand, which acts as a Lewis 
base. In general, however, the biological ligands can be categories as: 
1. Peptides (proteins) with amino acid side chains for coordination. The role of 
proteins is numerous: act as multidentate chelate ligand (via amino acid side 
chains), provide spatial fixation, and serve as a medium with defined dielectric 
properties. 
2. Macrocyclic chelate ligands such as tetrapyrroles (Chlorin, Porphyrin, 
metallo-porphyrin, etc.) act as tetradentate macrocyclic ligands (Fig. 3). biologically relevant: metal ions are Lewis acid sites able to accept lone pairs coming from the
ligand, which acts as a Lewis base. In general, however, the biological ligands can be categories
as:
1. Peptides (proteins) with amino acid side chains for coordination. The role of proteins is
numerous: act as multidentate chelate ligand (via amino acid side chains), provide spatial
fixation, and serve as a medium with defined dielectric properties.
2. Macrocyclic chelate ligands such as tetrapyrroles (Chlorin, Porphyrin, metallo-porphyrin,
etc.) act as tetradentate macrocyclic ligands.
Fig. 3.: Tetra pyrrole pattern involving different metal ions.
3. Nucleobases (nucleic acids): Nucleobases can exist in different tautomeric forms and can be
mono or multidentate ligands. Positively charged metal ions can affect the normal hydrogen￾bond interactions that are the basis of base pairing in DNA. This can be exploited for the
development of chemotherapeutic drugs through aptly executed functionalization. Biopolymer
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Tetra pyrrole pattern involving different metal ions. 
8 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
3. Nucleobases (nucleic acids): Nucleobases can exist in different tautomeric 
forms and can be mono or multidentate ligands. Positively charged metal ions 
can affect the normal hydrogen-bond interactions that are the basis of base 
pairing in DNA. This can be exploited for the development of chemotherapeutic 
drugs through aptly executed functionalization. Biopolymer affects the 
thermodynamic stability of a metal center, since it can control activity, through 
its three-dimensional structure; however, other associated factors could be: 
- Stereochemistry 
- Ligands available for coordination (when coordinated to Zn2+, water is 
10 times more acid than when it is free!) 
- Local hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity 
- Steric blockage of coordination sites 
- Hydrogen bonding formation. These considerations are very important in 
order to understand how metals function in biology as well as during plant or 
its part assisted nanomaterials synthesis. Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 9 
5. Animal Systems 
The discipline of osmolarity is pivotal for any organism to survive under the normal 
conditions or under environmental stress. The ionic balance has to be maintained 
for maintaining a normal physiology and metabolism. Heavy metals are required by 
other animals, including insects in their metabolism; however, when its level reaches 
beyond detoxification efficiency, it results in toxicity shearing and the contention is 
that metals do have a role in the origin of life itself [34]. The internal homeostasis 
is conserved through regular diffusion and assembly of a distinct structure called 
spherocrystals-originating from the ER-Golgi complex where elements precipitate 
upon a glycosaminoglycan nucleus in a fragile peripheral stratum. Most of the 
spherocrystals may have minerals, most commonly phosphates, or else may store 
wastes such as urates. The presence of additional metals in abundance in the 
environment allows insects such as cockroaches and ants to stay alive and to trap 
the metals (e.g., Pb or Cd) in surrounding layers of spherocrystals; however, the 
biochemical composition of cytoplasm remains unaltered. The ability of arthropods 
to withstand elevated levels of toxic metals dwells in probably their odd habitats. 
Besides, the lysosomes have the potential to retain toxic heavy metals like Cd or Hg 
within metallothionein-like proteins [35]. The cockroach exoskeleton is comprised 
of chitin (polymeric N-acetylglucosamine). The simultaneous presence of amino 
and acetyl group culminates in mildly acidic behaviour in a biosynthetic medium, 
subject to amenable modulation during the experiments for obtaining the desired 
nanomaterial. Cells of the animal die or get completely diminished after heating, but 
the elaborated cell metabolites in the broth solution help in nanomaterials fabrication. 
In cockroaches, there are proteins identified as tropomyosin that initiate allergic 
alerts among humans. The thermodynamics of actin binding proteins have been less 
studied and control actin mechanics. It consists of four alpha helices—A, B, C, and 
D that together form a quaternary structure and is responsible for muscle contraction 
[36]. This protein, because of its inherent thermodynamic behaviour, is thought to 
assist the entrapment of nascent nanomaterials thus extending strength. It has further 
been suggested that an inclusive interrelation of Bla g2 with the structures of other 
well-known aspartic proteases, suggest that ligand binding could be involved in the 
activity of this allergen [34]. It has been proposed that the loss of balance of metals 
results from genetic impairments or environmental pollution and is associated with 
negative health effects worldwide. Various in-depth studies have highlighted that an 
appreciable number of genes and their regulatory cues are involved in maintaining 
heavy metal homeostasis involving the metals tested in the study, Cd, Cu and Zn, and 
initiates various responses including triggering of genes coding for metallothionein, 
transporters, glutathione-mediated detoxification pathway components, antimicrobial 
peptides, ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, heat shock proteins, and cytochrome P450 
enzymes. The induction of metallothionein by the metals such as Cu, Zn, and Cd 
is well aligned with their role as metal scavenger and protective role against metal 
toxicity through the down regulation by copper depletion but remarkable variations 
in responses may be generated among metallothionein congeners. MtnA gets induced 
in response to a Cu assault, while MtnB and MtnC are more strongly induced by Zn 
and Cd, respectively. Recent studies have revealed that individual metallothioneins 10 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
preferentially defend against specific metals, with MtnA playing an important role 
in defending against copper excess, MtnB during zinc and cadmium excess, while 
MtnC and MtnD play only smaller acts in defending against these three metals. 
Therefore, elaboration of MtnA is higher, compared to other metallothioneins, with 
an intense baseline level and consequently a fewer degree of fold-induction, and 
this is suggestive of the fact that MtnA is the major metal hunter in the larva of 
Drosophila [37, 38]. It has been speculated that ferritin is a metal detoxicant among 
mammals in general and is able to detoxify, store, and transport iron; it has also the 
ability to bind some other metal ion species. This has also been observed among 
Drosophila where an induction was observed under zinc assault. It is interesting to 
note that although the chemical properties of Zn and Cd are identical, they tend 
to trigger varied responses biologically. Consequently, regulatory chores to combat 
excess Zn exposures are also functional in Cd stress as well [37]. 
The exoskeleton of banana fly and household mosquito (Culex sp.) are built 
of chitin (a polymer of N-acetylglucosamine) [38]. It is mildly acidic due to the 
occurrence of both the amino group with the acetyl group, and this can be suitably 
manipulated to obtain desired nanomaterials (i.e., metals/oxides/chalcogenides). 
Cell death ensues upon boiling, but metabolites get disseminated in the broth 
mixture/solution and this aids in fabrication of nanomaterials. Furthermore, 
tropomyosin as previously mentioned initiates allergic alerts among humans and is 
an actin-bound protein moiety whose function is to ensure actin agility. Tropomyosin 
is pivotal for muscle contraction, among other things [39]. This protein might have 
played a fundamental role of encapsulation for the nascent nanomaterials. An inherent 
similarity of Bla g2 with the structures of other well-known aspartic proteases, and 
its homology to PAG, suggest that ligand binding could be participating in the act of 
this allergen [40]. Metal toxicity leads to stress once the organisms experience higher 
than their naturally bestowed capacity for detoxification. Besides, heavy metals are 
well known for their toxicity and ability to bioaccumulate in aquatic ecosystems. 
The requirement of heavy metals by fishes is in traces while most of them act as 
micronutrients for both plants and animals, which are important components of 
enzymes and hormones, hence making them indispensable for an array of metabolic 
reactions. The transport of metals among fishes occurs through the blood, where the 
metal ions are usually tagged to proteins. Further, when metals are brought into the 
vicinity of different organs and tissues of the fish, they get accumulated there [36]. 
Therefore, it is but obvious that metals are usually present in high concentrations 
in the organs like gills, intestines, and digestive glands. The intestines of fishes 
are seldom consumed; they usually accumulate more heavy metals and might be 
considered as good bio-monitors of metals occurring in the surrounding environment. 
Studies suggest that metallothionein genes get triggered under heavy metal stress by 
specific transcription factors like MTF-1, which attaches to MREs (metal response 
elements) that are short DNA sequences [41]. At the genomic level, the expression 
of MTs is regulated transcriptionally by metal responsive transcription factor 1 
(MTF-1). MTF-1 binds to metal-response elements (MREs) in the MT promotor site processing discards for fabricating ZnO nanoparticles [39], which contain promising metabolites
that often end in wastes. Finally, the death of cells tends to liberate the potential metabolites that 
facilitate fabrication of the nanoscale materials. Inorganic elements carry out important and
otherwise not guaranteed functions. They are listed below:
• structural function (Ca2+ and Mg2+ for DNA polyanion)
• charge carriers for fast information transfer (Na+, K+
, Ca2+ for electrical impulses in 
nerves, muscles contraction)
• formation, metabolism and degradation of organic compounds. These functions often 
require Lewis acid/base catalysis (Zn2+ in hydrolytic enzymes)
• electron transfer for energy conversion. This function requires redox active metal centres
(FeII/FeIII/FeIV, CuI
/CuII, CoI
/CoII).
In metallothionein, the major protectant of most of the animals including insects, 30-35%
of amino acids are cystein with soft –SH groups coordination of soft heavy metal ions such as
Cd2+, Hg2+, Pb2+, and Zn2+. Biological function of metallothioneins, as stated earlier, is to protect
cells from toxic heavy metals. So, as and when an animal tissue broth is challenged with any
metal ion solution, the molecules respond in a jiffy leading to a successful nanomaterial
synthesis depending upon the modulation of the pivotal parameters like pH and temperature.
Fig. 4.: Molecular structure of Metallothionein showing involvement of Cysteine in
detoxification. 
4. Soft Chemical Synthesis
The blind spree of industrialization in the past has indeed created many unhealing wounds over
our environment and problems like global warming, green house effects are just to name a few. 
Every component of our ecosystem has been polluted. We generally forget that we have to
transfer this environment to our coming generations. The world of chemistry has covered an
Fig. 4. Molecular structure of Metallothionein showing involvement of Cysteine in detoxification. 
 
Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 11 
upon metal assault, which are significant in mediating the transcriptional responses to 
heavy metals [42, 43]. Fish discards consisting primarily of fish intestines were taken 
into use for preparing Ag nanoparticles [39] and goat meat processing discards for 
fabricating ZnO nanoparticles [39], which contain promising metabolites that often 
end in wastes. Finally, the death of cells tends to liberate the potential metabolites 
that facilitate fabrication of the nanoscale materials. Inorganic elements carry out 
important and otherwise not guaranteed functions. They are listed below: 
• structural function (Ca2+ and Mg2+ for DNA polyanion) 
• charge carriers for fast information transfer (Na+
, K+
, Ca2+ for electrical impulses 
in nerves, muscles contraction) 
• formation, metabolism and degradation of organic compounds. These functions 
often require Lewis acid/base catalysis (Zn2+ in hydrolytic enzymes) 
• electron transfer for energy conversion. This function requires redox active 
metal centres (FeII/FeIII/FeIV, CuI
/CuII, CoI
/CoII). 
In metallothionein, the major protectant of most of the animals including insects, 
30–35% of amino acids are cystein with soft –SH groups coordination of soft heavy 
metal ions such as Cd2+, Hg2+, Pb2+, and Zn2+. Biological function of metallothioneins, 
as stated earlier, is to protect cells from toxic heavy metals (Fig. 4). So, as and when 
an animal tissue broth is challenged with any metal ion solution, the molecules 
respond in a jiffy leading to a successful nanomaterial synthesis depending upon the 
modulation of the pivotal parameters like pH and temperature. 12 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
6. Soft Chemical Synthesis 
The blind spree of industrialization in the past has indeed created many unhealing 
wounds over our environment and problems like global warming, green house effects 
are just to name a few. Every component of our ecosystem has been polluted. We 
generally forget that we have to transfer this environment to our coming generations. 
The world of chemistry has covered an appreciably long journey commencing 
from the 19th century as an era of classical organic chemistry when environment 
was virtually under little or no consideration and we created a huge dump of toxic 
chemicals in every component of the ecosystem. Light concern was displayed during 
the 20th century when materials were replaced in order to reduce emissions and the 
concept of environmental audit emerged. Energy and environment got integrated and 
things started changing globally. In 21st century, we realized the importance of green 
chemistry, sustainability and circular economy. Instead of exponentially strangling 
the existing resources, we realized that it is more sensible to realize the importance 
of recycling our existing ones by adopting clean and green procedures as well as by 
eliminating the toxic ingredients in our industrial procedures. The promulgation of 
WEEE and RoHS guidelines added an exemplary thrust to the above idea and an 
evolving approach towards Nanotechnology and Environmental Health and Safety 
(EHS) has been suggested in three phases by James Hutchison, director of the Safer 
Nanomaterials and Nanomanufacturing Initiative (SNNI) [44]: 
1. Studies on significance of nanomaterials. 
2. Research on significance and applications to be undertaken in a coordinated 
manner. 
3. In order to eliminate hazards during the life cycle of materials, it would be 
necessary to emphasize on the green nanoscience approach during material and 
process designing steps. 
The sole purpose of accomplishing a nanomaterial synthesis involving soft 
chemicals goes nicely along with above mentioned ideas. Green chemistry is “the 
utilization of a set of principles that reduces or eliminates the use or generation 
of hazardous substances in the design, manufacture, and application of chemical 
products”. Nearly all of the principles of green chemistry can be readily applied to 
the design of nanoscale products, the development of nanosynthesis methods, and 
the application of nanomaterials. 
The sole game proceeds as dissociation/ionization of metal salts, kinetics (first 
order, second order reaction), thermodynamics (principally free energy may be 
available through ionization/dissociation, decomposition due to heating, breaking of 
bonds, tautomerization, resonance, etc.), and phase transformation (by attaining the 
threshold in terms of available free energy- from micro to nano). The purpose is to 
achieve a high degree of super-saturation within narrow time and space. Along with 
this, suppression of aggregation/agglomeration, mono-disperse growth, diffusion 
controlled growth/Ostwald ripening are major stakes. At a given point of time, entire 
material will never get transformed; rather some will be transformed while others Unleashing the Cues ofNanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 13 
will be attaining the threshold, yet others will be at the interface of transformation. 
It is a procedure of slow graduation! In general, the synthetic strategies could be: 
• Liquid Phase Synthesis 
• Gas Phase Synthesis 
• Vapour Phase Synthesis 
Among these, the liquid phase synthesis is widely in use and is well developed 
due to the fact that it is amenable for higher cornpositions and sophisticated products; 
in addition to this, size control is also possible through modulation of the key 
parameters. 
The soft chernical synthetic method was developed by our group as an off shoot 
of the sol-gel method where a lot of energy consurning and cumbersome steps were 
involved. We banked on the inherent chemical/thermodynarnic potential of higher 
carboxylic acids such as citric, tartaric and/or stearic acid. Carboxylic acid, like citric 
acid, has an encouraging resonance energy ofstabilization once dissolved in water and 
this helps in the procedure ofsynthesis. It helps in synthesizing metals, oxides/higher 
oxides, chalcognides, alloys, etc. Reaction conditions are required to be monitored 
carefully, very much amenable for synthesizing a variety of nanomaterials (Fig. 5). 
Fig. 5. Involvement of resonance energy in synthetic cue bestowed by citric acid. 
Fig. 6. Showing molecular level involvement of tartaric acid in synthetic cue.  
14 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Similarly, energy rich tartaric acid undergoes dissociation and under condition 
of heating at high temperature liberates sufficient amount of free energy for 
accomplishing synthesis of novel perovskites (e.g., Ag1/2Al1/2TiO3) (Fig. 6). 
7. Overall Thermodynamic Considerations 
Cells are isothermal systems—they function at essentially constant temperature (and 
constant pressure). Heat flow is not a source of energy for cells because heat can 
work only as it passes to a zone or object at a lower temperature. The energy that 
cells can and must use is free energy, described by the Gibbs free-energy function G, 
which allows prediction of the direction of chemical reactions, their exact equilibrium 
position, and the amount of work they can, in theory, perform at constant temperature 
and pressure. Heterotrophic cells acquire free energy from nutrient molecules and 
photosynthetic cells acquire it from absorbed solar radiation. Both kinds of cells 
transform this free energy into ATP and other energy-rich compounds capable of 
providing energy for biological work at constant temperature. 
Metal ions and biological ligands are important constituents of coordination 
complexes that are biologically pertinent: metal ions are Lewis acid sites that can 
accept lone pair of electrons of the ligand, which act as a Lewis base. This is well 
exemplified in metallothionein where 30–35% of its sulphur containing residue 
cysteine carries sulfhydryl groups. Metallothioneins protects the cells from toxic 
heavy metal assaults. Besides, the metal chelate complexes are stable due to release 
of non-chelating ligands. Additionally, the pKa values of coordinate ligands and 
alterations in the redox potentials also play significant role. The thermodynamic 
robustness of a metal centre is often affected by the biopolymers since it can 
regulate steric blockage of coordination sites and hydrogen bonding formation 
capability through its three-dimensional structure including its stereochemistry, 
available ligands for coordination, local hydrophilicity and/or hydrophobicity. 
Thermodynamic interaction/interdependence and its environment keeps molecules 
active and ensures nanomaterial formation. The mechanism of nanotransformation is 
based on the nucleation and growth theory to form a spherical particle in which the 
overall free energy change (ΔG) must be overcome. ΔG is the sum of the free energy 
due to the formation of a new volume and the free energy due to the new/novel 
4 surface being created [44]: ∆G = – πr3 kB T ln(S) + 4πr2 γ, here V, r, kB, S and γ are
V 
the molecular volume of the precipitated species, radius of the nucleus, Boltzmann 
constant, saturation ratio, and surface free energy per unit surface area, respectively. 
What emanates from the above equation is that a decrease or increase in S helps 
in the formation of desired/targeted nanoparticles. The interactions of metabolites 
contained in the broth/culture medium with metal salt leads to concentration of 
metal ions surrounded by different metabolites like flavonoids, terpenoids, organic 
acids, proteins, etc., which get adhered to the metal nuclei and result in a lower 
surface energy of the crystal lattice. To summarize, the major metabolites along with 
the experimental cues determine the fate of fabrication of the type of nanomaterial 
and the source/mean/method, irrespective of the procedure whether chemical or 
biological, the crux always lies with the thermodynamic parameters. In addition,  
Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 15 
even in case of dead animal cells/tissues, its metabolites are not made ineffective, 
rather they engage in energy changes and are thermodynamically agile enough to 
pursue nano synthesis. The thermodynamic heat ensures phase transformation from 
microscale to the nanoscale. 
Of the equal importance is yet another thermodynamic quantity, i.e., Partial 
Molar Volume (PMV) that decides the fate of a plant extract/animal tissue broth or 
a soft chemical mediated nanomaterials synthesis. The PMV is a thermodynamic 
quantity, which contains important information about the solute-solvent interactions 
as well as the solute structure in solution. Additionally, the PMV is the most essential 
quantity in the analysis of the pressure effect on chemical reactions. The PMV 
of a solute in solution Vu is defined as the volume change of solution when the 
solute is immersed into the solution: Vu = (∂V/∂Nu). T, p, Nv; where V, T, and p 
are, respectively, the volume, temperature, and pressure of the solution system, and 
Nu and Nv are the numbers of solutes and solvents, respectively. Once we know 
the partial molar volume of two components of a binary mixture, we can calculate 
the total volume. The term activity is used in the description of the departure of 
the behaviour of a solution from ideality. In any real solution, interactions occur 
between the components which reduce the effective concentration of the solution. 
The activity is a way of describing this effective concentration. In an ideal solution 
or in a real solution at infinite dilution, there are no interactions between components 
and the activity equals the concentration. Non-ideality in real solutions at higher 
concentrations causes a divergence between the values of activity and concentration. 
The ratio of the activity to the concentration is called the activity coefficient, γ, that is 
γ = activity/concentration. Depending on the units used to express concentration, we 
can have either a molar activity coefficient, γm, a molar activity coefficient, γc, or, if 
mole fractions are used, a rational activity coefficient, γx. Properties such as volume, 
enthalpy, free energy and entropy, which depend on the quantity of substance, are 
called extensive properties. In contrast, properties such as temperature, density and 
refractive index, which are independent of the amount of material, are referred to 
as intensive properties. The quantity denoting the rate of increase in the magnitude 
of an extensive property with increase in the number of moles of a substance 
added to the system at constant temperature and pressure is termed a partial molar 
quantity. Partial molar quantities are of importance in the consideration of open 
systems, that is, those involving transference of matter as well as energy. Another 
partial molar property, already introduced, is the partial molar Gibbs function or the 
chemical potential. Of particular interest is the partial molar free energy, which is 
also referred to as the chemical potential, μ. So, the partial molar volumes provide 
useful information about various types of interactions occurring in solutions. It is 
particularly useful in nanomaterial synthetic protocols if we are pursuing the soft 
chemical route. These studies are of great help in characterizing the structure and 
properties of solutions. The solution structure is of great importance in understanding 
the nature of action of bioactive molecules in the body system. The addition of 
an organic solvent to water brings about a sharp change in the solvation of ions. 
The peculiarities of the aqueous–organic mixtures are well reflected in dramatic 
changes in the reaction rates. The medium effect or free energies of transfer of ions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
cannot be explained on the basis of change in the dielectric constants of the solvent 
mixtures alone. As partial molar volume of a solute reflects the cumulative effects of 
solute–solvent interactions, it would be of interest to study partial molar volumes 
of the organic acids viz. citric acid and tartaric acid in binary aqueous mixtures of 
ethanol. Such data are expected to highlight the role of organic acids in influencing 
the partial molar volumes in mixed solvent systems. 
In a nutshell, the organic and inorganic systems show appreciable dynamism 
in terms of solvation, ionization and dissociation and this leads to the liberation 
of free energy. Their representation is broadly functional leading to a cascade of 
thermodynamic events. This area is largely unexplored and unreported in nanoscience 
and technology literatures and warrants further investigation in order to further 
thermodynamically details of free energy availability in different procedures. 
References 
[1] Gallegos, M.T., R. Schleif, A. Bairoch, K. Hofmann and J.L. Ramos. 1997. Arac/XylS family of 
transcriptional regulators. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 61: 393. 
[2] Hantke, K. 2001. Iron and metal regulation in bacteria. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 4: 172. 
[3] Hutkins, R.W. and N.L. Nannen. 1993. pH homeostasis in Lactic Acid bacteria. J. Dairy Sci. 
76: 2354. 
[4] http://www.lactic.com/index.php/lacticacid. (2009). 
[5] Avery, S.V. 2001. Metal toxicity in yeasts and the role of oxidative stress. Adv. Appl. Microbiol. 
49: 111. 
[6] Limon-Pacheco, J. and M.E. Gonsebatt. 2009. The role of antioxidants and antioxidant-related 
enzymes in protective responses to environmentally induced oxidative stress. Mutat. Res. 674: 137. 
[7] Jha, A.K. and K. Prasad. 2019. Biosynthetic methods for inorganic nanoparticles: Nature’s silent 
pursuit. In: Nalwa, H.S. (ed.). Encyclopaedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 26: 485. 
[8] Jha, A.K., K. Prasad and K. Prasad. 2009. Biosynthesis of Sb2O3 nanoparticles: A low‐cost green 
approach. Biotechnol. J. 4: 1582. 
[9] Ray, S., S. Sarkar and S. Kundu. 2011. Extracellular biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using the 
mycorrhizal mushroom Tricholoma Crassum (BERK.) SACC: Its antimicrobial activity against 
pathogenic bacteria and fungus, including multidrug resistant plant and human bacteria. Digest J. 
Nanomater. Biostruct. 6: 1289. 
[10] Lapworth, A. and A. Hann. 1902. The mutarotation of camphorquinonehydrazone and mechanism 
of simple desmotropic change. J. Chem. Soc. 81: 1508. 
[11] Poelarends, G., V. Veetuk and C. Whitman. 2008. Tautomerism: Introduction, history, and recent 
developments in experimental and theoretical methods. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 65: 3606. 
[12] Kasthuri, J., K. Kathiravan and N. Rajendiran. 2009. Phyllanthin assisted biosynthesis of silver and 
gold nanoparticles: A novel biological approach. J. Nanopart. Res. 11: 1075. 
[13] Jha, A.K. and K. Prasad. 2014. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and its activity on SiHa 
cervical cancer cell line. Adv. Mater. Lett. 5: 501. 
[14] Prasad, K.S., D. Pathak, A. Patel, P. Dalwadi, R. Prasad, P. Patel and K. Selvaraj. 2011. Biogenic 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Nicotiana Tobaccum leaf extract and study of their 
antibacterial effect. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 10: 8122. 
[15] Rao, M.L. and N. Savithramma. 2011. Biological synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Svensonia 
Hyderabadensis leaf extract and evaluation of their antimicrobial efficacy. J. Pharm. Sci. Res. 
3: 1117. 
[16] Jha, A.K. and K. Prasad. 2011. Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles using Bael (Aegle marmelos) 
leaf: Mythology meets technology. Int. J. Green Nanotechnol.: Phys. Chem. 3: 92. 
[17] Das, S., J. Das, A. Samadder, S.S. Bhattacharyya, D. Das and A.R. KhudaBukhsh. 2013. 
Biosynthesized silver nanoparticles by ethanolic extracts of Phytolacca decandra, Gelsemium  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unleashing the Cues of Nanomaterials Synthesis: A Thermodynamic Evaluation 17 
sempervirens, Hydrastis Canadensis and Thuja occidentalis induce differential cytotoxicity 
through G2/M arrest in A375 cells. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 101: 325. 
[18] Sathishkumar, M., S. Krishnamurthy and Y.S. Yun. 2010. Immobilization of silver nanoparticles 
synthesized using Curcuma longa tuber powder and extract on cotton cloth for bactericidal activity. 
Biores. Technol. 101: 7958. 
[19] Chandran, S.P., M. Chaudhary, R. Pasricha, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry. 2006. Synthesis of 
gold nanotriangles and silver nanoparticles using Aloe vera plant extract. Biotechnol. Prog. 
22: 577. 
[20] Ghule, K., A.V. Ghule, J.Y. Liu and Y.C. Ling. 2006. Microscale size triangular gold prisms 
synthesized using Bengal gram beans (Cicer arietinum L.) extract and HAuCl4x3H2O: a green 
biogenic approach. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 6: 3746. 
[21] Narayanan, K.B. and N. Sakthivel. 2008. Coriander leaf mediated biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles. 
Mater. Lett. 62: 4588. 
[22] Armendariz, V., I. Herrera, J. Peralta-Videa, M. Jose-Yacaman, H. Troiani and P. Santiago. 2004. Size 
controlled gold nanoparticle formation by Avena sativa biomass: use of plants in nanobiotechnology. 
J. Nanopart. Res. 6: 377. 
[23] Ghule, K., A.V. Ghule, J.Y. Liu and Y.C. Ling. 2006. Microscale size triangular gold prisms 
synthesized using Bengal gram beans (Cicer arietinum L.) extract and HAuCl4 3H2O: A green 
biogenic approach. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 6: 3746. 
[24] Savithramma, N., M.L. Rao and P.S. Devi. 2011. Evaluation of antibacterial efficacy of biologically 
synthesized silver nanoparticles using stem barks of Boswellia ovalifoliolata Bal. and Henry and 
Shorea tumbuggaia Roxb. J. Biol. Sci. 11: 39. 
[25] Jha, A.K. and K. Prasad. 2011. Green fruit of chili (Capsicum annum L.) synthesizes nano silver! 
Digest J. Nanomater. Biostruct. 6: 1717. 
[26] Shankar, S.S., A. Rai, B. Ankamwar, A. Singh, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry. 2004. Biological synthesis 
of triangular gold nano prisms. Nat. Mater. 3: 482. 
[27] Jha, A.K., V. Kumar and K. Prasad. 2011. Biosynthesis of metal and oxide nanoparticles using 
orange juice. J. Bionanosci. 5: 162. 
[28] Awwad, A.M., N.M. Salem and A.O. Abdeen. 2013. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using 
loquat leaf extract and its antibacterial activity. Adv. Mat. Lett. 4: 338. 
[29] Rao, K.J. and S. Paria. 2013. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from aqueous Aegle marmelos 
leaf extract. Mater. Res. Bull. 48: 628. 
[30] Singh, A., D. Jain, M.K. Upadhyay, N. Khandelwal and H.N. Verma. 2010. Green synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles using Argemone mexicana leaf extract and evaluation of their antimicrobial 
activities. Digest J. Nanomater. Biostruct. 5: 483. 
[31] Pandey, S., G.K. Goswami and K.K. Nanda. 2013. Green synthesis of polysaccharide/gold 
nanoparticle nanocomposite: an efficient ammonia sensor. Carbohyd. Polym. 94: 229. 
[32] Ghule, K., A.V. Ghule, B.J. Chen and Y.C. Ling. 2006. Preparation and characterization of ZnO 
nanoparticles coated paper and its antibacterial activity study. Green Chem. 8: 1034. 
[33] Raut, W.R., J.R. Lakkakula, N.S. Kolekar, V.D. Mendhulkar and S.B. Kashid. 2009. Phytosynthesis 
of silver nanoparticle using Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.). Curr. Nanosci. 5: 117. 
[34] Arruda, L.K., L.D. Vailes, B.J. Mann, J. Shannon, J.W. Fox, T.S. Vedvick, M.L. Haden and M.D. 
Chapman. 1995. Molecular cloning of a major cockroach (Blattella germanica) allergen, Bla g 2. 
Sequence homology to the aspartic proteases. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 19563. 
[35] Ballan-Dufrançais, C. 2002. Localization of metals in cells of pterygote insects. Microsc. Res. 
Tech. 56: 403. 
[36] Asturias, J.A., N. Gómez-Bayón, M.C. Arilla, A. Martínez, R. Palacios, F. Sánchez-Gascón and 
J. Martínez. 1999. Molecular characterization of American cockroach tropomyosin (Periplaneta 
americana allergen 7), a cross-reactive allergen. J. Immunol. 162: 4342. 
[37] Yepiskoposyan, H., D. Egli, T. Fergestad, A. Selvaraj, C. Treiber, G. Multhaup, O. Georgiev and 
W. Schaffner. 2006. Transcriptome response to heavy metal stress in Drosophila reveals a new zinc 
transporter that confers resistance to zinc. Nucleic Acids Res. 34: 4866. 
[38] Jha, A.K. and K. Prasad. 2016. Now the household mosquitoes (Culex Sp.) synthesize CdS 
nanoparticles! J. Chin. Adv. Mater. Soc. 4: 140.  
 
 
 
 
 
18 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[39] Egli, D., J. Domenech, A. Selvaraj, K. Balamurugan, H. Hua, M. Capdevila, O. Georgiev, W. 
Schaffner, and S. Atrian. 2006. The four members of the Drosophila metallothionein family exhibit 
distinct yet overlapping roles in heavy metal homeostasis and detoxification. Genes Cells 11: 647. 
[40] Joshi, J.G. and A. Zimmerman. 1988. Ferritin: An expanded role in metabolic regulation. Toxicology 
48: 21. 
[41] Ayandiran, T.A., O.O. Fawole, S.O. Adewoye and M.A. Ogundiran. 2009. Bioconcentration of 
metals in the body muscle and gut of Clarias gariepinus exposed to sub lethal concentrations of 
soap and detergent effluent. J. Cell Animal Biol. 3: 113. 
[42] Selvaraj, A., K. Balamurugan, H. Yepiskoposyan, H. Zhou, D. Egli, O. Georgiev, D.J. Thiele, and 
W. Schaffner. 2005. Metal-responsive transcription factor (MTF-1) handles both extremes, copper 
load and copper starvation, by activating different genes. Genes Dev. 19: 891. 
[43] Cooper, A. 1999. Protein: A Comprehensive Treatise (Allen Geoffrey Ed.), Vol. 2, pp. 217–270, JAI 
Press, Inc., Greenwich, CT, USA. 
[44] Stuart, G.W., P.F. Searle, H.Y. Chen, R.L. Brinster and R.D. Palmiter. 1984. A 12-base-pair DNA 
motif that is repeated several times in metallothionein gene promoters confers metal regulation to a 
heterologous gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 7318. 2


Biosynthesis of Silver
Nanoparticles Using Leaf
Extracts Characteristics

 Zygmunt Sadowski,* Joanna Feder-Kubis and Anna Wirwis 
1. Introduction 
Currently, the synthesis of nanoparticles might be performed by deploying a variety 
of techniques that are divided into three groups: physical, chemical and biological. 
The recommendations of “green chemistry” suggest employing biological methods 
that are environmentally friendly [1]. Biologically inspired methods of nanoparticles 
synthesis involve the application of bacteria [2], fungus [3], algae [4], yeasts [5], 
and plants [6]. Plants are the best candidate for nanoparticle biosynthesis due to 
their easy availability and the fact that they are readily available. Not all plants are 
suitable for the biosynthesis of nanoparticles. It turned out that plants that were 
previously applied as a therapeutic agent are most often used in biosynthesis. Plants 
offer this important advantage that it is simple to prepare desired extract for the ions’ 
bioreduction. The substances extracted from plants, apart from reducing properties, 
also have the ability to stabilize the fabricated nanoparticles. Various parts of plant 
are fitting for the extraction (Fig. 1). 
The most common are leaves, followed by flowers [7], stems [8], roots [9], and 
skins of fruit [10]. This chapter presents information on the biosynthesis of silver 
nanoparticles, with particular focus on the extract processes, where leaves are used as 
sources materials. Since ionic liquids are of importance in the extraction, the input in 
Wroclaw University Science and Technology, Department of Process Engineering and Polymer and 
Carbon Materials, Wybrzeze Wyspianskiego 27, 50-370 Wroclaw, Poland. 
* Corresponding author: zygmunt.sadowski@pwr.edu.pl  
 
 
Fig. 1. Plant parts used in preparation of the extract (created with BioRender.com). 
20 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
the synthesis of nanoparticles by the biological path using those ionic systems will be 
highlighted here. Silver nanoparticles are characterized by antibacterial properties, 
which is a sufficient reason why they can find application in the production of 
food packaging. Research on the production of this type of packaging is devoted 
to the BioNanoPolys program financed under the “Horizon 2020” program of the 
European Union. 
2. Aqueous Extract of Leaves 
Green leaves are collected, carefully washed with distilled water, then dried on the air 
in a sunny place and ground into powder which is the basis for extraction carried out 
at an elevated temperature, usually 60–90°C. Powder slurry is often briefly boiled 
(5–30 min) [11]. Filter Whatman No. 1 removes the biomass remaining after extraction 
from the suspension. Obtained in this manner, pure extract was next utilized for 
the synthesis of nanoparticles or should be stored in a refrigerator. The chemical 
composition of the extracts depends on the kind of plants from which they have 
been obtained. Different parts of plant have their own phytochemical compositions 
and potential bioreduction properties. Broadly, the extract consists of such groups of 
chemical compounds as: flavonoides, polyphenolics, reducing sugars, terpenoides, 
peptides, membrane proteins, and organic acids. These compounds have in turn 
such functional group as: amines, aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, carboxylic acid 
and sulfhydryl, that can actively participate in the silver ion bioreduction. Although 
bioreduction of silver ions using numerous type of plant extract still is ambiguous, 
the following phyto-reduction reaction can be predicted Fig. 2. 
a) Flavonoids 
b) Terpenoids 
c) Saponins (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 2. Phyto-reduction of Ag+
 ions to AgNPs by (a) flavonoids, (b) terpenoids, and (c) saponins. 
Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Leaf Extracts Characteristics 21 
3. Silver Nanoparticles Biosynthesis 
It was about 20 years ago that the first information on the biosynthesis of silver 
nanoparticles with the use of aqueous leaf extract emerged. The extract was prepared 
by means of Azardirachta indica (Neen) [12], alfalfa [13], and Pelargonium 
graveolens Geranium [12]. This method of nanoparticle biosynthesis soon won 
popularity. Review published ten and more years later reveal dozens of examples 
of various plants suitable for the synthesis of nanoparticles [14, 15]. Table 1 shows 
the list of plants whose leaves were a source material for silver nanoparticles’ 
biosynthesis in the period 2020–2022. Table 1. List of plants used for AgNPs biosynthesis in the period 2020–2022.


Plant Family AgNP size [nm] Shape References 
Brillantaisia patula Acanthaceae 45–110 spherical [16] 
Caesalpinia digyna Fabaceae 11.3–45.4 spherical [17] 
Cannabis sativa Cannabaceae 26.52 (average) uniformity [18] 
Carica papaya Caricaceae 10–20 smooth and spherical [19] 
Carissa carandas Caricaceae 35 (for 25°C) 
30 (for 60°C) 
spherical [20] 
Crossoptery febrifuga Rubiaceae 45–110 spherical [16] 
Cucumis prophetarum Cucurbitaceae 30–50 spherical [21] 
Delonix regia Fabaceae 43.5 (average) oval [22] 
Elytraria acaulis (Lindau) Acanthaceae 5–100 spherical [23] 
Eryngium caucasicum Apiaceae 10–20 
17.5 (average) 
spherical [24] 
Eucalyptus camaldulensis Myrtaceae 28 (SEM) 
68 (DLS) 
spherical [11] 
Hagenia abyssinica Rosaceae 22.2 (SEM) spherical [25] 
Ixora brachypoda Rubiacea 18–50 
27.76 (average) 
spherical [26] 
Juglans negia Juglandaceae 6.93 and 7.16 
(ultrasound) 
oval [27] 
Juniperus excelsa Cupressaceae 16.08–24.42 hexagonal spherical [28] 
Lotus lalambebsis Fabaceae 6–26 oval [29] 
Melia azedarach Melaiaceae 18–30 
23 (average) 
spherical [30] 
Mentha aquatica Lamiaceae 14 
8 (ultrasound) 
spherical [31] 
Mentha pulegium Lamiaceae 17.7 (average) spherical [32] 
Musa paradisiaca Musaceae 80–100 bed [33] 
Naringi crenulate Rutaceae 20–40 spherical [34] 
Oryza sativa Poeceae 36–107 spherical [35] 
Platycladus orientalis Cupressaceae 8 (average) spherical [36] 
Quercus coccifera Fagaceae 50–70 spherical [37] 
Salanum surattense Solanceae 52.27 (average) spherical [38] 
Salvia coccinea Lamiaceae 24–28.4 spherical [39] 
Senna siamea Fabaceae 45–110 spherical [16] 
Syngonium podophyllum Araceae 2–47 
25 (average) 
spherical [40] 
22 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications

Fig. 3. Microfluidic tubular reactor for AgNPs synthesis (created with BioRender.com). 
Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Leaf Extracts Characteristics 23 
AgNPs’ biosynthesis is carried out by mixing the plant extract with a silver 
nitrate solution. The concentration of the AgNO3 solution is in the order of 10–3 M. 
Biosynthesis is conducted in the dark to prevent the reduction of silver ions by light 
rays. The appearance of silver nanoparticles is accompanied by shift of the color of 
the reaction mixture from light yellow to dark brown. Bioreduction comes to an end 
within a few hours. Progress in silver ion bioreduction can be easily observed by 
measuring the changes in the absorbances of the reaction mixture (Fig. 3). The noting 
of peak at absorption in the 420 nm region is synonymous with the existence of silver 
nanoparticles. Prathna [41], while investigating AgNPs synthesis process kinetics 
with the application of Azidirachta indica leaf extract, noticed that the formation of 
nanoparticles usually occurs in the first two hours. Importantly, the authors marked 
that in the later two hours, aggregation processes of nanoparticles occurred. 
Aggregation of silver nanoparticles reduced their antibacterial activity, which 
called for resorting to surfactant and polymers [42]. A layer of the surfactant on the 
silver nanoparticles’ surface increases not only the stability of AgNPs suspension but 
also reduces dissolution. AgNPs synthesis based on Piper belt leaf extract with the use 
of commonly known cation surfactants, namely cetylthrimethylammonium bromide 
(CTAB), has shown that this compound has a tremendous impact on morphology 
and size of forming nanoparticles [43]. A similar effect was not observed for anionic 
surfactant sodium dodecyl sulphate SDS; it was observed for the cationic surfactant 
CTAB when AgNPs were synthesized with Azidirachta indica leaf extract [43]. 
Microwave irradiation can be an alternative factor supporting AgNPs synthesis. 
In the microwave-assisted system, a mixture of plant extract with AgNO3 solution 
is placed in a domestic microwave oven. The irradiation time is in the order of 1 to 
5 minutes, at a power of 800 W and a frequency of 2450 MHz [44–46]. The use of 
microwave irradiation lowers the high risk of disintegration of capping agent’s layer 
on the silver surface. 
A novel method of AgNPs synthesis has been demonstrated by Huang and 
co-workers [47] with an application of a continuous-flow tubular microreactor. The 
plant extract and AgNO3 solutions were placed in two separate containers with the 
main reactor being equipped with a controlled dosing reagents system (Fig. 3). Such 
a system makes it possible to correlate the flow rate of the reagents with the size and Fig. 4. XRD pattern of dried Ag NPs (Reprinted from Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and 
Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 79, D.S. Sheny, J. Mathew, D. Philip, Phytosynthesis of Au, Ag and Au–Ag 
bimetallic nanoparticles using aqueous extract and dried leaf of Anacardium occidentale, Pages No. 261, 
Copyright (2022), with permission from Elsevier). 
24 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
shape of the synthesized nanoparticles. An analogous system was used for AgNPs 
biosynthesis using the extract from Cacumen Platycladi [48]. 
4. Characterization of Silver Nanoparticles 
The obtained silver nanoparticles are investigated by various physicochemical 
methods such as X-ray analysis, spectroscopic methods (FTIR), and microscopic 
observations (SEM, TEM). 
4.1 XRD Analysis of AgNPs 
X-ray diffractogram shows four peaks at 38°, 44°, 64°, 77°, and 81°, respectively 
(Fig. 4). These peaks are described by the scattering from (111), (200), (220), (311) 
and (222) planes. The crystalline form of AgNPs varies from the monocrystalline to 
polycrystalline depending on synthesis time and temperature. Nucleation takes place 
at 90°C [49]. 
4.2 FTIR Analysis of AgNPs 
Plant extracts as a reagent reducing silver ions have a significant influence on the 
shape of the FTIR spectrum. The changes in peak values observed in the FT-IR 
spectrum of AgNPs should be compared with the spectrum of the plant extract, 
which is known to contain flavonoids and terpenoids—commonly recognized as 
responsible for the reduction process. Figure 5 shows the FTIR spectrum of AgNPs 
obtained from biosynthesis of Aloe vera Delonix regia leaf extract. 
Seven regions can be distinguished in the FTIR spectrum of bio-fabricated silver 
nanoparticles. A large transmission peak occurs in the area of 3285–3275 cm–1 and 
corresponds to hydroxyl group vibration. The peak in the range of 2976–2923 cm–1 
is caused by the symmetrical and asymmetrical C-H stretching of aliphatic -CH 
and -CH2 groups. In the 1743–1721 cm–1 range, there is a peak associated with Wavenumber (cm–1) 
Fig. 5. FT-IR spectra of leaf extract (A) and leaf extract derived AgNPs (B) (Reprinted from Materials 
Chemistry and Physics, 242, M.A. Siddiquee, M. uddin Parray, S.H. Mehdi, K.A. Alzahrani, A.A. 
Alshehri, M.A. Malik, R. Patel, Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from Delonix regia leaf extracts: 
In-vitro cytotoxicity and interaction studies with bovine serum albumin, Pages No 5, Copyright (2022), 
with permission from Elsevier). 
Fig. 6. (A) HRTEM micrographs (C) SEM image of silver nanoparticles synthesized from Delonix 
regia leaf extract (Reprinted from Materials Chemistry and Physics, 242, M.A. Siddiquee, M. Uddin 
Parray, S.H. Mehdi, K.A. Alzahrani, A.A. Alshehri, M.A. Malik and R. Patel. Green synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles from Delonix regia leaf extracts: In-vitro cytotoxicity and interaction studies with bovine 
serum albumin, Pages No 5, Copyright (2022), with permission from Elsevier). 
Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Leaf Extracts Characteristics 25 
the stretching vibration of carbonyl group C=O. The asymmetric and symmetric 
stretching vibrations of the carboxylate group are responsible for the peak in the 
range of 1635–1622 cm–1. The C-H bond in the aromatic ring is responsible for the 
formation of the peak in the range of 1392–1376 cm–1. The peak in the range of 
1254–1241 cm–1 is attributed to the protein bond. The stretching vibration of C-O-C 
group corresponds with the peak at the 1047–1037 cm–1 range. 
4.3 SEM and TEM Analysis of AgNPs 
The image and the size distribution of AgNPs enable examinations with the use of 
an electron microscope. In most cases, the biosynthesized silver nanoparticles have a 
spherical shape. The size of nanoparticles largely depends on the synthesis method. 
AgNPs ranging in size from 8 to 30 nm are most commonly obtained [51]. Images 
of AgNPs produced by biosynthesis with Thuya occidentalis extract based on the 
transmission (A) and scanning (C) electron microscope are shown in Fig. 6. 26 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
4.4 DLS and Zeta Potential 
The dynamic light scattering (DLS) technique is most frequently applied to evaluate 
the size distribution and average size of AgNPs. It is based on the measurement of 
the time-dependent fluctuation in the intensity of light scattering by colloid particles 
which are in constant Brownian motion. The intensity of the scattered light is 
correlated with the size of the scattered particles. The particle size measured by DLS 
is larger than the size indicated by XRD. 
The laser Doppler velocimetry is the best known technique for measuring particle 
flow velocity and determining zeta potential. The zeta potential value is correlated 
with the structure of the ionic double layer surrounding the particle surface. The 
zeta potential is also a crucial factor for knowledge of the stability of nanoparticles’ 
suspension. A zeta potential greater than +25 mV or –25 mV is assumed to guarantee 
nanoparticle stability. Most of the silver nanoparticles from by biosynthesis show 
a zeta potential lower than the value of +/–25 mV. Table 2 shows the zeta potential 
values of AgNPs obtained using various plant extracts. 
Ag nanoparticles from rice leaf extract showed interesting properties [37], 
namely, the value of the zeta potential correlated with synthesis time. A short 
synthesis time of 0–1 hours yielded a positive zeta potential of AgNPs; after 1 hour, 
the potential was negative. Apparently, short synthesis time prevents the adsorption 
of bioreagents on the surface of silver nanoparticles. 
Table 2. Zeta potential of AgNPs. 
Plant Zeta potential [mV] Reference 
Salvia coccinea –15.0 [39] 
Olea europaea –25.3 [52] 
Caesalpinia digyna –35.9 [17] 
Eucalyptus camaldulensis –19 [11] 
Ixora brachypoda –30.4 [26] 
Melia azedarach –13.1 [30] 
Naringi crenulate –24.3 [34] 
Quercus coccifera –26.4 [37] 
5. Ionic Liquids and Silver Nanoparticles’ Synthesis 
Ionic liquids (ILs) are a group of salts containing an organic cation and existing 
as a liquid at temperatures below 100°C. The specific features of ILs determine 
their numerous applications, mainly as a substitute for organic liquids. In AgNPs 
biosynthesis, ILs can support extraction [53] and participate in nanoparticle 
synthesis [54]. For example, the leaves of Cynanchum paniculatum were treated 
with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([C4mim]Cl) whose presence 
caused a significant enhancement of the amount of extracted substances. This 
phenomenon should be explained by an increase in cell wall permeability by IL 
pre-treatment [53]. Cholinium-based ILs were used to intensify the extraction 
saponins and polyphenols from tea leaves (Camellia sinensis) [55]. Extraction was  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Leaf Extracts Characteristics 27 
carried out at a temperature of 40°C with a 1:1 ratio of IL to water. The results 
of saponins and polyphenols extraction with the ILs were 30% better than those 
from reactions based on ethanol-water mixture. ILs can play various roles in the 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles, including stabilizing properties and functionalizing 
agents. Additionally, imidazolium salts possess weak reducing properties and 
have been shown to be the way for silver nanoparticle nucleation. The stability of 
nanoparticles is contingent on capping reagents and ILs, like surfactants, are able to 
prevent aggregation. Generally, there is electrostatic and steric stability. The charge 
located on the surface of nanoparticles is of the essence in electrostatic stability. The 
multiplicity of zeta potential is an indicator of nanoparticles’ stability. The steric 
stability is a result of protective layer formatted around nanoparticle that prevents 
aggregation. The formation of the hydrogen bond is one of the factor determining 
the occurring of a layer of ionic liquid molecules around the nanoparticle. The 
most common ionic liquids serving as stabilizing agents include imidazolium base 
ILs [56]. These liquids have a long alkyl chain that functions like a surfactant that 
sterically stabilizes AgNPs. This means that the structure of the IL molecule plays an 
important role on the morphology of tested AgNPs. 
Acknowledgement 
This chapter was supported by the H2020 project (grant agreement no. 953206) 
Open innovation test bed for developing safe nano-enabled bio-based materials and 
polymer bionanocomposites for multifunctional and new advanced applications 
“BioNanoPolys” (2021–2024). 
References 
[1] Saravanan, A., P.S. Kumar and S. Karishma. 2021. A review on biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles 
and its environmental application. Chemosphere 264: 128580. 
[2] Narayanan, K.B. and N. Sakthivel. 2010. Biological synthesis of metal nanoparticles by microbes. 
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 156: 1. 
[3] Mukherjee, P., S. Senapati, D. Mandal, D. et al. 2002. Extracellular synthesis of gold nanoparticles 
by the fungus Fusariun oxysporum. Chem. Bio. Chem. 3: 461. 
[4] Sarayaraj, K., S. Rajesh, and M.J. Rathi. 2012. Silver nanoparticles biosynthesis using marine alga 
Padina pavonic and its microbial activity. Dig. J. Nanometer. Biostructure 7: 1557. 
[5] Kowshik, M., S. Ashtaputre, S. Kharrazi et al. 2003. Extracellular synthesis of silver nanoparticles 
by a silver-tolerant yeast strain MKY3. Nanotechnology 14: 95. 
[6] Ahmed, S., Saifullah, M. Ahmad, L.B. Swami and S. Ikram. 2016. Green synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using Azadirachta indica aqueous leaf extract. J. Radiat. Res. Appl, Sci. 9: 1. 
[7] Babu, A.S. and G.H. Prabu. 2011. Synthesis of AgNPs using the extract of Colotropis procera 
flower at room temperature. Mater. Lett. 65: 1675. 
[8] Veeramani, S., E. Ravindran, P. Ramodoss, C. Joseph, K. Shanmugan and S. Renganathans. 
2018. Silver nanoparticles – Green synthesis with aq. extract of stems Ipomoea Pes-Caprae, 
characterization, antimicrobial and anti-cancer potential. Int. J. Med. Nano Res. 5: 24. 
[9] Arokiyaraj, S., S. Vincent, M. Saravanan, Y. Lee, K.Y. Oh and H.K. Kim. 2017. Green synthesis 
of silver nanoparticles using Rheum palmatum root extract and their antibacterial activity against 
Staphylococcus aurelus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Artif. L. Cell, Nanomed. Biotechnol. 
45: 372. 
[10] Bankar, A., B. Joshi, R.A. Kumar and S. Zinjarde. 2010. Banana peel extract mediated novel rout 
for the synthesis of nanoparticles. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 368: 58.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[11] Alghorai, I., Ch. Soukkaich, R. Zein, A. Alahamad, J-G. Walter and M. Daghestani. 2020. Aqueous 
extract of Eucalyptus camaldulensis leaves as reducing and capping agent in biosynthesis of silver 
nanoparticles. Inorg. Nano-Mat. Chem. 50: 895. 
[12] Shankar, S.S., A. Ahmed and M. Sastry. 2003. Geranium leaf assisted biosynthesis of silver 
nanoparticles. Biotechnol. Prog. 19: 1627. 
[13] Gardea-Torresday, L.J., E. Gomez. R.J. Peralta-Videa, G.J. Parsons, H. Troiani and M. Jose￾Yacaman. 2003. Alfalfa sprouts: A natural source for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles. Langmuir 
19: 1357. 
[14] Shah, M., D. Fawcett, S. Sharma, K.S. Tripathy and J.E.G. Poinern. 2015. Green synthesis of 
metallic nanoparticles via biological entities. Materials 8: 7278. 
[15] Ahmed, S., M. Ahmed, L.S. Swami and S. Ikaram. 2016. A review on plants extract mediated 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications: A green expertise. J. Adv. Res. 7: 
17. 
[16] Kambale, EK.E., I.C. Nkanga and B-P. Mutonkole. 2020. Green synthesis antimicrobial 
nanoparticles using aqueous leaf extract from three congolese plant species. Heliyon. 6: e4493. 
[17] Niloy, S.M., M. Hossain and M. Takikawa. 2020. Synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Caesalpinia 
digyna and investigation of their antimicrobial activity an in vivo biocompatibility. ACS Appl. Bio. 
Mater. 3: 7722. 
[18] Chouhan, S. and S. Guleria. 2020. Green synthesis of AgNPs using Cannabis sativa leaf extract: 
Characterization, antibacterial, anti-yeast and α-amylaz inhibitory activity. Mater. Sci. Energy. 
Technol. 3: 536. 
[19] Singh, P.S., A. Mishra, K.R. Shyanti, R.P. Singh and A. Acharya. 2021. Silver nanoparticles 
synthesized using Carica papaya leaf extract, AgNPs-PEL causes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in 
human prostate (DU 145) cancer cells. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 199: 1316. 
[20] Singh, R., C. Hano, G. Nath and B. Sharma. 2021. Green biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using 
leaf extract of Carissa carandas L. and their antioxidant and antimicrobial activity against human 
pathogenic bacteria. Biomolecules 11: 299. 
[21] Hemlata, R.P. Meena, P.A. Singh and K.K. Tejavath. 2020. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles 
using Cucumis prophetarium aqueous leaf extract and their antibacterial and antiproliferative 
activity against cancer cell lines. ACS Omega 5: 5520. 
[22] Siddiquee, A., M. Uddin Parray and H.S. Mehdi. 2020. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from 
Delonix regia leaf extract: In-vitro cytotoxicity and interaction studies with bovine serum albumin. 
Mat. Chem. Phys. 242: 122493. 
[23] Rangayasami, A., K. Kannan, S. Jashi and M. Subban. 2020. Bioengineered silver nanoparticles 
using Elytraria acaulis (L.f) Lindau leaf extract and its biological applications. Biocatal. Agric. 
Biotechnol. 27: 101690. 
[24] Azizi, M., S. Sedaghat, K. Tahvildari, P. Derakhshi and A. Ghaemi. 2020. Green biosynthesis of 
silver nanoparticles with Eryngium caucasicum Trautv aqueous extract. Inorg. Nano-Mat. Chem. 
50: 429. 
[25] Melkamu, W.W. and T.L. Bitew. 2021. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Hagenia 
abyssinica (Bruce) J.F Gmel plant leaf extract and their antibacterial and anti-oxidant activities. 
Heliyon. 7: e08459. 
[26] Bhat, M., B. Chakraborty and S.R. Kumar. 2021. Biogenic synthesis, characterization and 
antimicrobial activity of Ixora brachypoda (DC) leaf extract mediated silver nanoparticles. J. King 
Saud Univ. Sci. 33: 101296. 
[27] Hosseini, A.A., H. Djahaniani and F. Nabati. 2021. Ultrasound-assisted biosynthesis of Ag 
nanoparticles using Juglans negia L. leaves extract. Main Group Chem. 20: 1. 
[28] Good El-Rab, F.M.S., M.E. Halawan and S.S.S. Alzahrani. 2021. Biosynthesis of silver nano-drug 
using Juniperus excelsa and its synergistic antibacterial activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria 
for wound dressing application. Biotech. 11: 255. 
[29] Abdallah, M.B. and M.E. Ali. 2021. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Lotus lalambensis 
aqueous leaf extract and their anti-candidal activity against oral candidiasis. ACS Omega 6: 8151. 
[30] Jebril, S., B.K.R. Janana and C. Dridi. 2020. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Melia 
azedarach leaf extract and their antifungal activities. In vitro and in vivo. Mater. Chem. Phys. 
248: 122898.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Leaf Extracts Characteristics 29 
[31] Nouri, A., T.M. Yaraki, A. Lajevarch, Z. Rezaei, M. Gharbanpour, and M. Tanzifi. 2020. Ultrasonic￾assisted green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Mentha aquatica leaf extract for enhanced 
antibacterial properties and catalytic activity. Colloid Interface Sci. Commun. 36: 100252. 
[32] Wang, Y. and S. Wei. 2021. Green fabrication of bioactive silver nanoparticles using Mentha 
pulegium extract under alkaline: An enhanced anticancer activity. ACS Omega 10: 16267. 
[33] Narasimha, R., V.L. Hublikar, M.S. Patil and P. Bhat. 2021. Microwave assisted biosynthesis of 
silver nanoparticles using banana leaves extract. J. Water Environ. Nanotechnol. 6: 49. 
[34] Vallinayagam, S., K. Rajendran and V. Sekar. 2021. Green synthesis and characterization of silver 
nanoparticles using Naringi crenulate leaf extract: Key challenges for anticancer activities. J. Mol. 
Struct. 1243: 130829. 
[35] Saha, I., M. Hasanuzzaman, D. Sibhas, C.S. Debnath and K.M. Adak. 2021. Silver-nanoparticle and 
abscisic acid modulate sub 1A submergence tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Environ. Exp. Bot. 
181: 104276. 
[36] Anshiba, J., M. Poonkothai, P. Karthika and R. Mythili. 2022. Green route a novel and eco-friendly 
phytosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using Platycladus orientalis L. leaf extract. Mater. Lett. 
309: 131347. 
[37] Kocazorbaz, K.E., H. Moulahoum and E. Tut. 2021. Kermes oak (Quercus coccifera L.) extract 
for a biogenic and eco-benign synthesis of silver nanoparticles with efficient biological activities. 
Environ. Technol. Innov. 24: 102067. 
[38] Moni, M., H.J. Chano and D.A. Gandhi. 2020. Environmental and biomedical application of 
AgNPs synthesized using the aqueous extract of Solanum surattense leaf. Inorg. Chem. Commun. 
121: 108228. 
[39] Shanmugan, G., A. Sundaramoorthy and N. Shanmugan. 2021. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles 
from leaf extract of Salvia coccinea and its effects anti-inflammatory potential in tuman monocytic 
THP-cells. ACS App. Bio Mater. 4: 8433. 
[40] Naaz, R., U.V. Siddiqui, U.S. Qadrir and A.W. Siddiqi. 2021. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles 
using Syngonium podophyllum leaf extract and its antibacterial activity. Mater. Today: Proc. 
46: 2353. 
[41] Prathna, C.T., N. Chandrasekaran, M.A. Raichu and A. Nukherjee. 2011. Kinetic evolution studies 
of silver nanoparticles in bio-based green synthesis process. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. 
Asp. 377: 212. 
[42] Li, G., D. He, Y. Qian et al. 2012. Fungus – mediated green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using 
Aspergillus terneus. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 13: 466. 
[43] Khan, Z., I.J. Hussan and A.A. Hashmi. 2012. Shape-directing role of cetyltrimethylammonium 
bromide in green synthesis of Ag-nanoparticles using Neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf extract. 
Colloids Surf. B. 95: 229. 
[44] Joseph, S. and B. Mathew. 2015. Microwave-assisted green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and 
the study on catalytic activity in the degradation of dyes. J. Mol. Liq. 204: 181. 
[45] Joseph, S. and B. Mathew. 2014. Microwave assisted biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using the 
rhizome extract of Alpinia galanga and evaluation of their catalytic and antimicrobial activities. 
J. Nanopart. 9: 967802. 
[46] Anjana, N.V., M. Joseph, S. Francis, A. Joseph, E. Koshy and B. Mathew. 2021. Microwave 
assisted green synthesis of silver nanoparticles for optical, catalytic, biological and electrochemical 
applications. Artif. Cells, Nanomed. Biotechnol. 49: 438. 
[47] Huang, J., L. Lin, Q. Li et al. 2008. Continuous-flow biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles by 
lixivium of sundried Cinnamomum camphora leaf in turbular microreactor. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
47: 6081. 
[48] Liu, H., J. Huang, D. Sun et al. 2012. Microfluidic biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles: Effect of 
process parameters on size distribution. Chem. Eng. J., 209: 568. 
[49] Cushing, L.B., L.V. Kolesnichenko and J. O’Connor. 2004. Recent advances in the liquid-phase 
syntheses of inorganic nanoparticles. Chem. Rev. 104: 3893.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[50] Anju, R.T., S. Parvathy, V.M. Veettil, J. Rosemary, H.T. Ansalna and M.M. Shahzabanu. 2021. 
Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from Aloe vera extract and its antimicrobial activity. Mater. 
Today: Proc. 43: 3956. 
[51] Kanawaria, K.S., A. Sankhla and K.P. Jatav. 2018. Rapid biosynthesis and characterization of silver 
nanoparticles: an assessment of antibacterial and antimycotic activity. Appl. Phys. A. 124: 320. 
[52] Rashidipour, M. and H. Rouhollah. 2014. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using extract of olive 
leaf synthesis and in vitro cytotoxic effect on MCF7 cells. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 4: 112. 
[53] Jin, R., L. Fan, X. An et al. 2011. Microwave assisted ionic liquid pretreatment of medicinal plant 
for fast solvent extraction of active ingredients. Sep. Purif. Technol. 83: 45. 
[54] Patil, V., S. Mahajn, M. Kulkarni et al. 2020. Synthesis silver nanoparticles colloids in imidazolium 
halide ionic liquids and their antibacterial activity for gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. 
Chemosphere 2020: 125302. 
[55] Ribeiro, D.B., Z.A.M. Coelho, N.P.L. Rebelo and M.I. Marrucho. 2013. Ionic liquids as additives 
for extraction of saponin and polyphenols from Mate and tea (Camellia sinensis). Ind. Eng. Chem. 
Res. 32: 12146. 
[56] Verma, C., E.E. Ebensa and A.M. Quraishi. 2019. Transition metal nanoparticles in ionic liquids 
synthesis and stabilization. J. Mole. Liq., 276: 826. 3


Nanofabrication Using
Natural Cohorts 
Shushay Hagos Gebre 
1. Introduction 
The physical and chemical approaches are used extensively and effectively 
to synthesize the nanomaterials. However, these approaches employed harsh 
environmental conditions, rigorous energy, and toxic byproducts. Physical processes 
are performed without toxic reducing reagents, and narrow size distribution of 
the nanoparticles (NPs) are formed. However, physical techniques such as ball 
milling and laser ablation demand high energy consumption, tedious procedures 
and instrumentations and stringent conditions [1–3]. The chemical method is also 
popular, and most of its protocol depends on using toxic reducing agents like 
N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF), celyltriethylammonium chloride (CTAC), sodium 
borohydride, hydrazine, and organic solvents. The chemicals employed during the 
production of the nanomaterials are highly reactive, release undesirable byproducts 
and cause potential environmental and biological threats [4, 5]. The nanomaterials may 
not used directly for clinical application due to the toxic chemical absorbed on their 
surface [6]. In this context, researchers have developed a lucrative, environmentally 
benign strategy that provides a superior platform to fabricate various nanomaterials 
with well-defined morphology. The bionanofabrication of nanomaterials using living 
entities of plants and microorganisms has opened a new frontier for the biosynthesis 
of nanomaterials. Since this strategy does not require further stabilizing or capping 
chemical agents, the plant and microorganism constituents are used as capping and 
stabilizing agents [7]. Nature can also synthesize biocompatible nanomaterials, 
College of Natural and Computational Science, Department of Chemistry, Jigjiga University, P.O. Box 
1020, Jigjiga, Ethiopia. 
Email: shushayhagos@gmail.com 32 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
for example, magnetite nanostructures are obtained in magnetotactic bacteria 
as a part of their magnetic navigation devices which alludes to studying another 
microorganism [8]. 
Furthermore, microbes naturally detoxify metal ions into nanomaterials. 
The detoxifying mechanism may vary from one microorganism to another; some 
export them using efflux pumps, changing their solubility and altering their redox 
state. Other organisms may reduce the metal ions to their elemental forms. Then 
researchers harnessed the latter to redox the mechanism for synthesizing various 
nanomaterials using microbial cells like bacteria, fungi, yeast, and algae. Nowadays, 
the nanofabrication of nanomaterials with the help of microorganisms is popular and 
has incredible capability in non-toxic solvents (H2O) under mild conditions [9]. 
Thus, the biological or green method is environmental friendly in which the 
primary and secondary metabolites are used as natural biological agents during 
the biosynthesis procedure. The functional groups of the proteins or enzymes and 
phytochemicals are synergistically used as reducing, capping, and stabilizing agents. 
The plant system is straightforward and advantageous to the microorganism due 
to the devoid of complex and multi-step procedures like culturing and isolation 
[10]. The biosynthesis of the NPs with the help of plant extract includes the basic 
sequential steps of bio-reduction, nucleation, growth, coarsening, and aggregation 
[11] (Fig. 1a). 
The nanofabrication is not limited to metal or metal oxide nanoparticles (MoNPs) 
[12, 13]. Hence, metallic nanocomposites, bimetallic, trimetallic [14], quadrometallic 
nanostructures (QMNs), and hybrid are also promoted using the green route [15]. 
The nanomaterials are manipulated to various forms of multicomponent systems 
to improve their stability and performance. Due to the synergistic consequence 
among the metals, the ternary materials showed better performance in energy 
conversion than the bimetallic and monometallic systems. Organic nanomaterials 
like reduced graphene oxide (rGO), the effective supporting material for the metal 
NPs, are also synthesized using the plant array system. Leave extracts of Cynodon 
dactylon, Azadirachta indica, and Juglans regia plants have been used to synthesize 
metal-free carbon nanotube [16]. 
The functional groups of the biomolecules are synergistically or collectively 
used as capping agents to stabilize the NPs. Especially the plant and food-related 
derived NPs can be used for clinical applications without fear since they are 
free from toxic chemicals that probably adsorbs on their surface. Water extract 
Citrus macroptera fruit peel promotes the formation of 11 nm average size and 
face-centered cubic crystals and spherical morphology Ag NPs for catalytic 
degradation of organic dyes [17]. Similarly, an aqueous extract of Caesalpinia 
bonducella seeds were used to derive rice-shaped CuO NPs. The plant is known 
for its antioxidant activity since it contains citrulline, phytosterinin, β-carotene, and 
flavonoids which act as reducing, stabilizing, and capping agents. The obtained 
CuO NPs was utilized as a sensor and appeared to have good reproducibility and 
stability for 120 days [18]. Ethanol extracted embelin from Embelia tsjeriam-cottam 
fruit was successfully converted salt solution of Ag+ and Au+3 to their corresponding 
quasi-spherical and nanostars. Embelin was used as a reducing and capping agent, 3
Fig. 1.: (a) Nano biosynthesis steps using plant phytochemical (b) extraction of embelin from
the fruits of Embelia tsjeriam-cottam and synthesis of embelin stabilized silver nanoparticles
(Ag NP), gold nanoparticles (AuNP) and gold nanostars (E-GNS) using embelin reducing 
and stabilizing agent [19], (c) Putative model for the H. perforatum extract-mediated green
synthesis of Ag NPs [20], Reproduced with permission from American Chemical Society.
2. Microbial based nanofabrication
2.1. Fungi mediated nanofabrication
The use of fungal biomass for the fabrication of nanomaterials is a recent interest due to its
ready availability, simple culturing process, bioaccumulation ability to uptake metals, and its
secretion of higher amount of proteins than the other microorganisms [21]. Fungi have
enzymes and reducing components on their surface capable of bio-reduction of the metal ions
to the nanoscale [22]. Further, fungi cell walls are rich in glycoproteins and carbohydrates
made from glucan and chitin, which can react with the metal ions in the extra or intracellular
systems [23]. The extracellular synthesis is better than the intracellular one since additional
purification and extraction methods are required for the intracellular system, which may 
reduce the yield and quality of the final product [24]. To date, various fungi strains, namely
Rhizopus Oryzae, Neurospora crassa, Trichoderma harzianum, Aspergillus oryzae,
Helminthosporum solani, Cladosporium sp., Fusarium sp., Penicillium sp., Fusarium
semitectum, and Candida albicans are reported for the biosynthesis of MNPs, MoNPs, and
nanocomposites [25,26].
Biomolecules obtained from fungi extracts also serve as a capping agent during the
synthesis of the NPs, which protects the NPs from agglomerations. Biologically (fungi
Pycnoporus sp. templated) synthesized Ag NPs were carried out against Gram-positive and 
negative bacteria using the agar well diffusion method. The microbial-mediated Ag NPs
exhibited a zone inhibition of 24, 25, 26, and 22 mm for aureus, B. subtilis, E. coli, and
Klebsiella pneumonia, respectively. However, the chemically synthesized Ag NPs showed
Fig. 1. (a) Nano biosynthesis steps using plant phytochemical (b) extraction of embelin from the fruits 
of Embelia tsjeriam-cottam and synthesis of embelin stabilized silver nanoparticles (Ag NP), gold 
nanoparticles (AuNP) and gold nanostars (E-GNS) using embelin reducing and stabilizing agent [19], 
(c) Putative model for the H. perforatum extract-mediated green synthesis of Ag NPs [20], Reproduced 
with permission from American Chemical Society. 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 33 
which was able to used to grow the NPs via nucleation and their subsequent growth, 
as shown in Fig. 1b. The mall sizes of 3–15 nm of Ag and 12–15 nm of Au NPs 
are formed, respectively. The embelin stabilized gold nanostars (E-GNS), Au, and 
Ag NPs were created at a pH of 12 [19]. In another recent study, aerial part of 
Hypericum perforatum, which is also known as St. John’s wort, has been used for 
the fabrication of Ag NPs. The medicinal plant has unique bioactive compounds 
such as xanthones, phloroglucinols, and naphthodianthrones used as reducing and 
capping agents. When the plant extract is added, the Ag+
 ion is rapidly reduced to 
Ag0
. The atomic nuclei form a cluster of NPs until the maximum size is reached. The 
hydrophobicity nature of the Ag NPs allows binding with the capping agents on their 
surface to stabilize the surface energy, as demonstrated in Fig. 1c [20]. 
2. Microbial Based Nanofabrication 
2.1 Fungi Mediated Nanofabrication 
The use of fungal biomass for the fabrication of nanomaterials is a recent interest due 
to its ready availability, simple culturing process, bioaccumulation ability to uptake 
metals, and its secretion of higher amount of proteins than the other microorganisms 
[21]. Fungi have enzymes and reducing components on their surface capable of 
bio-reduction of the metal ions to the nanoscale [22]. Further, fungi cell walls are rich 
in glycoproteins and carbohydrates made from glucan and chitin, which can react with 
the metal ions in the extra or intracellular systems [23]. The extracellular synthesis is 
better than the intracellular one since additional purification and extraction methods 
are required for the intracellular system, which may reduce the yield and quality 34 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
of the final product [24]. To date, various fungi strains, namely Rhizopus Oryzae, 
Neurospora crassa, Trichoderma harzianum, Aspergillus oryzae, Helminthosporum 
solani, Cladosporium sp., Fusarium sp., Penicillium sp., Fusarium semitectum, 
and Candida albicans are reported for the biosynthesis of MNPs, MoNPs, and 
nanocomposites [25, 26]. 
Biomolecules obtained from fungi extracts also serve as a capping agent during 
the synthesis of the NPs, which protects the NPs from agglomerations. Biologically 
(fungi Pycnoporus sp. templated) synthesized Ag NPs were carried out against 
Gram-positive and negative bacteria using the agar well diffusion method. The 
microbial-mediated Ag NPs exhibited a zone inhibition of 24, 25, 26, and 22 mm 
for aureus, B. subtilis, E. coli, and Klebsiella pneumonia, respectively. However, 
the chemically synthesized Ag NPs showed 20, 19, 20, and 18 mm corresponding 
to aureus, B. subtilis, E. coli, and Klebsiella pneumonia [27]. Different shapes 
of Au NPs were synthesized using cell-free extract of the fungal strain Rhizopus 
oryzae at room temperature. The operating parameters (reaction time, metal ion 
concentration, and pH) greatly affect the formation of different shapes of Au, namely 
hexagonal, pentagonal, triangular, spherical, spheroidal, urchinlike, two-dimensional 
nanowires, and nanorods. The Au NPs were obtained using HAuCl4 (1500 mg/L and 
pH 5.0) after 24 hrs reaction time. Then, the triangles, hexagons, pentagons, and 
star-shaped Au NPs are formed at a concentration and pH of (1000 mg/L and 
pH 8.0), (1500 mg/L and pH 3.0), (2000 mg/L and pH 6.0), and (2000 mg/L and 
pH 10.0) after 24 h reaction time, respectively. As the gold ion concentration 
increases to 2500 mg/L at pH 9.0, a quasi-spherical shape resembling sea urchin is 
formed. Further increasing the gold ion concentration to 4000 mg/L, pH 10.0 lead to 
the formation of long wire Au NPs after 20 hrs, increasing the reaction time to 30 hrs 
to form single nanorods [28]. 
2.2 Bacteria Mediated Nanofabrication 
Bacteria are another potential source for the fabrication of nanomaterials through 
extracellular or intracellular pathways. Bacterial reducing enzymes such as 
NADH-dependent reductase or nitrate-dependent reductase play an essential role to 
reduce the metal ions into NPs [29]. The extracellular protocol is straightforward 
as it does not use complex downstream procedures [30]. Proteus vulgaris cultured 
mediated iron oxide NPs is synthesized using 10 mL of 3 mM FeCl3 solution with 
90 mL of bacterial supernatant extracellularly. The mixture was shaken for 5 days. A 
spherical shape with 19.23–30.51 nm size was obtained. Further, the NP was stable 
for two months without any deterioration while using as antioxidant and antibacterial 
activities [31]. The bacteria-assisted biosynthesis is more challenging than the fungi 
or plant sources due to cell culturing and isolation procedures. 
The nanofabrication mechanism may vary from bacteria to bacteria due to the 
varieties of bioactive macromolecules. The oxidation of NADH-dependent reductase 
enzyme to NAD+
 involves an electron transfer used for the bio-reduction of the 
metal ions to specific NPs [32]. The nanofabrication has been taking place in the 
cell wall of the bacteria. The metal ions enter the cytoplasm and are transported 
via the wall meshwork for extracellular delivery. Peptidoglycans of the cell wall 6
Fig. 2.: (a) FESEM micrographic image of synthesized No NPs [37], Reproduced with
permission from Elsevier, (b) FESEM images of the A. hydrophila synthesized TiO2
nanoparticle [38], Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, (c) anisotropic Au
nanoparticles with multifaceted morphology [46], Reproduced with permission from Elsevier
(d-f) TEM images of gold nanoplates synthesized under neutral pH [45], Reproduced with 
permission from American Chemical Society
3. Food related resource assisted nanofabrication
Food-related sources such as beans, rice, honey, and milk are also used for the synthesis of
nanomaterials without additional reducing or capping agents [47, 48]. Milk contains nearly 
3.3% of protein and essential amino acids. For example, in bovine milk, 82% of its protein is
casein, and the remaining 18% is serum or whey protein. Therefore, synthesizing NPs using 
milk is environmentally safe without releasing any harmful byproducts. Stable NPs are 
obtained since casein is stable at high temperatures [49, 50].
The honey bee is also another renewable resource for the synthesis of nanomaterials. 
It is a bio-directed and economically feasible method due to carbohydrates, enzymes,
vitamins, minerals and antioxidant compositions being responsible for the bio-reduction and
stabilizing of the nanomaterials. Few NPs such as Ag, Pt, Au, Pd, and carbon NPs are
prepared using honey as a reducing agent [51]. A spherical shape with 4 nm Ag NPs is
obtained using honey at a pH of 8.5. The possible reducing agent is glucose, and other
biomolecules such as proteins act as a capping agent to stabilize the NPs [52]. Similarly,
small-size Pt NPs (2.2 nm) are fabricated using an aqueous solution of honey. The honey￾mediated Pt nanostructure was stable in water for four months [53]. Natural honey was also
used to prepare a spherical shape with 15 nm size of Au NPs. The monosaccharide fructose
probably acts as a reducing agent and the proteins of the honey stabilize the NPs [54].
Superparamagnetic Fe3O4 NPs are effectively prepared using soya bean sprout
templates under ambient temperature. Spherical nanoparticles with uniform size and 8 nm
 
Fig. 2. (a) FESEM micrographic image of synthesized ZnO NPs [37], Reproduced with permission 
from Elsevier, (b) FESEM images of the A. hydrophila synthesized TiO2 nanoparticle [38], Reproduced 
with permission from Elsevier, (c) anisotropic Au nanoparticles with multifaceted morphology [46], 
Reproduced with permission from Elsevier (d–f) TEM images of gold nanoplates synthesized under 
neutral pH [45], Reproduced with permission from American Chemical Society. 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 35 
composition offer the incoming ion for stoichiometric interaction between the metal 
ion and bioactive functional groups of the cell walls with further inorganic deposition 
of metals. Amino acid’s reactive functional groups such as acids (-COOH), amine 
(-NH2), thiols (-SH), and alcohols (-OH) directly bind with metals and conversion of 
charge takes place. A spherical shape with 42 nm size of Ag NP was reported using a 
cell-free extract of Bacillus brevis (NCIM 2533) as a bio-reductant. Characterization 
of the NPs with Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) showed the 
linkage of protein and amino acid functional groups of -OH, -C=O, -CONH, and 
–C=C– [33]. 
Organic-coated Fe3O4 and Fe3S4 nanomaterials are obtained from magnetotactic 
and non-magnetotactic bacteria. The phospholipid bilayer membrane of the bacteria 
is used as a coating layer [34]. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, one of the natural 
magnetotactic bacteria, synthesized magnetic iron oxide NPs through biologically 
controlled mineralization. A magnet was used to separate the magnetosomes from 
the intracellularly biomineralized portion of the magnetotactic bacteria, and the 
debris was removed by washing with saline. Finally, the purified magnetosomes 
exhibited various morphologies of the NPs with a size range of 35–50 nm [35]. 
Cyanobacteria, a phototropic bacterium, is studied for the biosynthesis of ZnO 
NPs through its cell extract. The bioactive compounds like lipids, proteins, and 
pigments are responsible for the bio-reduction reaction. Characterizations of 
the ZnO NPs via scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM), and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) confirmed 
that a star-like shape with 60 nm, which comprises 31.80% Zn metal and an 
emission peak of oxygen comprising 63.2%, indicates the complete formation 
of Zn in its oxide form. Further, measured zeta potential value (–29.7) shows the 
stability of the NPs for a long time due to the presence of the bioactive compounds 
[36]. A bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila was also used to synthesize a controlled 
spherical and oval shape ZnO NP with 57.72 nm average size at 30°C and 24 h 36 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
reaction time (Fig. 2a) [37]. The above authors have studied the biosynthesis of 
TiO2 NPs using the same bacteria to afford a uniform spherical and uneven TiO2 
with a formation of aggregates in its surroundings (Fig. 2b). Smooth surfaces with 
28–54 sizes and pure TiO2 NPs were obtained according to the EDX chemical 
composition analysis [38]. 
2.3 Algae Mediated Nanofabrication 
Algae are low-cost photosynthetic microorganisms that can capture CO2 to prepare 
their food with the action of light. Algae cell walls are rich in biomolecules, and 
the functional groups of proteins (amines, amides, and carboxylic acids), and 
carbohydrates (aldehyde, ketone, and phenols or alcohols) are synergistically used 
for the biosynthesis of the NPs [39, 40]. Algae are used to synthesize NPs due 
to their high potential metal accommodation, are easily available, less toxic, and 
rapidly grow at a lower temperature. The live and dead algae biomasses can be used 
for the bionanofactories of NPs in a shorter reaction time than other microbes. The 
biosynthesis of the NPs can take place using the living culture either intracellularly 
or extracellularly. The biosynthesis of the NPs is carried out within the cell in the 
intracellular pathway. In contrast, algae secreting biomolecules in the surrounding can 
facilitate biosynthesis in the extracellular system. The extracellular pathway is more 
prominent. On the other hand, extracted biomolecules of algae such as carbohydrates, 
protein, lipids, nucleic acids, and others can be used for the biosynthesis of NPs [41]. 
Cultured green algae (Botryococcus braunii) isolate is used to produce Ag NPs 
by applying 5 mL algal extract with 45 mL of 1 mM AgNO3 aqueous solution on 
a stirrer for 3 h at room temperature. A negative control that contains only 1 mM 
AgNO3 was used for comparison and the transformation was controlled by the color 
change and recording on the UV-Vis spectrum. The obtained 40–90 nm size Ag NPs 
were used to synthesize biologically important benzimidazole compounds [42]. 
Similarly, a green alga (Spirogyra hyaline) is reported for the biosynthesis of Ag 
NPs using 50 mL of the algal extract and AgNO3 (1:1). A change of color confirmed 
the formation of the NPs after heating at 60°C in a magnetic stirrer for 45 min. 
Amine, alcohol/phenol, and aromatic functional groups are used as bio-reductants 
[43]. Similarly, extract biomolecule of brown algae (Cystoseira baccata) is reported 
for the biosynthesis of 8.4 ± 2.2 nm size Au NPs using 0.01 M of HAuCl4 and 
1 mL of the algal extract at room temperature. The fabricated NPs showed promising 
activity for cancer therapies [44]. Synthesis of nanomaterials with controlled shape, 
size, and composition is critical to realize the nanofabrication. Sargassum sp. (brown 
seaweed) is applied to reduce aqueous chloroauric acid solution to Au NPs. Flat 
gold nanocrystals with ~ 80–90% yields are obtained at room temperature and have 
nearly neutral pH, but no products were formed at acidic pH. Hexagonal, truncated 
triangular, and triangular nanoplates of Au NP are created under a controlled 
parameter (Fig. 2d–f) [45]. One-pot synthesis approach is applied using Gracilaria 
verrucose (red seaweed) for the fabrication of isotropic (60%) and anisotropic (40%) 
Au NPs with spherical, octahedral, pentagonal, rhombus and multifaceted triangular 
morphology (Fig. 2c) [46]. The microbes-mediated nanofabrication of nanomaterials 
under various conditions is summarized in Table 1. Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 37 
Table 1. Bio-synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles using microbes and algae.
Microbes Species NPs Metal ion source Size Shape Reaction conditions References 
Lactobacillus acidophilus Bacteria Ag AgNO3 4–50 Spherical 1 mM AgNO3 , 35o C, 24 h [57] 
Bacillus safensis LAU 13 Bacteria Ag AgNO3 5–30 Spherical 2 h, 1 mM AgNO3 , 30 ± 2°C [58] 
Streptomyces ghanaensis Bacteria Ag AgNO3 30‒50 Spherical 1 mmol/L AgNO3 , 100 mL extract, 30 ± 2°C [59] 
Corynebacterium glutamicum Bacteria Ag AgNO3 15 Spherical 1 mM AgNO3 , 24 h [60] 
Enterococcus sp. Bacteria Au HAuCl4 6–13 Spherical 1 mM HAuCl4 , 100 mL culture [61] 
Trichoderma longibrachiatum Fungi Ag AgNO3 1–25 Spherical 50 mL cell filtrate, 50 mL of 1 mM AgNO3 , 33°C [62] 
Aspergillus terreus Fungi Au AuCl3 10–50 Spherical 10 g/100 mL biomass, 1 mM AgNO3 , pH = 7, 
30 o C 
[63] 
Cystoseira baccata Algae Au HAuCl4 8.4 ± 2.2 Spherical 75 µL of 0.01 M HAuCl4 , 1 mL extract, 24 h, r.t. [44] 
Botryococcus braunii Algae Cu Cu(OAc)₂ 40–100 Spherical,
truncated 
50 mL of 1 mM, Cu(OAc)₂, 100°C, 24 h, 5 mL
algal extract 
[64] 
Vitis vinifera Algae Se H 2 SeO3 3–18 Spherical 4 × 10−5 M H2 SeO3 , 10 mL extract, 15 min [65] 
Padina gymnospora Algae Pt H 2 PtCl6 5–50 Truncated, 
octahedra 
10 mL aqueous extract, 0.001 M H2 PtCl6 , 10 min [66] 
Aspergillus fumigatus Fungi Ag AgNO3 84.4 Spherical 1 mM AgNO3 , 30o C, [67] 
Colpomenia sinuosa Algae Fe3 O 4 FeCl3 11.24–33.71 0.1 M FeCl3 and extract, r.t. [68] 
Sargassum muticum Algae Fe3 O 4 FeCl3 18 ± 4 Cube 0.1 M FeCl3 and extract, 60 min, r.t. [69] 
Aeromonas hydrophila Bacteria TiO2 TiO(OH)2 28–54 Spherical 5 mM TiO(OH)2 , 30°C, 24 h [38] 
Ulva lactuca Seaweed ZnO ZnC₄H₆O₄ 10–50 Sponge 1 mM ZnC₄H₆O₄ (95 mL), 3–4 h, 70°C [70] 
Padina pavonia Algae Ag AgNO3 49.58–86.37 Spherical,
triangular, 
rectangle,
polyhedral 
100 mL of 10–3 M, 200 mg extract, 2 min, r.t. [71] 38 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
3. Food Related Resource Assisted Nanofabrication 
Food-related sources such as beans, rice, honey, and milk are also used for the 
synthesis of nanomaterials without additional reducing or capping agents [47, 48]. 
Milk contains nearly 3.3% of protein and essential amino acids. For example, in 
bovine milk, 82% of its protein is casein, and the remaining 18% is serum or whey 
protein. Therefore, synthesizing NPs using milk is environmentally safe without 
releasing any harmful byproducts. Stable NPs are obtained since casein is stable at 
high temperatures [49, 50]. 
The honey bee is also another renewable resource for the synthesis of 
nanomaterials. It is a bio-directed and economically feasible method due to 
carbohydrates, enzymes, vitamins, minerals and antioxidant compositions being 
responsible for the bio-reduction and stabilizing of the nanomaterials. Few NPs such 
as Ag, Pt, Au, Pd, and carbon NPs are prepared using honey as a reducing agent [51]. 
A spherical shape with 4 nm Ag NPs is obtained using honey at a pH of 8.5. The 
possible reducing agent is glucose, and other biomolecules such as proteins act as 
a capping agent to stabilize the NPs [52]. Similarly, small-size Pt NPs (2.2 nm) are 
fabricated using an aqueous solution of honey. The honey-mediated Pt nanostructure 
was stable in water for four months [53]. Natural honey was also used to prepare a 
spherical shape with 15 nm size of Au NPs. The monosaccharide fructose probably 
acts as a reducing agent and the proteins of the honey stabilize the NPs [54]. 
Superparamagnetic Fe3O4 NPs are effectively prepared using soya bean sprout 
templates under ambient temperature. Spherical nanoparticles with uniform size 
and 8 nm average particle size Fe3O4 NPs were obtained. Protein functional groups 
of the bean are shown in the FTIR spectra [55]. Similarly, Coffee arabica seed 
extract-assisted Ag NPs were reported for antibacterial activity. The shape and size of 
the NPs was affected by the concentrations of AgNO3. A spherical and an ellipsoidal 
shape with 22, 20, and 16 nm particle sizes using 0.02, 0.05, and 0.1 M AgNO3 
concentrations, respectively, were obtained [56]. 
4. The Use of Plant Part Extracts 
The use of plant crude extract is more straightforward and advantageous than the 
other biological synthesis methods because further isolation and culture are not 
required. The plant parts are washed, dried and then powder or simply the fresh 
chopped plant sample is extracted using deionized water or alcohols and heated for 
certain hours at low temperatures usually below 60°C. If the extract is heated for 
a long time at a high temperature, the phytochemicals may decompose. The plant 
part extracts are mixed with different concentrations of the metal precursor. A color 
change or UV-Vis spectroscopy mostly controls the formation of the nanomaterials. 
Centrifugation, washing and drying or calcination continues until a crystalline powder 
is obtained [72]. Plant-derived nanomaterials are biocompatible that can be used in 
clinical applications without fear. Plant parts such as leaves, stem, bark, flower, roots, 
seeds, peel, gum, tube/bulb, and rhizome are used for the nanofabrication [73, 74] 
as summarized in Table 2. The water-soluble metabolites of the plant crude extract, 
such as alkaloids, phenolic compounds, quinones, acids, flavonoids, terpenoids, Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 39 
Table 2. Biosynthesis of nanomaterials using plant part extracts.
Plants Parts NPs Metal ion source Size (nm) Shape Reaction conditions References 
Buddleja globosa leave Ag AgNO3 16 Spherical 5% extract, r.t., 5 h, 10 mM AgNO3 [90] 
Silybum marianum seed Pd PdCl2 5 Spherical 10 –4 M PdCl2 , 4 mL extract, r.t., 2 h [91] 
Pongamia pinnata bark Ag AgNO3 5–55 Spherical 10 mL extract, 1 mM AgNO3 , r.t., [92] 
Tagetes erecta flower Ag AgNO3 10–90 Spherical 1 mM AgNO3 , 6 mL extract, r.t., 24 h [93] 
Carica papaya latex Ag AgNO3 12 ± 6 Spherical 2% extract, 2 mM AgNO3 , 37°C, 72 h [94] 
Cocos nucifera L. - Pd Pb(OAC)2 47 ± 2 Spherical 1 mM Pb(OAC)2 , 20 mL extract, r.t. [95] 
Limonia acidissima fruit Ag AgNO3 25–45 Spherical 1 mM AgNO3 , 10 mL extract [96] 
Centella asiatica - Ce (NH₄)₂Ce(NO₃)₆ 1–100 Spherical 4.5 mM salt, 5 mg/mL extract, 10 min [97] 
Azadirachta indica leave Ag AgNO3 34 Dispersed and
Spherical 
1 mM AgNO3 , 1–5 mL extract, r.t., 24 h [98] 
Murraya koenigii leave Fe FeSO4 .7H2 O 59 Spherical 0.10 M metal precursor, r.t. [99] 
Gleichenia pectinata leave Ag AgNO3 7.51 Spherical 5 mM AgNO3 , 10 mL extract, 30 min [100] 
Punica granatum seed α-Fe2 O 3 FeCl3 6H2 O 26.53 Irregular 150 mL FeCl3 6H2 O, 75°C, 15 min, 50 
mL extract 
[101] 
Emblica officinalis fruit Se Na₂SeO₃ 20–60 Spherical 2 mL extract, 10 mM Na₂SeO₃, 27 ± 
2°C, 24 h 
[102] 
Ficus hispida Linn leave Ag AgNO3 20 Spherical 4 mM AgNO3 , 10 mL extract, 60 min, 
90°C 
[103] 
Annona muricata leave Au AuCl3 25.5 Spherical 1 mL extract, 1 mM AuCl3 , 22 h [104] 
Coptidis rhizome rhizome Ag AgNO3 26.42 Spherical 1 mM AgNO3 , 40°C [105] 
Ziziphus zizyphus leave Au HAuCl4 .3H2 O 50 Spherical 5 mL extract, 1 mM HAuCl4 [106] 
Origanum vulgare L. - Ag AgNO3 2–25 Spherical 1 mL extract, 0.5 mM AgNO3 , 2 h, 
85–90°C 
[107]
Table 2 contd. ... 40 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications Plants Parts NPs Metal ion source Size (nm) Shape Reaction conditions References Withania coagulans leave Pd/RGO/Fe3 O 4 FeCl3 .6H2 O, PdCl2 7–13 - 6 h, 100°C, 15 mL extract [108] Astragalus tribuloides root Ag AgNO3 34.2 Spherical 10 mL extract, 1 mmol/L AgNO3 , r.t. [109] Alternanthera sessilis leave Ag AgNO3 23.44 Spherical 1 mM AgNO3 , 5–10 mL extract, 60 min [110] Capsicum baccatum L. fruit Au HAuCl4 .xH2 O 23.9 ± 9.7 Spherical 3 mL extract, 0.5 mM HAuCl4 , r.t., 60 min [111] Catharanthus roseus leave Au HAuCl4 25–35 Sphere-shaped 1 mM HAuCl4 , 1 mL extract, 24 h [112] Colocasia esculenta and Mesua ferrea L. leave, peel rGO Graphite 5.3 Sheet 10 mL extract, 60 mg GO [113] Phoenix dactylifera root Ag AgNO3 15–40 Spherical 5 mL root extract, 0.1 mM AgNO3 [114] Phoenix dactylifera leave Pd PdCl2 13 Irregular 0.003 M PdCl2 , 10 mL extract, 10 min [115] Alysicarpus monilifer leave Ag AgNO3 15 ± 2 Spherical 150 mL extract, 1 mM AgNO3 , 10 min [116] Cocos nucifera - Pb Pb(OAC)2 47 ± 2 Spherical 20 mL, 80 mL lead acetate, r.t. [95] Sphaeranthus indicus leave Au HAuCl4 .3H2 O 25 Spherical 1 mM AuCl4 , 10 mL extract, 30 min, 
pH = 5.4 
[117] 
Nerium oleander leave Au HAuCl4 2–10 Spherical 10 mL, 3 × 10–2 M HAuCl4 , 2 h [118] 
Zanthoxylum
chalybeum 
root Ag AgNO3 50–100 Spherical 10 mL of 2.5 mg/mL root extract, pH = 
9, 60°C, 18 h, 0.5–5.0 mM AgNO3 
[119] 
Ranunculus laetus leave Ag AgNO3 24.125 Spherical 0.1 M AgNO3 , 10 mL extract, 24 h [120] 
...Table 2 contd.. Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 41 
Ocimum sanctum leave Ag AgNO3 14 Spherical 60°C, 10 min, 2 mM AgNO3 [121] 
Amentotaxus
assamica 
leave Au HAuCl4 16 Spherical 0.01 M HAuCl4 , 55°C [122] 
Cacumen platycladi leave Au-Pd HAuCl4 /PdCl2 7.4 Spherical 0.25 mM of HAuCl4 , PdCl2 , 20 mL 
extract 
[123] 
Ocimum tenuiflorum leave ZnO Zn(NO3 ) 2 38 45 min, 130°C, 50 mL extract, 5 g 
Zn(NO3 ) 2 
[124] 
Eryngium campestre leave Cu/Cr/Ni CuSO4 .5H2 O, 
Cr(NO3 ) 3 .9H2 O, 
Ni(NO3 ) 2 .6H2 O 
100–104 Irregular 3.5 min, r.t., pH = 7 [125] 
Origanum vulgare leave Cu/Co/Ni Cu(NO3 ) 2 ·3H2 O, 
Co(NO3 ) 2 ·6H2 O, 
Ni(NO3 ) 2 ·6H2 O 
28.25 Irregular 20 mL extract, 0.01 M of each metal 
precursors, 40°C 
[126] 42 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
catechins, and co-enzymes are responsible reducing agents. Similarly, live plants can 
also reduce the metal ions to nanostructure [75]. Plant-based polyphenols are known 
as natural antioxidants with potential drug, and food additives are largely studied 
mainly as possible biological reducing agents in the biosynthesis [5]. 
Small size NPs are obtained using the plant extracts than the chemical methods; 
for example, 11–21 nm size ZnO NPs were obtained using Avocado fruit extract. 
However, 30–40 nm size of the NP was produced using precipitation synthesis 
methods. The activity of the bioinspired ZnO NPs was also 15–24 mm of a zone of 
inhibition against Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Salmonella, which 
is nearer to the standard drug (25 mm), while a 7–15 mm zone of inhibition was 
registered for the chemically synthesized ZnO [76]. In another study, Bixa orellana 
seed-extract derived TiO2 NPs and sol-gel-mediated TiO2 NPs were used for 
photovoltaic applications. The seed-mediated NP was a pure anatase phase, 
whereas the chemically synthesized one was a mixed phase of brookite and 
anatase. The formation of the pure anatase enhanced the surface area of the NPs 
and exhibited better performance than the conventionally obtained TiO2 NPs. The 
seed-derived TiO2 showed 1.97% photovoltaic conversion efficiencies; however, the 
sol-gel-mediated one possessed only 1.03% [77]. 
Aqueous leave extracts of Gardenia jasminoides promoted Ag–Fe bimetallic 
NP have been obtained. The spherical shape and 13 nm (± 6.3 nm) average diameter 
size magnetic NP exhibited better bactericidal activity against gram-positive and 
gram-negative bacteria than the monometallic NP due to the synergistic effect 
between Ag and Fe [78]. NPs such as CuO, Fe3O4, and Fe are successfully fabricated 
for catalytic applications using Stachys Lavandulifolia flowers, Pisum sativum 
peels, and Trigonella foenum-graecum seeds, respectively [79–81]. Recent studies 
witnessed that multi-metallic NPs showed superior biological, environmental, and 
energy conversion activities due to the electronic effect among the metals. A novel 
Au/Pt/Ag trimetallic nanoparticle (TNPs) is obtained from an aqueous extract of 
Lamii albi flos and 5 mM of AgNO3, HAuCl4, and K2PtCl6 in a 1:1:1 ratio after string 
for 24 h at 70°C. The TNPs with 35–40 nm particle size showed promising results 
in the bactericidal activities [82]. In another study, 20 nm size, spherical, triangular, 
and hexagonal shaped Meliloti officinal derived Au/ZnO/Ag TNP is prepared from 
5 mM of each HAuCl4, ZnCl2, and AgNO3 solution in the same ratio at 70°C for 
24 h [83]. A simple bioinspired method synthesizes Ag NPs using Rhodiola rosea 
Rhizome extract. A regular spherical shape with a small size (10 nm) of the NPs 
is obtained. The rhizome-mediated Ag NPs exhibited better performance in 
antioxidant and catalytic degradation of hazardous organic dyes. The NPs also used 
for fluorescence enhancer at a minimum concentration [84]. Polyphenols, gamma 
sterol, and n-hexadecanoic acid-rich Curculigo orchioides rhizome extracts are used 
for the biosynthesis of spherical morphology with 15–18 nm size of Ag NPs. The 
as-synthesized NPs showed promising results in antibacterial, larvicidal, and 
anticancer activities [85]. 
Various shape-controlled nanomaterials are fabricated using seed and fruit 
extracts, for example, stable rice-shaped Cu NPs are obtained using Caesalpinia 
bonducella seed extract assisted biosynthesis (Fig. 3a, b) [18]. Xanthium strumarium 10
sugars biomolecules (Fig. 3d). At various reaction temperatures, 99.45 ± 0.14%, 99.74 ± 0.02%,
and 97.99 ± 0.02% of Au3+ ions were successfully converted into Au NPs applying 0.5, 1.0 and
1.5 mM of HAuCl4.4H2O, respectively, after centrifugal ultrafiltration [87]. Highly porous nature
ZnO NPs with an energy bandgap of 3.3 eV and 370 nm UV-Visible absorbance is obtained
using water extract Artocarpus gomezianus fruit (Fig. 3e). It was found that 17.16% of
polyphenols and 22% of flavonoids were the secondary metabolites responsible for reducing of 
the Zn(NO3)3.6H2O to ZnO NPs [88]. Furthermore, water extract Tinospora cordifolia was also
reported for the fabrication of large surface area, small size (6–8 nm), and sponge-like structure
CuO NPs (Fig. 3f). Plant extracts of 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 g were mixed with 1.205 g of
Cu(NO3)2.3H2O to yield CuO NPs with higher bandgap energy than the bulk CuO [89].
Fig. 3.: Different shapes of plant part extract-mediated NPs (a, b) rice-shaped Cu NPs [18],
Reproduced with permission from American Chemical Society (c) pentagonal, spherical, and 
hexagonal shaped Au NPs [86], (d) triangular shaped Au NPs [87], (e) TEM image of No NPs
synthesized using water extract of Artocarpus gomezianus fruit [88], (f) TEM image of CuO NPs
synthesized using water extracts of Tinospora cordifolia leaves [89], (c-e) Reproduced with 
permission from Elsevier
Fig. 3. Different shapes of plant part extract-mediated NPs (a, b) rice-shaped Cu NPs [18], Reproduced 
with permission from American Chemical Society (c) pentagonal, spherical, and hexagonal shaped Au 
NPs [86], (d) triangular shaped Au NPs [87], (e) TEM image of ZnO NPs synthesized using water extract 
of Artocarpus gomezianus fruit [88], (f) TEM image of CuO NPs synthesized using water extracts of 
Tinospora cordifolia leaves [89], (c–e) Reproduced with permission from Elsevier. 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 43 
L. fruit isolated (caffeoylxanthiazonoside) is reported for the biosynthesis of 
25 nm average size and pentagonal, spherical, and hexagonal shaped Au NPs 
(Fig. 3c) [86]. Similarly, triangular and hexagonal shaped Au NPs are produced using 
Diospyros Kaki L. fruits rich in polyphenols, flavonoids and sugars biomolecules 
(Fig. 3d). At various reaction temperatures, 99.45 ± 0.14%, 99.74 ± 0.02%, and 
97.99 ± 0.02% of Au3+ ions were successfully converted into Au NPs applying 
0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 mM of HAuCl4.4H2O, respectively, after centrifugal ultrafiltration 
[87]. Highly porous nature ZnO NPs with an energy bandgap of 3.3 eV and 370 nm 
UV-Visible absorbance is obtained using water extract Artocarpus gomezianus fruit 
(Fig. 3e). It was found that 17.16% of polyphenols and 22% of flavonoids were 
the secondary metabolites responsible for reducing of the Zn(NO3)3.6H2O to ZnO 
NPs [88]. Furthermore, water extract Tinospora cordifolia was also reported for 
the fabrication of large surface area, small size (6–8 nm), and sponge-like structure 
CuO NPs (Fig. 3f). Plant extracts of 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 g were mixed with 1.205 g 
of Cu(NO3)2.3H2O to yield CuO NPs with higher bandgap energy than the bulk 
CuO [89]. 
5. Factors Influencing the Nanofabrication of Nanomaterials 
Various factors are considered during the biosynthesis of the nanomaterials to 
control the shape, size, surface area, and yield of the particles, such as reaction time, 
temperature, pH, plant/microbes’ extract volume, and precursor concentration [127]. 
The reaction time is primarily short minutes, and the reactions are carried out at 
average temperatures [90]. A calcination temperature is carried out after the NPs 
have grown to increase the crystallinity, aggregation, and to remove impurities. 44 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Still, the size of the particles rises as the temperature increases. The calcination 
temperature also affects the phase transformation among the NPs, for example, the 
transformations from anatase to brookite or rutile and vice versa in TiO2 NPs [128]. 
Most findings suggested that aggregated and large particle size NPs have 
resulted in lower pH (< 2); however, at a high pH value, the accessibility of the 
functional groups of the plant extract is available for the NPs’ nucleation resulting in 
the formation of small sized nanoparticles [129]. The effect of banana peel extract 
(BPE) volume was reported during the synthesis of Ag NPs. Intensive color (dark 
reddish-brown) and maximum surface plasmon resonance (SPR) peak was observed 
when 3 mL of BPE was used, but light reddish-brown color was observed when 0.25, 
0.5, and 0.75 mL of the BPE extracts were applied. This implies all available silver 
ions were reduced when enough phytochemicals were present. Similarly, highly 
monodispersed Ag NP was obtained at a pH of 11 with an average size of 23.7 nm. 
However, at a pH of 2.0, no reaction occurred and color change was observed at pH 
values of 4.5–6.5. The biomolecules are probably inactive or protonated under the 
acidic medium, and electrostatic repulsion between the protonated biomolecules and 
Ag+
 ion occurred, whereas under neutral or basic conditions, the biomolecules are 
negatively charged, which enables them to transfer the electrons to the Ag+
, which 
reduces Ag(0) [130]. 
Biomass of Cacumen Platycladi extracts (CPE) was reported for Pt NPs 
synthesis. The reaction temperature for converting Pt(II) to Pt NP was studied. The 
conversion rate was 81.2% at 90°C, whereas 27% conversion was obtained at 30°C; 
the particle size of the Pt NPs was 2.0 ± 0.4, 2.6 ± 0.4, and 2.9 ± 0.7 nm at 30, 60, 
and 90°C, respectively. Regarding the effect of the salt concentration (Na2PtCl4), 
86.5% and 64.7% conversion of Pt NPs has been exhibited using 0.5 and 2 mM 
Na2PtCl4, respectively. The CPE concentration also affects the conversion rate and 
size of the NPs. Greater than 95% conversion and 2.4 ± 0.8 nm particle size of 
Pt NPs were recorded using 70% CPE at 25 h reaction time, whereas 3.7 ± 0.7, 
3.1 ± 0.7, and 2.9 ± 0.7 nm particle size of the NPs exhibited CPE percentages of 
10, 30, and 50%, respectively [131]. The shape and size of the nanomaterials can 
be controlled by adjusting the solution temperature. If the reaction temperature is 
too high, it increases the reaction kinetics. However, if the kinetics of responses is 
fast, it is difficult to control the growth of the nanomaterials and poor bio-reduction 
process, uncontrolled, large size, and fast aggregations occur. In this regard, most 
biosynthesis reactions are carried out at a low temperature, which helps to control 
the reaction easily [132]. 
6. Possible Reaction Mechanisms 
Without a clear understanding, diverse primary and secondary metabolites 
cooperatively reduce the metal ions to nanoscale forms. The metabolites that act as a 
defense mechanism or chemical transformations of the plants to control various acute 
diseases are synergistically employed as reducing and capping agents. The functional 
groups of the phytochemical, mostly polar groups such as amine, hydroxy, carboxylic 
acids, thiol, and carbonyl groups, react with the electron-deficient metal ions, which 
are reduced via electrons that flow from the phytochemicals to the metal to activate Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 45 
the nucleation process. The plant phytochemicals are used as donors of electrons 
to the metal ion to convert into nanostructures. The formation of high surface area 
in the NPs allows for accommodating the phytochemical functional groups and a 
potential chelating site to form stable nanostructures. All the phytochemicals may not 
participate in reducing the ions, but they also showed outstanding tenacity against 
agglomeration [133–136]. 
Aqueous leave extracts of Plantago asiatica have been reported for the 
nanofabrication of Cu NPs. The Cu NPs are produced in a 20 mL solution of 
3 mM CuCl2.2H2O with 100 mL of the leave extract with vigorous shaking at 
80°C. The changing of color to dark within 5 min indicates the formation of Cu 
NPs. The antioxidant polyphenolic (quercetin) compound of the leave extract is 
used as a reducing agent, which oxidizes itself to ketone groups as shown in the 
proposed reaction mechanism (Fig. 4a) [137]. In another study, Cocos nucifera L. 
methanol extract was used to fabricate Pd NPs for photocatalytic application. 20 mL 
of methanol extract was mixed with 80 mL of lead acetate solution and was allowed 
to stir at room temperature. The extract contained phenolic compounds with a major 
constituent of 3-methoxy cinnamic acid as determined by Gas chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS). The 3-methoxy cinnamic acid has been dehydrated while 
reacting with the salt solution to yield Pb-NPs (Fig. 4b) [95]. 
The transformation of the bioactive constituents of the plant extracts is 
confirmed by comparing the plant extracts before and after the synthesis of the 
nanomaterials, mostly via the FTIR spectra. For example, Anacardium occidentale 
testa, known in catechin, epicatechin, and epigallocatechin compounds, was used for 
the nanofabrication of Ag NPs. As shown in Fig. 4c, the spectra (green) of the plant 
extract showed both hydroxy and carbonyl groups; similarly, the plant-derived Ag 
NPs showed both groups (orange spectra) in the FTIR, but additional sharp spectra 
at 1384 cm−1 is shown for nitrate ion [138]. 
In most of the reported studies, the peaks of the common functional groups 
are present even after calcination at a higher temperature. Once the phytochemicals 
can stabilize the nanomaterials, they are expected to decompose to CO2, O2, H2O, 
and NO2 gases after calcination; this needs deeper investigation since the peaks that 
appeared in the FTIR spectra may result from the adsorption of the gases on the 
surface of the nanomaterials. For example, Gloriosa superba L. leaf extract-derived 
CeO2 NPs calcined at 400°C for 2 h confirmed the presence of the main functional 
groups almost similar to the uncalcined CeO2 and the plant extract spectrum as shown 
in Fig. 4d. The Ce-OH, water, and CO2 absorption peaks may be due to the trapped 
air from ambience [139]. Similarly, the Cissus quadrangularis leaf extract mediated 
CuO NPs (30 ± 2 nm) calcinated at 300–400°C in a furnace showed the presence of 
organic functional groups such as O-H, C=O, and C-O stretching peaks in both the 
leaf extracts and the calcined NPs [140] (Fig. 4e). Calcination temperature affects 
the size, shape, and performance of the biosynthesized NPs. For example, Bacillus 
subtilis mediated Ag NPs showed potent inhibition against pathogenic bacteria; 
however, after calcination at 300°C, it does not show any inhibition. Similarly, the 
size of the uncalcined NPs was 18–100 nm; however, after calcination, it becomes 
49–253 nm [141]. If the plant or microbe extracts themselves have antimicrobial (a) OH OAc
O
OH 
OH
+ Cu(II) OH 
O
(c)
O HO 
OH O 
OH 
O 
+ Cu(I) 
O HO 
OH O 
OH
O 
O
+ Cu(0) 
e 
-
+ H + 
e 
-
+ H+ 
Cu NPs 
OH 
O 
O 
Pb(OAc)2 
O 
Pd OAc
OH 
O 
O 
OH
CHO Pd(0) + CO2 + H 2 O 
-CH3 COOH 
+ 
(b)
(d)
CuO NPs
Copper acetate
extract
(e)
Fig. 4. (a) Green synthesis of Cu NPs using the aqueous extract of the Plantago asiatica leave [137], (b) Possible mechanism behind formation of Pb-NPs [95], (c) FT
IR spectra of 
A. occidentale testa extract and synthesized Ag NPs [138], (d) FTIR spectra of G. superba plant extract, as-prepared sample and CeO2 NPs [139], (e) FT-IR 
spectroscopy of CuO NPs [140], Reproduced with permission from Elsevier. 
46 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
­ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 47 
activity, the capped NPs pertain to a synergistic effect. The NPs obtained without 
calcination (dried at oven) clearly show the presence of the bioactive molecules of 
the plant extract in the FTIR spectra. 
7. Conclusion and Future Prospects 
The green synthesis of the nanomaterials is a simple and one-step method, an 
economically feasible and environmentally benign approach, and an efficient 
alternative to the chemical methods. The green chemistry approach receives 
researchers’ attention for synthesizing various forms of nanomaterials using extracts 
of plant parts and microbes as reducing, stabilizing or capping agents for biomedical, 
agricultural, and environmental applications. The biosynthesized nanoparticles are 
biocompatible and showed promising activities against antibacterial, antioxidant, 
anticancer, biosensors and drug delivery. They also reduce environmental hazards, 
wastes, generate energy, etc. Though the green synthesis has all the advantages 
above, some limitations must be dealt with in the future. The yield and reproducibility 
of the green approach must be explored. The bio-reduction reaction mechanism 
between the salt metal ions and phytochemicals should be investigated well. The 
concentration of the phytochemicals responsible for the bio-reduction of the metals 
may vary due to seasonal and environmental uncertainties, which may limit the 
effectiveness of the bio-reduction process. Finally, the toxicity and side effects of the 
nanomaterials/nanoparticles should be considered and investigated since some 
reports showed that the metal nanoparticles are toxic to human and aquatic systems. 
References 
[1] Gebre, S.H. 2021. Recent developments in the fabrication of magnetic nanoparticles for the 
synthesis of trisubstituted pyridines and imidazoles: A green approach. Synth. Commun. 51: 1669. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00397911.2021.1900257. 
[2] Kora, A.J. 2018. Plant and tree gums as renewable feedstocks for the phytosynthesis of nanoparticles: 
a green chemistry approach. In: Kanchi, S. and S. Ahmed (eds.). Green Metal Nanoparticles 
Microwave, 79. Scrivener Publishing LLC, Hyderabad. 
[3] Souza, T.A.J., L.R.R. de Souza and L.P. Franchi. 2019. An integrated view of green synthesis 
methods, transformation in the environment, and toxicity. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safety 171: 691. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.12.095. 
[4] Fakhari, S., M. Jamzad and H.K. Fard. 2019. Green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles: a 
comparison. Green Chem. Lett. Rev. 12: 19. https://doi.org/10.1080/17518253.2018.1547925. 
[5] Yadi, M., E. Mostafavi, B. Saleh, S. Davaran, R. Khalilov, M. Nikzamir and M. Milani. 2018. Current 
developments in green synthesis of metallic nanoparticles using plant extracts: a review. Artificial 
Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol. 46: S336. https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2018.1492931. 
[6] Naika, H.R., K. Lingaraju, K. Manjunath, D. Kumar, G. Nagaraju, D. Suresh and H. Nagabhushana. 
2015. Green synthesis of CuO nanoparticles using Gloriosa superba L. extract and their antibacterial 
activity. J. Taibah Uni. Sci. 9: 7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtusci.2014.04.006. 
[7] Akhtar, M.S., J. Panwar and Y. Yun. 2013. Biogenic synthesis of metallic nanoparticles by plant 
extracts. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 1: 591. https://doi.org/10.1021/sc300118u. 
[8] Stankic, S., S. Suman, F. Haque and J. Vidic. 2016. Pure and multi metal oxide nanoparticles: 
synthesis, antibacterial and cytotoxic properties. J. Nanobiotechnol. 14: 73. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12951-016-0225-6. 
[9] Choi, Y. and S.Y. Lee. 2020. Biosynthesis of inorganic nanomaterials using microbial cells and 
bacteriophages. Nature Rev. Chem. 4: 638. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41570-020-00221-w.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[10] Lade, B.D. and A.S. Shanware. 2020. Phytonanofabrication: Methodology and factors affecting 
biosynthesis of nanoparticles. In: Bochenkov, V. and T. Shabatina (eds.). Smart Nanosystems for 
Biomedicine, Optoelectronics and Catalysis, 1, IntechOpen, Nagpur. 
[11] Chugh, H., D. Sood, I. Chandra, V. Tomar, G. Dhawan and R. Chandra. 2018. Role of gold and 
silver nanoparticles in cancer nano-medicine. Artificial Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol. 46: S1210. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2018.1449118. 
[12] Gebre, S.H. 2021. Recent developments of supported and magnetic nanocatalysts for organic 
transformations: an up-to-date review. Appl. Nanosci. 13: 15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13204-021­
01888-3. 
[13] Gebre, S.H. and M.G. Sendeku. 2019. New frontiers in the biosynthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles 
and their environmental applications: an overview. SN Appl. Sci. 1: 928. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s42452-019-0931-4. 
[14] Gebre, S.H. and M.G. Sendeku. 2022. Trimetallic nanostructures and their applications in 
electrocatalytic energy conversions. J. Energy Chem. 65: 329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jechem.2021.06.006. 
[15] Flak, D., E. Coy, M. Jarek, O. Ivashchenko, Ł. Przysiecka, B. Peplin and S. Jurga. 2021. Organic￾inorganic hybrid nanoparticles synthesized with hypericum perforatum extract: potential agents 
for photodynamic therapy at ultra-low power light. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 9: 1625. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c07036. 
[16] Tripathi, N., V. Pavelyev and S. Islam. 2017. Synthesis of carbon nanotubes using green plant 
extract as catalyst: unconventional concept and its realization. Appl. Nanosci. 7: 557. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s13204-017-0598-3. 
[17] Saha, P., Mahiuddin, A.B.M.N. Islam and B. Ochiai. 2021. Biogenic synthesis and catalytic efficacy 
of silver nanoparticles based on peel extracts of Citrus macroptera fruit. ACS Omega 6: 18260. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c02149. 
[18] Sukumar, S., A. Rudrasenan and D.P. Nambiar. 2019. Green-synthesized rice-shaped copper oxide 
nanoparticles using Caesalpinia bonducella seed extract and their applications. ACS Omega 
5: 1040. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.9b02857. 
[19] Sasidharan, S., R. Poojari, D. Bahadur and R. Srivastava. 2018. Embelin mediated green synthesis 
of quasi-spherical and star-shaped plasmonic nanostructures for antibacterial activity, photothermal 
therapy and computed tomographic imaging. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6: 10562. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b01894. 
[20] Pradeep, M., D. Kruszka, P. Kachlicki, D. Mondal and G. Franklin. 2022. Uncovering the 
phytochemical basis and the mechanism of plant extract-mediated eco-friendly synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled with a photodiode array and 
high-resolution mass spectrometry. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 10: 562. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acssuschemeng.1c06960. 
[21] Nagajyothi, P.C., S.V.P. Vattikuti, K.C. Devarayapalli, K. Yoo, J. Shim and T.V.M. Sreekanth. 
2019. Green synthesis: Photocatalytic degradation of textile dyes using metal and metal oxide 
nanoparticles-latest trends and advancements. Critical Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50: 2617. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2019.1705103. 
[22] Virkutyte, J. and R.S. Varma. 2013. Green synthesis of nanomaterials: environmental aspects. 
In: Sharma, S. (ed.). Sustainable Nanotechnology and the Environment: Advances and 
Achievements, 11. American Chemical Society, Washington DC. 
[23] Matussin, S., M.H. Harunsani, A.L. Tan and M.M. Khan. 2020. Plant-extract-mediated SnO2 
nanoparticles: Synthesis and applications. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 8: 3040. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b06398. 
[24] Wang, N., H.Y.J. Fuh, S.T. Dheen and A.S. Kumar. 2021. Synthesis methods of functionalized 
nanoparticles: a review. Bio-Des. Manufact. 4: 379. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42242-020-00106-3. 
[25] Bakshi, M., S. Mahanty and P. Chaudhuri. 2017. Fungi-mediated biosynthesis of nanoparticles and 
application in metal sequestration. In: Das, S. and H.R. Dash (eds.). Handbook of Metal–Microbe 
Interactions and Bioremediation, 423. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315153353. 
[26] Shi, C., N. Zhu, Y. Cao and P. Wu. 2015. Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles assisted by the 
intracellular protein extract of Pycnoporus sanguineus and its catalysis in degradation of 
4-nitroaniline. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 10: 1478. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-015-0856-9.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 49 
[27] Gudikandula, K., and S.C. Maringanti. 2016. Synthesis of silver nanoparticles by chemical and 
biological methods and their antimicrobial properties. J. Experiment. Nanosci. 11: 714. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/17458080.2016.1139196. 
[28] Das, S.K., A.R. Das and A.K. Guha. 2010. Microbial synthesis of multishaped gold nanostructures. 
Small 6: 1012. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.200902011. 
[29] Duan, H., D. Wang and Y. Li. 2015. Green chemistry for nanoparticle synthesis. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
44: 5778. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CS00363B. 
[30] Ovais, M., A.T. Khalil, M. Ayaz, I. Ahmad, S.K. Nethi and S. Mukherjee. 2018. Biosynthesis of 
metal nanoparticles via microbial enzymes: A mechanistic approach. Internat. J. Mol. Sci. 19: 1. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19124100. 
[31] Majeed, S., M. Danish, M.N.M. Ibrahim, S.H. Sekeri, M.T. Ansari, A. Nanda and G. Ahmad. 
2021. Bacteria mediated synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles and their antibacterial, antioxidant, 
cytocompatibility properties. J. Cluster Sci. 32: 1083. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10876-020-01876-7. 
[32] Gahlawat, G. and A.R. Choudhury. 2019. A review on the biosynthesis of metal and metal salt 
nanoparticles by microbes. RSC Adv. 9: 12944. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8ra10483b. 
[33] Saravanan, M., S.K. Barik, D. MubarakAli, P. Prakash and A. Pugazhendhi. 2018. Synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles from Bacillus brevis (NCIM 2533) and their antibacterial activity against 
pathogenic bacteria. Microb. Pthogen. 116: 221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2018.01.038. 
[34] Grasso, G., D. Zane and R. Dragone. 2020. Microbial nanotechnology: Challenges and prospects 
for green biocatalytic synthesis of nanoscale materials for sensoristic and biomedical applications. 
Nanomater. 10: 11. 
[35] Khan, A.A., S. Khan, S. Khan, S. Rentschler, S. Laufer and H. Deigner. 2021. Biosynthesis of 
iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles using clinically isolated Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Sci. Rep. 
11: 20503. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-99814-8. 
[36] Ebadi, M., M.R. Zolfaghari, S.S. Aghaei, M. Zargar, M. Shafie, H.S. Zahiri and K.A. Noghabi. 2019. 
A bio-inspired strategy for the synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) using the cell extract 
of Cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. EA03: from biological function to toxicity evaluation. RSC Adv. 
9: 23508. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9ra03962g. 
[37] Jayaseelan, C., A.A. Rahuman, A.V. Kirthi, S. Marimuthu, T. Santhoshkumar, A. Bagavan and 
K.V.B. Rao. 2012. Novel microbial route to synthesize ZnO nanoparticles using Aeromonas 
hydrophila and their activity against pathogenic bacteria and fungi. Spectroch. Acta Part A: Mol. 
Biomol. Spectros. 90: 78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2012.01.006. 
[38] Jayaseelan, C., A.A. Rahuman, S.M. Roopan, A.V. Kirthi, J. Venkatesan, S.K. Kim and C. Siva. 
2013. Biological approach to synthesize TiO2 nanoparticles using Aeromonas hydrophila and 
its antibacterial activity. Spectroch. Acta Part A: Mol. Biomol. Spectros. 107: 82. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.saa.2012.12.083. 
[39] Al-namil, D.S., E. El Khoury and D. Patra. 2019. Solid-state green synthesis of Ag NPs: Higher 
temperature harvests larger Ag NPs but smaller size has better catalytic reduction reaction. Sci. 
Rep. 9: 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-51693-w. 
[40] Siddiqi, K.S. and A. Husen. 2016. Fabrication of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles by algae and 
their toxic effects. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 11: 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-016-1580-9. 
[41] Chugh, D., V.S. Viswamalya and B. Das. 2021. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles with algae 
and the importance of capping agents in the process. J. Genetic Eng. Biotechnol. 19: 126. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s43141-021-00228-w. 
[42] Arya, A., V. Mishra and T.S. Chundawat. 2019. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from green 
algae (Botryococcus braunii) and its catalytic behavior for the synthesis of benzimidazoles. Chem. 
Data Collections 20: 100190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cdc.2019.100190. 
[43] Al-radadi, N.S., T. Hussain, S. Faisal, S. Ali and R. Shah. 2022. Novel biosynthesis, characterization 
and bio-catalytic potential of green algae (Spirogyra hyalina) mediated silver nanomaterials. Saudi 
J. Biol. Sci. 29: 411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.09.013. 
[44] González-ballesteros, N., S. Prado-lópez, J.B. Rodríguez-gonzález, M. Lastra and M.C. Rodríguez￾Argüelles. 2017. Green synthesis of gold nanoparticles using brown algae Cystoseira baccata: Its 
activity in colon cancer cells. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 153: 190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2017.02.020.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[45] Liu, B., J. Xie, J.Y. Lee, Y.P. Ting and J.P. Chen. 2005. Optimization of high-yield biological 
synthesis of single-crystalline gold nanoplates. J. Phys. Chem. B 109: 15256. 
[46] Chellapandian, C., B. Ramkumar, P. Puja, R. Shanmuganathan, A. Pugazhendhi and P. Kumar. 2019. 
Gold nanoparticles using red seaweed Gracilaria verrucosa: Green synthesis, characterization and 
biocompatibility studies. Process Biochem. 80: 58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2019.02.009. 
[47] Jiamboonsri, P. and S. Wanwong. 2021. Photoassisted synthesis of silver nanoparticles using 
riceberry rice extract and their antibacterial application. J. Nanomater. 2021: 1. https://doi. 
org/10.1155/2021/5598924. 
[48] Koli, R.R., M.R. Phadatare, B.B. Sinha, D.M. Sakate, A.V. Ghule, G.S. Ghodake and V.J. 
Fulari. 2019. Gram bean extract-mediated synthesis of Fe3O4 nanoparticles for tuning the 
magneto-structural properties that influence the hyperthermia performance. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. 
Eng. 95: 357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtice.2018.07.039. 
[49] Lee, K., S. Park, M. Govarthanan, P. Hwang, Y. Seo, M. Cho and B.-T. Oh. 2013. Synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using cow milk and their antifungal activity against phytopathogens. Mater. Lett. 
105: 128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2013.04.076. 
[50] Pandey, S., C. De Klerk, J. Kim, M. Kang and E. Fosso-Kankeu. 2020. Ecofriendly approach for 
synthesis, characterization and biological activities of milk protein stabilized silver nanoparticles. 
Polymers 12: 1418. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym12061418. 
[51] Balasooriya, E.R., C.D. Jayasinghe, U.A. Jayawardena, R. Weerakkodige, D. Ruwanthika, R.M. De 
Silva and P.V. Udagama. 2017. Honey mediated green synthesis of nanoparticles: New era of safe 
nanotechnology. J. Nanomater. 2017: 1. 
[52] Philip, D. 2010. Honey mediated green synthesis of silver nanoparticles. Spectroch. Acta Part A 75: 
1078. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2009.12.058. 
[53] Venu, R., T.S. Ramulu, S. Anandakumar, V.S. Rani and C.G. Kim. 2011. Bio-directed synthesis 
of platinum nanoparticles using aqueous honey solutions and their catalytic applications. Colloids 
Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 384: 733. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.05.045. 
[54] Philip, D. 2009. Honey mediated green synthesis of gold nanoparticles. Spectroch. Acta Part A 
73: 650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2009.03.007. 
[55] Cai, Y., Y. Shen, A. Xie, S. Li and X. Wang. 2010. Green synthesis of soya bean sprouts-mediated 
superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles. J. Mag. Mag. Mater. 322: 2938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jmmm.2010.05.009. 
[56] Dhand, V., L. Soumya, S. Bharadwaj, S. Chakra, D. Bhatt and B. Sreedhar. 2016. Green synthesis 
of silver nanoparticles using Coffea arabica seed extract and its antibacterial activity. Mater. Sci. 
Eng. C 58: 36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2015.08.018. 
[57] Rajesh, S., V. Dharanishanthi and A.V. Kanna. 2015. Antibacterial mechanism of biogenic silver 
nanoparticles of Lactobacillus acidophilus. J. Experimen. Nanosci. 10: 1143. https://doi.org/10.10 
80/17458080.2014.985750. 
[58] Lateef, A., I. Adelere, E.B. Gueguim-Kana, T. Asafa and L.S. Beukes. 2014. Green synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles using keratinase obtained from a strain of Bacillus safensis LAU 13. Int. Nano 
Lett. 5: 29. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40089-014-0133-4. 
[59] Abirami, M. and K. Kannabiran. 2016. Streptomyces ghanaensis VITHM1 mediated green 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles: Mechanism and biological applications. Front. Chem. Sci. Eng. 
10: 542. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11705-016-1599-6. 
[60] Gowramma, B., U. Keerthi, M. Raf and D.M. Rao. 2015. Biogenic silver nanoparticles production 
and characterization from native stain of Corynebacterium species and its antimicrobial activity. 
Biotech. 5: 195. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-014-0210-4. 
[61] Rajeshkumar, S. 2016. Anticancer activity of eco-friendly gold nanoparticles against lung and liver 
cancer cells. J. Genetic Eng. Biotechnol. 14: 195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jgeb.2016.05.007. 
[62] Elamawi, R.M., R.E. Al-harbi and A.A. Hendi. 2018. Biosynthesis and characterization of silver 
nanoparticles using Trichoderma longibrachiatum and their effect on phytopathogenic fungi. 
Egyptian J. Bio. Pest Control 28: 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41938-018-0028-1. 
[63] Balakumaran, M.D., R. Ramachandran, P. Balashanmugam, D.J. Mukeshkumar and P.T. 
Kalaichelvan. 2016. Mycosynthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles: Optimization, characterization 
and antimicrobial activity against human pathogens. Microbiol. Res. 182: 8.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 51 
[64] Arya, A., K. Gupta, T.S. Chundawat and D. Vaya. 2018. Biogenic synthesis of copper and silver 
nanoparticles using green alga Botryococcus braunii and its antimicrobial activity. Bioinorg. Chem. 
Appli. 2018: 1. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/7879403. 
[65] Sharma, G., A.R. Sharma, R. Bhavesh, J. Park, B. Ganbold, J. Nam and S. Lee. 2014. Biomolecule￾mediated synthesis of selenium nanoparticles using dried Vitis vinifera (Raisin) extract. Molecules 
19: 2761. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules19032761. 
[66] Ramkumar, V.S., A. Pugazhendhi, S. Prakash, N.K. Ahila, G. Vinoj, S. Selvam and R.B. Rajendran. 
2017. Synthesis of platinum nanoparticles using seaweed Padina gymnospora and their catalytic 
activity as PVP/PtNPs nanocomposite towards biological applications. Biomed. Pharmacother. 
92: 479. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2017.05.076. 
[67] Othman, A.M., M.A. Elsayed, N.G. Al-balakocy, M.M. Hassan and A.M. Elshafei. 2020. 
Biosynthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles induced by fungal proteins and its 
application in different biological activities. J. Genetic Eng. Biotechn. 17: 1. 
[68] Salem, D.M.S.A., M.M. Ismail and M.A. Aly-eldeen. 2019. Biogenic synthesis and antimicrobial 
potency of iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles using algae harvested from the Mediterranean Sea, 
Egypt. Egyptian J. Aquatic Res. 45: 197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejar.2019.07.002. 
[69] Mahdavi, M., F. Namvar, M. Bin Ahmad and R. Mohamad. 2013. Green biosynthesis and 
characterization of magnetic iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles using seaweed (Sargassum muticum) 
aqueous extract. Molecules 18: 5954. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules18055954. 
[70] Ishwarya, R., B. Vaseeharan, S. Kalyani, B. Banumathi, M. Govindarajan, N.S. Alharbi and G. 
Benelli. 2018. Facile green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using Ulva lactuca seaweed 
extract and evaluation of their photocatalytic, antibio film and insecticidal activity. J. Photochem. 
Photobiol., B: Biology 178: 249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2017.11.006. 
[71] Abdel-raouf, N., N.M. Al-enazi, M.B.I. Ibraheem, M.R. Alharbi and M.M. Alkhalaifi. 2019. 
Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles by using of the marine brown alga Padina pavonia and their 
characterization. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 26: 1207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2018.01.007. 
[72] Vanlalveni, C., S. Lallianrawna, A. Biswas, M. Selvaraj, B. Changmai and S.L. Rokhum. 2021. 
Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using plant extracts and their antimicrobial activities: a 
review of recent literature. RSC Adv. 11: 2804. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ra09941d. 
[73] Chung, I., I. Park, K. Seung-hyun, M. Thiruvengadam and G. Rajakumar. 2016. Plant-mediated 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles: their characteristic properties and therapeutic applications. 
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 11: 40. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-016-1257-4. 
[74] Metz, K.M., S.E. Sanders, J.P. Pender, M. Dix, D.T. Hinds, S.J. Quinn, and P.E. Colavita. 2015. 
Green synthesis of metal nanoparticles via natural extracts: the biogenic nanoparticle corona 
and its effects on reactivity. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 3: 1610. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acssuschemeng.5b00304. 
[75] Mohammadinejad, R., S. Karimi, S. Iravani and R.S. Varma. 2016. Plant-derived nanostructures: 
types and applications. Green Chem. 18: 20. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5GC01403D. 
[76] Bekele, B., A. Degefa, F. Tesgera, L.T. Jule, R. Shanmugam, L.P. Dwarampudi and K. Ramasamy. 
2021. Green versus chemical precipitation methods of preparing zinc oxide nanoparticles and 
investigation of antimicrobial properties. J. Nanomater. 2021: 1. 
[77] Chandra, I., S. Singh, S. Senapati, P. Srivastava and L. Bahadur. 2019. Green synthesis of TiO2 
nanoparticles using Bixa orellana seed extract and its application for solar cells. Solar Energy 
194: 952. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.10.090. 
[78] Padilla-Cruz, A.L., J.A. Garza-Cervantes, X.G. Vasto-Anzaldo, G. García-Rivas, A. León-Buitimea 
and J.R. Morones-Ramírez. 2021. Synthesis and design of Ag-Fe bimetallic nanoparticles as 
antimicrobial synergistic combination therapies against clinically relevant pathogens. Sci. Rep. 
11: 5351. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84768-8. 
[79] Prasad, C., G. Yuvaraja and P. Venkateswarlu. 2017. Biogenic synthesis of Fe3O4 magnetic 
nanoparticles using Pisum sativum peels extract and its effect on magnetic and methyl orange dye 
degradation studies. J. Mag. Mag. Mater. 424: 376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2016.10.084. 
[80] Radini, I.A., N. Hasan, M.A. Malik and Z. Khan. 2018. Biosynthesis of iron nanoparticles using 
Trigonella foenum-graecum seed extract for photocatalytic methyl orange dye degradation and 
antibacterial applications. J. Photochem. Photobiol., B: Biol. 183: 154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jphotobiol.2018.04.014.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[81] Veisi, H., B. Karmakar, T. Tamoradi, S. Hemmati, M. Hekmati and M. Hamelian. 2021. Biosynthesis 
of CuO nanoparticles using aqueous extract of herbal tea (Stachys Lavandulifolia) flowers and 
evaluation of its catalytic activity. Sci. Rep. 11: 1983. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81320-6. 
[82] Dlugaszewska, J. and R. Dobrucka. 2019. Effectiveness of biosynthesized trimetallic au/pt/ag 
nanoparticles on planktonic and biofilm Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium forms. J. 
Cluster Sci., 30: 1091. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10876-019-01570-3. 
[83] Dobrucka, R. 2019. Biogenic synthesis of trimetallic nanoparticles Au/ZnO/Ag using Meliloti 
officinalis extract. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem. 100: 981. https://doi.org/10.1080/03067319.2019.1 
646736. 
[84] Hu, D., X. Yang, W. Chen, Z. Feng, C. Hu, F. Yan and Z. Chen. 2021. Rhodiola rosea rhizome extract￾mediated green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and evaluation of their potential antioxidant and 
catalytic reduction activities. ACS Omega 6: 24450. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c02843. 
[85] Kayalvizhi, T., S. Ravikumar and P. Venkatachalam. 2016. Green synthesis of metallic silver 
nanoparticles using Curculigo orchioides rhizome extracts and evaluation of its antibacterial, 
larvicidal, and anticancer activity. J. Environ. Eng. 142: 1. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE) 
EE.1943-7870.0001098. 
[86] Peng, Q. and R. Chen. 2019. Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles using caffeoylxanthiazonoside, 
chemical isolated from Xanthium strumarium L. fruit and their anti-allergic rhinitis effect—a 
traditional Chinese medicine. J. Photochem. Photobiol., B: Biol. 192: 13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jphotobiol.2018.12.015. 
[87] Huo, C., M. Khoshnamvand, P. Liu, C. Liu and C. Yuan. 2019. Rapid mediated biosynthesis 
and quantification of AuNPs using persimmon (Diospyros Kaki L.f) fruit extract. J. Mol. Struct. 
1178: 366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2018.10.044. 
[88] Suresh, D., R.M. Shobharani, P.C. Nethravathi, M.A. Pavan Kumar, H. Nagabhushana and S.C. 
Sharma. 2015. Artocarpus gomezianus aided green synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles: Luminescence, 
photocatalytic and antioxidant properties. Spectrochim. Acta Part A: Mol. Biomol. Spectros. 
141: 128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2015.01.048. 
[89] Udayabhanu, P.C. Nethravathi, M.A.P. Kumar, D. Suresh, K. Lingaraju, H. Rajanaika and S. 
Sharma. 2015. Tinospora cordifolia mediated facile green synthesis of cupric oxide nanoparticles 
and their photocatalytic, antioxidant and antibacterial properties. Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. 
33: 81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mssp.2015.01.034. 
[90] Carmona, E.R., N. Benito, T. Plaza and G. Recio-sánchez. 2017. Green synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles by using leaf extracts from the endemic Buddleja globosa hope. Green Chem. Lett. 
Rev. 10: 250. https://doi.org/10.1080/17518253.2017.1360400. 
[91] Gopalakrishnan, R., B. Loganathan, S. Dinesh and K. Raghu. 2017. Strategic green synthesis, 
characterization and catalytic application to 4-nitrophenol reduction of palladium nanoparticles. 
J. Cluster Sci. 28: 2123. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10876-017-1207-z. 
[92] Rajeshkumar, S. 2016. Synthesis of silver nanoparticles using fresh bark of Pongamia pinnata and 
characterization of its antibacterial activity against gram positive and gram negative pathogens. 
Resource Efficient Technol. 2: 30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reffit.2016.06.003. 
[93] Padalia, H., P. Moteriya and S. Chanda. 2015. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from 
marigold flower and its synergistic antimicrobial potential. Arabian J. Chem. 8: 732. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2014.11.015. 
[94] Chandrasekaran, R., S. Gnanasekar, P. Seetharaman, R. Keppanan, W. Arockiaswamy and S. 
Sivaperumal. 2016. Formulation of Carica papaya latex-functionalized silver nanoparticles for its 
improved antibacterial and anticancer applications. J. Mol. Liq. 219: 232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
molliq.2016.03.038. 
[95] Elango, G. and S.M. Roopan. 2015. Green synthesis, spectroscopic investigation and photocatalytic 
activity of lead nanoparticles. Spectrochem. Acta Part A: Mol. Biomol. Spectros. 139: 367. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2014.12.066. 
[96] Pawar, O., N. Deshpande, S. Dagade, S. Waghmode and P.N. Joshi. 2016. Green synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles from purple acid phosphatase apoenzyme isolated from a new source Limonia 
acidissima. J. Exper. Nanosci. 11: 28. https://doi.org/10.1080/17458080.2015.1025300. 
[97] Sankar, V., P. Salinraj, R. Athira, R.S. Soumya, and K.G. Raghu. 2015. Cerium nanoparticles 
synthesized using aqueous extract of Centella asiatica: characterization, determination of free  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 53 
radical scavenging activity and evaluation of efficacy against cardiomyoblast hypertrophy. RSC 
Adv. 5: 21074. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4ra16893c. 
[98] Ahmed, S., Saifullah, M. Ahmad, B.L. Swami and S. Ikram. 2016. Green synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using Azadirachta indica aqueous leaf extract. J. Rad. Res. Appl. Sci. 9: 1. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrras.2015.06.006. 
[99] Devatha, C.P., A.K. Thalla and S.Y. Katte. 2016. Green synthesis of iron nanoparticles using 
different leaf extracts for treatment of domestic waste water. J. Cleaner Prod. 139: 1425. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.019. 
[100] Femi-adepoju, A.G., A.O. Dada, K.O. Otun, A.O. Adepoju and O.P. Fatoba. 2019. Green synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles using terrestrial fern (Gleichenia Pectinata (Willd.) C. Presl.): characterization 
and antimicrobial studies. Heliyon 5: 1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01543. 
[101] Ahmed, A., M. Usman, B. Yu, Y. Shen and H. Cong. 2021. Sustainable fabrication of hematite 
(α-Fe2O3) nanoparticles using biomolecules of Punica granatum seed extract for unconventional 
solar-light-driven photocatalytic remediation of organic dyes. J. Mol. Liq. 339: 116729. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.116729. 
[102] Gunti, L., R.S. Dass and N.K. Kalagatur. 2019. Phytofabrication of selenium nanoparticles from 
emblica officinalis fruit extract and exploring its biopotential applications: antioxidant, antimicrobial, 
and biocompatibility. Front. Microbiol. 10: 1. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.00931. 
[103] Ramesh, A.V., D.R. Devi, G. Battu and K. Basavaiah. 2018. A Facile plant mediated synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles using an aqueous leaf extract of Ficus hispida Linn. f. for catalytic, antioxidant 
and antibacterial applications. South Afri. J. Chem. Eng. 26: 25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
sajce.2018.07.001. 
[104] Folorunso, A., S. Akintelu, A. Kolawole, S. Ajayi, B. Abiola, I. Abdusalam and A. Morakinyo. 
2019. Biosynthesis, characterization and antimicrobial activity of gold nanoparticles from leaf 
extracts of Annona muricata. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 9: 121. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40097-019­
0301-1. 
[105] Sharma, G., J. Nam, A.R. Sharma and S. Lee. 2018. Antimicrobial potential of silver nanoparticles 
synthesized using medicinal herb Coptidis rhizome. Molecules 23: 1. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
molecules23092268. 
[106] Aljabali, A.A.A., Y. Akkam, M. Salim, A. Zoubi, K.M. Al-batayneh, B.A. Id and D.J.E. Id. 2018. 
Synthesis of gold nanoparticles using leaf extract of Ziziphus zizyphus and their antimicrobial 
activity. Nanomater. 8: 1. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano8030174. 
[107] Rafi, M., S. Id, M. Khan, M.K. Id, A. Al-warthan, A. Mahmood and S.F. Adil. 2018. Plant-extract￾assisted green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Origanum vulgare L. extract and their 
microbicidal activities. Sustainability 10: 1. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10040913. 
[108] Atarod, M., M. Nasrollahzadeh and S.M. Sajadi. 2016. Green synthesis of Pd/RGO/Fe3O4 
nanocomposite using Withania coagulans leaf extract and its application as magnetically separable 
and reusable catalyst for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol. J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 465: 249. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jcis.2015.11.060.
[109] Sharifi-rad, M., P. Pohl, F. Epifano and J.M. Álvarez-Suarez. 2020. Green synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using Astragalus tribuloides delile. root extract: characterization, antioxidant, 
antibacterial, and anti-inflammatory activities. Nanomater. 10: 2383. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
nano10122383. 
[110] Selvaraj, V., S. Sagadevan, L. Muthukrishnan, R.M. Johan and J. Podder. 2019. Eco-friendly 
approach in synthesis of silver nanoparticles and evaluation of optical, surface morphological and 
antimicrobial properties. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 9: 153. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40097-019-0306-9. 
[111] Kumar, B., K. Smita and L. Cumbal. 2015. Phytosynthesis of gold nanoparticles using Andean Ajı′ 
(Capsicum baccatum L.). Cogent Chem. 1: 1. https://doi.org/10.1080/23312009.2015.1120982. 
[112] Ke, Y., M. Saleh, A. Aboody, W. Alturaiki, S.A. Alsagaby, F.A. Alfaiz and S. Mickymaray. 
2019. Photosynthesized gold nanoparticles from Catharanthus roseus induces caspase-mediated 
apoptosis in cervical cancer cells (HeLa). Artificial Cells, Nanomed. Biotechnol. 41: 1938. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2019.1614017. 
[113] Thakur, S. and N. Karak. 2012. Green reduction of graphene oxide by aqueous phytoextracts. 
Carbon 50: 5331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2012.07.023.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[114] Oves, M., M. Aslam, M.A. Rauf, S. Qayyum, H.A. Qari, M.S. Khan and I.M. Ismail. 2018. 
Antimicrobial and anticancer activities of silver nanoparticles synthesized from the root hair extract 
of Phoenix dactylifera. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 89: 429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2018.03.035. 
[115] Tahir, K., S. Nazir, A. Ahmad, B. Li, S. Asim, A. Shah and F.U. Khan. 2016. Biodirected synthesis 
of palladium nanoparticles using Phoenix dactylifera leaves extract and their size dependent 
biomedical and catalytic. RSC Adv. 6: 85903. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ra11409a. 
[116] Kasithevar, M., M. Saravanan, P. Prakash, H. Kumar, M. Ovais, H. Barabadi and Z.K. Shinwari. 
2017. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Alysicarpus monilifer leaf extract and its 
antibacterial activity against MRSA and CoNS isolates in HIV patients. J. Interdiscip. Nanomed. 
2: 131. https://doi.org/10.1002/jin2.26. 
[117] Balalakshmi, C., K. Gopinath, M. Govindarajan, R. Lokesh, A. Arumugam, N.S. Alharbi and G. 
Benelli. 2017. Green synthesis of gold nanoparticles using a cheap Sphaeranthus indicus extract: 
Impact on plant cells and the aquatic Crustacean Artemia nauplii. J. Photochem. Photobiol., B: 
Biol. 173: 598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2017.06.040. 
[118] Tahir, K., S. Nazir, B. Li, A. Ullah, Z. Ul, H. Khan and A. Ahmad. 2015. Nerium oleander leaves 
extract mediated synthesis of gold nano- particles and its antioxidant activity. Mater. Lett. 156: 198. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2015.05.062. 
[119] Mahamadi, C. and T. Wunganayi. 2018. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Zanthoxylum 
chalybeum and their antiprolytic and antibiotic properties. Cogent Chem. 4: 1. https://doi.org/10.1 
080/23312009.2018.1538547. 
[120] Khalid, S., S.A. Majid and M.A. Akram. 2019. The prophylactic effect of Ranunculus laetus (wall) 
-mediated silver nanoparticles against some gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Bull. Nat. 
Res. Centre 43: 1. 
[121] Jain, S. and M.S. Mehata. 2017. Medicinal plant leaf extract and pure flavonoid mediated green 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their enhanced antibacterial property. Sci. Rep. 7: 15867. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-15724-8. 
[122] Phukan, S., P. Bharali, A.K. Das and H. Rashid. 2016. Phytochemical assisted synthesis of size and 
shape tunable gold nanoparticles and assessment of their catalytic activities. RSC Adv. 6: 49307. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ra23535a. 
[123] Zhan, G., J. Huang, M. Du, I. Abdul-Rauf, Y. Ma and Q. Li. 2011. Green synthesis of Au-Pd 
bimetallic nanoparticles: Single-step bioreduction method with plant extract. Mater. Lett. 65: 2989. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2011.06.079. 
[124] Upadhyay, P.K., V.K. Jain, A.K. Shrivastav, S. Sharma and R. Sharma. 2020. Green and chemically 
synthesized ZnO nanoparticles: A comparative study. Adv. Mater. Appl. 798: 012025. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/1757-899X/798/1/012025. 
[125] Vaseghi, Z., A. Nematollahzadeh and O. Tavakoli. 2019. Plant-mediated Cu/Cr/Ni nanoparticle 
formation strategy for simultaneously separation of the mixed ions from aqueous solution. 
J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 96: 148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtice.2018.10.020. 
[126] Alshehri, A.A. and M.A. Malik. 2020. Facile one-pot biogenic synthesis of Cu-Co-Ni trimetallic 
nanoparticles for enhanced photocatalytic dye degradation. Catalysts 10: 1138. 
[127] Jadoun, S., R. Arif, N.K. Jangid and R.K. Meena. 2021. Green synthesis of nanoparticles using plant 
extracts: a review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 19: 355. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-020-01074-x. 
[128] Kim, M.G., J.M. Kang, J.E. Lee, K.S. Kim, K.H. Kim, M. Cho and S.G. Lee. 2021. Effects of 
calcination temperature on the phase composition, photocatalytic degradation, and virucidal 
activities of TiO2 nanoparticles. ACS Omega 6: 10668. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c00043. 
[129] Nasrollahzadeh, M., M. Atarod, M. Sajjadi, S.M. Sajadi and Z. Issaabadi. 2019. Plant-mediated 
green synthesis of nanostructures: mechanisms, characterization, and applications. Interface Sci. 
Technol. 1st Ed. 28: 199. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813586-0.00006-7. 
[130] Ibrahim, H.M.M. 2019. Green synthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles using banana 
peel extract and their antimicrobial activity against representative microorganisms. J. Rad. Res. 
Appl. Sci. 8: 265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrras.2015.01.007. 
[131] Zheng, B., T. Kong, X. Jing, T. Odoom-wubah, X. Li, D. Sun and Q. Li. 2013. Plant-mediated 
synthesis of platinum nanoparticles and its bioreductive mechanism. J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 396: 138. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2013.01.021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Cohorts 55 
[132] Malek, F. and M. Nahid. 2018. Influence of temperature and concentration on biosynthesis and 
characterization of zinc oxide nanoparticles using cherry extract. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 8: 93. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40097-018-0257-6. 
[133] Ahmed, R.H. and D.E. Mustafa. 2020. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles mediated by 
traditionally used medicinal plants in Sudan. Int. Nano Lett. 10: 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40089­
019-00291-9. 
[134] Behravan, M., A.H. Panahi, A. Naghizadeh, M. Ziaee, R. Mahdavi and A. Mirzapour. 2019. 
Facile green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Berberis vulgaris leaf and root aqueous 
extract and its antibacterial activity. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 124: 148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijbiomac.2018.11.101. 
[135] Marslin, G., K. Siram, Q. Maqbool, R.K. Selvakesavan, D. Kruszka, P. Kachlicki and G. Franklin. 
2018. Secondary metabolites in the green synthesis of metallic nanoparticles. Materials 11: 1. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma11060940. 
[136] Ocsoy, I., D. Tasdemir, S. Mazicioglu, C. Celik, A. Kati and F. Ulgen. 2018. Biomolecules 
incorporated metallic nanoparticles synthesis and their biomedical applications. Mater. Lett. 
212: 45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2017.10.068. 
[137] Nasrollahzadeh, M., S.S. Momeni and S.M. Sajadi. 2017. Green synthesis of copper nanoparticles 
using Plantago asiatica leaf extract and their application for the cyanation of aldehydes using 
K4Fe(CN)6. J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 506: 471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2017.07.072. 
[138] Edison, T.N.J.I., R. Atchudan, M.G. Sethuraman and R.Y. Lee. 2016. Reductive-degradation 
of carcinogenic azo dyes using Anacardium occidentale testa derived silver nanoparticles. 
J. Photochem. Photobiol., B: Biol. 162: 604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2016.07.040. 
[139] Arumugam, A., C. Karthikeyan, A.S.H. Hameed, K. Gopinath, S. Gowri and V. Karthika. 
2015. Synthesis of cerium oxide nanoparticles using Gloriosa superba L. leaf extract and their 
structural, optical and antibacterial properties. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 49: 408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
msec.2015.01.042. 
[140] Devipriya, D. and S.M. Roopan. 2017. Cissus quadrangularis mediated ecofriendly synthesis of 
copper oxide nanoparticles and its antifungal studies against Aspergillus niger, Aspergillus flavus. 
Mater. Sci. Eng. C 80: 38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2017.05.130. 
[141] Mathivanan, K., R. Selva, J.U. Chandirika, R.K. Govindarajan, R. Srinivasan, G. Annadurai 
and P.A. Duc. 2019. Biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles against pathogenic bacteria: 
Synthesis, calcination and characterization. Biocatal. Agricul. Biotechnol. 22: 101373. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bcab.2019.101373.  
4


Nanofabrication 
Using Common
Kitchen/Domestic Wastes


An Approach Towards 
Sustainability and
Circular Economy


Manisha Mishra,1 Anal K. Jha2
 and K. Prasad3,* 
1. Introduction 
The focus on green synthesis of nanomaterials transcribes and modernizes each 
new day into innovative Green Nanotechnology approaches that has shifted 
global efforts by the scientific community into a more synergistic inter- and cross 
disciplinary endeavor to reduce hazardous wastes. Recently, with the emergence 
and catastrophe caused by Covid-19 pandemic, the world has experienced variation 
in the load of the municipal solid waste (MSW) that is majorly accounted for by the 
top three MSW producers—the United States, the Chinese Republic, and India, in 
terms of volume and variety, and has also influenced the sources of waste generation 
and its management [1, 2]. According to Gao et al. [3], kitchen wastes comprise a 
major proportion of MSW, and whether they can be engineered or not depends on 
the extent of deterioration and original content. These wastes contribute a major 
1 University Department of Botany, T.M. Bhagalpur University, Bhagalpur 812007, India. 2 Department of Biotechnology, O.P. Jindal University, Raigarh, Chhattisgarh 496109, India. 
3 University Department of Physics, T.M. Bhagalpur University, Bhagalpur 812007, India. 
* Corresponding author: k.prasad65@gmail.com Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 57 
chunk of the MSW as demand for food remains perpetual. The menace caused by 
these wastes is further aggravated due to population explosion and gets compounded 
as industrialization, urbanization and economic development sets in [4]. In homes, 
restaurants, and hotels, the left-over organic matter is referred to as kitchen waste 
[5]. The fundamental problem in waste management lies in competent sorting and 
the kitchen wastes when effectively sorted from MSW can enhance the treatment 
process [6, 7]. Although the kitchen wastes are rich in organic content, their elevated 
moisture content and heterogeneity pose serious threat to their effective conversion 
into valuable resources [8]. 
Sustainability is the new buzz word across the nations, ever since people have 
realized that environment is greatly at stake due to anthropogenic activities, and 
therefore, protecting the environment is of paramount concern for one and all. Besides 
this, as Industry 4.0 context is emerging, the concept of green chemistry needs to be 
made more sustainable. Nanotechnology can provide technological solutions that 
can accelerate and align efforts raised by the international scientific community 
to consummate the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals through 
interdisciplinary knowledge and skills [9]. Goal 9 of the Sustainable Development 
Goals of the United Nations emphatically maintains that manufacturing, and hence 
fabrication, is a key to global economic development [10]. This can be achieved 
by emphasizing the circular economy concept that can generate resources and 
leave zero waste. Nanotechnology was initially put up by Norio Taniguchi and 
it is expected that this technology can buttress the circular economy concept and 
its immense popularity in various applications such as in medical imaging, textile 
industry, tissue engineering, nanocomposites, biomedicine, and bioremediation 
has indeed proved that [11]. The research on synthesis of nanomaterials using 
kitchen wastes and their applications rests on the fabrication of nontoxic nanosized 
materials that are monodispersed and of various sizes and shapes. Synthesis of 
nanomaterials with high monodispersity is possible due to abundance of glutathione 
and phytochelatins in plants that aid in metal sequestration, and hence define 
dimension of nanomaterial [12]. The fabrication protocols should aim to produce 
nanoparticles with uniform size and shape, and unless this criterion is met along with 
limited or no toxicity to biological systems, their applications in addressing human 
health and the environmental concerns remains a challenge. The nanomaterials can 
be biomineralized in protein cages and can generate nanoparticles with controlled 
morphology and this approach is considered safe for biological applications [13]; 
however, as regards their application aspect, their antimicrobial, anticancer and 
anthelminthic features have to be carefully confirmed upon synthesis. 
The fabrication of nanomaterials is now considered as a major driver of industrial 
revolution and is majorly undertaken for their role in various sectors that emerges 
out of their unique surface area to volume ratio at the nanoscale level and promises 
solutions to several problems [14]. For fabrication, green protocol is preferred over 
chemical and other methods, because the former utilizes kitchen wastes and is 
relatively simple and cheap, reduces waste in the environment and is eco-friendly 
too [15]. The kitchen wastes are a kind of agro-waste and may contain lignin, 
cellulose, chitin, and polyphenolic compounds. When utilized, pyrolysis of kitchen  
 
58 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
wastes can yield carbon dots while the remaining components in plant tissues can 
serve as reducing, stabilizing, and capping agents in the synthesis of nanoparticles. 
The extracts made out of these kitchen and other agro wastes can yield metals, 
metal oxides, and nanocomposites, whereas nanosilica, nanocellulose, and carbon 
nanodots can be obtained directly from the agro-wastes [16]. The rich diversity of 
plant life, a faster reaction rate, and affordability makes kitchen wastes a valuable 
material for nanofabrication. The kitchen wastes in developing countries contain 
large quantities of water and nonhollo cellulose degradable organics [17]. Vegetable 
and fruit peels, seeds, tubers, and other chopped parts contained in the kitchen wastes 
are rich in phytochemicals like flavanols, terpenoids, coumarins, hesperidin, etc. and 
also contain co-enzymes, enzymes, proteins, phenolic compounds, alkaloids, 
sugars, and terpenoids. Besides this, fruit and vegetable wastes possess elevated 
carbohydrate content and various organics, multifunctional groups and polymeric 
proteins that can be harnessed to generate high-value products for nanomaterial 
fabrication by clean manufacturing technologies [18, 19]. The phytochemistry and 
biochemical composition of the plant extract can be obtained by LC-MS and these 
phytochemicals act as reducing and capping agents of metal ions during synthesis 
of nanosized materials. Figure 1 highlights the schema depicting the role of 
phytochemicals in nanomaterial fabrication. 
There are several disadvantages of physical and chemical methods of 
nanomaterial fabrication including production of several toxins that are hazardous 
(and adsorb on the nanomaterial surface), have enormous amount of energy 
requirement and involvement of reducing agents that are harsh, low yield, high cost, 
Fig. 1. The schematic highlights role of phytochemicals in nanomaterial fabrication. Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 59 
and lead to environmental damage [20]. As compared to this, using kitchen wastes 
makes use of relatively benign phytochemicals and are hence preferred over the 
physical and chemical methods. The enormous applications of metal nanoparticles 
in various fields are achieved by their fabrication using noble metals like Ag, Au, 
Fe, Cu, Pt, Zn, Pd, and their oxides and involves reduction of metal salts to metal 
nanoparticles by phytochemicals present in the plant extract [21]. 
Nanomaterials fabricated by the green synthesis protocols are advantageous 
as compared to the physicochemical methods and as science becomes more 
application-oriented, the novelty of nanomaterials lures environmentalists as they 
find a haven to manage kitchen wastes and generate value-added products to 
meet the demand for sustainable and economically viable processes that are safe, 
effective, and applicable in agriculture, medicine, etc. The higher reactivity and 
elaborated surface area of these nanosized materials can effectively reduce air and 
water pollution [22]. It has been noted that although scale-up of nano-conversion 
carried out in the laboratory is not efficient, the fabrication of nanomaterials from 
garbage, combustible waste ash, pharmaceutical waste, agricultural waste, and 
microbial biomass is not uncommon [23]. Thus, nanotechnology involves science 
and engineering at the nanoscale and finds application in fabric manufacturing, food 
and agricultural processing industries, and medical and medicinal applications and as 
antimicrobials, of which the last one is the most popular of all [24]. This chapter has 
been divided into two parts. The first part discusses the fabrication protocol whereas 
the second part delves into the types of nanomaterials—metals, metal oxides, carbon 
dots and porous nanocarbon spheres. 
2. Fabrication Protocol 
The fabrication of nanomaterials is undertaken by two approaches, namely, 
top-down and bottom-up. The former involves synthesis of nanomaterials from bulk 
materials and involves techniques like lithography, sputtering, etching, etc. The 
bottom-up approach involves growing nanomaterials through self-assembly and 
supramolecular chemistry. It involves fabrication from simple molecules to bulk 
materials and can be either combined with the top-down approach or used on its 
own [25, 26]. Structurally, the nanomaterial consists of a core, that is surrounded 
by a shell and it is the latter that determines the properties of the ultimate material. 
Surrounding the shell is the surface layer that can be functionalized using metals, 
metal oxides, surfactants, polymers like poly lactic acid, etc. and functionalization is 
usually undertaken depending on the final outcome or desired purpose. Structurally, 
the shell and the core are different and the name of the nanoparticle derives from its 
core [25]. Functionalization is also done to prevent particle agglomeration which may 
be undesirable for ultimate applications. In general, the protocol for nanomaterial 
fabrication involves collection and sorting of kitchen wastes. It is imperative to 
carefully determine the solvent used for extraction of phytochemicals, capping agent 
and the reducing agent, and the procedure is initiated by extract preparation, screening 
for phytochemicals and precursor preparation. Plant extracts are rich in polyphenols 
that are bio-reductive and need an organic solvent to solubilize. Often important 
parameters such as pH, temperature, and incubation time need to be optimized. After 60 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
etc.) 
etc.) 
etc.) 
etc. 
etc. 
Fig. 2. The schematic highlights of the various steps involved in nanomaterial fabrication utilizing 
kitchen wastes, right from their sorting from municipal solid waste until the end use. Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 61 
fabrication step, nanoparticles have to be characterized for various field applications 
by suitable techniques like SEM and TEM for determination of their optical, thermal 
and physicochemical properties [27, 14]. The schematic highlights of various steps 
involved in nanomaterial fabrication utilizing kitchen wastes have been illustrated 
in Fig. 2. 
3. Fabrication of Metal Nanoparticles 
Metallic nanoparticles are nanostructured materials, and the fabrication and 
application of nobel metal nanoparticles is gaining immense popularity as an 
active research theme nowadays [28]. Often chemicals like NaBH4, hydrazine, and 
formaldehyde that are used to reduce noble metal salt precursors poses toxicity 
during fabrication and hence concerns are always raised over their use in biological 
applications. However, nanofabrication using biological reduction process is 
considered safer and non-toxic. The enhanced surface area including large surface to 
volume ratio, improved stability, and easy functionalization provides exclusivity to 
noble metal nanoparticles and they find immense application in various fields [29]. 
Of the various noble metal NPs, the fabrication of AgNPs by the green protocol 
have been attempted by various research groups utilizing kitchen wastes like grape 
pomace, pomegranate peels, watermelon, banana peel extract, mango peel extract, 
Terminalia chebula, pine apple, cauliflower wastes, waste tea leaves, garlic, etc. 
The green synthesis bestows AgNPs with unique physicochemical and biological 
properties. Besides, the protocol abstains from the use of hazardous solvents and 
chemicals, and instead mostly utilizes fruit waste valorization. By adjusting the 
experimental parameters, the shape, size and concentration of nanoparticles can 
be altered. However, brows are still raised over their large-scale production and 
quality control as suggested by Ali et al. [30]. Besides, the process is eco-friendly, 
cost-effective, and fabricated nanoparticles are biocompatible [31]. Their 
biocompatibility allows them to be used as antimicrobial, antifungal, antiviral, and 
anticancer agents, in the treatment of diabetes-related complications, and wound healing 
properties and also for the degradation of pollutants. AgNPs fabrication was achieved 
by utilizing grape pomace, which itself is rich in tannins, and these phytochemicals 
acted as reducing and capping agents during synthesis. The characteristic peak 
obtained at 420 nm in UV-vis spectroscopy confirmed the fabrication of AgNPs, 
and from the application perspective, it was found that the synthesized nanoparticles 
showed exceptional antibacterial activity against selected pathogenic strains [32]. 
Utilizing the green method, Saad et al. [33] fabricated AgNPs that were effective 
in controlling larva of Spodoptera littoralis, from the extracts of pomegranate peels 
and watermelon, and the phytochemicals responsible for fabrication were identified 
as polyphenols. By using neem leaf and banana peel extract, AgNPs were fabricated 
and it was used in dye removal, wastewater treatment, and also as an anti-microbial 
agent [34]. Enhanced antimicrobial activity of AgNPs was observed when fabricated 
from banana peel extract [35]. Yet another application could be in packaging films 
for food items and to achieve this, PLA/MPE/AgNPs (poly lactic acid/mango peel 
extract/silver nanoparticles) were fabricated using mango peel extract by Cheng 
et al. [36]. The fabrication of AgNPs and AuNPs have also been done using potato 62 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
peel extract [37]. Biocompatible AgNPs were fabricated using Ipomea batatas (L.) 
Lam peels containing various phenolic and bioactive compounds [38]. The extracts 
of fruits of Terminalia chebula or black- or chebulic myrobalan were used to 
fabricate AgNPs that could be used for the reduction of methylene blue [39]. Gold 
NPs have also been fabricated using Terminalia chebula using the green protocol 
[40]. Research has shown that the ratio of silver ion precursor versus peel extract of 
Ananas comosus (Pineapple) and pH determines whether monodispersed and stable 
AgNPs will form or not and the authors have also reported the fabrication of AgNPs 
sized between 14–20 nm, without addition of any reducing or stabilizing agents [41]. 
Extracts obtained from cauliflower wastes were used to fabricate AgNPs and the 
synthesized nanoparticles were used in photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue 
(MB) dye and sensing Hg2+ ions [42]. In yet another report, green synthesis of AgNPs 
using waste tea leaves was done [43]. By utilizing milk whey proteins as a reducing 
agent, Verma et al. [44] fabricated silver nanoparticles and suggested that this was 
an economical and also environmentally amenable approach. By utilizing extract 
from garlic as a reducing agent and post-synthesis stabilizing ligands, AgNPs were 
fabricated, that were both monodisperse and stable [45]. 
AuNPs with desirable shape and dimensionality can be made using the green 
chemistry of kitchen wastes; for example, onion peels contain various soluble phenolic 
compounds and carry cysteine derivatives that aid in stabilizing and reducing AuNPs 
[46]. Members of the Brassica family comprise the most consumed vegetables and 
they contain phenolic compounds (which confer them with anti-oxidant properties) 
and these phytochemicals act as capping and reducing agents during the fabrication 
of AuNPs from Brassica oleracea. The synthesis of spherical AuNPs, having an 
average diameter of 25.08 ± 3.73 nm was confirmed and characterization was 
done by UV-vis and FTIR. This method was found to be a better alternative for the 
revalorization of Brassica by-products and synthesis of nanomaterials [47]. AuNPs 
also find many applications including health care; however, chemically synthesized 
AuNPs are toxic which deters their use in biological applications. Another application 
of AuNPs can be in the eradication of 4-nitrophenol and as insecticidal agents in 
industrial wastewaters [48]. 
4. Fabrication of Metal Oxide Nanomaterials 
Metal oxide nanoparticles are fabricated for their bactericidal activity against a range 
of microorganisms and the most commonly fabricated ones include those based on 
CuO, ZnO, CoO, MgO, NiO, Al2O3, In2O3, Cr2O3, Ni2O3, Mn2O3, TiO2, ZrO2, SiO2, 
Co3O4, etc. The antimicrobial and antibacterial property of these nanomaterials 
depends on various factors like shape, surface charge, nanomaterial concentration, 
material type, medium components and pH, dispersion and contact of nanomaterial to 
the bacterial cell, physicochemical properties, presence of active oxygen, liberation 
of antimicrobial ions, size, specific surface-area-to-volume ratios, role of biofilm 
formation, role of growth rate, cell wall of bacteria, and effect of UV illumination. 
The conventional antibacterial agents often display reduced efficiency due to long 
production–consumption cycle. Besides, more pervasive and widespread use of 
counterfeited medicines in undeveloped and developing economies further aggravates Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 63 
the problem. This challenge is usually addressed by effective nanostructure synthesis 
to deliver the antimicrobial agent for efficient targeting of the bacterial community. 
The potency of the said method reduces the chances of resistance development in 
microbial pathogens. Besides, at concentration effective enough for killing microbial 
pathogens, most of the metal oxide NPs have no toxicity towards humans and at 
least, at the research level, studies by Hoseinzadeh et al. [24] have suggested that 
NPs are excellent antibacterial agents. 
Metal oxide nanoparticles can be put to tremendous use because of their large 
surface area to volume ratio, coupled with reduced size, antimicrobial activity, 
photocatalytic and semiconducting properties. Several of these features facilitate 
the use of ZnONPs as anticancer drugs in new generation physical therapies, 
nanoantibiotics, and osteoinductive agents for bone tissue regeneration [49]. ZnO 
is currently listed as a generally recognized as safe (GRAS) material by the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) and also finds application as a food additive. 
The incorporation of ZnO in polymeric matrices improves antimicrobial activity 
and packaging properties [50]. The incorporation of metal oxide NPs in fuels can 
improve thermal efficiency and decrease specific fuel consumption. Besides, they 
enhance the cetane number, viscosity, and heating values of test fuels; however, they 
cause no appreciable change in noise and vibration [51]. For the conversion of solid 
kitchen waste into biofuel, cobalt and nickel oxide nanoparticles were fabricated 
using bread fungus and coriander leaves [52]. Recently, pursuant to the popular 
trend among the scientific community regarding the use of biologically active plant 
materials for nanofabrication that is sustainable, Chauhan et al. [53] fabricated 
ZnONPs using peels of water chestnut. The phytochemicals in water chestnut acted 
as both stabilizing and reducing agent, ensuring an economically viable option that 
was nontoxic and environmentally benign. Banana peel extract is rich in polyphenols 
and by utilizing it as stabilizing and reducing agent, iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) 
of size around 60 nm were synthesized via the green synthesis protocol [54]. The 
triglycerides present in waste frying oil were converted to biodiesel via esterification 
and the process utilized magnetic graphene oxide modified with three basic metal 
cations of cerium, zirconium, and strontium oxides to produce heterogeneous 
MGO@MMO nanocatalyst [55]. Silver and silver oxide nanoparticles were fabricated 
using powder from eggshell, and poultry waste and those were then used as materials 
for the fabrication of hybrid nanocomposites to make cheap polymer matrices made 
of antibacterial filler [56]. 
Green synthesis of TiO2 nanoparticles from remnant water, a kitchen waste, 
that was used to soak Bengal gram beans (Cicer arietinum L.) was made to react 
with TiCl4. Upon nanomaterial characterization, it was shown that uniformly sized 
TiO2 nanoparticles were synthesized that did not aggregate even upon calcination and 
this was attributed to the stabilizing molecules naturally present in the extract [57]. 
Rueda et al. [58] carried out a fast and low-cost green synthesis method of Titanium 
Dioxide Nanocrystals (TiO2-NCs) in which two volumetric ratios of tangerine peels, 
an organic waste, as bio-mediator of chemical reactions, were used to transform 
Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) precursor into TiO2-NCs. This approach could effectively 
bring down the environmental impact caused due to peels that eventually ended  
64 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
up in landfills and also it also demonstrated that a relatively large concentration of 
phytochemicals is crucial for the growth and formation of TiO2-nanocrystals. By 
utilizing waste cooking oil, methyl ester sulfonate (MES) surfactant was prepared. 
MES along with TiO2 nanoparticles were used to generate nanofluid detergent [59]. 
TiO2 NPs were fabricated from aqueous extract of Laurus nobilis (bay leaf) and 
the fabricated TiO2 NPs revealed a strong antioxidant activity when compared with 
the ascorbic acid standard. The process could be scaled up for large-scale industrial 
production, which would be eco-friendly, and economically viable with high 
productivity [60]. The fabrication of TiO2 NPs by green synthesis shows immense 
potential when compared to physical and chemical fabrication protocols and the 
fabricated particles find application in electronics, energy generation devices, 
batteries, and sensor manufacturing and also find immense use in photodynamic 
cancer therapy, as antileishmanial agents, and antibacterial medicines [61]. The 
removal of As(III) and As(V) from contaminated waste waters was performed using 
novel zirconium hydroxide nanoparticle encapsulated magnetic biochar composite 
(ZBC) fabricated from kitchen rice residue. ZBC displayed acceptable magnetic 
separation ability and its surface was encapsulated with lots of hydrous zirconium 
oxide nanoparticles [62]. 
5. Fabrication of Carbon Dots 
Carbon dots are immensely getting popular these days as unique class of nanomaterials 
that display unique optical properties, low toxicity, high biocompatibility, and 
economical fabrication process. These functionalities facilitate their applications 
in bioimaging, catalysis, sensing, and drug delivery and they are basically of two 
types—graphene and carbon quantum dots. Graphene quantum dots (GQDs) are 
anisotropic, circular, or elliptical-shaped and crystalline having few graphene layers 
connected via chemical groups, whereas carbon quantum dots (CQDs) are of two 
types based on the absence or presence of a crystal lattice and are strictly spherical 
shaped [63]. Although both types of CDs—synthesized by chemical methods and 
the green protocol—are fluorescent materials, CDs resulting from green synthesis 
protocols are pocket friendly, water-soluble, and non-toxic, with adjustable 
luminescence, and are highly biocompatible. CDs are excellent nanomaterials that 
can be used for the delivery of drugs, bioimaging, fluorescent inks, catalysis, and 
also detection of heavy metal ions [64]. Various researchers have fabricated carbon 
dots by utilizing the rich diversity of kitchen wastes. Green synthesis of CQDs was 
attempted using carbonized biomass peels of garlic, taro and sugarcane bagasse, and 
the researchers have highlighted that CQDs fabricated from taro peel waste showed 
maximum fluorescence quantum yield and was utilized to make fluorescence￾based nanoprobes. These nano-based probes showed excellent photoluminescence, 
biocompatibility and enhanced stability and could be used as sensors for the detection 
of fluorides in water [65]. Another group of workers have used cooked food wastes 
for the fabrication of CQDs to detect additives and heavy metal ions in food and 
in addition to being cost effective, this fabrication procedure also addresses the 
environmental pollution problem [66].  
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 65 
The waste frying oil is an important kitchen waste and serious concern emerges 
due to lack of its proper disposal. The possession of distinct pH sensitivity and 
the linear enhancement of the intensity of photoluminescence in 3–9 pH range 
leads to the use of waste frying oil for fabrication of sulfur-doped carbon dots 
(S-C-dots). These carbon dots are photostable, possess fascinating optical properties 
with reduced toxicity and find immense applications as fluorescent probes for cell 
imaging [67]. In yet another instance, sweet potato peels were used to fabricate 
carbon dots (CDs) that were found to be superior fluorophores and possessed lowered 
toxicity and superb photostability [68]. The preparation of gelatin based functional 
filler for food packaging films with low cytotoxicity was achieved by incorporation 
of carbon dots, fabricated from potato peels, and it was found that the said packaging 
film was biocompatible and demonstrated strong antioxidant and antimicrobial 
activities [69]. Thus, CDs emerge as value added products of immense potential 
and their incorporation into gelatin films can provide for low-cost and functional 
nanofiller for the preparation of gelatin film for use in packaging applications, 
with various advantages including enhanced transparency, antibacterial efficacy, 
appreciable permeability to water vapor and hydrophobicity without affecting its 
tensile strength [70]. Waste tea powder was used to fabricate carbon dots (CDs) by 
simple carbonization and it was then grafted on TiO2 by sol-gel method to produce 
nanocomposite in the range of 20 nm and was used as an active photocatalyst for the 
photodegradation of methyl orange [71]. Potato peels were used to fabricate catalytic 
magnetic microbots upon functionalization of iron oxide nanoparticles with carbon 
dots (C-Dots). These magnetic microbots could be reused without compromising 
with their performance in large-scale water treatment. This application showed 
synergistic effect of carbon dots and iron oxide nanoparticles in dye removal from 
water [72]. Recently, it has been reported that heteroatom doping enhanced optical 
and electronic properties of CDs by altering the structure and composition of CDs. 
Electrodes that are efficient and economical with improved capacity to store charge 
have been developed from potato peel that were doped with sulfur and phosphorus 
to generate co-doped porous activated carbon. The supercapacitor electrode material 
had large specific surface area and was porous—the latter feature was beneficial 
in reducing adsorption of ions and also enlarging the contact area [73]. Nitrogen 
functionalized carbon dots coated on zinc oxide nanoparticles (N-CDs/ZnONPs) 
were developed for the detection of latent DNA fingerprints in investigation of 
crimes, wherein the nanocomposite were fabricated using melamine, potato peel 
waste and zinc acetate dehydrate as precursors and showed improved efficiency, 
non-toxicity and excellent optical properties for the detection of freshly applied 
fingerprints [74]. In yet another set of experiments, carbon dots co-doped with S 
and N were synthesized by using water chestnut and onion and they were used as an 
off–on fluorescent probe for the quantification and imaging of coenzyme A [75]. 
Carbon dots were fabricated using garlic that is usually rich in C, N and S, is also used 
as a condiment in our kitchens and contain carbohydrates, proteins, and thiamine. In 
the presence of ferric ions, the fluorescence of these CDs showed quenching and 
therefore, they could be used as luminescent probes [76]. Soaked Bengal gram bean 
(Cicer arietinum L.) were used to fabricate Ni-doped SnO2 nanoparticles and coated  
 
 
 
 
 
66 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
onto glass to form thin films that could find application as promising biosensors [77]. 
Earnest et al. [5] fabricated iron nanoparticles doped kitchen waste charcoal from 
rotten or expired pulses and rice spent tea leaves, fruits, and vegetable peels that 
could be used for arsenic and fluoride removal from potable water. By using kitchen 
wastes like grape peel, fluorescent carbon nanodots that were dispersible in water 
were fabricated and they showed excellent Fe3+ selectivity based on fluorescence 
quenching between nanodots and metal ions [78]. 
6. Fabrication of Porous Nanocarbon Spheres (PNCSs) 
Porous nanocarbon spheres (PNCSs) can be produced by the valorization of kitchen 
wastes and they can be utilized as pocket friendly catalysts for bulk chemical 
transformation. An immensely cost-effective catalyst for use as bulk scale chemical 
transformation was produced by the valorization of kitchen wastes to the sustainable 
PNCSs [79]. As an example, onion peels upon pyrolysis at 1000°C yielded porous 
nanocarbon spheres that found application in the azo dye degradation, and the 
resulting corresponding amines were utilized for the synthesis of different azo 
compounds. It is expected that valorization of wastes would be beneficial for the 
environment and help in the upsurge and development of novel technologies, 
more in consonance with the concept of circular economy and sustainability and 
convert residues from different food sectors into valuable bio(nano)materials and it 
would also boost livelihoods and jobs [80]. The fabrication of carbon dot @ silver 
nanohybrids was done by utilizing peels of orange, mango and Colocasia (Taro), 
and these nanohybrids were larvicidal to mosquito vectors like Aedes albopictus, 
Anopheles stephensi and Culex quinquefasciatus that often bred in stagnant waters, 
municipal wastes and sewage water [81]. In yet another instance, kitchen wastes 
rich in starchy wastes were utilized to fabricate bacterial cellulose (BC) loaded with 
carbonaceous compounds that found application in the removal of cationic dyes [82]. 
7. Conclusion 
The text clearly highlights the biogenic fabrication of nanosized materials from 
various kitchen wastes and their far-reaching applications in every aspect of human 
lives and touches on the pervasive concept of sustainability and circular economy 
highlighted therein. However, getting nanomaterials of uniform size and morphology 
and process scale up needs to be addressed. The green synthesis protocols have many 
advantages; however, they get largely confined upon fabrication due to various perils 
such as [83] – 
i) Selection of suitable solvent system for plant extract preparation that is safe 
ii) Careful optimization of process parameters affecting the fabrication process 
iii) Ascertaining cytotoxicity of the fabricated nanomaterials 
iv) Bulk synthesis 
v) Generation of materials with controlled morphology, their upkeep and covering 
knowledge gaps.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 67 
Working out more rational fabrication protocols will depend on understanding 
the chemistry behind fabrication and the desired material characteristics that can be 
tailored to synthesize nanomaterials that are environmentally benign, biocompatible, 
and can have applications in biomedical science, environmental remediation, and 
consumer industries. Scaling up is definitely required as with other technologies and 
that would require extensive research on understanding synthesis mechanisms that 
would help in selection and identification of nontoxic biological and chemical agents, 
making the greener approach more practical industrially, and optimization of the 
factors that affect green synthesis process. It is expected that with these maneuvers, 
modern technologies including nanotechnology and Artificial Intelligence, drones, 
3-D printing and Robotics can revolutionize present day industry, and business 
models by fundamentally revamping them [84]. As evident from the latest literature, 
the technology at the nanoscale can definitely be benefitted by Artificial Intelligence 
and mathematical modeling, however much needs to be worked out on this platform 
[85]. Persistent and collaborative global efforts by the researchers and scientific 
community can definitely serve to rule out the above challenges and make the 
technology more viable and amenable. 
References 
[1] Nanda, S. and F. Berruti. 2021. Municipal solid waste management and landfilling technologies: a 
review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 19: 1433–1456. 
[2] Yousefi, M., V. Oskoei, A.J. Jafari, M. Farzadkia, M.H. Firooz, B. Abdollahinejad and J. 
Torkashvand. 2021. Municipal solid waste management during COVID-19 pandemic: effects and 
repercussions. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 28: 32200–32209. 
[3] Gao, W., Y. Chen, L. Zhan and X. Bian. 2015. Engineering properties for high kitchen waste content 
municipal solid waste. J. Rock Mech. Geotech. Eng. 7: 646–658. 
[4] Nanda, S. and F. Berruti. 2021. A technical review of bioenergy and resource recovery from 
municipal solid waste. J. Hazard. Mater. 403: 123970. 
[5] Earnest, I., R. Nazir and A. Hamid. 2021. Quality assessment of drinking water of Multan city, 
Pakistan in context with Arsenic and Fluoride and use of Iron nanoparticle doped kitchen waste 
charcoal as a potential adsorbent for their combined removal. Appl. Water Sci. 11: 1–15. 
[6] Meng, X., X. Tan, Y. Wang, Z. Wen, Y. Tao and Y. Qian. 2019. Investigation on decision-making 
mechanism of residents’ household solid waste classification and recycling behaviors. Resour. 
Conserv. Recycl. 140: 224–234. 
[7] Yu, Q. and H. Li. 2020. Moderate separation of household kitchen waste towards global optimization 
of municipal solid waste management. J. Clean. Prod. 277: 123330. 
[8] Sindhu, R., E. Gnansounou, S. Rebello, P. Binod, S. Varjani, I.S. Thakur, R.B. Nair and A. Pandey. 
2019. Conversion of food and kitchen waste to value-added products. J. Environ. Manage. 
241: 619–630. 
[9] Pokrajac, L., A. Abbas, W. Chrzanowski, G.M. Dias, B.J. Eggleton, S. Maguire, E. Maine, T. Malloy, 
J. Nathwani, L. Nazar and A. Sips. 2021. Nanotechnology for a sustainable future: addressing 
global challenges with the international network 4 sustainable nanotechnology. ACS Nano. 
15: 18608–18623. 
[10] Akinaga, H. 2019. Sens. Mater. Nanofabrication technologies for All. Sens. Mater. 31: 2477–2480. 
[11] Musee, N. 2011. Nanowastes and the environment: Potential new waste management paradigm. 
Environ. Int. 37: 112–128. 
[12] Oza, G., A. Reyes-Calderón, A. Mewada, L.G. Arriaga, G.B. Cabrera, D.E. Luna, H. Iqbal, 
M. Sharon and A. Sharma. 2019. Plant-based metal and metal alloy nanoparticle synthesis: a 
comprehensive mechanistic approach. J. Mater. Sci. 55: 1309–1330.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[13] Kulkarni, N. and U. Muddapur. 2014. Biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles: a review. J. Nanotechnol 
2014. Article ID 510246. 
[14] Kumar, P.S., K.G. Pavithra and M. Naushad. 2019. Characterization techniques for nanomaterials. 
pp. 97–124. In Nanomaterials for Solar Cell Applications, Elsevier. 
[15] Kumar, J.A., T. Krithiga, S. Manigandan, S. Sathish, A.A. Renita, P. Prakash, B.N. Prasad, T.P. 
Kumar, M. Rajasimman, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei and D. Prabu. 2021. A focus to green synthesis 
of metal/metal based oxide nanoparticles: Various mechanisms and applications towards ecological 
approach. J. Clean. Prod. 324: 129198. 
[16] Elemike, E.E., A.C. Ekennia, D.C. Onwudiwe and R.O. Ezeani. 2022. Agro-waste materials: 
Sustainable substrates in nanotechnology. pp. 187–214. In Agri-Waste and Microbes for Production 
of Sustainable Nanomaterials. Elsevier. 
[17] Chen, Y., R. Guo, Y.C. Li, H. Liu and T.L. Zhan. 2016. A degradation model for high kitchen waste 
content municipal solid waste. Waste Manage. 58: 376–385. 
[18] Mahanthesh, A.B., S. Haldar and S. Banerjee. 2022. Biotechnology for Zero Waste: Emerging 
Waste Management Techniques. John Wiley, 361–368. 
[19] Bhardwaj, A.K., R. Naraian, S. Sundaram and R. Kaur. 2022. Biogenic and non-biogenic waste 
for the synthesis of nanoparticles and their applications. pp. 207–218. In Bioremediation: Green 
Approaches for a Clean and Sustainable Environment Bioremediation. CRC Press. 
[20] Pal, G., P. Rai and A. Pandey. 2019. Green synthesis of nanoparticles: A greener approach for a cleaner 
future. pp. 1–26. In Green Synthesis, Characterization and Applications of Nanoparticles. Elsevier. 
[21] Jha, S.K. and A. Jha. 2021. Plant extract mediated synthesis of metal nanoparticles, their 
characterization and applications: A green approach. Curr. Green Chem. 8: 185–202. 
[22] Taran, M., M. Safaei, N. Karimi and A. Almasi. 2021. Benefits and application of nanotechnology 
in environmental science: an overview. Biointerface Res. Appl. Chem. 11: 7860–7870. 
[23] Rao, M., A.K. Jha and K. Prasad. 2018. Nanomaterials: An upcoming fortune to waste recycling. 
pp. 241–271. In Exploring the Realms of Nature for Nanosynthesis. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing. 
[24] Hoseinzadeh, E., P. Makhdoumi, P. Taha, H. Hossini, J. Stelling, M. Amjad Kamal and G. Md 
Ashraf. 2017. A review on nano-antimicrobials: metal nanoparticles, methods and mechanisms. 
Curr. Drug Metab. 18: 120–128. 
[25] Virkutyte, J. and R.S. Varma. 2013. Green synthesis of nanomaterials: environmental aspects. 
In Sustainable nanotechnology and the environment: advances and achievements ACS Symp. 
Series 1124: 11–39. 
[26]	Iqbal, P., J.A. Preece and P.M. Mendes. 2012. Nanotechnology: the “Top‐Down” and “Bottom‐Up”
Approaches. Supramolecular Chemistry: From Molecules to Nanomaterials. Wiley. 
[27] Devatha, C.P. and A.K. Thalla. 2018. Green synthesis of nanomaterials. pp. 169–184. In Synthesis 
of Inorganic Nanomaterials. Woodhead Publishing. 
[28] Pareek, V., A. Bhargava, R. Gupta, N. Jain and J. Panwar. 2017. Synthesis and applications of noble 
metal nanoparticles: a review. ASEM 9: 527–544. 
[29] Tan, K.B., D. Sun, J. Huang, T. Odoom-Wubah and Q. Li. 2021. State of arts on the bio-synthesis 
of noble metal nanoparticles and their biological application. Chin. J. Chem. Eng. 30: 272–290. 
[30] Ali, S., X. Chen, M.A. Shah, M. Ali, M. Zareef, M. Arslan, S. Ahmad, T. Jiao, H. Li and Q. Chen. 
2021. The avenue of fruit wastes to worth for synthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles and their 
antimicrobial application against foodborne pathogens: A review. Food Chem. 359: 129912. 
[31] Sharma, D., S.S. Gulati, N. Sharma and A. Chaudhary. 2022. Sustainable synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using various biological sources and waste materials: A review. Emergent Mater. 
5: 1649–1678. 
[32] Saratale, R.G., G.D. Saratale, S. Ahn and H.S. Shin. 2021. Grape pomace extracted tannin for 
green synthesis of silver nanoparticles: Assessment of their antidiabetic, antioxidant potential and 
antimicrobial activity. Polymers 13: 4355. 
[33] Saad, A.M., M.T. El-Saadony, A.M. El-Tahan, S. Sayed, M.A. Moustafa, A.E. Taha, T.F. Taha 
and M.M. Ramadan. 2021. Polyphenolic extracts from pomegranate and watermelon wastes as 
substrate to fabricate sustainable silver nanoparticles with larvicidal effect against Spodoptera 
littoralis. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 28: 5674–5683.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 69 
[34] Sengupta, A. and A. Sarkar. 2022. Synthesis and characterization of nanoparticles from neem leaves 
and banana peels: a green prospect for dye degradation in wastewater. Ecotoxicology 31: 537–548. 
[35] Ibrahim, H.M. 2015. Green synthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles using banana peel 
extract and their antimicrobial activity against representative microorganisms. J. Radiat. Res. Appl. 
Sci. 8: 265–275. 
[36] Cheng, J., X. Lin, X. Wu, Q. Liu, S. Wan and Y. Zhang. 2021. Preparation of a multifunctional silver 
nanoparticles polylactic acid food packaging film using mango peel extract. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
188: 678–688. 
[37] Pirathiba, S. and B.S. Dayananda. 2021. Potato peel waste as reductant for the biogenesis of gold 
and silver ultrafine particles. Mater. Today: Proc. 42: 1084–1090. 
[38] Das, G., J.K. Patra, C.N.V. Nagaraj Basavegowda and H.S. Shin. 2019. Comparative study on 
antidiabetic, cytotoxicity, antioxidant and antibacterial properties of biosynthesized silver 
nanoparticles using outer peels of two varieties of Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam. Int. J. Nanomed. 
14: 4741. 
[39] Edison, T.J.I. and M.G. Sethuraman. 2012. Instant green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using 
Terminalia chebula fruit extract and evaluation of their catalytic activity on reduction of methylene 
blue. Process Biochem. 47: 1351–1357. 
[40] Kumar, K.M., B.K. Mandal, M. Sinha and V. Krishnakumar. 2012. Terminalia chebula mediated 
green and rapid synthesis of gold nanoparticles. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectros. 
86: 490–494. 
[41] Agnihotri, S., D. Sillu, G. Sharma and R.K. Arya. 2018. Photocatalytic and antibacterial potential 
of silver nanoparticles derived from pineapple waste: process optimization and modeling kinetics 
for dye removal. Appl. Nanosci. 8: 2077–2092. 
[42] Kadam, J., P. Dhawal, S. Barve and S. Kakodkar. 2020. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles 
using cauliflower waste and their multifaceted applications in photocatalytic degradation of 
methylene blue dye and Hg2+ biosensing. SN Appl. Sci. 2: 1–16. 
[43] Rajput, D., S. Paul and A. Gupta. 2020. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using waste tea 
leaves. Advanced Nano Research, Adv. Nano Res. 3: 1–14. 
[44] Verma, A.K., N. Kumari and A.K. Jha. 2022. Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles using Milk 
Whey and its Applications. IOSR J. Appl. Chem. 15: 60–66. 
[45] Von White, G., P. Kerscher, R.M. Brown, J.D. Morella, W. McAllister, D. Dean and C.L. 
Kitchens. 2012. Green synthesis of robust, biocompatible silver nanoparticles using garlic extract. 
J. Nanomater. 2012: 55. 
[46] Patra, J.K., Y. Kwon and K.H. Baek. 2016. Green biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles by onion peel 
extract: Synthesis, characterization and biological activities. Adv. Powder Technol. 27: 2204–2213. 
[47] González-Ballesteros, N., J. Vidal-González and M.C. Rodríguez-Argüelles. 2021. Wealth from 
by-products: an attempt to synthesize valuable gold nanoparticles from Brassica oleracea var. 
acephala cv. Galega stems. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 11: 635–644. 
[48] Teimouri, M., F. Khosravi-Nejad, F. Attar, A.A. Saboury, I. Kostova, G. Benelli and M. Falahati. 
2018. Gold nanoparticles fabrication by plant extracts: synthesis, characterization, degradation 
of 4-nitrophenol from industrial wastewater, and insecticidal activity—a review. J. Clean. Prod. 
184: 740–753. 
[49] Carofiglio, M., S. Barui, V. Cauda and M. Laurenti. 2020. Doped zinc oxide nanoparticles: 
synthesis, characterization and potential use in nanomedicine. Appl. Sci. 10: 5194. 
[50] Espitia, P.J.P., N.D.F.F. Soares, J.S.D.R. Coimbra, N.J. de Andrade, R.S. Cruz and E.A.A. Medeiros. 
2012. Zinc oxide nanoparticles: synthesis, antimicrobial activity and food packaging applications. 
Food Bioprocess Technol. 5: 1447–1464.
[51]	Ağbulut, Ü., M. Karagöz, S. Sarıdemir and A. Öztürk. 2020. Impact of various metal-oxide based 
nanoparticles and biodiesel blends on the combustion, performance, emission, vibration and noise 
characteristics of a CI engine. Fuel 270: 117521. 
[52] Mahmood, T., S. ul Haq, A. Ahsan and W.A. Syed. 2019. Using cobalt and nickel oxide nanoparticles 
for the conversion of solid kitchen waste into biofuel. Curr. Anal. Energ. Environ. 1: 26–29. 
[53] Chauhan, M., S. Yadav, R. Pasricha and P. Malhotra. 2021. Water chestnut peel facilitated biogenic 
synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles and their catalytic efficacy in the ring opening reaction of 
styrene oxide. Chem. Select 6: 8315–8322.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[54] Majumder, A., L. Ramrakhiani, D. Mukherjee, U. Mishra, A. Halder, A.K. Mandal and S. Ghosh. 
2019. Green synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles for arsenic remediation in water and sludge 
utilization. Clean Technol. Environ. Policy 21: 795–813. 
[55] Rezania, S., M.A. Kamboh, S.S. Arian, N.A. Al-Dhabi, M.V. Arasu, G.A. Esmail and K.K. Yadav. 
2021. Conversion of waste frying oil into biodiesel using recoverable nanocatalyst based on 
magnetic graphene oxide supported ternary mixed metal oxide nanoparticles. Bioresour. Technol. 
323: 124561. 
[56] Yorseng, K., S. Siengchin, B. Ashok and A.V. Rajulu. 2020. Nanocomposite egg shell powder 
with in situ generated silver nanoparticles using inherent collagen as reducing agent. J. Bioresour. 
Bioprod. 5: 101–107. 
[57] Kashale, A.A., K.P. Gattu, K. Ghule, V.H. Ingole, S. Dhanayat, R. Sharma, J.Y. Chang and A.V. 
Ghule. 2016. Biomediated green synthesis of TiO2 nanoparticles for lithium ion battery application. 
Compos. B: Eng. 99: 297–304. 
[58] Rueda, D., V. Arias, Y. Zhang, A. Cabot, A.C. Agudelo and D. Cadavid. 2020. Low-cost tangerine 
peel waste mediated production of titanium dioxide nanocrystals: synthesis and characterization. 
Environmental Nanotechnology, Monitoring & Management 13: 100285. 
[59] Permadani, R.L. 2019. Development of nanofluid detergent based on methyl ester sulfonates 
surfactant from waste cooking oil and titanium dioxide nanoparticles. IOP Conf. Series: Mater. Sci. 
Eng. 509: 012120. 
[60] Rajeswari, V.D., E.M. Eed, A. Elfasakhany, I.A. Badruddin, S. Kamangar and K. Brindhadevi. 2021. 
Green synthesis of titanium dioxide nanoparticles using Laurus nobilis (bay leaf): Antioxidant and 
antimicrobial activities. Appl. Nanosci. 13: 1477–1484. 
[61] Verma, V., M. Al-Dossari, J. Singh, M. Rawat, M.G. Kordy and M. Shaban. 2022. A review on 
green synthesis of TiO2 NPs: Photocatalysis and antimicrobial applications. Polymer 14: 1444. 
[62] Peng, Y., M. Azeem, R. Li, L. Xing, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Guo, Q. Wang, H.H. Ngo, G. Qu and Z. 
Zhang. 2022. Zirconium hydroxide nanoparticle encapsulated magnetic biochar composite derived 
from rice residue: Application for As (III) and As (V) polluted water purification. J. Hazard. Mater. 
423: 127081. 
[63] Iravani, S. and R.S. Varma. 2020. Green synthesis, biomedical and biotechnological applications of 
carbon and graphene quantum dots. A review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 18: 703–727. 
[64] Shahraki, H.S., A. Ahmad and R. Bushra. 2022. Green carbon dots with multifaceted applications– 
Waste to wealth strategy. Flat. Chem. 31: 100310. 
[65] Boruah, A., M. Saikia, T. Das, R.L. Goswamee and B.K. Saikia. 2020. Blue-emitting fluorescent 
carbon quantum dots from waste biomass sources and their application in fluoride ion detection in 
water. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B: Biol. 209: 111940. 
[66] Fan, H., M. Zhang, B. Bhandari and C.H. Yang. 2020. Food waste as a carbon source in carbon 
quantum dots technology and their applications in food safety detection. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
95: 86–96. 
[67] Hu, Y., J. Yang, J. Tian, L. Jia and J.S. Yu. 2014. Waste frying oil as a precursor for one-step 
synthesis of sulfur-doped carbon dots with pH-sensitive photoluminescence. Carbon 77: 775–782. 
[68] Liu, H., L. Ding, L. Chen, Y. Chen, Y.T. Zhou, H. Li, Y. Xu, L. Zhao and N. Huang. 2019. A facile, 
green synthesis of biomass carbon dots coupled with molecularly imprinted polymers for highly 
selective detection of oxytetracycline. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 69: 455–463. 
[69] Himaja, A.L., P.S. Karthik, B. Sreedhar and S.P. Singh. 2014. Synthesis of carbon dots from kitchen 
waste: conversion of waste to value added product. J. Fluoresc. 24: 1767–1773. 
[70] Min, S., P. Ezati and J.W. Rhim. 2022. Gelatin-based packaging material incorporated with potato 
skins carbon dots as functional filler. Ind. Crops Prod. 181: 114820. 
[71] Kuldeep, A.R., R.D. Waghmare and K.M. Garadkar. 2022. Green synthesis of TiO2/CDs nanohybrid 
composite as an active photocatalyst for the photodegradation of methyl orange. J. Mater. Sci.: 
Mater. Electron. 33: 7933–7944. 
[72] Shivalkar, S., P.K. Gautam, A. Verma, K. Maurya, Md Palashuddin, S.K. Samanta and A.K. Sahoo. 
2021. Autonomous magnetic microbots for environmental remediation developed by organic waste 
derived carbon dots. J. Environ. Manag. 297: 113322. 
[73] Khalafallah, D., X. Quan, C. Ouyang, M. Zhi and Z. Hong. 2021. Heteroatoms doped porous 
carbon derived from waste potato peel for supercapacitors. Renew. Energy 170: 60–71.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Common Kitchen/Domestic Wastes 71 
[74] Prabakaran, E. and K. Pillay. 2020. Synthesis and characterization of fluorescent N-CDs/ZnONPs 
nanocomposite for latent fingerprint detection by using powder brushing method. Arab. J. Chem. 
13: 3817–3835. 
[75] Hu, Y., L. Zhang, X. Li, R. Liu, L. Lin and S. Zhao. 2017. Green preparation of S and N Co-doped 
carbon dots from water chestnut and onion as well as their use as an off–on fluorescent probe for 
the quantification and imaging of coenzyme A. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5: 4992–5000. 
[76] Sun, C., Y. Zhang, P. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Wang and W.W. Yu. 2016. Synthesis of 
nitrogen and sulfur co-doped carbon dots from garlic for selective detection of Fe3+. Nanoscale Res. 
Lett. 11: 1–9. 
[77] Gattu, K.P., K. Ghule, A.A. Kashale, V.B Patil, D.M. Phase, R.S. Mane, S.H. Han, R. Sharma and 
A.V. Ghule. 2015. Bio-green synthesis of Ni-doped tin oxide nanoparticles and its influence on gas 
sensing properties. RSC Adv. 5: 72849–72856. 
[78] Xu, J., T. Lai, Z. Feng, X. Weng and C. Huang. 2015. Formation of fluorescent carbon nanodots 
from kitchen wastes and their application for detection of Fe3+. Luminescence. 30: 420–424. 
[79] Supriya, S., G.S. Ananthnag, T. Maiyalagan and G. Hegde. 2022. Kitchen waste derived porous 
nanocarbon spheres for metal free degradation of azo dyes: An environmental friendly, cost 
effective method. J. Clust. Sci. 34: 243–254. 
[80] Xu, C., M. Nasrollahzadeh, M. Selva, Z. Issaabadi and R. Luque. 2019. Waste-to-wealth: Biowaste 
valorization into valuable bio (nano) materials. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48: 4791–4822. 
[81] Raul, P.K., P. Santra, D. Goswami, V. Tyagi, C. Yellappa, V. Mauka, R.R. Devi, P. Chattopadhyay, 
R.V. Jayaram and S.K. Dwivedi. 2021. Green synthesis of carbon dot silver nanohybrids from fruits 
and vegetable’s peel waste: Applications as potent mosquito larvicide. Curr. Res. Green Sustain. 
Chem. 4: 100158. 
[82] Saleh, A.K., H. El-Gendi, J.B. Ray and T.H. Taha. 2021. A low-cost effective media from starch 
kitchen waste for bacterial cellulose production and its application as simultaneous absorbance for 
methylene blue dye removal. Biomass Conv. Bioref. 13: 12437–12449. 
[83] Ahmed, S.F., M. Mofijur, N. Rafa, A.T. Chowdhury, S. Chowdhury, M. Nahrin, A.S. Islam and H.C. 
Ong. 2022. Green approaches in synthesising nanomaterials for environmental nanobioremediation: 
Technological advancements, applications, benefits and challenges. Environ. Res. 204: 111967. 
[84] Romanovs, A., I. Pichkalov, E. Sabanovic and J. Skirelis. 2019. Industry 4.0: methodologies, tools 
and applications. Proc. Open Conf. Elect., Electron. Info. Sci. (eStream), IEEE. 1–4. 
[85] Moore, J.A. and J.C. Chow. 2021. Recent progress and applications of gold nanotechnology in 
medical biophysics using artificial intelligence and mathematical modeling. Nano Express. 
2: 022001. 5


Nanofabrication Using
Physical Methods

 G.V.S. Subbaroy Sarma,1
 Payal B. Joshi2
 and Murthy Chavali3,* 
1. Introduction 
Nanotechnology is the creation and use of functioning entities on atom and molecule 
level that has one unique size in the nm range [1]. Due to their tiny dimensions, 
these substances and structures may be deliberately constructed to display unique 
and considerably better fundamental characteristics, behaviours, and procedures. 
Materials are classified as nanomaterials when only any of their dimensions are 
between 1 and 100 nanometres. Asbestos nanofibers were used to strengthen ceramic 
compositions around 4500 years ago [2]. PbS nanomaterials were known by early 
Egyptians over 4000 years back, so they have been utilised through a primitive hair￾dyeing method [3, 4]. The other noteworthy instance from earlier days would be the 
Lycurgus Cup. It was a diffracted bowl made mostly during the 4th century A.D. first 
by Romans. With illumination, it has a jade-like appearance, yet in transmittance, 
it has a transparent ruby appearance. Picture variability is visible based mostly on 
incident beam. 
The existence of silver as well as gold nanoparticles causes such colour 
changes [5]. Richard Adolf Zsigmondy came up with the term “nanometer” in 
1914. In his lecture at the American Physical Society’s yearly conference, British 
scientist and Nobel Laureate Richard Feynman presented the first unique notion 
1 Department of Physics, Malla Reddy Engineering College (A), Maisammaguda, Dhulapally, Medchal, 
Malkajgiri. Secundrabad-500100 Telangana State, India. 
2 Shefali Research Laboratories, 203/454, Sai Section, Ambernath (East)-421501, Mumbai, Maharashtra, 
India. 
3 Office of the Dean Research & Development), # CK 106-P, Chanakya Bldg, Dr. Vishwanath Karad 
MITWPU, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India. 
* Corresponding author: ChavaliM@gmail.com, ChavaliM@outlook.com Page 2 of 28
the American Physical Society's yearly conference, British scientist and Nobel Laureate 
Richard Feynman presented the first unique notion of nanotechnology [6]. He gave a
speech named "There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom. “Feynman demonstrated during
his presentation that now the rules of matter need not restrict human capacity to
operate only at atomic and molecular scales, but instead an absence of proper
technology and approaches [7]. Regularly, the science of nanotechnology advances and
today, sophisticated characterisation and fabrication methods are available for
generating nanocomposites effectively featured. Nanoparticles have developed into a
fascinating category of materials in great interest with a variety of commercial uses.
Nanomaterials are being used commercially in water-resistant paint, surface properties,
electronic parts, beauty products, ecological clean-up, sensor systems, and energy
storage devices [8]. The precise production, as well as assembly of nanoparticles and
nanostructures, is going to be a key enabler in science and technology.
2. Classification of nanomaterials
Nanomaterials have an extremely small size and have at least one dimension of 100 nm or
less. As per Siegel, nanomaterials are categorized into 0-Dm, 1-Dm, 2-Dm, and 3-Dm 
nanostructures, as illustrated in Fig 1.
Fig 1. (a) 0D spheres and clusters, (b) 1D nanofibers, wires, and rods, (c) 2D films, plates, and
networks, (d) 3D nanomaterials.
3. Properties of nanomaterials
Nanomaterials possess physical parameters that are midway among atoms as well as
composite materials. The characteristics of nanometer-sized substances vary markedly
from those in atom and composite substances. Nanomaterials have an extraordinarily
wide surface-to-volume ratio because of their short widths, leading to high vast
Commented [A3]: Or how?
Commented [A4]: Meaning?
Fig. 1. (a) 0D spheres and clusters, (b) 1D nanofibers, wires, and rods, (c) 2D films, plates, and networks, 
(d) 3D nanomaterials. 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 73 
of nanotechnology [6]. He gave a speech named “There’s Plenty of Room at the 
Bottom.ˮ Feynman demonstrated during his presentation, he explained how the rules 
of matter need not restrict human capacity to operate only at atomic and molecular 
scales, but instead an absence of proper technology and approaches [7]. Regularly, 
the science of nanotechnology advances and today, sophisticated characterisation 
and fabrication methods are available for generating nanocomposites. Nanoparticles 
have developed into a fascinating category of materials in great interest with a variety 
of commercial uses. Nanomaterials are being used commercially in water-resistant 
paint, surface properties, electronic parts, beauty products, ecological clean-up, 
sensor systems, and energy storage devices [8]. The precise production, as well as 
assembly of nanoparticles and nanostructures, is going to be a key enabler in science 
and technology. 
2. Classification of Nanomaterials 
Nanomaterials have an extremely small size and have at least one dimension of 
100 nm or less. As per Siegel, nanomaterials are categorized into 0-Dm, 1-Dm, 
2-Dm, and 3-Dm nanostructures, as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
3. Properties of Nanomaterials 
Nanomaterials possess physical parameters that are midway among atoms as well 
as composite materials. The characteristics of nanometer-sized substances vary 
markedly from those in atom and composite substances. Nanomaterials have an 
extraordinarily wide surface-to-volume ratio because of their short widths, leading to 
high vast interfacial, creating enhanced interface-dependent material characteristics. 
The surface characteristics of nanoparticles may influence the overall substance, 
particularly whenever the dimensions of nanoparticles are equivalent to magnitude. 
As a result, the core substances’ qualities might be enhanced or modified. Metallic 
nanomaterials, in particular, may be utilised in highly effective catalysts. 
3.1 Optical Properties 
The optical characteristics of nanoparticles are probably among the more exciting 
and relevant features. Nanomaterials’ optical capabilities are influenced by factors 
like smaller dimensions, form, and surface morphology, including additional factors 74 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
like adding impurities and making contact with the surroundings as well as similar 
nanoscale. Similarly, the form of metallic nanoparticles also has а significant impact 
on their optical characteristics. The optical characteristics of metallic nanoparticles 
vary as they become larger. Once anisotropy was introduced onto a nanoparticle, 
especially during its formation of nanostructures, the optical characteristics of the 
nanoparticles drastically altered. Whenever the size of the nanoparticles was lowered 
to less than 10 nm, dimension impacts upon optical characteristics were found [9]. 
3.2 Mechanical Properties 
Mechanical properties of nanomaterials generally consist strength, brittleness, 
hardness, toughness, fatigue strength, plasticity, elasticity, ductility, rigidity, and 
yield stress. Having a better knowledge of the mechanical characteristics of such 
substances, model computations and molecular mechanics investigations is critical. 
3.3 Electronic Transport in Nanostructures 
Nanomaterials feature novel characteristics, which are typically not found in bulk 
materials related to their distinct electrical configuration and charge concentration. 
By making use of the nanostructure’s unique features, modern electrical and 
optoelectronic components may be made. The 2D quantum theory field design 
is indeed the simplest to make of various nanomaterials. This is because, at 
the nanometer scale, it remains simply a single limited feature that might be the 
width of a thin layer that would be accurately modulated using advanced thin-film 
depositing methods like chemical vapour depositing. A quantum well design may 
be readily constructed by layering nm size tighter bandgap semiconductor among 
larger bandgap semiconductor materials. The movement of electrons across layered 
quantum well devices is governed by a tunnelling process. 
3.4 Magnetic Properties 
Although gold and platinum were quasi in bulk, both were magnetic at the nanoscale. 
Boundary atoms vary from bulk atoms as these could be transformed by interactions 
using various chemical species, i.e., by coating nanoparticles. Such a process allows 
for the modification of nanoparticle characteristics by encapsulating those using 
suitable compounds. Whenever quasi substances were synthesized at the nanoscale, 
they may display ferromagnetic-like properties. Non-magnetic substances may be 
used to make magnetic nanoparticles of Pd, platinum, and, more surprisingly, gold. 
Mostly in sense of Pt and Pd, ferromagnetism is caused by compositional 
modifications due to size impacts. Whenever nanocomposites were coated using 
exactly suitable molecules, they turned ferromagnetic: the charge concentrated at the 
nanoscale interface causes magnetic properties. Highly concentrated carriers in the 
5d band are found in molecules with diameters less than 2 nanometers. Bulk gold, 
like bare gold nps, exhibits an amazingly small concentration of regions and this will 
be diamagnetic. It is revealed how chemical bonding would create ferromagnetic 
properties in metallic groups by altering its d group configuration. Page 5 of 28
Fig 2. a) Top-down approach b) Bottom-up approach
4.1 Mechanical method
This represents a very low-cost approach for making nanoparticles in bulk. Ball milling is
the easiest mechanical technique for transferring kinetic energy through the grinding
material into any substance being reduced.
4.1.1 Mechanical/High ball milling method
Milling is a consistently solid procedure for the fabrication of nanomaterials. Due to
structural constraints, generating amazing nanoparticles with this approach is extremely
tough as well as time-consuming. Mechanical milling, on the other hand, has several
merits, including ease to use, relatively inexpensive nanomaterials’ manufacturing, as
well as the ability to increase up to huge proportions. The form of grinder, crushing rate,
containers, duration, humidity, environment, width and width variation of the processing
material, processing regulating agency, the mass ratio of spherical into powders, as well
as the amount of filling its vial were some key aspects determining this finalized
component as quality.
This was one of the quickest methods to synthesise nanoparticles as a format of
powdered from certain materials including composites. Milling comes in a variety of
Commented [A9]: Correct?
Commented [A10]: Correct?
Commented [A11]: Not clear
 
 
 
Fig. 2. (a) Top-down approach. (b) Bottom-up approach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 75 
4. Nanomaterial Fabrication Techniques 
Typically speaking, there are 2 methods of nanostructured materials’ fabrication 
(Fig. 2): 
1. Bottom-up approach 
2. Top-down approach 
Bottom-up procedures comprise continuous downsizing of material constituents, 
followed by a self-assembly mechanism that results in nanostructured synthesis. 
Mechanical influences occurring at the nanometer were employed to merge units 
forming bigger, structural shapes throughout self-assembly. With top-down 
techniques, bulkier starting configurations are used, that could be manipulated 
directly during nanostructured production [10]. The bigger molecule is chopped 
down into tiny components, which are subsequently transformed into a nanoparticle. 
Top-down fabrication techniques include crushing or milling, physical vapour 
deposition, as well as various damaging techniques [11]. 
4.1 Mechanical Method 
This represents a very low-cost approach for making nanoparticles in bulk. Ball 
milling is the easiest mechanical technique for transferring kinetic energy through 
the grinding material into any substance being reduced. 
4.1.1 Mechanical/High Ball Milling Method 
Milling is a consistently solid procedure for the fabrication of nanomaterials. Due 
to structural constraints, generating amazing nanoparticles with this approach is 
extremely tough as well as time-consuming. Mechanical milling, on the other hand, 
has several merits, including ease to use, relatively inexpensive nanomaterials’ Page 6 of 28
shapes and sizes, including planetary, vibratory, rod, and tumbling mills. To create huge
volumes with small particulates, one often several vessels were generally utilised at the
same moment. After all addition, the width of the vessel is determined by the number of 
interests. The very first substance might have any dimension or form. Tight lids are used
to lock the vessel. A 2:1 mass proportion of balls with the substance was generally
recommended. Its grinding capacity is diminished whenever this vessel is higher over
halfway full. When massive grinding balls collide, the impacting intensity is increased.
Grinding with heavier pellets results in reduced particulate diameter yet higher flaws
inside those nanoparticles.
Furthermore, certain pollutants inside these spheres might be introduced during this
procedure. Air or inert gas can also be used to load this vessel. Non-crystalline particle
production is enhanced by decreasing temperature. To discharge this energy created,
cryo-cooling was occasionally utilized. Fluids may similarly be employed throughout its
grinding. These vessels were revolved along their respective axis at a considerable rate.
For synthesizing nanomaterials with their desired form, grinding rate and time are
important [12, 13].
Fig 3. A schematic diagram of a ball mill vessel
The substance was driven towards its boundaries, squeezed along the boundaries once
its vessels rotate by about core direction as well as its inner axes, as observed in Fig 3. It 
was essential that grind the substance into a small particle for which size can be relatively
homogeneous simply by adjusting the rotational motion between the central axis and
vessel, also significantly with its period during grinding. With the revolution of a singular
vessel, the substance was forced toward the wall, with dark spots representing the
Commented [A12]: rephrase
Commented [A13]: correct now?
Commented [A14]: rephrase
Fig. 3. A schematic diagram of a ball mill vessel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
manufacturing, as well as the ability to increase up to huge proportions. The form of 
grinder, crushing rate, containers, duration, humidity, environment, width and width 
variation of the processing material, processing regulating agency, as well as the 
amount of filling its vial were some key aspects determining this finalized. 
This was one of the quickest methods to synthesise nanoparticles from certain 
materials including composites. Milling comes in a variety of shapes and sizes, 
including planetary, vibratory, rod, and tumbling mills. After all addition, the width 
of the vessel is determined by the number of interests. The very first substance 
might have any dimension or form. Tight lids are used to lock the vessel. A 2:1 mass 
proportion of balls with the substance was generally recommended. Its grinding 
capacity is diminished whenever this vessel is higher over halfway full. When 
massive grinding balls collide, the impacting intensity is increased. Grinding with 
heavier pellets results in reduced particulate diameter yet higher flaws inside those 
nanoparticles. 
Furthermore, certain pollutants inside these spheres might be introduced during 
this procedure. Non-crystalline particle production is enhanced by decreasing 
temperature. To discharge this energy created, cryo-cooling was occasionally 
utilized. Fluids may similarly be employed throughout its grinding. These vessels 
were revolved along their respective axis at a considerable rate. For synthesizing 
nanomaterials with their desired form, grinding rate and time are important [12, 13]. 
The substance was driven towards its boundaries, squeezed along the boundaries 
once its vessels rotate by about core direction as well as its inner axes, as observed in 
Fig. 3. It was essential that grind the substance into a small particle for which size can 
be relatively homogeneous. Simply by adjusting the rotational motion between the 
central axis and vessel, relatively homogeneous particles can be obtained. With the 
revolution of a singular vessel, the substance was forced toward the wall, with dark 
spots representing the powder form and vacant portions Fig. 4. The grinding device is 
used to make nanocrystalline substances such as cobalt, chromium, nickel-titanium, 
aluminium-iron and silver-iron nanoparticles in a matter of minutes to hours, ranging 
from a few milligrams to many kilograms. Page 7 of 28
powder form and vacant portions Fig 4. The grinding device is used to make
nanocrystalline substances such as cobalt, chromium, nickel-titanium, aluminium-iron and
silver-iron nanoparticles in a matter of minutes to hours, ranging from a few milligrams to
many kilograms.
Fig 4. Ball mill during rotation
The above method was used to create various metallic composite materials. The 
following list shows the various types of nanomaterials that have been created utilising
the ball milling approach and is in Table 1.
Table 1: Various types of nanomaterials that have been created utilising the ball milling
approach
NP
Types
Powder
size Model
Speed
of 
Milling
Time of 
Milling
Nanoparticle
(nm)
Characterization
techniques
ZnO 500 nm Horizontal 
Oscillatory
Mill
--- 1 h 110–50 XRD, SEM, PL
CuO Cupric
Acetate
Ultrasonic
Wave￾Assisted
Ball
Milling
256 rpm --- 20 XRD, TEM, UV￾Vis and
Fluorescence
TiO2 ∼0.5 mm Szegvari 400 rpm 10 h 10–20 XRD, TEM and
Fig. 4. Ball mill during rotation.


 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Various types of nanomaterials that have been created utilising the ball milling approach.


NP Powder Model Speed of Time of Nanoparticle Characterization 
Types size Milling Milling (nm) techniques 
ZnO 500 nm Horizontal 
Oscillatory Mill 
--­ 1 h 110–50 XRD, SEM, PL 
CuO Cupric 
Acetate 
Ultrasonic 
Wave-Assisted 
256 rpm --­ 20 XRD, TEM, UV￾Vis and 
Ball Fluorescence 
Milling 
TiO2 ~ 0.5 mm Szegvari 
Attritor 
400 rpm 10 h 10–20 XRD, TEM and 
UV-visible 
TiO2 Fine Ti and Planetary Ball 0 rpm 5 h 14.91 XRD, SEM, EDX 
Fe powder Mill PM 400/2 32.69 and UV-Vis 
(40 μm) 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 77 
The above method was used to create various metallic composite materials. 
The following list shows the various types of nanomaterials that have been created 
utilising the ball milling approach and is in Table 1. 
4.1.2 Melt Mixing 
Particles are synthesised when melted metallic streams are mixed with turbulence at 
extreme speeds. Inside a glass, nanoparticles are trapped. It seems to be an amorphous 
material with an asymmetric atomic or molecular arrangement. Metals might 
become crystalline solids-metallic glasses while lowered under rapid decreasing 
rates. Glasses can be used to make nanoparticles. Glasses are generally amorphous 
material in terms of structure because it lacks a vast variety of regular ordering and 
symmetric distribution of particles. A solid can form if a mixture cools under some 
temperatures (Tm), as can be seen in Fig. 5. 
Aside from heating, its amount of condensation, as well as nucleation tendency, 
determines if its molten material could be allowed to cool as a crystalline solid 
with a long scope sequence. Nuclei establish instantaneously because of relatively Page 9 of 28
Fig 5: Temperature Vs Enthalpy
4.2 Methods Based on Evaporation
4.2.1 Physical Vapour Deposition (PVD)
PVD is a flexible fabrication technology that can produce coating substances having
nanometer-scale selectivity through carefully regulating manufacturing parameters. PVD
has been a process that creates a vapour stage phase through evaporation, sputtering,
laser ablation, or an ion beam. Evaporation is the process of removing molecules in any
material when boiling it over melting temperature. Sputtering involves the collision of
intense particles ejecting atoms over the specimen area. Sputtering can install
substances with higher melting temperatures, like hard metallic materials, that are hard
in turn to nanostructures through evaporated.
When compared with evaporating procedures, sputtering may provide superior
equimolar manipulation over its layer. Sputter-grown layers possess greater densities
than evaporation-grown layers because sputtered molecules possess greater potential 
than evaporating particles. According to the reduced cleanliness of its sputtering
targeted components, sputtered coatings were particularly susceptible to contaminants
over evaporating layers.
4.2.2 Ionised cluster beam deposition
Commented [A16]: Meaning?
Fig. 5. Temperature Vs Enthalpy. 
 
 
 
 
 
78 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
homogenous or heterogeneous crystallisation and could indeed continue to expand 
to produce an arranged crystallography substance. Materials normally grow 
crystallization crystals, and then rapidly cool down; those could even shape amorphous 
substances. Conductive glasses have been the name given to these crystals. In those 
kinds of situations, the particles attempt to reorganise into crystallites. Its inclusion 
of components such as B, P, Si, and others aids in the preservation of amorphous 
conductive materials. Constrained warming could undoubtedly create nanomaterials 
inside metallic materials. It is indeed feasible to make nanomaterials by combining 
molten steel flows with turbulence at rapid speeds. Nanomaterials appear to might 
have been generated after proper stirring. TiB2 nanomaterials are formed by 
combining a molten Cu-B stream with a warmed Ti stream [14, 15]. 
4.2 Methods Based on Evaporation 
4.2.1 Physical Vapour Deposition (PVD) 
PVD is a flexible fabrication technology that can produce coating substances having 
nanometer-scale selectivity through carefully regulating manufacturing parameters. 
PVD has been a process that creates a vapour stage phase through evaporation, 
sputtering, laser ablation, or an ion beam. Evaporation is the process of removing 
molecules in any material when boiling it over melting temperature. Sputtering 
involves the collision of intense particles ejecting atoms over the specimen area. 
Sputtering can install substances with higher melting temperatures, like hard metallic 
materials, that are hard in turn to nanostructures via evaporation. 
When compared with evaporating procedures, sputtering may provide superior 
equimolar manipulation over its layer. Sputter-grown layers possess greater densities 
than evaporation-grown layers because sputtered molecules possess greater potential 
than evaporating particles. According to the reduced cleanliness of its sputtering 
targeted components, sputtered coatings were particularly susceptible to contaminants 
over evaporating layers. Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 79 
4.2.2 Ionised Cluster Beam Deposition 
This technique’s major goal was to produce large singular nanomaterials. A source 
for evaporating, a tip by where substance might extend inside its container, electronic 
beams that ionise the cluster, an assembly for a drive these structures, as well as 
substrates upon whose nanoparticles films could get coated, everything contained in 
an appropriate sealed container, constitute the overall setup. Clusters become ionised 
while colliding with a stream of electrons. Such nanoparticles are centred towards 
the substrates because of the supplied intensifying energy. Controlling the voltages 
was effective for controlling the intensity that how individual clusters influence the 
substrates. It might take considerable strength that destroys those bindings between 
stable clustering on some substances, thus they might prefer to stay as tiny as simple 
subatomic clusters. As a result, nanostructured layers might be made utilising an 
ionised clustered ray [16]. 
4.2.3 Laser Ablation 
Simple techniques enabling its production of nanomaterials using various solvents 
include laser ablation fabrication under solutions. Its elevated pulsing laser was 
concentrated within a vacuum container that impacts a specific location within the 
substance, resulting in combustion, where it can subsequently transform into an 
aqueous nanoparticle mixture. ND:YAG category is very common. The nanoparticles 
are created using a laser. Its form of lasers, the frequency of pulse, duration, as well 
as its form of solvents were all elements that influence the overall outcome. Different 
metals submerged in solution are irradiated with a laser light, which condenses 
plasma and produces nanomaterials [17]. This is another highly effective top-down 
way that reduces metals into nanoparticles, which is different from traditional basic 
approaches. Laser ablation processes are used to create steady nanomaterials that 
would neither require additional stabilising agents nor chemicals. Laser ablation was 
used to create several forms of nanoparticles, especially illustrated in Table 2 below. 
The elevated laser light comprising its optically concentrating mechanism as 
well as its metal-target delivery equipment are the 2 main components of the laser 
ablation technology shown in Fig. 6. This laser beam is directed onto the target’s 
face, ejecting a highly rapid stream of evaporating materials transverse towards the 
target’s surface but also spreading through the gaseous region well above the target. 
The gas phase carries these generated nanoparticles towards their final collectors. 
Their use of metal-based compounds as a precursor, and also its manufacture of 
nanocrystals, are the key advantages of these approaches. It is a testing medium 
Table 2. Laser ablation to create several forms of nanoparticles. 
Type of 
NPs 
Laser 
source 
Ablation 
duration 
Pulse 
width 
Wavelength 
(nm) 
Frequency 
(Hz) 
Target 
material 
Size of NPs 
(nm) 
ZnO Nd-YAG 35 min 95 nm 350 9 Zinc Foil 5–19 
CuO Nd-YAG 15 min 10 ns 1028 5 Copper 8–10 
TiO2 Nd-YAG 20 min 4 ns 1059 450 Titanium 4–35 
Ag Nd-YAG 10 min 9 ns 528 5 Silver 2–5 Page 11 of 28
CuO Nd-YAG 15 min 10 ns 1028 5 Copper 8–10
TiO2 Nd-YAG 20 min 4 ns 1059 450 Titanium 4–35 
Ag Nd-YAG 10 min 9 ns 528 5 Silver 2–5 
The elevated laser light comprising its optically concentrating mechanism as well as its
metal-target delivery equipment are the 2 main components of the laser ablation
technology shown in Fig 4. This laser beam is directed onto the target's face, ejecting a 
highly rapid stream of evaporating materials transverse towards the target's surface but
also spreading through the gaseous region well above the target.
Fig. 6 Laser Ablation Technologies
The gas phase carries these generated nanoparticles towards their final collectors. Their
use of metal-based compounds as a precursor, and also its manufacture of nanocrystals,
are the key advantages of these approaches. It is a testing medium in combustion
container, and its targeting substance, as well as the light working settings all influence
molar mass and sizes variation. The overall mass of produced nanomaterials from the 
surrounding atmosphere has been out over 100 significantly greater than with water,
whereas argon gas was approximately 100 times greater than with the surrounding
atmosphere, according to quantitative estimates. Their creation of Ni particles was
Commented [U17]: Author: Not cited in text.
Commented [A18]: rephrase
Fig. 6. Laser Ablation Technologies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
in combustion container, and its targeting substance, as well as the light working 
settings all influence molar mass and sizes variation. Their creation of Ni particles 
was predicted to be equal to 1.2105 cm–3 for the surrounding atmosphere and 
1.4106 cm–3 in the argon atmosphere stream employing nanosecond lasers [18]. 
Moreover, mixtures could occur due to their significant proportion of evaporating 
materials inside the plume. According to relatively limited yields and operating costs, 
such a technique is usually rarely used, particularly up on any huge level [19, 20]. 
4.2.4 Laser Pyrolysis 
Laser pyrolysis was a method that generated nanomaterials with a laser. With the 
presence of certain inert gases including helium or argon, intensive laser light is 
aimed effectively at the breakdown of entire concentration of the reaction mixture. 
Their compressed gas plays an important role in regulating crystallite size and 
distributions [21]. 
4.2.5 Sputter Deposition 
Sputter deposition was indeed a sheet depositing process that was commonly 
employed for creating molar ratio films using targeted materials. It is possible that 
the material is a metal, solid ceramics, and perhaps a composite. Sputtering could 
likewise be used to make non-porous compacted sheets. Depositing multi-layered 
sheets with mirrored or magnetized sheets with optoelectronic devices seems to be a 
highly reasonable method. In sputtering, elevated compressed gases, atoms such as 
Ar+
 will impact the substrate. 
This electron contact could indeed be a complicated task, based mostly on the 
energy of ions and the proportion of ion density to targeted particle size. Occurrence 
particles may be injected, rebounded, generate crash reactions through particles, 
disturb a few particles inside the target generating vacant positions, inclusions, and 
many imperfections, remove several substances, generate particles while losing mass predicted to be equal to 1.2105 cm-3 for the surrounding atmosphere and 1.4106 cm-3 in
the argon atmosphere stream employing nanosecond lasers [18]. Moreover, mixtures
could occur due to their significant proportion of evaporating materials inside the plume.
According to relatively limited yields and operating costs, such a technique is usually
rarely used, particularly up on any huge level [19, 20].
4.2.4 Laser Pyrolysis
Laser pyrolysis was a method that generated nanomaterials with a laser. With the
presence of certain inert gases including helium or argon, intensive laser light is aimed
effectively at the breakdown of entire concentration of the reaction mixture. Their
compressed gas plays an important role in regulating crystallite size and distributions
[21].
4.2.5 Sputter Deposition
Sputter deposition was indeed a sheet depositing process that was commonly employed
for creating molar ratio films using targeted materials. It is possible that the material is a
metal, solid ceramics, and perhaps a composite. Sputtering could likewise be used to
make non-porous compacted sheets. Depositing multi-layered sheets with mirrored or
magnetized sheets with optoelectronic devices seems to be a highly reasonable method.
In sputtering, elevated compressed gases, atoms such as Ar+ were impacted upon the
substrate.
This electron contact could indeed be a complicated task, based mostly on the energy of 
ions and the proportion of ion density to targeted particle size. Occurrence particles may
be injected, rebounded, generate crash reactions through particles, disturb a few
particles inside the target generating vacant positions, inclusions, and many
imperfections, remove several substances, generate particles while losing mass to target
atoms, and electron
beams due to their own
energy. The diagram
depicts a schematic
Commented [A19]: you mean ‘had an impact on’?
Page 12 of 28 
Fig. 7. Interaction of an ion with target. 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 81 
to target atoms, and electron beams due to their own energy. The diagram depicts a 
schematic representation of numerous options (Fig. 7). 
Direct Current (DC) sputtering, Radio Frequency (RF) sputtering, and magnetron 
sputtering are all possibilities for sputtering. In all the foregoing situations, discharges 
or plasma comprising compressed gases, ions or reacting gases are employed. Its 
deposits take place within a highly vacuum or extremely higher pressure pump 
comprising electrodes, each being a sputtering target as well as a substrate, often 
a gaseous injection capability among various components. While this mechanism 
would be under maximum gaseous compression while deposition which enables to 
get required purity. 
4.2.5.1 DC Sputtering 
It was an extremely simple depositing process where the sputtering targets were 
kept at a higher negative polarity while the substrates would remain near a positive, 
grounding, or floating voltage as shown in Figs. 8 and 9. According to that substance 
that is mounted, surfaces could be either warm or chilled around that same time. 
After this vacuum pump reached its desired basis level, argon gases were normally 
supplied under the stress of less than 10 Pa. Its commencement of depositing is 
indicated by a perceptible flame with power flow between both the cathode and 
anode. This glowing discharge was formed whenever a comparatively elevated 
potential is supplied across the anode and cathode having a gas particle, comprising 
various sections like cathode glow, Crooke’s dark space, and negative light up, 
Faraday darkness space, positive column, anode dark area, and anode brightening. 
Plasma, which contains a combination of particles, charges, and neutral atoms, 
with photons generated during numerous interactions, creates such zones. This 
compressed gas determines the overall quantity among distinct nanoparticles as well 
as the range through which these are spread. Gas ionisation is caused by intense 
particle collisions Fig. 7. The ion/neutral ratio is typically 10–4. As a result, under a 
few more Pa pressure, a very big enough number of particles can be generated. Page 14 of 28
and negative light up, Faraday darkness space, positive column, anode dark area, and
anode brightening.
Plasma, which contains a combination of particles, charges, and neutral atoms, with
photons generated during numerous interactions, creates such zones. This compressed
gas determines the overall quantity among distinct nanoparticles as well as the range
through which these are spread. Gas ionisation is caused by intense particle collisions Fig
7. The ion/neutral ratio is typically 10-4. As a result, under a few more Pa pressure, a very 
big enough number of particles has created enough sputter its targets.
Fig. 8 (a) Plasma Generation (b) various regions of plasma and (c) i-v characteristic
Fig 9. Typical DC sputtering unit schematic layout
4.2.5.2 RF Sputtering
Commented [A22]: rephrase
Commented [A23]: correct?
Commented [U24]: Author: Not cited in text.
Page 14 of 28
and negative light up, Faraday darkness space, positive column, anode dark area, and
anode brightening.
Plasma, which contains a combination of particles, charges, and neutral atoms, with
photons generated during numerous interactions, creates such zones. This compressed
gas determines the overall quantity among distinct nanoparticles as well as the range
through which these are spread. Gas ionisation is caused by intense particle collisions Fig
7. The ion/neutral ratio is typically 10-4. As a result, under a few more Pa pressure, a very 
big enough number of particles has created enough sputter its targets.
Fig. 8 (a) Plasma Generation (b) various regions of plasma and (c) i-v characteristic
Fig 9. Typical DC sputtering unit schematic layout
4.2.5.2 RF Sputtering
Commented [A22]: rephrase
Commented [A23]: correct?
Commented [U24]: Author: Not cited in text.
Page 15 of 28
DC sputtering becomes hard when applied as its material should become sputtered and
comprise isolating. Maintaining discharges among these terminals might demand their
application at extremely strong voltages. Sputtering at 100-3,000 V was frequent among
DC discharges. When a large intensity power is increased, its cathode and anode
alternately modify polarizability, and its oscillatory particles induce enough ionisation. 
Frequencies of 5-30 MHz could be employed, while its terminals could become insulated.
Nevertheless, while each frequency was allocated internationally for such purposes while
various frequencies were accessible, 13.56 MHz was most often utilized in a deposition.
Once this setup described in Fig 10 is adopted, this targeting is inherently biased towards
the negative electrode, turning negative.
Fig 10. RF sputtering set up with matching network
4.2.5.3 Magnetron sputtering
The use of magnetism would boost RF/DC sputtered speeds even more. Lorentz force
describes a force that a charging particle experiences whenever either electrical or
magnetical fields operate at the same time.
F= q (E + v ×B)
If E and B are parallel to one another, as shown in Fig. 11, single-particle departs its 
terminal with an inclination of 00. While v × B = 0, merely an applied potential operates 
mostly upon particles. Any particle creating an inclination θ, on the other hand, might be
affected by all electromagnetic fields. qv cos θ has been the amplitude of this particle
acceleration within directions of an applied force. Considering the strength of q v B sin θ, 
this component owing to magnetic force might be transverse towards each v and B. The
Commented [A25]: Correct?
Commented [A26]: Leaves?
Fig. 8. (a) Plasma Generation (b) various regions of plasma and (c) i–v characteristic. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Typical DC sputtering unit schematic layout. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
4.2.5.2 RF Sputtering 
Maintaining discharges among these terminals might demand their application at 
extremely strong voltages. Sputtering at 100–3,000 V was frequent among DC 
discharges. When a large intensity power is increased, its cathode and anode alternately 
modify polarizability, and its oscillatory particles induce enough ionisation. Frequencies 
of 5–30 MHz could be employed, while its terminals could become insulated. 
Nevertheless, while each frequency was allocated internationally for such purposes 
while various frequencies were accessible, 13.56 MHz was most often utilized in a 
deposition. Once this setup described in Fig. 10 is adopted, this targeting is inherently 
biased towards the negative electrode, turning negative. 
Fig. 10. RF sputtering set up with matching network. Page 16 of 28
length of a particle orbiting all across the magnetic fields axis was r. Then m (v sin θ)2 /r
was their centrifugal force around there.
Fig 11. Effect of E and B on electron
m (v sin 𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃)2
/r = q v B sin 𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃
Thus r = 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 sin 𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃
𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞
Each electron can ionise additional particles inside the gas by moving in a helix pattern. In
reality, magnetic fields that were simultaneously parallel and perpendicular to its axis of
the applied field were applied to enhance the ionizing of the gas and hence, it is
sputtering effectiveness. Metal oxides such as Al2O3, nitrides such as TiN, and carbides
such as WC could be produced by sputtering metallic substrates with gases such as O2, 
N2, NH3, CH4, and H2S. It was described as 'reactive sputtering'.
4.2.5.4 Electron Cyclotron Resonance (ECR) Plasma Deposition
Utilizing microwaves’ frequencies as well as associating the resonant frequencies of 
particles within a magnetic field, its plasma concentration could be increased even more.
𝜔𝜔𝜔𝜔 = 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
Commented [A27]: It’s?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 83 
4.2.5.3 Magnetron sputtering 
The use of magnetism would boost RF/DC sputtered speeds even more. Lorentz 
force describes a force that a charging particle experiences whenever either electrical 
or magnetical fields operate at the same time. 
F = q (E + v ×B) 
If E and B are parallel to one another, as shown in Fig. 11, single-particle leaves 
its terminal with an inclination of 00
. While v × B = 0, merely an applied potential 
operates mostly upon particles. Any particle creating an inclination θ, on the other 
hand, might be affected by all electromagnetic fields. qv cos θ has been the amplitude 
of this particle acceleration within directions of an applied force. Considering the 
strength of q v B sin θ, this component owing to magnetic force might be transverse 
towards each v and B. The length of a particle orbiting all across the magnetic fields 
axis was r. Then m (v sin θ)2
/r was their centrifugal force around there. 
m (v sin θ)2
/r = q v B sin θ
mv sin θ
Thus r = qB 
Each electron can ionise additional particles inside the gas by moving in a helix 
pattern. In reality, magnetic fields that were simultaneously parallel and perpendicular 
to its axis of the applied field were applied to enhance the ionizing of the gas and 
hence, It’s sputtering effectiveness. Metal oxides such as Al2O3, nitrides such as TiN, 
and carbides such as WC could be produced by sputtering metallic substrates with 
gases such as O2, N2, NH3, CH4, and H2S. It was described as ‘reactive sputtering’. 
Fig. 11. Effect of E and B on electron. 
4.2.5.4 Electron Cyclotron Resonance (ECR) Plasma Deposition 
Utilizing microwaves’ frequencies as well as associating the resonant frequencies of 
particles within a magnetic field, its plasma concentration could be increased even 
more. Page 17 of 28
Here 𝜔𝜔𝜔𝜔 is the microwave frequency, which was usually 2.45 GHz, e represents the charge
of the electron, m is the mass of the electron, and B is the magnetic field. ECR plasma
ionisation density is around 2–3 times of scale higher than prior approaches. With such a 
method, thin films and nanomaterials of SiO2, SiN, and GaN were produced. Fig 12 depicts 
a diagram illustrating such a strategy.
Fig 12. Electron Cyclotron Resonance schematic diagram for deposition
5 Other Physical Methods
5.1 Electric Arc Deposition
It was among the most basic and effective processes for bulk Fullerenes, carbon 
nanotubes, and other materials. This arrangement was depicted in Fig. 13, consisting
mostly of a liquid vacuum with electrodes that form an arc among themselves. This
positive electrode alone serves as a substance resource. Whenever catalysts were
employed, an extra heating supply of evaporation could be required. Inert gas is required
based on the targeted outcomes. An extremely strong current of 50-100 A was
transmitted through a lower voltage source across a 1 mm separation across its
terminals. Inside the vacuum pump, an inert atmosphere pressure is sustained. Anode
Commented [A28]: In capital?
 
 
 
 
 
84 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 12. Electron Cyclotron Resonance schematic diagram for deposition. 
eB 
ω = m 
Here ω is the microwave frequency, which was usually 2.45 GHz, e represents 
the charge of the electron, m is the mass of the electron, and B is the magnetic 
field. ECR plasma ionisation density is around 2–3 times of scale higher than prior 
approaches. With such a method, thin films and nanomaterials of SiO2, SiN, and 
GaN were produced. Figure 12 depicts a diagram illustrating such a strategy. 
5. Other Physical Methods 
5.1 Electric Arc Deposition 
It was among the most basic and effective processes for bulk fullerenes, carbon 
nanotubes, and other materials. This arrangement was depicted in Fig. 13, consisting 
mostly of a liquid vacuum with electrodes that form an arc among themselves. This 
positive electrode alone serves as a substance resource. Whenever catalysts were 
employed, an extra heating supply of evaporation could be required. Inert gas is 
required based on the targeted outcomes. An extremely strong current of 50–100 A 
was transmitted through a lower voltage source across a 1 mm separation across its 
terminals. Inside the vacuum pump, an inert atmosphere pressure is sustained. Anode 
substance disappears if the arc was formed. Once these electrodes are burned while 
their separation is widening, this gets increasingly necessary to regulate this electrode 
spacing before destroying a continuous vacuum. Such an approach involved creating 
an arc between two graphene sheets to obtain vast quantities of fullerenes. Under 
lower helium pressure, fullerenes develop, while nanotubes establish with increased 
pressure. Fullerenes can be made through purifying dust gathered near its vacuum 
chamber’s internal side, but nanotubes can exclusively be generated with higher He 
gas pressures and even inside its cathode’s mid-section. There were almost no carbon 
nanotubes just on the inner wall. Page 18 of 28
substance disappears if the arc was formed. Thus, longer for sufficient emission could be
sustained, it is conceivable. Once these electrodes are burned while their separation is
widening, this gets increasingly necessary to regulate this electrode spacing before
destroying a continuous vacuum. Such an approach involved creating an arc between
two graphene sheets to obtain vast quantities of fullerenes. Under lower helium
pressure, fullerenes develop, while nanotubes establish with increased pressure.
Fullerenes can be made through purifying dust gathered near its vacuum chamber's
internal side, but nanotubes can exclusively create with higher He gas pressures and
even inside its cathode's mid-section. There were almost no carbon nanotubes just on
the inner wall.
Carbon nanoparticles have been frequently observed just at sites in which nanotubes
were generated. When an arc discharge occurs, the temperatures might exceed 3,500
degree Celsius. Different nanoparticles might potentially be feasible to acquire using a 
similar process. Furthermore, it has been discovered that such an approach was best
suited for the production of fullerenes or carbon nanotubes.
Fig 13. Arc deposition set up
5.2 Ion Beam Technique
There exist many instances where lower or higher energetic ions were employed for
creating nanoparticles. Ions with concern can typically create with an ion gun that is 
specifically supposed to generate metallic ions that have been pushed to lower or higher
Commented [A29]: rephrase
Commented [A30]: create what?
Commented [A31]: rephrase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 85 
Fig. 13. Arc deposition set up. 
Carbon nanoparticles have been frequently observed just at sites in which 
nanotubes were generated. When an arc discharge occurs, the temperatures might 
exceed 3,500 degree Celsius. Different nanoparticles might potentially be feasible 
to acquire using a similar process. Furthermore, it has been discovered that such an 
approach was best suited for the production of fullerenes or carbon nanotubes. 
5.2 Ion Beam Technique 
There exist many instances where lower or higher energetic ions were employed for 
creating nanoparticles. Ion gun typically generate metallic ions that is specifically 
supposed to generate metallic ions that have been pushed to lower or higher 
energies and directed towards such a surface warmed up to only a few thousand ºC. 
Different mechanisms such as sputtering and electromagnetic radiation may occur 
in combination during sputtering depositing, based on the overall strength of such 
impacting ions. For such cases, heating was employed to enhance the crystalline 
nature of certain substances. Ion implantation was also used to synthesize doped 
nanoparticles in certain instances. Manufacturing nanoparticles with rapid ion beams 
and highly energetic ion accelerators may potentially be a feasible prospect. 
5.3 Plasma 
A further approach for producing nanoparticles includes the plasma technique. 
Radiofrequency heating circuits create this plasma. The first material was placed 
inside a pestle, which was then placed inside a fully isolated tube. Relatively high 
coils looped over that evacuation tube subsequently warmed solid material beyond its 
vaporization limit. Helium seems to be the gas employed mostly during the process, 
but upon entering into the device produces higher plasma within this vicinity of such 
coils. Such metals form vapourised nuclei mostly on helium atoms that disperse up to 
just a cool collecting rod, in which nanoparticles are then gathered but also properly 
sanitized with gaseous oxygen. Thermal plasma procedures, as well as plasma spray 
syntheses, are different sorts of plasma procedures. Plasma spray synthesizing seems 
to be a process for making nanoparticles which could be done out in free air. The Page 20 of 28
particulate gathering [25]. Plasma processes are classified depending upon the
substances supplied into the reactors as well as the thermal mechanism Fig 14.
Fig 14. Different plasma classification
5.4 Microwave irradiation
By their well-known merits beyond chemically synthesized approaches, microwave
irradiation was already frequently utilized in the preparation of biological, and chemical, 
including artificial nanocomposites [26]. The rapid and efficient oxidizing of chemical
molecules during microwave conditions was studied using a new stage transmission￾oxidizing agent called CTAMABC. CTMABC initially dissolved in acetonitrile, and then
alcohol was applied rapidly around room temperature with synthesized solution
forcefully mixed. After microwave irradiation, this liquid remained homogenous over a
brief period until the black-brown reducing chemical was collected. These interactions 
were monitored using paper chromatography as well as ultra-violet spectroscopy [27].
Some other researchers used hexamine as a reductant and bio-based pectin as a
stabiliser for the synthesis of Ag NPs through an aqueous solution with a quick, effective,
and cost-effective microwave-assisted synthesis method. These nanoparticles are
discovered to have an overall circular form with a diameter of 18.84 nm. Its activated
strength was estimated to be 47.3 kJ mol-1 [28], and its reactants increased upon its rise
in temperatures.
5.5 Pulsed laser method
Commented [A34]: Both are different 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 14. Different plasma classification. 
gathering of such created nanoparticles becomes challenging due to the fast flow 
speed with those nanoparticles. Nanoparticles bearing electrical charges emerge 
from the plasma region within the thermal plasma procedure. Thus, as a consequence 
of such advantages of using energetic ions, aggregation, as well as coagulation, could 
significantly be decreased [22, 23]. 
Different reaction rates could generally reach over vapour deposition since the 
reactants were ionised and then separated; however, their electrostatic interactions 
of the particles stay. Massive manufacturing prices, a thin grain size, as well as 
the capacity to make unagglomerated particles have all been major benefits of 
its technique [24]. This technique’s benefits include its flexibility, low price, and 
capacity to attain larger yields. This technique’s scope is restricted by the need for 
safe and reliable particulate gathering [25]. Plasma processes are classified depending 
upon the substances supplied into the reactors as well as the thermal mechanism 
Fig. 14. 
5.4 Microwave Irradiation 
By their well-known merits beyond chemically synthesized approaches, microwave 
irradiation was already frequently utilized in the preparation of biological, and 
chemical, including artificial nanocomposites [26]. The rapid and efficient oxidizing 
of chemical molecules during microwave conditions was studied using a new stage 
transmission-oxidizing agent called CTAMABC. CTAMABC initially dissolved in 
acetonitrile, and then alcohol was applied rapidly around room temperature with 
synthesized solution forcefully mixed. After microwave irradiation, this liquid 
remained homogenous over a brief period until the black-brown reducing chemical 
was collected. These interactions were monitored using paper chromatography as Page 21 of 28
A pulsed laser approach is typically utilised for the manufacture of nanoparticles with a 
fast speed of around 3 gm/min. Inside a blender-like appliance, silver nitrate solutions 
with some reduction reaction were injected. Its mechanism includes a hard disk, which
spins in with these solutions. To generate warm spots upon that disc's surfaces, it was
subjected to pulse using laser light. Its silver nitrate interacts only with reduction solution
to generate silver nanoparticles that may be extracted using centrifugation near hot
regions. Their average particle diameter is determined mostly by the laser's intensity and
its disc's rotational speed shown in Fig 15.
Fig 15. Pulsed laser setup
5.6 Gamma Radiation
Gamma radiation would be the best route for the fabrication of metallic nanoparticles
since this would be repeatable, can regulate the structure of the particulate, produces
narrow size distribution nanoparticles, has been simple, inexpensive, as well as requires
minimal toxins’ precursors: through the water as well as a solvent like ethanol, this has
used a fewest reaction mixture, this utilises a reaction conditions nearer to room
temperature using couple synthesised ways as conceivable, and reduces its portions of
created by-products and waste [29]. Radiolytic reductions were seen to be very effective
methods for producing monosized and widely scattered metallic clusters [30]. The
stimulation and ionizing of its liquid were the principal consequences of elevated gamma
radiation interacting with aqueous solutions containing ions [31]. Water could be
produced, for example, by irradiating a sequence of reduction and oxidation substances,
as illustrated in the expression below.
H 2 O ⇒ e − aq, H 3 O +, H •, OH •, H 2, H2O2
Commented [A35]: Please rephrase, breaking into smaller 
sentences.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 87 
well as ultra-violet spectroscopy [27]. Some other researchers used hexamine as a 
reductant and bio-based pectin as a stabiliser for the synthesis of Ag NPs through 
an aqueous solution with a quick, effective, and cost-effective microwave-assisted 
synthesis method. These nanoparticles are discovered to have an overall circular 
form with a diameter of 18.84 nm. Its activated strength was estimated to be 
47.3 kJ mol–1 [28], and its reactants increased upon its rise in temperatures. 
5.5 Pulsed Laser Method 
A pulsed laser approach is typically utilised for the manufacture of nanoparticles 
with a fast speed of around 3 gm/min. Inside a blender-like appliance, silver nitrate 
solutions with some reduction reaction were injected. Its mechanism includes a hard 
disk, which spins in with these solutions. To generate warm spots upon that disc’s 
surfaces, it was subjected to pulse using laser light. Its silver nitrate interacts only 
with reduction solution to generate silver nanoparticles that may be extracted using 
centrifugation near hot regions. Their average particle diameter is determined mostly 
by the laser’s intensity and its disc’s rotational speed shown in Fig. 15. 
Fig. 15. Pulsed laser setup. 
5.6 Gamma Radiation 
Gamma radiation would be the best route for the fabrication of metallic nanoparticles 
since this is repeatable, can regulate the structure of the particulate. Mainly produces 
narrow sized nanoparticles, which are simple, inexpensive, as well as requires 
minimal toxins’ precursors: through the water as well as a solvent like ethanol, 
this has used a fewest reaction mixture, this utilises a reaction condition nearer to 
room temperature and reduces its portions as by-products and waste [29]. Radiolytic 
reductions were seen to be very effective methods for producing monosized and 
widely scattered metallic clusters [30]. The stimulation and ionizing of its liquid 
were the principal consequences of elevated gamma radiation interacting with 
aqueous solutions containing ions [31]. Water could be produced, for example, by 
irradiating a sequence of reduction and oxidation substances, as illustrated in the 
expression below. 
H2O ⇒ e − , H3O +, H •, OH •, H2 aq , H2O288 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
The compounds e– aq and H• seem to be the core components for this way of 
producing nanoparticles using metallic dissolved salts. However, some specific 
hydroxyl scavengers were applied, and this formation of hydroxyl OH• hinders 
its effectiveness. Isopropanol [32] would be a popular choice with them. One such 
method had been frequently employed to develop nanoparticle fluids, especially 
silver and gold, in the past. Gamma Ray has been employed to capture nanoparticles 
within polymeric structures including mesoporous [33–35]. 
5.7 Lithographic Methods 
Lithographic techniques were top-down approaches capable of creating micron-sized 
features for most parts, although they are power complex and expensive apparatus. 
For centuries, lithography has been employed to create printable circuits and 
computers. Nanoimprint lithography would be a more specific variety of lithography 
than traditional lithography. It was a pretty lot similar pattern creation. Templates are 
created initially; subsequently, some softer polymer substance is pressed that makes a 
final design. Stamping materials were formed via the top-down process. Nanospheres 
lithography uses latex spheres to create functionalized matrices. Photolithography, 
e– beam lithography, soft lithography, focussed ion lithography, microlithography, 
and dipped pinning lithography are some of the patterning processes. 
5.8 Sputtering 
Sputtering would be a phenomenon in which nanoparticles are deposited by ejecting 
particles from that [36]. The heat treatment process is just a great way to build a thin 
sheet of nanomaterials. Both dimensions and shapes of nanoparticles are governed by 
the parameters mentioned: (i) temperatures (ii) layers’ width (iii) thermal treatment 
time (iv) surface, etc. [37]. 
6. Application of Nanoparticles 
6.1 Food Packaging 
Carbon nanotubes, which are cylindrical structures having nanoscale level width, 
represent an advancement in nanotechnologies for packaged foods. Nanosensors 
include detectors that are embedded in packing materials that identify gases that 
escape into defective foods, thus minimising gas penetration and condensation. Silica 
nanoparticles reduce losses of humidity out from substance while also preventing 
oxygen entry within the container [38]. Nanotechnology has yet to be used to monitor 
food. Nanosensors, which are small microchips implanted inside foods and create an 
electronic signal, will be used in the monitoring systems to help to follow quality 
ingredients through the field via factories to major retailers. Bacterial deterioration 
is, however, detected when the product is encased in a smart package. 
6.2 Food Processing 
In the categories of efficient nutrition delivery, and biological isolation of proteins, 
including nanoencapsulation of nutritional supplements, the possible influence Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 89 
of nanotechnologies in food manufacturing is a fast-growing trend. Nutrients, 
antibacterial agents, and antioxidants, including food ingredients like colourants, and 
preservatives have all been essential constituents of food products. Food qualities 
such as colour, tasting, texture, and storage stability were suitable with all of those 
ingredients. Nano encapsulating, nano emulsified, and other methods of preservation 
may be used. 
6.3 Medicine 
Nanoscience and technology are now being explored in the domain of medicine 
towards timely identification of diseases like cancers and atherosclerotic, as well as 
drug targeting to a specific biological cell. Timing of medication distribution and the 
speciality of sick cells were two essential characteristics of nanotechnology in drug 
delivery applications that enhance effective accessibility. Vast interfacial proportion 
enhances orthopaedic performance and reduces patient satisfaction by increasing 
bone interconnections [39]. 
6.4 Antimicrobial Activity 
The bacteriostatic impact of metal nanoparticles has been related to their tiny 
dimensions and surface area to volume ratio, which allows interaction carefully 
with microorganism’s membranes, allowing metal nanoparticles to penetrate 
quickly into cells excluding the intrinsic parts of the cell, effectively inactivating the 
microorganisms. 
6.5 Agriculture 
Agriculture is the main source of livelihood for several nations, such as India and 
China, which draw almost a percentage of their national wealth from this. However, 
mostly because of climatic change, ecological issues such as pesticide and fertiliser 
deposition, and urbanisation, such industry is currently facing multiple difficulties. 
Mostly in areas of nutrition absorption, identification of diseases, infection 
management, and intelligent supply networks, nanotechnology is revolutionising 
farming [40]. Nanocatalyst will improve accessible with pesticides and fertilisers 
within upcoming to improve energy effectiveness with reduced dose rates, and 
environmental protection against elevated pesticides. 
6.6 Textile 
Nanotechnology’s application within garment industries has been receiving attention 
as potential technology for various applications [41]. Water repellence, wrinkling 
resistance, anti-bacterial, anti-static, and UV protection are just a few features. 
7. Conclusion 
This paper provided a comprehensive summary of nanoparticles, including their 
categorization, production, characterization, and uses. Around a minimum of 
1 nm, groupings of elements are worked within nanotechnologies. Nanoparticles  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
were frequently classified as things with large sizes. Nanotechnology involves the 
scientific knowledge of substances, which display extraordinary qualities, functions, 
and processes because of their small size. Nanoparticles had sparked a lot of attention 
because of their unusual physical and chemical characteristics, and they can be used 
in a variety of applications. Nanotechnology nowadays takes advantage of the latest 
advances in material science, biotechnology, and electronics that produce innovative 
substances with special characteristics due to their nanometric structures. 
Several of these substances, including sunscreens and stain-resistant plants, 
have indeed made their way inside consumer items. Some were being studied 
in-depth seeking remedies for humankind’s most pressing issues, such as sickness, 
clean technology, and freshwater. Future nanotechnology goods, which would be 
accessible within the next generations, promise much more transformative uses than 
the present and relatively close nanotechnologies. Nanoparticles can be used in a 
variety of fields, including medical, agro-food, electronics, and energy generation. 
Nanoparticles, in a nutshell, have rendered our lives easier and more comfortable. 
Nanotechnology has a promising future because of its applications in numerous 
disciplines of research. Several nanoparticle-manufacturing processes were created, 
and they are appropriate for the synthesis of nanomaterials in a variety of applications. 
Acknowledgement 
We thank previous and current lab members for their valuable contributions. 
Author Contributions 
All authors read and equally contributed to this manuscript. 
References 
[1] Satya Narayana, T., M.V. Ramana Reddy and J. Siva Kumar. 2016. Synthesis and characterization 
of pure and indium doped SnO2 nanoparticles by sol-gel methods. International Journal of Scientific 
& Engineering Research 7(12). December-2016. ISSN 2229-5518. 
[2] Heiligtag, F.J. and M. Niederberger. 2013. The fascinating world of nanoparticle research. Research 
Review, Mat. Today 16: 262–271. 
[3] Walter, P., E. Welcomme, P. Hallegot, N.J. Zaluzec, C. Deeb, J. Castaing, P. Veyssiere, R. Breniaux, 
J. Leveque and G. Tsoucaris. 2006. Early use of PbS nanotechnology for an ancient hair dyeing 
formula. Nano Lett. 6: 2215–2219. 
[4] Jeevanandam, J., A. Barhoum, Y.S. Chan, A. Dufresne and M.K. Danquah. 2018. Review on 
nanoparticles and nanostructured materials: history, sources, toxicity and regulations. Beilstein J. 
Nanotech. 9: 1050–1074. 
[5] Freestone, I., N. Meeks, M. Sax and C. Higgitt. 2007. The Lycurgus Cup—A Roman Nanotechnology. 
Gold Bull. 40: 270–277. 
[6] Santamaria, A. 2012. Nanotoxicity, Historical Overview of Nanotechnology and Nanotoxicology. 
Humana Press, Totowa, chap-1: 1–12. 
[7] Nasrollahzadeh, M., M. Sajadi, M. Atarod, M. Sajjadi and Z. Issaabadi. 2019. An Introduction to 
Green Nanotechnology. Interface Science and Technology, Elsevier, 28: 1–27. 
[8] Sharifi, S., S. Behzadi, S. Laurent, M. Laird Forrest, P. Stroeve and M. Mahmoudi. 2012. Toxicity 
of nanomaterials. Chem. Soc. Rev. 41: 2323–2343. 
[9] Karak, N. 2019. Fundamentals of nanomaterials and polymer nanocomposites. pp. 1–45. 
In: Nanomaterials and Polymer Nanocomposites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Physical Methods 91 
[10] Namita, R. 2015. Methods of preparation of nanoparticles—a review. International Journal of 
Advances in Engineering & Technology Jan. 2015. ISSN: 22311963. 
[11] Iravani, S. 2011. Green synthesis of metal nanoparticles using plants. Green Chem. 13: 2638–2650. 
[12] Konrad, A., U. Herr, R. Tidecks, F. Kummer and K. Samwer. 2001. Luminescence of bulk and 
nanocrystalline cubic yttria. J. App. Physics 90: 3516–23. 
[13] Andrievskii, R.A. 1994. The synthesis and properties of nanocrystalline refractory compounds. 
Russian Chem. Rev. 63: 411–427. 
[14] Rastogi, A. 2017. A mini-review practice of formulations of nanoparticles. Int. J. Chem. Synthesis 
Chem. Reactions 3: 1–7. 
[15] Dikusar, A.I., P.G. Globa, S.S. Belevskii and S.P. Sidel nikova. 2009. On limiting rate of dimensional 
electrodeposition at meso and nanomaterial manufacturing by template synthesis. Surface Eng. 
Appl. Electrochem. 45: 171–9. 
[16] Karthikeyan, B. and B. Loganathan. 2013. A close look of Au/Pt/Ag nanocomposites using SERS 
assisted with optical, electrochemical, spectral and theoretical methods. Phys E 49: 105–10. 
[17] Amendola, V. and M. Meneghetti. 2009. Laser Ablation synthesis in solution and size manipulation 
of noble metal nanoparticles. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 11: 3805–3821. 
[18] Dudoitis, V. et al. 2011. Lith. J. Phys. 51: 03. 
[19] Skandan, G. and A. Singhal. 2006. In: Y. Gogotsi (ed.). Nanomaterials Handbook. Taylor and 
Francis Group, Florida. 
[20] Sudarsanam, P. and B.M. Reddy. 2013. In: T. Tsuzuki (ed.). Nanotechnology Commercialization. 
Pan Stanford Publishing, Singapore. 
[21] Behera, S. and P.L. Nayak. 2013. In vitro antibacterial activity of green synthesized silver 
nanoparticles using Jamun extract against multiple drug-resistant bacteria. World J. Nano Sci. 
Technol. 2: 62–65. 
[22] Vollath, D. and K.E. Sickafus. 1992. Synthesis of nanosized ceramic oxide powders by microwave 
plasma reactions. Nano Struct. Mat. 1: 427–437. 
[23] Vollath, D. 1994. Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 347: 629. 
[24] Vollath, D. 2008. Nanomaterials: An Introduction to Synthesis, Properties and Applications. 
Wiley-VCH, Weinheim 7: 865–870. 
[25] Luther, W. 2004. In Industrial application of nanomaterials-chances and risks. W. Luther (ed.). 
Future Technologies Division, Dusseldorf. 
[26] Horikoshi, S. and N. Serpone. 2013. Introduction to Nanoparticles, Microwaves in Nanoparticle 
Synthesis. 1st ed: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. KGaA. 
[27] Riaz, U., S.M. Ashraf and A. Madan. 2014. Effect of microwave irradiation time and temperature 
on the spectroscopic and morphological properties of nanostructured poly (carbazole) synthesized 
within bentonite clay galleries. New Journal of Chemistry 38: 4219–4228. 
[28] Tiwary, K.P., S.K. Choubey and K. Sharma. 2013. Structural and optical properties of ZnS 
nanoparticles synthesized by microwave irradiation method. Chalcogenide Letters 10: 319–323. 
[29] Rao, Y.N., D. Banerjee, A. Datta, S.K. Das, R. Guin and A. Saha. 2010. Gamma irradiation route 
to the synthesis of highly re-dispersible natural polymer capped silver nanoparticles. Radiation 
Physics and Chemistry 79: 1240–1246. 
[30] Marignier, J., J. Belloni, M. Delcourt and J. Chevalier. 1985. New micro aggregates of non-noble 
metals and alloys prepared by radiation-induced reduction. Nature 317: 344–345. 
[31] Abidi, W. and H. Remita. 2010. Gold-based nanoparticles generated by radiolytic and photolytic 
methods. Recent Patents on Engineering 4(3): 170–188. 
[32] Temgire, M.K., J. Bellare and S.S. Joshi. 2011. Gamma radiolytic formation of alloyed Ag-Pt 
nanocolloids. Advances in Physical Chemistry 9 p. Article ID: 249097. 
[33] Krklješ, A. 2011. Radiolytic synthesis of nanocomposites based on noble metal nanoparticles and 
natural polymer, and their application as biomaterial (IAEA-RC--12071). International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA). 
[34] Chen, Q., J. Shi, R. Zhao and X. Shen. 2010. Radiolytic syntheses of nanoparticles and 
inorganic-polymer hybrid microgels (IAEA-RC--11242). International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA). 
[35] Hornebecq, V., M. Antonietti, T. Cardinal and M. Treguer-Delapierre. 2003. Stable silver 
nanoparticles immobilized in mesoporous silica. Chemistry of Materials 15(10): 1993–1999.  
 
 
 
 
 
92 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[36] Shah, P. and A. Gavrin. 2006. Synthesis of nanoparticles using high-pressure sputtering for 
magnetic domain imaging. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 301(1): 118–123. 
[37] Lugscheider, E. et al. 1998. Magnetron-sputtered hard material coatings on thermoplastic polymers 
for clean room applications. Surf. Coat. Technol. 108: 398–402. 
[38] Sozer, N. and J.L. Kokini. 2009. Trends in Biotechnology 27(2): 82–89. 
[39] Sahoo, S.K., S. Parveen and J. Panda. 2007. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine 
3: 20–31. 
[40] Rai, M. and A. Ingle. 2012. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 94: 287–293. 
[41] Wong, Y.W.H., C.W.M. Yuen, M.Y.S. Leung, S.K.A. Ku and H.L.I Lam. 2006. Autex Research 
Journal 6: 1–8.  
 
6


Zno Nanostructured 
Materials for Surface and 
Biological Applications

 Mohamed S. Selim,1
 Shimaa A. Higazy,1
 Sherif A. El-Safty,2,*


Ahmed A. Azzam,2,3 Notaila M. Nasser2
 and


Mohamed A. Shenashen1,2,*


1. Introduction 
Nanomaterials’ research play an important role in solving problems and improving 
our lives in every aspect of technology. In this context, a lot of research endeavors have 
been devoted to providing several promising strategies to manufacturing surfaces 
and coatings based on nanostructured materials to enhance structural properties of 
surfaces as well as physical and chemical properties [1–4]. As is notable, the design 
of nanostructured thin-layer films, surfaces and coatings occupies a privileged 
position in numerous applications associated with the environmental, energy, and 
biological applications [5–10]. 
Interest in polymer composite systems research has been rapidly expanding in 
recent years due to their numerous potential applications [11–13], dielectrics [14], 
biological field [15–17], food packaging [18], bioplastics [19], extraction and water 
treatment [20–22], and coatings [23–26]. Adding inorganic nanofillers to polymers 
increases polymer properties that are radically different from standard polymer 
1 Petroleum Application Department, Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute (EPRI), Nasr City 11727, 
Cairo (Egypt). 
2 Research Center for Macromolecules and Biomaterials, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 
1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki-ken 305-0047, Japan. 
3 Environmental Research Department, Theodor Bilharz Research Institute, 12411, Cairo, Egypt. 
* Corresponding authors: sherif.elsafty@nims.go.jp; shenashen.mohameda@nims.go.jp 94 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
properties, according to the researchers [27–32]. Nanoparticles (NPs) have been 
found to have a significant impact on the characteristics of basic polymers when used 
to produce nanocomposite [33–35]. A multicomponent structure having microscopic 
fillers (less than 100 nm in at least one dimension) is referred to as a polymeric 
nanocomposite [33, 36, 37]. Because of their high aspect ratio and enormous surface 
area, nanofillers behave as intelligent improver in the polymeric resins. As a hot 
spot at the moment, nanofillers with controlled size and morphology are desirable 
reinforcing materials for polymers [38]. Moreover, various organic-inorganic hybrid 
nanocomposite materials have been designed for various applications [39–42]. In 
this regards, diverse nano-inorganic dopants including SiO2, Al2O3, TiO2, SiO2, ZnO, 
and other nano-metal oxide are commonly utilized as nano-dopants in the polymeric 
resins [43–46]. In this context, this study will focus on studying the features of ZnO 
nanofillers to develop new structural surfaces with advanced properties. ZnO can 
adopt various nanomaterials including NPs, nanowires (NWs), and nanorods (NRs). 
ZnO has a broad-band gap (3.4 eV) and is an n-type (II–V) semiconductor with 
several functions. 
Even in the presence of sunlight, water, and air, it possesses excellent chemical 
stability, UV absorbance, and binding energy (60 meV) [47]. ZnO can be used in 
biomedical applications because it is non-toxic and safe for the environment [48]. 
ZnO NPs have unique features that allow them to exist in both an anti-electrostatic 
and conductive form, as well as having excellent chemical, optical, magnetic, and 
electrical features. Polymer coatings, semiconductors, photochemical, UV-shielding 
materials, piezoelectric devices, optical waveguides, antibacterial agents, UV-laser 
emitters, cosmetics, solar cells, self-purification, and gas sensors materials (Fig. 1) 
[49–52] have a lot of potential. ZnO exhibits bactericidal activity in the absence of 
light and at pH 7–8 [53]. Additionally, visible fluorescence is detected in ZnO NPs, 
especially when synthesized by sol-gel, but hydrothermal synthesis renders them ideal 
for usage in UV emitters. Traditional metal oxides, such as ZnO, are combined with 
polymers in certain structural layouts to achieve the desired performance [13], which 
is a commonly utilized major method for producing ZnO/polymer nanocomposite. 
The components’ characteristics, the filler’s large surface area, 
polymer-nanofiller interfacial bindings and nanofiller’s well-distribution within 
the resins are all thought to contribute to the improvement in attributes. This can 
be fulfilled by tailoring the characteristics of nanofillers, polymers, and the hybrid 
nanocomposite to achieve outstanding features. In the required application, selecting 
an appropriate polymeric resin is crucial. Chemical and heat resistance, mechanical 
durability, biological activity, and friction coefficient can all be improved by 
incorporating ZnO into a polymer matrix [54]. The benefits of ZnO NPs are shown 
in Fig. 2. 
In general, controlling the structure of the ZnO/polymer composite well 
contributes to the improvement of the desired properties of the final structure, 
so many efforts have emerged regarding the adaptability and management of the 
filler particle interactions with the polymer matrix. Studying the ZnO nanofillers’ 
structure-property relationship is inevitable to develop newly structured surfaces 3
Fig. 1.: ZnO NPs in various applications including environment, industry and
bioapplications, as well as specific use of ZnO-NPs the surface fields.
Interest in polymer composite systems research has been rapidly expanding in recent
years due to their numerous potential applications [11-13], dielectrics [14], biological field 
[15-17], food packaging [18], bioplastics [19], extraction and water treatment [20-22], and
coatings [23-26]. Adding inorganic nanofillers to polymers increases polymer properties that
are radically different from standard polymer properties, according to the researchers [27-
32]. Nanoparticles (NPs) have been found to have a significant impact on the characteristics
of basic polymers when used to produce nanocomposite [33-35]. A multicomponent structure 
having microscopic fillers (less than 100 nm in at least one dimension) is referred to as a
polymeric nanocomposite [33,36,37]. Because of their high aspect ratio and enormous
surface area, nanofillers behave as intelligent improver in the polymeric resins. As a hot spot
at the moment, nanofillers with controlled size and morphology are desirable reinforcing
materials for polymers [38]. Moreover, various organic-inorganic hybrid nanocomposite
materials have been designed for various applications [39-42]. In this regards, diverse nano￾inorganic dopants including SiO2, Al2O3, TiO2, SiO2, ZnO, and other nano-metal oxide are 
commonly utilized as nano-dopants in the polymeric resins [43-46]. In this context, this study 
will focus on studying the features of ZnO nanofillers to develop new structural surfaces with 
Commented [A2]: Correct?
4
advanced properties. ZnO can adopt various nanomaterials including NPs, nanowires (NWs), 
and nanorods (NRs). ZnO has a broad-band gap (3.4 eV) and is an n-type (II-V) 
semiconductor with several functions.
Even in the presence of sunlight, water, and air, it possesses excellent chemical
stability, UV absorbance, and binding energy (60 meV) [47]. ZnO can be used in biomedical
applications because it is non-toxic and safe for the environment [48]. ZnO NPs have unique
features that allow them to exist in both an anti-electrostatic and conductive form, as well as
having excellent chemical, optical, magnetic, and electrical features. Polymer coatings,
semiconductors, photochemical, UV-shielding materials, piezoelectric devices, optical
waveguides, antibacterial agents, UV-laser emitters, cosmetics, solar cells, self-purification, 
and gas sensors materials (Fig. 1) [49-52] have a lot of potential. ZnO exhibits bactericidal
activity in the absence of light and at pH 7–8 [53]. Additionally, visible fluorescence is
detected in ZnO NPs, especially when synthesized by sol-gel, but hydrothermal synthesis
renders them ideal for usage in UV emitters. Traditional metal oxides, such as ZnO, are
combined with polymers in certain structural layouts to achieve the desired performance
[13], which is a commonly utilized major method for producing ZnO/polymer
nanocomposite.
Fig. 2.: Chemical, physical, and biological advantages of the ZnO nanostructured materials.
The components' characteristics, the filler's large surface area, polymer-nanofiller
interfacial bindings and nanofiller's well-distribution within the resins are all thought to
contribute to the improvement in attributes. This can be fulfilled by tailoring the
characteristics of nanofillers, polymers, and the hybrid nanocomposite to achieve outstanding 
features. In the required application, selecting an appropriate polymeric resin is crucial.
Chemical and heat resistance, mechanical durability, biological activity, and friction
coefficient can all be improved by incorporating ZnO into a polymer matrix [54]. The
benefits of ZnO NPs are shown in Fig. 2.
In general, controlling the structure of the ZnO/polymer composite well contributes to
the improvement of the desired properties of the final structure, so many efforts have
emerged regarding the adaptability and management of the filler particle interactions with the
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 95


Fig. 1. ZnO NPs in various applications including environment, industry and bioapplications. 
Fig. 2. Chemical, physical, and biological advantages of the ZnO nanostructured materials. 96 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
with advanced properties. It takes into account the impacts of functionalization, 
surface area to volume ratio of nanofillers, the antifouling effect, sustainability, and 
multifunctionality. Controlled ZnO nanostructures aid in the creation of a rough 
morphology and the generation of extra functionalities for the superhydrophobic 
surface. The influences of dispersing nano-ZnO within different polymeric resins 
is investigated in depth in this chapter, which covers production, processing, 
characterization methods, and a wide range of applications. Our research focuses 
on ZnO effects on modulating polymer nanocomposites’ surface, mechanical, 
photo-induced, antifouling, and antibacterial characteristics. Incorporation of 
nano-ZnO structure within various polymeric resins is an excellent technique for 
generating better performance even at low nanofillers loading percentages, thus 
producing feasible and applied nanocomposite surface materials. 
2. Synthesis Methodologies of Nanostructured ZnO Particles and 
Polymer Composites 
A variety of methods are used to synthesize ZnO NPs with different morphologies 
from distinct precursor materials. The most widely used methods are solid-state 
reactions [55], pyrolysis via flame spray [56], chemical, sonochemical, microwave, 
sol-gel, hydrothermal, and solvothermal methodologies [57–61]. ZnO NPs are made 
via the co-precipitation technique. Two important concerns in all of these synthesis 
processes are the homogeneity of the ZnO particle dispersion and the low reaction 
temperature. Nanostructures, on the other hand, contain impurities and metal ions that 
need be removed to optimize NP formation. Some of the many nano-ZnO shapes are 
NPs, NRs, nanorings, nanotubes, flower-like, and nanobelts. These nanostructures 
can be dispersed in a wide range of liquids and polymeric resins. ZnO NPs cluster 
like other NPs, compromising their uniform distribution in the polymer medium. 
Inorganic particles or polymers can be grafted onto the ZnO surface to alleviate this 
problem [62]. 
This would improve the distribution and interfacial bonding of nano-ZnO 
within the polymeric resin to produce improved nanocomposite materials. Such 
desired composite performance is influenced by the size of the nanofillers as 
well as the polymer matrix’s properties. This is often accomplished by selecting 
appropriate chemical and physical mixing procedures to reinforce the polymeric 
resin. Chemical reactions create chemical connections between polymers and fillers, 
unlike physical procedures that involve polymer/nanofillers mixing within a suitable 
solvent. Chemical synthesis yields composites that are multi-structured and stable, 
with stronger polymer/nanofiller connections. On the other hand, physical methods 
create polymer/nanofillers static connections, such as Lewis acid/base and/or van der 
Waals force interactions. Chemical-grafting of polymers onto ZnO surfaces yields 
homogenous, clear products that are easily removed from the system of reaction 
[63]. The breakdown temperatures of such composites are usually higher than those 
of ordinary polymers, and there is no significant phase separation. This assures that 
the system’s polymer-ZnO linkages are strong, and that the stronger the contact, the 
more stable the nanocomposites will be and can be applied for various industrial 
applications. Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 97 
3. Surface and Biological Applications of ZnO Nanostructures 
In every field of technology, ZnO nanomaterials help to solve problems and make 
our lives easier. There is an urgent need to develop innovative nanomaterials with 
improved properties to meet the demand for improvement [64, 65]. If new structured 
nanomaterials with enhanced properties are to be produced, the investigation of 
the structure-property relationship is a necessity. Engineering applications for 
ZnO-based surfaces include self-cleaning, anti-biofouling, anti-icing, anticorrosion, 
and textiles. To make superhydrophobic nano-surfaces, researchers employed a 
straightforward method of NP’s distribution within the polymer resin and then coating 
water-repellent polymeric nanocomposite film on a suitable substrate [66]. Controlled 
NP structures help create a rough morphology and provide additional characteristics 
for a superhydrophobic surface. 
3.1 Self-cleaning Surfaces 
Superhydrophobic nanostructured surfaces have piqued attention in a variety 
of industrial applications around the globe. Biomimetic [67] is an engineering 
architecture with a hierarchy, tectonics of materials, nano-surfaces, and machineries 
model based on the function and structure of biological systems. Biological systems 
could develop superhydrophobic coating materials. The development of biomimetic 
surfaces with micro and nanostructures is used to reduce fouling in the maritime 
environment. As a result, it is vital to clarify the process and precision for constructing 
bio-replicated multiscale structures [68]. Many natural surfaces are superhydrophobic 
and self-cleaning, such as butterfly wings as well as cabbage leaves [69]. The term 
“Lotus Effect” was named after the Lotus plant leaves (Nelumbo nucifera) [70], 
representing a well-known water-repellent example. Electron microscopy revealed 
projecting nubs 20–40 µm apart on the surface of lotus leaves that were covered by 
a waxy-rough crystalloid surface. WCAs ≥ 150° and low contact angle hysteresis 
are all characteristics of so-called superhydrophobic surfaces. Micro/nano binary 
roughness in combination with a low surface free energy (SFE) can facilitate such 
operations [71]. 
Since the initial synthetic ultra-hydrophobic coating was conducted in 1996 
[72], there have been a slew of new ways to create surface roughness that displays 
superhydrophobicity. Superhydrophobicity is a technique for ensuring important 
surface qualities are protected. Creating a hierarchical, rough morphology with low 
energy molecules is required for the fabrication of superhydrophobicity surfaces 
[73]. A simple method of dispersing NPs in a hydrophobic polymer matrix followed 
by surface coating the hydrophobic polymer/NP composite dispersion on a suitable 
substrate [74] was used to fabricate superhydrophobic nano-surfaces in addition to 
etching, lithography, biomimetic, and stamping processes. Controlled NP structures 
contribute in the formation of a rough morphology and the establishment of extra 
superhydrophobic surface capabilities [75]. 
Surface roughness and hydrophobicity can be increased not only by increasing 
the solid–liquid contact, but also by trapping air between the surface and the liquid 
droplet on a rough surface. The surface water-repellency will be enhanced by trapping 98 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
of air as it has a WCA of 180° [76]. A hierarchical micro-nano structured surface with 
a low SFE is responsible for superhydrophobicity [77]. ZnO nanostructures in zero 
dimensional (0D), 1-dimensional (1D), 2-dimensional (2D), as well as 3-dimensional 
(3D) dimensions have been described in the literature. Zero-dimension NPs are 
virtually spherical NPs. Using ZnO particles manufactured by a hydrothermal 
process, Gao et al. [78] constructed ultrahydrophobicity on a hierarchical 
nano-surface by dropping on glass substrates for a thorough experimental technique. 
To minimize surface energy and roughness, this method used a functional 
fluoroethylene-vinylether polymer with inorganic ZnO particles. The WCA can 
range from 135° ± 4° to 145° ± 3° and even 152° ± 2° depending on the reaction 
medium composition, and the ZnO particles can be formed in various shapes by 
adjusting reaction medium composition. 
Furthermore, “chestnut” ZnO particles were more flexible than 1D nano￾ZnO rods that proved useful in large-area grounding. The most prevalent 1D 
structures include NRs, nano-needles, nanotubes, NWs, and nanocombs. Lotus 
leaves have extremely hydrophobic surfaces and micro/nano-structured topology 
that have the potential to self-clean. Chakradhar et al. [79] used a 155° WCA to 
make ultrahydrophobic PDMS/nano-ZnO composite surfaces. To produce ZnO 
nanowires over tin oxide substrate doped with fluorine, Pauporte et al. [80] used 
a one-step electrochemical technique. The temperature at which ZnO NWs are 
deposited has been discovered to be a key factor in defining their morphology 
and structure. The surface non-wettability of a surface treated with stearic acid 
was changed from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity (WCA of 168.3°). An in-situ 
photo-reduction approach can prepare rGO/ZnO nanocomposite for self-cleaning, and 
pollution-removal characteristics were also studied [81–83] (Fig. 3A). Kumbhakar 
et al. [82] reported a green fabrication method to produce 2D rGO-ZnO nanocomposites 
using zinc acetate and apple juice for self-cleaning and photocatalytic applications 
(Fig. 3B). The results show the photo-degradation of methylene blue dye (~ 91%) 
within 1 h. 
The 2D architectures of ZnO include nanosheets, nanoplates, and nanopellets 
[84]. Li and co-workers [85] created nano-ZnO sheets on the bamboo-like substrate 
after utilizing chemical vapour deposition to alter the surface with fluoroalkyl silane. 
In the acidic rains, pH = 3. UV radiation for this newly formed structure displayed 
good water repellency and superhydrophobicity stability. 
Examples of three-dimensional morphologies of ZnO include Snowflakes, 
coniferous urchin, flower, dandelion, etc. formations and other 3D morphologies 
of ZnO have been discovered [86, 87]. Dai et al. [88] developed a 3D hierarchical 
ZnO film with variable wettability and lotus leaf-like micro/nano patterns. This 
superhydrophobic surface was created using ZnO micro pillars with a homogenous 
ZnO coating, which was then followed by the formation of ZnO NRs on the micropillars 
structure. The highest contact angle after 24 hours of growth is 160°. Developing 
ZnO hierarchical micro/nano structures with customizable morphology and surface 
topologies, as well as programmable wettability, remains a major challenge, despite 7
Fig. 3.: Self-assembly and photocatalytic production of rGO/ZnO hybrid nanocomposite for
dye removal. (A) photocatalytic ZnO/rGO nanocomposite for toxic dyes degradation [81];
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved, (B) photocatalytic degradation of
Rhodamine B [82]; Copyright 2012, with ACS permission, and (C) rGO/ZnO hybrid 
photocatalyst nanocomposite synthesized from zinc acetate and apple juice for self-cleaning
and photo-degradation of methylene blue dye [83]; Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.
Furthermore, "chestnut" ZnO particles were more flexible than 1D nano-ZnO rods
that proved useful in large-area grounding. The most prevalent 1D structures include NRs, 
nano-needles, nanotubes, NWs, and nanocombs. Based on the lotus leaves' chemical
nanostructures of lotus leaves. Chakradhar et al. [79] used a 155° WCA to make
ultrahydrophobic PDMS/nano-ZnO composite surfaces. To produce ZnO nanowires over tin
oxide substrate doped with fluorine, Pauporte et al. [80] used a one-step electrochemical
technique. The temperature at which ZnO NWs are deposited has been discovered to be a key
factor in defining their morphology and structure. The surface non-wettability of a surface 
Commented [A4]: incomplete
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 99 
Fig. 3. Self-assembly and photocatalytic production of rGO/ZnO hybrid nanocomposite for dye removal. 
(A) photocatalytic ZnO/rGO nanocomposite for toxic dyes degradation [81]; Copyright © 2018 Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved, (B) photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B [82]; Copyright 2012, with 
ACS permission, and (C) rGO/ZnO hybrid photocatalyst nanocomposite synthesized from zinc acetate 
and apple juice for self-cleaning and photo-degradation of methylene blue dye [83]; Copyright © 2018 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
the fact that there are multiple approaches for creating diverse morphologies of 
ZnO. The mean length and diameter size of nano-ZnO pillars can be changed in 
a hydrothermal reaction system by altering the solution concentration, growth 
time, and reaction temperature, according to Hao et al. [89]. Anchored graphene 
materials are well-defined photo-catalysts that can be used to make outstanding 
superhydrophobic, self-cleaning, and photocatalytic surface materials. He [90] 
developed a low-cost photocatalytic self-cleaning rGO/ZnO nanocomposite film. A 
trendy and environmentally sustainable trend is to use graphenic nanocomposite as 
strong fouling-release (FR) surface (Fig. 4). 8
treated with stearic acid was changed from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity (WCA of
168.3°). An in-situ photo-reduction approach can prepare rGO/ZnO nanocomposite for self￾cleaning, and pollution-removal characteristics were also studied [81-83] (Fig. 3A).
Kumbhakar et al. [82] reported a green fabrication method to produce 2D rGO-ZnO
nanocomposites using from zinc acetate and apple juice for self-cleaning and photocatalytic
applications (Fig. 3B). The results show the photo-degradation of methylene blue dye
(∼91%) within 1h.
The 2D architectures of ZnO include nanosheets, nanoplates, and nanopellets [84]. Li 
and co-workers [85] created nano-ZnO sheets on the bamboo-like substrate after utilizing
chemical vapour deposition to alter the surface with fluoroalkyl silane. In the acidic rains, pH 
= 3. UV radiation for this newly formed structure displayed good water repellency and 
superhydrophobicity stability.
Fig. 4.: A single-phase method was employed to develop rGO/ZnO hybrid composite coated
on a glassy surface and subjected to UV-Vis irradiation for photocatalytic self-cleaning
application. It produced a pollutant-repellant and FR nanosurface. Solar light may fragment
soil, which can then be transformed to CO2 and H2O [90]. In 2015, the copyright was granted
by Elsevier Ltd.
Snowflakes, flower-like, and dandelion, formations and other 3D morphologies of 
ZnO have been discovered [86,87]. Dai et al. [88] developed a 3D hierarchical ZnO film with
variable wettability and lotus leaf-like micro/nano patterns. This superhydrophobic surface
was created using ZnO micro pillars with a homogenous ZnO coating, which was then
followed by the formation of ZnO NRs on the micropillars structure. The highest contact
angle after 24 hours of growth is 160 °. Developing ZnO hierarchical micro/nano structures
with customizable morphology and surface topologies, as well as programmable wettability,
remains a major challenge, despite the fact that there are multiple approaches for creating
diverse morphologies of ZnO. The mean length and diameter size of nano-ZnO pillars can be 
changed in a hydrothermal reaction system by altering the solution concentration, growth 
time, and reaction temperature, according to Hao et al. [89]. Anchored graphene materials are
Commented [A5]: from what?
Commented [A6]: Correct? Sounds confusing
 
 
 
 
100 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 4. A single-phase method was employed to develop rGO/ZnO hybrid composite coated on a glassy 
surface and subjected to UV-Vis irradiation for photocatalytic self-cleaning application. It produced a 
pollutant-repellant and FR nanosurface. Solar light may fragment soil, which can then be transformed to 
CO2 and H2O [90]. In 2015, the copyright was granted by Elsevier Ltd. 
3.2 Antifouling Coating Surface 
In the maritime industry, biofouling is a fast-moving and complex problem [91]. 
Shipping is responsible for over 90% of all global trade. When the friction drag 
caused by fouling layers rises, the ship’s velocity drops. As a result, significant 
feasting of fuel is required for attaining the desired velocity, resulting in increased 
travel costs as well as the release of destructive substances into the environment [92]. 
Biofouling has typically been avoided by using leachant anti-fouling coatings, which 
release toxicants into the maritime environment, killing non-target creatures such 
as fish and dolphins. As global embargoes and constraints have grown, the usage of 
biocidal antifouling technologies has spurred the development of environmentally 
benign alternatives, such as FR technology. Silicone FR paints employ a method that 
prevents fouling attachments which decrease coating-fouling adhesion strength and 
improve the fouling-resistance. 
PDMS has many advantages over tin-free antifouling paints including 
non-stick, eco-friendly, non-leaching and a CH3 group, including ultra-smooth 
topology, extremely mobile surface, and reduced surface tension [93]. Thermally 
stable, anti-oxidant, anti-ozone, and UV resistant, PDMS is a great choice for a 
variety of applications. Although silicone paints already have good FR capabilities, 
inorganic boosting nano-additives are now required for better mechanical and FR 
performance. Inorganic–organic interactions can boost FR surface self-cleaning 
capabilities and performance by developing ultra-water-repellent surfaces with Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 101 
low SFE. Because of its remarkable chemical, optical, electrical, mechanical, and 
surface characteristics, metal oxide-based materials have been used in a variety of 
applications, including superhydrophobic FR coatings [94, 95]. 
The latest trend in eco-friendly, self-cleaning coatings is non-toxic FR 
nanocomposite coatings for vessel bottoms and the shipping sector. Biocompatibility, 
economics, corrosion resistance, and environmental safety are all exceptional 
features of graphene materials. Droplets of water pick up and eliminate dust, viruses, 
and bacteria as they come into contact with a surface. Self-cleaning is the term for 
this process. Superhydrophobic characteristics in marine coatings are advantageous 
for better antibacterial and anti-biofouling performance [96]. 
The surface’s weakness, which can be mechanically abraded, removes the 
coating’s self-cleaning properties due to degradation and layer removal is a 
major challenge. PDMS is often used to make superhydrophobic coatings. The 
introduction of various surface textures on PDMS with different textured materials, 
such as porous, hierarchical structure, or microsized repetitive pillars, creates 
an ideal blend of chemical functionality and topological homogeneity to prepare 
superhydrophobic surfaces. When expressing superhydrophobicity and self-cleaning 
properties, many FR techniques yield good results, but their scalability, robustness, 
or cost limit their industrial application potential. In this case, it is possible to 
build long-lasting, low-cost superhydrophobic FR and protective coatings. A 
superhydrophobic coating on multiple substrates was designed using PDMS to 
modify the synthesized MWCNTs/ZnO nanocomposites prepared via the sol-gel 
method (Fig. 5A) [97]. The engineered PDMS-MWCNTs/ZnO nanocomposite 
has superior superhydrophobic features with a water contact angle of 156°. The 
PDMS-MWCNTs/ZnO nanocomposite coating provides excellent anti-fouling and 
self-cleaning properties, as well as the ability to separate oil-water mixtures through 
a copper mesh coated with the prepared nanocomposite. 
Mechanical stability, FR self-cleaning, and barrier qualities useful for maritime 
coatings were predicted in organic/inorganic hybrid concept materials with 
dual-scale roughness [98]. A composite material for FR coatings with low free 
energy and superhydrophobicity based on PDMS loaded with ZnO NRs was reported 
(Fig. 5B) [99]. The filmed surface was applied on steel surface for micro/nanostructured 
non-wettable (WCA 158°) by dispersing 0.5 wt.% of ZnO NR fillers. The nanofillers 
exhibit stable surface at different pH values. Field experiments have shown that the 
silicone enriched with 0.5 wt.% ZnO NRs exhibits a high FR effectiveness when 
compared to the virgin silicone surface [100]. The findings were confirmed during 
a 180-day field test in seawater. To generate an increased ultrahydrophobic nano￾surface, scientists employed a nanocomposite of PDMS with vinyl terminals and 
Fe3O4 nanospheres. A series of efficient PDMS/ZnO@SiO2 hybrid composite was 
developed via the in-situ method for maritime navigation [101] (Fig. 6). 10
coating provides excellent anti-fouling and self-cleaning properties, as well as the ability to
separate oil-water mixtures through a copper mesh coated with the prepared nanocomposite.
Fig. 5.: (A) A superhydrophobic coating of PDMS modified MWCNTs/ZnO nanocomposites
designed on different substrates for various applications [97]; Copyright © 2020 Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved. PDMS/ZnO NR composite (B) Schematic design of PDMS/ZnO 
nano-composite surface manufactured using a hydrothermal and annealing technique for 
marine FR coating tested at different pH values and nanofiller content [100]; Copyright 2019,
produced after Elsevier Ltd. permission.
Mechanical stability, FR self-cleaning, and barrier qualities useful for maritime
coatings were predicted in organic/inorganic hybrid concept materials with dual-scale 
roughness [98]. A composite material for FR coatings with low free energy and
superhydrophobicity based on PDMS loaded with ZnO NRs was reported (Fig. 5B) [99].
The filmed surface was applied on steel surface for micro/nanostructured non-wettable 
(WCA 158°) by dispersing 0.5 wt.% of ZnO NR fillers. The nanofillers exhibit stable surface
at different pH values. Field experiments have shown that the silicone enriched with 0.5 
 
102 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 5. (A) A superhydrophobic coating of PDMS modified MWCNTs/ZnO nanocomposites designed 
on different substrates for various applications [97]; Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
PDMS/ZnO NR composite (B) Schematic design of PDMS/ZnO nano-composite surface manufactured 
using a hydrothermal and annealing technique for marine FR coating tested at different pH values and 
nanofiller content [100]; Copyright 2019, produced after Elsevier Ltd. permission. 
3.3 Anticorrosion Surfaces 
The severe environmental and economic consequences of metallic corrosion 
prompted the development of anticorrosion materials [102, 103]. Superhydrophobic 
nanostructured coatings could be used for several anticorrosion applications. 
Because of their wide-range of applications, steel surface protection during service 
operations is inevitable. A variety of organic-inorganic nanocomposite coatings 
have been designed to act as anticorrosive coatings of steel substrates. Surface 
roughness and reduced free energy are characteristics of anticorrosion PDMS-based 
nano-coatings with surface superhydrophobicity (WCA > 150° and CA hysteresis 
< 10) [104, 105]. By providing corrosion resistance and preventing adhesive failure, 
PDMS functions as a corrosion-resistant layer. It prevents blisters from forming and 
creates a barrier for corrosive ions. It has a higher electrical resistance and acts as a 11
wt.% ZnO NRs exhibits a high FR effectiveness when compared to the virgin silicone
surface [100]. The findings were confirmed during a 180-day field test in seawater. To
generate an increased ultrahydrophobic nano-surface, scientists employed a nanocomposite
of PDMS with vinyl terminals and Fe3O4 nanospheres. A series of efficient
PDMS/ZnO@SiO2 hybrid composite was developed via the in-situ method for maritime
navigation [101] (Fig. 6).
Fig. 6: Engineering of silicone/ZnO-SiO2 composite film via in-situ method and
hydrosilation curing technique. The TEM image of ZnO-SiO2 nanofiller and SEM of silicone
resin enriched with this nanofiller were illustrated [101]. Copyright 2017; reprinted with 
Elsevier's permission.
3.3. Anticorrosion surfaces
The severe environmental and economic consequences of metallic corrosion prompted the
development of anticorrosion materials [102,103]. Superhydrophobic nanostructured
coatings could be used for several anticorrosion applications. Because of their wide-range of
applications, steel surface protection during service operations is inevitable. Anticorrosion
performance of organic/inorganic nanocomposite coatings can extend the protect steel
constructions for long times. Surface roughness and reduced free energy are characteristics of
anticorrosion PDMS-based nano-coatings with surface superhydrophobicity (WCA >150°
and CA hysteresis <10 [104,105]. By providing corrosion resistance and preventing adhesive
failure, PDMS functions as a corrosion-resistant layer. It prevents blisters from forming and
creates a barrier for corrosive ions. It has a higher electrical resistance and acts as a corrosion
inhibitor by restricting the flow of external current between the anodes and cathodes [106].
Surface stability is a problem with most thin organic corrosion prevention coatings
[107]. Corrosion-resistance and water-repellent surfaces can be developed using organic–
inorganic nanocomposite [108]. It is advantageous to build corrosion-resistant coatings using
nano-ZnO fillers. Coatings with exceptional barrier qualities can be made using a graphene
nanosheet-like structure [109]. To avoid closely packed GO structures, GO nanosheets can be
decorated with nano-metal oxide particles [110,111]. 1D metal oxide NPs, notably NRs, have
Commented [A8]: In-situ: italicise
Commented [A9]: rephrase
 
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 103 
in-situ 
Fig. 6. Engineering of silicone/ZnO-SiO2 composite film via in-situ method and hydrosilation curing 
technique. The TEM image of ZnO-SiO2 nanofiller and SEM of silicone resin enriched with this nanofiller 
were illustrated [101]. Copyright 2017; reprinted with Elsevier’s permission. 
corrosion inhibitor by restricting the flow of external current between the anodes and 
cathodes [106]. 
Surface stability is a problem with most thin organic corrosion prevention 
coatings [107]. Corrosion-resistance and water-repellent surfaces can be developed 
using organic–inorganic nanocomposite [108]. It is advantageous to build 
corrosion-resistant coatings using nano-ZnO fillers. Coatings with exceptional 
barrier qualities can be made using a graphene nanosheet-like structure [109]. 
To avoid closely packed GO structures, GO nanosheets can be decorated with 
nano-metal oxide particles [110, 111]. 1D metal oxide NPs, notably NRs, have 
been used to anchor graphene materials by researchers [108]. Water-repellency of 
PDMS/GO-TiO2-diatomaceous Earth hybrid nanocomposite surface achieved surface 
durability and 96.7% corrosion inhibition [112]. NRs of ZnO exhibit large surface 
area as well as water-repellent characteristics [113]. A ternary composite of silicone 
resin filled with GO-ZnO exhibited corrosion-protection and ultrahydrophobic 
surface [114] (Fig. 7). To create GO nanosheets with a thickness of 2 nm, a modified 
Hummers’ method was employed. 
Nano-ZnO rods with 40 nm mean diameter and a prominently exposed crystal 
facet of [0001] were manufactured using a controlled hydrothermal methodology. A 
chemical bath deposition process was used to make a GO-ZnO hybrid nanofiller with 
precise size and morphology. To analyze such nanocomposites’ corrosion barrier 
characteristics, they were exposed to a 3.5% NaCl solution on the surface. According 
to Tafel polarization and EIS investigations, the addition of the nanofiller improved 
the coating’s corrosion protection. The maximum impedance value is found in the 
ternary nanocomposite coating of silicone resin enriched with 1 wt.% of GO-ZnO 
fillers. The PDMS coating system has been improved by 1 wt.%. The anticorrosion of 
GO-ZnO hybrid fillers were also demonstrated. The exceptional corrosion resistance 
was attributed to the efficient dispersion of the graphene-based nanocomposite. 12
been used to anchor graphene materials by researchers [108]. Water-repellency of
PDMS/GO-TiO2-diatomaceous Earth hybrid nanocomposite surface achieved surface
durability and 96.7% corrosion inhibition [112]. NRs of ZnO exhibit large surface area as
well as water-repellent characteristics [113]. A ternary composite of silicone resin filled with
GO-ZnO exhibited corrosion-protection and ultrahydrophobic surface [114] (Fig. 7). To
create GO nanosheets with a thickness of 2 nm, a modified Hummers' method was employed. 
Nano-ZnO rods with 40 nm mean diameter and a prominently exposed crystal facet
of [0001] were manufactured using a controlled hydrothermal methodology. A chemical bath
deposition process was used to make a GO-ZnO hybrid nanofiller with precise size and 
morphology. To analyze such nanocomposites' corrosion barrier characteristics, they were
exposed to a 3.5% NaCl solution on the surface. According to Tafel polarization and EIS
investigations, the addition of the nanofiller improved the coating's corrosion protection. The
maximum impedance value is found in the ternary nanocomposite coating of silicone resin
enriched with 1 wt.% of GO-ZnO fillers. The PDMS coating system has been improved by 1
wt.%. The anticorrosion of GO-ZnO hybrid fillers were also demonstrated. The exceptional
corrosion resistance was attributed to the efficient dispersion of the graphene-based
nanocomposite.
Fig. 7.: (A) A modified Hummers' procedure and a surfactant-assisted hydrothermal method
are used to synthesize GO nanosheets and ZnO NRs. (B) Chemical bath deposition 
methodology to prepare GO-ZnO nanofillers which were dispersed in the silicone matrix to 
produce ternary surface which is explained by the Cassie-Baxter approach for water￾repellency [114]. Copyright 2021, reprinted with Elsevier's permission.
3.4. Perovskite Solar Cells (PSCs)
PSCs research has advanced significantly in the previous decade [115,116]. PSCs are divided
into two categories, depending on the device architecture meso-superstructured and planar
104 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 7. (A) A modified Hummers’ procedure and a surfactant-assisted hydrothermal method are used 
to synthesize GO nanosheets and ZnO NRs. (B) Chemical bath deposition methodology to prepare 
GO-ZnO nanofillers which were dispersed in the silicone matrix to produce ternary surface which is 
explained by the Cassie-Baxter approach for water-repellency [114]. Copyright 2021, reprinted with 
Elsevier’s permission. 
3.4 Perovskite Solar Cells (PSCs) 
PSCs research has advanced significantly in the previous decade [115, 116]. PSCs 
can be divided into two classes, namely mesoporous PSCs and planar perovskite 
thin film solar cells, depending on whether a mesoporous layer is included in their 
structure or not [117]. TCO/hole transport layer/perovskite absorber/PC61BM/ 
cathode inverted structure revealed great commercialization prospects for planar 
PSCs [118]. This is due to the low-temperature processing, ease of use, high PCE, 
and large-scale manufacturing capacity. Their electrical properties are greatly 
influenced by charge injection and extraction at the cathode contact [119]. When 
a barrier remains between the interfacial contact between the Fermi level of certain 
electrode metals and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of organic material 
(PCBM) in organic optoelectronic devices, electron injection and extraction are 
poorer [120]. The interfacial contact between PCBM layer and metal electrode can 
reduce electronic extraction and injection. 
PSCs can be made more efficient using interfacial materials. The interfacial 
engineering of PSCs has received more attention as a result of this paradigm. PSC 
interfacial engineering has gotten a lot more attention as a result of this methodology. 
Because of its wide band gap semiconductor and high electron mobility, ZnO is 14
Fig. 8.: (A) ZnO NRs' TEM capture; (B) schematic illustration as well as SAED results for
ZnO-NRs; (C) schematic illustration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3xClx/PC61BM/CBLs/
Ag surface. (D) represents WCAs of ZnO NRs/BCP, ZnO NRs as well as BCP thin films
[127]. Copyright 2020, with permission from the ACS.
3.5. Antibacterial active agents
Controlled NPs hold a lot of promise in biological and health-related domains because of
their non-toxicity and biocompatibility [129-134]. NPs of ZnO, in particular, are 
antimicrobial and can deform and destroy bacterial cell membranes, causing intracellular
material leaks and, eventually, bacterial cell passing. ZnO NPs could be used to preserve
crops and food, according to these studies [135]. The antibacterial effectiveness of ZnO NPs
in controlling Rothia secludes in biofilm formation was established in biofilm growth
experiments on polystyrene plates [136]. The ciprofloxacin's bacterial resistance could be 
improved by enriching with ZnO NPs against S. aureus E. coli. The notion that the particles
interfere with NorA protein pumping could explain the enhanced activity of S. aureus in the
presence of ZnO NPs [137]. ZnO's antibacterial mobility may be influenced by the size and
closeness of regular white light. Preliminary research found that the smaller the molecule 
size, the more effective it is at preventing microbial growth. Furthermore, the author
speculated that ZnO surface coatings exhibit high antibacterial activity against different
microorganisms [138]. ZnO sensitivity was higher in gram-positive bacteria than in gram￾negative bacteria. Manufactured ZnO was also tested for antibacterial action against a variety
of pathogens, including foodborne illnesses. The antibacterial activity of the synthesized ZnO 
toward S. aureus and Salmonella typhimurium [139].
ZnO NPs can also be used in antibacterial coating materials to prevent
microorganisms from forming biofilms by connecting, colonizing, diffusing, and shaping
them. A comparable study between the antibacterial actions of ZnO NRs and SiC NWs with
varied diameter sizes, crystal orientation, and topological surface was investigated by Askar
et al. [140]. Both materials have high aspect ratio, surface area, and active centres to
microbes. ZnO NRs had better antibacterial performance than SiC NWs based on MIC,
immunomodulatory effect, and inhibitory zone. ZnO NRs outperformed SiC NWs in killing 
pathogenic bacteria, morphological disorder, and cellular membrane damage, as revealed by
scanning microscopic and confocal laser captures. Electrostatic interaction between the
negative bacterial surfaces and positive Zn+2 ions causes ZnO NRs to have a strong bacterial￾resistance capability (Fig. 9). Gram-positive bacterial strains are more susceptible to ZnO
Commented [A11]: incomplete
Fig. 8. (A) ZnO NRs’ TEM capture; (B) schematic illustration as well as SAED results for ZnO-NRs; 
(C) schematic illustration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3xClx/PC61BM/CBLs/Ag surface. 
(D) represents WCAs of ZnO NRs/BCP, ZnO NRs as well as BCP thin films [127]. Copyright 2020, with 
permission from the ACS. 
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 105 
widely used as a hole blocking layer and electron transport in modern photovoltaics 
[121]. Nano-ZnO is a suitable option for interfacial engineering as a CBL [122] 
because of its exceptional material stability and charge carrier extraction efficiency. 
In terms of nanostructures, shape, modification of surface, and composite hybrid, 
the performance of ZnO (employed as CBLs in polymeric resin and organic solar 
cells) has been investigated [123]. The influences of ZnO geometric structures on 
the solar cells’ photovoltaic efficiency has been investigated. The NR shape of ZnO 
is an excellent morphology for making photovoltaic instrument because it increases 
the active area of the solar cell while lowering electrical losses. Nano-ZnO seed layer 
serves as a hole barrier, preventing recombination at the cathode, while ZnO-NRs 
facilitate electron collection and transmission [124]. Changes in the crystallinity of 
the seed layer have no effect on ZnO-NR growth since it happens exclusively in the 
[002] plane. The NR shape, [002] orientation, reduced size, and enhanced solar cell 
hole blocking layer are all benefits of the NR form. 
Jia et al. [125] reported a ZnO-based solar cell surface device using 
(poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamion)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctyl)-
fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-diocty). The device’s efficiency was considerably increased 
as a result of more selective electron extraction. Between the PCBM layer and Ag 
electrode, Zhu et al. [126] employed a ZnO/TIPD film to improve inverted PSCs. In 
the ambient atmosphere, PCBM/ZnO/TIPD PSCs have a PCE and stability of 13.7%, 
which is greater than ZnO:TIPD or bare PCBM-based PSCs. For inverted PSCs with 
excellent power conversion efficiency (PCE), advanced cathode buffer layers (CBLs) 
based on ZnO [127] were developed (Fig. 8). After combining with bathocuproine 
(BCP), a controlled hydrothermal technique can be used to produce nano-ZnO rods 
with a mean diameter of 40 nm. Planar PSCs (p-i-n) with a device structure of (indium 
tin oxide/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3xClx/PC61BM/CBLs/Ag) were fabricated using 
the produced composite ZnO-NRs/BCP as a basis. The produced PSC composite 
exhibited 18.13% PCE and longer-term stability as compared with single-layer BCP 
(15.17%) or NRs of ZnO (16.55%) devices. The Narayanan group [128] created 
ZnO-NRs on microslide glass substrates with 150–450 nm mean size. 106 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
3.5 Antibacterial Active Agents 
Controlled NPs hold a lot of promise in biological and health-related domains 
because of their non-toxicity and biocompatibility [129–134]. NPs of ZnO, in 
particular, are antimicrobial and can deform and destroy bacterial cell membranes, 
causing intracellular material leaks and, eventually, bacterial cell passing. ZnO 
NPs could be used to preserve crops and food, according to these studies [135]. 
The antibacterial effectiveness of ZnO NPs in controlling Rothia secludes in biofilm 
formation was established in biofilm growth experiments on polystyrene plates 
[136]. The ciprofloxacin’s bacterial resistance could be improved by enriching with 
ZnO NPs against S. aureus E. coli. The notion that the particles interfere with NorA 
protein pumping could explain the enhanced activity of S. aureus in the presence 
of ZnO NPs [137]. ZnO’s antibacterial mobility may be influenced by the size and 
closeness of regular white light. Preliminary research found that the smaller the 
molecule size, the more effective it is at preventing microbial growth. Furthermore, 
the author speculated that ZnO surface coatings exhibit high antibacterial activity 
against different microorganisms [138]. ZnO sensitivity was higher in gram-positive 
bacteria than in gram-negative bacteria. Manufactured ZnO was also tested for 
antibacterial action against a variety of pathogens, including foodborne illnesses. The 
antibacterial activity against Salmonella typhimurium and S. aureus was checked 
and the synthesized ZnO showed good performance suggesting its conceivable 
application in the sustenance safeguarding field [139]. 
ZnO NPs can also be used in antibacterial coating materials to prevent 
microorganisms from forming biofilms by connecting, colonizing, diffusing, and 
shaping them. A comparable study between the antibacterial actions of ZnO NRs 
and SiC NWs with varied diameter sizes, crystal orientation, and topological surface 
was investigated by Askar et al. [140]. Both materials have high aspect ratio, surface 
area, and active centres to microbes. ZnO NRs had better antibacterial performance 
than SiC NWs based on MIC, immunomodulatory effect, and inhibitory zone. ZnO 
NRs outperformed SiC NWs in killing pathogenic bacteria, morphological disorder, 
and cellular membrane damage, as revealed by scanning microscopic and confocal 
laser captures. Electrostatic interaction between the negative bacterial surfaces and 
positive Zn+2 ions causes ZnO NRs to have a strong bacterial-resistance capability 
(Fig. 9). Gram-positive bacterial strains are more susceptible to ZnO NRs-induced 
microbial suppression than Gram-negative organisms because of their outer 
membrane proteins which protect them from cytotoxicity. ZnO NRs-based fabrics 
were also used to demonstrate wearable detection and antibacterial control without 
the use of an antiperspirant [134]. 
3.5.1 ZnO with Other Metals 
Bacterial-resistant inorganic nanomaterials are widely used against various microbial 
strains for various biological applications. When ZnO is coupled with other metals, 
it has antibacterial properties (Table 1). Inorganic antibiotic NPs are useful for a 
variety of antibacterial industrial fields. Mg/ZnO and Sb/ZnO nanocrystals have 15
NRs-induced microbial suppression than Gram-negative organisms because of their outer
membrane proteins which protect them from cytotoxicity. ZnO NRs-based fabrics were also
used to demonstrate wearable detection and antibacterial control without the use of an 
antiperspirant [134].
Fig. 9.: (A) Illustration of ZnO NRs' antibacterial mechanism against diverse bacterial
organisms, showing the interaction between bacterial surface and ZnO NRs. This can destroy
DNA and cause cellular-wall destruction, cell cytotoxicity, and microbial death. ZnO NRs'
TEM picture is included herein. (B) ZnO NRs confocal images versus S. aureus and E. coli
specimens and SEM of S. aureus after treatment with NRs [140]. Copyright 2021, produced 
with Elsevier's permission.
3.5.1. ZnO with other metals
Bacterial-resistant inorganic nanomaterials are widely used against various microbial strains
for various biological applications. When ZnO is coupled with other metals, it has
Fig. 9. (A) Illustration of ZnO NRs’ antibacterial mechanism against diverse bacterial organisms, showing 
the interaction between bacterial surface and ZnO NRs. This can destroy DNA and cause cellular-wall 
destruction, cell cytotoxicity, and microbial death. ZnO NRs’ TEM picture is included herein. (B) ZnO 
NRs confocal images versus S. aureus and E. coli specimens and SEM of S. aureus after treatment with 
NRs [140]. Copyright 2021, produced with Elsevier’s permission. 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 107 
been shown to have antibacterial action toward S. aureus, E. coli, and Aspergillus 
niger. The antibacterial performance of ZnO doped with other NPs was previously 
reported. After irradiation, ZnO doped with Sb increased from 12% in the dark 
to 93.4 percent after irradiation. Mg and Sb impregnated NPs demonstrated good 
bactericidal potencies at a 1:10 ratio, particularly against S. aureu and E. coli making 
them ideal antimicrobial nano-agent [141]. 
The antibacterial activities of ZnO paired with Mn ions produce a stable and 
long-term performance [138, 142]. Undoped and Mn-doped ZnO NPs, as well 
as fluorine doped ZnO exhibited high antibacterial activity against P. aeruginosa 
[143, 144]. Also, ZnO doped with Pd (5 mol%) composites showed enhanced 108 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications


Table 1. ZnO’s antibacterial properties when combined with other metals.


Materials Applications Microorganisms Ref. 
NRs of ZnO Food safety and 
agriculture 
E. coli [135] 
NRs of ZnO Formation of anti-biofilm R. dentocariosa and R. 
mucilaginosa 
[136] 
Ciprofloxacin with 
ZnO 
Resistance to antibiotics E. coli and S. aureus [137] 
NRs of ZnO Diseases that are 
contagious 
S. aureus [138] 
ZnO NPs Food preservation S. typhimurium and S. aureus [139] 
ZnO Applications in textiles E. coli [134] 
Mg-doped ZnO Several uses E. coli, S. aureus, Saccharomyces 
and Aspergillus niger 
[141] 
ZnO:Mn Biomedicine P. aeruginosa and E. coli [142, 143] 
ZnO:Mn:F Biomedicine B. subtilis [144] 
Pd doped ZnO Healthcare establishments P. aeruginosa and E. coli [145] 
Ag doped ZnO Biomedical equipment S. aureus and E. coli [146] 
Nd doped ZnO Biomedicine Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Streptococcus mutans 
[147] 
the antibacterial activity (64.07%) against E. coli. On the other hand, low 
Pd concentration of 1 mol% demonstrated the highest antibacterial activity 
(76.43%) toward P. aeruginosa [145]. Nano-ZnO doped with Ag are effective 
anti-infection agents and can be employed to manufacture biomedical devices. Also, 
polymer-Ag-ZnO nanostructured composite represents high antibacterial action for 
biomedical applications [146]. Also, Nd-doped ZnO nanomaterial exhibited high 
antimicrobial performance [147]. 
3.5.2 Synthetic Polymer/ZnO Composite 
Despite the fact that synthetic polymers are widely used in the pharmaceutical, 
culinary, textile, and other industries, they lack antibacterial characteristics. 
Polymer composites incorporating ZnO must be researched because materials with 
antibacterial characteristics on the exterior are needed for improved applications. 
Antibacterial characteristics of ZnO/polymer composites are summarized in Table 2. 
Because ZnO NPs operate as nucleating agents, and increasing their loading enhances 
crystallization temperature and crystallinity, the resulting composite exhibits 
superior crystalline behaviour when combined with poly (phenylene sulphide). 
They also demonstrated dynamic suppression of various bacterial strains as the ZnO 
concentration increased. The ZnO nanostructured composites have the potential to 
be used in medicine and dentistry as lightweight, high-performance materials. 
The inclusion of excellent-distributed ZnO NPs within a sunflower oil 
(SFO)-derived highly branched alkyd matrix has been shown to improve the cellular 
cytotoxicity and anticorrosive characteristics of composites for surface coatings Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 109 
Table 2. ZnO’s antibacterial properties when combined with polymers. 
Applications Microorganisms Ref. 
opylacrylamide) Implants in the Staphylococcus epidermidis and [148] 
Materials 
Poly(N-isopr
/ZnO composite Orthopaedics S. aureus 
ZnO/Hyperbranched 
polyurethane-urea 
Antimicrobial 
substances 
E. coli and S. aureus [149] 
High-density polyethylene/ 
ZnO composite 
Materials for 
photodegradation 
E. coli and S. aureus [150] 
Poly(ether ether ketone/ZnO 
composite 
Spina, Trauma, and 
orthopaedics 
E. coli and S. aureus [151] 
Poly(lactic acid)/ZnO/copper 
chlorophyll acid 
Applications in textiles E. coli [153] 
ZnO coated 
polyvinylchloride surface 
Packaging of food E. coli, S. aureus, Penicillium 
citrinum, Aspergillus flavus 
[154] 
Low-density polyethylene/ 
Ag/ZnO film 
Materials for packing Food pathogens [155] 
Nanohydroxyapatite/ZnO 
complex 
Applications in food 
packaging 
E. coli and S. aureus [156] 
Hydroxyapatite/ZnO 
composite 
Implantation of bone E. coli, S. aureus, and S. 
epidermidis 
[157] 
Ethylene diamine tetra acetic 
acid/sulfated β-cyclodextrin/ 
cotton fabric/ZnO composite 
Implantation of bone S. aureus and E. coli [158] 
ZnO-incorporated NR latex 
foam 
Applications in textiles S. aureus and E. coli [159] 
Brown seaweed Padina 
tetrastromatica-ZnO 
Materials that are 
antibacterial 
S. aureus and E. coli [160] 
ZnO and bacterial cellulose 
composites 
Applications in food 
packaging 
S. aureus and E. coli [161] 
[148] (Fig. 10). The cellular toxicity of mouse L929 fibroblast and MG-63 human 
osteoblast cells was assessed using the MTT test after 24 hours. Even at greater 
fillers’ percentages, the MTT assay revealed that the nanocomposites generated are 
non-toxic to cell lines. 
In polymer composites for surface coating, ZnO has been proposed as effective 
antibacterial active materials [149]. Hyperbranched polyurethane urea–ZnO hybrid 
coatings also increased antifungal capabilities (Aspergillus flavus) [150]. High 
density polyethylene/ZnO composite exhibited high antibacterial performance 
against E. coli and S. aureus [151]. Poly(ether ether ketone) enriched with ZnO NPs 
(0.5 wt.%) exhibited dynamic improvement, flame-retardant capability, and 
antibacterial performance toward S. aureus and E. coli bacterial strains [152]. 
Doumbia et al. [153] exhibited a high antibacterial activity of polylactide resin filled 
with ZnO (3 wt.%) fillers. 
Polylactide/ZnO/copper chlorophyll acid exhibits a 99.9% antibacterial activity 
against E. coli, with no noticeable loss in antibacterial efficacy during tolylene 18
aureus [151]. Poly(ether ether ketone) enriched with ZnO NPs (0.5 wt.%) exhibited dynamic
improvement, flame-retardant capability, and antibacterial performance toward S. aureus and
E. coli bacterial strains [152]. Doumbia et al. [153] exhibited a high antibacterial activity of
polylactide resin filled with ZnO (3 wt.%) fillers.
Fig. 10.: (A) Representation of SFO-derived highly branched alkyd synthesized using A2+B3
technique from prepared polyester and SFO; (B) schematic of the hydroxyl-terminated
hyperbranched polyester synthesised using the A2+B3 methodology. At a low concentration, 
(G) and (H) Alkyd/ZnO nanocomposite's TEM picture with well-distributed nanofillers.
L929 and MG-63 cells were used in an MTT assay to assess the cellular toxicity. Mechanical 
durability was assessed using a pull-off test for virgin and alkyd/ZnO nanocomposites [148].
Copyright 2017, produced with Elsevier's permission.
Polylactide/ZnO/copper chlorophyll acid exhibits a 99.9% antibacterial activity 
against E. coli, with no noticeable loss in antibacterial efficacy during tolylene diisocyanate
growth. This shows that the polylactide/ZnO/copper chlorophyll acid /tolylene diisocyanate
combination kills E. coli 99% of the time [154]. The biocidal effect of ZnO-polyvinyl alcohol
has been linked to particle size variations in pure ZnO. Polyvinyl chloride/ZnO composite
exhibited high antibacterial activity against S. aureus and E. coli and growth [155]. Low
density polyethyelene/Ag/ZnO exhibited high antibacterial performance for food packaging 
applications [156]. The biological activity of Ag-based compounds has been shown to be
extended by ZnO. In both the presence and absence of light, the hydroxyapatite/ZnO hybrid 
nanocomposite demonstrated good bioactivity and high antibacterial performance against
95.65% for E. coli (95.65%) and with S. aureus (99.45%) [157]. A nanocomposite of
hydroxyapatite/ZnO [158] induces a shift in microorganisms' static/bactericidal property. The
calcium phosphate additive to the previous nanocomposite could alter the hardness and break 
toughness slightly when compared to pure Hydroxyapatite. According to the study, a Commented [A14]: In capital?
Fig. 10. (A) Representation of SFO-derived highly branched alkyd synthesized using A2+B3 
technique from prepared polyester and SFO; (B) schematic of the hydroxyl-terminated hyperbranched 
polyester synthesised using the A2+B3 methodology. At a low concentration, (G) and (H) Alkyd/ZnO 
nanocomposite’s TEM picture with well-distributed nanofillers. L929 and MG-63 cells were used in an 
MTT assay to assess the cellular toxicity. Mechanical durability was assessed using a pull-off test for 
virgin and alkyd/ZnO nanocomposites [148]. Copyright 2017, produced with Elsevier’s permission. 
 
110 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
diisocyanate growth. This shows that the polylactide/ZnO/copper chlorophyll acid/ 
tolylene diisocyanate combination kills E. coli 99% of the time [154]. The biocidal 
effect of ZnO-polyvinyl alcohol has been linked to particle size variations in pure 
ZnO. Polyvinyl chloride/ZnO composite exhibited high antibacterial activity against 
S. aureus and E. coli and growth [155]. Low density polyethyelene/Ag/ZnO exhibited 
high antibacterial performance for food packaging applications [156]. The biological 
activity of Ag-based compounds has been shown to be extended by ZnO. In both 
the presence and absence of light, the hydroxyapatite/ZnO hybrid nanocomposite 
demonstrated good bioactivity and high antibacterial performance against 95.65% 
for E. coli (95.65%) and with S. aureus (99.45%) [157]. A nanocomposite of 
hydroxyapatite/ZnO [158] induces a shift in microorganisms’ static/bactericidal 
property. The calcium phosphate additive to the previous nanocomposite could alter 
the hardness and break toughness slightly when compared to pure hydroxyapatite. 
According to the study, a hyperbranched-ZnO composite containing 5 weight percent 
ZnO was able to attain extreme densification and hardness. 
4. Conclusions 
Due to their unique structure and physicochemical properties, ZnO nanomaterials 
have shown considerable promise in surface and biological applications. Recent  
 
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 111 
studies reported that the majority of research on metal oxide-based polymeric 
nanostructured composites exhibited various surface and biological applications. 
ZnO NPs’ dispersion in the polymer resin improve the chemical, physical, and 
antibacterial properties. ZnO added to a variety of polymer matrices would boost 
modulus and strength considerably. ZnO has emerged as a new green broad-spectrum 
antibacterial agent with low bacterial resistance and sustained release properties. 
The fundamental functions of size- and shape-controlled hybrid nanocomposites 
have been introduced for various ZnO applications. In addition, ZnO’s chemical 
variety provides the polymer with distinct characteristics. Surface, electrical, 
physico-mechanical, thermal, sensing, energy storage, and fuel cell features of 
ZnO/polymer composites are improved by well-distribution of ZnO nanofillers. 
Nanotechnology will be transformed by these prospective nanocomposites, which 
will have uses in electrical, mechanical, and chemical fields. Each example also 
contains remedies/proposals for overcoming hurdles and suturing extremely 
efficient ZnO nanocomposites. The final features are strongly influenced by the 
polymer/ZnO interfacial contact which can improve the mechanical, physical, and 
biological characteristics. ZnO nanofillers’ distribution is controlled during the 
manufacturing process, which affects reinforcing and, as a result, material properties. 
The cytotoxic effect on mammalian cells has also been investigated in recent years. 
Electrostatic interaction with the bacterial cells, oxidative stress, and cell entrapment 
are all well-known mechanisms for ZnO bacterial resistance. The necessary processes 
must be followed when using the appropriate reaction media, dissolution medium, 
polymer molecular weight, ZnO architecture, and desired output. The effect of 
structurally folded ZnO nanoagents tectonics, polymer nanocomposites, and building 
blocks on the production of exceptional antibacterial surface coatings is discussed in 
this chapter. Because of the functional groups in ZnO, the surface charge can be 
decreased even at low concentrations. This improves filler-polymer compatibility, 
resulting in composites with outstanding dielectric properties. The surface and 
biological percolation concentration displays efficient distribution of ZnO NPs with 
non-toxic and light-weight structure in various industry. As a result, many additional 
studies must be conducted in order to industrialize ZnO/polymer nanocomposites 
for human applications. This chapter will provide inspiration to the researchers in 
the field of material science, chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering. It will 
promote both academic and industrial research on various ZnO applications. 
References 
[1] Idumah, C.I., C.M. Obele, E.O. Emmanuel and A. Hassan. 2020. Recently emerging 
nanotechnological advancements in polymer nanocomposite coatings for anti-corrosion, 
anti-fouling and self-healing, surfaces interfaces. Surf. Interfaces 21: 100734. 
[2] Xavier, J.R. 2020. Electrochemical, mechanical and adhesive properties of surface modified 
NiO-epoxy nanocomposite coatings on mild steel. Mater. Sci. Eng. B 260: 114639. 
[3] Arukalam, I.O., E.O. Oguzie and Y. Li. 2016. Fabrication of FDTS-modified PDMS-ZnO 
nanocomposite hydrophobic coating with anti-fouling capability for corrosion protection of Q235 
steel. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 484: 220–228. 
[4] Hu, Y., S. Li, W. Kang, H. Lin and Y. Hu. 2021. Surface modification of Ti6Al4V alloy by 
polydopamine grafted GO/ZnO nanocomposite coating. Surf. Coat. Tech. 422: 127534.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[5] Panwar, V., G. Anoop, S.S. Gaur and S. Park. 2022. Enhanced sensing and electrical performance 
of hierarchical porous ionic polymer-metal nanocomposite via minimizing cracks in electrode. 
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 606: 837–847. 
[6] Behera, R. and K. Elanseralathan. 2022. A review on polyvinylidene fluoride polymer based 
nanocomposites for energy storage applications. J. Energy Storage 48: 103788. 
[7] Idumah, C.I. 2021. Novel advancements in green and sustainable polymeric nanocomposites 
coatings. Current Res. in Green Sustain. Chem. 4: 100173. 
[8] Karki, S., M.B. Gohain, D. Yadav and P.G. Ingole. 2021. Nanocomposite and bio-nanocomposite 
polymeric materials/membranes development in energy and medical sector: A review. Inter. J. 
Biological Macromol. 193: 2121–2139. 
[9] El-Safty, S.A. and M.A. Shenashen. 2020. Advanced nanoscale build-up sensors for daily life 
monitoring of diabetics. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 7(15): 2000153. 
[10] El-Safty, S.A. and M.A. Shenashen. 2020. Nanoscale dynamic chemical, biological sensor material 
designs for control monitoring and early detection of advanced diseases. Mater. Today Bio. 
5(15): 2000153. 
[11] Ponnamma, D., K.T. Varughese, M.A.A. Al-Maadeed and S. Thomas. 2017. Curing enhancement 
and network effects in multi-walled carbon nanotube-filled vulcanized natural rubber: evidence for 
solvent sensing. Polym. Int. 66: 931–938. 
[12] Goutham, S., S. Kaur, K.K. Sadasivuni, J.K. Bal, N. Jayarambabu, D.S. Kumar and K.V. Rao. 2017. 
Nanostructured ZnO gas sensors obtained by green method and combustion technique. Mater. Sci. 
Semicond. Process. 57: 110–115. 
[13] Goutham, S., D.S. Kumar, K.K. Sadasivuni, J.J. Cabibihan and K.V. Rao. 2017. Nanostructure 
ZnFe2O4 with Bacillus subtilis for detection of LPG at low temperature. J. Electron. Mater. 
46: 2334–2339. 
[14] Deshmukh, K., M.B. Ahamed, K.K. Sadasivuni, D. Ponnamma, M.A. AlMaadeed, S.K. Pasha and 
K. Chidambaram. 2017. Graphene oxide reinforced poly (4-styrenesulfonic acid)/polyvinyl alcohol 
blend composites with enhanced dielectric properties for portable and flexible electronics. Mater. 
Chem. Phys. 186: 188–201. 
[15] Stodolak, E., C. Paluszkiewicz, M. Bogun and M. Blazewicz. 2009. Nanocomposite fibres for 
medical applications. J. Mol. Struct. 924–926: 208–213. 
[16] Reda, A., S.A. El-Safty, M.M. Selim and M.A. Shenashen. 2021. Optical glucose biosensor built-in 
disposable strips and wearable electronic devices. Biosens. Bioelectronics 185: 113237. 
[17] Shenashen, M.A., M.Y. Emran, A. El Sabagh, M.M. Selim, A. Elmarakbi and S.A. El-Safty. 2022. 
Progress in sensory devices of pesticides, pathogens, coronavirus, and chemical additives and 
hazards in food assessment: Food safety concerns. Prog. Mater. Sci. 124: 100866. 
[18] Maizurah, M., A. Fazilah, M.H. Norzia and A.A. Karim. 2007. Antibacterial activity and mechanical 
properties of partially hydrolyzed sago starch-alginate edible film containing lemongrass oil. 
J. Food Sci. 72: C324–C330. 
[19] Domenek, S., P. Feuilloley, J. Gratraud, M.H. Morel and S. Guilbert. 2004. Biodegradability of 
wheat gluten based bioplastics. Chemosphere 54: 551–559. 
[20] Gomaa, H., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. Shenashen, S. Kawada, H. Yamaguchi, M. Abdelmottaleb and M.F. 
Cheira. 2018. Three-dimensional, vertical platelets of ZnO carriers for selective extraction of cobalt 
Ions from waste printed circuit boards. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 6(11): 13813–13825. 
[21] Gomaa, H., M.A. Shenashen, A. Elbaz, S. Kawada, T.A. Seaf El-Nasr, M.F. Cheira, A.I. Eid and 
S.A. El-Safty. 2021. Inorganic-organic mesoporous hybrid segregators for selective and sensitive 
extraction of precious elements from urban mining. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 604: 61–79. 
[22] Awual, M.R., M.A. Shenashen, A. Jyo, H. Shiwaku and T. Yaitaa. 2014. Preparing of novel fibrous ligand 
exchange adsorbent for rapid column-mode trace phosphate removal from water. J. Ind. Engin. Chem. 
20(5): 2840–2847. 
[23] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, A.M. Azzam, M.A. Shenashen, M.A. El-Sockary and O.M. Abo 
Elenien. 2019. Superhydrophobic silicone/TiO2–SiO2 nanorod-like composites for marine fouling 
release coatings. ChemistrySelect 4: 3395. 
[24] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. El-Sockary, A.I. Hashem, O.M. Abo Elenien, A.M. EL-Saeed 
and N.A. Fatthallah. 2015. Tailored design of Cu2O nanocube/silicone composites as efficient 
foul-release coatings. RSC Adv. 5(26): 19933–19943.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 113 
[25] Selim, M.S., M.A. Shenashen, S.A. El-Safty, M. Sakai, S.A. Higazy, M.M. Selim, H. Isago and A. 
Elmarakbi. 2017. Recent progress in marine foul-release polymeric nanocomposite coatings. Prog. 
Mater. Sci. 87: 1–32. 
[26] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. El-Sockary, A.I. Hashem, O.M. Abo Elenien, A.M. EL-Saeed and 
N.A, Fatthallah. 2015. Modeling of spherical silver nanoparticles in silicone-based nanocomposites 
for marine antifouling. RSC Adv. 5(78): 63175–63185. 
[27] Nagaraj, A., D. Govindaraj and M. Rajan. 2018. Magnesium oxide entrapped Polypyrrole hybrid 
nanocomposite as an efficient selective scavenger for fluoride ion in drinking water. Emerg. Mater. 
1: 25–33. 
[28] Selim, M.S., Z. Hao, P. Mo, J. Yi and H. Ou. 2020. Biobased alkyd/graphene oxide decorated 
with β–MnO2 nanorods as a robust ternary nanocomposite for surface coating. Colloid 
Surf. A: Physicochem. Engin. Asp. 601: 125057. 
[29] Selim, M.S., M.A. Shenashen, A.I. Hashem and S.A. El-Safty. 2018. Linseed oil-based alkyd/Cu2O 
nanocomposite coatings for surface applications. New J. Chem. 42: 10048–10058. 
[30] Selim, M.S., F.Q. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Huang and S. Kuga. 2017. Hyperbranched alkyd/magnetite￾silica nanocomposite as a coating material. Mater. Des. 135: 173–183. 
[31] Selim, M.S., H. Yang, Y. Li, F.Q. Wang, X. Li and Y. Huang. 2018. Ceramic hyperbranched 
alkyd/γ-Al2O3 nanorods composite as a surface coating. Prog. Org. Coat. 120: 217–227. 
[32] Sadasivuni, K.K., A. Saiter, N. Gautier, S. Thomas and Y. Grohens. 2013. Effect of molecular 
interactions on the performance of poly (isobutylene-co-isoprene)/graphene and clay 
nanocomposites. Colloid Polym. Sci. 291: 1729–1740. 
[33] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty and M.A. Shenashen. 2019. Chapter 8 - Superhydrophobic foul resistant 
and self-cleaning polymer coating. pp. 181–203. In: Samal, S.K., S. Mohanty and S.K. Nayak 
(eds.). Superhydrophobic Polymer Coatings. Elsevier. 
[34] Mazrouaa, A.M., N.A. Mansour, M.Y. Abed, M.A. Youssif, M.A. Shenashen and M.R. Awual. 
2019. Nano-composite multi-wall carbon nanotubes using poly (p-phenylene terephthalamide) for 
enhanced electric conductivity. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 7(2): 103002. 
[35] Ponnamma, D., K.K. Sadasivuni, Y. Grohens, Q. Guo and S. Thomas. 2014. Carbon nanotube 
based elastomer composites–an approach towards multifunctional materials. J. Mater. Chem. 
2: 8446–8485. 
[36] Selim, M.S., M.A. Shenashen, N.A. Fatthallah, A. Elmarakbi and S.A. El-Safty. 2017. In situ 
fabrication of onedimensional-based lotus-like silicone/γ-Al2O3 nanocomposites for marine fouling 
release coatings. ChemistrySelect 2(30): 9691–9700. 
[37] Kafy, A., K.K. Sadasivuni, A. Akther, S.K. Min and J. Kim. 2015. Cellulose/graphene nanocomposite 
as multifunctional electronic and solvent sensor material. Mater. Lett. 159: 20–23. 
[38] Selim, M.S., N.A. Fatthallah, S.A. Higazy, Z. Hao and P.J. Mo. 2022. A comparative study between 
two novel silicone/graphene-based nanostructured surfaces for maritime antifouling. J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 606: Part 1, 367–383. 
[39] Khairy, M., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. Shenashen and E.A. Elshehy. 2013. Hierarchical inorganic–organic 
multi-shell nanospheres for intervention and treatment of lead-contaminated blood. Nanoscale 
5(17): 7920–7927. 
[40] Azzam, A.M., M.A. Shenashen, M.M. Selim, H. Yamaguchi, I.M. El-Sewify, S. Kawada, A.A. 
Alhamid and S.A. El-Safty. 2017. Nanospherical inorganic α-Fe core-organic shell necklaces 
for the removal of arsenic (V) and chromium (VI) from aqueous solution. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 
109: 78–88. 
[41] Soliman, A.E., M.A. Shenashen, I.M. El‐Sewify, G.M. Taha, M. El‐Taher, H. Yamaguchi, 
A.S. Alamoudi, M.M. Selim and S.A. El‐Safty. 2017. Mesoporous organic–inorganic 
core–shell necklace cages for potentially capturing Cd2+ ions from water sources. ChemistrySelect 
2(21): 6135–6142. 
[42] El‐Sewify, I.M., M.A. Shenashen, A. Shahat, H. Yamaguchi, M.M. Selim, M.M.H. Khalil and 
S.A. El‐Safty. 2017. Ratiometric fluorescent chemosensor for Zn2+ ions in environmental samples 
using supermicroporous organic‐inorganic structures as potential platforms. ChemistrySelect 
2(34): 11083–11090.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[43] Wang, Z.S., C.H. Huang, Y.Y. Huang, Y.J. Hou, P.H. Xie, B.W. Zhang and H.M. Cheng. 2001. A 
highly efficient solar cell made from a dye-modified ZnO-covered TiO2 nanoporous electrode. 
Chem. Mater. 13: 678–682. 
[44] Khalifa, H., S.A. El-Safty, A. Reda, M.A. Shenashen and A.I. Eid. 2020. Anisotropic alignments of 
hierarchical Li2SiO3/TiO2@nano-C anode//LiMnPO4@nano-C cathode architectures for full-cell 
lithium-ion battery. Nation. Sci. Rev. 7(5): 863–880. 
[45] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. Shenashen, S.A. Higazy and A. Elmarakbi. 2020. Progress in 
biomimetic leverages for marine antifouling using nanocomposite coatings. J. Mater. Chem., B 
8: 3701. 
[46] Hirvikorpi, T., M. Vähä-Nissi, J. Nikkola, A. Harlin and M. Karppinen. 2011. Thin Al2O3 barrier 
coatings onto temperature-sensitive packaging materials by atomic layer deposition. Surf. Coat. 
Technol. 205: 5088–5092. 
[47] Janotti, A. and C.G. Van de Walle. 2009. Fundamentals of zinc oxide as a semiconductor. Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 2: 126501. 
[48] Hezam, A., K. Namratha, Q.A. Drmosh, D. Ponnamma, A.M. Saeed, V. Ganesh, B. Neppolian and 
K. Byrappa. 2018. Direct Z-scheme Cs2O–Bi2O3–ZnO heterostructures for photocatalytic overall 
water splitting. J. Mater. Chem. A 6: 21379–21388. 
[49] Parangusan, H., D. Ponnamma, M.A.A. Al-Maadeed and A. Marimuthu. 2018. Nanoflowerlike 
yttrium-doped ZnO photocatalyst for the degradation of methylene blue dye. Photochem. Photobiol. 
94: 237–246. 
[50] Seo, M., Y. Jung, D. Lim, D. Cho and Y. Jeong. 2013. Piezoelectric and field emitted properties of 
controlled ZnO nanorods on CNT yarns. Mater. Lett. 92: 177–180. 
[51] Yi, G.C., C. Wang and W.I. Park. 2005. ZnO nanorods: synthesis, characterization and applications. 
Semicond. Sci. Technol. 20: 22–34. 
[52] Li, R., S. Yabe, M. Yamashita, S. Momose, S. Yoshida, S. Yin and T. Sato. 2002. Synthesis and 
UV-shielding properties of ZnO- and CaO-doped CeO2 via soft solution chemical process. Solid 
State Ionics 151: 235–241. 
[53] Tam, K.H., A.B. Djurišić, C.M.N. Chan, Y.Y. Xi, C.W. Tse, Y.H. Leung and D.W.T. Au. 2008. 
Antibacterial activity of ZnO nanorods prepared by a hydrothermal method. Thin Solid Films 
516: 6167–6174. 
[54] Thangamani, G.J., K. Deshmukh, K.K. Sadasivuni, K. Chidambaram, M.B. Ahamed, D. Ponnamma, 
M.A.A. AlMaadeed and S.K.K. Pasha. 2017. Recent advances in electrochemical biosensor and gas 
sensors based on graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNT)—a review. Adv. Mater. Lett. 3: 196–205. 
[55] Suwanboon, S., P. Amornpitoksuk, A. Sukolrat, and N. Muensit. 2013. Optical and photocatalytic 
properties of La-doped ZnO nanoparticles prepared via precipitation and mechanical milling 
method. Ceram. Int. 39: 2811–2819. 
[56] Lee, S.D., S.H. Nam, M.H. Kim and J.H. Boo. 2012. Synthesis and photocatalytic property of ZnO 
nanoparticles prepared by spray-pyrolysis method. Phys. Procedia 32: 320–326. 
[57] Stanković, A., L. Veselinović, S.D. Škapin, S. Marković and D. Uskoković. 2011. Controlled 
mechanochemically assisted synthesis of ZnO nanopowders in the presence of oxalic acid. J. Mater. 
Sci. 46: 3716–3724. 
[58] Sharma, D., S. Sharma, B.S. Kaith, J. Rajput and M. Kaur. 2011. Synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles 
using surfactant free in-air and microwave method. Appl. Surf. Sci. 257: 9661–9672. 
[59] Kazeminezhad, I., A. Sadollahkhani and M. Farbod. 2013. Synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles and 
flower-like nanostructures using nonsono- and sono-electrooxidation methods. Mater. Lett. 
92: 29–32. 
[60] Ba-Abbad, M.M., A.A.H. Kadhum, A.B. Mohamad, M.S. Takriff and K. Sopian. 2013. The effect 
of process parameters on the size of ZnO nanoparticles synthesized via the sol–gel technique. J. 
Alloys Compd. 550: 63–70. 
[61] Aneesh, P.M., K.A. Vanaja and M.K. Jayaraj. 2007. Synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles by hydrothermal 
method. Proc. SPIE 6639: 66390J-1–66390J-9. 
[62] Wang, D., Y. Feng, L. Han and Y. Tian. 2008. Effect of wet surface treated nano-SiO2 on mechanical 
properties of polypropylene composite. J. Wuhan Univ. Technol. Mater. Sci. Ed. 23: 354–357. 
[63] Xiong, H.M., D.P. Xie, X.Y. Guan, Y.J. Tan and Y.Y. Xia. 2007. Water-stable blue-emitting ZnO@ 
polymer core–shell microspheres. J. Mater. Chem. 17: 2490.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 115 
[64] Shenashen, M.A., S.A. El-Safty and E.A. Elshehy. 2014. Synthesis, morphological control, 
and properties of silver nanoparticles in potential applications. Part. Part. Syst. Charact. 
31(3): 293–316. 
[65] Shenashen, M.A., A. Derbalah, A. Hamza, A. Mohamed and S.A. El-Safty. 2017. Antifungal 
activity of fabricated mesoporous alumina nanoparticles against root rot disease of tomato caused 
by Fusarium oxysporium. Pest Manag. Sci. 73(6): 1121–1126. 
[66] Dong, C., Y. Gu, M. Zhong, L. Li, K. Sezer, M. Ma and W. Liu. 2011. Fabrication of superhydrophobic 
Cu surfaces with tunable regular micro and random nano-scale structures by hybrid laser texture 
and chemical etching. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 211(7): 1234–1240. 
[67] Salta, M., J.A. Wharton, P. Stoodley, S.P. Dennington, L.R. Goodes, S. Werwinski, U. Mart, R.J.K. 
Wood and K.R. Stokes. 2010. Designing biomimetic antifouling surfaces. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A 
368: 4729–4754. 
[68] Sharma, B., P. Malik and P. Jain. 2018. Biopolymer reinforced nanocomposites: A comprehensive 
review. Mater. Today Commun. 16: 353–363. 
[69] Barthlott, W. and C. Neinhuis. 1997. Purity of the sacred lotus, or escape from contamination in 
biological surfaces. Planta 202(1): 1–8. 
[70] Mohamed, A.M.A., A.M. Abdullah and N.A. Younan. 2015. Corrosion behavior of superhydrophobic 
surfaces: A review. Arab. J. Chem. 8: 749–765. 
[71] Martines, E., K. Seunarine, H. Morgan, N. Gadegaard, C.D.W. Wilkinson and M.O. Riehle. 2005. 
Superhydrophobicity and superhydrophilicity of regular nanopatterns. Nano Lett. 5: 2097–103. 
[72] Onda, T., S. Shibuichi, N. Satoh and K. Tsujii. 1996. Super-water-repellent fractal surfaces. 
Langmuir 12: 2125–2127. 
[73] Selim, M.S., M.A. Shenashen, S.A. El-Safty, M. Sakai, S.A. Higazy, M.M. Selim, H. Isago and A. 
Elmarakbi. 2017. Recent progress in marine foul-release polymeric nanocomposite coatings. Prog. 
Mater. Sci. 87: 1–32. 
[74] Ding, Y., Y. Chen and J. Zheng. 2018. Dispersion of nanoparticles in polymer matrices with 
well-designed ligands as dispersant/emulsifier/comonomer. Compos. Sci. Technol. 156: 215–222. 
[75] Gao, X. and Z. Guo. 2017. Biomimetic superhydrophobic surfaces with transition metals and their 
oxides: A review. J. Bionic Engin. 14: 401–439. 
[76] Ma, M., Y. Mao, M. Gupta, K.K. Gleason and G.C. Rutledge. 2005. Superhydrophobic fabrics 
produced by electrospinning and chemical vapor deposition. Macromolecules 38(23): 9742–9748. 
[77] Yang, F. and Z. Guo. 2015. Characterization of micro-morphology and wettability of lotus leaf, 
waterlily leaf and biomimetic ZnO surface. J. Bionic Engin. 12: 88–97. 
[78] Gao, D. and M. Jia. 2015. Hierarchical ZnO particles grafting by fluorocarbon polymer derivative: 
Preparation and superhydrophobic behavior. Appl. Surf. Sci. 343: 172–180. 
[79] Chakradhar, R.P.S., V.D. Kumar, J.L. Rao and B.J. Basu. 2011. Fabrication of superhydrophobic 
surfaces based on ZnO–PDMS nanocomposite coatings and study of its wetting behaviour. Appl. 
Surf. Sci. 257(20): 8569–8575. 
[80] Pauporté, Th., G. Bataille, L. Joulaud and F.J. Vermersch. 2011. Well-aligned ZnO nanowire 
arrays prepared by seed-layer-free electrodeposition and their Cassie−Wenzel transition after 
hydrophobization. J. Phys. Chem. C 114: 194–202. 
[81] Mandal, S.K., K. Dutta, S. Pal, S. Mandal, A. Naskar, P.K. Pal, T.S. Bhattacharya, A. Singha, R. 
Saikh, S. De, and D. Jana. 2019. Engineering of ZnO/rGO nanocomposite photocatalyst towards 
rapid degradation of toxic dyes. Mater. Chem. Phys. 223: 456–465. 
[82] Wang, J., T. Tsuzuki, B. Tang, X. Hou, L. Sun and X. Wang. 2012. In-situ synthesis of rGO-ZnO 
nanocomposite for demonstration of sunlight driven enhanced photocatalytic and self-cleaning of 
organic dyes and tea stains of cotton fabrics. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 4(6): 3084–3090. 
[83] Kumbhakar, P., A. Pramanik, S. Biswas, A.K. Kole, R. Sarkar and P. Kumbhakar. 2018. Reduced 
Graphene oxide/ZnO composite: Reusable adsorbent for pollutant management. J. Hazardous 
Mater. 360: 193–203. 
[84] Chiu, W.S., P.S. Khiew, M. Cloke, D. Isa, T.K. Tan, S. Radiman, R. Abd-Shukor, M.A. Hamid, N.W. 
Huang, H.N. Lim and C.H. Chia. 2010. Photocatalytic study of two-dimensional ZnO nanopellets 
in the decomposition of methylene blue. Chem. Engin. J. 158: 345–352.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[85] Li, J., Q. Sun, Q. Yao, J. Wang, S. Han and C. Jin. 2015. Fabrication of robust superhydrophobic 
bamboo based on ZnO nanosheet networks with improved water-, UV-, and fire-resistant properties. 
J. Nanomater. 2015: 431426. 
[86] Polshettiwar, V., B. Baruwati and R.S. Varma. 2009. Self-assembly of metal oxides into 
three-dimensional nanostructures: Synthesis and application in catalysis. ACS Nano 3: 728–736. 
[87] Bitenc, M. and Z.C. Orel. 2009. Synthesis and characterization of crystalline hexagonal bipods of 
zinc oxide. Mater. Res. Bullet. 44: 381–387. 
[88] Dai, S., D. Zhang, Q. Shi, X. Han, S. Wang and Z. Du. 2013. Biomimetic fabrication and tunable 
wetting properties of three-dimensional hierarchical ZnO structures by combining soft lithography 
templated with lotus leaf and hydrothermal treatments. Crystengcomm 15: 5417–5424. 
[89] Hao, X., G. Wu, L. Wang, D. Lv, Y. Luo, L. Li and N. He. 2015. Superhydrophobic surfaces based 
on ZnO constructed hierarchical architectures. Microelectron. Engin. 141: 44–50. 
[90] He, H-Y. 2015. Photoinduced superhydrophilicity and high photocatalytic activity of ZnO–reduced 
graphene oxide nanocomposite films for self-cleaning applications. Mater. Sci. Semicon. Proc. 
31: 200–208. 
[91] Grant, T.M., D. Rennison and G. Cervin. 2022. Towards eco-friendly marine antifouling biocides – 
Nature inspired tetrasubstituted 2,5-diketopiperazines. Sci. Total Environ. 812: 152487. 
[92] Jin, H., L. Tian, W. Bing, J. Zhao and L. Ren. 2022. Bioinspired marine antifouling coatings: Status, 
prospects, and future. Prog. Mater. Sci. 124: 100889. 
[93] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, N.A. Fatthallah and M.A. Shenashen. 2018. Silicone/graphene 
oxide sheet-alumina nanorod ternary super hydrophobic antifouling coating. Prog. Org Coat. 
121: 160–172. 
[94] Selim, M.S., A. Elmarakbi, A.M. Azzam, M.A. Shenashen, A.M. EL-Saeed and S.A. El-Safty. 
2018. Ecofriendly design of superhydrophobic nano-magnetite/silicone composites for marine 
foul-release paints. Prog. Org. Coat. 116: 21–34. 
[95] Selim, M.S., H. Yang, F.Q. Wang, X. Li, Y. Huang and N.A. Fatthallah. 2018. Silicone/Ag@SiO2 
core–shell nanocomposite as a self-cleaning antifouling coating material. RSC Adv. 8: 9910–9921. 
[96] Bressy, C., J.-F. Briand, S. Lafond, R. Davy, F. Mazeas, B. Tanguy, C. Martin, L. Horatius, C. Anton, 
F. Quiniou and C. Compère. 2022. What governs marine fouling assemblages on chemically-active 
antifouling coatings? Prog. Org. Coat. 164: 106701. 
[97] Barthwal, S., W. Barthlott, B. Singh and N.B. Singh. 2020. Multifunctional and fluorine-free 
superhydrophobic composite coating based on PDMS modified MWCNTs/ZnO with self-cleaning, 
oil-water separation, and flame retardant properties. Colloids Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 
597: 124776. 
[98] Padmavathi, A.R., P.S. Murthy, A. Das, P. Veeramani and T.S. Rao. 2021. Inorganic nanoparticle 
embedded Polydimethyl siloxane nanocomposites for biofouling mitigation. Surf. Interf. 
25: 101171. 
[99] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. Shenashen, M.A. El-Sockary, O.M. Abo Elenien and A.M. 
EL-Saeed. 2019. Robust alkyd/exfoliated graphene oxide nanocomposite as a surface coating. 
Prog. Org. Coat. 126: 106–118. 
[100] Selim, M.S., H. Yang, F.Q. Wang, N.A. Fatthallah, Y. Huang and S. Kuga. 2019. Silicone/ZnO 
nanorod composite coating as a marine antifouling surface. Appl. Surf. Sci. 466: 40–50. 
[101] Selim, M.S., M.A. Shenashen, S. Hasegawa, N.A. Fatthallah, A. Elmarakbi and S.A. El-Safty. 
2017. Synthesis of ultrahydrophobic and thermally stable inorganic–organic nanocomposites for 
self-cleaning foul release coatings. Chem. Eng. J. 320: 653–666. 
[102] Ammar, S., K. Ramesh, I.A.W. Ma, Z. Farah, B. Vengadaesvaran, S. Ramesh and A.K. Arof. 2017. 
Studies on SiO2-hybrid polymeric nanocomposite coatings with superior corrosion protection and 
hydrophobicity. Surf. Coat. Technol. 324: 536–545. 
[103] Shaban, S.M., E.A. Badr, M.A. Shenashen and A.A. Farag. 2021. Fabrication and characterization 
of encapsulated Gemini cationic surfactant as anticorrosion material for carbon steel protection in 
down-hole pipelines. Environ. Tech. Innov. 23: 101603. 
[104] Qing, Y., C. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Zheng, X. Wang, Y. Shang, L. Wang and C. Liua. 2015. Facile 
fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces with corrosion resistance by nanocomposite coating of 
TiO2 and polydimethylsiloxane. Colloids Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 484: 471–477.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 117 
[105] Arukalam, I.O., E.E. Oguzie and Y. Li. 2018. Nanostructured superhydrophobicpolysiloxane 
coating for high barrier and anticorrosion applications in marine environment. J. Colloid Interface 
Sci. 512: 674–685. 
[106] Yilgör, E. and I. Yilgör. 2014. Silicone containing copolymers: Synthesis, properties and 
applications. Prog. Polym. Sci. 39(6): 1165–1195. 
[107] Ejenstam, L., A. Swerin, J. Pan and P.M. Claesson. 2015. Corrosion protection by hydrophobic 
silica particle-polydimethylsiloxane composite coatings. Corros. Sci. 99: 89–97. 
[108] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. Shenashena, M.A. El-Sockary, O.M. Abo Elenien and A.M. 
EL-Saeed. 2019. Robust alkyd/exfoliated graphene oxide nanocomposite as a surface coating. 
Prog. Org. Coat. 126: 106–118. 
[109] Othman, N.H., M.C. Ismail, M. Mustapha, N. Sallih, K.E. Kee and R.A. Jaal. 2019. 
Graphene-based polymer nanocomposites as barrier coatings for corrosion protection. Prog. Org. 
Coat. 135: 82–99. 
[110] McAllister, M.J., J.-L. Li, D.H. Adamson, H.C. Schniepp, A.A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, 
D.L. Milius, R. Car, R.K. Prud’homme and I.A. Aksay. 2007. Single sheet functionalized graphene 
by oxidation and thermal expansion of graphite. Chem. Mater. 19: 4396. 
[111] Gutierrez-Gonzalez, C.F., A. Smirnov, A. Centeno, A. Fern´andez, B. Alonso, V.G. Rocha, R. 
Torrecillas, A. Zurutuza and J.F. Bartolome. 2015. Wear behavior of graphene/alumina composite. 
Ceram. Inter. 41(6): 7434–7438. 
[112] Nine, M.J., M.A. Cole, L. Johnson, D.N.H. Tran and D. Losic. 2015. Robust superhydrophobic 
graphene-based composite coatings with self-cleaning and corrosion barrier properties. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 7: 28482–28493. 
[113] Wang, T., Y. Yun, M. Wang, C. Li, G. Liu and W. Yang. 2019. Superhydrophobic ceramic hollow 
fiber membrane planted by ZnO nanorod-array for high-salinity water desalination. J. Taiwan. Inst. 
Chem. Eng. 105: 17–27. 
[114] Selim, M.S., S.A. El-Safty, M.A. Abbas and M.A. Shenashen. 2021. Facile design of graphene 
oxide-ZnO nanorod-based ternary nanocomposite as a superhydrophobic and corrosion-barrier 
coating. Colloid. Surf. A: Physicochem. Engin. Asp. 611: 125793. 
[115] Green, M.A., A. Ho-Baillie and H.J. Snaith. 2014. The Emergence of Perovskite solar cells. Nat. 
Photonics 8: 506–514. 
[116] Nogay, G., F. Sahli, J. Werner, R. Monnard, M. Boccard, M. Despeisse, F. Haug, Q. Jeangros, A. 
Ingenito and C. Ballif. 2019. 25.1%-efficient monolithic Perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell based 
on A p-type monocrystalline textured silicon wafer and high-temperature passivating contacts. ACS 
Energy Lett. 4: 844–845. 
[117] Ball, J.M., M.M. Lee, A. Hey and H.J. Snaith. 2013. Low-temperature processed 
meso-superstructured to thin-film Perovskite solar cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 6: 1739–1743. 
[118] You, J., Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.B. Song, C.C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. 
Yang. 2014. Low-temperature solution-processed Perovskite solar cells with high efficiency and 
flexibility. ACS Nano 8: 1674–1680. 
[119] Elseman, A.M., L. Luo and Q.L. Song. 2020. Self-doping synthesis of trivalent Ni2O3 as a hole 
transport layer for high fill factor and efficient inverted Perovskite solar cells. Dalton Trans. 
49: 14243–14250. 
[120] Yip, H.L., S.K. Hau, N.S. Baek, H. Ma and A.K.Y. Jen. 2008. Polymer solar cells that use 
self-assembled-monolayer-modified Zno/metals as cathodes. Adv. Mater. 20: 2376–2382. 
[121] Wang, K., V. Körstgens, D. Yang, N. Hohn, S.V. Roth and P. Muller-Buschbaum. 2018. Morphology ̈
control of low temperature fabricated ZnO nanostructures for transparent active layers in all 
solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells. J. Mater. Chem. A 6: 4405–4415. 
[122] Liang, Z., Q. Zhang, O. Wiranwetchayan, J. Xi, Z. Yang, K. Park, C. Li and G. Cao. 2012. Effects 
of the morphology of a ZnO buffer layer on the photovoltaic performance of inverted polymer solar 
cells. Adv. Funct. Mater. 22: 2194–2201. 
[123] Liang, Z., R. Gao, J.L. Lan, O. Wiranwetchayan, Q. Zhang, C. Li and G. Cao. 2013. Growth of 
vertically aligned ZnO nanowalls for inverted polymer solar cells. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
117: 34–40.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[124] Wang, J.C., W.T. Weng, M.Y. Tsai, M.K. Lee, S.F. Horng, T.P. Perng, C.C. Kei, C.C. Yu and H.F. 
Meng. 2010. Highly efficient flexible inverted organic solar cells using atomic layer deposited ZnO 
as electron selective layer. J. Mater. Chem. 20: 862–866. 
[125] Jia, X., L. Zhang, Q. Luo, H. Lu, X. Li, Z. Xie, Y. Yang, Y.Q. Li, X. Liu and C.Q. Ma. 2016. Power 
conversion efficiency and device stability improvement of inverted Perovskite solar cells by using 
a ZnO:PFN composite cathode buffer layer. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8: 18410–18417. 
[126] Zhu, L., C. Chen, Y. Weng, F. Li and Q. Lou. 2019. Enhancing the performance of inverted 
Perovskite solar cells by inserting a ZnO:TIPD film between PCBM layer and Ag electrode. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 198: 11–18. 
[127] Selim, M.S., A.M. Elseman and Z. Hao. 2020. ZnO nanorods: An advanced cathode buffer layer for 
inverted Perovskite solar cells. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 3(12): 11781–11791. 
[128] Narayanan, G.N. and K. Annamalai. 2016. Role of hexamethylenetetramine concentration on 
structural, morphological, optical and electrical properties of hydrothermally grown zinc oxide 
nanorods. J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron. 27: 12209–12215. 
[129] Selim, M.S., A.M. Azzam, M.A. Shenashen, S.A. Higazy, B.B. Mostafa and S.A. El-Safty. 2024. 
Comparative study between three carbonaceous nanoblades and nanodarts for antimicrobial 
applications. J. Environ. Sci. 136: 594–605. 
[130] Azzam, A.M., M.A. Shenashen, B.B. Mostafa, W.A. Kandeel and S.A. El-Safty. 2019. Antibacterial 
activity of magnesium oxide nano-hexagonal sheets for wastewater remediation. Environ. Prog. 
Sustainable Energy 38: S260–S266. 
[131] Emran, M.Y., M.A. Shenashen, AI Eid, M.M. Selim and S.A. El-Safty. 2022. Portable sensitive 
and selective biosensing assay of dopamine in live cells using dual phosphorus and nitrogen doped 
carbon urchin-like structure. Chem. Eng. J. 430: 132818. 
[132] Azzam, A.M., M.A. Shenashen, M.M. Selim, A.S. Alamoudi and S.A. El-Safty. 2017. Hexagonal 
Mg(OH)2 nanosheets as antibacterial agent for treating contaminated water sources. ChemistrySelect 
2(35): 11431–11437. 
[133] Azzam, A.M., M.A. Shenashen, A. Tawfik, N.A. Safwat, B.B. Mostafa and S.A. El-Safty. 2022. 
Antimicrobial activity of mesoporous organic functionalized hexagon Fe3O4 nanosheets for 
wastewater treatment. Environ. Nanotech. Monit. Manag. 18: 100739. 
[134] Hatamie, A., A. Khan, M. Golabi, A.P. Turner, V. Beni, W.C. Mak, A. Sadollahkhani, H. Alnoor, B. 
Zargar, S. Bano and O. Nur. 2015. Zinc oxide nanostructure-modified textile and its application to 
biosensing, photocatalysis, and as antibacterial material. Langmuir 31: 10913–10921. 
[135] Liu, Y., L. He, A. Mustapha, H. Li, Z.Q. Hu and M. Lin. 2009. Antibacterial activities of zinc oxide 
nanoparticles against Escherichia coli O157:H7. J. Appl. Microbiol. 107: 1193–1201. 
[136] Khan, S.T., M. Ahamed, J. Musarrat and A.A. Al-Khedhairy. 2014. Anti-biofilm and antibacterial 
activities of zinc oxide nanoparticles against the oral opportunistic pathogens, Rothia dentocariosa 
and Rothia mucilaginosa. Eur. J. Oral Sci. 122: 397–403. 
[137] Banoee, M., S. Seif, Z.E. Nazari, P. Jafari-Fesharaki, H.R. Shahverdi, A. Moballegh, K.M. 
Moghaddam and A.R. Shahverdi. 2010. ZnO nanoparticles enhanced antibacterial activity of 
ciprofloxacin against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B Appl. 
Biomater. 93: 557–561. 
[138] Jones, N., B. Ray, K.T. Ranjit and A.C. Manna. 2008. Antibacterial activity of ZnO nanoparticle 
suspensions on a broad spectrum of microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 279: 71–76. 
[139] Tayel, A.A., W.F. El-Tras, S. Moussa, A.F. El-Baz, H. Mahrous, M.F. Salem and L. Brimer. 
2011. Antibacterial action of zinc oxide nanoparticles against food borne pathogens. J. Food Saf. 
31: 211–218. 
[140] Askar, A.A., M.S. Selim, S.A. El-Safty, A.I. Hashem, M.M. Selim and M.A. Shenashen. 2021. 
Antimicrobial and immunomodulatory potential of nanoscale hierarchical one-dimensional zinc 
oxide and silicon carbide materials. Mater. Chem. Phys. 263: 124376. 
[141] Zhang, X., R. Zhou, P. Liu, L. Fu, X. Lan and G. Gong. 2011. Improvement of the antibacterial 
activity of nanocrystalline zinc oxide by doping Mg (II) or Sb (III). Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol. 
8: 1087–10981. 
[142] Ravichandran, K., K. Karthika, B. Sakthivel, N.J. Begum, S. Snega, S. Swaminathan and 
V. Senthamilselvi. 2014. Tuning the combined magnetic and antibacterial properties of ZnO 
nanopowders through Mn doping for biomedical applications. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 358: 50–55.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zno Nanostructured Materials for Surface and Biological Applications 119 
[143] Rajendar, V., B. Rajitha, T. Dayakar, C.S. Chakra and K.V. Rao. 2016. Systematic approach on 
the fabrication of Mn doped ZnO semiconducting nanoparticles by mixture of fuel approach for 
antibacterial applications. Rend. Fis. Acc. Lincei. 27: 521–531. 
[144] Ravichandran, K., K. Karthika, M. Baneto, K. Shanthakumari and K.C. Lalithambika. 2015. 
Inducing superparamagnetic behavior and enhancing antibacterial efficiency of ZnO nanopowders 
through Mn+ F doping. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 26: 1812–1819. 
[145] Cruz-Reyes, I., A.D.J. Morales-Ramírez, D. Jaramillo-Vigueras, O. Rodriguez-Nava, R. Garro￾Matamoros and J. Moreno-Palmerin. 2015. Antimicrobial activity of Pd-doped ZnO sol-gel-derived 
films. Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol. 12: 1088–1095. 
[146] Michael, R.J.V., B. Sambandam, T. Muthukumar, M.J. Umapathy and P.T. Manoharan. 2014. 
Spectroscopic dimensions of silver nanoparticles and clusters in ZnO matrix and their role in 
bioinspired antifouling and photocatalysis. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 16: 8541–8555. 
[147] Vijayaprasath, G., R. Murugan, S. Palanisamy, N.M. Prabhu, T. Mahalingam, Y. Hayakawa and 
G. Ravi. 2015. Structural, optical and antibacterial activity studies of neodymium doped ZnO 
nanoparticles. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 26: 7564–7576. 
[148] Selim, M.S., M.A. Shenashen, A. Elmarakbi, A.M. ELSaeed, M.M. Selim and S.A. El-Safty. 2017. 
Sunflower oil-based hyperbranched alkyd/spherical ZnO nanocomposite modeling for mechanical 
and anticorrosive applications. RSC Adv. 7: 21796–21808. 
[149] Schwartz, V.B., F. Thetiot, S. Ritz, S. Putz, L. Choritz, A. Lappas, R. Forch, K. Landfester and 
U. Jonas. 2012. Antibacterial surface coatings from zinc oxide nanoparticles embedded in poly 
(n-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel surface layers. Adv. Funct. Mater. 22: 2376–2386. 
[150] Jena, K.K., R. Narayan and K.V. Raju. 2012. Investigation of the effect of ZnO nanoparticles 
on the thermomechanical and microbial properties of hyperbranched polyurethane-urea hybrid 
composites. Polym. Int. 61: 1309–1317. 
[151] Li, S.C. and Y.N. Li. 2010. Mechanical and antibacterial properties of modified nano-ZnO/high￾density polyethylene composite films with a low doped content of nano-ZnO. Int. J. Appl. Polym. 
Sci. 116: 2965–2969. 
[152] Frederickson, C.J., J.Y. Koh and A.I. Bush. 2005. The neurobiology of zinc in health and disease. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6: 449–462. 
[153] Doumbia, A.S., H. Vezin, M. Ferreira, C. Campagne and E. Devaux. 2015. Studies of polylactide/ 
zinc oxide nanocomposites: influence of surface treatment on zinc oxide antibacterial activities in 
textile nanocomposites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 132: 41776. 
[154] Fan, W., Y. Zhao, A. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Cao and J. Chen. 2015. Effect of a chain extender on the 
properties of poly (lactic acid)/zinc oxide/copper chlorophyll acid antibacterial nanocomposites. 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 132: 41561. 
[155] Li, X., Y. Xing, Y. Jiang, Y. Ding and W. Li. 2009. Antimicrobial activities of ZnO powder coated 
PVC film to inactivate food pathogens. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 44: 2161–2168. 
[156] Emamifar, A., M. Kadivar, M. Shahedi and S. Solimanian-Zad. 2012. Effect of nanocomposite 
packaging containing Ag and ZnO on reducing pasteurization temperature of orange juice. J. Food 
Process. Preserv. 36: 104–112. 
[157] Zhou, G., Y. Li, W. Xiao, L. Zhang, Y. Zuo, J. Xue and J.A. Jansen. 2008. Synthesis, characterization, 
and antibacterial activities of a novel nanohydroxyapatite/zinc oxide complex. J. Biomed. Mater. 
Res. 85: 929–937. 
[158] Saha, N., K. Keskinbora, E. Suvaci and B. Basu. 2010. Sintering, microstructure, mechanical, and 
antimicrobial properties of HAp-ZnO biocomposites. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomater. 
95: 430–440. 
[159] Rathnayake, W.G.I.U., H. Ismail, A. Baharin, I.M.C.C.D. Bandara and S. Rajapakse. 2014. 
Enhancement of the antibacterial activity of natural rubber latex foam by the incorporation of zinc 
oxide nanoparticles. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 131: 39601. 
[160] Pandimurugan, R. and S. Thambidurai. 2014. Seaweed-ZnO composite for better antibacterial 
properties. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 131: 40948. 
[161] Janpetch, N., N. Saito and R. Rujiravanit. 2016. Fabrication of bacterial cellulose-ZnO composite 
via solution plasma process for antibacterial applications. Carbohydr. Polym. 148: 335–344. 7


Electrochemical Flaking
of Graphene in
Aqueous System

 Kumar Anurag1,2,* and S.R. Kumar1,2 
1. Introduction 
Graphene is a monolayer strip of carbon atoms held tightly together by a hexagonal 
honeycomb pattern. A honeycomb lattice of graphene’s carbon atoms with the nearest 
neighbour spacing of 2.45 A° is formed. Three of the four valence electrons in carbon 
are used in the Sp2
 hybridization of the bonding orbitals. It is a carbon allotrope with 
a 0.142 nm molecular bond length. Layers of graphene are piled on top of one another 
to form graphite with only an interplanar spacing of 0.335 nm. Vanderwaals force, 
which can be conquered during flaking of graphene from graphite, holds the layers 
of graphene together. Researchers are attracted to graphene, a wonder substance that 
was discovered in 2004 and has amazing qualities like being the lightest known 
material to man (with 0.77 mg or less per square metre), the best-known conductor of 
electricity (higher than 200,000 Cm2
V–1S–1 electron mobility), elevated surface area, 
etc. Graphene is the strongest material yet pioneered, comprising 130 GPa in tensile 
strength and 1 TPa in Young’s modulus, rendering it 100–300 times stronger than 
steel. It has 13X greater electrical conductivity than copper. Graphene transfers heat 
in a different way than diamond, and it does so with twice the efficiency. Even the 
tiniest atom (helium) cannot travel through a monolayer graphene sheet because it is 
impermeable. Additionally, it may be stretched up to 20% beyond its original length. 
1 Department of Applied Sciences and Humanities.

 2 Thin Film Laboratory, National Institute of Advanced Manufacturing Technology (Formerly National 
Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology), Ranchi - 834003, India. 
* Corresponding author: pdash_022019@niamt.ac.in Electrochemical Flaking of Graphene in Aqueous System 121 
It is used to create transparent conducting electrodes and is 97.7% transparent. The 
2P orbitals that form the π state bonds that dislodge over the strips of carbon that 
compose graphene are responsible for this remarkable characteristic of graphene. 
The manufacturing of numerous contemporary electronics device applications is 
ideally suited to graphene’s outstanding characteristics. Graphene is used in electronic 
devices including supercapacitors [1], batteries [2], transistors [3, 4], solar cells 
[5, 6], and sensors [7] because of its exceptional characteristics. Graphene has 
outstanding mechanical, gas barrier, and thermal properties, making it a valuable 
admixture in composites [8–11]. Incredibly significant types of applications 
include those for conductive coatings, energy storage [12], printed electronics, 
etc. Because current electronic devices are made utilising the printable electronics 
technique, colloidal graphene solution must be created for use in solution form in 
order to employ it effectively in modern applications. The availability of graphene 
in colloidal solution form is necessary for developing electronics components like 
energy storage devices and sensors using printable electronics. This will enable the 
easier production of these flexible electronics based on graphene employing screen 
printing, spray coating, and brush coating processes. The absence of industrial scale 
ways to create good quality graphene is one of the limitations of the applications of 
graphene [13, 14]. 
There are numerous fabrication techniques available today for making 
graphene. The top-down method and the bottom-up method are the two basic 
categories into which graphene production techniques may be divided [15]. Different 
techniques of production result in graphene with varying dimensions, qualities, and 
forms. Different approaches provide options suitable for particular purposes [16]. 
Liquid-phase exfoliation, reduction of graphene oxide and mechanical exfoliation 
make up top-down synthesis [17]. Three processes are required to create reduced 
graphene oxide (rGO): first, graphite oxide (GO) is chemically oxidised; second, 
GO is exfoliated; and third, GO is reduced [18]. The primary issue with rGO is that 
chemical oxidation breaks down graphene’s electrical structure, which restricts its 
use in microelectronics and other fields [19]. The first proven method to extract 
graphene on a substrate using scotch tape is mechanical exfoliation. Although this 
method produces graphene of great quality and with few flaws, it is not appropriate 
for mass production. Its limited usefulness is due to its low repeatability [20–22]. 
LPE entails sonication or high-shear mixing to exfoliate natural graphite [23]. 
Although defect-free monolayer or few-layer graphene can be generated using 
LPE, its industrialisation is constrained by low graphene concentration and lengthy 
sonication times [24]. On the other hand, a bottom-up production method uses 
an additive process to construct the required things out of atoms and molecules. 
Bottom-up fabrication can create graphene with regulated thickness, free of flaws, 
and in vast quantities. But this approach has several limitations. This approach is 
constrained by its small size, high temperature, and high price. 
As a top-down fabrication method, electrochemical exfoliation in aqueous phase 
will be used to synthesize graphene in this article. DC voltage and electrolytes are 
needed for this exfoliating technique. Figure 1 depicts the various steps involved in 
electrochemical exfoliation. The lack of a more expensive production method and S.No. Graphene fabrication
method
Comparative advantage/disadvantage
1. Micromechanical exfoliation Poor reproducibility and not amenable for large
scale production
2. CVD Expensive and Poor scalability
3. Epitaxial growth Requires high temperature, Difficult in graphene
layer transfer
4. Liquid Phase exfoliation Prolonged sonication time required
5. Hummer’s method Harmful agents, usage of acids and impure
graphene
6. Electrochemical exfoliation One step-method, economical, facial and doesn’t
require any harsh chemicals
The aim of this project is to synthesise graphene in an aqueous media using an electrochemical
exfoliation method that yields high concentrations of graphene with few imperfections that are
appropriate as electrode materials for supercapacitors. The advantage of flaking graphene in 
aqueous phase is that water is typically thought of as the optimal dispersion medium, whereas the
available solvents for dispersing graphite are both pricey and dangerous [26].
Commented [A7]: correct?
Fig. 1. Steps involved in the electrochemical exfoliation procedure.


 
Table 1. Comparative advantage of electrochemical technique against alternatives.


S.No. Graphene fabrication method Comparative advantage/disadvantage 
1. Micromechanical exfoliation Poor reproducibility and not amenable for large scale 
production 
2. CVD Expensive and Poor scalability 
3. Epitaxial growth Requires high temperature, Difficult in graphene layer 
transfer 
4. Liquid Phase exfoliation Prolonged sonication time required 
5. Hummer’s method Harmful agents, usage of acids and impure graphene 
6. Electrochemical exfoliation One step-method, economical, gentle method and doesn’t 
require any harsh chemicals 
122 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
large-scale manufacturing process prevents graphene from being used extensively. 
Electrochemical exfoliation is a promising technique for the production of graphene, 
as it is less time-consuming, cost-effective, and simpler to implement than other 
methods [25]. Table 1 compares the electrochemical exfoliation method’s comparative 
advantages to those of alternative fabrication techniques. 
The aim of this project is to synthesise graphene in an aqueous media using an 
electrochemical exfoliation method that yields high concentrations of graphene with 
few imperfections that are appropriate as electrode materials for supercapacitors. 
The advantage of flaking graphene in aqueous phase is that water is typically thought 
of as the optimal dispersion medium, whereas the available solvents for dispersing 
graphite are both pricey and dangerous [26].  
Electrochemical Flaking of Graphene in Aqueous System 123 
2. Experimental Methods 
The process of electrochemical exfoliation was used to create graphene. FeSO4 
(AR grade) in the concentration of 0.1 M was dissolved in 40 ml of distilled water 
to create the electrolyte for the exfoliation. The bath was then loaded with two high 
quality natural graphite rods. Throughout the experiment, the spacing between the 
two high quality electrodes was maintained at around 2 cm. The two electrodes were 
subjected to static potential of 15 V. After 30 minutes, the anode graphite electrode 
started to corrode, and after that, at the bottom of the reaction chamber, a black 
precipitate began to develop gradually. The electrolyte was finally created in a 
homogeneous solution. After six hours, the precipitate was removed from the reaction 
chamber. The precipitate underwent a thorough cleaning with ethanol and distilled 
water before being dried for two hours at 60°C. For additional characterization, the 
finished product was acquired. With a scan rate of 3°/minute, the XRD of graphene 
and graphite was carried out on the Rigaku MiniFlex 600 apparatus from 20 to 90° 
of 2θ. Graphene’s morphology was examined with the Jeol JSM-6390LV at a 20 kV 
accelerating voltage with EDS detector. A laser beam with an agitation wavelength 
of 514 nm was used to record the Raman spectra using a Renishaw Plo Micro Raman 
spectrometer. Using Shimadzu Corp. IR - Prestige 21, FTIR spectrum of graphene 
was obtained. Graphene exfoliation absorption spectra were examined using 
spectrophotometer type-117. 
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1 Structural Analysis 
X-ray diffraction has been used to examine the crystal structures of exfoliated 
graphene and natural graphite. Figure 2 displays a photograph of natural graphite and 
graphene. Peeled-off graphene and graphite exhibit reflection peaks at 2θ = 26.4°, as 
shown in the picture. For all graphene generated using various electrolytes, the (002) 
and (004) planes, comparable to those in graphite, were generally represented by the 
peaks at 2θ = 26° and 2θ = 54° [27]. On the other hand, the peak at 2θ = 26° widened. 
This might be caused by its corrugated structure and the increase in inter-lameller 
spacing inside the graphitic structure, which indicated the presence of graphene. 
Exfoliated graphene (002) has a significantly lower intensity than graphite (002). The 
intensity of exfoliated graphene (002) significantly decreases due to the break of the 
interplanar carbon inside the graphitic structure during the electrochemical process, 
and the thickness of the graphite also decreases as a result [25]. The availability of the 
sample and energetic intercalation of SO4
2– ions may be to blame for the generation 
of oxygen gas, other side reactions, and the formation of CO2 and CO between the 
stratified layers of graphite electrode, which promoted hydroxylation to the surface 
and edge of exfoliated graphene. Therefore, the inter-lamellar distance will grow as a 
result of surface functionalization [28]. Additionally, the graph demonstrates that no 
extra crystal plane diffraction peak was seen in graphene, excluding the possibility 
of oxidation. Graphite (002) has a higher intensity than graphene, which suggests Fig. 2. XRD spectra of exfoliated graphene (EG) and natural graphite. Reprinted from Reference 42 with 
permission. Copyright (2022), Elsevier. 
Table 2. Structural parameters of natural graphite and exfoliated graphene (EG) obtained through XRD. 
Samples Peak ° (2θ) d(002) (Å) β (radian) D (nm) 
Graphite 26.4 3.36 0.00243 58.60 
Exfoliated graphene (EG) 26.4 3.37 0.00521 27.32 
124 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
that it has more crystallinity. Graphene (002) has a larger full width at half maxima 
(FWHM) than graphite (002). The Scherrer formula, 
0.9λ D = (1) β cos θ
was employed to determine the crystallite size of exfoliated graphene and graphite, 
where θ is the diffracted angle, β is the full width at half maximum of the (002) peak 
in radians and λ is the wavelength of the incident X-ray (= 0.154 nm) [29]. Table 2 
displays the FWHM, interplanar spacing, and crystallite size of exfoliated graphene 
and graphite. 
The size of the crystallites of graphene formed by electrochemical exfoliation 
is reduced because inter-lamellar spacing (d(002)) rises due to cavitation energy 
generation during the exfoliation process [26]. This leads to the conclusion that an 
electrochemical method is used to exfoliate graphite. 
3.2 Surface Morphology and Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy 
(EDS) Analysis 
The exfoliated graphene’s surface morphology has been depicted using a scanning 
electron microscope (SEM). The SEM was used to view the powered samples at a 
20 kV accelerating voltage in a high vacuum environment. The SEM image of 
exfoliated graphene is exhibited in Fig. 3. The image supports the formation of of plane deformation, and a crumpled or wrinkled appearance similar to paper [30]. Surfaces
become roughened as a result of distortion during exfoliation and restacking. All of these
features of graphene support the idea that it forms in aqueous media through an electrochemical
exfoliation process.
Fig.3. SEM photograph of exfoliated graphene at 50KX.
The compositional analysis of exfoliated graphene is shown in Figure 4. Using EDS, the
compositional analysis was done. The presence of C, O, S, and Fe with proportions close to unity
is confirmed by the EDS spectra. Table 3 displays the atomic proportion of exfoliated graphene.
of plane deformation, and a crumpled or wrinkled appearance similar to paper [30]. Surfaces
become roughened as a result of distortion during exfoliation and restacking. All of these
features of graphene support the idea that it forms in aqueous media through an electrochemical
exfoliation process.
Fig.3. SEM photograph of exfoliated graphene at 50KX.
The compositional analysis of exfoliated graphene is shown in Figure 4. Using EDS, the
compositional analysis was done. The presence of C, O, S, and Fe with proportions close to unity
is confirmed by the EDS spectra. Table 3 displays the atomic proportion of exfoliated graphene.
Fig. 4. EDS spectra of exfoliated graphene. Reprinted from Reference 42 with permission. Copyright 
(2022), Elsevier. 
Electrochemical Flaking of Graphene in Aqueous System 125 
Fig. 3. SEM photograph of exfoliated graphene at 50 KX. 
Table 3. Atomic percentage of exfoliated graphene. 
S.No. Elements Atomic % 
1. C 81.81 
2. O 1.25 
3. Fe 0.43 
4. S 16.50 
graphene, which exhibits roughened surface, out of plane deformation, and a 
crumpled or wrinkled appearance similar to paper [30]. Surfaces become roughened 
as a result of distortion during exfoliation and restacking. All of these features of 
graphene support the idea that it forms in aqueous media through an electrochemical 
exfoliation process. 
The compositional analysis of exfoliated graphene is shown in Fig. 4. Using 
EDS, the compositional analysis was done. The presence of C, O, S, and Fe with 
proportions close to unity is confirmed by the EDS spectra. Table 3 displays the 
atomic proportion of exfoliated graphene. Fig. 5. FTIR spectra of exfoliated graphene. Reprinted from Reference 42 with permission. Copyright 
(2022), Elsevier. 
126 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
3.3 FTIR Analysis 
Figure 5 displays the FTIR spectra of graphene powders that have been exfoliated 
electrochemically. To ascertain the bonding of the chemical, the frequency range 
of the FTIR spectra was 4000 cm–1 to 400 cm–1 (mid-infrared range). It is evident 
from the entire spectrum that the specimen is free of any non-bonded SO4– ions. 
Peaks linked with OH (3466 cm–1) and the C=C (1634 cm–1) are visible in the 
spectra in Fig. 5. Due to the adsorbed water molecules, the stretching vibrations of 
the O-H functional group emerged, producing a powerful and broad peak at 3466 
cm–1. Infrared (IR) absorption at 1634 cm–1 provides evidence for the stretching 
of the C=C bond in the aromatic ring of the carbon sheet [31]. The presence of 
a C=C linkage in an aqueous solution shows that graphene dispersion is present 
[32]. The Sp2
 character is also visible on the C=C bond [33]. The hydrocarbon 
group’s C-H stretching vibrations, which are inherited from graphite are visible in 
the peak at 2927 cm–1 [32]. The peaks that occurred at 1022 cm–1 and 1400 cm–1, 
respectively, demonstrate C-O stretching, alkoxide, and COO-H/CO-H stretching 
[31, 34]. The aromatic signal was linked to the sharp band at 800 cm–1. The various 
functional groups found in exfoliated graphene are listed in Table 4. The findings are 
in line with the study by Htwe et al. [27]. 
Table 4. Different functional groups appeared in exfoliated graphene. 
S.No. Functional groups Wavenumber(cm–1) 
1. C=C ~ 1634 
2. -OH ~ 3466 
3. C-O ~ 1022 
4. COO-H/CO-H ~ 1400 
5. C-H ~ 2927 absorption is found at a specific wavelength [35]. Due to the π-π* transition of aromatic CAC
bonds, the absorbance peak of exfoliated graphene was noticed at 267 nm [35,36]. Graphene
oxide (GO), on the other hand, displays π-π * transition of aromatic C-C rings. Due to the
electronic configuration of graphene during the reduction of graphene oxide, this shift, which is a
red shift, occurred [26].
Fig.6. UV-Visible spectra of exfoliated graphene. Reprinted from Reference 42 with permission,
Copyright (2022), Elsevier.
3.5. Raman Analysis
Commented [A9]: W to be capital 267 nm 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 6. UV-Visible spectra of exfoliated graphene. Reprinted from Reference 42 with permission, 
Copyright (2022), Elsevier.


 
 
 
 
Electrochemical Flaking of Graphene in Aqueous System 127 
3.4 UV-Visible Spectra of Exfoliated Graphene (EG) 
The UV-visible spectra of graphene in aqueous media are demonstrated in Fig. 6. A 
UV-Visible spectrometer spanning wavelengths between 200 and 800 nm is used to 
record data. To see the absorption peak, the UV-visible spectrum was recorded. This 
approach is based on the notion that the colour of the material being characterized 
is directly proportional to the absorption in a specific wavelength range. According 
to the UV-Visible spectrum, the highest absorption is found at a specific wavelength 
[35]. Due to the π-π* transition of aromatic CAC bonds, the absorbance peak of 
exfoliated graphene was noticed at 267 nm [35, 36]. Graphene oxide (GO), on the 
other hand, displays π-π* transition of aromatic C-C rings. Due to the electronic 
configuration of graphene during the reduction of graphene oxide, this shift, which 
is a red shift, occurred [26]. 
3.5 Raman Analysis 
For research on graphene, Raman spectroscopy is regarded as the most significant 
analysis. The number and orientation of layers, the quality and types of edges, strain, 
disorderly crystallinity, and functional groups are all determined by it. Additionally, 
it provides important details about the existence of Sp2
 and Sp3
 hybridization. Raman 
spectroscopy is a rapid, non-destructive technology that may be used on a variety of 
materials that have undergone various modifications. Raman spectroscopy, which 
analyses samples chemically by utilizing light to induce molecular vibration and then 
deciphering this interaction, falls under the genre of vibrational spectroscopy. The 
exfoliated graphene’s Raman spectra are illustrated in Fig. 7. With an exposure time 
of 0.5 seconds and 15 mW of power, the Raman spectra are acquired at a wavelength 
of 514 nm. As can be seen from the figure, the graphene specimen exhibits three 
different peaks that are labelled D band, G band, and 2D band, respectively. The 
structural disorder of graphene, which is mostly linked to surface dislocations, is La = 𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒.𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒
𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹 ............(2)
where R is the intensity ratio of D to G band. La was determined to be 4.7 nm in this instance. By 
adjusting the process parameter, the number of graphene layers and average graphene plane 
diameter will be increased.
Fig.7. Raman spectra of exfoliated graphene.
4. Conclusion
Electrochemical exfoliation was used to create graphene in an aqueous media. The
electrochemical exfoliation process is becoming a crucial method for obtaining different types of
graphene compounds. The production of graphene by electrochemical exfoliation has various
benefits, including a one-step process, environmental friendliness, a straightforward
experimental setup, and a lack of the use of harsh chemicals. SEM, XRD, and Raman studies
have all confirmed the production of graphene. Out of plane deformation, rough surfaces, and a
wrinkled paper appearance are all characteristics of exfoliated graphene. The hexagonal
Fig. 7. Raman spectra of exfoliated graphene. 
128 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
what causes the D band to appear at 1343 cm–1 [37]. The two-fold degenerate E2g
mode at the zone centre corresponds to the G band’s emergence at 1570 cm–1 [37]. 
All Sp2 hybridized carbons exhibit this peak, which results from the stretching of 
C-C bonds [37, 38]. The third and final one occurs at 2706 cm–1 and is frequently 
referred to as the 2D band; however, it is also known as the G1 band because the G1 
band is an overtone of the D band [39, 40]. The graphene signature is shown by the 
2D band. The origin of the 2D or G1 band, which is explained by double-resonant, 
is sometimes referred to as the second order Raman spectrum [40]. Additionally, 
the I2D/IG intensity ratio reveals the number of graphene layers. According to the 
intensity ratios I2D/IG of ˃ 2, 1–2 and ˂ 1, respectively, graphene is made up of a 
single layer, two layers, and several layers [38]. In this instance, the I2D/IG intensity 
ratio is 0.5, which is consistent with multilayer graphene. Using the formula provided 
here, we also determine the average diameter La of the graphene planes making up 
the domain here [41]. 
4.4 L a = (2) R 
where R is the intensity ratio of D to G band. La was determined to be 4.7 nm in this 
instance. By adjusting the process parameter, the number of graphene layers and 
average graphene plane diameter will be increased. 
4. Conclusion 
Electrochemical exfoliation was used to create graphene in an aqueous media. 
The electrochemical exfoliation process is becoming a crucial method for 
obtaining different types of graphene compounds. The production of graphene 
by electrochemical exfoliation has various benefits, including a one-step process, 
environmental friendliness, a straightforward experimental setup, and a lack of the 
use of harsh chemicals. SEM, XRD, and Raman studies have all confirmed the 
production of graphene. Out of plane deformation, rough surfaces, and a wrinkled  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical Flaking of Graphene in Aqueous System 129 
paper appearance are all characteristics of exfoliated graphene. The hexagonal 
configuration of graphene at (002) is also confirmed by the XRD. As a result of the 
breakage of the interplanar carbon atom inside the graphitic structure, the intensity of 
exfoliated graphene is significantly reduced when compared to graphite. Exfoliated 
graphene exhibits an absorption peak at 267 nm, which is comparable to graphene’s 
typical values. At around 2706 cm–1, the Raman analysis reveals the distinctive peak 
of graphene. All of this data points to the notion that graphene exfoliates in aqueous 
medium. This work also shows that a variety of parameters, including the use of 
graphite electrodes, electrolytes, applied potential, and others, affect the properties 
of graphene materials formed via electrochemical exfoliation. Low voltage, cathodic 
exfoliation, and thin graphite electrodes are advantageous. 
Acknowledgements 
For all characterizations, the author thanks CIF, BIT Mesra, CRF, IISc Bengaluru, 
and SMITA Research Lab, IIT Delhi. 
References 
[1] Stoller, M.D., S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R.S. Ruoff. 2008. Graphene-Based Ultracapacitors, Nano 
Lett. 8(10): 3498–3502. 
[2] Liang, M. and L. Zhi. 2009. Graphene-based electrode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries. 
J. Mater. Chem. 19: 5871–5878. 
[3] Han, M.Y., B. Özyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim. 2007. Energy band-gap engineering of graphene 
nanoribbons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98: 206805. 
[4] Ponomarenko, L.A., F. Schedin, M.I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E.W. Hill, K.S. Novoselov and A.K. 
Geim. 2008. Chaotic dirac billiard in graphene quantum dots. Science 320(5874): 356–358. 
[5] Hong, W., Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi. 2008. Transparent graphene/PEDOT–PSS 
composite films as counter electrodes of dye-sensitized solar cells. Electrochem. Commun. 
10(10): 1555–1558. 
[6] Liu, Q., X. Liu, X. Zhong, L. Yang, N. Zhang, G. Pan, S. Yin, Y. Chen and J. Wei. 2009. Photovoltaic 
cells based on solution-processable graphene and P3HT. Adv. Funct. Mater. 894–904. 
[7] Liu, Y., X. Dong and P. Chen. 2012. Biological and chemical sensors based on graphene materials. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 41(6): 2283–2307. 
[8] Wang, Y., K. Huang, A. Derre, P. Puech, S. Rouziere, P. Launois, C. Castro, M. Monthioux and 
A. Penicaud. 2017. Conductive graphene coatings synthesized from graphenide solutions. Carbon 
121: 217–225. 
[9] Kim, H., Y. Miura and C.W. Macosko. 2010. Nanocomposites for improved gas barrier and 
electrical conductivity, Chem. Mater. 22: 3441–3450. 
[10] Balandin, A.A., S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C.N. Lau. 2008. 
Superior thermal conductivity of single-layer graphene. Nano Lett. 8(3): 902–907. 
[11] Kuilla, T., S. Bhadra, D. Yao, N.H. Kim, S. Bose and J.H. Lee. 2010. Recent advances in graphene 
based polymer composites. Prog. Polym. Sci. 35(11): 1350–1375. 
[12] Li, X. and L. Zhi. 2018. Graphene hybridization for energy storage applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
47: 3189–3216. 
[13] Yi, M. and Z. Shen. 2015. A review on mechanical exfoliation for the scalable production of 
graphene. J. Mater. Chem. A 3(22): 11700–11715. 
[14] Novoselov, K.S., V.I. Fal’Ko, L. Colombo, P.R. Gellert, M.G. Schwab and K. Kim. 2012. A 
roadmap for graphene. Nature 490: 192–200. 
[15] Dong, L., J. Yang, M. Chhowalla and K.P. Loh. 2017. Synthesis and reduction of large sized 
graphene oxide sheets. Chem. Soc. Rev. 46: 7306–7316.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[16] Dreyer, D.R., R.S. Ruoff and C.W. Bielawski. 2010. From conception to realization: an 
historial account of graphene and some perspectives for its future. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
49(49): 9336–9344. 
[17] Xu, Y., H. Cao, Y. Xue, B. Li and W. Cai. 2018. Liquid-phase exfoliation of graphene: an overview 
on exfoliation media, techniques, and challenges. Nanomaterials 8(11): 942. 
[18] Cooper, D.R., B. D’Anjou, N. Ghattamaneni, B. Harack, M. Hilke, A. Horth, N. Majlis, M. 
Massicotte, L. Vandsburger, E. Whiteway and V. Yu. 2012. Experimental review of graphene. 
ISRN, Condens. Matter Phys. 2012: 1–56. 
[19] Yin, P.T., S. Shah, M. Chhowalla and K.-B. Lee. 2015. Design, synthesis, and characterization of 
graphene–nanoparticle hybrid materials for bioapplications. Chem. Rev. 115: 2483–2531. 
[20] Novoselov, K.S., V. Fal, L. Colombo, P. Gellert, M. Schwab and K. Kim. 2012. A roadmap for 
graphene. Nature 490: 192–200. 
[21] Randviir, E.P., D.A.C. Brownson and C.E. Banks. 2014. A decade of graphene research: Production, 
applications and outlook. Mater. Today 17: 426–432. 
[22] Kuila, T., S. Bose and A.K. Mishra. 2012. Chemical functionalization of graphene. J. Process 
Mater. Sci. 57: 1061–1105. 
[23] Yi, M. and Z. Shen. 2016. Fluid dynamics: An emerging route for the scalable production of 
graphene in the last five years. RSC Adv. 6: 72525–72536. 
[24] Amiri, A., M.N.M. Zubir, A.M. Dimiev, K.H. Teng, M. Shanbedi, S.N. Kazi and S. Bin Rozali. 
2017. Facile, environmentally friendly, cost effective and scalable production of few-layered 
graphene. Chem. Eng. J. 326: 1105–1115. 
[25] Saiful Badri, M.A., M.M. Salleh, N.F. Md Noor, M.Y.A. Rahman and A.A. Umar. 2017. Green 
synthesis of few-layered graphene from aqueous processed graphite exfoliation for graphene thin 
film preparation. Mater. Chem. Phys. 193: 212–219. 
[26] Thema, F.T., M.J. Moloto, E.W. Dikio, N.N. Nyangiwe, L. Kotsedi, M. Maaza and M. Khenfouch. 
2012. Synthesis and characterization of graphene thin films by chemical reduction of exfoliated and 
intercalated graphite oxide. J. Chem. 
[27] Htwe, Y.Z.N., W.S. Chow, Y. Suda, A.A. Thant and M. Mariatti. 2019. Effect of electrolytes and 
sonication times on the formation of graphene using an electrochemical exfoliation process. Appl. 
Surf. Sci. 469: 951–961. 
[28] Sahoo, S. and A. Mallik. 2015. Simple, Fast and cost–effective electrochemical synthesis of few 
layer graphene nanosheets. Nano 10(02): 1550019. 
[29] Cullity, B.D. 1978. Elements of X-ray Diffraction, Addison Wesley Reading, M.A., USA, 197. 
[30] Nishijo, J., Ch. Okabe, O. Oishi and N. Nishi. 2006. Synthesis, structures and magnetic properties 
of carbon-encapsulated nanoparticles via thermal decomposition of metal acetylide. Carbon 
44: 2943–2949. 
[31] Boehm, H. 2002. Surface oxides on carbon and their analysis: a critical assessment. Carbon 
40: 145–149. 
[32] Ahmad, A.F., F.H. Moin Abd, H.M. Mohd Kabir, I.A. Rahman, F. Mohamed, C.C. Hua, S. Ramli 
and S. Radiman. 2013. Graphene Colloidal dispersion in various organic solvents. Malaysian J. 
Anal. Sci. 17(3): 475–480. 
[33] Dato, A., Z. Lee, K.J. Jeon, T.R. Erni, V. Radmilovic, T.J. Richardson and M. Frenklach. 2009. 
Clean and highly ordered graphene synthesized in the gas phase. Chem. Commun. 40: 6095–6097. 
[34] Liu, J., H. Yang, S.G. Zhen, C.K. Poh, A. Chaurasia, J. Luo et al. 2013. A green approach to the synthesis 
of high-quality graphene oxide flakes via electrochemical exfoliation of pencil core. RSC Adv. 
3: 11745–11750. 
[35] Singh, R. and C.C. Tripathi. 2016. Flexible supercapacitors using liquid phase exfoliated graphene 
with enhanced specific capacitance. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 11: 6336–6346. 
[36] Kumar Anurag and S.R. Kumar. 2021. Synthesis of graphene through electrochemical exfoliation 
technique in aqueous medium. Materials Today: Proceedings 44: 2695–2699. 
[37] Swapan Das, Chandan K. Ghosh, Chandan K. Sarkar and Sunipa Roy. 2018. Facile synthesis 
of multi-layer graphene by electrochemical exfoliation using organic solvent. Nanotechnol Rev. 
7: 497–508.  
 
 
 
Electrochemical Flaking of Graphene in Aqueous System 131 
[38] Subramanya, B. and D.K. Bhat. 2015. Novel one-pot green synthesis of graphene in aqueous medium 
under microwave irradiation using a regenerative catalyst and the study of its electrochemical 
properties. New. J. Chem. 39: 420. 
[39] Tripathi, P., Ch. Ravi Prakash Patel, M.A. Shaz and O.N. Srivastava. 2013. Synthesis of high-quality 
graphene through electrochemical exfoliation of graphite in alkaline electrolyte, arXiv:1310.7371. 
[40] Walimbe, P. and M. Chaudhari. 2019. State of the art advancements in studies and applications of 
graphene: A comprehensive review. Materials Today Sustainability 6: 100026. 
[41] Puech, P., M. Kandara, G. Paredes, L. Moulin, E. Weiss-Hortala, A. Kundu, N. Ratel-Ramond, 
Jérémie-Marie Plewa, R. Pellenq and M. Monthioux. 2019. Analyzing the Raman spectra of 
graphene carbon materials from kerogens to nanotubes: What type of information can be extracted 
from defect bands? J. Carbon Research 5(4): 69. 8


Selenium Nanoparticles


Characteristics, Production, 
and Applications


Sara Rahimzadeh,1
 Mina Hosseini1
 and Mohammad Hossein Yazdi1,2,* 
1. Introduction 
Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius discovered selenium in 1817. While initially 
assumed by scientists as toxic, it was proved in 1950 that selenium plays an essential 
role in living organisms. Since organisms are unable to produce selenium, this 
element enters the body via dietary intake. Selenium exists in nature in two major 
forms; inorganic, which occurs in different oxidation states, including selenite 
(SeO3 
−2), selenide (Se2−), selenate (SeO4 
−2), and elemental selenium (Se0
); and 
organic, including selenomethionine and selenocysteine (1). In the aforementioned 
inorganic forms, the transition from one state to another occurs easily and is affected 
by several factors, including redox potential, oxygen concentration, pH, and humidity. 
Elemental selenium, which harbors the least toxicity, is formed through the reduction 
of other inorganic forms in biochemical cycles (2). Regarding its polymorphic 
structure, two forms of crystalline and amorphous structures exist in nature. The 
crystalline form includes monoclinic selenium (m-Se), which is red and consists 
of Se8 rings in three allotropic forms (α, β, and ɣ), as well as trigonal selenium 
(t-Se). Trigonal selenium is black and is known as the most stable crystalline form 
of selenium at room temperature. The non-crystalline forms of selenium include 
vitreous, red amorphous, and black amorphous selenium (3). 
1 Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and Biotechnology Research Center, School of Pharmacy, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
2 Department of Immunotherapy, The Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences (TIPS), Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
* Corresponding author: mh-yazdi@tums.ac.ir Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, and Applications 133 
As stated by the World Health Organization (WHO), the recommended daily 
dose of selenium is 55 and 70 µg/day for adult women and men, respectively, while 
a higher level of consumption ranges from 300 to 600 µg/day has also been reported. 
However, about 900 µg/day of selenium intake is generally considered the toxic dose 
of selenium, which may lead to a disorder called selenosis. Selenium is included 
in all mammalian selenium-containing proteins (i.e., selenoproteins) as the shape 
of the amino acid selenocysteine, through which the biological effects of selenium 
are exerted. Selenoproteins play a key role in keeping redox balance in the human 
body and affecting different physiological processes, including DNA synthesis, 
immunity against infections, and protection against oxidative stress. Keeping these 
important functions in mind, the industrial applications of selenium are also of 
utmost importance (3). 
Nowadays, nanotechnology has dramatically attracted attention in different 
aspects of human life and industry, including electronics, information technology, 
agriculture, and biomedicine. Nanomaterials demonstrate unique and novel physical 
and chemical properties, owing to their nano-scaled size. These materials harbor 
distinct features in shape, size, solubility, chemical composition, structure, and 
surface properties with unique applications. Nowadays, metal nanoparticles are 
one of the most important subsets of nanomaterials that are of interest to many 
researchers. Some examples of nanomaterials include gold NPs, silver NPs, copper 
NPs, zinc NPs, and selenium NPs. Although metal nanoparticles (NPs) of gold 
(Ag) and silver (Au) possess important medical applications, they are expensive 
to synthesize, while the synthesis of selenium nanoparticles (SeNPs) is considered 
cost-effective. Moreover, SeNPs demonstrate lower toxicity compared to other 
selenium-containing compounds, and their potential benefits can be easily enhanced 
through modification with other biological factors (4). The average particle size of 
selenium nanoparticles ranges from 1–100 nm, with a specific surface area of about 
2–10 m2
/g, and a gray-to-black appearance. Various methods have been developed 
for the synthesis of nano-selenium, including physical, chemical, and biological 
methods, each of which is discussed in detail in this chapter. 
NPs cause a great revolution in various aspects of science including the 
environment, electronics, and medicine. The extensive applications of SeNPs, 
including their biomedical applications, rely on their unique properties. Oxidative 
stress, which is generated as a by-product of normal oxygen metabolism, is the main 
reason for DNA and protein damage in cells, and an initial trigger for many diseases, 
including diabetes and cancer. SeNPs possess both antioxidant and pro-oxidant 
activities, and the setting in which SeNPs are present determines their eventual 
role as an anti- or pro-oxidant. In the context of living cells, a set of antioxidant 
enzymes, including thioredoxin reductase (TrxR), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), 
and iodothyronine deiodinases (IDD), protect our body from oxidative stress. 
Selenium acts as a component of such enzymes. Comparison of selenocysteine, 
selenite, selenomethionine and Se-methyl with SeNPs indicated that SeNPs can 
enhance the activity of selenoenzymes with the same effect and less toxicity. Thus, 
SeNPs demonstrate important anti-oxidative potentials (5). On the other hand, 
where a redox imbalance is present and the pH is acidic, SeNPs trigger Reactive Fig. 1. Various methods and different uses of selenium nanoparticles. 
134 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Oxygen Species (ROS) formation and subsequently, disruption of the mitochondrial 
membrane, leakage of mitochondrial proteins, and cell death (6). Such scenario is 
the case in malignant cells and occurs through the reduction of nano-selenium by 
the Trx (thioredoxins)/TrxR (thioredoxins reductases)/GRx (glutaredoxins)/GR 
(glutathione reductase)/GSH (glutathione) pathway and subsequent formation of 
selenide (Se–
) anion by the utilization of NADPH+H+
, leading to ROS formation. 
In addition to their potential role in disease treatment, SeNPs have shown anti-drug￾resistance properties as well as reduced the toxicities of chemotherapeutic agents. 
Hence, an important focus of this chapter would be on the extensive applications of 
SeNPs in different industries and biomedicine. Figure 1 shows synthesis methods 
and therapeutic applications of SeNPs. 
2. Synthesis Methods 
2.1 Physical Synthesis 
Selenium possesses specific features which can be harnessed in favor of physical 
synthesis to achieve SeNPs. These features include a low melting point, high 
piezoelectric and thermoelectric features, quite high photoconductivity, good 
oxidative and catalytic activities, and nonlinear optical responses. Furthermore, 
exposure to visible light with multiple orders of magnitude can increase the electrical 
conductivity of selenium. Some examples of physical synthesis methods include 
γ-irradiation, ultrasound, laser ablation, microwave-aided synthesis, and crashing of 
bulk materials. 
The most common methods which have been reported in the literature include 
ultrasound, microwave irradiation, and laser ablation. Ultrasound can be used 
in the synthesis, deposition, and dispersion of nanomaterials. The mechanism by Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, and Applications 135 
which ultrasound applies such effects has been proposed as “acoustic cavitation”, 
in which the ultrasonic wave passes through a solution while forming bubbles that 
consecutively grow and collapse in the solution (7). The laser ablation (LA) method, 
on the other hand, is a complicated process used to reduce the size of bulk materials 
while breaking down one part by using a laser pulse. Also, substances from the surface 
can be removed by the laser pulse. Melting and crushing large selenium particles 
in a liquid medium exposed to laser radiation produces high-quality nanoparticles 
(7). This method is an economical technique that is free of contaminations common 
with chemical agents, leading to highly-stable nanoparticles which can be collected 
rapidly after synthesis (8). Microwave-aided synthesis of SeNPs is another method 
that has recently attracted attention. Microwave irradiation is a regular heating 
technique in the laboratory, and in microwave-aided SeNP synthesis, selenium salts 
are used as the primary reagent in an aqueous solution without any surfactants. 
This method leads to the formation of SeNPs after 4 minutes of heating (9). Due 
to its unique advantages, including faster reaction rate and subsequent decrease in 
reaction time, quick heating procedures, high reaction selectivity, and energy-saving, 
microwave-aided synthesis has rapidly grown as a favored nanofabrication method. 
2.2 Chemical Synthesis 
Chemical synthesis of SeNPs is usually rapid and possible with a wide range of 
materials; however, this method is often considered energy-consuming and relies 
on toxic chemicals (10). Controlled decay of organometallic complexes and 
metal-surfactant compounds, electrochemical synthesis, reduction of metal salt 
precursors, and wet chemical method (which is based on solution-phase technique) 
are some examples of the chemical synthesis methods (10). Two types of agents, 
namely protective and reducing agents, are commonly employed in these methods. 
Surfactants are usually applied as protective agents, and sodium citrate, hydrazine 
hydrate, and borohydride are often used as reducing agents. Also, the carboxylic 
group of common organic acids, including ascorbic acid, folic acid, sialic acid, oxalic 
acid, benzoic acid, gallic acid, and acetic acid can cause a reduction in selenium 
salts, leading to the acid-induced synthesis of SeNPs (9). However, the most popular 
method of SeNPs chemical synthesis has been the reduction of selenium dioxide, 
selenate, or selenite via hydrazine, glycol, or sodium ascorbate as reducing agents. 
According to some reports, varied ratios of 100 mM sodium selenite and 50 mM 
ascorbic acid result in the production of SeNPs. Ascorbic acid possesses antioxidative 
features and has an important role in the reduction and transformation of SeNPs (11). 
In a study by Patil et al. in 2019, SeNPs were synthesized by the chemical reduction 
method at room temperature, using glutathione as a reducing agent. Glutathione acts 
as both a reducing agent and a stabilizer to prevent aggregation of SeNPs (12). This 
technique, which leads to the reduction of sodium selenite by glutathione, is one of 
the simplest chemical techniques for the synthesis of SeNPs. Mentioned chemical 
methods should be carried out in harsh experimental situations (13). 
Wet chemical methods, or solution-phase techniques, which can be performed 
in aqueous or non-aqueous solutions, are considered an excellent method for SeNP 
synthesis. Different sizes of nanomaterials, ranging from 12–50 nm, can be produced 136 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
by wet chemical methods. Chemical synthesis of SeNPs in aqueous solvent results 
in homogeneous, small, and stable particles, which are favorable for biomedical 
studies. In this method, sodium selenite and selenious acid (H2SeO3) are generally 
employed as primary agents, which are used along with reducing agents and 
stabilizers. Potassium/sodium borohydride and ascorbic acid are common reducing 
agents, with the former being considered more toxic. It is important to note that 
the concentration of primary substances and reducing agents affect the growth and 
nucleation of nanoparticles (14). Stabilizers are also used to prevent the potential 
aggregation of SeNPs in aqueous solvents, including polysaccharides, gallic and 
ascorbic acid, polyvinyl alcohol, and quercetin (7). This outlines the importance 
of sustaining the stability of SeNPs in aqueous solutions. For example, an increase 
in the size of nanoparticles leads to greater reactivity and a subsequent increase 
in the risk of particle interaction. A solution to avoid such interactions is to coat 
the particles with agents known as “capping agents”. A single layer coating of any 
dense matrix, such as a surfactant or polymer, is the simplest method to stabilize 
the particles, which enhances the viscosity of the solution, causing less interaction 
between nanoparticles and preventing their growth (12). Moreover, polysaccharides 
can be used for the dispersion and stabilization of SeNPs, due to their hydrophilic 
groups which can react with nanosized materials and avoid their aggregation (15). 
Both natural and modified water-soluble polysaccharides can be used as stabilizers in 
SeNPs synthesis. Chitosan, carboxymethyl chitosan, konjac glucomannan (KGM), 
acacia gum, sulfated polysaccharides, and carboxymethyl cellulose are some 
examples. Also, the combination of SeNPs with polysaccharides may potentially 
lead to useful materials for the pharmaceutical and food industry. 
Water-soluble, hyperbranched polysaccharide (HBP) is taken from sclerotia 
of Pleurotus tuber-regium and used as a stabilizer for the selenious acid-reducing 
system, leading to the successful synthesis of well-dispersed, spherical SeNPs. 
Chitosan (CTS) is another abundant natural polysaccharide and the N-deacetylated 
production of chitin. A great number of reports have indicated the non-toxic, 
non-allergic, biodegrading, and biocompatible features of chitosan. CTS decomposes 
into amino sugars, which are safe products and can be absorbed completely by 
the human body. Chitosan is known as a proper stabilizer for SeNPs synthesis, 
and, due to its intrinsic antioxidant activity, the in vitro antioxidative features of 
chitosan-loaded selenite increased significantly compared to selenite, as reported by 
Zeng et al. (15). 
The sol-gel technique is another wet chemical method that causes the production 
of micro- and nano-crystalline powders, thin films, ceramics, metal oxide, and 
organic-inorganic hybrid NPs’ powders (10). Sol-gel technology is an appropriate 
method to change material features and merge several functionalities in one material. 
This technique can be carried out in low-temperature conditions and without 
environment sensitivity, which eases the utilization of this technique for a range of 
materials. Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, and Applications 137 
2.3 Biological Synthesis 
In contrast to chemical methods, living organisms including fungi, plants, yeast, and 
bacteria are involved in the biological synthesis of SeNPs. Thus, biological synthesis 
is known as an eco-friendly, non-toxic method that leads to nanomaterial with 
significant pharmacological properties. 
As a result of the complexity inherent in chemical synthesis methods, 
biological-based synthesis, also known as “green synthesis”, has gained enormous 
popularity, since it avoids costly and complicated chemical reagents required in 
chemical methods. Hence, the chemistry and properties of green synthesis have 
been thoroughly investigated by researchers to realize the interaction between 
living organisms and inorganic compounds. Various types of microorganisms, plant 
extracts, and fungi have been implemented in the production of SeNPs (2). 
2.3.1 Plants 
Selenium nanoparticles can be synthesized through a one-step process in the presence 
of biologically-active plant extracts, which include different metabolites such as 
alkaloids, phenols, saponins, and flavonoids. These phytoconstituents carry out the 
biosynthesis of SeNPs through acting as capping, reducing, and stabilizing agents, 
increasing the efficiency of synthesis as compared to chemical methods. Various plant 
organs, such as leaves, flowers, and buds can be used for the biosynthesis of SeNPs 
(2). Leaf extracts of Aloe vera, which are a rich source of polysaccharides, sterols, 
phenolic compounds, flavonoids, lignin, and proteins, are well-known reducing and 
stabilizing reagents for the synthesis of SeNPs (7). Moreover, biosynthesis of spherical 
and crystalline SeNPs with a stable pH has been reported with the aqueous extract 
of Allium sativum, as well as Asteriscus graveolens, which leads to spherical SeNPs 
in the size of 20.06 nm that have been applied as anticancer drug carriers (16, 17). 
Catharanthus roseus and Peltophorum pterocarpum extracts are also an attractive 
alternative for the physical/chemical synthesis of SeNPs, due to the production of 
biocompatible, hollow SeNPs (18). The extract of Clausena dentata has also been 
applied in SeNP biosynthesis (19). Moreover, crystalline SeNPs with a 65 nm size 
has been green synthesized by Diospyros Montana extract, in which flavonoids and 
phenols act as stabilizers and reducing agents (20). In addition, the combination of 
sodium selenite (Na2SeO3) with green tea extract as a reducing agent, and Lycium 
barbarum as a surface capping agent, leads to the production of spherical SeNPs with 
a size range of 83–160 nm, which have shown robust biological activities, including 
free radical scavenging and antioxidant activity (21). Further, lemon leaf extracts 
have been used in the synthesis of SeNPs with the size range of 50–80 nm, which 
have been reported to protect human lymphocytes from UV radiation-induced DNA 
damage (14). Altogether, various plant extracts have been employed in the synthesis 
of different types of SeNPs with various size ranges, which offer a promising, green 
alternative to the physical/chemical synthesis methods. 
2.3.2 Microbes 
The rhythmic connection between inorganic materials and living organisms has led 
to the maintenance of life on this planet. Over the last few years, researchers have 138 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
under-investigated the relationship between inorganic molecules and biological 
organisms. Studies proved that some micro-organisms possess the ability to produce 
nanoparticles, which can be performed through intracellular or extracellular pathways. 
Microbial synthesis of selenium nanoparticles can be performed via bacterial, fungal, 
and yeast-mediated synthesis. 
2.3.2.1 Bacteria 
Since handling and expansion of prokaryotic micro-organisms are more feasible 
and facile, they are considered as a preferred source for SeNPs production. The 
biosynthesis of SeNPs can be carried out through intracellular, extracellular, and 
membrane-bound mechanisms. Of interest, selenium was observed on the cell 
wall and membrane of Escherichia coli for the first time in bacteria via electron 
microscopy (22). In the early studies, the gram-negative, obligate anaerobic, 
Sulfurospirillum barnesii SES-3 strain, which is a selenium respiring bacterium, was 
demonstrated to reduce selenate to elemental selenium, through which 3000-nm, 
uniform nanospheres were synthesized (23). Other examples of selenium-respiring 
bacteria include Selenihalanaerobacter, and Bacillus selenitireducens (24). The size 
of the resulting SeNPs produced by different bacterial strains is dependent on the 
concentration of sodium selenite (Na2SeO3) available to the bacteria, and biomass 
concentration. For instance, a low concentration of Shewanellasp. biomass synthesizes 
1–20 nm SeNPs after 2 hours of incubation, while larger SeNPs, ranging from 51 to 
60 nm, can be produced with a higher concentration of bacteria after 24–72 hours 
of incubation (25). Few studies have focused on the synthesis of SeNPs via aerobic 
microorganisms, including soil bacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Bacillus sp. 
(26). However, these studies have elucidated limited characterization aspects of the 
selenium nanospheres produced. Probiotic bacteria, including Lactobacillus sp., 
Streptococcus thermophilus, and Bifidobacteria sp. can reduce sodium hydrogen 
selenite (NaHSeO3) salt to elemental selenium. Of note, it has been demonstrated 
that lactic acid bacteria are able to merge selenium into intracellular proteins in 
the form of the amino acid selenocysteine (SeCys), which is the dominant form of 
selenium found in the lactobacillus species (27). Further, production of monoclinic 
SeNPs with 200-nm size and well dispersity via Pseudomonas alcaliphila has been 
reported, taking place at 28°C with ambient pressure. The transformation of SeNPs 
from nanospheres into nanorods takes place after 24 hours of the reaction; however, 
PVP (polyvinylpyrrolidone) is a capping agent and controls the size of produced 
SeNPs that causes an interruption in the mentioned transformation (28). Hence, 
according to the above examples, selenium respiring bacteria as well as many other 
strains can be used for the microbial synthesis of selenium nanoparticles. 
2.3.2.2 Fungi 
One of the most common methods for the production of metal nanoparticles is via 
fungi since they harbor metal accumulation activity. Almost all fungi are sensitive 
to selenium, meaning that selenium-containing compounds possess antifungal 
properties. It is now established that incubation of fungal bodies with a high 
concentration of selenium leads to the activation of detoxifying procedures and Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, and Applications 139 
subsequent cell damage in fungal cells. However, according to the study by Wangeline 
et al., fungi exposed to environments that contain high amounts of selenium are 
more tolerant to selenium-containing compounds (29). Studies by Sarkar et al. and 
Zare et al. have reported the extracellular synthesis of SeNPs by Alternaria alternate 
and Aspergillus terreus, respectively (30, 31). Aspergillus terreus incubated with 
selenium ions produces spherical SeNPs with a size of 47 nm after an incubation 
time of 60 minutes (31). Also, stable and uniform SeNPs can be synthesized via 
the Alternaria alternate fungus, in which the presence of a protein matrix in the 
outer shell of SeNPs acts as a stabilizing agent, enhancing their dispersion in liquid 
suspension for a longer period. 
2.3.2.3 Yeast 
Yeast cells harbor the potential to bioaccumulate numerous trace elements, including 
selenium, through their growth period. Saccharomyces cerevisiae is able to produce 
SeNPs in the selenium-rich medium under variable fermentation conditions including 
duration of fermentation, pH value, temperature, and shaking speed (32). However, 
few studies have reported the production of SeNPs via yeast cells, and green 
synthesis of SeNPs with yeast cells has not been investigated in-depth to date. Thus, 
it is crucial for nanobiotechnology researchers to better elucidate the mechanism and 
potentialities of yeast-mediated green synthesis of selenium and other nanometal 
particles. 
Although biological synthesis of SeNPs overcomes some serious issues 
associated with chemical and physical methods, it is not free of drawbacks. For 
instance, the complexity of the extraction step in case the nanoparticles are produced 
intracellularly by the microorganisms is one of the disadvantages of the biological 
method. Furthermore, sustaining appropriate growth conditions for microorganisms, 
as well as large-scale nanoparticle production with larger amounts of biomass are 
other important concerns that need to be addressed through further studies (10). 
3. Biomedical Applications 
Several nano-based pharmaceuticals have been approved for specific indications 
by the American Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Nanoparticles with the 
size range of 10–100 nm are ideal for therapeutic purposes since they are small 
enough to be protected from ingestion by the reticuloendothelial system (RES), 
and large enough not to pass through renal filtration (14). Importantly, when 
anti-tumor applications are intended, the pathologic vasculature conditions of the 
tumor microenvironment aids nanoparticle accumulation in tumor tissues. This 
effect is known as the Enhanced Permeability and Retention (EPR) effect, which 
allows macromolecules of specific size ranges to better accumulate and retain in 
tumors, rather than normal tissues (33). Among the available metal nanoparticles, 
SeNPs are one of the most useful in the biomedical industry. According to the 
properties of SeNPs discussed earlier, including the unique physiochemical features 
and low toxicity, they are constantly being studied for their potential pharmaceutical 
effects. Notable efficacy of SeNPs has been observed in various diseases, including 
anti-diabetic, anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory, and anti-microbial activity. Also, 140 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
SeNPs are gaining increasing attention as a suitable drug carrier in novel nano-based 
drug-delivery systems. 
3.1 Anti-cancer Activity 
The pathology of cancer is associated with uncontrolled cell division and migration, 
and it is considered a serious cause of mortality, morbidity, and low quality of life 
(QoL) in many societies. Approximately 19.3 million new cancer cases have been 
diagnosed in 2020, with the occurrence of almost 10 million cancer-related deaths 
in the same year (34). Radical surgery in early stages, as well as chemotherapy, 
radiotherapy, hormone therapy, and immunotherapy, are the most important cancer 
treatment modalities. Recently, nano-based drugs have drawn enormous attention 
as a game-changer in the treatment of cancer. In this regard, specific metal 
nanoparticles, including SeNPs, have demonstrated anti-cancer activities through 
several studies. The cytotoxic effects of SeNPs against various cancer cell lines, 
including human cervical carcinoma cells (HeLa, HeLa-S3, C-33A) (35), hepatic 
cancer cells (HepG2) (36), human lung adenocarcinoma cells (A549) (37), human 
breast adenocarcinoma cells (MCF-7) (38), and murine mammary carcinoma cells 
(4T1) (38) have been demonstrated. Of note, these nanoparticles have shown 
excellent safety and biocompatibility in normal epithelial, skeletal muscle, hepatic, 
and blood cells, especially when produced through “green synthesis” methods 
(39). Different mechanisms have been proposed through which SeNPs exert their 
anti-cancer effects, including activation of apoptosis pathways and cell cycle 
arrest, inducing mitochondrial dysfunction, production of reactive specious oxygen 
(ROS), disruption of cellular homeostasis, and DNA fragmentation. Triggering 
the apoptosis pathways by SeNPs starts with ROS accumulation associated 
with SeNP internalization in cancer, but not normal, cells. ROS starts a series of 
mitochondria-associated pathways which lead to endoplasmic reticulum stress and 
eventual activation of caspases. First, the mitochondrial membrane potential is 
affected, leading to cytochrome-c leakage into the cytosol, which leads to activation 
of several pathways, including MAPK-Erk, PI3K, NF-ĸB, and apoptosis pathways, 
leading to caspase-9 activation. Caspase-9 activation induces caspase-3 activity, 
which finally leads to DNA degradation and apoptosis. Moreover, the subsequent 
influx of modulated Ca2+ causes caspase activity and cell apoptosis. Thus, in cancer 
cells, ROS is known as a mediator for SeNP-induced anti-cancer activity (10). In a 
study by Vahidi et al., cancer cells treated with biologically-synthesized SeNPs have 
a notably higher caspase-3 activity than normal cells treated with biogenic SeNPs, 
outlining the exquisite safety of these nanoparticles in normal cells (39). Biologically 
synthesized SeNPs via Bacillus and Lactobacillus strains have been shown to 
stimulate anti-cancer immune responses in cancer-bearing mice and prevent tumor 
progression (40). Some of the immunostimulatory properties of biogenic SeNPs 
are assumed to occur due to the special functional groups located on the surface of 
SeNPs, which are absent on those synthesized chemically. Lactobacillus sp. possess 
immunomodulatory effects as the normal intestinal flora, and their antigen is thought 
to be expressed on the surface of biogenic SeNPs (41). Such immunostimulatory Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, and Applications 141 
effects are important for cancer patients in whom the immune system is compromised, 
and might present a novel immunotherapeutic modality for these patients. 
Several other compounds in combination with SeNPs have been investigated for 
their possible synergistic anti-cancer effects. Based on a study by El Batal et al., the 
combination of fermented wheat germ extract (FWGE) with SeNPs decreases tumor 
volume in an ascites carcinoma model in mice (42). FWGE inhibits oxidative damage 
in normal tissues, thereby leading to apoptosis in cancer cells, and is thus known 
as a nutritional supplement for cancer patients. This study revealed the superior 
anti-cancer efficacy of this supplement when combined with SeNPs. Moreover, the 
incorporation of selenium in the structure of hydroxyapatite (HA), which is the main 
inorganic mineral in hard tissues such as bones and teeth, reduces the recurrence of 
osteosarcoma in mice and is used as a supporting agent for bone regeneration in the 
bone graft (43). 
3.2 Antimicrobial Activity 
Selenium-containing compounds, including sodium selenite (Na2SeO3), sodium 
selenate (Na2SeO4), sodium selenide (Na2Se), and selenium dioxide (SeO2) have 
shown antibacterial effects against E. coli through inducing DNA damage (44). The 
same effect has been demonstrated with SeNPs, with the proposed mechanism being 
ROS generation and subsequent destruction of cell DNA and essential enzymes. 
Several anti-microbial potentials have been observed with SeNPs, including 
antibacterial (45), antifungal (46), and antialgal (47) properties. These properties 
can also be enhanced through modification with other agents. As an example, 
SeNPs were modified with the positively charged spider silk protein eADF4 (κ16), 
causing a surface positive charge that increases the bactericidal efficiency against 
gram-negative bacteria, including E. coli (2). The anti-bacterial properties of 
SeNPs have been shown to be strongly dependent on their size. Thus, the highest 
inhibition in the growth of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) and 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) have been observed with 
SeNPs with a concentration of 10 µg.mL–1 and a size of 81 nm (48). 
Recently, the activity of metal nanoparticles against pathogenic fungi have 
attracted the attention of many researchers. Candida albicans is an opportunistic 
pathogenic yeast that can cause mild to severe fungal infections, especially in 
long-term antibiotic consumers and immunocompromised patients. Based on 
several studies, selenium nanoparticles-enriched Lactobacillus spp. co-cultured with 
C. albicans inhibited the growth of C. albicans colony in the culture. In addition to the 
antifungal properties of SeNPs against C. albicans, it is assumed that Lactobacillus 
release metabolites that prevent C. albicans colony growth (46). Moreover, other 
studies have shown the potential of silver and selenium nanoparticles to prevent 
biofilm formation in C. albicans (2). A large amount of SeNPs accumulates in the cell 
wall of C. albicans through chemisorption, and selenium causes sulfur displacement 
from methionine and cysteine, thus damaging the cell wall. In addition, biogenic 
SeNPs produced via Klebsiella pneumonia demonstrate anti-fungal characteristics, 
inhibiting the mycelial growth of Alternaria solani and Colletotrichum capsica (47). 142 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
3.3 Drug Delivery Applications 
One of the most important potentials of nanoparticles is their gene and drug loading 
capacity. In the context of gene therapy, nanoparticles are classified as nonviral 
vectors, with the advantage of inducing minimal immunogenic responses compared 
to viral vectors, and the potential to transport larger nucleic acid molecules (1). SeNPs 
have also been studied as drug carriers, especially in the context of chemotherapeutic 
drugs, since SeNPs have been shown to reduce their systemic toxicity while improving 
their efficacy. The binding of the drug to SeNPs occurs through physical dispersion 
or chemical binding, and specific modifying agents, e.g., polymers, can increase the 
efficiency of the combination. Polymers are easy to modify and have high potentials 
for drug loading, condensation of nucleic acids, and targeting. Polymers can also 
act as a drug reservoir layer coating the nanoparticle, thus enhancing drug solubility 
and loading capacity, while protecting them from degradation (49). Cisplatin-, 
5-flurouracil-, and doxorubicin-loaded SeNPs have indicated enhanced anti-cancer 
effects compared to their non-nano-based counterparts (14). Further, according to 
the study by Huang et al., a transferrin-conjugated SeNP delivery system increased 
the uptake of doxorubicin in the mammalian breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Based 
on the results of this study, this drug delivery system effectively caused apoptosis 
and inhibition of cancer cell growth compared to control (50). A delivery system 
based on irinotecan and SeNPs in mice model and in vivo study indicated enhanced 
cytotoxicity, compared with each of the components used solely, in the human 
ileocecal adenocarcinoma cell line HCT-8, causing a 62.1% reduction in tumor size. 
Collectively, based on the results discussed above and those of many other similar 
studies, SeNPs offer a promising nano-based drug carrier platform due to their unique 
properties, especially for chemotherapeutic drugs. 
3.4 Anti-diabetic Activity 
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a metabolic disorder resulting from pancreas dysfunction. 
Pancreas secrets insulin, which is a hormone controlling the level of blood glucose. 
DM is classified into two major types, including type-I and type-II. Damage to 
many organs, including the eye, liver, heart, and kidneys are common complications 
in DM patients. Since the etiology of DM is in part associated with inflammation 
and oxidative response, selenium supplements and SeNPs might provide benefit 
in these patients from a theoretical point of view (2). A study by Ashrafizadeh et 
al. in 2020 showed the exceptional anti-diabetic potential of chitosan-stabilized 
selenium nanoparticles (CsS-SeNPs) in rat models of DM (51). Further studies 
concluded that modified SeNPs with peptide-conjugated chitosan (SCD) can activate 
VPAC-2, which is a receptor moderating glucose-dependent insulin secretion, 
eventually leading to reduction of blood glucose levels. SCD treatment in vitro 
indicated improved insulin sensitivity and lipid profile compared to control (52). 
3.5 Anti-inflammatory Activity 
Since the process of inflammation is involved in the pathology of many diseases, 
the potential anti-inflammatory activities of SeNPs have recently attracted enormous  
 
 
 
Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, and Applications 143 
attention. In the process of inflammation, stimulants triggering cellular stress activate 
the NF-κB transcription factor, which is regulated by mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAP-K), thus triggering the expression of various pro-inflammatory genes. 
SeNPs have demonstrated inhibition of MAP-K, NF-κB, and reduction in TNF-α 
levels, which are important markers of inflammation (2). Moreover, a combination 
of SeNPs with silymarin in low concentration indicated a marked reduction in NF-κB 
activity, as well as reductions in the level of IL-1β, MPO, and TNF-α (53). Further 
studies showed SeNPs modified with polysaccharides to harbor anti-inflammatory 
properties by inhibiting the degradation of Iκ-B, which prevents the NF-κB pathway, 
and phosphorylation of JNK1/2 and p38 (5). Iκ-B is an inhibitory protein that can 
be phosphorylated by Iκ-B kinase, then ubiquitinated and degraded. Degradation of 
Iκ-B leads to the initiation of the NF-κB pathway. Taken together, it can be inferred 
that the anti-inflammatory activity of SeNPs is one of their vital properties which 
needs to be further evaluated for possible translation into the clinic. 
4. Conclusion 
Selenium is an essential micronutrient for a living organism that is taken through diet. 
Nanoparticle-based formulations for a variety of metal elements are available, one 
of which is SeNPs. SeNPs have indicated distinct properties, including antioxidant 
and pro-oxidant effects, by affecting the catalytic activity of various physiologic 
enzymes. In comparison to selenium-containing compounds, SeNPs harbor less 
toxicity for living organisms and thus can widely be applied in different industries, 
especially in biomedicine. In this chapter, various methods of SeNPs synthesis 
have been discussed, with a focus on biological synthesis. Biologic synthesis of 
SeNPs is cost-effective, safe, and with less contamination compared with chemical 
methods, which require hazardous chemicals, extreme pH conditions, and high 
temperature. Further, we have discussed the several applications of SeNPs, including 
anti-microbial, anti-diabetic, and anti-inflammatory activities. More importantly, 
SeNPs offer promising potentials for cancer treatment, since they have shown 
potent anti-cancer effects through several studies. Furthermore, SeNPs offer a 
unique platform for drug delivery, especially for chemotherapeutic drugs. Further 
investigation regarding their properties and detailed mechanisms of action are 
needed to enhance our knowledge and better harness the distinctive potentials of 
these nanoparticles. 
References 
[1] Tapiero, H., D.M. Townsend and K.D. Tew. 2003. The antioxidant role of selenium and 
seleno-compounds. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy 57(3): 134–44. 
[2] Nayak, V., K.R.B. Singh, A.K. Singh and R.P. Singh. 2021. Potentialities of selenium nanoparticles 
in biomedical science. New Journal of Chemistry 45(6): 2849–78. 
[3] Khanna, P.K., N. Bisht and P. Phalswal. 2022. Selenium nanoparticles: a review on synthesis and 
biomedical applications. Materials Advances. 
[4] Forootanfar, H., M. Adeli-Sardou, M. Nikkhoo, M. Mehrabani, B. Amir-Heidari, A.R. Shahverdi 
et al. 2014. Antioxidant and cytotoxic effect of biologically synthesized selenium nanoparticles in 
comparison to selenium dioxide. Journal of Trace Elements in Medicine and Biology 28(1): 75–9.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
144 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[5] Khurana, A., S. Tekula, M.A. Saifi, P. Venkatesh and C. Godugu. 2019. Therapeutic applications 
of selenium nanoparticles. Biomedicine & pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & pharmacotherapie. 
111: 802–12. 
[6] Kondaparthi, P., S.J.S. Flora and S. Naqvi. 2019. Selenium nanoparticles: An insight on its 
Pro-oxidant and antioxidant properties. Frontiers in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 6. 
[7] Varlamova, E.G., E.A. Turovsky and E.V. Blinova. 2021. Therapeutic potential and main methods 
of obtaining selenium nanoparticles. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22(19): 10808. 
[8] Menazea, A.A., A.M. Ismail, N.S. Awwad and H.A. Ibrahium. 2020. Physical characterization 
and antibacterial activity of PVA/Chitosan matrix doped by selenium nanoparticles prepared via 
one-pot laser ablation route. Journal of Materials Research and Technology 9(5): 9598–606. 
[9] Skalickova, S., V. Milosavljevic, K. Cihalova, P. Horky, L. Richtera and V. Adam. 2017. Selenium 
nanoparticles as a nutritional supplement. Nutrition 33: 83–90. 
[10] Yazdi, M., Z. Sepehrizadeh, M. Mahdavi, A.R. Shahverdi and M. Faramarzi. 2016. Metal, 
metalloid, and oxide nanoparticles for therapeutic and diagnostic oncology. Nano Biomedicine and 
Engineering 8. 
[11] Sarkar, B., S. Bhattacharjee, A. Daware, P. Tribedi, K.K. Krishnani and P.S. Minhas. 2015. Selenium 
nanoparticles for stress-resilient fish and livestock. Nanoscale Research Letters 10(1): 371. 
[12] Patil, D.P., M. Usharani, A.G. Reddy, B. Kalakumar, G.K. Sawale and K. Vanitha. 2019. Chemical 
synthesis and characterization of selenium nanoparticles. Chemical Science Review and Letters 
8(32): 161–5. 
[13] Langi, B., C. Shah, K. Singh, A. Chaskar, M. Kumar and P.N. Bajaj. 2010. Ionic liquid-induced 
synthesis of selenium nanoparticles. Materials Research Bulletin 45(6): 668–71. 
[14] Maiyo, F. and M. Singh. 2017. Selenium nanoparticles: potential in cancer gene and drug delivery. 
Nanomedicine (London, England) 12(9): 1075–89. 
[15] Zeng, S., Y. Ke, Y. Liu, Y. Shen, L. Zhang, C. Li et al. 2018. Synthesis and antidiabetic properties 
of chitosan-stabilized selenium nanoparticles. Colloids and surfaces B, Biointerfaces 170: 115–21. 
[16] Anu, K., G. Singaravelu, K. Murugan and G. Benelli 2017. Green-synthesis of selenium 
nanoparticles using garlic cloves (Allium sativum): Biophysical characterization and cytotoxicity 
on vero cells. Journal of Cluster Science 28. 
[17] Zeebaree, S.Y.S., A.Y.S. Zeebaree and O.I.H. Zebari. 2020. Diagnosis of the multiple effect of 
selenium nanoparticles decorated by Asteriscus graveolens components in inhibiting HepG2 cell 
proliferation. Sustainable Chemistry and Pharmacy 15: 100210. 
[18] Deepa, B. and V. Ganesan. 2014. Bioinspiredsynthesis of selenium nanoparticles using flowers 
of Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don. and Peltophorum pterocarpum (DC.) Backer ex Heyne—A 
comparison. International Journal of ChemTech Research 77: 974–4290. 
[19] Sowndarya, P., G. Ramkumar and M.S. Shivakumar. 2017. Green synthesis of selenium 
nanoparticles conjugated Clausena dentata plant leaf extract and their insecticidal potential against 
mosquito vectors. Artificial Cells, Nanomedicine, and Biotechnology 45(8): 1490–5. 
[20] Kokila, K., N. Elavarasan and V. Sujatha. 2017. Diospyros montana leaf extract-mediated 
synthesis of selenium nanoparticles and their biological applications. New Journal of Chemistry 
41(15): 7481–90. 
[21] Zhang, W., J. Zhang, D. Ding, L. Zhang, L.A. Muehlmann, S.E. Deng et al. 2018. Synthesis and 
antioxidant properties of Lycium barbarum polysaccharides capped selenium nanoparticles using 
tea extract. Artificial Cells, Nanomedicine, and Biotechnology 46(7): 1463–70. 
[22] Wadhwani, S.A., U.U. Shedbalkar, R. Singh and B.A. Chopade. 2016. Biogenic selenium 
nanoparticles: current status and future prospects. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 
100(6): 2555–66. 
[23] Oremland, R.S., J.S. Blum, C.W. Culbertson, P.T. Visscher, L.G. Miller, P. Dowdle et al. 1994. 
Isolation, growth, and metabolism of an obligately anaerobic, selenate-respiring bacterium, strain 
SES-3. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60(8): 3011–9. 
[24] Bansal, V., A. Bharde, R. Ramanathan and S.K. Bhargava. 2012. Inorganic materials using ‘unusual’ 
microorganisms. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 179-182: 150–68. 
[25] Tam, K., C.T. Ho, J.H. Lee, M. Lai, C.H. Chang, Y. Rheem et al. 2010. Growth mechanism 
of amorphous selenium nanoparticles synthesized by Shewanella sp. HN-41. Bioscience, 
Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 74(4): 696–700.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selenium Nanoparticles: Characteristics, Production, and Applications 145 
[26] Torres, S.K., V.L. Campos, C.G. León, S.M. Rodríguez-Llamazares, S.M. Rojas, M. González et 
al. 2012. Biosynthesis of selenium nanoparticles by Pantoea agglomerans and their antioxidant 
activity. Journal of Nanoparticle Research 14(11): 1236. 
[27] Eszenyi, P., A. Sztrik, B. Babka and P. Joe. 2011. Elemental, nano-sized (100–500 nm) selenium 
production by probiotic lactic acid bacteria. International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and 
Bioinformatics 1: 148–52. 
[28] Zhang, W., Z. Chen, H. Liu, L. Zhang, P. Gao and D. Li. 2011. Biosynthesis and structural 
characteristics of selenium nanoparticles by Pseudomonas alcaliphila. Colloids and Surfaces B: 
Biointerfaces 88(1): 196–201. 
[29] Wangeline, A., J. Valdez, S.D. Lindblom, K. Bowling, F. Reeves and E. Pilon-Smits. 2011. 
Characterization of rhizosphere fungi from selenium hyperaccumulator and nonhyperaccumulator 
plants along the eastern Rocky Mountain Front Range. American Journal of Botany 98: 1139–47. 
[30] Sarkar, J., P. Dey, S. Saha and K. Acharya. 2011. Mycosynthesis of selenium nanoparticles. Micro 
& Nano Letters, IET 6: 599–602. 
[31] Zare, B., S. Babaie, N. Seyatesh and A.R. Shahverdi. 2012. Isolation and characterization of a 
fungus for extracellular synthesis of small selenium nanoparticles Extracellular synthesis of small 
selenium nanoparticles using fungi. Nanomed. J. 1: 14–20. 
[32] Esmaeili, S., K. Khosravi, R. Pourahmad and R. Komeili. 2012. An experimental design for 
production of selenium-enriched yeast. World Applied Sciences Journal 19: 31–7. 
[33] Ngoune, R., A. Peters, D. von Elverfeldt, K. Winkler and G. Pütz. 2016. Accumulating nanoparticles 
by EPR: A route of no return. Journal of Controlled Release 238: 58–70. 
[34] Sung, H., J. Ferlay, R.L. Siegel, M. Laversanne, I. Soerjomataram, A. Jemal et al. 2021. Global 
Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 
36 cancers in 185 countries. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 71(3): 209–49. 
[35] Rajkumar, K., S. Mvs, S. Koganti and S. Burgula. 2020. Selenium nanoparticles synthesized using 
Pseudomonas stutzeri (MH191156) show antiproliferative and anti-angiogenic activity against 
cervical cancer cells. Int. J. Nanomedicine 15: 4523–40. 
[36] Meng, Y., Y. Zhang, N. Jia, H. Qiao, M. Zhu, Q. Meng et al. 2018. Synthesis and evaluation of 
a novel water-soluble high Se-enriched Astragalus polysaccharide nanoparticles. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. 118(Pt B): 1438–48. 
[37] Liao, G., J. Tang, D. Wang, H. Zuo, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu et al. 2020. Selenium nanoparticles (SeNPs) 
have potent antitumor activity against prostate cancer cells through the upregulation of miR-16. 
World Journal of Surgical Oncology 18(1): 81. 
[38] Wadhwani, S.A., M. Gorain, P. Banerjee, U.U. Shedbalkar, R. Singh, G.C. Kundu et al. 2017. Green 
synthesis of selenium nanoparticles using Acinetobacter sp. SW30: optimization, characterization 
and its anticancer activity in breast cancer cells. Int. J. Nanomedicine 12: 6841–55. 
[39] Vahidi, H., H. Barabadi and M. Saravanan. 2020. Emerging selenium nanoparticles to combat 
cancer: a systematic review. Journal of Cluster Science 31(2): 301–9. 
[40] Yazdi, M.H., B. Varastehmoradi, E. Faghfuri, F. Mavandadnejad, M. Mahdavi and A.R. Shahverdi. 
2015. Adjuvant effect of biogenic selenium nanoparticles improves the immune responses and 
survival of mice receiving 4T1 cell antigens as vaccine in breast cancer murine model. Journal of 
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 15(12): 10165–72. 
[41] Yazdi, M.H., M. Mahdavi, N. Setayesh, M. Esfandyar and A.R. Shahverdi. 2013. Selenium 
nanoparticle-enriched Lactobacillus brevis causes more efficient immune responses in vivo and 
reduces the liver metastasis in metastatic form of mouse breast cancer. Daru: Journal of Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical Sciences 21(1): 33. 
[42] El-Batal, A., O. Abou Zaid, E. Noaman and E. Ismail. 2012. Promising antitumor activity of 
fermented wheat germ extract in combination with selenium nanoparticles. Int. J. Pharm Health 
Care 2(6): 1–22. 
[43] Shoeibi, S., P. Mozdziak and A. Golkar-Narenji. 2017. Biogenesis of selenium nanoparticles using 
green chemistry. Topics in Current Chemistry 375(6): 88. 
[44] Hosnedlova, B., M. Kepinska, S. Skalickova, C. Fernandez, B. Ruttkay-Nedecky, Q. Peng et al. 
2018. Nano-selenium and its nanomedicine applications: a critical review. Int. J. Nanomedicine 
13: 2107–28.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[45] Hariharan, H., N.A. Al-Dhabi, S.K. Rajaram and S. Arabia. (eds.). 2012. Microbial synthesis of 
selinium nanocomposite using Saccharomyces cerevisiae and its antimicrobial activity against 
pathogens causing nosocomial infection. Chalcogenide Letters December 2012, 9(12): 509–515. 
[46] Kheradmand, E., F. Rafii, M. Yazdi, A. Akhavan Sepahi, A.R. Shahverdi and M. Oveisi. 2014. 
The antimicrobial effects of selenium nanoparticle-enriched probiotics and their fermented broth 
against Candida albicans. Daru : Journal of Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences 22: 48. 
[47] Sasidharan, S., R. Sowmiya and R. Balakrishnaraja. 2015. Biosynthesis of selenium nanoparticles 
using citrus reticulata peel extract. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research 4: 1322–30. 
[48] Huang, T., J.A. Holden, D.E. Heath, N.M. O’Brien-Simpson and A.J. O’Connor. 2019. Engineering 
highly effective antimicrobial selenium nanoparticles through control of particle size. Nanoscale 
11(31): 14937–51. 
[49] Nicolas, J., S. Mura, D. Brambilla, N. Mackiewicz and P. Couvreur. 2013. Design, functionalization 
strategies and biomedical applications of targeted biodegradable/biocompatible polymer-based 
nanocarriers for drug delivery. Chemical Society Reviews 42(3): 1147–235. 
[50] Huang, Y., L. He, W. Liu, C. Fan, W. Zheng, Y.-S. Wong et al. 2013. Selective cellular uptake and 
induction of apoptosis of cancer-targeted selenium nanoparticles. Biomaterials 34(29): 7106–16. 
[51] Ashrafizadeh, H., S.R. Abtahi and A.A. Oroojan. 2020. Trace element nanoparticles improved 
diabetes mellitus; a brief report. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews 
14(4): 443–5. 
[52] Zhao, S.-J., D.-H. Wang, Y.-W. Li, L. Han, X. Xiao, M. Ma et al. 2017. A novel selective VPAC2 
agonist peptide-conjugated chitosan modified selenium nanoparticles with enhanced anti-type 2 
diabetes synergy effects. Int. J. Nanomedicine 12: 2143–60. 
[53] Miroliaee, A.E., H. Esmaily, A. Vaziri-Bami, M. Baeeri, A.R. Shahverdi and M. Abdollahi. 2011. 
Amelioration of experimental colitis by a novel nanoseleniu-silymarin mixture. Toxicology 
Mechanisms and Methods 21: 200–8. 9


Strategies for
Physicochemical Synthesis of
Manganese Nanomaterials


A Present View


B. Panda, A. Lenka and S.K. Dash* 
1. Introduction 
Manganese (Mn) nanomaterials (NMs) are unique by their physicochemical 
properties and applications such as composite synthesis [1], dye degradation [2, 3], 
metallic adsorption [4], construction of supercapacitors [5], batteries and solar cells 
[6], carrying drugs [7], scavenging of microbes [8, 9] and so on. Although these 
NMs are mostly synthesised as their oxides, they can also be produced as composite, 
alloys or doped with other metals [10–12]. Composites or alloys NMs exhibit 
synergistic properties of their counterparts and hence improved properties from their 
monometallic components [13]. On the contrary, doped-NMs do the same because 
their crystal defects and structural deformities resulted due to doping. However, 
all these forms of NMs have fascinated the researchers equally for their synthesis 
as they are unique by their properties and functions. Therefore, different groups 
have tried with different physicochemical and biological routes for the synthesis of 
these NMs either through top-down (milling, etching, sputtering, explosion, etc.) 
or bottom-up (sol-gel, spinning, flame spraying, laser or vapour deposition, etc.) 
approaches (Table 1). In the first case, bulk materials are first broken down into 
small mass and then those are converted into NMs, whereas in the latter case, atomic 
Department of Zoology, Berhampur University, Odisha-760007, India. 
* Corresponding author: dashsandipkumar@gmail.com 148 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications Table 1. Different physicochemical methods reported till date for the synthesis of Mn NMs. Sl. No. Type of NMs Methods Used Source Shape Size Reference 01 Mn3 O 4 Mechanical milling MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O Tetragonal ~ 30 nm [17] 02 MnO2 KMnO4 , MnCl2 Irregular Needle Rod -D: < 10 nm D: 15–20 nm, L: Variable [18] 03 MnFe2 O 4 Mn (NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O - ~ 10 nm [19] 04 MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical 7.6 nm [20] 05 MnO2 Powder Spherical 20 nm [21] 06 Mn-Ore Spherical 117 ± 27 nm [16] 07 Ni 51 Mn33.4 In 15.6 Mn Element - 30–200 nm [22] 08 Mn3 O 4 Vapour deposition Mn Powder Square 42 nm [23] 09 MnO, α-Mn, β-Mn, γ-Mn, Mn3 O 4 , MnO2 Irregular ≤ 80 nm [24] 10 MnO2 Mn2 O 3 Mn2 O 3 /Mn3 O 4 Mn3 O 4 Mn2 (CO)10 Rod Spherical D: 10–15, L: ≥ 100 nm < 10 nm [25] 11 Mn MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Dendritic Tetragonal Polycrystalline 20–150 nm 20–50 nm
30–50 nm 
[26] 
12 Mn5 O 8 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O - ~ 30 nm [27] 
13 γ-MnO2 Mn Powder Spherical 86.86 nm [28] 
14 Mn5 Si 3 Mn Metal Hexagonal ~ 8.6 nm [1] Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 149 
15 Mn-Pt Mn2 (CO)10 Cube Length: 7.7 nm [29] 
16 Mn-Al Mn Powder Spherical 95.4 nm [30] 
17 F-doped-MnO2 Mn(hfa)2 TMEDA Tetragonal 25–35 nm [12] 
18 Mn0.5 Zn0.5 Fe 2 O 4 Mn (NO3 ) 2 ·6H2 O Tetragonal 14–19 nm [31] 
19 MnO2 Sol-gel MnAc2 Wire D: 70, L: 500–700 nm [32] 
20 α-Mn2 O 3 MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical ~ 30 nm [33] 
21 MnO2 MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O Wire W: 10, L: 200 nm [34] 
22 Mn3 O 4 Mn (NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O Potato 30–90 nm [35] 
23 Mn3 O 4 KMnO4 Tetragonal 20–30 nm [36] 
24 α-MnO2 Rod D: 20 ± 3, L: 210 ± 3 nm [37] 
25 Mn3 O 4 MnAc2 ·4H2 O Spherical ~ 10 nm [38] 
26 MnO2 KMnO4 Spherical 41–72 nm [39] 
27 MnFe2 O 4 Mn(NO3 ) 2 Spherical 25–35 nm [40] 
28 Cubic spinel 15 nm [41] 
29 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅4H2 O Irregular - [42] 
30 Spherical - [43] 
31 NiMn2 O 4 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ·6H2 O Spherical 5–20 nm [44] 
32 Li 2 MnO3 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅4H2 O - 05–50 nm [45] 
33 Cu0.55Ni 0.44Mn0.01 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O Ellipsoid 13.4–47.9 nm [46] 
34 Li𝑥Cu0.12Mn0.88−2𝑥Fe 2+𝑥O 4 MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Cubic spinel 9–30 nm [47] 
35 Ca1-x Mnx Fe 2 O 4 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅4H2 O Irregular - [48]
Table 1 contd. ... 150 
Sl. No. Type of NMs Methods Used Source Shape Size Reference 
Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 36 MnFe2 O 4 Precipitation Sol-gel Hydrothermal Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O Spherical Reticular Sheet 36 nm 45 nm 16 nm [49] 37 Mn-Zn-Fe2 O 4 Microemulsion MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Globular ~ 5 nm [50] 38 MnFe2 O 4 Spherical 12–39 nm [51] 39 Mn-Zn-Fe2 O 4 Mn(II)2­ ethylhexanoate Spinel ~ 9.4, 5.2, & 2.4 nm [52] 40 Mn3 (PO4 ) 2 MnCl2 ·4H2 O, MnSO4 Spherical ~ 72 nm [53] 41 La0.7 Sr 0.3 Mn0.98 Ti 0 . 02 O 3 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ·6H2 O Irregular ~ 23.5 nm [54] 42 MnO2 Hydrothermal MnSO4 , KMnO4 Whisker Plate-like Rod - [55] 43 α-MnO2 Rod W: 150–200 nm [56] 44 α-MnO2 ε-MnO2 Sea Urchin Clew 1.30–40 nm 2.17 nm [57] 45 Mn3 O 4 MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Hexagonal L: 100, T: 10 nm [58] 46 Birnessite-MnO2 α-MnO2 
α-MnO2 
KMnO4 Nanosheet
Rod
Tube 
-
L: 2–3 µm
-
[59] 
47 MnO2 Spherical 100–300 nm [60] 
48 α-MnO2 KMnO4 and 
MnSO4 ·H2 O 
Rod L:2 µm, D: 30–50 nm [61] 
49 MnO2 MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O, KMnO4 Rod
Platelet 
- [62] 
50 β-MnO2 MnO2 Powder - ~ 100 nm [63] 
...Table 1 contd. Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 151 
51 𝛼-MnO2 KMnO4 Rod - [64] 
52 α-MnO2 Rod D: 137.1 nm & L: 1.66 µm [65] 
53 MnO2 Flower
Urchin
Rod 
D: ~ 2.2, L: ~ 1.4 µm
D: ~ 7, L: ~ 5 µm
D: 2, L: ~ 1 µm 
[66] 
54 Mn2 O 3 /Mn3 O 4 Wires
Flower 
L: 10–20 µm
~ 50 nm 
[67] 
55 α-MnO2 
γ-MnOOH
Mn3 O 4 
Mn (Ac)2 ⋅4H2 O Flower
Quadrilateral
-
500 nm
~ L: 20 nm
-
[68] 
56 β-MnO2 MnSO4 ·H2 O Rod D: 32 nm, L: 1.5–2.0 mm [69] 
57 γ-MnOOH
β-MnO2 
KMnO4 Rod W: 30, L: 0.5–1 µm [70] 
58 Mn3 O 4 MnCl2 ·4H2 O Spherical ~ 50 nm [71] 
59 δ-MnO2 Mn (NO3 ) 2 Rod
Sheet 
L: 0.2–0.4 µm
T: 50–10 nm 
[72] 
60 Mn3 O 4 KMnO4 Octahedron
Wire 
Edge size: 60 nm
-
[73] 
61 MnO2 KMnO4 , 
MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O 
Rod
Spherical 
- [74] 
62 MnO2 KMnO4 Flake T: 25–35 nm [75] 
63 α-MnO2 Mn Metal Sheet
Needle 
T: 30 nm
D: 5–30 nm, L: 3–6 µm 
[76] 
64 FeO/MnO MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Cubic 21 ± 3 nm [77] 
65 MnCo2 S 4 MnAc2 ·4H2 O - 50 nm [78] 
66 Mn0.5 Zn0.5 Smx EuX Fe1.8–2xO 4 Mn (NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O Spherical 10–35 nm [79]
Table 1 contd. ... 152 
Sl. No. Type of NMs Methods Used Source Shape Size Reference 
Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 67 α-MnO2 Hydrothermal, Ultrasonication KMnO4 Rod D: 20 nm [80] 68 Mn3 O 4 Polyol MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O Oval Rhomboedron ~ 7.9 nm ~ 12.6 nm [81] 69 Mn3 O 4 MnAc2 .4H2 O Spherical Rhombohedral 5.7 ± 0.6, 7.3 ± 1.1 nm 12.6 nm [82] 70 MnO2 Platelet 03–05 nm [83] 71 Mn52.5Pt 47.5 Mn2 (CO)10 Fcc 03 nm [84] 72 MnFe2 O 4 MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical 11–13 nm [85] 73 MnFe2 O 4 MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical 13.9 ± 0.13 nm [86] 74 LiMnPO4 Mn(CH3 COO)2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical Plate ~ 50 nm ~ 150 nm [87] 75 Mg0.8 Mn0.2 Fe 2 O 4 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O Quasi-spherical 10 ± 2 nm [88] 76 Mn3 O 4 Co-precipitation MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Tetragonal Rod Fractals 10–30 D: 09, L: > 200 nm - [89] 77 MnO2 MnSO4 .H 2 O, C 2 MnO4 Cubic 25–30 nm [90] 78 MnO2 - 22 nm [91] 
79 MnOOH MnCl2 ·4H2 O Rod D: ~ 5 nm [92] 
80 MnO2 MnSO4 ·H2 O Spherical 40.5–70 nm [93] 
81 Mn3 O 4 MnCl2 ·4H2 O Tetragonal 9.6 nm [94] 
...Table 1 contd. Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 153 
82 MnO2 MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Needle
Platelet 
D: ~ 30, L: 300 nm
D: 200, T: ~ 20 nm 
[95] 
83 Mn3 O 4 MnCl2 ·4H2 O, 
MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O 
Saucer 50–150 nm [96] 
84 α-MnO2 MnCl2 ⋅6(H2 O) Irregular 25–30 nm [97] 
85 Mn3 O 4 Mn (NO3 ) 2 ·6H2 O Spherical < 100 nm [98] 
86 Mn2 O 3 MnCl2 ·4H2 O Cubic 10–30 nm [99] 
87 MnO2 MnSO4 ·H2 O Spherical 10–30 nm [100] 
88 (𝛾-Fe2 O 3 )-Mn FeCl3 /MnCl2 Spherical ~ 10–40 nm [101] 
89 MnFe2 O 4 MnCl2 ·6H2 O Spherical 20–50 nm [102] 
90 MnO2
ZnMn2 O 4 
KMnO4 , MnSO4 ·H2 O Rod
Hexagonal and Rod 
L: 80–130 nm
D: ~ 100 nm (Hexagonal) 
[103] 
91 Fe-Mn MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Spherical 10.33–17.48 nm [104] 
92 Mn2 O 3 -Mn3 O 4 Spherical 20–30 nm [105] 
93 Mn3 O 4 Sonochemical MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Tetragonal 5–10 nm [106] 
94 δ-MnO2 KMnO4 Needle
Spherical
Cubic 
-
50–150 nm
0.2–1.0 µm 
[107] 
95 MnO2 KMnO4 Spherical 10–20 nm [108] 
96 α-MnO2 MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O Needle
Spherical 
10–30 nm
-
[5] 
97 MnO2 KMnO4 - ~ 02–03 nm [109]
Table 1 contd. ... 154 
Sl. No. Type of NMs Methods Used Source Shape Size Reference 
Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 98 Mn-Fe MnAc2 ·4H2 O Spherical 34–46 nm [110] 99 MnFe2 O 4 MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Rods Spherical 25 ± 0.5 nm - [111] 100 SrMnO3 KMnO4 , MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Warts Spherical 8–35 nm 4–12 nm [112] 101 Mn0.5 Zn0.5 Dyx Eux Fe 1.8-2xO 4 MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Cubic 20 nm [113] 102 Mnx Zn1-x Fe 2 O 4 Polyol Sonochemical MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical Cube 7–23 nm - [114] 103 Mn3 O 4 Solvothermal Mn Ore Spherical 48 ± 12 nm [115] 104 CuMn2 O 4 MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Rice - [116] 105 MnFe2 O 4 MnFe2 O 3 /C MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Polygonal Spherical 10–30 nm 06–30 nm [117] 106 Fe-Mn:Phosphate Mn(NO3 ) 2 ·4H2 O MnAc2 ·4H2 O Spherical D: 20 nm [118] 107 Sm2 NiMnO6 MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Rod - [119] 108 OMS-2 Microwave- assisted KMnO4 , MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O Spherical ~ 200 nm [120] 109 γ- MnO2 
α-MnO2 
MnSO4 ·H2 O Plates
Sea urchin 
50 nm
01–02 µm 
[121] 
110 Graphene sheet-Mn3 O 4 MnAc2 ⋅H 2 O Spherical 20 nm [122] 
111 LiMnPO4 /C MnSO4 ·H2 O Spindle L: ~ 250, W: ~ 120 nm [123] 
112 ZnMn2 O 4 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅4H2 O Spinel 10–70 nm [124] 
113 CoMn2 O 4 MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical ~ 51.42 nm [125] 
...Table 1 contd. Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 155 
114 Mn3 O 4 Laser ablation Mn(OH)2 Tetragonal 7.1–9.2 nm [126] 
115 MnO2 MnO2 Powder Spherical 100 nm [127] 
116 MnO, Mn3 O 4 Mn Disk Tetragonal 7–11 nm [128] 
117 Mn3 O 4
α-Mn/Mn3 O 4 
Mn Pieces Spherical, Irregular 20–90 nm [129] 
118 Au-MnOx Au-Mn Metal - 4.8 ± 1.2 nm [130] 
119 α-Mn Chemical reduction MnCl2 ⋅4H2 O Spherical 13.1 ± 3.3 nm [131] 
120 γ-MnO2 KMnO4 Spherical ~ 10–18 nm [132] 
121 α-MnO2 Rod D: 10, L: 50–100 nm [133] 
122 Rod D: 15–50 nm, L: 1–3 μm [134] 
123 MnO2 /RGO MnSO4 ⋅H 2 O - 10–20 nm [135] 
124 Mn0.5 Zn0.5 Fe2 O 4 Mn(NO3 ) 2 ⋅6H2 O Spherical 25 ± 3 nm [136] 
125 Ni 6 MnO8 Template Route MnAc2 ·4H2 O Spherical - [137] 
126 Mn3 O 4 Electrochemical Mn Metal Rod
Spherical 
D: 100–200 nm, L: 02–06
µm
35 nm 
[138] 
127 MnFe2 O 4 Microemulsion,
Co-precipitation 
MnAc2 ⋅4H2 O Cubic spinel - [139] 
128 MnO2 Selective etching Mn(NO3 ) 2 Hollow Spherical D: 1–2 μm, T: 300 nm [140] 
D: Diameter; L: Length; T: Thickness and W: Width 156 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
or sub-atomic particles are first organized into clusters and then transformed into 
NMs. Although recent studies have campaigned for the biological synthesis of NMs 
considering them eco-friendly [14, 15], physicochemical synthesis is productive, 
time-saving, and comparatively specific in NM production [16]. Therefore, these 
are more popular and used commonly both for small and large-scale synthesis of 
Mn NMs. In the present chapter, we have discussed the different physicochemical 
approaches used for the synthesis of Mn NMs along with their merits and demerits. 
2. Physical Methods 
2.1 Mechanical Milling 
Mechanical milling is one of the simple, economic, eco-friendly, but reliable 
top-down physical approach for synthesising pure, composite, and alloy Mn 
NMs. In this method, the metallic source is first ground into powder, inside a 
rotating abrasion-resistant hollow shell by repeated collision of the source onto 
metallic, alloy, ceramic or rubbers balls/rods, followed by blending them into NMs 
(Fig. 1) [16]. Furthermore, these mechanical mills are classified based on their mode 
of action: in case of planetary mills, the chambers rotate on a shaft, while in the case 
of tumblers, they rotate on their axes, causing the balls to fall to bottom from the 
top. Similarly, rod mills are different from the others as they rely on rods instead of 
balls. The morphology of the NMs produced in this method depend on the frequency, 
diameter, and time of rotation. The amount of heat produced during the process of 
synthesis is neutralized through cryo-cooling of the mills. 
Abdul-Razaq and Wu [141] used this technique to synthesise MnO and Mn3O4 
NPs in 2001 with the help of non-magnetic tungsten carbide vial and balls. In 
this process, the time of milling was varied at the range of 10, 20, 40, and 80 h, 
and found that size of particles depends reciprocally on the milling time. Gagrani 
et al. in 2018 [18] produced irregular or needle-shaped amorphous MnO2 NMs 
from KMnO4 and MnCl2 in 4 h, using steel balls. Surprisingly, those amorphous 
particles got transformed into crystalline nanorods on heating them at 350°C for 
1 h. In another study, Ochirkhuyag and group [142] utilized MnCl2.4H2O and 
KMnO4 as a NP source and in their finding, they saw that both MnO2 and Mn3O4 
NMs are produced on milling speed at 200 or 450 rpm, while on further increasing 
the speed to 600 rpm, only Mn3O4 NMs were produced. Several studies have also 
reported for the production of MnFe2O4 NMs using this method and their results have 
showed that crystal size of the NM directly depend on the annealing temperature of 
the synthesis. The foregoing process can also be used for the synthesis of alloy NMs 
from multiple metallic sources. Aslani et al. (2017) [22] prepared an alloy of such 
type, i.e., Ni51Mn33.4In15.6. In spite of all the above utilities, there always exists a 
need for further improvement of this method mainly because of its time-consuming, 
noisy, contamination-prone, and energy-intensive nature. Fig. 1. Schematic presentation of different types of mechanical mills. 
Fig. 2. Schematic presentation of the (a) VE, (b) IS, and (c) IP. 
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 157 
2.2 PVD Technique 
PVD is another routinely used physical method of Mn NM synthesis, which 
basically involves vaporization of a Mn source and then deposition of the vapour 
onto a substrate through condensation. The process is classified further into vacuum 
evaporation (VE), ion plating (IP), and ionic sputtering (IS) based on the heating 
source used (Fig. 2). In the first two cases, the source is generally present on a 
filament or crucible which is heated under pressure by using induction, radiation, 
high energy electron beam or laser light [28], whereas in the third case, He+
, Ar+ 
ions are collided onto the source under high pressure to produce plasma (secondary 
e– s, reflected ions, the Mn atoms/ions, and photons) (Fig. 3a) [143]. The plasma is 
then localized on or around the source, using high frequency radio-waves (insulated 
IS) or powerful magnetic field (magnetron sputtering) [144]. The ions of Mn in the  
Fig. 3. Schematic presentation for (a) plasma and (b) Lorentz force imparted on a charged ion in an 
electromagnetic field. 
158 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
plasma is imparted by Lorentz force (F) (Fig. 3b and equation 1), where, q, E, v, 
and B represent ion charge, electric field, potential gradient, and magnetic field, 
respectively [145]. The Mn vapours are then deposited onto a work piece in a single 
or multi-layer through condensation. The composition and thickness of deposition 
depend on the rate of evaporation of Mn source, applied pressure, reactive gas in 
the reaction chamber, sputtering yields, and/or distance between the source and the 
work-piece. 
F = q (E + vB) (1) 
IP is a hybrid form of both VE and IS, taken together, in which the heating source 
can follow either of the two. However, sometimes, heating at high temperature may 
melt down the platform itself; therefore, e-
 beams are used for target-specific heating 
of the source. Furthermore, to increase the rate of deposition and produce tuned 
NM, certain ion accelerators are used [27]. Chang et al. 2004 [23] used this PVD 
to synthesise ferromagnetic Mn3O4 NP in just 90 min and reported that size of the 
particle varies with temperature. Music and co-group in 2015 [146] produced MnO2 
NP nanolayer (9 mm) on Si, using a DC magnetron sputtering. After a year, the 
same approach was used but to deposit α-MnO2 nanorods (length: 30 ± 5 nm) on 
Ni-coated anodic Al2O3 [147]. Researches have also reported for the synthesis of 
composite NMs; for example, Das et al. in 2016 [1] deposited a nanolayer of Mn5Si3 
on the carbon surface through magnetron sputtering, while Nijam et al. in 2017 [28] 
fabricated a MgF2/γ-MnO2/α-Bi2O3/a-Si solar cell by depositing γ-MnO2/α-Bi2O3 
onto Si substrate. In another experiment, Fernandez-Barica and group in 2019 
[148] electrodeposited a Fe-Mn layer of 300–500 nm onto Si, using DC-magnetron 
co-sputtering at room temperature (RT). Morphology and biocompatibility of the 
NMs are seen changing with the change in Mn:Fe ratio. Similarly, Mn oxide was 
deposited onto graphite foil to produce porous needle-like MnxOy@graphite NMs 
for supercapacitor application [149]. 
Another type of PVD is laser ablation, which involves hitting the Mn source 
with a high-powered laser beam (in the UV spectrum) under ultra-high vacuum to 
form a plasma. The plasma is then condensed into liquid by colliding with an inert 
gas (Fig. 4a) [126]. The shape, size, and composition of the NM synthesised in this 
method depends on the source, chamber pressure, and laser type. Laser pyrolysis 
or laser assisted deposition is another type of PVD, in which non-reacting metallic Fig. 4. Schematic presentation for (a) laser ablation and (b) laser pyrolysis technique. 
Fig. 5. Schematic presentation of an EAD method. 
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 159 
sources are heat-decomposed and then reacted under ultra-high vacuum to form alloy 
NMs (Fig. 4b) [150]. 
Another simple but cost-effective PVD technique is electric arc deposition 
(EAD), which is used often to synthesise carbon nanotubes, but can also be used for 
preparing Mn NMs [24, 151]. When a current of high voltage is applied between two 
electrodes (1–2 mm gape) in vacuum, the Mn vapours get deposits at anode (Fig. 5) 
[150]. Although controlling the size and composition of the NMs is difficult in this 
process, the pressure and rate of discharge can do so to certain extent. This process 
is very common in producing thermal, chemical or mechanically resistant NMs. Kim 
et al. in 2013 [26] reported decreasing particle size with increasing discharge time 
for producing polycrystalline Mn NPs from the MnCl2·4H2O. Further, the particle 
morphology also varied with time and concentration of surfactant. Without the 
addition of CTAB, the NPs produced between 10–40 min were of dendritic-shape, 
while after 50 min, they were of tetragonal-shape; with CTAB, the particles produced 
at initial stage were of spherical-shaped, while later, they appeared octahedral or 
whisker-shaped. 
Zhang and group in 2010 [126] proposed tetragonal Mn3O4 NPs synthesis in 
MiliQ water at 1064 nm (pulse time 10 ns) for 30 min. At low temperature, the 
NPs exhibited ferromagnetism while at RT, they behaved as paramagnetic. After a 
year, Ganeev and group [152] synthesised Mn NPs in ethanol 50 ps laser in a laser 
ablation technique and observed a change in particle morphology with time. Particle 
size ranged from 6–50 nm at the beginning to 7–14 nm after 15 days. Similarly, 
the particles formed in the beginning were spherical-shaped, while towards end, 
they were triangle or square-shaped. In another study, Au-MnO2 and Au-Mn2O3 160 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
core-shell alloy nanolayers (~ 0.3–13 nm) were produced in 2 min using a laser beam 
of 238 nm in aqueous solution, pH-11. At 1064 nm, no core-shells were formed, 
rather simple Au and MnOx NPs were formed [130]. Shukla et al. in 2016 [153] used 
50 mJ/pulse for 15 min in polyvinyl alcohol and produced spherical MnFe2O4 NPs. 
The solvent not only controlled the size of the NPs, but also prevented agglomeration. 
Zhang et al. (2017) [154] produced FeMn@FeMn2O4 core-shell alloy, Mn3O4, and 
γ-MnO2 NPs in C2H5OH, C2H5OH-H2O, and H2O, respectively. In 2019, Rahmat 
et al. [127] used laser at 1064 nm (pulse 5 ns) and power, 103 mJ cm–2 to manufacture 
MnO2 nanocolloids from waste battery cell in H2O and CH3OH. Optical analysis 
of the particles revealed different properties of the NMs for different type of laser 
radiation used. Yang and co-workers, in the same year, synthesised irregular or 
spherical Mn3O4 and α-Mn/Mn3O4 composite NPs of size 20–90 nm at RT and 
~ 20 psa using 1064 nm laser beam. α-Mn/Mn3O4 NPs showed antiferromagnetic 
characteristics, whereas Mn3O4 were ferrimagnetic [129]. NPs of different Mn 
oxides were produced recently in MiliQ water by changing the laser ablation period. 
At 10 min, both MnO and Mn3O4 were produced while, at 25–35 min, MnO was 
transformed into agglomerated Mn3O4 NPs (7–11 nm) [128]. In spite of all the above 
merits, this approach is replaced with other methods as this is time-consuming, 
expensive, and requires high temperature. 
2.3 Microwave-assisted Synthesis 
In a microwave-assisted method, the heat produced from dipole or ionic interactions 
of high frequency microwaves (3 × 105
–3 × 108
 Hz) with materials [155, 125] is used 
to enhance the reaction kinetics and nucleation of NM production [122] in fluids 
such as DMF, ethylene glycol (EG), C2H5OH, H2O, and so on [155]. Opembe et al. in 
2010 [120] synthesised cryptomelane-type MnOx octahedral molecular sieve (OMS) 
from MnSO4·H2O and KMnO4 in the presence of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) using 
continuous microwave flow. The effect of variation in power input, time, DMSO 
on the NP morphology was assessed and optimised. The results showed that, for 
synthesising NM crystals, 5% DMSO at 300 W and slow microwave is suitable. 
Zhang et al. [156] successfully produced MnO2 nanostructures both in acidic and 
neutral condition but the NPs formed were smaller and γ-MnO2, at pH~7, while at pH 
< 7, α-MnO2 of larger of size was produced. In some other studies, microwave was 
used to assist other physicochemical methods for quicker and controlled synthesis 
of NMs. Using a microwave-assisted hydrothermal reaction, Li and co-workers 
[122] produced Mn3O4-graphene nanocomposite from MnAc2 and graphite oxide. 
Similarly, Long et al. in 2017 [123] utilized microwave-assisted polyol method for 
the synthesis of spindle-shaped LiMnPO4/C structures at 130ºC. In another study, 
microwave-assisted colloidal approach was employed, in which microwaves were 
irradiated at every 2 min interval for 4 h in C2H5OH to synthesise ZnMn2O4 NPs 
followed by drying at 500ºC [124]. Microwave-assisted solvothermal method is 
another approach, adopted by Phuruangrat and group for synthesising crystalline 
ferromagnetic MnFe2O4 NPs (30 nm) from Mn(NO3)2·6H2O in presence of EG in 
30 min at 100ºC [157].  
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 161 
3. Chemical Methods 
3.1 Hydrothermal Method 
In this process, hydrophilic inorganic compounds are heat-lysed at the hot end of a 
chamber under high pressure and then deposited onto the cool end on other side [75]. 
Ahmad and group [158] produced hexagonal (30 nm) and polycrystalline Mn3O4 
nanoplates (100 × 10 nm2
) from MnAc2∙4H2O in 14 h at 180°C in n-butylamine. In 
2019, Li et al. [159] followed a two-step process involving MnSiO3 as an intermediate 
to synthesise Mn3O4 NPs in the presence of NaOH. Besides the MnxOy, studies 
have also reported for the synthesis of composite Mn NMs through this method. 
In 2019, Zhang and group [78] synthesised stable mesoporous and microporous 
MnCo2S4 NPs, while Akhtar and co-workers produced agglomerated spherical 
Mn0.5Zn0.5SmxEuXFe1.8–2xO4 NPs (7–12 nm) at 180°C in 10 h [79]. In the same 
year, Ullrich et al. [77] synthesised core-shell cubes of MnxFe3–xO4@FeO/MnO 
(21 ± 3 nm) from Mn (II)-oleate and Fe(III)-oleate, using Na-oleate and oleic acid 
(OA) as surfactants. 
Shape and size of the NPs produced in hydrothermal method are influenced 
by temperature, pressure, time, solvent, ions, and surfactant [160]. A SDS-assisted 
hydrothermal approach was used for the synthesis of agglomerated MnO2 nanorods, 
forming a sea urchin nanostructure [56]. α-MnO2 sea urchin was also synthesised, 
using Al3+, but when Fe3+ was used instead of Al3+, clew-shaped ε-MnO2 was 
produced [57]. 
Impact of time on the NP morphology was demonstrated by Subramanian and 
group in 2005 [55], while synthesising α-MnO2 NPs at a constant temperature of 
140°C. The results showed that at the beginning, both amorphous and crystalline 
NMs were produced, while later on, only crystalline NMs were produced. The 
shape of the particles produced also showed change with time, plate, plate/rod, and 
rod-like NMs at 1, 9, and 12 h of reaction, respectively. In a similar study, Wang et al., in 
2018 [68] produced three different Mn NPs from same MnAc2·4H2O and CTAB, i.e., 
flower-like α-MnO2 nanostructures (~ 500 nm), regular quadrilateral γ-MnOOH NPs 
(~ 20 × 20 nm), and quadrilateral Mn3O4 NPs after 3, 11, and 24 h, respectively. In 
2020, Xiao et al. [76] had also observed that at 2 h, flower-like particles were produced, 
while at 4 h, needle-like α-MnO2 NMs were produced from Mn-contaminated H2O. 
Hydrothermal temperature is another crucial parameter for determining the NM 
morphology [74]. In a study, Xiao et al. [59] produced vertical birnessite-MnO2 
microsphere/nanosheets, α-MnO2 rods (2–3 µm), and α-MnO2 nanotubes, at 100, 
120, 140°C, respectively and on further heating, hollow α-MnO2 nanostructures were 
formed. Similarly, in 2012, Hlaing and Win [61] found that, heating at 90°C for 2 h, 
α-MnO2 nanorods were produced, while at 120°C both α and β-MnO2 nanorods were 
produced. However, on heating the same for 8 h, some of the rods got aggregated into 
wires. Chu and co-researchers in 2017 [66] created nanoflower, urchin, and nanorods 
of MnO2 at three distinct temperatures: 120, 140, and 160°C respectively. In a similar 
study, Venkata Swetha and group (2018) [67] used 150, 170, and 190°C to synthesise 
Mn oxide NPs from KMnO4 in the presence of urea and CTAB. At 150°C, they 
observed mixed phage Mn2O3/Mn3O4 nanowires, while at 170°C, nanoflowers 162 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
of the same were formed. On rising the temperature to 190°C, only single phage 
tetragonal Mn2O3 NPs were produced. In 2019, Selim et al. [70] found that heating 
KMnO4 at 120°C for 10 h, γ-MnOOH was formed, which on calcination at 400 and 
700°C, produced β-MnO2 and α-Mn2O3 NPs, respectively. In 2020, Han et al. [73] 
used C2H5OH to make Mn3O4 NMs from KMnO4. In their experiment, octahedron 
materials were produced at 170°C, while at 110°C, nanowires were produced. 
In addition to the aforementioned factors, stabilizing agents also decide NM 
morphology in a hydrothermal method. Nguyen and co-workers in 2011 [161] 
used various concentrations of 6-aminohexanoic acid to produce MnWO4 crystals 
(sphere, quasi-sphere, square, hexagonal, bar, and rod-shaped). In 2019, Shaik 
et al. [162] employed H2O2 to synthesise nanostructures of Mn3O4 from MnCl2·4H2O 
and observed that the particle size decreases with increasing the H2O2 concentration. 
They also observed particle morphology with changing H2O2 conc. At 1 M, 50-nm, 
agglomerated, spherical particles were formed, while at 2 and 3 M, flake-like and 
porous-shaped particles were produced, respectively. Although hydrothermal process 
is one of the widely accepted and adopted methods of NP synthesis, this method is 
quite expensive and accident prone. 
3.2 Solvothermal Method 
Solvothermal method is an one-step chemical process, used especially for the 
synthesis of composite NMs, which involves boiling of the solvents (H2O, CH3OH, 
C2H5OH, NH4, CO2, HCl, HF, etc.) in a autoclave under a pressure of > 1 bar 
[115,163,164]consequently, led to the nomenclature of phosphor-converted LEDs 
(pc-LEDs. Saravana and group (2017) [116] attempted to synthesise CuMn2O4 NPs 
in 12 h by heating at 120–160°C and found that 160°C as appropriate. However, 
crystallinity of the particles improved with increasing the temperature. Stoia 
et al. in 2017 [117] fabricated MnFe2O4 and MnFe2O4/C nanocomposites from 
MnCl2.4H2O. Yue and group (2019) [165] synthesised porous Co-Mn nanosheets 
in 1 h and reported that with increasing the Co: Mn ratio, the length and thickness 
of the nanosheet also increased. Singh and Kumar [119] fabricated polycrystalline 
mesoporous Sm2NiMnO6 nanorods (diameter: 10 nm) from Sm(NO3)3∙6H2O, 
Ni(NO3)2∙6H2O, and Mn(SO4)∙6H2O. Wang et al. [166] synthesised porous MnFe2O4 
nanoflakes by heating MnCl2.4H2O at 200°C for 12 h. Researchers have also utilized 
this method to synthesise metal-doped Mn NMs. In the same year, Liu et al. [118] 
prepared Co, Cu, Ni, and Fe-doped Mn3(PO4)2 NPs, first by adding Mn(NO3)2·4H2O 
to H3PO4 in the presence of olylamine and octadecene for 24 h at 180°C, followed 
by reaction with Fe(NO3)2 at 180°C. Among the different metallic-doped NPs 
produced, Fe-doped NPs showed the highest electrochemical activities. Like that 
of hydrothermal method, the morphology of the NPs produced in this method can 
also be controlled through temperature, time, and solvent concentration. Although 
both the hydrothermal as well as solvothermal methods are productive, they are 
time-consuming. Fig. 6. Schematic representation of CVD based NMs synthesis. 
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 163 
3.3 CVD Technique 
This process entails the vaporisation of one or more chemicals either inside a hot 
chamber (hot wall CVD) or on a heated platform present in the chamber (cold 
wall CVD) and then reaction of the vapour before deposition onto the substrate 
(Fig. 6) [167, 168]. The composition of the NMs produced in this method depend on 
the chemicals reacted, heating temperature, and pressure in the chamber. In 2008, 
Higgins et al. [169] synthesised nanowires of Mn19Si33 from Mn(CO)5SiCl3, using 
this method, and subsequently in 2011, they synthesised polyforms of the same 
NM with α-Mn5Si3, β-Mn5Si3, and β-Mn3Si [170]. In the same year, Le and group 
[25] synthesised MnO2, Mn2O3, Mn2O3/Mn3O4, Mn3O4 NPs by heating manganese 
carbonyl at 500, 700–1100, 1300, and 1500°C, respectively, in an electric furnace. 
A thin film of Mn oxide was deposited onto three substrates: glass, Si wafer, and 
carbon fibre paper from methylcyclopentadienyl manganese(I)tricarbonyl (MMT) 
[171]. Different parameters such as rate of plasma and H2 flow, pressure in the 
chamber, MMT, and O2 regulated the thickness and composition of NM film. The 
film thickness was calculated as 20 nm under a plasma flow of 500 W, chamber 
pressure of 80 Pa, and MMT, O2, H2 flow rate of 4.5 × 10–7 mol/min, 125 and 
25 sccm, respectively, in the presence of Ar in an unoptimized condition. Plasma power 
≥ 500 W and ≥ 53 Pa chamber pressure performed measurable deposition of film. A 
perfect, suitable deposited film was observed at MMT flow rate of 4.1 × 10–7 mol/min. 
Enhanced rate of flow of MMT precursor resulted in weak attachment of MnOx NP 
to surface. Barreca et al. 2018 [172] almost repeated the same experiment but by 
using fluorinated-Mn2+ as source. In their experiment, β-MnO2 NPs were produced 
at a temperature of < 300°C but at ~ 400°C, both MnO2 and Mn3O4 were produced. 
In another study, aerosol-assisted CVD was used to deposit CdO-Mn2O3 
nanocomposite from [Cd(dmae)2(OAc)2]⋅H2O (dmae: dimethylaminoethanol, 
OAc: acetato) and Mn (CH3COO)2 (v/v 1:1) onto a fluorine (F)-doped TiO2-SiO2 
substrate at 500°C in 45 mins in the presence of Ar. The thickness and morphology of 
the film varied with the type of solvent used. With tetrahydrofuran, an agglomerated 
and irregular NP film was formed, while in case of CH3OH, a film of barren soil 
like small chips of agglomerated particles was formed. When C2H5OH was used 
as solvent, an agglomerated irregular brick-shaped structure having small spherical 
granules were observed [173]. A similar study was carried out to deposit β-MnO2 
thin films from fluorinated Mn (II)diamine diketonate onto F-doped TiO2-SiO2 at  
	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	
164 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
100–400°C in the presence of Ar and O2. The study showed variation in the 
morphology of NMs with variation in the temperature [174]. Recently, Bigiani and 
co-researchers (2020) [12] fabricated F-doped β-MnO2 NP onto MgAl2O4, YAlO3, 
and Y3Al5O12 using Ar/O2 plasma at 300°C using Mn(1,1,1,5,5,5-hexafluoro￾2,4-pentanedione)2 N,N,N,N-tetramethylethylenediamine (Mn(hfa)2TMEDA) as 
precursor. Thus, although CVD approach is quite simple, economic, and dynamic, it 
sometimes produces harmful by-products. 
3.4 Sol-gel Method 
This is also a simple chemical approach, particularly for synthesis of pure or 
ultrapure NMs with a customized shape, size, and property. In this process, the 
precursor is first hydrolysed into an aqueous or non-aqueous solution, and then 
polymerized into a gel, either by olation or oxolation (Equations 2–4). These gels are 
then agitated and dried through spin/dip coating (xerogels), freezing (cryogels) or 
heating (aerogels) [43]. Finally, they are converted into powder through calcination 
(Fig. 7) [49]. The shape, size, and composition of the NPs synthesised by this method 
depend on the concentration of precursor, nature and pH of solvent, temperature and 
nature of the condenser, temperature and humidity of agitation, and/or calcination 
temperature [175]. 
M-OR + H-O-H → M-OH + R-OH	 (2) 
M-OR + M-OH → M-O-M + R-O	 (3) 
M-OH + M-OH → M-O-M + H-OH	 (4) 
The M, R, O, H, M-OR, and M-OH in the equations denote metal, alkyl, 
oxygen, hydrogen, metal alkoxide, and metal hydroxides, respectively [40, 176]. 
This technique can be used to produce both MnxOy as well as composite NMs 
with desirable size, shape, and properties. Zhang et al. in 2013 [44] adopted 
epoxide-based sol-gel technique to synthesise spherical mesoporous NiMn2O4 NPs. 
In their experiment, a mixture of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and Mn(NO3)2·6H2O (1:2) was 
prepared in 12 h at RT and then CA and propylene oxide were added. The wet gel was 
dried using Sc-CO2 and then calcinated at 200, 300, and 400°C for 5 h. In 2017, Zhao 
and group [177] produced Cu-Co alloy/Mn2O3-Al2O3 composite NP by gelating a 
mixture of two different solutions of Cu/Co and Mn/Al. Cu/Co was prepared by 
stirring a mixture of Cu (NO3)2 and Co(NO3)2 in CA at 50°C for 1 h, while the Mn/ 
Al was prepared from Mn/Al [x:(8–x)] by using CA and PEG. Both the solutions 
were mixed dropwise and then gelated through continuous stirring for 2 h at 80°C. 
At the end, the gel was heated at 120°C for overnight and then calcinated at 320 and 
400°C for 3 h each. In the next year, Dar and Varshney [178] synthesised both simple 
and metallic (Co, Ni, and Cu)-doped Mg0.95Mn0.05O NPs (31–48 nm), at pH > 7, 
using CA. Finally, the gels were dried at 400°C for 4 h. Recently in 2020, Ismail and 
co-group [38] synthesised gels of Mn3O4 and Mn3O4/rGO nanocomposite. For the 
first one a mixture of CA and Mn (CH3CO2)2·4H2O was stirred at 500 RPM and , 
80°C for 5 h, while for the second one, two or five percentage of GO was added 
to the mixture of CA and Mn (CH3CO2)2·4H2O, with other parameters being the 	 	 	 	
Fig. 7. Schematic representation of the sol-gel based synthesis of Mn NMs. 
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 165 
same. The gels were then dried at 110°C and calcined at 380°C for 12 h to produce 
corresponding NPs. The above steps yielded spherical and dispersed Mn3O4 NPs 
(~ 10 nm) with rGO sheets. The agglomeration and particle size decreased with 
increasing GO conc. Similarly, Ca-doped soft, porous and agglomerated MnxFe2O4 
·4Hּ 2O in 3)2.4H2O and Mn(NO3) NPs were synthesised by sol-gel route from Ca(NO 2
H O (1:1) at 25–80°C and pH 7 [48]. The efficiency 2 ּ 7· the presence of CA and C6H2O
of different chelating agents: ethylenediaminetetracaetic acid (EDTA), CA, tartaric 
acid, and phthalic acid on the synthesis of Li2MnO3 NPs, was evaluated by Ranjeh 
and group in 2020 [45]. A mixture of metal ion, EG, and chelating agent (1:1:1) was 
used, of which EDTA produced the smallest (10–180 nm) but uniform NPs. Winiarska 
and group in 2012 [179] used a combinatorial approach of co-precipitation and 
sol-gel method to produce Mn-Zn Fe2O4 NPs, in which the Zn, Mn, and Fe sulphates 
were independently co-precipitated into their corresponding ions at 60°C with the 
help of either NaOH or ammonium oxalate. The precipitates were then filtered, 
dried, and heat-burnt in the presence of CA and HNO3 to produce Mn-Zn Fe2O4 
NPs. Their results showed that oxalate-derived particles were smaller and spherical 
but agglomerated, while sodium hydroxide-derived particles were heterogeneous in 
shape (spherical, dendritic, and polyhedral). 
3.5 Microemulsion Method 
Microemulsions are thermostable droplets (600–8000 nm) containing both polar and 
non-polar solvents separated by a surfactant and/or co-surfactant. These droplets can 
be oil in water (O/W) or water in oil (W/O). However, in some cases, W/Sc-CO2 
(supercritical CO2) is used in place of W/O, particularly during NM synthesis in 
order to simplify the recovery step (Fig. 8). In a W/O nanoreactor, polar heads of 
the surfactants point inward with their hydrocarbon chains projecting outside. The 
synthesis follows either one microemulsion approach or one microemulsion plus 
reactant approach [180, 53]. In the first case, the chemicals present in the core of 
microemulsion is irradiated with a high energy ray to initiate the reaction (Equation5) 
[139], while in the second case, chemicals contained in the different microemulsions 
are made to collide and exchange their contents along with reaction (Equation 6). 
Caq 
+ Energy → Solventaq + CNM (5) ABaq + Caq → ACaq + BDNM (6) 
A hexanol oil phage-based W/O system with CTAB as surfactant was used by 
Kosak and group [50] for the synthesis of Mn-Zn-ferrite NPs. In 2011, Scano and 
co-group [51] synthesised MnFe2O4 NPs by thermal treatment of Mn and Fe 
oxohydride precursors in W/O. In another study, CTAB, 1-butanol (co-surfactant), 
and n-hexane were used to synthesise La0.7Sr0.3Mn0.98Ti0.02O3 perovskite NPs which 
were then calcinated at 700ºC for 4 h [54]. In 2017, Shahid et al. [181] produced 
Gd3+ and Co2+-doped MnFe2O4 (Mn1−xCoxFe2−yGdyO4) NPs. Another group in 2015 
used triton X-100/n-hexanol/cyclohexane system to synthesise Mn-Co-Ni-O NPs 
[182]. The NMs produced in this process were spherical at low temperatures, while 
tetragonal at 400ºC, and on rising the temperature to 700ºC, cubic spinel-shaped 
NPs were produced. A year later, Agarwal et al. [53] used pentanol and SDS to 
produce Mn3(PO4)2 NPs and their study showed that size of the particles increase 
with increasing the temperature. 
Although W/O system is the common microemulsion used for the synthesis of 
NMs, organic solvents used in this system can act as a pollutant, and also the yield 
is low, using this system. Therefore, O/W systems are used in place of the earlier. 
Pemartin et al. [52] used an O/W system to synthesise Mn-Zn-Fe2O4 NPs using 
tetramethylammoniumhydroxide and NaOH as precipitating agent and n-hexane 
as oil phage. They could find that particle size increased with increasing the conc. 
of oil phage and both size as well as crystallinity increased with the increase in 
the concentration of precipitating agent. Baig and co-workers in 2019 [139] used 
paraffin, dodecanol, and toluene as oil phage and CTAB, SDS, and Triton X-100 
as surfactants for the synthesis of MnFe2O4 NPs, and reported paraffin oil/W to be 
cheap and best. 
3.6 Polyol Method 
Polyol method basically involves hydrolysis of metal ions in a polyol such as EG, 
butylene glycol, propylene glycol, diethylene glycol (DG), triethylene glycol, 
tetraethylene glycol or polyethylene glycol (PEG) at a specific refluxing temperature 
[85]. These solvents act both as reducing as well as stabilizing agent for NM synthesis 
[123]. Diao et al. (2014) [183] used DEG to synthesise K-MnO2 and LiMn2O4 
NPs from KMnO4 in 10 min at 70°C, while Li et al. 2018 [184] employed PEG to 
produce hydrophilic MnO NPs from Mn(NO3)2·4H2O. Composite NMs have also 
Fig. 8. Schematic representation for (a) microemulsions, (b) one microemulsion method, and (c) one 
microemulsion plus reactant method. 
166 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 167 
been produced using the above technique. Ono and group [84] described one such 
study in which PtAc2 was initially reduced by 1,2-tetradecanediol at RT followed by 
increase in the temperature. When the temperature attained 100°C, Mn2(CO)10 in 
n-dioctyl ether containing OA, and oleylamine was added to the precipitate and on 
further rising the temperature, black particles appeared at 250°C. The particles were 
then characterized to be ferromagnetic face cantered cubic (Fcc)-shaped Mn52.5Pt47.5 
alloy NPs. Liu and co-workers [185] used PEG to make powdered Li2MnSiO4 from 
Si(OC2H5)4, LiAc2‧Hּ 2O and MnAc2·4H2O. Sucrose was then used as a carbon
source to coat the powder through ball milling. In two different studies, DG was 
used as reducing as well as stabilizing agent to synthesize Mg0.8Mn0.2Fe2O4 [88] 
and MnFe2O4 NPs [85] from Mn(NO3)2 and Mn(Ac)2, respectively. In this method, 
particle morphology also relies on the time and temperature for reduction, which also 
played crucial roles in determining the shape and size of the NMs [87, 83]. Rhadif 
et al. [81] showed that Mn(Ac)2∙4H2O produced oval-shaped Mn3O4 NPs at 2 h, 
while at 5 and 16 h, rhombohedron-shaped particles were formed. Sicard et al. 
[82] also proved the same by producing spherical yet oval-shaped Mn3O4 NPs at 
5–30 min, while rhomboidal-shaped particles at 2 h of reaction time. In another 
study, hollow, spherical, ferromagnetic MnFe2O4 and ZnFe2O4 NPs were 
synthesised, using EG and NaAc·3H2O at RT which turned into superparamagnetic, 
simply by increasing the temperature [186]. Using the same reducing agent, the 
group also reported spinel-shaped Mn, Co, and Ni ferrite NPs from their respective 
precursors [86]. 
3.7 Co-precipitation Method 
Co-precipitation method is a simple, effective, and low-cost technique for the 
synthesis of metal NPs [187]. In this procedure, the metallic ions are precipitated in the 
form of hydroxides, carbonates, oxalates or citrates with the help of certain reagents 
and then calcinated into nano-powders [188]. Many research groups have employed 
this method for synthesising MnxOy [89, 189]. MnO2 being the most prevalent of 
these oxides, researchers have attempted to synthesise these NMs using NaOH [93], 
SDS [95], etc. from MnC2O4 [91], MnSO4, [100], and so on. Shaker and Abdasalam 
used KOH instead of NaOH to produce Mn3O4 and Mn2O3 NPs [97]. In another 
report, Jamil et al. [96] used MnCl2 and MnAc2 to prepare saucer-shaped crystalline 
Mn3O4 NPs. Vignesh and co-workers [102] used MnCl2·6H2O and FeCl3·9H2O to 
prepare electrochemically stable MnFe2O4 NPs. In an attempt to synthesise Fe-Mn 
alloy NMs, Buccolieri et al. [101] used different combination of FeCl3 and MnCl2. 
At high concentration of MnCl2, no NMs were produced, while at low concentration, 
porous, spherical NPs (10–40 nm) were formed. Eslami and group [190] used an 
aeration-coprecipitation method for an increased rate of oxidation. This method 
produced spherical NMs with 29.36% Mn2O3 and 49.83% Fe2O3. Another experiment 
showed that treating MnSO4.H2O with NaOH at RT followed by calcination at 600°C 
for 2 h produced spherical composite NM of Mn2O3-Mn3O4 [105]. 
Morphology of the particles produced through this method is pH dependent. 
The size of the cubic Mn2O3 NPs produced by Najjar et al. in 2019 [99] was found 
to shrink with increasing the pH from 10 to 13. Zainab and Sadeq [191] used 168 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
two capping agents: CTAB and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) to synthesise Mn2O3 
NPs, in which CTAB created plate-like NMs (36–44 nm), while the other created 
non-uniform nanofibers (30–37 nm). Several groups have compared this method 
with other methods with regard to their efficacy and sensitivity and it was found 
to be superior than ultrasonic irradiation [98] and micro-emulsion [139]. Kafshgari 
et al. [49] synthesised MnFe2O4 NPs from Mn(NO3)2·4H2O and Fe(NO3)·9Hּ 2O using
co-precipitation, sol-gel, and hydrothermal processes, and found that co-precipitation 
yielded 36-nm spherical NPs, while sol-gel and hydrothermal processes produced 
45-nm reticular structured NPs and 16-nm nanosheets, respectively. Despite all of 
these, this method fails to synthesise pure or ultra-pure NPs, and also the method is 
time-taking. 
3.8 Sonochemical Method 
Sonochemical method is a kind of novel chemical approach for the synthesis of NMs 
that uses ultrasonic sound energy for accelerating the rate of hydrolysis [192, 193]. 
As compared to other methods, this method is preferred for producing small but pure 
and eco-friendly NPs. The technique can be grouped into primary and secondary 
sonochemistry depending on the precursor they use: the first method uses volatile 
precursors, while the second one uses non-volatile precursors [194]. Gnana Sundara 
Raj et al. [108] and Rajrana et al. [109] synthesised MnO2 NPs from KMnO4, using 
a sonochemical approach with PEG as reducing agent. Wang and group [195] 
synthesised PVP-coated MnFe2O4 NPs in 2018. Mn0.5Zn0.5DyxEuxFe1.8–2xO4 NPs 
(20 nm) in aggregated cubic grain were synthesised by Rehman et al. [113]. Amulya 
and co-workers produced rod-shaped MnFe2O4 NPs from MnSO4 quite recently [2]. 
Lei et al. [106] succeeded in producing uniform-sized tetragonal colloidal Mn3O4 
NPs from MnCl2 in ethanolamine at 40–100°C without even using any surfactant 
or extra nucleating component. Their findings revealed that, with increasing the 
temperature, size of the particle also increases. In another report, Dharmarathna 
and co-workers [196] synthesised octahedral molecular sieve (OMS) of Mn-ferrite 
from KMnO4 and MnSO4·H2O at RT by using a mixed phage of water/acetone. The 
NPs morphology also depended on sonication time and calcination temperature. A 
similar trend of the results was observed from Goswami et al. [110] for synthesising 
MnFe2O4 NPs from MnAc2. On increasing the temperature from 923 to 1223 K, 
particle size increased from 34 to 46 nm. Along with size, the shape of the particles 
also changed from spherical to rod-type. Excluding these factors, pH also plays a 
crucial role in deciding the particle morphology, which was proved from the study 
of Abulizi et al. in 2014 [107]. They could synthesise sheet/needle, spherical, and 
cubic/polyhedron-shaped δ-MnO2 NPs in just 20 min, from the same precursor, 
i.e., KMnO4 in the presence of PEG by simply varying the pH to 2.2, 6.0, and 9.3, 
respectively. 
Comparison study between the present method and other physicochemical 
methods has also been done. Mn-Zn ferrite (MnxZn1–xFe2O4) NPs were synthesised 
from MnCl2 and MnSO4 via both polyol and sonochemical methods. From MnCl2, 
the polyol method produced polydispersed tiny, aggregated, and low crystalline 
spherical NPs, while sonochemical route yielded monodispersed, cube-like, highly Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 169 
crystalline NPs. Similarly, MnSO4 created tiny NPs via the sonochemical approach, 
while the polyol method produced chain like circular NPs. Overall, the sonochemical 
method was proven to be more effective than the other [114]. Gholamrezaei and 
Salavati-Niasari [112] used ultrasonic, microwave, hydrothermal, and 
co-precipitation method to synthesise SrMnO3 NPs from KMnO4 and MnCl2·4H2O. 
Except sonochemistry, in all the other approaches, the NPs formed were of aggregated, 
destructured and indetermined form. Simultaneously, the surfactants also decided the 
particle morphology. PEG 600 produced wart-shaped agglomerated 8–35 nm NPs, 
while SDS produced, 4–12 nm spherical NPs. In spite of all, the main limitations of 
this method are low yield and inefficiency. 
3.9 Chemical Reduction 
This is nothing but oxidoreduction approach, in which the source of Mn is chemically 
reduced using a reducing agent. Air stable α-Mn NPs was synthesized by Bondi 
et al. [131] through Schlenk and Glove box technique, using n-butyllithium as a strong 
reducing agent and oleic acid as stabilizer. The NPs produced showed paramagnetic 
properties. In 2011, Hu and co-group leached Zn-Mn batteries and then burnt them in 
the presence of iron shells and citrate-nitrate precursors to prepare Mn0.5Zn0.5Fe2O4 
NPs [136]. In the same year, Qian et al. [135] employed polymer-assisted chemical 
reduction to synthesise MnO2/RGO nanocomposites from MnSO4·H2O; in this 
process, the source of Mn itself acted as a catalyst. Le and Phuc [132] synthesised 
γ-MnO2 NPs from KMnO4 in C2H5OH in 4 h at RT. In another study, instead of 
C2H5OH, deep eutectic solvent was used for synthesising rods and sheets of α-MnO2 
at 60, 70, and 80°C [133]. 
4. Additional Approaches 
In addition to the above physicochemical approaches, researchers have also explored 
other strategies for the synthesis of Mn NMs. Sui et al. [197] used molten salts of 
KNO3 and mixture of NaNO3 and LiNO3 to synthesise α-MnO2 wires and β-MnO2 
rods, respectively, from MnSO4·H2O. In the first case, reaction mixture was heated 
at 380°C for 2 h, while in the other for 3 h. The products were washed, recovered, 
and cooled to RT. However, increasing the temperature to above 400°C, Mn2O3 was 
produced in both the cases. Furthermore, the NMs produced at the beginning were 
found to be amorphous type while towards late, crystal NMs were formed. In another 
study, Wang et al. [137] followed a templet approach to make mesoporous Ni6MnO8 
nanospheres from Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O. Yang et al. (2019) [138] produced Mn3O4 
NPs through electrochemical scanning and observed a change in the morphology of 
the synthesised particles with the change in scan rate. Surprisingly, at 5 and 200 V/s, 
spherical and rod-shaped particles, respectively, were formed, while at 50 V/s both 
the type of particles were produced. 
5. Summary 
Manganese NMs have drawn the interest among researchers due to their novel 
properties and applications. However, since metal-doped, composite, alloy,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
polymetallic Mn NMs are better and superior than their counterparts, researchers 
are more inclined towards these NMs. For synthesising these NMs in vitro, different 
physicochemical or biological approaches are used but the Former is common and 
specific. 
Acknowledgement 
Ms. Bandita Panda would like to acknowledge S&T Department, Odisha for 
providing BPRF while writing the chapter. The authors would also like to thank 
HOD, Zoology for providing infrastructure and timely suggestions. 
References 
[1] Das, B., B. Balasubramanian, P. Manchanda, P. Mukherjee, R. Skomski, G.C. Hadjipanayis and 
D.J. Sellmyer. 2016. Nano Lett. 16: 1132. 
[2] Amulya, M.A.S., H.P. Nagaswarupa, M.R.A. Kumar, C.R. Ravikumar and K.B. Kusuma. 2021. 
J. Phys. Chem. Solids. 148: 109661. 
[3] Wang, Y., C. Hou, X. Lin, H. Jiang, C. Zhang and G. Liu. 2021. Appl. Phys. A. 127: 277. 
[4] Wan, S., J. Wu, S. Zhou, R. Wang, B. Gao and F. He. 2018. Sci. Total Environ. 616–617: 1298. 
[5] Ghasemi, S., S.R. Hosseini and O. Boore-talari. 2018. Ultrason. Sonochem. 40: 675. 
[6] Dessie, Y., S. Tadesse, R. Eswaramoorthy and B. Abebe. 2019. J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices. 4: 353. 
[7] Poon, K., Z. Lu, Y.D. Deene, Y. Ramaswamy, H. Zreiqat and G. Singh. 2021. Nanoscale. Adv. 
3: 4052. 
[8] Ogunyemi, S.O., M. Zhang, Y. Abdallah, T. Ahmed, W. Qiu, Md.A. Ali, C. Yan, Y. Yang, J. Chen, 
and B. Li. 2020. Front. Microbiol. 11: 3099. 
[9] Shaik, M.R., R. Syed, S.F. Adil, M. Kuniyil, M. Khan, M.S. Alqahtani, J.P. Shaik, M.R.H. Siddiqui, 
A. Al-Warthan, M.A.F. Sharaf, A. Abdelgawad and E.M. Awwad. 2021. Saudi J. Bio. Sci. 28: 1196. 
[10] Hoseinpour, V. and N. Ghaemi. 2018. J. Photochem. Photobiol B: Biol. 189: 234. 
[11] Souri, M., V. Hoseinpour, A. Shakeri and N. Ghaemi. 2018. IET Nanobiotechnol. 12: 822. 
[12] Bigiani, L., C. Maccato, A. Gasparotto, C. Sada, E. Bontempi and D. Barreca. 2020. Nanomat. 
(Basel) 10: E1335. 
[13] Huynh, K.-H., X.-H. Pham, J. Kim, S.H. Lee, H. Chang, W.-Y. Rho and B.-H. Jun. 2020. Int. J. Mol. 
Sci. 21: 5174. 
[14] Dewi, N. and Y. Yulizar. 2020. Mater. Today: Proc. 22: 199. 
[15] Amatya, S., S. Shrestha and S. Amatya. 2021. Asian J. Phy. Chem. Sci. 9: 1. 
[16] Sukmarani, G., R. Kusumaningrum, A. Noviyanto, F. Fauzi, A.M. Habieb, M.I. Amal and N.T. 
Rochman. 2020. Journal of Materials Research and Technology 9: 8497–8506. 
[17] Chen, D., B. Yang, Y. Jiang and Y. Zhang. 2018. Chem. Select. 3: 3904. 
[18] Gagrani, A., J. Zhou and T. Tsuzuki. 2018. Ceramics Internation. 44: 4694. 
[19] Aslibeiki, B., P. Kameli, H. Salamati, M. Eshraghi and T. Tahmasebi. 2010. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
322: 2929. 
[20] Bellusci, M., C. Aliotta, D. Fiorani, A. La Barbera, F. Padella, D. Peddis, M. Pilloni and D. Secci. 
2012. J. Nanopart. Res. 14. 
[21] Chen, D., Y. Zhang and Z. Kang. 2013. Chem. Eng. J. 215–216: 235. 
[22] Aslani, A., M. Ghahremani, M. Zhang, L.H. Bennett and E. Della Torre. 2017. IEEE Trans. Magn. 
53: 1. 
[23] Chang, Y.Q., X.Y. Xu, X.H. Luo, C.P. Chen and D.P. Yu. 2004. J. Cryst. Growth. 1–3: 232. 
[24] Si, P.Z., E. Brück, Z.D. Zhang, O. Tegus, W.S. Zhang, K.H.J. Buschow and J.C.P. Klaasse. 2005. 
Mater. Res. Bull. 40: 29. 
[25] Le, H.A., S. Chin, E. Park, L.T. Linh, G.-N. Bae and J. Jurng. 2011. Chem. Vap. Depos. 17: 228. 
[26] Kim, H.-G., H. Lee, S.-J. Kim, D.-H. Kim, J.-S. Kim, S.-Y. Kang and S.-C. Jung. 2013. J. Nanosci. 
Nanotechnol. 13: 6103.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 171 
[27] Aghazadeh, M., M. Ghannadi Maragheh, M.R. Ganjali and P. Norouzi. 2017. Inorg. Nano-Met. 
Chem. 47: 1085. 
[28] Najim, A., M. Muhi, K. Gbashi and A. Salih. 2017. Plasmonics 13: 1. 
[29] Kang, Y. and C.B. Murray. 2010. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132: 7568. 
[30] Lee, J.-G., P. Li, C.-J. Choi and X.-L. Dong. 2010. Thin Solid Films 519: 81. 
[31] Al-Hada, N.M., H.M. Kamari, A.H. Shaari and E. Saion. 2019. Results Phys. 12: 1821. 
[32] Wang, X., X. Wang, W. Huang, P.J. Sebastian and S. Gamboa. 2005. J. Power Sources 140: 211. 
[33] Gnanam, S. and V. Rajendran. 2011. J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 58: 62. 
[34] Tang, W., X. Shan, S. Li, H. Liu, X. Wu and Y. Chen. 2014. Mater. Letters 132: 317. 
[35] Chen, B., G. Rao, S. Wang, Y. Lan, L. Pan and X. Zhang. 2015. Mater. Letters 154: 160. 
[36] Bui, P.T.M., J.-H. Song, Z.-Y. Li, M.S. Akhtar and O.-B. Yang. 2017. J. Alloys Compd. 694: 560. 
[37] Ahn, M.-S., R. Ahmad, J.-Y. Yoo and Y.-B. Hahn. 2018. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 516: 364. 
[38] Ismail, M., S. Hemaanandhan, M. Durai, M. Arivanandhan, G. Anbalagan and R. Jayavel. 2020. 
J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 93. 
[39] Blinov, A.V., A.A. Kravtsov, S.O. Krandievskii, V.P. Timchenko, A.A. Gvozdenko and A.A. 
Blinova. 2020. Russ. J. Gen. Chem. 90: 283. 
[40] Kanagesan, S., S.B.A. Aziz, M. Hashim, I. Ismail, S. Tamilselvan, N.B.B.M. Alitheen, M.K. 
Swamy and B.P.C. Rao. 2016. Molecules 21: 312. 
[41] Ashwini, K., H. Rajanaika, K.S. Anantharaju, H. Nagabhushanad, P. Adinarayana Reddy, K. Shetty 
and K.R.V. Mahesh. 2017. Mater. Today: Proc. 4: 11902. 
[42] Bhandare, S.V., R. Kumar, A.V. Anupama, H.K. Choudhary, V.M. Jali and B. Sahoo. 2017. J. Magn. 
Magn. Mater. 433: 29. 
[43] Mary Jacintha, A., V. Umapathy, P. Neeraja, and S. Rex Jeya Rajkumar. 2017. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 
7: 375. 
[44] Zhang, M., S. Guo, L. Zheng, G. Zhang, Z. Hao, L. Kang and Z.-H. Liu. 2013. Electrochimica Acta. 
87: 546. 
[45] Ranjeh, M., M. Masjedi-Arani, M. Salavati-Niasari and H. Moayedi. 2020. J. Mol. Liq. 
300: 112292. 
[46] Pál, E., V. Zöllmer, D. Lehmhus and M. Busse. 2011. Colloids Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 
384: 661. 
[47] Quraishi, M.A.M. and M.H.R. Khan. 2013. Ind. J. Mater. Sci. 2013: e910762. 
[48] Noor, A., M.N. Akhtar, S.N. Khan, M.S. Nazir and M. Yousaf. 2020. Ceram. Int. 46: 13961. 
[49] Kafshgari, L.A., M. Ghorbani and A. Azizi. 2019. Part. Sci. Technol. 37: 904. 
[50] Košak, A., D. Makovec, M. Drofenik and A. Žnidaršič. 2004. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
272–276: 1542. 
[51] Scano, A., G. Ennas, F. Frongia, A. La Barbera, M.A. López-Quintela, G. Marongiu, G. Paschina, 
D. Peddis, M. Pilloni and C. Vázquez-Vázquez. 2011. J. Nanopart. Res. 13: 3063. 
[52] Pemartin, K., C. Solans, J. Alvarez-Quintana and M. Sanchez-Dominguez. 2014. Colloids. Surf. A: 
Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 451: 161. 
[53] Agarwal, S., I. Tyagi, V.K. Gupta, M. Jafari, M. Edrissi and H. Javadian. 2016. J. Mol. Liq. 
219: 1131. 
[54] Soleymani, M. and M. Edrissi. 2016. Bull Mater Sci. 39: 487. 
[55] Subramanian, V., H. Zhu, R. Vajtai, P.M. Ajayan and B. Wei. 2005. J. Phys. Chem. B. 109: 20207. 
[56] Song, X., Y. Zhao and Y. Zheng. 2007. Cryst. Growth Des. 7: 159. 
[57] Yu, P., X. Zhang, D. Wang, L. Wang and Y. Ma. 2009. Cryst. Growth Des. 9: 528. 
[58] Ahmed, K.A.M., Q. Zeng, K. Wu and K. Huang. 2010. J. Solid State Chem. 3: 744. 
[59] Xiao, W., D. Wang and X.W. Lou. 2010. J. Phys. Chem. C. 114: 1694. 
[60] Zhang, X., Y. Chen, P. Yu and Y. Ma. 2010. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 10: 7711. 
[61] Hlaing, A.A. and P.P. Win. 2012. Adv. Nat. Sci: Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 3: 025001. 
[62] Haoran, Y., D. Lifang, L. Tao and C. Yong. 2014. Sci. World J. 2014: e791672. 
[63] Harichandran, G., P. Parameswari, D.S. Amalraj and P. Shanmugam. 2014. Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. 
Eng. 443. 
[64] Dinh, V.-P., N.-C. Le, T.-P.-T. Nguyen and N.-T. Nguyen. 2016. J. Chem. 2016: e8285717. 
[65] Ahmad, K., A. Mohammad and S.M. Mobin. 2017. Electrochimica. Acta. 252: 549.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[66] Chu, J., D. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wang, X. Wang and S. Xiong. 2017. Mater. Letter. 193. 
[67] Venkata Swetha, J., H. Parse, B. Kakade and A. Geetha. 2018. Solid State Ion. 328: 1. 
[68] Wang, L., G. Duan, S.-M. Chen and X. Liu. 2018. J. Alloys Compd. 752: 123. 
[69] Racik, K.M., K. Guruprasad, M. Mahendiran, M. Joseph, T. Maiyalagan and V. Antony Raj. 2019. 
J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron. 30. 
[70] Selim, M.S., Z. Hao, Y. Jiang, M. Yi and Y. Zhang. 2019. Mater. Chem. Phys. 235: 121733. 
[71] Shaik, D.P.M.D., P. Rosaiah and O.M. Hussain. 2019. J. Electroanal. Chem. 851: 113409. 
[72] Xia, A., W. Yu, J. Yi, G. Tan, H. Ren and C. Liu. 2019. J. Electroanal. Chem. 839: 25. 
[73] Han, R., M. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Xie and Y. Sui. 2020. Nanomater. (Basel) 10: 461. 
[74] Kumar, Y., S. Chopra, A. Gupta, Y. Kumar, S.J. Uke and S.P. Mardikar. 2020. Mater. Sci. Energy 
Technol. 3: 566. 
[75] Mothkuri, S., S. Chakrabarti, H. Gupta, B. Padya, T.N. Rao and P.K. Jain. 2020. Materials Today: 
Proc. 26: 142. 
[76] Xiao, Y., Y. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Ni, X. Li, Y. Zhang and T. Xie. 2020. Environ. Technol. 41: 2037. 
[77] Ullrich, A., M.M. Rahman, P. Longo and S. Horn. 2019. Sci. Rep. 9: 19264. 
[78] Zhang, F., M. Cho, T. Eom, C. Kang and H. Lee. 2019. Ceram. Internation. 45: 20972. 
[79] Akhtar, S., S. Rehman, M.A. Almessiere, F.A. Khan, Y. Slimani and A. Baykal. 2019. Nanomater. 
(Basel) 9: 1635. 
[80] Balakumar, V., J.W. Ryu, H. Kim, R. Manivannan and Y.-A. Son. 2020. Ultrason. Sonochem. 
62: 104870. 
[81] Rhadfi, T., J.-Y. Piquemal, L. Sicard, F. Herbst, E. Briot, M. Benedetti and A. Atlamsani. 2010. 
Appl. Catal. A: Gen. 386: 132. 
[82] Sicard, L., J.-M. Le Meins, C. Méthivier, F. Herbst and S. Ammar. 2010. Journal of Magnetism and 
Magnetic Materials 322: 2634–2640. 
[83] Goikolea, E., B. Daffos, P.L. Taberna and P. Simon. 2013. Mater. Renew Sustain Energy 2: 16. 
[84] Ono, K., R. Okuda, Y. Ishii, S. Kamimura and M. Oshima. 2003. J. Phys. Chem. B. 107: 1941. 
[85] Ghutepatil, P.R., A.B. Salunkhe, V.M. Khot and S.H. Pawar. 2019. Chem. Pap. 73: 2189. 
[86] Iacovita, C., G.F. Stiufiuc, R. Dudric, N. Vedeanu, R. Tetean, R.I. Stiufiuc and C.M. Lucaciu. 2020. 
Magnetochem. 6: 23. 
[87] Kim, T.R., D.H. Kim, H.W. Ryu, J.H. Moon, J.H. Lee, S. Boo and J. Kim. 2007. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 
68: 1203. 
[88] Sabale, S., V. Khot, V. Jadhav, X. Zhu and Y. Xu. 2014. Acta Metallurgica Sinica (Eng. Lett.) 
27: 1122. 
[89] Chen, Z.W., J.K.L. Lai and C.H. Shek. 2006. Scripta Materialia 55: 735. 
[90] Kumar, H., S.P. Manisha and P. Sangwan. 2013. Int. J. Chem. Chem. Eng. 3: 155. 
[91] Sagadevan, S. 2015. J. Material Sci. Eng. 4. 
[92] Guo, S., W. Sun, W. Yang, Q. Li and J. Ku Shang. 2015. RSC Adv. 5: 53280. 
[93] Cherian, E., A. Rajan and Dr. B. Gurunathan. 2016. Int. J. Mod. Sci. Technol. 01: 17. 
[94] Gnanasekaran, L., R. Hemamalini, R. Saravanan, K. Ravichandran, F. Gracia, S. Agarwal and V.K. 
Gupta. 2017. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B: Biol. 173: 43. 
[95] Moazzen, E., E.V. Timofeeva and C.U. Segre. 2017. J. Mater. Sci. 52: 8107. 
[96] Jamil, S., S.R. Khan, B. Sultana, M. Hashmi, M. Haroon and M.R.S.A. Janjua. 2018. J. Clust. Sci. 
29: 1099. 
[97] Shaker, K. and A. AbdAlsalm. 2018. Eng. Technol. J. 36: 946. 
[98] Tholkappiyan, R., A.N. Naveen, K. Vishista, and F. Hamed. 2018. J. Taibah Univers. Sci. 12: 669. 
[99] Najjar, R., R. Awad, and A.M. Abdel-Gaber. 2019. J. Supercond Nov. Magn. 32: 885. 
[100] Soam, A. and R. Kumar. 2020. Surf. Rev. Lett. 27: 1950199. 
[101] Buccolieri, A., A. Serra, G. Maruccio, A.G. Monteduro, S. Kunjalukkal, A. Licciulli, V. Bonfrate, 
L. Salvatore, D. Manno, L. Calcagnile and G. Giancane. 2017. J. Anal. Methods Chem. 2017. 
[102] Vignesh, V., K. Subramani, M. Sathish and R. Navamathavan. 2018. Colloids Surf. A: Physicochem. 
Eng. Asp. 538: 668. 
[103] Zia, J., E.S. Aazam and U. Riaz. 2020. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 9: 9709. 
[104] Eslami, H., M.H. Ehrampoush, A. Esmaeili, A.A. Ebrahimi, M.T. Ghaneian, H. Falahzadeh and 
M.H. Salmani. 2019. Mater. Chem. Phys. 224: 65.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 173 
[105] Yadav, M.S. 2020. J. Energy Storage 27: 101079. 
[106] Lei, S., K. Tang, Z. Fang and H. Zheng. 2006. Cryst. Growth Des. 6: 1757. 
[107] Abulizi, A., G.H. Yang, K. Okitsu and J.-J. Zhu. 2014. Ultrason. Sonochem. 21: 1629. 
[108] Gnana Sundara Raj, B., A.M. Asiri, A.H. Qusti, J.J. Wu and S. Anandan. 2014. Ultrason. Sonochem. 
21: 1933. 
[109] Rajrana, K., A. Gupta, R.A. Mir and O.P. Pandey. 2019. Physica B: Condensed Matter. 564: 179. 
[110] Goswami, P.P., H.A. Choudhury, S. Chakma and V.S. Moholkar. 2013. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
52: 17848. 
[111] Amulya, M.A.S., H.P. Nagaswarupa, M.R.A. Kumar, C.R. Ravikumar and K.B. Kusuma. 2021. 
J. Phys. Chem. Solids 148: 109661. 
[112] Gholamrezaei, S. and M. Salavati-Niasari. 2018. Ultrason. Sonochem. 40: 651. 
[113] Rehman, S., M.A. Almessiere, F.A. Khan, A. Demir Korkmaz, N. Tashkandi, Y. Slimani and A. 
Baykal. 2019. Mater. Sci. Eng: C. 109: 110534. 
[114] Abbas, M., S.R. Torati, B.P. Rao, M.O. Abdel-Hamed and C. Kim. 2015. J. Alloys Compd. 
644: 774. 
[115] Abi, F.D.Y.P., R. Kusumaningrum, W.B. Widayatno, A.S. Wismogroho, A. Noviyanto, N.T. 
Rochman and M.I. Amal. 2019. IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 578: 012011. 
[116] Saravanakumar, B., S. Muthu Lakshmi, G. Ravi, V. Ganesh, A. Sakunthala and R. Yuvakkumar. 
2017. J. Alloys Compd. 723: 115. 
[117] Stoia, M., E. Muntean, C. Păcurariu and C. Mihali. 2017. Thermochim. Acta. 652: 1. 
[118] Liu, Y., J. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Cao, and B. Dong. 2020. Adv. Sustain. Syst. 4: 2000128. 
[119] Singh, J. and A. Kumar. 2020. Ceram. Int. 46: 11041. 
[120] Opembe, N.N., C.K. King’ondu, A.E. Espinal, C.-H. Chen, E.K. Nyutu, V.M. Crisostomo and S.L. 
Suib. 2010. J. Phys. Chem., C. 114: 14417. 
[121] Zhang, X., X. Sun, H. Zhang, D. Zhang and Y. Ma. 2013. Electrochim. Acta. 87: 637. 
[122] Li, L., Z. Guo, A. Du and H. Liu. 2012. J. Mater. Chem. 22: 3600. 
[123] Long, Y., Z. Zhang, Z. Wu, J. Su, X. Lv and Y. Wen. 2017. Particuology 33: 42. 
[124] Morán-Lázaro, J.P., E.S. Guillen-López, F. López-Urias, E. Muñoz-Sandoval, O. Blanco-Alonso, 
H. Guillén-Bonilla, A. Guillén-Bonilla, V.M. Rodríguez-Betancourtt, M. Sanchez-Tizapa and M. de 
la L. Olvera-Amador. 2018. Sensors (Basel) 18: 701. 
[125] Wiston, B.R. and M. Ashok. 2019. Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process 103: 104607. 
[126] Zhang, H., C. Liang, Z. Tian, G. Wang and W. Cai. 2010. J. Phys. Chem. C. 114: 12524. 
[127] Rahmat, M., A. Rehman, S. Rahmat, H.N. Bhatti, M. Iqbal, W.S. Khan, Y. Jamil, S.Z. Bajwa, Y. 
Sarwar and S. Rasul. 2019. J. Mol. Struct. 1191: 284. 
[128] Enríquez-Sánchez, N., A.R. Vilchis-Nestor, S. Camacho-López, M.A. Camacho-López and M. 
Camacho-López. 2020. Opt. Laser Technol. 131: 106418. 
[129] Yang, Y.T., P.Z. Si, C.J. Choi and H.L. Ge. 2019. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 489: 165481. 
[130] Simao, T., D.M. Chevrier, J. Jakobi, A. Korinek, G. Goupil, M. Lau, S. Garbarino, P. Zhang, S. 
Barcikowski, M.-A. Fortin and D. Guay. 2016. J. Phys. Chem. C. 120: 22635. 
[131] Bondi, J.F., K.D. Oyler, X. Ke, P. Schiffer and R.E. Schaak. 2009. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131: 9144. 
[132] Le, N.C. and D.V. Phuc. 2015. Adv. Nat. Sci: Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 6: 025014. 
[133] Lai, X. and G. Luo. 2019. Sep. Sci. Technol. 54: 1269. 
[134] Nulu, V. 2018. Template-free Facile International Journal of Electrochemical Science 
13: 5565–5574. 
[135] Qian, Y., S. Lu and F. Gao. 2011. Mater. Lett. 65: 56. 
[136] Hu, P., D. Pan, S. Zhang, J. Tian and A.A. Volinsky. 2011. J. Alloys Compd. 509: 3991. 
[137] Wang, L., G. Duan, J. Zhu, S.-M. Chen and X. Liu. 2016. Electrochim. Acta. 219: 284. 
[138] Yang, Y., X. Huang, Y. Xiang, S. Chen, L. Guo, S. Leng and W. Shi. 2019. J. Alloys Compd. 
771: 335. 
[139] Baig, M.M., M.A. Yousuf, P.O. Agboola, M.A. Khan, I. Shakir and M.F. Warsi. 2019. Ceram. Int. 
45: 12682. 
[140] Hu, X., F. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Zhang and L. Zhang. 2019. J. Nanomater. 2019: e7430687. 
[141] Abdul-Razzaq, W. and M. Wu. 2001. Superlattices Microstruct. 29: 273. 
[142] Ochirkhuyag, A., A. Sápi, Á. Szamosvölgyi, G. Kozma, Á. Kukovecz and Z. Kónya. 2020. Phys. 
Chem. Chem. Phys. 22: 13999.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
174 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[143] Jamkhande, P.G., N.W. Ghule, A.H. Bamer and M.G. Kalaskar. 2019. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 
53: 101174. 
[144] Gudmundsson, J.T. 2020. Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 29: 113001. 
[145] Depla, D., S. Mahieu and J.E. Greene. 2010. Handbook of Deposition Technologies for Films and 
Coatings (Third Edition), 253. P.M. Martin (ed.). 
[146] Music, D., P. Bliem, R.W. Geyer and J.M. Schneider. 2015. J. Appl. Phys. 118: 015302. 
[147] Kumar, A., A. Sanger, A. Kumar, Y. Kumar and R. Chandra. 2016. Electrochim. Acta. 222. 
[148] Fernández-Barcia, M., S. Kurdi, A. Terzopoulou, Z.H. Barber, V. Hoffmann, C. Damm, L. Giebeler, 
S. Pané, M. Uhlemann, U. Wolff, K. Nielsch and A. Gebert. 2019. Surf. Coat. Technol. 375: 182. 
[149] Ray, A., D. Korkut and B. Saruhan. 2020. Nanomater. 10: 1768. 
[150] Sumanth Kumar, D., B. Jai Kumar and H.M. Mahesh. 2018. Synthesis of Inorganic Nanomaterials 
59. Mohan Bhagyaraj, S., O.S. Oluwafemi, N. Kalarikkal and S. Thomas (eds.). 
[151] Ferreira, F.V., W. Franceschi, B.R.C. Menezes, A.F. Biagioni, A.R. Coutinho and L.S. Cividanes. 
2019. Carbon-Based Nanofillers and Their Rubber Nanocomposites. 1, Yaragalla, S., R. Mishra, S. 
Thomas, N. Kalarikkal and H.J. Maria (eds.). 
[152] Ganeev, R.A., A.S. Zakirov, G.S. Boltaev, R.I. Tugushev, T. Usmanov, P.K. Khabibullaev, T.W. 
Kang and A.A. Saidov. 2011. Optic. Mater. 33: 419. 
[153] Shukla, A., A.K. Bhardwaj, S.C. Singh, K.N. Uttam and R. Gopal. 2016. National Laser Symposium 
(NLS-25) KIIT, BBSR, 20–23 Dec. 
[154] Zhang, D., Z. ma, M. Spasova, A. Elsukova, S. Lu, M. Farle, U. Wiedwald and B. Gökce. 2017. 
Part. Part. Syst. Charact. 34: 1600225. 
[155] Rao, B.G., D. Mukherjee and B.M. Reddy. 2017. Nanostructures for Novel Therapy, 36. Ficai, D. 
and A.M. Grumezescu (eds.). 
[156] Zhang, X., X. Sun, H. Zhang, D. Zhang and Y. Ma. 2013. Electrochim. Acta. 87: 637. 
[157] Phuruangrat, A., B. Kuntalue, P. Dumrongrojthanath, T. Thongtem and S. Thongtem. 2018. Dig. J. 
Nanomater. Biostructures 13: 563. 
[158] Ahmad, K., A. Mohammad and S.M. Mobin. 2017. Electrochim. Acta. 252: 549. 
[159] Li, B., X. Zhang, J. Dou and C. Hu. 2019. Ceram. Int. 45: 16297. 
[160] Saravanakumar, B., A. Haritha, G. Ravi and R. Yuvakkumar. 2020. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 
20: 2813. 
[161] Nguyen, T.-D., D. Mrabet, T.-T.-D. Vu, C.-T. Dinh and T.-O. Do. 2011. CrystEngComm. 13: 1450. 
[162] Shaik, D.P., R. Pitcheri, Y. Qiu and O.M. Hussain. 2019. Ceram. Int. 45: 2226. 
[163] Nunes, D., A. Pimentel, L. Santos, P. Barquinha, L. Pereira, E. Fortunato and R. Martins. 2019. 
Metal Oxide Nanostructures, 21. Nunes, D., L. Santos, L. Pereira, R. Martins, A. pimentel, P. 
Barquinha and E. Fortunato (eds.). 
[164] Nair, G.B., H.C. Swart and S.J. Dhoble. 2020. Prog. Mater. Sci. 109: 100622. 
[165] Yue, L., C. Shen, Y. Zhang, Y. Song, W. Huang, Y. Lu, Y. Qian, Z. Jin, R. Guan and W. Zhang. 2019. 
J. Alloys Compd. 784: 29. 
[166] Wang, G., Y. Zeng, F. Zhou, X. Chen, Y. Ma, L. Zheng, M. Li, Y. Sun, X. Liu, H. Liu and R. Yu. 
2020. J. Alloys Compd. 819: 153044. 
[167] Hamedani, Y., P. Macha, T.J. Bunning, R.R. Naik and M.C. Vasudev. 2016. Chemical Vapour 
Depposition-Recent Advances and Applications in Opticals, Solar Cells and Solid state Devices. 
Neralla, S. (ed.). 
[168] Saeed, M., Y. Alshammari, S.A. Majeed and E. Al-Nasrallah. 2020. Molecules 25: 3856. 
[169] Higgins, J.M., A.L. Schmitt, I.A. Guzei and S. Jin. 2008. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130: 16086. 
[170] Higgins, J.M., R. Ding and S. Jin. 2011. Chem. Mater. 23: 3848. 
[171] Merritt, A., R. Rajagopalan and J. Carter. 2014. Thin Solid Films 556: 28. 
[172] Barreca, D., F. Gri, A. Gasparotto, T. Altantzis, V. Gombac, P. Fornasiero and C. Maccato. 2018. 
Inorg. Chem. 57: 14564. 
[173] Mansoor, M.A., M. Ebadi, M. Mazhar, N.M. Huang, L.K. Mun, M. Misran and W.J. Basirun. 2017. 
Mater. Chem. Phys. 186: 286. 
[174] Barreca, D., F. Gri, A. Gasparotto, G. Carraro, L. Bigiani, T. Altantzis, B. Žener, U. Lavrenčič 
Štangar, B. Alessi, D.B. Padmanaban, D. Mariotti and C. Maccato. 2019. Nanoscale 11: 98. 
[175] Esposito, S. 2019. Materials 12: 668.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategies for Physicochemical Synthesis of Manganese Nanomaterials 175 
[176] Bhandare, S.V., R. Kumar, A.V. Anupama, H.K. Choudhary, V.M. Jali, and B. Sahoo. 2017. 
J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 433: 29. 
[177] Zhao, L., W. Li, J. Zhou, X. Mu and K. Fang. 2017. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 42: 17414. 
[178] Dar, M.A. and D. Varshney. 2018. RSC Adv. 8: 14120. 
[179] Winiarska, K., I. Szczygieł and R. Klimkiewicz. 2012. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 52: 353. 
[180] Malik, M.A., M.Y. Wani and M.A. Hashim. 2012. Arab. J. Chem. 5: 397. 
[181] Shahid, M., S. Shafi, M.F. Aly Aboud, M.F. Warsi, M. Asghar and I. Shakir. 2017. Ceram. Int. 
43: 14096. 
[182] Chen, L., W. Kong, J. Yao, H. Zhang, B. Gao, Y. Li, H. Bu, A. Chang and C. Jiang. 2015. Ceram. 
Int. 41: 2847. 
[183] Diao, G., F. Chau, J.-Y. Piquemal, E. Briot, S. Ammar, M. Sicard, S. Nowak, P. Beaunier, H. Lecoq, 
P. Decorse and L. Yu. 2014. J. Nanopart. Res. 16: 2428. 
[184] Li, J., C. Wu, P. Hou, M. Zhang and K. Xu. 2018. Biosens. Bioelectron. 102: 1. 
[185] Liu, W., Y. Xu and R. Yang. 2010. Rare Metals 29: 511. 
[186] Iacovita, C., A. Florea, L. Scorus, E. Pall, R. Dudric, A.I. Moldovan, R. Stiufiuc, R. Tetean and 
C.M. Lucaciu. 2019. Nanomat. (Basel) 9: 1489. 
[187] Gupta, K., S. Bhattacharya, D. Chattopadhyay, A. Mukhopadhyay, H. Biswas, J. Dutta, N.R. Ray 
and U.C. Ghosh. 2011. Chem. Eng. J. 172: 219. 
[188] Ju-Nam, Y. and J.R. Lead. 2008. Sci. Total Environ. 400: 396. 
[189] Fu, F., Z. Cheng and J. Lu. 2015. RSC Adv. 5: 85395. 
[190] Eslami, H., M.H. Ehrampoush, A. Esmaeili, A.A. Ebrahimi, M.T. Ghaneian, H. Falahzadeh and 
M.H. Salmani. 2019. Mater. Chem. Phys. 224: 65. 
[191] Sadeq, Z.Z. 2019. SYLWAN 163: 76. 
[192] Sakthivel, R., S. Kubendhiran and S.-M. Chen. 2019. Ultrason. Sonochem. 54: 68. 
[193] Gupta, A. and R. Srivastava. 2019. Ultrason. Sonochem. 52: 414. 
[194] Modan, E.M. and A.G. Plăiașu. 2020. Annals of “Dunarea de Jos” University of Galati. Fascicl IX, 
Met. Mat. Sci. 43: 53. 
[195] Wang, G., D. Zhao, Y. Ma, Z. Zhang, H. Che, J. Mu, X. Zhang and Z. Zhang. 2018. Appl. Surf. Sci. 
428: 258. 
[196] Dharmarathna, S., C.K. King’ondu, W. Pedrick, L. Pahalagedara and S.L. Suib. 2012. Chem. Mater. 
24: 705. 
[197] Sui, N., Y. Duan, X. Jiao and D. Chen. 2009. J. Phys. Chem. C. 113: 8560.  
10


Fabrication of Ceramic 
Nano Powder Processing
Techniques by Solid 
State Synthesis

 Muhammad Salman Habib,1,* Muhammad Asif Rafiq,1


Qaisar Khushi2
 and Kiran Zahra3


1. Introduction 
The application of nano materials in space science, sensors, actuators biomaterials, fuel 
cells, aeronautic industry and aviation urge engineers to synthesize them commercially. 
The increasing demand for application-based nanomaterials explains that the synthesis 
of nanomaterials by using several methods can be utilized based on precursors, starting 
materials, the process route that specifies the intermediate and final product. The size 
of nanomaterials ranges from 1 nm to 100 nm. The process involved in the synthesis of 
ceramic-based nanomaterials helps to figure out the morphology, crystal structure, 
and atomic structure. The ceramic-based materials involved the bulk ceramic 
nanomaterial synthesis for energy applications. The powders prepared by solid 
state synthesis can be further applied to the coating of ceramic nanomaterials on 
metallic substrate. This increases the surface area, specific surface area, and the 
volume of the nanomaterials that can be observed in properties of materials clearly. 
There are several processes to manufacture ceramic nanomaterials like sol-gel, 
the direct reduction from bulk materials, lithography, solid-state synthesis, and 
1 Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, University of Engineering & Technology G.T. 
Road Lahore, Pakistan. 
2 Institute of Materials Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, 64287, Germany. 
3 Institute of Chemical Sciences Department of Chemistry Bahauddin Zakriya University, Multan 
Pakistan. 
* Corresponding author: salmanhabib2000@gmail.com 10. Fabrication of Ceramic Nano Powder Processing Techniques by Solid State
Synthesis
Muhammad Salman Habib1, *
, Muhammad Asif Rafiq1 and Qaisar Khushi2
, Kiran Zahra3
1
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, University of Engineering & Technology G.T. 
Road Lahore, Pakistan
2
Institute of Materials Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, 64287, Germany
3
Institute of Chemical Sciences Department of Chemistry Bahauddin Zakriya University, Multan Pakistan.
*Corresponding Author, email: salmanhabib2000@gmail.com
1. Introduction
The nanomaterials’ applications in space science, sensors, actuators, biomaterials, fuel cells,
aeronautic industry, and aviation. The increasing demand for application-based nanomaterials
explains that the synthesis of nanomaterials by using several methods can be utilized based
on precursors, starting materials, the process route that specifies the intermediate and final
product. The size of nanomaterials ranges from 1nm to 100 nm. The process involved in the
synthesis of ceramic-based nanomaterials helps to figure out the morphology, crystal
structure, and atomic structure. The ceramic-based materials involved both the bulk ceramic
nanomaterial synthesis and it further applied to the coating processes. The increase in the
Commented [A1]: Keywords?
Commented [U2]: Author: Figures are not cited in text.
Commented [A3]: Milling again 5h: correct?
Commented [A4]: incomplete
Commented [A5]: you say both, but one is mentioned.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Solid State Synthesis 177 
Fig. 1. The schematic of the solid-state process for preparation of Strontium Titanate. 
top-down approach or bottom-up approach. The ceramic nanoparticles can be 
processed by applying pressure ranging from 3000 Psi to 10000 Psi, pressing it into 
pellets, obtaining powders from the mixing of ball mills, and then heating at high 
temperatures to get the required product [1–4]. 
The compositions prepared from the solid-state method in the form of cylindrical 
pellets can be characterized by several techniques as Scanning Electron Microscopy, 
X-Ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and chemical analysis 
techniques [5–9]. 
This chapter focuses on the special case for the synthesis of ceramic nanomaterials 
by solid-state route, incorporating defects in the materials, milling the particles in 
either wet or dry medium. The particles were milled at high rotation per minute to 
reduce the size from micrometer to nanometer scale. The rate of diffusion can be 
increased by the temperature and pressure. The reactants having the same crystal 
structure enhance the nucleation rate which ultimately affects the composition 
prepared [10, 11]. There will be an increase in the mechanical, electrical, magnetic, 
properties that can be explained in detail in this chapter. 
2. Methods of Solid-State Synthesis 
2.1 Stoichiometric Calculations 
The precursors are weighted stoichiometry according to balanced chemical equations. 
The charge balance should be maintained for the reactants as well as for the products. 
The carbonates, nitrates, and oxides of the metals are used for this purpose. The 
commonly used precursors are metallic oxides that are FeO, Fe2O3, TiO2, CuO, ZnO, 
MgO2, Li2O, Bi2O3. The other precursors are carbonates of sodium, potassium, and 
calcium such as NaCO3, KCO3, and CaCO3. The carbon dioxide, ammonia, and 
water obtained in the products are sometimes not written in the balanced chemical 
equations.  
 
 
 
 
Some of the synthesis chemical equations can be explained below. 
1. The equation for the synthesis of Barium Titanate 
BaCO3 + TiO2 → BaTiO3 + CO2(↑) (1) 
2. The equation for the synthesis of Strontium Titanate 
SrCO3 + TiO2 → SrTiO3 + CO2(↑) (2) 
3. The equation for the synthesis of Bismuth Ferrite 
Bi2O3 + Fe2O3 → 2BiFeO3 (3) 
There are compositions that can be prepared by mixing the two precursors 
together and then balancing the equations. The powders should be used in 
nanometer (nm) size as the wet milling step will further decrease the particle size 
and the physical mixing of the precursors. Some of the equations below explain the 
synthesis of the Barium Calcium Zirconium Titanate (BCZT), the most common 
lead-free ceramic material. Besides this, there are many other compositions that can 
be prepared with replacing lead oxide (PbO2) like Na0.5 K0.5NbO3-LiSbO3-BiFeO3, 
(1–x) Na1/2Bi1/2TiO3-xBiFeO3, Na0.5K0.5NbO3-BiFeO3. 
4. The equation for the synthesis of Barium Calcium Zirconium Titanate 
0.85BaCO + 0.15CaCO + 0.1ZrO + 0.9TiO → (Ba Ca )(Zr Ti ) O + CO (4) 3 3 2 2 0.85 0.15 0.1 0.9 3 2(↑) 
 
 
 
 
178 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
2.2 Milling 
A ball plant is a sort of mixing/reduction of powder size, and it is utilized to grind 
powders by two forces: (I) shear force between the two balls (II) impact force of 
the balls from the height of the jar. The particle size is reduced to an amazing limit 
for use in mineral dressing forms, paints, fireworks, and pottery. The rotations per 
minute (rpms) of the ball mill can be adjusted from 200–400 rpm. The oxides that are 
hard ceramics required more rotations per minutes (rpm) and time while it takes less 
rpm and time for soft ceramic powders. The medium used for the mixing, grinding, 
and sizing is ethanol/methanol/acetone or any other inert solvent that may not react 
with the powder particles. The medium provide the slurry to create a force i–e impact 
force and shear force. Various materials are utilized as media, including zirconia 
balls, stone rocks, and stainless-steel balls. An inside falling impact diminishes the 
material to a fine powder. The distinction in speeds between the balls and granulating 
containers creates a connection among frictional and sway powers, which discharges 
high unique energies. The interchange between these powers creates the high and 
exceptionally viable level of size decrease of the planetary ball mill. The parameters 
involved in the milling are listed below: 
1. Milling speed 
2. Milling medium 
3. Balls/powder ratio 
4. Size of the powders adjusted from 200-400 rpm. It is concerned when hard material is ground the rpm and the
time is more while it is less for the soft powders. The medium used for the mixing, grinding,
and sizing is ethanol/methanol/acetone or any other inert solvent that may not react with the
powder particles. It can only use for the slurry making and forces to govern in a proper
manner. Various materials are utilized as media, including zirconia balls, stone rocks, and
stainless-steel balls. An inside falling impact diminishes the material to a fine powder. The
distinction in speeds between the balls and granulating containers creates a connection among
frictional and sway powers, which discharges high unique energies. The interchange between
these powers creates the high and exceptionally viable level of size decrease of the planetary
ball mill. The parameters involved in the milling are listed below:
1. Milling speed
2. Milling medium
3. Balls/powder ratio
4. Size of the powders
Figure 2: The mixing of raw materials and milling by shear and impact forces
2.3.Drying and Sieving 
The milling the slurry obtained was dried in the oven at 80-100 ℃ overnight. The drying
process was done to evaporate the ethanol from the jars and the remaining powders were 
cleaned from the zirconia ball for the process of calcination. If there will be using water, it 
Commented [A15]: rephrasae
Commented [A16]: rephrase
Commented [A17]: rephrase
Fig. 2. The mixing of raw materials and milling by shear and impact forces. 
 
 
 
 
 
Solid State Synthesis 179 
2.3 Drying and Sieving 
After milling the slurry obtained must be dried in the oven at 80–100℃. The drying 
process was done to evaporate the ethanol from the jars and the remaining powders 
were cleaned from the zirconia ball for the process of calcination. In case of water 
milling, it should be dried at a temperature of 100℃ to evaporate water from the 
slurry. Increasing the temperature increases decreases the drying time. Once the 
powder dried it must be sieved properly. The recovery of the product can be done by 
the polyethylene spatulas, spoons, stirrer, and giving some amount of energy to the 
powders. 
2.4 Calcination 
The process of removal of small molecules like CO2, H2O, and others at a temperature 
below their melting point to change the phase from one to another is called 
calcination; it is done in the oven or a low heating furnace by heating from room 
temperature to the required temperature. The removal of volatile particles occurs 
and the powders’ color, density, weight, and sometimes size may be changed due to 
heating cycle which confirms that the process is in the right way. Calcination is to be 
differentiated from roasting, in which progressively complex gas-strong responses 
occur between the furnace environment and the solids. Calcination is the process 
of thermal decomposition at a particular temperature or the progress (transition) 
temperature (for stage changes) to remove small molecules like water, ammonia and 
carbondioxide. This temperature is generally characterized by the Gibbs free energy 
in response to the material value that is equivalent to zero. 
The calcination temperatures can be found from the Thermogravimetric 
Analysis (TGA), i.e., heating material by changing the weight loss of the sample. 
The calcination temperatures of ceramic nanomaterials range from 600–800℃. The 
highest calcination temperature is of BCZT, BZT, and BT groups. While the ferrites 
groups are calcined at lower temperatures, so that the intermediates formed FexOy-M 
can be avoided. 
2.5 Pressing of Pellets 
The pressing of the ceramic nano powders is done by applying a pressure of 
4000 Psi to 10000 Psi in the required time. The morphology of the powder must be 
studied before pressing and if there is the diversity of the particles in the powder 
like circular, angular, spherical, etc., the pellets obtained are fine. If there are the pressing and if there is the diversity of the particles in the powder like circular, angular,
spherical, etc., the pellets obtained are fine. If there are the same type of particles in the 
powders, there will be spaces in the interlocking of the particles that may be removed by
adding some additive. The hydraulic press with the stainless-steel die is used to press the
powder in cylindrical pellets. Sometimes there should be the application of lubricant to
properly bind the material while applying pressure simultaneously. 
Figure 3: The pressure is applied on the die to make a cylindrical pellet.
2.6.Sintering
At the point when heat is applied to powder, it is densified and the normal grain size expands;
this procedure is called sintering, and the fundamental wonders happening structure this
Commented [A24]: correct?
Commented [A25]: Correct?
Fig. 3. The pressure is applied on the die to make a cylindrical pellet. 
 
 
180 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
same type of particles in the powders, there will be spaces in the interlocking of the 
particles that may be removed by adding some additive. Hydrostatic pressing with 
stainless steel die is used to press the powder in cylindrical pellets. Sometimes there 
should be the application of lubricant to properly bind the material while applying 
pressure simultaneously. 
2.6 Sintering 
As the heat is applied to the pressed pellets, the densification mechanism activated 
and the normal grain size expands; this process is called sintering of ceramic 
nano-materials. The fundamental grain growth happens when it is given time called 
"holding time". The process requires helps to form single phase. Sintering intends to 
deliver sintered parts with reproducible and, if conceivable, structured microstructure 
through control of the sintering factors [12, 13]. 
To get the maximum densification sintering parameters (time, temperature and 
heating rate) must be adjusted according to the needs. Sintering temperature varies 
with the thickness. The temperature rate must be adjusted for the compositions as 
the heating and cooling cycles must be kept in mind so that the material may not 
be burned or may not stick with the substrate. The sintering of the pellets can be 
done at a higher temperature, as the group of lead-free ceramics is sintered at higher 
temperatures usually at 1000℃ to 1400℃. 
3. Conclusions 
The solid state route is applied to synthesize the ceramic nanoparticles into pellets by 
a series of steps-from stoichiometric calculations to the sintering and obtaining the 
final product. The composition prepared can be tested by number of characterizations 
to study the details of the materials. The cylindrical pellets are further characterized 
to study the application-based effects of the materials.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Solid State Synthesis 181 
References 
[1] Jaffe, B. 2012. Piezoelectric ceramics. Vol. 3.: Elsevier. 
[2] Smith, B.C. 2011. Fundamentals of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy. CRC Press. 
[3] Singh, K. et al. 2011. Room temperature long range ferromagnetic ordering in (BiFeO3)1–x 
(PbTiO3)x nanocrystallites. Vol. 109: 123911–123911. 
[4] Carter, C. 2007. MG Norton Ceramic Material Science and Engineering. Springer Science and 
Business Media, New York. 
[5] Butz, B. 2011. Yttria-doped zirconia as solid electrolyte for fuel-cell applications: Fundamental 
aspects. Suedwestdeutscher Verlag fuer Hochschulschriften. 
[6] Rai, R. et al. 2010. Ferroelectric and Ferromagnetic Properties of Gd-Doped BiFeO3-BaTiO3 Solid 
Solution. 119: 539–545. 
[7] Lloyd, J. and J. Mitchinson. 2010. QI: The Book of General Ignorance-The Noticeably Stouter 
Edition. Faber & Faber. 
[8] Hamilton, S. 2007. An Analog Electronics Companion: Basic Circuit Design for Engineers and 
Scientists. Cambridge University Press. 
[9] Vilarinho, P.M., Y. Rosenwaks and A. Kingon. 2006. Scanning Probe Microscopy: Characterization, 
Nanofabrication and Device Application of Functional Materials: Proceedings of the NATO 
Advanced Study Institute on Scanning Probe Microscopy: Characterization, Nanofabrication and 
Device Application of Functional Materials, Algarve, Portugal, 1–13 October 2002. Vol. 186. 
Springer Science & Business Media. 
[10] Stuart, B. 2005. Infrared Spectroscopy. Wiley Online Library. 
[11] Moulson, A.J. and J.M. Herbert. 2003. Electroceramics: Materials, Properties, Applications. John 
Wiley & Sons. 
[12] Yanagida, H., K. Kōmoto and M. Miyayama. 1996. The Chemistry of Ceramics. John Wiley & 
Son Ltd. 
[13] Buchanan, R.C. 1986. Ceramic Materials for Electronics: Processing, Properties, and Applications. 
Marcel Dekker, Inc.  
 
 
11


Nanofabrication of 
Porous Structures


Solution Combustion Synthesis
of Advanced Electrode Materials 
in Energy Storage Devices


Parameshwar Kommu,1,2,* Divya Velpula,1


Shilpa Chakra Chidurala,1,* Shireesha Konda,1


Rakesh Kumar Thida,1
 Vikash Kumar,2
 Madhuri Sakaray,1


G.P. Singh2,* and Arnab Shankar Bhattacharyya2,*


1. Introduction 
The increasing depletion of fossil fuels and greenhouse gas emissions have urged 
people to develop energy storage systems [1, 2]. Energy storage systems play a major 
role in extracting energy from various sources and transforming it into the energy 
forms necessary for utility, manufacturing, construction, and electric vehicles (EV) 
applications. Energy sources like fossil fuels provide power based on consumer 
demand, easily stored while not in use. However, as new resources, such as solar 
and wind energy, become accessible, they must be captured and stored [3]. Energy 
storage is a viable option. Energy systems provide numerous advantages, including 
enhanced renewable energy distribution and improved economic performance 
1

 Center for Nano Science and Technology, Institute of Science and Technology, JNTU Hyderabad, 
India-500085. 
2 Department of Nanotechnology, Central University of Jharkhand, Ranchi, India-835205. 
* Corresponding author: shilpachakra.nano@jntuh.ac.in, gpsinghcuj@gmail.com, 2006asb@gmail.com Nanofabrication of Porous Structures 183 
[4]. Power storage is also essential for electrical systems because it allows load 
leveling and peak shaving, frequency management, energy oscillation damping, 
and improved power quality and reliability [3]. Electrochemical and battery energy 
storage, thermal and thermochemical energy storage, flywheel energy storage, 
and compressed gas energy storage are the most frequent energy storage methods. 
Pump/magnetic/chemical/hydrogen energy storage are all options for storing 
energy. Batteries and capacitors can be used to store electrical energy. Batteries are 
high-capacity, high-voltage energy storage devices with high power densities. 
Lithium-ion (LIB), sodium ion (SIB), lithium sulphur (LiS), lithium-air (Li-O2), zinc 
ion (ZIB), and zinc-air batteries are only a few of the several varieties. Supercapacitors 
or ultra-capacitors (UCs), have the highest capacitance per unit volume due to their 
porous electrode structure [5]. They are categorized as electrostatic electrolytic 
capacitors and electrochemical capacitors [6]. Many new electrode materials and 
electrolytes have been investigated and proposed to enhance the cost, energy density 
and power density, cycle life, and battery safety [7]. In this chapter, porous structured 
electrode material focuses on solution combustion synthesis process for advanced 
electrode material in energy storage device applications. 
1.1 Combustion Synthesis 
Combustion synthesis (CS) is a well-known, efficient, and appealing synthesis 
process. It’s utilized to make powders, ceramics, composites, and functional 
materials. Merzanov et al. were the first to develop this approach (1970) [8]. The 
CS is also a self-propagating, high-temperature synthesis as exothermic combustion 
reactions will form the desired inorganic matter [9]. The CS technique has been used 
in various academic and industrial applications [10–15]. Due to its unique approach, 
excellent benefits at a low cost, and a way that saves energy and time, this approach 
has garnered more visibility and accuracy in a short period. With these benefits, 
combustion synthesis has shown to be the most acceptable synthesis process for 
commercial adaption. The combustion synthesis is separated into two stages: 
self-transmitting high-temperature synthesis (SHS), and the thermal blast mode, 
although the phrase “combustion synthesis” is now generally used to refer to all of 
those self-sustaining and self-transmission illumination reactions [16]. According to 
the existing reports, carbide, nitride, boride, sulfate, and alumina nitride materials 
are made by the combustion synthesis method [17–22]. The combustion method has 
been divided into solid-state combustion and solution combustion in recent years. 
Combustion synthesis is the ideal option for a fast reaction and energy-saving. 
The following are a few critical steps in the combustion synthesis process: 
Step 1. The precise proportion of fuel to the oxidizer is vital in combustion synthesis, 
and stoichiometric balance is also essential.


Step 2. The fuel to oxidizer ratio should be equal to 1.


Step 3. The oxidizer and fuel are combined and agitated to form a homogenous 
solution using a solvent. Step 4. The resulting homogenous solution must be kept on a hot plate or in a muffle furnace with
the temperature adjusted to prevent the solution from burning with flames. Once the combustion 
process starts, it is self-propelled by an exothermic redox chemical reaction.
Step 5. When the entire homogenous mixture has been uniformly heated, it can be removed from the
hot plate or furnace and crushed thoroughly in a mortar pestle to obtain powder form.
2. Classification of combustion synthesis
Figure 1. Different types of process are involved in Combustion Synthesis Process
Solid-state combustion and solution combustion are the two most common types of combustion
synthesis. The synthesis of solid-state combustion is further separated into two groups.
1. Linear or self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS) and
2. Bulk or volume combustion synthesis (VCS). 
While the solution combustion synthesis can occur in various modes as we can see Figure.1 [23], a
detailed discussion of all combustion synthesis protocols is provided as follows.
2.1 Solid-state combustion method (SSCs)
The SSCs synthesis technique has been subject to chemical reactions and products in the solid-state 
[16]. The product created by explodes the reactants, which are primarily pellets. Solid-state 
combustion produces borides, carbides, nitrides, and oxides, among other compounds [10].
2.1.1 Self-propagating high-temperature synthesis
Commented [A3]: by what?
 
 
Fig. 1. Different types of process are involved in Combustion Synthesis Process. 
 
184 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Step 4. The resulting homogenous solution must be kept on a hot plate or in a muffle 
furnace with the temperature adjusted to prevent the solution from burning with 
flames. Once the combustion process starts, it is self-propelled by an exothermic 
redox chemical reaction. 
Step 5. When the entire homogenous mixture has been uniformly heated, it can be 
removed from the hot plate or furnace and crushed thoroughly in a mortar pestle to 
obtain powder form. 
2. Classification of Combustion Synthesis 
Solid-state combustion and solution combustion are the two most common types of 
combustion synthesis. The synthesis of solid-state combustion is further separated 
into two groups. 
1. Linear or self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS) and 
2. Bulk or volume combustion synthesis (VCS). 
While the solution combustion synthesis can occur in various modes as we 
can see Fig. 1 [23], a detailed discussion of all combustion synthesis protocols is 
provided as follows. 
2.1 Solid-state Combustion Method (SSCs) 
The SSCs synthesis technique has been subject to chemical reactions and products in 
the solid-state [16]. The product created explodes the reactants, which are primarily 
pellets. Solid-state combustion produces borides, carbides, nitrides, and oxides, 
among other compounds [10]. 
2.1.1 Self-Propagating High-Temperature Synthesis 
The SHS is an effective method for producing borides, carbides, and oxide powders 
directly from the reactions that exist in a reactive process [10, 23]. The process 
develops quickly by initiating and self-propagating extreme heatwaves generated Nanofabrication of Porous Structures 185 
from exothermic redox chemical reactions. The waves transfer at high speeds from 
high-temperature results to low-temperature factors, allowing the reactants to be 
heated to high temperatures in a short period and leading to the highly pure and fine 
nanopowder or nanoparticles [23–27]. 
There are many complex and interdependent parameters for self-propagating 
high-temperature synthesis, viz. the amount, composition and nano particle size, 
reaction purity, gas phase pressure, type, and amount of fuel of nanoparticles 
[23, 25]. In addition, other conditions are required here for the self-propagation 
high-temperature synthesis reactions of the critical reaction temperature 
(> 1500°C) [23]. 
To know the chemical reaction of Linear or SHS response, it is important to 
understand the nature of chemical reactions as SHS reactions are of the redox probes 
[23, 26]. Reducers such as iron, zinc and magnesium will reduce others by donating 
electrons [10, 23, 24]. The oxidizer in the SHS reaction is an electron receptor, while 
the fuel is an electron donor [26]. 
2.1.2 Volume Combustion Synthesis (VCS) 
VCS is a established method for planning a wide range of materials due to its 
effortlessness, wide niche range, and potential to effectively obtain elements in an 
ideal structure. VCS is less controlled and is used for miserable exothermic reactions 
that require pre-heating. VCS involves a reaction in a homogeneous aqueous 
oxidizer-fuel setting, heated continuously by an external bioenergy source [28]. 
2.2 Solution Combustion Synthesis 
The solution combustion synthesis (SCS) methods have drawn much interest in the 
scientific world as it is straightforward, simple, efficient, and fast process for the 
synthesis of porous structure nanomaterials. It can produce ceramics, metal oxides, 
sulfides, intermetallics, composites, and advanced functional materials in the range of 
1–100 nm [29, 30]. The oxidizer, fuel, and temperature are three crucial components 
in the SCS process. As shown in Fig. 2, the process comprises of an exothermic 
chemical reaction between an oxidizer (metal nitrates) and a fuel (urea, glycine, 
sucrose, polyvinyl alcohol, etc.) combined in an aqueous solution and heated on hot 
plate [13, 31]. The fuels are rich in carbon and hydrogen and facilitate heat release 
by forming CO2 and H2O during the combustion process. In addition, they efficiently 
form complexes with metal ions, thereby improving the mixing level and preventing 
separation [11, 16, 23, 25, 32]. Forming a precursor in viscous liquid or gel is 
essential to mix the basic ingredients at the molecular level and prevent accidental 
redox reactions between the oxidizer and the fuel [23]. On the other hand, the fuel 
is expected to start combustion with an oxidizer at low ignition temperatures. The 
fuel, the amount of fuel, the pH of the starting solution, and the fuel/oxidizer ratio are 
critical parameters that affect the properties of the precursor [23]. The second stage 
in nanoparticles synthesis by SCS is automatic or auto-ignition, which derives from 
the highly exothermic nature of the reactions between glycine nitrate reactants, that 
facilitates the hot crystal generated during combustion. The crystallization and phase Figure 2. Details of Solution combustion synthesis process to evaluate porous structure powder and
electrode fabrication for energy storage applications.
2.2 Solution Combustion Synthesis
The solution combustion synthesis (SCS) methods have drawn much interest in the scientific world
as it is straightforward, simple, efficient, and fast process for the synthesis of porous structure
nanomaterials. It can produce ceramics, metal oxides, sulfides, intermetallics, composites, and 
advanced functional materials in the range of 1-100 nm [29, 30]. The oxidizer, fuel, and 
temperature are three crucial components in the SCS process. As shown in figure 2, the process
comprises of an exothermic chemical reaction between an oxidizer (metal nitrates) and a fuel (urea,
glycine, sucrose, polyvinyl alcohol ,etc.) combined in an aqueous solution and heated on hot plate
[13, 31]. The fuels are rich in carbon and hydrogen and facilitate heat release by forming CO2 and
H2O during the combustion process. In addition, they efficiently form complexes with metal ions, 
thereby improving the mixing level and preventing separation [11, 16, 23, 25, 32]. Forming a
Fig. 2. Details of Solution combustion synthesis process to evaluate porous structure powder and Commented [A6]: In capital?
electrode fabrication for energy storage applications. 
 
 
 
 
186 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
formation occur in most of the cases of SCS, but it can increase crystal size, stiffness 
and specific surface area [23].


The advantages of solution combustion synthesis are:


1) Pure phase formation and high crystallinity 
2) Controlled morphology


3) Porous nature 
4) High surface area


5) Low temperature 
6) Simple, cost effective and easily to handle while synthesizing nano materials


7) High yield (80–90%) and scalable nano powder


2.3 Fuels 
The nanomaterials can be synthesized with the help of fuels (reducer) and metal 
nitrates (oxidizer) [28, 30, 33]. The fuel is an important component for preparing 
the porous structure of nano materials using solution combustion. The inorganic 
and organic fuels affect the properties of the final compound. The decrease in 
decomposition temperatures is also important due to the evolution of large amounts 
of gases. These gases help to produce enough heat distribution to create excess 
material porosity, good crystallinity, and cell aggregation [28, 29]. For example, 
porous structured ZnMn2O4 and ZnMn2O4/rGO nanopowder were synthesized precursor in viscous liquid or gel is essential to mix the basic ingredients at the molecular level and
prevent accidental redox reactions between the oxidizer and the fuel [23]. On the other hand, the
fuel is expected to start combustion with an oxidizer at low ignition temperatures. The fuel, the 
amount of fuel, the pH of the starting solution, and the Fuel/Oxidizer ratio are critical parameters
that affect the properties of the precursor [23]. The second stage in nanoparticles synthesis by SCS 
is automatic or auto-ignition, which derives from the highly exothermic nature of the reactions
between glycine nitrate reactants, that facilitates the hot crystal generated during combustion. The
crystallization and phase formation occur in most of the cases of SCS, but it can increase crystal
size, stiffness and specific surface area [23].
The advantages of solution combustion synthesis are:
1) Pure phase formation and high crystallinity
2) Controlled morphology
Figure. 3 (A and B) Reprinted with permission (Parameshwar Kommu et al.). Copyright (2020) material 
science and engineering B 261 (2020) 114647).
Commented [A8]: In capital?
Commented [A9]: Caption below: 
Kommu: year? Also, last name?
Fig. 3. (A and B) Reprinted with permission (Parameshwar Kommu et al. 2020). Copyright (2020) 
Material Science and Engineering B 261 (2020) 114647. 
 
 
Nanofabrication of Porous Structures 187 
by SCS using sucrose as fuel. The crystallographic and morphological analysis 
confirms the formation of porous ZnMn2O4 and ZnMn2O4/rGO nanopowder as is 
given in Fig. 3 (A&B) [34]. Here, the fuel is an important factor for changing the 
mechanism and dynamics of solution combustion synthesis. The choice of oxidant 
(metal nitrates) for the fuel ratio is the extremely crucial step that affects the behavior 
of the nanomaterials formed. The ratio of fuel to oxidizer is called “Ψ”, which is 
defined as [10, 28, 35–37] 
Reducing valences ( fuel ) Ψ = (1) oxidizing valences Metal Nitrate ( )
X(NO3)2. XH2O (oxidizing) + Fuel (reducing) → XnO (Product) + CO2(g) + 
N2(g) + H2O(g) (2) 
Here, “X” is metal nitrates (X = Li, Mn, Fe, Zn, Co, Mo, Ti, Sn, and Ce, etc.). 
Fuel can be urea, glycine, citric acid, sucrose, starch, or thiourea, etc., the solvent 
is water. The concentration of fuel plays a crucial role in controlling particle size, 
morphology, and specific surface area. The various types of fuels used in SCS 
method are given in Table 1. The reaction between zinc nitrate (Zn (NO3)2.6H2O) 
and urea (NH2-CO-NH2) is provided in equation (3). Herein, elemental valency of 
Zn, Mn, C, H, N and O is +2, +4, +1, 0 and –2, as calculated based on propellant 
chemistry. Accordingly, the oxidizing valency of zinc nitrate and reducing valiancy 
of urea are –10 and +6, respectively. The stoichiometric equilibrium combustion 
reaction is expressed by the equation (3) [38]. 
5 5Ψ + 3 5 10 Zn ( N O3 2 ) + ΨNH 2 −CO − NH 2 + 5(Ψ −1) O 2 → ZnO + N g 2 ( ) + ΨCO 2 + ΨHO g 2 () (3) 3 3 3 3 
Where, Ψ = 1 is stoichiometric state, Ψ < 1 and Ψ > 1 indicates fuel-lean and fuel-rich, 
respectively [29, 30]. The porous structure electrode material makes it very useful 
in electrochemical energy storage systems such as LIB, SIB and UCs. However, Li+
, 188 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Table 1. Various types of fuels are used in SCs method. 
Fuel Chemical formula Reducing valence 
Sucrose C12H22O11 48 
Glucose C6H12O6 24 
Urea NH2-CO-NH2 6 
Hexamethylenetetramine C6H12N4 36 
Glycine C2H5NO2 9 
Ascorbic acid C6H8O6 20 
Citric acid C6H8O7 18 
Ethylene glycol C2H6O2 10 
Hydrazine N2H4 4 
Hexamethylenetetramine C6H12N4 36 
Alanine C3H7NO2 15 
Acrylamide C3H5NO 15 
Aspartic acid C4H7NO4 15 
Tartaric acid C4H6O6 10 
Carbohydrazide CH6N4O 8 
Tryptophan C11H12N2O2 52 
Phenylalanine C9H11NO2 43 
Arginine C6H14N4O2 34 
Triethanolamine C6H15NO3 33 
Valine C5H11NO2 27 
Glutamic acid C5H9NO4 21 
Na+
, and K+
, etc. ions could allow more ions to adsorb onto electrode surface area 
and enhance charge-discharge performance of batteries and supercapacitors. Few 
porous structure electrode materials are given in Table 2. 
Table 2. Porous structures’ advanced electrode materials synthesis by solution combustion synthesis. 
Fuel Material Structure Applications Ref. 
Urea LiFePO4/C Porous Li-ion battery [39] 
CTAB and glycine 
as fuel 
LiFePO4 Hierarchical porous Li-ion battery [40] 
Sucrose ZnMn2O4 and 
ZnMn2O4/rGO 
Porous Li-ion battery and 
Supercapacitors 
[34] 
Glycine FeNi3/NiFe2O4 Microstructure with 
macropores 
Hybrid capacitors [41] 
Glycine NiS/rGO Porous with spherical 
nanoparticles 
Supercapacitors [42] 
Citric acid Li2MnO3 Spongy morphology 
with pores 
Li-ion battery [43] 
ᴅ-(+)-glucose Co3O4 Porous Li-ion battery [44] Nanofabrication of Porous Structures 189 
2.4 Oxidizers 
A metal precursor contains a specific metal cation that adds metallic components to the 
final product by introducing that element into the combustion mixture. Oxynitrates, 
chlorides, and oxychlorides are more metal precursors. Chlorides should not be used 
since they may adsorb or seep into the powder, polluting it; instead, chlorides can 
be dissolved in concentrated nitric acid and heated to remove the chlorine produced 
by the procedure. Metal precursors for SCS might include oxalates, acetates, 
hydroxides, acetylacetonates, and alkoxides. At higher temperatures, metal sulphates 
and phosphates are stable, but they do not provide enough oxygen to burn. They 
are rarely regarded precursors to combustion processes for this reason [13]. Metal 
precursors are salts that contain oxidants, reducers, or neutrals as counter anions. 
An oxidant is a moiety that serves as an energy source in combustion and redox 
processes. Hydrated nitrates are an excellent choice for oxidants because of their high 
oxidizing power (negative charge), solubility in water and polar organic solvents, 
and low breakdown temperature. Metal precursors commonly contain oxidizing 
moieties in the form of counter anions [45]. Commercial nitrates, water-soluble and 
inexpensive, are the metal precursors of choice. As a reduction, the metal cation has 
a significant impact on the chemical makeup of the final product (positive charge). 
The counter anion (NO3), on the other hand, acts as an oxidizing agent. The metal 
precursor utilized to introduce the metal into the combustion mixture impacts the 
combustion process, phase composition, and even the morphological features of the 
resultant powder. The following Table 3 lists some metal precursors for creating 
metal oxides utilized in combustion synthesis. 
Table 3. Various types of oxidizers involved in SCs method. 
Metal Oxidizer Fuel Material Temp 
(°C) 
Structure Particle/ 
Crystallite 
Size (nm) 
Ref. 
Co(NO3)2·6H2O Citric Acid Co3O4 350 Nanoparticles 20 [46] 
(Fe(NO3)3.9H2O Glycine/Glucose α-Fe2O3 500 Nanosheets 18 [47] 
Mg(NO₃)₂, Mg(OH)2 Ethylene Glycol MgO 600 Nano-size 
bubble-like 
holes 
50 W, 200 L [48] 
Ni(NO3)2·6H2O Glycine NiO 470 Nanofoam 30 [49] 
NH4VO3 Glycine/Citric 
Acid 
V2O5 - Nanospheres 200 [50] 
Fe (NO3)3 Glycine Fe2O3 300 Nanoneedles 100 [51] 
(NH4)6Mo7O24.4H2O Urea α-MoO3 200– 
600 
Nanorods 50 [52]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
190 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
3. Conclusion 
Solution combustion synthesis is one of the simplest, cost-effective technique for 
producing various nanomaterials. Significantly, the production of nanostructured 
materials using solution combustion protocol was studied extensively. The 
applications of nanomaterials synthesized by combustion methodology were 
discussed briefly. Further, fuel and oxidizers’ importance in combustion synthesis is 
explained with suitable examples. 
Credit Authorship Contribution Statement 
Parameshwar Kommu: Writing. Divya Velpula, Shireesha Konda, Madhuri 
Sakaray and Rakesh Kumar Thida: Data curation, Formal analysis. Shilpa 
Chakra Chidurala, GP Singh, Arnab Shankar Bhattacharyya: Supervisions, 
Conceptualization 
Acknowledgements 
One of the authors Parameshwar Kommu is thankful to Department of 
Nanotechnology, Central University of Jharkhand, India for financial support during 
PhD work. The authors also gratefully acknowledge F.No. CRG/2019/007040, DST 
SERB; File No: SP/YO/2019/1599, DST SYST and sanction no. SR/WOS-A/CS￾13/2019, DST Women Scientist (WOS-A), New Delhi. 
References 
[1] V, D., S. K. and S. Chakra Ch. 2021. Impact of synthetic strategies for the preparation of polymers 
and metal-polymer hybrid composites in electrocatalysis applications. Synth Met. 282. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.synthmet.2021.116956. 
[2] Ritchie, A.G. 2004. Recent developments and likely advances in lithium rechargeable batteries. 
J. Power Sources 136: 285–289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2004.03.013. 
[3] Koohi-Fayegh, S. and M.A. Rosen. 2020. A review of energy storage types, applications and recent 
developments. J. Energy Storage 27: 101047. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2019.101047. 
[4] Divya, V., S. Mondal and M.V. Sangaranarayanan. 2018. Shape-controlled synthesis of palladium 
nanostructures from flowers to thorns: electrocatalytic oxidation of ethanol. J. Nanosci. 
Nanotechnol. 19: 758–769. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.2019.15752. 
[5] Rakesh Kumar, T., C.H. Shilpa Chakra, S. Madhuri et al. 2021. Microwave-irradiated novel 
mesoporous nickel oxide carbon nanocomposite electrodes for supercapacitor application. J. Mater 
Sci. Mater. Electron. 32: 20374–20383. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10854-021-06547-5. 
[6] Shireesha, K., V. Divya, G. Pranitha et al. 2021. A systematic investigation on the effect of reducing 
agents towards specific capacitance of NiMg@OH/reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites. Mater 
Technol 00: 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/10667857.2021.1995933. 
[7] Shireesha, K., T.R. Kumar, T. Rajani et al. 2021. Novel NiMgOH-rGO-based nanostructured 
hybrids for electrochemical energy storage supercapacitor applications: Effect of reducing agents. 
Crystals 11. https://doi.org/10.3390/cryst11091144. 
[8] Varma, A. and A.S. Mukasyan. 2004. Combustion synthesis of advanced materials: Fundamentals 
and applications. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 21: 527–536. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02705444. 
[9] Liu, G., J. Li and K. Chen. 2013. Combustion synthesis of refractory and hard materials: A review. 
Int. J. Refract Met. Hard Mater. 39: 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrmhm.2012.09.002. 
[10] Patil, K.C., S.T. Aruna and S. Ekambaram. 1997. Combustion synthesis. Curr. Opin. Solid State 
Mater Sci. 2: 158–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1359-0286(97)80060-5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication of Porous Structures 191 
[11] Aruna, S.T. and A.S. Mukasyan. 2008. Combustion synthesis and nanomaterials. Curr. Opin. Solid 
State Mater. Sci. 12: 44–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cossms.2008.12.002. 
[12] Lackner, M. 2010. Combustion synthesis: Novel routes to novel materials. Combust Synth. Nov 
Routes to Nov Mater. https://doi.org/10.2174/97816080515571100101. 
[13] Deganello, F. and A.K. Tyagi. 2018. Solution combustion synthesis, energy and environment: 
Best parameters for better materials. Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater. 64: 23–61. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pcrysgrow.2018.03.001. 
[14] Cincotti, A., R. Licheri, A.M. Locci et al. 2003. A review on combustion synthesis of novel 
materials: Recent experimental and modeling results. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 78: 122–127. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jctb.757. 
[15] Ma, H., Y. Geng, Y.-I. Lee et al. 2013. Free-standing poly(2-vinylpyridine) foam films doped 
with silver nanoparticles formed at the planar liquid/liquid interface. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
394: 223–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2012.12.041. 
[16] Patil, K.C., S.T. Aruna and T. Mimani. 2002. Combustion synthesis: An update. Curr. Opin. Solid 
State Mater Sci. 6: 507–512. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-0286(02)00123-7. 
[17] Rosa, R., P. Veronesi and C. Leonelli. 2013. A review on combustion synthesis intensification 
by means of microwave energy. Chem. Eng. Process Process Intensif. 71: 2–18. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cep.2013.02.007. 
[18] Cao, Z. and C. Zuo. 2019. In situ synthesis of chromium carbide nanocomposites from solution 
combustion synthesis precursors. J. Mol. Struct. 1175: 496–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
molstruc.2018.08.008. 
[19] Durand, G.R., N. Hakmeh, V. Dorcet et al. 2019. New insights in structural characterization of 
transparent ZnS ceramics hot-pressed from nanocrystalline powders synthesized by combustion 
method. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 39: 3094–3102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2019.03.033. 
[20] Kumar, S., Rajawat, S., Purohit, R. and Malik, M.M. 2019. Optical studies of MWCNT doped 
boron carbon oxynitride (BCNO) nano composite phosphor material. Optik (Stuttg) 176: 617–625. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2018.09.030. 
[21] Van Tuyen, H., P. Van Do, V.X. Quang et al. 2019. Effect of B2O3 content on Eu3+−Surrounding 
in the system SrO−x.B2O3 containing Eu3+ ions prepared by combustion method. Phys B Condens 
Matter 555: 36–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physb.2018.11.047. 
[22] Qin, M., H. Wu, Z. Cao et al. 2019. A novel method to synthesize vanadium nitride nanopowders 
by ammonia reduction from combustion precursors. J. Alloys Compd. 772: 808–813. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2018.09.112. 
[23] Birol, H., C. Renato Rambo, M. Guiotoku and D. Hotza. 2013. Preparation of ceramic nanoparticles 
via cellulose-assisted glycine nitrate process: A review. RSC Adv. 3: 2873–2884. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c2ra21810k. 
[24] Materials, M.B.E. 2012. Self-Propagating High-Temperature Synthesis. 247–257. 
[25] Makino, A. and C.K. Law. 1994. SHS combustion characteristics of several ceramics and intermetallic 
compounds. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 77: 778–786. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1151-2916.1994.tb05365.x. 
[26] Merzhanov, A.G. 2004. The chemistry of self-propagating high-temperature synthesis. 1779–1786. 
[27] Maglia, F., U. Anselmi-Tamburini, G. Spinolo. and Z.A. Munir. 2000. Zirconia-based 
metastable solid solutions through self-propagating high-temperature synthesis: Synthesis, 
characterization, and mechanistic investigations. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 83: 1935–1941. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/j.1151-2916.2000.tb01493.x. 
[28] Parauha, Y.R., V. Sahu and S.J. Dhoble. 2021. Prospective of combustion method for preparation 
of nanomaterials: A challenge. Mater Sci. Eng. B Solid-State Mater. Adv. Technol. 267: 115054. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mseb.2021.115054. 
[29] Varma, A., A.S. Mukasyan, A.S. Rogachev and K.V. Manukyan. 2016. Solution combustion 
synthesis of nanoscale materials. Chem. Rev. 116: 14493–14586. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
chemrev.6b00279. 
[30] Li, F.T., J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S.Z. Qiao. 2015. Solution combustion synthesis of metal 
oxide nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion. Nanoscale 7: 17590–17610. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c5nr05299h.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
192 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[31] Novitskaya, E., J.P. Kelly, S. Bhaduri and O.A. Graeve. 2021. A review of solution combustion 
synthesis: an analysis of parameters controlling powder characteristics. Int. Mater. Rev. 
66: 188–214. https://doi.org/10.1080/09506608.2020.1765603. 
[32] Burgos-Montes, O., R. Moreno, M.T. Colomer and J.C. Fariñas. 2006. Synthesis of mullite powders 
through a suspension combustion process. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 89: 484–489. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
j.1551-2916.2005.00771.x. 
[33] Zhao, B., X. Yu, R. Cai et al. 2012. Solution combustion synthesis of high-rate performance 
carbon-coated lithium iron phosphate from inexpensive iron (iii) raw material. J. Mater. Chem. 
22: 2900–2907. https://doi.org/10.1039/c1jm14362j. 
[34] Kommu, P., G.P. Singh, C.S. Chakra et al. 2020. Preparation of ZnMn2O4 and ZnMn2O4/graphene 
nano composites by combustion synthesis for their electrochemical properties. Mater Sci. Eng. B 
Solid-State Mater Adv. Technol. 261: 114647. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mseb.2020.114647. 
[35] Challagulla, S. and S. Roy. 2017. The role of fuel to oxidizer ratio in solution combustion synthesis 
of TiO2 and its influence on photocatalysis. J. Mater Res. 32: 2764–2772. https://doi.org/10.1557/ 
jmr.2017.244. 
[36] Jadhav, L.D., S.P. Patil, A.P. Jamale and A.U. Chavan. 2013. Solution combustion synthesis: Role of 
oxidant to fuel ratio on powder properties. Mater. Sci. Forum 757: 85–98. https://doi.org/10.4028/ 
www.scientific.net/MSF.757.85. 
[37] Ahmadipour, M., K. Venkateswara Rao and V. Rajendar. 2012. Formation of nanoscale Mg(x) 
Fe(1–X) O(x = 0.1,0.2,0.4) structure by solution combustion: Effect of fuel to oxidizer ratio. 
J. Nanomater. 2012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/163909. 
[38] Wen, W. and J.M. Wu. 2014. Nanomaterials via solution combustion synthesis: A step nearer to 
controllability. RSC Adv. 4: 58090–58100. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4ra10145f. 
[39] Vedala, S. and M. Sushama. 2018. Urea assisted combustion synthesis of LiFePO4/C Nano 
composite cathode material for lithium ion battery storage system. Mater Today Proc. 
5: 1649–1656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2017.11.259. 
[40] Karami, M., S.M. Masoudpanah and H.R. Rezaie. 2021. Solution combustion synthesis of 
hierarchical porous LiFePO4 powders as cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Adv. Powder 
Technol. 32: 1935–1942. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apt.2021.04.007. 
[41] Rahmati, M., S.M. Masoudpanah, S. Alamolhoda and J. Barqi. 2022. High-performance hybrid 
capacitors based on the FeNi3/NiFe2O4 composite powders synthesized by combustion method. 
J. Mater Res. Technol. 16: 1578–1587. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2021.12.043. 
[42] Marand, N.A., S.M. Masoudpanah, S. Alamolhoda and M.S. Bafghi. 2021. Solution combustion 
synthesis of nickel sulfide/reduced graphene oxide composite powders as electrode materials 
for high-performance supercapacitors. J. Energy Storage 39: 102637. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2021.102637. 
[43] Ehi-Eromosele, C.O., S.O. Ajayi and C.N. Onwucha. 2021. Optimizing the electrochemical 
performance of Li2MnO3 cathode materials for Li-ion battery using solution combustion synthesis: 
Higher temperature and longer syntheses improves performance. J. Alloys Compd. 861: 157972. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.157972. 
[44] Michalska, M., H. Xu, Q. Shan et al. 2021. Solution combustion synthesis of a nanometer-scale 
Co3O4 anode material for Li-ion batteries. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 12: 424–431. https://doi. 
org/10.3762/BJNANO.12.34. 
[45] Carlos, E., R. Martins, E. Fortunato and R. Branquinho. 2020. Solution combustion synthesis: 
towards a sustainable approach for metal oxides. Chem. - A Eur. J. 26: 9099–9125. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/chem.202000678. 
[46] Deng, J., L. Kang, G. Bai et al. 2014. Electrochimica Acta Solution combustion synthesis of cobalt 
oxides (Co3O4 and Co3O4/CoO) nanoparticles as supercapacitor electrode materials. Electrochim 
Acta 132: 127–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2014.03.158. 
[47] Huang, M., M. Qin, P. Chen et al. 2016. a novel combustion-based route nanosheets via 
a novel combustion-based route. Ceram. Int. 42: 10380–10388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ceramint.2016.03.175. 
[48] Li, S. 2019. Combustion synthesis of porous MgO and its adsorption properties. Int. J. Ind. Chem. 
10: 89–96. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40090-019-0174-7.  
 
 
 
Nanofabrication of Porous Structures 193 
[49] Manukyan, K.V., A. Cross, S. Roslyakov et al. 2013. Solution Combustion Synthesis of Nano￾Crystalline Metallic Materials: Mechanistic Studies. 
[50] Jagadeesh, A., T.M. Rattan, M. Muralikrishna and K. Venkataramaniah. 2014. Instant one step 
synthesis of crystalline nano V2O5 by solution combustion method showing enhanced negative 
temperature coefficient of resistance. Mater. Lett. 121: 133–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matlet.2014.01.080. 
[51] Wang, X., M. Qin, F. Fang et al. 2018. Solution combustion synthesis of nanostructured iron 
oxides with controllable morphology, composition and electrochemical performance. Ceram. Int. 
44: 4237–4247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2017.12.004. 
[52] Prakash, N.G., M. Dhananjaya, A.L. Narayana et al. 2018. Author’s Accepted Manuscript. Elsevier 
Ltd. and Techna Group S.r.l. 12


Physicochemical
Dependency of
Biochar-based Nano-phase
Composites Derived through
Ball Milling for Visionary 
Energy Storage Applications

 Benjamin Raj,1
 P. Perumal,1 Arun Kumar Padhy,2
 D. S. Rao1
 and


Mamata Mohapatra1,3,*


1. Introduction 
Researchers and the scientific community face a significant issue as a result of the 
urgent need for an uninterrupted power supply that exacerbates the environmental 
crisis by depleting sources of fossil fuels like coal, petroleum, and natural gas. The 
continuous depletion of these sources poses a serious challenge for the climate 
change, energy security, social and political stability as well [1]. The advancement of 
an effective and sustainable infrastructure has received great attention of the scientific 
community due to its direct impact on social and environmental concerns. Therefore, 
it is the demand of today’s scenario to develop sustainable and cost effective 
materials to fulfill the needs and to reduce the use of fossil fuels [2]. In search of this, 
1 CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha – 751013, India. 2 Department of Chemistry, Central University of Jharkhand, Brambe, Ranchi - 835205, India. 
3 Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh - 201002, India. 
* Corresponding author: mamata@immt.res.in Biochar-based Nano-phase Composites for Energy Storage Application 195 
the researchers focus mainly on inexhaustible renewable solar energy and carbonous 
materials, because carbon is the most abundant and extensively available component 
after oxygen in the biosphere, which offers a foundation for the storage of renewable 
energy in the form of carbohydrates and other biopolymers. The current demand is 
for the development of advanced high-performance with cost-effective materials for 
practical use in energy storage devices like battery or supercapacitor and other means 
of energy storage/conversion. Meanwhile, a carbon based composite materials played 
a vital role in the development of renewable energy storage process and energy 
conversion like hydrogen storage, fuel cells, and as an effective electrode material 
for the Lithium ion battery and supercapacitor, respectively [3–5]. 
The conventional method for the development of carbonous materials 
(e.g., graphene, carbon nanotubes and activated carbon) was based on coal or 
petroleum products through tedious synthetic process and extensive energy 
consumption. Generally, activated carbon is produced from coal or other renewable 
resources via different process such as steam/CO2 activation or by applying 
chemicals like ZnCl2, H3PO4 and KOH, etc. The carbon nanotubes and graphene 
is produced by chemical vapor deposition or electric-arc-discharge techniques. The 
practical implication of using above mentioned techniques cannot be implicated 
as it requires high temperature and tedious chemical process which restricts the 
large-scale production and industrial application. Since it is highly expensive 
and also not suitable for environment, it is the demand of scientific community 
to develop a new technique/method for the production of carbonous material in 
cost-effective manner. The feedstock materials for the production of biochar is 
cost-effective and abundant with respect to other materials. The production of biochar 
requires less energy consumption, is economically viable and robust which not only 
fulfills the requirement of energy but also reduces the environmental stress [6, 7]. 
Therefore, the biochar carbon materials are considered as potential replacement of 
above-mentioned carbon materials (graphene and CNT, etc.) due to their abundant 
availability and renewable nature. However, there is no fundamental difference 
between the activated carbon and biochar materials as both have amorphous matrix 
with huge porosity as well. The basic difference between them is the existence of 
enormous functional group at the surface of biochar as compared to the other carbon 
materials. The conventional method employed for the production of carbon from 
fossils emitted huge amount CO2 that can be mitigated by the production of biochar 
from biomass. Generally, biomass is composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, pentoses, 
hexoses and uronic acid, etc. The biomass can easily be pyrolyzed at low temperature 
and it starts decomposing at the temperature ranges from 200–260℃. However, 
researchers reported that the biochar obtained at low temperature is not suitable for 
energy storage and conversion field including Li/Na ion batteries and so on due to 
the low surface area and poor pore volume [1]. Before their practical implication, 
the surface has to be functionalized and activated by addition of suitable reagents or 
techniques. 
During last few decades, biochar-based materials attracted attention in field 
of energy storage and other means of conversion because the surface chemistry 
and porosity can easily be tuned up. Ample researchers provide a mechanism that Figure-1 Schematic representation of biochar based functional material for probable
electrochemical storage application and conversion field.
Working principles of ball milling and its parameters
Ball milling is a class of grinder that works on the impact and attrition used to grind the
materials for the defect formation and size adjustment of solid. A ball mill consists of 
hollow cylindrical shell rotating about its axis and is partially filled with the requisite
mass of balls. The solid can be adjusted into small size through grinding media which 
may be made of stainless steel, ceramics, zirconia, tungsten carbide etc. In research, it is
basically used for the adjustment of size of solid grain particle in nanoscale ranges.
During the course, a high-energy mill is employed and specific powder charge is placed 
along with milling medium. The mass of sample and balls are fixed in specific ratio to
Commented [A9]: Emerging
Electrocatalysis
Production
Thermoelectrical
Commented [A10]: Solid what?
 
 
 
196 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
EMERGING FUEL 
ELECTROCATALYSIS PRODUCTION 
THERMOELECTRICAL 
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of biochar based functional material for probable electrochemical 
storage application and conversion field. 
energy storage and conversion involves mainly physical and chemical interaction 
between the interface and surface. As activity of energy storage is very much 
dependent on the surface morphology and porosity of materials, biochar plays an 
important role in developing new and advanced electrode material for energy storage 
system. The surface functional groups greatly influence the thermodynamics of the 
heterogeneous reaction that occurs at the interface when the transition of phases is 
taking place whereas the porosity can limit the extent of kinetics and rate of physical 
and chemical reaction. The biochar-based electrode materials are not only used 
in the supercapacitor or lithium-ion batteries but it can also be used as the other 
means of energy storage like hydrogen storage and production, fuel cells and oxygen 
production, respectively. The potential application of biochar-based nanocomposite 
materials is enlisted in Fig. 1. 
2. Working Principles of Ball Milling and Its Parameters 
Ball milling is a class of grinder that works on the impact and attrition used to grind 
the materials for the defect formation and size adjustment of solid materials. A ball 
mill consists of hollow cylindrical shell rotating about its axis and is partially filled 
with the requisite mass of balls. The solid can be adjusted into small size through 
grinding media which may be made of stainless steel, ceramics, zirconia, tungsten 
carbide, etc. In research, it is basically used for the adjustment of size of solid grain maintain the size of particles. The kinetic energy produced during the motion is
responsible for breaking of chemical bond in powder and reducing the particles’ size. To
modify the properties, ot dope with functionalized moieties onto biochar, a variety of
chemicals have been employed to mill together with carbon powder like melamine,
carboxylic acid, ammonium bicarbonate, magnesium, hexane, yttrium carbon dioxide,
dry ice etc. Various parameters which govern the process of ball milling are types of
mills (i.e. planetary ball mills, tumbler ball mills, vibratory and attrition mill), which 
decide the intensity of kinetics energy executed over the carbonous powder. The different
types of ball mills are shown in Figure-2 (b). The major advantages of this process are as
follows: -
(i) It can be performed at room temperature.
(ii) It can be used for both wet and dry sample.
(iii) It is used for grinding the toxic materials and can be performed in inert
atmosphere as well.
(iv) The heat generated during grinding is much less than that of other chemical
approaches.
(v) The grinding speed and time are the influencing factors on properties of
catalyst in the ball milling method and also problems like caking, overheating, 
and high temperature safety do not exist in this method. 
Along with all the advantages, this process has several disadvantages also, like it is a
noisy machine, very slow process, and it cannot be employed for the soft, tacky and 
fibrous materials. The general working principle and mechanism of ball milling is
presented in figure-2 (a).
Commented [A11]: It?
Commented [A12]: rephrase
Commented [A13]: you say various, but only one is mentioned.
Commented [A14]: or kinetic?
Figure-2(a) Basic working principle and mechanism of ball milling (reprinted with
permission [8]).
Figure-2(b) Different types of ball mills (reprinted with permission [8])
Synthesis/preparation of biochar using ball mill
The properties and functionalities of the materials are determined by compositional and
structural characteristics. The percentage of carbon content depends upon the
environment. In the oxygen restricted mode, the biochar material comprises of high
carbon content produced by pyrolysis of feedstock with specific temperature ranges of 
300 to 1000 ℃. From the reported data, it has been concluded that the different feedstock
treated with varying temperature comprises of different chemical composition and
structure [6]. Feedstock has been classified into three different group i.e. non-traditional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biochar-based Nano-phase Composites for Energy Storage Application 197 
particle in nanoscale ranges. During the course, a high-energy mill is employed and 
specific powder charge is placed along with milling medium. The mass of sample and 
balls are fixed in specific ratio to maintain the size of particles. The kinetic energy 
produced during the motion is responsible for breaking of chemical bond in powder 
and reducing the particles’ size. Several chemicals, including melamine, carboxylic 
acid, ammonium bicarbonate, magnesium, hexane, yttrium carbon dioxide, dry 
ice, etc., have been used to mill together with carbon powder in order to affect the 
properties of the biochar when functionalized moieties are applied. The parameters 
which govern the process of ball milling are types of mills (i.e., planetary ball mills, 
tumbler ball mills, vibratory and attrition mill), which decide the intensity of kinetic 
energy executed over the carbonous powder. The different types of ball mills are 
shown in Fig. 2(b). The major advantages of this process are as follows: ­
i) It can be performed at room temperature. 
ii) It can be used for both wet and dry sample. 
Fig. 2. (a) Basic working principle and mechanism of ball milling (reprinted with permission [8]). 
(b) Different types of ball mills (reprinted with permission [8]). material, agricultural waste, and forestry. The preparation of biochar is generally carried
out by using agricultural waste and forestry waste due to its easy availability and cost￾effectiveness. The residue like wood chips, rice husk, rice-straws, corn straws, and other
biowaste are produced each year by agricultural and human activities. The researchers
have reported that low-cost biochar is synthesized by the biomass origins consisting of
large number of lignin and cellulose content. The preparation of biochar by using
different feedstock has been presented in figure-3.
Figure-3 Schematic representation of formation of biochar using different feedstock. 
(reprints with permission) [6].
The emerging interest for applying biochar in various application has drawn its
great attention to the researchers for the conversion of biomass to biochar. In lieu of this,
ball milling is the most suitable and economically viable process for the production of
biochar as it does not require any external sources of energy and tedious process. It is an
energy efficient and ecofriendly procedure to synthesize nanomaterials including biochar. 
From the report, it is assumed that carbon-based materials treated in ball milling have
higher absorption capability, functional groups and environmental concern. The surface
functional group of biochar can be tuned by ball milling process which help in the wide
Commented [A16]: Correct?
 
 
 
 
 
 
198 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
iii) It is used for grinding the toxic materials and can be performed in inert 
atmosphere as well. 
iv) The heat generated during grinding is much less than that of other chemical 
approaches. 
v) The grinding speed and time are the influencing factors on properties of catalyst 
in the ball milling method and also problems like caking, overheating, and high 
temperature safety do not exist in this method. 
Along with all the advantages, this process has several disadvantages also, like it 
is a noisy machine, very slow process, and it cannot be employed for the soft, tacky 
and fibrous materials. The general working principle and mechanism of ball milling 
is presented in Fig. 2(a). 
3. Synthesis/Preparation of Biochar Using Ball Mill 
The properties and functionalities of the materials are determined by compositional 
and structural characteristics. The percentage of carbon content depends upon the 
environment. In the oxygen restricted mode, the biochar material comprises of 
high carbon content produced by pyrolysis of feedstock with specific temperature 
ranges of 300 to 1000℃. From the reported data, it has been concluded that the 
different feedstock treated with varying temperature comprises of different chemical 
composition and structure [6]. Feedstock has been classified into three different 
group, i.e., non-traditional material, agricultural waste, and forestry. The preparation 
of biochar is generally carried out by using agricultural waste and forestry waste due 
to its easy availability and cost-effectiveness. The residue like wood chips, rice husk, 
rice-straws, corn straws, and other biowaste are produced each year by agricultural 
and human activities. The researchers have reported that low-cost biochar is 
synthesized by the biomass origin consisting of large number of lignin and cellulose 
content. The preparation of biochar by using different feedstock has been presented 
in Fig. 3. 
Fig. 3. Schematic representation of formation of biochar using different feedstock (reprints with 
permission) [6]. Biochar-based Nano-phase Composites for Energy Storage Application 199 
The emerging interest for applying biochar in various application has drawn 
its great attention to the researchers for the conversion of biomass to biochar. In 
lieu of this, ball milling is the most suitable and economically viable process for 
the production of biochar as it does not require any external sources of energy and 
tedious process. It is an energy efficient and ecofriendly procedure to synthesize 
nanomaterials including biochar. From the report, it is assumed that carbon-based 
materials treated in ball milling have higher absorption capability, functional groups 
and environmental concern. The surface functional group of biochar can be tuned by 
ball milling process which help in the wide area of application. The surface properties 
and stability of the biochar can be tuned by introducing suitable heteroatom having 
excess of functional group. The process of optimization of ball milling parameters 
has great importance for the synthesis of biochar or biochar-based composite 
materials for customizing the functionality and performances. The particle size of the 
biochar can be tuned by controlling the speed of balling and reaction time. Thus, the 
selection of ball milling process condition should take into consideration the desired 
properties of biochar products, interaction with solvent and stabilizer as well as cost 
and environmental impact. 
4. Biochar-based Composite Materials for Batteries 
In the past few decades, tremendous development has taken place in the research 
on renewable energy production systems and their efficient storage. These 
renewable energy systems mitigate the eco-hazards and uphold the environmental 
sustainability. With this perspective, several renewable energy storages have been 
developed and these are lithium-ion, lead-acid, zinc-bromine, lithium-polymer, 
and solid-state batteries. Among them, superior attention has been devoted to the 
lithium-ion batteries’ (LIBs) research that successfully meets the commercial 
perspective in numerous portable as well as electrical devices. In addition to 
that, there has been further growth in the development of sodium-ion (SIBs) and 
lithium-sulfur batteries (Li-S) as well, which can be considered as a superior 
alternate system compared to LIBs [9–11]. The electrochemistry of SIBs is similar 
to the LIBs. Li-S system also exhibits excellent energy density than the LIBs. Most 
of the commercial LIBs contain graphite, Li-based metal oxides/phosphates and 1 
M LiPF6 in carbonate solvents, which are used as anode, cathode and electrolyte, 
respectively. It is noteworthy that to attain full performance of both LIBs and SIBs, 
contribution from anode part is imperative and efficient. However, few risk are yet to 
be researched further at anode section such as safety accidents due to the formation 
of dendrite, and strict volume changes in charging/discharging process. This can be 
attributed to the in-homogeneity in surface of active anode via cracks and voids, 
etc. [12, 13]. Moreover, exploitation of conventional graphite as anode in LIBs is 
incessantly increasing, which will lead to a shortage of graphite resources in future. 
Thereby, price of the same will be improved and comes under the critical supply risk 
material. In order to address these challenges, extensive research has been proposed 
on the synthesis of bio-char and related materials as a proficient anode in upcoming 
storage operations. Hence offering a fresh alternative and suggestions for the 
development of biochar anodes with better storage capabilities. For instance, Li and 200 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
co-workers [9] have attempted to modify the porous and surface tuning properties of 
the charcoal via ball-milling approach with thermal treatment. The modified charcoal 
is utilized as anode for both SIBs and LIBs and delivers the supreme charge storage 
behavior. They have attained higher specific capacity of 257 mAhg–1 and 109 mAhg–1 
for LIBs and SIBs, respectively. Both LIBs and SIBs demonstrate the sufficient 
capacity retention of 97.6% and 92.7%, which substantiates impact of tailoring the 
charcoal surface in order to obtain good cycling performance. On the one hand, 
cost-effective and environmental benefit biochar from chitin biopolymer is successfully 
obtained and elucidated by Magnacca et al. [11]. As-prepared biochar is investigated 
as positive electrode material in Li-S batteries and also delivers the higher specific 
surface area of 333 m2
g–1. From the galvanostatic charging/discharging measurements, 
highest discharge capacity of 905 mAhg–1 is obtained and also reveals the stable storage 
performance over several cycles. The stable electrochemical properties might be due to 
the rest of oxygen and nitrogen functionalities, and have strong chemisorption affinity 
for lithium polysulphides. The conductivity tuning of lignin feedstock-based biochar 
material is studied by Seth Kane and co-workers [14]. The lignin biochar is expected 
to demonstrate nearly equal electrical conductivity value compared to carbon black. 
They have analyzed the electrical conductivity with the use of three different biomass 
sources including wheat stem and cellulose with different experimental condition. As 
prepared biochar materials have the similar range of electrical conductivity and the 
range is 0.002 to 18.5 S/m. In order to further increase the conductivity of lignin biochar, 
content of oxygen percentage has to be reduced. More interestingly, miscanthus based 
biocarbon material is prepared by pyrolysis and ball milling route. As milled biocarbon 
shows that the heterogeneous shape and average size of particle has been reduced 
to less than 1 μm at higher milling time. Also, specific surface area of miscanthus 
biocarbon is doubled and the value is found to be 300 m2
g–1. The ball milled biocarbon 
displays the thermal conductivity of 0.116 W/mK [15]. More importantly, nitrogen 
(N) doped chitosan based biochar is synthesized by Nistico and workers [16]. The 
low-cost N-rich chitosan derived biochar material is thermally, morphologically and 
electrochemically studied with several analytical techniques. Finally, it plays a role as 
cathode host in Li-S batteries. The test result indicates that the biochar/sulfur cathode 
shows the superior initial discharge capacity (1330 mAhg–1) and good rate capability 
strength. The obtained biochar electrochemical result is consistent with the reference 
MWCNT substrate performance. This enhanced storage property is due to encapsulation 
of sulfur compound into active N-rich biochar via porous system, thereby presenting 
a good homogeneity of the same. Reproducible N-doped agaric biochar with low-cost 
and extremely porous structure is synthesized and reported by Gu and co-workers [17]. 
The N-doped agaric carbon reveals the higher specific surface area of 1568.2 m2
g–1 
and further assists the Li-ion storage properties. Thus, it helps to attain maximum 
reversible capacity of 875 mAh/g at 0.2 C over multiple cycles and retention capacity of 
620 mAh/g at 2 C rate, which substantiates the reversibility and rate capability of the Li-S 
device. The overwhelmed storage might be ascribed to the porous nature of N-doped 
biochar thereby accommodating more ions as well as active sulfur and polysulfides. 
Also, construction of conducting carbon skeletal network of N-doped agaric biochar 
supplies the constructive migration pathways and superior transportation of ions and cathode, thereby revealing the excellent ionic and electronic conductivity due to
synergetic effect of the same. Thus, it contributes to the sufficient transport kinetics of Li￾ion and lesser charge transfer resistance. As a result, stable discharge capacity of 125
mAhg-1 is achieved for N-doped biochar/cathode whereas bare cathode shows the lower
value of capacity (110 mAhg-1). Based on these findings, research on biochar materials
provide new guidance to global communities to use as an alternate as well as promising
material for futuristic greener storage devices as shown in Figure-4
Figure-4. The galvanostatic potential profiles for (a) bare LFP, (b) ESM@LFP, (c)
cycling performance profiles showing discharge capacity and its columbic efficiency of
bare LFP and ESM@LFP for 100 cycles between the voltage window of 2.5–4.2 V at a
current rate of 1C, and (d) rate capability profiles of bare LFP and ESM@LFP. Reprinted
with permission [20]
Biochar-based composite materials for supercapacitor
Supercapacitor is the energy storage device, which offers promising approach towards the
storage of clean and renewable energy. It is also known as ultracapacitor which attracts a
Commented [A22]: Use what?
 
 
Biochar-based Nano-phase Composites for Energy Storage Application 201 
electrons. Likewise, milled silica particles incorporated into chitosan based biocarbon 
material have been implemented as anode in LIBs, reported by Prasanna et al. [18]. 
As prepared biocarbon embedded with silica particles reveals higher performance 
than the bare silica material. The highest discharge capacity of 942.4 mAhg–1 at 
0.1 C rate, and columbic efficiency of 97% after several cycles is obtained. Lyu et al. 
[19] have reported that the ball-milled biochar exhibits the electrical conductivity of 
9210 μScm–1 whereas unmilled biochar delivers the conductivity of 1054 μScm–1. The 
ball-milled biochar presents superior conductivity which is nine times greater than 
the unmilled biochar. As a matter of fact, ball-milled and thermally assisted eggshell 
collagen has been employed as additive material in LIBs, investigated by Chang 
Won Ho and co-workers [20]. Here, eggshell membrane is effectively converted into 
eco-friendly biochar material for storage applications. Eggshell derived N-doped 
biochar is also prepared via solid-state route and thermal treatment. The N-doped 
biochar is fruitfully coated on the lithium iron phosphate cathode, thereby revealing 
the excellent ionic and electronic conductivity due to synergetic effect of the same. 
Thus, it contributes to the sufficient transport kinetics of Li-ion and lesser charge 
transfer resistance. As a result, stable discharge capacity of 125 mAhg–1 is achieved 
for N-doped biochar/cathode whereas bare cathode shows the lower value of capacity 
(110 mAhg–1). Based on these findings, research on biochar materials provide new 
guidance to global communities to use as an alternate as well as promising material 
for futuristic greener storage devices as shown in Fig. 4. 
Fig. 4. The galvanostatic potential profiles for (a) bare LFP, (b) ESM@LFP, (c) cycling performance 
profiles showing discharge capacity and its columbic efficiency of bare LFP and ESM@LFP for 
100 cycles between the voltage window of 2.5–4.2 V at a current rate of 1C, and (d) rate capability profiles 
of bare LFP and ESM@LFP. Reprinted with permission [20]. 202 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
5. Biochar-based Composite Materials for Supercapacitor 
Supercapacitor is the energy storage device, which offers promising approach 
towards the storage of clean and renewable energy. It is also known as ultracapacitor 
which attracts a considerable attention due to its long life-cycle, high power 
and energy density with an excellent reversibility [21, 22]. The numerous 
researchers/scientific community have well demonstrated about the biochar based 
composite materials as electrode for supercapacitor application with different process. 
Currently, researchers are very much keen on the recent development of biochar 
based composite materials from agricultural waste by using ball milling process as 
it is economically viable and eco-friendly in nature for the industrial development. 
The biochar based composite material has drawn attention towards the development 
of suitable electrode in the field of electrochemistry [23]. Herein, the biochar based 
composite materials as supercapacitor have been discussed. In search of this, Thines 
et al. [24] developed biochar based composite materials as high-performance 
supercapacitor. They have developed high porosity use of biochar by impregnating 
with three different metallic salts at temperature 800℃ for 25 minutes. They have 
fabricated biochar-based electrode materials for supercapacitor by support of PANI 
(polyaniline). The electrochemical study has been done by using conventional 
three-electrode system where they found an ultra-specific capacitance of 615 F/g 
at the scan rate of 10 mV/s with energy density of 76.88 Wh/kg. The ultrahigh 
specific capacitance comprises of the synergistic effect of biochar and PANI. 
Tulakarn Ketwong and co-workers demonstrated CuO loaded biochar electrode 
materials and its comparative study with different electrolyte (KOH, Na2SO4). The 
electrochemical study of this composite has been performed in conventional three￾electrode system using 2 M KOH and 1 M Na2SO4. The electrochemical properties 
of electrode materials showed better results in 2 M KOH than that of Na2SO4. The 
electrode materials exhibited an excellent specific capacitance of 495 and 274 Fg–1 
for 2 M KOH and 1 M Na2SO4 respectively. They have also examined the cyclic 
stability/retention of electrode materials in 5000 cycles where 92.7% capacitance 
retention is observed. Similarly, Nirmaladevi and co-workers [25] developed 
wood-based biochar supported MnO2 nanorods for high energy asymmetric 
supercapacitor. The successful formation and surface morphology of the prepared 
composite has been characterized with the help of various physico-chemical 
techniques. FESEM (Field emission scanning electron microscope) spectroscopic 
techniques reveal that the composite material has porous nature and bundle of 
nanorod like morphologies. The high surface area and morphologies are suitable 
for the electrochemical application. Hence, they have also tuned the electrochemical 
performances of composite by using three electrode system in 1 M Na2SO4 as electrolytic 
solution. In three electrode system. The specific capacitance in a three electrode system 
is 512 Fg–1 at 0.5 Ag–1 with an outstanding cyclic stability of 93% after 10,000 cycles. 
On the basis of three electrode results, they have also examined electrochemical 
performances in two electrode system. They have assembled asymmetric device 
which delivers huge energy density of 74.3 Whkg–1 and power density of 1996 Wkg–1. 
On the basis of observed electrochemical properties, the biochar based composite Biochar-based Nano-phase Composites for Energy Storage Application 203 
materials can be treated as suitable electrode for supercapacitor application in future 
endeavors. 
6. Biochar-based Composite Materials for Fuel Cells 
There is a rapid growth of global energy demand caused by utilization of more 
energy due to increase in population as well as depletion of fuels and also creation 
of environmental hazards. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to advance toward 
cleaner energy production. In this scenario, fuel cells (FC) are considered as a clean 
energy device due to absence of toxic by-products and here generation of water 
is a by-product. Fuel cells are converting chemical energy into electrical energy 
with the use of fuel via electrochemical reactions and consist of anode, electrolyte, 
catalyst and cathode. Several kinds of fuel cells have been constructed and reported 
elsewhere such as direct carbon FC, proton exchange membrane FC, microbial FC, 
solid oxide FC and direct methanol FC, etc. In fuel cell, biochar materials have been 
utilized in a different way and promote the greener energy technology in terms of 
biocompatibility and biodegradability. Herein, ball-milled bio-char related electrode 
materials towards the operation of fuel cells have been discussed in detail. Kiminaite 
et al. [26] have reported synthesis and fabrication of eco-friendly bio-char anode 
for the MFC application. Activated bio-char has been developed with the use of 
seaweed algae from the family of Rhodophyta and pyrolysis with KOH activation 
process. The formation of activated bio-char electrode has been done via ball milling 
approach and mucilage as a suitable binder. The optimized ball milling condition 
is 5 min, 30 min, and 200 rpm as a milling period, pause time and rotational speed, 
respectively. They have varied the binder percentage and their several physical and 
electrical properties are examined. From the electrical conductivity results, bulk 
bio-char without binder shows the highest conductivity of 82 S/m which is much better 
than the other bio-char samples. Unfortunately, binder added bio-char delivers the 
lower conductivity and the value of 58 S/m for 5 wt% binder. Increasing composition 
of the binder results in the electrical conductivity decrement, due to loss of porous 
surface and voids in bio-char electrode as well as poor transportation pathways. In 
the case of direct carbon FC, corn cob biochar has been utilized along with samarium 
doped ceria composite as electrolyte, studied by Yu and co-workers [27]. The general 
cell reaction of direct carbon FC is electrochemical oxidation of carbon in anodic side 
that leads to releasing CO2, i.e., C + O2 = CO2. Furthermore, involvement of solid 
oxide and also molten carbonate compounds are employed as electrolyte material in 
the direct carbon FC and are thereby able to achieve superior FC results. As fabricated 
direct carbon cell exhibits the promising electrochemical performance over the 
temperature range between 650 to 750℃. Maximum power output of 185 mW/cm2 
was achieved at a current density of 340 mA/cm2
 and a temperature of 750°C. In a 
similar way, direct carbon FC is constructed with use of kelp biochar and same is 
extremely found in ocean. The greater amount of porous surface and voids are present 
in the kelp biochar and are evenly distributed over the surface. The microstructure 
result demonstrates that the particle size of obtained biochar is typically around 
25 μm and has the low value of gasification temperature (700℃). Authors have 
compared FC performance of kelp biochar, activated carbon (AC) and Na-doped AC attempted to synthesize different types of biochar compounds with use of several sources
including wheat straw, corn cob and bagasse. The electrochemical properties of
successfully obtained different biochar material have been tested via direct carbon solid
oxide fuel cell.
Figure-5. The electrochemical characteristics of DC-SOFCs fueled by different carbon 
fuels at 850 ℃: (a) I-V-P curves; (b) impedance spectra under OCV; and output
performance of the DC-SOFC fueled by kelp biochar at 700–850 ℃: (c) I-V-P curves;
(d) impedance spectra; and (e) the discharging tests of DC-SOFCs operated under a
constant current of 0.1 A, with 0.5 g different carbon fuels, respectively, at 850 ℃.
[Reprinted with permission] [28]
 
 
204 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 5. The electrochemical characteristics of DC-SOFCs fueled by different carbon fuels at 850℃: 
(a) I-V-P curves; (b) impedance spectra under OCV; and output performance of the DC-SOFC fueled 
by kelp biochar at 700–850℃: (c) I-V-P curves; (d) impedance spectra; and (e) the discharging tests of 
DC-SOFCs operated under a constant current of 0.1 A, with 0.5 g different carbon fuels, respectively, at 
850℃. [Reprinted with permission] [28]. 
with catalyst loaded AC also. As comparison, best result of 285 mW/cm2 at 850℃ is 
attained for kelp biochar with electrolyte configuration of Ag/Gd0.1Ce0.9O2–δ - yttria 
stabilized zirconia (YSZ) - Ag/Gd0.1Ce0.9O2–δ. The obtained results broaden the area 
of biochar research as an alternate route of carbon [28]. The details of electrochemical 
activities are presented in Fig. 5. The stacking of direct carbon FC performance of 
walnut based biochar utilization is elucidated by Xie et al. [29]. Here, YSZ, pristine 
walnut and iron loaded walnut biochar have been employed as an electrolyte, and 
fuels, respectively. As fabricated single FC delivers the maximum power density of 
147 mW/cm2
 whereas iron loaded biochar FC shows the power density of 
205 mW/cm2
. Moreover, stacked direct carbon FC shows the outstanding electrical 
performance in terms of open circuit voltage (1.98 V) and output power (1.1 W). 
Also, noticed power density of 505 mW/cm3
 at 800°C and small value of ohmic 
resistance as well. Likewise, Qiu and co-workers [30] have attempted to synthesize 
different types of biochar compounds with use of several sources including wheat Biochar-based Nano-phase Composites for Energy Storage Application 205 
straw, corn cob and bagasse. The electrochemical properties of successfully obtained 
different biochar material have been tested via direct carbon solid oxide fuel cell. 
The constructed device displays the open circuit voltage of 0.98, 0.99 and 1 V 
for wheat straw, corn con and bagasse biochars with use of Al2O3-doped YSZ as an 
electrolyte. In terms of power density, bagasse using FC shows higher performance 
(260 mW/cm2
), which is lower than the corn cob (207 mW/cm2
) and wheat straw 
(187 mW/cm2
) biochar. 
7. Biochar-based Composite Materials for Hydrogen Storage 
The hydrogen storage technology is mainly implemented for the requirement of 
onboard automotive applications. Hydrogen is considered as foremost energy carrier 
due to its higher abundance, zero-emission and high combustion heat. However, 
meeting cost, performance and safety remains a greater challenge [31, 32]. Also, 
small ambient temperature density results in low energy per unit volume. Therefore, 
advanced storage routes are required for the higher energy density. For this purpose, 
development of porous compounds received broader attention and indicate good 
storage capacity. A wide variety of porous materials has been proposed and they 
are activated carbon, metal-oxide framework, zeolites, and carbide derived carbons. 
In particular, activated carbon and biochar based porous materials are extensively 
investigated as potential material for hydrogen storing, due to its excellent porosity, 
chemical stability and greater surface area, etc. Notably, mechanism of hydrogen 
storage in carbon compounds is related to physisorption process because of 
absorbed gas held by weaker van der Waals’s force and it can be easily reversed 
[33]. Therefore, utilization of weak interaction among active storage sample and 
hydrogen is a significant route and desorption of stored hydrogen is rapid with use 
of lesser energy. Yeboah et al. [34] have fabricated the biochar with use of waste 
palm kernel shell and magnesium based biochar composites for the first time. The 
magnesium-based materials have good hydrogen storage capacity, theoretically 
around 7.6 wt%; at the same time, they are cost-effective and earth-abundant. 
The milling conditions are as follows: milling speed 180 r/min, ball to biochar 
composite weight ratio 47:1, and time 1 hr. Several combinations of magnesium and 
biochar have been investigated under this investigation. The optimal palm kernel 
biochar content for magnesium has been determined to be 20 weight percent, and 
its advantages for hydrogen sorption magnesium into magnesium hydride (MgH2) 
have been determined to be 93%. The physical H2 sorption in carbon is formation of 
C-H dangling bonds via hydrogenation process. Also, oxygen containing groups on 
the surface of biochar-composite materials influence the hydrogen sorption process. 
The content of biochar increases with increasing the conversion of magnesium￾to-magnesium hydride and decreases the adhesion as well as agglomeration of 
magnesium particles. This helps to enrich the hydrogen diffusion and also formation 
of hydride phase, thus enhancing the sorption properties to an utmost level. On 
the one hand, series of carbon products have been prepared with application of 
empty fruit bunch and demonstrated by Arshad et al. [35]. As-prepared activated 
carbon materials have been tested their hydrogen storage with various pressure  
 
 
 
 
206 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
ranges starting from 0 to 100 bar. The created activated carbon shows the surface 
area range between 305 to 687 m2
g–1 and microporosity of 94% is noticed. Then, 
hydrogen storage capacity of 2.1 wt% is recorded at 19 bar pressure. In the same 
vein, rice husk based activated biochar has been applied as hydrogen storage 
material and its highest storage of 2.85 wt% is attained at cryogenic temperature 
(77 K) [36]. In addition, remarkable hydrogen storage capacity of tamarind seeds 
based biochar material is synthesized with several methods, studied by Ramesh et al. 
[37]. The surface related properties of prepared biochar are tuned and surface area 
of 1785 m2
g–1 with pore size distribution between 0.8–1.1 nm. Therefore, storage 
capacity of hydrogen is enriched and the value of 4.85 wt% at 4 MPa at ambient 
temperature. 
8. Summary 
It is evident that biochar is a potential material of interest for wide range of 
application which can be easily synthesized from agricultural waste via ball milling 
process. The biochar is a carbon rich material and widely used in the field of fuel, 
low quality adsorbent, soil ameliorator, and additive with excellent physical and 
chemical properties. It can also be employed for carbon capture and energy storage 
application in the form of supercapacitor, lithium-ion batteries and fuel cells. Many 
researchers admitted that it is suitable material for anode in the energy storage but 
it is still a challenge to replace the commercially available activated carbon as it has 
low activities. Thus, it is concluded that a necessary research and development in the 
field of developing potential electrode material for the commercialization as energy 
storage application. 
Author Contributions 
All the authors have equally contributed in data collection, drafting, editing or 
revising the articles to make it publishable format. 
Acknowledgement 
All the authors are thankful for their institutional support. 
References 
[1] Liu, W.-J., H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu. 2019. Emerging applications of biochar-based materials for 
energy storage and conversion. Energy Environ. Sci. 12: 1751–79. 
[2] Atinafu, D.G., S. Wi, B.Y. Yun and S. Kim. 2021. Engineering biochar with multiwalled carbon 
nanotube for efficient phase change material encapsulation and thermal energy storage. Energy 
216: 119294. 
[3] Dai, L., Y. Xue, L. Qu, H.-J. Choi and J.-B. Baek. 2015. Metal-free catalysts for oxygen reduction 
reaction. Chem. Rev. 115: 4823–92. 
[4] Su, D.S., S. Perathoner and G. Centi. 2013. Nanocarbons for the development of advanced catalysts. 
Chem. Rev. 113: 5782–816. 
[5] Guo, C., W. Liao, Z. Li, L. Sun and C. Chen. 2015. Easy conversion of protein-rich enoki mushroom 
biomass to a nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterial as a promising metal-free catalyst for oxygen 
reduction reaction. Nanoscale 7: 15990–8.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biochar-based Nano-phase Composites for Energy Storage Application 207 
[6] Zhao, Y., S.A. Qamar, M. Qamar, M. Bilal and H.M.N. Iqbal. 2021. Sustainable remediation of 
hazardous environmental pollutants using biochar-based nanohybrid materials. J. Environ. Manage. 
300: 113762. 
[7] Ahmed, M.J. and B.H. Hameed. 2020. Insight into the co-pyrolysis of different blended feedstocks 
to biochar for the adsorption of organic and inorganic pollutants: A review. J. Clean. Prod. 
265: 121762. 
[8] Kumar, M., X. Xiong, Z. Wan, Y. Sun, D.C.W. Tsang, J. Gupta, B. Gao, X. Cao, J. Tang and 
Y.S. Ok. 2020. Ball milling as a mechanochemical technology for fabrication of novel biochar 
nanomaterials. Bioresour. Technol. 312: 123613. 
[9] Li, M., W.-Y. Tsai, B.P. Thapaliya, H.M. Meyer, III, B.L. Armstrong, H. Luo, S. Dai, J. Nanda and I. 
Belharouak. 2021. Modified coal char materials with high rate performance for battery applications. 
Carbon N. Y. 172: 414–21. 
[10] Li, M., Du, Z., Khaleel, M.A. and Belharouak, I. 2020. Materials and engineering endeavors 
towards practical sodium-ion batteries. Energy Storage Mater. 25: 520–36. 
[11] Magnacca, G., F. Guerretta, A. Vizintin, P. Benzi, M.C. Valsania and R. Nisticò. 2018. Preparation, 
characterization and environmental/electrochemical energy storage testing of low-cost biochar 
from natural chitin obtained via pyrolysis at mild conditions. Appl. Surf. Sci. 427: 883–93. 
[12] Perumal, P., P. Sivaraj, K.P. Abhilash, G.G. Soundarya, P. Balraju and P.C. Selvin. 2020. Green 
synthesized spinel lithium titanate nano anode material using Aloe Vera extract for potential 
application to lithium ion batteries. J. Sci. Adv. Mater. Devices 5: 346–53. 
[13] Perumal, P., T. Kiruthika, P. Sivaraj, D. Lakshmi and P.C. Selvin. 2020. Tamarind seed polysaccharide 
biopolymer-assisted synthesis of spinel zinc iron oxide as a promising alternate anode material for 
lithium-ion batteries. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 31: 10593–604. 
[14] Kane, S., R. Ulrich, A. Harrington, N.P. Stadie and C. Ryan. 2021. Physical and chemical 
mechanisms that influence the electrical conductivity of lignin-derived biochar. Carbon Trends 
5: 100088. 
[15] Wang, T., A. Rodriguez-Uribe, M. Misra and A.K. Mohanty. 2018. Sustainable carbonaceous 
biofiller from miscanthus: Size reduction, characterization, and potential bio-composites 
applications. BioResources 13: 3720–39. 
[16] Nistico, R., F. Guerretta, P. Benzi and G. Magnacca. 2020. Chitosan-derived biochars obtained at 
low pyrolysis temperatures for potential application in electrochemical energy storage devices. Int. 
J. Biol. Macromol. 164: 1825–31. 
[17] Gu, X., H. Li, H. Wen, Y. Zhou, H. Kang, H. Liao, M. Gao, Y. Wang, L. Deng and X. Yi. 2020. From 
agaric hydrogel to nitrogen-doped 3D porous carbon for high-performance Li–S batteries. J. Mater. 
Sci. 55: 1136–47. 
[18] Prasanna, K., T. Subburaj, Y.N. Jo, P. Santhoshkumar, S.K.S.S. Karthikeyan, K. Vediappan, R.M. 
Gnanamuthu and C.W. Lee. 2019. Chitosan complements entrapment of silicon inside nitrogen 
doped carbon to improve and stabilize the capacity of Li-ion batteries. Sci. Rep. 9: 1–13. 
[19] Lyu, H., Z. Yu, B. Gao, F. He, J. Huang, J. Tang and B. Shen. 2019. Ball-milled biochar for 
alternative carbon electrode. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26: 14693–702. 
[20] Ho, C.W., N. Shaji, H.K. Kim, J.W. Park, M. Nanthagopal and C.W. Lee. 2022. Thermally assisted 
conversion of biowaste into environment-friendly energy storage materials for lithium-ion batteries. 
Chemosphere 286: 131654. 
[21] Raj, B., R. Oraon, M. Mohapatra, S. Basu and A.K. Padhy. 2020. Development of SnO2@ rGO 
hybrid nanocomposites through complexometric approach for multi-dimensional electrochemical 
application. J. Electrochem. Soc. 167: 167518. 
[22] Raj, B., A.K. Padhy, S. Basu and M. Mohapatra. 2020. Futuristic direction for R&D challenges to 
develop 2D advanced materials based supercapacitors. J. Electrochem. Soc. 167: 136501. 
[23] Norouzi, O., F. Di Maria and A. Dutta. 2020. Biochar-based composites as electrode active materials 
in hybrid supercapacitors with particular focus on surface topography and morphology. J. Energy 
Storage 29: 101291. 
[24] Thines, K.R., E.C. Abdullah, M. Ruthiraan, N.M. Mubarak and M. Tripathi. 2016. A new route 
of magnetic biochar based polyaniline composites for supercapacitor electrode materials. J. Anal. 
Appl. Pyrolysis 121: 240–57.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
208 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[25] Nirmaladevi, S., R. Boopathiraja, S.K. Kandasamy, S. Sathishkumar and M. Parthibavarman. 
2021. Wood based biochar supported MnO2 nanorods for high energy asymmetric supercapacitor 
applications. Surfaces and Interfaces 27: 101548.
[26] Kiminaitė, I., A. Lisauskas, N. Striūgas and Ž. Kryževičius. 2022. Fabrication and characterization 
of environmentally friendly biochar anode. Energies 15: 112. 
[27] Yu, J., Y. Zhao and Y. Li. 2014. Utilization of corn cob biochar in a direct carbon fuel cell. J. Power 
Sources 270: 312–7. 
[28] Wu, H., J. Xiao, S. Hao, R. Yang, P. Dong, L. Han, M. Li, F. Yu, Y. Xie and J. Ding. 2021. In￾situ catalytic gasification of kelp-derived biochar as a fuel for direct carbon solid oxide fuel cells. 
J. Alloys Compd. 865: 158922. 
[29] Xie, Y., J. Xiao, Q. Liu, X. Wang, J. Liu, P. Wu and S. Ouyang. 2021. Highly efficient utilization 
of walnut shell biochar through a facile designed portable direct carbon solid oxide fuel cell stack. 
Energy 227: 120456. 
[30] Qiu, Q., M. Zhou, W. Cai, Q. Zhou, Y. Zhang, W. Wang, M. Liu and J. Liu. 2019. A comparative 
investigation on direct carbon solid oxide fuel cells operated with fuels of biochar derived from 
wheat straw, corncob, and bagasse. Biomass and bioenergy 121: 56–63. 
[31] Lobato-Peralta, D.R., E. Duque-Brito, H.I.V. Vidales, A. Longoria, P.J. Sebastian, A.K. Cuentas￾Gallegos, C.A. Arancibia-Bulnes and P.U. Okoye. 2021. A review on trends in lignin extraction and 
valorization of lignocellulosic biomass for energy applications. J. Clean. Prod. 126123. 
[32] Sevilla, M. and R. Mokaya. 2014. Energy storage applications of activated carbons: supercapacitors 
and hydrogen storage. Energy Environ. Sci. 7: 1250–80. 
[33] Mohan, M., V.K. Sharma, E.A. Kumar and V. Gayathri. 2019. Hydrogen storage in carbon 
materials—A review. Energy Storage 1: e35. 
[34] Yeboah, M.L., X. Li and S. Zhou. 2020. Facile fabrication of biochar from palm kernel shell waste 
and its novel application to magnesium-based materials for hydrogen storage. Materials (Basel) 
13: 625. 
[35] Arshad, S.H.M., N. Ngadi, A.A. Aziz, N.S. Amin, M. Jusoh and S. Wong. 2016. Preparation of 
activated carbon from empty fruit bunch for hydrogen storage. J. Energy Storage 8: 257–61. 
[36] Heo, Y.-J. and S.-J. Park. 2015. Synthesis of activated carbon derived from rice husks for improving 
hydrogen storage capacity. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 31: 330–4. 
[37] Ramesh, T., N. Rajalakshmi and K.S. Dhathathreyan. 2015. Activated carbons derived from 
tamarind seeds for hydrogen storage. J. Energy Storage 4: 89–95.  
13


Nanofabrication Using
Natural Flavonoids for 
Biomedical Applications

 Prasanti Sharma,1
 Neelima Sharma,1,* Trishna Bal1
 and


Gayatri Thapa2


1. Introduction 
The recent decade has seen tremendous progress in the field of nanotechnology, 
especially in the biomedical field. Nanofabrication has taken amazing strides 
with respect to drug delivery and therapeutics along with providing solutions to a 
number of obstacles in the area of science and research. Compared to their bulk 
form, nanoparticles (NPs) have higher catalytic and biological activity, thermal 
conductivity, non-linear optical performance, and chemical stability because of their 
huge surface area to volume ratio. Owing to these properties, NPs are used in various 
sectors such as medicine [1], food technology [2], space [3], chemistry [4], cosmetic 
industries [5] and agriculture [6]. Nanoparticle synthesis can be done in a variety of 
ways, including physical, chemical, and biological approaches. Chemical methods 
include sol-gel technique, redox and hydrothermal processes. Physical methods 
include sonication, laser ablation, radiation and electro deposition while biological 
methods include nanoparticles synthesized from plants and micro-organisms [7]. 
The chemical and physical approaches are appropriate for the production of large 
amounts of particles within a short span of time with predetermined shapes and 
sizes, but they have the disadvantage of being difficult, costly, inefficient and out of 
date. These techniques pose a threat of toxicity and pollution as they emit harmful 
1 Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technology, Birla Institute of Technology, 
Mesra-835215, India. 
2 Department of Pharmacology, Himalayan Pharmacy Institute, Sikkim-737136, India. 
* Corresponding author: nsharma@bitmesra.ac.in, neelimarsharma@hotmail.com 210 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
by-products that are potentially detrimental to the environment [8]. Furthermore, 
NPs synthesized using such hazardous procedures are unsuited for medical use. 
To overcome these issues, recent years have witnessed a surge in interest 
towards developing techniques that do not involve the generation of hazardous 
by-products as part of the fabrication process. This task was achieved by implementing 
procedures that involve the use of green chemistry as a replacement for physical and 
chemical methods—a concept now known as “green synthesis”. 
Green nanosynthesis involves the use of naturally derived plants, plant extracts 
and their by-products such as proteins, lipids, alkaloids, and flavonoids and 
microorganisms (viruses, bacteria, fungi, and algae) for the development of safe and 
non-toxic nanoparticles by applying different biotechnology tools and techniques 
[9–13]. Green technology creates NPs that are superior than those generated 
by conventional methods because of a number of factors that include the use of 
cost-effective chemicals, less energy expenditure and the production of ecologically 
friendly products and by-products [14, 15]. Green synthesis of NPs uses a 
bottom-up approach involving the reducing and stabilizing agents. It is based on a 
redox mechanism in which an organism, plant, plant extract or its phytoconstituent 
reduces metal ions to stable NPs. There are three main factors that need to be taken into 
account while considering green nano-synthesis: the selection of a solvent medium, 
an environmentally safe and benign reducing agent and a nontoxic substance as a 
capping agent to stabilize the manufactured NPs [16]. Even though living organisms, 
such as fungi, algae, bacteria and plants can be exploited for the synthesis of NPs in 
vivo, plant extract-mediated in vitro green synthesis of NPs has gained appeal due 
to its simplicity, low cost, environmentally benign nature and ease of scale-up. The 
number of papers on green-synthesized nanoparticles is currently expanding at an 
exponential rate. The synthesis of NPs can be achieved using plant extracts as well 
as isolated components. The ability of plant extracts to reduce metal ions may be 
explained by the widespread presence of phenolic compounds as part of the extract. 
In context of the importance of plant extracts in mediating the synthesis of NPs, 
this chapter attempts to highlight and summarize the current state and prospective 
uses of the green synthesis with special emphasis on plant flavonoids contributing to 
the process. 
2. Techniques Used for Nanofabrication 
2.1 Conventional Approaches 
There are two main conventional approaches for the synthesis of nanomaterials: 
2.1.1 Top-down Approach 
The top-down approach begins with macroscopic structures. It is a destructive 
process that begins with larger particles being reduced to nanoparticles after a 
series of procedures applied to them. The larger molecules (bulk material) are 
decomposed into smaller molecules and then the smaller particles are transformed 
into nanosized particles. The main disadvantages of these technologies are that 
they require vast installations and a lot of money to set up. The methods are 
highly costly and unsuitable for large-scale production; thus, they are often used Fig. 1.:
Nanofabrication using natural flavonoids for biomedical applications 
Fig. 1. Approaches of nanoparticle synthesis. 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 211 
primarily in laboratory experiments. These methods are not suitable for soft samples. 
Figure 1 provides the graphical representation of this approach. Examples of methods 
in top-down approach are mechanical milling, lithography, thermal decomposition, 
etching, laser ablation, sputtering and electro-explosion, etc. 
2.1.2 Bottom-up Approach 
Bottom-up approach of nanomaterial synthesis is a constructive process that 
constitutes miniaturization of materials to the atomic level consequently leading to the 
development of nanostructures. The method is principally based on the principle of 
molecular recognition (self-assembly). Figure 1 provides a graphical representation 
of this approach. Many of these approaches are still in development or are only 
starting to be employed for commercial nanoparticle synthesis. The methods used 
in bottom-up approach include sol-gel synthesis, pyrolysis, colloidal precipitation, 
hydrothermal synthesis, organometallic chemical route, electrodeposition, chemical 
reduction and green synthesis, etc. 
2.2 Physical Methods 
2.2.1 Mechanical Milling 
Mechanical milling is a low-cost approach for fabricating nanoscale structures 
from bulk materials. Planetary, vibratory, rod and tumbler are the forms of mills 
employed. Hard steel or carbide balls are enclosed in the container. This process is 
used to make nanocrystalline Co, Cr, W, and Ag-Fe. The ball-to-materials ratio is 
2:1. The container is filled with inert gas or air and rotated rapidly around its axis. 
The materials are pushed between the container›s walls and the balls. Milling speed 
and time are important factors in producing nanoparticles of the right size [17, 18]. 212 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
2.2.2 Pulse Laser Ablation 
Nanoparticles are produced utilizing a powerful laser beam that hits the target material. 
The precursor or target vaporizes due to the high intensity laser irradiation, resulting 
in nanoparticle formation. This process can develop a wide variety of nanomaterials, 
including metal nanoparticles, carbon nanomaterials, oxide composites and ceramics 
[19, 20]. 
2.2.3 Arc Discharge Method 
It is a physical method that is most extensively used for producing metal nanoparticles. 
A pulsated current vaporizes a metal wire, resulting in a vapour that is then cooled by 
ambient gas to process nanoparticles. This scheme has a high fabrication speed and 
high energy productivity [21, 22]. 
2.2.4 Sputtering 
Sputtering is a technique for making nanomaterials that involves hitting solid surfaces 
with high-energy particles like plasma or gas. Sputtering can be accomplished in 
a variety of methods, including using a magnetron, a radio-frequency diode or a 
DC diode. Sputtering is typically carried out in an evacuated chamber into which 
the sputtering gas is injected. Free electrons collide with the gas and form gas ions 
when a high voltage is supplied to the cathode target. The positively charged ions 
move rapidly in the electric field towards the cathode target, which they repeatedly 
strike, causing atoms to be ejected off the target’s surface. The sputtering technique 
is intriguing because the composition of sputtered nanomaterials is similar to that of 
the target material while containing fewer contaminants [23–25]. 
2.3 Chemical Methods 
2.3.1 Sol-gel Method 
Sol-gel is a method for producing solid materials from small molecules. It is a 
wet-chemical method for creating several types of high-quality metal-oxide based 
nanoparticles. In this chemical procedure, the sol (or solution) is the liquid precursor 
that leads to the production of a gel-like diphasic system with both a liquid and solid 
phase, with the morphologies of the nanoparticles formed ranging from discrete 
particles to a continuous polymer network. Metal alkoxides are commonly used 
as precursors in the sol–gel process for the creation of nanomaterials. The sol–gel 
method for production of nanoparticles can be performed in multiple steps that mainly 
comprises of hydrolysis, condensation, aging, drying and finally calcination [26, 27]. 
2.3.2 Hydrothermal Synthesis 
One of the most well-known and widely used processes for producing nanostructured 
materials is the hydrothermal process. Nanostructured materials are created using 
the hydrothermal process, which involves a heterogeneous reaction in an aqueous 
medium at high pressure and temperature near the critical point in a sealed vessel. The 
solvothermal technique is similar to the hydrothermal technique. The only distinction 
is that it takes place in a non-aqueous environment. Hydrothermal and solvothermal Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 213 
methods are appealing because it can be used for creating various nano-geometries 
of materials, such as nanowires, nanorods, nanospheres and nanosheets [28, 29]. 
2.3.3 Co-precipitation Method 
Nucleation, growth, coarsening, and/or agglomeration processes all occur at the 
same time in coprecipitation reactions. In this approach, the precursors are usually 
inorganic salts (nitrate, chloride, sulphate, and so on) that are dissolved in water or 
any other appropriate media to generate a homogenous solution with ion clusters. 
To drive such salts to precipitate as hydroxides or oxalates, the solution is treated to 
pH modification or evaporation. The concentration of salt, temperature, the actual 
pH, and the rate of pH change all influence crystal formation and aggregation. The 
solid nanomaterials thus formed are then collected after precipitation, cleaning and 
progressive drying by heating to the medium’s boiling point. The washing and drying 
techniques used for co-precipitated hydroxides have an impact on the degree of 
agglomeration in the final powder [30, 31]. 
2.3.4 Inert Gas Condensation 
Metal nanoparticles are mostly made using this method. This is an inactive gas 
compression technique which produces fine nanoparticles by dispersing a metallic 
source in an inert gas. Metals are vaporized at an acceptable pace at a temperature 
that can be reached. Metal nanoparticles are synthesized inside a chamber containing 
argon, helium, or neon (inert gases) where the vaporization of metal atoms takes 
place thereby forming nanoparticles of the respective metal used for dispersion. 
Liquid nitrogen cools the gases, forming nanoparticles of the metal being considered 
in the range of 2–100 nm [31]. 
2.3.5 Sonochemical Synthesis 
It is based on acoustic cavitations that involve the development, growth and implosive 
collapse of bubbles in liquids. Bubbles in solutions are implosively deflated by 
acoustic fields where they are exposed to severe ultrasonic irradiation. At the centres 
of the bubbles, high-temperature and high-pressure fields are created. The implosive 
collapse of the bubbles causes adiabatic compression or shock wave production 
within the gas phase of the falling bubbles, resulting in a localized hotspot. In certain 
circumstances, the end product is nano amorphous particles, whereas in others, it 
is nanocrystalline. The temperature in the ring region where the reaction occurs 
determines type of end product formed [32]. 
2.4 Biological Methods 
2.4.1 Synthesis Using Microorganisms 
This method utilizes multicellular and unicellular organisms like bacteria [33], fungi 
[34], viruses [35], algae [36] and yeasts [37] for the formation of nanoparticles. There 
are two techniques of nanofabrication using micro-organisms: extracellular and 
intracellular biosynthesis. The synthesis of nanoparticles by various microbes is a 
consequence of development of resistance mechanisms to a specific metal that may 
result in them becoming less toxic. This happens through two processes: bioreduction 214 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
and biosorption. For example, the bacterium Rhodopseudomonas capsulata was 
reported to fabricate gold nanoparticles (10–20 nm in size) extracellularly through 
NADH-dependent reductase enzyme released by the bacterium [38]. Another bacterium 
Bacillus licheniformis was seen to produce silver nanoparticles intracellularly [39]. 
However, the major drawback with intracellular nanosynthesis is the difficulty in 
extraction and purification, therefore extracellular synthesis is preferred. 
2.4.2 Synthesis Using Plants and Plant Extracts 
Plants are believed to be more suitable for green nanoparticle manufacturing than 
microorganisms because they are non-pathogenic and the method of synthesis is 
extremely simple. For making nanoparticles from plant extracts, simply mix the 
extract with a metal salt solution at room temperature, and the reaction begins within 
minutes. Plant extracts containing bioactives have been used for the synthesis of 
a wide spectrum of nanoparticles. The leaf extract of Acacia nilotica resulted in 
the production of gold nanoparticles within 5 mins (as seen by the appearance if 
a pinkish red colour) with no need for additional stabilizing or capping agents. 
Homogenous particles ranging in size from 6 to 12 nm were formed with storage 
stability of several months [40]. Similarly, the bark extract of Pinus eldarica 
exhibited the ability to synthesize silver nanoparticles of size range 10–40 nm [41]. 
Gold and silver are the most commonly synthesized metals; however, plant extracts 
have been investigated and successfully reported to form nanoparticles of copper 
[42], copper oxide [43], platinum [44], palladium [45], titanium dioxide [46] and 
iron [47]. Bimetallic nanostructures are also being synthesized using extracts of 
certain plants such as Azadirachta indica [48], Anacardium occidentale [49] and 
Swietenia mahagony [50]. The major mechanism of metal nanoparticle formation 
using plant extract is the high reduction potential of metals that can be reduced to 
metal atoms by the polyphenolic components present in the extract. This results in 
the subsequent oxidation of polyphenols to their corresponding quinones. Further, 
the metal atoms collide with each other forming metal nanoparticles that is then 
stabilized by the resultant quinone or other phytoconstituents present in the extract. 
The stabilizing agent prevents the aggregation of formed nanoparticles [40]. Factors 
such as nature of the plant extract, concentration of the reactants, reaction time, 
pH and temperature affect the shape, size, yield and stability of the biosynthesized 
nanoparticles [51]. Nanoparticles have been fabricated in vivo, inside living plants 
and tissues [52]. Alfafa plants grown in gold enriched soil were found to show 
the presence of pure gold nanoparticles within the size range of 4 nm [10]. ZnO 
nanoparticles were synthesized within Physalis alkekengi with a mean size of 72.5 
nm [53]. Similarly, growth of Sesbania seedlings in chloroaurate solution resulted 
in the formation and accumulation of stable gold nanoparticles within plant tissues. 
Secondary metabolites found within the cells are thought to catalyze the reduction 
of metal ions [54]. 
2.4.3 Synthesis Using Isolated Phytochemicals 
Numerous chemical constituents have been extracted from plants that have shown 
much promise in the synthesis of nanoparticles through the process of bio-reduction. 
Tannic acid is a plant derived polyphenol used for the synthesis of gold [55], silver [56] Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 215 
and palladium nanoparticles [57]. The presence of several phenolic groups renders it 
a good reducing property and stabilizes the formed nanoparticles [58]. Glucose and 
gallic acid mediated metal nanoparticles have also been synthesized but the former 
possesses weak reducing ability while poor stabilizing potential of the later leads to 
the aggregation of the formed nanoparticles [59, 60]. The use of ascorbic acid both 
as a reducing and capping agent resulted in the production of copper nanoparticles 
in aqueous medium with average particle size less than 2 nm [61]. Polysaccharides, 
flavonoids, terpenoids and active glycosides are some other phytoconstituents that 
have been investigated with the aim of producing stable nanoparticles [62]. The current 
chapter mainly focuses on the use of flavonoids for the biosynthesis of nanoparticles, 
the possible mechanism involved, along with the likely biomedical application. 
Table 1 lists the various physical, chemical and biological methods that are used for 
nanoparticle synthesis. 
Table 1. Various methods of nanofabrication. 
Methods of nanoparticle synthesis 
Physical methods Chemical methods Biological methods 
Mechanical method Sol-gel method Micro-organism mediated synthesis 
Pulse laser ablation Hydrothermal synthesis Plants and plant extract mediated synthesis 
Arc discharge method Co-precipitation method Phytochemical mediated synthesis 
Sputtering Inert gas condensation 
method 
Sonochemical synthesis 
2.5 Shifting of Nanofabrication Techniques to Green Synthesis 
Phyto-nanotechnology is a novel method for the synthesis of nanoparticles that 
are environmentally acceptable, pure and involves cost-effective production 
techniques. Scalability, formation of non-toxic and bio-compatible products and 
by-products are the major advantages of green synthesis that facilitate its biomedical 
use. While the physical and chemical methods of nanoparticle synthesis are still in 
practice, they possess certain drawbacks such as the presence of impurities in the 
synthesized product, high energy consuming procedures, the use of toxic organic 
solvents and surfactants, time consuming processes, high cost of production, 
safety issues, requirement of expensive reactants, and toxic by-products, which 
have diverted the interest of researchers towards green synthesis [8, 63]. Green 
synthesized nanoparticles have a higher therapeutic potential, smaller size, superior 
mono-dispersity and are biologically non-toxic [15]. Major limitations to the 
commercial production of green synthesized nanoparticles are difficulty in scale-up, 
variability in the source of plant extracts and variability in experimental conditions 
[64]. Despite these shortcomings, green synthesis has been proposed as an alternative 
to the traditional methods of nanofabrication that aims to reduce the use of hazardous 
chemicals, is environmentally friendly and produces non-toxic nanomaterials. 216 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
3. Flavonoid Mediated Nanofabrication 
Plant extracts have been extensively investigated for the purpose of nanosynthesis 
that have shown outstanding results especially with regard to metal nanofabrication. 
The phytoconstituents present in these extracts are responsible for the reduction of 
metal ions to their respective nano-formulations. This has fascinated researchers to 
further investigate individual components of the plant extracts and look deeper into 
the mechanism of phyto-nanosynthesis. Flavonoids are one of the most ubiquitously 
present phytochemicals that are most commonly reported and predicted to participate 
in the nanofabrication of metal ions with some noteworthy results. Here we have 
emphasized on the most frequently studied flavonoids and their role in the green 
synthesis of nanoparticles. 
3.1 Nanofabrication Using Different Flavonoids 
Anthocyanins, flavone, flavonol, flavanone, chalcones, and isoflavone derivatives 
are all members of the flavonoid family of natural polyphenols. Flavonoids 
have a skeleton made up of two phenyl rings (A and B) joined by an oxygenated 
heterocycle ring C, which is hydroxylated in multiple places [65]. Because they 
engage in the response to biotic and abiotic stressors, these chemicals play a vital 
function in plants [66]. Natural flavonoids have received a lot of interest because 
of their metal chelating and antioxidative effects, which are necessary for plant 
physiology and favourable for human health. Flavonoids operate as a catalytic centre 
for the Fenton reaction where these molecules chelate metal ions and the resultant 
metal-flavonoid complex has been reported to act as an acceptor of hydroxyl radical, 
consequently exhibiting free radical scavenging potency. The antioxidant activity of 
flavonoid-metal complexes has been found to be higher than that of free flavonoid 
compounds [67]. Flavonoids are capable of actively chelating and reducing 
metal ions into nanoparticles through various functional groups. The tautomeric 
conversions of flavonoids from enol to keto form may release reactive hydrogen 
atoms that can convert metal ions to nanoparticles. Green synthesis of Ag NPs 
was achieved by Jain and Mehata [11] utilizing Ocimum sanctum leaf extract and 
a flavonoid (quercetin) contained in the extract. Their findings demonstrated that 
Ag NPs formed from both the extract as well as quercetin had identical optical, 
morphological, and antibacterial properties, indicating that quercetin was involved 
in NP formation. It was hypothesized that upon reaction with silver salt, quercetin 
was able to reduce two silver ions through a redox reaction in which the flavonoid 
underwent a tautomeric change from enol to keto form thereby releasing two protons 
that reduces silver ions into silver nanoparticles [11]. Quercetin also possesses potent 
chelating activity since it can chelate metals at three positions, i.e., the hydroxyl, 
carbonyl and catechol groups. These groups are capable of chelating several divalent 
and trivalent metal ions such as Fe2+, Fe3+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Al3+, Cr3+, Pb2+ and Co2+ [68]. 
After the reduction of metal ions, the subsequent adsorption of flavonoids onto the 
surface of formed nanoparticles provides stability against agglomeration. Apiin 
a natural flavonoid, present abundantly in celery, parsley and banana leaves was 
isolated from the leaves of Lawsonia inermis and used for the synthesis of gold and 
quasi-spherical silver nanoparticles. The mechanism involved the binding of metal Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 217 
ions to the carbonyl group of the flavonoid resulting in the bio-reduction of gold 
and silver ions to nanoforms and then a layer of apiin accumulated over the metal 
ions prevented the formation of nanoparticle clusters [69]. Kaempherol, a dietary 
flavonoid, produced gold nanoparticles from chloroauric acid through a rapid redox 
reaction. The formation of nanoparticles began within 15 secs that was seen through 
a change in the colour of the reaction medium. The hydroxyl group in the B ring of 
the flavonoid was believed to play a role the reduction of Au3+ to Au0
 [70]. In another 
study, kaempferol mediated nanogold exhibited potent anti-neoplastic activity against 
A549 lung cancer cells [71]. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Withania 
somnifera leaf extract produced particles ranging from 70–110 nm in size. The major 
phytochemicals trapped within the metal complex as identified by HPLC-UV were 
catechin, p-coumarin and luteolin-7-glucoside [72]. Three flavonoids hesperidin, 
naringin and diosmin found in citrus fruits and Mentha species were used for the 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles. Hesperidin and Naringin produced homogenously 
dispersed nanoparticles while diosmin derived particles showed the occurrence 
of agglomeration. This indicated that the presence of an unsaturated pyran ring in 
diosmin decreases the number of reducing functional groups thereby affecting its 
stabilizing ability. The FTIR spectrum revealed a decrease in the concentration of 
the -O-H groups in the reaction medium containing silver ions. This further confirms 
that the hydroxyl groups in flavonoids are responsible for the reduction of Ag+
 ions 
consequently leading to the formation of Ag-nanoparticles [73]. This study is in 
accordance with another report by Stephen et al. where stable spherical nanoparticles 
of silver were produced in the size range of 20–40 nm using hesperidin [74]. The 
green synthesis of gold nanoparticles using epigallocatechin-3-gallate, resveratrol 
and fisetin reported the formation of stable nanoparticles exhibiting enhanced 
anti-oxidant, anti-proliferative and apoptotic activities [75]. Another study evidenced 
that epigallocatechin gallate is a very efficient reducing and stabilizing agent capable 
of reducing tetrachloroaurate to its corresponding nanoparticle [76]. Dihydromyricetin 
mediated the synthesis of gold nanoparticles through the reduction of metal ions and 
self-oxidation of hydroxyl to carbonyl groups. pH dependent formation of uniform 
spherical particles was seen [77]. Likewise, interaction of the flavonoid Rutin with 
chloroauric acid led to the formation of gold nanoparticles in the following steps: 
first, rutin forms a salt with HAuCl4, then charge transfer between a hydroxyl group – of rutin and AuCl4 occurs forming an auric chloride-rutin complex with the loss 
of a water molecule. Next, the complex is reduced with the addition of 2H+
 ions 
thereby releasing Au atoms which aggregates to form gold nanoparticles. Further, 
rutin molecules adsorb onto the surface of gold nanoparticles thereby stabilizing the 
formed nanoparticles [78]. Analogous to this study, silver nanoparticles were formed 
from silver nitrate using rutin through a rather simple redox reaction where rutin 
reacts with Ag+
 through the hydroxyl atoms at 3’ and 4’ carbon of the B ring. The enol 
groups are consequently oxidized to keto forms and Ag+
 is reduced to Ag0
. Silver 
nanoparticles approximately 1 nm in size are initially formed which slowly coalesce 
resulting in the formation of larger particles within the size range of 40–90 nm [79]. 
Zinc oxide nanoparticles were biosynthesized via a simple precipitation technique 
using the flavonoid quercetin isolated from Combretum ovalifolium. The synthesized 
nanoparticles showed significant antioxidant behaviour and catalytic degradation of 218 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
methylene blue dye [80]. Gokul et al. synthesized copper nanoparticles utilizing 
quercetin. The isolated flavonoid acts as a reducing, capping and stabilizing agent to 
produce particles of 295.4 nm having good anti-oxidant and anti-cancer properties 
[81]. Rajkumari et al. reported the synthesis of Baicalein mediated gold nanoparticles 
and confirmed their enhanced antibacterial activity [82]. Stolarczyk et al. observed 
that genistin, a naturally occurring isoflavonoid, reduces ionic gold to neutral gold 
nanocrystals. The nanoparticles formed exhibited high toxicity against human 
melanoma cells [83]. All of the above mentioned green synthesized nanoparticles 
were reported to be highly bioactive and biocompatible. An overview of the various 
flavonoid mediated nanoparticles and their investigated bioactivities have been 
provided in Table 2. Figure 2 provides the structures of commonly studied flavonoids 
involved in green synthesis. 
Table 2. List of flavonoids used for the fabrication of metal nanoparticles and their investigated 
bioactivities. 
Flavonoids Plant species Nanoparticle Size (nm) Bio-activity reported Ref. 
Quercetin Ocimum 
Sanctum 
Ag 12 Anti-bacterial [12] 
Apiin Lawsonia 
inermis 
Au 
Ag 
21 
39 
[70] 
Kaempherol - Au 18.24 Anti- Leishmanial [71] 
Kaempherol - Au 1–3 Anti-cancer [72] 
Catechin, 
p-coumaric acid, 
Luteolin-7-glucoside 
Withania 
somnifera 
Ag 70–10 Anti-microbial [73] 
Diosmin, Hesperidin, 
Naringin 
- Ag 20–80 
5–50 
5–40 
Anti-bacterial, 
Cytotoxicity 
[74] 
Hesperidin - Ag 20–40 - [75] 
Epigallocatechin-3­
gallate (EGCG) 
Resveratrol Fisetin 
- Au 25.55 
14.55 
9.76 
Antioxidant, 
Antiproliferative, 
Apoptotic 
[76] 
EGCG - Au 15–45 Cellular internalization, 
cytotoxicity 
[77] 
Dihydro-myricetin - Au - - [78] 
Rutin - Au 16–60 - [79] 
Rutin - Ag 40–90 - [80] 
Quercetin Combretum 
ovalifolium 
ZnO 31.24 Antioxidant [81] 
Quercetin Thespesia 
populnea 
Cu 295.4 Antioxidant, 
Anti-cancer 
[82] 
Baicalein - Au 26.5 Anti-microbial [83] 
Genistin - Au 14–33 Anti-cancer [84] 
3.2 Mechanism of Flavonoid-mediated Green Synthesis 
Many plant species are capable of synthesizing and storing nanoparticles in their cells 
[84]. This is facilitated by the presence of several phytoconstituents that function Fig. 2.:
 
 
 
DIOSMIN NARINGIN BAICALEIN 
RESVERATROL EPIGALLOCATECHIN GALLATE FISETIN 
QUERCETIN RUTIN LUTEOLIN 
APIIN KAEMPHEROL HESPERIDIN 
Fig. 2. Structures of commonly investigated flavonoids for green synthesis. 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 219 
through bio-reduction resulting in the synthesis of nanoparticles. The entire process 
takes place in three phases: 
i) Reduction of metal ions to atoms- where the charged ions accept electrons from 
the reducing agents to form high energy metal-flavonoid complexes. 
ii) Nucleation and growth phase- where the highly energized complexes 
spontaneously aggregate and conform to their lower energy states that are 
thermodynamically stable. 
iii) Termination- In this phase, the nanoparticles acquire their most favorable 
conformation, highly influenced by the stabilizing ability of the phytochemical 
[85]. Fig. 3.:
Fig. 3. Schematic representation of metal nanoparticles synthesized by bio-reduction using natural 
flavonoids. The metal ions bind to the carbonyl/hydroxyl groups of flavonoids and undergo reduction. 
The resultant metal-flavonoid complex coalesces to form small nanoparticles. 
220 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
The ability of flavonoid molecules to chelate metal ions through their hydroxyl 
and carbonyl functional groups catalyzes the formation of nanoparticles [68]. 
Flavonoids act as phyto-reductants that donate electrons to the metal ions and 
transform them to nanoparticles. These nanoparticles exist at a high energy state 
and tend to covert to their low energy conformations by aggregating with each other. 
The size of the nanoparticles thus formed depends on the nature and ability of the 
flavonoid to act both as a reducing and stabilizing agent. Flavonoids with strong 
stabilizing potential result in the formation of smaller sized nanoparticles by exerting 
strong repulsive forces between the metal-flavonoid complex. ability of the flavonoid to act both as a reducing and stabilizing agent. Flavonoids with strong 
stabilizing potential result in the formation of smaller sized nanoparticles by exerting strong 
repulsive forces between the metal-flavonoid complex.
Metal-binding activity is influenced by the quantity of hydroxyl groups and the structure 
of flavonoids. Metal ions may be accepted in one coordination pocket between the 4-carbonyl
group and the 5-hydroxyl group in simple aglycones like chrysin and apigenin. Divalent metal 
ions are therefore bound by two flavonoid ligands in a 1:2 (metal:ligand) stoichiometry while
trivalent ions with a 1:3 (metal:ligand) stoichiometry [86,87]. The flavonoid baicalein has three
potential bidentate binding sites, making it a highly bioactive flavonoid (4-carbonyl and three
hydroxyl groups at carbons number 5, 6, 7). With a 1:1 and 1:2 stoichiometry, either hydroxyls at
5- and 6-carbon atoms or 6-hydroxyl-7-hydroxyl are suitable binding sites for Fe2+ and Fe3+
ions. The Fe-baicalein complexes have significant antioxidant characteristics [88,89]. Similarly,
two potential bidentate binding sites are present in the luteolin structure and both sites can bind 
Al3+ ions in the molar ratio 2:1 (metal:ligand) [90]. Quercetin has three potential bidentate
binding places rendering it a very strong chelating ability. For a wide range of metal ions, stable
complexes of quercetin have been reported [68].
It may be inferred that the number of free hydroxyl and carbonyl groups in flavonoids
determines it metal chelating, reducing and stabilizing potencies. Fig.3. provides a schematic
representation of the metal nanoparticles synthesized by bio-reduction using natural flavonoids.
4. Biomedical Applications of Flavonoid mediated Nanoparticles
Green nanoparticles can be used in a variety of biomedical applications. They could be employed
for medication delivery, biosensing, bio-imaging, and disease treatments. Because of their
antimicrobial qualities, nanoparticles are also used in everyday items such as cosmetics,
toothpaste, deodorants, water purification systems, and humidifiers.
Fig. 4.: Applications of green synthesized nanoparticles.
4.1. Anti-microbial potential
The rise in antibiotic resistance amongst harmful bacteria has drawn attention to nanoparticles'
antibacterial characteristics and their potential as novel medical tools. The antimicrobial activity
of green synthesized gold and silver nanoparticles is well-known and is utilized in multiple
medical preparations against infectious diseases. Silver nanoparticles exhibit antibacterial
Commented [U10]: Author: Not cited in text.
- -
Green 
Synthesized 
Nanoparticles 
Anti microbial Anti cancer Drug delivery Catalysis Nanosensors Photoimaging 
Applications 
Fig. 4. Applications of green synthesized nanoparticles. 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 221 
Metal-binding activity is influenced by the quantity of hydroxyl groups and 
the structure of flavonoids. Metal ions may be accepted in one coordination pocket 
between the 4-carbonyl group and the 5-hydroxyl group in simple aglycones like 
chrysin and apigenin. Divalent metal ions are therefore bound by two flavonoid ligands 
in a 1:2 (metal:ligand) stoichiometry while trivalent ions with a 1:3 (metal:ligand) 
stoichiometry [86, 87]. The flavonoid baicalein has three potential bidentate binding 
sites, making it a highly bioactive flavonoid (4-carbonyl and three hydroxyl groups 
at carbons number 5, 6, 7). With a 1:1 and 1:2 stoichiometry, either hydroxyls at 
5- and 6-carbon atoms or 6-hydroxyl-7-hydroxyl are suitable binding sites for Fe2+ 
and Fe3+ ions. The Fe-baicalein complexes have significant antioxidant characteristics 
[88, 89]. Similarly, two potential bidentate binding sites are present in the luteolin 
structure and both sites can bind Al3+ ions in the molar ratio 2:1 (metal:ligand) [90]. 
Quercetin has three potential bidentate binding places rendering it a very strong 
chelating ability. For a wide range of metal ions, stable complexes of quercetin have 
been reported [68]. 
It may be inferred that the number of free hydroxyl and carbonyl groups in 
flavonoids determines it metal chelating, reducing and stabilizing potencies. 
Figure 3 provides a schematic representation of the metal nanoparticles synthesized 
by bio-reduction using natural flavonoids. 
4. Biomedical Applications of Flavonoid Mediated Nanoparticles 
Green nanoparticles can be used in a variety of biomedical applications. They 
could be employed for medication delivery, biosensing, bio-imaging, and disease 
treatments. Because of their antimicrobial qualities, nanoparticles are also used 
in everyday items such as cosmetics, toothpaste, deodorants, water purification 
systems, and humidifiers (Fig. 4). 
4.1 Anti-microbial Potential 
The rise in antibiotic resistance amongst harmful bacteria has drawn attention to 
nanoparticles’ antibacterial characteristics and their potential as novel medical 
tools. The antimicrobial activity of green synthesized gold and silver nanoparticles 
is well-known and is utilized in multiple medical preparations against infectious 
diseases. Silver nanoparticles exhibit antibacterial activity against gram-negative 
and gram-positive bacteria [91]. Anti-microbial studies have shown that metal oxide 222 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
nanoparticles can cause significant membrane damage and DNA toxicity upon 
cellular uptake [92]. Copper nanoparticles have shown antibacterial efficacy against 
common pathogenic bacteria like E. coli [42]. 
4.2 Anti-cancer Activity 
Because of their cytotoxic effect against certain tumour cells, silver nanoparticles 
have been extensively studied for their anti-tumorigenic properties. Cu nanoparticles 
made using the stem latex of Euphorbia nivulia was found to curb the growth of 
cancerous cells in the lungs. This emphasises that green synthesized nanoparticles 
are as efficient as conventionally synthesized copper nanoparticles as potent 
chemotherapeutic agents in the field of oncology [93]. The small size of nanoparticles 
enables them to penetrate cancer cells for targeted treatment. Gold nanoparticles 
have shown increased anti-neoplastic efficacy towards cancer cell lines [94]. 
4.3 Drug Delivery Applications 
Metal nanoparticles serve as useful tools for targeted delivery of not only 
small molecules but they are also capable of delivering large biomolecules and 
phytochemicals [95]. Site specific delivery of drugs not only increases the therapeutic 
potential of the drug but also helps reduce systemic toxicity [96]. Delivery of flavonoid 
encapsulated metal nanoparticles is beneficial in enhancing the pharmacokinetic and 
dynamic properties of the sensitive molecules [97]. Several metals formulated as 
nanoparticles have been investigated as drug carriers of not just biomolecules and 
phytoconstituents but also of existing synthetic drugs in an attempt to reduce their 
toxicity and amplify therapeutic activity. 
4.4 Bio-sensing Applications 
Gold nanoparticles have been utilized in biosensing applications as they can be 
conjugated with recognition molecules such as antibodies. Metal nanoparticles 
can provide sensitivity for the detection of cancerous cells, blood glucose levels, 
pathogens and biological molecules [98]. 
Besides the above-mentioned applications, nanoparticles are extensively used 
in food, cosmetic and agriculture. They are also used as catalysts for the fast and 
efficient catalysis of several reactions [99]. 
5. Conclusion and Future Perspective 
The current chapter illustrates the various methods of nanoparticle synthesis that 
includes chemical, physical and biological methods used in the fabrication of 
nanomaterials. The physical and chemical methods of nanofabrication possess 
limitations associated with the use of toxic chemicals during synthesis and the 
production of environmentally and biologically harmful byproducts. Green synthesis 
serves as an eco-friendly and cost-effective alternative to produce biologically 
suitable nanoparticles. Phytochemicals isolated from plants, especially flavonoids, 
are capable of efficiently reducing metal ions to their respective nanoforms. Upon  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 223 
investigation of the mechanism behind this phenomenon, it was revealed that the 
hydroxyl and carbonyl groups present in these compounds are responsible for 
their metal chelating and reducing ability. Flavonoids are capable of synthesizing 
stable nanoparticles without any requirement of additional surfactants, stabilizing 
or capping agents. Therefore, several flavonoids are being studied with regard to 
the nanoformulation of metals including gold, silver, platinum, copper, palladium, 
iron and zinc. Exploitation of these natural compounds provides an opportunity for 
the rapid, facile, economically viable and eco-friendly approach of nanofabrication. 
Since the green synthesized nanomaterials are free from toxic impurities, they have 
shown increased therapeutic potential and has opened up avenues for use in drug 
delivery, bioimaging and therapeutics. Despite the obvious advantages of using green 
nanosynthesis, issues pertaining to the large scale bio-synthesis and an exhaustive 
understanding of the molecular mechanism of bioreduction still exist. As a result, 
further research is needed to analyse and comprehend the plant-dependent process, 
as well as to investigate its applications, particularly in the biomedical field. 
References 
[1] Joob, B. and V. Wiwanitkit. 2017. Nanotechnology for health: A new useful technology in medicine. 
Med. J. DY Patil Univ. 10: 401. 
[2] Singh, T., S. Shukla, P. Kumar, V. Wahla, V.K. Bajpai and I.A. Rather. 2017. Application of 
nanotechnology in food science: perception and overview. Front. Microbiol. 8: 1501. 
[3] Meyyappan, M. and M. Dastoor. 2004. Nanotechnology in space exploration. Rep. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. Initiative Workshop. 2: 24–26. 
[4] Mohan, S., G. Govindankutty, A. Sathish and N. Kamaraj. 2021. Spirulina platensis‐capped 
mesoporous magnetic nanoparticles for the adsorptive removal of chromium. Can. J. Chem. Eng. 
99: 294–305. 
[5] Fytianos, G., A. Rahdar and G.Z. Kyzas. 2020. Nanomaterials in cosmetics: Recent updates. 
Nanomaterials 10: 979. 
[6] Prasad, R., A. Bhattacharyya and Q.D. Nguyen. 2017. Nanotechnology in sustainable agriculture: 
Recent developments, challenges, and perspectives. Front. Microbiol. 8: 1014. 
[7] Cele, T. 2020. Preparation of Nanoparticles. Engineered Nanomaterials - Health and Safety 14. 
[8] Romania, E.M. and A.G. Modan. 2020. Advantages and disadvantages of chemical methods in the 
elaboration of nanomaterials. Metallurg. Mater. Sci. 43: 53–60. 
[9] Bala, N., S. Saha, M. Chakraborty, M. Maiti, S. Das, R. Basu and P. Nandy. 2015. Green synthesis of 
zinc oxide nanoparticles using Hibiscus subdariffa leaf extract: effect of temperature on synthesis, 
anti-bacterial activity and anti-diabetic activity. RSC Adv. 5: 4993–5003. 
[10] Gardea-Torresdey, J.L., J.G. Parsons, E. Gomez, J. Peralta-Videa, H.E. Troiani, P. Santiago and 
M.J. Yacaman. 2002. Formation and growth of Au nanoparticles inside live Alfalfa plants. Nano 
Lett. 2: 397–401. 
[11] Jain, S. and M.S. Mehata. 2017. Medicinal plant leaf extract and pure flavonoid mediated green 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their enhanced antibacterial property. Sci. Rep. 7: 15867. 
[12] Kumar, V. and S.K. Yadav. 2009. Plant-mediated synthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles and their 
applications. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 84: 151–157. 
[13] Narayanan, K.B. and N. Sakthivel. 2010. Biological synthesis of metal nanoparticles by microbes. 
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 156: 1–13. 
[14] Gómez-Graña, S., M. Perez-Amemeiro, X. Vecino, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Perez-Juste, J. Cruz and 
A. Moldes. 2017. Biogenic synthesis of metal nanoparticles using a biosurfactant extracted from 
corn and their antimicrobial properties. Nanomaterials 7: 139.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
224 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[15] Sudhasree, S., A. Shakila Banu, P. Brindha and G.A. Kurian. 2014. Synthesis of nickel nanoparticles 
by chemical and green route and their comparison in respect to biological effect and toxicity. 
Toxicological & Environmental Chemistry 96: 743–754. 
[16] Marslin, G., K. Siram, Q. Maqbool, R. Selvakesavan, D. Kruszka, P. Kachlicki and G. Franklin. 
2018. Secondary metabolites in the green synthesis of metallic nanoparticles. Materials 11: 940. 
[17] Muñoz, J.E., J. Cervantes, R. Esparza and G. Rosas. 2007. Iron nanoparticles produced by 
high-energy ball milling. J. Nanopart. Res. 9: 945–950. 
[18] Prasad Yadav, T., R. Manohar Yadav and D. Pratap Singh. 2012. Mechanical milling: a top down 
approach for the synthesis of nanomaterials and nanocomposites. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2: 22–48. 
[19] Amendola, V. and M. Meneghetti. 2009. Laser ablation synthesis in solution and size manipulation 
of noble metal nanoparticles. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 11: 3805. 
[20] Zhang, J., M. Chaker and D. Ma. 2017. Pulsed laser ablation-based synthesis of colloidal metal 
nanoparticles for catalytic applications. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 489: 138–149. 
[21] Jones, J.M., R.P. Malcolm, K.M. Thoma and S.H. Bottrell. 1996. The anode deposit formed during 
the carbon- arc evaporation of graphite for the synthesis of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes. Carbon 
34: 231–237. 
[22] Zhang, D., K. Ye, Y. Yao, F. Liang, T. Qu, W. Ma, B. Yang, Y. Dai and T. Watanabe. 2019. 
Controllable synthesis of carbon nanomaterials by direct current arc discharge from the inner wall 
of the chamber. Carbon. 142: 278–284. 
[23] Ayyub, P., R. Chandra, P. Taneja, A.K. Sharma and R. Pinto. 2001. Synthesis of nanocrystalline 
material by sputtering and laser ablation at low temperatures. Journal of Appl. Phys. 106: 67–73. 
[24] Nie, M., K. Sun and D.D. Meng. 2009. Formation of metal nanoparticles by short-distance sputter 
deposition in a reactive ion etching chamber. Journal of Applied Physics 106: 054314. 
[25] Wender, H., P. Migowski, A.F. Feil, S.R. Teixeira and J. Dupont. 2013. Sputtering deposition of 
nanoparticles onto liquid substrates: Recent advances and future trends. Coordination Chemistry 
Reviews 257: 2468–2483. 
[26] Bokov, D., A. Turki Jalil, S. Chupradit, W. Suksatan, M. Javed Ansari, I.H. Shewael, G.H. Valiev 
and E. Kianfar. 2021. Nanomaterial by sol-gel method: synthesis and application. Advances in 
Materials Science and Engineering 2021: 1–21. 
[27] Parashar, M., V.K. Shukla and R. Singh. 2020. Metal oxides nanoparticles via sol–gel method: a 
review on synthesis, characterization and applications. J. Mater Sci: Mater Electron 31: 3729–3749. 
[28] Jiang, Y., Z. Peng, S. Zhang, F. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Liu and K. Wang. 2018. Facile in-situ 
solvothermal method to synthesize double shell ZnIn2S4 nanosheets/TiO2 hollow nanosphere with 
enhanced photocatalytic activities. Ceramics International 44: 6115–6126. 
[29] Meng, L.-Y., B. Wang, M.-G. Ma and K.-L. Lin. 2016. The progress of microwave-assisted 
hydrothermal method in the synthesis of functional nanomaterials. Materials Today Chemistry 
1: 63–83. 
[30] Das, S. and V.C. Srivasatava. 2016. Synthesis and characterization of ZnO–MgO nanocomposite by 
co-precipitation method. Smart Science 4: 190–195. 
[31] Srivastava, R. 2012. Synthesis and characterization techniques of nanomaterials. International J. 
Green Nanotech. 4: 17–27. 
[32] Xu, H., B.W. Zeiger and K.S. Suslick. 2013. Sonochemical synthesis of nanomaterials. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 42: 2555–2567. 
[33] Husseiny, M.I., M.A. El-Aziz, Y. Badr and M.A. Mahmoud. 2007. Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles 
using Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular 
Spectroscopy 67: 1003–1006. 
[34] Mukherjee, P., A. Ahmad, D. Mandal, S. Senapati, S.R. Sainkar, M.I. Khan, R. Parishcha, P.V. 
Ajaykumar, M. Alam, R. Kumar and M. Sastry. 2001. Fungus-mediated synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles and their immobilization in the mycelial matrix: A novel biological approach to 
nanoparticle synthesis. Nano Lett. 1: 515–519. 
[35] Aljabali, A.A.A., J.E. Barclay, G.P. Lomonossoff and D.J. Evans. 2010. Virus templated metallic 
nanoparticles. Nanoscale 2: 2596. 
[36] Hamida, R.S., N.E. Abdelmeguid, M.A. Ali, M.M. Bin-Meferij and M.I. Khalil. 2020. Synthesis 
of silver nanoparticles using a novel cyanobacteria Desertifilum sp. extract: Their antibacterial and 
cytotoxicity effects. Int. J. Nanomed. 15: 49–63.  
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 225 
[37] Agnihotri, M., S. Joshi, A.R. Kumar, S. Zinjarde and S. Kulkarni. 2009. Biosynthesis of gold 
nanoparticles by the tropical marine yeast Yarrowia lipolytica. Materials Letters 63: 1231–1234. 
[38] He, S., Z. Guo, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Wang and N. Gu. 2007. Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles 
using the bacteria Rhodopseudomonas capsulata. Materials Letters 61: 3984–3987. 
[39] Kalimuthu, K., R. Suresh Babu, D. Venkataraman, Mohd. Bilal and S. Gurunathan. 2008. 
Biosynthesis of silver nanocrystals by Bacillus licheniformis. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 
65: 150–153. 
[40] Majumdar, R., B.G. Bag and N. Maity. 2013. Acacia nilotica (Babool) leaf extract mediated 
size-controlled rapid synthesis of gold nanoparticles and study of its catalytic activity. Int. Nano. 
Lett. 3: 53. 
[41] Iravani, S. and B. Zolfaghari. 2013. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Pinus eldarica 
bark extract. BioMed Research International 5: 1–5. 
[42] Lee, H.-J., J.Y. Song and B.S. Kim. 2013. Biological synthesis of copper nanoparticles using 
Magnolia kobus leaf extract and their antibacterial activity. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 
88: 1971–1977. 
[43]	Thekkae Padil, V.V. and M. Černík. 2013. Green synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles using gum
karaya as a biotemplate and their antibacterial application. Int J. Nanomed. 8: 889–898. 
[44] Song, J.Y., E.-Y. Kwon and B.S. Kim. 2010. Biological synthesis of platinum nanoparticles using 
Diopyros kaki leaf extract. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 33: 159–164. 
[45] Kumar Petla, R., S. Vivekanandhan, M. Misra, A. Kumar Mohanty and N. Satyanarayana. 2012. 
Soybean (Glycine max) leaf extract based green synthesis of palladium nanoparticles. J. Biomater. 
Nanobiotechnol. 3: 16695, 6 pages 
[46] Sundrarajan, M. and S. Gowri. 2011. Green synthesis of titanium dioxide nanoparticles by 
Nyctanthes Arbor-Tristis leaves extract. Chalcogenide Lett. 8: 447–451. 
[47] Pattanayak, M. and P.L. Nayak. 2013. Green synthesis and characterization of zero valent iron 
nanoparticles from the leaf extract of Azadirachta indica (Neem). World J. NSci. Tech. 2: 6–9. 
[48] Shankar, S.S., A. Rai, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry. 2004. Rapid synthesis of Au, Ag, and bimetallic 
Au core–Ag shell nanoparticles using Neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf broth. Journal of Colloid and 
Interface Science 275: 496–502. 
[49] Sheny, D.S., J. Mathew and D. Philip. 2011. Phytosynthesis of Au, Ag and Au–Ag bimetallic 
nanoparticles using aqueous extract and dried leaf of Anacardium occidentale. Spectrochimica Acta 
Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 79: 254–262. 
[50] Mondal, S., N. Roy, R.A. Laskar, I. Sk, S. Basu, D. Mandal and N.A. Begum. 2011. Biogenic 
synthesis of Ag, Au and bimetallic Au/Ag alloy nanoparticles using aqueous extract of mahogany 
(Swietenia mahogani JACQ.) leaves. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 82: 497–504. 
[51] Mittal, A.K., Y. Chisti and U.C. Banerjee. 2013. Synthesis of metallic nanoparticles using plant 
extracts. Biotechnology Advances 31: 346–356. 
[52] Rodriguez, E., J.G. Parsons, J.R. Peralta-Videa, G. Cruz-Jimenez, J. Romero-Gonzalez, B.E. 
Sanchez-Salcido, G.B. Saupe, M. Duarte-Gardea and J.L. Gardea-Torresdey. 2007. Potential of 
Chilopsis linearis for gold phytomining: Using XAS to determine gold reduction and nanoparticle 
formation within plant tissues. International Journal of Phytoremediation 9: 133–147. 
[53] Qu, J., X. Yuan, X. Wang and P. Shao. 2011. Zinc accumulation and synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles 
using Physalis alkekengi L. Environmental Pollution 159: 1783–1788. 
[54] Sharma, N.C., S.V. Sahi, S. Nath, J.G. Parsons, J.L. Gardea-Torresde and T. Pal. 2007. Synthesis 
of plant-mediated gold nanoparticles and catalytic role of biomatrix-embedded nanomaterials. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 41: 5137–5142. 
[55] Aswathy Aromal, S. and D. Philip. 2012. Facile one-pot synthesis of gold nanoparticles using tannic 
acid and its application in catalysis. Physica E: Low-dimensional Systems and Nanostructures 
44: 1692–1696. 
[56] Sivaraman, S.K., I. Elango, S. Kumar and V. Santhanam. 2009. A green protocol for room 
temperature synthesis of silver nanoparticles in seconds. Current Science 97: 6. 
[57] Meena Kumari, M., S.A. Aromal and D. Philip. 2013. Synthesis of monodispersed palladium 
nanoparticles using tannic acid and its optical non-linearity. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular 
and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 103: 130–133.  
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
226 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[58] Ahmad, T. 2014. Reviewing the tannic acid mediated synthesis of metal nanoparticles. Journal of 
Nanotechnology 2014: 1–11. 
[59] Liu, J., G. Qin, P. Raveendran and Y. Ikushima. 2006. Facile “Green” synthesis, characterization, 
and catalytic function of β-D-glucose-stabilized Au nanocrystals. Chem. Eur. J. 12: 2131–2138.
[60]	Martínez-Castañón, G.A., N. Niño-Martínez, F. Martínez-Gutierrez, J.R. Martínez-Mendoza and
F. Ruiz. 2008. Synthesis and antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles with different sizes. 
J. Nanopart. Res. 10: 1343–1348. 
[61] Xiong, J., Y. Wang, Q. Xue and X. Wu. 2011. Synthesis of highly stable dispersions of nanosized 
copper particles using l-ascorbic acid. Green Chem. 13: 900. 
[62] Park, Y., Y.N. Hong, A. Weyers, Y.S. Kim and R.J. Linhardt. 2011. Polysaccharides and 
phytochemicals: A natural reservoir for the green synthesis of gold and silver nanoparticles. IET 
Nanobiotechnol. 5: 69. 
[63] Rane, A.V., K. Kanny, V.K. Abitha and S. Thomas. 2018. Methods for synthesis of nanoparticles and 
fabrication of nanocomposites. pp. 121–139. In: Synthesis of Inorganic Nanomaterials. Woodhead 
Publ. Ch. 5. 
[64] Peralta-Videa, J.R., Y. Huang, J.G. Parsons, L. Zhao, L. Lopez-Moreno, J.A. Hernandez-Viezcas 
and J.L. Gardea-Torresdey. 2016. Plant-based green synthesis of metallic nanoparticles: scientific 
curiosity or a realistic alternative to chemical synthesis? Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng. 1: 4. 
[65] Kachlicki, P., A. Piasecka, M. Stobiecki and L. Marczak. 2016. Structural characterization of 
flavonoid glycoconjugates and their derivatives with mass spectrometric techniques. Molecules 
21: 1494. 
[66] Winkel-Shirley, B. 2002. Biosynthesis of flavonoids and effects of stress. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology 5: 218–223. 
[67] Samsonowicz, M., E. Regulska and M. Kalinowska. 2017. Hydroxyflavone metal complexes -
molecular structure, antioxidant activity and biological effects. Chemico-Biological Interactions 
273: 245–256. 
[68] Cherrak, S.A., N. Mokhtari-Soulimane, F. Berroukeche, B. Bensenane, A. Cherbonnel, H. Merzouk 
and M. Elhabiri. 2016. In vitro antioxidant versus metal ion chelating properties of flavonoids: a 
structure-activity investigation. PLoS ONE 11: e0165575. 
[69] Kasthuri, J., S. Veerapandian and N. Rajendiran. 2009. Biological synthesis of silver and gold 
nanoparticles using apiin as reducing agent. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 68: 55–60. 
[70] Halder, A., S. Das, T. Bera and A. Mukherjee. 2017. Rapid synthesis for monodispersed gold 
nanoparticles in kaempferol and anti-leishmanial efficacy against wild and drug resistant strains. 
RSC Adv. 7: 14159–14167. 
[71] Govindaraju, S., A. Roshini, M.-H. Lee and K. Yun. 2019. Kaempferol conjugated gold nanoclusters 
enabled efficient for anticancer therapeutics to A549 lung cancer cells. Int. J. Nanomed. 
14: 5147–5157. 
[72] Dias, A.C.P., G. Marslin, R.K. Selvakesavan, G. Franklin and B. Sarmento. 2015. Antimicrobial 
activity of cream incorporated with silver nanoparticles biosynthesized from Withania somnifera. 
Int. J. Nanomed. 10: 5955–5963. 
[73] Sahu, N., D. Soni, B. Chandrashekhar, D.B. Satpute, S. Saravanadevi, B.K. Sarangi and R.A. 
Pandey. 2016. Synthesis of silver nanoparticles using flavonoids: hesperidin, naringin and diosmin, 
and their antibacterial effects and cytotoxicity. Int. Nano Lett. 6: 173–181. 
[74] Stephen, A. and S. Seethalakshmi. 2013. Phytochemical synthesis and preliminary characterization 
of silver nanoparticles using hesperidin. Journal of Nanoscience 6: 1–6. 
[75] Sanna, V., N. Pala, G. Dessi, P. Manconi, A. Mariani, S. Dedola, M. Rassu, C. Crosio, C. Iaccarino 
and M. Sechi. 2014. Single-step green synthesis and characterization of gold-conjugated polyphenol 
nanoparticles with antioxidant and biological activities. Int. J. Nanomed. 9: 4935–4951. 
[76] Nune, S.K., N. Chanda, R. Shukla, K. Katti, R.R. Kulkarni, S. Thilakavathy, S. Mekapothula, R. 
Kannan and K.V. Katti. 2009. Green nanotechnology from tea: phytochemicals in tea as building 
blocks for production of biocompatible gold nanoparticles. J. Mater. Chem. 19: 2912.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanofabrication Using Natural Flavonoids for Biomedical Applications 227 
[77] Guo, Q., Q. Guo, J. Yuan and J. Zeng. 2014. Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles using a kind of 
flavonol: Dihydromyricetin. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 
441: 127–132. 
[78] Borodina, V.G. and Yu.A. Mirgorod. 2014. Kinetics and mechanism of the interaction between 
HAuCl4 and rutin. Kinet Catal. 55: 683–687. 
[79] Mirgorod, Yu.A., V.G. Borodina and N.A. Borsch. 2013. Investigation of interaction between silver 
ions and rutin in water by physical methods. Biophysics 58: 743–747. 
[80] Jeyaleela, G.D., J.R. Vimala, S.M. Sheela, A. Agila, M.S. Bharathy and M. Divya. 2020. 
Biofabrication of zinc oxide nanoparticles using the isolated flavonoid from Combretum ovalifolium 
and its anti-oxidative ability and catalytic degradation of methylene blue dye. Orient. J. Chem. 
36: 655–664. 
[81] Gokul, M., U.G. and A. Esakki. 2022. Green synthesis and characterization of isolated flavonoid 
mediated copper nanoparticles by using Thespesia populnea leaf extract and its evaluation of 
anti-oxidant and anti-cancer activity. Int. J. Chem. Res. 6: 15–32. 
[82] Rajkumari, J., S. Busi, A.C. Vasu and P. Reddy. 2017. Facile green synthesis of baicalein fabricated 
gold nanoparticles and their antibiofilm activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Microbial 
Pathogenesis 107: 261–269. 
[83] Stolarczyk, E.U., K. Stolarczyk, M. Laszcz, M. Kubiszewski, W. Maruszak, W. Olejarz and D. 
Bryk. 2017. Synthesis and characterization of genistein conjugated with gold nanoparticles and the 
study of their cytotoxic properties. European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 96: 176–185. 
[84] Harris, A.T. and R. Bali. 2008. On the formation and extent of uptake of silver nanoparticles by live 
plants. J. Nanopart. Res. 10: 691–695. 
[85] Marakov, V.V., A.J. Love, V. Sinitsyna, S.S. Marakova, I.V. Yaminsky, M.E. taliansky and N.O. 
Kalinina. 2014. ‘Green’ nanotechnologies: synthesis of metal nanoparticles using plants. Acta 
Naturae 6: 35–44. 
[86] Erdogan, G., R. Karadag and A. Eler. 2010. Aluminium(III), Fe(II) Complexes and dyeing 
properties of apigenin (5,7,4’ trihydroxy flavone). Reviews in Analytical Chemistry 29: 211–232. 
[87] Pusz, J. and B. Nitka. 1997. Synthesis and physicochemical properties of the complexes of Co(II), 
Ni(II), and Cu(II) with chrysin. Microchemical Journal 56: 373–381. 
[88]	Dimitrić Marković, J.M., Z.S. Marković, T.P. Brdarić, V.M. Pavelkić and M.B. Jadranin. 2011.
Iron complexes of dietary flavonoids: Combined spectroscopic and mechanistic study of their free 
radical scavenging activity. Food Chemistry 129: 1567–1577. 
[89] Perez, C.A., Y. Wei and M. Guo. 2009. Iron-binding and anti-Fenton properties of baicalein and 
baicalin. Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry 103: 326–332. 
[90] Rygula, A., T.P. Wrobel, J. Szklarzewicz and M. Baranska. 2013. Raman and UV–vis spectroscopy 
studies on luteolin–Al(III) complexes. Vibrational Spectroscopy 64: 21–26. 
[91] Velmurugan, P., S-M. Lee, M. Iydroose, K-J. Lee and B-T. Oh. 2013. Pine cone-mediated green 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their antibacterial activity against agricultural pathogens. 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97: 361–368. 
[92] Simon-Deckers, A., S. Loo, M. Mayne-L’hermite, N. Herlin-Biome, N. Menguy, C. Reynaud, B. 
Gouget and M. Carriere. 2009. Size-, composition- and shape-dependent toxicological impact 
of metal oxide nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes toward bacteria. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
43: 8423–8429. 
[93] Valodkar, M., R.N. Jadeja, M.C. Thounaojam, R.V. Devkar and S. Thakore. 2011. Biocompatible 
synthesis of peptide capped copper nanoparticles and their biological effect on tumor cells. 
Materials Chemistry and Physics 128: 83–89. 
[94] Rajan, A., A.R. Rajan and D. Philip. 2017. Elettaria cardamomum seed mediated rapid synthesis of 
gold nanoparticles and its biological activities. OpenNano 2: 1–8. 
[95] Ghosh, P., G. Han, M. De, C. Kim and V. Rotello. 2008. Gold nanoparticles in delivery applications. 
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 60: 1307–1315. 
[96] Vimala, K., S. Sundarraj, M. Paulpandi, S. Vengatesan and S. Kannan. 2014. Green synthesized 
doxorubicin loaded zinc oxide nanoparticles regulates the Bax and Bcl-2 expression in breast and 
colon carcinoma. Process Biochemistry 49: 160–172.  
 
 
228 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[97] Sulaiman, G.M., H.M. Waheeb, M.S. Jabir, S.H. Khazaal, Y.H. Dewir and Y. Naidoo. 2020. 
Hesperidin loaded on gold nanoparticles as a drug delivery system for a successful biocompatible, 
anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory and phagocytosis inducer model. Sci. Rep. 10: 9362. 
[98] Yeh, Y.-C., B. Creran and V.M. Rotello. 2012. Gold nanoparticles: preparation, properties, and 
applications in bionanotechnology. Nanoscale 4: 1871–1880. 
[99] Ijaz, I., E. Gilani, A. Nazir and A. Bukhari. 2020. Detail review on chemical, physical and green 
synthesis, classification, characterizations and applications of nanoparticles. Green Chemistry 
Letters and Rev iews 13: 223–245.  
14


Structural and Mechanical 
Aspects of Nanocomposite
Hard Thin Films for Device 
Fabrication at Nanoscale

 R. Dash,1
 R. P. Kumar,3 A. K. Rajak,1
 A. Kumari4
 and 
A.S. Bhattacharyya1,2,* 
1. Introduction 
The dimension, efficiency, and cost of N/MEMS-based devices are continuously 
been looked into for better performance [1–4]. Amongst these devices, piezoresistive 
pressure sensors are one of the most commonly used microsensors due to simple 
fabrication and circuits [5–13]. They are classified based on how the mechanical 
input (pressure) is transformed into electrical output; this includes piezoresistive, 
capacitive, piezoelectric, optical, and resonant pressure sensors. The properties of 
SiCN are also applicable to MEMS piezoresistive devices [14–17]. 
Nanocomposite hard films (e.g., SiN, SiC, TiN, and nanocomposites like 
SiCN, TiBCN, etc.) are used as protective coatings in industrial tools and 
nano/microelectromechanical systems (N/MEMS). The deposition of the 
nanocomposite films was carried out by RF and DC sputtering. The variation of 
1 Dept. of Nano Science and Technology, Central University of Jharkhand, Brambe, Ranchi: 835205. 2 Centre of Excellence in Green and Efficient Energy Technology (CoE GEET), Central University of 
Jharkhand, Brambe, Ranchi: 835205. 
3 ICAR - CRIDA, Santhosh Nagar, Hyderabad. 5000593. 
4 Dept. of Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New 
Delhi 110016. 
* Corresponding author: arnab.bhattacharya@cuj.ac.in; 2006asb@gmail.com 230 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
particle sizes and the nucleation and growth of different phases at different deposition 
conditions were observed. The mechanical properties like hardness and modulus 
were determined by nanoindentation. Scratch tests were done for adhesion studies 
of the films with the substrate. Failure studies performed by indentations showed the 
different cracking/failure phenomenon occurring, which were found to be dependent 
upon the coating thickness, hardness, and nature of the substrate. Radial and lateral 
cracks were mainly observed on coatings deposited on silicon substrates. This 
chapter provides an understanding of the mechanical properties of coatings at the 
nanoscale using nanoindentation which shall be useful in device fabrication [18–25]. 
Computational studies provide further insight into the aspects of the usage of these 
materials in devices at the nanoscale. 
1.1 Si-C-N Based MEMS 
Silicon-based MEMS sensors operate reliably only up to a temperature of about 150°C 
[26]. Therefore, high temperature, pressure, and vibrational domain applications 
such as automotive, gas turbine engines, and the oil industry, have induced the 
researchers to look for alternate materials to silicon in MEMS-based piezoresistive 
pressure sensors. In this connection, SiC stands out as one of the most promising 
candidates. An up-gradation to SiC comes in the form of SiCN which can withstand 
even higher temperatures than SiC. Phases like SiNx (including β-Si3N4) and CNx 
(including β-C3N4) are formed in the nanocomposite SiCN thin film providing good 
thermomechanical and conducting properties [27]. Silicon carbon nitride (Si-C-N) 
thin films have an application in aerospace and MEMS devices as high-temperature 
pressure sensors due to their piezoresistive properties [28]. 
Recently, other films like Cr2O3 have been also found as mechanically 
protective thin film applicable, for instance, in micro-electromechanical devices 
[29]. However, their high-temperature performance still needs to be studied. The 
variation of sputtering power during magnetron sputtering has been found to alter the 
piezoresistive properties of SiCN films and is an important consideration for the use 
as MEMS pressure sensors [30]. Other deposition parameters like ion acceleration 
voltages during ion beam assisted deposition also affect the mechanical properties. 
The percentage of carbon, which is the primary element in creating hard phases in 
the composite leads, to a lower friction coefficient being present in higher fractions 
[31]. Decreasing the power and temperature has been reported to increase the carbon 
content and lower the dielectric constant due to lower density in plasma-based 
atomic layer deposition of these films. The etch rate also got decreased due to high 
film density [32]. Hydrogenated SiCN:H and SiCN thin films have been synthesized 
from organosilicon compounds showing enhanced optical, thermal, dielectric, and 
mechanical properties [33]. Carbon Nanofiber (CNF)-SiCN nanocomposites with 
defect structure caused polarization [34] and polymer-derived SiCN are also used for 
electrochemical energy storage [35].  
Hard Films for Devices 231 
1.2 SiCN Based Memory Devices 
The fabrication of CBRAM based transparent devices for non-volatile memory 
applications based on SiCN films has been reported [36]. Si-C-N films have the 
potential for futuristic nonvolatile memory application at high temperatures and 
harsh environments. Si-C-N thin films have also been shown to have switching 
properties applicable in resistive RAM (ReRAM) which are potential next-generation 
non-volatile memory devices having a fast operation, lower power consumption, 
higher stacking density, and higher scalability [37, 38]. 
1.3 SiCN in Transport and High-Frequency Applications 
High electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) based upon heterojunctions are 
high-frequency devices used in satellite receivers and power amplifiers. They are 
mainly made of AlGaN/GaN layers. SiCN used as a cap layer in these HEMTs 
has been reported to cause a reduction in noise level [39]. SiCN cap layer used in 
AlGaN/GaN metal insulator semiconductor heterostructure field-effect transistors 
(MISHFETs) increased the 2D electron gas (2DEG) density, and also effectively 
passivated the surface of the AlGaN/GaN MISHFET leading to superior device 
performance [40]. 
1.4 Optoelectronic Properties of SiCN 
Radio Frequency (RF)-magnetron sputtered SiCN films with controlled process 
parameters like pressure, substrate temperature and power have been used in 
optoelectronic devices by showing photoelectric and PL properties emitting light 
in the blue-violet region [41]. Annealing caused magnetron sputtered SiCN films 
to emit enhanced blue-violet light on excitation evident from the increase in PL 
intensity [42]. Photoemission studies in hydrogenated and non-hydrogenated SiCN 
using first principal MD simulations showed quenching in photoemission with an 
increase in hydrogen flow [43]. SiCN aids in low-cost photovoltaics by acting as a 
buffer layer in GaN/InxGa1–x N-based solar cells [44]. 
1.5 SiCN in Electronic Packaging 
The lower bonding temperature (~ 250°C) in SiCN leads to its use in safer packaging 
in CMOS [45]. SiCN has application in wafer-level hybrid bonding [46]. Two Cu 
nano-pads on wafers were bonded with the help of SiCN. The adhesion between 
SiCN and ultralow K materials have been studied for better packaging to reduce 
signal processing delays [47, 48]. 
1.6 Microwave Absorption by SiCN 
SiCN and CNT composites have shown improved dielectric and microwave 
absorption properties. The lightweight, thermal stability, oxidation resistance of 
SiCN makes it this capable. The addition of CNT improves its performance further in 
terms of conductivity and as an MW absorbing material in an alternating electric field 
[49]. Microwave absorption has also been reported by Fe doped SiCN composites 232 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
where dielectric properties in terms of storage and transport properties on terms of 
the conductive network took place [50]. The addition of ɤ-Fe2O3 in SiCN led to the 
formation of core-shell Fe@Si3N4 particles in SiCN composite fibers which affected 
the permittivity and permeability and aided in electromagnetic wave absorption [51]. 
Titanium Carbide (TiC) when added to SiCN caused the formation of microstructure 
containing nanocrystalline phases of TiC, SiC, as well as graphite and diamond. The 
composite showed goof impedance matching due to the formation of permittivity 
gradient between the nanodielectric loss phases. The EM absorbing properties were 
also seen [52]. The incorporation of graphitic carbon and SiC nanowires in SiCN 
improved the electrical conductivity and electromagnetic shielding abilities [53]. 
Polymer-derived SiCN ceramics were also subjected to 3D printing and 2D/3D 
micro-shaping. Honeycomb-shaped SiCN ceramic prepared by 3D printing has 
shown excellent MW absorbing properties [54–56]. SiCN has also shown catalytic 
and photocatalytic capabilities in harsh environments [57]. 
2. Sputter Deposition and Nanocrystalline Phases 
The hard nanocrystalline phases formed in a nanocomposite film containing Ti, B, 
Si, C, and N justify their superiority over their monophasic forms. The restriction 
of crack growth and resistance to localized plastic deformation at hard operating 
conditions along with good electrical properties makes them lucrative towards 
N/MEMS devices. There are a lot of techniques by which these nanocomposite films 
may be produced, Magnetron sputtering is one of the highly acclaimed techniques 
which has the advantage of reactive sputtering based upon the choices of reactive 
gases and is also comparatively cleaner (high vacuum) and provides control over the 
stoichiometry. A 2-inch diameter sintered TiB2 or SiC target which act as the cathode 
is placed in front of the magnetron which is a circular arrangement of magnets 
creating an E × B filed at the center (Fig. 1a, b). The ionized argon gas hitting the 
target produces adatoms by collision cascade. The magnetron helps in keeping the 
process localized over its dimension by controlling the charged species which also 
includes secondary electrons. A plasma is created during the process. These ad atoms 
produced travel along the line of sight and get deposited on the substrate placed at 
a certain distance and angle. The formation of nanocrystallites were observed under 
transmission electron microscope (Fig. 1c). 
A representative SiCN thin film on a glass substrate in shown in Fig. 2. The 
formation of nanocrystallites in an amorphous matrix was evident from the TEM 
studies. The structural characterization showed the formation of phases of SiC Si3N4, 
CNx, nc-carbon (diamond), and graphite [18–25]. 
Both microstructural and structural characterization showed the formation of the 
highest fraction of hard phases at an optimum deposition condition for magnetron 
sputtered films. The nucleation of nanocrystalline phases on an amorphous matrix 
usually leads to an increase in hardness. However, coalescence of these crystalline 
phases may also reduce the hardness in the long run. The 3 stage Ferrari-Robertson 
model for carbon was modified into a 4-stage model for Si-C-N based upon the IG 
and ID bands and peak positions [20]. Whether DC or RF mode was used during 
sputtering was found to be also important showing variation in properties [24]. (a) (b) (c)
Fig 1Fig 1: Sintered SiC and TiB2 target : Sintered SiC and TiB2 target [79] and TEM of SiCN co [79] and TEM of SiCN coatings [25] 
(a) (b) (c) 
Fig. 1. Sintered SiC and TiB2 target [79] and TEM of SiCN coatings [25] (Reproduced under CC BY 
License ). 
atings [25] 
(Reproduced under CC BY License)
Fig 2: SiCN films deposited on glass substrates [79] (Reproduced under CC BY License)
(Reproduced under CC BY License)
Fig 2: SiCN films deposited on glass substrates [79] (Reproduced under CC BY License)
(a) (b) (c)
Fig 1: Sintered SiC and TiB2 target [79] and TEM of SiCN co
Fig. 2. SiCN films deposited on glass substrates [79] (Reproduced under CC BY License ). 
atings [25] 
(Reproduced under CC BY License)
Fig 2: SiCN films deposited on glass substrates [79] (Reproduced under CC BY License)
(a) (b) (c)
Fig 1: Sintered SiC and TiB2 target [79] and TEM of SiCN coatings [25] 
(Reproduced under CC BY License)
Fig 2: SiCN films deposited on glass substrates [79] (Reproduced under CC BY License)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hard Films for Devices 233 
3. Nanoindentation 
Nanoindentation is a method to characterize material mechanical properties on a 
very small scale due to its high spatial and depth resolution of the measurement 
[58, 59]. Features less than 100 nm across, as well as thin films less than 50 nm thick, can 
be evaluated. The configuration of the nanoindentation setup. The nanoindentation is 
usually done with a 3-sided pyramidal Berkovich indenter, although spherical as well 
as 4-sided pyramidal cube-corner indenter are also available. The sample stage is in a 
floating condition attached with a spring to minimize any effect of vibration. The test 
methods include indentation for comparative and quantitative hardness determination 
and scratching for evaluation of wear resistance and thin-film adhesion. It has been 
also used to determine creep properties of materials based on time on the sample 
[60–62]. Analysis of time of interaction of the probe with the sample and deviation in 
mechanical parameters relating to microstructure has been given in this section [63]. 
Computational modeling relating to fitting parameters and physical properties have 
been shown here with an in-depth analysis of the experimental results. 
For indentation, the probe is forced into the surface at a selected rate and to a 
selected maximum force. Nanoindentation studies were performed on the films by 
Nanoindenter XP (MTS, USA). Both bulk modulus (E) and hardness (H) are found 
from nanoindentation. The advantage lies in the possibility of very small indentation 
(~ 100 nm). Thus, it is useful in the case of thin films. During nanoindentation, ⋅ ⋅ π dP 1 E = . (1) r 2 dh A 
Pmax H = (2) A pr je te o cd 
Nanoindentation has been used to characterize materials used for N/MEMS in 
234 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
a Berkovich indenter with 70.3°C effective cone angle is pushed into the material 
and withdrawn. The indentation load and displacement are recorded. The hardness 
and elastic modulus are determined with the depth of penetration after each 2 nm 
penetration [63]. The nanoindentation plots are shown in Fig. 3. The max load 
applied (Pmax) corresponds to the maximum depth of penetration (hmax). Due to 
plastic deformation, a residual depth is observed (hr) after full unloading which is 
after an elastic recovery denoted by the elastic depth (he). The depth hc is the contact 
depth. The stiffness S = dP/dh at maximum penetration, obtained from the unloading 
portion of the plot, is used in elastic modulus determination as given in eqn 1. The 
hardness is determined from eqn 2 where Aprojected in the projected area. The details 
are given in ref [88]. 
terms of hardness, elastic modulus, creep and adhesion properties [64, 65]. Bending 
strength and fatigue properties of nanoscale Si beams were also studied using 
nanoindentation [66, 67]. Nanoindentation was also used to actuate a radio frequency 
micro switch [68]. Nanoindentation coupled with electrical measurements are useful 
in studying the contact resistance in metal contact switches [69]. 
Impulse plays an important role in nanoindentation, especially when dealing 
with a coating/substrate system. The time of contact of the indenter with the sample 
is also a major factor in determining the mechanical response of materials and is 
especially useful for N/MEMS based sensors. The time on sample and harmonic 
impulse plot for three different penetration depths is shown in Fig. 4 details of which 
are given in ref [63]. 
Piezoresistive MEMS used in pacemakers is based on impulse received from 
the heart’s vibration for energy production proving a longer lifetime of the device. 
A silicon-based MEMS cantilever is used which uses CMOS compatible AlN as the 
piezoelectric layer and works on shock-induced vibration producing energy. SiCN 
having piezoelectric property can replace AlN [70]. The mechanical response of 
N/MEMs under impulse loading is a major criterion for device fabrication [71]. 
The features during unloading are usually different depicting interesting 
mechanical facts about the specimen at the nanoscale. As nanoindentation is based 
on continuous stiffness mode (CSM), the increase in slope indicates faster recovery 
as the material has been removed during unloading. A higher rate of change of slope 
will indicate higher elastic recovery. The effect of impulse is discussed in details 
in ref [72–77]. Deviation in mechanical properties due to indenter positioning and 
determination of fracture toughness of thin films by nanoindentation has also been Fig 3. Nanoindentation (a) schematic P-h (b) load-depth (c) hardness (d) modulus with 
penetration depth - Reproduced with permission from Elsevier [88]
Fig 4. (a) Time on sample and (b) Impulse for three different nanoindentation penetrations
(Reproduced under CC BY License) [79]
(a) (b)
(a) (b) (c)
Fig 1: Sintered SiC and TiB2 target [79] and TEM of SiCN co
(a) (b) 
Displacement (nm) 
Fig. 4. (a) Time on sample and (b) Impulse for three different nanoindentation penetrations (Reproduced 
under CC BY License ) [79]. 
atings [25] 
(Reproduced under CC BY License)
Fig 2: SiCN films deposited on glass substrates [79] (Reproduced under CC BY License)
Fig 3. Nanoindentation (a) schematic P-h (b) load-depth (c) hardness (d) modulus with 
penetration depth - Reproduced with permission from Elsevier [88]
Fig 4. (a) Time on sample and (b) Impulse for three different nanoindentation penetrations
(Reproduced under CC BY License) [79]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Load (mN)
displacement (nm)
0
5
10
15
0 20 40 60
Hardness (GPa)
displacement (nm)
90
140
190
Modulus (GPa)
0 10 20 30 40 50
displacement (nm)
hc S = dP/dh
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig 5. Maximum principal stress distribution in a beam of trapezoidal cross-section
(Reproduced with permission from Elsevier) [88]
 
0.1 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 15 
(b) 
10
Hardness (GPa) Modulus (GPa) 
(a) 
hc S = dP/dh 
5
Load (mN) 
0 
0 20 40 60 0.3 displacement (nm) 
0.2 190 (c) 
140 0 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 90 Displacement (nm) 0 10 20 30 40 50 
Displacement (nm) displacement (nm) 
Fig. 3. Nanoindentation (a) schematic P-h (b) load-depth (c) hardness (d) modulus with penetration 
depth. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier [88]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Maximum principal stress distribution in a beam of trapezoidal cross-section (Reproduced with 
permission from Elsevier) [88]. 
 
Hard Films for Devices 235 
reported [78–83]. Computational studies based on nanoindentation with molecular 
dynamics simulation and modeling for fracture analysis have been done [84–86]. 
Finite Element Modelling of cantilever N/MEMS resonators was done as shown in 
Fig. 5 indicating the stress distributions [87, 88].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
236 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
4. Conclusions 
Nanocrystalline phases of technologically important materials like SiC, Si3N4, 
CNx, TiC, TiN and TiB2 deposited by means of magnetron sputtering for N/MEMS 
based devices like piezoelectric sensors. Nanoindentation studies show the effect of 
impulse and the effect of microstructural features on the nanomechanical properties. 
FEM modelling was done to analyze the stress distribution on cantilever structures. 
All these studies are beneficial for the N/MEMS based devices. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Dr. S.K. Mishra, CSIR-National Metallurgical 
Laboratory, for experimental facilities. 
Reference 
[1] Yu, Xiaomo. Maalla, Allam and Moradi, Zohre. 2022. Electroelastic high-order computational 
continuum strategy for critical voltage and frequency of piezoelectric NEMS via modified 
multi-physical couple stress theory. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 165: 108373. 
[2] Yadav, Shubham. Tripathy, Soumya and Sarkar, Deblina. 2022. NEMS sensors based on novel 
nanomaterials. Advanced MEMS/NEMS Fabrication and Sensors, 133–185. Springer. 
[3] Pu, Dong and Hu, Huan. 2021. Tip-based nanofabrication for NEMS devices. Advanced MEMS/ 
NEMS Fabrication and Sensors (2021): 1–18. 
[4] Kim, Namjung. 2018. M/NEM devices and uncertainty quantification. Doctor of Philosophy 
in Theoretical and Applied Mechanics in the Graduate College of the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. 
[5] Fan, Xuge. Smith, Anderson D. Forsberg, Fredrik, Wagner, Stefan, Schröder, Stephan, Shirin, 
Sayedeh, Akbari et al. 2020. Manufacture and characterization of graphene membranes 
with suspended silicon proof masses for MEMS and NEMS applications. Microsystems & 
Nanoengineering 6: 17. 
[6] Chang, Yuhua. Wei, Jingxuan and Lee, Chengkuo. 2020. Metamaterials—from fundamentals and 
MEMS tuning mechanisms to applications. Nanophotonics 9: 3049–3070. 
[7] Zara, J.M., S. Yazdanfar, K.D. Rao, J.A. Izatt and S.W. Smith. 2003. Electro-static micromachine 
scanning mirror for optical coherence tomography. Opt. Lett. 28: 628–630. 
[8] Patterson, Pamela Rae, Hah, Dooyoung, Fujino, Makoto, Piyawattanametha, Wibool and C. Wu, 
Ming. 2004. Scanning mirrors: an overview. Optomechatronic Micro/Nano Components, Devices, 
and Systems 5604: 1–13. 
[9] Yalcinkaya, A.D., H. Urey, D. Brown, T. Montague and R. Sprague. 2006. Two-axis electromagnetic 
micro scanner for high resolution displays. Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 
15: 786–794. 
[10] Hao, Z., B. Wingfield, M. Whiteley, J. Brooks and J.A. Hammer. 2003. A design methodology 
for a bulk-micromachined two-dimensional electrostatic torsion micromirror. Journal of 
Microelectromechanical Systems 12: 692–701. 
[11] Bao, Minhang. 2005. Analysis and Design Principles of MEMS Devices. Elsevier. 
[12] Bégot, Sylvie, Getie, Muluken Z. Diallo, Alpha, Lanzetta, François, Barthès, Magali and 
Labachelerie, Michel de. 2021. A novel model and design of a mems Stirling engine. International 
Journal of Heat and Technology 39: 1037–1046. 
[13] Sadhukhan, Dhrubajyoti. Singh and Gajendra Prasad. 2020. Study of electrostatic actuated MEMS 
biaxial scanning micro-mirror with comb structure. AIP Conference Proceedings 2269: 030019. 
[14] Karmarkar, Makarand. Singh, Gurpreet. Shah, Sandeep, Mahajan and Roop L. Priya, Shashank. 
2009. Large piezoresistivity phenomenon in SiCN–(La, Sr) MnO3 composites. Applied Physics 
Letters 94: 072902.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hard Films for Devices 237 
[15] Park, Nae-Man, Kim, Sang Hyeob and Sung, Gun Yong. 2003. Band gap engineering of SiCN film 
grown by pulsed laser deposition. Journal of Applied Physics 94: 2725. 
[16] Lee, Jae-Hoon, Jeong, Jae-Hyun and Lee, Jung-Hee. 2012. Enhanced electrical characteristics of 
AlGaN-based SBD with in situ deposited silicon carbon nitride cap layer. IEEE Electron Device 
Letters 33: 492–494. 
[17] Ting, Shyh-Fann, Fang, Yean-Kuen, Hsieh, Wen-Tse, Tsair, Yong-Shiuan, Chang, Cheng-Nan, 
Lin, Chun-Sheng, Hsieh, Ming-Chun, Chiang, Hsin-Che and Ho, Jyh-Jier. 2002. Heteroepitaxial 
silicon-carbide nitride films with different carbon sources on silicon substrates prepared by 
rapid-thermal chemical-vapor deposition. Journal of Electronic Materials 31: 1341–1346. 
[18] Mishra, S.K. and A.S. Bhattacharyya. 2008. Effect of substrate temperature on the Adhesion 
properties of magnetron sputtered Nanocomposite Si–C–N thin films. Materials Letters 62: 98– 
402. 
[19] Bhattacharyya, A.S., S.K. Mishra, S. Mukherjee and G.C. Das. 2009. A comparative study of 
Si–C–N films on different substrates grown by RF magnetron sputtering. Journal of Alloys and 
Compounds 478: 474–478. 
[20] Bhattacharyya, A.S. and S.K. Mishra. 2010. Raman studies on nanocomposite silicon carbonitride 
thin film deposited by r.f. magnetron sputtering at different substrate temperatures. Journal of 
Raman Spectroscopy 41: 1234–1239. 
[21] Bhattacharyya, A.S., S.K. Mishra and S. Mukherjee. 2010. Correlation of structure and hardness 
of rf magnetron sputtered silicon carbonitride films. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A 
28: 505–509. 
[22] Bhattacharyya, A.S. 2021. Sliding indentation: Failure modes with the study of velocity and loading 
rate. Surface Topography: Metrology and Properties 9: 035052. 
[23] Bhattacharyya, A.S. and S.K. Mishra. 2010. Micro/nanomechanical behavior of magnetron 
sputtered Si–C–N coatings through nanoindentation and scratch tests. Journal of Micromechanics 
and Microengineering 21: 015011. 
[24] Bhattacharyya, A.S., G.C. Das, S. Mukherjee and S.K. Mishra. 2009. Effect of radio frequency and 
direct current modes of deposition on protective metallurgical hard silicon carbon nitride coatings 
by magnetron sputtering. Vacuum 83: 1464–1469. 
[25] Bhattacharyya, A.S., S.K. Mishra, G.C. Das and S. Mukherjee. 2009. SiCN:Hot properties. Eur. 
Coat. J. 3: 108–114. 
[26] Yang, Jie. 2013. A harsh environment wireless pressure sensing solution utilizing high temperature 
electronics. Sensors 13: 2719–2734. 
[27] Riedel, Ralf, Kleebe, Hans-Joachim, Schönfelder, Herbert and Aldinger, Fritz. 1995. A covalent 
micro/nano composite resistant to high temperature oxidation. Nature 374: 526–528. 
[28] Jiang, Minming, Xu, Ke, Liao, Ningbo and Zheng, Beirong. 2022. Effect of sputtering power 
on piezoresistivity and interfacial strength of SiCN thin films prepared by magnetic sputtering. 
Ceramics International 48: 2112–2117. 
[29] Jõgiaas, Taivo, Tarre, Aivar, Mändar, Hugo, Kozlova, Jekaterina and Tamm, Aile. 2021. 
Nanoindentation of chromium oxide possessing superior hardness among atomic-layer-deposited 
oxides. Nanomaterials 12: 82. 
[30] Minming Jiang, Ke Xu, Ningbo Liao and Beirong Zheng. 2022. Effect of sputtering power on 
piezoresistivity and interfacial strength of SiCN thin films prepared by magnetic sputtering. 
Ceramics International 48: 2112–17. 
[31] Tanaka, Ippei. Matuoka, Shinichiro and Harada, Yasunori. 2022. Mechanical properties of 
amorphous SiCN films deposited by ion-beam-assisted deposition. Diamond and Related Materials 
121: 108732. 
[32] Jung, Chanwon, Song, Seokhwi, Park, Hyunwoo, Kim, Youngjoon, Lee, Eun Jong, Lee, Sung 
Gwon and Jeon, Hyeongtag. 2021. Characteristics of carbon-containing low-k dielectric SiCN 
thin films deposited via remote plasma atomic layer deposition. Journal of Vacuum Science & 
Technology A 39: 042404. 
[33] Ermakova, E. and M. Kosinova. 2022. Organosilicon compounds as single-source precursors for 
SiCN films production. Journal of Organometallic Chemistry 958: 122183. 
[34] Liu, Xingmin, Li, Minghang, Liu, Heqiang, Duan, Wenyan, Fasel, Claudia, Chen, Yongchao, Qu, 
Fangmu, Xie, Wenjie et al. 2022. Nanocellulose-polysilazane single-source-precursor derived  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
238 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
defect-rich carbon nanofibers/SiCN nanocomposites with excellent electromagnetic absorption 
performance. Carbon 188: 349–359. 
[35] Mujib, Shakir Bin and Singh, Gurpreet. 2021. Polymer derived SiOC and SiCN ceramics for 
electrochemical energy storage: A perspective. International Journal of Ceramic Engineering & 
Science 4: 4–9. 
[36] Kumar, Dayanand, Aluguri, Rakesh, Chand, Umesh and Tseng, Tseung-Yuen. 2018. Conductive 
bridge random access memory characteristics of SiCN based transparent device due to indium 
diffusion. Nanotechnology 29: 125202. 
[37] Singh, Narendra, Singh, Kirandeep and Kaur, Davinder. 2017. Bipolar resistive switching 
characteristics of silicon carbide nitride (SiCN)-based devices for nonvolatile memory applications. 
Ceramics International 43: 8970–74. 
[38] Singh, Narendra and Kaur, Davinder. 2018. Origin of tri-state resistive switching characteristics in 
SiCN thin films for high-temperature ReRAM applications. Applied Physics Letters 113: 162103. 
[39] Choi, Yeo-Jin, Lee, Jae-Hoon, Choi, Jin-Seok, An, Sung-Jin, Hwang, Young-Min, Roh, Jae-Seung 
and Im, Ki-Sik. 2021. Improved noise and device performances of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs with in situ 
silicon carbon nitride (SiCN) cap layer. Crystals 11: 489. 
[40] Lee, Jae-Hoon, Im, Ki-Sik and Lee, Jung-Hee. 2021. Effect of in-situ silicon carbon nitride (SiCN) 
cap layer on performances of AlGaN/GaN MISHFETs. IEEE Journal of the Electron Devices 
Society 9: 728–734. 
[41] Qiang Li, Cheng Chen, Mingge Wang, Yaohui Lv, Yulu Mao, Manzhang Xu, Yingnan Wang, 
Xuewen Wang, Zhiyong Zhang, Shouguo Wang, Wu Zhao and Johan Stiens. 2021. Study on 
photoelectricity properties of SiCN thin films prepared by magnetron sputtering, J. of Mater Res. 
and Technol. 15: 460–46. 
[42] Qiang Li, Cheng Chen, Manzhang Xu, Yingnan Wang, Xuewen Wang, Zhiyong Zhang, Wu 
Zhao and Johan Stiens. 2021. Blue-violet emission of silicon carbonitride thin films prepared by 
sputtering and annealing treatment. Applied Surface Science 546: 149121. 
[43] Ivashchenko, V.I., O.K. Porada, A.O. Kozak, V.S. Manzhara, O.K. Sinelnichenko, L.A. Ivashchenko 
and R.V. Shevchenko. 2022. An effect of hydrogenation on the photoemission of amorphous SiCN 
films. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 47(11): 7263–73. 
[44] Khan, A.N., K. Jena, G. Chatterjee et al. 2022. An approach towards low cost III-Nitride 
GaN/InGaN solar cell: the use of Si/SiCN substrate. Silicon 14: 2107–14. 
[45] Xavier, F.B., C. Patrick and S. Ewald. 2021. Investigation of low stress and low temperature SiN 
and SiCN PVD films for advanced packaging applications. IEEE 71st Electronic Components and 
Technology Conference (ECTC) 2111–17. 
[46] Iacovo, S. et al. 2021. Characterization of bonding activation sequences to enable ultra-low 
Cu/SiCN wafer level hybrid bonding. 2021 IEEE 71st Electronic Components and Technology 
Conference (ECTC) 2097–104. 
[47] Kim, S.-W. et al. 2020. Novel Cu/SiCN surface topography control for 1 μm pitch hybrid wafer￾to-wafer bonding. 2020 IEEE 70th Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) 
216–22. 
[48] Imbert, G., M. Neffati, C. Moutin, S. Chhun, D. Galpin, O. Kermarrec, E. Sabouret and D. Pinceau. 
2012. Impact of Ultra Low K materials on flip chip copper pillar packaging. Minapad. 
[49] Shan Wang, Hongyu Gong, Yujun Zhang and M. Zeeshan Ashfaq. 2021. Microwave absorption 
properties of polymer-derived SiCN(CNTs) composite ceramics. Ceramics International 
47(1): 1294–302. 
[50] Xiao Lin, Hongyu Gong, Yujun Zhang, Lu Zhang, Ma Li, Shan Wang and Saleem Adil. 2021. 
Targeted design and analysis of microwave absorbing properties in iron-doped SiCN/Si3N4 
composite ceramics. Ceramics International 47(4): 4521–4530. 
[51] Xue Guo, Feifei Xiao, Jiao Li, Hua Zhang, Qiangqiang Hu, Guochang Li and Haibin Sun. 2021. 
Fe-doped SiCN composite fibers for electromagnetic waves absorption. Ceramics International 
47(1): 1184–1190, 
[52] Liu, X., Z. Tang, J. Xue et al. 2021. Enhanced microwave absorption properties of polymer-derived 
SiC/SiCN composite ceramics modified by TiC. J Mater Sci: Mater Electron. 32: 25895–907.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hard Films for Devices 239 
[53] Xingmin Liu, Hailong Xu, Guoqiang Liu, Wenyan Duan, Yi Zhang, Xiaomeng Fan and Ralf Riedel. 
2021. Electromagnetic shielding performance of SiC/graphitic carbon-SiCN porous ceramic 
nanocomposites derived from catalyst assisted single-source-precursors. Journal of the European 
Ceramic Society 41(9): 4806–14. 
[54] Mahmoudi, Mohammadreza, Sungjin Kim, Arif M. Arifuzzaman, Tomonori Saito, Corson L. 
Cramer and Majid Minary‐Jolandan. 2022. Processing and 3D printing of SiCN polymer‐derived 
ceramics. International Journal of Applied Ceramic Technology 19(2): 939–948. 
[55] Hagelüken, Lorenz, Sasikumar, Pradeep, Lee, Ho-Yun, Stadio, David Di, Chandorkar, 
Yashoda, Rottmar, Markus et al. 2022. Multiscale 2D/3D microshaping and property tuning of 
polymer-derived SiCN ceramics. Journal of the European Ceramic Society 42(5): 1963–1970. 
[56] Pan, Zhenxue, Wang, Dan, Guo, Xiang, Li, Yongming, Zhang, Zongbo and Xu, Caihong. 2022. 
High strength and microwave-absorbing polymer-derived SiCN honeycomb ceramic prepared by 
3D printing. Journal of the European Ceramic Society 42(4): 1322–31. 
[57] Silva, Bernardo Araldi, Luiz Fernando Belchior Ribeiro, Sergio Yesid Gómez González, Dachamir 
Hotza, Regina de Fátima Peralta Muniz Moreira and Agenor De Noni Junior. 2021. SiOC and 
SiCN-based ceramic supports for catalysts and photocatalysts. Microporous and Mesoporous 
Materials 327: 111435. 
[58] Oliver, W.C. and G.M. Pharr. 1992. An improved technique for determining hardness and elastic 
modulus using load and displacement sensing indentation experiments. Journal of Materials 
Research 7: 1564–83. 
[59] Oliver, W.C. 2004. Measurement of hardness and elastic modulus by instrumented indentation: 
Advances in understanding and refinements to methodology. Journal of Materials Research 19: 3. 
[60] He, L.H. and M.V. Swain. 2009. Nanoindentation creep behavior of human enamel. Journal of 
Biomedical Materials Research A 91(2): 352–59. 
[61] Oyen, M.L. 2005. Spherical indentation creep following ramp loading. Journal of Materials 
Research 20(8): 2094–2100. 
[62] Oyen, M.L. and C.C. Ko. 2007. Examination of local variations in viscous, elastic, and plastic 
indentation responses in healing bone. Journal of Materials Science Materials in Medicine 
18(4): 623–628. 
[63] Bhattacharyya, A., S. Kumar, P. Rajak, N. Kumar, R. Sharma, A. Acharya, G. V. Ranjan. 2016. 
Analyzing time on sample during nanoindentation. Material Science Research India 13(2): 74–79. 
[64] Wu, Ziheng, Baker, Tyler A. Ovaert, Timothy C. Niebur and L. Glen. 2011. The effect of holding 
time on nanoindentation measurements of creep in bone. J. Biomech. 7; 44(6): 1066–1072. 
[65] Tamin, Mohd Nasir. 2011. Damage and fracture of composite materials and structures. Advanced 
Structured Materials 17, Springer. 
[66] Li, Xiaodong, Bhushan, Bharat, Takashima, Kazuki, Baek, Chang-Wook and Kim, Yong-Kweon. 
2003. Mechanical characterization of micro/nanoscale structures for MEMS/NEMS applications 
using nanoindentation techniques. Ultramicroscopy 97(1–4): 481–494. 
[67] Li, Xiaodong and Bhushan, Bharat. 2003. Fatigue studies of nanoscale structures for 
MEMS/NEMS applications using nanoindentation techniques. Surface and Coatings Technology 
163–164: 521–526. 
[68] Hyukjae Lee, Ronald A. Coutu Jr, Shankar Mall and Paul E. Kladitis. 2005. Nanoindentation 
technique for characterizing cantilever beam style RF microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) 
switches. J. Micromech. Microeng. 15: 1230. 
[69] Broue, Adrien, Fourcade, Thibaut, Dhennin, Jérémie, Courtade, Frédéric, Charvet, Pierre–Louis, 
Pons,Patrick, Lafonta, Xavier andPlana, Robert. 2010.Validation of bending tests by nanoindentation 
for micro-contact analysis of MEMS switches. J. Micromech. Microeng. 20: 085025. 
[70] Jackson, Nathan. Olszewski, Oskar Z. O’Murchu, Cian and Mathewson, Alan. 2017. 
Shock-induced aluminum nitride based MEMS energy harvester to power a leadless pacemaker. 
Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 264: 212–218. 
[71] Kimberley, J., I. Chasiotis and J. Lambros. 2008. Failure of microelectromechanical systems 
subjected to impulse loads. International Journal of Solids and Structures 45(2): 497–512. 
[72] Tamin, M.N. 2012. Damage and Fracture of Composite Materials and Structures. Springer Series 
Advanced Structured Materials Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
240 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[73] Burghard, Z. 2004. Behaviour of Glasses and Polymer-Derived Amorphous Ceramics Under 
Contact Stress. PhD-Thesis, Max-Planck Institute for Metals Research & University of Stuttgart 
Germany. 
[74] Mishra, S.K. and A.S. Bhattacharyya. 2013. Silicon-based nanomaterials. Mishra, S.K. and A.S. 
Bhattacharyya (eds.). Springer Series in Materials Science, Vol. 187, Book Chapter 10. 
[75] Bhattacharyya, A.S. and S.K. Mishra. 2011. Micro/nanomechanical behavior of magnetron 
sputtered Si–C–N coatings through nanoindentation and scratch tests. Journal of Micromechanics 
and Microengineering 21: 015011. 
[76] Cuadrado, N., J. Seuba, D. Casellas, M. Anglada and E. Jiménez-Piqué. 2015. Geometry of 
nanoindentation cube-corner cracks observed by FIB tomography: Implication for fracture 
resistance estimation. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 35(10): 2949–55. 
[77] Chen, Zhangwei, Bhakhri, Vineet, Giuliani, Finn and Atkinson, Alan. 2013. Nanoindentation of 
porous bulk and thin films of La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ. Acta Mat. 61(15): 5720–5734. 
[78] Moradkhani, Alireza, Baharvandi, Hamidreza, Tajdari, Mehdi, Latifi, Hamidreza and Martikainen, 
Jukka. 2013. Determination of fracture toughness using the area of micro-crack tracks left in brittle 
materials by Vickers indentation test. Journal of Advanced Ceramics 2(1): 87–102. 
[79] Bhattacharyya, A.S. and R.P. Kumar. 2017. Deviation in nano-mechanical properties of ceramic 
nanocomposite thin films. Mat. Sci. Res. India 14(1): 1–4. 
[80] Palmero, Paola. 2015. Structural ceramic nanocomposites: a review of properties and powders’ 
synthesis methods. Nanomaterials 5: 656–696. 
[81] Mishra, S.K., A.S. Bhattacharyya, P. Mahato and L.C. Pathak. 2012. Multicomponent TiSiBC 
superhard and tough composite coatings by magnetron sputtering. Surface Coat. Technol. 
207: 19–23. 
[82] Sha, Z.D., Q. Wan, Q.X.S.S. Pei, Z.S. Quek, Y. Liu et al. 2014. On the failure load and mechanism 
of polycrystalline graphene by nanoindentation. Scientific Reports 4: 7437. 
[83] Sun, J. Ma, A. Jiang, J. Han, J. Han, Ying. 2016. Orientation-dependent mechanical behavior and 
phase transformation of mono-crystalline silicon. J. Appl. Phys. 119: 095904. 
[84] Bhattacharyya, A.S., Kumar, Ramagiri. Priyadarshi, Shubham, Sonu, Shivam, Swetabh and S. 
Anshu. 2018. Nanoindentation stress-strain for fracture analysis and computational modeling for 
hardness and modulus. J. Mat. Engg. & Perform. 27: 2719–26. 
[85] Du, Xiancheng, Hongwei, Zhao, Hongwei and Zhang, Lin. 2015. Molecular dynamics 
investigations of mechanical behaviours in monocrystalline silicon due to nanoindentation at 
cryogenic temperatures and room temperature. Scientific Reports 5: 16275. 
[86] Bhattacharyya, A.S. 2015. Computational studies of the nanoindentation load depth curves. J. Sc. 
& Ind. Res. 74(4): 223–224. 
[87] Bhushan, Bharat and Agarwal, B. Gaurav. 2002. Stress analysis of nanostructures using a finite 
element method. Nanotechnology 13: 515–23. 
[88] Dash, Ritambhara and A.S. Bhattacharyya. 2022. Nanoindentation and stress analysis of Si-based 
N/MEMS. Materials Today: Proceedings. Article in Press. 15


Nanocrystalline Diamond
Films as Solid Lubricant 
Coatings for Extreme
Tribological Environments

 Vikash Kumar,1
 Rishi Sharma1,* and Manish Roy2 
1. Introduction 
Solid lubricants are those materials that are used to lubricate mainly in dry 
circumstances. Its main role is similar to that of oils and greases, which is used to 
create a continuous and adherent lubricant film on the tribological pair surfaces for 
minimising friction and wear [1]. These coatings are typically employed in situations 
where liquid lubricants cannot be used or do not offer expected lubrication, such 
as in high or cryogenic temperatures, high vacuum, ultrahigh-radiation, reactive 
environments and in extreme contact pressure conditions [2]. Different types of 
solid lubricants, including graphite, have been extensively used since the middle 
of the 20th century [3]. From 1950 onwards, development in aeronautics industries 
emphasised the research and development of advanced solid lubricants. They can be 
classed based on their crystalline structure, features, properties, or functions, among 
other things. Different types of solid lubricant coating are shown in Fig. 1 [1]. 
The research and development of carbon-based solid lubricant films, such as 
diamond-like carbon (DLC), has received a lot of interest in the last two decades. 
These films have a crystalline structure identical to diamond, except they are 
amorphous. Commonly, a-C has a hardness between 12 to 25 GPa and sp3
 bonds up 
1 Department of Physics Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Ranchi-835215, India. 2 Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad-500058, India. 
* Corresponding author: rsharma@bitmesra.ac.in; rishisharmabit@hotmail.com Fig. 1.: Types of solid lubricants [1].
Fig. 2.: Properties of the solid lubricants [1].
Diamond is the hardest known natural material, which provides a wide range of
possibilities for protecting wear and friction even in the most challenging circumstances.
Diamond generally has a coefficient of friction against many engineering materials of less
than 0.1 [9]. It may exhibit oxidative wear at high temperatures, especially when sliding
against ferrous-based surfaces. Diamonds have the highest heat conductivity of all known
materials. At room temperature, a highly-pure, single-crystal CVD diamond has a thermal 
conductivity of more than 2000 Wm–1K–1, decreasing to around 700 Wm–1K–1 at 773K [10].
Its optical characteristics, including transmission from ultraviolet to microwave wavelengths,
coupled with its highest thermal conductivity and low thermal expansion coefficient, makes it
an excellent window material [11]. The chemical inertness of diamond guarantees extreme
resistance to corrosion in acidic medium or other forms of chemical attack [12]. Natural
diamond, however, cannot be employed in many tribological applications due to its high cost.
Synthetic diamond films have been grown using CVD techniques for tribological applications
during the past three decades. Nano-crystalline diamond (NCD) film, which can be directly
Fig. 1.: Types of solid lubricants [1].
Fig. 2.: Properties of the solid lubricants [1].
Diamond is the hardest known natural material, which provides a wide range of
possibilities for protecting wear and friction even in the most challenging circumstances.
Diamond generally has a coefficient of friction against many engineering materials of less
than 0.1 [9]. It may exhibit oxidative wear at high temperatures, especially when sliding
against ferrous-based surfaces. Diamonds have the highest heat conductivity of all known
materials. At room temperature, a highly-pure, single-crystal CVD diamond has a thermal 
conductivity of more than 2000 Wm–1K–1, decreasing to around 700 Wm–1K–1 at 773K [10].
Its optical characteristics, including transmission from ultraviolet to microwave wavelengths,
coupled with its highest thermal conductivity and low thermal expansion coefficient, makes it
an excellent window material [11]. The chemical inertness of diamond guarantees extreme
resistance to corrosion in acidic medium or other forms of chemical attack [12]. Natural
diamond, however, cannot be employed in many tribological applications due to its high cost.
Synthetic diamond films have been grown using CVD techniques for tribological applications
during the past three decades. Nano-crystalline diamond (NCD) film, which can be directly
Fig. 1. Types of solid lubricants [1]. 
 
Fig. 2. Properties of the solid lubricants [1]. 
 
242 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
to 50%, whereas the hardness of ta-C lies in the range of 30 to 70 GPa and has 50 to 
85% sp3
 bonds [4]. DLC coatings, which are generally characterized by large residual 
stresses and limited toughness, are favoured because of their superior wear resistance. 
These coatings would be susceptible to cracking failure at low loads, regardless of 
their enhanced hardness. Another widely used solid lubricant is MoS2 (molybdenum 
disulphide), alloys of MoS2 [5] or other transition metal dichalcogenide [6, 7], which 
have been used in many applications such as aerospace and automobile industries [8]. 
Its thermal stability in non-oxidizing conditions is adequate up to 1373 K. However, 
oxidation can restrict the temperature limit of these films in the air to a range of 
623 K to 673 K. Adsorbed water vapours and oxidizing conditions can also cause a 
small but significant increase in friction and wear [1]. 
Since all the solid lubricants discussed above have certain limitations, that is 
why the development of new and advanced solid lubricant coating material is one of 
the challenging tasks for researchers till date. Solid lubricant should have some of the 
properties as shown in Fig. 2 [1]. Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 243 
Diamond is the hardest known natural material, which provides a wide range 
of possibilities for protecting wear and friction even in the most challenging 
circumstances. Diamond generally has a coefficient of friction against many 
engineering materials of less than 0.1 [9]. It may exhibit oxidative wear at high 
temperatures, especially when sliding against ferrous-based surfaces. Diamonds 
have the highest heat conductivity of all known materials. At room temperature, 
a highly-pure, single-crystal CVD diamond has a thermal conductivity of more 
than 2000 Wm–1K–1, decreasing to around 700 Wm–1K–1 at 773 K [10]. Its optical 
characteristics, including transmission from ultraviolet to microwave wavelengths, 
coupled with its highest thermal conductivity and low thermal expansion coefficient, 
makes it an excellent window material [11]. The chemical inertness of diamond 
guarantees extreme resistance to corrosion in acidic medium or other forms of 
chemical attack [12]. Natural diamond, however, cannot be employed in many 
tribological applications due to its high cost. Synthetic diamond films have been 
grown using CVD techniques for tribological applications during the past three 
decades. Nano-crystalline diamond (NCD) film, which can be directly grown on 
a substrate, and composed of nanosized grains, is desirable in application fields of 
tribology. Because of the small crystal size, tunable thermal conductivity, chemical 
inertness, high hardness, smooth surfaces, flexibility to deposit on various substrates, 
NCD can function extremely well in tribological applications [2, 13]. Because of 
the superlative tribological and mechanical properties, these films may be used to 
coat the majority of mechanical tools and components to enhance their durability 
and performance; however, the development of these coatings is still at the stage of 
infancy [8]. Due to the atomic level surface smoothness and tunable properties of the 
NCD films, superlubricity may be achieved with these films. 
The present chapter concerns the self-lubricating characteristics of NCD films 
keeping in mind its application in a demanding environment. An attempt will be 
made to outline a brief review of development in NCD films for such application in 
the recent past. After the introduction, this chapter discusses advances in deposition 
techniques of NCD films and pre-treatment of substrate materials to increase the 
density of nucleation of the diamond. This was followed by characterisation 
techniques, mechanical properties and tribological performances of these films. 
Finally, the chapter is concluded along with a brief write up on the direction of future 
research. 
2. Advances in Deposition Techniques for NCD Coatings 
Unlike various carbon films [14] or carbon-containing other self-lubricating films 
[15], chemical vapour deposition (CVD) is the most popularly used approach for 
the deposition of nanocrystalline diamond films [16]. This process involves the 
gas phase decomposition of a gas mixture containing hydrocarbon, argon and 
hydrogen. Several methods, including microwave plasma, radio frequency plasma, 
and hot filament, are available for activating the gas combination [17–21]. Since 
the gas-phase chemistry is so identical, the appearance and characteristics of the 
nanocrystalline diamond films synthesized by each process are almost identical. 244 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications


Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of Microwave PECVD and Hot-filament CVD techniques.


S. Deposition Advantages Disadvantages 
No. technique 
1 MPECVD 1. High-quality diamond film 1. Sophisticated system design and 
deposition. operation. 
2. No use of electrodes or filament in 
the system. 
3. Tuneable control over the chemical 
composition of deposited NCD 
film. 
4. Faster deposition rate as compared 
to other CVD techniques. 
2. High power consumption. 
3. Substrate size limitation. 
4. Difficulty in handling of the 
microwave plasma device and 
relatively higher cost. 
5. Not suitable for many applications, 
including large area substrate coating. 
2 HFCVD 1. Simple system design and easy 
handling. 
2. Low cost of the equipment. 
3. Suitable for diamond deposition on 
three-dimensional substrates. 
4. The thick dense coating on large 
surfaces area with a dense layer. 
5. Coatings can be applied to a variety 
of substrates, such as metals and 
alloys. 
6. Temperature uniformity throughout 
the surface of the substrate. 
1. Low chemical stability of the 
filaments. 
2. High substrate temperature is required 
for the deposition of NCD film. 
3. Optimization of process parameters 
such as gas flow, filament 
temperature and pressure inside the 
chamber is a tedious task 
4. Contamination of the growing 
diamond film by the filaments. 
Hot Filament CVD (HFCVD) and Microwave PECVD (MPECVD) are the 
commonly used techniques for the deposition of NCD films. In addition to these 
techniques, direct current (dc) discharge [22], magnetron sputtering [23] and radio 
frequency (rf) plasma [20,24,25] have been utilized for NCD film deposition. 
Diamond films can be deposited below 1 torr using ECR plasma [26–28]. Bozeman 
et al. in 1995 reported diamond deposition at 4 Torr using planar inductively coupled 
plasma [29]. Okada and co-workers also reported the deposition of NCD films at 
low-pressure CH4/CO/H2, followed by Teii and Yoshida using the identical gas 
composition [30, 31]. A detailed description of MPECVD and HFCVD techniques 
is given below. The advantages and disadvantages of these two techniques are also 
listed in Table 1. 
2.1 Microwave Plasma-Enhanced CVD (MPECVD) 
A microwave plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (microwave PECVD) 
is a commonly employed technique for the deposition of diamond films. In this 
technique, the operating pressure is kept between 20–50 Torr [32]. A CH4/H2 mixture 
(with 5% CH4) leads to polycrystalline diamond films of micrometer size. NCD film 
can be synthesized by increasing CH4 content up to 10% while keeping the other 
parameters constant [19, 33]. NCD can also be grown by substituting hydrogen with 
a noble gas while keeping the CH4 content the same. Gruen and co-workers showed 
the synthesis of NCD films in a CH4/Ar or C60/Ar microwave discharge without Fig. 3.: (a) Schematic diagram of a microwave PECVD system and (b) MPECVD system
available at Plasma Lab, Department of Physics, Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, 
Ranchi, India.
The MPECVD system has several advantages, including the avoidance of diamond
film contamination due to hot wire evaporation with a variety of reactive gases. In this
method, no electrode or filament is used in the reactor. This ensures that diamonds grow in a
clean environment. Because of the prominent input power and the substrate kept in the
plasma, the diamond deposition rate is also relatively faster. Thin films with the necessary
microstructure and mechanical properties can be consistently produced by controlling
operating parameters such as gas flow rate and its constituents, chamber pressure, substrate
temperature, and microwave power. The microwave power can be changed continuously and 
smoothly, allowing the deposition temperature to change steadily. Furthermore, a large-area 
and sustained plasma sphere may be produced by adjusting the MPECVD reaction chamber
geometry. MPECVD systems are usually expensive, and the handling and operation of these
systems are complicated. The research group at Plasma Lab in BIT Mesra, Ranchi, has
indigenously developed a modest, safe and sparing microwave deposition instrument for
developing good quality ultra nanocrystalline diamond (UNCD) films. This microwave
PECVD system works at 2.45 GHz, 3 kW, which is powered by a magnetron operating at 50
Hz. The schematic diagram and photograph of the MPECVD system are shown in Figures
3(a) and 3(b). The substrate holder is equipped with an additional heating system that allows
us to regulate the temperature of the substrate. The height of the sample holder can be shifted
to fit the plasma ball location, which is determined by the microwave power and chamber
pressure [37].
2.2 The hot-filament chemical vapour deposition
The microwave PECVD, discussed above, is a commonly used technique for the deposition
of diamond films; however, substrate size limitation, difficulty in handling the microwave
plasma device and relatively higher cost makes it unsuitable for many applications, including
large-area substrate coating. In comparison to plasma-enhanced CVD, the hot-filament CVD
method is mainly capable of deposition of diamond films over the substrate of various shapes
Fig. 3.

(a) Schematic diagram of a microwave PECVD system and (b) MPECVD system available at 
Plasma Lab, Department of Physics, Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Ranchi, India. 
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 245 
hydrogen [34, 35]. The deposition of diamond films with micrometre-sized crystals 
was reported by Philip et al. under conventional deposition conditions [36]. 
The MPECVD system has several advantages, including the avoidance of 
diamond film contamination due to hot wire evaporation with a variety of reactive 
gases. In this method, no electrode or filament is used in the reactor. This ensures 
that diamonds grow in a clean environment. Because of the prominent input power 
and the substrate kept in the plasma, the diamond deposition rate is also relatively 
faster. Thin films with the necessary microstructure and mechanical properties can 
be consistently produced by controlling operating parameters such as gas flow 
rate and its constituents, chamber pressure, substrate temperature, and microwave 
power. The microwave power can be changed continuously and smoothly, allowing 
the deposition temperature to change steadily. Furthermore, a large-area and 
sustained plasma sphere may be produced by adjusting the MPECVD reaction 
chamber geometry. MPECVD systems are usually expensive, and the handling and 
operation of these systems are complicated. The research group at Plasma Lab in BIT 
Mesra, Ranchi, has indigenously developed a modest, safe and sparing microwave 
deposition instrument for developing good quality ultra nanocrystalline diamond 
(UNCD) films. This microwave PECVD system works at 2.45 GHz, 3 kW, which is 
powered by a magnetron operating at 50 Hz. The schematic diagram and photograph 
of the MPECVD system are shown in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b). The substrate holder is 
equipped with an additional heating system that allows us to regulate the temperature 
of the substrate. The height of the sample holder can be shifted to fit the plasma ball 
location, which is determined by the microwave power and chamber pressure [37]. 
2.2 The Hot-Filament Chemical Vapour Deposition 
The microwave PECVD, discussed above, is a commonly used technique for the 
deposition of diamond films; however, substrate size limitation, difficulty in 246 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
handling the microwave plasma device and relatively higher cost makes it unsuitable 
for many applications, including large-area substrate coating. In comparison to 
plasma-enhanced CVD, the hot-filament CVD method is mainly capable of 
deposition of diamond films over the substrate of various shapes and sizes. Since 
the first experimental demonstration of CVD diamond with heated filaments by 
Matsumoto et al. in the past 1980s, the hot-filament CVD method has been used for 
the deposition of polycrystalline diamond coatings at the industrial scale [38–40]. 
High film uniformity, low cost of the equipment, the probability of depositing dense 
layers on larger areas, uniformity of temperature over the substrate surface, coating 
on different types of substrates, including metals, make HFCVD the first choice 
for the deposition of NCD films. Hirose and Terasawa [41] claimed that diamond 
films may be deposited onto silicon substrates at faster growth rates (8–10 µm/h) by 
employing organic compounds with high methyl concentrations, such as acetylene, 
ethanol, methanol, acetone, tri-methylamine, etc., instead of methane (CH4). Chen 
et al. [42] reported that the accumulation of oxygen-rich gases such as CO, CO2, and 
H2O to CH4-H2 could influence the diamond’s growth rates and crystallization. 
The hot-filament chemical vapour deposition technology uses a hot coiled 
wire to break down the precursor reactants in the gas mixture and deposit a coating 
on the substrate surface, which is placed near the filament. For the deposition of 
nanocrystalline diamond films, the filament is resistively heated, the temperature 
between 1800–2300°C is maintained and a gas mixture composed of a hydrocarbon 
like CH4 or C2H2 in hydrogen or argon is decomposed at that temperature. The 
decomposition of hydrocarbon gases takes place via heterogeneous reactions at the 
heated substrate surface, which initiates the chemical vapour deposition process. 
Metals like tungsten (W), tantalum (Ta), rhenium (Re), etc., are being used for making 
the filament. The filament temperature is vital in deciding the type and quality of the 
diamond films. No diamond film got deposited for filament temperatures lower than 
1800°C, whereas higher filament temperatures, around 2300°C, result in a significant 
growth rate and superior polycrystalline diamond quality. The substrate holder of the 
hot-filament CVD system is heated up to 850°C, in general [9]. 
Figure 4(a) and 4(b) show the photograph and filament assembly of the 
HFCVD system available at Plasma Lab, Department of Physics, Birla Institute of 
Technology, Mesra, Ranchi, India. The system typically consists of a stainless-steel 
chamber. The substrate holder is placed over the top of the substrate heater at the 
centre of the chamber, and the filament assembly is held at 5–10 mm above the 
substrate holder. Spring-shaped filaments are frequently used because of the large 
surface area; however, these filaments possess a bending tendency over the time 
during film growth, resulting in unsteady growth conditions. The multiple parallel 
wire filament system, on the other hand, improves the homogeneity and overall area 
of the resultant films; however, they need a high-current power supply. and sizes. Since the first experimental demonstration of CVD diamond with heated filaments
by Matsumoto et al. in the past 1980s, the hot-filament CVD method has been used for the 
deposition of polycrystalline diamond coatings at the industrial scale [38–40]. High film 
uniformity, low cost of the equipment, the probability of depositing dense layers on larger
areas, uniformity of temperature over the substrate surface, coating on different types of
substrates, including metals, make HFCVD the first choice for the deposition of NCD films.
Hirose and Terasawa [41] claimed that diamond films may be deposited onto silicon
substrates at faster growth rates (8 -10 µm/h) by employing organic compounds with high
methyl concentrations, such as acetylene, ethanol, methanol, acetone, tri-methylamine, etc., 
instead of methane (CH4). Chen et al. [42] reported that the accumulation of oxygen-rich
gases such as CO, CO2, and H2O to CH4-H2 could influence the diamond’s growth rates and 
crystallization.
The hot-filament chemical vapour deposition technology uses a hot coiled wire to break
down the precursor reactants in the gas mixture and deposit a coating on the substrate surface,
which is placed near the filament. For the deposition of nanocrystalline diamond films, the
filament is resistively heated, the temperature between 1800–2300°C is maintained and a gas
mixture composed of a hydrocarbon like CH4 or C2H2 in hydrogen or argon is decomposed at
that temperature. The decomposition of hydrocarbon gases takes place via heterogeneous
reactions at the heated substrate surface, which initiates the chemical vapour deposition 
process. Metals like tungsten (W), tantalum (Ta), rhenium (Re) etc., are being used for 
making the filament. The filament temperature is vital in deciding the type and quality of the
diamond films. No diamond film got deposited for filament temperatures lower than 1800°C,
whereas higher filament temperatures, around 2300°C, result in a significant growth rate and
superior polycrystalline diamond quality. The substrate holder of the hot-filament CVD
system is heated up to 850 o
C, in general [9].
Fig. 4(a) and 4(b) show the photograph and filament assembly of the HFCVD system
available at Plasma Lab, Department of Physics, Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, 
Ranchi, India. The system typically consists of a stainless-steel chamber. The substrate holder
is placed over the top of the substrate heater at the centre of the chamber, and the filament
assembly is held at 5–10 mm above the substrate holder. Spring-shaped filaments are
frequently used because of the large surface area; however, these filaments possess a bending 
tendency over the time during film growth, resulting in unsteady growth conditions. The
multiple parallel wire filament system, on the other hand, improves the homogeneity and 
overall area of the resultant films; however, they need a high-current power supply.
Fig. 4. (a) HFCVD system at Plasma Lab, Department of Physics, Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, 
Ranchi, India (b) Photograph of the filament assembly. 
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 247 
3. Pre-Treatment Process to Enhance the Nucleation 
Density of NCD Films 
Pre-treatment process plays an important role in diamond nucleation. The properties 
of diamond such as orientation, transparency, grain size, adhesion and roughness that 
are necessary for targeted applications can be optimized by controlling the nucleation. 
Two separate phases of film deposition, nucleation and growth, are subject to various 
criteria. The initial nucleation step in the CVD deposition of NCD films significantly 
affects the properties of the deposited film. A detailed study on pre-treatment method 
and growth has been discussed by Lee et al. and Sharma et al. [43, 44]. Nowadays, 
various pre-treatment methods are being used to enhance nucleation; a few of them 
are discussed below. 
3.1 Mechanical Abrasion of the Substrate 
The diamond powder can be used to scratch the substrate surface to enhance the 
nucleation density [45]. Nowadays, scratching the substrates is being used popularly 
for diamond growth. While not as effective as diamond powder, scratching with 
silicon carbide, cubic boron nitride, copper, stainless steel, ZrB2, and Al2O3 also 
increases nucleation. According to some reports, using diamond grit to scratch 
substrates can increase the nucleation density by about three orders of magnitude 
compared to substrates that aren’t scratched. A compilation of various diamond 
powders used for scratching is made in Table 2. 
3.2 Bias-Enhanced Nucleation 
Surface free energies and lattice constants of the silicon and silicon carbide 
substrates are much distinct from that of diamond; hence, it is hard for the diamond 
to nucleate on these substrates. By using a negative substrate bias voltage in a 
microwave PECVD system, Yugo et al. were able to achieve a nucleation density 
of approximately 109
–1010 cm–2 on a mirror-polished silicon substrate [46]. Using 248 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Table 2. Diamond powders used for nucleation experiments [43]. 
ite and Diamond Nano-mixture, raw > 16% diamond phase (Cat. No. PL-GD-5g) 
ite and Diamond Nano-mixture, purified, > 16% diamond phase (Cat. No. PL-GDMOF-5g) 
diamonds, > 97% grade G nano-diamonds powder (Cat. No. PL-D-G-5g) 
1 Graph
2 Graph
3 Nano￾4 Nanopure, Aqueous suspension of 4% Nano-diamonds (Cat. No. PL-Nano) 
5 Nano-diamonds, > 97% grade G01 nano-diamonds powder (Cat. No. PL-D-G01-5g) 
6 NanoPure, Aqueous suspension of 4% Nano-diamonds (Cat. No. PL-Nanopure-G01- 50m) 
7 Nano-diamonds, Agglomerate free, positively charged and 10% aqueous suspension 
8 Sufipol BG and Nano-diamonds Super-Finish Polishing Paste 
this method, mirror-polished silicon has witnessed the maximum nucleation density, 
which has been measured at 1010–1011 cm–2. When a negative bias is applied to the 
substrate in the HFCVD system, Stubhan et al. demonstrated, diamond nucleation 
enhancement is also possible [47]. The highest nucleation density can reach up to 
109
–1010 cm–2 on mirror-polished silicon. 
3.3 Diamond Nucleation at a Low Gas Pressure 
Using either HFCVD or ECR plasma CVD without the use of surface scratching or a 
substrate bias, a high density of diamond nucleation (109
–1011 cm–2) has been attained 
on mirror-polished silicon surfaces at low pressures (0.1–1 Torr) [44]. On Titanium 
substrates, similar outcomes have also been obtained. This technique enables the 
development of diamond grains with a density > 1010 cm–2. 
3.4 Ion Implantation Enhanced Nucleation 
Ion implantation can also be used to produce diamonds with a high nucleation density 
using CVD techniques [48]. Silicon ions (Si+
) are implanted into a mirror-polished 
silicon wafer. Only the surface structure, not the composition of silicon, is altered 
by the implantation of Si+
. The diamond may easily nucleate and grow on a silicon 
wafer after treatment with Si+
 (25 keV) with an implantation dose of 2 × 1017 cm–2, 
and a continuous diamond layer can be produced. 
Sharma et al. [43] has investigated the impact of various pre-treatment 
procedures and specified plasma properties. Eight different diamond powders were 
selected for pre-treatment in order to examine the effects of pre-treatment techniques 
on the nucleation of nanocrystalline diamond. All types of used diamond powder 
have been shown in Table 2. SEM image of the diamond nucleation on silicon is 
shown in Fig. 5(a), and Fig. 5(b) shows the growth of the individual nuclei in 5 hours. 
A comparison of different pre-treatment methods is listed in Table 3. 3 Nano-diamonds, > 97 % grade G nano-diamonds powder (Cat. No. PL-D-G-5g)
4 Nanopure, Aqueous suspension of 4 % Nano-diamonds (Cat. No. PL-Nano)
5 Nano-diamonds, > 97 % grade G01 nano-diamonds powder (Cat. No. PL-D-G01-5g)
6 NanoPure, Aqueous suspension of 4 % Nano-diamonds (Cat. No. PL-Nanopure-G01-
50m)
7 Nano-diamonds, Agglomerate free, positively charged and 10 % aqueous suspension
8 Sufipol BG and Nano-diamonds Super-Finish Polishing Paste
Table: 3: Compilation of different pre-treatment methods
S. 
No.
Nucleation
techniques
Investigators Remark
1 Mechanical
abrasion of
substrate
Mitsuda et al.
[45]
Nucleation density is enhanced by
roughly three order of magnitude
compared with non-scratched silicon (up 
to 107 cm-2).
2 Bias-enhanced 
nucleation (BEN)
Yugo et al. and 
Stubhan et al.
[46,47]
Nucleation density of about 109 -1010
cm-2 on a mirror-polished silicon.
3 Nucleation at low
gas pressure
Lee, Lin, and Jiang
[44]
High nucleation density (109 – 1011 cm￾2
) has been achieved under low
pressures (0.1 – 1 Torr).
4 Ion implantation 
enhanced 
nucleation
Yang et al.
[48]
Diamond can easily nucleate and grow
on a silicon wafer after treating substrate
with Si+ (25 keV) and an implantation 
dose of 2 × 1017 cm–2.
Fig. 5.: (a) SEM image of diamond nucleation on silicon and (b) SEM image of growth of
nuclei after 5 hours [43].
4. Characterization of nanocrystalline diamond films
Commented [A4]: To be written like this?
Commented [A5]: same
Table 3. Compilation of different pre-treatment methods. 
ucleation techniques Investigators Remark 
echanical abrasion of Mitsuda et al. Nucleation density is enhanced by roughly 
ubstrate [45] three order of magnitude compared with non￾scratched silicon (up to 107
 cm–2). 
9 10 –2
S. No. N
1 M
s
2 Bias-enhanced nucleation 
(BEN) 
Yugo et al. and 
Stubhan et al. 
[46, 47] 
Nucleation density of about 10 –10 cm on 
a mirror-polished silicon. 
3 Nucleation at low gas 
pressure 
Lee, Lin and 
Jiang [44] 
High nucleation density (109
–1011 cm–2) has 
been achieved under low pressures 
(0.1–1 Torr). 
4 Ion implantation 
enhanced nucleation 
Yang et al. 
[48] 
Diamond can easily nucleate and grow on a 
silicon wafer after treating substrate with 
Si+
 (25 keV) and an implantation dose of 
2 × 1017 cm–2. 
Fig. 5. (a) SEM image of diamond nucleation on silicon and (b) SEM image of growth of nuclei after 
5 hours [43]. 
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 249 
4. Characterization of Nanocrystalline Diamond Films 
To study the various properties of nanocrystalline diamond films, different 
characterization techniques are used. A few important characterization techniques 
have been discussed below. 
4.1 Raman Spectroscopy 
Not long after C. V. Raman discovered the Raman Effect in 1928, Raman spectroscopy 
was utilized to characterize various carbon species. Also, it is one of the most reliable 
tools used to validate the growth of NCD films. Raman spectra of the NCD films 
deposited with the variation of microwave power are shown in Fig. 6. Raman spectra 
of the NCD films, which are predominated by the G peak and D peak, can contribute a 
view of sp3
 and sp2
 bonded carbon atom content at the grain boundaries by observing 
both G peak position and ratio of I(D) and I(G). In each spectrum, four broad peaks 
are identified. The peak at 1550 cm–1 (G peak) is caused by sp2
 bonded graphite, 
while the peak at 1345 cm–1 (D peak) is caused by graphite disorder. Peaks centred 
at 1140 cm–1 and 1470 cm–1 are common in NCD films and are related to the v1 and To study the various properties of nanocrystalline diamond films, different characterization
techniques are used. A few important characterization techniques have been discussed below.
4.1 Raman spectroscopy
Not long after C. V. Raman discovered the Raman Effect in 1928, Raman spectroscopy was
utilized to characterize various carbon species. Also, it is one of the most reliable tools used 
to validate the growth of NCD films. Raman spectra of the NCD films deposited with the
variation of microwave power are shown in Figure 6. Raman spectra of the NCD films,
which are predominated by the G peak and D peak, can contribute a view of sp3 and sp2
bonded carbon atom content at the grain boundaries by observing both G peak position and
ratio of I(D) and I(G). In each spectrum, four broad peaks are identified. The peak at 1550 
cm-1 (G peak) is caused by sp2 bonded graphite, while the peak at 1345 cm-1 (D peak) is
caused by graphite disorder. Peaks centred at 1140 cm-1 and 1470 cm-1 are common in NCD
films and are related to the v1 and v3 vibration modes of transpolyacetylene developed with
the diamond phase at the grain boundaries. Diamond is represented by a strong peak around
1332 cm-1 located on the right side of the D peak. The Raman spectra of NCD films are
significantly different from those of single-crystal diamonds. The diamond peak at 1332 cm-1
is much diminished, and the spectra are dominated by D and G peaks produced by sp2
bonded carbon located at the grain boundaries of the NCD films [43].
4.2 X-ray diffractometer (XRD)
XRD is a technique used in materials science to investigate crystallographic structure. This
technique works by irradiating a material with X-rays and then measuring the intensities and
scattering angles. An XRD scan of a few µm thick NCD film deposited on silicon substrate is 
shown in Figure 7 [21]. Constructive interference between the (111) lattice planes of the 
crystalline diamond are shown by the peak at scattering angle of 44o
. As a result, the only
crystalline phase present within these NCD films is polycrystalline diamond. The width of
diffraction peaks is further investigated to determine the average crystallite size. The width of
a diffraction peak in a perfect infinite crystal is solely limited by the X-ray diffractometer’s
resolution [49]. The peak broadening of XRD is mainly induced by finite crystallite size and 
hence used to find the crystal size of the investigated particles.
Fig. 6.: RAMAN spectra of NCD films [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]].
Fig. 7.: XRD pattern of the NCD films grown on silicon [Reprinted with permission from
Elsevier [21]].
4.3 Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
An AFM produces topographic images by scanning a tiny cantilever across a sample’s
surface. The cantilever’s pointed tip makes contact with the surface, bending it and altering
the quantity of laser light reflected into the photodiode. The response signal is then restored
by adjusting the height of the cantilever, resulting in the recorded cantilever height following 
the surface. The AFM studies of nanocrystalline diamond film by many authors clearly shows
that the topology of the sample varies significantly with the process parameters. AFM
micrograph of the NCD films is shown in Figure 8 [21]. The formation of nanograins,
elongated along one direction, separated by sharp grain boundaries, has clearly been observed
in the image.
Fig. 8.: AFM (Lateral force images) of the nanocrystalline diamond films [Reprinted with
permission from Elsevier [21]].
Fig. 6. RAMAN spectra of NCD films [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]]. 
 
Fig. 7. XRD pattern of the NCD films grown on silicon [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]]. 
250 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
v3 vibration modes of transpolyacetylene developed with the diamond phase at the 
grain boundaries. Diamond is represented by a strong peak around 1332 cm–1 located 
on the right side of the D peak. The Raman spectra of NCD films are significantly 
different from those of single-crystal diamonds. The diamond peak at 1332 cm–1 is 
much diminished, and the spectra are dominated by D and G peaks produced by sp2 
bonded carbon located at the grain boundaries of the NCD films [43]. 
4.2 X-ray Diffractometer (XRD) 
XRD is a technique used in materials science to investigate crystallographic structure. 
This technique works by irradiating a material with X-rays and then measuring the 
intensities and scattering angles. An XRD scan of a few µm thick NCD film deposited 
on silicon substrate is shown in Fig. 7 [21]. Constructive interference between the 
(111) lattice planes of the crystalline diamond are shown by the peak at scattering 
angle of 44o
. As a result, the only crystalline phase present within these NCD films Fig. 7.: XRD pattern of the NCD films grown on silicon [Reprinted with permission from
Elsevier [21]].
4.3 Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
An AFM produces topographic images by scanning a tiny cantilever across a sample’s
surface. The cantilever’s pointed tip makes contact with the surface, bending it and altering
the quantity of laser light reflected into the photodiode. The response signal is then restored
by adjusting the height of the cantilever, resulting in the recorded cantilever height following 
the surface. The AFM studies of nanocrystalline diamond film by many authors clearly shows
that the topology of the sample varies significantly with the process parameters. AFM
micrograph of the NCD films is shown in Figure 8 [21]. The formation of nanograins,
elongated along one direction, separated by sharp grain boundaries, has clearly been observed
in the image.
FigFig. 8. . 8.: AFM (Lateral for AFM (Lateral force images) of the nanocrystalline diamond films [Reprinted with permission ce images) of the nanocrystalline diamo
from Elsevier [21]]. 
nd films [Reprinted with
permission from Elsevier [21]].
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 251 
is polycrystalline diamond. The width of diffraction peaks is further investigated to 
determine the average crystallite size. The width of a diffraction peak in a perfect 
infinite crystal is solely limited by the X-ray diffractometer’s resolution [49]. The 
peak broadening of XRD is mainly induced by finite crystallite size and hence used 
to find the crystal size of the investigated particles. 
4.3 Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) 
An AFM produces topographic images by scanning a tiny cantilever across a sample’s 
surface. The cantilever’s pointed tip makes contact with the surface, bending it and 
altering the quantity of laser light reflected into the photodiode. The response signal 
is then restored by adjusting the height of the cantilever, resulting in the recorded 
cantilever height following the surface. The AFM studies of nanocrystalline diamond 
film by many authors clearly shows that the topology of the sample varies significantly 
with the process parameters. AFM micrograph of the NCD films is shown in Fig. 8 
[21]. The formation of nanograins, elongated along one direction, separated by sharp 
grain boundaries, has clearly been observed in the image. 
4.4 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM)/Scanning 
Electron Microscope (SEM) 
FESEM and SEM are the advanced techniques that are used to capture the 
microstructure images of different materials. It is used to study the micrographs 
and cross-sectional images of nanocrystalline diamond film to study the surface 
morphology and the thickness of NCD films by many research groups. The surface 
topography of the NCD films obtained by SEM is shown in Fig. 9 [21]. The fine 
grain structure of the NCD film is clearly visible in the morphology. 4.4 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM)/ Scanning Electron 
Microscope (SEM)
FESEM and SEM are the advanced techniques that are used to capture the microstructure
images of different materials. It is used to study the micrographs and cross-sectional images
of nanocrystalline diamond film to study the surface morphology and the thickness of NCD
films by many research groups. The surface topography of the NCD films obtained by SEM
is shown in Figure 9 [21]. The fine grain structure of the NCD film is clearly visible in the
morphology.
Fig. 9.: SEM image of an NCD film [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]].
4.5 X-ray induced photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
XPS is a powerful tool for detecting contaminants and analysing binding relationships. XPS 
is primarily used to explore the chemical bonding states, namely the sp2 and sp3 fractions,
present in the nanocrystalline diamond films. It is also used to track chemical changes in the
diamond films' near-surface region. The XPS spectra of the NCD are shown in Figure 10.
The C1s core level is concentrated on 284 eV [50].
Fig. 10: XPS spectra of an NCD film [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [50]].
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) Commented [A6]: is this the heading?
4.4 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM)/ Scanning Electron 
Microscope (SEM)
FESEM and SEM are the advanced techniques that are used to capture the microstructure
images of different materials. It is used to study the micrographs and cross-sectional images
of nanocrystalline diamond film to study the surface morphology and the thickness of NCD
films by many research groups. The surface topography of the NCD films obtained by SEM
is shown in Figure 9 [21]. The fine grain structure of the NCD film is clearly visible in the
morphology.
Fig. 9.: SEM image of an NCD film [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]].
4.5 X-ray induced photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
XPS is a powerful tool for detecting contaminants and analysing binding relationships. XPS 
is primarily used to explore the chemical bonding states, namely the sp2 and sp3 fractions,
present in the nanocrystalline diamond films. It is also used to track chemical changes in the
diamond films' near-surface region. The XPS spectra of the NCD are shown in Figure 10.
The C1s core level is concentrated on 284 eV [50].
Fig. 10: XPS spectra of an NCD film [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [50]].
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) Commented [A6]: is this the heading?
 
 
252 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 9. SEM image of an NCD film [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]]. 
Fig. 10. XPS spectra of an NCD film [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [50]]. 
4.5 X-ray Induced Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) 
XPS is a powerful tool for detecting contaminants and analysing binding relationships. 
XPS is primarily used to explore the chemical bonding states, namely the sp2
 and 
sp3
 fractions, present in the nanocrystalline diamond films. It is also used to track 
chemical changes in the diamond films’ near-surface region. The XPS spectra of the 
NCD are shown in Fig. 10. The C1s core level is concentrated on 284 eV [50]. 
4.6 Fourier-transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) 
The IR spectrum of absorbance or emission of a solid, liquid, or gas is obtained using 
the Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy technique. It is the most extensively 
used method for determining the material’s bonding and chemical bondings. Various 
research groups have investigated FTIR spectroscopy of nanocrystalline diamond 
film, which provides information about different bending and stretching modes 
between carbon and hydrogen atoms. FTIR spectra of NCD films investigated by 
Sharma et al. is shown in Fig. 11, which shows bending and stretching of different 
peaks [21]. Peaks lying between 2800 and 3300 cm–1 are due to C-H stretching 
modes. The IR spectrum of absorbance or emission of a solid, liquid, or gas is obtained using the
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy technique. It is the most extensively used method for
determining the material's bonding and chemical bondings. Various research groups have
investigated FTIR spectroscopy of nanocrystalline diamond film, which provides information 
about different bending and stretching modes between carbon and hydrogen atoms. FTIR
spectra of NCD films investigated by Sharma et al. is shown in Figure 11, which shows
bending and stretching of different peaks [21]. Peaks lying between 2800 and 3300 cm-1 are 
due to C-H stretching modes.
Fig. 11.: FTIR spectra of NCD films [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]].
5. Mechanical properties of nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) films
Hardness and elastic modulus of naocrystalline diamond film is the most widely investigated 
mechanical properties. A representative load vs. displacement curves along with load vs.
square of displacement curves of H terminated and O terminated NCD films are provided in 
Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 [51,52]. An important feature of load vs. displacement curves of diamond
film is absence of indentation creep [53]. That means there is no increase of displacement
even though the load is held constant at highest load. However, such phenomenon is highly
conspicuous in carbon films [54,55]. According to the contact mechanics theories of
plasticity, the load varies with the square of depth of penetration. It is clear from Fig. 13 that
all the curves exhibit a straight line without any step and with a turning point during loading.
This indicates the high cohesive strength and high fracture toughness of these NCDs [56]. No
cracking in these films can be observed in the applied load range. Further, the maximum
Hertz-like shear stresses experienced by these films are not enough to make the substrate
yield, although these films deform substantially.
Commented [A7]: Mechanics’?
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 253 
Fig. 11. FTIR spectra of NCD films [Reprinted with permission from Elsevier [21]]. 
5. Mechanical Properties of Nanocrystalline 
Diamond (NCD) Films 
Hardness and elastic modulus of naocrystalline diamond film is the most widely 
investigated mechanical properties. A representative load vs. displacement curves 
along with load vs. square of displacement curves of H terminated and O terminated 
NCD films are provided in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 [51, 52]. An important feature of load 
vs. displacement curves of diamond film is absence of indentation creep [53]. That 
means there is no increase of displacement even though the load is held constant 
at highest load. However, such phenomenon is highly conspicuous in carbon films 
[54, 55]. According to the contact mechanics' theories of plasticity, the load varies 
with the square of depth of penetration. It is clear from Fig. 13 that all the curves 
exhibit a straight line without any step and with a turning point during loading. This 
indicates the high cohesive strength and high fracture toughness of these NCDs [56]. 
No cracking in these films can be observed in the applied load range. Further, the 
maximum Hertz-like shear stresses experienced by these films are not enough to 
make the substrate yield, although these films deform substantially. 
A compilation of mechanical properties of various NCD films available in 
literature is made in Table 4. Both hardness and elastic modulus of NCD films vary 
over a wide range. The highest hardness of 121 GPa is shown by the film deposited 
by hot wire CVD technique at very low temperature 635°C and the hardness was 
measured at a very low load of 47 mN by Cicala et al. [57]. In contrast, the lowest 
hardness pertains to UNCD deposited in argon free environment employing PVD 
technique by Shen et al. [58]. All the cases films with higher hardness possess lower 
elastic modulus and vice versa. 
Off late, the ratio of hardness to elastic modulus (H/E) is found to be a very 
important material parameter [59, 60]. When this ratio is multiplied by the ratio of 
the diameter of plastic zone to the diameter of the total deformed zone, it gives Fig. 12.: Load vs. displacement curves for H-terminated and O-terminated NCD films.
A compilation of mechanical properties of various NCD films available in literature is made
in table 4. Both hardness and elastic modulus of NCD films vary over a wide range. The
highest hardness of 121 GPa is shown by the film deposited by hot wire CVD technique at
very low temperature 635o
C and the hardness was measured at a very low load of 47 mN by 
Cicala et al. [57]. In contrast, the lowest hardness pertains to UNCD deposited in argon free
environment employing PVD technique by Shen et al. [58]. All the cases films with higher
hardness possess lower elastic modulus and vice versa.
Off late, the ratio of hardness to elastic modulus (H/E) is found to be a very important
material parameter [59,60]. When this ratio is multiplied by the ratio of the diameter of
plastic zone to the diameter of the total deformed zone, it gives an index known as plasticity
index which, in turn, governs deformation behaviour of contacting surfaces. This parameter is
also an important part of expressions for fracture toughness [61]. In addition to this
parameter, the ratio of the hardness to the power three to square of elastic modulus i.e. the
ration H3
/E2 is also another important parameter referred as elasticity of the film [62]. These
two parameters are also listed in table 4. Both these parameters play an important role on the
wear behaviour governed by deformation behaviour of materials. It is interesting to note that
the increasing or decreasing trend of these two parameters are not related to increase or
decrease of hardness or elastic modulus of the investigated films. The highest H/E and H3
/E2
values are indicated by highly transparent NCD film deposited using PVD Technique by You 
et al. [63] signifying the fact that this film has the maximum fracture toughness and elasticity.
Commented [A8]: In italics?
Commented [A9]: In italics?
Commented [A10]: In capitals?
Fig. 13.: Load vs. square of displacement curves for H-terminated and O-terminated NCD
films.
Table: 4: Compilation of various mechanical properties NCD reported in literature
Si 
No Investigators H (GPa) E (GPa) H/E H3/E2
(GPa) Remark
1 Roy et al.
[50] 58.7± 9.4 419± 40 0.14 1.15 O terminated NCD
2 Kumar et al.
[13] 36.2 492.8 0.07 0.19 NCD with grain size
between 80-100 nm.
3 You et al. 
[63] 64 ± 1 395 ± 5 0.16 1.71 Highly transparent
NCD film
4 Cicala et al.
[57]
121 ± 25 1036 ±
163 0.11 1.65
Low deposition 
temperature 653o
C
and 47 mN load
5
Gu et al.
2021
[64]
38 315 0.12 0.55
Low pressure
deposition ( 0.3 
mbar)
6 Shen et
al.[58]
28.8 225 0.13 0.47
UNCD deposited in 
argon free
environment
7 Gruber et al.
[65] 46.5 ± 1.7 903 ± 35.3 0.05 0.12
Hardness of NCD 
sub-layer evaluated
by bending 
experiment
Commented [A11]: To be written?
4500 
Load(mN) 4000 
3500 
3000 
2500 
2000 
1500 
1000 
500 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
0 
Depth(nm) 
NCD-H 
Fig. 12. Load vs. displacement curves for H-terminated and O-terminated NCD films. 
 
 
 
 
 
4500 
4000 
3500 
3000 
2500 
2000 
1500 
1000 
500 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 
0 
Depth (nm)
 NCD-H 
Load (mN) 
Fig. 13. Load vs. square of displacement curves for H-terminated and O-terminated NCD films. 
 
 
254 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
an index known as plasticity index which, in turn, governs deformation behaviour 
of contacting surfaces. This parameter is also an important part of expressions for 
fracture toughness [61]. In addition to this parameter, the ratio of the hardness to 
the power three to square of elastic modulus, i.e., the ration H3
/E2
 is also another 
important parameter referred as elasticity of the film [62]. These two parameters 
are also listed in Table 4. Both these parameters play an important role on the wear 
behaviour governed by deformation behaviour of materials. It is interesting to note 
that the increasing or decreasing trend of these two parameters are not related to 
increase or decrease of hardness or elastic modulus of the investigated films. The 
highest H/E and H3
/E2
 values are indicated by highly transparent NCD film deposited 
using PVD technique by You et al. [63] signifying the fact that this film has the 
maximum fracture toughness and elasticity. Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 255 
Table 4. Compilation of various mechanical properties NCD reported in literature. 
 No Investigators H (GPa) E (GPa) H/E H3
/E2
 (GPa) Remark 
Roy et al. [50] 58.7 ± 9.4 419 ± 40 0.14 1.15 O terminated NCD 
Kumar et al. 36.2 492.8 0.07 0.19 NCD with grain size 
[13] between 80–100 nm. 
You et al. [63] 64 ± 1 395 ± 5 0.16 1.71 Highly transparent NCD 
film 
Cicala et al. 121 ± 25 1036 ± 163 0.11 1.65 Low deposition 
[57] temperature 653°C and 
Si
1 
2 
3 
4 
47 mN load 
5 Gu et al. [64] 38 315 0.12 0.55 Low pressure deposition 
(0.3 mbar) 
6 Shen et al. 
[58] 
28.8 225 0.13 0.47 UNCD deposited in argon 
free environment 
7 Gruber et al. 
[65] 
46.5 ± 1.7 903 ± 35.3 0.05 0.12 Hardness of NCD 
sub-layer evaluated by 
bending experiment 
8 Yan et al. 
[66] 
94.01 936.26 0.10 0.95 NCD deposited on 
cobalt-cemented tungsten 
carbide (WC-Co) 
9 Wiora et al. 
[18] 
96 1050 0.09 0.80 Young’s modulus and 
hardness as a function of 
grain size. 
10 Yang et al. 
[67] 
91 721 0.12 1.44 NCD film deposited by 
Laser MPCVD 
6. Tribological Properties of Nanocrystalline Diamond 
(NCD) Films 
Tribology is the study of interacting surfaces which are in relative motion. It 
involves the study and application of friction, wear and lubrication. Lubricants are 
materials which reduce friction between surfaces and keep wear under control [68]. 
It is generally assumed that for better tribological performance, a material should 
have high hardness as well as very smooth surface morphology. A lot of studies 
have been done to investigate the tribological properties of NCD film. Some of the 
important factors that influence the tribological properties such as wear and friction 
coefficient are microstructure, hardness and elastic modulus of a material. Kumar 
et al. [9] deposited nanocrystalline diamond film using hot-filament CVD and 
showed that NCD film deposited at higher substrate temperature has high hardness 
and elastic modulus due to increase in grain size from 30 nm at 600°C to 80 nm at 
870°C. Researchers report that the results of sliding friction studies on NCD films 
are encouraging [69, 70]. Coefficient of friction between 0.1–0.15 and wear rates 
~ 3 × 10–7 mm3
/Nm of the diamond films have been observed for large-duration 
test (> 5 × 104
 s) opposite to Si3N4 balls in the air. These wear rates seem to reflect 
initial wear asperities. After wear track flatening, wear rates become essentially 
immeasurable [69, 71, 72]. Recently, tribological and corrosion resistance 256 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
behaviour of the NCD coated on Ti alloy has been studied [73]. It has been shown 
that the NCD coated samples show a mixed response in both electrochemical and 
tribo-electrochemical environments. 
The tribological properties of the NCD films are measured using a tribometer. 
This system measures tribology between counteracting surfaces, such as coefficient 
of friction, frictional force, and wear volume. One of the most widely used tribometers 
is the pin on disc tribometer, which consists of a stationary pin that is generally 
loaded against a rotating disc. To simulate a specific contact, the pin can be any 
form, but cylindrical tips are widely employed to optimize the contact geometry. The 
ratio of the frictional force to the loading force on the pin determines the coefficient 
of friction. The total volume of material lost during sliding (the wear volume), V, 
is proportional to the actual area of contact multiplied by the sliding distance by 
a wear factor, K, which is a unitless proportionality constant. The wear factor can 
be modified to determine the specific wear rate K, which is generally measured in 
mm3
/Nm and is often more practical and physically direct. As demonstrated, the 
specific wear rate is calculated using the formula below. 
V K = F dn 
A few tribological properties of the NCD films are discussed below. 
6.1 Friction Coefficient of NCD 
Friction force is a physical quantity, which acts between two surfaces when one 
surface moves or tries to move over another surface. The ratio between friction force 
and normal force is a constant known as coefficient of friction (COF) which is a 
dimensionless number denoted by µ. COF is a measure of the quantity of friction 
between two surfaces, i.e., if the coefficient of friction value is low, then it specifies 
that the force needed for sliding to start is less than the force needed when the 
quantity of coefficient of friction is high. For lubricious materials, it is estimated that 
COF should be lower than 0.1. COF depends upon the nature of the materials and 
roughness of the surface. Hence, for better tribological properties, the surface must 
be very smooth because in case of rough surface, the friction coefficient increases 
which leads to wastage of energy in form of generation of heat. 
Investigation indicates [74] that friction coefficient of NCD films is not 
influenced much by roughness of the film. Further, it is also observed that friction 
coefficient is not altered much with change of lubrication signifying the fact that 
cheap lubricant can be used instead of expensive lubricant. Bar diagram showing 
the friction coefficient of oxygen terminated and hydrogen terminated NCD films in 
various synthetic lubricant as noted by Schneider et al. is given in Fig. 14. The figure 
is in conformity with above statements. Schneider et al. also reported a significant 
change in friction coefficient of NCD films depending on geometry, direction of 
movement and counter body materials. 
Roy et al. investigated friction behaviour of oxygen terminated (O-terminated) 
and hydrogen terminated (H-terminated) nanocrystalline diamond film [50] at very 
low load to explore possible application of this film as self-lubricating film in micro terminated and O-terminated NCD films is presented in Figure 16 [50]. With similar
scratching conditions, the friction behaviour remains the same for both types of films. The
friction coefficient remains the same with an increase in sliding distance, and it reduces with
the increase of the applied load. Thus, the friction behaviour for V-shaped diamond indenter
is free of the nature of surface termination, whether the surface is hydrophobicity or
hydrophilicity.
Fig. 12.: The variation of the coefficient of friction as function of sliding distances at an
applied load of (a) 25 mN, (b) 50 mN, and (c) 200 mN.
6.2 Wear behaviour of NCD film
Wear is described as the interactions between surfaces. It is defined as the removal and
deformation of material from a surface due to the mechanical action of the contacting object
through motion. The wear rate is commonly measured using Pin-on-disk setup. A material 
with good tribological properties has the least wearing rate, leading to an increased lifetime.
To reduce the wear of materials, various techniques and lubricants are used. It is believed that
surfaces with a more roughness have high wear rates. Also, the increase in the friction
coefficient with the surface roughness is a well-known fact. Erdemir et al. showed the wear
rates of Si3N4 balls sliding against the smooth NCD and rough MCD films in air and dry N2.
The observations indicate that the wear rates of balls slid against the nanocrystalline diamond
films are more than two orders of magnitude lower than the wear rates of balls slid against
the rough microcrystalline diamond films [71]. The high friction coefficients of MCD films
are due to the abrasive cutting and ploughing effects of sharp asperity tips, whereas the
ploughing effects due to NCD films are minimal and thus exhibit lower friction.
NCD films reduce wear rate significantly, particularly at high specific pressures (1000 MPa),
especially when both tribo partners are coated with NCD. Wear rate of uncoated counter￾body against NCD coated system is a concern. The influence of various counter-bodies
against an NCD coated body on the wear rate of the counter-bodies is illustrated in Fig. 17
due to Schneider et al. [75]. Figure clearly shows that the wear rate is the minimum when
both counter-bodies are NCD coated. 
Commented [A14]: Correct? You mean hydrophobic or
hydrophilic?
Commented [A15]: No.
Commented [A16]: In capital?
Commented [A17]: Which figure?
6.1 Friction coefficient of NCD
Friction force is a physical quantity, which acts between two surfaces when one surface
moves or tries to move over another surface. The ratio between friction force and normal
force is a constant known as coefficient of friction (COF) which is a dimensionless number
denoted by µ. COF is a measure of the quantity of friction between two surfaces i.e. if the
coefficient of friction value is low, then it specifies that the force needed for sliding to start is 
less than the force needed when the quantity of coefficient of friction is high. For lubricious
materials, it is estimated that COF should be lower than 0.1. COF depends upon the nature of
the materials and roughness of the surface. Hence, for better tribological properties, the
surface must be very smooth because in case of rough surface, the friction coefficient
increases which leads to wastage of energy in form of generation of heat.
Fig. 14.: Bar diagram showing the friction coefficient of NCD in various lubricant.
Investigation due to indicates [74] that friction coefficient of NCD films is not
influenced much by roughness of the film. Further, it is also observed that friction coefficient 
is not altered much with change of lubrication signifying the fact that cheap lubricant can be
used instead of expensive lubricant. Bar diagram showing the friction coefficient of oxygen
terminated and hydrogen terminated NCD films in various synthetic lubricant as noted by 
Schneider et al. is given in Fig. 14. The figure is in conformity with above statements. 
Schneider et al. also reported a significant change in friction coefficient of NCD films
depending on geometry, direction of movement and counter body materials. 
Roy et al. investigated friction behaviour of oxygen terminated (O- terminated) and
hydrogen terminated (H-terminated) nanocrystalline diamond film [50] at very low load to 
explore possible application of this film as self-lubricating film in micro electro mechanical
system (MEMS). The variation of the coefficient of friction as a function of the sliding 
distance for H terminated NCD films at different applied loads is shown in Figure 15 [50].
The observed value of the friction coefficients is less than 0.8 in both cases. The value of
COF is high at low load, whereas it is low at high load. The change in friction coefficient as a
consequence of sliding distance under a one-directional single indenter in touch for H￾Commented [A12]: Without: one word
Commented [A13]: due to what?
No. of Cycles 
Fig. 15. The variation of the coefficient of friction as function of sliding distances at an applied load of 
(a) 25 mN, (b) 50 mN, and (c) 200 mN. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Without 
Fig. 14. Bar diagram showing the friction coefficient of NCD in various lubricant. 
 
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 257 
electro mechanical system (MEMS). The variation of the coefficient of friction as a 
function of the sliding distance for H terminated NCD films at different applied loads 
is shown in Fig. 15 [50]. The observed value of the friction coefficients is less than 
0.8 in both cases. The value of COF is high at low load, whereas it is low at high 
load. The change in friction coefficient as a consequence of sliding distance under a 
one-directional single indenter in touch for H-terminated and O-terminated NCD 
films is presented in Fig. 16 [50]. With similar scratching conditions, the friction 
behaviour remains the same for both types of films. The friction coefficient remains 
the same with an increase in sliding distance, and it reduces with the increase of the 
applied load. Thus, the friction behaviour for V-shaped diamond indenter is free of 
the nature of surface termination, whether the surface is hydrophobic or hydrophilic. Fig. 13.: The variation of the coefficient of friction as a function of sliding distance for
unidirectional single indenter contact. (a) H-terminated, (b) O-terminated [Reprinted
with permission from Elsevier [50]].
Fig. 17.: Bar diagram showing wear area of different counter-body.
7. Conclusion and future work
In this chapter, we attempted to summarize different methods for deposition of NCD films
and increasing nucleation density of diamond. Subsequently, characterisation techniques,
mechanical and tribological properties of NCD films are discussed. Since solid lubricants
have wider application area and show impressive result in extreme environmental conditions
due to improved tribology, it is one of the most important topics being researched since many
decades. Recent developments in the CVD deposition techniques have also encouraged
 
 
258 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Fig. 16. The variation of the coefficient of friction as a function of sliding distance for unidirectional 
single indenter contact. (a) H-terminated, (b) O-terminated [Reprinted with permission from 
Elsevier [50]]. 
6.2 Wear Behaviour of NCD Film 
Wear is described as the interactions between surfaces. It is defined as the removal 
and deformation of material from a surface due to the mechanical action of the 
contacting object through motion. The wear rate is commonly measured using 
pin-on-disk setup. A material with good tribological properties has the least wearing 
rate, leading to an increased lifetime. To reduce the wear of materials, various 
techniques and lubricants are used. It is believed that surfaces with a more roughness 
have high wear rates. Also, the increase in the friction coefficient with the surface 
roughness is a well-known fact. Erdemir et al. showed the wear rates of Si3N4 
balls sliding against the smooth NCD and rough MCD films in air and dry N2. The 
observations indicate that the wear rates of balls slid against the nanocrystalline 
diamond films are more than two orders of magnitude lower than the wear rates of 
balls slid against the rough microcrystalline diamond films [71]. The high friction 
coefficients of MCD films are due to the abrasive cutting and ploughing effects of 
sharp asperity tips, whereas the ploughing effects due to NCD films are minimal and 
thus exhibit lower friction. 
NCD films reduce wear rate significantly, particularly at high specific pressures 
(1000 MPa), especially when both tribo partners are coated with NCD. Wear rate 
of uncoated counter-body against NCD coated system is a concern. The influence 
of various counter-bodies against an NCD coated body on the wear rate of the 
counter-bodies is illustrated in Fig. 17 due to Schneider et al. [75]. Figure 17 clearly 
shows that the wear rate is the minimum when both counter-bodies are NCD coated. Fig. 13.: The variation of the coefficient of friction as a function of sliding distance for
unidirectional single indenter contact. (a) H-terminated, (b) O-terminated [Reprinted
with permission from Elsevier [50]].
Fig. 17.: Bar diagram showing wear area of different counter-body.
7. Conclusion and future work
In this chapter, we attempted to summarize different methods for deposition of NCD films
and increasing nucleation density of diamond. Subsequently, characterisation techniques,
mechanical and tribological properties of NCD films are discussed. Since solid lubricants
have wider application area and show impressive result in extreme environmental conditions
due to improved tribology, it is one of the most important topics being researched since many
decades. Recent developments in the CVD deposition techniques have also encouraged
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 259 
Fig. 17. Bar diagram showing wear area of different counter-body. 
7. Conclusion and Future Work 
In this chapter, we attempted to summarize different methods for deposition of NCD 
films and increasing nucleation density of diamond. Subsequently, characterisation 
techniques, mechanical and tribological properties of NCD films are discussed. Since 
solid lubricants have wider application area and show impressive result in extreme 
environmental conditions due to improved tribology, it is one of the most important 
topics being researched since many decades. Recent developments in the CVD 
deposition techniques have also encouraged researchers to study and improve the 
tribology of complex micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). Nanocrystalline 
diamond films have much to offer for future tribological applications. Unlike most 
other engineering materials, diamond offers an impressive combination of low 
friction and high wear resistance under a wide range of sliding contact conditions. 
One major problem for deposition of diamond film is high deposition 
temperature. The high temperature of deposition limits usage of these films in many 
applications particularly for microelectronics. Thus, systematic and comprehensive 
efforts are to be directed to bring down the deposition temperatures of such films. 
Areas for deposition of these films are very small and this restricts its applications in 
several components. This requires further development of deposition techniques for 
large area deposition. The influence of the size of grains, and surface morphology 
on mechanical and tribological properties are hardly reported in literature and hence 
demands substantial attention. Evaluation of mechanical and tribological properties 
of these films in demanding environment such as gaseous or liquid environment 
in cryogenic or elevated temperature is far from satisfactory. These areas should 
be explored extensively in order to identify various potential applications of these 
films. Although roughness of the NCD films is much lower than that of MCD, further 
reduction of roughness of these films can be addressed with special emphasis on post 
processing techniques such as micromachining, micropolishing, etc. Last but not the 
least is development of free standing diamond films which find many applications 
in microelectronics.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
260 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
References 
[1] Miyoshi, K. 2019. Solid Lubrication Fundamentals and Applications. CRC Press. 
[2] Xu, J., J. Dai, F. Ren, Y. Wang, P. Wang, S. Xu, S. Wu, J. Lin, Y. Yang, D. Guo and X. Wang. 
2021. Ultrahigh radiation resistance of nanocrystalline diamond films for solid lubrication in harsh 
radiative environments. Carbon 182: 525–536. 
[3] Auciello, O. and D.M. Aslam. 2021. Review on advances in microcrystalline, nanocrystalline and 
ultrananocrystalline diamond films-based micro/nano-electromechanical systems technologies. 
Journal of Materials Science 56: 7171–7230. 
[4] Robertson, J. 2002. Diamond-like amorphous carbon. Materials Science and Engineering: 
R: Reports 37: 129–281. 
[5] Tomastik, C., A. Tomala, A. Pauschitz and M. Roy. 2014. The influence of carbon content 
on the microtribological performance of WSC films. Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part J: Journal of Engineering Tribology 228: 745–755. 
[6] Pauschitz, A., E. Badisch, M. Roy and D.V. Shtansky. 2009. On the scratch behaviour of self￾lubricating WSe2 films. Wear 267: 1909–1914. 
[7] Pauschitz, A. and M. Roy. 2021. Mechanical and friction properties of Mo-Se-C film at low load. 
Surface and Coatings Technology 405: 126730. 
[8] Sharma, R., A.K. Pandey, N. Sharma, D. Sasmal and P.K. Barhai. 2010. Diamond like carbon films 
as a protective surface on PMMA for biomedical applications. Surface and Coatings Technology 
205: 2495–2502. 
[9] Kumar, N., K.J. Sankaran, A.T. Kozakov, A.V. Sidashov, A.V. Nicolskii, K. Haenen and V.I. 
Kolesnikov. 2019. Surface and bulk phase analysis of the tribolayer of nanocrystalline diamond 
films sliding against steel balls. Diamond and Related Materials 97: 107472. 
[10] Mohr, M., L. Daccache, S. Horvat, K. Brühne, T. Jacob and H.J. Fecht. 2017. Influence of grain 
boundaries on elasticity and thermal conductivity of nanocrystalline diamond films. Acta Materialia 
122: 92–98. 
[11] Wort, C. and R. Balmer. 2008. Diamond as an electronic material. Materials Today 11: 22–28. 
[12] Winkelmann, H., E. Badisch, M. Roy and H. Danninger. 2009. Corrosion mechanisms in the wood 
industry, especially caused by tannins. Materials and Corrosion 60: 40–48. 
[13] Kumar, N., K. Panda, S. Dash, C. Popov, J.P. Reithmaier, B.K. Panigrahi, A.K. Tyagi and B. Raj. 
2012. Tribological properties of nanocrystalline diamond films deposited by hot filament chemical 
vapor deposition. AIP Advances 2: 032164. 
[14] Tomala, A., M.R. Ripoll and E. Badisch. 2013. Tool–solid lubricant–workpiece interactions in high 
temperatures applications. Procedia Engineering 68: 626–633. 
[15] Tomala, A., M. Roy and F. Franek. 2010. Nanotribology of Mo–Se–C films. Philosophical 
Magazine 90(29): 3827–3843. 
[16] Pauschitz, A., J. Schalko, T. Koch, C. Eisenmenger-Sittner, S. Kvasnica and M. Roy. 2003. 
Nanoindentation and AFM studies of PECVD DLC and reactively sputtered Ti containing carbon 
films. Bulletin of Materials Science 26: 585–591. 
[17] Mannarelli, M., K. Rajagopal and R. Sharma. 2006. Testing the Ginzburg-Landau approximation for 
three-flavor crystalline color superconductivity. Physical Review D-Particles, Fields, Gravitation 
and Cosmology 73: 114012. 
[18] Wiora, M., K. Brühne, A. Flöter, P. Gluche, T.M. Willey, S.O. Kucheyev, A.W. Van Buuren, 
A.V. Hamza, J. Biener and H.-J. Fecht. 2009. Grain size dependent mechanical properties of 
nanocrystalline diamond films grown by hot-filament CVD. Diamond and Related Materials 
18: 927–930. 
[19] Sharda, T., M.M. Rahaman, Y. Nukaya, T. Soga, T. Jimbo and M. Umeno. 2001. Structural and 
optical properties of diamond and nano-diamond films grown by microwave plasma chemical 
vapor deposition. Diamond and Related Materials 10: 561–567. 
[20] Amaratunga, G., A. Putnis, K. Clay and W. Milne. 1989. Crystalline diamond growth in thin films 
deposited from a CH4/Ar RF plasma. Applied Physics Letters 55: 634–635. 
[21]	Sharma, R., N. Woehrl, M. Vrućinić, M. Timpner, V. Buck and P.K. Barhai. 2011. Effect of
microwave power and C2 emission intensity on structural and surface properties of nanocrystalline 
diamond films. Thin Solid Films 519: 7632–7637.  
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 261 
[22] Konov, V.I., A.A. Smolin, V.G. Ralchenko, S.M. Pimenov, E.D. Obraztsova, E.N. Loubnin, S.M. 
Metev and G. Sepold. 1995. Dc arc plasma deposition of smooth nanocrystalline diamond films. 
Diamond and Related Materials 4: 1073–1078. 
[23] Kundu, S.N., M. Basu, A.B. Maity, S. Chaudhuri and A.K. Pal. 1997. Nanocrystalline 
diamond films deposited by high pressure sputtering of vitreous carbon. Materials Letters 
31: 303–309. 
[24] Amaratunga, G.A.J., S.R.P. Silva and D.R. McKenzie. 1991. Influence of dc bias voltage on the 
refractive index and stress of carbon‐diamond films deposited from a CH4/Ar RF plasma. Journal 
of Applied Physics 70: 5374. 
[25] Fedoseev, D.V., V.P. Varnin and B.V. Deryagin. 1984. Synthesis of diamond in its thermodynamic 
metastability region. Russian Chemical Reviews 53: 435–444. 
[26] Eddy, C.R., D.L. Youchison, B.D. Sartwell and K.S. Grabowski. 1992. Deposition of diamond onto 
aluminum by electron cyclotron resonance microwave plasma-assisted CVD. Journal of Materials 
Research 7: 3255–3259. 
[27] Wei, J., H. Kawarada, J. ichi Suzuki and A. Hiraki. 1990. Growth of diamond films at low pressure 
using magneto-microwave plasma CVD. Journal of Crystal Growth 99: 1201–1205. 
[28] Zarrabian, M., N. Fourches-Coulon, G. Turban, C. Marhic and M. Lancin. 1997. Observation of 
nanocrystalline diamond in diamondlike carbon films deposited at room temperature in electron 
cyclotron resonance plasma. Applied Physics Letters 70: 2535. 
[29] Bozeman, S.P., D.A. Tucker, B.R. Stoner, J.T. Glass and W.M. Hooke. 1995. Diamond deposition 
using a planar radio frequency inductively coupled plasma. Applied PhysicsnLetters 66: 3579. 
[30] Okada, K., S. Komatsu and S. Matsumoto. 1999. Preparation of microcrystalline diamond in a low 
pressure inductively coupled plasma. Journal of Materials Research 14: 578–583. 
[31] Teii, K., H. Ito, M. Hori, T. Takeo and T. Goto. 2000. Kinetics and role of C, O, and OH in 
low-pressure nanocrystalline diamond growth. Journal of Applied Physics 87: 4572. 
[32] Kamo, M., Y. Sato, S. Matsumoto and N. Setaka. 1983. Diamond synthesis from gas phase in 
microwave plasma. Journal of Crystal Growth 62: 642–644. 
[33] Erz, R., W. Dötter, K. Jung and H. Ehrhardt. 1993. Preparation of smooth and nanocrystalline 
diamond films. Diamond and Related Materials 2: 449–453. 
[34] Gruen, D.M., S. Liu, A.R. Krauss, J. Luo and X. Pan. 1994. Fullerenes as precursors for diamond 
film growth without hydrogen or oxygen additions. Applied Physics Letters 64: 1502. 
[35] Zhou, D., T.G. McCauley, L.C. Qin, A.R. Krauss and D.M. Gruen. 1998. Synthesis of nanocrystalline 
diamond thin films from an Ar–CH4 microwave plasma. Journal of Applied Physics 83: 540-543. 
[36] Philip, J., P. Hess, T. Feygelson, J.E. Butler, S. Chattopadhyay, K.H. Chen and L.C. Chen. 2003. 
Elastic, mechanical, and thermal properties of nanocrystalline diamond films. Journal of Applied 
Physics 93: 2164-2171. 
[37] Chatterjee, V., R. Sharma and P.K. Barhai. 2014. Effect of process parameters on the properties of 
ultrananocrystalline diamond films deposited using microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapor 
deposition. Advanced Materials Letters 5: 172–179. 
[38] Matsumoto, S., Y. Sato, M. Kamo and N. Setaka. 1982. Vapor deposition of diamond particles from 
methane. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 21: L183–L185. 
[39] Herlinger, J. 2006. sp3
’s experience using hot filament CVD reactors to grow diamond for an 
expanding set of applications. Thin Solid Films 501: 65–69. 
[40] Zhang, J. J.W. Zimmer, R.T. Howe and R. Maboudian. 2008. Characterization of boron-doped 
micro-and nanocrystalline diamond films deposited by wafer-scale hot filament chemical vapor 
deposition for MEMS applications. Diamond and Related Materials 17: 23–28. 
[41] Hirose, Y. and Y. Terasawa. 1986. Synthesis of diamond thin films by thermal CVD using organic 
compounds. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 25(6A): L519. 
[42] Huang, C., X. Peng, B. Yang, X. Chen, Q. Li, D. Yin and T. Fu. 2018. Effects of strain rate and 
annealing temperature on tensile properties of nanocrystalline diamond. Carbon 136: 320–328. 
[43] Sharma, R., N. Woehrl, P.K. Barhai and V. Buck. 2010. Nucleation density enhancement for 
nanocrystalline diamond films. Journal of Optoelectronics and Advanced Materials 12: 1915–1920. 
[44] Lee, S.T., Z. Lin and X. Jiang. 1999. CVD diamond films: nucleation and growth. Materials Science 
and Engineering: R: Reports 25: 123–154.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
262 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
[45] Mitsuda, Y., Y. Kojima, T. Yoshida and K. Akashi. 1987. The growth of diamond in microwave 
plasma under low pressure. Journal of Materials Science 22: 1557–1562. 
[46] Yugo, S., T. Kanai, T. Kimura and T. Muto. 1991. Generation of diamond nuclei by electric field in 
plasma chemical vapor deposition. Applied Physics Letters 58: 1036. 
[47] Stubhan, F., M. Ferguson, H.J. Füsser and R.J. Behm. 1995. Heteroepitaxial nucleation of diamond 
on Si (001) in hot filament chemical vapor deposition. Applied Physics Letters 66: 1900. 
[48] Yang, J., X. Su, Q. Chen and Z. Lin. 1995. Si+
 implantation: A pretreatment method for diamond 
nucleation on a Si wafer. Applied Physics Letters 66: 3284. 
[49] Steinmüller-Nethl, D., F.R. Kloss, M. Najam-Ul-Haq, M. Rainer, K. Larsson, C. Linsmeier and 
G. Bonn. 2006. Strong binding of bioactive BMP-2 to nanocrystalline diamond by physisorption. 
Biomaterials 27(26): 4547–4556. 
[50] Roy, M., S. Ghodbane, T. Koch, A. Pauschitz, D. Steinmüller-Nethl, A. Tomala, C. Tomastik and 
F. Franek. 2011. Tribological investigation of nanocrystalline diamond films at low load under 
different tribosystems. Diamond and Related Materials 20: 573–583. 
[51] Roy, M. and R. Haubner. 2013. Diamond Films and Their Tribological Performances. Springer 
Vienna 79–110. 
[52] Koch, T., M. Evaristo, A. Pauschitz, M. Roy and A. Cavaleiro. 2009. Nanoindentation 
and nanoscratch behaviour of reactive sputtered deposited W–S–C film. Thin Solid Films 
518: 185–193. 
[53] Bogus, A., I.C. Gebeshuber, A. Pauschitz, M. Roy and R. Haubner. 2008. Micro-and nanomechanical 
properties of diamond film with various surface morphologies. Diamond and Related Materials 
17: 1998–2004. 
[54] Kvasnica, S., J. Schalko, C. Eisenmenger-Sittner, J. Benardi, G. Vorlaufer, A. Pauschitz and M. 
Roy. 2006. Nanotribological study of PECVD DLC and reactively sputtered Ti containing carbon 
films. Diamond and Related Materials 15: 1743–1752. 
[55] Tomastik, C., J.M. Lackner, A. Pauschitz and M. Roy. 2016. Structural, chemical and 
nanomechanical investigations of SiC/polymeric a-C: H films deposited by reactive RF unbalanced 
magnetron sputtering. Solid State Sciences 53: 1–8. 
[56] Ding, J., Y. Meng and S. Wen. 2000. Mechanical properties and fracture toughness of multilayer 
hard coatings using nanoindentation. Thin Solid Films 371: 178–182. 
[57] Cicala, G., V. Magaletti, G. Carbone and G.S. Senesi. 2020. Load sensitive super-hardness of 
nanocrystalline diamond coatings. Diamond and Related Materials 101: 107653. 
[58] Shen, B., Q. Lin, S. Chen, Z. Ji, Z. Huang and Z. Zhang. 2019. High-rate synthesis of 
ultra-nanocrystalline diamond in an argon-free hot filament chemical vapor deposition atmosphere 
for tribological films. Surface and Coatings Technology 378:124999. 
[59] Musil, J. and M. Jirout. 2007. Toughness of hard nanostructured ceramic thin films. Surface and 
Coatings Technology 201: 5148–5152. 
[60] Roy, M., T. Koch and A. Pauschitz. 2010. The influence of sputtering procedure on nanoindentation 
and nanoscratch behaviour of W–S–C film. Applied Surface Science 256: 6850–6858. 
[61] Sapate, S.G., N. Tangselwar, S.N. Paul, R.C. Rathod, S. Mehar, D.S. Gowtam and M. Roy. 2021. 
Effect of coating thickness on the slurry erosion resistance of HVOF-sprayed WC-10Co-4Cr 
coatings. Journal of Thermal Spray Technology 30: 1365–1379. 
[62] Charitidis, C.A. and S. Logothetidis. 2005. Effects of normal load on nanotribological properties of 
sputtered carbon nitride films. Diamond and Related Materials 14: 98–108. 
[63] You, M.S., F.C.N. Hong, Y.R. Jeng and S.M. Huang. 2009. Low temperature growth of highly 
transparent nanocrystalline diamond films on quartz glass by hot filament chemical vapor 
deposition. Diamond and Related Materials 18:155–159. 
[64] Gu, J., Z. Chen, R. Li, X. Zhao, C. Das, V. Sahmuganathan, J. Sudijono, M. Lin and K.P. Loh. 2021. 
Nanocrystalline diamond film grown by pulsed linear antenna microwave CVD. Diamond and 
Related Materials 119: 108576. 
[65] Gruber, D.P., J. Todt, N. Wöhrl, J. Zalesak, M. Tkadletz, A. Kubec, S. Niese, M. Burghammer, 
M. Rosenthal, H. Sternschulte, M.J. Pfeifenberger, B. Sartory and J. Keckes. 2019. 
Gradients of microstructure, stresses and mechanical properties in a multi-layered diamond 
thin film revealed by correlative cross-sectional nano-analytics. Carbon 144:666–674.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanocrystalline Diamond Films as Solid Lubricant Coatings 263 
[66] Yan, G., Y. Wu, D. Cristea, L. Liu, M. Tierean, Y. Wang, F. Lu, H. Wang, Z. Yuan, D. Munteanu and 
D. Zhao. 2019. Mechanical properties and wear behavior of multi-layer diamond films deposited 
by hot-filament chemical vapor deposition. Applied Surface Science 494: 401–411. 
[67] Yang, M., S. Bai, Q. Xu, J. Li, T. Shimada, Q. Li, T. Goto, R. Tu and S. Zhang. 2020. Mechanical 
properties of high-crystalline diamond films grown via laser MPCVD. Diamond and Related 
Materials 109: 108094. 
[68] Szeri, A. 2010. Fluid Film Lubrication. Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
[69] Erdemir, A., C. Bindal, G.R. Fenske, C. Zuiker, A.R. Krauss and D.M. Gruen. 1996. Friction 
and wear properties of smooth diamond films grown in fullerene + argon plasmas. Diamond and 
Related Materials 5: 923–931. 
[70] Erdemir, A., M. Halter, G.R. Fenske, C. Zuiker, R. Csencsits, A.R. Krauss and D.M. Gruen. 2008. 
Friction and wear mechanisms of smooth diamond films during sliding in air and dry nitrogen. 
Tribology Transactions 40: 667–675. 
[71] Erdemir, A., G.R. Fenske, A.R. Krauss, D.M. Gruen, T. McCauley and R.T. Csencsits. 1999. 
Tribological properties of nanocrystalline diamond films. Surface and Coatings Technology 120– 
121: 565–572. 
[72] Erdemir, A., M. Halter, G.R. Fenske, A. Krauss, D.M. Gruen, S.M. Pimenov and V.I. Konov. 1997. 
Durability and tribological performance of smooth diamond films produced by Ar-C60 microwave 
plasmas and by laser polishing. Surface and Coatings Technology 94: 537–542. 
[73] Gopal, V., M. Chandran, M.S.R. Rao, S. Mischler, S. Cao and G. Manivasagam. 2017. Tribocorrosion 
and electrochemical behaviour of nanocrystalline diamond coated Ti based alloys for orthopaedic 
application. Tribology International 106: 88–100. 
[74] Schneider, A., D. Steinmueller-Nethl, M. Roy and F. Franek. 2010. Enhanced tribological 
performances of nanocrystalline diamond film. International Journal of Refractory Metals and Hard 
Materials 28: 40–50. 
[75] Schneider, A., J. Brenner, D. Steinmüller-Nethl, M. Roy and F. Franek. 2009. Tribological properties 
of lubricated nanocrystalline diamond surfaces for various loads and geometries. Tribology￾Materials, Surfaces & Interfaces 3(4): 175–181. Index


A
acetone 178


Animal System 9


arc discharge method 85


B
Ball Milling 194, 196–200, 202, 203, 206


Biochar 194–206


Biogenic synthesis 137


Biological Ligands 7, 14


biomedical applications 209, 211, 215, 221


Biosynthesis 19, 21–26, 31–36, 39, 42–44


Bulk 176


C
calcination 179


Ceramic 176–180


Chemical synthesis 135–137


Chemical vapour deposition 243–246


Coatings 93, 94, 97, 98, 100–103, 106, 108, 
109, 111


Crystal 176, 177


D
Defects 177


densification 180


Disease diagnosis 133, 139


DLC 241, 242


drug delivery 209, 221–223


E
eco-friendly 222, 223


Electrochemical exfoliation 121–125, 128, 129


Electrode materials 182, 183, 187, 188


Energy 194–197, 199, 202, 203, 205, 206


Energy storage 182, 183, 186, 187


Environment 195, 198


Eukaryotes 3


F
Fabrication 57–67 
flavonoids 209–211, 215–223 
Free Energy 1–4, 12, 14–16 
Friction 241–243, 255–259 
G
gas-phase 79, 80


Graphene 99–101, 103, 120–129


green nano-synthesis 210


Green procedures 12


I


ionic liquid 19, 26, 27


K
Kitchen wastes 56–66 
L
lead-free 178, 180


leaf extract 19, 21, 23–26


Lithography 176


Lubrication 241, 255–257


M
Magnetic 177


manganese nanomaterials 147


mechanical milling 75, 148, 156


metal nanoparticles 212–215, 218, 220–222


microbes 32, 36, 37, 43, 47

266 Nanofabrication: Enrapturing Cues and Prodigal Applications 
Micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) 229, 
230, 232, 234–236


micro-emulsion 168


milling 177–179


morphology 176, 179


N
Nanocomposite 196


Nanocrystalline Diamond Films 241, 243, 246, 
249, 251, 252, 255, 256, 258, 259


Nanofabrication 31–34, 36, 38, 43, 45, 135, 
209–211, 213, 215, 216, 222, 223


Nanoindentation 230, 233–236


nanomaterial 1–4, 8–15, 31–36, 38, 39, 42–45, 
47, 72–80, 84, 88, 90


Nanoparticles 72–77, 79–81, 85–90


Nanoscience 12, 16


Nanostructured surface 97


Nanosynthesis 4, 12


Nanotechnology 56, 57, 59, 67, 209, 215


Nanotransformation 4, 14


Nucleation density 247–249, 259


P
Physical synthesis 134


Physicochemical synthesis 147, 156


phytoconstituents 210, 214–216, 218, 222


plant extract 32, 33, 42–47


Plant System 4


Porous structures 182, 183, 185–188


Prokaryotes 1


protective nanocomposite 101


R
Raman 123, 127–129


Raman spectroscopy 249


Resonance 12, 13


S
Selenium Nanoparticles 132–134, 137, 138, 
141, 142


SEM 124, 125, 128


Sensors 229, 230, 234, 236


SiCN 229–234


silver nanoparticles 19–21, 23–27


slurry 178, 179


sol-gel 147, 149, 150, 164, 165, 168


Solution combustion synthesis 182–188, 190


sonochemical 153, 154, 168, 169


Sputtering 229, 230, 232, 236


sputtering technique 80, 88


stoichiometry 177


substrate 176, 180


surfactant 23, 27


Sustainability 56, 57, 66


T
Tautomerization 3, 12


Thin film 229–234


Tribology 243, 255, 256, 259


V


vapour deposition 147, 148


W
Wear 241–243, 255–259 
X


X-Ray diffraction 250, 251


X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy 252


XRD 123, 124, 128, 129


Z
zeta potential 26, 27


zirconia 178, 179


ZnO nanofillers 94, 104, 111


