NANOTECHNOLOGY-ENHANCED 
SOLID MATERIALS 
Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, 
and Perspectives Innovations in Physical Chemistry: Monograph Series 
NANOTECHNOLOGY-ENHANCED 
SOLID MATERIALS 
Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, 
and Perspectives 
Edited by 
Lionello Pogliani, PhD 
Ann Rose Abraham, PhD 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
Prabhat Ranjan, PhD First edition published 2024 
Apple Academic Press Inc. CRC Press 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 USA 
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2024 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: Nanotechnology-enhanced solid materials : design, synthesis, properties, applications, and perspectives / edited by 
Lionello Pogliani, PhD, Ann Rose Abraham, PhD, A.K. Haghi, PhD, Prabhat Ranjan, PhD. 
Names: Pogliani, Lionello, editor. | Abraham, Ann Rose, editor. | Haghi, A. K., editor. | Ranjan, Prabhat, editor. 
Series: Innovations in physical chemistry. 
Description: First edition. | Series statement: Innovations in physical chemistry: monographic series | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 20230171206 | Canadiana (ebook) 20230171230 | ISBN 9781774912201 (hardcover) | 
ISBN 9781774912218 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003333449 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Nanostructured materials. | LCSH: Nanostructured materials—Industrial applications. | LCSH: 
Nanotechnology. 
Classification: LCC TA418.9.N35 N38 2023 | DDC 620.1/15—dc23
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress
ISBN: 978-1-77491-220-1 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-221-8 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00333-344-9 (ebk) BOOK SERIES: 
INNOVATIONS IN PHYSICAL 
CHEMISTRY: MONOGRAPH SERIES 
This book series, Innovations in Physical Chemistry: Monograph Series, 
offers a comprehensive collection of books on physical principles and 
mathematical techniques for majors, non-majors, and chemical engineers. 
Because there many exciting new areas of research involving computational 
chemistry, nanomaterials, smart materials, high-performance materials, and 
applications of the recently discovered graphene, there can be no doubt 
that physical chemistry is a vitally important field. Physical chemistry is 
considered a daunting branch of chemistry— it is grounded in physics and 
mathematics and draws on quantum mechanics, thermodynamics, and statis￾tical thermodynamics. 
Innovations in Physical Chemistry has been carefully developed to 
help readers increase their confidence when using physics and mathe￾matics to answer fundamental questions about the structure of molecules, 
how chemical reactions take place, and why materials behave the way 
they do. 
This series covers: Computational Chemistry; Elementary Chemical 
Kinetics; Fundamental Concepts of Thermodynamics; Heat, Work, Internal 
Energy, Enthalpy, and the First Law of Thermodynamics; The Importance 
of State Functions: Internal Energy and Enthalpy; Thermochemistry; 
Entropy; and the Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics; Chemical 
Equilibrium; The Properties of Real Gases; Phase Diagrams and the Rela￾tive Stability of Solids, Liquids, and Gases; Ideal and Real Solutions; 
Electrolyte Solutions; Electrochemical Cells, Batteries, and Fuel Cells; 
From Classical to Quantum Mechanics; The Schrödinger Equation; The 
Quantum Mechanical Postulates; Using Quantum Mechanics on Simple 
Systems; and more. 
Modern applications are drawn from biology, environmental science, and 
material science. Spectroscopy applications are introduced early in concert 
with theory; for example, IR and rotational spectroscopy are discussed 
immediately after the harmonic oscillator. vi Book Series: Innovations in Physical Chemistry: Monograph Series 
Modern research is featured throughout, along with new developments 
in the field, such as scanning tunneling microscopy, bandgap engineering, 
quantum wells, teleportation, and quantum computing. 
The books in the series act as guides that take readers into the subject, 
in spite of the generally modest background they might have on the subject 
matter. The physical basis of essential ideas is emphasized, and mathematical 
developments are simple and closely tied to the physical bases. The overall 
organization of the titles in the series is such that topics are introduced in 
stages so students can become familiar with, and grow into each topic, and 
chapters are written so that there is flexibility in the order in which they may 
be used. 
EDITORS-IN-CHIEF 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
Former Editor-in-Chief, International Journal of Chemoinformatics and 
Chemical Engineering and Polymers Research Journal; Member, Canadian 
Research and Development Center of Sciences and Cultures (CRDCSC), 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Email: AKHaghi@Yahoo.com 
K. Haghi, PhD, is a retired professor with over 250 academic research￾oriented books as well as over 1000 research papers published in various 
journals and conference proceedings with over 3350 citations and h-index 
of 30, according to the Google Scholar database. He is currently a senior 
material engineering consultant in the UK. Professor Haghi has received 
several grants, consulted for several major corporations, and is a frequent 
speaker to national and international audiences. He is Founder and former 
Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of Chemoinformatics and 
Chemical Engineering and as Polymers Research Journal. Professor Haghi 
has acted as an editorial board member of many international journals. He has 
served as a member of the Canadian Research and Development Center of 
Sciences & Cultures and the Research Chemistry Centre, Coimbra, Portugal. 
He has supervised several PhD and MSc theses at the University of Guilan 
(UG) and co-supervised international doctoral projects. Professor Haghi 
holds a BSc in urban and environmental engineering from the University of 
North Carolina (USA) and holds two MSc, one in mechanical engineering 
from North Carolina State University (USA) and another one in applied 
mechanics, acoustics, and materials from the Université de Technologie 
de Compiègne (France). He was awarded a PhD in engineering sciences at 
Université de Franche-Comté (France). Book Series: Innovations in Physical Chemistry: Monograph Series vii 
Lionello Pogliani, PhD 
University of Valencia-Burjassot, Spain 
Email: lionello.pogliani@uv.es 
Lionello Pogliani, PhD, is a retired Professor of Physical Chemistry. 
He received his postdoctoral training at the Department of Molecular 
Biology of the C. E. A. (Centre d’Etudes Atomiques) of Saclay, France, 
at the Physical Chemistry Institute of the Technical and Free University 
of Berlin, and at the Pharmaceutical Department of the University of Cali￾fornia, San Francisco, USA. He spent his sabbatical years at the Technical 
University of Lisbon, Portugal, and at the University of Valencia, Spain. 
He has contributed more than 200 papers in the experimental, theoretical, 
and didactical fields of physical chemistry, including chapters in special￾ized books and a book on numbers 0, 1, 2, and 3. A work of his has been 
awarded with the GM Neural Trauma Research Award. He is a member 
of the International Academy of Mathematical Chemistry, and he is on 
the editorial board of many international journals. He is presently a part￾time teammate at the Physical Chemistry department of the University of 
Valencia, Spain. 
Ana Cristina Faria Ribeiro, PhD 
Researcher, Department of Chemistry, University of Coimbra, Portugal 
Email: anacfrib@ci.uc.pt 
Ana C. F. Ribeiro, PhD, is a researcher in the Department of Chemistry 
at the University of Coimbra, Portugal. Her area of scientific activity is 
physical chemistry and electrochemistry. Her main areas of research 
interest are transport properties of ionic and non-ionic components in 
aqueous solutions. She has experience as a scientific adviser and teacher 
of different practical courses. Dr. Ribeiro has supervised master’s degree 
theses as well as some PhD theses and has been a theses jury member. She 
has been a referee for various journals as well an expert evaluator of some 
of the research programs funded by the Romanian government through 
the National Council for Scientific Research. She has been a member of 
the organizing committee of scientific conferences, and she is an editorial 
member of several journals. She has received several grants, consulted for 
a number of major corporations and is a frequent speaker to national and 
international audiences. She is a member of the Research Chemistry Centre, 
Coimbra, Portugal. viii Book Series: Innovations in Physical Chemistry: Monograph Series 
BOOKS IN THE SERIES 
• Applied Physical Chemistry with Multidisciplinary Approaches 
Editors: A. K. Haghi, PhD, Devrim Balköse, PhD, and Sabu Thomas, PhD 
• Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Chemistry: 
Applied Research and Interactions 
Editors: Francisco Torrens, PhD, Debarshi Kar Mahapatra, PhD, and 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
• Chemical Technology and Informatics in Chemistry with Applications 
• Editors: Alexander V. Vakhrushev, DSc, Omari V. Mukbaniani, DSc, 
and Heru Susanto, PhD 
• Chemistry and Chemical Engineering for Sustainable Development: 
Best Practices and Research Directions 
Editors: Miguel A. Esteso, PhD, Ana Cristina Faria Ribeiro, 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
• Chemistry and Industrial Techniques for Chemical Engineers 
• Editors: Lionello Pogliani, PhD, Suresh C. Ameta, PhD, and 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
• Engineering Technologies for Renewable and Recyclable Materials: 
Physical-Chemical Properties and Functional Aspects 
Editors: Jithin Joy, Maciej Jaroszewski, PhD, Praveen K. M., 
Sabu Thomas, PhD, and Reza Haghi, PhD 
• Engineering Technology and Industrial Chemistry with Applications 
Editors: Reza Haghi, PhD, and Francisco Torrens, PhD 
• High-Performance Materials and Engineered Chemistry 
Editors: Francisco Torrens, PhD, Devrim Balköse, PhD, and 
Sabu Thomas, PhD 
• Methodologies and Applications for Analytical and 
Physical Chemistry 
Editors: A. K. Haghi, PhD, Sabu Thomas, PhD, Sukanchan Palit, and 
Priyanka Main 
• Modern Green Chemistry and Heterocyclic Compounds: Molecular 
Design, Synthesis, and Biological Evaluation 
Editors: Ravindra S. Shinde, and A. K. Haghi, PhD 
• Modern Physical Chemistry: Engineering Models, Materials, and 
Methods with Applications 
Editors: Reza Haghi, PhD, Emili Besalú, PhD, Maciej Jaroszewski, 
PhD, Sabu Thomas, PhD, and Praveen K. M. Book Series: Innovations in Physical Chemistry: Monograph Series ix 
• Molecular Chemistry and Biomolecular Engineering: 
Integrating Theory and Research with Practice 
Editors: Lionello Pogliani, PhD, Francisco Torrens, PhD, and 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
• Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, 
Properties, Applications, and Perspectives 
Editors: Lionello Pogliani, PhD, Ann Rose Abraham, PhD, 
A. K. Haghi, PhD, and Prabhat Ranjan, PhD 
• Physical Chemistry for Chemists and Chemical Engineers: 
Multidisciplinary Research Perspectives 
Editors: Alexander V. Vakhrushev, DSc, Reza Haghi, PhD, and 
J. V. de Julián-Ortiz, PhD 
• Physical Chemistry for Engineering and Applied Sciences: 
Theoretical and Methodological Implication 
• Editors: A. K. Haghi, PhD, Cristóbal Noé Aguilar, PhD, 
Sabu Thomas, PhD, and Praveen K. M. 
• Practical Applications of Physical Chemistry in 
Food Science and Technology 
• Editors: Cristóbal Noé Aguilar, PhD, Jose Sandoval Cortes, PhD, 
Juan Alberto Ascacio Valdes, PhD, and A. K. Haghi, PhD 
• Research Methodologies and Practical Applications of Chemistry 
Editors: Lionello Pogliani, PhD, A. K. Haghi, PhD, and 
Nazmul Islam, PhD 
• Theoretical and Empirical Analysis in Physical Chemistry: 
A Framework for Research 
Editors: Miguel A. Esteso, PhD, Ana Cristina Faria Ribeiro, PhD, and 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
• Theoretical Models and Experimental Approaches in Physical 
Chemistry: Research Methodology and Practical Methods 
Editors: A. K. Haghi, PhD, Sabu Thomas, PhD, Praveen K. M., and 
Avinash R. Pai ABOUT THE EDITORS 
Lionello Pogliani, PhD 
University of Valencia, Burjassot, Spain 
Lionello Pogliani, PhD, is a retired Professor of Physical Chemistry. He 
received his postdoctoral training at the Department of Molecular Biology of 
the C. E. A. (Center d’Etudes Atomiques) of Saclay, France, at the Physical 
Chemistry Institute of the Technical and Free University of Berlin, and at the 
Pharmaceutical Department of the University of California, San Francisco, 
USA. He spent his sabbatical years at the Technical University of Lisbon, 
Portugal, and at the University of Valencia, Spain. He has contributed more 
than 200 papers in the experimental, theoretical, and didactical fields of 
physical chemistry, including chapters in specialized books and a book on 
numbers 0, 1, 2, and 3. A work of his has been awarded with the GM Neural 
Trauma Research Award. He is a member of the International Academy 
of Mathematical Chemistry, and he is on the editorial board of many 
international journals. He is presently a part-time teammate at the Physical 
Chemistry department of the University of Valencia, Spain. 
Ann Rose Abraham, PhD 
Assistant Professor, Department of Basic Sciences, Amal Jyothi College of 
Engineering, Kanjirappally, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Ann Rose Abraham, PhD, is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department 
of Basic Sciences, Amal Jyothi College of Engineering, Kanjirappally, 
Kerala, India. She has research experience at various national institutes, 
including Bose Institute, SAHA Institute of Nuclear Physics, and UGC-DAE 
CSR Center, Kolkata, and she has collaborated with various international 
laboratories, such as the University of Johannesburg, South Africa; Institute of 
Physics, Belgrade; etc. She is a recipient of a Young Researcher Award in the 
area of physics in the year 2016. Dr. Abraham has delivered invited lectures 
and sessions at national and international conferences. During her tenure 
as a doctoral fellow, she taught and mentored students at the postgraduate 
level at the International and Inter-University Center for Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, India. She has co-authored many book chapters and co-edited 
books. She has a number of publications to her credit, published in many xii About the Editors 
peer-reviewed journals of international repute. She has expertise in the field 
of materials science, nanomagnetic materials, multiferroics, and polymeric 
nanocomposites. Dr. Abraham was involved in teaching and also served as 
the examiner for the valuation of answer scripts of Engineering Physics at 
APJ Abdul Kalam Technological University. Dr. Abraham received her MSc, 
MPhil, and PhD degrees in Physics from the School of Pure and Applied 
Physics, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kerala, India. Her PhD thesis was on 
“Development of Hybrid Multiferroic Materials for Tailored Applications.” 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
Professor Emeritus of Engineering Sciences, Former Editor-in-Chief, 
International Journal of Chemoinformatics and Chemical Engineering 
Member, Canadian Research and Development Center of Sciences and 
Culture 
A. K. Haghi, PhD, published over 250 academic research-oriented books 
as well as over 1,000 research papers published in various journals and 
conference proceedings. He has received several grants, consulted for a 
number of major corporations, and is a frequent speaker to national and 
international audiences. He is the Founder and former Editor-in-Chief of 
the International Journal of Chemoinformatics and Chemical Engineering, 
published by IGI Global (USA), as well as Polymers Research Journal, 
published by Nova Science Publishers (USA). Professor Haghi has acted as 
an editorial board member of many international journals. He has served as a 
member of the Canadian Research and Development Center of Sciences and 
Cultures (CRDCSC) and the Research Chemistry Center, Coimbra, Portugal. 
Dr. Haghi holds a BSc in urban and environmental engineering from the 
University of North Carolina (USA), an MSc in mechanical engineering 
from North Carolina A&T State University (USA), and an MSc in applied 
mechanics, acoustics, and materials from the Université de Technologie de 
Compiègne (France), and a PhD in engineering sciences from Université de 
Franche-Comté (France). 
Prabhat Ranjan, PhD 
Associate Professor, Department of Mechatronics Engineering at 
Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
Prabhat Ranjan, PhD, is an Associate Professor in the Department of 
Mechatronics Engineering at Manipal University Jaipur. He is working in 
the domain of energy materials, smart materials, computational materials About the Editors xiii 
science, and density functional theory since last 10 years. He has published 
more than 40 research papers in peer-reviewed journals of high repute and 
several book chapters in research-edited book. He has also edited many 
high-end research-based books. He has received the prestigious President 
Award of Manipal University Jaipur, India (2015); material design 
scholarship from the Imperial College of London, UK (2014); a DAAD 
Fellowship (2014); the CFCAM-France Award (2015) and President gold 
medal for excellence in research (2019), and best research award for various 
recognized international agencies. Dr. Ranjan has received several grants 
and also participated in national and international conferences and summer 
schools. He holds a bachelor of engineering in electronics and communication 
and a master of technology in instrumentation control system engineering 
from the Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, as well as 
a PhD in engineering from Manipal University Jaipur, India. Contributors..........................................................................................................xvii 
Abbreviations ......................................................................................................... xxi 
Preface ................................................................................................................ xxvii 
1. Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons in Molecular Forms.............1 
K. V. Arun Kumar, P. Arjun Suresh, Greeshma Sara John, Athira Maria Johnson, 
K. A. Naseer, and N. V. Unnikrishnan 
2. Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles 
Catalysis.........................................................................................................27 
H. Akhina and Tressia Alias Princy Paulose 
3. Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids................................55 
Lavanya Tandon, Vijender Singh, Aabroo Mahal, and Poonam Khullar 
4. Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids with 
Multidisciplinary Applications in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology ......77 
Amir Gull, Raees Ul Haq, Mohd. Aaqib Sheikh, Tariq Ahmad Ganaie, Mushtaq Ahmad 
Lone, and Shaheen Khursid 
5. A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 
Nanoparticle-Based Clusters........................................................................99 
Shayeri Das, Prabhat Ranjan, and Tanmoy Chakraborty 
6. Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 
Material for Highly Efficient Supercapacitors .........................................117 
Ranjit Debnath and Mitali Saha 
7. Applications of Recycled Solid Substances of Solar Photovoltaic 
Modules and Their Environmental Impact Analysis...............................143 
Manisha Sheoran, Pancham Kumar, Susheela Sharma, and Prabhat Ranjan 
8. Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism, and 
Functionalization of Magnetic Solid Nanoparticles and 
Their Application in Treatment of Wastewater........................................153 
Aditi Singh, Rajpreet Kaur, Anita Gupta, Christine Jeyaseelan, and Poonam Khullar 
CONTENTS 9. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes...................................................................171 
Mihai Ciocoiu 
10. CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment ................................213 
Rony Rajan Paul and Maria Mathew 
11. Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/
Nano-Polymers Using Cold Plasma...........................................................237 
Igor Novák, Anton Popelka, Ahmed Asanidezhad, Marián Lehocký, Ivan Chodák, Ján 
Sedliačik, Ján Matyašovský, Peter Jurkovič, Katarína Valachová, and Ladislav Šoltés 
12. Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs and Cylinders: 
For Macro to Micro/Nano-Scale Systems .................................................259 
Savita Bansal and Satya Bir Singh 
Index.....................................................................................................................281 
xvi ContentsCONTRIBUTORS 
H. Akhina 
International and Inter-University Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 
Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Ahmed Asanidezhad 
Tomas Bata University in Zlín, Zlín, Czech Republic
Savita Bansal 
Research Scholar, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India 
Tanmoy Chakraborty 
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, School of Basic Sciences and Research, 
Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Ivan Chodák 
Polymer Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia 
Mihai Ciocoiu 
Textiles-Leather and Industrial Management at Gheorghe Asachi Technical University of Iasi, Romania 
Shayeri Das 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, Dehmi Kalan, Rajasthan, India 
Ranjit Debnath 
Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Agartala, Tripura, India 
Tariq Ahmad Ganaie 
Department of Food Science and Technology, Government Degree College Shopian, 
Jammu and Kashmir, India 
Amir Gull 
Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, 
Jammu and Kashmir, India 
Anita Gupta 
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Raees Ul Haq 
Department of Food Engineering and Technology, SLIET, Sangrur, Punjab, India 
Christine Jeyaseelan 
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Greeshma Sara John 
Department of Physics, Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Research Center, 
CMS College (Autonomous), Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Athira Maria Johnson 
Department of Physics, Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Research Center, 
CMS College (Autonomous), Kottayam, Kerala, India xviii Contributors 
Peter Jurkovič
VIPO, A.S., Gen. Svobodu, Partizánske, Slovakia 
Rajpreet Kaur 
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India; Department of Chemistry, 
B.B.K. D.A.V. College for Women, Amritsar, Punjab, India 
Poonam Khullar 
Department of Chemistry, B.B.K. D.A.V. College for Women, Amritsar, Punjab, India 
Shaheen Khursid 
Department of Zoology, Government Degree College Tral, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
K. V. Arun Kumar 
Department of Physics, Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Research Center, 
CMS College (Autonomous), Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Pancham Kumar 
School of Electrical Skills, Bhartiya Skill Development University, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
Marián Lehocký 
Tomas Bata University in Zlín, Zlín, Czech Republic
Mushtaq Ahmad Lone 
Directorate of Planning and Monitoring, SKUAST-K, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
Aabroo Mahal 
Department of Chemistry, Khalsa College for Woman, Amritsar, Punjab, India 
Maria Mathew 
Department of Chemistry, CMS College, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Ján Matyašovský 
VIPO, A.S., Gen. Svobodu, Partizánske, Slovakia 
K. A. Naseer 
Department of Physics, The Gandhigram Rural Institute–Deemed to be University, Gandhigram, 
Tamil Nadu, India; Department of Physics, Farook College (Autonomous), Kozhikode, Kerala, India 
Igor Novák 
Polymer Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia 
Rony Rajan Paul 
Department of Chemistry, CMS College, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Tressia Alias Princy Paulose 
Post-Graduate and Research Department of Chemistry, Bishop Moore College, Mavelikara, Alappuzha, 
Kerala, India 
Anton Popelka 
Center for Advanced Materials, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 
Prabhat Ranjan 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, Dehmi Kalan, Rajasthan, India 
Mitali Saha 
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Agartala, Tripura, 
India Contributors xix 
Ján Sedliačik
Technical University in Zvolen, T.G. Masaryka, Zvolen, Slovakia 
Susheela Sharma 
Department of Basic Science, Bhartiya Skill Development University, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
Mohd. Aaqib Sheikh 
Department of Food Technology, IUST, Awantipora, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
Manisha Sheoran 
Department of Basic Science, Bhartiya Skill Development University, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
Aditi Singh 
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Satya Bir Singh 
Professor, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India 
Vijender Singh 
Department of Chemistry, S.K. Government College, Kanwali Rewari, Haryana, India 
Ladislav Šoltés 
Center of Experimental Medicine SAS, Institute of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
Bratislava, Slovakia 
P. Arjun Suresh 
Department of Physics, Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Research Center, 
CMS College (Autonomous), Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Lavanya Tandon 
Department of Chemistry, B.B.K. D.A.V. College for Women, Amritsar, Punjab, India 
N. V. Unnikrishnan 
School of Pure and Applied Physics, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Katarína Valachová 
Center of Experimental Medicine SAS, Institute of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
Bratislava, Slovakia ABBREVIATIONS 
AA acrylic acid 
AB ammonia borane 
AC activated carbon 
ACNT aligned carbon nanotube 
AmB amphotericin B 
AOP advanced oxidation process 
ATPSs aqueous two-phase polymer systems 
ATRP atom-transfer radical polymerization 
BC bacterial cellulose 
B-CNT boron-doped CNT 
BHJ bulk heterojunction 
BTEX benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and o-xylene 
C carbon 
CB conduction band 
CBL cathode buffer layers 
CE counter electrode 
CF carbon foam 
CHP cumene hydroperoxide 
Cl chlorine 
CMC critical micelle concentration 
CNTFETs carbon nanotube field-effect transistors 
CNTPE carbon nanotube-based paste electrodes 
CNTs carbon nanotubes 
CNTY CNT yarns 
CoAl LDH cobalt–aluminum layered double hydroxide 
CPC cetylpyridinium chloride 
CRT cathode ray tube 
CSCs charge selective contacts 
CTAB cetyltrimethylammonium bromide 
CVD chemical vapor deposition 
CWAO catalytic wet air oxidation 
DA degree of methylation 
DCSBD diffuse coplanar surface barrier discharge 
DA degree of acetylation xxii Abbreviations 
DMMP dimethyl methylphosphonate 
DMSS dual mesoporous silica sphere 
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid 
DOA dissociated oxygen atoms 
DSSCs dye-sensitized solar cells 
DWCNTs double-walled CNTs 
DWNTs double-walled nanotubes 
ECD electron capture detector 
EG ethylene glycol 
EMI electromagnetic interference 
ESD electrostatic discharge 
ETL electron transport layer 
Fcc face-centered cubic 
FCs fuel cells 
FET field effect transistors 
FF fill factor 
FGM functionally graded material 
FID flame ionization detector
FO forward osmosis 
FTO fluoride tin oxide 
FTS Fischer Tropsch synthesis 
GAG glycosaminoglycan 
GCB gleaming cresyl blue 
GCE glassy carbon electrodes 
GC-MS gas chromatography/mass spectrometry 
GE general electric 
GlcA D-glucuronic acid 
GO graphene oxide 
GO/mSiO2
/PANI graphene oxide, mesoporous silica, and polyaniline 
GO/PANI graphene oxide and polyaniline 
GOBIN GO-based benzimidazole crosslinked network 
Gox glucose oxidase 
GY graft yield 
H2
O2 hydrogen peroxide 
HELs hole extraction layers 
HG homogalacturonan 
HOPG high-oriented pyrolytic graphite 
HPC hierarchical porous structure 
HPLC high-performance liquid chromatography LCC 
Abbreviations xxiii 
HTL hole transport layer 
IO iron oxide 
IOMNPs iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 
ITO indium tin oxide 
lignin-carbohydrate complex 
LCST lower critical solution temperatures 
LDPE low-density polyethylene 
LIBs lithium-ion batteries 
LW/AB Lifshitz-van der Waals/acid-base 
MAPI3 methylammonium lead iodide 
MAPR microwave-assisted polyol reduction 
MB methylene blue 
MD molecular dynamics 
MEHQ monomethyl ether of hydroquinone 
MHPs metal-halide perovskites 
MIS metal-insulator-semiconductor 
MM mixed matrix 
MnO2 manganese dioxide 
MNPs magnetic nanoparticles 
MoS2 molybdenum disulfide 
MS metal-semiconductor 
MSS mesoporous silica sphere 
MW microwave 
MWCNT multi-walled carbon nanotube 
MWNTs multi-wall carbon nanotubes 
N-CNT nitrogen-doped CNT 
NCY Ni-plated cotton yarn 
NiAl-LDHs nickel aluminum layered double hydroxides 
NiCo–CH NiCo–carbonate hydroxide 
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology 
NMOs nanosized metal oxides 
NMP nitroxide-mediated radical polymerization 
NPs nanoparticles 
NR neutral red 
NTs nanotubes 
NW nanowire 
O oxygen 
OPV organic photovoltaic 
P3HT poly(3-hexylthiophene) xxiv Abbreviations 
P3
OT poly(3-octylthiophene) 
PAA polyacrylic acid 
PCBM phenyl Cn butyric acid methyl ester 
PCE power conversion energy 
PEDOT poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) 
PEDOT/GO poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) and graphene 
oxide 
PEI polyethyleneimine 
PEM polymer electrolyte membrane 
PEMFC proton-exchange membrane fuel cells 
PHBV polyhydroxybutyrate-co-valerate 
PL photoluminescence 
PMMA polymethyl methacrylate 
PNIPAAm poly N-isopropylacrylamide 
POAP poly ortho amino phenol 
POM polyoxometalate 
PPF porous polypropylene films 
PPy polypyrrole 
PPy/GO polypyrrole and graphene oxide 
PPy/GO/ZnO polypyrrole, graphene oxide, and zinc oxide 
PS polystyrene 
PSC perovskite solar cell 
PS-PAA poly(styrene)-block-poly(acrylic acid) 
PSS poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate) 
PSS poly(styrenesulfonate) 
Pt platinum 
PV photovoltaic 
PVA polyvinyl alcohol 
PVC poly(vinyl chloride) 
QD quantum dot 
RAFT reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer 
RGO reduced graphene oxide 
RO reverse osmosis 
ROS reactive oxygen species 
SCs supercapacitors 
SEE System surface energy evaluation system 
SEM scanning electron microscopy 
Si silicon 
SMAs shape memory alloys Abbreviations xxv 
SMPs shape memory polymers 
SPIONs superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles 
SSQ-GO silsesquioxane containing graphene oxide 
SWCNTs single-walled carbon nanotubes 
SWNT-FETs single-walled nanotube-filled effect transistor 
SWNTs single-walled nanotubes 
TCO transparent conducting oxide 
TEM transmission electron micrograph 
TEOS tetraethyl orthosilicate 
TFT thin-film transistors 
TMOS tetramethoxysilane 
TOF turnover-frequency 
UYC unified yield criterion 
VA vertically aligned 
VB valence band 
VHSVs volume hour space velocities 
WAO wet air oxidation 
WGS water–gas shift 
WPU waterborne polyurethane 
ZnO NPs zinc oxide nanoparticles 
ZnO zinc oxide PREFACE 
This advanced research-oriented book was developed to equip postgraduate 
students, nanotechnologists, materials scientists, chemists, physicists, 
chemical engineers, and researchers with a deep understanding of nano￾scale solid materials by focusing on the principles of nanotechnology and 
nanoscience. It provides the latest information on the emergence and rapid 
development of nanotechnology-enhanced solid materials and the ways it has 
impacted almost every aspect of nano-engineering. In each chapter of this new 
volume, the authors have given a brief description of the problem along with 
an introduction and a concise summary of the relevant physical principles. 
The discussions then continue with emphasizing universal commonalities 
between seemingly disparate areas and encouraging postgraduate students 
and scientists to develop an intuitive understanding of this diverse area of 
study. It also provides the readers with a comprehensive overview of the 
field, focusing on the design, synthesis, and properties of solid materials, 
presenting updated, practical, and systematic knowledge on the modification 
of nanomaterials. Topics covered include a wide range of solid material 
formulations and self-assemblies. 
One of the most important points in this new research-oriented book is 
the theoretical concepts that are linked to real-world applications, allowing 
readers to connect theory and practice. 
This new volume is an excellent resource for senior postgraduate students 
with backgrounds in materials science and technology, physics, and chem￾istry. Because of the integral nature of the topics, it will also be of interest 
to a broad spectrum of audiences, including industrial scientists, industrial 
engineers, nanotechnologists, materials scientists, chemists, physicists, 
biologists, chemical engineers, and all those who are involved and interested 
in the future frontiers of nanomaterials. 
This research-oriented book: 
• Features a variety of designs of nanomaterials, helping engineers to 
make the best use of theories. 
• Contains underlying principles of how nanomaterials work and the 
variety of applications they provide. xxviii Preface 
• Assesses the viability of various methods for mass production and 
commercialization. 
• Highlights the design of functionalized nanomaterials with respect to 
recent progress in the industrial arena and their respective applications. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
PHOTOVOLTAICS APPLICATIONS OF 
SOLID CARBONS IN MOLECULAR 
FORMS 
K. V. ARUN KUMAR,1,2 P. ARJUN SURESH,1,2 
GREESHMA SARA JOHN,1,2 ATHIRA MARIA JOHNSON,1,2 
K. A. NASEER,3,4 and N. V. UNNIKRISHNAN4,5 
1
Department of Physics, CMS College (Autonomous), Kottayam, 
Kerala, India 
2
Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Research Center, 
CMS College (Autonomous), Kottayam, Kerala, India) 
3
Department of Physics, The Gandhigram Rural Institute–Deemed to 
be University, Gandhigram, Tamil Nadu, India 
4
Department of Physics, Farook College (Autonomous), Kozhikode, 
Kerala, India 
5
School of Pure and Applied Physics, Mahatma Gandhi University, 
Kottayam, Kerala, India 
ABSTRACT 
Renewable energy conversion using photovoltaic devices plays a crucial 
role in converting solar energy into electricity. Improving the efficiency 
and lifetime of the photovoltaic (PV) cell is one of the intense research 
activities solving the problem of energy issues and environmental concerns. 
Carbon-based photovoltaic cells exhibit numerous advantages and efficiency 2 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
improvements over ordinary photovoltaic cells. Material properties like high 
surface area, low cost, and high electrical conductivity play a key role in 
efficiency improvement. Energy generation using carbon-based photovoltaic 
materials in the future is an alternating, safe, low-cost, and efficient method. 
Structures like carbon nanotube (CNT), fullerene, graphene, etc., have a wide 
range of applications like photoanode, cathode in DSSC, electron transport 
layer (ETL), hole transport layer (HTL), and encapsulant in photovoltaic 
(PV) cells. The applications of carbon-based nanomaterials devices like 
photovoltaics in energy generation applications are discussed in this chapter. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Solar energy is considered one of the largest clean energy sources. 
Exploration of renewable energies is one of the concerns about climate and 
environmental issues. With the increased demand for global energy due to 
the increased population and fast-growing, we need improved technology. 
Researchers are looking for alternative energy sources with improved 
efficiency and low cost. However, the excessive use of conventional fossil 
energy sources has limitations. The most promising route to store and 
utilize solar energy is converting solar light into electricity, which leads 
to the considerable development of solar cells. Crystalline silicon solar 
cell is dominated in the current market, but it has limitations like higher 
fabrication cost and complicated fabrication technique. It is more expensive 
than conventional fossil fuels. Another drawback of silicon solar cells is 
the degradation under illumination, which causes a decrease in lifetime 
and stability. Therefore, finding a new nature-friendly and cheap energy 
resource is essential [1–9]. Next-generation solar cells like perovskite and 
dye sensitize solar cells, etc., have more technological advantages. Their 
advantages, like elevated power conversion efficiency, easy fabrication, 
and low cost, are attracted particular attention. Carbon is considered an 
alternative material, which is highly attractive because of some similar 
properties like silicon and its highly stable nature. In such a situation, 
carbon-based materials have a great scope in photovoltaic applications. 
Carbon is one of the most abundant materials on earth and exists in various 
stable forms such as semiconducting/insulator diamond, metallic/semi￾metallic graphite, conducting/semiconducting fullerenes, carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs), etc. Different carbon allotrope structures and hybridization states 
show different chemical, mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties, 
opening various applications in different fields. The nano-scale cylindrical Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 3 
structure of CNT has a tremendous interest. For high predicted mobility 
applications in p-type, semiconductor CNTs are used. 
Solar energy harvesting combination of CNTs with electron donors is an 
innovative concept. Introduction C60, CNTs into conjugated polymers have 
tremendous applications in an organic photovoltaic (OPV) device. In the case 
of organic solar cells, Fullerene C60 has been considered as the most suitable 
electron-accepting and transporting material. Another vital characteristic of 
carbon-based materials allows electronic transitions between the conduction 
and valance bands to proceed without the involvement of phonons. A single￾layer structure of two-dimensional graphite, namely graphene, is highly 
transparent and absorbs less incident white light. Graphene is a material that 
is extremely strong and conductive. Graphene films obtained from thermally 
reduced graphite oxide show high conductivity and are more transparent. 
Here, we discussed the applications of carbon nanomaterials like fullerene, 
CNTs, and graphene in photovoltaic solar cells. The role of carbon materials 
due to their properties, unique structure, and potential applications in energy 
conversion has been a great deal of interest in recent years [1, 10–15]. 
1.2 CARBON NANOMATERIALS AND SYNTHESIS 
1.2.1 GRAPHENE 
1.2.1.1 GENERAL STRUCTURE OF GRAPHENE 
Graphene is one of the allotropes of carbon and was first discovered by 
Konstatin Novoseov and Andre Geim in 2004 [16]. Graphene is a sheet of sp2 
hybridized atoms of carbon having one atom thickness, and it exists in a 2D 
structure [17]. Graphene can also exist in 3D structures by stacking several 
graphene sheets together [16, 18]. It is considered a fundamental building block 
of graphite, fullerene, and CNT. Graphite is considered stacked graphene, the 
CNT is considered rolled graphene, and the fullerenes are wrapped graphene. It 
is transparent, and it shows good mechanical, optical, and electrical properties. 
Due to these peculiarities, it is used in solar cells, fuel cells (FCs), supercapaci￾tors (SCs), batteries, etc. Graphene mainly exists in three forms: 3D graphene, 
Heteroatom-doped graphene, and graphene oxide (GO) (Figure 1.1). 
Another critical characteristic of graphene materials is no energy band 
gap between conduction and valence bands (VBs). The stacking order 
of graphene is equally crucial in determining its properties. The chirality 
and orientation of the graphene layer play a significant role in varying its 4 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
characteristics. Due to the hexagonal structure of graphene, it can have two 
types of edges – Armchair and Zigzag [19]. The presence of defects while 
synthesizing graphene also varies its mechanical and conductive properties. 
The type of defects in graphene can be classified into two – intrinsic and 
extrinsic defects. Intrinsic defects are formed due to the perturbation of its 
crystal structure, not due to foreign atoms. Extrinsic defects are due to the 
presence of foreign atoms (Figure 1.2) [20]. 
FIGURE 1.1 Structure of graphene. 
FIGURE 1.2 Types of edges of graphene: (a) zigzag; (b) armchair. 
1.2.1.2 SYNTHESIS OF GRAPHENE 
Graphene and its derivatives have different applications in various fields. 
The properties of graphene depend on its preparation methods. Graphene can Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 5 
be synthesized in various methods; research will find a suitable synthesizing 
technique for mass and cost-effective graphene production. 
Graphene can be synthesized by using two approaches, either the top￾down approach or by the bottom-up approach. In the top-down approach, 
graphite is reduced to graphene sheets by dissociating individual layers of 
graphite using liquid-state oxidation or by solid-state exfoliation of graphite. 
In the bottom-up approach, carbon molecules create graphene layers by 
building molecular precursors through different methods [21]. The top￾down method is generally used for more economical and mass production of 
graphene. For the synthesis of graphene, different methods are used, which 
are mechanical exfoliation, chemical exfoliation, chemical vapor deposition 
(CVD) method, pulsed laser deposition, etc. 
CVD is the most popular method for producing graphene. Graphene 
that is synthesized through the CVD method shows high purity. In the CVD 
method, carbon is deposited above metal surfaces. Ni and Cu are the most 
used metals for the deposition of carbon. 
Mechanical exfoliation is considered one of the simplest methods of 
producing high-quality graphene. The graphene layer can be prepared 
by simply using scotch tape. The scotch tape is first stuck into graphite, 
and a few layers of graphene are mechanically peeled from high-oriented 
pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). Then the graphene layer is transferred to a suit￾able substrate. The process is repeated at different times [22]. By using this 
method, we can make a graphene layer of high purity and fewer defects. This 
method is commonly used for laboratory purposes, and it is not suitable for 
the large-scale production of graphene [23]. 
In the liquid exfoliation method, different solvents are used to separate 
graphene layers with the help of ultrasonication [24]. Different solvents, 
such as sulfuric acid, acetic acid, etc., are used for this purpose. 
This method includes three steps: 
• Oxidation of graphite; 
• Dispersing the oxidized graphite in the solvent; and 
• Reduction of graphite oxide into graphene. 
1.2.2 CARBON NANOTUBES (CNTS) 
1.2.2.1 STRUCTURE AND SYNTHESIS OF CNTS 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), being unique nanostructures, have a hexagonal 
matrix of the carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice by sp2
 hybridization. CNTs Covalent bond 
Carbon atom 
Hexagon 
Pentagon 
FIGURE 1.3 Structure of carbon nanotube. 
6 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
are considered graphene sheets rolled up to make seamless hollow cylinders. 
They have a high aspect ratio, i.e., hollow cylinders having tens of microm￾eter length and a small diameter of 0.7 nm. Both the endings of the tubes 
have a half-fullerene molecule, as caps. They have remarkable electronic and 
mechanical properties due to their unique structure and morphology. Even 
though CNTs are closely connected to a 2D graphene sheet, the nanotube 
curvature, and the quantum confinement of the CNTs in the circumferential 
direction contribute to having properties different from graphene [25]. CNTs 
were observed firstly by Iijima in 1991 [15, 25–27] accidentally during the 
synthesis of fullerenes. Single-Walled CNTs (SWCNTs) or Multi-Walled 
CNTs (MWCNTs) are the two kinds of CNTs. SWCNTs are fundamental 
structural units, having a cylindrical shell with only one atom thickness. 
MWCNTs have multiple coaxial cylinders of SWCNTs about a common axis 
of increasing diameter (Figure 1.3) [25]. 
1.2.2.1.1 Chemical Vapor Deposition Method (CVD) 
In the CVD method, a transition metal catalyst is heated up at a high 
temperature in a tube furnace while a hydrocarbon gas is flown through Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 7 
the tube reactor for some time. The temperature range is 550–750°C. 
Iron, nickel, and cobalt are also used as catalysts [25]. A diverse form of 
CNTs, such as powder, thick or thin films, entangled or aligned, coiled, 
or straight can be grown by this method. Growing nanotubes of desired 
architecture at prearranged spots on a patterned substrate is another 
advantage of CVD [26, 27]. 
The arc discharge method and laser ablation method are two other 
synthesis methods of CNTs that can produce high-quality and highly crystal￾line CNTs [25–27]. 
1.2.3 FULLERENE 
1.2.3.1 FULLERENES: STRUCTURE AND SYNTHESIS 
Fullerene, the first synthesized third allotropic form of carbon, was 
discovered in 1985 by Richard E. Smalley Harold. W. Kroto, and Robert F. 
Curl. The fullerenes with 60 and 70 carbon atoms, denoted as C60 and C70, 
were the most common out of other higher fullerenes as they were present 
in 75 and 24%, respectively, in the synthesis conducted Kratschmer et al. 
in 1990 [28, 30, 33]. The properties of fullerene, such as color, depending 
on molecular weight and symmetry [28]. C60 fullerene, commonly called 
the Buckminsterfullerene, is arranged in 12 pentagons and 20 hexagons 
[30]. Fullerenes are essential due to their exciting electronic and structural 
properties, such as high electron mobility, increased electron affinity, and 
low reorganization energy [39]. This allotrope’s essential properties that 
enhance its use in energy conversion applications are high electrochemical 
stability, small size, well-ordered structure, and specific morphology [31]. 
The most common fullerene derivatives employed in different applications 
are PCBM (phenyl Cn butyric acid methyl ester), a dimer of fullerene that 
exists in dumbbell-shape, which is a connection of two fullerene cages [32], 
etc. (Figure 1.4). 
The synthesis method employed to produce fullerenes in large quantity is 
the arc-discharge method discovered by Kratschmer et al. in 1990 as a peak 
in the mass spectra of quenched carbon atoms [33]. This method, commonly 
called the Hufmann-Kra¨tschmer method, utilizes carbon soot produced 
by evaporated graphite rods in contact as the precursor for producing bulk 
fullerenes [28, 30, 33]. The advantage of this method is that graphite is the 
only by-product, which can be reformed into rods and recycled [28]. The 
process involves arc discharge employed between graphite rods kept in 8 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
an atmosphere of helium, at a very high temperature. The smoke particles 
collected as a result of the evaporation and condensation of the precursor 
were analyzed by ultra-violet, infrared, and visible spectral studies at 100 
Torr quenching gas pressure, which confirmed the existence of strong bands 
[34]. The confirmation of the production of C60 fullerenes was done as the 
experimental result of the infrared spectroscopy showed a good agreement 
with the theoretical symmetry results [34]. Other methods employed to 
synthesize fullerenes are benzene combustion in an oxygen-deficient atmo￾sphere, the condensation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons [28], and the 
Laser-furnace method [35]. 
FIGURE 1.4 Structure of fullerene. 
1.3 PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR CELL 
1.3.1 SILICON SOLAR CELL 
Traditional silicon solar cells are p-n junctions illuminated under 
sunlight. The p-n junctions are synthesized by merging a p-doped area 
of silicon into an n-doped area within the same lattice, where the p and n 
regions are unsymmetrically doped. At the junction of both layers, there 
exists the space charge region [36]. The n-doped region is called the 
emitter through which light enters the solar cell. Even now, crystalline 
silicon-based solar cells dominate the photovoltaics market due to the 
high module efficiency and enduring stability, and highly established 
processing technology. Still, the cost of production is enormous and has 
a complicated fabrication [37]. Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 9 
1.3.2 DSSC 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) belonging to third-generation solar cells 
were reported back in 1990 [38]. Through these years, DSSC has attained 
more efficiency and prominence as they could be used in our daily lives like 
decoration, iPads, etc., as announced by industries like Sony and Apple [38]. 
DSSC comprises a photoelectrode and a counter electrode (CE) arranged 
in a sandwich architecture [38]. The former is a semiconductor layer, while 
the latter consist of a light-harvesting dye adsorbed on an electrode [38]. 
Semiconductors employed are NiO (p-type) and ZnO or TiO2
 (n-type) 
[38]. The platinum (Pt) layers cover the substrate electrode, which uses 
an electrolyte to complete the circuit [38]. The challenges possessed by 
DSSC are classified as: (i) lack of highly efficient iodine-free electrolytes; 
(ii) efficient and Pt-free counter-electrodes; (iii) solid-state electrolytes 
with appreciable ion diffusion and conductivity factors; (iv) panchromatic 
dyes; and (v) increased charge collection yields at the photoelectrodes [38]. 
These challenges are being overcome by incorporating nanocarbon such 
as fullerenes, CNT, or graphene as they possess multifunctional behavior 
[38]. The first challenge disappears by using nanocarbons as interlayers 
or dopants on the photoelectrodes [38]. The second challenge could 
be rectified by employing multifunctional nanocarbons into solid-state 
electrolytes depending on ionic liquids. The third challenge vanishes as the 
multifunctional nanocarbons could work as efficient electrolytes without 
iodine [38]. The fourth and fifth challenges could be overcome by employing 
porphyrin, ITO, and PEDOT [38]. 
1.3.3 PEROVSKITE SOLAR CELL (PSC) 
Being a new addition to the third-generation solar cells, perovskite solar 
cells (PSCs) have attained great interest as they could contribute to the 
large-scale production of solar energy due to their high-power conversion 
energy (PCE). The perovskite solar cells (PSCs) evolved from the DSSC 
when the dyes were replaced with CH3
NH3
PbI3
 and CH3
NH3
PbBr3
 NCs. 
Perovskite was employed as it could perform as light-harvesting mate￾rial. Perovskite with a cubic structure possesses the general formula of 
ABX3
, where A and B are monovalent and divalent ions, respectively [8]. 
X is either N, O, C, or a halogen. For light-absorbing perovskites A, B, 
and X are CH3NH +
3 , Cs+, etc., Pb2+, Sn2+, etc.; I–
, Br–
, respectively [39]. 
PSCs with the advantage of having great optoelectronic properties, such 10 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
as long carrier diffusion length, high carrier mobility, and high absorption 
coefficient [39], act as an ideal candidates for third-generation solar cells. 
Studies have reported that the PCE has enhanced from 3.8% to 22.1% 
during the past years [39]. 
Two types of PSCs exist planar heterojunction and mesoscopic structures. 
The latter could be further divided into p-i-n and n-i-p structures based on the 
electron/hole transport layer (HTL) [39]. 
1.3.4 ORGANIC SOLAR CELL 
An ample amount of research was already done in the field of organic solar 
cells. It is also one of the leading devices in photovoltaics. Silicon solar 
cells are the most popular devices in solar cell technology and the consumer 
market [40]. It offers a lifetime of nearly 25 years, but the drawback of silicon 
solar cells is their high cost of production, and it is difficult to manufacture 
in large sizes industrially. It is imperative to find an alternative material; 
organic solar cells are such a device that can be manufactured in simple and 
cost-effective methods. It can be prepared by using spray deposition spin 
coating, printing, etc. [41]. 
The OPV can be divided into polymer solar cells and small-molecule solar 
cells [42]. The basic structure of organic solar cells, including a substrate, 
HTL, an electron transport layer (ETL), a photoactive layer, ITO, TCO, 
etc., are generally used as transparent substrates. It will act as a transparent 
window for passing light to the photoactive layer and also act as an anode. 
ETL is used to conduct electrons and block holes emitted from the photoac￾tive layer, while HTL conduct holes and block electrons. Generally, PEDOT: 
PSS is used as an electron-blocking layer. 
1.4 APPLICATIONS OF CARBON NANOMATERIALS IN 
PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR CELLS 
1.4.1 GRAPHENE AS PHOTOANODE IN DSSC 
Due to the peculiar characteristics of graphene, it is used in various fields of 
research. In the DSSC, things are not different. Due to its high surface area, 
outstanding transparency, and conductivity, graphene is used for various 
purposes [43]. Graphene offers a transparency rate of about 97.7%, and its 
conductivity makes it a worthy candidate for DSSC solar cells (Figure 1.5). Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 11 
FIGURE 1.5 Structure of DSSC. 
Photoanode is considered an electron transport material that transfers 
electrons from excited dye to the outer circuit. If graphene is placed between 
FTO and TiO2
, it will increase the charge transfer to the photoanode. The 
band position of graphene [–4.4 eV] lies in between the FTO [–4.7 eV] and 
TiO2
 [–4.2 eV], and hence it will act as an easy pathway for electron transfer 
[44]. Graphene also helps make a crack-free TiO2
 layer by acting as an auxil￾iary binder without decreasing its efficiency. But it is reported that excess 
graphene will decrease the transmittance of light into the dye and decrease 
its photoconversion efficiency [45]. 
1.4.2 GRAPHENE AS THE CATHODE IN DSSC 
The CE is another important part of the DSSC solar cell. These electrodes 
have the role of transferring electrons from the outer circuit to the electrolyte. – The process that happens is called triiodide reduction; in this, I3 will convert – into I–
. The reaction that happens here is I3 + 2e–
 = 3I–
 [44]. 
Generally, Pt is used as a CE in DSSC due to its low resistivity and 
high catalytic activity. The main issues of using Pt as CE are its high cost 
and its low chemical inertness. Researches are going on to replace Pt with 
other electrodes. Graphene is considered suitable for replacing Pt due to its 
high surface area, transparency, and conductive nature. It is reported that 
using functionalized graphene sheet as CE in DSSC, a power conversion 
efficiency (PCE) of 3.83% and that of HNO3
 doped graphene was about 
3.21% [44]. 
Graphene shows transparency in all wavelengths of the solar spectrum, 
including the IR region, so it can also make tandem solar cells. Tandem solar 12 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
cells can absorb the wavelength of the entire spectrum, increasing the overall 
efficiencies of the solar cell [44, 46]. 
1.4.3 EFFECT OF GRAPHENE IN PEROVSKITE SOLAR CELL 
In earlier studies, PSC has shown a considerable development in efficiency 
from 3.8% to 22.1% [47]. The most common materials used for the develop￾ment of PSCs are MAPbI3
 and FAPbI3
. In this material, Spiro-OMeTAD is 
generally used as HTL and TiO2
 as ETL (Figure 1.6). 
FIGURE 1.6 Structure of PSC. 
1.4.4 GRAPHENE IN THE ELECTRON TRANSPORT LAYER (ETL) 
TiO2
 is commonly used as ETL in PSCs. The instability of the TiO2
 layer 
with UV radiation limits its applications. Thus, researchers are going on 
to find an alternative material. Graphene is a material that exhibits good 
conductivity and mobility. It is reported that adding a small amount of 
graphene after the device fabrication will enhance the electron collection 
and give an efficiency of about 15.6% compared with that of 14.1% of 
ordinary samples [48]. The optimized amount of graphene that can be used 
is about 0.6–0.8 wt.%, and excess graphene does not favor increasing effi￾ciency. Another benefit of adding graphene is that the annealing tempera￾ture can be reduced from 500°C to 150°C. This reduces its fabrication cost 
to a great extent. Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 13 
1.4.5 GRAPHENE AS HOLE TRANSPORT LAYER (HTL) 
The critical role of the HTL is to conduct holes and block electrons emitted 
from the active layer. In PSCs, Spiro-OMeTAD is commonly used as 
HTL. Due to the high surface area, transparency, and conductive property 
of graphene, it gains more attention in this also. Researches are going on 
regarding the change in graphene and GO efficiency by spin coating on FTO 
and ITO substrates. The perovskite film spin-coated above the GO layer 
shows more film coverage compared to ITO [49]. 
Compared to commonly used HTL-Spiro-OMeTAD, GO offers less 
efficiency [50]. But the advantage of GO is its high stability; graphene-based 
PSC shows a 14% higher resistance against moisture than Spiro-OMeTAD. 
The efficiency of Spiro-OMeTAD significantly reduced by about 41% in 
1,987 minutes, while the case of PSCs with GO shows an increase in effi￾ciency from 4.87% to 6.62% in the meantime [51]. 
PSC, which uses rGO and Spiro-OMeTAD together as HTL, shows 
efficiency of about 13.01%. The composite structure of rGO and Spiro￾OMeTAD shows higher efficiency compared to individual ones. 
1.4.6 GRAPHENE AS ENCAPSULANT 
PSCs are emerging photovoltaic devices that show excellent efficiency 
comparable to silicon solar cells. The manufacturing cost of PSC is compara￾tively lesser compared to other photovoltaic devices. Even though it shows 
higher efficiency, the critical problem they are facing is its stability. The PSC 
is a device that is sensitive to moisture and oxygen in the outer atmosphere. 
This decreases its efficiency to a great extent [52]. 
The instability of PSCs may be due to a lack of intrinsic and extrinsic 
stability. The intrinsic stability is due to internal factors, including changes 
between the PSC layers. Extrinsic stability indicates the changes due to 
external factors like moisture, oxygen, etc., in the outer atmosphere [53]. It 
is found that the rate of degradation dramatically depends on the humidity 
content. The PSC materials show faster degradation in humid conditions 
than expected, and the degradation process will be faster in a brighter 
environment than in the dark [52]. Various research has been carried out to 
decrease the instability of perovskite materials. Graphene encapsulation is 
considered one of the most suitable methods to decrease its degradation. 
Due to the hydrophobic property of graphene, the graphene layer acts as 
an encapsulant against the oxygen and moisture content. The graphene 14 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
layer can be added to PSC using the spin coating method or the CVD 
method [52, 54]. 
1.4.7 CNTS IN SILICON SOLAR CELLS 
A hybrid heterojunction device of silicon and CNT is an alternative due to 
the advantageous qualities of simple structure, ease of fabrication, promising 
performance, and low cost [55]. The superior optoelectronic properties of 
CNTs, together with conventional silicon photovoltaic technologies, is a 
highly promising photovoltaic devices [56]. 
In CNT/Si hybrid solar cells, the transparent CNT films implanted on 
the Si wafer act as conductive electrodes for charge carrier accumulation. 
It sets up a built-in voltage for the separation of photo carriers [56]. The 
silicon’s maximum absorbance of the incident light occurs due to the CNT 
film’s noteworthy optical transparency. Thus, CNT films work as window 
electrodes for accumulating holes in the CNT/Si solar cells [55]. SWCNTs 
are more suitable for being used as the electrodes than the MWCNTs or 
double-walled CNTs (DWCNTs) because of their tunable/direct bandgap 
energies that match a broad range of the solar spectrum and superior charge 
carrier transporting properties [56]. 
The p-n junction heterojunction, metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) 
Schottky junction, which acts as a p-n homojunction, and metal-semicon￾ductor (MS) Schottky junction, are three operation models. In the p-n junction 
design, the p-type emitter is SWCNT thin film; photocarriers got separated 
at the SWCNT (p-type)/Si (n-type) junction by the activity of the barrier 
potential. A thin insulator is embedded between SWCNT (M) and Si (S) in 
the MIS Schottky model. The Schottky barrier is generated at the junction of 
SWCNT (M)/Si (S) in the MS Schottky junction, which is accountable for the 
majority of carrier-driven modification [56]. 
Jung et al. demonstrated SWCNT/Si solar cells with an innate power 
conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.2% and a fill factor (FF) of 74.1%. The 
superacid sliding coating method was followed for the synthesis of high￾quality SWCNT thin films [56]. 
Sun et al. fabricated flexible CNT/Si solar cells by the usage of ultra￾thin monocrystalline Si films to overcome the problem of the high rate of 
recombination of the electron-hole pairs inside the Si side and the high cost 
of the materials in the case of CNT/Si cells fabricated from amorphous 
silicon. An improved CVD method was followed to prepare CNT films, 
including a mixture of SWCNTs and DWCNTs. The efficiency obtained was Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 15 
approximately 4.2%. An improvement in efficiency is obtained by dropping 
HNO3 at the interface between CNTs and Si thin films. A PCE of 6% was 
obtained after acid dropping, showing the heterojunction interface’s signifi￾cance on the solar cell’s performance. The reflectance declined evidently, 
and thereby absorption of light at the visible region was enhanced by the 
presence of CNTs. The CNT/Si thin-film solar cells also have appealing 
stability through the bending-recovery cycles [37]. 
Hu et al. reported CNT/Si solar cells using small-bundle SWCNT film 
of high quality. These CNTs were produced by the floating catalyst CVD. 
They have a minimal sheet resistance of 180 Ω sq–1 when the transmittance is 
90%. Devices with active areas of 9.0 mm2
 and 2.3 mm2
 exhibit exceptional 
PCEs of 11.8% and 14.2%, respectively. Also, the cell showcased impressive 
stability in the air without any encapsulation [57]. 
Xu et al. explored the possibility of expanding the CNT-Si solar cell area 
above 2 cm2
, keeping the efficiencies high by about 10%. They introduced 
narrow CNT strips of superior conductivity to act like self-similar top elec￾trodes corresponding to the metal grids employed in traditional silicon solar 
cells. Adding an optimum number of CNT strips boosted the cell efficiency 
by enhancing the charge transportation and collection at the CNT side. Also, 
CNT/Si junctions have improved. Adding six strips increased the efficiency 
from 3.97% to 6.52%. The efficiency was further enhanced to 10.11% after 
TiO2
 coating and acid doping. Even though there is efficiency degradation 
after storing in the air for two days, the cell performance could be recovered 
by the HNO3
 treatment [58]. 
1.4.8 CNTS IN DSSC 
The large surface area of the nanoporous TiO2
 photoanode increases the 
adsorption of dye molecules, but it decreases electron transportation. The 
resistance of the host material is reduced by introducing CNTs into the semi￾conductor material. CNTs also enhance the mechanical strength, electrical 
conductivity, thermal conductivity, and flexibility of the device. The main 
intention of using CNTs is to transmit electrons from the semiconducting 
component to the transparent conducting oxide (TCO) through CNT by 
experiencing no resistance in the grain boundaries [60]. 
Mehmood et al. fabricated DSSCs utilizing TiO2
/MWCNT composite 
with CNTs of varying concentration and using N3 dye as a photosensitizer. 
An optimum concentration of 0.03% MWCNTs/TiO2
 gave the highest PCE 
of 0.85%, approximately 30% more than pure TiO2
 photoanodes (0.65%). 16 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
The increment in the surface area of the photoanode enhances the efficacy 
of the cell, with an outcome of improved dye loading. The PCE enhance￾ment is the result of improved injection efficiency of electrons. The TiO2
/ 
MWCNT photoanode exhibits a greater redshift than the pure TiO2
 electrode 
pertaining to the photosensitizing properties of CNTs, as a fact of which 
the photovoltaic properties of the cell are extended to the visible region of 
the spectrum. Increasing the concentration of MWCNT above the optimum 
value negatively affects the working of the cell [61]. 
Kabir et al. reported TiO2
/SWCNT-based DSSC using a mixture of two 
natural dyes, betalain, and curcumin. An optimum mixture of betalain and 
curcumin dye in the volume ratio of 1:2 yields an efficiency of 0.649% for 
pure TiO2
 DSSC. Incorporating SWCNT into the TiO2
 photoanode gives 
an improved efficiency of 0.903%. TiCl4
-treated SWCNT/TiO2
 further 
enhances the efficiency to 1.108%. SWCNT/TiO2
 hybrid material allocates 
the co-occurrence of dual pores, satisfying the high surface area required for 
dye adsorption. Also, it supports a high-quality junction between semicon￾ductor TiO2
 material and the dyes. The degradation study of the cell under 
normal atmospheric conditions for 360 hours results in significant degrada￾tion (16.3–27.5%) of the cell performance [60]. 
Kilic successfully fabricated DSSC using CNT/ZnO nanowire (NW) 
hybrid photoelectrode. The efficiency obtained was 5.55%. The efficiency 
of the DSSC without CNT was 5.05%. The N719 ruthenium dye absorption 
on the surface of hybrid composites enhances, and the short circuit current 
density increases significantly due to better electron lifetime. All these happen 
due to the presence of CNT. The power conversion efficiency of the DSSC 
is improved with an increased device voltage due to the carrier density incre￾ment by the CNTs, and decremented recombination of charge carriers [59]. 
Pt CEs used in DSSC have the drawback of high cost. CNTs having high 
electrochemical activity, and low cost is a better alternative [62] because a 
CE must have excellent electronic conductivity, large active surface area, 
high catalytic activity, high transparency, and excellent compliance with the 
transparent TCO support [63], for achieving a high PCE of DSSCs [62]. 
Nam et al. reported the functioning of DSSC using CNTs as CEs. Two 
methods were used for the CNT preparation. Screen printing of randomly 
dispersed MWCNT was the first method. For the second CNT preparation, 
the catalytic CVD method was followed, and reasonably well-aligned CNTs 
were grown directly from this method. DSSC with reference Pt CE yielded 
an efficiency of 8.80%. The efficiency corresponding to the CE from the 
randomly dispersed screen-printed CNT was 8.03%. It is due to the decreased Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 17 
short circuit current. But the directly grown CNT as CE yielded an efficiency 
of 10.04% for DSSC from the remarkably improving FF, which is due to the 
fast redox reaction on the CEs [62]. 
Ma et al. developed a novel bilayer CEs of reduced graphene oxide 
(RGO) and aligned carbon nanotube (ACNT). The ACNT underlayer acts as 
a transition layer for RGO. The overlayer of RGO plays the role of catalytic 
layer. The directional arrangement of ACNT makes it easier for the electrons 
to pass through the transport channel. Also, the ACNT CE yields higher PCE 
than the DSSC based on the MWCNT CE. The surfactant functionalization 
of RGO by a cationic surfactant cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) enhances 
cell performance. The CPC-RGO/ACNT-based DSSC gives a PCE of 3.9%, 
a 1.24-fold increase than the ACNT-based DSSC [64]. 
Fiber-shaped DSSC has attracted significant attention due to its portable 
and flexible nature. Modified titanium wire-based photoanode and Pt-based 
CEs are the essential components for a fiber-shaped DSSC. Kim et al. used 
CNT yarns (CNTY) for the CE for the fiber-shaped DSSC. The CNTY was 
fabricated by dry spinning from vertically aligned (VA) MWCNTs. CNTY￾based CE showed increased electrocatalytic activity in the solid-state fiber 
DSSCs. The PCE enhanced up to 4.00% was obtained, competing with 
2.64% PCE of the Pt wire electrodes. Also, the device exhibits a decreased 
series resistance which indicates a decrease in the leakage current and an 
increase in the extraction efficiency. The device exhibits a high level of flex￾ibility and washability and better long-term stability over 35 days. These 
can be accredited to the large specific area of CNTY, that derives from high 
graphitization, the mesoporous structure of the spun CNTY, and the long 
length of the constituent CNT arrays [63]. 
1.4.9 CNTS IN PEROVSKITE SOLAR CELLS (PSCS) 
Habisreutinger et al. studied the successful incorporation of CNTs based 
upon metal-halide perovskites (MHPs). CNTs can work as contact materials 
which have an essential part in the functioning of MHP solar cells because 
the contact materials introduce electronic symmetry in the apparatus. Wu et 
al. used a thin semi-transparent electronically connected matrix of SWCNTs 
as alternative contact material that could maintain a light balance between 
high bandwidth light transmittance and low electrical resistance. The contacts 
should have good charge selectivity and improve the long-term stability of 
the cells [65]. 18 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
CNTs have been found out to have the usage as charge selective 
contacts (CSCs) both for the p-type and n-type sides of perovskite devices. 
Habisreutinger et al. studied the usage of SWCNT-based HTL combination 
with various configurations like that with polymers which could meet the 
stability requirements of the p-type contact. But further studies proved that 
SWCNTs used as the sole HTL could not build up a solid built-in field to 
lessen the recombination losses at the interfaces, resulting in a substantial 
photovoltage deficit and thus lower steady-state performance. The CNTs can 
work as charge extraction routes from the absorber to the HTL when CNTs 
are combined with secondary hole transporters. The CNT minimizes the 
recombination of charge carriers at the interfaces by the accelerated charge 
extraction into the secondary material. The poor charge carrier transporta￾tion properties of various hole-transporting materials are compensated by 
combining SWCNT with them. Studies have been done on hybrid systems 
showing the advancement of carrier transport inside the absorber layer by 
directly constituting SWCNT into the absorber layer. SWCNTs have the 
possibility of usage as bridging elements to boost up the inter-grain charge 
carrier transport mechanism [65]. 
Wang et al. used hydrophobic poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) 
combining MWCNTs as the HTL and developed a carbon electrode-based 
CsPbI2
Br inorganic PSC, which showcased excellent cell performance as 
well as excellent stability. A PCE up to 10.01% with a stabilized effi￾ciency of 8.85% was attained. The P3HT-MWCNT protects the CsPbI2
Br 
from atmospheric moisture and prevents moisture inrush that improves 
the stability of the cell. MWCNTs significantly boost up the charge￾transporting mechanism of the P3HT matrix, whilst P3HT forbids the 
transfer of electrons from the CsPbI2
Br layer to MWCNTs. The device 
exhibits exceptional long-term stability as it retains ~85% of the begin￾ning value of PCE over 240 hours under ambient conditions with no need 
for encapsulation [66]. 
Mohammed et al. reported CNT-incorporated methylammonium lead iodide 
(MAPI3
) perovskite film made in atmospheric air. It was used as an effective 
absorber layer in MAPI3
-based solar cells giving a PCE up to 15% [67]. 
1.4.10 CNTS IN ORGANIC SOLAR CELLS 
The intention of incorporating CNTs into BHJ devices is mainly to replace 
fullerenes that are expensive, less conducting, and low air-stable with 
CNTs to combine their unique charge transport characteristics with the Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 19 
physicochemical properties of conductive polymers. An improved percola￾tion network with exceptionally high exciton separation in polymeric BHJs 
is obtained [68]. 
CNTs can be used as the photoactive components of BHJ devices [68], 
enhancing device efficiency by several orders of magnitude. CNTs act as 
exciton dissociation centers; the CNTs and the conducting polymers trans￾port electrons and holes, respectively to the electrodes. Even though there 
is an enhancement of PCE, it remains lower than the PCE of inorganic 
PV cells. CNTs should be uniformly dispersed in the polymer for efficient 
charge dissociation. The uniform dispersion of CNTs in polymer has another 
advantage of forming a percolation path through the composites, making the 
transportation of electrons easier and reducing the recombination of charge 
carriers in the active layer [69]. 
CNTs can also have the application as transparent conductive or hole 
extraction layers (HELs) to replace indium tin oxide (ITO). This application 
is inferred from the substantial inherent charge mobility of individual CNTs, 
amenability to solution processing, and large optical transparency over a 
broad range of frequencies [68]. 
Lee et al. presented BHJ solar cells from nitrogen-doped CNT (N-CNT) 
or boron-doped CNT (B-CNT) as an exceedingly selective hole or electron￾transport enhancing materials. The semiconducting polymer used was P3HT/ 
PCBM, and the CNTs were the multi-walled ones. Both the CNTs showed 
enhanced cell performances. B-doped CNT-based solar cells, in particular, 
showed more improvement in short circuit current and PCE. PCE obtained 
was 4.1% for 1.0% wt. of B-CNT. It results from the observed enhancement 
in carrier mobility [70]. 
1.4.11 APPLICATIONS OF FULLERENE IN PHOTOVOLTAICS 
The environmental hazards and the high cost of fossil fuels paved an opening 
for a renewable energy substitute for them, which resulted in the invention 
of many energy conversion devices such as FCs, photovoltaic cells, SCs, etc. 
Our area of interest is photovoltaics, which converts the abundant energy 
resource, solar energy, into electrical energy [72, 73]. The basic phenom￾enon associated with photovoltaic devices is the production of electron-hole 
pairs due to photon absorption [74]. The branch of photovoltaics could 
be broadly divided into organic solar cells and inorganic solar cells [3]. 
Organic solar cells are metal-free solar cells that possess advantages such as 
(i) tunable electrochemical and optical properties; (ii) their technology has 20 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
high flexibility and low production cost; and (iii) increased light-harvesting 
ranges [74]. Organic solar cells work based on the formation of excitons 
under irradiation of white light and are thus called excitonic solar cells [72]. 
Although inorganic solar cells are characterized by their higher efficiency, 
they possess the disadvantage of high cost [73], rigidity, and weight [74]. 
The lower efficiency faced by organic solar cells could be increased by 
incorporating the appropriate donor-acceptor pair and the device architecture 
[72]. The significant affinity for electrons and increased ability to transport 
charge [72] make fullerenes the electron-accepting component in organic 
solar cells. 
Thus, here we are discussing in detail the role of fullerenes in the field of 
photovoltaics, specifically, organic-inorganic perovskites solar cells, organic 
solar cells, and DSSCs. 
1.4.12 FULLERENES IN ORGANIC SOLAR CELLS 
The organic solar cells employed in the present scenario are the bulk hetero￾junction (BHJ) solar cells, which possess polymer donors and fullerene 
acceptors. Several factors, such as donor-acceptor interaction, morphology, 
etc., are being studied to understand the effect of fullerene derivatives as 
electron acceptors [72]. Fullerene-based polymers are examples of previ￾ously synthesized BHJ solar cells [72, 73]. 
Since the fundamental phenomenon to enhance efficiency is incorporating 
fullerenes as the electron acceptor, studies on the donor-acceptor interactions 
should be considered. Thus, the electronic properties of polymer-fullerene 
interactions are tuned to absorb a more significant amount of light, produce 
free electrons, and transport charges to respective electrodes [72]. Fullerenes 
are capable of acting as electron acceptors as they possess: (a) energetically 
deep-lying LUMO with high electron affinity [72]; (b) they are capable of 
stabilizing negative charges; (c) they have very high photoinduced charge 
transfer; (d) possess high electron mobility; (e) it possesses a constant elec￾tronic structure (does not depend on the functionalization). 
Morphology is another factor responsible for increasing the efficiency of 
BHJ solar as the physical interaction of donor and acceptor has a significant 
role in the BHJ solar cells [72]. The factors affecting the morphology of 
the polymer-fullerene interaction are the crystallinity and miscibility of the 
materials used, the solvent we chose, and its annealing [72]. At present, the 
most suitable combination among MDMO-PPV/PCBM and P3HT/PCBM 
combinations is P3HT/PCBM [72]. Chlorobenzene and toluene are the two Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 21 
critical solvents employed to improve the efficiency of organic solar cells. 
Moreover, thermal healing helps to attain morphology to a greater extent [72].
C derivative of PCBM and Porphyrin-fullerene combination of donor- 70 
acceptor are composites used in organic solar cells to increase efficiency [73]. 
1.4.13 EFFECTS OF FULLERENES IN DSSC 
The role of fullerenes is introduced in the solid-state electrolyte to produce 
iodine-free electrolytes [38]. The fullerene-based electrolyte was first reported 
in 2012 [38]. Fullerene-based electrodes possess the advantages of insig￾nificant absorption features in the visible region compared to iodine-based 
electrolytes and the efficient regeneration of ruthenium dyes. The addition of 
fullerene-based electrolytes improved the efficiency by up to 2% [38]. It also 
enhances the device’s photocurrent [38]. Fullerene-based dyes were regarded 
as potential dye-based on multifunctional nanocarbons, which could enhance 
the performance of the DSSC [38]. The addition of fullerene-based dye date 
back to 2007, where fullerene attached via diaminohydrocarbon linkers were 
employed [38]. Reports suggest that metallotetraphenylporphyrin – fullerene 
could also be used as a fullerene-based dye [29]. Thus, fullerene derivatives 
could improve the efficiency of DSSC by causing a change in the electrolytes 
and dyes. 
1.4.14 EFFECTS OF FULLERENES IN PEROVSKITE SOLAR CELLS 
(PSCS) 
The PSC faces many disadvantages of which, the major one being the usage 
of toxic lead. Apart from this, they encounter the problem of instability and 
hysteresis [39]. Thus, studies report that fullerenes could be employed in 
PSCs due to their highly-matched energy levels with that of perovskites and 
also since they possess other merits of low reorganization energy, increased 
electron affinity, and high electron mobility. Fullerenes and fullerene 
derivatives could be used as trap-state passivation, interfacial modification 
materials, and electron transport materials [39]. 
The fullerenes could enhance the efficiency of the PSC by reducing the 
hysteresis as they could successfully passivate the trap states at the grain 
boundaries and surfaces of the perovskite layer concerning the formation of 
fullerene–halide radicals that inhibit the formation of trap states [39]. The 
chemical structures of fullerenes could also affect the efficiency of the PSC. 22 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
The role of fullerenes in PSCs could be discussed as the effect of fullerenes 
in the ETL, the effect of fullerenes in the interlayers, and the studies on 
fullerene–perovskite heterojunctions [39]. 
Fullerenes incorporated in the ETL of p-i-n structure: Studies reported 
affirm that the efficiency of PSC is improved by employing fullerene deriva￾tives in the ETL. Many research groups have worked on the same field, of 
which one group in 2014 employed double fullerene layers as layers capable 
of extracting electrons, thus increasing the FF to 80% [39]. These double 
fullerene layers were capable of lowering the dark current leakage and 
also could passivate charge traps. Studies could also elucidate the effect of 
electron mobility of fullerene in enhancing photovoltaic performance [39]. 
A fulleropyrrolidine with a hydrophilic triethylene glycol monoethyl ether 
side chain (PTEG-1) was used as the ETL to overcome the light-soaking 
phenomenon. The Voc of PSCs is improved by using fullerene deriva￾tives with increased LUMO energy levels as ETLs [39] and high bandgap 
perovskites as absorbers [39]. 
Fullerenes employed in the cathode buffer layer: fullerenes owing to 
the advantage of chemical tunability and solution processability, could be 
used as cathode buffer layers (CBL) [39]. Amine-functionalized fullerene 
derivatives are majorly used as CBL since the amine group has the potential 
to behave as an interfacial dipole layer that can decrease the work func￾tion of metal electrodes and enable ohmic contact at ETL/metal electrode 
interfaces [39]. 
Fullerenes employed in the interfacial layer were used in the interfacial 
layer of the n-i-p structure, which used TiO2
 as the ETL, which had the 
disadvantage of lower stability and anomalous hysteresis. A self-assembled 
fullerene monolayer (C60-SAM) was used to overcome the difficulties 
possessed by TiO2
 as it could inhibit electron transfer from the perovskite 
to TiO2
 and decrease Voc Loss [39]. PC61BM is the fullerenes derivative 
commonly used as the interfacial layer. Fullerene derivative has the added 
advantage of acting as surface modifiers on other metal oxide materials [39]. 
Effect of fullerene in perovskite-fullerene heterojunction: Due to the 
small diffusion length of electrons (shorter than that of holes,) the latter 
could be extracted more efficiently than electrons in perovskites. Therefore, 
studies are done to enhance the electron extraction efficiency to increase 
the device’s performance. Fullerene and fullerene-based polymers could 
improve the electron extraction efficiency in perovskites [39]. PC61BM is 
widely employed for this purpose. Pristine fullerenes are also being used to 
form perovskite-fullerene heterojunctions. Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 23 
Thus, fullerenes could improve the efficiency of PSCs by acting as ETL, 
CBL, and interfacial layer, and also it could be employed in perovskite 
heterojunctions. 
KEYWORDS 
• carbon nanotube 
• fullerene 
• graphene 
• multi-walled CNTs 
• nanomaterials 
• photovoltaic 
• solar cell 
REFERENCES 
1. Moore, K., & Wei, W. (2021). Applications of carbon nanomaterials in perovskite solar 
cells for solar energy conversion. Nano Materials Science, 3(3), 276–290. 
2. Zhu, H., Wei, J., Wang, K., & Wu, D., (2009). Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 
93(9), 1461–1470. 
3. Shah, A., Torres, P., Tscharner, R., Wyrsch, N., & Keppner, H., (1999). Science, 285 
(5428), 692–698. 
4. Parida, B., Iniyan, S., & Goic, R., (2011). Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 
15(3), 1625–1636. 
5. El Chaar, L., & El Zein, N., (2011). Review of photovoltaic technologies. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15(5), 2165–2175. 
6. Guldi, D. M., (2007). Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 9(12), 1400–1420. 
7. Notarianni, M., Liu, J., Vernon, K., & Motta, N., (2016). Beilstein Journal of Nanotech￾nology, 7(1), 149–196. 
8. Choi, H. J., Jung, S. M., Seo, J. M., Chang, D. W., Dai, L., & Baek, J. B., (2012). Nano 
Energy, 1(4), 534–551. 
9. Pumera, M., (2011). Energy & Environmental Science, 4(3), 668–674. 
10. Robertson, J., (2002). Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports, 37(4–6), 129–281. 
11. Novoselov, K. S., Geim, A. K., Morozov, S. V., Jiang, D. E., Zhang, Y., Dubonos, S. V., 
& Firsov, A. A., (2004). Science, 306(5696), 666–669. 
12. Geim, A. K., & Novoselov, K. S., (2010). A Collection of Reviews from Nature Journals, 
11–19. 
13. Kroto, H. W., Heath, J. R., O’Brien, S. C., Curl, R. F., & Smalley, R. E., (1985). C 60: 
Buckminsterfullerene. Nature, 318(6042), 162, 163. 24 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
14. Hirsch, A., & Brettreich, M. (2005). Fullerenes: Chemistry and Reactions. John Wiley 
& Sons, 1–412; ISBN 3-527-30820-2. 
15. Iijima, S., (1991). Nature, 354(6348), 56–58. 
16. Das, S., Pandey, D., Thomas, J., & Roy, T., (2019). Advanced Materials, 31(1), 1802722. 
17. Verdejo, R., Bernal, M. M., Romasanta, L. J., & Lopez-Manchado, M. A., (2011). Journal 
of Materials Chemistry, 21(10), 3301–3310. 
18. Agrawal, N., Parihar, A. S., Singh, J. P., Goswami, T. H., & Tripathi, D. N., (2015). 
Procedia Mater. Sci., 10. 
19. Pan, B., Xu, G., Zhang, B., Ma, X., Li, H., & Zhang, Y. (2012). Preparation and 
tribological properties of polyamide 11/graphene coatings. Polymer-Plastics Technology 
and Engineering, 51(11), 1163–1166. 
20. Yang, M., Zhang, Z., Zhu, X., Men, X., & Ren, G., (2015). Friction, 3, 72. 
21. Mahmoudi, T., Wang, Y., & Hahn, Y. B., (2018). Nano Energy, 47, 51–65. 
22. Lee, H. C., Liu, W. W., Chai, S. P., Mohamed, A. R., Aziz, A., Khe, C. S., & Hashim, U., 
(2017). RSC Advances, 7(26), 15644–15693. 
23. Rosli, N. N., Ibrahim, M. A., Ludin, N. A., Teridi, M. A. M., & Sopian, K., (2019). 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 99, 83–99. 
24. Hernandez, Y., Nicolosi, V., Lotya, M., Blighe, F. M., Sun, Z., De, S., & Coleman, J. N., 
(2008). Nature Nanotechnology, 3(9), 563–568. 
25. Mildred S. Dresselhaus, Phaedon Avouris (auth.), Mildred S. Dresselhaus, Gene Dres￾selhaus, Phaedon Avouris (eds.). Smalley, R. E. (Foreword) (2001). Carbon Nanotubes: 
Synthesis, Structure, Properties, and Applications. 1–421. ISBN 3-540-41086-4. 
26. Gupta, N., Gupta, S. M., & Sharma, S. K., (2019). Carbon Letters, 29(5), 419–447. 
27. Ando, Y., Zhao, X., Sugai, T., & Kumar, M., (2004). Materials Today, 7(10), 22–29. 
28. De La Puente, F. L., & Nierengarten, J. F. (Eds.). (2012). Fullerenes: Principles and 
Applications. Royal Society of Chemistry, 3–594. ISBN: 978-1-84973-136-2. 
29. El Mahdy, A. M., Halim, S. A., & Taha, H. O., (2018). Journal of Molecular Structure, 
1160, 415–427. 
30. Yadav, B. C., & Kumar, R., (2008). International Journal of Nanotechnology and Appli￾cations, 2(1), 15–24. 
31. Coro, J., Suarez, M., Silva, L. S., Eguiluz, K. I., & Salazar-Banda, G. R., (2016). 
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 41(40), 17944–17959. 
32. Zhang, R., Murata, M., Wakamiya, A., & Murata, Y., (2013). Chemistry Letters, 42(8), 
879–881. 
33. Tanigaki, K., Kuroshima, S., & Ebbesen, T. W., (1995). Thin Solid Films, 257(2), 154–165. 
34. Krätschmer, W., Fostiropoulos, K., & Huffman, D. R., (1990). Chemical Physics Letters, 
170(2, 3), 167–170. 
35. Smalley, R. E., (1992). Accounts of Chemical Research, 25(3), 98–105. 
36. Goetzberger, A., Knobloch, J., & Voß, B., (2014). Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells, 9–48. 
37. Sun, H., Wei, J., Jia, Y., Cui, X., Wang, K., & Wu, D., (2014). Nano-Scale Research Letters, 
9(1), 1–6. 
38. Costa, R. D., Lodermeyer, F., Casillas, R., & Guldi, D. M., (2014). Energy & Environ￾mental Science, 7(4), 1281–1296. 
39. Deng, L. L., Xie, S. Y., & Gao, F., (2018). Advanced Electronic Materials, 4(10), 1700435. 
40. Tao, M., (2008). The Electrochemical Society Interface, 17(4), 30. 
41. Tang, C. W., (1986). Two-layer organic photovoltaic cell. Applied Physics Letters, 48(2), 
183–185. Photovoltaics Applications of Solid Carbons 25 
42. Shin, R. Y. C., Kietzke, T., Sudhakar, S., Dodabalapur, A., Chen, Z. K., & Sellinger, A., 
(2007). Chemistry of Materials, 19(8), 1892–1894. 
43. Das, S., Sudhagar, P., Verma, V., Song, D., Ito, E., Lee, S. Y., & Choi, W., (2011). 
Advanced Functional Materials, 21(19), 3729–3736. 
44. Das, S., Sudhagar, P., Kang, Y. S., & Choi, W., (2014). Journal of Materials Research, 
29(3), 299–319. 
45. Kim, H. N., Yoo, H., & Moon, J. H., (2013). Nanoscale, 5(10), 4200–4204. 
46. Reina, A., Jia, X., Ho, J., Nezich, D., Son, H., Bulovic, V., & Kong, J., (2009). Nano 
Letters, 9(1), 30–35. 
47. Saliba, M., Matsui, T., Seo, J. Y., Domanski, K., Correa-Baena, J. P., Nazeeruddin, M. 
K., & Grätzel, M., (2016). Energy & Environmental Science, 9(6), 1989–1997. 
48. Han, G. S., Song, Y. H., Jin, Y. U., Lee, J. W., Park, N. G., Kang, B. K., & Jung, H. S., 
(2015). ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 7(42), 23521–23526. 
49. Liu, Z., Robinson, J. T., Sun, X., & Dai, H., (2008). Journal of the American Chemical 
Society, 130(33), 10876–10877. 
50. Yun, J. M., Yeo, J. S., Kim, J., Jeong, H. G., Kim, D. Y., Noh, Y. J., & Na, S. I., (2011). 
Advanced Materials, 23(42), 4923–4928. 
51. Shi, Z., & Jayatissa, A. H., (2018). Materials, 11(1), 36. 
52. Berhe, T. A., Su, W. N., Chen, C. H., Pan, C. J., Cheng, J. H., Chen, H. M., & Hwang, 
B. J., (2016). Energy & Environmental Science, 9(2), 323–356. 
53. Uddin, A., Upama, M. B., Yi, H., & Duan, L., (2019). Coatings, 9(2), 65. 
54. Cao, J., Liu, Y. M., Jing, X., Yin, J., Li, J., Xu, B., & Zheng, N., (2015). Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 137(34), 10914–10917. 
55. Hu, X., Hou, P., Liu, C., & Cheng, H., (2019). Nano Materials Science, 1(3), 156–172. 
56. Jung, Y., Li, X., Rajan, N. K., Taylor, A. D., & Reed, M. A., (2013). Nano Letters, 13(1), 
95–99. 
57. Hu, X. G., Hou, P. X., Liu, C., Zhang, F., Liu, G., & Cheng, H. M., (2018). Nano Energy, 
50, 521–527. 
58. Xu, W., Wu, S., Li, X., Zou, M., Yang, L., Zhang, Z., & Cao, A., (2016). Advanced Energy 
Materials, 6(12), 1600095. 
59. Kilic, B., (2019). Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, 30(4), 3482–3487. 
60. Kabir, F., Sakib, S. N., Uddin, S. S., Efaz, E. T., & Himel, M. T. F., (2019). Sustainable 
Energy Technologies and Assessments, 35, 298–307. 
61. Mehmood, U., Hussein, I. A., Harrabi, K., Mekki, M. B., Ahmed, S., & Tabet, N., 
(2015). Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 140, 174–179. 
62. Nam, J. G., Park, Y. J., Kim, B. S., & Lee, J. S., (2010). Scripta Materialia, 62(3), 148–150. 
63. Kim, J. H., Hong, S. K., Yoo, S. J., Woo, C. Y., Choi, J. W., Lee, D., & Song, M., (2021). 
Dyes and Pigments, 185, 108855. 
64. Ma, J., Yang, H. L., & Ren, W. H., (2020). Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 
20(3), 1749–1755. 
65. Habisreutinger, S. N., & Blackburn, J. L., (2021). Journal of Applied Physics, 129(1), 
010903. 
66. Wang, G., Liu, J., Chen, K., Pathak, R., Gurung, A., & Qiao, Q., (2019). Journal of 
Colloid and Interface Science, 555, 180–186. 
67. Mohammed, M. K., Sarusi, G., Sakthivel, P., Ravi, G., & Younis, U., (2021). Materials 
Research Bulletin, 137, 111182. 26 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials
68. Cataldo, S., Salice, P., Menna, E., & Pignataro, B., (2012). Energy & Environmental 
Science, 5(3), 5919–5940. 
69. Abdulrazzaq, O. A., Saini, V., Bourdo, S., Dervishi, E., & Biris, A. S., (2013). Particulate 
Science and Technology, 31(5), 427–442. 
70. Lee, J. M., Park, J. S., Lee, S. H., Kim, H., Yoo, S., & Kim, S. O., (2011). Advanced 
Materials, 23(5), 629–633. 
71. Yan, J., & Saunders, B. R., (2014). RSC Advances, 4(82), 43286–43314. 
72. Thompson, B. C., & Fréchet, J. M., (2008). Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 
47(1), 58–77. 
73. Imahori, H., & Fukuzumi, S., (2004). Advanced Functional Materials, 14(6), 525–536. 
74. Echeverry, C. A., & Castro, E., (2018). Int. J. Chem. Res., 1(1), 1–8. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 2 
ROLE OF CARBON NANOTUBES AS 
SUPPORTED METAL-NANOPARTICLES 
CATALYSIS 
H. AKHINA1
 and TRESSIA ALIAS PRINCY PAULOSE2 
1
International and Inter-University Center for Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
2
Post-Graduate and Research Department of Chemistry, 
Bishop Moore College, Mavelikara, Alappuzha, Kerala, India 
ABSTRACT 
The unique tubular morphology of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) has fascinated 
scientists and attracted widespread research interest in the last few decades. 
Ever since its discovery in 1991, CNTs have found diverse commercial appli￾cations in almost all areas of science and technology, ranging from recharge￾able batteries, energy storage, environmental remediation, and biotechnology 
to automotive parts and sporting goods. Their unique features, including a 
large specific surface area, chemical inertness, and high oxidative stability, 
have contributed to their widespread use as catalysis supports. The contribu￾tions of CNTs as supports in heterogeneous catalysis are discussed in this 
chapter. Recent investigations on the preparation and morphological charac￾terization of various metal/metal oxide particles on CNTs are discussed. The 
potential applications of CNT as catalyst supports in heterogeneous catalysis 
are also explored in this chapter. According to reports in the literature, CNTs 
are a promising material for use as supports in various catalytic processes, 
contributing to a greener environment by providing ligandless, recyclable, 28 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
cheaper catalysts with good activity in catalytic reactions using solventless/ 
environmentally benign solvents at lower/ambient pressure/temperature 
conditions. 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The year 1991 witnessed the beginning of a new era in the field of nanoscience 
and nanotechnology with the entry of the fourth allotrope of carbon which 
exhibited unique physical and chemical properties. The material consisted 
of graphitic sheets, i.e., an aromatic mono-atomic layer made up of a 
hexagonal arrangement of sp2
 hybridized carbon atoms, rolled up into a 
tubular structure. Iijima, who discovered these extremely thin needle-like 
structures while examining carbon materials under an electron microscope, 
named them carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [1, 2]. Although tubular structures 
were known for some silicate minerals, tubular carbon structures had never 
been synthesized or found in nature. With his dual publication in the journal 
Nature, Iijima announced the preparation of these magnificent structures. 
CNTs can be produced in two forms: Single-wall carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNTs) and multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). SWCNTs are 
formed from a graphene sheet that has been coiled into a hollow tube with 
a hemisphere of fullerene at one or both ends. CNTs range in length from 
a few microns to several millimeters, with an interior diameter of 0.4 to 
2.5 nanometers. MWCNTs can be regarded as concentric SWCNTs with 
an increasing diameter, which is coaxially disposed of like ‘Russian dolls.’ 
The number of concentric tubes present can vary from two (double-wall 
carbon nanotubes) to 100, such that the external diameter can reach 100 nm. 
Depending on the number of layers and the helicity created by rolling up 
each graphitic sheet, CNTs have conducting or semi-conducting qualities. 
SWCNTs display superior properties, such as higher mechanical strength, 
higher thermal/electrical conductivity, higher specific surface area, higher 
thermal resistance, and unique optical properties when compared to 
MWCNTS. SWCNTs also have lesser defects on their surfaces and therefore 
are more stable than MWCNTs. SWCNTs have a tendency to form bundles 
or ropes due to van der Waals attraction between the tubes, with each rope 
containing tens to hundreds of tightly packed tubes of similar diameter that 
are entangled together in the solid state, giving rise to a highly complex 
network; and thus, are difficult to disperse. Despite its excellent features, 
SWCNT applications have been limited due to difficulties in synthesizing 
synthetically pure SWCNTs and their dispersibility. Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 29 
Driven by their extraordinary electronic, mechanical, and thermal 
properties, CNTs have found diverse applications as composite materials, in 
energy storage, in the field of photovoltaics, integrated circuits, biosensors, 
nanomedicine, etc. However, one of the major applications of CNTs has 
been in the field of catalysis, especially as support. 
2.2 PREPARATION AND MORPHOLOGICAL STUDIES OF CNT￾SUPPORTED CATALYST 
Supported catalysts can be prepared by depositing catalytic material onto 
the inert support and then optionally treating them before feeding them into 
the reaction chamber. Catalytic materials supported or bonded to CNTs are 
referred to as CNT-supported catalysts. The literature review reveals that 
both the exterior as well as the interior wall of the CNT have been utilized for 
the bounding of catalytic materials. The catalytic materials generally used 
are precious metals like Pt, Pd, Ru, Rh, Ir, Au, etc., transition metals like 
Fe, Co, Ni, Mo, etc., and metal oxides, hybrids [3], bifunctional catalyst 
materials, etc. [4–7]. The catalytic property of a supported metal catalyst 
has been reported to depend on the degree of dispersion of the metal on the 
support. Various methods have been utilized for the preparation of CNT￾supported catalysts, including wet impregnation [3, 5, 8–10], deposition/ 
precipitation techniques [11], microemulsion-templated synthesis [12], 
liquid phase reduction [13–15], microwave (MW) assisted synthesis [16, 
17], strong electrostatic adsorption method [18], etc. As CNT is inert support, 
pre-treatment is needed in most of the preparation methods to attain optimal 
interaction between the support and the catalyst material. Some of the recent 
studies dealing with the preparation of CNT-supported catalysts using MW 
assistance are discussed here. 
The MW-assisted approach has been regarded as one of the most effec￾tive methods for chemical reactions and the manufacture of CNT-supported 
catalysts [19, 20]. In terms of energy use, MW heating is more efficient. The 
literature review reveals that one can tailor the particle size of the catalyst 
materials by changing the duration of MW heating. It is an advantage of this 
method over conventional preparation methods. Also, in most cases, only a 
very short reaction time is required for MW-assisted synthesis. Moreover, 
MW-assisted synthesis is seen as an effective, fast, simpler, homogeneous 
method, and it can increase the reaction rate greatly [16, 21]. 
Using a MW heating technique, multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)-
supported catalysts were recently prepared by Lee et al. [22]. With a MW 30 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
heating for 10 minutes, they were able to generate a uniform dispersion 
of nanoparticles (NPs) with an average size of roughly 5 nm. They have 
selected the precursors H2
PtCl6
·6H2
O, RuCl3
, and NiCl2
 and were mixed at 
the atomic ratio of 6:3:1 to obtain 0.1 g of Pt–Ru–Ni nanoparticles supported 
on MWCNTs. The functionalized MWCNTs were disseminated in ultra-pure 
water and isopropyl alcohol at first. The pH of the mixture was adjusted to 10 
by adding 0.3 M KOH. The solution was transferred into a container and was 
then MW-treated at 800 W for 10, 20, and 30 min. The resulting catalysts were 
using a vacuum oven at 80°C for 24 h. Morphology of as prepared catalysts 
was analyzed using TEM, and they come in to the conclusion that an increase in 
the MW heating time accelerated the aggregation of the PtRuNi nanoparticles. 
Devrim and Arica [23] used MW-assisted synthesis for the prepara￾tion CNT supported Pt catalyst. They have varied the time of heating, and 
MW power obtained a particle size in the range of 2.6–2.9 nanometer was 
obtained. For the synthesis of Pt/MWCNT catalyst with the Pt loading of 50 
wt.%, they have ultrasonicated the mixture containing 50 mg MWCNT, 24 
ml EG and 6 mL IPA with ultrasonic bath for 1 h. After 1 h, H2
PtCl6
 (100 
mg) was added into the solution and ultrasonic treatment continued for 10 
min. 1M NaOH in EG was used to adjust the pH of the mixture above 12. 
The resultant mixture was then kept in MW oven for different times and 
MW power. Finally, the resulting mixture was filtered, washed with acetone, 
deionized water, and dried in the oven at 100°C overnight. The catalysts thus 
prepared are denoted as PT/MWCNT-1, PtMWCNT-3, and Pt/MWCNT-4 
based on the time of heating, MW power, and Pt loading. 
TEM images (Figure 2.1) expose the successful attachment of Pt on 
the MWCNT and state of dispersion. The Pt catalyst nanoparticles are 
almost spherically formed. The average size of the dispersed Pt particles 
was estimated at approximately 2.9, 2.6, and 2.8 nm for Pt/MWCNT-1, Pt/ 
MWCNT-3, and Pt/MWCNT-4 catalysts, respectively. All catalyst has a 
narrow Pt particle size distribution. 
Xing et al. [24] prepared nitrogen doped-mildly oxidized MWCNT￾supported Pt catalyst using MW-assisted polyol process. The modified 
Hummers method was used for the oxidation of CNT, and then this mildly 
oxidized MWCNT was treated with NH3
.H2
O, followed by hydrothermal 
reduction at 180° for 12 h. Thus, nitrogen-doped-mildly oxidized MWCNT 
(catalyst support) was obtained. Then 20 mg support was dispersed in 40 mL 
of ethylene glycol (EG) under ultrasonic treatment for 1 h. Subsequently, 
the proper amount of H2
PtCl6
 solution was added to the uniform ink under 
vigorous stirring. At room temperature, the mixture was stirred for 3 hours. 30 
24 
18 
12 
6 
0 
1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.4 
FIGURE 2.2 TEM image and size distribution of Pt on nitrogen doped-mildly oxidized 
MWCNT. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [24]. © 2019 Elsevier. 
Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 31 
The pH value was then tuned to 10 and the suspension was subjected to 
consecutive MW heating for 60 s. After microwaving, the solution was 
stirred again for another 8 h, after that the product was filtrated, washed with 
alcohol, and distilled water, and dried at 80°C in a vacuum oven for 8 h. They 
have obtained a particle size of about 1.84 nm. Following is TEM image 
(Figure 2.2) and size distribution of Pt on nitrogen doped-mildly oxidized 
MWCNT. 
FIGURE 2.1 TEM images of CNT supported Pt catalyst and particle size distribution. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [23]. © 2019 Elsevier. FIGURE 2.3 TEM images of tenorite nanoparticles decorating MWCNTs from: (a) 9.1 wt.%; 
and (b) 47.4 wt.% CuAc initial loading. Inset, higher magnification image of the CuO nanoparticle. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [21]. © 2019 Elsevier. 
32 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
MWCNT -supported Ni catalysts were prepared by Kim et al. [20] 
using MW-assisted synthesis. Typically, CNT-supported Ni catalysts were 
prepared by a combined impregnation-chemical reduction method. Green 
homogeneous NiCl2
.H2
O solution having good stability was prepared by 
dissolving 0.42 g in 70 ml EG. Then, after 1.5 hours of ultrasonic dispersion, 
sufficient amounts of oxidized CNTs were suspended in the as-prepared 
solution, followed by 2 hours of vigorous stirring. Then, with constant 
stirring, 3.5 ml hydrazine hydrate was added dropwise to the solution, 
followed by suitable volumes of NaOH. The solution was heated in a MW 
oven for 1 minute at 300 W, resulting in decreased Ni particles being formed 
from the solution, which was then washed and dried. 
An interesting work done by Rudd et al. [21] that demonstrated a one-pot 
synthesis of copper oxide decorated CNTs using MW treatment. In this 
method, firstly, 10 mg of MWCNTs were taken in a glass vial. To establish a 
range of CuAc loadings on MWCNTs, a stock solution of copper acetate in 
water (concentration 1 mg/mL) was prepared and the appropriate volume of 
solution was applied. After that, the CuAc and MWCNTs vial was sonicated 
for 15 minutes. Following that, the vial was placed in an oven for 4 hours 
at 80°C to evaporate the water and dry the sample. After allowing the vial 
to cool to ambient temperature, it was placed in a MW for the appropriate 
number of 1-minute MW treatments at 1,000 W. They have placed two Pyrex 
beakers containing water in the MW during the treatments, to prevent over￾heating. TEM images of the CuO-decorated CNTs are shown in Figure 2.3. 
Wallace et al. [17] prepared a SWCNT-supported Pt catalyst using 
MW-polyol synthesis. In the typical process, 40 mg of acid-treated SWCNTs Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 33 
were dispersed in 25 mL EG solvent. Then 1.0 mL 0.05 M H2
PtCl6 in EG was 
added and the pH of the solution was tuned to 12 by adding 0.5 mL of 0.05 M 
NaOH aqueous solution. The solution was heated for two 75-second periods 
at 700 W in a domestic MW oven (National 700 W, Japan). The solution 
was then agitated overnight to ensure that the particles were completely 
deposited on the CNT supports. The solid Pt/FCNTs catalyst was centrifuged 
and washed four times with acetone before being dried in a vacuum oven at 
85°C overnight. The S-TEM image indicated the uniform distribution of Pt 
nanoparticles with an average size of 2.5–4 nm on SWCNT support. 
2.3 APPLICATION OF CARBON NANOTUBES (CNTS) AS 
SUPPORTS IN CATALYSIS 
The activity and selectivity of a supported heterogeneous catalyst are widely 
influenced by choice of its support. Catalyst supports serve to improve the 
mechanical strength, distribution, stability, reactivity, and selectivity of 
catalysts. Granular, powdered, colloidal, co-precipitated, extruded, pelleted, 
spherical, wires, honeycombs, and skeletal supports are examples of support 
types. They can be either inert or active in the reactions; most supports also 
act as promoters. The goal of the support is to create a solid granular material 
covered with the catalytic component, which will provide a hard and sturdy 
structure that will withstand disintegration under reaction conditions. Supports 
reduce the amount of catalyst needed by dispersing the catalyst onto a larger 
area, thus making it environment-friendly and economical. Supports can also 
act as stabilizers to prevent lower-melting-point materials from agglomera￾tion. There are many different types of supports available, ranging from the 
traditional alumina and silica to the new carbon supports. CNTs have been 
increasingly used as supports in literature due to their exceptional physical 
[25] and chemical properties such as high mechanical strength, excellent 
chemical and thermal stability, thermal/electrical conductivity, large specific 
surface area because of its hollow tubular structure, decreased mass-transfer 
limitations, good chemical inertness, relatively high oxidation stability, 
resistance to acid/basic media, controllable porosity and surface chemistry to 
certain limits, and easy recovery of the precious metals supported on CNTs 
by burning off the support in a low environmental impact. Depending on 
their helicity and diameter, CNTs may have either metallic nature [26, 27] or 
semiconductive nature [28, 29], and this property can greatly affect charge 
transfer processes. Their excellent thermal conductivity [30] helps to prevent 34 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
the agglomeration and growth of small nanoparticles during post-annealing 
treatments, and stabilize newly formed phases. 
CNTs have been used as catalytic supports for a variety of nanoparticles 
in many catalytic reactions such as hydrogenation, oxidation, hydrodeha￾logenation, etc. CNTs usually contain residual metal impurities, carried 
over from the catalysts used in their production process, which are usually 
removed by a purification step which involves a concentrated nitric acid 
treatment. Pristine CNTs are highly hydrophobic as they do not have oxygen 
containing functional groups and hence are unsuitable for supporting metal 
nanoparticles. Oxidation of CNTs by various oxidants is therefore commonly 
employed as an effective way to introduce various functional groups, such 
as –COOH, –OH and –C=O on the surface of the CNTs, which acts as nucle￾ation sites for the metal, resulting in a high dispersion of metal particles. The 
surface oxygen-containing groups, although initially essential to enhance the 
loading and dispersion of metal precursors, are later removed after the metal 
loading by a high temperature treatment to avoid unnecessary side reactions 
during the catalytic process. 
2.3.1 OXIDATION REACTIONS 
Carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide oxidation in the presence of a catalyst 
is one of the most studied reactions in heterogeneous catalysis, and it has 
sparked a lot of interest in recent years because of its potential applications 
in fields like pollution control in the auto industry, gaseous waste reduction 
in petrochemical industries, ethanol or other fuel production, and pure 
hydrogen production for proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (FCs) [31]. 
Platinum (Pt), palladium, and rhodium are considered the most efficient 
transition metal catalysts due to their ability to separate molecular oxygen at 
a low temperature and to combine strongly with both atomic oxygen and CO. 
Due to the high cost of noble metals, researchers are now turning towards 
employing relatively cheaper transition metals such as Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, 
or their combinations as catalysts. Co/CNT have demonstrated high catalytic 
activity for CO oxidation at low temperatures and a thermal stability that is 
superior to Co/AC which is attributed to the highly dispersed Co particles 
on the CNTs (20–30 nm) with nanosized cobalt particles (10–15 nm) [32]. 
The optimum reaction conditions for CO conversion are O2 concentration 
3%, operation temperature 250°C, CO concentration 5,000 ppm, and 
space velocity 1,56,000 h–1. Moreover, as gaseous NO and CO coexist in 
incineration flue gas, the simultaneous removal efficiency of CO and NO Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 35 
was also assessed, and the results demonstrated that regardless of whether 
NO coexisted with CO, the efficiency of CO removal was not impacted by the 
presence of oxygen. At 250°C, CO may act as a reductant for NO reduction 
over Co/CNT in the presence of oxygen, with a maximum NO reduction 
of 30% at CO/NO = 2.5. As the electrodes in proton-exchange membrane 
FCs are extremely sensitive to even low levels of CO, the efficiency of 
CO oxidation under H2
 rich conditions was also assessed. Under H2
 rich 
conditions, the optimum reaction temperature for CO conversion was under 
300C, and CO2
 selectivity was better at 200°C than at 250°C as the oxygen 
concentration increased from 0.5% to 0.7%. 
The clean-burning nature of hydrogen made it an important energy carrier 
for sustainable energy consumption. It can be used as a fuel either directly in 
internal combustion engines or indirectly in polymer electrolyte membrane 
(PEM) FCs to generate power. However, storage and safety concerns have 
restricted the use of H2
 for mobile applications such as fuel cell vehicles. 
However, these problems can be overcome by the production of hydrogen in 
situ from a suitable H2
 rich liquid fuel, such as methanol. Selective synthesis 
of hydrogen from methanol by partial oxidation has significant advantages 
over other methods since it is an exothermic reaction with a greater reac￾tion rate, which reduces the reaction time to reach the working temperature 
from the cold start-up conditions. Conventional Cu/ZnO-based catalysts 
supported on alumina and silica have issues with long-term stability, limited 
resistance to impurities, and the creation of toxic CO as a by-product, 
despite their better activity and selectivity for H2 synthesis from methanol. 
The production of hydrogen from the partial oxidation of methanol has been 
studied using Cu-Zn catalysts supported on high-quality CNTs (POM) [33]. 
Using these CNTs, synthesized using acetylene as carbon source over anodic 
aluminum oxide template by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method, 
as support, Cu-Zn catalysts with varying metal loading were prepared by 
co-precipitation method. The methanol conversion rate and selectivity of H2 
improved from 0.066 to 0.11 mol/h/g cat and 57 to 70.6%, respectively, when 
increasing Cu loading from 5 to 12 wt.% at 260°C and any further increase 
shows a fall in activity. The enhanced activity is due to the improved metal 
dispersion, narrow particle size distribution, and almost complete reduction 
of Cu particles. The XRD study revealed that the active Cu0
 species is slowly 
transformed into CuO during the POM reaction, resulting in a decrease in 
activity. Cu0
 species has a high activity for hydrogen synthesis with inhibited 
CO creation, but unreduced species Cu+
 and Cu2+ hinder hydrogen produc￾tion from methanol, according to the findings. 36 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Hydrogen is usually produced through the steam reforming of hydro￾carbons or alcohols, followed by the water–gas shift (WGS) reaction, with 
the subsequent formation of trace amount of carbon monoxide. Due to the 
poisonous nature of CO for the Pt-based anodes used in fuel cell technology 
at the operation temperature (~353 K), it has to be selectively removed 
without modifying the hydrogen stream obtained after the WGS reaction. 
Over Pt catalysts supported on MWCNTs, preferential oxidation of CO in 
excess hydrogen (PROX) was investigated [34]. Pt/CNT catalyst exhibited 
a superior performance compared to a Pt/AC catalyst prepared under similar 
conditions. More active catalysts having increased particle size were yielded 
by increasing the thermal treatment temperature. The addition of oxygen 
functions to the carbon support, regardless of the carbon support employed, 
was detrimental to the CO oxidation reaction. Both catalytic activity and 
selectivity of Pt/CNT catalyst can be further improved by the addition of 
CeO2
 at low temperatures. 
Toxic, dangerous, and highly concentrated organic pollutants are typically 
found in wastewater from chemical, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, 
agricultural, and textile manufacturing companies, posing a serious threat 
to water bodies and human health. Catalytic wet air oxidation (CWAO) is 
one of the popular wastewater treatment methods, which aims at effectively 
oxidizing hazardous, toxic, and highly concentrated organic pollutants in 
wastewater to innocuous end products without any toxic emissions using 
oxygen as the oxidant. Nitric acid oxidized MWCNT-supported Pt [35–37], 
Cu [37], and Ru [37, 38] catalysts have displayed good activities for the CWAO 
of aniline aqueous solutions in the order of Pt/CNT > Ru/CNT, Cu>CNT. Pt 
catalysts have been made from bare oxidized CNTs and carboxylated CNTs 
treated with sodium carbonate to create carboxylate groups on the outer 
surface. These catalysts have been tested in the CWAO of phenol aqueous 
solutions in a continuous trickle-bed reactor at 2.0 MPa of total pressure and 
temperatures of 160 and 200°C [39]. Good conversion rate for phenol and 
total organic carbon was obtained with the activity per catalyst weight of 30.0 
g –1 h–1 mmol in steady-state conditions. At temperatures ranging from phenol cat 
40°C to 150°C, Pt/MWCNT catalysts manufactured using a molecular-level 
mixing approach have been used in the catalytic oxidation of volatile organic 
molecules such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and o-xylene (BTEX) 
[40]. Catalytic oxidation using a BTEX concentration ranging from 100 to 
500 ppmv in air at volume hour space velocities (VHSVs) of approximately 
7.5 × 104
 h–1 – 3.4 × 105
 h–1 has been conducted. With 30 wt.% Pt/CNT, full 
oxidation was achieved at temperatures as low as 115°C, significantly below Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 37 
the temperatures required in previously researched Pt-based catalysts. These 
VOCs were completely oxidized into CO2
 and H2
O over the Pt/CNT catalysts 
at low temperatures without the formation of by-products. The oxidation 
activity was likely boosted by the greater surface BTEX concentration 
provided by MWCNTs’ adsorption capacity. 
Surface-functionalization of CNTs can highly promote the catalytic 
performance of CNT-supported catalysts for oxidation reactions. In the 
solvent-free selective aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde, 
the catalytic performance of palladium nanoparticles supported on CNTs 
functionalized with various organosilane modifiers, prepared through a 
post-synthesis grafting method followed by a metal adsorption-reduction 
approach, has been tested [41]. The variation in type and amount of surface￾functional groups played a significant role in controlling catalytic behavior. 
An appropriate amount of 3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane surface-modified 
CNT-supported Pd catalyst turned out to be the optimal catalyst as a result 
of the finely-tuned surface basicity, small Pd particle size with a narrow size 
distribution, high electron density, and enhanced metal-support electronic 
interaction, with a remarkably high quasi-turnover frequency of 2,88,755 
h–1 for benzyl alcohol oxidation. The catalytic activity of Pd/MnOx
/CNT has 
also been tested in solvent-free benzyl alcohol oxidation. Palladium nanopar￾ticles were homogeneously deposited onto MnOx
/MWCNT composite, 
synthesized via a surface deposition method, followed by a reduction under 
H2
 atmosphere [42]. The catalytic activity was correlated with MnOx
 loading 
and dispersion. Due to the disturbance of the electronic structure of the active 
sites, the reducible MnOx on CNT enables electron transport at the interfa￾cial region of Pd and MnOx, changing the physical and chemical properties 
of the catalyst. It also enhances the oxygen activation by transporting lattice 
oxygen to Pd catalytic active site. During the catalytic reaction, the oxygen 
vacancies within MnOx clusters can be generated and reloaded by molecular 
oxygen due to the highly reducible nature of transition metal oxide. The Pd/ 
MnOx/CNT catalysts were extremely durable against deactivation due to the 
strong metal support contact. 
Ruthenium (IV) oxide (RuO2
) nanoparticles supported by herringbone￾shaped CNTs have demonstrated high activity and selectivity in the aerobic 
oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones in the liquid phase under mild 
conditions [43]. A homogeneous oxidation-precipitation (HOP) approach 
using hydrogen peroxide (H2
O2
) as both oxidant and precipitant at room 
temperature was used to make herringbone CNT-supported amorphous 
hydrous RuO2
 nanoparticles. When compared to commonly used supports 38 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
such as γ-Al2
O3
 and activated carbon (AC), CNTs had a better ability to 
induce the formation of highly dispersed nanoparticles, resulting in high 
activity and excellent selectivity as demonstrated by the oxidation of various 
aromatic, saturated, and cyclic alcohols. 
2.3.2 HYDROGENATION REACTIONS 
Because of its over-reduction to cyclohexanol, direct selective hydrogena￾tion of phenol to cyclohexanone under green circumstances is difficult. The 
direct hydrogenation of phenol to cyclohexanone was shown to be very 
active using palladium nanoparticles supported on polyaniline-functional￾ized carbon nanotubes (Pd–PANI/CNT) [44]. Selective hydrogenation of 
other hydroxylated aromatic compounds with similar performance, again 
under green and moderate circumstances, was used to prove the catalyst’s 
applicability for this process. Pd–N interactions and polymeric stabiliza￾tion are required for the creation of stable and widely dispersed palladium 
nanoparticles on the conducting composite material PANI/CNT. The results 
also revealed a link between phenol conversion rate and PANI/conductive 
CNT’s characteristic, while cyclohexanone selectivity is ascribed to PANI/ 
nitrogen-containing CNT’s nature. Furthermore, the aggressive and selec￾tive phenol hydrogenation is caused by the high adsorption of phenol in a 
“nonplanar” form on nitrogen-containing basic sites. Thus, it is obvious from 
the above-mentioned literature that the catalyst support can alter hydrogena￾tion via steric or electronic contact, which is usually mediated by the support 
material’s surface features. 
Pd–ZnO catalysts supported on MWCNTs exhibited excellent perfor￾mance for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol at 3.0 MPa and 523 K, with an 
observed turnover-frequency (TOF) of 1.15 × 10–2 s–1 over the 16% Pd0.1Zn1
/ 
CNTs (h-type) higher than that obtained for the 35% Pd0.1Zn1
/AC and 20% 
Pd Zn /ϒ-Al O catalysts with the respective optimal Pd Zn -loading 0.1 1 2 3 0.1 1 
[45]. Using MWCNTs as the catalyst support instead of AC or ϒ-Al2
O3
 had 
no effect on the apparent activation energy for CO2 hydrogenation, but it 
did result in an increase in the relative content of the catalytically active 
Pd0
-species closely associated with methanol generation at the surface of the 
functioning catalyst. At temperatures ranging from ambient temperature to 
623 K, the MWCNT-supported Pd–ZnO catalyst could reversibly adsorb a 
larger amount of hydrogen. This particular property would aid in the creation 
of a micro-environment at the surface of the functional catalyst with a larger 
concentration of H-adsorbed species, hence enhancing the rate of surface Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 39 
hydrogenation processes. Silica-coated Ru/CNT catalysts have displayed 
high activity for the hydrogenation of CO and 1-hexene [46]. In order to 
improve the stability, they covered the Ru/CNT catalysts with silica layers 
by the successive hydrolysis of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane and tetraeth￾oxysilane followed by reduction with hydrogen at 623 K. Coverage of the 
Ru/CNT with these silica layers improved its durability towards Ru sintering 
at high temperatures and prevented the detachment of Ru metal particles 
during the repeated hydrogenation of 1-hexene with the recycled catalyst. 
The catalytic activity of functionalized MWCNT-supported Pd, Rh, and 
Rh/Pd nanoparticle catalysts prepared using water-in-oil microemulsions 
containing metal ions as starting materials were studied in hydrogenation 
reactions [12]. MWCNT-supported Rh nanoparticles was found to be an 
active catalyst for the hydrogenation of arenes, and the CNT-supported 
bimetallic Pd/Rh nanoparticles exhibited unusually high catalytic activity for 
the hydrogenation of anthracene. Pt/CNT exhibited higher catalytic activity 
than the commercial Pt/AC catalyst in the hydrogenation of trans-β-methyl 
styrene and trans-stilbene in toluene at room temperature under the atmo￾spheric pressure of hydrogen [47]. Pt was anchored onto SWCNTs using 
a two-step process of wet oxidation followed by an ion exchange reaction 
with a Pt precursor salt. Nitrobenzene hydrogenation under atmospheric 
pressure and ambient temperature has been carried out using Pt/CNT cata￾lysts prepared by impregnation and reduction–precipitation method with 
chloroplatinic acid as metal precursor [48]. Both lower and higher Pt loading 
exhibited high activity for direct hydrogenation of nitrobenzene to aniline 
under mild conditions. Extraordinary activity of catalysts can be attributed 
to the good dispersion and mesoporosity. 
Selective hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde to cinnamyl alcohol is a 
very important reaction in the pharmaceutical and fragrance industry. Due 
to the thermodynamically favorable hydrogenation of C=C double bonds 
in – unsaturated aldehydes, hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde produces 
additional by-products such as hydrocinnamaldehyde and hydrocinnamyl 
alcohol. The most effective catalysts for the selective hydrogenation of cinna￾maldehyde appear to be supported Pt nanoparticles, according to consider￾able research. Pt-based bimetallic catalysts supported on MWCNTs prepared 
by a facile microwave-assisted polyol reduction (MAPR) method was found 
to be active in the selective hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde to cinnamyl 
alcohol and superior than that prepared by the conventional impregnation 
method [49]. The surface features of CNTs, as well as the solvent used and 
the transition metal promoter used, were shown to be crucial in fine-tuning 
the catalytic performance. The highest catalytic results were obtained on 40 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Fe-and Co-modified Pt catalysts in the presence of ethyl acetate as the 
solvent after removing oxygen-containing groups from CNT surfaces. By 
removing oxygen-containing species from CNTs, acid-catalyzed side reac￾tions are suppressed, and electron transport between CNTs and Pt nanopar￾ticles is accelerated, enhancing cinnamaldehyde hydrogenation activity and 
selectivity. Whereas, further functionalization with iron and cobalt nanopar￾ticles on MWCNT surfaces after removing oxygen-containing groups 
leads to a metal–metal synergic effect and therefore elevates the activity 
and selectivity in cinnamaldehyde hydrogenation. SWCNTs grown by arc 
method, containing Pt and cobalt, have also been as catalysts in the selective 
hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde to cinnamyl alcohol [50]. This catalytic 
system containing 7% (w/w) cobalt and 5.4% (w/w) Pt and presenting a 
mean particle size(s) of 8 nm exhibited 80–85% molar selectivity towards 
cinnamyl alcohol. Furthermore, the initial cinnamyl alcohol selectivity of 
close to 100%, was not reported for the PtCo/charcoal catalytic system. This 
might indicate the presence of some peculiar SWNT–PtCo(s) interactions. 
Unpurified nanotubes coming from direct current arc discharge evaporation 
of graphite were used to support ruthenium to conduct the liquid-phase 
cinnamaldehyde hydrogenation reaction [51]. This unpurified MWCNT￾supported Ru catalytic system was compared to Ru/alumina and Ru/AC 
catalysts presenting similar metallic particle sizes (3.5 nm): the selectivity 
for cinnamyl alcohol was 92, 20–30, and 30–40%, respectively. 
Rhodium catalysts supported on MWCNTs have been used for the 
liquid-phase hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde to hydrocinnamaldehyde 
[52]. MWCNTs were first oxidized via the nitric acid treatment to intro￾duce carboxylic acid groups on the surface and their corresponding sodium 
carboxylate salt was then made to undergo an organometallic transformation 
with [Rh2
Cl2
(CO)4
], which led to the production of highly dispersed Rh 
nanoparticles on the MWCNTs (with a specific surface area of 180 m2
/g) 
after a decomposition/reduction step. In the liquid phase hydrogenation of 
cinnamaldehyde, this 1% (w/w) Rh/MWCNTs showed 100% selectivity for 
hydrocinnamaldehyde, and their catalytic activity was three times higher 
than that of a 1% (w/w) Rh supported on AC with a surface area of 700 
m2
/g. Rhodium catalysts prepared without the HNO3
 treatment on MWCNTs 
(particle size up to 100 nm) showed no activity, nitric acid-treated MWCNTs 
(particle size 2.5–5 nm) had an activity of 27 gsubstrate gRh
–1 h–1 and MWCNTs 
functionalized with –COONa groups (particle size 1.5–2.5 nm) which had 
the most highly dispersed Rh nanoparticles was the most active with a value –1 h–1 of 78 g . In the liquid-phase hydrogenation of cinnamalde- substrate gRh 
hyde, nitrogen-doped CNTs (N-CNTs) produced using a CVD method at Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 41 
temperatures ranging from 600°C to 850°C have been employed as supports 
for palladium catalysts [53]. When nitrogen atoms were introduced into the 
carbon matrix, the number of surface nucleation sites increased, resulting 
in a considerable increase in metal dispersion and consequently catalytic 
activity in the hydrogenation reaction when compared to undoped ones. 
Palladium particle size on the nitrogen-doped CNTs (N/C: 3 at.%) was 
centered at around 3 nm versus 10 nm on the undoped CNTs. The researchers 
also discovered that the type of nitrogen species inserted in the structure of 
CNTs might affect the catalytic activity. The catalyst’s exceptional stability 
was confirmed by catalytic recycling testing, which revealed no palladium 
leaching or deactivation. 
2.3.3 FISCHER TROPSCH SYNTHESIS (FTS) 
Fischer Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is a well-established eco-friendly, indus￾trial process, in which synthesis gas (CO + H2
) is converted into liquid 
hydrocarbons. This is a potentially attractive technology for production of 
high-quality liquid fuels and chemicals from coal, natural gas or biogas and 
has received attention as a source of low-sulfur diesel fuel [54]. The most 
common catalysts used for FTS are iron, cobalt, manganese, and ruthenium. 
Usually, these metals are supported on silica, alumina or titania, and these 
supported catalysts are used for FTS. It has been revealed from literature 
that the catalyst activity and selectivity in FTS is influenced by nature and 
structure of the support, nature of the active metal, catalyst dispersion, metal 
loading, and catalyst preparation method [55]. Recently, CNTs have been 
identified as a promising support for catalysts used in FTS, because CNTs 
have a relatively large surface area and are able to improve the dispersion of 
the catalytically active nanoparticles. 
In 2002, van Steen and Prinsloo [11], first used CNTs as a support 
for Fe-based FT catalysts to investigate the effect of catalyst preparation 
method and promoters on the catalyst performance during FTS. They have 
synthesized CNT supported Fe-based catalyst system using three methods 
viz-incipient wetness, deposition/precipitation using K2
CO3
, and deposition/ 
precipitation using urea. The catalyst prepared by initial dampness was the 
most active. The selectivity of the three catalysts in the FT synthesis appears 
to be independent of the method of production. CNT-supported cobalt FT 
catalyst is a preferred commercial catalyst over iron due to its low water￾gas shifting activity, high long-chain hydrocarbon selectivity and high 
stability. Another advantage of using Co-based catalysts is the production 42 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
of less amount of unwanted CO2
 in FTS compared with Fe-based catalysts. 
Recently, Haghtalab et al. [56] prepared CNT-supported Co and Co-Ru 
bifunctional catalyst systems and investigated the effect on FT synthesis. 
The results showed that the Co-Ru/CNTs catalysts exhibited high catalytic 
activity with the maximum long-chain hydrocarbons (C5+
) selectivity of 
74.76%, which was greater than the Co-Ru/γ-Al2
O3 (61.20%), Co/CNTs 
(43.68%), and Co/γ-Al2
O3
 (61.20%) catalysts (37.69%). However, as the 
CNTs are inherently inert and hydrophobic in nature, surface modification 
is necessary to attain high dispersion of catalytically active metal particles. 
Oxidation/activation of CNT using HNO3
/H2
SO4
 is the most accepted modi￾fication [57, 58]. Nitrogen-doped CNTs can be obtained by treating oxidized 
CNTs in flowing ammonia [59, 60]. Introduced functional groups can act 
as anchoring sites for metal nanoparticles, and hence, metals supported on 
oxidized CNT typically display increased resistance towards sintering under 
reaction conditions [58]. 
2.3.4 DEHYDROGENATION 
CNT-supported catalysts have also been investigated for catalytic dehydroge￾nation reactions and hydrogen fuel production. CNT-supported Pt exhibited 
the highest yield toward H2 in the microwave (MW)-assisted decalin dehy￾drogenation, compared to carbon black, AC, graphite, and carbon nanofibers, 
due to the relatively small Pt nanoparticles formed on CNT surfaces with 
relatively large surface area as well as the highest temperature attained by the 
system during the microwave-assisted dehydrogenation, shown in Figure 2.4 
[61]. CNTs’ high aspect ratio and low bulk density result in strong electrical 
conductivity and, as a result, a considerable dielectric loss in CNT-containing 
suspension, resulting in the suspension’s remarkable thermal performance 
under the microwave (MW). It is revealed that MW can heat the Pt/CNT￾catalyzed reaction system to a temperature above the boiling point of decalin. 
Defect-rich CNTs obtained after an acid oxidation followed by a high 
temperature treatment in an Argon atmosphere at 800°C, were used as 
supports for Pt nanoparticles and was found to have high catalytic activity in 
the ammonia borane (AB) hydrolytic dehydrogenation reaction [62]. Acid￾treated CNTs possess a number of defects and oxygen-containing groups. 
The defects have been proved to be responsible for the improvement of the 
Pt catalytic activity in the AB hydrolytic dehydrogenation instead of oxygen￾containing groups. An exceptional H2
 generation turnover frequency as high 
as 567 molH2
 molPt
–1 min–1 at 30°C was obtained, significantly higher than FIGURE 2.4 Temperature profiles of different carbon materials suspended in decalin under 
MW (input power 250 ± 15 W). 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [61]. © 2014 Elsevier. 
Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 43 
those of Pt/AC. Higher cyclohexanone selectivity in cyclohexanol dehydro￾genation has been reported for Co/CNT than Co/AC catalysts because of the 
electronic properties of the CNTs as well as its lesser acid sites [63]. The 
effect of K addition, attributed to electronic promotion, was also stronger on 
Co–K/CNT than on Co–K/AC. The catalytic performance of Co supported 
on nitric acid oxidized MWCNTs and unoxidized MWCNTs have been 
studied in the selective dehydrogenation of cyclohexanol to cyclohexanone 
which is an important reaction in the industrial production of caprolactam 
[64]. While the selectivity of both the catalytic systems were almost similar 
(95%), the conversions of Co catalysts supported on the nitric acid oxidized 
MWCNTs were higher than the unoxidized MWCNTs catalyst system due 
to the smaller particle size obtained on the nitric acid-treated MWNT, 5 nm 
instead of 100 nm on untreated support. The initial conversions of cyclo￾hexanol over two catalysts are 75.2 and 56.8%, respectively. 
2.3.5 AMMONIA/METHANE DECOMPOSITION 
The ammonia decomposition to produce H2
 without COx
 for FCs has 
attracted great attention, due to its feasibility, cleanness, superior hydrogen 
storage capacity of 17.6 wt.% and is also more economical than methanol 44 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
decomposition. Supported transition metals have been used as catalysts 
for the decomposition of ammonia to release hydrogen. CNTs have been 
reported to be an attractive support for transition metal nanoparticles. The 
effects of active components (Ru, Rh, Pt, Pd, Ni, Fe) and support (CNTs, 
AC, Al2
O3
, MgO, ZrO2
, TiO2
) on the catalysis of ammonia decomposition 
have been investigated for the generation of COx
-free hydrogen [65, 66]. 
The Ru/CNT catalyst exhibited the highest conversion and TOF. In the range 
of 2–5 nm, the particle size of Ru on CNTs is the smallest with the highest 
dispersion among the supported Ru catalysts. The catalytic activity was 
further improved by modifying CNTs with KOH which indicated that strong 
basicity of support is essential for high catalytic performance. The influences 
of the porous and graphitic structures of carbon supports on the catalytic 
ammonia decomposition have also been reported [67]. The catalytic activity 
over supported Ru catalysts is ranked as Ru/graphitic carbon > Ru/CNTs 
> Ru/carbon black > Ru/AC. Ru particles are highly dispersed on carbon 
supports with an optimum particle size of around 3–4 nm. In comparison to 
the pore architectures of the carbon supports, the graphitic structure of the 
carbons is crucial to the catalytic activity of the supported Ru catalyst. 
The high dispersion of Ru, as well as the excellent graphitization and 
purity of CNTs, when Ru/CNTs are modified with potassium ions, result in 
a significant increase in catalytic activity [66, 68]. The influence of different 
rare earth, alkali, and alkaline earth compounds as promoters with Ru/ 
CNTs have also been studied. These promoters decrease the pore volume 
and surface area but improves the thermal stability of Ru/CNTs [68]. These 
modifications have no effect on the size and morphology of Ru particles. 
The activities of metal nitrate-modified catalysts were observed in the 
following order: K–Ru > Na–Ru > Li–Ru > Ce–Ru > Ba–Ru > La–Ru > 
Ca–Ru > Ru, indicating that within the same groups (K, Na, and Li; Ba 
and Ca), the greater the electronegativity of the promoter, the lower the 
NH3
 conversion. The electron-withdrawing groups, F–
, Cl–
, Br–
, SO4
2–, and 
PO4
3– were found to be inhibitors of Ru catalysts. A modifier’s promotional 
effects are the consequence of a combination of increased combinative 
desorption of nitrogen atoms and a lower apparent activation energy of the 
decomposition reaction. Despite having similar Ru particle sizes, nitrogen 
doping of MWCNT supports using NH4
OH solution increases the activity 
of Ru nanoparticles for low temperature ammonia decomposition, with 
TOF numbers of 6,200 LH2
 molRu
–1 h–1 at 400°C, which is higher than the 
values of unmodified CNT support under the same conditions (4,400 LH2 
molRu
–1 h–1) [69]. Nitrogen doping causes an electronic modification of Ru 
due to improved conductivity and basicity of the support, promoting a strong Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 45 
metal-support interaction, which results in higher TOF in the ammonia 
decomposition reaction than the Ru catalysts supported on unmodified 
commercial MWCNT. CNTs doped with nitrogen using N2
 MW plasma at 
the powers of 200 and 400 W have also been used as supports for Ru catalyst 
in ammonia decomposition [70]. However, due to the low nitrogen content, 
doping using this method does not dramatically alter the bulk or the surface 
texture of CNTs or improve the TOF. 
Low-temperature hydrogen production via ammonia decomposition has 
been reported by graphitized MWCNT-supported and cesium-promoted Ru 
nanoparticles at as low as 450 K [71]. Commercial MWCNTs are graphitized 
to remove any residual metal catalysts from the CNT synthesis, as well as 
surface functional groups and defects on the CNTs that are known to act as 
anchoring points for metal active nanoparticles, and to lower the surface area 
of the material slightly. The high conductivity of graphitized CNTs allows 
for more electronic alteration of the Ru nanoparticles by cesium which is in 
proximity but without direct contact, avoiding active site blockage and thereby 
boosting the metal-support interaction. This advancement in low-temperature 
catalytic activity is a major step forward in the use of ammonia as a chemical 
storage medium for in-situ hydrogen generation in FCs. Addition of sodium 
as a promoter in the Ru/CNT catalyzed low-temperature hydrogen production 
via ammonia decomposition was found to enhance the catalytic activity 
(316.7 molH2
 molRu
–1 h–1 at 350°C) due to the electronic modification of the 
Ru nanoparticles by the electron-donating sodium promoter [72]. The activity 
of Ru/CNTs in ammonia decomposition is dependent on the dispersion of Ru 
particles and the amount of nitrogen on the surface of CNTs. Commercial 
CNT-supported Co-Mo nanoparticles have also exhibited catalytic activity 
for hydrogen production from ammonia. The hollow channels of CNTs were 
found to efficiently limit the particles at the appropriate size to keep the balance 
between dispersion and intrinsic activity. The metal-carbon intercalation on 
the interface area is expected to be responsible for the stabilization of the 
CNTs. The nature of Co-Mo synergic effect improves the long-term stability 
as well as keeps the activity [73]. 
2.3.6 HYDRODEHALOGENATION REACTIONS 
CNT-supported Pd catalysts have been widely used to catalyze the hydrode￾halogenation of aryl halides, a hazardous pollutant, because Pd promotes the 
cleavage of carbon–halogen bonds and enables hydrogenation. Pd/MWCNT 
prepared by traditional impregnation method was active in the liquid-phase TABLE 2.1 Comparison of the Catalytic Conversion and TOF Using Different Catalyst Supports 
Support Pd Loading (wt.%)a Conversion (%)b TOF (h–1
)
c 
CNTs 2.04 69 691 
AC 1.85 21 232 
SiO2 1.72 12 143 
Al O2 3 1.74 18 211 
MgO 1.37 6 90 
a
 Determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry. 
b
 Reaction time: 30 min. c
 Mol bromobenzene converted per mol Pd per hour. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [19]. © 2008 Elsevier. 
46 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
hydrodehalogenation of bromobenzene in milder conditions. Compared to 
traditional supports such as AC, Al2
O3
, SiO2
, and MgO, MWCNTs offer 
improved performance with lesser amounts of Pd as shown in Table 2.1. The 
significant activity of Pd/CNTs in liquid-phase bromobenzene hydrodeha￾logenation was attributed to their high exterior surface area and absence of 
micropores in MWCNTs, which eliminated significant mass transfer limita￾tions [74]. In contrast, despite the high specific surface area, the presence of 
a large fraction of micropores inside AC considerably hampered reactant and 
product diffusion, resulting in decreased activity. In addition, the electron 
transfer from the nanotube support to metal particles increases the electronic 
density around Pd nanoparticles which promotes the adsorption and activa￾tion of bromobenzene, thus improving catalyst activity. The use of CNTs as 
a catalytic support could result in unusual activity and selectivity in bromo￾benzene hydrodehalogenation. 
Pd/CNT nanocomposites made by depositing tris(dibenzylideneacetone) 
dipalladium(0) [Pd2
(dba)3
] on thiolated nanotube surfaces where the thiol 
groups act as linkers to prevent the Pd nanoparticles from agglomeration, were 
active in the hydrodehalogenation of aryl halides at a low Pd content (2.3%) 
and without any additional ligand [75]. CNTs significantly influenced the 
catalytic activities of CNT-supported metal catalysts for hydrodehalogenation 
than the reference systems. MWCNTs were oxidatively functionalized 
using a 3:1 (v/v) mixture of concentrated H2
SO4
/HNO3
, sonicated at 60°C, 
resulting in a large number of surface oxide groups which favored the 
dispersion of Pd nanoparticles, thus improving its catalytic performance in 
the hydrodehalogenation of bromobenzene [76]. Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 47 
2.3.7 CARBON-CARBON COUPLING REACTIONS 
Carbon-carbon coupling reactions on supported Pd nanoparticles can 
decrease product contamination and promote the development of greener 
routes in organic synthesis. However, the catalytic reaction mechanisms 
on supported Pd catalysts remain a controversial topic with regards to the 
leaching of Pd species into solution and the true heterogeneous nature of 
the reaction. MWCNTs supported Pd0
 have efficiently catalyzed Suzuki￾Miyaura cross-coupling of aryl bromides with arylboronic acids in aqueous 
solvents or neat water without the assistance of any ligands or additives, and 
the catalyst could be recovered by simple filtration, thus meeting the criteria 
of green chemistry [77]. The low catalyst loading as well as simple reaction 
setup is also economically attractive. Pd/MWCNT prepared by a simple 
approach based on supercritical fluid deposition has high catalytic activity in 
Suzuki coupling reactions. Furthermore, the catalysts can be reused at least 
six times without losing their effectiveness [78]. Suzuki coupling of phenyl￾boronic acid and 1-iodo-4-nitrobenzene to nitro-biphenyl was attained with 
94% conversion after 30 min and with a TOF of 709 h–1. For the Heck reac￾tion of styrene and iodobenzene and the Suzuki coupling of phenylboronic 
and iodobenzene, palladium nanoparticles (2–10 nm) produced on SWCNTs 
by spontaneous reduction from Pd(OAc)2
 or from oxime carbapalladacycle 
displayed stronger catalytic activity than Pd/AC [79]. The activity of 
palladium-supported catalysts depends dramatically on the metal dispersion 
and the particle size. Leaching of palladium is a problem which questioned 
the true heterogeneous nature and reusability of the catalyst. However, in 
spite of the occurrence of the palladium leaching during the reaction, no 
substantial drop in the activity of the recycled catalyst was observed which 
was explained by the re-deposition of most of the palladium nanoparticles on 
the SWNT as the reaction ceased and the system cooled down. 
Pd/SWCNT and Pd/MWCNT were made using a fast, solvent-free 
method that did not require any reducing agents or electricity and involved 
a direct dry mixing of a precursor Pd salt (e.g., palladium acetate) with CNT 
at room temperature by ball-milling or followed with annealing at 300°C in 
an inert atmosphere [80]. The nanoparticles made by ball-milling at room 
temperature had higher catalytic activity towards the Suzuki cross-coupling 
reactions than those prepared under thermal conditions, mainly due to the 
smaller particle size, uniform dispersion of Pd nanoparticles on the surface 
of SWCNTs and MWCNTs, and lack of agglomeration of these nanoparticles 
during the mechanochemical preparation at room temperature. While both 48 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
the catalysts exhibited excellent catalytic activity in Suzuki cross-coupling 
reaction under ligand free ambient conditions in an environmentally benign 
solvent system, Pd/MWCNT prepared by ball-milling showed a slightly better 
reactivity and recyclability with the TON of 7,250 and TOF of 2,17,500 h–1. 
The superior catalytic activity and increased recyclability was attributed to 
the larger diameter of the MWCNTs (~20–150 nm), which provides stronger 
surface contacts and anchor for the Pd particles, thus facilitating the deposi￾tion of the greater number of Pd nanoparticles on the surface of MWCNTs. 
In addition, the higher Pd content of 8.5 wt.% in this sample, smaller particle 
size (1–3 nm), and the more uniform distribution of the Pd nanoparticles 
on the surface are also considered to be contributing factors to the overall 
catalyst performance. 
After an annealing treatment at 700°C and 1,500°C to improve the graphi￾tization and the concentrated nitric acid treatment at 120°C to improve the 
surface functionalization, CNTS were used as supports for Pd nanoparticles 
[81]. CNTs annealed at a lower temperature 700°C, had more defects than 
CNTs annealed at 1,500°C and the acid treatment introduced a high function￾alization on the defective CNTs when compared to the graphitized CNTs. The 
functionalities act as sites for anchoring metal cations during impregnation. 
The Pd supported on highly functionalized CNTs was found to have higher 
activity in the Suzuki-Miyaura reaction of iodobenzene with phenylboronic 
acid with a TOF of 190 h–1 at completion of the reaction when compared 
to the Pd supported on low functionalized CNTs with a TOF of 124 h–1. 
Nanopalladium clusters supported on MWCNTs prepared using the direct 
reaction between the MWCNTs and Pd(dba)2
 (dba: dibenzylideneacetone) 
and removal of the ligand dba demonstrated high efficiency in the Suzuki 
Miyaura, Heck, and Sonogashira cross-coupling reactions as well as in the 
hydrogenation of unsaturated hydrocarbons [82]. The catalyst is recyclable 
and can work in aqueous media. 
Pt supported on thiolated MWCNTs demonstrated high activity and 
recyclability for the ligand-free Suzuki coupling of 4-iodoanisole and 
4-methylbenzene boronic acid [83]. The catalyst achieved >99% conversion 
within 24 h, while traditional Pd or Pt complex catalysts showed <5% 
conversion. Moreover, even after 12 recycles it gave 82% yield. This high 
activity was attributed to a combination of the electronic state of Pt in almost 
zero-valent state, the large surface area due to the extreme degree of particle 
dispersion, and the fast charge compensation of Pt by the sulfur ligand. 
Pd-CNT prepared from thiolated MWNT and Na2
PdCl4
 showed good activities 
without any additional ligand in the decarboxylative coupling reactions of 
aryl iodides and aryl alkynyl carboxylic acids to form the diaryl alkynes in Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 49 
good yields [84]. The Pd nanoparticles had an average diameter of 2.9 nm and 
a limited size dispersion. Without the need of an expensive palladium catalyst 
or toxic ligands, Co nanoparticles supported on imidazolium ionic liquid￾functionalized MWCNTs have been used as an environmentally safe and 
cost-effective catalyst for the Heck coupling reaction in a significantly shorter 
reaction time [85]. The catalyst could be recycled at least six times without 
losing its effectiveness. A Pd(II) salen complex supported on MWCNTs 
showed excellent catalytic activity and stability for the Mizoroki-Heck and 
Hiyama cross-couplings of aryl halides with olefins and phenylsiloxanes 
[86]. Furthermore, the catalytic activity of this air/moisture and thermally 
stable heterogeneous catalyst could be recovered readily following simple 
modifications, allowing it to be reused up to four times. 
Furthermore, the catalytic activity of this air/moisture and thermally 
stable heterogeneous catalyst may be easily recovered following simple 
modifications, allowing it to be reused up to four times [87]. The catalytic 
activity of Pd(0) deposited on MWCNT is higher than that of commercially 
available Pd(0) on charcoal for Sonogashira-type cross-coupling reactions. 
When Pd (10%)/MWCNTs are utilized, the creation of new enzyme cross￾coupled products is regio- and stereoselective. Pd nanoparticles supported 
on MWCNTs functionalized with mercapto-melamine groups by covalent 
grafting of CNTs with ethylenediamine, cyanuric chloride, and 2-mercapto￾ethanol were successfully used in the Buchwald-Hartwig C–N cross-coupling 
reaction of aryl halides and amines with a wide variety of functionalized 
substrates to give high yields of aryl amines [88]. The catalyst was recycled 
six times without much change in its catalytic activity. 
2.4 CONCLUSIONS 
The morphology of CNTs is very crucial for its application as support in 
catalysis. CNTs can be modified with a variety of surface functionalities 
which play a significant role in binding and dispersing the active catalytic 
phases on the CNTs. In many studies, CNTs have been found to be much 
superior as supports in enhancing the activity of the catalyst, when compared 
to other conventional and carbonaceous supports like alumina, silica, ACs, 
carbon black, charcoal, etc. Although many applications of CNTs as support 
have been reviewed in this chapter, it is by no means an exhaustive list. 
Also, the applications of CNTs as catalyst supports in many fields, such as 
photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, FCs, etc., including catalysts confined inside 
the CNTs have not been discussed. Even though the major use of CNTs in 50 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
catalysis is as supports, they have also been employed as catalysts in various 
chemical transformations, either as such or after modifications by intro￾ducing surface functional groups via different oxidation treatments. CNTs 
as catalysts have shown remarkable activity in wet air oxidation (WAO), wet 
peroxide oxidation, ozonation, oxidative dehydrogenation, hydroxylation, 
etc. In the last three decades, CNTs have been widely explored as catalysts 
and as supports in various fields such as wastewater treatment, pollution 
control, hydrogen storage, FCs, etc.; however, the full potential of CNTs in 
catalysis yet remains to be unraveled. 
KEYWORDS 
• carbon nanotube 
• catalyst support 
• functionalization 
• green environment 
• heterogeneous catalysis 
• morphology 
REFERENCES 
1. Iijima, S., & Ichihashi, T., (1993). Nature, 363, 603–605. 
2. Iijima, S., (1991). Nature, 354, 56–58. 
3. Mierczynski, Pawel, Krasimir Vasilev, Agnieszka Mierczynska, Waldemar Maniukiewicz, 
Malgorzata I. Szynkowska, & Tomasz P. Maniecki. (2016). Applied Catalysis B: Environ￾mental 185, 281–294. 
4. Oosthuizen, R. S., & Nyamori, V. O., (2011). Platin. Met. Rev, 55, 154–169. 
5. Rather, R. A., Siddiqui, S., Khan, W. A., & Siddiqui, Z. N., (2020). Mol. Catal., 490, 110975. 
6. Liu, Z., Li, Z., Wang, F., Liu, J., Ji, J., Wang, J., & Wang, W., (2011). Mater. Lett., 65, 
3396–3398. 
7. Ying, Q., Naidoo, S., & Vaivars, G., (2015). Phys. Scr., 90, 94021. 
8. Aliana-Nasharuddin, N., Asikin-Mijan, N., Abdulkareem-Alsultan, G., Mohd Izham 
Saiman, Fahad A. Alharthi, Abdulaziz Ali Alghamdi, & Taufiq-Yap, Y. H. (2020). RSC 
Adv., 10, 626–642. 
9. Hjorth, I., Wang, Y., Li, Y., Melandsø, B. M. E., Nord, M., Rønning, M., Yang, J., & 
Chen, D., (2020). Catal. Today, 1–10. 
10. Li, M., Sun, Y., Tang, Y., Sun, J., Xu, Z., & Zheng, S., (2020). J. Hazard. Mater., 388, 
121745. Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 51 
11. Van, S. E., & Prinsloo, F. F., (2002). Catal. Today, 71, 327–334. 
12. Yoon, B., & Wai, C. M., (2005). J. Am. Chem. Soc., 127, 17174–17175. 
13. Ulas, B., Caglar, A., Kivrak, A., & Kivrak, H., (2019). Chem. Pap., 73, 425–434. 
14. Bhuvanendran, Narayanamoorthy, Sabarinathan Ravichandran, Weiqi Zhang, Qiang 
Ma, Qian Xu, Lindiwe Khotseng, & Huaneng Su, (2020). Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 45, 
6447–6460. 
15. Er, O. F., Caglar, A., Ulas, B., Kivrak, H., & Kivrak, A., (2020). Mater. Chem. Phys., 241, 
122422. 
16. Xu, Q. C., Lin, J. D., Li, J., Fu, X. Z., Liang, Y., & Liao, D. W., (2007). Catal. Commun., 
8, 1881–1885. 
17. Zhang, W., Chen, J., Swiegers, G. F., Ma, Z. F., & Wallace, G. G., (2010). Nanoscale, 
2, 282–286. 
18. Tropsch, F., Akbarzadeh, O., Asmawati, N., Zabidi, M., Wang, G., Kordijazi, A., 
Sadabadi, H., et al., (2020). Symmetry (Basel), 12, 1–14. 
19. Chen, H., Tang, Q., Chen, Y., Yan, Y., Zhou, C., Guo, Z., Jia, X., & Yang, Y., (2013). 
Carbon nanotube supported Pd catalyst for liquid-phase hydrodehalogenation of 
bromobenzene. Catal. Sci. Technol., 3, 328–338. 
20. Li, F., Li, Q., & Kim, H., (2013). Adv. Mater. Res., 622, 816–820. 
21. Rudd, J. A., Gowenlock, C. E., Gomez, V., Kazimierska, E., Al-Enizi, A. M., Andreoli, 
E., & Barron, A. R., (2019). Solvent-free microwave-assisted synthesis of tenorite 
nanoparticle-decorated multi-walled carbon nanotubes. J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 35, 
1121–1127. 
22. Woo, S., Cho, H., Kim, J., Lee, Y., & Lee, S., (2020). J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 57, 192–199. 
23. Devrim, Y., & Arıca, E. D., (2019). Multi-walled carbon nanotubes decorated by 
platinum catalyst for high temperature PEM fuel cell. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 44, 
18951–18966. 
24. Liang, L., Xiao, M., Zhu, J., Ge, J., Liu, C., & Xing, W., (2019). Low-temperature 
synthesis of nitrogen doped carbon nanotubes as promising catalyst support for methanol 
oxidation. J. Energy Chem., 28, 118–122. 
25. Dresselhaus, M. S., Dresselhaus, G., Charlier, J. C., & Hernández, E., (2004). Philos. 
Trans. R. Soc. London. Ser. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 362, 2065–2098. 
26. Mintmire, J. W., Dunlab, B. I., & White, C. T., (1992). Phys. Rev. Lett., 68, 631–634. 
27. Tans, S. J., Devoret, M. H., Dai, H., Thess, A., Smalley, R. E., Geerligs, L. J., & Dekker, 
C., (1997). Nature, 386, 474–477. 
28. Hamada, N., Sawada, S., & Oshiyama, A., (1992). Phys. Rev. Lett., 68, 1579–1581. 
29. Hassanien, A., Tokumoto, M., Ohshima, S., Kuriki, Y., Ikazaki, F., Uchida, K., & Yumura, 
M., (1999). Appl. Phys. Lett., 75, 2755–2757. 
30. Berber, S., Kwon, Y., & Tománek, D., (2000). Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 4613–4616. 
31. Al Soubaihi, R. M., Saoud, K. M., & Dutta, J., (2018). Catalysts, 8, 660. 
32. Lu, C. Y., & Wey, M. Y., (2007). Fuel, 86, 1153–1161. 
33. Eswaramoorthi, I., Sundaramurthy, V., & Dalai, A. K., (2006). Appl. Catal. A Gen., 313, 
22–34. 
34. Jardim, E. O., Gonçalves, M., Rico-Francés, S., Sepúlveda-Escribano, A., & Silvestre￾Albero, J., (2012). Appl. Catal. B Environ., 113, 114, 72–78. 
35. Gomes, H. T., Samant, P. V., Serp, P., Kalck, P., Figueiredo, J. L., & Faria, J. L., (2004). 
Appl. Catal. B Environ., 54, 175–182. 52 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
36. Garcia, J., Gomes, H. T., Serp, P., Kalck, P., Figueiredo, J. L., & Faria, J. L., (2005). 
Catal. Today, 102, 103, 101–109. 
37. Ovejero, G., Sotelo, J. L., Romero, M. D., Rodríguez, A., Ocaña, M. A., Rodríguez, G., 
& García, J., (2006). Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 45, 2206–2212. 
38. Garcia, J., Gomes, H. T., Serp, P., Kalck, P., Figueiredo, J. L., & Faria, J. L., (2006). 
Carbon N. Y., 44, 2384–2391. 
39. Ovejero, G., Sotelo, J. L., Rodrı, A., Diaz, C., Sanz, R., & Garcia, J., (2007). Ind. Eng. 
Chem. Res., 46, 6449–6455. 
40. Joung, H. J., Kim, J. H., Oh, J. S., You, D. W., Park, H. O., & Jung, K. W., (2014). Appl. 
Surf. Sci., 290, 267–273. 
41. Yan, Y., Chen, Y., Jia, X., & Yang, Y., (2014). Applied Catal. B, Environ., 156, 157, 385–397. 
42. Tan, H. T., Chen, Y., Zhou, C., Jia, X., Zhu, J., Chen, J., Rui, X., Yan, Q., & Yang, Y., 
(2012). Appl. Catal. B Environ., 119, 120, 166–174. 
43. Fu, X., Yu, H., Peng, F., Wang, H., & Qian, Y., (2007). Appl. Catal. A Gen., 321, 190–197. 
44. Chen, J., Zhang, W., Chen, L., Ma, L., Gao, H., & Wang, T., (2013). Chempluschem, 
78, 142–148. 
45. Liang, X. L., Dong, X., Lin, G. D., & Zhang, H. B., (2009). Appl. Catal. B Environ., 
88, 315–322. 
46. Arike, M., T., Takenaka, S., Matsune, H., & Kishida, (2010). Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 959, 
953–959. 
47. Onoe, T., Iwamoto, S., & Inoue, M., (2007). Catal. Commun., 8, 701–706. 
48. Li, C. H., Yu, Z. X., Yao, K. F., Ji, S. F., & Liang, J., (2005). J. Mol. Catal. A Chem., 
226, 101–105. 
49. Guo, Z., Chen, Y., Li, L., Wang, X., Haller, G. L., & Yang, Y., (2010). J. Catal., 276, 
314–326. 
50. Brotons, V., Coq, B., & Planeix, J. M., (1997). J. Mol. Catal. A Chem., 116, 397–403. 
51. Planeix, J. M., Coustel, N., Coq, B., Brotons, V., Kumbhar, P. S., Dutartre, R., Geneste, 
P., Bernier, P., & P. M. Ajayan. (1994). Journal of the American Chemical Society, 
116(17), 7935–7936. 
52. Giordano, R., Serp, P., Kalck, P., Kihn, Y., Schreiber, J., Marhic, C., & Duvail, J., (2003). 
Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 4, 610–617. 
53. Chizari, K., Janowska, I., Houllé, M., Florea, I., Ersen, O., Romero, T., Bernhardt, P., 
Ledoux, M. J., & Pham-Huu, C., (2010). Appl. Catal. A Gen., 380, 72–80. 
54. Dry, M. E., (1999). Appl. Catal. A Gen., 189, 185–190. 
55. Bukur, D. B., Lang, X., Mukesh, D., Zimmerman, W. H., Rosynek, M. P., & Li, C., 
(1990). Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 29, 1588–1599. 
56. Shariati, J., Haghtalab, A., & Mosayebi, A., (2019). J. Energy Chem., 9–22. 
57. Eschemann, T. O., Lamme, W. S., Manchester, R. L., Parmentier, T. E., Cognigni, A., 
Rønning, M., & De Jong, K. P., (2015). J. Catal., 328, 130–138. 
58. Van, D. T. W., Yoshida, H., Oord, R., Zečević, J., Weckhuysen, B. M., & De Jong, K. P., 
(2020). Appl. Catal. A Gen., 593, 117441. 
59. Feng, L., Yan, Y., Chen, Y., & Wang, L., (2011). Energy Environ. Sci., 4, 1892–1899. 
60. Mabena, L. F., Sinha, R. S., Mhlanga, S. D., & Coville, N. J., (2011). Appl. Nanosci., 1, 
67–77. 
61. Li, X., Tuo, Y., Li, P., Duan, X., Jiang, H., & Zhou, X., (2014). Effects of carbon support 
on microwave-assisted catalytic dehydrogenation of decalin. Carbon N. Y., 67, 775–783. Role of Carbon Nanotubes as Supported Metal-Nanoparticles Catalysis 53 
62. Chen, W., Ji, J., Duan, X., Qian, G., Li, P., Zhou, X., Chen, D., & Yuan, W., (2014). Chem. 
Commun., 50, 2142–2144. 
63. Liu, Z. J., Xu, Z., Yuan, Z. Y., Lu, D., Chen, W., & Zhou, W., (2001). Catal. Letters, 72, 
203–206. 
64. Liu, Z. J., Yuan, Z. Y., Zhou, W., Peng, L. M., & Xu, Z., (2001). Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 
3, 2518–2521. 
65. Yin, S. F., Zhang, Q. H., Xu, B. Q., Zhu, W. X., Ng, C. F., & Au, C. T., (2004). J. Catal., 
224, 384–396. 
66. Yin, S. F., Xu, B. Q., Zhu, W. X., Ng, C. F., Zhou, X. P., & Au, C. T., (2004). Catal. Today, 
93, 95, 27–38. 
67. Li, L., Zhu, Z. H., Yan, Z. F., Lu, G. Q., & Rintoul, L., (2007). Appl. Catal. A Gen., 320, 
166–172. 
68. Wang, S. J., Yin, S. F., Li, L., Xu, B. Q., Ng, C. F., & Au, C. T., (2004). Appl. Catal. B 
Environ., 52, 287–299. 
69. Bell, T. E., Zhan, G., Wu, K., Zeng, H. C., & Torrente-Murciano, L., (2017). Top. Catal., 
60, 1251–1259. 
70. Chen, J., Zhu, Z. H., Wang, S., Ma, Q., Rudolph, V., & Lu, G. Q., (2010). Chem. Eng. 
J., 156, 404–410. 
71. Hill, A. K., & Torrente-Murciano, L., Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2015, 172–173, 129–135. 
72. Hu, Z., Mahin, J., Datta, S., Bell, T. E., & Torrente-Murciano, L., (2019). Top. Catal., 
62, 1169–1177. 
73. Zhang, J., Su, D. S., & Schlögl, R., (2009). Phys. Status Solidi Basic Res., 246, 2502–2506. 
74. Chen, L., Yang, K., Liu, H., & Wang, X., (2008). Carbon N. Y., 46, 2137–2143. 
75. Kim, J. Y., Jo, Y., Lee, S., & Choi, H. C., (2009). Tetrahedron Lett., 50, 6290–6292. 
76. Xu, Y., Chen, L., & Wang, X., (2013). Can. J. Chem., 91, 307–314. 
77. Zhang, P. P., Zhang, X. X., Sun, H. X., Liu, R. H., Wang, B., & Lin, Y. H., (2009). 
Tetrahedron Lett., 50, 4455–4458. 
78. Bin, P. H., Yen, C. H., Yoon, B., Sato, M., & Wai, C. M., (2006). Synth. Commun., 36, 
3473–3478. 
79. Corma, A., Garcia, H., & Leyva, A., (2005). J. Mol. Catal. A Chem., 230, 97–105. 
80. Siamaki, A. R., Lin, Y., Woodberry, K., Connell, J. W., & Gupton, B. F., (2013). J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 1, 12909–12918. 
81. Shao, L., Zhang, B., Zhang, W., Hong, S. Y., Schlçgl, R., & Su, D. S., (2013). Angew. 
Chemie - Int. Ed., 52, 1–5. 
82. Sokolov, V. I., Rakov, E. G., Bumagin, N. A., & Vinogradov, M. G., (2010). Fullerenes, 
Nanotubes. Carbon Nanostructures, 18, 558–563. 
83. Lee, E., Park, S. A., Woo, H., Hyun, K., Wook, D., Lim, H., & Kim, Y. T., (2017). J. 
Catal., 352, 388–393. 
84. Pyo, A., Kim, J. D., Choi, H. C., & Lee, S., (2013). J. Organomet. Chem., 724, 271–274. 
85. Hajipour, A. R., Khorsandi, Z., & Karimi, H., (2015). Appl. Organomet. Chem., 29, 
805–808. 
86. Movassagh, B., Parvis, F. S., & Navidi, M., (2015). Appl. Organomet. Chem., 29, 40–44. 
87. Olivier, J. H., Camerel, F., Ziessel, R., Retailleau, P., Amadou, J., & Pham-Huu, C., 
(2008). New J. Chem., 32, 920–924. 
88. Veisi, H., Safarimehr, P., & Hemmati, S., (2019). Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 96, 310–318. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 3 
MESOPOROUS SILICA 
NANOMATERIALS AND POROUS 
SOLIDS 
LAVANYA TANDON1
, VIJENDER SINGH2
, AABROO MAHAL3
, and 
POONAM KHULLAR1 
1
Department of Chemistry, B.B.K. D.A.V. College for Women, 
Amritsar, Punjab, India 
2
Department of Chemistry, S.K. Government College, Kanwali Rewari, 
Haryana, India 
3
Department of Chemistry, Khalsa College for Woman, Amritsar, 
Punjab, India 
ABSTRACT 
The morphology of the surface depends upon the use of solvent during 
Stöber synthesis. After treating hydrothermally, obtained silica spheres 
possess smooth surfaces on the use of the surfactant cetyltrimethylam￾monium bromide (CTAB), whereas corrugated shells are obtained on 
using isopropanol or butanol. Using static acidic conditions mesoporous 
spheres of silica whose size lies within the range of 2 to 6 µm have been 
synthesized. By using cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) and 
amphiphilic block copolymer (polystyrene-b-poly(acrylic acid), PS-b-PAA) 
as the co-templates, dual-mesoporous silica spheres (DMSS) with pore size 
2.0 nm can be synthesized. By varying the TEOS amount and length of the 
hydrophobic block, the size of the pore and the thickness of the shell can 56 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
be tuned. In the case of a heterogeneous system, small particles kept on 
emerging during the synthesis. By increasing the amount of silica precursor 
particle size was found to be enlarged. On adding different silica precursor 
mesoporous sphere of silica having hydrophobic shell and hydrophilic core 
was obtained. In mesoporous silica spheres, immobilization of enzymes is 
obtained by layer-by-layer assembly of the thin shells. The use of enzyme 
provides the enhanced stability of the reaction by increasing the number of 
layers and reducing the stability of the reaction. 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, modern nanotechnology is a part of science. It possesses major 
applications in the field of biotechnology and plays a major role in disease 
diagnoses. The medicine evolution has been a great boon for society. Non￾toxic, biodegradable, and biocompatible nanocarriers are being developed. 
For infectious and cancerous diseases polymeric and lipid base nanocarriers 
are being developed. Inorganic nanoparticles also have a vital role in the 
biomedical field. The commercially available particles are the nanoparticles 
of gold and carbon dots. Among these, the particles of silica have attained 
great attention in phase I trials on humans, which is necessary during the 
investigation of the new drug. In recent years, the mesoporous particles of 
silica have acquired great attraction as it has uniform and tunable pore size. 
The functionalization on its surface takes place independently. It serves as 
the promising carrier for the drug. This carrier has been used for loading 
drugs to various macromolecules like RNA, DNA, and proteins. The present 
given review focuses on the synthesis of the mesoporous silica sphere under 
different conditions. 
Mesoporous spheres of silica having tunable pore size, large surface area 
is used in different applications like catalysis [1, 2], delivery of drug [3–5], 
and various other applications [6–9]. 
3.2 SYNTHESIS OF MESOPOROUS SILICA SPHERES 
Many methods have been developed for synthesizing silica mesoporous 
sphere in which surfactants are used as templates for the formation of 
spheres [6, 10–15]. Stöber synthesis is used to produce ordered mesoporous 
spheres possessing high monodispersity, smooth surface and tunable pore 
size [16]. Mesoporosity can also be introduced into the Stöber spheres, Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 57 
via pseudomorphic transformations. These transformations are the reac￾tion which involves the change in chemical composition. Reprecipitation 
followed by dissolution results in perseverance of the solid materials shape. 
Hydrothermal treatment is involved for the pseudomorphic transformation of 
amorphous and dense silica and this is an alternative method for synthesizing 
mesoporous silica spheres. 
During transformation, size and monodispersity of original spheres of 
silica is retained [17, 18]. There is a great influence of solvent in synthesizing 
silica spheres. The use of solvent affects the condensation occurring in silica 
spheres and this determines the silica dissolution and the architecture of the 
spheres obtained. When surfactant having long chain like alkylammonium 
is obtained then pseudomorphic products of silica spheres are synthesized. 
When EtOH is used then silica spheres having smooth surface is obtained. 
When BuOH or iPrOH is used then silica spheres with corrugated surface is 
obtained. For nanocasting, silica spheres having corrugated surfaces are used 
as template and mesoporous spheres of carbon with hollow cores resembling 
to mesoporous silica are obtained as the products and these provides insights 
into the surfactant molecules diffusion depth in the parent silica sphere. It 
is revealed that the cores of mesoporous spheres remain solid. The parent 
silica spheres as shown in Figure 3.1, having smooth surfaces were obtained 
by Stöber syntheses using various solvents like iO2
-iPrOH, SiO2
-BuOH and 
SiO2
-EtOH [19]. 
The smooth surface can be seen in Figure 3.1(A), (D), and (G). After 
undergoing reactions of pseudomorphic transformation, the mesoporous 
product average diameter of all the spheres were found to be increased 
HT-SiO2
-BuOH (733, 40 nm), SiO2
-EtOH (436, 18 nm), SiO2
-iPrOH (623, 
37 nm), SiO2
-BuOH (494, 23 nm), HT-SiO2
-EtOH (527, 20 nm); HT-SiO2
-
iPrOH (730, 45 nm). The product obtained have been found to be more 
aggregated as compared to parents’ sphere. The morphologies of the surface 
have been found to be different than those obtained after treating hydrother￾mally (can be seen in Figure 3.2). In Figure 3.1(B) and (C) smooth surfaces 
are obtained in which EtOH has been used as a surfactant. In these, meso￾porous channels are directed on the outside surface. These results have been 
sufficiently observed through TEM. It can be seen in given Figure 3.2(A). 
The products which are obtained from parent spheres of silica using BuOH 
or iPrOH solvent are found to possess deep cavities along with the corruga￾tion at the surface of the product, it can be seen in Figure 3.1(E) and (F), in 
which iPrOH is used as solvent and in Figure 3.1(H) and (I) in which BuOH is 
used as solvent. The cavities possess elongated openings. Figure 3.2(B)–(D) FIGURE 3.1 SEM images of parent silica and hydrothermal silica spheres: (A) parent silica 
spheres produced in EtOH (SiO2
–EtOH); (B) hydrothermal product HT–SiO2
–EtOH; (C) 
magnified image of HT–SiO2
–EtOH; (D) parent silica spheres produced in iPrOH (SiO2
– 
iPrOH); (E) hydrothermal product HT–SiO2
–iPrOH and broken structures of HT–SiO2
–iPrOH 
in the inset with a scale bar of 500 nm; (F) magnified image of HT–SiO2
–iPrOH; (G) parent 
silica spheres produced in BuOH (SiO2
–BuOH); (H) hydrothermal product HT–SiO2
–BuOH 
and broken structures of HT–SiO2
–iPrOH in the inset with a scale bar of 500 nm; (I) magnified 
image of HT–SiO2
–BuOH. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [19]. © 2011 American Chemical Society. 
58 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
represents the spheres outer parts. It has been found that the products obtained 
after the hydrothermal treatment have been directed outwards from core to 
outside. As seen in the TEM images of Figure 3.2(B) and (C), the cores of 
HT-SiO2
-BuOH and HT-SiO2
-iPrOH are found to be denser. 
The SEM image, as shown in Figure 3.1(E) and (H) shows that spheres 
are broken and the shell structure is corrugated. In Figure 3.2(B), small 
aggregate particles along with larger spheres have been observed. The side 
products have been obtained during the hydrothermal treatment via surface 
templating of silica and through multiple centrifugation it can be removed. FIGURE 3.2 TEM images of hydrothermal reaction products: (A) HT–SiO2
–EtOH; (B) HT– 
SiO2
–iPrOH; and (C) HT–SiO2
–BuOH. The inset in (B) shows an enlargement of the circled 
region with a scale bar of 100 nm; (D) shows a higher magnification image of HT–SiO2
–iPrOH. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [19]. © 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 59 
It has been observed that products obtained by different methods 
possess the same alignment of pores on the surface, but the texture of pore 
and the morphology of the surface are found to be different. The products 
obtained using different solvents after the hydrothermal reactions exhibit 
radial direction that has resulted from the combined effect of individual 
surfactant molecule that aligns on the surface of the sphere and thus 
the surface energy is reduced and also the tendency for assembling into 
micelles is reduced [20, 21]. 60 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
3.3 SYNTHESIS OF TRANSPARENT MESOPOROUS SPHERES 
By using emulsion-based chemistry, transparent marble-like mesoporous 
spheres is obtained. The silica spheres possess a uniform size ranging from 
0.1 to 2 mm and size of mesoporous sphere of silica lie in the diameter range 
of 1–5 nm. The sorbets used for chromatographic separations depend upon the 
texture, porosity, size, and mechanical strength of the particles. The molecular 
selectivity and the space flow velocity are obtained because of the mono￾dispersed pore size and high surface area. These particles are obtained through 
annealing and packing of the uniformly sized spheres at high temperatures. 
Small spherical droplets of gelled silica are obtained through the process 
of spray drying. It can also be obtained by gelling the liquid through heating 
or by the chemical action in which the droplets have been sprayed [22]. 
Different size spheres are obtained by changing the size of the silica solution 
before it gets gelled. The silicon ester-like tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) or 
Tetramethylorthoslicate (TMOS) acts as the source of silica. The obtained 
hydrogel spherical structures were first washed and then dried at a tempera￾ture of 120°C and at a high temperature of about 450°C. By controlling the 
silicon esters hydrolysis, spherical solid particles are obtained. 
By partial hydrolysis of methyl or ethyl silicate or methyl silicate in the 
alcohol, an emulsion in water-alcohol solidifies into the gel beads. Silica 
beads with a diameter of 0.2–0.5 nm and having pore diameter with size 
2 nm are obtained. The pore volume, distribution of pore size, pore shape 
and surface texture of silica sphere requires preparation conditions. Silica 
spheres prepared by these methods possess low surface area, and irregular 
shape [23]. Calcined spherical solid particles are also obtained by silicon 
ester hydrolysis. For example, the silica gel beads of size 0.2–0.5 mm 
diameter are obtained by partial hydrolysis of methyl or ethyl silicate in 
alcoholic solution containing less amount of water and in this HCl act as the 
catalyst and water-alcohol emulsion is formed which are solidified into the 
gel beads. Silica spheres obtained by this method possess irregular shape 
and have large pore size dispersion and low surface area. 
3.3.1 EFFECT OF STIRRING ON SYNTHESIS OF MESOPOROUS 
SILICA SPHERES 
The mesoporous silica spheres can also be prepared in single-step method. 
By varying the reaction volume and the stirring conditions, silica spheres 
of different sizes are obtained [24]. For synthesis of emulsions, sphere FIGURE 3.3 Size and shape of spheres using CTAB as surfactant: (a) as-made sample; 
(b) calcined at 500°C sample. The strength of the sphere depends upon the sphere’s dryness. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [24]. © 1997 American Chemical Society. 
Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 61 
formation is influenced by the speed of stirring. Soft particles of gel are 
obtained when the speed of stirring is low, i.e., <200 rpm and hard spheres 
are obtained when the speed of stirring is medium, i.e., 200–400 rpm and 
fine powder is obtained when high speed of stirring is applied, i.e., >450 rpm 
[27]. The shape and size of the spheres prepared by using CTAB are shown 
in given Figure 3.3. 
3.4 SYNTHESIS OF SPHERES UNDER ACIDIC AND BASIC 
CONDITIONS 
Efforts have been made for fabricating defined mesoporous spheres of silica. 
Under static conditions, various sizes of mesoporous silica sphere (MSS) are 62 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
obtained by following the templating routes of cationic surfactant through 
stirring under the basic conditions. The sub micrometer-sized MSS’s ranging 
from 0.4 to 1.1 µm and the millimeter sized particles of 0.1 to 2 mm are 
obtained [25]. 
Using the method of emulsion templating, under the acidic conditions, the 
MSS’s having diameter within 1–100 µm are synthesized. After the removal 
of the organic phase, hollow microspheres are obtained and crushed readily 
[26]. Under the acidic conditions, mesoporous silica possessing various 
morphologies like disc like, spheroidal spiral and toroidal are produced. 
Templating route of cationic surfactant is followed to obtain the MSS’s 
possessing the tunable mesopore size and the configuration. The nonionic 
surfactant interacts with the cationic surfactant and the mixed surfactant 
aggregates are obtained in the aqueous solution. Thus, it is expected that 
modified morphology is expected by particles of mesoporous silica which 
are obtained by mixing the cationic-non-ionic surfactant. Thus, the particles 
with the size 2–6 µm are synthesized under the static acidic conditions 
through mixing the cationic–non-ionic surfactant templating. Scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) has been used to analyze the growth of MSS’s 
the micrometer size, and it has been found that stirring is not suitable for 
the silica sphere formation, but the quiescent synthesis favors the spherical 
morphology. Stirring has great effect on the morphology of the obtained 
product. When stirring is applied for 30 minutes, then two morphologies 
are obtained. One of these consists of spheres of micrometer size and the 
other are the irregular large monoliths and when the sample is stirred for 960 
minutes then only the irregular monoliths are obtained (Figure 3.4). 
TEM images are also obtained at different stages during the formation 
of MSS’s. Spherical particles showing the fluffy and spongy structure are 
obtained when the sample is aged for 5 hours under the static conditions. Tiny 
particles lying around the micrometer-sized particles aggregate together. The 
exterior surface of these particles is obtained by the subunit’s aggregation. 
And these subunits possess the rough surface and consist of large number of 
nanometer pores and after aging for 16 hours the spongy and fluffy particles 
grow and dense and spherical particles with range 2 to 6 µm are developed, 
as shown in Figure 3.5. 
Thus, the synthesized mesoporous product has not formed through drying 
and calcination but has resulted from growth in the mother solution. Thus, 
the process of unidirectional aggregation is followed to obtain these spheres. 
TEOS is hydrolyzed along with the cationic-non-ionic template to produce 
subunit of 0.1 µm in size. These subunit aggregates unidirectionally to obtain Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 63 
the fluffy and spongy spherical particles and these reconstructed into dense 
spheres possessing the smooth surface on aging through the internal cemen￾tation. Large monoliths are obtained when the soluble silica gets deposited 
on the surface of solid silica. The continuous stirring damages the particle 
morphology as unexpected aggregation occurs between the silica particles. 
This mesoporous sphere formation is an example of selective processing of 
this mesoporous silica into the macroporous form. 
FIGURE 3.4 SEM micrographs of calcined mesoporous silica stirred for: (a) 0.5; and (b) 16 h. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [27]. ©1998 American Chemical Society. FIGURE 3.5 TEM micrographs of mesoporous silica aged under static conditions for: (a–c) 
5; and (d) 16 h. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [19]. ©1998 American Chemical Society. 
64 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
3.5 SYNTHESIS OF SPHERES HAVING BIMODAL PORES 
Dual templating approach or hydrothermal or chemical post-treatment of the 
mesoporous silica particles is used to obtain the porous materials possessing 
bimodal porosity. These bimodal pores do not have well defined structure 
and the size of the macropores lies in the range of 200 to 300 nm. Recently 
it has been discovered that different block co-polymers are being used as 
templates having large pores, and surfactants are being used as templates 
with small pores for synthesizing these bimodal mesopore material with 
tunable pore size and structure. The particles obtained possess irregular 
morphology and their particle size distribution is also broad. A simple 
method has been reported for synthesizing dual mesoporous silica sphere 
(DMSS) having core-shell structure. PS-b-PAA, an anionic block copolymer 
is being used as a template for forming large mesopores. By changing the 
lengths of the blocks of PS-b-PAA, the size of the pores and the thickness SCHEME 3.1 (a) THF solution of PS-b-PAA; (b) CTAB-coated PS-b-PAA aggregates 
formed by the electrostatic interaction between CTA+ and PAA–; (c) core part formed from 
the assembly between CTAB-coated PS-b-PAA aggregates and TEOS; (d) mesoporous shell 
formation via the self-assembly between the remaining CTAB and the additional TEOS; (e) 
final core-shell structured dual-mesoporous silica spheres after calcination. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [28]. © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 65 
of the shell can be tuned. The dual MSS’s prepared by this method possess 
uniform size of the particles and a defined structure of core-shell. The dual 
MSS’s were prepared by hydrophobic nanoparticles encapsulation like iron 
oxide (IO) magnetic particles. It has been shown by the drug storing and 
releasing tests that approximately 500 mg of the Ibuprofen can be stored in 
one gram of DMSS. The following mechanism discussed has been proposed 
for the formation of the DMSS [28] (Scheme 3.1). 
By adding the small molecules of surfactants or the inorganic ions, PS-b￾PAA micelles morphology can be changed from spheres to rod shape [29]. 
Rod-shaped aggregates were formed in the beginning of the experiment 
and it was due to the use of ammonia and the CTAB surfactant. The PAA 66 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
hydrophilic block of aggregates of rod shape could couple via electrostatic 
interaction and the columbic forces with the micelles of CTAB and the 
composite micelles were formed also it leads to the CTAB coating on the 
rod-like particles. By using ethanol or TEOS, rod-like aggregates coated by 
CTAB, which have been made up of silicate oligomers were formed first. 
Core dual mesoporous structure has been obtained when composites of 
silica material packed in ordered fashion which was similar to the model that 
was proposed by Cai and co-workers [30]. These electrostatic interactions 
are responsible for the spherical morphology of the spherical silica. The 
remaining amount of the CTAB molecule was expelled out from the struc￾ture’s core and when the structures core become large then the outer area of 
the core gets rich in the CTAB and it leads to the self-assembly between the 
TEOS and the CTAB molecules. The core gets surrounded with the outer 
shell consisting of small pores. CTAB has an important role in the structure’s 
formation. Without CTAB, the coated aggregates could not have formed and 
also the self-assembly could not have been possible and the mesoporous 
structure would not have been formed. The solvent ethanol, also plays an 
important role in the formation of these aggregates. If no ethanol has been 
used or only a small amount of ethanol have been used then MSS’s could 
not be obtained. This is so because usage of large amount of ethanol results 
in high CMC (critical micelle concentration) value. It has been found that 
metal nanoparticles could be incorporated into DMSS large pores so as to 
achieve the magnetic stabilization. By this encapsulation, the structure and 
monodispersity remains unaffected. By using the same procedure, different 
hydrophobic nanoparticles could be incorporated into spheres of DMSS 
and multifunctional spheres of silica could form having mesoporous dual 
structure. 
3.6 DRUG RELEASE USING MESOPOROUS SILICA SPHERES 
It has been found that drug release rate of the molecules can be tuned by 
adjusting the thickness of the DMSS shell. The three-step release of the drug 
has been observed; the first step involves fast drug release of the drug in 60 
minutes. The second stage involves an increase in concentration of the drug 
in the next 6 to 24 h. Large stage involves the drug absorption in large pores. 
This release profile of DMSS is same with that of mesoporous structure of 
yolk-shell previously reported [31]. Mesoporous silica sphere possesses 
uniform characteristics as it has high specific surface area [32, 33]. Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 67 
Mesoporous silica can be synthesized under acidic and basic conditions. 
Spheres of spherical shape are obtained because of the minimum surface 
energy. The reaction rate can be reduced in the acidic media by carrying 
out the synthesis by using the non-ionic surfactant [34]. The self-assembly 
method induced by evaporation or the aerosol-assisted method is used for 
synthesizing the spherical MSS’s [35, 36]. 
In basic conditions, surfactants like compounds of ammonia, salts of 
alkyl amines were used as surfactants. Modified Stöber method has been 
used to synthesize these spheres. Recently, spheres having hexagonal 
regularity have been synthesized by optimizing the concentration of TMOS 
(tetramethoxysilane) and C (n-alkyl trimethylammonium) halide n
TMAX 
and these hexagonally ordered mesopores are aligned uniformly from 
center towards the spheres surface. Many researchers have investigated 
the mechanism for developing such homogeneous spheres. Mechanism of 
cooperative templating followed by templating mechanism of liquid crystal 
have been developed [32]. These reactions are conducted above surfactant’s 
CMC value. The nucleation, particle growth, and spherical formation of the 
silica spheres cannot be interpreted by the single mechanism, as synthesis has 
been carried out under various reaction conditions. As reported by Ostafin 
and co-workers, the growth of particles has been attributed to oligomers and 
monomers in addition to the surface [37]. It has been found that at the silica 
sphere center, cubic structure was obtained, and from this structure aligned 
mesopores were obtained. Central core structure has governed alignment of 
the mesopore. It has been found that particle growth occurs rapidly during the 
reaction and is followed by propagation and termination and monodispersed 
particles formation. In Figure 3.6, the particle appearing small in size, i.e., 
of 140 nm at 144 seconds is found to grow bigger and obtain the size of 500 
nm at 600 seconds 39. 
Figure 3.6 confirms that small synthesized particles homogeneously 
grow into large particles and this leads to the generation of spherical mono￾dispersed particles. From the given figure, it is confirmed that, during the 
reaction, small particles appeared in the reaction mixture along with the 
monodispersed particles. These particles can occur any time in the reaction 
mixture and thus it was suggested that new particles were kept on occur￾ring during the reaction mixture. These small particles are found to grow 
homogeneously in big particles and finally leads to the formation of mono￾dispersed particles. 
It was observed that, under certain reaction conditions, small particles 
appeared suddenly when the particles have grown to their final size. Small FIGURE 3.6 Transmission electron micrograph (TEM) images of samples obtained at 
different times: (a) 130; (b) 144; (c) 150; (d) 160; (e) 200; (f) 240; (g) 360; and (h) 600 s after 
the commencement of the experiment. The scale bar represents 500 nm. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [39]. © 2007 American Chemical Society. 
68 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
particles were continuously observed during the synthesis. The result has 
been confirmed by the TEM observations (Figure 3.7). Mesoporous silica 
has a diameter within the range of 2–50 nm [32]. This size is comparable 
with the enzyme’s diameter, and thus these materials can be used for the 
immobilization of enzyme. 
3.7 SYNTHESIS OF MESOPOROUS SPHERES HAVING LARGE 
PORES 
Recently, the simple, and useful method has been reported for preparing 
particles loaded with enzymes using mesoporous spheres of silica with large 
pore size. The enzyme can be immobilized on the surface of the sphere and 
a multilayer shell was made to assemble on the surface of the sphere via 
L-b-L, i.e., layer-by-layer assembly through electrostatic interactions [40]. FIGURE 3.7 TEM images of samples obtained at different times: (a) 120; (b) 240; (c) 540; 
and (d) 720 s after the commencement of the experiment for a heterogeneous system. The 
scale bar represents 2 µm. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [39]. © 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 69 
BMS particles enzyme immobilization capacity has been investigated for 
enzymes having different isoelectric points (pI) and different sizes. Hosts 
used for immobilization of enzymes are MS spheres and spheres of nonpo￾rous silica, constituting different pore sizes. 
Following are the systems used for dense coatings on the BMS spheres 
loaded with enzymes: (i) a multilayer shell of PAA formed by deposition 
of poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) and poly(diallyl dimethylammo￾nium chloride) (PDDA); (ii) formation of a composite shell via SiNP (Silica 
Nanoparticle) and PDDA (Figure 3.8). 
3.8 ENCAPSULATION OF ENZYME 
For encapsulation of enzyme (as shown in given Figure 3.9(a)) bimodal 
mesoporous spheres with size ranging between 2 and 4 µm were used. TEM 
studies (Figure 3.9) have confirmed their inner structure, shown in Figure 
3.9(b) and (c). The homogeneous character of the particles has been shown 
in Figure 3.9(b). These bi-modal particles underwent slicing and resulted 
into large size distribution. Figure 3.9(c) shows the disordered structure of 
pores with size 10–40 nm. 
The material is confirmed to possess a bimodal structure with small pores 
having a size of 2–3 nm and large pores having a size of 10–40 nm. Enzymes 
are the macromolecules and their encapsulation can occur in structures 
consisting of large pores. Figure 3.9(d) shows the nanoporous image of the FIGURE 3.8 Schematic representation of enzyme encapsulation using MS spheres as 
supports. The enzyme is first immobilized and subsequently encapsulated by a (I) PE or (II) 
PE/nanoparticle multilayer shell. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [40]. © 2005 American Chemical Society. 
FIGURE 3.9 Electron microscopy images of the silica spheres employed: (a) SEM images 
of the BMS spheres; and (b, c) TEM of ultramicrotomed samples of the BMS spheres; SEM 
images of the (d) NS spheres; (e) MS-12 spheres; and (f) MS-16 spheres. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [40]. © 2005 American Chemical Society. 
70 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 71 
silica in which the size of the mesopores is 2–3 nm and Figures 3.9(e) and 
(f) depicts the image of particles of MS-12 and 16, which were synthesized 
in a homogeneous phase. SBA-15 with a pore size of 7 nm were also used as 
supports for enzyme immobilization. As compared with the BMS particles, 
the particle size of the MS-12 and MS-16 are found to be more homogeneous. 
Several enzymes with different pI values and having different molecular 
weights were used to determine the potential of enzyme encapsulation via 
BMS sphere, i.e., bimodal mesoporous silica sphere. It was observed that 
enzymes having low weight of molecule and high value of pI underwent high 
loading. Electrostatic forces have occurred for encapsulating the enzyme 
in the silica sphere because pI of silica is 3. For the encapsulation of larger 
enzymes having low value of pI, the tendency of loading is found to decrease. 
The size of pore and enzyme plays a significant role in encapsulation. The 
interactions between the enzyme and MSS’s are so weak that enzymes 
undergo desorption when they are dispersed in the solution and to prevent 
this desorption, a protective barrier is provided for enzyme loading. For this 
purpose, a shell composed of multilayers was imposed on the surface of BMS 
sphere. Encapsulated catalase is being used in the food industry and helps in 
removing hydrogen peroxide (H2
O2
) from food. It is also used in the textile 
industry and analytical field. By measuring the enzyme activity, the amount 
of desorbed catalase can be measured by monitoring the H2
O2 kinetics. After 
the deposition of the multilayer on the spheres, the leakage of enzyme was 
decreased to a great extent. The activity of the loaded sphere is dependent 
upon layer type and the number of layers deposited. 
3.9 CONCLUSION 
Spheres reactivity is affected depending upon the type of solvent used. As 
carbon atoms increase, the condensation decreases on moving from ethanol 
to propanol to butanol spheres prepared using ethanol are found to be 
mesoporous throughout. Under static conditions, Mesoporous silica with 
micrometer size dimensions have been synthesized using cationic–anionic 
surfactant templating. By varying the length of PS-b-PAA. The pore size of 
DMSS can be tuned. The thickness can be controlled by varying the TEOS 
concentration. These have potential applications in the field of separation, 
sorption, and biomedical field. The bimodal silica particles play a significant 
role in the immobilization of the enzyme. Because of the encapsulation, the 
properties of enzymes get enhanced. 72 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
3.10 CURRENT AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVE 
Nanomedicines are found to have a great impact in disease therapy and 
are being used for diagnosis or conventional treatment. Research is being 
carried out for using this technology in treating multiple disease therapy. The 
mesoporous silica particles fabrication is costly but simple. These particles 
can also be used as nanocarriers for drugs placements and drug loading. 
The amount of these particles can be varied as in the same concentration 
drug cannot be loaded. FDA has approved the use of silica nanoparticles 
on the human trials for C dots. It is a very important step. Challenge lies 
because of the lack of genotoxicity, chronic toxicity, tissue compatibility, 
etc. Degradation mesoporous silica mechanism has not been discovered yet. 
Efforts are being made to cover the gap between clinical and preclinical use 
of mesoporous silica particles. The novel design of these materials can be 
used in diagnosing, imaging, and treating the patients need. 
KEYWORDS 
• dual mesoporous silica sphere 
• enzymes 
• morphology 
• silica spheres 
• surfactant 
• tetraethyl orthosilicate 
REFERENCES 
1. Shokouhimehr, M., Piao, Y., Kim, J., Jang, Y., & Hyeon, T., (2007). A magnetically 
recyclable nanocomposite catalyst for olefin epoxidation. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 46(37), 
7039–7043. doi: 10.1002/anie.200702386. 
2. Zhang, Q., Lee, I., Ge, J., Zaera, F., & Yin, Y., (2010). Surface-protected etching of 
mesoporous oxide shells for the stabilization of metal nanocatalysts. Adv. Funct. Mater., 
20, 2201–2214. /doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201000428. 
3. Lai, C. Y., Trewyn, B. G., Jeftinija, D. M., Jeftinija, K., Xu, S., Jeftinija, S., & Lin, V. S. Y., 
(2003). A Mesoporous silica nanosphere-based carrier system with chemically removable 
CdS nanoparticle caps for stimuli-responsive controlled release of neurotransmitters and 
drug molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 125(15), 4451–4459. doi: 10.1021/ja028650l. Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 73 
4. Lu, J., Liong, M., Zink, J. I., & Tamanoi, F., (2007). Mesoporous silica nanoparticles as a 
delivery system for hydrophobic anticancer drugs. Small, 3(8), 1341–1346. doi: 10.1002/ 
smll.200700005. 
5. Zhu, Y., Shi, J., Shen, W., Dong, X., Feng, J., Ruan, M., & Li, Y., (2005). Stimuli-responsive 
controlled drug release from a hollow mesoporous silica sphere/polyelectrolyte multilayer 
core-shell structure. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 44, 5083–5087. doi: 10.1002/anie.200501500. 
6. Nooney, R. I., Thirunavukkarasu, D., Chen, Y., Josephs, R., & Ostafin, A. E., (2002). 
Synthesis of nanoscale mesoporous silica spheres with controlled particle size. Chem. 
Mater., 14, 4721–4728.doi.org/10.1021/cm0204371. 
7. Wang, Y., & Caruso, F., (2005). Mesoporous silica spheres as supports for enzyme immo￾bilization and encapsulation. Chem. Mater., 17, 953–961.doi.org/10.1021/cm0483137. 
8. Wang, Y., & Caruso, F., (2006). Nanoporous protein particles through templating 
mesoporous silica spheres. Adv. Mater., 18, 795–800.doi.org/10.1002/adma.200501901. 
9. Wang, Y., Yu, A., & Caruso, F., (2005). Nanoporous polyelectrolyte spheres prepared 
by sequential coating sacrificial mesoporous silica spheres Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 44, 
2888–2892. 
10. Lu, Y., Fan, H., Stump, A., Ward, T. L., Rieker, T., & Brinker, C., (1999). Aerosol -assisted 
self assembly of mesostructured spherical nanoparticles. J. Nature, 398, 223–226. 
11. Gr€un, M., Unger, K. K., Matsumoto, A., & Tsutsumi, K., (1999). Novel pathways for the 
preparation of mesoporous MCM-41 materials: Control of porosity and morphology. Micro￾Porous Mesoporous Mater., 27, 207–216.doi.org/10.1016/S1387-1811(98)00255-8. 
12. Yoon, S. B., Sohn, K., Kim, J. Y., Shin, C. H., Yu, J. S., & Hyeon, T., (2002). Fabrication 
of carbon capsules with hollow macroporous core/mesoporous shell structures. Adv. 
Mater., 14, 19–21.https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-4095. 
13. Tan, B., Lehmler, H. J., Vyas, S. M., Knutson, B. L., & Rankin, S. E., (2005). Controlling 
nanopore size and shape by fluorosurfactant templating of silica. Adv. Mater., 17, 
2368–2371. doi.org/10.1021/cm048991t. 
14. Ganguly, A., Ahmad, T., & Ganguli, A. K., (2010). Silica mesostructures: Control of 
pore size and surface area using a surfactant-templated hydrothermal process. Langmuir, 
26, 14901–14908. DOI: 10.1021/la102510c. 
15. Kim, T. W., Chung, P. W., & Lin, V. S. Y., (2010). Facile synthesis of monodisperse 
spherical MCM-48 mesoporous silica nanoparticles with controlled particle size. Chem. 
Mater. 2010,doi.org/10.1021/cm1017344. 
16. St€ober, W., Fink, A., & Bohn, E., (1968). Controlled growth of monodisperse silica 
spheres in the micron size range. J. Colloid Interface Sci., 62–69. 
17. Martin, T., Galarneau, A., Renzo, F. D., Fajula, F., & Plee, D., (2002). Morphological 
control of MCM-41 by pseudomorphic synthesis. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 41, 
2590–2592.10.1002/1521-3773(20020715). 
18. Botella, P., Corma, A., & Navarro, M. T., (2007). Single gold nanoparticles encapsulated 
in monodispersed regular spheres of mesostructured silica produced by pseudomorphic 
transformation. Chem. Mater., 19, 1979–1983.doi.org/10.1021/cm0629457. 
19. Yoo, W., & Stein, A., (2011). Solvent effects on morphologies of mesoporous silica 
spheres prepared by pseudomorphic transformations. Chem. Mater., 23, 1761–1767.doi. 
org/10.1021/cm102829m |. 
20. Yoon, S. B., Kim, J. Y., Kim, J. H., Park, Y. J., Yoon, K. R., Park, S. K., & Yu, J. S., (2007). 
Synthesis of monodisperse spherical silica particles with solid core and mesoporous 
shell: Mesopore channels perpendicular to the surface J. Mater. Chem., 17, 1758–1761. 74 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
21. Deng, Y., Qi, D., Deng, C., Zhang, X., & Zhao, D., (2008). Superparamagnetic high￾magnetization microspheres with an Fe3
O4
@SiO2 Core and perpendicularly aligned 
mesoporous SiO2
 Shell for removal of microcystins. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 130, 28–29.doi. 
org/10.1021/ja0777584. 
22. Von, R. K., (1979). The chemistry of silica. Solubility, polymerization, colloid and surface 
properties, and biochemistry. J. Angewandte. Chichester, XXIV, 886. John Wiley and Sons. 
23. Van, D., Grift, C. J. G., Geus, J. W., Barten, H., Leferink, R. G. I., Van, M. J. C., & Den, 
O. A. T., (1988). In: Unger, K. K., Rouquuerol, J., Sing, K. S. W., & Kral, H., (eds.), 
Characterization of Porous Solids, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal. (Vol. 39, p. 619). Elsevier: 
Amsterdam. 
24. Huo, Q., Feng, J., Schu, F., & Stucky, G., (1997). Preparation of hard mesoporous silica 
spheres. Chem. Mater., 9, 14–17. 
25. Grun, M., Lauer, I., & Unger, K. K., (1997). The synthesis of micrometer and sub￾micrometer sized spheres of ordered mesoporous oxide MCM-41Adv. Mater., 9, 254–257. 
26. Schacht, S., Huo, Q., Voigt-Martin, I. G., Stucky, G. D., & Schuth, F., (1996). Oil-water 
interface templating of mesoporous macroscale structures. Science, 273, 768. DOI: 
10.1126/science.273.5276.768. 
27. Limin, Q., Jiming, M., Humin, C., & Zhenguo, Z., (1998). Micrometer-sized mesoporous 
silica spheres grown under static conditions. Chem. Mater., 10, 1623–1626. 
28. Dechao, N., Zhi, M., Yongsheng, L., & Jianlin, S., (2010). Synthesis of core-shell 
structured dual-mesoporous silica spheres with tunable pore size and controllable shell 
thickness. J. AM. Chem. Soc., 132, 15144–15147. 
29. Yu, Y., & Zhang, L., (1998). Eisenberg, morphogenic effect of solvent on crew-cut 
aggregates of amphiphilic diblock copolymers.doi.org/10.1021/ma971254gA. Macro￾molecules, 31, 1144–1154. 
30. Cai, Q., Luo, Z., Pang, W., Fan, Y., Chen, X., & Cui, F., (2001). Dilute solution routes 
to various controllable morphologies of MCM-41 silica with a basic medium Chem. 
Mater., 13, 258–263.doi.org/10.1021/cm990661z. 
31. Liu, J., Qiao, S. Z., Hartono, S. B., & Lu, G. Q., (2010). Monodisperse yolk-shell 
nanoparticles with a hierarchical porous structure for delivery vehicles and nanoreactors. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 49, 4981–4985. 
32. Kresge, C. T., Leonowicz, M. E., Roth, W. J., Vartuli, J. C., & Beck, J. S., (1992). Ordered 
mesoporous molecular sieves synthesized by a liquid-crystal template mechanism. 
Nature, 359, 710. 
33. Beck, J. S., Vartuli, J. C., Roth, W. J., Leonowicz, M. E., Kresge, C. T., Schmitt, K. D., Chu, 
C. T. W., et al., (1992). Synthesis and characterization of mesoporous silica nanoparticles 
(MSNp) MCM 41 from natural waste rice husk. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 114, 10834. 
34. Qi, L., Ma, J., Cheng, H., & Zhao, Z., (1998). Micrometer-sized mesoporous silica spheres 
grown under static conditions Chem. Mater., 10, 1623.doi.org/10.1021/cm970811a. 
35. Lu, Y., Fan, H., Stump, A., Ward, T. L., Rieker, T., & Brinker, C. J., (1999). Aerosol 
assisted self assembly of meso- structured spherical nanoparticles. Nature, 398, 223. 
36. Bore, M. T., Rathod, S. B., Ward, T. L., & Datye, A. K., (2003). Hexagonal mesostructures 
in powders produced by evaporation induced self-assembly of aerosol from aqueous 
tetra ethoxy silane solution. Langmuir, 19, 256. 
37. Nooney, R. I., Thirunavukkarasu, D., Chen, Y., Josephs, R., & Ostafin, A. E., (2002). 
Synthesis of nanoscale mesoporous silica spheres with controlled particle size. Chem. 
Mater., 14, 4721. doi.org/10.1021/cm0204371. Mesoporous Silica Nanomaterials and Porous Solids 75 
38. Pauwels, B., Tendeloo, G. V., Thoelen, C., Rhijn, W. V., & Jacobs, P. A., (2001). Structure 
determination of spherical MCM-41 particles. Adv. Mater., 13, 1317. 
39. Nakamura, T., Mizutani, M., Nozaki, H., Suzuki, N., & Yano, K., (2007). Formation 
mechanism for monodispersed mesoporous silica spheres and its application to the 
synthesis of core/shell particles. J. Phys. Chem. C, 111. doi.org/10.1021/jp0648240. 
40. Wang, W., & Caruso, F., (2005). Mesoporous silica spheres as supports for enzyme 
immobilization and encapsulation Chem. Mater., 17, 953–961. 10.1021/cm0483137. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 4 
TRENDS IN SMART BIOPOLYMER 
COMPOSITES AND POLYMER 
SOLIDS WITH MULTIDISCIPLINARY 
APPLICATIONS IN NANOSCIENCE 
AND NANOTECHNOLOGY 
AMIR GULL1
, RAEES UL HAQ2
, MOHD. AAQIB SHEIKH3
, 
TARIQ AHMAD GANAIE4
, MUSHTAQ AHMAD LONE5
, and 
SHAHEEN KHURSID6 
1
Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Kashmir, 
Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
2
Department of Food Engineering and Technology, SLIET, Sangrur, 
Punjab, India 
3
Department of Food Technology, IUST, Awantipora, 
Jammu and Kashmir, India 
4
Department of Food Science and Technology, 
Government Degree College Shopian, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
5
Directorate of Planning and Monitoring, SKUAST-K, Srinagar, 
Jammu and Kashmir, India 
6
Department of Zoology, Government Degree College Tral, 
Jammu and Kashmir, India 78 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
ABSTRACT 
Living systems respond to external stimuli by adapting themselves to 
changing conditions. Smart polymers or intelligent materials are materials 
that can exhibit stimuli-sensitive properties and are becoming important in 
many commercial applications. These polymers undergo large reversible 
changes, either physical or chemical, in their properties as a consequence of 
small environmental variations such as temperature, pH, stress, UV irradia￾tion, magnetic or electric field, ionic factors, etc., and respond in an antici￾pated and desired way. During recent years, research on stimuli-responsive 
polymers has been extensively performed, especially in bio-separation, 
affinity precipitation, bio-catalysis, waste minimization, glucose sensors, 
drug delivery, and protein purification. The versatility and potential of these 
materials have emerged with great potential and enabled the development 
of various types of substances that are biologically inspired. This chapter is 
aimed at creating a multidisciplinary forum of discussion on the most recent 
research advances in the application of smart polymer, providing a potential 
guided outlook for future studies. 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
Polymers are mostly carbon-based chains of monomers, occasionally in amal￾gamation with metals and non-metals. Properties of polymers enabling them 
to respond to different external stimuli (electromagnetic field, the intensity of 
light, pH, temperature, and so on) are designated as smart polymers. Changes 
in different environmental conditions result in reversible or large physical 
and chemical changes in the properties of smart polymers. The polymers 
change either by folding into various conformations or change the color in 
response to environmental stimuli. To live up to the tag of ‘smart,’ polymers 
must possess the ability to detect environmental alterations and respond in 
an anticipated and desired way. The polymers may respond either to single 
or to multiple stimuli causing transitions from solution to gel, swelling, and 
collapsing of molecules and so on, therefore the term stimuli-responsive poly￾mers is interchangeable for smart polymers [1]. The response of polymers to 
the environmental conditions depends upon the physical state of molecular 
chains with reversible solution to gel states arising from solubilized linear 
macromolecules while as the cross-linked polymers are associated with the 
transition of an expanded state from a collapsed state by virtue of reorga￾nizing the polymeric chain. Another mechanism involves the development Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 79 
of responsive interfaces by changing the hydrophilic nature of smart surfaces 
with response to different stimuli. Application of the above-mentioned 
responses can be employed for designing smart materials for different prac￾tical applications in tissue engineering, pharmaceutical delivery systems, 
etc. [2]. The uniqueness of these polymers has gained considerable attention 
from last two decades and have witnessed exponential growth in the field 
of biotechnology, medicine, and engineering. Smart or intelligent polymers 
have also been used for bio-separation, drug delivery, waste minimization, 
and other biotechnological applications such as in purification techniques, 
affinity precipitation, controlled permeation membranes, thermo-sensitive 
chromatography, development of biocatalysts, biomimetic actuators, aqueous 
polymer two-phase partitioning, modulation of catalytic processes and as 
surfaces with switchable hydrophobic-hydrophilic properties [3]. The use 
of smart polymers, in combination with non-chromatographic technologies, 
represents a useful approach to the development of new separation techniques. 
These can be physically or chemically conjugated to biomolecules to yield 
polymer-biomolecule systems that can respond to biological, physical, or 
chemical stimuli. Smart polymers could be prepared by either by membrane 
processing and surface modification and the commonly used smart polymers 
are alginates, Eudragit S-100, Eudragit L-100, chitosan, poly(N-isopropyl 
acrylamide), poly(methacrylic acids), poly(acrylic acids), sulfobetaine 
methacrylate, etc. The structure of polymers can be altered by integrating the 
chain with different functional molecules like biological receptors by pre- and 
post-polymerization methods [4, 5]. Controlled living radical polymerization 
techniques are used in the management of nanoparticles and nano-assemblies 
by forming graft, star, and block copolymers, gels, and surface modifications 
[6, 7]. Nitroxide-mediated radical polymerization (NMP), one amongst three 
processing techniques involves the use of dormant and active moieties via 
temperature regulation. Proliferation of radicals in reversible addition-frag￾mentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization takes place by inclusion of 
thiocarbonylthio group within polymerization system and lastly atom-transfer 
radical polymerization (ATRP) transition uses oxidation-reduction reaction. 
Composite supported shape memory alloys (SMAs) are considered to be 
promising candidates for the supposed “smart composite materials” [8]. Shape 
memory composites with shape memory material systems give potential for 
making new paradigms in material-structural interactions [9]. Shape memory 
polymers (SMPs) are a category of stimuli-responsive materials which will 
change their shapes on command, from a short-lived form to their permanent 
form upon exposure to associate degree external stimulus. This phenomenon 
is based on twin section system, during which one segment is very elastic and  
80 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
when the stimulant is applied other segment remarkably cut back its stiffness 
[10]. SMPs have various benefits, which includes higher capability for elastic 
strain (more than 100% in most cases), lower density, tunable transformation 
temperature, and the most important is low cost which allows the employ￾ment of SMPs for extensive scope of applications [10]. The demand of shape 
memory composites for engineering and technical applications is increasing 
with time [11]. 
4.2 APPLICATION OF BIOPOLYMER COMPOSITES 
4.2.1 CHITOSAN 
Chitosan, polycationic derivatives of poly-N-acetyl-d-glucosamine (chitin) is 
most abundant natural polymer extracted from the algae, fungi cell walls as 
well as in the exoskeleton of invertebrates (crab, lobster, and shrimp) [12, 
13]. Chitosan physicochemical and biological properties are determined by 
the distribution and composition of acetylated monomers (GlcNAc; A-unit) 
and deacetylated monomers (GlcN; D-unit) [14]. The degree of acetylation 
(DA) in chitosan can vary from DA-0 (fully deacetylated) to DA-1 (partially 
acetylated) depends on whether the N-acetyl group is either fully or partially 
replaced by NH2 group. Being biocompatible, biodegradable, and nontoxic, it 
has gained great attention in food, cosmetic, pharmaceutical, and biomedical 
field [14] Also, the antibacterial property of this polymer makes it a suitable 
material for tissue engineering and wound healing. Wound healing proper￾ties of chitosan hydrogel/nano zinc oxide (ZnO) composite was evaluated 
by Sudheesh et al. [15]. Results indicated that chitosan composites exhibited 
excellent antibacterial activity, hemostatic potential and activated platelets 
attached on the composite bandage surface. Similarly, Madhumathi et al. [16]; 
Sudheesh et al. [17]; Chen et al. [18] reported high swelling ratio, antibacte￾rial potential, controlled biodegradation, and excellent blood clotting ability 
of silver-incorporated chitosan hydrogel composite bandages. Studies of Choi 
et al. [19]; Salomäki & Kankare [20] showed chitosan-hyaluronate sponges 
exhibited enhanced wound healing potential than corresponding controls. 
4.2.2 PECTIN 
Pectin is a high-molecular-weight polymer consisting mainly of esterified 
D-galacturonic acid residues linked by α-(1-4) chain. Pectin is soluble Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 81 
in water, but it is insoluble in most organic solvents. Its solubility rate is 
associated with the degree of polymerization, distribution, and number 
of methyl-ester groups. Being made up of several structural units, 
homogalacturonan (HG) composed of (1→4)-linked α-d-GalpA residues 
and type I rhamnogalacturonan (RG-I) consists of disaccharide-repeating 
unit [→4)-α-d-GalpA-(1→2)-α-l-Rhap-(1→]n with a variety of side chains 
consisting of l-arbinosyl and d-galactosyl residues are the important structural 
units. A number of moles of methanol or acetic acid/100 mol GalA are defined 
as DA and degree of methylation (DA). Native pectin is having DA in order 
of 70–80 and it can range from 0–100%. High methoxyl pectin are having 
DA >50 and pectin with DA <50 is known as low methoxyl pectin. The 
most significant attribute that affects solubility, gelling, and film forming 
properties of pectin is the degree of esterification, and it varies according 
to plant source, plant harvesting, processing, and storage conditions [21, 
22]. Nowadays, there is an increased interest in commercial use of pectin 
hydrogels for biomedical applications such as drug delivery, gene delivery, 
tissue engineering, and wound healing. As reported by Munarin, Tanzi, & 
Petrini [21]; Mishra et al. [22]; Coimbra et al. [23], pectin exhibits several 
benefits as it can be easily tailored into hydrogels, films, scaffolds, and 
nanoparticles. Due to its excellent swelling and erosion properties, it is 
useful for colon targeting systems. Besides this, it has been successfully 
investigated for constructing the colon-biodegradable drug delivery systems 
apart from being used as coating material for tablets, pellets, microparticles, 
and beads [24, 25]. 
4.2.3 HYALURONAN 
Hyaluronan is a linear polysaccharide composed of repeating β-1,4-linked
D-glucuronic acid (GlcA) and β-1,3-linked N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc)
disaccharide units. Hyaluronan being the simplest glycosaminoglycan (GAG) 
polymer is commonly found in the extracellular matrix of all vertebrate 
epithelial, neural, and connective tissues. Apart from this, it is also present in 
bacteria capsules (e.g., Streptococci strains), but is lacking in fungi, plants, and 
insects. Hyaluronan highest content in the human body is found in synovial 
fluid, umbilical cords and in the eye vitreous humor. Due to its special 
viscoelastic, rheological properties and high molar mass of 107
 DA make it 
an interesting biomaterial for medical applications including drug delivery, 
ophthalmic surgery, osteoarthritis treatment and tissue engineering [26]. 
Studies of Zacchi et al. [27] showed that the pattern of expression of particular 82 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
dermal and epidermal molecules was similar to that found in normal skin, while 
demonstrated the use of HA benzyl ester in the coculture human fibroblasts 
and keratinocytes. Collagen-HA scaffold matrix produced by cross-linking 
formyl group-modified HA polymers with collagen fibers, possessed excellent 
biocompatibility and increased osteoconductivity [28]. N-succinyl chitosan/ 
aldehyde HA composite hydrogel promoted the attachment and encapsulation 
of chondrocytes in vitro, thus demonstrating the potential applications of these 
hydrogels in cartilage tissue engineering [29]. 
4.2.4 GELLAN GUM 
Gellan gum is a linear, anionic exopolysaccharide, consisting of a-L-r 
hamnose, β-D-glucose, and β-D-glucuronate units. Gellan is having 
molecular weight of 5×105
 DA, produced by Sphingomonas elodea 
bacteria. Due to its versatile properties such as thermo-responsive, nontoxic, 
biocompatibility, potential to remain stable over extensive heat make it an 
interesting biomaterial for tissue engineering and pharmaceutical fields [30]. 
Elastic and soft gels are produced by gellan gum composites, while as pure 
gellan gum produces hard and transparent gels. Gelrite TM (acyl GG or 
acylated GG) and Kelcogel TM (low acyl GG or deacylated GG) are the 
commercially available gellan gum under different trade names. Besides, 
it is widely used for gene transfection, gene therapy, wound healing, cell 
adhesion, guided bone regeneration, dental care, ophthalmic formulations, 
biological signaling and delivery agents [31, 32]. In tissue engineering 
field it has been used as a material for cartilage reconstruction. Implants 
consisting of gellan microparticles immersed in gellan matrix were designed 
by Pereira et al. [33]. Although storage and loss moduli differ from those 
of human intervertebral disc. However, it turned out that implant swelling 
and degradation behavior can be regulated by adjusting the concentration of 
low- and high-acyl gellan. Application of Hesperidin (heteropolysaccharide) 
along with gellan gum have been successfully used in tissue engineering 
applications and confirmed the cartilage regeneration, cell adhesion, and 
differentiation ability of the prepared scaffold, using 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol￾2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide (MTT), SEM, and RT-PCR studies 
[34]. Chondrocyte encapsulated gellan gum-based HA hydrogel for cartilage 
regeneration have been successfully prepared by Kim et al. [35] results 
showed enhanced cell adhesion, viability, proliferation, and gene expression 
in an in vitro and in an in vivo model through hydrogel. Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 83 
4.2.5 ALGINATES 
Alginates belong to a group of natural polymers found widely in brown 
seaweeds, that are formed by the linear copolymers of d-mannuronic acid 
and l-guluronic acid units joined together by β-1-4 linkages. The different
species of brown algae (Macrocystis pyrifera, Ascophyllum nodosum, 
Laminaria japonica, Laminaria digitata, and Laminaria hyperborean) used 
for commercial extraction of alginates are treated with alkaline aqueous 
solutions preferably sodium hydroxide solution. Calcium or sodium chloride 
is added to the extract for precipitating alginate that is further treated with 
hydrochloric acid for transforming alginate into alginic acid [36]. The 
application of alginates in biomedical science and various engineering fields 
has been widely explored by researchers and the reason for its success involves 
its biocompatibility and gelation properties. The presence of the carboxylic 
group within the structural chain permits the polymer to form gels whenever 
there is the presence of bipolar ions. The ease of developing an ionic gel 
from alginate polymers has led to its use in encapsulating cells aimed towards 
drug delivery systems and artificial organs [37]. The high-water absorption 
property of alginate polymers along with its porous structure makes it as an 
ideal material for developing wound dressings [38]. In addition to maintaining 
a moist microenvironment around the injury, alginate wound dressings reduce 
the chances of bacterial infection and enhance the wound healing. 
4.2.6 CELLULOSE 
Structurally cellulose is made up of repeated glucose monomers joined 
together by β-1-4 glycosidic linkages in such a way that one out of every two
consecutive glucose molecules are rotated by 180°C with respect to other. 
Cellulose forms microfibrils in plants that are regarded as the basic structural 
framework of plants. Protofibrils, a chain of around 30 cellulose molecules, 
assemble together into much larger units known as microfibrils that ultimately 
form the cellulose fibers. The higher membrane permeability of cellulose is 
the reason for its consideration as a hemodialysis membrane [39]. Cellulose in 
plants is mainly associated with lignocellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, lignin, 
etc., whereas cellulose from microbial origin is devoid of any contaminants. 
The application of cellulose ranges from cutting-edge techniques in 
biotechnology to modern procedures of papermaking. Application of cellulose 
from the plant origin is much more complex than the pure bacterial cellulose 
(BC) due to the presence of different impurities in the former. Different 84 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Gram-negative bacterial cultures used for the production of BC include 
Acetobacter, Achromobacter, Agrobacter, Azotobacter, Rhizobium, Sarcina, 
etc. [40, 41]. Both the static as well as shaking culture techniques are employed 
for the production of BC with the former process resulting in a comparatively 
lower production yield. The existence of hydroxyl groups in addition to better 
mechanical properties allows cellulose polymers for purification of proteins. 
Carboxymethyl cellulose fibers have been developed into dressings under the 
trade name of Aquacel that upon hydration forms a strong cohesive gel. Water 
solubility of cellulose fibers has enabled researchers to study these polymers 
as components for drug delivery systems [42]. 
4.2.7 LIGNIN 
Lignin along with hemicellulose, cellulose, and other different extractives 
are among the widely available natural polymers found on the planet earth 
forming the bulk of biomass. The occurrence of lignin as lignin-carbohydrate 
complex (LCC) in plants poses challenges in separating lignin from cellulose. 
Lignin known as redox polymer of aryl propane units is a complex naturally 
occurring polymer made up of phenyl propane structural units without a 
distinctive primary structure. The quantity and type of aromatic ring substi￾tutes in the phenyl propane units are the basis of its differentiation involving 
units of guaiacyl, hydroxyphenyl, and syringyl groups designated as G, H, 
and S, respectively [43]. Absence of glucose molecules within the polymeric 
structure is regarded as the unique characteristic feature of lignin. The most 
common use of lignin involves production of dispersants and carbon fibers. 
The low heat capacity and a higher glass transition temperature of lignin 
are associated with small amounts of methoxyl groups in the structure [44]. 
Recent advancements in the field of biotechnological sector have enhanced 
the role and use of lignin for: (i) modifying plants in order to improve their 
transformation into fuels; (ii) enhancing the potential yield of biomass; (iii) 
optimization of overall biomass productivity; (iv) creation of promising and 
improved enzyme systems for effective downstream processing of biomass 
into biofuels. 
4.3 APPLICATIONS OF SMART POLYMERS 
Application of smart polymers along with stimuli response of controlled 
drug release are shown in Figure 4.1. Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 85 
FIGURE 4.1 Smart polymer application combined with stimulus-response-controlled 
medication release. 
4.3.1 BIO-SEPARATION 
Advancement in biotechnology has led to the enlargement of a number of 
products using bio-separation processes and other techniques. Bio-separation 
process generally includes three steps: 
• Favorable partitioning of the desired component and contamination; 
• Phase separation by mechanical methods; and 
• Recovery of the desired component. 
Cost purification is a critical factor in determining the overall production 
cost of the desired product (biomolecule). Smart polymers have the capability 
to respond non-linearly by undergoing change in one or more of their 
inherent properties as a consequence of slight variations in their surrounding 
environment, such as pH, light, temperature, humidity, ionic strength, 86 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
electrical potential, mechanical stress, and polarity, etc. [45]. Smart polymers 
show phase transition property in response to changes in the environmental 
stimuli and changes are translated to avalanche changes in the whole system, 
such as phase separation and facilitate the precipitation process. The potential 
of smart polymers to undergo phase separation makes it possible to use 
them in bio-separation process, where the bio-responsive polymer secures 
the formation of a new phase, including polymer precipitate enriched with 
desired component [46]. In an aqueous solution, smart polymers has the 
property to form a separate phase when the conditions are slightly changed, 
and the target component can be recovered easily by precipitation of the smart 
polymer. This property of smart polymers is utilized to isolate and purify 
target components such as protein, antibodies, etc. Smart polymeric materials 
versatility and untapped potentials are becoming increasingly attractive, 
which has led to some simple and economical strategies in bio-separation. 
Conjugates of smart polymers with ligands like (metal chelates, triazine dyes, 
carbohydrates, antibodies, antibiotics, nucleotides, protease inhibitors, etc., 
forms a complex with the desired component and phase separation of the 
complex is triggered by the slight change in the surrounding environment, 
transforming the polymer backbone into an insoluble state. Finally, the desired 
component is dissociated from the complex or precipitate, and remains in the 
supernatant in a purified form while as impurities (ligand-polymer conjugate) 
re-precipitates and remains in the solution. The ligands commonly used are 
p-aminobenamidene, biotin, aminophenyl-α-d-glucopyranoside, etc., have the
affinity for given target component [47]. The use of bio-responsive polymers 
in the bio-separation process has developed into a broad area of application 
because it has been widely recognized as an efficient, scalable, and a single￾step technique for the purification and recovery of desired products. 
4.3.2 AFFINITY PRECIPITATION 
The common merely used technique for separation is precipitation, purifi￾cation, and recovery of the desired component. Affinity precipitation is a 
non-chromatographic method based on using a bio-responsive polymer, 
which selectively binds (electrostatic or hydrophobic interactions) with 
the target component and facilitates the precipitation process. The choice 
of the smart polymer carrier for affinity precipitation is decisive for the 
success of the purification process. Smart polymers have the ability to sense 
the surrounding environmental changes and respond to these changes in a Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 87 
pre-programed and marked way [48]. Phase separation of the complex is 
triggered by small changes of medium property (pH, temperature, ionic 
strength, electrical potential, etc.). The bio-responsive polymer changes its 
confirmation and precipitates in the complex with the target component, 
transforming the polymer backbone into an insoluble form. For separation, 
the desired component can be recovered from the precipitate by dissolution 
and dissociation, however, all the impurities remain in solution. The smart 
polymers facilitate phase separation as a consequence of slight variation in 
ionic strength and leads to target recovery with a high yield of the desired 
component. Attaching the target component with bio-responsive polymer 
makes the separation process simple, faster, and more efficient for purifica￾tion, refolding, and recovery of the desired component. The affinity precipi￾tation with smart polymers is one of the most successful and well-known 
biotechnological techniques usually characterized by reasonably high yields 
around 70–90% and purification folds up to 100 of desired components like 
proteins, antibodies, etc. [49]. Affinity precipitation is readily combined 
with other separation techniques like aqueous two-phase polymer systems 
(ATPSs). ATPSs is an important separation technique in biotechnology. It is 
a partition-based separation process usually composed of two incompatible 
polymers in water solution or a polymer and a high concentration of salt with 
a clear interface when the critical concentration of polymers is exceeded. 
The partitioning is a complex process and ATPSs plays a vital role in the 
selective partitioning of the target component between the two phases, which 
mainly depends on the surface properties of the target component. The possi￾bility of easy recovery of target component from the reaction media when the 
conversion is completed as well as reuse of catalyst (smart polymer) makes 
it an efficient tool for the purification of desired component as it reduces 
whole purification process cost. The phase-forming components are selected 
depending upon the combination and application of biocatalysts with smart 
polymers, dispenses a novel opportunity for managing bio-catalytic reactions. 
4.3.3 BIO-CATALYSIS 
Over the last few decades, the conjugation of smart polymers with enzymes 
has achieved significant attention to establish more stable and competent 
enzymes. In an aqueous solution, smart polymers have the capability to form 
separate phases when there is a slight change in the surrounding environ￾ment. This property of smart polymer is used to generate reversibly soluble/ 88 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
insoluble biocatalyst, which catalyze an enzyme reaction in their soluble 
state, provided that the enzyme molecule is covalently bounded and can be 
used in reactions with insoluble or poorly soluble substrates. As the reaction 
is complete, the conditions are altered to cause the catalyst to precipitate so 
that it can be separated from the product and reused. For waste minimization, 
catalyst recovery, and catalyst reuse polymer bound smart catalysts are very 
useful. With the use of smart polymers for immobilization of enzymes, the 
biocatalyst can be reused after homogenous catalysis [50]. The reversible 
biocatalyst inherits the advantages of immobilized enzymes, such as ease of 
separation and also overcomes the disadvantage of immobilized enzymes, 
such as difficulty in transport of substrate and products. The bio-conjugate 
can be separated simply by precipitation and in non-aqueous media, immobi￾lization is used for enzyme stabilization against inactivation due to the media 
[51]. Reversibly soluble biocatalysts are used in various reactions which are 
impossible to carry out with the help of immobilized enzymes, for example, 
the use of reversibly soluble biocatalyst in the hydrolysis of high-molecular￾mass substrates such as casein, dextrin, cellulose, and starch [52, 53]. 
4.3.4 WASTE MINIMIZATION 
Non-biodegradable wastes have attracted widespread attention and require 
appropriate treatments before disposal. Reducing the amount of hazardous 
wastes, recycling polluted water and provide more freshwater is vital to 
environmental health. Polymer-bound smart adsorbents like nano-magnetic 
polymers, chitosan, cyclodextrins, etc., are extremely potent for adsorption 
of metal ions and effective in waste minimization [54]. They exhibit great 
potential in the elimination of contaminants (especially heavy metals) from 
wastewater due to their distinctive features like enhancing the adsorption 
capacity as well as selectivity for the targeted contaminants and also remark￾ably minimizes the pretreatment time [55]. Polymeric smart coatings have 
been developed for detecting, preventing, and remedying environmental 
damage due to hazardous contamination and play an important role in 
biological wastewater treatments like membrane bioreactors, activated 
sludge processes and fixed film processes by providing binding sites for 
other particles as well as metals. The use of polymeric smart materials to 
treat wastewater has grown exponentially due to their high sensitiveness, 
chemical strength under harsh conditions, remarkable selectivity for target 
components, swift, and accurate determination of trace environmental 
pollutants, etc. Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 89 
4.3.5 GLUCOSE SENSORS 
Diabetes mellitus, a disease characterized by high blood glucose levels, is 
a big threat to human health globally because untreated high sugar levels 
can damage the eyes, kidneys, heart, etc. Advances in smart polymers have 
promoted the fabrication of insulin (a hormone responsible for lowering 
blood sugar) delivery systems for the treatment of diabetic patients, which 
is of great significance in human healthcare and modern medicine [56]. 
Glucose sensors having smart polymers (conducting polymer hydrogels or 
pH-sensitive hydrogels) provides effective methods for carrying the exact 
amount of insulin at the time of need [57]. Due to quick responses, good 
sensitivity, precise detection at low sample volume, and versatile metabolic 
monitoring glucose sensors are widely used in monitoring the blood glucose 
level. 
4.3.6 BIOMEDICAL FIELD 
Utilization of smart polymers in the biomedical field is regarded vital and 
important aspect among the various developments in this field. Treatment of 
different diseases through advances in therapies along with the development 
of highly sophisticated devices that are programmed to react and function 
in response to an external stimulus or at the surrounding environment of 
tissues have been achieved. Different behavioral aspects of cells involving its 
proliferation, adhesion, and migration are accustomed to properties of surface 
substrate [58]. Polymers regulating the behavioral response with respect to 
different external stimuli are known as responsive substrates and are regarded 
to be of great significance in tissue engineering applications [59]. Attaining 
precise response towards smart surfaces in tissue engineering is achieved by 
functionalizing the surface of bioactive molecules, nanoscale 3D designing 
of hydrogels and tunable properties of surfaces. Application of different 
synthetic polymers in tissue engineering is tabulated in Table 4.1. Hydrogels, 
the 3D polymer network, are amongst the finest biomaterials used for scaffold 
preparation and to regulate their cellular alignment proper mechanical or 
electrical stimulus needs to be provided [60]. Enabling responses in smart 
hydrogels, physical (light, temperature, and electric), as well as chemical 
(ionic interactions, pH) stimuli, are necessary [61]. Polymers known for their 
shape memory are sensitive towards temperature and have been reported for 
developing medical devices employed in minimal invasive surgery procedures 
[62]. Introducing the medical device in its compressed form at the place of TABLE 4.1 Uses of Some Smart Polymers in Tissue Engineering 
Polymer Cell/Tissue Type References 
Biomineralized polyurethane Bone [77] 
Polyurethane + PEG hydrogel Heart aortic valve [78] 
GeIMA + reduced graphene oxide Cardiac [79] 
Methacrylated gelatin (GelMA) + Gelatin Bone marrow stem cells [80] 
GeIMA + Chitin nanofibers Vascularization [81] 
PEG-caprolactone (PEG-CAP) hydrogel end- Cartilage [82] 
capped with norbornene (PEG-CAP-NOR) 
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) PNIPAAm – Gelatin Cardiac [83] 
PPy with PLA Peripheral nerve [84] 
90 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
choice followed by its expansion by minimal invasive surgery is possible 
only through the unique properties of SMPs. In recent times developing the 
stents mainly used in urological and vascular procedures are among its most 
pertinent applications. In addition to the mechanical properties the polymeric 
stunts are regarded as more beneficial than metallic stunts due to the possible 
incorporation of a drug and its elution at the functional place; examples 
include reducing the infections in urological stents or reduction of thrombosis 
after vascular stent implantation [63]. 
Cancer therapy and its diagnosis have been greatly improved by the 
unique properties of smart polymers. Advances in magnetic resonance 
imaging diagnosis, cellular labeling, treating hyperthermia, immunoassay, 
and magnetic separation techniques are developed from magnetic nanopar￾ticles (MNPs) [64]. Smart polymer-based biosensors find their applicability 
in forensics and clinical diagnosis because of the variations in analytic 
concentration (glucose in diabetes) or alterations in physical variables viz. 
pH and temperature (quantifying stomach CO2
 partial pressure by a pH 
sensor for diagnosing gastrointestinal ischemia) taking place in different 
diseases [65]. Pooling together biosensors with different medical devices 
has been employed with cochlear grafts and insulin-delivering devices as a 
few examples [66]. Identification of systematic concentration of analytes by 
combining with biosensors is used by medical devices based on microfluidics 
to discharge various bioactive materials in response to extreme or inadequate 
concentration of the above-mentioned analytes [67]. 
The role and use of smart polymers in permitting controlled drug delivery 
has been accredited to the selectively active treatments involving the transport 
of a particular drug to its precise place at the exact moment. Specific drug Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 91 
delivery procedure involves four mediums namely nano-fibers, hydrogels, 
nanoparticles, and assemblies, and lastly, bio-conjugates for successfully 
targeting the specific tissue [68, 69]. Mostly smart polymers made from 
poly N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm) along with its derivatives are used 
in biomedicine applications. Derivatives of the aforementioned polymers 
include molecules combining with hydroxyl or amino, ether or amide groups 
possessing hydrophobicity or in other words a very little affinity towards 
water. Laboratory synthesis of stimulus sensitive polymers along with well 
understanding of molecular biology aid in developing explicitly localized, 
effective, and personalized therapies, like the case of specific degradation of 
neutrophil elastase at inflammation areas acted upon by neutrophils [70, 71]. 
Minute variations in temperature cause solubility changes in thermo-sensi￾tive polymers and this thermal-sensitive solubility successfully regulates the 
drug release rate without drastically compromising the polymer’s biological 
activity and physicochemical stability inside the body [72]. Hydrophobicity 
of the alkyl groups necessary for solubility variation is important in insti￾tuting critical solution temperatures or more elaborately lower and upper 
critical temperatures. The normal range of human body temperature make 
upper critical solution temperature systems highly unlikely contenders for 
drug delivery due to requirements of considerably higher temperatures as the 
human body fails to provide the same. Changes in the conformation of poly￾mers prominently occur above lower critical solution temperatures (LCST), 
making the system insoluble and hydrophobic, while as below the LCST, 
the polymer solubility increases in an aqueous solution [72]. PNIPAAm is 
an example of a thermo-sensitive polymer having a normal LCST of 32°C 
that can be successively enhanced towards the normal biological system of 
humans by addition of surfactants and additives. Possible role of PNIPAAm 
for in situ delivery of drugs is being currently explored by the researchers. 
A drooping basic or an acidic group marks its presence in pH-sensitive 
or responsive polymers that behave in accordance with the pH of surround￾ings by accepting or donating the protons. Polyelectrolyte polymers 
possess various ionizable groups characterized further into weak poly bases 
(discharging protons at high pH and accepting them at neutral and high pH) 
and weak poly acids (take up protons at low pH and releasing them at high 
pH and neutral) [73]. High pH inside the human stomach paves the way 
for the practicality of pH-responsive polymers preventing denaturation of 
drugs administered orally that would otherwise breakdown in the presence 
of gastric juices. Oral administration of enteric drugs coated with a layer of 
polyacid remains in its intact form inside the high acidic environment of the 
stomach and gets released only inside the basic environment present within 92 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
small intestines. Release of the drug is encouraged in small intestines where 
hydrogen bonds surrounding the material of choice break down and is taken 
up into the blood stream via absorption mechanism. Drugs coated within 
polybasic carriers are released at low pH environment, whereas at high pH 
conditions, the enteric coating gets more rigid [74]. 
Changes in the physical properties of smart polymers with respect to 
minute variations in electric current are termed as electric field responsive 
polymers. The majority of these polymers are ionizable polyelectrolytes 
functioning as acceptors as well as donors of electrons, thereby addition￾ally acting as pH-responsive polymers. The significance of the relationship 
between electric current and pH change causes disturbances in hydrogen 
bonding of polymer chains resulting in degradation of polymers, thereby 
finding application in controlled drug delivery as a smart targeted mechanism 
for future application. Electrophoresis, diffusion, and forcing via syneresis 
water are commonly applicable methods of drug delivery involving the 
use of electric field responsive polymers [72]. Mechanical alteration of 
piezoelectric polymers develops surface charges without the application 
of any extra electrodes. Piezoelectric materials can be accustomed for the 
regeneration of tissues involving cartilage, bone, and neuronal tissue by 
using them as electroactive scaffolds producing electric signals in reaction 
to internal forces. Voltage-gated channels in biological cellular membranes 
receive the generated electric signals resulting in activation of biological 
events viz. tissue repair [75]. The use of polyhydroxybutyrate-co-valerate 
(PHBV) in bone tissue engineering is backed by its piezoelectric coefficient 
that is analogous with the coefficient of natural bone [76]. Light-responsive 
polymers are regarded as untraditional polymers that experience phase 
transition upon light exposure. Drugs coated with light-responsive polymers 
are transferred to the target, followed by the application of a light source 
enabling targeted delivery of the drug. Polymeric coatings sensitive towards 
light are regarded as novel along with reliably safe procedures as the active 
polymers are mainly water-soluble, biocompatible, and totally biodegrad￾able [72]. Incorporation of chromophores or photosensitive molecules in 
light-responsive polymers is the basis for the functioning of such polymers. 
4.4 CONCLUSION 
Development of novel materials possessing a robust and more intricate 
structure from smart polymers needs scientists from multidisciplinary fields Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 93 
to form materials that are capable of undergoing rapid, reversible, physical, 
or chemical changes in their properties as a consequence of slight variations 
in their surrounding environment, such as light, temperature, humidity, ionic 
strength, electrical potential, mechanical stress, polarity, etc. Polymer-conju￾gated biomolecules, including proteins, polysaccharides, single or double￾stranded oligonucleotides, simple lipids, phospholipids, ligands, synthetic 
drug molecules, etc., can be used in developing smart polymers and smart 
surfaces responsive to specific external stimuli. Different natural, as well as 
synthetic materials employed for the development of smart polymers, have 
both advantages and disadvantages. Therefore, their combination needs a 
very careful choice of selection. Researchers from polymer, organic, physics, 
pharmaceutical, biological, organic, and medical fields need to cooperate and 
work in tandem for effective responses to necessities of civilization related 
to advancement in quality of life in different fields of life. 
KEYWORDS 
• atom-transfer radical polymerization 
• biopolymer 
• bio-separation 
• drug delivery 
• smart polymers 
• waste minimization 
REFERENCES 
1. Aguilar, C. M. R., Elvira, C., Gallardo, A., Vázquez, B., & San, R. J., (2007). Smart 
polymers and their applications as biomaterials. In: Ashammakhi, N., Reis, R. L., & 
Chiellini, E., (eds.), Topics in Tissue Engineering. E-book, Expert issues. 
2. Arora, G., Singh, I., Nagpal, M., & Arora, S., (2011). Recent advances in stimuli induced 
pulsatile drug delivery system: A review. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology, 
4, 691–703. 
3. Ma, X., Tao, H., Yang, K., Feng, L., Cheng, L., Shi, X., Li, Y., et al., (2012). A 
functionalized graphene oxide-iron oxide nanocomposite for magnetically targeted drug 
delivery, photothermal therapy, and magnetic resonance imaging. Nano Research, 5, 
199–212. 94 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
4. Arnold, R. M., Huddleston, N. E., & Locklin, J., (2012). Utilizing click chemistry 
to design functional interfaces through post-polymerization modification. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry, 22, 19357–19365. 
5. Guillerm, B., Monge, S., Lapinte, V., & Robin, J. J., (2012). How to modulate the 
chemical structure of polyoxazolines by appropriate functionalization. Macromolecular 
Rapid Communications, 33, 1600–1612. 
6. Ebara, M., Kotsuchibashi, Y., Narain, R., Idota, N., Kim, Y. J., Hoffman, J. M., et 
al., (2014). Introductory Guide to Smart Biomaterials, Smart Biomaterials (pp. 1–8). 
National Institute for Materials Science. Springer. 
7. Barhoum, A., Bechelany, M., & Hamdy, M. A. S., (2019). Handbook of Nanofibers: 
Fundamental Aspects and Experimental Setup, Synthesis, Properties, and Characteriza￾tion (Vol. I.). Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-53654-5. 
8. Zheng, Y. J., Cui, L. S., & Schrooten, J., (2005). Basic design guidelines for SMA/epoxy 
smart composites. Material Science Engineering, 390, 139–143. 
9. Jani, J. M., Leary, M., Subic, A., & Gibson, A. M. A., (2014). A review of shape memory 
alloy research, applications and opportunities. Materials and Design, 56, 1078–1113. 
10. Leng, J. S., Zhang, D. W., Yu, K., & Lan, X., (2010). Study on the activation of styrene￾based shape memory polymer by medium-infrared laser light. Applied Physics Letters, 
96, 111–905. 
11. Damanpack, A., Aghdam, M., & Shakeri, M., (2015). Micro-mechanics of composite 
with SMA fibers embedded in metallic/polymeric matrix under off-axial loadings. 
European Journal of Mechanics a-Solids, 49, 467–480. 
12. Rinaudo, M., (2006). Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications. Progress in 
Polymer Science, 31, 603–632. 
13. Yen, M. T., & Mau, J. L., (2007). Physico-chemical characterization of fungal chitosan 
from shiitake stipes. LWT -Food Science and Technology, 40, 472–479. 
14. Anitha, A., Sowmya, S., Sudheesh, K. P. T., Deepthi, S., Chennazhi, K. P., Ehrlich, 
H., Tsurkan, M., & Jayakumar, R., (2014). Chitin and chitosan in selected biomedical 
applications. Progress in Polymer Science, 39, 1644–1667. 
15. Sudheesh, K. P. T., Lakshmanan, V. K., Biswas, R., Nair, S. V., & Jayakumar, R., (2012). 
Synthesis and biological evaluation of chitin hydrogel/nano ZnO composite bandage as 
antibacterial wound dressing. Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology, 8, 1–10. 
16. Madhumathi, K., Sudheesh, K. P. T., Abilash, S., Sreeja, V., Tamura, H., Manzoor, K., 
Nair, S. V., & Jayakumar, R., (2010). Development of novel chitin/nanosilver composite 
scaffolds for wound dressing applications. Journal of Material Science. Materials in 
Medicine, 807–813. 
17. Sudheesh, K. P. T., Abhilash, S., Manzoor, K., Nair, S. V., Tamura, H., & Jayakumar, 
R., (2010). Preparation and characterization of novel β-chitin/nanosilver composite 
scaffolds for wound dressing applications. Carbohydrate Polymers, 80, 761–777. 
18. Chen, M., Yang, Z., Wu, H., Pan, X., Xie, X., & Wu, C., (2011). Antimicrobial activity 
and the mechanism of silver nanoparticle thermosensitive gel. International Journal of 
Nanomedicine, 6, 2873–2877. 
19. Choi, Y. S., Lee, S. B., Hong, S. R., Lee, Y. M., Song, K. W., & Park, M. H., (2001). 
Studies on gelatin-based sponges: Part III. A comparative study of cross-linked gelatin/ 
alginate, gelatin/hyaluronate and chitosan/hyaluronate sponges and their application 
as a wound dressing in full-thickness skin defect of rat. Journal of Material Science: 
Materials in Medicine, 12, 67–73. Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 95 
20. Salomäki, M., & Kankare, J., (2008). Influence of synthetic polyelectrolytes on the 
growth and properties of hyaluronan-chitosan multilayers. Biomacromolecules, 10, 
294–301. 
21. Munarin, F., Tanzi, M. C., & Petrini, P., (2012). Advances in biomedical applications of 
pectin gels. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 51, 681–689. 
22. Mishra, R. K., Banthia, A. K., & Majeed, A. B. A., (2012). Pectin based formulations 
for biomedical applications: A review. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Clinical 
Research, 5, 1–7. 
23. Coimbra, P., Ferreira, P., De Sousa, H. C., Batista, P., Rodrigues, M. A., Correia, I. J., 
& Gil, M. H., (2011). Preparation and chemical and biological characterization of a 
pectin/chitosan polyelectrolyte complex scaffold for possible bone tissue engineering 
applications. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 42, 112–118. 
24. Dafe, A., Etemadi, H., Dilmaghani, A., & Mahdavinia, G. R., (2017). Investigation of 
pectin/ starch hydrogel as a carrier for oral delivery of probiotic bacteria. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 97, 536–543. 
25. Izadi, Z., Divsalar, A., Saboury, A. A., & Sawyer, L., (2016). β-Lactoglobulin-pectin 
nanoparticle- based oral drug delivery system for potential treatment of colon cancer. 
Chemical Biology and Drug Design, 88, 209–216. 
26. Deangelis, P. L., (2012). Glycosaminoglycan polysaccharide biosynthesis and production: 
Today and tomorrow. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 94, 295–305. 
27. Zacchi, V., Soranzo, C., Cortivo, R., Radice, M., Brun, P., & Abatangelo, G., (1997). In 
vitro engineering of human skin-like tissue. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research, 
40, 187–194. 
28. Tan, H., Chu, C. R., Payne, K. A., & Marra, K. G., (2009). Injectable in situ forming 
biodegradable chitosan-hyaluronic acid based hydrogels for cartilage tissue engineering. 
Biomaterials, 30, 2499–2506. 
29. Liu, L. S., Thompson, A. Y., Heidaran, M. A., Poser, J. W., & Spiro, R. C., (1999). An 
osteoconductive collagen/hyaluronate matrix for bone regeneration. Biomaterials, 20, 
1097–1108. 
30. Oliveira, J. T., Martins, L., Picciochi, R., Malafaya, P. B., Sousa, R. A., Neves, N. M., 
Mano, J. F., & Reis, R. L., (2010). Gellan gum: A new biomaterial for cartilage tissue 
engineering applications. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research, 93, 852–863. 
31. Jeon, H. Y., Shin, E. Y., Choi, J. H., Song, J. E., Reis, R. L., & Khang, G., (2018). 
Evaluation of saponin loaded gellan gum hydrogel scaffold for cartilage regeneration. 
Macromolecular Research, 26, 724–729. 
32. Kumar, S., Kaur, P., Bernela, M., Rani, R., & Thakur, R., (2016). Ketoconazole 
encapsulated in chitosan-gellan gum nanocomplexes exhibits prolonged antifungal 
activity. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 93, 988–994. 
33. Pereira, D. R., Silva-Correia, J., Caridade, S. G., Oliveira, J. T., Sousa, R. A., Salgado, 
A. J., Oliveira, J. M., et al., (2011). Development of gellan gum-based microparticles/ 
hydrogel matrices for application in the intervertebral disc regeneration. Tissue 
Engineering, Part C, 17, 961–972. 
34. Jeon, S. H., Lee, W. T., Song, J. E., Park, H., Choi, I. N., Kim, C. M., & Khang, G., 
(2017). Cartilage regeneration using hesperidin-containing gellan gum scaolds. Polymer 
(Korea), 41, 670–674. 
35. Kim, W. K., Choi, J. H., Shin, M. E., Kim, J. W., Kim, P. Y., Kim, N., Song, J. E., & 
Khang, G., (2019). Evaluation of cartilage regeneration of chondrocyte encapsulated 96 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
gellan gum-based hyaluronic acid blended hydrogel. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 141, 51–59. 
36. Clark, D. E., & Green, H. C., (1936). Alginic Acid and Process of Making Same. US 
Patent. 2036922. 
37. Mumper, R. J., Huffman, A. S., Puolakkainen, P. A., Bouchard, L. S., & Gombotz, 
W. R., (1994). Calcium-alginate beads for the oral delivery of transforming growth 
factor-β1 (TGF-β1): Stabilization of TGF-β1 by the addition of polyacrylic acid within 
acid treated beads. Journal of Controlled Release, 30(3), 241–251. 
38. Horncastle, J., (1945). Wound dressings. Past, present, and future. Medical Device 
Technology, 6(1), 30–34. 
39. Von, B. H., Lajous-Petter, A., Debrandt, W., Hampl, H., Kochinke, F., & Herbst, R., 
(1988). Surface reactions on blood contact during haemodialysis and haemofiltration 
with various membrane types. Journal of Membrane Science, 36, 215–229. 
40. Shoda, M., & Sugano, Y., (2005). Recent advances in bacterial cellulose production. 
Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering, 10, 1–8. 
41. Mohite, B. V., & Patil, S. V., (2014). Physical, structural, mechanical and thermal 
characterization of bacterial cellulose by G. hansenii NCIM, 2529. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 106, 132–141. 
42. Thomas, S., Durand, D., Chassenieux, C., & Jyotishkumar, P., (2013). Handbook of 
Biopolymer-Based Materials: From Blends and Composites to Gels and Complex 
Networks. John Wiley and Sons. 
43. Bogolitsin, K. G., Lunin, V. V., & Kosyakov, D. S., (2010). Fizicheskaya Khimiya 
Lignina (Physical Chemistry of Lignin). Moscow: Akademkniga. 
44. Li, H., & McDonald, A. G., (2014). Fractionation and characterization of industrial 
lignins. Industrial Crops and Products, 62, 67–76. 
45. Wischerhoff, E., Badi, N., & Lutz, J. F., (2010). Smart polymer surfaces: Concepts and 
applications in biosciences. Advances in Polymer Science, 240, 1–33. 
46. Galaev, I. Y., & Mattiasson, B., (2002). Smart Polymers for Bioseparation and Biopro￾cessing. London: Taylor and Francis. 
47. Schneider, M., Guillot, C., & Lamy, B., (1981). The affinity precipitation techniques: 
Application to the isolation and purification of trypsin from bovine pancreas. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 369, 257–263. 
48. Gisser, K. R. C., geselbracht, M. J., Capellari, A., Hunsberger, L., Ellis, A. B., Perepezko, 
J., & Lisensky, G. C., (1994). Nickel-titanium memory metal. A smart material exhibiting a 
solid-state phase change and super elasticity. Journal of Chemical Education, 71, 334–340. 
49. Hoffman, A. S., (2000). Bioconjugation of intelligent polymers and recognition proteins 
for use in diagnostics and affinity separation. Clinical Chemistry, 46, 1478–1486. 
50. Roy, I., & Gupta, M. N., (2006). Design of smart biocatalysts: Immobilization of 
enzymes on smart polymers. In: Guisan, J. M., (ed), Immobilization of Enzymes & Cells 
(Vol. 22, pp. 87–95). Humana Press Inc., New York. 
51. Gupta, M. N., (2000). Methods in Non-Aqueous Enzymology. Switzerland: Birkhauser Verlag. 
52. Taniguchi, M., Kobayashi, M., & Fujii, M., (1989a). Properties of a reversible soluble￾insoluble cellulose and its application to repeated hydrolysis of crystalline cellulose. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 34, 1092–1097. 
53. Hoshino, K., Taniguchi, M., Marumoto, H., & Fujii, M., (1989). Repeated batch 
conversion of raw starch to ethanol using amylase immobilized on reversible soluble- auto￾precipitating carrier and flocculating yeast cell. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 53, 
1961–1967. Trends in Smart Biopolymer Composites and Polymer Solids 97 
54. Kakhki, M. R., (2015). Application of magnetic nanoparticles modified with cyclodextrins 
as efficient adsorbents in separation systems. Journal of Inclusion Phenomena and 
Macrocyclic Chemistry, 82, 301–310. 
55. Euvrard, E., Morin-Crini, N., Druart, C., Bugnet, J., Martel, B., Cosentino, C., Moutarlier, 
V., & Crini, G., (2016). Cross-linked cyclodextrin-based material for treatment of metals 
and organic substances present in industrial discharge waters. Beilstein Journal of 
Organic Chemistry, 12, 1826. 
56. Nambiar, S., & Yeow, J. T., (2011). Conductive polymer-based sensors for biomedical 
applications. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 26, 1825–1832. 
57. Zhao, Y., Cao, Y., Li, L., Cheng, W., Xu, L., Ping, X., Pan, L., & Shi, Y., (2016). Conducting 
polymers and their applications in diabetes management. Sensors (Basel), 16, 1787. 
58. Alves, D. N. M., Pashkuleva, I., Reis, R. L., & Mano, J. F., (2010). Controlling cell 
behavior through the design of polymer surfaces. Small, 6, 2208–2220. 
59. Perez, R. A., Won, J. E., Knowles, J. C., & Kim, H. W., (2013). Naturally and synthetic 
smart composite biomaterials for tissue regeneration. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 
65, 471–496. 
60. Wu, Y., Wang, L., Guo, B., & Ma, P. X., (2017). Interwoven aligned conductive nanofiber 
yarn/hydrogel composite scaffolds for engineered 3D cardiac anisotropy. ACS Nano, 
11(6), 5646–5659. 
61. Eslahi, N., Abdorahim, M., & Simchi, A., (2016). Smart polymeric hydrogels for cartilage 
tissue engineering: A review on the chemistry and biological functions. Biomacromol￾ecules, 17(11), 3441–3463. 
62. Yakacki, C. M., & Gall, K., (2010). Shape-memory polymers for biomedical applications. 
Advances in Polymer Science, 226, 147–175. 
63. Xue, L., Dai, S., & Li, Z., (2012). Synthesis and characterization of elastic star 
shape-memory polymers as self-expandable drug-eluting stents. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry, 22, 7403–7411. 
64. Karimi, Z., Karimi, L., & Shokrollahi, H., (2013). Nano-magnetic particles used 
in biomedicine: Core and coating materials. Materials Science Engineering, 33, 
2465–2475. 
65. Herber, S., Bomer, J., Olthuis, W., Bergveld, P., & Van, D. B. A., (2005). A miniaturized 
carbon dioxide gas sensor based on sensing of pH-sensitive hydrogel swelling with a 
pressure sensor. Biomedical Microdevices, 7, 197–204. 
66. Laursen, W., (2006). Breaking the sound barrier [cochlear implants]. Engineering 
Technology, 1, 38–41. 
67. Do, J., Lee, S., Han, J., Kai, J., Hong, C. C., Gao, C., Nevin, J. H., Beaucage, G., & Ahn, 
C. H., (2008). Development of functional lab-on-a-chip on polymer for point-of-care 
testing of metabolic parameters. Lab on a Chip, 8, 2113–2120. 
68. Abdal-hay, A., Agour, M., Kim, Y. K., Lee, M. H., Hassan, M. K., El-Ainin, H. A., et al., 
(2019). Magnesium-particle/polyurethane composite layer coating on titanium surfaces 
for orthopedic applications. European Polymer Journal, 112(3), 555–568. 
69. Asadi, N., Del, B. A. R., Davaran, S., & Akbarzadeh, A., (2019). Common biocompatible 
polymeric materials for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Materials 
Chemistry and Physics, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2019 122528. 
70. Aimetti, C. A. A., Machen, A. J., & Anseth, K. S., (2009). Poly (ethylene glycol) 
hydrogels formed by thiol-ene photopolymerization for enzyme-responsive protein 
delivery. Biomaterials, 30, 6048–6054. 98 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
71. Fleige, E., Quadir, M. A., & Haag, R., (2012). Stimuli-responsive polymeric nanocarriers 
for the controlled transport of active compounds: Concepts and applications. Advance 
Drug Delivery Reviews, 64, 866–884. 
72. Priya, J. H., Rijo, J., Anju, A., & Anoop, K. R., (2014). Smart polymers for the controlled 
delivery of drugs-a concise review. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica, 4(2), 120–127. 
73. Hamdy, M. A. S., & Abu-Thabit, N. Y., (2018). Stimuli-Responsive Polymeric 
Nanocarriers for Drug Delivery Applications: Types and Triggers (Vol. 1.). Elsevier. 
ISBN: 9780081019979. 
74. Abu-Thabit, A. N. Y., & Hamdy, M. A. S., (2018). Historical development of drug 
delivery systems: From conventional macroscale to controlled, targeted and responsive 
nanoscale systems. In: Makhlouf, A. S. H., & Abu-Thabit, N. Y., (eds.), Stimuli 
Responsive Polymeric Nanocarriers for Drug Delivery Applications: Types and Triggers 
(Vol. 1, pp. 1–41). Elsevier. 
75. Abzan, A. N., Kharaziha, M., & Labbaf, S., (2019). Development of three-dimensional 
piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride-graphene oxide scaffold by non-solvent induced 
phase separation method for nerve tissue engineering. Materials and Design, 167, 107636. 
76. Gorodzha, S. N., Muslimov, A. R., Syromotina, D. S., Timin, A. S., Tcvetkov, N. Y., 
Lepik, K. V., et al., (2017). A comparison study between electrospun polycaprolactone 
and piezoelectric poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) scaffolds for bone 
tissue engineering. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 160, 48–59. 
77. Meskinfam, M., Bertoldi, S., Albanese, N., Cerri, A., Tanzi, M. C., Imani, R., et al., 
(2018). Polyurethane foam/nano-hydroxyapatite composite as a suitable scaffold for 
bone tissue regeneration. Materials Science and Engineering, 82, 130–140. 
78. Puperi, D. S., Kishan, A., Punske, Z. E., Wu, Y., Cosgriff-Hernandez, E., West, J. L., et al., 
(2016). Electrospun polyurethane and hydrogel composite scaffolds as biomechanical 
mimics for aortic valve tissue engineering. ACS Biomaterials Science and Engineering, 
2(9), 1546–1558. 
79. Shin, S. R., Zihlmann, C., Akbari, M., Assawes, P., Cheung, L., Zhang, K., et al., 
(2016). Reduced graphene oxide-gelMA hybrid hydrogels as scaffolds for cardiac tissue 
engineering. Small, 12(27), 3677–3689. 
80. Yin, J., Yan, M., Wang, Y., Fu, J., & Suo, H., (2018). 3D bioprinting of low-concentration 
cell-laden gelatin methacrylate (GelMA) bioinks with a two-step cross-linking strategy. 
ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, 10(8), 6849–6857. 
81. Hassanzadeh, P., Kazemzadeh-Narbat, M., Rosenzweig, R., Zhang, X., Khademhosseini, 
A., Annabi, N., et al., (2016). Ultrastrong and flexible hybrid hydrogels based on 
solution self-assembly of chitin nanofibers in gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA). Journal of 
Materials Chemistry B, 4(15), 2539–2543. 
82. Neumann, A. J., Quinn, T., & Bryant, S. J., (2016). Nondestructive evaluation of a 
new hydrolytically degradable and photo-clickable PEG hydrogel for cartilage tissue 
engineering. Acta Biomaterialia, 39, 1–11. 
83. Navaei, A., Truong, D., Heffernan, J., Cutts, J., Brafman, D., Sirianni, R. W., et al., 
(2016). PNIPAAm-based biohybrid injectable hydrogel for cardiac tissue engineering. 
Acta Biomaterialia, 32, 10–23. 
84. Zhou, J. F., Wang, Y. G., Cheng, L., Wu, Z., Sun, X. D., & Peng, J., (2016). Preparation 
of polypyrrole-embedded electrospun poly (lactic acid) nanofibrous scaffolds for nerve 
tissue engineering. Neural Regeneration Research, 11(10), 1644. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 5 
A COMPUTATIONAL STUDY 
OF METAL DOPED SILVER 
NANOPARTICLE-BASED CLUSTERS 
SHAYERI DAS1
, PRABHAT RANJAN1
, and TANMOY CHAKRABORTY2 
1
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, 
Dehmi Kalan, Rajasthan, India 
2
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 
School of Basic Sciences and Research, Sharda University, 
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
ABSTRACT 
Transition metal-based nanoclusters have made a huge impact on applications 
in solid-state devices, solar cells, biotechnology, etc. In this report, the 
properties of nano alloy clusters Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) are studied using Gaussian 
16 within the Density Functional Theory (DFT) framework. The ground 
state configurations have been used for the computation of the DFT-based 
global descriptors. All the clusters exhibit an odd-even oscillation of the 
computed descriptors. The bond length of these clusters is validated by 
their experimental values. The results show that the nanoclusters, due to 
the substantial highest occupied-lowest unoccupied molecular orbital gap, 
have good prospects in biomedical applications. Specifically, this study 
proposes that the nanoclusters Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) are appropriate for future 100 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
applications in biomedicine, since they could improve some contemporary 
difficulties of some nanoparticles, especially toxicity, as silver is non-toxic 
in nature. Similarly, Fe, also being non-toxic in nature, adds to the diversity 
in application. 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Among all transition metals, the noble metals, mainly copper, silver, and 
gold, have been minutely studied predominantly due to their significant 
deviation of nanoparticle properties from larger materials [1]. Both mono￾metallic and bimetallic nanoclusters are the subjects of intense research, 
from mutually computational and experimental vantage point [2–4] 
and technical applications in an assortment of specializations have been 
projected due to the prevailing methodologies to manufacture functional 
nanoparticles of commercial importance [5–7]. It has been reported to be 
realistic to implement their physicochemical characteristics for explicit 
purposes, such as in medication [8], catalysis [9], food technology [10], and 
electronics, specifically in semiconductor devices [11, 12]. 
Specifically, silver nanoparticles have drawn huge interest for biomedical 
applications [13–15] as antimicrobial agents. Silver nanoclusters possess 
extremely less toxicity and are predominantly used in industries like health 
[16, 17], cosmetics and beauty products [18, 19], and other environmental 
applications [20–22]. 
Pereiro et al. [23] studied the biomedical application of pure silver 
clusters and observed its effects based on various-sized clusters. They 
reported the magnetic properties of those nanoparticles and their suitability 
in biomedicine, by eradicating difficulties like toxicity and opsonization. 
Roy Chowdhury et al. [16] synthesized silver nanoparticles and generated 
stable antimicrobial clusters. The researchers focused on plant-derived and 
biomolecule-based synthesis to avoid harmful chemicals. They reported 
that the cacao-based method generated stable Ag nanoparticles, which have 
applications in the biomedical field. Tavaf et al. [17] studied the antibacterial 
and other biomedicine-based activities of silver particles and reported that the 
silver nanoparticles with spherical and similar contours possess significant 
antibacterial, anti-biofilm, and anti-oxidant activities. Lin et al. [24] studied 
the synthesis of metallic nanoclusters. They reported that the nanoclusters 
are more bio-compatible and stable than organic dyes. The optical properties 
obtained render the clusters to be ideal for various applications in biomedical 
engineering and also molecular biology. Mathew et al. [25] stated that the A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 101 
novel properties which are a result of size quantization, for instance, lumi￾nescence open up new fields of application. They reviewed the possibilities 
that exclusive abilities and biocompatibility make the nanoclusters favorable 
contenders for the development of next-generation quantum medicine for 
disease diagnosis and treatment. Castro [26] studied the gold super atom 
clusters and reported their tunable properties like electronic, optical, and 
chiroptical properties. The authors reported the modulation or properties 
by different ligands for tunable clusters. Zhang et al. [27] performed a first 
principle investigation on noble metal clusters incorporating silver and gold. 
Based on the tunable optical properties, they reported that the outcome 
of the computed dielectric function indicated that the optical transition of 
Au clusters is reliant on concentration and the optical transition between 
HOMO and LUMO alters to the lower energy range as the number of Ag 
atom increases. These clusters are suitable for cell imaging, photothermal 
therapy as well as radiotherapy. Thakore et al. [28] efficiently synthesized 
silver and other nanoparticles using fruit latex. Comparative in-vitro toxicity 
has been observed by them, and it was deduced that the nanoclusters had 
good prospect in cellular imaging or photothermal therapy. 
Kiruba et al. [29] reported an eco-friendly amalgamation of Au–Ag 
bimetallic nanoparticles using gripe water, where the synthesized Au–Ag 
nanoparticles have applications in surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopic 
and have been studied to heighten the Raman signals of rhodamine 6G. 
Sun et al. [30] reported a study of gold-doped iron nanoclusters, in order to 
utilize the magnetic properties in biomedical applications. They deduced that 
the stability of gold prevented oxidation and can be used for targeted drug 
delivery. Burdusel et al. [31] investigated silver nanoparticles and explored 
their nanostructures. They were motivated for their work on the most 
recent data concerning the biomedical application of Ag nanostructures, 
comprising of aspects associated to their potential toxicity, unique 
physiochemical properties, and biofunctional behaviors, and discussed the 
intrinsic biomedicine-based features of Ag-based nanostructures. It has been 
reported that modifications to contemporary biomaterials along with devices 
can be achieved using silver nanoparticles. Zhang et al. [32] reported that 
notable antimicrobial activity of Ag nanoparticles presents with a strong 
starting point for the design, development, and implementation of new and 
performance-biomedical products including target-based medical devices 
and supporting devices. Wei et al. [33] stated that the translation of Ag-based 
nanotechnology into clinical applications involves not only the improvement 
of viable methods for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles, but also a 
systematic comprehension of the related physicochemical particularities,  
102 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
in vitro and in vivo effects, biodistribution, safety control mechanisms, 
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of silver nanoparticles. Yaqoob 
et al. [34] studied the biomedical applications of various transition metals 
like gold, silver, and palladium and reported that due to cytotoxicity further 
research is viable in this domain. The group suggested that metal-based 
nanoparticles can overcome the limitations of drug resistance as these 
clusters are applicable in the fabrication of more progressive binding affinity 
of biomolecules for detection of life-threatening diseases. Sanpo et al. [35] 
reported the biomedical applications of transition metal-substituted cobalt 
ferrite clusters and high-lighted the antibacterial properties of cobalt ferrite. 
They performed various analysis and indicated that transition metals strongly 
vary the microstructure and the crystal structure. 
Chen et al. [36] reported the magnetic properties of Au-coated Fe 
nanoparticles. The group studied the morphology and magnetic properties 
using TEM and alternative gradient magnetometry. Gupta et al. [37] 
conducted a study on various iron oxide (IO) nanoparticles. The study 
suggests that the MNPs have the ability to bind to drugs, proteins, etc., and 
can be used in target-based cell therapy like tissue, tumor, etc. Figuerola 
et al. [38] reported the advancement of IO nanoalloys towards iron-based 
inorganic designs. They described the inorganic hybrid nanostructures 
of different materials as diagnostic and therapeutic agents. Lim et al. [39] 
stated the effects of iron and aluminum on graphene and reported about the 
enhanced catalytic reactivity of iron upon adsorption. Mahtout et al. [40] 
reported a study of iron-doped silicon clusters using DFT, where they found 
that system with spin-up electrons have high energy gap than the spin-down 
electrons. Huang et al. [41] fabricated iron-doped transition metal clusters 
and reported the variations in their structure and properties by using XRD, 
immersion tests and other methods. The cytotoxicity evaluation showed 
none of the materials exhibited significant toxicity. Janssens et al. [42] 
carried out DFT computation on single-doped Au5
X+
 systems (X=Au, Sc, 
Ti, Cr, Fe). The authors reported that the delocalized electrons depend on the 
constituting atoms as well as the equilibrium geometry of the cluster. The 
configurational, electronic, and magnetic features of Fen
 clusters (n=2–7) 
doped in icosahedral C60 and C80 fullerenes using first-principles calculations 
based on the DFT has been performed by Bezi Javan et al. [43] where they 
reported that magnetic moment of the larger clusters reduce with stronger 
hybridization. 
Li et al. [44] studied the structure and electronic properties of Fe clusters 
where they showed that in the decomposition process the pentacarbonyl-iron A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 103 
molecule gives preference to remove CO and produce more stable molecules. 
They have reported that the HOMO-LUMO gap have higher stability than 
their neighboring atoms. Khanna et al. [45] reported about the geometry, 
with various features of Fe encapsulated Sin
 (n= 9–11) atoms using the DFT 
and have global gradient approximation for exchange and correlation. The 
group studies the magnetic moment of all the clusters in the system. Singh 
et al. [46] conducted a study on magnetic moments of Fe, Co, and Ni and 
observed the total magnetic moment with respect to ground state structure 
using ab initio calculations. They stated that the atomic clusters are half￾metallic as they exhibit very small HOMO-LUMO energy gap for minority 
spin in comparison to majority spin component. Kumar et al. [47] reported 
that metal-doped Si clusters, one of the dopants being iron depending upon 
the cluster size forms fullerene-like structures. Ma et al. [48] reported 
Fe-doped Si clusters Sin
Fe (n = 1–14), they found that polarizability of system 
is enhanced after doing with iron. The outcomes of ab initio calculations 
for Ni N (N = 2–16) and Fe8
Ni5
 clusters using DFT within the generalized 
gradient approximation have been reported by Sahoo et al. [49]. Postnikov et 
al. [50] stated that the largest clusters of Fe were relaxed, under a particular 
morphology type, the study of which they conducted using DFT. They found 
that the relaxation in cluster surface was accompanied by the enhancement 
of local magnetic moments. Ebert et al. [51] found a pronounced enhance￾ment for the spin as well as the orbital moments of Fe and FePt clusters and 
obtained satisfactory results with available experimental counterpart. Košuth 
et al. [52] reported the electronic and magnetic properties of ferromagnetic 
semiconductor systems where they were able to check the magnetic moment 
with the magneto-crystalline anisotropy energy. Li et al. [53] investigated 
structures, electronic properties, magnetic moments, and growth strategies of 
Fen
N clusters varying number of Fe atoms from 1 to 7, using DFT. The results 
indicated that nitrogen doping significantly alters the Fen
 clusters. Zhao et al. 
[54] reported a DFT approach of Fe-doped germanium clusters where they 
found that Fe dopants contribute to the reinforcement of the stability of the 
germanium framework. The HOMO-LUMO gaps were reduced due to the 
presence of Fe atoms in germanium clusters. Yu et al. [55] examined pure 
iron clusters, Fen (n = 1–8) by using DFT. They reported that the ground state 
structures of iron clusters prefer higher dimensional arrangement as well as 
coordination number. 
These prospects of silver and iron in various fields have led to this 
computational study where Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) has been studied using DFT 
based descriptors where their electronic properties along with other DFT based descriptors have been computed and observed. This report has been 
presented in such a way that Section 5.2 provides a brief account of the 
computational methodology. Additionally, the subsequent sections provide 
the computational results along with the corresponding discussions. The 
entirety of the study has been briefed in Section 5.4. 
5.2 COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS 
Among several computational techniques, Density Functional Theory 
(DFT) has gained importance for being computational friendly. Various 
fields of study like alloy-based clusters, fluid mechanics, molecular, and 
nuclear physics, life sciences, etc., have adopted this technique [56–61]. 
DFT methods have been successfully used in various cases [62–65]. In the 
past few years, our group has performed various studies on metallic clusters 
[66–73] based on DFT. 
In this report a theoretical investigation based on the transition metal￾based clusters, Agn
Fe, where (n = 1–5) has been conducted. Optimization 
of the clusters have been instigated by means of Gaussian 16 [74] using 
DFT framework. For the optimization purpose, Local Spin Density Approxi￾mation, i.e., LSDA exchange-correlation with basis set LanL2dz is imple￾mented. LSDA is a proven correlation for theoretical analysis of clusters [75, 
76] whereas the basis set offers high accuracy in case of metallic clusters 
[75, 76]. 
Ionization energy (I) and electron affinity (A) of all the alloys are deter￾mined via the following equations [77]: 
I = –εHOMO (1) 
A = –εLUMO (2) 
By means of values of ‘I’ and ‘A,’ which are the conceptual descriptors, 
molecular hardness (η), molecular softness (S), electronegativity (χ) and
electrophilicity index (ω) have been computed. The equations based on which
computation have been performed have been presented in Eqns. (3) to (6): 
+
χ = −µ = I A (3)
2
here; μ symbolizes the chemical potential of the cluster:
− η = I A (4) 2
104 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials S = 1 (5) 2η
µ2
ω = (6) 2η
The bond order parameter of Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) cluster is defined as [78]: 
σ = (N + N – N )/(N + N + N ) (7) Ag-Ag Fe-Fe Ag-Fe Ag-Ag Fe-Fe Ag-Fe 
where; N , N , and N are the number of nearest-neighbor bonds Ag-Ag Fe-Fe Ag-Fe
between Ag-Ag, Fe-Fe, and Ag-Fe, respectively. 
5.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
5.3.1 EQUILIBRIUM GEOMETRY 
The ground state or lowest energy structures of Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) has been 
presented in Figure 5.1, along with the point groups and spin multiplicity. 
Figure 5.1 also shows the bond lengths between all the atoms in every struc￾ture. Bond length is elucidated as the distance between the centers of two 
atoms that are covalently bonded atoms. The length of the bond is confirmed 
using the total number of bonded electrons. The increase in the bond order, 
leads to the stronger attraction between the two atoms and results in shorter 
magnitude of bond length. In general, the length of the bond between two 
atoms is almost equal to the sum of the covalent radii of the atoms. Bond 
length is represented in Angstrom (Å). 
AgFe displays ground state configuration is a linear structure presented 
in Figure 5.1(a) with Ag atom linked in a line with Fe atom. The orientation 
has the symmetry group C∞V and doublet spin multiplicity. The bond length
of Ag-Fe is 2.378 Å. 
Ag2
Fe has straight line ground state structure, presented in Figure 5.1(b), 
which has Fe placed at one of the ends. The structure comprises of point 
group of C∞Vs and triplet spin multiplicity. The bond length of Ag-Ag is 2.680 
Å and that of Ag-Fe is 2.320 Å. 
Ag3
Fe in Figure 5.1(c) represents structural modification of a quadrilateral 
with the diagonals connected to each other, exhibiting point group C2v and 
doublet spin multiplicity. In this structure, the bond lengths vary diagonally 
as well as at the vertices. The Ag-Ag bonds connected directly has bond 
A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 105 106 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
length 2.619 Å and that connected diagonally has bond length 3.471 Å. Simi￾larly, the Ag-Fe atoms which are directly placed at corresponding vertices 
possess a bond length of 2.463 Å and the diagonal bond length is 3.312 Å. 
The structure possessing the lowest energy for Ag4
Fe is presented in 
Figure 5.1(d), which is the most stable structure, point group C2v and quintet 
spin multiplicity. The structure resembles a trapezium-like shape. The Ag-Ag 
bond length at the non-parallel sides is both 2.674 Å. The Ag-Ag bond length 
at corresponding side is 2.713 Å. The Fe atom in placed in the center of the 
base and the four Ag atoms are linked with it. The Ag atoms on the same side 
create Ag-Fe bonds of the length 2.609 Å and that on the opposite arm have 
bond lengths 2.459 Å. 
Figure 5.1(e) shows the ground state structure of Ag5
Fe which has point 
group C2v and multiplicity detect Å. The structure is hexagonal in shape with 
Fe atom being centrally located. All the Ag atoms are directly connected 
with the Fe atom. The Ag-Ag bonds created with the Ag atom at the topmost 
vertex has bond length 2.528 Å. The Ag-Ag bonds on the parallel sides have 
bond length 2.578 Å. Ag-Fe bond length with Ag atoms at the base side 
is 2.703 Å, with the top vertex is 2.664 Å and the remaining atoms on the 
parallel side is both 2.598 Å.
The reported experimental bond length of Ag-Ag atoms is 2.530 Å [79]. 
The computed data obtained is in range with the experimental value as the 
shortest bond length is approximately equal to the experimental value with 
a mere difference of 0.002 Å. The bond length between silver atoms follows 
odd-even oscillations where for structures having an odd number of total 
atoms, the bond lengths are larger in value. The shortest bond length of 
Ag-Ag bond is 2.528 Å which is exhibited by Ag5
Fe and the longest bond
length for the pair is 3.471 Å which is possessed by Ag3
Fe. In case of Ag-Fe 
the bond length remains same for both AgFe and Ag2
Fe, which is also the 
shortest bond length of 2.378 Å. The highest bond length for Ag-Fe is 3.312 
Å. The bond lengths then keep on increasing with the total number of atoms. 
In the entire series of clusters, the Ag3
Fe cluster is an exception. This cluster 
breaks the pattern of change in bond length and exhibits highest bond length 
for both Ag-Ag and Ag-Fe atom sets. The reported bond length of Ag with 
Au is 2.500 Å [80]. So, it can be inferred that by substituting Au with Fe, the 
bond length with Ag does not vary to a huge extent. The transition metals 
thus exhibit similar bond lengths even when substituted with another of its 
kind. The change in bond lengths with an increase in cluster size has been 
presented in Table 5.1. AgFe, 5.1(a) Ag2Fe, 5.1(b) Ag3Fe, 5.1(c) 
C , ΔE = 0eV, S = 2 C , ΔE = 0 eV, S = 3 C , ΔE = 0 eV, S = 2 ∞V ∞V 2V 
Ag4Fe, 5.1(d) Ag5Fe, 5.1(e) 
C2V, ΔE = 0 eV, S = 5 C2V, ΔE = 0 eV, S = 10
FIGURE 5.1 Lowest energy structures of AgnFe (n = 1–5). 
A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 107 TABLE 5.1 Bond Lengths of Ag-Ag Atoms in Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) Clusters 
Cluster Ag-Ag Bond Lengths in Structure 
AgFe None 
Ag2
Fe 2.680 Å 
Ag3
Fe 2.619 Å, 3.471 Å 
Ag4
Fe 2.674 Å, 2.713 Å 
Ag5
Fe 2.528 Å, 2.578 Å 
TABLE 5.2 Bond Orders of Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) Clusters 
Species Bond Order 
AgFe –1 
Ag2
Fe 0.5 
Ag3
Fe 0.5 
Ag4
Fe 0.43 
Ag5
Fe 0.44 
108 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Bond order is another integral part of the atomic structure. Bond order 
determines the stability of a bond between a pair of electrons. Both bond 
length and bond order influence the type and strength of the bond formed. 
They vary inversely to each other, i.e., when bond order increases, the bond 
length will decrease. Bond order provides a quantitative measure of segrega￾tion in nanoalloy clusters [81–85]. The values of bond order can be expressed 
in positive, zero or negative values. When the value of bond order is positive, 
the structure possesses segregation of atoms in their respective clusters. The 
bond order zero signifies that the concerned structure is a disorderly mixed 
cluster and if the value is negative in magnitude, then the species has mixed 
phases of clusters in it. 
The bond order of the clusters has been computed using Eqn. (7). The 
tabulated representation of bond order of all the clusters under study is in 
Table 5.2 of this report. 
Comparing the computed data with criteria of bond order variations, we 
can state that AgFe is in a mixed phase of clusters and the rest of the clusters 
contain segregation of atoms in them. 
5.3.2 ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES AND DFT-BASED DESCRIPTORS 
Using electronic structure theory, the computational study of transition 
metallic silver-iron cluster is performed. The global descriptors which A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 109 
are based on density functional theory like molecular hardness, molecular 
softness, electronegativity, and electrophilicity are evaluated using Eqns. 
(3) to (6). The same is presented in Table 5.3. 
TABLE 5.3 DFT-based Global Descriptors of Agn
Fe (n = 1–5) Clusters 
Species HOMO- Hardness Softness Electronega- Electrophili- Dipole 
LUMO Gap (eV) (eV) tivity (in eV) city Index Moment 
(in eV) (in eV) (in Debye) 
AgFe 0.396 0.198 2.526 4.507 51.306 0.791 
Ag Fe 2 1.653 0.827 0.605 4.725 13.504 1.025 
Ag Fe 3 0.519 0.259 1.928 5.474 57.774 0.216 
Ag Fe 4 1.649 0.824 0.606 4.259 11.003 0.378 
Ag Fe 5 0.131 0.066 7.609 3.769 108.087 0.409 
It has been stated that molecular orbitals of donor and acceptor have 
an imperative role in the transfer of charge and bond creation during the 
establishment of the donor-acceptor system [86–92]. The energy alteration 
between orbitals HOMO and LUMO is an essential factor to compute the 
electronic properties like chemical hardness, softness, and other values 
depending on the energy gap of HOMO and LUMO [93, 94]. Kinetic stability 
of a cluster decreases with the decrease of the HOMO-LUMO gap. It states 
the minimum energy requirement of an electron to move from occupied 
orbital to unoccupied orbital [95]. In this study, Ag2
Fe exhibits the highest 
HOMO-LUMO gap and Ag5
Fe, the least value. Reported data [96] shows 
that the best HOMO-LUMO gap suitable for biomedical application in 0.39 
eV. In that respect presented range of HOMO-LUMO gap of clusters Agn
Fe 
(n = 1–4) are suitable for biomedical application, only Ag5
Fe falls below 
the reported value. The computed HOMO-LUMO gaps also present with 
an odd-even oscillation where the clusters bearing an odd number of atoms 
exhibit a higher energy gap than those with an even number of electrons. 
Correspondingly the gap increases in case of even number of total atoms 
(AgFe<Ag3
Fe) and decreases in case of odd number of total atoms (Ag2
Fe 
> Ag4
Fe). Ag5
Fe remains an exception even in this aspect as the HOMO￾LUMO gap instead of increasing in value, diminishes by a huge range. 
In order to comprehend molecular structure, stability, binding, and 
dynamics of chemical species, molecular hardness is a vital factor [97]. 
It is the natural tendency of every molecule to configure themselves with 
maximum hardness [98]. Molecular hardness is an electronic parameter of 
clusters which depict the stability of the molecular system. Movement of a 110 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
molecule from stable to unstable state reduces its hardness value and vice 
versa [88]. According to computed date, Ag2
Fe exhibits the highest value and 
Ag5
Fe, the least, the range varying from 0.066 eV to 0.827 eV. The cluster 
with the maximum HOMO-LUMO gap also possesses the highest value of 
hardness and vice versa. 
The clusters that possess the peak HOMO-LUMO gap, are the least prone 
to respond against any external agitation. Hence the molecular softness shares 
an inverse relation with the HOMO-LUMO gap of the cluster. Correspond￾ingly the cluster with the maximum hardness gap exhibits minimum softness 
and vice versa. The molecular softness ranges from 0.605 eV–7.609 eV, with 
Ag5
Fe being highest and Ag2
Fe presenting with the least value. The change 
is values of molecular softness is abrupt as for Agn
Fe (n = 1–4) the values 
are increasing in a linear rate whereas for cluster Ag5
Fe, the value increases 
at an extremely steep rate and in more than triple of the second highest value 
of softness. The variation of softness with the HOMO-LUMO gap is plotted 
in Figure 5.2. 
Another most vital factor to comprehend the transfer of charge from 
donor to acceptor is electronegativity [99, 100]. In the computed data the 
electronegativity varies from 3.769 eV to 5.474 eV. Maximum value is found 
for Ag3
Fe and the minimum for Ag5
Fe. According to the computed data, the 
lowest value of electronegativity is exhibited by the structure with the lowest 
HOMO-LUMO gap. In the case of electronegativity all the computed values 
are close in magnitude with no huge variations in value. 
The electrophilicity index is the constraint for computation of the expanse 
of energy reduction due to additional flow of electrons for the duration of 
donor-acceptor interaction, which is influenced by both ionization energy 
and electron affinity [101]. The cluster with lowest HOMO-LUMO gap 
exhibits the maximum electrophilicity index. The margin of the highest 
value is almost double to that of the second highest one. Ag5
Fe cluster has 
the highest electrophilicity index and the least belongs to Ag4
Fe. The entire 
range of computed data shows that electrophilicity index has an odd-even 
oscillating relation. The clusters with an even sum of atoms possess much 
higher values of electrophilicity index than the ones with an odd number of 
electrons. Ag5
Fe being the only exception in change of magnitude, the odd 
and even pairs show small change in computed values. 
The tabulation also contains the dipole moment of the cluster. The 
optimized structures presented with most values to be less than 1 Debye. 
Dipole moment is related to the structural symmetry of a cluster, among the 
clusters Ag2
Fe presents with the highest value. The range of dipole moment is A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 111 
0.216–1.025 Debye. The cluster Ag2
Fe which has the highest dipole moment 
also retains the highest HOMO-LUMO gap. The variation between numbers 
of Ag atoms with dipole moment is expressed in Figure 5.3. 
FIGURE 5.2 Relationship among HOMO-LUMO gap with molecular softness. 
FIGURE 5.3 Relationship between number of Ag atoms with dipole moment. 112 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
5.4 CONCLUSION 
A computational study of iron-doped silver nanoparticle-based clusters has 
been performed. DFT-based global descriptors have been computed based 
on the clusters varying 1 to 5 silver atoms with a single Fe atom, possessing 
the most stable configuration. The obtained bond length of the ground state 
configuration of the clusters validates their reported experimental values. The 
bond order of the clusters AgFe is in a mixed phase of clusters and the rest of 
the clusters contain segregation of atoms in them. The computed data present 
with HOMO-LUMO gap which is validated by reported values of metallic 
clusters. The nanoalloy clusters, excluding Ag5
Fe, present with an energy 
gap that is suitable for biomedical applications, thus opening new avenues of 
research incorporating organic compounds due to their non-toxicity. All the 
clusters present a unique odd-even oscillating character in terms of molecular 
hardness, softness, electronegativity, and electrophilicity index. The values 
of hardness are limited within a small range varying from 0.066 eV to 0.827 
eV. On the contrary, the values of molecular softness exhibit a higher range 
of 0.605 eV to 1.928 eV. Similar to molecular hardness, electronegativity 
also exhibits a small range in terms of computed magnitude. Only the cluster 
Ag5
Fe shows unnatural progression in magnitude of the computed data, 
especially in the case of electrophilicity. 
KEYWORDS 
• density functional theory 
• electronegativity 
• pharmacokinetics 
• photothermal therapy 
• radiotherapy 
• silver nanoparticles 
REFERENCES 
1. Wang, J., Wang, G., & Zhao, J., (2003). Chem. Phys. Lett., 380, 716. 
2. Nørskov, J. K., Bligaard, T., Rossmaisl, J., & Christensen, C. H., (2009). Nat. Chem., 1, 37. A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 113 
3. Zhang, Q., Xie, J., Yu, Y., & Lee, J. Y., (2010). Nanoscale, 2, 1962. 
4. Ferrando, R., Jellinek, J., & Johnston, R. L., (2008). Chem. Rev., 108, 845. 
5. Harding, C., Habibpour, V., Kunz, S., Farnbacher, A. N., Heiz, U., Yoon, B., & Landman, 
U., (2009). J. Am. Chem. Soc., 131, 538. 
6. Fang, B., Wanjala, B. N., Hu, X., Last, J., Loukrakpam, R., Yin, J., Luo, J., & Zhong, C. J., 
(2011). J. Power Sources, 196, 659. 
7. Wang, W., Wang, S., Ma, X., & Gong, J., (2011). Chem. Soc. Rev., 40, 3703. 
8. Huh, Y. M., Lee, E. S., Lee, J. H., Jun, Y. W., Kim, P. H., Yun, C. O., Kim, J. H., Suh, J. 
S., & Cheon, J., (2007). Adv. Mater., 19, 3109. 
9. Campelo, J. M., Luna, D., Luque, R., Marinas, J. M., & Romero, A. A., (2009). Chem. 
Sus. Chem., 2, 18. 
10. Sozer, J., & Kokini, L., (2009). Trends Biotech., 27, 82. 
11. Steiner, D., Mokari, T., Banin, U., & Millo, O., (2005). Phys. Rev. Lett., 95, 056805. 
12. Saraf, D., & Kshirsagar, A., (2014). Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 16, 10823. 
13. Alexander, J. W., (2009). Surg. Infect., 10, 289–292. 
14. Ioan-Avram, N., Anton, F., Maria, S., Denisa, F., Ovidiu, O., & Ecaterina, A., (2014). 
Curr. Org. Chem., 18, 173–184. 
15. Geraldo, D. A., Needham, P., Chandia, N., Arratia-Perez, R., Mora, G. C., & Villagra, N. 
A., (2016). Biointerface Res. Appl. Chem., 6, 1263–1271. 
16. Chowdhury, N. R., MacGregor-Ramiasa, M., Zilm, P., Majewski, P., & Vasilev, K., 
(2016). J. Colloid Interface Sci., 482, 151–158. 
17. Tavaf, Z., Tabatabaei, M., Khalafi-Nezhad, A., & Panahi, F., (2017). Eur. J. Integr. Med., 
12, 163–171. 
18. Domeradzka-Gajda, K., Nocun, M., Roszak, J., Janasik, B., Quarles, C. D. Jr., Wasowicz, 
W., Grobelny, J., Tomaszewska, E., Celichowski, G., Ranoszek-Soliwoda, K., et al., 
(2017). Toxicol. Lett., 272, 38–48. 
19. Kraeling, M. E. K., Topping, V. D., Keltner, Z. M., Belgrave, K. R., Bailey, K. D., Gao, 
X., & Yourick, J. J., (2018). Regul. Toxicol. Pharm., 95, 314–322. 
20. Kejlová, K., Kašpárková, V., Krsek, D., Jírová, D., Kolářová, H., Dvořáková, M., 
Tománková, K., & Mikulcová, V., (2015). Int. J. Pharm., 496, 878–885. 
21. Zhang, L., Zeng, G., Dong, H., Chen, Y., Zhang, J., Yan, M., Zhu, Y., Yuan, Y., Xie, Y., 
& Huang, Z., (2017). Bioresour. Technol., 230, 132–139. 
22. Gupta, S. D., Agarwal, A., & Pradhan, S., (2018). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 161, 
624–633. 
23. Pereiro, M., Baldomir, D., Botana, J., Arias, J. E., Warda, K., & Wojtczak, L., (2008). J. 
Appl. Phys., 103, 07A315. 
24. Lin, C. A. J., Lee, C. H., Hsieh, J. T., Wang, H. H., Li, J. K., Shen, J. L., Chan, W. H., 
Yeh, H. I., & Chang, W. H., (2009). Jpn. J. Med. Electron. Biol., 29(6), 276–283. 
25. Mathew, A., & Pradeep, T., (2014). Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 31, 1017–1053. 
26. Muñoz-Castro, A., (2019). Inorg. Chem. Front., 6, 2349–2358. 
27. Zhang, X. D., Guo, M. L., Wu, D., Liu, P. X., Sun, Y. M., Zhang, L. A., She, Y., et al., 
(2011). Int. J. Mol. Sci., 12, 2972–2981. 
28. Thakore, S. I., Nagar, P. S., Jadeja, R. N., Thounaojam, M., Devkarc, R. V., & Rathore, 
P. S., (2019). Arabian J. Chem., 12, 694–700. 
29. Kirubha, E., & Palanisamy, P. K., (2014). Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 5(4), 6. 
30. Sun, Q., Kandalam, A. K., Wang, Q., Jena, P., Kawazoe, Y., & Marquez, M., (2006). 
Phys. Rev. B, 73, 134409. 114 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
31. Burdușel, A. C., Gherasim, O., Grumezescu, A. M., Mogoantă, L., Ficai, A., & Andronescu,
E., (2018). Nanomaterials, 8, 681. 
32. Zhang, X. F., Liu, Z. G., Shen, W., & Gurunathan, S., (2016). Int. J. Mol. Sci., 17, 1534. 
33. Wei, L., Lu, J., Xu, H., Patel, A., Chen, Z. S., & Chen, G., (2015). Drug Discov. Today, 
20, 595–601. 
34. Yaqoob, S. B., Adnan, R., Rameez, K. R. M., & Rashid, M., (2020). Front. Chem., 8, 376. 
35. Sanpo, N., Berndt, C. C., Wen, C., & Wang, J., (2013). Acta Biomater., 9, 5830–5837. 
36. Chen, M., Yamamuro, S., Farrell, D., & Majetich, S. A., (2003). J. Appl. Phys., 93, 7551. 
37. Gupta, A. K., & Gupta, M., (2005). Biomaterials, 26, 3995–4021. 
38. Figuerola, A., Di Corato, R., Manna, L., & Pellegrino, T., (2010). Pharmacol. Res., 62, 
126–143. 
39. Lim, D., Negreira, A. S., & Wilcox, J., (2011). J. Phys. Chem. C., 115, 8961–8970. 
40. Mahtout, S., & Belkhir, M. A., (2006). Phys. Lett. A, 360, 384–389. 
41. Huang, T., Cheng, J., Bian, D., & Zheng, Y., (2015). J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 
104, 225–240. 
42. Janssens, E., Tanaka, H., Neukermans, S., Silverans, R. E., & Lieven, P., (2004). Phys. 
Rev. B., 69, 085402. 
43. Bezi, J. M., & Tajabor, N., (2012). J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 324, 52–59. 
44. Li, Z., Shao, T., & Zhao, Z., (2021). Phase Transitions, 94(5), 298–307. 
45. Khanna, S. N., Rao, B. K., Jena, P., & Nayak, S. K., (2003). Chem. Phys. Lett., 373, 433–438. 
46. Singh, R., & Kroll, P., (2008). Phys. Rev. B, 78, 245404. 
47. Kumar, V., & Kawazoe, Y., (2003). Phys. Rev. Lett., 91, 199901. 
48. Ma, L., Wang, J., & Wang, G., (2013). J. Chem. Phys., 138, 094304 (1–9). 
49. Sahoo, S., Rollmann, G., & Entel, P., (2005). Phase Transitions, 78, 723–731. 
50. Postnikov, A. V., & Entel, P., (2007). Phase Transitions, 77, 149–159. 
51. Ebert, H., Bornemann, S., Minár, J., Kosbreveuth, M., Sbreveipr, O., Dederichs, P. H., 
Zeller, R., & Cabria, I., (2005). Phase Transitions, 78(1–3), 71–83. 
52. Košuth, M., Minár, J., Cabria, I., Perlov, A., Crisan, V., Ebert, H., & Akai, H. (2002). 
Phase Transitions, 75(1, 2), 113–123. 
53. Li, Z., & Zhao, Z., (2017). Mater. Chem. Phys., 187, 54–59. 
54. Zhao, W. J., & Wang, Y. X., (2008). Chem. Phys., 352, 291–296. 
55. Yu, S., Chen, S., Zhang, W., Yu, L., & Yin, Y., (2007). Chem. Phys. Lett., 446, 217–222. 
56. Illas, F., & Martin, R. L., (1998). J. Chem. Phys., 108, 2519. 
57. Gyorffy, B., Staunton, J., Stocks, G., Gross, E., & Dreizler, R., (1995). Plenum (p. 461). 
NY, 461. 
58. Kummel, S., & Brack, M., (2001). Phys. Rev. A, 64, 022506. 
59. Car, R., & Parrinello, M., (1985). Phys. Rev. Lett., 55, 2471. 
60. Koskinen, M., Lipas, P., & Manninen, M., (1995). Nucl. Phys. A, 591, 421. 
61. Schmid, R. N., Engel, E., & Dreizler, R. M., (1995). Phys. Rev. C, 52, 164. 
62. Chen, P., Qin, M., Chen, H., Yang, C., Wang, Y., & Huang, F., (2013). Phys. Status Solidi 
A, 210, 1098. 
63. Palacios, P., Sanchez, K., Conesa, J. C., & Wahnon, P., (2006). Phys. Stat. Sol., 203, 
1395–1401. 
64. Palacios, P., Sanchez, K., Conesa, J. C., Fernandez, J. J., & Wahnon, P., (2007). Thin 
Solid Films, 515, 6280–6284. 
65. Palacios, P., Wahnon, P., Pizzinato, S., & Conesa, J. C., (2006). J. Chem. Phys., 124, 
014711. A Computational Study of Metal Doped Silver 115 
66. Ranjan, P., & Chakraborty, T., (2020). J. Nanopart. Res., 22, 35-1-11. 
67. Ranjan, P., & Chakraborty, T., (2020). J. Nanopart. Res., 22, 280-1-11. 
68. Ranjan, P., Dhail, S., Venigalla, S., Kumar, A., Ledwani, L., & Chakraborty, T., (2015). 
Mater. Sci. -Pol., 33, 719–724. 
69. Ranjan, P., Venigalla, S., Kumar, A., & Chakraborty, T., (2014). New Front. Chem., 23, 
111–122. 
70. Ranjan, P., Kumar, A., & Chakraborty, T., (2016). Mat. Today Proc., 3, 1563–1568. 
71. Ranjan, P., Chakraborty, T., & Kumar, A., (2020). Mater. Sci. Pol.,38, 97–107. 
72. Ranjan, P., & Chakraborty, T., (2018). Key Eng Mater., 777, 183–189. 
73. Ranjan, P., Das, S., Yadav, P., Tandon, H., Chaudhary, S., Malik, B., Rajak, S. K., et al., 
(2021). Theor. Chem. Acc. 140. 59 (1–12). 
74. Gaussian 16, Revision C.01, Frisch, M. J., Trucks, G. W., Schlegel, H. B., Scuseria, G. 
E., Robb, M. A., Cheeseman, J. R., et al., Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT, (2016). 
75. Chen, F. Y., & Johnston, R. L., (2007). Apply. Phys. Lett., 90, 153123–1-3. 
76. Chen, F. Y., & Johnston, R. L., (2008). Acta Mater., 56, 2374–2380. 
77. Parr, R. G., & Yang, W., (1989). Density Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules. 
Oxford University Press, New York, Oxford. 
78. Li, W., & Chen, F., (2013). J. Nanopart. Res., 15, 1809. 
79. Beutel, V., Kramer, H. G., Bhale, G. L., Kuhn, M., Weyers, K., & Demtroder, W., (1993). 
J. Chem. Phys., 98, 2699. 
80. Fabbi, J. C., Langenberg, J. D., Costello, Q. D., Morse, M. D., & Karlsson, L., (2001). 
J. Chem. Phys., 115, 7543. 
81. Ranjan, P., Chakraborty, T., & Kumar, A., (2018). Theoretical analysis: Electronic, 
Raman, Vibrational, and magnetic properties of CunAg (n= 1-12) nanoalloy clusters. In: 
Theoretical and Quantum Chemistry at the Dawn of the 21st Century (pp. 25–58). Apple 
Academic Press. 
82. Mayer, I., (1983). Charge, bond order and valence in the AB Initio SCF theory. Chem. 
Phys. Lett., 97(3), 270–274. 
83. Cordy, W., (1947). J. Chem. Phys., 15, 305. 
84. Brenner, D. W., Shenderova, O. A., Harrison, J. A., Stuart, S. J., Ni, B., & Sinnott, S. B., 
(2002). J. Phys.: Condens. Matter., 14, 783. 
85. Horsfield, P., Bratkovsky, A. M., Fearn, M., Pettifor, D. G., & Aoki, M., (1996). Phys. 
Rev. B, 53, 12694. 
86. Fujimoto, H., Kato, S., Yamabe, S., & Fukui, S., (1974). J. Chem. Phys., 60, 572. 
87. Fujimoto, H., Kato, S., Yamabe, S., & Fukui, S., (1974). J. Am. Chem. Soc., 96, 2024. 
88. Ghosh, D. C., & Bhattacharyya, S., (2004). Int. J. Mol. Sci., 5, 239. 
89. Ghosh, D. C., (1984). Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 22, 346. 
90. Ghosh, D. C., (1989). Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 27, 160. 
91. Xiao, H., Kheli, J. T., & Goddard, III. W. A., (2011). J. Phys. Chem. 2, 212–217. 
92. Saravanan, S., & Balachandran, V., (2014). Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 120, 351–364. 
93. Azam, F., Alabdullah, N. H., Ehmedat, H. M., Abulifa, A. R., Taban, I., et al., (2018). J. 
Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 36, 2099–2117. 
94. Parr, R. G., & Zhou, Z., (1993). Acc. Chem. Res., 26, 256–258. 
95. Xiao, H., Kheli, J. T., & Goddard, III. W. A., (2011). J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2, 212. 
96. Gowri, S., Gopinath, K., & Arumugam, A., (2018). J. Photochem. Photobiol. B, 180, 
166–174. 116 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials
97. Chattaraj, P. K., & Sengupta, S., (1999). J. Phys. Chem., 103, 6122–6126. 
98. Pearson, R. G., (1987). J. Chem. Ed., 64, 561–567. 
99. Sanderson, R. T., (1951). Science, 114, 670–672. 
100. Sanderson, R. T., (1952). Science, 116, 41, 42. 
101. Parr, R. G., Szentpaly, L. V., & Liu, S., (1999). J. Am. Chem. Soc., 121, 1922–1924. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 6 
GRAPHENE OXIDE AS AN EMERGING 
SOLID-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE 
MATERIAL FOR HIGHLY EFFICIENT 
SUPERCAPACITORS 
RANJIT DEBNATH and MITALI SAHA 
Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Agartala, 
Tripura, India 
ABSTRACT 
Nanomaterials have great potential for electronic conductivity and ionic 
transport with respect to conventional batteries or supercapacitors (SCs). 
They have the capability of occupation of each intercalation site available 
in their particle volume, which enables them for fast ion diffusion and high 
specific capacities. Over the last two decades, various allotropic forms of 
carbon, such as fullerenes, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), etc., have 
been investigated as sources of energy generation, storage, and ease of 
production. Since the development of the first graphene-based supercapacitor 
in 2008, a tremendous amount of research work was reported on the fabrica￾tion and modification of graphene-based SCs. Although the energy storage 
capacity of pristine graphene is very poor, its energy storage capacity can be 
modified by using nanocomposites of graphene with other materials. Inter￾estingly, it has been found that functionalized graphene, i.e., graphene oxide 
(GO) exhibits higher capacitance than graphene due to pseudo-capacitance 
effect of oxygen-containing functional groups present on its basal planes. 118 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
In view of easy synthesis, shorter processing time, lower cost, and higher 
capacitance, GO may be a better choice and more efficient material than 
graphene for SCs. This chapter represents the recent research progress on 
GO-based materials for application in SCs. 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Carbon-based supercapacitors (SCs) have proven efficient power storage 
systems which can store electrical energy between the adsorbed electrolyte 
layer and carbonaceous electrode surface. Currently, the real challenge to 
develop SCs is probably low cost, good electrochemical stability, environ￾mental safety, excellent conductivity, and large specific surface area. Carbon 
nanostructures with different spatial dimensions show unique properties 
during their usage as electrode materials for SCs. It has been found that 
commercial SCs containing activated carbons (ACs) suffer from serious 
problem of limited energy densities due to restricted charge accumulation and 
sluggish mass diffusion. To overcome the issues, enormous efforts are being 
carried out to design and develop SCs with different forms of nanocarbons. 
This chapter highlights the significance and recent advances of the graphene￾based SCs. Figure 6.1 shows the schematic diagram of a supercapacitor. 
FIGURE 6.1 The schematic diagram of supercapacitor. Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 119 
6.2 CARBON MATERIALS FOR SUPERCAPACITORS (SCS) 
Various materials like templated carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon 
nanofiber, AC, carbon nanocomposites, graphene, and nanocomposites are 
currently being used as important materials for supercapacitor applications. 
The reason of great importance of carbon materials for supercapacitor lies 
on the fact that carbon is present in different forms, naturally abundant, its 
thermal and chemical stability as well as good electrical conductivity which 
enabled the researchers to design low-priced SCs. An efficient superca￾pacitor requires a favorable material containing large active surface area, 
suitable pore size, excellent conductivity, surface wettability, rapid charge/ 
discharge rate, high cycle stability, etc. To design a relevant storage system, 
it is necessary to give importance to the lifetime, reliability, storage capacity, 
cost, and environmental impact. In this context, carbon materials not only 
exhibit lightweight, high-power density, long cyclic stability, low cost but 
also provides several designs for energy storage purpose. 
6.2.1 ZERO-DIMENSIONAL CARBON NANOMATERIALS FOR 
SUPERCAPACITORS (SCS) 
0-dimensional carbon nanomaterials refer to materials which are usually 
composed of a small number of atoms and molecules. Carbon nanoparticles 
without any defined crystalline structures were exploited due to their broad 
optical absorptions, comparable to CNTs or graphene, etc. Due to higher 
electron affinity, fullerenes are considered to be one of the best electric 
charge acceptors which make them promising materials for SCs. The redox 
activity of C60 has been utilized in molecular electronics, solar cells, and 
energy storage devices and when researchers find difficult to control layers 
in graphene, a number of walls and length diameter in CNTs, fullerenes 
possess no problems and efficiently worked for reversible and reproducible 
electroreductions. Carbon or graphene quantum dots (QDs) also exhibits 
optical properties and photoinduced redox characteristics that easily rival 
those of fullerenes. In fact, in addition to fullerenes, carbon dots can be 
considered as another nanoscale allotrope of carbon with zero-dimension, 
which will represent a rapid and advance research field in the near future. 
Capacitance is not only determined by electrical conductivity or surface 
area, but also depends on pore size distribution, pore shape, structure, etc., 
and in this context, ACs play an important role having a wide range of pore 120 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
size distribution such as micropores with <2 nm, mesopores of 2–50 nm and 
macropores of >50 nm. 
6.2.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL CARBON NANOMATERIALS FOR 
SUPERCAPACITORS (SCS) 
1-dimensional nanostructures such as nanotubes, nanofibers, nanobelts, nano￾pillars, nanoribbons, nanowires (NWs), etc., are being given considerable 
attention due to the dependence of their functional properties on dimensions. 
They include NWs, nanopillars, nanoribbons, and nanobelts. For high perfor￾mance flexible SCs, 1-D nanostructured materials have gained increasing 
interest owing to their high specific area, efficient electron transport, and 
excellent mechanical strength, thus enabling them to be flexible SCs with 
some suitable properties, such as high energy densities, superb power densi￾ties, and great flexibilities. 1D nanodomain of carbon materials particularly 
CNTs has shown tremendous impact as an effective electrode material to 
construct supercapacitor devices as it imparts high thermal and electrical 
conductivity, high tensile strength, and high surface area. Although 1-D 
carbon nanostructures can be excellent supercapacitor electrode materials, 
the main challenges are to grasp the physiochemical properties along with 
the electrochemical behavior of these nanomaterials within multicomponent￾fabricated charge storage systems. 
6.2.3 TWO-DIMENSIONAL CARBON NANOMATERIALS FOR 
SUPERCAPACITORS (SCS) 
Two-dimensional (2D) carbon materials were greatly explored as potential 
and promising candidates for the development of flexible supercapacitor 
devices with improved electrochemical performance. Although, these 2D 
nanomaterials can be assembled into a dense film to be used for flexible 
SCs, yet the high packing density creates restacking problems along with 
poor volumetric capacitance. Since all the atoms are present on the surface of 
2D carbon materials, the design of surface structure becomes highly critical 
for determination of bulk electrochemical properties. However, such 2D 
structures are well fitted to store the surface charges in a SCs. Since the 
first isolation of graphene, several 2D nanomaterials have been exploited 
for energy storage systems with respect to their bulk counterparts. Interest￾ingly, graphene and other porous carbon materials were found to store charge Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 121 
through electrostatic interaction and also found to be capable of achieving 
rapid charging and high power with high stability. 
6.2.4 THREE-DIMENSIONAL CARBON NANOMATERIALS FOR 
SUPERCAPACITORS (SCS) 
During the last few years, a growing interest has been observed in the 
development of natural and synthetic bulky carbon with 3D structures 
rather than two-dimensional structures due to the increase of active surface 
area throughout the entire 3D carbon structures. As compared to 1D and 
2D structures, 3D morphology offers more opportunities in rational design 
and development of hierarchical porous carbon nanostructures with 3D 
configuration, which are assumed to enhance the performances of energy 
storage devices. From the perspective of supercapacitor applications, 
three-dimensional porous carbon materials are highly demanding as they 
generally possess highly ordered channels along with large specific surface 
area, high electronic and ionic conductivity, etc. They also possess a large 
amount of open pores and low tortuosity, which is why as an electrode 
material, it not only provides a fast electron transport path, shortening the 
ion diffusion length significantly to achieve fast kinetic performances, 
but also suppresses the agglomeration of nanoparticles. Furthermore, 
the porous interconnected structure of bulky carbon along with the high 
surface area can provide a large contact area with the electrolyte, therefore 
continuous ion transportation pathways always occur in the entire space, 
thereby enhancing the rate performance. The as-grown 3-D carbon foams 
(CFs) are also being used as electrode materials for energy storage devices 
like SCs and batteries. 
6.3 GRAPHENE OXIDE (GO)-BASED COMPOSITES FOR 
SUPERCAPACITORS (SCS) 
Due to aggregation of graphene nanosheets, the available surface area of 
graphene is usually smaller than the theoretical one and its capacitance value 
is also low. Although, it has been theoretically claimed that graphene oxide 
(GO) is not suitable for SCs, but GO-based nanocomposites with conducting 
polymers, metal oxides, etc., exhibits lower cost, shorter processing time, 
higher capacitances, good cycling performances, etc. Figure 6.2 represents 
the schematic diagram of GO. 122 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
FIGURE 6.2 The schematic diagram of graphene oxide. 
In 2010, Xin et al. fabricated a composite of needle-like MnO2
 nanocrys￾tals supported by GO through a simple soft chemical route and showed that 
the electrochemical performance of nanocomposites could be modified by 
the chemical interaction between MnO2
 and GO, and this method provided 
a direct approach to deposit MnO2
 nanoparticles onto the GO sheets [1]. 
Zhixiang Wei and coworkers constructed nanocomposites electrode by 
combining one dimensional polyaniline (PANI) NWs with two-dimensional 
GO nanosheets. The composite showed specific capacitance of 555 F.g–1 at 
a discharge current of 0.2 A.g–1 and the capacitance retention of 92% after 
2000 consecutive cycles [2]. In 2011, Konstantin et al. reported the synthesis 
of nanocomposites-based electrode by GO and multi-walled carbon 
nanotube (MWCNT) and compared its performance with pristine GO and 
multi-walled CNT. They found that, in the potential range of 0.1 to 0.5 V, 
the specific capacitances of GO/MWCNT, MWCNTs, and GO were 251, 
85, and 60 F.g–1, respectively [3]. Hu Zhongai and coworkers prepared a 
nanocomposites electrode using cobalt nitrate and aluminum nitrate as the 
raw material, where graphite oxide was employed as carrier. Al-substituted 
α-Co(OH)2
/GO showed specific capacitance of 1,137 F.g–1 in 6 M KOH 
solution at 1 A.g–1 current density within the potential range of 0–0.5 V and 
only 12% of the initial specific capacitance were losses after 500 cycles [4]. Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 123 
Bin et al. compared graphene and GO both as an electrode material in SCs 
and they found that GO exhibited higher capacitance up to 189 F.g–1 than 
graphene due to a pseudo-capacitance effect of attached oxygen-containing 
functional groups on its planes [5]. 
In 2012, Jipeng et al. synthesized CoAl-layered double hydroxide 
(CoAl-LDH) with GO and a maximum specific capacitance of 772 F/g 
was obtained at 1 A/g in 6 mol/L KOH solution for 12.9% containing 
GO and the composite also exhibited excellent cyclic stability of 73% 
specific capacitance remains even after 10,000 cycles [6]. In 2013, Jun et 
al. fabricated nanocomposite electrode using MnO2
, CNT, and graphene 
oxide (MCGO), where GO acted as a surfactant to disperse CNTs for the 
subsequent deposition of MnO2
. The specific capacitance of this composite 
was 4.7 times more than that of pure MnO2
. The composite also showed 
high energy density of 30.4–14.2 Wh.kg–1, large power density of 2.6–50.5 
kWkg–1, maintaining 94% of the initial specific capacitance value after 
1,000 cycles [7]. Bao-Hang et al. synthesized nanocomposite material by 
GO-based benzimidazole cross-linked network (GOBIN). The composite 
showed the highest specific capacitance value up to 370 F/g at a current 
density of 0.1 A/g and maintained cyclic stability about 90% of the original 
capacitance after 5,000 cycles [8]. Chandrakant D. Lokhande and coworkers 
improved the capacitance of supercapacitor electrode by carbon-based 
GO and manganese oxide (Mn3
O4
), and the composite achieved specific 
capacitance of 344 F/g at a scan rate of 5 mV/s [9]. Wei et al. prepared 
a material by graphene oxide and polyaniline (GO/PANI) using one-step 
electrochemical co-deposition method. The composites achieved the highest 
specific capacitance of 1136.4 F/g with GO concentration of 10 mg/L, at a 
scan rate of 1 mV/s, which was almost two times higher than that of PANI 
(484.5 F/g). The GO/PANI composite also showed 89% cycling stability of 
its initial capacitance after 1,000 cycles [10]. In the year 2014, Liming et 
al. presented a new type of electrochemical SCs based on GO NWs and 
polypyrrole (PPy) NWs into a microporous Al2
O3
 template. The composite 
electrode achieved high capacitance of 960 F/g due to the large surface area 
of the vertically aligned (VA) NWs and the superficial contact between the 
NWs and the substrate electrode. It also retained high stability after 300 
charging and discharging cycles [11]. Hyoung-Joon Jin and coworkers 
prepared carbon aerogels from silk proteins and GO by a flash lyophilization 
process followed by carbonization, the nitrogen-enriched carbon aerogels 
show a high capacitance of 298 F.g–1 because of the pseudocapacitive effects 
and also achieved a specific energy of 63 Wh.kg–1, specific power of 20 124 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
kW.kg–1, and high cyclic stability even after 5,000 cycles [12]. Chunnian 
Chen and coworkers synthesized nanocomposite electrodes using GO, 
nano-sulfur, and PPy. In 1M Li2
SO4
 electrolytic solution, the composite 
showed excellent conductivity because of the higher surface area of GO 
and porous structure of PPy. The GO/nano-S/PPy composite exhibited a 
better specific capacitance of 892.5 F.g–1 at scan rates of 5 mV.s–1 and the 
capacitance retained about 81.2% after 500 cycles [13]. Hyung et al. studied 
SCs containing GO electrodes using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. 
The full range of electrode oxidation from 0% to 100% (fully oxidized GO) 
was investigated by decorating the graphene surface with hydroxyl groups 
and ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMI+
BF4
–
) 
as an electrolyte. Their study suggested that capacitance has a tendency to 
decrease with increasing electrode oxidation [14]. Chunliang et al. prepared 
nanocomposite from aniline (ANI), GO, and ammonium persulfate (APS) by 
polymerization with the mass ratio (mANI:mGO) 1000:1, 100:1, and 10:1, 
respectively. The PANI/GO composite with the mass ratio 1000:1 possessed 
excellent capacitive behavior with a specific capacitance as high as 355.2 F.g–1 
at 0.5 A.g–1 in 1 M H2
SO4
 electrolyte [15]. Jian Xie and coworkers developed 
covalently-grafted PANI and GO nanocomposites. The covalently-grafted 
(PANI/GO) composites showed unique morphology of much larger specific 
surface area and pore volume, and this maximized the synergistic effect 
between PANI and GO, resulting in excellent electrochemical performances. 
The specific capacitance of PANI/GO (6:1) was found to be 442 F/g vs. 226 
F/g of pure PANI with improved cyclic stability of 83% after 2,000 cycles, 
whereas for PANI/GO (6:1) the cyclic stability was 54.3% after 1,000 cycles 
[16]. De Yan et al. synthesized hybrid electrode based on GO flakes with 
manganese dioxide (MnO2
) nanosheets. The MnO2
-GO hybrid exhibited 
enhanced specific capacitance of 213 F/g at a current density of 0.1 A/g, and 
specific capacitance retention of 98.1% at 1 A/g after 1,000 cycles compared 
with the MnO2
 and GO [17]. Yanfeng et al. designed electrode via an in 
situ oxidative polymerization from GO and conducting polymers (PANI and 
PPy). The obtained specific capacitance of APGO/PPy and APGO/PANI are 
404 and 522 F.g–1, respectively, and the composites exhibited good electrical 
conductivity, low internal resistance, and stable cyclic performance [18]. 
In 2015 Haihan Zhou and coworkers introduced a simple and low-cost 
electrochemical co-deposition method to fabricate nanocomposites by 
polypyrrole and graphene oxide (PPy/GO) and the nanocomposite showed a 
high areal capacitance of 152 m F.cm–2 at 10 mV.s–1 with good cyclic stability 
[19]. Yufeng et al. developed a composite electrode using MnO2
, GO, and 
3D hierarchical porous structure (HPC) in 1 M Na2
SO4
 aqueous electrolyte. Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 125 
The optimized MnO2
/GO/HPC asymmetric supercapacitor showed a highest 
specific capacitance of 84 F/g, energy density of 46.7 Wh.kg–1 at a power 
density of 100 W.kg–1 and also showed superior long cyclic stability of 100% 
capacitance retention after 1,000 cycles and 93% after 4,000 cycles [20]. 
Yaming Wang and coworkers fabricated a 3D composite electrode from GO 
and PPy in an aqueous solution of LiClO4
. The PPy/GO composite electrode 
with a mass loading of 0.26 mg cm–2 exhibited excellent specific capacitance 
value of 481.1 F/g, whereas the electrode containing larger mass loading 
of 1.02 mg cm–2 exhibited the best area capacitance of 387.6 mF cm–2, at a 
current density of 0.2 mA cm–2 along with capacitance retention of 80% as 
the current density load increased from 0.2 to 10 mA cm–2 [21]. Jianhui Qiu 
and coworkers reported a novel method for the preparation of composites 
material by GO, PPy, and MWCNTs. The composite showed high capacitance 
of 406.7 F/g at current density of 0.5 A/g and along with the cyclic stability of 
92% after 1,000 cycles [22]. Lim H. N and coworkers prepared a composite 
material with polypyrrole, graphene oxide and zinc oxide (PPy/GO/ZnO) 
through potentiostatic electrochemical polymerization. The composite 
showed a specific capacitance of 94.6 F.g–1 at a current density of 1 A.g–1 
and the capacitance retention of the supercapacitor was 74% of its initial 
value after 1,000 charge/discharge cycles [23]. Weihua et al. developed an 
electrode using GO with bacterial cellulose (BC) fibers through one-step 
esterification having a 3D network structure. The composite electrode 
showed a good specific capacitance of 160 F/g at a current density of 0.4 
A/g and also demonstrated an outstanding capacitance retention of 90.3% 
after 2,000 recycles [24]. Kaushik Pal and coworkers prepared a GO-based 
nanocomposites through in-situ polymerization of pyrrole and aniline to 
study the interaction of GO with PPy and PANI. The specific capacitance 
of PPy-coated GO increased by ~122.73% compared to pristine GO and 
due to the presence of oxygen-containing functional group, the binding 
energy of polypyrrole-GO was found to be better than polyaniline-GO [25]. 
Chang et al. reported a novel strategy for self-assembly of GO-induced 
monolithic NiCo–carbonate hydroxide (NiCo–CH) NWs-based composite 
films (G–CH). The GO surface having oxygen-containing functional groups 
helped effectively to induce the formation of monodisperse NiCo–CH 
NWs. The obtained monolithic G–CH architectures showed extraordinary 
supercapacitor performance as binder- and conductive agent-free electrode 
and also showed superior volumetric capacitance of 2,936 F cm–3 with good 
cyclic stability [26]. 
In 2016, Yusran Sulaiman and coworkers developed an electrode material 
using poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) and graphene oxide (PEDOT/GO) 126 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
potentiostatically at 1.2 V with different electrodeposition times (1–30 min) 
and different concentrations of GO. The composite was found to have high 
power density and energy of 496.64 Wh/kg and 18.24 W/kg, respectively 
and showed excellent specific capacitance of 157.17 F.g–1 at a current density 
of 1.0 A.g–1 [27]. Huaihe et al. synthesized electrode by carbonization of 
GO, resorcinol-formaldehyde aerogels using inverse emulsion method. The 
composite showed a stabilized specific capacitance value of 123.6 F.g–1 at a 
current density of 0.1 A.g–1 and 113.9 F.g–1 at a current density of 1 A.g–1 after 
2,000 cycles [28]. Mei et al. developed a homogeneous electrode material 
using PANI and GO with a redox system in which iron dichloride (FeCl2
) and 
cumene hydroperoxide (CHP) acted as reductant and oxidant, respectively. 
The nanocomposites showed much higher specific capacitance of 308.3 F.g–1 
than that of the pure PANI at a current density of 1 A.g–1 in 2 M H2
SO4
 elec￾trolyte [29]. Zheng et al. developed a honeycomb shape composites electrode 
using GO, polyaniline, and metal hydroxide with cobalt ions or nickel ions. 
The GO/PANI/Ni(OH)2
 nanocomposite showed highest specific capacitance 
of 743 F.g–1 whereas GO/PANI/Co(OH)2
 showed specific capacitance of 723 
F.g–1 and cyclic stability of specific capacitance was found to be 15.6% after 
2,000 cycles [30]. Seong Chan Jun and coworkers developed an electrode 
using GO and layered molybdenum disulfide (MoS2
). The MoS2
/GO hybrid 
electrode showed a high specific capacitance of 613 F.g–1 at low scan rate. 
Moreover, the MoS2
/GO electrode-based asymmetric supercapacitor device 
exhibited ultra-high energy (23 Wh kg–1) with a power density of 17 kW kg–1 
[31]. Sumit et al. investigated low-cost electrode material for supercapacitor 
based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) matrix by integrating GO as filler. The 
nanocomposite (GOPVA) prepared by adding 0.5% (w/w) of GO in PVA 
showed significantly higher specific capacitance of 400 F.g–1 [32]. Yang 
et al. synthesized electrode with GO with Mn3
O4
 nanocrystals via a facile 
solvothermal self-assembly method. The composites showed the specific 
capacitance of 225 F/g at the scan rate of 5 mV/s and also showed high elec￾trochemical stability that retained about 99.5% capacitance after 6,000 cycles 
and the energy density was found to be as high as 34.1 Wh/kg at the power 
density of 251 W/kg [33]. Haihan Zhou and coworkers fabricated composite 
films of heterogeneous conducting polymers-coated GO with carbon 
nanotubes (CPs-GO/CNTs) via one-step electrochemical co-deposition. 
The as-prepared PPy-GO/CNTs and PEDOT-GO/CNTs ternary composites 
achieved a high specific capacitance of 142.2 mF.cm–2 and 99.0 mF.cm–2 at 
1.0 mA cm–2, respectively. The composite showed excellent cycle stability 
of 97.3% and 99.2% of initial capacitance after 5,000 cycles, respectively 
[34]. Haihan et al. fabricated electrode material by GO nanosheets loaded  
Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 127 
with poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (GO/PEDOT). This nanocomposite 
showed the improved capacitive behaviors and achieved a high capacitance 
of 66.3 mF cm–2 at 10 mV/s [35]. Lixian et al. prepared a composite of PPy, 
Prussian blue and GO which showed a specific capacitance of 525.4 F/g at 
a current density of 5 A/g in the potential range from 0.2 to 0.6 V using 1 
M KNO3
 as electrolyte, and the as-prepared supercapacitor retain a specific 
capacitance of 96% after 2,000 cycles [36]. 
In 2017, Saeed Shahrokhian and coworkers developed an electrode based 
on vanadium pentoxide (V2
O5
), PPy, and GO via one-step electrochemical 
deposition process and this nanocomposite showed a specific capacitance 
value of 750 F.g–1 at a current density of 5 A.g–1, maintaining 83% of its 
initial value after 3,000 cycles. It showed better electrochemical stability of 
the electrode and device assembled by V2
O5
/PPy/GO yielded a maximum 
power density of 13,680 W kg–1 at an energy density of 22.8 W h kg–1 [37]. 
N. Manyala and coworkers developed prepared material in the form of gel, 
based on GO and carbon nanorods showing specific capacitance of 719.5 
F.g–1 corresponding to specific capacities of 80.8 mAh g–1 at a current density 
of 0.5 A.g–1 [38]. Nasser Arsalani and coworkers developed an electrode 
based on polyaniline, GO, vanadium pentoxide and ammonium persulfate, 
and the resultant composite showed significantly higher specific capacitance 
of 712 F.g–1 at the current density of 0.5 A.g–1 in 1 M H2
SO4 solution. The 
composite retained 83% of its original specific capacitance after 6,000 
charge-discharge cycles [39]. Yusuke et al. reported the fabrication of a new 
composite, combining GO sheets with Prussian blue nanoparticles used a 
precursor for iron oxide (IO). The GO/IO hybrid (prepared from GO: PB 
=75: 25) showed a better specific capacitance of 91 F.g–1 at a scan rate of 20 
mV s–1, compared to pure GO (81 F.g–1) and pure IO (47 F.g–1) [40]. Li et al. 
developed flexible electrode from GO, carbon nano-onion (OLC) and Ni3
S2 
(GCNi3
S2
) and it showed a high specific capacitance value of 1064.3 F.g–1, 
energy density of 3.63 mWh cm–3 and retaining long cycle stability of 97.2% 
capacitance after 5,000 cycles [41]. Chenghua et al. synthesized materials 
based on ultrathin α-FeOOH nanorods and GO, the resultant α-FeOOH 
nanorods/GO composite with 20% iron content has the largest specific 
capacitance of 127 F.g–1 at 10 A.g–1, excellent rate capability of 100 F.g–1 at 
current density of 20 A.g–1 and good cyclic performance by retaining 85% 
after 2,000 cycles [42]. Lin Zhang and coworkers developed nanocomposite 
based on nickel aluminum layered double hydroxides (NiAl-LDHs) with 
GO, containing 12 wt.% GO, showing excellent specific capacitance of 959 
F.g–1 at current density of 1 A.g–1 and the better capacitance retention of 67% 
even at 10 A.g–1 [43].  
128 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
In 2018, Ignacio Martin-Gullon et al. synthesized electrode using carbon 
xerogel and GO (concentrations range from 1.2 to 2.5%), which showed 
specific capacitance of 120 F.g–1 and power densities above 30 kW/kg, almost 
180% more as compared to pristine xerogels [44]. Himadri Acharya and 
coworkers synthesized a hybrid electrode by GO and copper terephthalate 
metal-organic framework (Cu-(BDC)-MOF) which delivered high specific 
capacitance of 606 F/g at scan rate of 2 mV/s with better stability over 
93% retention of initial capacitance after 1,000 cycles [45]. Qiang Ma and 
coworkers synthesized an electrode based on PPy and GO, the specific 
capacitance of which remained at 389 F/g under a current density of 2 A/g 
after 1,000 cycles. The highest conductivity of the composite achieved, was 
27 times better than that of Ppy [46]. Innocenzo et al. developed material 
using PVA, GO coupled with Ni-Co through electrodeposition method, 
where the nanocomposite electrode showed a specific capacitance value of 
about 2,100 ± 200 F.g–1 by maintaining the potential scan rates in the range 
of 10 mV s–1 to 250 mV s–1 [47]. 
3D CF has been largely used for preparing self-supporting supercapacitor 
electrodes. To improve the performance of such electrodes, Xiaodong Hong 
and coworkers prepared material by spin-coating method using GO and 
CF, the CF/GO-4,500 (4,500 rpm, 1.2 wt.% GO) composite showed the 
specific capacitance of 159 Fg–1 (258 mF cm–2) at 0.5 Ag–1 [48]. Nasser et 
al. developed an electrode from polyaniline with ammonium persulfate in 
presence of acidic solution of GO, and the electrode exhibited a better current 
density in cyclic voltammetry studies with specific capacitance of 727 F.g–1 
and excellent cyclic stability by controlling only 4.3% loss after 5,000 cycles 
[49]. Yaoming Xiao and coworkers developed an electrode in which two 
sides of porous polypropylene films (PPF) was covered with the composite 
of PPy-GO via galvanostatic method to establish the sandwich structured 
PPy-GO//PPF//PPy-GO composite films, presenting specific capacitance 
value of 108.0 mF cm–2 at scan rate of 2 mV s–1 along with excellent flexibility 
and cyclic stability of 84.9% capacitance retention after 10,000 cycles [50]. 
Tong et al. fabricated electrode in which PANI nanofibers placed into GO 
architecture by the adsorption of aniline onto stacked GO sheets, performed 
a high capacitance of 780 F/g at 0.5 A/g and excellent rate performance of 
521 F/g at 50 A/g compared to pristine PANI of 323 F.g–1 at 0.5 A.g–1. The 
assembled PGA50//PGA50 supercapacitor achieved a high energy density of 
30 Wh kg–1 at a power density of 216 W/kg [51]. 
In 2019, Dan et al. reported a colloidal gel containing GO together with 
polyaniline nanofiber where the GO network helped in the gelation process Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 129 
and also served as an effective energy-transmission network to provide 
fast structural recovery after the gel is deformed due to high-rate shearing. 
This outstanding fast recovery property has made it possible to use in the 
technique of conventional air-brush spray to print the flexible surfaces and 
showed 46 times higher areal capacitance value than traditionally spray￾printed ones [52]. Yifu et al. synthesized material by combining Co2
SiO4 
nanobelts with GO, and the Co2
SiO4
/GO composites showed high specific 
capacitance of 511 F.g–1 at 0.5 A.g–1 with excellent cyclic stability of 84% 
after 10,000 cycles [53]. Dongyu Zhao and coworkers developed an elec￾trode using polyaniline, graphene oxide and copper (PANI/GO/Cu), which 
exhibited specific capacitance of 557.92 F/g with good cycling stability [54]. 
Haijun et al. developed a composite by polyoxometalate (POM), GO, and 
metallacalixarene viz. [Ag5
 (C2 H2
N3
)6 ][H5
⊂SiMo12 O40 ] and [Ag5
(C2 H2
N3
)6 ]
[H5
⊂SiW12 O40 ]; (C2
H2
N3 = 1H-1,2,4-triazole). Due to the synergetic effects 
of GO and POM-incorporated metallacalixarenes, the compound 1/15% 
GO-based electrode showed the highest specific capacitance of up to 230.2 
F.g–1 at current density equal to 0.5 A.g–1 [55]. 
Xiankai et al. synthesized electrode by using GO and waterborne 
polyurethane (WPU) followed by treatment with ferric catalyst and boric 
acid to increase the specific surface area, the resultant materials provided 
high specific capacitance of 330 F.g–1 at 0.5 A.g–1 and also showed a good 
capacitance retention of about 89.9% after 5,000 cycles in 6 M KOH 
electrolyte [56]. Ill Min et al. developed highly effective nanocomposite using 
Ni nanoparticles with GO producing 3 wt.% NiO/GO(Ni/GO-1) and 8 wt.% 
NiO/GO(Ni/GO-2) where, Ni was present as Ni(OH)2
, NiO, Ni2
O3
, NiOOH, 
and NiO2
. The Ni/GO-2 as electrode material exhibited better specific 
capacitance of 461 F.g–1 in 6 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV [57]. Nomxolisi 
et al. developed composite using GO decorated with copper, silver, or 
platinum (Pt) nanoparticles based on dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid (DBSA)-
doped polyaniline (PANI). The composites GO/Cu/DBSA–PANI, GO/Ag/ 
DBSA–PANI and GO/Pt/DBSA–PANI showed specific capacitance values 
of 192.8, 206.4, and 227.2 F.g–1, respectively [58]. Yazhen et al. developed 
materials by blending 2-methylimidazole and cobalt nitrate hexahydrate 
together in aqueous solutions containing hexadecyltrimethylammonium 
bromide (CTAB), followed by GO wrapping to form nanocomposites which 
showed better specific capacitance of 100.41 F/g at a sweep rate of 5 mV/s 
[59]. Soo-Jin et al. developed a hybrid supercapacitor electrode using metal￾organic framework with dual metal (Ni and Co) centers (Ni-Co-MOF) on 
graphene oxide sheets (Ni-Co-MOF/GO) through a one-pot solvothermal  
130 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
reaction. At a current density of 1 A/g, the maximum specific capacitance 
observed was 447.2 F/g with excellent rate capability. It also possessed 
outstanding life stability of 99.6% after 300 cycles [60]. 
Cobalt–aluminum layered double hydroxide (CoAl LDH) has been 
identified as a promising electrode material for pseudocapacitors. However, 
some properties of CoAl LDH, such as aggregation and poor conductivity 
limited its large-scale practical applications. To overcome such limitations, 
Yuxin et al. developed nanocomposites of GO with CoAl LDH and the 
product showed outstanding specific capacitance value of 1725.71 F/g at a 
current density of 1 A/g and optimal 87.73% capacitance retention at 7 A/g 
[61]. Paper-based SCs are more flexible and show advantages due to the 
adhesion between paper and active materials compared to other substrates 
like plastics. Yanwu et al. fabricated paper-based solid-state flexible SCs 
by inkjet printing using hybrid ink consisting of GO platelets and carbon 
quantum dots (CQDs), followed by casting of PVA/sulfuric acid (H2
SO4
) 
gel electrolyte. This showed a specific capacitance of ~1.0 mF cm–2 at a 
scan rate of 100 mV s–1, an energy density of 0.078 mW h cm–3 at a power 
density of 0.28 mW cm–3 and also showed a retention of capacitance 98% 
after 1,000 cycles [62]. Xueping et al. synthesized composite electrode based 
on GO with polyaniline. They further added hexadecyltrimethylammonium 
bromide (CTAB) into the solution. As a result, GO was uniformly distributed 
in the solution and aniline monomers were easily adsorbed on the surface of 
GO, and when it was applied in SCs showed a specific capacitance value of 
405 F.g–1 at 1 A.g–1 with 80% content of PANI [63]. 
In 2020, Xiankai Jiang and coworkers reported composite containing 
WPU, phenolic resin (PF), GO, ferric catalyst and boric acid (WPU/PF/GO/ 
Fe/B). This supercapacitor electrode performed a high specific capacitance 
of 340.5 F/g at a current density of 0.5 A/g with excellent cycling stability 
[64]. Fabian et al. synthesized and compared different electrode materials 
using different metal oxides mixed with GO namely Co3
O4
@GO, MnO2
@ 
GO, and Co3
O4
/MnO2
@GO. These sowed specific capacitance of 975, 
1,358, and 1,718 F.g–1, respectively at a current density of 1 A.g–1 [65]. 
Ali Maleki and coworkers presented electrode material, which contained 
melamine-functionalized graphene oxide nano-sheets (GO@melamine), 
zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) and IO nanoparticles (Fe3
O4 NPs). The 
nanocomposite Fe3
O4
/GO@melamine-ZnO can sustain with scan rate up to 
800 mV/s and showed specific volumetric capacitance of 0.00049889 F/g [66]. 
Elaheh et al. synthesized electrode using silsesquioxane containing graphene 
oxide (SSQ-GO) and tris[2-(2-methoxy ethoxy) ethyl] methyl ammonium 
iodide (TMEMAI) incorporated with conductive polymer, poly ortho amino Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 131 
phenol (SSQ-GO-TMEMAI-POAP). The specific capacitance calculated 
was 450 F.g–1 at a current density of 0.5 A.g–1 with excellent retention 
capacity of ~96% within 3,000 charge-discharge cycles [67]. Behzad et al. 
represented a simple method for the fabrication of nanocomposites based on 
graphene oxide and polychrysoidine (GO-PCHRYS), which performed better 
storage capacity and high specific capacitance of 715.3 F.g–1 at the current 
density of 0.5 A.g–1, while the electrode stability determined was 89.8% after 
10,000 cycles [68]. Elaheh et al. prepared composite using triethyl amine 
(Et3
N) and CrCl3
 to host a Cr-containing molecule, grafted covalently on the 
surface of GO (Cr-GO). The Cr-GO composited electro-synthetically with 
poly ortho amino phenol (POAP) and then used as an efficient electrode 
material showing specific capacitance of 354 F.g–1 at 0.5 A.g–1 with excellent 
durability and cyclic stability of 94% after 5,000 cycles [69]. Lifang Liu 
and coworkers developed heteroatom-decorated hierarchical porous carbon 
nanofibers composites containing PANI, GO, phosphazene (N3
P3
(p-OC6
H4
-
p-CHO)6
, HAPCP) and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). This novel free￾standing flexible electrode exhibited excellent electrochemical performance 
of 680.8 F/g at 0.5 A/g with a good capacitance retention of 93.5% after 
3,000 cycles [70]. 
Md. Mominul et al. synthesized material from 3D MWCNTs horizontally 
dispersed on 2D GO nanosheet framework, supported by MnO2
. The optimum 
contents of MWCNTs and MnO2
 in the composites showed a maximum 
specific capacitance of 1,380 F.g–1 [71]. Haifeng et al. prepared materials for 
symmetric solid-state SCs by PPy/GO where with 2.5 wt.% GO, the PPy/ 
GO nanocomposite showed a high specific capacitance of 97.3 mF cm–2 
at current density of 1 mA cm–2 and the PPy/GO film supercapacitor also 
provided excellent cycling stability and good flexibility [72]. Xiaohong et 
al. prepared porous electrode materials by combination of carbon materials 
(GO) and active metal (Zn, Co, and Ni) (GO/Zn–Co–Ni). The GO/ZCN 
exhibits a specific capacitance of 843.0 C/g at a current density of 1 A/g 
and also exhibited capacitance retention of 97.71% at the end of 5,000 
charge-discharge cycles [73]. Zhong-Shuai et al. introduced a new class of 
“all-inside-one” film SCs by encapsulating 2D interdigital microelectrodes 
in chemically cross-linked PVA-based hydrogel electrolyte containing GO 
which significantly improved the ionic conductivity and boosted robustness 
of hydrogel electrolyte. It showed high single-cell areal capacitance of 40.8 
mF cm–2 from microelectrodes as thin as 5 μm [74]. Partha Pratim Das 
and coworkers developed electrode using vanadomanganate and graphene 
oxide (K7
MnIVV13 .18H2
O-GO with 2:1 and 4:1 ratio), The MnV13 O / 38 
GO composite of ratio 4:1 in 1M Na2
SO4
 electrolyte and that of ratio 2:1 132 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
in 1M LiCl electrolyte showed significant specific capacitance values of 
387.02 F.g–1 and 269.15 F.g–1, respectively with energy density of 53.75 
Wh/kg and 37.38 Wh/kg, respectively at a scan rate of 5 mV.s–1 [75]. Juan 
et al. fabricated the nitrogen-doped hierarchical carbon nanosheets (i.e., 
HGPC-A) for electrode via one-step carbonization and activation strategy in 
the presence of GO using PVA/polyaniline hydrogels as precursors and they 
observed that when the current density increased from 0.5 A.g–1 to 20 A.g–1, 
it showed high specific capacitance of 311 F.g–1 with superior rate capacity, 
excellent cycling stability of 88.5% over 10,000 cycles and better charge 
storage capacity of 7.0 Wh kg–1 [76]. 
In 2021, Wu et al. developed a sandwich-like composite electrode based 
on PANI, ZIF-67 and graphene oxide (GO/ZIF-67/PANI) which showed the 
specific capacitance up to 1,014 F.g–1 at a current density of 1 A.g–1. The 
assembled ASC based on GO/Co(OH)2
/PANI provided a high energy density 
of 53.42 Wh·kg–1 at a power density of 800 W·kg–1 and the cyclic capacitance 
remained 80% after 20,000 cycles [77]. Fouad Ghamouss and coworkers 
synthesized material by combination of polyaniline (PANI), protic ionic 
liquid (PIL) and GO, the PANI/PIL/GO containing 16 wt.% of GO material 
exhibited specific capacitance of 223 F.g–1 at current density of 10 A.g–1 in 
H2
SO4
 (1 mol L–1) [78]. Somenath et al. developed a composite electrolyte 
using GO sheets, carboxylated carbon nanotubes (fCNTs), and the hybrid of 
fCNT/GO. The composite electrolyte fCNT/GO-PGE showed 50% higher 
thermal stability than original PGE. Finally, MnO2
-based SCs using PGE, 
GO-PGE, and fCNT/GO-PGE electrolytes were fabricated and the electrode 
showed specific capacitance as 39.5, 77.6, and 83.3 F.g–1, respectively [79]. 
Nehal et al. developed electrode by polyindole (PIND), polyacrylonitrile 
(PAN) and GO. The PIND/PAN/GO nanofiber webs exhibited a better 
specific capacitance of 4,960 mF g–1 than that of PIND/PAN nanofiber webs 
(1,810 mF g–1) in 1 M H2
SO4
 [80]. Mohammad Mazloum-Ardakani et al. 
synthesized material using arginine amino acid and GO, and the resultant 
electrode provided an exceptional specific capacitance of 295 F/g in 1 A/g 
with excellent cycling stability of 94% after 4,000 cycles [81]. Liang et al. 
developed nanocomposite with GO, PPy, and PANI. This composite when 
used as an electrode for supercapacitor, it exhibited specific capacitance of 
372 F/g at current density of 0.4 A/g and also maintained cyclic stability of 
about 91% of the specific capacitance after 2,000 electrochemical cycles 
[82]. Debajyoti et al. developed a green approach for the synthesis of 
composite material from PANI and GO. The composite PANI-GO showed 
pseudocapacitive behavior with an enhanced specific capacitance of 510 F/g 
at a current density of 1 A/g and also maintained 92% cyclic stability even Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 133 
after completing 1,000 cycles [83]. Guoji Liu and coworkers synthesized 
electrode material based on graphene oxide, mesoporous silica, and poly￾aniline (GO/mSiO2
/PANI) where the composite showed a highest specific 
capacitance of 1218.4 F/g at 0.5 A/g and maintained capacitive stability of 
92.5% after 1,000 cycles [84]. 
Yongjin et al. developed 3D composites using Co3
O4
 based on GO and 
MoS2
 (GO-MoS2
/Co3
O4
) which exhibited excellent specific capacitance 
of 135.3 F.g–1 at current density of 1 A.g–1 and also showed great cycling 
stability by retaining 87% after 3,000 cycles [85]. Eduardo et al. synthesized 
nanocomposites using GO, MnO2
 nanoparticles and PANI in presence of 
aqueous medium of KMnO4
 as oxidizing agent. The composites showed 
highest capacitances of 150 F.g–1 with 68.2% cyclic stability after 500 
charge-discharge cycles [86]. Wenfeng Qiu and coworkers developed 
a composite electrode with GO and lanthanum ntitanate (La2
Ti2
O7
, LTO) 
fibers. The composite showed a high specific capacitance of 900.6 F/g at 
a current density of 1 A/g in 1 M H2
SO4
 and 10 wt.% aqueous solution of 
sucrose as the electrolyte [87]. 
Shuihua et al. synthesized nanocomposite using Ni2
CoS4
 and GO 
(MH-Ni2
CoS4
/GO) by microwave (MW) heating and hydrothermal method. 
The MH-Ni2
CoS4
/GO electrode exhibited high specific capacitance of 2675.0 
F/g at the current densities of 2 A/g, and showed cyclic stability of 95.0% 
even after 2,000 cycles [88]. Wanwan et al. developed electrode material by 
GO nanosheets and polyacrylonitrile (PAN-GO) and then nanofibers were 
coated on the surface of Ni-plated cotton yarn (NCY) through conjugate 
electrospinning process, followed by chemical deposition of PPy layer and 
the electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 28.34 mF cm–2 with 
high energy density of 3.98 μWh cm–2 and also showed high capacitance 
retention of 90.2% after 1,000 cycles [89]. The recent developments of 
GO-based SCs are mentioned in Table 6.1. 
6.4 CONCLUSION 
Graphene-based materials are extensively being investigated as prom￾ising materials for the development of low-cost and efficient SCs. As the 
capacitance is proportional to the surface area of the electrode materials, 
so chemically and electrochemically inert carbons such as graphene can be 
considered as good candidates for supercapacitor matrices. Scientists and 
researchers have suggested the incorporation of transition metals and metal 
oxides along with graphene and GO to improve the capacitance value of SCs TABLE 6.1 Recent Developments of Graphene Oxide-based Supercapacitors
Composites Specific Capacitance (F/g) Current Density (A/g) Cyclic Stability References 
NiO/GO 461 – – [57] 
GO/Pt/DBSA–PANI 227.2 50.8 – [58] 
CTAB/GO 100.4 1 – [59] 
Ni-Co-MOF/GO 447.2 1 99.6%@300 cycles [60] 
CoAl LDH/GO 1725.7 1 85.56%@5000 cycles [61] 
GO/CQDs – – 98% @1000 cycles [62] 
GO/PANI 405 1 71% @700 cycles [63] 
WPU/PF/GO/Fe/B 340.5 0.5 – [64] 
Co O /MnO @GO 1,718 1 82.23%@5000 cycles [65] 3 4 2 
Fe3O4/GO@melamine-ZnO 0.00049889 – 72%@1000 cycles [66] 
SSQ-GO-TMEMAI-POAP 450 0.5 96%@3000 cycles [67] 
GO-PCHRYS 715.3 0.5 89.8%@10000 cycles [68] 
Cr-GO 354 0.5 94%@5000 cycles [69] 
PANI/GO/PMMA/HAPCP 680.8 0.5 93.5% @3000 cycles [70] 
MnO2/MWCNT/GO 1,380 – – [71] 
PPy/GO – – 94.1%@1000 cycles [72] 
GO/ZCN 843 1 97.7%@5000 cycles [73] 
GPAH/MP/GPAH – – – [74] 
MnV13/GO 387 0.5 – [75] 
HGPC-A 311 – 88.5%@10000 cycles [76] 
GO/ZIF-67/PANI 1,014 1 80%@20000 cycles [77] 
134 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials TABLE 6.1 (Continued) 
Composites Specific Capacitance (F/g) Current Density (A/g) Cyclic Stability References 
PANI/PIL/GO 223 10 – [78] 
fCNT/GO-PGE 83.3 – – [79] 
PIND/PAN/GO 4.9 – – [80] 
Arg/GO 295 1 94%@4000 cycles [81] 
GO/PPy/PANI 372 0.4 91%@2000 cycles [82] 
PANI/GO 510 1 92%@1000 cycles [83] 
GO/mSiO2/PANI 1218.4 0.5 92.5%@1000 cycles [84] 
GO-MoS /Co O 135.3 1 87%@3000 cycles [85] 2 3 4 
GO/MnO2/PANI 150 – 68.2%500 cycles [86] 
GO/LTO 900.6 1 – [87] 
MH-Ni2CoS4/GO 2,615 2 96%@2000 cycles [88] 
PGPG/NCY – – 92%@1000 cycles [89] 
135 Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 136 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
due to additional redox reactions. This chapter highlights brief information 
on the requirement of graphene-based materials in different macrostructural 
complexity such as 0D, 1D, 2D, 3D, etc. The recent trends toward the ratio￾nalizing of the nanostructure and architecture of graphene-based nanocom￾posites to achieve better electrochemical performances in the field of SCs are 
discussed in detail. 
KEYWORDS 
• carbon nanotubes 
• GO-based benzimidazole cross-linked network 
• graphene oxide 
• multi-walled carbon nanotube 
• polyaniline 
• supercapacitors 
REFERENCES 
1. Chen, S., Zhu, J., Wu, X., Han, Q., & Wang, X., (2010). Graphene oxide-MnO2
 nano￾composites for supercapacitors. ACS Nano, 4, 2822–2830. 
2. Xu, J., Wang, K., Zu, S. Z., Han, B. H., & Wei, Z., (2010). Hierarchical nanocomposites 
of polyaniline nanowire arrays on graphene oxide sheets with synergistic effect for 
energy storage. ACS Nano, 4, 5019–5026. 
3. Aboutalebi, S. H., Chidembo, A. T., Salari, M., Konstantinov, K., Wexler, D., Liu, H. 
K., & Dou, S. X., (2011). Comparison of GO, GO/MWCNTs composite and MWCNTs 
as potential electrode materials for supercapacitors. Energy & Environmental Science, 
4, 1855–1865. 
4. Chen, Y., Hu, Z., Chang, Y., Wang, H., Fu, G., Jin, X., & Xie, L., (2011). Layered 
Al-substituted cobalt hydroxides/GO composites for electrode materials of supercapaci￾tors. Chinese Journal of Chemistry, 29, 2257–2262. 
5. Xu, B., Yue, S., Sui, Z., Zhang, X., Hou, S., Cao, G., & Yang, Y., (2011). What is the 
choice for supercapacitors: Graphene or graphene oxide?. Energy & Environmental 
Science, 4, 2826–2830. 
6. Fang, J., Li, M., Li, Q., Zhang, W., Shou, Q., Liu, F., & Cheng, J., (2012). Microwave￾assisted synthesis of CoAl-layered double hydroxide/graphene oxide composite and its 
application in supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta, 85, 248–255. 
7. You, B., Li, N., Zhu, H., Zhu, X., & Yang, J., (2013). Graphene oxide-dispersed pristine 
CNTs support for MnO2
 nanorods as high performance supercapacitor electrodes. 
ChemSusChem, 6, 474–480. Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 137 
8. Cui, Y., Cheng, Q. Y., Wu, H., Wei, Z., & Han, B. H., (2013). Graphene oxide-based 
benzimidazole-crosslinked networks for high-performance supercapacitors. Nanoscale, 
5, 8367–8374. 
9. Gund, G. S., Dubal, D. P., Patil, B. H., Shinde, S. S., & Lokhande, C. D., (2013). 
Enhanced activity of chemically synthesized hybrid graphene oxide/Mn3O4 composite 
for high performance supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta, 92, 205–215. 
10. Zhang, Q., Li, Y., Feng, Y., & Feng, W., (2013). Electropolymerization of graphene 
oxide/polyaniline composite for high-performance supercapacitor. Electrochimica Acta, 
90, 95–100. 
11. Chen, Z., Yu, D., Xiong, W., Liu, P., Liu, Y., & Dai, L., (2014). Graphene-based nanowire 
supercapacitors. Langmuir, 30, 3567–3571. 
12. Yun, Y. S., Cho, S. Y., & Jin, H. J., (2014). Carbon aerogels based on regenerated 
silk proteins and graphene oxide for supercapacitors. Macromolecular Research, 22, 
509–514. 
13. Chen, C., Fu, X., Ma, T., Fan, W., Wang, Z., & Miao, S., (2014). Synthesis and electro￾chemical properties of graphene oxide/nanosulfur/polypyrrole ternary nanocomposite 
hydrogel for supercapacitors. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 131. 
14. DeYoung, A. D., Park, S. W., Dhumal, N. R., Shim, Y., Jung, Y., & Kim, H. J., (2014). 
Graphene oxide supercapacitors: A computer simulation study. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry C, 118, 18472–18480. 
15. Gui, D., Liu, C., Chen, F., & Liu, J., (2014). Preparation of polyaniline/graphene oxide 
nanocomposite for the application of supercapacitor. Applied Surface Science, 307, 
172–177. 
16. Li, Z. F., Zhang, H., Liu, Q., Liu, Y., Stanciu, L., & Xie, J., (2014). Covalently￾grafted polyaniline on graphene oxide sheets for high performance electrochemical 
supercapacitors. Carbon, 71, 257–267. 
17. Liu, Y., Yan, D., Li, Y., Wu, Z., Zhuo, R., Li, S., & Geng, Z., (2014). Manganese dioxide 
nanosheet arrays grown on graphene oxide as an advanced electrode material for 
supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta, 117, 528–533. 
18. Wu, W., Li, Y., Zhao, G., Yang, L., & Pan, D., (2014). Aldehyde–poly (ethylene 
glycol) modified graphene oxide/conducting polymers composite as high-performance 
electrochemical supercapacitors. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2, 18058–18069. 
19. Zhou, H., Han, G., Xiao, Y., Chang, Y., & Zhai, H. J., (2014). Facile preparation of 
polypyrrole/graphene oxide nanocomposites with large areal capacitance using electro￾chemical code position for supercapacitors. Journal of Power Sources, 263, 259–267. 
20. Zhao, Y., Ran, W., He, J., Huang, Y., Liu, Z., Liu, W., & Gao, F., (2015). High-performance 
asymmetric supercapacitors based on multilayer MnO2
/graphene oxide nanoflakes and 
hierarchical porous carbon with enhanced cycling stability. Small, 11, 1310–1319. 
21. Cao, J., Wang, Y., Chen, J., Li, X., Walsh, F. C., Ouyang, J. H., & Zhou, Y., (2015). Three￾dimensional graphene oxide/polypyrrole composite electrodes fabricated by one-step 
electrodeposition for high performance supercapacitors. Journal of Materials Chemistry 
A, 3, 14445–14457. 
22. Wang, B., Qiu, J., Feng, H., & Sakai, E., (2015). Preparation of graphene oxide/poly￾pyrrole/multi-walled carbon nanotube composite and its application in supercapacitors. 
Electrochimica Acta, 151, 230–239. 
23. Chee, W. K., Lim, H. N., Harrison, I., Chong, K. F., Zainal, Z., Ng, C. H., & Huang, 
N. M., (2015). Performance of flexible and binderless polypyrrole/graphene oxide/ 138 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
zinc oxide supercapacitor electrode in a symmetrical two-electrode configuration. 
Electrochimica Acta, 157, 88–94. 
24. Liu, Y., Zhou, J., Zhu, E., Tang, J., Liu, X., & Tang, W., (2015). Facile synthesis of 
bacterial cellulose fibres covalently intercalated with graphene oxide by one-step cross￾linking for robust supercapacitors. Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 3, 1011–1017. 
25. Pal, K., Panwar, V., Bag, S., Manuel, J., Ahn, J. H., & Kim, J. K., (2015). Graphene oxide– 
polyaniline–polypyrrole nanocomposite for a supercapacitor electrode. RSC Advances, 5, 
3005–3010. 
26. Yang, J., Yu, C., Fan, X., Zhao, C., & Qiu, J., (2015). Ultrafast self-assembly of graphene 
oxide-induced monolithic NiCo–carbonate hydroxide nanowire architectures with a 
superior volumetric capacitance for supercapacitors. Advanced Functional Materials, 
25, 2109–2116. 
27. Azman, N. H. N., Lim, H. N., & Sulaiman, Y., (2016). Influence of concentration and 
electrodeposition time on the electrochemical supercapacitor performance of poly (3, 
4-ethylene dioxythiophene)/graphene oxide hybrid material. Journal of Nanomaterials. 
28. Lei, Q., Song, H., Chen, X., Li, M., Li, A., Tang, B., & Zhou, D., (2016). Effects of 
graphene oxide addition on the synthesis and supercapacitor performance of carbon 
aerogel particles. RSC Advances, 6, 40683–40690. 
29. Li, M., Yin, W., Han, X., & Chang, X., (2016). Hierarchical nanocomposites of polyaniline 
scales coated on graphene oxide sheets for enhanced supercapacitors. Journal of Solid 
State Electrochemistry, 20, 1941–1948. 
30. Ma, L., Su, L., Zhang, J., Zhao, D., Qin, C., Jin, Z., & Zhao, K., (2016). A controllable 
morphology GO/PANI/metal hydroxide composite for supercapacitor. Journal of Electro￾analytical Chemistry, 777, 75–84. 
31. Patil, U. M., Nam, M. S., Kang, S., Sohn, J. S., Sim, H. B., Kang, S., & Jun, S. C., 
(2016). Fabrication of ultra-high energy and power asymmetric supercapacitors based 
on hybrid 2D MoS 2/graphene oxide composite electrodes: A binder-free approach. RSC 
Advances, 6, 43261–43271. 
32. Pawar, P. B., Shukla, S., & Saxena, S., (2016). Graphene oxide–polyvinyl alcohol 
nanocomposite based electrode material for supercapacitors. Journal of Power Sources, 
321, 102–105. 
33. Zhang, C., Wang, L., Zhao, Y., Tian, Y., & Liang, J., (2016). Self-assembly synthesis of 
graphene oxide double-shell hollow-spheres decorated with Mn3
O4
 for electrochemical 
supercapacitors. Carbon, 107, 100–108. 
34. Zhou, H., & Han, G., (2016). One-step fabrication of heterogeneous conducting 
polymers-coated graphene oxide/carbon nanotubes composite films for high-performance 
supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta, 192, 448–455. 
35. Zhou, H., Zhai, H. J., & Han, G., (2016). Adjust the electrochemical performances of 
graphene oxide nanosheets-loaded poly (3, 4-ethylene dioxythiophene) composites for 
supercapacitors with ultralong cycle life. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in 
Electronics, 27, 2773–2782. 
36. Zou, Y., Wang, Q., Xiang, C., She, Z., Chu, H., Qiu, S., & Sun, L., (2016). One-pot synthesis 
of ternary polypyrrole-Prussian-blue-graphene-oxide hybrid composite as electrode 
material for high-performance supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta, 188, 126–134. 
37. Asen, P., & Shahrokhian, S., (2017). One step electrodeposition of V2
O5
/polypyrrole/ 
graphene oxide ternary nanocomposite for preparation of a high performance superca￾pacitor. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 42, 21073–21085. Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 139 
38. Oyedotun, K. O., Madito, M. J., Bello, A., Momodu, D. Y., Mirghni, A. A., & Manyala, 
N., (2017). Investigation of graphene oxide nanogel and carbon nanorods as electrode 
for electrochemical supercapacitor. Electrochimica Acta, 245, 268–278. 
39. Tabrizi, A. G., Arsalani, N., Namazi, H., & Ahadzadeh, I., (2017). Vanadium oxide 
assisted synthesis of polyaniline nanoarrays on graphene oxide sheets and its application 
in supercapacitors. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 798, 34–41. 
40. Tanaka, S., Salunkhe, R. R., Kaneti, Y. V., Malgras, V., Alshehri, S. M., Ahamad, T., 
& Hossain, M. S., (2017). A. Prussian blue derived iron oxide nanoparticles wrapped 
in graphene oxide sheets for electrochemical supercapacitors. RSC Advances, 7, 
33994–33999. 
41. Wang, C., Wu, C., Chen, S., Zhao, X., Xu, W., Niu, Z., & Song, L., (2017). Membrane￾assisted assembly strategy of flexible electrodes for multifunctional supercapacitors. 
Carbon, 125, 419–428. 
42. Wei, Y., Ding, R., Zhang, C., Lv, B., Wang, Y., Chen, C., & Li, Y., (2017). Facile 
synthesis of self-assembled ultrathin α-FeOOH nanorod/graphene oxide composites for 
supercapacitors. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 504, 593–602. 
43. Zhang, L., Yao, H., Li, Z., Sun, P., Liu, F., Dong, C., & Zhao, B., (2017). Synthesis 
of delaminated layered double hydroxides and their assembly with graphene oxide for 
supercapacitor application. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 711, 31–41. 
44. Ramos-Fernández, G., Canal-Rodríguez, M., Arenillas, A., Menéndez, J. A., Rodríguez￾Pastor, I., & Martin-Gullon, I., (2018). Determinant influence of the electrical conductivity 
versus surface area on the performance of graphene oxide-doped carbon xerogel superca￾pacitors. Carbon, 126, 456–463. 
45. Islam, D. A., Chakraborty, A., Roy, A., Das, S., & Acharya, H., (2018). Fabrication of 
graphene oxide (GO)-supported sheet-like CuO nanostructures derived from a metal￾organic-framework template for high-performance hybrid supercapacitors. Chemistry 
Select, 11816–11823. 
46. Fu, C., Ma, Q., Liu, H., & Tang, W., (2018). Effects of graphene oxide on the conductivity 
and capacitance of polypyrrole. Int J. Electrochem Sci., 13, 4267–4275. 
47. Coviello, D., & Casella, I. G., (2018). Electrochemical performance of binary Ni-Co 
particles deposited on graphene oxide/polyvinyl alcohol substrate in alkaline medium. 
Electrochimica Acta, 261, 104–112. 
48. Hong, X., Lu, Y., Li, S., Wang, R., & Liu, Y., (2018). Extremely low fractions of graphene 
oxide in carbon foam prepared by a spin-coating method as freestanding supercapacitor 
electrodes. Journal of Materials Science, 53, 16476–16483. 
49. Tabrizi, A. G., Arsalani, N., Mohammadi, A., Ghadimi, L. S., Ahadzadeh, I., & Namazi, 
H., (2018). A new route for the synthesis of polyaniline nanoarrays on graphene oxide 
for high-performance supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta, 265, 379–390. 
50. Wang, N., Han, G., Xiao, Y., Li, Y., Song, H., & Zhang, Y., (2018). Polypyrrole/graphene 
oxide deposited on two metalized surfaces of porous polypropylene films as all-in-one 
flexible supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta, 270, 490–500. 
51. Zhou, Q., Wei, T., Yue, J., Sheng, L., & Fan, Z., (2018). Polyaniline nanofibers confined 
into graphene oxide architecture for high-performance supercapacitors. Electrochimica 
Acta, 291, 234–241. 
52. Xiong, Z., Yun, X., Qiu, L., Sun, Y., Tang, B., He, Z., & Li, D., (2019). A dynamic 
graphene oxide network enables spray printing of colloidal gels for high-performance 
micro-supercapacitors. Advanced Materials, 31, 1804434. 140 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
53. Cheng, Y., Zhang, Y., & Meng, C., (2019). Template fabrication of amorphous Co2
SiO4 
nanobelts/graphene oxide composites with enhanced electrochemical performances for 
hybrid supercapacitors. ACS Applied Energy Materials, 2, 3830–3839. 
54. Ma, Y., Zhao, D., Chen, Y., Huang, J., Zhang, Z., Zhang, X., & Zhang, B., (2019). Anovel 
core-shell polyaniline/graphene oxide/copper nanocomposite for high performance and 
low-cost supercapacitors. Chemical Papers, 73, 119–129. 
55. Hou, Y., Chai, D., Li, B., Pang, H., Ma, H., Wang, X., & Tan, L., (2019). Polyoxometalate￾incorporated metallacalixarene@ graphene composite electrodes for high-performance 
supercapacitors. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 11, 20845–20853. 
56. Li, R., Qin, C., Zhang, X., Lin, Z., Lv, S., & Jiang, X., (2019). Boron/nitrogen co-doped 
carbon synthesized from waterborne polyurethane and graphene oxide composite for 
supercapacitors. RSC Advances, 9, 1679–1689. 
57. Gopiraman, M., Saravanamoorthy, S., Deng, D., Ilangovan, A., Kim, I. S., & Chung, I. 
M., (2019). Facile mechanochemical synthesis of nickel/graphene oxide nanocomposites 
with unique and tunable morphology: Applications in heterogeneous catalysis and 
supercapacitors. Catalysts, 9, 486. 
58. Dywili, N. R., Ntziouni, A., Ikpo, C., Ndipingwi, M., Hlongwa, N. W., Yonkeu, A. 
L., & Iwuoha, E. I., (2019). Graphene oxide decorated nanometal-poly (anilino￾dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid) for application in high performance supercapacitors. 
Micromachines, 10, 115. 
59. Cao, W., Han, M., Qin, L., Jiang, Q., Xu, J., Lu, Z., & Wang, Y., (2019). Synthesis 
of zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 nanocube wrapped by graphene oxide and its 
application for supercapacitors. Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry, 23, 325–334. 
60. Hong, J., Park, S. J., & Kim, S., (2019). Synthesis and electrochemical characterization 
of nanostructured Ni-Co-MOF/graphene oxide composites as capacitor electrodes. 
Electrochimica Acta, 311, 62–71. 
61. Jing, C., Huang, Y., Xia, L., Chen, Y., Wang, X., Liu, X., & Zhang, Y., (2019). Growth of 
cobalt-aluminum layered double hydroxide nanosheets on graphene oxide towards high 
performance supercapacitors: The important role of layer structure. Applied Surface 
Science, 496, 143700. 
62. Liu, J., Ye, J., Pan, F., Wang, X., & Zhu, Y., (2019). Solid-state yet flexible supercapacitors 
made by inkjet-printing hybrid ink of carbon quantum dots/graphene oxide platelets on 
paper. Science China Materials, 62, 545–554. 
63. Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Tian, Y., Ma, L., Wang, C., & Gao, X., (2019). Fabrication and 
characterization of graphene oxide/polyaniline electrode composite for high performance 
supercapacitors. ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology, 8, M103. 
64. Zhang, X., Lin, Z., Qin, C., Guo, X., Ma, Y., & Jiang, X., (2020). One-step carbonization 
production of B/N co-doped carbon from polyurethane/phenolic/GO composite for 
supercapacitors. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, 31, 715–727. 
65. Obodo, R. M., Onah, E. O., Nsude, H. E., Agbogu, A., Nwanya, A. C., Ahmad, I., & 
Ezema, F. I., (2020). Performance evaluation of graphene oxide based Co3
O4
@ GO, 
MnO2
@ GO and Co3
O4
/MnO2
@ GO electrodes for supercapacitors. Electroanalysis, 32, 
2786–2794. 
66. Eivazzadeh-Keihan, R., Taheri-Ledari, R., Khosropour, N., Dalvand, S., Maleki, 
A., Mousavi-Khoshdel, S. M., & Sohrabi, H., (2020). Fe3
O4
/GO@ melamine-ZnO 
nanocomposite: A promising versatile tool for organic catalysis and electrical capacitance. 
Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 587, 124335. Graphene Oxide as an Emerging Solid-Based Nanocomposite 141 
67. Ajdari, F. B., Kowsari, E., Nadri, H. R., Maghsoodi, M., Ehsani, A., Mahmoudi, H., & 
Ramakrishna, S., (2020). Electrochemical performance of silsesquioxane-GO loaded 
with alkoxy substituted ammonium-based ionic liquid and POAP for supercapacitor. 
Electrochimica Acta, 354, 136663. 
68. Zarandi, R. F., Rezaei, B., Ghaziaskar, H. S., & Ensafi, A. A., (2020). Synthesis of 
graphene oxide-polychrysoidine nanocomposite for supercapacitor applications. Journal 
of Energy Storage, 29, 101334. 
69. Ashtiani, A. A., Kowsari, E., Haddadi-Asl, V., Yousefi, M., Naderi, H. R., Chinnappan, 
A., & Ramakrishna, S., (2020). Pseudocapacitive efficiency of covalently Cr-complex 
with L-histidine-methyl ester as a ligand graphene oxide blended with conducting 
polymer (POAP) as electrode material in supercapacitor. Journal of Molecular Liquids, 
315, 113697. 
70. Zhu, J., Zhang, Q., Chen, H., Zhang, R., Liu, L., & Yu, J., (2020). Setaria viridis-inspired 
electrode with polyaniline decorated on porous heteroatom-doped carbon nanofibers for 
flexible supercapacitors. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 12, 43634–43645. 
71. Islam, M. M., Mollah, M. Y. A., Susan, M. A. B. H., & Islam, M. M., (2020). Frontier 
performance of in situ formed α-MnO2
 dispersed over functionalized multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes covalently anchored to a graphene oxide nanosheet framework as 
supercapacitor materials. RSC Advances, 10, 44884–44891. 
72. Wen, J., Ding, Y., Zhong, J., Chen, R., Gao, F., Qiao, Y., & He, H., (2020). Ice-interface 
assisted large-scale preparation of polypyrrole/graphene oxide films for all-solid-state 
supercapacitors. RSC Advances, 10, 41503–41510. 
73. Zhu, L., Hao, C., Wang, X., & Guo, Y., (2020). Fluffy cotton-like GO/Zn–Co–Ni layered 
double hydroxides form from a sacrificed template GO/ZIF-8 for high performance 
asymmetric supercapacitors. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 8, 11618–11629. 
74. Das, P., Shi, X., Fu, Q., & Wu, Z. S., (2020). Substrate-free and shapeless planar micro￾supercapacitors. Advanced Functional Materials, 30, 1908758. 
75. Kumari, S., Maity, S., Vannathan, A. A., Shee, D., Das, P. P., & Mal, S. S., (2020). 
Improved electrochemical performance of graphene oxide supported vanadomanganate 
(IV) nanohybrid electrode material for supercapacitors. Ceramics International, 46, 
3028–3035. 
76. Wang, M., Yang, J., Liu, S., Li, M., Hu, C., & Qiu, J., (2020). Nitrogen-doped hierarchically 
porous carbon nanosheets derived from polymer/graphene oxide hydrogels for high￾performance supercapacitors. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 560, 69–76. 
77. Xu, M., Guo, H., Xue, R., Wang, M., Wu, N., Wang, X., & Yang, W., (2021). Sandwich￾like GO@ Co (OH)2
/PANI derived from MOFs as high-performance electrode for 
supercapacitors. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 863, 157699. 
78. Al-Zohbi, F., Ghamouss, F., Schmaltz, B., Abarbri, M., Zaghrioui, M., & Tran-Van, 
F., (2021). Enhanced storage performance of PANI and PANI/graphene composites 
synthesized in protic ionic liquids. Materials, 14, 4275. 
79. Azizighannad, S., Wang, Z., Siddiqui, Z., Kumar, V., & Mitra, S., (2021). Nano carbon 
doped polyacrylamide gel electrolytes for high performance supercapacitors. Molecules, 
26, 2631. 
80. Elmessiry, K. S., El-Aassar, M. R., Nassr, A. B. A. A., Kenawy, E. R., Moharam, B. 
E., & Ali, N., (2021). Free-standing working electrodes for supercapacitors based on 
composite polymer nanofibers and functionalized with graphene oxide. Journal of 
Electronic Materials, 50, 5599–5611. 142 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials
81. Haghshenas, M., Mazloum-Ardakani, M., Amiri-Zirtol, L., & Sabaghian, F., (2021). 
Arginine-functionalized graphene oxide for green and high-performance symmetric 
supercapacitors. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 46, 30219–30229. 
82. Zhao, Z., Wang, H., Huang, H., Li, L., & Yu, X., (2021). Graphene oxide/polypyrrole/ 
polyaniline composite hydrogel synthesized by vapor-liquid interfacial method for 
supercapacitors. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 
626, 127125. 
83. Konwar, G., Deka, J., Raidongia, K., & Mahanta, D., (2021). Fabrication of polyaniline– 
graphene oxide hybrid nanocomposites by green interfacial polymerization for all-solid￾state supercapacitors and enzymatic glucose sensors. New Journal of Chemistry, 45, 
17909–17917. 
84. Chen, X., Xu, L., & Liu, G., (2021). Graphene oxide-mesoporous silica-polyaniline 
composite with intercalated structures as supercapacitor electrode materials. Russian 
Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 95, 623–629. 
85. Xu, J., Liang, J., Zou, Y., Xu, F., Chen, Q., Xiang, C., & Sun, L., (2021). Layer-by￾layer self-assembled GO-MoS2
Co3
O4
 three-dimensional conducting network for high￾performance supercapacitors. Journal of Energy Storage, 43, 103195. 
86. Zeplin, G., & Neiva, E. G., (2021). One-pot green synthesis of graphene oxide/MnO2
/ 
polyaniline nanocomposites applied in aqueous and neutral supercapacitors and sensors. 
Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 115776. 
87. Lu, M., Cao, Y., Xue, Y., & Qiu, W., (2021). Preparation of graphene Oxide/La2
Ti2
O7 
composites with enhanced electrochemical performances for supercapacitors. ACS 
Omega. 
88. Tang, Z., Tang, S., Li, Q., Wei, Z., & Zhou, T., (2021). Synergistic effect of microwave 
heating and hydrothermal methods on synthesized Ni2
CoS4
/GO for ultrahigh capacity 
supercapacitors. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 582, 312–321. 
89. Zhao, X., Li, W., Li, F., Hou, Y., Lu, T., Pan, Y., & He, J., (2021). Wearable yarn super￾capacitors coated with twisted PPy@ GO nanosheets and PPy@ PAN-GO nanofibres. 
Journal of Materials Science, 56, 18147–18161. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 7 
APPLICATIONS OF RECYCLED 
SOLID SUBSTANCES OF SOLAR 
PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULES AND 
THEIR ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
ANALYSIS 
MANISHA SHEORAN1
, PANCHAM KUMAR2
, SUSHEELA SHARMA1
, 
and PRABHAT RANJAN3 
1
Department of Basic Science, Bhartiya Skill Development University, 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
2
School of Electrical Skills, Bhartiya Skill Development University, 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
3
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Manipal University, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India 
ABSTRACT 
With the increasing population density, energy requirements have heightened 
drastically, and it was fulfilled by renewable energy technology. In this, 
solar photovoltaic technology proved as the main contributing factor. Solar 
photovoltaic installations in India started from late 1993. It further hiked 
exponentially from early 2010 to 2018. Till December 2019, total solar 
installations were reported to 33.730 GW. This chapter pertains to the 
state-wise installations of solar photovoltaic systems in the country. At 
the end life cycle, solar photovoltaic modules will bring damaging effects 
on the ecosystem; however, these effects can be curtailed by persuading 144 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
towards recycling methods. A feasibility analysis is carried out on the 
recycled products so as to bring out their utilization in various aspects. 
The recovery product can be further utilized for applications like making 
window frames of Aluminum parts, using copper wires for new connections, 
making decorative items of silicon panels, also utilizing the solar panels 
for making the buildings, tables, cupboards, and toys working under low 
voltage requirements. The damaged solar panels can be used in making 
monuments and dustbins for public use. The panels can be used for making 
vehicle’s body, and travel bags and also can be utilized for making roads 
after the removal of harmful elements from the used and damaged solar 
panels. Recovery product of recycling is analyzed quantitatively so as to 
know the payback of recycling procedures. Existing recycling methods of 
solar photovoltaic technology are assessed and their environmental impacts 
are studied. Landfilling option is also taken under consideration, but due to 
lower economic value, it cannot be taken forward on a commercial scale. 
The chapter lays emphasis upon the environmental impact of the solar 
photovoltaic technology along with their recycling economic analysis. 
Recycling came out to be less burdensome than landfilling procedure. 
Value can be made from the damaged and decommissioned solar panels. 
Further recycling brought out the environmental benefits in terms of human 
toxicity potential, global warming potential, abiotic resource depletion 
potential, acidification potential, etc. Solar waste disposal, it’s handling, and 
coordination of the economy make recycling a real phenomenon. 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
The accelerated growth of solar photovoltaic installations in India has been 
attributed to Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission launched in 2010 
by the Indian government [1–3]. The main objective of this mission was to 
establish India as a leader in the field of solar energy. Solar installations in 
India started from early 1993. Overconsumption of the fossil fuels lead to 
their exploitation and paved the way for alternative renewable sources of 
energy. Among these, solar energy is considered to be a clean and prominent 
source of energy as its freely available from the Sun. Being free from 
harmful gaseous emissions during the operational phase solar photovoltaic 
technology is considered as an important clean source of energy among the 
other renewable technologies. 
The solar power installations have gone up to 3 MW from 2010 to 26,869 
MW in 2018 in India and are expected to proliferate to 479 GW by 2047 [4]. Applications of Recycled Solid Substances of Solar 145 
Along with this, the waste accumulation in the country will reach 2,00,000 
tons in 2030 and 1.8 million tons by 2050 [5]. Due to their restricted lifespan 
of 25 to 30 years, the amount of waste accumulation has been left unnoticed. 
The amount of solar photovoltaic waste accumulated is directly proportional 
to their installation [6–8]. Due to further negligence, solar photovoltaic waste 
will become a disaster in the approaching times. Solar photovoltaic waste is 
included in the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment directive by the 
European Union. Further, it was given the responsibility to the manufacturers 
to look after the waste so generated from the solar photovoltaic panels [9]. 
State-wise installations of solar photovoltaic technology are shown in 
Figure 7.1. From the figure data, it is analyzed that Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh, and Gujarat are leading states in solar power installations. 
While Meghalaya, Sikkim, Mizoram, Lakshadweep, and Nagaland have 
lesser installations in comparison to other states. With the surplus installations 
in the country, the land requirement is also a major issue that needs emphasis 
as the amount of waste generated at the end life cycle of solar photovoltaic 
panels is to be dumped on land before sending it to any recycling firm [10–12]. 
7.2 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC 
TECHNOLOGY 
Elements like selenium, cadmium, lead, and tellurium present in first and 
second-generation solar photovoltaic modules are categorized as hazardous 
as these affect the aquatic and terrestrial inhabitants as it affects the kidney, 
bones, and lungs due to their higher absorption capacity [13–16]. Cadmium 
and lead pose a danger due to further leaching into soil from decommissioned 
and damaged solar photovoltaic panels. During the manufacturing phase, 
emissions from the firm also affect the health of working people [16, 17]. Safe 
disposal of solar photovoltaic waste is an impeding factor for the environment. 
Analysis of environmental impact provides the viable impulse to the manu￾facturer for completely ensuring the safe disposal of hazardous components 
of solar panels. 
7.3 RECYCLING OF SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS 
Analysis of recycling methods requires the determination of the economic 
feasibility of crystalline silicon, amorphous silicon, copper indium gallium 146 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
FIGURE 7.1 State-wise installations of solar photovoltaic technology (MNRE). 
diselenide, cadmium telluride, and polycrystalline silicon photovoltaic 
panels. The recycling process of thin film photovoltaic panels involves the 
sweltering, acid bath for the recovery of elements like Ga, Se, and In. Glass 
can also be removed by decomposition through high temperature, and acid 
dissolution can also be used for the removal of EVA polymer layer [18–20]. 
Stripping with the help of chemicals is processed in the case of cadmium 
telluride panels for the removal of metals. Further separation of these metals Applications of Recycled Solid Substances of Solar 147 
can be done by precipitation, electrodeposition, and evaporation [21, 22]. 
Due to the maximum installations of crystalline silicon photovoltaic modules 
in India, emphasis is laid on its economic recycling analysis and also on the 
solar panels containing elements of economic benefit like Gallium, Indium, 
Silicon, Cadmium, Tellurium, Aluminum, etc. [23]. Frame made of glass and 
aluminum separated by the physical process is not taken into consideration for 
economic recycling analysis. For the determination of economic feasibility 
of recycling on various generation of the solar cells like a-Si, c-Si, CIGS, 
CdTe, GaAs an analysis is carried out. 
The analysis is carried out on a 1 m2
 area of solar panel [8]. The recovered 
product mass is depicted as: 
m = At ρ Ζ [g/module] (1) r s s s 
where; mr
 is the recovered product mass; A is the area in cm2
; ts
 is the 
thickness in cm; ρs
 is the semiconductor material density in g/cm3
; and Ζs 
is the material recovered in percentage. 
The profit made from selling of the recovered semiconductor is estimated 
by: 
Ps
= mr
vs
 [$/module] (2) 
where; vs
 is the money earned by reselling. 
Other than semiconductor materials, profit can also be earned by recov￾ering the glass: 
m = Atg 
ρ Ζg
 [g/module] (3) g.r g 
where; mg
.
r
 is the recovered product mass; A is the area; tg
 is the thickness 
of glass in cm; ρg
 is the glass density in g/cm3
; Ζg
 is the glass recovered, it is 
taken as 100%. 
Pg
= mg
vg
 [$/module] (4) 
where; Pg is the profit from recycling glass; vg is the money earned by selling 
recovered glass. 
Along with recycling the disposal cost for landfill can be calculated 
depending on the waste generated by a module. 
W = AEw/Np
 [kg/module] (5) 
where; E is the power of each module in per unit area in W/m2
; w is the 
weight of the module in Kg; Np is the nominal power in Watt. 
The overall disposal cost (D) is calculated as: 
D = WT [$/module] (6) 
where; W is the solar module waste mass; T is the tipping fees paid for the 
disposal site. 148 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
The cumulative profit (Pc
) earned by the recycling: 
Pc
 = (Ps
 + Pg
) + D – C [$/module] (7) 
where; C is the recycling cost of the material prevailing in the market. 
The recovered mass from different PV modules like c-Si (279.6 g), a-Si 
(1.17 g), CIGS (5.23 g of Ga and 8.62 g of In), CdTe (8.98 g of Cd and 9.15 g 
of Te) [24]. The recovered product mass from each of the above solar panels 
is 16.64 kg from c-Si, 17.680 kg from CIGS and 16.64 kg from CdTe panels. 
Ps of c-Si panels is 7.54, in CIGS panels 25.85 from Ga and 15.70 from In, in 
CdTe panels 0.23 from Cd and 2.02 from Te. Pg from c-Si, CIGS, CdTe are 
0.06, 0.07, and 0.06, respectively [9]. Weight (kg) of different panels were 
12.32 (c-Si), 11.64 (mc-Si), 13.43 (a-Si), 17.5 (CIGS), 16.72 (CdTe) [25]. Pc 
of c-Si, mc-Si, a-Si, CIGS, CdTe were –23.96, –23.99, 0.73-C, 22.25, and 
–0.24, respectively [9]. The overall disposal cost of c-Si, mc-Si, a-Si, CIGS, 
and CdTe panels came out to be 0.61, 0.58, 0.67, 0.87, 6.45 for each in $ and 
43.31, 41.18, 47.57, 61.77, 457.95 in rupees, respectively. 
From the above, it is concluded that CIGS panels are economically 
feasible for recycling. However, disposal costs for the CdTe panels are the 
highest and they also possess environmental hazards due to the presence 
of Cd. Recycling of a-Si panels isn’t practiced on a commercial level due 
to less recyclable semiconductor material. About 16–17 kg/m2
 of glass can 
be recovered. Environmental friendly recycling needs to be practiced along 
with aiming for economic value. The recycled products so obtained and their 
reuse is depicted in Figure 7.2. 
7.4 CONCLUSION 
With the increasing installations of solar photovoltaic plants in the country 
amount of waste gathered will reach to 2,00,000 million tons in 2030 and 
1.8 million tons by 2050. Negligence towards solar photovoltaic waste 
will be the main culprit for adverse effects on the environment. Value can 
be generated from solar photovoltaic waste by their recycling at the end 
of life. Recycling techniques need to be practiced at a commercial scale 
so as to recover valuable materials as it will boon the employment sector 
by establishing a recycling industry, and a further new industry will be set 
up to utilize recycled materials. The construction industry can utilize the 
recovered aluminum in making doors, window panes, and floor tiles. The 
automotive industry can utilize Al, Cu, glass, etc. The packaging industry 
can also utilize recycled solar panel parts. Interior design can be furnished by Applications of Recycled Solid Substances of Solar 149 
FIGURE 7.2 Solar PV recycled materials and their application. 
recycled products. Recycling of the CIGS solar panels is most economical 
due to the presence of the CdS buffer layer; however, CdTe panel recycling 
is not economically beneficial, but it’s a must for the reduction of toxicity 150 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
occurring due to disposal of CdTe panels in the environment. Crystalline 
silicon panels, though they contain fewer amounts of valuable materials 
other than silver, are non-toxic to the environment. Recycling should be 
taken ahead with focusing on both environmental and economic benefits to 
attain sustainability in terms of development. 
KEYWORDS 
• amorphous silicon 
• crystalline silicon 
• environmental impact 
• solar panel 
• solar photovoltaic 
• solar PV module recycling 
REFERENCES 
1. Manju, S., & Sagar, N., (2017). Progressing towards the development of sustainable 
energy: A critical review on the current status, applications, developmental barriers and 
prospects of solar photovoltaic systems in India. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 70, 298–313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.226. 
2. Sahoo, S. K., (2016). Renewable and sustainable energy reviews solar photovoltaic 
energy progress in India: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 59, 
927–939. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.01.049. 
3. Sharma, A., (2011). A comprehensive study of solar power in India and world. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15(4), 1767–1776. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2010. 
12.017. 
4. Arora, N., Bhattacharjya, S., Bakshi, S. K., Anand, M., Dasgupta, D., Gupta, A., Prasad, 
N. S., et al., (2018). Greening the Solar PV Value Chain. www.resourceefficiencyindia. 
com (accessed on 19 September 2022). 
5. Suresh, S., Singhvi, S., & Rustagi, V., (2019). Managing India’s PV Module Waste 
[Analytical]. Bridge To India. 
6. Blanco, C. F., Cucurachi, S., Peijnenburg, W. J. G. M., Beames, A., & Vijver, M. G., 
(2019). Are technological developments improving the environmental sustainability of 
photovoltaic electricity? Energy Technology, ente.201901064. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ente.201901064. 
7. Chowdhury, Md. S., Rahman, K. S., Chowdhury, T., Nuthammachot, N., Techato, K., 
Akhtaruzzaman, Md., Tiong, S. K., Sopian, K., & Amin, N., (2020). An overview of Applications of Recycled Solid Substances of Solar 151 
solar photovoltaic panels’ end-of-life material recycling. Energy Strategy Reviews, 27, 
100431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2019.100431. 
8. Deng, R., Chang, N. L., Ouyang, Z., & Chong, C. M., (2019). A techno-economic 
review of silicon photovoltaic module recycling. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 109, 532–550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.04.020. 
9. McDonald, N. C., & Pearce, J. M., (2010). Producer responsibility and recycling solar 
photovoltaic modules. Energy Policy, 38(11), 7041–7047. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enpol.2010.07.023. 
10. Held, M., & Ilg, R., (2011). Update of environmental indicators and energy payback time 
of CdTe PV systems in Europe. Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 
19(5), 614–626. https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.1068. 
11. Pagnanelli, F., Moscardini, E., Granata, G., Abo, A. T., Altimari, P., Havlik, T., & 
Toro, L., (2017). Physical and chemical treatment of end of life panels: An integrated 
automatic approach viable for different photovoltaic technologies. Waste Management, 
59, 422–431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2016.11.011. 
12. Sica, D., Malandrino, O., Supino, S., Testa, M., & Lucchetti, M. C., (2018). Management 
of end-of-life photovoltaic panels as a step towards a circular economy. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 82, 2934–2945. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.10.039. 
13. Faircloth, C. C., Wagner, K. H., Woodward, K. E., Rakkwamsuk, P., & Gheewala, S. H., 
(2019). The environmental and economic impacts of photovoltaic waste management 
in Thailand. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 143, 260–272. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.01.008. 
14. Fthenakis, V. M., Kim, H. C., & Alsema, E., (2008). Emissions from photovoltaic life 
cycles. Environmental Science & Technology, 42(6), 2168–2174. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
es071763q. 
15. Goe, M., & Gaustad, G., (2016). Estimating Direct Human Health Impacts of End- of 
-life Solar Recovery. Golisano Institute for Sustainability. 
16. Prakash, A., & Rayabagi, S., (2015). Challenges in manufacturing and end-of-life 
recycling or disposal of solar PV panels. IOSR-JEEE, 10(4), 7. 
17. Contreras-Lisperguer, R., Muñoz-Cerón, E., Aguilera, J., & Casa De, J. La., (2017). 
Cradle-to-cradle approach in the life cycle of silicon solar photovoltaic panels. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 168, 51–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.206. 
18. Granata, G., Pagnanelli, F., Moscardini, E., Havlik, T., & Toro, L., (2014). Recycling 
of photovoltaic panels by physical operations. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 
123, 239–248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2014.01.012. 
19. Klugmann-Radziemska, E., (2012). Current trends in recycling of photovoltaic solar 
cells and modules waste/recykling zużytych ogniw i modułów fotowoltaicznych—
stan obecny. Chemistry-Didactics-Ecology-Metrology, 17(1, 2), 89–95. https://doi. 
org/10.2478/cdem-2013-0008. 
20. Mahmoudi, S., Huda, N., Alavi, Z., Islam, M. T., & Behnia, M., (2019). End-of￾life photovoltaic modules: A systematic quantitative literature review. Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling, 146, 1–16.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.03.018. 
21. Marwede, M., Berger, W., Schlummer, M., Mäurer, A., & Reller, A., (2013). Recycling 
paths for thin-film chalcogenide photovoltaic waste – Current feasible processes. 
Renewable Energy, 55, 220–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2012.12.038. 
22. Paiano, A., (2015). Photovoltaic waste assessment in Italy. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 41, 99–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.208. 152 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials
23. Kim, H., Cha, K., Fthenakis, V. M., Sinha, P., & Hur, T., (2014). Life cycle assessment of 
cadmium telluride photovoltaic (CdTe PV) systems. Solar Energy, 103, 78–88. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.02.008. 
24. Fthenakis, V. M., (2003). CdTe PV: Facts and Handy Comparisons. Brookhaven National 
Laboratory. 
25. Xsunx, (2009). Preliminary Specification Sheet CIGS Thin Film Solar Modules. Available 
at: http://www.xsunx.com/pdf/CIGS Brochure-draft.pdf (accessed on 19 September 2022). 
26. Physical Progress (Achievements). Ministry of New & Renewable Energy. https://mnre. 
gov.in/physical-progress-achievements (accessed on 19 September 2022). Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8 
CORE-SHELL STRUCTURE, 
SUPER PARA MAGNETISM, AND 
FUNCTIONALIZATION OF MAGNETIC 
SOLID NANOPARTICLES AND THEIR 
APPLICATION IN TREATMENT OF 
WASTEWATER 
ADITI SINGH1
, RAJPREET KAUR1,2, ANITA GUPTA1
, 
CHRISTINE JEYASEELAN1
, and POONAM KHULLAR2 
1
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, 
India 
2
Department of Chemistry, B.B.K. D.A.V. College for Women, 
Amritsar, Punjab, India 
ABSTRACT 
Nanoparticles, with their sub-microscopic size, have unique magnetic 
properties which enable their application in a wide area, including engineering, 
medicine, and environmental remediation. The core-shell structure of iron 
oxide (IO) magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) and their superparamagnetic 
behavior is a platform for their implementation in vivo and in vitro 
applications. Control over the shape and size of IO MNPs has proved their 
importance in various fields. Application in wastewater treatment, removal 
of organic contaminants from water, and how surface functionalization of 
MNPs provides them stabilization have been briefly discussed. 154 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Nanoscience captures an important area of modern science’s research with its 
reach at the cellular and molecular level leading to its advancement in medical 
and life sciences. Materials made out of nanoparticles have been providing 
merits because of their uniqueness in size and their physiochemical properties 
[1]. Among these various sorts of nanomaterials, magnetic nanoparticles 
(MNPs) have always caught the eyes of scientists, as exhibited by an unusual 
increase in papers of research that focuses on these kinds of materials [2]. A 
magnetic field is used to manipulate this class of nanomaterials. A magnetic 
material such as cobalt, iron, and nickel with a chemical entity having such 
functionality together form such particles. Magnetic nanobeads are clusters 
of MNPs 50–200 nm in diameter comprising individual MNPs. 
NPs can be synthesized using two methods: The first method is the ‘top￾down’ method, in which large materials are broken down for the generation 
of NPs. This method of synthesis is normally used for ceramic materials 
where shape and size are not essential elements for their application as the 
particles obtained through this synthesis have assorted shapes, and there is 
a wide distribution of particle size. The other method of synthesis is called 
the ‘bottom-up’ method. Larger NPs are formed by the fusion of atoms and 
molecules. Using this method NPs can be obtained that have fewer defects in 
them with more homogeneous chemical composition and uniformity in the 
distribution of shape and size [3]. 
MNPs possess both the features of nanoparticles (NPs) and the properties 
of a magnet. Metal alloy NPs, metal oxide NPs, and metal NPs are the main 
class of MNPs. FePt, FeCo, etc., come under metal alloy NPs and Iron 
oxides (γ-Fe O and Fe O ), and Ferrites (CoFe O and MnO.6ZnO.4Fe O ) 2 3 3 4 2 4 2 4 
are included mainly under Metal oxide NPs. The shape and particle size of 
Fe2
O3
 and Fe3
O4
 are easily controllable and can be prepared manually and 
also these are the MNPs that are used extensively. For the preparation of 
a diverse number of Ferrite NPs (MnO.6ZnO.4Fe O , Mn Zn Fe O , etc.), 2 4 3 7 2 4 
some of the metallic elements such as Zinc (Zn) and Manganese (Mn) can be 
added to nanosized structures of iron oxide (IO). 
MNPs with their behavior being non-poisonous and non-immunogenic can 
show surface effects with great specific surface area and prove to be a good 
carrier for drugs, fragments of DNA, and modified compounds. MNPs also 
prove to be biocompatible and some of them possess superparamagnetism 
[4]. Various methods and techniques for the advancement in the production 
of controlled size and monodispersed MNPs (e.g., Fe3
O4
, FePt, and γ-Fe2
O3
) 
have to lead to an increase in MNP’s application in various fields [5]. Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 155 
NPs of IO with superparamagnetic property can be used for various in 
vivo applications such as drug delivery, tissue repairment, cell separation, 
etc. In such applications, the value of magnetism for NPs should be high, 
particle size less than 100 nm, and distribution of the size of the particle 
should be narrow. Also, for such applications, MNPs have to coat the surface 
peculiarly; being biocompatible and non-toxic, and localization of particles 
must be such that it allows a targeted delivery [6]. Particle structure, the 
functionality of the surface, and the resultant magnetic properties are needed 
to be understood for all those applications to measure and understand by 
implicating the properties on the challenges being faced. 
There has been a lack of brief review of characterization methods and 
simplified demonstration of various fields in support of MNPs which focus 
on characterization, synthesis, and MNPs application [7]. 
In this book chapter, we discuss the core-shell structure of MNPs, 
magnetic properties and the structure of IO NPs, their superparamagnetic 
behavior, their functionalization, their removal from organic contaminants, 
and their application in wastewater treatment. 
8.2 CORE-SHELL STRUCTURE OF MNPs 
The structure of the core-shell of MNPs plays an important role for its 
characteristic properties of magnetism, bio-recognition, and biocatalytic 
features with its core part being made of inorganic magnetic material and 
composition of the shell of biological or biomolecular species which are 
being chemically bound to the core with organic linkers [8]. The magnetic 
structure of a single domain is usually acquired by MNPs. Regarding 
the study of magnetic properties that are size-dependent and without 
the involvement of complex domain wall movement; MNPs have been 
providing great opportunities to understand magnetic properties at the 
atomic level. Understanding fundamentally the magnetic properties of NPs 
can have a great impact on modern technology and certainly, interpretation 
of some fundamental issues, such as quantum tunneling of magnetization 
could be done by the study of MNPs. They have potential towards modern 
science, such as applications as a drug carrier for delivery of site-specific 
drugs [9]. Study on the architecture of core-shell has been done extensively 
for various nanomaterials. Besides varying shape, size, and composition, 
this methodology turns into a predominant technique by enabling us to 
freely address entering technical demands on properties of magnetism like 
magnetization, thermal stability, and coercivity. Understanding magnetic 156 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
interactions and achieving the desirable characteristics of magnetism would 
be certainly easy on exploring different combinations of core-shell [10]. 
Categorizing spinels based on the distribution of cation, they are normal, 
inverse, or partially inverse. In a normal spinel structure, the tetrahedral sites 
are occupied by 8 bivalent cations and the octahedral sites are occupied by 
16 trivalent cations, whereas, in an inverse spinel structure, 8 octahedral sites 
are occupied by 8 bivalent cations, and distribution of 16 trivalent cations is 
among 8 octahedral and 8 tetrahedral sites. i=0, for a normal spinel, and i=0, 
for an inverted spinel. It is said to be partially inverted if both the octahedral 
and tetrahedral sites are occupied by the divalent cations and 0 < i < 1 [11]. 
In the spinel structure of ferrites, 24 cations (Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, 
Mg2+, Gd3+, Fe3+) and 32 anions of O2– form a unit cell in which the cations 
can acquire positions in 96 possible ways (32 octahedral and 64 tetrahedral 
positions) [12]. Nanoferrites, the chemical formula being MFe2
O4
 (M = Zn, 
Mn, Co, Ni, etc.), have shown noteworthy properties converse to its bulk 
behavior. Magnetite (Fe3
O4
) NPs being chemically inert towards oxidation 
and in-built magnetic properties have been descended by Ferrite systems 
of Cobalt Ferrite (CoFe2
O4
; CFO) and Manganese Ferrite (MnFe2
O4
) [13]. 
NiFeO4
 and CoFe2
O4
 have inverse spinel structure with Nickel Ferrite 
being soft having high electrical resistance used in applications related to 
high frequency and the surface properties influence their NPs and thus their 
fabrication becomes important for their catalytic applications. For controlling 
the shape and size surfactants, organic solvents, organic molecules, and 
organometallic compounds are used and also for the synthesis of metal ferrite 
NPs. The representation for spinel structures for Nickel and Cobalt Ferrite is 
(Fe3+)[Ni2+Fe3+]O4
 and Fe3+)[Co2+Fe3+]O4
, respectively [14]. 
Strong magnetism is possessed by some of the elements such as Fe, Co, 
Ni, etc., and a few of them show poor magnetism, e.g., Mg, Mo, and Li. 
8.3 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURE OF IRON OXIDE 
(IO) NANOPARTICLES 
Among the eight IOs being known, magnetite, hematite, and maghemite are 
the most favorable ones due to their uniqueness in catalytic, biochemical, 
magnetic, and other properties that are appropriate for biological and technical 
applications [15]. 
Materials possess five types of magnetism categorized as: paramagnetism, 
diamagnetism, ferrimagnetism, ferromagnetism, and anti-ferromagnetism. A Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 157 
property of a substance in which it tends to oppose an applied magnetic 
field is referred to as diamagnetism in which the magnetic susceptibility is 
negative, small (10–6), and temperature independent. Also, such materials 
have no such electrons that are unpaired, and the direction of spins of the 
paired electrons is opposite, which offsets the magnetic moment. Whereas, 
paramagnetic substances have electrons that are unpaired with spins having 
random directions of magnetic moments. On application of magnetic field, 
the alignment of the spin is in the direction of the applied magnetic field with 
a value of magnetic susceptibility small (0–0.01) and positive. Curie-Weis 
law describes its behavior and variation with temperature. Ferromagnetic 
materials have similar behavior as paramagnetic substances having unpaired 
electrons and their alignment in the direction of the applied magnetic field. 
The difference lies in the magnetic moment of ferromagnetic substances, 
which remain in the lower-energy state and parallel to each other and this 
state remains even after the removal of the applied magnetic field. The 
characteristics of a ferrimagnetic magnet are that it is capable of keeping 
magnetic moment in lack of magnetic field and the direction of spin of 
neighboring electron pairs are opposite. The net magnetic moment in an 
antiferromagnet is zero, which is due to the neighbor valence electrons 
having an intrinsic magnetic moment in the opposite direction [11]. 
In 3D orbitals of iron, four electrons are unpaired providing a strong 
magnetic moment to it. Various magnetic states can arise from the forma￾tion of crystals from iron atoms. In the paramagnetic state, the net magnetic 
moment possessed by the crystal is zero with the random alignment of the 
individual magnetic moments concerning each other. A small net magnetic 
moment is achieved by the crystal when being subjected to an external 
magnetic moment resulting in the alignment of some of these moments. 
There is no need for an external magnetic field in the case of ferromagnetic 
crystals as all the individual moments are aligned even without it [10]. 
Superparamagnetism is exhibited by NPs comprising ferromagnetic mate￾rials size being less than 10–20 nm and these kinds of materials include 
elemental metals, oxides, alloys, and other chemical compounds [9]. In a 
ferrimagnetic crystal, the arrangement of moments is antiparallel with net 
magnetic moment from two different atoms. The crystal is referred to as an 
antiferromagnetic when the magnitude of the antiparallel magnetic moments 
is the same and they possess no net magnetic moment. 
Paramagnetism is exhibited by hematite above Curie temperature of 
956 K. It possesses weak ferrimagnetism at room temperature and goes 
through a phase transition at 260 K (the Morrin temperature) to a state of 158 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
antiferromagnetism. Size of particles, crystallinity, and extent of cation 
substitution are the factors of the dependence of the behavior of magnetism 
in hematite. With the decrease in the size of the particle of hematite, there 
is also a decrease in Morrin temperature. Curie temperature and Morrin 
temperature tend to be lowered by factors such as cation substitution and 
poor crystallinity at all temperatures. 
Ferrimagnetism is possessed by bulk magnetite and maghemite. Magne￾tite possesses ferrimagnetism at room temperature with a Curie temperature 
of 850 K. Superparamagnetic behavior is seen in particle size less than 6 
nm in particles of magnetite at room temperature. However, the synthesis 
methods determine the properties of magnetism possessed by the particles. 
Maghemite possesses ferrimagnetism at room temperature but is unstable at 
higher temperatures and its magnetic susceptibility is lost with time. When 
doped with ions of other metals stabilization can be achieved. The particle 
size of maghemite less than 10 nm exhibits superparamagnetism at room 
temperature [10]. 
In the crystal structure, tetrahedral and octahedral sites are occupied 
by closely packed planes of iron cations and oxygen anions. In hematite, 
Fe (III) ions occupy the octahedral sites with oxygen ions in a hexagonal 
close-packed arrangement. In magnetite and maghemite, the arrangement of 
oxygen ions is cubic close-packed. The structure of magnetite is an inverse 
spinel with face-centered cubic (Fcc) unit cell and Fe (II) ions occupying 
the octahedral sites, and Fe (III), the tetrahedral and octahedral sites being 
randomly distributed. Fe3+(A)[Fe2+Fe3+](B)O4
 is the formula deduced from 
the arrangement. In this, Fe3+ occupies the tetrahedral site denoted by 
A with four O atoms surrounding it, a mixture of Fe2+/Fe3+ occupies the 
octahedral site being denoted as B with 6 O atoms surrounding it [10, 11]. 
The occupancy of iron ions in the tetrahedral and octahedral sites of the 
spinel structure of magnetite (Fe3
O4
) affects its magnetic properties. In the 
octahedral sites, the magnetic spins of the ions are ferromagnetically coupled 
and tetrahedral sites are antiferromagnetically coupled. Due to the same 
number of Fe3+ ions in octahedral and tetrahedral sites, the magnetic spins 
cancel each other. Therefore, contribution towards net magnetic moment is 
only by the magnetic spins of Fe2+ ions in the octahedral sites. Replacement 
of Fe2+ ions with other divalent transition metal ions, Co2+, Mn2+, Zn2+, and 
Ni2+, is one of the ways to control the magnetic properties of NPs with spinel 
structure (Figure 8.1(a)). Except for Zn2+ in which the net magnetic moments 
are proportional to the magnetic spins. Among the divalent ions, Mn2+ ions 
exhibit the strongest magnetic moment which has five unpaired electrons in 
its d-orbital. Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 159 
ZnFe2
O4
 has a normal spinel structure in which Zn2+ and Fe2+ ions 
occupy the tetrahedral and octahedral sites, respectively. Due to the 
nonmagnetic property of Zn2+ ions and antiferromagnetic coupling 
between Fe3+ ions, ZnFe2
O4
 is not suited to be used as an MRI contrast 
agent. However, the net magnetization increases due to the partial substi￾tution of Fe2+ and Zn2+ ions as the magnetic spins of Fe3+ are not perfectly 
canceled (Figure 8.1(b)) [16]. 
FIGURE 8.1 (a) Schematic representation of the spin alignments of magnetic ions in 
various ferrite structures. MnFe2
O4
 has the highest magnetization with a magnetic spin 
magnitude of 5 μB. Therefore, MnFe2
O4
 nanoparticles exhibit the strongest T2
 contrast 
effect. (b) Schematic representation of the spin alignments of magnetic ions in Zn-doped 
ferrite structures. Zn doping increases the number of noncancelled Fe3+ ions progressively, 
resulting in higher magnetization. The T2
 contrast effect is enhanced up to the Zn doping 
level of x = 0.4. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [16]; ©2015, American Chemical Society. 
Maghemite has a similar spinel structure to magnetite but the cation 
sublattice has some vacancies in it. All or most of the Fe atoms in maghemite 
are in Fe (III) state. There is regularity in Fe (III) ions arrangement with 
occupancy in two-thirds of the sites but one vacant site is being followed 
with two filled sites. It was found by Haneda and Morry that the degree of 
vacancy ordering decreases with decreasing particle size, with no vacancy 
ordering in maghemite smaller than about 20 nm [10, 11]. 160 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
8.4 SUPERPARAMAGNETIC MNPS 
Small ferrimagnetic or ferromagnetic NPs exhibit a kind of magnetism known 
as superparamagnetism in which a random flip of the direction of magnetiza￾tion is possessed under the temperature influence. With the decrease in NPs 
size below a critical value (around 20–30 nm), the behavior of separate NPs 
is as such a single magnetic domain, and the behavior of superparamag￾netism is exhibited. They tend to respond rapidly to the magnetic field being 
applied but negligible coercivity and residual magnetism are exhibited by 
them [17]. There is an increase in the ratio of surface-to-volume and also 
the number of atoms on the surface increases than present in the bulk [18]. 
IO NPs possess superparamagnetism due to a reduction in the size of NPs 
than in the bulk state. On applying an external magnetic field, there is an 
alignment of magnetic moment in the direction of the field applied, and on 
its removal; the magnetic moment immediately becomes zero confirming the 
property of superparamagnetism in IO NPs. No coercivity is exhibited by 
superparamagnetic particles therefore there is no observation of hysteresis in 
the magnetization curve. The temperature below which the stable magnetiza￾tion is observed is known as blocking temperature which is used to outline 
the starting behavior of superparamagnetism [17]. 
Hematite (α-Fe O ), maghemite (β-Fe O ), and magnetite (Fe O ) with 2 3 2 3 3 4 
different critical properties, like molecular size, and various magnetic speci￾fications are the oxides of iron that shape the core of superparamagnetic iron 
oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) [19]. Modifications of the active surface of 
SPIONs lead to an increase in their colloidal stability in aqueous media. 
These modifications may involve their coating with a biocompatible, hydro￾philic polymer or capping SPIONs with organic acids. Figure 8.2 illustrates 
the conjugation of coated SPIONs with various biomolecules [20]. 
Ferrimagnetism is exhibited by magnetite in its natural form possessing 
the strongest properties of magnetism of all oxides of transition metals. 
After subjection of a ferrimagnetic material to an external magnetic field, 
its magnetization tends to remain up to some level even after the removal 
of the field. This is due to the alignment of magnetic moments even if 
the magnetic field is absent. Therefore, a hysteresis loop is shown by its 
magnetization moment in the function of an external magnetic field. SPIONs 
show their properties of magnetism when being subjected to an external 
magnetic field, but in the case of magnetite, it preserves the properties even 
in the absence of a magnetic field. Therefore, to be superparamagnetic the 
diameter of the crystals of Fe3
O4
 should be 20 nm or less [19]. Unique Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 161 
size-dependent magnetic properties are exhibited by Fe3
O4
 as shown in 
Figure 8.3. Bulk Fe3
O4
 is ferrimagnetic with a multidomain structure and 
Curie temperature of 858 K. With the decrease in particle size below ~100 
nm, Fe3
O4
 particles become a single domain structure with maximization 
in coercivity. When the size of the particles decreases below ~20 nm, the 
magnetization of Fe3
O4
 NPs is randomized by thermal energy so that they 
become superparamagnetic [21]. 
FIGURE 8.2 Schematic of SPION structure for therapeutic applications. SPIONs core 
(magnetite, maghemite, hematite) can be coated with various synthetic polymers (such as 
PEG, PVP, dextran, chitosan, and polysaccharide). They can be used as chemotherapeutic, 
immunotherapeutic, and radiotherapeutic agents and be conjugated with tumor-specific 
monoclonal antibodies/siRNA/miRNA in targeted drug delivery. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [20]; ©2020, American Chemical Society. 
Likewise, Fe3+ is present in both hematite and maghemite possessing 
different properties in the bulk form and after the formation of tiny crystals 
show superparamagnetism [19]. 
8.5 FUNCTIONALIZED MNPS 
The ideality of superparamagnetic NPs in biomedicine prepared via organic 
synthesis is because of monodispersity in shape, size, and composition. The 
stabilization acquired by these superparamagnetic NPs is by surfactants and 
their hydrophobic nature. Surface functionalization is required to make the 
NPs hydrophilic which is done via the addition of surfactant or exchange 
of surfactants. An amphiphilic molecule comprises of both hydrophobic 162 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
component that forms a double-layered structure with the initial chain of 
hydrocarbon and hydrophilic segment which is in the outer periphery of 
NPs making them water-soluble, and this process of adsorption results in 
the addition of surfactants [19, 22]. In surfactant exchange, a bifunctional 
surfactant directly replaces the initial surfactant [22]. To modify the surface 
of superparamagnetic particles of FeCo having a high magnetic moment, 
a modification in the coating of phospholipid micelle with PEG has been 
recently developed by Dai’s group [23]. In the same way for the transfer of 
hydrophobic NPs to aqueous systems from the organic solvents, different 
amphiphilic polymers, like poly(styrene)-block-poly(acrylic acid) (PS-PAA), 
polyethylene glycol-2-tetradecyl ether, and tetradecylphosphonate are used. 
FIGURE 8.3 Surfactant-based size dependent properties of iron oxide nanoparticles. 
Source: Inset TEM images and magnetization curves of magnetic nanoparticles were reprinted 
with permission from Ref. [21]; ©2015, American Chemical Society. 
To steer clear of agglomeration organic materials are often chosen to 
passivate the IO NPs surface during or after the preparation procedure. Also, 
the surface being hydrophobic with a wide ratio of surface-area-to-volume, 
cause the reason for their agglomeration if not properly coated and also 
the hydrophobic interaction between the NPs. IO NPs coated with organic Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 163 
materials provide higher potentials to be applied in many fields. The structure 
of this type of magnetic IO NPs includes two main parts: magnetic IOs with 
preserved magnetic properties and organic materials whose properties are 
also preserved. Also, these types of functionalized NPs not only provide the 
basic characteristics of magnetism but also hold good biodegradability and 
biocompatibility of the functional organic compounds. 
For functionalization based upon small molecules and surfactants, 
it can be simply categorized based on characteristics of the surface into 
three kinds: water-soluble, oil-soluble, and amphiphilic. Oil-soluble ones 
are the ones having weak attraction towards the solvent domain and are 
mostly hydrophobic groups such as alkylphenol, fatty acids, etc. This type 
of functionalization work upon preventing or decreasing agglomeration of 
NPs and monodispersity arises due to an increase in their stability and are 
relatively easily preparable and controllable. Whereas water-soluble ones 
are those having strong attraction among the chemical compounds in the 
solvent domain and are mostly hydrophilic groups like polyol, ammonium 
salt, lycine, etc. These can be broadly used in biodetection and bioseparation. 
Those comprising both hydrophobic and hydrophilic chemical compounds 
are referred to as amphiphilic [24]. 
8.6 APPLICATIONS IN WASTEWATER TREATMENT 
Due to lower cost and higher efficiencies, technology-based upon nanoma￾terials has proven to be one of the favorable techniques for the treatment of 
wastewater and also to meet the rising stringent water quality standards [15]. 
Recently, several methods have shown their efficiency towards the removal 
of heavy metals from water, such as chemical precipitation, photocatalytic 
oxidation, membrane filtration, adsorption, ion exchange, and electro￾chemical techniques. Adsorption has emerged as a crucial technique for the 
removal of heavy metal from wastewater, leading to high-standard treatment 
of effluents due to its flexible operation and design. Also, regeneration of 
adsorbents is possible by satisfactory processes of desorption that are highly 
efficient, easily operational, and the cost of maintenance being low [25, 
26]. Wastewater persists in contaminants that include organic and inorganic 
compounds, heavy metals, including pollutants of complex compounds. The 
release of these contaminants in the environment harms humans and our 
ecological surroundings. Therefore, it is a must to remove these contami￾nants to tackle the problems related to water pollution [26]. 164 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Selection of materials that are harmless with hydrophilic coating on them 
should be done carefully so that they can bind or react to substances that are 
toxic in wastewater. Magnetic nanomaterials have been used for the removal 
of various pollutants from wastewater through catalysis and adsorption 
methods. For the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions, nano￾sized metal oxides (NMOs) are potent towards their removal which include 
nanosized magnesium oxides, ferric oxides, titanium oxides, aluminum 
oxides, and cerium oxides are categorized as emerging ones. NMOs show 
very favoring sorption to heavy metals in respect of selectivity and high 
capacity, as suggested in recent research. From these studies, when size is 
reduced to nanometer from micrometer, stability decreases due to increased 
surface area and due to interaction, such as Vanderwaal forces, they become 
prone to agglomeration. 
Leaving behind earlier NMOs, the easy separation of magnetic NMOs 
from aqueous systems under a magnetic field has grabbed attraction. NMOs 
that have been studied widely for the adsorption process include manga￾nese oxides, IOs, titanium oxides, and aluminum oxides [27]. Iron oxide 
magnetic nanoparticles (IOMNPs) with their strong capacity of adsorption, 
high reactivity, high surface area-volume ratio, and also an additional 
magnetic property serve as a simple and less costly process of separation 
for their extraction from aqueous systems because they tend to aggregate 
on applying an external magnetic field. With superparamagnetic behavior 
of NPs redispersion can be easily done as removal of the magnetic field 
leads to loss of magnetic field. Superparamagnetic behavior is exhibited 
by magnetite and maghemite being small in size and they can function as 
nanoadsorbents or as the core element of structures of core-shell where the 
NPs act as magnetic separation and for the adsorption of pollutants, desired 
functionality is provided by the core-shell [15]. Treatment of water using 
SPIONs relies on surface functional groups, side effects, and also on applying 
external magnetic field easy removal from water is possible. SPIONs have 
also been potent towards metal ions removal from water by surface modi￾fication with chelating ligands to heavy metal ions and further removed by 
an external magnetic field. The capacity of adsorption can be enhanced by 
decreasing the diameter of the particle and specific surface modification 
[28]. Through surface modification, functional groups on the surfaces of NPs 
can be altered providing specific functionalization for selective uptake of 
ions and enhancing their capability for uptake of heavy metals in treatment 
of wastewater treatment in addition to the improvements in their stability 
against agglomeration. Various coating materials such as organic, inorganic Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 165 
molecules, polymeric, and nonpolymeric materials are used for coating NPs 
based on Van der Waal’s interaction, covalent attachment, and electrostatic 
interactions for their stabilization and also to prevent oxidation [2, 26]. 
8.7 MNPS FOR REMOVAL OF ORGANIC CONTAMINANTS 
Numbers of dyes and dye-related stuff have been causing significant concern 
due to its harmful effects on humans by polluting the aqueous systems [29]. 
For this purpose, MNPs are chosen as with the help of magnetic separa￾tion their recollection from water proves to be easy. Dyes are mostly stable 
towards biodegradation, photodegradation, and oxidizing agents. Therefore, 
for removal, the process of adsorption is efficient and the method costs less 
[30]. Although, adsorption has problems related to the disposal of adsor￾bents, it is simply an effective method without the concern of generation 
of unwanted by-products, and a good percentage of dye can be removed. 
Figure 8.4 shows the differences between physical and chemical adsorp￾tion. Physical adsorption (physisorption) is caused by weak Van der Waal’s 
force and on the surface of adsorption contains multilayers of the adsorbate. 
The adsorption is known as chemical adsorption (chemisorption) when the 
attractive force existing between the particles of adsorbent and adsorbate are 
almost of the same strength as the covalent bonding, which is single-layer 
adsorption [31]. 
FIGURE 8.4 Physical and chemical adsorption. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [31]; ©2020, American Chemical Society. 
Dyes can be categorized into two groups: cationic and anionic which can 
be removed from the aqueous solutions by using MNPs as an adsorbent [29]. 166 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Cationic dyes are harmful as they can interact easily with the surface of 
cell membranes that carry a negative charge on them and ought to be toxic. 
At pH 5–12 their removal from the aqueous system is quick and highly 
efficient [30]. 
8.8 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 
MNPs provide a high surface-area-to-volume ratio offering a large surface 
for physical and chemical adsorption. Due to their number of physiochemical 
properties, MNPs have been a particular area of interest for the purification 
of water. Being cost-efficient and easy availability of functionalization, 
the water purification process using MNPs is safe and clean. Surface 
functionalization improves chemical stability and biocompatibility and 
also tailor’s solubility in water and dispersibility. These properties have 
been proven effective towards applications such as the extraction of metal 
nanoparticles using MNPs, and the extraction of dyes using MNPs. In these 
applications, surface, active, and aqueous bulk solubilized MNPs can be used 
for the extraction process. The extraction process is facilitated when there is 
simultaneous operation of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions. 
For minimizing the toxic effects of magnetic nanomaterials, safety 
measures should be taken during their fabrication, or their use, as any kind 
of negligence, can lead to threats towards humans and the environment. 
The potential towards their reusability and regeneration should be looked 
over for designing easy steps of regeneration. Progress in functional mate￾rial is needed to be done, which could be environmentally acceptable and 
cost-effective. 
KEYWORDS 
• core-shell 
• functionalization 
• iron oxide nanoparticles 
• magnetic nanoparticles 
• superparamagnetic 
• water-treatment Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 167 
REFERENCES 
1. Akbarzadeh, A., Samiei, M., & Davaran, S., (2012a). Magnetic nanoparticles: Preparation, 
physical properties, and applications in biomedicine. Nanoscale Research Letters, 7(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1556-276X-7-144. 
2. Gul, S., Khan, S. B., Rehman, I. U., Khan, M. A., & Khan, M. I., (2019). A comprehensive 
review of magnetic nanomaterials modern day theranostics. Frontiers in Materials, 6, 
1–15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmats.2019.00179. 
3. Hernández-Hernández, A. A., Aguirre-Álvarez, G., Cariño-Cortés, R., Mendoza-Huizar, L.
H., & Jiménez-Alvarado, R., (2020). Iron oxide nanoparticles: Synthesis, functionalization, 
and applications in diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Chemical Papers, 74(11), 3809–3824. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11696-020-01229-8. 
4. Guo, T., Lin, M., Huang, J., Zhou, C., Tian, W., Yu, H., Jiang, X., et al., (2018). The recent 
advances of magnetic nanoparticles in medicine. Journal of Nanomaterials, 2018. https:// 
doi.org/10.1155/2018/7805147. 
5. Clemons, T. D., Kerr, R. H., & Joos, A., (2019). Multifunctional magnetic nanoparticles: 
Design, synthesis, and biomedical applications. Comprehensive Nanoscience and Nano￾technology, 1–5(8), 193–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12–803581-8.10462-X. 
6. Laurent, S., Forge, D., Port, M., Roch, A., Robic, C., Vander, E. L., & Muller, R. 
N., (2010). Erratum: Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: Synthesis, stabilization, 
vectorization, physicochemical characterizations, and biological applications, Chemical 
Reviews, 2008, 108, p. 2064; Chemical Reviews, 110(4), p. 2574. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
cr900197g. 
7. Sandler, S. E., Fellows, B., & Thompson, M. O., (2019). Best practices for characterization 
of magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications. Analytical Chemistry, 91(22), 
14159–14169. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03518. 
8. Evgeny, K. Synthesis, properties and applications of magnetic nanoparticles and 
nanowires—A brief introduction. Magnetochemistry, 5(4), 61. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
magnetochemistry5040061. 
9. Liu, C., & Zhang, Z. J., (2001). Size-dependent superparamagnetic properties of Mn 
spinel ferrite nanoparticles synthesized from reverse micelles. Chemistry of Materials, 
13(6), 2092–2096. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm0009470. 
10. Song, Q., & Zhang, Z. J., (2012). Controlled synthesis and magnetic properties of 
bimagnetic spinel. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134(24), 10182–10190. 
11. Carta, D., Casula, M. F., Falqui, A., Loche, D., Mountjoy, G., Sangregorio, C., & Corrias, 
A., (2009). A Structural and magnetic investigation of the inversion degree in ferrite 
nanocrystals mfe2o4 (M = Mn, Co, Ni). Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 113(20), 
8606–8615. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp901077c. 
12. Issa, B., Obaidat, I. M., Albiss, B. A., & Haik, Y., (2013). Magnetic nanoparticles: 
Surface effects and properties related to biomedicine applications. International Journal 
of Molecular Sciences, 14(11), 21266–21305. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms141121266. 
13. Ansari, S. M., Ghosh, K. C., Devan, R. S., Sen, D., Sastry, P. U., Kolekar, Y. D., & 
Ramana, C. V., (2020). Eco-friendly synthesis, crystal chemistry, and magnetic properties 
of manganese-substituted CoFe2
O4 nanoparticles. ACS Omega, 5(31), 19315–19330. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.9b02492. 
14. Ortiz-Quiñonez, J. L., Pal, U., & Villanueva, M. S., (2018). Structural, magnetic, 
and catalytic evaluation of spinel Co, Ni, and Co-Ni ferrite nanoparticles fabricated 168 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
by low-temperature solution combustion process. ACS Omega, 3(11), 14986–15001. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.8b02229. 
15. Wu, W., Wu, Z., Yu, T., Jiang, C., & Kim, W. S., (2015). Recent progress on magnetic iron 
oxide nanoparticles: Synthesis, surface functional strategies and biomedical applications. 
Science and Technology of Advanced Materials, 16(2).https://doi.org/10.1088/1468-6996/ 
16/2/023501. 
16. Lee, N., Yoo, D., Ling, D., Cho, M. H., Hyeon, T., & Cheon, J., (2015). Iron oxide 
based nanoparticles for multimodal imaging and magnetoresponsive therapy. Chemical 
Reviews, 115(19), 10637–10689. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00112. 
17. Bao, N., & Gupta, A., (2011). Self-assembly of superparamagnetic nanoparticles. 
Journal of Materials Research, 26(2), 111–121. https://doi.org/10.1557/jmr.2010.25. 
18. Seabra, A. B., Pelegrino, M. T., & Haddad, P. S., (2017). Antimicrobial applications 
of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: Perspectives and challenges. In: 
Nanostructures for Antimicrobial Therapy. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
323-46152-8.00024-X. 
19. Dulińska-Litewka, J., Łazarczyk, A., Hałubiec, P., Szafrański, O., Karnas, K., & Karewicz, 
A., (2019). Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles-current and prospective medical 
applications. Materials, 12(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/ma12040617. 
20. Nabavinia, M., & Beltran-Huarac, J., (2020). Recent progress in iron oxide nanoparticles 
as therapeutic magnetic agents for cancer treatment and tissue engineering. ACS Applied 
Bio Materials, 3(12), 8172–8187. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.0c00947. 
21. Ling, D., Lee, N., & Hyeon, T., (2015). Chemical synthesis and assembly of uniformly 
sized iron oxide nanoparticles for medical applications. Accounts of Chemical Research, 
48(5), 1276–1285. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00038. 
22. Frey, N. A., Peng, S., Cheng, K., & Sun, S., (2009). Magnetic nanoparticles: Synthesis, 
functionalization, and applications in bioimaging and magnetic energy storage. Chemical 
Society Reviews, 38(9), 2532–2542. https://doi.org/10.1039/b815548h. 
23. Chen, Z., Wu, C., Zhang, Z., Wu, W., Wang, X., & Yu, Z., (2018). Synthesis, functionalization, 
and nanomedical applications of functional magnetic nanoparticles. Chinese Chemical 
Letters, 29(11), 1601–1608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cclet.2018.08.007. 
24. Wu, W., He, Æ. Q., & Jiang, Æ. C., (2008). Magnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles: 
Synthesis and Surface Functionalization Strategies, 397–415. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11671-008-9174-9. 
25. Gutierrez, A. M., Dziubla, T. D., & Hilt, J. Z., (2018). Recent Advances on Iron Oxide 
Magnetic Nanoparticles as Sorbents of Organic Pollutants in Water and Wastewater 
Treatment, 32, 111–117. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2016-0063. 
26. Xu, P., Ming, G., Lian, D., Ling, C., Hu, S., & Hua, M., (2012). Science of the total 
environment use of iron oxide nanomaterials in wastewater treatment: A review. Science 
of the Total Environment, 424, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.02.023. 
27. Hua, M., Zhang, S., Pan, B., Zhang, W., Lv, L., & Zhang, Q., (2012). Heavy metal removal 
from water/wastewater by nanosized metal oxides: A review. Journal of Hazardous 
Materials, 211, 212, 317–331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.10.016. 
28. Li, X., Xu, G., Liu, Y., & He, T. (2011). Magnetic Fe3
O4
 Nanoparticles: Synthesis and 
Application in Water Treatment. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Asia, 1(1), 14–24. 
29. Sharma, M., Kalita, P., Senapati, K. K., & Garg, A., (2018). Study on magnetic materials 
for removal of water pollutants. Emerging Pollutants - Some Strategies for the Quality 
Preservation of Our Environment. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75700. Core-Shell Structure, Super Para Magnetism 169 
30. Abkenar, S. D., Khoobi, M., Tarasi, R., Hosseini, M., Shafiee, A., & Ganjali, M. R., 
(2015). Fast removal of methylene blue from aqueous solution using magnetic-modified 
Fe3
O4
 nanoparticles. Journal of Environmental Engineering, 141(1), 04014049. https:// 
doi.org/10.1061/(asce)ee.1943-7870.0000878. 
31. Moosavi, S., Lai, C. W., Gan, S., Zamiri, G., Akbarzadeh, P. O., & Johan, M. R., 
(2020). Application of efficient magnetic particles and activated carbon for dye 
removal from wastewater. ACS Omega, 5(33), 20684–20697. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsomega.0c01905. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 9 
SOLID-STATE CARBON NANOTUBES 
MIHAI CIOCOIU 
Textiles-Leather and Industrial Management at Gheorghe Asachi 
Technical University of Iasi, Romania 
ABSTRACT 
Bionanocomposites and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) by virtue of their 
uniqueness make them better placed against other conventional materials 
for specialty applications. There are numerous examples of the prevailing 
commercial uses of CNTs and their potential applications in the near future. 
Nanotubes are synthesized in different types ranging from multiwalled 
nanotubes possessing various degrees of perfection to the close-to-perfect 
single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) molecular in nature. The past decade 
of research has brought to the fore many feasible applications of these 
materials, such as electronic, field emission, electrochemical devices, 
interconnects, namely, supercapacitors (SCs) and batteries, nano-sensors, 
electromechanical actuators, targeted drug delivery systems, etc. The 
present status of this frontier area and the value-added applications in 
existence as against the revolutionary and state-of-the-art applications 
of different types of CNTs within different timelines are reviewed in 
this chapter. The open opportunities challenges are thrown, and the main 
bottlenecks, covering manufacturing of large amounts of nanotubes, will 
be introduced along with the applications space for CNTs. The summary of 
this chapter captures the broad picture of CNT applications. Moreover, a 
few of the concerns pertaining to health, environment, and safety protocols 
for CNTs too are part of the discussion. 172 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
The cumulative effect of structure, topology, and dimensions generates 
various physical properties in CNTs which are quite unique than most of 
the other known materials. After research of more than a decade which 
showed that such tiny quasi one-dimensional (1-D) structures exhibit lot 
much of potential in a host of applications areas, like nano-probes, molecular 
reinforcing materials in composites, display, molecular, electronic devices, 
sensors, energy-harvesting [1–3]. There have been huge modifications in 
synthesis and refinement protocols, which can yield qualitative nanotubes 
on a mass scale. There is a huge and exciting database derived from 
theoretical calculations and experimentations which opens up numerous 
unique possibilities in the applications of carbon depending upon their 
property profile. On looking at the applications landscape for CNTs and 
CNT-based materials, it can be break into several categories depending upon 
different conditions: incumbent ones that are present in the marketplace, 
short-term ones that will come up in the marketplace in the coming decade, 
while long-term ones refer to those post a decade down the line. Beyond 
these clearly foreseeable practical applications, there have been significant 
advancements in the knowledge of the chemistry science and physics 
underlying carbon-based materials that have worked as a front runner for 
the area of nanotechnology, dragging a lot much of attention right from the 
academicians to industries alike. 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) came up as a unique research outcome in carbon 
science, apart from the Buckminsterfullerene molecules [4]. Fullerenes have 
so far stimulated and motivated the huge scientific community, and their area 
of applications are very extensive up to now. While, graphite and carbon 
fibers [5], the analogs of nanotubes, have been in use for commercial uses 
over decades. Their application profile ranges from conductive fillers and 
mechanical structural fillers in composites (e.g., aerospace industry) to elec￾trode materials (e.g., batteries). Although primarily the bonding in graphite, 
carbon fibers and nanotubes remains same (i.e., the sp2
-hybridized, hexagonal 
layer-like honeycomb lattice pattern); nanotubes are distinct from the other 
allotropic forms of carbon by virtue of their unique morphology, scale, and 
deviations in crystal lattices. CNTs resemble with the theoretical in-plane 
characteristics possessed by graphite, which involve the carbon-carbon bond 
that is free from defects, which make the bond quite strong in nature. The 
substantially large modulus, electrical, and thermal conductivity as well as 
elasticity of graphite are all found as the intrinsic properties of nanotubes [6]. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 173 
There are essentially two types of nanotubes that are used currently [7]. 
The multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs), which have shown the lot 
much of promise. These are produced catalytically by using chemical vapor 
deposition (CVD) technique. The so-formed multi-layered graphitic tubular 
structures are subjected to annealing to reduce defect density. They may 
be many tens of nanometers in diameter, but sometimes structures such as 
single-layered tubular structures smaller in dimensions are also obtained. In 
the 1990s, Iijima et al. [8, 9] obtained smaller, but largely graphitized multi￾walled structures by employing high-temperature arc-discharge technique. It 
was followed by the discovery of SWNTs (single-walled nanotubes) [10, 11] 
in 1993 by the NEC and IBM teams using catalytic vapor deposition method 
to obtain single-layer tubular structures with controlled growth of graphene 
having dimensions as little as 1 nm. To grow such defect-free graphene tubes 
smaller in dimensions made researchers to prescribe numerous applications 
for such structures, characterized by chirality, defect-free, and small dimen￾sion structures which showed future prospects of using them as quantum 
wires. 
Carbon-based fibrous structures, on the other hand unlike the conven￾tional graphite-like materials possess molecular structures that find applica￾tions in non-conventional fields such as nanoelectronics. Today, nanotubes 
are prepared with a precise tuning of a number of layers, like SWNTs and 
double-walled nanotubes (DWNTs), and there is a lot much headway in terms 
of scalability of such materials. It has also become possible to manufacture 
CNTs on a mass scale these days that are doped with elements like nitrogen 
and find use in selective applications. As far as applications of nanotubes are 
concerned, they are divided into conventional (where nanotubes are value￾added as against carbon fibers and other allotropes of carbon) and unconven￾tional (whereas nanotubes with unique applications) uses, regardless of the 
timelines expected for applications. 
9.2 APPLICATIONS OF CARBON NANOTUBES (CNTS) 
Over the last two decades of research in fullerenes and nanotubes has 
brought to the fore plethora of applications for such materials. However, 
the applications of carbon nanomaterials have been limited in reaching to 
the marketplace, due to problems in processing, scale-up, and the inability 
to assess the timeline that is required to reach new products to market, 
particularly when such products lead to disruptive technologies. Various 174 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
applications of fullerenes and nanotubes belong to this category, like drug 
delivery and nanoelectronics using fullerenes and nanotubes, respectively. 
Moreover, there are innate challenges in the nano-regime that have reduced 
the rate at which the applications of such new materials grow. 
Likewise, some applications of CNT’s are commercialized in reality 
today. The well-known examples of applications of CNTs in bulk are the 
application of CVD-grown much bigger MWNTs (multiwalled nanotubes) 
especially in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and plastics in electrostatic discharge 
(ESD) applications. The excellent mechanical or electronic properties of 
perfect nanotubes are not made use of in both of these applications, but as 
additives to the products (e.g., mechanical stability to batteries and static 
charge dissipation in plastics). These applications are in accord with bulk 
volumes of nanotubes, and it has led to manufacturing of such material on a 
mass scale over the last few years. 
Presently, the large volumes of MWNTs turn out to be hundreds of tons 
per year. The condition of SWNTs however is different with the volume 
of material manufactured/year is less than a few kilograms. Few indicators 
predict that there may be a quantum jump in the manufacture of SWNTs in 
following years will be driven by the demand for this material in selective 
application areas. One of the potential applications of SWNTs that requires 
material on large scale is the field emission display, which has been exten￾sively considered as the major application of SWNTs; and prototypes have 
already been showcased by big companies namely, Samsung and Motorola. 
However, the product is not yet commercialized for unknown reasons. 
Some of the key application areas of both MWNTs and SWNTs are dealt 
with. The important applications that arise by virtue of the intrinsic proper￾ties of nanotubes will be put to use in the range of areas such as electronics, 
energy, composites, sensors, field emission, biology, etc. 
9.3 ELECTRONICS APPLICATIONS 
The integration of nanotubes with electronic devices takes a long application 
time and therefore commercialization of products may take a time span of 
10 years or so. However, nanotubes in particular, SWNTs have come up 
as a potential class of electronic materials by virtue of their dimensions in 
the nanoscale and unique properties, like ballistic electronic conduction [12, 
13] and insensitivity to electro-migration [14, 15]. SWNTs (metallic and 
semiconducting) reveal electrical properties that are much better placed than 
the incumbent best of the electronic materials. The latest advancements in Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 175 
the separation [16, 17] of SWNTs having various electronic properties have 
made it possible for the nanoscientists to design the field effect transistors 
(FET) and interconnects on a mass scale. In the quest of Moore’s law, giants 
in the semiconductor industry such as Intel, IBM, AMD, UMC, and TSMC 
are commercializing silicon-based transistors to 65 nm scale node (Q1, 
2007). Intel is aimed at commercializing transistors to 45 nm node till 2007 
[18, 19]. The smallest silicon transistor that can be conceived today is 16 nm 
and is expected to reach markets not before 2018 as a part of an evolutionary 
process. To bring about a revolution in speeding up this process to envision 
realistically only nanotechnology can come to rescue. Single-walled carbon 
nanotubes, of 1 nm diameter, have been found to work as field-effect transis￾tors almost 10 years back, and thereafter, the FETs have grown in a steady 
manner in terms of versatility and promise and will meet the futuristic needs 
of nanoelectronics. 
The earliest room-temperature research in CNT-based transistors was 
undertaken by the Delft [20] and IBM teams [21]. They showed that semi￾conducting SWNTs possess a channel conductance that can be enhanced 
by many folds (105
) on application of gate voltage externally, similar to 
MOSFET. Such CNT-based FETs are p-type, and the charge transport was 
regulated with the changes in the Schottky barrier height at the electrical 
contact in between the nanotube and the metal probe on subjecting it to a 
gate voltage. Subsequently, continuous research is underway to grow n-type 
and ambipolar CNT-FETs. Till 2001, an important milestone was achieved 
in building nanotubes from transistors to logic circuits. Transistor circuits 
containing up to three transistors which exhibit a plethora of digital logic 
operations, were showed namely: 
• an inverter; 
• a logic NOR; 
• a static random-access memory cell; and 
• an ac-ring oscillator [22]. 
IBM devised a technique to prepare an array of CNT-based transistors, 
without the use of distinct metallic and semiconducting nanotubes [23]. 
Eventually many technological progresses attracted the use of CNTFETs 
(carbon nanotube field-effect transistors) in diverse applications. CNT￾powered transistors were found to have lower switching resistance and more 
current-handling capacity 20 and 200 times respectively as compared to 
traditional power MOSFETs. A University of Maryland team has shown that 
CNTs have significant carrier mobility of the order of 105
 cm2
/Vs. Other 
investigators could further the feasibility of employing nanotubes-based 176 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
FETs ranging from GHz to THz frequency. More innovations, such as nano￾tube Y-junctions to develop switches [24], and functionalizing chemically to 
alter nanotubes conductance have brought better flexibility in design terms 
in the ultimate chip-forming process. 
Apart from transistors, nanotubes can also work as interconnects because 
of the metallic characteristics possessed by them. As interconnect feature 
downsizes, copper resistivity exacerbates which is attributed to their scat￾tered grain-boundary and surface heterogeneities [25] unlike CNTs that 
show a ballistic flow of electrons having electron mean-free paths of many 
micrometers, and have an ability to conduct massive current densities [26]. 
CNTs withstand current densities of the order of 1,009 A/cm2
, superseding 
copper by 1,000 times. A bunch of densely packed aligned metallic CNTs, 
or a MWNT large enough and free from defects are to be employed for the 
next generation interconnects. A bunch of 400 SWNTs can be as thin as 20 
nm in diameter and using in bundles and connecting them serve two major 
purposes. Firstly, connecting in parallel overcomes the issue of the more 
contact resistance of a nanotube and secondly bundles lower capacitance as 
against that possessed by a nanotube [27]. Nanotubes are characterized by 
high aspect ratio structures such as vias, having maximum current densities. 
Apart from on-chip (short and via) interconnects, because of the mechanical 
flexibility and compliance of nanotubes in bundles, they too are used for 
back-end (die to package) flexible interconnects and these can be obtained in 
a timeline rapidly as compared to the integrated on-chip nanotubes-enabled 
structures. The innate electromechanical properties of nanotubes can be used 
to advantage in the preparation of electrode arrays that find a host of applica￾tions in the microelectronics industry. 
FETs containing semiconducting CNTs are used in the form of channels in 
transistors [28, 29]. Such carbon-nanotubes FETs have successfully demon￾strated a conductance, GON/GOFF ratio [30]. In addition, thin films made up of 
high dielectric materials, like ZrO2
 and HfO2
, are favorable for gate dielectric 
integration in FETs as they lead to higher ON-state current densities (speed) 
and lower working power consumption. The integration of high-κ dielectric 
materials, however, is quite challenging in planar MOSFETs because of the 
intrinsic mobility decrease of the Si channels. CNTs have a unique advantage 
in the form of compatibility with high-κ dielectric materials. The absence of 
dangling bonds at the interface between nanotubes and high-κ dielectrics, 
accompanied by the poor non-covalent interactions prevent any hindrance to 
the electron scavenging in CNTs [30]. 
Another important electronic application of CNT’s is the production of an 
electromechanical memory device by Nanterro Inc. By taking the advantage Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 177 
of mechanical resilience and electrical conductivity, CNTs can work as 
sensitive nano-electromechanical devices namely, non-volatile memory. 
With a crossbar layered configuration, Nanterro is fabricating a bi-stable 
memory device which is actuated electrostatically [31]. This device, is 
co-fabricated by LSI Logic, will reach the market in the near future. Invisible 
circuits driven by transparent transistors hold a lot of promise and potential 
in consumer, military, and industrial electronic devices. 
The flexible and transparent transistors prepared using SWNTs have led 
to numerous exciting achievements. SWNTs have been in use to prepare the 
conducting as well as semiconducting films, of thin-film transistors (TFT) 
[32]. Such devices are designed on plastic substrate surfaces by piling of 
layers and transfer printing of SWNT’s networks developed by CVD method 
on optimization. The unique properties possessed by SWNTs networks have 
imparted electrical (better efficiency on plastic), optical (clarity in the visible 
region), and mechanical (can be bent readily) properties to such TFTs which 
are impossible to attain in traditional materials. A work of similar kind [33] 
has demonstrated that SWNTs electrodes can be integrated with organic 
semiconducting materials to produce TTFTs (transparent thin film transis￾tors) fabricated on plastic substrate surfaces. 
Such devices have exhibited excellent electrical properties like 
abysmally low contact resistance, mobilities greater than 0.5 cm2
V–1s–1, 
flexibility (curvature radius < 5 mm) and optical transparency (69%). 
Moreover, further efforts aimed at producing ultrathin, transparent, uniform, 
conducting layers of pure SWNTs and DWNTs and fabricating such films 
on different substrates were quite successful [34]. The performance of such 
films in respect of conductivity and transparency was in semblance with the 
commercially employed indium tin oxide (ITO) films although supersede in 
transparency in the vital IR bandwidth. Therefore, the transparent CNT films 
would replace ITO, in the application areas like displays, touch screens and 
(Light-Emitting Diodes) LEDs in coming years. Getting reasonably higher 
transparency (>90%) accompanied by high conductivity is challenging. 
The necessary electrical applications of CNTs are on those fronts wherein 
high aspect ratio, and electrical conductivity of CNTs with better disper￾sion in polymer matrices make them useful in applications such as ESD 
and electrical shielding [35]. For ESD applications, the nanotubes should 
have the ability to prevent the buildup of charge on the plastic substrate 
surfaces. Currently, huge amounts of multiwalled nanotubes and nanofibrils 
are prepared by the Hyperion Catalysis International and procured in the 
form of premixed material with plastics to the general electric (GE) for 
using it in engineering plastics which are further used in making automobile 178 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
components and is one of the largest application of nanotubes presently. The 
MWNTs (Multi-Walled Nano Tubes) are commercially used for the first 
time in making use of their properties to solve the problem of ESD. Further 
applications cover microelectronics products that are high-end wherein static 
buildup of electric discharge from packaging materials can cause destruction 
of electronic chip parts. Apart from the ESD, electromagnetic interference 
(EMI) shielding applications too have been explored for nanotubes with 
more loadings, taking the advantage significantly higher conductivity of 
nanotubes. In fact, carbon fibers are used on this front however, nanotubes 
can have a comparative advantage as against the conventional fillers, it is 
yet unknown whether nanotube-enabled plastics would supersede traditional 
materials in the area of EMI shielding or otherwise. 
Another front where nanotubes can bring about a sea of change may be 
in the future is in the area of on-chip heat management. Large consump￾tion of power and consequent issue of heat dissipation is major problem 
in microprocessors presently. Many scientists reported that efficient cooling 
can be accomplished in microprocessors with the help of multiwalled 
carbon nanotube (MWCNT) arrays that are aligned (MWNTs) [36]. Small 
cooling elements can be manufactured and grown on silicon chips to ensure 
substantially high-power dissipation from the chips heated up and hot spots 
generated. The cooling efficiency showed by nanotube-based elements are 
the useful candidates for on-chip heat dissipation. The problem in this case 
is that of thermal interfaces at which scattering responsible for dissipation of 
heat. To improve performance on this count, the thermal contact resistance 
has to be reduced. The high thermal anisotropy possessed by nanotubes￾based structures (high longitudinal conductivity vis-a-vis weak transverse 
conductivity) may either pose a challenge or a comparative benefit while 
manufacturing cooling elements out of nanotubes. 
9.4 ENERGY APPLICATIONS 
Conventional carbon-based materials have been in use either in the form of 
electrode materials or the filler, which is conducive to the active materials in 
numerous electrochemical energy-harvesting applications because of their 
properties such as better chemical stability and electrical conductivity. Thus, 
as a natural choice CNTs have been used as the preferred substitute for elec￾trode materials attributed to their unique electrical and electronic properties, 
in addition to broad electrochemical stability window, and more availability Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 179 
of surface area. With reference to energy production and storage, nanotubes 
exhibit huge potential in supercapacitors (SCs), Li-ion batteries, solar cells, 
and fuel cells. In general energy applications would be the largest applica￾tion domain wherein nanotubes can be used in bulk. Hydrogen-storage was 
considered as one of the major energy applications which generated a great 
promise for nanotubes however now it is not found to be a viable option as 
the thorough investigations showed that the hydrogen storage capacity of 
nanotubes at ambient temperature is quite low and therefore it is not much 
of practical interest as far as storage of hydrogen in nanotubes is concerned. 
The CNTs have a huge potential as the electrode materials in LIBs 
[37–40] as they showed an increase in reversibility up to 1,000 mAh/g [41]. 
However, the larger reversible capacity, the hysteresis, and the lack of a 
voltage plateau, found in a hard carbon [42], do not find nanotubes a right 
candidate for the electrode materials in LIBs. Alternatively, CNTs have been 
commercially used as the conductive fillers of choice in the materials for 
anodes in LIBs [43]. CNTs on dispersion in graphite (3% by wt.) develop 
a homogeneous conductive network along with a mechanically stubborn 
electrode, leading to the acquisition of a two-fold energy efficiency in LIBs 
[44]. Nitrogen-doped CNTs (N-CNTs) and nanofibers too have exhibited 
higher efficiency in reversible energy storage in LIBs (480 mAh/g), larger 
than commercially used carbon-based materials used in LIBs (330 mAh/g). 
Energy storage systems apart from batteries, supercapacitors have been 
explored extensively as they have the capacity to store and deliver energy 
on demand fast and with efficiency over a longer life cycle by adopting a 
simple charge separation technique [45]. Moreover, their broad spectrum of 
power capacity makes it suitable to couple with other energy-storage systems 
namely, batteries, and fuel cells (FCs). Although they find use these days 
in a host of electronic devices (e.g., memory backup), from computers to 
vehicles, their low energy density has limited the adoption in the market on 
a larger scale. In such situation, supercapacitors containing carbon-nanotube 
electrodes have been researched for increasing their energy density [46, 
47]. E.g., a SWNT electrode showed the highest capacitance of the order 
of 180 F/g and a power density varying between 6.5 to 7 Wh/kg. Similarly, 
chemically modified MWNTs are in the infancy stage of commercialization 
to employ them as a conductive filler particularly in porous carbon-based 
materials in SCs [48]. 
Silicon-based photovoltaics have attained solar-energy conversion 
efficiencies of 25%; however, since it is an environmentally hazardous 
technology, and expensive and therefore not suitable as a substitute to fossil 180 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
fuels for extensive applications. Another option is to employ organic thin 
films of conjugated polymers, which have low conversion efficiencies (5%), 
but have lower cost in comparison with silicon-based technology. Conjugated 
polymers an ability to absorb a light and create an exciton which can split 
into an electron-hole pair on subjecting it to the high electric field observed 
at polymer/metal interface. One of the soundest designs for an organic solar 
cell makes use of a bulk hetero-junction composite made out of a conjugated 
polymer containing electron acceptors a nanoscale producing a percolating 
network via the thin film. This enhances the area at the interfaces between 
the metal as a filler and the polymer, which exacerbates charge separation 
and provides for scavenging of the electrons via the network to collect at the 
electrode. An organic solar cell can be commercially viable and comparable 
with silicon-based technologies it needs to attain an energy conversion 
efficiency of the order of 5 to 10%, and possess a minimum lifetime (five 
years) and cost (< 1/peak watt). 
CNTs can be an excellent candidate for designing bulk hetero-junctions 
in organic solar cells that is attributed to the high aspect ratio possessed by 
them which provides for the development of a percolating network of CNTs at 
lower dopant concentration quantity in a polymer composite [49, 50]. As 1-D 
nanostructures, nanotubes are suitable for electron transport too as they show 
quasiballistic properties [51, 52]. The bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic 
solar cell is in general designed as a sandwich comprising of a transparent 
conducting electrode, normally ITO or fluoride tin oxide (FTO), deposited 
on a glass or PET substrate, a film of poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) 
(PEDOT) or poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS), a film of the composite mate￾rial, and a thermally evaporated electrode in the top, commonly aluminum. 
Ultrasonication is employed for the dispersion of nanotubes in the conju￾gated polymer, and then it is subjected to centrifugation to get rid of larger 
aggregates. The dispersion is then coated on the transparent electrode by 
using either drop or spin casting. Kymakis et al. [53, 54] proved for the first 
time that SWNTs on dispersing in poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3
OT) demon￾strated a rise in short circuit current (ISC), by two folds as against P3
OT in 
isolation in an ITO/composite/aluminum sandwich-type device. An increase 
in the intensity of light brings an increase in the photocurrent of the device, 
which is attributed to the generation of excitons in the composite. The device 
performance was improved further in 2005 by depositing the ITO electrode 
with the conductive co-polymer (PEDOT:PSS) that brings about the promo￾tion of injection of hole into the ITO [55]. This device revealed a rise in 
power conversion efficiency from 2.5 × 10–5 to 0.1% as against P3
OT alone.  
 
Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 181 
By adjusting the concentration levels of SWNTs in the composite matrix, the 
highest efficiency attained was with 1% SWNTs, as further loading caused 
the limitation in the photocurrent due to the lower rate of photogeneration 
from the polymer [56, 57]. 
CNTs find use in various conjugated polymer matrices leading to 
enhancement in charge transport and separation. Numerous research teams 
have attained a 2–6-fold rise in the photocurrent of the composite materials 
in differentiation with the pure polymer [58–65]. Devices fabricated from 
composites containing polymers that are water-soluble and conducting 
enabled to sustain the better environmentally friendly processing and cut 
down in costs of production. The performance of such devices; however, is 
not good enough to be of commercial interest currently, but in the long run, 
the enhancement will pay off. Bulk hetero-junctions of nanotubes in organic 
conjugated polymers have brought about improvement in the exciton split￾ting and charge transport; however, such devices are yet to be optimized so 
as make them absorb light over the solar spectrum in entirety. Although the 
solar spectrum shows a light intensity to the maximum between the wave￾length range 500 to 800 nm, however, many of the semiconducting polymers 
won’t absorb significantly within this region. One of the approaches adopted 
to better the photoresponse within 500–800 nm is to introduce organic dyes 
with higher absorption coefficients at the nanotube/conducting polymer 
interface that can absorb to the maximum [66, 67]. 
Bhattacharyya et al. reported the enhancement in performance of SWNT 
or MWNT-based solar cells by introducing a dye containing aromatic 
pyrenyl groups N-(1-pyrenyl) maleimide (PM) into a SWNT/P3
OT device. 
Kymakis et al. used Naphthalocyanine (NaPc) as the sensitizing agent in a 
SWNT/P3
OT system. The enhancement of the order of 20 of the photocur￾rents was obtained in this device with the dye in connection with no dye use 
condition. Naphthalocyanine finds use in MWNT-poly(3-hexylthiophene) 
(P3HT) composites to significantly enhance the absorption of light in the 
visible area of the spectrum, furthering a greater production rate of excitons. 
Nanotube-based hybrids are also prepared to promote exciton formation and 
charge separation with the help of quantum dots (QDs) and nanoparticles. 
QD-SWNT hybrid systems were prepared by the Landi et al. research team 
to use QD electron affinity to the advantage and the lower dopant concen￾tration levels of SWNTs. Photovoltaic efficiency shown by this composite 
resemble with the SWNT/P3
OT but with a restricted efficiency, due to inter￾facial defects at the junctions in the device. Titania (TiO2
) nanoparticles too 
find use in enhancing the performance of the device by using electrostatic 182 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
interactions. Feng et al. [68] used MWNTs, which are functionalized with 
acidic groups to bind titania nanoparticles and found a doubly increased 
photocurrent in a device with no nanotubes. 
Semiconducting CNTs can produce excitons on absorption of light in the 
near-infrared region, which in turn can further effective exciton formation 
in the device and enlarge the bandwidth of light that is absorbed [69, 70]. 
Spataru et al.; Ando et al.; Kazaoui et al. [71] have showed with a SWNT/ 
poly[2-methoxy, 5-(2-ethylhexoxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEHPPV) 
or SWNT/P3
OT composite having Al and ITO electrodes in a sandwich 
structure, that the photo-response bandwidth can be broadened beyond the 
visible region to 300–1,600 nm. The photo-response shown by such devices 
in a region 900–1,500 nm is in tandem with that shown by semiconducting 
SWNTs. Below 900 nm the photocurrent is driven by exciton formation 
from MEHPPV of P3
OT. 
CNTs, therefore, have been promising candidates for hetero-junctions in 
organic thin-film solar cells in bulk. Such devices have exhibited marked 
improvement in charge separation and scavenging, however, presently work 
with comparatively low performances. Even with such low efficiencies, 
there is an increase in interest, however, to go ahead with the commercial￾ization, particularly in low-power consumption applications in the time to 
come. Better enhancement and optimization of the nanotube/polymer inter￾faces in such materials can help in reaching energy conversion efficiency of 
the order of 15 to 20% in the coming decade. The emphasis in the current 
development is laid upon improvement in device performance in addition 
to the longevity of the cell such that a competitive technology using silicon 
cells is developed. At this juncture the potential pathways are dye sensitiza￾tion and nanoparticle hybrids use to better exciton formation and charge 
separation. In fuel-cells, CNTs hold a lot of promise as complementary 
materials for Pt catalyst [72, 73]. CNTs [74] and nanohorns piled up [75] 
with a greater part of reactive edge sites were found to be quite effective in 
anchoring uniformly distributed tiny particles of Pt catalysts, which has led 
to a doubling of fuel-cell efficiency [76]. The National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST), carbon nanotechnologies, Inc., Motorola, Inc. and 
Johnson Matthey FCs, Inc. in collaboration are working to design a free￾standing carbon-nanotube electrodes that may be applied in micro-FCs so 
as to fulfill the ever-increasing demand for power and longer run times in 
customized microelectronic devices. Proton-exchange membrane fuel cells 
(PEMFC) with greater efficiencies have been designed with Pt catalysts 
grown on MWNTs [77]. This application seems to be very promising and 
has tremendous market potential of five years. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 183 
9.5 MEDICAL APPLICATIONS 
The applications of CNTs in mechanical and structural field hold a lot much 
promise as the largest mass-scale applications for the material. Yamamoto et 
al. described the mechanical, and thermal properties of CNTs in detail. Nano￾tubes are ideal candidates for fibers with outstanding mechanical properties 
as against the excellent carbon fibers, which already has the specific strength 
(strength/density) 50 times that of steel and have excellent load-bearing 
capacity of fillers in composites. Carbon fibers have been in use as fillers 
in high strength, performance, and light weight composites. The products 
wherein they find use vary from costlier tennis rackets to spacecraft as well 
as aircraft components. In reality, nanotubes are much better in their perfor￾mance for more than carbon fibers in mechanical applications. The tensile 
strength of nanotubes may be in the vicinity of a few 100 GPa while their 
modulus of elasticity lies in the tera-pascal range [78–80], which is far more 
than conventional carbon fibers. Nanotubes have higher strain sustenance too 
when subjected to compression than conventional carbon fibers. 
The deformation reversibility like buckling, has been researched [81]. 
Flexibility and compliance of nanotubes are governed by the geometric 
factors of the CNT’s, which could be coordinated. The flexibility of nanotubes 
when subjected to mechanical force is vital as far as their potential applica￾tion as nanoprobes and in electromechanical fields are concerned [82]. The 
properties of nanotubes have induced many research teams, such as NASA, 
to invest huge amounts of resources in designing CNT-based composites for 
a host of applications in the aerospace industry. Although nanotubes have 
close to ideal structures and higher aspect ratios, there are challenges to in 
adopting such materials in structural applications. In spite of that, there has 
not been much substantial change, in fabricating nanotube-based composites 
that supersede the most conventional carbon fiber-based composites. 
Nanotube-reinforced polymer composites have advantages of their 
own however, the major problem is in forming a better interface between 
nanotubes and the polymer matrix and provide much better force-transfer 
from the matrix to the nanotubes during loading [83–86]. It is so because 
firstly nanotubes are smooth at the atomic level and if engineered well, the 
interface becomes strong. Secondly, nanotubes are at times bundled into 
aggregates (concentric alignment within MWNTs and SWNTs as bundles) 
that show variation in load response, in comparison with the free nanotubes. 
Previous studies of load transfer with Raman spectroscopy hinted at just 
mixing nanotubes into a polymer that however doesn’t assure sound load 184 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
transfer. Therefore, latest approaches are all dependent upon chemical modi￾fication of the surface functional groups of nanotubes so as to create stronger 
interfaces [87]. 
Apart from these intrinsic issues, processing of nanotube-reinforced 
polymers (e.g., epoxy) is not easy as even a low wt.% of the nanotubes 
(< 5%) improves viscosity significantly, making processing quite uneasy. 
Lastly, even when aspect ratios are very high, nanotubes essentially behave 
like short fibers, that are not perfect structural fillers in comparison with 
the continuous fiber fillers in composites. The function of nanotubes in 
composites may vary as against active load-carrying fibers in the composites, 
nanotubes however an important role as a matrix additive, offering multi￾functionality to the composite. There are many companies in the USA (e.g., 
Zyvex corporation) and Japan (e.g., Mistui Corporation, Toray) which are 
producing nanotube-dispersed plastics for getting specialty sporting goods 
and the products having far better performance are in the market already. 
These use the chemical vapor deposition (CVD-driven) multi-wall carbon 
nanotubes (MWNTs) and Nano-fibrils as additives. 
Nanotubes in such products work more as enhancers of matrix over the 
primary load-sustaining structures. In an approach, it has been observed that 
nanotubes can better the properties of 3D composites. Here nanotubes are 
not the major load-carrying fibers, but add value to the composites in the 
transverse direction to the fibers plane. Conventional fiber-filled composites 
consisting of fiber stacks aligned and embedded in a polymer matrix possess 
outstanding in-plane characteristics but are poor in through-thickness (trans￾verse to the fiber stacks direction) characteristics. There have been numerous 
strategies, particularly through innovative fiber-packing architectures, have 
been however successful to a limited extent. Oriented inter-laminar arrays 
of carbon-nanotubes (CVD coated onto SiC fiber stacks) offer improved 
multifunctional characteristics along the direction of thickness. The arrays 
of carbon nanotubes provide for the fastening of adjoining stacks in the 
3D-composites, offering the highly sought after interlaminar strength and 
toughness when subjected to varying loading situations. The fabricated 
3D-composites wherein nanotubes are embedded, marked enhancements in 
the properties such as inter-laminar fracture toughness, de-lamination resis￾tance, damping, thickness transverse to the fiber stacks direction, and other 
mechanical properties without compromising the in-plane characteristics of 
the composites simultaneously. 
Such 3D composites using nanotubes add value by incorporating distinct 
geometries to conventional composites of nanotubes find applications as 
structural polymer composites. The interfacial tension between nanotubes Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 185 
and polymer matrices can be used to advantage by applying it on the front 
of vibration damping. Damping eradication is a main problem in aerospace 
and automobile industry, and the systematic application of nanotubes for 
vibration damping [88, 89]. Research has demonstrated that the nanotube￾polymer matrix sliding energy-dissipation mechanism can increase the loss 
modulus of a polymer matrix by nearly three folds with a comparatively little 
(1–2%) weight fraction of properly dispersed SWNT as a reinforcing agent. 
An increase in damping in epoxy and other high-temperature resins takes 
place with SWNT fillers. Mass scale production and use of nanotube-based 
composites, wherein nanotubes are used as fillers and as damping elements 
which would be an application in the bulk. Such applications of nanotubes in 
composites are under development still it may take several years to assess the 
efficacy of nanotube composites as compared to conventional fiber-reinforced 
composites. Nanotubes in composites would offer multifunctionality (matrix 
stiffness, damping, conductivity, ESD, etc.), instead of merely working as 
mechanical fillers. 
Pristine nanotubes offer weak interfaces with polymers, therefore there 
have been efforts to dope nanotubes for the acquisition of more interfacial 
strength, which is very vital in composites. Preliminary investigations on the 
synthesis of epoxy composites by using N-doped MWNTs demonstrated a 
significant rise in the glass transition temperature with the introduction of 
little amount (2.5 wt.%) of nitrogen. It has been observed that it is possible 
to decorate polystyrene (PS) on N-doped MWNTs [90] and nitroxide-driven 
free radical polymerization mechanism [91] with no acid treatment that is 
required otherwise to create defects in CNTs. It shows that in-plane doping is 
of importance in the formation of covalent linkages at the nanotube-polymer 
interfaces. Latest mechanical and electrical characterization have shown 
that PS-grafted doped nanotubes demonstrate improved characteristics as 
against blends of PS and doped nanotubes. These explorations have given an 
impetus to the design of strong, and conducting composites. Terrones et al. 
and Kavan et al. described the chemical and electrochemical doping of CNTs 
for various applications. 
The potential applications of nanotube-reinforced polymers in the 
field of medicine, like microcatheter, have been studied [92]. Identically 
dispersed CNTs in nylon polymer matrix make micro-catheters to acquire 
external diameters of about 0.52 mm size, with two-fold increase in 
mechanical strength, color intensity, and decrease in thrombogenicity and 
blood coagulation ability, in comparison with a pure polymer containing 
microcatheter. Moreover, stable biological responses of nanotube￾reinforced microcatheters were used to measure the systematic T-cells and  
186 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
a histopathological examination [93]. Therefore, it is found that the carbon￾nanotube-based composite driven catheter demonstrated excellent properties 
in comparison with a pure polymer-based catheter, and it is predicted that 
such systems will have extensive uses in numerous medical devices. 
9.6 SENSING APPLICATIONS 
CNTs have been quite effective as sensors making use of their electrical, 
electrochemical, and optical properties. Very low concentration levels of 
hazardous gases are detected, which is of importance from environmental and 
chemical safety point of view. SWNTs have been considered as promising 
candidates as gas sensors because of their 1-D electronic structure. SWNTs 
have a comparative advantage over traditional metal-oxide-dependent 
sensors in respect of consumption of power, detection limits, miniaturiza￾tion, and mass production reliability [94]. Kong et al. [95] reported a change 
in conductance by three folds than individual semiconducting SWNTs on 
exposing to NH3 and NO2 gas within few seconds. This prototype SWNT 
gas sensing element [96], consisted of a system dependent upon a field￾effect transistor (FET). The variation in conductance of a back-gated SWNT 
channel on the adsorption of an analyte is followed through source/drain 
electrodes. The SWNT-FET that is untreated selectively demonstrates a 
p-type behavior, with limits of voltage being altered on exposure to gas [97, 
98]. Electron charge transfer takes place between a SWNT and an analyte that 
is adsorbed which can be proved both theoretically [99] and experimentally 
[100]. Nevertheless, it is yet to be clear up as how the signal transduction 
takes place in a SWNT-FET. 
On exposing toward electron-lending gases namely, [NH3
] shifts the 
Fermi level to a higher energy level from the valence band (VB), resulting 
into hole depletion and conductance reduction. Electron-accepting gasses 
(i.e., NO2
), on the other hand, the shift the Fermi level nearer to the VB 
generated more hole carriers and conductance increase. Heinze et al. [101] 
demonstrated that a SWNT-FET works as a Schottky barrier transistor, 
numerous works have been presented on the function of the SWNT-metal 
interface. Bradley et al. [102] for the first time proved experimentally that 
the signal generated was not from the interface, but on exposing interface￾passivated sensing elements to NH3
 and polyethyleneimine (PEI). Results 
of similar kind were derived for thionyl chloride. Anyway, a latest work by 
Zhang and others [103] proved that NO2
 sensing takes place at the interface 
in preference between the nanotubes and electrodes. Thorough investigations Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 187 
on numerous analyzes need to be done to get a better understanding about the 
mechanism underlying sensing. 
Most of the initiatives till today have been aimed at bettering the sensitivity 
and selectivity. A commonly employed approach is the functionalization of 
the nanotubes with selectively attaching ligands like polymers. NO2
 at the 
PPT level was detected in preference over NH3
 using a PEI-functionalized 
SWNT array device, on the other hand NH3
 selectivity was accomplished by 
nafion-functionalization. SWNT array device becomes a n-type on function￾alization using electron-lending PEI, which allows for better binding affinity 
with the electron-accepting NO2
. The array was grown with nanoparticles 
of transition metal for the analytes under examination possessing a bit of 
electron-donating or accepting behavior (i.e., CH4
, CO) [104]. It is suggested 
that the transition metal-analyte complex formed promotes the charge 
transfer between the nanotubes and metal nanoparticles. Staii et al. [105] 
utilized DNA-grown SWNTs for many analytes with the tailored sensitivity 
by changing the DNA sequences. Robustness in the sensor is a vital param￾eter for applications on long term. It is observed for various analytes that the 
signal derived from the sensor won’t get restored to its starting value, which 
is due to adsorption of an analyte irreversibly onto the nanotube. Therefore, 
the nanotube array has to be reactivated and freed from such analytes. Kong 
et al. could bring about the removal of such analytes by thermal desorp￾tion. A photodesorption at the molecular level by UV irradiation [106] and 
a gate bias [107] were used to reactivate the nanotube surface. Hydrolysis 
is a readily used method for the remediation of moisture sensitive analytes. 
Snow et al. [108] showed the use of an innovative SWNT chemi-capacitor 
for gas sensing. An optically transparent and electrically continuous single￾walled nanotubes (SWNT) network was decorated on silicon oxide substrate 
by CVD, and electrodes were patterned on the SWNT film. Analytes are 
subjected to polarization by application of an electric field from the SWNT 
network, resulting into rise in capacitance. This chemi-capacitor is character￾ized by high sensitivity, rapid, and reversible. Functionalizing with chemo￾selective polymers made it possible to detect dimethyl methylphosphonate 
(DMMP) at ppb level, which is used as a stimulant for the nerve agent 
sarin. Further this configuration has an added advantage of the possibility 
of simultaneous monitoring of both the capacitance and conductance. More 
study showed the ratio of the conductance to capacitance response is a 
characteristic of a given analyte and is independent of concentration [109] 
which confirms an unknown gas can be made-out by considering the ratio of 
conductance to capacitance. 188 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Carbon-nanotube gas sensors are available commercially in the market. A 
sensor, by nanomix, is meant for the detection of hydrogen at industrial level 
wherein nanotube networks were decorated on a silicon substrate and in 
electrical contact. A top layer fabricated for preferential binding of hydrogen 
was then coated to the array. A substantial enhancement in cross-sensitivity, 
in comparison with other commercialized products in the form of catalytic 
beads or metal oxides, has been showing with interferants namely, CO, CO2
, 
H2
S, NH3
, and CH4
. Tailoring the top layer for recognition purpose led to 
the development of a CO2
 sensing device for breath analysis. Preparation 
of strong preferential binding ligands, coupled with a nanotube separation 
achieved recently using electronic structure, is very vital for further advance￾ments on this front. 
CNTs are outstanding materials for electrodes in electrochemical sensors 
attributed to rapid electron transfer kinetics by a host of electroactive 
moieties. A plethora of sensor architectures have been designed varying from 
carbon nanotube-based paste electrodes (CNTPE), glassy carbon electrodes 
(GCE) altered using CNTs, metal nanoparticle-altered CNT electrodes, to 
CNTs reinforced in a conducting polymer matrix. Many sensing technologies 
consist of enzymes immobilized on the surface of CNT electrodes, either by 
means of electrostatic interactions or through covalent bonding. Sensing of 
Glucose is an example of the electrochemical biosensor. Most of the elec￾trochemical glucose sensors involve immobilization of the enzyme glucose 
oxidase (GOx), and catalyzes the oxidation of β-D-glucose to D-glucono￾1,5-lactone using hydrogen peroxide (H2
O2
) as a by-product of the reaction. 
The liberated H2
O2
 is further subjected to oxidation at the electrode surface, 
sensed, and measured as current generated. Such a sensor configuration was 
designed for the first time by Sotiropoulou and Chaniotakis with the help of 
MWCNTs decorated directly on the surface of a Pt electrode. The device was 
developed by binding GOx to carboxylic acid functional groups attached 
to the MWNTs. Wang et al. [110] encapsulated MWNTs using a Teflon 
and GOx grown on a GCE, and showed a substantial rise in detection of 
glucose in comparison with a similar device prepared from graphite. Further, 
Gao et al. [111] reinforced MWNTs and GOx in a conducting polypyrrole 
(PPy) matrix and demonstrated a nearly linear response relationship to 
glucose concentration level in the range of 0–20 mM. Tang et al. applied 
another sensing architecture by introducing Pt nanoparticles in a Nafion/ 
GOx/MWNT matrix probe [112]. The Pt nanoparticles were used further 
in SWNT by Hrapovic et al. for Nafion/GOx/SWNT on the surface of a 
GCE and obtained a sensitivity of 0.5 μ [113]. The sensitivity was improved 
further by using Cu nanoparticles to the extent of 250 μM [114].Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 189 
The major limitation of these devices is the narrow linear response range 
of glucose concentration. Moreover, numerous devices have been designed 
for the electrochemical sensing of DNA. The “ssDNA” or single-stranded 
DNA is made to immobilize on the surface of the electrode and the resulting 
current changes are measured on hybridization of DNA with a complemen￾tary strand. Normallt, a redox indicator having more affinity for double 
stranded DNA (dsDNA) is made use of to alter the electrochemical response. 
Cai et al. [115] fabricated a sensor first of its kind using a MWNT/GCE and 
daunomycin (Dmc) as an intercalate. Methylene blue (MB) too has been in 
use as a redox indicator to detect DNA [116]. Methods using no reagent for 
the detection of DNA have also been monitored by following the oxidation 
of guanine [117, 118]. A host of other analyzes have been analyzed by using 
electrochemical responses. Ajayan et al. have used CNTs for the first time as 
electrochemical sensors [119], who found reversible oxidation of dopamine 
on the surface an electrode made from multiwalled CNT. Many researchers 
have suggested that directly electrons are transferred to nanotube electrodes 
from redox enzymes namely, GOx [120, 121] and cytochrome C [122]. 
Analytes like NAD+
 [123], cholesterol [124], and indole acetic acid [125] 
too have been detected. Since electrochemical sensors use nanotubes, they 
are considered as a mature technology that is CNT-based for bio-sensing. 
However, the use of CNTs for commercial purposes in biosensors has more 
challenges and a difficult task as well as it will take its own time as far as 
their availability is concerned in the near future. 
Semiconducting SWNTs have been developed as field-effect transistor 
(FET) devices. These devices are quite sensitive and are adsorption-based 
on the surface of the nanotube. Besteman et al. fabricated the first SWNT￾FET-based device for biosensing [126] by binding GOx, through a linker, 
to solitary SWNTs, exhibiting a bit of change in conductance when glucose 
is added. Chen et al. [127] showed protein detection selectively by first 
functionalization of the nanotubes by a suitable ligand, such as biotin or 
staphylococcal protein A or U1A antigen, and demonstrated a quantifiable 
change in conductance on attaching protein to the target ligand. However, 
further research by the same team hinted at the adsorption of protein on the 
surface of the gold electrodes as the underlying mechanism of sensing, since 
on passivating the electrodes, there is no measurable conductance change on 
binding the protein [128]. Star et al. developed a SWNT-FET-based DNA 
hybridization sensor and showed detection of a solitary nucleotide poly￾morphism, responsible for a host of diseases [129]. Tang et al., through a 
similar kind of work, demonstrated that the mechanism underlying deoxyri￾bonucleic acid (DNA) hybridization sensing on the surface of single-walled 190 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
nanotube-filled effect transistor (SWNT-FETs) was hybridization at the 
surface of gold electrodes, thereby questioning the role of SWNT-FETs in 
detecting DNA hybridization [130]. 
The latest nanotube biosensor developed takes the advantage of 
photoluminescence (PL) exhibited by the semiconducting SWNT. Lefebvre 
et al. described the science of PL shown by CNTs. SWNTs have a competitive 
edge over traditional fluorophores; which fluoresce within a given region 
of the electromagnetic spectrum wherein blood and tissue won’t fluoresce, 
and will not photobleach thereby are sensitive to variations in the localized 
dielectric environment. Strano et al. brought about the adsorption of GOx 
and work as a reaction facilitator, and quenches single-walled nanotube 
(SWNT) PL, to dissolve single-walled nanotube (SWNT) individually. H2
O2 
liberated on the oxidation of glucose followed by its reaction with GOx and 
restoration of SWNT PL. A DNA hybridization sensor was also developed, 
by allowing adsorption of a target DNA strand in the first place onto the 
SWNT. Hybridization with the complement led to a hypsochromic shift (blue 
shift) of the order of 2 meV at the max emission wavelength. Ultimately, 
Bivalent metal ions are added to DNA-dispersed SWNT which resulted into 
a bathochromic shift (red shift) of the SWNT PL. This shift was detectable 
by encapsulating the single-walled nanotube in living cells as well. The 
application of SWNT PL opens up fresh opportunities of detecting, however, 
commercial availability of such sensor may take another 10 years or so. 
Apart from the FET-based sensors, there have also been research initiatives 
to design sensors made up of nanotubes that function as electrodes, to make 
good use of the field-ionization properties possessed by nanotubes towards 
gases. E.g., the gas-ionization sensor, wherein the arrays of nanotubes replace 
transition metal-based electrodes [131]. The sharp tips of nanotubes produce 
large amounts of electric fields at comparatively lower voltages, reducing 
break-down voltages by many folds as against the conventional electrodes, 
and consequently making compact, battery-powered, and safe operability 
of these sensors. These sensors exhibit better sensitivity and outstanding 
selectivity, and are not influenced by parameters like temperature, humidity, 
and gas flow. 
Such simple, cost effective, sensor electrodes depending upon oriented 
MWNTs vertically could be used for numerous gas-sensor applications, 
like environmental monitoring and in the chemical industry. Nanotubes 
aligned vertically, by virtue of their marked elastic compressibility, provide 
for fabricating electromechanical pressure sensors. The resistivity in phase 
determined in accordance with the cyclic compressive strain on arrays of 
nanotubes aligned vertically has been sensitive to little variations in the strain Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 191 
levels [132]. These strain sensors are quite useful in MEMS devices. The 
response in the form of conductivity of the nanotube to pressure too has been 
made use of inflow sensing, but the challenge of factoring out the effects of 
only pressure is posed in comparison with the temperature, adsorption, etc., 
in influencing the nanotube conductance. 
Electromechanical actuators have been suggested by using sheets of 
SWNTs and MWNTs [133, 134]. Nanotube sheets infiltrated by using 
polymer binders have been found to work as an excellent electrochemical 
actuator, resembling the actuator mechanism observed in natural muscles. 
The nanotube-based actuators are better placed over conducting polymer￾based ones, as the former don’t require an ion intercalation (that curtails 
actuator life). Several applications have been suggested ranging from 
nanotube-based micro-cantilevers to artificial muscles which are stable at 
elevated temperatures. The electromechanical and electrochemical applica￾tions of nanotubes are being researched and have stiff challenges because of 
intrinsic limitations as against novel ferroelectric and organic materials. 
9.7 FIELD EMISSION AND LIGHTING APPLICATIONS 
CNTs have been prescribed as best field emitters attributed to their lower 
threshold voltage, better emission stability and longer emitter lifetime 
[135–138]. Ma et al. contributed to the discussion of electron relaxation 
processes shown by CNTs. These properties make them advantageous in 
designing cathode-ray lighting systems and flat panel displays. The cathode 
ray tube (CRT) as a prototype lighting device is devised by using arc-based 
MWNTs as cold electron sources showed stable electron emission, suffi￾cient luminance, and longer life of the emitters [139]. Samsung fabricated a 
4.5-inch diode type flat panel display with the help of arc-derived SWNTs 
[140]. Although single-walled nanotubes were found to possess best emit￾ting performance, they were vulnerable to degradation at elevated emission 
current [141]. Double-walled nanotubes and thin multiwalled nanotubes 
have been considered as the excellent field emitting materials as they possess 
a low threshold voltage in tune with SWNTs and a comparatively better 
structural stability than SWNTs, resembling with that of MWNTs [142–144]. 
Hiraoka et al. [145] successfully devised a DWNT forest with the help of 
Ni-based alloys using Fe or Cr as catalysts, followed by measurement of the 
field emission from a CNT/buckypaper cathode to an anode. They proposed 
that the uniform emission from the DWNT electrode is due to the better 
electrical contact of DWNTs with the grid substrate. Printable DWNT or thin 192 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
MWNT-based field emitters have a competitive edge for designing larger￾area field emission displays (FEDs) at comparatively lower cost. Although 
some technical issues need to be sorted out, still nanotube-based larger-area 
color FEDs will be a reality soon in the market. 
Pfeiffer et al. described the science underlying DWNTs. Doping of nano￾tubes would also be of great help in the field emission. Charlier et al. [146] 
have proved both theoretical and experimental terms that B-doped MWNTs 
show improved field emission (turn-on voltage of 1.4 V/μm) as compared to 
pure MWNTs (turn on voltage of 3 V/μm). It is attributed to B atoms at the 
tip of nanotubes, which leads to improved density of states nearing the Fermi 
level. Theoretical tight-binding and ab-initio-based computations show that 
the work function of B-doped SWNT is too low (1.7 eV) as compared to pure 
MWNTs. Moreover, it has been observed that N-doped MWNTs in bundles 
have the ability to generate electrons at comparatively lower turn-on voltage 
(2 V/μm) and higher current density (0.2–0.4 A/cm2
) [147]. Further, isolated 
N-doped MWNTs have also exhibited outstanding field emission property 
profile at 800°K; work functions of the order of 5 eV and emission currents 
of magnitude 100 nA experimentally were derived at ±10 V [148]. 
9.8 BIOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS 
The optical properties of nanotubes make them useful in bio-imaging appli￾cations in live cells and tissues. The distinct photostability of SWNT PL 
provides for lengthening of excitation time at more laser fluence as against 
organic fluorophores and QDs. Opaque tissue shows largely attenuated 
absorption, auto-fluorescence, and scattering properties in the wavelength 
range of 700–1,400 nm. This range overlaps with the fluorescence profiles 
of a host of semiconducting NTs (nanotubes), providing for their detection 
in blood and dense tissue [149]. Cherukuri et al. [150] captured images of 
nanotubes on introduction by macrophages, witnessing a lack of photo￾bleaching – a phenomenon that is detrimental to traditional bio-imaging. 
Nanotube fluorescence was utilized to capture images of SWNT in tissue 
sections and to determine their strength in blood [151]. The tremendous 
resonance-driven Raman scattering effect shown by nanotubes is applied to 
tissues as resonance boost takes place at near-IR wavelengths [152]. Saito 
et al. studied in detail about resonance Raman scattering science. Moreover, 
Heinz described Rayleigh scattering in CNTs, while Hartschuh explained 
supporting techniques, like near-field optics. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 193 
The effect of drug therapeutics is consistently on the rise via the fabrica￾tion of novel targeted drug delivery systems. Earlier, such systems covered 
viral vectors, liposomes, cationic lipids, polymers, and nanoparticles. Viral 
vectors consist of an inbuilt transfection capacity, however. There were safety 
issues regarding their applications, resulting in new avenues in the form of 
other vehicles [153]. Although nonviral carriers are versatile in terms of 
shape, size, and materials, a major concern is the weak penetrability of few 
therapeutics into cells. CNTs are easily internalized by cells; and on surface 
functionalization, they show lower cytotoxicity for a few days [154–161]. 
Moreover, they offer a more surface area to volume ratio, offering nanotubes 
the ability to conjugate with more functional groups than spheres and to 
have more loadings of therapeutics. Therefore, nanotubes have dragged a lot 
much of attention as promising candidates for carriers used in targeted drug 
delivery. 
A right protocol for conjugating the drug with the nanotube is asked for to 
translate CNTs into viable delivery carriers. The nanotubes are characterized 
by hydrophobicity and therefore not soluble in biological media in liquid 
form, so numerous methods have been employed for practical application 
of the NTs (nanotubes), both by using covalent and noncovalent interactions 
to bring about their dissolution. Noncovalent methods, involve molecules 
possessing hydrophobic functional groups, covering RNA, DNA [162], 
Triton-X-100 [163], and 1-pyrenebutanoic acid [164], made to adsorb revers￾ibly onto the nanotube surfaces, while the hydrophilic functional groups 
make the conjugates soluble. Covalent functionalization is a very common 
method with different underlying chemistries depending upon the generation 
of carboxyl [165, 166] and amino functional groups at the ends and walls of 
the nanotubes. The carboxyl sites, are bonded with amino [167–169] and 
thiol functional groups, to attach numerous biomolecules to the nanotubes. 
An important step for nanotube drug delivery is to ensure conjugation of the 
nanotubes such that the ligancy of the biomolecules is preserved. The cova￾lently functionalized NTs (nanotubes) tend to work as sites of condensation 
for plasmid DNA that has been considered as a starting material for nanotube 
targeted gene-delivery carriers. Enzymes like Biliverdin/Xbeta reductase has 
also been vulnerable to conjugate with functionalized nanotubes. Salvador￾Morales et al. [170] also presented that nanotubes can regenerate a response 
in the complementary portion of the human immune system, as shown from 
the adsorption of selective fibrinogen and apolipoproteins. 
Researchers recently have demonstrated that the conjugates of nanotubes 
can penetrate into cell and release the therapeutics to ensure delivery of drugs 194 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
successfully. Wu et al. presented the application wherein passive cellular 
uptake is used to deliver multiwalled carbon nanotubes in conjugation with 
amphotericin B (AmB), an antibiotic in connection with fungal infections 
effectively, however the same conjugate is toxic to mammalian cells when it 
is isolated in solution. The conjugate decreased the toxic potential at Jurkat 
cells, while retaining or increasing in some instances, and thereby inhibit the 
growth of C. parapsilosis, C. albicans, and C. neoformans. 
The incorporation of foreign DNA into cells is one more key area for the 
delivery of therapeutic agents by using CNTs. Cai et al. applied nanotube 
spearing, using the magnetic characteristics of nickel-dispersed single￾walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), for the delivery of DNA plasmid vectors 
having the sequence for EGFP (a fluorescent protein) to Bal17 and Mouse 
splenic B cells, which are not divisible cells, and consequently unable 
to transfect. They found expression of EGFP in the cells, while a vector 
with no EGFP didn’t exhibit any measurable fluorescence. Moreover, the 
commercial product, Lipofectamine 2000, too didn’t show any detectable 
fluorescence from EGFP, demonstrating the tremendous efficiency of the 
nanotube-spearing technique. Cai et al. too showed that the nanotubes tiny 
in size provide for easy penetration with very little hindrances to the cell, and 
the magnetic spearing may be better placed over the ballistic method. 
Single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) show strong absorption at Near-IR 
wavelengths and exhibit localized heating. This study demonstrated that 
NIR radiation is responsible for the nanotubes to release the DNA, providing 
for its internalization into the nuclei of the cell. This technique was also 
employed to bring about cell death. Nanotubes on functionalization with a 
folate moiety made them to be internalized specifically by cells having folate 
receptor tumor markers. NIR irradiation caused the death of cells because 
of localized heating due to the nanotubes. Kam et al. applied a technique 
that made use of a disulfide linker for the conjugation of oligonucleotide￾SWNT and siRNA-SWNT. These conjugated nanotubes were passively 
endocytosed inside the cells, followed by the cleavage of the disulfide bond 
due to the presence of thiol-reducing enzymes and the acidic medium present 
in the liposome. NTs (nanotubes) have also been employed for the delivery 
of proteins, namely, cyt-c, to cells to cause apoptosis, or cell death that is 
programmed. In this study, cyt-c-SWNT were endocytosed into NIH-3T3 
cells. The cyt-c-SWNTs were then released on addition of chloroquine to the 
cell environment, leading to an increase in the pace of apoptosis [171]. 
Substantial progress has been made on the front delivery of therapeutics 
via carbon nanotubes. However, there are many problems areas too that are Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 195 
yet to be sorted out before the potential of such materials is fully tapped in 
clinical applications. The field would see furtherance in the growth with the 
advancements of a clear ways for the release of nanotubes from endosomes 
into cells. Passive methods provide for constant up taking of nanotubes by 
cells, a regulated, but nondestructive, technique of nanotube mobility with 
respect to selecting the target area would enhance the therapeutic potential 
of such materials. Better efficient methods of release would enhance the effi￾cacy too. More research is required to estimate the effects in the long-term 
on conjugation of nanotubes in-vivo, given problems namely, toxicity, and 
interaction with biological entities such as blood and tissue. The metabolism 
of such materials, and the probability of in-vivo NTs (nanotube) release on 
delivering the therapeutics are of importance. While such problem areas may 
require years together to address, still the field is quite promising, as NTs 
(nanotubes) have already been showing large and versatile loading power for 
therapeutics, specific unloading, and more cell penetration as compared to a 
host of other materials used in the targeted delivery vehicles. 
Apart from biomedical applications, the diffusion of nanotubes into cells 
is of pivotal importance. The mainstay mechanism of the cellular mobility of 
CNTs is the transportation. Comprehending this mechanism will help give an 
impetus to drug fabrication and gene delivery, other than to enable specific 
cellular targeting in bio-imaging applications. There is a huge controversy 
and confusion about the underlying mechanism by which nanotubes transport 
into cells. Dai et al. have presented that SWNTs that are functionalized with 
acidic groups can transport into the cells by following the endocytosis route; 
however, Bianco et al. prescribes a passive, endocytosis-free mechanism 
for SWNTs and multiwalled nanotubes (MWNTs) functionalized with 
ammonium group. Multiwalled nanotubes (MWNTs), have a size limit 
beyond the endocytosis line, therefore the suggested mechanism is one 
wherein the flipping of lipid molecules of the membrane takes place, 
providing for an access to the cells [172]. 
The coating on the nanotube surface is a parameter that is instrumental 
in the NT (nano-tube) and cell interaction. Serum in cell environment has 
numerous proteins, like albumin, fibronectin, and transferrin, which will be 
adsorbed on the surface of nanotubes. In the systems with no serum, the 
cell generates adequate protein fast to coat the nanotube. Such proteins are 
available in vivo too and rapidly coat any foreign material incorporated 
into the body. In both of these cases, the actual surface made available to 
the cell is the protein-altered surface [173], and it has been confirmed in 
the gold nanoparticles [174]. The morphology of a particle too influences 196 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
the way particles interact with the cells. Phage cells present in the immune 
system consume foreign particles (phagocytosis) with size larger than 
many hundreds of nm, and is suggested one of the pathways for cellular 
uptake by CNTs. Next potential mechanism is receptor-driven endocy￾tosis. In case of nanotube cellular mobility, clathrin-driven endocytosis is 
also another largely exploited pathway mediated by receptors [175]. The 
clathrin naturally takes a molecular size limiting to about 150 nm for the 
cages developed during the course of endocytosis on the membrane, which 
prescribes a cap on the size of particles. Moreover, physical forces, covering 
van der Waals, electrostatic, and hydrophobic interactions are responsible 
for the attraction of towards cells and induce the uptake efficiency, e.g., 
the cations on a nanoparticle boosts the optimal wrapping of the clathrin to 
nanoparticles with the size greater than 25 nm [176]. If the free energy of 
adsorption between the nanoparticles and the cell membrane is greater than 
a given receptor-ligand linkage, the optimal wrapping size may reduce too 
[177]. However, MWNTs, having a 10 nm radius and 200 nm length, are not 
amenable to follow an endocytotic route, but possibly instant switching of 
lipid molecules in the membrane. One more unaddressed issue is the fate of 
nanotubes on getting into the cell. The majority of biological applications 
demand the subsequent expulsion of nanotubes from the cell; although there 
is no clarity in the literature about it. Extensive research work needed on 
nanotube cellular diffusion before such problems are addressed, allowing 
exact knowledge and control of nanotube transport into the cells. As such, 
the use of nanotubes for the biological applications has a lot much of promise 
and potential in the long run, although not in the foreseeable future. 
9.9 MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATIONS 
One of the key applications of nanotubes is nanotube-based electrode tips. 
Given very small sizes, better conductivity, mechanical strength and elasticity, 
nanotubes have demonstrated huge potential to be used as nano-electrodes 
[178–180]. The nanotube-based tips allow for higher resolution for imaging 
and longevity due to their elasticity, as against traditional silicon tips that 
crash frequently. Currently, MWNT-based AFM probe tips are purchased 
from manufacturers of scanning-probe microscopes. These are however are 
very costly, e.g., many 100 dollars/tip and can be looked upon as a specialty 
application with low demand. There have been many offers for the use of 
nanotube tips in futuristic technologies, say in imaging, nanolithography 
[181] and nanoelectrodes. The nanotube tips have been employed for the Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 197 
cause of imaging of surfaces in addition to biological sample matrices, 
namely, DNA at higher resolution. The nanotube tips are conducting and 
can be modified by chemical processing to use it in chemical imaging and 
in maneuvering the molecular moieties on surfaces. It is expected that the 
future of nanotube probes will rely upon how do we fabricate these tips 
(either decorated directly or transferred onto traditional tips) on a mass scale. 
One more exciting application that has been suggested for nanotubes is 
their application as membrane filters. Scientists suggested that membranes 
prepared from oriented arrays of nanotube (both SWNTs and MWNTs) 
could be made use of for selective mobility of species [182–184]. Acti￾vated and porous carbons have been conventionally employed as filters 
(e.g., water treatment) but the nanotubes are advantageous because of their 
uniform and tiny pore sizes, which facilitate the separation of quite small 
molecules becomes. Although the pore size is small, the flow rate is not 
decreased because of the distinct nature of the solvents flow via the cavities 
of the nanotubes. One more advantage is that the nanotube surfaces can be 
chemically functionalized so as to ensure the selective separation. Although 
research is underway to design nanotube-derived membranes for filtration, 
molecular, and gas separation, these are still the areas yet to be explored 
more and the products commercialized. 
Research work has been undertaken in obtaining stable dispersions of 
nanotubes in different solvents (e.g., nanotube inks) [185], that can either 
be spun or printed on numerous substrates. Readily printable (e.g., inkjet 
printing) circuits and films are quite useful for a host of applications 
varying from flexible electronics to antennas. Nanotubes can be spun into 
fibers too by employing different techniques by extradition of slurries of 
nanotubes or by drawing from oriented arrays. Dispersions of SWNTs 
with more weight percentage have either been spun or polymer binders for 
drawing fibers of macro-scale lengths [186, 187]. The fibers can be woven 
into sheets, membranes, etc. Many applications have been found for these 
nanotube-based fibers and other derived products, namely, incandescent 
bulbs with high brightness [188], fillers in polymers, shielding elements as 
well as ballistic protection. Aligned nanotubes can be decorated directly and 
employed to prepare unique products, like brushes [189]. The small brushes 
with bristles made out of nanotubes have been suggested for use in a wide 
range of application areas covering cleaning micro-spaces, conducting 
contact brushes, and probe arrays. The next application of oriented nanotube 
arrays is dry adhesive tapes if nanotube arrays are engineered well then, they 
have excellent adhesive strengths superseding gecko feet even [190]. The 
range of assembled and dispersed products derived from nanotubes would 198 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
meet the needs of many industrial applications in the time to come and would 
provide for consistent and roll-to-roll manufacturing introducing nanotubes. 
A host of such products (preferentially the spun fibers) could reach the 
marketplace within the coming decade [191]. 
Research in CNTs has offered opportunities in designing novel carbon 
nanostructures, which would have specialty applications. Nanotubes 
reinforced with different materials have been prepared by adopting strate￾gies like capillarity infiltration [192, 193]. Hybrid structures consisting of 
nanowires (NWs) and nanotubes have been developed and even branched 
nanostructures have been prepared [194, 195]. All such structures allow for 
the variety of building blocks that could be applied in nanotechnology-based 
products in the coming decade or so. However, few structures, like carbon 
nanohorns (fullerene-alike structures with lower density and higher surface 
area) as explained in detail by Yudasaka et al. [196] which can find use in 
applications such as electrodes and SCs and a range of other applications. 
These materials can be easily synthesized on a mass production using 
the pyrolysis of carbon precursors and further commercialized within the 
10-year time span. 
9.10 ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH APPLICATIONS 
CNTs hold a lot of promise in the fields such as electronics, environment, 
energy, and biomedicine. One of the problems yet to be solved is the safety 
and biocompatibility of the NT-based materials [197–205]. It has been 
proposed recently that a simple and effective way to assess the toxicity and 
biocompatibility of CNTs is by determination of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells in 
peripheral blood and their histopathological examination on carbon-nanotube 
implanted tissues. Most importantly, in the procedure proposed, the mortality 
of animals was quite low, and no chronological variations of body weight 
were noticed amongst nanotube-administered rats against control over a 
period three months after implantation. Time-based difference in peripheral 
T-cells, which consisted of CNTs in situ, was related to a phase of granuloma 
development. Although the potential toxicity was examined and found quite 
low for CVD-decorated MWNTs, further thorough and systematic (long￾term) research pertaining to the toxic nature of numerous kinds of CNTs 
(covering direct inhalation of the nanotubes in lungs) have to be undertaken 
to solve the safety issues of CNTs. 
Nanotube cytotoxicity appears as situational, based largely on the extent 
and kind of functionalization, state of aggregation, and the availability of metal Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 199 
catalyst particles left over after synthesis. Pristine nanotubes are presented to 
affect oxidative stress and reduce cell viability [206, 207], although there is 
an indication that remaining catalyst particles are responsible for this effect 
[208]. The cytotoxicity can be largely reduced by functionalization. Sayes 
et al. [209] showed that the more cytotoxic potential of pristine SWNTs can 
be decreased to zero by enhancing coverage with a covalently bonded polar 
functional group. The selection of functional groups can modify a spectrum of 
cell responses covering the activation of primary immune cells by PEG-coated 
SWNTs [210]. The toxic potential of modified CNTs using noncovalent inter￾actions depends on the kind of the adsorbate. The DNA-coated SWNTs and 
encapsulated leave cells free on penetration of the complex [211]. Toxicity 
studies are also carried out by Terrones et al. on N-doped nanotubes. 
9.11 CONCLUSION 
The applications of nanotubes are summarized based on the timeline that 
depend on mass-scale manufacturing from those that are dependent upon 
regulated fabrication. There are challenges, too, in the successful transfer 
of understanding of commercialization of applications. The promise with 
which nanotubes has enriched the research community should pay off in 
the future. This demands the tapping of the full potential of nanotubes as a 
commercial entity. The applications of nanotubes, can be classified in two 
categories; one, based on the commercialization timeline and second, based 
on the scale of manufacturing (i.e., bulk vs. limited volume). 
There are a plethora of the issues and challenges in exploring the carbon￾nanotube applications since its inception. These challenges have reduced the 
rate at which nanotube commercialization takes place. The topmost issue is 
in regard to the manufacturing. The large-scale applications of nanotubes 
essentially will depend upon the capacity of manufacturing nanotubes in 
large volume, at the industrial scale. In such a case CVD-decorated MWNTs 
(Endo fibers) mass-scale manufacturing has been fairly successful. Company 
giants like Hyperion in the USA and Mitsui Corporation and Showa-Denko 
in Japan have erected manufacturing concerns that can manufacture many 
tons of product/year so as to meet the demand for nanotubes in particular 
from the ESD and battery-based applications. 
The volume of CNTs is small as compared to carbon fibers and other 
carbons that are commercialized. As far as SWNTs are concerned the situa￾tion is different. After pursuing the research for more than a decade on this 
front, still no method is able to manufacture this material in a given volume. 200 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
The quantities are yet confined to some grams, restricting any really an 
application in the bulk for this material. There have been exciting initiatives 
by many manufacturing concerns in the USA, Canada, and China promising 
the procurement of SWNT in required volumes to the availability of MWNT 
in the coming decade or so, but such claims need to be substantiated. Apart 
from the availability there are there are other bottlenecks like cost (SWNTs 
still cost around 100 USD/gram), in comparison with the few dollars/kg 
for the CVD-decorated MWNTs) in addition to basic materials science 
related issues and compatibility, e.g., the aspect of interfaces pertaining to 
polymer composites and furtherance of research in engineering to address 
all concerned issues. 
The applications which will hold lot much of promise in the near future 
will surface from value added applications, like the use of nanotubes as addi￾tives in battery electrodes to impart mechanical stability. The applications that 
demand organized nanotube structures should emphasize upon integration 
pathways. The revolutionary applications of nanotubes, involve nanotube 
electronics, which lay more focus on regulated assembly and integration. 
There are bottlenecks in this route, e.g., the tailored growth of nanotubes 
with selective chirality or diameter. There are still challenges in synthesizing 
nanotubes with regulated length, oriented alignment, location control, etc. 
Processing too is a problem, e.g., the temperatures that are maintained to 
process nanotubes currently are too high than for silicon semiconductor 
processing and therefore integration of nanotubes in the present processes 
in the industry poses challenges. These high value-added applications using 
nanotubes will take its own time to realize. In the near future, there would 
be nanotube-based devices in frontier applications, namely, field emission 
displays, sensors, membranes, coatings, etc., for example, electromechanical 
memories and transparent conductive films which are dependent upon random 
organization of nanotubes. To make them commercially viable, consistency 
in the manufacturing cost-effectiveness is required, such that they compete 
with other material options present in the market today. Scientists carried out 
a survey on the synthesis and processing means of CNTs. 
There are a host of other issues which need to be looked into seriously as 
we carry on with applications of nanotubes. The issues of pivotal importance 
are the environmental and health-safety ones regarding nanomaterials. 
Experiments in isolation have demonstrated that the nanotubes are non-toxic. 
However, we need to have standard protocols as regards how to handle 
such materials, both on the laboratory and an industrial scale. Well-defined 
regulations have to be in vogue when huge amounts of the material are 
required to be dealt with routinely. The impact of these on health in the long Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 201 
run need to be examined. Standard procedures have to be laid down on the 
way nanotube-based materials need to be packed and transported as well as 
the ways to handle them. 
The ensuing decade will be the nanotechnology decade which ask 
for further research in nanometrology as suggested by many scientists. 
CNTs and CNTs-derived products will have a deciding role to play. Huge 
amounts of resources are invested and will be invested in the time to come 
for understanding and production of the CNT-based materials. Several 
years till now have been quite exciting. The new scientific discoveries 
and understanding developed with nanotubes have been significant and 
fulfilling. We are at the crossroads now where the laboratory research find￾ings need to be translated into products of societal importance. Some of 
such initiatives will emerge as successful and some may fail miserably. 
The crucial test for the nanotube materials will be whether it will live up 
to the expectations and promises that have been raised depending upon its 
interesting and exciting properties. 
KEYWORDS 
• carbon nanotubes 
• chemical vapor deposition 
• double-walled nanotubes 
• feld effect transistors 
• multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
• thin-flm transistors 
REFERENCES 
1. Baughman, R. H., Zakhidov, A. A., & Zakhidov, W. A., (2002). Carbon nanotubes–the 
route toward applications. Science, 297, 787–792. 
2. Yakobson, B. I., & Smalley, R. E., (1997). Fullerene nanotubes: C1,000,000 and beyond. 
Am. Sci., 85, 324. 
3. Ajayan, P. M., (1999). Nanotubes from carbon. Chem. Rev., 99, 1787–1800. 
4. Kroto, H. W., Heath, J. R., O’Brien, S. C., Curl, S. C., & Smalley, R. E., (1985). C60: 
Buckministerfullerene. Nature, 318, 162, 163. 
5. Dresselhaus, M. S., Dresselhaus, G., Sugihara, K., Spain, I. L., & Goldberg, H. A., 
(1988). Graphite Fibers and Filaments. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 202 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
6. Oberlin, A., Endo, M., & Koyama, T., (1976). Filamentous growth of carbon through 
benzene decomposition. J. Cryst. Growth, 32, 335–349. 
7. Saito, R., Dresselhaus, G., & Dresselhaus, M. S., (1998). Physical Properties of Carbon 
Nanotubes. Imperial College Press, London. 
8. Iijima, S., (1991). Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon. Nature, 354, 56–58. 
9. Ebbesen, T. W., & Ajayan, P. M., (1992). Large scale synthesis of carbon nanotubes. 
Nature, 358, 220. 
10. Iijima, S., & Ichihashi, T., (1993). Single shell carbon nanotubes of 1-nm diameter. 
Nature, 363, 603–605. 
11. Bethune, D. S., Klang, C. H., deVries, M. S., Gorman, G., Savoy, R., Vazquez, J., & 
Beyers, R., (1993). Cobalt catalysed growth of carbon nanotubes with single atomic 
layer wells. Nature, 363, 605–607. 
12. Dekker, C., (1999). Carbon nanotubes as molecular quantum wires. Phys. Today, 52, 22–28. 
13. Javey, A., (2003). Ballistic carbon nanotube field-effect transistors. Nature, 424, 654–657. 
14. McEuen, P. L., Fuhrer, M. S., & Park, H. K., (2002). Single-walled carbon nanotube 
electronics. IEEE Transact. Nanotechnol., 1, 78–85. 
15. Kreup, F., Graham, A. P., Liebau, M., Duesberg, G. S., Seidel, R., & Unger, E., (2004). 
Carbon Nanotubes for Interconnect Applications (pp. 683–686). IEDM. 
16. Arnold, M. S., Green, A. A., Hulvat, J. F., Stupp, S. I., & Hersam, M. C., (2006). 
Sorting carbon nanotubes by electronic structure using density differentiation. Nature 
Nanotechnol., 1, 60–65. 
17. Zhang, G. Y., (2006). Selective etching of metallic carbon nanotubes by gas-phase 
reaction. Science, 314, 974–977. 
18. Wei, B. Q., Vajtai, R., & Ajayan, P. M., (2001). Reliability and current carrying capacity 
of carbon nanotubes. Appl. Phys. Lett., 79, 1172. 
19. URL http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/45nm URL: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/65nm17 
(accessed on 19 September 2022). 
20. Tans, S. J., Verschueren, A. R. M., & Dekker, C., (1998). Room-temperature transistor 
based on a single carbon nanotube. Nature, 393, 49–52. 
21. Martel, R., Schmidt, T., Shea, H. R., Hertel, T., & Avouris, P., (1998). Single- and 
multiwall carbon nanotube field-effect transistors. Appl. Phys. Lett., 73, 2447. 
22. Bachtold, A., Hadley, P., Nakanishi, T., & Dekker, C., (2001). Reports, logic circuits 
with carbon nanotube transistors. Science, 294, 1317–1320. 
23. Collins, P. G., Arnold, M. S., & Avouris, P., (2001). Engineering carbon nanotubes and 
nanotube circuits using electrical breakdown. Science, 292, 706–709. 
24. Klinke, C., Hannon, J. B., Afzali, A., & Avouris, P., (2006). Field effect transistors 
assembled from functionalized nanotubes. Nano Lett., 6, 906–910. 
25. Rossnagel, S. M., & Kaun, T. S., (2004). Alteration of Cu conductivity in the size effect 
regime. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 22, 240–247. 
26. White, C. T., & Todorov, T. N., (2001). Quantum electronics – nanotubes go ballistic. 
Nature, 411, 649–651. 
27. Naeemi, A. R., Sarvari, R., & Meindl, J. D., (2005). Performance comparison between 
carbon nanotube and copper interconnects for gigascale integration (GSI). IEEE 
Electron. Device Lett., 26, 84–86. 
28. Lin, Y. M., Appenzeller, J., Chen, Z., Chen, Z. G., Cheng, H. M., & Avouris, P., (2005). 
High-performance dual-gate carbon nanotube FETs with 40-nm gate length. IEEE 
Electron. Device L., 26, 823–825. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 203 
29. Javey, A., Guo, J., Farmer, D. B., Wang, Q., Yenilmez, E., Gordon, R. G., Lundstrom, M., 
& Dai, H., (2004). Self-aligned ballistic molecular transistors and electrically parallel 
nanotube arrays. Nano Lett. 4, 1319–1322. 
30. Javey, A., Kim, H. S., Brink, M., Wang, Q., Ural, A., Guo, J., McIntyre, P., et al., (2002). 
High-kappa dielectrics for advanced carbon-nanotube transistors and logic gates. Nature 
Mater., 1, 241–246. 
31. Nantero. Website http://www.nantero.com/ (accessed on 19 September 2022). 
32. Cao, Q., Hur, S. H., Zhu, Z. T., Sun, Y. G., Wang, C. J., Meitl, M. A., Shim, M., & 
Rogers, J. A., (2006). Highly bendable, transparent thin-film transistors that use carbon￾nanotube-based conductors and semiconductors with elastomeric dielectrics. Adv. Mater., 
18, 304–309. 
33. Cao, Q., Zhu, Z. T., Lemaitre, M. G., Xia, M. G., & Rogers, M. S. J. A., (2006). 
Transparent flexible organic thin-film transistors that use printed single-walled carbon 
nanotube electrodes. Appl. Phys. Lett., 88, 113511. 
34. Wu, Z., Chen, Z., Du, X., Logan, J. M., Sippel, J., Nikolou, M., Kamaras, K., et al., 
(2004). Transparent, conductive carbon nanotube films. Science, 305, 1273–1276. 
35. URL: http://www.fibrils.com/ (accessed on 19 September 2022). 
36. Kord´as, K., Tth, G., Moilanen, P., Kumpumki, M., Vhkangas, J., Uusimki, A., Vajtai, 
R., & Ajayan, P. M., (2007). Chip cooling with integrated carbon nanotube microfin 
architectures. Appl. Phys. Lett., 90, 123105. 
37. Leroux, F., Metenier, K., Gautier, S., Frackowiak, E., Bonnamy, S., & Beguin, F., 
(1999). Electrochemical insertion of lithium in catalytic multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
J. Power Sources, 81, 317–322. 
38. Claye, A. S., Fischer, J. E., Huffman, C. B., Rinzler, A. G., & Smalley, R. E., (2000). 
Solid-state electrochemistry of the Li single wall carbon nanotube system. J. Electrochem. 
Soc., 147, 2845–2852. 
39. Shimoda, H., et al., (2002). Lithium intercalation into opened single-wall carbon 
nanotubes: Storage capacity and electronic properties. Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 015502. 
40. Lu, W., & Chung, D. D. L., (2001). Anodic performance of vapor-derived carbon 
filaments in lithium-ion secondary battery. Carbon, 39, 493–496. 
41. Gao, B., Kleinhammes, A., Tang, X. P., Bower, C., Fleming, L., Wu, Y., & Zhou, O., 
(1999). Electrochemical intercalation of single-walled carbon nanotubes with lithium. 
Chem. Phys. Lett., 307, 153–157. 
42. Sato, M., Noguchi, A., Demachi, N., Oki, N., & Endo, M., (1994). A mechanism of 
lithium storage in disordered carbons. Science, 264, 556–558. 
43. Endo, M., Kim, C., Nishimura, K., Fujino, T., & Miyashita, K., (2000). Recent develop￾ment of carbon materials for Li ion batteries. Carbon, 38, 183–197. 
44. Endo, M., Kim, Y. A., Hayashi, T., Nishimura, K., Matsushita, T., Miyashita, K., & 
Dresselhaus, M. S., (2001). Vapor-grown carbon fibers (VGCFs) basic properties and 
battery application. Carbon, 39, 1287–1297. 
45. Conway, B. E., (1999). Electrochemical Supercapacitors-Scientific Fundamentals and 
Technological Applications. Kluwer, New York. 
46. Niu, C., Sickel, E. K., Hoch, R., Moy, D., & Tennent, H., (1997). High power electro￾chemical capacitors based on carbon nanotube electrodes. Appl. Phys. Lett., 70, 1480–1482. 
47. An, K. H., Kim, W. S., Park, Y. S., Moon, J. M., Bae, D. J., Lim, S. C., Lee, Y. S., 
& Lee, Y. H., (2001). Electrochemical properties of high-power supercapacitors using 
single-walled carbon nanotube electrodes. Adv. Funct. Mater., 11, 387–392. 204 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
48. Kim, Y. J., Kim, Y. A., Chino, T., Suezaki, H., Endo, M., & Dresselhaus, M. S., (2006). 
Chemically modified multi-walled carbon nanotubes as an additive for supercapacitors. 
Small, 2, 339–345. 
49. Landi, B. J., Castro, S. L., Ruf, H. J., Evans, C. M., Bailey, S. G., & Raffaelle, R. P., 
(2005). CdSe quantum dot-single wall carbon nanotube complexes for polymeric solar 
cells. Sol. Energ. Mater. Sol. C., 87, 733–746. 
50. Kymakis, E., & Amaratunga, G. A. J., (2006). Electrical properties of single-wall carbon 
nanotube-polymer composite films. J. Appl. Phys., 99, 084302. 
51. Xu, Z. H., Wu, Y., Hu, B., Ivanov, I. N., & Geohegan, D. B., (2005). Carbon nanotube 
effects on electroluminescence and photovoltaic response in conjugated polymers. Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 87, 263118. 
52. Bachtold, A., Fuhrer, M. S., Plyasunov, S., Forero, M., Anderson, E. H., Zettl, A., & 
McEuen, P. L., (2000). Scanned probe microscopy of electronic transport in carbon 
nanotubes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 6082–6085. 
53. Kymakis, E., Alexandrou, I., & Amaratunga, G. A. J., (2003). High open-circuit voltage 
photovoltaic devices from carbon-nanotube-polymer composites. J. Appl. Phys., 93, 
1764–1768. 
54. Kymakis, E., & Amaratunga, G. A. J., (2002). Single-wall carbon nanotube/conjugated 
polymer photovoltaic devices. Appl. Phys. Lett., 80, 112–114. 
55. Kymakis, E., & Amaratunga, G. A. J., (2005). Carbon nanotubes as electron acceptors 
in polymeric photovoltaics. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 10, 300–305. 
56. Bhattacharyya, S., Kymakis, E., & Amaratunga, G. A. J., (2004). Photovoltaic properties 
of dye functionalized single-wall carbon nanotube/conjugated polymer devices. Chem. 
Mater., 16, 4819–4823. 
57. Kymakis, E., & Amaratunga, G. A. J., (2003). Photovoltaic cells based on dye sensitization 
of single-wall carbon nanotubes in a polymer matrix. Sol. Energ. Mater. Sol. C., 80, 
465–472. 
58. Rahman, G. M. A., Guldi, D. M., Cagnoli, R., Mucci, A., Schenetti, L., Vaccari, L., & 
Prato, M., (2005). Combining single wall carbon nanotubes and photoactive polymers 
for photoconversion. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 127, 10051–10057. 
59. Raffaelle, R. P., Landi, B. J., Harris, J. D., Bailey, S. G., & Hepp, A., (2005). Carbon 
nanotubes for power applications. Mater. Sci. Eng. B-Solid, 116, 233–243. 
60. Miller, A. J., Hatton, R. A., & Silva, S. R. P., (2006). Water-soluble multiwall￾carbonnanotube-polythiophene composite for bilayer photovoltaics. Appl. Phys. Lett., 
89, 123115. 
61. Miller, A. J., Hatton, R. A., & Silva, S. R. P., (2006). Interpenetrating multiwall carbon 
nanotube electrodes for organic solar cells. Appl. Phys. Lett., 89, 133117. 
62. Lee, S. B., Katayama, T., Kajii, H., Araki, H., & Yoshino, K., (2001). Electrical and 
optical properties of conducting polymer-C-60-carbon nanotube system. Synth. Met., 
121, 1591, 1592. 
63. Landi, B. J., Raffaelle, R. P., Castro, S. L., & Bailey, S. G., (2005). Single-wall carbon 
nanotube-polymer solar cells. Prog. Photovoltaics, 13, 165–172. 
64. Rud, J. A., Lovell, L. S., Senn, J. W., Qiao, Q., & Mcleskey, J. T., (2005). Water soluble 
polymer/carbon nanotube bulk heterojunction solar cells. J. Mater. Sci., 40, 1455–1458. 
65. Valentini, L., & Kenny, J. M., (2005). Novel approaches to developing carbon nanotube 
based polymer composites: Fundamental studies and nanotech applications. Polymer, 
46, 6715–6718. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 205 
66. Spiekermann, S., Smestad, G., Kowalik, J., Tolbert, L. M., & Grtzel, M., (2001). Poly(4-
undecyl-2,2’-bithiophene) as a hole conductor in solid state dye sensitized titanium 
dioxide solar cells. Synth. Met., 121, 1603, 1604. 
67. Gratzel, M., (2001). Photoelectrochemical cells. Nature, 414, 338–344. 
68. Feng, W., Feng, Y., Wu, Z., Fujii, A., Ozaki, M., & Yoshino, K., (2005). Optical and 
electrical characterizations of nanocomposite film of titania adsorbed onto oxidized 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes. J. Phys.-Condens. Matter., 17, 4361–4368. 
69. Spataru, C. D., Ismail-Beigi, S., Benedict, L. X., & Louie, S. G., (2004). Quasiparticle 
energies, excitonic effects and optical absorption spectra of small-diameter single￾walled carbon nanotubes. Appl. Phys. A-Mater., 78, 1129–1136. 
70. Ichida, M., Mizuno, S., Tani, Y., Saito, Y., & Nakamura, A., (1999). Exciton effects of 
optical transitions in single-wall carbon nanotubes. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 68, 3131–3133. 
71. Kazaoui, S., Minami, N., Nalini, B., Kim, Y., & Hara, K., (2005). Near-infrared photo￾conductive and photovoltaic devices using single-wall carbon nanotubes in conductive 
polymer films. J. Appl. Phys., 98, 084314. 
72. Britto, P. J., Santhanam, K. S. V., Rubio, A., Alonso, A., & Ajayan, P. M., (1999). 
Improved charge transfer at carbon nanotube electrodes. Adv. Mater., 11, 154–157. 
73. Che, G., Lakshmi, B. B., Fisher, E. R., & Martin, C. R., (1999). Carbon nanotube 
membranes for electrochemical energy storage and production. Nature, 393, 346–349. 
74. Endo, M., Kim, Y. A., Ezaka, M., Osada, K., Yanagisawa, T., Hayashi, T., Terrones, M., & 
Dresselhaus, M. S., (2003). Selective and efficient impregnation of metal nanoparticles 
on cup-stacked-type nanofibers. Nano Lett., 3, 723–726. 
75. Yoshitake, T., Shimakawa, Y., Kuroshima, S., Kimura, H., Ichihashi, T., Kubo, Y., 
Kasuya, D., et al., (2002). Preparation of fine platinum catalyst supported on single-wall 
carbon nanohorns for fuel cell application. Physica B, 323, 124–126. 
76. Kim, C., Kim, Y. J., Kim, Y. A., Yanagisawa, T., Endo, M., & Dresselhaus, M. S., (2004). 
Pt/Ru supported on cup-stack typed carbon nanotubes as an electrode for fuel cell 
applications. J. Appl. Phys. 96, 5903–5905. 
77. Wang, C., Waje, M., Wang, X., Tang, J. M., Haddon, R. C., & Yan, Y. S., (2004). Proton 
exchange membrane fuel cells with carbon nanotube based electrodes. Nano Lett., 4, 
345–348. 
78. Treacy, M. M. J., Ebbesen, T. W., & Gibson, J. M., (1996). Exceptionally high young’s 
modulus observed for individual carbon nanotubes. Nature, 381, 678–681. 
79. Yu, M., Lourie, O., Dyer, M. J., Moloni, K., Kelly, T. F., & Ruoff, R. S., (2000). Strength 
and breaking mechanism of multiwalled carbon nanotubes under tensile load. Science, 
287, 637–640. 
80. Wagner, H. D., Lourie, O., Feldman, Y., & Tenne, R., (1998). Stress–induced fragmenta￾tion of multiwall carbon nanoutbes in a polymer matrix. Appl. Phys. Lett., 72, 188–190. 
81. Yakobson, B. I., (1998). Mechanical relaxation and intramolecular plasticity in carbon 
nanotubes. Appl. Phys. Lett., 72, 918. 
82. Cao, A., Dickrell, D. L., Sawyer, W. G., Ghasemi-Nejhad, M. N., & Ajayan, P. M., 
(2005). Super-compressible foamlike carbon nanotube films. Science, 310, 1307–1310. 
83. Ajayan, P. M., Schadler, L. S., Giannaris, C., & Rubio, A., (2000). Single-walled carbon 
nanotube-polymer composites: Strength and weakness. Adv. Mater., 12, 750. 
84. Veedu, V. P., Cao, A., Li, X., Ma, K., Soldano, C., Kar, S., Ajayan, P. M., & Ghasemi￾Nejhad, M. N., (2006). Multifunctional composites using reinforced laminae with 
carbon-nanotube forests. Nature Mater., 5, 457–462. 206 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
85. Suhr, J., Zhang, W., Ajayan, P. M., & Koratkar, N. A., (2006). Temperature-activated 
interfacial friction damping in carbon nanotube polymer composites. Nano Lett., 6, 
219–223. 
86. Schadler, L. S., Giannaris, S. C., & Ajayan, P. M., (1998). Load transfer in carbon 
nanotube epoxy composites. Appl. Phys. Lett., 73, 3842. 
87. Eitan, A., Jian, K. Y., Dukes, D., Andrews, R., & Schadler, L. S., (2003). Surface 
modification of multiwalled carbon nanotubes: Toward the tailoring of the interface in 
polymer composites. Chem. Mater., 15, 3198–3201. 
88. Suhr, J., Koratkar, N., Keblinski, P., & Ajayan, P. M., (2005). Viscoelasticity in carbon 
nanotube composites. Nature Mater., 4, 134. 
89. Gibson, R. F., Ayorinde, E. O., & Wen, Y. F., (2007). Vibrations of carbon nanotubes and 
their composites: A review. Compos. Sci. Technol., 67, 1–28. 
90. Fragneaud, B., Masenelli-Varlot, K., González-Montiel, A., Terrones, M., & Cavaillé, 
J. Y., (2005). Efficient coating of N-doped carbon nanotubes with polystyrene using 
atomic transfer radical polymerization. Chem. Phys. Lett., 419, 567. 
91. Dehonor, M., Varlot, K. M., Montiel, A. G., Gauthier, C., Cavaillé, J. Y., Terrones, 
H., & Terrones, M., (2005). Nanotube brushes: Polystyrene grafted covalently on 
CNx nanotubes by nitroxide-mediated radical polymerization. Chem. Commun., 42, 
5349–5351. 
92. Endo, M., Koyama, S., Matsuda, Y., Hayashi, T., & Kim, Y. A., (2005). Thrombogenicity 
and blood coagulation of a micro-catheter prepared from carbon nanotubenylon based 
composite. Nano Lett., 5, 101–106. 
93. Koyama, S., Haniu, H., Osaka, K., Koyama, H., Kuroiwa, N., Endo, M., Kim, Y. A., 
& Hayashi, T., (2006). Medical application of carbon nanotube-filled nanocomposites: 
Microcatheter. Small, 2, 1406–1411. 
94. Qi, P., Vermesh, O., Grecu, M., Javey, A., Wang, Q., Dai, H., Peng, S., & Cho, K. J., 
(2003). Toward large arrays of multiplex functionalized carbon nanotube sensors for 
highly sensitive and selective molecular detection. Nano Lett., 3, 347–351. 
95. Kong, J., Franklin, N. R., Zhou, C., Chapline, M. G., Peng, S., Cho, K., & Dai, H., 
(2000). Nanotube molecular wires as chemical sensors. Science, 287, 622–625. 
96. Barone, P. W., Baik, S., Heller, D. A., & Strano, M. S., (2005). Near-infrared optical 
sensors based on single-walled carbon nanotubes. Nature Mater., 4, 86–92. 
97. Jeng, E. S., Moll, A. E., Roy, A. C., Gastala, J. B., & Strano, M. S., (2006). Detection 
of DNA hybridization using the near-infrared band-gap fluorescence of single walled 
carbon nanotubes. Nano Lett., 6, 371–375. 
98. Heller, D. A., Jeng, E. S., Yeung, T. K., Martinez, B. M., Moll, A. E., Gastala, J. B., 
& Strano, M. S., (2006). Optical detection of DNA conformational polymorphism on 
single-walled carbon nanotubes. Science, 311, 508–511. 
99. Peng, S., & Cho, K. J., (2000). Chemical control of nanotube electronics. Nanotechnol., 
11, 57–60. 
100. Lee, C. Y., Baik, S., Zhang, J., Masel, R. I., & Strano, M. S., (2006). Charge transfer 
from metallic single-walled carbon nanotube sensor arrays. J. Phys. Chem. B, 110, 
11055–11061. 
101. Heinze, S., Tersoff, J., Martel, R., Derycke, V., Appenzeller, J., & Avouris, P., (2002). 
Carbon nanotubes as Schottky barrier transistors. Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 106801. 
102. Bradley, K., Gabriel, J. C. P., Star, A., & Grüner, G., (2003). Short-channel effects in 
contact-passivated nanotube chemical sensors. Appl. Phys. Lett., 83, 3821–3823. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 207 
103. Zhang, J., Boyd, A., Tselev, A., Paranjape, M., & Barbara, P., (2006). Mechanism of 
NO2
 detection in carbon nanotube field effect transistor chemical sensors. Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 88, 123112. 
104. Lu, Y., Li, J., Han, J., Ng, H. T., Binder, C., Partridge, C., & Meyyappan, M., (2004). 
Room temperature methane detection using palladium loaded single-walled carbon 
nanotube sensors. Chem. Phys. Lett., 391, 344–348. 
105. Staii, C., & Johnson, A. T., (2005). DNA-decorated carbon nanotubes for chemical 
sensing. Nano Lett., 5, 1774–1778. 
106. Chen, R. J., Franklin, N. R., Kong, J., Cao, J., Tombler, T. W., Zhang, Y., & Dai, H., 
(2001). Molecular photodesorption from single-walled carbon nanotubes. Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 79, 2258–2260. 
107. Novak, J. P., Snow, E. S., Houser, E. J., Park, D., Stepnowski, J. L., & McGill, R. A., 
(2003). Nerve agent detection using networks of single-walled carbon nanotubes. Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 83, 4026–4028. 
108. Snow, E. S., Perkins, F. K., Houser, E. J., Badescu, S. C., & Reinecke, T. L., (2005). 
Chemical detection with a single-walled carbon nanotube capacitor. Science, 307, 
1942–1945. 
109. Snow, E. S., & Perkins, F. K., (2005). Capacitance and conductance of single-walled 
carbon nanotubes in the presence of chemical vapors. Nano Lett., 5, 2414–2417. 
110. Wang, J., & Musameh, M., (2003). Carbon nanotube/teflon composite electrochemical 
sensors and biosensors. Anal. Chem., 75, 2075–2079. 
111. Gao, M., Dai, L. M., & Wallace, G. G., (2003). Biosensors based on aligned carbon 
nanotubes coated with inherently conducting polymers. Electroanal., 15, 1089–1094. 
112. Tang, H., Chen, J., Yao, S., Nie, L., Deng, G., & Kuang, Y., (2004). Amperometric 
glucose biosensor based on adsorption of glucose oxidase at platinum nanoparticle 
modified carbon nanotube electrode. Anal. Biochem., 331, 89–97. 
113. Hrapovic, S., Liu, Y., Male, K. B., Luong, & T, J. H., (2004). Electrochemical 
biosensing platforms using platinum nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes. Anal. Chem., 
76, 1083–1088. 
114. Male, K. B., Hrapovic, S., Liu, Y., Dashan, W., Luong, & T, J. H., (2004). Electrochemical 
detection of carbohydrates using copper nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes. Anal. Chim. 
Acta, 516, 35–41. 
115. Cai, H., Cao, X., Jiang, Y., He, P., & Fang, Y., (2003). Carbon nanotube-enhanced 
electrochemical DNA biosensor for DNA hybridization detection. Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 
375, 287–293. 
116. Wang, S. G., Wang, R., Sellin, P. J., & Zhang, Q., (2004). DNA biosensors based on self 
assembled carbon nanotubes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm., 325, 1433–1437. 
117. Kerman, K., Morita, Y., Takamura, Y., Ozsoz, M., & Tamiya, E., (2004). DNA-directed 
attachment of carbon nanotubes for enhanced label-free electrochemical detection of 
DNA hybridization. Electroanal., 16, 1667–1672. 
118. Wang, J., Liu, G., & Jan, M. R., (2004). Ultrasensitive electrical biosensing of proteins 
and DNA: Carbon-nanotube derived amplification of the recognition and transduction 
events. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 3010–3011. 
119. Britto, P. J., Santhanam, K. S. V., & Ajayan, P. M., (1996). Carbon nanotube electrode 
for oxidation of dopamine. Bioelectroch. Bioener., 41, 121–125. 
120. Guiseppi-Elie, A., Lei, C. H., & Baughman, R. H., (2002). Direct electron transfer of 
glucose oxidase on carbon nanotubes. Nanotechnol., 13, 559–564. 208 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
121. Zhao, Y. D., Zhang, W. D., Chen, H., & Luo, Q. M., (2002). Direct electron transfer of 
glucose oxidase molecules adsorbed onto carbon nanotube powder microelectrode. Anal. 
Sci., 18, 939–941. 
122. Wang, J., Li, M., Shi, Z., Li, N., & Gu, Z., (2002). Direct electrochemistry of cytochrome 
c at a glassy carbon electrode modified with single-wall carbon nanotubes. Anal. Chem., 
74, 1993–1997. 
123. Musameh, M., Wang, J., Merkoci, A., & Lin, Y., (2002). Low-potential stable NADH 
detection at carbon-nanotube-modified glassy carbon electrodes. Electrochem. Commun., 
4, 743–746. 
124. Li, G., Liao, J. M., Hu, G. Q., Ma, N. Z., & Wu, P. J., (2005). Study of carbon nanotube 
modified biosensor for monitoring total cholesterol in blood. Biosens. Bioelectron., 20, 
2140–2144. 
125. Wu, K., Sun, Y., & Hu, S., (2003). Development of an amperometric indole-3-acetic acid 
sensor based on carbon nanotubes film coated glassy carbon electrode. Sens. Actuators 
B-Chem., 96, 658–662. 
126. Besteman, K., Lee, J., Wiertz, F. G. M., Heering, H. A., & Dekker, C., (2003). Enzyme 
coated carbon nanotubes as single-molecule biosensors. Nano Lett., 3, 727–730. 
127. Chen, R. J., Bangsaruntip, S., Drouvalakis, K. A., Kam, N. W. S., Shim, M., Li, Y., Kim, 
W., et al., (2003). Noncovalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes for highly specific 
electronic biosensors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 4984–4989. 
128. Chen, R. J., et al., (2004). An investigation of the mechanisms of electronic sensing of 
protein adsorption on carbon nanotube devices. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 1563–1568. 
129. Star, A., et al., (2006). Label-free detection of DNA hybridization using carbon nanotube 
network field-effect transistors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 103, 921–926. 
130. Tang, X. W., et al., (2006). Carbon nanotube DNA sensor and sensing mechanism. Nano 
Lett., 6, 1632–1636. 
131. Modi, A., Koratkar, N., Lass, E., Wei, B. Q., & Ajayan, P. M., (2003). Miniaturized gas 
ionization sensors using carbon nanotubes. Nature, 424, 171. 
132. Victor, P., et al., (2007). Electromechanical properties of a macroscale carbon nanotube 
block. Appl. Phys. Lett. In review. 
133. Baughman, R. H., Cui, C., Zhakhidov, A. A., Iqbal, Z., Barisci, J. N., Spinks, G. M., 
Wallace, G. G., et al., (1999). Carbon nanotube actuators. Science, 284, 1340. 
134. Hamberg, M. W., et al., (1995). An electrochemical micro actuator. In: Micro–Electro 
Mechanical Systems, Proc. IEEE, 106. 
135. Rinzler, A. G., et al., (1995). Unraveling nanotubes: Field emission from an atomic wire. 
Science, 269, 1550–1553. 
136. Heer, W. A. D., Chatelain, A., & Ugarte, D., (1995). A carbon nanotube field emission 
electron source. Science, 270, 1179, 1180. 
137. Saito, Y., & Uemura, S., (2000). Field emission from carbon nanotubes and its applica￾tions to electron sources. Carbon, 38, 169–182. 
138. Fan, S. S., Chaplind, M. G., Franklin, N. R., Tombler, T. W., Cassel, A. M., & Dai, 
H., (1999). Self oriented regular arrays of carbon nanotubes and their field emission 
properties. Science, 283, 512–514. 
139. Saito, Y., Uemura, S., & Hamaguchi, K., (1998). Cathode ray tube lighting elements 
with carbon nanotube field emitters. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 37, L346–L348. 
140. Choi, W. B., Chung, D. S., Kang, J. H., Kim, H. Y., Jin, Y. W., Han, I. T., Lee, Y. H., et 
al., (1999). Fully sealed high brightness carbon nanotube field emission display. Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 75, 3219–3231. Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 209 
141. Bonard, J. M., Salvetat, J. P., Stockli, T., Deheer, W. A., Forro, L., & Chatelain, A., 
(1998). Field emission from single-wall carbon nanotube film. Appl. Phys. Lett., 73, 
918–920. 
142. Kurachi, H., Uemura, S., Yotani, J., Nagasako, T., Yamada, H., Ezaki, H., Maesoba, T., 
et al., (2001). In: Proc. 21st Int. Display Res. Conf./8th Int. Display Workshops: Soc. Inf. 
Display (pp. 1245–1248). 
143. Seko, K., Kinoshita, J., & Saito, Y., (2005). In situ transmission electron microscopy 
of field-emitting bundles of double wall carbon nanotubes. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 44, 
L743–L745. 
144. Son, Y. W., Oh, S., Ihm, J., & Han, S., (2005). Field emission properties of double-wall 
carbon nanotubes. Nanotechnol., 16, 125–128. 
145. Hiraoka, T., Yamada, T., Hata, K., Futaba, D. N., Kurachi, H., Uemura, S., Yumura, M., 
& Iijima, S., (2006). Synthesis of single and double walled carbon nanotubes forests on 
conducting metal foils. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 128, 13338, 13339. 
146. Charlier, J. C., Terrones, M., Baxendale, M., Meunier, V., Zacharia, T., Rupesinghe, 
N. L., Hsu, W. K., et al., (2002). Enhanced electron field emission in B-doped carbon 
nanotubes. Nano Lett., 2, 1191. 
147. Golberg, D., Dorozhkin, P. S., Bando, Y., Dong, Z. C., Tang, C. C., Uemura, Y., Grobert, 
N., et al., (2003). Structure, transport and field-emission properties of compound 
nanotubes: CNx vs. BNCx (x <0.1). Appl. Phys. A-Mater., 76, 499. 
148. Doytcheva, M., Kaiser, M., Reyes-Reyes, M., Terrones, M., & De Jonge, N., (2004). 
Electron emission from individual nitrogen-doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Chem. Phys. Lett., 396, 126. 
149. Heller, D. A., et al., (2006). Optical detection of DNA conformational polymorphism on 
single-walled carbon nanotubes. Science, 311, 508–511. 
150. Cherukuri, P., et al., (2004). Near-infrared fluorescence microscopy of single-walled 
carbon nanotubes in phagocytic cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 15638, 15639. 
151. Cherukuri, P., et al., (2006). Mammalian pharmacokinetics of carbon nanotubes using 
intrinsic near-infrared fluorescence. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 103, 18882–18886. 
152. Heller, D. A., et al., (2005). Single-walled carbon nanotube spectroscopy in live cells: 
Towards long-term labels and optical sensors. Adv. Mater., 17, 2793–2799. 
153. Klumpp, C., et al., (2006). Functionalized carbon nanotubes as emerging nanovectors 
for the delivery of therapeutics. BBA-Biomembranes, 1758, 404–412. 
154. Pantarotto, D., et al., (2004). Translocation of bioactive peptides across cell membranes 
by carbon nanotubes. Chem. Commun., 2004, 16, 17. 
155. Kam, N. W. S., et al., (2004). Nanotube molecular transporters: Internalization of carbon 
nanotube-protein conjugates into mammalian cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 6850–6851. 
156. Cai, D., et al., (2005). Highly efficient molecular delivery into mammalian cells using 
carbon nanotube spearing. Nature Method., 2, 449–454. 
157. Lu, Q., et al., (2004). RNA polymer translocation with single-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Nano Lett., 4, 2473–2477. 
158. Kam, N. W. S., & Dai, H. J., (2005). Carbon nanotubes as intracellular protein transporters: 
Generality and biological functionality. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 127, 6021–6026. 
159. Wu, W., et al., (2005). Targeted delivery of amphotericin B to cells by using functionalized 
carbon nanotubes, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit., 44, 6358–6362. 
160. Pantarotto, D., et al., (2004). Functionalized carbon nanotubes for plasmid DNA gene 
delivery, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit., 43, 5242–5246. 210 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
161. Kam, N. W. S., Liu, Z., & Dai, H. J., (2005). Functionalization of carbon nanotubes via 
cleavable disulfide bonds for efficient intracellular delivery of siRNA and potent gene 
silencing. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 127, 12492, 12493. 
162. Zheng, et al., (2003). Structure-based carbon nanotube sorting by sequence dependent 
DNA assembly. Science, 302, 1545–1548. 
163. Panhuis, M. I. H., et al., (2003). Characterization of an interaction between functionalized 
carbon nanotubes and an enzyme. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 3, 209–213. 
164. Chen, R. J., et al., (2001). Noncovalent sidewall functionalization of single-walled 
carbon nanotubes for protein immobilization. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 123, 3838, 3839. 
165. Liu, J., et al., (1998). Fullerene pipes. Science, 280, 1253–1256. 
166. Hu, H., et al., (2004). Chemically functionalized carbon nanotubes as substrates for 
neuronal growth. Nano Lett., 4, 507–511. 
167. Liu, Y., et al., (2005). Polyethylenimine-grafted multiwalled carbon nanotubes for secure 
noncovalent immobilization and efficient delivery of DNA. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 44, 
4782–4785. 
168. Pastorin, G., et al., (2006). Double functionalisation of carbon nanotubes for multimodal 
drug delivery. Chem. Commun., 11, 1182–1184. 
169. Singh, R., et al., (2005). Binding and condensation of plasmid DNA onto functionalized 
carbon nanotubes: Toward the construction of nanotube-based gene delivery vectors. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc., 127, 4388–4396. 
170. Salvador-Morales, C., et al., (2006). Complement activation and protein adsorption by 
carbon nanotubes. Mol. Immunol., 43, 193–201. 
171. Kam, N. W. S., et al., (2005). Carbon nanotubes as multifunctional biological transporters 
and near-infrared agents for selective cancer cell destruction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 
102, 11600–11605. 
172. Lopez, C. F., et al., (2004). Understanding nature’s design for a nanosyringe. Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 4431–4434. 
173. Lynch, I., (2007). Are there generic mechanisms governing interactions between 
nanoparticles and cells? Epitope mapping the outer layer of the protein material inter￾face. Physica A, 373, 511–520. 
174. Chithrani, B. D., Ghazani, A. A., Chan, & W, W. C., (2006). Determining the size and 
shape dependence of gold nanoparticle uptake into mammalian cells. Nano Lett., 6, 
662–668. 
175. Kam, N. W. S., Liu, Z. A., & Dai, H. J., (2006). Carbon nanotubes as intracellular trans￾porters for proteins and DNA: An investigation of the uptake mechanism and pathway. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 45, 577–581. 
176. Osaki, F., et al., (2004). A quantum dot conjugated sugar ball and its cellular uptake on 
the size effects of endocytosis in the subviral region. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 6520, 6521. 
177. Gao, H. J., Shi, W. D., & Freund, L. B., (2005). Mechanics of receptor-mediated 
endocytosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 9469–9474. 
178. Woolley, A. T., Guillemette, C., Cheung, C. L., Housman, D. E., & Lieber, C. M., 
(2000). Direct haplotyping of kiobase size DNA using carbon nanotube probes. Nature 
Biotechnol., 18, 760–763. 
179. Hafner, J. H., Cheung, C. L., Woolley, A. T., & Lieber, C. M., (2001). Structural and 
functional imaging with carbon nanotube AFM probes-review. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Bio., 
77, 73–110. 
180. URL: http://www.xidex.com (accessed on 19 September 2022). Solid-State Carbon Nanotubes 211 
181. Dai, H., Franklin, N., & Han, J., (1998). Exploiting the properties of carbon nanotubes 
for nanolithography. Appl. Phys. Lett., 73, 1508–1510. 
182. Hinds, B. J., Chopra, N., Rantell, T., Andrews, R., Gavalas, V., & Bachas, L. G., (2004). 
Aligned multiwalled carbon nanotube membranes. Science, 303, 62–65. 
183. Holt, J. K., Park, H. G., Wang, Y. M., Stadermann, M., Artyukhin, A. B., Grigoropoulos, 
C. P., Noy, A., & Bakajin, O., (2006). Fast mass transport through sub-2-nanometer 
carbon nanotubes. Science, 312, 1034–1037. 
184. Srivastava, A., Srivastava, O. N., Talapatra, S., Vajtai, R., & Ajayan, P. M., (2004). 
Carbon nanotube filters. Nature Mater., 3, 610–614. 
185. Kordas, K., et al., (2006). Inkjet printing of electrically conductive patterns of carbon 
nanotubes. Small, 2, 1021–1025. 
186. Ericson, L. M., et al., (2004). Macroscopic, neat, single-walled carbon nanotube fibers. 
Science, 305, 1447–1450. 
187. Y.-Li, L., Kinloch, I. A., & Windle, A. H., (2004). Direct spinning of carbon nanotube 
fibers from chemical vapor deposition synthesis. Science, 304, 276–278. 
188. Wei, J., Zhu, H., Wu, D., & Wei, B., (2004). Carbon nanotube filaments in household 
light bulbs. Appl. Phys. Lett., 84, 4869–4871. 
189. Cao, A., Veedu, V. P., Li, X., Yao, Z., Ghasemi-Nejhad, M. N., & Ajayan, P. M., (2005). 
Multifunctional brushes made from carbon nanotubes. Nature Mater., 4, 540–545. 
190. Yurdumakan, B., Raravikar, N. R., Ajayan, P. M., & Dhinojwala, A., (2005). Synthetic 
gecko foot-hairs from multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Chem. Commun., 30, 3799–3801. 
191. Dalton, A. B., et al., (2004). Continuous carbon nanotube composite fibers: Properties, 
potential applications and problems. J. Mater. Chem., 14, 1. 
192. Sun, L., Banhart, F., Krasheninnikov, A. V., Rodriguez-Manzo, J. A., Terrones, M., & 
Ajayan, P. M., (2006). Carbon nanotubes as high-pressure cylinders and nanoextruders. 
Science, 312, 1199–1202. 
193. Ajayan, P. M., Stephan, O., Redlich, P., & Colliex, C., (1995). Carbon nanotubes as 
removable templates for metal oxide nanocomposites and nanostructures. Nature, 375, 
564. 
194. Ou, F. S., Shaijumon, M. M., Ci, L., Benicewicz, D., Vajtai, R., & Ajayan, P. M., (2006). 
Multisegmented one-dimensional hybrid structures of carbon nanotubes and metal 
nanowires. App. Phys. Lett., 89, 243122. 
195. Meng, G. W., Jung, Y. J., Cao, A., Vajtai, R., & Ajayan, P. M., (2005). Controlled 
fabrication of hierarchically branched nanopores, nanotubes and nanowires. Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci., 102, 707. 
196. Sano, N., (2004). Low cost synthesis of single-walled carbon nanohorns using the arc in 
water method using gas injection. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 37, L17–L20. 
197. Shvedova, A. A., Castranova, V., Kisin, E. R., Schwegler-Berry, D., Murray, A. R., 
Gandelsman, V. Z., Maynard, A., & Baron, P., (2003). Exposure to carbon nanoutbe 
material: Assessment of nanotube cytoxicity using human keratinocyte cell. J. Toxicol. 
Environ. Health, 66, 1909–1926. 
198. Lam, C. W., James, J. T., McCluskey, R., & Hunter, R. L., (2004). Pulmonary toxicity 
of single-wall carbon nanotubes in mice 7 and 90 days after intratracheal instillation. 
Toxicol. Sci., 77, 126–134. 
199. Warheit, D. B., Laurence, B. R., Reed, K. L., Roach, D. H., Reynolds, G. A., & Webb, T. 
R., (2004). Comparative pulmonary toxicity assessment of single-wall carbon nanotubes 
in rats. Toxicol. Sci., 77, 117–125. 212 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials
200. Maynard, A. D., Baron, O. P. A., Foley, M., Shvedova, A. A., Kisin, E. R., & Castranova, 
V., (2004). Exposure to carbon nanotube material: Aerosol release during the handling 
of unrefined single walled carbon nanotube material. J. Toxicol. Environ. Heath, 67, 
87–107. 
201. Koyama, S., Endo, M., Kim, Y. A., Hayashi, T., Yanagisawa, T., Osaka, K., Koyama, H., 
et al., (2006). Role of systemic T-cells and histopathological aspects after subcutaneous 
implantation of various carbon nanotubes in mice. Carbon, 44, 1079–1092. 
202. Jia, G., Wang, H., Yan, L., Wang, X., Pei, R., Yan, T., Zhao, Y., & Guo, X., (2005). 
Cytoxicity of carbon nanomaterials: Single wall nanotube, multi-wall nanotube, and 
fullerene, Environ. Sci. Technol., 39, 1378–1383. 
203. Cui, D., Tian, F., Ozkan, C., Wang, M., & Gao, H., (2005). Effect of single wall carbon 
nanotubes on human HEK293 cells. Toxicol. Lett., 155, 73–85. 
204. Sato, Y., Shibata, K., Kataoka, H., Ogino, S., Bunshi, F., Yokoyama, A., Tamura, K., et 
al., (2005). Mol. BioSyst. 1, 142–145. 
205. Service, R. F., (2006). Science policy: Priorities needed for nano-risk research and 
development. Science, 314, 45. 
206. Cui, D. X., et al., (2005). Effect of single wall carbon nanotubes on human HEK293 
cells. Toxicol. Lett., 155, 73–85. 
207. Manna, S. K., et al., (2005). Single walled carbon nanotube induces oxidative stress and 
actiaves nuclear transcription factor – kappa B in human keratinocytes. Nano Lett., 55, 
1676–1684. 
208. Kagan, V. E., et al., (2006). Direct and indirect effects of single walled carbon nanotubes 
on RAW 264.7 macrophages: Role of iron. Toxicol. Lett., 165, 88–100. 
209. Sayes, C. M., et al., (2006). Functionalization density dependence of single-walled 
carbon nanotubes cytotoxicity in vitro. Toxicol. Lett., 161, 135–142. 
210. Dumortier, H., et al., (2006). Functionalized carbon nanotubes are non-cytotoxic and 
preserve the functionality of primary immune cells. Nano Lett., 6, 1522–1528. 
211. Kam, N. W. S., et al., (2006). Carbon nanotubes as multifunctional biological transporters 
and near-infrared agents for selective cancer cell destruction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 
102, 11600–11605. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 10 
CNT-BASED SOLID COMPOSITES FOR 
WATER TREATMENT 
RONY RAJAN PAUL and MARIA MATHEW 
Department of Chemistry, CMS College, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
ABSTRACT 
Lack of accessibility to safe and clean water is one of the greatest challenges 
that mankind is facing today. The increasing population and rapidly 
progressing urbanization and industrialization have led to a great demand for 
fresh water. Since the sustainability of the human race is largely dependent 
on the availability of fresh water, researchers are always in search for a better 
technology for wastewater treatment. Among the various methods developed, 
water treatment applications based on carbon nanotube (CNT) appears to 
be the most dependable technological advancement. The large surface area, 
high chemical reactivity, mesoporous structure, tunable surface properties, 
low cost, and less impact on the environment prompted researchers to work 
on it. This chapter discusses the various potential applications of CNT as 
adsorbents, catalysts, antimicrobial surfaces, and sensors. Also, the recent 
developments in the field of CNTs in this line are discussed. 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
The shortage of availability of fresh and clean water is one of the major 
universal problems which the researchers are trying to address. With the 
increasing population, urbanization, and climate changes water crisis has 214 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
become a major issue. According to the reports of the World Bank, about 
40% of world population is badly facing the issue of water crisis. It has 
been predicted that by 2025; about 3 billion people will be hardly struggling 
for drinking water [1]. Water scarcity can affect both economic growth and 
human health, as it threatens industrial production and at the same time, a 
shortage of hygienic food and drinks can cause various epidemic diseases. 
The increasing pressure on water scarcity issue highly requires cost-effec￾tive water treatment technologies to produce high-quality clean water. Some 
processes, such as reverse osmosis (RO), forward osmosis (FO), membrane 
distillation, and capacitive deionization are favorable in the desalination of 
both sea and brackish water. The conventional water treatment technologies 
include physical methods (boiling, distillation, filtration, ultrafiltration, and 
coagulation); chemical degradation (ozone, chlorine, ultraviolet, solar water 
disinfection, etc.); and biological methods (microbial water sludge treatment) 
have failed because of their dependence on influent water qualities. However, 
the advent of nanotechnology introduces impressive nanomaterials such 
as CNT, fullerenes, nanofibers, NWs, zeolites, and various nanoparticles– 
Fe3
O4
, MnO2
, Co3
O4
, and TiO2
. Amongst these, CNT-based water treatment 
technologies are one of the leading and most effective ones. It is capable 
of purifying water from organic, inorganic, and biological pollutants [2]. 
The high surface area, low cost, greater reactivity, low chemical mass, and 
lower impact on the environment adds to its properties to be utilized in this 
manner. CNTs are made of graphite sheets rolled up in the form of a cylinder 
(Figure 10.1). Mainly there are two types of CNTs-multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes (MWCNTs) composed of multiple layers of graphene sheets and 
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) consisting of a single graphene 
sheet. These structures help in the easy transport of water molecules and thus 
purify water efficiently [3]. 
Figure 10.2 illustrates some of the most important functions of CNTs in 
water purification. Generally, they are used as an adsorbent for the adsorp￾tion of various organic (volatile organic compounds, drug molecules, dyes, 
insecticides, and fats), inorganic (heavy metal ions), and biological pollutants 
(bacteria, viruses, fungi). Secondly, CNT catalysts support enhancing the 
catalytic reactivity toward contaminant mitigation [4]. Also, the mechanistic 
action of CNTs toxicity towards bacterial cells in water disinfection is not 
worthy. Here, CNT act by interrupting bacterial cell membrane causing its 
death. The other major applications include the desalination of seawater and 
brackish water using CNT membrane and the sensing and monitoring of 
water pollutants using nanosensors modified with CNTs. CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 215 
FIGURE 10.1 Structural representation of (A) MWCNT; and (B) SWCNT. 
FIGURE 10.2 Water treatment applications of CNTs. 
This chapter aims to discuss the mechanism of action of CNTs for 
adsorption, catalysis, disinfection, desalination, and sensing of various types 
of water pollutants. 
10.2 ADSORPTION 
Adsorption is a surface phenomenon in which adsorbate molecules are 
adsorbed and creates a film on adsorbent surface. The surface chemistry, 216 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
morphology, physical, and chemical interaction with organic, inorganic, and 
biological pollutants have made CNT an effective and preferred material for 
water remediation [2, 3, 5–7]. CNT is now considered as a better material 
than usual adsorbents such as zeolite, clay, and activated charcoal. 
Rate of pollutant adsorption depends upon several factors, such as 
available sites, pore density, outer surface area, functional groups present, 
purity, etc. Figure 10.3 illustrates the four major CNT adsorption sites for the 
adsorption of water pollutants (a) interstitial channels, (b) inner CNT holes, 
(c) grooves, and (d) CNT outer surfaces. Most of the organic pollutants 
are adsorbed at the outer surface and inner sites of open-ended SWCNTs. 
Functionalization of the external surface of CNTs helps in attaching various 
organic and inorganic pollutants [3]. Small pollutants are easily trapped by 
the interstitial channels. However, the rate of adsorption depends upon the 
type of nanotube. SWCNTs create more interstitial channels than MWCNTs. 
Because, SWCNTs have greater aggregation effects than MWCNTs. Rate 
of aggregation decreases with increase in the number of nanotube layers 
[8]. Aggregation of CNTs has both favorable and unfavorable effects on 
adsorption [9–18]. On one side, it reduces the total surface area of SWCNTs 
which helps in bulk pollutant adsorption, and on the other side; it creates 
interstitial channels between the tubes that would significantly increase the 
pore volume and groves on the external surface of CNT bundles. 
10.2.1 ORGANIC POLLUTANTS 
Organic compounds present in water are engulfed by microorganisms 
that will decrease the oxygen content of water during the decomposition 
process. Similarly, the organic effluents ejected from industries also cause 
the deterioration of the quality of freshwater sources. In order to overcome 
this problem, various organic pollutants present in water has to be removed. 
10.2.1.1 FACTORS AFFECTING THE ADSORPTION OF ORGANIC 
MOLECULES 
1. Morphology and Active Sites of CNTs: Surface topography has a 
huge impact on the adsorption capabilities of CNTs. Rough surfaces 
have large surface areas than smooth ones; hence, rough surfaces show 
greater adsorption than smooth-surfaced CNTs like pristine [10]. CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 217 
2. Effect of pH: Several comparative studies have been done in order 
to understand the effect of pH on the adsorption rate. Ghaedi et al. 
[11] found out that MWCNTs have higher adsorption capacity and 
they reach equilibrium faster than SWCNTs. 
3. Effect of Temperature: Adsorption capacity increases with increase 
in temperature, because CNTs are endothermic in nature which 
increases adsorption with temperature [12]. The highest result 
obtained is at around 133 mg/g at 310 K [13]. 
4. Magnetic MWCNT: Gong et al. have studied the adsorption of 
cationic dyes such as methylene blue (MB), neutral red (NR), and 
gleaming cresyl blue (GCB) from aqueous solution by means of 
magnetic MWCNT nanocomposite. Similar studies were also done by 
Gaog et al. [14–21] for the removal of anionic azo dyes and found out 
that magnetic polymer MWCNTs are very effective for the separation 
process. 
10.2.2 FUNCTIONALIZATION AND ADSORPTION 
Functionalization of CNTs proved to be very effective for the specific 
pollutant adsorption. It increases CNT colloidal stability as well as the 
chemical reactivity [15, 16]. Three different methods for CNT functionaliza￾tion are: (i) physical non-covalent wrapping [17]; (ii) covalent wet chemical 
agent treatment [18]; (iii) endohedral filling of CNT hollow cavity. Major 
interactions between CNT functionalities and water pollutants are covalent 
bonding, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions, hydrophobic interac￾tions, ion exchange, and π-π electron coupling. In Figure 10.4, we have 
depicted different functionalities added to the CNT surface through different 
routes. 
CNTs are hydrophobic in nature because of the presence of non-polar 
graphene sheets. These hydrophobic natures make them capable of adsorbing 
aromatic pollutants such as benzene, naphthalene, pyrene, and so on. The 
π electrons available on the individual graphene sheets help in the forma￾tion of strong chemical complex between organic aromatic pollutants and 
CNT surface. Functionalities can enhance CNT solubility and bring CNTs 
repel each other. This allows the free movement of individual CNTs through 
homogeneous solution, thus avoiding aggregation. In addition, charged 
functional groups on the CNT surface can bind ionized water pollutants 
through electrostatic interactions. 218 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
FIGURE 10.3 Four major adsorption sites on a homogeneous bundle of partially opened 
SWCNT. 
10.2.3 INORGANIC POLLUTANTS 
CNTs are found to be used for the adsorption of toxic heavy metal ions such as 
Cd(II), Cu(II), Pb(II), and Hg(II) from water as they are harmful to living beings 
[19]. Sorption capacities can be improved by oxidizing CNT surfaces with H2
O2
, 
KMnO4
, and HNO3
 [20]. Pristine CNTs have shown an adsorption capacity of 
only 1.1 mg/g, however, on oxidation, it reached nearly 5.0–11.0 mg/g. Cd (II) 
adsorption by CNT is highly dependent on pH and this pH dependence leads 
to the conclusion that, adsorption by CNT is not only dependent on its surface 
chemistry but also regulated by other parameters like pH, temperature, nature of 
adsorbate, concentration of pollutants, contact time, and so on. 
10.3 CATALYSIS 
The unique electrical properties of CNTs, which resulted from the presence 
of surface functional groups, curvature pattern, topological defects, and edge 
plane sites [21], make CNTs an ideal candidate for catalysis (photocatalysis, 
catalytic wet air oxidation (CWAO), enzyme biocatalysis, and so on). High 
electrical conductivity and excellent charge-transferring ability of one￾dimensional CNTs make them highly effective for the photo-degradation CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 219 
of organic pollutants [22, 23]. In CWAO, dissolved and suspended water 
contaminants are oxidized by molecular oxygen from the air. In addition, 
CNTs are also used for immobilizing enzymes. The known atomic structure, 
larger surface area, mass transfer ability, and good enzyme loading capacities 
make CNTs an effective biocatalyst for water purification. The mechanisms 
of three CNT-based catalytic process – photocatalysis, CWAO, and enzyme￾biocatalysis are discussed in subsections. 
FIGURE 10.4 Surface functionalization of CNT. 
10.3.1 PHOTOCATALYSIS 
Initially, semiconductors such as TiO2
, ZnO, CdS, and ZnS have been used as 
photocatalyst to remove various organic compounds from water. However, 
these semiconductors have a major drawback that the photogenerated 220 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
charge carriers will undergo rapid recombination resulting in low quantum 
efficiency [24]. In order to overcome these drawbacks, researchers developed 
a solid photocatalyst with improved photocatalytic activity [25, 26]. CNTs 
have been used as reinforced photocatalytic composite material along with 
these semiconductors [27]. The major advantages of CNTs, achieved by 
functionalization are their tunable surface properties, large surface area, and 
thermodynamic stability, which make them suitable for photodegradation. 
The two methods used for the synthesis of CNT-based photocatalytic 
composites are: (i) attachment of desired nanoparticles on the CNT surface 
via covalent and noncovalent bonding [40]; (ii) in-situ synthesis of desired 
nanoparticle followed by electrochemical deposition [41]. 
Figure 10.5 illustrates the possible mechanism for CNT-supported 
photocatalysis. When a catalyst nanoparticle is irradiated with photons from 
different light sources, electrons from its VB are excited to its conduction 
band (CB) creating holes in the VB. These holes will then react with H2
O 
and OH–
 ions followed by the formation of hydroxyl radicals (•OH) which 
will directly oxidize the adsorbed pollutants on the CNT surface. At the same 
time, the photoexcited electrons from the CB will be trapped by MWCNTs 
which then react with molecular oxygen to form reactive species such as 
O2 
–
, H2
O2
 and OH. These highly reactive species can attack and oxidize the 
target pollutant immediately. Thus, the recombination of charge carriers can 
be reduced, thereby improving the photocatalytic activity [42]. 
FIGURE 10.5 Charge separation efficiency in MWCNTs nanohybrid photocatalytic system.TABLE 10.1 Photocatalytic Decomposition of Organic Pollutants by CNT-Supported 
Photocatalyst 
Hybrid Organic Optimum Degradation Efficiency References 
Photocatalyst Pollutant Loading 
(MWCNT) 
Ag3
PO4
/ 
MWCNTs 
BiOBr/ 
MWCNTs 
BiOCOOH/ 
MWCNTs 
BiOI/ 
MWCNTs 
Bi2
MoO6
/ 
MWCNTs 
Bi2
O2
CO3
/ 
MWCNTs 
Bi2
WO6
/ 
MWCNTs 
Bi4
O5
Br2
/ 
MWCNTs 
C3
N4
/ 
MWCNTs 
CaIn2
S4
/ 
MWCNTs 
Rhodamine B 
(RhB) 
Rhodamine B 
(RhB) 
Rhodamine B 
(RhB) 
Acid Orange II 
(AOII) 
Methylene 
blue (MB) 
Rhodamine B 
(RhB) 
Tetracycline 
(TC) 
Tetracycline 
hydrochloride 
(TCH) 
Methylene 
blue (MB) 
X-3B 
0.1 wt.% 
0.05 wt.% 
3 wt.% 
1% 
Not provided 
3 wt.% 
3% 
0.1% 
Not provided 
1 wt.% 
Ag3
PO4
: 68% (12 min) 
Ag3
PO4
/MWCNTs: 92% (12 
min) 
BiOBr: 70% (75 min) 
BiOBr/MWCNTs: 97% (75 
min) 
BiOCOOH: 53% (60 min) 
BiOCOOH/MWCNTs: 92% 
(60 min) 
BiOI: 60% (180 min) BiOI/ 
MWCNTs: >80% (180 min) 
Bi2
MoO6
: 50% (30 min) 
Bi2
MoO6
/MWCNTs: 95% 
(30 min) 
The decomposition rate of 
RhB by Bi2
O2
CO3
/MWCNTs 
is 4.5 times higher than bare 
Bi2
O2
CO3 
The degradation rate of TC 
by Bi2
WO6
/MWCNTs is 35% 
higher than bare Bi2
WO6 
Bi4
O5
Br2
: 42% (30 min) 
Bi4
O5
Br2
/MWCNTs: 63% 
(30 min) 
C3
N4
: 35% (90 min) C3
N4
/ 
MWCNTs: 67% (90 min) 
CaIn2
S4
: 89% (90 min) 
CaIn2
S4
/MWCNTs: 98% (90 
min) 
[28] 
[29] 
[30] 
[31] 
[32] 
[33] 
[34] 
[35] 
[36] 
[37] 
CdS/MWCNTs Methyl orange 3% CdS: 30% (60 min) CdS/ [38] 
(MO) MWCNTs: 90% (60 min) 
CuFe2
O4
/ Diethyl 33.3% CuFe2
O4
: 30% (30 min) [39] 
MWCNTs phthalate CuFe2
O4
/MWCNTs: 75% 
(DEP) (30 min) 
CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 221 
Also, CNT as catalyst support makes photocorrosion unfavorable enhancing 
the photodegradation rate (Table 10.1) [43, 44]. 222 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
10.3.2 CATALYTIC WET AIR OXIDATION (CWAO) 
Catalytic wet air oxidation (CWAO) is one of the efficient advanced oxidation 
processes (AOP) used to convert highly concentrated, hazardous, and toxic 
organic pollutants to CO2
 and H2
O [45]. WAO process takes place under 
high temperature (200–300°C) and high pressure (20–200 bar) using O2 as 
the oxidant without producing any toxic emissions. It is also an economi￾cally feasible process without utilizing ozone and hydrogen peroxide (H2
O2
). 
Despite these advantages, its high operating temperature and pressure limit 
its practical applications. Here comes the necessity of developing a process 
under mild conditions using a suitable catalyst. 
Thus, CWAO has emerged as one of the excellent water treatment 
methods. In this process, CNT act as a very good catalyst due to the 
presence of carboxyl and hydroxyl functional groups introduced via surface 
functionalization. It also offers several other advantages: (i) increased 
catalytic efficiency; (ii) simplified operation conditions; (iii) reduced cost; 
(iv) enhanced reaction rate, and so on. Yang et al. [46] reported functionalized 
MWCNTs for CWAO of phenol in a batch reactor (Figure 10.6). Carboxylic 
groups (–COOH) on CNTs exhibited excellent catalytic activity in phenol 
oxidation (1,000 mg/L) at 160°C and 2.0 MPa. The adsorbed liquid O2
 will 
get dissociated on MWCNTs and produce dissociated oxygen atoms (DOA) 
[47]. Carboxylic functional groups are introduced by treating MWCNTs 
with H2
SO4
/HNO3
 and DAO will produce OH2
 radical. Then the radicals 
decompose phenol to CO2
 and H2
O and in this way, organic compounds are 
removed in CWAO process. 
10.3.3 NANO-BIOHYBRID CATALYSIS 
Another important application of CNT is as a biocatalyst support matrix 
for the removal of recalcitrant pollutants such as dyes, polyaromatic hydro￾carbons and other agricultural and pharmaceutical wastes. Enzymes are 
naturally occurring complex protein structures with specific biochemical 
properties useful for the biodegradation of various recalcitrant pollutants. 
CNT-enzyme biocatalysts or simply “Nanobiohybrid catalyst” formed by the 
immobilization of enzymes on CNT surfaces are found to be highly selective 
and efficient [48] for sensing, monitoring, and degrading multiple pollutants 
from water. Formation of nanobiohybrid by immobilizing enzymes on CNT 
surface takes place via three major routes: (i) binding to a support (physical CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 223 
adsorption and covalent bonding); (ii) cross-linking (career free); (iii) encap￾sulation or entrapment [49]. 
FIGURE 10.6 (a) Mechanism of producing the radical (HO2
•) in CWAO for phenol breakdown 
by H2
SO4
–
/HNO3
 treated MWCNTs; (b) efficiency of phenol removal.
In physical adsorption, enzymes are spontaneously adsorbed on to 
CNT surface via hydrophobic and electrostatic interaction (Figure 10.7(I)) 
[50]. Enzymes are covalently bonded to the CNT surface by inducing the 
reaction between the free amine groups on the surface of protein with the 
–COOH group on the CNT surface (Figure 10.7(II)) [51, 52]. Cross-linking 
polymers such as chitosan, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) can 
also be used for immobilizing enzymes on CNT surface. Finally, multilayer 
enzyme films are produced on the CNT surface by the encapsulation of 
enzymes (Figure 10.7(III)). Proper considerations should be taken while 
selecting the immobilization technique; else, it will lead to the denaturation 
of the enzyme [53]. 
The immobilization of enzymes onto CNT surfaces offers a lot of 
practical benefits, such as cost-effective post-treatment removal, increased 
reusability, broad pH and temperature ranges, enhanced storage, and 
operational stability [54]. Nanohybrid catalysis for water purification is 
particularly effective in those cases in which the reaction products are 
less toxic, the enzymatic reaction is straightforward, i.e., no co-factors 
are required, and the composition of the contaminated water is not too 
complex. 224 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
The properties of CNT-based nanobiohybrids can be enhanced by the 
chemical modifications of enzymes and surface functionalization of CNT 
surfaces. 
FIGURE 10.7 Mechanism of a potential nano-biohybrid catalyst for water purification.
10.4 DISINFECTION 
Disinfection is one of the most powerful and heavily practiced techniques 
to remove various chemical and biological contaminants from freshwater 
sources. The requirement of high-quality water for drinking purposes 
demanded the removal of pathogens from freshwaters, which is a very 
difficult process due to the varying concentrations and types of pathogens 
present in water [55]. 
Studies have revealed that CNTs, specifically SWCNTs are highly 
efficient for the selective adsorption of bacterial species compared 
to other available adsorbents. This is due to their fibrous structure and 
external surface accessibility [56]. Liu et al. [57] have studied the toxic  
CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 225 
effects of pristine SWCNTs on both gram-positive bacteria like B. subtilis 
and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), and gram-negative bacteria like 
Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa [58]. They have 
reported that the dispersed individual CNTs puncture the cell membrane 
rapidly in comparison with the aggregated CNTs. Soft and smooth cells 
such as gram-positive bacteria were more vulnerable and are easily 
attacked by CNTs than gram-negative bacteria. It has been shown that 
the membrane-penetrating effect can be enhanced by increasing CNTs 
concentration, controlling shaker speed augmentation during incubation, 
and using dispersed CNTs solution. 
10.4.1 CHARACTERISTICS OF CNT FOR WATER DISINFECTION 
Extremely high surface area-to-volume ratio and optimally controlled pore 
size distribution have provided CNTs exceptional and efficient sorption 
capabilities compared to other conventional sorbents such as activated 
charcoal. Powerful antimicrobial activity and high-water flux are some 
other important features. CNTs have been compared with porous materials 
of comparable sizes. Several methods have been developed in this line to 
improve the adsorption characteristics of CNTs, like functionalization of 
CNTs which in turn enhanced their dispersibility and specific surface area. 
The application of CNT membrane in disinfection and bio-fouling 
reduction for conventional water treatment emerged as one of the focused 
research areas in the 21st century. By modifying the structural characteristics 
of CNT membranes, such as pore size, granule shape, and tortuosity, CNT 
membranes can provide better performance in water treatment applications. 
The anti-biofouling capability of the CNT membrane can inactivate bacteria 
based on its effect on bacterial adhesion. The resistance offered by CNT to 
the well-mature biofilm formed by a large number of bacteria adhered to the 
membrane is an add-on benefit in water disinfection. 
The role of CNT in the removal of pathogenic bacteria has been 
well studied. The development of PGLa antimicrobial peptide and 
glutathione-conjugated CNTs with porous graphene oxide (GO) 
membrane has been manifested to be highly efficient in disinfecting the
E. coli O157: H7 bacteria and for the elimination of As(III), As(V) and 
Pb(II) from the water (Figure 10.8) [59] involving synergetic mecha￾nism. Silver nanoparticles/MWCNTs coated on polyacrylonitrile (PAN) 
hollow fiber membrane is an alternative and a safer way to eliminate 226 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
pathogens. The disinfection properties of these composite membranes 
are achieved by the proper dispersion of Ag nanoparticles on the outer 
surface of CNTs, which can react with the bacteria cells. Also, Vecitis 
et al. [55] have studied the inactivation of bacteria (E. coli) and viruses 
(MS2) via anodic MWCNTs. Filtration followed by electrolysis signifi￾cantly enhanced the inactivation. Fan et al. [60] recently developed 
an electropolished CNT/ceramic membrane that possesses the high 
capability for the reduction of bio-fouling in water. The performance 
of the electropolished membrane is dependent on the synergistic effects 
of electrostatic repulsion, electrokinetic behavior, and electrochemical 
oxidation. 
FIGURE 10.8 Removal efficiency of As(III), As(IV), Pb(III), and E. coli from water by CNT. 
10.4.2 ANTIBACTERIAL MECHANISM 
An understanding of the antimicrobial action of CNT is very crucial to reduce 
the occurrence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria spread through contaminated 
water sources. The most important mechanistic action of CNT’s toxicity 
towards bacterial cells is the disruption of bacterial membrane integrity 
through interaction between bacterial cells and CNTs [61]. This loss of CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 227 
membrane integrity will cause the death of cells through the leakage of 
bacterial DNA and RNA content [62]. However, the interaction with gram￾positive and gram-negative bacteria differs due to the difference in the 
thickness of the peptidoglycan layer. The peptidoglycan layer is thicker in 
gram-positive bacteria and in gram-negative bacteria there is an additional 
outer membrane layer that consists of lipid bilayer, which is responsible for 
its resistance to CNTs. 
Oxidative stress is another mechanism by which bacterial cells are 
destroyed by the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) through CNT 
exposure. ROS is generated through the photoinduced chemical reactions 
of CNTs in aqueous media in which large amounts of singlet oxygen (1
O2
), 
hydroxyl radicals (•OH), and superoxide anions (O2
•–
) are continuously 
produced. •OH radicals initiate lipid peroxidation process with the poly￾unsaturated fatty acids, sugars, and proteins in biological components [63] 
which cause disintegration of membrane integrity facilitated through oxida￾tive stress mediated by hydroxyl groups, ultimately resulting in the mortality 
of the bacterial cells. 
10.5 DESALINATION 
In the context of the global water crisis, CNT’s role in the desalination of 
both sea and brackish waters cannot be overruled [64]. Currently, polymer 
reverse-osmosis membranes are used to filter out dissolved salts and fine 
solids. At present, there are mainly two types of nanotube membranes: (i) 
vertically aligned (VA); and (ii) mixed matrix (MM) CNT membranes [65] 
(Figure 10.9). These membranes can operate at lower energy because of 
CNT’s frictionless water transport ability through the hydrophobic hollow 
cavity. It has been proved both theoretically and experimentally that water 
transport through CNTs is several orders of magnitude faster than other 
porous materials of comparable size. Ordered hydrogen bonds are created 
in the water-CNT interface, which in turn introduces a vapor phase barrier 
between the chain of water molecules and the non-polar CNT wall that 
allows the frictionless flow of water. Dumee et al. [66] observed the highest 
water permeability in (5,5) and (8,8) SWCNTs and the highest sodium ion 
retention in (5,5) and (6,6) SWCNTs at flux rates of ca. 12 kg m–2 h–1. 
CNTs acquire ion exclusion ability via tip functionalization. Func￾tionalities such as positive (–NH3
+
), negative (–COO–
), and hydrophobic 
(aromatic) groups introduced on the CNT interface [67, 68] using different 228 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
wet oxidizing agents has the ability to reject a particular pollutant, and at the 
same time it can attract water molecules through nanotube hole. Fornasiero 
et al. reported that negatively charged groups introduced by plasma treat￾ment resulted in aligned CNT membranes which reject as high as 98% ions, 
and the ion exclusion was dominated by the charge exclusion mechanism. 
The defect-free CNT membranes with sub-nanometer pores will be, for sure, 
a future desalination technology. 
FIGURE 10.9 Schematic illustrations of the two types of CNT membranes: (a) vertically 
aligned; (b) mixed matrix. 
10.6 SENSING AND MONITORING 
Analysis of the concentration of pollutants is essential for investigating the 
quality of drinking water [69–71]. For many years, high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC), gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC-MS), 
and different detectors such as the electron capture detector (ECD), flame 
ionization detector (FID) were used for the analysis of water pollutants 
[72–75]. Even though these techniques possess a lot of advantages, the 
need for derivatization for analyzes, large purification setups, and highly CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 229 
expensive equipment remained as drawbacks. To an extent, the development 
of highly sensitive and fast responsive CNT-based sensors addressed these 
backdrops. The chemically modified electrochemical sensors are found to be 
able to analyze compounds of weak oxidation/reduction signals. The high 
electrical conductivity of CNTs makes them the best conductive materials 
for the modification of electrochemical sensors. The electrical conductivity 
of CNT is a function of its diameter and carbon atom bonds in a hexagonal 
lattice, which is useful for fabricating electrochemical sensors of controlled 
electrical conductivity [76–79]. Unlike in graphite, carbon atoms in CNTs 
bind to the other three carbon atoms with sp2
 molecular orbitals. The 
remaining fourth valence electron can be hybridized to form π-bands, thus 
increasing the electrical conductivity of CNTs. 
Surface functionalization is another important method for customizing 
CNTs for use in electrochemical sensors. There are several reports on the 
surface modification of CNTs with –COOH, –NH2
, –SH, and other active 
groups [80, 81]. And this will improve the coupling of CNTs with electro￾active mediators like metal oxide nanoparticles or biomolecules [82, 83]. 
The sensitivity and selectivity of electrochemical sensors for the trace 
analysis of water pollutants can be enhanced in this manner. Karimi-Maleh 
et al. reported that CNTs modified with ZnO nanoparticles could improve 
the sensitivity of the resulting electrodes for the voltammetric determination 
of hydrazine in the presence of phenol, which in turn, are two important 
water pollutants [84]. 
10.6.1 PROCEDURE FOR THE MODIFICATION OF 
ELECTROCHEMICAL SENSORS WITH CNTS 
Two approaches are mainly utilized for the modification of working elec￾trodes with CNT: 
i. In the case of solid electrodes such as glassy carbon and gold elec￾trode, a thin film of CNT is coated on the electrode surface by the 
dropping method or by electro-polymerization of CNTs in polymer 
solutions (Figure 10.10(a)). Neflon, sulfuric acid, acetone, and DMF 
are the solvents used for preparing suspensions of CNTs [85–87]. 
ii. Second approach involves the addition of CNTs to the carbon paste 
matrix, which is then used as a conductive binder in the composite 
electrode material (Figure 10.10(b)) [88]. 230 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
10.6.2 TYPES OF ELECTROCHEMICAL SENSORS 
There are mainly three types of electrochemical sensors modified with CNTs 
that are used for the analysis of water pollutants viz: (i) potentiometric; (ii) 
voltammetric; and (iii) amperometric sensors. Potentiometric sensors are useful 
for the determination of toxic ions, while voltammetric and amperometric 
sensors are used for the determination of organic and inorganic pollutants. 
Arguably, CNT-modified electrochemical sensors have developed as an 
effective tool for the determination of water pollutants. 
FIGURE 10.10 Diagram showing the process of modification of (a) solid electrodes; (b) 
carbon paste electrodes with CNTs. 
10.7 CONCLUSION 
The changes in the global scenario, as part of industrialization and urbanization 
have increased the scarcity of fresh and safe water. The need of fresh water 
for human sustainability has become a major concern worldwide. CNT-based 
water purification has emerged as the technology of the future, particularly 
in wastewater purification. CNT-based adsorption, catalysis, disinfection, 
desalination, as well as sensing of organic, inorganic, and biological pollutants 
has opened up a new era for wastewater treatment. Interesting physiochemical 
properties, low cost, and less impact on the environment are the driving 
forces that prompted researchers to exploit CNT-based water treatment. 
Further interdisciplinary research in this line, as well as timely decisions, will 
definitely help mankind to drink safe water and sustain life in this world. CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 231 
KEYWORDS 
• adsorption 
• carbon nanotubes 
• catalysis 
• desalination 
• disinfection 
• sensing and monitoring 
REFERENCES 
1. Urban Urgency, (2007). Water Caucus Summary. World Water Council (WWC), Marseille, 
France. 
2. Upadhyayula, V. K. K., Deng, S. G., Mitchell, M. C., & Smith, G. B., (2009). Science of 
the Total Environment, 408, 1–13. 
3. Ren, X., Chen, C., Nagatsu, M., & Wang, X., (2011). Chemical Engineering Journal. 170 
395–410. 
4. Qu, X. L., Alvarez, P. J. J., & Li, Q. L., (2013). Applications of nanotechnology in water 
and wastewater treatment. Water Res., 47, 3931–3946. 
5. Hosaain, F., Perales-Perez, O. J., Hwang, S., & Roman, F., (2014). Antimicrobial 
nanomaterials as water disinfectant: Applications, limitations and future perspectives. 
Science of the Total Environment, 466, 1047–1059. 
6. Yu, J. G., Zhao, X. H., Yu, L. Y., Jiao, F. P., Jiang, J. G., & Chen, X. Q., (2014). Removal, 
recovery and enrichment of metals from aqueous solutions using carbon nanotubes, J. 
Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 299, 1155–1163. 
7. Mubarak, N., Sahu, J., Abdullah, E., & Jayakumar, N., (2014). Removal of heavy metals 
from wastewater using carbon nanotubes, Sep. Purif. Rev., 43, 311–338. 
8. Yang, S., Hu, J., Chen, C., Shao, D., & Wang, X., (2011). Mutual effects of Pb (II) and 
humic acid adsorption on multiwalled carbon nanotubes/polyacrylamide composites 
from aqueous solutions. Environ. Sci. Technol., 45, 3621–3627. 
9. Chi, W., Shi, H., Shi, W., Guo, Y., & Guo, T., (2012). 4-Nitrophenol surface molecularly 
imprinted polymers based on multiwalled carbon nanotubes for the elimination of 
paraoxon pollution. J. Hazard. Mater., 227, 243–249. 
10. Peng, X., Li, Y., Luan, Z., Di, Z., Wang, H., Tian, B., & Jia, Z., (2003). J. Chem. Phys. 
Lett., 736, 154–158. 
11. Ghaedi, M., Shokrollahi, A., Hossainian, H., & Kokhdan, S. N., (2011). J. Chem. Eng. 
Data., 56, 3227–3235. 
12. Huaiyu, Z., Chumxiang, I., Jiajun, Z., Minghua, L., & Shiyu, F., (2010). Trends, Carbohy. 
Res., 2, 1–9. 
13. Shahryari, Z., Goharrizi, A. S., & Azadi, M., (2010). Int. J. Water Resour. Environ. Eng., 
2, 16–28. 232 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
14. Gong, J., Wang, B., Zeng, G., Yang, C., Niu, C., Niu, Q., Zhou, W., & Liang, Y., (2009). 
J. Hazard. Mater., 164, 1517–1722. 
15. Das, R., Hamid, S. B. A., Ali, M., Annuar, M., Samsudin, E. M. B., & Bagheri, S., 
(2015). Covalent functionalization schemes for tailoring solubility of multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes in water and acetone solvents. Sci. Adv. Mater., 7, 2726–2737. 
16. Ali, M., Das, R., Maamor, A., & Hamid, S. B. A., (2014). Multifunctional carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs): A new dimension in environmental remediation. Adv. Mater. Res., 832, 328–332. 
17. Das, R., (2017). Nanobiohybrid preparation. in: Nanohybrid Catalyst Based on Carbon 
Nanotube (pp. 105–128). Springer. 
18. Das, R., Hamid, S. B. A., & Annuar, M. S. M., (2016). Highly efficient and stable novel 
nanobiohybrid catalyst to avert 3, 4-dihydroxybenzoic acid pollutant in water. Sci. Rep., 
6, 33572. 
19. Srivastava, S., (2013). Mater. Lett., 4, 2–8. 
20. Li, Y. H., Hung, T. H., & Chen, C. W., (2009). A first-principles study of nitrogen-and 
boron-assisted platinum adsorption on carbon nanotubes, Carbon, 47, 850–855. 
21. Rivas, F., Kolaczkowski, S., Beltran, F., & McLurgh, D., (1998). Development of a 
model for the wet air oxidation of phenol-based on a free radical mechanism, Chem. 
Eng. Sci., 53, 2575–2586. 
22. Czech, B., & Buda, W., (2015). Photocatalytic treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater 
using new multiwall-carbon nanotubes/TiO2/SiO2 nanocomposites. Environ. Res., 
137(Supplement C), 176–184. 
23. Da Dalt, S., Alves, A. K., & Bergmann, C. P., (2013). Photocatalytic degradation of 
methyl orange dye in water solutions in the presence of MWCNT/TiO2
 composites. 
Mater. Res. Bull., 48(5), 1845–1850. 
24. Ananthakumar, S., Ramkumar, J., & Babu, S. M., (2016). Semiconductor nanoparticles 
sensitized TiO2 nanotubes for high efficiency solar cell devices. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 57(Supplement C), 1307–1321. 
25. Kim, W., Tachikawa, T., Kim, H., Lakshminarasimhan, N., Murugan, P., Park, H., et 
al., (2014). Visible light photocatalytic activities of nitrogen and platinum-doped TiO2
: 
Synergistic effects of co-dopants. Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 147(Supplement C), 642–650. 
26. Tanabe, I., & Ozaki, Y., (2014). Consistent changes in electronic states and photocatalytic 
activities of metal (Au, Pd, Pt)-modified TiO2
 studied by far-ultraviolet spectroscopy. 
Chem. Commun., 50(17), 2117–2119. 
27. Di Paola, A., Garcia-Lopez, E., Marci, G., & Palmisano, L., (2012). A survey of photo￾catalytic materials for environmental remediation, J. Hazard. Mater., 211, 3–29. 
28. Xu, H., Wang, C., Song, Y., Zhu, J., Xu, Y., Yan, J., et al., (2014). CNT/Ag3
PO4
 composites 
with highly enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity and stability. Chem. Eng. J., 
241, 35–42. 
29. Xia, J., Di, J., Yin, S., Li, H., Xu, L., Xu, Y., et al., (2014). Improved visible light 
photocatalytic activity of MWCNT/BiOBr composite synthesized via a reactable ionic 
liquid. Ceram. Int., 40(3), 4607–4616. 
30. Hu, S., Li, S., Xu, K., Jiang, W., Zhang, J., & Liu, J., (2017). MWCNTs/BiOCOOH 
composites with improved sunlight photocatalytic activity. Mater. Lett., 191(Supplement 
C), 157–160. 
31. Su, M., He, C., Zhu, L., Sun, Z., Shan, C., Zhang, Q., et al., (2012). Enhanced adsorption 
and photocatalytic activity of BiOI–MWCNT composites towards organic pollutants in 
aqueous solution. J. Hazard. Mater., 229, 72–82. CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 233 
32. Dai, K., Li, D., Geng, L., Liang, C., & Liu, Q., (2015). Facile preparation of Bi2
MoO6
/ 
multi-walled carbon nanotube nanocomposite for enhancing photocatalytic performance. 
Mater. Lett., 160 (Supplement C) , 124–127. 
33. Zhang, X., Li, S., Hu, S., Chen, J., Jiang, W., & Zhang, J., (2016). Flower-like MWCNTs/ 
Bi2
O2
CO3 composites with enhanced photocatalytic activity under simulated solar light 
irradiation. Mater. Lett., 185, 50–53. 
34. Yue, L., Wang, S., Shan, G., Wu, W., Qiang, L., & Zhu, L., (2015). Novel MWNTs– 
Bi2
WO6
composites with enhanced simulated solar photoactivity toward adsorbed and 
free tetracycline in water. Appl. Catal. B, 176, 11–19. 
35. Di, J., Ji, M., Xia, J., Li, X., Fan, W., Zhang, Q., et al., (2016). Bi4
O5
Br2
 ultrasmall 
nanosheets in situ strong coupling to MWCNT and improved photocatalytic activity 
for tetracycline hydrochloride degradation. J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 424(Supplement 
C), 331–341. 
36. Xu, Y., Xu, H., Wang, L., Yan, J., Li, H., Song, Y., et al., (2013). The CNT modified 
white C3
N4
 composite photocatalyst with enhanced visible-light response photoactivity. 
Dalton Trans., 42(21), 7604–7613. 
37. Xia, Y., Li, Q., Wu, X., Lv, K., Tang, D., & Li, M., (2017). Facile synthesis of CNTs/ 
CaIn2
S4
 composites with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic performance. Appl. Surf. 
Sci., 391, 565–571. 
38. Ye, A., Fan, W., Zhang, Q., Deng, W., & Wang, Y., (2012). CdS–graphene and CdS–CNT 
nanocomposites as visible-light photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution and organic dye 
degradation. Catal. Sci. Technol., 2(5), 969–978. 
39. Zhang, X., Feng, M., Qu, R., Liu, H., Wang, L., & Wang, Z., (2016). Catalytic degradation 
of diethyl phthalate in aqueous solution by persulfate activated with nano-scaled magnetic 
CuFe2
O4
/ MWCNTs. Chem. Eng. J., 301, 1–11. 
40. Peng, X., Sfeir, M. Y., Zhang, F., Misewich, J. A., & Wong, S. S., (2010). Covalent 
synthesis and optical characterization of double-walled carbon nanotube-nanocrystal 
heterostructures, J. Phys. Chem. C, 114, 8766–8773. 
41. Yang, J., Jiang, L. C., Zhang, W. D., & Gunasekaran, S., (2010). A highly sensitive 
non-enzymatic glucose sensor based on a simple two-step electrodeposition of cupric oxide 
(CuO) nanoparticles onto a multi-walled carbon nanotube arrays. Talanta, 82, 25–33. 
42. Vamvasakis, I., Georgaki, I., Vernardou, D., Kenanakis, G., & Katsarakis, N., (2015). 
Synthesis of WO3 catalytic powders: Evaluation of photocatalytic activity under NUV/ 
visible light irradiation and alkaline reaction pH. J. Sol-Gel. Sci. Technol., 76(1), 120–128. 
43. Cui, X., Wang, Y., Jiang, G., Zhao, Z., Xu, C., Duan, A., et al., (2014). The encapsulation 
of CdS in carbon nanotubes for stable and efficient photocatalysis. J. Mater. Chem. A., 
2(48), 20939–20946. 
44. Tang, Y., Tian, J., Malkoske, T., Le, W., & Chen, B., (2017). Facile ultrasonic synthesis of 
novel zinc sulfide/carbon nanotube coaxial nanocables for enhanced photodegradation 
of methyl orange. J. Mater. Sci., 52(3), 1581–1589. 
45. Zimmermann, F., (1958). New waste disposal process. Chem. Eng., 65(8), 117–121. 
46. Yang, S., Zhu, W., Li, X., Wang, J., & Zhou, Y., (2007). Multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MWNTs) as an efficient catalyst for catalytic wet air oxidation of phenol. Catal. 
Commun., 8(12), 2059–2063. 
47. Mestl, G., Maksimova, N. I., Keller, N., Roddatis, V. V., & Schlögl, R., (2001). Carbon 
nanofilaments in heterogeneous catalysis: An industrial application for new carbon 
materials? Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 40(11), 2066–2068. 234 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
48. Nelson, D. L., Lehninger, A. L., & Cox, M. M., (2008). Lehninger Principles of Bio￾chemistry (pp. 369–420). Macmillan. 
49. Hwang, E. T., & Gu, M. B., (2013). Enzyme stabilization by nano/microsized hybrid 
materials. Eng. Life. Sci., 13, 49–61. 
50. Gao, Y., & Kyratzis, I., (2008). Covalent immobilization of proteins on carbon 
nanotubes using the cross-linker 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide-a 
critical assessment. Bioconjug. Chem. 19, 1945–1950. 
51. Asuri, P., Karajanagi, S. S., Sellitto, E., Kim, D. Y., Kane, R. S., & Dordick, J. S., 
(2006). Water-soluble carbon nanotube-enzyme conjugates as functional biocatalytic 
formulations. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 95, 804–811. 
52. Jiang, K., Schadler, L. S., Siegel, R. W., Zhang, X., Zhang, H., & Terrones, M., (2004). 
Protein immobilization on carbon nanotubes via a two-step process of diimide-activated 
amidation. J. Mater. Chem., 14, 37–39. 
53. Sheldon, R., & Van, P. S., (2013). Enzyme immobilization in biocatalysis: Why, what 
and how. Cheml. Soc. Rev., 6224–6225. 
54. Dai, Y., Yao, J., Song, Y., Liu, X., Wang, S., & Yuan, Y., (2016). Enhanced performance 
of immobilized laccase in electrospun fibrous membranes by carbon nanotubes 
modification and its application for bisphenol A removal from water. J. Hazard. Mater., 
317(Supplement C), 485–493. 
55. Vecitis, C. D., Schnoor, M. H., Rahaman, M. S., Schiffman, J. D., & Elimelech, M., 
(2011). Electrochemical multiwalled carbon nanotube filter for viral and bacterial 
removal and inactivation. Environ. Sci. Technol., 45, 3672–3679. 
56. Upadhyayula, V. K., Deng, S., Mitchell, M. C., & Smith, G. B., (2009). Application of 
carbon nanotube technology for removal of contaminants in drinking water: A review. 
Sci. Total Environ., 408, 1–13. 
57. Liu, H., Ru, J., Qu, J., Dai, R., Wang, Z., & Hu, C., (2009). Removal of persistent 
organic pollutants from micro-polluted drinking water by triolein embedded absorbent. 
Bioresour. Technol., 100, 2995–3002. 
58. Karthikairaj, K., Isaiarasu, L., & Sakthivel, N., (2014). Efficacy of some herbal extracts on
microbes causing flacherie disease in mulberry silkworm, Bombyx mori L. J. Biopesticides, 
7, 89. 
59. Viraka, N. B. P., Kanchanapally, R., Pedraza, F., Sinha, S. S., Pramanik, A., Hamme, A. 
T., et al., (2015). Bio-conjugated CNT-bridged 3D porous graphene oxide membrane 
for highly efficient disinfection of pathogenic bacteria and removal of toxic metals from 
water. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 7, 19210–19218. 
60. Fan, X., Zhao, H., Quan, X., Liu, Y., & Chen, S., (2016). Nanocarbon-based membrane 
filtration integrated with electric field driving for effective membrane fouling mitigation. 
Water Res., 88, 285–292. 
61. Maas, M., (2016). Carbon nanomaterials as antibacterial colloids. Materials, 9, 617. 
62. Kang, S., Mauter, M. S., & Elimelech, M., (2008). Physicochemical determinants of 
multiwalled carbon nanotube bacterial cytotoxicity. Environ. Sci. Technol., 42, 7528–7534. 
63. Rajavel, K., Gomathi, R., Manian, S., & Rajendra, K. R. T., (2014). In vitro bacterial 
cytotoxicity of CNTs: Reactive oxygen species mediate cell damage edges over direct 
physical puncturing. Langmuir, 30, 592–601. 
64. Das, R., Ali, M. E., Abd, H. S. B., Ramakrishna, S., & Chowdhury, Z. Z., (2014). Carbon 
nanotube membranes for water purification: A bright future in water desalination, 
Desalination, 336, 97–109. CNT-Based Solid Composites for Water Treatment 235 
65. Ahm, C. H., Baek, Y., Lee, C., Kim, S. O., Lee, S., Kim, S. H., Bae, S. S., et al., (2012). 
Carbon nanotube-based membranes: Fabrication and application to desalination, J. Ind. 
Eng. Chem., 18, 1551–1559. 
66. Dumee, L. F., Sears, K., Suhutz, J., Finn, N., Huynh, C., Hawkins, S., Duke, M., & Gray, 
S., (2010). Characterization and evaluation of carbon nanotube Bucky-paper membranes 
for direct contact membrane distillation, J. Membr. Sci., 351, 36–43. 
67. Goh, P., Ismail, A., & Ng, B., (2013). Carbon nanotubes for desalination: Performance 
evaluation and current hurdles. Desalination, 308, 2–14. 
68. Kar, S., Bindal, R., & Tewari, P., (2012). Carbon nanotubes membrane for desalination 
and water purification: Challenges and opportunities. Nano Today, 7, 385–389. 
69. Mijangos, L., Ziarrusta, H., Olivares, M., Zuloaga, O., Möder, M., Etxebarria, N., & 
Prieto, A., (2018). Simultaneous determination of 41 multiclass organic pollutants in 
environmental waters by means of polyethersulfone microextraction followed by liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 410(2), 615–632. 
70. Mohamed, M. E., Frag, E. Y., & Mohamed, M. A., (2018). A newly validated and 
characterized spectrophotometric method for determination of a three water pollutants 
metal ions. Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc., 189, 239–249. 
71. Do Nascimento, M. T. L., De Oliveira, S. A. D., Felix, L. C., Gomes, G., e Sá, M. D. 
O., Da Cunha, D. L., Vieira, N., Hauser-Davis, R. A., Neto, J. A. B., & Bila, D. M., 
(2018). Determination of water quality, toxicity and estrogenic activity in a nearshore 
marine environment in Rio de Janeiro, Southeastern Brazil. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 
149, 197–202. 
72. Magi, E., Di Carro, M., Mirasole, C., & Benedetti, B., (2018). Combining passive 
sampling and tandem mass spectrometry for the determination of pharmaceuticals and 
other emerging pollutants in drinking water. Microchem. J., 136, 56–60. 
73. Tankiewicz, M., & Biziuk, M., (2018). Fast, sensitive and reliable multi-residue method 
for routine determination of 34 pesticides from various chemical groups in water samples 
by using dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction coupled with gas chromatography￾mass spectrometry. Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 410(5), 1533–1550. 
74. Miyawaki, T., Tobiishi, K., Takenaka, S., & Kadokami, K., (2018). A rapid method 
combining microwave-assisted extraction and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
with a database, for determining organochlorine pesticides and polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons in soils and sediments. Soil Sedim. Contam. Int. J., 27(1), 31–45. 
75. Háková, M., Havlíková, L. C., Chvojka, J., Solich, P., & Šatínský, D., (2018). An on-line 
coupling of nanofibrous extraction with column-switching high-performance liquid 
chromatography–a case study on the determination of bisphenol A in environmental 
water samples. Talanta, 178, 141–146. 
76. Ebbesen, T., Lezec, H., Hiura, H., Bennett, J., Ghaemi, H., & Thio, T., (1996). Electrical 
conductivity of individual carbon nanotubes. Nature, 382(6586), 54. 
77. Lekawa-Raus, A., Patmore, J., Kurzepa, L., Bulmer, J., & Koziol, K., (2014). Electrical 
properties of carbon nanotube based fibers and their future use in electrical wiring. Adv. 
Func. Mater., 24(24), 3661–3682. 
78. Dresselhaus, M. S., Dresselhaus, G., Eklund, P., & Rao, A., (2000). Carbon Nanotubes, 
the Physics of Fullerene-Based and Fullerene-Related Materials (pp. 331–379). Springer, 
Berlin. 
79. Ramanathan, T., Fisher, F., Ruoff, R., & Brinson, L., (2005). Amino-functionalized carbon 
nanotubes for binding to polymers and biological systems. Chem. Mater., 17(6), 1290–1295. 236 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials
80. Balasubramanian, K., & Burghard, M., (2005). Chemically functionalized carbon 
nanotubes. Small, 1(2), 180–192. 
81. Zhao, Q., Gan, Z., & Zhuang, Q., (2002). Electrochemical sensors based on carbon 
nanotubes. Electroanalysis, 14(23), 1609–1613. 
82. Ramnani, P., Saucedo, N. M., & Mulchandani, A., (2016). Carbon nanomaterial￾based electrochemical biosensors for label-free sensing of environmental pollutants. 
Chemosphere, 143, 85–98. 
83. Liu, G., Wang, S., Liu, J., & Song, D., (2012). An electrochemical immunosensor based 
on chemical assembly of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes on carbon substrates for 
direct detection of the pesticide endosulfan in environmental water. Anal. Chem., 84(9), 
3921–3928. 
84. Karimi-Maleh, H., Moazampour, M., Ensafi, A. A., Mallakpour, S., & Hatami, M., 
(2014). An electrochemical nanocomposite modified carbon paste electrode as a sensor 
for simultaneous determination of hydrazine and phenol in water and wastewater 
samples. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 21(9), 5879–5888. 
85. Musameh, M., Wang, J., Merkoci, A., & Lin, Y., (2002). Low-potential stable NADH 
detection at carbon-nanotube-modified glassy carbon electrodes. Electrochem. Commun., 
4(10), 743–746. 
86. Tsai, Y. C., Chen, J. M., Li, S. C., & Marken, F., (2004). Electroanalytical thin film 
electrodes based on a Na fion™–multi-walled carbon nanotube composite. Electrochem. 
Commun., 6(9), 917–922. 
87. Wu, K., Hu, S., Fei, J., & Bai, W., (2003). Mercury-free simultaneous determination 
of cadmium and lead at a glassy carbon electrode modified with multi-wall carbon 
nanotubes. Anal. Chim. Acta, 489(2), 215–221. 
88. Ensafi, A. A., & Karimi-Maleh, H., (2010). Modified multiwall carbon nanotubes paste 
electrode as a sensor for simultaneous determination of 6-thioguanine and folic acid 
using ferrocene dicarboxylic acid as a mediator. J. Electroanal. Chem., 640(1), 75–83. Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 11 
INVESTIGATION OF SELECTED ANTI￾BACTERIALLY MODIFIED MICRO/ 
NANO-POLYMERS USING COLD 
PLASMA 
IGOR NOVÁK1
, ANTON POPELKA2
, AHMED ASANIDEZHAD3
, 
MARIÁN LEHOCKÝ3
, IVAN CHODÁK1
, JÁN SEDLIAČIK4
, 
JÁN MATYAŠOVSKÝ5
, PETER JURKOVIČ5
, KATARÍNA VALACHOVÁ6
, 
and LADISLAV ŠOLTÉS6 
1
Polymer Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia 
2
Center for Advanced Materials, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 
3
Tomas Bata University in Zlín, T.G.M., Zlín, Czech Republic 
4
Technical University in Zvolen, T.G. Masaryka, Zvolen, Slovakia 
5
VIPO, A.S., Gen. Svobodu, Partizánske, Slovakia 
6
Centre of Experimental Medicine SAS, Institute of Experimental 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Bratislava, Slovakia 
ABSTRACT 
Medical-grade polymers, i.e., polyvinylchloride and low-density polyethylene 
(LDPE), were modified by antibacterial compounds through a multistep 
physicochemical approach. The polymer initial surface activation was 
performed foremost via diffuse coplanar surface barrier discharge (DCSBD) 238 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
plasma in air at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure. Then, radical 
graft copolymerization of acrylic acid (AA) through grafting-from pathway 
was directed to render a well-defined brush of high density, and finally the 
selected antibacterial compounds were immobilized onto the functionalized 
polymer surfaces. This modification led to inhibition of Escherichia coli and 
Staphylococcus aureus bacterial strains adhesion to the polymer surface. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
Medical-grade polymers are widely used in many biomedical applications 
including, e.g., the production of catheters for coronary angioplasty [1–9]. 
However, infections may cause implant failure or removal, complex revision 
processes, which can lead to patient suffering, prolonged hospitalization, and 
in some cases, even death. Biocompatibility depends on the many surface 
characteristics such as wettability, roughness, chemistry, surface charge, and 
density of functional groups. The presence of hydrophobic and hydrophilic 
domains, charge, the functional group densities, and their conformation play 
ascendant roles in affecting cell behavior. Many problems can be eliminated 
by surface modification of polymers using an appropriate method as well as 
cold plasma when surface free energy is increasing due to the introduction 
of polar functional groups on treated surface thereby the surface of polymers 
becomes more hydrophilic. The development of discharge plasma techniques 
belong to important surface modifications of polymers when a very thin 
layer of polymer surface is treated without various changes. Processing of 
discharge plasma can significantly enhance adhesion by removing surface 
contamination and have impact on surface morphology changes through 
increased roughness due to etching. Anti-infective properties of polymers 
can be achieved as follows: (a) anti-infection agent added into the polymer; 
(b) copolymerization of an anti-infection agent with monomer; (c) surface 
treatment of medical polymer. Antibacterial surface modification is controlled 
by physicochemical interactions between bacteria and polymer surface. This 
treatment has several advantages due to no impact on the volume of the 
polymer, no release of antibacterial agents from the polymer, and relative 
simplicity and effectivity of this technique. 
It is eligible that surface coatings such as hospital furniture, kitchen 
worktops, wood-based floorings, and many other surfaces used in public areas 
possess antibacterial properties. Cold plasma can be used on various surfaces 
where their self-cleaning and antibacterial ability is very important. A multistep 
physicochemical process allowing the use of plasma technology combined  
Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 239 
with wet chemistry, which is considerable interesting due to delivery of 
surface-active anti-adherence materials [10]. In the first step of the approach, 
concerning an inherent lack of functional groups on a pristine substrate, 
plasma treatment at low temperature and atmospheric pressure has been 
substantiated to be productive to yield reactive entities on the surface [11–15]. 
Low temperature atmospheric pressure plasma is put into the spotlight by 
virtue of rapid, efficient in-line processing possibility without costly vacuum 
apparatus [6]. However, the necessity to shorten the duration of the treatment 
to a few seconds remains a pressing obstacle to extensive applications of this 
type of plasma [16–19]. To eliminate the underscored drawbacks, a novel 
technology coined as diffuse coplanar surface barrier discharge (DCSBD) 
has been devised [20], which enables the generation of a uniform plasma 
layer under atmospheric pressure with a high surface power density in the 
very close contact of treated specimen. DCSBD is established on surface 
barrier discharge with a high density of thin discharge channels generated 
on a dielectric surface in parallel with the sample surface. The plasma is in a 
tight contact with the sample thereof [20, 21], which appreciably shortens the 
treatment time and lessens energy consumption [21–26]. In the second phase 
of the approach, an end-functionalized polymer brush is synthesized on the 
surface via surface-initiated polymerization. Surface-initiated polymerization 
encourages the formation of surface-confined thick brush layers of high 
grafting density on the surface using generation of appropriate initiators 
anchored to substrate in which monomers are able to easily make their way 
through already-grafted layer and contribute to the chain growth [27–29]. 
11.2 EXPERIMENTAL PART 
11.2.1 MATERIALS 
PVC pellets, extrusion medical-grade RB1/T3M of 1.25 g·cm–3 density, 
were obtained from ModernPlast (Italy) and used as received. Low-density 
polyethylene (LDPE) Bralen FB 2–17: Slovnaft MOL (Slovakia), containing no 
additives, the thickness of LDPE film was 20 µm, density = 0.918 g·cm–3, mass 
flow rate, MFR (190°C, 2.16 kg) = 2 g per 10 min, Vicat softening temperature 
= 96°C. This type of LDPE is suitable for food contact. The product complies 
with Food Contact Regulations and the grade is suitable for manufacturing 
of pharmaceutical packing-product. Pectin from apple (BioChemika, with 
esterification of 70–75%), acrylic acid (99.0%, anhydrous), and N-(3-dimethyl 
aminopropyl)-N′-ethyl carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDAC, 98.0%) were 240 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
supplied by Fluka (USA). Chitosan from crab shells with medium molecular 
weight and deacetylation degree of 75–85%. Triclosan (5-chloro-2-(2,4-
dichlorophenoxy)phenol): Irgasan, C12H7
Cl3
O2
, Fluka Analytical (Italy), 
white powder, assay ≥ 97.0% (HPLC), Mr
 = 289.54 g·mol–1, ash ≤ 0.1%,
melting temperature = 56°C. Chlorhexidine (N,’N”‘-hexane-1,6-diylbis[N-
(4-chlorophenyl): imidodicarbonimidic diamide, Cl C 2 Aldrich 22H30 N10, 
Chemistry (Spain), white powder, assay = 98%, Mr = 505.46 g·mol–1, melting 
temperature = 134°C. Acrylic acid (propenoic acid): C3
H4
O2
, colorless liquid, 
Acros Organics (Belgium), assay = 99.5%, extra pure, stabilized by 180 to 220 
pm monomethyl ether of hydroquinone (MEHQ), Mr
 = 72.06 g·mol–1, flash 
temperature = 48°C, density = 1.050 g·cm–3, boiling temperature = 139°C. 
11.2.2 PLASMA TREATMENT 
Plasma treatment was implemented in static conditions by DCSBD 
technology (Scheme 11.1) of laboratory scale with air as the gaseous medium 
at atmospheric pressure and room temperature. A schematic profile of the 
plasma system is illustrated in Scheme 11.1. It basically comprises a series of 
parallel metallic electrodes inset inside a ceramic dielectric located in a glass 
chamber which allows the carrier gases to flow. All samples were treated on 
both sides with plasma power of 200 W for 15 sec. 
SCHEME 11.1 Scheme of device for DSBD plasma treatment. SCHEME 11.2 Multistep approach of biomolecules binding: (1) Plasma treatment, (2) 
Generation radicals, (3) AA radical graft polymerization, (4) Antibacterial deposition. 
Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 241 
11.2.3 MULTISTEP MODIFICATION TECHNIQUE 
PVC and/or LDPE substrates, upon treatment with plasma, were 
immersed into spacer solutions containing 10 vol.% acrylic acid (AA) 
in aqueous solution. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 24 h at 
30°C. PAA grafted polymer samples were immersed into EDAC aqueous 
solution at 4°C for 6 h in order to activate the carboxyl groups on the 
surface. The highly active key intermediate, O-acylisourea, is produced 
having the potential to react with reducing agents. Subsequently, they 
were transferred to chitosan and stored for 24 h at 30°C. This way pre￾prepared LDPE sample was then immersed into the solution of triclosan 
and chlorhexidine (Scheme 11.2). 
The wettability of LDPE treated by multistep process via PAA plasma 
grafted and antibacterial immobilization were carried out by the measure￾ment of contact angle using sessile drop technique via surface energy 
evaluation system (SEE system with CCD camera, Advex Instruments, 
Czech Republic). As testing liquids deionized water, ethylene glycol (EG), 
glycerol, formamide, diiodomethane were used at volume 5 μl (elimination
of influence of gravity) and a static contact angle was captured shortly after 
its creation when thermodynamic equilibrium is reached among the three 
phases: solid, liquid, and gas. Surface energy (γtot), its polar acid-base (γAB), 
dispersive (γLW), electron-acceptor (γ–
) and electron-donor (γ+
) components 242 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
were calculated by Acid-Base regression model using the method of least 
squares. 
11.2.4 SEM 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out on VEGA II LMU 
(TESCAN) operating in the high vacuum/secondary electron imaging mode 
at an accelerating voltage of 5–20 kV. 
11.2.5 ADHESIVE PROPERTIES 
The adhesive properties, namely peel strength (force per unit width) of adhesive 
joint of antibacterially-treated LDPE and immobilized by antibacterial 
compounds via DCSBD to poly-(2-ethylhexyl acrylate) deposited onto 
polypropylene foil (15 mm width), were carried out by measurements of 90° 
peel test at a rate of peel 10 mm per minute using 100 N universal Instron 
4,301 dynamometer (England). Ends of the polymer film were firmly fixed 
into the jaws of dynamometer so that the tension was evenly distributed across 
the entire width of the surface. 
11.2.6 FTIR 
Attenuated total reflectance FTIR measurements were performed by FTIR 
NICOLET 8,700 spectrometer (thermo-scientific) through the single bounce 
ATR accessory equipped with Ge crystal at an angle of incidence 45°. For 
each measurement, the spectral resolution and the number of scans were 2 
cm–1 and 64, respectively. 
11.2.7 BACTERIAL ADHESION AND BIOFILM TESTS 
Bacterial adhesion and biofilm experiments were performed using gram￾positive (S. aureus 3953) and gram-negative (E. coli 3954) bacteria. The 
circular shape specimens (d ≈ 8 mm) were cut from the polymer before further 
investigation. After 24 h incubation at 37°C under continuous shaking at 100 
rpm, the bacteria adhered on the surface of the specimens were removed by 
vigorous shaking of the test tube at 2,000 rpm for 30 s and quantified by 
serial dilutions and spread plate technique.  
TABLE 11.1 Surface Properties of Poly(Vinyl Chloride) Treated by Multistep Process* 
Sample θw θe θd θf γ- γ+ γAB γLW γtot 
1 85.9 60.5 43.5 64.2 5.1 0.0 1.0 37.8 38.8 
(±2.5) (±3.0) (±3.5) (±6.0) 
2 64.9 49.4 36.2 51.0 6.6 0.1 1.1 41.4 42.6 
(±3.0) (±4.0) (±5.5) (±6.0) 
3 46.5 32.1 38.0 47.7 10.4 0.5 4.5 43.7 48.1 
(±4.0) (±2.4) (±5.0) (±4.5) 
4 63.7 43.4 28.2 44.9 2.4 0.7 2.5 44.0 46.5 
(±5.5) (±3.0) (±2.5) (±5.0) 
5 50.5 40.0 31.5 31.0 5.2 0.2 2.0 44.4 46.4 
(±3.5) (±2.5) (±4.5) (±3.5) 
Surface free energies: γ-
, γ+
, γAB, γLW, γtot in mJ/m2
; contact angle θ in o
. 
w = deionized water, e = ethylene glycol, d = diiodomethane, f = formamide. 
*Sample 1: pristine LDPE/control; Sample 2: plasma-treated; Sample 3: PAA grafted; Sample 
4: chitosan immobilized; Sample 5: chitosan/pectin immobilized (mean±standard deviation). 
Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 243 
11.3 RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
11.3.1 MEDICAL-GRADED POLY(VINYL CHLORIDE) (PVC) 
11.3.1.1 SURFACE WETTABILITY 
A highly surface sensitive technique is contact angle analysis which enables 
a convenient assessment of the surface wettability. Table 11.1 includes the 
contact angle values of deionized water (θw) recorded on different PVC 
samples (numbered from 1 to 5). Based on the given data, Sample 1 exhibits 
hydrophobic character with an evident change in θw and hydrophilicity 
ascends is anticipated after being treated by plasma. This trend continues up 
to Sample 3 on which polyacrylic acid (PAA) chains are grafted where more 
hydrophilic propensity is inferred from θw value. The elevated hydrophilicity 
upon multistep modifications is assumed to originate from the inclusion of 
superficial hydrophilic entities. Hydrophilicity then decreases as polysac￾charides are coated onto the surface, though it is higher than that of Sample 
1, as the inherent hydrophilicity of chitosan is beyond doubt. Furthermore, 
Sample 5 exhibits higher wettability than Sample 4 implying a more effec￾tive binding of chitosan onto the surface, as remarked in other efforts as well. 
To further explore the physicochemical parameters of the examined 
surfaces, an extensively used theory, Lifshitz-van der Waals/acid-base (LW/  
244 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
AB), has been exploited for free surface energy evaluation whose outputs 
with reference to diiodomethane, EG, and deionized water as wetting liquids 
are supplied in Table 11.1. Sample 1 exhibits a basic character (γ–
>γ+
) as 
proposed by the data, even though the acidity or basicity of neat PVC is 
yet controversial. Subsequent to the plasma treatment, the total surface free 
energy (γtot) is raised in terms of the contact angle values. This increase is 
principally assisted by the polar (acid-base) component (γAB), rather than 
the apolar one (γLW), implying an incorporation of superficial polar oxygen￾containing entities thanks to the air plasma treatment. A significant rise in 
γtot and γAB values is noticed for Sample 3, in comparison with samples 1 and 
2, indicative of the presence of carboxyl-containing units on the surface. As 
for samples 4 and 5, a reduction in γAB and γtot values is observed compared 
to Sample 3, however, their γtot values rise above that of Sample 1. The 
minimum values of θE and θF
 are found for Sample 5 which reflect that the 
surface is seemingly coated by alcoholic and amine containing moieties 
which in fact points to the more efficient binding of chitosan when compared 
to Sample 4. 
11.3.1.2 SURFACE MORPHOLOGY 
The surface topography of samples 1−5, investigated by SEM as a common 
surface qualitative technique, is presented in Figure 11.1. Sample 1 shows 
uniform morphology which goes through a significant alteration ensuing 
the plasma treatment taking on an etched pattern with an unevenly shaped 
texture. The generated morphology is advantageous for the next coupling 
processes due to an enhanced surface area and roughness. The developed 
pattern on Sample 2 is indeed an outcome of competing functionalization 
and ablation phenomena which brings on reorganization of the surface 
microstructure. 
The incident of the ablation is validated by gravimetric analysis where a 
weight loss of 4 μg·cm–2 was observed due to the plasma treatment for 15 
s implying an approximate etching rate of 2 nm/s in terms of the used PVC 
grade density. Based on micrograph from Sample 3, PAA chains develop 
superficial domains of submicron dimension and brush-like features are then 
recognizable on the surface. As the grafting moves forward, clustering takes 
place because of the domains size growth. An additional compelling factor 
in controlling the surface microstructure is the grafting mechanism which is 
actually initiated by generated surface radicals. Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 245 
FIGURE 11.1 SEM micrographs of PVC samples 1−5 taken at 30,000 times magnification. 
11.3.1.3 FTIR 
FTIR is extensively utilized as a surface analysis technique to provide semi￾quantitative information on the chemistry of the near-surface region. The 
mean probe depth of FTIR equipped with ZnSe crystal for PVC of refractive 
index measures 1.5 lies on the order of 4 μm which goes beyond the regular 246 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
thickness of modified layers on a substrate. Figure 11.2 displays the infrared 
spectra of samples 1−5 separated over three wavenumber ranges for clarity 
purpose. In the spectrum of Sample 1, one can readily identify the charac￾teristic bands of ester, and carbonyl-containing groups, besides neat PVC 
typical signals. This shows the existence of some additives in the current 
medical-grade PVC. After exposing the samples to plasma, no pronounced 
change is detected regarding the spectrum of Sample 2, compared to Sample 
1. This happens due to overlapping of signals, which leads to disguising of 
the plasma effects, and also due to the limited depth of plasma modification 
to outermost layers, which thus cannot be well explored by FTIR. Neverthe￾less, a new absorption of weak strength comes into view around 1,630 cm–1 
which relates to C=C stretching vibration as a result of the dehydrochlorina￾tion process. 
FIGURE 11.2 FTIR spectra of PVC samples 1−5 with different range of wavenumbers.
11.3.1.4 X-RAY PHOTOELECTRON SPECTROSCOPY (XPS) ANALYSIS 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), with a probe depth measuring 
around 5 nm, was selected to monitor thoroughly the bearings of the surface 
modifications by picking up a quantitative perception into the surface 
elemental composition. The survey spectra along with the corresponding 
surface atomic compositions and ratios of samples 1−5 are reported in 
Figure 11.3. Carbon (C), oxygen (O), chlorine (Cl), and silicon (Si) elements Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 247 
are found on the Sample 1 surface whose composition and elemental ratios 
are presented in the legend of the respective graph. The Cl2p atomic content 
is substantially lower than the amount found for neat PVC containing no 
additives which refers to the existence of several additives and also X-ray 
degradation. The same rationale accounts for the considerable amount of 
O1s detected in Sample 1 which is not a typical element in standard PVC. 
XPS also recognizes some trivial quantity of silicon which may be associ￾ated with the production/molding process as a contaminant. An ostensible 
change in C1s, O1s, and Cl2p core-level signals intensity arises for Sample 
2 quantitatively expressed in the legend of the graph. It is obvious that the 
Cl2p intensity abates while that of O1s noticeably increases which alludes 
to the introduction of superficial oxygenous entities together with dehydro￾chlorination as a result of the ablation. Nitrogen (N1s) is also found on the 
surface because the plasma treatment was implemented in an air medium. 
The O/C ratio increases while Cl/C declines when compared to those of 
Sample 1. The amount of Si2p on the Sample 2 surface increases supposedly 
coming from plasma parts as a pollutant. 
Upon binding chitosan on the surface (Sample 4), pronounced changes 
appear in the surface chemistry, as O1s content and O/C fraction increase 
and also N1s signal emerges, while Cl2p and Si2p bands abate due to the 
surface coverage by polysaccharide species. This trend yet continues for 
Sample 5 as higher O1s and N1s as well as O/C and N/C atomic rations are 
detectable compared to Sample 4 giving support to the notion that chitosan 
can be more stable, i.e., in higher quantity, attached onto the surface when 
layered along with pectin. In other words, the use of pectin can promote the 
ability of chitosan binding. 
11.3.1.5 BACTERIAL ADHESION AND BIOFILM ASSAY 
The most crucial step of the biofilm formation is bacterial adhesion, 
considered as a sophisticated topic in biointerface science whose plenty 
of aspects have not yet been well conceived. As a matter of fact, adhesion 
phenomenon is an interplay of myriad factors. Figure 11.4 shows the 
histograms of bacterial adhesion extent for samples 1−5 after 24 h incubation. 
As regards the adherence degree of S. aureus onto the samples 2−4, no 
reduction is evident in the number of viable adhered colonies, compared to 
Sample 1, signifying an inability of the modifications in hampering the S. 
aureus adhesion to the surface. From samples 1−3, both hydrophilicity and 
roughness rise, as remarked earlier, and then decrease in samples 4 and 5. 248 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials FIGURE 11.3 XPS survey-scan spectra of PVC samples 15 along with atomic compositions. FIGURE 11.4 Histograms of bacterial adhesion degree for PVC samples 1−5 after 24 h 
incubation against two strains of microorganisms. 
Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 249 
The adhesion degrees vary with a similar trend as well. Considering Sample 
5, it is inferred that chitosan/pectin assembly imparts biocidal effects against 
S. aureus. Chitosan single layer and chitosan/pectin multilayer restrain the 
adherence degree by 50% and 20%, respectively. Chitosan/pectin multilayer 
is found to be effective against both gram-positive and gram-negative strains 
which can be translated as a higher quality of chitosan coating when it is 
applied along with pectin. 
11.3.1.6 CONCLUSION (PVC) 
These research results highlight the functionality of the adopted multistep 
physicochemical approach to bind polysaccharide species onto the medical￾grade PVC surface. DCSBD plasma is capable of raising roughness, surface 
energy, and introducing oxygen-containing functionalities anchored onto the 
surface. A structured PAA brush of high graft density is synthesized using 
surface-initiated approach to further improve hydrophilicity and develop a 
stable brush-like assembly to yield a platform for biomolecular binding. In 
vitro bacterial adhesion and biofilm formation assays indicate incapability of 
single chitosan layer in hindering the adhesion of S. aureus bacterial strain, 
while up to 30% reduction is achieved by chitosan/pectin layered assembly. 
On the other hand, chitosan and chitosan/pectin multilayer could retard E. 
coli adhesion by 50%, and 20%, respectively. Furthermore, plasma treated 
and graft copolymerized samples are also found effective to diminish the 
adherence degree of E. coli. 250 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
11.4 LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (LDPE) 
11.4.1 SURFACE WETTABILITY 
Wetting can be defined by the degree of a wetted solid. When a drop is totally 
spread on a solid surface, and the contact angle approaches 0 deg, then 
the surface is completely wet. However, in many cases, it is only a partial 
wettability (or non-wettability). The extent of wettability of a solid surface 
can be evaluated by contact angle measurements. Wetting can be expressed 
as relative strength of cohesion (liquid/liquid) and adhesion (solid/liquid) 
forces. Weak cohesion with strong adhesion due to the very low contact angle 
approaches the full wettability. When solid/liquid interactions decrease and 
liquid/liquid interactions increase, the wettability decreases. A drop with a 
large contact angle about 90 deg is hydrophobic, which is associated with 
poor wettability, poor adhesion, and low surface free energy of solid. On 
the other side, a drop with a small contact angle is more hydrophilic, which 
reflected the higher wettability, higher adhesion, and higher surface energy 
of an investigated material. Changes in contact angles of the testing liquid 
set, graft yield (GY), surface free energy (γtot), and its components of anti￾bacterially treated LDPE are shown in Table 11.2. The GY was calculated by 
the following equation: 
W2 −W1  GY[%] =  ×100%
 W1 
where; W1 and W2 represent the weight of the samples before and after 
surface treatment. The water contact angle (θw) of untreated LDPE (Sample 
1) achieves the highest values from all samples because it is polymer with 
hydrophobic and chemical inert surface. The parameter θw significantly 
decreased after exposition of plasma to Sample 1 when different functional 
groups in plasma species were introduced and therefore this treatment surface 
acquired more polar or hydrophilic character. The most decreased contact 
angle was observed in PAA (Sample 3) which relates to its hydrophilic char￾acter. To investigate other physicochemical parameters of the treated surface 
LW/AB theory was used whereby γtot and non-polar LW (γLW) and polar AB 
(γAB) components can be obtained. LW indicates the total dispersive Lifhitz￾Van der Walls interaction and AB refers to the acid-base or electron-acceptor/ 
electron donor interaction according to Lewis. LDPE belongs to group of 
low-energy polymeric materials and therefore γtot of Sample 1 achieves very 
low values which related to its worse further processing, such as dyeing,  
TABLE 11.2 Surface Properties of Low-Density Polyethylene Treated by Multistep 
Modification Process* 
Sample θw θe θd θf γ- γ+ γAB γLW γtot GY(%) 
1 99.2 70.9 48.4 80.7 1.0 0.1 0.7 34.5 35.2 -
(±0.6) (±1.2) (±1.2) (±0.9) 
2 77.53 51.0 36.0 52.8 6.6 0.1 1.1 41.4 42.6 0.0 
(±1.1) (±2.8) (±1.2) (±1.5) 
3 66.9 32.1 32.5 37.0 10.4 0.5 4.5 43.7 48.1 0.5 
(±0.7) (±2.4) (±1.6) (±2.0) 
4 79.9 36.1 30.5 48.3 2.4 0.7 2.5 44.0 46.5 1.8 
(±1.5) (±0.7) (±1.5) (±1.2) 
5 76.7 38.1 30.0 50.4 5.2 0.2 2.0 44.4 46.4 2.0 
(±0.5) (±2.5) (±1.6) (±1.5) 
Surface free energies: γ-
, γ+
, γAB, γLW, γtot in mJ/m2
; contact angle θ in o
. 
w=deionized water, e=ethylene glycol, d=diiodomethane, f=formamide. 
*
Sample 1: untreated LDPE; Sample 2: plasma-treated; Sample 3: Poly(acrylic acid) grafted; 
Sample 4: triclosan immobilized; Sample 5: chlorhexidine immobilized (mean ± standard 
deviation). 
Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 251 
printing, and bonding (low adhesion). This lack can be removed by plasma 
treatment of LDPE when γtot can significantly increase as in Sample 2. 
Compared with other samples, the highest increase of γtot and γAB was shown 
in Sample 3 which had high polarity due to the presence of polar oxygen 
groups. Samples 4 and 5 showed a similar increase in surface free energy 
values thereby confirming an increase in wettability. 
11.4.2 ADHESIVE PROPERTIES 
The results of measurements peel strength of adhesive joint LDPE– 
poly(acrylate) is shown in Figure 11.5. Surface energy changes are closely 
related to adhesion between two materials in contact. Therefore, the increased 
wettability has resulted in an increase in adhesion strength of adhesive joint to 
more polar poly(acrylate). The adhesive properties depend on chemical compo￾sition as well as on surface morphology (roughness), which allows rougher 
surface, and higher adhesion. Adhesion is thus a complex of several related 
chemical and physicochemical properties. Therefore, in Sample 3 even though 
the surface energy reaches its highest value, the peel strength is lower than in 
samples 4 and 5. Crosslinking occurring in Sample 5 (via glutaraldehyde) was 
another factor that contributed to the increase in the adhesion strength. 252 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
FIGURE 11.5 LDPE peel strength vs. surface treatment. 
11.4.3 SURFACE CHEMISTRY 
The FTIR measurements provide mostly semi-quantitative information on 
the chemical changes of the near-surface region because of the average 
sampling depth (depending on refractive indices of polymers, approximately 
4 μm. For better visualization, the infrared spectra of pure LDPE and the 
modified material together with the pure triclosan were splitted into three 
different wavenumber regions. The significant changes in spectra are 
observed also in (both) cases of modification of LDPE-PAA grafting and 
after the subsequent triclosan coating. On the spectrum of grafted material 
one can observe some characteristic peaks of PAA, i.e., the most intense peak 
at 1,712 cm–1 (carbonyl band, C=O stretching) and also some unresolved 
peaks in the fingerprint region (1,300–1,100 cm–1, C-O stretching and CH2 
bending). After triclosan treatment, the shape of the spectrum changes, as 
can be seen in Figure 11.6. These changes are significant almost in a whole 
mid-infrared region, especially in the region below 1,700 cm–1. Because 
of the simple spectrum of LDPE (small numbers of peaks) in comparison 
with the spectrum of triclosan, we can assume that almost all changes in the Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 253 
spectrum of the triclosan immobilized LDPE originate from triclosan. The 
presence of triclosan in the treated sample is confirmed by an appearance 
of a number of peaks which are also present in the spectrum of the pure 
triclosan (e.g., at 1,491 cm–1 (benzene ring vibration), and also undoubtedly 
by a peak at 752 cm–1 (stretching mode of C-Cl in triclosan molecule). The 
shifts in the maxima of individual peaks and the changes in their shapes can 
probably be assigned to the bonding of triclosan molecules to the LDPE 
surface and inhibition of their unrestricted motion. 
FIGURE 11.6 FTIR spectra LDPE treated by plasma, grafted by AA, and immobilized by 
triclosan. 
The more significant changes in spectra are observed in (both) cases 
of modification of LDPE-PAA grafting and subsequently immobilized by 
chlorhexidine. After chlorhexidine treatment, the shape of the spectrum 
changes, as can be seen in Figure 11.7. These changes are significant almost 
in a whole mid-infrared region, especially in the region below 1,700 cm–1. 
The presence of chlorhexidine is confirmed by an appearance of a peak at 
1,640 cm–1 (C=N vibration) and also undoubtedly by a peak at 1,530 cm–1 
(stretching mode of aromatic ring in chlorhexidine molecule). 
FIGURE 11.7 FTIR spectra LDPE treated by plasma, grafted by AA, and immobilized by 
chlorhexidine. 254 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
11.4.4 ANTIBACTERIAL ACTIVITY 
Inhibition zone area was calculated from the average diameter of inhibi￾tion zone, whereas the area of the sample was not taken into account. Each 
experiment was performed in triplicate (Figure 11.8). The untreated sample, 
plasma treated sample and sample grafted by PAA with chitosan together 
with glutaraldehyde did not show any antibacterial activity against E. coli 
and S. aureus strains. Chitosan/pectin coated sample showed minor activity 
only against S. aureus, their inhibition zone moves around 70 mm2
. Similar 
results were gained for chitosan/pectin coated with glutaraldehyde sample. 
This sample also showed activity against E. coli. However, the antibacterial 
activity of these samples is not significant. The highest and most clear inhibi￾tion zones were given by samples grafted by PAA and coated by chitosan. 
Their levels were on average 35 mm2
 for E. coli and 275 mm2
 for S. aureus. 
FIGURE 11.8 Inhibition zone area on LDPE surface for S. aureus and E. coli strains. Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 255 
PAA grafted sample showed no inhibition zone for E. coli, nevertheless 
the same sample indicated antibacterial activity for S. aureus. This could 
be explained by the high sensitivity of PAA brush and its ability to easily 
absorb impurities during manipulation. As it can be seen from the results, 
only sample grafted by PAA and coated by chitosan demonstrated active 
antibacterial properties against both bacterial strains. 
11.4.5 CONCLUSION (LDPE) 
The aim of this work was to examine the impact of selected antibacterial agents, 
namely triclosan and chlorhexidine bound to the surface of LDPE with acrylic 
acid via DCSBD plasma. As an activator of LDPE surface for efficient binding 
of acrylic acid DCSBD plasma generator was used. The plasma was used for 
transformation of acrylic acid to form the polymer by radical polymerization. 
The grafted acrylic acid creates polymer brushes on the surface, that was capable 
of binding antibacterial agent in an effective manner. Antibacterial effect of 
such treated LDPE film was confirmed against E. coli as well as for S. aureus. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors are grateful for financial support to the Slovak Research and 
Development Agency projects No. APVV-18-0378, APVV-19-0269 and 
APVV-20-0159 APVV 20-0593, and VEGA grant 2/0019/19. 
KEYWORDS 
• antibacterial properties 
• cold plasma 
• FTIR 
• low-density polyethylene 
• medical-grade polyvinylchloride 
• multi-step modifcation 
• scanning electron microscopy 
• surface energy 
• X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 256 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
REFERENCES 
1. Desmet, T., Morent, R., Geyter, N. D., Leys, C., Schacht, E., & Dubruel, P., (2009). 
Nonthermal plasma technology as a versatile strategy for polymeric biomaterials surface 
modification: A review. Biomacromolecules, 10, 2351−2378.
2. Novák, I., Števiar, M., Popelka, A., Chodák, I., Mosnáček, J., Špírková, M., Janigová, I., 
et al., (2013). Surface modification of polyethylene by diffuse barrier discharge plasma. 
Polym. Eng. Sci., 53, 516−523.
3. Popelka, A., Novák, I., Lehocký, M., Junkar, I., Mozetic, M., Kleinová, A., Janigová, 
I., et al., (2012). A new route for chitosan immobilization onto polyethylene surface. 
Carbohydr. Polym., 90, 1501−1508.
4. Popelka, A., Novák, I., Lehocký, M., Chodák, I., Sedliačik, J., Gajtanská, M., Sedliačiková,
M., et al., (2012). Antibacterial treatment of polyethylene by cold plasma for medical 
purposes. Molecules, 17, 762−785.
5. Kenawy, E. R., Worley, S. D., & Broughton, R., (2007). The chemistry and 
applications of antimicrobial polymers: A state-of-the-art review. Biomacromolecules, 
8, 1359−1384.
6. Denes, F. S., & Manolache, S., (2004). Macromolecular plasma-chemistry: An emerging 
field of polymer science. Prog. Polym. Sci., 29, 815. 
7. Černák, M., Černáková, L., Hudec, I., Kováčik, D., & Zahoranová, A., (2009). Diffuse 
coplanar surface barrier discharge and its applications for in-line processing of 
low-added-value materials. Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys., 47, 22806. 
8. Černák, M., Ráhel, J., Kováčik, D., Šimor, M., Brablec, A., & Slavíček, P., (2004). 
Generation of thin surface plasma layers for atmospheric-pressure surface treatments. 
Contrib. Plasma Phys., 44, 492. 
9. Asanidezhad, A., Novák, I., Lehocký, M., Bílek, F., Vesel, A., & Junkar, I., (2010). 
Polysaccharides coatings on medical-grade PVC: A probe into surface characteristics 
and the extent of bacterial adhesion. Molecules, 15, 1007−1027.
10. Asanidezhad, A., Novák, I., Lehocký, M., Sedlarik, V., Vesel, A., & Junkar, I., (2010). A. 
Physicochemical approach to render antibacterial surfaces on plasma-treated medical￾grade PVC: Irgasan coating. Plasma Processes Polym., 7, 504−514.
11. Bhattacharya, A., & Misra, B. N., (2004). Grafting: A versatile means to modify polymers 
techniques, factors and applications. Prog. Polym. Sci., 29, 767−814.
12. Zhao, B., & Brittain, W. J., (2000). Polymer brushes: Surface-immobilized macromol￾ecules. Prog. Polym. Sci., 25, 677. 
13. Costa, F., Carvalho, I. F., Montelaro, R. C., Gomes, P., & Martins, M. C., (2011). 
Covalent immobilization of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) onto biomaterial surfaces. 
Acta Biomater., 7, 1431–1440. 
14. Goddard, J. M., & Hotchkiss, J. H., (2008). Tailored functionalization of low-density 
polyethylene surfaces. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 108, 2940–2949. 
15. Faucheux, N., Schweiss, R., Lutzow, K., Wemer, C., & Groth, T., (2004). Self-assembled 
monolayers with different terminating groups as model substrates for cell adhesion 
studies. Biomaterials, 25, 2721−2730.
16. Michael, K. E., Vernekar, V. N., Keselowsky, B. G., Meredith, J. C., Latour, R. A., & 
Garcia, A. J., (2003). Adsorption-induced conformational changes in fibronectin due to 
interactions with well-defined surface chemistries. Langmuir, 19, 8033−8040.Investigation of Selected Anti-Bacterially Modified Micro/Nano-Polymers 257 
17. Keselowsky, B. G., Collard, D. M., & Garcia, A. J. J., (2003). Surface chemistry 
modulates fibronectin conformation and directs integrin binding and specificity to 
control cell adhesion. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A, 66, 247−259.
18. Luk, Y. Y., Kato, M., & Mrksich, M., (2000). Self-assembled monolayers of alkanethiolates 
presenting mannitol groups are inert to protein adsorption and cell attachment. Langmuir, 
16, 9604−9608.
19. Vesel, A., Junkar, I., Cvelbar, U., Kovac, J., & Mozetic, M., (2008). Surface modification 
of polyester by oxygen- and nitrogen-plasma treatment. Surf. Interface Anal., 40, 
1444−1453.
20. Drnovská, H., Lapčík, L. Jr., Buršíková, V., Zemek, J., & Barros-Timmons, A. M., 
(2003). Surface properties of polyethylene after low-temperature plasma treatment. 
Colloid Polym. Sci., 281, 1025. 
21. Novák, I., Števiar, M., Chodák, I., Krupa, I., Nedelčev, T., Špírková, M., Chehimi, M. 
M., et al., (2007). Study of adhesion and surface properties of low-density polyethylene 
pre-treated by cold discharge plasma. Polym. Adv. Technol., 18, 97. 
22. Olifirenko, A. S., Novak, I., Rozova, E. Y., Saprykina, N. N., Mitilineos, A. G., & 
Elyashevich, G. K., (2009). Hydrophilization of porous polyethylene films by cold 
plasma of different types. Polym. Sci., 51, 247−255.
23. Lloyd, G., Friedman, G., Jafri, S., Schultz, G., Fridman, A., & Harding, K., (2010). Gas 
plasma: Medical uses and developments in wound care. Plasma Process. Polym., 7, 
194−211.
24. Sanchis, R., Fenollar, O., García, D., Sánchez, L., & Balart, R., (2008). Improved 
adhesion of LDPE films to polyolefin foams for automotive industry using low-pressure 
plasma. Int. J. Adh. Adhes., 28, 445. 
25. Pappas, D., (2011). Status and potential of atmospheric plasma processing of materials. 
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 29, 020801:1–020801:17. 
26. Yang, L., Chen, J., Guo, Y., & Zhan, Z., (2009). Surface modification of a biomedical 
polyethylene. Appl. Surf. Sci., 255, 4446−4451.
27. Černák, M., Černáková, Ľ., Hudec, I., Kováčik, D., & Zahoranová, A., (2009). Diffuse
coplanar surface barrier discharge and its applications for in-line processing of low-added￾value materials. Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys., 47, 22806. 
28. Šimor, M., Ráheľ, J., Vojtek, P., Černák, M., & Brablec, A., (2002). Atmospheric-pressure
diffuse coplanar surface discharge for surface treatments. Appl. Phys. Lett., 81, 2716−2718.
29. Černák, M., Ráheľ, J., Kováčik, D., Šimor, M., Brablec, A., & Slavíček, P., (2004). 
Generation of thin surface plasma layers for atmospheric-pressure surface treatments. P. 
Contrib. Plasma Phys., 44, 492−495.Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials: Design, Synthesis, Properties, Applications, and Perspectives. 
Lionello Pogliani, Ann Rose Abraham, A. K. Haghi, & Prabhat Ranjan (Eds.) 
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 12 
STEADY-STATE CREEP DEFORMATION 
IN ROTATING DISCS AND CYLINDERS: 
FOR MACRO TO MICRO/NANO-SCALE 
SYSTEMS 
SAVITA BANSAL1
 and SATYA BIR SINGH2 
1
Research Scholar, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India 
2
Professor, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India 
ABSTRACT 
The creep behavior of composites and functionally graded materials (FGMs) 
has become highly significant in engineering designs of rotating discs 
and cylinders. The chapter gives information about the steady state creep 
in discs and cylinders formed from monolithic material to FGM done by 
various researchers in the past eight decades. An overview of yield criteria, 
constitutive equations, creep laws, associated flow rules, and other related 
terms using classical theory is given. The empirical results have proved to 
be preferable for designing a model, and some authors have justified their 
results through experimental data. Setting up apparatuses, making samples of 
different materials, performing experiments by applying appropriate pressure/ 
heat, etc., to obtain the values of yield strength, applied in longitudinal and 
transversal directions, is a time-consuming task. The aim of this chapter is 
to compare the impact of stresses, strains, and strain rates under internal 
and external pressure on the structural component cylinder done by many 260 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
researchers over a period of time. Rotating discs having variable thickness 
has also been studied by many authors, but experimental validation of the 
results is very rare in these chapters. 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
In the engineering of solids, the strength of the material is very important 
while making an object. The stronger the material is, the better the engineered 
object will be. However, in engineering designs of rotating objects, creep 
behavior of the materials also becomes very important. Creep refers to 
permanent deformation over a period of time on objects under constant stress 
or under stress for longer duration during the time period. Any engineer 
designing an object for her/his purpose would certainly look for greater 
longevity of the object thus created. If the object so designed is to withstand 
constant stress over a period of time, as in the case of fast-rotating objects 
like turbines, turbochargers, rotors in machines like pumps and motors, etc., 
the material so chosen will be checked for having a slower creep rate. The 
slower the creep rate, the longer the design object will last, and thus the 
greater the longevity of the design. 
Over a period of time, people have researched the behavior of various 
types of materials to find their utility for an umpteen number of usages. The 
major utility of the researched objects has been found in the construction 
sector, manufacturing sector, in engineering of better and bigger machines, 
in aviation and in space, among others. The most researched materials for 
various purposes are wood, plastics, ceramics, metals, steel, alloys, organic 
materials, polymers, and so on and so forth. 
Towards the end of the 20th century, it was realized that composite 
materials were a cost-effective method of finding the material for designing 
objects as compared to naturally occurring materials. Furthermore, it was 
researched that composite objects are better capable of exhibiting design￾specific characteristics as compared to naturally occurring materials. 
Such materials are generally formed by homogeneous mixing, graded 
mixing (fused) or binding of layers, such that different materials mixed, 
fused, and bound have different physical and chemical properties. The desired 
physical properties of a design object can be obtained if such materials are 
used for making the design objects. 
Physically, such materials can be categorized into isotropic and anisotropic 
materials. Isotropic materials have the same physical, mechanical, thermal, 
and electrical properties in all directions, whereas anisotropic materials Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 261 
exhibit different behavior in different directions. Orthotropic materials are 
a subset of anisotropic materials which exhibit symmetric characteristics in 
three orthogonal planes. In the remaining planes, the object exhibits aniso￾tropic behavior. The intersecting lines of these planes are known as axes of 
anisotropy. 
The subset of composite materials, functionally graded materials (FGMs), 
is designed for acquiring graded variation in the material properties. The 
manufacturing technique of FGM leads to the manufacturing of unique 
materials which are not available naturally. For example, FGM is the 
most important non-homogeneous material formed for high-temperature 
application [33]. 
The overall objective of various research in this field is to create or 
discover such objects which exhibit the requisite physical, chemical, elec￾tromagnetic, and thermal characteristics without much deviation, and at 
the same time, withstand the rigorous test of time and force, such that the 
designed object has greater reliability and longevity (Figure 12.1). 
FIGURE 12.1 Characteristic representation of functionally gradient materials. 
Source: Singh & Ray [33]. 
12.1.1 YIELDING CRITERIA 
The yielding criterion is the limit of elasticity. It is the condition under which 
the object leaves its elastic behavior and starts behaving in a plastic manner. 
These criteria define the boundary conditions for the object to behave in an 
elastic manner. These criteria, coupled with constitutive equations, lead to 
assessing the creep rate of objects and materials. Some of the most popular 
yielding criteria preferred by researchers are von Mises and Tresca’s Yield 
Criteria. Other important yield criteria are Hoffman’s Yielding Criterion,  
262 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Hill’s Yielding Criterion, and Singh and Ray’s Yielding Criterion. Through 
these, we get to know when the material operating under the same load 
conditions start getting deformed in a plastic manner. These yield criteria are 
the functions of principal stresses σ1
, σ2
, σ3
, in such a way that σ1 > σ > σ >. 2 
The above-mentioned yielding criteria are as follows: 
12.1.1.1 TRESCA YIELD CRITERION (OR MAXIMUM SHEAR-STRESS 
CRITERION) 
Tresca yield criterion states that when τmax (maximum shear stress) reaches 
a critical value (k), the material starts deforming. Here, τmax is calculated as 
follows: 
σ1 − σ 3 τ max = 2
Conditions for uniaxial tension are: 
σ e σ1 =σ σe , 2 3 =σ =0,τ e = 2
Solving above two expressions, we get: 
σ σ 1 3 − σ e − 0 σ e τ max = = = = τ e 2 2 2
⇒ σ e =σ1 3 −σ
Conditions of pure shear state are: 
σ = −σ = k,σ = 0, 1 3 2
Using these conditions in the above τmax expression, we get: 
σ σ k 1 − 3 k + k 2
τ max = = = = k
2 2 2
⇒ =
σ σ 1 − 3 ⇒ σ σ 1 − 3 =2k =σ e k
2
σ k ⇒ = e
2
In Tresca yield criterion, intermediate principal stress is neglected, there￾fore, the following von-Mises yield criterion is preferred by researchers in 
most of their research papers.  
12.1.1.2 VON-MISES YIELD CRITERION (OR DISTORTION-ENERGY 
PRINCIPLE) 
In 1913, this criterion was proposed by von-Mises for isotropic material that 
yield exists when stress deviator exceeded some critical value, i.e., 
1 2 2 2 (σ σ ) ( + − + σ σ ) 2
 − σ σ ) ( −  = k 1 2 2 3 3 1 6 
Now, condition of yield in uniaxial tension is σ1
 = σ = σ3
 = 0, σ 2
 + σ 2 
e
, σ2 e e 
= 6k2
. After solving both the equations, we get von-Mises yield criterion as: 
1 2 2 2 1
σ =  σ σ− + σ σ σ σ 2 − + −  
( 3 ) ( 1 ) ( 2 )  e 2 3 1
2
12.1.1.3 HOFFMAN’S ISOTROPIC YIELD CRITERION 
For isotropic material, Hoffman’s yield criterion utilizes uniaxial compres￾sion (fc
) and tensile yield stresses (ft
) and is formulated as follows [31]: 
2 2 2 (σ σ+ +σ ) −(σσ σσ σσ + + ) 1 2 3 1 2 2 3 3 1
+ ( f − f )(σ σ+ +σ )− f f =0 c t 1 2 3 c t
12.1.1.4 HILL’S YIELD CRITERION 
In 1948, Hill proposed this criterion for anisotropic material by modifying 
the von-Mises yield criterion (isotropic material) [31]: 
2 2 2
2 f F= (σ σ ( 1 σ σ ) =1 2 − 3 ) +G σ σ 3 − ) + H ( 1 − 2
Here, the potential function 2f can be found from effective stress expres￾sion given as: 
2 f
σ e = G H+
In Hill’s yield criterion, it is assumed that the material is orthotropic. This 
means there are 3 planes of symmetry which are mutually intersecting each 
other at 90° at every point inside material and these planes are known as the 
principal axes of anisotropy. When principal axes of anisotropy are taken in 
x, y, and z directions, Hill’s yield criterion converts into the following form: 
Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 263 264 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
2 2 2
F (σ −σ +G σ −σ + H σ σ =1 2 3 ) ( 3 1 ) ( 1 − 2 )
where; F, G, and H are anisotropic constants. If F = G = H = 1, then this 
reduces to von-Mises yield criterion. 
12.1.1.5 SINGH AND RAY’S YIELD CRITERION 
In 2003, Singh & Ray proposed this criterion for anisotropic material using 
uniaxial compression (fc
) and tensile stress (ft
). This criterion is developed 
using Hill’s criterion and Hoffman’s criterion. 
2 2 2
2f =F(σ −σ +G σ −σ + H σ σ + (k σ + k σ + k σ ) 2 3 ) ( 3 1 ) ( 1 − 2 ) 1 1 2 2 3 3 =1;
f − f  ki =  c t  i = 1,2,3
 f f th c t i principal direction
Since the difference between tensile stress and compressive stress has 
been calculated by thermal residual stresses, so: 
f − f  k1 = k2 = k3 =  c t  f f  c t 
12.1.2 CONSTITUTIVE EQUATIONS 
Constitutive equations of design objects define the behavior of a design 
object of a particular material when presented with external stimuli. The 
constitutive equations are the mathematical model of the object’s behavior 
under various forces/stresses. Here the behavior implies strain on the object 
caused by external stresses. 
The fundamental constitutive equations for the orthotropic theory of 
creep as given by Bhatnagar & Gupta [5] are as follows: 
•
• ε
ε =r [(G + H)σ −r Hσ −θ Gσz ] 2σ
•
ε (H + σ− σ− F z σ •
θ = ε [ F) θ H r ] 2σ
•
ε =z (F+G)σ − Gσ− σ r F
2σ
• ε [ z θ ]2.1.3.2 TIME-HARDENING LAW 
•
B tm 1 ε = σn −
2.1.3.3 STRAIN-HARDENING LAW 
  • n −1 1−  1
m ε = Cσm ε  
2.1.3.4 MARIN’S LAW 
• −q m n ε = De σ + Eσ
here; A, B, C, D, E, n, m, q are the experimental constants in uniaxial cases 
y Finnie & Heller [15]. 
2.1.3.5 SHERBY’S LAW 
1
• n 1   −Q  n
ε = 
M(σ−σ0 ) whereM = Aexp    E   RT 
here; A, Q, R, T, E, σ0
, n, M are constant, activation energy, gas constant, 
bsolute temperature, Young’s modulus, threshold stress, creep exponent, 
nd estimated creep parameter, respectively. 
2.2 LITERATURE REVIEW 
otating discs are found in many fields, like engineering, biological sciences, 
echanical engineering, etc. We can find the applications of rotating discs 
n the turbine section of an aircraft gas turbine engine, ship propellers, turbo 
enerators, flywheels, gears, hub-mounted disc wheels, disc brakes on motor￾ycles, cars, aerospace structures, etc. Rotating discs can set up radial, circum￾erential, and axial stresses. To reduce these stresses, it is very important to 
12.1.3 CREEP LAWS ASSUMED BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
12.1.3.1 NORTON’S LAW 
•
ε = Aσn
1
1
1
w
b
1
w
a
a
1
R
m
i
g
c
f
Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 265 266 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
understand the loads acting on the structural components. Rotating discs have 
been discussed in the form of solid discs and hollow discs (hollow shafts). 
This structural component has been actively studied by various researchers 
over the past years so that they can develop materials that are stronger, stiffer, 
and are less prone to creep. Researchers made the assumption that the axial 
stress is zero for a thin disc. Anisotropic, isotropic, and orthotropic rotating 
disc made of composites and functionally gradient materials have been taken 
into account by different researchers. This section of the chapter analyzes the 
stress and strains acting on rotating discs by various authors. 
12.2.1 CREEP IN ROTATING DISCS 
Wahl et al. [44] have presented steady state creep behavior and stress 
distribution in a rotating disk made of anisotropic material. The validity of 
theoretical results was observed experimentally. The authors compared the 
results formed by the Tresca yield criterion and the von Mises criterion and 
revealed that in the Tresca yield criterion, stresses in the rotating disc are in 
better agreement than in the von Mises criterion. 
Wahl [43] calculated stress distributions with the help of Tresca and 
associated flow rules on inner rotating discs having different thicknesses. 
The stress distributions are calculated on discs undergoing steady-state creep 
at a very high temperature. The results obtained were compared with avail￾able data and were found to be reasonable. The methodology of Wahl when 
applied to transient states, where stress distribution changes from the starting 
period up to steady-state conditions, is also found satisfactory. 
Wahl [42] simulated the real conditions of blades by subjecting the discs 
to peripheral load. He discovered that the power function of stress and time is 
directly proportional to the steady-state creep rate. Wahl formulated various 
design charts of stress distribution for different values of stress and creep 
exponent at various diameters of discs. 
Saroja [26] analyzed the creep deformation in a thin rotating disc with 
radii of 1.25 inches and 6 inches of hole and disc, respectively, with constant 
thickness. Assumptions made are that a biaxial state of stress exists, axial 
stress is zero. The author compared her results of stress distribution with 
the results found by Wahl and presented them graphically. The author 
represented the creep at the inner and outer diameter of a rotating disk at a 
temperature of 1,000°F (degree Fahrenheit) and an initial speed of 15,000 
r.p.m. It is concluded that we can eliminate the assumption that radial strain 
rate is equal to zero made by Wahl. Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 267 
Ma [22] presented the analysis of creep in rotating disks in which the 
thickness and temperature are both variables, and finally compared the results 
with the distributions having uniform thickness and temperature varying. In 
this chapter, the author concluded that we can solve a complicated problem 
in a simpler way by using the closed form. With the help of Tresca’s criteria, 
associated flow rule, exponential function creep law, equilibrium equations, 
the incompressibility equations, and compatibility equations, the stress 
equations are easily derived. 
Venkatraman & Patel [41] analyzed creep in annular plates with uniform 
pressure by using the shearing stress criterion. The authors assumed that 
the creep rate is a power function of moment and time. They discussed four 
mathematical problems and concluded that in three problems, the size of 
the hole affects the nature of the moment distribution. Moreover, in the 
fourth mathematical problem, nature does not depend either on size or creep 
exponent. 
Bhatnagar et al. [8] analyzed the torsion problem using a rod comprised 
of a substance exhibiting orthotropic characteristics. The rod (cylindrical in 
shape) is long, solid, and uniform in density, having a circular cross-sectional 
radius of ‘a.’ The axis of anisotropy is considered along the z-axis. The rod 
is applied with equal and opposite torque at both ends. The authors have 
derived the resultant stress as a function of for small displacements. The 
constitutive equations for creep were assumed to be similar to those defined 
by Bhatnagar & Gupta [45]. 
Chang [11] analyzed the anisotropic behavior of the material and stresses 
in rotating disks or orthotropic cylinders. The stresses and displacements 
established in a rotating disk are axially symmetrical and the deformation 
is not circular. To obtain a closed-form solution for the stresses in spinning 
circular and elliptical discs made of orthotropic material, the semi-inverse 
approach is used. The approach can be used to solve some types of boundary 
value problems. 
Arya & Bhatnagar [2] presented the creep deformation of orthotropic and 
rotating disks by assuming that the material is incompressible, axial stress 
is negligible, and the creep rate is a function of stress into time, which is the 
time-hardening law. The strain rates and stresses were obtained with the help 
of the time-hardening law, constitutive equations created by Bhatnagar & 
Gupta for orthotropic creep theory and the equilibrium equation for a disk 
with constant thickness. The authors compared steady and non-steady state 
solutions. The author discusses the following cases to check the anisotropy 
of the material: 268 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
• Case 1: Greatest Anisotropy: Ratio of G and F = 0.5, Ratio of H and 
F = 1.5. 
• Case 2: Smaller Anisotropy: Ratio of G and F = 0.75, Ratio of H and 
F = 1.25. 
• Case 3: Anisotropy vanishes (Isotropic case): Ratio of G and F = 1, 
Ratio of H and F = 1. 
Tangential stress versus radius (ranging from 1 inch to 6 inches) for 
all the three cases discussed above is represented graphically. The plotted 
graphs illustrate that tangential stress is decreased at all radii. 
Guowei et al. [16] have developed a unified yield criterion (UYC) for 
analysis of a rotating annular disc considering variable thickness. The 
boundary conditions of the problem are attained by choosing a weight coef￾ficient in the above-mentioned criterion and are as follows. 
1 1 1 (bσ +σ 2 )= σ0 when σ ≤2 ( σ − 3 σ +σ 1 3 ), 1 b + 2
1 1 (σ+ σb )− σ =σ when σ ≥ (σ +σ ) 1 2 3 0 2 1 3 1 b + 2
Because of piecewise linearity, this criterion is very useful in the 
engineering branch. The formula derived here based on this criterion gives 
the exact solutions of rotating discs for separate yield criteria. 
Singh & Ray [33] investigated the response of steady-state creep in a 
particle-reinforced FGM isotropic disc with linear variation of particle 
distribution along the radial distance and matched it with that of a disc 
containing particles which were distributed uniformly. They checked the 
results on a disc comprising of composite materials containing silicon carbide 
particles in a matrix of 6,061 aluminum alloy. Available experimental data 
was used to estimate the variation in the material parameters of creep using 
regression fit. The shearing stress rises in the area near the inner radius of 
the FGM disc due to increased density caused by higher particle content, and 
the creep rate is reduced by decreasing the value of creep parameters and 
increasing particle content. 
Singh & Ray [32] have analyzed the anisotropy due to the formation of 
whiskers and found that short fiber formation actually helps in significantly 
lowering the tangential creep rate apart from a reduction in compressive 
radial strain. The results thus obtained in the chapter were significant from 
the point of view of the manufacturing of composite materials in the context 
of real-life engineering. Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 269 
Singh & Ray [31] published two papers in the year. The first one was 
related to creep analysis in an isotropic aluminum composite rotating disc. 
They have assumed that there is a linear particle distribution in the composite 
for it to be isotropic. The authors deduced that the creep rates in the radial 
and tangential directions are smaller than those of an isotropic disc with 
uniform particle distribution. They have found that the steady-state creep 
response of this disc with linearly decreasing particle content with increasing 
radius is considerably higher than that of an isotropic rotating FGM disc with 
uniform particle content distribution. 
Singh & Ray [31] in their second paper stated that many times, residual 
stress remains in the object due to the process of manufacturing, which may 
be because of the process involved, like extrusion, or because of sudden 
cooling of the object from high to low temperature. The authors modified 
the Hill Criterion to account for residual stresses. They found that the results 
are comparable when the residual stress is assumed to be negligible. The 
authors were able to thus establish that the use of aluminum composites 
under rotation leads to the formation of residual stresses. 
Deepak, Gupta, & Dham [13] have analyzed the impact of stress 
exponents at 3, 5, and 8 of the creep law on creep performance of the 
aluminum-silicon matrix composites in rotating discs. They concluded that 
steady state creep in Al-SiCp
 is better represented by assuming the stress 
exponent of the creep law at 5, rather than at 3 or 8. They also found that the 
distribution of stress varies with varying values of stress exponent and, thus, 
the strain rates are significantly affected by varying stress exponent. They 
found that radial stress corresponding to stress exponent 3 is the highest 
and stress exponent 8 is the lowest. Tangential stress is highest at the inner 
radius of stress exponent 3 and gradually becomes lowest at the outer radius. 
Similarly, for stress exponent 8, tangential stress is lowest at the inner radius, 
which gradually becomes highest at the outer radius. Radial and tangential 
strains are highest for stress component 8 and lowest for stress component 
3. Values for stress exponent 5 lie in between the two stress exponent values 
for both stress and strain. 
Chamoli, Rattan, & Singh [10] studied secondary creep in a rotating disc 
which is anisotropic in nature and is composed of Aluminum Silicon Carbide 
Particulate. The creepy behavior is expressed using Sherby’s law. The study 
revealed that the anisotropy of a material significantly impacts the creep 
behavior of the rotating discs. 
Vandana & Singh [39] analyzed the creep in a rotating disc composed 
of Al-SiCp
 composite having different thicknesses at different radii using 270 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
Sherby’s law. The chapter analyzed creep response for varying thicknesses 
as constant, linear variation and hyperbolic variation. The change in radial 
stress was not found to be very significant in the three cases. The authors have 
concluded that material anisotropy can help to keep the disc creep resistant. 
Vandana & Singh [38] analyzed the effect of residual stress on creep in a 
rotating disc and its thickness varied. It was concluded that stress and strain 
distribution are affected by thermal residual stress in both types of discs. 
The authors observed that the thermal residual stress is less for anisotropic 
materials as compared to isotropic materials. The designer could keep in 
mind the residual stress while fabricating a design for a material. 
Sharma & Sahni [29] analyzed the creep response of rotating discs which 
were thin and whose thickness and density varied with edge loading. The 
authors established that edge loading is safer in cases where density and 
thickness decrease with increasing radius of a rotating disc. They also found 
that deformation is much more significant in rotating discs which have edge 
loading as compared to those without edge loading. 
Vandana & Singh [40] have created an analytical framework for creep 
analysis in an isotropic functionally graded rotating disc with varying thickness 
and uniform thickness. The authors also explained the analysis in non-FGM 
with uniform and varying thickness. Sherby’s law has been used to determine 
the creep behavior in rotating discs and the value of creep exponent is taken 
as 8. Finally, they compared the results obtained for isotropic functionally 
graded rotating disc with constant thickness and with varying thickness. 
Thakur, Gupta, & Singh [37] studied the impact of linear thermal 
gradient (non-classical approach) on creep behavior in discs comprised of 
aluminum silicon carbide and are isotropic in nature. The study is significant 
considering the fact that many engineering components resembling rotating 
discs are exposed to varying temperatures, and thus the creep response of 
such components can be best studied if the rotating discs are studied on a 
temperature gradient. The radial strain rate is lowest somewhere in the middle 
of the thickness of the cylinder. The results are quite significant, which show 
that the strain rates are reduced over the entire radius of the disc operating 
under a temperature gradient and is considered to be for safe designing of a 
disc under elevated temperatures. 
Shahi, Singh, & Thakur [28] have presented the analysis of creep param￾eters in rotating discs made of Beryl, Magnesium, and Brass subjected to 
rigid shaft using Seth’s theory, which is the non-classical approach. Authors 
have observed that the stress in the radial direction has more value than the 
stress in the circumferential direction at the internal surface of isotropic discs Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 271 
and creep rates for transversely isotropic material have the highest value at 
the inner surface. 
12.2.2 CREEP IN ROTATING CYLINDERS 
Rotating cylinders have many engineering applications in real life. The use 
of rotating cylinders has generated great interest in many research problems 
in the field of solid mechanics. Most researchers have used anisotropic, 
isotropic, and orthotropic rotating cylinders under constant internal pressure, 
varying internal pressure, and both internal and external pressure to predict 
the deformation. This section focuses on the analysis of creep stresses and 
creep strain rates in thick and thin rotating cylinders subjected to different 
loads. A good amount of phenomenological studies have been conducted 
in the field of creep analysis of rotating cylinders. The behavior of creep in 
cylinders has been discussed by the following authors: 
Rimrott et al. [25] observed that in any hollow cylindrical vessel under 
constant inner pressure, the vessel will continue to expand at an increased 
rate until the wall thickness has decreased to the point that the material’s 
strength is no longer adequate to support the weight of the constant internal 
pressure felt at the inner radius, and the vessel will crack due to the applica￾tion of two simultaneous effects, i.e., constant internal pressure at the internal 
radius of the cylindrical vessel and reduced strength of the material due to 
expansion of the vessel. In this chapter, creep-failure time (the time where 
the true strain approaches infinity) has been examined for thin and thick￾walled cylindrical vessels using Norton’s law. The authors have represented 
their results through graphs. 
Rimrott & Luke [24] analyzed the behavior of creep for a rotating cylinder 
using Norton’s law and found the values of strain rates, strains, and stresses 
for creep exponent (n) = 1. The duo showed that we could find the values of 
strains, strain rates, and stresses for different values of the creep exponent. 
The authors said that the cylinders could be made from any material, and the 
findings are independent of inner and outer radius. The author derived the 
exact solution for isotropic material by assuming that strains are large. For 
this, the authors used the finite-strain theory to predict the time after which 
the cylinder would be deformed. 
Schweiker & Sidebottom [27] developed an incompressible creep theory 
of a thick-walled cylinder to predict deformations under internal pressure. 
A hyperbolic sine function is used for the strain-stress-time expression. The 272 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
general assumptions used are: the cylinder is closed-ended, the material is 
incompressible, the deformations are infinitesimal, and the validation of the 
total strain theory. The experiment was carried out on a 1.5-inch diameter 
high-density polyethylene bar. The authors have deduced that deformation in 
the cylinder cannot be changed by redistribution of stress with time. 
Bhatnagar & Gupta [5] formulated constitutive equations based on the 
orthotropic theory of creep. Two applications are discussed. One is the 
tension of a bar (principal axes of stress and anisotropy do not coincide), and 
the other one is the variation in stresses taking load as constant with time. 
These constitutive equations are based on the anisotropic plastic model of 
Hill. 
Pai [23] used a piecewise linear model and the von Mises criterion to 
get the solutions for the creep of an orthotropic cylinder under internal 
pressure. Under the hypothesis of plane strain, closed-end, and open-end, 
he found the expressions for stress and creep rate. In all three axial condi￾tions, creep anisotropy of the material affected the strain rates. The chapter 
compares the creep behavior of tensile and compressive creep experiments, 
as well as allowing for the material’s directional tendency in tensile creep 
tests. He observed that plane strain conditions are equivalent to closed-end 
conditions. The solution helped to predict the values of strain rate accurately. 
During steady-state creep conditions, isotropic materials in the elastic range 
or plastic range may become highly anisotropic. 
King & Mackie [19] presented a detailed study of creep distortion under 
internal pressure and load on the isotropic material of a thick-walled cylinder. 
The authors observed that tensile stress would increase continuously during 
extension. They concluded that when the values of strains are greater than the 
elastic strains, then the creep distortion for cylinders and the experimental 
value from diametric measurements are correlated. 
Bhatnagar & Gupta [6] found the different values of stresses and creep 
rates of a thick-walled cylinder made of an orthotropic material and pressure 
applied internally under the assumptions of: 
•
i. Plane strain, i.e., ε =z 0
ii. Generalized plane strain, i.e., ε
•
z is not a function of r. 
iii. Plane stress, i.e., σz
 = 0 
They used Norton’s law and the constitutive equations of anisotropy 
and compared their results with those obtained by Pai [23]. In-plane strain 
assumption, results show that axial stress is dependent on material anisot￾ropy. The results give two independent anisotropic constants. In the plane Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 273 
stress case, the effect of anisotropy is small on radial stress. Lastly, they 
found that creep anisotropy has a notable effect on cylinder behavior and 
cylinders made from anisotropic material will be less deformed. 
Bhatnagar & Arya [4] concluded that after applying external pressure 
on the thick-walled cylinder, the strain rate decreases and the durability of 
the cylinder increases, which is beneficial in designing a cylinder so that 
creep deformation will be less. They analyzed that the anisotropic behavior 
of the material affects the creep behavior of the cylinder. At the inner radius, 
axial stress is compressible and it is tensile at the outer radius. The chapter 
concludes that the strain rate increases with increasing deformation (strain). 
The authors also discussed the behavior of isotropic materials and compared 
their results with those of Rimrott for an isotropic cylinder. 
Arya & Bhatnagar [3] investigated the analysis of creep in thick-walled 
cylinders composed of anisotropic material by applying internal and 
external pressure, both considering the elastic strains. The authors obtained 
fundamental equations of an orthotropic cylinder for the behavior of creep 
by assuming that the total axial strain is a function of time, not radius, 
displacement is radial (a function of radius), and the axial stress is uniform 
throughout. The solutions of these equations are discussed for planar anisot￾ropy and these results are compared with the isotropic case. 
Conditions for planar anisotropy are taken from Gupta [17]; and Lekh￾nitskii [21] as follows: 
1 −v F = G, S = = S , S = , 1 1 2 2 12 E E
−v1 1 S13 = = S , S = 1 23 13 1 E E
where; E, E1
 are Young’s moduli; v, v1
 are Poisson’s ratio; F and G are aniso￾tropic creep constants and S11, S12, …, S33 are anisotropic elastic constants. 
The authors estimated the values of radial stress and tangential stress 
by taking different values of r (ranging from 1.0 inches to 2.0 inches) and 
time t (t = 100 hours, 1,000 hours, 10,000 hours). The values of strain rates 
are higher in the case of isotropic materials than in the case of anisotropic 
materials. 
Bhatnagar, Arya, & Debnath [7] investigated the steady state creep 
analysis of a hollow rotating cylinder using power law by finding the 
values of different strain rates and corresponding stresses in an anisotropic 
material. Rotating cylinders are used in power generation and various 
industries. Assumptions made by the authors are that the material of the • • •
274 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
cylinder is homogeneous and orthotropic, no change in the volume after 
creep deformations (i.e., εr + εθ + εz = 0), condition of plane-strain occurs •
(ε =z 0). In numerical computations, the cylinder is made up of steel or steel 
alloys implemented in three cases of anisotropy. They concluded that the 
anisotropic behavior of the material and the creep exponent (n) both affected 
the strain rates and stresses. The authors suggested the anisotropic material 
is beneficial for the formulation of cylinders, giving reasons why the life 
of the cylinder will be longer (because the strain rate is less). Graphical 
representation of all the stresses and tangential strain rate for three cases of 
anisotropy is present and taking creep exponent (n) = 1.0, 3.0, 6.9, etc. 
Bhatnagar, Kulkarni, & Arya [9] developed an application based on 
finite strain theory and demonstrated that if creep analysis is performed with 
respect to small strain theory, the structure of the cylinder would not be safe. 
The authors worked on the creep behavior of an orthotropic thick-walled 
revolving cylinder made up of anisotropic material. The Equilibrium equation 
can be obtained by using tangential strain and radial strains. By evaluating 
this equation, the expression for the radial stress is found. After that, the 
authors used boundary conditions by taking the axial force improvised on the 
cylinder as zero and testing for creep exponent n = 1. 
Chen et al. [12] have compared the estimated solution of an equation 
of order five with the results of finite element analysis using the program 
ABAQUS as it allows to get an exact solution for the functionally graded 
cylinder’s time-dependent behavior. The effects on the material are 
symmetric about an axis and depend on the radial coordinate. An approxi￾mated solution is derived using Taylor’s expansion series for time-dependent 
creep response. Asymptotic solutions for all the three stresses under internal 
pressure and external pressure are plotted in this chapter. More attention is 
paid to the calculation when pressure is enforced on the functionally graded 
cylinder internally. 
Abrinia et al. [1] applied an observational solution for calculating radial 
stress and tangential stress of a thick-walled functionally graded cylindrical 
vessel under internal pressure and applied temperature. The authors used 
Maple 9.5 software for plotting the graphs of stresses versus pressure and 
temperature. They have concluded that the radial stress and circumferential 
stress expressions of FGM and homogeneous material are the same when￾ever the value of the parameter is taken as zero. Lastly, the authors suggested 
that this chapter can be further extended by researchers in the yielding region 
to find an elastic-plastic solution. Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 275 
Singh & Gupta [34] investigated the creep analysis of a cylinder having 
thick walls and it is formed of an Al-SiCP
 composite under internal pressure. 
The stresses and strain rates are examined for different values of the size of 
the SiCP
, its content and temperature applied. It is concluded that there is very 
little impact of the above factors on stress. Moreover, the value of strain rate at 
the radius and tangent direction of the cylinder can be reduced by decreasing 
the size of SiCP
 and applied temperature, and increasing its content. 
Sherby’s law (Creep exponent n = 5) is altered by the author as: 
1
• n 1  1  −Q  n
ε = 
M(σ−σ0 ) whereM = A exp    E   RT 
The value of threshold stress will be found using a linear extrapolation 
technique. Assumptions made are: the material is incompressible, isotropic, 
and SiCP
 is distributed uniformly in the aluminum matrix. Initially, less 
pressure is enforced and, after some time, it will be constant. At any point, 
stresses in this shape remain constant with time. Elastic deformation is 
neglected. Effective stress is taken by the von Mises yielding criterion given 
in Dieter [14]. We can see the variation in strain rates, stresses, and effective 
stress in the composite cylinder for various sizes of the SiC content and 
temperature. The strain distribution curves show that the strain is highest 
with the lowest reinforcement density and vice versa. It was also observed 
that the life of the cylinder increased significantly. 
Habibi et al. [18] defined a numerical method for investigating the creep 
and elastic behavior of FGMs in rotating cylinders. Displacement equations 
are used to find the compatibility equation for the thermo-elasticity theory. • ς q Norton’s law is used in this chapter as ε = Kσ τ where ς and q are experi￾mental constants. 
Equilibrium equations for a rotating functionally graded thick-walled 
cylinder based on thermos-elasticity theory are derived and nonlinear heat 
transfer equations in radial direction are used to get temperature distribution 
in a rotating cylinder. The solution was obtained by using three different 
cases on boundary conditions. Hollow cylinder with free edges (i.e.,σrr = 0, 
t = innerradius and outerradius), hollow cylinder with fixed-free edges (i.e., 
u = 0 when r = inner radius and σrr = 0, t = inner radius and outer radius), 
filled cylinder with free edges (i.e., u = 0 when r = 0; σrr = 0, t = inner 
radius). Here, u is the displacement, r is the radius of the cylinder. The 
expression of the radial stress is calculated by using the stress-strain relation 
for plain strain conditions. The authors validated their results with the help of 276 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
examples and compared these results with the results generated by Singh & 
Ray graphically. The authors concluded that cylinder properties approach the 
properties of a metal base (it has a smaller modulus of elasticity) and radial 
strain changes from positive values to negative values and tangential strain 
increases in the positive direction as the value of n increases. 
Singh & Singh [36] carried out the creep behavior analysis of an isotropic 
cylindrical vessel having thick walls and made of aluminum matrix reinforced 
with silicon carbide by using Sherby’s law in which threshold stress is included. 
i.e., •
) n
ε = M(σ−σ   0 
•
where; M is the creep parameter, εσσ0 , , are effective creep rate, effective 
stress, threshold stress respectively, n is the creep exponent and the values 
selected for creep exponent are 3, 5, and 8. The von Mises yielding criterion 
is used with constitutive equations and equilibrium equations to obtain 
the stress distribution, creep stress and strain rates in this vessel. Authors 
observed that all three stresses increase and the strain rates decrease along 
the radius. They concluded that for isotropic material, stress in the direction 
of radius is maximum at the inner radius and zero at the outer radius and the 
strain rates decrease at every point of the composite cylinder with a decrease 
in the value of creep exponent n from 8 to 3. 
Kohli et al. [20] have described how the small strain theory leads to unsafe 
cylinder designs by using the finite strain theory. Small strain theory helps 
in designing a cylinder so that the cylinder can work under hard mechanical 
and thermal loadings. The chapter analyzed the behavior of creep of a thick￾walled aluminum-based composite reinforced with silicon carbide under 
internal pressure. Sherby’s law is used because of the large creep exponent 
and higher activation energy. The authors calculated the creep rate at inner 
radius, effective stress and then plotted all the stresses and strain rates for 
different values of the radii of a cylinder. They concluded that at the center of 
the cylinder, radial stress shows a slight change and other stresses and strain 
rates show a large change when the strain increases at the inner radius. 
12.3 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The research done on FGM is either purely analytical or numerical-based 
methods. Many mathematical models adopted for the various analysis of 
FGM proved to be very efficient and convergent. Most work has been done Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 277 
on various aspects of FGM. However, there are still some gaps that need 
to be filled to take more in-depth advantage of FGM. Such gap areas are 
described below: 
• In the existing studies, 3D analysis of FGM is mainly focused on linear 
buckling and free vibration analysis. 
• Most of the research has focused on the properties of FGM without 
taking into account the environmental effects. 
• Numerous applications of FGM exist in aerospace, defense, nuclear, 
automobiles, and other industries. For the betterment of human lives, 
more in-depth investigation needs to be done into FGM with respect 
to health care, such as bone implantation, dentistry, etc. 
KEYWORDS 
• composite material 
• constitutive equations 
• creep 
• functionally graded material 
• organic materials 
• stresses 
• yielding 
REFERENCES 
1. Abrinia, K., Naee, H., Sadeghi, F., & Djavanroodi, F., (2008). New analysis for the FGM 
thick cylinders under combined pressure and temperature loading. American Journal of 
Applied Sciences, 5(7), 852–859. 
2. Arya, V. K., & Bhatnagar, N. S., (1979). Creep analysis of rotating orthotropic disks. 
Nuclear Engineering and Design, 55, 323–330. 
3. Arya, V. K., & Bhatnagar, N. S., (1976). Creep of thick-walled orthotropic cylinders 
subject to combined internal and external pressures. Journal Mechanical Engineering 
Science, 18(1), 1–5. 
4. Bhatnagar, N. S., & Arya, V. K., (1974). Large strain creep analysis of thick-walled 
cylinders. Int. J. Non-Linear Mechanics, 9, 127–140. 
5. Bhatnagar, N. S., & Gupta, R. P., (1966). On the constitutive equations of the orthotropic 
theory of creep. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 21(5), 1003–1007. 278 Nanotechnology-Enhanced Solid Materials 
6. Bhatnagar, N. S., & Gupta, S. K., (1969). Analysis of thick-walled orthotropic cylinder 
in the theory of creep. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 27(6), 1655–1661. 
7. Bhatnagar, N. S., Arya, V. K., & Debnath, K. K., (1980). Creep analysis of orthotropic 
rotating cylinder. Journal of Pressure Vessel Technology, 102, 371–377. 
8. Bhatnagar, N. S., Gupta, S. K., & Gupta, R. P., (1969). The torsion of an orthotropic rod 
in the theory of creep. Wood Science and Technology, 3, 167–174. 
9. Bhatnagar, N. S., Kulkarni, P. S., & Arya, V. K., (1986). Creep analysis of orthotropic 
rotating cylinders considering finite strains. Int. J. Non-Linear Mechanics, 21(1), 61–71. 
10. Chamoli, N., Rattan, M., & Singh, S. B., (2010). Effect of anisotropy on the creep of 
a rotating disc of Al-SiCp
 composite. Int. J. Contemp. Math. Sciences, 5(11), 509–516. 
11. Chang, C. I., (1975). The anisotropic rotating disks. Int. J. Mech. Sci., 17, 397–402. 
12. Chen, J. J., Tu Shan, T., Xuan, F. Z., & Wang, Z. D., (2007). Creep analysis for a func￾tionally graded cylinder subjected to internal and external pressure. J. Strain Analysis, 
42, 69–77. 
13. Deepak, D., Gupta, V. K., & Dham, A. K., (2009). Impact of stress exponent on steady 
state creep in a rotating composite disc. J. Strain Analysis, 44, 127–135. 
14. Dieter, G. E., (1988). Mechanical Metallurgy. McGraw-Hill, London. 
15. Finnie, I., & Heller, W. R., (1959). Creep of Engineering Materials. McGraw-Hill, New 
York, NY. 
16. Guowei, M., Hong, H., & Yukata, M., (2001). Limit angular velocity of rotating disc with 
unified yield criterion. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 43, 1137–1153. 
17. Gupta, R. P., (1967). Some Problems on the Theory of Creep. Ph.D. Thesis, University 
of Roorkee. 
18. Habibi, N., Samawati, S., & Ahmadi, O., (2016). Creep analysis of the FGM cylinder under 
steady state symmetric loading. Journal of Stress Analysis, 1(1), 9–21, Spring –Summer. 
19. King, R. H., & Mackie, W. W., (1967). Creep of thick-walled cylinders. Journal of Basic 
Engineering, 89(4), 877–884. 
20. Kohli, G. S., Singh, T., & Singh, H., (2020). Creep analysis in thick composite cylinder 
considering large strain. Journal of the Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences and 
Engineering, 42, Article No. 68, 1–8 of Chapter 68. 
21. Lekhnitskii, S. G., (1963). Theory of Elasticity of an Anisotropic Body. Publisher: 
Holden & Day, OCLC Number: 803145982. 
22. Ma, B. M., (1961). Creep analysis of rotating solid disks with variable thickness and 
temperature. Journal of the Franklin Institute, 271(1), 40–55. 
23. Pai, D. H., (1967). Steady-state creep analysis of thick walled orthotropic cylinders. Int. 
J. Mech. Sci., 9, 335–348. 
24. Rimrott, F. P. J., & Luke, J. R., (1961). Large strain creep of rotating cylinders. ZAMM, 
41(12), 485–500. 
25. Rimrott, F. P. J., Mills, E. J., & Marin, J., (1960). Prediction of creep failure time for 
pressure vessels. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 27, 303–308. 
26. Saroja, B. V., (1960). The analysis of creep in a thin rotating disk with a central circular 
hole. Aircraft Engineering and Aerospace Technology, 32(2), 34–36. 
27. Schweiker, J. W., & Sidebottom, O. M., (1965). Creep of thick walled cylinders subjected 
to internal pressure and axial load. Experimental Mechanics, 5, 186–192. 
28. Shahi, S., Singh, S. B., & Thakur, P., (2019). Modeling creep parameter in rotating 
discs with rigid shaft exhibiting transversely isotropic and isotropic material behavior. 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research, 6(1), 387–395. Steady-State Creep Deformation in Rotating Discs 279 
29. Sharma, S., & Sahni, M., (2013). Creep analysis of thin rotating disc having variable 
thickness and variable density with edge loading. International Journal of Engineering, 
Tome XI- Fascicule-3, 279–296. 
30. Singh, S. B., & Ray, S., (2003). Newly proposed yield criterion for residual stress 
and steady-state creep in an anisotropic composite rotating disc. Journal of Materials 
Processing Technology, 143, 144, 623–628. 
31. Singh, S. B., & Ray, S., (2003). Creep analysis in an isotropic FGM rotating disc of 
Al-SiC composite. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 143, 144, 616–622. 
32. Singh, S. B., & Ray, S., (2002). Modeling the anisotropy and creep in orthotropic 
aluminum-silicon carbide composite rotating disc. Mechanics of Materials, 34, 363–372. 
33. Singh, S. B., & Ray, S., (2001). Steady-state creep behavior in an isotropic functionally 
graded material rotating disk of Al-SiC composite. Metallurgical and Materials Transac￾tions A, 32A, 1679–1685. 
34. Singh, T., & Gupta, V. K., (2009). Creep analysis of an internally pressurized thick 
cylinder made of a functionally graded composite. J. Strain Analysis, 44, 583–594. 
35. Singh, T., & Gupta, V. K., (2009). Effect of material parameters on steady state creep in 
a thick composite cylinder subjected to internal pressure. The Journal of Engineering 
Research, 6(2), 20–32. 
36. Singh, T., & Singh, I., (2016). Modeling to steady state creep in thick-walled cylinders 
under internal pressure. International Journal of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engi￾neering, 10(5). 
37. Thakur, P., Gupta, N., & Singh, S. B., (2017). Thermal effect on the creep in a rotating 
disc by using sherby’s law. Kragujevac Journal of Science, 39, 17–27. 
38. Vandana, & Singh, S. B., (2012). Creep modeling in a composite rotating disc with 
thickness variation in the presence of residual stress. International Journal of Mathematics 
and Mathematical Sciences, 2012, Article ID 924921, 1–14. 
39. Vandana, & Singh, S. B., (2011). Modeling anisotropy and steady-state creep in a 
rotating disc of Al-SiCp
 having varying thickness. International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research, 2(10), 1–12. 
40. Vandana, & Singh, S. B., (2016). Mathematical modeling of creep in a functionally 
graded rotating disc with varying thickness. Regenerative Engineering and Translational 
Medicine, 2(3, 4), 126–140. doi: 10.1007/s40883-016-0018-3. 
41. Venkatraman, B., & Patel, S. A., (1963). Creep analysis of annular plates. Journal of the 
Franklin Institute, 275(1), 13–23. 
42. Wahl, A. M., (1957). Stress distributions in rotating disks subjected to creep at elevated 
temperature. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 24, 299–306. 
43. Wahl, A. M., (1956). Analysis of creep in rotating disks based on the Tresca criterion 
and associated flow rule. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 23, 231–238. 
44. Wahl, A. M., Sankey, G. O., Manjoine, M. J., & Shoemaker, E., (1954). Creep tests of 
rotating disks at elevated temperatures and comparison with theory. Journal of Applied 
Mechanics, 21, 225–235. 
45. Bhatnagar, N. S., & Gupta, R. P., (1967). On the constitutive equations of the orthotropic 
theory of creep. Wood Science and Technology, 1, 142–148. INDEX 
A 
Acetic acid, 5, 81, 189 
Acetobacter, 84 
Achromobacter, 84 
Acid-base regression model, 242 
Acidification potential, 144 
Acrylic acid (AA), 55, 238–241, 251, 253, 
255 
Activated carbon (AC), 34, 36, 38–40, 
42–44, 46, 47, 49, 118, 119 
Adsorbents, 88, 163, 165, 213, 216, 224 
Adsorption, 15, 16, 29, 37, 38, 46, 88, 102, 
128, 162–166, 186, 187, 189–191, 193, 
196, 214–218, 223–225, 231 
functionalization adsorption, 217 
inorganic pollutants, 218 
organic pollutants, 216 
adsorption of organic molecules, 216 
Advanced oxidation process, 222 
Aerosol-assisted method, 67 
Aerospace industry, 172, 183 
Affinity precipitation, 78, 79, 86, 87 
Agglomeration, 33, 34, 46, 47, 121, 
162–164 
Agrobacter, 84 
Alginate, 83 
polymers, 83 
Aligned carbon nanotube (ACNT), 17 
Alkaline earth compounds, 44 
Aluminum, 144, 147, 269 
oxides, 164 
silicon carbide, 270 
Aminobenamidene, 86 
Aminophenyl-α-d-glucopyranoside, 86
Ammonia 
borane (AB), 42, 244, 250 
decomposition, 43–45 
Ammonium persulfate (APS), 124, 127, 128 
Amorphous silicon, 14, 145, 150 
Amperometric sensors, 230 
Amphiphilic, 55, 161–163 
Amphotericin B (AmB), 194 
Angstrom, 105 
Aniline, 36, 39, 124, 125, 128, 130 
Anionic azo dyes, 217 
Anisotropic, 266 
behavior, 261, 267, 273, 274 
material, 260, 261, 263, 264, 266, 270, 
273, 274 
plastic model, 272 
Anthracene hydrogenation, 39 
Antibacterial 
effect, 255 
potential, 80 
properties, 102, 238, 255 
surface modification, 238 
Anti-biofilm, 100 
Antiferromagnetic, 156, 158 
coupled, 158, 159 
Antimicrobial agents, 100 
Anti-oxidant activities, 100 
Antiparallel magnetic moments, 157 
Apolipoproteins, 193 
Aqueous two-phase polymer systems 
(ATPSs), 87 
Aromatic pollutants, 217 
Arylboronic acids, 47 
Ascophyllum nodosum, 83 
Atmospheric pressure, 39, 238–240 
Atom-transfer radical polymerization 
(ATRP), 79, 93 
Attenuated total reflectance FTIR 
measurements, 242 
Auto-fluorescence, 192 
Automobiles, 277 
Automotive industry, 148 
Azotobacter, 84 
B 
Bacterial cellulose (BC), 83, 84, 125 
Ballistic protection, 197 
Bandwidth light transmittance, 17 282 Index 
Bathochromic shift, 190 
Benzene toluene ethylbenzene o-xylene 
(BTEX), 36, 37 
Betalain, 16 
Bifunctional 
catalyst materials, 29 
surfactant, 162 
Bimetallic nanoclusters, 100 
Bimodal porosity, 64 
Bio-catalysts 
development, 79 
reactions, 87 
Biochemical properties, 222 
Biocidal effects, 249 
Biocompatibility, 82, 83, 101, 163, 166, 
198, 238 
nanocarriers, 56 
Biodetection, 163 
Biodistribution, 102 
Biofunctional behaviors, 101 
Biointerface science, 247 
Biological 
applications, 192 
pollutants, 214, 216, 230 
wastewater treatments, 88 
Biomass productivity, 84 
Biomedical 
application, 81, 99–102, 109, 112, 195, 
238 
engineering, 100 
field, 56, 71, 80, 89, 100 
Biomedicine applications, 91 
Biomimetic actuators, 79 
Biomolecular 
binding, 249 
synthesis, 100 
Biopolymer, 93 
alginates, 83 
application, 80 
cellulose, 83 
chitosan, 80 
gellan gum, 82 
hyaluronan, 81 
lignin, 84 
pectin, 80 
Bio-responsive polymer, 86, 87 
Biosensors, 29, 90, 189 
Bio-separation, 78, 79, 85, 86, 93, 163 
Biotechnological 
sector, 84 
techniques, 87 
Biotin, 86, 189 
BMS particles enzyme immobilization 
capacity, 69 
Bone implantation, 277 
Boric acid, 129, 130 
Boron-doped CNT (B-CNT), 19 
Bromobenzene hydrodehalogenation, 46 
Buchwald-Hartwig C-N cross-coupling 
reaction, 49 
Buckminsterfullerene, 7, 172 
Bulk heterojunction (BHJ), 18–20, 180 
C 
Cadmium, 145, 147 
telluride panels, 146 
Calcined spherical solid particles, 60 
Cancer therapy, 90 
Capacitance 
deionization, 214 
retention, 122, 124, 125, 127–131, 133 
Carbohydrates, 86 
Carbon, 1–3, 5–7, 18, 23, 27, 28, 33–36, 
38, 41–45, 47, 49, 50, 56, 57, 71, 78, 84, 
117–121, 123, 126–128, 130–132, 136, 
171–173, 175, 176, 178, 179, 182–184, 
188, 194, 198, 199, 201, 213, 229–231, 246 
chains (monomers), 78 
electrode surface, 118 
fibrous, 84, 172, 173, 178, 183, 199 
structures, 173 
foam (CF), 121 
gas sensors, 188 
materials for supercapacitors (SCS), 119 
one-dimensional carbon nanomaterials, 
120 
three-dimensional carbon 
nanomaterials, 121 
two-dimensional carbon nanomaterials, 
120 
zero-dimensional carbon 
nanomaterials, 119 
nanomaterials synthesis, 3 
carbon nanotubes (CNTS), 5 
fullerene, 7 
general structure of graphene, 3 Index 283 
graphene, 3 
structure synthesis (CNTS), 5, 7 
nanostructures, 118 
nanotube (CNT), 2, 3, 5–7, 9, 14–19, 23, 
27–50, 117, 119, 120, 122, 123, 126, 
132, 136, 171–186, 188–196, 198–201, 
213–220, 222–227, 229–231 
adsorption, 230 
ammonia-methane decomposition, 43 
application of, 33 
carbon-carbon coupling reactions, 47 
dehydrogenation, 42 
field-effect transistors (CNTFETs), 175 
fischer tropsch synthesis (FTS), 41 
hydrodehalogenation reactions, 45 
hydrogenation reactions, 38 
oxidation reactions, 34 
paste electrodes (CNTPE), 188 
supported catalysts, 29, 37, 42 
water treatment technologies, 214 
yarns (CNTY), 17 
photovoltaic cells, 1 
quantum dots (CQDs), 130 
Carbonization, 123, 126, 132 
Carbonyl-containing groups, 246 
Carboxylic group, 83 
Carboxymethyl cellulose fibers, 84 
Carrier-driven modification, 14 
Cartilage tissue engineering, 82 
Catalysis, 27, 29, 44, 49, 50, 56, 78, 100, 
164, 215, 218, 230, 231 
Catalyst 
ammonia decomposition, 44 
applications, 156 
efficiency, 222 
materials, 29 
performance, 37, 39, 43, 44, 46 
process, 27, 34, 79, 219 
reaction mechanisms, 47 
recycling testing, 41 
support, 27, 30, 38, 49, 50, 221 
wet air oxidation (CWAO), 36, 218, 219, 
222, 223 
Cathode 
buffer layers (CBL), 22, 23 
ray tube (CRT), 191 
Cationic surfactant, 17, 62 
Cell adhesion, 82 
Cellulose, 83, 84, 88 
Ceramics, 260 
Cerium oxides, 164 
Cetyl 
pyridinium chloride (CPC), 17 
trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), 
55, 61, 65, 66, 129, 130 
Charcoal, 40, 49, 216, 225 
Charge 
selective contacts (CSCs), 18 
transport, 15 
characteristics, 18 
Chelating ligands, 164 
Chemical 
exfoliation, 5 
imaging, 197 
inertness, 11, 27, 33 
precipitation, 163 
reactivity, 213, 217 
species dynamics, 109 
stability, 119, 166, 178 
tunability, 22 
vapor deposition (CVD), 5–7, 14–16, 35, 
40, 173, 174, 177, 184, 187, 198–201 
Chemi-capacitor, 187 
Chemotherapeutic, 161 
Chiroptical properties, 101 
Chitosan, 80, 240, 249, 254 
hyaluronate sponges, 80 
pectin layered assembly, 249 
Chlorhexidine, 241, 251, 253, 255 
Chlorine (Cl), 44, 214, 240, 246, 247, 253 
Chlorobenzene, 20 
Chloroquine, 194 
Chromatographic separations, 60 
Chromophores, 92 
Chronic toxicity, 72 
Cinnamaldehyde, 39, 40 
hydrogenation activity, 40 
Clinical diagnosis, 90 
Cobalt, 7, 34, 40, 41, 102, 122, 126, 129, 154 
aluminum layered double hydroxide 
(CoAl LDH), 130 
Cold plasma, 238, 255 
Collagen-HA scaffold matrix, 82 
Colon-biodegradable drug delivery systems, 
81 
Commercial 
applications, 27, 78 
extraction (alginates), 83 284 Index 
Compatibility equations, 267 
Complex revision processes, 238 
Composite material, 29, 38, 79, 125, 132, 
180, 181, 220, 260, 261, 268, 277 
Compressive radial strain, 268 
Conduction band (CB), 220 
Conjugated polymer matrices, 181 
Connective tissues, 81 
Constitutive equations, 259, 261, 264, 267, 
272, 276, 277 
Contact angle measurements, 250 
Conventional 
air-brush spray, 129 
carbon 
fibers, 183 
materials, 178 
Cu-ZnO catalysts, 35 
electrodes, 190 
fiber 
filled composites, 184 
reinforced composites, 185 
fossil energy sources, 2 
graphite-like materials, 173 
impregnation method, 39 
preparation methods, 29 
silicon photovoltaic technologies, 14 
sorbents, 225 
treatment, 72 
water treatment, 214, 225 
Copolymerization, 238 
Copper terephthalate metal-organic 
framework (Cu-(BDC)-MOF), 128 
Core-shell, 64, 65, 153, 155, 156, 164, 166 
Coronary angioplasty, 238 
Cost-effective 
methods, 10 
water treatment technologies, 214 
Counter electrode (CE), 9, 11, 16, 17 
Creep, 259–261, 264–277 
anisotropy, 272, 273 
Critical micelle concentration (CMC), 66, 67 
Cross-linked 
formyl group-modified HA polymers, 82 
polymers, 78 
Crystalline silicon, 8, 145, 147, 150 
Cumene hydroperoxide (CHP), 126 
Curcumin, 16 
Cyanuric chloride, 49 
Cycle stability, 119, 126, 127 
Cyclodextrins, 88 
Cyclohexanol, 38, 43 
D 
Daunomycin (Dmc), 189 
Deactivation, 37, 41 
Decomposition process, 102, 216 
Degree of acetylation (DA), 80–82 
Degree of methylation, 81 
Dehydrochlorination process, 246 
Density functional theory (DFT), 99, 
102–104, 108, 109, 112 
global descriptors, 99, 112 
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 56, 154, 187, 
189, 190, 193, 194, 197, 199, 227 
Desalination, 214, 215, 227, 228, 230, 231 
technology, 228 
Dextrin, 88 
D-glucuronic acid (GlcA), 81 
Diabetes mellitus, 89 
Diamagnetism, 156, 157 
Diaminohydrocarbon linkers, 21 
Dibenzylideneacetone (Dba), 46, 48 
Diffuse coplanar surface barrier discharge 
(DCSBD), 237, 239, 240, 242, 249, 255 
Digital logic operations, 175 
Diiodomethane, 241, 243, 244, 251 
Dimethyl methylphosphonate (DMMP), 187 
Disease diagnoses, 56 
Disinfection, 214, 215, 224, 225, 230, 231 
antibacterial mechanism, 226 
characteristics of CNT for water 
disinfection, 225 
Dissociated oxygen atoms (DOA), 222 
D-mannuronic acid, 83 
Dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid (DBSA), 129 
Double 
spin multiplicity, 105 
stranded DNA (dsDNA), 189 
walled 
CNTs (DWCNTs), 14 
nanotubes (DWNTs), 173, 177, 191, 
192, 201 
Drug 
delivery, 78, 79, 81, 83, 84, 90–93, 101, 
155, 161, 171, 174, 193 
denaturation, 91 
molecules, 214 Index 285 
Dual mesoporous silica sphere (DMSS), 55, 
64–66, 71, 72 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), 9, 
15–17, 20 
E 
Ecological surroundings, 163 
Economic recycling analysis, 147 
Efficiency 
charge dissociation, 19 
degradation, 15 
Elastic deformation, 275 
Electrical 
conductivity, 2, 15, 28, 33, 42, 119, 120, 
124, 177, 178, 218, 229 
energy, 19, 118 
potential, 86, 87, 93 
properties, 2, 3, 174, 177, 218, 260 
resistance, 17, 156 
Electrochemical 
biosensor, 188 
devices, 171 
energy-harvesting applications, 178 
oxidation, 226 
performance, 120, 122, 124, 131, 136 
properties, 120 
sensors, 188, 189, 229, 230 
stability, 7, 118, 126, 127, 178 
techniques, 163 
Electrodeposition method, 128 
Electrokinetic behavior, 226 
Electromagnetic, 78, 178, 190, 261 
interference (EMI), 124, 178 
spectrum, 190 
Electromechanical 
actuators, 171, 191 
memories, 200 
pressure sensors, 190 
Electro-migration, 174 
Electron 
accepting gasses, 186 
acceptor, 241, 250 
affinity, 7, 20, 21, 104, 110, 119, 181 
blocking layer, 10 
capture detector (ECD), 228 
donating sodium promoter, 45 
donor, 241 
hole pairs, 14, 19 
mobility, 7, 20–22 
relaxation processes, 191 
transport 
layer (ETL), 2, 10, 12, 22, 23 
materials, 21 
Electronegativity, 44, 104, 109, 110, 112 
Electronic 
density, 46 
structure theory, 108 
symmetry, 17 
transitions, 3 
Electrophilicity, 104, 109, 110, 112 
index, 104, 110, 112 
Electrophoresis, 92 
Electroreductions, 119 
Electrostatic 
discharge (ESD), 174, 177, 178, 185, 199 
forces, 71 
interaction, 65, 66, 68, 121, 165, 188, 
217, 223 
repulsion, 226 
Emulsion chemistry, 60 
Encapsulation 
chondrocytes, 82 
enzyme, 69 
End-functionalized polymer brush, 239 
Endosomes, 195 
Energy 
conversion efficiency, 180, 182 
densities, 118, 120 
storage systems, 120, 179 
transmission network, 129 
Enhanced metal-support electronic 
interaction, 37 
Environmental 
alterations, 78 
hazards, 19, 148 
impact, 33, 119, 144, 145, 150 
issues, 2 
remediation, 27, 153 
stimuli, 78, 86 
Enzyme, 68, 69, 71, 72, 87, 88, 188, 189, 
194, 219, 222–224 
stabilization, 88 
Epidemic diseases, 214 
Equilibrium 
equations, 275 
geometry, 102 286 Index 
Escherichia coli, 225, 226, 238, 242, 249, 
254, 255 
Ethyl silicate, 60 
Ethylene 
diamine, 49 
glycol (EG), 30, 32, 33, 241, 243, 244, 
251 
Excitonic solar cells, 20 
Exothermic reaction, 35 
Extracellular matrix, 81 
Extrinsic stability, 13 
Eye vitreous humor, 81 
F 
Fabrication, 2, 8, 12, 14, 72, 89, 102, 117, 
127, 131, 156, 166, 193, 195, 199 
Face-centered cubic (Fcc), 158 
Ferrimagnetic, 156–158, 160 
magnet, 157 
material, 160 
Ferrites, 154 
Ferromagnetic, 156 
crystals, 157 
materials, 157 
substances, 157 
Field 
effect transistors (FET), 175, 186, 189, 
190, 201 
emission, 171, 174, 191, 192, 200 
displays (FEDs), 192 
ionization properties, 190 
Fill factor (FF), 14, 17, 22 
Fischer Tropsch synthesis (FTS), 41, 42 
Flame ionization detector (FID), 228 
Fluid mechanics, 104 
Fluoride tin oxide (FTO), 11, 13, 180 
Food 
contact regulations, 239 
technology, 100 
Formamide, 241, 243, 251 
Forward osmosis (FO), 214 
Freshwater sources, 216, 224 
Fuel cells (FCs), 3, 19, 34, 35, 43, 45, 49, 
50, 179, 182 
technology, 36 
Fullerene, 2, 3, 6–8, 20–23, 28, 103, 198 
dyes, 21 
electrolyte, 21 
perovskite heterojunctions, 22 
polymers, 22 
Fullerene C60, 3 
Fulleropyrrolidine, 22 
Functionally graded material (FGMs), 259, 
261, 275, 277 
G 
Gallium, 147 
Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
(GC-MS), 228 
Gelation properties, 83 
Gellan gum, 82 
composites, 82 
General electric (GE), 177 
Genotoxicity, 72 
Germanium clusters, 103 
Glassy carbon electrodes (GCE), 188, 189 
Gleaming cresyl blue (GCB), 217 
Global 
gradient approximation, 103 
warming potential, 144 
Glucose 
oxidase (GOx), 188–190 
sensors, 78, 89, 188 
Glutaraldehyde, 251, 254 
Glycosaminoglycan (GAG), 81 
Gold 
doped iron nanoclusters, 101 
electrodes, 189, 190 
Graft yield (GY), 250, 251 
Gram-negative 
bacteria, 225, 227 
strains, 249 
Graphene, 2–6, 9–13, 23, 28, 102, 117–125, 
129–134, 136, 173, 214, 217, 225 
nanocomposites, 136 
oxide (GO), 3, 13, 117, 118, 121–133, 
136, 225 
benzimidazole cross-linked network 
(GOBIN), 123, 136 
mesoporous silica polyaniline 
(GO-mSiO2-PANI), 133 
nanocomposites, 121, 125 
polyaniline (GO-PANI), 123, 126 
polychrysoidine (GO-PCHRYS), 131 
Graphitic sheets, 28 
Graphitization, 17, 44, 48 Index 287 
Green 
chemistry, 47 
environment, 50 
H 
Helium, 8 
Hematite, 156–158, 161 
Hemicellulose, 83, 84 
Hemodialysis membrane, 83 
Hesperidin, 82 
Heterogeneous catalysis, 27, 34, 50 
Hetero-junction composite, 180 
Hexagonal structure of graphene, 4 
Hierarchical porous structure (HPS), 124, 
125 
High-oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), 5 
High-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC), 228, 240 
High-power density, 119 
High-water absorption property, 83 
Hole 
extraction layers (HELs), 19 
transport 
layer (HTL), 2, 10, 12, 13, 18 
materials, 18 
Homogalacturonan (HG), 81 
Homogeneous 
catalysis, 88 
method, 29 
mixing, 260 
oxidation-precipitation (HOP), 37 
Hospitalization, 238 
Hufmann-Kra¨tschmer method, 7 
Human 
intervertebral disc, 82 
sustainability, 230 
toxicity potential, 144 
Hyaluronan, 81 
Hybrid composites, 16 
Hydrazine hydrate, 32 
Hydrochloric acid, 83 
Hydrocinnamaldehyde, 39, 40 
Hydrocinnamyl alcohol, 39 
Hydrodehalogenation, 34, 45, 46 
bromobenzene, 46 
Hydrogen 
bonding, 92, 217 
peroxide (H2O2), 37, 71, 188, 190, 218, 
222 
storage, 43, 50, 179 
Hydrophilic 
chemical compounds, 163 
domains, 238 
functional groups, 193 
interactions, 166 
Hydrophobic, 91, 193 
interaction, 86, 162, 196, 217 
property, 13 
shell, 56 
Hydrothermal 
method, 133 
reactions, 59 
treatment, 58 
Hydroxyl functional groups, 222 
Hydroxyphenyl, 84 
Hyperbolic variation, 270 
Hyperion Catalysis International, 177 
Hypsochromic shift, 190 
I 
Imidodicarbonimidic diamide, 240 
Immobilization 
enzyme, 56, 68, 69, 88, 222, 223 
technique, 223 
Immunotherapeutic, 161 
In short circuit current (ISC), 180 
In situ oxidative polymerization, 124 
Incandescent bulbs, 197 
Incompressibility equations, 267 
Independent anisotropic constants, 272 
Indium, 147 
tin oxide (ITO), 9, 10, 13, 19, 177, 180, 
182 
Industrial production, 43, 214 
caprolactam, 43 
Infrared spectroscopy, 8 
Inhibition zone, 254, 255 
Inorganic 
hybrid nanostructures, 102 
magnetic material, 155 
pollutants, 216, 230 
Insulin-delivering devices, 90 
Integrated circuits, 29 
Inter-grain charge carrier transport 
mechanism, 18 288 Index 
Intrinsic biomedicine features, 101 
Iodine 
electrolytes, 21 
free electrolytes, 9, 21 
Iodobenzene, 47, 48 
Ionic 
conductivity, 121, 131 
strength, 85, 87, 93 
Iron oxide (IO), 65, 102, 127, 130, 153–156, 
160, 162–164, 166 
magnetic nanoparticles (IOMNPs), 164 
nanoparticles, 162, 166 
Isotropic 
aluminum composite, 269 
cylindrical vessel, 276 
materials, 270, 272, 273 
K 
Keratinocytes, 82 
L 
Laminaria 
digitata, 83 
hyperborean, 83 
japonica, 83 
Lanthanum ntitanate, 133 
Laser-furnace method, 8 
Life-threatening diseases, 102 
Lifshitz-van der Waals-acid-base, 243 
Light 
emitting diodes (LEDs), 177 
harvesting 
dye, 9 
ranges, 20 
responsive polymers, 92 
Lignin, 84 
carbohydrate complex (LCC), 84 
Lignocellulose, 83 
Linear 
extrapolation technique, 275 
thermal gradient, 270 
Liposomes, 193 
Liquid-phase 
bromobenzene hydrodehalogenation, 46 
cinnamaldehyde hydrogenation reaction, 
40 
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), 174, 179 
Local spin density approximation (LSDA), 
104 
Long-chain hydrocarbon selectivity, 41 
Low 
critical solution temperatures (LCST), 91 
density polyethylene (LDPE), 237, 239, 
241–243, 250–255 
adhesive properties, 251 
antibacterial activity, 254 
conclusion (LDPE), 255 
surface chemistry, 252 
surface wettability, 250 
temperature catalytic activity, 45 
M 
Macrocystis pyrifera, 83 
Maghemite, 156, 158–161, 164 
Magnetic 
nanobeads, 154 
nanoparticles (MNPs), 90, 102, 153–155, 
162, 165, 166 
properties, 100–103, 153, 155, 156, 158, 
161, 163 
stabilization, 66 
Magneto-crystalline anisotropy energy, 103 
Manganese, 41, 123, 124, 154, 156, 164 
dioxide (MnO2), 122–125, 131–133 
Mass 
diffusion, 118 
transfer limitations, 33 
Materials, 1, 27, 55, 77, 99, 117, 136, 143, 
153, 154, 156, 171, 213, 237, 259 
Mechanical 
exfoliation, 5 
flexibility, 176 
stability, 174, 200 
strength, 15, 28, 33, 60, 120, 185, 196 
Mechanochemical preparation, 47 
Medical 
applications, 183 
grade 
polymers, 237, 238 
polyvinylchloride, 255 
Membrane 
distillation, 214 
filtration, 163 
Mesoporosity, 56 
dual structure, 66 Index 289 
particles of silica, 56 
silica, 55–57, 60–65, 71, 72 
particles, 64, 72 
sphere (MSS), 55–57, 60–62, 65–67, 71 
Mesoscopic structures, 10 
Metal 
carbon intercalation, 45 
halide perovskites (MHPs), 17 
insulator-semiconductor (MIS), 14 
Schottky model, 14 
nanoclusters, 100 
nanoparticles, 34, 42, 66, 166, 187 
nitrate-modified catalysts, 44 
oxide materials, 22 
precursors dispersion, 34 
semiconductor (MS), 14, 69–71 
support interaction, 45 
Metallotetraphenylporphyrin, 21 
Methanol, 35, 38, 43, 81 
Methoxyl groups, 84 
Methylammonium lead iodide (MAPI3
), 18 
Methylene blue (MB), 189, 217, 221 
Microbial water sludge treatment, 214 
Microelectronics 
industry, 176 
products, 178 
Microemulsion-templated synthesis, 29 
Micro-environment, 38, 83 
Microwave (MW), 29–33, 39, 42, 43, 45, 
133, 144 
assistance, 29 
polyol reduction (MAPR), 39 
synthesis, 29, 30, 32 
Mixed matrix (MM), 227, 228 
Molecular 
dynamics (MD), 124 
electronics, 119 
softness, 104, 109–112 
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2
), 126 
Monodispersity, 56, 57, 66, 161, 163 
Monolithic material, 259 
Monomethyl ether of hydroquinone 
(MEHQ), 240 
Morphological, 6, 7, 20, 21, 27, 44, 49, 50, 
55, 59, 62–66, 72, 102, 103, 121, 124, 
172, 195, 216, 238, 244, 251 
characterization, 27 
Multifunctional nanocarbons, 9, 21 
Multi-layered graphitic tubular structures, 173 
Multi-step modification, 255 
Multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), 6, 14–18, 
23, 28–32, 36–40, 43–49, 122, 125, 
131, 136, 178, 184, 188, 194, 122, 201, 
214–217, 220–223, 225, 226 
nanotubes (MWNTs), 171, 174, 177–179, 
182–185, 188, 190–192, 195–200 
N 
Nafion-functionalization, 187 
Nanoadsorbents, 164 
Nanoalloy clusters, 108, 112 
Nanobelts, 120, 129 
Nanobiohybrid, 222 
catalyst, 222 
Nanocasting, 57 
Nanoelectronics, 173–175 
Nanoferrites, 156 
Nanohybrid catalysis, 223 
Nano-magnetic polymers, 88 
Nanomaterials, 2, 3, 23, 119, 120, 154, 155, 
163, 164, 166, 173, 200, 214 
Nanomedicine, 29 
Nanoparticles (NPs), 30, 32–34, 37–42, 
44–49, 56, 65, 66, 72, 79, 81, 91, 
100–102, 112, 119, 121, 122, 127, 129, 
130, 133, 153–166, 181, 182, 187, 188, 
193, 195, 196, 214, 220, 226, 229 
Nanopillars, 120 
Nanoporous TiO2
 photoanode, 15 
Nanoscience, 27, 28, 154 
Nanosized metal oxides (NMOs), 164 
Nanotechnology, 28, 56, 101, 172, 175, 198, 
201, 214 
Nano-tube (NT), 7, 40, 120, 171–187, 
189–201, 213 
actuators, 191 
cellular mobility, 196 
composites, 183, 185 
conducting polymer interface, 181 
curvature, 6 
cytotoxicity, 198 
derived membranes, 197 
dispersed plastics, 184 
electronics, 200 
elements, 178 290 Index 
fibers, 197 
materials, 201 
mobility, 195 
polymer interfaces, 185 
reinforced polymer, 184, 185 
composites, 183 
spearing technique, 194 
targeted gene-delivery carriers, 193 
Nanowires (NWs), 16, 120, 122, 123, 125, 
198, 214 
Naphthalene, 217 
Naphthalocyanine (NaPc), 181 
National Institute of Standards Technology 
(NIST), 182 
Near-IR wavelengths, 192 
Neuronal tissue, 92 
Neutral red (NR), 217 
Neutrophil elastase, 91 
Nickel, 7, 126, 127, 154, 194 
aluminum layered double hydroxides 
(NiAl-LDHs), 127 
ferrite, 156 
NiCo–carbonate hydroxide (NiCo-CH), 125 
Ni-plated cotton yarn (NCY), 133 
Nitrobenzene hydrogenation, 39 
Nitrogen-doped 
CNTs (N-CNTs), 19, 40, 41, 179 
hierarchical carbon nanosheets, 132 
Nitroxide 
driven free radical polymerization 
mechanism, 185 
mediated radical polymerization (NMP), 79 
Non-biodegradable wastes, 88 
Non-chromatographic technologies, 79 
Noncovalent 
interactions, 193, 199 
methods, 193 
Non-homogeneous material, 261 
Nonpolymeric materials, 165 
Novel 
ferroelectric, 191 
materials, 92 
Nuclear physics, 104 
O 
Odd-even oscillations, 106 
Oligomers, 66, 67 
One-step electrochemical co-deposition 
method, 123 
Ophthalmic 
formulations, 82 
surgery, 81 
Opsonization, 100 
Optical transparency, 14, 19, 177 
Oral administration (enteric drugs), 91 
Organic 
compounds, 112, 163, 214, 219, 222 
dyes, 100, 181 
effluents, 216 
fluorophores, 192 
inorganic perovskites solar cells, 20 
materials, 162, 163, 191, 260, 277 
photovoltaic (OPV), 3, 10 
pollutants, 36, 216, 219, 221, 222 
solar cells, 3, 10, 19–21, 180 
Organometallic compounds, 156 
Organosilane modifiers, 37 
Orthotropic 
characteristics, 267 
cylinder, 267, 272, 273 
material, 261, 267, 272 
rotating cylinders, 271 
Osteoconductivity, 82 
Oxidation 
stability, 33 
stress, 227 
Oxidizing agents, 165, 228 
Oxime carbapalladacycle, 47 
Oxygen (O), 8, 9, 13, 30, 34–38, 40, 42, 44, 
46, 117, 123, 125, 129–131, 133, 154, 
156, 158–160, 214, 216, 219–221, 227, 
240, 241, 246, 247, 251, 252 
containing groups, 34, 40, 42 
P 
Palladium, 34, 37, 38, 41, 47, 49, 102 
nanoparticles, 37 
Panchromatic dyes, 9 
Paramagnetic 
state, 157 
substances, 157 
Paramagnetism, 156, 157 
Partial hydrolysis, 60 
Pectin, 80, 239 
Peptidoglycan, 227 
Percolation network, 19 
Performance-biomedical products, 101 Index 291 
Perovskite, 9 
devices, 18 
fullerene heterojunction, 22 
solar cells (PSCs), 9, 10, 12–14, 18, 21–23 
Perturbation, 4 
Phage cells, 196 
Phagocytosis, 196 
Pharmaceutical delivery systems, 79 
Pharmacodynamics, 102 
Pharmacokinetics, 102, 112 
Phenyl 
boronic, 47, 48 
Cn butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), 7, 
19–21 
siloxanes, 49 
Phosphazene, 131 
Phospholipids, 93 
Photoactive components, 19 
Photoanode, 11 
Photobleaching, 192 
Photocatalytic 
activity, 220 
oxidation, 163 
Photoconversion efficiency, 11 
Photodegradation, 165, 220, 221 
Photodesorption, 187 
Photoelectrode, 9, 16 
Photoinduced redox characteristics, 119 
Photoluminescence, 190 
Photon absorption, 19 
Photosensitizer, 15 
Photothermal therapy, 101, 112 
Photovoltaic (PV), 1–3, 13, 14, 16, 19, 22, 
23, 143–149, 181 
PH-responsive polymers, 91, 92 
Physical non-covalent wrapping, 217 
Physicochemical 
approach, 237, 249 
interactions, 238 
parameters, 243, 250 
particularities, 101 
properties, 19, 251 
stability, 91 
Physiochemical properties, 101, 120, 154, 
166, 230 
Piezoelectric 
materials, 92 
polymers, 92 
Planar heterojunction, 10 
Plasma 
technology, 238 
treatment, 228, 239, 240, 244, 247, 251 
Platinum (Pt), 9, 11, 16, 17, 29, 30–34, 36, 
37, 39, 40, 42–44, 48, 129, 182, 188 
free counter-electrodes, 9 
Polarity, 86, 93, 251 
Pollutant adsorption, 216, 217 
Poly N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm), 
90, 91 
Poly ortho amino phenol (POAP), 131 
Poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) 
(PEDOT), 9, 10, 125–127, 180 
graphene oxide (PEDOT-GO), 125 
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), 18–20, 181 
Poly(3-octylthiophene) (P OT), 180–182 3 
Poly(acrylic acids), 79 
Poly(diallyl dimethylammonium chloride) 
(PDDA), 69, 223 
Poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate), 69 
Poly(styrene)-block-poly(acrylic acid) 
(PS-PAA), 162 
Poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS), 10, 69, 180 
Poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC), 239, 241, 243–249 
pellets, 239 
Polyacrylic acid (PAA), 55, 64, 65, 69, 71, 
241, 243, 244, 249, 250, 252–255 
Polyacrylonitrile (PAN), 132, 133, 225 
Polyaniline (PANI), 38, 122–133, 136 
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons, 222 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, 8 
Polyelectrolyte polymers, 91 
Polyethyleneimine (PEI), 186, 187 
Polyhydroxybutyrate-co-valerate (PHBV), 92 
Polyindole (PIND), 132 
Polymer, 78, 89, 90 
biomolecule systems, 79 
coatings sensitive, 92 
conjugated biomolecules, 93 
electrolyte membrane (PEM), 35 
smart 
coatings, 88 
materials, 88 
solar cells, 10 
stabilization, 38 
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), 131 
Polyoxometalate (POM), 35, 129 
incorporated metallacalixarenes, 129 292 Index 
Polypyrrole (PPy), 90, 123–128, 131–133, 188 
graphene oxide, 124 
Polystyrene (PS), 55, 64, 65, 71, 162, 185 
Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), 126, 128, 130–132 
Porous polypropylene films (PPF), 128 
Post-synthesis grafting method, 37 
Potentiometric, 230 
sensors, 230 
Potentiostatic electrochemical 
polymerization, 125 
Power 
conversion energy (PCE), 9–11, 14–19 
densities, 120, 128 
Preferential oxidation of CO (excess 
hydrogen), 36 
Pristine 
CNTs, 34, 218 
nanotubes, 185, 199 
Production-molding process, 247 
Proliferation, 82, 89 
Protease inhibitors, 86 
Proteins purification, 84 
Protic ionic liquid (PIL), 132 
Protofibrils, 83 
Proton-exchange membrane fuel cells 
(PEMFC), 34, 182 
Pseudo-capacitance 
behavior, 132 
effect, 117, 123 
Pseudocapacitors, 130 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 225 
Pseudomorphic 
products, 57 
transformation, 57 
Q 
Quantum 
dot (QDs), 119, 181, 192 
tunneling (magnetization), 155 
Quiescent synthesis, 62 
R 
Radial tangential strains, 269 
Radical polymerization, 79, 255 
techniques, 79 
Radiotherapeutic, 101, 112 
agents, 161 
Raman spectroscopy, 183 
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 227 
Reduced graphene oxide (RGO), 17, 90 
Renewable 
energy, 2, 19, 143 
sources, 144 
Reorganization energy, 7, 21 
Resorcinol-formaldehyde aerogels, 126 
Responsive substrates, 89 
Reverse 
addition-fragmentation chain transfer 
(RAFT), 79 
osmosis (RO), 214 
Rhizobium, 84 
Ruthenium, 16, 21, 40, 41 
(IV) oxide, 37 
S 
Safety control mechanisms, 102 
Sarcina, 84 
Scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM), 58, 62, 63, 
70, 82, 242, 244, 245, 255 
probe microscopes, 196 
Schottky barrier transistor, 186 
Secondary hole transporters, 18 
Selective 
catalysts, 33 
hydrogenation, 38, 39 
phenol hydrogenation, 38 
Semiconducting-insulator diamond, 2 
Semiconductor, 9 
devices, 100 
Semiquantitative information, 245, 252 
Sensing 
applications, 186 
monitoring, 214, 231 
Sensitive nano-electromechanical devices, 177 
Shape memory 
alloys (SMAs), 79 
polymers (SMPs), 79, 80, 90 
Ship propellers, 265 
Silica 
nanoparticle (SiNP), 69 
spheres, 55, 57, 58, 60, 67, 70, 72 
Silicon (Si), 2, 8, 10, 13–15, 39, 60, 69, 
102, 103, 144, 146–148, 150, 175, 176, 
178–180, 182, 187, 188, 196, 200, 247, 
268, 269, 276 
photovoltaics, 179 Index 293 
solar cells, 10 
transistors, 175 
Silsesquioxane containing graphene oxide 
(SSQ-GO), 130, 131 
Silver 
nanoclusters, 100 
nanoparticles, 225 
Singh rays yielding criterion, 262 
Single 
cell areal capacitance, 131 
walled 
carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) , 6, 14, 
17, 18, 28, 32, 39, 40, 47, 175, 214, 
216, 217, 224, 225, 227 
filled effect transistors (SWNT-FETs), 
190 
nanotube (SWNT), 40, 47, 171, 
173–177, 179–183, 185–192, 194, 
195, 197, 199, 200 
Smart 
hydrogels, 89 
polymeric, 78, 79, 84–93 
materials, 86 
Sodium chloride, 83 
Solar 
cell, 2, 3, 8–15, 17–21, 23, 99, 119, 147, 
179–182 
technology, 10 
energy, 1–3, 9, 19, 144 
panel, 144, 145, 147–150 
photovoltaic, 143–146, 148, 150 
module recycling, 150 
modules, 143, 145 
panels, 145 
systems, 143 
technology, 143–146 
waste, 145, 148 
waste disposal, 144 
Solid 
engineering, 260 
photocatalyst, 220 
state 
electrolytes, 9 
exfoliation (graphite), 5 
Solitary nucleotide polymorphism, 189 
Solubilized linear macromolecules, 78 
Sp2
 hybridization, 5 
Spherical monodispersed particles, 67 
Sphingomonas elodea, 82 
Spray deposition spin coating, 10 
Stable antimicrobial clusters, 100 
Staphylococcus aureus, 225, 238, 242, 247, 
249, 254, 255 
Steady-state 
creep response, 269 
performance, 18 
Stimuli-responsive 
materials, 79 
polymers, 78 
Stöber synthesis, 55–57 
Strain-stress-time expression, 271 
Streptococci strains, 81 
Stress, 259, 262–267, 269, 271–277 
distribution, 266, 276 
Substantial photovoltage deficit, 18 
Sulfobetaine methacrylate, 79 
Sulfuric acid, 5, 130, 229 
Supercapacitors (SCs), 3, 19, 117–121, 123, 
124, 130–134, 136, 171, 179, 198 
applications, 119, 121 
Supercritical fluid deposition, 47 
Superficial 
hydrophilic entities, 243 
oxygenous entities, 247 
Superparamagnetic, 153–155, 158, 
160–162, 164, 166 
iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs), 160, 
161, 164 
MNPS, 160 
NPs, 161 
Surface 
active anti-adherence materials, 239 
charge, 92, 120, 238 
energy, 59, 67, 241, 244, 249–251, 255 
evaluation system, 241 
free energy, 238, 244, 250, 251 
functionalization, 161, 166, 219, 229 
initiated polymerization, 239 
qualitative technique, 244 
topography, 216 
wettability, 119, 243 
Surfactant, 17, 55, 57, 59, 61, 62, 65, 67, 71, 
72, 123, 161, 162 
Sustainable energy consumption, 35 
Suzuki cross-coupling reactions, 47 
Symmetric characteristics, 261 294 Index 
Synthetic 
drug molecules, 93 
polymers, 89, 161 
T 
Tandem solar cells, 11 
Tellurium, 147 
Tetradecylphosphonate, 162 
Tetraethoxysilane, 39 
Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), 55, 60, 62, 
65, 66, 71, 72 
Tetrahedral sites, 156, 158 
Tetramethoxysilane, 67 
Tetramethylorthoslicate (TMOS), 60, 67 
Theoretical in-plane characteristics, 172 
Therapeutics, 193–195 
Thermal 
conductivity, 15, 33, 172 
contact resistance, 178 
resistance, 28 
sensitive solubility, 91 
stability, 33, 34, 44, 132, 155 
heterogeneous catalyst, 49 
Thermodynamic stability, 220 
Thermo-sensitive 
chromatography, 79 
polymers, 91 
Thin-film transistors (TFT), 177, 201 
Thiocarbonylthio group, 79 
Tissue 
compatibility, 72 
engineering, 79–82, 89, 92 
field, 82 
Titania, 181 
Trace environmental pollutants, 88 
Traditional metal-oxide-dependent sensors, 
186 
Transistor circuits, 175 
Transition metal 
analyte complex, 187 
nanoclusters, 99 
nanoparticles, 44 
Transmission electron micrograph, 68 
Transparent 
conducting oxide (TCO), 10, 15, 16 
thin film transistors (TTFTs), 177 
Trans-β-methyl styrene, 39
Trans-stilbene, 39 
Trap-state passivation, 21 
Triclosan treatment, 252 
Triiodide reduction, 11 
Tris[2-(2-methoxy ethoxy) ethyl] methyl 
ammonium iodide (TMEMAI), 130, 131 
Tunable 
direct bandgap energies, 14 
electrochemical, 19 
optical properties, 101 
transformation temperature, 80 
Turbo 
chargers, 260 
generators, 265 
Turnover-frequency (TOF), 38, 44–48 
Two-dimensional (2D), 3, 6, 120, 121, 131, 
136 
graphite, 3 
Type I rhamnogalacturonan (RG-I), 81 
U 
Ultrasonication, 180 
Ultrathin monocrystalline Si films, 14 
Umbilical cords, 81 
Unified yield criterion (UYC), 268 
Urbanization, 213, 230 
Urological stents, 90 
V 
Valence band (VB), 3, 186, 220 
Value added applications, 200 
Van der Waal 
attraction, 28 
forces, 164 
interaction, 165 
Vanadium pentoxide, 127 
Vanadomanganate, 131 
Vascular stent implantation, 90 
Vertically aligned (VA), 17, 123, 227, 228 
Voltage-gated channels, 92 
Voltammetric, 229, 230 
determination, 229 
Volume 
capacitance, 120, 125, 130 
hour space velocities (VHSVs), 36 Index 295
W 
Waste 
minimization, 78, 79, 88, 93 
water 
purification, 230 
treatment, 36, 50, 153, 155, 164, 213, 
230 
Water 
borne polyurethane (WPU), 129, 130 
gas shift (WGS), 36 
in-oil microemulsions, 39 
remediation, 216 
scarcity, 214 
treatment, 166 
Wet 
air oxidation (WAO), 50, 222 
oxidation, 39 
Wettability, 238, 241, 243, 250, 251 
X 
X-ray degradation, 247 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 
246–248, 255 
Y 
Yarn, 13, 133, 
Y-junctions, 176 
Yield, 9, 16, 17, 36, 42, 48, 79, 84, 145, 
247, 259, 261, 262, 274–277 
Z 
Zeolite, 216 
Zinc oxide (ZnO), 9, 16, 38, 80, 125, 130, 
219, 229 
nanoparticles, 130 
