Nanofillers
This book explores the modifying effects of various nanofillers on mechanical and 
physical properties of polymer nanocomposites. Looking at the four basic aspects 
of processing, characterization, properties, and applications, it analyzes how their 
features can allow for innovative multifunction within industry.
Covering design, production, and manufacture, this book focuses on meeting end￾use requirements and the fabrication of materials. The importance of mindful design 
and the use of an appropriate synthesis method is the primary lens through which 
theory and practice are discussed. This volume looks at the various synthesis meth￾ods available for organic nanofillers and what characterizes them. Properties includ￾ing mechanical, thermal, electrical, and tribological are thoroughly examined, along 
with the various computational techniques used to determine them. With important 
sustainable properties, nanofillers are essential to meeting the increasing demand 
for biodegradable and environmentally friendly materials. This book details the role 
nanofillers have to play in sustainability, alongside economic factors such as efficient 
manufacturing processes.
This book will appeal to both academic and industrial engineers involved with 
nanofillers in a variety of industries, including automotive, aerospace, and biomedi￾cal engineering.Nanofillers
Fabrication, Characterization and 
Applications of Organic Nanofillers
Edited by 
Vijay Chaudhary, Bhasha Sharma, 
Shashank Shekhar, and Partha Pratim DasFirst edition published 2024
by CRC Press
6000Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2024 selection and editorial matter, Vijay Chaudhary, Bhasha Sharma, Shashank Shekhar, Partha 
Pratim Das; individual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and 
publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of 
their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material 
reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and 
let us know so we may rectify it in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.
com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 
01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@
tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 9781032245843 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032245850 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003279372 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372
Typeset in Times
by codeMantrav
Contents
Preface......................................................................................................................vii
Editors.......................................................................................................................ix
Contributors..............................................................................................................xi
Chapter 1 Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers..... 1
Prakash Chander Thapliyal
Chapter 2 Dimension-Based Nanofillers: Synthesis and Characterization......... 19
Qazi Adfar, Mohammad Aslam, and Shrikant S. Maktedar
Chapter 3 Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical, and Magnetic 
Properties of Organic Nanofillers ...................................................... 71
Tousif Reza, Rokib Uddin, Mohammad Fahim Tazwar, 
Md Enamul Hoque, and Yashdi Saif Autul
Chapter 4 Standard Reinforcement Methods, Mechanism, Compatibility, 
and Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers...................... 115
Kriti Sharma, G. L. Devnani, Sanya Verma, and Mohit Nigam
Chapter 5 Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers—Influence 
of Geometry and Chemical Modification on Properties of 
Nanocomposites ............................................................................... 145
Milanta Tom, Sabu Thomas, Bastien Seantier, Yves Grohens, 
P. K. Mohamed, S. Ramakrishnan, and Job Kuriakose
Chapter 6 Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer 
Hydrogels.......................................................................................... 173
M. Iqbal Ishra, B. S. S. Nishadani, 
M. G. R. Tamasha Jayawickrama, and 
M. M. M. G. P. G. Manthilaka
Chapter 7 Environmental Impact in Terms of Nanotoxicity and 
Limitations of Employing Organic Nanofillers in Polymers ........... 199
Habibul Islam, Md Enamul Hoque, Shek Md Atiqure Rahman, 
and Faris M. Al-Oqlavi Contents
Chapter 8 Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties, and Applications 
in Polymers....................................................................................... 233
Aswathy Ajayan and Maida Mary Jude
Chapter 9 Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 
[Cellulose-Graft-Poly (Acrylamide)/Nano-Hydroxyapatite/ Soluble 
Fertilizer] and Evaluation of Its Nutrient Release ............................257
Kiplangat Rop, George N. Karuku, and Damaris Mbui
Chapter 10 Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and 
Applications...................................................................................... 281
P. A. Nizam and Sabu Thomas
Chapter 11 Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers.........297
Basma M. Eid
Index.......................................................................................................................323vii
Preface
The present edited book volume named Nanofillers: Fabrication, Characterization 
and Applications of Organic Nanofillers will provide a systematic knowledge of 
various aspects of nanofillers and their influence on the performance of polymer 
composites. This edited book will cover various methods of nanofiller synthesis 
and development of nanocomposites along with their characterization techniques to 
study various properties (mechanical, tribological, thermal, electrical, etc.). It also 
provides an insight on a wide spectrum of potentially advanced applications ranging 
from automotive and aerospace to biomedical and packaging, etc.
This book will also address the advantages of nanofillers to promote applications 
of organic nanofillers and nanocomposites. This book will also address the limita￾tions of using nanofiller to promote sustainability and the eco-friendly environment, 
the economic aspects of using nanofillers and their future perspectives.
The contents of this book will be beneficial for students attending mechanical 
engineering, civil engineering, material science, chemistry, physics, and researchers 
both working in industry and academia. In short, this book will focus on the synthe￾sis, characterization, and application of characterization and applications of organic 
nanofillers.
This book consists of 11 chapters whose details are as follows:
Chapter 1 discusses in detail about the organic nanofillers and their classifica￾tion employed in polymers. In this chapter, the use of organic nanofillers in mak￾ing polymer nanocomposites dealing with the major present developments has been 
discussed.
Chapter 2 is dedicated to the fabrication and characterization of nanofillers. Apart 
from that, the potential applications have also been discussed.
Chapter 3 discusses the mechanical, thermal, electrical, optical and magnetic 
properties of organic nanofillers. Apart from those, the various physical and chemi￾cal properties have also been discussed in the present chapter.
Chapter 4 covers the standard reinforcement methods, mechanism, compatibility 
and surface modification of nanofillers in polymers. This chapter is finally concluded 
with the benefits, drawbacks and potential applications of nanofillers/nanofiller-rein￾forced polymer composite.
Chapter 5 describes the nanocellulose-based green fillers for elastomers - influ￾ence of geometry and chemical modification on properties of nanocomposites. In 
addition, this chapter looks inward on how the reinforcement of nanocellulose can 
yield a material with improved performance characteristics
Chapter 6 is focused on the recent advances in organic nanofillers derived polymer 
hydrogels. This chapter gives an idea that organic nanofiller-derived polymer hydro￾gels are applied in modification of hydrogel materials, logical systems to release 
substance, matrix for health monitoring, antibacterial coatings, wound dressing, drug 
delivery, tissue engineering, and various other applications.
Chapter 7 explains about the environmental impact in terms of nanotoxicity and 
limitations of employing organic nanofillers in polymers. This chapter tries to give viii Preface
an overview of how nanoparticles can enter the environment and create adverse 
effects on different components of the environment.
Chapter 8 discusses natural nanofillers family, their properties, and applications 
in polymers. Various natural nanofiller families, their key properties, and various 
uses are discussed in this chapter.
Chapter 9 discusses about the formulation of polymer nanocomposite NPK fer￾tilizer [cellulose-graft-poly (acrylamide)/nano-hydroxyapatite/soluble fertilizer] and 
evaluating its nutrient release. In this chapter, data revealed reduced chances of 
leaching losses with concomitant pollution to the groundwater and toxic effects to 
the plant roots as well as synchronized nutrient release to cater for the requirement 
by crops.
Chapter 10 focuses on the classification of natural nanofibers, their properties, and 
applications. This chapter focuses on several types of natural fibers, their properties, 
and their use in diverse industries
Chapter 11 discusses the biomedical applications of organic nanofillers in 
polymers. This chapter highlights the role of organic nanofiller namely cellulose 
nanoparticles (CN), chitosan nanoparticles (CsNPs) and lignin nanoparticles (LNPs) 
in developing the polymer matrix composite for biomedical applications.
All the three editors are thankful to almighty God. Apart from this, Dr. Vijay 
Chaudhary, Dr. Bhasha Sharma, and Mr. Partha Pratim Das are also thankful to 
their family members for the support extended during the editing of this book. Dr. 
Shashank Shekhar is also thankful to her parents and wife for the encouragement and 
support extended during the entire duration of editing this book.
We editors are also thankful to all our contributors who submitted their chapters 
in the present volume of this book.
We are also thankful to entire team of CRC Press (Taylor & Francis Group) for 
publishing this book in fastest possible time and in the most efficient manner.
Dr. Vijay Chaudhary
Dr. Bhasha Sharma
Dr. Shashank Shekhar
Mr. Partha Pratim Dasix
Editors
Dr. Vijay Chaudhary is currently working as an 
Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical 
Engineering, Amity School of Engineering and 
Technology (A.S.E.T.), Amity University Uttar Pradesh, 
Noida (India). He obtained his B. Tech. in 2011 
from Department of Mechanical Engineering, Uttar 
Pradesh Technical University, Lucknow, India and then 
obtained his M. Tech (Hons) in 2013 from Department 
of Mechanical Engineering, Madan Mohan Malviya 
Engineering College, Gorakhpur, India. He obtained 
his Ph.D. in 2019 from Department of Mechanical 
Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology, University of Delhi, India. His 
research areas of interest include processing and characterization of Polymer composites, 
tribological analysis of biofiber-based polymer composites, water absorption of biofiber￾based polymer composites, and surface modification techniques related to polymer com￾posite materials. Dr. Chaudhary has over 8years of teaching and research experience. 
He has published more than 60 research papers in peer-reviewed international journals 
as well as in reputed international and national conferences. He has published 16 book 
chapters with reputed publishers. More than 25 students have completed their Summer 
Internships, B.Tech. Projects and M.Tech. Dissertations under his guidance. Currently, he 
is working in the field of biocomposites, nanocomposites, and smart materials.
Dr. Bhasha Sharma is currently working as an 
Assistant Professor in Department of Chemistry, 
Shivaji College, University of Delhi, India. She 
received her BSc (2011) in Polymer Sciences from 
the University of Delhi. Dr. Sharma completed 
her Ph.D. in Chemistry in 2019 under the guid￾ance of Prof Purnima Jain from the University of 
Delhi. She has more than 7years of teaching expe￾rience. She has published more than 40 research 
publications in reputed international journals. 
Her recently edited book titled Graphene-Based 
Biopolymer Nanocomposites has been published in 
Springer Nature. Her authored book 3D Printing 
Technology for Sustainable Polymers and edited 
books Biodegradability of Conventional Plastics: Opportunities, Challenges, and 
Misconceptions, and Sustainable Packaging: Gaps, Challenges, and Opportunities has 
been accepted in Wiley, Elsevier and Taylor Francis, respectively. Her research inter￾ests revolve around sustainable polymers for packaging applications, environmentally x Editors
benign approaches for biodegradation of plastic wastes, fabrication of bionanocompos￾ites and finding strategies to ameliorate the electrochemical activity of biopolymers.
Dr. Shashank Shekhar is currently working as 
an Assistant Professor at Netaji Subhas University 
of Technology and is also associated with the 
Quantum Research Centre of Excellence as an 
Associate Director in the Department of Renewable 
Energy. He completed his PhD in Chemistry at the 
University of Delhi. Dr. Shekhar has been working 
on biopolymers and Schiff base metal complexes 
for the last 5years and has published more than 
20 articles in reputed international journals. He 
has 6years of research and teaching experience. 
Presently, he is working on several projects includ￾ing the circular economy approach to plastic waste, 
synthesis of nanomaterials and nanocomposites 
for energy harnessing, biodegradation of plastic wastes, electrochemical analysis of 
resultant biodegradable nanocomposites for employment in super-capacitor applica￾tions, and polymer technology for packaging applications.
Mr. Partha Pratim Das is pursuing Master of 
Technology (Materials Science and Metallurgical 
Engineering) in the Department of Materials Science 
and Metallurgical Engineering at Indian Institute of 
Technology Hyderabad (IITH), India. Currently, he 
is working in the field of active food packaging to 
extend the shelf-life of fresh produce with Cellulose 
and Composites Research Group at IIT Hyderabad. 
He completed his B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering 
with first-class distinction in the year 2021 from 
Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India. During 
his B.Tech, he worked on various projects with the 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati and Indian Oil Corporation Limited, 
Guwahati, Assam. He has presented several research papers at national and 
international conferences and published a good number of research papers in 
SCI journals and book chapters to his credit with reputed publishers includ￾ing Springer, CRC press (T&F), and Elsevier. He also served as a reviewer in 
Materials Today: Proceedings and Applied Composite Materials, Springer. In 
the year 2020, he received the Innovative researcher of the year award. He is also 
a Certified Executive of Lean Management and Data Practitioner (Minitab and 
MS-Excel) from the Institute for Industrial Performance and Engagement (IIPE), 
Faridabad, India. He is a community associate member at American Chemical 
Society (ACS). His area of research includes natural fibre-based composites, 
processing and characterization of polymer matrix composites, nanofiller-based 
composites for various applications and biodegradable food packaging.xi
Contributors
Qazi Adfar
Vishwa Bharti Degree College
Rainawari, India
Aswathy Ajayan
Post Graduate and Research 
Department of Chemistry
Sree Sankara College
Kalady, India
Faris M. Al-Oqla
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Hashemite University
Zarqa, Jordan
Mohammad Aslam
Materials Chemistry & Engineering 
Research Laboratory, Department of 
Chemistry
National Institute of Technology
Srinagar, India
Yashdi Saif Autul
Department of Mechanical and 
Materials Engineering
Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI)
Worcester, Massachusetts
G. L. Devnani
Department of Chemical Engineering
Harcourt Butler Technical University
Kanpur, India
Basma M. Eid
Institute of Textile Research and 
Technology
National Research Centre
Giza, Egypt
Yves Grohens
Université Bretagne Sud
Lorient, France
Md Enamul Hoque
Department of Biomedical Engineering
Military Institute of Science and 
Technology (MIST)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
M. Iqbal Ishra
Postgraduate Institute of Science
University of Peradeniya
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka
and
MRSC
Institute of Materials Engineering and 
Technopreneurships
Kandy, Sri Lanka
Habibul Islam
Department of Biomedical Engineering
Military Institute of Science and 
Technology (MIST)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
M. G. R. Tamasha Jayawickrama
Postgraduate Institute of Science
University of Peradeniya
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka
and
MRSC
Institute of Materials Engineering and 
Technopreneurships
Kandy, Sri Lanka
Maida Mary Jude
Post Graduate and Research
Department of Chemistry
Sree Sankara College
Kalady, India
George N. Karuku
Department of Land Resources and 
Agricultural Technology
University of Nairobi
Nairobi, Kenyaxii Contributors
Job Kuriakose
Global R&D Centre, Asia
Apollo Tyres Ltd.
Chennai, India
Shrikant S. Maktedar
Biofuels Research Laboratory
Department of Chemistry
National Institute of Technology
Srinagar, India
M. M. M. G. P. G. Manthilaka
Postgraduate Institute of Science
University of Peradeniya
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka
and
MRSC
Institute of Materials Engineering and 
Technopreneurships
Kandy, Sri Lanka
Damaris Mbui
Department of Land Resources and 
Agricultural Technology
University of Nairobi
Nairobi, Kenya
P. K. Mohamed
Global R&D Centre, Asia
Apollo Tyres Ltd.
Chennai, India
Mohit Nigam
Department of Chemical Engineering
RBSETC, Bichpuri
Agra, India
B. S. S. Nishadani
Postgraduate Institute of Science
University of Peradeniya
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka
and
MRSC
Institute of Materials Engineering and 
Technopreneurships
Kandy, Sri Lanka
P. A. Nizam
School of Chemical Science
Mahatma Gandhi University
Kottayam, India
S. Ramakrishnan
Global R&D Centre, Asia
Apollo Tyres Ltd.
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Shek Md Atiqure Rahman
Sustainable and Renewable Energy
Engineering
University of Sharjah
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
Tousif Reza
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Military Institute of Science and 
Technology (MIST)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Kiplangat Rop
Department of Chemistry
University of Nairobi
Nairobi, Kenya
Bastien Seantier
Université Bretagne Sud
Lorient, France
Kriti Sharma
Department of Chemical Engineering
Harcourt Butler Technical University
Kanpur, India
Mohammad Fahim Tazwar
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Military Institute of Science and 
Technology (MIST)
Dhaka, BangladeshContributors xiii
Prakash Chander Thapliyal
Advanced Structural Composites and 
Durability Group
CSIR-Central Building Research 
Institute
Roorkee, India
Sabu Thomas
School of Energy Materials
Mahatma Gandhi University
Kottayam, India
Milanta Tom
School of Energy Materials
Mahatma Gandhi University
Kottayam, India
Rokib Uddin
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Military Institute of Science and 
Technology (MIST)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Sanya Verma
Biochemical Engineering and 
BioTechnology
Indian Institute of Technology
New Delhi, India1
1 Organic Nanofillers 
and Their Classification 
Employed in Polymers
Prakash Chander Thapliyal
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute
1.1 INTRODUCTION
A lot of literature is available on research works where studies have been made 
on the impact of the inclusion of nanofillers into polymers. Nanofillers are materi￾als of diverse chemical characteristics containing at least one element between 1 
and 100nm. Characteristically, such polymer nanocomposites display a great deal 
superior mechanical, thermal and other properties than conventional polymer com￾posites. A distinctive crossing point formed involving polymer and nanofiller dem￾onstrates enhanced performances of such nanofiller having composites. Due to the 
large explicit surface area of nanofillers, figure of filler-polymer matrix contact sites 
increases in finely dispersed polymer nanocomposites, playing a significant role in 
controlling the properties (See Table 1.1). Adhesive properties similar to the coef￾ficient of wetting, interfacial free energy, etc. are mainly impacted by the nano￾fillers (Guchait et al., 2022). The insertion of nanofiller in polymeric coatings can 
significantly advance their corrosion resistance, thermal stability, flame retardancy, 
transparency and resistance to organic solvents and decrease the inclination for the 
coating to blister and/or delaminate (Kabeb et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2006).
CONTENTS
1.1 Introduction.......................................................................................................1
1.2 Types of Nanofillers..........................................................................................2
1.3 Organic Nanofillers...........................................................................................3
1.3.1 Nanocellulose .......................................................................................3
1.3.2 Nano Lignins ........................................................................................7
1.3.3 Nano Chitosan ......................................................................................7
1.3.4 Miscellaneous.......................................................................................9
1.4 Limitations of Organic Nanofillers................................................................. 11
1.5 Future Scope of Organic Nanofillers .............................................................. 11
Acknowledgments.................................................................................................... 12
References................................................................................................................ 12
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-12 Nanofillers
Innovative trends and perspectives in nanotechnology have facilitated conduit 
en route for employing nanofillers like dynamic agents in packaging manufactur￾ing. This resolution applies toward making of biodegradable packaging composites 
depending on biopolymers as well as nanofillers. Such kind of nanocomposite mate￾rial is incapable of partially substituting man-made packaging materials because 
of its fragile mechanical properties, excessive hydrophilicity and vulnerability to 
disintegration. On the other hand, they may be proven alternatives to plastic materi￾als and be able to apply into areas wherever plastic revival is not efficiently viable 
(Majeed et al., 2013). At present, there is mounting concern in grouping of biopoly￾mer with nanofiller-based materials. Nanofillers comprise diverse figures and dimen￾sions; however, their individual particle dimension must be under 100 nm (George 
and Ishida, 2018). Nanofillers are commonly added to polymers en route for attaining 
well-designed properties not possessed in polymer itself. On the whole, such appro￾priate additives are flame retardants along with conductive nanofillers (Moczo and 
Pukanszky, 2008).
In this chapter, an overview of the research that has appeared in the literature 
is presented for the use of organic nanofillers in making polymer nanocomposites, 
dealing with the major present developments and progress in this field.
1.2 TYPES OF NANOFILLERS
Natural fibers are believed to be an important as well as strong substitute to synthetic 
silicates and carbon-based fibers; nevertheless, the incompatibility of natural fiber 
with polymer matrices along with the higher dampness absorption fraction of natural 
fiber confines their applications. To surmount face treatment of natural fiber and 
nanofiller addition have turn out to be the most important aspects toward improving 
performance of natural fiber reinforced polymer composites. The shape and charac￾teristics of the nanofiller will also determine the process to be engaged for the mak￾ing of the polymer nanocomposites.
TABLE 1.1 
Pros and Cons of Use of Nanofillers
Pros Cons
• Reinforcement
• Chemical resistance
• Mechanical properties 
(tensile strength, toughness, and stiffness)
• Dimensional stability
• Thermal expansion
• Gas barrier
• Flame retardant
• Ablation resistance
• Dispersion problems
• Processability
• Sedimentation
• Optical clarity
• ColorationOrganic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 3
There are mainly four types of nanofillers on the basis of chemistry: clays, inor￾ganic, organic and carbon nanostructure (see Figure 1.1). Among these are organic 
nanofillers, which may include natural biopolymers, e.g. chitosan and cellulose 
(Youssef and El-Sayed, 2018; Sothornvit, 2019).
1.3 ORGANIC NANOFILLERS
Organic nanofillers have been used to improve the performance of the biopolymers 
(Othman, 2014). Natural biopolymer nanofibrils composed of molecules such as col￾lagen, cellulose and chitin are repeatedly used as organic nanofillers owing to their 
biodegradability, biocompatibility, availability, durability and mechanical properties 
(Ling et al., 2018).
An extensive diversity of organic and inorganic nanofillers has been joined with 
diverse polymers to achieve polymer nanocomposites planned with precise proper￾ties for every type of function. Organic nanofillers include many polymer nanofibers 
and natural fibers, e.g. cellulose, flax and wood (Miao and Hamad, 2019; Zhu et al., 
2019).
1.3.1 Nanocellulose
Material researchers in academia and industry are looking for the ways to replace 
synthetic nanofillers with materials from natural and biodegradable sources. There 
are many sources of getting a variety of organic nanofillers. Advantageous cellu￾lose properties comprise biodegradability, toughness, biocompatibility, renewabil￾ity, water insolubility, low-cost, colorless, non-toxicity, lightweight, high mechanical 
strength and durability (George and Sabapathi, 2015), and such striking properties 
create it an appropriate option to fossil fuel-based polymers.
Cellulose is the most abundant renewable polymer resource and has been growing 
in use owing to its fine thermal as well as chemical strength, higher hydrophilicity 
and exceptional biocompatibility, making it a potential material for diverse applica￾tions such as biomedical applications, nano-drug release systems and food packag￾ing. Cellulose nanofibers (CNF) have admirable mechanical strength, good optical 
properties, thermal and dimensional stability and their renewable nature with the 
FIGURE 1.1 Classification of nanofillers.4 Nanofillers
occurrence of hydroxyl functionality by the side of the cellulose chain, resulting in 
the creation of network of intra- and intermolecular bonds (Mariano et al., 2014) with 
the establishment of van der Waals connections amid the chains. Its Young’s modu￾lus is a great deal higher than that meant for glass fibers, i.e. in the region of 70GPa. 
It is analogous to Kevlar (60–125GPa) and potentially stronger in comparison with 
steel (200–220GPa) and in general depends on extraction methods. CNCs illustrate 
greater applications especially within green material science and biomedical field 
(Lizundia et al., 2016; Fortunati et al., 2017).
Nanocellulose is identified by reactive surface of hydroxyl groups and can be tai￾lored in the direction of diverse surface properties (Khalil et al., 2012a; Phanthong et 
al., 2018). Three types of cellulose are used as a nanofiller in biopolymeric films, i.e. 
nanofibrillated cellulose, nanocrystalline cellulose and bacterial nanocellulose, which 
differ in their morphology, quantity of crystallinity, grain dimension, etc. Bacterial 
nanocellulose (BNC) is primarily obtained from the commencing cultures of gram￾negative bacteria Gluconacetobacter xylinus and has a higher molecular weight and 
higher crystallinity as compared to plant-based cellulose (Niamsap et al., 2019).
Auad et al. (2008) used CNCs to boost the mechanical strength of polyurethane￾based SMP and achieved a 53% raise in the tensile strength. Furthermore, nanocom￾posite showed shape recoveries greater than 95%, signifying strengthening CNCs 
has no effect on the shape memory.
Earlier, Bitinis et al. (2013) integrated CNCs with a mixture of poly (lactic acid) 
and natural rubber and achieved a fine distribution of the nanofillers into the mix 
in course of casting and extrusion processes. Similarly, Mariano et al. (2017) have 
done non-covalent amendment of CNCs in the midst of two diverse poly(Lactide) 
(PLLA) dependent surfactants to get better nanofiller–matrix compatibility. Rueda 
et al. (2013) evaluated the mechanical as well as thermal behaviors of polyurethane￾based SMP reinforced by way of various CNC fillings (1.5–30 weight %) and found 
an increase in material stiffness with temperature along with enhanced strength. 
Lately, non-toxic electroactive hydrogel was fabricated through reinforcing of poly￾vinyl alcohol by CNCs having superior displacement in electric field (Jayaramudu 
et al., 2018).
Wu et al. (2014) made-up water-triggered SMP nanocomposites having para￾mount shape recall of 98 in addition to 99% for shape fixity and recovery by way of 
23 weight % CNCs accordingly; Young’s modulus improved by 4400% while elonga￾tion at break improved by 400%.
Using nanocellulose, rod-like core–shell nanocellulose/polyaniline nanocompos￾ites have been prepared via in situ polymerization. In comparison with clean polyani￾line, these nanocomposites illustrate better film-forming characteristics along with 
exceptional electrochromic properties, i.e. quicker reaction instance (1.5 s for bleach￾ing along with 1.0 s for coloring), superior optical contrast (62.9%), higher coloration 
effectiveness (206.2 cm2/C) and amazing switching steadiness of over 500 cycles 
(Zhang et al., 2017).
Kaboorani et al. (2017) prepared a UV-curable acrylic coating system by adding 
cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) and showed CNC is an ideal reinforcing nanofiller that 
can positively influence the mechanical properties of coating systems.Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 5
Shankar and Rhim (2016) developed a method for preparing nanocellulose (NC) 
starting from microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) and tested the properties of agar￾based composite films (1, 3, 5 and 10 weight % based on agar). NC can be used as 
a reinforcing agent in support of developing films for biodegradable food packaging 
materials.
Addition of CNF resulted in 44% enhancement in compressive stiffness of 
foams compared with virgin foam. Further, it was discovered that 0.1% cellulose 
nanofiller loading can result in maximum enhancement in compressive stiffness of 
the foams. Using nanofillers to improve foam properties encompasses the potential 
to decrease polyol content as well as shift in direction of greener foams (Ghasemi 
et al., 2021).
Xu et al. (2013) prepared CNCs and used them as organic nanofillers by dispersing 
them into polycarbonate and studied their control on mechanical, optical and thermal 
properties of resulting composite films. Due to excellent thinning out of nanofillers 
in polymeric matrix, powerful hydrogen bonds resulted amid carbonyl groups of the 
polymer chain along with the hydroxyl functionality of CNCs, leading to a reinforce￾ment outcome both on mechanical and thermal properties. Furthermore, nanofill￾ers in polymer nanocomposites efficiently stalled main thermal degradation routes 
of polycarbonate concerning chain scission by the side of carbonate linkage along 
with the rearrangement of carbonate groups. When compared with neat polycarbon￾ate, nanocomposite films with 3% by weight CNCs have enhancement of 27.3% in 
Young’s modulus, 30.6% in tensile strength and 3.3% in maximum decomposition 
temperature although films stay transparent.
Cellulose-based organic nanofillers were brought in with polymers to fabricate 
transparent composite film. CNCs are introduced into polycarbonates by Jagadeesh 
et al. (2021) in organic solvent by means of solvent switchover. Hydroxyl groups in 
CNC were hydrogen bonded with carbonyl group of polycarbonates (Xu et al., 2013).
Prihatiningtyas et al. (2019) showed that the incorporation of CNCs modified the 
sponge-like membrane to self-assembled structure allowing for an excellent separa￾tion of water from NaCl. Experiments also demonstrated that the incorporation of 
3% CNCs into cellulose triacetate membrane effectively enhanced water flux more 
than three times.
Nanocellulose hydrogels are comparatively fresh group of engineerable, renew￾able, biodegradable and non-toxic nanofillers. These gels are exceedingly hydrated 
(99.9%–95% water) and outline a three-dimensional permeable network having fine 
mechanical properties and finding applications in cell culture, drug delivery, tissue 
engineering, diagnostics and separation (Curvello et al., 2019).
CNCs were openly incorporated within aqueous piperazine solution meant for 
fabricating thin film nanocomposite nanofiltration membranes, which exhibit rougher 
and more hydrophilic surfaces compared with membranes devoid of CNCs, ensuing 
in drastic boost of water permeation flux (106.9 Lm–2/h) while keeping rational salt 
elimination to sodium sulfate (98.3%) and magnesium sulfate (96.1%) (Huang et al., 
2019).
Organic filler like CNCs were used as nanofiller within biodegradable polymer 
matrix since very long. Rescignano et al. (2014) modulated thermal, physical in addi￾tion to biocompatibility properties of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) by combining CNCs 6 Nanofillers
with nanoparticles of poly(D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) and loading them by 
way of bovine serum albumin fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate (FITC-BSA). 
These systems join high mechanical strength and biocompatibility of polymeric 
PLGA nanoparticles with PVA/CNC systems respectively.
Comparable data concerning the consequence of reinforcement part of cellu￾losic nanostructures in polymer matrix were obtained by means of erstwhile cel￾lulosic nanostructures extracted commencing on or after diverse natural resources 
in addition to united with diverse ecological matrices. CNC and cellulose nanofibers 
obtained from sunflower stalks were used in gluten-associated nanocomposites for 
growing mechanical and barrier properties (Fortunati et al., 2016), while for flax 
and phormium fibers (Fortunati et al., 2013) and barley derivatives (Fortunati et al., 
2015) into PVA, or Posidonia oceanica in grouping with ZnO nanoparticles, Luzi 
et al., (2017a) was also carried out. Luzi et al. (2016) studied poly(lactic acid) with 
poly(butylene succinate) blends as well as bionanocomposite films loaded with 1–3 
weight % CNCs obtained from Carmagnola carded hemp fibers.
Luzi et al. (2016) observed during their studies a heartening synergic outcome of 
poly(butylene succinate) (PBS) together with cellulose nanocrystals (CNC & s-CNC) 
in stipulations of barrier properties; CNC in addition to s-CNC resulted in a decrease 
of oxygen and water vapor permeability due to the presence of PBS, which enhances 
the crystallinity quantity.
CNC was added to copolyesters having butylene succinate (BS) and triethylene 
succinate (TES) (Fortunati et al., 2017) and results showed how copolymerization 
and nanofiller addition together produced slim extruded films with tunable properties 
by changing quantity of nanofiller (s-CNC) meeting the needs for a broad variety of 
applications.
Cellulose nanofibrils (CNF), CNCs and cellulose filaments (CelFil) were used as 
nanofillers at 0.1–0.8 weight % loading levels (Ghasemi et al., 2021). It was found that 
the addition of 0.1 weight % CNF resulted in a 44% enhancement in the compressive 
modulus of foams.
After incorporating 5 weight % CNCs, the mechanical strength of carboxymethyl 
cellulose nanocomposite film was amplified linearly and CNC from barley straw, 
wheat straw and rice straw results in improvement of tensile strength by 42.6%, 
25.2% and 45.7% respectively (Oun and Rhim, 2016).
CNCs were extracted from kiwi Actinidia deliciosa and used at the same time as 
nanoreinforcement in poly(vinyl alcohol) blended through chitosan systems. Also, 
the presence of carvacrol resulted in antimicrobial activity (Luzi et al., 2017a).
Perumal et al. (2018) studied the thermal effect of rice stalk CNC-filled CS/PVA 
biocomposites and showed that CNC is a valuable substance to augment thermal 
steadiness by strong interaction flanked through CNC functional groups and CS/
PVA polymer chain blends.
Sugar palm nanocrystalline cellulose reinforced sugar palm starch composites 
were developed (Ilyas et al., 2018). The nanofiller concentration was varied from 0 to 
1 weight % and mounting nanofiller concentration led to decline in mass loss under 
3000C, proving the thermal stability improvement of nanofiller addition. Further 
eggshell nanoparticles filled hemp/epoxy composites showed higher thermal stabil￾ity (Bhoopathi and Ramesh, 2020).Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 7
Kenaf cellulose nano-fibrillated fiber (CNF) incorporation in PLA improved the 
thermal stability when compared to neat polylactic acid composite owing to enhanced 
distribution with PLA along with creation of strong attachment (Rizal et al., 2021).
1.3.2 Nano Lignins
Lignin is the second most abundant and widely accepted aromatic polymer on the 
globe and is a three-dimensional, cross-linked molecule with varieties of substituted 
phenols. Manufacturing organic molecules such as hydrocarbons, polyols, alcohols, 
acids, ketones and phenols can be obtained from lignin. Lignins can be thought of as 
another lignocellulosic resource to be integrated within different polymers (Thakur 
et al., 2014). In current existence, diverse lignin nanoparticles (LNPs) from various 
resources were produced (Beisl et al., 2017a; Tian et al., 2017). However, lignin’s 
tendency to self-aggregate harmfully influences distribution in formulations (Beisl 
et al., 2017b).
Antioxidant action was obtained for grocery wrapping purposes once bio-based 
nanoparticles have been used as active nanofillers in various biopolymers (Yang 
et al., 2018). It was earlier found that there was a connection flanked by antibacterial 
and antioxidant property of lignin given that the free-radical scavenging action of 
lignin was set up to be firmly associated with phenolic structures on oxygen-contain￾ing reactive free radicals (Dizhbite et al., 2004).
Several researchers studied lignin nanoparticles (LNPs) once they are integrated 
in diverse polymers for packaging (Armentano et al., 2018). Two dissimilar PLA 
mixes, one having 3 weight % LNPs and other having 3 weight % LNPs along with 1 
weight % CNCs tested adjacent to bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. 
tomato (Yang et al., 2016a, 2016b) while action of pure PVA, CH or mixed PVA/CH 
films and nanocomposites having LNPs (Yang et al., 2016c) against gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria plant pathogens revealing lesser CFU inside first 3 hours. 
Yang et al. were too deliberate on the effects of having LNPs on mechanical as well 
as thermal behavior of wheat gluten (WG) with glycidyl methacrylate-grafted poly￾lactic acid (Yang et al., 2015a, 2015b). Results also established a common decline in 
light transmittance during visible light spectrum following LNP incorporation from 
89% for neat WG and headed for 56% for WG containing 3 weight % LNPs while in 
UV range, i.e. beneath 400 nm, transmittance less than 2% reached for LNP contain￾ing PVA in addition to WG samples.
Gupta et al. (2010) developed and assessed poly(dl-lactide-co-glycolide) nanopar￾ticles for sparfloxacin ophthalmic release to get better precorneal habitation moment 
as well as visual infiltration. The resulting nanosuspension had a mean particle size 
of 180–190 nm appropriate for ophthalmic use with zeta potential of –22mV. In 
vitro discharge from this nanosuspension showed an extensive discharge contour of 
sparfloxacin.
1.3.3 Nano Chitosan
Like cellulose, chitin is also a long-chain polysaccharide consisting of numerous 
N-acetylglucosamine molecules, which are glucose derivatives. Chitin is mainly 8 Nanofillers
obtained from animal sources like octopi, squid, insects, crabs, prawns, lobsters and 
also from fungi. Just similar to cellulose, chitin can form nanowhiskers and nanofi￾brils, having several applications in bio-nanocomposite films.
After cellulose, chitin is the next most profuse polysaccharide occurring in nature. 
Chitin nanocrystals or chitin whiskers (CHWs) can also be isolated under definite 
conditions such as acidolysis from amorphous domains. CHWs collectively with 
other organic nanofillers such as cellulose and starch illustrate lots of advantages 
above conventional inorganic nanofillers like effortless accessibility, non-toxicity, 
low density, biodegradability and uncomplicated alteration. Hence, CHWs have been 
extensively used as substitutes on behalf of inorganic nanofillers in reinforcing poly￾mer nanocomposites (Zeng et al., 2012).
The chitin and chitosan nanoparticles are accepted organic nanofillers for the rea￾son that of their fine film-forming aptitude, non-toxic nature, active surface area and 
biocompatible nature. The combustion of oil palm side products that is to say EFB, 
fibers along with nutshells, gives organic nanoparticles. These nanoparticles have 
typical span amid 93.9 and 192.20 nm, while width involving 18.17 and 43.45nm 
(Khalil et al., 2012a).
Inorganic nanomaterials are known to harden nylon with decrease in its tough￾ness as well as ductility, and they are not eco-friendly. Hao et al. (2020) studied the 
smooth modification of nylon’s mechanical strength from rigid to hard by means of 
CNCs in addition to chitosan nanowhiskers (CSWs) as biorenewable nanofillers. It 
was found that by way of CSWs, in situ-incorporated nanofiller with 0.4 weight % 
loading strengthened nylon and led to 1.9 fold raise in its Young’s modulus (2.6GPa) 
plus 1.7 times boost in ultimate tensile strength (106MPa), whereas solution blended 
nanofiller by means of a 0.3 weight % loading toughened polymer with a 2.1 fold 
augment.
Chitosan has inherent antibacterial activity, and hence, chitosan nanofillers were 
expected to improve antibacterial properties. To obtain nanofiller from chitosan, it 
was first emulsified by surfactants and then cross-linked by means of sodium tripoly￾phosphate (TPP) to outline antibacterial nanofillers (Pan et al., 2019).
Poonguzhali et al. (2017) prepared Chitosan/Poly (vinyl pyrrolidone)/nanocellu￾lose (CPN) nanocomposites by solution casting method and have shown composite 
with 3% CPN had antibacterial property and can be used as wound healing material.
Chitosan and chitin nanoparticles have received interest as nanofillers owing 
to striking surface area, non-toxicity, biocompatibility in addition to film-forming 
capacity (Hassan et al., 2016; Olivera et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2018; Azarifar et al., 
2019; Jamroz et al., 2019; Vahedikia et al., 2019). Further, their stability can be 
enhanced by scheming the environment such as by modifying the constitution by 
way of chemical agents. Presently, meager solubility of chitosan nanoparticles is a 
big problem in encapsulation of hydrophobic drugs (Naskar et al., 2019).
The chitosan thymol nanofillers packed CS-quinoa composites were weathered 
on behalf of antibacterial performance against one gram-negative along with two 
gram-positive bacteria (Medina et al., 2019). Researcher (Jannatyha et al., 2020) 
compared antimicrobial properties of nanochitosan (NCH)/CMC as well as nanocel￾lulose (NCL)/CMC nanocomposites. Good antimicrobial properties were observed 
owing to accumulation of nanofillers within NCH/CMC nanocomposites.Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 9
1.3.4 Miscellaneous
Rafieian et al. (2014) studied thermal, mechanical and morphological properties of 
nanocomposite films prepared commencing WG matrix with cellulose nanofibrils. 
A coconut crust nanofine particles packed jute mat/epoxy composite was formed for 
diverse structural applications, and it was observed that 15 weight % nanofiller addi￾tion resulted in the highest TS of 38.7MPa, 15.17% superior than without nanofiller 
(Jagadeesh et al., 2021).
Polytetrafluoroethylene nanoparticles in Ni matrix were introduced by electro￾deposition, and resulting composite films have shown good water repellency and 
solid lubrication owing to low surface free energy in addition to frication coefficient 
(Wang et al., 2004). Similarly Ni-P-TiO2-PTFE nanocomposite coatings by way of 
extensive array of surface energy components were prepared by Liu and Zhao (2011) 
using an electroless plating.
The inclusion of MMT/GO hybrid nanofillers into PAN nanofibers showed a clear 
enhancement of up to 30°C for starting decomposition temperature plus 1.32 times 
bigger tensile strength than pure PAN demonstrating that hybrid nanofiller is capa￾ble contender in getting better thermal and mechanical polymeric properties (Wang 
et al., 2014).
Yuan et al. (2016) developed nanocomposite multifunctional coatings with self￾cleaning, anticorrosion and antiwear properties on top of aluminum substrate by 
spraying core–shell structured polyaniline/functionalized carbon nanotubes (PANI/
fCNTs) into ethylene tetrafluoroethylene (ETFE) matrix en route for creating lotus 
leaf like structures. This coating demonstrates steady non-wetting performance over 
broad temperature range of less than 400°C and exceptional self-cleaning capability 
to avert contagion by sludge, concentrated H2SO4 and ethylene glycol.
Elkhouly et al. (2020) reported use of organic nanoparticles derived from date 
seeds as nanofiller for polyethylene terephthalate (PET) in making of polymer nano￾composites, which showed better chemical stability. Additionally, main properties 
like hardness, compressive strength and wear resistance were enhanced and opti￾mized with a DSN reinforcement of 0.75 weight %.
Yang et al. (2019) synthesized three-dimensional COF (3D-COF) nanofiller for 
preparing nanocomposite membrane on the road to carbon dioxide separation and 
showed that 3D-COF was competent in sinking aging process of membrane through 
capitalizing on amine functional groups in addition to vast surface area to freeze and 
rigidify polyimide polymer chains and thus avoiding collapse of free volume.
Recently, researchers have developed polyethersulfone (PES) membrane by 
means of covalent organic frameworks (COFs) nanofiller having average dimension 
of 30nm causing a drop in surface roughness and an improvement in hydrophilicity 
improving their flux and fouling resistance significantly. Water flux improved 2.6 
times by adding 0.5 weight % COF, and this membrane can be used for dye sepa￾ration along with judicious salt separation with appropriate antifouling properties 
(Vatanpour and Paziresh, 2022).
Sen and Kumar (2010) prepared coir-fiber-based fire retardant nanofiller for use 
in epoxy resin. Initially, coir fiber brominated using saturated bromine water and 
afterward reacted by stannous chloride solution. On air drying, it was powdered to 10 Nanofillers
nanodimension and mixed fine with epoxy resin for synthesis of composites. Smoke 
density as well as limiting oxygen index of coir–epoxy nanocomposites has improved 
considerably (Saba et al., 2014).
Recently, antioxidant 2D covalent organic framework dopamine (COFDOPA) 
nanofiller was developed and incorporated into plasticized poly(lactic acid) matrix 
by means of 15 weight % of acetyl tributyl citrate to build up non-migratory sustain￾able wrapping. Bionanocomposites loaded with low amounts (0.5 weight % and 1 
weight %) resulted in transparency and showed fine interfacial adhesion, better crys￾tallinity and thermo-mechanical performance (Arroyo et al., 2020; Prihatiningtyas 
et al., 2019).
Saba et al. (2016) found that tensile strength as well as toughness of kenaf tough￾ened epoxy composites enhanced by adding oil palm nanoparticles, great surface 
area behaving as stage in support of connecting amid matrix with fiber. Oil palm 
nanoparticles also enhanced interface physical adhesion along with appropriate 
stress transfer under loading.
Date palm nanofillers have found in packaging and dental applications in recent 
times (Ghori et al., 2018). Adel et al (2018) obtained oxidized nanocellulose from 
fibers of date palm sheath and used it as a packaging additive in chitosan films. 
Salih et al. (2018) formed maxillary denture bases from poly(methyl methacrylate) 
(PMMA) composites reinforced with nanoscale pressed date powder. Arifin et al. 
(2018) make use of rice husk agricultural waste and prepared organic nanofillers (325 
mesh<45μm) for the development of polymer nanocomposites.
Wang et al. (2020) synthesized aminophend/formaldehyde polymeric nanospheres 
(APFNSs) by means of sol-gel technique from 3-aminophenol and formaldehyde and 
used them as nanofillers through incorporation into polyamide (PA) sheets to con￾struct thin film nanocomposite (TFN) membranes. The water flux of TFN-As mem￾brane modified as a result of APFNSs nanofillers is 71.3 L/m2h twice of pure TFC 
membrane, and salt rejection keeps over 96%. This effort demonstrated that amino￾phend/formaldehyde polymeric nanospheres (APFNSs) can be promising as nano￾filler for budding novel TFN membranes with superior desalination performance.
A novel category of poly(ether sulfone) (PES) supported MMM containing 
metal–organic framework (MOF) nanofillers of HKUST-1 were blended among 
poly(methyl methacrylate-co-methacrylic acid) (PMMA-co-MAA) copolymer to 
give HKUST-1@mPES MMM for use in ultrafiltration and competent water treat￾ment applications. The ensuing HKUST-1@mPES MMM exhibited pure water 
permeability (PWP) nearly three times higher than that of mPES membrane san 
HKUST-1 nanofillers (Lin et al., 2019).
Liao et al. (2020) used asymmetric organic nanofiller resorcinol formaldehyde 
nanobowls (RFB), into the polyamide membrane resulting in superior nanofiltration 
performance of the prepared membrane. Water fluxes of TFN-B0.12 membrane were 
119.74 ± 4.28 for sodium sulfate solution and 141.46 ± 5.92 L/(m2h) for magnesium 
chloride solution, one and half times higher than that of thin film composite (TFC) 
membrane.
The use of aramid nanofibers (ANFs) as multifunctional nanofillers improved 
polyethylene oxide (PEO)-LiTFSI electrolytes through the hydrogen bond inter￾actions. Thus, ANF tailored electrolytes demonstrated better room temperature Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 11
conductivity of 8.8×10−5S/cm and displayed better mechanical strength, electro￾chemical firmness, thermostability along with interfacial resistance against lithium 
dendrites (Liu et al., 2020).
Even et al. (2011) revealed peptide nanotubes (PNTs) as nanofillers for epoxy with 
an increase of 70% in shear strength in addition to 450% in peel strength in compari￾son with unmodified epoxy. In fact, these effects go beyond reinforcement effect of 
several well-known inorganic nanofillers.
Stimuli-response nanocomposites respond to electric currents, light, temperature, 
magnetic field, pH changes, etc. (Ponnamma et al., 2019; Zarnegar et al., 2019; Li et al., 
2020;). Chen et al. (2020) reported production of a shape-memory nanocomposite with 
a rapid light response and self-healing performance from poly(ε-caprolactone)/thermo￾plastic polyurethane and used polydopamine nanospheres as active nanofiller provid￾ing the system a memory response shape effect to light with 100% ratio. Moreover, 
these nanocomposites showed superb self-healing effects in light irradiation for only 
150s and exhibited exceptional mechanical properties (tensile strength of 1.6MPa),
which makes them perfect for biomedical uses.
1.4 LIMITATIONS OF ORGANIC NANOFILLERS
A widespread test intended for every organic nanofiller to achieve the best possible 
performance of a nanocomposite is the homogeneous distribution of nanofillers in 
the polymer matrix (Melly et al., 2020).
On the other hand, CNC-based materials have some restrictions and drawbacks, 
such as moisture uptake/swelling, agglomeration of nanofillers, trouble in redispers￾ing agglomerated particles and inappropriateness amid hydrophobic polymers (See 
Table 1.1).
Earlier researchers indicated that in the bulk polymer nanocomposites, huge dis￾array was omnipresent and recommended incorporation of high aspect ratio nano￾fillers unproductive owing to the following: (i) troubles with agglomeration and 
dispersion and (ii) the prospective for customized molecular self-assembly concern￾ing a superior extent of ‘cooperation’ amid the nanofiller and matrix (Schaefer and 
Justice, 2007).
The addition of organic nanofillers resulted in drop of water vapor permeability 
of alginate-based nanocomposites (Abdollahi et al., 2013). Owing to the analogous 
polysaccharide structures, there were fine interfacial connections, and as a result, the 
tensile strength along with the elongation of nanocomposite films improved. Lastly, 
these outcomes suggested that organic CNP had the capability to create entirely 
renewable and natural nanocomposites compared with inorganic nanoclay fillers in 
the case of carbohydrate biopolymers.
1.5 FUTURE SCOPE OF ORGANIC NANOFILLERS
Single-component organic nanofillers have revealed a few restrictions in their per￾formance, which can be overcome through hybrid nanofillers with two or more dis￾similar components.12 Nanofillers
Organic nanofillers have enhanced prospects for lessening constraints in the use 
of nanocomposite films in food packaging.
Polymer nanocomposites demonstrate stupendous performance and bulk-pro￾cessing capabilities compared with usual composites because they are recyclable, 
lightweight and efficient even at small nanofiller loading. In particular, organic nano￾fillers with a high aspect ratio and low density are appealing for the reason that 
their consistent dispersal in a polymer medium provides an exceptional matrix/filler 
interface for improving thermal and/or mechanical properties of polymers, which 
in turn leads to lighter, cheaper, more environmentally friendly and more sustain￾able polymer nanocomposites. Nanocellulose, CNCs, rod-like shaped, can be found 
in the natural structure of cellulose fibers, which have a high aspect ratio and are 
almost defect-free, renewable and biocompatible. Adding together, CNCs are stiffer 
than Kevlar, and their mechanical properties are comparable to other reinforcements, 
even those with a low density. This is why there is still growing interest in sustainable 
cellulose materials.
Hence, there is a need for a more methodical and rigorous approach for nano￾composite researchers guided by a development in multistage theoretical modeling. 
Innovative experimental techniques need to be developed and applied to better probe 
and understand fine structures and conformations at the polymer–nanofiller interface. 
Also, there is a need to study possible environmental health and safety implications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Author wishes to express gratitude to the Director of the CSIR-Central Building 
Research Institute, Roorkee, for his constant encouragement.
REFERENCES
Abdollahi, M., Alboofetileh, M., Rezaei, M., & Behrooz, R. (2013). Comparing physico￾mechanical and thermal properties of alginate nanocomposite films reinforced with 
organic and/or inorganic nanofillers. Food Hydrocolloids, 32(2), 416–424.
Adel, A., El-Shafei, A., Ibrahim, A., & Al-Shemy, M. (2018). Extraction of oxidized nanocel￾lulose from date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) sheath fibers: Influence of CI and CII 
polymorphs on the properties of chitosan/bionanocomposite films. Ind. Crops Prod., 
124, 155–165.
Arifin, B., Aprilia, S., Alam, P. N., Mulana, F., Amin, A., Anaska, D. M., & Putri, D. E. (2018). 
Characterization nanofillers from agriculture waste for polymer nanocomposites rein￾forcement. MATEC Web of Conferences, 156, 05020.
Armentano, I., Puglia, D., Luzi, F., Arciola, C. R., Morena, F., Martino, S., & Torre, L. (2018). 
Nanocomposites based on biodegradable polymers. Materials, 11(5), 795. doi:10.3390/
ma11050795
Arroyo, P. G., Arrieta, M. P., Garcia, D. G., Rodriguez, R. C., Fombuena, V., Mancheno, M. J., 
& Segura, J. L. (2020). Plasticized poly(lactic acid) reinforced with antioxidant covalent 
organic frameworks (COFs) as novel nanofillers designed for non-migrating active pack￾aging applications. Polymer, 196, 122466.
Auad, M. L., Contos, V. S., Nutt, S., Aranguren, M. I., & Marcovich, N. E. (2008). 
Characterization of nanocellulose reinforced shape memory polyurethanes. Polym Int., 
57, 651–659.Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 13
Azarifar, M., Ghanbarzadeh, B., Khiabani, M. S., Basti, A. A., Abdulkhani, A., Noshirvani, N., 
& Hosseini, M. (2019). The optimization of gelatin-CMC based active films containing 
chitin nanofiber and Trachyspermum ammi essential oil by response surface methodol￾ogy. Carbohydr. Polym., 208, 457–468.
Beisl, S., Friedl, A., & Miltner, A. (2017a). Lignin from micro- to nanosize: Applications. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci., 18, 2367.
Beisl, S., Miltner, A., & Friedl, A. (2017b). Lignin from micro- to nanosize: Production 
Methods. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 18, 1244.
Bhoopathi, R., & Ramesh, M. (2020). Influence of eggshell nanoparticles and effect of alka￾lization on characterization of industrial hemp fibre reinforced epoxy composites. J. 
Polym. Environ., 28, 2178–2190.
Bitinis, N., Verdejo, R., Bras, J., Fortunati, E., Kenny, J. M., Torre, L., & López-Manchado, 
M. A. (2013). Poly(lactic acid)/natural rubber/cellulose nanocrystal bionanocomposites. 
Part I. Processing and morphology. Carbohyd Polym., 96(2), 611–620.
Chen, Y., Zhao, X., Luo, C., Yang, M. B., & Yin, B. (2020). A facile fabrication of shape mem￾ory polymer nanocomposites with fast light-response and self-healing performance. 
Compos. Part A: Appl. Sci. Manuf., 135, 105931.
Curvello, R., Raghuwanshi, V. S., & Garnier, G. (2019). Engineering nanocellulose hydrogels 
for biomedical applications. Adv. Coll. Interface Sci., 267, 47–61.
Dizhbite, T., Telysheva, G., Jurkjane, V., & Viesturs, U. (2004). Characterization of the radical 
scavenging activity of lignins-Natural antioxidants. Bioresour. Technol., 95, 309–317.
Elkhouly, H. I., Rushdi, M. A., & Magied, R. K. A. (2020). Eco-friendly date-seed nanofillers 
for polyethylene terephthalate composite reinforcement. Mater. Res. Express, 7, 025101 
https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/ab6daa
Even, N., Abramovich, L. A., Buzhansky, L., Dodiuk, H., & Gazit, E. (2011). Improvement of 
the mechanical properties of epoxy by peptide nanotube fillers. Small, 7(8), 1007–1011.
Fortunati, E., Benincasa, P., Balestra, G. M., Luzi, F., Mazzaglia, A., Del Buono, D., Puglia, 
D., & Torre, L. (2015). Revalorization of barley straw and husk as precursors for cel￾lulose nanocrystals extraction and their effect on PVA_CH nanocomposites. Ind. Crop. 
Prod., 92, 201–217.
Fortunati, E., Gigli, M., Luzi, F., Dominici, F., Lotti, N., Gazzano, M., Cano, A., Chiralt, A., 
Munari, A., Kenny, J. M., et al. (2017). Processing and characterization of nanocompos￾ite based on Poly(butylene/triethylene succinate) copolymers and cellulose nanocrystals. 
Carbohydr. Polym., 165, 51–60.
Fortunati, E., Luzi, F., Jiménez, A., Gopakumar, D.A., Puglia, D., Thomas, S., Kenny, J. M., 
Chiralt, A., & Torre, L. (2016). Revalorization of sunflower stalks as novel sources of 
cellulose nanofibrils and nanocrystals and their effect on wheat gluten bionanocompos￾ite properties. Carbohydr. Polym., 149, 357–368.
Fortunati, E., Puglia, D., Luzi, F., Santulli, C., Kenny, J. M., & Torre, L. (2013). Binary PVA 
bio-nanocomposites containing cellulose nanocrystals extracted from different natural 
sources: Part I. Carbohydr. Polym., 97, 825–836.
George, J., & Ishida, H. (2018). A review on the very high nanofiller-content nanocomposites: 
Their preparation methods and properties with high aspect ratio fillers. Prog. Polym. 
Sci., 86, 1–39.
George, J., & Sabapathi, S. N. (2015). Cellulose nanocrystals: Synthesis, functional properties, 
and applications. Nanotechnol Sci Appl, 8, 45–54.
Ghasemi, S., Amini, E. N., Tajvidi, M., Kiziltas, A., Mielewski, D. F., & Gardner, D. J. (2021). 
Flexible polyurethane foams reinforced with organic and inorganic nanofillers. J. Appl. 
Polym. Sci., 138, e49983.
Ghori, W., Saba, N., Jawaid, M., & Asim, M. (2018). A review on date palm (phoenix dac￾tylifera) fibers and its polymer composites. IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and 
Engineering, 368012009.14 Nanofillers
Guchait, A., Saxena, A., Chattopadhyay, S., & Mondal, T. (2022). Influence of nanofillers on 
adhesion properties of polymeric composites. ACS Omega, 7, 3844–3859.
Gupta, H., Aqil, M., Khar, R. K., Ali, A., Bhatnagar, A., & Mittal, G. (2010). Sparfloxacin￾loaded PLGA nanoparticles for sustained ocular drug delivery. Nanomed Nanotechnol 
Biol Med., 6, 324–333.
Hao, L. T., Eom, Y., Tran, T. H., Koo, J. M., Jegal, J., Hwang, S. Y., Oh, D. X., & Park, J. (2020). 
Rediscovery of nylon upgraded by interactive biorenewable nano-fillers. Nanoscale, 12, 
2393–2405.
Hassan, E. A., Hassan, M. L., Abou-zeid, R. E., & El-Wakil, N. A. (2016). Novel nanofibril￾lated cellulose/chitosan nanoparticles nanocomposites films and their use for paper coat￾ing. Ind. Crops Prod., 93, 219–226.
Huang, S., Wu, M. B., Zhu, C. Y., Ma, M. Q., Yang, J., Wu, J., & Xu, Z. K. (2019). Polyamide 
nanofiltration membranes incorporated with cellulose nanocrystals for enhanced water 
flux and chlorine resistance. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 7(14), 12315–12322.
Ilyas, R. A., Sapuan, S. M., Ishak, M. R., & Zainudin, E. S. (2018). Development and charac￾terization of sugar palm nanocrystalline cellulose reinforced sugar palm starch bionano￾composites. Carbohydr. Polym., 202, 186–202.
Jagadeesh, P., Puttegowda, M., Rangappa S. M., & Siengchin, S. (2021). Influence of nanofillers 
on biodegradable composites: A comprehensive review. Polym. Compos, 42(11), 5691.
Jamroz, E., Kulawik, P., & Kopel, P. (2019). The effect of nanofillers on the functional 
properties of biopolymer based films: A review. Polymers, 11(4), 675. doi:10.3390/
polym11040675
Jannatyha, N., Shojaee-Aliabadi, S., Moslehishad, M., & Moradi, E. (2020). Comparing 
mechanical, barrier and antimicrobial properties of nanocellulose/CMC and nanochito￾san/CMC composite films. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 164, 2323–2328.
Jayaramudu, T., Ko, H. U., Kim, H. C., Kim, J. W., Muthoka, R. M., & Kim J. (2018). 
Electroactive hydrogels made with polyvinyl alcohol/cellulose nanocrystals. Materials, 
11(9), 1615.
Kabeb, S. M., Hassan, A., Mohamad, Z., Sharer, Z., Mokhtar, M., & Ahmad, F. (2019). 
Exploring the effects of nanofillers of epoxy nanocomposite coating for sustainable cor￾rosion protection. Chem. Eng. Trans., 72, 121–126.
Kaboorani, A., Auclair, N., Riedl, B., & Landry, V. (2017). Mechanical properties of UV-cured 
cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) nanocomposite coating for wood furniture. Prog. Org. 
Coat., 104, 91–96.
Khalil, H. A., Mahayuni, A. R., Rudi, D., Almulali, M. Z., & Abdullah, C. K. (2012). Ash from 
palm biomass. BioResources, 7(4), 5771–5780.
Khalil, H. P. S. A., Bhat, A. H. I., & Yusra, A. F. (2012). Green composites from sustainable 
cellulose nanofibrils: A review. Carbohydr. Polym., 87, 963–979.
Li, M., Shi, Y., Gao, H., & Chen, Z. (2020). Bio-inspired nanospiky metal particles enable thin, 
flexible, and thermo-responsive polymer nanocomposites for thermal regulation. Adv. 
Funct. Mater., 30, 1910328.
Liao, Z., Fang, X., Li, Q., Xie, J., Ni, L., Wang, D., Sun, X., Wang, L., & Li, J. (2020). 
Resorcinol-formaldehyde nanobowls modified thin film nanocomposite membrane with 
enhanced nanofiltration performance. J. Membr. Sci., 594, 117468.
Lin, Y., Wu, H. C., Yasui, T., Yoshioka, T., & Matsuyama, H. (2019). Development of an 
HKUST-1 nanofiller templated poly(ether sulfone) mixed matrix membrane for a highly 
efficient ultrafiltration process. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 11(20), 18782–18796.
Ling, S., Chen, W., Fan, Y., Zheng, K., Jin, K., Yu, H., Buehler, M. J., & Kaplan, D. L. (2018). 
Biopolymer nanofibrils: Structure, modeling, preparation, and applications. Prog. 
Polym. Sci., 85, 1–56.
Liu, C., & Zhao, Q. (2011). Influence of surface-energy components of Ni-P-TiO2-PTFE 
nanocomposite coatings on bacterial adhesion. Langmuir, 27(15), 9512–9519.Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 15
Liu, L., Lyu, J., Mo, J., Yan, H., Xu, L., Peng, P., Li, J., Jiang, B., Chu, L., & Li, M. (2020). 
Comprehensively-upgraded polymer electrolytes by multifunctional aramid nanofibers 
for stable all-solid-state Li-ion batteries. Nano Energy, 69, 104398.
Lizundia, E., Fortunati, E., Dominici, F., Vilas, J. L., León, L. M., Armentano, I., Torre, L., & 
Kenny, J. M. (2016). PLLA-grafted cellulose nanocrystals: Role of the CNC content and 
grafting on the PLA bionanocomposite film properties. Carbohydr. Polym., 142, 105–113.
Luzi, F., Fortunati, E., Giovanale, G., Mazzaglia, A., Torre, L., & Balestra, G. M. (2017a). 
Cellulose nanocrystals from Actinidia deliciosa pruning residues combined with carva￾crol in PVA_CH films with antioxidant/antimicrobial properties for packaging applica￾tions. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 104, 43–55.
Luzi, F., Fortunati, E., Jiménez, A., Puglia, D., Chiralt, A., & Torre, L. (2017b). PLA nano￾composites reinforced with cellulose nanocrystals from posidonia oceanica and ZnO 
nanoparticles for packaging application. J. Renew. Mater., 5, 103–115.
Luzi, F., Fortunati, E., Jiménez, A., Puglia, D., Pezzolla, D., Gigliotti, G., Kenny, J. M., Chiralt, 
A., & Torre, L. (2016). Production and characterization of PLA_PBS biodegradable 
blends reinforced with cellulose nanocrystals extracted from hemp fibres. Ind. Crops 
Prod., 93, 276–289.
Ma, Q., Liang, T., Cao, L., & Wang, L. (2018). Intelligent poly (vinyl alcohol)-chitosan 
nanoparticles-mulberry extracts films capable of monitoring pH variations. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol., 108, 576–584.
Majeed, K., Jawaid, M., Hassan, A., Bakar, A. A., Khalil, H. P. S. A., Salema, A. A., & Inuwa, 
I. (2013). Potential materials for food packaging from nanoclay/natural fibres filled 
hybrid composites. Mater. Des., 46, 391–410.
Mariano, M., El Kissi, N., & Dufresne, A. (2014). Cellulose nanocrystals and related nano￾composites: Review of some properties and challenges. J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. 
Phys., 52, 791–806.
Mariano, M., Pilate, F., de Oliveira, F. B., Khelifa, F., Dubois, P., Raquez, J. M., & Dufresne, 
A. (2017). Preparation of cellulose nanocrystal-reinforced poly(lactic acid) nanocom￾posites through noncovalent modification with PLLA-based surfactants. ACS Omega, 
2(6), 2678–2688.
Medina, E., Caro, N., Abugoch, L., Gamboa, A., Díaz-Dosque, M., & Tapia, C. (2019). 
Chitosan thymol nanoparticles improve the antimicrobial effect and the water vapour 
barrier of chitosan-quinoa protein films. J. Food Eng., 240, 191–198.
Melly, S. K., Liu, L., Liu, Y., & Leng, J. (2020). Active composites based on shape memory 
polymers: Overview, fabrication methods, applications, and future prospects. J. Mater. 
Sci., 55, 10975–11051.
Miao, C., & Hamad, W. Y. (2019). Critical insights into the reinforcement potential of cellulose 
nanocrystals in polymer nanocomposites. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 23, 100761.
Moczo, J., & Pukanszky, B. (2008). Polymer micro and nanocomposites: Structure, interac￾tions, properties. J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 14(5), 535–563.
Naskar, S., Sharma, S., & Kuotsu, K. (2019). Chitosan-based nanoparticles: An overview of 
biomedical applications and its preparation. J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 49, 66–81.
Niamsap, T., Lam, N. T., & Sukyai, P. (2019). Production of hydroxyapatite-bacterial nanocel￾lulose scaffold with assist of cellulose nanocrystals. Carbohydr. Polym., 205, 159–166.
Olivera, S., Muralidhara, H. B., Venkatesh, K., Guna, V. K., Gopalakrishna, K., & Kumar, 
Y. (2016). Potential applications of cellulose and chitosan nanoparticles/composites in 
wastewater treatment: A review. Carbohydr. Polym., 153, 600–618.
Othman, S. H. (2014). Bio-nanocomposite materials for food packaging applications: Types of 
biopolymer and nano-sized filler. Agric. Agric. Sci. Procedia, 2, 296–303.
Oun, A. A., & Rhim, J. W. (2016). Isolation of cellulose nanocrystals from grain straws and 
their use for the preparation of carboxymethyl cellulose-based nanocomposite films. 
Carbohydr. Polym., 150, 187–200.16 Nanofillers
Pan, C., Qian, J., Fan, J., Guo, H., Gou, L., Yang, H., & Liang, C. (2019). Preparation nanopar￾ticle by ionic cross-linked emulsified chitosan and its antibacterial activity. Colloids 
Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Aspects, 568, 362–370.
Perumal, A. B., Sellamuthu, P. S., Nambiar, R. B., & Sadiku, E. R. (2018). Development of 
polyvinyl alcohol/chitosan bio-nanocomposite films reinforced with cellulose nanocrys￾tals isolated from rice straw. Appl. Surf. Sci., 449, 591–602.
Phanthong, P., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Xu, G., Abudula, A., & Guan, G. (2018). 
Nanocellulose: Extraction and application. Carbon Resour. Convers., 1, 32–43.
Ponnamma, D., Parangusan, H., Tanvir, A., & AlMa’adeed, M. A. A. (2019). Smart and robust 
electrospun fabrics of piezoelectric polymer nanocomposite for self-powering electronic 
textiles. Mater. Des., 184, 108176.
Poonguzhali, R., Basha, S. K., & Kumari, V. S. (2017). Synthesis and characterization of chito￾san-PVP-nanocellulose composites for in-vitro wound dressing application. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol., 105, 111–120.
Prihatiningtyas, I., Volodin, A., & Bruggen, B. V. (2019). Cellulose nanocrystals as organic 
nanofillers for cellulose triacetate membranes used for desalination by pervaporation. 
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 58(31), 14340–14349.
Rafieian, F., Shahedi, M., Keramat, J., & Simonsen, J. (2014). Thermomechanical and mor￾phological properties of nanocomposite films from wheat gluten matrix and cellulose 
nanofibrils. J. Food Sci., 79, N100–N107.
Rescignano, N., Fortunati, E., Montesano, S., Emiliani, C., Kenny, J. M., Martino, S., & 
Armentano, I. (2014). PVA bio-nanocomposites: A new take-off using cellulose nano￾crystals and PLGA nanoparticles. Carbohydr. Polym., 99, 47–58.
Rizal, S., Sadasivuni, K. K., Atiqah, M. S. N., Olaiya, N. G., Paridah, M. T., Abdullah, C. K., 
Alfatah, T., Mistar, E. M., & Khalil, H. P. S. A. (2021). The role of cellulose nanofi￾brillated fibers produced withcombined supercritical carbon dioxide and high-pressure￾homogenization process as reinforcement material inbiodegradable polymer. Polym. 
Compos., 42, 1795–1808.
Rueda, L., Saralegui, A., d’Arlas, B. F., Zhou, Q., Berglund, L. A., Corcuera, M. A., 
Mondragon, I., & Eceiza, A. (2013). Cellulose nanocrystals/polyurethane nanocompos￾ites. Study from the viewpoint of microphase separated structure. Carbohyd. Polym., 
92(1), 751–757.
Saba, N., Paridah, M. T., Abdan, K., & Ibrahim, N. A. (2016). Effect of oil palm nano filler on 
mechanical and morphological properties of kenaf reinforced epoxy composites. Constr. 
Build. Mater., 123, 15–26.
Saba, N., Tahir, P. M., & Jawaid, M. (2014). A review on potentiality of nano filler/natural fiber 
filled polymer hybrid composites. Polymers, 6, 2247–2273. doi:10.3390/polym6082247
Salih, S. I., Oleiwi, J. K., & Mohamed, A. S. (2018). Investigation of mechanical properties 
of PMMA composite reinforced with different types of natural powders. ARPN J. Eng. 
Appl. Sci., 13, 2–21.
Schaefer, D. W., & Justice, R. S. (2007). How nano are nanocomposites? Macromolecules, 
40 (24), 8501–8517.
Sen, A. K., & Kumar, S. (2010). Coir-fiber-based fire retardant nano filler for epoxy compos￾ites. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 101, 265–271.
Shankar, S., & Rhim, J. W. (2016). Preparation of nanocellulose from micro-crystalline cel￾lulose: The effect on the performance and properties of agar-based composite films. 
Carbohydr. Polym., 135, 18–26.
Sothornvit, R. (2019). Nanostructured materials for food packaging systems: New functional 
properties. Curr. Opin. Food Sci., 2, 82–87.
Thakur, V. K., Thakur, M. K., Raghavan, P., & Kessler, M.R. (2014). Progress in green polymer 
composites from lignin for multifunctional applications: A review. ACS Sustain. Chem. 
Eng., 2, 1072–1092.Organic Nanofillers and Their Classification Employed in Polymers 17
Tian, D., Hu, J., Bao, J., Chandra, R. P., Saddler, J. N., & Lu, C. (2017). Lignin valorization: 
Lignin nanoparticles as high-value bio-additive for multifunctional nanocomposites. 
Biotechnol. Biofuels, 10, 192.
Vahedikia, N., Garavand, F., Tajeddin, B., Cacciotti, I., Jafari, S. M., Omidi, T., & Zahedi, 
Z. (2019). Biodegradable zein film composites reinforced with chitosan nanoparticles 
and cinnamon essential oil: Physical, mechanical, structural and antimicrobial attributes. 
Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces, 177, 25–32.
Vatanpour, V., & Paziresh, S. (2022). A melamine-based covalent organic framework nanoma￾terial as a nanofiller in polyether sulfone mixed matrix membranes to improve separation 
and antifouling performance. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 139(1), e51428.
Wang, F., Arai, S., & Endo, M. (2004). Electrochemical preparation and characterization of 
nickel/ultra-dispersed PTFE composite films from aqueous solution. Mater. Trans., 45 
(4), 1311–1316.
Wang, Q., Li, G., Zhang, J., Huang, F., Lu, K., & Wei, Q. (2014). PAN nanofibers reinforced 
with mmt/go hybrid nanofillers. J. Nanomater., 2014, Article ID 298021, 10 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/298021
Wang, Y., Zhang, H., Song, C., Gao, C., & Zhu, G. (2020). Effect of aminophend/formalde￾hyde resin polymeric nanospheres as nanofiller on polyamide thin film nanocomposite 
membranes for reverse osmosis application. J. Membr. Sci., 614, 118496.
Wang, Z., Han, E., & Ke, W. (2006). Effect of nanoparticles on the improvement in fire-resis￾tant and anti-ageing properties of flame-retardant coating. Surf. Coat. Technol., 200(20), 
5706–5716.
Wu, T., Frydrych, M., O’Kelly, K., & Chen, B. (2014). Poly(glycerol sebacate urethane)-cellu￾lose nanocomposites with water-active shape-memory effects. Biomacromolecules, 15, 
2663–2671.
Xu, W., Qin, Z., Yu, H., Liu, Y., Liu, N., Zhou, Z., & Chen, L. (2013). Cellulose nanocrystals 
as organic nanofillers for transparent polycarbonate films. J. Nanopart. Res., 15(4), 1–8.
Yang, W., Dominici, F., Fortunati, E., Kenny, J. M., & Puglia, D. (2015a). Effect of lignin 
nanoparticles and masterbatch procedures on the final properties of glycidyl methac￾rylate-g-Poly(lactic acid) films before and after accelerated UV weathering. Ind. Crops 
Prod., 77, 833–844.
Yang, W., Fortunati, E., Dominici, F., Giovanale, G., Mazzaglia, A., Balestra, G. M., Kenny, J. 
M., & Puglia, D. (2016a). Effect of cellulose and lignin on disintegration, antimicrobial 
and antioxidant properties of PLA active films. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 89, 360–368.
Yang, W., Fortunati, E., Dominici, F., Giovanale, G., Mazzaglia, A., Balestra, G. M., Kenny, J. 
M., & Puglia, D. (2016b). Synergic effect of cellulose and lignin nanostructures in PLA 
based systems for food antibacterial packaging. Eur. Polym. J., 79, 1–12.
Yang, W., Fortunati, E., Gao, D., Balestra, G. M., Giovanale, G., He, X., Torre, L., Kenny, J. 
M., & Puglia, D. (2018). Valorization of acid isolated high yield lignin nanoparticles 
as innovative antioxidant/antimicrobial organic materials. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 6, 
3502–3514.
Yang, W., Kenny, J. M., & Puglia, D. (2015b). Structure and properties of biodegradable wheat 
gluten bionanocomposites containing lignin nanoparticles. Ind. Crops Prod., 74, 348–356.
Yang, W., Owczarek, J. S. S., Fortunati, E., Kozanecki, M., Mazzaglia, A., Balestra, G. M. M., 
Kenny, J. M. M., Torre, L., & Puglia, D. (2016c). Antioxidant and antibacterial lignin 
nanoparticles in polyvinyl alcohol/chitosan films for active packaging. Ind. Crops Prod., 
94, 800–811.
Yang, Y., Goh, K., Weerachanchai, P., & Bae, T. H. (2019). 3D covalent organic framework for 
morphologically induced high-performance membranes with strong resistance toward 
physical aging. J. Membr. Sci., 574, 235–242.
Youssef, A. M., & El-Sayed, S. M. (2018). Bionanocomposites materials for food packaging 
applications: Concepts and future outlook. Carbohydr. Polym., 193, 19–27.18 Nanofillers
Yuan, R., Wu, S., Yu, P. et al. (2016). Superamphiphobic and electroactive nanocomposite 
toward self-cleaning, antiwear, and anticorrosion coatings. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 
8(19), 12481–12493.
Zarnegar, Z., Safari, J., & Zahraei, Z. (2019). Design, synthesis and antimicrobial evaluation 
of silver decorated magnetic polymeric nanocomposites. Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 
19, 100368.
Zeng, J. B., He, Y. S., Li, S. L., & Wang, Y. Z. (2012). Chitin Whiskers: An overview. 
Biomacromolecules, 13(1), 1–11.
Zhang, S., Sun, G., He, Y., Fu, R., Gu, Y., & Chen, S. (2017). Preparation, characterization, and 
electrochromic properties of nanocellulose-based polyaniline nanocomposite films. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 9(19), 16426–16434.
Zhu, T. T., Zhou, C. H., Kabwe, F. B., Wu, Q. Q., Li, C. S., & Zhang, J. R. (2019). Exfoliation 
of montmorillonite and related properties of clay/polymer nanocomposites. Appl. Clay 
Sci., 169, 48–66.19
2 Dimension-Based 
Nanofillers
Synthesis and 
Characterization
Qazi Adfar
Vishwa Bharti Degree College
Mohammad Aslam and Shrikant S. Maktedar
National Institute of Technology
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-2
CONTENTS
2.1 Introduction.....................................................................................................20
2.1.1 NANO: The Small Size and Its Usefulness........................................ 21
2.2 Methods of Fabrication of Nanofillers............................................................23
2.2.1 Top–Down Methods............................................................................24
2.2.1.1 Synthesis of Nanoelectromechanical Systems.....................24
2.2.1.2 Lithographic Techniques......................................................24
2.2.1.3 Arc Discharge Method.........................................................26
2.2.1.4 Laser Ablation Method ........................................................26
2.2.1.5 Ball Milling Method ............................................................27
2.2.1.6 Inert Gas Condensation........................................................28
2.2.2 Bottom–Up Methods ..........................................................................30
2.2.2.1 Electrospinning....................................................................30
2.2.2.2 Hydrothermal Synthesis....................................................... 31
2.2.2.3 Sol–Gel Method................................................................... 33
2.2.2.4 Electrochemical Method......................................................34
2.2.2.5 Molecular Beam Epitaxy .....................................................36
2.2.2.6 Chemical Vapor Deposition Method....................................37
2.2.2.7 Microwave Method.............................................................. 41
2.2.2.8 Homogeneous Nucleation.................................................... 41
2.3 Characterization Techniques for Chemical Analysis of Nanofillers............... 43
2.3.1 X-Ray Diffraction...............................................................................44
2.3.2 Raman Spectroscopy ..........................................................................48
2.3.3 XPS Technique: X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy......................... 53
2.3.4 DLS Technique ...................................................................................5620 Nanofillers
2.1 INTRODUCTION
In the course of the evolution of mankind, technologies have come and gone. 
Technologies are so important that their names are given to the ages they were 
known for, for example, the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age, rather 
than the age of hunting, roaming for food, agriculture, urbanization, etc. One large 
difference between the present-day technology and the technology of the past lies in 
the time taken for the evolution of near-perfect or perfect technologies. The agrarian 
era, driven by the associated technologies of irrigation, tools, fertilizers, etc., took a 
few thousand years to evolve with the time period involved varying, as it depended 
on the geographical locations and the overall circumstances of particular regions.
The industrial age, which came just after the agrarian era, started around the 
1800s and took about 150 years to improve upon. By the middle of the 19th century, 
it was in full swing in Britain and then rapidly spread to Europe and North America. 
This, in turn, was replaced by the information technology revolution, marked by 
unprecedented capabilities in gathering, storing, retrieving, and analyzing informa￾tion, which finally shaped up into modern-day high-speed computing. We are still 
within that epoch, but the next revolution already appears to be on the horizon, and 
it has been named the nanorevolution (Figure 2.1).
Although technologies have come and gone, it is important to assess what they 
have given us. The industrial age of the 1900s gave us advanced agricultural prac￾tices like the use of chemical fertilizers, radio, TV, air conditioning cars, jets, planes, 
modern medicines, and fabrics. The information age has given us mobile phones, 
Internet, cable TV, e-mail, ATMS, administrative reforms, reduced distances, 
among other things, which has transformed our neighborhood completely. This age 
has removed the distinction between the king and the common man. The immense 
change in our lives has occurred due to science. Chemistry, on the whole, has been 
the driving force in the front, which has contributed to major changes in the 19th 
and 20th centuries. The large production of ammonia, sulfuric acid, dyes, polymers, 
plastics, petroleum products, etc., has changed the world. While this growth of chem￾istry was continuing, a major breakthrough occurred in 1947 in the field of physics, 
with the discovery of transistor. In the 1950s and beyond, the advent of semiconduc￾tor devices facilitated the development of consumer electronics. Everything that we 
2.4 Classification of Nanomaterials......................................................................60
2.4.1 Zero Dimensional (0-D) Nanomaterials.............................................60
2.4.2 One-Dimensional Nanomaterials....................................................... 61
2.4.3 Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials....................................................... 62
2.4.3.1 Properties and Applications................................................. 62
2.4.4 Three-Dimensional Nanomaterials.....................................................63
2.5 Functionally Graded Materials .......................................................................65
2.5.1 Introduction.........................................................................................65
2.5.2 FGM Types.........................................................................................66
2.5.3 FGM Applications ..............................................................................66
2.6 Conclusion ...................................................................................................... 67
Bibliography ............................................................................................................68Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 21
purchase today has an integrated circuit in it. Gadgets from toys to cars function 
with these circuits. This, along with computers, helped build an era of physics. Many 
predict that the next era would be of biology and materials. The next era seems to 
be all set to remove the barriers between humans and their surroundings. We can 
only wonder how the next era unfolds. With the evolution of nanoera in our laps, it is 
expected that more of the vast mysteries of nature are yet to be accomplished, which 
will open a new gateway for human beings to enter into a universe that they will have 
to rediscover with a new beginning.
Progress made in few decades has taken us deeper into the unending nature of 
matter as a whole, providing us with all kinds of new opportunities, possibilities, and 
abilities to achieve exciting and unimaginable technological advancements in multi￾disciplinary sciences for the benefit of mankind and novel civilization that we humans 
will be carving for ourselves, with the help of nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Basic nanoscience research has been in existence for over 20 years. Since then, 
many products have made their way into the market place. Nanotechnology has the 
potential to impact all the commercial products of today and tomorrow. It has poten￾tial to change our lifestyles to a great extent, and it is already being influenced by it.
The current nanorevolution is attributed not only to the recognition of its potential 
value but also to the availability of the tools and methods that allow scientists to 
explore the world at the nanoscale and transform their discoveries and inventions into 
various applications that practically benefits our everyday life.
2.1.1 NANO: The Small Size and Its Usefulness
The word “nano” is a Greek word meaning “dwarf.” The term nanoscale is used to 
refer to objects with dimensions of the order of 1–100 nanometers (nm). A nanome￾ter is one-billionth of a meter, 0.000000001, or 10–9m. Hence, in the international 
FIGURE 2.1 Technological revolutions in science. (Adapted from Nano-technology the sci￾ence of small-Wiley.)22 Nanofillers
system of units, the prefix “nano-” means one-billionth or 10–9m. It is difficult to 
imagine just how small “nano” is; so, here are some examples:
• A sheet of paper is about 100,000nm thick.
• There are 25,400,000nm in 1 inch.
• A strand of human hair is approximately 80,000–100,000 nm wide.
Some more illustrations are given in Figures 2.2 and 2.3.
A nanometer is used to measure things that are very small. Atoms and molecules, 
the smallest pieces of everything around us, are measured in nanometers. For exam￾ple, a water molecule is less than 1 nm, and our DNA is in the 2.5-nm range. The size 
of nanomaterials or nanofillers is similar to that of most biological molecules and 
structures. Nanoparticles exist in the natural world and are also created as a result 
FIGURE 2.2 Nanoscale biomolecules and nanostructures. (Adapted from ResearchGate.)
FIGURE 2.3 Ten hydrogen atoms placed side by side to make 1 nm. (Adapted from Wiley.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 23
of human activities. Because of their submicroscopic size, they have unique material 
characteristics. The nanoscale effects on properties are as follows:
• They show better catalytic efficiency through a higher surface area-to-vol￾ume ratio.
• Their electrical conductivity is high.
• They have high magnetic coercivity and paramagnetic behavior.
• They show a spectral shift of the optical region.
• They show high permeability through biological barriers and are biocompatible.
• They exhibit high hardness and toughness of metals and alloys.
For their novel and unique properties, which do not exist in their bulk forms, 
nanoparticles are also engineered and designed for various applications. They are 
used in many commercial products and processes such as sunscreens, cosmetics, 
sports goods, stain-resistant clothing, tires, and electronics. Nanomaterials are also 
of paramount importance for biologists and medical students. Biological structures 
are within the nanosize range, which researchers are now able to manipulate and 
control. Therefore, nanomaterials can be used both in in vivo and in vitro biomedi￾cal research and applications. They are used in medicine for purposes of diagnosis, 
imaging, and drug delivery.
Nowadays, the role of nanomaterials or nanofillers has become so significant in 
technological advancements that various modern techniques have been developed to 
fabricate them, some of which are based on earlier concepts, while some are designed 
on modern lines.
2.2 METHODS OF FABRICATION OF NANOFILLERS
Nanofabrication involves the manufacture of nanofillers or nanostructures that are 
products with zero, one, two, or three dimensions in the nanometer range, which 
most commonly find applications in fields of industry, agriculture, food industry, and 
biomedical technology.
Two different paths are pursued for nanofabrication:
One is the top–down approach of miniaturizing, or in engineering terms, it is 
simply a scaling down process. This process is essentially subtractive. A material is 
removed from bulk blocks by grinding, ball milling, crushing, etc., or even carving a 
block of wood or sculpturing are examples of a top–down method. In the top–down 
method, there is a certain amount of waste materials.
The second approach is called the bottom–up method in which the molecular 
bulk is synthesized atom by atom, and it is similar to building a house brick by brick. 
Nanofabrication of nanofillers is carried out by either of these two methods. In gen￾eral, the bottom–up approach is meant to be the synthesis of nanoparticles by means 
of chemical reactions among atoms/ions/molecules, whereas the top–down method 
involves the mechanical methods of crushing/breaking of bulk into several parts to 
form nanoparticles.24 Nanofillers
2.2.1 Top–Down Methods
2.2.1.1 Synthesis of Nanoelectromechanical Systems
The main advantage of the top–down approach in nanofabrications is the fabrication 
of integrated circuits, where the parts are both patterned and built in place, so that 
no assembly step is needed, e.g., nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMSs). In these 
systems, small mechanical components such as levers, springs, and fluid channels 
along with electronic circuits are embedded into a small chip. The starting materials 
in these fabrications are relatively large structures such as silicon crystals.
The increased sensitivity achieved by NEMSs leads to smaller and more efficient 
sensors to detect stresses, vibrations, forces at the atomic level, and chemical sig￾nals. Atomic force microscope (AFM) tips and other detection at nanoscale heavily 
depend on the NEMS (Figure 2.4).
2.2.1.2 Lithographic Techniques
The most common top–down approach involves lithographic patterning tech￾niques, which use short-wavelength optical sources, such as extreme ultraviolet and 
X-rays. These are being developed to allow lithographic printing techniques to reach 
FIGURE 2.4 Tip-based nanofabrication of NEMS devices. (Adapted from springer link.) 
NEMS, nanoelectromechanical system.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 25
dimensions from 10 to 100 nm. Scanning beam techniques such as electron beam 
lithography provides patterns down to about 20 nm (Figure 2.5).
Lithography has few more types depending on the kind of source used for the 
top–down process, viz., focused ion beam and neutral atom beam lithography, nano￾imprint lithography, AFM nanolithography, and electron beam lithography.
Electron beam lithography has the advantage that it can write custom patterns 
with sub-10-nm resolution and low throughput; this, at the same time, limits its usage 
to photomask fabrication, low-volume production of semiconductor devices, and 
research development.
Overall, lithography is considered a hybrid approach because the etching process 
is a top–down approach, whereas the growth of nanolayers involves the bottom–up 
approach.
FIGURE 2.5 Photolithography process steps. (Adapted from ScienceDirect.) (a) Coating 
of photoresistant material on the substrate, mask placed over the upper layer and exposed to 
UV radiations. (b) Resist development and stripping. (c) Ion etching process. (d) Final QD 
structure after process.26 Nanofillers
2.2.1.3 Arc Discharge Method
The arc discharge method was attempted for the first time in 1992 by Y. Ando for the 
synthesis of CNTs. In this direct current, arc voltage is applied across two graphite 
electrodes immersed in an inert gas such as He. When pure graphite rods are used, 
fullerenes are deposited as a soot inside the chamber, and multiwalled carbon nano￾tubes (MWCNTs) are deposited on the cathode. When a graphite anode containing a 
metal catalyst (Fe or Co) is used with a pure graphite cathode, single-walled carbon 
nanotubes (SWCNTs) are generated in the form of soot (Figure 2.6).
2.2.1.4 Laser Ablation Method
The laser ablation method is a method for fabricating various kinds of nanoparticles, 
including semiconductor quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, nanowires, and core–
shell nanoparticles. In this method, nanoparticles are generated by nucleation and 
growth of laser-vaporized species in a background gas, or in a vacuum chamber. The 
most common background gas in this process is oxygen. Laser ablation is commonly 
utilized to synthesize various carbon nanomaterials, such as CNTs and fullerences. 
Kroto, Curl, and Smalley synthesized fullerenes (C) by vaporizing graphite via 
pulsed laser irradiation. Sun et al. were one of the first to apply laser ablation to a 
carbon source to produce CDs. These nanoparticles only became CDs after surface 
passivation with poly(ethylene glycol) and poly(propionylethylene imine-co-ethylene 
imine).
FIGURE 2.6 Simplest setup of the arc discharge method, technique for CNT synthesis. 
(Adapted from ResearchGate.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 27
The laser ablation technique provides an alternative to the conventional metal 
reduction method to form metal-based NPs. NPs produced by this method require no 
chemical/stabilizing agents during synthesis (Figure 2.7).
2.2.1.5 Ball Milling Method
Ball milling is a mechanical technique that is broadly used to grind powders into 
fine particles. In ball milling, reactants are broken by mechanical forces; hence, the 
term “mechanochemistry” has been introduced in this regard. Usually, ceramics, 
fling pebbles, and stainless steel are used as tiny rigid balls in a concealed container, 
which generate localized high pressure in the ball mill device. It is simply a size 
reduction technique that uses media in a rotating cylinder chamber to mill materials 
to a fine nanopowder, e.g., high-energy ball milling is used to prepare nickel–ferrite 
(NiFe2O4) nanopowders. High-energy ball milling (HEBM) of the mixture of alpha￾NiO and alpha Fe2O3, followed by annealing at 1000°C, was carried out to synthesize 
nickel–ferrite nanoparticles.
The main advantages of this method are that it can be applied on the large scale 
also. A large number of elemental and metal oxide nanocrystals like Co, Cr, Al, Fe, 
Ag-Fe, and Fe can be prepared including a variety of intermetallic compounds Ni 
and Al. By using this method, ultra-five poly(methyl methacrylate) PMMA can also 
be synthesized.
The formation of nanostructures requires a ball velocity of >5m/s and a frequency 
of >1000 cycles/min. However, these powders have a low surface dispersed size dis￾tribution, and they are highly reactive to oxygen hydrogen and nitrogen.
FIGURE 2.7 Synthesis of nanoparticles by laser ablation method. (Adapted from 
ResearchGate.)28 Nanofillers
The ball milling technique is used to synthesize NPs from a diverse range of mate￾rials, such as metals, metal oxides, ceramics, and polymers, as shown in Figure 2.8:
2.2.1.6 Inert Gas Condensation
Inert gas condensation involves the vaporization of metal or inorganic materials from 
a vaporizing source in the presence of an inert gas atmosphere, followed by rapid 
condensation of the vaporized atoms of the metal or inorganic material on a cold 
surface to form nanoparticles (Figure 2.9).
This system comprises an ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) chamber, which acts as a 
container, having the metal or inorganic substance in a solid or liquid form. The 
container has one of the vaporization techniques deployed in them. When started, the 
contents in the container are converted into a gaseous state. Inert gas introduced into 
the UHV chamber. An outlet tube takes the vapor out of the chamber, which is kept 
cool by using liquid nitrogen. This allows the collection and rapid condensation of 
the particles. When the collection procedure is completed, nanoparticles and nano￾composites drop down into the collecting funnel and then into the chamber, where 
these nanoparticles and nanocomposites are treated with low- and high-pressure 
compaction units, respectively, to make sure the desired physical properties.
FIGURE 2.8 (a) HEBM system and (b) schematic representation of the NP synthesis using 
the HEBM method with and without surfactants. (Adapted from ResearchGate.) HEBM, 
high-energy ball milling.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 29
The method can synthesize Co, Mn, Mo, Fe, and Zn like Fe-Cu and Fe-Ni. 
Different nanomaterials like intermetallic compounds, semiconductors, and ceramic 
composites are also prepared. The method has many advantages, and a major advan￾tage is that the size and shape of nanoparticles can be controlled by different factors, 
such as the pressure of the chamber, the inert gas injected into the chamber, and the 
temperature.
FIGURE 2.9 Inert gas condensation technique for synthesis of nanoparticles. (Adapted 
from nano graphi.com.)30 Nanofillers
2.2.2 Bottom–Up Methods
2.2.2.1 Electrospinning
The electrospinning method is used to generate a nonwoven web of micro- or nanofi￾bers. In this method, high-voltage electricity is applied to the liquid solution and the 
collector. The solution ejects from the nozzle of the solution reservoir in the form of 
a jet, which form fibers on drying and are then deposited on the collector, as shown 
in the Figure 2.10:
In electrospinning, electrical forces at the surface of a precursor polymer or 
metal solution cause a charge jet to be ejected from the solution. As the jet dries 
and solidifies, the charged fibers are accelerated and directed by an electrical force 
and collected on a suitable surface. This method produces amorphous fibers, and 
the fibrous mat is packed or posttreated if needed, e.g., in the production of the 
TiO2/PVP composite, pyrolysis of PVP at 500°C yields porous TiO2 nanofibers. 
Electrospinning is a simple and versatile method for preparation of long polymer 
fibers, e.g., polyacrylonitrile nanofibers and polyethylene oxides, which are embed￾ded with nanoparticles or nanowires and organic–inorganic hybrid fibers, e.g., TiO2
polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) composite, used for a wide range of applications, 
including optics, microelectronics, and protective clothing. Nanofibers prepared 
using traditional single-needle electrospinning methods have found broad applica￾tions and have prospects in many fields, e.g., textile, filtration, energy, biomedicine, 
sensing, and protection. However, the solution flow rate during the single-needle 
electrospinning process generally varies from 0.1 to 0.3 mL/h, which results in 
very low nanofiber production. Therefore, to improve the yield of nanofibers and 
to take their production on large scale, researchers have developed multineedle 
FIGURE 2.10 Electrospinning. (Adapted from ScienceDirect.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 31
electrospinning devices to obtain more jets and thus increase the yield of nanofibers, 
as shown in Figure 2.11.
2.2.2.2 Hydrothermal Synthesis
The term “hydrothermal” is purely of geological origin. It was first coined by British 
geologist Sir Roderick Murchison to describe the action of water under elevated tem￾perature and pressure in bringing changes in the earth crust, leading to the formation 
of various rocks and minerals.
In the hydrothermal synthesis of nanomaterials, the hydrothermal method is 
based on the ability of water and aqueous solution to dilute the substances at high 
temperatures and pressures, which are practically insoluble under normal conditions. 
These include oxides, silicates, and sulfides. This method leads to the formation of 
single crystals, which depends on the solubility of minerals in hot water under high 
pressure. Crystal growth is performed in an apparatus consisting of a steel pressure 
vessel called an autoclave, in which a nutrient is supplied along with water/solvent. It 
is heated externally, and the pressure is generated in it internally (Figure 2.12).
The autoclave is washed with double-distilled water, and nutrient is placed in its 
lower part. It is filled with a specific amount of solvent and is heated in a furnace up 
to a desired temperature (not more than 300°C), and two temperature zones are cre￾ated. The nutrient dissolves in the hotter zone, and the saturated aqueous solution in 
the lower part is transported to the upper part of the autoclave by connection motion 
of the solution. The cooler and denser solution in the upper part of the autoclave 
FIGURE 2.11 Active generation of multiple jets for producing nanofibers with high quality 
and high throughput. (Adapted from ScienceDirect.)32 Nanofillers
descends, while the counter flow of the solution ascends. The solution in the auto￾clave becomes supersaturated in the upper region, and the crystallization process 
takes place (Figure 2.13).
The main advantage of the hydrothermal method is that most of the materials can 
be dissolved in an appropriate solvent by modulating the temperature and pressure. 
This technique links all the important technologies like geotechnology, biotechnol￾ogy, and nanotechnology. It has become one of the most important tools for advanced 
materials processing and find applications in electronics, optoelectronics, catalysis, 
ceramics, magnetic data storage, biomedicine, biophotonics, etc. The technique 
offers a unique method for coating of various compounds on metals, polymers, and 
ceramics as well as for the fabrication of powders and bulk ceramic bodies.
FIGURE 2.12 Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave used in hydrothermal synthesis. 
(Adapted from ScienceDirect.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 33
2.2.2.3 Sol–Gel Method
The interest in sol–gel processing can be traced back to the mid-1800 with the obser￾vation that the hydrolysis of tetraethyl orthosilicate under acidic conditions led to the 
formation of SiO2 in the form of fibers and monoliths, and later, it was developed in 
1950s for the production of radioactive powders of UO2 and ThO2 for nuclear fuels. 
In the 1990s, it became so important that about 35,000 papers were published world￾wide through this process. Since then, an intensive and extensive research has been 
carried out in this regard. The area of technology covered by this method ranges 
from physics to biology.
The sol–gel process is a wet chemical technique also known as chemical solu￾tion deposition, which involves several steps that are as follows: hydrolysis, polycon￾densation, gelation, aging, drying, densification, and crystallization (as illustrated in 
Figure 2.14).
In this chemical procedure, a “sol” (i.e. a colloidal solution) is formed, which 
gradually evolves in the formation of a gel-like diphasic system containing both liq￾uid and solid phases whose morphologies range from discrete particles to continuous 
polymer networks. In case the particle density is very low, a significant amount of liq￾uid may need to be removed initially for the gel-like properties to be recognized. This 
can be accomplished in any number of ways. The simplest method is to allow time 
for sedimentation to occur and then pour off the remaining liquid. Centrifugation 
FIGURE 2.13 Experimental setup of TiO2 thin film formation using hydrothermal method. 
(Adapted from ResearchGate.)34 Nanofillers
can also be used to accelerate the process of phase separation. Removal of remaining 
liquid (i.e., solvent) requires a drying process, which is typically accompanied by a 
significant amount of shrinkage and densification. The rate at which the solvent is 
removed ultimately determines the porosity in the gel and, hence, its microstructure. 
Afterward, thermal treatment, or firing process, is conducted, if necessary, in order 
to favor further polycondensation for enhancement of mechanical properties and 
structural stability via final sintering, densification, and grain growth.
The sol–gel method has the following advantages:
• It is a low-cost method and is energy-saving due to low annealing 
temperature.
• The obtained nanoparticles have good uniformity and high porosity. Even 
small quantities of dopants, such as organic dyes and rare earth elements, 
can be introduced into the sol to end up uniformly dispersed in the final 
product.
• Sol–gel-derived materials have diverse applications in optics, electronics, 
energy, space, biosensors, medicine (e.g., controlled drug release), reactive 
material, and separation technology (e.g., chromatography). They are used 
in ceramics, casting materials, or as a means of producing very thin films 
of metal oxides for various purposes, such as coating fibers and glasses to 
synthesize powders (e.g., microspheres and nanospheres).
2.2.2.4 Electrochemical Method
The electrochemical deposition technique has been widely used for the synthesis of 
metal nanoparticles. Electrochemical deposition occurs at the interface of an elec￾trolyte solution containing the metal to be deposited and an electrically conductive 
metal substrate. It is a potentially low-cost technique and has high product yield. 
FIGURE 2.14 Different sol–gel process steps to control the final morphology of the prod￾uct. (Adapted from ResearchGate.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 35
It gives yield at low synthetic temperatures with high purity, contamination with by￾products resulting from chemical reduction agents is avoided, and the products are 
easy to isolate from the precipitate. Besides all these advantages, the electrochemical 
method is also environmentally friendly. Therefore, electrochemical synthesis repre￾sents a highly efficient method for the fabrication of nanostructured energy materials 
and various nanostructures such as nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, 
nanosheets, dendritic nanostructures, and composite nanostructures.
The electrochemical techniques are quite interesting because they allow obtain￾ing particles with high purity using fast and simple procedures. More importantly, 
by this method, the particle size and shape are controlled by modulating numer￾ous parameters such as current density, solvent polarity, charge flow, and distance 
between electrodes and temperature. All these parameters are critical for control￾ling particle size and shape selectivity of the electrochemical synthesis process. For 
instance,
• In case of Pd, NPs size from about 1 up to 5 nm is tuned using tempera￾ture, charge flow, and current density-variable parameters. This approach 
has also been used to synthesize bimetallic NPs including Ni-Pd, Fe-Co, 
and Fe-Ni.
• Cobalt NPs with a tunable average particle size from 2 to 7 nm have been 
synthesized electrochemically in the presence of tetraalkyl ammonium 
salts.
• Ni- and Rh-structured catalysts were prepared by electrosynthesis of 
hydrotalcite-type compounds on FeCrAlY foam, followed by calcina￾tion. The film coating growth and the morphology of the final catalytic 
layer were controlled by the applied potential and deposition time. By 
tuning the deposition parameters, it was possible to prepare Ni- and 
Rh-based catalysts, which are very active in steam reforming and 
catalytic partial oxidation of methane. In this study, CdS NPs with an 
average size of 5 nm have also been synthesized by using the one-step 
electrochemical process.
• Noble metal nanoparticles have been intensely investigated due to their 
excellent optical, catalytic, and electric properties; for example, metallic sil￾ver NPs are technologically important because they show unique properties 
normally related to noble metals such as excellent conductivity, chemical 
stability, and nonlinear optical behavior; besides, they exhibit impressive 
antibacterial action.
• An electrochemical procedure, based on the dissolution of a metallic 
anode in an aprotic solvent, has been used to obtain silver nanoparticles 
ranging from 2 to 7 nm. By changing the current density and by using 
different kinds of counterelectrodes, different particle sizes of silver NPs 
were obtained.
• Different stabilizers have been used in electrochemical techniques, which 
include organic monomers as electrostatic stabilizers, and polymeric com￾pounds as steric stabilizers; the latter has been shown to obtain more stable 
NPs, e.g., polyethylene glycol-stabilized silver has been found to be highly 36 Nanofillers
stable and effectively controlling the size and shape of silver NPs through￾out the electrochemical process.
• Flower-like AuPt alloy nanoparticles were successfully synthesized using a 
one-step electrochemical reduction method at a low potential of −0.30V (vs 
Pt) and a low temperature of 30°C. In this process, the deep eutectic solvent 
(DES) called a new-generation green solvent, acted as a solvent and shape￾directing agent. Moreover, the electrode modified with the as-prepared 
nanomaterials were used as the anode for the electrochemical oxidation 
synthesis. The glassy carbon electrode modified with the Aupt nanoflowers 
was directly employed to the electro-oxidation of xanthene (XT) to xan￾thone (XO) under a constant low potential of 0.80V (vs Ag/AgCl) and room 
temperature, with high yield of XO. Moreover, the synthesis process was 
milder and more environment-friendly than conventional organic synthesis, 
as shown in Figure 2.15:
• Yet another interesting electrochemical synthesis was carried out by Ye 
et al. (2017). In this study, selenium NPs were prepared using a selenium 
powder-doped carbon paste electrode. Se NPs formed were spherical with a 
diameter of about 43, 60, and 85 nm and were well dispersed in the presence 
of sucrose, polyvinylpyrrolidone, and sodium dodecyl sulfonate, respec￾tively. Surprisingly, when cetane trimethyl ammonium bromide was added 
to Se NPs modified with sodium dodecyl sulfonate, the spherical Se NPs 
arranged in a sea urchin-like form by electrostatic assembly, as shown in 
Figure 2.16.
2.2.2.5 Molecular Beam Epitaxy
Molecular beam epitaxy is a process in which a thin single crystal layer is deposited 
on a single crystal substrate using atomic or molecular beams generated in Knudsen 
cells contained in a UHV chamber. A Knudsen cell is an effusion evaporator source 
FIGURE 2.15 Schematic illustration of the preparation of AuPt NFs and the electrochemi￾cal synthesis of XO from XT. (Adapted from ResearchGate.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 37
for relatively low-partial pressure elementary source (e.g., Ga. Al, Hg, and As) 
because in this, it is easy to control temperature. This setup is combined with a set 
of in situ tools such as Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) and/or the reflection high 
electron diffraction (RHEED) for characterization of deposited layers during growth. 
In a solid source MBE, ultrapure elements such as gallium and arsenic are heated 
in separate quasi-Knudsen effusion cells until they begin to slowly evaporate. The 
evaporated elements then condense on the wafer, where they may react with each 
other. In the case of gallium and arsenic, single crystal gallium arsenide is formed. 
The term beam simply means that evaporated atoms do not interact with each other 
or any other vacuum chamber gases until they reach the wafer due to a long mean 
force path of beam. The substance is rotated to ensure uniform growth over its sur￾face. By operating mechanical shutters in front of the cells, it is possible to control 
which semiconductor on metal is deposited (Figure 2.17).
2.2.2.6 Chemical Vapor Deposition Method
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a vacuum deposition method used to produce 
high-quality and high-performance solid materials of various structures. The process 
is often used in the semiconductor industry to produce thin films. In typical CVD, the 
wafer is exposed to one or more volatile processors, which react and/or decompose 
on the substrate surface to produce a desired deposit. Frequently volatile by-products 
are also produced, which are removed by gas flow through the reaction chamber.
Microfabrication processes widely use CVD to deposit materials in various forms, 
including nanocrystalline, polycrystalline, amorphous, and epitaxial films and coat￾ing. The method is also used to fabricate carbon nanofillers such as fibers, nanofibers, 
nanotubes CNTs, diamond, and graphene. Besides, numerous inorganic materials are 
synthesized, which have a wide range of applications.
FIGURE 2.16 Electrochemical synthesis of Se NPs and the formation of sea urchin-like 
assembly due to electrostatic influences. (Adapted from ScienceDirect.com)38 Nanofillers
For example, in the preparation of CNTs, CVD involves the cleavage of a carbon 
atom containing gas continuously flowing through the catalyst nanoparticles to gen￾erate carbon atoms and subsequent synthesis of CNTs on the surface of the catalyst 
or the substrate. The reaction is carried out at a sufficiently high temperature in a 
tubular reactor.
Mechanism: When a hydrocarbon vapor is contacted with the heated metal 
nanoparticles, it is first decomposed to carbon and hydrogen. Hydrogen leaves with 
FIGURE 2.17 Molecular beam epitaxy showing growth with nearly monolayer precision. 
(Adapted from deep phase.com)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 39
the passing carrier gas or reducing gas, and carbon dissolves in the metal catalyst. 
When the temperature reaches the carbon solubility limit of the metal, the decom￾posed carbon particles are precipitated and crystallize to CNTs. For growth of CNTs, 
currently, there are two widely accepted mechanisms, depending on the interaction 
between the catalyst and the substrate.
• When the catalyst interacts weakly with the substrate, it entirely promotes 
the growth of metal nanoparticles. When these are entirely covered with 
excess carbon, growth stops. This is called “tip growth,” as shown in 
Figure 2.18.
• When the catalyst interacts strongly with the substrate, carbon precipitates 
from the top of the metal without pushing up the metal particles. This is 
called the “basic growth model,” which is also called the “root growth 
model,” as shown in Figure 2.18.
During the synthesis of CNTs, many parameters affect the final morphology and 
properties of CNTs such as reactor temperature, system pressure, flow rate of carrier 
FIGURE 2.18 Synthesis of carbon nanotubes by catalytic CVD-illustrating two growth 
model diagrams for CNTs (alpha)-showing tip growth mechanism and (beta)-showing root 
growth mechanism. (Adapted from researchgate.net) CVD, chemical vapor deposition.40 Nanofillers
gas, deposition time, reactor type, the geometry of the reactor, catalyst support, and 
active metal components in the catalyst. Moreover, the concentration of the carbon 
source gas also has an impact on the properties of CNTs. If the concentration is too 
high, too many CNTs can be wrapped by amorphous carbon and carbon nanopar￾ticles, resulting in a rough product surface.
CVD is considered a viable method in terms of yield, purity, structural control, 
and growth parameters.
Some popular transition metal nanoparticles that are usually used as catalysts in 
CVD synthesis of CNTs are Fe, Pd, Pt, Au, Mn, Ti, W, Co, Mg, Al, In, Na, K, Cs, 
and Ni (Figure 2.19).
Typical growth temperatures are 550°C–750°C for MWCNTs and 850°C–1000°C 
for SWCNTs. Synthetic SWCNTs usually require nanosized particles as catalysts; 
however, MWCNTs can be produced without catalyst. At present, the preparation 
process of MWCNTs is quite mature, and its industrial production has been realized 
by using the CVD method.
It is possible to grow CNTs in plasma without using a catalyst, with an excep￾tion in the growth of CNTs on SiGe islands on the Si substrate using methane and 
hydrogen.
SWCNTs can be synthesized from methane, benzene, phenylacetylene, fuller￾enes, and cyclohexcane as a carbon source.
For example, in 2002, Maruyam et al. reported synthesis of high-purity SWCNTs 
from ethanol on a double-impregnated zeolite matrix at low temperatures. In this, 
CNTs produced have no amorphous carbon.
In 2015, Zdrejek et al. demonstrated that CVD can be used to synthesize high￾quality SWCNTs and MWCNTs at a range of temperatures using propane as a car￾bon source. By adjusting the growth temperature, the volume of CNTs could be 
controlled.
FIGURE 2.19 Growth of CNTs using CVD method. (Adapted from Intech open.) CVD, 
chemical vapor deposition.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 41
Besides, these CNTs can be successfully synthesized by using the CVD method 
from camphor (Kumar et al 2020.) with kerosene, liquefied petroleum, gas, natural 
gas, waste plastics, green grass, and other daily raw materials as a carbon source.
2.2.2.7 Microwave Method
Microwave synthesis has been employed in the synthesis of nanoparticles as it com￾bines the advantage of speed and homogeneous heating of the precursor materials. 
Microwave irradiation has penetration characteristics, which makes it possible to 
homogeneously heat up the reaction solution. The result is uniform nucleation and 
rapid crystal growth, which lead to the formation of crystallites that have narrow 
size distribution. Compared to other methods, the synthesis of microwave irradiation 
has the advantage of short time of reaction, which is ascribed to the combined forces 
created by both electric and magnetic components of the microwave, which generate 
friction and collision of molecules. Microwaves are selective in approach, i.e., they 
are absorbed by molecules having an electric dipole.
Microwave energy has the potential to selectively heat either the solvent or the 
precursor molecules for nanomaterial preparation, e.g., the template of microwave 
synthesis of silver nitrate and starch solution (Nanofibers-by Brijesh Kumar). Starch 
acts as a reductant as well as a capping material to protect the nanoparticles at the 
surfaces and prevents the particles from aggregation.
• Zuliani et al. made use of a monomode microwave reactor, in which the 
magnetite metallic nickel nanoparticles were synthesized by using simple 
nickel chloride as a precursor, ethylene glycol as a solvent, and ethanol as a 
reducing agent. They achieved metallic nickel in 5 minutes at 250°C under 
MW conditions, which showed high catalytic activity for the hydrogenolysis 
of benzyl phenyl ether.
• May-Masnon et al. utilized microwave energy and nanotechnology, which 
improved the printability of cotton prints. This was carried out by making 
use of the screen printing technique. They pre-treated each cotton sample 
separately by microwave power in the range of 300–700W for a period of 
1–9 minutes, followed by printing using the paste dye Remazol and silver 
nanoparticles of various concentrations. This was again followed by fixing 
with MW energy and further subjected to streaming or thermal fixation. 
The results indicated that the prints obtained by using microwave and Ag 
NPs were found to have better color, strength, fastness, antibacterial behav￾ior, and surface morphology than conventional techniques.
Reports on microwave-assisted synthesis have been well documented since last five 
decades, which includes reactions illustrated in Figure 2.20.
2.2.2.8 Homogeneous Nucleation
When the concentration of a solute in a solvent exceeds its equilibrium solubility 
or the temperature decreases below the phase transformation point, a new phase 
appears. At this point, the solution possesses a high Gibbs free energy, and the 42 Nanofillers
overall energy of the system would be reduced by segregating solute from the 
solution. This reduction of Gibbs free energy is the driving force for both nucle￾ations and growth. Homogeneous nucleation is also responsible for the formation 
of particles from the vapor phase. In this process, vapor atoms or molecules are 
transformed into solid particles in a supersaturated vapor without the presence of 
foreign substances.
The formation of nuclei within its own melt with the help of foreign substances or 
substrate is known as heterogeneous nucleation. This probably occurs at structural 
inhomogeneties, e.g., container surfaces, impurities, grain boundaries, and disloca￾tions, whereas homogeneous nucleation occurs when nuclei form uniformly through￾out the parent phase.
Homogeneous nucleation is yet another method to synthesis various NPs, viz., Au, 
Ag, CdS, TiO2, SiO3, Zn, and Fe2O3 (Figure 2.21).
For example:
• Gold NPs are synthesized by gradually adding aqueous solution of sodium 
citrate to chloroauric acid at 80°C till the color of the solution turns red. 
This change in color indicates the formation of gold nanoparticles.
• Silver NPs are prepared by gradually adding aqueous solution of sodium 
citrate to aqueous AgNO3 by stirring for 1hour at 80°C. The clear solution 
turns gold yellow, indicating the formation of silver nanoparticles.
FIGURE 2.20 Various types of microwave-assisted synthesis. (Adapted from Intech Open.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 43
2.3 CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES FOR 
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF NANOFILLERS
Nanoscience and nanotechnology are considered the key technologies in the current 
century. Efforts are being made worldwide to create smart and intelligent nanoma￾terials that have innumerable applications in various products and systems, which 
will lead to an unprecedented level of performance in various sectors of different 
industries. The precise control of nanomaterials, viz., their dimensions, size, size 
distributions, dispersion at nanolevel, and their deposition on substrates that affects 
their properties and dynamic performances, needs highly sophisticated charracter￾ization techniques such as particle size analysis, electron microscopy (SEM/TEM/
HRTEM), AFM, X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and 
dynamic light scattering (DLS) techniques. We will now discuss some of these 
FIGURE 2.21 Schematic representation of homogeneous nucleation of Au nanoparti￾cles on adding sodium citrate to chloroauric acid and subsequent heating. (Adapted from 
ResearchGate.)44 Nanofillers
instrumental techniques employed in field of nanotechnology that lie within the 
scope of this chapter.
2.3.1 X-Ray Diffraction
XRD is a technique used in materials science to determine the crystallographic 
structure of a material. XRD works by irradiating a material with incident X-rays and 
then measuring the intensities and scattering angles of the X-rays that leave the mate￾rial. A primary use of XRD analysis is the identification of materials based on their 
diffraction patterns and the phase identification. XRD yields information on how the 
actual structure deviates from the ideal one, owing to internal stresses and defects.
• Principle XRD (Bragg’s Law):
The XRD method works on Bragg’s principle. Crystals are a regular array of 
atoms, while X-rays are considered to be waves of electromagnetic radiations. 
Crystal atoms scatter incident X-rays, primarily through interaction with the 
atoms’ electrons. This phenomenon is known as scattering, and the electron 
is known as the scatterer. If there is no change in the energy of the incident 
and scattered photons, then the scattering is elastic. Inelastic scattering occurs 
when the scattered photons lose energy. A regular array of scatterers produce 
a regular array of spherical waves. In the majority of directions, these waves 
cancel each other through destructive interference; however, they add con￾structively in a few specific directions, as determined by Bragg’s law:
n d λ θ = 2 sin
where d is the interplanar spacing, θ is the incident angle, n is an integer, 
and λ is the wavelength of the incoming X-ray. These specific directions 
appear as spots on the diffraction pattern called reflections.
X-rays are used to produce a diffraction pattern because their wavelength 
lambda ranges from 0.01 to 0.7 nm, and this range matches the lattice spac￾ing in the crystal structures (Figure 2.22).
• Generation of X-rays:
X-rays are generated in the source arm of the diffractometer, which com￾prises an electron gun, a target, and a slit. The electron gun consists of a 
source material that is surrounded by electrically controlled coils, as shown 
in Figure 2.23. The source material is heated up by passing current in the 
coils to activate the thermionic emission of electrons. These electrons, ener￾gized by high accelerating voltage, are then targeted to the metal target. 
They hit the target to remove electrons from its lower orbit, and the electron 
in the upper shell tends to fill the empty orbitals in the lower state, emitting 
a photon of energy ranging from to 10 to 100 keV, which falls in the X-ray 
spectrum. These rays are then focused on the sample at different angles by 
the movement of the X-ray generator arm.
• Instrument:
A diffractometer is a measuring instrument used for analyzing the struc￾ture of the material from the scattering pattern produced when a beam of Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 45
FIGURE 2.23 A schematic view of the components of the X-ray generators. (Adapted from 
Design World.)
FIGURE 2.22 XRD patterns of maghemite nanoparticles deposited at different current den￾sities (i.e. 500 and 2000 mA/Cm2
). XRD, X-ray diffraction. (Adapted from ResearchGate.)46 Nanofillers
radiation such as X-rays interact with it. A typical diffractometer (Figure 
2.24) consists of a source of radiation, a monochromator to choose the 
wavelength, slits to adjust the shape of the beam, a sample, and a detector.
Nanoparticles are not very good single crystals. Hence, one needs to perform a pow￾der diffraction experiment. In 1916, Peter J.W. Debye and Paul Scherrer in Germany 
and A. W. Hull in the USA independently obtained XRD patterns from a single 
sample in a powder form. Therefore, sometimes this method is called Hull–Debye–
Scherrer method.
In this method, the monochromatic X-ray beam strikes the powdered specimens 
kept in a thin-walled capillary. The X-rays are diffracted from specific planes, 
FIGURE 2.24 A typical diffractometer. (Adapted from Wikipedia.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 47
making an angle theta with the beam (obeying Bragg’s law), as shown in Figure 2.25. 
The diffracted rays generate cone, concentric with the incident beam. The total open￾ing angle of the diffraction cone 4 theta is determined by measuring the distance S
between two diffraction lines corresponding to a particular plane and is related to 
Bragg’s angle by
4 theta / = × S R radius
where R is the specimen-to-film distance, usually the radius of the camera housing 
the film. A list of theta values can be obtained from the measured value of S.
Since the wavelength is known, substitution of theta and lambda in Bragg’s equa￾tion 2d sin theta=n lambda gives the spacing d between neighboring planes, and n
is the integer.
By measuring the distance between symmetrical lines and line intensities, the 
following information is obtained.
1. A crystalline substance can be distinguished from an amorphous one 
because the former produces lines on the photographic plate and the latter 
does not.
2. With the aid of the standard photograph of known chemical compounds, their 
presence in a mixture can be detected by comparison of the photographs.
3. The size of unit cell and type of lattice of the crystalline solid can be deter￾mined. Diffraction peak positions are accurately measured with XRD, 
which makes it the best method for characterizing homogeneous and inho￾mogeneous strains.
FIGURE 2.25 X-ray powder diffraction. (Adapted from pd.chem.ucl.uk)48 Nanofillers
Inhomogeneous strain causes the broadening of diffraction peaks, where in the crys￾tallite size D can be estimated from the peak width by using Scherrer’s formula:
D K= lambda/ C B os theta
where lambda is the X-ray wavelength, B is the full width at half maximum of a dif￾fraction peak, theta is the diffraction angle, and K is Scherrer’s constant of the order 
of unity for the usual crystal.
However, the fact that nanoparticles often form twined structures. Scherrer’s 
formula may produce results different from that of its real particle size. Overall, 
XRD only provides collective information of the particle size and usually requires a 
sizable amount of powder.
• XRD Analysis:
For XRD patterns obtained from powder diffraction, one needs to index 
peaks based on combination of Bragg’s law and the properties of the seven 
systems into which all crystals can be classified. This involves determina￾tion of the number of atoms per unit cell and the density of a given mate￾rial. Thus, its chemical composition can be determined. The assignment of 
atoms to the respective peaks can be found by using the information con￾tained in the intensity of the respective scattering peaks, depending on the 
scattering power and absolute and relative intensities, which may vary. This 
variation helps identify the type of atom in a given lattice site. In most cases, 
XRD data obtained for a given compound are compared to the International 
Crystal Structure Database, which is known as the Rietveld method. This 
method refines structural data by using correction parameters with respect 
intensity, lattice, line shape crystal structure, and possible zero shifts of the 
detection system.
2.3.2 Raman Spectroscopy
Raman Effect:
In 1928, Sir C. V. Raman, while studying the scattering of light by liquids, found 
that when a beam of monochromatic light was passed through organic liquids such 
as benzene and toluene, the scattered light contained other frequencies in addition to 
the incident light. Most of the scattering is elastic in nature. This is called Rayleigh 
scattering, and the scattered light has some energy, wavelength, and frequency as 
that of the incident light. The smaller portion of the light is scattered inelastically, 
which will have higher or lower frequency and, therefore, energy different from 
that of the incident light, as shown in Figure 2.25; this is called Raman scattering 
or Raman effect. This makes up the Raman spectrum as, shown in Figure 2.26. The 
wavelength-shifted photons are called Raman scatter. For this discovery, Sir C.V. 
Raman was awarded Noble Prize in physics in 1930, and this effect is named after 
him.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 49
• Principle:
In Rayleigh scattering, the electron decays back to the same level from 
which it started. In Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman scattering, the electron 
decays to a level different from where it started. Stokes scattering is much 
more common than anti-Stokes scattering because at any given time, an 
electron in the most common temperature range is most likely to be in its 
lowest energy state (Figure 2.27).
A Raman spectrum is a plot of the intensity of Raman-scattered radia￾tion as a function of its frequency difference from the incident radiation 
(usually in units of wave number cm–1). The difference is called the Raman 
shift. The additional peaks in the Raman spectrum arise due to the shift in 
the frequency of the scattered light. The elastic scattered light (Rayleigh 
scattering) dominates the spectrum with an intense peak at the energy of 
incoming photons.
Raman scattering is commonly used in spectroscopy. Raman spec￾troscopy has been a very powerful tool for finding information about the 
molecular vibration of materials. There are two different types of Raman 
spectroscopy: surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) and reso￾nance Raman spectroscopy. Both of these processes enhance the weak sig￾nal of the Raman spectra.
FIGURE 2.26 Energy level diagram of Rayleigh scattering, Stokes Raman scattering, and 
anti-Stokes Raman scattering. (Adapted from Research gate.)50 Nanofillers
• Construction and working of the Raman Spectrometer:
A typical Raman spectrometer has three primary components, namely, an 
excitation source, a sampling apparatus, and a detector. While these three 
components have come in varying forms over the years, modern Raman 
instrumentation has developed around using a laser as the excitation source, 
a spectrometer as the detector, and either a microscope or a fiber optic probe 
as the sample apparatus. It is essential to use a clean and narrow-band￾width laser because the quality of Raman peaks is directly affected by the 
sharpness and stability of the excitation light source. A probe is a collection 
device that collects the scattered photons, filters out the Rayleigh scatter 
and any background signal from the fiber optic cables, and sends the Raman 
scatter to the spectrograph. Here, scattered photons are passed through a 
transmission grating to separate them by wavelength and passed to a detec￾tor, which records the intensity of the Raman signal at each wavelength. 
These data are plotted as a Raman spectrum (Figure 2.28).
• Raman scattering microscopy:
Raman scattering microscopy is an analytical microscopy and is used as a 
tool for analyzing advanced nanomaterials such as biomolecules in a live 
FIGURE 2.27 Raman spectra from RGO at high, medium, and low reduction and from GO. 
(Adapted from MDPI.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 51
cell for the study of cellular dynamics, semiconductor devices for character￾izing strain distribution and contamination and nanocarbons and nano-2D 
materials.
A Raman microscope begins with a standard optical microscope and 
adds an excitation laser, a monochromator, and a sensitive detector (such 
as a CCD or a photomultiplier tube, MT. Nano-Raman spectroscopy yields 
chemical information on nanoscale without damaging the samples. When 
used it in conjunction with AFM, it can also produce a topographic image 
to correlate with the Raman spectra. In order to obtain spectral information 
with a much spatial resolution, researchers turned to near-field scanning 
optical microscopy establishing the field of nano-Raman spectroscopy. In 
near-field scanning optical microscopy, the transmitted light has x, y, and 
z components, which enable the investigation of a variety of polarization 
configurations. Satoshi Kawata et al. (2017) have come forward with three 
approaches for the enhancement of scattering efficiency, and they have 
shown that the scattering enhancement synergistically increases the spa￾tial resolution. They have also discussed the mechanisms of tip enhanced 
Raman scattering, UV resonant Raman scattering, and coherent nonlinear 
FIGURE 2.28 A schematic overview of a Raman spectrometer. (Adapted from ResearchGate.)52 Nanofillers
Raman scattering for micro- and nanoapplications. The combination of 
these three approaches contributes to nanometer-resolution Raman scat￾tering microscopy. Jian Feng Li et al. (2017) emphasized on plasmonic 
core–shell nanomaterials, which are extensively used in surface-enhanced 
vibrational spectroscopies, in particular SERS due to unique localized sur￾face plasmon resource property. They also put forward the concept of shell￾isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, which overcomes 
the long-standing limitations of materials and morphological generality 
encountered in traditional SERS.
• Raman Spectrum Analysis:
The data acquired by the detector after the calculation in the software 
attached with the spectrophotometer are collected, and the Raman spec￾trum is plotted on the screen. The Raman spectrum is an intensity vs 
wavelength shift, a graph which is plotted with intensity on the y-axis and 
Raman shift (wave number cm–1) on the x-axis, as shown in Figure 2.29. 
Usually, the spectrum of material that can be captured lies in the range of 
wave numbers from 4000 to 10 cm−1, which reveals information about the 
molecules present in the sample. The software used for the data analysis of 
the collected data is “invia Raman.” The software allows us to handle the 
spectrometer with different excitation wavelengths of the laser source and 
many controls.
FIGURE 2.29 A typical Raman spectrum recorded for ZnO and plotted with intensity vs 
wavelength.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 53
2.3.3 XPS Technique: X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
As the demand for high-performance materials has increased, so has the importance 
for surface engineering. The material surface is its point of interaction with the exter￾nal environment and other materials, and this influences factors such as corrosion 
rates, catalytic activity, adhesive properties, wettability, contact potential, and failure 
mechanisms.
Surface modifications can be used to alter or improve these characteristics; there￾fore, surface analysis is used to understand surface chemistry. X-ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy is one of the standard tools for surface characterization. It finds use 
from non-stick cookware coatings to thin film electronics and bioactive surfaces.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy is also known as electron spectroscopy for 
chemical analysis. It is a technique for analyzing material surface chemistry. XPS 
can measure the elemental composition as well as the chemical and electronic states 
of the atoms within a material. XPS spectra are obtained by irradiating the material 
surface with a beam of X-rays and measuring the kinetic energy of electrons that are 
emitted from the top 1 to 10 nm of the material. The sample to be analyzed can be a 
solid, a liquid, or a gas.
A photoelectron spectrum is recorded by counting ejected electrons over a range 
of kinetic energies. The energies and intensities of the photoelectron peaks enable the 
identification and quantification of all surface elements.
Additionally, the change in bond energy caused by the electrons surrounding the 
atoms to be analyzed, such as atomic valence changes and interatomic distances, 
tends to be greater than the chemical shift observed in Advanced Encryption Standard 
(meant for electronic data established by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and 
Technology in 2001). This makes it relatively easy to identify the state of chemical 
bonds, which is yet another advantage of XPS (Figure 2.30).
• Instrumentation:
The main components of an XPS system are the source of X-ray, an UHV 
chamber with mu-metal magnetic shielding, an electron collection lens, an 
electron energy analyzer, an electron detector system, a sample introduc￾tion chamber, sample mounts, a sample stage with ability to heat or cool, a 
sample, and a set of stage manipulators (Figures 2.31 and 2.32).
• Excitation Source (scanning microfocus X-ray source):
A scanning microfocus X-ray source is an X-ray source that can scan a 
focused monochrome Al ka beam on sample. In general, characteristics of 
X-rays such as Al ka rays are widely used as excitation sources for photo￾electrons. The X-ray beam diameter can be set between several um zeta to 
several hundred um zeta, and the scan range can be changed arbitrarily, 
enabling the measurement of the most appropriate analysis area for the sam￾ple. Secondary electron image observation (scanning X-ray image) based on 
this feature also allows accurate analysis and location. Besides, it supports 
various analyses, including multipoint simultaneous analysis, large area 
measurement line analysis, and area analysis (Figure 2.33).54 Nanofillers
FIGURE 2.31 Diagram and main components of XPS system. (Adapted from Research 
Gate.)
FIGURE 2.30 Electron being ejected from the core level by penetration of X-rays. (Adapted 
from ULVAC-Phi.)Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 55
FIGURE 2.32 XPS survey spectrum, on C22 after polarization at oV(+) in a PH=7. 
(Adapted from XPS fitting.com)
FIGURE 2.33 Scanning microfocus X-ray. (Adapted from ULVAC-Phi.)56 Nanofillers
• Analysis Time:
It takes typically 1–20 minutes for a broad survey that measures the amount 
of all detectable elements and typically 1–15 minutes for a high-resolution 
scan that reveals the chemical depth profile that measures 4–5 elements as 
a function of etched depth (this time range can vary as many factors play 
their role).
• Applications:
XPS is routinely used to analyze inorganic compounds, metal alloys, semi￾conductors, polymers, catalysts, glasses, ceramics, paints, paper, inks, 
woods, plant parts, make up teeth, bones, medical implants, biomateri￾als, coatings, viscous oils, glues, ion-modified materials, and many others. 
Sometimes XPS is also used to analyze the hydrated forms of materials 
such as hydrogels and biological samples by freezing them in their hydrated 
state in an ultrapure environment and allowing multiple layers of ice to sub￾lime away prior to analysis.
2.3.4 DLS Technique
• Introduction:
DLS is an established and precise measurement technique for characteriz￾ing particle sizes in suspensions and emulsions. It is particularly suitable for 
nanomaterials. The measurement range for DLS is from 0.3 to 10 nm. This 
range largely overlaps with the laser diffraction, which starts from 10 nm 
up to the millimeter range. With much decreasing particle size, the method 
of DLS becomes a better option than laser diffraction. For larger particles, 
the latter has an advantage over DLS. However, DLS also allows measure￾ment in a wide concentration range from a few ppm to 40 vol % (sample￾dependent), and many DLS instruments offer the possibility to measure zeta 
potential.
• Principle:
The DLS measurement technique is based on the Brownian motion of parti￾cles, which states that smaller particles move faster, while larger ones move 
slower in a liquid. The light scattered by particles contains information on 
the diffusion speed and thus on the size distribution (Figure 2.34).
• Working of DLS:
In particle analysis using DLS, the sample is illuminated by a laser beam, 
and the scattered light is recorded at one detection angle over a period of 
usually 30–120 seconds. The movement of the particles causes intensity 
fluctuations in the scattered light. From these fluctuations, the diffusion 
coefficient can be determined and thus also the particle size (Figure 2.35).
• DLS particle size calculation formula
The diffusion coefficient (D) of particles are inversely proportional to the 
size (dp– hydrodynamic diameter) of the particle according to the Stokes–
Einstein relationship.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 57
D K= T n /3 pi dp
where K is Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, and n is vicosity; to deter￾mine the particle size accurately, the precise value of T and n of the liquid 
must be known.
• Technicality involved: 
Moreover, the temporal fluctuation of the scattered light signal is important 
because it contains information about the movement of the particles and 
also contains slight frequency shifts caused by the time-dependent position 
or velocity of particles. These frequency shifts can be determined by com￾parison with a coherent optical reference and are on the scale of 1 Hz–100 
KHz.
Two approaches exist for optical reference:
1. Homodyne detection (also called “self-beating” or “self-reference” and
2. Heterodyne detection (“reference beating” or controlled reference) 
(Figure 2.36)
FIGURE 2.34 Schematic diagram of DLS spectrometer. (Adapted from Research Gate.) 
DLS, dynamic light scattering.58 Nanofillers
FIGURE 2.36 Scheme of homodyne and heterodyne detection. (Adapted from microtac.
com)
FIGURE 2.35 DLS showing larger particles move slower with longer wavelength and 
smaller particles move fast with shorter wavelength. (Adapted from Firefly Sci cuvette shop.) 
DLS, dynamic light scattering.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 59
Of the two approaches, the heterodyne mode with controlled reference offers many 
advantages over the homodyne setup in a DLS analyzer. The most important of 
these is signal intensity, which is proportional to Is2, i.e., the square of mean of the 
scattered light in the homodyne measurement, while as in case of heterodyne mea￾surement, it is proportional to Is x Io, i.e., the product of the scattered intensity and 
intensity of the reference. This results in a much stronger measurement.
Signal allows the use of laser diodes as a light source and silicon photodiodes as a 
detector. The improved signal strength facilitates the measurement of very small low 
scattering particles down to the lower nanometer range.
• Evaluation of the DLS signal:
The DLS signal can be evaluated in different ways, via a time-dependent 
auto-correlation function or a frequency power spectrum (FPS). The FPS 
method is the most reliable and superior method in terms of sensitivity, 
accuracy, and resolution. The DLS signal from the detector is mathemati￾cally transformed into FPS by the fast Fourier transform, and after iterative 
error minimization, it provides a direct indication of the size distribution.
The FPS takes the form of a Lorentzian function. The characteris￾tic frequency w is inversely proportional to the particle size, as shown in 
Figure 2.37.
FIGURE 2.37 DLS graph plotted between amplitude vs frequency. (Adapted from micro￾trac.com)60 Nanofillers
2.4 CLASSIFICATION OF NANOMATERIALS
Based on their dimensionality, nanomaterials are classified into four types as follows:
0 (zero) dimensional or 0-D
1 (one) dimensional or 1-D
2 (two) dimensional or 2-D
3 (three) dimensional or 3-D
2.4.1 Zero Dimensional (0-D) Nanomaterials
Nanomaterials with external dimensions at the nanoscale, i.e., between 1 and 100 nm, 
may be classified as zero dimensional (0-D). This class of nanomaterials includes 
quantum dots and various types of nanoparticles such as nanospheres, dendrimers, 
and fullerenes (Figure 2.38).
• Properties and Applications:
Graphene quantum dots (GQDs), carbon quantum dots, inorganic quan￾tum dots, magnetic nanoparticles noble metal nanoparticles upconversion 
nanoparticles, and polymer dots have attracted extensive research interest 
due to their optical stability, wavelength-dependent photoluminescence 
FIGURE 2.38 0-D nanostructures. (Adapted from Research Gate.) 0-D, zero-dimensional.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 61
(PL) chemical inertness, cellular permeability, and biocompatibility. These 
0-D nanomaterials offer great adaptability to biomedical applications such 
as nanomedicine, cosmetics, bioelectronics, biosensors, and biochips.
Due to their low mass production, low intrinsic toxicity, and multifunc￾tional surface functionalization, 0-D carbon dots are widely studied materi￾als in the field of nanotechnology.
One of the outstanding features of GQDs is their (PL, and their emis￾sion wavelength can be changed by adjusting their dimension, morphol￾ogy, or dopant. The tunable PL property enables GQD use in bioimaging 
and biosensing. Besides, there are many oxygen-rich functional groups 
at the edge of GQDs that contribute to their good water solidities and 
biocompatibility. Furthermore, GQDs have good conductivity and anti￾bleaching properties. Nowadays, GQD-based sensors are widely used in 
the detection of various ions and biomarkers as well as in the diagnoses 
of major diseases.
2.4.2 One-Dimensional Nanomaterials
Nanomaterials with two external dimensions at the nanoscale and the third dimension 
being usually at the microscale are known as one-dimensional (1-D) nanomaterials. 
This class of nanomaterial include nanofillers, nanotubes, nanowires, nanorods, and 
nanofilaments (Figure 2.39).
• Properties and Applications: Electrons are confined within two dimen￾sions, indicating that electrons cannot move freely. Moreover, 1-D nanoma￾terials can be amorphous or crystalline, single or polycrystalline; metallic, 
ceramic, or polymeric similar to 0-D materials. However, 1-D nanomateri￾als can be pure or impure (such as in doped semiconductors). Furthermore, 
1-D nanostructured metal oxide materials exhibit exceptional properties and 
potential applications in many areas such as electronics, miniatured devices, 
and catalysis.
1-D/fibrous nanomaterials, due to their high aspect ratio and often good cohe￾sion to the matrix (providing efficient stress transfer between the matrix and 
the fillers), are frequently used to improve the mechanical properties in com￾posites. Carbon nanotubes are popular components for this purpose because of 
their high stiffness with Young’s modulus of 1TPa; protein nanofillers display 
a lower modulus but are more hydrophilic than carbon nanomaterials, which 
makes them easier to disperse in aqueous solution. Remarkably, the use of pro￾tein nanofillers from hen egg white lysozyme improved the stiffness of a sili￾cone elastomer to a level twice that obtained with the use of carbon nanotubes 
(Xinchen Ye et al 2019).
Boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) possess many extraordinary physical proper￾ties, many of which are comparable or even superior to those of CNTs. For instance, 
Young’s modulus of up to 1.3 TPa and the tensile strength of up to 33GPa have been 
reported for BNNTs. They are also resistant to oxidation at high temperatures and 62 Nanofillers
inert to almost all harsh chemicals. BNNTs also possess a large band gap (5–6 eV) 
and therefore are excellent electrical insulators. They also are excellent neutron 
absorber materials. They are biocompatible and exhibit no apparent toxicity in inter￾action with protein and liver cells. They find use in biomedicines, nanocomposites, 
protective shields, and insulators.
2.4.3 Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials
Nanomaterials with one external dimension at the nanoscale and other two dimen￾sions outside the nanoscale are known as two-dimensional (2-D) nanomaterials. This 
class of nanomaterials include thin nanofilms, nanolayers, nanocoatings, and nano￾plates (Figure 2.40).
2.4.3.1 Properties and Applications
Two-dimensional nanomaterials are a special class of nanomaterials that are ultra￾thin and have a single layer of atoms. Because of their large surface area, 2-D lay￾ered nanomaterials exhibit peculiar electronic properties such as graphene. Other 
than graphene, 2-D nanomaterials are those of hexagonal boron nitride, different 
transition metal chalcogenides, germanane, silicone, and phosphorene. The layered 
FIGURE 2.39 1-D nanostructure. (Adapted from Research Gate.) 1-D, one-dimensional.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 63
structures of 2-D materials have properties of lubricants. These materials show a 
range of electronic properties and can be used in nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, 
catalysis, sensors, energy storage, and other flexible devices. Moreover, 2-D metal 
nanomaterials have also found applications in surface enhanced Raman scatter￾ing, bioimaging, solar cells, and photothermal therapy (Ye Cheng, Zhanxi Fan et al. 
2018). Furthermore, 2-D nanomaterials such as metal nanosheets, graphene-based 
materials, and transition metal oxides/dichalcogenides provide enhanced physical 
and chemical functions owing to their ultrathin structures, high surface-to-volume 
ratios, and surface charges. They have also been found to have high catalytic activi￾ties in terms of natural enzymes such as peroxidase, oxidase, catalase, and superox￾ide dismutase. (Shuangfei Cai and Rong Yag 2020).
2.4.4 Three-Dimensional Nanomaterials
Nanomaterials that are not confined to the nanoscale in any dimension but display 
internal nanoscale features are known as three-dimensional (3-D) nanomaterials. 
This class of nanomaterials includes nanocomposites, dispersions of nanoparticles, 
bundles of nanowires, and nanotubes as well as multi-nanolayers, nanopowders, and 
nanostructured materials (Figure 2.41).
FIGURE 2.40 2-D nanostructures. (Adapted from ResearchGate.) 2-D, two-dimensional.64 Nanofillers
• Properties and Applications: Hierarchical nanostructures are 3-D mol￾ecules that gradually grow from one parent structure into a more complex 
form. These nanostructures are synthesized by used building blocks such 
as biomolecules and organic molecules. They exhibit catalytic chemilu￾minescence properties, superhydrophobicity, optical properties, magnetic 
properties, catalytic activity, photolytic activity, flammability, and appli￾cations in lithium-ion batteries, Ni_MH batteries, and so on.
For example, it is proved that solvent-assisted 3-D ZnS hierarchical nano￾structures have good photocatalytic and electrochemical performance. All 
samples possess high photocatalytic efficiency for degrading eosin Y dye, 
i.e., more than 94%. Samples ZA2 and ZA3 possess superior characteristics, 
i.e., highest specific capacitance, as it has smallest crystallite size, maxi￾mum pore diameter, and high diffusion coefficient compared with other 
samples (Medha Bhushan, Ranjana Jha 2020).
• Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) have been used as a reinforcement agent 
in composite materials or hydrogels to improve their mechanical proper￾ties, thermal stability, and/or water absorption properties.
FIGURE 2.41 3-D nanostructures. (Adapted from Research Gate.) 3-D, three-dimensional.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 65
• Hydrogels of hemicellulose and CNCs showed improved toughness, good 
recovery behavior, and acceptable swelling and mechanical properties. 
They have found to have load-bearing biomedical applications such as AC 
replacements.
• CNCs possess a large surface area, size, crystallinity, and hydrophilic 
characteristic and have demonstrated a positive impact on food packaging 
performance.
2.5 FUNCTIONALLY GRADED MATERIALS
2.5.1 Introduction
Functionally graded materials (FGMs) are multifunctional materials that contain a 
spatial variation in composition and/or microstructure for the specific purpose of 
controlling variations in thermal, structural, or functional properties. FGMs have 
been developed as ultrahigh-resistant materials for aircrafts, space vehicles, and 
other engineering specifications. Most of the FGMs are particle-reinforced, and their 
compositions depend on position.
Since 1990, an international congress on FGMs is organized by the interna￾tional Advisory Committee of AFGMs every 2 years. The proceedings of these 
congresses give a lot of information about research on FGMs. FGMs is a broad 
research area and has attracted tremendous attention today in the material sci￾ence and engineering society. In recent years, FGMs have experienced remarkable 
developments in manufacturing methods. FGMs can be produced using several 
well-known processing techniques from conventional to advanced. Research made 
in this field for the past 30 years provides an overview of manufacturing methods 
for FGMs and can be considered as a milestone for their future production and 
analysis investigations and beneficial for researchers, designers, and manufacturers 
in this regard. A better modified version of composite materials can build a struc￾ture that is higher in weight and yet harder than its base materials. The applications 
and uses of FGMs are immense from aerospace industries, engineering structures, 
automobile industries to paints, coatings, and oil industries. The advances in tech￾nology have added impetus to the development and usage of FGMs. 3D printing 
can now be used for the fabrication of FGMs. New coating techniques and surface 
modifications have added extra value to the marketing and processing of matrixes 
and composites.
Traditionally, four potential methods were used for fabrication of FGMs; powder 
metallurgy, CVD, self-propagating high-temperature synthesis, and plasma spraying. 
Some of the recently developed methods are the cast–decant–cast process, friction 
stir processing, and laser engineered net shaping, which are usually cost-effective 
and used to make changes in properties. FGMs are also available in nature, in the 
form of culms of bamboo and barley, in the bones, seashells, and teeth. These natu￾rally occurring FGMs completely match advanced FGMs in terms of desired proper￾ties and function at the desired surface.
The FGM is one of the promising candidate for a variety of applications, such as 
biomaterial implants, thermal barriers, materials for energy conversion, metal cutting 66 Nanofillers
and rock drilling tools, mechanical element as gears, and optical and optoelectronic 
applications. FGMs possess a good chance of reducing mechanical and thermal 
stress concentrations in many structural materials that can be developed for spe￾cific applications. Mathematical modeling and numerical simulations are extremely 
helpful tools for the design and investigation of FGMs. With the help of numerical 
simulations, chemical composition and design optimization may be achieved, which 
increases the performance of FGMs significantly. For instance, an optimized compo￾sition gradient of a metal cutting tool may improve the tool life and wear resistance. 
Similarly, in dental implants, optimized composition gradients and gradient thick￾ness result in improvement of implant life and its biocompatibility.
2.5.2 FGM Types
FGMs can be categorized based on their uses, gradation, composition, and material 
combination, as shown in the table below:
2.5.3 FGM Applications
FGMs are versatile in nature with a broad area of applications, some of which are 
listed below:
• Durable thermal barrier coating is needed for space shuttle materials 
because when it enters into space, it has to face extremely high temperature 
on the outer side (the temperature difference between the outside and the 
inside is 1000°C). In such conditions, FGMs sustain very effectively with 
the combination of a ceramic and a metal of a low thermal expansion coef￾ficient, e.g., partially stabilized zirconia ceramic/austenitic steel. A similar 
kind of combination is used in cryogenics, nuclear fusion, nuclear fission 
(where high-energy radiation hits a cold container), and laser and plasma 
technology.
Classification of FGMs based on type
Area of application Biomaterial FGM HA-Ti
Piezoelectric FGM PZT-Ag
Heat-resistant FGM PSZ-Steel
Energy conversion FGM NiO-YSZ
Type of gradient Continuous graded type Al-AlZr
Stepwise graded type WC-Co
Changing composition Functionally gradient type WC-Co
Functionally gradient coating type WC-Co-Fe
Material combination Metal/ceramic PSZ-Steel
Ceramic/ceramic Al2O3-ZrO2
Ceramic/glass CaO/ZrO2/SiO2Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 67
• FGMs can be used as an effective material for metal cutting and rock drill￾ing tools to attain economic cutting condition, optimum cutting speed, and 
maximized tool life, e.g., diamond–Co and WC–Co are combination mate￾rials for these purposes.
• Corrosion of metallic and nonmetallic components at high temperatures 
can be prevented effectively by FGM coating. Gas turbine blades and areas 
subjected to thermomechanical stresses or fatigue exposure are protected by 
FGM coating like MeCrALY.
• Gears and other functional components of machines can be manufactured 
with greater economy and good performance as compared to conventional 
costly alloy steel.
• FGMs have been successfully fabricated for energy conversion materials. 
There is noticeable improvement in the performance of photoelectric, ther￾moelectric, thermionic, and nuclear energy conversion.
• Piezoelectricity and ferroelectricity are other fields of application of FGM 
techniques. Piezoelectric FGMs have the ability to reduce stress concentra￾tion, improve residual stress distribution, and reduce delamination and have 
good thermal properties and greater fracture toughness.
• In the human body, the concept of gradation is present in the teeth and bone. 
Keeping this in mind, it is possible to manufacture FGMs as an implant 
material. Thus, FGMs can be used in the healing of fractures as a bone 
plate, dental implant, biomaterial disc in the lumbar spine, femoral compo￾nent for knee replacement, and hip prothesis coating. Metallic alloys with 
functionally graded porosity can be successfully prepared for bioengineer￾ing. In order to prepare the HAP/Ti dental implant, cold isostatic pressing 
and sintering process were successfully adopted.
• Optical and optoelectronics are other fields of application of FGMs in which 
glass fiber can be made with a variation of refractive index and lenses with 
varying optical wave transmissions and absorption properties.
2.6 CONCLUSION
Nanoscience and nanotechnology have dramatically influenced almost every major 
sphere of life, be it health care, environment, electronics, energy conversions, opto￾electronics, agriculture, veterinary sciences, engineering sciences, etc. Besides it has 
to show its more, and much needed involvement in pollution control, defense and 
missions for space endeavors. A lot of developments of nanotechnology are arises 
in terms of fabrication of nanomaterials, which the researchers are improving upon 
day by day with new discoveries, and novel designs that are further refining the 
existing techniques. The method of compound/element characterization is gaining 
importance with new methods and models of instrumentations, with each equipment 
working in its own capacity with much more precision and accuracy than its respec￾tive previous version. The latest techniques light DLS has taken nanotechnology to 
a next level. The innovation of FGMs in 1990s has added one more laurel to the 
techniques of nanotechnology, with compositions of various materials mixed in such 
proportions, which have enhanced and added to the dynamic and excellent properties 68 Nanofillers
of the substances that are serving their end use to desired maxima. There is always 
scope for further improvements and developments which will always persist to be 
there so long the human pursuits are constantly persevering with their exploring and 
curious minds.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Inigo Agote and Miguel Angel Lagos. Fundamentals and applications of field-assisted sinter￾ing techniques (FAST). Encyclopedia of Materials: Metals and Alloys, 272–280, 2022.
Sajid Ali Ansari and Moo Hwan Cho. Highly visible light responsive narrow band gap TiO2 
nanoparticles modified by elemental red phosphorus for photocatalysis and petrochemi￾cal applications. Scientific Reports, 6, 25405, 2016.
Anton Paar. Principles of dynamic light scattering. https://wiki.anton-paar.com/in-en/
multiple-detection-angles-in-dynamic-light-scattering-analysis/
Valmik Bhavan, Prakash Kattire, Sandeep Thakare, Sachin Patil, and R.K.P. Singh. A review 
on functionally gradient materials (FGMs) and their applications. In IOP Conference 
Series: Materials Science and Engineering, Vol. 229, No. 1, p. 012021. IOP Publishing, 
2017.
Medha Bhushan and Ranjana Jha. Surface activity correlations of mesoporous 3-D hierarchi￾cal ZnS nanostructures for enhanced photo and electro catalytic performance. Applied 
Surface Science, 2020. DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.146988
Britannica. Molecular beam epitaxy – (Material Science).
Andrei A. Bunaciu, Elena Gabriela Udristioice, and Hassan Y. Aboul Enain. X-ray diffraction: 
Instrumentation and applications. Reviews in Analytical Chemistry, 45(4): 289–299, 
2015.
Shuangfei Cai and Rong Yang. Two dimensional nanomaterials with enzyme-like prop￾erties for biomedical applications. Frontiers in Chemistry, 2020. DOI:10.3389/
fchem.2020.565940
Shixuan Chen, Bing Liu, Mark A. Carlson, Adrian F. Gombart, Debra A. Reilley, and Jingwei 
Xie. Recent advances in electrospun nanofibers for wound healing. Nanomedicine 
(London), 12(11), 1335–1352, 2017.
Ye Chen, Zhanxi Fan, Zhicheng Zhang, Wenxin Niu, Cuiling Li, Nailiang Yang, Bo Chen, and 
Hua Zhang. Two dimensional metal nano-materials: Synthesis, properties and applica￾tions. Chemical Reviews, 118(13), 6409–6455, 2018.
Anthony Dichiara, Jin-kai Yuan, Sheng-Hong Yao, and Alain Sylvestre. Chemical vapour 
deposition synthesis of carbon nanotube-graphene nanosheet hybrids and their applica￾tion in polymer composites. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 12, 6935–
6940. DOI:10.1166/jnn.2012.6573.2012.
Dynamic light scattering – An overview. Science Direct Topics.
Yong X. Gan, Ahalapitya H. Jayatissa, Zhen Yu, Xi Chen, and Mingheng Li. 
Hydrothermal synthesis of nanoparticles. Journal of Nanomaterials, 2020. 
DOI:10.1155/2020/8917013
HORIBA. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) particle size distribution analysis. https://www.
horiba.com/cze/scientific/technologies/dynamic-light-scattering-dls-particle-size-distri￾bution-analysis/dynamic-light-scattering-dls-particle-size-distribution-analysis/
Satoshi Kawata, Taro Ichimura, Atsushi Taguchi, and Yasuaki Ku Mamoto. Nano-Raman scat￾tering microscopy: Resolution and enhancement. Chemical reviews, 117(7), 4983–5001, 
2017.
Ibrahim Khan and Idrees Khan. Nanoparticles: Properties, applications and toxicities. Arabian 
Journal of Chemistry, 12(7), 908–931, 2017.
Sulabha K. KulKarni. Nanotechnology: Principles and practices. Springer eBooks, 2015.Synthesis and Characterization of Dimension-Based Nanofillers 69
Anuj Kumar, Yun Kuang, Zheng Liang, and Xiamomin Sun. Microwave chemistry, recent 
advancements, and eco-friendly microwave-assisted synthesis of nanoarchitectures and 
their applications: A review. Materials Today Nano, 11, 100076, 2020.
S. Kumar. Advances in additive manufacturing and tooling. Comprehensive Materials 
Processing, 10, 303–344, 2014.
Jian-Feng Li, Yue-Jiao Zhang, Song-Yuan Ding, Rajapandiyan Panneerselvam, and Zhong￾Qun Tian. Core–shell nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Chemical Reviews, 
117(7), 5002–5069, 2017.
Guodong Liu, Zhengbiao Gu, Yan Hong, Li Chang, and Caiming Li. Electrospum starch nano￾fibers: Recent advances, challenges and strong strategies for potential pharmaceutical 
applications. Journal of Controlled Release, 28, 95–107, 2017.
Yehia M. Manawi, Ihsanullah, and Muataz A. Atieh. A review of carbon nanomaterials, synthe￾sis via the chemical vapor deposition CVD method. Journal of Materials, 11, 822, 2018.
S. Maruyama, R. Kojima, Y. Miyauchi, S. Chiashi, and M. Kohno. Low-temperature synthesis 
of high-purity single-walled carbon nanotubes from alcohol. Chemical Physics Letters, 
360(3–4), 229–234, 2002.
Adnan Memic, Tuerdimaimait Abudula, Halimates S. Mohammad, Kassturia Josh Navare, 
Thibault Colombani, and Sids A. Bencherif. Latest progress in electrospum nanofibers, 
for wound healing applications. ACS Applied Bio Materials, 2, 952–969, 2019.
Microtrac. Dynamic light scattering: DLS particle analyzer. https://www.microtrac.com/
products/particle-size-shape-analysis/dynamic-light-scattering/
Molecular beam Epitaxy: An overview. Science Direct.
M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, and M. W. Barsoum. Mxenes: A new family of two-dimensional mate￾rials and its application as electrodes for Li and Na-ion batteries. In Electrochemical 
Society Meeting Abstracts 227. The Electrochemical Society, Inc., April 2015, No. 9, 
p. 849.
Kannan Badri Narayanam, Gyu Tae Park, and Sung Soo Han. Electrospun poly (vinyl alcohol)/
reduced graphene oxide nanofibrous scaffolds for skin tissue engineering. Colloids and 
Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 191, 110994, 2020.
Seiichi Normua and Donna M. Sheahen. Micromechanical approach to the thermomechani￾cal analysis of FGMs. Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Functionally 
Graded Materials, AIST Tsukuba Research Center, Tsukuba, Japan, October 21–24, 
1996.
Steffen Oswald. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy in analysis of surfaces. Wiley, 2013.
Rityuj Singh Parihar, Srinivasu Gang Setti, and Rajkumar Sahu. Recent advances in the manu￾facturing processes of functionally graded materials a review. Science and Engineering 
of Composite Materials, 25(2), 309–336, 2016.
T. Pradeep. Nano: The essentials. Understanding nanoscience and nanotechnology. McGraw￾Hill, 2009.
M. Virginia Roldan, Nora Pellegri, and Oscar de Sanctis. Electrochemical method for Ag-PEG 
nanoparticle synthesis. Journal of Nanoparticles, April 2013. DOI:10.1155/2013/524150.
Micheal B. Ross, Chad A. Mirkin, and George C. Schatz. Optical properties of one, two 
and three dimensional arrays of plasmonic nanostructures. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry C, 120(2), 816–830, 2015.
Amir Reza Sadrolhosseini, Mohd Adzir Mahdi, Farideh Alizadeh, and Suraya Abdul Rashid. 
Laser ablation technique for synthesis of metal nanoparticle in liquid. In Yufei Ma (ed.) 
Laser Technology and Its Applications, pp. 63–83. IntechOpen, 2018.
Charlene M. Schaldach, Graham Bench, James J. Deyoreo, Tony Esposito, David P. Fergenson, 
James Ferreira, … & Stephan P. Velsko. State of the art in characterizing threats: Non￾DNA methods for biological signatures. In S. Schutzer, R.G. Breeze, B. Budowle (eds.) 
Microbial Forensics, pp. 251–294. Academic Press, 2005.
M. A. Shah and K. A. Shah. Nanotechnology: The science of small. Wiley, 2019.70 Nanofillers
R. Singaravelan and S. Bangaru Sudarsan Alwan. Electrochemical synthesis, characteriza￾tion and phytogenic properties for silver nanoparticles. Applied Nanoscience, 5(8), 983, 
2015.
Sourabh Soltani, Nasrin Khanian, Thomas Shean Yaw Choong, and Umer Rashid. Recent pro￾gresses in design and synthesis of nanofibers over diverse synthetic methodologies, char￾acterization and potential applications. New Journal of Chemistry, 2000. DOI:10.1039/
d0nj01071e
Yuta Suzuki, Hideitsu Hino, and Kauta Ono. Symmetry Prediction and knowledge discov￾ery from x-ray diffraction patterns using an interpretable machine learning approach. 
Scientific Reports, 10, 21790, 2020.
Faris B. Sweidan and Ho Jin Ryu. One step functionally graded materials fabrication using 
ultra large temperature gradients obtained through finite element analysis of field 
assisted sintering technique. Materials & Design, 192, 108714, 2020.
Thermo Fischer Scientific. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XPS surface analysis of mate￾rials ranging from metals to polymers. https://www.thermofisher.com/in/en/home/
materials-science/xps-technology.html#:~:text=X%2Dray%20photoelectron%20
spectroscopy%20(XPS,the%20atoms%20within%20a%20material
T. Varghese and K. M Balakrishna. Nanotechnology: An introduction to synthesis properties 
and applications of nanomaterials. Atlantic Publishers & Distributors, 2012.
Jurina M. Wessels, Heinz Geog Nothofer, William E. Ford, Florian von Wrochem, Frank 
Scholz, Tobias Vossmeyer, Andrea Schroedter, Horst Weller, and Akio Yasuda. Optical 
and electrical properties of three-dimensional interlinked gold nanoparticle assemblies. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society: JACS, 126, 3349–3356, 2004.
Wikipedia. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/X-ray_photoelectron_spectroscopy
Chris Woodford. Molecular beam epitaxy. March 2021.
Xiaoting Ye, Liyan Chen, Liyang Liu, and Yan Bai. Electrochemical synthesis of selenium 
nanoparticles and formation of sea urchin-like selenium nanoparticles by electrostatic 
assembly. Materials Letters, 196, 381–384, 2017.
M. Zdrojek, J. Sobieski, A. Duzynska, and J. Judek. Synthesis of carbon nanotubes from pro￾pane ÃÃ. Chemical Vapor Deposition, 21, 1–5, 2015.
Zhigang Zhang, G. Yao, X. Zhang, J. Ma, and Hao Lin. Synthesis and characterization of nickel 
ferrite nanoparticles via planetary ball milling assisted solid state reaction. Ceramics 
International, 41(3), 4523–4530, 2015.71
3 Mechanical, Thermal, 
Electrical, Optical, and 
Magnetic Properties of 
Organic Nanofillers
Tousif Reza, Rokib Uddin, 
Mohammad Fahim Tazwar, 
and Md Enamul Hoque
Military Institute of Science and Technology (MIST)
Yashdi Saif Autul
Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-3
CONTENTS
3.1 Introduction.....................................................................................................72
3.2 Properties of Organic Nanofillers ................................................................... 74
3.2.1 Cellulose Nanocrystal (CNC)............................................................. 74
3.2.1.1 Mechanical Properties of CNC............................................ 74
3.2.1.2 Thermal Properties of CNC................................................. 75
3.2.1.3 Electrical Properties of CNC ............................................... 75
3.2.1.4 Optical Properties of CNC................................................... 78
3.2.1.5 Magnetic Properties of CNC ...............................................79
3.2.2 Cellulose Nanofiber (CNF).................................................................79
3.2.2.1 Mechanical Properties of CNF ............................................80
3.2.2.2 Electrical Properties of CNF................................................ 81
3.2.2.3 Thermal Properties of CNF.................................................. 81
3.2.2.4 Optical Properties of CNF ...................................................82
3.2.2.5 Magnetic Properties of CNF................................................82
3.2.3 Bacterial Nanocellulose (BNC)..........................................................83
3.2.3.1 Mechanical Properties of BNC............................................83
3.2.3.2 Electrical Properties of BNC ...............................................84
3.2.3.3 Thermal Properties of BNC.................................................84
3.2.3.4 Optical Properties of BNC...................................................84
3.2.3.5 Magnetic Properties of BNC ...............................................85
3.2.4 Chitin Nanocrystal (ChNC)................................................................86
3.2.4.1 Mechanical Properties of ChNC..........................................8672 Nanofillers
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Recent years have seen a surge in curiosity in the design and production of light poly￾mer composites with improved mechanical and thermal properties (Ravichandran 
et al., 2022). Thus, biopolymers have garnered considerable attention due to their 
critical role in daily life and their unique tunable properties, which make them desir￾able for an expansive range of applications (Biswas et al., 2022). Nanofillers are used 
to create nanocomposites because of the application’s key issue. It is not necessary to 
modify the density of composites when adding nanofillers to increase their mechani￾cal, electrical, thermal, magnetic, and optical characteristics (Lamouroux & Fort, 
2016). The procedures for nanocomposite synthesis and dispersion modification have 
been highlighted, and also a detailed examination of the effect of several nanofillers 
on the physicomechanical characteristics of nanocomposites in comparison to those 
of natural bone (Michael et al., 2016). Typically, nanofillers aggregate and create a 
filler cluster. This aggregation inhibits their dispersion within the polymer network 
and has an unfavorable effect on the nanocomposite characteristics (Sagadevan et al., 
2019). As a result of this extensive research and analysis of nanofillers, a wide range 
of nanocomposites are now possible. Most nanocomposite material’s mass comprises 
nanofiller particles, which can be made up of either inorganic or organic compo￾nents or even a combination of both inorganic and organic components (Saba et al., 
2014). At least one dimension of a filler must be between 1 and 100nm for it to be 
referred to as a nanofiller and for composites to be referred to as nanocomposites. 
One family of nanomaterials is the group of biocomposites, where a nano-object 
is spread in a matrix or a fraction of a more considerable substance (Lamouroux 
& Fort, 2016). Organic, carbon-based nanomaterials, inorganic, and clays are the 
3.2.4.2 Thermal Properties of ChNC...............................................88
3.2.4.3 Electrical Properties of ChNC .............................................89
3.2.4.4 Optical Properties of ChNC.................................................89
3.2.4.5 Magnetic Properties of ChNC .............................................90
3.2.5 Chitin Nanofiber (ChNF)....................................................................90
3.2.5.1 Mechanical Properties of ChNF ..........................................90
3.2.5.2 Electrical Properties of ChNF..............................................92
3.2.5.3 Thermal Properties of ChNF................................................92
3.2.5.4 Optical Properties of ChNF .................................................92
3.2.5.5 Magnetic Properties of ChNF..............................................93
3.2.6 Starch Nanocrystal (SNC) ..................................................................93
3.2.6.1 Mechanical Properties of SNC ............................................94
3.2.6.2 Thermal Properties of SNC..................................................95
3.2.6.3 Electrical Properties of SNC................................................96
3.2.6.4 Optical Properties of SNC ...................................................96
3.2.6.5 Magnetic Properties of SNC................................................96
3.3 Conclusion ......................................................................................................98
List of Abbreviations................................................................................................98
Nomenclature.........................................................................................................100
References..............................................................................................................100Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 73
most common types of nanofillers. A carbon nanostructure is a carbon nanofiller 
that includes fullerenes, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and different nanofibers. Chitin, 
starch, and cellulose are examples of organic nanofillers. The use of organic nanofill￾ers in polymer composites improves their mechanical characteristics (tensile, flex￾ural, impact, and tribological) and, most notably, their self-healing property, which 
results in their widespread application. For several technical applications, the usage 
of anti-bacterial nanocomposite coatings has increased dramatically in recent years. 
The interaction between organic nanofillers and eco-friendly biopolymers leads to 
the better functioning of nanocomposite materials. CNC, an organic nanofiller, is 
rapidly being used as a reinforcement in biodegradable polymers because of its ben￾eficial properties. It is possible to use CNFs to improve the performance of solar cells 
and other electronic equipment. Colorful optical behaviors in self-assembling films 
may be achieved by using ChNCs to construct the chiral nematic crystalline state in 
suspension. An organic nanofiller known as BNC can be used for biomedical appli￾cations. The block diagram of the applications of organic nanofillers can be seen in 
Figure 3.1.
We shall examine the properties of organic nanofillers in detail in this chapter. 
We will discuss six different organic nanofillers composed of cellulose, starch, and 
chitin, and outline those materials’ mechanical, thermal, electrical, optical, and mag￾netic properties. The six nanofillers include (i) cellulose nanocrystal (CNC), (ii) cel￾lulose nanofiber (CNF), (iii) bacterial nanocellulose (BNC), (iv) chitin nanocrystal 
(ChNC), (v) chitin nanofiber (ChNF), and (vi) starch nanocrystal (SNC). The block 
diagram of six types of organic nanofillers is shown in Figure 3.2.
Food
Organic 
Nanofillers
Packaging
Biosensors
Cosmetics
Biomedical 
Applications
Filters
Industrial 
Applications
FIGURE 3.1 Block diagram of the application of organic nanofillers. 74 Nanofillers
3.2 PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC NANOFILLERS
3.2.1 Cellulose Nanocrystal (CNC)
Nanocellulose is a lightweight, cellulose-based material with a high aspect ratio com￾posed of nanosized cellulose fibers (Tusnim et al., 2020). Biodegradable polymers 
increasingly use CNCs as reinforcement because of their favorable characteristics 
and a wide variety of potential uses (Ferreira et al., 2018). This development is due to 
creating nanocomposites with enhanced features while preserving the matrix’s bio￾degradability. Solvent casting, in situ polymerization, and melt mixing have been the 
primary methods for creating CNC-based nanocomposites. Several recent advance￾ments in producing these nanocomposites are discussed in recent review publications 
(Kargarzadeh et al., 2018; Mondal, 2018). CNCs are low in cost, readily available, 
high in strength, etc. (Khalil et al., 2014).
The different properties that CNCs bear are discussed later.
3.2.1.1 Mechanical Properties of CNC
CNCs are extended rod-like particles with high crystallinity and bending strength of 
around 10GPa. They may also be strong under tension, with strength up to 7.5GPa 
and Young’s modulus of about 150GPa (Azizi Samir et al., 2004; Jonoobi et al., 2015). 
Crystalline cellulose has a density of 1.5–1.6 g/cm3, whereas glass has a density of 
2.5 g/cm3, making it a lighter material. CNCs can be employed as reinforcement in 
nanocomposites because of their unique characteristics (Azeredo et al., 2017). CNCs 
often raise the material’s strength and modulus to a “maximum” CNC content, typi￾cally about 5% (Abdollahi et al., 2013).
The structural similarity of the two biopolymers allows for combining each com￾ponent’s characteristics in composite matrices based on chitosan reinforced with 
CNCs as nanofiller (Celebi & Kurt, 2015; Fernandes et al., 2009; Xu, Liu, et al., 2018). 
When 0.5% CNC was added to chitosan-reinforced nanocomposites (CH-CNC1h, 
FIGURE 3.2 Block diagram of various organic nanofillers. Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 75
CH-CNC2h, and CH-CNC3h), the mechanical properties improved in the case of 
CH-CNC2h films which can be seen from Figure 3.3a. Similarly, the change in 
stress due to the incorporation of CNC in the chitosan-based films can be viewed in 
Figure 3.3b. The stress value of unreinforced chitosan films was determined to be 
47.3MPa, but reinforced films reinforced with 0.75%, 0.5%, 0.25%, and 0.1% CNC 
enhanced the stress values to 60.6, 68.2, 53.9, and 55MPa, respectively (less than or 
equal to 0.05). The increase amounted to a 28.2%, 44.1%, 14%, and 16.4% increase 
in strength, respectively, when related to the CH matrix (Marín-Silva et al., 2019).
Additionally, by and large, starch films have excellent barrier characteristics 
against oxygen, lipids, and CO2. However, they exhibit poor mechanical attributes 
compared to typical synthetic polymer films (El Miri et al., 2015). If CNCs are put 
through a carboxymethylation reaction, carboxymethyl cellulose can be obtained via 
a slurry method (Hebeish et al., 2010). From Figure 3.4, we can see the elongation and 
tensile strength of the cassava starch-based nanocomposite films. Tensile strength of 
the N-CMCs/cassava starch film with N-CMCs was 5.6 and 2.8 times stronger than 
the cassava starch film without N-CMCs and the CMCs/cassava starch film with 
CMCs, respectively. A concentration of 0.5 g/100mL of N-CMCs improved the ten￾sile strength, as shown in Figure 3.4. The tensile strength of the CNC/cassava starch 
was reduced due to a rise in the concentration of CNCs from 0.4 to 0.5 g/100mL. 
This phenomenon is because as CNC aggregates easily, it has poorer dispersion when 
compared to N-CMCs due to its higher crystallinity index (Ma et al., 2017).
3.2.1.2 Thermal Properties of CNC
The melting temperature (Tm), crystallization temperature (Tc), and degree of crystal￾linity (Xc) of a polymer are all augmented by CNCs as nucleating agents. Polymer 
crystalline lamellae with thicker lamellae can increase Tm (Lipparelli Morelli et al., 
2015). As the nucleating agent, the Tc of the nanocomposite is generally pushed to a 
little higher temperature than the Tc of the neat polymer, which is directly connected 
to a higher number of disparate nuclei for crystallization (Ferreira et al., 2017). A 
reduction in Tc may also be observed (J. Chen et al., 2016).
Additionally, the hydrogen bonding between the filler and polyvinyl alcohol 
(PVA) matrix was strengthened by adding CNC, making nanocomposites much 
more thermally stable (Mandal & Chakrabarty, 2014). Moreover, the degradation 
temperature was raised by 7°C–9°C due to the addition of CNC to the gelatin matrix 
(Echegaray et al., 2016). The addition of lignin-coated CNC (L-CNC) increased the 
thermal stability at a higher temperature in the case of a 3D printed nanocomposite 
(Alam et al., 2014).
3.2.1.3 Electrical Properties of CNC
When it comes to electrical and electronics applications, CNCs are a potential mate￾rial because of their insulating characteristics and high resistivity compared to paper 
(Kang et al., 2012; Le Bras et al., 2015; Nair et al., 2016). A dielectric paper might be 
replaced with cellulosic nanocrystals in the fabrication of batteries, supercapacitors, 
and electric motors. Many electrical devices use the dielectric form, which degrades 
or absorbs humidity over time, causing them to lose their quality or collapse and 
financial losses for both the vendor and the customer. Dielectric paper is utilized 76 Nanofillers
FIGURE 3.3 Behavior of tensile tension and strain during (a) CNC-0.5% nanocomposites 
and CH films and (b) different CNC concentrations used to create CH films and nanocom￾posites (Marín-Silva et al., 2019). Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 77
in many electrical products. It would be wonderful to replace them with products 
that have better qualities. CNCs might be used in the power industry since they are 
readily available materials with fascinating features (Hernández-Flores et al., 2020).
Nowadays, piezoresistive sensors with extensive response bands and excellent 
sensitivity are in high demand as the flexible electronic sector proliferates (J. Huang 
et al., 2019; W. Huang et al., 2017; H. Liu et al., 2018; Xiao-peng et al., 2019; Zhai 
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). CNCs were added to a WPU/CNT composite foam in 
order to uplift its piezoresistive performance. As CNC loading increased, the gauge 
factor (GF) of WCT foam rose, and the GF jumped to 2.5 times the GF of compos￾ite foam without CNC. GF=(ΔR/R0)/ε, ε represents the applied compression strain, 
which is the ratio of resistance change/unit and length change/unit. That is all good 
for the sensor’s use as wearable electronics that can detect a wide range of human 
movements with varying levels of compressive strain (Zhang et al., 2020).
Additionally, various PVDF/CNC nanocomposites were electrospun with dif￾ferent CNC contents (0%–5%), and their piezoelectric properties were studied. The 
usage of CNC drastically improved the piezoelectric properties of the nanocompos￾ite. It was found that a sample with 3% or 5% CNC could quickly charge a 33-μF 
capacitor over a voltage of 6. The model was further able to light up a LED for a 
period of over half a minute (Fashandi et al., 2016).
FIGURE 3.4 Variations in tensile strength by the concentration of N-CMCs and CNCs 
(X. Ma et al., 2017). 78 Nanofillers
3.2.1.4 Optical Properties of CNC
Scientists are increasingly interested in using photonic crystals to create materials 
with structural shades (Baba, 2008; Drake & Genack, 1989; Huang, 2020; John, 
1991; Marcelo et al., 2021; Wang & Zhang, 2013; Wen et al., 2020). Materials scien￾tists may tune the chiral nematic nanostructure of CNCs-based films to produce col￾ored films, and this exhibits a 1D photonic crystal feature (Bardet et al., 2015; Gu et 
al., 2016; Khattab et al., 2020). Due to the chiral spiral morphology of the CNCs, the 
liquid crystal film’s internal structure generates circularly polarized light reflection, 
giving it outstanding optical qualities and its vibrant structural color (Duan et al., 
2021). A chiral nematic liquid composed of cellulose photonic crystals, which selec￾tively reflect visible light, causes crystals to reveal stunning structural colors when 
illuminated by natural light (Furumi et al., 2003). It is possible to find out the final 
mean refractive index through the orientation of each of the layers of the crystal mol￾ecules. Bragg diffraction occurs when light reflected off the film’s surface is irradi￾ated from a source with a different relative refractive index than that of the film itself.
Three parameters dictate the pitch (P) of the reflected light, which is
λ=reflected wavelength,
navg=mean refractive index,
sinθ=angle of incidence of the light.
λ=navg×P×sinθ (De Vries, 1951)
Because of its customized optical characteristics, cellulose chiral liquid crystal film 
may be used to create stimuli-responsive displays.
Cellulose chiral nematic liquid crystals bear some other properties also that 
include strong birefringence, and CNCs tend to manifest a high birefringence phe￾nomenon (Dumanli et al., 2014). Optical rotation is also quite fascinating in the 
case of chiral nematic crystals. The vibration plane of the light incident of the liquid 
crystal undergoes a specific deviation, and there will be a deflection angle between 
the vibration plane of the incident and the transmitted light, which can be identi￾fied through a circular polarizing filter. Thus, the crystals are able to express more 
vibrant colors on the left-hand side polarizing filter. However, the color on the right￾hand side filter will be dim in comparison to the left-hand side. With further scruti￾nization, the optical properties of the reflecting left-handed polarized light and the 
transmitting right-handed transmitting light can be corroborated (Tran et al., 2020). 
Again, in light of the eminent properties of CNCs to exhibit liquid-crystalline activ￾ity in the water, one notable application is the fabrication of iridescent products. As 
a visual phenomenon, iridescence has attracted inventors, artists, and scientists for 
ages, including Newton, Aristotle, and Darwin (Meadows et al., 2009). Additionally, 
nanopapers obtained from CNCs showed an exorbitant visible light transmittance 
which was over 90% and possessed a wavelength of around 300–800 nm. This high 
value of transmittance is beneficial for nanopapers because it allows light to pass 
through them without causing a significant amount of light scattering (Yao et al., 
2017).Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 79
3.2.1.5 Magnetic Properties of CNC
Linear chains of hydrogen-bonded β-D glucopyranose are packed together into 
nanorods with diameters of 10–20nm and lengths of 200–400nm in CNCs. CNCs 
are suitable template elements for nanomaterials because of their negative charge and 
hydroxyl (OH) groups (e.g., Au, 16). In the last few years, silica–CNCs composites 
have attracted much attention and have been utilized to create chiral nematic car￾bon needles and mesoporous carbon. Silica functioned as robust nanoreactors and 
frameworks accordingly (Asefa, 2012; Shopsowitz et al., 2011; Silva et al., 2012). To 
support an iron oxide nanoparticle, silica and CNCs were used as the coating mate￾rial and supporting template. Thus, a CNC@Fe3O4@SiO2 hybrid nanomaterial was 
formed (Chen et al., 2014). A vibrating sample magnetometer was used to investigate 
the magnetic characteristics of CNC@Fe3O4@SiO2 hybrids with varied silica shell 
depths at 300 K. Coercivity was shown to be low in the Fe3O4 and CNC@Fe3O4
hybrids, confirming the superparamagnetism of the hybrid systems through hyster￾esis loop analysis. Superparamagnetic features of the hybrids led to a rapid reaction 
to external magnetic fields and a brisk redistribution under mild shaking when the 
magnetic field was withdrawn. Many applications benefit from the reversibility of 
this procedure.
Again, in another work, Fe3O4 nanoparticles (MGCNCs) were incorporated into 
CNCs produced from bamboo utilizing an in situ coprecipitation method. After being 
disseminated in polylactic acid (PLA), a directional magnetic field was used to align 
the MGCNCs in the nanocomposites after being disseminated in PLA. Magnetically 
susceptible MGCNCs may be readily aligned in a polymeric matrix because of their 
rod-like form when the magnetic field is modest. In PLA/MGCNC nanocomposites, 
better scattering of CNCs in the polymeric matrix is envisaged as a consequence of 
the synergistic effects of two separate nanofillers (Fe3O4 nanoparticles and CNCs). 
Nanofillers have also been shown to increase the mechanical, thermal, electrical, and 
magnetic characteristics of nanocomposite films when aligned in a particular direc￾tion in a magnetic field (Dhar et al., 2016).
In addition, iron oxides (IONCs) were mixed with CNCs, upraising the filler’s 
magnetic properties. It was realized through the movement and agglomeration of 
particles in the direction of an external magnet without precipitation. Thus, it can be 
implemented in many applications, i.e., externally generated magnetic fields might 
be used to align them in various matrices and augment their mechanical characteris￾tics in a particular direction (L. Chen et al., 2020). A magnified image of a CNC filler 
mixed with IONC can be viewed in Figure 3.5.
3.2.2 Cellulose Nanofiber (CNF)
Due to the enormous specific surface area and interfacial properties, CNFs have 
significantly enhanced features such as mechanical, crystallinity, resistance, bar￾rier, and flexibility qualities (H. Lee et al., 2014; Pires et al., 2019). It is possible 
to mechanically remove CNFs, also known as “nanofibrillated cellulose,” from the 
fibrous cellulose fibers (Moohan et al., 2019). Wood cellulose fibers floating in water 
may be mechanically degraded into CNFs with 10–50 nm diameter by high-intensity 80 Nanofillers
homogenization. However, the manufacturing of such mechanically disintegrated 
CNFs consumes a tremendous amount of energy (>200 kWh/kg), making CNF pro￾duction expensive (Isogai, 2013; Isogai et al., 2010; Klemm et al., 2011).
The different properties that CNFs bear are later.
3.2.2.1 Mechanical Properties of CNF
CNFs are capable of augmenting the mechanical attributes of nanocomposites con￾siderably. When CNF was included in a PVA film, intriguing results were obtained. 
PVA nanocomposite films tensile strength and modulus increased by 74% and 90%, 
respectively, when 15% CNF loading was added (Kassab et al., 2019). Additionally, 
the PVA film tensile strength and modulus were significantly increased by 44% and 
210%, respectively, when 15% of CNF was introduced (D. Liu et al., 2013). Similarly, 
when CNFs (0.5% w/w) were added to starch films, the mechanical strength of the 
biofilm rose by 3.4% and 35%, which was related to the way of processing each of the 
components (Karimi, 2014).
Again, lignin was combined with CNFs and LCNFs in another research by Yang 
et al. (2020). When LCNFs were introduced to PVA composites, tensile strength and 
Young’s modulus were elevated considerably.
The inclusion of 5% CNFs with PLA nanocomposites increased the material’s 
modulus from around 3 to 3.6GPa (Jonoobi et al., 2010). Furthermore, adding CNF 
nanofillers to polyion complex (PIC) gels elevated their mechanical properties 
(Yataka et al., 2020). The mechanical properties of the CNF-reinforced films were 
inspected in both dry and wet conditions. In the dried state, the modulus increased to 
around 3300MPa, which exhibited an enhancement of around 65% compared to the 
original film. However, the improvement in Young’s modulus was significantly more 
significant in the wet state, which was a mammoth 1300% enhancement compared 
to the original film.
FIGURE 3.5 The IONPs and their distribution on the CNCs surface under a transmission 
electron microscope (L. Chen et al., 2020). Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 81
3.2.2.2 Electrical Properties of CNF
Because CNF is innately insulating, novel approaches must be devised to transmit 
electrical characteristics to it (Lay et al., 2016). CNFs and conductive polymers 
(CPs) can therefore be integrated to enhance the functionality of supercapacitors, 
solar cells, and other electrical gadgets that use CNFs (Luo et al., 2014; Nyholm 
et al., 2011; Tammela et al., 2015; Z. Wang et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2013; Zhu 
et al., 2013). Since CNFs are naturally insulating, the addition of merely 8% PPy 
filler resulted in a semiconductor product because of the consistently linked con￾ducting networks formed on the CNF’s surface during drying and filtering (Koga 
et al., 2014). Nanopapers contain up to 20% PPy, and the electrical conductivity was 
5.2×10–2S/cm, which is three times larger than the conventional semiconductor-like 
silicon (1.5×10–5S/cm) (Lay et al., 2016).
Again, in a work by Hou et al. (n.d.), a CNF layer is placed between two 
reduced graphene oxide (RGO) layers. Thus, a highly conductive network was 
formed with significantly higher electrical conductivity to around 4382 Sm–1 than 
the base composite paper. Insights for biobased flexible electronic devices were 
provided by this successful technique offered at an affordable price. Additionally, 
supercapacitor electrodes made from CNFs have the most full-electrode-normal￾ized volumetric (122 F/cm3) and gravimetric (127 F/g) capacitances at high current 
densities (300 mA/cm2 33 A/g) to date (Z. Wang et al., 2015). Moreover, dielectric 
constant (k) is a fundamental property for high-touch-sensitivity applications—
ultralong metal nanofibers embedded in CNF films improve k significantly. Thus, 
different electronic gadgets have been established based on this principle (Ji et al., 
2017).
3.2.2.3 Thermal Properties of CNF
Many researchers have investigated starch-based bioplastics (Abral et al., 2017; 
Panchagnula & Kuppan, 2019; Syafri et al., 2017). However, starch possesses low 
thermal stability, which can be overcome by using organic nanofillers. Biomass 
derived from CNFs can enhance bioplastic’s thermal characteristics. The loss sample 
was reduced due to an addition in the CNF content in the case of a CNF/PCC nano￾composite. As the number of nanofillers was elevated, the loss was further reduced 
(Syafri et al., 2018). Raised filler content improves thermal stability because of the 
strong bond between fibers and matrix (Prachayawarakorn et al., 2013). Additionally, 
when CNFs were added to kenaf/epoxy composite, due to the cross-linked CNF fill￾er’s better heat receptivity and the epoxy matrix’s limitation of molecular mobility, 
CNF/kenaf/epoxy hybrid nanocomposite demonstrated exceptional thermal stability 
(S. H. Lee et al., 2011; Saba et al., 2017).
Thermoplastic starch (TPS) is one of the most popular natural polymers due to 
its inexpensive cost and good physical attributes (Balakrishnan et al., 2017). On the 
other hand, TPS has several downsides, such as lower heat stability than other ther￾moplastic polymers (Glenn et al., 2011). When CNFs were added to TPSs, the ther￾mal results showed that 1.5% CNF provided better resistivity toward heat. Moreover, 
the TPS-foamed composites’ Tg was raised by the addition of CNFs (Ghanbari et al., 
2018).82 Nanofillers
3.2.2.4 Optical Properties of CNF
CNFs possess high optical properties. PMMA nanocomposites reinforced with CNFs 
were developed in the research by D. W. Kim et al. (2020). The optical transparency 
of the composite films in the range of CNF concentration was equivalent to that of 
the pristine PMMA films, with a transmittance of around 87% at 600 nm which we 
can see in Figure 3.6. This value was similar to the N,N-dimethylformamide solvent 
cast PMMA/CNF nanocomposite film (Fujisawa et al., 2018).
In another work, a simple water solution method was used to create poly(ethylene 
oxide)/CNF nanocomposite (Safdari et al., 2017). When CNFs were mixed, the opti￾cal characteristics of PEO were unaffected by the addition of CNFs, indicating that 
the scattering of CNFs in PEO was excellent (Petersson & Oksman, 2006; Safdari 
et al., 2016). Only a 5% drop in transmittance values was recorded by inserting 5wt% 
CNFs into PLA film. Optoelectronic and optical use was possible for this very reason 
(Janardhnan & Sain, 2011; Kalia et al., 2014; Safdari et al., 2016; Siro & Plackett, 
2010; Tercjak et al., 2015; X. Xu et al., 2013).
Furthermore, CNFs made by electrospinning cellulose acetate from bamboo cel￾lulose and then deacetylating it were employed as supports to create optically trans￾parent composites. Even though the final composite film had a large percentage of 
fibers, it nevertheless manifested an excellent transmittance of light (Cai et al., 2016).
3.2.2.5 Magnetic Properties of CNF
Nanocellulose, a biodegradable, low-density, superior mechanical and elevated sur￾face area substance, has substantial advantages over other materials employed as 
templates for the manufacture of nanomaterials (Moon et al., 2011). Crystalline pack￾ing, vital physical characteristics, and nanomaterial’s formation/condensation are all 
controlled by H-bonding between cellulose’s OH groups on the surface, which also 
provides a nanofiber network for the formation of nanoparticles. The next generation 
of renewable nanomaterials for high-performance, long-term-use materials is being 
studied, and nanocellulose is one (Walther et al., 2011). In a work by Amiralian 
FIGURE 3.6 Transmittance spectra of PMMA/CNF films (D. W. Kim et al., 2020). Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 83
et al., assembling a relatively homogeneous flexible nanocomposite membrane with 
high levels of magnetic nanoparticles by synthesizing nanomaterials on the surfaces 
of colloidal suspensions of colloidal fibers was exhibited. CNFs were effectively 
employed as a layout to produce magnetic nanoparticles with diameters below 20 nm 
and limited size distribution. A densely packed iron oxide nanoparticle structure 
on the surfaces of nanofibers, which contributes to the high magnetic characteris￾tics, was shown to form due to the nucleation and development of nanomaterials 
on nanofiber surfaces first and subsequently on Fe3O4 nanomaterials grafted onto 
CNF (Amiralian et al., 2020). Similarly, CNFs were mixed with magnetite nanopar￾ticles, and a membrane was created for loudspeakers (Tarrés et al., 2017). The present 
loudspeakers, which are usually electrodynamic and rely on the motion of a magnet 
owing to the induction of a magnetic field when a coil is stimulated electrically, 
might benefit from the employment of these nanoparticles on membranes.
3.2.3 Bacterial Nanocellulose (BNC)
Due to its remarkable physical and biological properties, BNC has arisen as a natu￾ral biopolymer of extraordinary value in several technical fields. In the form of an 
exopolysaccharide of β-D glucopyranose, bacteria can produce the promising natural 
biopolymer known as BNC. BNC is well suited for adhesion and cellular immobiliza￾tion due to its nanostructured shape and water-holding capability, which is compa￾rable to that of collagen, an extracellular matrix protein. As a result of its numerous 
unique features, BNC falls under the group of items generally regarded as safe 
(El-Hoseny et al., 2015; Sharma & Bhardwaj, 2019). Young’s modulus of BNC in a 
dry state is around 15–35GPa. Its tensile strength is around 300MPa (Stanisławska, 
2016).
The different properties that BNCs bear are discussed later.
3.2.3.1 Mechanical Properties of BNC
Studies in the papermaking sector have shown that BNC may be used for biomedical 
purposes. Inter-fiber interaction is enhanced by its nanoscale fibers and vast free OH 
groups. As a result, BNC is an excellent reinforcing material for recycled paper and 
nonwoody cellulosic paper with high mechanical strength (Skočaj, 2019). Moreover, 
when BNCs were added to cement particles, the mechanical features of the cement 
increased. Mechanical characteristics are improved when BNC between 0.05% and 
0.20% was added to the cement. This improvement might also be due to increased 
hydration, which boosts the substance’s strength (Barría et al., 2021).
Again, it was found that by combining polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA) 
and BNC gels using polyethylene glycol as a solvent (BNC/PEG gel), the gel’s 
mechanical strength was increased, resulting in a composite structure (Numata 
et al., 2015). Mechanical qualities like tear resistance and form retention of natural 
BNC are superior to synthetic materials. BNC treated into a film or sheet has excel￾lent mechanical toughness when combined with organic layers, like cellophane or 
polypropylene (Stanisławska, 2016).84 Nanofillers
3.2.3.2 Electrical Properties of BNC
The usage of BNC nanocomposites in flexible electrodes, supercapacitors, or biosen￾sors has recently been researched (X. Chen et al., 2016; Qiu & Netravali, 2014). After 
being pyrolyzed in nanocomposites, BNC can be utilized as an electrical conductor 
(L.-F. Chen et al., 2013; Liang et al., 2012; B. Wang et al., 2013; Z.-Y. Wu et al., 
2013). Nanocomposites may also be made using BNC as an ideal matrix for conduct￾ing nanocomposites with other materials (Gutierrez et al., 2012; Kang et al., 2012; 
J. Shah & Brown, 2005; Wan et al., 2018). A bio-triboelectric-based nanogenerator 
(Bio-TENG) based on BNC (an eco-friendly and plentiful biomaterial) was described 
for the first time in a research carried out by H.-J. Kim et al., (2017, p. 130–137). At a 
load resistance of 1MΩ, the BNC bio-accumulated TENG’s charges and maximum 
power density may reach around 8 μC/m2 and 5 mW/m2, respectively.
Thanks to BNC films, flexible optoelectronic devices and systems may now use an 
entirely new application area. Disposable/biocompatible electronics, including paper 
RFID, smart packaging, and point-of-care systems in bio-applications, may be made 
using BNC because of its compatibility with large-scale/extensive area deposition 
processes (Fortunato, 2016).
3.2.3.3 Thermal Properties of BNC
BNC’s low thermal conductivity makes it an excellent support material for inter￾face solar steam production because it effectively transports water and manages heat 
(Q. Jiang et al., 2016). Layers of BNC and PDA were used to create a biodegradable, 
scalable, and flexible solar steam generator (Q. Jiang et al., 2017). The device showed 
excellent photothermal conversion and localization of heat. Additionally, the layers of 
PDA/BNC illustrated remarkable steam generation capability under the sun. The effi￾cacy was around the 78% mark. Again, polydopamine (PDA) particulates and BNC 
were used to create a bilayer photothermal membrane with a permeate flow of 1 kg/
m2/h under single solar irradiation, and the efficiency of solar energy to collected 
water was shown to be as high as 68% (X. Wu et al., 2021). It is an excellent solution 
for reducing nondegradable polymer pollutants, as both BNC and PDA are biodegrad￾able materials compared to other polymer-based membranes (Q. Jiang et al., 2017).
A mass loss of 53.57% on average and a residual mass of 46.43% were found by 
thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in the thermal degradation of BNC. The activa￾tion energy (Ea=59.39 kJ/mol) and preexponential factor (ko=1.62×1010min–1) for 
BNC were calculated using kinetic modeling, suggesting that the compound is highly 
reactive, possessing a very high thermal reactivity (Nyakuma et al., 2021).
3.2.3.4 Optical Properties of BNC
Excellent features such as high flexibility and porosity make BNC an ideal choice for 
use as a substrate to create optical (bio)sensors. It was possible to create a portable, 
efficient, inexpensive assay kit for HSA monitoring by integrating the optical charac￾teristics of curcumin with the intriguing qualities of BNC nanopaper as a promising 
sensing substrate (Naghdi et al., 2019). Moreover, a technique for making nanocom￾posites using BNC and metal nanoparticles that self-assemble has been discovered 
for the first time. An increase in absorption wavelengths may be achieved by com￾pressing BNC–AuNP composites, which results in regulated near-field interaction Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 85
between the two nanoparticles. For colorimetric biosensor development, it is critical 
that biomolecule adsorption on NPs can thoroughly screen their near-field contact 
upon being compressed (Eskilson et al., 2020).
Furthermore, BNC and PDA (polydopamine)/BNC membranes were analyzed 
at wavelengths ranging from 450 to 700 nm for optical transmission and reflection. 
BNC’s light transmittance was 59%, while its reflectance was just 11%, resulting 
in a 30% light extinction. However, FTCS-PDA/BNC showed exceedingly minimal 
light transmittance (0%) and reflectance (2%), which led to a light extinction (98%) 
in the visible range after polydopamine particles were loaded. The FTCS-PDA/BNC 
membrane’s good light-to-heat conversion may be ascribed to the PDA particles’ 
strong light extinction in the BNC network, which is responsible for the membrane’s 
high light extinction (X. Wu et al., 2021). We can view the comparison between the 
reflectance, the transmittance, and the extinction in Figure 3.7a and b.
For water purification, the development of flexible, porous, and self-supported 
BNC/MoS2 hybrid aerogel films with photocatalytic and absorptive capabilities was 
reported. For in-flow photo-assisted removal of organic model pollutants (MB dye) 
and hazardous heavy metal compounds (Cr(VI)), the material’s efficacy in a spe￾cially built membrane photoreactor was examined. MoS2 nanostructures mixed with 
BNC membranes almost perfectly removed pollutants by boosting the membrane’s 
adsorption ability and providing visible light photocatalytic properties (Ferreira￾Neto et al., 2020).
3.2.3.5 Magnetic Properties of BNC
BNC lacks magnetic properties, but ferrites (Fe3O4) can be mixed to give it a magnetic 
character. BNC/Fe3O4 nanocomposite films may be prepared using the in situ synthe￾sis approach, which involves two or three processes. This method can be executed at 
room temperature as well. For the nanocomposites, it was crucial to boost the satu￾ration magnetization (Ms) dependent on nanoparticle dispersion while using simple 
FIGURE 3.7 (a) Transmittance and reflectance of light of FTCS-PDA/BNC and neat BNC 
membranes, (b) extinction of light of FTCS-PDA/BNC and neat BNC membranes (X. Wu 
et al., 2021). 86 Nanofillers
procedures (N. Shah et al., 2013; Yingkamhaeng et al., 2018). The MS value of BNC/
Fe3O4 CNFs was around 40.57 emu/g, which is a high number. It was clear from the 
FE-SEM and TGA data that Fe3O4 NPs may be found embedded in BNC nanofibrils, 
with an exceptional distribution of nanoparticles in the BNC matrix. BNCs act as a 
template for various metals capable of providing magnetic properties (Yingkamhaeng 
et al., 2018). Again, BNC nanoribbons were used as a template in preparing cobalt fer￾rite nanotubes (NTs). At ambient temperature, the BNC-templated CoFe2O4 nanotubes 
displayed magnetic characteristics. Nanomaterials in the superparamagnetic condition 
were found to alter the magnetic behavior (Menchaca-Nal et al., 2016).
Furthermore, coprecipitation of natural IONPs in situ resulted in a magnetically 
synthesized BNC. The BNC fiber framework and IONPs formed a strong connection, 
and the IONPs were distributed uniformly. It was also shown to have a paramagnetic 
reaction suggesting it might be an excellent choice for coating an aneurysm-neck 
stent. Thus, this MBNC will help implement a magnetic field (external) for the treat￾ment of PBI injuries in a unique magnetic approach (Arias et al., 2016).
The different properties related to CNCs, CNFs, and BNCs have been illustrated 
above. The different types of CNCs can be seen in Figure 3.8, and the molecular 
structure of cellulose can be viewed in Figure 3.9.
3.2.4 Chitin Nanocrystal (ChNC)
ChNCs, crystalline rod-like nanomaterials obtained from natural sources, have a 
high aspect ratio, a high modulus, and excellent reinforcing capacity toward poly￾mers (Y. Liu et al., 2018). It is common for ChNCs to have widths of around 10–50 nm 
and lengths of around 150–200 nm, which leads to a high ratio. Polymers benefit 
from CNCs’ high elastic modulus of 150GPa, which provides a significant amount 
of reinforcement (M. Liu et al., 2015). Physical cross-linking via H-bonding with 
polymer chains may be achieved using ChNC reinforcements for polymer hydrogels 
(Y. Huang et al., 2015; M. Liu et al., 2015).
The different properties that ChNCs bear are discussed later.
3.2.4.1 Mechanical Properties of ChNC
In a research, poly(lactic acid) was employed as the core and polyacrylonitrile/ChNCs 
as the shell for core–shell nanofibers. Coaxial membranes with nanocrystals saw a 
FIGURE 3.8 Microscopic images of different kinds of nanocellulose: (a) CNCs, (b) CNF, 
and (c) BNC (Thomas et al., 2018). Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 87
rise in tensile strength and elastic modulus compared to coaxial membranes that did 
not. The most extraordinary mechanical characteristics were found at 15wt% ChNC. 
ChNC-coated coaxial fibers were very hydrophilic in nature (Jalvo et al., 2017). A 
novel epoxidized natural rubber (ENR)/ChNCs composites were successfully manu￾factured without standard cross-linking agents in another study. ChNC OH groups 
interacted with epoxy groups in ENR, resulting in hydrogen bonds between the two 
molecules. This interaction allowed ChNCs to develop supramolecular networks, 
enhancing mechanical characteristics while also providing ENR/CNC composites 
with improved self-healing capabilities. There has been an almost two-fold increase 
in ENR/CNC composite’s mechanical strength, including 20% ChNCs compared to 
the clean ENR (1.1MPa) (Nie et al., 2019).
ChNCs, when used as nanofillers in a cross-linked styrene-butadiene rubber 
(S-xSBR) matrix, enhance their mechanical properties substantially. Static and 
dynamic tensile strength and modulus may both be improved greatly by including 
CNCs. For S-xSBR/CNC/CNC composites, the tensile strength and the tensile mod￾ulus, when 4wt% ChNCs are added, are 97% and 62.5% greater than neat S-xSBR 
(L. Ma et al., 2016). ChNCs are also responsible for elevating the tensile strength 
of NR/CNC amalgams. 5.75MPa is the tensile strength of the NR/CNCs nanocom￾posite comprising 5% ChNCs, which is around six times more than neat NR. The 
uniform distribution of CNCs and the excellent interfacial contacts between rubber 
and ChNC molecular chains are responsible for the improved NR characteristics 
(Y. Liu et al., 2018). The tensile strength of PLA nanocomposite is augmented by 
about 30MPa from 41MPa when orientated using ChNCs. The prolongation at break 
FIGURE 3.9 H-bonding among several cellulosic units (Rana et al., 2021). 88 Nanofillers
was significantly enhanced to 55% more than the neat nanocomposite when ChNCs 
were used (Singh et al., 2018).
3.2.4.2 Thermal Properties of ChNC
ChNCs are responsible for improving the thermal stability in biocomposite films 
(Salaberria et al., 2014, 2015). In a study, nanocomposite films based on PVA with 
varying concentrations of Origanum vulgare essential oil were reinforced with 0.5% 
(w/v) of alpha ChNCs and made by solvent casting. The integration of ChNCs into 
the PVA/OEO films improved their thermal stability. Degradation at high tempera￾tures (380°C) of ChNCs and the substantial uniformity and contact between PVA 
and ChNCs have been linked to this phenomenon. At the same time, increased crys￾tallinity of PVA molecules in the presence of the nanocrystals is also a good chance 
(Fernández-Marín et al., 2020). In another work, CNF and ChNC self-bonded com￾posite films were manufactured using hot pressing to test their characteristics. The 
inclusion of ChNCs improved the composite’s heat resistance (Herrera et al., 2016).
Composites of natural rubber (NR) and ChNCs were prepared by combining 
ChNCs dispersions with NR latex. Rubber’s thermal stability was improved because 
of the inclusion of ChNCs equally disseminated throughout the NR matrix. TGA was 
used to test the NR/ChNCs composites for thermal stability, as shown in Figure 3.10. 
FIGURE 3.10 Composite NR/CNCs with varying ChNCs contents as determined by TA 
(Y. Liu et al., 2018). Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 89
In the whole temperature range, the weight loss curve of plain NR is lower than the 
curves of NR/ChNC compounds. The thermal stability of NR seems to be enhanced 
by using ChNCs. At 600°C, ChNC-infused NR/ChNC composites had a higher resi￾due than NR/ChNCs without CNCs (Y. Liu et al., 2018). ChNCs depicted a positive 
impact on the thermomechanical properties of PLA composites. The tan delta peak 
shifted to an elevated temperature with rising ChNC concentration in the material. 
Both the ChNC in the nanoparticles and the arrangement of the ChNC with the poly￾mer chains caused by solid-state drawing are predicted to have synergistic impacts 
on these improvements in thermal characteristics (Singh et al., 2018).
3.2.4.3 Electrical Properties of ChNC
By using chitosan-based nanocomposite films reinforced with ChNCs, several dielec￾tric and conductivity tests were performed in a research performed by Salaberría 
et al. (2018). Under isothermal circumstances at a temperature of 298 K, the com￾plex conductivity was measured at a frequency of 10–2 to 107Hz. At lower frequencies, 
direct current (DC) showed a significant impact, but at higher frequencies, alternant 
current (AC) had a significant impact. As chitin concentration in the bionanocompos￾ites grew, the AC conductivity of the bionanocomposites marginally improved until 
the CH/ChNC had the same chitin and chitosan fractions. However, a drop in DC con￾ductivity was seen for chitin content in bionanocomposites as its value rose minimally. 
This pattern continued until the DC conductivity was the same for both CH and ChNC. 
The conductivity rocketed for chitin levels greater than around 50%, and the overall 
functioning of the heterogeneous system was impacted by the dispersal of the ChNCs 
in the CH matrix. These findings matched up with those from examining the dielectric 
relaxation spectra. Due to a phase transition break, the ChNCs clogged the chitosan 
matrix’s conductivity pathways.
3.2.4.4 Optical Properties of ChNC
For self-assembling substances (films) to display colorful optical behaviors that origi￾nate from reflected wavelengths, ChNC can produce the chiral nematic crystalline 
phase in suspensions (Y. Wang et al., 2019). ChNCs were used in an investigation by 
Zhong et al. to see if they could be used in tandem with a current pliable packaging 
surface coating. Oxidized ChNCs were used in a water-based acrylic resin (WBAR). 
Flexible films of biaxially oriented polypropylene that contained ChNCs, either as an 
extra to the matrix or as a continuous network in a lamina, did not reduce the original 
packaging’s optical transparency but instead preserved it. Contemporary packaging 
materials seek transparency as a desirable quality (Zhong et al., 2019). Additionally, 
in a work, acrylated epoxy soybean oil (AESO) dispersions with ChNCs as the only 
amalgamate were successfully created employing ChNC as a biobased aqueous 
coalescence. Increased toughness may be achieved by keeping optical transparency 
intact by including ChNCs in the treated layers (Cheikh et al., 2021).
The properties shown by ChNCs in a chitosan/O-ChNC matrix were found by 
Wu et al. ChNC nanofillers build up in the chitosan matrix-induced light diffusion 
or reduced optical transmission when ChNCs were incorporated into the chitosan 
matrix. However, the film obtained showed high optical transparency (C. Wu et al., 
2019).90 Nanofillers
3.2.4.5 Magnetic Properties of ChNC
Very insufficient research has been performed so far regarding the magnetic prop￾erties of ChNCs. In a study, in a strong magnetic field of around 5 Tesla, a ChNC/
polyacrylic acid composite film was created. The liquid crystal form of ChNC 
nanoparticles was stabilized via free-radical polymerization, which was photo-initi￾ated. The long axis of these rod-shaped nanoparticles was found to form a 90° angle 
with the magnetic field (Morganti et al., 2006).
3.2.5 Chitin Nanofiber (ChNF)
Chitin has recently gained increased attention as a promising material for enzyme 
immobilization due to its biodegradability, biocompatibility, renewability, sustain￾ability, high affinity for enzymes, accessibility of reactive groups for chemical 
treatment, and mechanical stability. Nanofibers of chitin have diameters of 15 nm 
and up to several micrometers in length (Gopalan Nair & Dufresne, 2003; J. Wu 
et al., 2014). Because of the protonation of amine units under suitably acidic circum￾stances, ChNFs have a total ionic charge on their surfaces which is positive in nature 
(Junkasem et al., 2006).
The different properties that ChNFs bear are discussed later.
3.2.5.1 Mechanical Properties of ChNF
The viscoelastic reaction of the ChNF network is rate-dependent so that displace￾ment decreases with a higher applied load for a constant load. Although surface 
quality and inherent inhomogeneity are likely to account for the minor dispersion in 
the stress-strain data, the average result of the material beneath the punch diameter 
is sufficiently repeatable (Hassanzadeh et al., 2014). The axially symmetric flattened 
punch nano-indentation of viscoelastic layers and the extraction of material proper￾ties, most notably via creep tests, have been explored experimentally and theoretically 
(L. Cheng et al., 2000; Y.-T. Cheng & Yang, 2009). Chitin has a strain-dependent 
reaction, and when compressed to 40%, the chitin layer exhibits a functional elastic￾ity in the region of around 4–5GPa. The small strain modulus (about 2GPa) is con￾sistent with the bulk tensile tests mentioned previously, while the significant strain 
modulus is consistent with the single nanofiber modulus computed previously. A set 
of 600 s creep trials (all performed at different sites) with constant loads of one, two, 
and four mN demonstrate the characteristic steady rise in strain with time associated 
with a creeping process. Within each load step, the dispersion in data is caused by 
somewhat varied beginning strains and variable drift rates, which typically decrease 
with each consecutive indentation as the device stabilizes (Hassanzadeh et al., 2014). 
Again, in another work, SEM, phase diagram, and textural and rheological investi￾gations were performed to determine the mechanical characteristics of ChNF-SPI 
complex gel. ChNFs aided in the development of gel by forming an initial frame￾work. The electrostatic interactions made the SPI gel stiffer. The textural features of 
SPI-ChNF gels were evaluated using massive deformation rheology. Gels of varied 
protein concentrations were tested for hardness, chewiness, cohesiveness, gummi￾ness, and resilience. The gel’s hardness is augmented with the addition of ChNF at Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 91
both protein concentrations, which is in line with the minor deformation rheological 
findings. There was a similar pattern in the findings of gumminess and chewiness. 
We can see the change in properties in Figure 3.11a. As a result of the ChNFs, frac￾ture strain and compressive stress have increased. After combining with ChNFs at 
about 7% protein concentration, the fracture strain rose from around 0.5 to 0.7. Even 
FIGURE 3.11 (a) Texture profile analysis (TPA) and (b) stress-strain curve of ChNF-SPI 
gels as a function of protein and ChNF concentration (Q.-H. Chen et al., 2021). 92 Nanofillers
under compression strain, the 9% SPI-ChNF complex gel did not shatter, and the 
ultimate stress value was nearly two times higher than that of the SPI gel. We can see 
the changes in stress and strain in Figure 3.11b (Q.-H. Chen et al., 2021).
3.2.5.2 Electrical Properties of ChNF
It is well established that chitin exhibits piezoelectric capabilities (due to inherent 
molecular polarization caused by the noncentrosymmetric crystalline construction 
of both β-chitin and α-chitin polymorphs) (Fukada & Sasaki, 1975; J. Huang et al., 
2017). The easily controllable ferroelectric chitin film exhibits superior piezoelec￾tricity when exposed to external mechanical pressure, comparable to that of stan￾dard piezoelectric polymers based on stand Fl (K. Kim et al., 2018). Notably, the 
adequate piezoelectric performance of the chitin sheet enables to demonstrate not 
only an increased printed microphone and speaker that perform over an extensive 
range of frequencies without substantially degrading the output and input resonances 
but also a transparent speaker composed of AgNWs electrodes on freestanding chitin 
film that also reproduces the original sound. The sustainable chitin polymer may be 
effectively destroyed within 8 days using the chitinase enzyme, leaving no harmful 
residues behind.
Jin et al. described the manufacturing and characterization of a transparent ChNF 
paper and illustrated its promise as a base material for foldable sustainable electron￾ics by building an OLED gadget on the ChNF paper. The OLED device created on 
the ChNF substrate surface performed satisfactorily; with time, it beats a benchmark 
device produced on a more excellent artificial plastic film. We envision using ChNF 
translucent sheet as a structural foundation for foldable green electronics due to its 
reassuring macroscopic features, biofriendly traits, and abundance of the raw mate￾rial (Jin et al., 2016).
3.2.5.3 Thermal Properties of ChNF
A simple blending procedure was performed to manufacture the nanocomposite with 
varying ChNF and BACNF concentrations (Hai et al., 2020). Hai et al. explored the 
nanocomposite’s morphologies, mechanical characteristics, chemical interactions, 
thermal characteristics, water contact angles, and biodegradability. The nanocom￾posite is more thermally stable than pure BACNF. TGA was used to study the heat 
breakdown of the chitin-cellulose nanocomposite. Evaporation of water molecules 
in the nanocomposites is found at the first temperature range of 30°C–100°C. ChNF 
begins to degrade at approximately 230°C. The ChNF has superior thermal stability 
when contrasted to the BACNF (Hai et al., 2020). Compared to plain PVA, adding 
α-chitin whiskers resulted in a significant delay in the heat degradation of PVA nano￾composites (Sriupayo et al., 2005).
3.2.5.4 Optical Properties of ChNF
Naghdi et al. took benefit of the excellent features of CNF paper to construct bio￾active, productive, transparent, flexible, and shrunken optical sensing bioplatforms 
by incorporating numerous plasmonic nanomaterials (silver and gold nanomaterials), 
photoluminescent nanoparticles, and colorimetric reagents (dithizone, curcumin, etc.) 
in ChNF paper’s nanonetwork framework. Mobile phones were used in conjunction Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 93
with the established ChNF paper-based sensing bioplatforms by Naghdi et al. to digi￾tize the pictures of the acquired colorimetric/fluorometric readings. Indeed, by link￾ing ChNF paper-based sensors to phone technologies and designing an IoNT model, 
these new biosensing stages can be used as economical, consumer, and transportable 
sensing or monitoring devices, particularly in evolving smart municipalities (Naghdi 
et al., 2020). Because of their unique nanostructure and superior physicochemical 
parameters, ChNF films are considered to be suitable for chiral separation mem￾branes (Ifuku & Saimoto, 2012).
3.2.5.5 Magnetic Properties of ChNF
In W.-C Huang et al.’s work, a novel biodegradable magnetic ChNF composite 
(MCNC) was developed as a platform for enzyme immobilization.
Chymotrypsin (CT) was utilized as a prototype enzyme, and its immobilization in 
the MCNCs was successful. The stability of the immobilized CTs was much greater 
than that of the free CTs. Cross-linking of CTs significantly increased the load-bear￾ing capacity of the MCNCs. Additionally, the synthetic biocatalytic system demon￾strated high recyclability. These findings indicated that the MCNC has considerable 
potential to be used as a substrate for the immobilization of a variety of enzymes in 
biomedical applications (W.-C. Huang et al., 2018).
3.2.6 Starch Nanocrystal (SNC)
Starch is a biodegradable and renewable polymer that many plants manufacture 
for energy storage. Human beings and their forefathers have always consumed 
starchy foods. Starch grains were recently (2010) detected in grinding stones from 
30,000-year-old Europe (Italy, the Czech Republic, and Russia) (Healy & Healy, 
1999). Beans, maize, potatoes, rice, wheat, and sago are just a few of the numerous 
crops that provide starch (Hoque et al., 2013). Cereal kernels account for most of the 
composition, at about 60%. The fundamental advantage of starch is that it can be 
readily isolated from other parts and the granules have varying forms, dimensions, 
topologies, and chemical compositions based on their various botanical sources 
(Saha et al., 2020). The practical utilization of starch derivatives (i.e., nonfood appli￾cations) began when Egyptians glued papyrus strips together with a wheat starch 
adhesive (Revedin et al., 2010).
Nowadays, the main applications of starch have remained relatively constant, with 
approximately 60% being utilized for foods and 40% for commercial applications 
(Huber & BeMiller, 2010). SNCs are the crystalline structures that remain after the 
amorphous structures of starch granules are destroyed by acid hydrolysis. SNCs, 
starch crystallites, microcrystalline starch, and hydrolyzed starches are all terms that 
refer to the crystalline portion of starch that is formed during hydrolysis. They dif￾fer in the amount to which they have been hydrolyzed (from the most to the least). 
They must be differentiated from starch nanoparticles, of which they are subtypes 
and capable of becoming amorphous (Le Corre & Angellier-Coussy, 2014). The fol￾lowing review focuses on SNC, a kind of SNP possessing crystalline properties and 
a platelet-like shape. SNC can be extracted from various starch botanical sources, 
resulting in a wide variety of amylose concentrations, form, suspension viscosity, 94 Nanofillers
surface reactivity, and thermal resistance. So far, the most frequently used method 
for obtaining SNC is moderate acid hydrolysis of native granular starch’s amorphous 
components. Until now, alternative procedures have resulted in significantly lower 
yields. Since the inception of SNC research, the primary objective has been to utilize 
them as reinforcement for polymer matrices. Due to the high reactivity of starch, the 
surface of SNCs can be changed via grafting or cross-linking, resulting in a more 
dispersible material in the polymer matrix (Le Corre & Angellier-Coussy, 2014).
The different properties that SNCs bear are discussed later.
3.2.6.1 Mechanical Properties of SNC
Interfacial interactions between the polymer and the filler were crucial in increasing 
the mechanical properties of nanocomposites due to the nanoparticle’s unusually high 
surface areas (N.-J. Huang et al., 2017). When nanoclay is added to nanocomposite 
layers, the tensile characteristics of the material and the elastic modulus rise, while 
the elasticity at break decreases in comparison to the starch/PVA mixture. These 
improvements in mechanical qualities corroborated prior findings (N.-J. Huang et al., 
2017). They demonstrated that increasing the amount of Na-MMT in TPS/Na-MMT 
nanocomposites from 0% to 30% by weight increased the tensile strength to 27.34MPa 
from around 6MPa and decreased the elongation at break from around 85% to 18%. 
Additionally, Wetzel et al. established that for starch/PVA/Na-MMT nanostructures 
to have enhanced mechanical characteristics, H-bonds among the nanoparticles and 
polymer chains must be formed first (Wetzel et al., 2003). Additionally, Ali et al. 
demonstrated that adding Na-MMT with a proportion of 10–100 enhanced the inter￾facial contacts among nanoclays and polymer chains through hydrogen bondings 
(Ali et al., 2011); besides the physical intertwining of polymer chains generated by 
nanoclays, the important hydrogen bonding contact among nanoclays and polymer 
matrix increased the mechanical properties. Compared to neat PLA, with the addi￾tion of SNC and Ac-SNC (acetylated SNC), all nanocomposites tensile properties 
and elastic modulus were enhanced. Tensile strength measures a material’s ability to 
withstand stress (Yu et al., 2008). As the proportion of nanofiller was increased to 
3% by weight (Yan et al., 2013), the reinforcement effect became more pronounced. 
The PLA-Ac-SNC-3wt% had the highest tensile strength, which may result from the 
boosted interfacial adhesion and dissemination of Ac-SNC inside the PLA matrix 
(Xu, Chen, et al., 2018; Yin et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2011; Arrieta et al., 2014). When 
SNC and Ac-SNC were added to neat PLA, the pattern in elongation at break val￾ues shifted in the other direction, with values dropping. The reduction of value was 
more noticeable in PLA-SNC nanocomposite; this indicated that the nanocomposite 
had increased brittleness due to the existence of rigid SNC (Fortunati et al., 2015; 
Robles et al., 2015). However, there was a growth in PLA-Ac-SNC nanocomposites 
compared to PLA-SNC nanocomposites. PLA nanocomposite containing untreated 
and treated CNCs (surfactant) yielded similar results (Fortunati et al., 2015). This 
phenomenon highlighted the beneficial effect of acetylation on nanocomposites. 
Tensile testing validated the plasticizing effect induced by surface treatment of SNC 
nanocomposites, and the results supplemented the nanocomposite’s morphology 
(Fortunati et al., 2015). Overall, this suggested that depending on the concentra￾tion and alteration of the surface of SNC, the ultimate properties of nanocomposites Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 95
may be altered to meet the specifications of the intended application. As a result, 
biodegradable nanocomposites are formed. Additionally, all packed nanocomposites 
outperformed their unfilled counterparts or tidy PLA (Bondeson & Oksman, 2007).
3.2.6.2 Thermal Properties of SNC
The addition of nanoparticles to the mixture augmented the thermal stability of 
nanostructured materials in general (Sessini et al., 2019). Nanoclay platelets worked 
as gas-permeable barriers, and the polymeric matrix’s thermal stability improved the 
quality of this barrier effect alongside its inorganic nature. Additionally, physico￾chemical dalliances and significant hydrogen bonding between nanoclay and poly￾mer chain layers hindered polymer chain mobility (Leszczynska & Pielichowski, 
2008). Consequently, the temperature at which particular nanocomposites began to 
degrade was more significant than the temperature at which the pure mix began to 
degrade. These findings agreed with those of Wang et al., who discovered that com￾bining cellulose nanowhiskers and SNCs in an aqueous polyurethane matrix could 
improve the thermal stability of nanocomposites. However, the BSN5 nanocomposite 
with 5 % weight SNCs had the lowest thermal stability due to SNC agglomeration. 
These findings were consistent with the deficient mechanical properties obtained 
for BSN5. At 500°C, in general, the addition of nanofillers boosted residual mass. 
The residual mass for samples BCL5, BCL3, and BCL1 was around 17%, 15%, and 
14.7%, respectively. For the blend that was pure, the amount was close to 15%. In gen￾eral, the addition of nanofillers increased residual mass. Two variables most likely 
contributed to this increase in residual mass: (i) nanofillers mass and (ii) an elevation 
in the interfacial area between fillers and polymers as a consequence of nanofillers 
being uniformly dispersed throughout the polymer matrix leading to more effective 
interactions between them.
From the work of Takkalkar et al., we can see the TGA profiles of unprocessed 
waxed maize starch and SNC. Both raw waxy maize starch and SNC went through 
three significant stages of degradation (Takkalkar et al., 2019). Between 30°C and 
110°C, the first stage is evident, which can be attributable to moisture loss through 
dehydration/evaporation. As shown by a lower weight loss % for SNC, SNC appears 
to have a lower moisture content than refined waxed maize starch. It is predicted that 
loose nanoparticle powder is formed when moisture is removed from the SNC dur￾ing freeze-drying. At 254°C and 275°C, SNC and raw waxy maize starch undergo 
thermal breakdown, causing carbohydrate polymer chain breakdown. The difference 
in breakdown behavior between SNC and raw waxy maize starch can be associated 
with the presence of sulfate anion of SNC, which acts as a catalyst for polymer chain 
degradation. Once all sulfate ions have been destroyed at 200°C–300°C, the rest 
of the unprocessed waxy maize starch trend is the same (D. D. Jiang et al., 1999). 
LeCorre et al. detected a similar trend in the depolymerization of unprocessed waxed 
maize starch and SNC (LeCorre et al., 2012).
Furthermore, T. Jiang et al. contended that the humidity content of the samples 
during decomposition does not affect the degradation temperature. The temperature 
stays unaffected because the first phase of degradation eliminates all moisture con￾tents before reaching the second stage. The third stage is the total burning of carbo￾hydrates to ash, which happens at temperatures between 380°C and 400°C. Inside the 96 Nanofillers
experimental margins of error, both SNC and unprocessed waxed maize starch have 
the same combustion temperature (T. Jiang et al., 2020).
3.2.6.3 Electrical Properties of SNC
The abrasion-resistant properties of rubber composites can be significantly improved 
by adding benzyl SNCs to silica/NR composites (C. Wang et al., 2014). It can also 
reduce rubber tire rolling resistance because of its excellent bonding strength and 
other essential characteristics. Finally, the low substitution benzyl SNCs were antici￾pated to be used as an active biopolymer ingredient in polymer composites.
3.2.6.4 Optical Properties of SNC
By measuring transmittance from 400 to 800nm, the optical transparency of the nano￾composite film was determined (Bel Haaj et al., 2016). When measured in the visible 
light spectrum (400–800nm), the neat PBMA matrix had a light transmittance of over 
90%. Adding starch nanofillers results in a loss of transparency. SNCs, on the other 
hand, saw a more significant decline in transmittance than SNPs. In contrast, even in 
the presence of 2% nanofiller, a significant decrease in transmittance was observed for 
SNCs. Because of the particle’s light scattering, which is highly dependent on particle 
size, there will be a decrease in transparency when nanoparticles are incorporated into 
a polymer matrix. To prevent Rayleigh scattering from reducing the transmitted light’s 
intensity, the maximum diameter of a nanoparticle is typically 40–50nm (Althues 
et al., 2007). The nanofiller’s dispersion will strongly influence a nanocomposite film’s 
translucency in the host matrix. Nanoparticle accumulation during film processing 
increases scattering and reduces film transparency by definition. Since SNCs cluster 
into a dense network throughout the film development process, the reduced trans￾mittance observed in the existence of SNCs is perhaps most probably attributable to 
hydrogen-bonding-mediated self-interaction. Another reason for the reduced opacity 
of SNC-based nanocomposite is the size distribution discrepancy between SNC and 
SNP. As indicated in Figure 3.12, substantial light scattering was created by adding 
nanoparticles greater than 60nm to SNC.
3.2.6.5 Magnetic Properties of SNC
SNC hydrolyzed in sulfuric acid and phosphorylated SNC have more ordered 
regions and thus exhibit greater crystallinities than SNC treated enzymatically 
(Zhao et al., 2021). By graft copolymerizing SNCs with styrene, an amphiphilic 
SNC copolymer was formed (Song et al., 2008). The amorphous portion of starch 
was hydrolyzed and eliminated during the hydrolysis process, producing crystal￾line microparticles of 50 nm termed SNCs. The SEM pattern indicated that the 
amphiphilic SNCs had particle dimensions of around 80–100 nm. The amphiphi￾lic SNCs spread efficiently in polar and nonpolar liquids (Song et al., 2008). Its 
exceptional amphiphilic capabilities are due to the hydrophobic polystyrene side 
chains and the hydrophilic starch core displaying different conformational changes 
in nonpolar and polar liquids. The amphiphilic starch-g-polystyrene NCs synthe￾sized in Song et al.’s experiment can be employed as fillers in polymer matrixes, 
using NR, PLA, and polycaprolactone to make nanocomposites with a variety of 
exclusive properties (Song et al., 2008).Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 97
FIGURE 3.12 (a) Dimensions of a given particle and (b) ζ-potential distribution of SNP and 
SNC suspension from waxy maize (Haj & Thielemans, 2016). 98 Nanofillers
3.3 CONCLUSION
Polymer nanocomposites have emerged as being the most empowering and appeal￾ing family of materials science in recent decades, gaining widespread attention for 
their unique ability to improve the physical and mechanical attributes of fabrication, 
medical sciences, cosmetics, food packaging, and a variety of other industries based 
on composite.
Nanocomposites are nanoparticles encased in a polymer matrix. It appears as 
though the nanofillers specific structure governs the envisioned applications for nano￾composites. Therefore, the nanofiller’s shapes, properties, and interfacial properties 
should be tuned via modification of their preparation methodologies or postprepara￾tion treatments. If someone wishes to achieve an optimal mixture state, special con￾sideration must be paid to the preparation, modification, and, most importantly, the 
incorporation techniques used in the polymer matrix. The remaining major difficulty 
is to carefully select and functionalize individual nanofillers in accordance with the 
polymer’s intended application. The various nanofillers capable of improving the 
properties of materials or mitigating some of their well-known shortcomings have 
been introduced, emphasizing the role of the elemental composition of the nanoma￾terials, their volume, and their composition in the materials.
However, advancements should continue to be directed toward developing safer 
materials with novel properties and superior functional capabilities. Thus, the manu￾facturing and application processes for such biocompatible nanomaterials must be 
thoroughly analyzed in order to identify any opportunities for technical and opera￾tional segment optimization.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
1D One Dimensional
AC Alternating Current
Ac-SNC Acetylated SNC
AESO Acrylated Epoxy Soybean Oil
AgNW Silver Nanowire
AuNP Gold Nanoparticle
BACNF Bamboo Cellulose Nanofiber
BCL Starch/PVA Blend containing Na-MMT
BNC Bacterial Nanocellulose
BSN Biosynthesized Silver Nanoparticle
BSN Starch/PVA Blend containing SNCs
CH Chitosan
ChNC Chitin Nanocrystal
ChNF Chitin Nanofiber
CNC Cellulose Nanocrystals
CNF Cellulose Nanofiber
CP Conductive Polymer
CT Chymotrypsin
DC Direct CurrentMechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 99
ENR Epoxidized Natural Rubber
FE-SEM Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopes
FTCS (tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl)-trichlorosilane
HSA Human Serum Albumin
IONC Iron Oxide
IONP Iron Nanoparticle
IoNT Internet of Nanothings
L-CNC Lignin-Coated CNC
LCNF Lignin-Coated Cellulose Nanofiber
LED Light-Emitting diode
MB Methylene Blue
MBNC Magnetic Bacterial Nanocellulose
MCNC Magnetic Chitin Nanofiber Composite
MGCNC Magnetic Cellulose Nanocrystal
MS Saturation Magnetization
Na-MMT Sodium Montmorillonite
NC Nanocellulose
N-CMC Carboxymethyl Cellulose
nm Nanometer
NP Nanoparticle
NR Natural Rubber
NT Nanotube
O-CNC Oxidized Chitin Nanocrystal
OEO Oregano Essential Oil
OLED Organic Light-Emitting Diode
PBI Penetrating Brain Injury
PBMA Polybutyl Methacrylate
PCC Precipitated Calcium Carbonate
PDA Polydopamine
PEGDA Polyethylene glycol diacrylate
PEO Polyethylene Oxide
PIC Polyion Complex
PLA Polylactic Acid
PMMA Polymethyl Methacrylate
PPy Polypyrrole
PVA Polyvinyl Alcohol
PVDF Polyvinylidene Fluoride
PVOH Polyvinyl Alcohol
RFID Radio Frequency Identification
RGO Reduced Graphene Oxide
SNC Starch Nanocrystal
SNP Starch Nanoparticle
SPI Soy Protein Isolate
TEM Transmission Electron Microscope
TENG Triboelectric-Based Nanogenerator
TGA Thermogravimetric Analysis100 Nanofillers
TPA Texture Profile Analysis
TPS Thermoplastic Starch
WBAR Water-Based Acrylic Resin
WPU/CNT Waterborne Polyurethane/Carbon Nanotube
xSBR Cross-linked Styrene-Butadiene Rubber
NOMENCLATURE
Au Gold
CO2 Carbon Dioxide
CoFe2O4 Cobalt Ferrite
Cr Chromium
Fe3O4 Magnetite
Fl Fluorine
H Hydrogen
MoS2 Molybdenum Disulfide
OH Hydroxyl
SiO2 Silicon dioxide
REFERENCES
Abdollahi, M., Alboofetileh, M., Behrooz, R., Rezaei, M., & Miraki, R. (2013). Reducing 
water sensitivity of alginate bio-nanocomposite film using cellulose nanoparticles. 
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 54, 166–173. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2012.12.016
Abral, H., Putra, G., Asrofi, M., Park, J.-W., & Kim, H.-J. (2017). Effect of vibration dura￾tion of high ultrasound applied to bio-composite while gelatinized on its properties. 
Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2017.08.019
Alam, M. K., Islam, M. T., Mina, M. F., & Gafur, M. A. (2014). Structural, mechanical, ther￾mal, and electrical properties of carbon black reinforced polyester resin composites. 
Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 131(13), n/a-n/a. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.40421
Ali, S. S., Tang, X., Alavi, S., & Faubion, J. (2011). Structure and physical properties of starch/
poly vinyl alcohol/sodium montmorillonite nanocomposite films. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 59(23), 12384–12395. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf201119v
Althues, H., Henle, J., & Kaskel, S. (2007). Functional inorganic nanofillers for transpar￾ent polymers. Chemical Society Reviews, 36(9), 1454–1465. https://doi.org/10.1039/
B608177K
Amiralian, N., Mustapic, M., Hossain, M. S. A., Wang, C., Konarova, M., Tang, J., Na, J., Khan, 
A., & Rowan, A. (2020). Magnetic nanocellulose: A potential material for removal of 
dye from water. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 394, 122571. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2020.122571
Arias, S. L., Shetty, A. R., Senpan, A., Echeverry-Rendón, M., Reece, L. M., & Allain, J. 
P. (2016). Fabrication of a functionalized magnetic bacterial nanocellulose with iron 
oxide nanoparticles. Journal of Visualized Experiments, 111, 52951. https://doi.
org/10.3791/52951
Arrieta, M. P., Fortunati, E., Dominici, F., Rayón, E., López, J., & Kenny, J. M. (2014). 
PLA-PHB/cellulose based films: Mechanical, barrier and disintegration proper￾ties. Polymer Degradation and Stability, 107, 139–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab.2014.05.010Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 101
Asefa, T. (2012). Chiral nematic mesoporous carbons from self-assembled nanocrystalline cel￾lulose. Angewandte Chemie (International Ed. in English), 51, 2008–2010. https://doi.
org/10.1002/anie.201107332
Azeredo, H. M. C., Rosa, M. F., & Mattoso, L. H. C. (2017). Nanocellulose in bio-based 
food packaging applications. Industrial Crops and Products, 97, 664–671. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2016.03.013
Azizi Samir, M. A. S., Alloin, F., Sanchez, J.-Y., El Kissi, N., & Dufresne, A. (2004). Preparation 
of cellulose whiskers reinforced nanocomposites from an organic medium suspension. 
Macromolecules, 37(4), 1386–1393. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma030532a
Baba, T. (2008). Slow light in photonic crystals. Nature Photonics, 2(8), 465–473. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nphoton.2008.146
Balakrishnan, P., Sreekala, M. S., Kunaver, M., Huskić, M., & Thomas, S. (2017). Morphology, 
transport characteristics and viscoelastic polymer chain confinement in nanocompos￾ites based on thermoplastic potato starch and cellulose nanofibers from pineapple leaf. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.04.017
Bardet, R., Belgacem, N., & Bras, J. (2015). Flexibility and color monitoring of cellulose nano￾crystal iridescent solid films using anionic or neutral polymers. ACS Applied Materials 
& Interfaces, 7(7), 4010–4018. https://doi.org/10.1021/am506786t
Barría, J. C., Vázquez, A., Pereira, J.-M., & Manzanal, D. (2021). Effect of bacterial nanocel￾lulose on the fresh and hardened states of oil well cement. Journal of Petroleum Science 
and Engineering, 199, 108259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2020.108259
Bel Haaj, S., Thielemans, W., Magnin, A., & Boufi, S. (2016). Starch nanocrystals 
and starch nanoparticles from waxy maize as nanoreinforcement: A compara￾tive study. Carbohydrate Polymers, 143, 310–317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2016.01.061
Biswas, M. C., Jony, B., Nandy, P. K., Chowdhury, R. A., Halder, S., Kumar, D., Ramakrishna, 
S., Hassan, M., Ahsan, M. A., Hoque, M. E., & Imam, M. A. (2022). Recent advance￾ment of biopolymers and their potential biomedical applications. Journal of Polymers 
and the Environment, 30(1), 51–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-021-02199-y
Bondeson, D., & Oksman, K. (2007). Polylactic acid/cellulose whisker nanocomposites modi￾fied by polyvinyl alcohol. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 
38(12), 2486–2492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2007.08.001
Cai, J., Chen, J., Zhang, Q., Lei, M., He, J., Xiao, A., Ma, C., Li, S., & Xiong, H. (2016). Well￾aligned cellulose nanofiber-reinforced polyvinyl alcohol composite film: Mechanical 
and optical properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 140, 238–245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2015.12.039
Celebi, H., & Kurt, A. (2015). Effects of processing on the properties of chitosan/cellulose 
nanocrystal films. Carbohydrate Polymers, 133, 284–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2015.07.007
Cheikh, F., Ben Mabrouk, A., Lancelon-Pin, C., & Putaux, J.-L. (2021). Honeycomb orga￾nization of chitin nanocrystals (ChNCs) in nanocomposite films of UV-cured water￾borne acrylated epoxidized soybean oil emulsified with ChNCs. Biomacromolecules, 22. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biomac.1c00612
Chen, J., Defeng, W., Tam, K., Pan, K., & Zheng, Z. (2016). Effect of surface modification of 
cellulose nanocrystal on nonisothermal crystallization of poly(β-hydroxybutyrate) com￾posites. Carbohydrate Polymers, 157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.11.071
Chen, L., Berry, R., & Tam, K. (2014). Synthesis of β-cyclodextrin-modified cellulose 
nanocrystals (CNCs)@Fe3O4@SiO2 superparamagnetic nanorods. ACS Sustainable 
Chemistry & Engineering, 2, 951–958. https://doi.org/10.1021/sc400540f
Chen, L., Sharma, S., Darienzo, R. E., & Tannenbaum, R. (2020). Decoration of cellulose 
nanocrystals with iron oxide nanoparticles. Materials Research Express, 7(5), 055003. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/ab8a82102 Nanofillers
Chen, L.-F., Huang, Z.-H., Liang, H.-W., Guan, Q.-F., & Yu, S.-H. (2013). Bacterial-cellulose￾derived carbon nanofiber@MnO2 and nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber electrode mate￾rials: An asymmetric supercapacitor with high energy and power density. Advanced 
Materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), 25. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201204949
Chen, Q.-H., Li, X.-Y., Huang, C.-L., Liu, P., Zeng, Q.-Z., Yang, X.-Q., & Yuan, Y. (2021). 
Development and mechanical properties of soy protein isolate-chitin nanofibers com￾plex gel: The role of high-pressure homogenization. LWT, 150, 112090. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.lwt.2021.112090
Chen, X., Yuan, F., Zhang, H., Huang, Y., Yang, J., & Sun, D. (2016). Recent approaches and 
future prospects of bacterial cellulose-based electroconductive materials. Journal of 
Materials Science, 51(12), 5573–5588. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-016-9899-2
Cheng, L., Xia, X., Yu, W., Scriven, L. E., & Gerberich, W. W. (2000). Flat-punch indentation of 
viscoelastic material. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics, 38(1), 10–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-0488(20000101)38:1<10::AID-POLB2>3.0.CO;2-6
Cheng, Y.-T., & Yang, F. (2009). Obtaining shear relaxation modulus and creep compliance of 
linear viscoelastic materials from instrumented indentation using axisymmetric indent￾ers of power-law profiles. Journal of Materials Research, 24(10), 3013–3017. https://
doi.org/10.1557/jmr.2009.0365
De Vries, Hl. (1951). Rotatory power and other optical properties of certain liquid crystals. 
Acta Crystallographica, 4(3), 219–226. https://doi.org/10.1107/S0365110X51000751
Dhar, P., Kumar, A., & Katiyar, V. (2016). Magnetic cellulose nanocrystal based anisotro￾pic polylactic acid nanocomposite films: Influence on electrical, magnetic, thermal, 
and mechanical properties. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 8(28), 18393–18409. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b02828
Drake, J. M., & Genack, A. Z. (1989). Observation of nonclassical optical diffusion. Physical 
Review Letters, 63(3), 259–262. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.63.259
Duan, C., Cheng, Z., Wang, B., Zeng, J., Xu, J., Li, J., Gao, W., & Chen, K. (2021). Chiral pho￾tonic liquid crystal films derived from cellulose nanocrystals. Small, 17(30), 2007306. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202007306
Dumanli, A. G., van der Kooij, H. M., Kamita, G., Reisner, E., Baumberg, J. J., Steiner, U., & 
Vignolini, S. (2014). Digital color in cellulose nanocrystal films. ACS Applied Materials 
& Interfaces, 6(15), 12302–12306. https://doi.org/10.1021/am501995e
Echegaray, M., Mondragon, G., Martin, L., González, A., Peña, C., & Arbelaiz, A. (2016). 
Physicochemical and mechanical properties of gelatin reinforced with nanocellulose 
and montmorillonite. Journal of Renewable Materials, 4. https://doi.org/10.7569/
JRM.2016.634106
El Miri, N., Abdelouahdi, K., Barakat, A., Zahouily, M., Fihri, A., Solhy, A., & El Achaby, M. 
(2015). Bio-nanocomposite films reinforced with cellulose nanocrystals: Rheology of 
film-forming solutions, transparency, water vapor barrier and tensile properties of films. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 129, 156–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.04.051
El-Hoseny, S., Basmaji, P., Molina de Olyveira, G., Costa, L. M., Abdulwahid, M., Oliveira, J., 
& Francozo, G. (2015). Natural ECM-bacterial cellulose wound healing—Dubai study. 
Journal of Biomaterials and Nanobiotechnology, 06, 237–246. https://doi.org/10.4236/
jbnb.2015.64022
Eskilson, O., Lindström, S. B., Sepulveda, B., Shahjamali, M. M., Güell‐Grau, P., Sivlér, P., 
Skog, M., Aronsson, C., Björk, E. M., Nyberg, N., Khalaf, H., Bengtsson, T., James, J., 
Ericson, M. B., Martinsson, E., Selegård, R., & Aili, D. (2020). Self‐assembly of mecha￾noplasmonic bacterial cellulose–metal nanoparticle composites. Advanced Functional 
Materials, 30(40), 2004766. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202004766
Fashandi, H., Abolhasani, M. M., Sandoghdar, P., Zohdi, N., Li, Q., & Naebe, M. (2016). 
Morphological changes towards enhancing piezoelectric properties of PVDF electri￾cal generators using cellulose nanocrystals. Cellulose, 23(6), 3625–3637. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10570-016-1070-3Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 103
Fernandes, S. C. M., Oliveira, L., Freire, C. S. R., Silvestre, A. J. D., Neto, C. P., Gandini, A., 
& Desbriéres, J. (2009). Novel transparent nanocomposite films based on chitosan and 
bacterial cellulose. Green Chemistry, 11(12), 2023. https://doi.org/10.1039/b919112g
Fernández-Marín, R., Labidi, J., Andrés, Ma. M., & Fernandes, S. C. M. (2020). Using α-chitin 
nanocrystals to improve the final properties of poly (vinyl alcohol) films with Origanum 
vulgare essential oil. Polymer Degradation and Stability, 179, 109227. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2020.109227
Ferreira, F., Franceschi, W., Menezes, B., Brito, F. S., Lozano, K., Coutinho, A. R., Cividanes, 
L., & Thim, G. (2017). Dodecylamine functionalization of carbon nanotubes to improve 
dispersion, thermal and mechanical properties of polyethylene based nanocomposites. 
Applied Surface Science, 410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.03.098
Ferreira, F. V., Dufresne, A., Pinheiro, I. F., Souza, D. H. S., Gouveia, R. F., Mei, L. H. I., & 
Lona, L. M. F. (2018). How do cellulose nanocrystals affect the overall properties of 
biodegradable polymer nanocomposites: A comprehensive review. European Polymer 
Journal, 108, 274–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2018.08.045
Ferreira-Neto, E., Ullah, S., Silva, T., Domeneguetti, R., Perissinotto, A., De Vicente, F., 
Rodrigues Filho, U. P., & Ribeiro, S. (2020). Bacterial nanocellulose/MoS2 hybrid 
aerogels as bifunctional adsorbent/photocatalyst membranes for in-flow water decon￾tamination. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, XXXX. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.0c14137
Fortunati, E., Luzi, F., Puglia, D., Petrucci, R., Kenny, J. M., & Torre, L. (2015). Processing 
of PLA nanocomposites with cellulose nanocrystals extracted from Posidonia oceanica 
waste: Innovative reuse of coastal plant. Industrial Crops and Products, 67, 439–447. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2015.01.075
Fortunato, E., Gaspar, D., Duarte, P., Pereira, L., Águas, H., Vicente, A., ... & Martins, R. 
(2016). Optoelectronic devices from bacterial nanocellulose. In Bacterial Nanocellulose 
(pp. 179–197). Elsevier.
Fujisawa, S., Togawa, E., & Kimura, S. (2018). Large specific surface area and rigid network 
of nanocellulose govern the thermal stability of polymers: Mechanisms of enhanced 
thermomechanical properties for nanocellulose/PMMA nanocomposite. Materials 
Today Communications, 16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtcomm.2018.05.002
Fukada, E., & Sasaki, S. (1975). Piezoelectricity of α-chitin. Journal of Polymer 
Science: Polymer Physics Edition, 13(9), 1845–1847. https://doi.org/10.1002/
pol.1975.180130916
Furumi, S., Yokoyama, S., Otomo, A., & Mashiko, S. (2003). Electrical control of the structure 
and lasing in chiral photonic band-gap liquid crystals. Applied Physics Letters, 82(1), 
16–18. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1534613
Ghanbari, A., Tabarsa, T., Ashori, A., Shakeri, A., & Mashkour, M. (2018). Thermoplastic 
starch foamed composites reinforced with cellulose nanofibers: Thermal and mechani￾cal properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 197, 305–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2018.06.017
Glenn, G., Imam, S., & Orts, W. J. (2011). Starch-based foam composite materials: Processing 
and bioproducts. MRS Bulletin, 36, 696–702. https://doi.org/10.1557/mrs.2011.205
Gopalan Nair, K., & Dufresne, A. (2003). Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural rubber 
nanocomposites. 1. Processing and swelling behavior. Biomacromolecules, 4(3), 657–
665. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm020127b
Gu, M., Jiang, C., Liu, D., Prempeh, N., & Smalyukh, I. I. (2016). Cellulose nanocrystal/
poly(ethylene glycol) composite as an iridescent coating on polymer substrates: 
Structure-color and interface adhesion. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 8(47), 
32565–32573. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b12044
Gutierrez, J., Tercjak, A., Algar, I., Retegi, A., & Mondragon, I. (2012). Conductive properties 
of TiO2/bacterial cellulose hybrid fibres. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 377, 
88–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2012.03.075104 Nanofillers
Hai, L., Choi, E. S., Zhai, L., Panicker, P. S., & Kim, J. (2020). Green nanocomposite made 
with chitin and bamboo nanofibers and its mechanical, thermal and biodegradable prop￾erties for food packaging. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 144, 
491–499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.12.124
Haj, S., & Thielemans, W. (2016). Starch nanocrystals and starch nanoparticles from waxy 
maize as nanoreinforcement: A comparative study. Carbohydrate Polymers, 143. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.01.061
Hassanzadeh, P., Sun, W., de Silva, J. P., Jin, J., Makhnejia, K., Cross, G. L. W., & Rolandi, M. 
(2014). Mechanical properties of self-assembled chitin nanofiber networks. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry B, 2(17), 2461–2466. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3TB21550D
Healy, J. F. (1999). Pliny the Elder on Science and Technology. Oxford University Press.
Hebeish, A., El-Rafie, M., Abdel-Mohdy, F., Abdel-Halim, E., & Emam, H. (2010). 
Carboxymethyl cellulose for green synthesis and stabilization nanoparticles. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 82, 933–941. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2010.06.020
Hernández-Flores, J. A., Morales-Cepeda, A. B., Castro-Guerrero, C. F., Delgado-Arroyo, F., 
Díaz-Guillén, M. R., de la Cruz-Soto, J., Magallón-Cacho, L., & León-Silva, U. (2020). 
Morphological and electrical properties of nanocellulose compounds and its application 
on capacitor assembly. International Journal of Polymer Science, 2020, 1–14. https://
doi.org/10.1155/2020/1891064
Herrera, N., Salaberria, A. M., Mathew, A. P., & Oksman, K. (2016). Plasticized polylactic acid 
nanocomposite films with cellulose and chitin nanocrystals prepared using extrusion and 
compression molding with two cooling rates: Effects on mechanical, thermal and optical 
properties. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 83, 89–97. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2015.05.024
Hoque, M. E., Ye, T. J., Yong, L. C., & Mohd Dahlan, K. (2013). Sago starch-mixed low￾density polyethylene biodegradable polymer: Synthesis and characterization. Journal of 
Materials, 2013, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/365380
Hou, M., Xu, M., & Li, B. (n.d.). Enhanced electrical conductivity of cellulose nanofiber/
graphene composite paper with a sandwich structure, 25.
Huang, C.-L. (2020). A study of the optical properties and fabrication of coatings made of three￾dimensional photonic glass. Coatings, 10(8), 781. https://doi.org/10.3390/coatings10080781
Huang, J., Li, D., Zhao, M., Ke, H., Mensah, A., Tian, X., & Wei, Q. (2019). Flexible electri￾cally conductive biomass-based aerogels for piezoresistive pressure/strain sensors. The 
Chemical Engineering Journal. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.05.136
Huang, J., Zhong, Y., Zhang, L., & Cai, J. (2017). Extremely strong and transparent chitin 
films: A high-efficiency, energy-saving, and “green” route using an aqueous KOH/Urea 
solution. Advanced Functional Materials, 27(26), 1701100. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.201701100
Huang, N.-J., Zang, J., Zhang, G.-D., Guan, L.-Z., Li, S.-N., Zhao, L., & Tang, L.-C. (2017). 
Efficient interfacial interaction for improving mechanical properties of polydimethyl￾siloxane nanocomposites filled with low content of graphene oxide nanoribbons. RSC 
Advances, 7(36), 22045–22053. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7RA02439H
Huang, W., Dai, K., Zhai, Y., Liu, H., Zhan, P., Gao, J., Zheng, G.-Q., Liu, C., & Shen, C. 
(2017). Flexible and lightweight pressure sensor based on carbon nanotube/thermoplas￾tic polyurethane aligned conductive foam with superior compressibility and stability. 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 9. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b16975
Huang, W.-C., Wang, W., Xue, C., & Mao, X. (2018). Effective enzyme immobilization onto a 
magnetic chitin nanofiber composite. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 6(7), 
8118–8124. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b01150
Huang, Y., Yao, M., Zheng, X., Liang, X., Su, X., Zhang, Y., Lu, A., & Zhang, L. (2015). Effects 
of chitin whiskers on physical properties and osteoblast culture of alginate based nano￾composite hydrogels. Biomacromolecules, 16(11), 3499–3507. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.biomac.5b00928Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 105
Huber, K. C., & BeMiller, J. N. (2010). Modified starch: Chemistry and properties. En: 
Starches: Characterization, properties and applications, (AC Bertolini ed.) Pp. 145–
204. CRC Press.
Ifuku, S., & Saimoto, H. (2012). Chitin nanofibers: Preparations, modifications, and applica￾tions. Nanoscale, 4(11), 3308–3318. https://doi.org/10.1039/C2NR30383C
Isogai, A. (2013). Wood nanocelluloses: Fundamentals and applications as new bio-based 
nanomaterials. Journal of Wood Science, 59. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10086-013-1365-z
Isogai, A., Saito, T., & Fukuzumi, H. (2010). TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibers. 
Nanoscale, 3, 71–85. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0nr00583e
Jalvo, B., Mathew, A. P., & Rosal, R. (2017). Coaxial poly(lactic acid) electrospun compos￾ite membranes incorporating cellulose and chitin nanocrystals. Journal of Membrane 
Science, 544, 261–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2017.09.033
Janardhnan, S., & Sain, M. (2011). Bio-treatment of natural fibers in isolation of cellulose 
nanofibres: Impact of pre-refining of fibers on bio-treatment efficiency and nanofiber 
yield. Journal of Polymers and the Environment, 19, 615–621. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10924-011-0312-6
Ji, S., Jang, J., Cho, E., Kim, S.-H., Kang, E.-S., Kim, J., Kim, H.-K., Kong, H., Kim, S.-K., 
Kim, J.-Y., & Park, J.-U. (2017). High dielectric performances of flexible and transparent 
cellulose hybrid films controlled by multidimensional metal nanostructures. Advanced 
Materials, 29(24), 1700538. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201700538
Jiang, D. D., Yao, Q., McKinney, M. A., & Wilkie, C. A. (1999). TGA/FTIR studies on the 
thermal degradation of some polymeric sulfonic and phosphonic acids and their sodium 
salts. Polymer Degradation and Stability, 63(3), 423–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0141-3910(98)00123-2
Jiang, Q., Gholami Derami, H., Ghim, D., Cao, S., Jun, Y.-S., & Singamaneni, S. (2017). 
Polydopamine-filled bacterial nanocellulose as a biodegradable interfacial photothermal 
evaporator for highly efficient solar steam generation. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 
5(35), 18397–18402. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7TA04834C
Jiang, Q., Tian, L., Liu, K.-K., Tadepalli, S., Raliya, R., Biswas, P., Naik, R. R., & Singamaneni, 
S. (2016). Bilayered biofoam for highly efficient solar steam generation. Advanced 
Materials, 28(42), 9400–9407. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201601819
Jiang, T., Duan, Q., Zhu, J., Liu, H., & Yu, L. (2020). Starch-based biodegradable materials: 
Challenges and opportunities. Advanced Industrial and Engineering Polymer Research, 
3(1), 8–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiepr.2019.11.003
Jin, J., Lee, D., Im, H.-G., Han, Y. C., Jeong, E. G., Rolandi, M., Choi, K. C., & Bae, B.-S. 
(2016). Chitin nanofiber transparent paper for flexible green electronics. Advanced 
Materials, 28(26), 5169–5175. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201600336
John, S. (1991). Localization of light. Physics Today, 44(5), 32–40. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.881300
Jonoobi, M., Harun, J., Mathew, A. P., & Oksman, K. (2010). Mechanical properties of cel￾lulose nanofiber (CNF) reinforced polylactic acid (PLA) prepared by twin screw extru￾sion. Composites Science and Technology, 70(12), 1742–1747. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compscitech.2010.07.005
Jonoobi, M., Oladi, R., Davoudpour, Y., Oksman, K., Dufresne, A., Hamzeh, Y., & Davoodi, R. 
(2015). Different preparation methods and properties of nanostructured cellulose from 
various natural resources and residues: A review. Cellulose, 22(2), 935–969. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10570-015-0551-0
Junkasem, J., Rujiravanit, R., & Supaphol, P. (2006). Fabrication of α-chitin whisker-reinforced 
poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposite nanofibres by electrospinning. Nanotechnology, 
17(17), 4519–4528. https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-4484/17/17/039
Kalia, S., Celli, A., & Kango, S. (2014). Nanofibrillated cellulose: Surface modification and 
potential applications. Colloid and Polymer Science, 292. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00396-013-3112-9106 Nanofillers
Kang, Y., Chun, S.-J., Lee, S.-S., Kim, B.-Y., Kim, J., Chung, H., Lee, S., & Kim, W. (2012). 
All-solid-state flexible supercapacitors fabricated with bacterial nanocellulose papers, 
carbon nanotubes, and triblock-copolymer ion gels. ACS Nano, 6, 6400–6406. https://
doi.org/10.1021/nn301971r
Kargarzadeh, H., Mariano, M., Gopakumar, D., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Dufresne, A., Huang, 
J., & Lin, N. (2018). Advances in cellulose nanomaterials. Cellulose, 25(4), 2151–2189. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-018-1723-5
Karimi, S. (2014). A comparative study on characteristics of nanocellulose reinforced ther￾moplastic starch biofilms prepared with different techniques. Nordic Pulp and Paper 
Research Journal, 29, 041–045. https://doi.org/10.3183/NPPRJ-2014-29-01-p041-045
Kassab, Z., Boujemaoui, A., Ben Youcef, H., Hajlane, A., Hannache, H., & El Achaby, M. 
(2019). Production of cellulose nanofibrils from alfa fibers and its nanoreinforce￾ment potential in polymer nanocomposites. Cellulose, 26. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10570-019-02767-5
Khalil, H. P. S. A., Davoudpour, Y., Aprilia, N. A. S., Mustapha, A., Hossain, S., Islam, N., & 
Dungani, R. (2014). Nanocellulose-based polymer nanocomposite: Isolation, character￾ization and applications. In V. K. Thakur (Ed.), Nanocellulose Polymer Nanocomposites
(pp. 273–309). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118872246.ch11
Khattab, T. A., Abdelrahman, M. S., Ahmed, H. B., & Emam, H. E. (2020). Molecularly 
imprinted cellulose sensor strips for selective determination of phenols in aque￾ous environment. Fibers and Polymers, 21(10), 2195–2203. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12221-020-1325-3
Kim, D. W., Shin, J., & Choi, S. Q. (2020). Nano-dispersed cellulose nanofibrils-PMMA 
composite from pickering emulsion with tunable interfacial tensions. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 247, 116762. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116762
Kim, H.-J., Yim, E.-C., Kim, J.-H., Kim, S.-J., Park, J.-Y., & Oh, I.-K. (2017). Bacterial 
nano‐cellulose triboelectric nanogenerator. Nano Energy, 33, 130–137. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.01.035
Kim, K., Ha, M., Choi, B., Joo, S. H., Kang, H. S., Park, J. H., Gu, B., Park, C., Park, C., Kim, 
J., Kwak, S. K., Ko, H., Jin, J., & Kang, S. J. (2018). Biodegradable, electro-active chitin 
nanofiber films for flexible piezoelectric transducers. Nano Energy, 48, 275–283. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.03.056
Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindström, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D., & Dorris, 
A. (2011). Nanocelluloses: A new family of nature-based materials. Angewandte 
Chemie (International Ed. in English), 50, 5438–5466. https://doi.org/10.1002/
anie.201001273
Koga, H., Nogi, M., Komoda, N., Nge, T., Sugahara, T., & Suganuma, K. (2014). Uniformly 
connected conductive networks on cellulose nanofiber paper for transparent paper elec￾tronics. NPG Asia Materials, 6, e93. https://doi.org/10.1038/am.2014.9
Lamouroux, E., & Fort, Y. (2016). An overview of nanocomposite nanofillers and their 
functionalization. In S. Thomas, D. Rouxel, & D. Ponnamma (Eds.), Spectroscopy of 
Polymer Nanocomposites (pp. 15–64). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-
40183-8.00002-1
Lay, M., Méndez, J. A., Delgado-Aguilar, M., Bun, K. N., & Vilaseca, F. (2016). Strong 
and electrically conductive nanopaper from cellulose nanofibers and polypyrrole. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 152, 361–369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.06.102
Le Bras, D., Strømme, M., & Mihranyan, A. (2015). Characterization of dielectric properties 
of nanocellulose from wood and algae for electrical insulator applications. The Journal 
of Physical Chemistry B, 119(18), 5911–5917. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b00715
LeCorre, D., & Angellier-Coussy, H. (2014). Preparation and application of starch nanopar￾ticles for nanocomposites: A review. Reactive and Functional Polymers, 85, 97–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2014.09.020Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 107
LeCorre, D., Bras, J., & Dufresne, A. (2012). Influence of native starch’s properties on starch 
nanocrystals thermal properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 87(1), 658–666. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.08.042
Lee, H., Abd Hamid, S. B., & Zain, S. (2014). Conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to nano￾cellulose: Structure and chemical process. TheScientificWorldJournal, 2014, 631013. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/631013
Lee, S. H., Teramoto, Y., & Endo, T. (2011). Cellulose nanofiber-reinforced polycaprolac￾tone/polypropylene hybrid nanocomposite. Composites Part A: Applied Science and 
Manufacturing, 42, 151–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2010.10.014
Leszczynska, A., & Pielichowski, K. (2008). Application of thermal analysis methods for char￾acterization of polymer/montmorillonite nanocomposites. Journal of Thermal Analysis 
and Calorimetry, 93(3), 677–687. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973-008-9128-6
Liang, H.-W., Guan, Q.-F., Zhu, Z., Song, L.-T., Yao, H.-B., Lei, X., & Yu, S.-H. (2012). 
Highly conductive and stretchable conductors fabricated from bacterial cellulose. NPG 
Asia Materials, 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/am.2012.34
Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P. R., Feng, J., & Yu, J. (2011). Surface acetylation of cellulose 
nanocrystal and its reinforcing function in poly(lactic acid). Carbohydrate Polymers, 
83(4), 1834–1842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2010.10.047
Lipparelli Morelli, C., Belgacem, N., Branciforti, M., Bretas, R., Crisci, A., & Bras, J. (2015). 
Supramolecular aromatic interactions to enhance biodegradable film properties through 
incorporation of functionalized cellulose nanocrystals. Composites Part A: Applied 
Science and Manufacturing, 83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2015.10.038
Liu, D., Sun, X., Tian, H., Maiti, S., & Ma, Z. (2013). Effects of cellulose nanofibrils on the 
structure and properties on PVA nanocomposites. Cellulose, 20. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10570-013-0073-6
Liu, H., Li, Q., Zhang, S., Yin, R., Liu, X., He, Y., Dai, K., Shan, C.-X., Guo, J., Liu, C., Shen, 
C., Wang, X., Wang, N., Wang, Z., Wei, R., & Guo, Z. (2018). Electrically conduc￾tive polymer composites for smart flexible strain sensors: A critical review. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry C, 6. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8TC04079F
Liu, M., Huang, J., Luo, B., & Zhou, C. (2015). Tough and highly stretchable polyacrylamide 
nanocomposite hydrogels with chitin nanocrystals. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 78, 23–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2015.03.059
Liu, Y., Liu, M., Yang, S., Luo, B., & Zhou, C. (2018). Liquid crystalline behaviors of chitin 
nanocrystals and their reinforcing effect on natural rubber. ACS Sustainable Chemistry 
& Engineering, 6(1), 325–336. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b02586
Luo, Y., Zhang, J., Li, X., & Liao, C. (2014). The cellulose nanofibers for optoelec￾tronic conversion and energy storage. Journal of Nanomaterials, 2014. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2014/654512
Ma, L., Liu, M., Peng, Q., Liu, Y., Luo, B., & Zhou, C. (2016). Crosslinked carboxylated SBR 
composites reinforced with chitin nanocrystals. Journal of Polymer Research, 23(7), 
134. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10965-016-1025-2
Ma, X., Cheng, Y., Qin, X., Guo, T., Deng, J., & Liu, X. (2017). Hydrophilic modifica￾tion of cellulose nanocrystals improves the physicochemical properties of cassava 
starch-based nanocomposite films. LWT, 86, 318–326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
lwt.2017.08.012
Mandal, A. & Chakrabarty, D. (2014). Studies on the mechanical, thermal, morphological 
and barrier properties of nanocomposites based on poly(vinyl alcohol) and nanocellu￾lose from sugarcane bagasse. Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 20(2), 
462–473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2013.05.003
Marcelo, G., López-González, M. del M., Vega, M., & Pecharromán, C. (2021). Colored sur￾faces made of synthetic eumelanin. Nanomaterials, 11(9), 2320. https://doi.org/10.3390/
nano11092320108 Nanofillers
Marín-Silva, D. A., Rivero, S., & Pinotti, A. (2019). Chitosan-based nanocomposite matrices: 
Development and characterization. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
123, 189–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.035
Meadows, M., Butler, M., Morehouse, N., Taylor, L., Toomey, M., Mcgraw, K., & 
Rutowski, R. (2009). Iridescence: Views from many angles. Journal of the Royal 
Society, Interface/the Royal Society, 6 Suppl 2, S107–13. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsif.2009.0013.focus
Menchaca-Nal, S., Londoño-Calderón, C. L., Cerrutti, P., Foresti, M. L., Pampillo, L., Bilovol, 
V., Candal, R., & Martínez-García, R. (2016). Facile synthesis of cobalt ferrite nano￾tubes using bacterial nanocellulose as template. Carbohydrate Polymers, 137, 726–731. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.10.068
Michael, F. M., Khalid, M., Walvekar, R., Ratnam, C. T., Ramarad, S., Siddiqui, H., & Hoque, 
M. E. (2016). Effect of nanofillers on the physico-mechanical properties of load bear￾ing bone implants. Materials Science and Engineering: C, 67, 792–806. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.msec.2016.05.037
Mondal, S. (2018). Review on nanocellulose polymer nanocomposites. Polymer-Plastics 
Technology and Engineering, 57(13), 1377–1391. https://doi.org/10.1080/03602559.2
017.1381253
Moohan, J., Stewart, S. A., Espinosa, E., Rosal, A., Rodríguez, A., Larrañeta, E., Donnelly, 
R. F., & Domínguez-Robles, J. (2019). Cellulose nanofibers and other biopolymers for 
biomedical applications. A review. Applied Sciences, 10(1), 65. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app10010065
Moon, R. J., Martini, A., Nairn, J., Simonsen, J., & Youngblood, J. (2011). Cellulose nano￾materials review: Structure, properties and nanocomposites. Chemical Society Reviews, 
40(7), 3941–3994. https://doi.org/10.1039/C0CS00108B
Morganti, P., Muzzarelli, R., & Muzzarelli, C. (2006). Multifunctional use of innovative chitin 
nanofibrils for skin care. Journal of Applied Cosmetology, 24, 105–114.
Naghdi, T., Golmohammadi, H., Vosough, M., Atashi, M., Saeedi, I., & Maghsoudi, M. T. 
(2019). Lab-on-nanopaper: An optical sensing bioplatform based on curcumin embed￾ded in bacterial nanocellulose as an albumin assay kit. Analytica Chimica Acta, 1070, 
104–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2019.04.037
Naghdi, T., Golmohammadi, H., Yousefi, H., Hosseinifard, M., Kostiv, U., Horák, D., & 
Merkoçi, A. (2020). Chitin nanofiber paper toward optical (bio)sensing applications. 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b23487
Nair, J. R., Bella, F., Angulakshmi, N., Stephan, A. M., & Gerbaldi, C. (2016). Nanocellulose￾laden composite polymer electrolytes for high performing lithium–sulphur batteries. 
Energy Storage Materials, 3, 69–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2016.01.008
Nie, J., Mou, W., Ding, J., & Chen, Y. (2019). Bio-based epoxidized natural rubber/
chitin nanocrystals composites: Self-healing and enhanced mechanical proper￾ties. Composites Part B: Engineering, 172, 152–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compositesb.2019.04.035
Numata, Y., Sakata, T., Furukawa, H., & Tajima, K. (2015). Bacterial cellulose gels with high 
mechanical strength. Materials Science and Engineering: C, 47, 57–62. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.msec.2014.11.026
Nyakuma, B. B., Wong, S., Utume, L. N., Abdullah, T. A. T., Abba, M., Oladokun, O., Ivase, T. 
J.-P., & Ogunbode, E. B. (2021). Comprehensive characterisation of the morphological, 
thermal and kinetic degradation properties of Gluconacetobacter xylinus synthesised 
bacterial nanocellulose. Journal of Natural Fibers, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/1544
0478.2021.1907833
Nyholm, L., Nyström, G., Mihranyan, A., & Strømme, M. (2011). Toward flexible polymer 
and paper-based energy storage devices. Advanced Materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), 
23. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201004134Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 109
Panchagnula, K. K., & Kuppan, P. (2019). Improvement in the mechanical properties of neat 
GFRPs with multi-walled CNTs. Journal of Materials Research and Technology, 8(1), 
366–376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2018.02.009
Petersson, L., & Oksman, K. (2006). Biopolymer based nanocomposites: Comparing layered 
silicates and microcrystalline cellulose as nanoreinforcement. Composites Science and 
Technology, 66, 2187–2196. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2005.12.010
Pires, J., Souza, V., & Fernando, A. (2019). Production of Nanocellulose from Lignocellulosic 
Biomass Wastes: Prospects and Limitations (pp. 719–725). Springer Verlag. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-91334-6_98
Prachayawarakorn, J., Chaiwatyothin, S., Mueangta, S., & Hanchana, A. (2013). Effect of jute 
and kapok fibers on properties of thermoplastic cassava starch composites. Materials & 
Design, 47, 309–315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2012.12.012
Qiu, K., & Netravali, A. N. (2014). A review of fabrication and applications of bacterial cel￾lulose based nanocomposites. Polymer Reviews, 54(4), 598–626. https://doi.org/10.108
0/15583724.2014.896018
Rana, A. K., Frollini, E., & Thakur, V. K. (2021). Cellulose nanocrystals: Pretreatments, 
preparation strategies, and surface functionalization. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 182, 1554–1581. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.05.119
Ravichandran, S., Sagadevan, S., & Hoque, M. E. (2022). Physical, mechanical, and thermal 
properties of fiber-reinforced hybrid polymer composites. In Senthilkumar Krishnasamy, 
Senthil Muthu Kumar Thiagamani, Chandrasekar Muthukumar, Rajini Nagarajan, & 
Suchart Siengchin (Eds.), Natural Fiber-Reinforced Composites (pp. 309–320). John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527831562.ch18
Revedin, A., Aranguren, B., Becattini, R., Longo, L., Marconi, E., Lippi, M. M., Skakun, N., 
Sinitsyn, A., Spiridonova, E., & Svoboda, J. (2010). Thirty thousand-year-old evidence 
of plant food processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(44), 
18815–18819. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1006993107
Robles, E., Urruzola, I., Labidi, J., & Serrano, L. (2015). Surface-modified nano-cellulose as 
reinforcement in poly(lactic acid) to conform new composites. Industrial Crops and 
Products, 71, 44–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2015.03.075
Saba, N., Safwan, A., Sanyang, M. L., Mohammad, F., Pervaiz, M., Jawaid, M., Alothman, O. 
Y., & Sain, M. (2017). Thermal and dynamic mechanical properties of cellulose nanofi￾bers reinforced epoxy composites. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
102, 822–828. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.04.074
Saba, N., Tahir, P., & Jawaid, M. (2014). A review on potentiality of nano filler/natural fiber 
filled polymer hybrid composites. Polymers, 6(8), 2247–2273. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym6082247
Safdari, F., Bagheriasl, D., Carreau, P., Heuzey, M.-C., & Kamal, M. (2016). Rheological, 
mechanical, and thermal properties of polylactide/cellulose nanofiber biocomposites. 
Polymer Composites, 39. https://doi.org/10.1002/pc.24127
Safdari, F., Carreau, P. J., Heuzey, M. C., Kamal, M. R., & Sain, M. M. (2017). Enhanced 
properties of poly(ethylene oxide)/cellulose nanofiber biocomposites. Cellulose, 24(2), 
755–767. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-016-1137-1
Sagadevan, S., Fareen, A., Hoque, M. E., Chowdhury, Z. Z., Johan, Mohd. R. B., Rafique, R. 
F., Aziz, F. A., & Lett, J. A. (2019). Chapter 12-Nanostructured polymer biocompos￾ites: Pharmaceutical applications. In S. K. Swain & M. Jawaid (Eds.), Nanostructured 
Polymer Composites for Biomedical Applications (pp. 227–259). Elsevier. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816771-7.00012-0
Saha, T., Hoque, M. E., & Mahbub, T. (2020). Biopolymers for sustainable packaging in food, 
cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals. In Faris M. Al-Oqla & S. M. Sapuan (Eds.), Advanced 
Processing, Properties, and Applications of Starch and Other Bio-Based Polymers
(pp. 197–214). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819661-8.00013-5110 Nanofillers
Salaberria, A. M., Fernandes, S. C. M., Diaz, R. H., & Labidi, J. (2015). Processing of 
α-chitin nanofibers by dynamic high pressure homogenization: Characterization and 
antifungal activity against A. niger. Carbohydrate Polymers, 116, 286–291. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.04.047
Salaberria, A. M., Labidi, J., & Fernandes, S. C. M. (2014). Chitin nanocrystals and nanofibers as 
nano-sized fillers into thermoplastic starch-based biocomposites processed by melt-mixing. 
Chemical Engineering Journal, 256, 356–364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.07.009
Salaberría, A. M., Teruel-Juanes, R., Badia, J. D., Fernandes, S. C. M., Sáenz de Juano-Arbona, 
V., Labidi, J., & Ribes-Greus, A. (2018). Influence of chitin nanocrystals on the dielectric 
behaviour and conductivity of chitosan-based bionanocomposites. Composites Science 
and Technology, 167, 323–330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2018.08.019
Sessini, V., Raquez, J.-M., Kenny, J. M., Dubois, P., & Peponi, L. (2019). Melt￾processing of bionanocomposites based on ethylene-co-vinyl acetate and starch 
nanocrystals. Carbohydrate Polymers, 208, 382–390. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2018.12.095
Shah, J., & Brown, R. (2005). Towards electronic paper displays made from microbial cel￾lulose. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 66, 352–355. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00253-004-1756-6
Shah, N., Ul-Islam, M., Khattak, W. A., & Park, J. K. (2013). Overview of bacterial cellulose 
composites: A multipurpose advanced material. Carbohydrate Polymers, 98(2), 1585–
1598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.08.018
Sharma, C., & Bhardwaj, N. K. (2019). Bacterial nanocellulose: Present status, biomedi￾cal applications and future perspectives. Materials Science and Engineering: C, 104, 
109963. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2019.109963
Shopsowitz, K. E., Hamad, W. Y., & MacLachlan, M. J. (2011). Chiral nematic mesopo￾rous carbon derived from nanocrystalline cellulose. Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition, 50(46), 10991–10995. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201105479
Silva, R., Al-Sharab, J., & Asefa, T. (2012). Edge-plane-rich nitrogen-doped carbon nanonee￾dles and efficient metal-free electrocatalysts. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 
51(29), 7171–7175. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201201742
Singh, A. A., Wei, J., Herrera, N., Geng, S., & Oksman, K. (2018). Synergistic effect of chi￾tin nanocrystals and orientations induced by solid-state drawing on PLA-based nano￾composite tapes. Composites Science and Technology, 162, 140–145. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2018.04.034
Siro, I., & Plackett, D. (2010). Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite materials: A 
review. Cellulose, 17, 459–494. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-010-9405-y
Skočaj, M. (2019). Bacterial nanocellulose in papermaking. Cellulose, 26(11), 6477–6488. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-019-02566-y
Song, S., Wang, C., Pan, Z., & Wang, X. (2008). Preparation and characterization of amphi￾philic starch nanocrystals. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 107(1), 418–422. https://
doi.org/10.1002/app.27076
Sriupayo, J., Supaphol, P., Blackwell, J., & Rujiravanit, R. (2005). Preparation and charac￾terization of α-chitin whisker-reinforced chitosan nanocomposite films with or with￾out heat treatment. Carbohydrate Polymers, 62(2), 130–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2005.07.013
Stanisławska, A. (2016). Bacterial nanocellulose as a microbiological derived nano￾material. Advances in Materials Science, 16(4), 45–57. https://doi.org/10.1515/
adms-2016-0022
Syafri, E., Kasim, A., Abral, H., & Asben, A. (2017). Effect of precipitated calcium carbonate 
on physical, mechanical and thermal properties of cassava starch bioplastic composites. 
International Journal on Advanced Science, Engineering and Information Technology, 
7, 1950. https://doi.org/10.18517/ijaseit.7.5.1292Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 111
Syafri, E., Kasim, A., Abral, H., Sudirman, Sulungbudi, G. T., Sanjay, M. R., & Sari, N. H. 
(2018). Synthesis and characterization of cellulose nanofibers (CNF) ramie reinforced 
cassava starch hybrid composites. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
120, 578–586. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.08.134
Takkalkar, P., Ganapathi, M., Dekiwadia, C., Nizamuddin, S., Griffin, G., & Kao, N. (2019). 
Preparation of square-shaped starch nanocrystals/polylactic acid based bio-nanocompos￾ites: Morphological, structural, thermal and rheological properties. Waste and Biomass 
Valorization, 10(11), 3197–3211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12649-018-0372-0
Tammela, P., Wang, Z., Frykstrand, S., Zhang, P., Sintorn, I.-M., Nyholm, L., & Strømme, 
M. (2015). Asymmetric supercapacitors based on carbon nanofibre and polypyr￾role/nanocellulose composite electrodes. RSC Advances, 5. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C4RA15894F
Tarrés, Q., Deltell, A., Espinach, F. X., Pèlach, M. À., Delgado-Aguilar, M., & Mutjé, P. 
(2017). Magnetic bionanocomposites from cellulose nanofibers: Fast, simple and effec￾tive production method. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 99, 29–36. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.02.072
Tercjak, A., Gutierrez, J., Barud, H., Domeneguetti, R., & Ribeiro, S. (2015). Nano- and mac￾roscale structural and mechanical properties of in situ synthesized bacterial cellulose/
PEO- b -PPO- b -PEO biocomposites. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 7, 4142–
4150. https://doi.org/10.1021/am508273x
Thomas, B., Raj, M., B, A., H, R., Joy, J., Moores, A., Drisko, G., & Sanchez, C. (2018). 
Nanocellulose, a versatile green platform: From biosources to materials and their appli￾cations. Chemical Reviews, 118. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00627
Tran, Q. N., Kim, I. T., Hur, J., Kim, J. H., Choi, H. W., & Park, S. J. (2020). Composite 
of nanocrystalline cellulose with tin dioxide as Lightweight Substrates for high-perfor￾mance Lithium-ion battery. Korean Journal of Chemical Engineering, 37(5), 898–904. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11814-020-0506-5
Tusnim, J., Hoque, M. E., Hossain, S. A., Abdel-Wahab, A., Abdala, A., & Wahab, M. A. (2020). 
Nanocellulose and nanohydrogels for the development of cleaner energy and future sus￾tainable materials. In F. Mohammad, H. A. Al-Lohedan, & M. Jawaid (Eds.), Sustainable 
Nanocellulose and Nanohydrogels from Natural Sources (pp. 81–113). Elsevier. https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816789-2.00004-3
Walther, A., Timonen, J., Díez, I., Laukkanen, A., & Ikkala, O. (2011). Multifunctional high￾performance biofibers based on wet-extrusion of renewable native cellulose nanofibrils. 
Advanced Materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), 23, 2924–2928. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.201100580
Wan, Y., Li, J., Yang, Z., Ao, H., Xiong, L., & Luo, H. (2018). Simultaneously depositing poly￾aniline onto bacterial cellulose nanofibers and graphene nanosheets toward electrically 
conductive nanocomposites. Current Applied Physics, 18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cap.2018.05.008
Wang, B., Li, X., Luo, B., Yang, J., Wang, X., Song, Q., Chen, S., & Zhi, L. (2013). Pyrolyzed 
bacterial cellulose: A versatile support for lithium ion battery anode materials. Small 
(Weinheim an Der Bergstrasse, Germany), 9. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201300692
Wang, C., Pan, Z., & Zeng, J. (2014). Structure, morphology and properties of benzyl starch 
nanocrystals. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, 39(9), 6703–6710. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13369-014-1201-9
Wang, H., & Zhang, K.-Q. (2013). Photonic crystal structures with tunable structure color as 
colorimetric sensors. Sensors, 13(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/s130404192
Wang, Y., Chen, Z., Tang, J., & Lin, N. (2019). Tunable optical materials based on self￾assembly of polysaccharide nanocrystals. In N. Lin, J. Tang, A. Dufresne, & M. K. C. 
Tam (Eds.), Advanced Functional Materials from Nanopolysaccharides (pp. 87–136). 
Springer Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-0913-1_3112 Nanofillers
Wang, Z., Carlsson, D., Tammela, P., Hua, K., Zhang, P., Nyholm, L., & Strømme, M. 
(2015). Surface modified nanocellulose fibers yield conducting polymer-based flex￾ible supercapacitors with enhanced capacitances. ACS Nano, 9. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsnano.5b02846
Wen, K., Zhang, Z., Jiang, X., He, J., & Yang, J. (2020). Image representation of structure 
color based on edge detection algorithm. Results in Physics, 19, 103441. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rinp.2020.103441
Wetzel, B., Haupert, F., & Qiu Zhang, M. (2003). Epoxy nanocomposites with high mechani￾cal and tribological performance. Composites Science and Technology, 63(14), 2055–
2067. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0266-3538(03)00115-5
Wu, C., Sun, J., Chen, M., Ge, Y., Ma, J., Hu, Y., Pang, J., & Yan, Z. (2019). Effect of oxidized 
chitin nanocrystals and curcumin into chitosan films for seafood freshness monitoring. 
Food Hydrocolloids, 95, 308–317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2019.04.047
Wu, J., Zhang, K., Girouard, N., & Meredith, J. C. (2014). Facile route to produce chitin nanofi￾bers as precursors for flexible and transparent gas barrier materials. Biomacromolecules, 
15(12), 4614–4620. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm501416q
Wu, X., Cao, S., Ghim, D., Jiang, Q., Singamaneni, S., & Jun, Y.-S. (2021). A thermally engi￾neered polydopamine and bacterial nanocellulose bilayer membrane for photothermal 
membrane distillation with bactericidal capability. Nano Energy, 79, 105353. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.105353
Wu, Z.-Y., Li, C., Liang, H.-W., Chen, J.-F., & Yu, S.-H. (2013). Ultralight, flexible, and 
fire-resistant carbon nanofiber aerogels from bacterial cellulose. Angewandte Chemie 
(International Ed. in English), 52, 2925–2929. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201209676
Xiao-peng, L., Li, Y., Li, X., Song, D., Min, P., Hu, C., Zhang, H.-B., Koratkar, N., & Yu, 
Z.-Z. (2019). Highly sensitive, reliable and flexible piezoresistive pressure sensors fea￾turing polyurethane sponge coated with MXene sheets. Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science, 542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2019.01.123
Xu, C., Chen, C., & Wu, D. (2018). The starch nanocrystal filled biodegradable poly(ε￾caprolactone) composite membrane with highly improved properties. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 182, 115–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.11.001
Xu, K., Liu, C., Kang, K., Zheng, Z., Wang, S., Tang, Z., & Yang, W. (2018). Isolation of nano￾crystalline cellulose from rice straw and preparation of its biocomposites with chitosan: 
Physicochemical characterization and evaluation of interfacial compatibility. Composites 
Science and Technology, 154, 8–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2017.10.022
Xu, X., Liu, F., Jiang, L., Zhu, J. Y., Haagenson, D., & Wiesenborn, D. (2013). Cellulose 
nanocrystals vs. cellulose nanofibrils: A comparative study on their microstructures and 
effects as polymer reinforcing agents. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 6. https://
doi.org/10.1021/am302624t
Yan, M., Li, S., Zhang, M., Li, C., Dong, F., & Li, W. (2013). Characterization of surface acety￾lated nanocrystalline cellulose by single-step method. BioResources, 8(4), 6330–6341.
Yang, M., Zhang, X., Guan, S., Dou, Y., & Gao, X. (2020). Preparation of lignin contain￾ing cellulose nanofibers and its application in PVA nanocomposite films. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 158, 1259–1267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.05.044
Yao, J., Huang, H., Mao, L., Li, Z., Zhu, H., & Liu, Y. (2017). Structural and optical properties 
of cellulose nanocrystals isolated from the fruit shell of Camellia oleifera Abel. Fibers 
and Polymers, 18(11), 2118–2124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-017-7489-9
Yataka, Y., Suzuki, A., Iijima, K., & Hashizume, M. (2020). Enhancement of the mechani￾cal properties of polysaccharide composite films utilizing cellulose nanofibers. Polymer 
Journal, 52(6), 645–653. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41428-020-0311-3Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical, Optical and Magnetic Properties 113
Yin, Z., Zeng, J., Wang, C., & Pan, Z. (2015). Preparation and properties of cross-linked starch 
nanocrystals/polylactic acid nanocomposites. International Journal of Polymer Science, 
2015, e454708. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/454708
Yingkamhaeng, N., Intapan, I., & Sukyai, P. (2018). Fabrication and characterisation of 
functionalised superparamagnetic bacterial nanocellulose using ultrasonic-assisted 
in situ synthesis. Fibers and Polymers, 19(3), 489–497. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12221-018-7738-6
Yu, J., Ai, F., Dufresne, A., Gao, S., Huang, J., & Chang, P. R. (2008). Structure and mechanical 
properties of poly(lactic acid) filled with (starch nanocrystal)-graft-poly(ε-caprolactone). 
Macromolecular Materials and Engineering, 293(9), 763–770. https://doi.org/10.1002/
mame.200800134
Zhai, W., Xia, Q., Zhou, K., Yue, X., Ren, M., Zheng, G., Dai, K., Liu, C., & Shen, C. (2019). 
Multifunctional flexible carbon black/polydimethylsiloxane piezoresistive sensor with 
ultrahigh linear range, excellent durability and oil/water separation capability. Chemical 
Engineering Journal, 372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.04.142
Zhang, S., Liu, H., Yang, S., Shi, X., Zhang, D., Shan, C., Mi, L., Liu, C., Shen, C., & Guo, 
Z. (2019). Ultrasensitive and highly compressible piezoresistive sensor based on poly￾urethane sponge coated with cracked cellulose nanofibril/silver nanowire layer. ACS 
Applied Materials & Interfaces, 11. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b00900
Zhang, S., Sun, K., Liu, H., Chen, X., Zheng, Y., Shi, X., Zhang, D., Mi, L., Liu, C., & Shen, C. 
(2020). Enhanced piezoresistive performance of conductive WPU/CNT composite foam 
through incorporating brittle cellulose nanocrystal. Chemical Engineering Journal, 387, 
124045. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.124045
Zhao, X., Xu, Z., Xu, H., Lin, N., & Ma, J. (2021). Surface-charged starch nanocrystals 
from glutinous rice: Preparation, crystalline properties and cytotoxicity. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 192, 557–563. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2021.10.024
Zheng, G., Cui, Y., Karabulut, E., Wågberg, L., Zhu, H., & Hu, L. (2013). Nanostructured paper 
for flexible energy and electronic devices. MRS Bulletin/Materials Research Society, 38, 
320–325. https://doi.org/10.1557/mrs.2013.59
Zhong, T., Wolcott, M. P., Liu, H., & Wang, J. (2019). Developing chitin nanocrystals for flexi￾ble packaging coatings. Carbohydrate Polymers, 226, 115276. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2019.115276
Zhu, H., Hu, L., Cumings, J., Huang, J., Chen, Y., Preston, C., & Rohrbach, K. (2013). Highly 
transparent and flexible nanopaper transistor. ACS Nano, 7. https://doi.org/10.1021/
nn304407r115
4 Standard Reinforcement 
Methods, Mechanism, 
Compatibility, and 
Surface Modification of 
Nanofillers in Polymers
Kriti Sharma and G. L. Devnani
Harcourt Butler Technical University
Sanya Verma
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
Mohit Nigam
RBSETC
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-4
CONTENTS
4.1 Introduction .................................................................................................. 116
4.2 Types of Nanofillers...................................................................................... 117
4.3 Organic Nanofillers ......................................................................................120
4.3.1 Nanofibers.........................................................................................120
4.3.1.1 Nanocellulose.....................................................................120
4.3.1.2 Nanolignin .........................................................................120
4.3.1.3 Chitin/Chitosan..................................................................120
4.3.1.4 Organic–Inorganic Hybrid Nanofillers.............................. 121
4.4 Inorganic Nanofillers.................................................................................... 121
4.4.1 Carbon-Based Nanofillers ................................................................ 121
4.4.1.1 Carbon Nanotubes ............................................................. 121
4.4.1.2 Graphene............................................................................ 121
4.4.2 Nanoclays.......................................................................................... 122
4.4.2.1 Layered Nanoclays............................................................. 122
4.4.2.2 Nonlayered Silicates .......................................................... 122
4.4.3 Metal Oxide Nanofillers................................................................... 122
4.4.4 Metal Nanoparticles.......................................................................... 122
4.4.5 Other Nanoparticles.......................................................................... 122116 Nanofillers
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The need and usage of special materials or combination materials have been ever 
increasing. Engineering materials at nano, micro, atomic or molecular scales give us 
the freedom and control to mix certain materials to get the desired properties. Such 
materials are called composites. Polymer composites are those composites where 
one of the materials is a polymer matrix. These polymer composites when reinforced 
using nanoscale particles are called polymer nanocomposites (PNCs). These consist 
4.5 Surface Modification Techniques of Nanofillers..........................................125
4.6 Types of Surface Modification Techniques..................................................126
4.6.1 Physical............................................................................................. 126
4.7 Heat Treatment ............................................................................................. 126
4.7.1 Plasma Treatment ............................................................................. 127
4.7.2 Low Atmospheric Pressure Discharge ............................................. 127
4.7.3 High Atmospheric Pressure Discharge............................................. 127
4.7.4 γ Irradiation....................................................................................... 127
4.8 Chemical Treatment......................................................................................128
4.8.1 Coupling Agent Treatment................................................................128
4.8.2 Graft Polymerization ........................................................................128
4.9 Mechanisms of Reinforcement of Nanofillers in PNCs ............................... 129
4.9.1 For Particulate Fillers (Carbon Black, Silica, ZnO)......................... 129
4.9.2 For Tubular Fillers (Carbon Nanotubes [CNTs], Nanofibers)........... 130
4.9.3 For Layered Filler (Nanoclays)......................................................... 130
4.9.3.1 Mechanisms....................................................................... 131
4.10 Compatibilization of Nanofillers.................................................................. 132
4.11 Processing of Polymer Nanocomposites....................................................... 132
4.11.1 In Situ Polymerization ...................................................................... 133
4.11.2 Blending/Direct Mixing ................................................................... 133
4.11.2.1 Solution Mixing ................................................................. 133
4.11.2.2 Melt Blending..................................................................... 134
4.11.3 Bottom-Up ........................................................................................ 135
4.11.4 Sol-Gel.............................................................................................. 135
4.12 Characterization/Evaluation Techniques...................................................... 135
4.12.1 Structural and Morphological Characterization............................... 135
4.12.2 Wide-Angle X-Ray Diffraction ........................................................ 136
4.12.3 Small-Angle X-Ray Diffraction/Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering ..... 136
4.12.4 Scanning Electron Microscopy ........................................................ 137
4.12.5 Raman Spectroscopy ........................................................................ 137
4.12.6 Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM).................................................... 137
4.13 Thermal, Mechanical, Rheological and Other Techniques of 
Characterization............................................................................................ 137
4.14 Benefits and Drawbacks................................................................................ 138
4.15 Potential Applications of Polymer Nanocomposites .................................... 139
4.16 Conclusion .................................................................................................... 140
References.............................................................................................................. 141Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 117
of a polymer or copolymer having nanoparticles or nanofillers dispersed in the poly￾mer matrix where the nanosized particles or nanofillers are classified into various 
types according to their shape and material.
In the last decades, it has been observed that the addition of low content of these 
nanofillers into the polymer improves their properties (mechanical, thermal, barrier 
and flammability) without affecting their processability. Nanocomposites can also 
show unique design possibilities, which offer excellent advantages in creating func￾tional materials with desired properties for specific applications. The performance of 
nanocomposites may depend on a number of nanoparticle features such as size, spe￾cific surface area, aspect ratio, volume fraction used, compatibility with the matrix 
and dispersion.
The nanoparticle dispersion and distribution state remain the key challenge in 
order to obtain the full potential of enhancement of properties because of the hydro￾philicity of the nanofillers and hydrophobicity of the polymer matrix. But, due to 
the recent development in the field of nanotechnology and growing interest in poly￾mer matrix composites, nanosized fillers are distributed homogeneously (known as 
filler–polymer nanocomposites). This is mainly achieved through surface modifica￾tion of nanofillers via physical, chemical or plasma treatments and further addition 
of compatibilizers to increase the dispersion of nanofillers into the polymer matrix 
and adhesion of the nanofiller–polymer surface (Bitinis et al., 2011; Müller et al., 
2017).
Uniform dispersion can be characterized by different states at nano-, micro- and 
microscopic scales. To obtain nanocomposites with different polymers, various types 
of nanoparticles have been used such as clay (Oliveira et al., 2012; Zaïri et al., 2011), 
graphene (de Melo et al., 2018), nanotube (Maron et al., 2018) and nanocellulose 
(Sonia & Priya Dasan, 2013). Techniques like wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) 
and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), electron microscopy, Raman spectroscopy 
and atomic force microscopy (AFM) and thermal, mechanical and rheological tech￾niques like Fourier-transformed infrared (FTIR), rheometry, differential scanning 
calorimeter (DSC) and thermogravimetric (TGA), thermomechanical (TMA) and 
dynamic modulus analysis (DMA) have been used to evaluate the degree of disper￾sion and distribution of the nanoparticles in the polymeric matrices (Beatrice et al., 
2010).
Depending on the degree of separation of the nanoparticles, three types of nano￾composite morphologies are possible (Alexandre & Dubois, 2000) (Figure 4.1).
Due to the large surface area of contact between the matrix and nanoparticles, 
exfoliated nanocomposites have maximum reinforcement. This is the main differ￾ence between nanocomposites and conventional composites.
The aim of this chapter is to review the understanding of the types of nanofillers, 
mechanism, compatibilization, and surface modification of nanofillers in polymers 
(Bhattacharya et al., 2008).
4.2 TYPES OF NANOFILLERS
Nanofillers are nanoscopic (i.e., size 1–100 nm) particles used as additives or 
fillers in reinforced polymer composites. Such reinforced composites where the 118 Nanofillers
nanofillers are dispersed into the matrix of polymer composites are called poly￾mer nanocomposites or PNCs. The surface modification of nanofillers in addition 
to their small size and large surface-to-volume ratio results in a highly enhanced 
interaction of nanofillers with the polymer matrix, which in turn enhances some of 
the mechanical (like stiffness), thermal (kinetic motion), electrical (like electrical 
resistivity), barrier (like gas storage), chemical (like catalytic reactivity) and other 
resulting properties (like electromagnetic forces) of PNCs which increase with an 
increase in the interfacial interactions, adhesion, motion of particles, etc (Guo, 
2016).
On the basis of their dimension, nanofillers can be classified into three types 
(Rangaraj Vengatesan & Mittal, 2015):
i. one nanoscale dimension (nanoplatelet)
ii. two nanoscale dimension (nanofiber)
iii. three nanoscale dimension (nanoparticulate) (Figure 4.2)
On the basis of the particulate material, nanofillers can be broadly classified into 
three types (Jamróz et al., 2019; Rallini & Kenny, 2017):
i. inorganic nanofillers (metals and metal oxides)
ii. organic nanofillers (natural biopolymers)
iii. organic–inorganic hybrid (hybrid of organic and inorganic) (Figure 4.3)
Depending upon the requirements and availability, the desired material and shape 
of nanofillers can be decided. Using appropriate chemical and mechanical meth￾ods, the nanofillers can be manufactured into their desired form, shape or dimension 
(Dantas de Oliveira & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019; Fu et al., 2019; Jamróz 
et al., 2019b; Lim et al., 2021; Rallini & Kenny, 2017b; Shankar & Rhim, 2018).
• Composites of separate phases are obtained with properties similar to
traditional composites when the polymer is unable to intercalate between
the silicate layers.
Conventional composites (or microcomposites)
• Well-ordered intercalated layers of polymer and clay are obatined when
one or more extended polymer chain is intercalated between the layers of
the silicate.
Intercalated nanocomposites
• Exfoliated PNCs are obatined when the silicate layers are completely and
uniformly dispersed in a continuous polymer matrix.
Exfoliated nanocomposites
FIGURE 4.1 Represent three types of nanocomposites.Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 119
1-D Nanofillers
•(nanoplatelets)
•Shape/Form: Nanodiscs 
(Fe3O4), nanoprism, 
nanosheets (ZnO), branched 
structures, nanoplatelets 
(GNP) and nanowalls (carbon)
•Enhanced Properties when 
reinforced with PNCs: 
Electrical, magnetic and optic 
properties
•Applications: Used in 
biosensors and microelectronics
2-D Nanofillers
•(nanofibers)
•Shape/Form: Tubes 
(carbon), fibers (cellulose) and 
filaments (gold)
•Enhanced Properties when 
reinforced with PNCs: 
Flame-retardant properties and 
better reinforcement than 3-D 
nanofillers
•Applications: Used in 
catalysis and nanoreactors
3-D Nanofillers
•(nanoparticulates)
•Shape/Form: Spherical and 
cubical
•Enhanced Properties when 
reinforced with PNCs: 
Stability and photocatalysis
•Applications: Used in 
purification and biomedicine
FIGURE 4.2 Represents the classification and properties of nanofillers on the basis of their 
dimensions.
FIGURE 4.3 Represents the classification of nanofillers on the basis of particulate material.120 Nanofillers
4.3 ORGANIC NANOFILLERS
4.3.1 Nanofibers
4.3.1.1 Nanocellulose
Nanocellulose is one of the widely used nanofibers. As a source of renewable 
energy, there is an interest in the use of biomass and cellulose is a promising 
source of biomass. Nanocellulose fibrils are produced via mechanical shearing 
(using a homogenizer or microfluidizer) of the cellulose fiber slurry (Dufresne, 
2017). Nanocrystals of cellulose can be obtained via acid hydrolysis (Cellulose 
Intercr y s Talline, n.d.). In 1983, the first report on the mechanical destructura￾tion of cellulose fiber was published in two companion papers. Nanocellulose is 
usually chemically modified using esterification, amidation, etc., and can also 
be modified using surfactants. Since nanofibers are biodegradable, environment￾friendly to use and abundantly available, their use as nanofillers is becoming 
increasingly popular.
4.3.1.2 Nanolignin
After cellulose, the abundantly available natural polymer is lignin. It is considered 
an amorphous polymer that is highly branched and also has high purity. Lignin is 
obtained by the most important industrial method known as kraft method in terms 
of quantity production. In a solution of sodium hydroxide and Na2S (black liquor), 
lignin is solubilized by the use of the kraft method (Gilca et al., 2014). Due to the 
presence of sulfur, the use of lignin in the polymer is limited and may interfere 
with chemical functionalization. As a result, another industrial method of extraction 
without the use of sulfur was developed. The preparation of lignin nanoparticles is 
possible when the lignin is extracted.
Nanolignin can be produced via hydroxymethylation of lignin obtained by the 
alkaline extraction process. By reducing the hydroxyls, the compatibility between 
lignin and the nonpolar polymer is enhanced. Nanolignin is modified chemically 
using alkylation or acetylation (Frangville et al., 2012).
4.3.1.3 Chitin/Chitosan
Chitin/chitosan are abundant materials. As food waste, they are obtained from crab 
and shrimp shells. The chemical structure of chitin is similar to cellulose and is 
considered a mucopolysaccharide. As a drug delivery system, chitosan is suitable for 
pharmaceutical applications. It poses various advantages like nonmetric particles, 
for example, it can be transported in the body through blood circulation, and for 
more surfaces, it can transport more drugs. Chitin nanofibers can be obtained via 
acid hydrolysis and chitosan nanofibers can be obtained via the addition of sodium 
hydroxide and tripolyphosphate to a solution of chitosan in acetic acid. Chitosan can 
be modified chemically via carboxyalkylation or grafting copolymerization (Rallini 
& Kenny, 2017).Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 121
4.3.1.4 Organic–Inorganic Hybrid Nanofillers
Organic–inorganic hybrid nanofillers have the properties like tenacity derived 
from the organic material while properties like thermal stability and rigidity are 
derived from the inorganic material. An example of organic–inorganic hybrid 
nanofiller is POSS or polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes. These are popular as 
they are compatible with a lot of different types of polymers and can be directly 
grafted to use with the polymer. Due to their high compatibility with the polymer, 
the mechanical and fire retardancy properties are highly enhanced in the POSS￾reinforced PNCs.
4.4 INORGANIC NANOFILLERS
4.4.1 Carbon-Based Nanofillers
4.4.1.1 Carbon Nanotubes
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are tubular structures having their cylindrical diameter 
in nanometers and a size length in micrometers. They are classified into multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) or single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) based 
on the method of their preparation (Machado et al., 2014; Torres, 2011). MWCNTs 
are cylindrical shells of concentric shells of graphene sheets while SWCNTs are 
solid cylinders of rolled-up graphene sheets. PNCs based on CNTs have highly 
enhanced electrical, thermal and mechanical properties. The main problem with 
CNTs is that they tend to agglomerate which results in a decrease in their disper￾sion into the polymer matrix. The surface of the CNT is chemically modified to 
introduce functional groups on the side wall to increase polymer–filler interac￾tions. For instance, CNT treated with HNO3/H2SO4 mix (nitric acid–sulfuric acid 
mixture) gives rise to the formation of carboxylic acid groups on the surface of the 
CNT leading to better interaction with the polymer matrix (Oliveira et al., 2016; 
Torres, 2011).
4.4.1.2 Graphene
Andre. K. Geim and Konstantin S. Novoselov discovered graphene in 2004. Graphene 
nanoparticles are in the form of a sheet structure where the carbon atoms are bonded 
via sp2 hybridization. Graphene nanofillers are manufactured using graphites through 
thermal expansion, micromechanical exfoliation, CVD (chemical vapor deposition) 
or chemical reduction of graphene oxide. Some properties of graphene are that 1 TPa 
is Young’s modulus of graphene, 5000 W/m.fK is thermal conductivity and 125GPa 
is fracture strength. Due to high surface area and high gas impermeability value of 
graphene, the graphene-reinforced PNCs have enhanced mechanical, thermal, elec￾trical and gas barrier properties. On the exfoliation of bulk graphite into individual 
sheets, the use of graphene was dependent. To produce individual exfoliated gra￾phene sheets, various chemical–mechanical routes were developed such as chemical 
exfoliation and CVD. Depending on the presence of defects and the purity, each 
method has its own advantages and disadvantages (Mittal & Chaudhry, 2015; Wan 
& Chen, 2012).122 Nanofillers
4.4.2 Nanoclays
4.4.2.1 Layered Nanoclays
These include layered silicates (montmorillonite or MMT), clay minerals (hydrous 
aluminum phyllosilicates) and traces of metal oxides and organic matter. Nanoclay￾reinforced PNCs show an enhanced increase in stiffness, barrier properties and 
flame retardancy at a very low amount of nanoclay volume fraction due to their 
lamellar structure and high surface area. Nanoclays are usually organically modi￾fied or silanized before polymer composite preparation (Kotal & Bhowmick, 2015).
4.4.2.2 Nonlayered Silicates
These are usually tubular in shape and hollow and have a high aspect ratio and high 
surface area. Nonlayered silicate-reinforced PNCs show enhanced mechanical, ther￾mal and flammability properties.
4.4.3 Metal Oxide Nanofillers
These include silica (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3), etc. They have a high specific surface 
area. Metal oxide nanofillers are obtained via the process of high-temperature hydro￾lysis (to obtain nonporous nanoparticles) or sol-gel process or precipitation process 
(to obtain porous nanoparticles). Metal oxide nanoparticles tend to agglomerate 
and hence are modified chemically or using heat treatment (Dantas de Oliveira & 
Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019b).
4.4.4 Metal Nanoparticles
These include metals like Cu (copper), Zn (zinc) and Ag (silver). Silver nanoparti￾cles can be obtained via chemical reduction or laser irradiation. Nanosilver particles 
are usually physically modified using surfactants like diacid (Dantas de Oliveira & 
Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019b; Rallini & Kenny, 2017).
4.4.5 Other Nanoparticles
PNCs can also be made with metal hydride alloys. These are produced as free 
metal powder particles from repeating hydriding–dehydriding cycle and conse￾quent pulverization (Dantas de Oliveira & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019b) 
(Table 4.1). Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 123 TABLE 4.1 Summarizes Few Common Nanofillers Used Name Types Manufacturing Process Surface Modification Advantages Carbon- based nanofillers Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) Laser furnace, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) Treatment with (HNO3/H2SO4) High chemical reactivity and electrical conductivity Graphene sheet CVD, chemical/mechanical exfoliation Treatment with potassium, sonication Carbon nanofibers (CNFs) Electrospinning of polymers followed by CVD Oxidation with strong acids Carbon black Thermal decomposition by oils (to obtain furnace black) Oxidation, halogenation, grafting with alkyl chains Nanoclays Layered silicates Chemical exfoliation Silanization, use of alkylphosphonium salts Nonlayered silicates Natural fibers Cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) Mechanically induced destructuration strategy via mechanical shearing Biodegradable and easily and abundantly available naturally Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) Strong acid hydrolysis treatment Treatment with sulfuric acid, amidation, esterification, and etherification (during acid hydrolysis) Lignin Hydroxymethylation or precipitation using hydrochloric acid of extracted lignin Alkylation, acetylation
(Continued)124 Nanofillers TABLE 4.1 (Continued) Summarizes Few Common Nanofillers Used Name Types Manufacturing Process Surface Modification Advantages Chitin/chitosan Dissolve chitosan in acetic acid, adjust pH with sodium hydroxide and add an aqueous solution of tripolyphosphate Carboxyalkylation, graft copolymerization Metallic particles Metallic nanoparticles Utilization of metals in solid state storage of the gas Nano-oxides (like silica (SiO2), alumina (Al O2 3), and titania (TiO2)) High-temperature hydrolysis to obtain fumed oxides Heat treatment/chemical modification to remove the hydrophilic group Nanocarbides [Silicon carbide (SiC) and boron carbide (B4C), zirconium carbide (ZrC)] Thermal plasma-assisted methods, vaporization–condensation process Others Other nanoparticles (POSS, silver nanoparticles) Chemical reduction of metal salts and laser irradiation Graft polymerization for POSS, modification using diacid for nanosilver Compatible or miscible with many solvents and polymer Source: Suter et al., 2015; Bitinis et al., 2011; Zaïri et al., 2011.Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 125
4.5 SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNIQUES OF NANOFILLERS
In general, nanofillers and the polymer matrix are incompatible due to the following 
reasons:
i. Agglomeration of nanofillers
Due to their small size, nanofillers have high surface energy which leads to 
their agglomeration.
ii. Nonuniform dispersion
Due to the agglomeration of nanofillers, the dispersion of nanofillers into 
the polymer matrix becomes nonhomogeneous or nonuniform.
iii. Poor interfacial interaction
Due to the surface of nanofillers being hydrophilic and the surface of poly￾mers being hydrophobic, the interfacial interaction and consecutive adhesion/
bonding of nanofillers and the polymer matrix become weak during the fabri￾cation step. Due to the incompatibility of nanofillers and the polymer matrix, 
the properties of PNCs are compromised. The described problems can be 
overcome by modifying the surface of the nanofillers. Surface modification 
techniques modify the surface of the nanofillers in such a way that the hydro￾philicity of the surface of the nanomaterial is increased and nanoparticles do 
not agglomerate which in turn leads to better dispersion and interfacial inter￾action and consequently more enhanced properties of PNCs. Nanomaterials 
whose surface have been modified are commonly referred to as surface modi￾fication nanomaterials or SMNs (Dantas de Oliveira & Augusto Gonçalves 
Beatrice, 2019; Fu et al., 2019; Kolosov et al., 2020; Nesic & Seslija, 2017; 
Rallini & Kenny, 2017b; Rangaraj Vengatesan & Mittal, 2015b; Rong et al., 
2006; Saman et al., 2021; Tanahashi, 2010; Tanaka et al., 2004) (Figure 4.4).
Improving the
properties of
liquid polymer
matrix and the
composite as a 
whole
Improving the
structure of
composites and
optimizing the
ratio of their
components.
Improving the operational properties of traditional NM and PCMs
Improving the
surface properties
of oriented,
dispersed and
nanoscale fillers
of tradititional NM
and PCMs
Method of physical, chemical and physiochemical modification
FIGURE 4.4 The considered approach to improving the technological properties of com￾posites (NM: nanomaterial; PCM: polycomposite material).126 Nanofillers
4.6 TYPES OF SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNIQUES
4.6.1 Physical
This involves physical modification of the nanofillers using surfactants or macromol￾ecules or polymeric chains of macromolecules which contain two parts:
i. one or more polar group(s)
ii. an aliphatic chain
Due to the presence of a polar group(s) in the surfactant, an electrostatic interaction 
occurs between the nanofiller surface of high energy and the polar component of the 
surfactant, which results in selective adsorption of the polar groups onto the surface 
of the nanoparticle. In some cases, an ionic bond is formed as well. This in turn 
decreases the extent of interparticle interaction between the nanoparticles resulting 
in a decrease in the agglomeration of nanoparticles.
For inorganic nanofillers, encapsulation can be carried out:
i. using preformed polymers
ii. using in situ polymers
iii. using the emulsion polymerization process
Encapsulation of inorganic particles with preformed polymers uses hyperdisper￾sants while encapsulation of inorganic nanoparticles with in situ polymers uses a 
polymeric dispersant that consists of a functional group (like –OH and –COOH) 
and a macromolecular chain (like polyester and polyether). Hyperdispersants and 
polymeric dispersants can anchor more strongly to the surface of the nanoparticles 
and reduce the tendency of re-agglomeration of the nanoparticles due to the inter￾ference from their long polymeric chains, as compared to the traditional surfac￾tants. However, hyperdispersants only encapsulate the agglomerated nanoparticles 
and they are not diffused or adsorbed onto the nanoparticle surface. Emulsion 
polymerization involves surface adsorption of monomer and consecutive polymer￾ization occurring at the adsorbed surface layer of the nanoparticles due to surface 
adsorption of monomer, for example, using the modified surface of SiO2 with oleic 
acid for polylactide (PLA) matrix (Rangaraj Vengatesan & Mittal, 2015b; Rong 
et al., 2006).
Advantage: Physical methods are easier and faster to implement.
Drawback: The modifiers (surfactants) are easily desorbed with no chemical 
bonding to hold them in place, hence leading to insignificant surface modification.
4.7 HEAT TREATMENT
This is used to enhance the electrical properties of nanomaterials. The use of an 
appropriate amount of heat dries the moisture on the surface of the nanofillers, hence 
leading to a decrease in the number of hydrogen and hydroxide ions, thus decreasing 
the overall conductivity of the nanomaterial resulting in better insulation.Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 127
Drawback: If the amount of heat exposure to the nanomaterial exceeds the mini￾mum amount of heat that the nanofiller can withstand, then the surface structure and 
morphology of the nanofiller can go through irreparable damage.
4.7.1 Plasma Treatment
Plasma treatment involves coating the surface of the nanofiller with plasma. It uses 
either a glow plasma discharge (uniform discharge) or filamentary plasma discharge 
(nonuniform discharge). Uniform discharge leads to more enhanced dispersibility 
of nanoparticles in the polymer matrix. Plasma is the fourth state of matter, where 
an ionized substance starts exhibiting a very high electrical conductivity. Plasma 
must be chosen from its different types (based on electron density and electron tem￾perature) and effectiveness. Cold plasma treatment can be done under two conditions 
(Saman et al., 2021).
4.7.2 Low Atmospheric Pressure Discharge
It involves the use of low-pressure plasma (made under pressure lower than atmo￾spheric pressure) and low-pressure plasma reactors (like microwaves at 2.53GHz) 
inside a closed vacuum system. Uniform discharge is easily achieved under low gas 
pressure.
Low-pressure plasma treatment is a complicated and expensive method. Moreover, 
low-pressure conditions are difficult to achieve, maintain and control as part of a con￾tinuous process (Laroussi, 2009; Mandolfino, 2019).
4.7.3 High Atmospheric Pressure Discharge
It overcomes the problems with low-pressure plasma discharge treatment as it does 
not use a closed vacuum system. Under atmospheric conditions, nanoparticles are 
exposed to the plasma plume forms. It can be carried out using two regimes:
i. microdischarge or filamentary plasma (formed using corona discharge, 
dielectric barrier discharge and plasma jet configuration)
ii. atmospheric pressure glow discharge
Advantage: This is a very effective method of enhancing the properties, mainly the 
insulation properties.
Drawbacks: Selection of the most suitable plasma is difficult. Plasma discharge 
treatment also involves the generation of harmful by-products (Brandenburg, 2018; 
Cristofolini et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2017).
4.7.4 γ Irradiation
The nanoparticles are exposed to γ rays, and hence, both the outside and inside sur￾faces of the nanoparticle agglomerates are equally activated due to which monomers 128 Nanofillers
are able to interact with the nanoparticles to a higher extent. Silica, iron, nickel and 
cobalt nanoparticles are used for γ irradiation grafting.
Advantages: Chemical modification ensures covalent bond formation between 
the modifier and the nanofiller; hence, desorption of the modifier from the nanopar￾ticles is eliminated.
Drawbacks: The use of chemicals in this method is an unsustainable practice 
owing to the nondecomposability and toxicity of chemicals. Moreover, the by-prod￾ucts formed in the process are sometimes unknown and might be even more harmful 
to the environment.
4.8 CHEMICAL TREATMENT
This involves the use of chemical agents and solvents to alter the surface of the 
nanoparticles.
4.8.1 Coupling Agent Treatment
Coupling agents like silane, zirconate, etc., are used to increase the extent of adhe￾sion between the nanofillers and the polymer matrices. 
Drawback: It is hard to figure out the uniform surface coverage of coupling 
agents on nanofillers with the available methods.
4.8.2 Graft Polymerization
It involves the interaction of graft monomer particles with the polymer matrix under 
the desired graft conditions to form a nanocomposite microstructure (radical, anionic 
and cationic polymerization) consisting of an agglomeration of strong nanoparticles 
and the grafted and the ungrafted polymers. Graft polymerization can be done using 
two routes (Vengatesan & Mittal, 2015; Rong et al., 2006):
i. Grafting from: It involves the use of active compounds as an initiator which 
are attached to the inorganic particle surface covalently. The monomers are 
polymerized from these active compounds from scratch. This is of two types:
i. Using polymerizable groups (e.g. silane grafting)
ii. Using initiating groups
While using polymerizable groups is easier, polymerization through 
initiating groups leads to a higher grafting percentage and efficiency.
ii. Grafting to: Polymers are not synthesized from scratch using monomers. 
Ready-made polymers containing reactive end groups are available which 
interact with the functional groups on the nanoparticles’ surface. Grafting 
considerably improves the dispersibility of nanoparticles in organic solvents 
and their compatibility with polymers.
‘Grafting from’ is more widely used due to the easy penetration of small 
monomers into the nanoparticle agglomerates rather than larger polymer Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 129
penetration in ‘grafting to’. Moreover, ‘grafting to’ leads to a polymer coat￾ing on nanoparticles resulting in further attachment of the polymer dur￾ing the composite preparation although ‘grafting in’ allows to control the 
weight of the grafting polymer.
4.9 MECHANISMS OF REINFORCEMENT 
OF NANOFILLERS IN PNCs
Reinforcement mechanisms in nanocomposites are complex and are still a topic of 
research. There are many different mechanisms proposed for nanocomposites, but 
a conclusion has not been reached yet. According to the different types and shapes 
of the nanofillers being used, the reinforcing mechanism of rubber nanocomposites 
differs.
Reinforcement of particulate nanofillers can be explained based on the following 
elements:
i. Polymer network (strain independent): Describes the increase in modu￾lus due to the polymer cross-link network of the unvulcanized as well as the 
vulcanized rubber.
ii. Hydrodynamic effects (strain independent): Describe the increase in the 
modulus of the rubber as a function of the volume fraction of the filler when 
nanoparticles are added.
iii. Filler–composite interactions (strain independent): Describe the forma￾tion of bound rubber or immobilized rubber due to the trapping of the poly￾mer rubber chains inside the void of the filler–filler network. Subsequently, 
the immobilized rubber starts acting as filler particles contributing to the 
reinforcement mechanism due to the prevention of the separation of the 
nanofiller and rubber giving rise to a ‘constrained compatibility’ between 
the nanofiller and the rubber.
iv. Filler–filler interactions (dependent on strain): Describe a decrease in 
the modulus at high strain due to breaking of the filler–filler bonds.
According to the shape of the nanofillers being used, the reinforcing mechanism of 
rubber nanocomposites differs.
4.9.1 For Particulate Fillers (Carbon Black, Silica, ZnO)
Deformation at low strains of the particulate nanofiller agglomerates is very com￾mon in nanoparticle-reinforced rubber. Payne effect which involves the reformation 
of nanofiller agglomerates or network structure at high filler concentrations is used 
to describe the filler interactions with the rubber and the filler itself. Reinforcement 
of nanoparticles in rubber is mainly attributed to the increase in the modulus of 
the rubber composite due to the constrained volume of the rubber around the 
nanoparticles which is mainly described by filler–polymer interaction in the case 
of nanoparticles.130 Nanofillers
The reinforcement efficiency for particulate fillers mainly depends on the:
i. Size of the nanoparticle
ii. Structure of the nanoparticle
iii. Surface area of the nanoparticle
iv. Filler–rubber interaction
v. Filler–filler interaction
vi. Dispersion Level
4.9.2 For Tubular Fillers (Carbon Nanotubes [CNTs], Nanofibers)
The bonding between tubular fillers and polymer is weak due to the tendency of nano￾tubes to form agglomerates resulting in a nonuniform dispersion of nanotubes into 
the polymer matrix. Tubular fillers like CNTs are reinforced to the polymer through 
the formation of covalent bonds due to open-end oxidation or functionalization of the 
walls/surface of the modified tubular-walled surface of CNTs. Additionally, modi￾fication of polymer surface too leads to better dispersion and adhesion-like rein￾forcement of modified CNTs with epoxidation of natural rubber gives a much better 
adhesion than reinforcement of CNTs with natural rubber.
Nanomechanical interlocking of CNTs is a method involving a change in the con￾figuration or surface morphology of the nanotubes to increase the filler–rubber inter￾actions through noncovalent bond formation between the nanotubes and the rubber. 
Reinforcement of tubular fillers in rubber is mainly attributed to the effect of the 
formation of cross-links or networks and physical entanglements with rubber.
The reinforcement efficiency for tubular fillers mainly depends on the:
i. Aspect ratio
ii. Dispersion Level
iii. Alignment
iv. Extent of interfacial stress transfer
4.9.3 For Layered Filler (Nanoclays)
Layered fillers like nanoclays consisting of layered silicates have two layers and 
the gap in between these two layers is referred to as ‘gallery’. This gap is filled 
by the addition of cations to counterbalance the negative charges of the silicate 
sheet. Then, these cations are organically modified by replacing the cations with 
long organic chains (like alkyl ammonium or alkyl phosphonium ions) consisting 
of organic cations. This allows the dispersion of the layered silicates into the poly￾mer matrix as intercalated (for shorter alkyl chains lesser than 8 carbon atoms) or 
exfoliated structures (for longer alkyl chains). The intercalation increases the inter￾layer distance giving rise to better dispersion of the modified layered silicates. Low 
surface energy polymers are adsorbed to the high surface energy layered silicates 
by entering in between the gaps or the galleries and subsequently into the interlayer 
spacing. Immobilization of the rubber around the nanofiller surface also contrib￾utes to the reinforcement of the nanofiller into the polymer. However, at low strains, Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 131
the hydrodynamic effect mainly describes the reinforcement mechanism and the 
increase in the modulus of the rubber–nanoclay composite.
Reinforcement for nanofillers having a high aspect ratio is described by physi￾cal entanglements rather than the filler–polymer interactions. For example, CNTs 
being tubular have a high aspect ratio and have physical entanglements influencing 
the reinforcement more than the filler–rubber interactions in low aspect ratio carbon 
black or silica.
The reinforcement efficiency for nanoclay fillers mainly depends on the:
i. Extent of exfoliation or intercalation
ii. Degree of immobilization of polymer or volume of polymer constrained
iii. Alignment
4.9.3.1 Mechanisms
Now, many mechanisms have been proposed for rubber reinforcement by nanofillers 
based on the shape of the nanofillers, but the common features found in all types of 
nanofiller–rubber composite which contribute to the reinforcement mechanism are:
i. Payne effect describing the bonding–unbonding or agglomeration–deag￾glomeration of the filler network
ii. Formation of percolated nanofiller networks at higher concentrations of the 
nanofiller (percolation phenomenon)
iii. Immobilized or bound rubber contributing to increased filler–rubber 
interactions
Reinforced rubber composite mainly depends on the stiffness of the reinforced com￾posite, i.e., the more the stiffness, the better the reinforcement. Hence, the Payne 
effect, formation of percolated structure, formation of immobilized rubber, etc., all 
lead to an increase in the stiffness, and subsequently, the reinforcement takes place.
At low strains, linear viscoelastic behavior can be observed due to a very high 
degree of reinforcement because of the physical entanglements around the surface 
of the nanofillers or the restriction of the conformational freedom of the polymer 
chains on the nanofiller surface. Percolated structure and nanofiller network contrib￾ute to the reinforcement at low strains. Hence, at low strains, a very high modulus is 
observed. At high strains, the percolated structures and nanofiller network deform 
and the modulus is decreased suddenly due to the release of polymer chains, and this 
release of strain and subsequent re-adsorption of the released polymer chains restates 
the modulus back. The increase in modulus is attributed to the Payne effect which 
involves the reformation of nanofiller agglomerates or network structures at high 
filler concentrations. The nonlinear behavior in the mechanism of polymer matrix￾filler bonding and unbonding is associated with the network structure of filler going 
through an agglomeration–deagglomeration process.
In general, the reinforcement efficiency depends on the following factors:
i. Particle size of nanofiller
ii. Structure of nanofiller132 Nanofillers
iii. Surface area of nanofiller
iv. Filler–composite interactions: Higher the filler–composite interactions, i.e., 
the higher the bonding between the filler and the composite, the higher the 
reinforcement.
v. Filler–filler interactions: Lower filler–filler interactions (or larger interlayer 
distance between the layers of nanofillers), i.e., interparticle interactions 
of the nanofiller, give rise to higher filler–composite interaction, hence a 
higher degree of reinforcement.
vi. Dispersion level of nanofiller in the polymer matrix: The higher the unifor￾mity and the homogeneity of dispersion of the nanofiller into the polymer 
matrix, the higher the reinforcement.
vii. Volume of the polymer matrix in the proximity of nanofillers
viii. Extent of network or cross-linking
ix. Interfacial adhesion: The higher the interfacial adhesion between the 
nanofiller surface and the polymer surface, the higher the reinforcement 
(Donnet, 1998; Maiti et al., 2008; Rezende et al., 2010; Robertson et al., 
2011; Sahakaro, 2017).
4.10 COMPATIBILIZATION OF NANOFILLERS
The differences in the chemical nature of polymers and nanofillers give rise to 
incompatibility between the polymer and nanofiller which in turn lead to low 
enhancement of properties of the final polymer nanocomposite. Nanofillers are sub￾ject to thermomechanical degradation while polymers may undergo cross-linking 
(Mistretta et al., 2014). Degradation of substances during surface modification 
involving decomposition of the modifier and the resulting interaction between the 
degraded products and polymers leads to less interfacial interaction between the 
nanofiller and polymer. This degradation must be minimized to enhance the proper￾ties of PNCs. This is done by either increasing the number of processing cycles or 
carrying out the processing in severe conditions for a longer time. The compatibility 
of the nanofiller is further enhanced during the processing step of PNCs (Dantas 
de Oliveira & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019c; Mistretta et al., 2014). Research 
has shown that polymer blends of polyesters and polyamides using clay nanofill￾ers can be compatibilized with compatibilizers like maleic anhydride, oxazoline, 
etc (Dantas de Oliveira & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019; Taguet et al., 2014; 
Vrsaljko et al., 2015).
4.11 PROCESSING OF POLYMER NANOCOMPOSITES
Polymer nanocomposites can be produced by two methods:
i. in situ polymerization
ii. blending
For the preparation of good quality polymer nanocomposite samples, using a proper 
processing method is critical to achieve high performance of PNCs. The selection Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 133
of a proper processing method is based on the type of polymeric matrix and nano￾fillers and desired properties for the final product (Dantas de Oliveira & Augusto 
Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019; Donatella et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2019; Gou et al., 2012; 
Nayak et al., 2020; Rallini & Kenny, 2017b; Tanahashi, 2010b).
4.11.1 In Situ Polymerization
In situ polymerization or in situ intercalative polymerization involves the dis￾persion of the nanofiller particles into a monomer or monomeric solution (of 
the selected polymer) followed by its polymerization to obtain the final PNC 
product. Polymerization is carried out via standard methods of heat/high-tem￾perature treatment/radiation or via an initiator (organic/inorganic or a catalyst). 
After polymerization, the polymer and nanofiller are covalently bonded or poly￾mer molecules can also wrap themselves around the nanofiller particles. Clay￾reinforced PNCs, carbon-based reinforced PNCs, metal-polymer PNCs, etc., can 
be prepared via in situ polymerization. In situ intercalative polymerization is 
especially used to manufacture clay-based PNCs where the nanoclay having an 
organic filler intercalated between the interlayer space/galleries is dispersed into 
the polymer matrix.
Advantages: In situ polymerization is safe to use for thermally unstable or insolu￾ble polymers being used in PNC preparation. Polymers with high loading of nanofill￾ers can also be prepared via the in situ method because the polymers can be grafted 
onto the surface of the nanofiller. Other benefits also include cost effectiveness, high 
transparency, good interfacial adhesion of the nanofiller and controllable particle 
morphology.
Drawbacks: The main problem of this method is the increase in the viscosity 
of the polymer–filler mixture as the polymerization progresses. Removal of solvent 
also becomes a challenge if in situ polymerization is carried out in the presence of 
a solvent. Moreover, nanofiller particles tend to agglomerate easily; hence, surface 
modification of nanofillers is essential before processing via in situ.
4.11.2 Blending/Direct Mixing
Direct mixing involves the breaking down of the nanofiller agglomerates due to the 
mixing process of nanofillers and polymers. The mixing can be carried out using 
two methods:
i. Mixing in the presence of a solvent or solution mixing
ii. Mixing in the absence of a solvent or melt compounding
4.11.2.1 Solution Mixing
Solution mixing involves the dispersion of the nanofiller into a polymer solution fol￾lowed by evaporation or coagulation or precipitation of the solvent to get the final 
PNC product. Sonication, ultrasonic irradiation, magnetic stirring, shear mixing or 
other forms of agitation are used to disperse the nanoparticles in the polymer solution 134 Nanofillers
for deagglomeration. PNCs manufactured through solution mixing are generally 
obtained as thin films or sheets. Solution mixing is used to produce layered silicate￾reinforced PNCs, CNT-reinforced PNCs, etc.
Advantages: This method is easy to use and a relatively good dispersion of nano￾filler into the polymer matrix is obtained. Being a solution-based method, the overall 
viscosity of the nanofiller-polymer-solvent mixture is reduced which facilitates dis￾persion and mixing.
Drawbacks: Due to the use of the solvent, the selection of polymer is subject 
to its solubility in the solvent and hence the selection is limited to only a few poly￾mers. The use of chemical solvents and their subsequent disposal pose a threat to the 
environment.
4.11.2.2 Melt Blending
Melt blending is a comparatively new and well-established method carried out in 
the presence of an inert gas like argon, neon, etc. In this, nanofillers are dispersed 
into the polymer matrix above the glass transition temperature of the polymer or 
into the molten polymer. It makes use of high-force shear compounding devices 
such that shear is applied on the nanoparticles by the polymer during the mixing 
in the melt form by the dragging viscous force. As a result of this shear force, 
the breakdown of the agglomerates of the nanofillers occurs, thus achieving a 
uniform and homogeneous dispersion. The breakdown of the agglomerates can 
be explained through rupture models. One rupture model states that since the 
area of contact of the particles with their neighbors is very small at the cross 
section of the nanofiller agglomerate, rupture first occurs there and rises to split 
the agglomerate into two equal halves. Another rupture model called the ‘onion’ 
peeling’ model states that the pressure or stresses generated at any point on the 
surface of the agglomerates are large enough to eliminate the smaller particles 
or aggregate of smaller particles off of the larger agglomerates. Removal of the 
smaller nanofiller agglomerates slowly forms a cloud of agglomerates near the ini￾tial agglomerate, preventing a further reduction in the size of the initial nanofiller 
agglomerate. A further reduction in size occurs when the aggregates are swept off 
from the cloud and are replaced by fresh aggregates from the agglomerate. Melt 
blending is the preferred method for the preparation of PNCs of thermoplastics 
and elastomeric polymeric matrix.
Advantages: The main advantage of this method is that since it does not require 
the use of a chemical solvent, it is environment-friendly and is also simple, easy and 
convenient to use. Well-dispersed PNCs are obtained only at lower nanofiller loads. 
Moreover, melt blending gives end users the liberty to choose specifications for the 
final product like the choice of polymer grade, level of reinforcement, etc., because 
it allows the direct formulation of PNCs using the shearer/mixer which shifts the 
process downstream. The specificity of interactions of filler–polymer and intercala￾tion is also increased as the polymer–solvent interactions are eliminated due to the 
absence of the solvent.
Disadvantage: The limitation of this technique is that it uses a high temperature, 
which can damage the modified surface of the nanofillers.Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 135
4.11.3 Bottom-Up
The bottom-up approach involves the creation of a second phase directly in the 
polymer matrix. Typically, a precursor (a salt, an alkoxide) dispersed in the polymer 
matrix undergoes a series of chemical reactions to obtain the second phase.
Advantages: The bottom-up approach allows direct control of the interphase of 
the particles. For instance, to increase filler–polymer interfacial interactions, suitable 
covalent bonds can be created.
4.11.4 Sol-Gel
Sol-gel or in situ particle processing is mainly used to produce organic–inorganic 
hybrid PNCs. Sol-gel either proceeds through the mixing of a precursor with a 
copolymer of the polymer matrix or the mixing of a precursor with the polymer 
matrix itself; a combination of both can also be used. Basically, it involves in 
situ precipitation of the nanofiller in the polymer matrix through hydrolysis and 
condensation reactions of the precursors. In the sol-gel method, nanoparticles in 
solid form are spread over a monomer forming a colloidal solution called sol, and 
interconnecting regions, called gel, between the phases are created during the 
polymerization reaction spreading a 3D network of filler–polymer throughout the 
liquid phase. Crystals are created in the polymer matrix due to nucleation, and 
finally, PNCs are created from these crystals. Silica-reinforced PNCs, titania￾reinforced PNCs, metal-polymer PNCs, etc., can be prepared using the sol-gel 
processing technique. The sol-gel method is also fit for amorphous polymers like 
rubbers.
Advantage: It can be used for insoluble polymers and for the preparation of 
organic–inorganic hybrid PNCs.
Disadvantages: The process control is difficult and needs to be continuously 
monitored and maintained due to the complex chemical reactions taking place dur￾ing the sol-gel PNC preparation process. Moreover, chemical wastes are nonbiode￾gradable and harmful to the environment, and hence, it should be ensured that they 
are properly disposed.
4.12 CHARACTERIZATION/EVALUATION TECHNIQUES
Characterization/evaluation techniques are used to understand the basic physical and 
chemical properties of PNCs. Figure 4.5 shows various characterization/evaluation 
techniques.
4.12.1 Structural and Morphological Characterization
Good dispersion and distribution are the key factors for improving the properties 
of nanocomposites. During the preparation of nanocomposites, different structures 
and morphologies are generated, and they depend on various parameters. The most 
important is the method of preparation, particle concentration and the nature of 136 Nanofillers
particle functionalization (Marini & Bretas, 2017; Rallini & Kenny, 2017b; Zhao 
et al., 2005). Some commonly used techniques are:
i. wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD)
ii. small-angle X-ray diffraction (SAXD)
iii. scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
iv. Raman spectroscopy
v. atomic force microscopy (AFM)
4.12.2 Wide-Angle X-Ray Diffraction
WAXD involves analysis of the diffraction pattern. It identifies the crystalline phases 
by measuring the space between the crystalline layers using Bragg’s law. This method 
provides information about the crystalline structure, unit cell size, chemical compo￾sition as well as chemical stoichiometry. This method is the most widely used and 
is simple and easily available. The industrial application of WAXD includes its use 
in the evaluation of intercalation/exfoliation of clays in thermoplastics, elastomeric 
matrices and thermosets.
4.12.3 Small-Angle X-Ray Diffraction/Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering
SAXS is an analytical characterization technique. In SAXS, the intensities of X-rays 
scattered by a sample are measured as a function of the scattering angle. These 
FIGURE 4.5 Various characterization/evaluation techniques.Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 137
measurements are done at very small angles. AFM and SEM are also required to 
characterize the dispersion and distribution of nanoparticles.
4.12.4 Scanning Electron Microscopy
SEM is a type of electron microscope. In this, images of the sample surface are 
obtained by scanning the surface with a focused beam of electrons.
4.12.5 Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy has proven to be a useful investigation of carbon-based mate￾rial properties. This technique is based on the vibrational spectra. It uses a laser light 
that interacts with molecular vibration/phonons. The energy of these laser phonons 
is shifted up or down. It evaluates energy shifts to provide information on vibrational 
modes in conventional Raman spectroscopy systems. It is suitable for the analysis of 
nanomaterials. Their vibrational spectra allow the identification of phases and phase 
transitions, or shape determination of nanostructures, in nanoparticles. This tech￾nique is particularly suitable for the analysis of graphene nanoplatelets.
4.12.6 Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
Images of any type of surface including polymers, ceramics, composites, glasses and 
also biological samples can be obtained. Measurement and localization of adhesion 
strength, magnetic forces and mechanical properties can be done using AFM. This 
technique is performed using a sharp tip about 10–20nm in diameter attached to a can￾tilever. AFM consists of a cantilever in silicon or silicon nitride provided with a probe 
capable of interacting with the sample surface. It may work in two modes: contact 
mode and trapping mode. The AFM tip is continuously in contact with the surface in 
the process of the contact mode while in tapping mode the AFM cantilever is vibrated 
above the sample surface so the tip is in contact with the surface only intermittently.
4.13 THERMAL, MECHANICAL, RHEOLOGICAL AND 
OTHER TECHNIQUES OF CHARACTERIZATION
To enhance the properties of polymeric materials like conductivity, strength, etc., dis￾persed nanoparticles are used. A large surface-to-volume ratio facilitates increased 
interaction between the matrix and fillers, thus enhancing the overall material prop￾erties. In this section, we will discuss the effect of various fillers on mechanical, 
electrical, thermal, rheological and other techniques. So, as we go for further char￾acterization of PNCs, some techniques are commonly used, i.e., DSC, FTIR, rhe￾ometry, TGA, TMA and DMA. Viscoelastic measurements are more sensitive to 
the nano- and the mesoscale structure of polymers; when combined with techniques 
like WAXD, TEM, DSC, TGA and DMA, it will provide the understanding of the 
state and mechanism of dispersion of the nanoparticles. Variations in polymer com￾position and structure highly affect the rheological properties of PNCs. In dynamic 
mechanical spectrum, nanocomposites exhibit a change of pattern, as a function of 138 Nanofillers
the degree of exfoliation/dispersion. No. of particles per unit volume, use for deter￾mining the characteristics response of nanocomposites. These nanocomposites show 
solid-like behavior and slower response because of the presence of nanofillers. This 
type of behavior is explained by the development of grafting percolated nanoparticle 
network structure. Its formation is a consequence of physical interactions between 
dispersed nanoparticles, polymeric chains and surfactants, which promote a consid￾erable resistance to flow.
4.14 BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS
PNCs are composite materials, and hence, they give the users the freedom to manu￾facture PNCs of desired properties according to their requirements.
Several benefits are associated with PNCs:
i. low cost
ii. superior mechanical, flammability and thermal properties
iii. increased biodegradability of biodegradable polymers due to nanofiller 
reinforcement
iv. high temperature capability.
FIGURE 4.6 The benefits and drawbacks of PNCs.Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 139
But, the development of PNCs also poses several challenges. The biggest limita￾tion of PNCs is nanoparticle agglomeration. But the majority of the time, nanofillers 
cannot be directly used with the polymer matrix due to their incompatibility with 
the polymer. Hence, before the processing step, surface modification of nanofillers 
becomes necessary for better reinforcement, adding an extra step of costing time and 
money. Figure 4.6 represents the benefits and drawbacks of PNCs (Al-Haik et al., 
2010; Njuguna et al., 2014; Tyagi & Tyagi, 2014).
4.15 POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS OF 
POLYMER NANOCOMPOSITES
PNCs have various applications in an increasing number of commercial products, 
for example, structural applications, industrial applications such as automotive 
parts, food packaging and constructions (Ray, 2014), aerospace, etc., the develop￾ment of high-performance composites, biomedical applications (Suter et al., 2015), 
coating applications, environment protection, etc (Bitinis et al., 2011; Zaïri et al., 
2011) (Table 4.2).
TABLE 4.2
Shows Various Modes of Applications
Various Modes 
of Applications Uses
Structural 
applications
Polymeric materials are mostly used in structural applications because of vast 
applications from domestic to aerospace. PNCs have exceptional mechanical 
properties and also good electrical conductivities. So, it is good for structural 
applications
Develop high￾performance 
composites
To reduce weight and increase strength considerably
Industrial 
applications
Automotive: It is used in gas tanks and interior and exterior panels. 
Aerospace: Use of high-performance and flame-retardant panels
 Food packaging: Containers and wrapping films in food packaging. The use 
of nanocomposite packaging increases the shelf life of various types of 
foods. 
Construction: It is used in building sectional and structural panels
Environment 
protection
Water-laden atmosphere is the most damaging environment polymer materials 
can encounter. The major advantage is the ability of absorption of less water. 
Use environment-friendly nanocomposites that have strong anticorrosion 
properties .It plays a significant role in the development of a sustainable 
environment
Biomedical 
applications
Biodegradable polymers fulfill the need for biomedical applications. PLA is a 
biodegradable polymer and is used in food packaging applications and 
biomedical products
Source: Suter et al., 2015; Bitinis et al., 2011; Zaïri et al., 2011.140 Nanofillers
4.16 CONCLUSION
In this chapter, the commonly used nanofillers, their types, surface modification 
techniques, reinforcement mechanisms and compatibilization have been reviewed. 
The processing methods and characterization techniques of nanofiller-reinforced 
composites have also been explained. PNCs are more in demand than conventional 
polymer composites due to the small size of nanofillers contributing to the light￾weight of PNCs, the enhanced stiffness and other mechanical and barrier properties. 
Most nanofillers in popular use are inorganic and nonbiodegradable. With the focus 
on sustainable technology, nanofibers like nanocellulose and nanolignin should be 
used more often. But, even nonbiodegradable nanofillers increase the biodegradabil￾ity of the biodegradable polymer composites due to a very less amount of nanofillers 
required for the reinforcement, another class of nanofillers called hybrid nanofiller 
which is a combination of both organic and inorganic nanofillers is also becoming 
increasingly popular due to their direct grafting, high compatibility with many poly￾mers and more enhanced properties of the hybrid nanofiller-reinforced PNCs.
In general, nanofillers cannot be directly used with the polymer due to their incom￾patibility with the polymer because of the tendency of agglomeration of nanofillers 
which results in a nonuniform dispersion of the nanofiller particles in the polymer 
matrix and low adhesion and interfacial interaction between the nanofiller and poly￾mer surface. Hence, the nanofillers’ surface needs to be modified either by physically 
using surfactants or by giving heat treatment, chemically using chemical coupling 
agents or graft polymerization or by giving plasma treatment. Surface modification 
of nanofillers usually functionalizes the surface of nanofillers that introduces func￾tional groups on the surface of the nanofiller which increases covalent or noncovalent 
or van der Waals or hydrogen bonding depending upon the type of the functionaliza￾tion group introduced. For better adhesion and interaction, surface modification of 
polymers can also be done. Compatibilizers are also added to the nanofiller and poly￾mer matrix to prevent the degradation of substances during surface modification. The 
addition of a modifier during surface modification undergoes thermal decomposition 
which results in an interaction between the degraded products and the polymers, thus 
decreasing the nanofiller and polymer interactions leading to lower adhesion.
The mechanism of reinforcement of nanofillers has been sufficiently researched, 
but yet, no conclusion has been reached to confirm a general mechanism. This chap￾ter reviews nanofiller reinforcement rubber which mainly depends on filler–filler and 
filler–polymer interactions. More research is recommended to identify reinforcement 
mechanisms at nano, atomic and molecular levels for different nanofillers reinforced 
in different polymers.
The processing of PNCs basically involves the dispersion of nanofillers into the poly￾mer matrix. The selection of the final processing technique should be done based on the 
availability of the nanofiller and the polymer matrix and most importantly in order to 
achieve a good dispersion of the nanofiller into the polymer matrix for producing a good 
quality PNC. Therefore, a single PNC processing method cannot be used to produce all 
types of PNCs. PNCs can be obtained according to our desired shape like thin films 
or sheets, using methods like in situ polymerization, direct mixing, sol-gel, etc. PNCs 
of good quality can only be processed for only a limited amount of nanofillers, but to 
achieve the full potential of the properties of PNCs, the problem of low dispersion at high Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 141
nanofiller loading should be solved. Moreover, the processing of PNCs leads to the deg￾radation of the modified nanofiller surface. Research needs to be done to eliminate such 
degradation problems. Most of the conventional processing techniques require surface 
modification of nanofillers to eliminate the problem of agglomeration; sol-gel, however, 
can be used without a modified nanofiller as the aggregates are broken using high-force 
compounding devices. Finally, we use characterization techniques for PNCs to under￾stand the mechanical, thermal, rheological, electrical and flammability properties by 
measuring or detecting the crystallographic structures of nanofillers, chemical composi￾tion, particle concentration, dispersion and distribution pattern of nanofillers, etc., using 
various techniques like WAXD, SAXD, Raman spectroscopy, etc. After identifying and 
comprehending the properties of PNCs, one can utilize them in suitable applications and 
can also research to further improve the properties.
Although PNCs being composite materials have an edge over the use of conven￾tional materials given the flexibility to choose the polymer and the nanofiller, the sur￾face modification technique and the processing step according to our requirements, 
yet, they also pose a limitation on the available choices due to the incompatibility of 
polymer and nanofiller, hence a further restriction to use the most suitable processing 
method for maximum processing efficiency. Therefore, more research is needed to 
find the best combinations of polymer, nanofiller and processing methods in order to 
manufacture the best quality PNCs.
REFERENCES
Al-Haik, M., Luhrs, C. C., Reda Taha, M. M., Roy, A. K., Dai, L., Phillips, J., & Doorn, S. 
(2010). Hybrid carbon fibers/carbon nanotubes structures for next generation polymeric 
composites. Journal of Nanotechnology. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/860178
Alexandre, M., & Dubois, P. (2000). Polymer-layered silicate nanocomposites: preparation, 
properties and uses of a new class of materials. Materials Science and Engineering: R: 
Reports, 28, 1–63.
Beatrice, C. A. G., Branciforti, M. C., Alves, R. M. V., & Bretas, R. E. S. (2010). Rheological, 
mechanical, optical, and transport properties of blown films of polyamide 6/residual 
monomer/montmorillonite nanocomposites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 
116(6), 3581–3592. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.31898
Bhattacharya, S. N., Kamal, M. R., Musa, R., & Gupta, R. K. (2008). Polymeric Nanocomposites: 
Theory and Practice. Carl Hanser Publishers.
Bitinis, N., Hernandez, M., Verdejo, R., Kenny, J. M., & Lopez-Manchado, M. A. (2011). 
Recent advances in clay/polymer nanocomposites. Advanced Materials, 23(44), 5229–
5236. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201101948
Brandenburg, R. (2018). Corrigendum: Dielectric barrier discharges: progress on plasma 
sources and on the understanding of regimes and single filaments (Plasma Sources 
Science and Technology (2017) 26 (053001) DOI: 10.1088/1361-6595/aa6426). 
In Plasma Sources Science and Technology (Vol. 27, Issue 7). Institute of Physics 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6595/aaced9 
Cellulose Intercr y s Talline. (n.d.).
Cristofolini, A., Popoli, A., & Neretti, G. (2020). A multi-stage model for dielectric barrier dis￾charge in atmospheric pressure air. International Journal of Applied Electromagnetics 
and Mechanics, 63(S1), S21–S29. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAE-209120
Dantas de Oliveira, A., & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, C. (2019). Polymer nanocomposites 
with different types of nanofiller. In Nanocomposites - Recent Evolutions. IntechOpen. 
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.81329142 Nanofillers
de Melo, C. C. N., Beatrice, C. A. G., Pessan, L. A., de Oliveira, A. D., & Machado, F. M. 
(2018). Analysis of nonisothermal crystallization kinetics of graphene oxide - rein￾forced polyamide 6 nanocomposites. Thermochimica Acta, 667, 111–121. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tca.2018.07.014
Donatella, D., Silvestre, C., Cimmino, S., Marra, A., & Pezzuto, M. (2016). Processing, struc￾ture, and morphology in polymer nanocomposites. Polymer Morphology: Principles, 
Characterization, and Processing, 374–396.
Donnet, J. B. (1998). Black and white fillers and tire compound. Rubber chemistry and tech￾nology, 71(3), 323–341.
Dufresne, A. (2017). Cellulose nanomaterial reinforced polymer nanocomposites. In Current 
Opinion in Colloid and Interface Science (Vol. 29, pp. 1–8). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cocis.2017.01.004
Frangville, C., Rutkevičius, M., Richter, A. P., Velev, O. D., Stoyanov, S. D., & Paunov, 
V. N. (2012). Fabrication of environmentally biodegradable lignin nanoparticles. 
ChemPhysChem, 13(18), 4235–4243. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.201200537
Fu, S., Sun, Z., Huang, P., Li, Y., & Hu, N. (2019). Some basic aspects of polymer nanocom￾posites: A critical review. Nano Materials Science, 1(1), 2–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nanoms.2019.02.006
Gilca, I. A., Ghitescu, R. E., Puitel, A. C., & Popa, V. I. (2014). Preparation of lignin nanopar￾ticles by chemical modification. Iranian Polymer Journal (English Edition), 23(5), 355–
363. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13726-014-0232-0
Gou, J., Zhuge, J., & Liang, F. (2012). Processing of polymer nanocomposites. In Manufacturing 
Techniques for Polymer Matrix Composites (PMCs) (pp. 95–119). Elsevier. https://doi.
org/10.1533/9780857096258.1.95
Guo, Q. (2016). Polymer Morphology: Principles, Characterization, and Processing. John 
Wiley & Sons. 
Jamróz, E., Kulawik, P., & Kopel, P. (2019). The effect of nanofillers on the functional prop￾erties of biopolymer-based films: A review. In Polymers (Vol. 11, Issue 4). MDPI AG. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11040675
Kolosov, A. E., Sivetskii, V. I., Kolosova, E. P., Vanin, V. v., Gondlyakh, A. v., Sidorov, D. E., 
Ivitskiy, I. I., & Symoniuk, V. P. (2020). Use of physicochemical modification meth￾ods for producing traditional and nanomodified polymeric composites with improved 
operational properties. International Journal of Polymer Science, 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2019/1258727
Kotal, M., & Bhowmick, A. K. (2015). Polymer nanocomposites from modified clays: Recent 
advances and challenges. In Progress in Polymer Science (Vol. 51, pp. 127–187). 
Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2015.10.001
Laroussi, M. (2009). Low-temperature plasmas for medicine? In IEEE Transactions on Plasma 
Science (Vol. 37, Issue 6 PART 1, pp. 714–725). https://doi.org/10.1109/TPS.2009.2017267
Lim, J. V., Bee, S. T., Sin, L. T., Ratnam, C. T., & Hamid, Z. A. A. (2021). A review on the syn￾thesis, properties, and utilities of functionalized carbon nanoparticles for polymer nano￾composites. In Pavel Urbáne (Ed.), Polymers (Vol. 13, Issue 20, 3547). MDPI. https://
doi.org/10.3390/polym13203547
Machado, I. R. L., Mendes, H. M. F., Alves, G. E. S., & Faleiros, R. R. (2014). Carbon nano￾tubes: Potential use in veterinary medicine. Ciencia Rural, 44(10), 1823–1829. https://
doi.org/10.1590/0103-8478cr20140003
Maiti, M., Bhattacharya, M., & Bhowmick, A. K. (2008). Elastomer nanocomposites. Rubber 
Chemistry and Technology, 81(3), 384–469.
Mandolfino, C. (2019). Polypropylene surface modification by low pressure plasma to increase 
adhesive bonding: Effect of process parameters. Surface and Coatings Technology, 366, 
331–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2019.03.047
Marini, J., & Bretas, R. E. S. (2017). Optical properties of blown films of PA6/
MMT nanocomposites. Materials Research, 20, 53–60. https://doi.org/10.1590/ 
1980-5373-MR-2017-0280Surface Modification of Nanofillers in Polymers 143
Maron, G. K., Noremberg, B. S., Alano, J. H., Pereira, F. R., Deon, V. G., Santos, 
R. C. R., Freire, V. N., Valentini, A., & Carreno, N. L. V. (2018). Carbon fiber/
epoxy composites: Effect of zinc sulphide coated carbon nanotube on thermal and 
mechanical properties. Polymer Bulletin, 75(4), 1619–1633. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00289-017-2115-y
Mistretta, M. C., Morreale, M., & la Mantia, F. P. (2014). Thermomechanical degrada￾tion of polyethylene/polyamide 6 blend-clay nanocomposites. Polymer Degradation 
and Stability, 99(1), 61–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2013.12.
009
Mittal, V., & Chaudhry, A. U. (2015). Polymer - graphene nanocomposites: Effect of polymer 
matrix and filler amount on properties. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering, 
300(5), 510–521. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201400392
Müller, K., Bugnicourt, E., Latorre, M., Jorda, M., Sanz, Y. E., Lagaron, J. M., Miesbauer, O., 
Bianchin, A., Hankin, S., Bölz, U., Pérez, G., Jesdinszki, M., Lindner, M., Scheuerer, 
Z., Castelló, S., & Schmid, M. (2017). Review on the processing and properties of poly￾mer nanocomposites and nanocoatings and their applications in the packaging, automo￾tive and solar energy fields. In Nanomaterials (Vol. 7, Issue 4). MDPI AG. https://doi.
org/10.3390/nano7040074
Nayak, R. K., Mahato, K. K., & Ray, B. C. (2019). Processing of Polymer‐Based 
Nanocomposites. Reinforced Polymer Composites: Processing, Characterization and 
Post Life Cycle Assessment, 55–75.
Nesic, A. R., & Seslija, S. I. (2017). The influence of nanofillers on physical–chemical proper￾ties of polysaccharide-based film intended for food packaging. In Food Packaging (pp. 
637–697). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-804302-8.00019-4
Njuguna, J., Ansari, F., Sachse, S., Zhu, H., & Rodriguez, V. M. (2014). Nanomaterials, nano￾fillers, and nanocomposites: Types and properties. In Health and Environmental Safety of 
Nanomaterials: Polymer Nancomposites and Other Materials Containing Nanoparticles
(pp. 3–27). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857096678.1.3
Oliveira, A. D., Beatrice, C. A. G., Passador, F. R., & Pessan, L. A. (2016). Polyetherimide￾based nanocomposites materials for hydrogen storage. AIP Conference Proceedings, 
1779. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4965497
Oliveira, A. D., Larocca, N. M., Paul, D. R., & Pessan, L. A. (2012). Effects of mixing pro￾tocol on the performance of nanocomposites based on polyamide 6/acrylonitrile-buta￾diene-styrene blends. Polymer Engineering and Science, 52(9), 1909–1919. https://doi.
org/10.1002/pen.23152
Rallini, M., & Kenny, J. M. (2017). Nanofillers in polymers. In Modification of Polymer Properties
(pp. 47–86). Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-44353-1.00003-8
Ray, S. S. (2014). Recent trends and future outlooks in the field of clay-containing polymer 
nanocomposites. Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics, 215(12), 1162–1179. https://
doi.org/10.1002/macp.201400069
Rezende, C. A., Bragança, F. C., Doi, T. R., Lee, L. T., Galembeck, F., & Boué, F. (2010). 
Natural rubber-clay nanocomposites: Mechanical and structural properties. Polymer, 
51(16), 3644–3652. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2010.06.026
Robertson, C. G., Lin, C. J., Bogoslovov, R. B., Rackaitis, M., Sadhukhan, P., Quinn, J. D., & 
Roland, C. M. (2011). Flocculation, reinforcement, and glass transition effects in silica￾filled styrene-butadiene rubber. Rubber Chemistry and Technology, 84(4), 507–519. 
https://doi.org/10.5254/1.3601885
Rong, M. Z., Zhang, M. Q., & Ruan, W. H. (2006). Surface modification of nanoscale fillers 
for improving properties of polymer nanocomposites: A review. Materials Science and 
Technology, 22(7), 787–796. https://doi.org/10.1179/174328406X101247
Sahakaro, K. (2017). Mechanism of reinforcement using nanofillers in rubber nanocompos￾ites. In Progress in Rubber Nanocomposites (pp. 81–113). Elsevier Inc. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100409-8.00003-6144 Nanofillers
Saman, N. M., Ahmad, M. H., & Buntat, Z. (2021). Application of cold plasma in nanofill￾ers surface modification for enhancement of insulation characteristics of polymer 
nanocomposites: A review. IEEE Access, 9, 80906–80930. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2021.3085204
Shankar, S., & Rhim, J.-W. (2018). Bionanocomposite films for food packaging appli￾cations. In Reference Module in Food Science. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-08-100596-5.21875-1
Sonia, A., & Priya Dasan, K. (2013). Celluloses microfibers (CMF)/poly (ethylene-co-vinyl 
acetate) (EVA) composites for food packaging applications: A study based on barrier 
and biodegradation behavior. Journal of Food Engineering, 118(1), 78–89. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2013.03.020
Suter, J. L., Groen, D., & Coveney, P. V. (2015). Chemically specifi C multiscale modeling 
of clay-polymer nanocomposites reveals intercalation dynamics, tactoid self-assembly 
and emergent materials properties. Advanced Materials, 27(6), 966–984. https://doi.
org/10.1002/adma.201403361
Taguet, A., Cassagnau, P., & Lopez-Cuesta, J. M. (2014). Structuration, selective dispersion 
and compatibilizing effect of (nano)fillers in polymer blends. In Progress in Polymer 
Science (Vol. 39, Issue 8, pp. 1526–1563). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
progpolymsci.2014.04.002
Tanahashi, M. (2010). Development of fabrication methods of filler/polymer nanocomposites: 
With focus on simple melt-compounding-based approach without surface modification 
of nanofillers. Materials, 3(3), 1593–1619. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma3031593
Tanaka, T., Montanari, G. C., & Mulhaupt, R. (2004). Polymer nanocomposites as dielec￾trics and electrical insulation-perspectives for processing technologies, material char￾acterization and future applications. In IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical 
Insulation (Vol. 11, Issue 5). IEEE.
Torres, T. (2011). Carbon nanotubes and related structures. Synthesis, characterization, func￾tionalization, and applications. Edited by Dirk M. Guldi and Nazario Martín. Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition, 50(7), 1473–1474. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201006930
Tyagi, M., & Tyagi, D. (2014). Polymer nanocomposites and their applications in electronics 
industry. In International Journal of Electronic and Electrical Engineering (Vol. 7, Issue 
6). IRPH. http://www.irphouse.com
Vengatesan, M. R., & Mittal, V. (2015). Surface modification of nanomaterials for application 
in polymer nanocomposites: an overview. In Vikas Mittal (Ed.), Surface Modification 
of Nanoparticle and Natural Fiber Fillers (pp. 1–28). Wiley‐VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
Vrsaljko, D., Macut, D., & Kovačevic, V. (2015). Potential role of nanofillers as compatibil￾izers in immiscible PLA/LDPE Blends. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 132(6). 
https://doi.org/10.1002/app.41414
Wan, C., & Chen, B. (2012). Reinforcement and interphase of polymer/graphene oxide nano￾composites. Journal of Materials Chemistry, 22(8), 3637–3646. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c2jm15062j
Zaïri, F., Gloaguen, J. M., Naït-Abdelaziz, M., Mesbah, A., & Lefebvre, J. M. (2011). Study 
of the effect of size and clay structural parameters on the yield and post-yield response 
of polymer/clay nanocomposites via a multiscale micromechanical modelling. Acta 
Materialia, 59(10), 3851–3863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2011.03.009
Zhang, Y., Wang, H. Y., Zhang, Y. R., & Bogaerts, A. (2017). Formation of microdischarges 
inside a mesoporous catalyst in dielectric barrier discharge plasmas. Plasma Sources 
Science and Technology, 26(5). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6595/aa66be
Zhao, J., Morgan, A. B., & Harris, J. D. (2005). Rheological characterization of polystyrene￾clay nanocomposites to compare the degree of exfoliation and dispersion. Polymer, 
46(20), 8641–8660. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2005.04.038145
5 Nanocellulose-Based 
Green Fillers for 
Elastomers—Influence 
of Geometry and 
Chemical Modification 
on Properties of 
Nanocomposites
Milanta Tom and Sabu Thomas
Mahatma Gandhi University
Bastien Seantier and Yves Grohens
Université Bretagne Sud
P. K. Mohamed, S. Ramakrishnan, 
and Job Kuriakose
Apollo Tyres Ltd.
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-5
CONTENTS
5.1 Introduction................................................................................................... 146
5.2 Nanocellulose................................................................................................ 147
5.3 Cellulose Nanocrystal (CNC) ....................................................................... 149
5.4 Cellulose Nanofiber (CNF)........................................................................... 149
5.5 Modifications of Nanocellulose .................................................................... 150
5.6 Esterification/Acetylation ............................................................................. 152
5.7 Silylation....................................................................................................... 152
5.8 Carboxylation/Oxidation............................................................................... 153
5.9 Sulfonation.................................................................................................... 153
5.10 Carbamation (Urethanization) ...................................................................... 153
5.11 Phosphorylation ............................................................................................ 154146 Nanofillers
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The development of bio-based composites has drawn attraction to lower the con￾sumption of petroleum-based materials with green fillers such as natural fibers, 
cellulose, chitosan, lignin, biochar, etc. These fillers stand as counter measures to 
tackle the environmental concern. Cellulose is an important sustainable candidate 
for designing bio-based composites with its myriad of inherent properties, especially 
the nanoderivative, where its properties are comparable to those of synthetic fillers 
like Kevlar.
Nanocellulose is an extract from various cellulosic resources such as plants 
(Omran et al., 2021), animals, bacteria (Noor et al., 2020), and agricultural waste 
(Mateo et al., 2021). The nanoscale-structured cellulosic materials possess improved 
mechanical properties (e.g., high strength, stiffness, and modulus), physical proper￾ties (e.g., lightweight, high surface-area-to-volume ratio), and chemical properties 
(e.g., biocompatibility) (Nair et al., 2018). With potentially reactive hydroxyl func￾tional groups on its surface, nanocellulose can readily be modified with the desired 
functional groups (Habibi, 2014). Considering these properties, nanocellulose has 
attracted considerable attention from various industries such as nanomedicine, bio￾composites, and automotive.
The role of nanocellulose as a filler is determined by its morphology and phys￾iochemical properties (Camargos & Rezende, 2021). The geometrical dimensions 
of the prepared nanocellulose vary depending on the source and extraction condi￾tions (George & Sabapathi, 2015). Two important entities under the label of nano￾cellulose are cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) and cellulose nanofiber (CNF). Through 
proper control over the preparation conditions, modulation of morphological fea￾tures can be implemented to both CNCs and CNFs, which have major effects on the 
mechanical and rheological property. The selection of either of the nanocellulose 
depends on the application. Furthermore, tailoring the ionizable groups and stability 
5.12 Amidation.................................................................................................... 154
5.13 Grafting of Molecules or Macromolecular Groups .................................... 154
5.14 Non-Covalent Surface Modification ........................................................... 155
5.15 Structure–Property Relationship................................................................. 156
5.16 Morphological Analysis.............................................................................. 156
5.17 X-Ray Diffraction (XRD)........................................................................... 157
5.18 FTIR............................................................................................................ 159
5.19 Rheology Studies........................................................................................ 160
5.20 Mechanical Properties................................................................................. 160
5.21 Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (DMA) ...................................................... 161
5.22 Fracture Mechanism.................................................................................... 163
5.23 Thermal Properties...................................................................................... 164
5.24 Contact Angle.............................................................................................. 165
5.25 Swelling Properties..................................................................................... 165
5.26 Transparency ............................................................................................... 165
5.27 Conclusion .................................................................................................. 165
References.............................................................................................................. 166Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 147
of nanocellulose give good inference about the shelf life of nanocellulose formula￾tions as well as its use as an additive in nanocomposites.
Elastomers with their characteristic flexibility, extensibility, and other prominent 
properties play ubiquitous role in areas like automobile, construction, consumer 
products, wire and cable, and industrial and medical products. Fillers are quintes￾sential part of elastomers to achieve notable mechanical reinforcement to meet the 
performance requirements. Fillers with dimensions in the range of nanoscale have 
marked reinforcing effect owing to their large surface area which leads to a large 
interphase or boundary area between the matrix and nanofiller (Jamróz et al., 2019). 
The abundant availability of plant biomass and the superior mechanical properties of 
nanocellulose have made it a desirable reinforcing material for elastomer nanocom￾posites (Camargos & Rezende, 2021).
The most widely studied elastomer, natural rubber (NR), obtained from renew￾able biomass (Hevea Brasiliensis) endowed with high mechanical strength, flexibil￾ity, elasticity, resilience, abrasion resistance, and biodegradability (Feldman, 2012; 
Mariano et al., 2016; Trovatti et al., 2013) is one of the important elastomers in the 
development of nanocomposites. Nanocomposites of synthetic rubber like butadiene 
rubber, styrene–butadiene rubber, neoprene, the polysulfide rubbers (thiokols), butyl 
rubber, silicones, etc., and thermoplastic elastomers like styrenic copolymers, poly￾urethane elastomers, polyester elastomers, etc., are of great importance because of 
their extensive applications in diverse high-technology arena.
The lower compatibility of nanocellulose in hydrophobic matrix can be improved 
by suitable surface treatments and modifications. The treatments on nanocellulose 
surface would render them with enhanced properties and broaden the applications 
(Omran et al., 2021; Tavakolian et al., 2020). The main objective of this chapter is to 
present a comprehensive overview of the current state-of-the-art on the development 
of green materials applications. In addition, this chapter shows clear distinctions 
between short rigid CNCs and long relatively tough CNFs in terms of their reinforc￾ing effects and mechanisms, thus providing reference guidance for the development 
of polymer nanocomposites containing nanocellulose.
5.2 NANOCELLULOSE
Nanocellulose, nanostructured form of cellulose, is one of the most prominent green 
materials of modern times. The biodegradability and regenerative specifications 
along with large surface area, supreme strength, high transparency, light density, 
immense biocompatibility, and chemical improvement make it a good choice for func￾tional composite materials. The abundant hydroxyl functional groups allow a wide 
range of functionalizations, to develop materials with tunable features (Trache et al., 
2020). Cellulose is a linear chain polysaccharide consisting of repeated β-(1→4)-D￾glucopyranose units. Cellulose was first extracted by Anselme Payen in 1838 and 
coined the term ‘cellulose’ and later Herman Staudinger established its chemical 
structure (Santmartí & Lee, 2018). The cellobiose units are linked together to form 
elementary fibrils, a crystalline structure of cellulose. These fibrils are bundled 
together to produce microfibrils, which in turn form macrofibrils or cellulosic fibers. 
The properties like hydrophilicity, chirality, ease of chemical functionalization, 148 Nanofillers
insolubility in most aqueous solvents, and infusibility of cellulosic materials are set 
forth by intra- and intermolecular chemical groups. Nanocellulose can be extracted 
from either woody or non-woody cellulosic sources like herbaceous plants, grass, 
agricultural crops and their by-products, animal, algae and bacterial sources, waste 
paper, among others (Noor et al., 2020; Trache & Thakur, 2020). A schematic repre￾sentation of cellulose from woody source to the fundamental molecule is displayed 
in Figure 5.1. The properties of nanocellulose are found to dependent on its natural 
source, pretreatment, extraction methodologies, and reaction parameters (Blanco 
et al., 2018; Dufresne, 2013; Trache et al., 2017). Generally, extraction of nanocel￾lulose from lignocellulosic sources requires pretreatments like delignification and 
bleaching processes to eliminate non-cellulosic components (Fernandes et al., 2013). 
Pretreatments promote the accessibility toward cellulose-rich fraction and increase 
the porosity, the inner surface, and reactivity, but decrease the degree of polymeriza￾tion (Kargarzadeh et al., 2017). Lesser number of pretreatments are required in the 
case of nanocellulose extracted from animal source (Trache et al., 2017), whereas 
bacterial cellulose does not contain extractives, hemicellulose, and lignin with 
respect to vegetable cellulose, and thus does not necessitate specific pretreatments. 
Nevertheless, its production in industrial scale remains relatively expensive (Oun 
et al., 2020).
The high aspect ratio of nanocellulose allows the superior transfer of stress from 
the matrix to the filler, and the huge specific surface area leads to a low concentration 
FIGURE 5.1 Schematic representation of extraction of nanocellulose from wood source 
(Haron et al., 2021), reprinted with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 149
of the filler to gain a reinforcing result (Wang et al., 2019). As a result of strongly 
reactive hydroxyl groups, there is a strong tendency in the cellulose material to con￾nect together forming wide network through both intermolecular and intramolecu￾lar hydrogen bonds (Rana et al., 2021). Furthermore, the plenteous availability of 
hydroxyl groups enables functionalizing of nanocellulose via convenient molecules 
for effectual reinforcement.
5.3 CELLULOSE NANOCRYSTAL (CNC)
Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) were first isolated in 1947 by Nickerson and Habrie 
by sulfuric acid hydrolysis (Nickerson and Habrie, 1947). These are highly crys￾talline nanoscale cellulose with a characteristic rod or whisker shape of 3–5nm 
width and 50–500nm length (Chin et al., 2018; Kaur et al., 2021; Vanderfleet & 
Cranston, 2021). The dimensions of CNCs depend on various parameters like cel￾lulosic source, extraction conditions, etc. The most common isolation technique of 
these nanocrystals is the chemical process involving acid hydrolysis. Though differ￾ent types of acids and mixed acids can be utilized for nanocrystal extraction, sulfuric 
acid hydrolysis is the most common. This is due to uniformity, reproducibility, high 
yield, improved stability of nanocellulose dispersion by anionic sulfate group, and 
predictable properties of CNCs (Vanderfleet & Cranston, 2021). CNCs are charac￾terized by very high mechanical and thermal properties due to their high crystalline 
content. The colloidal stability, size, and crystallinity index of CNCs can influence 
their performance. Higher colloidal stability facilitates uniform dispersion of CNCs 
with predictable and consistent performance, which also influences material pro￾cessing, viscosity, and shelf life (Lin et al., 2019). The high surface-area-to-volume 
ratios of these nanoscale materials provide greater number of active sites for chemi￾cal reactions, thus improving adhesion between CNCs and other material/chemical 
of interest (Barnat-Hunek et al., 2019). Relatively high aspect ratio of these nano￾fillers is advantageous in reinforcing polymeric materials. In addition, high aspect 
ratios allow self-assembly, adopt mesh structures to stabilize interfaces, and form 
percolated networks. Broadly, crystalline domains are more resistant to chemical, 
mechanical, and enzymatic treatments compared to the amorphous ones (Thakur 
et al., 2021). Crystallinity of CNCs is primarily linked to mechanical properties but 
can also affect chemical reactivity and thermal stability (Agarwal et al., 2016). The 
existence of large number of hydroxyl groups facilitates easy surface tuning of nano￾cellulose to achieve desired properties (Calvino et al., 2020). The schematic repre￾sentation of CNCs and CNFs is represented in Figure 5.2.
5.4 CELLULOSE NANOFIBER (CNF)
CNFs are long entangled cellulosic chains that contain both their crystalline and 
amorphous regions (Shaghaleh et al., 2018). Fibrillation of biomass into CNF has 
been achieved through enzymatic, chemical, and mechanical treatments, or a com￾bination thereof, and the morphology of the nanomaterial produced is specific to the 
production process (Pennells et al., 2020). Mechanical fibrillation is the most common 
extraction method which includes high-pressure homogenization, Microfluidization, 150 Nanofillers
ball milling, cryocrushing, ultrasonication, grinding, etc. (K. Zhang et al., 2019). 
According to TAPPI, CNF should have diameter of around 5–30 nm, but with an 
aspect ratio greater than 50 (TAPPI, 2011). CNF suspensions are found to have gel 
properties even at low cellulose concentrations, and they usually form porous entan￾gled network structure (Carter et al., 2021).
The morphologies and dimensions of CNFs can vary substantially, depending on 
the degrees of fibrillation and any pretreatment involved. CNFs contain amorphous 
cellulose and are not as highly crystalline as CNCs. The fibrillation process enables 
the exposure of inner surface and leads to gradual breakdown of inter- and intra￾molecular hydrogen bonds. This in turn will enhance the reactivity and accessibil￾ity of the cellulose structure. By selecting the appropriate fibrillation method and 
optimum operating conditions, the CNFs can be obtained in different morphologies 
ranging from the micro- to nanofibrillar levels. Adoption of pretreatments like acid 
hydrolysis, enzymatic or oxidation pretreatment, etc., before mechanical treatments 
can decrease the energy consumption (K. Zhang et al., 2019). CNFs are often char￾acterized by their exceptional features like tensile strength of 0.3–22GPa, Young’s 
modulus of 58–180GPa, very large aspect ratio, and flexibility, which would impart 
greater reinforcing efficacy to these nanofibers (Ghasemlou et al., 2021; Mateo 
et al., 2021).
5.5 MODIFICATIONS OF NANOCELLULOSE
The emergence of intense researches on these bionanomaterials for their utilization 
in high-value applications found that surface modification or functionalization can 
impart excellent compatibility with the matrix material, thus playing a pivotal role 
in controlling the properties of the nanocomposites. There are a number of surface 
modification techniques to improve the interface without impairment of the intrinsic 
properties of nanocellulose. The two important routes of different modifications on 
nanocellulose are represented in Figure 5.3, and common modifications of nanocel￾lulose are given in Figure 5.4.
FIGURE 5.2 Schematic representation of cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) and cellulose 
nanofibers (CNFs) (Fiorati et al., 2020), reprinted with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 151
FIGURE 5.3 Schematic representation of routes of modifications on nanocellulose (Yang 
et al., 2021), reprinted with permission.152 Nanofillers
5.6 ESTERIFICATION/ACETYLATION
Esterification is one of the simple approaches for reducing the hydroxyl density of 
nanocellulose by chemical reaction between acid carboxylic acid) and alcohol (or 
other –OH) (Hakimi et al., 2021). Acetylation is the most widely studied esterification 
reaction (Chin et al., 2018). Esterification can be quantified by the degree of substitu￾tion of hydroxyl groups. Higher the degree of substitution, higher will the hydropho￾bicity and better will be the dispersion in hydrophobic matrices, which in turn lead 
to more mechanical reinforcement in composites (Yin et al., 2020). Esterification 
reaction develops effective chemical bonding between nanocellulose filler and NR 
matrix interface, which results in higher cross-link density and stiffness in the nano￾composites (Noremylia et al., 2022). Acetylation using acetic anhydride is one of 
the simplest esterification treatments on nanocellulose (Marakana et al., 2021). Silva 
et al. reported esterification of nanocellulose using phthalic anhydride in the absence 
of any solvent and catalyst (Silva et al., 2018).
5.7 SILYLATION
In the process of silylation, silyl groups are introduced onto the surface of nanocel￾lulose through substitution reactions. Silanes are effective coupling agents as they 
have strong affinity for hydroxyl groups. Permanent grafting of silane moieties can 
be achieved through condensation of Si-OH with C-OH during temperature cur￾ing process (Rui et al., 2015). Organosilanes such as 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane 
FIGURE 5.4 Different types of modifications on nanocellulose (Trache et al., 2020), reprinted 
with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 153
(APTES), bis-(3-triethoxysilylpropyl) tetrasulfide (TESPT), and 3-isocyanateprop￾yltriethoxysilane (IPTS) have been fruitfully used to reduce the hydrophilic nature 
of hydroxyl-rich nanocellulose (Roy et al., 2021). Silyl-modified CNC showed better 
dispersion and interfacial adhesion to polymer matrix. CNFs produced through pre￾treatment involving alkalis possess more reactive sites, enabling increased silylation 
(Sharma et al., 2019).
5.8 CARBOXYLATION/OXIDATION
Oxidation is one of the standing out methods to impart hydrophobicity to nanocel￾lulose by selectively converting the hydroxyl groups present on the C-6 of the glucose 
unit of cellulose into negatively charged carboxylic as well as aldehyde groups (Habibi, 
2014). The most widely applied method for oxidation is TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetrameth￾ylpiperidine–1–oxyl) (Neves et al., 2021). TEMPO-mediated oxidation of cellulosic 
fibers is considered as a pretreatment for the preparation of nanocellulose (Haunreiter 
et al., 2022). During TEMPO-mediated oxidation, the primary C6 hydroxyl get com￾pletely or selectively converted to sodium C6-carboylate groups. Therefore, TEMPO￾oxidized nanocellulose consists of glucosyl and sodium glucuronosyl units. The 
carboxylate contents increase from ≈0.1 mmol/g for the starting wood cellulose to 
≈1.7 mmol/g after the TEMPO-mediated oxidation, depending on the oxidation con￾ditions. TEMPO oxidation is often used to selectively activate the primary hydroxyl 
groups of cellulose nanoparticles by their conversion to carboxylic acids (Dufresne 
et al., 2021). The high dimensional stability of TEMPO-oxidized nanocellulose makes 
them suitable for applications in electronic devices (Isogai, 2021).
5.9 SULFONATION
In this process, sulfuric acid catalyzes the hydrolysis to replace hydroxyl groups with 
sulfate half-ester moieties. The negative charge of sulfate half-ester groups has a 
positive impact on the dispersion of nanocellulose and suppressing hydrogen bond 
formation by exerting electrostatic repulsion (Dhali et al., 2021). The sulfonation 
of nanocellulose can achieve via three routes. First one is direct sulfonation during 
sulfuric acid hydrolysis of cellulose, and second one is the post-sulfonation of nano￾cellulose. The mechanism of dispersion of nanocellulose after sulfonation is similar 
to that of nanocellulose produced by sulfuric acid hydrolysis (Raza & Abu-Jdayil, 
2022). The third strategy involves a two-step process of periodate oxidation and sul￾fonation (Zhu & Lin, 2019). In contrast to sulfonation, sulfoethylation introduces 
sulfate half-ester groups to nanocellulose surface, which could be used to enhance 
the mechanical properties due to the maintenance of the fibril-like morphology (Z. 
Li et al., 2021).
5.10 CARBAMATION (URETHANIZATION)
Urethanization involves the reaction between isocyanate and surface –OH groups 
of nanocellulose to form covalent bond (urethane linkage) (Raza & Abu-Jdayil, 
2022). The higher concentration of hydroxyl groups on the nanocellulose surface 154 Nanofillers
provides the active reaction sites for isocyanates to form carbamates. Toluene-2,4-
diisocyanate (TDI) is a widely used isocyanate for nanocellulose modification. The 
reaction between isocyanates and the hydroxyl groups of nanocellulose and the resul￾tant formation of polyurethane bonds can be facilitated with the help of amines such 
as triethylamine as excellent catalysts although they could self-polymerize as a side 
reaction (Abushammala & Mao, 2019).
5.11 PHOSPHORYLATION
Phosphorylation is the surface treatment of nanocellulose with phosphorylating agent 
such as phosphorus oxychloride, phosphorus pentoxide, phosphoric acid, diam￾monium hydrogen phosphate, and organophosphates. The degree of substitution 
depends on several factors such as molar ratio of phosphorylating agent and anhydro￾glucose units of cellulose, time, and temperature (Ram & Shanmuganathan, 2021). 
The modification results in negatively charged nanocellulose surface, exhibiting bet￾ter dispersion properties. Another special feature of phosphorylated nanocellulose is 
the improvement in heat resistance and flame retardancy. It has better prospects than 
other surface modification techniques since it can increase nanocellulose dispersion 
along with the improvement in physical properties like fire retardancy, mechanical 
strength, recovery, and reusability of non-toxic reagent (Raza & Abu-Jdayil, 2022).
5.12 AMIDATION
Amidation modification is usually performed as second-step reaction on pre-oxidized 
nanocellulose, targeting carboxylic functionalities. This amine-modified nanocellu￾lose can be infused with a hydrophobic alkyl chain of TEMPO-oxidized nanocel￾lulose to enhance the hydrophobicity (Jaffar et al., 2022). The amidation reaction can 
take place both in organic solvents (e.g., dimethylformamide, abbreviated as DMF) 
and aqueous solutions. In the aqueous reaction system, the carboxylated nanocel￾lulose is reacted with N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) to improve the reactivity of 
carboxyl groups on nanocellulose surface with the amide groups. The final step of 
amidation modification is to mix the NHS-activated carboxylated nanocellulose with 
the amide-containing molecules. The amine groups of the molecules can directly 
react with NHS-activated carboxylated nanocellulose, and conjugate the molecules 
onto the nanocellulose surface with the linkage of amide bonds. If the reaction route 
chooses organic solvents instead of aqueous medium, the amine-containing mol￾ecules can be directly conjugated onto the carboxylated surface of nanocellulose 
(Huang et al., 2019).
5.13 GRAFTING OF MOLECULES OR 
MACROMOLECULAR GROUPS
Grafting of molecules or macromolecules onto the surface of nanocellulose is com￾mon to bring on non-polar properties (Peng et al., 2021). Modification by grafting 
mechanism can be done through three routes, namely ‘grafting from’, ‘grafting to’, Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 155
and ‘grafting through’. In ‘grafting to’ approach, presynthesized polymer chain cou￾pled onto the surface of nanocellulose, enabling good control over the properties 
of grafted molecule while compromising graft density due to steric hindrance. The 
‘grafting from’ route involves direct polymerization on the surface of nanocellulose. 
Even though ‘grafting from’ approach can achieve polymer grafts with higher den￾sity, the moieties obtained through ‘grafting from’ approach can disperse in organic 
solvents due to lower steric hindrance exerted by small monomers and less shielding 
of the reactive sites on the surface and the lower viscosity of the medium (Zhu & 
Lin, 2019). In the ‘grafting-through’ route, the functionalization of cellulosic mate￾rial occurs through polymerizable species, which is then mixed with a co-monomer 
and then the polymerization reaction is initiated (Thakur et al., 2021). The illustra￾tion of interactions of nanocellulose before and after modification is represented in 
Figure 5.5.
5.14 NON-COVALENT SURFACE MODIFICATION
This method involves tuning the surface by physical interactions or adsorption of mol￾ecules or macromolecules. The physical bonding can occur through charge–charge 
interactions, hydrogen bonds, Van der Waals forces, and solvency and association 
forces (Tortorella et al., 2020). Cationic and anionic surfactants are used commonly 
for non-covalent surface modifications. The hydrophilic end of the surfactant mol￾ecule may adsorb on the surface of nanocellulose, whereas the hydrophobic end may 
extend out providing a non-polar surface and lowering the surface tension of the 
nanoparticle (Putro et al., 2019). The adsorption of surfactants will be better if the 
nanocellulose has a charged surface either positive or negative, and the most com￾monly used surfactant is cetyltrimethylammonium bromide CTAB (Dufresne et al., 
FIGURE 5.5 Illustration of interaction of nanocellulose before and after surface modifica￾tion (Ghasemlou et al., 2021), reprinted with permission.156 Nanofillers
2021). The adsorption of macromolecules like polyethylene oxide and block copo￾lymers of polyethylene glycol has improved the dispersibility, thermal stability, and 
mechanical properties of nanocellulose (Lunardi et al., 2021).
5.15 STRUCTURE–PROPERTY RELATIONSHIP
The structure–property relationship of nanocellulose composites is quite complex 
as it depends on several factors such as dispersion, the type of the nanocellulose, 
morphology, and interfacial interactions between the polymeric matrix and the nano￾cellulose (Talebi et al., 2022). As we know the CNC and CNF are different in shape, 
size, and composition, the incorporation of these would result in different proper￾ties in elastomer matrix. Moreover, surface modifications with specific functional 
groups can physically/chemically interact with the polymer matrix to form bridge 
(Mahendra et al., 2020). The influence of geometry of the nanocellulose and modifi￾cations on elastomer composites is discussed through the following characterization 
techniques.
5.16 MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
a. SEM
The short rod-like structures of CNC and long entangled chain like struc￾tures of CNF can easily be identified in morphological analysis like SEM 
(He et al., 2020). The morphological analysis indicated CNF samples with 
much higher number of bridging compared to CNC. This is because of the 
CNFs’ interfiber entanglements and larger aspect ratio (Isogai & Zhou, 
2019). It is essential to analyze the orientation and arrangement of nanocel￾lulose as they can influence the properties of nanocomposites (X. Zhang 
et al., 2020). Figure 5.6 represents SEM images of CNC and CNF.
FIGURE 5.6 SEM image of CNF (Sathishkumar et al., 2014) and CNC (Habibi et al., 2010), 
reprinted with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 157
b. TEM
The morphological difference between different types of nanocellulose can 
be clearly observed in TEM analysis. CNFs exhibit a complex, highly entan￾gled structure. Twisted/untwisted, curled/straight, and entangled/separate 
nanofibrils with diameters ranging from 6 to 100 nm in diameter can be 
identified. The highly entangled structure of CNFs significantly increases 
resistance to flow and results in gel-like behavior. CNC suspension shows 
much lower viscosity than the CNF sample even at higher fiber concentra￾tion because of the former’s low aspect ratio and lack of entanglement. Due 
to CNFs’ complex network morphology, it is difficult to measure the length 
and diameter of individual CNF with high accuracy (Barkane et al., 2021; 
Camargos & Rezende, 2021; Flauzino Neto et al., 2016; Mahendra et al., 
2020). TEM images and size distribution of CNC and CNF are represented 
in Figure 5.7.
5.17 X-RAY DIFFRACTION (XRD)
The crystalline nature of molecules is analyzed using XRD. The mode of extraction 
of nanocellulose can affect the crystallinity (Trifol et al., 2016). Nanocellulose, both 
CNC and CNF, shows higher peak intensity than cellulose due to the major amor￾phous content during isolation process (Xu et al., 2013). CNC shows higher degree 
FIGURE 5.7 (a) TEM images of CNC and CNF, (b) diameter distribution of CNC (gray), 
and CNF (black) (c) size distribution of CNC (gray) and CNF (black) (Yu et al., 2016), 
reprinted with permission.158 Nanofillers
of crystallinity as most of the amorphous regions are cleaved during the hydroly￾sis treatment releasing individual crystallites (Kaur et al., 2021). CNCs generally 
show diffraction peaks at 15.1°, 17.5°, 22.7°, and 34.3°, representing cellulose I crystal 
planes (101), (101 ), (002), and (040), respectively, and diffractions from cellulose II ̅
are present at angles of 12.5°, 20.1°, 22.7°, and 34.3° (Cheng et al., 2019). Treatments 
on cellulosic fibers transform cellulose I to cellulose II. The XRD patterns of CNFs 
are broad peaks which are shifted to lower angles. This may because of superposition 
of the crystalline diffraction peaks upon increasingly strong amorphous diffractions 
(Gopi et al., 2017). Figure 5.8 represents XRD patterns of bagasse cellulose, CNC, 
and CNF. It is observed that the high-pressure mechanical grinding used in CNF 
manufacturing could deform cellulose crystals leading to broadened and shifted dif￾fraction peaks (Yu et al., 2016). Zhang et al. observed that high-intensity shearing 
treatment could produce more regular arrangement of fiber in the crystallization area 
(Zhang et al., 2019).
FIGURE 5.8 XRD patterns of bagasse cellulose (BC), CNC, and CNF (B. Zhang et al., 
2019), reprinted with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 159
5.18 FTIR
The functional composition of CNC and CNF is same, but varies as a result of extrac￾tion method adopted (Ahmad et al., 2017). The –OH stretching vibration of the nano￾cellulose was revealed at the wide band between 3700 and 3200 cm−1 (Cheng et al., 
2019). The spectra of all samples showed the characteristic C–H stretching vibration 
around 2900cm−1. The higher absorption of CNF may be because of possibilities of 
higher hydrogen bonding within the hydroxyl groups of large entangled structure (He 
et al., 2020). In the case of nanocellulose-incorporated nanocomposites, the higher 
absorption indicates better interaction between filler and matrix (Barkane et al., 
2021). The absorption bands attributed to nanocellulose at 1316 and 1430 cm−1 repre￾senting CH2 wagging and C–H stretching vibrations. The separate peak at 898 cm−1
is related to C–O–C asymmetric stretching (Blanco et al., 2018). The vibration peak 
detected at 1366 cm−1 in CNC and CNF samples is related to the bending vibration 
of the C–H and C–O bonds in the polysaccharide aromatic rings (Han et al., 2013). 
Figure 5.9 represents the FTIR spectra of CNC, CNF, and cellulose.
FIGURE 5.9 FTIR spectra of cellulose, CNC, and CNF (Teixeira et al., 2021), reprinted 
with permission.160 Nanofillers
5.19 RHEOLOGY STUDIES
Assuming the surface functionalities to be same for CNC and CNF, the differences 
observed are likely due to the distinct specific surface area, degree of entangle￾ment, aspect ratio, which can contribute to the difference in rheological properties. 
It was observed that CNFs present high steady shear viscosity and gel-like behavior 
(Camargos & Rezende, 2021). Mariano et al. observed the magnitude of modulus 
values was higher for CNF suspension as nanofibers could create stronger network 
at low concentrations (Mariano et al., 2018). The rheological properties of elastomer 
nanocomposites containing CNC and CNF nanofillers with and without modifier are 
represented in Figure 5.10.
Considering the rheological properties imparted nanocellulose in composites, the 
cellulosic nanofillers do not influence critical value of strain amplitude, but reduce 
relative amplitude of Payne effect. The weak strain overshoot of nanocellulose-rein￾forced compounds indicated the intermolecular association via hydrogen bonding. 
The filling effect and the structural complexation between polymer chain and either 
type of nanocellulose improve modulus and lower tan δ. Yasin et al. found that modi￾fication on nanocellulose, its type, and cross-linking can affect the relative amplitude 
of Payne effect due to the restriction on segmental movements of polymer chains 
and influence on rubber–filler interaction under straining. The destruction of the 
hydrogen-bonded networks is partially responsible for the intensified Payne effect. 
Furthermore, the Payne effect is related to the types of the cellulosic nanofillers. 
However, the nanofiller and the filler–rubber interfacial interactions exert influence 
on the molecular motion as evidenced from the figure (Yasin et al., 2021). According 
to Chen et al., the physical adsorption and hydrogen bonding between nanocellu￾lose and cross-linked elastomer resulted in increased storage modulus of compounds 
(Chen et al., 2015).
5.20 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES
Nanocellulose in all forms has found to be efficient reinforcing filler that can induce 
a significant improvement in mechanical properties and is comparative to conven￾tional fillers. Two important factors that have to be considered to achieve optimum 
FIGURE 5.10 Storage modulus G′, loss modulus G″, and tan δ as a function of strain ampli￾tude, and solid symbols and hollow symbols represent without and with ionic liquid (Yasin 
et al., 2021), reprinted with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 161
mechanical properties are that (i) good interfacial interaction between filler and 
matrix and (ii) effective transfer of involved stress (Han et al., 2019; Jarnthong et al., 
2015; Jiang et al., 2020; Ogunsona et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2020). Considering the 
influence of geometry of nanocellulose, the mechanical properties of nanocompos￾ites containing CNF were greater than those containing CNC. Conversely, nanocom￾posites containing CNC exhibited higher Young’s modulus at lower concentrations 
of filler loading. This could be the result of higher crystallinity and degree of polym￾erization of CNCs (Talebi et al., 2022). The stress–strain curves of CNC- and CNF￾loaded elastomer composites are given in Figure 5.11.
The difference in the elongation properties of both types of nanocellulose arises 
from the structural difference crystals and fibers. Higher elongation properties are 
due to efficient stress transfer throughout the polymer nanocomposite, even distribu￾tion of applied stress, and minimization of the areas of stress concentrations (Hakimi 
et al., 2021). The CNF-reinforced composites have outstanding tensile strength and 
elongation when compared to CNC-reinforced composites due to the higher entan￾glement of the CNF molecules, formation of percolation networks, and much larger 
aspect ratio (Chang et al., 2021). The short rod-like structures of CNC stand behind 
CNF in stress transfer (Mahendra et al., 2020). Furthermore, long fibers reach perco￾lation at low filler contents and the fiber−fiber interactions due to percolation contrib￾ute to further improvement in the mechanical properties of composites. Therefore, 
nanofillers with high aspect ratio outweigh fiber strength in the case of mechanical 
properties (Zhao et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2013).
5.21 DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS (DMA)
The DMA is susceptible to molecular motions, and it can be utilized to analyze 
the effect of CNC and CNF in nanocomposites. The incorporation of nanocellu￾lose in either morphology will result in an increase in storage modulus due to the 
restriction of free molecular motion of the matrix chains by the nanocellulose mol￾ecules (Lavoratti et al., 2015). The glass transition temperature and tan δ intensity 
were higher for CNF-incorporated nanocomposites because of larger number of 
FIGURE 5.11 Stress–strain curves of CNC- and CNF-reinforced elastomer composites 
with and without ionic liquid modification (Yasin et al., 2021), reprinted with permission.162 Nanofillers
hydrogen bonding and higher penetration on the texture than CNC (Xu et al., 2013). 
According to Dufresne, enhancement of the storage modulus confirms good disper￾sion of nanocellulose in the polymer matrix. Good interaction of nanocellulose filler 
with the matrix is evidenced by the movement of tan δ peak to a higher temperature 
(Dufresne, 2000).
Barkane et al. reported a contradictory view on the viscoelastic properties of 
CNC- and CNF-reinforced nanocomposites. They observed that at lower concentra￾tions, CNF would act like separate reinforcing agents, but at higher loading they 
form entangled mesh-like structures, providing optimum reinforcement. The short 
rod-like nanoparticles of CNC, with its high crystalline nature, provide sufficient 
rigidity to the nanocomposites. As represented in figure, CNC exhibits an improved 
storage modulus when compared to CNF, which attributes to the efficient disper￾sion of CNC in polymer matrix. The higher loadings of nanocellulose restrict poly￾mer segmental motions which require higher energy for phase transitions, which in 
turn results in higher energy dissipation. This has been reflected in the loss modulus 
curves of nanocomposites. The lower tan δ peaks of nanocellulose-loaded compos￾ites signify its influence on polymer chain mobility (Barkane et al., 2021). Figure 5.12 
represents storage modulus, loss modulus, and loss factor tan δ of nanocomposites 
with different wt% of CNC and CNF.
FIGURE 5.12 (a) Storage modulus, (b) loss modulus, and (c) loss factor tan δ of nanocom￾posites with different wt% of CNC and CNF (Barkane et al., 2021), reprinted with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 163
5.22 FRACTURE MECHANISM
The influence of geometry of nanocellulose is evident in fracture mechanism of 
nanocomposites. The fibrils of CNF can bridge the crazes throughout the samples, 
which contributes to the increased tensile strength and strain-at-failure. This is pos￾sibly ascribed to CNFs’ interfiber entanglements and much larger aspect ratio when 
compared to CNC. Figure illustrates the fracture mechanisms of nanocomposite 
reinforced by CNCs and CNFs. The larger lengths and higher flexibility of CNF 
fibril make it possible to link a craze at multiple locations. The higher aspect ratio, 
formation of network structures, and entanglements facilitate the formation of a large 
number of visible pullout and fibril interlocking on the fracture in the case of CNF￾reinforced nanocomposite (Xu et al., 2013). The illustration of fracture mechanism is 
given in Figure 5.13. Dominic et al. observed plastic deformation and fracture stress 
transfer in nanocellulose-reinforced NR composites, which is an indication of effec￾tive stress transfer from the matrix to the filler (Dominic et al., 2020).
FIGURE 5.13 Illustration of fracture mechanism of CNC- and CNF-incorporated polymer 
nanocomposites (Xu et al., 2013), reprinted with permission.164 Nanofillers
5.23 THERMAL PROPERTIES
Thermal stability is very important to evaluate the feasibility of using nanocellulose 
as effective filler for elastomers (Gan et al., 2020). The study of degradation behavior 
allows to optimize the designing and processing conditions of composites and to 
develop polymer nanocomposites with enhanced thermal stability (W. Li et al., 2014). 
The decomposition temperature of nanocellulose is approximately 200°C–300°C. 
Differences in the source of nanocellulose, geometry, composition, types of matri￾ces, processing techniques, and the drying process could affect the thermal stability 
of the nanocomposites (Blanco et al., 2018).
Hu et al. observed that CNC has better thermal stability than CNF. Because of 
high crystallinity of CNC, the chemical groups within crystal area need more energy 
to overcome the interaction between adjacent molecules (Hu et al., 2021). The degra￾dation temperature of CNF was observed in a range from 191°C to 364°C, whereas 
decomposition process of CNC occurred between 368°C and 482°C (Mahendra 
et al., 2020). The thermogram of CNC and CNF is given in Figure 5.14. Another 
important point to be considered is that remnant sulfate groups present on the sur￾face of the CNC due to sulfuric acid treatment reduces the thermal stability of CNC. 
Another contradictory behavior is that sulfate groups introduced during hydrolysis 
with sulfuric acid could act as flame retardant (Rahimi Kord Sofla et al., 2016). It was 
found that nanocellulose-reinforced elastomer showed improved thermal stability to 
certain loading of filler, where the interaction between the filler and matrix is opti￾mum. Later on, further addition of nanocellulose leads to agglomeration and poor 
interaction, which is reflected on lower thermal decomposition temperatures (Abdul 
Rashid et al., 2018).
FIGURE 5.14 Thermogram of CNC and CNF along with its macroscale source bagasse 
(Rahimi Kord Sofla et al., 2016), reprinted with permission.Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 165
5.24 CONTACT ANGLE
The degree of water wettability is a measure of hydrophilicity of nanocomposites, 
which is determined by the contact angle measurements. The contact angle of nano￾composites is also affected by the morphology of the filler content. The nanocompos￾ites containing CNC were found to have higher contact angle than CNF-incorporated 
nanocomposites. This is because of the higher rigidity of CNC than CNF (Talebi 
et al., 2022). The hydrophobic modification of nanocellulose can reduce the surface 
energy and enhance the roughness that can even lead to superhydrophobic surfaces. 
Hydrophobic or superhydrophobic surfaces are preferred to enhance the interaction 
between the nanocellulose and the elastomer (Panchal et al., 2019).
5.25 SWELLING PROPERTIES
The incorporation of nanocellulose has resulted in decrease in absorption of solvents 
due to the restriction of movement of solvent molecules due to the presence of nanocel￾lulose (Abraham et al., 2013). It is also reported that the nanocellulose has the ability 
to restrict the polymer chain mobility and thereby decrease diffusion and permeation 
through the nanocomposite (Mathew, 2017). Another interesting observation is that 
incorporation of CNC has lower swelling value when compared to CNF at equal con￾tents. This may be attributed to the higher crystallinity of CNC when compared to 
CNF (Talebi et al., 2022). According to Celestini et al., the incorporation of 1wt% 
of cellulose nanoparticles in NR reduced swelling and prevented the appearance of 
breakage of the elastomeric matrix even after long duration of immersion in solvents. 
This observation is independent of the filler source or the amount used (Celestini 
et al., 2021). Dominic et al. observed that there is an increase in swelling at higher 
concentrations of CNFs in NR composites due to the agglomeration of nanocellulose 
and poor interaction between the filler and matrix (M. C. D. Dominic et al., 2020).
5.26 TRANSPARENCY
The optical transparency is a matter of concern in the case of elastomer sensors. It has 
been observed that CNCs exhibit higher transparency than do CNFs. This behavior is 
most likely due to smaller sizes and lack of entanglement. This property is advantageous 
to optical applications where several common nanocomposites such as carbon and clay 
nanocomposites have to be avoided because of their lack of transparency (Camargos 
& Rezende, 2021). Zhang et al. verified the transparency by determining the transmit￾tance of nanocomposites. They found that transmittance decreased with the increase 
in concentration of nanocellulose. Higher concentrations will lead to agglomeration of 
nanocellulose, hence reducing the transmittance (K. Zhang et al., 2019).
5.27 CONCLUSION
Nanocellulose has brought a new facet in reinforcing elastomers with its extraordi￾nary properties. The extraction of nanocellulose from various cellulosic materials has 
been optimized through years, and large-scale production at lower cost is becoming 166 Nanofillers
common. The valuable inherent traits of nanocellulose have a great dependence on its 
source and method of extraction. Nanocellulose-based elastomer composites exhibit 
a higher tensile strength than, for example, carbon fibers or aramid fibers such as 
Kevlar. Nanocellulose, in its different forms, is efficient reinforcing filler for elasto￾mers which could replace the conventional petroleum-based fillers. The strong depen￾dence of the properties of nanocellulose on the geometry has to be taken into account 
for its consideration in various applications. There is a bright future for nanocellulose 
as well as nanocellulose-reinforced elastomers as it benefits both industry and society, 
being environmentally friendly, low cost, and high mechanical performance.
REFERENCES
Abdul Rashid, E. S., Muhd Julkapli, N., & Yehye, W. A. (2018). Nanocellulose reinforced 
as green agent in polymer matrix composites applications. Polymers for Advanced 
Technologies, 29(6), 1531–1546. https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.4264
Abraham, E., Thomas, M. S., John, C., Pothen, L. A., Shoseyov, O., & Thomas, S. (2013). 
Green nanocomposites of natural rubber/nanocellulose: Membrane transport, rheologi￾cal and thermal degradation characterisations. Industrial Crops and Products, 51, 415–
424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2013.09.022
Abushammala, H., & Mao, J. (2019). A review of the surface modification of cellulose and 
nanocellulose using aliphatic and aromatic mono- and di-isocyanates. Molecules, 
24(2782), 1–18.
Agarwal, U. P., Ralph, S. A., Reiner, R. S., & Baez, C. (2016). Probing crystallinity of never￾dried wood cellulose with Raman spectroscopy. Cellulose, 23(1), 125–144. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10570-015-0788-7
Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., Wiley, A. D. J., Ioelovich, M., & Kinds, V. (2017). Handbook of 
Nanocellulose and Cellulose Nanocomposites. Wiley.
Barkane, A., Kampe, E., Platnieks, O., & Gaidukovs, S. (2021). Cellulose nanocrystals vs. 
Cellulose nanofibers: A comparative study of reinforcing effects in uv-cured vegetable 
oil nanocomposites. Nanomaterials, 11(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11071791
Barnat-Hunek, D., Grzegorczyk-Frańczak, M., Szymańska-Chargot, M., & Łagód, G. (2019). 
Effect of eco-friendly cellulose nanocrystals on physical properties of cement mortars. 
Polymers, 11(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11122088
Blanco, A., Monte, M. C., Campano, C., Balea, A., Merayo, N., & Negro, C. (2018). 
Nanocellulose for industrial use: Cellulose nanofibers (CNF), cellulose nanocrystals 
(CNC), and bacterial cellulose (BC). In: Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain (ed) Handbook of 
Nanomaterials for Industrial Applications, 74–126. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-813351-4.00005-5
Calvino, C., Macke, N., Kato, R., & Rowan, S. J. (2020). Development, processing and appli￾cations of bio-sourced cellulose nanocrystal composites. Progress in Polymer Science, 
103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2020.101221
Camargos, C. H. M., & Rezende, C. A. (2021). Structure–property relationships of cellulose 
nanocrystals and nanofibrils: Implications for the design and performance of nanocom￾posites and all-nanocellulose systems. ACS Applied Nano Materials, 4(10), 10505–
10518. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.1c02008
Carter, N., Grant, I., Dewey, M., Bourque, M., & Neivandt, D. J. (2021). Production and charac￾terization of cellulose nanofiber slurries and sheets for biomedical applications. Frontiers 
in Nanotechnology, 3(December), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnano.2021.729743
Celestini, V., Ribeiro, W. B., Damo, T., Lavoratti, A., Zattera, A. J., & Brandalise, R. N. (2021). 
Changes in the rheometric, morphological and mechanical properties of nitrile rubber 
composites by the use of different concentrations of cellulose nanofibers. Journal of 
Elastomers and Plastics, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1177/00952443211017183Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 167
Chang, B. P., Gupta, A., Muthuraj, R., & Mekonnen, T. H. (2021). Bioresourced fillers for 
rubber composite sustainability: Current development and future opportunities. Green 
Chemistry, 23(15), 5337–5378. https://doi.org/10.1039/d1gc01115d
Chen, Y., Xu, C., & Cao, X. (2015). Dynamic rheology studies of carboxylated butadiene – sty￾rene rubber/cellulose nanocrystals nanocomposites: Vulcanization process and network 
structures. Polymer Composites, 36(4), 623–629. https://doi.org/10.1002/pc
Cheng, G., Zhou, M., Wei, Y. J., Cheng, F., & Zhu, P. X. (2019). Comparison of mechani￾cal reinforcement effects of cellulose nanocrystal, cellulose nanofiber, and microfibril￾lated cellulose in starch composites. Polymer Composites, 40, E365–E372. https://doi.
org/10.1002/pc.24685
Chin, K. M., Sung Ting, S., Ong, H. L., Omar, M., Ting, S. S., Ong, H. L., Omar, M., Sung 
Ting, S., Ong, H. L., & Omar, M. (2018). Surface functionalized nanocellulose as a veri￾table inclusionary material in contemporary bioinspired applications: A review. Journal 
of Applied Polymer Science, 135(13). https://doi.org/10.1002/app.46065
Dhali, K., Ghasemlou, M., Daver, F., Cass, P., & Adhikari, B. (2021). A review of nanocel￾lulose as a new material towards environmental sustainability. Science of the Total 
Environment, 775, 145871. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145871
Dominic, M., Joseph, R., Sabura Begum, P. M., Kanoth, B. P., Chandra, J., & Thomas, S. 
(2020). Green tire technology: Effect of rice husk derived nanocellulose (RHNC) in 
replacing carbon black (CB) in natural rubber (NR) compounding. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.115620
Dominic, M. C. D., Joseph, R., Begum, P. M. S., Joseph, M., Padmanabhan, D., Morris, L. 
A., Kumar, A. S., & Formela, K. (2020). Cellulose nanofibers isolated from the Cuscuta 
Reflexa plant as a green reinforcement of natural rubber. Polymers, 12(4). https://doi.
org/10.3390/POLYM12040814
Dufresne, A. (2000). Dynamic mechanical analysis of the interphase in bacterial polyester/
cellulose whiskers natural composites. Composite Interfaces, 7(1), 53–67. https://doi.
org/10.1163/156855400300183588
Dufresne, A. (2013). Nanocellulose: A new ageless bionanomaterial. Materials Today, 16(6), 
220–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2013.06.004
Dufresne, A., de Souza, A. G., de Lima, G. F., Colombo, R., Rosa, D. S., Xie, J., Liu, S., 
Tortorella, S., Buratti, V. V., Maturi, M., Sambri, L., Franchini, M. C., Locatelli, E., 
Bhagia, S., Bornani, K., Agarwal, R., Satlewal, A., Ďurkovič, J., Lagaňa, R., … Adhikari, 
B. (2021). 5. Chemical modification of nanocellulose. Nanocellulose, 15(June), 35–42. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2021.101418
Feldman, D. (2012). Elastomer nanocomposite; Properties. Journal of Macromolecular 
Science, Part A: Pure and Applied Chemistry, 49(9), 784–793. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10601325.2012.703537
Fernandes, E. M., Pires, R. A., Mano, J. F., & Reis, R. L. (2013). Bionanocomposites from 
lignocellulosic resources: Properties, applications and future trends for their use in 
the biomedical field. Progress in Polymer Science, 38(10–11), 1415–1441. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2013.05.013
Fiorati, A., Bellingeri, A., Carlo, P., Corsi, I., & Venditti, I. (2020). Silver nanoparticles for 
water pollution monitoring and treatments: Ecosafety challenge and cellulose-based 
hybrids solution. Polymers, 12(1635). https://doi.org/10.3390/POLYM12081635
Flauzino Neto, W. P., Mariano, M., da Silva, I. S. V., Silvério, H. A., Putaux, J. L., Otaguro, H., 
Pasquini, D., & Dufresne, A. (2016). Mechanical properties of natural rubber nanocom￾posites reinforced with high aspect ratio cellulose nanocrystals isolated from soy hulls. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 153, 143–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.07.073
Gan, P. G., Sam, S. T., Abdullah, M. F., & Omar, M. F. (2020). Thermal properties of nanocel￾lulose-reinforced composites: A review. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 137(11). 
https://doi.org/10.1002/app.48544168 Nanofillers
George, J., & Sabapathi, S. N. (2015). Cellulose nanocrystals: Synthesis, functional proper￾ties, and applications. Nanotechnology, Science and Applications, 8, 45–54. https://doi.
org/10.2147/NSA.S64386
Ghasemlou, M., Daver, F., Ivanova, E. P., Habibi, Y., & Adhikari, B. (2021). Surface modifica￾tions of nanocellulose: From synthesis to high-performance nanocomposites. Progress 
in Polymer Science, 119, 101418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2021.101418
Gopi, S., Balakrishnan, P., Divya, C., Valic, S., Govorcin Bajsic, E., Pius, A., & Thomas, S. 
(2017). Facile synthesis of chitin nanocrystals decorated on 3D cellulose aerogels as a 
new multi-functional material for waste water treatment with enhanced anti-bacterial 
and anti-oxidant properties. New Journal of Chemistry, 41(21). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c7nj02392h
Habibi, Y. (2014). Key advances in the chemical modification of nanocelluloses. Chemical 
Society Reviews, 43(5), 1519–1542. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cs60204d
Habibi, Y., Lucia, L. A., & Rojas, O. J. (2010). Cellulose nanocrystals: Chemistry, self-assem￾bly, and applications. Chemical Reviews, 110(6), 3479–3500. https://doi.org/10.1021/
cr900339w
Hakimi, N. M. F., Hua, L. S., Chen, L. W., Mohamad, S. F., Osman Al Edrus, S. S., Park, B. D., 
& Azmi, A. (2021). Surface modified nanocellulose and its reinforcement in natural rub￾ber matrix nanocomposites: A review. Polymers, 13(19), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym13193241
Han, J., Lu, K., Yue, Y., Mei, C., Huang, C., Wu, Q., & Xu, X. (2019). Nanocellulose-templated 
assembly of polyaniline in natural rubber-based hybrid elastomers toward flexible elec￾tronic conductors. Industrial Crops and Products, 128(November 2018), 94–107. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2018.11.004
Han, J., Zhou, C., Wu, Y., Liu, F., & Wu, Q. (2013). Self-assembling behavior of cellulose 
nanoparticles during freeze-drying: Effect of suspension concentration, particle size, 
crystal structure, and surface charge. Biomacromolecules, 14(5), 1529–1540. https://doi.
org/10.1021/bm4001734
Haron, G. A. S., Mahmood, H., Noh, M. H., Alam, M. Z., & Moniruzzaman, M. (2021). 
Ionic liquids as a sustainable platform for nanocellulose processing from bioresources: 
Overview and current status. ACS Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering, 9(3), 1008–
1034. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c06409
Haunreiter, K. J., Dichiara, A. B., & Gustafson, R. (2022). Nanocellulose by ammonium persul￾fate oxidation: An alternative to TEMPO-mediated oxidation. ACS Sustainable Chemistry 
& Engineering, 10(12), 3882–3891. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c07814
He, Y., Boluk, Y., Pan, J., Ahniyaz, A., Deltin, T., & Claesson, P. M. (2020). Comparative 
study of CNC and CNF as additives in waterborne acrylate-based anti-corrosion coat￾ings. Journal of Dispersion Science and Technology, 41(13), 2037–2047. https://doi.org
/10.1080/01932691.2019.1647229
Hu, C., Zhou, Y., Zhang, T., Jiang, T., Meng, C., & Zeng, G. (2021). Morphological, thermal, 
mechanical, and optical properties of hybrid nanocellulose film containing cellulose 
nanofiber and cellulose nanocrystals. Fibers and Polymers, 22(8), 2187–2193. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12221-021-0903-3
Huang, J., Ma, X., Yang, G., & Alain, D. (2019). Introduction to nanocellulose. 
Nanocellulose: From Fundamentals to Advanced Materials, Mcc, 1–20. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9783527807437.ch1
Isogai, A. (2021). Emerging nanocellulose technologies: Recent developments. Advanced 
Materials, 33(28), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202000630
Isogai, A., & Zhou, Y. (2019). Diverse nanocelluloses prepared from TEMPO-oxidized 
wood cellulose fibers: Nanonetworks, nanofibers, and nanocrystals. Current Opinion 
in Solid State and Materials Science, 23(2), 101–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cossms.
2019.01.001Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 169
Jaffar, S. S., Saallah, S., Misson, M., Siddiquee, S., Roslan, J., Saalah, S., & Lenggoro, W. 
(2022). Recent development and environmental applications of nanocellulose-based 
membranes. Membranes, 12(3). https://doi.org/10.3390/membranes12030287
Jamróz, E., Kulawik, P., & Kopel, P. (2019). The effect of nanofillers on the functional proper￾ties of biopolymer-based films: A review. Polymers, 11(4), 1–43. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym11040675
Jarnthong, M., Wang, F., Wei, X. Y., Wang, R., & Li, J. H. (2015). Preparation and properties 
of biocomposite based on natural rubber and bagasse nanocellulose. MATEC Web of 
Conferences, 26, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1051/matecconf/20152601005
Jiang, W., Shen, P., Yi, J., Li, L., Wu, C., & Gu, J. (2020). Surface modification of nanocrys￾talline cellulose and its application in natural rubber composites. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science, 137(39). https://doi.org/10.1002/app.49163
Kargarzadeh, H., Mariano, M., Huang, J., Lin, N., Ahmad, I., Dufresne, A., & Thomas, S. 
(2017). Recent developments on nanocellulose reinforced polymer nanocomposites: A 
review. Polymer, 132, 368–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2017.09.043
Kaur, P., Sharma, N., Munagala, M., & Rajkhowa, R. (2021). Nanocellulose: Resources, physio￾chemical properties, current uses and future applications. Frontiers in Nanotechnology, 
3(November), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnano.2021.747329
Lavoratti, A., Scienza, L. C., & Zattera, A. J. (2015). Dynamic mechanical analysis of cellulose 
nanofiber/polyester resin composites. ICCM International Conferences on Composite 
Materials, 2015-July (April 2016).
Li, W., Wu, Q., Zhao, X., Huang, Z., Cao, J., Li, J., & Liu, S. (2014). Enhanced thermal 
and mechanical properties of PVA composites formed with filamentous nanocel￾lulose fibrils. Carbohydrate Polymers, 113, 403–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2014.07.031
Li, Z., Zhang, Y., Anankanbil, S., & Guo, Z. (2021). Applications of nanocellulosic products 
in food: Manufacturing processes, structural features and multifaceted functionalities. 
Trends in Food Science and Technology, 113(December 2020), 277–300. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tifs.2021.03.027
Lin, K. H., Hu, D., Sugimoto, T., Chang, F. C., Kobayashi, M., & Enomae, T. (2019). An analy￾sis on the electrophoretic mobility of cellulose nanocrystals as thin cylinders: Relaxation 
and end effect. RSC Advances, 9(58), 34032–34038. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9ra05156b
Lunardi, V. B., Soetaredjo, F. E., Putro, J. N., Santoso, S. P., Yuliana, M., Sunarso, J., Ju, Y., & 
Ismadji, S. (2021). Nanocellulose: Sources, pretreatment, isolations, modification, and 
its application as the drug carriers. Polymers, 13, 2052.
Mahendra, I. P., Wirjosentono, B., Tamrin, T., Ismail, H., Mendez, J. A., & Causin, V. (2020). 
The effect of nanocrystalline cellulose and TEMPO-oxidized nanocellulose on the 
compatibility of polypropylene/cyclic natural rubber blends. Journal of Thermoplastic 
Composite Materials. https://doi.org/10.1177/0892705720959129
Marakana, P. G., Dey, A., & Saini, B. (2021). Isolation of nanocellulose from lignocellulosic 
biomass: Synthesis, characterization, modification, and potential applications. Journal 
of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 9(6), 106606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jece.2021.106606
Mariano, M., El Kissi, N., & Dufresne, A. (2016). Cellulose nanocrystal reinforced oxidized 
natural rubber nanocomposites. Carbohydrate Polymers, 137, 174–183. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.10.027
Mariano, M., El Kissi, N., & Dufresne, A. (2018). Cellulose nanomaterials: Size and surface 
influence on the thermal and rheological behavior. Polimeros, 28(2), 93–102. https://doi.
org/10.1590/0104-1428.2413
Mateo, S., Peinado, S., Morillas-Gutiérrez, F., La Rubia, M. D., & Moya, A. J. (2021). 
Nanocellulose from agricultural wastes: Products and applications—A review. 
Processes, 9(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/pr9091594170 Nanofillers
Mathew, A. P. (2017). Elastomeric Nanocomposites Reinforced with Nanocellulose and 
Nanochitin. In: H. Kargarzadeh, I. Ahmad, S. Thomas, & A. Dufresne (eds) Handbook 
of Nanocellulose and Cellulose Nanocomposites, 217–234. Wiley. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9783527689972.ch6
Nair, S. S., Chen, H., Peng, Y., Huang, Y., & Yan, N. (2018). Polylactic acid biocomposites 
reinforced with nanocellulose fibrils with high lignin content for improved mechani￾cal, thermal, and barrier properties. ACS Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering, 6(8), 
10058–10068. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b01405
Neves, R. M., Ornaghi, H. L., Zattera, A. J., & Amico, S. C. (2021). Recent studies on modi￾fied cellulose/nanocellulose epoxy composites: A systematic review. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 255(November 2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.117366
Nickerson, R. F., & Habrie, J. A. (1947). Cellulose intercrystalline structure. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry, 39(11), 1507–1512.
Noor, S. M., Anuar, A. N., Tamunaidu, P., Goto, M., Shameli, K., & Halim, M. H. A. (2020). 
Nanocellulose production from natural and recyclable sources: A review. IOP Conference Series: 
Earth and Environmental Science, 479(1). https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/479/1/012027
Noremylia, M. B., Hassan, M. Z., & Ismail, Z. (2022). Recent advancement in isolation, 
processing, characterization and applications of emerging nanocellulose: A review. 
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 206(January), 954–976. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.03.064
Ogunsona, E., Hojabr, S., Berry, R., & Mekonnen, T. H. (2020). Nanocellulose-triggered 
structural and property changes of acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber films. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 164, 2038–2050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2020.07.202
Omran, A. A. B., Mohammed, A. A. B. A., Sapuan, S. M., Ilyas, R. A., Asyraf, M. R. M., Saeid, 
S., Koloor, R., & Petr, M. (2021). Micro- and nanocellulose in polymer composite mate￾rials: A review. Polymers, 13(2), 1–35.
Oun, A. A., Shankar, S., & Rhim, J. W. (2020). Multifunctional nanocellulose/metal and 
metal oxide nanoparticle hybrid nanomaterials. Critical Reviews in Food Science and 
Nutrition, 60(3), 435–460.
Panchal, P., Ogunsona, E., & Mekonnen, T. (2019). Trends in advanced functional material 
applications of nanocellulose. Processes, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.3390/pr7010010
Peng, S., Luo, Q., Zhou, G., & Xu, X. (2021). Recent advances on cellulose nanocrystals and 
their derivatives. Polymers, 13(19), 3247. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13193247
Pennells, J., Godwin, I. D., Amiralian, N., & Martin, D. J. (2020). Trends in the production 
of cellulose nanofibers from non-wood sources. Cellulose, 27(2), 575–593. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10570-019-02828-9
Putro, J. N., Ismadji, S., Gunarto, C., Yuliana, M., Santoso, S. P., Soetaredjo, F. E., & Ju, Y. 
H. (2019). The effect of surfactants modification on nanocrystalline cellulose for pacli￾taxel loading and release study. Journal of Molecular Liquids, 282, 407–414. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.03.037
Rahimi Kord Sofla, M., Brown, R. J., Tsuzuki, T., & Rainey, T. J. (2016). A comparison of 
cellulose nanocrystals and cellulose nanofibres extracted from bagasse using acid and 
ball milling methods. Advances in Natural Sciences: Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 
7(3). https://doi.org/10.1088/2043-6262/7/3/035004
Ram, F., & Shanmuganathan, K. (2021). Nanocellulose-based materials and compos￾ites for fuel cells. In: Sabu Thomas & Yasir Beeran Pottathara (eds) Nanocellulose 
Based Composites for Electronics, 259–293. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/
b978-0-12-822350-5.00011-4
Rana, A. K., Frollini, E., Thakur, V. K., Pasquini, D., de Teixeira, E. M., da Curvelo, A. A. 
S., Belgacem, M. N., & Dufresne, A. (2021). Cellulose nanocrystals: Pretreatments, 
preparation strategies, and surface functionalization. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 182(3), 1554–1581. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.05.119Nanocellulose-Based Green Fillers for Elastomers 171
Raza, M., & Abu-Jdayil, B. (2022). Cellulose nanocrystals from lignocellulosic feedstock: A 
review of production technology and surface chemistry modification. Cellulose, 29(2), 
685–722. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-021-04371-y
Roy, K., Pongwisuthiruchte, A., Chandra Debnath, S., Potiyaraj, P., Syuhada, D. N., Azura, A. 
R., Mokhothu, T. H., & John, M. J. (2021). Bio-based fillers for environmentally friendly 
composites. Polymers, 1–8(20), 243–270. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13203600
Rui, H. Y., Chen, C. G., Liu, L., Yao, X. Y. J., Yu, H. Y., Chen, R., Chen, G. Y., Liu, L., Yang, X. 
G., & Yao, J. M. (2015). Silylation of cellulose nanocrystals and their reinforcement of 
commercial silicone rubber. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 17(9), 1–13. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11051-015-3165-4
Santmartí, A., & Lee, K.-Y. (2018). Crystallinity and thermal stability of nanocellulose. 
Nanocellulose and Sustainability, January, 67–86. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781351262
927-5
Sathishkumar, P., Kamala-kannan, S., Cho, M., Su, J., Hadibarata, T., Razman, M., & Oh, 
B. (2014). Laccase immobilization on cellulose nanofiber: The catalytic efficiency and 
recyclic application for simulated dye effluent treatment. Journal of Molecular Catalysis. 
B, Enzymatic, 100, 111–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcatb.2013.12.008
Shaghaleh, H., Xu, X., & Wang, S. (2018). Current progress in production of biopolymeric 
materials based on cellulose, cellulose nanofibers, and cellulose derivatives. RSC 
Advances, 8(2), 825–842. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra11157f
Sharma, A., Thakur, M., Bhattacharya, M., Mandal, T., & Goswami, S. (2019). Commercial 
application of cellulose nano-composites – A review. Biotechnology Reports, 21(2018), 
e00316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2019.e00316
Silva, L. S., Ferreira, F. J. L., Silva, M. S., Citó, A. M. G. L., Meneguin, A. B., Sábio, R. M., 
Barud, H. S., Bezerra, R. D. S., Osajima, J. A., & Silva Filho, E. C. (2018). Potential 
of amino-functionalized cellulose as an alternative sorbent intended to remove anionic 
dyes from aqueous solutions. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 116, 
1282–1295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.05.034
Singh, S., Dhakar, G. L., Kapgate, B. P., Maji, P. K., Verma, C., Chhajed, M., Rajkumar, K., 
& Das, C. (2020). Synthesis and chemical modification of crystalline nanocellulose 
to reinforce natural rubber composites. Polymers for Advanced Technologies, 31(12), 
3059–3069. https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.5030
Talebi, H., Ghasemi, F. A., & Ashori, A. (2022). The effect of nanocellulose on mechanical 
and physical properties of chitosan-based biocomposites. Journal of Elastomers and 
Plastics, 54(1), 22–41. https://doi.org/10.1177/00952443211017169
TAPPI. (2011). ISO Technical Specification ISO/TS 27687, Nanotechnologies – Terminology 
and definitions for nano ‐ objects – Nanoparticle, nanofiber and nanoplate. 1–6.
Tavakolian, M., Jafari, S. M., & Van De Ven, T. G. M. (2020). A review on surface -
Functionalized cellulosic nanostructures as biocompatible antibacterial materials. Nano￾Micro Letters, 12(1), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820-020-0408-4
Teixeira, L. T., Braz, W. F., Correia de Siqueira, R. N., Pandoli, O. G., & Geraldes, M. C. (2021). 
Sulfated and carboxylated nanocellulose for Co+2 adsorption. Journal of Materials 
Research and Technology, 15, 434–447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2021.07.123
Thakur, V., Guleria, A., Kumar, S., Sharma, S., & Singh, K. (2021). Recent advances in nano￾cellulose processing, functionalization and applications: A review. Materials Advances, 
2(6), 1872–1895. https://doi.org/10.1039/d1ma00049g
Tortorella, S., Buratti, V. V., Maturi, M., Sambri, L., Franchini, M. C., & Locatelli, E. (2020). 
Surface-modified nanocellulose for application in biomedical engineering and nano￾medicine: A review. International Journal of Nanomedicine, 15, 9909–9937. https://doi.
org/10.2147/IJN.S266103
Trache, D., Hussin, M. H., Haafiz, M. K. M., & Thakur, V. K. (2017). Recent progress in cel￾lulose nanocrystals: Sources and production. Nanoscale, 9(5), 1763–1786. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c6nr09494e172 Nanofillers
Trache, D., Tarchoun, A. F., Derradji, M., Hamidon, T. S., Masruchin, N., Brosse, N., & Hussin, 
M. H. (2020). Nanocellulose: From fundamentals to advanced applications. Frontiers in 
Chemistry, 8(May). https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2020.00392
Trache, D., & Thakur, V. K. (2020). Nanocellulose and nanocarbons based hybrid materi￾als: Synthesis, characterization and applications. Nanomaterials, 10(9), 1–5. https://doi.
org/10.3390/nano10091800
Trifol, J., Plackett, D., Sillard, C., Hassager, O., Daugaard, A. E., Bras, J., & Szabo, P. (2016). 
A comparison of partially acetylated nanocellulose, nanocrystalline cellulose, and nano￾clay as fillers for high-performance polylactide nanocomposites. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science, 133(14). https://doi.org/10.1002/app.43257
Trovatti, E., Carvalho, A. J. F., Ribeiro, S. J. L., & Gandini, A. (2013). Simple green approach 
to reinforce natural rubber with bacterial cellulose nanofibers. Biomacromolecules, 
14(8), 2667–2674. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm400523h
Vanderfleet, O. M., & Cranston, E. D. (2021). Production routes to tailor the performance of cel￾lulose nanocrystals. Nature Reviews Materials, 6(2), 124–144. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41578-020-00239-y
Wang, J., Liu, X., Jin, T., He, H., Liu, L., Wang, J., Liu, X., Jin, T., He, H., & Liu, L. (2019). 
Preparation of nanocellulose and its potential in reinforced composites: A review prepa￾ration of nanocellulose and its potential in. Journal of Biomaterials Science, Polymer 
Edition, 30(11), 919–946. https://doi.org/10.1080/09205063.2019.1612726
Xu, X., Liu, F., Jiang, L., Zhu, J. Y., Haagenson, D., & Wiesenborn, D. P. (2013). Cellulose 
nanocrystals vs. cellulose nanofibrils: A comparative study on their microstructures 
and effects as polymer reinforcing agents. ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, 5(8), 
2999–3009. https://doi.org/10.1021/am302624t
Yang, X., Biswas, S. K., Han, J., Tanpichai, S., Li, M. C., Chen, C., Zhu, S., Das, A. K., & 
Yano, H. (2021). Surface and interface engineering for nanocellulosic advanced materi￾als. Advanced Materials, 33(28). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202002264
Yasin, S., Hussain, M., Zheng, Q., & Song, Y. (2021). Effects of ionic liquid on cellulosic 
nanofiller filled natural rubber bionanocomposites. Journal of Colloid And Interface 
Science, 591, 409–417. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2021.02.029
Yin, Y., Lucia, L. A., Pal, L., Jiang, X., & Hubbe, M. A. (2020). Lipase-catalyzed laurate esteri￾fication of cellulose nanocrystals and their use as reinforcement in PLA composites. 
Cellulose, 27(11), 6263–6273. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-020-03225-3
Yu, S. Il, Min, S. K., & Shin, H. S. (2016). Nanocellulose size regulates microalgal floccula￾tion and lipid metabolism. Scientific Reports, 6(October), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep35684
Zhang, B., Huang, C., Zhao, H., Wang, J., Yin, C., Zhang, L., & Zhao, Y. (2019). Effects of cellu￾lose nanocrystals and cellulose nanofibers on the structure and properties of polyhydroxy￾butyrate nanocomposites. Polymers, 11(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11122063
Zhang, K., Barhoum, A., Xiaoqing, C., Li, H., & Samyn, P. (2019). Cellulose nanofibers: 
Fabrication and surface functionalization techniques. In: A. Barhoum, M. Bechelany, 
& A. Makhlouf (eds) Handbook of Nanofibers, 409–449. Springer. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-53655-2_58
Zhang, X., Xiong, R., Kang, S., Yang, Y., & Tsukruk, V. V. (2020). Alternating stacking of 
nanocrystals and nanofibers into ultrastrong chiral biocomposite laminates. ACS Nano, 
14(11), 14675–14685. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.0c06192
Zhao, K., Tian, X., Xing, J., Huang, N., Zhang, H., & Huanying Zhao, W. W. (2022). Tunable 
mechanical behavior of collagen-based films: A comparison of celluloses in differ￾ent geometries. Bioresource Technology Reports, 100310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2022.05.191
Zhu, G., & Lin, N. (2019). Surface chemistry of nanocellulose. In: J. Huang, A. Dufresne, & N. 
Lin (eds) Nanocellulose: From Fundamentals to Advanced Materials, 115–150. Wiley. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527807437.ch5173
6 Recent Advances in 
Organic Nanofillers￾Derived Polymer 
Hydrogels
M. Iqbal Ishra, B. S. S. Nishadani, 
M. G. R. Tamasha Jayawickrama, and 
M. M. M. G. P. G. Manthilaka
University of Peradeniya
Institute of Materials Engineering and Technopreneurships
CONTENTS
6.1 Introduction................................................................................................... 174
6.2 Types of Polymer Hydrogels and Nanofillers............................................... 175
6.2.1 Classification of Hydrogels............................................................... 175
6.2.2 Types of Nanofillers.......................................................................... 177
6.2.3 Types of Organic Nanofillers............................................................ 179
6.3 Effect of Organic Nanofillers on the Functional Properties of Polymer 
Hydrogel Materials....................................................................................... 181
6.4 Functional Applications of Polymer Hydrogel-Based Materials with 
Organic Nanofillers....................................................................................... 183
6.4.1 Drug Delivery Applications.............................................................. 183
6.4.2 Gene Delivery Applications.............................................................. 185
6.4.3 Tissue Engineering Applications ...................................................... 186
6.4.4 Energy Application ........................................................................... 187
6.4.5 Food and Environment Applications ................................................ 188
6.5 Other Applications........................................................................................ 189
6.6 The Future of Nanomaterials........................................................................ 190
References.............................................................................................................. 191
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-6174 Nanofillers
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology could bring another revolution to the world of material science 
(L. Zhang et al., 2019). Nanotechnology involves the manipulations of matter on an 
atomic scale. The first-ever concept was presented in 1959 by the famous professor of 
physics Dr. Richard p. Feynman (Ranjan et al., 2018). The term nanotechnology had 
been coined by Norio Taniguchi in 1974. The field of nanotechnology is one of the 
most popular areas for current research and development in various technical disci￾plines (Polarz & Smarsly, 2002). This obviously includes polymer science and tech￾nology, and even in this field, the investigations cover a broad range of topics. This 
would include nanoelectronics as the critical dimension scale for modern devices is 
now below 100nm. The general class of organic nanofiller-derived polymer hydrogel 
materials is a fast-growing research area. Significant effort is focused on the ability 
to obtained control of the nanoscale structure via innovative synthetic approaches 
(Park, 2007). The properties of nanofiller-incorporated materials depend not only on 
the properties of their individual parents but also on their morphology and interfa￾cial characteristic (Xing & Tang, 2021). Therefore, organic nanofillers promise new 
applications in many fields.
A hydrogel is a 3D network of hydrophilic polymers that can swell in a fluid 
environment and hold a large amount of water while maintaining the struc￾tures due to the chemical or physical cross-linking of individual polymer chains 
(C. Zhao et al., 2020). Organic nanofiller-based hydrogel is a new generation 
of materials with a combination of bio-based polymer and fillers that have at 
least 1nm scale dimension (Abu Elella et al., 2021). In polymer nanocomposites 
films, the biopolymers act as a matrix, while organic nanofillers are dispersed 
there to improve the functional properties. These show unique properties com￾bining the advantages of fillers and polymer hydrogels (Bellet et al., 2021). The 
organic nanofillers have a set of improved properties, such as mechanical, anti￾microbial, and antioxidant properties and physical properties (Shin et al., 2018). 
These properties do not occur naturally in the hydrogels themselves; therefore, 
they are gained due to the addition of nanocomposites. The components of poly￾mer hydrogels are characterized by high availability and good biodegradability 
(Pacelli et al., 2018).
The limitations of polymer-based hydrogels can be reduced by mixing two or 
more components. Currently, a novel method to improve the properties of hydro￾gel is the use of nanofillers, which not only can fulfill the reinforcing function but 
also could act as an active agent for hydrogel matrix that can extend the shelf life 
of products through exhibiting antimicrobial and antioxidative properties (Aranaz 
et al., 2021). The aim of this chapter is to summarize recent advances and achieve￾ments regarding the addition of organic nanofillers into polymer hydrogels with a 
focus on their functional properties and possible uses in different research areas, 
which include drug delivery, enzyme delivery medical and pharmaceutical applica￾tion, tissue engineering, wound dressing, food packing and design, environment 
applications, energy application, and material synthesis for various research fields 
(A. Kumar et al., 2019).Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 175
6.2 TYPES OF POLYMER HYDROGELS AND NANOFILLERS
6.2.1 Classification of Hydrogels
Hydrogels are a type of three-dimensional network of hydrophilic cross-linked 
polymer that can absorb and store large amounts of water (Feldman, 2019). The 
hydrophilic groups present in the polymer network can be hydrated under neu￾tral conditions to produce a gel structure (Heifler et al., 2021). The cross-linked 
network structure does not dissolve but can highly swell in water and respond to 
the fluctuation of environmental stimuli (Ng et al., 2020). The hydrophilic groups 
(like –OH, –CONH, –CONH2, and –SO3H) present in the polymeric backbone 
enable the absorption of a large quantity of water, while the cross-linked network 
structure suppresses their dissolution (Pacelli et al., 2018). Hydrogels show both 
solid-like and liquid properties (C. Zhang et al., 2020). In general, a low-concen￾tration aqueous hydrophilic polymer solution with no entangled structures exhibits 
Newtonian mechanical behavior (Abu Elella et al., 2021). Cross-linked hydrogels 
possess rheological properties with extremely high viscosity and high elastic￾ity similar to solids. Due to their water insolubility, hydrogels are the research 
hotspots of swollen polymer networks, as well as their application studies (Vashist 
et al., 2018). Hydrogels have been applied to a variety of fields, such as drought 
resistance in dry areas, masks in cosmetics, antipyretic stickers, analgesic stickers, 
agricultural films, new prevention agents in construction, humidity control, water￾blocking agents in the petroleum industry, dehydration of crude oil and refined oil, 
dust suppressants in mining, food preservatives, thickeners, pharmaceutical carri￾ers in medical applications, tissue engineering scaffolds, wound dressings, etc. It 
is worth noting that different application fields require different polymer materials 
(Bellet et al., 2021).
Hydrogels can be classified by different methods according to several views (Figure 
6.1). Recent literature reports hydrogels can be classified into natural hydrogels and 
synthetic hydrogels based on their origin. Natural polymers are collagen, gelatin, 
hyaluronic acid, fibrin, sodium alginate, agarose, chitosan, dextran, cyclodextrin, etc. 
(F. Zhu et al., 2021). The hydrogels prepared with these abundant polymers inherit 
these excellent properties and are sensitive to the external environment. Most animals 
and plants contain a large number of natural polymer gels (Seidi et al., 2020)
The study of the structure and properties of such hydrogels is also an important 
way to study the physiological mechanisms of tissues for biomimetic applications. 
These hydrogels are biocompatible, biodegradable, and nontoxic (Larrañeta et al., 
2018). However, they have poor mechanical properties and batch variation may lead 
to poor reproducibility. Synthetic hydrogels are cross-linked polymers prepared 
by the addition reaction or ring-opening polymerization under artificial conditions 
(Yuan et al., 2019). Polyacrylic acid and its derivatives, polyvinyl alcohol, polyeth￾ylene glycol, its copolymers, polyvinylpyrrolidone (Wakuda et al., 2018) are usually 
used as the skeletons to prepare synthetic hydrogels. Synthetic hydrogels have the 
advantages of easy industrial production and chemical modification and precisely 
controllable properties, yet with poor biocompatibility, bioactivity, and biodegrad￾ability, as compared with natural polymer hydrogels (Yuan et al., 2019).176 Nanofillers
Based on cross-linking, they can be classified as physical and chemical hydro￾gels (Ciolacu & Suflet, 2018). Chemical hydrogels result in a strong covalent bond 
between polymer strands and it forms an irreversible gel structure (T. Zhu et al., 
2019), which gives degradation resistance compared to other materials. Physical 
hydrogels have noncovalent bonds (Eshkol-Yogev et al., 2021). Polymers are capable 
of forming hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, ionic interactions, and crystal￾lization cross-linking (Narayanan & Han, 2017). These have high biocompatibility 
and low toxicity and are also easily reversible under specific conditions. Classification 
according to the degree of swelling can be low swelling, medium swelling, high 
swelling, and superabsorbent (Anjani et al., 2021). Cross-linked network of polymer 
hydrogel swells when water or solvent is present. The swelling property of hydrogels 
depends on the density of the network present in hydrogels, polymer–solvent interac￾tions, nature of solvent present, and act. The hydrophilic polymer can absorb a high 
amount of water and swell up quickly. Depending on hydrophilic groups present in 
the backbone structure of the polymer, swelling ability differs. This swelling ability 
of hydrogels gives raise to different porosity in the polymer hydrogel materials. This 
leads to nonporous, microporous, and superporous. The swelling of superporous 
hydrogels is governed by capillary wetting (Guo et al., 2020).
Based on biodegradability, hydrogels can be divided into biodegradable hydro￾gels and nonbiodegradable hydrogels. Most of the natural polymer hydrogels are 
biodegradable hydrogels (Ilyas et al., 2018). The three-dimensional structures of 
these hydrogels can be destroyed by the actions of microorganisms and enzymes 
under natural conditions (Aranaz et al., 2021). The bonding between the molecu￾lar chains and within the molecular chains is then broken, and the strength of the 
hydrogel is reduced. Eventually, the hydrogel is degraded into small molecules. 
FIGURE 6.1 Classification of hydrogels based on different characteristics. (Adapted from 
ResearchGate.)Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 177
b. Nonbiodegradable hydrogels are a class of hydrogels that are insensitive to envi￾ronmental stimuli and can maintain stable structural, physical, and chemical proper￾ties for a long time (Saba et al., 2018). Most synthetic hydrogels were prepared by 
chemical cross-linking (Dilks, 1980).
Classification according to polymeric composition can be homopolymer, co-poly￾meric, and semi-interpenetrating network, and interpenetrating network hydrogels 
(Giri et al., 2019). Polymer network derived from single species of monomer is known 
as a homopolymer. Hydrogels are composed of two types of monomers referred to as 
copolymers (El-Zawawy, 2005). In this type, at least one monomer is hydrophilic in 
nature. A semi-interpenetrating network forms when linear polymer penetrates into the 
cross-linked polymer network, without forming any other chemical bonds in-between 
them. An interpenetrating polymer network forms by the joining of two polymers 
(Pacelli et al., 2018).
Some hydrogels are sensitive to environmental stimuli. These hydrogels are 
named smart hydrogels. They can be characterized into pH-sensitive hydrogels, 
temperature-sensitive hydrogels, electrosensitive hydrogels, light-responsive hydro￾gels, antigen-sensitive hydrogels, and pressure-sensitive. pH-sensitive polymers will 
contain acid or base hangings on their structures (Kaniewska et al., 2020). These 
will respond to the pH change by the gain or loss of a proton. Temperature-sensitive 
hydrogels will form a gel-like structure under temperature changes. These hydrogels 
will have hydrophobic nature due to the presence of hydrogen bond-making sub￾stances (methyl, ethyl, and propane and act.) on their structures. Hydrogen bonds 
between these hydrogels are formed to swell (Bellet et al., 2021). Formed hydro￾gen bonds are consonant to the temperature. Electrosensitive hydrogels will swell or 
shrink when an applied electric field is present (Ruggiero et al., 2017). These have the 
ability to convert electrical energy to mechanical energy. Due to this characteristic, 
these can be used in vast applications. In light-sensitive hydrogels, when irradiated 
with light sources they will undergo structural transformation (Malagurski et al., 
2017). These changes result in expansion and contract. At a specific wavelength of 
light source chromophores in the hydrogel, the structure will absorb and increase 
the temperature of the hydrogels. This will lead to altering the swelling character of 
thermosensitive hydrogels (Aung et al., 2020).
6.2.2 Types of Nanofillers
Nanofillers are usually classified as organic and inorganic nanofillers (Seidi et al., 
2020), which are discussed in Figure 6.2. Nanophase can be categorized based 
on nanosized dimensions Figure 6.3. They are 3D nanofiller, 2D nanofillers, and 
1D nanofillers. 3D nanofillers include nanosphere, nanocrystals/nanoparticles (all 
dimensions<100nm). 2D nanofillers include nanofibrils, nanowhiskers, and nano￾tubes (diameter<100nm). The 1D nanofillers include nanosheets or nanoplatelets 
(thickness<100nm) (H. Liu et al., 2019). Based on sources used for the synthesis of 
nanofillers, they categorized into organic and inorganic nanofillers. Inorganic nano￾fillers mainly consist of metal oxides and clay nanoparticles. Nanofillers can improve 
the material property by varying the mixture of ratios between organic matrixes and 
nanofillers (Wei et al., 2010). Nanofillers were incorporated into polymer matrixes at 178 Nanofillers
1%–10% by mass. By incorporating various nanofiller types into different materials, 
we can improve their physical and chemical properties according to our needs (Dai 
et al., 2019).
Polymer nanocomposites, a class of polymers reinforced with low quantities of 
well-dispersed nanoparticles, offer advantages over conventional composites (Tie 
et al., 2021). It has been proved that when the sizes of nanofillers are very small (at 
least one of their dimensions is under 100nm), the interface regions are so large that 
they start to interact at a very low level of loadings. Nanoparticles have a great effect 
on the properties and morphology of polymeric nanocomposites due to their large 
specific surface and high surface energy (Qian et al., 2020). The interactions between 
polymer matrix and nanoparticles alter polymer chemistry, that is, chain mobility 
FIGURE 6.2 Different types of nanofillers. (Adapted from ResearchGate.)
FIGURE 6.3 Nanofillers based on dimensions (1D, 2D, and 3D). (Adapted from the 
ResearchGate.)Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 179
and degree of cure, and generate new trap centers in the composite which brings 
about a significant change in electrical properties (Sun et al., 2020). Where the size 
of the particle is close to that of the polymer chain length, the particles do not behave 
like foreign inclusions and space charge densities are small.
6.2.3 Types of Organic Nanofillers
Naturally occurring polysaccharides can be classified according to their origin. 
Plant-based polysaccharides are starch, cellulose, pectin, gum, and act. Algae-based 
polysaccharides are agar, alginate, and Galatian’s act. Animal-based polysaccharides 
are chitin, chitosan, hyaluronic acid, and cellulose. Bacteria-based polysaccharides 
are xanthan, cellulose, dextran, and levan. Fungi-based polysaccharides are chitin, 
chitosan, and yeast glucan (Seidi et al., 2020). Organic nanofillers mainly consist of 
naturally occurring cellulose, starch, chitosan, and chitin in the form of nanocrystals, 
nanofibrils, nanowhiskers, or NPS based on the method of extraction and source. 
Nanofillers have a greater surface area per mass. The nanometric size effect leads to 
the intensive topic in the research area of nanosized particles. The high surface area 
of nanosize particles opens various routes for novel interactive behavior with poly￾mers/hydrogel materials (Tomczykowa & Plonska-Brzezinska, 2019).
Chitin (CTN) is the richest natural polysaccharide in the world. It is considered 
to be one of the most important renewable resources. It is found in cuticles or exo￾skeletons of invertebrates and in the cell walls of algae and fungi species. The dry 
weight of chitin obtained from crustaceans is highest when compared with the other 
sources (Tovar et al., 2020). CTN is a large, structural homopolymer of β-(1–4)-N￾acetyl D-glucosamine (β-NAG) linkages. Based on the source of origin, it occurs 
in two forms, namely, α- and β-forms (Vashist et al., 2019). The chains of chitin are 
interconnected through hydrogen bonding, which impacts its solubility, reactivity, 
and swelling. The α chitin form is abundant in nature, as compared to the β form 
(Ali & Ahmed, 2018). The crystallographic measures of the two forms clearly dis￾play the fact that per unit cell in α-chitin (α-CTN), there are two antiparallel mol￾ecules, but only one in β-chitin (β-CTN), which are arranged in parallel. In both 
cases, chains in the sheets are held through hydrogen bonds, which are assumed 
to account for the resistance with respect to swelling of α-CTN in water, which is 
white in color, hard, and stiff. Unlike other natural polysaccharides, which are either 
neutral or acidic, CTN is highly basic. Typically, being hydrophobic and insoluble 
in water, has a chelating property, the ability to form polyoxysalt and films. It is 
soluble in certain organic solvents. CTN does not have well-characterized melting 
points, but they show the excessive application of heat. The water molecules are 
tightly bound with chitin, and hence, water loss generally occurs in the temperature 
range of 53°C–100°C. Both CTN and chitosan have numerous advantageous biologi￾cal properties. They are hemostatic, fungistatic, and spermicidal; they also bind well 
to microbial and mammalian cells, regenerate gum tissue, and accelerate the synthe￾sis of osteoblasts that is responsible for bone formation. They exhibit antitumor and 
antioxidant properties (Ahmadi et al., 2015). They can also act as central nervous 
system depressants and immunologic adjuvants. They have applications in multiple 
streams because of their fiber- and film-forming properties. Natural polymers are 180 Nanofillers
important in the development of biocomposite materials (Eshkol-Yogev et al., 2021). 
Composite materials are made of two immiscible components (Giri et al., 2019). The 
main function of reinforcement is to improve the mechanical, thermal, and biological 
properties of polymer hydrogels. The unique properties of chitin are utilized in pack￾aging, coating, water treatment, biomedicine, and in other fields in various areas. In 
order to increase the mechanical and water-resistant properties of polymer hydro￾gel materials, certain organic nanofillers are incorporated into the polymer hydrogel 
matrix (Qian et al., 2020). Recycling of thermoplastic polymer hydrogel is done by 
the molding technique. Melting temperature is one of the restrictive conditions in 
the recycling of chitin-based composites, and it should not increase beyond 300°C, 
at which point it begins to degrade. This technique does not damage the reinforce￾ment in the polymer hydrogel material (C. T. G. V. M. T. Pires et al., 2014). CTN has 
attracted significant and chitin-based bionanocomposite’s notable attention in the last 
6years as a biodegradable material with a satisfactory way of waste management of 
the crustacean shells (Antonino et al., 2017).
Cellulose is the most abundant renewable polymer which takes 1st place on earth 
and is responsible for parallel in a highly ordered manner (Han et al., 2021). Cellulose 
is mainly synthesized by plants but it is also synthesized by bacteria (Figure 6.4). 
Cellulose is a homopolymer of glucose. Glucose monomers are joined by β-1,4 link￾age. Cellulose chains are ordered in a manner to form microfibrils that build up 
the plant cell wall. Toughness, water insolubility, and fibrous polysaccharides play 
important role in keeping the structure of plant cell walls stable (Ilyas et al., 2018). 
The morphology, size, and other characteristics depend on the origin of the cellulose. 
the nanoform of cellulose exists mainly as crystalline cellulose (CNC) and cellulose 
nanofibers (CNFs). Nanoforms of cellulose have been proven for many green materi￾als in recent times (Seidi et al., 2020). Nanocellulose has excellent properties such 
as abundance, better mechanical properties, high aspect ratio, biocompatibility, and 
renewable (Jiao et al., 2021). In recent studies, bioethanol was used for the isolation 
of CNC having highly negative surface ζ-potential compared to sludge-based CNC in 
acidic pH (pH 5.0). Surface modification of nanocellulose is performed using various 
routes. A green approach using the enzyme hexokinase can be done for the introduc￾tion of phosphate (PO4
2+) groups on the surface of cellulose fiber (Saba et al., 2018). 
The size of nanocellulose depends on the origin of cellulose, isolation method, and 
processing conditions (Qian et al., 2020).
The polysaccharides are synthesized by green plants. Starch is a polymer car￾bohydrate that consists of numerous glycosidic bonds between glucose. Pure starch 
molecule bears properties like white, tasteless, and odorless powder which is 
insoluble in cold water and alcohols. Starch nanoparticles (St-NPs) have attracted 
much attention due to their unique behavior that is different from their bulk mate￾rial (Huang et al., 2019). In a study, St-NPs were extracted from starch granules by 
means of physical or chemical treatments (González et al., 2018). Modifying the 
surface of starch nanoparticles can increase surface functionality (Ilyas et al., 2018). 
Alginate-based nanoparticles have been widely used in target drug delivery and cell 
transplant in tissue engineering due to their biocompatibility, low toxicity, low cost, 
and high surface-area-to-mass ratio (T. Zhu et al., 2019). Pectin is polysaccharides 
rich in galacturonic acids. Nano form of pectin is commonly used as a gelling agent, Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 181
colloidal stabilizers, and thickening agent in the food industries and has also been 
used for drug-loading vehicles (Martau et al., 2019). In the world, the most abundant 
natural polymers such as chitosan ranked second place. Organic nanofiller-based 
hydrogels have been extensively been used in recent years in various fields for several 
applications (L. Liu et al., 2020).
6.3 EFFECT OF ORGANIC NANOFILLERS ON THE FUNCTIONAL 
PROPERTIES OF POLYMER HYDROGEL MATERIALS
The use of nonbiodegradable plastic increases with time, and waste produced from 
that is an increasingly serious problem. Therefore, researches forces on the develop￾ment of products with biodegradable and eco-friendly properties. The interaction 
between polymer hydrogels and organic nanofillers leads to the improved function￾ality of the hydrogel materials. Depending on the properties of organic nanofillers, 
improved version can be obtained (Mondal et al., 2020). The mechanical strength 
FIGURE 6.4 Structure of cellulose and chitin. (Adapted from Springer link.)182 Nanofillers
of hydrogels is important in various applications. The assessment of the mechanical 
strength of hydrogels is significant for suitable physiological functions in various 
fields such as biomedical applications, tissue engineering, drug delivery, food indus￾try, energy applications, and gene delivery (Eshkol-Yogev et al., 2021). It is impor￾tant for the hydrogel to maintain its physical texture during the release or intake of 
appropriate agents for a specific time period. The required mechanical properties of 
hydrogels can be attained by incorporating specific polymers comonomers, nano￾fillers, and cross-linkers by changing the degree of cross-linking. A higher degree 
of cross-linking will result in low elongation and electricity with higher brittleness 
(Pacelli et al., 2018). An increase in cross-linking is important in order to retain the 
compromised mechanical strength and elasticity (Rallini & Kenny, 2017).
The empty space in the structural network of hydrogels can be occupied by water 
molecules. This property is considered in the water content of the film. The addition 
of organic nanofillers can make a change in the water content. This phenomenon can 
be related to the interaction between nanofillers and functional groups present in the 
polymer hydrogels, which can lead to a reduction in the available space in the poly￾mer hydrogel matrix (Eshkol-Yogev et al., 2021). The development of starch-PVP 
hydrogel with cellulose nanocrystals shows a decrease in the moisture content due to 
the addition of organic nanofillers (Koyani, 2020). This behavior is the result of cel￾lulose nanocrystals structure, which leads to a lower water uptake than the polymer 
matrix and strong interaction due to hydrogen bonding between cellulose nanocrys￾tals and starch-PVA hydrogel matrixes (Abu Elella et al., 2021).
The most significant property of polymer hydrogels is the swelling degree 
(Prihatiningtyas et al., 2019), which gives an idea about the amount of water that can 
be absorbed. When the degree of swelling increases, the tolerance of the hydrogel 
matrix to water increases. Normally addition of nanofillers improves the water resis￾tance of the polymer hydrogel matrixes (Mohammadinejad et al., 2020). Anyhow, 
reverse reaction also can be noticed during the addition of fillers. The addition of 
chitin nanofibers can lead to a higher swelling degree due to the formation of a higher 
amount of OH– resulting in increased water absorption (Ahmed, 2015).
The addition of organic nanofillers to polymer hydrogel can affect their mechani￾cal properties (Sánchez et al., 2019). This occurs because nanofillers have a very 
high specific surface area that can affect the strength and degree of dispersion. 
Homogeneous dispersion of organic nanofillers within the polymer hydrogels gives 
rise to a specific transfer of stress via the shear mechanism from the polymer matrix 
to the nanofillers and can result in increased strength of the polymer hydrogel 
matrixes (Lee et al., 2020). The strategy of strengthening the tensile strength may 
also result by the interaction between the nanofillers and polymer hydrogel matrixes. 
Covalent and hydrogen bonds between hydroxyl groups of hydrogels are formed, 
which will lead to the strengthening of molecular forces between nanofillers and 
hydrogel matrixes (Dai et al., 2019).
Antimicrobial packaging system in various fields is important to ensure safety 
and increase the storage stability of materials by preventing the growth of microor￾ganism (Hassan et al., 2012). The antimicrobial properties of packaging materials 
can be achieved through the addition of antimicrobial substances to the polymer 
hydrogels (González et al., 2018). Antimicrobial agents can be categorized into two Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 183
categories. They are bactericidal and bacteriostatic. Encapsulating organic nanopar￾ticles in polymer hydrogels will increase the antimicrobial property of the materials. 
The mechanism of antibacterial properties of organic nanofillers is depended on the 
type of nanofillers as well as on the species and the natural properties of the bacteria 
(Ali & Ahmed, 2018). Quick-growing bacteria are more sensitive to nanofillers than 
slow-growing bacteria. Chitin nanofibers can be characterized under bacteriostatic. 
The addition of chitin nanofillers leads to course blocking the route of access to the 
nutrient and oxygen, which leads to the inhibition of bacterial growth (Yu Chen, 
2019). Chitosan has also been identified as an antibacterial agent to prevent infec￾tion in wounds and hasten the wound-healing process by increasing the growth of 
skin cells. It was also used for food preservative purposes during packaging foods 
(Armentano et al., 2018).
6.4 FUNCTIONAL APPLICATIONS OF POLYMER HYDROGEL￾BASED MATERIALS WITH ORGANIC NANOFILLERS
The idea behind the nanofillers is to use the building blocks with dimensions in 
nanometer scale to design and create new materials with new properties. Organic 
nanofillers is the most exploited area in polymer hydrogel science in various fields. 
Organic nanofillers derived from polymer hydrogels have gained considerable atten￾tion in recent years owing to their unique potential via combining the characteristic 
properties of polymer hydrogels and organic nanofillers. The unique properties of 
these materials lead research scientists to focus on multiple applications in various 
fields. Some of those applications are gene delivery, tissue engineering, wound dress￾ing, food packaging, drug delivery, and act (Shah et al., 2020).
6.4.1 Drug Delivery Applications
People around the world are connected through the various lines each other than 
earlier. Globalization is increasing, and the spread of technologies and innovation 
has led human life to higher standers of living across the globe. The ease of work 
had made the reduction of human activity (Vashist et al., 2019). The lack of physical 
exercise leads to face various diseases. Biopolymeric nanoparticles such as poly￾saccharides and proteins have attracted greater attention in therapeutic applications 
(Liechty et al., 2010). Chitosan is the most famous polysaccharide, which is ranked 
2nd in abundance, the first being cellulose. Chitosan is obtained by the deacetylation 
reaction of chitin. It is cost-effective, biocompatible, environmentally friendly, and 
biodegradable (Jamróz et al., 2019). Nanoparticles of the biopolymer chitosan have 
gained great attention for application in drug delivery agents due to their high stabil￾ity in aqueous solution, lower toxicity, and providing several routes of administration 
(Figure 6.5). Therefore, chitosan nanoparticles can be used as promising drug deliv￾ery vehicles for several diseases (Zeng et al., 2012).
Chitosan nanoparticles are defined as solid particles with a size in the range of 
1–100nm. There are different methods available for the synthesis of chitosan NP 
such as emulsion, ionic gelation, reverse micellar, and self-assembling methods 184 Nanofillers
(Hossain & Iqbal, 2014). A popular method used to synthesize a chitosan nanopar￾ticle is reverse micellar and ionic gelation methods. In the ionic gelation method, 
chitosan NP can be synthesized by the interaction of oppositely charged macromol￾ecules (Manickam et al., 2020). Tripolyphosphate is extensively used in the prepara￾tion and assembling of the NP of chitosan. Tripolyphosphate has less toxicity and 
has the ability to form gels through ionic interactions. The interaction of oppositely 
charged molecules can be controlled by the charge density of chitosan and tripoly￾phosphate by changing the pH of the solution. These interactions can be facilitated 
by various factors, such as pH, method of mixing, and the ratio of the component 
(Vashist et al., 2019). Recently, a very easy method to synthesize Fe3O4-chitosan 
NP (magnetic) by cross-linking with tripolyphosphate, precipitation with NaOH, and 
oxidation with O2 in aqueous HCl containing chitosan and Fe(OH)2 was reported 
(He et al., 2020). Polymeric NP with controlled shape and size can be synthesized 
by reverse micellar method. In the preparation of reverse micelles, the organic sol￾vent was used to dissolve the surfactant (Sun et al., 2020). The solution of chitosan 
is added with constant shaking to avoid any turbidity. The aqueous phase should be 
FIGURE 6.5 Drug delivery mechanism. (Adapted from Europe PMC.)Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 185
controlled in such a way as to maintain the whole solution in an optically transpar￾ent microemulsion phase. To control the shape and size of chitosan NP, lowering the 
molar mass of chitosan would be advantageous due to either lowering the viscosity 
of the internal aqueous phase or an increase in the separation of the polymer chains 
during the process (Ng et al., 2020).
Chitin and chitosan nanoparticles derived polymer hydrogels and films have also 
found applications in wound healing. Chitosan is also being used to control natural 
clotting of blood, block nerve endings, and reduce pain (Kamoun et al., 2015). It 
expedites wound healing and prevents scar formation. Chitosan films in combination 
with silver and zinc oxide NP have shown good antibacterial behavior against E. coli, 
S. aureus, and B. subtilis. Copper NP modified chitosan. Chitosan NP is used as an 
adjuvant for different vaccines such as hepatitis B and influenza. These NP have bet￾ter antigen uptake ability by mucosal lymphoid tissues and lead to induction of strong 
immune responses against antigens (Aranaz et al., 2021).
6.4.2 Gene Delivery Applications
The polysaccharides, importantly chitosan, are extensively used in biomedical and 
pharmaceutical industries due to their capacity to regulate the release of drugs, DNA, 
proteins, vaccines, and genes. Gene is the unit cell of heredity and sequence of nucleo￾tides in DNA and RNA which contain information to code their respective proteins 
(Massaro et al., 2018), which is located on chromosomes. Chromosomes are located 
inside the cells. Gene therapy is a technique used to treat genetic disorders at their 
genetic roots (Saba et al., 2018), by injecting genes into the cells. In gene therapy, an 
active vector is used that is biocompatible at productive in the most significant barri￾ers. The virus has limitations in cell transduction, due to its extreme adverse effects. 
So, there is a need to develop nonviral gene delivery systems. Organic nanofillers can 
enhance the therapeutic effectiveness of the drug by monitoring their efficient deliv￾ery time and circulation time. Chitosan-based nanofillers have been established due to 
their high biocompatibility, low toxicity, high positive charge, inexpensive, low immu￾nogenicity, and ability to form polyelectrolyte complexes with DNA (Zhou et al., 2020).
Partially diacetyl chitosan consists of repeating units of glucosamine and N-acetyl 
glucosamine, which is soluble in an acidic medium and positively charged. In neutral 
pH, it does not dissolve. The solubility of chitosan can be modified by enhancing 
surface functionalization to produce chitosan derivatives. Various types of chitosan￾based derivatives are made which include trimethyl, and dimethyl chitosan by alkyla￾tion of the amino groups of chitosan (Ali & Ahmed, 2018). This process is aided with 
an appropriate aldehyde with the help of a reducing agent and then applied in various 
fields (Ningaraju et al., 2018). New properties of chitosan can be achieved by altera￾tion of hydroxyl functional groups present in chitosan, thiolates, hydrophobic, and by 
chemically grafting by deriving chitosan, which will improve the properties of chito￾san such as drug permeation efficiency, being a barrier for acid-sensitive biomolecules 
and drugs, easy solubility at neutral pH, the enhanced release of drugs and reaching 
target sites (Aranaz et al., 2021). Chitosan-based gene delivery systems should form a 
stable complex with genetic materials, targeting the cells, being a barrier for nuclear 
degradation, and ease cellular transportation (Kumar Teli et al., 2010).186 Nanofillers
6.4.3 Tissue Engineering Applications
Biomedical engineering involves and uses a combination of cell, engineering, materi￾als, methods, and new technologies to restore physiochemical properties and replace 
the biological tissues (Figure 6.6). Various naturally occurring biomaterials have 
been suggested as a templating material, as they have the biocompatibility, degrad￾ability, desired mechanical strength, and biological activity in vivo. Alginates are 
salts of algin, which is a polysaccharide derived from the cell wall of brown algae 
(F. Zhu et al., 2021). Alginate is extracted by initially treating the algae with aqueous 
NaOH. Alginate hydrogels are a network of water-insoluble polymeric chains. They 
are a type of colloidal gel having water as its dispersion medium (Mohamadali et al., 
2017). The gels can contain over 99% water of their total volume; regardless of the 
high water content, they also retain their stiffness. The high water content and the 
desired stiffness render the gel an extracellular matrix-like property, which makes 
them suitable to provide mechanical support for an injured tissue and serve as a 
platform for delivering biomolecules to the injured tissue for its repair and regenera￾tion (Ahmadi et al., 2015). Alginate hydrogels are used in combination with cells; 
the hydrogels are modified to make them compatible for interaction with the cells. 
FIGURE 6.6 Steps involved in the tissue engineering. (Adapted from ResearchGate.)Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 187
An increased cell–hydrogel matrix interaction is observed upon covalently conju￾gating the hydrogel with heparin-binding peptides and related peptide sequences 
(Mohamadali et al., 2017). Sodium alginate hydrogels have a lot of potential in cell 
and tissue engineering applications and have been studied extensively in the field 
of regenerative medicine. The modulation of the physico-chemical characteristics 
of these alginate-based hydrogels is usually achieved by selecting the appropriate 
divalent cation employed in the gel. Peptide-loaded modified alginate hydrogels act 
as extracellular matrix providing adhesion and attachment to cell for proliferation 
and differentiation. The use of calcium ions for cross-linking sodium alginate hydro￾gels has been shown to significantly increase the proliferation and differentiation 
of osteoblasts (Mohamadali et al., 2017; Piantanida et al., 2019). Using barium and 
strontium as a divalent cation in place of calcium leads to more rigid hydrogels. Drug￾encapsulated alginate hydrogels can be modified to act as an extracellular matrix and 
accelerate the healing process. Wound-healing properties of sodium alginate films 
have been well established with findings that suggest rapid and efficient healing with 
faster wound closure (Udayakumar et al., 2021).
The injectable polymer hydrogels based on chitosan, cellulose nanocrystals, 
and pectin were designed with compatible internal structures that are prominent 
for tissue engineering (Ali & Ahmed, 2018). Cartilage’s extracellular matrix is 
made up of a collagen mesh containing slowly dividing chondrocytes and nega￾tively charged proteoglycans (Kamoun et al., 2015). Any injury and trauma to the 
cartilage lead to defects, which do not heal properly. The insufficient cartilage 
regeneration causes severe pain, rendering the person disabled, ultimately requir￾ing a total joint replacement to treat the condition. Alginate–polyacrylamide-based 
hybrid hydrogel with organic nanofillers has shown immense potential as a substi￾tute for cartilage (Mohammadinejad et al., 2020). This alginate–polyacrylamide–
silica hydrogel consists of short chains of alginate that dissipate the strain energy 
via ionic cross-linking, providing the structure healing properties by reforming the 
ionic cross-links.
6.4.4 Energy Application
Nanostructured materials are critically important in many areas of technology 
because of their unusual physical and chemical properties due to their limited 
dimensions (Ranjan et al., 2018). Micro- or nanostructures owing to unique chemi￾cal or physical properties, tunable functionalities, hydrogels, and derivatives have 
emerged as an important class of functional materials and receive increasing interest 
from research scientists (Kausar, 2020a). Bottom-up synthetic methods to rationally 
design and modify their molecular architectures enable nanostructured functional 
hydrogels to give several critical challenges in advanced energy technologies (S. 
Kumar et al., 2018). Integrating the intrinsic or extrinsic properties of various func￾tional materials, nanostructured functional hydrogels hold the promise to break the 
limitations of current materials, improving the device performance of energy storage 
and conversion. The focus is on the fundamentals and applications of nanostructured 
functional hydrogels in energy conversion and storage. Various organic nanofillers 188 Nanofillers
derived hydrogel works as core components in batteries, supercapacitors, and various 
other energy-providing materials (F. Zhao et al., 2018).
As a promising functional material, hydrogels have attracted extensive attention, 
especially in flexible wearable sensor fields, but it remains a great challenge to fac￾ilely integrate excellent mechanical properties, self-adhesion, and strain sensitivity 
into a single hydrogel (Tie et al., 2021). In this work, we present high in strength, 
stretchable, conformable, and self-adhesive chitosan/poly (acrylic acid) double-net￾work organic nanofiller-derived hydrogels for application in epidermal strain sensor 
via in situ polymerization of acrylic acid in chitosan acid aqueous solution with tan￾nic acid-coated cellulose nanocrystal (TA-CNC) acting as nanofillers to reinforce 
tensile properties, followed by a soaking process in a saturated NaCl solution to 
cross-link chitosan chains. With the addition of a small amount of TA-CNC, the 
double-network nanocomposite hydrogels became highly adhesive and mechanically 
compliant, which were critical factors for the development of conformable and resil￾ient wearable epidermal sensors (Khan et al., 2018). The salt-soaking process was 
applied to cross-link chitosan chains by shielding electrostatic repulsions between 
positively charged amino groups, drastically enhancing the mechanical properties of 
the hydrogels (Cui et al., 2019). The obtained double-network nanocomposite hydro￾gels exhibited excellent tunable mechanical properties that could be conveniently 
tailored with fracture stress and fracture strain ranging from 0.39 to 1.2MPa and 
370% to 800%, respectively (Massaro et al., 2018). Besides, the hydrogels could be 
tightly attached onto diverse substrates, including wood, glass, plastic, polytetrafluo￾roethylene, glass, metal, and skin, demonstrating high adhesion strength and com￾pliant adhesion behavior (Ali & Ahmed, 2018; Piantanida et al., 2019). In addition, 
benefiting from the abundant free ions from strong electrolytes, the flexible hydrogel 
sensors demonstrated stable conductivity and strain sensitivity, which could monitor 
both large human motions and subtle motions (González et al., 2018). Furthermore, 
the antibacterial property originating from chitosan made the hydrogels suitable for 
wearable epidermal sensors (González et al., 2018). The facile soaking strategy pro￾posed in this work would be promising in fabricating high-strength multi-functional 
conductive hydrogels used for wearable epidermal devices (Cui et al., 2019).
6.4.5 Food and Environment Applications
In recent years, a huge development in packaging materials based on proteins and 
polysaccharides has been developed, which is caused by environmental problems 
resulting from the presence of an increasing number of packaging based on petro￾leum (Tomono, 2019). Biocompatibility, biodegradability, and antimicrobial proper￾ties of chitosan indicate that this polysaccharide can be used as a packaging material 
(Seidi et al., 2020). Enriched with various additives such as nanofillers, it generates 
completely new active properties. Despite the fact that there is a huge number of 
studies regarding the production and characteristics of various types of chitosan￾based films, its industrial use is still limited. Currently, research needs to be focused 
on developing a scheme for obtaining cheap chitosan packaging material that would 
eliminate the use of the expensive and environmentally unfriendly chemicals that are 
used in the production of synthetic films (Jamróz et al., 2019).Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 189
Chitin biopolymers are biodegradable and renewable (Ali & Ahmed, 2018). To 
achieve the preferred functionalities to improve product safety, an active food pack￾aging system is employed in which active components are loaded in the chitin matrix. 
These active agents can act as absorbers, releasers, or reacting agents. Biobased plas￾tics were less than 1% in 2009 and they started to increase to 20% by the end of 2020. 
Solubility of chitin in acidic media is a valuable characteristic since it can be modi￾fied as fibers, films, sponges, beads, gels, or solutions and blended with polymers of 
both natural and synthetic origin (Jeon et al., 2000). Nanofillers can be fabricated by 
using electrospraying techniques, which produce ultrathin solids with health-promot￾ing active packaging strategies (Akpan et al., 2018). There are numerous challenges 
as well as opportunities involved in commercializing biodegradable packaging. An 
extra major requirement for such biocomposite films used in packaging applications 
is that they comply with government legislation. To be more specific, such packag￾ing material should exhibit minimal or no migration effect and not interact with the 
product. Biopackaging is expected to offer a clean and pollution-free environment in 
the future (Yang Chen et al., 2019; Fertahi et al., 2021).
Chitin nanofillers are both biodegradable and renewable. To achieve the preferred 
functionalities to improve product safety, an active packaging system is employed in 
which active components are loaded in the polymer hydrogels (Selim et al., 2017). 
These active agents can act as absorbers, releasers, or reacting agents. Solubility of 
chitin in acidic media is a valuable characteristic since it can be modified as fibers, 
films, sponges, beads, gels, or solutions and blended with polymers of both natural 
and synthetic origin. Nanofillers can be generated by using electrospraying tech￾niques, which produce ultrathin solids with health-promoting active packaging art 
(Hu et al., 2021; Rallini & Kenny, 2017). The CTN composite-based packaging sys￾tem showed enhanced improvement in wettability, as well as in mechanical charac￾teristics, and helped in preventing grapes from microbial attack. There are numerous 
challenges as well as opportunities involved in commercializing biodegradable pack￾aging (Aljbour et al., 2019; J. Pires et al., 2021). To be more specific, such packaging 
material should exhibit minimal or no migration effect and not interact with the 
product. Biopackaging is expected to offer a clean and pollution-free environment 
in the future.
6.5 OTHER APPLICATIONS
Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) with >2000 photoactive groups on each can act as 
highly efficient initiators for radical polymerizations, cross-linkers, as well as cova￾lently embedded nanofillers for nanocomposite hydrogels. This is achieved by a 
simple and reliable method for surface modification of CNCs with a photoactive 
bis(acyl) phosphate oxide derivative. Shape-persistent and free-standing 3D struc￾tured objects were printed with a monofunctional methacrylate, showing a superior 
swelling capacity and improved mechanical properties (González et al., 2018).
Since corrosion has tremendous economic effects, academics and industries 
are in need to develop more effective coatings (Hettiarachchi et al., 2019). These 
efforts have led to the profound importance of nanocomposite coatings based on 
polymers and carbon nanostructures. It is shown that good reinforcement, advanced 190 Nanofillers
mechanical properties, and high corrosion resistance are only found at relatively low 
levels of nanocarbon (i.e., fullerene, carbon black, carbon nanotubes, graphene, gra￾phene oxide, and carbon dots) loadings in coating compositions (Pourhashem et al., 
2020). Herein, a survey of breakthrough scientific studies on the application of car￾bon nanostructures in corrosion-resistant organic coatings is carried out to pave the 
way for future developments in novel nanocoatings. The chitosan NP has also been 
used as an anti-aging skin agent and has shown the skin regenerative properties when 
materials were tested against skin cell fibroblasts and keratinocytes in the laboratory 
(Arshad et al., 2020). Infections caused by bacterial wounds are common infections. 
Excess use of antibiotics leads to raising the growth of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. 
Using antibiotics to prevent and treat wound infections is not successful with the 
spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Antibacterial wound dressing involves encap￾sulating an antiseptic agent into polymer hydrogel matrixes to avoid microbial con￾tamination. The study of poly (acrylic acid) (PAA) and bacterial cellulose nanofiber 
shows effectiveness in wound dressing applications (Eshkol-Yogev et al., 2021; Jao 
et al., 2017; T. Zhu et al., 2019).
6.6 THE FUTURE OF NANOMATERIALS
Several research articles and magazines on organic nanofillers derived from polymer 
hydrogels reflect the significant value of organic nanofillers. Many important tech￾nological developments have been used to increase the abilities and advance the con￾sistency of organic-based nanocomposites for various applications, particularly in 
gene delivery and the medical field. Organic nanofillers are biocompatible, natural, 
biodegradable, toxin-free, which has ideal properties for biomedicine applications. 
In addition, nanofillers and nanocomposites are resources that have an extensive 
range of useful applications (Tekade et al., 2017; Yanat & Schroën, 2021). These have 
some drawbacks that limit its application, such as its basic and insoluble nature in 
neutral media. Several nanoparticles and other polymers, such as carbon nanotubes, 
have served as supportive candidates for the emerging and enormously varied appli￾cations of chitosan nanocomposites. Furthermore, chitosan can be improved with 
polysaccharide-based nanocomposites for gene delivery and tissue engineering vari￾ous functional groups to regulate the hydrophobic, anionic, and cationic parameters 
(Nalwa, 2014). This is why chitosan is comparatively unique among biopolymers. 
The most unusual properties of chitosan arise from primary amines groups with their 
structure. These types of structures communicate to the polysaccharides, which have 
highly encouraged physical and chemical properties, but also have specific contacts 
with proteins, cells, and living creatures. In this chapter, the importance of chitosan 
nanocomposites and the basic properties of chitosan have also been studied. Making 
an accurately biodegradable product provides both environmental and humanoid 
protection (Tao et al., 2019). At the least, production must be nontoxic. Other eco￾friendly qualities are the use of sustainable ingredients, produced in ways that will 
not damage the bionetwork. Polysaccharide-based nanofillers displays a capacity for 
gentle applications in healthcare products, which are not toxic and are safe materi￾als. However, care is necessary to ensure that the material remains pure, as metal, or 
many supplementary impurities, could produce harmful properties, individually or Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 191
in derivative combinations and various quantities (Kausar, 2020b). The cross-linking 
or derivatization and unreacted substances must be carefully eliminated to avoid 
unintended consequences, as many substances are toxic. It was shown that for supe￾rior applications such as biomedical gene delivery and food packing, the thermal and 
mechanical aspects of pure nanofillers are not. Additionally, several studies focus 
on schemes with organic nanocomposites. The addition of a small number of clay 
nanomaterials improved thermal or mechanical properties, overcoming the restric￾tions of organic nanofiller-derived hydrogels alone being functionalized in fields that 
need a definite thermal and strength stability. The polymeric nanocomposites and 
polymeric system can offer a good result in terms of gene delivery, as well as drug 
discharge enzyme immobilization, high biocompatibility, and toxin-free properties 
offering a broad diversity of applications such as medical, material engineering, and 
pharmaceuticals in the future.
REFERENCES
Abu Elella, M. H., Goda, E. S., Gab-Allah, M. A., Hong, S. E., Pandit, B., Lee, S., Gamal, 
H., Rehman, A. U., & Yoon, K. R. (2021). Xanthan gum-derived materials for applica￾tions in environment and eco-friendly materials: A review. Journal of Environmental 
Chemical Engineering, 9(1). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104702
Ahmadi, F., Oveisi, Z., Samani, M., & Amoozgar, Z. (2015). Chitosan based hydrogels: 
Characteristics and pharmaceutical applications. Research in Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
10(1), 1–16.
Ahmed, E. M. (2015). Hydrogel: Preparation, characterization, and applications: A review. 
Journal of Advanced Research, 6(2), 105–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2013.07.006
Akpan, E. I., Shen, X., Wetzel, B., & Friedrich, K. (2018). Design and Synthesis of Polymer 
Nanocomposites. In Pielichowski, Krzysztof & Majka, Tomasz M. (eds) Polymer 
Composites with Functionalized Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications 
(pp. 47–83). Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814064-2.00002-0
Ali, A., & Ahmed, S. (2018). A review on chitosan and its nanocomposites in drug deliv￾ery. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 109, 273–286. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.078
Aljbour, N. D., Beg, M. D. H., & Gimbun, J. (2019). Acid hydrolysis of chitosan to oligomers 
using hydrochloric acid. Chemical Engineering and Technology, 9, 1741–1746. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceat.201800527
Anjani, Q. K., Permana, A. D., Cárcamo-Martínez, Á., Domínguez-Robles, J., Tekko, I. 
A., Larrañeta, E., Vora, L. K., Ramadon, D., & Donnelly, R. F. (2021). Versatility of 
hydrogel-forming microneedles in in vitro transdermal delivery of tuberculosis drugs. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 158(December 2020), 294–
312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.12.003
Antonino, R. S. C. M. D. Q., Fook, B. R. P. L., Lima, V. A. D. O., Rached, R. Í. D. F., Lima, E. 
P. N., Lima, R. J. D. S., Covas, C. A. P., & Fook, M. V. L. (2017). Preparation and char￾acterization of chitosan obtained from shells of shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei Boone). 
Marine Drugs, 15(5), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.3390/md15050141
Aranaz, I., Alcántara, A. R., Civera, M. C., Arias, C., Elorza, B., Caballero, A. H., & Acosta, 
N. (2021). Chitosan: An overview of its properties and applications. Polymers, 13(19). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13193256
Armentano, I., Puglia, D., Luzi, F., Arciola, C. R., Morena, F., Martino, S., & Torre, L. (2018). 
Nanocomposites based on biodegradable polymers. Materials, 11(5). https://doi.
org/10.3390/ma11050795192 Nanofillers
Arshad, M. S., Fatima, S., Nazari, K., Ali, R., Farhan, M., Muhammad, S. A., Abbas, N., 
Hussain, A., Kucuk, I., Chang, M. W., Mehta, P., & Ahmad, Z. (2020). Engineering and 
characterisation of BCG-loaded polymeric microneedles. Journal of Drug Targeting, 
28(5), 525–532. https://doi.org/10.1080/1061186X.2019.1693577
Aung, N. N., Ngawhirunpat, T., Rojanarata, T., Patrojanasophon, P., Pamornpathomkul, B., & 
Opanasopit, P. (2020). Fabrication, characterization and comparison of α-arbutin loaded 
dissolving and hydrogel forming microneedles. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 
586, 119508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2020.119508
Bellet, P., Gasparotto, M., Pressi, S., Fortunato, A., Scapin, G., Mba, M., Menna, E., & Filippini, 
F. (2021). Graphene-based scaffolds for regenerative medicine. Nanomaterials, 11(2), 
1–41. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11020404
Chen, Yang, Huang, A., Zhang, Y., & Bie, Z. (2019). Recent advances of boronate affin￾ity materials in sample preparation. Analytica Chimica Acta, 1076, 1–17. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.aca.2019.04.050
Chen, Yu. (2019). Hydrogels Based on Natural Polymers. Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/10.1016/
C2018-0-00171-1
Ciolacu, D. E., & Suflet, D. M. (2018). Cellulose-Based Hydrogels for Medical/Pharmaceutical 
Applications. In Popa, Valentin & Volf, Irina (eds) Biomass as Renewable Raw Material 
to Obtain Bioproducts of High-Tech Value (pp. 401–439). Elsevier B.V. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63774-1.00011-9
Cui, C., Shao, C., Meng, L., & Yang, J. (2019). High-strength, self-adhesive, and strain-sensi￾tive chitosan/poly(acrylic acid) double-network nanocomposite hydrogels fabricated by 
salt-soaking strategy for flexible sensors [research-article]. ACS Applied Materials and 
Interfaces, 11(42), 39228–39237. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b15817
Dai, X., Du, Y., Yang, J., Wang, D., Gu, J., Li, Y., Wang, S., Xu, B. B., & Kong, J. (2019). Recoverable 
and self-healing electromagnetic wave absorbing nanocomposites. Composites Science and 
Technology, 174(February), 27–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2019.02.018
Dilks, A. (1980). Characterisation of Polymers By Esca. In Dawkins, J. V. (ed) 
Developments in Polymer Characterisation (Vol. 1, pp. 145–182). Springer. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-010-9237-1_4
El-Zawawy, W. K. (2005). Preparation of hydrogel from green polymer. Polymers for Advanced 
Technologies, 16(1), 48–54. https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.537
Eshkol-Yogev, I., Gilboa, E., Giladi, S., & Zilberman, M. (2021). Formulation - Properties 
effects of novel dual composite hydrogels for use as medical sealants. European Polymer 
Journal, 152(January), 110470. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2021.110470
Feldman, D. (2019). Polymers and polymer nanocomposites for cancer therapy. Applied 
Sciences (Switzerland), 9(18). https://doi.org/10.3390/app9183899
Fertahi, S., Ilsouk, M., Zeroual, Y., Oukarroum, A., & Barakat, A. (2021). Recent trends in 
organic coating based on biopolymers and biomass for controlled and slow release 
fertilizers. Journal of Controlled Release, 330(December 2020), 341–361. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.12.026
Giri, A., Bhowmick, R., Prodhan, C., Majumder, D., Bhattacharya, S. K., & Ali, M. (2019). 
Synthesis and characterization of biopolymer based hybrid hydrogel nanocompos￾ite and study of their electrochemical efficacy. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 123, 228–238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.010
González, K., García-Astrain, C., Santamaria-Echart, A., Ugarte, L., Avérous, L., Eceiza, A., & 
Gabilondo, N. (2018). Starch/graphene hydrogels via click chemistry with relevant elec￾trical and antibacterial properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 202(April), 372–381. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.09.007
Guo, Y., Bae, J., Fang, Z., Li, P., Zhao, F., & Yu, G. (2020). Hydrogels and hydrogel-derived 
materials for energy and water sustainability. Chemical Reviews, 120(15), 7642–7707. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00345Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 193
Han, L., Zhang, H., Yu, H. Y., Ouyang, Z., Yao, J., Krucinska, I., Kim, D., & Tam, K. C. 
(2021). Highly sensitive self-healable strain biosensors based on robust transparent con￾ductive nanocellulose nanocomposites: Relationship between percolated network and 
sensing mechanism. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 191(February), 113467. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bios.2021.113467
Hassan, B. A. R., Yusoff, Z. B. M., Hassali, M. A., & Othman, B. S. (2012). Supportive and 
Palliative Care in Solid Cancer Patients. IntechOpen. http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/55358
He, R., Niu, Y., Li, Z., Li, A., Yang, H., Xu, F., & Li, F. (2020). A hydrogel microneedle patch 
for point-of-care testing based on skin interstitial fluid. Advanced Healthcare Materials, 
9(4), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201901201
Heifler, O., Borberg, E., Harpak, N., Zverzhinetsky, M., Krivitsky, V., Gabriel, I., Fourman, V., 
Sherman, D., & Patolsky, F. (2021). Clinic-on-a-needle array toward future minimally 
invasive wearable artificial pancreas applications. ACS Nano, 15(7), 12019–12033. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c03310
Hettiarachchi, N. M., De Silva, R. T., Prasanga Gayanath Mantilaka, M. M. M. G., Pasbakhsh, 
P., Nalin De Silva, K. M., & Amaratunga, G. A. J. (2019). Synthesis of calcium car￾bonate microcapsules as self-healing containers. RSC Advances, 9(41), 23666–23677. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c9ra03804c
Hossain, M. S., & Iqbal, A. (2014). Production and characterization of chitosan from shrimp 
waste. Journal of the Bangladesh Agricultural University, 12(1), 153–160.
Hu, H., Teng, X., Zhang, S., Liu, T., Li, X., & Wang, D. (2021). Structural characteristics, 
rheological properties, and antioxidant activity of novel polysaccharides from “deer tripe 
mushroom.” Journal of Food Quality, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6593293
Huang, Y., Kormakov, S., He, X., Gao, X., Zheng, X., Liu, Y., Sun, J., & Wu, D. (2019). 
Conductive polymer composites from renewable resources: An overview of preparation, 
properties, and applications. Polymers, 11(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11020187
Ilyas, R. A., Sapuan, S. M., Ishak, M. R., & Zainudin, E. S. (2018). Development and char￾acterization of sugar palm nanocrystalline cellulose reinforced sugar palm starch 
bionanocomposites. Carbohydrate Polymers, 202, 186–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2018.09.002
Jamróz, E., Kulawik, P., & Kopel, P. (2019). The effect of nanofillers on the functional proper￾ties of biopolymer-based films: A review. Polymers, 11(4), 1–42. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym11040675
Jao, D., Xue, Y., Medina, J., & Hu, X. (2017). Protein-based drug-delivery materials. Materials, 
10(5), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma10050517
Jeon, Y. J., Shahidi, F., & Kim, S. K. (2000). Preparation of chitin and chitosan oligomers and 
their applications in physiological functional foods. Food Reviews International, 16(2), 
159–176. https://doi.org/10.1081/FRI-100100286
Jiao, Y., Lu, K., Lu, Y., Yue, Y., Xu, X., Xiao, H., Li, J., & Han, J. (2021). Highly viscoelastic, 
stretchable, conductive, and self-healing strain sensors based on cellulose nanofiber-rein￾forced polyacrylic acid hydrogel. Cellulose, 28(7), 4295–4311. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10570-021-03782-1
Kamoun, E. A., Chen, X., Mohy Eldin, M. S., & Kenawy, E. R. S. (2015). Crosslinked 
poly(vinyl alcohol) hydrogels for wound dressing applications: A review of remarkably 
blended polymers. Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 8(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
arabjc.2014.07.005
Kaniewska, K., Karbarz, M., & Katz, E. (2020). Nanocomposite hydrogel films and coat￾ings – Features and applications. Applied Materials Today, 20, 100776. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apmt.2020.100776
Kausar, A. (2020a). Nanocarbon in polymeric nanocomposite hydrogel—Design and multi￾functional tendencies. Polymer-Plastics Technology and Materials, 59(14), 1505–1521. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/25740881.2020.1757106194 Nanofillers
Kausar, A. (2020b). Shape memory polyester-based nanomaterials: Cutting-edge advance￾ments. Polymer-Plastics Technology and Materials, 59(7), 765–779. https://doi.org/10
.1080/25740881.2019.1695268
Khan, M., Khurram, A. A., Li, T., Zhao, T., Subhani, T., Gul, I. H., Ali, Z., & Patel, V. (2018). 
Synergistic effect of organic and inorganic nano fillers on the dielectric and mechanical 
properties of epoxy composites. Journal of Materials Science and Technology, 34(12), 
2424–2430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmst.2018.06.014
Koyani, R. D. (2020). Journal of drug delivery science and technology synthetic polymers 
for microneedle synthesis: From then to now. Journal of Drug Delivery Science and 
Technology, 60(September), 102071. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2020.102071
Kumar, A., Zo, S. M., Kim, J. H., Kim, S. C., & Han, S. S. (2019). Enhanced physical, mechan￾ical, and cytocompatibility behavior of polyelectrolyte complex hydrogels by reinforc￾ing halloysite nanotubes and graphene oxide. Composites Science and Technology, 
175(March), 35–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2019.03.008
Kumar, S., Sarita, Nehra, M., Dilbaghi, N., Tankeshwar, K., & Kim, K. H. (2018). Recent advances 
and remaining challenges for polymeric nanocomposites in healthcare applications. 
Progress in Polymer Science, 80, 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2018.03.001
Kumar Teli, M., Mutalik, S., & Rajanikant, G. K. (2010). Nanotechnology and nanomedicine: 
Going small means aiming big. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 16(16), 1882–1892. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/138161210791208992
Larrañeta, E., Henry, M., Irwin, N. J., Trotter, J., Perminova, A. A., & Donnelly, R. F. 
(2018). Synthesis and characterization of hyaluronic acid hydrogels crosslinked using 
a solvent-free process for potential biomedical applications. Carbohydrate Polymers, 
181(December), 1194–1205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.12.015
Lee, T. H., Oh, J. Y., Jang, J. K., Moghadam, F., Roh, J. S., Yoo, S. Y., Kim, Y. J., Choi, T. H., Lin, 
H., Kim, H. W., & Park, H. B. (2020). Elucidating the role of embedded metal-organic frame￾works in water and ion transport properties in polymer nanocomposite membranes. Chemistry 
of Materials, 32(23), 10165–10175. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c03692
Liechty, W. B., Kryscio, D. R., Slaughter, B. V., & Peppas, N. A. (2010). Polymers for Drug 
Delivery Systems. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-073009-100847
Liu, H., Peng, H., Xin, Y., & Zhang, J. (2019). Metal-organic frameworks: A universal strategy 
towards super-elastic hydrogels. Polymer Chemistry, 10(18), 2263–2272. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c9py00085b
Liu, L., Lyu, J., Mo, J., Yan, H., Xu, L., Peng, P., Li, J., Jiang, B., Chu, L., & Li, M. (2020). 
Comprehensively-upgraded polymer electrolytes by multifunctional aramid nanofi￾bers for stable all-solid-state Li-ion batteries. Nano Energy, 69, 104398. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2019.104398
Malagurski, I., Levic, S., Nesic, A., Mitric, M., Pavlovic, V., & Dimitrijevic-Brankovic, S. 
(2017). Mineralized agar-based nanocomposite films: Potential food packaging mate￾rials with antimicrobial properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 175, 55–62. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.07.064
Manickam, P., Vashist, A., Madhu, S., Sadasivam, M., Sakthivel, A., Kaushik, A., & Nair, M. 
(2020). Gold nanocubes embedded biocompatible hybrid hydrogels for electrochemi￾cal detection of H2O2. Bioelectrochemistry, 131, 107373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bioelechem.2019.107373
Martau, G. A., Mihai, M., & Vodnar, D. C. (2019). The use of chitosan, alginate, and pectin in 
the biomedical and food sector-biocompatibility, bioadhesiveness, and biodegradability. 
Polymers, 11(11). https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11111837
Massaro, M., Cavallaro, G., Colletti, C. G., Lazzara, G., Milioto, S., Noto, R., & Riela, S. 
(2018). Chemical modification of halloysite nanotubes for controlled loading and release. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry B, 6(21), 3415–3433. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8tb00543eRecent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 195
Mohamadali, M., Irani, S., & Soleimani, M. (2017). PANi/PAN copolymer as scaffolds for the 
muscle cell-like differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. December 2016. https://doi.
org/10.1002/pat.4000
Mohammadinejad, R., Kumar, A., Ranjbar-Mohammadi, M., Ashrafizadeh, M., Han, S. S., 
Khang, G., & Roveimiab, Z. (2020). Recent advances in natural gum-based biomaterials 
for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine: A review. Polymers, 12(1). https://doi.
org/10.3390/polym12010176
Mondal, S., Das, S., & Nandi, A. K. (2020). A review on recent advances in polymer 
and peptide hydrogels. Soft Matter, 16(6), 1404–1454. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c9sm02127b
Nalwa, H. S. (2014). A special issue on reviews in nanomedicine, drug delivery and vaccine 
development. Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology, 10(9), 1635–1640. https://doi.
org/10.1166/jbn.2014.2033
Narayanan, K. B., & Han, S. S. (2017). Dual-crosslinked poly(vinyl alcohol)/sodium alginate/
silver nanocomposite beads – A promising antimicrobial material. Food Chemistry, 234, 
103–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.04.173
Ng, J. Y., Obuobi, S., Chua, M. L., Zhang, C., Hong, S., Kumar, Y., Gokhale, R., & Ee, P. L. 
R. (2020). Biomimicry of microbial polysaccharide hydrogels for tissue engineering 
and regenerative medicine – A review. Carbohydrate Polymers, 241, 116345. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116345
Ningaraju, S., Hegde, V. N., Prakash, A. P. G., & Ravikumar, H. B. (2018). Free volume 
dependence on electrical properties of poly (styrene co-acrylonitrile)/nickel oxide poly￾mer nanocomposites. Chemical Physics Letters, 698, 24–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cplett.2018.03.002
Pacelli, S., Paolicelli, P., Avitabile, M., Varani, G., Di Muzio, L., Cesa, S., Tirillò, J., Bartuli, 
C., Nardoni, M., Petralito, S., Adrover, A., & Casadei, M. A. (2018). Design of a tun￾able nanocomposite double network hydrogel based on gellan gum for drug delivery 
applications. European Polymer Journal, 104, 184–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eurpolymj.2018.04.034
Park, K. (2007). Nanotechnology: What it can do for drug delivery. Journal of Controlled 
Release, 120(1–2), 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2007.05.003
Piantanida, E., Alonci, G., Bertucci, A., & De Cola, L. (2019). Design of nanocomposite 
injectable hydrogels for minimally invasive surgery. Accounts of Chemical Research, 
52(8), 2101–2112. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.9b00114
Pires, C. T. G. V. M. T., Vilela, J. A. P., & Airoldi, C. (2014). The effect of chitin alkaline 
deacetylation at different condition on particle properties. Procedia Chemistry, 9, 220–
225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proche.2014.05.026
Pires, J., de Paula, C. D., Souza, V. G. L., Fernando, A. L., & Coelhoso, I. (2021). Understanding 
the barrier and mechanical behavior of different nanofillers in chitosan films for food 
packaging. Polymers, 13(5), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13050721
Polarz, S., & Smarsly, B. (2002). Nanoporous materials. Journal of Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, 2(6), 581–612. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.2002.151
Pourhashem, S., Ghasemy, E., Rashidi, A., & Vaezi, M. R. (2020). A review on application of 
carbon nanostructures as nanofiller in corrosion-resistant organic coatings. Journal of 
Coatings Technology and Research, 17(1). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11998-019-00275–6
Prihatiningtyas, I., Volodin, A., & Van Der Bruggen, B. (2019). 110th anniversary: Cellulose 
nanocrystals as organic nanofillers for cellulose triacetate membranes used for desalina￾tion by pervaporation. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, 58(31), 14340–
14349. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b02106
Qian, C., Higashigaki, T., Asoh, T. A., & Uyama, H. (2020). Anisotropic conductive hydrogels 
with high water content. ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, 12(24), 27518–27525. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c06853196 Nanofillers
Rallini, M., & Kenny, J. M. (2017). Nanofillers in Polymers. In Jasso-Gastinel, Carlos F. & 
Kenny, José M. (eds) Modification of Polymer Properties (pp. 47–86). Elsevier Inc. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-44353-1.00003-8
Ranjan, R., Narnaware, S. D., & Patil, N. V. (2018). A novel technique for synthesis of calcium 
carbonate nanoparticles. National Academy Science Letters, 41(6), 403–406. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40009-018-0704-4
Ruggiero, F., Vecchione, R., Bhowmick, S., Coppola, G., Coppola, S., Esposito, E., Lettera, 
V., Ferraro, P., & Netti, P. A. (2017). Electro-drawn polymer microneedle arrays 
with controlled shape and dimension. Sensors & Actuators: B. Chemical. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.snb.2017.08.165
Saba, N., Jawaid, M., & Asim, M. (2018). Nanocomposites with Nanofibers and Fillers from 
Renewable Resources. In Koronis, Georgios & Silva, Arlindo (eds) Green Composites 
for Automotive Applications (pp. 145–170). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-08-102177-4.00007-0
Sánchez, J. A. L., Díez-Pascual, A. M., Capilla, R. P., & Díaz, P. G. (2019). The effect 
of hexamethylene diisocyanate-modified graphene oxide as a nanofiller material on 
the properties of conductive polyaniline. Polymers, 11(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym11061032
Seidi, F., Jin, Y., Han, J., Saeb, M. R., Akbari, A., Hosseini, S. H., Shabanian, M., & Xiao, H. 
(2020). Self-healing polyol/borax hydrogels: Fabrications, properties and applications. 
Chemical Record, 20(10), 1142–1162. https://doi.org/10.1002/tcr.202000060
Selim, M. S., Shenashen, M. A., El-Safty, S. A., Higazy, S. A., Selim, M. M., Isago, H., & 
Elmarakbi, A. (2017). Recent progress in marine foul-release polymeric nanocom￾posite coatings. Progress in Materials Science, 87, 1–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pmatsci.2017.02.001
Shah, S. A., Kulhanek, D., Sun, W., Zhao, X., Yu, S., Parviz, D., Lutkenhaus, J. L., & Green, M. 
J. (2020). Aramid nanofiber-reinforced three-dimensional graphene hydrogels for super￾capacitor electrodes. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 560, 581–588. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2019.10.066
Shin, J. E., Kim, H. W., Yoo, B. M., & Park, H. B. (2018). Graphene oxide nanosheet-embed￾ded crosslinked poly(ethylene oxide) hydrogel. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 
135(24), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.45417
Sun, X., Yao, F., & Li, J. (2020). Nanocomposite hydrogel-based strain and pressure sensors: A 
review. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 8(36), 18605–18623. https://doi.org/10.1039/
d0ta06965e
Tao, Y., Wei, C., Liu, J., Deng, C., Cai, S., & Xiong, W. (2019). Nanostructured electrically con￾ductive hydrogels obtained: Via ultrafast laser processing and self-assembly. Nanoscale, 
11(18), 9176–9184. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9nr01230c
Tekade, R. K., Maheshwari, R., Soni, N., Tekade, M., & Chougule, M. B. (2017). 
Nanotechnology for the Development of Nanomedicine. In Mishra, Vijay, Kesharwani, 
Prashant, Amin, Mohd Cairul Mohd, & Iyer, Arun (eds) Nanotechnology-Based 
Approaches for Targeting and Delivery of Drugs and Genes (pp. 3–61). Elsevier Inc. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809717-5.00001-4
Tie, J., Chai, H., Mao, Z., Zhang, L., Zhong, Y., Sui, X., & Xu, H. (2021). Nanocellulose￾mediated transparent high strength conductive hydrogel based on in-situ formed poly￾pyrrole nanofibrils as a multimodal sensor. Carbohydrate Polymers, 273(2999), 118600. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2021.118600
Tomczykowa, M., & Plonska-Brzezinska, M. E. (2019). Conducting polymers, hydrogels and 
their composites: Preparation, properties and bioapplications. Polymers, 11(2), 1–36. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11020350
Tomono, T. (2019). A new way to control the internal structure of microneedles: A case of 
chitosan lactate. Materials Today Chemistry, 13, 79–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mtchem.2019.04.009Recent Advances in Organic Nanofillers-Derived Polymer Hydrogels 197
Tovar, G. I., Fernández de Luis, R., Arriortua, M. I., Wolman, F. J., & Copello, G. J. (2020). 
Enhanced chitin gel with magnetic nanofiller for lysozyme purification. Journal of Industrial 
and Engineering Chemistry, 88, 90–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2020.03.026
Udayakumar, G. P., Muthusamy, S., Selvaganesh, B., Sivarajasekar, N., Rambabu, K., Banat, 
F., Sivamani, S., Sivakumar, N., Hosseini-Bandegharaei, A., & Show, P. L. (2021). 
Biopolymers and composites: Properties, characterization and their applications in food, 
medical and pharmaceutical industries. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 
9(4), 105322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.105322
Vashist, A., Ghosal, A., Vashist, A., Kaushik, A., Gupta, Y. K., Nair, M., & Ahmad, S. (2019). 
Impact of nanoclay on the pH-responsiveness and biodegradable behavior of biopoly￾mer-based nanocomposite hydrogels. Gels, 5(4), 44.
Vashist, A., Kaushik, A., Ghosal, A., Bala, J., Nikkhah-Moshaie, R., Wani, W. A., Manickam, 
P., & Nair, M. (2018). Nanocomposite hydrogels: Advances in nanofillers used for nano￾medicine. Gels, 4(3), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3390/gels4030075
Wakuda, Y., Nishimoto, S., Suye, S. I., & Fujita, S. (2018). Native collagen hydrogel nanofi￾bres with anisotropic structure using core-shell electrospinning. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-24700-9
Wei, L., Hu, N., & Zhang, Y. (2010). Synthesis of polymer—Mesoporous silica nanocompos￾ites. Materials, 3(7), 4066–4079. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma3074066
Xing, W., & Tang, Y. (2021). On mechanical properties of nanocomposite hydrogels: Searching 
for superior properties. Nano Materials Science, May. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nanoms.2021.07.004
Yanat, M., & Schroën, K. (2021). Preparation methods and applications of chitosan 
nanoparticles; with an outlook toward reinforcement of biodegradable packaging. 
Reactive and Functional Polymers, 161(December 2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
reactfunctpolym.2021.104849
Yuan, T., Cui, X., Liu, X., Qu, X., & Sun, J. (2019). Highly tough, stretchable, self-healing, and 
recyclable hydrogels reinforced by in situ-formed polyelectrolyte complex nanoparticles. 
Macromolecules, 52(8), 3141–3149. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.macromol.9b00053
Zeng, J. B., He, Y. S., Li, S. L., & Wang, Y. Z. (2012). Chitin whiskers: An overview. 
Biomacromolecules, 13(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm201564a
Zhang, C., Wu, B., Zhou, Y., Zhou, F., Liu, W., & Wang, Z. (2020). Mussel-inspired hydrogels: 
From design principles to promising applications. Chemical Society Reviews, 49(11), 
3605–3637. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9cs00849g
Zhang, L., Jin, L., Liu, B., He, J., & Liu, B. (2019). Templated growth of crystalline mesopo￾rous materials : From soft/hard templates to colloidal templates. Frontiers in Chemistry, 
7(January), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2019.00022
Zhao, C., Zhang, P., Zhou, J., Qi, S., Yamauchi, Y., Shi, R., Fang, R., Ishida, Y., Wang, S., 
Tomsia, A. P., Jiang, L., & Liu, M. (2020). Layered nanocomposites by shear-flow￾induced alignment of nanosheets. Nature, 580(7802), 210–215. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-020-2161-8
Zhao, F., Bae, J., Zhou, X., Guo, Y., & Yu, G. (2018). Nanostructured functional hydrogels as 
an emerging platform for advanced energy technologies. Advanced Materials, 30(48), 
1–16. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201801796
Zhou, L., Ramezani, H., Sun, M., Xie, M., Nie, J., Lv, S., Cai, J., Fu, J., & He, Y. (2020). 
3D printing of high-strength chitosan hydrogel scaffolds without any organic solvents. 
Biomaterials Science, 8(18), 5020–5028. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0bm00896f
Zhu, F., Du, B., Xu, B., Science, F., & Program, T. (2021). Polysaccharides. Springer, 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-03751-6
Zhu, T., Mao, J., Cheng, Y., Liu, H., Lv, L., Ge, M., Li, S., Huang, J., Chen, Z., Li, H., Yang, 
L., & Lai, Y. (2019). Recent progress of polysaccharide-based hydrogel interfaces for 
wound healing and tissue engineering. Advanced Materials Interfaces, 6(17), 1–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.201900761199
7 Environmental Impact 
in Terms of Nanotoxicity 
and Limitations of 
Employing Organic 
Nanofillers in Polymers
Habibul Islam and Md Enamul Hoque
Military Institute of Science and Technology
Shek Md Atiqure Rahman
University of Sharjah
Faris M. Al-Oqla
Hashemite University
CONTENTS
7.1 Introduction...................................................................................................200
7.2 Nanotoxicity.................................................................................................. 201
7.2.1 Definition .......................................................................................... 201
7.2.2 Factors............................................................................................... 201
7.2.2.1 Size .................................................................................... 201
7.2.2.2 Particle Shape, Surface Area, and Surface Charge ............203
7.3 Exposure Routes ...........................................................................................203
7.3.1 Dermal Route....................................................................................204
7.3.2 Respiratory Route .............................................................................204
7.3.3 Gastrointestinal Tracts......................................................................206
7.4 Nanoparticle Emission in the Environment ..................................................207
7.4.1 Emission in Air .................................................................................207
7.4.2 Emission in Soil................................................................................209
7.4.3 Emission in Water.............................................................................209
7.5 Detection of Nanoparticles in the Environment............................................209
7.6 Nanoparticles’ Interaction with the Environment......................................... 210
7.7 Toxicity Mechanisms of Nanoparticles......................................................... 213
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-7200 Nanofillers
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Although American physicist Richard P. Feynman is considered to be the introducer 
of the concept of nanomaterial manipulation and thus nanotechnology (Hulla et al., 
2015), earlier Indian potteries from the 6th century BC were reported to have used 
carbon nanotubes in coating (Kokarneswaran et al., 2020). Damascus steel, a mate￾rial from the 9th century, was reported to have cementite nanowires (Sanderson, 
2006). From ancient use of nanotechnology to modern-day applications, the field has 
come a long way and has become one of the most important sections of science and 
engineering today.
Nanoparticles are materials that are on the nanoscale. Because of their smaller 
size, these materials have a greater surface area-to-volume ratio, which allows these 
particles to interact with different systems differently than conventional materials. 
As the size decreases, the physiochemical properties take an interesting turn. Due to 
their excellent and exceptional properties, nanomaterials have been used in applica￾tions as follows:
Lightweight transport system can significantly reduce fuel consumption:
Carbon nanotubes have been experimented to be used in next-generation aircraft sys￾tems, which will make the systems lighter, and conductivity of carbon nanotubes will 
also improve their electromagnetic shielding and thermal management (Gohardani 
et al., 2014).
Biomedical imaging contrast agents: Contrast agents for different diagnostic 
methods such as magnetic field-based imaging techniques like Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (MRI) and Magnetic Particle Imaging (MPI). Recent advances have been 
made to use nanoscale ferrites as contrast agents, instead of conventional gadolin￾ium-based contrast agents (Ravichandran & Velumani, 2020).
Drug delivery and tissue engineering applications: Biocompatibility and bioac￾tivity of bionanomaterials have made these materials ideal candidates for biomedical 
applications. Many pieces of research have been carried out to use nanomaterials for 
tissue regeneration and biosensing applications (Hoque et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2013; 
Mahbub & Hoque, 2020; Padmanabhan et al., 2019; Rabbani et al., 2020; Suri et al., 
2007).
Construction materials: The invention of the crystal nanostructure of calcium 
silicate hydrate has opened new doors in the construction sector. These materials 
have water and wear resistance, corrosion protection.
Energy Applications: Nanomaterials have been reported to be used in develop￾ing more efficient and environment-friendly batteries. A different example of energy 
applications where nanomaterials have been extensively researched is solar cells, 
hydrogen fuel cells, and nanographene batteries (Ghernaout et al., 2018; Y. Li et al., 
2017; Sarno, 2020).
7.8 Environmental Impact of Nanoparticles....................................................... 213
7.8.1 Positive Impacts................................................................................ 213
7.8.2 Negative Impacts .............................................................................. 215
7.9 Limitations of Organic Nanofillers............................................................... 218
7.10 Future Aspects and Conclusion..................................................................... 219
References..............................................................................................................220Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 201
Although there is a constant increase of nanotechnology in different applications, 
there is also a rising question regarding the ecotoxicity of nanomaterials. How these 
nanomaterials interact with human bodies has been the most common topic in nano￾toxicology, but their interaction with the environment and other living things has 
got limited attention. In this era of the nanotechnology boom, the limited number 
of research and investments in the assessment of ecotoxicity due to nanoparticles 
is a great concern. This chapter tries to give an overview of how nanoparticles can 
enter the environment and create adverse effects on different components of the 
environment.
7.2 NANOTOXICITY
In this growing era of nanomaterial usage, concerns about the negative effects of 
nanoscale particles on the human body and environment have been a topic of discus￾sion. Quantum size effects that come with a great reduction in material sizes and a 
larger surface area-to-volume ratio guarantee exceptional properties of these materi￾als compared to larger materials (Khan et al., 2019; Monticone et al., 2000). With 
these excellent properties, there also comes an issue with toxicity. Although there 
are specific protocols to use these nanoparticles as human bodies can be directly 
exposed to these nanoparticles via various routes, there are still risks involved with 
these materials (Chakraborty et al., 2011).
7.2.1 Definition
Nanotoxicology can be defined as the evaluation of the toxicity of nanoparticles, 
especially to the human body. Engineered and modified nanomaterials are used in 
different sectors such as regenerative medicine, tissue engineering applications, auto￾mation industry, space research, construction, electronics industries, security and 
defense industries, textiles, and cosmetics. These nanoparticles can get exposed to 
human bodies via different routes. There are mainly five forms of in vitro nanotoxic￾ity, as shown in Figure 7.1 (Aillon et al., 2009).
7.2.2 Factors
7.2.2.1 Size
One of the main factors of toxicity of nanoparticles is their size. With the reduction 
in the size of nanoparticles, the surface area increases, which leads to a greater 
number of molecules binding to the surface area, resulting in more toxic effects. 
Some studies have shown that macrophage clearance mechanisms in the lungs 
work less efficiently on nanoparticles than other larger-size molecules with adverse 
effects (E. Fröhlich & Salar-Behzadi, 2014; Nho, 2020; Schraufnagel, 2020). 
Figure 7.2 shows how the size of nanoparticles can affect toxicity (Akçan et al., 
2020; Chithrani et al., 2006; Elechiguerra et al., 2005; Jiang et al., 2008; Osaki 
et al., 2004).202 Nanofillers
FIGURE 7.1 Forms of in vitro nanotoxicity. (Reprinted with permission from Aillon et al. 
(2009). Copyright (2009) Elsevier.)
FIGURE 7.2 Toxicokinetic findings of different sizes of nanoparticles.Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 203
7.2.2.2 Particle Shape, Surface Area, and Surface Charge
The surface chemistry of nanoparticles can also affect the toxicity of materials by 
influencing the interaction between the environment of the human or animal model 
and nanoparticles. Figure 7.3 shows toxicokinetic findings and biological effects for 
nanoparticles of different shapes, charges, and surface areas (Chithrani et al., 2006; 
Driscoll et al., 1996; Jiang et al., 2008; Lockman et al., 2004; Nigavekar et al., 2004; 
Nikula et al., 1995; Park et al., 2003; Radomski et al., 2005; Schins et al., 2002).
7.3 EXPOSURE ROUTES
Due to the increase in the use of nanotechnology in different sectors of health sci￾ence and engineering, it has become more likely to get exposed to these nanopar￾ticles and their potential risk elements. Toxic nanoparticles can enter the human body 
through various routes, such as skin contact, respiratory, dental, and ocular routes, 
FIGURE 7.3 Effects of shape, surface area, and charge on toxicity.204 Nanofillers
and intestinal tract (Davoren et al., 2007; Günter et al., 2005; Yah et al., 2012; Zheng 
et al., 2007). Although nanoparticles can get through these routes, the main issue 
with toxicity relies on how efficiently different organs can remove these nanomateri￾als from the body, which also depends on the factors discussed earlier. Nanoparticles 
have greater potential to get into the human body than larger-size molecules. There 
are seemingly numerous amounts of airborne nanoparticles in the environment that 
can enter our body through any of the specified routes and translocate into other 
organs and the bloodstream, which can put adverse effects on our body.
7.3.1 Dermal Route
Being the largest organ of the body and with immediate interaction with the external 
environment, the skin is the largest route through which foreign particles can enter 
the body. Once toxic particles pass the dermal layer, they can travel to different organs 
via the circulatory system. Any wound, scrapes, and skin conditions can allow the 
passing of nanoparticles as well as particles larger in size (Nafisi & Maibach, 2018; 
Thanigaivel et al., 2021). In one study, quantum dots were seen to be penetrating 
through the viable epidermis and into the upper dermis within 24hours (Prow et al., 
2012). With the development of nanomaterials in the cosmetic industry, the exposure 
to nanoparticles through the use of cosmetic products has increased largely. Many 
cosmetics products have a large amount of titanium oxide nanoparticles, zinc oxide 
nanoparticles, and silver nanoparticles, which can enter the body via dermal routes 
(Piccinno et al., 2012). Although some studies show the unlikeliness of nanoparticles 
entering the body, some studies have shown that iron nanoparticles can penetrate 
the body through hair follicles (Watkinson et al., 2013). Some studies have shown 
that although nanoparticles in the range of 4 nm can penetrate intact and undamaged 
skin, nanoparticles larger than 45 nm can enter through the dermal layer only if the 
skin is damaged (Larese Filon et al., 2015). Figure 7.4 illustrates how nanoparticles 
can enter through the skin (Palmer & DeLouise, 2016).
7.3.2 Respiratory Route
The respiratory tract is one of the most common routes of nanomaterial exposure 
as there are countless airborne nanoparticles surrounding our environment. Some 
amount of nanoparticles entering the body through the respiratory tract is usually 
discharged by various methods. According to Sajid et al, one-third of the nanopar￾ticles inhaled are removed by various defense mechanisms of the respiratory system 
(Sajid et al., 2015). The size of nanoparticles affects their capacity to enter the human 
respiratory tract (Bakand & Hayes, 2016). Large nanoparticles that have a size range 
between 5 and 30 usually reside in the nasopharyngeal region, which is a part of the 
upper respiratory tract. Smaller nanoparticles with a size range of 1–5 deposit in the 
tracheobronchial region of the lower respiratory tract. Further smaller nanoparticles 
(0.1–1) reside in the deepest part of the lower respiratory region, which is the alveo￾lar region. This segmentation happens due to size differences of the nanoparticles 
as well as gravitational sedimentation and Brownian diffusion. Figure 7.5 shows Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 205
FIGURE 7.4 Illustration of nanoparticle skin penetration pathways. (Reprinted with per￾mission from Palmer and DeLouise (2016). Copyright (2016) MDPI.)
FIGURE 7.5 Size-dependent hosting of nanoparticles inside the lungs. (Reprinted with 
Permission from Yhee et al. (2016). Copyright (2016) MDPI.)206 Nanofillers
different parts of the lungs and the size-dependent hosting of nanoparticles inside the 
lungs (Yhee et al., 2016).
Male Sprague–Dawley rats exposed to titanium oxide nanoparticles for 6hours 
via the inhalation route were found to have traces of TiO2 nanoparticles inside their 
lungs, liver, kidney, and spleen, suggesting that nanoparticles were eliminated by 
feces and urine by mucociliary clearance and ingestion (Pujalté et al., 2017).
7.3.3 Gastrointestinal Tracts
Nanoparticles can enter the body through the gastrointestinal tract by eating food 
and drinking. Additionally, nanoparticles can enter the stomach via the trachea with 
the help of mucociliary cells (Bergin & Witzmann, 2013; Braakhuis et al., 2015). The 
epithelial tissues in the stomach are specialized in absorbing nutrients from food, 
which can also absorb toxic nanoparticles from the stomach, ultimately releasing 
those particles into the bloodstream. This absorption of nanoparticles largely depends 
on the pH of the stomach and peristalsis (Bellmann et al., 2015; E. E. Fröhlich & 
Fröhlich, 2016). There are mainly four ways through which nanoparticles can enter 
the bloodstream via the gastrointestinal tract.
1. Nanoparticles of less than 100nm in diameter can be absorbed by endocy￾tosis in epithelial cells.
2. Large nanoparticles and microparticles can pass through the intestinal epi￾thelium via transcytosis and perception by M-cells.
3. Nanoparticles can also change the morphology of the epithelium, which can 
form gaps in the apical zone of villi through which nanoparticles can cross 
the epithelium.
4. In disease conditions, paracellular uptake can also happen by which 
nanoparticles can exit the stomach.
Figure 7.6 shows the four mechanisms of nanoparticles crossing through the stomach 
discussed (Powell et al., 2010).
FIGURE 7.6 Nanoparticle crossing through the gastrointestinal route. (Reprinted with per￾mission from Powell et al. (2010). Copyright(2010) Elsevier.)Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 207
With the increasing use of nanoparticles in food and pharmaceutical industries 
as additives, the risk of getting exposed to an excessive amount of nanoparticles 
has increased (Kaida Takahiro et al., 2004). Titanium oxide, which is commercially 
known as E171, is extensively used in sweet foods (Weir et al., 2012). Ag nanopar￾ticles and SiO2 nanoparticles have been used in food industries in recent times. Some 
studies have shown that the ideal amount of consumption of these nanoparticles is 
31.5 mg/day for TiO2 nanoparticles, 80 g/day for Ag nanoparticles, and 126 mg/day 
for SiO2 nanoparticles for a 70 kg person (Dekkers et al., 2011; Lomer et al., 2000). 
But due to the increased usage of these nanoparticles, risks of toxicity have been an 
issue for discussion.
7.4 NANOPARTICLE EMISSION IN THE ENVIRONMENT
With the increased use of nanoparticles in the modern world, the possibility of 
nanoparticle emission in the environment has also increased. Although nanotechnol￾ogy has created new possibilities in the field of health and biological sciences, the 
impact on the environment due to the excessive use of nanoparticles is not neces￾sarily positive. Nanoparticles can be formed in two ways: natural and industrial. 
Both natural and industrial nanomaterials can be produced either accidentally or 
artificially. Accidentally and naturally produced nanoparticles are released into the 
environment where nanoparticles are produced by the industrial process. Figure 7.7 
represents different ways of nanoparticle production (Martínez et al., 2021).
Engineered and natural nanoparticles can impact the environment by getting 
emitted into the air, soil, and water by various means. These nanoparticles can either 
positively impact the weather and soil quality or can have adverse effects such as 
pollution, and animal and plant toxicity. The total emission of nanoparticles can be 
divided into four categories (Keller et al., 2013):
1. Emission into landfills: (63%–91% of total production volumes)
2. Emission into soil: (8%–28% of total production volumes)
3. Emission into the aquatic environment (7% of total production volumes)
4. Emission to air (1.5% of total production volumes)
7.4.1 Emission in Air
Although large amounts of nanoparticles are released into the air, a limited num￾ber of research studies have been performed for finding the ultimate stage of those 
released nanomaterials. Nanoparticles can get released into the air in every stage of 
production, handling, packaging, and applications (Caballero-Guzman & Nowack, 
2016). Airborne nanomaterials are generally produced by traffic exhaust smoke, fire, 
combustion, explosion, industrial exhaust, and oxidation of atmospheric gases. After 
the production of nanomaterials, some amounts are released into the air during inter￾nal handling and transportation (Brouwer, 2010; Ding et al., 2017). Also, emissions 
can happen from stacks, during use, industrial continuous-release, waste treatment 
and disposal, and accidental emission (John et al., 2017). Another way nanoparticles 208 Nanofillers
get released into the air is by vehicle exhaustion. One study has shown that nanopar￾ticles get emitted from vehicles even when not fueled (Rönkkö et al., 2014). The 
release of nanoparticles from waste incineration centers mainly depends on the rate 
of combustion and composition of the nanoparticles. Usually, carbonaceous and 
organic nanoparticles burn out completely in the incineration center, but nanoclays 
tend to have residues even after the combustion process (Ounoughene et al., 2015). In 
many cases, nanomaterials get released into the air as a larger mass of materials by 
aggregation (Ding et al., 2017). Higher amounts of nanoparticles can also be emitted 
due to accidents in incineration centers (John et al., 2017). After getting released into 
the air, nanoparticles can face physiochemical changes in composition due to various 
factors like sunlight, UV radiation, and other chemical treatments.
FIGURE 7.7 Classification of nanoparticles by production methods.Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 209
7.4.2 Emission in Soil
Emission of nanoparticles into the soil can occur from fertilizers, waste, wastewater, 
plant protection products, floodplains, biosolids, etc. (Batley et al., 2013). Most of the 
nanoparticles in the soil come from the use of nanotechnology in agricultural products 
(Chhipa, 2017). Nanoparticles in these agricultural products and other sources can 
enter the soil through the matrix pores and accumulate in the soil. These nanoparticles 
due to their greater surface area hold the soil further aggregating (Mukhopadhyay, 
2014). Artificially produced nanomaterials can have adverse effects on the soil as 
these materials can be resilient to degradation and may also accumulate in the soil. 
Nanoparticles in the soil affect the fertility of the soil. These nanoparticles which 
are toxic to plants can influence plant growth and germination (Khodakovskaya et 
al., 2009). Various studies nanoparticles harm microorganisms in soils. Several 
studies have shown that nanoparticles have different effects on microorganisms pres￾ent in the soil. Generally, upon exposure to nanoparticles such as gold, copper, silver, 
and titanium oxide, reduction in the microbial community and biomass in the soil 
was observed (Asadishad et al., 2017; Hänsch & Emmerling, 2010; Javed et al., 2019; 
Kumar et al., 2012; Pradhan et al., 2011; Tong et al., 2010). But there was no notice￾able difference in the microbial community when the soil was exposed to a mixture of 
cobalt, iron, nickel, and silver nanoparticles (Kumar et al., 2012).
Along with negative impacts on the microenvironment, nanoparticles can also 
affect plant or crop growth, pH value of soil, and other characteristics of the soil 
environment.
7.4.3 Emission in Water
Nanoparticles can enter the water stream through industrial discharge, waste￾water treatment effluent dumping, and/or surface runoff from soils (Batley et al., 
2013)in water depend on the composition, size, and coating of the materials. Jang 
et al. showed that silver nanoparticles coated with citrate and polyvinylpyrrolidone 
showed fate dependency on the coating materials (Jang et al., 2014). How nanoma￾terials interact with water depends on the size and surface chemistry of nanopar￾ticles. Usually, if nanoparticles aggregate, their surface area gets decreased, making 
these particles less reactive, ultimately resulting in slow degradation (Baker et al., 
2014). Nanomaterials in water can react with other substances and particles in water. 
Studies have shown genetic damage, death, oxidative stress, and growth inhibition 
in aquatic organisms due to nanoparticle exposure (Baker et al., 2014; Grillo et al., 
2015; Rocha et al., 2015). Brien and Cummins prepared a model to understand the 
characteristics of nanomaterials in surface water and human exposure (O’Brien & 
Cummins, 2010).
7.5 DETECTION OF NANOPARTICLES IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Usually, there are some straightforward analytical methods by which nanoparticles 
can be detected. But, with time, new computational approaches have been devel￾oped that give better accuracy than analytical methods. Generally, there are three 210 Nanofillers
analytical approaches to detecting and characterizing nanoparticles in the environ￾ment (Picó & Andreu, 2014).
Measurements of nanoparticles in environment media: In this method, detec￾tion and analysis of nanoparticles are carried out in different environments and eco￾systems with different media such as solid, gas, and liquid. The analysis is performed 
by techniques such as electron microscopy, chromatography, centrifugation, laser 
light scattering, ultrafiltration, and spectroscopy (Petersen & Henry, 2012).
Detection and size distribution: In this approach, detection and size distribution 
of nanoparticles by using three techniques.
1. Scanning mobility particle sizer
2. Imaging techniques
3. Light absorbance and emission
Chemical composition and quantification: In this approach, a sample suspension 
is prepared. After the preparation of samples, separation techniques like field flow 
fractionation, liquid chromatography, capillary electrophoresis, and hydrodynamic 
chromatography are performed. Finally, a quantitative determination is performed. 
Some common quantitative determination techniques are given below:
1. Atomic absorption spectroscopy
2. Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy
3. UV/visible spectroscopy
4. Fluorescence-based techniques
5. Raman spectroscopy
6. Mass spectrometry
Although these analytical techniques give somewhat accurate results, computational 
approaches have been proved to be more efficient and accurate (Mueller & Nowack, 
2008). Material flow models also show limiting accuracy due to an insignificant amount 
of detail (Caballero-Guzman & Nowack, 2016). Recently, advanced models with proba￾bilistic approaches have been proved to be more accurate (Sun et al., 2014). These mod￾els predict the time-dependent material flow of different nanoparticles in different kinds 
of environments. Although these models have not shown relative success in determining 
the outcome of nanoparticles in the environment, the accuracy of detecting nanopar￾ticles and measuring their quantitative properties has been a great success (Baalousha 
et al., 2016; Bäuerlein et al., 2017; Caballero-Guzman & Nowack, 2016; Mitrano et al., 
2017). For nanoparticles with more complicated structures, a new multi-element method 
of detection such as sp-ICP-Time of Flight (ToF)-MS has been prepared and has been 
used to detect CeO2 nanoparticles in the soil (Praetorius et al., 2017).
7.6 NANOPARTICLES’ INTERACTION WITH THE ENVIRONMENT
The fate of nanoparticles in the environment depends on the size, surface chemistry, 
surface area, and surface charge of that particular nanoparticle. Figure 7.8 shows 
nanoparticle pathways to the environment.Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 211
The type of interaction that happens between the nanoparticles and the environ￾ment decides if the material will cause ecotoxicity. There can be changes in chemical 
properties, degradation rate, dissolution, and surface charge alteration of nanomate￾rials due to different factors present in media. Many pieces of research have been 
performed to detect the chemical transformation of nanomaterials in soil and aquatic 
environments (Baer et al., 2013; Barton et al., 2014; Sekine et al., 2013; Sivry et al., 
2014). Figure 7.9 illustrates different types of interaction of nanoparticles with the 
environment.
Nanoparticles face dissolution in the environment depending on the chemical 
composition of the materials. In aerobic conditions, an oxide layer can be created 
around silver nanoparticles, which ultimately results in releasing silver ions (Elzey & 
Grassian, 2010). This happens not only due to chemical characteristics like surface 
charge and coating but also because of environmental factors such as pH and temper￾ature (Brunetti et al., 2015; Khaksar et al., 2015; Metreveli et al., 2016). Nanoparticles 
in the environment can also face sulfidation. Due to sulfidation, silver nanoparticles 
turn into hollow silver sulfide nanoparticles, which can be toxic to many organisms 
(Kraas et al., 2017; Levard et al., 2012; Thalmann et al., 2016). Homo-aggregation, 
hetero-aggregation, and disaggregation are also possible outcomes of nanomaterials’ 
FIGURE 7.8 Nanoparticle pathways to the environment. (Reproduced with permission 
Nowack and Bucheli (2007). Copyright (2007) Elsevier.)212 Nanofillers
interaction with the environment. These outcomes depend mainly on the colloidal 
stability of the nanoparticles (Schaumann et al., 2015; H. Wang et al., 2015).
In addition to engineered nanoparticles, environmental nanoparticles also interact 
with other factors and elements of the environment. After emission from the source, 
nanoparticles are called primary nanoparticles, which in the presence of H2SO4, 
HNO3, and other organic chemicals become secondary or volatile nanoparticles 
under different conditions of temperature, residence time, dilution ratio, and concen￾tration of carbon compounds (Morawska et al., 2008). These increasing number of 
particles can lead to atmospheric optical effects, building soiling, and climate change 
(Nowack & Bucheli, 2007). Nanomaterials’ interaction with ocean water changes 
with depth. Nanoparticles can accumulate on the surface microlayers of the ocean, 
creating a risk of aerosol exposure to marine animals and organisms residing under 
FIGURE 7.9 Interaction and the results of nanoparticles in the environment. (a) Dissolution, 
(b) sulfidation, (c) homo-aggregation, (d) hetero-aggregation, (e) coating with natural organic 
matter, (f) nanoparticle adsorption on biological surfaces, (g) sedimentation/deposition, and 
(h) persistence. (Reprinted with permission from Bundschuh et al. (2018). Copyright (2018) 
Springer.)Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 213
the surface microlayers (Kennedy et al., 2004). Oberdörster et al. performed acute 
toxicity assays to assess the toxicity of C60. They exposed three different aquatic and 
marine creatures to fullerenes and found toxicity of the nanomaterial in the speci￾mens (Oberdörster et al., 2006).
7.7 TOXICITY MECHANISMS OF NANOPARTICLES
Nanoparticles even if not proven toxic to humans can induce cytotoxicity and geno￾toxicity in plants and other animals. The main way nanoparticles induce toxicity 
to organisms is by producing reactive oxygen species. Due to their reactivity and 
surface charge, nanomaterials react with organelles containing O2
–, OH radicals, and 
H2O2 and create reactive oxygen species. These reactive particles can then interact 
with proteins, molecules, and other parts of tissues, which can result in cell death 
(Lojk et al., 2020). Although oxidative stress is known as the most common tox￾icity mechanism of nanoparticles, some reports showed modification of hormones, 
which resulted in reproduction system complications (Muller et al., 2015). These 
mechanisms for toxicity can be classified as transgenerational effects (Jacobasch et 
al., 2014). Recent research has proved the accumulation of nanoparticles in terrestrial 
plants results in biochemical and physiochemical changes (Du et al., 2017; Marslin 
et al., 2017; Tripathi, Shweta, et al., 2017). Cao et al. showed negative impacts on 
carbon fixation and water usage during photosynthesis when soybean was exposed to 
cerium oxide nanoparticles (Cao et al., 2017). Table 7.1 shows exposure of different 
nanoparticles to different plants and their biological effects on the plants.
7.8 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF NANOPARTICLES
With the increasing use of nanotechnology and the possibility of further expansion of 
the sector, the environment is filled with nanomaterials. Nanomaterials can affect the 
environment in both positive and negative ways. Figure 7.10 provides an overview of 
the positive and negative impacts of nanoparticles on the environment.
7.8.1 Positive Impacts
Nanotechnology can significantly influence their surroundings by creating more effi￾cient solutions. With their wide range of applications, nanoparticles can significantly 
decrease pollution and energy stress on the environment. Using nanoparticles in air￾craft can reduce the weight of the aircraft significantly, which can result in less fuel 
use (Kausar et al., 2017). Another way nanoparticles are working to make energy 
more efficient is through wind turbines. By using nanoparticles in turbine blades, 
the turbines get lighter but stronger, which means better energy efficiency (Patel & 
Mahajan, 2017). As the demand for green energy is increasing day by day, the use of 
photovoltaic cells that utilize solar radiation to convert that energy into electricity has 
been on the rise. But due to their low energy absorption efficiency and high produc￾tion cost, alternative materials have been searched to use within these cells. Some 
studies have shown that carbon nanotubes can be an alternate for this application as 
carbon nanotubes are easier to synthesize and have better energy absorption quality 214 Nanofillers
(Ong et al., 2010). Due to their photocatalytic activity, titanium oxide nanoparticles 
have also been considered in some research for this application (Abdel-Mottaleb 
et al., 2011).
Purification of air and water by nanoparticles with greater efficiency was reported 
in some studies (Kunduru et al., 2017). Although some studies proved the toxic￾ity of nanoparticles to specific plants, using nanoparticles in fertilizers, herbicides, 
and pesticides can lead to improved plant growth with a limited amount of these 
TABLE 7.1
Different Nanoparticle Exposure to Different Plants and Their Biological 
Effects on the Plant
Nanoparticle Plant Biological Effects Reference
Ag Triticum aestivum L. Negatively affect seedling growth Vannini et al. 
(2014)
Pisum sativum L. Chlorophyll fluorescence Tripathi, Singh, 
et al. (2017)
Allium cepa Induced oxidative stress and toxicity Cvjetko et al. 
(2017)
Phaseolus radiatus Greater accumulation in roots and 
shoots.
W.-M. Lee et al. 
(2012)
Au Arabidopsis thaliana Root length was decreased by 75%. 
Accumulation
Taylor et al. 
(2014)
CeO2, ZnO Glycine max Greater reactive oxygen species and 
noticeable lipid peroxidation 
Priester et al. 
(2017)
CuO Ipt-cotton No reduction in height and root length le Van et al. 
(2016)
Fe3O4, TiO2,
and C 
nanoparticles
Cucumber plants Negatively affect seed germination rate, 
root elongation, and germination 
index
Mushtaq (2011)
MWCNTs, 
Ag, Cu, 
ZnO, and Si
Cucurbita pepo Adverse effects on seed germination, 
root elongation, and biomass
Stampoulis 
et al. (2009)
ZnO Allium cepa Cytotoxic and genotoxic effects include 
lipid peroxidation, a reduction of the 
mitotic index, and an increase in 
chromosomal aberration indexes
Kumari et al. 
(2011)
Al2O3 Arabidopsis thaliana Toxic effects on seed germination, root 
elongation, and number of leaves
C. W. Lee et al. 
(2010)
Carbon 
nanotubes
Tomato plants Increased seed germination and growth Khodakovskaya 
et al. (2009)
TiO2 Riticum aestivum, 
Brassica napus, and 
Arabidopsis thaliana
No effect on the plants Larue et al. 
(2011)
TiO2 D1/D2/Cyt b559 
complex of spinach
Better energy utilization and conversion Su et al. (2009)Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 215
substances as some nanoparticles even in smaller quantities can ultimately enhance 
the activity of these growth promoter compounds (Meier et al., 2020). By using less 
amounts of these compounds, the rate of soil pollution and water pollution decreases 
by a significant amount. Compounds used in pesticides and fertilizers can sometimes 
be subjected to photodegradation. Coating these compounds with zinc and aluminum 
nanoparticles has been proved to protect active components of pesticides against 
photodegradation (Medina-Pérez et al., 2019). In recent times, the effectiveness of 
nanomaterials for soil remediation has been studied extensively. Zinc nanoparticles 
have shown efficacy in the degradation of compounds in such a way that the soil 
does not become toxic and polluted (Pandey, 2018). Fe nanoparticles were shown to 
remove heavy metal and organochlorine compounds from the soil via the electronic 
donation process (Guerra et al., 2018). Saif et al. showed that iron oxide nanoparticles 
can remove chromium from the soil, with an efficiency of more than 90% (Saif et al., 
2016). Carbon nanotubes are porous, which is why their surface-to-volume ratio is 
high. This property of carbon nanotubes can be used to filer inorganic and organic 
compounds from water, which makes them an appropriate candidate for nanofilters 
(Ong et al., 2010). Graphene oxide nanoparticles have also been tested to filter poly￾cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, gasoline, dyes, heavy metals, etc. (Kemp et al., 2013). 
Metallic iron nanoparticles have also been proven to be effective in filtering organo￾chlorine compounds, arsenic, or petroleum derivatives (Saif et al., 2016).
Some recent studies reported the antibacterial effect of silver nanoparticles against 
different types of bacteria (Durán et al., 2005). Silver nanoparticles have also shown 
antifungal activities against different fungi species (Bratovcic, 2019). However, in 
their early stages, nanoparticles have shown promises in sensing different contami￾nants, pollutants, pesticides, antibiotics, and microorganisms due to their larger sur￾face area and high reactivity (Z. Li et al., 2020; R. P. Singh, 2011; Song et al., 2020; 
Zhu et al., 2020).
7.8.2 Negative Impacts
Although there are not enough studies to back up the claim that nanoparticles have a 
more negative than positive impact, the issue of nanotoxicity needs to be addressed. 
With the increasing use of nanotechnology in almost every sector of science and 
engineering, the aspect of toxicity is needed to be assessed with more importance 
1. Light and Stringer Structure 
2. Co2 Isolation 
3. Self-Cleaning 
4. More Efficient Solar Cells 
5. Disaster Management
6. Precision Manufacturing 
7. Purification and Filtration 
1. Cytotoxicity and Genotoxicity
2. DNA Damage
3. Reduction in Plant Growth 
4. Adverse Health effects 
5. Carrier of Pollutants
Positive Impacts Negative Impacts 
FIGURE 7.10 An overview of the benefits and risks of nanoparticles on the environment.216 Nanofillers
than ever. Although limited, several studies proved toxicity issues and negative 
impacts of nanoparticles on the environment, animals, and plants as well as humans. 
Due to less efficient detection methods, low detection limits, and other environmen￾tal constraints, determining the impacts of nanoparticles on the environment is dif￾ficult. The United States Environmental Protection Agency stated that because of 
their exceptional chemical characteristics, high reactivity, and dissolubility in water, 
the toxicity of nanoparticles is very difficult to measure. Because of these properties, 
the characteristics of specimens can change even when collecting and analyzing the 
samples (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2007).
The main issue with nanoparticles’ negative impact is the absorption and dis￾tribution of nanoparticles by microorganisms in the environment. Microorganisms 
absorb nanoparticles through their cell surface, but for other complex living things, 
nanoparticles enter through exposure routes discussed in this chapter before. Carbon 
nanotubes can enter the human body through the pulmonary epithelium and can 
cause toxicity, but fullerenes are non-toxic (Garner & Keller, 2014). Nanoparticles 
cause more toxicity to eukaryotic cells than to prokaryotic cells as prokaryotic cell 
walls can stop the transfer of nanoparticles inside the cell, whereas eukaryotic cells 
do not have this type of mechanism (Taghavi et al., 2013). Wang et al. showed that 
porous cell walls of seaweeds allow nanoparticle entrance inside the cell cytoplasm 
(Y. Wang & Xia, 2019). After the entrance into the cell cytoplasm, the severity and 
type of toxicity will depend on the particular material. For example, carbon nano￾tubes induce toxicity to mitochondria (Samiei et al., 2020). Silver nanoparticles stay 
at the cell membrane affecting the permeability of the cell membrane, which can 
disrupt the transport mechanisms of the cell (Xiang et al., 2020). In some cases, 
when the nuclear membrane becomes vulnerable, nanoparticles can enter the nuclei 
and disrupt the normal function of the Golgi complex (Elsaesser & Howard, 2012). 
The main mechanism by which nanoparticles can induce toxicity at the cellular level 
is discussed in previous sections. Figure 7.11 shows the toxic effects of nanoparticles 
on different intracellular components (Martínez et al., 2021).
Bacteria, as an essential component of the ecosystem, nanoparticles’ effects on 
these microorganisms have been a subject of research. Although the amounts of 
research are limited, several studies assessed toxicity induced by different nano￾materials in both gram-positive and gram-negative strains. The kind and scale of 
toxicity depend on the cell structure and components of microorganisms. A lim￾ited number of studies, in this case, have shown that nanoparticles can induce oxi￾dative stress, metal ion release, and other non-oxidative mechanisms in bacterial 
cells (Prajitha et al., 2019). In one study, Ge et al. showed a decrease in the growth 
rate of Rhizobiales or Methylobacteriaceae and an increase in the growth rate of 
Streptomyces when introduced to TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticles at different doses 
(Yuan et al., 2012). Singh et al. performed genotoxicity and cytotoxicity assays and 
found that zinc oxide nanoparticles introduced cell membrane damage, and morpho￾logical changes to Deinococcus radiodurans by producing reactive oxygen species 
and altering energy routes inside the cells (R. Singh et al., 2020). Most of the research 
regarding this area has been performed with silver nanoparticles. Silver nanopar￾ticles showed toxicity in five different kinds of soils. Another study by Beddow et al. 
reported a reduction in the nitrification potential in three ammonia-oxidizing bacteria Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 217
(Nitrosomonas europaea, Nitrosospira multiformis, and Nitrosococcus oceani). Ag 
nanoparticles were also found to cause cell lysis and cell membrane disruption for 
Microcystis aeruginosa. Although this can be toxic for the microorganism, using this 
method bloom-forming bacteria can be removed from water. Two separate studies 
on polymeric nanomaterials against Vibrio fischeri showed different results. Silicon 
nanoparticles and polyethyleneimine polystyrene nanoparticles showed no toxicity to 
the mentioned strain, but poly (N-isopropyl acrylamide) and N-isopropylacrylamide/
N-tert-butylacrylamide polymeric nanomaterials showed toxicity after limited expo￾sure (Casado et al., 2013; Naha et al., 2009). Many nanotoxicity studies have been 
performed for plants, specifically plants related to the food chain. Table 7.2 demon￾strates the findings of different studies related to nanotoxicity toward different plants.
For proper assessment of nanotoxicity and its impact on the environment, nano￾toxicity studies on mammals and marine animals are needed to be performed. Some 
studies have tried to determine probable toxicity levels of nanoparticles in different 
animal models. Unirne et al. examined the exposure of Cu, Ag, and Au nanoparticles 
exposure to earthworms. The effect of these nanoparticles depended on the kinds 
of soil media (Unrine et al., 2010). When Daphnia magna was directly exposed to 
carbon nanotubes, intestinal toxicity and movement impairment were visible, but 
when carbon nanotubes were given with food, no toxicity was observed (FraseR 
et al., 2011; Petersen et al., 2011). This indicates that nanotoxicity induced by carbon 
nanotubes is due to interaction with organism surfaces. A similar kind of research 
has been performed for different species such as Tigriopus japonicus and Elasmopus 
rapax larvae (Wong et al., 2010), Mediterranean mussel hemocytes (Canesi et al., 
2015), zebrafish (Lehner et al., 2019), Oreochromis niloticus, and tilapia zillii fishes 
(Saddick et al., 2017), Wistar rats (Thakur et al., 2014), etc.
FIGURE 7.11 Toxic effects of nanoparticles on different intracellular components. 
(Reprinted with Permission from Martínez et al. (2021). Copyright (2021) MDPI.)218 Nanofillers
7.9 LIMITATIONS OF ORGANIC NANOFILLERS
With increasing concern in green nanotechnology and green synthesis of poly￾mer materials, researchers have been trying solutions in organic nanofillers such 
as starch, cellulose, chitosan, and proteins. Although many studies have suggested 
that by incorporating these organic nanofillers into polymers, non-toxic and biode￾gradable materials can be produced, seemingly, there have been some limitations 
regarding these nanofillers. Inorganic and organic nanofillers have been studied to 
be used in specific drug delivery applications (Hoque et al., 2015; Majumder et al., 
2020). Organic nanofillers have been reported to be respiratory irritants in some 
TABLE 7.2
Findings of Different Studies Related to Nanotoxicity Toward Different 
Plants
Nanoparticle Concentrations Plant Samples Experiment Findings References
TiO2 For 21 nm size 
–0 to 100 mg/L
For 60 nm size 
–0 to 360 mg/L
For 400 nm size 
–0 to 500 mg/L
Nitzschia 
closterium
Increase in Half maximal 
effective concentration with 
size which shows a decrease 
in toxicity with size.
Xia et al. 
(2015)
TiO2 0,2,4,6,8, and 10 
mM
Allium cepa • DNA folding
• Chromosomal aberrations
• ROS production 
Ghosh et al. 
(2010)
ZnO 10, 20, 40 and 
80 mg/L
Phaeodactylum 
tricornutum,
Cylindrotheca 
gracilis,
Thalassiosira 
pseudonana
Growth inhibition for 
Cylindrotheca gracilis and
Thalassiosira pseudonana and 
concentration-based growth 
reduction for Phaeodactylum 
tricornutum
Matranga and 
Corsi (2012)
ZnO 0–300 mg/L Arabidopsis 
thaliana 
Oxidative stress produced by 
Zn2+ results in cellular 
toxicity, disruption in gene 
expression, photosynthesis, 
and growth
X. Wang et al. 
(2016)
Ag 55 mg/L Ulva lactuca Reduction in photosynthesis Turner et al. 
(2012)
Ag 20, 200, and 
2000 mg/kg
Triticum 
aestivum L. 
• Dose-dependent toxicity
• Severe phytotoxicity
• Short height
• Lower grain weight
• Reduced nutrients
Yang et al. 
(2018)
Fe2O3, CuO 50 and 500 
mg/kg
Arachis 
hypogaea 
Reduced amino acid 
concentration
Rui et al. 
(2017, 2018)Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 219
studies (Alves et al., 2010). Polymer materials have been reported to have excellent 
mechanical and thermal properties, but adding these organic nanofillers can ulti￾mately impact the usual properties of polymer composites.
As organic nanofillers like cellulose, chitosan, and starch have lower degradation 
temperatures than conventional polymers, there can be a decrease in thermal stabil￾ity for polymer materials. Different environmental conditions such as temperature, 
chemical compounds, and UV radiation can degrade organic nanofillers faster than 
polymers, ultimately resulting in less durability. Due to these reasons, it is difficult 
to accurately determine the lifetime of these nanofillers. Also, organic nanofillers 
are subjected to microbial attack more commonly. For example, flax fibers have been 
reported to be under microbial attack within 3 days (Yan et al., 2021). Ibrahim et al. 
examined different organic nanofillers and their effect on polymer composites. The 
research reported a reduction in tensile strength and modulus due reinforcement of 
different nanofillers. Table 7.3 illustrates weight loss and strength reduction in dif￾ferent organic nanofillers incorporated with polymer composite materials (Ibrahim 
et al., 2018).
7.10 FUTURE ASPECTS AND CONCLUSION
In a technologically expanding world, the upcoming era is the era of nanotechnology 
where different industries and sectors are coming together on the importance of the 
nanotechnology issue. Although different sectors intend to give importance to differ￾ent properties of nanomaterials, the end goal is to create a technological system that 
depends on nanomaterials. For instance, for medical sectors, the most importance 
is given to biocompatibility, bioactivity, and non-toxicity of the materials, whereas 
industrial sectors dive deep into creating a more efficient manufacturing system. If 
these approaches can be combined wholeheartedly, a future with safe and effective 
nanotechnology can evolve.
The use of nanotechnology includes both benefits and risks. To properly use nano￾technology for humans as well as the environment, a proper balance between these 
benefits and risks should be established. Many regulatory bodies have been formed 
to properly evaluate any use and research of nanomaterials. In the United States, 
the use of nanomaterials in food, drugs, medicine, and cosmetics is regulated by 
TABLE 7.3
Weight Loss and Strength Reduction in Different Organic Nanofillers 
Incorporated with Polymer Composite Materials
Filler Material Weight Loss (%)
Reduction in 
Tensile Strength (%)
Reduction in 
Tensile Modulus (%)
Palm 15.4 49 54.6
Banana 18.6 86.1 83
Bagasse 20.3 88 94
Flax 20 87.2 84220 Nanofillers
the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
n.d.), whereas the emission of nanoparticles in the environment is regulated by the 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency | US EPA, n.d.). The European Union developed the Biomaterial Risk 
Management (BIORIMA) project to establish a framework to assess bio-nanoma￾terials used in medical applications (BIORIMA | Risk Management of Biomaterials, 
n.d.). Nanodatabase is an initiative created with funds from the European Research 
Council and Danish Consumer Council. Nanodatabase categorizes different nano￾materials based on toxicity to human health and the environment. Currently, there 
are more than 5000 products in the database (Welcome to The Nanodatabase, n.d.).
Nanomaterial emissions into the environment can happen any time during their 
life cycle, which is why determining the timeline of exposure is difficult. Although 
many studies reported the biocompatibility, biodegradation, bioactivity, barrier prop￾erties, reactive and thermal properties, and electrical characteristics of nanomaterials 
and nanomaterials incorporated with polymer composites, the study of ecotoxicity 
induced by nanoparticles is fairly limited. But in those limited number of studies, 
the hint of dose and concentration-dependent ecotoxicity was reported by exposing 
different nanoparticles to different plants, microorganisms, mammals, and aquatic 
animals.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Mottaleb, M. S. A., Byrne, J. A., & Chakarov, D. (2011). Nanotechnology and 
solar energy. International Journal of Photoenergy, 2011, 194146. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2011/194146
Aillon, K. L., Xie, Y., El-Gendy, N., Berkland, C. J., & Forrest, M. L. (2009). Effects of 
nanomaterial physicochemical properties on in vivo toxicity. Advanced Drug Delivery 
Reviews, 61(6), 457–466. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2009.03.010
Akçan, R., Aydogan, H. C., Yildirim, M. Ş., Taştekin, B., & Sağlam, N. (2020). Nanotoxicity: 
A challenge for future medicine. Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences, 50(4), 1180–
1196. https://doi.org/10.3906/sag-1912-209
Alves, C., Ferrão, P. M. C., Silva, A. J., Reis, L. G., Freitas, M., Rodrigues, L. B., & Alves, 
D. E. (2010). Ecodesign of automotive components making use of natural jute fiber 
composites. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(4), 313–327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2009.10.022
Asadishad, B., Chahal, S., Cianciarelli, V., Zhou, K., & Tufenkji, N. (2017). Effect of gold 
nanoparticles on extracellular nutrient-cycling enzyme activity and bacterial community 
in soil slurries: role of nanoparticle size and surface coating. Environmental Science: 
Nano, 4(4), 907–918. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6EN00567E
Baalousha, M., Yang, Y., Vance, M. E., Colman, B. P., McNeal, S., Xu, J., Blaszczak, J., Steele, 
M., Bernhardt, E., & Hochella, M. F. (2016). Outdoor urban nanomaterials: The emer￾gence of a new, integrated, and critical field of study. Science of The Total Environment, 
557–558, 740–753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.03.132
Baer, D. R., Engelhard, M. H., Johnson, G. E., Laskin, J., Lai, J., Mueller, K., Munusamy, 
P., Thevuthasan, S., Wang, H., Washton, N., Elder, A., Baisch, B. L., Karakoti, A., 
Kuchibhatla, S. V. N. T., & Moon, D. (2013). Surface characterization of nanomaterials 
and nanoparticles: Important needs and challenging opportunities. Journal of Vacuum 
Science & Technology A, 31(5), 050820. https://doi.org/10.1116/1.4818423Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 221
Bakand, S., & Hayes, A. (2016). Toxicological considerations, toxicity assessment, and risk 
management of inhaled nanoparticles. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 
17(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms17060929
Baker, T. J., Tyler, C. R., & Galloway, T. S. (2014). Impacts of metal and metal oxide 
nanoparticles on marine organisms. Environmental Pollution, 186, 257–271. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2013.11.014
Barton, L. E., Auffan, M., Bertrand, M., Barakat, M., Santaella, C., Masion, A., Borschneck, 
D., Olivi, L., Roche, N., Wiesner, M. R., & Bottero, J.-Y. (2014). Transformation of 
pristine and citrate-functionalized CeO2 nanoparticles in a laboratory-scale activated 
sludge reactor. Environmental Science & Technology, 48(13), 7289–7296. https://doi.
org/10.1021/es404946y
Batley, G. E., Kirby, J. K., & McLaughlin, M. J. (2013). Fate and risks of nanomaterials in 
aquatic and terrestrial environments. Accounts of Chemical Research, 46(3), 854–862. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ar2003368
Bäuerlein, P. S., Emke, E., Tromp, P., Hofman, J. A. M. H., Carboni, A., Schooneman, F., de 
Voogt, P., & van Wezel, A. P. (2017). Is there evidence for man-made nanoparticles in 
the Dutch environment? Science of The Total Environment, 576, 273–283. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.09.206
Bellmann, S., Carlander, D., Fasano, A., Momcilovic, D., Scimeca, J. A., Waldman, W. J., 
Gombau, L., Tsytsikova, L., Canady, R., Pereira, D. I. A., & Lefebvre, D. E. (2015). 
Mammalian gastrointestinal tract parameters modulating the integrity, surface prop￾erties, and absorption of food-relevant nanomaterials. WIREs Nanomedicine and 
Nanobiotechnology, 7(5), 609–622. https://doi.org/10.1002/wnan.1333
Bergin, I. L., & Witzmann, F. A. (2013). Nanoparticle toxicity by the gastrointestinal route: 
evidence and knowledge gaps. International Journal of Biomedical Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, 3(1/2), 163–210.
BIORIMA | Risk Management of Biomaterials. (n.d.). Retrieved May 20, 2022, from https://
www.biorima.eu/
Braakhuis, H. M., Kloet, S. K., Kezic, S., Kuper, F., Park, M. V. D. Z., Bellmann, S., van der 
Zande, M., le Gac, S., Krystek, P., Peters, R. J. B., Rietjens, I. M. C. M., & Bouwmeester, 
H. (2015). Progress and future of in vitro models to study translocation of nanoparticles. 
Archives of Toxicology, 89(9), 1469–1495. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-015-1518-5
Bratovcic, A. (2019). Different applications of nanomaterials and their impact on the environ￾ment. International Journal of Material Science and Engineering, 5(1), 1–7.
Brouwer, D. (2010). Exposure to manufactured nanoparticles in different workplaces. 
Toxicology, 269(2), 120–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2009.11.017
Brunetti, G., Donner, E., Laera, G., Sekine, R., Scheckel, K. G., Khaksar, M., Vasilev, K., de 
Mastro, G., & Lombi, E. (2015). Fate of zinc and silver engineered nanoparticles in sewer￾age networks. Water Research, 77, 72–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.03.003
Bundschuh, M., Filser, J., Lüderwald, S., McKee, M. S., Metreveli, G., Schaumann, G. E., 
Schulz, R., & Wagner, S. (2018). Nanoparticles in the environment: Where do we 
come from, where do we go to? Environmental Sciences Europe, 30(1), 6. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12302-018-0132-6
Caballero-Guzman, A., & Nowack, B. (2016). A critical review of engineered nanomate￾rial release data: Are current data useful for material flow modeling? Environmental 
Pollution, 213, 502–517. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.02.028
Canesi, L., Ciacci, C., Bergami, E., Monopoli, M. P., Dawson, K. A., Papa, S., Canonico, 
B., & Corsi, I. (2015). Evidence for immunomodulation and apoptotic processes 
induced by cationic polystyrene nanoparticles in the hemocytes of the marine bivalve 
Mytilus. Marine Environmental Research, 111, 34–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marenvres.2015.06.008222 Nanofillers
Cao, Z., Stowers, C., Rossi, L., Zhang, W., Lombardini, L., & Ma, X. (2017). Physiological 
effects of cerium oxide nanoparticles on the photosynthesis and water use efficiency 
of soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.). Environmental Science: Nano, 4(5), 1086–1094. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C7EN00015D
Casado, M. P., Macken, A., & Byrne, H. J. (2013). Ecotoxicological assessment of silica 
and polystyrene nanoparticles assessed by a multitrophic test battery. Environment 
International, 51, 97–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.11.001
Chakraborty, M., Jain, S., & Rani, V. (2011). Nanotechnology: Emerging tool for diagnostics 
and therapeutics. Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 165(5), 1178–1187. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12010-011-9336-6
Chhipa, H. (2017). Nanofertilizers and nanopesticides for agriculture. Environmental 
Chemistry Letters, 15(1), 15–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-016-0600-4
Chithrani, B. D., Ghazani, A. A., & Chan, W. C. W. (2006). Determining the size and shape 
dependence of gold nanoparticle uptake into mammalian cells. Nano Letters, 6(4), 662–
668. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl052396o
Cvjetko, P., Milošić, A., Domijan, A.-M., Vinković Vrček, I., Tolić, S., Peharec Štefanić, P., 
Letofsky-Papst, I., Tkalec, M., & Balen, B. (2017). Toxicity of silver ions and differ￾ently coated silver nanoparticles in Allium cepa roots. Ecotoxicology and Environmental 
Safety, 137, 18–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2016.11.009
Davoren, M., Herzog, E., Casey, A., Cottineau, B., Chambers, G., Byrne, H. J., & Lyng, F. 
M. (2007). In vitro toxicity evaluation of single walled carbon nanotubes on human 
A549 lung cells. Toxicology in Vitro, 21(3), 438–448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tiv.2006.10.007
Dekkers, S., Krystek, P., Peters, R. J. B., Lankveld, D. P. K., Bokkers, B. G. H., van Hoeven￾Arentzen, P. H., Bouwmeester, H., & Oomen, A. G. (2011). Presence and risks of nano￾silica in food products. Nanotoxicology, 5(3), 393–405. https://doi.org/10.3109/174353
90.2010.519836
Ding, Y., Kuhlbusch, T. A. J., van Tongeren, M., Jiménez, A. S., Tuinman, I., Chen, R., Alvarez, 
I. L., Mikolajczyk, U., Nickel, C., Meyer, J., Kaminski, H., Wohlleben, W., Stahlmecke, 
B., Clavaguera, S., & Riediker, M. (2017). Airborne engineered nanomaterials in the 
workplace—A review of release and worker exposure during nanomaterial produc￾tion and handling processes. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 322, 17–28. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.04.075
Driscoll, K. E., Carter, J. M., Howard, B. W., Hassenbein, D. G., Pepelko, W., Baggs, R. 
B., & Oberdörster, G. (1996). Pulmonary inflammatory, chemokine, and mutagenic 
responses in rats after subchronic inhalation of carbon black. Toxicology and Applied 
Pharmacology, 136(2), 372–380. https://doi.org/10.1006/taap.1996.0045
Du, W., Tan, W., Peralta-Videa, J. R., Gardea-Torresdey, J. L., Ji, R., Yin, Y., & Guo, H. (2017). 
Interaction of metal oxide nanoparticles with higher terrestrial plants: Physiological and 
biochemical aspects. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 110, 210–225. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.04.024
Durán, N., Marcato, P. D., Alves, O. L., de Souza, G. I. H., & Esposito, E. (2005). Mechanistic 
aspects of biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles by several Fusarium oxysporum strains. 
Journal of Nanobiotechnology, 3(1), 8. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-3155-3-8
Elechiguerra, J. L., Burt, J. L., Morones, J. R., Camacho-Bragado, A., Gao, X., Lara, H. H., 
& Yacaman, M. J. (2005). Interaction of silver nanoparticles with HIV-1. Journal of 
Nanobiotechnology, 3(1), 6. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-3155-3-6
Elsaesser, A., & Howard, C. V. (2012). Toxicology of nanoparticles. Advanced Drug Delivery 
Reviews, 64(2), 129–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2011.09.001
Elzey, S., & Grassian, V. H. (2010). Agglomeration, isolation and dissolution of commercially 
manufactured silver nanoparticles in aqueous environments. Journal of Nanoparticle 
Research, 12(5), 1945–1958. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-009-9783-yEnvironmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 223
FraseR, T. W. K., Reinardy, H. C., Shaw, B. J., Henry, T. B., & Handy, R. D. (2011). Dietary 
toxicity of single-walled carbon nanotubes and fullerenes (C60) in rainbow trout 
(Oncorhynchus mykiss). Nanotoxicology, 5(1), 98–108. https://doi.org/10.3109/17435
390.2010.502978
Fröhlich, E. E., & Fröhlich, E. (2016). Cytotoxicity of nanoparticles contained in food on 
intestinal cells and the gut microbiota. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 
17(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms17040509
Fröhlich, E., & Salar-Behzadi, S. (2014). Toxicological assessment of inhaled nanoparticles: 
Role of in vivo, ex vivo, in vitro, and in silico studies. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 15(3), 4795–4822. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms15034795
Garner, K. L., & Keller, A. A. (2014). Emerging patterns for engineered nanomaterials in the 
environment: a review of fate and toxicity studies. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 
16(8), 2503. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-014-2503-2
Ghernaout, D., Alghamdi, A., Touahmia, M., Aichouni, M., Aït-Messaoudène, N., Ait, N., 
& Nanotechnology, M. (2018). Nanotechnology phenomena in the light of the solar 
energy. Journal of Energy, Environmental & Chemical Engineering, 3, 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.11648/j.jeece.20180301.11
Ghosh, M., Bandyopadhyay, M., & Mukherjee, A. (2010). Genotoxicity of titanium dioxide 
(TiO2) nanoparticles at two trophic levels: Plant and human lymphocytes. Chemosphere, 
81(10), 1253–1262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.09.022
Gohardani, O., Elola, M. C., & Elizetxea, C. (2014). Potential and prospective implementation 
of carbon nanotubes on next generation aircraft and space vehicles: A review of current 
and expected applications in aerospace sciences. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 70, 
42–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2014.05.002
Grillo, R., Rosa, A. H., & Fraceto, L. F. (2015). Engineered nanoparticles and organic matter: 
A review of the state-of-the-art. Chemosphere, 119, 608–619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2014.07.049
Guerra, F. D., Attia, M. F., Whitehead, D. C., & Alexis, F. (2018). Nanotechnology for envi￾ronmental remediation: Materials and applications. Molecules, 23(7). https://doi.
org/10.3390/molecules23071760
Günter, O., Eva, O., & Jan, O. (2005). Nanotoxicology: An emerging discipline evolving from 
studies of ultrafine particles. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113(7), 823–839. 
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.7339
Hänsch, M., & Emmerling, C. (2010). Effects of silver nanoparticles on the microbiota and 
enzyme activity in soil. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science, 173(4), 554–558. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jpln.200900358
Hoque, M. E., Daei, J. M. G., & Khalid, M. (2018). Next generation biomimetic bone tissue 
engineering matrix from poly (L-lactic acid) pla/calcium carbonate composites doped 
with silver nanoparticles. Current Analytical Chemistry, 14(3), 268–277.
Hoque, M. E., Prasad, R. G. S. V., Aparna, R. S. L., & Sapuan, S. M. (2015). Nanofibers: 
Drug Delivery. In M. Mishra (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Biomedical Polymers and Polymeric 
Biomaterials (1st ed., Vol. 11). Taylor and Francis.
Hulla, J. E., Sahu, S. C., & Hayes, A. W. (2015). Nanotechnology: History and future. Human & 
Experimental Toxicology, 34(12), 1318–1321. https://doi.org/10.1177/0960327115603588
Ibrahim, H., Mehanny, S., Darwish, L., & Farag, M. (2018). A comparative study on the 
mechanical and biodegradation characteristics of starch-based composites reinforced 
with different lignocellulosic fibers. Journal of Polymers and the Environment, 26(6), 
2434–2447. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-017-1143-x
Jacobasch, C., Völker, C., Giebner, S., Völker, J., Alsenz, H., Potouridis, T., Heidenreich, H., 
Kayser, G., Oehlmann, J., & Oetken, M. (2014). Long-term effects of nanoscaled tita￾nium dioxide on the cladoceran Daphnia magna over six generations. Environmental 
Pollution, 186, 180–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2013.12.008224 Nanofillers
Jang, M.-H., Bae, S.-J., Lee, S.-K., Lee, Y.-J., & Hwang, Y. S. (2014). Effect of material 
properties on stability of silver nanoparticles in water. Journal of Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, 14(12), 9665–9669.
Javed, Z., Dashora, K., Mishra, M., Fasake, V., & Srivastava, A. (2019). Effect of accumula￾tion of nanoparticles in soil health-a concern on future. Frontiers in Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, 5, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.15761/FNN.1000181
Jiang, W., Kim, B. Y. S., Rutka, J. T., & Chan, W. C. W. (2008a). Nanoparticle-mediated cel￾lular response is size-dependent. Nature Nanotechnology, 3(3), 145–150. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nnano.2008.30
John, A. C., Küpper, M., Manders-Groot, A. M. M., Debray, B., Lacome, J.-M., & Kuhlbusch, 
T. A. J. (2017). Emissions and possible environmental implication of engineered 
nanomaterials (ENMs) in the atmosphere. Atmosphere, 8(5). https://doi.org/10.3390/
atmos8050084
Kaida, T., Kobayashi, K., Adachi, M., & Suzuki, F. (2004). Optical characteristics of titanium 
oxide interference film and the film laminated with oxides and their applications for 
cosmetics. Journal of Cosmetic Science, 55(2), 219–220.
Kausar, A., Rafique, I., & Muhammad, B. (2017). Aerospace application of polymer nanocom￾posite with carbon nanotube, graphite, graphene oxide, and nanoclay. Polymer-Plastics 
Technology and Engineering, 56(13), 1438–1456. https://doi.org/10.1080/03602559.20
16.1276594
Keller, A. A., McFerran, S., Lazareva, A., & Suh, S. (2013). Global life cycle releases of 
engineered nanomaterials. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 15(6), 1692. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11051-013-1692-4
Kemp, K. C., Seema, H., Saleh, M., Le, N. H., Mahesh, K., Chandra, V., & Kim, K. S. (2013). 
Environmental applications using graphene composites: Water remediation and gas 
adsorption. Nanoscale, 5(8), 3149–3171. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3NR33708A
Kennedy, C. B., Scott, S. D., & Ferris, F. G. (2004). Hydrothermal phase stabilization of 2-line 
ferrihydrite by bacteria. Chemical Geology, 212(3), 269–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemgeo.2004.08.017
Khaksar, M., Jolley, D. F., Sekine, R., Vasilev, K., Johannessen, B., Donner, E., & Lombi, E. 
(2015). In situ chemical transformations of silver nanoparticles along the water–sedi￾ment continuum. Environmental Science & Technology, 49(1), 318–325. https://doi.
org/10.1021/es504395m
Khan, I., Saeed, K., & Khan, I. (2019). Nanoparticles: Properties, applications and tox￾icities. Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 12(7), 908–931. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
arabjc.2017.05.011
Khodakovskaya, M., Dervishi, E., Mahmood, M., Xu, Y., Li, Z., Watanabe, F., & Biris, A. 
S. (2009). Carbon nanotubes are able to penetrate plant seed coat and dramatically 
affect seed germination and plant growth. ACS Nano, 3(10), 3221–3227. https://doi.
org/10.1021/nn900887m
Kim, N. J., Lee, S. J., & Atala, A. (2013). 1- Biomedical Nanomaterials in Tissue 
Engineering. In A. K. Gaharwar, S. Sant, M. J. Hancock, & S. A. Hacking (Eds.), 
Nanomaterials in Tissue Engineering (pp. 1–25e). Woodhead Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1533/9780857097231.1
Kokarneswaran, M., Selvaraj, P., Ashokan, T., Perumal, S., Sellappan, P., Murugan, K. D., 
Ramalingam, S., Mohan, N., & Chandrasekaran, V. (2020). Discovery of carbon nano￾tubes in sixth century BC potteries from Keeladi, India. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 19786. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-76720-z
Kraas, M., Schlich, K., Knopf, B., Wege, F., Kägi, R., Terytze, K., & Hund-Rinke, K. (2017). 
Long-term effects of sulfidized silver nanoparticles in sewage sludge on soil microflora. 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 36(12), 3305–3313. https://doi.org/10.1002/
etc.3904Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 225
Kumar, N., Shah, V., & Walker, V. K. (2012). Influence of a nanoparticle mixture on an arctic 
soil community. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 31(1), 131–135. https://doi.
org/10.1002/etc.721
Kumari, M., Khan, S. S., Pakrashi, S., Mukherjee, A., & Chandrasekaran, N. (2011). Cytogenetic 
and genotoxic effects of zinc oxide nanoparticles on root cells of Allium cepa. Journal 
of Hazardous Materials, 190(1), 613–621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.03.095
Kunduru, K. R., Nazarkovsky, M., Farah, S., Pawar, R. P., Basu, A., & Domb, A. J. (2017). 
2-Nanotechnology for Water Purification: Applications of Nanotechnology Methods 
in Wastewater Treatment. In A. M. Grumezescu (Ed.), Water Purification (pp. 33–74). 
Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804300-4.00002-2
Larese Filon, F., Mauro, M., Adami, G., Bovenzi, M., & Crosera, M. (2015). Nanoparticles 
skin absorption: New aspects for a safety profile evaluation. Regulatory Toxicology and 
Pharmacology, 72(2), 310–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2015.05.005
Larue, C., Khodja, H., Herlin-Boime, N., Brisset, F., Flank, A. M., Fayard, B., Chaillou, S., 
& Carrière, M. (2011). Investigation of titanium dioxide nanoparticles toxicity and 
uptake by plants. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 304, 012057. https://doi.
org/10.1088/1742-6596/304/1/012057
le Van, N., Rui, Y., Cao, W., Shang, J., Liu, S., Nguyen Quang, T., & Liu, L. (2016). Toxicity and 
bio-effects of CuO nanoparticles on transgenic Ipt-cotton. Journal of Plant Interactions, 
11(1), 108–116. https://doi.org/10.1080/17429145.2016.1217434
Lee, C. W., Mahendra, S., Zodrow, K., Li, D., Tsai, Y.-C., Braam, J., & Alvarez, P. J. J. (2010). 
Developmental phytotoxicity of metal oxide nanoparticles to Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 29(3), 669–675. https://doi.org/10.1002/
etc.58
Lee, W.-M., Kwak, J. I., & An, Y.-J. (2012). Effect of silver nanoparticles in crop plants 
Phaseolus radiatus and Sorghum bicolor: Media effect on phytotoxicity. Chemosphere, 
86(5), 491–499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.10.013
Lehner, R., Weder, C., Petri-Fink, A., & Rothen-Rutishauser, B. (2019). Emergence of nano￾plastic in the environment and possible impact on human health. Environmental Science 
& Technology, 53(4), 1748–1765. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b05512
Levard, C., Hotze, E. M., Lowry, G. V., & Brown, G. E. (2012). Environmental transforma￾tions of silver nanoparticles: Impact on stability and toxicity. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 46(13), 6900–6914. https://doi.org/10.1021/es2037405
Li, Y., Yang, J., & Song, J. (2017). Nano energy system model and nanoscale effect of gra￾phene battery in renewable energy electric vehicle. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 69, 652–663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.118
Li, Z., Wang, Z., Khan, J., LaGasse, M. K., & Suslick, K. S. (2020). Ultrasensitive monitoring 
of museum airborne pollutants using a silver nanoparticle sensor array. ACS Sensors, 
5(9), 2783–2791. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssensors.0c00583
Lockman, P. R., Koziara, J. M., Mumper, R. J., & Allen, D. D. (2004). Nanoparticle surface 
charges alter blood–brain barrier integrity and permeability. Journal of Drug Targeting, 
12(9–10), 635–641. https://doi.org/10.1080/10611860400015936
Lojk, J., Repas, J., Veranič, P., Bregar, V. B., & Pavlin, M. (2020). Toxicity mechanisms of 
selected engineered nanoparticles on human neural cells in vitro. Toxicology, 432, 
152364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2020.152364
Lomer, M. C. E., Thompson, R. P. H., Commisso, J., Keen, C. L., & Powell, J. J. (2000). 
Determination of titanium dioxide in foods using inductively coupled plasma optical 
emission spectrometry. Analyst, 125(12), 2339–2343. https://doi.org/10.1039/B006285P
Mahbub, T., & Hoque, M. E. (2020). Chapter 1-Introduction to Nanomaterials and 
Nanomanufacturing for Nanosensors. In K. Pal & F. Gomes (Eds.), Nanofabrication 
for Smart Nanosensor Applications (pp. 1–20). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-820702-4.00001-5226 Nanofillers
Majumder, S., Sharif, A., & Hoque, M. E. (2020). Chapter 9-Electrospun Cellulose Acetate 
Nanofiber: Characterization and Applications. In F. M. Al-Oqla & S. M. Sapuan (Eds.), 
Advanced Processing, Properties, and Applications of Starch and Other Bio-Based 
Polymers (pp. 139–155). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819661-8.00009-3
Marslin, G., Sheeba, C. J., & Franklin, G. (2017). Nanoparticles alter secondary metabo￾lism in plants via ROS burst. Frontiers in Plant Science, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpls.2017.00832
Martínez, G., Merinero, M., Pérez-Aranda, M., Pérez-Soriano, E. M., Ortiz, T., Villamor, E., 
Begines, B., & Alcudia, A. (2021). Environmental impact of nanoparticles’ application as 
an emerging technology: A review. Materials, 14(1). https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14010166
Matranga, V., & Corsi, I. (2012). Toxic effects of engineered nanoparticles in the marine envi￾ronment: Model organisms and molecular approaches. Marine Environmental Research, 
76, 32–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2012.01.006
Medina-Pérez, G., Fernández-Luqueño, F., Vazquez-Nuñez, E., López-Valdez, F., Prieto￾Mendez, J., Madariaga-Navarrete, A., & Miranda-Arámbula, M. (2019). Remediating 
polluted soils using nanotechnologies: Environmental benefits and risks. Polish Journal 
of Environmental Studies, 28(3), 1013–1030. https://doi.org/10.15244/pjoes/87099
Meier, S., Moore, F., Morales, A., González, M.-E., Seguel, A., Meriño-Gergichevich, C., 
Rubilar, O., Cumming, J., Aponte, H., Alarcón, D., & Mejías, J. (2020). Synthesis of 
calcium borate nanoparticles and its use as a potential foliar fertilizer in lettuce (Lactuca 
sativa) and zucchini (Cucurbita pepo). Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 151, 673–
680. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.04.025
Metreveli, G., Frombold, B., Seitz, F., Grün, A., Philippe, A., Rosenfeldt, R. R., Bundschuh, 
M., Schulz, R., Manz, W., & Schaumann, G. E. (2016). Impact of chemical compo￾sition of ecotoxicological test media on the stability and aggregation status of silver 
nanoparticles. Environmental Science: Nano, 3(2), 418–433. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C5EN00152H
Mitrano, D. M., Mehrabi, K., Dasilva, Y. A. R., & Nowack, B. (2017). Mobility of metal￾lic (nano)particles in leachates from landfills containing waste incineration residues. 
Environmental Science: Nano, 4(2), 480–492. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6EN00565A
Monticone, S., Tufeu, R., Kanaev, A. V., Scolan, E., & Sanchez, C. (2000). Quantum size 
effect in TiO2 nanoparticles: Does it exist? Applied Surface Science, 162–163, 565–570. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-4332(00)00251-8
Morawska, L., Ristovski, Z., Jayaratne, E. R., Keogh, D. U., & Ling, X. (2008). Ambient nano 
and ultrafine particles from motor vehicle emissions: Characteristics, ambient process￾ing and implications on human exposure. Atmospheric Environment, 42(35), 8113–8138. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2008.07.050
Mueller, N. C., & Nowack, B. (2008). Exposure modeling of engineered nanoparticles in the 
environment. Environmental Science & Technology, 42(12), 4447–4453. https://doi.
org/10.1021/es7029637
Mukhopadhyay, S. S. (2014). Nanotechnology in agriculture: Prospects and constraints. 
Nanotechnology, Science and Applications, 7(2), 63–71. https://doi.org/10.2147/NSA.
S39409
Muller, E. B., Lin, S., & Nisbet, R. M. (2015). Quantitative adverse outcome pathway analysis 
of hatching in zebrafish with CuO nanoparticles. Environmental Science & Technology, 
49(19), 11817–11824. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b01837
Mushtaq, Y. K. (2011). Effect of nanoscale Fe3O4, TiO2 and carbon particles on cucumber 
seed germination. Journal of Environmental Science and Health, Part A, 46(14), 1732–
1735. https://doi.org/10.1080/10934529.2011.633403
Nafisi, S., & Maibach, H. I. (2018). Chapter 3-Skin Penetration of Nanoparticles. In 
R. Shegokar & E. B. Souto (Eds.), Emerging Nanotechnologies in Immunology
(pp. 47–88). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-40016-9.00003-8Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 227
Naha, P. C., Casey, A., Tenuta, T., Lynch, I., Dawson, K. A., Byrne, H. J., & Davoren, M. 
(2009). Preparation, characterization of NIPAM and NIPAM/BAM copolymer nanopar￾ticles and their acute toxicity testing using an aquatic test battery. Aquatic Toxicology, 
92(3), 146–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2009.02.001
Nho, R. (2020). Pathological effects of nano-sized particles on the respiratory system. 
Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine, 29, 102242. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nano.2020.102242
Nigavekar, S. S., Sung, L. Y., Llanes, M., El-Jawahri, A., Lawrence, T. S., Becker, C. W., 
Balogh, L., & Khan, M. K. (2004). 3H Dendrimer nanoparticle organ/tumor dis￾tribution. Pharmaceutical Research, 21(3), 476–483. https://doi.org/10.1023/
B:PHAM.0000019302.26097.cc
Nikula, K. J., Snipes, M. B., Barr, E. B., Griffith, W. C., Henderson, R. F., & Mauderly, J. L. 
(1995). Comparative pulmonary toxicities and carcinogenicities of chronically inhaled 
diesel exhaust and carbon black in F344 rats. Fundamental and Applied Toxicology, 
25(1), 80–94. https://doi.org/10.1006/faat.1995.1042
Nowack, B., & Bucheli, T. D. (2007). Occurrence, behavior and effects of nanoparticles in 
the environment. Environmental Pollution, 150(1), 5–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2007.06.006
Oberdörster, E., Zhu, S., Blickley, T. M., McClellan-Green, P., & Haasch, M. L. (2006). 
Ecotoxicology of carbon-based engineered nanoparticles: Effects of fullerene (C60) 
on aquatic organisms. Carbon, 44(6), 1112–1120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.
2005.11.008
O’Brien, N., & Cummins, E. (2010). Nano-scale pollutants: Fate in Irish surface and drinking 
water regulatory systems. Human and Ecological Risk Assessment: An International 
Journal, 16(4), 847–872. https://doi.org/10.1080/10807039.2010.501270
Ong, Y. T., Ahmad, A. L., Zein, S. H. S., & Tan, S. H. (2010). A review on carbon nano￾tubes in an environmental protection and green engineering perspective. Brazilian 
Journal of Chemical Engineering, 27(2), 227–242. https://doi.org/10.1590/
S0104-66322010000200002
Osaki, F., Kanamori, T., Sando, S., Sera, T., & Aoyama, Y. (2004). A quantum dot conju￾gated sugar ball and its cellular uptake. On the size effects of endocytosis in the subvi￾ral region. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 126(21), 6520–6521. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ja048792a
Ounoughene, G., le Bihan, O., Chivas-Joly, C., Motzkus, C., Longuet, C., Debray, B., Joubert, 
A., le Coq, L., & Lopez-Cuesta, J.-M. (2015). Behavior and fate of halloysite nano￾tubes (HNTs) when incinerating PA6/HNTs nanocomposite. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 49(9), 5450–5457. https://doi.org/10.1021/es505674j
Padmanabhan, V. P., Sankara Narayanan, T. S. N., Sagadevan, S., Hoque, M. E., & Kulandaivelu, 
R. (2019). Advanced lithium substituted hydroxyapatite nanoparticles for antimicrobial 
and hemolytic studies. New J. Chem., 43(47), 18484–18494. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C9NJ03735G
Palmer, B. C., & DeLouise, L. A. (2016). Nanoparticle-enabled transdermal drug delivery 
systems for enhanced dose control and tissue targeting. Molecules, 21(12). https://doi.
org/10.3390/molecules21121719
Pandey, G. (2018). Prospects of nanobioremediation in environmental cleanup. Oriental 
Journal of Chemistry, 34(6), 2838–2850.
Park, K. H., Chhowalla, M., Iqbal, Z., & Sesti, F. (2003). Single-walled carbon nanotubes 
are a new class of ion channel blockers*. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 278(50), 
50212–50216. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310216200
Patel, V., & Mahajan, Y. R. (2017). Techno-Commercial Opportunities of Nanotechnology 
in Wind Energy. In Nanotechnology for Energy Sustainability (pp. 1079–1106). John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527696109.ch43228 Nanofillers
Petersen, E. J., & Henry, T. B. (2012). Methodological considerations for testing the eco￾toxicity of carbon nanotubes and fullerenes: Review. Environmental Toxicology and 
Chemistry, 31(1), 60–72. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.710
Petersen, E. J., Zhang, L., Mattison, N. T., O’Carroll, D. M., Whelton, A. J., Uddin, N., Nguyen, 
T., Huang, Q., Henry, T. B., Holbrook, R. D., & Chen, K. L. (2011). Potential release 
pathways, environmental fate, and ecological risks of carbon nanotubes. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 45(23), 9837–9856. https://doi.org/10.1021/es201579y
Piccinno, F., Gottschalk, F., Seeger, S., & Nowack, B. (2012). Industrial production quan￾tities and uses of ten engineered nanomaterials in Europe and the world. Journal of 
Nanoparticle Research, 14(9), 1109. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-012-1109-9
Picó, Y., & Andreu, V. (2014). 12-Nanosensors and other techniques for detecting nanopar￾ticles in the environment. In K. C. Honeychurch (Ed.), Nanosensors for Chemical and 
Biological Applications (pp. 295–338). Woodhead Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1533/
9780857096722.2.295
Powell, J. J., Faria, N., Thomas-McKay, E., & Pele, L. C. (2010). Origin and fate of dietary 
nanoparticles and microparticles in the gastrointestinal tract. Journal of Autoimmunity, 
34(3), J226–J233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2009.11.006
Pradhan, A., Seena, S., Pascoal, C., & Cássio, F. (2011). Can metal nanoparticles be a threat 
to microbial decomposers of plant litter in streams? Microbial Ecology, 62(1), 58–68. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-011-9861-4
Praetorius, A., Gundlach-Graham, A., Goldberg, E., Fabienke, W., Navratilova, J., Gondikas, 
A., Kaegi, R., Günther, D., Hofmann, T., & von der Kammer, F. (2017). Single-particle 
multi-element fingerprinting (spMEF) using inductively-coupled plasma time-of-flight 
mass spectrometry (ICP-TOFMS) to identify engineered nanoparticles against the ele￾vated natural background in soils. Environmental Science: Nano, 4(2), 307–314. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C6EN00455E
Prajitha, N., Athira, S. S., & Mohanan, P. v. (2019). Bio-interactions and risks of engi￾neered nanoparticles. Environmental Research, 172, 98–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2019.02.003
Priester, J. H., Moritz, S. C., Espinosa, K., Ge, Y., Wang, Y., Nisbet, R. M., Schimel, J. P., 
Susana Goggi, A., Gardea-Torresdey, J. L., & Holden, P. A. (2017). Damage assess￾ment for soybean cultivated in soil with either CeO2 or ZnO manufactured nanoma￾terials. Science of The Total Environment, 579, 1756–1768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2016.11.149
Prow, T. W., Monteiro-Riviere, N. A., Inman, A. O., Grice, J. E., Chen, X., Zhao, X., Sanchez, 
W. H., Gierden, A., Kendall, M. A. F., Zvyagin, A. v, Erdmann, D., Riviere, J. E., & 
Roberts, M. S. (2012). Quantum dot penetration into viable human skin. Nanotoxicology, 
6(2), 173–185. https://doi.org/10.3109/17435390.2011.569092
Pujalté, I., Dieme, D., Haddad, S., Serventi, A. M., & Bouchard, M. (2017). Toxicokinetics of 
titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles after inhalation in rats. Toxicology Letters, 265, 
77–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxlet.2016.11.014
Rabbani, M., Hoque, M. E., & Mahbub, Z. Bin. (2020). Chapter 7-Nanosensors in Biomedical 
and Environmental Applications: Perspectives and Prospects. In K. Pal & F. Gomes 
(Eds.), Nanofabrication for Smart Nanosensor Applications (pp. 163–186). Elsevier. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820702-4.00007-6
Radomski, A., Jurasz, P., Alonso-Escolano, D., Drews, M., Morandi, M., Malinski, T., & 
Radomski, M. W. (2005). Nanoparticle-induced platelet aggregation and vascular 
thrombosis. British Journal of Pharmacology, 146(6), 882–893. https://doi.org/10.1038/
sj.bjp.0706386
Ravichandran, M., & Velumani, S. (2020). Manganese ferrite nanocubes as an MRI contrast 
agent. Materials Research Express, 7(1), 016107. https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/
ab66a4Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 229
Rocha, T. L., Gomes, T., Sousa, V. S., Mestre, N. C., & Bebianno, M. J. (2015). Ecotoxicological 
impact of engineered nanomaterials in bivalve molluscs: An overview. Marine 
Environmental Research, 111, 74–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2015.06.013
Rönkkö, T., Pirjola, L., Ntziachristos, L., Heikkilä, J., Karjalainen, P., Hillamo, R., & Keskinen, 
J. (2014). Vehicle engines produce exhaust nanoparticles even when not fueled. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 48(3), 2043–2050. https://doi.org/10.1021/
es405687m
Rui, M., Ma, C., Tang, X., Yang, J., Jiang, F., Pan, Y., Xiang, Z., Hao, Y., Rui, Y., Cao, W., & 
Xing, B. (2017). Phytotoxicity of silver nanoparticles to peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.): 
Physiological responses and food safety. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 
5(8), 6557–6567. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b00736
Rui, M., Ma, C., White, J. C., Hao, Y., Wang, Y., Tang, X., Yang, J., Jiang, F., Ali, A., Rui, Y., 
Cao, W., Chen, G., & Xing, B. (2018). Metal oxide nanoparticles alter peanut (Arachis 
hypogaea L.) physiological response and reduce nutritional quality: A life cycle study. 
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 5(9), 2088–2102. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8EN00436F
Saddick, S., Afifi, M., & Abu Zinada, O. A. (2017). Effect of zinc nanoparticles on oxidative 
stress-related genes and antioxidant enzymes activity in the brain of Oreochromis niloti￾cus and Tilapia zillii. Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences, 24(7), 1672–1678. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2015.10.021
Saif, S., Tahir, A., & Chen, Y. (2016). Green synthesis of iron nanoparticles and their envi￾ronmental applications and implications. Nanomaterials, 6(11). https://doi.org/10.3390/
nano6110209
Sajid, M., Ilyas, M., Basheer, C., Tariq, M., Daud, M., Baig, N., & Shehzad, F. (2015). Impact 
of nanoparticles on human and environment: review of toxicity factors, exposures, con￾trol strategies, and future prospects. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 
22(6), 4122–4143. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-014-3994-1
Samiei, F., Shirazi, F. H., Naserzadeh, P., Dousti, F., Seydi, E., & Pourahmad, J. (2020). 
Correction to: Toxicity of multi-wall carbon nanotubes inhalation on the brain of rats. 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 27(23), 29699. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-020-09667-3
Sanderson, K. (2006). Sharpest cut from nanotube sword. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/
news061113-11
Sarno, M. (2020). Chapter 22-Nanotechnology in Energy Storage: The Supercapacitors. 
In A. Basile, G. Centi, M. de Falco, & G. Iaquaniello (Eds.), Studies in Surface 
Science and Catalysis (Vol. 179, pp. 431–458). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-64337-7.00022-7
Schaumann, G. E., Philippe, A., Bundschuh, M., Metreveli, G., Klitzke, S., Rakcheev, D., 
Grün, A., Kumahor, S. K., Kühn, M., Baumann, T., Lang, F., Manz, W., Schulz, R., & 
Vogel, H.-J. (2015). Understanding the fate and biological effects of Ag- and TiO2-
nanoparticles in the environment: The quest for advanced analytics and interdisciplin￾ary concepts. Science of the Total Environment, 535, 3–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2014.10.035
Schins, R. P. F., Duffin, R., Höhr, D., Knaapen, A. M., Shi, T., Weishaupt, C., Stone, V., 
Donaldson, K., & Borm, P. J. A. (2002). Surface modification of quartz inhibits toxicity, 
particle uptake, and oxidative DNA damage in human lung epithelial cells. Chemical 
Research in Toxicology, 15(9), 1166–1173. https://doi.org/10.1021/tx025558u
Schraufnagel, D. E. (2020). The health effects of ultrafine particles. Experimental & Molecular 
Medicine, 52(3), 311–317. https://doi.org/10.1038/s12276-020-0403-3
Sekine, R., Khaksar, M., Brunetti, G., Donner, E., Scheckel, K. G., Lombi, E., & Vasilev, K. 
(2013). Surface immobilization of engineered nanomaterials for in situ study of their 
environmental transformations and fate. Environmental Science & Technology, 47(16), 
9308–9316. https://doi.org/10.1021/es400839h230 Nanofillers
Singh, R., Cheng, S., & Singh, S. (2020). Oxidative stress-mediated genotoxic effect of zinc 
oxide nanoparticles on Deinococcus radiodurans. 3 Biotech, 10(2), 66. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13205-020-2054-4
Singh, R. P. (2011). Prospects of nanobiomaterials for biosensing. International Journal of 
Electrochemistry, 2011, 125487. https://doi.org/10.4061/2011/125487
Sivry, Y., Gelabert, A., Cordier, L., Ferrari, R., Lazar, H., Juillot, F., Menguy, N., & Benedetti, M. 
F. (2014). Behavior and fate of industrial zinc oxide nanoparticles in a carbonate-rich river 
water. Chemosphere, 95, 519–526. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.09.110
Song, Y., Zhou, T., Liu, Q., Liu, Z., & Li, D. (2020). Nanoparticle and microorganism detection 
with a side-micron-orifice-based resistive pulse sensor. Analyst, 145(16), 5466–5474. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D0AN00679C
Stampoulis, D., Sinha, S. K., & White, J. C. (2009). Assay-dependent phytotoxicity of nanopar￾ticles to plants. Environmental Science & Technology, 43(24), 9473–9479. https://doi.
org/10.1021/es901695c
Su, M., Liu, H., Liu, C., Qu, C., Zheng, L., & Hong, F. (2009). Promotion of nano-anatase TiO2 
on the spectral responses and photochemical activities of D1/D2/Cyt b559 complex of 
spinach. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 72(5), 
1112–1116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2009.01.010
Sun, T. Y., Gottschalk, F., Hungerbühler, K., & Nowack, B. (2014). Comprehensive probabilis￾tic modelling of environmental emissions of engineered nanomaterials. Environmental 
Pollution, 185, 69–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2013.10.004
Suri, S. S., Fenniri, H., & Singh, B. (2007). Nanotechnology-based drug delivery systems. Journal of 
Occupational Medicine and Toxicology, 2(1), 16. https://doi.org/10.1186/1745-6673-2-16
Taghavi, S. M., Momenpour, M., Azarian, M., Ahmadian, M., Souri, F., Taghavi, S. A., Sadeghain, 
M., & Karchani, M. (2013). Effects of nanoparticles on the environment and outdoor 
workplaces. Electronic Physician, 5(4), 706–712. https://doi.org/10.14661/2013.706-712
Taylor, A. F., Rylott, E. L., Anderson, C. W. N., & Bruce, N. C. (2014). Investigating the toxic￾ity, uptake, nanoparticle formation and genetic response of plants to gold. PLOS ONE, 
9(4), e93793-. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0093793
Thakur, M., Gupta, H., Singh, D., Mohanty, I. R., Maheswari, U., Vanage, G., & Joshi, D. 
S. (2014). Histopathological and ultra structural effects of nanoparticles on rat tes￾tis following 90 days (Chronic study) of repeated oral administration. Journal of 
Nanobiotechnology, 12(1), 42. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-014-0042-8
Thalmann, B., Voegelin, A., Morgenroth, E., & Kaegi, R. (2016). Effect of humic acid on the 
kinetics of silver nanoparticle sulfidation. Environmental Science: Nano, 3(1), 203–212. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C5EN00209E
Thanigaivel, S., Vickram, A. S., Anbarasu, K., Gulothungan, G., Nanmaran, R., Vignesh, D., 
Rohini, K., & Ravichandran, V. (2021). Ecotoxicological assessment and dermal layer 
interactions of nanoparticle and its routes of penetrations. Saudi Journal of Biological 
Sciences, 28(9), 5168–5174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.05.048
Tong, M., Ding, J., Shen, Y., & Zhu, P. (2010). Influence of biofilm on the transport of fullerene 
(C60) nanoparticles in porous media. Water Research, 44(4), 1094–1103. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.09.040
Tripathi, D. K., Shweta, Singh, S., Singh, S., Pandey, R., Singh, V. P., Sharma, N. C., Prasad, 
S. M., Dubey, N. K., & Chauhan, D. K. (2017). An overview on manufactured nanopar￾ticles in plants: Uptake, translocation, accumulation and phytotoxicity. Plant Physiology 
and Biochemistry, 110, 2–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.07.030
Tripathi, D. K., Singh, S., Singh, S., Srivastava, P. K., Singh, V. P., Singh, S., Prasad, S. M., 
Singh, P. K., Dubey, N. K., Pandey, A. C., & Chauhan, D. K. (2017). Nitric oxide 
alleviates silver nanoparticles (AgNps)-induced phytotoxicity in Pisum sativum seed￾lings. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 110, 167–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
plaphy.2016.06.015Environmental Impacts of Using Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 231
Turner, A., Brice, D., & Brown, M. T. (2012). Interactions of silver nanoparticles with the 
marine macroalga, Ulva lactuca. Ecotoxicology, 21(1), 148–154. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10646-011-0774-2
Unrine, J. M., Tsyusko, O. V., Hunyadi, S. E., Judy, J. D., & Bertsch, P. M. (2010). Effects of 
particle size on chemical speciation and bioavailability of copper to earthworms (Eisenia 
fetida) exposed to copper nanoparticles. Journal of Environmental Quality, 39(6), 1942–
1953. https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq2009.0387
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2007). Nanotechnology White Paper. www.epa.gov/
osa
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency | US EPA. (n.d.). Retrieved May 20, 2022, from www.
epa.gov/
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (n.d.). Retrieved May 20, 2022, from www.fda.gov/
Vannini, C., Domingo, G., Onelli, E., de Mattia, F., Bruni, I., Marsoni, M., & Bracale, M. 
(2014). Phytotoxic and genotoxic effects of silver nanoparticles exposure on germi￾nating wheat seedlings. Journal of Plant Physiology, 171(13), 1142–1148. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jplph.2014.05.002
Wang, H., Adeleye, A. S., Huang, Y., Li, F., & Keller, A. A. (2015). Heteroaggregation of 
nanoparticles with biocolloids and geocolloids. Advances in Colloid and Interface 
Science, 226, 24–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2015.07.002
Wang, X., Yang, X., Chen, S., Li, Q., Wang, W., Hou, C., Gao, X., Wang, L., & Wang, S. (2016). 
Corrigendum: Zinc oxide nanoparticles affect biomass accumulation and photosynthe￾sis in arabidopsis. Frontiers in Plant Science, 7. www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
fpls.2016.00559
Wang, Y., & Xia, Y. (2019). Optical, electrochemical and catalytic methods for in-vitro diagno￾sis using carbonaceous nanoparticles: A review. Microchimica Acta, 186(1), 50. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00604-018-3110-1
Watkinson, A. C., Bunge, A. L., Hadgraft, J., & Lane, M. E. (2013). Nanoparticles do not 
penetrate human skin—A theoretical perspective. Pharmaceutical Research, 30(8), 
1943–1946. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-013-1073-9
Weir, A., Westerhoff, P., Fabricius, L., Hristovski, K., & von Goetz, N. (2012). Titanium 
dioxide nanoparticles in food and personal care products. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 46(4), 2242–2250. https://doi.org/10.1021/es204168d
Welcome to The Nanodatabase. (n.d.). Retrieved May 20, 2022, from https://nanodb.dk/
Wong, S. W. Y., Leung, P. T. Y., Djurišić, A. B., & Leung, K. M. Y. (2010). Toxicities of nano 
zinc oxide to five marine organisms: Influences of aggregate size and ion solubility. 
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(2), 609–618. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00216-009-3249-z
Xia, B., Chen, B., Sun, X., Qu, K., Ma, F., & Du, M. (2015). Interaction of TiO2 nanopar￾ticles with the marine microalga Nitzschia closterium: Growth inhibition, oxidative 
stress and internalization. Science of The Total Environment, 508, 525–533. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.11.066
Xiang, Q.-Q., Wang, D., Zhang, J.-L., Ding, C.-Z., Luo, X., Tao, J., Ling, J., Shea, D., & 
Chen, L.-Q. (2020). Effect of silver nanoparticles on gill membranes of common 
carp: Modification of fatty acid profile, lipid peroxidation and membrane fluidity. 
Environmental Pollution, 256, 113504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113504
Yah, C. S., Iyuke, S. E., & Simate, G. S. (2012). A review of nanoparticles toxicity and their 
routes of exposures. Iranian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 8(1), 299–314. www.
ijps.ir/article_2193.html
Yan, W., Riahi, H., Benzarti, K., Chlela, R., Curtil, L., & Bigaud, D. (2021). Durability and 
reliability estimation of flax fiber reinforced composites using tweedie exponential dis￾persion degradation process. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2021, 6629637. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6629637232 Nanofillers
Yang, J., Jiang, F., Ma, C., Rui, Y., Rui, M., Adeel, M., Cao, W., & Xing, B. (2018). Alteration 
of crop yield and quality of wheat upon exposure to silver nanoparticles in a life cycle 
study. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 66(11), 2589–2597. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.jafc.7b04904
Yhee, J. Y., Im, J., & Nho, R. S. (2016). Advanced therapeutic strategies for chronic lung dis￾ease using nanoparticle-based drug delivery. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 5(9). https://
doi.org/10.3390/jcm5090082
Yuan, G., P, S. J., & A, H. P. (2012). Identification of soil bacteria susceptible to TiO2 and ZnO 
nanoparticles. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 78(18), 6749–6758. https://
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00941-12
Zheng, L., Tracy, H., Rebecca, S., Rebecca, C., S, L. S., Shih-Houng, Y., Anna, S., I, L. M., & P, 
S. P. (2007). Cardiovascular effects of pulmonary exposure to single-wall carbon nano￾tubes. Environmental Health Perspectives, 115(3), 377–382. https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.9688
Zhu, C., Zhao, Q., Meng, G., Wang, X., Hu, X., Han, F., & Lei, Y. (2020). Silver nanopar￾ticle-assembled micro-bowl arrays for sensitive SERS detection of pesticide residue. 
Nanotechnology, 31(20), 205303. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6528/ab7100233
8 Natural Nanofillers 
Family, Their Properties, 
and Applications 
in Polymers
Aswathy Ajayan and Maida Mary Jude
Sree Sankara College
8.1 INTRODUCTION
The development of materials from renewable, sustainable resources is of great 
public interest with increasing ecological and environmental concerns nowadays. 
Nanocomposites have been one of the most promising and developing study fields in 
recent years. Polymer nanocomposites have several advantages: (i) They are lighter 
than conventional composites because high degrees of stiffness and strength can be 
achieved with far less high-density material, (ii) their barrier properties are improved 
over the neat polymer, (iii) their mechanical and thermal properties are potentially 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-8
CONTENTS
8.1 Introduction................................................................................................... 233
8.2 Polysaccharide Nanomaterials...................................................................... 235
8.2.1 Nanocellulose (NC) .......................................................................... 235
8.2.1.1 Preparation of NC..............................................................237
8.2.1.2 Applications of NC ............................................................ 239
8.2.2 Nanostarch ........................................................................................240
8.2.2.1 Preparation of Nanostarch ................................................. 241
8.2.2.2 Application of Nanostarch .................................................242
8.2.3 Nanochitin.........................................................................................242
8.2.3.1 Preparation of Nanochitin..................................................243
8.2.3.2 Applications of Nanochitin................................................245
8.2.4 Nanochitosan ....................................................................................245
8.2.4.1 Preparation of Nanochitosan..............................................246
8.2.4.2 Applications of Nanochitosan............................................247
8.2.5 Alginate Nanoparticles......................................................................247
8.3 Conclusion ....................................................................................................249
8.3.1 Nanomaterials: Future ......................................................................249
References..............................................................................................................250234 Nanofillers
superior, and (iv) they have excellent flammability properties and increased biodegrad￾ability (Dantas de Oliveira & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019). In situ polymerisa￾tion, solution, and melt mixing are three ways for making polymer nanocomposites. 
According to the kind of polymeric matrix, nanofiller, and desired qualities for the final 
products, a suitable procedure is chosen (Mallakpour & Naghdi, 2018).
A filler is a relatively innocuous ingredient added to a plastic to adjust its strength, per￾manence, working characteristics, or other features, or to reduce costs, according to the 
definitions proposed by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM-D-883). 
The type of filler used in nanocomposite formulation is one of the most essential char￾acteristics that define its qualities (Dos Ouros et al., 2014). Before selecting filler that 
will be included into a polymer matrix to achieve a specific composite property, many 
factors must be taken into account. Chemical surface composition, nanoparticle size 
and shape, structure, pore diameters, interlayer distances, hydrophobicity, and mechani￾cal, electrical, and thermal properties are only a few of the filler’s critical qualities to 
consider. Fillers are categorised as either inorganic or organic substances, with further 
subcategories based on chemical family or form and size (aspect ratio). More than 70 
types of particles or flakes, as well as more than 15 types of natural and synthetic fibres, 
have been employed or assessed as fillers in thermoplastics and thermosets (Wypych, 
2016). Nanofillers are fillers with particle sizes ranging from 1 to 100nm. As nanofillers 
have a large surface area, they provide a large interphase or border area between the 
biopolymer matrix and the nanofiller, which is advantageous for nanocomposite materi￾als. The introduction of nanofillers found to modify the aesthetics of the final product. 
Nanofillers have strong reinforcing effects; they not only reduce the cost of composites, 
but also impart performance improvements. Even at low filler content, nanocomposites 
show versatile properties compared to conventional composites due to the nanomet￾ric size. Depending on application, nanofillers with suitable physical and dimensional 
properties can be selected. Nanofillers for polymer composite applications are divided 
into three categories based on their dimensions: one nanoscale dimension nanoplatelets, 
two nanoscale dimension nanofibres, and three nanoscale dimension nanoparticulates 
(Dantas de Oliveira & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, 2019). New or improved proper￾ties of nanocomposites can be obtained based on the properties of nanofillers, such as 
barrier qualities, better mechanical strength, antibacterial and antioxidant properties, 
or thermal stability (Jamróz et al., 2019). The most difficult aspect of working with 
nanoparticles is achieving homogeneous dispersion within a polymeric matrix.
Nanofillers can be classified according to their origin as natural and synthetic. 
Natural nanofillers include that originated from animals, plants as well as from min￾erals (Figure 8.1). Synthetic nanofillers are man-made and can be organic or inor￾ganic. Clays, organic, inorganic, and carbon nanostructure are the four categories of 
nanofillers based on composition.
Biomass as a source of renewable energy is gaining popularity. Agricultural and for￾estry wastes, animal residues, sewage, algae, and aquatic crops are the most major biomass 
sources. Polysaccharides are large, complex macromolecules made up of hexoses and pen￾toses, with non-sugar components such as short organic acids or sulphates. They are pri￾marily extracted from biomass such as terrestrial plants (starch, cellulose, galactomannan, 
and pectin), macroalgae (sulphated galactans, alginates, laminarins, or ulvans), animals 
(chitin, chitosan (CS), and glycosaminoglycans), and bacteria (xanthan, dextran, gellan, Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 235
or curdlan) (AppliedChem|Special Issue : Polysaccharides from Biomass Conversion, 
n.d.). Polysaccharides are superior candidates as renewable nanofillers due to the partly 
crystalline structures conferring interesting properties. Most fillers are considered as 
additives because of their characteristic features like surface area, geometrical features, 
and chemical composition. Cellulose and starch are two abundantly occurring polysac￾charides in nature. Cellulose is the most ample renewable polymer on our planet and 
key component of plant cell wall and is a viable biomass source. Nanocellulose (NC) 
is a cellulose-derived natural fibre. This substance has been labelled a “novel bion￾anomaterial”. Chemical treatments such as alkali extraction and bleaching are used to 
extract cellulose from plant fibres. Starch is the second most excessive biomass mate￾rial found in nature. Over long periods, starch is been produced by green plants and 
algae for energy storage. Owing to their attractive and excellent characteristics such as 
abundance, high aspect ratio, better mechanical properties, renewability, and biocom￾patibility, these materials have gained growing interests over the past decades. Chitin 
(CH, poly-(1–4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine), obtained mostly from seafood wastes such 
as shrimp, crab, lobster, and squid pen, is a renewable and plentiful polysaccharide that 
will soon become one of the most important organic raw resources (Li et al., 2018). 
Chitin has a micro- and nanofibril structure that is highly structured and incorporates 
both crystalline and amorphous domains. CS is a linear polysaccharide with inher￾ent antibacterial activity derived from naturally occurring chitin, the most prevalent 
biopolymer on the planet after cellulose and starch. Pullulan is a neutral polysaccha￾ride derived from the fermentation medium of Aureobasidium pullulans, a fungus-like 
yeast. It has excellent optical properties, and the use of this non-toxic, biodegradable 
polymer in innovative optical materials could be promising.
8.2 POLYSACCHARIDE NANOMATERIALS
8.2.1 Nanocellulose (NC)
For thousands of years, cellulose has been used as an engineering material. 
Furthermore, cellulose found in most lignocellulosic biomass, that is derived from 
agricultural waste, energy crops, and forestry residues, provides a better option over 
food crops as a renewable resource for the production of new materials due to its 
availability in enormous amounts and low cost (Loow et al., 2017). Cellulose is the 
nanofillers
natural
animals
plants
minerals
synthec
organic
inorganic
FIGURE 8.1 Classification of nanofillers.236 Nanofillers
most abundant component in lignocellulosic biomass, accounting for around 35%–
50% of the whole (Figure 8.2). It is made up of a linear homopolysaccharide of 
1,4-linked anhydro-d-glucose units as well as a cellobiose repeating unit. A mono￾mer of cellobiose is made up of three hydroxyl groups that form strong hydrogen 
bonds with neighbouring glucose units in the same chain and with distinct chains, 
respectively, forming intramolecular and intermolecular hydrogen bonding networks 
(Figure 8.3). The hydrogen bonding networks in the crystalline sections of cellulose 
FIGURE 8.2 Wood hierarchical structure: from tree to cellulose (Li et al., 2018).
FIGURE 8.3 Intramolecular ( ) and intermolecular ( ) hydrogen bonding networks in 
cellulose structure (Phanthong et al., 2018).Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 237
fibrils are strongly packed, resulting in a plant cell wall that is stiff, fibrous, insoluble 
in water, and highly resistant to most organic solvents.
NC has been proven to be one of the most environmentally benign materials in recent 
history. The word “nanocellulose” refers to a group of compounds made from cellulose 
that have at least one nanometre dimension. A new bionanomaterial (Dufresne, 2013) 
has been described for this material. Nanoparticles with one or two dimensions can be 
extracted from any naturally existing supply of cellulose using appropriate chemical 
and mechanical treatments. NC is commonly derived by the disintegration of natu￾rally occurring polymers or produced by bacterial action. NC-based materials have a 
low-carbon footprint and are sustainable, renewable, recyclable, and non-toxic, making 
them truly green nanomaterials with a wide range of useful and surprising features.
Along with its nanometre size diameter, NC is comprised of different proper￾ties such as high surface area, magnificent mechanical performance, low density, 
and excellent stiffness, which make it attractive for various purposes (Kargarzadeh 
et al., 2017) with high stiffness up to 220GPa of elastic modulus which is greater 
than Kevlar fibre. NC or cellulose nanomaterials can be categorised based on its size 
and structure into two major groups: nano-objects (10–100m) and nanostructures 
(1–50 nm) (Kargarzadeh et al., 2017; Loow et al., 2017).
8.2.1.1 Preparation of NC
NC (Figure 8.4) has been isolated from cellulosic materials using a variety of pro￾cesses of which the three primary extraction processes are acid hydrolysis, enzy￾matic hydrolysis, and mechanical process. The most common method for extracting 
NC from cellulosic materials is acid hydrolysis. Ball milling is another novel and 
vital mechanical approach for extracting NC from biomass efficiently (Phanthong 
et al., 2018). Varied extraction procedures resulted in different types and qualities of 
NC produced (Peng et al., 2011).
As mention above, one of the most common ways to extract NC from cellulosic 
materials is through acid hydrolysis. Since cellulose chains contain both ordered and 
disordered sections, the disordered regions can be easily dissolved by acid, leav￾ing just the orderly parts. For acid hydrolysis, sulphuric acid is the most commonly 
utilised acid (Dong et al., 1998). Due to the esterification of the hydroxyl group by 
sulphate ions (P. Lu & Hsieh, 2010), it can not only firmly isolate nanocrystalline cel￾lulose, but also disseminate it as a stable colloid system. Reaction time, temperature, 
and acid content are the primary regulating elements that influence the properties of 
produced NC. The acid wastewater generated during the washing process to neutral￾ise the pH value (Wang et al., 2007) of the NC suspension is the main disadvantage of 
FIGURE 8.4 Schematic of NC extraction from lignocellulosic biomass (Phanthong et al., 
2018).238 Nanofillers
acid hydrolysis. Adding cold water and centrifuging until a neutral pH is obtained is 
typically how the washing process is carried out. Another approach for washing the 
collected items is to neutralise the pH value with an alkaline such as sodium hydrox￾ide. Maiti et al. (2013), for example, used 47% sulphuric acid to extract NC from three 
different types of biomass. After the reaction was completed, the acid was removed 
by washing with deionised water and centrifugation, and then neutralising the sus￾pension with 0.5N sodium hydroxide, followed by washing with distilled water. To 
oxidise the hydroxyl group of cellulose to carboxylates, the 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiper￾idine-1-oxyl radical (TEMPO) can be utilised as a catalyst with hypochlorite as the 
primary oxidant. As a result, the nanofibrillated cellulose is created with a diameter 
of 3–4 nm and a length of a few microns. TEMPO-oxidised cellulose nanofibres have 
a uniform width (3–4nm) and a high aspect ratio, making them suitable for applica￾tions such as transparent and flexible displays, gas barrier films for packaging, and 
nanofibre infill for composite materials (Fukuzumi et al., 2008).
When cellulosic fibres are subjected to several mechanical shearing events, more 
or fewer individual microfibrils are released. Microfibrillated cellulose is the common 
name for this material (Dufresne, 2013). Because of their more homogeneous nature, 
the mechanical characteristics of cellulose microfibrils should be greater and less scat￾tered than those of the lignocellulosic fibres from which they are liberated. To prepare 
MFC, various mechanical treatment processes have been documented. High-pressure 
homogenisation and/or grinding are the most common methods (Nanocellulose: 
From Nature to High Performance Tailored Materials—Alain Dufresne—Google 
Books, n.d.). Pre-treatments such as mechanical cutting (Microfibrillated Cellulose: 
Morphology and Accessibility (Conference) | OSTI.GOV, n.d.), acid hydrolysis 
(Boldizar et al., 2006), enzymatic pre-treatment (Pääkko et al., 2007; Henriksson 
et al., 2007), and the introduction of charged groups by carboxymethylation or 
TEMPO-mediated oxidation (Pääkko et al., 2007) have all been proposed to aid this 
process. The shape, degree of crystallinity, particle size, and other features of several 
forms of NC vary. Because of the abundance of interacting surface hydroxyl groups, 
cellulose nanoparticles have a great tendency for self-association. Various functional 
nanomaterials with remarkable features, or significantly improved physical, chemical, 
biological, and electrical properties, can be created by appropriately modifying NCC. 
The qualities of NCC are affected by a number of parameters, including the type of 
cellulose utilised, the reaction time and temperature, and the acid employed for hydro￾lysis (Vaishnav, 2016). Because of the rising potential uses of modified NCC in many 
industrial sectors, such as personal care, nanocomposites, biomedical, and so on, there 
is a growing research focus on NCC modification.
Nanocrystalline cellulose, nanofibrillated cellulose, and bacterial NC (BNC) are 
the three forms of cellulose utilised as a nanoscale component. BNC, which is mainly 
extracted from cultures of the Gram-negative bacteria, Gluconacetobacter xylinus, 
has a higher molecular weight and crystallinity than cellulose from plant sources. 
Regardless of the fact that NC has a number of unique features and is abundant 
in nature, extracting NC from lignocellulosic biomass or cellulosic products con￾tinues to be a major difficulty. Since lignin, hemicelluloses, and other components 
in plant cell walls clump together, biomass pre-treatment is required to remove all 
non-cellulosic compounds which always involves multiple procedures, takes a long Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 239
time, uses harmful chemicals, and produces trash. Furthermore, general methods for 
extracting NC from cellulosic materials have limitations such as high acid wastewa￾ter creation during acid hydrolysis, high energy consumption during the mechanical 
process, and a long reaction time for enzymatic hydrolysis. The amount of research 
into cellulose-based materials has expanded significantly; yet, cellulose has some 
functional constraints. In this regard, NC nanocrystalline cellulose (Echeverria et al., 
2015), microfibrillar/nanofibrillar cellulose, and bacterial cellulose (Wiegand et al., 
2015; Li et al., 2018) are gaining popularity. Despite the fact that cellulose is the most 
abundant natural polymer on the planet, it has only lately acquired attention as a 
nanostructured material in the form of NC.
8.2.1.2 Applications of NC
Nanocrystalline cellulose, nanofibrillated cellulose, and BNC are the three kinds 
of cellulose utilised as a nanoscale component to biopolymer films (Phanthong 
et al., 2018). NCC is mostly used to strengthen polymeric matrices in nanocomposite 
composites. The use of NCC as reinforcing fillers in poly(styrene-co-butyl acrylate) 
(poly(S-co-BuA)-based nanocomposites was reported in 1995 (Favier et al., 1995).
Many exhilarating applications of NC have been explored, particularly in the 
fabrication of polymer nanocomposites. NC has several uses in healthcare sector, 
petroleum and gas, packaging, paper and board, composites, printed and flexible 
electronics, textiles, filtration, rheology modifiers, 3D printing, aerogels, coating 
films, etc. Agricultural wastes are attractive sources for NC production in recent 
years. The research regarding NC is not only about its extraction from biomass, but 
also the new applications in numerous fields (Phanthong et al., 2018). Materials made 
from NC are carbon-neutral, long-lasting, recyclable, and non-toxic. As a result, they 
have the potential to be truly green nanomaterials with a wide range of beneficial 
and surprising features. Heavy metal removal, dye removal, carbon sequestration, 
and antibacterial activity have mostly been proven in NC-based nanocomposites, 
making them ideal for environmental remediation. Food packaging (Li et al., 2013), 
cellular orientation (Mallakpour & Naghdi, 2018), and electronics have all been pro￾posed as applications for CNC films. Ultrathin, aligned CNC films have recently 
been proven to have a significant piezoelectric response and so have potential in 
flexible electronic devices (Csoka et al., 2012). Because of its good biocompatibility 
and low toxicity, as well as its unique geometry, surface chemistry, rheology, crys￾tallinity, and self-assembly behaviour, NC is a promising biomaterial for medical 
applications. NC-based materials for drug delivery, like membranes, tablet coatings, 
and composite-biopolymer delivery systems, are another hot topic. These materi￾als can be pre-loaded with the drug of choice and have a regulated release profile. 
Furthermore, surface modification of CNCs has been employed to construct novel 
carriers (Dash & Ragauskas, 2012). One especially versatile alteration of CNCs uses 
an aromatic linker to enable both binding and selective release of amine-containing 
medicines. NC fluorescence labelling with a variety of fluorophores is gaining popu￾larity in bioimaging, targeting, and sensing applications (Dong & Roman, 2007). 
Since the porosity network provides a physical barrier against external infections 
while enabling release of pre-loaded antimicrobial drugs, NC BC wound dressings 
can also help with antimicrobial treatment (Abitbol et al., 2016). NC-based materials 240 Nanofillers
are carbon-neutral, sustainable, recyclable, and non-toxic. As a result, they have the 
potential to be truly green nanomaterials with a wide range of beneficial and surpris￾ing features.
8.2.2 Nanostarch
The versatile nature of starch is a promising advantage for manufacturing environ￾mentally friendly materials. The nutritious content, easy storage and transportation, 
adaptability to diverse growing conditions, etc., made starch a staple ingredient of the 
human diet for a long time. Starch is a renewable natural resource, extracted from 
different parts of the plants, like leaves, seeds, fruits, tubers, and roots. A variety of 
vegetables like potato, peas, maize, tapioca, corn, cassava, avocado, etc., have enor￾mous source of starch. Starch can either be used as “native starch”, or it undergoes 
chemical modifications to obtain specific properties, and is called “modified starch”.
As a biodegradable thermoplastic polymer and as biodegradable particulate filler, 
starch has received enormous attention of researchers during the past decades. The 
superiority of starch fillers are their availability, biodegradability, renewability, high 
specific strength, non-abrasive character which lets easier processing even at high 
filling levels, and a relatively reactive surface that can be modified by adding reactive 
groups compatible with the polymeric matrix (Lamanna et al., 2013).
Starch is a biopolymer composed of linear amylase with α-(1–4)-linked d-glucose 
units and branched amylopectin with α-(1–4)-d-glucose backbones, and about 5% 
α-(1–6)-d-glucose units co-exist. Starches obtained from different botanical origins 
vary in their morphology and functional properties. The content, morphology, and 
functional properties vary depending on the botanical source. Molecular weight of 
the components determines the functionality and applicability. The properties of 
starch are determined by the amylase/amylopectin ratio as well as the non-starch 
contents like lipids, proteins, and phosphates. Starch granules (Figure 8.5) exist in 
different shapes and sizes as spheres, polygon, ellipsoids, platelets, irregular tubules, 
FIGURE 8.5 Schematic illustration of starch granule structure and chemical structure of 
amylopectin (Lin et al., 2011).Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 241
etc., with diameters ranging from about 0.1 to 200 μm depending on their botanical 
origin (Spinozzi et al., 2020).
Nanostarches (particle sizes ranging from 1 to 1000 nm) have recently sparked a 
flurry of research and public interest due to their unusual surface area and reaction 
activity. Starch nanoparticles (SNPs) and starch nanocrystals (SNCs) are the most 
common forms of nanostarch. SNPs have a higher surface area and a modified amor￾phous/crystallinity ratio than native starch.
Various approaches have been developed to create nanosized particles from the 
starch biopolymer throughout the last few decades. “Top-down” (e.g., acid hydro￾lysis, enzyme hydrolysis, or physical treatments) and “bottom-up” techniques are 
used to make nanostarches (e.g., self- assembly and nanoprecipitation) (Dukare 
et al., 2021). The use of SNCs as reinforcing fillers in a matrix was first investi￾gated using the analogy of cellulose whiskers. Sulphuric acid hydrolysis followed 
by ultrasonic treatment is the traditional method of nanostarch synthesis (Rajisha 
et al., 2014). Researchers have recently attempted to prepare nanostarch from native 
starch using acid hydrolysis (Lunardi et al., 2021), homogenisation (Apostolidis & 
Mandala, 2020), rapid ultrasonication (Chang et al., 2019), microemulsion (Qi & 
Tester, 2016), ionic gelation (Liu et al., 2020), rapid antisolvent nanoprecipitation 
(Dong et al., 2021), alkali freezing and cross-linking (Xiao et al., 2020), acid hydro￾lysis and ultrasound technique (Shabana et al., 2019), and enzyme-based approach 
(Cuthbert et al., 2017).
8.2.2.1 Preparation of Nanostarch
SNCs were made by hydrolysing waxy maize starch and amaranth starch with 
H2SO4 (3.16 M) at 40°C for 3, 5, and 10 days, according to Sanchez de la Concha 
et al. (2018). The yield and particle size ranged from 3.6% to 26.0% and 322 to 
577 nm, respectively, with lower values indicating longer hydrolysis times. The 
H2SO4 concentration of 3.16 M, the reaction temperature of 40°C, and the reac￾tion duration of 5 days serve as the foundation for SNCs industrial production. 
Furthermore, waxy maize starch was found to be a suitable and widely available 
raw material for making SNCs. Because the crystalline regions of starch are mostly 
made up of amylopectin, the materials used may influence the yield of SNCs. In 
acid hydrolysis process, a reactor submerged in an oil bath was filled with 117.5 g 
of wheat or waxy maize starch and 800 ml of sulphuric acid 3.16 mol/l, which was 
heated to 40°C with a stirring speed of 100 rpm. The reaction was halted after 
7 days, and the suspension was rinsed with distilled water and centrifuged for 10 
minutes at 5000 rpm (2236 g) until neutralisation was obtained. For 1 week, the 
final suspension was refrigerated at 6°C (Angellier et al., 2004). The acid hydroly￾sis process has a number of drawbacks, including long preparation times, pollution, 
and low yields (15%), all of which make industrial-scale SNC manufacture dif￾ficult. Chemical treatment changes the surface features of SNCs, which improves 
interfacial interactions with the polymer matrix and so affects the performance of 
nanomaterials (Lin et al., 2011). Strong interfacial adhesion aids stress transfer and 
acts as a reinforcement for nanocrystals. Furthermore, functional modification of 
SNCs, such as grafting fluorescent molecules, could broaden their application in 
biological materials.242 Nanofillers
8.2.2.1.1 Preparation of SNPs by Enzymatic Treatment with Pullulanase
A 5% w/v starch suspension in a sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5) was made and 
cooked at 80°C–90°C with steady stirring within 15 minutes. The suspension was 
then transferred to an autoclave and incubated at 121°C for 60 minutes, where the 
starch gelatinisation process occurred. The suspension was chilled after gelatinisa￾tion, and 1-ml pullulanase (1000 ASPU/g dry starch) was added at 55°C. The reaction 
was stopped after 24 hours, and the suspension was placed in a boiling water bath 
for 30 minutes to deactivate the enzyme, followed by 2 hours of natural cooling to 
laboratory temperature. The samples and EM3 were then kept at 4°C in the fridge 
(Chena Aldao et al., 2018). The production of nanoparticles was mostly attributable 
to the recrystallisation of linear glucans following native starch enzymolysis. The 
linear glucans were vulnerable to retrogradation. As a result, the SNP was formed 
by crystallisation in two steps: first, linking linear glucans into double helices and 
forming clusters with hydrogen bonds, and second, rearrangement of clustering into 
the SNP (Sun et al., 2014). SNCs’ main drawback is their hydrophilicity, which limits 
their employment as a reinforcing phase in hydrophilic polymers. To increase the 
affinity between the filler and hydrophobic polymer matrices, many ways of surface 
chemical modification of SNCs have been intensively researched.
8.2.2.2 Application of Nanostarch
SNCs have been incorporated into natural rubber latex for the manufacture of nano￾composites using an aqueous suspension of waxy maize SNCs as the reinforcing 
phase (Angellier et al., 2005). Nanostarch has received a lot of attention as a food￾grade Pickering emulsion stabiliser because of its biodegradability, non-toxicity, 
small size, and large specific surface area. Nanostarch has been used as a filler in 
biocompatible films since it is affordable and abundant in the environment. New 
nanotechnology trends and views have paved the way for the use of starch nanofillers 
as active agents in the packaging sector. This method is applicable to the develop￾ment of biodegradable packaging materials based on biopolymers and nanofillers. 
Synthetic and biodegradable polyester matrices, such as poly(lactic acid) and poly￾caprolactone, have also employed chemically modified SNCs as reinforcing fillers. 
The structure of SNCs is less robust than that of cellulose nanocrystals, especially 
during functional modification, which hinders the development of SNCs for applica￾tion in biomaterials. Nanofillers, which can serve as both a reinforcing and an active 
element, are currently being used as a unique ingredient to improve the properties 
of biopolymer films. The most commonly used polysaccharides in the production of 
biopolymer films are starch and CS.
8.2.3 Nanochitin
After cellulose, chitin is the second most abundant natural organic resource. It is usually 
found in the exoskeletons of mollusks, arthropods, and in some fungi (Mincea et al., 2012). 
Chitin is a high-molecular-weight straight-chain polysaccharide linked by [N-acetyl￾2-amido-2-deoxy-D-glucose] via the β-(1,4) glycosidic bond (Fernandes et al., 2011). 
The structure of chitin is similar to that of cellulose in which the hydroxyl at the C2 Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 243
position has been replaced with an acetamido group (Figure 8.6). It is a nitrogen-con￾taining polysaccharide, which is hard, white, inelastic, semi-transparent substance with 
low chemical reactivity, and insoluble in majority of the organic solvents. The high 
percentage of nitrogen in chitin makes it a better chelating agent. Chitin has the char￾acteristics of biodegradability, biocompatibility, non-toxicity, and antibacterial activity 
(Barikani et al., 2014). Nanochitin is a high-potential nanomaterial that not only main￾tains the properties of the original chitin, but also has a high aspect ratio, large surface 
area, low density, and large number of functional groups, which contributes to surface 
functionalisation. Due to its linear structure with two hydroxyl groups and one acet￾amide group, natural chitin is highly crystalline with strong hydrogen bonds (Azuma 
et al., 2014). The shellfish (shrimp or crab shells) industry produces large amounts of 
waste from shellfish shells that contain about 30% chitin, results in relatively low price 
of chitin. In living organisms, chitin exists as a semi-crystalline biopolymer which 
creates microfibrillar arrangements. These microfibrils consist of alternate crystalline 
and amorphous domains. It has a highly ordered crystal structure comprising three 
crystal forms: α-chitin, β-chitin, and γ -chitin. These crystal forms of chitin differ in 
packing arrangements (Rinaudo, 2006). Chitin can be synthesised from different types 
of cells. Therefore, various chitin derivatives can be obtained using different species of 
crustaceans and different production methods. The extraction and purification of chitin 
involves demineralisation, deproteinisation, and decolourisation (Soon et al., 2018).
8.2.3.1 Preparation of Nanochitin
The purification of chitin is the first step in the process of the preparation of nanochitin 
(elKnidri et al., 2018). The purification involves the treatment with alkali (NaOH, KOH) 
or enzyme to remove protein, bleaching with CH3CH2OH or NaClO3 to remove pigments, 
and inorganic minerals are eliminated by the treatment with acid (HCl). Generally, the 
preparation of nanochitin involves two routes: top-down and bottom-up. The isolation of 
nanochitin from the crustacean shell follows top-down method. This method comprises 
the bulk separation of nanochitin from natural chitin source. It involves the purifica￾tion of chitin followed by microfibrillation. The synthesis of nanochitin from crustacean 
FIGURE 8.6 Structure of chitin (Ravi Kumar, 2000).244 Nanofillers
shells by processes like acid hydrolysis, partial deacetylation, mechanical treatment, and 
TEMPO oxidation are top-down methods. Gopi et al. reported the preparation of chitin 
nanowhiskers by the acid hydrolysis of native chitin by stirring with hydrochloric acid 
for a specific time. The reaction is stopped by the addition of distilled water, and the 
resultant suspension is centrifuged followed by ultrasonication. The morphology of chi￾tin nanowhiskers thus obtained depends on the time of acid hydrolysis and the concen￾tration of the acid (Figure 8.7). The acids have a tendency to attack amorphous regions 
first in the acid hydrolysis method. Dufresne et al. extracted chitin nanowhiskers which 
is 100–600nm in length and 4–40nm in width from crab shells (Gopi et al., 2016).
The mechanical treatment involves the use of methods like ultrasonication, grind￾ing, and high-pressure homogenisation which are used individually or simultane￾ously under neutral or acidic conditions to obtain nanochitin. The morphology of 
nanochitin differs based on the chitin source, the time, and the intensity of the ultra￾sound used. Ultrasound can even make chitin powder and chitin gels to nanosized 
dimensions. Mechanical grinding can be used for the separation of chitin nanofibres. 
Ifuku et al. used grinding method for the separation of chitin nanofibres from mush￾room cell walls (Ifuku et al., 2015). Wu et al. reported the preparation of chitin nano￾fibres by using high-pressure homogenisation method (Wu et al., 2014).
TEMPO-mediated oxidation (TEMPO-mediated oxidation) is an important 
method used for the isolation of chitin nanowhiskers. In this method, the purified 
chitin undergoes oxidation in the presence of compounds like NaBr and NaClO with 
pH of 10. The water-soluble polyuronic acid and water-insoluble whiskers are the 
major products remaining after oxidation. These whiskers will then undergo ultra￾sonication treatment to obtain chitin nanowhiskers (Fan et al., 2008).
In the bottom-up method, chitin solution is prepared by dissolving the crustacean 
shell in limited amount of solvent, and nanochitin is synthesised from this solution 
FIGURE 8.7 Mechanism of acid hydrolysis of chitin (X. Yang et al., 2020).Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 245
by electrospinning, dissolution-regeneration, and self-assembly method. The mor￾phology of the chitin nanofibres formed by electrospinning method varies with the 
concentration of the chitin solution. Process conditions, solution properties, and 
environmental parameters are the factors affecting electrospinning method. In this 
method, the molecular weight of chitin is reduced by ultrasonication or microwave 
irradiation and then it is dissolved in highly toxic solvents like 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoro￾2-propanol. 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate is an ionic liquid which is used as 
an alternative for volatile organic solvents, can dissolve crustacean shells, and then 
spin nanofibres from the extract solution (Singh, 2019).
The dissolution-regeneration method is a process in which chitin is first dissolved 
in a solution, and then the chitin molecules are regenerated into chitin nanofibres 
using a precipitating agent. Wet spinning is an example of dissolution-regeneration 
method (elSeoud et al., 2021).
In self-assembly method, chitin is dissolved in certain solvents, and chitin nano￾fibres are regenerated from this solution. The solvents used in self-assembly method 
include water-based solvents, toxic solvents, and green solvents, which helps in the 
cleavage of hydrogen bonds (Kadokawa, 2015). Duan et al. prepared chitin nanofibre 
microspheres in urea–NaOH aqueous solution by thermally induced self-assembly 
(Duan et al., 2018).
8.2.3.2 Applications of Nanochitin
Nanochitin is a material which is used for various purposes. It can be utilised in water 
purification, paper finishing, textile industry, heavy metal chelating agents, and bio￾medical applications. The biomedical applications consist of tissue engineering, drug 
delivery, wound dressings, and antibacterial coatings (Jayakumar et al., 2010). Due to 
the presence of hydroxyl, carboxyl, and amino groups, surface modifications can be eas￾ily done in nanochitin which makes them highly suitable for drug delivery applications.
Nanochitin has been used in tissue engineering and surgical sutures due to the presence 
of chitinase and similar proteins in the human body. It has the ability to stimulate immune 
cells and exhibit significant anti-cancer activity. The nanofibrils and nanocrystals of chi￾tin are used in skin protective formulations due to its anti-ageing properties, moisturising 
effect, and UV protection ability. Torres-Rendon et al. used sacrificial templating of nano￾chitin and NC hydrogels for the manufacture of bioactive gyroid scaffolds for biomimetic 
tissue engineering (Torres‐Rendon et al., 2015). Nanochitin is an excellent raw material for 
the fabrication of rapidly degradable and inexpensive bioplastics. Chitin nanomaterials can 
be used as reinforcing agents to enhance the mechanical properties of starch-based food 
films. Due to the presence of abundant hydroxyl and acetamide functional groups and the 
large surface-to-volume ratio, nanowhiskers act as an excellent adsorbent. Nanochitin can 
be used as reinforcing fillers in biopolymer-based nanocomposites to improve its proper￾ties (Joseph et al., 2020).
8.2.4 Nanochitosan
CS is a natural, cationic amino polysaccharide which is the N-deacetylated derivative 
of chitin. The degree of deacetylation ranges from 70% to 95%. It is obtained from the 
crustacean shells. CS (Figure 8.8) is a copolymer of β-(1→4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 246 Nanofillers
and β-(1→4)-D-glucosamine (Riva et al., 2011). It is highly crystalline, hydrophilic, 
and soluble in wide range of organic solvents. The solubilisation is due to the proton￾ation of -NH2 functional group on the C-2 position of the repeated D-glucosamine 
unit. Thus, in acidic medium, this polysaccharide gets converted to polyelectrolyte. 
Since it is soluble in aqueous solutions, it is extensively used in various applica￾tions such as fibres, films, gel, or solutions. Nanochitosan is a natural, environment 
friendly material with excellent physicochemical properties and has received great 
attention due to their nanosize, large surface area, high aspect ratio, biocompatibility, 
and good biodegradability (Thomas et al., 2019). Compared to chitin, CS is much 
easier to process, but due to their hydrophilic character, the stability of CS materials 
is generally lower. The superior characteristics of CS include anticoagulant proper￾ties, water solubility, fluidity, high water-reducing ratio, and biological properties like 
controlled drug delivery, gelation, and targeting the colon.
8.2.4.1 Preparation of Nanochitosan
Different strategies are used for the preparation of CS nanoparticles. It also involves 
bottom-up and top-down approaches. The major challenge for the synthesis of CS 
nanoparticles was that the method should be of low cost, simple, and high yield. 
Obtaining fibres from CS was relatively easy because it dissolves in dilute acids 
like acetic acid. The methods such as precipitation or coagulation, microemulsion, 
ionic cross-linking, covalent cross-linking, and polyelectrolyte complexation can 
be used for the preparation of nanochitosan. These techniques follow a bottom-up 
approach in which nanoparticles are formed from individual macromolecules via 
self-assembly. The first method for the preparation of nanochitosan was reported by 
Ohya et al. in 1994 (Grenha, 2012). Berthold et.al used sodium sulphate as the pre￾cipitating agent for the synthesis of CS nanoparticles. Initially, Tween 80 is added to 
the CS acetic acid solution, and then sodium sulphate solution is added to this solu￾tion with constant stirring followed by ultrasonication (Biró et al., 2008).
Tang et al. used 2.0% acetic acid to dissolve CS followed by the dropwise addi￾tion of sodium tripolyphosphate (TPP) with constant stirring (Tang et al., 2007). 
Bodmeier et al. used the ionic cross-linking method to prepare CS nanoparticles 
by adding TPP cations to CS solution. The intermolecular cross-linking reactions 
FIGURE 8.8 Structure of CS (Ravi Kumar, 2000).Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 247
between the TPP cations and the free amino groups of CS form a bead gel of CS 
(Huang et al., 2009).
Moura et al. prepared nanochitosan by dissolving CS and maleic acid in distilled 
water and kept for 30 minutes under magnetic stirring and heated for 3hours at a con￾stant temperature of 70°C. They added K2S2O8 to this solution and cooled in ice bath 
to obtain a milky emulsion, centrifuged, and then freeze-dried using freeze-dryer 
(Zareie, 2013). In emulsion cross-linking method, aqueous solution of CS is emulsi￾fied in the oil phase, and a surfactant is used to stabilise the aqueous droplets. CS 
nanoparticles are precipitated by adding glutaraldehyde as the cross-linking agent 
(Agnihotri et al., 2004).
In top-down approach, the bulk material is subjected to mechanical grinding to 
form nanosized particles. Beads mill is an instrument which is used to synthesise 
nanoparticles via top-down approach. Rochima et al. reported the preparation of CS 
nanoparticles by bead-milling process and proposed the mechanism of surface modi￾fication of the CS nanoparticles thus produced (Rochima et al., 2017).
8.2.4.2 Applications of Nanochitosan
Nanochitosan is used to prepare fibres, films, and hydrogels (Afshar et al., 2020). Due 
to its biocompatibility, it is mostly used in biomedical domain. In artificial organs, it 
is used as a controlled release drug carrier for gene transfer (H.-C. Yang et al., 2010). 
Nanochitosan has been used to enhance the strength, antibacterial effects, and wash￾ability of the textiles. In addition, it is used in the fabrication of sensors, packaging 
materials, and tissue engineering. Nanochitosan polymeric membranes are used for 
the purification of contaminated water (Divya & Jisha, 2018).
Because of the presence of cationic amino group, it is reported that its antimicro￾bial property is high at low pH. It is used in dentistry, orthopaedics, and ophthalmol￾ogy due to its adhesive nature (Sivanesan et al., 2021).
8.2.5 Alginate Nanoparticles
Alginate is a naturally occurring polysaccharide generated from brown algal cell 
walls that has unique properties that make it ideal for a variety of biological and 
pharmacological applications. Alginate (Alg) is a naturally occurring anionic poly￾saccharide of linear copolymers made up of blocks of β-D-mannuronate (M units) 
and α-L-guluronate (G units) residues linked by β-glycosidic bonds (i.e., β—1,4 link￾ages) (Figure 8.9) (Dodero et al., 2021). Alginate extraction is a multi-step process 
that typically involves the use of aqueous acid and alkali solution treatments, salt￾induced precipitation, and subsequent purification (Rinaudo, 2008). One of the most 
truly amazing properties of alginate, which, by the way, allows for its widespread 
industrial use, is its ability to form gels through the coordination of divalent (e.g., 
Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+, etc.) or trivalent cations (e.g., Al3+, Fe3+, etc.), as well as in acidic 
environment owing to polymer chain shrinkage.
Alginate-based nanomaterials hold extreme promises owing to their superior bio￾compatibility, mucoadhesive properties, non-toxicity, hydrophilicity, bioavailabil￾ity, relatively low cost, and possible mass production; hence, they can be employed 
in several application fields with particular emphasis on the biomedical and 248 Nanofillers
pharmaceutical industries where their unique biological properties play a fundamen￾tal role. Antimicrobial products, medication and gene delivery, tissue engineering, 
cancer therapy, wound dressing, and biosensors are just a few of the many applica￾tions for alginate-based nanomaterials (Rinaudo, 2008). In this regard, alginate is 
used to make nanostructured scaffolds, membranes, gels, beads, and sponge mor￾phologies, as well as NPs, nanocapsules, NFs, and nanocoating. NPs (Lopes et al., 
2017; Nayak & Hasnain, 2020; Zhu et al., 2021) are by far the most studied alginate￾based nanostructures in pharmaceutical applications for the delivery of drugs and 
other chemicals (e.g., enzymes, factors, vitamins, etc.) at the nanoscale level directly 
to the site of interest. To date, there are numerous methods for making alginate-based 
NPs. Ion-induced alginate gelation, covalent cross-linking methodology (Zhu et al., 
2021), electro-spraying technique, emulsification technique, and other procedures 
are common in this regard. A polyelectrolyte complexation phenomenon (Nayak & 
Hasnain, 2020) can also be used to make alginate-based NPs.
Alg-NPs containing curcumin and resveratrol were studied for the treatment of 
prostate cancer and shown to have a significant cytotoxicity effect on tumour cells with￾out causing hemolysis, making them safe for intravenous administration (Saralkar & 
Dash, 2017). Similarly, when compared to equivalent free drug formulations and pH￾responsive delivery for the targeted treatment of breast cancer, oxidised alginate NPs 
conjugated with doxorubicin and containing curcumin showed decreased toxicity 
towards health cells (Gao et al., 2017). Alginate–CS NPs loaded with a short peptide 
generated from a neural growth factor have also showed potential for the treatment 
FIGURE 8.9 (a) Alginate monomer structural units, (b) alginate block distribution and 
chain conformation, and (c) alginate egg-box gelation model with divalent cations (Dodero 
et al., 2021).Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 249
of brain degenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease, by promoting the dif￾ferentiation of stem cells into adult neurons (Lauzon et al., 2018). Because of their 
great biocompatibility, alginate-based NFs incorporating curcumin and cross-linked 
with trifluoroacetic acid have been proposed for a variety of applications, including 
tissue engineering. Alginate NFs (H. Lu et al., 2021), on the other hand, have been 
examined as a viable platform for immobilising lipase, an enzyme with significant 
potential in bone regeneration, with the ability to preserve its activity for up to 14days 
(İspirliDoğaç et al., 2017). By comparing their physical–chemical and biological qual￾ities to commercially available goods, alginate NFs were combined with natural spi￾der silk and evaluated as wound dressing materials (İspirliDoğaç et al., 2017). It’s no 
surprise that alginate-based nanofibrous scaffolds have showed significant promise in 
replacing and/or mending both soft and hard tissues, such as bones, cartilage, nerves, 
and skin, due to their adaptability.
Despite the many benefits of alginate NPs and alginate electrospun NFs, the fact 
that they are naturally derived means they have an intrinsically variable structure 
that can affect the material’s physical–chemical properties, which can be further 
influenced by the extraction and processing procedures. Furthermore, despite pure 
alginate’s overall biocompatibility, the inclusion of contaminants in industrially gen￾erated products could cause unforeseen negative effects in the human body. Another 
significant barrier to large-scale usage of alginate-based nanostructures is the signifi￾cantly lower production rate compared to synthetic polymers.
8.3 CONCLUSION
There is a growing demand for products manufactured from non-petroleum-based 
resources that are renewable and sustainable. In relation to their inherent features 
like biocompatibility and biodegradability in the human body for some of them, an 
important development of polysaccharide applications may be projected for the next 
few years; they are also renewable and have fascinating physical properties (film￾forming, gelling, and thickening properties). Furthermore, they can be processed into 
a variety of forms, including beads, films, capsules, and fibres. CS is a highly fasci￾nating film-forming base due to its biological (antimicrobial and antioxidant activity) 
and physical (thermal or mechanical) qualities.
The potential of cellulosic nanoparticles or NC for unique functional nanomateri￾als has been established.
8.3.1 Nanomaterials: Future
The European Commission considers nanotechnology to be a key enabling tech￾nology. Because of the intriguing features of nanoparticles, a growing number 
of novel materials are being developed, and assessing their dangers necessitates 
a unique approach to each nanomaterial. Nanomaterials are subject to the same 
strong regulatory framework that governs the safe use of all chemicals and com￾binations in the EU, namely the REACH and CLP guidelines. This means that the 
dangerous qualities of nanoforms of substances must be evaluated, and their safe 
usage must be guaranteed. The presence of nanoparticles in foods and cosmetics 250 Nanofillers
must be disclosed on the label in the ingredient list. Due to various concerns 
regarding the safety of employing nanomaterials, further research is needed to 
determine whether and particular nanoparticles can be a viable replacement to 
existing materials for use in a variety of applications. Still, more study with a focus 
on regulatory issues is required, particularly in regards to the application of the 
nanomaterials definition.
REFERENCES
Abitbol, T., Rivkin, A., Cao, Y., Nevo, Y., Abraham, E., Ben-Shalom, T., ... & Shoseyov, 
O. (2016). Nanocellulose, a tiny fiber with huge applications. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 39, 76–88.
Afshar, M., Dini, G., Vaezifar, S., Mehdikhani, M., & Movahedi, B. (2020). Preparation and 
characterization of sodium alginate/polyvinyl alcohol hydrogel containing drug-loaded 
chitosan nanoparticles as a drug delivery system. Journal of Drug Delivery Science and 
Technology, 56, 101530. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2020.101530
Agnihotri, S. A., Mallikarjuna, N. N., &Aminabhavi, T. M. (2004). Recent advances on chi￾tosan-based micro- and nanoparticles in drug delivery. Journal of Controlled Release, 
100(1), 5–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2004.08.010
Angellier, H., Choisnard, L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Ozil, P., & Dufresne, A. (2004). Optimization 
of the preparation of aqueous suspensions of waxy maize starch nanocrystals using 
a response surface methodology. Biomacromolecules, 5(4), 1545–1551. https://doi.
org/10.1021/BM049914U
Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., & Dufresne, A. (2005). Mechanical properties of waxy 
maize starch nanocrystal reinforced natural rubber. Macromolecules, 38(22), 9161–9170.
Apostolidis, E., & Mandala, I. (2020). Modification of resistant starch nanoparticles using 
high-pressure homogenization treatment. Food Hydrocolloids, 103, 105677. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2020.105677
AppliedChem | Special Issue : Polysaccharides from Biomass Conversion. (n.d.). A Special Issue 
of AppliedChem (ISSN 2673–9623). Retrieved February 17, 2022, from https://www.
mdpi.com/journal/appliedchem/special_issues/Polysaccharides_Biomass_Conversion
Azuma, K., Ifuku, S., Osaki, T., Okamoto, Y., & Minami, S. (2014). Preparation and biomedical 
applications of chitin and chitosan nanofibers. Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology, 
10(10), 2891–2920. https://doi.org/10.1166/jbn.2014.1882
Barikani, M., Oliaei, E., Seddiqi, H., & Honarkar, H. (2014). Preparation and application of 
chitin and its derivatives: a review. Iranian Polymer Journal, 23(4), 307–326. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13726-014-0225-z
Biró, E., Németh, Á. Sz., Sisak, C., Feczkó, T., & Gyenis, J. (2008). Preparation of chitosan 
particles suitable for enzyme immobilization. Journal of Biochemical and Biophysical 
Methods, 70(6), 1240–1246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2007.11.005
Boldizar, A., Klason, C., Kubát, J., Näslund, P., &Sáha, P. (2006). Prehydrolyzed cellulose as 
reinforcing filler for thermoplastics. International Journal of Polymeric Materials and 
Polymeric Biomaterials, 11(4), 229–262. https://doi.org/10.1080/00914038708078665
Chang, R., Ji, N., Li, M., Qiu, L., Sun, C., Bian, X., Qiu, H., Xiong, L., & Sun, Q. (2019). 
Green preparation and characterization of starch nanoparticles using a vacuum cold 
plasma process combined with ultrasonication treatment. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 
58, 104660. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ULTSONCH.2019.104660
Chena Aldao, D., Šárka, E., Ulbrich, P., &Menšíková, E. (2018). Starch Nanoparticles-Two 
Ways of their Preparation. Czech J. Food Sci, 36(2), 0–6. https://doi.org/10.17221/371/
2017-CJFS
Csoka, L., Hoeger, I. C., Rojas, O. J., Peszlen, I., Pawlak, J. J., & Peralta, P. N. (2012). Piezoelectric 
effect of cellulose nanocrystals thin films. ACS Macro Letters, 1(7), 867–870.Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 251
Cuthbert, W. O., Ray, S. S., & Emmambux, N. M. (2017). Isolation and characterisation 
of nanoparticles from tef and maize starch modified with stearic acid. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 168, 86–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CARBPOL.2017.03.067
Dantas de Oliveira, A., & Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice, C. (2019). Polymer nanocomposites 
with different types of nanofiller. Nanocomposites - Recent Evolutions. https://doi.
org/10.5772/intechopen.81329
Dash, R., & Ragauskas, A. J. (2012). Synthesis of a novel cellulose nanowhisker-based drug 
delivery system. RSC Advances, 2(8), 3403–3409.
Divya, K., & Jisha, M. S. (2018). Chitosan nanoparticles preparation and applications. 
Environmental Chemistry Letters, 16(1), 101–112. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-017-
0670-y
Dodero, A., Alberti, S., Gaggero, G., Ferretti, M., Botter, R., Vicini, S., & Castellano, M. (2021). 
An Up-to-Date Review on Alginate Nanoparticles and Nanofibers for Biomedical and 
Pharmaceutical Applications. https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202100809
Dong, H., Zhang, Q., Gao, J., Chen, L., & Vasanthan, T. (2021). Comparison of morphology 
and rheology of starch nanoparticles prepared from pulse and cereal starches by rapid 
antisolvent nanoprecipitation. Food Hydrocolloids.
Dong, S., & Roman, M. (2007). Fluorescently labeled cellulose nanocrystals for bioimaging 
applications. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 129(45), 13810–13811.
Dong, X. M., Revol, J. F., & Gray, D. G. (1998). Effect of microcrystallite preparation condi￾tions on the formation of colloid crystals of cellulose. Cellulose 1998 5:1, 5(1), 19–32. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009260511939
Duan, B., Huang, Y., Lu, A., & Zhang, L. (2018). Recent advances in chitin based materials 
constructed via physical methods. Progress in Polymer Science, 82, 1–33. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2018.04.001
Dufresne, A. (2013). Nanocellulose: a new ageless bionanomaterial. Materials Today, 16(6), 
220–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MATTOD.2013.06.004
Dukare, A. S., Arputharaj, A., Bharimalla, A. K., Saxena, S., & Vigneshwaran, N. (2021). Nanostarch 
production by enzymatic hydrolysis of cereal and tuber starches. Carbohydrate Polymer 
Technologies and Applications, 2, 100121. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CARPTA.2021.100121
Echeverria, C., Almeida, P. L., Feio, G., Figueirinhas, J. L., & Godinho, M. H. (2015). A cel￾lulosic liquid crystal pool for cellulose nanocrystals: structure and molecular dynam￾ics at high shear rates. European Polymer Journal, 72, 72–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
EURPOLYMJ.2015.09.006
elKnidri, H., Belaabed, R., Addaou, A., Laajeb, A., & Lahsini, A. (2018). Extraction, 
chemical modification and characterization of chitin and chitosan. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 120, 1181–1189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2018.08.139
elSeoud, O. A., Jedvert, K., Kostag, M., & Possidonio, S. (2021). Cellulose, chitin and silk: 
the cornerstones of green composites. Emergent Materials. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s42247-021-00308-0
Fan, Y., Saito, T., &Isogai, A. (2008). Chitin nanocrystals prepared by TEMPO-mediated 
oxidation of α-chitin. Biomacromolecules, 9(1), 192–198. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bm700966g
Favier, V., Canova, G. R., Cavaillé, J. Y., Chanzy, H., Dufresne, A., & Gauthier, C. (1995). 
Nanocomposite materials from latex and cellulose whiskers. Polymers for Advanced 
Technologies, 6(5), 351–355. https://doi.org/10.1002/PAT.1995.220060514
Fernandes, S. C., Freire, C. S., Silvestre, A. J., Pascoal Neto, C., & Gandini, A. (2011). Novel 
materials based on chitosan and cellulose. Polymer International, 60(6), 875–882. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.3024
Fukuzumi, H., Saito, T., Iwata, T., Kumamoto, Y., & Isogai, A. (2008). Transparent and high 
gas barrier films of cellulose nanofibers prepared by TEMPO-mediated oxidation. 
Biomacromolecules, 10(1), 162–165. https://doi.org/10.1021/BM801065U252 Nanofillers
Gao, C., Tang, F., Gong, G., Zhang, J., Hoi, M. P. M., Lee, S. M. Y., & Wang, R. (2017). pH￾Responsive prodrug nanoparticles based on a sodium alginate derivative for selective co￾release of doxorubicin and curcumin into tumor cells. Nanoscale, 9(34), 12533–12542. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C7NR03611F
Gopi, S., Pius, A., & Thomas, S. (2016). Enhanced adsorption of crystal violet by synthesized 
and characterized chitin nano whiskers from shrimp shell. Journal of Water Process 
Engineering, 14, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2016.07.010
Grenha, A. (2012). Chitosan nanoparticles: a survey of preparation methods. Journal of Drug 
Targeting, 20(4), 291–300. https://doi.org/10.3109/1061186X.2011.654121
Henriksson, M., Henriksson, G., Berglund, L. A., & Lindström, T. (2007). An environmentally 
friendly method for enzyme-assisted preparation of microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) 
nanofibers. European Polymer Journal, 43(8), 3434–3441. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
EURPOLYMJ.2007.05.038
Huang, K.-S., Sheu, Y.-R., & Chao, I.-C. (2009). Preparation and properties of nanochito￾san. Polymer-Plastics Technology and Engineering, 48(12), 1239–1243. https://doi.
org/10.1080/03602550903159069
Ifuku, S., Hori, T., Izawa, H., Morimoto, M., & Saimoto, H. (2015). Preparation of zwit￾terionically charged nanocrystals by surface TEMPO-mediated oxidation and partial 
deacetylation of α-chitin. Carbohydrate Polymers, 122, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2014.12.060
İspirliDoğaç, Y., Deveci, İ., Mercimek, B., & Teke, M. (2017). A comparative study for lipase 
immobilization onto alginate based composite electrospun nanofibers with effective and 
enhanced stability. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 96, 302–311. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJBIOMAC.2016.11.120
Jamróz, E., Kulawik, P., & Kopel, P. (2019). The effect of nanofillers on the functional prop￾erties of biopolymer-based films: a review. Polymers, 11(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/
POLYM11040675
Jayakumar, R., Prabaharan, M., Nair, S. V., & Tamura, H. (2010). Novel chitin and chitosan 
nanofibers in biomedical applications. Biotechnology Advances, 28(1), 142–150. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2009.11.001
Joseph, B., Mavelil Sam, R., Balakrishnan, P., J. Maria, H., Gopi, S., Volova, T., C. M. 
Fernandes, S., & Thomas, S. (2020). Extraction of nanochitin from marine resources 
and fabrication of polymer nanocomposites: recent advances. Polymers, 12(8), 1664. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym12081664
Kadokawa, J. (2015). Fabrication of nanostructured and microstructured chitin materials 
through gelation with suitable dispersion media. RSC Advances, 5(17), 12736–12746. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C4RA15319G
Kargarzadeh, H., Ioelovich, M., Ahmad, I., Thomas, S., & Dufresne, A. (2017). Methods 
for extraction of nanocellulose from various sources. Handbook of Nanocellulose and 
Cellulose Nanocomposites, 1–49. https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527689972.CH1
Lamanna, M., Morales, N. J., Lis, N., & Goyanes, S. (2013). Development and characterization 
of starch nanoparticles by gamma radiation: potential application as starch matrix filler. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 97(1), 90–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.04.081
Lauzon, M. A., Marcos, B., & Faucheux, N. (2018). Characterization of alginate/chitosan￾based nanoparticles and mathematical modeling of their SpBMP-9 release inducing neu￾ronal differentiation of human SH-SY5Y cells. Carbohydrate Polymers, 181, 801–811. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CARBPOL.2017.11.075
Li, J., Cha, R., Mou, K., Zhao, X., Long, K., Luo, H., Zhou, F., & Jiang, X. (2018). 
Nanocellulose-based antibacterial materials. Advanced Healthcare Materials, 7(20), 
1800334. https://doi.org/10.1002/ADHM.201800334
Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P. R., Anderson, D. P., & Yu, J. (2011). Preparation, modifica￾tion, and application of starch nanocrystals in nanomaterials: a review. Journal of 
Nanomaterials. https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/573687Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 253
Liu, Q., Cai, W., Zhen, T., Ji, N., Dai, L., Xiong, L., & Sun, Q. (2020). Preparation of deb￾ranched starch nanoparticles by ionic gelation for encapsulation of epigallocatechin 
gallate. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 161, 481–491. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.IJBIOMAC.2020.06.070
Loow, Y. L., New, E. K., Yang, G. H., Ang, L. Y., Foo, L. Y. W., & Wu, T. Y. (2017). Potential 
use of deep eutectic solvents to facilitate lignocellulosic biomass utilization and conver￾sion. Cellulose, 24(9), 3591–3618. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10570-017-1358-Y
Lopes, M., Abrahim, B., Veiga, F., Seiça, R., Cabral, L. M., Arnaud, P., Andrade, J. C., & 
Ribeiro, A. J. (2017). Preparation methods and applications behind alginate-based par￾ticles. Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery, 14(6), 769–782. https://doi.org/10.1080/1742
5247.2016.1214564
Lu, H., Butler, J. A., Britten, N. S., Venkatraman, P. D., & Rahatekar, S. S. (2021). 
Natural antimicrobial nano composite fibres manufactured from a combination of 
alginate and oregano essential oil. Nanomaterials, 11(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/
NANO11082062
Lu, P., & Hsieh, Y. Lo. (2010). Preparation and properties of cellulose nanocrystals: rods, 
spheres, and network. Carbohydrate Polymers, 82(2), 329–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
CARBPOL.2010.04.073
Lunardi, V. B., Soetaredjo, F. E., Putro, J. N., Santoso, S. P., Yuliana, M., Sunarso, J., Ju, Y. 
H., & Ismadji, S. (2021). Nanocelluloses: sources, pretreatment, isolations, modifica￾tion, and its application as the drug carriers. Polymers, 13(13). https://doi.org/10.3390/
POLYM13132052
Microfibrillated cellulose: morphology and accessibility (Conference) | OSTI.GOV. (n.d.). 
Retrieved January 26, 2022, from https://www.osti.gov/biblio/5039044
Mincea, M., Negrulescu, A., & Ostafe, V. (2012). Preparation, modification, and applica￾tions of chitin nanowhiskers: a review. Reviews on Advanced Materials Science, 30(3), 
225–242.
Nanocellulose: From Nature to High Performance Tailored Materials - Alain Dufresne - 
Google Books. (n.d.). Retrieved January 26, 2022, from https://books.google.co.in/book
s?hl=en&lr=&id=vElADwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR7&ots=E8sugBcvvt&sig=u4nq
rFzKl7zA2Ep43pz0gHXx5AE&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false
Nayak, A. K., & Hasnain, M. S. (Eds.). (2020). Alginates in drug delivery. Academic Press.
Ouros, A. C. D., Souza, M. O. D., & Pastore, H. O. (2014). Metallocene supported on inor￾ganic solid supports: an unfinished history. Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society, 
25, 2164–2185.
Pääkko, M., Ankerfors, M., Kosonen, H., Nykänen, A., Ahola, S., Österberg, M., Ruokolainen, 
J., Laine, J., Larsson, P. T., Ikkala, O., & Lindström, T. (2007). Enzymatic hydrolysis 
combined with mechanical shearing and high-pressure homogenization for nanoscale 
cellulose fibrils and strong gels. Biomacromolecules, 8(6), 1934–1941. https://doi.
org/10.1021/BM061215P
Peng, B. L., Dhar, N., Liu, H. L., & Tam, K. C. (2011). Chemistry and applications of nanocrys￾talline cellulose and its derivatives: A nanotechnology perspective. Canadian Journal of 
Chemical Engineering, 89(5), 1191–1206. https://doi.org/10.1002/CJCE.20554
Phanthong, P., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Xu, G., Abudula, A., & Guan, G. (2018). 
Nanocellulose: Extraction and application. Carbon Resources Conversion, 1(1), 32–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CRCON.2018.05.004
Qi, X., & Tester, R. F. (2016). Effect of native starch granule size on susceptibility to 
amylase hydrolysis. Starch - Stärke, 68(9–10), 807–810. https://doi.org/10.1002/
STAR.201500360
Rajisha, K. R., Maria, H. J., Pothan, L. A., Ahmad, Z., & Thomas, S. (2014). Preparation 
and characterization of potato starch nanocrystal reinforced natural rubber nanocom￾posites. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 67, 147–153. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.IJBIOMAC.2014.03.013254 Nanofillers
Ravi Kumar, M. N. V. (2000). A review of chitin and chitosan applications. Reactive and 
Functional Polymers, 46(1), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1381-5148(00)00038-9
Rinaudo, M. (2006). Chitin and chitosan: properties and applications. Progress in 
Polymer Science (Oxford), 31(7), 603–632. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.
2006.06.001
Rinaudo, M. (2008). Main properties and current applications of some polysaccharides as 
biomaterials. Polymer International, 57(3), 397–430. https://doi.org/10.1002/PI.2378
Riva, R., Ragelle, H., des Rieux, A., Duhem, N., Jérôme, C., & Préat, V. (2011). Chitosan and 
Chitosan Derivatives in Drug Delivery and Tissue Engineering (pp. 19–44). https://doi.
org/10.1007/12_2011_137
Rochima, E., Azhary, S. Y., Pratama, R. I., Panatarani, C., & Joni, I. M. (2017). Preparation and 
Characterization of Nano Chitosan from Crab Shell Waste by Beads-Milling Method. 
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 193, 012043. https://doi.
org/10.1088/1757-899X/193/1/012043
Maiti, S., Jayaramudu, J., Das, K., Reddy, S.M., Sadiku, R., Ray, S. S., & Liu, D. (2013). 
Preparation and characterization of nano-cellulose with new shape from different pre￾cursor. Carbohydrate Polymers, 98, 562–567.
Sanchez de la Concha, B. B., Agama-Acevedo, E., Nuñez-Santiago, M. C., Bello-Perez, L. A., 
Garcia, H. S., & Alvarez-Ramirez, J. (2018). Acid hydrolysis of waxy starches with dif￾ferent granule size for nanocrystal production. Journal of Cereal Science, 79, 193–200. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCS.2017.10.018
Saralkar, P., & Dash, A. K. (2017). Alginate nanoparticles containing curcumin and resveratrol: 
preparation, characterization, and in vitro evaluation against DU145 prostate cancer cell 
line. AAPS PharmSciTech, 18(7), 2814–2823. https://doi.org/10.1208/S12249-017-0772-7
Shabana, S., Prasansha, R., Kalinina, I., Potoroko, I., Bagale, U., & Shirish, S. H. (2019). 
Ultrasound assisted acid hydrolyzed structure modification and loading of antioxidants 
on potato starch nanoparticles. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 51, 444–450. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.ULTSONCH.2018.07.023
Singh, S. K. (2019). Solubility of lignin and chitin in ionic liquids and their biomedical appli￾cations. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 132, 265–277. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.182
Sivanesan, I., Muthu, M., Gopal, J., Hasan, N., Kashif Ali, S., Shin, J., & Oh, J.-W. (2021). 
Nanochitosan: commemorating the metamorphosis of an ExoSkeletal waste to a ver￾satile nutraceutical. Nanomaterials, 11(3), 821. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11030821
Soon, C. Y., Tee, Y. B., Tan, C. H., Rosnita, A. T., & Khalina, A. (2018). Extraction and physico￾chemical characterization of chitin and chitosan from Zophobas morio larvae in varying 
sodium hydroxide concentration. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
108, 135–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.11.138
Spinozzi, F., Ferrero, C., & Perez, S. (2020). The architecture of starch blocklets follows phyl￾lotaxic rules. Scientific Reports, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-72218-w
Sun, Q., Li, G., Dai, L., Ji, N., & Xiong, L. (2014). Green preparation and characterisation 
of waxy maize starch nanoparticles through enzymolysis and recrystallisation. Food 
Chemistry, 162, 223–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODCHEM.2014.04.068
Tang, Z.-X., Qian, J.-Q., & Shi, L.-E. (2007). Preparation of chitosan nanoparticles as car￾rier for immobilized enzyme. Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 136(1), 77–96. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02685940
Thomas, M. S., Koshy, R. R., Mary, S. K., Thomas, S., & A. Pothan, L. (2019). Starch, 
Chitin and Chitosan Based Composites and Nanocomposites. Springer International 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-03158-9Natural Nanofillers Family, Their Properties and Applications in Polymers 255
Torres‐Rendon, J. G., Femmer, T., de Laporte, L., Tigges, T., Rahimi, K., Gremse, F., Zafarnia, 
S., Lederle, W., Ifuku, S., Wessling, M., Hardy, J. G., & Walther, A. (2015). Bioactive 
gyroid scaffolds formed by sacrificial templating of nanocellulose and nanochitin hydro￾gels as instructive platforms for biomimetic tissue engineering. Advanced Materials, 
27(19), 2989–2995. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201405873
Vaishnav, D. G. (2016). Chapter - Introduction to Nanomaterials. December 2011.
Wang, N., Ding, E., & Cheng, R. (2007). Thermal degradation behaviors of spherical cellulose 
nanocrystals with sulfate groups. Polymer, 48(12), 3486–3493. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
POLYMER.2007.03.062
Wiegand, C., Moritz, S., Hessler, N., Kralisch, D., Wesarg, F., Müller, F. A., Fischer, D., & 
Hipler, U. C. (2015). Antimicrobial functionalization of bacterial nanocellulose by load￾ing with polihexanide and povidone-iodine. Journal of Materials Science. Materials in 
Medicine, 26(10). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10856-015-5571-7
Wu, J., Zhang, K., Girouard, N., & Meredith, J. C. (2014). Facile route to produce chitin nanofi￾bers as precursors for flexible and transparent gas barrier materials. Biomacromolecules, 
15(12), 4614–4620. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm501416q
Wypych, G. (2016). Handbook of Fillers: Fourth Edition, 1–922. ChemTec Publishing. https://
doi.org/10.1016/C2015-0-01953-0
Xiao, H., Yang, F., Lin, Q., Zhang, Q., Zhang, L., Sun, S., Han, W., & Liu, G. Q. (2020). 
Preparation and characterization of broken-rice starch nanoparticles with different 
sizes. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 160, 437–445. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.IJBIOMAC.2020.05.182
Yang, H.-C., Wang, W.-H., Huang, K.-S., & Hon, M.-H. (2010). Preparation and application 
of nanochitosan to finishing treatment with anti-microbial and anti-shrinking properties. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 79(1), 176–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2009.07.045
Yang, X., Liu, J., Pei, Y., Zheng, X., & Tang, K. (2020). Recent progress in preparation and 
application of nano‐chitin materials. Energy & Environmental Materials, 3(4), 492–515. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/eem2.12079
Zareie, C. (2013). Preparation of nanochitosan as an effective sorbent for the removal of 
copper ions from aqueous solutions. International Journal of Engineering, 26(8 (B)). 
https://doi.org/10.5829/idosi.ije.2013.26.08b.04
Zhu, F. D., Hu, Y. J., Yu, L., Zhou, X. G., Wu, J. M., Tang, Y., Qin, D. L., Fan, Q. Z., & Wu, A. 
G. (2021). Nanoparticles: a hope for the treatment of inflammation in CNS. Frontiers in 
Pharmacology, 12, 1114. https://doi.org/10.3389/FPHAR.2021.683935/BIBTEX257
9 Formulation of Polymer 
Nano-Composite NPK 
Fertilizer [Cellulose￾Graft-Poly (Acrylamide)/
Nano-Hydroxyapatite/
Soluble Fertilizer] 
and Evaluation of Its 
Nutrient Release
Kiplangat Rop, George N. Karuku, 
and Damaris Mbui
University of Nairobi
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-9
CONTENTS
9.1 Introduction ..................................................................................................258
9.2 Materials and Methods.................................................................................259
9.2.1 Synthesis of Hydroxyapatite (HA) Nano-Particles...........................259
9.2.2 Formulation of Cellulose-g-Poly(Acrylamide)/Nano-HA/Soluble 
Fertilizer Composite .........................................................................260
9.2.3 Chemical Characterization of Nano-HA and Nano-Composite 
Fertilizer ...........................................................................................260
9.2.4 Evaluating Nutrient Release from Nano-Composite Fertilizer by 
Soil Incubation Experiment ..............................................................260
9.2.4.1 Study Site ...........................................................................260
9.2.4.2 Soil Sampling and Preparation for Incubation Experiment ....261
9.2.4.3 Soil Characterization Before the Onset of Incubation 
Experiment......................................................................... 261
9.2.4.4 Fertilizer Nano-Composite Samples and Laboratory 
Incubation Experiment ....................................................... 261
9.4.4.5 Estimation of Nitrogen Mineralization Potential (N0).......262
9.2.5 Statistical Data Analysis...................................................................263258 Nanofillers
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Soil fertility decline contributes to low-crop yields due to the lack of nutrient 
resources, imbalanced nutrient mining, reduced fallow periods, fewer rotations and 
soil erosion, among other limiting factors (Kimetu et al., 2007; Mucheru-Muna et al., 
2014). To increase and sustain crop yields, farmers apply chemical fertilizers such 
as diammonium phosphate (DAP), triple superphosphate, nitrogen, phosphorous and 
potassium (NPK), monoammonium phosphate, single super phosphate (SSP), cal￾cium ammonium nitrate (CAN), urea (Mathenge, 2009; Shoals, 2012; Oseko and 
Dienya, 2015) and to some extent, organic manure, to supply the most-limiting nutri￾ents (NPK). However, the use of considerable amounts of chemical fertilizers in the 
sub-humid zones results in low nutrient use efficiency (NUE) due to leaching. Split 
application by top dressing is known to improve NUE, but small-scale poor-resource 
farmers consider it a luxury or apply below recommended rates (Mucheru-Muna 
et al., 2014) leading to poor crop performance. On the other hand, exclusive use of 
organic manure is limited by bulkiness, low nutrient quality, low nutrient mineraliza￾tion (Makokha et al., 2001; Gaskell and Smith, 2007; Leye and Omotayo, 2014) and 
extra labour that adds to the production cost.
Of the amount of fertilizers applied to the farms, only a small percentage is uti￾lized by plants while the rest is eventually washed into water bodies (Tolescu et al., 
2009) through leaching and surface runoff or lost by volatilization under reduced 
conditions. About 40%–70% N and 80%–90% P of fertilizers applied in the farms 
are lost to the environment resulting not only in economic and resource losses but also 
environmental pollution (Guo et al., 2005; Naderi and Danesh, 2013; Giroto et al., 
2017). Efforts have been made to minimize these challenges by developing new￾generation fertilizers, the so-called “smart” fertilizers. Among them are slow-release 
fertilizers (SRF) which contain at least one nutrient that either delays its availability 
and utilization processes or is available for plant uptake for a longer period than a 
standard fertilizer considered “quickly available” (Zeroual and Kossir, 2012; Chen 
et al., 2013). The availability of nutrients is prolonged by either slowing the release 
or altering reactions leading to losses (Olson-Rutz et al., 2011). The enhancement of 
NUE implies more efficient food production and reduced cost for environmental pro￾tection (Naderi and Danesh, 2013; Yuejin et al., 2013). Further, SRF can be applied 
as a pre-plant application, and the need for split application is eliminated, reducing 
production costs (Chen et al., 2013).
9.3 Results and Discussion .................................................................................263
9.3.1 FTIR Spectroscopic Analysis ...........................................................263
9.3.2 Transmission Electron Microscopy ..................................................266
9.3.3 Chemical Characteristics of Soil at the Onset of Incubation 
Experiment ........................................................................................267
9.3.4 Nitrogen Mineralization.................................................................... 267
9.3.5 Available Phosphorous...................................................................... 273
9.3.6 Exchangeable Potassium .................................................................. 274
9.4 Conclusion .................................................................................................... 275
References.............................................................................................................. 276Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 259
In the face of resource scarcity and ever-increasing population, development in 
agriculture can be achieved exclusively through the effective use of modern technol￾ogies. To date, intensive research is directed towards integrating nano-technologies 
into fertilizer development or formulation. Due to the high surface-area-to-volume 
ratio, nano-fertilizers are expected to be more effective than polymer-coated conven￾tional SRF as they enhance NUE, reduce toxicity and minimize the potential negative 
effects associated with an excess application such as groundwater pollution (DeRosa 
et al., 2010; Naderi and Danesh, 2013; Monreal et al., 2015; Montalvo et al., 2015). 
Hydroxyapatite (HA) nano-particles are rated as one of the prominent candidates 
for potential agricultural nutrient sources (Kottegoda et al., 2011). However, much 
of the available data on HA is mainly focused on biomedical applications (Mateus 
et al., 2007; Pang et al., 2010; Pataquiva-Mateus et al., 2013) while the agricultural 
application is lacking.
More recently, there has been an increasing interest in the use of polymer hydro￾gels (PHGs) in agricultural production. PHGs are macromolecular networks with 
the ability to swell or shrink in the presence or absence of water due to hydrophilic 
groups such as –SO3H, –CONH–, –CONH2, and –OH and a slightly cross-linked 
structure which resists dissolution (Sannino et al., 2009; Qiu and Hu, 2013; Laftah 
and Hashim, 2014; Ahmed, 2015). Polyacrylamide (PAM) is used as a chemical 
intermediate in the production of PHGs with high absorption capacity (super￾absorbents) such as disposable diapers and medical and agricultural products, 
among others (Charoenpanich, 2013; Laftah and Hashim, 2014). High-molecular￾weight PAM is added into the soil through irrigation water as anti-erosion additive 
(Charoenpanich, 2013) and it has been reported to be degraded by native soil bacte￾rial species such as Bacillus, Pseudomonas and Rhodococcus, among others and 
also fungi (Aspergillus) which are capable of accessing N through amidase activity 
(Kay-Shoemake et al., 1998; Yu et al., 2015). Extracellular amidase enzyme cata￾lyzes the hydrolysis of the C-N bond of the amides, resulting in the generation of 
NH3, NH4
+ and carboxylic acid groups (–COOH). The production of NH3 under 
moist conditions contributes to mineral N in the soil, whereas carboxylic acid is 
further degraded by microorganisms as the source of carbon (energy) to CO2 and 
H2O, thus being environment-friendly. PAM-treated agricultural soil has been 
experimentally demonstrated by Kay-Shoemake et al. (1998) to exhibit higher bac￾terial counts and high inorganic N concentration and amidase activity, hence con￾sidered healthier soil than the untreated ones. In this study, cellulose-grafted PAM 
polymer hydrogel was utilized in the formulation of slow-release nano-composite 
fertilizer, and the release of nutrients was assessed using laboratory incubation 
experiment.
9.2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
9.2.1 Synthesis of Hydroxyapatite (HA) Nano-Particles
The methodology used in the synthesis was adopted from Kottegoda et al. (2011) with 
some modifications namely introducing a surfactant. Ca(OH)2 7.716 g was weighed 
into a beaker and 0.22mM TX-100 (non-ionic surfactant) solution was added to make 260 Nanofillers
a total volume of 100mL and the mixture was stirred for 30 minutes with a motorized 
stirrer. A 100mL solution of 0.6M H3PO4 was added into the suspension of Ca(OH)2
drop-wise (15 mL/min) from the burette while stirring vigorously at 1000 rpm. After 
the reaction, the dispersion was stirred for 10 minutes and then allowed to age for 
2hours. It was then oven-dried at 105°C to constant weight and then pulverized into 
a fine powder. The surfactant was removed by washing the powder with methanol.
9.2.2  Formulation of Cellulose-g-Poly(Acrylamide)/
Nano-HA/Soluble Fertilizer Composite
Thirty millilitres (pre-determined volume containing 0.8 g dry weight) of cel￾lulose fibres, 1.0 g nano-HA and varied amounts of soluble NPK fertilizer blend 
(NH4)2HPO4, urea and K2SO4 weight ratio 3:5:2, respectively, were transferred into a 
3-necked flask. The flask was fitted with a reflux condenser and nitrogen line and then 
placed in a thermostated water bath equipped with a magnetic stirrer. Nitrogen gas 
was bubbled through the mixture for 10 minutes, as the temperature was gradually 
raised to 70°C. Ammonium persulphate 0.1 g was added to the mixture and stirred 
for 30 minutes to generate radicals. Acrylic acid (AA) 2.7mL partially neutralized 
with NH3 to a 70% degree of neutralization was added to 0.25 g of N,N-methylene–
bis-acrylamide, stirred to dissolve and then introduced into the reaction mixture. 
The total volume of the reaction mixture was adjusted to 40mL. The mixture was 
stirred for an additional 1 minute after which the reaction was allowed to proceed for 
2 hours. The reaction product was then cooled to room temperature, removed from 
the flask and then cut into regular pieces. NH3 solution (1:1) was added drop-wise 
to adjust the pH to 8. The nano-composite fertilizer was then oven-dried at 60°C to 
constant weight and then pulverized to pass through a 1mm sieve.
9.2.3  Chemical Characterization of Nano-HA
and Nano-Composite Fertilizer
Nano-HA and cellulose-g-poly(acrylamide)/nano-HA/soluble fertilizer composite 
were characterized using Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer, 
Shimadzu IRAffinity-1S, by scanning the samples between 4000 and 400 cm−1. The 
morphology was assessed by transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Tecnai G2 
F20 X-TWIN MAT).
9.2.4  Evaluating Nutrient Release from Nano-Composite
Fertilizer by Soil Incubation Experiment
9.2.4.1 Study Site
The study was carried out at the Faculty of Agriculture, Upper Kabete Campus, 
University of Nairobi, located in Kiambu County, coordinates 1° 15′ S and 36° 44′
E and an altitude of 1940m above sea level. The site is representative of large areas 
of central highlands of Kenya in terms of soils and climate, and the geology is com￾posed of the Nairobi Trachyte of the Tertiary age. The soils are very deep (>180m), Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 261
well-drained, dark-red to dark-reddish-brown, friable clays with moderate-to-high 
inherent fertility (Gachene, 1989; Kimetu et al., 2007; Karuku et al., 2012; Mucheru￾Muna et al., 2014) and are classified as humic Nitisols (WRB, 2015). The climate 
is characterized as semi-humid according to the Kenya Soil Survey agro-climatic 
zonation (Sombroek et al., 1982). The annual average rainfall to annual potential 
evaporation (r/Eo) is 58% (Karuku et al., 2012, 2014a, 2014b). The average monthly 
maximum and minimum temperatures are 23.8°C and 12.6°C, respectively. The 
area experiences bimodal rainfall distribution (long rains from mid-March to May 
and short rains from October to December) and the average annual precipitation 
is 1000mm (Jaetzold et al., 2006). Crops grown in the area include kale (Brassica 
oleracea), tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum), cabbage (Brassica oleracea), carrots 
(Daucus carota), onions (Allium fistulosum), beans (Phaseolus vulgaris), maize (Zea 
mays) and coffee (Coffea arabica).
9.2.4.2 Soil Sampling and Preparation for Incubation Experiment
The surface litter that included leaves, sticks, stumps and other materials was 
removed gently to expose the surface soil. Soil samples at a depth of 0–20cm were 
randomly collected in a transect at selected points in a field measuring 50 × 50m 
using a 600 cm3 soil auger and bulked to make a composite sample. The composite 
sample was air-dried in the laboratory and crushed to pass through a 4mm sieve to 
remove large pieces of surface materials. A portion of the composite sample was set 
aside for chemical characterization and the other portion for incubation experiments.
9.2.4.3 Soil Characterization Before the Onset of Incubation Experiment
A sub-soil sample was air-dried in the laboratory and crushed to pass through a 
<1mm sieve. Total N was determined by the micro-Kjeldahl method (Bremner, 
1996) and available P by the Mehlich-1 method (Mehlich, 1953). Exchangeable cat￾ions (Ca, K and Mg) were extracted with 1M NH4OAc; Ca and Mg contents were 
then determined in the leachate by atomic absorption spectroscopy and K by flame 
photometry. Organic carbon (OC) was determined using the wet oxidation method 
(Nelson and Sommers, 1996) and the organic matter (OM) was calculated by multi￾plying the % of OC by 1.724. Soil texture was determined by the hydrometer method 
(Glendon and Doni, 2002). Soil pH-H2O was determined with a pH metre (with glass 
electrodes) at a 1:2.5 soil-to-water (salt) ratio while the electrical conductivity was 
measured at a 1:2.5 (soil-to-water ratio) extract using a conductivity metre. Cation 
exchange capacity (CEC) was determined by leaching the soil with NH4OAc at pH 
7, and the NH4
+ concentration in the leachate was determined through steam distilla￾tion by the micro-Kjeldahl method (Bremner, 1996).
9.2.4.4 Fertilizer Nano-Composite Samples and 
Laboratory Incubation Experiment
Table 9.1 shows the composition of the nano-composite fertilizer and the amount of 
NPK added to the soil for incubation experiments. T1 is cellulose-g-poly(acrylamide) 
polymer hydrogel (PHG) and T2-T6 was formulated to contain the cellulose-g-poly262 Nanofillers
(acrylamide)/nano-HA/soluble fertilizer. The amount of soluble fertilizer (SF) in the 
composites was increased from T2 to T6 while the content of PHG and nano-HA 
decreased, and T7 represented a conventional fertilizer (CF).
The formulated nano-composite fertilizer (<1mm) was added to the soil at the 
rate of 50 mgN/kg, thoroughly mixed and then placed in plastic incubation bags. This 
corresponded to 100 kgN/ha, recommended for N application for maize in Kiambu 
County (planting, 250 kg/ha NPK 23:23:0; top dressing with CAN, 125 kg/ha). 
The amount of the fertilizer added to 1 kg of soil includes T1–397mg, T2–362mg, 
T3–325mg, T4–298mg, T5–250mg, T6–235mg and T7–227mg. The treatments 
were replicated three times, with untreated soil serving as the control. Distilled water 
was added to field capacity (30% w/w) and the bags were sealed and incubated in the 
dark at 20°C for 16weeks. The amount of mineral N (NH4-N and NO3-N), P and K 
was followed biweekly since the onset of incubation. The soil was kept moist at field 
capacity throughout the incubation period by adding distilled water where the feel 
method was used to establish the necessity. Aerobic conditions were maintained by 
opening plastic bags periodically to allow aeration. Each of the samples was divided 
into two portions at the time of sampling. For one portion, available N (NH4-N and 
NO3-N) was extracted and quantified. The other portion was air-dried before analys￾ing for total N, available P and K.
9.4.4.5 Estimation of Nitrogen Mineralization Potential (N0)
Potentially mineralizable N (N0), which is the fractional quantity N susceptible to 
mineralization, was estimated using single first-order kinetics employed by Stanford 
et al. (1974) and later adopted by Karuku (1989), and Karuku and Mochoge (2018), 
Equation 9.1.
dN
dt = −kN (9.1)
TABLE 9.1
The Composition of the Formulated Nano-Composite Fertilizer and the 
Amounts of N, P and K, in the Treatments
Treatment
Composition of Nano-Composite Fertilizer (% w/w) Soil Treatment (mg/kg)
N-P2O5-K2O PHG SF Nano-HA N P2O5 K2O
T1 14: 0: 0 100 0 0 50 0 0
T2 13.8: 18.8: 4.6 68.8 16.0 16.0 50 68.1 16.6
T3 15.4: 20: 4.8 62.7 22.3 15.0 50 65.0 15.6
T4 16.8: 21.5: 6.2 57.7 28.5 14.3 50 64.0 18.4
T5 20: 24: 9.7 44.5 44.4 11.1 50 60.0 24.2
T6 21.3: 25.2: 11.6 25.0 66.0 9.0 50 58.5 27.2
T7 22: 24: 11 0 100 0 50 54.5 24.9
PHG, polymer hydrogel; SF, soluble fertilizer; nano-HA. nano-hydroxyapatite.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 263
The integration gives Equation 9.2,
Log  l ( ) N N 0 0 − = t ogN k −  /t 2.303 (9.2)
where Nt
 is the cumulative N mineralized at time t (days), N0 is the amount of poten￾tially mineralizable N and k is the first-order rate constant (day-1). Stanford et al. (1974) 
and Karuku and Mochoge (2018) found the rate constant k to be reasonably equal for 
a large number of soils, and a period of 2weeks short-term pre-incubation was suf￾ficient to estimate the mineralization potential (N0) using simplified Equation 9.3. 
N N 0 = 9.77  t (9.3)
where N0 is nitrogen mineralization potential and Nt
 is nitrogen mineralized in 
2weeks.
9.2.5 Statistical Data Analysis
The data were subjected to ANOVA using IBM SPSS Statistics version 20. A Tukey 
honest significant difference post hoc test was used to compare and assess the signifi￾cance of the mean values at a probability level of P ≤ 0.05.
9.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
9.3.1 FTIR Spectroscopic Analysis
The Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum of HA nano-particles is shown in 
Figure 9.1. The absorption bands at 1419 and 875 cm–1 correspond to CO3
2– ions, 
attributed to the physical interaction of HA with CO2 during the synthesis at ambient 
conditions (Iyyappan and Wilson, 2013). The spectrum observed in the study is simi￾lar to that of Costescu et al. (2010), who reported decreased intensity of the peaks 
related to CO3
2– at high calcination temperatures of 600 and 1000°C. The broad 
and weak bands at 3600–3000 cm–1 and 1635 cm–1 are attributed to H-O-H of lattice 
water (Costescu et al., 2010) and also stretching vibrations of –OH ions in the nano￾HA lattice (Cisneros-Pineda et al., 2014; Gayathri et al., 2018). The characteristic 
bands for PO4
3– group appear at 1022 and 964cm–1 due to stretching vibrations and 
those at 601 and 563 cm–1 corresponding to bending vibrations. The band character￾istics of C-H stretch at 2928 and 2856 cm–1 due to –CH3 and –CH2 respectively were 
found to be absent in the FTIR spectrum. This confirms a complete removal of T-X 
100 upon washing HA nano-particles with methanol.
FTIR spectrum of nano-composite fertilizer is shown in Figure 9.2. The broad 
and strong bands at 2500–3500cm–1 can be assigned to the O–H stretch due to car￾boxylic acid (AA) and alcoholic group (cellulose), and also, N–H for the amide group 
(acrylamide). The bands at 3182 and 1543cm–1 are assigned to the N–H stretching 
vibration for primary amides (Bundela and Bajpai, 2008).264 Nanofillers
4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500
cm-1
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
%T
1635.64
1419.61
964.41
875.68
601.79
563.21
489.92
439.77
1022.27
HA1
FIGURE 9.1 FTIR spectrum of hydroxyapatite nano-particles.
4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500
cm-1
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
%T
3182.55
2974.23
2916.37
2360.87
2133.27
1716.65
1635.64
1543.05
1438.90
1400.32
1319.31
1230.58
1153.43
1049.28
956.69
898.83
744.52
655.80
613.36
516.92
489.92
439.77
Fertilizer Composite1
FIGURE 9.2 FTIR spectrum of cellulose-g-poly(acrylamide)/nano-HA/soluble fertilizer 
composite.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 265
Eritsyan et al. (2006) and Fernandes et al. (2015) proposed a radical polymeriza￾tion reaction mechanism between AA and urea via the carbonyl carbon as shown 
in Scheme 9.1. According to these authors, the moderately strong band at 1635 cm–1
(Figure 9.2) is assigned to the adsorption of NH3
+ and COO– groups as a result of 
intra- and intermolecular interactions between –COOH and –NH2 which lead to the 
formation of a salt.
Since AA was partially neutralized with NH3, ammonium acrylate could react the 
same way according to Scheme 9.2. Alongside radical polymerization, a condensa￾tion reaction between urea and AA may also occur (Fernandes et al., 2015), yielding 
a branched copolymer according to Scheme 9.3.
The strong band at 1438–1400 cm–1 (Figure 9.2) corresponds to the O–H bending 
vibration for carboxylic acid, revealing incomplete neutralization of AA. Spectral 
bands at 1153 to 1049 cm–1 are assigned to C–O–C bridging resulting from the 
or
Intra-molecular interaction
Inter-molecular interaction
SCHEME 9.1 Radical polymerization between urea and acrylic acid.
70 °C
- H2O
SCHEME 9.2 Radical polymerization between urea and ammonium acrylate.
- H2O
SCHEME 9.3 Condensation reaction between urea and acrylic acid.266 Nanofillers
reaction between ammonium acrylate (monomer) and the –OH group of cellulose. 
The band at 898 cm–1 is assigned to the C–O–C stretch of glycosidic bonds for amor￾phous cellulose (Synytsya and Novak, 2014). The FTIR peaks from 1049 to 920 cm–1
are assigned to P–O–C (Figure 4.13), suggesting an overlap between bands attrib￾uted to C–O–C and P–O–C groups. The peaks at 1049 and 956cm–1 are assigned 
to P–O–C stretching vibrations, indicating the reaction between –OH groups at the 
surface of HA nano-particles and the monomer. The bands at 1319 and 516 cm–1
(Figure 9.2) are attributed to P=O stretching vibrations for the PO4
3– ion due to 
(NH4)2HPO4, whereas the bands at 613 and 439 cm–1 correspond to SO4
2– ion due to 
K2SO4, i.e. inorganic salts.
From the FTIR spectrum of the nano-composite fertilizer, there is an indication of 
the existence of chemical interactions between (i) the monomer, cellulose and nano-HA 
and (ii) monomer and urea molecules towards the formation of 3-D network structure. 
Additionally, due to the large surface area of HA nano-particles, Kottegoda et al. (2011, 
2017) associated the formation of urea-HA nano-hybrid (molar ratio, 6:1) to the exis￾tence of H-bonds between the –OH group on the surface of HA and –NH2 group of urea.
9.3.2 Transmission Electron Microscopy
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrographs of HA nano-particles 
and cellulose-g-poly(acrylamide)/nano-HA/SF composite are shown in Figure 9.3. 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
FIGURE 9.3 TEM micrographs of (a,b) HA nano-particles, (c,d) cellulose-g￾poly(acrylamide)/nano-HA/soluble fertilizer) composite, at 50 and 20 nm scales.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 267
The images of nano-HA displayed rod-shaped nano-particle agglomerates with par￾ticle size <50nm (Figure 9.3a, b). This is consistent with the observation made by 
Iyyappan and Wilson (2013) who attributed the formation of rod-shaped nano-HA 
to a hydrophobic ring complex formed through the ion-dipole interaction between 
the Ca2+ and polyoxyethylene group of TX-100. The agglomeration of nanoparticles 
observed in Figure 9.3a, b was attributed to the high specific surface energy that led 
to aggregation (Pramanik et al., 2009; Ragu and Sakthivel 2014). TEM images of 
the fertilizer composite (Figure 9.3c, d) showed the dispersion of HA nano-parti￾cles and the salt crystals. Similarly, Ragu and Sakthivel (2014) observed diminished 
agglomeration of nano-HA in polymethyl methacrylate/nano-HA composite at about 
20–50nm. This was attributed to the reduction in surface energy of nano-HA by the 
polymer through its pendent PO4
3– group.
9.3.3  Chemical Characteristics of Soil at the
Onset of Incubation Experiment
Table 9.2 shows the salient characteristics of the soil used in the study. The soils at 
the site were acidic with low available P content. The soil acidity could be attributed 
to the humid conditions in the central highlands of Kenya which lead to the leach￾ing of Ca, Mg and K and other basic cations. Low amounts of available P could be 
attributed to the soil acidity which renders P unavailable through fixation by Al, Fe 
and Mn and also continuous removal by crops.
9.3.4 Nitrogen Mineralization
The mineral N (NH4-N+NO3-N) content during 16weeks of incubation is shown 
in Table 9.3. The results show low mineral N content in the initial stages of incuba￾tion with some decrease in the 4th week followed by a significant increase through 
the 8th week and a peak at the 12th week and then a decline in the 16th week. Low 
TABLE 9.2
Some Salient Chemical Characteristics of Soil 
Used in Incubation Experiment
Parameters Units Values
pH (soil:H2O, 1:2.5) – 5.25
pH (CaCl2:1:2.5) – 4.50
Electrical conductivity ds/m 0.26
Cation exchange capacity Cmol(+) kg–1 15.62
Total N % 0.29
Available P ppm 8.50
Exchangeable K Cmol(+) kg–1 1.10
Ca Cmol(+) kg–1 8.51
Mg Cmol(+) kg–1 4.26268 Nanofillers
mineralization of N in the initial stages of incubation reflects the lag phase (Deenik 
and Yost, 2008) associated with the immobilization of nutrients by microorganisms 
to nourish and diversify their species and biomass (Karuku and Mochoge, 2016, 
Karuku and Mochoge, 2018; Tambone and Adani, 2017). The inorganic nutrients, 
sufficient water, carbon sources and trace elements are essential for the maintenance 
and population growth of microorganisms. The incubation period between the 4th 
and 12th week relates to the microbial exponential growth phase where microbes 
proliferated and were able to act on the substrate. After they are satiated, the remain￾ing portion of the substrate is mineralized into the soil. The decline in mineral N 
content after the 12th week of incubation may be attributed to the depletion of the 
mineralizable substrate and the possibility of immobilization by microbes as their 
population had proliferated during the long incubation period (Karuku, 2019). This 
mineralization pattern may favour annual crops such as maize since the uptake of N 
is slow at establishment and moderate at development and reproductive growth stages 
and declines at maturity as the plant reaches senescence.
The release of N from the SRF composites T2 to T6 [cellulose-g-poly(acrylamide)/
nano-HA/SF composite] is thought to have occurred in two phases: (i) diffusion of 
urea-N and NH4-N and (ii) hydrolysis of amide-N according to Liu et al. (2007). 
The highest content of mineral N in the first 4weeks was observed in CF (T7) and 
was attributed to the urea-N hydrolysis and release of NH4-N in DAP. However, no 
significant difference was observed between T7 and T2 to T6 in the initial period of 
incubation. This non-significant difference may be attributed to the small particle 
sizes of SRF composites (<1mm) that enabled rapid diffusion of SF into the soil. 
Thus, the rate of diffusion of soluble N may be decreased by increasing the particle 
size of the fertilizer composite. Significant higher mineral N content was observed 
TABLE 9.3
Mineral N (NO3-N + NH4-N) Content (ppm) During 16 Weeks of Incubation 
Period
Treatment
Incubation Period (Weeks)
2 4 8 12 16
Cumulative Mineral 
N at the 16th week
Cntrl 43.6a 24.2a 107.2a 145.8a 85.1a 405.8a
T1 50.8ab 33.0b 152.9b 176.6ab 117.9b 531.1b
T2 59.0abc 44.1cd 176.4c 200.1bc 128.4cd 608.0cd
T3 55.0abc 41.5c 189.5cd 192.2bc 119.3b 597.4c
T4 55.3abc 46.0cd 205.1de 266.1e 139.1e 711.7e
T5 63.5bc 42.9c 190.1cde 210.6cd 124.7bcd 631.8cd
T6 58.3abc 48.8cd 211.7e 242.1de 131.2de 692.1e
T7 73.2c 51.7d 184.9cd 207.5bc 129.6d 646.9d
Notes: Different letters in the same column are significantly different (p ≤ 0.05 level). Cntrl = no treat￾ment, T1 = 14: 0: 0, T2 = 13.8: 18.8: 4.6, T3 = 15.4: 20: 4.8, T4 = 16.8: 21.5: 6.2, T5 = 20: 24: 
9.7, T6 = 21.3: 25: 11.2, T7 = 24: 22: 11.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 269
in T6 in the 8th and 12th weeks and T4 in the 12th and 16th weeks, relative to T7. 
The lower values observed in T7 (relative to T4 and T6) during this period (8th–16th 
week) may be attributed to early exposure of NH4-N to exchangeable sites in the 
soil and the possibility of immobilization through fixation. The higher mineral N 
content in T4 and T6 (than T7) in the later stages of incubation (8th–12th week) was 
attributed to its reduced interaction with soil particles in the early stages of incuba￾tion and release of hydrolyzed amide-N. NH4
+ fixation occurs in clay soils due to 
the formation of NH·O bond in the hexagonal holes and the balancing of positive 
charge deficiency which arises from the isomorphous substitution of Si4+ and Al3+
ions (Chen, 1997). No significant difference in mineral N content was observed in 
the 12th week between T7 and T1, T2 and T3, indicating considerable mineralization 
of N in all SRF treatments. The observed increase in mineral N contents between 
the 8th and 16th week in SRF treatments (T1 to T6) may be attributed to the release 
through hydrolysis of amide-N.
Cumulative mineral N generally increased from T1 to T6 due to the increased 
proportion of SF and decreased content of nano-HA in the fertilizer formulation 
(Table 3.1). N mineralization is a biological process; hence, its release depends on 
the chemical constituent of the fertilizer such as N content and C:N ratio (Masunga 
et al., 2016) as well as lignin and lingocellulose ratio, among other factors (Karuku 
et al., 2014b; Karuku, 2019). The C:N ratio influences the mineralization rate, as 
microorganisms have to immobilize N to break carbon bonds/chains in the organic 
material for their energy requirement (Dong et al., 2012; Karuku and Mochoge, 
2016; Tambone and Adani, 2017). The significant difference observed in T1 mineral 
N content compared to all other SRF treatments, from the 4th to the 16th week, was 
related to the carbon content in the formulation. The slow mineralization of N in T1 
(100% of PHG which is composed of carbonaceous material of acrylic and cellulose 
chains) may have been due to its higher carbon content, compared to other SRF 
treatments (Table 9.1). The proportion of carbon decreased on incorporating SF and 
nano-HA into PHG.
Nevertheless, significantly higher mineral N content in T1 compared with the 
control indicates substantial hydrolysis of the amide-N within the incubation period. 
Cellulose chains being part of the polymer composite provide easily degradable C to 
the microorganisms, enhancing the breakdown of the copolymer, hence N release. 
The addition of organic material to PAM-amended soil has been reported to effect 
degradation through increased microbial activity. Higher amounts of soil aggregat￾ing fungi were reported by TonThat et al. (2008) in macro-aggregates generated 
from PAM-wheat residue-amended soil compared to the control. Award et al. (2012) 
also reported a stimulating effect of synthesized PAM biopolymer (BP) and biochar 
(BC) on the decomposition of soil OM and maize residue. These workers observed 
higher enzymatic activities in both BP- and BC-amended soil compared to the con￾trol and, fungi were implicated for contributing largely to plant residue decomposi￾tion. Watson et al. (2016) observed stimulation of nitrification and C mineralization 
in maize straw-amended soil conditioned with PAM, a phenomenon attributed to 
improved microbial conditions and partial utilization of PAM as a substrate.
The addition of mineral N from an inorganic source to organic fertilizer enhances 
the decomposition of organic material (Abbasi and Khaliq 2016, Karuku, 2019; 270 Nanofillers
Karuku and Mochoge, 2018). Further, cultures of bacteria derived from agricultural 
soils have been reported to utilize PAM as an N source (Kay-Shoemake et al., 1998). 
The bacterial strain (Pseudomonas putida H147) studied by Yu et al. (2015) showed a 
31.1% of degradation efficiency of PAM in 7 days and exceeded 45% under optimum 
culture conditions. Degraded PAM showed low-molecular-weight oligomer deriva￾tives while acrylamide monomers did not accumulate. The observed increase in the 
content of mineral N in SRF treatments T2 to T6 could be attributed to the increased 
amount of soluble N from DAP and easily hydrolyzable N from urea. The microbes 
were provided with an easy source of N, and to acquire energy (carbon), the polymer 
had to be degraded. The polymer medium supplemented with mineral N, liquid par￾affin and sucrose has been shown to contribute to PAM degradation and microbial 
biomass compared to the control (Yu et al., 2015). The significantly (p ≤0.05) lower 
content of mineral N observed in SRF treatment T5 relative to T4 and T6 could be 
attributed to the experimental errors.
Table 9.4 shows ammonium-N and nitrate-N contents during different incubation 
stages. The NH4-N content in T7 was significantly higher (p ≤0.05) than T1, T2, T4 
TABLE 9.4
NH4-N and NO3-N Content (ppm) During 16 Weeks of Incubation Period
Treatment
Incubation Period (Weeks)
2 4 8 12 16
Cumulative Mineral 
N after 16 Weeks
NH4-N
Cntrl 29.4 a 17.1 a 72.5 a 87.0 a 53.3 a 259.0 a
T1 34.0 ab 24.5 b 83.0 ab 99.6 ab 69.3 b 310.3 b
T2 38.8 c 26.8 b 97.4 bc 116.8 bc 78.9 cd 358.7 cd
T3 34.0 ab 25.0 b 95.4 bc 114.5 bc 73.6 bc 342.5 bc
T4 35.1 ab 29.3 b 109.8 c 131.7 c 86.4 d 392.3 bc
T5 35.8 ab 23.5 ab 86.29 ab 103.5 ab 78.9 cd 328.0 bc
T6 38.8 c 28.3 b 113.7 c 136.4 c 78.9 cd 396.1 d
T7 38.8 c 27.9 b 89.5 ab 107.4 ab 73.6 bc 342.6 c
NO3-N
Cntrl 14.2 a 7.2 a 34.6 a 58.8 a 31.7 a 146.5 a
T1 16.8 ab 8.7 b 69.9 b 77.0 ab 48.5 b 220.8 b
T2 20.2 abc 17.2 cd 79.1 c 83.3 bc 49.5 cd 249.2 c
T3 20.9 abc 16.5 c 94.1 cd 77.7 bc 45.7 bc 254.9 c
T4 20.2 abc 16.7 c 95.4 de 134.4 e 52.7 e 319.3 d
T5 27.6 bc 19.5 c 103.9 cde 107.1 cd 45.7 bcd 303.8 d
T6 19.4 bc 20.5 cd 98.1 e 105.7 de 52.3 de 295.9 d
T7 34.3 c 23.8 d 95.4 cd 100.1 bc 56.0 d 309.7 d
Notes: Different letters in the same column are significantly different (p ≤ 0.05 level). Cntrl = no treat￾ment, T1 = 14: 0: 0, T2 = 13.8: 18.8: 4.6, T3 = 15.4: 20: 4.8, T4 = 16.8: 21.5: 6.2, T5 = 20: 24: 
9.7, T6 = 21.3: 25: 11.2, T7 = 24: 22: 11.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 271
and T5 in the 2nd week, whereas for NO3-N, T7 showed a significantly higher value 
than T1, T3, T4 and T5 in the 4th week of incubation. No significant difference in 
both NH4-N and NO3-N contents was observed between T7 and SRF T2, T3 and T5 
in the 8th, 12th and 16th weeks, but significantly higher values were observed in T4 
and T6 compared to T7. Significantly higher N content in T7 at early stages of incu￾bation (2nd and 4th weeks) reveals the availability of N which crops may not fully 
utilize as it may be lost through leaching or fixation by clay minerals, while in SRFs 
it may be preserved for future use, hence better synchronization. From the 8th to the 
16th week, T7 and most of the SRFs showed nearly equal N content, implying that 
the plant can utilize the N released by SRF more efficiently than T7 which might get 
depleted sooner due to the susceptibility to early losses.
NH4-N content was higher than NO3-N throughout the incubation. Subsequently, 
the cumulative NH4-N content at the end of the incubation period recorded higher 
values than NO3-N content and generally increased from T1 to T6. No significant dif￾ference was observed in cumulative NH4-N content between T7 and SRF T2, T3, T4 
and T5, and also, in the cumulative NO3-N between T7 and SRF T4, T5 and T6. The 
higher NH4-N content compared to NO3-N may be attributed to the acidity of the soil 
which could have inhibited the growth and activities of nitrifying bacteria. The pH 
of the soil during the incubation period showed some increase in the 12th and 16th 
weeks (Table 9.5), particularly in SRF T2 to T6, though not significant among the 
treatments. The lowest pH value was 5.15 recorded in the 2nd week, while the high￾est was 5.97 recorded in the 16th week. Nitrification (biological oxidation of NH4
+
to NO3
–
) occurs in the soil at pH values ranging from 5.5 to 10.0, is optimal at a pH 
value of about 8.5, and is inhibited at a pH less than 5 (Sahrawat, 2008).
Similar to the current study, Omar and Ismail (1999) observed a higher content of 
NH4-N than NO3-N in the soil treated with a mixture of urea and CaCl2 or K2SO4. 
The population of bacteria and fungi decreased in both urea and CaCl2 or K2SO4
TABLE 9.5
Soil pH During the Incubation Period 
Incubation Period (Weeks)
Treatment 2 4 8 12 16
Cntrl 5.34 a 5.60 a 5.53 a 5.33 a 5.42 a
T1 5.31 a 5.54 a 5.43 a 5.66 b 5.71 b
T2 5.28 a 5.23 a 5.56 a 5.74 b 5.76 bc
T3 5.21 a 5.69 a 5.30 a 5.63 ab 5.67 b
T4 5.33 a 5.46 a 5.36 a 5.68 b 5.83 bc
T5 5.15 a 5.47 a 5.44 a 5.59 ab 5.71 bc
T6 5.28 a 5.80 a 5.34 a 5.47 ab 5.92 c
T7 5.24 a 5.65 a 5.23 a 5.52 ab 5.68 b
Notes: Different letters in the same column are significantly different (p ≤ 0.05 level).
Cntrl = no treatment, T1 = 14: 0: 0, T2 = 13.8: 18.8: 4.6, T3 = 15.4: 20: 4.8, T4 = 16.8: 21.5: 6.2, T5 = 
20: 24: 9.7, T6 = 21.3: 25: 11.2, T7 = 24: 22: 11.272 Nanofillers
treatments. The soil pH increased in urea amendment but was decreased in inorganic 
salt amendments to values lower than that of the control. The toxic effect of urea 
and inorganic salts was reduced when they were applied as a mixture. Giroto et al. 
(2017) observed higher pH values (6.3–7.9) after 42days of aerobic incubation of 
soil amended with urea/HA and thermoplastic starch urea/HA compared to that of 
untreated soil, whereas the pH of the soil amended with HA and SSP remained close 
to the pH of the control (≈5). The increase in pH in nano-composite amendments was 
attributed to the high hydrolysis of urea in the soil with low CEC and low buffering 
capacity. The existence of more mineral N in the form of NH4-N is beneficial because 
it is not susceptible to leaching losses.
Table 9.6 shows N mineralization potential (N0), mineralization rate constant (K), 
coefficient of determination (R2
) and time taken for 50% of potentially mineraliz￾able N (t1/2), to be mineralized. T7 had the highest potentially mineralizable nitrogen 
(N0) compared to all other treatments though not significantly different from T2, 
T3, T4, T5 and T6. The low N mineralization observed in SRF treatments may be 
attributed to a slow release in nutrients in the initial stages of incubation. N0 related 
well to the observed cumulative mineral N at the 16th week of incubation. However, 
no significant difference was observed for the cumulative mineral N between T7, T2 
and T5 at the 16th week of incubation, implying that the incorporation of SF into the 
polymer composite enhances the mineralization of N. Thus, the significantly higher 
(p≤0.05) mineral N values observed in T4 and T6, relative to T7, may be attributed 
to improved mineralization, leading to the release of higher amounts of mineral N in 
the later stages of incubation.
The coefficient of determination, R2, ranged from 0.742 to 0.917, indicating a good 
fit of the experimental data to the single-order kinetic model. The mineralization 
TABLE 9.6
Nitrogen Mineralization Potential (No), Mineralization Rate Constant (K), 
Half-Life (t1/2) and Cumulative Mineral Nitrogen
Treatment No (ppm) R2
K 
(Week–1)
t1/2 
(Weeks)
Observed Cumulative 
Mineral N at 16 Weeks (ppm)
Cntrl 425 a 0.903 0.052 13.3 405 a
T1 495 ab 0.917 0.051 13.6 531 b
T2 576 abc 0.829 0.059 11.7 608 cd
T3 536 abc 0.716 0.051 13.6 597 c
T4 539 abc 0.865 0.056 12.4 712 e
T5 619 bc 0.742 0.060 11.6 632 cd
T6 569 abc 0.910 0.053 13.1 692 e
T7 714 c 0.831 0.057 12.2 647 d
No = nitrogen mineralization potential, K = mineralization rate constant and t1/2 = time taken for 50% 
of potentially mineralizable nitrogen to be mineralized. Cntrl = no treatment, T1= 14: 0: 0, T2 
= 13.8: 18.8: 4.6, T3 = 15.4: 20: 4.8, T4 = 16.8: 21.5: 6.2, T5 = 20: 24: 9.7, T6 = 21.3: 25: 11.2, 
T7 = 24: 22: 11.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 273
rate constant ranged from 0.051 to 0.056week-1 which resulted in the half-life time 
(t1/2) ranging from 11.6 to 13.6weeks, suggesting that mineralization of most of the N 
would occur within the growing period of most annual crops of about 20weeks. The 
t1/2 values obtained in the experiment were similar to the average value of 12.8weeks 
reported by Stanford and Smith (1972) on evaluating t1/2 of 39 soil types in the United 
States. Since there was less variation in the t1/2 among the treatments, the advantage 
of SRF over T7 could be attributed to the slow initial N mineralization, leading to the 
release of significantly (p≤0.5) higher amounts in the later stages of incubation. The 
incubation experiment was, however, carried out at optimal conditions of moisture, 
temperature and aeration for the growth and activity of soil microbes, and hence, the 
N mineralization rate might be lower/higher in the field than in the laboratory due to 
varying conditions that could affect the performance of microorganisms.
9.3.5 Available Phosphorous
Available P at different incubation times is shown in Table 9.7. The lowest P values 
were recorded in the 4th week and highest in the 8th week and remained nearly 
constant in the 12th and 16th weeks of incubation. The decline in P content between 
the 2nd and 4th week could be attributed to microbial immobilization and adsorp￾tion of soluble P into the soil. The increased P availability after 4weeks in all SRF 
treatments may be attributed to its release through microbial solubilization of nano￾HA and degradation of the copolymer. Insoluble phosphates such as apatite have 
been shown to be solubilized by native soil microorganisms. Phosphate-solubilizing 
bacteria (Pseudomonas, Enterobacter and Anthrobacter) and fungi (Aspergillus and 
Penicillium) present in the soil and the rhizosphere have been reported to hydrolyze 
the insoluble P by secreting low-molecular-mass organic acids, chelate mineral ions 
or lower the pH (Khan et al., 2014; Alori et al., 2017). Besides organic acids, mineral 
TABLE 9.7
Available P Content (ppm) at Different Incubation Times (Weeks)
Treatment
Incubation Period (Weeks)
2 4 8 12 16
Cntrl 21.0 a 10.4 a 25.3 a 23.9 a 26.1 a
T1 24.1 ab 12.9 abc 25.9 a 26.3 a 28.5 a
T2 24.1 ab 12.5 ab 39.3 b 37.8 b 41.1 b
T3 22.3 ab 13.6 abc 46.5 bc 46.6 c 46.2 bc
T4 26.1 ab 14.4 bc 55.2 cd 54.3 d 51.6 cd
T5 25.6 ab 16.3 cd 63.5 d 66.2 e 66.2 e
T6 27.4 ab 16.3 cd 76.3 e 80.4 f 76.6 f
T7 27.8 b 19.6 d 54.2 cd 53.7 d 54.3 d
Notes: Different letters in the same column are significantly different (p ≤ 0.05 level).
Cntrl = no treatment, T1= 14: 0: 0, T2 = 13.8: 18.8: 4.6, T3 = 15.4: 20: 4.8, T4 = 16.8: 21.5: 6.2, 
T5 = 20: 24: 9.7, T6 = 21.3: 25: 11.2, T7 = 24: 22: 11.274 Nanofillers
acids such as HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4 produced by chemoautotrophs and H+ pump, for 
instance in Penicillium rugulosum, have been reported to solubilize P (Khan et al., 
2014). Soil fungi such as mycorrhizae have been shown to be better solubilizers of P 
than bacteria as they traverse longer distances within the soil and also produce and 
secrete more acids such as gluconic, citric, lactic, 2-ketogluconic, oxalic, tartaric 
and acetic acids (Alori et al., 2017). Additionally, the assimilation of NH4
+ within 
microbial cells releases H+ that solubilizes P without the production of organic acids. 
Acidification of microbial cells and their surroundings release P through the substitu￾tion of H+ for Ca2+ ions. The release of Ca2+ ions into the soil could be the reason for 
the observed increase in soil pH towards the end of the incubation period (Table 9.5). 
Ca2+ ions are bases and have the effect of neutralizing soil acidity (Mucheru-Muna 
et al., 2014).
No significant difference was observed in the 2nd week between T7 and SRF 
T1 to T6, while in the 4th week T1 to T4 recorded a significantly lower P content 
compared to T7. From the 8th to 16th week, the highest P value was observed in 
T6 which was also significantly different from all the treatments. The observation 
could be attributed to the solubilization of nano-HA and release of soluble P which 
was physically protected by the composite from adsorption into the soil in the initial 
stages of incubation.
Fertilizer nano-composites were quantified to deliver a specific amount of N (50 
mgN/kg of soil) into the soil regardless of NPK formulae; hence, the amount of P in 
the amendments varied as: T2=68.1 mg/kg, T3=65 mg/kg, T4=64 mg/kg, T5=60 
mgkg-1, T6=58.5 mg/kg and T7=54.5 mg/kg (Table 9.1). The available P increased 
significantly (p≤0.05) from T2 to T6, an observation attributed to the increased 
content of soluble P and decreased content of HA. No significant difference was 
observed between T7 and T4, except in the 4th week, a fact attributed to the bal￾ance between the amount of P in the treatment (T7<T4) and availability in the soil. 
Nitisols are strong P-sorping soils (WRB, 2015), and hence, the lower content of P 
observed in T7, relative to T5 and T6, could be attributed to the soil retention capac￾ity which increases with contact time (Naima et al., 2015; Giroto et al., 2017). The 
slow microbial solubilization of nano-HA and encapsulation by the copolymer com￾posite could have reduced the available P time of contact in T5 and T6. No signifi￾cant difference was observed between the control and T1 since they did not contain 
P in the shipments. Due to the varied content of P in the amendments (Table 9.1), it 
was not possible to ascertain the optimum amount to be incorporated into the nano￾composite fertilizer.
9.3.6 Exchangeable Potassium
Exchangeable K at different incubation times is shown in Table 9.8. The K con￾tent showed less variation during the incubation period suggesting a short release 
time. The small particle size of the SRF nano-composite and high water solubility of 
the K2SO4 salt could have enabled faster diffusion of K into the soil. No significant 
difference (p≥0.05) was observed between CF T7 and SRF T1 to T6 in the first 
4weeks, but a significant difference was observed between the same from the 8th 
to the 16th week. The control did not differ significantly from T1 throughout the Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 275
incubation period and this was expected as K was not included in the formulation. 
The contents of K in the treatments were different (Table 9.1), and hence, just like in 
P, it was not possible to ascertain the optimum amount to be incorporated into the 
nano-composite fertilizer.
9.4 CONCLUSION
A slow-release nano-composite fertilizer was formulated and characterized. FTIR 
spectroscopy revealed the existence of chemical interaction between nano-HA, urea 
molecules and the copolymer structure besides physical entrapment within the copo￾lymer. The incubation experiment revealed low mineral N content in the first 4weeks 
and a peak in the 12th week corresponding to the most active and nutrient demand 
stages of development and reproduction of most crops, hence proper synchroniza￾tion of SRF. The highest mineral N content was observed in CF in the first 4weeks, 
whereas between the 8th and 16th week, both CF and SRF showed a similar mineral 
N content with some SRFs, for instance T4 and T6, releasing significantly higher 
amounts. The single first-order kinetic model predicted well N mineralization, and 
the half-life time (t1/2) showed less variation among the treatments. Low contents of 
P were observed in the first 4weeks, increased to a maximum in the 8th week and 
remained constant thereafter. Availability of P increased significantly in SRF with 
increased content of soluble P and decreased content of nano-HA. SRF T5 and T6 
could provide synchronized release of N and P, although the release of K was almost 
immediate. The SRF nano-composite would be more suitable for use in annual crops 
and should be applied during planting so as to match nutrient release with the crop 
uptake. The release of nutrients from nano-composite fertilizer was, however, based 
on a laboratory incubation experiment, and the evaluation should be done under field 
conditions before they can be recommended with confidence.
TABLE 9.8
Exchangeable K Content (Cmol/kg) at Different Incubation Times (Weeks)
Incubation Period (Weeks)
Treatment 2 4 8 12 16
Cntrl 1.63 a 1.70 a 1.87 a 1.58 a 1.70 a
T1 1.75 ab 1.85 ab 1.90 ab 1.85 a 1.80 a
T2 1.87 ab 1.83 ab 1.98 bc 2.05 b 2.08 b
T3 2.00 ab 1.92 ab 1.90 c 2.06 b 2.18 c
T4 2.05 ab 2.05 bc 1.95 d 2.00 c 1.95 d
T5 2.10 ab 2.10 bc 2.05 d 2.10 d 2.37 e
T6 2.17 ab 2.13 bc 2.25 e 2.17 e 2.27 e
T7 2.10 b 2.07 bc 2.30 d 2.37 c 2.28 d
Notes: Different letters in the same column are significantly different (p ≤ 0.05 level).
Legend: Cntrl = No treatment, T1= 14: 0: 0, T2 = 13.8: 18.8: 4.6, T3 = 15.4: 20: 4.8, T4 = 16.8: 21.5: 
6.2, T5 = 20: 24: 9.7, T6 = 21.3: 25: 11.2, T7 = 24: 22: 11276 Nanofillers
REFERENCES
Abbasi, M.K. and Khaliq, A. (2016), Nitrogen mineralization of a loam soil supplemented with 
organic–inorganic amendments under laboratory incubation, Frontiers in Plant Science, 
7: 1038.
Ahmed, E.M. (2015), Hydrogel: Preparation, characterization and applications: A review, 
Journal of Advanced Research, 6(2): 105–121.
Alori, E.T., Glick, B.R. and Babalola, O.O. (2017), Microbial phosphorus solubilization and its 
potential for use in sustainable agriculture, Frontiers in Microbiology, 8: 971.
Award, Y.M., Blagodatskaya, E., Ok, Y.S. and Kuzyakov, Y. (2012), Effect of polyacrylamide, 
biopolymer and biochar on decomposition of soil organic matter and plant residues as 
determined by 14C and enzyme activities, European Journal of Soil Biology, 48: 1–10.
Bremner, J.M. (1996), Total nitrogen, in: Sparks, D.L. (Eds), Methods of Soil Analysis, 
Part 3: Chemical Methods, Soil Science Society of America and American Society of 
Agronomy, Madison, Wisconsin, pp. 1085–1086.
Bundela, H. and Bajpai, A.K. (2008), Designing of hydroxyapatite-gelatin based porous 
matrix as bone substitute: Correlation with biocompatibility aspects, Polymer Letters, 
2(3): 201–213.
Charoenpanich, J. (2013), Removal of acrylamide by microorganisms, in: Yogesh, P. and 
Prakash R. (Eds), Applied Bioremediation - Active and Passive Approaches, IntechOpen 
Limited, London, UK, pp. 101–121.
Chen, C., Gao, Z., Qiu, X. and Hu, S. (2013), Enhancement of the controlled-release prop￾erties of chitosan membranes by cross-linking with suberoyl chloride, Molecules, 18: 
7239–7252.
Chen, J.F. (1997), Adsorption and diffusion of ammonium in soils, in: Zhu, Z., Wen, Q. and 
Freney, J.R. (Eds), Nitrogen in Soils of China, Development in Plant Soil Sciences. 
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, p. 74.
Cisneros-Pineda, O.G., Kao, W.H., Loría-Bastarrachea, M.I., Veranes-Pantoja, Y. Cauich￾Rodríguez, J.V. and Cervantes-Uc, J.M. (2014), Towards optimization of the silanization 
process of hydroxyapatite for its use in bone cement formulations, Materials Science 
and Engineering, C, 40: 157–163.
Costescu, A., Pasuk, I., Ungureanu, F., Dinischiotu, A., Costache, M., Huneau, F., Galaup, S., 
Le Coustumer, P. and Predoi, D. (2010), Physico-chemical properties of nano-sized hex￾agonal hydroxyapatite powder synthesized by sol-gel, Digest Journal of Nanomaterials 
and Biostructures, 5(4): 989–1000.
Deenik, J.L. and Yost, R.S. (2008), Nitrogen mineralization potential and nutrient availabil￾ity from five organic materials in an atoll soil from the Marshall Islands, Soil Science,
173(1): 54–68.
DeRosa, C., Monreal, C., Schnitzer, M., Walsh, R. and Sultan, Y. (2010), Nanotechnology in 
fertilizers, Nature Nanotechnology, 5(2): 91–94.
Dong, W., Zhang, X., Wang, H., Dai, X., Sun, X., Qiu, W. and Yang, F. (2012), Effect of differ￾ent fertilizer application on the soil fertility of paddy soils, in red soil region of Southern 
China, PLoS ONE, 7(9): e44504.
Eritsyan, M.L., Gyurdzhyan, L.A., Melkonyan, L.T. and Akopyan, G.V. (2006), Copolymers 
of acrylic acid with urea, Russian Journal of Applied Chemistry, 79(10): 1666–1668.
Fernandes, B.S., Pinto, J.C, Cabral-Albuquerque, E.M. and Fialho, R.L. (2015), Free￾radical polymerization of urea, acrylic acid and glycerol in aqueous solutions, Polymer 
Engineering and Science, 55(6):1219–1229.
Gachene, C.K.K. (1989), Soils of the erosion research farm, Kabete Campus, Department of 
Agricultural Engineering, University of Nairobi.
Gaskell, M. and Smith, R., (2007), Nitrogen sources for organic vegetable crops, Hortechnology,
17(4): 431–441.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 277
Gayathri, B., Muthukumarasamy, N., Velauthapillai, D., Santhosh, S.B. and Asokan, V. (2018), 
Magnesium incorporated hydroxyapatite nanoparticles: Preparation, characterization, 
antibacterial and larvicidal activity, Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 11: 645–654.
Giroto, A.S., Guimarães, G.F., Foschini, M. and Ribeiro, C. (2017), Role of slow-release nano￾composite fertilizers on nitrogen and phosphate availability in soil, Scientific Reports, 
7: 46032.
Glendon, W.G. and Doni, O.R. (2002), Particle-size analysis, in: Dane, J.H. and Topp, G.C. 
(Eds), Methods of Soil Analysis. Part 4: Physical Methods, Soil Science Society of 
America, Inc., Madison, WI, pp. 255–293.
Guezennec, A.G., Michael, C., Bru, K., Touze, S., Desroche, N., Mnif, I. and Motelica-Heino, 
M. (2015), Transfer and degradation of polyacrylamide-based flocculants in hydrosys￾tems: A review, Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 22(9): 6390–6406.
Guo, M., Liu, M., Hu, Z., Zang, F. and Wu, L. (2005), Preparation and properties of a slow 
release NP compound fertilizer with superabsorbent and moisture preservation, Journal 
of Applied Polymer Science, 96: 2132–2138.
Iyyappan, E. and Wilson, P. (2013), Synthesis of nanoscale hydroxyapatite particles using 
Triton X-100 as an organic modifier, Ceramics International, 39: 771–777.
Jaetzold, R., Schmidt, H., Hornetz, B. and Shisanya, C. (2006), Farm management hand￾book of Kenya Vol. II., Natural conditions and farm management information (2nd Ed.) 
Part A: West Kenya, Subpart A1: Western Province, Ministry of Agriculture Kenya in 
Cooperation with the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), Nairobi, Kenya.
Karuku, G.N. (2019), Effect of lime, N and P salts on nitrogen mineralization, nitrification 
process and priming effect in three soil types, andosols, luvisols and ferralsols, Journal 
Agriculture and Sustainability, 12(1): 74–106.
Karuku, G.N. and Mochoge, B.O. (2016), Nitrogen forms in three Kenyan soils nitisols, luvi￾sols and ferralsols, International Journal for Innovation Education and Research, 4(10): 
17–30.
Karuku, G.N. and Mochoge, B.O. (2018), Nitrogen mineralization potential (No) in three 
Kenyan soils, nitisols, ferralsols and luvisols, Journal of Agricultural Science, 10(4): 
60–78.
Karuku, G.N., Gachene, C.K., Karanja, N., Cornelis W. and Verplancke, H. (2014a), Use of 
CROPWAT model to predict water use in irrigated tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) 
production at Kabete, Kenya, East African Agriculture and Forestry Journal, 80(3): 
175–183.
Karuku, G.N., Gachene, C.K., Karanja, N., Cornelis, W. and Verplancke, H. (2014b), Effect 
of different cover crop residue management practices on soil moisture content under 
a tomato crop (Lycopersicon esculentum), Tropical Subtroptropical Agroecosystems,
17(3): 509–523.
Karuku, G.N., Gachene, C.K., Karanja, N., Cornelis, W., Verplancke, H. and Kirochi, G. 
(2012), Soil hydraulic properties of a nitisol in Kabete, Kenya, Tropical and Subtropical 
Agroecosystems, 15: 595–609.
Kay-Shoemake, J.L., Wartwood, M., Lentz, R. and Sojka, R. (1998), Polyacrylamide as an 
organic nitrogen source for soil micro-organisms with potential effects on inorganic soil 
nitrogen in agricultural soil, Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 30(8–9): 1045–1052.
Khan, M.S., Zaidi, A. and Ahmad, E. (2014), Mechanism of phosphate solubilization and physio￾logical functions of phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms, in: Khan, M.S., Zaidi, A. and 
Musarrat, J. (Eds), Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms, Springer, Cham, pp. 31–62.
Kimetu, J.M., Mugendi, D.N., Bationo, A., Palm, C.A., Mutuo, P.K., Kihara, J., Nandwa, S. 
and Giller, K. (2007), Partial balance of nitrogen in a maize cropping system in humic 
nitisol of Central Kenya, in: Bationo, A., Waswa, B., Kihara, J. and Kimetu, J. (Eds), 
Advances in Integrated Soil Fertility Management in Sub-Saharan Africa: Challenges 
and Opportunities, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 521–530.278 Nanofillers
Kottegoda, N., Munaweera, I., Madusanka, N. and Karunaratne, V. (2011), A green slow￾release fertilizer composition based on urea-modified hydroxyapatite nanoparticles 
encapsulated wood, Current Science, 73–78.
Kottegoda, N., Sandaruwan, C., Piryrashana, G., Siriwardhana, A., Rathnayake, A.U., 
Arachchige, D.M.B., Kumarasinghe, A.R., Dahanayake D., Karunaratne, V. and 
Amaratunga, G.A.J. (2017), Urea-hydroxyapatite nanohybrid for slow release of nitro￾gen, ACS Nano, 11(2): 1214–1221.
Laftah, W.A. and Hashim, S. (2014), Synthesis, optimization, characterization and potential 
agricultural application of polymer hydrogel composites based on cotton microfiber, 
Chemical Papers, 68(6): 798–808.
Leye, A.S. and Omotayo, A.E. (2014), Mineralization rates of soil forms of nitrogen, phospho￾rus, and potassium as affected by organomineral fertilizer in sandy loam, Advances in 
Agriculture, 2014: 1–5, Article ID 149209.
Liu, M., Liang, R, Zhan, F., Liu, Z. and Niu, A. (2007), Preparation of superabsorbent slow 
release nitrogen fertilizer by inverse suspension polymerization, Polymer International,
56: 729–737.
Makokha, S., Kimani, S., Mwangi, W., Verkuij, H. and Musembi, F. (2001), Determinants of 
fertilizer and manure use in maize production in Kiambu district, Kenya, Mexico, D.F.: 
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center, Kenya Agricultural Research Institute.
Masunga, R.H, Uzokwe, V.N., Mlay, P.D., Odeh, I., Singh, A., Buchan, D. and De Neve, S. 
(2016), Nitrogen mineralization dynamics of different valuable organic amendments 
commonly used in agriculture, Applied Soil Ecology, 101: 185–193.
Mateus, P.A., Barrias, C.C., Ribeiro, C., Ferraz, M.P. and Monteiro, F.J. (2007), Comparative 
study of nano-hydroxyapatite microspheres for medical applications, Journal of 
Biomedical Materials Research, 86A: 483–493.
Mathenge M.K. (2009), Fertilizer types, availability and consumption in Kenya, Tegemeo 
Institute, Egerton University; Paper presented at the 6th National Fertilizer Conference 
in Kenya, on “Towards Increased Use of Fertilizer and Improved Seed for Food Security 
and Economic Growth,” KARI headquarters, Nairobi, Kenya, August 20–21, 2009.
Mehlich, A. (1953), Determination of P, Ca, Mg, K, Na and NH4, North Carolina Soil Testing 
Laboratory, Raleigh, University of North Carolina.
Monreal, C.M., DeRosa, M., Mallubhotla, S.C., Bindraban, P.S. and Dimkpa, C. (2015), 
Nanotechnologies for increasing the crop use efficiency of fertilizer-micronutrients, 
Biology and Fertility of Soils, 52: 423.
Montalvo, D., McLaughlin, M.J., and Degryse, F. (2015), Efficacy of hydroxyapatite nanopar￾ticles as phosphorus fertilizers in andisols and oxisols, Soil Science Society of America 
Journal, 79: 551–558.
Mucheru-Muna, M., Mugendi, D., Pypers, P., Mugwe, J., Kungu, J., Vanlauwe, B. and Merckx, 
R. (2014), Enhancing maize productivity and profitability using organic inputs and 
mineral fertilizer in Central Kenya small-hold farms, Experimental Agriculture, 50(2): 
250–269.
Naderi, M. and Danesh, S. (2013), Nano-fertilizers and their roles in sustainable agriculture, 
International Journal of Agriculture and Crop Sciences, 5(19): 2229–2232.
Naima, B., Leila, H. and Adil, M. (2015), Effect of incubation period of phosphorous fertilizer 
on some properties of sandy soil with low calcareous content, Southern Algeria, Asian 
Journal of Agricultural Research, 9(3): 123–131.
Nelson, E.W. and Sommers, L.E. (1996), Total carbon, organic carbon and organic matter, in: 
D.L. Sparks (Ed.), Methods of Soil Analysis, Part 3: Chemical Methods, Soil Science 
Society of America, Inc., Madison, WI, pp. 961–1010.
Olson-Rutz, K., Jones, C. and Dinkins, C.P. (2011), Enhanced efficiency fertilizers, Montana 
State University Extension, http://landresources.montana.edu/soilfertility/documents/
PDF/pub/EEFEB0188.pdf, Available 25th August 2019.Formulation of Polymer Nano-Composite NPK Fertilizer 279
Omar, S.A. and Ismail, M.A. (1999), Microbial populations, ammonification and nitrification 
in soil treated with urea and inorganic salts, Folia Microbiologica, 44(2): 205–212.
Oseko, E. and Dienya, T. (2015), Fertilizer consumption and fertilizer use by crop (FUBC) 
in Kenya, 2010–2013, https://africafertilizer.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/FUBC￾Kenya-final-report-2015.pdf, Available 25th August 2019.
Pang, X., Zeng H., Liu, J., Wei, S. and Zheng, Y. (2010), The properties of nanohydroxyapatite 
materials and its biological effects, Material Sciences and Applications, 1: 81–90.
Pataquiva-Mateus, A.Y., Ferraz, M.P. and Monteiro, F.J. (2013), Nanoparticles of hydroxyapa￾tite: Preparation, characterization and cellular approach: An overview, Revista Mutis, 
3(2): 43–57.
Pramanik, N., Mishra, D., Banerjee, I., Maiti, T.K., Bhargava, P. and Pramanik, P. (2009), 
Chemical synthesis, characterization, and biocompatibility study of hydroxyapatite/chi￾tosan phosphate nanocomposite for bone tissue engineering applications, International 
Journal of Biomaterials, 2009: Article ID 512417, 8 pgs.
Qiu, X. and Hu, S. (2013), “Smart” materials based on cellulose: A review of the preparations, 
properties, and applications, Materials, 6: 738–781.
Ragu, A. and Sakthivel, P. (2014), Synthesis and characterization of nano hydroxyapatite with 
polymethyl methacrylate nanocomposites for bone tissue regeneration, International 
Journal of Science and Research, 3(11): 2282–2285.
Sahrawat, K.L. (2008), Factors affecting nitrification in soils, Communication in Soil Science 
and Plant Analysis, 39(9–10): 1436–1446.
Sannino, A., Demitri, C. and Madaghiele, M. (2009), Biodegradable cellulose-based hydro￾gels: Design and applications: A review, Materials, 2: 353–373.
Shoals, M. (2012), Kenya Fertilizer Assessment, The African Fertilizer and Agribusiness 
Partnership, IFDC. https://africafertilizer.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Kenya￾Fertilizer-Market-Assessment-IFDC-AFAP-June-2012.pdf, Available 25th August 2019.
Sombroek, W.G., Braun, H.M. and Van Der Pouw, B.J. (1982), The exploratory soil map and 
agro climatic zone map of Kenya, 1980 scale 1: 1,000,000. Exploratory Soil Survey 
Report No. E1, Kenya Soil Survey, Nairobi, Kenya
Stanford, G., Carter S.J. and Smith, S.J. (1974), Estimates of potentially mineralizable soil 
nitrogen based on short term incubations, Soil Science Society of America Proceedings,
38(1): 99–102.
Stanford, G. and Smith, S.J. (1972), Nitrogen mineralization potentials of soils, Soil Science 
Society of America Journal, 36(3): 465–472.
Synytsya, A. and Novak, M. (2014), Structural analysis of glucans: A review, Annals of 
Translational Medicine, 2(2): 17.
Tambone, F. and Adani, F. (2017), Mineralization from digestate in comparison to sewage 
sludge, compost and urea in a laboratory incubation soil experiment, Journal of Plant 
Nutrition and Soil Science, 180: 355–365.
Tolescu, C., Neamtu, C., Raceanu, G., Popescu, M. and Iovu, H. (2009), Polymeric micro￾structures for slow release of fertilizers, Materiale Plastice, 46(4): 387–392.
TonThat, T.C., Busscher, W.J., Novak, J.M., Gaskin, J.F. and Kim, Y. (2008), Effects of poly￾acrylamide and organic matter on microbes associated to soil aggregation of Norfolk 
loamy sand, Applied Soil Ecology, 40: 240–249.
Watson, C., Singh, Y., Iqbal, T., Knoblauch, C., Simon, P. and Wichern, F. (2016), Short-term 
effects of polyacrylamide and dicyandiamide on C and N mineralization in a sandy loam 
soil, Soil Use and Management, 32: 127–136.
WRB (World Reference Base) for Soil Resource (2015), International soil classification for 
naming soils and creating legends for maps, World Soil Resources Report, 106.
Yu, F., Fu, R., Xie, Y. and Chen W. (2015), Isolation of polyacrylamide-degrading bacteria 
from dewatered sludge, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 12: 4214–4230.280 Nanofillers
Yuejin, W., Xiaoyu, N., Zhengyan, W., Lin, W., Guannan, Q. and Lixiang, Y. (2013), A novel 
slow-release urea fertilizer: Physical and chemical analysis of its structure and study of 
its release mechanism, Biosystems Engineering, 1159: 274–282.
Zeroual, Y. and Kossir, A. (2012), Smart fertilizers for sustainable agriculture: The state of 
the art and the recent developments, 25th AAF International Fertilizer Technology 
Conference and Exhibition, Morocco.281
10 Natural Nanofibers 
Classification, Their 
Properties, and 
Applications
P. A. Nizam and Sabu Thomas
Mahatma Gandhi University
10.1 INTRODUCTION
The exponential growth of the world’s population necessitates increased efforts to 
address their social and economic requirements. The rising environmental conscious￾ness and regulatory demands, the production, usage, and disposal of non-biodegrad￾able wastes are being scrutinized more closely. At present, synthetic materials, which 
are polluting the environment and endangering individuals, are a big worry. These 
materials are employed in almost all applications, which eventually fills the lands or 
oceans causing an imbalance with non-biodegradable materials in the environment.
There has been an increase in ecological consciousness over the last several 
decades, which has aroused the interest of materials’ researchers in the use of natural 
biofibers created from renewable resources rather than standard fibers (glass, carbon, 
and aramid) in polymer matrix composites. Extensive study has demonstrated that 
natural fibers such as banana, sisal, coir, jute, hemp, kenaf, sugarcane bagasse, rice 
CONTENTS
10.1 Introduction................................................................................................. 281
10.2 Classification of Natural Fibers ..................................................................282
10.3 An Overview of Animal Fibers...................................................................282
10.4 Plant Fibers.................................................................................................284
10.4.1 Hemp Fiber....................................................................................285
10.4.2 Kenaf Fiber....................................................................................287
10.4.3 Flax Fiber......................................................................................288
10.4.4 Sisal Fibers....................................................................................289
10.4.5 Banana and Pineapple Fibers........................................................ 291
10.4.6 Wood Fibers ..................................................................................292
10.4.7 Cellulose and Their Related Fibers...............................................293
10.5 Conclusion ..................................................................................................294
References..............................................................................................................294
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-10282 Nanofillers
husk, pineapple leaf, Roselle, and ramie have the potential to be good reinforcing 
agents for polymer matrix composites. Although natural fibers derived from renew￾able resources have significant environmental advantages over synthetic fibers, they 
also have several downsides, including greater moisture absorption, poor thermal 
stability, and lower impact strength. These properties can be improved by various 
treatments which enhances their applications in various sectors.
The chapter focuses on several types of natural fibers, their properties, and their 
use in diverse industries. These materials show promise for a more sustainable future 
since their flaws may be mitigated via surface modification and use as reinforce￾ments. Proper study of these fibers will undoubtedly lead to the development of novel 
technologies in the field of natural fiber science.
10.2 CLASSIFICATION OF NATURAL FIBERS
A basic understanding of the classification of natural fibers is necessary to better 
understand the topic. Natural fibers may be categorized into three types based on 
their origin: animal fiber, mineral fiber, and plant or vegetable fiber. Proteins make 
up the majority of animal fibers, the most well-known examples being silk and wool. 
Fibers derived from various animal sources have varying characteristics. Merino and 
Cotswold wool are two examples of wool from distinct animal species. The texture of 
Cotswold is coarse, whereas the texture of the former is soft. It should also be men￾tioned that the consistency of natural fibers varies, while synthetic fibers are known 
to be more consistent. Animal fibers have been used to make soft and warm jack￾ets, wraps, blazers, ponchos, shawls, coats, and various garments and accessories. 
Carpets, coverings, and rugs are often constructed of rougher animal fibers.
Asbestos refers to a group of mineral fibers with great flexibility and resilience 
to heat, corrosion, wear and tear, humidity, and other factors. These fibers are non￾flammable and have a low electrical conductivity. Asbestos is easily incorporated 
into construction materials (glue, plaster, concrete, etc.). As a result, until recently, 
significant amounts of asbestos were mined. However, health concerns have signifi￾cantly curtailed the industry’s size in recent years. Wherever feasible, asbestos has 
been substituted by alternative fibers such as glass or Nomex.
Plant fibers are derived from plants. Also known as crop fibers, they are elon￾gated, thick-walled cells with pointed ends that are made of cellulose, hemicellulose, 
and lignin. Plant fibers come in a variety of varieties such as jute, flax, cotton, and so 
on. Fibers are used commercially in the textile industry for weaving cloth, as a filter￾ing medium, and for insulation. In this chapter, we will concentrate on plant fibers, 
which have recently gained prominence. Figure 10.1 depicts an overview of natural 
fibers, which are divided into three categories: animal, plant, and minerals. Cellulose 
is present in all fibers and is the basic unit of all plant species.
10.3 AN OVERVIEW OF ANIMAL FIBERS
Animal fibers are often generated from the animals’ hair, fur, skin, or secretions. 
They are frequently woven or knitted (or sometimes felted) after they have been 
removed to create beautiful animal textiles. Historically, animal fibers were used to Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and Applications 283
make soft and warm jackets, wraps, blazers, shawls, ponchos, coats, and other types 
of apparel and accessories. Carpets, coverings, and rugs are often constructed of 
rougher animal fibers. The common animal fiber includes silk and wool.
Many people consider silk to be a “natural” protein fiber. The most well-known 
type of silk is that which is acquired from cocoons grown in captivity by silkworm 
larvae of the Bombyx mori species. Sericulture is a term used to describe the activ￾ity of raising silkworms. It should also be highlighted that degummed fibers derived 
from the Bombyx mori species have a diameter ranging from 5 to 10m. Certain 
varieties of silk are well known for their shimmering look, which is caused by the 
fiber’s triangular prism-like cross-sectional structure. Light incident on the silk fiber 
is refracted at different angles due to the prism-like fibrous features. The quality of 
silk fibers is also determined by the health of the silkworm larvae, which is deter￾mined by the food and living circumstances supplied to them.
FIGURE 10.1 Classification of natural fibers. Cellulose is a common component of all these 
fibers.284 Nanofillers
Spider silk is one of the strongest natural fibers known to man. The strongest 
dragline silk known to man is said to be three times stronger than Kevlar and five 
times stronger than steel. The elasticity of some varieties of spider silk is also well 
recognized. The silk made by the ogre-faced spider, for example, is reported to 
be able to extend to more than five times its length without incurring harm. These 
fibers are highly biocompatible and biodegradable, also broadcasting a high elonga￾tion and contraction. Their properties such as high breaking strength and durability 
provide opportunities for designing these materials in applications such as bridge 
cable, aircraft bodies, parachutes, armors, etc. Biodegradable spider silk (SS) is 
regarded as an appealing fiber in the field of biomedical application because of 
its sustainability and remarkable biological compatibility (Thirugnanasambantham 
et al., 2020).
The term “wool” is commonly used to refer to animal fibers obtained from the 
furs of Caprinae family animals. Although wool is typically produced from sheep 
fur, wool from other species such as rabbits, goats, and alpacas is not uncommon. 
The fundamental distinction between sheep’s wool and hair is that sheep’s wool is 
known to include overlapping scales (like shingles on a roof). Some varieties of wool 
contain almost 20 such bends in a single inch. A strand of wool can have a diameter 
ranging from 17 to 35μm. Wool fiber’s structure and chemical makeup distinguish it 
from other types of fibers; its enormous diversity, heterogeneity of traits, and benefits 
are unlike any other natural or artificial fiber. The use of wool in the clothing and tex￾tile industry dates back to antiquity. Wool has the most complicated structure of any 
textile fabric. This complex structure provides good flexibility, moisture absorption, 
flame resistance, warmth, coolness, odor absorption, biodegradability, recyclability, 
breathability, and resilience softness, absorbs noise, and is simple to handle. Wool 
fiber has several restrictions in technical industrial applications owing to cost. This 
fiber, on the other hand, has received far more attention for technological applications 
than synthetic fibers. Animal fibers have long been used in a variety of industries. 
Their exceptional qualities, environmental friendliness, and biodegradability have 
further increased their usage (Allafi et al., 2020).
10.4 PLANT FIBERS
Plant fibers are among the earliest natural materials known to mankind. 
Archaeologists have discovered cloth fragments believed to be 10,000 years old in 
both the Old and New Worlds. Initially, humans collected a variety of wild plant 
species like leaves or barks for their varied fibers. However, the discovery of cotton 
and hemp altered the course of history. When manufacturing increased substantially, 
fibers derived from cultivated plants made a variety of tasks easier. As a result, plant 
fibers became important in human life in a very short period (Kilinç, Durmuşkahya, 
and Seydibeyoğlu, 2017). Initially, these materials were restricted to domestic use, 
but as technology advanced, they were introduced to the industry as well. Cotton, 
sisal, coir, jute, hemp, flax, banana, bamboo, and other natural fibers are commonly 
utilized in polymer composites. They are a hybrid material composed of a polymer 
reinforced by fibers, combining the fiber’s excellent mechanical and physical per￾formance with the polymer’s appearance, bonding, and physical qualities. The case Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and Applications 285
has changed where fibers are being used as a matrix these days. A comprehensive 
outlook of different plant fibers is discussed (Ekundayo, 2019).
10.4.1 Hemp Fiber
Hemp fibers are regarded as one of the most powerful members of the bast fibers 
family and are produced from the Cannabis plant species. Although the hemp plant 
is native to India and Persia, it has been planted in practically every temperate and 
tropical country. Russia is the world’s largest hemp fiber producer, accounting for 
around 33% of yearly global output. Other nations that produce significant amounts 
of hemp fiber include France, Germany, Italy, Yugoslavia, Japan, China, Peru, etc. 
Hemp is a tall, agricultural plant that can be harvested within 2–3months of sowing. 
These fibers, found in the bast, have a rigidity equivalent to glass fibers. The cross 
section of hemp fiber is uneven and does not remain consistent along its length. The 
phloem comprises the major bast fibers, which are made up of roughly 70%–74% cel￾lulose, 15%–20% t hemicellulose, 3.5%–5.7% lignin, 0.8% pectin, and 1.2%–6.2% 
wax. Secondary bast fibers emerge from the cambium and are found in the phloem. 
With several lumens on sides, these hemp fibers can be seen as a composite of a 
multi-celled structure. Figure 10.2 depicts a typical fundamental structure of hemp 
fiber. The cell wall of hemp fiber is multi-layered, with the primary cell wall (the ini￾tial layer deposited during cell formation) and the secondary wall (S), which is com￾posed of three layers (S1–3). Lignin holds the primary fibers together in the middle 
lamella (the concentration of lignin is about 90%). The S2 layer, on the other hand, 
FIGURE 10.2 Fundamental structure of hemp fiber.286 Nanofillers
has the highest percentage of cellulose, at over 50%. S2 is also the thickest layer, and 
because of its greater cellulose concentration, it regulates the fiber characteristics 
(Manaia, Manaia, and Rodriges, 2019).
Hemp fibers have gained widespread recognition as reinforcements in composite 
materials because of their biodegradability and low density as compared to artifi￾cial fibers. These materials also exhibit mechanical, thermal, and acoustic charac￾teristics. Surface functionalization of hemp fibers is critical for expanding its uses. 
Various researches are being carried out on these fibers to better understand their 
properties, interaction, etc., to enhance their use in various domains. As lignocellu￾lose is susceptible to moisture, it can cause structural deterioration as well as dimen￾sion fluctuation, which affects the interaction between hemp and the matrixes. As a 
result, their incorporation into a polymer or mineral matrix involves the removal of 
interface incompatibilities by the application of fiber chemical pretreatments. Some 
treatments like one with NaOH where treatment with 6% NaOH cleans the fibers 
by eliminating amorphous substances and increases the crystallinity index of the 
fiber bundles. The ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) treatment separates the 
fibers and the complex calcium ions associated with the pectin (Le Troedec et al., 
2008). The tensile modulus of silane-treated fiber composites is higher than that of 
untreated and alkali-treated fiber composites, and the characteristics were noticeably 
superior to those produced from alkali treatment. A silane content of 1% is optimal 
for improving mechanical characteristics (Sepe et al., 2018).
The mechanical properties of the thermoset composites are governed by the cumu￾lative mechanical properties of both the matrix and the fibers. Mechanical anchor￾ing, physical attractive forces (van der Waals force and hydrogen bond), and chemical 
bonding between the matrix and the fiber all contribute to interfacial bonding. The 
surface of the natural fiber has several hydroxyl groups in its chemical structure that 
form hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl groups in the matrix’s major backbone chain.
Thermoplastics have several benefits over thermoset polymers, including lower 
processing costs, design freedom, and the simplicity of molding complicated pieces. 
Their main drawback is that their processing temperature is limited to less than 230°C 
to avoid thermal damage of reinforced natural fibers. Only thermoplastics that have 
a processing temperature of less than 230°C, such as polyethylene and polypropyl￾ene (PP), are suitable for natural fibers (Shahzad, 2012). PP due to its low density, 
processability, mechanical property, etc. is the extensively used thermoplastic. The 
alkaline treatment of hemp fiber boosted the tensile and flexural strengths of hemp/PP 
composites, indicating better interfacial bonding. The 4% alkali chemical treatment 
produced the highest tensile and flexural strengths in hemp-reinforced PP composites. 
Meanwhile, the tensile and flexural strengths of the 6% NaOH-treated fiber compos￾ite were lower than those of the 2% and 4% NaOH-treated composites. This finding 
might be attributed to the presence of hemicellulose and lignin on the fiber, which was 
mostly eliminated following the 6% alkali treatment, which permitted fibrils in the 
fibers to be readily taken out (fibrillation) (Suardana, Piao and Lim, 2011).
Hemp finds applications in textiles, for clothes bags, etc., in the paper industry, in 
biomedical as well as in military industries. In response to the rising need for biode￾gradable, renewable, and recyclable materials, the usage of hemp fibers as support in 
composite materials has lately expanded.Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and Applications 287
10.4.2 Kenaf Fiber
Kenaf fibers are inexpensive and widely available when compared to other fiber fam￾ilies. Kenaf is a dicotyledons plant that belongs to the family of Malvaceae (Hibiscus 
genus). This 4000-year-old crop was originated in Africa since they were adopted 
in different parts of the world. This plant requires less water as its lifecycle is 150–
180 days. Two types of fibers are collected, which are long fibers from the bast and 
the small fibers from the center. Kenaf is a well-known cellulose source with both 
economic and environmental benefits. These robust plants are excellent resistant to 
climates and insects while using minimum water, fertilizers, and pesticides.
Kenaf has been generally regarded as a promising biological resource and pro￾spective alternative for fossil fuels because of its vast adaptability, high resilience, 
massive biomass, and high cellulose content. Kenaf is a dicotyledonous plant, which 
means that the stalk has three layers: an outside cortical layer called phloem, an 
inner woody core tissue layer called xylem, and a thin central pith layer made up of 
sponge-like tissue with predominantly non-ferrous cells. These biodegradable fibers 
have high cellulose content and no silica content which reduces abrasiveness in pro￾cessing equipment. Kenaf has 40% usable fibers from stock which is double that of 
other fibers just as hemp, flax, or jute. Kenaf is being used in a variety of novel goods, 
including paper, absorbents, construction materials, and animal feeds. In addition, 
there is increased interest in the utilization of kenaf fibers, particularly for composite 
reinforcement.
Like jute fiber, kenaf fiber also requires surface treatment, due to excess lignocel￾lulose content. This material imparts high hydrophilicity and makes it difficult to 
reinforce with polymer matrixes. Surface treatments are carried out to improve the 
interfacial bonding between polymer and fiber using reagents with functional groups 
that bond with hydroxyl groups of natural fiber. One such alkali treatment where 
fibers are dipped in NaOH solution for a while. This enhances their roughness and 
thus mechanical bonding to polymer matrixes. Studies have shown that this treat￾ment shows higher tensile strength for composite when reinforced, which depicts that 
the surface adhesive properties are improved. This treatment also reduces agglom￾eration of fiber which enhances a uniform distributed fiber-reinforced composite.
Silane treatments involve the dipping of fibers in a mixture of water/alcohol, where 
silanol and alcohol are formed by the disintegration of silanes. These silanols interact 
with cellulose, thus establishing covalent linkages with the cell walls. A stronger 
bonding between the fiber and matrix is attained by the use of silanes whereby the 
cross-linking and surface area of fibers are boosted. Silane has several major advan￾tages as a coupling chemical: First, it is inexpensive; second, it has an alkoxysilane 
group that interacts with hydroxyl groups of fibers at one end, while on the other end, 
functional groups that can be tailored depending on the matrix to be used. Many 
other treatments are also studied such as grafting, mercerization, etc.
Kenaf fibers were evaluated as a natural reinforcement with three thermosets, 
epoxy, vinyl ester, and unsaturated polyester. Plain woven kenaf fibers inherit good 
mechanical properties to which they were employed for such applications. The ten￾sile, impact, and flexural strength of kenaf/epoxy were superior to others with a lin￾ear graph for stress–strain diagram (Salman et al., 2015). In the case of thermosets, 288 Nanofillers
polypropylene-reinforced kenaf fibers were studied. Pure PP is poor in tensile and 
flexural properties. The addition of kenaf fibers in the range of 0–20 enhances their 
tensile modulus. Furthermore, with more percentage of loading of kenaf, the flex￾ural strength is also improved (Lee, Sapuan and Hassan, 2017). The alkali-treated 
fiber improves the adhesion between thermoplastic polyurethane and natural rubber, 
which were shown with an improvement in mechanical strength water absorption, 
and thickness swelling. The hydrogen bonding due to fiber adhesion has enhanced 
the water barrier properties of the composite (Azammi et al., 2020). These fibers 
are used in various domains and applications such as rope, nags and fabrics, fast￾food containers, engineering wood as composites, in energy for electricity and bio￾fuels, animal bedding, insulated panels, as oil and liquid-absorbent materials, as 
reinforcing materials, black liquor, bioengineering, and biomedical applications, etc. 
Furthermore, the potential for kenaf fiber to replace synthetic fibers (glass) in flexural 
and tensile applications has been carefully assessed. Kenaf fibers due to their impact 
strength can be employed in a wide range of applications which include structural 
as well as non-structural. Buildings and construction are concerned with improving 
the functional qualities of main construction materials such as concrete, steel, wood, 
and glass.
Kenaf can be used as a substitute for solid woods and plastic composites and can 
be molded into different forms for applications. This is the first and most reason￾ably priced plastic timber for usage as a construction material in the housing sector. 
Furthermore, it is utilized to create a strong, lightweight cement block with excellent 
insulation and fire resistance. Kenaf core blocks are being utilized to build multi￾story and single-family dwellings without the usage of power equipment.
10.4.3 Flax Fiber
Due to its specific properties, flax fiber (Linum usitatissimum) is regarded as the 
most essential member of the bast family for composite reinforcing. Bast fibers are 
extracted from fibrous bundles found within the inner bark of a plant stem. Flax 
fiber’s intrinsic high strength and stiffness, as well as its low elongation to failure, are 
essential properties that make it appealing for composite research. Flax fibers are not 
continuous like synthetic fibers, but they do have a hierarchical structure and a struc￾ture akin to composites. Their macroscopic qualities are determined by their micro￾and nanostructural characteristics. Flax has been utilized as a significant industrial 
fiber since antiquity. Twisted wild flax strands were used by prehistoric hunters to 
haft stone weapons, weave baskets, and stitch clothes more than 30,000 years ago.
Flax fibers are found as fiber bundles on the plant stem’s outer surface. Their 
fast-growing nature is very ideal for their use which reaches a height of 100–150 cm 
in less than 110days. Cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, and pectin are the primary 
components of flax fibers. Oil, wax, and structural water are also found in minor 
amounts. Cellulosic elements make up both main and secondary cell walls. Cellulose 
fibrils (diameter 0.1–0.3 lm) are surrounded by concentric lamella, which is made up 
of around 15% hemicellulose and 2% pectin which contributes to the fibers’ thermal 
breakdown and moisture absorption activity. The location in the stem affects the 
mechanical characteristics of flax fibers. The flax fibers toward the bottom of the Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and Applications 289
stem have the poorest mechanical characteristics, whereas the fibers in the middle 
have the best mechanical properties. The investigation revealed that both cellulose 
and non-cellulosic polymers are abundantly present. Cellulose is the comparable 
reinforcement material and non-cellulosic materials that facilitate the load transfer 
from one microfibril to another. They resemble a single cell as that of hemp fiber 
Figure 10.2.
Most of the fibers possess identical structures and contents. Their moisture sus￾ceptibility is one of their main drawbacks. As cellulose and hemicellulose are the 
main components of plant fibers, hydrogen bondings are predominant in these mate￾rials. The hydroxyl (OH)-to-carbon (C) ratio in cellulose and hemicellulose is high. 
Water molecules may not be able to enter cellulose because it has a very crystalline 
area. Water molecules, on the other hand, seep into the amorphous portions of cel￾lulose and hemicellulose, breaking intermolecular hydrogen bonds. This permits the 
cellulose chains’ intermolecular distance to rise, causing fiber swelling.
Fundamental flax fibers are processed into mats, roving, textiles, and yarns for 
application in composites production. To make composites, materials are joined into 
numerous layers with the matrix material of some sort of resin after selecting a suit￾able production procedure. The adhesion between these fibers and the hydrophobic 
matrix material is frequently influenced by their hydrophilic activity. Chemical and 
physical treatments of the fibers, such as alkali treatment, acetylation, bleaching, iso￾cyanate treatment, peroxide treatment, vinyl grafting, coupling agents, and so on, are 
employed to solve this issue. Various surface treatments have been briefly explained 
in the previous sections (Moudood et al., 2019). Polypropylene-based composite 
with treated and untreated flax fibers was evaluated for their mechanical property 
and water absorption. The study showed results similar to other fibers where treated 
fibers enhance the tensile, impact, and water absorption property of the composite 
(Soleimani et al., 2008).
10.4.4 Sisal Fibers
Sisal fiber is a popular natural fiber that is also quite easy to grow. It is derived from 
the sisal plant, known commonly as Agave Sisalana. These plants generate rosettes 
of sword-shaped leaves that are toothed at first but eventually lose their teeth as they 
mature. Each leaf has several long, straight threads that can be removed by a process 
called decortication. Decortication is the method by which sisal fiber is created. The 
leaves of the sisal plant are squeezed and trodden by a spinning wheel installed in 
this procedure. The kit includes blunt knives, resulting in just fibers remaining. Water 
washes away the remaining sections of the leaf. Water is also used to clean the decor￾ticated fibers before they are dried in natural heat or by an artificial process using hot 
air. The quality of fiber is determined by the moisture content, and hence proper dry￾ing is required. For higher grades, artificial drying is favored over natural sun drying. 
After drying, the fibers are untangled and graded using a machine. Retting, followed 
by scraping, is another method for separating the fiber from leaves. For plant rot￾ting, the retting process employs a mix of bacteria activity and moisture. The pro￾cedure removes cellular tissues and sticky substances from the vicinity of bast-fiber 
bundles, allowing the fiber to split from the stem. For higher grades, artificial drying 290 Nanofillers
is favored over natural sun drying. After drying, the fibers are untangled and graded 
using a machine. Retting, followed by scraping, is another method for separating the 
fiber from leaves. For plant rotting, the retting process employs a mix of bacteria 
activity and moisture. The procedure removes cellular tissues and sticky substances 
from the vicinity of bast-fiber bundles, allowing the fiber to split from the stem.
Sisal is roughly classified into three classes: lower, medium, and high grades. 
Paper manufacturers employ lower-grade fiber because it contains a high concentra￾tion of hemicelluloses and cellulose. Medium-grade fiber is primarily used in the 
manufacturing of binder twine, ropes, and balers by the cordage industry. These 
items are typically utilized in agriculture, maritime, and general industrial applica￾tions. The carpet business uses the third-quality, a high-grade sisal type, to create 
strands. For a softer hand, sisal is used alone or in mixes with wool and acrylic in 
carpets.
In cross section, sisal fiber is made up of hundreds of fiber cells that are smooth, 
straight, and yellow. Sisal fiber’s key characteristic is its strength, which gives it a 
rough and stiff look. Strength, durability, stretchability, and resistance to deteriora￾tion in salt water are just a few of the reasons why sisal is used to make ropes and 
other related items. The nature of the fiber guarantees that it absorbs dyes quickly 
and gives the most diverse variety of colored colors of any natural fiber. Because of 
their great toughness, sisal fiber–polyester composites are more likely to yield high 
work of fracture than pineapple and banana fiber composites. The fiber is incredibly 
durable and requires little maintenance due to its low wear and tear. However, sisal 
fiber is still not employed in the garment sector and is not suitable for moist environ￾ments. For fire resistance, sisal leaves are frequently treated with natural borax. Sisal 
is extensively utilized in the maritime sector for securing small ships, lashing, and 
cargo handling. Surprisingly, it is also employed as the core fiber of elevator steel 
wire cables.
Several researchers studied the potential of employing sisal fiber in thermoset 
polymers because of the low cost of manufacturing and the ability of sisal fibers 
to be laminated and wrapped. Sisal fiber-based composites have a specific strength 
equivalent to glass fiber-reinforced polymer composites. Furthermore, unidirectional 
sisal fiber-reinforced epoxy composites have a tensile modulus of 8.5GPa. Because 
of these exceptional properties, sisal fiber-based polymeric composites have been 
used to construct civil engineering structures, consumer items, and low-cost housing 
(Joseph et al., 1999). Longitudinally oriented sisal fiber polymer composites outper￾formed short sisal fiber polymer composites in terms of mechanical characteristics. 
Fiber length, fiber orientation, fiber dispersion in the matrix, wt percent of fiber, 
and interfacial strength are all parameters that influence the tensile strength of sisal 
LDPE composites. The addition of glass fiber to sisal LDPE composites increased 
their tensile strength. With a crucial fiber length of 6mm, longitudinally oriented 
sisal fiber composites have the highest storage modulus. The dielectric constant of 
sisal LDPE composites was enhanced by using additional sisal fiber in the thermo￾plastic matrix. Sisal fiber has the potential to be used as a reinforcement in polymer 
composites. This fiber has prospective uses in the aircraft and automobile industries, 
in addition to its typical applications (ropes, carpets, mats, and so on) (Naveen et al., 
2018).Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and Applications 291
10.4.5 Banana and Pineapple Fibers
Banana fiber is not a new invention, even though few people are aware of its exis￾tence or application. Banana stems have been used to make fiber since the early 13th 
century in Japan. However, when other fibers such as cotton and silk from China 
and India grew more popular, the use of banana plants as a source of fiber for tex￾tiles diminished. Banana fiber, on the other hand, is making a rebound in the fash￾ion sector. This fiber has recently made a resurgence in a variety of sectors and is 
used in a variety of items throughout the world, ranging from tea bags to automobile 
tires to saris and Japanese yen notes. The Banana family (Musa) is a member of the 
Musaceae family of monocotyledons. The Musaceae plant family is one of the most 
beneficial in the world. It offers us a wide range of meals as well as industrial raw 
materials. Musa sapientum provides us with the banana; Musa textiles provide us 
with the papermaking and cordage fiber abaca or Manila hemp. The Musa textiles 
plant yields this vegetable leaf fiber.
The most significant Musa species for fiber production is Musa textiles Nee, 
from which Abaca fiber, commonly known as hemp Manila, is derived. The stalks 
of abaca are typically slim, and the leaves are narrower, thinner, and tapered than 
those of a banana plant. Abaca is an extremely robust and lustrous material. Abaca 
rope is extremely flexible, robust, and resistant to saltwater damage. Along with coir, 
henequen, and sisal, it is classed as a hard fiber. Abaca has a pleasant natural shine. 
Its color is determined by the processing circumstances; excellent-grade abaca is 
off-white; however, some bad-quality fiber is virtually black. Individual fiber cells 
are cylindrical and have a smooth surface. They can be up to 6mm (1/4 in) long and 
have a consistent width. The ends gradually taper to a point. The coarse abaca fibers, 
which may grow up to 3m long and have a very high tensile strength, were tradition￾ally used as cordage, particularly for ship rigging. These are mostly pulped processed 
for vacuum bags, tea bags, banknotes, sausages, cigarette papers, etc. Once a popular 
rope material, abaca is now showing promise as an energy-saving substitute for glass 
fibers in vehicles.
Pineapple is a perennial herbaceous plant with a height and breadth of 1–2m that 
belongs to the Bromeliaceae family. It is mostly grown in coastal and tropical areas, 
primarily for its fruits. Pineapple leaf fiber production is abundant for industrial pur￾poses with no further additions. Pineapple fibers (from the leaf PALF) are white, 
smooth, and glossy like silk, medium in length, and have high tensile strength. It has 
a softer surface than other natural fibers and absorbs and retains color well. PALF, 
on the other hand, has high specific strength and stiffness, and it is hydrophilic due 
to its high cellulose content. The leaves are harvested from the pineapple trunk after 
which the fibers are scrapped using the technique of decoration. The bundle of cel￾lulose strands is then cleaned and hung to dry at a nearby river. Waxing and whip￾pings are carried out to remove any entanglements or remaining plant tissues. The 
leaf strands are then one by one knotted to make a continuous filament yarn. This is 
a time-consuming, labor-intensive operation that frequently involves 30 individuals. 
Pineapple fiber makes a transparent, rigid, lightweight material that is ideal for usage 
in subtropical climes for traditional attire and accessories. It is today best known 
as Piatex®, a stronger weight material used as an alternative to leather in footwear, 292 Nanofillers
fashion, etc. This is a cradle-to-cradle material, which means that the entire material 
stays inside its life cycle—any waste from the manufacturing process may be uti￾lized as fertilizer, and they even transform energy into biomass during the decoration 
(extraction) process.
Natural fibers with reinforcement composites play an important role in biocom￾posite and material science. PALF is a good replacement for synthetic fibers because 
of its low cost and renewable nature. The specific strength of natural fibers contrib￾utes to the improvement of the physical and mechanical strength of the polymer 
matrix without the use of any further processing. PALF is generally recognized in 
the textile industry and is currently utilized in everyday materials, but we believe that 
additional research will improve its applicability in the development of many exist￾ing goods (Asim et al., 2015).
10.4.6 Wood Fibers
Wood fibers are produced up of both live and dead cells in the wood, depending 
mainly on the age of the tree. Because of the hierarchical structure of wood fibers, 
this fibrous material has good performance features, such as high strength-to-weight 
ratio. Wood fibers are extracted from trees via chemical, mechanical, biological, and 
a variety of combination techniques.
The surface property is one of the most important aspects of wood fibers; it 
influences the interfacial adherence of resin on the surface of fibers as well as the 
mechanical properties of fiber-based composites. Fiber shape, chemical makeup, 
extractive chemicals, and processing conditions all have an impact on this charac￾teristic. Because of the surface’s strong polarity, the fibers are less compatible with 
non-polar resin. As a result, the combination of the inherent polar and hydrophilic 
properties of wood fibers and the non-polar properties of resins causes difficulties in 
combining these materials, resulting in inefficient stress transmission of its compos￾ites under load. The use of various physical and chemical surface treatment proce￾dures (e.g., coupling agents such as silanes) results in changes in the surface structure 
of the fibers as well as changes in surface characteristics (Dai and Fan, 2013). As 
people become more aware of the interconnectedness of global environmental fac￾tors, principles such as sustainability, industrial ecology, and ecoefficiency, as well as 
green chemistry and engineering, are being incorporated into the design of the next 
generation of materials, products, and processes. Wood fibers are largely employed 
in the paper and paperboard industries (about 80.5%), accounting for more than 55% 
of total paper and paperboard output. Composites employ 17.03% of wood fibers, 
with wood-fiber-based composites accounting for more than 80% of natural fiber￾reinforced composites. Wood fibers are the dispersion component in wood-fiber com￾posites. The matrix might be made of an inorganic substance, a natural polymer, or a 
synthetic resin. The matrix dominates the form, surface appearance, environmental 
tolerance, and overall durability of the composites, while the fibrous reinforcement 
bears the majority of the structural load, giving macroscopic stiffness and strength. 
Wood fiber–inorganic compound composites are one of the composite industry’s 
most successful uses of wood fibers. They have been widely employed in a variety 
of architectural and agricultural applications as corrugated or flat roofing materials, Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and Applications 293
cladding panels, and water containers. Although large-scale manufacturing of wood 
nanocellulose is still in the works, a new generation of wood fiber composites will 
provide a boost in the next decades.
10.4.7 Cellulose and Their Related Fibers
Cellulose is the most prevalent polymer on the globe, accounting for 1.5×1012 tons 
of total yearly biomass production, making it a nearly limitless source of raw mate￾rial. Not unexpectedly, cellulose-based items are abundant in our society, as seen 
by the massive global businesses in cellulose derivatives, paper/packaging, textiles, 
and forest products. Natural cellulose fibers may be obtained from a variety of natu￾ral resources, including animal, bird, vegetable, and mineral sources. Natural fibers 
based on cellulose are derived from diverse sections of vegetables and plants. The 
physical and mechanical qualities of natural cellulose fibers are determined by the 
chemical composition, the location in which it is cultivated, the age of the plant, and 
the extraction procedures (Venkatarajan and Athijayamani, 2020). Cellulose fibers 
are categorized by their origin and are classified as follows: leaf: abaca, cantala, 
curaua, date palm, henequen, pineapple, sisal, banana; seed: cotton; bast: flax, hemp, 
jute, ramie; fruit: coir, kapok, oil palm; grass: alfa, bagasse, bamboo; stalk: straw 
(cereal). The varieties of bast and leaf (hard fibers) are the most typically employed in 
composite applications. Plant fibers are made up of cellulose fibers, which are made 
up of helically wrapped cellulose microfibrils held together by an amorphous lignin 
matrix. Lignin maintains water in fibers, protects against bacterial attack, and works 
as a stiffener to offer stem resistance to gravity forces and wind. Hemicellulose, 
which is abundant in natural fibers, is thought to act as a compatibilizer between 
cellulose and lignin.
Cellulose nanofibers have a significant potential for usage in a variety of applica￾tions, notably as reinforcement in the production of nanocomposites (Rose Joseph 
et al., 2021). Many investigations on the separation and characterization of cellulose 
nanofibers from diverse sources have been conducted. Simple mechanical methods 
or a mix of chemical and mechanical approaches can be used to remove cellulose 
nanofibers from cell walls. To create composites with improved mechanical charac￾teristics and environmental performance, the hydrophobicity of the cellulose fibers 
must be increased, as well as the interface between matrix and fibers. The usage of 
plant cellulose fiber-reinforced composites is less appealing because of weak inter￾facial adhesion, low melting point, and poor moisture resistance. Pretreatments of 
cellulose fiber can clean the surface, chemically change the surface, halt moisture 
absorption, and enhance surface roughness (Kalia et al., 2011).
Cellulose fibers come in a variety of sizes, including microfibrillated and nano￾fibrillated. Cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) are presently taking over in a variety of 
applications, including water purification (Nizam et al., 2020), energy (Nizam et al., 
2021), medicine, and scaffolding. Their surface chemistry with hydroxy groups, as 
well as their ease of modification to produce hydrophobicity, increases their use in a 
variety of applications. Furthermore, the pores in CNF allow other nanoparticles to 
become trapped in their pores, increasing their characteristics. To avoid aggregation, 
these holes are frequently used in the synthesis of nanoparticles.294 Nanofillers
10.5 CONCLUSION
The chapter covers briefly some of the main natural fibers used for various applica￾tions. These fibers are currently employed in applications such as carpets, ropes, mat￾tresses, etc, but are promising materials to replace various synthetic materials. Their 
unique characteristics and composition such as lignin and cellulose are promising for 
future application.
REFERENCES
Allafi, F. et al. (2020) ‘Advancements in applications of natural wool fiber: Review’, Journal 
of Natural Fibers, 19(1), pp. 1–16. doi: 10.1080/15440478.2020.1745128
Asim, M. et al. (2015) ‘A review on pineapple leaves fibre and its composites’, International 
Journal of Polymer Science. doi: 10.1155/2015/950567
Azammi, A. M. N. et al. (2020) ‘Physical and damping properties of kenaf fibre filled natu￾ral rubber/thermoplastic polyurethane composites’, Defence Technology, 16(xxxx), pp. 
29–34. doi: 10.1016/j.dt.2019.06.004
Dai, D. and Fan, M. (2013) Wood fibres as reinforcements in natural fibre composites: 
Structure, properties, processing and applications. In Natural Fibre Composites: 
Materials, Processes and Applications. Woodhead Publishing Limited. doi: 
10.1533/9780857099228.1.3
Ekundayo, G. (2019) ‘Reviewing the development of natural fiber polymer composite: A case 
study of sisal and jute’, American Journal of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, 
3(1), p. 1. doi: 10.11648/j.ajmme.20190301.11
Joseph, K. et al. (1999) ‘A review on sisal fiber reinforced polymer composites’, Revista 
Brasileira de Engenharia Agrícola e Ambiental, 3(3), pp. 367–379. doi: 10.1590/1807-
1929/agriambi.v3n3p367-379
Kalia, S. et al. (2011) ‘Cellulose-based bio- and nanocomposites: A review’, International 
Journal of Polymer Science. doi: 10.1155/2011/837875
Kilinç, A. Ç., Durmuşkahya, C., and Seydibeyoğlu, M. Ö. (2017) ‘Natural fibers’, 
Fiber Technology for Fiber-Reinforced Composites, pp. 209–235. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-08-101871-2.00010-2
Le Troedec, M. et al. (2008) ‘Influence of various chemical treatments on the composition 
and structure of hemp fibres’, Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 
39(3), pp. 514–522. doi: 10.1016/j.compositesa.2007.12.001
Lee, C. H., Sapuan, S. M., and Hassan, M. R. (2017) ‘Mechanical and thermal properties 
of kenaf fiber reinforced polypropylene/magnesium hydroxide composites’, Journal of 
Engineered Fibers and Fabrics, 12(2), pp. 50–58. doi: 10.1177/155892501701200206
Manaia, J. P., Manaia, A. T., and Rodriges, L. (2019) ‘Industrial hemp fibers: An overview’, 
Fibers, 7(12), pp. 1–16. doi: 10.3390/?b7120106
Moudood, A. et al. (2019) ‘Flax fiber and its composites: An overview of water and moisture 
absorption impact on their performance’, Journal of Reinforced Plastics and Composites, 
38(7), pp. 323–339. doi: 10.1177/0731684418818893
Naveen, J. et al. (2018) Mechanical and physical properties of sisal and hybrid sisal fiber￾reinforced polymer composites. In Mechanical and Physical Testing of Biocomposites, 
Fibre-Reinforced Composites and Hybrid Composites. Elsevier Ltd. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-08-102292-4.00021-7
Nizam, P. A. et al. (2020) ‘Mechanically robust antibacterial nanopapers through mixed dimen￾sional assembly for anionic dye removal’, Journal of Polymers and the Environment, 
28(4), pp. 1279–1291. doi: 10.1007/s10924-020-01681-3Natural Nanofibers Classification, Their Properties, and Applications 295
Nizam, P. A. et al. (2021) Nanocellulose-based composites. In Nanocellulose Based Composites 
for Electronics. Elsevier Inc. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-822350-5.00002-3
Rose Joseph, M. et al. (2021) ‘Development and characterization of cellulose nanofi￾bre reinforced Acacia nilotica gum nanocomposite’, Industrial Crops and Products, 
161(December 2020), p. 113180. doi: 10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.113180
Salman, S. D. et al. (2015) ‘Physical, mechanical, and morphological properties of woven 
kenaf/polymer composites produced using a vacuum infusion technique’, International 
Journal of Polymer Science. doi: 10.1155/2015/894565
Sepe, R. et al. (2018) ‘Influence of chemical treatments on mechanical properties of hemp 
fiber reinforced composites’, Composites Part B: Engineering, 133, pp. 210–217. doi: 
10.1016/j.compositesb.2017.09.030
Shahzad, A. (2012) ‘Hemp fiber and its composites - A review’, Journal of Composite 
Materials, 46(8), pp. 973–986. doi: 10.1177/0021998311413623
Soleimani, M. et al. (2008) ‘The effect of fiber pretreatment and compatibilizer on mechanical 
and physical properties of flax fiber-polypropylene composites’, Journal of Polymers 
and the Environment, 16(1), pp. 74–82. doi: 10.1007/s10924-008-0102-y
Suardana, N. P. G., Piao, Y., and Lim, J. K. (2011) ‘Mechanical properties of HEMP fibers and 
HEMP/PP composites: Effects of chemical surface treatment’, Materials Physics and 
Mechanics, 11(1), pp. 1–8.
Thirugnanasambantham, K. G. et al. (2020) ‘SPIDER silk fiber: A brief review on molecu￾lar structure, properties and applications of spider silk’, AIP Conference Proceedings, 
2283(October). doi: 10.1063/5.0024918
Venkatarajan, S. and Athijayamani, A. (2020) ‘An overview on natural cellulose fiber rein￾forced polymer composites’, Materials Today: Proceedings, 37(Part 2), pp. 3620–3624. 
doi: 10.1016/j.matpr.2020.09.773297
11 Biomedical Applications 
of Organic Nanofillers 
in Polymers
Basma M. Eid
National Research Centre
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Biomedical applications include antimicrobial activity, drug delivery, gene delivery, 
cell imaging, wound healing, tissue engineering and vaccine adjuvants. The materi￾als utilized in biomedical applications should have several significant properties 
since they have direct contact with the human body. Therefore, biomedical materials 
should be characterized by biodegradability, biocompatibility and non-toxicity and 
meet the required specifications for which they will be used (Hule & Pochan, 2007; 
Rahmani, Maroufkhani, Mohammadzadeh-Komuleh, & Khoubi-Arani, 2022).
CONTENTS
11.1 Introduction.................................................................................................297
11.2 Common Polymer for Biomedical Applications (Rahmani et al., 2022)....298
11.3 Types of Nanofillers....................................................................................300
11.4 Cellulose .....................................................................................................300
11.4.1 Cellulose Nanoparticles ................................................................302
11.4.2 Isolation and Preparation of Nanocellulose ..................................302
11.4.2.1 Chemical Treatment .....................................................302
11.4.2.2 Mechanical Process......................................................304
11.4.2.3 Chemical Hydrolysis....................................................304
11.4.3 Bacteria Cellulose .........................................................................304
11.4.4 Nanocellulose Filler......................................................................305
11.4.5 Biomedical Applications of Nanocellulose Filler in Polymer.......306
11.5 Chitosan ...................................................................................................... 310
11.5.1 Chitosan Nanoparticles (CsNPs)................................................... 311
11.5.2 Chitosan Nanofibers (CsNFs) ....................................................... 312
11.5.3 Biomedical Applications of Chitosan Nanoparticle and 
Chitosan Nanofibers in Polymer ................................................... 312
11.6 Other Organic Nanofiller ............................................................................ 312
11.7 Conclusions................................................................................................. 316
References.............................................................................................................. 316
DOI: 10.1201/9781003279372-11298 Nanofillers
Consequently, polymers of both natural and synthetic origin have been widely 
utilized in various biomedical applications. This is due to their relatively low cost, 
biodegradability, non-toxic properties, compatibility, facile preparation and fabrica￾tion, and they meet the requirements needed for utilization in biomedical applica￾tions, which include interaction with the human body. However, their mechanical and 
physical properties are considered to be their drawbacks.
Incorporating nanofiller into the polymer matrix to form a nanocomposite is car￾ried out to boost the polymer matrix properties. Nowadays, there are wide types 
of nano-organic/ inorganic filler due to their biological properties that have been 
selected and investigated for biomedical applications (Hule & Pochan, 2007; 
Rahmani et al., 2022). The combination of polymer and organic/inorganic nanofiller 
in the nanocomposite matrix results in a synergetic integration of physical, chemical 
and biological properties, which have led to obtain novel nanocomposite with out￾standing properties, such as excellent strength, dimensional stability, high electrical/
thermal conductivity, tailored permeability, improved biocompatibility and biode￾gradability, to expand their applications in the biomedical field (Crosby & Lee, 2007; 
Tripathy, 2017)
Nowadays, various types of nanoparticles are available to upgrade the polymeric 
matrix nanocomposite. These nanoparticles, with high interfacial area-to-volume 
ratio, can be embedded into the organic matrices, enhancing the molecular interac￾tions with the polymeric matrix that eventually lead to conferring desirable and 
novel effects to the nanocomposite in comparison with the traditional one (Koo, 
2019; Paul & Robeson, 2008; Schadler, Brinson, & Sawyer, 2007; Schmidt & 
Malwitz, 2003).
Additionally, nanofillers include two major types: organic, which consist of natu￾ral biopolymers (e.g. chitosan and cellulose), and inorganic, which can be subdivided 
into carbon nanostructure (e.g. fullerenes, graphene and carbon nanotubes) and metal 
or metal oxide nanoparticles (e.g. AgPs, ZnONPs and TiO2NPs) (Nasrollahzadeh, 
Issaabadi, Sajjadi, Sajadi, & Atarod, 2019; Sothornvit, 2019). This chapter will mainly 
focus on the utilization of organic nanofillers in polymer for biomedical applications.
11.2 COMMON POLYMER FOR BIOMEDICAL 
APPLICATIONS (RAHMANI ET AL., 2022)
Generally, polymers can be classified into two main groups: (i) natural polymers 
and (ii) synthetic polymers (Figure 11.1). Natural polymers, which are called bio￾polymers, can be obtained from plant-based sources such as cellulose and sugarcane 
or from animal-based sources such as chitin, chitosan and collagen. Natural poly￾mers have been utilized in various biomedical applications, which include wound 
healing, drug delivery and tissue engineering (Gobi, Ravichandiran, Babu, & Yoo, 
2021; Mogoşanu & Grumezescu, 2014), due to their inherent properties such as bio￾compatibility, non-toxicity, biodegradability and bioactivity, anti-inflammatory and 
antibacterial properties (Z. Liu, Jiao, Wang, Zhou, & Zhang, 2008; Ribeiro et al., 
2019; Singh, Patel, & Singh, 2016). However, these natural polymers have some limi￾tations related to their very low dimensional stability, susceptibility to immunogenic Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 299
responses and possibility of pathogen transmission. On the other hand, synthetic 
polymers, such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly (caprolactone) (PCL), polylactic 
acid (PLA), poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) and 
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), are the most common synthetic polymers used in biomed￾ical applications. The biggest advantages of these polymers are their reproducibility 
and that they are biologically inert; however, they can cause chronic inflammation 
(Rahmani et al., 2022).
FIGURE 11.1 Classification of polymer.300 Nanofillers
11.3 TYPES OF NANOFILLERS
Generally, the utilization of nanoparticles (NPs) has a significant impact on develop￾ing polymer matrix nanocomposites for the implementation of new products with 
high added value. Polymer nanocomposite is a material consisted of at least one dis￾continuous phase (nanofiller) embedded in a matrix (polymer). The transition region 
between the surface of the NPs and the matrix is considered to be a new phase in the 
composite (interphase) in which the interaction between the nanofiller and the poly￾mer occurs (Ciprari, Jacob, & Tannenbaum, 2006; Paul & Robeson, 2008; Rallini 
& Kenny, 2017). The properties of the interphase itself determine the final proper￾ties of the obtained nanocomposites. This is due to that the nanoparticles have high 
surface-to-volume ratio; thus, the formed interphase fills the majority of the compos￾ite’s volume and can become the fundamental factor in upgrading the nanocomposite 
properties (Ciprari et al., 2006).
Recently, there are many distinct forms of nanoparticles, inorganic and organic, 
that can be implanted into organic matrices to create polymer nanocomposites 
Figure 11.2, each of which has a unique influence on the polymeric matrix depend￾ing on the chemical structure and physical dimensions (Ciprari et al., 2006). The next 
section will focus on the role of organic nanofiller in various biomedical applications.
11.4 CELLULOSE
Cellulose is considered to be one of the most renewable and abundant polysaccharides 
biopolymer in nature. This biopolymer can be found in plants, such as wood, seed 
and agriculture wastes (McCarthy, 2003), or it can be biosynthesized from bacteria 
FIGURE 11.2 Classification of nanofiller.Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 301
(BC), such as Acetobacter (Gama, Dourado, & Bielecki, 2016; Park, Kim, Kwon, 
Hong, & Jin, 2009). It can also be found in the cell walls of some fungi algae, such 
as Valonia and Microdictyon, in a highly crystalline form, and very rarely in animal 
sources, such as in the membrane of marine animal named tunicate (Heinze, 2016).
Cellulose consists of a liner chain of β (1–4) linked D-glucose units with formula 
(C6H12O6)n where Cellobiose is the repeating unit of cellulose with degree of polym￾erization ranging from 10,000 to 15,000. Each anhydroglucose unit contains three 
reactive hydroxyl s (-OH) groups, a primary (OH) at position C6 and two secondary 
at positions C2 and C3. Cellulose has chains arranged as a basic fibrillar unit (i.e. 
elementary fibrils), which contain high-ordered crystalline region folded in a longi￾tudinal direction and lower ordered amorphous region with a relatively lower density 
and more random orientation (Figure 11.3a, b). The degree of crystallinity is ranging 
FIGURE 11.3 (a) Chemical structure of cellulose. (b) Crystalline and amorphous dis￾tribution in a cellulose nanofibril. (Reproduced from Rallini, M., & Kenny, J. M. (2017). 
3-Nanofillers in Polymers. In C. F. Jasso-Gastinel & J. M. Kenny (Eds.), Modification of 
Polymer Properties (pp. 47–86), with permission Elsevier. Copyright 2017.)302 Nanofillers
from 40% to 70% depending on the cellulose source and production method while 
it can reach 80% in case of bacteria cellulose (Rebouillat & Pla, 2013a; Schenzel, 
Fischer, & Brendler, 2005).
11.4.1 Cellulose Nanoparticles
Nanocellulose can be referred to cellulose molecules with at least on dimension in 
nanoscale (1–100 nm). The increasing interest in utilizing nanocellulose as a nonofiller 
in diverse fields especially in biomedical applications related to its biodegradability 
nature, anisotropic shape, outstanding mechanical properties, biocompatibility and 
its interesting optical properties (Nabil A Ibrahim, Eid, & Sharaf, 2021; Phanthong 
et al., 2018).
There are three major types of nanocellulose that can be categorized into the 
following:
1. Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), also known as cellulose whiskers
2. Cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs), also known as nanofibrillated cellulose 
(NFC), microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) or cellulose nanofibers
3. Bacterial cellulose (BC) and electrospun cellulose nanofibers (ECNFs)
The production of nanocellulose is depending on their types. CNCs and CNFs are 
produced via a top-to-bottom method where the cellulose fiber can be disintegrated 
into cellulose nanoparticles, whereas BC and ECNF can be produced via a bottom￾to-top method in which a low molecular weight of sugars is generated by bacte￾ria (BC), or via electrospinning of dissolved cellulose (ECNF) (Nabil A. Ibrahim 
et al., 2021; Mondal, 2017; Nasir, Hashim, Sulaiman, & Asim, 2017; Tayeb, Amini, 
Ghasemi, & Tajvidi, 2018).
11.4.2 Isolation and Preparation of Nanocellulose
11.4.2.1 Chemical Treatment
The main objective of natural cellulose fiber chemical treatments is the selective 
removal of non-cellulosic compounds. It is a crucial step to overcome the energy 
consumption of nanofibers production via mechanical isolation process, and it 
improves the fibrillation process by increasing nanofiber productivity since it can 
improve cellulose yield from 43% to 84% (Chinga-Carrasco, 2011; Islam, Alam, 
Patrucco, Montarsolo, & Zoccola, 2014; Khalil et al., 2014). Pretreatment is carried 
out to widen the space between hydroxyl groups, increasing the inner surface, alter￾ing crystallinity and breaking cellulose hydrogen bonds, thus enhancing surface 
areas, which helps boost the reactivity of the fibers (Nasir, Hashim, Sulaiman, & 
Asim, 2017). Several pretreatments can be applied in order to remove all the non￾cellulosic materials that surround the cellulosic structure such as hemicellulose, 
lignin, pectin, wax and fat, then degrading the more accessible cellulose in amor￾phous region in order to liberate cellulose nanofiber. This step can be carried out by 
following methods:Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 303
11.4.2.1.1 Alkaline-Acid Pretreatment
This step aims to remove lignin, pectin, wax and fats that existed in the outer layer of 
the fiber cell walls through disrupting the lignin structure to break down the linkages 
between carbohydrate and lignin. This pretreatment method consists of (Islam et al., 
2014; Khalil et al., 2014) the following:
– Soaking in NaOH (12–17wt%) soaking for 2 hours to increase the cellulose 
fiber surface area and facilitate the hydrolysis;
– Soaking in HCl (1M) at 60°C–80°C for hemicelluloses solubilization;
– Treating with NaOH (2wt%) at 60°C–80°C for 2hours for disrupting the 
structure of lignin, and breaking the linkages between carbohydrate and 
lignin.
11.4.2.1.2 Oxidative Pretreatment
Oxidative treatment using TEMPO radicals is used before mechanical treatment to 
solve the aggregation problem caused by the presence of native cellulose –OH groups. 
TEMPO-mediated oxidation creates negative charges at surface of the microfibrils 
by introducing carboxylate and aldehyde functional groups into cellulose under and 
mild conditions, which in turn led to the repulsion of the nanofibers that made the 
fibrillation process easier (Johnson, Zink-Sharp, Renneckar, & Glasser, 2009; Saito, 
Kimura, Nishiyama, & Isogai, 2007; Saito, Nishiyama, Putaux, Vignon, & Isogai, 
2006)
11.4.2.1.3 Enzymatic Pretreatment
Enzymatic pretreatment is an eco-friendly, inexpensive and highly specific method.
It also increases the solids level and allows a smooth pass during high-pressure 
homogenization technique (HPH) (Nabil A. Ibrahim et al., 2021; Siddiqui, Mills, 
Gardner, & Bousfield, 2011). In this method, Laccase enzyme is used to degrade or 
modify the lignin and hemicellulose contents without attacking cellulose content 
(Nabil A. Ibrahim et al., 2021; Nasir, Gupta, Beg, Chua, & Asim, 2014; Nasir et al., 
2015). However, a set of cellulases enzymes are used to facilitate MFC disintegration 
(Henriksson & Berglund, 2007; Pääkkö et al., 2007) as follows:
– Cellobiohydrolases: for crystalline cellulose;
– Endoglucanases: for disordered structure of cellulose.
11.4.2.1.4 Ionic Liquids
This method has been tried to produce NFC. ILs are organic salts with interesting 
properties such as non-flammability, thermal and chemical stability, and infinitely 
low vapor pressure (Phanthong et al., 2017; Pinkert, Marsh, Pang, & Staiger, 2009). 
NFCs were produced by treating sugarcane bagasse with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazo￾lium chloride [(Bmim) Cl] as ionic liquid (IL) and followed by HPH technique (J. Li 
et al., 2012; Phanthong et al., 2017).304 Nanofillers
11.4.2.2 Mechanical Process
Mechanical fibrillation can be carried solely without chemical treatment; however, 
chemo-mechanical treatment can produce finer cellulose having diameter rang￾ing from 5 to 50 nm (Chauhan & Chakrabarti, 2012). There are many mechanical 
methods that can be utilized to transform cellulosic fiber to nanocellulose including 
homogenizing (Siró & Plackett, 2010), microfluidization (Bharimalla, Deshmukh, 
Patil, & Vigneshwaran, 2015; Ferrer, Filpponen, Rodríguez, Laine, & Rojas, 2012; 
Phanthong et al., 2018), grinding (Panthapulakkal & Sain, 2012), cryocrushing 
(Chakraborty, Sain, & Kortschot, 2005) and high-intensity ultrasonication (HIUS) 
(Frone et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 2009).
11.4.2.3 Chemical Hydrolysis
The isolated NFCs from mechanical methods contain both crystalline and amorphous 
regions within the single cellulose fibril Figure 11.4. To obtain nanocrystalline cellulose 
(CNCs) with crystallinity more than 90%, the amorphous region should be dissolved by 
acids Figure 11.5. The acid hydrolysis of cellulose fiber is performed using strong but 
control acids. The most popular acids for hydrolysis are HCl and H2SO4. Nevertheless, 
phosphoric acid and nitric acid had been also investigated. It is also recommended to 
apply mechanical agitation such as sonication to avoid agglomeration during the treat￾ment (Bhat, Dasan, Khan, Soleimani, & Usmani, 2017; Phanthong et al., 2018)
11.4.3 Bacteria Cellulose
Bacterial cellulose (BCN) is commonly produced from bacteria (e.g. Acetobacter 
xylinum) as a separate molecule, and no further pretreatment is required to remove 
FIGURE 11.4 Schematic of NFC extracted from cellulose chains using mechanical process. 
(Reproduced from Phanthong, P., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Xu, G., Abudula, A., & Guan, G. 
(2018). Carbon Resources Conversion, 1(1), 32–43, with permission Elsevier. Copyright 2018.)
FIGURE 11.5 Schematic of CNC extracted from cellulose chains using acid hydrolyzed. 
(Reproduced from Phanthong, P., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Xu, G., Abudula, A., & Guan, G. 
(2018). Carbon Resources Conversion, 1(1), 32–43, with permission Elsevier. Copyright 2018.)Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 305
non-cellulosic impurities as in the case of CNF and CNC. The biosynthesis of BCN is 
considered to be a bottom-to-up method. The ribbon-shaped BCN nanofibers are pro￾duced when the glucose chains are supplied inside the bacterial body and expelled out 
through minor pores present on the cell wall. The length of the formed ribbon-like web￾shape is ranged between 20 and 100nm long (S.-P. Lin et al., 2013; Nasir et al., 2017).
11.4.4 Nanocellulose Filler
To optimize the properties of nanocellulose-based fillers as an effective reinforce￾ment for producing high-strength polymer nanocomposites, nanocellulose-based fill￾ers should be homogenously aggregated in polymer matrices without aggregation; 
however, the hydrophilic nature of nanocellulose is considered to be the major draw￾back during the fabrication of polymer nanocomposite using nanocellulose-based 
fillers. Table 11.1 illustrates the most widely used techniques in order to fabricate 
nanocellulose-based nanocomposites.
TABLE 11.1
Techniques to Fabricate Cellulose Nanocrystal-Based Bio-nanocomposites
Technique Description Advantages & Disadvantages Ref. 
Casting 
evaporation
NCC is dispersed in a medium 
that is compatible with the 
polymer solution 
Nanocellulose/polymer matrix 
solution can be obtained via 
the following techniques:
casting on plate followed by 
evaporation to dry
Freeze drying followed by 
compress molding
extruding, followed by molding 
compression of the mixture
Advantages: 
• fabrication is easy and simple
• preserve the dispersion state of the 
nanoparticles in the liquid
• no need for specific equipment
Disadvantages:
• the retention of toxic solvent in 
polymer matrix
• the use of solvents can cause 
denaturation to the proteins and other 
molecules integrated into the polymer 
matrix, and
• the ultimate product’s shape is limited
Bhat et al. 
(2017); 
Rebouillat 
and Pla 
(2013b)
Electrospinning • The used polymer is 
melted out of an orifice 
(syringe) then a high 
voltage is used between the
orifice and collecting target
• Followed by evaporation or 
solidifying of the polymer 
and collected as 
interconnected web of fibers 
on the collecting target
• NCC was covalently 
bonded to PLA chain via 
silane-modified PLA in the 
electrospinning 
Fabrication of nanofibers with diameter 
ranging from 1 µm down to nm
Rahmat, 
Karrabi, 
Ghasemi, 
Zandi, and 
Azizi 
(2016)
(Continued)306 Nanofillers
11.4.5 Biomedical Applications of Nanocellulose Filler in Polymer
The potential applications of cellulose nanoparticles and their nanocomposites 
have been extensively studied in multiple fields. Cellulose nanoparticles are highly 
applicable in biomedical fields, which include drug release, tissue engineering and 
scaffolds due to their appealing features, such as sustainability, non-toxicity, bio￾compatibility and excellent mechanical properties as well as low production cost in 
addition to its high surface area which in turn offers vast possibilities for chemical 
modifications (N. Lin & Dufresne, 2014). Table 11.2 summarizes the utilization of 
nanocellulose as filler in biomedical fields.
CNC is considered to be an excellent candidate as biomaterial for drug delivery 
system since it has reactive functional groups on its surface where drugs, nanopar￾ticles or targeting molecules could be attached (Bober et al., 2014). On the other 
hand, nanocellulose can be a promising material for tissue engineering as material 
for cell attachment and proliferation due to their outstanding mechanical proper￾ties and biocompatibility. Among nanocellulose types, BNC is considered to be 
TABLE 11.1 (Continued)
Techniques to Fabricate Cellulose Nanocrystal-Based Bio-nanocomposites
Technique Description Advantages & Disadvantages Ref. 
Extrusion Suspension of NCC can be 
pumped into the polymer melt 
during the extrusion process.
This method resulted in improving in 
mechanical properties and moisture 
sensitivity. 
Bhat et al. 
(2017)
Impregnation Film of NCC is immersed in the 
thermosetting resin under 
vacuum conditions. 
The used polymer should be in a 
solubilizing state to ensure 
good impregnation.
Advantages:
• No specific equipment is required. 
Disadvantages:
• Inefficient techniques from the 
industrial point of view because the 
obtained shape of final product is 
limited. 
Bondeson 
and 
Oksman 
(2007); 
Peng, Dhar, 
Liu, and 
Tam (2011)
Layer-by-layer 
(LBL)
The LBL method is defined as 
the successive adsorption of 
oppositely charged components 
in solution by dipping them 
alternatively.
Cellulose nanocrystal multilayer 
composites were fabricated 
with poly (diallyldimethyl￾ammonium chloride) via LBL 
assembly technique.
• Simple technique
• Uniform coverage of the produced 
nanocomposites 
• Nanoscale thickness can be control
• No specific device or components is 
required
Podsiadlo et 
al. (2005); 
Tang, Li, 
Du, and He 
(2012)Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 307
TABLE 11.2
Some Potential Applications of Nanocellulose Filler in Biomedical Fields 
Biomedical 
Application 
Type of 
Nanocomposite Main Findings/Remark References 
Drug delivery PVA/CNC/PLGA-NPs 
bio-nanocomposites
[Polyvinyl alcohol/
cellulose 
nanocrystals/
poly(D,L lactide-co￾glycolide) 
(nanoparticles loaded 
with bovine serum 
albumin fluorescein 
isothiocyanate 
conjugate)
• The incorporation of CNC in the produced 
bio-nanocomposites increased the elongation 
properties without adversely affecting other 
mechanical properties.
• Biopolymeric nanoparticles can be 
successfully delivered to adult bone marrow 
mesenchymal stem cells using the prepared 
PVA/CNC/PLGA-NPs bio-nanocomposite 
films, suggesting a novel tool for drug delivery 
techniques.
Rescignano 
et al. (2014)
CNCs/CSOS
(oxidized cellulose 
nanocrystal/chitosan 
oligosaccharide) 
CNC–CSOS particles were loaded with procaine 
hydrochloride PrHy at pH 8.
The obtained bio-nanocomposite has potential 
applications as fast response drug carriers in 
wound dressings and local drug delivery. 
Akhlaghi, 
Berry, and 
Tam (2013)
NCC/cyclodextrin/
polymer inclusion
The results revealed that the new nanocomposite 
hydrogels can be a good candidate as a controlled 
delivery vehicle.
Zhang et al. 
(2010)
Tissue 
engineering
Collagen/CNCs 
composite film
• The results showed that the maximum 
mechanical properties for the collagen/CNCs 
composite were reached by adding 7 wt% of 
CNCs.
• CNCs exhibited good biocompatibility and 
showed no negative effect on the cell 
morphology, viability, and proliferation and 
possess. 
• The used method for incorporating CNCs in 
collagen was simple and it can be a promising 
method to reinforce collagen films without 
compromising biocompatibility. 
• The obtained composite can be promising in 
the field of skin tissue engineering.
Li et al. (2014)
(HA/CNC/SF) 
scaffold
hydroxyapatite/
cellulose 
nanocrystals/silk 
fibroin
The results showed that the HA/CNC/SF scaffold 
exhibited better thermostability and mechanical 
properties compared with SF, CNC/SF, or HA/SF 
scaffolds as well as outstanding biocompatibility 
and remarkable osteoconductivity 
Chen, Zhou, 
Chen, and 
Chen (2016)
(Continued)308 Nanofillers
TABLE 11.2 (Continued)
Some Potential Applications of Nanocellulose Filler in Biomedical Fields 
Biomedical 
Application 
Type of 
Nanocomposite Main Findings/Remark References 
The HA/CNC/SF scaffold revealed to be a 
promising candidate for repairing of bone defects 
in bone tissue engineering since their efficiency 
for bone regeneration in the rat calvarial defect 
model demonstrated that the rat calvarial defect 
healed with new-formed bone within 12 weeks of 
implantation and the degradation rate of the 
scaffold was a good match to the bone 
regeneration rate.
PLA-g-silane/NCC 
nanocomposites
Poly(lactic acid)-g￾silan/nanocrystalline 
cellulose
• The obtained results revealed a noticeable 
enhancement in tensile strength owing to the 
incorporation of NCC into the produced 
nanocomposite.
• The biocompatibility of the modified 
nanocomposite was also evaluated through 
cytotoxicity test.
• The results also confirmed that obtained 
nanocomposite can be a suitable candidate for 
tissue engineering applications.
Rahmat et al. 
(2016)
3D CNF/HG hydrogel
(CNF/hyaluronan￾gelatin composite 
hydrogel)
• This work was aimed to create 3D culture 
environment for HepaRG liver progenitor 
cells.
• The results demonstrated that 3D NFC/HG 
hydrogels accelerate the hepatic differentiation 
of HepaRG liver progenitor cells better than 
the standard 2D culture environment as it 
improved cell morphology, expression 
and localization of hepatic markers, and 
metabolic activity. 
• The CNF/HG hydrogel can be favorable 
material for hepatic cell culture and tissue 
engineering.
Malinen et al. 
(2014)
CNF-based/
gelatin/β-tricalcium 
phosphate
• CNF was incorporated in these scaffolds was 
to decrease the rate of degradation, controlling 
the release of osteoinductive biomolecule 
(simvastatin). 
• The produced scaffolds improved bone 
formation and enhanced collagen matrix 
deposition compared to the control.
• The obtained nanocomposite exhibited a good 
potency for bone tissue engineering.
Sukul, Min, 
Lee, and Lee 
(2015)
(Continued)Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 309
TABLE 11.2 (Continued)
Some Potential Applications of Nanocellulose Filler in Biomedical Fields 
Biomedical 
Application 
Type of 
Nanocomposite Main Findings/Remark References 
BC/Gel/Hap 
nanoscaffolds
Bacterial cellulose/
gelatin/
hydroxyapatite
• A regular vertical pore arrays BC was 
produced using a laser patterning technique.
• The cytocompatibility test of the obtained 
scaffolds using chondrogenic rat cells showed 
the capability of the scaffold to keep the cell 
viable via supporting the chondrogenic rat cell 
attachment and proliferation. 
Jing et al. 
(2013)
PAM/BC 
nanocomposite 
hydrogel 
Hybrid 
polyacrylamide/
bacterial cellulose 
nanofiber 
• The obtained hydrogel composite showed an 
outstanding large elongation at break of 
2200%, and a high fracture stress of 
1.35 MPa.
• The results revealed that the PAM/BC 
hybrid hydrogel was benign according to 
the cell viability test and the obtained 
hydrogel can be a suitable candidate for 
biomedical applications such as bone and 
cartilage repair materials. 
Yuan et al. 
(2016)
PLA/PBS/CNFs 
fibrous scaffolds
poly (lactic acid)/poly 
(butylene succinate) 
(PBS)/cellulose 
nanofibrils 
• The incorporation of CNF in PLA/PBS 
scaffold for reinforcement produced scaffolds 
with multi-scaled structure and interconnected 
porous morphology.
• The results revealed that the incorporation of 
CNFs in PLA/PBS/CNFs composite scaffolds 
showed a better support to the attachment and 
proliferation of human fibroblast cells than 
PLA, PBS or their blends. 
• Conclusively, the obtained composite scaffolds 
showed a good possibility for vascular tissue 
engineering application.
Abudula et al. 
(2019)
Wound 
healing 
PDA-TH/TOCNFs 
hydrogel
(tetracycline 
hydrochloride loaded 
polydopamine/
(TEMPO)-oxidized 
cellulose nanofibrils
The obtained hydrogel of nanocellulose and 
polydopamine crosslinked physically with Ca2+ 
exhibited an excellent drug release for wound 
healing process. 
The results that the obtained hydrogel showed good 
antibacterial activity against different types of 
bacteria
Liu et al. 
(2018)
Chitosan/PVP/
Nanocellulose
The fabricated chitosan/PVP/nanocellulose 
composite dressing in the presence of stearic acid 
was applied as biological wound healing on 
albino rats.
The obtained results showed that the healing period 
was shorter than the control wounds. 
Poonguzhali, 
Basha, and 
Kumari 
(2017)
(Continued)310 Nanofillers
bacterial most suitable choice for the medium of cell culture owing to its high poros￾ity, biodegradability, and low toxicity. It can also be an appropriate replacement for 
traditional skin restoration materials due to its high water holding capacity, high 
elasticity and comfort, as well as high mechanical strength (Czaja, Young, Kawecki, 
& Brown, 2007).
11.5 CHITOSAN
Chitosan is one of the outstanding natural polymers with a wide range of applica￾tions, and it is one of the most promising biopolymers for the production of advanced 
materials next to cellulose (Mhd Haniffa, Ching, Abdullah, Poh, & Chuah, 2016; 
Xu, Huang, Zhu, & Ye, 2015). Chitosan (Cs) is a polyamino-saccharide composed 
of β-(1–4)-2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucose units that include active primary amine, pri￾mary hydroxyl and secondary hydroxyl groups on its molecular chain Figure 11.6 
(N. A. Ibrahim & Eid, 2017). Cs is commonly obtained by deacetylation of chitin, 
a natural linear copolymer that is vastly found in marine crustaceans (e.g. shrimp, 
crab), cuticles of insects and micro-organisms cell walls.
Chitosan is also a cationic polymer that exhibits great potential in biomedical 
applications because of its distinctive properties such as antibacterial, antioxidant, 
chelating, no toxicity, pH sensitivity, biodegradability and biocompatibility as well 
as excellent film-forming ability.
For obtaining Cs with lower molecular weight, depolymerization of Cs can be 
performed by one of the following methods (N. A. Ibrahim & Eid, 2017; Mourya & 
Inamdar, 2008):
TABLE 11.2 (Continued)
Some Potential Applications of Nanocellulose Filler in Biomedical Fields 
Biomedical 
Application 
Type of 
Nanocomposite Main Findings/Remark References 
Antimicrobial NFC/PPy-Ag
(nanofibrillated 
cellulose/
polypyrrole/AgNPs)
• The addition of NFC to PPy increased the 
material's capacity to form film. The obtained 
composites showed good mechanical and 
electrical properties.
• The results revealed that the NFC/PPy-Ag 
composite films exhibited strong antibacterial 
activity against G+ve bacteria, e.g. 
Staphylococcus aureus. 
• The given data demonstrated that the obtained 
nanocomposite with good electrical 
conductivity and excellent antimicrobial 
activity can be a good candidate for various 
applications in the field of biomedical 
treatments and diagnostics.
Bober et al. 
(2014)Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 311
– Acid hydrolysis at 80°C for short time using concentrated hydrochloric acid 
(HCl) or orthophosphoric acid (H3PO4) at room temperature for longer time,
– Oxidative degradation via generation of hydroxyl radicals by using concen￾trated nitrous acid (HNO2) or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2),
– Salt treatment in presence of microwave heating or by
– Enzymatic treatment using specific chitinases or non-specific mixture of 
enzymes such as cellulases and lipases.
The existence of three free functional groups in chitosan—an amino group and pri￾mary and secondary hydroxyl groups at C2, C3 and C6 positions—facilitate chemi￾cal modification of the chitosan structure without altering its biophysical properties 
(Divya & Jisha, 2018; Gao & Wu, 2022). The developed functional properties in 
the produced chitosan derivatives have been exploited successfully to create a novel 
product based on chitosan that is highly promising in a vast number of applications, 
especially in biomedical applications.
11.5.1 Chitosan Nanoparticles (CsNPs)
There are five simple methods to prepare chitosan nanoparticles namely ionotropic 
gelation, microemulsion, emulsification solvent diffusion, polyelectrolyte complex 
and reverse micellar; however, ionotropic gelation and polyelectrolyte complex are 
the most common and widely used for CsNP preparation (Divya & Jisha, 2018; Gao 
& Wu, 2022). The ionotropic gelation method is based on electrostatic interaction 
between the amine group of chitosan and a negatively charged group of polyanion 
such as tripolyphosphate (Shiraishi, Imai, & Otagiri, 1993). However, polyelectrolyte 
complex is carried out by self-assembly of the cationic charged polymer and plasmid 
DNA where the CsNPs is formed after adding DNA solution to dissolved chitosan 
in acetic acid media using mechanical stirring at room temperature (Erbacher, Zou, 
Bettinger, Steffan, & Remy, 1998). CsNPs are characterized by chitosan properties 
and nanoparticle advantages, such as large surface area and interface effect.
FIGURE 11.6 Chemical structure of chitosan (CS).312 Nanofillers
11.5.2 Chitosan Nanofibers (CsNFs)
There are many methods to produce nanofiber. Nevertheless, the electrospinning 
technology has gained much attention because it produces nanofibers ranging in size 
from micrometers to nanometers (Jayakumar, Prabaharan, Nair, & Tamura, 2010). 
The electrospinning process is based on dissolving chitosan in acid to protonate and 
changing it to polyelectrolyte followed by subjecting the solution to high electric field.
However, this process results in producing beads due to low charge density which in 
turn causes inadequate stretch of filaments during the whipping of jet. To prevent the 
formation of these beads, blending chitosan with synthetic polymers, such as polyvi￾nyl alcohol (PVA), poly ethyl oxide (PVO) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET), has 
been successfully performed.
11.5.3 Biomedical Applications of Chitosan Nanoparticle
and Chitosan Nanofibers in Polymer
It is well known that chitosan, as a biopolymer, has outstanding importance in all bio￾medical applications due to its attractive inherited properties. Besides, the biological 
activities of chitosan can be broadened by chemical modification of chitosan through 
its three active groups which include an amino group and two hydroxyl groups. On the 
other hand, nanomaterials with small size and large surface area have brought great 
attention toward biomedical applications as they show high efficiency, better perfor￾mance better biological distribution and site-specific drug delivery due to their unique 
physical and chemical properties. Therefore, chitosan-based nanomaterials have 
shown a great contribution in the field of biomedical applications, such as antibacte￾rial property, drug and gene delivery, cancer and hyperthermia therapy, cell imaging, 
restorative dentistry, wound healing, tissue engineering and other biomedical fields. 
Nevertheless, this section focuses on the role of chitosan nanoparticle-polymer com￾posite in biomedical applications. Table 11.3 summarizes some of these activities.
11.6 OTHER ORGANIC NANOFILLER
Several organic nanofillers have been incorporated into polymers for versatile bio￾medical applications. The following are some of the examples:
– The LNP@Ag–Fe-PAA hydrogel showed remarkable self-healing ability 
and excellent antibacterial activities against both the G-ve (E. coli) and G-ve 
(S. aureus) due to the presence of Ag NPs and lignin in the polymer matrix. 
The remarkable antibacterial efficacy of LNP@Ag–Fe-PAA hydrogels arise 
their potential for biomedical applications (Cui et al., 2021).
– Carboxylated lignin nanoparticles (CLNPs) with an increased amount of 
carboxyl groups as reactive sites were grafted in PEG, polyhistidine (PHIS) 
and a cell-penetrating peptide by EDC/NHS peptide coupling chemistry. The 
obtained results revealed that an increased circulation in the bloodstream and 
also pH-responsive behavior. Additionally, the study showed a high biocompatibil￾ity ability release the drug is dependent on the pH media (Figueiredo et al., 2017).Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 313
TABLE 11.3
Some Potential Applications of CsNPs/Polymer Composites in Biomedical Fields
Biomedical 
Application Type of Nanocomposite Main Findings/Remark References
Drug 
delivery
Fucoidan/CsNPs/MTX)
(fucoidan/chitosan 
nanoparticles/
methotrexate)
• The MTX-loaded fucoidan/chitosan 
nanocomposite is higher than MTX 
alone against A549 lung cancer cells for 
about seven times.
• These results revealed that fucoidan/
chitosan nanocomposite can be suitable 
for oral delivery in cancer therapy.
Barbosa, Costa 
Lima, and Reis 
(2019)
• Fucoidan/chitosan nanocomposite was 
prepared for the treatment of skin 
inflammatory diseases by topical 
delivery of methotrexate. 
• Fucoidan/chitosan nanocomposite show 
no effect on cell vitality and exhibited 
lower cytotoxicity than MTX alone.
• The composite exerts the anti￾inflammatory effect and improves skin 
permeation therefore it can be a good 
candidate for methotrexate topical delivery.
Coutinho, Costa 
Lima, Afonso, 
and Reis (2020)
Wound 
dressing
Cs/PVP/ZnO nanofibrous
chitosan/polyvinyl 
alcohol/zinc oxide 
nanofibrous membrane 
• The results revealed that the prepared 
Cs/PVP/ZnO nanofibrous exhibited 
higher antibacterial activity, antioxidant 
and accelerated wound healing much 
higher than Cs/PVP nanofibrous.
• Electrospun scaffolds made of Cs/PVP/
ZnO nanofibrous could be suitable for 
diabetic wound dressings.
Ahmed et al. 
(2018)
Cs/SF composite 
nanofiber
(chitosan/Silk fibroin 
composite nanofiber)
The results showed that the Nanofibrous 
membranes made of CS/SF composite 
boosted cell adhesion and proliferation.
The antibacterial activity of the membrane 
increased by increasing the Cs proportion 
which in turn promotes the prepared Cs/SF 
nanofibrous to utilize as wound dressings.
Cai et al. (2010)
PCL/mupirocin+ Cs/LID 
DLS 
(polycaprolactone/
mupirocin and chitosan/
lidocaine hydrochloride 
double-layer nanofibrous 
scaffolds)
• The DLS scaffold exhibited excellent 
porosity and swelling behaviors, which 
are favorable for absorbing extra exudates 
and keeping moist on the wound surface. 
Tensile strength and Young's modulus of 
the prepared DLS nanofibers scaffold had 
been remarkably increased.
• The multifunctional DLS exhibited high 
antibacterial efficiency against S. 
aureus, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa with 
no toxicity to fibroblasts.
Li, Wang, Yang, 
Liu, and Zhang 
(2018)
(Continued)314 Nanofillers
TABLE 11.3 (Continued)
Some Potential Applications of CsNPs/Polymer Composites in 
Biomedical Fields
Biomedical 
Application Type of Nanocomposite Main Findings/Remark References
Cs/PVA/GO NF 
Chitosan/poly (vinyl 
alcohol)/graphene oxide 
nanofibrous membrane 
• Cs/PVA/GO NF membrane loaded with 
ciprofloxacin antibiotic was successfully 
fabricated.
• The fabricated NF membranes 
remarkably enhanced the antibacterial 
efficiency against E. coli, S. 
aureus and B. subtilis after the addition 
of ciprofloxacin. 
• NF membranes loaded with Cipro 
showed excellent cytocompatibility with 
Melanoma cells.
• The existence of GO slightly enhanced 
the rate of drug release.
Yang, Zhang, and 
Zhang (2019)
Tissue 
engineering 
PLGA–chitosan/PVA 
composite NF
Poly lactide-co-glycolide/
chitosan/poly (vinyl 
alcohol) nanofibrous 
membrane
The composite membrane exhibited 
moderate tensile strength.
Cell culture test demonstrated that the 
PLGA–chitosan/PVA membrane was able 
to elevate fibroblast attachment and 
proliferation. 
Conclusively, PLGA–chitosan/PVA 
composite nanofiber could be suitable for 
skin reconstruction
Duan et al. (2006)
PCL/NFC composite 
Polycaprolactone/
nanofibrillated chitosan 
composite
• NFC was used as dispersing phase in the 
PCL matrix to fabricate electrospun 
nanocomposite fibrous scaffolds.
• PCL/NC scaffolds exhibited significant 
improvement in enhancement in 
mechanical properties in terms of tensile 
strength and Young’s modulus compared 
to individual PCL scaffold. 
• The wettability of scaffolds was 
improved after adding NC.
• Incorporated NFC to the 
composite enhanced proliferation and 
adhesion of cells. 
• Conclusively, PCL/NC can be proposed 
as a suitable scaffold for tissue 
engineering applications.
Fadaie, Mirzaei, 
Geramizadeh, 
and Asvar (2018)
(Continued)Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 315
– The prepared lignin-g-PMMA was able to self-assemble into micelles 
(diameter approximately 100 nm) and successfully control the release of 
IBU (Ibuprofen). The results indicated that the drug release was faster in 
neutral pH (81% at pH 7.4) and slower in acidic media (16% release, at pH 
1.5) (Cheng et al., 2020).
– Two types of chitin nanofillers namely nanocrystals (CHNC) and nanofibers 
(CHNF) incorporated into chitosan (CS) matrix were prepared by solvent 
evaporation-casting approach. The CS-based bionanocomposite films rein￾forced with CHNF exhibited remarkable mechanical properties compared 
to CHNC. The prepared CS/CHNF bionanocomposite showed significant 
antifungal activity against A. Niger (>80%). Conclusively, these bionano￾composite films exhibited great potential for medical devices (Salaberria, 
Diaz, Labidi, & Fernandes, 2015).
TABLE 11.3 (Continued)
Some Potential Applications of CsNPs/Polymer Composites in 
Biomedical Fields
Biomedical 
Application Type of Nanocomposite Main Findings/Remark References
K/PVA-PLA/CHNF/ZnO 
composite nanofibers 
(Keratin/polyvinyl 
alcohol-polylactic 
nanofibers/nanofibrillated 
chitosan/ZnONPs) 
composite 
• Composite nanofibers were fabricated 
by using PLA and keratin/PVA as the 
matrix and nanofibrillated chitosan 
(CHNF)/ZnO as the nanofiller.
• Incorporation of (CHNF)/ZnO resulted 
in reduction of the nanofiber size and 
enhancement in mechanical properties.
• Wettability of the nanofiber composite 
varied according to the nanofiller type as 
it increase in case of using CHNF alone
and decrease in the presence of ZnONPs.
• Incorporation of CHNF/ZnONPs into 
the polymer matrix increased the cell 
viability significantly. 
• The fabricated nanocomposites can be 
proper candidate for tissue engineering 
applications.
Ranjbar￾Mohammadi, 
Shakoori, and 
Arab-Bafrani 
(2021)
Antibacterial Poly(lactic acid) /CsNP
PLA/(Chitosan 
Nanoparticle) composite 
nanofibrous
• The developed PLA/chitosan composite 
was a highly porous structure in which 
CsNPs were homogenously distributed 
throughout the entire fiber.
• PLA/chitosan fibrous membranes 
exhibited high antibacterial activity 
against Escherichia 
coli and Staphylococcus aureus that 
reach 99.4% and 99.5%, respectively. 
Li, Wang, Zhang, 
and Pan (2018)316 Nanofillers
– Polycaprolactone/Nano-Hydroxyapatite/Chitin-Nano-Whisker nanocom￾posite scaffolds (Polycaprolactone/nHA/CNW) were fabricated, and 
their suitability for biomedical applications was investigated by using 
preosteoblast mouse bone cell line for cell proliferation and attachment 
assays. The results demonstrated that the existence of CNW in the fila￾ments enhanced the mechanical properties of the 3D printed parts. CNW 
(3% content) showed remarkable improvement in the cell proliferation 
and attachment properties of the scaffolds. However, both nHA and 
CNW nanofillers improve the PCL biodegradation rate. Conclusively, the 
prepared PCL/nHA/CNW composite can notably enhance the mechani￾cal biological and properties of the 3D printed products to be used in 
bone tissue scaffolds (Karimipour-Fard, Jeffrey, JonesTaggart, Pop-Iliev, 
& Rizvi, 2021).
– Chitin nanowhiskers (CNWs) were integrated into chitosan/β￾glycerophosphate disodium salt for tissue engineering scaffold. The results 
revealed that tensile strength and elongation at break were both increased 
more than four compared with individual CS/GP hydrogel may be to that 
the CNWs acted as a cross-linker through hydrogen bond interaction in the 
gel formation process. The cytotoxicity of hydrogel in vitro studies con￾firmed a good biocompatibility of (CS/GP) injectable hydrogel containing 
CNWs (Wang, Chen, & Chen, 2017).
11.7 CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, the role of organic nanofiller in polymer matrix for biomedical 
applications have been reviewed, which include drug delivery, tissue engineer￾ing, wound dressing, and medical. Organic nanofiller-based nanocomposite can 
be considered a green nanomaterial for biomedical applications. These organic 
nanofillers include but not exclude cellulose, chitin, chitosan, lignin and starch. 
Among the different types of organic nanofiller, nanocrystalline cellulose-based 
bionanocomposites have been thoroughly investigated due to their outstanding 
mechanical properties such as renewability, biodegradability and biocompatibil￾ity. However, the major challenge in utilizing organic nanofiller such as nanocrys￾talline cellulose in nanocomposite preparation is its hydrophilic nature, which 
results in poor dispersion in hydrophobic polymer matrices. That is why most of 
the conducted research work is mainly dependent on using inorganic nanofiller 
such as carbon nanostructure and metal or metal oxide nanoparticles. Therefore, 
much attention and R&D efforts regarding surface modifications should be paid to 
overcome these challenges and make them more attractive to be utilized in a wide 
range of biomedical fields.
REFERENCES
Abudula, T., Saeed, U., Memic, A., Gauthaman, K., Hussain, M. A., & Al-Turaif, H. (2019). 
Electrospun cellulose nano fibril reinforced PLA/PBS composite scaffold for vascular 
tissue engineering. Journal of Polymer Research, 26(5), 110. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10965-019-1772-yBiomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 317
Ahmed, R., Tariq, M., Ali, I., Asghar, R., Noorunnisa Khanam, P., Augustine, R., & Hasan, 
A. (2018). Novel electrospun chitosan/polyvinyl alcohol/zinc oxide nanofibrous mats 
with antibacterial and antioxidant properties for diabetic wound healing. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 120, 385–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2018.08.057
Akhlaghi, S. P., Berry, R. C., & Tam, K. C. (2013). Surface modification of cellulose nano￾crystal with chitosan oligosaccharide for drug delivery applications. Cellulose, 20(4), 
1747–1764. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-013-9954-y
Barbosa, A. I., Costa Lima, S. A., & Reis, S. (2019). Application of pH-responsive fucoidan/
chitosan nanoparticles to improve oral quercetin delivery. Molecules, 24(2), 346.
Bharimalla, A. K., Deshmukh, S. P., Patil, P. G., & Vigneshwaran, N. (2015). Energy effi￾cient manufacturing of nanocellulose by chemo-and bio-mechanical processes: a review. 
World Journal of Nano Science and Engineering, 5, 204–212.
Bhat, A. H., Dasan, Y., Khan, I., Soleimani, H., & Usmani, A. (2017). Application of nanocrys￾talline cellulose: Processing and biomedical applications Cellulose-reinforced nanofibre 
composites (pp. 215–240). Elsevier.
Bober, P., Liu, J., Mikkonen, K. S., Ihalainen, P., Pesonen, M., Plumed-Ferrer, C., … Latonen, 
R.-M. (2014). Biocomposites of nanofibrillated cellulose, polypyrrole, and silver 
nanoparticles with electroconductive and antimicrobial properties. Biomacromolecules, 
15(10), 3655–3663.
Bondeson, D., & Oksman, K. (2007). Polylactic acid/cellulose whisker nanocomposites modi￾fied by polyvinyl alcohol. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 
38(12), 2486–2492.
Cai, Z.-X., Mo, X.-M., Zhang, K.-H., Fan, L.-P., Yin, A.-L., He, C.-L., & Wang, H.-S. (2010). 
Fabrication of chitosan/silk fibroin composite nanofibers for wound-dressing applica￾tions. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 11(9), 3529–3539.
Chakraborty, A., Sain, M., & Kortschot, M. (2005). Cellulose microfibrils: A novel method of 
preparation using high shear refining and cryocrushing. Holzforschung, 59(1), 102–107.
Chauhan, V. S., & Chakrabarti, S. K. (2012). Use of nanotechnology for high performance 
cellulosic and papermaking products. Cellulose Chemistry and Technology, 46(5), 389.
Chen, X., Zhou, R., Chen, B., & Chen, J. (2016). Nanohydroxyapatite/cellulose nanocrystals/
silk fibroin ternary scaffolds for rat calvarial defect regeneration. RSC Advances, 6(42), 
35684–35691. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ra02038k
Cheng, L., Deng, B., Luo, W., Nie, S., Liu, X., Yin, Y., … Chen, J. (2020). pH-responsive 
lignin-based nanomicelles for oral drug delivery. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 68(18), 5249–5258. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.9b08171
Chinga-Carrasco, G. (2011). Cellulose fibres, nanofibrils and microfibrils: The morphological 
sequence of MFC components from a plant physiology and fibre technology point of 
view. Nanoscale Research Letters, 6(1), 1–7.
Ciprari, D., Jacob, K., & Tannenbaum, R. (2006). Characterization of polymer nanocom￾posite interphase and its impact on mechanical properties. Macromolecules, 39(19), 
6565–6573.
Coutinho, A. J., Costa Lima, S. A., Afonso, C. M. M., & Reis, S. (2020). Mucoadhesive 
and pH responsive fucoidan-chitosan nanoparticles for the oral delivery of methotrex￾ate. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 158, 180–188. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.04.233
Crosby, A. J., & Lee, J. Y. (2007). Polymer nanocomposites: the “nano” effect on mechanical 
properties. Polymer Reviews, 47(2), 217–229.
Cui, H., Jiang, W., Wang, C., Ji, X., Liu, Y., Yang, G., … Ni, Y. (2021). Lignin nanofiller￾reinforced composites hydrogels with long-lasting adhesiveness, toughness, excellent 
self-healing, conducting, ultraviolet-blocking and antibacterial properties. Composites 
Part B: Engineering, 225, 109316.318 Nanofillers
Czaja, W. K., Young, D. J., Kawecki, M., & Brown, R. M. (2007). The future prospects of 
microbial cellulose in biomedical applications. Biomacromolecules, 8(1), 1–12.
Divya, K., & Jisha, M. (2018). Chitosan nanoparticles preparation and applications. 
Environmental Chemistry Letters, 16(1), 101–112.
Duan, B., Yuan, X., Zhu, Y., Zhang, Y., Li, X., Zhang, Y., & Yao, K. (2006). A nano￾fibrous composite membrane of PLGA–chitosan/PVA prepared by electrospin￾ning. European Polymer Journal, 42(9), 2013–2022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eurpolymj.2006.04.021
Erbacher, P., Zou, S., Bettinger, T., Steffan, A.-M., & Remy, J.-S. (1998). Chitosan-based vec￾tor/DNA complexes for gene delivery: Biophysical characteristics and transfection abil￾ity. Pharmaceutical Research, 15(9), 1332–1339.
Fadaie, M., Mirzaei, E., Geramizadeh, B., & Asvar, Z. (2018). Incorporation of nanofibrillated 
chitosan into electrospun PCL nanofibers makes scaffolds with enhanced mechanical and 
biological properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 199, 628–640. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2018.07.061
Ferrer, A., Filpponen, I., Rodríguez, A., Laine, J., & Rojas, O. J. (2012). Valorization of 
residual Empty Palm Fruit Bunch Fibers (EPFBF) by microfluidization: Production 
of nanofibrillated cellulose and EPFBF nanopaper. Bioresource Technology, 125, 
249–255.
Figueiredo, P., Ferro, C., Kemell, M., Liu, Z., Kiriazis, A., Lintinen, K., … Kostiainen, M. 
A. (2017). Functionalization of carboxylated lignin nanoparticles for targeted and pH￾responsive delivery of anticancer drugs. Nanomedicine, 12(21), 2581–2596.
Frone, A. N., Panaitescu, D. M., Donescu, D., Spataru, C. I., Radovici, C., Trusca, R., & 
Somoghi, R. (2011). Preparation and characterization of PVA composites with cellulose 
nanofibers obtained by ultrasonication. BioResources, 6(1), 487–512.
Gama, M., Dourado, F., & Bielecki, S. (2016). Bacterial Nanocellulose: From Biotechnology 
to Bio-Economy. Elsevier.
Gao, Y., & Wu, Y. (2022). Recent advances of chitosan-based nanoparticles for biomedical 
and biotechnological applications. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 
203, 379–388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.01.162
Gobi, R., Ravichandiran, P., Babu, R. S., & Yoo, D. J. (2021). Biopolymer and synthetic 
polymer-based nanocomposites in wound dressing applications: A review. Polymers, 
13(12), 1962.
Heinze, T. (2016). Cellulose: Structure and properties. In O. J. Rojas (Ed.), Cellulose Chemistry 
and Properties: Fibers, Nanocelluloses and Advanced Materials (pp. 1–52). Springer 
International Publishing.
Henriksson, M., & Berglund, L. A. (2007). Structure and properties of cellulose nanocom￾posite films containing melamine formaldehyde. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 
106(4), 2817–2824.
Hule, R. A., & Pochan, D. J. (2007). Polymer nanocomposites for biomedical applications. 
MRS Bulletin, 32(4), 354–358.
Ibrahim, N. A., & Eid, B. M. (2017). Chitosan-based composite materials: Fabrication and 
characterization. In V. K. Thakur, M. K. Thakur, & M. R. Kessler (Eds.), Handbook 
of Composites from Renewable Materials. Physico-Chemical and MechanicaL 
Characterization (pp. 103–136). Scrivener Publishing LLC.
Ibrahim, N. A., Eid, B. M., & Sharaf, S. (2021). Nanocellulose: Extraction, surface func￾tionalization and potential applications. In Vijay Kumar Thakur, Elisabete Frollini, & 
Janet Scott (Eds.), Cellulose Nanoparticles: Volume 1: Chemistry and Fundamentals
(pp. 1–28). Royal Society of Chemistry.
Islam, M. T., Alam, M. M., Patrucco, A., Montarsolo, A., & Zoccola, M. (2014). Preparation 
of nanocellulose: A review. AATCC Journal of Research, 1(5), 17–23. https://doi.
org/10.14504/ajr.1.5.3Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 319
Jayakumar, R., Prabaharan, M., Nair, S. V., & Tamura, H. (2010). Novel chitin and chitosan 
nanofibers in biomedical applications. Biotechnology Advances, 28(1), 142–150. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2009.11.001
Jing, W., Chunxi, Y., Yizao, W., Honglin, L., Fang, H., Kerong, D., & Yuan, H. (2013). Laser 
patterning of bacterial cellulose hydrogel and its modification with gelatin and hydroxy￾apatite for bone tissue engineering. Soft Materials, 11(2), 173–180. https://doi.org/10.1
080/1539445x.2011.611204
Johnson, R. K., Zink-Sharp, A., Renneckar, S. H., & Glasser, W. G. (2009). A new bio-based 
nanocomposite: Fibrillated TEMPO-oxidized celluloses in hydroxypropylcellulose 
matrix. Cellulose, 16(2), 227–238.
Karimipour-Fard, P., Jeffrey, M. P., JonesTaggart, H., Pop-Iliev, R., & Rizvi, G. (2021). 
Development, processing and characterization of polycaprolactone/nano-hydroxyapa￾tite/chitin-nano-whisker nanocomposite filaments for additive manufacturing of bone 
tissue scaffolds. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 120, 
104583. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2021.104583
Khalil, H. A., Davoudpour, Y., Islam, M. N., Mustapha, A., Sudesh, K., Dungani, R., & Jawaid, 
M. (2014). Production and modification of nanofibrillated cellulose using various 
mechanical processes: A review. Carbohydrate Polymers, 99, 649–665.
Koo, J. H. (2019). Polymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Characterization, and Applications. 
McGraw-Hill Education.
Li, H., Wang, Z., Zhang, H., & Pan, Z. (2018). Nanoporous PLA/(chitosan nanoparticle) com￾posite fibrous membranes with excellent air filtration and antibacterial performance. 
Polymers, 10(10), 1085.
Li, J., Wei, X., Wang, Q., Chen, J., Chang, G., Kong, L., … Liu, Y. (2012). Homogeneous 
isolation of nanocellulose from sugarcane bagasse by high pressure homogenization. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 90(4), 1609–1613.
Li, W., Guo, R., Lan, Y., Zhang, Y., Xue, W., & Zhang, Y. (2014). Preparation and properties 
of cellulose nanocrystals reinforced collagen composite films. Journal of Biomedical 
Materials Research Part A, 102(4), 1131–1139. https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.34792
Li, X., Wang, C., Yang, S., Liu, P., & Zhang, B. (2018). Electrospun PCL/mupirocin and chi￾tosan/lidocaine hydrochloride multifunctional double layer nanofibrous scaffolds for 
wound dressing applications. International Journal of Nanomedicine, 13, 5287–5299. 
https://doi.org/10.2147/ijn.s177256
Lin, N., & Dufresne, A. (2014). Nanocellulose in biomedicine: Current status and future pros￾pect. European Polymer Journal, 59, 302–325.
Lin, S.-P., Loira Calvar, I., Catchmark, J. M., Liu, J.-R., Demirci, A., & Cheng, K.-C. (2013). 
Biosynthesis, production and applications of bacterial cellulose. Cellulose, 20(5), 2191–
2219. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-013-9994-3
Liu, Y., Sui, Y., Liu, C., Liu, C., Wu, M., Li, B., & Li, Y. (2018). A physically crosslinked polydo￾pamine/nanocellulose hydrogel as potential versatile vehicles for drug delivery and wound 
healing. Carbohydrate Polymers, 188, 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.01.093
Liu, Z., Jiao, Y., Wang, Y., Zhou, C., & Zhang, Z. (2008). Polysaccharides-based nanoparticles 
as drug delivery systems. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 60(15), 1650–1662.
Malinen, M. M., Kanninen, L. K., Corlu, A., Isoniemi, H. M., Lou, Y.-R., Yliperttula, M. L., & 
Urtti, A. O. (2014). Differentiation of liver progenitor cell line to functional organotypic 
cultures in 3D nanofibrillar cellulose and hyaluronan-gelatin hydrogels. Biomaterials, 
35(19), 5110–5121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.03.020
McCarthy, S. P. (2003). Biodegradable polymers. In A. Andrady (Ed.), Plastics and the 
Environment (pp. 359–377). John Wiley and Sons.
Mhd Haniffa, M. A. C., Ching, Y. C., Abdullah, L. C., Poh, S. C., & Chuah, C. H. (2016). 
Review of bionanocomposite coating films and their applications. Polymers, 8(7), 246. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym8070246320 Nanofillers
Mogoşanu, G. D., & Grumezescu, A. M. (2014). Natural and synthetic polymers for wounds 
and burns dressing. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 463(2), 127–136.
Mondal, S. (2017). Preparation, properties and applications of nanocellulosic materials. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 163, 301–316.
Mourya, V. K., & Inamdar, N. (2008). Chiosan-modifications and applications: Opportunities 
galore. Reactive and Functional Polymers, 68, 1031–1051.
Nasir, M., Gupta, A., Beg, M. D. H., Chua, G. K., & Asim, M. (2014). Laccase applica￾tion in medium density fibreboard to prepare a bio-composite. RSC Advances, 4(22), 
11520–11527.
Nasir, M., Hashim, R., Sulaiman, O., & Asim, M. (2017). 11-Nanocellulose: Preparation 
methods and applications. In M. Jawaid, S. Boufi, & A. K. H. P. S (Eds.), Cellulose￾Reinforced Nanofibre Composites (pp. 261–276): Woodhead Publishing.
Nasir, M., Hashim, R., Sulaiman, O., Nordin, N. A., Lamaming, J., & Asim, M. (2015). 
Laccase, an emerging tool to fabricate green composites: A review. BioResources, 10(3), 
6262–6284.
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Issaabadi, Z., Sajjadi, M., Sajadi, S. M., & Atarod, M. (2019). Types of 
nanostructures. Interface Science and Technology, 28, 29–80.
Pääkkö, M., Ankerfors, M., Kosonen, H., Nykänen, A., Ahola, S., Österberg, M., … Ikkala, 
O. (2007). Enzymatic hydrolysis combined with mechanical shearing and high-pressure 
homogenization for nanoscale cellulose fibrils and strong gels. Biomacromolecules, 
8(6), 1934–1941.
Panthapulakkal, S., & Sain, M. (2012). Preparation and characterization of cellulose nano￾fibril films from wood fibre and their thermoplastic polycarbonate composites. 
International Journal of Polymer Science, 2012, 1–6. Article ID 381342. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2012/381342.
Park, W.-I., Kim, H.-S., Kwon, S.-M., Hong, Y.-H., & Jin, H.-J. (2009). Synthesis of bacterial 
celluloses in multiwalled carbon nanotube-dispersed medium. Carbohydrate Polymers, 
77(3), 457–463. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2009.01.021
Paul, D. R., & Robeson, L. M. (2008). Polymer nanotechnology: Nanocomposites. Polymer, 
49(15), 3187–3204.
Peng, B. L., Dhar, N., Liu, H., & Tam, K. (2011). Chemistry and applications of nanocrystal￾line cellulose and its derivatives: A nanotechnology perspective. The Canadian Journal 
of Chemical Engineering, 89(5), 1191–1206.
Phanthong, P., Karnjanakom, S., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Abudula, A., & Guan, G. 
(2017). A facile one-step way for extraction of nanocellulose with high yield by ball 
milling with ionic liquid. Cellulose, 24(5), 2083–2093.
Phanthong, P., Reubroycharoen, P., Hao, X., Xu, G., Abudula, A., & Guan, G. (2018). 
Nanocellulose: Extraction and application. Carbon Resources Conversion, 1(1), 32–43.
Pinkert, A., Marsh, K. N., Pang, S., & Staiger, M. P. (2009). Ionic liquids and their interaction 
with cellulose. Chemical Reviews, 109(12), 6712–6728.
Podsiadlo, P., Choi, S.-Y., Shim, B., Lee, J., Cuddihy, M., & Kotov, N. A. (2005). Molecularly 
engineered nanocomposites: Layer-by-layer assembly of cellulose nanocrystals. 
Biomacromolecules, 6(6), 2914–2918.
Poonguzhali, R., Basha, S. K., & Kumari, V. S. (2017). Synthesis and characterization 
of chitosan-PVP-nanocellulose composites for in-vitro wound dressing applica￾tion. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 105, 111–120. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.07.006
Rahmani, S., Maroufkhani, M., Mohammadzadeh-Komuleh, S., & Khoubi-Arani, Z. (2022). 
Chapter 7-Polymer nanocomposites for biomedical applications. In A. Barhoum, 
J. Jeevanandam, & M. K. Danquah (Eds.), Fundamentals of Bionanomaterials 
(pp. 175–215). Elsevier.Biomedical Applications of Organic Nanofillers in Polymers 321
Rahmat, M., Karrabi, M., Ghasemi, I., Zandi, M., & Azizi, H. (2016). Silane crosslinking 
of electrospun poly (lactic acid)/nanocrystalline cellulose bionanocomposite. Materials 
Science and Engineering: C, 68, 397–405.
Rallini, M., & Kenny, J. M. (2017). 3-Nanofillers in polymers. In C. F. Jasso-Gastinel & J. 
M. Kenny (Eds.), Modification of Polymer Properties (pp. 47–86). William Andrew 
Publishing.
Ranjbar-Mohammadi, M., Shakoori, P., & Arab-Bafrani, Z. (2021). Design and character￾ization of keratin/PVA-PLA nanofibers containing hybrids of nanofibrillated chitosan/
ZnO nanoparticles. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 187, 554–565. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.07.160
Rebouillat, S., & Pla, F. (2013a). State of the art manufacturing and engineering of nanocel￾lulose: A review of available data and industrial applications. Journal of Biomaterials 
and Nanobiotechnology, 4(02), 165.
Rebouillat, S., & Pla, F. (2013b). State of the art manufacturing and engineering of nanocel￾lulose: A review of available data and industrial applications. Journal of Biomaterials 
and Nanobiotechnology, 4, 165–188.
Rescignano, N., Fortunati, E., Montesano, S., Emiliani, C., Kenny, J. M., Martino, S., & 
Armentano, I. (2014). PVA bio-nanocomposites: A new take-off using cellulose nano￾crystals and PLGA nanoparticles. Carbohydrate Polymers, 99, 47–58. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.08.061
Ribeiro, D. M. L., Carvalho Junior, A. R., Vale de Macedo, G. H. R., Chagas, V. L., Silva, L. 
D. S., Cutrim, B. D. S., … de Miranda, R. D. C. M. (2019). Polysaccharide-based for￾mulations for healing of skin-related wound infections: Lessons from animal models and 
clinical trials. Biomolecules, 10(1), 63.
Saito, T., Kimura, S., Nishiyama, Y., & Isogai, A. (2007). Cellulose nanofibers prepared by 
TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules, 8(8), 2485–2491.
Saito, T., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.-L., Vignon, M., & Isogai, A. (2006). Homogeneous sus￾pensions of individualized microfibrils from TEMPO-catalyzed oxidation of native cel￾lulose. Biomacromolecules, 7(6), 1687–1691.
Salaberria, A. M., Diaz, R. H., Labidi, J., & Fernandes, S. C. (2015). Preparing valuable renew￾able nanocomposite films based exclusively on oceanic biomass–Chitin nanofillers and 
chitosan. Reactive and Functional Polymers, 89, 31–39.
Schadler, L., Brinson, L., & Sawyer, W. (2007). Polymer nanocomposites: A small part of the 
story. Jom, 59(3), 53–60.
Schenzel, K., Fischer, S., & Brendler, E. (2005). New method for determining the degree of 
cellulose I crystallinity by means of FT Raman spectroscopy. Cellulose, 12(3), 223–231.
Schmidt, G., & Malwitz, M. M. (2003). Properties of polymer–nanoparticle composites. 
Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science, 8(1), 103–108.
Shiraishi, S., Imai, T., & Otagiri, M. (1993). Controlled release of indomethacin by chito￾san-polyelectrolyte complex: Optimization and in vivo/in vitro evaluation. Journal of 
Controlled Release, 25(3), 217–225.
Siddiqui, N., Mills, R. H., Gardner, D. J., & Bousfield, D. (2011). Production and charac￾terization of cellulose nanofibers from wood pulp. Journal of Adhesion Science and 
Technology, 25(6–7), 709–721.
Singh, M. R., Patel, S., & Singh, D. (2016). Natural polymer-based hydrogels as scaffolds 
for tissue engineering. In Alexandru Mihai Grumezescu (Ed.), Nanobiomaterials in Soft 
Tissue Engineering (pp. 231–260). Elsevier.
Siró, I., & Plackett, D. (2010). Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite materials: A 
review. Cellulose, 17(3), 459–494.
Sothornvit, R. (2019). Nanostructured materials for food packaging systems: New functional 
properties. Current Opinion in Food Science, 25, 82–87.322 Nanofillers
Sukul, M., Min, Y.-K., Lee, S.-Y., & Lee, B.-T. (2015). Osteogenic potential of simvastatin 
loaded gelatin-nanofibrillar cellulose-β tricalcium phosphate hydrogel scaffold in crit￾ical-sized rat calvarial defect. European Polymer Journal, 73, 308–323. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2015.10.022
Tang, L., Li, X., Du, D., & He, C. (2012). Fabrication of multilayer films from regenerated 
cellulose and graphene oxide through layer-by-layer assembly. Progress in Natural 
Science: Materials International, 22(4), 341–346.
Tayeb, A. H., Amini, E., Ghasemi, S., & Tajvidi, M. (2018). Cellulose nanomaterials—Binding 
properties and applications: A review. Molecules, 23(10), 2684.
Tripathy, J. (2017). Polymer nanocomposites for biomedical and biotechnology applications. 
In Deba Kumar Tripathy & Bibhu Prasad Sahoo (Eds.), Properties and Applications of 
Polymer Nanocomposites (pp. 57–76). Springer.
Wang, Q., Chen, S., & Chen, D. (2017). Preparation and characterization of chitosan based inject￾able hydrogels enhanced by chitin nano-whiskers. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior 
of Biomedical Materials, 65, 466–477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.09.009
Xu, L., Huang, Y.-A., Zhu, Q.-J., & Ye, C. (2015). Chitosan in molecularly-imprinted poly￾mers: Current and future prospects. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 16(8), 
18328–18347.
Yang, S., Zhang, X., & Zhang, D. (2019). Electrospun chitosan/poly (vinyl alcohol)/graphene 
oxide nanofibrous membrane with ciprofloxacin antibiotic drug for potential wound￾dressing application. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 20(18), 4395. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijms20184395
Yuan, N., Xu, L., Zhang, L., Ye, H., Zhao, J., Liu, Z., & Rong, J. (2016). Superior hybrid hydro￾gels of polyacrylamide enhanced by bacterial cellulose nanofiber clusters. Materials 
Science and Engineering: C, 67, 221–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2016.04.074
Zhang, X., Huang, J., Chang, P. R., Li, J., Chen, Y., Wang, D., … Chen, J. (2010). Structure 
and properties of polysaccharide nanocrystal-doped supramolecular hydrogels based 
on Cyclodextrin inclusion. Polymer, 51(19), 4398–4407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2010.07.025323
Index
γ rays 127
ζ-potential 180
absorption bands 159
active agents 189
Ag nanoparticles 217
agglomeration 11
alginate-based nanomaterials 247
anisotropic shape 302
antimicrobial activity 297
arc discharge method 26
asbestos 282
bacterial cellulose 239
bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) 83
bactericidal and bacteriostatic 183
bio-based composites 146
biodegradability 3
biological molecules 22
biological tissues 186
biomedical applications 3
biopolymer 241
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) 9, 121, 200
catalytic efficiency 23
cationic polymer 310
cell–hydrogel matrix 187
cell membrane 216
cellulose 3
cellulose nanofibers 293
cellulose nanowhiskers 95
cellulosic materials 148
chemical treatments 235
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) 37
chitin 90
chitin nanocrystal (ChNC) 86
chromatography 210
colloidal stability 212
colloidal stabilizers 181
contact angle 165
coupling agents 128
cross-linking 176
cryocrushing 150
crystallinity 158
CVD (chemical vapor deposition) 121
cytotoxicity 213
drug delivery 182
ecotoxicity 201
elastomers 147
electrochemical deposition 34
electrolytes 10
electron beam lithography 25
electrospinning 30
encapsulation 126
energy conversion and storage 187
environmentally friendly 166
enzymatic pretreatment 303
esterification 152
flammability 234
flax fiber (Linum usitatissimum) 288
Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) 263
fracture mechanism 163
functionally graded materials (FGMs) 65
graft monomer particles 128
grafting 155
green nanotechnology 218
green solvents 245
hemp fibers 285
high water holding capacity 310
hydrogels 175
hydrophobicity 153
hydrothermal 31
hydroxyl groups 149
in vitro nanotoxicity 202, 203
inorganic nanomaterials 8
ionic gelation 184
ionotropic gelation 311
kenaf fibers 287
laser ablation 26
lignocellulosic biomass 236
linear glucans 242
lithographic patterning 24
low-carbon footprint 237
low-pressure plasma 127
mechanical and thermal properties 72
mechanical fibrillation 304
mechanical grinding 244
mechanical properties 2
mechanochemistry 27
Nano Chitosan 7
Nano Lignins 7
nanocarbon 190324 Index
nanocellulose 74
nanochitin 243
nanoclays 122
nanocomposite 72
nanoelectronics 174
nanofabrication 23
nanolignin 120
nanomaterial emissions 220
nanoparticle dispersion 117
nanorevolution 21
nanoscience and nanotechnology 21
natural fibers 282
network morphology 157
organic matrices 298
organic nanofillers 1, 73
packaging materials 188
pH-responsive delivery 248
phosphorylation 154
photocatalytic activity 214
photodegradation 215
physicochemical properties 246
piezoelectric capabilities 92
plasma treatment 127
poly(dl-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles 7
poly(vinyl alcohol) 5
polycarbonates 5
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 9
Polymer composites 116
polymer hydrogels (PHGs) 259
polymer matrix 6
polymer nanocomposites 1
polymerization 4
polysaccharide 8, 179
polytetrafluoroethylene nanoparticles 9
potentially mineralizable 262
radical polymerization 265
Raman spectroscopy 137
renewable 233
respiratory tract 204
rheological properties 160
self-adhesion 188
self-healing 11
silk fibers 283, 284
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) 26
SiO2 nanoparticles 207
sisal fiber 289
soil fertility 258
sol-gel process/ing 33, 122
starch 93, 240
stress transfer 161, 162
structure–property relationship 156
surface modification 125
surfactant 260
synthetic polymers 299
TEMPO-oxidised cellulose nanofibers 238
thermal stability 164
TiO2 nanoparticles 206
top–down approach 24
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 266
ultrahigh-vacuum 28
UV radiation 208
viscoelastic reaction 90
wastewater treatment 209
water fluxes 10
well-dispersed 178
wettability 165
wood fibers 292
wound healing 185
