p,
A SCIENCE PUBLISHERS BOOK p,
NANOSENSORS
 
Editors 
Dimitrios Nikolelis 
Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry
 
Department of Chemistry
 
University of Athens
 
Panepistimiopolis-Kouponia
 
15771 Athens, Greece
 
Georgia Paraskevi Nikoleli 
Department of Biomedical Sciences
 
Faculty of Health and Care Sciences
 
University of West Attica
 
Egaleo Park Campus
 
12243 Athens, Greece
 
A SCIENCE PUBLISHERS BOOK Cover images provided by the first editor, Dimitrios Nikolelis. 
First edition published 2023 
by CRC Press 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 
and by CRC Press 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
© 2023 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and 
publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of 
their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material 
reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and 
let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood 
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please 
contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data (applied for) 
ISBN: 978-0-367-36985-9 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-032-48030-5 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-367-82228-6 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.1201/9780367822286 
Typeset in Times New Roman 
by Radiant Productions Preface
 
Nanotechnology and biosensors show how nanotechnology is used to create 
affordable, mass-produced, portable, small sized biosensors to directly monitor a 
wide range of chemical compounds, i.e., toxicants such as environmental pollutants. 
In addition, it provides information on their integration into components and systems 
for mass market applications in food analysis, environmental monitoring and health 
diagnostics. Nanotechnological advancements have led to an improvement in the 
characteristics of biosensors such as lifetime, costs, performance, detection limits, 
sensitivity and selectivity of biosensors. This text covers a lot of ground and will be 
of interest to those wishing for a general overview of the range of nanomaterials used 
for biosensing in environmental, food and medical sensing applications. 
Nanotechnology plays an important role in the development of biosensors. 
Application of nanomaterials in biosensors allows the use of many new signal 
transduction technologies. Because of their small size, nanosensors, nanoprobes, 
and other nanosystems are revolutionizing the fields of chemical analysis, to enable 
rapid detection of multiple chemicals in food and environmental samples. Recent 
progress in nanotechnology has finalized the production of low cost, mass-produced 
nanosensors and in integrating these nanosensors into components and systems 
(ca. portable ones) for market applications. Sensing includes chemical food toxicants, 
such as toxins, insecticides, pesticides, herbicides, microorganisms, bacteria, viruses, 
and other microorganisms, phenolic compounds, allergens, genetically modified 
foods, hormones, and dioxins. The limit of detection, costs and performance of these 
devices is being improved by the use of nanomaterials for their construction. The use 
of these nanomaterials has permitted the introduction of many new methods of signal 
transduction in biosensors. Because of their small size, nanosensors, nanoprobes, and 
other nanosystems have permitted simple and rapid analyses in vivo. Portable devices 
which are able to analyse multiple components are becoming available. This book 
reviews the status of the various nanostructure-based nanosensors and investigates 
prototype nanosensing devices specially in the design and microfabrication which 
now is based on novel nanotechnological tools providing nanosensors that are 
suitable for the rapid and in the field detection of food toxicants and environmental 
pollutants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface iii 
1. Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of 
Different Classes of Antibiotics 
1 
Stella Girousi and Christina Sarakatsanou 
2. Electrochemical DNA Sensors Based on Nanomaterials for 
Pharmaceutical Determination 
23 
Anna Porfireva, Veronika Subjakova, Gennady Evtugyn and Tibor Hianik 
3. Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 
Alexander N. Yakunin, Sergey V. Zarkov, Yuri A. Avetisyan, 
Garif G. Akchurin and Valery V. Tuchin 
69 
4. Recent Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based 
Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors for Autoimmune Disease 
Biomarkers 
90 
Paloma Yáñez‑Sedeño, Araceli González‑Cortés, Susana Campuzano 
and José M. Pingarrón 
5. Immunosensors and Genosensors Based on Voltammetric Detection 
of Metal-Based Nanoprobes 
Anastasios Economou and Christos Kokkinos 
109 
6. Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of 
Vitamins 
127 
Stella Girousi and Panayiotis Zararis 
7. Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere 
Paulina Listewnik, Valery V. Tuchin and Małgorzata Szczerska 
159 
8. Nanosensors for Diagnostics and Conservation of Works of Art 
Georgia‑Paraskevi Nikoleli 
173 
9. Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 
Georgia‑Paraskevi Nikoleli, Marianna‑Thalia Nikolelis 
181 
and Vasillios N. Psychoyios 
Contents
 vi Nanosensors 
10. Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection 205 
of Mycotoxins 
Sondes Ben Aissa, Rupesh K. Mishra, Noureddine Raouafi 
and Jean Louis Marty 
Index 255 1
 
Applications of Sensitive 
Electrode Surfaces; Determination 
of Different Classes of Antibiotics
 
Stella Girousi* and Christina Sarakatsanou 
1. Introduction 
Antibiotics are among the drugs most commonly administered to patients with 
marked inter-individual pharmacokinetic variability. Non-invasive monitoring 
of antibiotic levels in biological fluids contributes to the evaluation of the body’s 
adequate exposure to them. In this way, we can understand the relationship between 
the dose of antibiotics and their clinical effects [1]. 
There is a wide variety of antibiotics that differ in use and mechanism of action. 
The following figure (Figure 1) summarizes the main classes of antibiotics and 
provides a brief overview of how they fight bacterial infections. We will also look at 
each of the groups, in this chapter, along with some antibiotics that belong to each 
category [2]. 
Bacteria can be divided in two categories—gram-positive and gram-negative. 
These categories are named by the Gram test, which involves adding a violet dye 
to the bacteria. Gram-positive bacteria retain the violet color of the dye, while 
Gram-negative bacteria do not; the latter are instead colored red or pink. Gram￾negative bacteria are more resistant to antibodies and antibiotics than Gram-positive 
bacteria [2]. 
2. β-lactams 
Τhe first antibiotic to be discovered in the β-lactams class of antibiotics was penicillin, 
which Alexander Fleming identified in 1928. The antibiotics in this class contain a 
β-lactam ring and include penicillins, such as amoxicillin and cephalosporins. They 
Analytical Chemistry laboratory, School of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. 
* Corresponding author: girousi@chem.auth.gr 1
APPLICATIONS OF SENSITIVE ELECTRODE SURFACES;
DETERMINATION OF DIFFERENT CLASSES OF ANTIBIOTICS
Stella Girousi* and Christina Sarakatsanou
Analytical Chemistry laboratory, School of Chemistry, Faculty of
Sciences, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece
*girousi@chem.auth.gr
Introduction
Antibiotics are among the drugs most commonly administered to patients with marked
interindividual pharmacokinetic variability. Non-invasive monitoring of antibiotic levels
in biological fluids contributes to the evaluation of the body's adequate exposure to
them. In this way, we can understand the relationship between the dose of antibiotics
and their clinical effects [1].
There is a wide variety of antibiotics that differ in use and mechanism of action. The
following figure (Scheme 1) summarizes the main classes of antibiotics and provides
a brief overview of how they fight bacterial infections. We will also look at each of the
groups, in this chapter, along with some antibiotics that belong to each category [2].
Scheme 1. Different classes of antibiotics
Commented [RS1]: inter-individual
Commented [SG2R1]: Inter-individual
Commented [RS3]: Figure
Commented [SG4R3]: Figure
Commented [p5]:
Commented [RS6]: Figure
Commented [SG7R6]: Figure
 
 
2 Nanosensors 
Figure 1. Different classes of antibiotics. 
work by interfering with the synthesis of peptidoglycan, a component of the bacterial 
cell wall, and are mainly used against gram-positive bacteria [2]. 
2.1 Penicillin 
In order to detect penicillin V, Švorc et al. developed a simple, sensitive and selective 
differential pulse voltammetric method on a bare boron diamond electrode. The 
oxidation peak of penicillin V was reproducible and well-defined irreversible peak, 
at a very positive potential of +1.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). Optimal experimental conditions 
for penicillin V oxidation were achieved in an acetate buffer solution (pH 4.0). These 
optimal conditions were: modulation amplitude of 0.1 V, modulation time of the 
pulse as 0.05 s, and a scan rate 0.05 V s−1, selected for differential pulse voltammetry. 
Linear response of peak current on the concentration ranged from 0.5 to 40 μM, 
with a coefficient of determination of 0.999, good repeatability (RSD of 1.5%) and a 
detection limit of 0.25 μM; these were observed without any chemical modification 
or electrochemical surface pretreatment. The effect of possible interferents such as 
stearic acid, glucose, urea, uric acid and ascorbic acid appeared to be negligible, 
proving the good selectivity of the method. The above method was applied for the 
detection of penicillin V in pharmaceutical formulations (tablets) and human urine 
samples, with satisfactory recoveries (98 to 101% for tablets and 97 to 103% for 
human urine) [3]. 
2.2 Ceftazidime 
Ceftazidime (CFZ) is one of the third-generation cephalosporin antibiotics and is 
widely used against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. CFZ is not 
metabolized and is excreted unchanged (mainly through urine). It is an electroactive 
compound and therefore electrochemical techniques offer a good opportunity for 
its detection. Thus, a simple, sensitive and selective sensor based on carbon paste 
electrode modified by functionalized mesoporous silica material was developed by Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 3 
Dehdashtian and Abdipur for the electrochemical detection of ceftazidime (CFZ). 
The oxidation of CFZ was studied on modified carbon paste electrode using cyclic 
voltammetry, differential pulse voltammetry and electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy (EIS). The working electrode was an unmodified or modified carbon 
paste electrode, and the auxiliary electrode and the reference electrode were platinum 
wire and SCE respectively. The results showed that the oxidation peak current of 
CFZ on the modified carbon paste electrode was improved compared to that obtained 
on the bare carbon paste electrode. Under optimum conditions, the sensor exhibited 
a linear response over the CFZ concentration range of 1–2500 nM, with a detection 
limit of 0.3 nM. The proposed sensor was successfully applied for monitoring of 
CFZ in the pharmaceutical and biological samples, and satisfactory results were 
obtained [4]. 
2.3 Amoxicillin 
The first study for the detection of amoxicillin (AMX) developed an electrochemical 
sensor based on a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) modified by three-dimensional 
graphene (3D-GE) and polyglutamic acid (PGA). AMX response at PGA/3D-GE/
GCE involving the transfer of one electron and an equal number of protons was 
determined using electrochemical approaches. By optimizing the experimental 
conditions, the performance of AMX was linear in the range of 2–60 μM. In addition, 
the detection limit was found to be 0.118 μM (S/N = 3). Τhe modified electrode 
could determine the concentration of AMX in human urine samples. Overall, the 
developed PGA/3D-GE/GCE for the detection of AMX showed great potential in 
practice [5]. 
According to a second research, Cu(II)-exchanged clinoptilolite nanoparticles 
(Cu(II)-NCL) were prepared and characterized by FT-IR, BET, XRD and TEM 
techniques. The obtained Cu(II)-NCL was then used to form a carbon paste electrode 
(CPE). The resulting Cu(II)-NCL/CPE was finally used for the voltammetric 
determination of amoxicillin (AMX). The best voltammetric response was obtained 
by the electrode containing 20% of the modifier (copper–doped nano-clinoptilolite) in 
0.05 mol L–1 NaCl at 2.2 and 7.2 pH levels. The electrode showed a linear response 
in the concentration range of 4.0 × 10–8 – 1.0 × 10–4 M AMX, with a detection limit of 
2.0 × 10–8 M, in square wave voltammetry. The electrode showed good repeatability, 
reproducibility and long lifetime as confirmed by statistical tests. The electrode 
also had good selectivity and applicability in the detection of AMX in urine and 
pharmaceutical tablets [6]. 
Furthermore, a new electrochemical device based on a combination of 
nanomaterials such as Printex 6L Carbon and cadmium telluride quantum dots within 
a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate film was developed 
by Wong et al. for the sensitive detection of amoxicillin [7]. The electrochemical 
determination of AMX was carried out using square-wave voltammetry. Under 
optimized experimental conditions, the proposed sensor showed high sensitivity, 
repeatability and stability to AMX detection, with an analytical curve in the 
AMX concentration range from 0.90 to 69 μM, and a low detection limit of 
50 nM. No significant interference in the electrochemical signal of the antibiotic was 4 Nanosensors 
observed due to possible biological factors or drugs such as uric acid, paracetamol, 
urea, ascorbic acid and caffeine. It turned out that without any sample pre-treatment 
and with the use of a simple measurement device, the sensor could prove to be an 
effective alternative method for not only the analysis of pharmaceutical products 
(commercial tablets) and clinical samples (urine), but also the examination of food 
quality (milk samples) [7]. 
Finally, a new electrochemical method for indirect chronoamperometric 
detection of amoxicillin (AMX) in the presence of copper ions Cu (II) at a carbon 
paste electrode (CPE) was suggested by Hrioua et al. [8]. The method was based on 
the interaction between the β-lactam antibiotic and copper ions. This interaction was 
initially studied by square wave voltammetry (SWV), wherein the peak corresponding 
to the oxidation of AMX at 0.7 V decreased significantly in the presence of copper 
ions. The product of the reaction was characterized by UV-visible spectrophotometry 
and infrared spectroscopy (IR). Moreover, when AMX was added to the electrolyte 
solution containing copper ions, the chronoamperometric current from the 
Cu(II)/Cu(I) redox system was increased. This increase in current was used for the 
indirect detection of amoxicillin. By selecting an appropriate concentration of copper 
(II), the calibration curve for AMX was established in the concentration range of 
1.95 × 10–7 to 1.46 × 10–5 M. The detection limit was found to be 8.84 × 10–8 M. 
The effect of different organic compounds on the detection of AMX and the effect 
of coexistence of other metal ions in the electrolytic solution were studied. The 
applicability of the proposed method was tested in human blood and pharmaceutical 
tablets [8]. 
2.4 Ampicillin 
The design and construction of a “signal-on” electrochemical sensor based on aptamer 
E-AB for the detection of ampicillin was reported by Yu and Lai, and the sensor’s 
response was reportedly fast [9]. Since all the sensor components were surface￾immobilized, it was regenerable and could be reused for a minimum of three times. 
The sensor demonstrated good specificity, and distinction could be made between 
ampicillin and structurally similar antibiotics such as amoxicillin. This sensor can 
be used directly in complex samples, including serum, saliva and milk. Although 
both alternating current voltammetry (ACV) and square wave voltammetry (SWV) 
are suitable sensor characterization techniques, the results showed ACV to be more 
suitable for target analysis in this case. Even under optimal experimental conditions, 
the detection limit of the sensor obtained in ACV (1 µM) was significantly lower 
than that obtained in SWV (30 µM) [9].
2.5 Cefadroxil 
The first study in this section presents a novel nano-silver amalgam paste 
microelectrode (nano-Ag-APME) for the detection of cefadroxil in pharmaceutical 
formulations and biological specimens [10]. The proposed electrode, prepared in the 
plastic tip of a micropipette tied with the nano-silver amalgam paste, mainly consists 
of silver nano-powder and pure mercury (1:9 w/w). The silver nanopowder and the 
nanosilver amalgam paste were characterized using scanning electron microscope, Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 5 
energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD). The proposed 
method, based on square-wave stripping voltammetry for the measurement of 
cefadroxil at pH 4 in Britton–Robinson buffer, showed a well-defined reduction 
peak at −0.160 V. The comparative study of SW-AdSV and spectrophotometric 
methods showed the linear response for CFL in a range from 0.033–0.304 µM 
and 10–70 µM, respectively. The analytical performance for the quantification of 
CFL by the SW-AdSV method was significantly better than the spectrophotometric 
method (p < 0.01). Moreover, it was indicated that SW-AdSV is more sensitive 
and selective for routine analysis of CFL, compared to the spectrophotometric 
method [10]. 
The electrochemical behavior of cefadroxil has also been studied at glassy 
carbon electrodes in aqueous media over a wide pH range [11]. The first oxidation 
process is of the phenol moiety and follows an ECE mechanism, generating catechol 
and resorcinol derivatives as sub-products, which are subsequently reduced and 
oxidized in subsequent cycles. The sulfur heteroatom present in the cyclic structure 
near the β-lactam moiety is oxidized in two steps to form sulfoxide and sulfone. 
This process was identified from direct comparison with amoxicillin, which has a 
similar molecular structure, although they belong to different classes of β-lactam 
antibiotics. For amoxicillin, the oxidation of the sulfur heteroatom occurs at more 
positive potentials, most likely due to structural difficulties in stabilizing the charged 
oxidized species. The formation of a complex between copper (II) and the above 
antibiotics was studied by cyclic voltammetry in commercial samples [11]. 
2.6  Cefixime
Afkhami et al. introduced a new and efficient electrochemical sensor for the detection 
of cefixime (CEF) in 0.04 M buffer solution (pH 3.0), using gold nanoparticles 
electrodeposited on a modified multi-walled carbon paste electrode (GNPs/MWCPE). 
The voltammetric behavior of cefixime on this modified electrode was studied using 
cyclic and square wave voltammetric techniques. The oxidation of cefixime was 
irreversible and showed a pH-controlled diffusion process. The effect of various 
experimental parameters, including pH, scan rate, accumulation potential and time 
on the voltammetric response of CEF, was investigated. The results indicated that the 
process of oxidation of this compound was irreversible and adsorption-controlled. 
Under optimal conditions, the CEF concentration was determined using square wave 
voltammetry (SWV) in a linear range of 1.0 × 10−2 to 2.0 × 102 μM, with a correlation 
coefficient of 0.9996, and the detection limit was found to be 3.0 × 10−9 M. Square 
wave voltammetric method was successfully applied to the detection of cefixime in a 
pharmaceutical dose and a urine sample. GNPs/MWCPE shows excellent analytical 
performance for the detection of cefixime, with a very low detection limit, high 
sensitivity, fantastic repeatability and reproducibility, compared to other methods 
reported in the literature [12]. 
The voltammetric behavior of cefixime has also been studied using cyclic, 
linear sweep, differential pulse and square wave voltammetric techniques [13]. The 
oxidation of cefixime was found to be irreversible and showed a pH-controlled 
diffusion process. In the study, various parameters were tested to optimize the 6 Nanosensors 
conditions for the detection of cefixime. Furthermore, the dependence on pH, 
concentration, scan rate and nature of the buffer was also investigated. According to 
the linear relationship between the peak current and concentration, differential pulse 
(DPV) and square wave (SWV) voltammetric methods were used to detect cefixime 
in pharmaceutical forms and biological fluids. An acetate buffer at pH 4.5 was also 
proposed, allowing for quantitation over 6 × 10−6 – 2 × 10−4 M range in supporting 
electrolyte and spiked serum sample, 8 × 10−6 – 2 × 10−4 M range in urine sample 
and 6 × 10−6 – 1 × 10−4 M range in breast milk samples for both the techniques. 
The repeatability, reproducibility and accuracy of the methods in all media were 
investigated. No electroactive interferences from the excipients and endogenous 
substances were found in the pharmaceutical dosage forms and biological samples 
respectively [13]. 
In another work, a novel and cost-effective electrochemical sensor was 
developed for the electrochemical investigation of cefixime [14]. SEM, CV and EIS 
were used for the characterization of electrodes. At CTAB/AuNPs/PGE, the oxidation 
of cefixime was found to be irreversible and diffusion-controlled. The linearity 
was established in the range of 10 × 10−9 to 30 × 10−8 M, with a detection limit of 
1.21 × 10−10 M. The studies involved pharmaceutical formulations and biological 
fluids [14]. 
2.7 Cephalosporins 
In a study by Feier et al. the electrochemical oxidation of seven cephalosporins 
(ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, cefadroxil, cefuroxime, cefaclor, cefalexin) 
was evaluated at high potentials, using a bare boron-doped diamond electrode, and 
the influence on the analytical response of the side chains was investigated. According 
to the anodic oxidation of the cephalosporin nucleus, a simple and sensitive method 
was developed for the electrochemical detection of cefalexin by differential pulse 
voltammetry. After optimization of the experimental conditions, a linear correlation 
was achieved between the peak height and the molar concentration of cefalexin in the 
range of 0.5 μΜ–700 μM, with a detection limit of 34.74 ng mL–1 [15]. The anodic 
peak for cefalexin was evaluated in the presence of other cephalosporin molecules and 
other common interferents. The developed method was applied to detect cefalexin in 
environmental, biomedical and pharmaceutical samples, and the results were found 
to be satisfactory. The electrochemical oxidation of cephalosporins was successfully 
adapted for flow injection analysis, with sensitive and reproducible successive 
analysis of cefalexin in different concentrations. Flow analysis also made it possible 
to determine the total amount of cephalosporins present in the sample [15]. 
3. Sulfonamides 
Sulfonamides belong to a large class of antibiotics and are capable of acting on both 
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Unlike β-lactams, they do not act by 
directly killing bacteria, but by inhibiting the bacterial synthesis of Vitamin B or folic 
acid, thus preventing the growth and reproduction of bacteria. Today, sulfonamides Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 7 
are rarely used, partially because of the development of bacterial resistance, and also 
because of concerns regarding their side effects (e.g., hepatotoxicity) [2]. 
3.1 Sulfamethoxazole 
For the detection of sulfamethoxazole (SMX) and trimethoprim (TMP), a new 
electrochemical sensor modified with multi-walled carbon nanotubes decorated with 
Prussian blue nanocubes (MWCNT/PBnc) was developed by Sgobbi et al. [16]. 
MWCNT/PBnc composite combines the high presence of catalytically active sites 
on the PBnc edges with the MWCNT platform to enhance PBnc stability at neutral 
pH levels. The detection of these antibiotics was performed by differential pulse 
voltammetry. The MWCNT/PBnc film exhibited high selectivity and sensitivity 
to both the antibiotics. A linear detection range of 0.1–10.0 μM, with the limit of 
detection (LOD) as 60 nM was achieved for TMP; for SMX, a linear detection range 
of 1.0–10.0 μM, with an LOD of 38 nM was observed. The sensor allowed for the 
simultaneous detection of SMX and TMP in artificial urine, with recovery between 
91.3 to 101% [16]. 
3.2 Sulfanilamide 
Ferraz et al. detected Sulfanilamide (SFD) in otologic solution, human urine and 
serum by electroanalytical techniques on glassy carbon electrode (GCE) [17]. The 
cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments showed an irreversible oxidation peak at 
+1.06 V in 0.1 M BRBS solution (pH 2.0) at 50 mV/s. Different voltammetric scan 
rates (from 10 to 250 mV/s) were applied, and it was evident that the oxidation of 
SFD on the GCE was controlled by diffusion. Square-wave voltammetry (SWV) 
under optimized conditions showed a linear response to SFD from 5.0 to 74.7 μM
(R = 0.999), with detection and quantification limits of 0.92 and 3.10 μM respectively. 
The SWV method proved to yield better results for the detection limit and linear range, 
compared to the chronoamperometry method. This technique has been successfully 
deployed to determine SFD concentration in pharmaceutical formulation, human 
urine sample and serum samples, with recovery close to 100% [17]. 
3.3 Sulfasalazine 
Sadhegi et al. developed an electrochemical sensor to detect the antibiotic 
sulfasalazine, based on molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) as the recognition 
element [18]. A sulfasalazine selective MIP and a non-imprinted polymer (NIP) were 
synthesized and then incorporated into carbon paste to prepare the modified carbon 
paste electrodes. The MIP-based sensor showed high recognition ability towards 
sulfasalazine, compared to that of the NIP-based sensor. The influence of experimental 
parameters such as carbon paste composition, pH, incubation time, potential scan 
rate and potential amplitude were also optimized. Under optimal conditions, the 
MIP-based sensor performed well for sulfasalazine over the concentration range of 
1.0 × 10−8 to 1.0 × 10−6 M, with a detection limit of 4.6 × 10−9 M and a sensitivity of 
1.11 × 107
 μA L mol−1. The MIP-based sensor was successfully used in a commercial 
pharmaceutical formulation and a human serum [18]. 8 Nanosensors 
4. Aminoglycosides 
Aminoglycosides inhibit protein synthesis in bacteria, eventually leading to cell 
death. They are effective against some gram-negative bacteria and some gram￾positive bacteria, but are not absorbed during digestion and should hence be injected. 
Streptomycin was the first drug found to be effective in the treatment of tuberculosis. 
However, due to problems with aminoglycoside toxicity, their use is currently 
limited [2]. 
4.1 Streptomycin 
Streptomycin (STR) is used in humans and animals to treat gram-negative bacterial 
infections. In the present study, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and thiol graphene 
quantum dots (GQD-SH) were used as the nanomaterial for ultrasensitive detection of 
streptomycin (STR). GQD-SH was immobilized onto the surface of a glassy carbon 
electrode (GCE). AuNPs were immobilized on SH groups of GQDs through bond 
formation of Au\S, and Apt was loaded on the electrode surface through interactions 
between thiol groups of the aptamer. By incubating STR as a target on the surface 
of the prepared Apt/AuNPs/GQD-SH/GCE as a proposed nanoaptasensor, the 
Apt/STR complex was formed and changes in the electrochemical signal were 
evaluated using EIS. The proposed nanoaptasensor showed wide linear detection 
range from 0.1 to 700 pg ml−1. Consequently, the proposed nanoaptasensor was 
successfully used for the detection of STR in real samples, yielding satisfactory 
results [19]. 
5. Tetracyclines 
Tetracyclines are antibiotics that work against both gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria. They inhibit protein synthesis, thus preventing the growth and reproduction 
of bacteria. The increased resistance of bacteria towards them has reduced their 
usage; however, they still find use in the treatment of acne, urinary tract infections 
(UTI), respiratory tract infections and chlamydial infections [2]. 
5.1 Tetracycline 
The first research we discuss under this section dealt with an electrochemical 
sensor based on a carbon paste electrode modified with a combination of multi￾walled carbon nanotubes functionalized with carboxyl groups (MWCNT-COOH), 
together with graphene oxide (GO), for the detection of tetracycline. Such sensors 
were constructed using carbon paste modified with 2.6% (w/w) of MWCNT-COOH 
and 3.1% (w/w) of GO. Under optimal conditions, using adsorptive stripping 
differential pulse voltammetry (AdSDPV), the sensor showed a linear response for 
tetracycline concentrations between 2.0 × 10−5 and 3.1 × 10−4 M, a sensitivity of 
1.2 × 104 μA L mol−1, and a detection limit of 3.6 × 10−7 M. The sensor showed 
great sensitivity, selectivity and stability. The MWCNT-COOH-GO/CPE sensor 
was successfully used for the detection of tetracycline in river water, artificial 
urine and pharmaceutical samples, without sample pretreatment. The relative Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 9 
standard deviation (RSD) of the electrochemical measurements was less than 6.0% 
(n = 3) [20]. 
Another study in this domain reported the construction of an electrochemical 
sensing platform based on platinum nanoparticles supported on carbon (PtNPs/C) 
for the detection of the antibiotic tetracycline (TTC). Initially, the PtNPs/C was 
synthesized and characterized by powder X-ray diffraction spectroscopy and 
transmission electron microscopy. Different experimental parameters for the 
electrochemical behavior of the PtNPs/C-coated glassy carbon electrode (PtNPs/C/ 
GCE) were evaluated. Under the optimal experimental conditions, the linear 
calibration range, detection limit, quantification and sensitivity of the PtNPs/C/GCE 
were 9.99–44.01 μM, 4.28 μM, 14.3 μM and 3.32 μAL μmol−1 cm−2 respectively. 
Eventually, the proposed electrochemical sensing platform was successfully 
deployed to detect low TTC concentrations in urine samples [21]. 
6. Chloramphenicol 
Chloramphenicol is an antibiotic which acts by inhibiting protein synthesis and, in 
turn, the growth and reproduction of a few bacteria. It is used to treat typhoid fever 
and infections including salmonellosis. Due to potential severe toxic effects, it is 
generally used in developed countries only in cases where infections are considered 
life-threatening. Nevertheless, it is a very common antibiotic in developing countries, 
due to its low cost. Thus, the use of CP in pharmaceuticals, food-producing animals 
and agriculture can pose a serious threat to both human and animal health. Therefore, 
the development of a highly selective CP detection method has become essential for 
the protection of human health [2, 22, 23]. 
6.1 Chloramphenicol 
In a particular study for the detection of CPL, well dispersive palladium nanoparticles 
decorated with graphene oxide (Pd NPs/GO) nanocomposite were developed 
using facile ice bath method. The electrochemical behavior of the electrochemical 
sensor was investigated by cyclic voltammetry and amperometric method. The 
Pd NPs/GO nanocomposite showed an excellent electrocatalytic behavior in 
terms of higher cathodic peak current and lower peak potential. Furthermore, the 
Pd NPs/GO-modified GCE displayed an excellent linear response range 
(0.007 to 102.68 μM), good sensitivity (3.0479 μA μM−1 cm2
) and a low detection 
limit (0.001 μM). The Pd NPs/GO/GCE sensor exhibited an excellent selectivity 
for CPL sensing in the presence of other interfering compounds. Additionally, the 
nanocomposite was efficaciously applied to biological and food samples for the 
detection of CPL and demonstrated good recoveries values [22]. 
7. Macrolides 
Macrolides, as antibiotics, are mainly effective against gram-positive bacteria. They 
act in a bacteriostatic way, preventing their growth and reproduction, inhibiting the 
synthesis of proteins. These antibiotics have shown to be effective against numerous 10 Nanosensors 
types of bacteria. While some bacterial species have developed macrolide resistance, 
they are still the second most commonly prescribed antibiotic in the NHS, with 
erythromycin being the most commonly prescribed antibiotic in this class [2]. 
7.1 Azithromycin 
Azithromycin (AZM) is a widely used macrolide antibiotic; it is used to treat or 
prevent multiple bacterial infections [2]. As a semi-synthetic derivative of macrolide 
antibiotics, it has significant tissue pharmacokinetic properties and antibiotic activity 
with rapid absorption, long half-life (68 hours), very large volume of distribution 
and low plasma protein binding [2, 24]. However, AZM also has some side effects 
on the body’s gastrointestinal tract. High levels of AZM accumulate in ocular tissues, 
with approximately 10% of the administered AZM excreted unchanged in the urine 
[2]. Therefore, a need arises for the administration of the appropriate dose of AZM 
[24]. 
In one of the studies, a selective and sensitive molecularly imprinted polymer 
(MIP)-based electrochemical sensor was fabricated for the detection of azithromycin 
from various biological samples (urine, tears, plasma). The reversible boronate 
ester bond-mediated, thin (~ 75 nm) MIP-based biomimetic recognition layer was 
electrodeposited in non-aqueous media onto the surface of a glassy carbon electrode. 
The surface morphology and the analytical performance of the developed sensor 
were assessed using scanning electron microscope (SEM), atomic force microscope 
(AFM), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic voltammetry 
(CV). The sensor showed a wide dynamic range (13.33 nM–66.67 μM) for AZM 
detection, and an estimated detection limit in the subnanomolar range (0.85 nM). The 
sensor was simple to build, reusable and had a good shelf-life, exhibiting remarkable 
selectivity over a wide number of antibiotics, commonly associated drugs and 
endogenous compounds [1]. 
7.2 Erythromycin 
Erythromycin has a similar antimicrobial spectrum as penicillin and is widely used 
especially for the treatment of patients allergic to penicillin. In a research towards 
detection of Erythromycin, Vajdle et al. used a renewable silver-amalgam film 
electrode (Hg(Ag)FE) for the characterization and determination of erythromycin 
ethylsuccinate (EES), a widely used esterified form of the antibiotic, by means of 
cyclic voltammetry (CV) and square wave voltammetry (SWV). In the aqueous 
Britton-Robinson buffer (pH 5.0–9.0), one reduction peak of EES was observed 
in the potential range of –0.75V to –1.80 V vs. SCE, with peak potential maxima 
ranging from –1.59 V to –1.70 V, depending on the applied pH as well as the 
peak shape. The optimal conditions resulted in stable SWV responses with a 
decent linear correlation in the EES concentration range from 4.53 to 29.8 μg mL–1 
(LOD = 1.36 μg mL–1), and from 0.69 μg mL–1 to 2.44 μg mL–1 (LOD 0.21 μg mL–1) 
in the case of optimized SW-AdSV. The relative standard deviation was found to 
be below 1.5%. The reliability of the elaborated procedures and thus the accuracy 
of the results were validated by comparing them with those obtained by means of Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 11 
HPLC-DAD measurements. The direct cathodic SWV method was successfully 
applied for the detection of EES in the pharmaceutical preparation Eritromicin1, 
while SW-AdSV was applied in spiked urine sample. In both cases, the standard 
addition method was used [25]. 
8. Glycopeptides 
Glycopeptide antibiotics are active against a limited number of bacteria, inhibiting 
their growth and reproduction, rather than killing them immediately [2]. Glycopeptides 
include the drug vancomycin—commonly used when other antibiotics fail. 
8.1 Vancomycin 
Gill et al. modified a copper(II) benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate (BTC) metal-organic 
framework (MOF) with poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) and used it in a vancomycin 
electrochemical sensor. The MOF, which was synthesized through a single-pot 
method, improved MOF solubility and dispersibility in water, without compromising 
its crystallinity and porosity. It showed improved electrocatalytic properties when 
placed on a glassy carbon electrode (GCE). This led to better dispersion of the 
MOF and improved interaction between MOF and vancomycin. Furthermore, the 
structural, spectral and electrochemical properties of the MOFs and their vancomycin 
complexes was characterized. The modified GCE proved to be a viable tool for 
electrochemical detection (best at a working potential of 784 mV vs. Ag/AgCl) of 
the antibiotic vancomycin in spiked urine and serum samples. Response was linear 
in the 1–500 nM vancomycin concentration range, and the detection limit was found 
to be 1 nM, with a relative standard deviation of ±4.3% [26].
9. Oxazolidinones 
Oxazolidinones are active against gram-positive bacteria and act by inhibiting 
protein synthesis, and their growth and reproduction in turn. They are a completely 
synthetic class of antimicrobial agents. Two less toxic oxazolidinone derivatives 
were developed in the 1990s, one of which is linezolid morpholine. It binds to the 
subunit of ribosomes in bacteria and inhibits protein synthesis. The pharmacokinetic 
properties of Linezolid (LNZ), along with its effective ability to enter and concentrate 
in the tissue in many parts of the body, make it an effective drug for use in surgical 
infections [2, 27]. 
9.1 Linezolid 
Aydin et al. investigated the electrochemical prop
renewable pencil graphite and carbon paste elect
erties of linezolid, using unmodified 
rodes, in a Britton Robinson buffer 
solution (pH 2–10) [27]. The experimental studies were examined by square-wave 
(SW) and cyclic voltammetry (CV). Initially, the parameters affecting the performance 
of both the electrodes, such as electrode activation, support electrolyte selection, 
pH effect, interval of potentials, scan rates and voltammetric parameters were 
investigated with square wave voltammetry. Linezolid was not reversibly oxidized 12 Nanosensors 
in supporting electrolyte solutions, yielding well-defined peaks in its oxidation 
potential range. Using the pencil graphite electrode (PGE), a linear relationship 
between peak current and concentration was obtained between 0.01 and 0.2 μg mL–1 
(2.96 × 10–8 – 5.93 × 10–7 M); at the carbon paste electrode (CPE), the range was 
0.1 and 7.5 μg mL–1 (2.96 × 10–7 – 2.22 × 10–5 M), as obtained by SWV. The 
selectivity, sensitivity, precision and other validation parameters of the developed 
voltammetric method was also evaluated. Eventually, the concentration of linezolid 
was examined in pharmaceutical and biological samples using the standard addition 
technique [27]. 
10. Ansamycins 
Ansamycins are effective as antibiotics against a few gram-positive and gram￾negative bacteria. They lead to the death of bacterial cells by inhibiting the production 
of RNA, which is critical for bacterial cells [2]. 
11. Quinolones 
Quinolones are bactericidal compounds that interfere with the replication and 
transcription of DNA in bacterial cells. They are broad-spectrum antibiotics and are 
used for treating urinary tract infections as well as for veterinary purposes [2]. 
11.1  Levofloxacin
Rkik et al. developed a method to detect the presence of Levofloxacin (LEV) 
antibiotic in human serum and urine samples, using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and 
square wave voltammetry (SWV). Boron-doped diamond (BDD) was used as a 
sensor for these voltammetric methods. This electrode was used as the anode, the 
electrochemical response of which showed three irreversible well-defined peaks. 
The oxidation mechanism of the molecule included the transfer of 2 electrons 
and 2 protons, leading to LEV N-oxide. Under optimized conditions, CV was 
less sensitive than SWV. At length, the SWV method gave the lowest limit of 
detection and quantification. LOD and LOQ were found to be 2.88 and 9.60 μM for 
SWV respectively [28]. 
11.2  Ofloxacin
In a study by Elfiky et al. a new sensor was prepared using a carbon paste electrode 
mixed with flake graphite and oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes. The electric 
conductivity and electrocatalytic activity of this sensor towards the electrochemical 
oxidation of ofloxacin were better than those of modified graphite flake-shaped 
carbon paste electrodes or oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Under optimal 
conditions, the modified carbon paste electrode achieved detection limits of 
0.18 nM and 0.24 nM in pharmaceutical samples and spiked human urine samples 
respectively. The sensor proved to be extremely stable, reusable and free of 
interference from other common excipients in drug formulations [29]. Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 13 
11.3  Ciprofloxacin
Zhang et al. prepared a glassy carbon electrode modified with poly(alizarin red)/ 
electrodeposited graphene (PAR/EGR) composite film for the detection of 
ciprofloxacin (CΙP), in the presence of ascorbic, uric acid and dopamine [30]. The 
electrocatalytic oxidation of CΙP on AR/EGR was investigated by cyclic voltammetry 
(CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV). A linear detection range of 4 × 10–8 
to 1.2 × 10–4 M was observed, with a detection limit (S/N = 3) of 0.01 μM. The 
modified electrode could be applied to the detection of CIP individually as well as 
in the presence of ascorbic acid, uric acid and dopamine. In conclusion, the method 
proved to be very simple and selective for the detection of CIP in pharmaceutical 
preparation and biological media [30]. 
In another study, ciprofloxacin (CIP) was detected using an indirect 
electrochemical method based on the complexation of CIP with Cd2+ [31]. On a 
graphene-modified electrode, Cd2+ showed a strong anodic stripping peak current 
response, which was efficiently prohibited in the presence of CIP. Thus, the anodic 
stripping peak current of Cd2+ was considered as the indicative signal for CIP 
detection. Some parameters such as the modified volume of graphene, solution pH, 
accumulation time and complexation reaction time were also investigated. Under 
optimum conditions, the concentration range of CIP was found to be 1.0 × 10–7 to 
1.0 × 10–5 M, with a detection limit of 5.9 × 10–8 M. The method was very selective 
and reproducible, and could be successfully used to detect CIP in pharmaceutical 
formulations and human urine [31]. 
Voltammetric methods for the detection of ciprofloxacin have been further 
developed. In one such study, a cathodically pre-treated boron-doped diamond 
(BDD) electrode coupled with square-wave voltammetry (SWV) and differential 
pulse voltammetry (DPV) was used [32]. Analytical curves were obtained for CIP 
concentrations from 2.50 to 50.0 μM for SWV, and from 0.500 to 60.0 μM for 
DPV, with detection limits of 2.46 and 0.440 μM respectively. Moreover, sufficient 
recovery values were obtained for the detection of CIP in synthetic urine samples by 
DPV. On the other hand, SWV was employed to evaluate the interaction between 
CIP and double-stranded dsDNA. The results showed that CIP binds to dsDNA by 
intercalation, with a binding constant calculated as 5.91 × 105
 L mol–1. Thus, the 
cathodically pre-treated BDD electrode was successfully deployed for the detection 
of CIP in biological samples and for studies on the interaction of this fluoroquinolone 
with dsDNA [32]. 
In yet another study, a new and efficient electrochemical sensor was developed to 
detect ciprofloxacin, using a composite of magnetic multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MMWCNTs) and molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) [33]. A magnetic MIP
(MMIP) was synthesized by simple procedure; MMIP can respond selectively to 
ciprofloxacin. The performance of the carbon paste electrode modified with MMIP
was investigated using cyclic voltammetry and differential pulse voltammetry. The 
detection limit of this method was found to be 0.0017 μM, with a linear detection 
range (3Sb/m) of 0.005–0.85 μM. The detection of ciprofloxacin was possible in 
pharmaceutical samples and biological fluids. This method proved to have potential 14 Nanosensors 
applications in routine analysis, given its high specificity, excellent reproducibility 
and good stability [33]. 
The aim of the final paper discussed under this section was to use boron-doped 
diamond electrodes for a sensitive, simple and reliable voltammetric detection of 
ciprofloxacin in human urine samples. Initially, an optimal level of boron doping was 
determined to achieve the highest sensitivity. Ciprofloxacin provided a well-defined 
irreversible oxidation peak at a potential of +1.15 V, using cyclic voltammetry, in an 
ammonium acetate buffer (pH 5). Optimal experimental conditions were achieved 
and the concentration range obtained by square wave voltammetry was linear from 
0.15 to 2.11 μM (R2 = 0.9974), while the limit of detection (0.05 μM) was very low. 
The developed square wave method was successfully used to detect ciprofloxacin in 
human urine samples, with a decent recovery (97 to 102%) [34]. 
12. Streptogramins 
Streptogramins are usually given as a combination of two antibiotics from different 
classes of antibiotics: streptogramin A and streptogramin B. Individually, these 
compounds inhibit growth, but when used in combination, they have a synergistic 
effect and can directly kill bacterial cells by inhibiting protein synthesis. They are 
often used to treat resistant infections; however bacterial resistance has developed 
for these antibiotics as well [2]. 
13. Lipopeptides 
Lipopeptides are bactericidal towards gram-positive bacteria. Daptomycin is the 
most widely used antibiotic in this class and has a unique mechanism of action. It 
disrupts the function of the cell membrane in bacteria, and is administered through 
injection, treating infections of the skin and tissues. Hence, this mechanism of action 
of daptomycin is significantly beneficial and the cases of drug resistance appear to 
be rare [2]. 
14. Future prospects 
Electroanalysis may hold excellent prospects for detecting antibiotics in biological 
fluids, given their high sensitivity and accuracy. However, electrochemical 
techniques have a limited field of application when compared with optical and 
separation methods due to their relatively lower selectivity for some techniques and 
significant interference. Thus, it is proposed to develop new selective electrodes, as 
well as conduct additional research on 26 molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) 
and aptamers—which are distinguished for their high specific recognition capacity 
for the respective target molecules, while at the same time being unaffected by any 
interference that may be present in the respective substrates. Furthermore, modified 
electrodes can be an important object of research due to the difficulty in renewing 
their surface, which in turn reduces their repeatability. Ultimately, it would be 
interesting to further explore, study and develop electrochemical DNA biosensors 
that would make a significant contribution towards improving health. Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 15 
Summary Table 
Antibiotics Electroanalytical 
Technique 
Electrode Detection Limit 
(μM) 
Linear Range (μM) Substrate References 
Penicillin Differential Pulse 
Voltammetry (DPV) 
Boron-Doped Diamond 
Electrode (BDDE) 
0.25 μM 0.5–40 μM Human 
urine and 
pharmaceutical 
[3] 
formulations 
Amoxicillin Square Wave PGA/3D-GE/GCE 0.118 μM 2–60 μM Urine [5] 
Voltammetry (SWV) [glassy carbon electrode 
(GCE) modified by three￾dimensional graphene (3D-GE) 
and polyglutamic acid (PGA)] 
Square Wave Cu(II)-NCL/CPE (carbon 0.02 μM 0.04–100 μM Urine and [6] 
Voltammetry (SWV) paste electrode modified with pharmaceutical 
Cu(II)-exchanged clinoptilolite tablets 
nanoparticles) 
Chronoamperometry Carbon paste electrode with 
copper ions Cu(II) 
8.84 × 10–2 μM 0.195–14.6 μM Human 
blood and 
pharmaceutical 
[7] 
tablets 
Square Wave Nanomaterials such as 0.05 μM 0.90–69 μM Urine, [8] 
Voltammetry (SWV) Printex 6L Carbon and 
cadmium telluride quantum 
dots within a poly(3,4­
pharmaceutical 
and milk 
samples 
ethylenedioxythiophene) 
polystyrene sulfonate film 
Table contd. ... 16 Nanosensors Antibiotics Electroanalytical Technique Electrode Detection Limit (μM) Linear Range (μM) Substrate References Cefadroxil Square-wave Stripping Voltammetry (SW-AdSV) Nano-silver amalgam pastes microelectrode 0.011 μM 0.033–0.304 μM Pharmaceutical formulations and biological [10] 
specimen 
Cyclic Voltammetry Glassy carbon electrode (GCE) 0.3 μM 1–5 μM Commercial 
samples 
[11] 
Ampicillin Alternating Current 
Voltammetry (ACV) 
“Signal-on” electrochemical 
aptamer-based sensor 
ACV: 1 μM
SWV: 30 μM
ACV: 5–5000 
SWV: 100–5000 μM
Serum, saliva, 
and milk 
[9] 
& Square Wave 
Voltammetry (SWV) 
Cefixime Cyclic Voltammetry Multi walled carbon paste 3 × 10–3 μM 1 × 10–2 – 2 × 102 μM Urine and [12] 
& Square Wave electrode modified with gold pharmaceutical 
Voltammetry nanoparticles GNPs/MWCPE samples 
Cyclic, linear Glassy Carbon Electrode DPV: in Serum sample: For Serum sample: Biological [13] 
sweep, differential 
pulse and square 
wave voltammetric 
techniques 
0.428 μM
Urine: 5.31 × 10–2 μM
Breast milk: 0.177 μM
SWV: in Serum sample: 
0.541 μM
6–200 μM
Urine: 8–200 μM
Breast milk: 
6–100 μM
for DPV and SWV 
fluids (urine, 
serum, breast 
milk) 
Urine: 0.245 μM
Breast milk: 0.186 μM
techniques 
Differential Pulse 
Voltammetry (DPV) 
Modified pencil graphite 
electrode (PGE) using gold 
nanoparticles (AuNPs) and 
1.21 × 10–4 μM 0.01–0.3 μM Pharmaceutical 
formulations 
and biological 
[14] 
cetyltrimethyl ammonium 
bromide (CTAB) 
fluids 
...Table contd. Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 17 
Ceftazidime Cyclic & differential 
pulse voltammetry, 
electrochemical 
Carbon paste electrode 
modified by functionalized 
mesoporous silica material 
0.30 × 10−3 μM 0.001–2.5 μM Biological and 
pharmaceutical 
samples 
[4] 
impedance 
spectroscopy (EIS) 
Cephalosporins Differential Pulse 
Voltammetry (DPV) 
Bare boron-doped diamond 
electrode (BDDE) 
34.74 nM
(0,099 μM)
173.80–243313.00 
μg/L 
Enviromental, 
biomedical and 
[15] 
(0.5–700 μM) pharmaceutical 
samples 
Sulfamethoxazole 
& Trimethoprime 
Differential Pulse 
Voltammetry (DPV) 
Electrochemical sensor 
modified with multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes decorated 
TMP: 60 × 10−3 μM
SMX: 38 ×10−3 μM
TMP: 0.1–10 μM
SMX: 1–10 μM
Artificial urine [16] 
with Prussian blue nanocubes 
(MWCNT/PBnC) 
Sulfanilamide Square-wave 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon electrode (GCE) 0.92 μM 5–74.7 μM Otologic 
solution, 
human urine 
[17] 
and serum 
Sulfasalazine Differential Pulse 
Voltammetry (DPV) 
Carbon paste electrode 
modified with molecularly 
imprinted polymer (MIP)
4.6 × 10–3 μM 0.01–1 μM Human 
serum and 
pharmaceutical 
sample 
[18] 
Streptomycin Electrochemical Apt/AuNPs/GQD-SH/GCE 5.67 × 10–8 μM 1.72 × 10–7 – 1.2 × Human serum [19] 
impedance Nanoaptasensor (0.033 pg/ml) 10–3 μM
spectroscopy (EIS) 
Table contd. ... 18 Nanosensors Antibiotics Electroanalytical Technique Electrode Detection Limit (μM) Linear Range (μM) Substrate References Tetracycline Adsorptive stripping differential pulse Carbon paste electrode modified with multiwalled 0.36 μM 20–310 μM River water, artificial [20] voltammetry 
(AdSDPV) 
carbon nanotubes 
functionalized with carboxyl 
groups (MWCNT-COOH), 
urine, and 
pharmaceutical 
samples 
together with graphene oxide 
(GO) 
Cyclic Voltammetry Platinum nanoparticles 4.28 μM 9.99–44.01 μM Urine [21] 
& Differential Pulse supported on carbon 
Voltammetry (DPV) (PtNPs/C/GCE) 
Linezolid Square-wave 
(SW) and cyclic 
Pencil graphite and carbon 
paste electrodes (PGE/CPE) 
BR buffer at pH = 4: 
1.39 × 10–3 μM
At pH = 4 (PGE): 
0.0296–0.593 μM
Pharmaceutical 
and biological 
[27] 
voltammetry (CV) BR buffer at pH = 7: At pH = 7 (CPE): samples 
9.25 × 10–3 μM 0.296–22.2 μM
Chloramphenicol Amperometry PdNPs/GO/GCE 0.001 μM 0.007–102.68 μM Biological and 
food samples 
[22] 
Ciprofloxacin Cyclic voltammetry 
(CV) and differential 
pulse voltammetry 
Modified glassy carbon 
electrode 
0.01 μM 0.04–120 μM Biological and 
pharmaceutical 
samples 
[30] 
(DPV) 
Anodic stripping Graphene-modified electrode 59 × 10–3 μM 0.1–10 μM Pharmaceutical [31] 
voltammetry formulation 
and human 
urine 
...Table contd. Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 19 
Square-wave Boron doped diamond SWV: 2.46 μM SWV: 2.50–50.0 μM Urine [32] 
voltammetry (SWV) electrode (BDD) DPV: 0.440 μM DPV: 0.500–60.0 
and differential pulse μM
voltammetry (DPV) 
Cyclic voltammetry Electrochemical sensor 0.0017 μM 0.005–0.85 μM Biological [33] 
(CV) and differential MMWCNTs/MIP fluids & 
pulse voltammetry pharmaceutical 
(DPV) samples 
Cyclic voltammetry Boron doped 0.05 μM 0.15–2.11 μM Human urine [34] 
(CV) &amp; square diamond electrode 
wave voltammetry 
(SWV) 
Azithromycin Cyclic voltammetry Electrochemical sensor 0.0017 μM 0.005–0.85 μM Biological [1] 
(CV) and differential 
pulse voltammetry 
(DPV) 
MMWCNTs/MIP fluids & 
pharmaceutical 
samples 
Erythromycin Cyclic voltammetry Boron doped diamond 0.05 μM 0.15–2.11 μM Human urine [25] 
(CV) & square wave electrode 
voltammetry (SWV) 
Ofloxacin Square wave 
adsorptive anodic 
stripping voltammetry 
Carbon paste electrode 
blended with flake graphite 
and oxidized multiwall carbon 
In urine: 0.24 × 10–3 μM
In medicines: 
0.18 × 10–3 μM
urine: 
0.0008–0.02 μM
medicines: 
Pharmaceutical 
and human 
urine samples 
[29] 
(SWAdASV) nanotubes ([FG2/MW2]/CPE) 0.0006−0.015 μM
Table contd. ... 20 Nanosensors Antibiotics Electroanalytical Technique Electrode Detection Limit (μM) Linear Range (μM) Substrate References Levofloxacin Cyclic voltammetry Boron doped diamond CV: 10.01 μM CV: 48–100 μM Urine and [28] (CV) and square wave electrode (BDD) SWV: 2.88 μM SWV: 10–80.9 μM human serum voltammetry (SWV) 
Vancomycin Cyclic Voltammetry Glassy carbon electrode 
modified with MOF 
10–3 μM 10–3–0.5 μM Urine & serum [26] 
[copper(II) benzene-1,3,5­
tricarboxylate (BTC) metal￾organic framework] 
...Table contd.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Antibiotics’s Electroanalysis 21 
Literature 
[1] Stoian, I.A., Bogdan-Cezar Iacob, Cosmina-Larisa Dudaș, Lucian Barbu-Tudoran, Diana Bogdan, 
Iuliu Ovidiu Marian, Ede Bodoki and Radu Oprean. 2020. Biomimetic electrochemical sensor 
for the highly selective detection of azithromycin in biological samples. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
155(February): 112098. 
[2] Compound-Interest. A Brief Overview of Classes of Antibiotics. [Online]. Available: http://www. 
compoundchem.com/2014/09/08/antibiotics/.
[3] Švorc, Ľ., J. Sochr, M. Rievaj, P. Tomčík and D. Bustin. 2012. Voltammetric determination of 
penicillin V in pharmaceutical formulations and human urine using a boron-doped diamond 
electrode. Bioelectrochemistry 88: 36–41. 
[4] Dehdashtian, S. and Z. Abdipur. 2017. Fabrication of an ultrasensitive electrochemical sensor based 
on a mesoporous silica material functionalized by copper ion (SBA-15-Cu(II)) modified carbon 
paste electrode for determination of antibiotic ceftazidime and its application in pharmaceutical 
an. J. Iran. Chem. Soc. 14(8): 1699–1709.
[5] Chen, C. et al. 2019. Amoxicillin on polyglutamic acid composite three-dimensional graphene 
modified electrode: Reaction mechanism of amoxicillin insights by computational simulations. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 1073: 22–29. 
[6] Nosuhi, M. and A. Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh. 2017. Comprehensive study on the electrocatalytic effect 
of copper–doped nano-clinoptilolite towards amoxicillin at the modified carbon paste electrode–
solution interface. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 497: 66–72. Doi: 10.1016/j.jcis2017.02.055. Epub 
2017 Feb 24. 
[7]	 Wong, A., A.M. Santos, F.H. Cincotto, F.C. Moraes, O. Fatibello-Filho and M.D.P.T. Sotomayor. 
2020. A new electrochemical platform based on low cost nanomaterials for sensitive detection of 
the amoxicillin antibiotic in different matrices. Talanta 120252.
[8] Hrioua, A., A. Farahi, S. Lahrich, M. Bakasse, S. Saqrane and M.A. El Mhammedi. 2019. 
Chronoamperometric detection of amoxicillin at graphite electrode using chelate effect of 
copper(II) Ions : Application in human blood and pharmaceutical tablets. Chemistry Select 
4(28): 8350–8357. 
[9]	 Yu, Z. gang and R.Y. Lai. 2018. A reagentless and reusable electrochemical aptamer-based sensor 
for rapid detection of ampicillin in complex samples. Talanta 176: 619–624. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
talanta.2017.08.057. Epub 2017 Aug 19. 
[10] Atif, S., J.A. Baig, H.I. Afridi, T.G. Kazi and M. Waris. 2020. Novel nontoxic electrochemical 
method for the detection of cefadroxil in pharmaceutical formulations and biological samples. 
Microchem. J. 154(December 2019): 104574.
[11] Sanz, C.G., S.H.P. Serrano and C.M.A. Brett. 2019. Electrochemical characterization of cefadroxil 
β-lactam antibiotic and Cu(II) complex formation. J. Electroanal. Chem. 844(January): 124–131.
[12] Afkhami, A., F. Soltani-Felehgari and T. Madrakian. 2013. Gold nanoparticles modified carbon 
paste electrode as an efficient electrochemical sensor for rapid and sensitive determination of 
cefixime in urine and pharmaceutical samples. Electrochim. Acta 103: 125–133.
[13] Golcu, A., B. Dogan and S.A. Ozkan. 2005. Anodic voltammetric behavior and determination of 
cefixime in pharmaceutical dosage forms and biological fluids. Talanta 67(4): 703–712.
[14] Manjunatha, P. and Y.A. Nayaka. 2019. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide-gold nanoparticles 
composite modified pencil graphite electrode for the electrochemical investigation of cefixime 
present in pharmaceutical formulations and biology. Chem. Data Collect. 21: 100217. 
[15] Feier, B., A. Gui, C. Cristea and R. Săndulescu. 2017. Electrochemical determination of 
cephalosporins using a bare boron-doped diamond electrode. Anal. Chim. Acta 976: 25–34. 
[16] Sgobbi, L.F., C.A. Razzino and S.A.S. Machado. 2016. A disposable electrochemical sensor 
for simultaneous detection of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim antibiotics in urine based on 
multiwalled nanotubes decorated with Prussian blue nanocubes modified screen-printed electrode. 
Electrochim. Acta 191: 1010–1017. 
[17] Ferraz, B.R.L., T. Guimarães, D. Profeti and L.P.R. Profeti. 2018. Electrooxidation of sulfanilamide 
and its voltammetric determination in pharmaceutical formulation, human urine and serum on 
glassy carbon electrode. J. Pharm. Anal. 8(1): 55–59. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22	 Nanosensors 
[18] Sadeghi, S., A. Motaharian and A.Z. Moghaddam. 2012. Electroanalytical determination of 
sulfasalazine in pharmaceutical and biological samples using molecularly imprinted polymer 
modified carbon paste electrode. Sensors Actuators, B Chem. 168: 336–344.
[19] Ghanbari, K. and M. Roushani. 2018. A novel electrochemical aptasensor for highly sensitive and 
quantitative detection of the streptomycin antibiotic. Bioelectrochemistry 120: 43–48. 
[20]	 Wong, A., M. Scontri, E.M. Materon, M.R.V. Lanza and M.D.P.T. Sotomayor. 2015. Development 
and application of an electrochemical sensor modified with multi-walled carbon nanotubes and 
graphene oxide for the sensitive and selective detection of tetracycline. J. Electroanal. Chem. 
757: 250–257. 
[21] Kushikawa, R.T., M.R. Silva, A.C.D. Angelo and M.F.S. Teixeira. 2016. Construction of an 
electrochemical sensing platform based on platinum nanoparticles supported on carbon for 
tetracycline determination. Sensors Actuators, B Chem. 228: 207–21. 
[22] Kokulnathan, T., T.S.K. Sharma, S.M. Chen, T.W. Chen and B. Dinesh. 2018. Ex-situ decoration of 
graphene oxide with palladium nanoparticles for the highly sensitive and selective electrochemical 
determination of chloramphenicol in food and biological samples. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 
89: 26–38. 
[23]	 Yadav, M., V. Ganesan, R. Gupta, D.K. Yadav and P.K. Sonkar. 2019. Cobalt oxide nanocrystals 
anchored on graphene sheets for electrochemical determination of chloramphenicol. Microchem. 
J. 146: 881–887.
[24] Hu, L., Tingting Zhou, Jingwen Feng, Hua Jinc, Yun Tao, Dan Luo, Surong Mei and 
Yong-Ill Lee. 2018. A rapid and sensitive molecularly imprinted electrochemiluminescence 
sensor for Azithromycin determination in biological samples. J. Electroanal. Chem. 
813(November 2017): 1–8. 
[25]	 Vajdle, O., Valéria Guzsvány, Dušan Škorić, Jasmina Anojčić, Pavle Jovanov, Milka Avramov-Ivić, 
János Csanádia Zoltán Kónya, Slobodan Petrović and Andrzej Bobrowski. 2016. Voltammetric 
behavior of erythromycin ethylsuccinate at a renewable silver-amalgam film electrode and its 
determination in urine and in a pharmaceutical preparation. Electrochim. Acta 191: 44–54. 
[26] Gill, A.A.S., Sima Singh, Nikhil Agrawal and Rajshekhar Karpoormath. 2020. A poly(acrylic 
acid)-modified copper-organic framework for electrochemical determination of vancomycin. 
Microchim. Acta 187(1).
[27]	 Aydin, I., H. Akgun and P.T. Pınar. 2019. Analytical determination of the oxazolidinone antibiotic 
linezolid at a pencil graphite and carbon paste electrodes. Chemistry Select 4(34): 9966–9971. 
[28] Rkik, M., M. Ben Brahim and Y. Samet. 2017. Electrochemical determination of levofloxacin 
antibiotic in biological samples using boron doped diamond electrode. J. Electroanal. Chem.
[29] Elfiky, M., N. Salahuddin, A. Hassanein, A. Matsuda and T. Hattori. 2019. Detection of antibiotic 
Ofloxacin drug in urine using electrochemical sensor based on synergistic effect of different 
morphological carbon materials. Microchem. J. 146: 170–177.
[30] Zhang, X., Y. Wei and Y. Ding. 2014. Electrocatalytic oxidation and voltammetric determination 
of ciprofloxacin employing poly(alizarin red)/graphene composite film in the presence of ascorbic 
acid, uric acid and dopamine. Anal. Chim. Acta. 835: 29–36. Doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2014.05.020. 
[31] Shan, J., Y. Liu, R. Li, C. Wu, L. Zhu and J. Zhang. 2015. Indirect electrochemical determination 
of ciprofloxacin by anodic stripping voltammetry of Cd(II) on graphene-modified electrode. J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 738: 123–129. 
[32] Garbellini, G.S., R.C. Rocha-Filho and O. Fatibello-Filho. 2015. Voltammetric determination of 
ciprofloxacin in urine samples and its interaction with dsDNA on a cathodically pretreated boron￾doped diamond electrode. Anal. Methods 7(8): 3411–3418.
[33] Bagheri, H., H. Khoshsafar, S. Amidi and Y. Hosseinzadeh Ardakani. 2016. Fabrication of an 
electrochemical sensor based on magnetic multi-walled carbon nanotubes for the determination of 
ciprofloxacin. Anal. Methods 8(16): 3383–3390.
[34] Radičová, M., Miroslav Behúl, Marián Marton, Marian Vojs, Róbert Bodor, Robert Redhammer 
and Andrea Vojs Staňová. 2017. Heavily boron doped diamond electrodes for ultra sensitive 
determination of ciprofloxacin in human urine. Electroanalysis 29(6): 1612–1617.2
 
Electrochemical DNA Sensors Based 
on Nanomaterials for Pharmaceutical 
Determination
 
Anna Porfireva,
1 Veronika Subjakova,
2 Gennady Evtugyn1 
and Tibor Hianik2,* 
1. Introduction 
An electrochemical biosensor is a self-contained integrated device which can provide 
specific quantitative or semi-quantitative analytical information using a biological 
recognition element (biochemical receptor) retained in direct spatial contact with 
an electrochemical transduction element [1]. This IUPAC definition elaborated 
in numerous discussions sheds light on the main peculiarities of biosensors’ 
assembly and behavior that set them apart from other chemical sensors and provide 
undisputable advantages and a few drawbacks. The source of the recognition element 
plays a crucial role in the performance of a biosensor—in terms of both extraordinary 
selectivity and sensitivity of recognition event and modest stability of the signal, 
but with a rather short lifetime of the biosensor. Although some new receptors 
mimicking nature have been recently introduced in biosensor assembly (aptamers 
[2], molecularly imprinted polymers [3] and DNA chimeras [4]), they are yet to 
surpass the numerous properties and opportunities that natural components offer—in 
terms of analysis, especially in medicine, pharmacy, toxicology and environmental 
monitoring. From the very beginning of biosensor history, they were considered as 
a tool of diagnostics, which were simpler in operation, and faster and more reliable 
1 A.M. Butlerov’ Chemistry Institute of Kazan Federal University, 18 Kremlevskaya Street, Kazan, 
420008, Russian Federation. 
2
 Department of Nuclear Physics and Biophysics, Comenius University, Mlynska dolina F1, 842 48 
Bratislava, Slovakia. 
* Corresponding author: Tibor.Hianik@fmph.uniba.sk 24 Nanosensors 
than traditional assays based on “wet chemistry”. Biochemical reactions, mainly 
those catalyzed by enzymes, were considered as simple models for the same process 
in human beings. Complication of biochemical parts of biosensors and introduction 
of biochemical reactants other than enzymes made it possible to extend the potential 
application of biosensors. 
This is especially true for deoxyribonucleic acids (DNAs) introduced in 
biosensor investigations later than enzymes. On one hand, DNAs have a unique 
structure of a huge size and considerable regularity, offering many opportunities 
for molecular recognition. On the other hand, this molecule is too big and natural 
functions of DNAs are very complicated; they demand much longer periods than 
those covered with biosensor signal measurement. For this reason, instead of whole 
DNA molecules, their parts related to some specific genes have been mainly used 
in biosensor assembly (DNA probes). The detection of hybridization event, i.e., 
the reaction of the DNA probe with the complementary sequence, has been used as 
an evidence of appropriate genetic material in samples tested though quantitative 
analysis of appropriated sequences. However, this was not sufficiently accurate or 
reproducible. Today, DNA sensors have considerably extended areas of application 
and have learned to mimic other functions like elongation and shortening of primary 
nucleotide sequences. This is compensated for by a much more complicated 
measurement protocol, which is sometimes far from the initial idea of a reagent-free 
sensor [5]. 
Nevertheless, in the area of DNA sensors, one topic remains mostly in trend 
for simple and fast analysis of small molecules. This is the investigation of 
DNA—drug interactions that cover both the theoretical aspects of kinetics exploration 
or affinity constant calculations, and the applied area of real sample assays 
(including screening of new drug formulations and individual dose assessment). 
Most of such investigations cover anti-cancer drugs that are either targeted at DNA 
or affect DNA-related biochemical functions. In this review, various aspects of 
such biosensors are discussed, along with the role and importance of nano-sized 
components that now offer new opportunities in the sensitivity of assays and 
microfabrication of DNA sensors as parts of microfluidics and lab-on-chip 
devices. Rather useful for biosensor assembly are sensing layers performed by 
electropolymerization that are characterized by a variety in the shape and size. All 
such materials are considered as a part of biorecognition system and their influence 
on the performance of DNA sensors has been illustrated through examples of drug 
detection or determination. 
Recently, several comprehensive reviews associated with various aspects of 
biosensors used for drug analysis have been published [6, 7]. Most of them consider 
the classification of appropriate biosensors based on biochemical components, and 
a significant part of the reviews is devoted to enzyme-based and immune sensors. In 
this review, DNA-based sensors have been focused on and significant attention has 
been paid to the mechanism of signal generation and the role of microenvironment 
on the DNA immobilized on the transducer for the analytical characteristics of the 
response. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 25 
2. Nanomaterials used in the assembly of electrochemical 
DNA sensors 
Current progress in the development of biosensors is, to a great extent, based on 
the synthesis and application of new nanomaterials. Depending on their nature, 
size, shape and functionality, nanomaterials can serve as universal platforms for 
immobilization of bioreceptors, or as signal generating elements or amplifiers 
intended for enhancing the signals of existing labels. Nanomaterials are sufficiently 
compatible with miniaturization and microfabrication trends and are considered 
as an indispensable part of future measurement devices to be used for biomedical 
applications within a paradigm of point-of-care platforms. Recently, several reviews 
have summarized the trends in the application of nanomaterials in electrochemical 
biosensors, with an emphasis on DNA-based devices [8]. 
2.1 Carbon nanomaterials 
Carbon nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes, graphene and its derivatives, and 
carbon black have garnered significant attention for offering unique chemical, physical 
and electrical properties, and due to their ability as nanomaterials to allow for tuning 
their size and shape for a high surface area. These properties have thus opened up 
the possibility of designing novel systems and fabrication of electrochemical sensors 
[9]. Electrochemical sensors provide several advantages in terms of cost, sensitivity, 
selectivity, reliability and size, and hold prospects for many promising applications 
in biomedical fields and analytical chemistry [10]. 
Carbon nanotubes 
Since their discovery in 1991 [11], carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have attracted the 
attention of researchers and have come into use in a wide range of biosensing 
applications. Carbon nanotubes are cylindrical molecules made of sp2
 hybridized 
carbon atoms in a hexagonal lattice; their size is typically in the order of several 
nanometers in diameter and micrometers in length. CNTs are known in two structural 
compositions: single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) with one rolled-up graphene 
sheet (Figure 1A), and multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) consisting of two or 
more rolled concentric graphene sheets (Figure 1B) [12–14]. The application of CNTs 
in electrochemical sensors is based on their remarkable electronic properties and high 
chemical stability [12]. Furthermore, for using CNTs in biosensors, functionalization 
of CNT surface is necessary to overcome their low dispersion in most solvents and to 
increase biocompatibility through covalent or non-covalent bonding [15]. 
Graphene and its derivatives 
Graphene is a one atom thick, two-dimensional planar carbon material with notable 
chemical and physical properties. Reduced graphene can be produced by different 
methods—chemical, thermal and electrochemical; the resulting defects and oxygen 
groups help enhance electron transfer and make it more effective for further 
functionalization by biomolecules [13]. Graphene oxide (GO) contains hydroxyl 26 Nanosensors 
and carboxyl groups, and can easily adsorb various functional molecules such as 
DNA through mainly π-π stacking and hydrogen bonding (Figure 1C). GO can be 
used in electrochemical sensors and as efficiently in optical sensors [16]. For using 
graphene in electrochemistry, it is necessary to study its electrochemical properties 
and behaviors [17]. Chemically reduced graphene on glassy carbon electrode 
has been used for studying the oxidation characteristics of free DNA bases. The 
electrochemical activity of DNA bases is greatly enhanced at GO-modified surface 
[18]. The enhancement of the activity of GO has also been confirmed for other 
species like dopamine, NADH, etc. Functionalized graphene-modified graphite 
electrode has been used for the detection dopamine to eliminate interference from 
ascorbic acid and uric acid. Three separate oxidation peaks were thence observed 
in the voltammogram. It has been found that functionalized graphene increases the 
electrocatalytic activity of graphite electrode [19]. Electrochemical graphene-based 
biosensors have also been reviewed in literature [20]. 
Carbon nanomaterials have been also used in many electrochemical sensors for 
monitoring DNA-drug interactions. The main principle is based on the electroactive 
nature of DNA bases and drugs [21]. For example, DNA-GO-modified glassy carbon 
electrode was investigated for studying the electrochemical signal of DNA depending 
on the concentration of diclofenac [22]. GO-modified electrode demonstrated 
enhanced electrochemical signal for the detection of the anti-cancer drug mitomycin 
C. 21.4% and 34.4% signal enhancement was observed for mitomycin C and guanine 
respectively, compared to an electrode without GO. Specific binding of mitomycin 
to DNA resulted in a suppressed electrochemical signal [23]. The guanine oxidation 
peak was examined by DPV as a reference for the detection of the anti-cancer drug 
methotrexate. DNA was immobilized on GO-modified glassy carbon electrode by 
electrodeposition. The applied potential and time duration affected the guanine 
oxidation peak. The presence of GO has shown higher sensitivity for the detection of 
methotrexate (limit of detection (LOD): 7.6 nM) [24]. 
Figure 1. Examples of structures of (A) single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), (B) multi-wall carbon 
nanotubes (MWNTs), and (C) graphene oxide (GO). 
SWCNTs and MWCNTs have been successfully employed for electrode 
modification and for the study of the interaction of drugs with DNA, indicating 
excellent electrocatalytic behavior [25], as well as for the development of 
aptasensors [26]. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 27 
Carbon nanomaterials with other polymers and metal nanoparticles are very 
attractive in terms of increasing the active surface and electron transfer at the electrode, 
combining the benefits of nanomaterials. Composites of graphene and chitosan [27] 
and MWCNTS and chitosan [28] increase the active surface area significantly on 
a glassy carbon electrode, resulting in a higher oxidative peak in the presence of 
K3[Fe(CN)6]. The above-mentioned modified electrodes have been used for studying 
the interaction of dsDNA and the anti-cancer drug 6-mercaptopurine. Furthermore, 
dsDNA was immobilized on a pencil graphite electrode modified by a composite of 
polypyrrole/functionalized MWCNTs through external application of voltage. The 
decrease in the oxidation response of guanine and adenine after the interaction with 
6-mercaptopurine was also examined. The response of guanine was proportional to 
the concentration of the analyte and an LOD of 0.08 µM was achieved [29]. 
Carbon black 
Among carbon materials, carbon black is an extremely low-cost conductive material 
widely used in electrochemical sensors due to its morphological and electronic 
properties with a 3–100 nm size range of agglomerates. Fabrication of a carbon black 
electrode is based on a thin layer of composites [30]. A DNA biosensor based on a 
composite of acetylene black has been used for the detection of DNA hybridization, 
with an LOD as low as 0.12 fM [31]. In another study, a voltammetric DNA sensor 
was fabricated based on a composite of carbon black, pillar[5]arene molecules and 
poly (Neutral red), layer-by-layer on a glassy carbon electrode, for the detection 
of oxidative DNA damage [32]. The sensor allowed for the detection of oxidative 
damage of DNA in the presence of reactive oxygen species generated by Cu2+/H2O2 
mixture. 
2.2 Gold nanoparticles 
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are small particles (less than 100 nm in diameter) 
with tunable optical and electrical properties with respect to size and shape. For 
the synthesis of AuNPs, various methods have been introduced; the most widely 
known process therein was developed by Turkevich et al. [33]. Their method was 
based on the reduction of hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (HAuCl4) (heated till boiling) 
by citric acid. Other strategies have also been developed for the synthesis of AuNPs 
in controlled sizes and shapes [34]. There is a wide range of applications of AuNPs 
in sensing, targeted drug delivery and imaging, by virtue of their easy surface 
modification and biocompatibility [35]. 
Nanoparticles play an important role in electrochemical sensors for 
immobilization or labeling of biomolecules, catalysis of chemical reaction and 
enhancement of electron transfer [36]. In this light, AuNP-modified electrodes 
increase the active surface and conductivity, and can be prepared by electrodeposition, 
for controlled properties [37, 38]. 
Gold electrodes are very common as working electrodes in electrochemical 
measurements due to their high stability in air and high affinity to thiol groups. 
Molecules containing thiol groups can be chemisorbed on the gold surface and form 28 Nanosensors 
self-assembled monolayers (SAM) (Figure 2) [39, 40]. The effect of surface pre￾treatment is very crucial for the formation of well-ordered SAM as a support for 
further immobilization of biomolecules and for blocking non-specific interactions. 
Several cleaning techniques have been reported and compared in literature [41]. 
AuNPs can be used for increasing the effective area of the biosensor for the 
immobilization of DNA probes (Figure 2A) as well as for enhancing the detection of 
DNA hybridization (Figure 2B). 
Figure 2. Schematic illustration of AuNPs in an electrochemical sensor: (A) AuNPs increase the 
active surface area of the electrode, (B) AuNPs as a label, for DNA hybridization detection, for signal 
amplification. 
Antibiotic drugs play an important role in disease treatment; however, an 
overdose of antibiotics leads to bacterial resistance. Similarly, even anti-cancer 
drugs cause many side effects in the human body. Herein, several electrochemical 
DNA sensors based on AuNPs have been reported for the detection of antibiotic and 
anti-cancer drugs [42–47]. For example, electrodeposition of AuNPs on a flat gold 
electrode improves the sensitivity of the DNA sensor for antibiotic drug detection 
(nogalamycin, mithramycin and netropsin). Electron transfer was measured by 
impedance spectroscopy and LOD was enhanced by a factor of 15–40 with AuNPs 
[42]. Another strategy based on AuNPs, designed for the detection of ampicillin, 
another antibiotic drug, uses a glassy carbon electrode, wherein DNA functionalized 
AuNPs are immobilized on the electrode surface through hybridization with 
DNA aptamers. Therein, single-stranded DNA binding protein (ssDNA-BP) had 
a specific interaction with DNA-functionalized AuNPs, resulting in a drop in the 
signal from the redox probe. In the presence of the drug, the electrochemical signal 
increased due to the blocking interaction between DNA-functionalized AuNPs and 
ssDNA-BP. An LOD of 0.38 pM was achieved and the recovery in spiked milk samples 
was observed to be 95.5–105.5% [46]. Furthermore, addition of functionalized 
AuNPs amplifies the changes in the peak current after the specific interaction of 
DNA bases with the anti-cancer drug dacarbazine [43]. 
The presence of AuNPs increases the active surface area of a pencil graphite 
electrode by a factor of 5.1, for modification by dsDNA, and facilitates the 
detection of anti-cancer drugs, with an LOD of 1 nM in the linear response range of 
5 nM–45 μM. Such a biosensor has shown good performance in terms of detection of 
drugs in real samples, such as capsules, urine and blood serum [47]. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 29 
Fabrication of nanocomposites combines the unique characteristics of 
nanomaterials as well as polymers. AuNPs are often used in nanocomposites to 
increase the electrochemical active area of electrodes and their conductivity [48, 49]. 
In one study, a nanocomposite platform of AuNPs and polymer 
polyvinylferrocenium was used for analyzing the interaction of DNA and 
chemotherapeutic agent mitomycin C [50]. Therein, changes in the peak current 
of electroactive DNA bases (guanine and adenine) were investigated using DPV. 
The presence of AuNPs in polymer-coated Pt electrode enhanced the oxidation peak 
signal for both the DNA bases. 
A team of researchers constructed an electrochemical sensor for the detection 
of dopamine on carbon ionic liquid electrode by step-by step electrodeposition 
of graphene, AuNPs and dsDNA [51]. The application of nanomaterials resulted 
in good sensor performance and well-defined redox peaks. The sensor had a 
linear response in the range 70–600 μM, with an LOD of 19 nM [51]. Other 
electrochemical sensors based on AuNP nanocomposites have been demonstrated 
for the detection of chemotherapeutic drug valrubicin [45] and for monitoring the 
interaction of isoproterenol-(β-adrenergic receptor agonist) induced DNA damage 
of cardiomyocyte [52]. Thus, nanoparticles are a rather useful tool for biosensor 
fabrication, increasing the sensitivity of response. 
2.3 Metal organic frameworks structures 
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are novel prospective molecular crystalline 
materials with a wide range of applications in biosensing, catalysis, separation and 
nanomedicine. MOFs are composed of metal ions or clusters linked by organic ligands. 
The organic linkers involved in MOFs are the source of a conjugated π-electron 
system and provide a basis for hydrogen bonds that can facilitate interactions 
between MOFs and single-stranded DNA (ssDNA). MOFs can recognize DNA 
and other biomolecules by means of electrochemical changes [53]. These materials 
can be compared with sponges with unique abilities—being able to absorb, hold 
and release molecules from their pores. With a highly-ordered framework of pores, 
MOFs exhibit the largest known surface areas per gram—one gram of an MOF can 
have a surface area of up to 7000 m2
. Therefore, MOFs are the fastest growing class 
of materials in chemistry today. More than 20000 MOFs have been found in the 
last 20 years. The scheme of formation of hemin@MOF composite is presented in 
Figure 3. 
Aunique feature of MOFs, owing to their high electron transfer ability and porous 
structure, is that they can be doped with various species such as nanoparticles, nucleic 
acids, protein receptors, etc. However, for electrochemical sensing the MOF must be 
doped with conducting materials like metallic nanoparticles or carbon nanomaterials. 
Among the several advantages of MOFs, the following are important: (1) the highly 
porous three-dimensional structure of MOFs, which enlarges the electroactive surface 
area (hence, more molecules can be involved in electrochemical response); (2) the 
hydroxyl and carboxyl groups in MOFs can interact with biomolecules via H-bonding, 
which also provides better sensitivity; and (3) the well-arranged pore structures of 30 Nanosensors 
MOFs can improve sensor selectivity [54]. Recent progress in research on MOFs 
has already been reviewed [55]. In this section, we will focus on the applications 
of MOFs in the development of electrochemical DNA sensors. Electrochemical 
methods are rather attractive due to their relative simplicity, fast response, high 
selectivity, low cost and easy operation. MOFs facilitate the amplification of the 
signal generated. The development of electrochemical DNA sensors based on MOFs 
is in premature stages; therefore, only a few papers have been published on this 
topic so far. Moreover, all of them invariably focused on gene detection. As of now, 
there have been no papers using MOFs aimed at the development of sensors for the 
detection of DNA-drug interactions. 
Shao et al. reported an electrochemiluminiscence (ECL) biosensor for the 
detection of miRNA-141. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are short non-protein coding 
strands (19–23 nucleotides) [56]. It has been seen that an increased concentration 
of miRNA can be associated with cancer diseases (for example, prostate cancer) 
[57, 58]. Therefore, miRNA is considered as an important cancer marker. Ruthenium￾MOFs (Ru-MOFs) have been used as a platform for ECL signal detection. ECL is 
a rather sensitive method based on luminiscence induced by redox reaction at the 
electrode surface, initiated by an externally applied voltage [59]. The capture DNA 
(cDNA) is immobilized on the magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles to form a capture 
unit. Addition of miRNA-141 to the solution containing capture units results in 
hybridization with cDNA. Using magnetic glassy carbon electrode, it is possible to 
attach the nanoparticles containing miRNA-141 to the electrode surface. Addition 
of Ru-MOFs modified by signaling DNA allows for extending the double electric 
layer that improves the sensitivity of measurements. The ECL signal is provided 
by the oxidation of tripropylamine (TPrA) that serves as a co-reactant in the 
Ru(bpy)3
2+/TPrA couple. The luminophore in the excited state (Ru2+) relaxes to 
the ground state and emits a photon. The measurements performed in 0.1 M PBS 
(pH 7.4) containing 20 mM TPrA have shown the rather high sensitivity of this 
approach, with a detection limit of 0.3 fM and a wide dynamic range 1 fM–10 pM. 
MOFs are quite useful in the development of non-enzymatic biosensors. In 
one case, hemin@MOF composite was used for the fabrication of a sensor for 
detecting hydrogen peroxide and DNA [54]. Hemin has been used as a catalyst in 
many reactions. It has been observed that MOFs improve the stability of hemin. The 
high surface area of MOFs helps in isolating hemin, thus eliminating its aggregation 
and preserving its catalytic activity [60]. The hemin@MOF composite mentioned 
earlier was prepared by doping hemin onto Cu-MOF-199. The composite was 
adsorbed at the surface of a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) and served as a catalyst 
for the detection of H2O2. This hemin-containing composite was used for detecting 
hydrogen peroxide in the concentration range of 0.1 μM to 2.2 mM, with an LOD 
of 0.07 μM. Furthermore, hemin@MOF was used as a platform for the development 
of DNA sensors. (The principles of DNA detection have been presented in Figure 
3). When carboxyl functionalized graphene (CFGR-COOH), which possesses 
excellent conducting properties, was coated on the surface of GCE, 5’-amino and 
3’-biotin DNA probes (pDNA) were immobilized at the said surface via amidation 
reaction. This fixed the stem-loop structure of pDNA. In the next step, streptavidin Electrochemical DNA Sensors 31 
(SA) functionalized hemin@MOF (hemin@MOF-SA) was prepared for recognizing 
biotin at the 3’end of pDNA. After the addition of the matched tDNA, the loop 
structure of pDNA unfolded due to hybridization with tDNA. Subsequently, hemin@ 
MOF-SA could access the electrode through the binding of SA to the biotin of 
pDNA. The electrocatalytic properties of Hemin@MOF-SA were employed for the 
detection tDNA. This DNA sensor allowed the detection of DNA with an LOD of 
6.9 × 10–16 M, with an excellent selectivity of one base mismatch. 
Figure 3. The scheme of detection of DNA through a biosensor based on the electrocatalytic activity 
of hemin@MOF composite towards H2O2. Adopted from [54] with permission of the Electrochemical 
Society. 
NiCo-based metal-organic framework (NiCo-MOF) impedimetric DNA 
sensor for the detection HIV-1 virus was recently reported [53]. In the said case, 
EIS measurements were performed in 0.01 M PBS containing 0.1 M KCl, 
5 mM K3[Fe(CN)6] and 5 mM K4[Fe(CN)6]. It was shown that the hybridization of 
the target HIV-1-derived DNA with the probe DNA immobilized at the surface of 
the NiCo-MOF composite (NiCo2O4/CoO/CNTs) resulted in an increase in charge 
transfer resistance. This was because electron transfer was impeded due to the 
increased negative surface charge during the hybridization of the probe DNA with 
HIV-1 target DNA. The LOD for this detection was found to be 16.7 fM. The sensor 
was validated in HIV-1 DNA spiked healthy human blood serum samples diluted 
by 200 times, with recovery and relative standard deviation values in the range of 
101.85–111.94% and 2.9–4.4% respectively. Table 1 compares the sensitivity of the 
DNA sensors based on various surfaces (including MOFs). 
In the preparation of electrochemical DNA sensors, a crucial requirement is the 
stability of the DNA probe at the surface. Typically used thiol-based methods are 
relatively easy and facile for DNA immobilization; however, storage of such sensors 
in a buffer, results in the loss of DNA within several days after sensor preparation [75]. 
Recent studies have demonstrated that MOFs can be used for the immobilization of 
various biomolecules to protect them from degradation [76]. Ma et al. [77] proposed a 
simple method for the protection of DNA self-assembled monolayers on gold surface 
by covering them with MOFs. It was shown that zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 
(ZIF-8) can be grown on a gold electrode modified with DNA probes and can 
be completely removed by rinsing, thus restoring the detection properties. ZIF-8 
exoskeleton also protected DNA probes on the gold electrode surface from different Surface 
modification 
Method of detection Linear range (mol/L) Detection 
limit (mol/L) 
References 
graphene-Nafion/ 
GCE 
EIS 1.0 × 10−13 - 1.0 × 10−10 2.3 × 10−14 [61] 
Exo III-assisted 
biosensor 
Amperometry 1.0 × 10−11 – 1.0 × 10−6 1.18 × 10−11 [62] 
RCA-based 
biosensor 
DPV, MB as a probe 2.0 × 10−14 – 5.0 × 10−8 8.3 × 10−15 [63] 
ssDNA/MCH/gold 
electrode 
DPV, SWV 1.0 × 10−12 – 1.0 × 10−8 5.0 × 10−13 [64] 
Electro￾polydopamine/SPCE 
LSV 1.0 × 10−12 – 7.0 × 10−11 3.0 × 10−13 [65] 
Ag@AuNP/Au CV, amperometry 1.0 × 10−14 – 1.0 × 10−12 3.72 × 10−13 [66] 
CFGR-COOH/GCE￾MOFs 
CV, amperometry 1.0 × 10−15 – 1.0 × 10−6 6.9 × 10−16 [54] 
Ru-MOFs ECL 1.0 × 10−15 – 1.0 × 10−11 3.0 × 10−16 [56] 
AuNTs/nanoporous 
polycarbonate 
EIS 1.0 × 10−14 – 1.0 × 10−6 1.0 × 10−15 [67] 
PANI-NC/ITO EIS 1.0 × 10−17 – 1.0 × 10−6 7.0 × 10−18 [68] 
AuNPs-PAT/rGO/ 
GCE 
EIS, DPV 1.0 × 10−12 – 4.0 × 10−10 7.0 × 10−14 [69] 
pDNA/PANI-MoS 
2/ITO 
EIS 1.0 × 10−17 – 1.0 × 10−6 3.0 × 10−18 [70] 
NiCo/CNTs-MOF EIS 1.0 × 10−13 – 2.0 × 10−8 16.7 × 10−15 [53] 
Ferrocene-PAMAM 
dendrimers 
CV, DPV 1.3 × 10−9 – 2.0 × 10−8 3.8 × 10−10 [71] 
Te-ZnO nanowires EIS 1.0 × 10−12 – 1.0 × 10−6 1.0 × 10−13 [72] 
AuNPs/TiO/CdS/ 
dendrimer 
Photoelectrochemistry 1.0 × 10−15 – 1.0 × 10−10 1.0 × 10−10 [73] 
AuNPs DPV 1.0 × 10−17 – 1.0 × 10−13 0.68 × 10−18 [74] 
Table 1. Comparison of the sensitivity of various electrochemical DNA sensors.
 
32 Nanosensors
 
Abbreviations: EIS – electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, CV – cyclic voltammetry, 
DPV – differential pulse voltammetry, LSV – linear sweep voltammetry, SWV – square wave 
voltammetry, ECL – electrochemiluminiscence, MB – methylene blue. 
extreme environmental conditions such as heat and ionic strength, as well as from 
nuclease degradation. The DNA on the surface was protected for at least 30 days. The 
growth of MOFs on the DNA monolayer can be monitored by mere electrochemical 
measurement. The efficiency of the protection of the DNA layer by ZIF-8 has been 
demonstrated on DNA electrochemical sensors prepared using four types of DNA 
probes labeled by methylene blue (MB) redox marker—single-stranded DNA 
(ssDNA), hairpin DNA (hpDNA), double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and tetrahedron 
skeleton (TDN). The current intensity of MB was monitored in various conditions. It 
was seen that without protection, all the types of sensors lost their stability rapidly, Electrochemical DNA Sensors 33 
as indicated by a decrease in the MB signal. For example, after 15 days of storage, 
the signaling current fell to ~ 41% for ssDNA sensor, ~ 29% for hpDNA sensor, 
~ 15% for dsDNA sensor and ~ 8% for TDN sensor. This was mainly due to the 
rupture of Au-S bonds in the buffer. It was also shown that ssDNA-, hpDNA- and 
dsDNA-based sensors underwent substantial current reduction when exposed to a 
solution containing DNAase I (0.5 U/μL) for merely 1 hour. However, TDN sensor 
exhibited better resistance against DNAase I; yet, even for this sensor, only 31% 
of the current signal was retained after 20 hours of incubation. The application of 
ZIF-8 substantially improves the stability of DNA layers. For example, the weakest 
TDN-based sensor retains over 68% of the MB signal for up to 30 days, versus a 
total loss without ZIF-8. By washing the substrate with an acidic buffer, the MOFs 
are completely removed and the electrode surface with immobilized DNA probes 
is recovered. The mechanism of protection herein is based on the in situ growth of 
ZIF-8 around DNA probes. ZIF-8, being small in size, tightly encapsulates DNA 
probes and protects them from the influence of environmental factors (including 
temperature) and DNAses. Recent advancements in MOF-based electrochemical 
aptasensors have also been reviewed in literature [78]. 
2.4 Electropolymerized supports 
Electropolymerization involves the anodic oxidation of an appropriate monomer, 
resulting in the formation of radicals capable of undergoing oligomerization, 
and precipitation of insoluble products on an appropriate support, mainly on 
the electrode surface [79]. As per traditional organic chemistry, the reaction of 
electropolymerization belongs primarily to the category of polycondensation and is 
accompanied by a release of by-products with low molecular weights (usually water 
molecules). The phenomenon of formation of such oligomers though known for 
many years, was generally considered as a drawback of the electrolysis protocol as 
the deposition of oligomeric products reduced the active surface area and decreased 
the current and the yield of the main product. However, the situation has changed 
with the dawn of the biosensor era. Most electropolymerized products have found 
applications in biosensor assembly and their contribution to the progress of biosensor 
has not yet exhausted [80, 81]. 
From the point of view of electrochemical properties, all the electropolymerized 
products applied in DNA sensors can be divided into three groups [82]: 
(1) Electroconductive polymers: They exhibit conductivity akin to many 
semiconductors, in a wide range of polarization potentials. Polyaniline, 
polypyrrole, polythiophene and their derivatives are the most frequently used 
polymers in this group [83]. 
(2) Redox active polymers: These polymers are formed mostly via polymerization 
of polyheteroaromatic structures like phenazine and phenothiazine dyes. They 
contain redox centers capable of reversible electron/hydrogen ion transfer 
[84]. Their behavior is like that of conventional mediators of electron transfer 
deposited on the electrodes. Redox active polymers can be easily combined  
34 Nanosensors 
with electroconductive nanoparticles like carbon nanotubes, Au nanoparticles, 
etc. [85–87]. In such composites, a synergy of electrochemical properties takes 
place, resulting in current amplification and decrease in the potential of analyte 
oxidation. 
(3) Electrochemically inactive polymers: These compounds are obtained by the 
oxidation of some phenols and aromatic amines, or from the overoxidation 
of conductive polymers [88]. Such polymers can serve as supports for the 
immobilization of DNA oligonucleotides or for mechanical protection of the 
biosensitive layer of a biosensor. Insulating layers can be also used for the 
formation of molecularly imprinted polymers selective towards the transfer of 
low-molecular species [89]. 
It should be noted that the mechanism of electropolymerization does not 
dramatically differ from that of chemical oxidation of appropriate monomers. It 
involves the formation of the cation radical, followed by its dimerization, hydrogen 
ion subtraction, and restoration of the neutral dimeric analog of the initial compound 
(Scheme 1). After that, the cycle repeats until the oligomer is deposited on the 
electrode. This means that coupling of each monomer unit requires the transfer of two 
electrons so that the electropolymerization does not correspond to the electrocatalysis 
and its efficiency can be characterized by the current yield [90]. 
Scheme 1. Schematic outline of aniline, pyrrole and thiophene electropolymerization. 
Although the described mechanism is rather common for most electrochemically 
active polymers, some peculiarities affecting the performance of polymeric products 
are worth mentioning. The oxidation of aniline results in the formation of a linear 
polymer with repeating fragments connected with imine bonds capable of both 
hydrogen ion and electron transfer. This results in a high dependence of the redox 
properties on the acidity of the environment. Consecutive electron/H+
 transfers result 
in the formation of three main forms of polyaniline—pernigraniline, emeraldine and 
leuco-emeraldine—in equilibrium, depending on the redox potential and pH. Out of 
these three forms, only the second one (emeraldine salt) shows electroconductivity. 
For this reason, polyaniline is better for synthesis in strongly acidic media and for 
application in biosensors that can be operated at pH < 3.0 [91]. For the same reason, 
polyaniline properties significantly depend on the nature of the acid used in its 
synthesis, i.e., on the counter-anion in the polymer matrix that controls equalization 
of the charge changes related to the redox conversion (Scheme 2) [92]. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 35 
Scheme 2. Redox and acid-base equilibrium of polyaniline. 
The involvement and release of acids, also known as doping and dedoping 
respectively, are followed by significant changes in polymer volume. DNA exerts 
a high negative charge of phosphate residues and hence forms complexes with 
polyaniline as a polyanionic substance. This spontaneous reaction is used for the 
amplified synthesis of polyaniline (DNA templating effect [93]) or for the detection 
of DNA-related reactions resulting in changes in the charge distribution of the 
biopolymer (hybridization effects, chemical DNA damage, DNA denaturing, etc.). 
To suppress the pH sensitivity of polyaniline, acidic groups can be introduced 
in the monomer or the polymer structure. Such polymers formed from sulfanilic 
acid or anthranilic acid or from their mixtures with unsubstituted aniline are called 
‘self-doped’ polyaniline [94]. Depending on the biosensor assembly, polyaniline can 
be used as a support for the immobilization of DNA probes or specific labels and 
for the generation of biosensor signal. In case of the latter, it is possible to monitor 
any biospecific reaction that alters the redox equilibrium in the DNA-polymer 
composite. This can be done through voltammetry or electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy. 
Unlike polyaniline, thiophene, polypyrrole and their derivatives contain only 
C-C bonds and are hence less sensitive to the acidity of the microenvironment and the 
acid-base equilibrium [95]. On the other hand, substituents at heteroaromatic rings 
can serve as anchors for DNA probes with minimal loss in the electroconductivity of 
the product. However, similar to polyaniline, low solubility of these polymers limits 
their use in DNA sensors. From this point of view, electropolymerization allows 
for the direct assembly of the sensing layer, with control over the film’s thickness 
and its redox properties by choosing the regime of electrolysis. Polypyrrole and 
polythiophene are synthesized in neutral aqueous media but can be also obtained 
from polar organic solvents (like acetonitrile and dichloromethane). 
Thiophene is oxidized to initiate electropolymerization at a potential higher 
than that required for the oxidation of its oligomers (“thiophene paradox”, 
Scheme 3) [96]. 
Scheme 3. Sulfone formation during the oxidation of polythiophene due to “thiophene paradox”. 36 Nanosensors 
Polythiophene formed from the monomer is always contaminated with sulfone 
derivatives. To avoid this, instead of monomeric thiophene, terthiophene derivatives 
are used as the initial compounds in electropolymerization [97]. Low solubility of 
the above compounds can be partially compensated by the introduction of polar 
substituents. 3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) is the most popular example of 
such derivatives. The polymerization product (PEDOT) is synthesized in neutral 
media and shows electroconductivity characteristics comparable with ‘pure’ 
polythiophene [98]. Other examples of monomer derivatization for attaching DNA 
probes are presented in Figure 4 [99]. 
Figure 4. Substituted pyrrole and thiophene used as precursors in electropolymerization. 
It should be mentioned that polypyrrole and polythiophene change their 
electrochemical properties as a response to target DNA interactions but to a lower 
extent in comparison with polyaniline. For this reason, they are mostly used for the 
electrical wiring of other mediators [100] and nanoparticles introduced in the sensing 
layer (for instance, Au nanoparticles, reduced graphene oxide nanosheets, carbon 
nanotubes, metal complexes, etc.). 
Regarding redox active polymers, the mechanism of their polymerization has 
been explored to a much less extent, even for the most popular poly(Methylene blue) 
and poly(Neutral red) [101]. Polymerization of Methylene blue probably involves 
N-demethylation and formation of a covalent bond between the amino group of a 
monomer preliminarily oxidized to cation-radical and the aromatic ring belonging to 
another monomeric molecule of the dye (Scheme 4). 
Scheme 4. Supposed mechanism of Methylene blue electropolymerization. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 37 
Appropriate products have been found among dimerization and trimerization 
products investigated by preparative electrolysis coupled with electrospray mass 
spectrometry [102]. A similar product has also been proposed by researchers for the 
oxidative coupling of Neutral red dye (Scheme 5) [101]. 
Scheme 5. Possible structure of Neutral red tetramer formed by electropolymerization. 
Some polyheteroaromatic species with a primary amino group (thionine) are 
electropolymerized following the mechanism of polyaniline formation [103]. 
Most of the electropolymerized materials used in a DNA sensor assembly are 
formed by the anodic oxidation of monomers. Although this reaction can be performed 
in various regimes, multiple cycling of potential is the method mostly used in 
biosensor assembling. This protocol facilitates the formation of thin dense films with 
high adhesion to the electrode. Variation of scan rate, potential area and number of 
cycles makes it possible to influence the morphology of the surface and its roughness. 
In the case of polyaniline (and to a lesser extent for polypyrrole), the characteristics 
of the resulting product depend also on the nature of the counteranions present in 
the solution. In the case of electroconductive polymers, the peaks attributed to the 
products of polymerization tend to increase with the number of cycles. Phenazine 
(phenothiazine) dyes commonly show two pairs of reversible peaks related to the 
redox equilibrium of the monomeric and polymeric forms (Figure 5). 
Figure 5. Electropolymerization of (A) Methylene blue and (B) Neutral red on a glassy carbon electrode 
by multiple cycling of potential. Reaction conditions: (A) Methylene blue: 0.1 M phosphate buffer 
+ 0.1 M Na2SO4, pH = 8.2, 0.5 mM solution; (B) Neutral red: 0.025 M phosphate buffer + 0.1 M NaNO3, 
pH = 5.5, 0.5 mM solution; scan rate: 50 mV/s. Arrows indicate changes in the voltammogram shape with 
increasing number of cycles. 38 Nanosensors 
The latter peaks are less reversible and are shifted to higher potentials, compared 
to the monomeric forms, due to slower electron exchange via polymeric film 
deposition on the electrode [103, 104]. Neutral red is the only exception herein. 
In this case, the peaks of the monomeric and polymeric forms are recorded at the 
same potential [101, 105]. Low changes in voltammograms or their stability during 
multiple cycling indicate no polymerization. The use of the pulse technique makes 
it possible to increase the roughness of the surface film by influencing the rate of 
formation of new phase nuclei and their growth. Such a technology is mostly applied 
for polypyrrole—where several electrodeposition steps (different in amplitude and 
duration of pulses) alter each other [106]. The deposition of insoluble products and 
the influence of DNA on electropolymerization can be monitored by electrochemical 
quartz crystal microbalance [32, 107] and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) 
[93, 108] techniques. For SPR analysis, the formation and reduction of Au oxides 
should be considered. 
All electropolymerized materials are well compatible with nanomaterials that 
can be used during electropolymerization from their dispersions or deposited on 
the polymer film. Au nanoparticles and reduced graphene oxide can be obtained 
in one step by chemical or electrochemical oxidation of aniline [109]. This can be 
performed onto an electropolymerized layer or Au film to increase the thickness 
and stability of the layer. Covalent binding assumes preliminary functionalization of 
nanomaterials. Carbon nanodots can be doped with nitrogen to form amino groups on 
the surface [110]. Single-walled carbon nanotubes are oxidized to obtain carboxylic 
groups at the ends of the tube. Multiwalled carbon nanotubes are formed in addition 
to the carboxylic groups at the defects of the side walls. In both the cases, oxidation 
with a mixture of nitric acid and sulfuric acid is used. Oxidative treatment decreases 
the average molar mass, length and diameter of the carbon nanotubes. After that, 
carboxylated particles can be covalently attached to the amino groups of polymers 
(for example, thionine and Neutral red polymers) or can electrostatically hold onto 
positively charged polymers preferably existing in the oxidized cationic form [111]. 
In a similar manner, aminated DNA oligonucleotides are covalently bonded to the 
carboxylic groups of the carriers and thiolated derivatives to the Au nanoparticles on 
the polymeric support surface. The advantages of Au nanoparticles over a bare gold 
electrode include higher reactivity and larger surface area available for biopolymer 
binding. 
3. General principles of electrochemical sensing of 
DNA-analyte interactions 
Most DNA sensors described in the literature have been designed for the detection 
of hybridization phenomena. They are intended for searching DNA sequences 
complementary to those used in the biosensor assembly (DNA probes). The 
hybridization between complementary ssDNA strands is due to multiple weak 
molecular interactions by hydrogen bonds between the nucleobases. Being rather 
weak, they nevertheless provide high efficiencies in recognition of hybridization due 
to multiple new bonds established in the recognition event. The determination of Electrochemical DNA Sensors 39 
drugs or the quantification of DNA-drug interactions significantly differs from the 
working and purpose of such biosensors. 
The size of a drug is incomparably lower than that of the DNA probe attached 
to the electrode surface. This implies that a single binding of the analyte molecule 
does not remarkably alter the structure of the surface layer. This makes its difficult 
to recognize of target interactions. Furthermore, the specificity of DNA-analyte 
interactions influences the nature of the factors limiting the performance of the 
biosensor. For detection of the hybridization event, steric factors dominate to offer 
the access of the DNA sequence to the probe immobilized on the electrode. In such 
biosensors, covalent immobilization of DNA probe via terminal functional groups is 
preferred. In the case of low-molecular analytes, electrostatic factors mostly affect 
target interactions with the DNA sequence. Thus, with physical immobilization 
by entrapment in the growing polymer film, self-assembly or adsorption of 
polyelectrolye complexes on the polar sorbents can take precedence over covalent 
single point binding. 
The methods for electrochemical sensing of DNA-analyte interactions are 
commonly divided into three groups (Figure 6): (1) application of redox signals to 
the groups covalently attached to the DNA molecule mostly via terminal functional 
groups; (2) label-free techniques, where diffusion-free indicators change their redox 
properties due to target interactions on the electrode interface; and (3) self signal of 
the drug accumulated on the DNA as specific adsorbent or entrapped molecule in 
the DNA-containing matrix. In the case of drugs, the first strategy of labeling should 
be extended. In these methods, all the types of biosensors are included (with redox 
response which does not involve diffusion as a mass transfer mechanism). 
Figure 6. Classification of electrochemical DNA sensors based on signal measurement protocol. 
Thus, changes in the intrinsic redox activity of the electropolymerized film are 
responsible for the signal of this group of methods. 
3.1 Label-based techniques 
Changes in the redox equilibrium involving DNA and redox active polymers on the 
electrode surface are mostly mentioned in this group of methods. Such changes can 40 Nanosensors 
be observed for almost all polymers with redox activity—both electroconductive and 
redox active—but the signal value is higher for polyaniline and related derivatives, 
while the sensitivity of the assay is comparable with that of other polymers with less 
expressed charge sensitivity of their redox status. 
There are two mechanisms that affect the redox equilibrium on the biosensor 
interface. The first one is associated with the partial elimination of the DNA’s 
influence on the relation between the oxidized and reduced forms of the polymer. 
As has been established for polyaniline, the presence of DNA in close contact with 
polymer molecules increases the conductivity and extends the range of pH values for 
maintaining electrochemical activity of polyaniline, compared to the same polymer 
synthesized with no DNA. This is due to the ability of DNA to stabilize oppositely 
charged forms of polyaniline, i.e., emeraldine salt, by virtue of electrostatic interactions 
with phosphate residues of the DNA helix. In this case, any reactant capable of 
shielding (neutralizing) negative charge would diminish the electroconductivity of 
the surface layer. This results in synchronous increase of charge transfer resistance 
and capacitance, as measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). 
Redox-active polymers also exert reversible changes in the peak currents recorded 
by direct current voltammetry or EIS parameters resulting from the electrostatic 
force shielding; this has been observed for poly(Neutral red) [112], poly(Azure B) 
[113] and polythionine [114]. 
The second mechanism deals with DNA intercalation and increases its volume 
and flexibility, affecting charge separation and redox equilibrium of the polymeric 
matrix. This mechanism has been indirectly confirmed by experiments performed 
with polyelectrolyte complexes with DNA as a polyanionic substance. Thermal 
DNA denaturation, its treatment with reactive oxygen species and interaction 
with doxorubicin affect the permeability of the surface layer, as monitored by EIS, 
even though the polyelectrolyte complex does not contain redox-active components 
[115]. 
The idea of partial shielding of the redox equilibrium on the electrode interface 
can be performed by the covalent attachment of the redox-active group (label) on 
a rather flexible linker as well. With this, it has been observed that Neutral red can 
be covalently attached to carboxylated thiacalix[4]arene by carbodiimide binding 
[112]. Therein, target interaction of DNA limits the exchange of electrons between 
the oxidized and reduced forms of the dye (Figure 7A). Furthermore, the concept of 
E-DNA scaffold sensor requires the use of thiolated DNA probes with redox label 
attached to the opposite ends of the molecule. Due to the partial complementarity 
of the sequence, the DNA probe forms a circle so that the label is positioned near 
the electrode surface and a high label signal is recorded (Figure 7B). Owing to the 
reaction with the target (e.g., a short complementary sequence), the probe is converted 
to the linear configuration and the distance between the label and the electrode 
dramatically increases. The E-Sensor protocol has been elaborated primarily for 
hybridization detection [116]. However, there are some examples of its application 
in drug detection [117]. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 41 
Figure 7. Mechanism of signal generation for (A) a DNA sensor based on controlled intrinsic electron 
exchange, and (B) an E-DNA scaffold biosensor). 
3.2 Methylene blue case 
Methylene blue is a phenothiazine drug that exhibits photosensitizing properties 
and can promote oxidative DNA damage due to the generation of singlet oxygen 
[118]. Methylene blue has found enormous application in DNA sensors due to the 
numerous advantages it offers – like photobleaching stability, high cell stain abilities 
and reversible redox behavior, to name a few (Scheme 6). 
Scheme 6. Reversible redox conversion of Methylene blue used for amperometric detection of DNA￾specific interactions. 
The reaction of Methylene blue with dsDNA in a solution results in a partial 
decrease of the signal measured by DPV [119]. The estimation of the stoichiometry 
of interaction performed by UV spectroscopy and DPV techniques gives the ratio 
1:2, indicating maximal binding of one dye molecule per two nucleobases [120]. This 
reaction has been considered as a multipoint interaction with partial intercalation of 
the dye in the guanine-cytosine-rich parts of the DNA molecule [121]. Moreover, it 
has been established that Methylene blue can alternatively bind to the minor grooves 
in DNA fragments with alternating adenine-thymine base sequences [122]. 
The transfer of DNA molecules on the electrode interface complicates the 
observation of their interaction with Methylene blue. In the case of physical adsorption 
on carbonaceous materials, including that electrostatically enforced by electrode￾positive polarization, DNA molecules are randomly positioned along the surface of 
the electrode. Methylene blue shows a higher affinity towards ssDNA than towards 
dsDNA; hence, its reduction signal increases against a bare electrode by up to 40% of 
the initial value. Hybridization performed on the same electrode converts an ssDNA 
probe into a dsDNA helix. Intercalation of the dye decreases its signal on cyclic 
voltammogram or DPV to the extent depending on the degree of hybridization. This 
makes it possible to use Methylene blue as an effective indicator of hybridization 
event, capable of distinguishing between single and double mismatches [123]. 
The use of covalent immobilization of DNA probes on Au electrodes or Au 
nanoparticles via terminal –SH groups results in the formation of regular self­42 Nanosensors 
assembled monolayers with a dense packing of probes on the electrode. In such 
a system, the direct contact of free Methylene blue molecules with the electrode 
becomes impossible. To ensure this, the electrode can be additionally treated with 
hexanethiol. In this case, saturation of DNA helix with dye molecules initiates a 
long-distance electron transfer along the DNA sequence via aromatic systems of the 
nucleobase pairs or via dye molecules attached to the phosphate groups near each 
other [124, 125]. Furthermore, hybridization results in an increase in the Methylene 
blue signal. An additional increase in the current recorded is achieved by the addition 
of ferricyanide ions involved in the mediated oxidation of the dye molecules 
[126, 127]. 
Finally, Methylene blue can serve as a label in the DNA-A scaffold biosensors 
described above (Figure 7B). Additional modification of the dye with carboxylic 
groups neutralizes its positive charge and excludes non-specific electrostatic 
interaction with negatively charged DNA sequences. This increases the specificity 
of interaction. Thus, depending on the biosensor format, Methylene blue provides 
signal-on or signal-off sensing of a specific interaction. 
In the domain of drugs, diffusion-free Methylene blue has been successfully 
used for sensitivity enhancement based on substitution protocol. For this reason, 
dsDNA is first saturated with the dye and then covered with polyaniline layer. 
Incubation in the doxorubicin solution results in the release of the dye. However, 
it cannot leave the surface layer due to the upper polyaniline film and is involved 
in an electron exchange chain providing sensitive response towards anthracycline 
preparation inactive at working potential [128]. 
3.3 Label-free DNA sensors 
In most cases, specific binding of DNA with drug molecules starts with the formation 
of molecular complexes with phosphate residues at minor and major grooves of the 
DNA helix or by incorporation of drug molecules between the pairs of nucleobases. 
The latter is promoted by hydrophobic interactions of aromatic electron systems so 
that appropriate drugs have a planar polyaromatic structure in a rather large area 
[129]. Intercalation process mostly results in the shielding of drug molecules which 
lose their redox activity. Some extreme cases that contradict this common mechanism 
have been discussed below. Intercalation can be used in DNA sensors to control the 
conformation of double-stranded (ds) DNA molecules in extreme environments or 
after chemical/thermal damage, or to quantify the hybridization of complementary 
sequences. Detection of hybridization, which is more popular, is out of the scope of 
this review. Nevertheless, the interaction of intercalators with DNA retains interest 
for drug design and monitoring of pharmacokinetics. 
Direct measurement of permeability is performed in a manner common for 
monitoring the surface coating of modified electrodes. In such protocols belonging 
to Faradaic EIS, an equimolar mixture of K3[Fe(CN)6] and K4[Fe(CN)6] is added to 
the solution. Using direct current voltammetry, equilibrium potential is determined 
as the half-sum of the peak potentials. At this potential, small alterations in the 
applied potential in EIS do not shift the equilibrium to anodic or cathodic reaction; Electrochemical DNA Sensors 43 
hence, the Faradaic current does not disturb the measurement results. Subsequently, 
charge transfer resistance and constant phase element (close to the pure capacity for 
an ideal electrode reaction) are calculated from the Nyquist diagram, reflecting the 
ratio between the imaginary and real parts of impedance. This approach has become 
widely prevalent, although the interpretation of the EIS data is sometimes far from 
theory. In actuality, redox activity and reversible electron exchange typical for DNA 
sensors based on appropriate polymers pose difficulties towards describing the 
processes within the layer as the existing equilibrium compensates for the changes 
caused by external stimuli (like polarization of the electrode interface). Regarding the 
use of nanomaterials, changes in charge transfer resistance can result from increased 
electrode area but not from DNA-specific reactions. 
For inert carriers, Faradaic EIS offers results that are closer to theory and 
DNA-drug target interactions. The use of negatively charged [Fe(CN)6]3–/4– probe 
is preferable because of electrostatic repulsion from phosphate residues that prevent 
non-specific accumulation of the probe. On the other hand, electron exchange with 
the participation of this redox probe is independent of pH. Other candidates like 
hydroquinone or Ru hexamine complex are less suitable for such DNA sensors. 
Redox conversion of hydroquinone is complicated due to the formation of 1:1 
molecular complex (quinhydrone) and pH-dependence of the reaction. Consequently, 
the redox equilibrium is sensitive to the dissolved molecular oxygen, as opposed to 
the ferricyanide/ferrocyanide reaction. 
Irrespective of the redox probe used, drug accumulation results in an increased 
charge transfer resistance due to the lower rate of diffusional transfer of the 
ferricyanide ion in the layer after drug binding. Hydrophobic interactions mentioned 
above can also decrease the signal due to higher hydrophobicity of the DNA-drug 
complex against the initial DNA sensor and slower transfer of a small but trivalent/ 
tetravalent-charged anion of the redox probe. If aptamers are used as recognition 
elements, even small quantities of drugs can provoke conformational reorganization 
and formation of G4 quadruplexes (see E-DNA scaffold sensor described above) with 
a denser packing of the layer. Although there are a few examples of DNA aptamers 
used for drug determination, they are beyond the scope of this review. 
Another instance of label-free sensing is based on DNA changes that follow 
the formation of a DNA-drug complex. This is typical for cytostatic drugs like 
anthracyclines (Section 4.1). Their incorporation in between planar pairs of 
complementary nucleobases is anchored by amino groups capable of protonation 
and interaction with phosphate residues [130]. Such a process disturbs the 
configuration of the DNA helix and opens guanine (and, to a lower extent, adenine) 
residues for attack from reactive oxygen species. As a result, oxo-guanine and oxo￾adenine signals appear on DPVs as a sign of those reactions. The aforementioned 
nucleobases also yield irreversible oxidation peaks at high anodic potentials so 
that the synchronous changes attributed to nucleobases and their oxo-products are 
observed. Except for a high working potential, such signals are quite convenient 
for the detection of intercalation event. To avoid DNA oxidative damage following 
drug intercalation, voltammetric signals should be measured in de-aerated media as  
44 Nanosensors 
the product of a single electron transfer on the dioxygen molecule initiates the same 
reactions as direct oxidation of native DNA. Similar signals can be obtained for de￾hybridization reactions and other cases of alteration of native DNA configuration. To 
distinguish between the various possible causes of guanine (or adenine) oxidation, 
EIS measurements should be performed. Intercalation increases the average distance 
between the phosphate residues of the DNA strands, resulting in increased charge 
separation and decreased effective charge of the DNA complex. Meanwhile, 
intercalation results in consolidation of the DNA layer of the biosensor. In other 
words, charge transfer resistance and interface capacitance change in the opposite 
directions for DNA intercalation and both tend to increase in case of severe damage 
to the DNA structure. 
4. Electrochemical DNA sensors for drug determination 
Although there are many targets for DNA sensors, anti-tumor drugs have, for a long 
period time, remained a priority due to the severe consequences of cancer on the 
human population, the rapid growth in the number of affected patients, and the lethal 
outcomes. Some recent reviews have been devoted to the determination of drugs 
by electrochemical sensors and biosensors using nanomaterials and bioreceptors 
[6, 131, 132]. They show opportunities, achievements and prospects of these 
biomedical devices for preliminary diagnostics, dose control and new pharmaceuticals 
research. 
4.1 Anthracyclines 
Adriamycin (doxorubicin chloride) is one of the most widely researched anthracycline 
drugs and has been known for about 50 years (Scheme 7). It strongly intercalates 
DNA in guanine-cytosine rich areas and interferes with DNA regulation processes. 
Scheme 7. Most frequently used anthracycline drugs. 
Furthermore, adriamycin, like other anthracyclines, promotes the generation of 
reactive oxygen species and chemical DNA damage. In aqueous solutions, adriamycin 
shows a pair of reversible peaks associated with the reduction of 5,12-diquinone 
groups, and two irreversible peaks in the anodic area at 0.5 and 0.6 V—attributed to 
the oxidation of the 6,11-dihydroquinone unit [133]. All the peaks are pH-dependent. 
The contact of adriamycin with immobilized DNA produces a short-lived radical at 
–0.6 V, causing damage to the DNA and appearance of a new peak, associated with Electrochemical DNA Sensors 45 
8-oxoguanine (a product of oxidative DNA damage), at 0.4 V. The relation between 
the cathodic reduction of adriamycin and the formation of 8-oxoguanine has been 
confirmed by experiments in Ar atmosphere and by transfer of electrodes with a 
physically adsorbed thick DNA layer into a buffer solution containing oxygen in the 
absence of the drug [134]. Also, anthracyclines can involve Fe(II) ions in oxidative 
mutagenesis due to the formation of the 1:1 complex exerting a toxic effect on the 
native DNA [135]. Conversely, addition of antioxidants to anthracycline drugs allays 
their damaging effect on DNA; this happens due to the scavenging radical species 
formed in by reaction between the drug and oxygen [136]. Reduced working potential 
of doxorubicin oxidation can be achieved by using other nanosized modifiers like 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes with Pt [137] or Ag nanoparticles [138], polystyrene￾Fe3O4-sulfonated graphene oxide nanomagnetic particles [139], or thiacalix[4]arene 
bearing Neutral red terminal fragments [112]. In the case of thiacalix[4]arene bearing 
Neutral red terminal fragments, interaction with DNA hinders electron exchange 
between the reduced and the oxidized forms of the dye, hence increasing charge 
transfer resistance and decreasing the reversibility of the cyclic voltammograms 
recorded with the fericyanide pair added to the solution. 
In a similar manner, DNA-polyaniline composites obtained with DNA added 
to the solution or drop-casted on polyaniline surface appears to be sensitive to the 
DNA configuration, including changes in the native shape by intercalation. Direct 
addition of DNA in the reaction medium may result in DNA damage because of 
the strong mineral acids used to obtain an electroconductive polymer. However, 
substitution of sulfuric acid with oxalic acid makes it possible to increase the pH 
to 3.0 and retain the DNA structure and its accessibility to external stimuli [140]. 
Appropriate biosensors respond to incubation in anthracycline preparations by 
increasing the charge transfer resistance and decreasing the current of [Fe(CN)6]3– 
as the diffusion-free redox indicator. The following LODs have been achieved in 
optimal conditions: 0.01 nM for doxorubicin, 0.1 nM for daunorubicin and 0.2 nM 
for idarubicin. The associated signals have been found to be quite selective and 
only slightly altered in the presence of serum proteins, sulfanilamide antibiotics and 
plasma electrolytes. 
In later studies, it was proposed to introduce DNA between two polyaniline 
layers to minimize the negative effects of the high acidity of the polymerization 
media. Intrinsic redox activity of the polyaniline layer was determined through 
constant current voltammetry. The oxidation peak current increased with the number 
of potential cycles applied during the stage of electropolymerization and with 
the quantity of dsDNA on the polymer surface. For increased sensitivity towards 
doxorubicin, the DNA was saturated with Methylene blue (see previous Section). 
Its substitution with doxorubicin resulted in larger changes in the permeability 
and redox activity of the composite layer [128]. 0.6 pM was the minimum LOD 
achieved. 
Some researchers have used adriamycin as the redox indicator of hybridization 
event though its oxidation potential is rather high. Thus, subsequently, a glassy 
carbon electrode consecutively modified with carboxylated multi-walled carbon 46 Nanosensors 
nanotubes, electropolymerized 3-(3-pyridyl)acrylic acid and silver nanoparticles, 
followed by the attachment of thiolated DNA probe was used [141]. The signal of 
hybridization resulted in an increase in the signal associated with adriamycin. A 
possible cause of the opposite direction of the signal change is long distance electron 
transfer via anthracycline aromatic systems after intercalation of the hybridization 
product. The linear range of concentrations is determined from 0.009 to 9.0 nM 
(LOD 3.2 pM). 
Doxorubicin forms with DNA in homogeneous solutions the complexes of 
1:1 to 1:6 stoichiometry. These complexes can be identified by the hypochromic 
shift of the peak at 240–260 nm in the UV spectra. Doxorubicin forms a pair 
of reversible peaks at –0.55 and –0.80 V and one irreversible anodic peak at 
0 to –0.1 V on appropriate voltammograms recorded in the absence of dissolved 
oxygen. The addition of dsDNA results in lower reversible peaks associated with 
anthracycline moiety [142]. 
Epirubicin is structurally related to doxorubicin cytostatic drug; however, it 
shows fewer side effects. Its reduced toxicity is attributed to the spatial orientation 
of hydroxyl groups at 4’ position in the sugar moiety, making it responsible for faster 
elimination of the drug from the organism. Epirubicin is used against breast and 
ovarian cancer, gastric cancer, lung cancer and lymphomas. It is oxidized on a glassy 
carbon electrode, forming a single peak near 0.4 V; this peak is lowered and shifts 
to higher potentials in the presence of dsDNA. It also can substitute Methylene blue, 
thus intercalating into dsDNA and increasing its accessibility to redox reactions. This 
results in an increased sensitivity of electrochemical detection of DNA-epirubicin 
interactions [143]. 
Mitoxantrone is used in the clinical treatment of leukemia, ovarian cancer 
and breast cancer. It poses a lower risk of cardiotoxic effects when compared to 
doxorubicin and daunomycin. The reaction of mitoxantrone with dsDNA is 
stimulated by electrostatic interactions of side chains containing amino groups with 
phosphate residues of DNA. As other antracyclines, G-C base pairs are specifically 
involved in mitoxantron intercalation. The interaction of this drug with DNA, 
both in the solution and on the electrode surface, results in the lowering of the two 
irreversible anodic peak currents (at 0.51 V and 0.78 V) attributed to the oxidation 
of 5,8-dihydroxyl fragment and aminoalkyl substituents [144]. Amplification of 
mitoxantrone signal has been achieved by the incorporation of the DNA into chitosan 
carbon paste [145]. In optimal conditions, 0.030–3.50 mg/L of the drug could be 
detected using the anodic DPV peak at 0.46 V (LOD 1.3 nM) with a 7-minute 
incubation period. 
Pirarubicin intercalates into DNA adsorbed on a graphite electrode [146]. 
Analytical signal of DNA sensors developed for detection of anthracycline drugs was 
monitored by own drug reduction peak using DPV in phosphate buffer. Incorporation 
of DNA increased the sensitivity of drug detection by about 3,000 times against bare 
glassy carbon, with an LOD of 4.3 pM and a dynamic range of 1 to 50 pM. 
Analytical aspects of DNA sensors for the detection of anthracycline drugs have 
been summarized in Table 2, with emphasis on the application of nanomaterials. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 47 
Table 2. Analytical characteristics of detection of anthracycline drugs with electrochemical DNA sensors 
using nanomaterials. 
Immobilization 
protocol 
Measurement principle Detection 
technique 
Dynamic 
range, LOD 
Real sample Ref. 
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin) 
GCE/MWCNT- Changes in an analyte DPV LOD – [147] 
COOH/PPAA/ reduction current, 1 μM 
Agnano/ss- or adriamycin as indicator of 
ds-DNA hybridization event 
GCE/MWCNT- Changes in the analyte DPV, CV 8.2–19 nM, – [138] 
COOH/Agnano reduction current, (DNA LOD 1.7 nM 
(DNA in solution) adriamycin as a DNA 
intercalator 
detection) 
Au/(MWCNT-SH/ Changes in the DPV LOD 1 μM – [141] 
GNPs)n doxorubicin oxidation 
current, doxorubicin 
as redox intercalator 
for hybridization event 
detection 
(n = 6) 
E-AB biosensor MB as electroactive label SQWV 1 μM– 
0.1 mM 
Undiluted 
blood serum, 
whole blood 
[148] 
Pt/MWCNTs Changes in the CV 0.05–4 Plasma [137] 
(DNA in solution) doxorubicin redox μg/mL, samples 
current, doxorubicin as 0.002 
redox intercalator for μg/mL 
DNA detection 
GCE/PANI+DNA, Changes in the cathodic CV CV: 0.2 “Doxorubicin­ [140] 
polymerization current of the ferricyanide mM–10 nM; LANS®”, 
media contains redox probe 10 nM– artificial 
DNA 0.1 nM, samples 
LOD 0.1 pM with BSA 
and plasma 
electrolytes 
GCE/poly(NR)/ Changes in the NR CV, EIS CV: 0.1– “Doxorubicin­ [112] 
polycarboxylated cathodic peak current and 100 nM, LANS®” and 
thiacalix[4]arene/ charge transfer resistance 0.05 nM “Rastocin”, 
NR/DNA in the presence of EIS:1 nM– artificial 
[Fe(CN)6]3–/4– 0.1 mM, plasma 
0.1 nM electrolytes 
SPE/AuNPs/ 
pTTBA/DNA/ 
CL/AuNPs 
(Microfluidic 
device with FASS 
and FASI channels) 
Temporal changes of the 
current 
EKC-EC 7.5–50 pM, 
LOD 3.6 fM 
Human urine 
samples 
[149] 
Table 2 contd. ... Immobilization 
protocol 
Measurement principle Detection 
technique 
Dynamic 
range, LOD 
Real sample Ref. 
Au/MUA/(PAA/ SPR angle shift SPR 1.0 pM– – [108] 
DNA)n 0.1 μM, 
LOD 0.7 pM 
(n = 8 ) 
GCE/poly(NR)/ Changes in charge EIS 20 μM– – [150] 
PSS/DNA/ transfer resistance in 1 nM, LOD 
octaaminothiacalix 
[4]arene 
presence of [Fe(CN)6]3–/4– 0.1 nM 
GCE/poly(azure Changes in intrinsic redox CV 0.1 μM– Doxorubicin­ [113] 
B)/DNA activity of the polymeric 0.1 nM, LANS® and 
layer LOD 70 pM Doxorubicin￾Teva®, blood 
serum, 
artificial blood 
serum 
GCE/PANI/DNA/ 
PANI 
Changes in charge 
transfer resistance in 
presence of [Fe(CN)6]3–/4– 
EIS 1.0 pM– 
0.1 mM, 
LOD 0.6 pM 
Artificial 
urine samples 
[127] 
GCE/PANI/ Changes in the PANI CV 0.1 nM– Doxorubicin­ [151] 
DNA(MB) cathodic peak current, 
displacement protocol 
(MB is displaced with 
analyte) 
1 μM, 10 pM LANS®, 
blood serum, 
artificial blood 
plasma 
GCE/thiacalix[4] 
arenes bearing 
oligolactic 
fragments/PEI/ 
DNA 
Changes in the MB redox 
probe current 
CV cone: 1 nM– 
30 pM, LOD 
10 pM 
paco: 
0.1 μM– 
1 nM, LOD 
0.5 pM 
1,3-alt: 
0.1 μM–1 
μM 0.3 nM, 
LOD 0.1 nM 
– [152] 
Valrubicin 
Au/MWCNTs/en/ 
AuNPs 
Changes in valrubicin 
cathodic peak current 
CV 0.5–80.0 μM, 
LOD 
0.018 μM 
Blood serum, 
urine samples 
[45] 
Mitoxantrone 
SPE/AuNPs/ 
pTTBA/DNA/CL/ 
AuNPs 
Microfluidic device 
with FASS and 
FASI channels 
Changes in current as 
a function of time in 
dependence on analyte 
concentration 
EKC-EC 2–60 pM, 
LOD 1.2 fM 
Human urine 
samples 
[153] 
48 Nanosensors 
...Table 2 contd. 
Table 2 contd. ... Electrochemical DNA Sensors 49 
...Table 2 contd. 
Immobilization 
protocol 
Measurement principle Detection 
technique 
Dynamic 
range, LOD 
Real sample Ref. 
GCE/MWCNT-Ag￾PT/DNA 
Changes in mitoxantrone 
anodic peak current 
DPV 50 nM– 
0.1 mM, 
LOD 13 nM 
Blood serum, 
urine samples 
[154] 
Epirubicin 
GSPE/FMWCNTs￾IL-Chit/AuNPs/ 
Apt/Dna 
Changes in the 
cucurbituril (5 µM) peak 
current 
DPV 0.007– 
0.1 mM, 
0.3–7.0 mM, 
LOD 3 nM 
– [155] 
PGE/DNA/NrG/PP Changes in the guanine 
oxidation signal 
DPV 0.004– 
55.0 μM, 
1 nM 
Epirubicin 
hydrochloride 
solutions, 
urine samples 
[156] 
Daunorubicin 
SPE/AuNPs/ 
pTTBA/DNA/ 
CL/AuNPs 
(Microfluidic 
device with FASS 
and FASI channels) 
Changes in current as 
a function of time in 
dependence on analyte 
concentration 
EKC-EC 8–50 pM, 
LOD 5.5 fM 
Human urine 
samples 
[153] 
CPE/Ag-4-ATP￾MWCNT/DNA 
Changes in ferricyanide 
probe current as redox 
indicator 
DPV 1 nM– 
10 μM, 
LOD 0.3 nM 
Human urine, 
Human blood 
serum samples 
[154] 
PGE/rGO/DNA Changes in guanine 
oxidation signal after 
daunorubicin intercalation 
(DNA detection) 
DPV LOD 6 μM – [157] 
GCE/PANI+DNA, 
polymerization 
media contains 
DNA 
Changes in the cathodic 
current of the ferricyanide 
redox probe 
CV 10 μM– 
0.5 nM, 
LOD 0.1 nM 
Artificial 
samples 
containing 
BSA and 
plasma 
electrolytes 
[140] 
GCE/poly(NR)/ 
polycarboxylated 
thiacalix[4]arene/ 
NR/DNA 
Changes in the NR 
cathodic peak current 
and charge transfer 
resistance in presence of 
[Fe(CN)6]3–/4– 
CV, EIS CV: 0.1– 
10 nM, 
0.1 nM 
EIS: 1 nM– 
10 mM, 
0.1 nM 
– [112] 
Al foil/PNIPAM-g￾TiO2/PNIPAM-co￾PMMA) 
(DNA in solution) 
Changes in daunorubicin 
reduction current 
interaction with DNA 
CV 0.33 mM – [158] 
GCE/AuNPs/ 
polyTTBA/PS￾aptamer/AuNPs 
Changes in reduction 
current of daunorubicin 
DPV 0.1 and 
60.0 nM 
LOD 52.3 pM 
Human urine 
samples 
[149] 
Table 2 contd. ... 50 Nanosensors 
...Table 2 contd. 
Immobilization 
protocol 
Measurement principle Detection 
technique 
Dynamic 
range, LOD 
Real sample Ref. 
Idarubicin 
GCE/PANI+DNA, 
polymerization 
media contains 
DNA 
Changes in the cathodic 
current of the ferricyanide 
redox probe 
CV 0.1 mM– 
1 nM, 
0.2 nM 
– [140] 
GCE/poly(NR)/ 
polycarboxylated 
thiacalix[4]arene/ 
NR/DNA 
Changes in the NR 
cathodic peak current 
and charge transfer 
resistance in presence of 
[Fe(CN)6]3–/4– 
CV, EIS CV: 1 nM– 
1 mM, LOD 
0.5 nM 
EIS: 1 nM– 
0.1 mM, 
LOD 1 nM 
– [112] 
SPE/AuNPs/ 
pTTBA/DNA/ 
CL/AuNPs 
(Microfluidic 
device with FASS 
and FASI channels) 
Changes in current as 
a function of time in 
dependence on analyte 
concentration 
EKC-EC 5.0– 
55.0 pM, 
LOD 2.2 pM 
Human urine 
samples 
[149] 
Abbreviations: Ag-4-ATP – Ag nanoparticles on 4-aminothiophenol; Agnano – silver nanoparticles; 
Apt – aptamer; AuNPs, GNPs – gold nanoparticles; Chit – chitosan; CL – Cardiolipin; E-AB 
biosensor – electrochemical aptamer-based biosensor; EKC-EC – electrokinetic chromatography 
with electrochemical detection; en – ethylenediamine; FASS – field amplified sample stacking; 
FASI – field amplified sample injection; GCE – glassy carbon electrode; GPE – graphite paste 
electrode; GSPE – graphite screen-printed electrode; IL – ionic liquid; MB – Methylene blue; 
MUA – 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid; MWCNT – multi-walled carbon nanotube; NR – Neutral Red; 
NrG – nitrogen-doped reduced graphene; PAA – poly(allylamine hydrochloride); PANI – polyaniline; 
PEI – poly(ethylene imine); PGE – pencil graphite electrode; PNIPAM-co-PMMA – poly(N￾isopropylacrylamide)-co-poly(methyl methacrylate) nanofibers; PNIPAM-g-TiO2 – titanium dioxide 
nanoparticles grafted with thermoresponsive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide); polyTTBA, pTTBA – 
poly-5,2’:5’,2”-terthiophene-3’carboxylic acid; PP – polypyrrole; PPAA-poly (trans-3-(3-pyridyl) 
acrylic acid); PS – phosphatidylserine; PSS – poly(sodium styrenesulfonate); PT – polythiophene; 
SPE – screen-printed electrode. 
4.2 Other anti-tumor drugs 
Chalcones (α,β-unsaturated ketones) exhibit a wide spectrum of anti-tumor, 
antibacterial and anti-flammatory properties. Their interaction with DNA has been 
monitored by the introduction of ferrocene moiety in the chalcone structure by a few 
researchers [159]. Therein, DNA from chicken blood was mixed with the drug in 
deaerated solution and cyclic voltammograms of ferrocene redox conversion were 
recorded with direct current voltammetry. Decrease in the peaks corresponded to 
the affinity constant equal to 5.2 × 103
 M–1 and 1:1 stoichiometry of the interaction. 
6-Mercaptopurine is a drug used in chemotherapy of different forms of leukemia. 
Its reaction with DNA introduced in carbon paste results in the accumulation of 
oxidation signal recorded by DPV [160]. The dynamic range of concentrations 
determined is 5.0 to 20 aM (LOD 2.0 aM) for an accumulation period of 6 minutes. 
This method has been tested on the tablets of this drug. The use of pencil graphite Electrochemical DNA Sensors 51 
electrode modified with polypyrrol and multi-walled carbon nanotubes shifted 
the LOD to 80 nM (concentration range: 0.2 to 100 μM) [29]. Interaction of 
6-mercaptopurine with dsDNA has been confirmed by monitoring the changes in 
guanine and adenine signals with drug concentration as well as by IR spectroscopy. 
Another purine thioanalog, 6-thioguanine, is used in the treatment of systematic 
connective tissue diseases like leukemia and lymphomas. Belonging to the category 
of anti-metabolite drugs, 6-thioguanine is transferred in the cancer cell in the form of 
6-thioguanylic acid; it interferes with the synthesis of guanine nucleotides and finally 
halts the cell cycle. 6-thioguanidine was first investigated with hanging mercury drop 
electrode where its reduction peak was observed in neutral media by direct current 
voltammetry [161]. In the presence of dsDNA, this peak disappeared, and another one 
at –1.27 V appeared and increased with the DNA concentration. This peak, attributed 
to adenine reduction, makes it possible to be detected by square-wave voltammetry 
in the ranges of 16–360 μM and 400–3000 μM (two linear ranges on the calibration 
curve), with an LOD of 1.1 μM of 6-thioguanine. The same drug is oxidized at 
0.88 V at a glassy carbon electrode covered with single-walled carbon nanotubes 
and dsDNA [162]. The effect gradually increases with incubation time. The formation 
of the complex where drug molecules are attached to the minor groove area of the 
DNA helix has also been confirmed by EIS. An LOD of 0.25 μM has been reached 
with the DNA sensor in optimal conditions. 
Mitomycin C is used in clinical chemotherapy against a broad range of solid 
tumors. As evidence suggests, reduction of mitomycin C on a hanging mercury drop 
electrode with adsorbed DNA results in the covalent binding of reactants with the 
guanine residue capable of reduction at –0.49 V [163]. To exclude the influences of 
the self-signal of the drug, the electrode is transferred in a working buffer after the 
accumulation step. Reductive activation follows the disappearance of the guanine 
reduction peak. It is interesting to note that a similar reaction in acidic conditions also 
forms adducts, but is of a different nature and capable of reduction at lower cathodic 
potentials. 
Mitomycin C has also been investigated in oil/water systems in the presence 
of DNA from fish sperm [164]. In the referred study, pencil graphite electrode 
was first polarized to electrostatically accumulate DNA and then transferred 
in a microemulsion containing the drug. In DPV regime, specific DNA-drug 
interactions resulted in a decrease of the guanine signal observed in the range from 
0.1 to 10 μg/mL of DNA. 
A similar methodology has been reported for the investigation of the interactions 
of anti-tumor flavonoids (3-hydroxyflavone, hesperidin) with dsDNA adsorbed on a 
hanging mercury drop electrode [165]. Herein, the drugs were first converted into 
complexes with Cu(II) ions, which intercalate into DNA and retain their ability of 
cathodic reduction at –1.45 V; square-wave and direct current voltammetry were 
used for the quantification of dsDNA. 
A DNA-sensor based on a glassy carbon electrode modified with reduced 
graphene oxide using adsorptive stripping DPV has been used for the detection of 
methotrexate, a broad-spectrum anti-cancer drug [76]. After its accumulation on the 
DNA helix, the guanine oxidation peak current was measured; a dynamic range from              
52 Nanosensors 
0.055 to 2.2 μM (LOD 7.6 nM) was achieved. The biosensor was tested in diluted 
urine. 
Topotecan, an effective drug against ovarian cancer, cervical cancer and small 
cell lung cancer, belongs to the family of camptothecin derivatives. For its interaction 
with dsDNA, a graphene paste electrode is used. The drug produces an irreversible 
peak at about 0.68 V, which dramatically increases in the presence of DNA and 
shifts to more anodic potentials [166]. The sensor makes it possible to detect the 
drug in a concentration range of 0.7 to 90 μM (LOD 0.37 μM). This biosensor has 
been tested in spiked serum and urine samples and shows recoveries in the range of 
99% to 102%. 
Ajmalin, a cytostatic drug that inhibits the replication and transcription of DNA, 
can be oxidized on a glassy carbon electrode, with the formation of an irreversible 
anodic peak at +0.6 V on cyclic voltammogram [167, 168]. The DNA adsorbed on 
the same electrode decreases the peak height due to the intercalation of the drug 
molecules. This phenomenon has been used for the accumulation of ajmalin on 
DNA-containing support, followed by the release of the drug in concentrated LiClO4 
solution. An LOD of 0.3 nM was achieved in optimal accumulation conditions. 
Etoposide interacts with ssDNA and dsDNA from salmon sperm through 
combined intercalation and electrostatic interaction [169]. The binding contents 
determined for DNA adsorbed on a screen-printed electrode were found to be 
4.1 × 105
 M–1 (pH 4.5) and 5.2 × 105
 M–1 (pH 7.4) for 1:1 stoichiometry of the 
complex. The affinity of the drug towards cation-radical was observed to be slightly 
higher. This investigation was performed using DPV and confirmed by UV-vis 
spectroscopy. 
Furazolidone can be reduced on a glassy carbon electrode covered with multi￾walled carbon nanotubes and dsDNA from calf thymus in a concentration range of 
40 to 100 μg/L (LOD 25 μg/L) [170]. The presence of DNA enhances the peak of 
furazolidone reduction and shifts it to less cathodic values. The stoichiometry and 
binding constant of the DNA-drug interaction can be assessed using the Hill’s model 
(5.9 × 103
 M–1 and 1:1 complex formation). 
4.3  Other drugs and non-specific interactions (DNA as adsorbent)
Efavirenz, an anti-HIV type 1 drug, can be detected using a DNA biosensor 
based on pencil graphite electrode [171]. The incubation of the drug with dsDNA 
solution results in the formation and regular increase of the guanine peak recorded 
by adsorptive stripping DPV at 1.0 V and 180 second accumulation, and decrease 
of the self Efavirenz peak at 1.3 V. Physical adsorption of the DNA on the same 
electrode does not affect the voltammograms. A similar transducer covered with 
polypyrrole/reduced graphene oxide was used for the subsequent accumulation of 
dsDNA, didanosine drug playing the same role of DNA transferase inhibition as 
Efavirenz described above [172]. The interaction of the drug and DNA decreased the 
oxidation peaks of guanine and adenine as measured by DPV. The dynamic range of 
concentration determination was 0.02–50 μM (LOD 8.0 nM). These DNA sensors 
were validated in spiked samples of urine using HPLC as the independent method 
of analysis. Electrochemical DNA Sensors 53 
Rutin, a well-known flavonoid with antioxidant properties, interacts with 
dsDNA and ssDNA in an aqueous solution and on the surface of a glassy carbon 
electrode covered with Langmuir-Blodgett film formed by octadecylamine [173]. 
This interaction results in a decreased rutin reduction peak current recorded in 
the presence of DNA. The associated calculations indicate the saturation of DNA 
molecules corresponding to 1 rutin molecule per two nucleobase pairs. 
Khellin is a drug used as a therapeutic agent in the treatment of vitiligo and 
psoriasis. Its reaction with DNA can be used for its detection in a concentration range 
of 2 μM to 50 nM (LOD 10 nM); its oxidation peak as recorded by stripping DPV 
is observed as the analytical signal [174]. DNA from calf thymus is electrostatically 
accumulated on the carbon paste electrode prior to its contact with the drug. This 
method has been validated on spiked samples of blood serum and tablets. 
Oxytetracycline can be detected through square-wave anodic stripping 
voltammetry on a carbon paste electrode contained of 40% multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes and 40% DNA from calf thymus [175]. The accumulation at –1.7 V results 
in the formation of a sharp peak at –0.18 V (attributed to the drug). The peak current 
is observed to be linear to the analyte concentration in the range of 1 to 10 ng/L 
(LOD 0.4 ng/L). In the referred study, however, the mechanism of signal generation 
has not been discussed. Surprisingly, doxycycline, chlorotetracycline and tetracycline 
did not interfere with most of the analyzed species. Among inorganic species, only 
Fe and Hg ions interfered with the measurements. 
The irreversible reduction peak of nicotin decreases from –1.1 to –1.6 V on a 
glassy carbon electrode after physical adsorption of ssDNA [176]. No arguments 
regarding specific interactions of the reactants on the electrode surface have been 
found; however, the formal description of the concentration profiles of the signal 
shows a binding constant of 831 M–1. 
Colchicin gets accumulated on the dsDNA adsorbed on a boron-doped diamond 
electrode. The associated DPV shows two oxidation peaks, the first one (at 1.1 
V) being proportional to the concentration of the drug in a range of 1 to 100 μM 
(LOD 0.26 μM) [177]. 
Methotrexate inhibits the functioning of dehydrofolate reductase (which plays 
an essential role in the synthesis of thymine nucleotide) and hence exhibits 
cytotoxicity towards cancer cells. Its interaction with DNA has been explored 
through DPV on glassy carbon and highly ordered pyrographite electrodes [178]. 
The oxidation peaks related to the damaged DNA fragments were recorded after 
the incubation of the DNA sensor obtained through dsDNA, poly(dA) and poly(dG) 
molecules physically adsorbed on the electrode surface. The reaction of dsDNA 
with the drug resulted in the appearance of two anodic peaks (related to oxo-ganine 
and oxo-adenine). The reaction was very fast and resulted in DNA condensation, 
as confirmed by atomic force microscopy and by the resultant lowering of the 
mentioned peaks. The preferred affinity of methotrexate towards adenine-rich DNA 
fragments was confirmed using homo-polynucleotide sequences. 
The interaction of Ciprofloxacin with calf thymus DNA has been studied 
through changes in the irreversible oxidation peak of the drug recorded on a waxed 
graphite electrode at 0.88 V by differential pulse voltammetry [179]. Assuming 54 Nanosensors 
that the drug fully loses its electrochemical activity after reacting with the DNA, 
a non-linear fitting of the concentration profile results in the determination of the 
binding constant as 1.36 × 105 M–1 and complexation stoichiometry as at most one 
molecule of the drug per two pairs of nucleobases. Increased signal of ciprofloxacin 
oxidation is obtained on graphene nanoflakes distributed on the surface of a glassy 
carbon electrode [180]. Co-adsorption of salmon sperm dsDNA increases the signal 
due to increased charge on the surface and electrostatic accumulation of positively 
charged DNA molecules. The graphene-based DNA sensor makes it possible to 
detect 0.1 to 100 μM of ciprofloxacin (LOD 0.1 μM). In later studies, the interaction 
of ciprofloxacin with dsDNA was recorded using an electrochemical sensor on a 
platform of pencil graphite electrode covered with electropolymerized polypyrrole, 
single-walled carbon nanotubes and DNA [181]. The electrode was used for the 
detection of the drug accumulated on DNA molecules, with a dynamic range of 
0.008 to 30 μM (LOD 4.0 nM). The incubation of the electrode in ciprofloxacin 
solution decreased the oxidation currents of guanine (0.865 V) and adenine 
(1.169 V) on DPV voltammograms. The usability of this DNA sensor was 
substantiated by measurements in spiked urine samples against HPLC assay. Contrary 
to anthracycline intercalators, hydrophobic interactions are largely considered 
responsible for drug complexation in this case. 
Similar results of ciprofloxacin oxidation have been obtained on boron-doped 
diamond electrodes [182]. Therein, a binding constant of 5.91 × 105
 M–1 was obtained 
through square wave voltammetry for dsDNA intercalation; DPV made detection 
possible in the 0.50–60 μM range, with an LOD of 0.44 μM. 
Domperidone, a drug used for treating gastrointestinal ailments, interacts with 
DNA along the minor groove of the DNA helix. Such an interaction affects the 
electrochemical behavior of the drug. To accumulate donperidone and characterize 
its reaction with dsDNA, electrochemical sensors consisting of carbon paste 
electrodes with oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes have been designed [183]. 
The associated cyclic voltammogram contains one pair of reversible peaks at 
0.4–0.6 V and an irreversible peak at 0.9–1.1 V. All the peaks tend to decrease after 
increased addition of DNA to the drug solution. With changes in the peak currents, 
the binding constant is calculated to be 7.9 × 104
 M–1. 
Chlorpromazine, a psychotropic drug, intercalates into dsDNA immobilized 
on Au electrode through the terminal –SH group [184]. As a result, higher peak 
currents at 0.67 V and a lower LOD of 0.6 μM are achieved using DPV for signal 
recording. 
Amitriptyline, a drug used for antipsychotic and sedative aggression, can be 
detected using an electrochemical DNA sensor based on composite materials 
consisting of graphite, SiO2, Al2O3, Nb2O5 and dsDNA [185]. The initial material is 
obtained by sol-gel method; it is then mechanically mixed with DNA, graphite powder 
and mineral oil. Without the drug, two peaks are recorded on the voltammogram, 
attributed to the oxidation of guanine and adenine (0.8 V and 1.11 V). The addition 
of the drug increases the currents associated with the mediation of electron transfer. 
In optimal conditions, 10–80 μM of amitriptyline can be detected (LOD 0.12 μM). Electrochemical DNA Sensors 55 
Ketamine, an anesthesia drug, can interact with ssDNA and dsDNA adsorbed on 
electrochemically pre-oxidized carbon paste electrodes. The reaction results in the 
accumulation of the drug on ssDNA, resulting in a higher irreversible oxidation peak 
current at 1.14 V [186]. Parallel recording of the UV-vis spectra makes it possible to 
calculate the binding constant as 1.0 × 107
 for dsDNA and 3.0 × 107
 M–1 for ssDNA. 
Hybridization of the DNA sequence complementary to the DNA probe decreases the 
peak due to the competition of its binding at guanine residues. This disposable DNA 
sensor can detect ketamine in concentrations as low as 1.98 nM. 
4.4 DNA-damaging factors 
DNA-damaging factors have been studied for DNA sensors from the very beginning 
of the biosensor era [187–190]. Since 1990s, the electrochemistry of dsDNA and 
ssDNA adsorbed on polarized screen-printed carbon electrodes has come to be in 
use for both determination of DNA quantities and assessment of their interactions 
with potentially damaging factors. In these works, oxidation of guanine residues 
was mostly investigated through potentiometric stripping analysis at a constant 
current. Daunomycin, an anthracyline drug, was used as the intercalator. The 
potential decreased with DNA damage, whereas the guanine signal increased [191]. 
Additional information can be obtained from the comparison of signals recorded 
with ssDNA from the same source. Various anti-tumor drugs (cisplatin, acridine 
orange), aromatic amines (2-anthramine, 2-naphtylamine), mycotoxins, industrial 
pollutants (PCB, phthalates), as well as industrial waste waters, which exhibit 
genotoxicity as per standard texts (ToxAlert, umu-assay), have been tested to show 
possible areas of application of such biosensors. It has, however, come to be known 
that low selectivity and rather high concentration of the tested pollutants limit the 
performance of biosensors. Furthermore, the necessity for anodic polarization of 
the electrode during the entire duration of DNA accumulation complicates sensor 
preparation, especially in field conditions. 
Interaction of antiproliferative metallodrugs with dsDNA has been 
investigated through changes in guanine oxidation currents recorded on glassy 
carbon electrodes [192, 193]. In one of the studies, the reactions of cis-platin, 
carboplatin, 2,2’-bypiridylbis(pyridine) Pt(II), titanocene dichloride and trans￾tetrachlorodimethylsulfoxide imidazole ruthenate (III) with ssDNA and dsDNA 
from calf thymus electrostatically accumulated on screen-printed carbon electrode 
at 1.6 V were investigated. Therein, the relative decay of the guanine oxidation peak 
recorded by square-wave voltammetry at 0.95 V was used as a measure of specific 
interactions. In another study, the reaction of cis-platin and DNA was explored with 
an electrochemical sensor assembled on a glassy carbon electrode covered with 
electrochemically reduced graphene oxide and adsorbed dsDNA [194]. Guanine 
peaks (at 1.0 V on a bare electrode and 0.76 V on modified glassy carbon electrode) 
and adenine peaks (at 1.25 V on a bare electrode and 1.05 V on modified glassy 
carbon electrode) were recorded with adsorptive transfer stripping voltammetry 
and DPV. The peak heights were observed to decrease with increased drug 
concentration. 56 Nanosensors 
Cis-platin and oxaliplatin have been studied on disposable graphite electrodes 
modified with single-walled carbon nanotubes and adsorbed DNA [195]. The 
reaction results in reduced guanine signals and increased charge transfer resistance 
measured in a short time period (3–5 minutes). 
Temozolomide is an antineoplastic alkylating agent which works against 
brain tumors. In solution phase, it undergoes spontaneous hydrolysis to yield 
methyldiazonium ions (Scheme 8). 
Scheme 8. The scheme of hydrolysis of temozolomide. 
Intermediate and final products can also affect DNA conformation and damage. 
Electrochemical investigations of reactions performed in the presence of dsDNA 
from calf thymus on glassy carbon electrodes, through DPV, have confirmed DNA 
damage. In this case, the peaks attributed to the products of such a damage—8­
oxo-guanine, 2,8-dioxoadenine and guanine—were recorded by DPV [196]. The 
reactions were performed in solution phase or with the DNA physically adsorbed on 
the electrode prior to its contact with the drug. In case of the latter, the DNA sensor 
was first moved to the buffer solution with no drug and then the oxidation peaks 
of the damaged DNA were recorded. Changes in the peak currents for differently 
incubated DNA sensors showed condensation of DNA into double-helical structures 
and specific interactions between the drug and its metabolites and guanine residue of 
the DNA chain [197]. A similar phenomenon has been observed with temozolomide 
accumulated onto dsDNA layer assembled on a pre-oxidized pencil graphite electrode 
[198]. The DNA damage caused by the products of drug conversion was observed 
within 7 days of their contact. The guanine oxidation peak currents recorded by DPV 
depended on the methylation degree of the DNA oligonucleotides. 
Nitroimidazoles are also considered as a source of reactive oxygen species 
produced by the reduction of the nitro group in the drug molecule. The interaction of 
benznidazole and dsdna and ssDNA from calf thymus has been investigated through 
DPV on the interface of a glassy carbon electrode [199]. In the absence of DNA, the 
reduction is observed in one step in an alkaline medium, and in two separate steps 
with intermediate formation of hydroxylamine derivative in a weakly acidic medium. 
The addition of DNA results in the formation of two oxidation peaks—attributed to 
the guanosine (1.05 V) and adenosine (1.20 V) fragments. 
Isoproterenol is an adrenoergic receptor agonist used in the treatment of cardiac 
arrest and shock. Its interaction with cardiomyocyte DNA has been investigated using 
glassy carbon electrodes modified with mutli-walled carbon nanotubes, polyaniline 
and gold nanoparticles assembled by drop casting of oppositely charged layers [52]. 
Therein, the assembling of the surface layer was monitored by EIS and fluorescence 
microscopy and the drug-DNA interaction was observed by means of DPV. The 
incubation of DNA with the drug resulted in the appearance and enhancement of Electrochemical DNA Sensors 57 
the guanine signal at 0.84 V. Meanwhile, the self peak of isoproterenol oxidation 
at 0.38 V decreased synchronously. Furthermore, DNA damage (breakage in DNA 
double strands) was confirmed by protein expression and electrophoretic detection 
of appropriate protein markers in in vivo experiments. Top et al. [200] proposed 
impedimetric detection of DNA-isoproterenol complexation using screen-printed 
electrodes covered with electrostatically accumulated DNA. Significant difference 
in the behavior of cancer and normal DNA was shown. 
Amlodipin is a third-generation calcium antagonist used against high blood 
pressure, hypertension and cardiac arrhythmia. Its reaction with DNA has been 
investigated using boron-doped diamond electrodes modified with physically 
adsorbed DNA [201], wherein the modification was monitored through changes 
in the cyclic voltammogram of ferricyanide redox pair. Increasing DNA quantities 
decreased the peak currents and increased the peak potential difference. Preliminary 
incubation of amlodipin with DNA prior to its adsorption changed the redox 
indicator voltammograms in the opposite direction, indicating partial shielding of 
DNA active sites from damage. This conclusion was confirmed by monitoring DPV 
of the guanine peaks in the absence of an external redox indicator. 
Leuprolide interacts with dsDNA from fish sperm accumulated on an anodically 
activated pencil graphite electrode [202]. This interaction results in an increase in 
the guanine oxidation signal. In optimal working conditions, 0.20–6.00 ppm of the 
drug (LOD 0.04 ppm) can be detected. The biosensor in the referred study has been 
used for the analysis of peuprolide in pharmaceutical dosage form. Contrary to that, 
another anti-cancer drug, fulvestrand, decreases the guanine signal measured by 
DPV on the same electrode in a range of 1 to 20 ppb (LOD 0.31 ppb) [203]. 
Glivec, an anti-leukemia drug, causes the oxidation of adenine fragments of 
DNA with the formation of peaks attributed to 2,8-dehydroxyadenine at about 
1.28 V, as is revealed DPV [204]. The reaction is found to be rather fast: the peak 
reaches its maximum after 3 minutes of incubation. In addition to the above, smaller 
peaks of guanine and oxoguanine are also observed on the voltammogram. 
5. Conclusion 
Recent advancements in the development of DNA sensors for drug detection 
encompas all modern trends in the progress of bioelectroanalysis, including broad 
application of nanomaterials, miniaturization tendency, application of disposable 
sensors or their transducers, and joint consideration of electrochemical techniques 
and physical methods of interfacial research. Electron exchange and interaction 
with DNA result in remarkable changes in the optical properties of the electrode 
interface, facilitating the assessment of binding constants and stoichiometry of the 
reaction. Comparing the results obtained in homogeneous conditions and those on 
the electrode surface offers new prospective avenues in the study of the mechanism 
of DNA-drug interactions, as well as for distinguishing between electrostatic and 
steric control of these interactions. 
Unfortunately, there are no examples of DNA sensors used for screening 
anti-tumor drugs or for researching new types of biological activities of newly  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58	 Nanosensors 
synthesized compounds. At present, anthracyclines are the only assurance of the 
future benefits that are associated with such an approach. However, interest in this 
class of cytostatics is rather related to their function as a redox probe in other DNA 
sensors. Rather challenging are applications of DNA sensors in a real sample assay. 
The spiked samples are mostly used for this purpose, and possible interferences with 
target species still remain an important topic for future investigation. 
Acknowledgments 
TH acknowledges the financial support of Science Agency VEGA, Project No. 
1/0419/20. 
References 
[1] Thevenot, D.R., K. Toth, R.A. Durst and G.S. Wilson. 2001. Electrochemical biosensors: 
Recommended definitions and classification. Biosens. Bioelectron. 16: 121–131. 
[2] Dunn, M.R., R.M. Jimenez and J.C. Chaput. 2017. Analysis of aptamer discovery and technology. 
Nat. Rev. Chem. 1: 0076. 
[3] Gui, R., H. Jin, H. Guo and Z. Wang. 2018. Recent advances and future prospects in molecularly 
imprinted polymers-based electrochemical biosensors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 100: 56–70. 
[4] Lee, S.T., D. Beaumont, X.D. Su, K. Muthoosamy and S.Y. New. 2018. Formulation of DNA 
chimera templates: Effects on emission behavior of silver nanoclusters and sensing. Anal. Chim. 
Acta 1010: 62–68. 
[5] Miao, P., Y. Tang, B. Wang, J. Yin and L. Ning. 2015. Signal amplification by enzymatic tools for 
nucleic acids. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 67: 1–15. 
[6] Lima, H.R.S., J.S. da Silva, E.A.O. Farias, P.R.S. Teixeira, C. Eiras and L.C.C. Nunes. 2018. 
Electrochemical sensors and biosensors for the analysis of antineoplastic drugs. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 108: 27–37. 
[7]	 Pourbasheer, E., Z. Azari and M.R. Ganjali. 2019. Recent advances in biosensors based 
nanostructure for pharmaceutical analysis. Curr. Anal. Chem. 15: 152–158. 
[8] Erdem, A. 2007. Nanomaterial-based electrochemical DNA sensing strategies. Talanta 
74: 318–325. 
[9]	 Wang, J. 2005. Nanomaterial-based electrochemical biosensors. Analyst 130: 421–426. 
[10] Chen, A. and S. Chatterjee. 2013. Nanomaterials based electrochemical sensors for biomedical 
applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42: 5425–5438. 
[11] Iijima, S. 1991. Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon. Nature 354: 56–58. 
[12] Zhao, Q., Z. Gan and Q. Zhuang. 2002. Electrochemical sensors based on carbon nanotubes. 
Electroanalysis 14: 1609–1613. 
[13] Zhu, Z. 2017. An overview of carbon nanotubes and graphene for biosensing applications. Nano￾Micro. Lett. 9: 25. 
[14] Jung, H. and C.W. Bielawski. 2019. Asphaltene oxide promotes a broad range of synthetic 
transformations. Commun. Chem. 2: 113. 
[15] Daniel, S., T.P. Rao, K.S. Rao, S.U. Rani, G.R.K. Naidu, H.-Y. Lee and T. Kawai. 2007. A review 
of DNA functionalized/grafted carbon nanotubes and their characterization. Sens. Actuat. B. 
122: 672–682. 
[16] Gao, L., C. Lian, Y. Zhou, L. Yan, Q. Li, C. Zhang, L. Chen and K. Chen. 2014. Graphene oxide￾DNA based sensors. Biosens. Bioelectr. 60: 22–29. 
[17] Shao, Y., J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I.A. Aksay and Y. Lin. 2009. Graphene based electrochemical 
sensors and biosensors: A review. Electroanalysis 22: 1027–1036. 
[18] Zhou, M., Y. Zhai and S. Dong. 2009. Electrochemical sensing and biosensing platform based on 
chemically reduced graphene oxide. Anal. Chem. 81: 5603–5613.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical DNA Sensors 59 
[19] Mallesha, M., R. Manjunatha, C. Nethravathi, G.S. Suresh, M. Rajamathi, J.S. Melo and T.V. 
Venkatesha. 2011. Functionalized-graphene modified graphite electrode for the selective 
determination of dopamine in presence of uric acid and ascorbic acid. Bioelectrochemistry 
81: 104–108. 
[20] Fang, Y. and E. Wang. 2013. Electrochemical biosensors on platforms of graphene. Chem. 
Commun. 49: 9526–9539. 
[21]	 Morales De la Cruz, K., G. Alarcón-Angeles and A. Merkoçi. 2019. Nanomaterial-based sensors 
for the study of DNA interaction with drugs. Electroanalysis 31: 1845–1867. 
[22]	 Wei, L., J. Borowiec, L. Zhu and J. Zhang. 2012. Electrochemical investigation on the interaction 
of diclofenac with DNA and its application to the construction of a graphene-based biosensor. J. 
Solid State Electrochem. 16: 3817–3823. 
[23] Erdem, A., M. Muti, P. Papakonstantinou, E. Canavar, H. Karadeniz, G. Congur and S. Sharma. 
2012. Graphene oxide integrated sensor for electrochemical monitoring of mitomycin C–DNA 
interaction. Analyst 137: 2129–2135. 
[24] Chen, J., B. Fu, T. Liu, Z. Yan and K. Li. 2018. A graphene oxide-DNA electrochemical sensor 
based on glassy carbon electrode for sensitive determination of methotrexate. Electroanalysis 
30: 288–295. 
[25] Erdem, A., H. Karadeniz and A. Caliskan. 2009. Single-walled carbon nanotubes modified 
graphite electrodes for electrochemical monitoring of nucleic acids and biomolecular interactions. 
Electroanalysis 21: 464–471. 
[26] Evtugyn, G., A. Porfireva, R. Shamagsumova and T. Hianik. 2020. Advances in electrochemical 
aptasensors based on carbon nanomaterials. Chemosensors 8: 96. 
[27]	 Tang, W., M. Zhang and X. Zeng. 2014. Establishment of dsDNA/GNs/chit/GCE biosensor and 
electrochemical study on interaction between 6-mercaptopurine and DNA. Biomed. Mater. Eng. 
24: 1071–1077. 
[28]	 Tang, W., W. Li, Y. Li, M. Zhang and X. Zeng. 2015. Electrochemical sensors based on multi￾walled nanotubes for investigating the damage and action of 6-mercaptopurine on double-stranded 
DNA. New J. Chem. 39: 8454–8460. 
[29] Karimi-Maleh, H., F. Tahernejad-Javazmi, N. Atar, M.L. Yola, V.K. Gupta and A.A. Ensafi. 
2015. A novel DNA biosensor based on a pencil graphite electrode modified with polypyrrole/ 
functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes for determination of 6-mercaptopurine anticancer 
drug. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 54: 3634–3639. 
[30] Silva, T.A., F.C. Moraes, B.C. Janegitz and O. Fatibello-Filho. 2017. Electrochemical biosensors 
based on nanostructured carbon black: A review. J. Nanomaterials 2017: 14. 
[31] Shuai, H.-L., K.-J. Huang and Y.-X. Chen. 2016. A layered tungsten disulfide/acetylene black 
composite based DNA biosensing platform coupled with hybridization chain reaction for signal 
amplification. J. Mater. Chem. B 4: 1186–1196. 
[32] Kuzin, Yu., D. Kappo, A. Porfireva, D. Shurpik, I. Stoikov, G. Evtugyn and T. Hianik. 2018. 
Electrochemical DNA sensor based on carbon black–poly(Neutral red) composite for detection of 
oxidative DNA damage. Sensors 18: 3489. 
[33]	 Turkevich, J., P.C. Stevenson and J. Hillier. 1951. A study of the nucleation and growth processes 
in the synthesis of colloidal gold. Discuss. Faraday Soc. 11: 55–75. 
[34]	 Yeh, Y.-C., B. Creran and V.M. Rotello. 2012. Gold nanoparticles: Preparation, properties and 
application in bionanotechnology. Nanoscale 4: 1871–1880. 
[35] Elahi, N., M. Kamali and M.H. Baghersad. 2018. Recent biomedical applications of gold 
nanoparticles: A review. Talanta 184: 537–556. 
[36] Luo, X., A. Morrin, A.J. Killard and M.R. Smyth. 2006. Application of nanoparticles in 
electrochemical sensors and biosensors. Electroanalysis 18: 319–326. 
[37] Chiang, H.C., Y. Wang, Q. Zhang and K. Levon. 2019. Optimization of the electrodeposition of 
gold nanoparticles for the application of highly sensitive, label-free biosensor. Biosensors 9: 50. 
[38] Zabihollahpoor, A., M. Rahimnejad, G. Najafpour and A.A. Moghadamnia. 2019. Gold nanoparticle 
prepared by electrochemical deposition for electrochemical determination of gabapentin as an 
antiepileptic drug. J. Electroanal. Chem. 825: 281–286.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60	 Nanosensors 
[39] Campuzano, S., M. Pedrero, C. Montemayor, E. Fatás and J.M. Pingarrón. 2006. Characterization 
of alkanethiol-self-assembled monolayers-modified gold electrodes by electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy. J. Electroanal. Chem. 586: 112–121. 
[40] Colangelo, E., J. Comenge, D. Paramelle, M. Volk and Q. Chen. 2017. Characterizing self￾assembled monolayers on gold nanoparticles. Bioconjugate Chem. 28: 11–22. 
[41]	 Fischer, L., M. Tenje, M. Heiskanen, A.R. Masuda, N. Castillo, J. Bentien, J. Emneus, M.H. 
Jakobsen and A. Boisen. 2009. Gold cleaning methods for electrochemical detection applications. 
Microelectronic Eng. 86: 1282–1285. 
[42] Li, C.-Z., Y. Liu and J. H.T. Luong. 2005. Impendance sensing of DNA binding drugs using gold 
substrates modified with gold nanoparticles. Anal. Chem. 77: 478–485. 
[43] Shen, Q., X. Wang and D. Fu. 2008. The amplification effect of functionalized gold nanoparticles 
on the binding of anticancer drug dacarbizane to DNA and DNA bases. Appl. Surf. Sci. 
255: 577–580. 
[44] He, X., W. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Chen. 2014. Electrochemical determination of 
bleomycins based on dual-amplification of 4-mercaptophenyl boronic acid-capped gold 
nanoparticles and dopamine-capped gold nanoparticles. Anal. Methods 6: 6893–6899. 
[45] Hajian, R., Z. Mehrayin, M. Mohagheghian, M. Zafari, P. Hosseini and N. Shams. 2015. Fabrication 
of an electrochemical sensor based on carbon nanotubes modified with gold nanoparticles for 
determination of valrubicin as a chemotherapy drug: Valrubicin-DNA interaction. Mater. Sci. Eng. 
C 49: 769–775. 
[46]	 Wang, J., K. Ma, H. Yin, Y. Zhou and S. Ai. 2018. Aptamer based voltammetric determination 
of ampicillin using a single-stranded DNA binding protein and DNA functionalized gold 
nanoparticles. Microchim. Acta 185: 68–74. 
[47] Jahandari, S., M.A. Taher, H. Karimi-Maleh, A. Khodadadi and E. Faghih-Mirzaei. 2019. 
A powerful DNA-based voltammetric biosensor modified with Au nanoparticles, for the 
determination of Temodal; an electrochemical and docking investigation. J. Electroanal. Chem. 
840: 313–318. 
[48] Gholivand, M.B. and M. Torkashvand. 2016. The fabrication of a new electrochemical sensor 
based on electropolymerization of nanocomposite gold nanoparticle-molecularly imprinted 
polymer for determination of valganciclovir. Materials Sci. Eng. C 59: 594–603. 
[49] Najari, S., H. Bagheri, Z. Monsef-Khoshhesab, A. Hajian and A. Afkhami. 2018. Electrochemical 
sensor based on gold nanoparticle-multiwall carbon nanotube nanocomposite for the sensitive 
determination of docetaxel as an anticancer drug. Ionics 24: 3209–3219. 
[50] Kuralay, F. and A. Erdem. 2015. Gold nanoparticles/polymer nanocomposite for highly sensitive 
drug- DNA interaction. Analyst 140: 2876–2880. 
[51]	 Wang, W., Y. Cheng, L. Yan, H. Zhu, G. Li, J. Li and W. Sun. 2015. Highly sensitive electrochemical 
sensor for dopamine with a double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid/gold nanoparticle/graphene 
modified electrode. Analyt. Meth. 7: 1878–1883. 
[52]	 Wang, J., Y. Li, C. Li, X. Zeng, W. Tang and X. Chen. 2017. A voltammetric study on the interaction 
between isoproterenol and cardiomyocyte DNA by using a glassy carbon electrode modified with 
carbon nanotubes, polyaniline and gold nanoparticles. Microchim. Acta 184: 2999–3006. 
[53] Jia, Z., Y. Ma, L. Yang, C. Guo, N. Zhou, M. Wang, L. He and Z. Zhang. 2019. NiCo2O4 spinel 
embedded with carbon nanotubes derived from bimetallic NiCo metal-organic framework for the 
ultrasensitive detection of human immune deficiency virus-1 gene. Biosens. Bioelectr. 133: 55–63. 
[54] Cheng, D., X. Xiao, X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Liang, Z. Yu, C. Jin, N. Zhou, M. Chen, Y. Dong, Y. 
Lin, Z. Xie and C. Zhang. 2018. A non-enzymatic electrochemical sensing platform based on 
hemin@MOF composites for detecting hydrogen peroxide and DNA. J. Electrochem. Soc. 
165: B885–B892. 
[55] Liao, X., H. Fu, T. Yan and J. Lei. 2019. Electroactive metal–organic framework composites: 
Design and biosensing application. Biosens. Bioelectron. 146: 111743. 
[56] Shao, H., J. Lu, Q. Zhang, Y. Hu, S. Wang and Z. Guo. 2018. Ruthenium-based metal organic 
framework (Ru-MOF)-derived novel Faraday-cage electrochemiluminescence biosensor for 
ultrasensitive detection of miRNA-141. Sens. Act. B. 268: 39–46.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical DNA Sensors 61 
[57] Lu, J., G. Getz, E.A. Miska, E.A. Saavedra, J. Lamb, D. Peck, A.S. Cordero, B.L. Ebert, R.H. Mak, 
A.A. Ferrando, J.R. Downing, T. Jacks, H.R. Horvitz and T.R. Golub. 2005. MicroRNA expression 
profiles classify human cancers. Nature 435: 834–838. 
[58] Jou, A.F., C.H. Lu, Y.C. Ou, S.S. Wang, S.L. Hsu, I. Willner and J.A. Ho. 2015. Diagnosing the 
miR-141 prostate cancer biomarker using nucleic acid-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs and 
telomerase. Chem. Sci. 6: 659–665. 
[59]	 Forster, R.J., P. Bertoncello and T.E. Keyes. 2009. Electrogenerated chemiluminescence. Ann. 
Review of Anal. Chem. 2: 359–385. 
[60] Qin, F., S. Jia, F. Wang, S. Wu, J. Song and Y. Liu. 2013. Hemin@metal–organic framework 
with peroxidase-like activity and its application to glucose detection. Catalysis Sci. Technol. 
3: 2761–2768. 
[61] Gong, Q., Y. Wang and H. Yang. 2017. A sensitive impedimetric DNA biosensor for the 
determination of the HIV gene based on graphene-Nafion composite film. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
89: 565–569. 
[62] Huang, Y., Z. Gao, H. Luo and N.B. Li. 2017. Sensitive detection of HIV gene by coupling 
exonuclease III-assisted target recycling and guanine nanowire amplification. Sens. Act. B 
238: 1017–1023. 
[63] Deng, K., C. Li, J. Huang and X. Li. 2017. Rolling circle amplification based on signal-enhanced 
electrochemical DNA sensor for ultrasensitive transcription factor detection. Sens. Actuat. B 
238: 1302–1308. 
[64] Li, Q., W. Cheng, D. Zhang, T. Yu, Y. Yin, H. Ju and S. Dinget. 2012. Rapid and sensitive 
strategy for salmonella detection using an InvA gene-based electrochemical DNA sensor. Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci. 7: 844–856. 
[65] Zhang, Y., X. Geng, J. Ai, Q. Gao, H. Qi and C. Zhang. 2015. Signal amplification detection 
of DNA using a sensor fabricated by one-step covalent immobilization of amino-terminated 
probe DNA onto the polydopamine-modified screen-printed carbon electrode. Sens. Actuat. B 
221: 1535–1541. 
[66]		 Wu, S., Y. Tang, L. Chen, X. Ma, S. Tian and J. Sun. 2015. Amplified electrochemical hydrogen 
peroxide reduction based on hemin/G-quadruplex DNAzyme as electrocatalyst at gold particles 
modified heated copper disk electrode. Biosens. Bioelectron. 73: 41–46. 
[67] Shariati, M., M. Ghorbani, P. Sasanpour and A. Karimizefreh. 2019. An ultrasensitive label free 
human papilloma virus DNA biosensor using gold nanotubes based on nanoporous polycarbonate 
in electrical alignment. Anal. Chim. Acta 1048: 31–41. 
[68] Soni, A., C.M. Pandey, S. Solanki and G. Sumana. 2019. Synthesis of 3D-coral like polyaniline 
nanostructures using reactive oxide templates and their high performance for ultrasensitive 
detection of blood cancer. Sens. Act. B 281: 634–642. 
[69] Gholivand, M.-B. and A. Akbari. 2019. A sensitive electrochemical genosensor for highly specific 
detection of thalassemia gene. Biosens. Bioelectron. 129: 182–188. 
[70] Soni, A., C.M. Pandey, M.K. Pandey and G. Sumana. 2019. Highly efficient polyaniline￾MoS2 hybrid nanostructures based biosensor for cancer biomarker detection. Anal. Chim. Acta 
1055: 26–35. 
[71] Senel, M., M. Dervisevic and F. Kokkokoglu. 2019. Electrochemical DNA biosensors for label￾free breast cancer gene marker detection. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 411: 2925–2935. 
[72] Khosravi-Nejad, F., M. Teimouri, S. Jafari Marandi and M. Shariati. 2019. The highly sensitive 
impedimetric biosensor in label free approach for hepatitis B virus DNA detection based on 
tellurium doped ZnO anowires. Appl. Phys. A 125: 616. 
[73]	 Divsar, F. 2019. A label-free photoelectrochemical DNA biosensor using a quantum dot–dendrimer 
nanocomposite. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 411: 6867–6875. 
[74]	 Lv, M.-M., S.-F. Fan, Q.-L. Wang, Q-Y. Lv, X. Song and H.-F. Cui. 2020. An enzyme-free 
electrochemical sandwich DNA assay based on the use of hybridization chain reaction and gold 
nanoparticles: application to the determination of the DNA of Helicobacter pylori. Microchim. 
Acta 187: 73. 
[75] Flynn, N.T., T.N.T. Tran, M.J. Cima and R. Langer. 2003. Long-term stability of self-assembled 
monolayers in biological media. Langmuir 19: 10909–10915.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62	 Nanosensors 
[76] Chen, Y., P. Li, J.A. Modica, R.J. Drout and O.K. Farha. 2018. Acid-resistant mesoporous metal– 
organic framework toward oral insulin delivery: Protein encapsulation, protection, and release. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 140: 5678–5681. 
[77] Ma, J., W. Chai, J. Lu, T. Tian, S. Wu, Y. Yang, J. Yang and C. Li. 2019. Coating a DNA self￾assembled monolayer with a metal organic framework-based exoskeleton for improved sensing 
performance. Analyst 144: 3539–3545. 
[78] Evtugyn, G., S. Belyakova, A. Porfireva and T. Hianik. 2020. Electrochemical aptasensors based 
on hybrid metal-organic frameworks. Sensors 20: 6943. 
[79]	 Wallace, G.G., G.M. Spinks, I.A.P. Kane-Maguire and P.R. Teasdale. 2003. Conductive 
Electroactive Polymers. Intelligent Materials Systems. CRC Press, Boca Raton. 
[80] Evtugyn, G. and T. Hianik. 2016. Electrochemical DNA sensors and aptasensors based on 
electropolymerized materials and polyelectrolyte complexes. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 
79: 168–178. 
[81] Malhotra, B.D., A. Chaubey and S.P. Singh. 2006. Prospects of conducting polymers in biosensor. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 578: 59–74. 
[82] Ates, M. 2013. A review study of (bio)sensor systems based on conducting polymers. Mater. Sci. 
Eng. C 33: 1853–1859. 
[83] Inzelt, G. 2011. Rise and rise of conducting polymers. J. Solid State Electrochem. 15: 1711–1718. 
[84] Puskás, Z. and G. Inzelt. 2005. Formation and redox transformations of polyphenazine. 
Electrochim. Acta 50: 1481–1490. 
[85] Barsan, M.M., M.E. Ghica and C.M.A. Brett. 2015. Electrochemical sensors and biosensors based 
on redox polymer/carbon nanotube modified electrodes: A review. Anal. Chim. Acta 881: 1–23. 
[86] Xu, Y., X. Ye, Y.L. Yang, P. He and Y. Fang. 2006. Impedance DNA biosensor using 
electropolymerized polypyrrole/multiwalled carbon nanotubes modified electrode. Electroanalysis 
18: 1471–1478. 
[87] Rezaei, B., M.Kh. Boroujeni and A.A. Ensafi. 2016. Development of Sudan II sensor based on 
modified treated pencil graphite electrode with DNA, o-phenylenediamine, and gold nanoparticle 
bioimprinted polymer. Sens. Actuators B 222: 849–856. 
[88] Osaka, T., T. Momma, S. Komaba, H. Kanagawa and S. Nakamura. 1994. Electrochemical process 
of formation of an insulating polypyrrole film. J. Electroanal. Chem. 372: 201–207. 
[89] Liu, K., W.-Z. Wei, J.-X. Zeng, X.-Y. Liu and Y.-P. Gao. 2006. Application of a novel 
electrosynthesized polydopamine-imprinted film to the capacitive sensing of nicotine. Anal. 
Bioanal. Chem. 385: 724–729. 
[90]	 Cosnier, S. and M. Holzinger. 2011. Electrosynthesized polymers for biosensing. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
40: 2146–2156. 
[91] Okamoto, H. and T. Kotaka. 1999. Effect of counter ions in electrochemical polymerization media 
on the structure and responses of the product polyaniline films. III. Structure and properties of 
polyaniline films prepared via electrochemical polymerization. Polymer 40: 407–417. 
[92] Prakash, R. 2002. Electrochemistry of polyaniline: Study of the pH effect and electrochromism. 
J. Appl. Polymer Sci. 83: 378–385. 
[93] Shao, Y., Y. Jin and S. Dong. 2002. DNA-templated assembly and electropolymerization of aniline 
on gold surface. Electrochem. Commun. 4: 773–779. 
[94] Malinauskas, A. 2004. Self-doped polyanilines. J. Power Sources 126: 214–220. 
[95] Sadki, S., P. Schottland, N. Brodie and G. Sabouraud. 2000. The mechanisms of pyrrole 
electropolymerization. Chem. Soc. Rev. 29: 283–293. 
[96] Krische, B. and M. Zagorska. 1989. The polythiophene paradox. Synthetic Metals 28: C263–C268. 
[97] Jadamiec, M., M. Lapkowski, M. Matlengiewicz, A. Brembilla, B. Henry and L. Rodehüser. 2007. 
Electrochemical and spectroelectrochemical evidence of dimerization and oligomerization during 
the polymerization of terthiophenes. Electrochim. Acta 52: 6146–6154. 
[98] Patra, A., M. Bendikov and S. Chand. 2014. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxyselenophene) and its 
derivatives: Novel organic electronic materials. Acc. Chem. Res. 47: 1465–1474. 
[99] Huynh, T.-P., P.S. Sharma, M. Sosnowska, F. D’Souza and W. Kutner. 2015. Functionalized 
polythiophenes: Recognition materials for chemosensors and biosensors of superior sensitivity, 
selectivity, and detectability. Progress Polym. Sci. 47: 1–25.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical DNA Sensors 63 
[100] Palomera, N., J.L. Vera, E. Meléndez, J.E. Ramirez-Vick, M.S. Tomar, S.K. Arya and S.P. Singh. 
2011. Redox active poly(pyrrole-N-ferrocene-pyrrole) copolymer based mediator-less biosensors. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 658: 33–37. 
[101] Pauliukaite, R., M.E. Ghica, M. Barsan and C.M.A. Brett. 2007. Characterisation of poly(neutral 
red) modified carbon film electrodes; application as a redox mediator for biosensors. J. Solid State 
Electrochem. 11: 899–908. 
[102] Kertesz, V. and G.J. Van Berkel. 2001. Electropolymerization of methylene blue investigated using 
on-line electrochemistry/electrospray mass spectrometry. Electroanalysis 13: 1425–1430. 
[103] Schlereth, D.D. and A.A. Karyakin. 1995. Electropolymerization of phenothiazine, phenoxazine 
and phenazine derivatives—characterization of the polymers by UV-visible difference 
spectroelectrochemistry and Fourier-transform IR spectroscopy. J. Electroanal. Chem. 
395: 221–232. 
[104] Karyakin, A.A., E.E. Karyakina and H.-L. Schmidt. 1999. Electropolymerized azines: A new 
group of electroactive polymers. Electroanalysis 11: 149–155. 
[105]	 Yang, C., J. Yi, X. Tang, G. Zhou and Y. Zeng. 2006. Studies on the spectroscopic properties 
of poly(neutral red) synthesized by electropolymerization. Reactive Functional Polym. 
66: 1336–1341. 
[106] Ge, D., S. Huang, R. Qi, J. Mu, Y. Shen and W. Shi. 2009. Nanowire based polypyrrole hierarchical 
structures synthesized by a two-step electrochemical method. ChemPhysChem 10: 1916–1921. 
[107] Kuzin, Yu., A. Ivanov, G. Evtugyn and T. Hianik. 2016. Voltammetric detection of oxidative DNA 
damage based on interactions between polymeric dyes and DNA. Electroanalysis 28: 2956–2964. 
[108]	 Ivanov, A., Yu. Kuzin and G. Evtugyn. 2018. SPR sensor based on polyelectrolyte complexes with 
DNA inclusion. Sens. Actuators B 281: 574–581. 
[109] Liu, C., D. Jiang, G. Xiang, L. Liu, F. Liu and X. Pu. 2014. An electrochemical DNA biosensor for 
the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, based on signal amplification of graphene and a gold 
nanoparticle–polyaniline nanocomposite. Analyst 139: 5460–5465. 
[110]	 Muthusankar, G., R. Sasikumar, S.-M. Chen, G. Gopu, N. Sengottuvelan and S.-P. Rwei. 2018. 
Electrochemical synthesis of nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots decorated copper oxide for the 
sensitive and selective detection of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug in berries. J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 523: 191–200. 
[111] Li, X. and X. Kan. 2019. A boronic acid carbon nanodots/poly(thionine) sensing platform for the 
accurate and reliable detection of NADH. Bioelectrochem. 130: 107344. 
[112] Evtugyn, G., A. Porfireva, V. Stepanova and H. Budnikov. 2015. Electrochemical biosensors 
based on native DNA and nanosized mediator for the detection of anthracycline preparations. 
Electroanalysis 27: 629–637. 
[113] Porfireva, A., V. Vorobev, S. Babkina and G. Evutgyn. 2019. Electrochemical sensor based on 
poly(Azure B)-DNA composite for doxorubicin determination. Sensors 19: 2085. 
[114]		 Stoikov, D.I., A.V. Porfireva, D.N. Shurpik, I.I. Stoikov and G.A. Evtyugin. 2019. Electrochemical 
DNA sensors on the basis of electropolymerized thionine and Azure B with addition of pillar[5] 
arene as an electron transfer mediator. Russ. Chem. Bull. 68: 431–437. 
[115] Evtugyn, G.A., V.B. Stepanova, A.V. Porfireva, A.I. Zamaleeva and R.R. Fakhrullin. 2014. 
Electrochemical DNA sensors based on nanostructured organic dyes/DNA/polyelectrolyte 
complexes. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 14: 6738–6747. 
[116] Ricci, F. and K.W. Plaxco. 2008. E-DNA sensors for convenient, label-free electrochemical 
detection of hybridization. Microchim. Acta 163: 149–155. 
[117] Shen, Q., M. Fan, Y. Yang and H. Zhang. 2016. Electrochemical DNA sensor-based strategy for 
sensitive detection of DNA demethylation and DNA demethylase activity. Anal. Chem. Acta 
934: 66–71. 
[118] Davies, J., D. Burke, J.R. Olliver, L.J. Hardie, C.P. Wild and M.N. Routledge. 2007. Methylene blue 
but not indigo carmine causes DNA damage to colonocytes in vitro and in vivo at concentrations 
used in clinical chromoendoscopy. Gut 56: 155–156. 
[119] Hajian, R., N. Shams and M. Mohagheghian. 2009. Study on the interaction between doxorubicin 
and deoxyribonucleic acid with the use of Methylene blue as a probe. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 
20: 1399–1405.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 Nanosensors 
[120] Kara, P., K. Kerman, D. Ozkan, B. Meric, A. Erdem, Z. Ozkan and M. Ozsoz. 2002. Electrochemical 
genosensor for the detection of interaction between methylene blue and DNA. Electrochem. 
Commun. 4: 705–709. 
[121]	 Vardevanyan, P.O., A.P. Antonyan, M.A. Parsadanyan, M.A. Shahinyan and L.A. Hambardzumyan. 
2013. Mechanisms for binding between Methylene blue and DNA. J. Appl. Spectr. 80: 595–599. 
[122] Rohs, R. and H. Sklenar. 2004. Methylene blue binding to DNA with alternating AT base sequence: 
Minor groove binding is favored over intercalation. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 21: 699–711. 
[123] Erdem, A., K. Kerman, B. Meric, U.S. Akarka and M. Ozsoz. 2000. Novel hybridization indicator 
methylene blue for the electrochemical detection of short DNA sequences related to hepatitus B 
virus. Anal. Chim. Acta 422: 139–149. 
[124] Kelley, S.O., J.K. Barton, N.M. Jackson and M.G. Hill. 1997. Electrochemistry of Methylene blue 
bound to a DNA-modified electrode. Bioconjugate Chem. 8: 31–37. 
[125] Farjami, E., L. Clima, K.V. Gothelf and E.E. Ferapontova. 2010. DNA interactions with a 
Methylene Blue redox indicator depend on the DNAlength and are sequence specific. Analyst 
135: 1443–1448. 
[126] Kekegy-Nagy, L. and E. Ferapontova. 2019. Directional preference of DNA-mediated 
electron transfer in gold-tethered DNA duplexes: Is DNA a molecular rectifier? Angew. Chem. 
58: 3048–3052. 
[127] Kekedy-Nagy, L., S. Shipovskov and E.E. Ferapontova. 2019. Electrocatalysis of ferricyanide 
reduction mediated by electrontransfer through the DNA duplex: Kinetic analysis by thin layer 
voltammetry. Electrochim. Acta 318: 703–710. 
[128] Kulikova, T., A. Porfireva, G. Evtugyn and T. Hianik. 2019. Electrochemical DNA sensors with 
layered polyaniline—DNA coating for detection of specific DNA interactions. Sensors 19: 469. 
[129] Graves, D.E. and L.M. Velea. 2000. Intercalative binding of small molecules to nucleic acids. 
2000. Curr. Org. Chem. 4: 915–929. 
[130]	 Pérez-Arnaiz, C., N. Busto, J.M. Leal and B. García. 2014. New insights into the mechanism of the 
DNA/doxorubicin interaction. J. Phys. Chem. B 118: 1288−1295. 
[131] Kurbanoglu, S., B. Dogan-Topal, E.P. Rodriguez, B. Bozal-Palabiyik, S.A. Ozkan and B. Uslu. 
2016. Advances in electrochemical DNA biosensors and their interaction mechanism with 
pharmaceuticals. J. Electroanal. Chem. 775: 8–26. 
[132] Hasanzadeh, M. and N. Shadjou. 2016. Pharmacogenomic study using bio- and 
nanobioelectrochemistry. Drug-DNA interaction. Mater. Sci. C 61: 1002–1007. 
[133] Piedale, J.A.P., I.R. Fernandez and A.M. Oliveira-Brett. 2002. Electrochemical sensing of DNA– 
adriamycin interactions. Bioelectrochem. 56: 81–83. 
[134] Oliveira-Brett, A.M., M. Vivan, I.R. Fernandes and J.A.P. Piedade. 2002. Electrochemical 
detection of in situ adriamycin oxidative damage to DNA. Talanta 56: 959–970. 
[135] Kostoryz, E.L. and D.M. Yourtee. 2001. Oxidative mutagenesis of doxorubicin-Fe(III) complex. 
Mutation Res. 490: 131–139. 
[136] Cheng, G., H. Qu, D. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. He and Y. Fang. 2002. Spectroelectrochemical study of 
the interaction between antitumor drug daunomycin and DNA in the presence of antioxidants. J. 
Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 29: 361–369. 
[137] Hajian, R., Z. Tayebi and N. Shams. 2017. Fabrication of an electrochemical sensor for 
determination of doxorubicin in human plasma and its interaction with DNA. J. Pharm. Anal. 
7: 27–33. 
[138] Zhang, K. and Y. Zhang. 2010. Electrochemical behavior of adriamycin at an electrode modified 
with silver nanoparticles and multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and its application. Microchim. Acta 
169: 161–165. 
[139] Soleymani, J., M. Hasanzadeh, N. Shadjou, M.K. Jafari, J.V. Gharamaleki, M. Yadollahi and A. 
Jouyban. 2016. A new kinetic-mechanistic approach to elucidate electrooxidation of doxorubicin 
hydrochloride in unprocessed human fluids using magnetic graphene based nanocomposite 
modified glassy carbon electrode. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 61: 638–650. 
[140] Shamagsumova, R., A. Porfireva, V. Stepanova, Y. Osin, G. Evtugyn, and T. Hianik. 2015. 
Polyaniline–DNA based sensor for the detection of anthracycline drugs. Sens. Actuators, B 
220: 573–582.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical DNA Sensors 65 
[141] Zhang, Y., K. Zhang and H. Ma. 2009. Electrochemical DNA biosensor based on silver 
nanoparticles/poly(3-(3-pyridyl)acrylic acid)/carbon nanotubes modified electrode. Anal. 
Biochem. 387: 13–19. 
[142] Cheng, G.F., J. Zhao, Y.-H. Tu, P.-G. He and Y.-Z. Fang. 2005. Study on the interaction between 
antitumor drug daunomycin and DNA. Chinese J. Chem. 23: 576–580. 
[143] Hajian, R., E. Eknhlasi and R. Daneshvar. 2012. Spectroscopic and electrochemical studies on the 
interaction of epirubicin with fish sperm DNA. E-Journal Chem. 9: 1587–1598. 
[144] Li, N., Y. Ma, C. Yang, L. Guo and X. Yang. 2005. Interaction of anticancer drug mitoxantrone 
with DNA analyzed by electrochemical and spectroscopic methods. Biophys. Chem. 
116: 199–205. 
[145]	 Torkzadeh-Mahani, A., A. Mohammadi, M. Torkzadeh-Mahani and M. Mohamadi. 2017. A label￾free electrochemical DNA biosensor for the determination of low concentrations of mitoxantrone 
in serum samples. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 12: 6031–6044. 
[146] Paziewska-Nowak, A., J. Jankowska-Śliwińska, M. Dawgul and D.G. Pijanowska. 2017. 
Selective electrochemical detection of pirarubicin by means of DNA-modified graphite biosensor. 
Electroanalysis 29: 1810–1819. 
[147] Zhang, Y., H. Ma, K. Zhang, S. Zhang and J. Wang. 2009. An improved DNA biosensor built 
by layer-by-layer covalent attachment of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and gold nanoparticles. 
Electrochim. Acta 54: 2385–2391. 
[148] Li, H., P. Dauphin-Ducharme, G. Ortega and K.W. Plaxco. 2017. Calibration-free electrochemical 
biosensors supporting accurate molecular measurements directly in undiluted whole blood. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 139: 11207–11213. 
[149] Chandra, P., S.A. Zaidi, H.-B. Noh and Y.-B. Shim. 2011. Separation and simultaneous detection 
of anticancer drugs in a microfluidic device with an amperometric biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
28: 326–332. 
[150] Porfireva, A.V., K.S. Shibaeva, V.G. Evtyugin, L.S. Yakimova, I.I. Stoikov and G.A. Evtyugin. 
2019. An electrochemical DNA sensor for doxorubicin based on a polyelectrolyte complex and 
aminated thiacalix[4]arene. J. Anal. Chem. 74: 542–550. 
[151] Kulikova, T.N., A.V. Porfireva, R.V. Shamagsumova and G.A. Evtugyn. 2018. Voltammetric 
sensor with replaceable polyaniline-DNA layer for doxorubicin determination. Electroanalysis 
30: 2284–2292. 
[152] Stepanova, V., V. Smolko, V. Gorbatchuk, I. Stoikov, G. Evtugyn and T. Hianik. 2019. DNA￾Polylactide modified biosensor for electrochemical determination of the DNA-drugs and aptamer￾aflatoxin M1 interactions. Sensors 19: 4962. 
[153] Chandra, P., H.B. Noh, M.S. Won and Y.B. Shim. 2011. Detection of daunomycin using 
phosphatidylserine and aptamer co-immobilized on Au nanoparticles deposited conducting 
polymer. Biosens. Bioelectron. 26: 4442–4449. 
[154] Saljooqi, A., T. Shamspur and A. Mostafavi. 2019. The MWCNT-Ag-PT GCE electrochemical 
sensor functionalized with dsDNA for mitoxantrone sensing in biological media. IEEE Sens. J. 
19: 4364–4368. 
[155] Hashkavayi, A.B., J.B. Raoof and R. Ojani. 2017. Preparation of epirubicin aptasensor using 
curcumin as hybridization indicator: Competitive binding assay between complementary strand of 
aptamer and epirubicin. Electroanalysis 29: 1–9. 
[156] Khodadadi, A., E. Faghih-Mirzaei, H. Karimi-Maleh, A. Abbaspourrad, S. Agarwal and V.K. 
Gupta. 2019. A new epirubicin biosensor based on amplifying DNA interactions with polypyrrole 
and nitrogen-doped reduced graphene: Experimental and docking theoretical investigations. Sens. 
Actuat. B 284: 568–574. 
[157] Eksin, E., E. Zor, A. Erdem and H. Bingol. 2017. Electrochemical monitoring of biointeraction by 
graphene-based material modified pencil graphite electrode. Biosens. Bioelectron. 92: 207–214. 
[158] Gong, Z.L., D.Y. Tang, X.D. Zhang, J. Ma and Y. Mao. 2014. Self-assembly of thermoresponsive 
nanocomposites and their applications for sensing daunorubicin with DNA. Appl. Surf. Sci. 
316: 194–201. 
[159] Shah, A., R. Qureshi, A.M. Khan, F.L. Ansari and S. Ahmad. 2009. Determination of binding 
parameters and mode of ferrocenyl chalconeDNA interaction. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 82: 453–457.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 Nanosensors 
[160] Zhu, J.-J., K. Gu, J.-Z. Xu and H.-Y. Chen. 2001. DNA modified carbon paste electrode for the 
detection of 6-mercaptopurine. Anal. Lett. 34: 329–337. 
[161] Mirmomtaz, E., A. Zirakbash and A.A. Ensafi. 2016. An electrochemical DNA sensor for 
determination of 6-thioguanine using adsorptive stripping voltammetry at HMDE: An anticancer 
drug DNA interaction study. Russ. J. Electrochem. 52: 320–329. 
[162] Unal, D.N., E. Eksin and A. Erdem. 2017. Carbon nanotubes modified graphite electrodes for 
monitoring of biointeraction between 6-thioguanine and DNA. Electroanalysis 29: 2292–2299. 
[163] Perez, P., C. Teijeiro and D. Marin. 1999. Interactions of surface-confined DNAwith electroreduced 
mitomycin C comparison with acid-activated mitomycin C. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 117: 65–81. 
[164] Karadeniz, H., L. Alparslan, A. Erdem and E. Karasulu. 2007. Electrochemical investigation of 
interaction between mitomycin С and DNA in a novel drug-delivery system. J. Pharm. Biomed. 
Anal. 45: 322–326. 
[165]		 Temerk, Y.M., M.S. Ibrahim, M. Kot and W. Schuhmann. 2013. Interaction of antitumor flavonoids 
with dsDNA in the absence and presence of Cu (II). Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 405: 3839–3846. 
[166] Beitollahi, H., G. Dehghannoudeh, H.M. Moghaddam and H. Forootanfar. 2017. A sensitive 
electrochemical DNA biosensor for anticancer drug Topotecan based on graphene carbon paste 
electrode. J. Electrochem. Soc. 164: H812–H817. 
[167] Babkina, S.S., G.K. Budnikov and N.A. Ulakhovich. 2009. Bioaffine methods for determining 
ajmaline using an amperometric DNA-sensor and an immunoenzyme epectrophotometric test 
system. J. Anal. Chem. 64: 958–963. 
[168] Babkina, S.S. and N.A. Ulakhovich. 2011. Determination of pharmaceuticals based on indole 
alkaloids with amperometric dna-sensors and enzyme immunoassay test-system. Anal. Lett. 
44: 837–849. 
[169] Radi, A.-E., H.M. Nassef and A. Eissa. 2013. Voltammetric and ultraviolet-visible spectroscopic 
studies on the interaction of etoposide with deoxyribonucleic acid. Electrochim. Acta 
113: 164–169. 
[170] Fotouhi, L. and F. Bahmani. 2013. MWCNT modified glassy carbon electrode: Probing 
furazolidone-DNA interactions and DNA determination. Electroanalysis 25: 757–764. 
[171] Dogan-Topal, B., B. Uslu and S.A. Ozkan. 2009. Voltammetric studies on the HIV-1 inhibitory 
drug Efavirenz: The interaction between dsDNA and drug using electrochemical DNA biosensor 
and adsorptive stripping voltammetric determination on disposable pencil graphite electrode. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 24: 2358–2364. 
[172] Karimi-Maleh, H., A. Bananezhad, M.R. Ganjali, P. Norouzi and A. Sadrnia. 2018. Surface 
amplification of pencil graphite electrode with polypyrrole and reduced graphene oxide for 
fabrication of a guanine/adenine DNA based electrochemical biosensors for determination of 
didanosine anticancer drug. Appl. Surf. Sci. 441: 55–60. 
[173]	 Tian, X., F. Li, L. Zhu and B. Ye. 2008. Study on the electrochemical behavior of anticancer herbal 
drug rutin and its interaction with DNA. J. Electroanal. Chem. 621: 1–6. 
[174] Radi, A. 1999. Voltammetric study of khellin at a DNA-coated carbon paste electrode. Anal. Chim. 
Acta 386: 63–68. 
[175]	 Ly, S.Y., C.H. Lee and Y.S. Jung. 2007. Measuring oxytetracycline using a simple prepared 
DNA immobilized on a carbon nanotube paste electrode in fish tissue. J. Korean Chem. Soc. 
51: 412–417. 
[176]	 Wang, L., H. Xiong, X. Zhang and S. Wang. 2009. Electrochemical behaviors of nicotine and its 
interaction with DNA. Electrochem. Commun. 11: 2129–2132. 
[177] Stanković, D.M., L. Švorc, J.M.L. Mariano, A. Ortner and K. Kalcher. 2017. Electrochemical 
determination of natural drug colchicine in pharmaceuticals and human serum sample and its 
interaction with DNA. Electroanalysis 29: 2276–2281. 
[178] Ponthina, A.D.R., S.M.A. Jorge, A.-M.C. Paquim, V.C. Diculescu and A.M. Oliveira-Brett. 2011. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13: 5227–5234. 
[179] Shi, Q., S. Wang, B. Zhu and M. Ji. 2008. Electrochemical studies of reaction of ciprofloxacin and 
DNA. Front. Chem. China 3: 52–56. 
[180] Lim, S.A. and M.U. Ahmed. 2016. A simple DNA-based electrochemical biosensor for highly 
sensitive detection of ciprofloxacin using disposable graphene. Anal. Sci. 32: 687–693.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical DNA Sensors 67 
[181] Cheraghi, S., M.A. Taher, H. Karimi-Maleh and E. Faghih-Mirzaeide. 2017. A nanostructure label￾free DNA biosensor for ciprofloxacin analysis as a chemotherapeutic agent: an experimental and 
theoretical investigation. New J. Chem. 41: 4985–4989. 
[182] Garbellini, G.S., R.C. Rocha-Filho and O. Fatibello-Filho. 2015. Voltammetric determination of 
ciprofloxacin in urine samples and its interaction with dsDNA on a cathodically pretreated boron￾doped diamond electrode. Anal. Methods 7: 3411–3418. 
[183] El-Desoky, H., M. Ghoneim, M. Abdel-Galeil and A. Khalifa. 2017. Electrochemical sensor based 
on functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes, domperidone determination, DNA binding and 
molecular docking. J. Electrochem. Soc. 164: H1133–H1147. 
[184] Jankowska-Śliwińska, J., M. Dawgul and D.G. Pijanowska. 2014. DNA intercalation-based 
amperometric biosensor for chlorpromazine detection. Proc. Eng. 87: 747–750. 
[185] Marco, J.P., K.B. Borges, C.R.T. Tarley, E.S. Ribeiro and A.C. Pereira. 2013. Development 
and application of an electrochemical biosensor based on carbon paste and silica modified with 
niobium oxide, alumina and DNA (SiO2/Al2O3/Nb2O5/DNA) for amitriptyline determination. J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 704: 159–168. 
[186] Asghary, M., J.B. Raoof, R. Ojani and E. Hamidi-Asl. 2015. A genosensor based on CPE for 
study the interaction between ketamine as anesthesia drug with DNA. Intern. J. Biol. Macromol. 
80: 512–519. 
[187] Mascini, M., I. Palchetti and G. Marazza. 2001. DNA electrochemical biosensors. Fresenius J. 
Anal. Chem. 369: 15–22. 
[188] Rauf, S., J.J. Gooding, K. Akhtar, M.A. Ghauri, M. Rahman, M.A. Anwar and A.M. Khalid. 
2005. Electrochemical approach of anticancer drugs-DNA interaction. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
37: 205–217. 
[189] Svitková, V. and J. Labuda. 2017. Construction of electrochemical DNA biosensors for 
investigation of potential risk chemical and physical agents. Monatsh. Chem. 148: 1569–1579. 
[190] Fojta, M., A. Daňhel, L. Havran and V. Vyskočil. 2016. Recent progress in electrochemical sensors 
and assays for DNA damage and repair. Trends in Anal. Chem. 79: 160–167. 
[191] Marazza, G., I. Chanella and M. Mascini. 1999. Disposable DNA electrochemical biosensors for 
environmental monitoring. Anal. Chim. Acta 387: 297–307. 
[192] Mascini, M., G. Bagni, M.L. Di Pietro, M. Ravera, S. Baracco and D. Osella. 2006. Electrochemical 
biosensor evaluation of the interaction between DNA and metallo-drugs. BioMetals 19: 409–418. 
[193] Ravera, M., G. Bagni, M. Mascini, J.C. Dabrowiak and D. Osella. 2007. The activation of 
platinum(II) antiproliferative drug in carbonate medium evaluated by means of a DNA-biosensor. 
J. Inorg. Chem. 101: 1023–1027. 
[194]	 Yardim Y., M. Vandeput, M. Çelebi, Z. Şentürk and J.-M. Lauffmann. 2017. A reduced graphene 
oxide-based electrochemical DNA biosensor for the detection of interaction between cisplatin and 
DNA based on guanine and adenine oxidation signals. Electroanalysis 29: 1451–1458. 
[195]	 Yapasan, E., A. Caliskan, H. Karadeniz and A. Erdem. 2010. Electrochemical investigation of 
biomolecular interactions between platinum derivatives and DNA by carbon nanotubes modified 
sensors. Mater. Sci. Eng. 169: 169–173. 
[196] Lopes, I.C., S.C.B. Oliveira and A.M. Oliveira-Brett. 2013. In situ electrochemical evaluation 
of anticancer drug temozolomide and its metabolites–DNA interaction. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
405: 3783–3790. 
[197]		 Tiğ, G.A., G. Günendi, T.E. Bolelli, İ. Yalçın and Ş. Pekyardımcı. 2016. Study on interaction 
between the 2-(2-phenylethyl)-5-methylbenzimidazole and dsDNA using glassy carbon electrode 
modified with poly-3-amino-1,2,4-triazole-5-thiol. J. Electroanal. Chem. 776: 9–17. 
[198]	 Topkaya, S.N., G. Serindere and M. Ozder. 2016. Determination of DNA hypermethylation using 
anticancer drug-temozolomide. Electroanalysis 28: 1052–1059. 
[199] La-Scalea, M.A., S.H.P. Serrano, E.I. Ferreira and A.M. Oliveira Brett. 2002. Voltammetric 
behavior of benznidazole at a DNA-electrochemical biosensor. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
29: 561–568. 
[200]	 Top, M., O. Er, G. Congur, A. Erdem and F.Y. Lambrecht. 2016. Intracellular uptake study of 
radiolabeled anticancer drug and impedimetric detection of its interaction with DNA. Talanta 
160: 157–163.  
 
 
 
68 Nanosensors 
[201] Svítková, V., S. Švikruhová, M. Vojs, M. Marton and L. Švorc. 2016. DNA-modified boron-doped 
diamond electrode as a simple electrochemical platform for detection of damage to DNA by 
antihypertensive amlodipine. Monatsh. Chem. 147: 1365–1373. 
[202] Dogan-Topal, B. and S.A. Ozkan. 2011. A novel sensitive electrochemical DNA biosensor for 
assaying of anticancer frug leuprolide and its adsorptive stripping voltammetric determination. 
Talanta 83: 780–788. 
[203] Dogan-Topal, B. and S.A. Ozkan. 2011. Electrochemical determination of anticancer drug 
fulvestrant as dsDNA modified pencil graphite electrode. Electrochim. Acta 56: 4433–4438. 
[204] Diculescu, V.C., M. Vivan and AM. Oliveira Brett. 2006. Voltammetric behavior of antileukemia 
drug Glivec. Part III: In situ DNA oxidative damage by the Glivec electrochemical metabolite. 
Electroanalysis 18: 1963–1970.  
 
3
 
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray 
Sensors for Computed Tomography
 
Alexander N. Yakunin,
1,* Sergey V. Zarkov,
2 Yuri A. Avetisyan,
2
 
Garif G. Akchurin2,3
 and Valery V. Tuchin2,3,4
 
1. Introduction: A brief history of development of X-Ray: 
Innovations to increase the depth and resolution of images 
As of today, more than 125 years have passed since the discovery of X-rays by 
Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen while studying the nature of cathode rays in a Crookes gas￾discharge vacuum tube [1]. He had recorded the penetration of X-rays through his 
palm with a metal ring on his finger, using a photographic plate. The image showed 
a significant contrast of soft tissues, bones and metal through variation in grayscale. 
Thereafter, the diagnostic use of X-rays in medicine began almost immediately. 
However, the physical mechanism for the generation of X-rays was only discovered 
in 1912—a result of research by Max von Laue, William Henry Bragg and William 
Lawrence Bragg. 
Experimental observations of X-ray diffraction in crystals allows one to establish 
the electromagnetic nature of the radiation and determine its wavelength [2, 3]. It 
is known that the spectrum of X-ray radiation lies in the wavelength range from 
0.005 to 10 nm [4]. The upper limit corresponds to extreme ultraviolet radiation and 
1 Laboratory of System Problems in Control and Automation in Mechanical Engineering, Institute of 
Precision Mechanics and Control, FRC “Saratov Scientific Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences,” 
410028 Saratov, Russia. 
2 Laboratory of Laser Diagnostics of Technical and Living Systems, Institute of Precision Mechanics and 
Control, FRC “Saratov Scientific Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences,” 410028 Saratov, Russia. 
3 Scientific Medical Center, Saratov State University, 410012 Saratov, Russia. 
4 Laboratory of Laser Molecular Imaging and Machine Learning, Tomsk State University, 634050 Tomsk, 
Russia. 
Emails: szarcov@gmail.com; yuaavetisyan@mail.ru; akchuringg@mail.ru; tuchinvv@mail.ru 
* Corresponding author: anyakunin@mail.ru  
70 Nanosensors 
the lower limit corresponds to gamma radiation. The spectrum of X-ray waves is 
determined by the energy еVa (eV) of electrons accelerated by an electrostatic field 
(Va being the potential difference between the cathode and the anode) and colliding 
with a metal anode (anti-cathode). 
The efficiency of converting the energy of accelerated electrons into X-ray 
electromagnetic radiation (which has a continuous spectrum and is called 
bremsstrahlung) is determined by the empirical relation η = a·Z·Va, where Z is 
the atomic number of the target material and a is a constant equal to 1.1 × 10–9 
Va
–1 [5]. For a tungsten target (Z = 74) and an accelerating potential of 100 kV, 
the efficiency is 0.0081, i.e., it is less than 1%; most of the electron energy in this 
case is converted into heat. The minimum wavelength of X-ray bremsstrahlung is 
λmin(nm) = 1240/еVа (eV), while maximum radiation is realized at λmax = (3/2) 
λmin [4]. The spectral dependence of the intensity of bremsstrahlung radiation on 
wavelength is determined from the relation Iλ = β·Z·(λ–λmin)/(λ3
·λmin), where β is the 
proportionality coefficient [4]. 
At a certain anode voltage Va, against a background of broadband bremsstrahlung 
radiation, narrow resonance spectral peaks appear due to X-ray radiation from 
the atoms of the anode material. This so-called characteristic radiation is a line 
spectrum—a set of narrow doublet spectral lines arising from the ionization of an 
atom of the anode material, as a result of a collision with an accelerated electron. 
These spectral lines are due to radiative transition from the upper energy levels of 
the filled electron shells of the atom (L (n = 2) and M (n = 3)) to the innermost 
shell of the atom (the so-called K (n = 1) series) in accordance with the quantum￾mechanical selection rules. The mechanism of occurrence of the L and M spectral 
series is similar. The wavelengths of the characteristic spectrum are determined by 
the theory of Moseley (1913) [6, 7]. An important consequence of this theory is 
that the inverse of the square root of the wavelength of the resonant radiation is 
proportional to the charge number Z of the chemical element of the anode material. 
This regularity is used in practice for the unambiguous identification of the chemical 
composition of a material. 
In 1913, an American researcher, Wiiliam David Coolidge, proposed and 
experimentally investigated a high-vacuum X-ray tube with an electron source in 
the form of an incandescent tungsten cathode. Therein, the cathode temperature 
was found to significantly affect the emission current, and the voltage between 
the cathode and the anode determined the electron energy [8]. This technology for 
obtaining X-ray radiation is the one mainly used at present. 
The main advantages of probing biological objects of sizes in the range of the 
wavelength of X-ray radiation are determined by the two factors, the first being that 
the refractive index of any biological tissue in the X-ray region is close to 0.99. 
Also, for Z > 20, the effects of X-ray radiation scattering can be neglected, and for 
Z < 20, the scattering coefficient of biological tissues is much less than the absorption 
coefficient. Therefore, the propagation of the rays is close to straightforward 
(ballistic). Second, the low absorption of X-ray radiation (in the order of 0.2 cm–1) 
at Va > 100 kV [9] provides an increase in the transmission thickness to 50–70 cm, 
with the possibility of precise measurement of absorption coefficient. In the X-ray Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 71 
spectral range used in medical fluorography and tomography (at an anode voltage of 
about 50 kV), the typical absorption coefficient of human bone tissue does not exceed 
0.48 cm–1; the corresponding numbers are 0.178 cm–1 for muscles and 0.18 cm–1 for 
blood [9]. The absorption coefficient μa of X-ray radiation by atoms is determined 
from the relation μa = С·λ3
·Z4
 (C is the proportionality coefficient) [4]. The cubic 
dependence of μa on λ allows one to significantly reduce absorption when using 
short-wavelength X-rays, the generation of which in X-ray tubes for computer 
tomography (CT) is provided at high anode voltages (up to 150 kV). 
The sensitivity of photographic film or solid-state detectors in digital systems, 
which allows for the detection of three to four orders of intensity gradation, turns 
out to be sufficient to effectively solve the tomography problem—reconstructing 
the spatial configuration of structural inhomogeneities of the studied object from the 
results of two-dimensional projections—using the Radon mathematical transform 
[10]. The physical basis of the method is the exponential law of extinction of X-ray 
beams propagating in a straight line. The first mathematical algorithms for X-ray CT 
were developed in 1917 by the Austrian mathematician I. Radon. Further, in 1971, 
the American physicist A. Cormack, who discovered a new solution to the problem 
of tomographic reconstruction, and the English engineer-physicist G. Hounsfield, 
who designed and tested the first computerized X-ray tomograph, were awarded 
the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine “for the development of computed 
tomography” [11, 12]. 
The advantages and potentialities of X-ray CT applied to biological objects of 
considerable size (humans, animals) become obvious when compared with the CT 
parameters of biological tissues in the traditional optical wavelength range [13]. It is 
known that in the spectral region of transparency of biological tissues (NIR range: 
700–1100 nm), the absorption coefficient of various types of biological tissues is 
comparable to the typical absorption coefficient in the X-ray range and is less than 
0.5 cm–1. However, in the same spectral region, the scattering coefficient of optical 
radiation of almost all biological tissues, excluding eye tissues (sclera and retina), 
exceeds the absorption coefficient by one or two orders of magnitude. Therefore, the 
developed projection methods of X-ray tomography cannot be automatically applied 
in the optical range. For these purposes, optical low-coherence or laser confocal 
methods have been developed; they use the features of the spatial and temporal 
coherence of probing optical beams and underlie the corresponding tomographs. The 
main area of medical application of 3D OCT is ophthalmology, namely, the study of 
pathologies of the retina with a transparent lens and cornea with a maximum probing 
depth of about 1 mm, or a catheter light guide study of the mucous walls of internal 
hollow organs with a thickness of no more than 1 mm and a depth resolution of 
3–6 µm [13]. 
The progress of CT tomographs is directly related to the increase in the number 
of detectors, that is, to the increase in the number of simultaneously collected 
projections. Hence, in the first tomograph (developed in 1973), one X-ray emitter 
and one receiver were used. To create two-dimensional projections, they were 
simultaneously rotated around the patient in one-degree increments. It took about 
1 hour to obtain a complete tomogram. The succeeding generations of tomographs 72 Nanosensors 
included one X-ray emitter and an array of detectors with circular rotation with 
a frequency of up to three hertz and a simultaneous translational displacement of 
the patient’s position along the axis of rotation. The maximum spatial resolution 
of such 3D CT systems is currently determined by the voxel size (approximately 
0.5 mm × 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm). The advantage of an array of detectors is that the 
number of detectors in a row can be easily increased to obtain more slices per 
revolution of the X-ray tube. 
2. Advantages of matrix X-Ray sensors and the role of 
nanostructured field emitters in radiation dose reduction 
and resolution increase 
A further step in the direction of development of CT systems with increased scanning 
speed and spatial resolution was the creation of an array of miniature sources of 
electron beams based on nanostructured cathodes with field emission [14–23]. The 
advantages of such systems include the simplification of the device by eliminating the 
cathode heating circuit and, in turn, the auxiliary heater unit. A significant increase 
in scan speed is achieved by reducing the switching time (low inertia) compared to 
systems based on hot cathodes. An increase in the number of elementary sources of 
electron beams and X-ray detectors (an increase in the size of source and detector 
matrices) provided a significant improvement in the spatial resolution of X-ray CT 
systems. Each X-ray source is activated to generate one view. The entire scan is 
performed electronically by triggering all X-ray sources, which can be performed at 
a high speed. In addition to improved temporal resolution, the absence of any moving 
parts in stationary CT arguably offers improved reliability [14]. 
The last decade was marked by the development, research and practical 
application of the technology for creating arrays of field emitters based on carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs) for CT systems [15, 16, 24–29]. X-ray tubes with CNT emitters 
are used in micro-CT systems [26] and for high resolution stationary digital breast 
tomosynthesis [27]. The magnitude of the electron current in the field emission of 
CNT emitters is determined by the potential difference applied to create a strong 
external electric field. Direct monitoring of electron emission makes it easy to 
obtain both nanosecond X-ray pulses and a time-constant X-ray flux. In micro￾CT applications, this allows for precise timing of short X-ray pulses to provide 
better transient cardiac or respiratory strobing for obtaining better images and 
reducing stress on patients [26]. Electron emission in CNT emitters does not require 
heating; therefore, several emitters can be densely located in one vacuum tube. In 
tomosynthesis systems, one X-ray tube with CNT emitters and a linear array of fixed 
focal spots replaces a moving X-ray source [27]. Each projection is obtained by 
including different focal points. This array of focal spots speeds up tomosynthesis 
scans and removes image blur caused by a moving source. CNT emitters can also 
be organized in the form of a two-dimensional (2D) matrix, which is effective in 
creating X-ray sources for diagnostic and radiotherapy applications [28]. 
The possibility of successful implementation of matrix current sources is due 
to the progress in technologies ensuring the required durability of emitters based on  
 
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 73 
CNTs with an acceptable emissivity. CNTs exhibit excellent characteristics such as 
high aspect ratio, high thermal conductivity and low chemical reactivity. However, 
the degradation of the field emission of CNTs at elevated current densities is a major 
obstacle in designing durable X-ray tubes. Therefore, the technological aspects of 
ensuring thermal stability are constantly in focus for research. For instance, in one 
piece of research, an increase in the thermal stability of CNTs was achieved using 
the technology of their treatment with boron and phosphorus compounds [29]. As 
other examples of successful technological solutions, one can cite the results of 
developments as presented in Figure 1 and Figure 2 [24, 25]. 
To form the isotropic focal spot at anode target, the emitter has an elliptical area 
of 2.0 mm × 0.5 mm as shown in Figure 1a [24]. The initial CNTs without post￾treatment are vertically aligned; after post-treatments they form the array of bundles 
(Figure 1b). One CNT bundle (Figure 1c) has a diameter of 3 µm. CNT bundles are 
precisely located with an island-to-island distance of 15 µm. 
Researchers have also obtained CNT matrices with high current density, 
stable current and high adhesion strength to the substrate by designing a unique 
Figure 1. SEM images of the elliptical emitter with dimensions 2.0 mm × 0.5 mm, formed by resist￾assisted patterning process (a); magnified image of CNT array emitters with 3 µm islands and 15 µm pitch 
(b); a magnified image of one CNT-bundle (c). Reproduced from Ref. [24] with permission of MDPI. 
Figure 2. SEM image of an as-grown CNT array: overall shape of the CNT array (a); higher resolution 
image of the CNT array (b). Reproduced from Ref. [25] with the permission of the American Vacuum 
Society, The Authors. 74 Nanosensors 
multilayer metal structure for CNT growth [25]. The multilayer structure provides 
good adhesion of CNTs and a reduction in thermal resistance at the “substrate￾CNT” interface. Eventually, this radically increases the thermal stability of the field 
emitter. 
Improvement of digital CT (DCT) systems for mammography and brain 
neuropathology, aimed at the monitoring and early diagnosis of oncological diseases, 
requires the urgent development of knowledge-intensive technologies in the interest 
of modern medicine [30]. The experience of developing such systems with X-ray 
sources based on emitters with field emission of electrons [31, 32] shows that the 
emitter current must be sufficiently high for high-quality signal detection and image 
reconstruction. Estimates based on the results of experimental data [32] indicate that 
the average emission current density should not be less than 80 mA/cm2
 during the 
entire service life of the device. 
It should be noted that the problem of ensuring the reliability and durability of 
field emission emitters is fundamental because of the inherent exponential dependence 
of emission current density on the strength of the local electrostatic field. The result 
of such a criticality may be spontaneous thermal breakdown at small fluctuations of 
accelerating voltage, leading to the irreversible degradation of emission properties 
and, ultimately, the destruction of the emitter [33]. 
The two main technical limitations of modern CT technology are low spatial 
resolution and long scan times [34]. Therefore, a large number of researchers have 
aimed at replacing devices consisting of a rotating or moving X-ray tube with matrix 
radiation sources [15–23, 35]. The use of such arrays yields two advantages. First of 
all, the source matrix is activated without any mechanical movement, but by switching 
control potentials. Therefore, the speed of scanning and generation of projection 
images, which are necessary for the synthesis of a volumetric image of the object 
under study, increases. An important role to this end is played by the efficiency of the 
algorithms for digital processing of large data sets [36]. The second advantage is that 
the elimination of mechanical movement of the X-ray source decreases image blur 
and increases spatial resolution. Furthermore, reducing the size of the elementary 
current source (within the pixel) also improves the quality of the X-ray image. This 
aspect has led many researchers to orient themselves towards the development of 
matrix emitters with field emission of electrons [15, 16, 24–29]. In almost all of 
these structures, carbon nanotubes have been used as the source of field emission. 
In one such study, an array of emitters based on tungsten trioxide nanowires was 
synthesized, with artificially formed defects to increase the field emission current 
density to about 14 mA/cm2
 [37]. 
3. Prospects for optically controlled matrix X-Ray sensors 
The idea of further increasing the scanning speed and spatial resolution of DCT 
systems was developed during the implementation of optical (instead of electric) 
control of the processes of generation of X-ray beams. Relatively recently, an X-ray 
source was patented; it included a photocathode source of electrons, wherein the 
photocathode was illuminated by a spatially scanning laser beam [38]. An acousto￾optic modulator was used to control the intensity of the laser beam and the exposure  
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 75 
time. This photocathode source of electrons can include halides of alkali metals 
(CsBr, CsI) with a low work function A; then, if photon energy hν > A, photoemission 
of electrons into vacuum occurs. The emitted electrons are accelerated by the applied 
electrostatic field and generate X-rays by bombarding the metal anode (material 
options—Tungsten, Copper, Rhodium, Molybdenum). Another solution, which 
makes it possible to initiate a sufficiently high emission current from CNT cathodes 
at a relatively low accelerating voltage, was described in [39]. For this purpose, the 
CNT array was irradiated with a 150-mW laser beam with wavelength λ = 650 nm, 
focused onto a spot, the average intensity of which was 50 W/cm2
. Despite the fact 
that the photon energy of laser radiation is approximately two times lower than the 
electron work function for CNTs, the CNT array was heated to a temperature of 
2000°C within a short time duration due to the effective absorption of laser radiation. 
The high temperature yielded thermally stimulated field emission. 
The composite structure of a blade type with field emission has been described 
in literature [40]. Here, low-voltage field emission resulted due to the lowering of the 
potential barrier at the “metal blade – vacuum” interface in the zone of localization 
of the electrostatic field. The results of an experimental study showed its durability 
of 8700 hours at an average emission current density of at least 100 mA/cm2
. The 
achieved emission levels provide the prospect of using such structures in current 
sources of X-ray systems. High photosensitivity of the structure was also witnessed 
in a wide wavelength range [41, 42]. 
As a development in the construction of a pixel current source with photoinduced 
electron emission, a new hybrid material (HM) based on gold nanostars (GNS) 
embedded in a nanoscale film of diamond-like carbon (DLC) has been described in 
a study [43]. 
Below in Sections from 4 to 6 presented results of a study of the influence of 
plasmon effects in GNS on the optical properties in the wavelength range from 
UV to NIR, the features of localization of field and heat sources, the generation 
of high-energy hot electrons and the mechanisms of their transport into vacuum. 
An assessment of the advantages of the material in comparison with the original 
composite and the prospects for using an X-ray CT system in a matrix source has 
also been provided. 
4. Features of tunnel photoemission into vacuum 
In this section of the chapter, the processes associated with the generation and 
tunneling of hot electrons at the “nanoparticle–vacuum” or “semiconductor film– 
vacuum” interface in a strong external electrostatic field will be discussed. This 
differs them from most of the works [44–46] devoted to the problems of solar energy 
conversion or catalysis. The motivation for the work was the previously obtained 
encouraging results [47, 48], as well as experimental data [33, 40–42, 49–51] on 
tunneling emission of hot electrons from metal (Mo) and composite structures such 
as a “metal–DLC (α-C) film” in a vacuum under conditions of combined exposure 
to a strong electrostatic field and laser radiation. It has been found that irradiation 
of interdigital structures such as “metal–DLC film” of a vacuum microcathode with 
CW laser radiation of milliwatt power (power density of approximately 100 W/cm2
)  
76 Nanosensors 
at discrete wavelengths from 405 to 1550 nm produces a tunnel photocurrent which 
varies linearly with the light intensity [50]. With an increase in the voltage at the 
anode, an exponential increase in the photocurrent is observed, which is characteristic 
for tunneling emission. Similar experiments on the emission of hot electrons from a 
metal and the above-mentioned composite, into a vacuum, have also been carried out 
under irradiation with nanosecond laser pulses of mJ level (10 mJ/cm2 fluence) in the 
400–1200 nm range [51]. It is typical of the red threshold of the photoelectric effect 
for Mo to exceed the photon energy of the laser beam by a factor of 4–6, indicating 
precisely the tunneling mechanism of emission. 
In an HM, which is GNS embedded in a DLC film, two electron transport 
mechanisms are implemented in the presence of a strong electrostatic field, as shown 
in Figure 3. For “metal–DLC film” structures, an additional potential barrier appears 
at the metal–semiconductor interface, along with the drift transfer of nonequilibrium 
charges in the DLC film and their subsequent tunneling through the potential barrier 
at the “semiconductor–vacuum” interface, as shown in Figure 3b. 
Figure 3. Energy levels of a gold nanoparticle (a) and a hybrid material—gold nanostars (GNS), 
embedded into a diamond–like carbon (DLC) film (b) in a strong electrostatic field F under irradiation 
with light in the visible or NIR range. Reproduced from Ref. [43] with permission of MDPI. 
In Figure 3 and further in this chapter, the following designations and values have 
been used: spectral range is λ = 400–1100 nm; the energy of nonequilibrium “hot” 
electrons corresponded to the indicated wavelength range: 3.10–1.13 eV; EF is the 
Fermi level; EVAC is the vacuum level; Eg is the width of the band gap in the DLC; EC 
and EV are the energy levels corresponding to the bottom of the conduction band and 
the top of the valence band in DLC; χ is the electronic affinity; EB is the height of the 
potential barrier at the metal–semiconductor interface; δ = (e3
βF)
1/2 ≈ 1.2 (F(V/nm))1/2 
is the decrease in the height of the potential barrier in a strong electrostatic field at the 
metal–vacuum interface (see Figure 3a), taking into account the Schottky effect and 
δs for a semiconductor film with reduced field strength F in the film by a factor of ε; ε 
is the dielectric constant of the film material and β is the form factor of strengthening 
the electrostatic field due to the curvature of the surface at the semiconductor– 
vacuum interface; work function A = EVAC − EF; the shape of the potential barrier at 
the metal–vacuum interface is determined by the ratio (–eFζ−e2
/4ζ), where F is the Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 77 
strength of the electrostatic field, e is the absolute value of the electron charge and 
ζ is the distance from the interface; ds is the “skin depth” (in the order of several tens 
of nanometers for noble metals); and d is the thickness of the diamond-like nanofilm 
(10–30 nm). 
Modification of the emission structure (see Figure 4a) by replacing the existing 
emitter with an HM structure and manufacturing electrodes from a light-transmitting 
indium tin oxide (ITO) alloy (see Figure 4b) makes it possible to implement the array 
X-ray emitter design (see Figure 4c) for DCT systems [49]. The performance of the 
device is provided by the use of a high-speed laser scanner. 
Figure 4. SEM image of a previously developed emitter in the form of a Mo–DLC blade (1–emitter, 
2–gate) (a); schematic representation of the proposed hybrid nanostructured cathode cell based on hybrid 
material (HM) (1–emitter, 2–gate) (b); block diagram of an optically controlled X–ray emitter array (c). 
Reproduced from Ref. [43] with permission of MDPI. 
5. Statement of the problem of modeling a hybrid nanomaterial 
based on GNS-DLC 
Plasmon-resonant GNS are of particular interest as a new type of metal nanoparticles 
used in various technical and biomedical applications [44–46, 52–57]. Compared 
to nanospheres, the advantage of their use is high absorption of radiation in the 
NIR region—which is important, in particular, for laser medicine and biophotonics,  
78 Nanosensors 
including biosensing, optoporation, and transfection of cells [52, 53]. Compared 
to gold nanorods, GNS are characterized by a lower orientational and polarization 
sensitivity towards induced optical [57–59] and temperature [60] fields. In the 
succeeding paragraphs, we consider the possibility of intensifying the photoemission 
of electrons from composite photocathodes based on GNS embedded in a nano-scale 
film of diamond-like carbon. 
For the electrodynamic calculation of the optical characteristics of GNSs (see 
Figure 5a) in the medium, a 3D finite element model (shown in Figure 5b) was used. 
In the schematically shown computational domain, the wave equation for the electric 
field vector E: 
1 k 2 ∇×µ− (∇ ×E) − ε E = 0 (1) r λ r 
was solved. Here, μr and εr represent magnetic permeability and dielectric function 
respectively, and kλ = 2π/λ is the wavenumber of the irradiating light in vacuum. For 
all materials, it was assumed that μr = 1 and εr
 = (n – ik)
2
, where n and k are the real 
and imaginary parts of the complex refractive indices of materials, respectively. 
Figure 5. Geometric model of a nanostar (a); schematic representation of the computational domain for 
finite element modeling of a nanostar embedded into a DLC film (b). Reproduced from Ref. [43] with 
permission of MDPI. 
At all the interfaces of regions made of dissimilar materials, the boundary 
conditions of continuity for the tangential components of strength along with the 
normal components of the induction of electric and magnetic fields were satisfied. 
External surfaces modeling the transition to free space were constrained by 
“perfectly matched layers” [61, 62]. The case of normal incidence of a plane wave 
in the positive direction of the z-axis with an electric vector directed along the x-axis 
was considered. For the magnetic field strength H in the symmetry plane x–z with 
the normal vector y0, the “perfect magnetic conductor” boundary condition [61, 62] 
was used: 
y0 × H = 0. (2) 
A symmetric GNS model with spikes uniformly oriented along the angle was 
considered. The thermo-optical parameters of the hybrid material were simulated,  
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 79 
taking into account the effect of limiting the electron path length in the spikes of the 
nanostar. This noticeably improves the agreement between theory and experiment 
[55]. 
The specific absorption of radiation was calculated by the formula [45]: 
Q = vIm(εr)|E|
2
, (3) 
where ν and E are the frequency and the vector of electric field strength, respectively. 
To verify the model, the results of the calculation of absorption and scattering 
cross-sections were compared with the experimentally determined spectral 
dependences of the extinction of a suspension of GNS in water and GNS on a glass 
plate [57]. This showed a good quantitative agreement between the theoretical and 
experimental results. In particular, when using the two-fraction approximation of the 
GNS ensemble model in water, the coincidence of the first resonance peak of the 
normalized extinction spectrum near 900 nm was obtained in theory and experiment. 
Additionally, the difference in the positions of the second resonance peak near 
1900 nm did not exceed 100 nm. The theoretical and experimental peaks coincided 
within a few percent. Therefore, the use of the described mathematical model seems 
reasonable. 
Photocathodes of complex structures and shapes are characterized by the 
localization of the concentration of photoexcited electrons in separate spatial regions 
called “hot spots”. The estimation of the spatial distribution of the concentration of 
“hot” electrons in the CW irradiation mode has been carried out within the framework 
of simplified formalism [44–46] based on the following equation: 
2 2 2 dN () r 2e E =| Enorm ( )| r 2 F , (4) 2 hv 4 dsdE π γ () 
where d2
N(r)/dsdE is the number of hot electrons for unit area s and energy E in 
the vicinity of the considered point r on the surface, Enorm(r) is the component of 
the complex amplitude of the electric field normal to the surface at point r, e is the 
absolute value of electron charge, EF is the Fermi energy, γ is the rate of energy 
relaxation of single electrons, and hν is the energy of the irradiating photons. 
In accordance with [45], the estimate of the influence of the spectral dependence 
of the function multiplied by |Enorm(r)|2
 in Equation (4) leads to the conclusion that 
this function can be approximated by a constant with an error of no more than 25%. 
Thus, for the analysis of the concentration distribution of hot electrons, the key 
characteristic is |Enorm(r)|2
, which is investigated in detail below. 
Photoemission current density is also significantly influenced by the electrostatic 
field, which lowers the height of the potential Schottky barrier at the metal-vacuum 
and DLC-vacuum interfaces. Calculations show that the spatial distribution of the 
electrostatic field in structures with field emission is significantly heterogeneous 
[51, 63]. Furthermore, on the basis of numerical calculations, an analysis of the 
localization of optical field (to identify areas of effective generation of hot electrons) 
and the spatial distribution of electrostatic field (to intensify photoelectron emission) 
was carried out. The influence of the spatial separation of the regions of localization 80 Nanosensors 
of the electrostatic field and hot electrons on the photoemission process is discussed 
in the succeeding section. 
6. Modelling of plasmon effects, hot electrons and 
field emission in hybrid nanomaterial 
To describe the bulk dielectric functions of materials (gold [64], DLC [65], ITO 
[66]), the interpolated tabular data given in the above works were used. The 
dielectric constant of the glass substrate was taken to be εr = 2.25. The geometrical 
parameters of GNS (used in the design of the computational model) were considered 
in accordance with the GNS synthesized and experimentally investigated in 
Ref. [43]. Thermo-optical properties of such GNS have been studied theoretically 
earlier [34]. The results obtained made it possible to explain the experimentally 
observed threshold nature of their photomodification when irradiated with 
nanosecond laser pulses. Therefore, the geometrical model of GNS was a sphere of 
22 nm diameter, with twelve S-cone spikes with a height and base diameter of 10 nm 
each and a tip curvature radius of 1.5 nm. 
From the calculations of the optical parameters of a GNS presented in Figure 6, 
it can be seen that in the case of GNS in a vacuum, the absorption and scattering 
cross-section spectra have one narrow resonance peak near λ = 600 nm. For 
GNS embedded in the HM structure, the shape of the spectra becomes much 
more complicated—the spectra noticeably broaden and an additional pronounced 
resonance peak appears in the NIR region near λ = 1000 nm. 
It can be seen that halfway from the maxima, the width of the resonance curve 
of the absorption cross section increases by a factor of 5, and, taking into account 
the second peak, by a factor of nine. The appearance of this peak in the NIR region 
was expected and is associated with an increase in the real part of the dielectric 
function of the medium surrounding the part of the GNS immersed in the DLC film 
Figure 6. Spectral dependence of the absorption (a) and scattering (b) cross sections of a GNS in 
vacuum (shown schematically in the lower insert) and a GNS embedded in the GNS–DLC film (shown 
schematically in the upper insert). The inserts schematically show the X-Z symmetry plane section of 
the GNS in a vacuum (lower insert) and in a DLC film (upper insert). Reproduced from Ref. [43] with 
permission of MDPI.  
 
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 81 
[53, 54]. Hence, it can be expected that the main contribution to this shift is made by 
precisely those rays that are immersed in the DLC film. The non-trivial multi-peak 
shapes of the spectra are due to the fact that the GNS is only partially immersed in 
the DLC film. Various spikes, partially or completely immersed in a vacuum or in a 
film, mainly contribute to the short-wavelength and NIR region of the spectral curves 
respectively. 
Slices in Figure 7 (upper panel) demonstrate how the localization zones of |E| 
are redistributed along different spikes of the GNS with changing laser wavelength. 
The relative change in the field amplitude, accounting for size correction, is from 5% 
at 808 nm to 19% at 970 nm. In addition to the spike tips, localization zones are also 
observed on the exit/entry lines of the spikes in the DLC film. Therefore, in addition 
to the tips on the four spikes of the GNS, the field characteristics are analyzed at 
two points on the exit/entry lines of the spikes in the DLC film. The positions of 
these six points are shown in the inserts in the following figures. The regularities of 
localization of absorption zones are practically identical to those given for |E| above 
(see Figure 7 (lower panel)). 
Figure 7. 2D maps of normalized electric field (upper panel) and specific radiation absorption power 
Q under an irradiation field of intensity I0 = 1 W/cm2
 (lower panel) in an HM slice at 584 nm (a, e), 634 nm 
(b, f), 808 (c, g) and 970 nm (d, h), calculated for bulk (a–d) and size-corrected (e–h) dielectric function 
of spikes. Reproduced from Ref. [43] with permission of MDPI. 82 Nanosensors 
The results in Figure 6 confirm the previously stated assumption about the cause 
of the multi-peak shape of the absorption and scattering cross-sections—various 
spikes, partially or completely immersed in a vacuum or in a film, make the main 
contribution to the short-wave and NIR regions of the spectral curves respectively. 
The difference between the solid and dashed curves in the fragment in Figure 8c, 
which reached 23% in the NIR, indicates the need for considering size correction in 
the dielectric function of the GNS spikes. 
Figure 8. Spectral curves for modules of normal |Enorm| (a), tangential |Etang| (b) and complete |E| (c), 
with the amplitudes of the electric field at six points on the GNS surface indicated in the insets. In panel 
(c), the solid and dotted curves were obtained with and without size correction respectively. The curves 
were normalized with the amplitude of the incident field |E0|. Field localization zones: points 1 and 4 are 
the spike tips in vacuum, points 3 and 6 are the spike tips in DLC, and points 2 and 5 are the exit/entry of 
the spikes in the DLC film. Curve colors match the point number colors. Reproduced from Ref. [43] with 
permission of MDPI. 
The results of the calculation of the specific radiation specific absorption rate 
Q at the selected points of the GNS are presented in Figure 9. It is worthy to note 
the reduced values of Q at the tips of the GNS spikes, which are predominantly in 
a vacuum compared to other GNS spikes immersed in DLC. This difference in Q 
values can be 3–9-fold. It is peculiar that the spectral curves of Q for each of the 
points are predominantly single-peaked. 
Figure 10a shows the spectral dependences of the square of the modulus of 
the normal component of the electric/irradiating field |Enorm|, normalized with the 
square of the modulus of the irradiating field strength |E0| and proportional to the 
concentration of hot electrons [44–46]. Note that despite the symmetric position of 
points 1 and 6 with respect to the electric vector of the irradiating field, the ratio ψ 
= |Enorm|
2
/|E0|
2
 for these points differs by a factor of 5. Obviously, the reason for this 
is the influence of environmental properties. If point 1 belongs to the tip of the spike 
directed into vacuum, then point 6 is on the tip of the spike partially immersed in the 
DLC film. In this case, ψ at point 6 (in the DLC film) is higher than ψ at point 1 (in 
vacuum). Thus, one should expect an increased concentration of hot electrons in the 
spike with point 6, which favors the injection of electrons into the near-surface DLC 
layer and their further tunneling into the vacuum. 
Comparing the results in Figure 10a and 10b, the prevalence of the normal 
component of the field over the tangential component can be seen for all of the 
studied points – except for point 5, in which it is the opposite. Therefore, the spectral Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 83 
Figure 9. Spectral curves of the specific radiation specific absorption rate Q at the indicated points on the 
GNS surface (Intensity of the irradiating field I0 = 1 W/cm2
). The designations of points and curves are the 
same as in Figure 8. Reproduced from Ref. [43] with permission of MDPI. 
Figure 10. Spectral curves for the squares of the modulus of normal |Enorm| (a) and tangential |Etang| 
(b) field components and total field (c), normalized with the square of the modulus of the irradiating field 
|E0|, at six specified points on the GNS surface. The designations of the points and the curves are the same 
as in Figure 8. Reproduced from Ref. [43] with permission of MDPI. 
curves of the total field in Figure 10c are also very close for all points, except for 
point 5. 
To assess the role of the electrostatic field in stimulating the photoemission of an 
HM based on GNS-DLC, it is important to know the features of localization of field 
under the influence of a high external voltage. In this respect, the information on the 
concentration (amplification) of the external field strength F0 on the heterogeneities 
of the GNS form embedded in DLC is of the greatest interest. The results of modeling 
the distribution of this gain ξF = |F(r)|/|F0| (where F(r) is the vector of the electrostatic 
field strength at the current point with the radius vector r) are shown in Figure 11a. 
It can be seen that the orientation of the rays relative to the external field vector 
F0 significantly affects the distribution of ξF. Local maxima ξF are observed at the 
points of the GNS rays, but the value of each of the maxima increases with a decrease 
in the angle between the spike axis and the direction of the vector F0. Thus, for a 
spike with a minimum deviation from the direction of the vector F0, the value of ξF is 
maximum and equal to 6.7. For a spike with a maximum deviation from the direction 
of the vector F0, the value of ξF is halved to 3.3. It should be noted that, according 
to the calculation, the external field F0 also has a positive effect on the conditions of 84 Nanosensors 
Figure 11. A map of the gain distribution ξF of the electrostatic field on the surface of GNS embedded in 
the DLC film and its surroundings (a), the vector of an external uniform field with strength F0 is directed 
along the Z-axis; results of modeling the trajectories of electrons emitted from the particular points of 
GNS spikes (b). Reproduced from Ref. [43] with permission of MDPI. 
injection of hot electrons into the DLC film. Therefore, on the tip of the GNS spike, 
slightly deep in the film (designated as point 6 in Figure 11), the field gain is 2. 
Hot electrons formed in the aforementioned localization zones of the normal 
component (Enorm) of the optical field have a high probability of tunneling through 
the Schottky barrier in strictly limited areas of concentrated electrostatic field. 
From the comparative analysis of the results in Figures 7a (upper panel), 10a 
and 11a, it follows that, in the case under consideration, such localized zones of 
coordinated effects of optical and electrostatic fields should be recognized primarily 
in the vicinity of points 1 and 4. This is due to the high efficiency of conversion of 
the laser beam energy into hot electrons (see Figure 10a) and the relatively high 
electrostatic field gain (see Figure 11a). Additional consideration of the influence 
of the plasmon effect as well (see Figure 10c) allows us to conclude that the 
conditions for the generation of hot electrons are approximately equivalent in the 
vicinity of the tips of both spikes (points 1 and 4). However, there is a difference 
between them in terms of the magnitude of amplification of the electrostatic 
field; at point 4, ξF is twice as high as that at point 1. This affects the magnitude 
of the lowering of the Schottky barrier and will consequently lead to more intense 
tunneling of hot electrons into vacuum. The results of modeling the trajectories of 
photoelectrons from the tips of the GNS spikes are shown in Figure 11b. Under 
conditions of uniformly accelerated motion in a uniform electrostatic field, this beam 
will form a spot with a diameter of no more than 60 µm on the anode located at a 
distance of 20 mm from the emitter. 
The high efficiency of generating hot electrons in the vicinity of points 2 
and 6 (see Figures 7a (upper panel), 10a, 11a and 11b) triggers an alternative 
mechanism—injecting electrons into the DLC film, transporting them to the 
film surface and further emission into the vacuum [40, 42]. The lowest degree of 
matching of the optical and electrostatic fields in the vicinity of points 3 and 5 lowers 
the probability of both generation and successful transport of hot electrons into the 
vacuum.  
 
 
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 85 
It should also be noted that the scope of the described matrix sources is not 
limited exclusively to DCT systems based on the analysis of changes in the intensity 
of transmitted hard X-ray photons. They can be successfully implemented in a 
number of existing promising imaging systems that use the coherent properties of 
ultraviolet and soft X-ray radiation, giving an increased resolution [67, 68]. 
7. Conclusion 
Based on the analysis of the development of X-ray CT, the significance of the 
appearance of distributed matrix sources of an electron beam generating X-ray 
beams has been discussed. Due to the increase in speed, such systems provide a 
high degree of detail in the X-ray image and decrease the radiation dose. The 
transition from thermionic cathodes to current sources with field emission from 
nanostructured emitters provides compactness, energy efficiency and durability to 
X-ray CTs. Further improvement in the characteristics of such systems is associated 
with the implementation of the idea of ultrafast optical control of the current of each 
elementary emitter of the cathode array. 
A new hybrid material based on GNS embedded in a nanoscale DLC film has 
also been theoretically investigated in this chapter. The results obtained therein make 
it possible to assess the prospects of using the effect of an increased concentration 
of hot electrons in nanostructures with plasmonic materials for photostimulated 
field emission of electrons and prospective applications in the field of biomedical 
instrumentation and sensing. In particular, the material is promising for the 
development of a matrix source with photoemission for X-ray computed tomography 
sensors, providing an increase in the resolution and a decrease in the criticality of 
local heating during tunneling electron emission of an X-ray gun with a matrix 
cathode. 
The broadband effect of optical excitation of the hybrid material in the visible 
and NIR wavelength ranges has been noted. The areas of localization of electrostatic 
and optical fields in GNS, in which their effective matching is ensured, have also 
been determined. 
Acknowledgment 
This research was partially funded by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research 
(Project No. 19-54-06008). The results of Sections 1–5 were obtained within the 
framework of the State Assignment of Ministry of Science and Higher Education of 
the Russian Federation (Theme No. FFNM-2021-0002). VVT was supported by the 
Tomsk State University Development Programme (Priority-2030). 
References 
[1] Kaye, G. 1934. Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen: And the early history of the Roentgen Rays. Nature 
133: 511–513. https://doi.org/10.1038/133511a0. 
[2]	 Eckert, M. 2012. Max von Laue and the discovery of X-ray diffraction in 1912. Annalen der 
Physik. 524: A83–A85. DOI: 10.1002/andp.201200724. 
[3]	 Bragg, W.H. and W.L. Bragg. 1913. The reflection of X-rays by crystals. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 
88: 428–438. http://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1913.0040.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86	 Nanosensors 
[4] Handbook of X-ray Spectrometry, 2nd ed., Van Grieken, R. and A. Markowicz (eds.). Marcel 
Dekker, Inc: New York and Basel, 2002, 984 pp., ISBN 0-8247-0600-5. 
[5]	 Michael, G. 2001. X-ray computed tomography. Phys. Educ. 36(6): 442–451. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/0031-9120/36/6/301. 
[6] Moseley, H.G.J. 1913. The high-frequency spectra of the elements. The London, Edinburgh, 
and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 26(156): 1024–1034. DOI: 
10.1080/14786441308635052. 
[7] Soltis, T., L. Folan and W. Eltareb. 2017. One hundred years of Moseley’s law: 
An		 undergraduate experiment with relativistic effects. American Journal of Physics 
85: 352–358. DOI: 10.1119/1.4977793. 
[8] Coolidge, W.D. 1913. A powerful Röntgen Ray tube with a pure electron discharge. Phys. Rev. 
2: 409. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.2.409. 
[9] Elbakri, I.A. and J.A. Fessler. 2002. Statistical image reconstruction for polyenergetic X-Ray 
computed tomography. IEEE Trans. on Medical Imaging 21(2): 89–99. Doi: 10.1109/42.993128.
[10] Ólafsson, G. and E.T. Quinto. 2006. The radon transform, inverse problems, and tomography. 
Proc. of Symposia in Applied Mathematics 63. https://doi.org/10.1090/psapm/063. 
[11] Cormack, A.M. 1980. Nobel Award address. Early two-dimensional reconstruction and recent 
topics stemming from it. Med. Phys. 7(4): 277–282. Doi: 10.1118/1.594708. 
[12] Hounsfield, G.N. 1980. Nobel Award address. Computed medical imaging. Med. Phys. 
7(4): 283–290. Doi: 10.1118/1.594709. PMID: 6993911. 
[13]	 Tuchin, V. 2007. Tissue Optics: Light Scattering Methods and Instruments for Medical Diagnosis 
(2nd ed.). SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, USA, 841 pp., ISBN: 0-8194-6433-3. 
[14] Neculaes, V.B., P.M. Edic, M.A. Frontera Caiafa, G. Wang and B. De Man. 2014. Multisource 
X-Ray and CT: Lessons learned and future outlook. IEEE Access 2: 1568–1585. Doi: 10.1109/ 
ACCESS.2014.2363949. 
[15] Hadsell, M., G. Cao, J. Zhang, L. Burk, T. Schreiber, E. Schreiber, S. Chang, J. Lu and O. Zhou. 
2014. Pilot study for compact microbeam radiation therapy using a carbon nanotube field emission 
micro-CT scanner. Med. Phys. 41: 061710. Doi: 10.1118/1.4873683. 
[16] Li, X., J. Zhou, Q. Wu, M. Liu, R. Zhou and Z. Chen. 2019. Fast microfocus X-ray tube based on 
carbon nanotube array. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 37: 051203. Doi: 10.1116/1.5099697. 
[17] Lin, Z., P. Xie, R. Zhan, D. Chen, J. She, S. Deng, N. Xu and J. Chen. 2019. Defect-enhanced 
field emission from WO3 nanowires for flat-panel X-Ray sources. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 
2: 5206–5213. Doi: 10.1021/acsanm.9b01074. 
[18] Gan, H., T. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Lin, Z. Li, H. Chen, J. Chen and F. Liu. 2019. The growth methods 
and field emission studies of low-dimensional boron-based nanostructures. Appl. Sci. 9: 1019. 
Doi: 10.3390/app9051019. 
[19] Koh, A.L., E. Gidcumb, O. Zhou and R. Sinclair. 2017. In situ field emission of carbon nanotubes 
in oxygen using environmental TEM and the influence of the imaging electron beam. Microsc. 
Microanal. 23: 910–911. Doi: 10.1017/S1431927617005219. 
[20] Burk, L.M., Y.Z. Lee, J. Lu and O. Zhou. 2016. Carbon nanotube field-emission x-ray-based micro￾computed tomography for biomedical imaging. pp. 201–226. In: Zhang, M., R.R. Naik and L. Dai 
(eds.). Carbon Nanomaterials for Biomedical Applications; Springer: Heidelberg, Germany; New 
York, NY, USA; Dordrecht, The Netherlands; London, UK; Cham, Switzeland. Doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-22861-7_6. 
[21] Kang, J.-T., H.-R. Lee, J.-W. Jeong, J.-W. Kim, S. Park, M.-S. Shin, J.-H. Yeon, H. Jeon, S.-H. 
Kim, Y.C. Choi and Y.-H. Song. 2015. Fast and stable operation of carbon nanotube field-emission 
X-Ray tubes achieved using an advanced active-current control. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 
36: 1209–1211. Doi: 10.1109/LED.2015.2478157. 
[22] Shan, J., A.W. Tucker, Y.Z. Lee, M.D. Heath, X. Wang, D.H. Foos, J. Lu and O. Zhou. 2014. 
Stationary chest tomosynthesis using a carbon nanotube x-ray source array: A feasibility study. 
Phys. Med. Biol. 60: 81–100. Doi: 10.1088/0031-9155/60/1/81. 
[23] Cole, M.T., R.J. Parmee and W.I. Milne. 2016. Nanomaterial-based X-ray sources. Nanotechnology 
27: 082501. Doi: 10.1088/0957-4484/27/8/082501. 
[24]	 Ryu, J.H., J.S. Kang and K.C. Park. 2012. Carbon nanotube electron emitter for X-ray imaging. 
Materials 5: 2353–2359. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma5112353.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 87 
[25] Li, X., J. Zhou, Q. Wu, M. Liu, R. Zhou and Z. Chen. 2019. Fast microfocus X-Ray tube 
based on carbon nanotube array. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 37(5): 051203. 
Doi: 10.1116/1.5099697. 
[26] Cao, G., L.M. Burk, Y.Z. Lee, X. Calderon-Colon, S. Sultana, J. Lu and O. Zhou. 2010. 
Prospective-gated cardiac micro-CT imaging of free-breathing mice using carbon nanotube field 
emission X-Ray. Med. Phys. 37(10): 5306–5312. Doi: 10.1118/1.3491806. 
[27] Qian, X., A. Tucker, E. Gidcumb, J. Shan, G. Yang, X. Calderon-Colon, S. Sultana, J. Lu, O. Zhou, 
D. Spronk, F. Sprenger, Y. Zhang, D. Kennedy, T. Farbizio and Z. Jing. 2012. High resolution 
stationary digital breast tomosynthesis using distributed carbon nanotube X-Ray source array. 
Med. Phys. 39(4): 2090–2099. Doi: 10.1118/1.3694667. 
[28]	 Wang, S., X. Calderon, R. Peng, E.C. Schreiber, O. Zhou and S. Chang. 2011. A carbon nanotube 
field emission multipixel x-ray array source for microradiotherapy application. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
98(21): 213701. Doi: 10.1063/1.3595268. 
[29] Floweri, O., H. Jo, Y. Seo and N. Lee. 2018. Improving the thermal stability of carbon nanotubes 
and their field emission characteristics by adding boron and phosphorus compounds. Carbon 
139: 404–414. Doi: 10.1016/j.carbon.2018.06.072. 
[30] Hu, Z., Z. Chen, C. Zhou, X. Hong, J. Chen, Q. Zhang, C. Jiang, Y. Ge, Y. Yang, X. Liu, H. 
Zheng, Z. Li and D. Liang. 2020. Evaluation of reconstruction algorithms for a stationary digital 
breast tomosynthesis system using a carbon nanotube X-ray source array. J. Xray Sci. Technol. 
28: 1157–1169. Doi: 10.3233/XST-200668. 
[31] Gonzales, B., D. Spronk, Y. Cheng, Z. Zhang, X. Pan, M. Beckmann, O. Zhou and J. Lu. 2013. 
Rectangular computed tomography using a stationary array of CNT emitters: Initial experimental 
results. Proc. SPIE 8668: 86685K. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2008030. 
[32] Gidcumb, E., B. Gao, J. Shan, C. Inscoe, J. Lu and O. Zhou. 2014. Carbon nanotube electron field 
emitters for x-ray imaging of human breast cancer. Nanotechnology 25(24): 245704. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/0957-4484/25/24/245704. 
[33]	 Aban’shin, N.P., Y.A. Avetisyan, G.G. Akchurin, A.P. Loginov, S.P. Morev, D.S. Mosiyash 
and A.N. Yakunin. 2016. A planar diamond-like carbon nanostructure for a low-voltage field 
emission cathode with a developed surface. Tech. Phys. Lett. 42: 509–512. Doi: 10.1134/ 
S1063785016050175. 
[34] Qian, X., A. Tucker, E. Gidcumb, J. Shan, G. Yang, X. Calderon-Colon, S. Sultana, J. Lu, O. Zhou, 
D. Spronk, F. Sprenger, Y. Zhang, D. Kennedy, T. Farbizio and Z. Jing. 2012. High resolution 
stationary digital breast tomosynthesis using distributed carbon nanotube X-ray source array. Med. 
Phys. 39: 42090–42099. Doi: 10.1118/1.3694667. 
[35] Cole, M.T., R.J. Parmee and W.I. Milne. 2016. Nanomaterial-based X-ray sources. Nanotechnology 
27: 082501. Doi: 10.1088/0957-4484/27/8/082501. 
[36] Hu, Z., Z. Chen, C. Zhou, X. Hong, J. Chen, Q. Zhang, C. Jiang, Y. Ge, Y. Yang, X. Liu, H. 
Zheng, Z. Li and D. Liang. 2020. Evaluation of reconstruction algorithms for a stationary digital 
breast tomosynthesis system using a carbon nanotube X-ray source array. J. Xray Sci. Technol. 
28: 1157–1169. Doi: 10.3233/XST-200668. 
[37] Lin, Z., P. Xie, R. Zhan, D. Chen, J. She, S. Deng, N. Xu and J. Chen. 2019. Defect-enhanced 
field emission from WO3 nanowires for flat-panel X-Ray sources. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 
2: 5206–5213. Doi: 10.1021/acsanm.9b01074. 
[38] Patent US 9,520.260 B2. 
[39] Li, Z., B. Bai, C. Li and Q. Dai. 2015. Efficient photo-thermionic emission from carbon nanotube 
arrays. Carbon 96: 641–646. Doi: 10.1016/j.carbon.2015.09.074. 
[40]	 Aban’shin, N.P., A.P. Loginov, D.S. Mosiyash and A.N. Yakunin. 2016. Theoretical and experimental 
study of characteristics of the planar tetrode with field emission of diamond-like carbon film. 
pp. 1–2. In: Proceedings of the 2016 29th International Vacuum Nanoelectronics Conference 
(IVNC), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 11–15 July. Doi: 10.1109/IVNC.2016.7551494. 
[41]	 Yakunin, A.N., N.P. Aban’shin, D.S. Mosiyash, Y.A. Avetisyan and G.G. Akchurin. 2018. 
Features of field emission and formation of electron beam in a multi-electrode planar cathode. 
pp. 249–252. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Actual Problems of 
Electron Devices Engineering (APEDE), Saratov, Russia, 27–28 September. Doi: 10.1109/ 
apede.2018.8542332.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88	 Nanosensors 
[42] Zimnyakov, D.A., N.P. Aban’shin, G.G. Akchurin, Y.A. Avetisyan, A.P. Loginov, S.A. Yuvchenko 
and A.N. Yakunin. 2019. Experimental study of a broadband vacuum photosensor with the tunnel 
emission from a metal nanoscale blade. Proc. SPIE 11022: 110220A. Doi: 10.1117/12.2521749. 
[43]	 Yakunin, A.N., S.V. Zarkov, Y.A. Avetisyan, G.G. Akchurin, N.P. Aban’shin and V.V. Tuchin. 
2021. Modeling of laser-induced plasmon effects in GNS-DLC-based material for application in 
X-ray source array sensors. Sensors 21: 1248. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21041248. 
[44] Santiago, E.Y., L.V. Besteiro, X.-T. Kong, M.A. Correa-Duarte, Z. Wang and A.O. Govorov. 2020. 
Efficiency of hot-electron generation in plasmonic nanocrystals with complex shapes: Surface￾induced scattering, hot spots, and interband transitions. ACS Photonics 7: 2807–2824. Doi: 
10.1021/acsphotonics.0c01065. 
[45] Kong, X.-T., Z. Wang and A.O. Govorov. 2017. Plasmonic nanostars with hot spots for efficient 
generation of hot electrons under solar illumination. Adv. Opt. Mater. 5: 1600594. Doi: 10.1002/ 
adom.201600594. 
[46] Besteiro, L.V., X.-T. Kong, Z. Wang, G.V. Hartland and A.O. Govorov. 2017. Understanding 
hot-electron generation and plasmon relaxation in metal nanocrystals: Quantum and classical 
mechanisms. ACS Photonics 4: 2759–2781. Doi: 10.1021/acsphotonics.7b00751. 
[47] Forati, E., T.J. Dill, A.R. Tao and D. Sievenpiper. 2016. Photoemission-based microelectronic 
devices. Nat. Commun. 7: 13399. Doi: 10.1038/ncomms13399. 
[48] Piltan, S. and D. Sievenpiper. 2018. Plasmonic nano-arrays for enhanced photoemission and 
photodetection. JOSA B 35: 208–213. Doi: 10.1364/JOSAB.35.000208. 
[49]	 Yakunin, A.N., N.P. Aban’shin, Y.A. Avetisyan, G.G. Akchurin, G.G. Jr. Akchurin, A.P. 
Loginov, S.P. Morev and D.S. Mosiyash. 2019. Stabilization of field- and photoemission of a 
planar structure with a nanosized diamond-like carbon film. J. Commun. Technol. Electron. 
64: 83–88. Doi: 10.1134/S1064226919010133. 
[50] Akchurin, G.G., A.N. Yakunin, N.P. Aban’shin, B.I. Gorfinkel, G.G. Jr. Akchurin. 2013. Controlling 
the Red boundary of the tunneling photoeffect in nanodimensional carbon structures in a broad 
(UV–IR) wavelength range. Tech. Phys. Lett. 39: 544–547. Doi: 10.1134/S1063785013060151. 
[51]	 Yakunin, A.N., N.P. Aban’shin, G.G. Akchurin, Y.A. Avetisyan, A.P. Loginov, S.A. Yuvchenko and 
D.A. Zimnyakov. 2019. A visible and near-IR tunnel photosensor with a nanoscale metal emitter: 
The effect of matching of hot electrons localization zones and a strong electrostatic field. Appl. Sci. 
9: 5356. Doi: 10.3390/app924535. 
[52] Fabris, L. 2020. Gold nanostars in biology and medicine: Understanding physicochemical properties 
to broaden applicability. J. Phys. Chem. C 124: 26540–26553. Doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c08460. 
[53] Pylaev, T., E. Vanzha, E. Avdeeva, B. Khlebtsov and N. Khlebtsov. 2019. A novel cell transfection 
platform based on laser optoporation mediated by Au nanostar layers. J. Biophotonics 
12: e201800166. Doi: 10.1002/jbio.201800166. 
[54] Cristiano, M.N., T.V. Tsoulos and L. Fabris. 2020. Quantifying and optimizing photocurrent via 
optical modeling of gold nanostar-, nanorod-, and dimer-decorated MoS2 and MoTe2. J. Chem. 
Phys. 152: 014705. Doi: 10.1063/1.5127279. 
[55] Pettine, J., P. Choo, F. Medeghini, T.W. Odom and D.J. Nesbitt. 2020. Plasmonic nanostar 
photocathodes for optically controlled directional currents. Nat. Commun. 11: 1–10. Doi: 10.1038/ 
s41467-020-15115-0. 
[56]	 Tsoulos, T.V., S. Atta, M.J. Lagos, M. Beetz, P.E. Batson, G. Tsilomelekis and L. Fabris. 
2019. Colloidal plasmonic nanostar antennas with wide range resonance tunability. Nanoscale 
11: 18662–18671. Doi: 10.1039/C9NR06533D. 
[57]	 Khlebtsov, N.G., S.V. Zarkov, V.A. Khanadeev and Y.A. Avetisyan. 2020. A novel concept of 
two-component dielectric function for gold nanostars: Theoretical modeling and experimental 
verification. Nanoscale 12: 19963–19981. Doi: 10.1039/d0nr02531c. 
[58]	 Zarkov, S., Y. Avetisyan, G. Akchurin, G. Jr. Akchurin, O. Bibikova, V. Tuchin and A. Yakunin. 
2020. Numerical modeling of plasmonic properties of gold nanostars to prove the threshold nature 
of their modification under laser pulse. Opt. Eng. 59: 061628. Doi: 10.1117/1.OE.59.6.061628. 
[59]	 Vigderman, L., B.P. Khanal and E.R. Zubarev. 2012. Functional gold nanorods: Synthesis, self￾assembly, and sensing applications. Adv. Mater. 24: 4811–4841. Doi: 10.1002/adma.201201690.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials in Matrix X-ray Sensors for Computed Tomography 89 
[60]	 Zarkov, S.V., A.N. Yakunin, Y.A. Avetisyan, G.G. Akchurin, G.G. Jr. Akchurin and V.V. Tuchin. 
2019. The peculiarities of localized laser heating of a tissue doped by gold nanostars. Proc. SPIE. 
Doi: 10.1117/12.2530519. 
[61]		 Wave Optics Module User’s Guide. Available online: https://doc.comsol.com/5.3/doc/com. 
comsol.help.woptics/WaveOpticsModuleUsersGuide.pdf (accessed on 10.03.2021). 
[62] Jin, J.-M. 2010. Theory and Computation of Electromagnetic Fields; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: 
Hoboken, NJ, USA, pp. 3–560, ISBN 978-0-470-53359-8. 
[63]		 Aban’shin, N.P., B.I. Gorfinkel, S.P. Morev, D.S. Mosiyash and A.N. Yakunin. 2014. Autoemission 
structures of nanosized carbon with ionic protection. Studying the prospects of reliable control in 
forming structures. Tech. Phys. Lett. 40: 404–407. Doi: 10.1134/S1063785014050022. 
[64] Johnson, P.B. and R.W. Christy. 1972. Optical constants of the noble metals. Phys. Rev. B 6: 4370. 
Doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.6.4370. 
[65] Zhou, X.L., T. Suzuki, H. Nakajima, K. Komatsu, K. Kanda, H. Ito and H. Saitoh. 2017. Structural 
analysis of amorphous carbon films by spectroscopic ellipsometry, RBS/ERDA, and NEXAFS. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 110: 201902. Doi: 10.1063/1.4983643. 
[66] König, T.A.F., P.A. Ledin, J. Kerszulis, M.A. Mahmoud, M.A. El-Sayed, J.R. Reynolds and V.V. 
Tsukruk. 2014. Electrically tunable plasmonic behavior of nanocube-polymer nanomaterials 
induced by a redox-active electrochromic polymer. ACS Nano 8: 6182–6192. Doi: 10.1021/ 
nn501601e. 
[67]	 Yakunin, A.N., Y.A. Avetisyan, G.G. Akchurin, S.V. Zarkov, N.P. Aban’shin, V.A. Khanadeev and 
V.V. Tuchin. 2022. Photoemission of plasmonic gold nanostars in laser-controlled electron current 
devices for technical and biomedical applications. Sensors 22: 4127. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
s22114127. 
[68] Skruszewicz, S., S. Fuchs, J.J. Abel, J. Nathanael, J. Reinhard, C. Rödel, F. Wiesner, M. 
Wüјnsche, P. Wachulak, A. Bartnik, K. Janulewicz, H. Fiedorowicz and G.G. Paulus. 2021. 
Coherence tomography with broad bandwidth extreme ultraviolet and soft X-ray radiation. Appl. 
Phys. B 127: 55. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-021-07586-w. 4
 
Recent Advances and Prospects in 
Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical 
Affinity Biosensors for Autoimmune 
Disease Biomarkers 
Paloma Yáñez-Sedeño,* Araceli González-Cortés, 
Susana Campuzano and José M. Pingarrón
 
1. Introduction 
The use of nanomaterials has been instrumental in improving the performance 
and demonstrating the potential of electrochemical affinity biosensors (mainly 
immunosensors, peptide-based or DNA biosensors) for early detection and 
monitoring of autoimmune diseases. 
Nanomaterials can be used as carrier tags or for nanostructuring electrode 
surfaces and their use can prove to be instrumental in improving electron transfer 
to the electrode surface, in increasing the active surface area of the electrode and/ 
or for enhancing its catalytic capability, thus resulting in biodevices with improved 
sensitivity and selectivity. Nanomaterials may also exert positive effects on the 
signal-to-noise ratio, hence allowing for low limits of detection and enhancing the 
calibration dynamic ranges, reproducibility, robustness and storage stability. 
This chapter delves into the latest advances in electrochemical affinity-based 
biosensors using nanomaterials for the determination of biomarkers related to 
autoimmune diseases. They have been classified according to the role played by 
the nanomaterial in the biosensor, its type, and the disease to which the developed 
biosensor has been applied. 
Departamento de Química Analítica, Facultad de CC. Químicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 
E-28040 Madrid (Spain). 
* Corresponding author: yseo@quim.ucm.es Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 91 
2.  Nanomaterials as electrode modifiers
The use of nanomaterials as modifiers of electrode surfaces has been widely used 
in electroanalytical chemistry, yielding three main achievements: (i) the excellent 
electrical conductivity of nanomaterials such as CNTs or graphene aids in the 
improvement of the responses of conventional electrodes for providing larger currents 
and higher signal-to-background ratios, ultimately resulting in a larger sensitivity; 
(ii) the possibility of nanomaterials functionalization by simple oxidation, grafting of 
organic molecules, or self-assembling monolayers, among other strategies, gives rise 
to a wide variety of suitable platforms for further immobilization of (bio)molecules; 
(iii) the ability of nanomaterials such as gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) to maintain 
the bioactivity of biomolecules involved in the preparation of biosensors, creating 
suitable environments for bioreagents immobilization, has contributed towards 
extending the lifetime of these bioplatforms. These improvements are illustrated 
in the following sections with some relevant examples classified according to the 
monitored disease. 
2.1 Rheumatoid arthritis 
The need for early prediction, diagnosis and monitoring of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) has led to the designing of a variety of electrochemical biosensors capable 
of detecting specific biomarkers. Many of these biosensors involve the use of 
nanomaterials. RA is a progressive and chronic inflammatory autoimmune condition 
that causes deformities in joints and pain in aged populations [1]. A few reports have 
recognized certain causal pathways and target proteins that lead to the generation 
of autoantibodies in RA [2]. Rheumatoid factors (RF) primarily consist of IgM, 
IgA and IgG antibodies directed against the Fc fragment within the patient’s own 
IgG antibody molecules. The IgM isotype (IgM RF) exhibits the highest prevalence 
in RA diagnosis by virtue of its polyvalence; therefore, the sensitive detection 
of IgM-RF is of great importance. Recently, label-free and direct detection of 
IgM-RF using an impedimetric-interdigitated wave type microelectrode array 
(IDWμE) was reported. The IDWμE was fabricated on a glass slide substrate by 
deposition of nanolayers of Ti and Au functionalized with a self-assembled monolayer 
(SAM) of thioctic acid (TA) (Figure 1). The sensor design involved immobilization 
of IgG-Fc through the TA SAM onto the nanometric metal surface of IDWμE, 
thus providing a biocompatible environment preserving the biological activity of 
immunoreagents. Impedance measurements were target specific and linear with 
IgM-RF concentrations between 1 and 200 IU mL−1. An LOD value of 0.22 IU mL−1 
was achieved in human serum [3]. 
Anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs) are detected in most of RA 
patients [4, 5]. These antibodies recognize different self-proteins, such as filaggrin or 
vimentin, the arginyl residues of which have been post-translationally transformed 
into citrullyl residues appearing during the early stages of the disease and in healthy 
individuals who later develop RA. Despite the importance of ACPAs in diagnosis and 
prediction of response to biological therapy, only one electrochemical immunosensor 
for the detection of ACPAs has been found in the literature [6]. The biosensor 92 Nanosensors 
Figure 1. Photograph and microscopic images of the IDWμE array: (a) scheme of SAM functionalization 
of IDWμE and crosslinking of IgG-Fc fragments, (b) EIS measurements in the absence and in the presence 
of 100 IU mL–1 IgM-RF. Reproduced from [3] with permission. 
consisted of an amperometric device where a chimeric fibrin–filaggrin synthetic 
peptide was used as the recognition element anchored to the surface of a multiwalled 
carbon nanotube–polystyrene electrochemical transducer. The determination 
of ACPAs was performed using a secondary antibody labeled with peroxidase 
(HRP-IgG), and hydrogen peroxide as the enzyme substrate. The presence of the 
nanocarbon composite as a modifier of the metallic thin film electrodes assured not 
only stable immobilization of the synthetic antigen through covalent bonding, but 
also the high conductivity and well-defined reversible faradaic response provided by 
3,3´,5,5´-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) used as the redox probe. The biosensor was 
tested in the sera of rabbits previously inoculated with the synthetic peptide as well 
as for the detection of ACPAs in human sera. 
The pathogenic activity of ACPAs has been explained by considering the formation 
of immune complexes with the subsequent release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, 
including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) from monocytes/macrophages [7]. 
Because of this, several electrochemical biosensors have been developed for the 
determination of TNF-α and interleukins such as IL-6, which are also biomarkers 
commonly used for monitoring RA disease activity. An illustrative example is 
a label-free impedimetric sensor for the determination of TNF-α using reduced 
graphene oxide (rGO) with AuNPs on an indium tin oxide (ITO) microdisk electrode 
(Figure 2A). In this case, the detection mechanism relied on the measurements 
of resistance changes due to [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− redox probe movement towards 
the conductive channels of the AuNP-rGO films by the recognition of the target 
biomarker by its anti-TNF-α antibody. The antibody adsorbed electrode showed an Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 93 
increase in resistance (ΔR) with increasing antigen concentration. The sensor exhibited 
a linear range of 1–1,000 pg mL–1 with an LOD value of 0.78 pg mL–1 in human serum 
[8]. Mazloum-Ardakani et al. [9] reported a label-free electrochemical immunosensor 
for the determination of TNF-α, which involved entrapping the captured antibody 
into a nanocomposite containing fullerene-functionalized MWCNTs and ionic liquid 
(1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis (trifluoromethyl sulfonyl)imide) (Figure 2B). 
The determination of TNF-α was based on the obstruction of the electrocatalytic 
oxidation of catechol after the TNF-α binding to the surface through interaction with 
the anti-TNF-α, the protein layers on the modified electrode acting as a barrier for 
the electron-transfer. Under optimal conditions, the electrochemical immunosensor 
showed a dynamic range between 5.0 and 75 pg mL–1 TNF-α, with an LOD value 
of 2.0 pg mL–1. The immunosensor was successfully applied to the determination of 
TNF-α in serum samples. 
Interleukins not only provide valuable information about the evolution of RA but 
also aid in the early detection of other autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, 
type 1 diabetes, and psoriasis. Hence, numerous biosensors have been reported for 
Figure 2. (A) Schematic diagrams showing the binding mechanism of TNF-α with the receptor antibodies 
on AuNPs-rGO/ITO electrode and EIS detection, and (B) the preparation of a TNF-α immunosensor using 
a C60-CNTs/IL modified SPE. Adapted from [8] and [9]. 94 Nanosensors 
the determination of interleukins. For instance, Chen and co-workers developed a 
method for the determination of IL-6 levels (involved in the pathogenesis of RA), 
using a liquid-gated field-effect transistor (FET) sensor with horizontally aligned 
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). The method relied on the transistor 
drain current responses upon interactions of IL-6 with the corresponding antibody 
(IL-6R) immobilized on the nanotubes’ surface. The immunosensor exhibited 
an LOD of 1.37 pg mL–1 and a linear response in the 1–100 pg mL–1 IL-6 range. 
Furthermore, no significant degradation in the electronic performance was observed 
after storage under ambient conditions for up to three months, a possible explanation 
for the same being the strong adhesion and good horizontal alignment of CNTs 
on the quartz substrate [10]. A dual electrochemical and electrochemiluminescent 
(ECL) sandwich-type immunosensor has also been reported for the detection of 
IL-6; this involves the use of two kinds of TiO2 mesocrystal nanoarchitectures. Herein, 
glassy carbon electrodes modified with a composite of TiO2 (anatase) mesocages 
and a carboxy-terminated ionic liquid (CTIL) were used for the immobilization of 
anti-IL-6, whereas octahedral anatase TiO2 mesocrystals were used as the matrix 
for immobilizing acid phosphatase, along with a detection antibody labelled with 
HRP. The electrochemical response was obtained by measuring the oxidation 
signal of 1-naphthyl phenol at 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, which increased linearly with the 
IL-6 concentration in the 10 fg mL–1 to 90 ng mL–1 range and provided an LOD of 
0.32 fg mL–1 [11]. 
Lou et al. developed an immunosensor for the detection of human IL-6, 
involving the immobilization of the capture antibody onto a platform composed 
of electrochemically reduced graphene oxide (ERGO) and gold/palladium 
bimetallic nanoparticles (AuPdNPs) (Figure 3). Separately, polystyrene spheres 
(PS, ϕ = 200 nm) covered with polydopamine (PDA) and functionalized with AgNPs 
and IL-6 (IL-6-PS@PDA-AgNPs) were fabricated for their use as biolabels for 
the determination of IL-6 levels through competitive assay. The electrochemical 
response was obtained by incubation of the immunosensor in KCl, and the 
Figure 3. (A) Schematic of the process of fabrication of IL-6-PS@PDA-AgNPs biolabels, and (B) 
competition between IL-6 and the biolabel. Reprinted from [12] with permission.  
Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 95 
silver component, acting as the target compound, was measured by linear sweep 
voltammetry (LSV). As an uncommon practice, it should be noted, an electrically 
heated carbon paste electrode (HCPE) was used for sensitivity enhancement. The 
immunosensor exhibited a wide linear response to IL-6 concentrations ranging from 
0.1 to 105
 pg mL–1, with an LOD of 0.059 pg mL–1 [12]. 
Interleukin-17A (IL-17A or simply IL-17) has received substantial attention 
as a valuable biomarker associated with numerous autoimmune diseases such as RA 
and multiple sclerosis (MS), among others [13, 14]. Over-expression of IL-17 is 
associated with the pathogenesis of such processes and strongly correlated with the 
cell surface expression level of its receptor, IL-17RA, which is also considered 
as a valuable biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis of these disorders. Jeong 
et al. constructed an electrochemical aptasensor for the detection of IL-17RA, using a 
specific aptamer [15]. Figure 4 shows that AuNPs were electrodeposited onto a gold 
electrode and the 5´-thiol modified aptamer immobilized. Quantitative detection 
of IL-17R was made by impedimetric measurements. The sensor exhibited a wide 
dynamic range of 10–104 pg mL–1 and an LOD of 2.13 pg mL–1—which is lower than 
that of commercially available ELISA kits. The clinical applicability of the sensor 
was demonstrated using neutrophils isolated from asthma patients [15]. 
Figure 4. Scheme of preparation and functioning of the aptasensor for the determination of IL-17RA. 
Adapted from [15] with permission. 
2.2 Multiple sclerosis and related diseases 
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system 
(CNS), characterized by progressive demyelination of neural axons. The disease 
causes slow damage to the nervous system, causing inhibited muscle coordination, 
loss of visual sense, and other effects [16]. Among the recognized biomarkers, 
the specific antibody of myelin basic protein (anti-MBP) is commonly used for 
MS monitoring. Derkus et al. [17] combined alginate (a polysaccharide forming 
hydrogels with high porosity) and TiO2 nanoparticles (characterized by a high 
surface area and electron transfer rate promoting properties) for the fabrication of a 
biointerface acting as an efficient matrix for immobilization of MBP and its further 96 Nanosensors 
interaction with the anti-MBP antibodies from the samples. Platinum electrodes 
modified with this biocomposite (MBP-alg/TiO2) were prepared and the resulting 
label-free immunosensor was able to determine anti-MBP antibodies levels, with an 
LOD value of 0.18 ng mL–1, by impedimetric measurements using ferro-ferricyanide 
as the redox probe. In addition, anti-MBP was determined in real samples of 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum of MS patients. More recently, the same authors 
prepared a nanoimmunosensor for the simultaneous quantification of MPB and 
Tau proteins [18]. Both biomolecules are recognized as clinical biomarkers of MS, 
although the latter is also involved in other neurological disorders such Alzheimer’s 
disease [19]. For the preparation of the immunosensor, the respective antibodies 
were immobilized onto SPCEs modified with GO and first-generation dendrimers 
of trimethylolpropane tris[poly(propyleneglycol)] (pPG) functionalized with amide 
groups. Differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) was used for the determination of 
proteins using pPG/CdS/anti-MBP and pPG/PbS/anti-Tau electrochemical signal 
probes in which the presence of CdS and PbS nanocrystals resulted in two distinct 
peaks—at –0.6 and –0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The LOD values were 0.30 nM for MBP 
and 0.15 nM for Tau protein, which was sufficient to analyse the CSF and serum of 
MS patients. 
Sphingomyelinase (SMEnzyme) has emerged as a reliable biomarker for 
improved diagnosis and prognosis of MS. This enzyme, found in lysosomes and 
in the extracellular space, catalyzes sphingomyelin (SM), an important class 
of phospholipids. Using a nanostructured electrode surface, an electrochemical 
method involving methylene blue (MB)-encapsulated sphingomyelin (SM)-based 
liposomes with 50% cholesterol, synthesized via sonication, was developed by Dutt 
and Park [20], for the real-time monitoring of SMEnzyme. Figure 5 shows that 
the presence of the target SMEnzyme causes the free release of MB from the MB￾liposome formulation, which is detected at a GCE modified with AuNPs-embedded 
polyaniline nanowires (Au-PANI) self-assembled on nitrogen- and sulphur-doped 
graphene quantum dots (N,S-GQDs). The long-term stability and nanodimensional 
structure of PANI chain, combined with the well-defined and controlled shape of 
AuNPs and the graphitic structure of N,S-GQDs, provides an excellent surface for 
capturing the maximum amount of MB from the liposome. Furthermore, the presence 
of N and S atoms in GDQs respectively enhance their electrochemical properties 
and increase the number of anchoring sites for AuNPs adsorption. In the said study, 
DPV was used to obtain a calibration plot for SMEnzyme in the 0.1–10 mU mL–1 
range with an LOD value of 0.0072 mU mL–1. The developed biosensor was used 
for detecting SMEnzyme in spiked human serum and plasma and in cell culture 
supernatant [20]. 
Other diseases related to MS, which involve inflammatory symptoms of the 
central nervous system should also be duly considered. Among these, neuromyelitis 
optica (NMO), also known as Devic’s disease, causes blindness and paralysis and 
is commonly confused with MS due to the similar symptoms. However, NMO is 
characterized by the presence of autoantibodies against the aquaporin-4 protein 
(AQP4)—recognized as specific biomarkers by [21]. Son et al. reported a CNTs-field￾effect transistor (CNTs-FET) with immobilized AQP4 extracellular loop peptides Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 97 
Figure 5. Preparation of methylene blue-encapsulated sphingomyelin liposome (MB-liposome) and 
fundamentals of detection of SMEnzyme at a GCE modified with Au-PANI and N,S-GQDs. Reproduced 
from [20] with permission. 
for the rapid detection of the concerned antibodies in human serum without any 
sample treatment [22]. As is known, the unique one-dimensional nanoscale structure 
of CNTs and their large surface-to-volume ratio allow their electrical properties 
to be easily changed by surface adsorption of biomolecules. After the synthesis 
of peptides, phenylalanine (Phe) was added to the C-terminus to immobilize them 
onto CNTs via π-π interactions with the aromatic rings. The constructed biosensor 
showed p-type FET characteristics and was able to detect AQP4 antibodies present 
in human serum through a rapid decrease in conductance, with an LOD value of 
1 ng L–1 [22]. 
Semaphorins and their receptors (plexins) are soluble cell-surface proteins that 
contribute to the process of morphogenesis in multiple organs [23]. A member of 
this family, Semaphorin 3E (Sema 3E), plays a crucial role in immune regulation, 
among other actions. The serum level of soluble Sema 3E shows high correlation 
with immunological diseases like systemic sclerosis [24]. Therefore, Sema 3E is 
considered as a potential biomarker for these disorders. Yuan et al. proposed a metal 
nanowire-based biosensor for the quantification of Sema 3E levels [25]. To achieve 
this, trimetallic CuAuPd nanowire networks (NNWs) with high specific surface 
area, good electron transport and catalytic properties and biocompatibility were 
synthesized and used as a multifunctional substrate for electron transfer, antibody 
immobilization and signal amplification via amperometric detection of H2O2 98 Nanosensors 
Figure 6. Schematic of the electrochemical immunosensor for the determination of Sema 3E levels using 
trimetallic CuAuPd nanowire networks. Reproduced from [25] with permission. 
(Figure 6). A linear performance in the range from 100 fg mL−1 to 10 ng mL−1, with 
a low LOD of approximately 1.5 fg mL−1, was achieved. 
2.3 Celiac disease 
As a common knowledge, celiac disease (CD) is a gluten-dependent autoimmune 
disorder affecting a significant percentage of the population. One of the effects of this 
disease is the production of autoantibodies that cause the destruction of the intestinal 
mucosa [26]. At the same time, an essential route for non-invasive detection of the 
disease is the identification and quantification of antibodies produced upon gluten 
exposure, appearing in blood [27]. Among these, anti-gliadin antibody (AGA) and 
anti-tissue transglutaminase (anti-tTG) are the most frequently detected targets. 
Reliable analytical methods for the serological diagnosis of the disorder are still 
required for performing both an early diagnosis and the follow-up of a patient adhering 
to a gluten-free diet. For this purpose, Habtamu et al. prepared an amperometric 
immunosensor for the diagnosis of CD, using MWCNTs/SPCEs for covalent 
linking with the antigen (gliadin) and determination of the concentration of AGA by 
measuring current changes, using cyclic voltammetry with ferricyanide as the redox 
probe [28]. The antibody could be detected over a 2.7 to 650 μg mL–1 concentration 
range. The LOD value attained with this method was 0.13 μg mL–1. For anti-tTG 
detection, an electrochemical immunosensor was recently developed with the use 
of gold nanoelectrodes (NEEs) prepared through the deposition of gold within the 
pores of polycarbonate track-etched membranes [29]. NEEs were functionalized 
with tissue transglutaminase and their incubation in the samples resulted in the 
capture of anti-tTG. Quantification was accomplished by incubation with an HRP￾labelled secondary antibody, followed by measuring the electrochemical response Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 99 
of H2O2 in the presence of hydroquinone as the redox mediator. The immunosensor 
resulted in an LOD of 1.8 ng mL−1 and was successfully deployed for the analysis of 
human serum. Giannetto et al. [30] developed an amperometric immunosensor for 
the detection of both IgA and IgG serotypes of anti-tTG in human serum, involving 
covalent immobilization of tissue transglutaminase enzyme in its open conformation 
(open-tTG), which seems to be more specifically involved in the pathogenesis of CD 
[31]. A GCE was electrochemically functionalized with AuNPs and subsequently 
derivatized with an 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid SAM for covalent anchoring 
of the enzyme. This step was performed under carefully controlled conditions to 
keep the open conformation of the tTG. The immunosensor showed LOD values of 
1.7 AUmL–1 for IgA and 2.7 AU mL–1 for Ig and was validated in sera from pediatric 
patients, against the results obtained with two specific ELISA kits. 
2.4 Type 1 Diabetes 
Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) is a chronic immune disorder that results from the destruction 
of β-cell function in the islets of Langerhans, resulting in deficient insulin levels 
which in turn raise blood glucose levels due to impaired glucose metabolism 
(hyperglycemia). The etiology of T1D is largely unknown, but a combination of 
genetic predisposition, environmental factors and dysregulated immune system is 
believed to be the cause of the disorder [32]. The action of various autoantibodies 
such as GADA (glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 autoantibody) has been reported 
as triggering factors for type 1 diabetes (T1D) [33] and the serum concentration of 
GADA has been recognized as a highly valuable biomarker for the prediction of T1D. 
Premaratne et al. developed an electrochemical immunosensor for the detection of 
GADA by modifying a gold electrode array with carboxylated graphene, followed 
by covalent attachment of GAD-65 antigen and complexation with GADA standard 
solutions; alternatively, the sample was carried onto protein A/G-functionalized 
magnetic microparticles (MAG) (Figure 7) [34]. A dynamic range obtained between 
0.02 and 2 ng mL–1 and an LOD of 48 pg mL–1 were obtained by impedimetric 
measurements with ferro-ferricyanide redox probe. In the same experimental 
conditions, DPV decreased with increasing GADA concentration, providing a lower 
LOD value than that achieved with impedimetric transduction (34 pg mL–1). In both 
the cases, these results were better than those obtained by surface plasmon resonance 
(SPR) using an immunoassay scheme similar to that used in the electrochemical 
approach. Real serum from patients with T1D and spiked serum samples were 
analyzed, with results in coherence with those provided by an ELISA kit [34]. 
2.5 Graves’ disease and other autoimmune disorders 
The immune system of Grave’s disease (GD) patients produces antibodies which 
stimulate the thyroid gland to release excess amounts of thyroid hormone into the 
blood (hyperthyroidism). Production of substantial CXCL10 chemokines under 
interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-induced stimulation has been observed in such cases and, 
therefore, IFN-γ detection is of high significance for the diagnosis of GD. Various 
electrochemical biosensors involving nanomaterials have been constructed for 100 Nanosensors 
Figure 7. Scheme of preparation of MAG-Protein-A/G-GADA electrochemical immunosensor. Reprinted 
from [34] with permission. 
this purpose. A relevant example here is a label-free immunosensor involving the 
immobilization of anti-IFN-γ on a TiO2-modified electrode and the measurement of 
impedimetric changes after loading of proteins. A dynamic range obtained between 
0.0001 and 0.1 ng mL–1, and an LOD of 0.74 pg mL–1 IFN-γ were obtained [35]. 
IFN-γ is also involved in other autoimmune diseases (e.g., psoriasis). In this 
context, Bao et al. reported an electrochemical biosensor providing a low LOD of 
0.6 fM IFN-γ [36]. The biosensor used a zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) 
as the immobilization substrate. This nanomaterial shows advantages such as ease 
of synthesis, large surface area and pore size, good chemical stability and negligible 
cytotoxicity. However, its low conductivity hinders electron-transfer, thus affecting 
the biosensor sensitivity negatively. To minimize this drawback, the authors prepared 
graphene@ZIF-8 hybrids with anchored gold nanoclusters (AuNCs), improving 
both conductivity and biocompatibility. Figure 8 shows that once AuNCs-GR@ 
ZIF-8 was prepared and hemin/G-quadruplex DNAzyme decorated, an improved 
and efficient layered-branched hybridization chain reaction (LB-HCR) pattern was 
designed with the cascade-like assembly of four hairpins. HP1 and HP2 participated 
in the traditional HCR process to form long double-helix DNA, and AD1 and 
AD2 assembled alternately to facilitate the layer chain-branching growth of DNA Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 101 
Figure 8. Schematic illustration of multiple-amplified electrochemical biosensor for the detection of 
IFN-γ: (A) synthesis of AuNCs-GR@ZIF-8, (B) target-induced release of T-DNA, and (C) cascade-like 
DNA assembly in LB-HCR process on the electrode. Reprinted from [36] with permission. 
nanostructures. The target-triggered LB-HCR resulted in the generation of dendritic 
DNA nanostructures integrated with numerous in-situ formed hemin/G quadruplex 
DNAzyme as amplifying labels, which catalyzed the reduction of H2O2 with thionine. 
This multiple-amplified strategy exhibited a wide linear range from 1 fM to 50 pM 
IFN-γ. 
3. Nanomaterials used as detection tags 
Methodologies replacing conventional enzymatic labels with electrochemical tags 
using nanomaterials have advantages such as reducing the time required for the 
enzymatic reaction, or facilitating multiplexed detection. Moreover, these nanolabels 
are often adequate for increasing the sensitivity of detection, generating amplified 
electrochemical signals that endow the developed configuration with the analytical 
ability for application to complex samples which generally require sensitive methods. 102 Nanosensors 
The so designed sensing architectures are able to determine the low concentration 
levels of biomarkers of autoimmune diseases in early stages of health disorders. 
This is particularly interesting when nanomaterials play the role of nanocarriers, 
loading large amounts of bioreagents, enzymes or redox mediators. Some illustrative 
examples of these strategies have been discussed in this section. In order to facilitate 
the understanding of the reader, they have been classified according to the type of 
nanomaterial involved in the synthesis of the nanotag. 
3.1 Quantum dots 
Quantum dots (QDs) consisting of semiconductor metallic nanoparticles are widely 
used as biosensing labels suitable for linking to antibodies and/or antigens. Besides 
electroactivity, other advantages of QDs include variety of metal composition and 
sizing of these nanoparticles, which allow for a great versatility as well as the 
possibility of using different alternatives to perform electrochemical measurements. 
Various examples regarding the use of CdSe/ZnS QDs as labels in CD detection have 
been reported [37]. One of the examples comprises electrochemical immunosensing 
strategy using 8-channel screen-printed arrays for the detection of tTG IgA antibodies 
involving biotin-anti-human IgA and streptavidin labeled with CdSe/ZnS QDs 
[38]. This detection scheme was based on the dissolution of the QDs’ components 
in acidic medium and the subsequent monitoring of the released Cd(II) by anodic 
stripping voltammetry. The calibration plot was linear over 3 to 100 U mL–1 anti-tTG 
IgA antibodies concentration range, with an LOD of 2.4 U mL–1. The same group 
reported substantial improvement in performance by enhancing the mass transfer 
of ions for detection of CdSe/ZnS QDs in the solution. A magnetoelectrochemical 
support with two permanent magnets was used to generate forced convention in the 
droplet placed on the active surface of a SPCE located in the middle of a magnetic 
field. Once the QDs were dissolved in hydrochloride acid, Cd(II) ions were pre￾concentrated on the electrode surface from a solution also containing Hg(II) and 
Fe(III), by applying a cathodic potential at which a mercury film is formed on the 
electrode and ferric ions are reduced simultaneously with cadmium deposition. In the 
presence of the magnetic field, the deposition efficiency was enhanced with Fe(III) 
acting as a pumping species generating a high cathodic current and a large Lorentz 
force that caused a convective effect in the solution. The application of this method 
for the determination of anti-tTG (IgA) levels provided a linear relationship with a 
slope value of 0.74 μA U–1 mL, and an LOD value of 1.7 U mL–1 [39]. 
Graphene quantum dots (GQDs) have also been used to improve the sensitivity 
of anti-tTG electrochemical biosensors. GQDs are composed of small graphene 
sheets with lateral dimensions smaller than 10 nm and less than 10 such graphene 
layers forming the nanoparticle [40]. They are characterized by a high surface area 
with a large length-to-diameter ratio (the ratio of length to thickness), low intrinsic 
toxicity, chemical inertness, mechanical stiffness, excellent solubility, high stability, 
easier grafting of their surface with receptors, and greater electrical conductivity 
than conventional semiconductor QDs [41]. Researchers have modified different 
substrates with GQDs for increasing the rate of electrochemical reactions. For 
instance, Gupta et al. combined GQDs and poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 103 
to prepare a biosensor for the detection of anti-tTG IgA in human serum [42]. 
Figure 9 shows screen-printed electrodes modified with AuNPs and MWCNTs, 
used for the covalent attachment of GQDs and PAMAM. GQDs are characterized 
by high surface area to volume ratio and good conductivity, whereas PAMAM 
dendrimers possess a branched structure containing many amino groups for 
conjugation. Therefore, once tissue transglutaminase (tTG) antigen is immobilized, 
the binding with the specific anti-tTG antibody provides significant electrochemical 
changes measured by DPV, with a sensitivity of 1297.14 A cm–2 pg–1 and an LOD of 
0.1 fg per 6 μL. 
Figure 9. Scheme of preparation and fundamentals of the tTG-PAMAM-GQD-AuNPs/MWCNTs/SPCE 
biosensor for the detection of anti-tTG antibody. Reproduced from [42] with permission. 
3.2 CNTs and graphene 
CNTs and graphene or their derivatives have also been employed as nanocarriers 
for the detection of interleukins through immunoassay strategies. Wang et al. 
designed an electrochemical immunosensor for IL-6, using AuNPs, rGO and silica 
sol–gel (tetraethyl orthosilicate, TEOS) prepared in situ on an ITO electrode as the 
immobilization platform for anti-IL-6 capture antibody, and AuNPs-polydopamine 
(PDA)@CNTs as the carrier tag for immobilizing HRP-labeled detection antibodies 
(Figure 10A) [43]. The combination of the said three components—AuNPs, PDA and 
CNTs—in the nanolabel provided amperometric responses of magnitudes larger than 
any of the possible double combinations, probably due to the high electron transfer 
capability of CNTs and the higher surface-to-volume ratio of the resulting composite 
in the presence of PDA, which in turn yields a larger amount of immobilized HRP￾antibodies. A dynamic working range of 1–40 pg mL–1 with a low LOD of 0.3 pg mL–1 
IL-6 was achieved. Also, for the detection of IL-6, another immunosensor has been 
reported; it involves gold electrodes modified with a single layer of GO, followed by 
attachment of the capture antibody (Figure 10B) [44]. In this case, after a blocking 
step, a sandwich-type configuration was implemented by covalent immobilization 104 Nanosensors 
Figure 10. Schemes of two sandwich-type immunosensors prepared for the detection of IL-6: 
(A) HRP-dAb-(AuNPs-PDA@CNTs)-IL-6-cAb-AuNPs/rGO/TEOS/ITO, and (B) NB-GO-dAb-IL-6­
cAb-GO/PPC/AuE. Reprinted from [43] (A) and [44] (B) with permission. 
of the detector antibody onto another GO layer functionalized with Nile blue used 
as the redox probe. Thus, in this configuration, GO acted as an electron transfer 
bridge, while also playing the role of a nanoprobe, to report the signal of the analyte. 
Furthermore, to endow antifouling capabilities, 4-aminophenyl phosphorylcholine 
(PPC) zwitterion molecules were introduced in the immunosensor platform. The 
prepared bioelectrode allowed for the detection of IL-6 over the 1−300 pg mL−1 IL-6 
range, with an LOD value of 1 pg mL–1. The biosensor was used for monitoring IL-6 
secretion in raw cells and in live mice [44]. 
3.3 Polymer/metal core-shell nanocomposites 
Polymer/metal core-shell nanocomposites prepared with polystyrene (PS) and 
polydopamine (PDA) were proposed by Shi et al. for preparing metal labels for 
the simultaneous detection of IL-6 and MMP-9 (matrix metalloproteinase-9) [45]. 
MMP-9 is an enzyme involved in the pathological processes occurring in autoimmune 
diseases—such as degradation of collagen type 4, which is a major component of the 
basement membrane, thus enabling the invasion of T cells. Like IL-6, the detection 
of MMP-9 is of interest in the diagnosis and monitoring of autoimmune diseases 
such as RA, MS, systemic sclerosis (SSc), or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
among others [46]. In the said study, PS@PDA modified with AgNPs or Cd2+ ions 
was used as the carrier after immobilization of detected antibodies of IL-6 and 
MMP-9 respectively, whereas the corresponding anti-IL-6 and anti-MM-9 capture 
antibodies were immobilized onto a graphene nanoribbon (GNR)-modified heated 
screen-printed carbon electrode (HSPCE). The electrochemical detection was 
performed by square wave voltammetry (SWV) recording the stripping responses 
appearing at +0.1 V and –0.7 vs Ag/AgCl, which corresponded respectively with 
AgNPs oxidation and Cd2+ reduction. The developed method aided the detection 
of IL-6 and MMP-9 in concentration ranges from 10–3 to 103
 ng mL–1 and Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 105 
10–5 to 103
 ng mL–1 respectively, with LODs of 0.1 pg mL–1 and 5 fg mL–1 respectively. 
This method was successfully applied to the analysis of serum samples from 
patients. 
4 Conclusions and perspectives 
Although in a few applications till date, electrochemical biosensors involving the use 
of nanomaterials have demonstrated their usefulness in the detection of biomarkers 
of autoimmune diseases, against more sophisticated and expensive techniques 
such as mass spectrometry, or less accurate and often time-consuming ELISA 
methodologies. The combination of electrochemical techniques with nanomaterials 
such as CNTs or AuNPs endows the biosensors with well-known special features, 
such as improved sensitivity and selectivity, simplicity and multiplexing capabilities, 
and point-of-care application. Moreover, other nanomaterials such as metal oxides, 
bimetallic nanoparticles, or frameworks provide benefits which are yet to be exploited 
to develop biosensing methods with better performance in terms of sensitivity and 
accuracy, while also offering greater stability and better selectivity. 
Versatility is a particularly noteworthy feature of electrochemical biosensors for 
their applications in the domain of disease biomarkers detection. As noted in the works 
cited above, different techniques, electrolytic or otherwise, can be used for the said 
purpose. These techniques include amperometry, voltammetry and electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy, all of which are very easy in terms of implementation; 
another technique mentioned involves stripping voltammetry, a highly sensitive 
and practically specific technique when using optimal experimental conditions. 
Likewise, electrochemical sensing platforms can be developed with bioreagents of 
different natures, whether antibodies or antigens, DNA chains or peptides, depending 
on the availability associated with the type of analyte. 
Considering these aspects, it is expected that new nanomaterials would be 
discovered in the forthcoming years, making it possible to improve the analytical 
characteristics of detection aimed at ultra-sensitivity in order to detect biomarkers 
in even earlier stages of an illness. In addition, it is necessary to discover new 
biomolecules capable of interacting with biomarkers that do not yet have specific 
reagents, such as autoantibodies involved in several autoimmune diseases, and it 
should be extended to research in the design of biosensors based on new peptides and 
proteins, their metabolites, and nucleic acids, specifically micro-RNA, etc. 
It is important to understand that the benefits achieved must be demonstrated 
by applying the implemented methods to clinical samples obtained from patients 
suffering from different types of diseases. The collaboration between technical 
and medical research will hence be crucial in the development of electrochemical 
biosensors for the detection of biomarkers in near future. 
Acknowledgments 
The financial support from PID2019-103899RB-I00 (Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia 
e Innovación) and RTI2018-096135-B-I00 (Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106 Nanosensors 
Universidades) Research Projects and the TRANSNANOAVANSENS-CM Program 
from Comunidad de Madrid (Grant S2018/NMT-4349) is gratefully acknowledged. 
References 
[1] Smolen, J.S., D. Aletaha, A. Barton, G.R. Burmester, P. Emery, G.S. Firestein, A. Kavanaugh, I.B. 
McInnes, D.H. Solomon, V. Strand and K. Yamamoto. 2018. Rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Rev. Dis. 
Primers 4: 18001. Doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2018.1. 
[2] Sweet, R.A., J.L. Cullen and M.J. Shlomchik. 2013. Rheumatoid factor B cell memory leads to 
rapid, switched antibody-forming cell responses. J. Immunol. 190: 1974−1981. 
[3] Chinnadayyala, S.R., J. Park, M.A. Abbasi and S. Cho. 2019. Label-free electrochemical 
impedimetric immunosensor for sensitive detection of IgM rheumatoid factor in human serum. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 143: 111642. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.111642. 
[4] Pruijn, G.J., A. Wiik and W.J. van Venrooij. 2010. The use of citrullinated peptides and proteins for 
the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. 12: 203. Doi: 10.1186/ar2903. 
[5] Rossi, G., F. Real-Fernández, F. Panza, F. Barbetti, F. Pratesi, P. Rovero and P. Migliorini. 
2014. Biosensor analysis of anti-citrullinated protein/peptide antibody affinity. Anal. Biochem. 
465: 96–101. 
[6]	 Villa, M.G., C. Jiménez-Jorquera, I. Haro, M.J. Gomara, R. Sanmartí, C. Fernández-Sánchez and 
E. Mendoza. 2011. Carbon nanotube composite peptide-based biosensors as putative diagnostic 
tools for rheumatoid arthritis. Biosens. Bioelectron. 27: 113−118. 
[7] Lu, M.C., N.S. Lai, H.C. Yu, H.B. Huang, S.C. Hsieh and C.L. Yu. 2010. Anti–citrullinated protein 
antibodies bind surface-expressed citrullinated Grp78 on monocyte/macrophages and stimulate 
tumor necrosis factor α production. Arthritis Rheum. 62: 1213–1223. 
[8]	 Yagati, A.K., M.-H. Lee and J. Min. 2018. Electrochemical immunosensor for highly sensitive and 
quantitative detection of tumor necrosis factor-α in human serum. Bioelectrochem. 122: 93–102. 
[9] Mazloum-Ardakani, M., L. Hosseinzadeh and A. Khoshroo. 2015. Label-free electrochemical 
immunosensor for detection of tumor necrosis factor α based on fullerene-functionalized carbon 
nanotubes/ionic liquid. J. Electroanal. Chem. 757: 58−64. 
[10] Chen, H., T.K. Choo, J. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Platt, A. Palaniappan, B. Liedberg and A.I.Y. 
Tok. 2016. Label-free electronic detection of interleukin-6 using horizontally aligned carbon 
nanotubes. Mater. Des. 90: 852−857. 
[11] Liu, N., Y. Huan, L. Yanyu, H. Zheng, X. Zheng, D. Lin and H. Dai. 2018. Combined 
electrochemiluminescent and electrochemical immunoassay for interleukin 6 based on the use 
of TiO2 mesocrystal nanoarchitectures. Microchim. Acta 185: 277. Doi: 10.1007/s00604-018­
2802-x. 
[12] Lou, Y., T. He, F. Jiang, J.-J. Shi and J.-J. Zhu. 2014. A competitive electrochemical immunosensor 
for the detection of human interleukin-6 based on the electrically heated carbon electrode and 
silver nanoparticles functionalized labels. Talanta 122: 135–139. 
[13] Kirkham, B.W., M.N. Lassere, J.P. Edmonds, K.M. Juhasz, P.A. Bird, C. Soon Lee, R. Shnier and I.J. 
Portek. 2006. Synovial membrane cytokine expression is predictive of joint damage progression in 
rheumatoid arthritis: A two‐year prospective study (the DAMAGE study cohort). Arthritis Rheum. 
54: 1122−1131. 
[14] Graber, J.J., S.R. Allie, K.M. Mullen, M.V. Jones, T. Wang, C. Krishnan, A.I. Kaplin, A. Nath, 
D.A. Kerr and P.A. Calabresi. 2008. Interleukin-17 in transverse myelitis and multiple sclerosis. J. 
Neuroimmunol. 196: 124−132. 
[15] Jo, H., S-K. Kim, H. Youn, H. Lee, K. Lee, J. Jeong, J. Mok, S.-H. Kim, H.-S. Park and C. 
Ban. 2016. A highly sensitive and selective impedimetric aptasensor for interleukin-17 receptor A. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 81: 80–86. 
[16] Bhavsar, K., A. Fairchild, E. Alonas, D.K. Bishop, J.T. La Belle, J. Sweeney, T.L. Alford and 
L. Joshi. 2009. A cytokine immunosensor for multiple sclerosis detection based upon label-free 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy using electroplated printed circuit board electrodes. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 25: 506–509.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advances and Prospects in Nanomaterials-Based Electrochemical Affinity Biosensors 107 
[17] Derkus, B., E. Emregul, K.C. Emregul and C. Yucesan. 2014. Alginate and alginate-titanium 
dioxide nanocomposite as electrodematerials for anti-myelin basic protein immunosensing. Sens. 
Actuators B 192: 294−302. 
[18] Derkus, B., P.A. Bozkurt, M. Tulu, K.C. Emregul, C. Yucesan and E. Emregul. 2017. Simultaneous 
quantification of myelin basic protein and Tau proteins in cerebrospinal fluid and serum of multiple 
sclerosis patients using nanoimmunosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 89: 781−788. 
[19] Barthélemy, N.R., F. Fenaille, C. Hirtz, N. Sergeant, S. Schraen-Maschke, J. Vialaret, L. Buée, 
A. Gabelle, C. Junot, S. Lehmann and F. Becher. 2016. Tau protein quantification in human 
cerebrospinal fluid by targeted mass spectrometry at high sequence coverage provides insights 
into its primary structure heterogeneity. J. Proteome Res. 15: 667−676. 
[20] Dutt, C.A. and E.Y. Park. 2019. Methylene blue-encapsulated liposomal biosensor for 
electrochemical detection of sphingomyelinase enzyme. Sens. Actuators B 301: 127153. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2019.127153. 
[21] Kitley, J., P. Waters, M. Woodhall, M.I. Leite, A. Murchison, J. George, W. Küker, S. Chandratre, 
A. Vincent and J. Palace. 2014. Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders with aquaporin-4 
and myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies: A comparative study. JAMA Neurol. 
71(3): 276–283. 
[22] Son, M., D. Kim, K. Seok, S. Hong and T.H. Park. 2016. Detection of aquaporin-4 antibody using 
aquaporin-4 extracellular loop-based carbon nanotube biosensor for the diagnosis of neuromyelitis 
optica. Biosens. Bioelectron. 8: 87−91. 
[23] Sakurai, A., J. Gavard, Y. Annas-Linhares, J.R. Basile, P. Amornphimoltham, T.R. Palmby, 
H. Yagi, F. Zhang, P.A. Randazzo, X. Li, R. Weigert and J.S. Gutkind. 2010. Semaphorin 3E 
initiates antiangiogenic signaling through plexin D1 by regulating Arf6 and R-Ras. Mol. Cell Biol. 
30: 3086−3098. 
[24] Mazzotta, C., E. Romano, C. Bruni, M. Manetti, G. Lepri, S. Bellando-Randone, J. Blagojevic, L. 
Ibba-Manneschi, M. Matucci-Cerinic and S. Guiducci. 2015. Plexin-D1/Semaphorin 3E pathway 
may contribute to dysregulation of vascular tone control and defective angiogenesis in systemic 
sclerosis. Arthritis Res Ther. 21: 221. Doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0749-4. 
[25]	 Yuan, Z., J. Chen, Y. Wen, C. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yang and C. Yu. 2019. A trimetallic CuAuPd 
nanowire as a multifunctional nanocomposites applied to ultrasensitive electrochemical detection 
of Sema3E. Biosens. Bioelectron. 145: 111677. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.111677. 
[26] Lindfors, K., K. Kaukinen and M. Mäki. 2009. A role for anti-transglutaminase 2 autoantibodies 
in the pathogenesis of coeliac disease? Amino Acids 36: 685–691. 
[27] Pasinszki, T. and M. Krebsz. 2018. Biosensors for non-invasive detection of celiac disease 
biomarkers in body fluids. Biosensors 8: 55. Doi: 10.3390/bios8020055. 
[28] Gupta, S., A. Kaushal, A. Kumar and D. Kumar. 2016. Multiwalled carbon nanotubes based 
immunosensor for diagnosis of celiac disease. Mol. Cell Biol. 62: 3. 
[29] Habtamu, H.B., T. Not, L. De Leo, S. Longo, L.M. Moretto and P. Ugo. 2019. Electrochemical 
immunosensor based on nanoelectrode ensembles for the serological analysis of IgG-type tissue 
transglutaminase. Sensors 19: 1233. Doi: 10.3390/s19051233. 
[30] Giannetto, M., M. Mattarozzi, E. Umiltà, A. Manfredi, S. Quaglia and M. Careri. 2014. An 
amperometric immunosensor for diagnosis of celiac disease based on covalent immobilization 
of open conformation tissue transglutaminase for determination of anti-tTG antibodies in human 
serum. Biosens. Bioelectron. 62: 325–330. 
[31]		 Leffler, D.A., K. Pallav, M. Bennett, S. Tariq, H. Xu and T. Kabbani. 2012. Open conformation 
tissue transglutaminase testing for celiac dietary assessment. Dig. Liver Dis. 44: 375–378. 
[32] Ziegler, A.-G. and G.T. Nepom. 2010. Prediction and pathogenesis in type 1 diabetes. Immunity 
32: 468–478. 
[33] Pociot, F. and Å. Lernmark. 2016. Genetic risk factors for type 1 diabetes. Lancet 387: 2331−2339. 
[34] Premaratne, S.G., J. Niroula, M.K. Patel, W. Zhong, S.L. Suib, A.K. Kalkan and S. Krishnan. 2018. 
Electrochemical and surface-plasmon correlation of a serum autoantibody immunoassay with 
binding insights: Graphenyl surface versus mercapto-monolayer. Anal. Chem. 90: 12456−12463. 
[35] Chu, Z., H. Dai, Y. Liu and Y. Lin. 2017. Development of a semiconductor-based electrochemical 
sensor for interferon-γ detection. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 12: 9141−9149.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108 Nanosensors 
[36] Bao, T., M. Wen, W. Wen, X. Zhang and S. Wang. 2019. Ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensor 
of interferon-gamma based on gold nanoclusters-graphene@zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 
and layered-branched hybridization chain reaction. Sens. Actuators B. 296: 1266062. 10.1016/j. 
snb.2019.05.083. 
[37] Scherf, K.A., R. Ciccocioppo, M. Pohanka, K. Rimarova, R. Opatrilova, L. Rodrigo and P. Kruzliak. 
2016. Biosensors for the diagnosis of celiac disease: Current status and future perspectives. Mol. 
Biotechnol. 58: 381–392. 
[38]	 Martín-Yerga, D. and A. Costa-García. 2015. Towards a blocking-free electrochemical 
immunosensing strategy for anti-transglutaminase antibodies using screen-printed electrodes. 
Bioelectrochem. 105: 88–94. 
[39]	 Martín-Yerga, D., P. Fanjul-Bolado, D. Hernández-Santos and A. Costa-García. 2017. Enhanced 
detection of quantum dots by the magnetohydrodynamic effect for electrochemical biosensing. 
Analyst 142: 1591–1600. 
[40] Li, M., T. Chen, J.J. Gooding and J. Liu. 2019. Review of carbon and graphene quantum dots for 
sensing. ACS Sens. 4: 1732−1748. 
[41] Campuzano, S., P. Yáñez-Sedeño and J.M. Pingarrón. 2019. Carbon dots and graphene quantum 
dots in electrochemical biosensing. Nanomaterials 9: 634. Doi: 10.3390/nano9040634. 
[42] Gupta, S., A. Kaushala, A. Kumar and D. Kumar. 2017. Ultrasensitive transglutaminase based 
nanosensor for early detection of celiac disease in human. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 105: 905−911. 
[44] Qi, M., J. Huang, H. Wei, C. Cao, S. Feng, Q. Guo, E.M. Goldys, R. Li and G. Liu. 2017. Graphene 
oxide thin film with dual function integrated into a nanosandwich device for in vivo monitoring of 
interleukin-6. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9: 41659−41668. 
[45] Shi, J.-J., T.-T. He, F. Jiang, E.S. Abdel-Halim and J.-J. Zhu. 2014. Ultrasensitive multi-analyte 
electrochemical immunoassay based on GNR-modified heated screen-printed carbon electrodes 
and PS@PDA-metal labels for rapid detection of MMP-9 and IL-6. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
55: 51–56. 
[46] Ram, M., Y. Sherer and Y. Shoenfeld. 2006. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 and autoimmune diseases. 
J. Clin. Immunol. 26: 299−307. 5
 
Immunosensors and Genosensors 
Based on Voltammetric Detection 
of Metal-Based Nanoprobes 
Anastasios Economou* and Christos Kokkinos 
1. Introduction 
Nowadays, there is a strong demand for on-site or point-of-care (POC) assays based 
on portable and disposable instrumentation for the detection or the determination 
of different analytes in samples of environmental, nutritional, pharmaceutical and 
clinical interest. The necessary requirements of such methodologies are operational 
and instrumental simplicity, rapidity, high specificity and sensitivity, low cost, small 
size, wide scope of applications and potential for multiplexed detection of different 
analytes. 
Biosensors are fit-for-purpose (bio)analytical platforms that can fulfill these 
analytical and operational requirements and possess many attractive features [1]. 
They are based on the specific interaction between the target analyte and one or more 
biomolecular probe(s), the latter being biomolecules (such as enzymes, antibodies, 
oligonucleotides) that can selectively interact with the analyte; their interaction 
induces physical or chemical changes that can be monitored [2]. 
Affinity biosensors include immunosensors (which utilize an antibody specific 
to the target protein or cell as the biological recognition element) and genosensors 
(that use an oligonucleotide complementary to the target DNA or RNA fragment as 
the biomolecular recognition element) [3–5]. In affinity biosensors, either the target 
analyte or at least one of the probes is immobilized on a suitable transducer and the 
probe-analyte interaction is designed to generate a measurable signal. 
Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, 157 71 Greece. 110 Nanosensors 
Electrochemical biosensors use an electrochemical transducer to monitor the 
probe-analyte interactions. The advantages of electrochemical detection in biosensing 
include high specificity and sensitivity, scope for automation, miniaturization and 
multiplexing capabilities, combined with simple and portable instrumentation. So 
far, different types of electrochemical biosensors have been designed for clinical 
analysis [6, 7], food analysis and quality control [8, 9], environmental monitoring 
[10] and pathogen or toxin detection [11, 12]. In electrochemical biosensors, 
detection is performed by the transducer either directly (in a label-free format) 
[13, 14] or indirectly via a suitable label (in a labeled format) [15–21]. Although the 
use of labels increases the complexity of the analytical protocol, the assay time-scale 
and the overall cost, it provides enhanced detection sensitivity and selectivity and 
also enables multiplexed detection schemes. 
Electrochemical labels are molecules, ions or atoms which possess redox 
properties and serve as “barcodes” for the indirect detection of the target biomolecule. 
The most widely used metal-based nanoparticles (NPs) in biosensing, serving as 
electrochemically active labels, are metal NPs (such as gold NPs (AuNPs) and silver 
NPs (AgNPs)) and quantum dots (QDs, nanocrystals composed of single or mixed 
metal salts) [16, 17, 21–27]. In voltammetric bioassays using metal-based NP labels, 
the target biomolecule is selectively bound with the recognition probe, which is 
conjugated with an appropriate NP label. After the affinity interaction, the metal￾based nanoprobe is detected and quantified using a voltammetric technique. 
AuNPs are the most widely used noble metal NPs, thanks to their stability, 
simple synthesis, biocompatibility and scope for effective conjugation with 
biomolecules; other metal NPs include AgNPs, copper NPs (CuNPs) and platinum 
NPs (PtNPs) [16, 26, 28, 29]. QDs are nanocrystals with sizes between 1 and 20 nm, 
composed of single or mixed metal salts (such as PbX, CdX, ZnX, where X=S, Se, 
Te) with interesting optical and electrochemical properties [30–32]. Several reviews 
on the synthesis of noble metal NPs and QDs have been published [32, 33]. The 
most common route for the synthesis of metal NPs is based on the reduction of 
the respective cations in the presence of a suitable reducing agent (such as sodium 
borohydride, D-glucose or sodium citrate) in a way that the size distribution of the 
resulting NPs is carefully controlled [24, 33]. The synthesis of QDs is based on 
different bottom-up or top-down methodologies, depending on the desired QDs type, 
properties and core material [24, 32]. 
A critical factor for effective utilization of noble metal NPs and QDs as redox 
labels is their surface modification with functional groups (such as amino and 
carboxyl groups) to enable further conjugation with specific biomolecules. Different 
NP functionalization schemes and conjugation strategies with biomolecules have been 
described in various relevant reviews [34, 35]. Immobilization of biomacromolecules 
on NPs can be achieved through physical adsorption using hydrophobic, electrostatic, 
hydrogen binding and van der Waals interactions. However, in this case, the 
adsorption process is poorly controlled. Moreover, covalent binding strategies are 
rather sophisticated and require several steps, including the derivatization of the NPs 
surface by introduction of different functional groups (e.g., –COOH and –NH2). In Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 111 
the case of AuNPs, biomolecules can be attached to the gold surface through Au-SH 
bonds; the inherently strong interaction between thiol compounds (–SH, mercaptans 
or sulfydryl groups) and noble metal enables the formation of self-assembled 
monolayers (SAM) of a wide variety of thiol compounds on the surface of AuNPs. 
Primary amine groups are probably the most used functional group to link molecules 
covalently. NPs modified with carboxylic groups (–COOH) on their surface can 
react directly with primary amines existing on the surface of biomolecules after an 
activation step with 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) and 
N-hydroxysuccinimie (NHS). Attachment of molecules such as oligonucleotides 
or antibodies via amino groups is advantageous, for these biomolecules have 
many available reactive amino groups for conjugation, located at their surface. 
Furthermore, there are many examples involving linkage between biomolecules 
and NPs through an affinity protein-protein interaction, most commonly the biotin￾streptavidin bond. The strategy of biomolecule binding via biotin-binding proteins 
takes advantage of the natural strong interaction between (strept)avidin and biotin 
(which is significantly resistant to a wide range of pH, elevated temperatures and 
extreme chemical conditions). In this case, NPs and biomolecule have to be modified 
with (strept)avidin and biotin respectively. Following different strategies (i e.g., 
EDC), (strep)tavidin attachment to NPs surfaces can be achieved by amino groups 
or carboxyl groups of the protein. In the case of biomolecule derivatization, biotin 
group can be introduced through amine groups of the biomolecule with biotin-NHS 
ester or biotin sulfo-NHS ester. 
Metal-based NP labels can be detected voltammetrically using different 
methodologies. The two most widely used detection techniques are solution-phase 
voltammetry and anodic stripping voltammetry; the latter affords higher sensitivity 
thanks to the preconcentration deposition step that precedes the voltammetric scan 
[36]. AuNPs can be chemically oxidized in a Br2/HBr medium to bromo-Au(III) 
complexes or electrochemically oxidized in ΗCl to chloro-Au(III) complexes. The 
released Au(III) is detected by cathodic voltammetry or, for higher sensitivity, by 
anodic stripping voltammetry after preconcentration (Figure 1(A)). A common 
strategy to increase the detection sensitivity is the catalytic or enzymatic growth of 
an Ag shell on AuNPs; after acidic dissolution of the Ag shell, Ag(I) is quantified 
by anodic stripping voltammetry (Figure 1(B)). Other metal NPs can be detected 
in the same way by direct voltammetry or stripping voltammetry. The detection 
of AuNPs and other metal NPs is commonly performed at carbon-based working 
electrodes. 
On the other hand, QDs, which contain a Pb, Cd or Zn core, can be readily 
dissolved and chemically oxidized in an acidic medium (containing HCl or HNO3) 
to the respective metal cations (Figure 1(C)); the released cations are detected by 
anodic stripping voltammetry, preferably at the Hg, Bi or Sn electrodes [36]. 
The synergistic effects of a high loading of NP moities at each recognition probe 
and the highly sensitive (stripping) voltammetric detection lead to ultrasensitive 
bioassays, sometimes reaching sub-picomolar limits of detection [22–24]. 112 Nanosensors 
Figure 1. Biosensing based on voltammetric detection schemes for: (A) AuNPs, (B) AgNPs grown on 
AuNPs and (C) heavy metal QDs. 
2. Immunosensors using metal-based nanoprobes 
Typically, immunoassays follow either a sandwich or a competitive format [37]. In 
the case of the sandwich mode of operation, an immobilized capture antibody binds 
the target protein or cell in the sample, followed by an interaction of the target with 
a second reporting antibody labeled with a detectable tag. On the other hand, in the 
competitive mode, the unlabeled analyte competes either with the labeled analyte 
to bind an immobilized capture antibody or with the labeled reporting antibodies to 
bind the immobilized analyte. 
So far, numerous interesting electrochemical immunosensing devices have been 
developed with metal NPs as labels. A competitive immunoassay has been developed 
for the determination of human serum albumin, using AuNPs as labels, with the 
detection of the AuNPs taking place voltammetrically at a 3-electrode screen-printed 
cell, following their electrochemical oxidation in HCl [38]. In recent years, carbon 
nanomaterials (e.g., graphene and carbon nanotubes) have been widely exploited for 
the fabrication of biosensors with enhanced performance. In one study, a sandwich 
immunoassay was described for the detection of human chorionic gonadotropin, using 
AuNPs as the label at a graphene-modified electrode [39]. After the immunoreaction, 
the AuNP labels were oxidized to AuCl4 
−
 and quantified by voltammetry. In another 
study, a glassy carbon electrode was modified with graphene, single walled carbon 
nanotubes and AuNPs in a chitosan matrix [40]; this transducer formed the basis 
for a sandwich assay for the detection of prolactin, using AuNPs as signal tags 
immobilized on secondary antibodies and biotinylated DNA. Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 113 
In addition to AuNPs, other metal NPs have also been reported as labels in 
voltammetric biosensing. An electrochemical immunosensor for the determination of 
antibodies to tick-borne encephalitis virus was developed by Khristunova et al. [41]. 
Covalent immobilization of the antigen was performed via thiolation and glutarization 
of the electrode’s surface and detection was based on the silver reduction signal after 
dissolution of the Ag-antibodies bioconjugates. A sandwich immunosensor for the 
detection of Staphylococcus aureus, utilizing magnetic beads (MBs) and AgNPs, has 
also been reported in literature [42]. In this work, streptavidin-modified MBs were 
used for the immobilization of biotinylated primary anti-S. aureus aptamer, while 
a secondary anti-S. aureus aptamer was conjugated to the AgNPs used as labels. 
After magnetic separation and dissolution of AgNPs in HNO3, the voltammetric 
detection of Ag(I) was carried out at a screen-printed carbon working electrode. 
AgNPs have also been used as labels for the detection of human IgG and IgE using 
3-electrode screen-printing cells with bare carbon and AuNPs-modified working 
electrodes respectively [43, 44]. In both the cases, AgNPs were used as labels for 
the voltammetric determination of human IgGs, after their conjugation with the 
reporting antibody. Following the immunoassay, the AgNPs were dissolved in HNO3 
and the released Ag(I) was detected using a three-electrode screen-printed device 
with a carbon working electrode. In another study, silver dendrimer nanocomposites 
were synthesized and used as labels in immunoassays with stripping voltammetric 
detection of Ag(I) on a carbon electrode [45]. Other metal NPs can also serve as 
useful voltammetric labels in biosensing; relevant examples include CuNPs for the 
detection of glutathione [46], PtNPs for the detection of prostate specific antigen 
[47], Au-PdNPs for carbohydrate antigen 19-9 [48] and Ag/Au bimetallic NPs for the 
detection of Escherichia coli [49]. 
An important property of AuNPs is that they can serve as a catalyst to mediate 
the reduction of silver and copper ions. The reduction reaction leads to the in situ 
deposition of silver or copper on the AuNPs, the surface of which effectively serves 
as a nucleation site and results in the increase of the amount of the deposited copper 
or silver, with remarkable signal amplification. For example, an electrochemical 
sandwich-type immunosensor was reported for the detection of human 
cytomegalovirus glyco protein B, using Ag deposition catalyzed by AuNPs [50], 
while another immunosensor for the detection of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) 
employed MBs loaded with copper-encapsulated AuNPs [51]. In an attractive signal 
amplification process developed for the detection of carcinoembryonic antigen, 
involving silver deposition on polybead-loaded AuNPs, poly(styrene-co-acrylic 
acid) microbeads loaded with AuNPs were used as tags to label the signaling 
antibody, while AuNPs induced the deposition of silver [52]. In all these examples, 
the nucleated metal nanoclusters were detected voltametrically. 
QDs (composed of heavy metal sulfide, selenide or telluride salts) have been 
widely used as voltammmetric labels in immunosensing. In respective studies, a 
competitive immunoassay was developed for the detection of 17b-estradiol, using 
CdSe QD labels detected at a bismuth-coated carbon electrode [53]; and a CdTe QD￾based voltammetric biosensor was reported for the detection of neutravidin [54]. In 
another work, a PbS QDs-based sandwich-type immunoassay of C-reactive protein 114 Nanosensors 
was used at a bismuth citrate-loaded graphite screen-printed working electrode [55]. 
Therein, bismuth citrate served as a precursor compound for the in situ generation of 
bismuth nanostractured film on the surface of the transducer during the electrolytic 
preconcentration step. In yet another study, an immunosensor with a ZrO2-modified 
screen-printed carbon electrode was reported for the detection of organophosphorylated 
butyrylcholinesterase [56]. In this approach, the ZrO2 NPs were used to capture the 
organophosphate moiety of organophosphorylated butyrylcholinesterase adducts, 
followed by the introduction of CdSe QD-tagged anti-butyrylcholinesterase conjugate 
to form a sandwich-type complex on the sensor’s surface; Cd(II) released from the 
QDs were detected by anodic stripping voltammetry. Sharma et al. developed a 
novel electrochemical immunosensor for a sensitive and specific detection of anthrax 
protective antigen [57]. The immunosensor consisted of: (i) a glassy carbon electrode 
modified with a Nafion-multiwalled carbon nanotubes–bismuth nanocomposite film 
(BiNPs/Nafion-MWCNTs/GCE) as a sensing platform, and (ii) titanium phosphate 
NPs/cadmium(II)/mouse anti-protective antigen antibodies as signal amplification 
tags. Therein, the Cd(II) ions loaded on titanium phosphate NPs were detected in situ 
by cathodic voltammetry. Zhong et al. used CdS QDs-encapsulated metal-organic 
frameworks as signal-amplifying tags for ultrasensitive electrochemical detection of 
Escherichia coli O157:H7 in milk samples [58] (Figure 2). The tags were modified 
with anti-E. coli O157:H7 and a sandwich type electrochemical immunosensor 
for E. coli O157:H7 was fabricated, using voltammetric detection of the released 
Cd(II) ions. 
Multiplexed detection is highly desirable in biosensing, for multiparametric 
information (e.g., monitoring of more than one biomarkers in cancer diagnosis) 
Figure 2. (a) Schematic illustration of the of the sandwich-type electrochemical immunoassay for the 
detection of E. coli O157:H7 using CdS@ZIF-8 as signal tags; (b) Schematic illustration of the steps for 
voltammetric detection. From [58], Figure 1. Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 115 
is required in many cases. Two routes exist for multiplexed detection and will be 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
The first approach is based on a single type of metallic nanoprobe using a 
spatially separated array of electrodes, each devoted to a single bioassay. For example, 
Leng et al. developed a screen-printed device with two separate graphite working 
electrodes (and silver reference and graphite counter electrodes) for the preparation 
of two sandwich-type assays using AuNP labels for the parallel detection of human 
imunoglobulin and goat imunoglobulin [59]; the AuNPs were electrooxidized in HCl – to produce AuCl4 which was detected voltammetrically. Another screen-printed 
chip with two working carbon electrodes was deployed for the quantification of 
carcinoembryonic antigen and a-fetoprotein, using antibody-labeled AuNPs and 
silver deposition, by Lai et al. [60]. 
The second, and comparatively more elegant, multiplexing approach relies on 
using different types of QDs (e.g., PbS, CdS and ZnS) as specific “bio-tags” to label 
two or more biomolecules. In this case, detection can be carried out simultaneously 
at a single sensor and differentiation at the detection stage is based on the different 
voltammetric peak potentials of the respective QD metals. Multiplexed voltammetric 
immunoassays with multiple QD labels have been developed for the detection of 
carcinoembryonic antigen and cetuximab using CdSe and ZnO QDs [61], for 
B-cell lymphoma 2 and Bcl-2-associated X protein using CdSeTe/CdS QDs and Ag 
nanoclusters [62], for immunoglobulin G and carcinoembryonic antigen using CdSe 
and PbS QDs [63], for tumor cells using CdTe and ZnSe QDs [64], for bovine casein 
and bovine IgG using CdSe/ZnS and PbS QDs [65], for tetracycline and chloramphenicol 
with CdS and PbS QDs [66], for Escherichia coli O157:H7, campylobacter and 
salmonella with CuS, PbS and CdS QDs [67], and for carcinoembryonic antigen 
and a-fetoprotein using CdS/DNA and PbS/DNA nanochains [68]. The design of a 
sandwich-type immunoassay protocol has also been reported for the simultaneous 
detection of multiple biomarkers (CA 125, CA 15-3 and CA 19-9) [69], wherein 
the capture probes were prepared by co-immobilizing capture antibodies on 
ΜBs. PAMAM dendrimer-metal sulfide QD nanolabels containing CdS, ZnS and 
PbS were synthesized and used to tag polyclonal rabbit probe antibodies. Cd(II). 
Zn(II) and Pb(II) released by the acidic dissolution of the corresponding QD 
nanolabels were quantified by stripping voltammetry at a mercury-film electrode 
(Figure 3). 
Many types of microfluidic, flexible and lab-on-a-chip devices have been 
developed for the ultrasensitive detection of proteins and cells, using labels with 
metal-based nanoprobes. Martin-Yerga et al. reported an 8-channel screen-printed 
carbon electrochemical array controlled by a multipotentiostat for the detection 
of biotin and antitransglutaminase IgG antibodies, using CdSe/ZnS QDs as labels 
[70, 71]. After the immunoreactions, the QDs were dissolved in HCl and the released 
Cd(II) was detected by stripping voltammetry. Another study reported a PDMS flow 
injection microfluidic platform for the simultaneous detection of cardiac troponin I 
and C-reactive protein, using CdTe and ZnSe QDs as labels [72] (Figure 4). Oliveira 
et al. developed a simple, low-cost and disposable microfluidic device for Salmonella 
typhimurium (S. typhi) detection in milk, using AuNPs as a label [73]. S. typhi cells 116 Nanosensors 
Figure 3. Schematic illustration of the multiplexed stripping voltammetric immunoassay protocol using 
dendrimer-metal sulfide QD nanolabels and trifunctionalized MBs: (a) preparation process and (b) 
measurement principle. From [69], Scheme 1. 
Figure 4. PDMS flow injection microfluidic platform for the simultaneous detection of cardiac troponin 
I and C-reactive protein using CdTe and ZnSe QDs as labels. From [72], Figure 2.
 
were captured using MBs modified with anti-Salmonella antibody, followed by the 
tagging with a probe anti-Salmonella antibody labeled with AuNPs. The MBs bearing 
the immunoconjugate were injected into the device and magnetically captured on the 
working electrode surface. Detection of the AuNPs was performed after oxidation 
and voltammetric detection. Medina-Sánchez et al. developed an on-chip magneto￾immunoassay for apolipoprotein E, using CdSe/ZnS QDs as labeling carriers [74]. 
The immunoassay was performed in a flow mode, using MBs as a preconcentration Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 117 
platform in a flexible microfluidic chip with integrated screen-printed electrodes. 
The detection of Cd(II) was performed by stripping voltammetry. 
3. Genosensors using metal-based nanoprobes 
The operation of genosensors is based on the selective hybridization event of a 
single-stranded complementary probe oligonucleotide with the target DNA or RNA. 
Usually, the probe oligonucleotide or the target DNA or RNA is modified with metal￾based nanoprobes which can be monitored electrochemically [75]. 
AuNPs have been widely used as labels for the development of electrochemical 
genosensors. For instance, a biotinylated oligonucleotide probe DNA was immobilized 
in a streptavidin-modified microwell [76]. The biotinylated target DNA hybridized 
with the capture probe DNA and streptavidin-modified AuNPs were used as labels. 
The AuNPs labels were dissolved in HBr/Br2 solution and detected using stripping 
voltammetry at a glassy carbon working electrode. Daneshpour et al. developed a 
novel chip for the detection of RASSF1A tumor suppressor gene methylation, using 
Fe3O4/N-trimethylchitosan/AuNPs as tags to label a DNA probe [77] (Figure 5). 
Electrochemical detection involved the oxidation of AuNPs, along with cathodic 
voltammetry. In order to enhance the sensitivity of AuNPs-based DNA bioassays, 
different methodologies have been adopted, for instance conjugation of AuNPs with 
latex microspheres and with MBs [78]. AgNPs are another popular label in DNA 
biosensors. An relevant example is the development of a voltammetric biosensor for 
Figure 5. Schematic representation of the electrochemical DNA assay using Fe3O4/N-trimethylchitosan/ 
AuNPs as labels. From [77], Figure 1. 118 Nanosensors 
the detection of sequence-specific DNA by Hu et al. [79]. Initially, thiolated peptide 
nucleic acid probes were immobilized onto gold surface and the target DNA was 
hybridized. Subsequently, hematin was added for catalyzing the reduction of Ag ions 
in the presence of catechol, leading to the formation of AgNPs, detected by anodic 
stripping voltammetry. In a study by Hakimian and Ghourchian, another genosensor 
was developed for the detection of miR-155 as a breast biomarker [80]. Therein, 
a thiolated probe was immobilized on the gold electrode surface and allowed to 
hybridize with the target; thereafter, positively charged polyethyleneimine-AgNPs 
were absorbed onto the negatively charged probe-target hybrid; finally, the anodic 
current produced due to the oxidation of AgNPs was recorded. 
Different QD-based DNA assays have been reported in the literature. A DNA 
assay in microwells, developed by Sun et al., was based on a target-induced strand 
displacement reaction with blocker DNA (labeled with CdS QDs) from a biotinylated 
hairpin DNA [81]. For this assay, a hairpin-blocker DNA was immobilized on 
the surface of the microwell through biotin-streptavidin interaction. On addition 
of target DNA, the CdS-labeled blocker DNA was displaced by target DNA from 
the hairpin-blocker to form a new target-blocker DNA. Then, Cd(II) was released 
from the QDs using HNO3 and detected by stripping voltammetry at a mercury-film 
sensor. Another interesting QDs-based electrochemical biosensor was developed by 
Li et al. for detection of telomerase activity at the single-cell level in humans [82], 
wherein a thiol-modified capture DNA was attached to an Au surface. The presence 
of telomerase enabled the addition of telomere repeats to the 3’ end of the primer, 
accompanied by the incorporation of abundant biotins in the extension product. 
The extension product hybridized with the capture oligonucleotide and induced the 
concentration of a large number of streptavidin-modified QDs through streptavidin￾biotin interaction. Cd(II) released from the acidically dissolved QDs was detected 
by stripping voltammetry. Zhang et al. used a glassy carbon electrode modified with 
AuNPs for the development of a DNA QD-based biosensor [83]. Τhe biotin-labeled 
probe DNA was immobilized on the electrode and a label composed of streptavidin￾modified CdSe QDs was linked to the probe DNA. Upon hybridization with the 
target DNA, MspI endonuclease could recognize its specific sequence in the duplex 
DNA and cleave the dsDNA fragments linked with the CdSe QDs (Figure 6). After 
the dissolution of QDs in acid, Cd(II) was monitored by stripping voltammetry. 
Kokkinos et al. carried out the detection of the C634R mutation of DNA at a 
graphite screen-printed electrode modified with bismuth citrate [84]. In this case, 
streptavidin-modified PbS QDs were used to tag biotinylated DNA probes. In another 
piece of work, Kokkinos et al. fabricated a flexible 3-electrode sensor suitable for 
bioassays, using metal sputtering [85]. The DNA assay was developed directly in 
microtitration wells, where the complementary DNA probe modified with PbS 
QDs underwent hybridization with the biotinylated target oligonucleotide. Pb(II) 
was detected by stripping voltammetry at the bismuth-coated electrode. Kokkinos 
et al. also experimented with tin film electrodes produced on silicon wafer by a 
microengineering process as transducers for the voltammetric detection of Cd(II) 
liberated from QDs tags, enabling the detection of DNA at nanomolar levels [86]. Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 119 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the operational principle of a QDs-based DNA biosensor using MspI 
endonuclease. From [83], Figure 1. 
Several multiplexed voltammetric DNA and RNA assays using metal NPs and, 
more often, QD labels have also been reported in literature. For instance, Azzouzi 
et al. developed a neutravidin electrochemical biosensor for the simultaneous detection 
of miRNA-21 and miRNA-141 [87]. The assay was based on the fact that the target 
miRNA causes the opening of biotin-molecular beacons, followed by the capture 
of the biotinylated molecular beacons-metal NPs by the neutravidin biosensor and 
simultaneous detection of the captured AgNPs and AuNPs by stripping voltammetry. 
Vijian et al. developed an RNA genosensor for the detection of multiple pathogens 
using QDs tags [88]. Therein, RNA sequences were used as gene targets for Vibrio 
cholerae, Salmonella sp. and Shigella sp., while PbS, CdS and ZnS QDs were 
functionalized with DNA probes that were specific to each pathogen. The detection 
of released cations was performed by anodic stripping voltammetry. Krejcova et al. 
reported a multi-target barcode electrochemical assay for the detection of single point 
mutations in the H5N1 neuraminidase gene [89]. They used paramagnetic particles 
with covalently bound oligonucleotide probes for the isolation of complementary 
H5N1 chains labeled with QDs (CdS, ZnS and/or PbS). The metals in the QDs were 
detected by ASV at a mercury electrode. Rezai et al. developed an electrochemical 
assay for the simultaneous detection of two hemophilia A-related microRNAs (miR￾1246 and miR-4521) [90] (Figure 7). The assay used heavy metal QDs encapsulated 
in metal-organic frameworks and catalytic hairpin assembly for signal amplification. 
In another piece of research, Zhang et al. reported a voltammetric bio-barcoded 
biosensor for the simultaneous detection of the protective antigen A gene of Bacillus 
anthracis and the insertion element gene of Salmonella enteritidis [91]. Their 120 Nanosensors 
Figure 7. Schematic diagram of the operational principle of a biosensor for duplex detection of miR￾1246 and miR-4521 using catalytic hairpin assembly for signal amplification and QD labels. From [90], 
Figure 1. 
biosensor exploits three types of nanoparticles (AuNPs, MBs, and PbS and CdS QDs) 
for signal amplification, and a sandwich structure is formed: MBs-1st probeDNA/ 
target DNA/2nd probe DNA-AuNP-QDs barcoded DNA. A magnetic field is applied 
to separate the sandwich structure; the QDs are dissolved in nitric acid and the 
released cations are detected by anodic stripping voltammetry. Zhu et al. described 
an electrochemical assay for the multiplexed quantification of miRNAs, based on 
the combination of the high base-mismatch selectivity of ligase chain reaction and 
the significant electrochemical amplification of QDs barcodes [92]. Two reporting 
probes were prepared from oligonucleotides labeled with PbS and CdS QDs and two 
capture probes were immobilized on MBs. The miRNAs in the sample interacted 
with the reporting and capture probes, followed by the addition of T4 DNA ligase. 
After the release of the disjointed QDs barcodes from the MB-conjugates, the two 
target miRNAs of miR-155 and miR-27b could be simultaneously detected by 
stripping voltammetry. 
Paper-based analytical devices (PADs) have lately gained immense popularity, 
thanks to the advantageous operational features of paper as an analytical platform. 
In one study, Kokkinos et al. introduced a fluidic electrochemical PAD (ePAD) for 
the voltammetric detection of DNA (associated with Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia 
Type 2), using CdSe QDs as the label [93]. The ePAD was patterned by wax-printing, 
and featured an assay zone, an inlet zone and a sink. On the reverse side of the 
paper, an electrochemical cell was formed by the deposition of sputtered metals. The 
DNA assay involved immobilization of the capture complementary oligonucleotide, 
hybridization with biotinylated target DNA and labeling with streptavidin-modified 
Cd-based QDs. The released Cd(II) was measured by stripping voltammetry at a tin￾film sputtered electrode. In another research, a folding paper device for DNA sensing 
was introduced by Lu et al. [94]. The production procedure of the sensor consisted Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 121 
of wax-printing and screen-printing of electrodes. The device was modified with 
AuNPs and graphene in order to achieve an efficient DNA immobilization, and 
detection was based on a sandwich assay with AuNPs as labels. 
4. Conclusion and challenges 
Metal-based nanoprobes are very promising tools for the development of 
voltammetric biosensors in labelled format. Voltammetric detection is sensitive, 
selective and requires low-cost and portable instrumentation with minimal power 
consumption. In particular, stripping voltammetric detection allows for a further 
amplification step due to the initial accumulation of the target metal on the electrode 
surface. Furthermore, metal NPs and QDs can be easily prepared and functionalized 
with different chemical groups in order to facilitate conjugation with different types 
of biomolecules (proteins, cells and oligonucleotides). Their use as electrochemical 
labels enhances the detection sensitivity as a large number of potentially detectable 
label moieties can be attached to each target molecule. Also, signal amplification 
can be achieved using functionalized bulky carriers (e.g., metal-organic frameworks, 
carbon nanomaterials, MBs) with large surface areas, onto which an even larger 
amount of redox nanoprobes can be attached. Another alternative towards signal 
amplification is to initiate catalytic growth of metal nanoclusters. 
The selection of a suitable working electrode is another critical factor. 
Typically, metal NPs are detected at carbon electrodes and the detection sensitivity 
can be enhanced by modification of the transducer with nanomaterials like metal 
NPs, metal oxides and carbon nanomaterials. In this context, “one-shot” low-cost 
3-electrode sensors manufactured via screen-printing are ideal for the development 
of biosensors. Although heavy metals released from QDs can be detected at carbon 
electrodes, electrodes made of or modified with alloy-forming metals offer much 
higher sensitivity; while mercury is still being used, “green” bismuth- and tin￾based electrodes are gaining popularity due to their low toxicity and satisfactory 
analytical performance. Microengineering techniques (e.g., photolithography and 
sputtering) and screen-printing are particularly useful for the fabrication of single 
metal-film electrodes, integrated 3-electrode sensors or array sensors for multiplexed 
detection. 
In many cases, multiplexed analysis is required, in clinical analysis involving 
biomarker detection for instance. Although the use of electrode arrays for several 
spatially distinct and simultaneous bioassays is possible, this approach is limited 
by the requirement of a multi-potentiostat, while “cross-talk” between adjacent 
electrodes can occur. In this respect, the use of heavy metal QDs, which serve as 
“bio-barcodes”, is highly advantageous. After labeling each biomolecule with a 
different type of QD, multiplexed detection is possible in a single voltammetric scan 
by exploiting the different redox potential of each metal-based QD. 
Finally, new biosensing approaches based on the use of microfludic devices, 
paper-based devices and lab-on-a-chip devices have emerged; these platforms are 
useful for point-of-care and on-site applications due to their small size, low cost and 
disposability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 Nanosensors 
References 
[1]	 Bahadır, E.B. and M.K. Sezginturk. 2015. Applications of commercial biosensors in clinical, food, 
environmental and biothreat/biowarfare analyses. Anal. Biochem. 478: 107–120. 
[2] Justino, C.I.L., A.C. Freitas, R. Pereira, A.C. Duarte and T.A.P. Rosha-Santos. 2015. Recent 
developments in recognition elements for chemical sensors and biosensors. TrAC Trends Anal. 
Chem. 68: 2–17. 
[3] Arugula, M.A. and A. Simonian. 2014. Novel trends in affinity biosensors: Current challenges and 
perspectives. Meas. Sci. Technol. 25: 032001. 
[4] Holford, T.R.J., F. Davis and S.P.J. Higson. 2012. Recent trends in antibody based sensors. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 34: 12–24. 
[5]	 Tan, A., C. Lim, S. Zou, Q. Ma and Z. Gao. 2016. Electrochemical nucleic acid biosensors: From 
fabrication to application. Anal. Methods 8: 5169–5189. 
[6] Hasanzadeh, M. and N. Shadjou. 2016. Electrochemical nanobiosensing in whole blood: Recent 
advances. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 80: 167–176. 
[7]	 Wan, Y., Yan Su, X. Zhu, G. Liu and C. Fan. 2013. Development of electrochemical immunosensors 
towards point of care diagnostics. Biosens. Bioelectron. 47: 1–11. 
[8] Martin-Fernandez, B., C.L. Manzanares-Palenzuela, M.S.P. Lopez, N. Santos- Alvarez and B. 
Lopez-Ruiz. 2017. Electrochemical genosensors in food safety assessment. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. 
Nutr. 13: 2758–2774. 
[9] Duffy, G.F. and E.J. Moore. 2017. Electrochemical immunosensors for food analysis: A review of 
recent developments. Anal. Lett. 50: 1–32. 
[10] Arduini, F., S. Cinti, V. Scognamiglio, D. Moscone and G. Palleschi. 2017. How cutting-edge 
technologies impact the design of electrochemical (bio)sensors for environmental analysis. A 
review. Anal. Chim. Acta 9: 15–42. 
[11] Skladal, P., D. Kovar, V. Krajicek, P. Siskova, J. Pribyl and E. Svabenska. 2013. Electrochemical 
immunosensors for detection of microorganisms. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 8: 1635–1649. 
[12] Orozco, J. and L.K. Medlin. 2013. Review: Advances in electrochemical genosensors based 
methods for monitoring blooms of toxic algae. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 20: 6838–6850. 
[13] Sang, S., Y. Wang, Q. Feng, Y. Wei, J. Ji and W. Zhang. 2016. Progress of new label-free techniques 
for biosensors: A review. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 36: 465–481. 
[14] Luo, X. and J.J. Davis. 2013. Electrical biosensors and the label free detection of protein disease 
biomarkers. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42: 5944–5962. 
[15] Pei, X., B. Zhang, J. Tang, B. Liu, W. Lai and D. Tang. 2013. Sandwich-type immunosensors and 
immunoassays exploiting nanostructure labels: A review. Anal. Chim. Acta 758: 1–18. 
[16]	 Omidfar, K., F. Khorsand and M.D. Azizi. 2013. New analytical applications of gold nanoparticles 
as label in antibody based sensors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 43: 336–347. 
[17] Ding, L., A.M. Bond, J. Zhai and J. Zhang. 2013. Utilization of nanoparticle labels for signal 
amplification in ultrasensitive electrochemical affinity biosensors: A review. Anal. Chim. Acta 
797: 1–12. 
[18] Huo, X., X. Liu, J. Liu, P. Sukumaran, S. Alwarappan and D.K.Y. Wong. 2016. Strategic applications 
of nanomaterials as sensing platforms and signal amplification markers at electrochemical 
immunosensors. Electroanalysis 28: 1730–1749. 
[19] Lei, J. and H. Ju. 2016. Signal amplification using nanomaterials for biosensing. pp. 17–41. In: 
Tuantranont, A. (ed.). Springer Series on Chemical Sensors and Biosensors, Applications of 
Nanomaterials in Sensors and Diagnostics, Volume 14, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. 
[20] Fenzl, C., T. Hirsch and A.J. Baeumner. 2016. Nanomaterials as versatile tools for signal 
amplification in (bio)analytical applications. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 79: 306–316.
[21] Koyappayil, A. and M.H. Lee. 2021. Ultrasensitive materials for electrochemical biosensor labels. 
Sensors 21: 89. 
[22] Malekzad, H., P.S. Zangabad, H. Mirshekari, M. Karimi and M.R. Hamblin. 2017. Noble metal 
nanoparticles in biosensors: Recent studies and applications. Nanotechnol. Rev. 6: 301–329. 
[23] Kokkinos, C. and A. Economou. 2017. Emerging trends in biosensing using stripping voltammetric 
detection of metal-containing nanolabels—A review. Anal. Chim. Acta 961: 12–32.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 123 
[24]	 Valera, E., A. Hernandez-Albors and M.P. Marco. 2016. Electrochemical coding strategies using 
metallic nanoprobes for biosensing applications. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 79: 9–22. 
[25] Campuzano, S., P. Yáñez-Sedeño and J.M. Pingarrón. 2019. Nanoparticles for nucleic-acid-based 
biosensing: Opportunities, challenges, and prospects. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 411: 1791–1806. 
[26] Iglesias-Mayor, A., O. Amor-Gutiérrez, A. Costa-García and A. de la Escosura-Muñiz. 2019. 
Nanoparticles as emerging labels in electrochemical immunosensors. Sensors 19: 5137. 
[27] Merkoci, A., M. Aldavert, S. Marın and S. Alegret. 2005. New materials for electrochemical 
sensing V: Nanoparticles for DNA labeling. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 24: 341–349. 
[28] Zhou, W., X. Gao, D. Liu and X. Chen. 2015. Gold nanoparticles for in vitro diagnostics. Chem. 
Rev. 115: 10575–10636. 
[29]	 Wang, J. 2012. Electrochemical biosensing based on noble metal nanoparticles. Microchim. Acta 
177: 245–270. 
[30] Pedrero, M., S. Campuzano and J.M. Pingarron. 2017. Electrochemical (bio)sensing of clinical 
markers using quantum dots. Electroanalysis 29: 24–37. 
[31] Huang, H. and J.J. Zhu. 2013. The electrochemical applications of quantum dots. Analyst 
138: 5855–5865. 
[32] Farzin, M.A and H. Abdoos. 2021. A critical review on quantum dots: From synthesis toward 
applications in electrochemical biosensors for determination of disease-related biomolecules. 
Talanta 224: 121828. 
[33] Jamkhande, P.G., N.W. Ghule, A.H. Bamer and M.G. Kalaskar. 2019. Metal nanoparticles synthesis: 
An overview on methods of preparation, advantages and disadvantages, and applications. J. Drug 
Deliv. Sci. Technol. 53: 101174. 
[34] Karakoti, A.S., R. Shukla, R. Shanker and S. Singh. 2015. Surface functionalization of quantum 
dots for biological applications. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 215: 28–45. 
[35] Yüce, M. and H. Kurt. 2017. How to make nanobiosensors: Surface modification and 
characterisation of nanomaterials for biosensing applications. RSC Adv. 7: 49386–49403. 
[36] Economou, A. and C. Kokkinos 2016. Advances in stripping analysis of metals. pp. 1–18. 
In: Arrigan, D.W.M. (ed.). Electrochemical Strategies in Detection Science, RSC Detection 
Science Series No. 6, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK. 
[37] Kokkinos, C., A. Economou and M.I. Prodromidis. 2016. Electrochemical immunosensors: 
Critical survey of different architectures and transduction strategies. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 
79: 88–105. 
[38]	 Omidfar, K., H. Zarei, F. Gholizadeh and B. Larijani. 2012. A high-sensitivity electrochemical 
immunosensor based on mobile crystalline material-41-polyvinyl alcohol nanocomposite and 
colloidal gold nanoparticles. Anal. Biochem. 421: 649–656. 
[39] Lim, S.A., H. Yoshikawa, E. Tamiya, H.M. Yasin and M.U. Ahmed. 2014. Highly sensitive 
gold nanoparticle bioprobe based electrochemical immunosensor using screen printed graphene 
biochip. RSC Adv. 4: 58460–58466. 
[40] Li, S., Y. Yan, L. Zhong, P. Liu, Y. Sang, W. Cheng and S. Ding. 2015. Electrochemical sandwich 
immunoassay for the peptide hormone prolactin using an electrode modified with graphene, 
single walled carbon nanotubes and antibody-coated gold nanoparticles. Microchim. Acta 
182: 1917–1924. 
[41] Khristunova, Y., E. Korotkova, B. Kratochvil, J. Barek, E. Dorozhko, V. Vyskocil, E. Plotnikov, O. 
Voronova and V. Sidelnikov. 2019. Preparation and investigation of silver nanoparticle–antibody 
bioconjugates for electrochemical immunoassay of tick-borne encephalitis. Sensors 19: 2103. 
[42] Abbaspour, A., F. Norouz-Sarvestani, A. Noori and N. Soltani. 2015. Aptamer-conjugated silver 
nanoparticles for electrochemical dual-aptamer-based sandwich detection of staphylococcus 
aureus. Biosens. Bioelectron. 68: 149–155. 
[43] Hao, N., H. Li, Y. Long, L. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Xu and H.Y. Chen. 2011. An electrochemical 
immunosensing method based on silver nanoparticles. J. Electroanal. Chem. 656: 50–54. 
[44] Song, W., H. Li, H. Liu, Z. Wu, W. Qiang and D. Xu. 2013. Fabrication of streptavidin functionalized 
silver nanoparticle decorated graphene and its application in disposable electrochemical sensor for 
immunoglobulin E. Electrochem. Commun. 31: 16–19. 
[45] Stofik, M., Z. Stryhal and J. Maly. 2009. Dendrimer-encapsulated silver nanoparticles as a novel 
electrochemical label for sensitive immunosensors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 24: 1918–1923.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124 Nanosensors 
[46]	 Wang, Z., P. Han, X. Mao, Y. Yin and Y. Cao. 2017. Sensitive detection of glutathione by using 
DNA-templated copper nanoparticles as electrochemical reporters. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 
238: 325–330. 
[47] Spain, E., S. Gilgunn, S. Sharma, K. Adamson, E. Carthy, R.O. Kennedy and R.J. Forster. 2016. 
Detection of prostate specific antigen based on electrocatalytic platinum nanoparticles conjugated 
to a recombinant scFv antibody. Biosens. Bioelectron. 77: 759–766. 
[48]	 Yang, F., Z. Yang, Y. Zhuo, Y. Chai and R. Yuan. 2015. Ultrasensitive electrochemical immunosensor 
for carbohydrate antigen 19-9 using Au/porous graphene nanocomposites as platform and Au@ 
Pd core/shell bimetallic functionalized graphene nanocomposites as signal enhancers. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 66: 356–362. 
[49] Eksi, H., R. Guzel, B. Guven, I.H. Boyaci and A.O. Solak. 2015. Fabrication of an electrochemical 
E. coli biosensor in biowells using bimetallic nanoparticle-labelled antibodies. Electroanalysis 
27: 343–352. 
[50] Pires, F., H. Silva, O. Dominguez-Renedo, M.A. Alonso-Lomillo, M.J. Arcos-Martinez and 
A.C. Dias-Cabral. 2015. Disposable immunosensor for human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B 
detection. Talanta 136: 42–46. 
[51] Shen, G. and Y. Zhang. 2010. Highly sensitive electrochemical stripping detection of hepatitis 
B surface antigen based on copper-enhanced gold nanoparticle tags and magnetic nanoparticles. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 674: 27–31. 
[52] Lin, D., J. Wu, M. Wang, F. Yan and H. Ju. 2012. Triple signal amplification of graphene film, 
polybead carried gold nanoparticles as tracing tag and silver deposition for ultrasensitive 
electrochemical immunosensing. Anal. Chem. 84: 3662−3668.
[53] Chaisuwan, N., H. Xu, G. Wu and J. Liu. 2013. A highly sensitive differential pulse anodic 
stripping voltammetry for determination of 17b-estradiol (E2) using CdSe quantum dots based on 
indirect competitive immunoassay. Biosens. Bioelectron. 46: 150–154. 
[54] Dua, D., J. Ding, Y. Tao, H. Li and X. Chen. 2008. CdTe nanocrystal-based electrochemical 
biosensor for the recognition of neutravidin by anodic stripping voltammetry at electrodeposited 
bismuth film. Biosens. Bioelectron. 24: 863–868.
[55] Kokkinos, C., M. Prodromidis, A. Economou, P. Petrou and S. Kakabakos. 2015. Disposable 
integrated bismuth citrate-modified screen-printed immunosensor for ultrasensitive quantum dot￾based electrochemical assay of C-reactive protein in human serum. Anal. Chim. Acta 886: 29–36. 
[56] Lu, D., J. Wang, L. Wang, D. Du, C. Timchalk, R. Barry and Y. Lin. 2011. A novel nanoparticle-based 
disposable electrochemical immunosensor for diagnosis of exposure to toxic organophosphorus 
agents. Adv. Funct. Mater. 21: 4371–4378. 
[57] Sharma, M.K., J. Narayanan, S. Upadhyay and A.K. Goel. 2015. Electrochemical immunosensor 
based on bismuth nanocomposite film and cadmium ions functionalized titanium phosphates for 
the detection of anthrax protective antigen toxin. Biosens. Bioelectron. 74: 299–304. 
[58] Zhong, M., L. Yang, H. Yang, C. Cheng, W. Deng, Y. Tan, Q. Xie and S. Yao. 2019. An 
electrochemical immunobiosensor for ultrasensitive detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7 using 
CdS quantum dots-encapsulated metal-organic frameworks as signal-amplifying tags. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 126: 493–500. 
[59] Leng, C., G. Lai, F. Yan and H. Ju. 2010. Gold nanoparticle as an electrochemical label for 
inherently crosstalk-free multiplexed immunoassay on a disposable chip. Anal. Chim. Acta 
666: 97–101. 
[60] Lai, G., L. Wang, J. Wu, H. Jua and F. Yan. 2012. Electrochemical stripping analysis of nanogold 
label-induced silver deposition for ultrasensitive multiplexed detection of tumor markers. Anal. 
Chim. Acta 721: 1–6. 
[61]	 Yang, C., C. Xu, X. Wang and X. Hu. 2012. Quantum-dot-based biosensor for simultaneous 
detection of biomarker and therapeutic drug: First steps toward an assay for quantitative 
pharmacology. Analyst 137: 1205–1209. 
[62] Zhou, S., Y. Wang and J.J. Zhu. 2016. Simultaneous detection of tumor cell apoptosis regulators 
Bcl-2 and Bax through a dual-signal-marked electrochemical immunosensor. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 8: 7674−7682. 
[63] Qian, J., H. Dai, X. Pan and S. Liu. 2011. Simultaneous detection of dual proteins using quantum 
dots coated silica nanoparticles as labels. Biosens. Bioelectron. 28: 314–319.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Metal Nanoprobe-Based Voltammetric Biosensors 125 
[64]	 Wu, Y., P. Xue, Y. Kang and K.M. Hui. 2013. Highly specific and ultrasensitive graphene-enhanced 
electrochemical detection of low-abundance tumor cells using silica nanoparticles coated with 
antibody-conjugated quantum dots. Anal. Chem. 85: 3166−3173.
[65] Kokkinos, C., M. Angelopoulou, A. Economou, M. Prodromidis, A. Florou, W. Haasnoot, P. 
Petrou and S. Kakabakos. 2016. Lab-on-a-membrane foldable devices for duplex drop-volume 
electrochemical biosensing using quantum dot tags. Anal. Chem. 88: 6897−6904.
[66] Liu, B., B. Zhang, G. Chen and D. Tang. 2014. Biotin-avidin-conjugated metal sulfide nanoclusters 
for simultaneous electrochemical immunoassay of tetracycline and chloramphenicol. Microchim. 
Acta 181: 257–262. 
[67]	 Viswanathan, S., C. Rani and J.A. Ho. 2102. Electrochemical immunosensor for multiplexed 
detection of food-borne pathogens using nanocrystal bioconjugates and MWCNT screen-printed 
electrode. Talanta 94: 315– 319. 
[68] Kong, F.Y., B.Y. Xu, J.J. Xu and H.Y. Chen. 2103. Simultaneous electrochemical immunoassay 
using CdS/DNA and PbS/DNA nanochains as labels. Biosens. Bioelectron. 39: 177–182. 
[69]	 Tang, D., L. Hou, R. Niessner, M. Xu, Z. Gao and D. Knopp. 2013. Multiplexed electrochemical 
immunoassay of biomarkers using metal sulfide quantum dot nanolabels and trifunctionalized 
magnetic beads. Biosens. Bioelectron. 6: 37–43. 
[70]	 Martin-Yerga, D., M.B. Gonzalez-Garcia and A. Costa-Garcia. 2013. Biosensor array based on the 
in situ detection of quantum dots as electrochemical label. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 182: 184–189. 
[71]	 Martin-Yerga, D., M.B. Gonzalez-Garcia and A. Costa-Garcia. 2014. Electrochemical 
immunosensor for anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies based on the in situ detection of 
quantum dots. Talanta 130: 598–602. 
[72] Zhou, F., M. Lu, W. Wang, Z.P. Bian, J.R. Zhang and J.J. Zhu. 2016. Electrochemical immunosensor 
for simultaneous detection of dual cardiac markers based on a poly(dimethylsiloxane)-gold 
nanoparticles composite microfluidic chip: A proof of principle. Clin. Chem. 56: 1701–1707.
[73] Oliveira, T.R., D.H. Martucci and R.C. Faria. 2018. Simple disposable microfluidic device 
for Salmonella typhimurium detection by magneto-immunoassay. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 
255: 684–69. 
[74] Medina-Sánchez, M., S. Miserere, E. Morales-Narváez and A. Merkoçi. 2014. On-chip magneto￾immunoassay for Alzheimer’s biomarker electrochemical detection by using quantum dots as 
labels. Biosens. Bioelectron. 54: 279–284. 
[75] Kokkinos, C. 2019. Electrochemical DNA biosensors based on labeling with nanoparticles. 
Nanomaterials 9: 1361. 
[76] Liao, K.T., J.T. Cheng, C.L. Li, R.T. Liu and H.J. Huang. 2009. Ultra-sensitive detection of 
mutated papillary thyroid carcinoma DNA using square wave stripping voltammetry method and 
amplified gold nanoparticle biomarkers. Biosens. Bioelectron. 24: 1899–1904. 
[77] Daneshpour, M., L. Syed Moradi, P. Izadi and K. Omidfar. 2016. Femtomolar level detection 
of RASSF1A tumor suppressor gene methylation by electrochemical nano-genosensor based on 
Fe3O4/TMC/Au nanocomposite and PT-modified electrode. Biosens. Bioelectron. 77: 1095–1103. 
[78]	 Low, K.F., P. Rijiravanich, K.K.B. Singh, W. Surareungchai and C.Y. Yean. 2015. An 
electrochemical genosensing assay based on magnetic beads and gold nanoparticle-loaded latex 
microspheres for Vibrio cholerae detection. J. Biom. Nanotechn. 11: 702–710. 
[79] Hu, Q., W. Hu, J. Kong and X. Zhang. 2015. Ultrasensitive electrochemical DNA biosensor 
by exploiting hematin as efficient biomimetic catalyst toward in situ metallization. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 63: 269–275. 
[80] Hakimian, F. and H. Ghourchian. 2020. Ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensor for detection of 
microRNA-155 as a breast cancer risk factor. Anal. Chim. Acta 1136: 1–8. 
[81] Sun, A.L., Y.F. Zhang and X.N. Wang. 2015. Sensitive voltammetric determination of DNA via a 
target-induced strand-displacement reaction using quantum dot-labeled probe DNA. Microchim. 
Acta 182: 1403–1410. 
[82] Li, C.C., J. Hu, M. Lu and C.Y. Zhang. 2018. Quantum dot-based electrochemical biosensor 
for stripping voltammetric detection of telomerase at the single-cell level. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
122: 51–57. 
[83] Zhang, C., J. Lou, W. Tu, J. Bao and Z. Dai. 2015. Ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensing for 
DNA using quantum dots combined with restriction endonuclease. Analyst 140: 506–511.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Nanosensors 
[84] Kokkinos, C., M. Prodromidis, A. Economou, P. Petrou and S. Kakabakos. 2015. Quantum dot￾based electrochemical DNA biosensor using a screen-printed graphite surface with embedded 
bismuth precursor. Electrochem. Comm. 60: 47–5. 
[85] Kokkinos, C., A. Economou, T. Speliotis, P. Petrou and S. Kakabakos. 2015c. Flexible 
microfabricated film sensors for the in situ quantum dot-based voltammetric detection of DNA
hybridization in microwells. Anal. Chem. 87: 853−857.
[86] Kokkinos, C., A. Economou, P. Petrou and S. Kakabakos. 2013. Microfabricated Tin−film 
electrodes for protein and DNA sensing based on stripping voltammetric detection of Cd(II) 
released from quantum dots labels. Anal. Chem. 85: 10686−10691.
[87] Azzouzi, S., Z. Fredj, A.P.F. Turner, M. Ben Ali and W.C. Mak. 2019. Generic neutravidin 
biosensor for simultaneous multiplex detection of microRNAs via electrochemically encoded 
responsive nanolabels. ACS Sens. 4: 326–334. 
[88]	 Vijian, D., S.V. Chinni, L.S. Yin, B. Lertanantawong and W. Surareungchai. 2016. Non-protein 
coding RNA-based genosensor with quantum dots as electrochemical labels for attomolar 
detection of multiple pathogens. Biosens. Bioelectron. 77: 805–811. 
[89] Krejcova, L., D. Hynek, P. Kopel, M.A.M. Rodrigo, V. Adam, J. Hubalek, P. Babula, L. Trnkova 
and R. Kizek. 2013. Development of a magnetic electrochemical bar code array for point mutation 
detection in the H5N1 neuraminidase gene. Viruses 5: 1719–1739. 
[90] Rezaei, H., M. Motovali-Bashi and S. Radfar. 2019. An enzyme-free electrochemical biosensor 
for simultaneous detection of two hemophilia A biomarkers: Combining target recycling with 
quantum dots-encapsulated metal-organic frameworks for signal amplification. Anal. Chim. Acta 
1092: 66–74. 
[91] Zhang, D., M.C. Huarng and E.C.A. Alocilja. 2010. Multiplex nanoparticle-based bio-barcoded 
DNA sensor for the simultaneous detection of multiple pathogens. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
26: 1736–1742. 
[92] Zhu, W., X. Su, X. Gao, Z. Dai and X. Zou. 2014. A label-free and PCR-free electrochemical assay 
for multiplexed microRNA profiles by ligase chain reaction coupling with quantum dots barcodes. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 53: 414–419. 
[93] Kokkinos, C.T., D.L. Giokas, A.S. Economou, P.S. Petrou and S.E. Kakabakos. 2018. Paper-based 
microfluidic device with integrated sputtered electrodes for stripping voltammetric determination 
of DNA via quantum dot labeling. Anal. Chem. 90: 1092−1097. 
[94] Lu, J., S. Ge, L. Ge, M. Yan and J. Yu. 2012. Electrochemical DNA sensor based on three￾dimensional folding paper device for specific and sensitive point-of-care testing. Electrochim. 
Acta 80: 334–341.  
 
 
 
6
 
Applications of Sensitive Electrode 
Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins
 
Stella Girousi* and Panayiotis Zararis 
1. Introduction 
The term vitamin was first used in 1912, and the associated capital letters as we 
know today began to be used in 1916. Today, vitamins are categorized as either 
water-soluble (vitamins C and B) or fat-soluble (A, D, E, K). Vitamins are a group 
of heterogeneous chemical compounds known for their usefulness in the normal 
functioning of organisms. Some vitamins, in addition to their use as dietary 
supplements, are used as food additives due to their antioxidant properties. 
Vitamins are organic substances (without calories) that regulate the body’s 
functions. More specifically, vitamins regulate: 
1. the absorption of nutrients, 
2. their metabolism, 
3. the digestion of nutrients, and 
4. the creation of body tissues. 
They got their name from the Latin word ‘vita’, which means life, and from 
the word ‘amines’ because they were originally believed to be related to amines. 
International IU units are used to measure the amount of vitamins in food or in the 
body. The amount in grams of vitamin corresponding to 1 IU is different for each 
vitamin. For instance, 1 IU is equal to 0.3 µg of vitamin A, while 1 IU is equal to 
0.025 µg of vitamin D. Their sources and their chemical structure have been 
summarized in the literature [1–6]. Athorough introduction about the physicochemical 
and electrochemical principles regarding the characterization of vitamins is also 
available in literature [7–12, 14] In Table 1 are shown the chemical structures of the 
vitamins. 
Analytical Chemistry laboratory, School of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. 
* Corresponding author: girousi@chem.auth.gr 128 Nanosensors 
Table 1. Chemical structure of vitamins. 
N OH
N HO OH
H2N
N+ Cl- OH
S
N NH
N N O
OH O
B1, thiamine B2, rivoflavin 
O O
NH2 OH
N N
B3, nicotinamide B4, niacin 
HN
OH
HO
O
O
HO
Β5, pantothenic acid 
HO N
HO
OH
B6, pyridoxine 
NH
O
H
H HN
S HN
N
O
NH
H2N
N
N
HO
O
B7, biotin 
O
OH
HN
O
O
OH
B9, folic acid 
Table 1 contd. ... Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 129 
...Table 1 contd. 
B12 cyanocobalamin 
OH
OH
O OH
O
HO
C, ascorbic acid 
OH
Α1, retinol 
O
Retinal 
HO
D2, ergocalciferol 
HO
D3, cholocalciferol 
Table 1 contd. ... O
O O
K2, menaquinone 
OH
E, tocopherol K1, menaquinone 
130 Nanosensors 
...Table 1 contd. 
2. Water-soluble vitamins 
2.1 Vitamin B 
The group of B vitamins consists of various compounds which vary significantly from 
one another. This group consists of thiamine (B1), riboflavin (B2), nicotinic acid and 
nicotinamide (B3), pantothenic acid and its calcium salt (B5), biotin (B7), folic acid 
(B9), and cyanocobalamin (B12). Of all these vitamins, only B5 is electrochemically 
inactive to a range of potentials typically applied to conventional electrodes. 
It has been observed that Vit B5 cannot be detected in some electrolytic systems 
since no peaks appear in the corresponding cyclic voltammograms recorded by 
differential pulse voltammetry [15]. There is only one study referring to the redox 
behavior of the alcoholic derivative D-panthenol using differential pulse voltammetry 
[16]. 
The main techniques used in vitamin B analysis are differential pulse 
voltammetry (DPV) and square pulse voltammetry (SWV). Both of these techniques 
are characterized by higher sensitivity due to their ability to distinguish faradaic from 
capacitive current. However, less sensitive techniques such as cyclic voltammetry 
(CV) and linear scan voltammetry are still used because of their ease of use and 
because they do not require the same parameters as those in DPV and SWV. 
For the detection of B vitamins, the use of cyclic and stripping voltammetry 
on glassy carbon or mercury electrodes, as well as on electrodes formed with gold, 
mercury and organic materials has been reported in literature [13]. Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 131 
When it comes to electrode selection, most methods rely on chemically 
modified electrodes. This is because a suitable modifier can reduce the potential and/ 
or minimize contamination of the electrode surface, and increase the sensitivity and 
the separation of peaks. 
This method is particularly useful in complex systems such as interfering 
biological samples. Glassy carbon, a material characterized by low porosity, good 
electrical conductivity and high stability even in corrosive media, is the most widely 
used substrate. 
Among the most innovative modifiers, it is worth mentioning nanoparticles like 
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), gold nanoparticles, and graphene. Carbon paste electrodes 
are also still widely used. As a matter of fact, they are an easy way to make modified 
electrodes [17]. The modifier can be dissolved in a binder or mixed with the paste 
during homogenization. Carbon pastes are reusable materials that have excellent 
conductivity and electrocatalytic properties. 
Despite the trend towards more “green” chemistry and concerns about the 
toxicity and waste of mercury, mercury-based electrodes are still widely used in the 
detection of vitamins. Bismuth electrodes, which appeared a decade ago to replace 
mercury, have also found some applications in the detection of vitamins. This trend 
probably reflects the fact that the first electrochemical methods proposed for vitamins 
were methods of redistribution. 
Also noteworthy is the introduction of screen-printed electrodes (SPEs), which 
have attracted interest in recent years due to their low cost, commercial viability, high 
repeatability and the absence of time-consuming cleaning procedures (as required for 
common electrodes). 
Regarding the performance of the proposed methods, the limits of detection 
and their ranges are variable. This is to be expected as it reflects the wide variety 
of substrates to be studied. As is well known, the concentration of vitamins varies 
in many orders of magnitude, from very high in pharmaceuticals and dietary 
supplements, to very low in food and biological fluids. 
Furthermore, each substrate needs a specific treatment with the most appropriate 
method; too much dilution not only minimizes the effect of the substrate but also 
affects the final accuracy, as the uncertainty should be changed taking dilution into 
account. 
Stripping voltammetric methods were developed for the determination of 
vitamin B1 by various electrodes such as glassy carbon modified with lead film, or 
mercury, with ring-shaped electrode with liquid silver amalgam modified (AgLAF￾AgSAE) as well as paste electrode DNA/MWCNT [17–20]. 
Lead has been found to be valuable as a substitute for mercury, given its low 
toxicity, high potential range, ability to operate over a wide pH range and the fact 
that its surface can be easily renewed. Two of these methods allow for the simultaneous 
determination of vitamin B1 with other vitamins such as B2 and C. The use of the 
AgLAF-AgSAE electrode gives well-separated peaks for B1 and C, with a detection 
limit comparable to mercury electrodes [18–21]. The actual samples studied were 
biological, pharmaceutical and juices. The detection limits reported in the literature 
were similar. 132 Nanosensors 
The electrochemistry of vitamin B2 (riboflavin) has been extensively studied in 
the last 10 years. Stripping voltammetric methods have been developed on Bi-Cu 
electrodes, amalgams of silver, mercury, hot graphite and DNA-modified electrodes. 
Carbonated glass electrodes modified with various materials have also been tested 
for stripping voltammetry. It is worth mentioning that the most novel nanomaterials 
include poly (3,4 ethylenedioxythiophene)/zirconia nanocomposites (PEDOT/ 
ZrO2NPs), oleamine nanocomposites (OLA), NiO/polyunsaturates and Cr/SnO 
[21–24]. A single glassy carbon electrode has also been used to detect B2 in breast 
milk [25]. The use of Co-Y zeolites on carbon paste electrodes in differential pulse 
voltammetry measurements has been found to increase electrode selectivity and 
sensitivity due to the interactions of riboflavin with zeolites [26]. 
Some of these methods rely on the selective adsorption of riboflavin on the 
modifier, thus allowing a lower LOD and avoiding interference from other substances. 
Nanocomposites show excellent catalytic activity for riboflavin detection. Co￾determination of riboflavin with ascorbic acid and folic acid has also been studied by 
researchers [26, 27]. 
Modifiers help overcome the problems and limitations of simple electrodes. It is 
a characteristic of classical glassy carbon electrodes to not show stable voltammetric 
signals for many vitamins in a mixture due to the contamination caused by their 
oxidation products [27]. 
Nicotinic acid and nicotinamide (vitamin B3) can be detected in pharmaceutical 
samples using cyclic voltammetry and gold electrodes [28]. Gold has also been used 
as a substrate for the deposition of thioglycolic acid monolayers and the resulting 
probe used to detect nicotinic acid in foods through stripping voltammetry [29]. 
Nicotinic acid can be detected in urine samples by amperometric detection 
at a carbon/TiO2 nanotube electrode inoculated with La [30]. This electrode 
prevents interference from other vitamins due to the specialized interactions of the 
nanocomposite with nicotinic acid. Nicotinamide in pharmaceutical samples has also 
been detected by polarography using a surfactant system as well as with a carbon 
paste electrode modified with macrocyclic compounds [31, 32]. 
As far as vitamin B6 is concerned, many studies have focused on the detection 
of mainly pyridoxine. In pharmaceutical and urine samples, pyrodoxine has been 
detected using unmodified glassy carbon electrodes, through cyclic voltammetry and 
differential pulse voltammetry [33, 34]. 
Glassy carbon has also been studied as a substrate in pyridoxine sensors, with 
various modifiers such as DNA, carbon nanotubes, methylene green polymer with 
modified carbon nanotubes, and carbon nanotubes with Au-CuO, for differential 
pulse voltammetry; Carbon paste electrodes modified with nanoparticles and ionic 
liquids, ZnO or ZnO2, crown ethers and polyurethane have also been found to be able 
to detect vitamin B6 through square pulse voltammetry [37–40]. 
It has been successfully detected in various types of samples, including 
multivitamin tablets, cereals, energy drinks, blood and cerebrospinal fluid, using 
graphite electrodes modified with molecularly imprinted polymer using bimetallic 
magnetic nanoparticles as the substrate. Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 133 
The detection of biotin (Vitamin B7) has been mentioned very few times in the 
literature, and only in the last decade. It is associated with the analysis of food, using 
biosensors. One of the investigations that took place used a composite liquid ion￾chitin film with electrochemically deposited Pd-Fe-Ni nanoparticles as the sensor 
[42], while another reported a composite electrode sensor where the electrochemical 
signal was based on the enzymatic activity of the enzyme superoxide. Horseradish 
when adding H2O2 as a substrate and o-phenylenediamine as a co-substrate [43]. 
Square wave voltammetry was used in both the studies. 
Folic acid (B9) has been extensively studied due to its biological importance. 
Many examples with carbon paste electrodes have been reported for the detection of 
vitamin B9. Among the materials used to make the electrodes are TiO2 nanoparticles 
composite materials (with differential pulse voltammetry) [44] and carbon nanotubes 
(with circular and differential pulse voltammetry) [45]. 
Ru(II)-ZnO complex composites with carbon nanotubes for circular voltammetry 
and square pulse voltammetry [46], gold nanoparticles for circular voltammetry and 
square pulse voltammetry, Co for square pulse voltammetry [49], as well as various 
polymers for circular voltammetry and differential pulse voltammetry have also been 
studied [50, 51]. The resulting sensors were used to analyze real samples, such as 
pharmaceutical and biological samples, and food. Glassy carbon electrodes have 
also been modified with nanostructured materials for differential and quadratic pulse 
voltammetry [52, 53]; polymeric films for differential pulsed voltammetry [54] and 
metals for resorption adsorption voltammetry [55] have also been investigated for the 
detection of vitamins B9 and C. Furthermore, gold electrodes with nanostructured 
materials in differential pulse voltammetry have also been reported [56]. 
Stripping voltammetry after the accumulation of different materials such as 
silver amalgams [57], mercury [58], and bismuth film [59] has also proven to be a 
technique capable of detecting folic acid, mainly in pharmaceuticals. 
Vitamin B12 can be detected using disposable graphite electrodes modified 
with carbon nanotubes and chitosan, through square pulse voltammetry and 
cyclic voltammetry [60]; peptide nanotubes also do a good job with square pulse 
voltammetry [61]. Both these methods have proven to be simple, fast, low-cost and 
capable of detecting the vitamin in pharmaceutical samples. 
The same electrode proposed for use in refolding voltammetry for the detection 
of folic acid [57] has been shown to be capable of B12 detection as well [62]. Other 
associated studies with stripping voltammetry have used bismuth films [63] and 
printed disposable carbon mesh electrodes [64]. 
2.2 Vitamin C 
Ascorbic acid is undoubtedly the most researched vitamin. This is because not only is it 
the most common antioxidant, but is also found in the brains of mammals, along with 
various neurotransmitters. Hence, its detection is particularly important for medical 
science. It is the most common electrochemically active biological compound and is 
easily oxidized; this forms the basis of its electrochemical detection. 
Ascorbic acid forms an irreversible redox pair with dehydroascorbic acid [3]. 
Oxidation of ascorbic acid involves the release of two electrons and two protons, and 134 Nanosensors 
the production of dehydroascorbic acid, followed by irreversible hydration when pH 
is less than 4 [65]. 
Irreversible hydration yields an electrochemically inert product, 2,3-dicetogulonic 
acid, which is formed after the dehydroascorbic acid lactone ring opens; the former is 
easily absorbed on the electrode surface, resulting in contamination. 
Bibliographic data on the oxidation of ascorbic acid at pH < 8 reports two 
consecutive oxidation reactions of an electron, accompanied by immediate 
dehydration, making the oxidation irreversible. During the oxidation with gold 
electrodes, two signals corresponding to two stages have been found to be generated. 
The first stage is a two-electron process in which two protons are exchanged in the 
pH range 2–4.5, one proton in pH range 4.5–8 and two protons at pH > 8. 
In particular, at pH values less than the pKa1 of L-ascorbic acid, which is about 
4.5, two protons are exchanged. At higher pH levels, an electron is exchanged with 
the ascorbate anion as an electroactive species. These observations are consistent 
with the variations in peak dynamics as a function of pH for pH levels up to 8. 
Identification of ascorbic acid oxidation products is difficult as the study of the 
second oxidation at pH >8 is not possible since ascorbic acid and dehydroascorbic 
acid are unstable in basic solutions. The intermediate, the ascorbate anion, has been 
found to be oxidized to diketolactone, and then dehydrated to dehydroascorbic acid 
which is rearranged into another diol further oxidized at higher potentials [66]. For 
this electrochemical pair, the height of the anodic peak relative to the concentration 
of the substance to be analyzed corresponds to the oxidation of the reduced form. 
The stoichiometric formation of hydrogen peroxide from ascorbic acid has 
been studied with square pulse voltammetry in a standard wine system, with a 
hanging mercury drop electrode. Ascorbic acid and peroxide were detected in the 
same sample initially by an ascending scan for ascorbic acid, and a downstream for 
hydrogen peroxide. The potential was scanned from 0 to 400 mV for ascorbic acid. 
The resulting voltammograms were repeatable and the repeatability of the ascorbic 
acid peak current was considerably good, with a relative deviation of less than 
1% [67]. 
Although L-ascorbic acid is one of the most electroactive biomolecules, it is 
generally difficult to determine its concentration with unmodified carbon electrodes 
or pure metal electrodes due to their susceptibility to contamination. However, several 
studies have been performed with the aim of sustainable detection of ascorbic acid 
using such electrodes, which include necessary stages of pre-treatment or repeated 
stages of electrochemical purification. 
More specifically, ascorbic acid can be detected using a gold electrode with 
linear scan voltammetry, a gold monocrystalline electrode with cyclic voltammetry 
and differential pulse voltammetry, a platinum electrode with cyclic voltammetry 
(L = 0.25 mM), a carbon paste electrode with cyclic voltammetry (LOD = 0.21 mM 
LOQ = 0.068 mM), and a glassy carbon electrode with differential pulse voltammetry 
[67–69]. 
The need to reduce the potential and minimize electrode contamination has 
led to attempts at modifying electrodes to increase their sensitivity and enhance the Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 135 
separation of the peaks, especially for complex media such as biological samples, 
where ascorbic acid coexists with other electroactive compounds. 
Linear scan voltammograms with gold electrodes modified with 
dimercaptothiadiazole layers have shown that a thin layer of dimercaptothiadiazole 
formed in the process separates the uric acid and ascorbic acid voltammetric signals 
[70]. In one study, ascorbic acid was detected simultaneously with dopamine, using 
a gold electrode modified with gold nanoparticles [71]. 
One of the most convenient and easy-to-use materials for preparing modified 
electrodes is undoubtedly carbon paste. The modifier can be dissolved in a binder 
or mixed with the paste during homogenization. Pastes are dynamic and renewable 
materials with excellent conductivity and electrocatalytic properties; hence, they 
have a wide range of applications in electrochemical or bioelectrochemical sensors 
[17, 72]. 
The response of ascorbic acid to cyclic voltammetry measurements has been 
studied with an unmodified carbon paste electrode and a carbon paste electrode 
modified with tetrabromo-p-benzoquinone. The superpotential was observed to be 
reduced by about 430 mV and the current peak was amplified with the modified 
electrode, which was effective not only in detecting ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric 
acid, but also in simultaneous voltammetric quantification of their concentration in 
the mixture. 
The electrolytic behavior of a modified carbon paste electrode with methionine 
for ascorbic acid electro-oxidation has been studied through cyclic voltammetry. 
The results show a good amplitude of current at the anode peak for the modified 
electrode (compared to the unmodified one). This method has been adapted to detect 
ascorbic acid in real samples and the results have been considered satisfactory [74]. 
Carbon paste electrode modified with 2,2’-(1,8-octanedhyldisenitriloethylidine)­
bis-hydroquinone show a high electrocatalytic activity towards ascorbic acid. The 
current is significantly amplified, compared to an unmodified electrode [75]. 
In a study, different porphyrins were used in the design of seven carbon paste and 
diamond paste electrodes for their use in the detection of ascorbic acid by differential 
pulse voltammetry. The detection limits were quite low – between 1.1 × 10–14 M and 
5.1 × 10–7 M. Detection of ascorbic acid in pharmaceutical samples and beverages 
showed recovery rates greater than 92% and 91.5% respectively. The surface of the 
electrodes was easily renewable by polishing [76]. 
A graphene-inoculated carbon paste electrode was prepared by adding graphene 
to the carbon paste mixture in another study. Compared to the single electrode, an 
improved electrochemical response was found with the graphene electrode; this 
was attributed to the excellent electrical conductivity of graphene. This electrode 
was further used to detect ascorbic acid, with low hyperpotential, enhanced current 
response and good sensitivity [77]. 
The voltammetric response of manganese dioxide composite electrode with 
graphite, for ascorbic acid detection has been studied in a phosphate buffer of 
pH 7.2. Therein, the oxidation current was found to increase with increasing amount 
of ascorbic acid and the voltammetric peaks appeared for concentrations down to 
250 μM [78].136 Nanosensors 
Other carbon-based materials (e.g., glassy carbon) have been used as modifiable 
electrodes due to their high electrical conductivity, chemical resistance, wide current 
suitability, and compatibility with acidic media. The glassy carbon electrode has been 
modified by electrochemical oxidation in mildly acidic media (0.1 M H2SO4) for the 
single and simultaneous detection of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid [79]. In 
this case, single and modified electrode cyclic voltammetry responses were recorded 
in a phosphate buffer. The modified electrode gave a redox pair, which was explained 
by the formation of functional groups during the electrochemical pre-treatment. In 
particular, the presence of these functional groups led to a reduction in the oxidation 
superpowers relative to the single glassy carbon electrode, allowing for a simple and 
sensitive simultaneous detection of the three substances [79]. 
Polymeric films have been found to enhance the electrocatalytic activity of 
ascorbic acid by increasing the rate of electron transfer between the glassy carbon 
electrode and the polymeric film. In one study, a fixed modified glassy carbon electrode 
based on poly (3-(5-chloro-2-hydroxyphenylase)-4,5-dihydroxynaphthalen-2,7­
disulfonic acid) film was prepared by electrochemical polymerization to study its 
electrochemical behavior with cyclic voltammetry. The modified electrode showed 
electrolytic activity towards ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid, at pH 4, with a 
decrease in the superpowder by about 0.12, 0.35 and 0.50 V respectively [80]. 
An electrode formed by a poly (caffeic acid) film deposited on a glassy carbon 
electrode surface can be used to detect ascorbic acid, dopamine and their mixture 
through cyclic voltammetry [81]. This modified electrode has good sensitivity, 
selectivity and stability and can be applied to the analysis of drug samples, yielding 
satisfactory results. 
Another voltammetric method for the detection of ascorbic acid is the use of 
poly (modified bromocresol violet) glass electrode. Cyclic voltammetry studies 
show that compared to the single electrode, the modified electrode showed better 
electrolytic activity towards ascorbic acid by reducing the oxidation potential by 
about 240 mV and increasing the current response. Ascorbic acid recoveries were 
also good – between 99.78 and 102.54% [82]. 
The use of conductive polymers offers unparalleled opportunities for translating 
analyst-recipient interactions into measurable responses. The advantages of 
conductive polymer sensors over chemical sensors stem from the ability of conductive 
polymers to exhibit properties that respond to even minor system disturbances [83]. 
A team of researchers prepared thin polyaniline films doped with 
polyvinylsulfonate and polystyrene sulphide anions on platinum microelectrodes and 
studied the oxidation of ascorbic acid in various media, including wine and port juice 
samples. The electrodes maintained their electroactivity in neutral pH solutions. 
The differences found in the amplitude of the currents demonstrate the effect of 
inoculation ions on the redox properties of polyaniline, showing possible means of 
modifying its conductivity and morphology [84]. 
In the presence of the cationic surfactant CTAB adsorbed on the surface of a 
glassy carbon electrode, a significant catalytic effect on the oxidation of ascorbic 
acid has been observed [85]. Another glassy carbon electrode with the surfactant 
was modified with a chitosan film with cetylpyridinium bromide and used for the Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 137 
detection of uric acid and ascorbic acid through differential pulse voltammetry. 
This electrode showed effective electrocatalytic activity and satisfactory selective 
resolution for both the acids [86]. 
A new glassy carbon electrode modified with copper diphenate complex 
has been reported for use in cyclic voltammetry [87]. It showed very effective 
electrocatalytic action against the anodic oxidation of dopamine and ascorbic acid, 
with a significant reduction in superconductivity. The electrode was found to be 
stable and reproducible, and yielded satisfactory results in the analysis of ascorbic 
acid and dopamine in pharmaceutical samples and food [87]. 
Standard analysis curves for ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid have been 
found to be linear across a range of concentrations using a glassy carbon electrode 
modified with LaFeO3 nanoparticles. Good correlation coefficient values were also 
observed therein [88]. 
In one study, a downstream pre-treated boron-grafted diamond electrode 
was used for the simultaneous ascending detection of ascorbic acid and caffeine 
by differential pulse voltammetry. This method was successfully deployed in 
pharmaceutical samples and the results were confirmed by high pressure liquid 
chromatography [89]. 
Carbon nanotubes have excellent electrical, chemical, mechanical and structural 
properties, which make them particularly attractive for applications in chemical 
sensors in general, and for electrochemical sensors in particular. In addition to their 
enhanced electrochemical activity, electrodes modified with carbon nanotubes have 
been found to be useful in the accumulation of biomolecules and in the reduction of 
surface pollution. Remarkable sensitivity and conductivity allow the use of carbon 
nanotubes as sensitive nanoscale sensors [90]. 
Following the above, a new electrochemical method was studied for in vivo 
measurements of ascorbic acid in mouse brains, with carbon fiber electrodes 
modified with multi-walled carbon nanotubes. The technique was based on the 
electrochemical property of nanotubes to promote the oxidation of ascorbic acid 
[91]. Simultaneous voltammetric detection of ascorbic acid and rutin on a carbon 
paste electrode modified with a carbon-chitosan nanotube composite film has also 
been achieved [92]. 
Simultaneous selective detection of ascorbic acid, paracetamol and tryptophan 
by square pulse voltammetry, with a carbon paste electrode modified with multi￾walled carbon nanotubes, has been reported in literature [93]. The use of a carbon 
paste electrode modified with graphite-multi-walled carbon nanotubes and a cationic 
surfactant has also been proposed. The electrochemical response of this modified 
electrode to ascorbic acid was studied through cyclic voltammetry and differential 
pulse voltammetry at pH 2. Compared to activated carbon or graphite, the modified 
electrode not only shifted the oxidation potential of ascorbic acid to less positive 
potentials, but also amplified the peak current. Moreover, the oxidation of ascorbic 
acid was very stable, allowing for its quantification in pharmaceutical samples and 
food [94]. 
Differential pulse voltammetry has been applied to the simultaneous detection 
of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid, with a sensor based on helical carbon 
nanotubes. A water-soluble cationic polymer, poly (diallyldimethylammonium 138 Nanosensors 
chloride), was used to modify the surface of the nanotubes, with the aim of improving 
their dispersion and adhesion. The current responses with this modified electrode 
were much enhanced in differential pulse voltammetry than in cyclic voltammetry. 
The properties of the electrode facilitated the simultaneous determination of ascorbic 
acid, dopamine and uric acid in fetal bovine serum samples [95]. 
In another study, a new composite carbon electrode containing the ionic 
liquid n-octylpyridinium hexafluorophosphate and single-walled carbon nanotubes 
was prepared and studied. Compared to other graphite and paraffin oil composite 
electrodes, this electrode showed a significant increase in the electron transfer rate 
for the electroactive compound and a significant reduction in the superconductivity 
of the ascorbic acid reaction. Furthermore, the new electrode had a strong 
electrocatalytic effect and was used for the quantification of ascorbic acid in real 
food samples [96]. 
A new type of modified electrode sensor for ascorbic acid was prepared by 
depositing multi-walled and poly (Nile blue A) carbon nanotubes on a glassy carbon 
electrode surface in yet another study. Nile blue was electropolymerized either above 
the nanotube layer. The electrodes were studied through cyclic voltammetry and the 
best results were found with the modified polymer electrodes under the thinnest layer 
of nanotubes. Ascorbic acid was quantified using cyclic voltammetry; the modified 
electrodes exhibited good sensitivity, large linear range, a detection limit of 1.6 μM, 
and good stability [97]. 
Poly (xanthuric acid) and multi-walled carbon nanotube composites can be 
prepared to modify glass glass electrode for the detection of ascorbic acid [98]. 
A well-defined redox pair is identified as a result of the redox reaction of poly 
(xanthuric acid). The composite is found to be stable at different scan rates and pH 
values, and the electrode reduces the superpotential, while increasing the current 
responses. With a potential of +300 mV, its sensitivity to ascorbic acid detection is 
160.2 μA/mmol cm2
 [98]. 
Recently, a graphene/platinum-modified glassy carbon electrode was prepared 
for the simultaneous quantification of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid levels 
through cyclic voltammetry and differential pulse voltammetry. In the said case, 
platinum nanoparticles with an average diameter of 1.7 nm self-assembled on the 
surface of graphene [99]. 
A high response sensor for ascorbic acid, using oxidized polypyrrole and 
palladium nanoparticles, has also been reported [100]. In the presence of palladium 
nanoparticles, polypyrrole was plated on a gold electrode through cyclic voltammetry, 
and oxidized in NaOH solution. The results showed that the modified electrode 
had the ability to catalyze the oxidation of ascorbic acid by reducing its oxidation 
potential to 0 V, with a detection limit of 1 μM [100].
A simple and effective strategy proposed for the detection of ascorbic acid is 
the synthesis of nickel nanoparticles dispersed in poly (1,5-diaminonaphthalene). 
The electrochemical characterization of the electrode shows a stable redox behavior 
of the Ni(III)/Ni(II) pair in 0.1 μM NaOH solution. Here, the electro-oxidation of 
glucose, ascorbic acid and dopamine in alkaline solutions can be studied by quadratic 
pulse voltammetry; the limit of detection of ascorbic acid has been found to be 
0.01 μM [101].Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 139 
Carbon nanotubes are sophisticated, ideal materials for supporting metal 
nanoparticles in electrocatalysis. Thus, composite carbon nanoparticle-composite 
films combine the advantages of enhanced electrocatalytic action and large surface 
area. Following this, a new bimetallic film with platinum and gold nanoparticles in 
Nafion polymer and carbon nanotubes, developed potentiostatically, has been 
reported. The composite film was found to be able to detect ascorbate anion, 
epinephrine and urate anion through cyclic voltammetry and differential pulse 
voltammetry [102]. 
A carbon-ceramic material, SiO2/C/Nb2O5, has also been used to develop 
electrodes, and studied using cyclic voltammetry and differential pulse voltammetry. 
It showed the ability to improve electron transfer between the electrode surface 
and ascorbic acid. The presence of Nb2O5 on the surface of SiO2/C reduced 
the oxidation potential of ascorbic acid by about 180 mV. The peak current was 
significantly amplified compared to the ascorbic acid response on the surface of the 
SiO2/C electrode. This behavior points towards the electrocatalytic effect of the 
SiO2/C/Nb2O5 electrode on the oxidation of ascorbic acid. The voltammetric 
response of ascorbic acid to this electrode may be due to its interactions with Nb2O5, 
which involves the formation of covalent bonds, thus leading to very rapid oxidation 
[103]. 
Modified carbon-ceramic electrodes with single-walled carbon nanotubes have 
also been used for the simultaneous detection of paracetamol and ascorbic acid by 
differential pulse voltammetry. The electrodes showed excellent electrochemical 
catalytic activity compared to simple glassy carbon electrodes [104]. 
3. Fat-soluble vitamins 
3.1 Vitamin A 
The conversion between the different forms of vitamin A compounds involves 
oxidation and reduction processes, which is suitable for their study by electrochemical 
methods. There are some studies describing the voltammetric properties of retinol, 
retinal and retinoic acid, but most electrochemical studies have been performed as a 
means of quantifying their levels in biological samples. 
Through cyclic voltammetry, retinol has been found to be oxidized at a potential 
of +0.8 V with an Ag/AgCl electrode in tetrahydrofuran with tetrabutylammonium 
perchloride, in methanol with acetate buffer, and in an acetonitrile/water mixture 
with LiClO4 [105]. Its oxidation is irreversible since only one oxidation peak is 
observed and the electrochemical oxidation of retinol to tetrahydrofuran takes place 
with the exchange of one electron per molecule. However, the oxidation of retinal to 
tetrahydrofuran takes place at +1 V with Ag/AgCl electrode and is carried out by the 
transfer of up to 4 electrons per molecule, and is also irreversible. 
Electrochemical studies suggest that retinoids can be reduced by platinum 
electrodes or electrodes coated with mercury and lead [106]. Retinol is reduced at 
about –2 V, whereas retinal is reduced at –1.42 V with respect to the reference black 
electrode. These reductions take place through the transfer of one electron at cyclic 
voltammetry times (seconds) but with a larger number of electrons at electrolysis 
times (minutes). 140 Nanosensors 
Furthermore, while retinol is reduced by a chemically irreversible process at a 
scan rate of 0.1 V/s, retinal reduction is found to be chemically reversible since the 
ratio of upward ipox to downward ipred is 1 for a scan rate of 0.1 V/s [107]. 
Carotenoids found in nature have been extensively studied by voltammetric 
methods (cyclic and quadratic pulse). They are subjected to oxidation by two 
processes of one electron transfer in CH2Cl2 between +0.5 and +1 V with respect to 
the reference calomel electrode [108, 109]. The voltammetric behavior of carotenoids 
has been studied mainly in CH2Cl2 due to their good solubility in it. 
Many carotenoids can also be reduced to various stages in CH2Cl2 at potentials 
more negative than –1 V with respect to the reference black electrode. More attention 
has been paid to the oxidation mechanism because the important biological properties 
of these compounds (antioxidant properties and photoprotection) are considered to 
be related to cations. For most carotenoids, the first oxidation (E1) occurs at +0.5 to 
+0.72 V and the second (E2) between +0.52 and +0.95 V vs Ag/AgCl. 
Some carotenoids show oxidation by 2 electrons in cyclic voltammetry 
experiments, while others (such as β-carotene) show only one oxidation, which 
corresponds to the transfer of two electrons in two processes of one electron transfer 
occurring almost simultaneously [108]. 
In the case of β-carotene, it is believed that the second oxidation of one electron 
during cyclic voltammetry takes place at a very similar potential to the first and, 
therefore, only one oxidation peak is observed, corresponding to the chemically 
reversible oxidation of two electrons of β-carotene in the oxidized form with 
oxidation number +2, through an intermediate with oxidation number +1 [109]. 
The oxidized forms of carotenoids are not very stable at room temperature, and 
only survive for a few seconds in CH2Cl2. Nevertheless, this is sufficient to observe 
the reverse reduction process in cyclic voltammetry. 
3.2 Vitamin D 
The electrochemical properties of vitamin D have not been extensively reported 
in the literature [111]. A study of vitamins D2 and D3 through cyclic voltammetry 
in methanol with acetate buffer concluded that both of these compounds can be 
irreversibly oxidized, although the number of electrons involved in the oxidation 
process was not reported [112]. The oxidation was considered irreversible because 
only one oxidation peak was detected during the scan, and no reduction peak was 
observed when the scan direction was reversed. The potential of the Epox oxidation 
peak for both the vitamins was found to be approximately +1.1 V with respect to 
the black reference electrode, and no reduction in negative potential values was 
detected. 
Cyclic voltammetry experiments have also been performed on vitamin D2 in 
ethanol, with LiCO4 as the electrolyte, and a chemically irreversible oxidation peak 
at about +1.2 V relative to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode was detected [111]. Both 
the studies, in methanol and ethanol, were performed on a glassy carbon electrode, 
and these vitamins were found to be adsorbed during the oxidative scan. Adsorption 
involves the passivation of the electrode surface by oxidized products, leading to 
continuously reduced oxidative currents during continuous scans. Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 141 
More recently, vitamins D2 and D3 have been studied through cyclic voltammetry 
using glassy carbon and platinum electrodes, and both the compounds showed 
similar behavior by transferring one electron during their irreversible oxidation 
[113]. Vitamins D2 and D3 have also been studied through cyclic voltammetry and 
differential pulse voltammetry, using a glassy carbon electrode; here, they exhibited 
different electrochemical behaviors due to differences in their solubility [114]. 
In one study, vitamin D3 was detected in real samples by cyclic voltammetry 
and differential pulse voltammetry, using a modified glassy carbon electrode with 
Ni(OH)2 particles in an inorganic SiO2 matrix/graphene oxide [115]. 
3.3 Vitamin E 
The voltammetric behavior of vitamin E, α-tocopherol in particular, has been 
extensively studied over the last 40 years. It has been found to undergo some 
interesting redox reactions where the intermediates have remarkably long life times 
compared to the oxidative intermediates of other phenols. 
The general electrochemical mechanism of α-tocopherol (which also applies 
to β, γ and δ tocopherols) in organic solvents CH3CN or CH2Cl2 [116]. The path 
followed depends on whether the oxidation takes place in the presence or absence 
of fat-soluble acids and bases. The R chain does not affect the electrochemical 
properties; so, when it is replaced by a methylene group in a standard compound, the 
resulting voltammograms are identical. 
In the absence of an acid or base, α-tocopherol is oxidized by an electron at a 
potential of about +0.5 V relative to a standard Fc/Fc
+ electrode and forms α-TOH. 
The deprotonation rate constant calculated by simulating variable scan rate through 
cyclic voltammetry in CH3CN was estimated to be 3 ± 2 × 104 s–1 [117, 118]. 
Because the oxidation potential of the α-TO radical is lower than that of 
α-tocopherol, the α-TO radical oxidizes directly at the electrode surface and forms 
the α-TO+ transmagnetic cation. In general, the oxidation reaction can be considered 
to take place through ECE mechanism (electron transfer, chemical reaction, electron 
transfer). 
However, there is another possibility where the second electron transfer step 
follows a homogeneous redistribution mechanism, which also produces α-TO+
. 
Regardless of the exact course of the reaction, the oxidation to CH3CN and CH2Cl2 
is completely chemically reversible in the fast time frames of cyclic voltammetry 
and as well as during electrolysis; so, by applying the reduction potential, the starting 
material can be significantly recovered [119, 120]. The position and shape of the 
reduction peak are affected by the moisture traces present in the solvent [117]. 
Both the aforementioned processes involve the transfer of two electrons and 
one proton. The reason why there is a considerable difference between the reduction 
potential of the two phases is that the elementary phases of electron transfer take 
place at different potentials and the transfer of the proton takes place between them. 
One difference observed in the electrochemical behavior of α-tocopherol 
compared to other phenols is that it shows a reduction peak after oxidation [117, 
118]. 142 Nanosensors 
Although all phenols follow the oxidation mechanism mentioned above, 
a majority of them form very unstable transmagnetic cations when oxidized and 
therefore show only the peak of oxidation. Moreover, electrochemical oxidation of 
phenols in aprotic solvents usually results in a large number of products, including 
dimers formed by the irreversible dimeric bonding of radicals [121–124]. 
When α-tocopherol is deposited directly on the surface of an electrode as drops 
and subsequent voltammetric oxidation takes place in aqueous solutions, paraquinone 
is formed immediately in large yields over a wide pH range (1–13), probably due to 
the reaction of α-TO+
 with water or hydroxide ions [125, 126]. 
3.4 Vitamin K 
Electrochemical studies with aprotic organic solvents with low water content have 
shown that vitamin K behaves in a manner as expected for a quinone-structured 
compound and is, therefore, reduced in 2 steps involving one electron transfer each 
[127–130]. 
The mechanism of electrochemical reduction of vitamin K1 and other quinones 
in aprotic organic solvents has been described in the literature [125]. It has been 
noted that although it is known that water is always present as an impurity in organic 
solvents, electrochemists rarely measure or report the percentage of moisture 
in the solvents they use. Therefore, recent studies have suggested the use of the 
voltammetric behavior of vitamin K1 as a method for estimating the amount of 
moisture in solvents. 
The difference between the dynamics of the first and second electron transfer is 
measured and compared with the exact water content in the solvent as determined by 
Karl Fischer titration equations. Standard curves are generated for various solvents 
that allow voltammetric scanning in the presence of vitamin K1 for determining the 
level of moisture traces in them [127, 130]. 
Voltammetric experiments have also been performed on vitamin K1 in aqueous 
media over a wide range of pH values, either by depositing it as an oil on the electrode 
surface [131] or by incorporating it into the phospholipids or alkanethiols bound to 
the electrode surface [132–134]. 
When vitamin K1 is reduced in an aqueous medium at a low pH, it is reduced 
by 2 electrons and 2 protons to form hydroquinone. The reduction is chemically 
reversible and occurs in a voltammetric step, although there might be elementary 
electron and proton transfers that occur simultaneously. In aqueous media, the reverse 
oxidation of hydroquinone occurs with 2 electrons and 2 protons and is evident from 
one voltammetric peak [135, 136]. 
An interesting question is whether the hemiquinone is important in the biological 
reactions of vitamin K, since in the presence of water or protons, its reduction always 
occurs with 2 electrons. However, in some cases, the anionic radical of hemiquinone 
has been observed in aqueous solutions, possibly due to a shift in the equilibrium of 
the reaction involving the dione [137]. 
In Table 2 are summarized the main features of voltammetric techniques for the 
detection of water-soluble vitamins. In Table 3 are summarized the main features of 
voltammetric techniques for the detection of fat-soluble vitamins. Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 143 
Table 2. Main features of voltammetric techniques for the detection of water-soluble vitamins. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Substrate Reference 
B1 Stripping Glassy carbon/lead Pharmaceuticals/ [18] 
voltammetry food 
Differential pulse Carbon nanotubes modified with Human blood [19] 
voltammetry DNA 
Stripping Solid silver amalgam modified Pharmaceuticals, [20] 
voltammetry with liquid silver amalgam film juice 
B2 Stripping Solid silver amalgam modified Pharmaceuticals, [20] 
voltammetry with liquid silver amalgam film juice 
Stripping Copper plated with bismuth film Pharmaceuticals [22] 
voltammetry 
Differential pulse Glassy carbon modified with Poly Mixture Β2, [24] 
voltammetry (3,4 ethylenedioxythiophene)/ Β6, C
Zirconia 
Differential pulse Glassy carbon Breast milk [25] 
voltammetry 
Cyclic voltammetry Carbon paste modified with Polyvitamins [26] 
zeolite Co2+ -Y formulation 
Differential pulse Glassy carbon modified with Blood plasma [27] 
voltammetry 3-amino-5-mercapto-1,2,4-triazole 
B3 Cyclic voltammetry Gold electrode Pharmaceuticals [28] 
Cyclic voltammetry Gold coated with mercaptoacetic Food [29] 
acid 
Cyclic voltammetry Carbon nanotube paste/TiO2, Urine [30] 
Lanthanum doped 
Cyclic voltammetry, HMDE Polyvitamins [31] 
Differential pulse formulation 
voltammetry 
B6 Cyclic voltammetry, Glassy carbon modified with Poly Mixture Β2, [24] 
Differential pulse (3,4 ethylenedioxythiophene)/ Β6, C
voltammetry Zirconia 
Cyclic voltammetry, Glassy carbon Β6 formulation [33] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon Ανάλυση [34] 
βιταμερών Β6
Differential pulse Graphite modified with methylene Pharmaceuticals [35] 
voltammetry green and carbon nanotubes 
Cyclic voltammetry, Modified glassy carbon with Polyvitamins [36] 
Differential pulse Au-CuO nanoparticles and carbon 
voltammetry nanotubes 
Square wave Carbon paste modified with ZnO Food [37] 
voltammetry nanoparticles 
Table 2 contd. ... Vitamin Technique Electrode Substrate Reference 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Polyurethane modified graphite Pharmaceuticals [38] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Modified carbon paste with crown 
ethers 
Polyvitamins [39] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with ZrO2 
and ionic liquids 
Food [40] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Graphite modified with MIPs and 
nanoparticles Fe/Cu 
Pharmaceuticals, 
blood 
[41] 
B7 Square wave 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
Pd-Fe-Ni nanoparticles 
Infant milk, liver, 
eggs 
[42] 
B9 Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Modified glassy carbon Blood plasma [27] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with TiO2 
nanoparticles 
Injections of 
deoxyholic acid 
[44] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
nanoparticles and ionic liquid 
Food [45] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
Ru(III) complex-ZnO/carbon 
nanotubes 
Urine, food, 
pharmaceuticals 
[46] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with gold 
nanoparticles 
Blood plasma [47] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with Fe3O4 
nanoparticles 
Medicines, blood 
plasma, lemon 
juice 
[48] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
nanomalgam Pt: Co 
Food [49] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Graphite modified with cobalt (II) 
tetraaminophthalocyanine 
Pharmaceuticals, 
urine 
[50] 
Cyclic voltammetry Modified carbon paste with 
nickel ions dispersed in poly 
(o-anisidine) film 
Pharmaceuticals [51] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
platinum nanoparticles inoculated 
with carbon nanotubes 
Pharmaceuticals, 
food 
[52] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
platinum nanoparticles inoculated 
with carbon nanotubes 
Pharmaceuticals, 
food 
[52] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Gold modified with polypyrrole/ 
polyoxetallic anions/gold 
nanoparticles 
Polyvitamins, 
blood serum 
[53] 
144 Nanosensors 
...Table 2 contd. 
Table 2 contd. ... Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 145 
...Table 2 contd. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Substrate Reference 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
5-amino-2-mercapto-1,3,4­
thiodiazole 
Blood serum [54] 
Stripping 
voltammetry 
Lead-coated glassy carbon Pharmaceuticals [55] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Gold modified with gold 
nanoparticles 
Folic acid 
tablets, food 
[56] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Solid silver amalgam Juice [57] 
Stripping 
voltammetry 
Hanging mercury drop Multivitamins [58] 
Stripping 
voltammetry 
Bismuth modified glassy carbon Pharmaceuticals [59] 
B12 Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Graphite modified with chitosan/ 
carbon nanotubes 
Pharmaceuticals [60] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Graphite modified with peptide 
nanotubes 
Pharmaceuticals [61] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
differential pulse 
voltammetry, linear 
scan voltammetry 
Solid silver amalgam Multivitamins [62] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
adsorptive 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon plated with bismuth Pharmaceuticals [63] 
Stripping 
voltammetry 
Screen printed electrode Pharmaceuticals [64] 
C Stripping 
voltammetry 
Solid silver amalgam modified 
with liquid silver amalgam film 
Pharmaceuticals, 
juices 
[20] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Poly (3,4 ethylenedioxythiophene) 
glass-modified glass/Zirconia 
Mixture of 
vitamins B2, 
B6, C 
[24] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glass-modified carbon with 
3-amino-5-mercapto-1,2,4-triazole 
Blood plasma [27] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
Ru (III)-ZnO complex/carbon 
nanotubes 
Urine, 
pharmaceuticals, 
food 
[46] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with Fe3O4 
nanoparticles 
Pharmaceuticals, 
blood plasma, 
lemon juice 
[48] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glass-modified carbon with 
5-amino-2-mercapto-1,3,4­
thiodiazole 
Blood serum [54] 
Table 2 contd. ... 146 Nanosensors 
...Table 2 contd. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Substrate Reference 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
linear scan 
voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry, 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon Pharmaceuticals [65] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Hanging mercury drop Wine [67] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon Pharmaceuticals, 
juices 
[68] 
Linear sweep 
voltammetry 
Gold modified with 
dimercaptothiodiazole 
Simultaneous 
determination of 
uric and ascorbic 
acid 
[70] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Gold modified with gold 
nanoparticles 
Simultaneous 
determination of 
ascorbic acid and 
dopamine 
[71] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
tetrabromo-p-benzoquinone 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
dopamine 
[73] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
methionine 
Juices [74] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
hydroquinone 
Pharmaceuticals [75] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon and diamond paste 
modified with porphyrins 
Pharmaceuticals, 
drinks 
[76] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
graphene 
– [77] 
Linear sweep 
voltammetry 
Carbon powder modified with 
magnesium dioxide 
– [78] 
Cyclic voltammetry Oxidized glassy carbon Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
dopamine 
[79] 
Table 2 contd. ... Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 147 
...Table 2 contd. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Substrate Reference 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with a 
disulfonic acid derivative 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
dopamine 
[80] 
Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon-modified 
polycarbonate (caffeic acid) 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
dopamine 
[81] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon electrode modified 
with Poly bromocresol violet) 
Pharmaceuticals [82] 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon electrode modified 
with Poly (3,4- ethylene 
dioxythiophene) 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
dopamine 
[83] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum modified with 
polyaniline 
Drinks [84] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon electrode modified 
with chitosan and surfactant 
Simultaneous 
determination of 
uric and ascorbic 
acid 
[85] 
Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon electrode Simultaneous 
determination 
of ascorbic acid, 
hydroquinone 
and nitrobenzene 
[86] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon electrode modified 
with copper dinuclear complex 
Simultaneous 
determination of 
ascorbic acid and 
dopamine in food 
and medicine 
[87] 
Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon electrode modified 
with LaFeO3 nanoparticles 
Simultaneous 
determination of 
ascorbic acid and 
dopamine in food 
and medicine 
[88] 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Boron doped dimamond electrode Simultaneous 
determination 
of ascorbic acid 
and caffeine in 
medicine 
[89] 
Cyclic voltammetry Carbon fiber modified with carbon 
nanotubes 
Mice brains [91] 
Table 2 contd. ... 148 Nanosensors 
...Table 2 contd. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Substrate Reference 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
chitosan/carbon nanotubes 
Simultaneous 
determination of 
ascorbic acid and 
rutin in drugs 
[92] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Carbon paste modified with 
carbon nanotubes 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of ascorbic acid, 
paracetamol and 
tryptophan 
[93] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Graphite paste modified with 
carbon nanotubes and surfactant 
Pharmaceuticals, 
food 
[94] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
carbon nanotubes and cationic 
polymer 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
dopamine in fetal 
bovine serum 
[95] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon/ionic liquid/carbon 
nanotube composite electrode 
Food [96] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glass-modified carbon with 
carbon nanotubes and Nile blue 
Pharmaceuticals [97] 
Linear sweep 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
poly(xanthuric acid) and carbon 
nanotubes 
– [98] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
platinum/graphene 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
dopamine 
[99] 
Cyclic voltammetry Gold modified with polypyrrole 
and Pd nanoparticles 
– [100] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
nickel nanoparticles 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of ascorbic acid, 
glucose and 
dopamine 
[101] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon modified with 
carbon nanotubes/Nafion/nano 
Pt/nano Au 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of uric, ascorbic 
acid and 
epinephrine 
[102] 
Table 2 contd. ... Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 149 
...Table 2 contd. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Substrate Reference 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
SiO2/C modified with Niobium 
oxide
 – [103] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Carbon-ceramic modified with 
carbon nanotubes 
Simultaneous 
determination 
of ascorbic acid, 
paracetamol in 
drugs 
[104] 
Table 3. Main features of voltammetric techniques for the detection of fat-soluble vitamins. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Subtrate Reference 
Α Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon Creams, food [105] 
Cyclic voltammetry Mercury coated with 
phospholipids 
– [106] 
Cyclic voltammetry Hanging mercury drop 
electrode 
– [107] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave voltammetry 
Platinum – [108] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [109] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [110] 
D Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon Pharmaceuticals [112] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave voltammetry 
Glassy carbon/ 
platinum 
– [113] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon Detection in a 
mixture of vitamins 
[114] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Differential pulse 
voltammetry 
Glassy carbon 
modified with SiO2/ 
graphene oxide/ 
(NiOH) 2 
– [115] 
E Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [110] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [117] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [118] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [119] 
Cyclic voltammetry, 
Square wave voltammetry 
Glassy carbon/ 
platinum 
– [120] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [124] 
Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon 
modified with lecithin 
and Nafion 
Detection of low 
molecular weight 
biological molecules 
[125] 
Cyclic voltammetry Pyrolytic graphite – [126] 
Table 3 contd. ... 150 Nanosensors 
...Table 3 contd. 
Vitamin Technique Electrode Subtrate Reference 
K Cyclic voltammetry, Glassy carbon/ – [127] 
Square wave voltammetry platinum 
Steady state voltammetry Gold – [128] 
Cyclic voltammetry Platinum – [129] 
Cyclic voltammetry, Glassy carbon Quantification of [130] 
Square wave voltammetry traces of moisture in 
organic solvents 
Cyclic voltammetry Gold – [131] 
Cyclic voltammetry Gold – [132] 
Cyclic voltammetry Gold Menadione [133] 
permeability study 
Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon – [134] 
modified with lipids 
Cyclic voltammetry Pyrolytic graphite Study of [136] 
electrochemical 
behavior of 
phylloquinone 
Cyclic voltammetry Glassy carbon Study of [137] 
electrochemical 
behavior of quinones 
4. Conclusion 
The use of electrochemical analysis methods, given their much higher speeds and 
lower costs, is an attractive alternative to conventional analytical techniques. The 
simultaneous identification of many vitamins is a challenge but the results of recent 
studies are promising. Many new electrode materials, especially nanostructured 
materials, have been introduced and have improved the selectivity and sensitivity 
of detection, while also aiding the quantification of vitamins in real samples, in 
concentrations much smaller than that of the other components. 
The range of applications of electrochemical methods is particularly wide— 
from pharmaceutical and nutritional supplements to more complex samples such as 
food and biological fluids. However, most of the proposed methods still require pre￾treatment and/or dilution of the actual sample for analysis. 
The challenge for future studies will be to develop sensors capable of identifying 
vitamins directly in actual samples; this will further increase the speed of analysis. The 
development of mobile devices in combination with the use of consumable sensors 
will open a new avenue of prospects. Electrochemical techniques have proven to 
be excellent candidates for such applications, and small portable potentiostats are 
already available in the market.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 151 
References 
[1] Combs, G. The Vitamins. Fundamental Aspects in Nutrition and Health, 3rd ed., Academic Press, 
n.d. 
[2] Azzi, A. 2007. Molecular mechanism of α-tocopherol action. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 43: 16–21.
[3] Pisoschi, A.M., A. Pop, A.I. Serban and C. Fafaneata. 2014. Electrochemical methods for ascorbic 
acid determination. Electrochim. Acta 121: 443–460. Doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2013.12.127. 
[4] Ingrid T. Loessing (ed.). 2007. Vitamin A: New Research, Nova. 
[5]	 Frankenburg, F.R. 2009. Vitamin discoveries and disasters: History, science, and controversies. 
ABC-CLIO. 
[6] Litwack, G. 2007. Vitamin E. Academic Press. 
[7] Atkins, P. and J. De Paula. 2011. Physical Chemistry for the Life Sciences. Oxford University 
Press, USA. 
[8] Li, G. and P. Miao. 2012. Electrochemical Analysis of Proteins and Cells. Springer Science & 
Business Media. 
[9] Dahmen, E.A.M.F. (ed.). 1986. Chapter 1 Introduction. pp. 3–9. In: Electroanal. Theory Appl. 
Aqueous Non-Aqueous Media Autom. Chem. Control, Elsevier. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0167-9244(08)70252-X. 
[10] Heinze, J. 1984. Cyclic voltammetry—“electrochemical spectroscopy”. New analytical methods 
(25). Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. English 23: 831–847. Doi: 10.1002/anie.198408313. 
[11] Girousi, S. 2015. Biosensors. pp. 95–122. In: Bioanalytical Chemistry, 1st ed., Hellenic Academic 
Libraries Association Athens. https://repository.kallipos.gr/handle/11419/3667. 
[12] Herzog, G. and V. Beni. 2013. Stripping voltammetry at micro-interface arrays: A review. Anal. 
Chim. Acta. 769: 10–21. Doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2012.12.031. 
[13] Brunetti, B. 2016. Recent advances in electroanalysis of vitamins. Electroanalysis 28: 1930–1942. 
Doi: 10.1002/elan.201600097. 
[14] Blake, C.J. 2007. Analytical procedures for water-soluble vitamins in foods and dietary 
supplements: A review. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 389: 63–76. 
[15] Brunetti, B. and E. Desimoni. 2014. Voltammetric determination of vitamin B 6 in food samples 
and dietary supplements. J. Food Compos. Anal. 33: 155–160. 
[16]	 Wang, L.-H. and S.-W. Tseng. 2001. Direct determination of d-panthenol and salt of pantothenic 
acid in cosmetic and pharmaceutical preparations by differential pulse voltammetry. Anal. Chim. 
Acta. 432: 39–48. 
[17]	 Vytřas, K., I. Švancara and R. Metelka. 2009. Carbon paste electrodes in electroanalytical 
chemistry. J. Serbian Chem. Soc. 74: 1021–1033. 
[18]	 Tyszczuk-Rotko, K. 2012. New voltammetric procedure for determination of thiamine in 
commercially available juices and pharmaceutical formulation using a lead film electrode. Food 
Chem. 134: 1239–1243. 
[19] Brahman, P.K., R.A. Dar and K.S. Pitre. 2013. DNA-functionalized electrochemical biosensor 
for detection of vitamin B1 using electrochemically treated multiwalled carbon nanotube paste 
electrode by voltammetric methods. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 177: 807–812. 
[20] Baś, B., M. Jakubowska and Ł. Górski. 2011. Application of renewable silver amalgam annular 
band electrode to voltammetric determination of vitamins C, B 1 and B 2. Talanta 84: 1032–1037. 
[21]	 Yosypchuk, B., M. Heyrovský, E. Palecek and L. Novotný. 2002. Use of solid amalgam electrodes 
in nucleic acid analysis. Electroanalysis 14: 1488–1493.
[22] Sá, É.S., P.S. da Silva, C.L. Jost and A. Spinelli. 2015. Electrochemical sensor based on bismuth￾film electrode for voltammetric studies on vitamin B 2 (riboflavin). Sensors Actuators B Chem. 
209: 423–430. 
[23]	 Kumar, D.R., D. Manoj and J. Santhanalakshmi. 2014. Au–ZnO bullet-like heterodimer 
nanoparticles: Synthesis and use for enhanced nonenzymatic electrochemical determination of 
glucose. RSC Adv. 4: 8943–8952.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
152 Nanosensors 
[24] Nie, T., K. Zhang, J. Xu, L. Lu and L. Bai. 2014. A facile one-pot strategy for the electrochemical 
synthesis of poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/Zirconia nanocomposite as an effective sensing 
platform for vitamins B 2, B 6 and C. J. Electroanal. Chem. 717: 1–9. 
[25] Mikheeva, E.V., O.A. Martynyuk, G.B. Slepchenko and L.S. Anisimova. 2009. Study of the 
voltammetric behavior of vitamin B 2 and the development of a procedure for its determination in 
breast milk. J. Anal. Chem. 64: 731–734. 
[26] Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh, A. and P. Pouladsaz. 2014. Voltammetric determination of riboflavin based 
on electrocatalytic oxidation at zeolite-modified carbon paste electrodes. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
20: 2146–2152. 
[27] Revin, S.B. and S.A. John. 2012. Simultaneous determination of vitamins B 2, B 9 and C using a 
heterocyclic conducting polymer modified electrode. Electrochim. Acta. 75: 35–41.
[28]	 Wang, X., N. Yang and Q. Wan. 2006. Cyclic voltammetric response of nicotinic acid and 
nicotinamide on a polycrystalline gold electrode. Electrochim. Acta 52: 361–368. 
[29]	 Yang, N. and X. Wang. 2008. Thin self-assembled monolayer for voltammetrically monitoring 
nicotinic acid in food. Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces 61: 277–281. 
[30]	 Wu, J., H. Liu and Z. Lin. 2008. Electrochemical performance of a carbon nanotube/La-doped 
TiO2 nanocomposite and its use for preparation of an electrochemical nicotinic acid sensor. 
Sensors 8: 7085–7096. 
[31]	 Kotkar, R.M. and A.K. Srivastava. 2008. Polarographic behavior of nicotinamide in surfactant 
media and its determination in cetyltrimethylammonium bromide surfactant system. Anal. Sci. 
24: 1093–1098. 
[32]	 Kotkar, R.M. and A.K. Srivastava. 2008. Electrochemical behavior of nicotinamide using carbon 
paste electrode modified with macrocyclic compounds. J. Incl. Phenom. Macrocycl. Chem. 
60: 271–279. 
[33]	 Wu, Y.-H. and F.-J. Song. 2008. Voltammetric investigation of vitamin B6 at a glassy carbon 
electrode and its application in determination. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 29: 38–42. 
[34] Gonzalez-Rodriguez, J., J.M. Sevilla, T. Pineda and M. Blazquez. 2012. Electrochemical analysis 
on compounds of the vitamin B6 family using glassy carbon electrodes. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
7: 2221–2229. 
[35] Barsan, M.M., C.T. Toledo and C.M.A. Brett. 2015. New electrode architectures based on poly 
(methylene green) and functionalized carbon nanotubes: Characterization and application to 
detection of acetaminophen and pyridoxine. J. Electroanal. Chem. 736: 8–15. 
[36]	 Kumar, D.R., D. Manoj, J. Santhanalakshmi and J.-J. Shim. 2015. Au-CuO core-shell nanoparticles 
design and development for the selective determination of Vitamin B 6. Electrochim. Acta 
176: 514–522. 
[37] Raoof, J.B., N. Teymoori and M.A. Khalilzadeh. 2015. ZnO nanoparticle ionic liquids carbon 
paste electrode as a voltammetric sensor for determination of Sudan I in the presence of vitamin 
B6 in food samples. Food Anal. Methods 8: 885–892. 
[38] Fonseca, C.A., G.C.S. Vaz, J.P.A. Azevedo and F.S. Semaan. 2011. Exploiting ion-pair formation 
for the enhancement of electroanalytical determination of pyridoxine (B 6) onto polyurethane￾graphite electrodes. Microchem. J. 99: 186–192. 
[39] Desai, P.B., R.M. Kotkar and A.K. Srivastava. 2008. Electrochemical behaviour of pyridoxine 
hydrochloride (vitamin B6) at carbon paste electrode modified with crown ethers. J. Solid State 
Electrochem. 12: 1067–1075. 
[40] Baghizadeh, A., H. Karimi-Maleh, Z. Khoshnama, A. Hassankhani and M. Abbasghorbani. 
2015. A voltammetric sensor for simultaneous determination of vitamin C and vitamin B6 in 
food samples using ZrO2 nanoparticle/ionic liquids carbon paste electrode. Food Anal. Methods. 
8: 549–557. 
[41] Patra, S., E. Roy, R. Das, P. Karfa, S. Kumar, R. Madhuri and P.K. Sharma. 2015. Bimetallic 
magnetic nanoparticle as a new platform for fabrication of pyridoxine and pyridoxal-5′-phosphate 
imprinted polymer modified high throughput electrochemical sensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
73: 234–244.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 153 
[42] Gholivand, M.-B., A.R. Jalalvand, H.C. Goicoechea, G. Paimard and T. Skov. 2015. Surface 
exploration of a room-temperature ionic liquid-chitin composite film decorated with 
electrochemically deposited PdFeNi trimetallic alloy nanoparticles by pattern recognition: An 
elegant approach to developing a novel biotin biosensor. Talanta 131: 249–258. 
[43]	 Kergaravat, S.V., M.I. Pividori and S.R. Hernandez. 2012. Evaluation of seven cosubstrates 
in the quantification of horseradish peroxidase enzyme by square wave voltammetry. Talanta 
88: 468–476. 
[44] Ardakani, M.M., M.A.L.I. Sheikhmohseni, H. Beitollahi, A. Benvidi and H. Naeimi. 2011. 
Simultaneous determination of dopamine, uric acid, and folic acid by a modified TiO2 nanoparticles 
carbon paste electrode. Turkish J. Chem. 35: 573–585. 
[45] Xiao, F., C. Ruan, L. Liu, R. Yan, F. Zhao and B. Zeng. 2008. Single-walled carbon nanotube-ionic 
liquid paste electrode for the sensitive voltammetric determination of folic acid. Sensors Actuators 
B Chem. 134: 895–901. 
[46] Karimi‐Maleh, H., F. Tahernejad‐Javazmi, M. Daryanavard, H. Hadadzadeh, A.A. Ensafi
and M. Abbasghorbani. 2014. Electrocatalytic and simultaneous determination of ascorbic 
acid, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide and folic acid at Ruthenium (II) Complex‐ZnO/CNTs 
nanocomposite modified carbon paste electrode. Electroanalysis 26: 962–970.
[47] Arvand, M. and M. Dehsaraei. 2013. A simple and efficient electrochemical sensor for folic 
acid determination in human blood plasma based on gold nanoparticles–modified carbon paste 
electrode. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 33: 3474–3480. 
[48] Kingsley, M.P., P.B. Desai and A.K. Srivastava. 2015. Simultaneous electro-catalytic oxidative 
determination of ascorbic acid and folic acid using Fe3O4 nanoparticles modified carbon paste 
electrode. J. Electroanal. Chem. 741: 71–79. 
[49] Jamali, T., H. Karimi-Maleh and M.A. Khalilzadeh. 2014. A novel nanosensor based on Pt: Co 
nanoalloy ionic liquid carbon paste electrode for voltammetric determination of vitamin B 9 in 
food samples. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 57: 679–685. 
[50]	 Georgescu, R., J.F. van Staden, R.-I. Stefan-van Staden and C. Boscornea. 2015. Evaluation of 
amperometric dot microsensors for the analysis of folic acid in pharmaceutical tablets and urine 
samples. J. Porphyr. Phthalocyanines. 19: 679–687. 
[51] Ojani, R., J. Raoof and S. Zamani. 2009. Electrocatalytic oxidation of folic acid on carbon 
paste electrode modified by nickel ions dispersed into poly (o‐anisidine) film. Electroanalysis 
21: 2634–2639. 
[52] Kun, Z., Z. Ling, H. Yi, C. Ying, T. Dongmei, Z. Shuliang and Z. Yuyang. 2012. Electrochemical 
behavior of folic acid in neutral solution on the modified glassy carbon electrode: Platinum 
nanoparticles doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes with Nafion as adhesive. J. Electroanal. 
Chem. 677: 105–112. 
[53] Babakhanian, A., S. Kaki, M. Ahmadi, H. Ehzari and A. Pashabadi. 2014. Development of 
α-polyoxometalate–polypyrrole–Au nanoparticles modified sensor applied for detection of folic 
acid. Biosens. Bioelectron. 60: 185–190. 
[54] Kalimuthu, P. and S.A. John. 2009. Selective electrochemical sensor for folic acid at physiological 
pH using ultrathin electropolymerized film of functionalized thiadiazole modified glassy carbon 
electrode. Biosens. Bioelectron. 24: 3575–3580. 
[55] Korolczuk, M. and K. Tyszczuk. 2007. Determination of folic acid by adsorptive stripping 
voltammetry at a lead film electrode. Electroanalysis 19: 1959–1962.
[56] Mirmoghtadaie, L., A.A. Ensafi, M. Kadivar, M. Shahedi and M.R. Ganjali. 2013. Highly selective, 
sensitive and fast determination of folic acid in food samples using new electrodeposited gold 
nanoparticles by differential pulse voltammetry. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 8: 3755–3767.
[57] Bandžuchová, L. and R. Šelešovská. 2011. Voltammetric determination of folic acid using liquid 
mercury free silver amalgam electrode. Acta Chim. Slov. 58. 
[58] Farias, P.A.M., M.C. Rezende and J.C. Moreira. 2012. Folic acid determination in neutral pH 
electrolyte by adsorptive stripping voltammetry at the mercury film electrode. IOSR J. Pharm. 
2: 302–311.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
154 Nanosensors 
[59] Rutyna, I. 2015. Determination of folic acid at a bismuth film electrode by adsorptive stripping 
voltammetry. Anal. Lett. 48: 1593–1603. 
[60] Kuralay, F., T. Vural, C. Bayram, E.B. Denkbas and S. Abaci. 2011. Carbon nanotube–chitosan 
modified disposable pencil graphite electrode for Vitamin B 12 analysis. Colloids Surfaces B 
Biointerfaces 87: 18–22. 
[61] Pala, B.B., T. Vural, F. Kuralay, T. Çırak, G. Bolat, S. Abacı and E.B. Denkbaş. 2014. Disposable 
pencil graphite electrode modified with peptide nanotubes for Vitamin B 12 analysis. Appl. Surf. 
Sci. 303: 37–45. 
[62] Bandžuchová, L., R. Šelešovská, T. Navrátil and J. Chýlková. 2013. Silver solid amalgam electrode 
as a tool for monitoring the electrochemical reduction of hydroxocobalamin. Electroanalysis 
25: 213–222. 
[63] Kreft, G.L., O.C. de Braga and A. Spinelli. 2012. Analytical electrochemistry of vitamin B 12 on 
a bismuth-film electrode surface. Electrochim. Acta 83: 125–132.
[64] Michopoulos, A., A.B. Florou and M.I. Prodromidis. 2015. Ultrasensitive determination of vitamin 
B12 Using disposable graphite screen‐printed electrodes and anodic adsorptive voltammetry. 
Electroanalysis 27: 1876–1882. 
[65] Erdurak-Kiliç, C.S., B. Uslu, B. Dogan, U. Ozgen, S.A. Ozkan and M. Coskun. 2006. Anodic 
voltammetric behavior of ascorbic acid and its selective determination in pharmaceutical dosage 
forms and some Rosa species of Turkey. J. Anal. Chem. 61: 1113–1120. 
[66] Rueda, M., A. Aldaz and F. Sanchez-Burgos. 1978. Oxidation of L-ascorbic acid on a gold 
electrode. Electrochim. Acta 23: 419–424. 
[67]	 Bradshaw, M.P., P.D. Prenzler and G.R. Scollary. 2002. Square‐wave voltammetric determination 
of hydrogen peroxide generated from the oxidation of ascorbic acid in a model wine base. 
Electroanalysis 14: 546–550. 
[68]	 Yilmaz, S., M. Sadikoglu, G. Saglikoglu, S. Yagmur and G. Askin. 2008. Determination of ascorbic 
acid in tablet dosage forms and some fruit juices by DPV. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 3: 1534–1542. 
[69]	 Wang, J. and B.A. Freiha. 1983. Evaluation of differential pulse voltammetry at carbon electrodes. 
Talanta 30: 317–322. 
[70] Kalimuthu, P. and S.A. John. 2005. Solvent dependent dimercaptothiadiazole monolayers on 
gold electrode for the simultaneous determination of uric acid and ascorbic acid. Electrochem. 
Commun. 7: 1271–1276. 
[71] Raoof, J.B., A. Kiani, R. Ojani, R. Valiollahi and S. Rashid-Nadimi. 2010. Simultaneous 
voltammetric determination of ascorbic acid and dopamine at the surface of electrodes modified 
with self-assembled gold nanoparticle films. J. Solid State Electrochem. 14: 1171–1176.
[72] Švancara, I., A. Walcarius, K. Kalcher and K. Vytřas. 2009. Carbon paste electrodes in the new 
millennium. Open Chem. 7: 598–656. 
[73] Zare, H.R., N. Nasirizadeh and M.M. Ardakani. 2005. Electrochemical properties of a tetrabromo￾p-benzoquinone modified carbon paste electrode. Application to the simultaneous determination 
of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid. J. Electroanal. Chem. 577: 25–33. 
[74] Chethana, B.K. and Y.A. Naik. 2012. Electrochemical oxidation and determination of ascorbic 
acid present in natural fruit juices using a methionine modified carbon paste electrode. Anal. 
Methods 4: 3754–3759. 
[75] Mazloum-Ardakani, M., F. Habibollahi, H.R. Zare, H. Naeimi and M. Nejati. 2009. Electrocatalytic 
oxidation of ascorbic acid at a 2, 2′-(1, 8-octanediylbisnitriloethylidine)-bis-hydroquinone 
modified carbon paste electrode. J. Appl. Electrochem. 39: 1117–1124.
[76] Stefan-van Staden, R.-I., S.C. Balasoiu, J.F. van Staden and G.-L. Radu. 2012. Microelectrodes 
based on porphyrins for the determination of ascorbic acid in pharmaceutical samples and 
beverages. J. Porphyr. Phthalocyanines 16: 809–816. 
[77] Li, F., J. Li, Y. Feng, L. Yang and Z. Du. 2011. Electrochemical behavior of graphene doped carbon 
paste electrode and its application for sensitive determination of ascorbic acid. Sensors Actuators 
B Chem. 157: 110–114.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 155 
[78] Langley, C.E., B. ŠLJUKIC, C.E. Banks and R.G. Compton. 2007. Manganese dioxide graphite 
composite electrodes: Application to the electroanalysis of hydrogen peroxide, ascorbic acid and 
nitrite. Anal. Sci. 23: 165–170. 
[79] Thiagarajan, S., T.-H. Tsai and S.-M. Chen. 2009. Easy modification of glassy carbon electrode 
for simultaneous determination of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
24: 2712–2715. 
[80] Ensafi, A.A., M. Taei and T. Khayamian. 2009. A differential pulse voltammetric method for 
simultaneous determination of ascorbic acid, dopamine, and uric acid using poly (3-(5-chloro-2­
hydroxyphenylazo)-4, 5-dihydroxynaphthalene-2, 7-disulfonic acid) film modified glassy carbon 
electrode. J. Electroanal. Chem. 633: 212–220. 
[81] Li, N.B., W. Ren and H.Q. Luo. 2008. Simultaneous voltammetric measurement of ascorbic acid 
and dopamine on poly (caffeic acid)-modified glassy carbon electrode. J. Solid State Electrochem. 
12: 693–699. 
[82] Zhang, R., S. Liu, L. Wang and G. Yang. 2013. Electroanalysis of ascorbic acid using poly 
(bromocresol purple) film modified glassy carbon electrode. Measurement 46: 1089–1093.
[83]	 Kumar, S.S., J. Mathiyarasu, K.L.N. Phani and V. Yegnaraman. 2006. Simultaneous determination 
of dopamine and ascorbic acid on poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) modified glassy carbon 
electrode. J. Solid State Electrochem. 10: 905–913. 
[84] Kilmartin, P.A., A. Martinez and P.N. Bartlett. 2008. Polyaniline-based microelectrodes for 
sensing ascorbic acid in beverages. Curr. Appl. Phys. 8: 320–323. 
[85] Cao, X., Y. Xu, L. Luo, Y. Ding and Y. Zhang. 2010. Simultaneous determination of uric acid and 
ascorbic acid at the film of chitosan incorporating cetylpyridine bromide modified glassy carbon 
electrode. J. Solid State Electrochem. 14: 829–834. 
[86] Sripriya, R., M. Chandrasekaran and M. Noel. 2006. Voltammetric analysis of hydroquinone, 
ascorbic acid, nitrobenzene and benzyl chloride in aqueous, non-aqueous, micellar and 
microemulsion media. Colloid Polym. Sci. 285: 39–48. 
[87]	 Wang, M., X. Xu and J. Gao. 2007. Voltammetric studies of a novel bicopper complex modified 
glassy carbon electrode for the simultaneous determination of dopamine and ascorbic acid. J. 
Appl. Electrochem. 37: 705–710. 
[88]	 Wang, G., J. Sun, W. Zhang, S. Jiao and B. Fang. 2009. Simultaneous determination of dopamine, 
uric acid and ascorbic acid with LaFeO3 nanoparticles modified electrode. Microchim. Acta. 
164: 357–362. 
[89] Lourencao, B.C., R.A. Medeiros, R.C. Rocha‐Filho and O. Fatibello‐Filho. 2010. Simultaneous 
differential pulse voltammetric determination of ascorbic acid and caffeine in pharmaceutical 
formulations using a boron‐doped diamond electrode. Electroanalysis 22: 1717–1723.
[90]	 Wang, J. 2005. Carbon‐nanotube based electrochemical biosensors: A review. Electroanalysis 
17: 7–14. 
[91] Zhang, M., K. Liu, L. Xiang, Y. Lin, L. Su and L. Mao. 2007. Carbon nanotube-modified carbon 
fiber microelectrodes for in vivo voltammetric measurement of ascorbic acid in rat brain. Anal. 
Chem. 79: 6559–6565. 
[92] Deng, P., Z. Xu and J. Li. 2013. Simultaneous determination of ascorbic acid and rutin in 
pharmaceutical preparations with electrochemical method based on multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes–chitosan composite film modified electrode. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 76: 234–242.
[93] Keyvanfard, M., R. Shakeri, H. Karimi-Maleh and K. Alizad. 2013. Highly selective and sensitive 
voltammetric sensor based on modified multiwall carbon nanotube paste electrode for simultaneous 
determination of ascorbic acid, acetaminophen and tryptophan. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 33: 811–816. 
[94]	 Noroozifar, M., M.K. Motlagh and H. Tavakoli. 2012. Determination of ascorbic acid by a 
modified multiwall carbon nanotube paste electrode using cetrimonium iodide/iodine. Turkish J. 
Chem. 36: 645–658. 
[95] Zhang, B., D. Huang, X. Xu, G. Alemu, Y. Zhang, F. Zhan, Y. Shen and M. Wang. 2013. 
Simultaneous electrochemical determination of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid with helical 
carbon nanotubes. Electrochim. Acta. 91: 261–266.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 Nanosensors 
[96] Ping, J., Y. Wang, J. Wu, Y. Ying and F. Ji. 2012. Determination of ascorbic acid levels in 
food samples by using an ionic liquid–carbon nanotube composite electrode. Food Chem. 
135: 362–367. 
[97] Kul, D., M.E. Ghica, R. Pauliukaite and C.M.A. Brett. 2013. A novel amperometric sensor for 
ascorbic acid based on poly (Nile blue A) and functionalised multi-walled carbon nanotube 
modified electrodes. Talanta 111: 76–84.
[98] Lin, K.-C., P.-C. Yeh and S.-M. Chen. 2012. Electrochemical determination of ascorbic acid 
using poly (xanthurenic acid) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
7: 12752–12763. 
[99] Sun, C.-L., H.-H. Lee, J.-M. Yang and C.-C. Wu. 2011. The simultaneous electrochemical detection 
of ascorbic acid, dopamine, and uric acid using graphene/size-selected Pt nanocomposites. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 26: 3450–3455. 
[100] Shi, W., C. Liu, Y. Song, N. Lin, S. Zhou and X. Cai. 2012. An ascorbic acid amperometric sensor 
using over-oxidized polypyrrole and palladium nanoparticles composites. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
38: 100–106. 
[101] Hathoot, A.A., U.S. Yousef, A.S. Shatla and M. Abdel-Azzem. 2012. Voltammetric simultaneous 
determination of glucose, ascorbic acid and dopamine on glassy carbon electrode modified 
byNiNPs@ poly 1, 5-diaminonaphthalene. Electrochim. Acta 85: 531–537. 
[102] Yogeswaran, U., S. Thiagarajan and S.-M. Chen. 2007. Nanocomposite of functionalized multiwall 
carbon nanotubes with nafion, nano platinum, and nano gold biosensing film for simultaneous 
determination of ascorbic acid, epinephrine, and uric acid. Anal. Biochem. 365: 122–131. 
[103] Arenas, L.T., P.C.M. Villis, J. Arguello, R. Landers, E.V. Benvenutti and Y. Gushikem. 2010. 
Niobium oxide dispersed on a carbon–ceramic matrix, SiO 2/C/Nb 2 O 5, used as an electrochemical 
ascorbic acid sensor. Talanta 83: 241–248. 
[104] Habibi, B., M. Jahanbakhshi and M.H. Pournaghi-Azar. 2011. Differential pulse voltammetric 
simultaneous determination of acetaminophen and ascorbic acid using single-walled carbon 
nanotube-modified carbon–ceramic electrode. Anal. Biochem. 411: 167–175.
[105] Ziyatdinova, G., E. Giniyatova and H. Budnikov. 2010. Cyclic voltammetry of retinol in surfactant 
media and its application for the analysis of real samples. Electroanalysis 22: 2708–2713. 
[106] Nelson, A. 1992. Voltammetry of retinal in phospholipid monolayers adsorbed on mercury. J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 335: 327–343. 
[107] Powell, L.A. and R.M. Wightman. 1981. Mechanism of electrodimerization of retinal and 
cinnamaldehyde. J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 117: 321–333. 
[108] Liu, D., Y. Gao and L.D. Kispert. 2000. Electrochemical properties of natural carotenoids. J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 488: 140–150. 
[109] Hapiot, P., L.D. Kispert, V. V Konovalov and J.-M. Savéant. 2001. Single two-electron transfers 
vs successive one-electron transfers in polyconjugated systems illustrated by the electrochemical 
oxidation and reduction of carotenoids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123: 6669–6677. 
[110] Tan, Y.S. and R.D. Webster. 2011. Electron-transfer reactions between the diamagnetic cation of 
α-tocopherol (vitamin E) and β-carotene. J. Phys. Chem. B 115: 4244–4250.
[111] Liu, X., K. Liu, G. Cheng and S. Dong. 2001. Electrochemical and spectroscopic study of vitamin 
D 2 by in situ thin layer CD spectroelectrochemistry. J. Electroanal. Chem. 510: 103–107. 
[112] Hart, J.P., M.D. Norman and C.J. Lacey. 1992. Voltammetric behaviour of vitamins D2 and D3 
at a glassy carbon electrode and their determination in pharmaceutical products by using liquid 
chromatography with amperometric detection. Analyst 117: 1441–1445. 
[113] Chan, Y.Y., Y. Yue and R.D. Webster. 2014. Voltammetric studies on vitamins D2 and D3 in 
organic solvents. Electrochim. Acta 138: 400–409. 
[114] Cincotto, F.H., T.C. Canevari and S.A.S. Machado. 2014. Highly sensitive electrochemical sensor 
for determination of vitamin D in mixtures of water‐ethanol. Electroanalysis 26: 2783–2788.
[115] Canevari, T.C., F.H. Cincotto, R. Landers and S.A.S. Machado. 2014. Synthesis and characterization 
of α-nickel (II) hydroxide particles on organic-inorganic matrix and its application in a sensitive 
electrochemical sensor for vitamin D determination. Electrochim. Acta 147: 688–695.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications of Sensitive Electrode Surfaces; Determination of Vitamins 157 
[116]	 Webster, R.D. 2012. Voltammetry of the liposoluble vitamins (A, D, e and K) in organic solvents. 
Chem. Rec. 12: 188–200. Doi: 10.1002/tcr.201100005. 
[117]	 Tan, Y.S., S. Chen, W.M. Hong, J.M. Kan, E.S.H. Kwek, S.Y. Lim, Z.H. Lim, M.E. Tessensohn, 
Y. Zhang and R.D. Webster. 2011. The role of low levels of water in the electrochemical 
oxidation of α-tocopherol (vitamin E) and other phenols in acetonitrile. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
13: 12745–12754. 
[118]	 Yao, W.W., H.M. Peng, R.D. Webster and P.M.W. Gill. 2008. Variable scan rate cyclic voltammetry 
and theoretical studies on tocopherol (vitamin E) model compounds. J. Phys. Chem. B. 
112: 6847–6855. 
[119]	 Williams, L.L. and R.D. Webster. 2004. Electrochemically controlled chemically reversible 
transformation of α-tocopherol (vitamin E) into its phenoxonium cation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
126: 12441–12450. 
[120] Lee, S.B., C.Y. Lin, P.M.W. Gill and R.D. Webster. 2005. Transformation of α-tocopherol (vitamin 
E) and related chromanol model compounds into their phenoxonium ions by chemical oxidation 
with the nitrosonium cation. J. Org. Chem. 70: 10466–10473. 
[121] Speiser, B. and A. Rieker. 1980. Electrochemical oxidations: Part V. Electrochemical investigations 
into the behaviour of 2, 6-di-tert-butyl-4-(4-dimethylamino-phenyl)-phenol Part 2: Anodic 
oxidation in the presence of 2, 6-dimethylpyridine and the mechanism of the formation of the 
pheno. J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 110: 231–246. 
[122]	 Vigalok, A., B. Rybtchinski, Y. Gozin, T.S. Koblenz, Y. Ben-David, H. Rozenberg and D. Milstein. 
2003. Metal-stabilized phenoxonium cation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125: 15692–15693. 
[123]	 Webster, R.D. 2007. New insights into the oxidative electrochemistry of vitamin E. Acc. Chem. 
Res. 40: 251–257. 
[124]	 Wilson, G.J., C.Y. Lin and R.D. Webster. 2006. Significant differences in the electrochemical 
behavior of the α-, β-, γ-, and δ-tocopherols (Vitamin E). J. Phys. Chem. B. 110: 11540–11548.
[125]	 Yao, W.W., C. Lau, Y. Hui, H.L. Poh and R.D. Webster. 2011. Electrode-supported biomembrane 
for examining electron-transfer and ion-transfer reactions of encapsulated low molecular weight 
biological molecules. J. Phys. Chem. C 115: 2100–2113. 
[126]	 Wain, A.J., J.D. Wadhawan, R.R. France and R.G. Compton. 2004. Biphasic redox chemistry of 
α-tocopherol: Evidence for electrochemically induced hydrolysis and dimerization on the surface 
of and within femtolitre droplets immobilized onto graphite electrodes. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
6: 836–842. 
[127] Hui, Y., E.L.K. Chng, C.Y.L. Chng, H.L. Poh and R.D. Webster. 2009. Hydrogen-bonding 
interactions between water and the one-and two-electron-reduced forms of vitamin K1: Applying 
quinone electrochemistry to determine the moisture content of non-aqueous solvents. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 131: 1523–1534. 
[128] Rees, N.V., A.D. Clegg, O.V. Klymenko, B.A. Coles and R.G. Compton. 2004. Marcus theory for 
outer-sphere heterogeneous electron transfer: Predicting electron-transfer rates for quinones. J. 
Phys. Chem. B 108: 13047–13051. 
[129] Chih, T., S.Y. Yeh and C.M. Wang. 2003. Evidence and applications for electron transfer between 
vitamin K 3 and oxygen. J. Electroanal. Chem. 543: 135–142. 
[130] Hui, Y., E.L.K. Chng, L.P.-L. Chua, W.Z. Liu and R.D. Webster. 2010. Voltammetric method for 
determining the trace moisture content of organic solvents based on hydrogen-bonding interactions 
with quinones. Anal. Chem. 82: 1928–1934. 
[131] Bulovas, A., N. Dirvianskytė, Z. Talaikytė, G. Niaura, S. Valentukonytė, E. Butkus and V. Razumas. 
2006. Electrochemical and structural properties of self-assembled monolayers of 2-methyl-3-(ω￾mercaptoalkyl)-1, 4-naphthoquinones on gold. J. Electroanal. Chem. 591: 175–188. 
[132] Jeuken, L.J.C., R.J. Bushby and S.D. Evans. 2007. Proton transport into a tethered bilayer lipid 
membrane. Electrochem. Commun. 9: 610–614. 
[133] Cannes, C., F. Kanoufi and A.J. Bard. 2002. Cyclic voltammetric and scanning electrochemical 
microscopic study of menadione permeability through a self-assembled monolayer on a gold 
electrode. Langmuir 18: 8134–8141.  
 
 
 
158	 Nanosensors 
[134]	 Yang, J.-E., J.-H. Yoon, M.-S. Won and Y.-B. Shim. 2010. Electrochemical and 
spectroelectrochemical behaviors of vitamin K 1/lipid modified electrodes and the formation of 
radical anion in aqueous media. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 31: 3133–3138. 
[135]	 Wadhawan, J.D., A.J. Wain and R.G. Compton. 2003. Electrochemical probing of photochemical 
reactions inside femtolitre droplets confined to electrodes, ChemPhysChem. 4: 1211–1215.
[136]	 Wain, A.J., J.D. Wadhawan and R.G. Compton. 2003. Electrochemical studies of vitamin K1 
microdroplets: electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution. ChemPhysChem. 4: 974–982. 
[137] Gupta, N. and H. Linschitz. 1997. Hydrogen-bonding and protonation effects in electrochemistry 
of quinones in aprotic solvents. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119: 6384–6391.  
7
 
Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere
 
Paulina Listewnik,
1 Valery V. Tuchin2,3,4 
and Małgorzata Szczerska1,* 
1. Introduction 
Fiber-optic sensors are devices used for the measurement of various physical 
(such as temperature, pressure, vibration [3–6]) and chemical quantities ([7, 8]). 
Furthermore, their structure allows them to be used in places in which common 
electric sensors cannot be inset, like remote and hard to access locations, hazardous 
places, potentially explosive areas (ATEX directives), places endangered by fire, 
and regions with severe climatic and corrosive conditions [9–11]. These sensors 
are manufactured as small and compact devices resistant to external influences like 
electromagnetic interference or ionizing radiation [1, 2]. Because of their numerous 
advantages and wide application range, the development of fiber-optic sensors has 
been distinctly visible throughout the last decade. 
State-of-the-art devices used in fiber-optics technology enable the manufacture 
of microstructures of various geometrical parameters which can be integrated into a 
fiber-optic sensor. There are a multitude of fiber-optic structures, including tapers, 
microrings, microcavities, microdiscs [12–15], as well as various techniques and 
types of applications of these structures [16]. However, they are mainly used as 
microresonators [17, 18]. And then, there are microspheres – the most common and 
1 Department of Metrology and Optoelectronics, Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and 
Informatics, Gdańsk University of Technology, Narutowicza Street 11/12, 80-233 Gdańsk, Poland. 
2 Research-Educational Institute of Optics and Biophotonics, Saratov State University (National Research 
University of Russia), Astrakhanskaya 83, 410012 Saratov, Russian Federation. 
3 Laboratory of Laser Diagnostics of Technical and Living Systems, Institute of Precision Mechanics and 
Control RAS, Rabochaya 24, 410028 Saratov, Russian Federation. 
4 Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Biophotonics, National Research Tomsk, State University, Lenin’s av. 
36, 634050 Tomsk, Russian Federation. 
* Corresponding author: malszcze@pg.edu.pl 160 Nanosensors 
readily used of the structures. To date, the majority of research focusing on sensors 
with optical microspheres deals with highly coherent light sources (i.e., lasers) 
for inciting a resonance through the phenomenon of Whispering Mode Gallery 
[19–21]. 
Furthermore, utilizing any of the mentioned microstructures often requires them 
to be coupled with other structures [22, 23], as a means to introduce a signal, and 
uses specialized types of optical fibers [24, 25]. The sensors discussed in this chapter 
are designed to act as standalone devices, made from a standard telecommunication 
fiber, therefore reducing the dimensions and complexity of the system, thus in turn 
minimizing the possible impacts on the accuracy of the performed measurements and 
ultimately ensuring the availability of components and materials. 
In this chapter, the problems occurring during the manufacture of an optical 
microsphere have been elucidated, along with the theoretical possibility of 
modification of their properties by altering their structure or coating. Furthermore, 
representative sensors with microspheres and the way to tune their parameters have 
been presented. 
2. Microsphere as a standalone device 
In most of the fiber-optic microsphere sensors described in the literature, light is 
coupled directly with the microspherical resonator through an external setup and 
transmitted to the detector via attached fibers [26]. The working principle of a 
standalone microspherical sensor is based on the idea to use the fiber (on which the 
microsphere is fabricated) as a way to feed the light to the structure as well as for the 
transmission of the output signal. 
The theoretical rationale for such a device was presented by Hirsch [27]. 
The microsphere is created on the tip of a commonly used single mode fiber (like 
SMF-28) by short-time localized heating (by an electrical arc discharge employed 
in fiber fusion splicers, for instance). If fabricated carefully, a microsphere may 
preserve the original structure of the fiber, with a distinct boundary between the 
material of the fiber core and the cladding (Figure 1). 
Figure 1. Standalone fiber-optic microsphere device: schematic diagram of the structure (M1, M2 – 
boundaries between different materials upon reflection of light; L – cavity length; d – sphere diameter). Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere 161 
When the light source illuminates the device through the optical fiber, the 
light is reflected off the boundary between media of different refractive indices – 
first between the core and the cladding of the optical fiber, and then between the 
cladding and the examined environment in which the sensor is enveloped, therefore 
inciting interference. The wave reflected off the first boundary is always constant, 
whereas the wave reflected on the second boundary is dependent on changes to the 
surrounding medium. Such a structure has been described as a low-finesse Fabry￾Pérot interferometer, where the interferometer cavity is made of fiber cladding 
material and its length is related to the size of the microsphere [27]. 
Sensors employing a microsphere structure can be used to detect changes in the 
refractive index of an external medium by measuring the reflected signal intensity. 
Moreover, owing to the intrinsic Fabry-Pérot interferometer, it is also possible to 
monitor the state of the sensor structure by measuring the interference component 
visible in the reflected spectrum. The position of the interference fringes is directly 
related to the length of the interferometer cavity and, thus, for instance, can be used 
to detect deformation of the sensor head or for distinguishing between sensors of 
different sizes in a distributed sensing system. 
Figure 2 presents the typical measurement setup that is used for the sensor. 
Figure 2. Typical measurement setup. 
The results of the simulation of sensor response for a microsphere of 240 µm 
diameter have been displayed in Figure 3 [28]. 
3. Microsphere manufacturing—what can go wrong? 
When opting to use an optical microsphere in the fiber-optic sensor, the goal is to create 
a clean and perfectly round structure for highly precise results. Paying close attention 
to all the details, like predetermined fusion current supplied to the electrodes, fiber 
prefuse time and the type of fiber during the fabrication of a microsphere makes the 
sensors reproducible, thus rendering it easy to modify them for tuning to the selected 
measurements. Figure 4 shows an example of the ideal microsphere; the image has 
been obtained by a Scanning Electron Microscope (Quanta FEG 250, OR, USA). 
However, in the quest for a perfect microsphere, numerous obstacles are met 
along the way. It is important to pay attention to every element in order to ensure the 
production of the best microstructure possible. Fig. 4. The exemplary structure of a fiber-optic microsphere allows one to obtain highly
accurate and reproducible measurement results. Comment [RS2]: reproducible
 
 
 
162 Nanosensors 
Figure 3. Theoretical sensor response: a) reflected spectra for the sensor illuminated with Superluminescent 
Diode (SLD)-like sources, for various refractive indices of the external medium – uncoated microspheres; 
b) reflected spectra for the sensor illuminated with an SLD-like source, for various refractive indices of 
the external medium – microsphere with a 200 nm ALD ZnO coating; c) signal intensity vs. refractive 
index of the external medium – uncoated microsphere; d) signal intensity vs. refractive index of external 
medium – microsphere with a 200 nm ALD ZnO coating. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [28], 
Copyright 2019, MDPI. 
Figure 4. The exemplary structure of a fiber-optic microsphere allows one to obtain highly accurate and 
reproducible measurement results. 
During the process of makingan optical microsphere on the end-face of an 
optical fiber, a slew of issues are likely to occur; these include: 
• deformity in the microsphere, 
• offset between the center of a microsphere and the core of a fiber,
 
• inconsistent diameter of the microsphere,  
 
 
Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere 163 
• damage to the inner structure integrity, 
• appearance of defects in the material structure, and 
• improper application of the coating. 
Each of the above mentioned issues introduces uncertainty on its own. However, 
any combination of these invalidates the measurements completely. 
The most criticial aspect during the fabrication of the microsphere, visible at 
the very first glance, is obtaining the structure which is round and centered vis-á￾vis the fiber propagating the signal. Each deformity – whether an elongation of the 
microsphere or a gravitational drop (like the ones shown in Figure 5) – causes a 
considerable alteration of the optical spectrum. Figure 5 presents an image obtained 
by an optical microscope (Olympus CX31, Japan). 
Figure 5. Elongation and/or offset of the microsphere during the fabrication process are the easiest 
mistakes to spot. 
Secondly, obtaining the selected diameter of the microsphere is of utmost 
importance. One of the features of microsphere-based fiber-optic sensors is the 
presence of an intrinsic fixed cavity. Changing the diameter of the microstructure 
influences the length of the cavity; therefore, using a microsphere of a diameter 
different from the one specifically selected results in a vastly different spectrum of 
measured signals, compared to that expected, which in turn causes erroneous data 
analysis. Figure 6 shows examples of a variety of microsphere dimensions. 
Another issue shown in Figure 6 is the preservation of the inner structure of 
the microsphere. It can be observed that the core of the fiber was disturbed during 
its production. The microsphere made at the core of an optical fiber was detached, 
resulting in the rest of the core to form a taper. Figures 7 and 8 were obtained by a 
Stimulated Emmision Depletion microscopy (Leica TCS SP8 STED, Germany). 
Magnification of the microsphere surface, as presented in Figure 8, shows 
certain damage to the fiber structure. This indicates that the parameters of the splicer 
during the production of the microspheres were improperly set, therefore causing 
the emergence of air bubbles within the material of the optical fiber. Such a damage 
distorts the signal during measurement. 
Additional issues emerge during the deposition of the coating on the surface of 
the microsphere. Therefore, the ALD method is chosen to obtain a uniform coating 
and to avoid run-off of the deposited material which occurs in methods like dip 
coating (presented in Figure 9). The images in Figure 9 were obtained by a digital 
microscope (Keyence VHX-7000 Series, Japan). 164 Nanosensors 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
(e)
 
Figure 6. Altering the diameter of the microsphere results in changing of the cavity dimensions. Examples 
of microspheres with varying diameters: (a) 177 µm, (b) 253 µm, (c) 270 µm, (d) 301 µm and (e) 477 µm. 
a) b) 
Figure 7. Impaired inner structure integrity of the microsphere: a) STED microscopy image, b) schematic 
explanation of the issue. Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere 165 
Figure 8. Magnification of the microsphere surface with affected material structure. 
a) b) 
Figure 9. Improperly deposited coating causes its run-off and lack of uniformity: a) view along the fiber, 
b) view of the microsphere. 
Moreover, the selection of the coating material has to be thoroughly thought￾out. Firstly, attention must be paid to the compatibility of the coating material with 
the material of the fiber. Deposition of the coating on an uneven surface and the 
application of an unsuitable material may not be possible or might even damage the 
microsphere (Figure 10). 
Figure 10. Optical microsphere after application of the coating; the method used for applying the coating 
irreparably damaged the structure of the sensor. 
Secondly, the coating should be selected with due consideration to its 
compatibility with the measured medium. Improper material choice results in 
possible contamination of the environment in which the sensor is used, as well as 166 Nanosensors 
the inadvertent degradation of the coating, ultimately rendering the sensor unfit for 
further operation. 
4.  Tuning the metrological parameters of fiber-optic sensors with
microspheres 
A research has been conducted to determine the optimum diameter of the microsphere 
for interferometric measurements. Following the formulas presented in [27], theoretical 
calculation of various sizes of the microsphere show that an increase in diameter leads 
to a lower intensity of the reflected signal (Figure 11). However, considering the size 
of the standard optical fiber that has a diameter of 120 µm, a fully formed spherical 
shape of the sensor-head can be achieved with spheres of diameter well above 
200 µm (as can be observed in Figure 6). 
Figure 11. Results of numerical simulations: reflected signal intensity vs. sphere diameter for a sensor 
illuminated by an SLD-like source with a central wavelength of 1290 nm. 
In this chapter, a microsphere-based fiber-optic sensor with a diameter of 
240.7 µm has been investigated for the measurement of refractive index. During 
the investigation, the surface of the microsphere was coated with Zinc oxide (ZnO) 
using ALD method. Unlike other methods, Atomic Layer Deposition allows for 
uniform deposition of coating on the fibers, regardless of the structure. Homogeneity 
of the coating, along with its comparison with an uncoated microsphere, has been 
presented through SEM images in Figure 12 (Reproduced with permission from 
[28], Copyright 2019, MDPI.) 
Thin ALD ZnO layer has a thickness in the order of only hundreds of nanometers; 
however, it substantially influences the optical parameters of the structure, thus in turn 
influencing the metrological properties of the fiber-optic sensor. Careful selection 
of both the deposition method and its parameters are crucial for obtaining the 
optimal sensitivity and measurement range of a fiber-optic sensor [27]. Metrological 
parameters of microsphere-based fiber-optic sensors with ALD ZnO coating can be 
optimized by modifying the thickness of the coating. Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere 167 
a) b) 
c) d) 
Figure 12. SEM images of microsphere-based fiber-optic sensors: a) uncoated microsphere, b) surface 
topography of an uncoated microsphere, c) microsphere with a 200 nm ALD ZnO coating, d) surface 
topography of the microsphere with a 200 nm ALD ZnO coating. 
Furthermore, deposition of ALD ZnO coating on the surface of the optical 
microsphere allows for broadening the range and the sensitivity of refractive index 
measurements. When the refractive index of a measured medium is similar to the 
refractive index of an optical fiber core (1.43), the value of the intensity of the obtained 
signal is close to 0. By using thin ALD coatings with a higher refractive index (such 
as with ZnO), the transition point can be shifted to a higher value, therefore allowing 
for carrying out such measurements. The highlighted range of 1.4–1.5 in Figure 13 
shows the calculation of the increase in the reflected signal intensity between sensors 
with an uncoated microsphere and those with a microsphere having 200 nm ZnO 
ALD coating. 
Figure 13. Coatings with a high refractive index shift the transition point, allowing for the measurement 
of refractive index of media with a refractive index of 1.4–1.5. 168 Nanosensors 
Sensors used for the measurement of refractive index use 50 nm, 100 nm 
and 200 nm thick ZnO ALD coatings [28, 29]. Sensors without additional coating 
have also been examined herein. The results of this investigation are presented in 
Figure 14. 
Experimental measurements confirm that the value of peak intensity in a 
1.4–1.5 range of refractive index is substantially higher when the thickness of the 
coating is higher. In other words, depending on the thickness of the ALD ZnO 
coating, the intensity of the investigated fiber-optic sensor changes. The sensitivity 
of these sensors is 78 µW/RIU, 259 µW/RIU and 384 µW/RIU for 50 nm, 100 nm 
and 200 nm thick coatings, respectively; it is 89 µW/RIU for a sensor without any 
coating. 
Figure 14. Dependence of the absolute values of signal intensity on refractive index, measured using 
microsphere-based fiber-optic sensors with ALD ZnO coatings. 
Parameters of microsphere-based fiber-optic sensors can be altered by modifying 
their structure – their geometrical parameters (form, dimensions by selecting a 
predetermined fusion current supplied to the electrodes, fiber prefuse time and the 
type of fiber) and deposition of thin ALD coatings on their surface (e.g., ZnO). 
5.  Potential biological applications
Quantification of refractive index (RI) is becoming a powerful tool in tissue and 
cell biology for studying the structure and dynamics of tissues and cells in real time, 
along with their interaction with metabolic and optical clearing agents [30–38]. All 
of this ultimately leads to the crucial role of local real-time assessment of RI of 
biological tissues and fluids in various domains like biophysics, biochemistry and 
biomedicine. An accurate knowledge of the RI of proteins, lipids and carbohydrates 
is important for the analysis of radiation transfer in tissues, suspensions, or cell flows 
[30–38]. However, a precise assessment of the RI of biological media in situ is far 
from always possible due to the obvious limitations of traditional measurement 
techniques. Therefore, the fiber-optic ball sensor presented in this work, with the 
size of the sensitive part comparable to the size of cells can be efficiently used Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere 169 
for monitoring the pathological conditions of cells, tissues and organs, and prove 
to be a significantly useful tool in this field where the RIs of proteins, lipids and 
carbohydrates constituting tissue and cells have an inherernt relation with the 
existing types and states of these molecular structures in health and disease 
[30, 35, 38]. 
Current trends in the study of biological solutions and cells, including new 
imaging methods using microfluidic platforms [34, 36] and flow cytometry [37], 
provide grounds for using fiber-optic sensors with high spatial and temporal 
resolution for RI measurements, which is necessary for a deeper understanding of 
pathological processes. 
Thus, the physiological or pathological state of tissues and cells can be 
investigated, monitored and interpreted based on the spatio-temporal variations in RI. 
In particular, RI measurements provide information on the morphology of individual 
cells and their structure, the concentration and the type of substances contained in 
the cells, the cell cycle, the dry matter content of living cells, and apoptosis or cell 
necrosis; it is hence possible to monitor functional dynamics and metabolic processes 
in tissues and organs at cellular and sub-cellular levels [30, 32, 34, 35, 37, 38]. 
Modern optical technologies for imaging tissues and cells based on measurements 
of the spatial distribution of RI values include tomographic phase microscopy, digital 
holographic microscopy, bright field tomographic microscopy, integrated chip 
technique, optical trapping technique, etc. [30, 34]; these are technically complex 
devices, which do not allow for in situ measurements. This lends credibility to the 
developed fiber-optic biosensor discussed in this chapter, which shows promise for 
such studies on cerebral cortex, oral mucosa and other cavity organs of humans and 
other animals, as well as for express diagnostics of liquid biopsies, while being easily 
integrated into the microfluidic diagnostic system [36]. 
For instance, RI mapping can aid in automated cancer screening. In general, 
malignant cells have a higher average RI than their normal counterparts. RI mapping 
can effectively identify fundamental precancerous and cancerous changes such as 
increased nuclear size, irregular cell and nuclear shape, and increased chromatin 
concentration. RI mapping also shows promise for differentiating between circulating 
tumor cells (CTCs) in the bloodstream and normal blood cells, which may help in the 
early detection of metastases, which present a major obstacle in the optimization of 
cancer treatment [30, 34, 37, 38]. 
6. Conclusion 
A novel implementation of optical microspheres integrated with fiber-optic sensors 
allows one to detect, in real time, the damage to the structure of the sensor head, 
which may occur during measurement execution. Optimization of the metrological 
properties of fiber-optic sensors can be achieved by modifications in optical 
microspheres and thin ALD ZnO coating deposited on their surface. 
Ultimately, microsphere-based sensors are ideal for long-term and remote 
measurements of parameters such as refractive index due to their ability to constantly 
monitor the integrity of the sensor head.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170 Nanosensors 
Acknowledgment 
The authors acknowledge the financial support of the DS Programs of the Faculty 
of Electronics, Telecommunications and Informatics of the Gdańsk University of 
Technology. 
VVT was supported by the grant from the Government of the Russian Federation 
#075-15-2019-1885. 
References 
[1]		 Tripathi, S.M., W.J. Bock and P. Mikulic. 2017. A wide-range temperature immune refractive￾index sensor using concatenated long-period-fiber-gratings. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 
243: 1109–1114. Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2016.12.012. 
[2] Chiavaioli, F., C.A.J. Gouveia, P.A.S. Jorge and F. Baldini. 2017. Towards a uniform metrological 
assessment of grating-based optical fiber sensors: From refractometers to biosensors. Biosensors 
(Basel) 7. Doi: 10.3390/bios7020023. 
[3] Islam, M.R., M.M. Ali, M.-H. Lai, K.-S. Lim and H. Ahmad. 2014. Chronology of Fabry-Perot 
interferometer fiber-optic sensors and their applications: A review. Sensors (Basel) 14: 7451–7488. 
Doi: 10.3390/s140407451. 
[4] Hromadka, J., N.N. Mohd Hazlan, F.U. Hernandez, R. Correia, A. Norris, S.P. Morgan and S. 
Korposh. 2019. Simultaneous in situ temperature and relative humidity monitoring in mechanical 
ventilators using an array of functionalised optical fibre long period grating sensors. Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical 286: 306–314. Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2019.01.124. 
[5] Matsunaga, T., Y. Haga, S. Osaki, Y. Shimizu, S. Tupin, M. Ohta, M. Shojima, H. Yoshida and 
N. Tsuruoka. 2017. Multipoint pressure measurement in blood vessel model for evaluation of 
intravascular treatment of cerebral aneurysm using fiber-optic pressure sensors. In Proceedings 
of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Cyborg and Bionic Systems (CBS); IEEE: Beijing, 
pp. 136–139. 
[6] Chen, J., Y. Yang, X. Pan, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang and H. Ge. 2019. A new measurement method for 
resonance frequency of fiber optic interferometric vibration detector. In Proceedings of the 2019 
4th International Conference on Measurement, Information and Control (ICMIC); IEEE: Harbin, 
China, pp. 25–27. 
[7]		 Wang, X. and O.S. Wolfbeis. 2020. Fiber-optic chemical sensors and biosensors (2015–2019). 
Anal. Chem. 92: 397–430. Doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b04708. 
[8] Pérez, M.A., O.G. Arias and J.R. 2013. Optical fiber sensors for chemical and biological 
measurements. Current Developments in Optical Fiber Technology. Doi: 10.5772/52741. 
[9] Li, M., T. Dubaniewicz, H. Dougherty and J. Addis. 2018. Evaluation of fiber optic methane sensor 
using a smoke chamber. International Journal of Mining Science and Technology 28: 969–974. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.ijmst.2018.05.010. 
[10] Alves, H.P., J.F. Nascimento, E. Fontana, I.J.S. Coelho and J.F. Martins-Filho. 2018. Transition 
layer and surface roughness effects on the response of metal-based fiber-optic corrosion sensors. J. 
Lightwave Technol. 36: 2597–2605. Doi: 10.1109/JLT.2018.2817517. 
[11] Xue, Z., J.-Q. Shi, Y. Yamauchi and S. Durucan. 2018. Fiber optic sensing for geomechanical 
monitoring: (1)-distributed strain measurements of two sandstones under hydrostatic confining 
and pore pressure conditions. Applied Sciences 8: 2103. Doi: 10.3390/app8112103. 
[12] Kou, J., J. Feng, L. Ye, F. Xu and Y. Lu. 2010. Miniaturized fiber taper reflective interferometer for 
high temperature measurement. Opt. Express 18: 14245. Doi: 10.1364/OE.18.014245. 
[13] Arumona, A.E., A. Garhwal, P. Youplao, I.S. Amiri, K. Ray, S. Punthawanunt and P. Yupapin. 
2020. Electron cloud spectroscopy using micro-ring Fabry–Perot sensor embedded gold grating. 
IEEE Sensors J. 20: 10564–10571. Doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2020.2994240. 
[14] Ma, J., J. Ju, L. Jin, W. Jin and D. Wang. 2011. Fiber-tip micro-cavity for temperature and 
transverse load sensing. Opt. Express 19: 12418. Doi: 10.1364/OE.19.012418.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fiber-optic Sensors with Microsphere 171 
[15]		 Shankar, R. and M. Lončar. 2014. Silicon photonic devices for mid-infrared applications. 
Nanophotonics 3: 329–341. Doi: 10.1515/nanoph-2013-0027. 
[16] Ferreira, M.S., P. Roriz, S.O. Silva, J.L. Santos and O. Frazão. 2013. Next generation of Fabry￾Perot sensors for high-temperature. Optical Fiber Technology 19: 833–837. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
yofte.2013.07.006. 
[17] Eryürek, M., Z. Tasdemir, Y. Karadag, S. Anand, N. Kilinc, B.E. Alaca and A. Kiraz. 2017. 
Integrated humidity sensor based on SU-8 polymer microdisk microresonator. Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical 242: 1115–1120. Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2016.09.136. 
[18] Bhattacharya, S., A.V. Veluthandath, C.C. Huang, G.S. Murugan and P.B. Bisht. 2020. Effect of 
coating few-layer WS 2 on the Raman spectra and whispering gallery modes of a microbottle 
resonator. J. Opt. 22: 105003. Doi: 10.1088/2040-8986/abad50. 
[19] Liang, L., M. Li, N. Liu, H. Sun, Q. Rong and M. Hu. 2018. A high-sensitivity optical fiber relative 
humidity sensor based on microsphere WGM resonator. Optical Fiber Technology 45: 415–418. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.yofte.2018.07.023. 
[20] Mahmood, A., V. Kavungal, S.S. Ahmed, G. Farrell and Y. Semenova. 2015. Magnetic-field sensor 
based on whispering-gallery modes in a photonic crystal fiber infiltrated with magnetic fluid. Opt. 
Lett., OL 40: 4983–4986. Doi: 10.1364/OL.40.004983. 
[21] Xu, X., W. Chen, G. Zhao, Y. Li, C. Lu and L. Yang. 2018. Wireless whispering-gallery-mode 
sensor for thermal sensing and aerial mapping. Light: Science & Applications 7: 62. Doi: 10.1038/ 
s41377-018-0063-4. 
[22] Fujii, S. and T. Tanabe. 2020. Dispersion engineering and measurement of whispering gallery 
mode microresonator for Kerr frequency comb generation. Nanophotonics 9: 1087–1104. Doi: 
10.1515/nanoph-2019-0497. 
[23] Cai, L., J. Pan, Y. Zhao, J. Wang and S. Xiao. 2020. Whispering gallery mode optical 
microresonators: Structures and sensing applications. Phys. Status Solidi A 217: 1900825. Doi: 
10.1002/pssa.201900825. 
[24] Dong, B., J. Hao, T. Zhang and J.L. Lim. 2012. High sensitive fiber-optic liquid refractive index 
tip sensor based on a simple inline hollow glass micro-sphere. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 
171-172: 405–408. Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2012.05.001. 
[25]		 Tang, S., B. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Dai, G. Wang and M. Yang. 2015. Self-compensated microstructure 
fiber optic sensor to detect high hydrogen concentration. Opt. Express 23: 22826. Doi: 10.1364/ 
OE.23.022826. 
[26] Zhang, Y., T. Zhou, B. Han, A. Zhang and Y. Zhao. 2018. Optical bio-chemical sensors based on 
whispering gallery mode resonators. Nanoscale 10: 13832–13856. Doi: 10.1039/C8NR03709D. 
[27] Hirsch, M. 2018. Fiber optic microsphere with ZnO thin film for potential application in 
refractive index sensor—theoretical study. Photonics Letters of Poland 10: 85–87. Doi: 10.4302/ 
plp.v10i3.835. 
[28] Listewnik, P., M. Hirsch, P. Struk, M. Weber, M. Bechelany and M. Jędrzejewska-Szczerska. 2019. 
Preparation and characterization of microsphere ZnO ALD coating dedicated for the fiber-optic 
refractive index sensor. Nanomaterials 9: 306. Doi: 10.3390/nano9020306. 
[29] Hirsch, M., P. Listewnik, P. Struk, M. Weber, M. Bechelany and M. Szczerska. 2019. ZnO coated 
fiber optic microsphere sensor for the enhanced refractive index sensing. Sensors and Actuators A: 
Physical 298: 111594. Doi: 10.1016/j.sna.2019.111594. 
[30]		 Wang, Z., K. Tangella, A. Balla and G. Popescu. 2011. Tissue refractive index as marker of disease, 
J. Biomed. Opt. 16(11): 116017. Doi: 10.1117/1.3656732. 
[31]		 Yanina, I. Yu., E.N. Lazareva and V.V. Tuchin. 2018. Refractive index of adipose tissue and lipid 
droplet measured in wide spectral and temperature ranges. Applied Optics 57: 4839. https://doi. 
org/10.1364/AO.57.004839. 
[32] Lazareva, E.N. and V.V. Tuchin. 2018. Measurement of refractive index of hemoglobin in the 
visible/NIR spectral range. J. Biomed. Opt. 23: 035004. Doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.23.3.035004. 
[33]		 Bashkatov, A.N., K.V. Berezin, K.N. Dvoretskiy, M.L. Chernavina, E.A. Genina, V.D. Genin, V.I. 
Kochubey, E.N. Lazareva, A.B. Pravdin, M.E. Shvachkina, P.A. Timoshina, D.K. Tuchina, D.D. 
Yakovlev, D.A. Yakovlev, I. Yanina, O.S. Yu.; Zhernovaya and V.V. Tuchin. 2018. Measurement 
of tissue optical properties in the context of tissue optical clearing. J. Biomed. Opt. 23: 091416. 
Doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.23.9.091416.  
 
 
 
 
172 Nanosensors 
[34] Gul, B., S. Asharf, S. Khan, H. Nisar and I. Ahmad. 2020. Cell refractive index: Models, insights, 
applications and future perspectives. Photodiagnosis and Photodynamic Therapy. Doi: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.102096. 
[35] Li, X., B. Xie, M. Wu, J. Zhao, Z. Xu and L. Liu. 2020. Visible-to-Near-infrared optical properties 
of protein, lipid and carbohydrate in both solid and solution state at room temperature. Journal of 
Quantitative Spectroscopy & Radiative Transfer. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jqsrt.2020.107410. 
[36] Credi, C., C. Dallari, E. Lenci, A. Trabocchi, S. Nocentini, D. Wiersma, R. Cicchi and F.S. Pavone. 
2020. 3D printing of multifunctional optofluidic systems for high-sensitive detection of pathological 
biomarkers in liquid biopsies. Proc. SPIE 11361: 113610A. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2553685. 
[37] Tuchin, V.V. 2014. In vivo optical flow cytometry and cell imaging. Rivista Del Nuovo Cimento 
37: 375. Doi: 10.1393/ncr/i2014-10102-x. 
[38] Oliveira, L. and V.V. Tuchin. 2019. The Optical Clearing Method: A New Tool for Clinical Practice 
and Biomedical Engineering, Basel: Springer Nature Switzerland AG, 177 p. https://www.springer. 
com/gp/book/9783030330545. 8
 
Nanosensors for Diagnostics and 
Conservation of Works of Art
 
Georgia-Paraskevi Nikoleli 
1. Introduction 
Nanosensors have high sensitivity and selectivity, and use electrical, optical and 
acoustic transduction schemes to detect low limits of analytes. The exceptional 
properties that nanomaterials possess are: large surface area to volume ratio, use 
of charge and reactive sites, and physical structure and potentiality to detect low 
limits of analytes; these characteristics provide an advantage towards ideal sensing 
properties. High-sensitivity is managed mainly through signal amplification. With 
the use of such nanosensors, their sensitivity and selectivity can provide various 
advantages in biomedical analysis, such as earlier diagnosis of diseases and biotoxin 
threats, and subsequently create significant improvements in clinical, environmental 
and industrial outcomes. The emerging discipline of nanotechnology at the boundary 
of life sciences and chemistry offers a wide range of prospects within a number 
of fields like fabrication and characterization of nanomaterials, supramolecular 
chemistry, targeted drug supply and early detection of disease-related biomarkers. 
Till date, research has focused on developing non-invasive or micro-invasive 
techniques to characterize components and degradation products. However, these 
techniques usually require advanced instrumentation and highly specialized personnel 
for data acquisition and processing. Moreover, although conservators and curators 
recognize the importance of scientific analyses in restoration campaigns, the time and 
financial costs involved are prohibitive. An alternative approach is to develop easy￾to-use analytical kits, which would enable conservators to rapidly obtain information 
to guide their restoration strategy. 
Department of Conservation of Antiquities and Works of Art, School of Applied Arts & Culture, University 
of West Attica, 12243 Egaleo, Greece. 
Email: gnikoleli@uniwa.gr 174 Nanosensors 
Based on point-of-care testing (POCT) approach, miniaturized nanosensors 
which can be used by conservators to identify proteins in artworks have been 
developed [1, 2]. Thanks to the miniaturization of instrumentation and delocalization 
of analyses, conservators thus become akin to a primary care physician, performing 
anamnesis (that is, cultural context, characterization of materials), diagnosis 
(evaluation of conservation state, identification of degradation processes), prognosis, 
and therapy (restoration). 
Proteinaceous materials have been used as fixatives or binders in paintings since 
ancient times; yet, even now, their characterization is a challenge for diagnostic 
studies. Immunological approaches have proved to be particularly powerful, for 
they are simple, highly specific, can be implemented with relatively inexpensive 
instruments, can recognize even denaturized proteins, and require minimal sample 
processing. In fact, although originally developed for medicine, immunoassays have 
been used to detect proteins in paintings for over 45 years now. Immunofluorescence 
microscopy (IFM) and chemiluminescence (CL) detection have been used for single 
or multiplexed localization of proteins in artwork samples [2, 3]. However, these 
techniques do not offer the advantages of nanosensing devices, have high costs, are 
time consuming, and will therefore not be included in this chapter. 
The analysis of materials composing works of art has been a fundamental issue 
for long. Moreover, the techniques should essentially be non-destructive and require 
the use of a very small amount of sample. The development of portable devices that 
give quick and reliable chemical information to the restorer during the restoration 
work has prompted the evolution of an efficient scientific approach. Analytical 
diagnostics on a work of art is fundamental to restoration and conservation purposes 
or for certifying the authenticity of an ancient artefact. Analyzing the chemicals of 
which the work of art is composed is thus crucial. A layer of complexity is added by the 
microscopic structure of the cross section of a paint, which is in actuality composed 
of five or even more superimposed layers, each with its own typical composition 
and requiring a specific analytical approach to be identified and classified. Some 
of these layers are made of composite materials: in particular, the pictorial layer 
is made by pigments (inorganic oxides and salts and/or organic dyes or pigments) 
bound and dispersed in the binder, the latter being a glue of animal or vegetal origin 
for tempera paints or a drying oil for oil paintings. Moreover, fillers, emulsifiers, 
preservatives and/or other additives are also present, depending on factors like period 
of production, painter, following restoration intervention, etc. 
The point-of-care testing concept has been used to design and develop portable and 
cheap bioanalytical systems that can be used on-site by conservators. These systems 
deploy lateral flow immunoassays to simultaneously detect two proteins (ovalbumin 
and collagen) in artworks. For an in-depth study on the application of these portable 
biosensors, both chemiluminescent and colorimetric detections have been developed 
and compared in terms of sensitivity and feasibility. The chemiluminescent system 
displays the best analytical performance (that is, two orders of magnitude lower 
limits of detection than the colorimetric system). To simplify its use for this specific 
application, disposable cartridges have been designed ad hoc. These results highlight Nanosensors for Diagnostics and Conservation of Works of Art 175 
the enormous potential of these inexpensive, easy-to-use and minimally invasive 
diagnostic tools for conservators in the cultural heritage field. 
This chapter focuses on the recent advances and prospects of the application 
of two classes of nanosensors—surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and 
nanostructured electrochemical (EC) nanosensors, both characterized by high 
selectivity and sensitivity, in the domain of cultural heritage. Both of these techniques 
require the use of a metal surface which acts as a transducer for EC nanosensors or, 
when nanostructured, as a signal amplifier in the case of SERS. It is noteworthy 
that both these techniques use metal substrates and this, in the near future, would 
lead to the development of nanosensors capable to provide both spectroscopic and 
electrochemical information. 
2. SERS 
As discussed in the introduction, a painting is a multilayer matrix and the pictorial 
layer itself is a complex system composed of pigments dispersed in a binding 
medium. The nature of the binder determines the working behavior of the paint 
and the final characteristics of the work of art, not only from an aesthetic point of 
view, but also from the perspectives of durability and conservation. Western artists 
have been using a variety of binders, including animal glue, casein, eggs, drying 
oils, resins, natural gums and, more recently, synthetic materials such as acrylic 
and vinyl polymers. The detection of binders has long presented a key issue in the 
study of cultural heritage materials. Vibrational spectroscopic techniques (e.g., IR 
and Raman spectroscopy) have been widely used for preliminary identification of 
binders. However, their lack of specificity in identifying the biological provenance 
of these macromolecules warrants the use of chromatography (e.g., GC/MS and 
HPLC) for a more precise diagnosis. Among the methods based on optical detection, 
the chemiluminescent approach gives the best results in terms of sensitivity. The 
use of enzyme-labeled antibodies in the presence of a chemiluminescent substrate 
(e.g., horseradish peroxidase (HRP) reacts with luminol when hydrogen peroxide is 
added, generating an emission of photons) allows for the simultaneous detection of 
ovalbumin and casein on cross sections of real samples. A promising alternative to 
this approach is represented by SERS, whose potential has not been exploited to its 
maximum yet. NPs can be bound to specific antibodies for the target proteins and to 
a Raman-probe by means of functional thiols. In this way, the so-called SERS nano￾tags can be employed even directly on cross sections. Once bound to the surface, the 
nano-tags are mapped using the SERS technique, revealing the distribution of the 
protein in the cross-section [3, 4]. 
Interesting avenues in this area can be opened by combining SERS detection 
with lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA) to substitute typical fluorescence detection 
methods. A recently developed lateral flow immunoassay demonstrated the possibility 
to simultaneously detect the presence of two proteins (ovalbumin and collagen) in 
artworks; it was based on the use of disposable cartridges and a chemiluminescent 
detection system [5]. 176 Nanosensors 
The extraordinary positive results achieved by means of SERS make it a worthy 
substitute detection technique in such an approach. Furthermore, a SERS substrate 
immunochemically functionalized and labeled with a Raman-probe can prove to be 
a promising biosensor to be employed on site, taking advantage of the strong Raman 
enhancement produced by anisotropic Ag nanostars [6], which are able to create a 
larger number of SERS hot spots than spherical NPs. 
3. Electrochemical immunosensors for pictorial binders and 
paper substrates 
One of the oldest painting techniques is the tempera technique, based on the use 
of water dispersible binders which, upon drying, become insoluble. The ancient 
tempera technique was described by Cennino Cennini in his XVth century book 
“Il Libro dell’Arte” and is based simply on mixing finely grounded pigments with egg 
yolk; however, from Renaissance onward, tempera recipes became more complex 
and different binders came to be in use, such as whole eggs or egg whites, singly or 
in combination with flour or animal glue or oily components [7]. From an analytical 
perspective, identifying proteins from different animal sources is not an easy task, 
typically requiring the use of spectroscopic and chromatographic or hyphenated 
mass spectrometric techniques. 
As also mentioned in the previous section dealing with SERS sensors, an 
alternative approach to detection is offered by the use of immunosensors coupled with 
optical detection methods. The first study in this direction was aimed at developing 
a sensor suitable for the detection of the glycoprotein immunoglobulin IgY, the main 
immunoglobulin present in chicken egg yolk [7]. This approach is summarized in 
Figure 1. 
IgY is captured by the polycarbonate surface (A), after blocking with bovine 
serum albumin; the electrode is incubated with anti-IgY labeled with HRP (anti￾IgY-HRP) (B) and, finally, the presence of the label HRP is detected by adding the 
enzyme substrate H2O2 and a mediator (C). Also, other molecules in the sample can 
spontaneously bind to the polycarbonate; however, only IgY is recognized by the 
HRP-labeled anti-IgY, which finally generates the electrocatalytic signal, detected 
by cyclic voltammetry. This allows the development of a high precision diagnostic 
scheme able to qualitatively distinguish egg-yolk tempera (which contains IgY) from 
other kinds of tempera (not containing IgY) and oil or acrylic paints. In the experiment, 
the capability of the sensor to identify egg yolk tempera was successfully tested on 
24 samples, ranging from paint mockups to artworks from XVIII–XX centuries, and 
validated by a chemiometrical approach [7]. 
A similar approach has been used for the detection of ovalbumin (OVA) from 
egg white (or albumin) [8], which is also used as a binder in works of art—for 
egg white or whole-egg tempera or for preparing the photosensitive emulsion of 
XIXth century albumen photographic prints for instance. Ovalbumin is extracted 
from microsamples by ultrasonication in aqueous buffer; then, it is incubated and 
bound directly to the polycarbonate surface of the NEE, thus reducing the number 
of analytical steps and the volume of reagents required to a minimum. The protein alternative approach is offered by the use of immunosensors coupled with op￾tical detection methods. The first study in this direction was aimed at develop￾ing a sensor suitable for the detection of the glycoprotein immunoglobulin IgY,
the main immunoglobulin present in chicken egg yolk [7]. This approach is
summarized in Fig. 1.
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the analytical protocol used to detect
immunoglobulin IgY extracted from tempera paints. MB and LB are the
oxidized and reduced forms of the redox mediator methylene blue and HRP
Comment [RS17]: approach to ___ 
detection
Comment [DN18]: OK 
 
 
 
Nanosensors for Diagnostics and Conservation of Works of Art 177 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the analytical protocol used to detect immunoglobulin IgY extracted 
from tempera paints. MB and LB are the oxidized and reduced forms of the redox mediator methylene 
blue and HRP represents horseradish peroxidase (used as an enzymatic label for the anti-IgY antibody); 
(a) capture on the polycarbonate of the NEE of immunoglobulin IgY extracted by ultrasonication from 
a paint microfragment; (b) molecular recognition by anti-IgY labeled with HRP; (c) generation of 
electrocatalytic cycle and detection by cyclic voltammetry, by adding the enzyme substrate H2O2 and the 
mediator MB (Reprinted with permission from [7]). 
captured on the polycarbonate membrane is reacted selectively with anti-OVA 
antibody labelled with glucose oxidase (GOx). The addition of the GOx substrate 
(i.e., glucose) and a ferrocenyl redox mediator provides an electrocatalytic oxidation 
current, strictly dependent on the OVA concentration present in the extracts 
from historical photographic prints or ancient tempera paintings. It has also been 
demonstrated that the combined use of IgY and OVA NEE-based sensors allows to 
distinguish egg yolk from whole egg tempera in real samples [8]. 
The qualitative identification of substances, as well as their location within a 
complex paint stratigraphy (e.g., a cross section), is one of the most challenging 
issues in the characterization of painting materials. This requirement led G. Sciutto 
et al. [9] to develop a new detection approach for the immunochemical localization 
of ovalbumin in paint cross-sections based on the use of scanning electrochemical 
microscopy (SECM). To identify ovalbumin in paint samples, immunochemical 
analyses were performed using an anti-ovalbumin primary antibody and a secondary 
antibody labelled with HRP. SECM measurements were performed in feedback 
mode using benzoquinone (BQ)/hydroquinone (H2Q) redox couple as the SECM 
probe. The results obtained were promising, foreseeing a wider application of SECM 
in cultural heritage researches and allowing localized identification of the binder in 
different layers of a cross-section from real paint samples. 178 Nanosensors 
4. Chemiluminescence 
The point-of-care testing concept has been used to design and develop portable and 
cheap bioanalytical systems that can be used on-site by conservators. These systems 
employ lateral flow immunoassays to simultaneously detect two proteins (ovalbumin 
and collagen) in pieces of art. For an in-depth study on the application of these portable 
biosensors, both chemiluminescent and colorimetric detections have been developed 
and compared in terms of sensitivity and feasibility. The chemiluminescent system 
displays the best analytical performance (that is, two orders of magnitude lower 
limits of detection than the colorimetric system). To simplify its use, disposable 
cartridges have been designed ad hoc for this specific application. These results 
highlight the enormous potential of these inexpensive, easy-to-use, and minimally 
invasive diagnostic tools for conservators in the cultural heritage field. 
Proteinaceous materials have been used as fixatives or binders in paintings 
since ancient times and their characterization is still a challenge for diagnostic 
studies. Immunological approaches are particularly powerful as they are simple, 
highly specific, can be implemented with relatively inexpensive instruments, can 
recognize even denaturized proteins, and require minimal sample processing. In fact, 
although originally developed for medicine, immunoassays have been used to detect 
proteins in paintings for over 45 years. Immunofluorescence microscopy (IFM) 
and chemiluminescent (CL) detection have been used for single or multiplexed 
localization of proteins in art samples. Previous studies have supported the suitability 
of immunochemical analyses for aged and historical samples, showing that aging 
does not hamper recognition of proteins by immunological methods [10–12]. Past 
research has also confirmed the absence of detectable interferences owing to paint 
materials [10, 12]. In particular, the effect of metal ions in pigments was excluded 
probably due to a limited release of such ions in the solution during the incubation 
steps [10]. 
Recently, a chemiluminescence immunochemical portable imaging device which 
can be used to detect ovalbumin in paintings has been developed [13]. The analytical 
prototype used a silanized glass slide with an array of immobilized antibody spots 
and a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) fluidic element. 
A design of new portable devices that can simultaneously detect two proteins, 
using the lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA) technology, was recently described in the 
literature [10]. This is one of the most commercially successful POCT techniques, 
owing to its ease of use and quickness. LFIA technology uses cellulose-based 
materials assembled in a strip format, which acts as an inexpensive and easy-to￾use platform for performing immunological assays [14]. The strip is preloaded with 
appropriate reagents and the capillary force makes the sample and reagents flow 
across it without the need of external pumps. Immunoreagents are immobilized 
in specific areas on the nitrocellulose membrane, namely on one or more test 
(T)-line(s), in which the analyte(s) are bound and detected, and on a control 
(C)-line, in which the excess labeled probe is captured to confirm the validity of the 
analysis. 
The simplest LFIAs employ colorimetric detection, often based on gold 
nanoparticles (AuNPs) as labels, which may suffer from poor detectability and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanosensors for Diagnostics and Conservation of Works of Art 179 
limited quantitative performances [15]. As an alternative, chemiluminescent (CL)­
based LFIAs provide high detectability and a wide linear range for quantitative 
analyses [16]. In this case, the detection probe is often labeled with an enzyme 
which catalyzes a CL reaction in the presence of a proper CL substrate. However, 
CL detection involves the addition of a series of reagents, and thus requires a more 
complex analytical procedure. 
5. Conclusions and prospects 
This review on the development and application of SERS and electrochemical 
sensors for diagnostics, conservation and restoration of works of art indicates the 
great potentialities offered by such approaches. Of course, sensors complement the 
analytical information obtained by consolidated analytical methods based on the use 
of complex and expensive instrumentation. Yet, sensors are capable of providing 
reliable information at a competitive cost and can be used by non-specialized 
personnel in raw samples, with no or minimal use of reagents and/or standards. 
These features make sensors particularly apt for performing on-site analysis, to 
be used by conservation scientists alongside restorers or conservators, during the 
restoration intervention. It is worth stressing that only in a few cases can sensors be 
used in a completely non-destructive manner. However, the most recent works of 
research have shown that both SERS and electrochemical sensors can be successfully 
applied to analyze cross-sections of works of art. Note that such a sampling, although 
nowadays miniaturized to a microsampling level, is almost always necessary for a 
full characterization of a piece of art due to its complexity and multilayered structure. 
The application of SERS and electrochemical techniques to characterize these 
multilayered samples has demonstrated their ability to provide valuable chemical 
information which implements significantly the information obtained by optical and 
electronic microscopies and spectroscopic techniques – the techniques most widely 
applied on cross-sections. 
References 
[1] Nikoleli, G.-P. 2020. Biosensors for bacteria for artwork. Int. J. Adv. Res. in Chem. Sci. 7(3): 1–7. 
[2] Palmieri, C.L., M. Vagnini and L. Pitzurra. 2016. Immunochemical methods applied to art￾historical materials: Identification and localization of proteins by ELISA and IFM. Top. Cur. 
Chem. 374 (1): Article No. 5. 
[3] Arslanoglu, J., S. Zaleski and J. Loike. 2010. An improved method of protein localization in 
artworks through SERS nanotag-complexed antibodies. Anal. Bioanal. 399: 2997–3010. 
[4] Sciutto, L., C. Lilli, S. Lofrumento, M. Prati, M. Ricci, A. Gobbo, E. Roda, M. Castellucci, M. 
Meneghetti and R. Mazzeo. Alternative SERRS probes for the immunochemical localization of 
ovalbumin in paintings: An advanced mapping detection approach. Analyst 138(16): 4532–4541. 
[5] Sciutto, G., M. Zangheri, L. Anfossi, M. Guardigli, S. Prati, M. Mirasoli, F.D. Nardo, C. Baggiani 
and A. Roda. 2018. Miniaturized biosensors to preserve and monitor cultural heritage: From 
medical to conservation diagnosis. Angew. Chem. 130(25): 7507–7511. 
[6] García-Leis, A., J.V. García-Ramos and S. Sánchez-Cortés. 2013. Silver nanostars with high SERS 
performance. J. Phys. Chem. C 117: 7791–7795. 
[7] Bottari, F., P. Oliveri and P. Ugo. 2014. Electrochemical immunosensor based on ensemble of 
nanoelectrodes for immunoglobulin IgY detection: Application to identify hen’s egg yolk in 
tempera paintings. Biosens. Bioelectron. 52: 403–410.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
180 Nanosensors 
[8] Gaetani, C., G. Gheno, M. Borroni, K.D. Wael, L.M. Moretto and P. Ugo. 2019. Nanoelectrode 
ensemble immunosensing for the electrochemical identification of ovalbumin in works of art. 
Electrochim. Acta 312: 72–79. 
[9] Sciutto, G., S. Prati, R. Mazzeo, M. Zangheri, A. Roda, L. Bardini, G. Valenti, S. Rapino and M. 
Marcaccio. 2014. Localization of proteins in paint cross-sections by scanning electrochemical 
microscopy as an alternative immunochemical detection technique. Anal. Chim. Acta 831: 31–37. 
[10] Sciutto, G., M. Zangheri, S. Prati, M. Guardigli, M. Mirasoli, R. Mazzeo and A. Roda. 2016. 
Immunochemical micro Imaging analyses for the detection of proteins in artworks. Top. Curr. 
Chem. 374: 31–59. 
[11] Palmieri, M., M. Vagnini, L. Pitzurra, P. Rocchi, B.G. Brunetti, A. Sgamellotti and L. 
Cartechini. 2011. Development of an analytical protocol for a fast, sensitive and specific protein 
recognition in paintings by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
399: 3011–3023. 
[12] Lee, H.Y., N. Atlasevich, C. Granzotto, J. Schultz, J. Loieke and J. Arslanoglu. 2015. Development 
and application of an ELISA method for the analysis of protein-based binding media of artworks. 
Anal. Methods 7: 187–196. 
[13] Wong, C. and H.Y. Tse. 2009. Lateral Flow Immunoassay, Humana Press, New York. 
[14] Huang, X., Z.P. Aguilar, H. Xu, W. Lai and Y. Xiong. 2016. Membrane-based lateral flow 
immunochromatographic strip with nanoparticles as reporters for detection: A review. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 75: 166–180. 
[15] Zangheri, M., L. Cevenini, L. Anfossi, C. Baggiani, P. Simoni, F. Di Nardo and A. Roda. 2015. A 
simple and compact smartphone accessory for quantitative chemiluminescence-based lateral flow 
immunoassay for salivary cortisol detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 64: 63–68. 
[16] Madariaga, J.M. 2015. Analytical chemistry in the field of cultural heritage. Anal. Methods 
7: 4848–4876.  
9
 
Applications of Biosensors 
in Animal Biotechnology 
Georgia-Paraskevi Nikoleli,
1,* Marianna-Thalia Nikolelis2 
and Vasillios N. Psychoyios2 
1. Introduction 
One of the novel detection methods that are used in analytical chemistry involve an 
analytical device for the detection of an analyte, combining a biological component 
with a physicochemical detector [1, 2]. These devices are called biosensors. In truth, 
they are systems that typically consist of a bio-recognition site, a biotransducer 
component, and an electronic system which includes a signal amplifier, a processor 
and a display. Figure 1 provides the schematic of a typical lipid membrane-based 
biosensor. 
Transducers and electronics can be combined. One such example can be found 
in CMOS-based microsensor systems [3, 4]. The recognition component, often 
called bioreceptor, use biomolecules from organisms or receptors that are modeled 
after interaction with biological systems. This interaction is usually measured by the 
biotransducer, the output of which is a measurable signal proportional to the presence 
of the target analyte in the sample. The general aim of a biosensor design is to enable 
quick and convenient testing; therefore, within the domain biosensors, there is a class 
– the so-called point of concern or point of care class – which works at the site where 
the sample is procured [5–8]. 
1 Laboratory of Statistical Modelling and Educational Technology in Public and Environmental Health, 
Department of Public and Community Health, Faculty of Public Health, University of West Attica, 122 
43 Egaleo, Athens, Greece. 
2 Laboratory of Inorganic & Analytical Chemistry, School of Chemical Engineering, Department 1, 
Chemical Sciences National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece. 
* Corresponding author: gnikoleli@uniwa.gr Figure 1. Schematic of a lipid membrane-based biosensor (the lipid bilayer serves as
an intermediate transduction element and exists only in a lipid membrane-based
biosensor) [reprinted from: Nikoleli, G.-P., Nikolelis, D.P., Siontorou, C.G., Karapetis,
S., Nikolelis, M.-T., Application of biosensors based on lipid membranes for the rapid
detection of toxins, ,
Biosensors, MPDI, 2018, 8(3), 61]. Commented [RS1]: Reference missing from the list at the end of
the Chapter
Commented [D2R1]: I havde inserted it now
 
 
182 Nanosensors 
Figure 1. Schematic of a lipid membrane-based biosensor (the lipid bilayer serves as an intermediate 
transduction element and exists only in a lipid membrane-based biosensor) [Reprinted from: Nikoleli, 
G.-P., D.P. Nikolelis, C.G. Siontorou, S. Karapetis and M.-T. Nikolelis. 2018. Application of biosensors 
based on lipid membranes for the rapid detection of toxins. Biosensors, MPDI 8(3): 61]. 
Nanotechnology deals with the generation and alteration of materials in 
the nano-scale (10–9 m). Nanomaterials are materials with dimensions between 
1–100 nm. The size constraints of these materials makes them very special as they 
have most of their constituent atoms located at or near their surface and have all 
vital physicochemical properties significantly different from materials of the bulk 
scale. Nanomaterial-based biosensors or “nano-biosensors” – biosensors made from 
nanomaterials – represent the integration of material science, molecular engineering, 
chemistry and biotechnology, and have improved the sensitivity and specificity for 
biomolecule detection; they have a great potential for applications in fields such 
as molecular recognition, food analysis, environment monitoring, biomedical and 
clinical analysis, and pathogen diagnosis [9]. Hence, nanomaterials can play a very 
important role in the future of biosensor technology. 
Several nanomaterials have been discovered and many of those have been 
researched for their electronic and mechanical properties that can be improved 
in biological signaling and transduction mechanisms. Notable examples include 
nanotubes, nanowires, nanorods, nanoparticles, and thin films made of nanocrystalline 
matters [10]. 
Cytosensors are biosensors that use living cells as the measuring element. They 
are typically used to detect substances according to the effect of the substance on the Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 183 
functional activities of living cells. A primary impetus to cytosensors research was 
provided due to their prospects in building instruments that are triggered by broad 
ranges of biological or chemical substances. Such broadly specific cytosensors can 
find many applications in areas where the question is not as to what is in a sample, 
but rather whether anything dangerous is present in the sample. The cytosensors in 
this study identify bio-active agents by detecting changes in the morphology and/or 
physiology of a living cell. 
This work reviews the status of various nanostructure devices that are used 
as biosensors in animal biotechnology. The chapter provides the state of the art of 
design and microfabrication of prototype nanosensing devices for the rapid detection 
of viruses, pathogens, antibiotics, infectious agents, toxins, etc., in animals, so as to 
prevent diseases and deaths. These devices also are integrated inside an animal body 
to provide useful information on the animal’s medical condition and the challenges 
that lie ahead. 
2. Animal biosensors 
Sensors and wearable technologies can be implanted on animals to detect their sweat 
constituents [11–13]⁠ and pH [14]⁠, prevent diseases, and detect analytes such as 
viruses and pathogens [15–18], antibiotics, infectious diseases and toxins. Wearable 
sensors help farmers detect the disease early, and thereby prevent the death of 
animals. Farmers can also cull diseased animals in time, hence preventing the spread 
of diseases in cattle herds, through prediction. 
Apart from collecting useful data regarding animal health, general farm 
monitoring can also be made easier and more reliable through the use of biosensors 
integrated with cellphones and hand-held devices, as opposed to conventional 
methods like writing notes, keeping a farm diary or using a simple equipment without 
data-sharing functions. A number of systems have been developed on cellphones 
and hand-held devices to reduce the effort of recording data manually [19]⁠. Solar￾powered receivers mounted on livestock can collect data that is transmitted to a 
central server. The final data can easily be viewed on a custom dashboard or an office 
computer, making this technology very convenient for farmers. 
Commercially available biosensor collars are now being used on cows for the 
detection of estrus period [20, 21]⁠. Herein, an innovative robotic grazing system uses 
electronic leg bands that interact with sensors mounted on the animal to record data 
on its feeding and milking behavior and pattern. It is a big challenge to provide good 
quality safe meat to meet the increasing global demand for meat and poultry products. 
With rising demand comes growing concerns of animal health [22]. Devices that can 
be integrated inside the body of an animal, patched under its skin, or that remain in its 
stomach, provide the animal owner with useful information regarding their behavior 
and medical conditions. 
The abovementioned electronic devices have applications in the medical 
treatment of animals, detection on their heating and cooling needs, iontophoretic 
drug delivery, and even conservation of wild species. The ability to quickly, 
accurately and reliably detect the presence or absence of biomarkers or specific 184 Nanosensors 
chemicals can be a matter of life or death for farmed animals. Monitoring glucose 
or proteins or enzymes in the bloodstream, testing for harmful compounds such as 
metals or antibiotic residues in animals and early warning of biological and chemical 
agents in the livestock requires sensitive and reliable sensing devices. While the 
demand for real-time detection of diseases using sensors and devices is ever more 
urgent, the capability of several relevant enabling technologies to build such sensing 
devices is also unprecedented. Bionanotechnology and microelectronics have 
made the fabrication of transistors smaller than 100 nm and integration of several 
hundreds of them into a functional circuit on a small chip possible. Rapid progress in 
nanofabrication has also offered novel enabling technologies. 
A variety of methods are used to detect the level of antibiotics in a living body 
to avoid health hazards. Biosensors are the most prevalent method herein. The 
mechanism and configuration of biosensors is very simple and easy to understand, 
and provides fast and accurate detection of antibiotics. Biosensors work with the 
help of a recognition element and a transducing device. The recognition element 
works on the mechanism of affinity-pairing, such as enzyme substrate and antibody￾antigen receptors. The transducer detects any contact between such pairs by 
producing a detectable electrical signal in response to biological activity, which is 
later analyzed. 
Biosensors, for their applications in animal health management, are an 
emerging market that is quickly gaining recognition globally. Worldwide, numerous 
sensors being produced for animal health management are at various stages of 
commercialization. Some technologies that are used for reporting the health 
status accurately and for disease diagnosis are applicable only for humans, with 
a few modifications (or in the testing phase) for animals. Now, these innovative 
technologies are being considered for their future use in livestock development and 
welfare. However, there is a need to integrate all the available sensors and create an 
efficient online monitoring system so that animal health status can be monitored in 
real time, without delay. 
The commercialization of biosensors for applications in animal biotechnology 
is currently limited mainly because the biological sensing element is affected by 
different factors, including environmental factors and type of molecules. Moreover, 
the size of the transducer can also affect the efficiency and functioning of a biosensor. 
The biological element can be affected by the temperature, pH, ionic strength, etc., of 
the electrolyte solution. These factors affect the sensitivity of response. The size of 
the transducer also affects the response time; it is well known that thinner transducers 
have a faster response. Also, the smaller the surface, the more pronounced is its effect 
on the response time. 
The main methods used in the detection of antibiotics in animals are Surface 
Plasmon Resonance technology (SPR), Surface-enhanced Raman Spectroscopy 
or Surface-enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS), Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent 
Assay (ELISA), Liquid Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS), High￾Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) and other types of chromatography 
and spectroscopy. Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 185 
Each of the aforementioned methods has its advantages and limitations in the 
analysis of antibiotics. The main advantage of chromatography techniques is that 
they are straightforward and yield reliable results; however, the main disadvantage 
is that they are time consuming and have an extensive preparation procedure. The 
main advantages of biosensor technology in comparison with traditional analytical 
methods are fast detection (in the order of minutes) and response (in the order of 
seconds), high sensitivity (typically nM; even higher sensitivity with nanoparticles – 
in the order of pM and better), high selectivity, and easy preparation and operation of 
the assay. Furthermore, most of these devices are reusable and have low-cost assays 
(typically less than 10 EUR/sensor). 
Methods like SPR make the future of biosensors very promising. About 20 
commercial standard SPR platforms are currently present in the market. The 
application of gold nanoparticles for detecting antibiotics in food residues has 
caught the attention of the food industry. Recently, nanoparticles have been shown 
to amplify SPR signals. Gold nanoparticles, upon combination with screen-printed 
electrodes can exhibit versatile and suitable electrochemical properties [23–26]. The 
physical and chemical properties of these particles, such as efficient mass transport 
and enhanced surface area, are desirable due to their high surface to volume ratio. 
Owing to a fast binding rate with the biomolecules and low toxicity, gold 
nanoparticles have found their application in antibiotic detection. Using Solid Phase 
Extraction (SPE) in combination with Self Assembled Monolayer (SAM) cysteine 
(Cys) on gold nanoparticles also raises the selectivity of this technique and boosts 
sensitivity by increasing the efficiency [27]. Impedimetric immunosensors constitute 
another highly sensitive and fast way to detect biomarkers and analytes of interest. 
Integrating a soluble gel-derived silica-based material with these immunosensors 
ensures the encapsulation of biorecognition elements with adequate mechanical 
stability [28, 29]. 
The most recent development in biosensing technology is the introduction of 
an SPR device for portable detection of antibiotics. This approach is significantly 
practical and yields highly sensitive results towards antibiotic detection in chicken 
muscle/blood serum in slaughterhouses. However, there is still a huge potential of 
growth for the technology to detect larger families of antibiotics more easily and 
quickly, and apply SPR to the detection of catalase in milk samples [30, 31]⁠. 
3. Transduction Systems 
Biosensors can be classified based on the transduction methods they employ. 
Transduction can be accomplished through a large variety of methods that can be 
categorized into three main classes: (1) optical detection methods, (2) electrochemical 
detection methods, and (3) mass-based detection methods. These methods have been 
discussed in subsequent sections. 
3.1 Spectroscopic detection methods 
This method offers the largest number of possible sub-categories as optical biosensors 
can be used with various types of spectroscopies like absorption, fluorescence, 186 Nanosensors 
phosphorescence, Raman, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), refraction, 
and dispersion spectrometry. The signal intensity associated with optical detection 
is usually directly proportional to the number of a specific chromophore within 
a certain path length and can be directly dependent on the concentration of the 
chromophore. The linear relationship between signal intensity and concentration of 
a species is known as Beer–Lambert’s law. The cases in which discrepancies from 
this linear relationship occur are usually a result of secondary effects such as self￾absorbance, and equilibrium conditions. Every spectroscopy has different properties 
in terms of amplitude, energy, polarization, decay time and phase. Amplitude is the 
most commonly measured parameter of the electromagnetic spectrum, for it can be 
correlated with the concentration of the analyte of interest. 
The energy of the electromagnetic radiation measured usually provides 
information about changes in the environment of the analyte. Generally, the 
information comes from molecular vibration – Raman or infrared absorption 
spectroscopy (IR) – or from the formation of new energy levels. When the interaction 
of a free molecule with a fixed surface is investigated in polarization measurements 
is usually differ from emitted light; but, when a molecule gets bound to a fixed 
surface, the emitted light often remains polarized. 
The decay time of a specific emission signal (fluorescence or phosphorescence), 
being highly dependent on the excited state of the molecules and their environment, 
can also be used to derive information about molecular interactions. Another property 
that can be measured is the phase of the emitted radiation. When an electromagnetic 
radiation interacts with a surface, the speed or phase of that radiation is altered. This 
difference is based on the refractive index of the analyte. 
When the analyte changes, the refractive index may change and the phase of 
the impinging radiation may be altered. This property of electromagnetic radiation 
has been successfully exploited in commercial applications using surface plasmon 
resonance sensors. 
3.2 Fluorescence 
Fluorescence is one of the most sensitive spectroscopic techniques that makes 
biosensors suited for the detection of very low concentrations of analytes. Particularly 
when a biosensor is coupled with a high-power light source (such as a laser beam), 
it can yield very high signal-to-noise ratios (S/N). Single-molecule detection using 
laser-induced fluorescence has been reported in many studies. Its inherent high 
sensitivity has traditionally made this technique usable for the optical detection of 
trace-level analytes. For high-quantum-yield fluorophores, the effective fluorescence 
cross sections can be as high as 10–16 cm2
/molecule. 
A typical optical setup for a fluorescence biosensor using laser as the light source 
is a one-instrument system consisting of an optical fiber with antibodies immobilized 
at the sensor tip. Excitation light from a laser is sent through a beam splitter onto 
the incidence end of the optical fiber. The laser beam is transmitted inside the fiber 
onto the sensor tip, where it excites the analyte molecules bound to the antibodies. 
The excited antigen, fluorescence and retransmitted to the incidence end of the fiber, 
directed by the beam splitter onto the entrance slit of a monochromator, and recorded Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 187 
by a photomultiplier. This fluoroimmunosensor (FIS) has been used to detect the 
carcinogen benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) [32, 33]. 
Fluorescence detection is also suitable for time- or phase-resolved 
measurements. For this purpose, the excitation laser beam is modulated with 
an acousto-optic modulation system. The function of the generator provides the 
waveforms to drive the modulator. Laser light is delivered to the sample through an 
optical fiber and fluorescence is collected by the same fiber. The fluorescence from 
the sensing probe is collimated by appropriate optics and focused onto the entrance 
slit of a monochromator equipped with a photomultiplier. A lock-in amplifier 
synchronized with the function generator is used to measure phase-resolved signals. 
3.3 Surface plasmon resonance 
Since the first application of the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) phenomenon for 
sensing almost two decades ago, this method has made great strides in terms of 
instrumentation development and applications [34]⁠. SPR biosensor technology has 
been commercially available and has now become a useful tool for characterizing 
and quantifying biomolecular interactions. 
SPR makes it possible to monitor the binding process as a function of time 
by following the increase in refractive index that occurs when interacting partners 
bind to their ligand immobilized on the surface of an SPR sensor substrate [35]⁠. The 
most important advantage of this technique is that it does not require the labeling 
of reactants. This simplifies the data collection process. Biosensor binding data is 
also useful in the selection of peptides used in diagnostic solid-phase immunoassays. 
Consequently, very small changes in binding affinity can be measured with good 
precision. This is a prerequisite for analyzing the functional effect and thermodynamic 
implications of limited structural changes in interacting molecules. For example, the 
on-rate (ka) and off-rate (kd) kinetic constants of the interaction between a protein 
and an antibody can be readily measured and the equilibrium affinity constant, K, 
can be calculated from the ratio ka/kd = K [35]⁠. 
The transduction principle involved in surface plasmon resonance sensors is 
based on the arrangement of a dielectric-metal-dielectric sandwich; hence, when 
light impinges a metal surface, a wave is excited within the plasma, formed by 
the conduction of electrons in the metal [36, 37]⁠. A surface plasmon is a surface 
charge density wave occurring at a metal surface. When plasmon resonance is 
induced on the surface of a metal conductor due to the impact of light and the critical 
wavelength and angle, the effect, observed as a minimum in the intensity of light, 
is reflected off the metal surface. The critical angle is naturally very sensitive to the 
dielectric constant of the medium immediately adjacent to the metal and therefore 
lends itself to exploitation for bioassays. For example, the metal can be deposited 
upon illumination with a wide band of frequencies and the absence of reflected 
light at the frequencies at which the resonance matching conditions are met can be 
observed. 
Because of the intrinsic dependence on the refractive index of the surface, 
surface plasmon resonance can be used as a sensor transducer for indicating when 
alterations at the surface happened. The binding event involves antibody-antigen 188 Nanosensors 
recognition or DNA hybridization at the SPR sensor surface. These are the most 
common SPR applications. SPR can detect small variations in the refractive index at 
the metal-coated interface caused by changes in a few monolayers above the surface. 
In biosensor devices, surface plasmon resonance is detected as a very sharp 
decrease in light reflectance when the angle of incidence is varied. The resonance 
angle is very sensitive to variations in the refractive index of the analyte. The electric 
field probes the analyte within only a few hundreds of nanometers from the metal 
surface. The conditions of the resonance are very sensitive to variations in thin films 
on the surface. Changes in the refractive index are about 10–5, and can be thus easily 
detected. 
The surface plasmon wave penetrates in both directions of normal to the interface 
of the incident angle or frequency resonance that is observed due to the refractive 
index of the dielectric of the interface. Liedberg and co-workers have shown 
that surface plasmon resonance can be used as the basis of a genuine reagentless 
immunosensor if large analytes can be monitored in the antibody that is immobilized 
on the metal [36]⁠. When a large antibody binds, it displaces the solution with protein 
or other bioreceptors. The effective refractive index of the dielectric adjacent to the 
metal is thus changed in proportion to the amount of analyte bound, and the surface 
plasmon resonance is shifted accordingly. Flanagan and Pantell have shown that the 
amount of analyte bound can be directly related to the resonance shift even when 
the resonance curve is distorted by scattering caused by surface roughness, thus 
relieving one of the constraints of precise control of metalization, which would have 
been unattractive in the mass production of inexpensive sensors [37]⁠. 
SPR biosensors can give qualitative information on macromolecular assembly 
processes under a variety of conditions. Such information can be obtained in a manner 
similar to conventional solid phase assays. The main advantage of SPR biosensors 
here is that the formation and breakdown of complexes can be monitored in real 
time. This offers a possibility of determining the mechanism and kinetic rate. These 
constants are associated with a binding event. Hence, this information is essential for 
understanding how biological systems work at the molecular level. 
However, accurate interpretation of biosensor data is not always straightforward. 
A few software programs can interpolate SPR data and provide an estimated 
binding constant [38]⁠. For example, the interactions between adenylate kinase 
(AK) and a monoclonal antibody against AK have been examined with an optical 
biosensor, and the sensograms were fitted to four models using numerical integration 
algorithms [39]⁠. 
3.4 Electrochemical detection 
Electrochemical detection is another possible means of transduction that has been 
extensively used in biosensors [40–44]⁠. This technique is complementary to optical 
detection methods such as fluorescence. Since many analytes of interest are not 
strongly fluorescent, they can be tagged by a molecule with a fluorescent label 
that is often labor-intensive. Electrochemical transduction can be very useful in 
such cases as it can combine the sensitivity of electrochemical measurements with  
 
Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 189 
the selectivity provided by bioreception. Detection limits comparable to those of 
fluorescence biosensors are often achievable by electrochemical sensors as well. 
The associated electrochemical techniques are based on the principle that 
the potential, current or charge in an electrochemical cell serves as the analytical 
signal. These analytical techniques measure potential, charge or current to 
determine an analyte’s concentration or to characterize an analyte’s chemical 
reactivity. Collectively, we call this area of analytical chemistry electrochemistry 
as it originated from the study of movement of electrons in an oxidation-reduction 
reaction. Despite the difference in instrumentation, all electrochemical techniques 
share several common features. Electrochemical methods of analysis include three 
main categories: (1) coulometry, (2) potentiometry, and (3) voltammetry. Coulometry 
is based on exhaustive electrolysis of the analyte. In other words, the analyte is 
completely oxidized or reduced at the working electrode, or it reacts completely with 
a reagent generated at the working electrode. There are two forms of coulometry: 
controlled-potential coulometry (in which a constant potential is applied to the 
electrochemical cell) and controlled-current coulometry (in which a constant current 
is passed through the electrochemical cell). In potentiometry, the potential of an 
electrochemical cell under static conditions is measured. Because no or negligible 
level of current flows through the electrochemical cell, its composition remains 
unchanged. For this reason, potentiometry is a useful quantitative method. The first 
quantitative potentiometric applications appeared soon after the formulation of the 
Nernst equation, which relates an electrochemical cell’s potential to the concentration 
of electroactive species in the cell. In the case of voltammetry, a time-dependent 
potential is applied to an electrochemical cell and the resulting current is measured 
as a function of that potential. The resulting plot of current versus applied potential 
is called a voltammogram; it is the electrochemical equivalent of a spectrum in 
spectroscopy, providing quantitative and qualitative information about the species 
involved in the oxidation or reduction reaction. Voltammetry includes polarography 
and amperometry. 
Polarography is a type of voltammetry where the working electrode is a dropping 
mercury electrode (DME) or a static mercury drop electrode (SMDE); these electrodes 
are useful for their wide cathodic ranges and renewable surfaces. Polarography was 
invented in 1922 by the Czech chemist, Jaroslav Heyrovský, for which he won the 
Nobel prize in 1959. Amperometry is the term indicating the entirety of electrochemical 
techniques in which current is measured as a function of an independent variable 
which is, typically, time or electrode potential. Chronoamperometry is the technique 
in which the current is measured at a fixed potential, at different times since the 
start of polarisation. It is typically carried out in an unstirred solution and at a fixed 
electrode, that is, under experimental conditions avoiding convective mass transfer 
to the electrode. On the other hand, voltammetry is a subclass of amperometry, in 
which the current is measured by varying the potential applied to the electrode. 
According to the waveform that describes the way how the potential is varied as a 
function of time, different voltammetric techniques are defined. Recently, confusion 
arose regarding the correct use of many terms appropriately in electrochemistry/ 
electroanalysis, often owing to the diffusion of electroanalytical techniques in fields 190 Nanosensors 
where they constitute an instrument for use, not being the ‘core business’ of the 
study. Though electrochemists are pleased about this, they welcome the usage the 
terms properly in order to avoid grave misunderstandings. Electrochemical detection 
is usually based on the chemical potential of a particular species in the analyte and 
can be measured by comparison with a reference electrode. 
Electrochemical response is dependent on the activity of the analyte species and 
not on their concentration. However, for dilute solutions of low ionic strength, the 
thermodynamic parameter activity approaches the physical parameter concentration 
(in molar terms). 
4. Detection of toxins 
Biosensor devices allow effective toxin and antigen detection, which has many 
beneficial applications in health care of animals. Microporous calcium alginate 
gels, low-energy food products, foams and emulsions can be produced through this 
technology as well. Nanoparticle synthesis and formation of plastic microfluidic chips 
for applications in food safety have also increased recently. Microfluidic devices are 
being used for the culture and manipulation of embryos in assisted reproduction of 
cattle [45]. 
The interactions of aflatoxin MI (AFM1) with bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs) 
composed of egg phosphatidylcholine (PC) have been investigated by researchers 
[46]. These interactions were found to be electrochemically transduced by BLMs in 
the form of a transient current signal of duration in the order of seconds and appeared 
within 7 seconds of exposure of the membranes to this toxin. BLMs composed of 
PC demonstrated the maximum sensitivity. The mechanism of signal generation 
was also explored. This mechanism takes place due to alterations in the membrane 
surface electrostatics (that is, reorganization of the electrochemical double layer 
of membranes), which results in a charging current signal due to the adsorption of 
AFM1. The magnitude of the transient current signal is related to the concentration 
of AFM1 in the bulk solution in the concentration range of 2–15 nM. The application 
of the electrochemical transduction system for the determination of aflatoxin MI in 
skimmed milk was also studied. 
The rapid, sensitive and selective electrochemical flow injection monitoring 
of AFM1 using stabilized filter-supported BLMs has been reported in the literature 
[47]. In the referred study, injections of AFM1 were made into the flowing streams 
of a carrier electrolyte solution (KCl) and a transient current signal with duration in 
the order of seconds reproducibly appeared less than 10 seconds after the exposure 
of the lipid membranes to the toxin. The magnitude of this signal was related linearly 
to the concentration of AFM1, with detection limits being in subnanomolar levels. 
The mechanism of signal generation was explored by physicochemical (differential 
scanning calorimetric) experiments and the results showed phase structure alterations 
in the lipid membranes. 
The development of a one-shot electrochemical sensor for AFM1 has been also 
reported [48]. The interactions of AFM1 with these Langmuir-Blodgett films were 
found to be electrochemically transduced as a transient current signal with a duration Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 191 
of seconds and appeared within 7 seconds after the exposure of the membranes to 
AFM1. The magnitude of the transient current signal was related to the concentration 
of AFM1 in a range of 2–15 nM. The present preliminary work included novel 
applications of BLM-based films in real samples and explored the matrix effects in 
electrochemical transduction for the determination of AFM1 in skimmed milk. 
The interactions of AFM1 with self-assembled metal-supported bilayer lipid 
membranes and its effects on DNA hybridization have been investigated previously 
[49]. Therein, alterations of electrochemical signals due to DNA hybridization were 
used for the rapid detection of this toxin. The interactions of AFM1 with these 
membranes (composed of egg PC) provided ion current increases which reproducibly 
appeared within 8–10 seconds after the lipid membranes were exposed to the toxin. 
The magnitudes of the current signals were related to the toxin concentration, which 
could be determined within the range of 1.9–20.9 nM. Furthermore, AFM1 was 
found to affect the kinetics and time of signal generation due to DNA hybridization, 
which was electrochemically monitored using s-BLMs. The “receptor” oligomer was 
single-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (ssDNA) thymidylic acid icosanucleotide that 
terminated with a C16 alkyl chain to assist incorporation into s-BLMs (dT20-C16). 
The target oligomer was deoxyadenylic acid icosanucleotide (dA20). The “receptor” 
was incorporated into s-BLMs and complementary dA 20 (cDNA) was injected 
into the stirred bulk electrolyte solution. The electrochemical ion current across 
s-BLMs was found to increase due to the presence of ssDNA and decrease due to 
the formation of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). The toxin reduced the initial rate 
of signal alterations and increased the time of equilibrium. This provided a means 
for rapid (less than 1 minute) and sensitive (detection limit of 0.5 nM) detection of 
AFM1, based on measurements of the initial rate of hybridization. 
A multi-assay flow through sensor has been proposed in literature for the 
detection of AFM1 in cheese [50]. In the referred case, stabilized filter-supported 
BLMs were used as detectors. Single-stranded dT20-C16 was incorporated into the 
membranes. The incorporation of dT20-C16 in BLMs lowered the detection limit for 
this toxin by one to four orders of magnitude, compared to the detection limit obtained 
in the absence of DNA. This biosensor provided the possibility to continuously 
monitor this toxin at concentrations that approached those that could be of interest as 
set by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and most European countries. 
Injections of AFM1 were made into flowing streams of a 0.1 M KC1 electrolyte 
solution, and a transient current signal with duration in the order of seconds appeared 
12 seconds after the exposure of the BLMs to the toxin. The magnitude of this signal 
was related linearly to the concentration of the toxin, with detection limits being at 
sub-nM concentration levels. The effect of interferents like proteins and lipids was 
also explored. The interferences from proteins could be eliminated by adjustment of 
the flow rate of the carrier electrolyte solution. The technique was applied for the 
rapid flow determination of aflatoxin MI in cheese samples with a rate of at least 
4 samples per minute. Repetitive cycles of injection of AFM1 showed no signal 
degradation during each cycle for experiments that attempted over 30 cycles of 
detection. 192 Nanosensors 
In one study, lipid films were deposited on the sensing surface in an optical 
biosensor instrument [51]. The membranes were mixtures of biologically occurring 
lipids. Eight surfaces were prepared, some of which contained various glycolipids as 
minor components. One of the surfaces was supplemented with membrane proteins. 
The binding of six protein toxins (cholera toxin, cholera toxin B sub-unit, diphtheria 
toxin, ricin, ricin B sub-unit and staphylococcal enterotoxin B) and of bovine 
serum albumin at pH 7.4 and pH 5.2 respectively to each of the sensor surfaces was 
investigated. Each of the seven proteins gave a distinct binding pattern. The assay 
was rapid and simple, with no need of reagents. The lipid sensor surface was readily 
regenerated after binding and was very stable. The concept with mixed lipid layers 
and assays at different pHs gives numerous combinations and can be applied for 
developing a sensor for protein toxins. 
The rabbit pyrogen test and limulus amoebocyte lysate (LAL) [52, 53] have 
been used to detect endotoxins, and are considered conventional methods. The 
United States Food and Drug Administration has approved these methods as the 
standard methods. The rabbit pyrogen test was first developed in 1920. For the test, 
a test solution is injected into a rabbit’s body and one waits for some time to witness 
any change in the body temperature to detect an endotoxin. However, an animal 
rights group has opposed the use of this method for preventing the killing of rabbits. 
Moreover, the method is time-consuming and expensive. Now this method is losing 
favor, and only the LAL test is used, which was first discovered 67 years ago in 1950, 
by Dr. Frederik Bang [54], after he first observed that horseshoe-crab blood forms 
clots when exposed to endotoxins. 
For the LAL test, endotoxin-contaminated food or water is mixed with 
horseshoe-crab blood to derive the amoebocyte extraction; then, one waits for a 
response from the endotoxins. The FDA has approved four tests: chromogenic assay, 
colorimetric [55] (lower protein), gel-clot and turbidity metric (spectrophotometric) 
tests. The particular reaction of amoebocyte/endotoxin characterizes these methods. 
The method of gel clots is based on the occurrence or non-occurrence of gel 
formation in the sample; when endotoxins are present in the sample, gelation occurs 
due to the coagulation of proteins. Turbidity occurs due to the sharp division of 
an endotoxin-sensitive substrate, and the turbidimetric methods use this turbidity 
to detect endotoxins. Another technique, known as the chromogenic technique, 
relies on the change in color during the division of a complex into a peptide and a 
chromogen [56]. 
The concentration of Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is expressed as EU/mL or 
EU/mg, where EU stands for endotoxin unit for biological activity in LPS. Suppose 
that in one EU, 10−15 g of LPS is contributed by gram-negative bacteria. This implies 
that at most 105
 bacteria can be generated thereafter. The response of an LAL test is 
quick and it takes approximately 30 minutes to get the result. The detection limit is 
considerably low and the technique is highly sensitive compared to other detection 
methods. However, a major disadvantage is that it requires expert personnel 
to complete all the complex steps to avoid any external interference. Another 
disadvantage of the LAL test is that the testing kits are expensive for some sampling 
tests. Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 193 
5.  Detecting influenza virus using FRET
Influenza virus is highly contagious among birds. It can spread through saliva, nasal 
secretions and other excretions from infected birds [57]⁠. 
A homogenized and uniform fluorescence-quenching-based assay has been 
recently developed for specifically detecting the influenza virus surface antigen 
hemagglutinins (HAs) [58]. This assay is expected to revolutionize the process of 
detecting viruses and can be a sensitive diagnostic tool for influenza virus detection. 
The assay consists of two nanoprobes: glycan-conjugated highly luminescent 
quantum dots (Gly-QDs), and HA-specific antibody-modified gold nanoparticle 
(Ab-Au NPs). These nanoprobes are brought together when exposed to strain￾specific HA. This happens due to a very specific binding event between the HA and 
the two nanoprobes, which forms a sandwich complex. QDs fluorescence intensity 
is hence diminished as a non-radiative energy transfer occurs from QDs to Au NPs 
[44]⁠. The fluorescence changes, and a resulting correlation between the target’s HA 
concentrations is easily observed. Moreover, the origin of the HAs can be easily 
detected and, due to the specific interaction between HA and glycan with sialic acid 
residues, we can distinguish between human (H1) and avian (H5) viral sub-types. 
Normally, the influenza virus is detected using the so-called “gold standard” 
viral culture and RT-PCR, which is both time-intensive and labor-intensive. 
Immunoassays like ELISA are less specific and less sensitive, which makes them 
inconvenient to be used for this purpose. However, fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer (FRET) is sensitive enough to detect small changes due to interactions 
between the biomolecules. It is a very powerful method in which non-radiative 
energy is transferred from an excited donor to an acceptor at ground state (quencher) 
placed almost 1 to 10 nm away [59]⁠. 
A homogenous fluorescence-quenching-based assay for specific and sensitive 
detection of influenza virus a hemagglutinin antigen [60, 61]. Illegal feed additives 
can also be detected using fluorescence quenching and immunochromatography; 
determination of ractopamine and clenbuterol in porcine muscle and swine urine, for 
instance [60, 61]⁠. 
Direct contact with infected poultry can infect healthy birds with the avian 
influenza virus. Even sharing water and feed can result in contamination. The disease 
manifests itself in two forms, with low and high extremes of virulence. The low 
pathogenic form is less virulent and shows mild symptoms, like lesser egg production. 
The highly pathogenic form manifests itself by rapidly spreading through flocks 
and affecting multiple internal organs. A system called Sensor Networks assists in 
collecting data from a desired location and transmitting it to a computer. Sensor 
Networks contain different sensors which perform extraordinary signal, alarm and 
decision-making functions. The sensor system uses an open-source technology, 
Arduino – an electronics prototype that can be integrated with various sensors 
to monitor parameters like body temperature and movement of the animals. The 
alarm is sent to an observing station, which is used to monitor whether the observed 
value is less or greater than the normal value. The detection of avian influenza is 
thus assisted by monitoring the level of H5H1 virus, which causes mortality in 
chickens [62]. 194 Nanosensors 
6.  Detection of bacteria using SERS
SERS, a label-free biosensing method for bacterial detection, provides information 
about the chemical structure of analytes. It uses the intrinsic vibrational 
fingerprint of analytes to detect molecules. Moreover, the performance of Raman 
spectroscopy remains unaffected by the surrounding water, allowing easy detection 
of bacteria [17]⁠. 
Raman spectroscopy has found another application in the label-free modes of 
analysis of chemical and biological components. The detection of disease-causing 
bacteria in drinking water through label-free near-infrared surface-enhanced Raman 
scattering/spectroscopy (NIR-SERS) method is a recent development, which provides 
a diagnostic platform. This analytical method is a rapid way for the successful label￾free identification of pathogenic bacteria in health-care applications. The in situ 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) within bacterial cell suspensions provides 
a means for the detection of food-borne bacteria. 
This method does not require a preparatory phase and is label-free. To enhance 
the assay’s sensitivity, Triton X-100 is used to pre-treat the bacterial cells. However, 
probing the fingerprints of bacteria through this method becomes difficult due to 
poor selectivity as it is a simple mixing process. This remarkable technology not only 
helps detect pathogenic bacteria, but also enables one to distinguish between different 
types of these bacteria, such as Methicillin-resistant, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Listeria spp. 
This method also helps differentiating between two species—L. monocytogenes 
and L. innocua—through the comparison of the SERS spectra and Raman frequencies. 
Similarly, it is also possible to differentiate between two MRSA strains from clinical 
isolates [63]⁠. Even the most intricate details, like the molecular composition of a 
sample, can be revealed using this spectroscopic technique at a micrometer scale. 
Metallic nanoparticles (NPs) in the diameter range of 104 to 106 nm have been 
used with SERS via SPR. This method ensures that there is homogenous contact 
of the constituents of the bacterial cells with nanoparticles, and provides an intense 
spectrum with better selectivity [63]⁠. Another study explored a novel microfluidic 
platform employing methodologies for chemometric data analysis, including a 
combination of principle component analysis and linear discriminant analysis, as 
well as silver nanoparticles. Distinguishing between eight key food-borne pathogens 
(E. coli, L. monocytogenes, L. innocua, S. typhimirium, S. enteritis, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, MRSA 35 and MRSA 86), which significantly affect the food industry, 
has been made possible through this method. 
Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy has made the imaging and detection of 
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria successful as well. The distinction between 
these two types of bacteria depends on the difference in the scattering intensity; 
it is higher for gram-positive bacteria, compared to that of gram-negative bacteria. 
Another method for the detection of bacteria suggests the synthesis of magnetic– 
plasmonic Fe3O4–Au core–shell nanoparticles to concentrate bacterial cells. This is 
accomplished through the application of an external point magnetic field and SERS 
[17]⁠. Biosensors can also be used to detect live bacteria in drinking water using Ag 
nanoparticles. This novel technology has also detected anthrax spores on nanosphere Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 195 
substrates. Even multi-drug-resistant strains of bacteria can be detected using 
complex nanohybrid systems. These systems are developed by combining antibody￾conjugated gold nanoparticles with single-walled carbon nanotubes. 
7. Pathogen detection methods 
In conventional methods, the detection of pathogens mostly depends on the 
identification of precise microbiological and biochemical constituents [64]. There 
are three types of conventional methods: (1) immunology-based method, (2) count 
method of culturing and colony, and (3) polymerase chain reaction method (PCR) 
[64–66]. The culturing technique gives accurate results due to its high selectivity 
and sensitivity [67, 68]. Various microorganisms grow on food samples and, 
depending on the growth of the microorganisms, the specific pathogens are identified. 
The process requires selective plating, pre-enrichment, selective enrichment, 
and identifications, taking a few days to yield results. This detection method is 
monotonous and lengthy. 
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method is very popular for detection of 
pathogens [69, 70]. Specific bacteria based on their nucleic acid sequence [71–73], 
protozoa [74, 75], and viruses [76, 77] are targeted when PCR is used for pathogen 
detection. Different PCR methods are available for pathogen detection, like reverse 
transcript PCR (RT-PCR) [78, 79], real-time PCR [80] and multiplex PCR [81]. 
The immunological detection technique is also used for the detection of pathogens 
[82, 83]. The antigen-antibody bindings are utilized widely in immunological 
detection for pathogens from gram-negative bacteria. This method has been 
successfully used to detect Salmonella and E. coli [84, 85]. Enzyme immunoassay 
(EIA) [86, 87], enzyme-linked fluorescent assay (ELFA) [88, 89], enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) [90, 91], flow injection immunoassay [92], and other 
immunological methods [93, 94] are mostly used for immunological detection. They 
require less time for assay preparation, compared to a culturing technique. However, 
real-time pathogen detection is not possible with this method [95]. 
Strategies like elemental doping and photo-irradiation are deployed to vary the 
physico-chemical functionalities of GO. Biosensing applications can be improved 
to a great extent by incorporating a durable single hybrid nanostructure on the GO 
surface, with suitable optical and biocompatible capabilities. Reactivity of the oxygen 
functional groups present on the edges of GO govern the chemical functionalization 
of materials on the GO’s surface [96]⁠. The detection of pathogens from the skins, 
oral cavity, feces of farm animals and also in the environment of a barn or pen can be 
efficiently quantified using hybrid nanoparticle-based biosensors. 
HNPs-GO electrodes, known for their remarkable electrochemical immune￾sensing properties, are being currently employed to detect Listeria monocytogenes 
(Lm), a major foodborne pathogen. Lm is a gram-positive bacterium that causes 
listeriosis, which is widespread and has a high mortality rate. This alarming 
situation calls for an efficient system to detect Lm in food products. Nanosheets 
of graphene oxide (GO) coated with hybrid nanoparticles of a silver–ruthenium 
bipyridine complex (Ag@ [Ru (bpy)3]2+) core and chitosan shell have significant 
immunosensing properties. 196 Nanosensors 
The oxygenated groups of GO and the amine groups on the surface of hybrid 
nanoparticles play a significant role in unique immunosensing application. 
Contamination in milk and other food products can be easily detected using 
monoclonal antibodies and HNPs-GO immunosensors. Hence, intelligent and 
specific optimization of the bio-recognition elements on HNPs-GO electrodes can 
provide a bright future in the food processing industry. Having good fabrication, 
thin layering and tunable oxygen functional groups make two-dimensional Graphene 
Oxide (GO) and reduced GO (rGO) preferred choices. Surface treatment of the 
active components on GO nanosheets changes the crystallite size and the properties 
associated with it. 
8. Detection of infectious agents 
Globalization has led to the rapid and unhindered distribution of animal products 
all over the world, posing great threats to humans. Transboundary animal diseases 
(TADs), including foot-and-mouth disease and classical swine fever, can spread very 
quickly across borders and countries. These diseases affect animal trade and have 
a devastating impact on animal husbandry. Some animal diseases cross the species 
barrier and can affect humans, causing zoonotic infections. 
Therefore, appropriate methods must be used for the diagnosis of such diseases. 
This would help in devising special precautionary measures like vaccinations and 
quarantine. In direct detection methods, infectious agents can easily be detected 
in samples collected from animals. Classical methods for detection of microbes 
include identification by culture techniques and immunofluorescence. Molecular 
techniques include Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification (LAMP) for the detection of infectious agents. Occurrence of 
infections in hosts can be diagnosed though indirect methods as well; for instance, 
by identifying the antibodies against various infectious agents. 
The advantage of PCR is its high specificity. PCR is a highly sensitive assay that 
can diagnose infectious agents at the molecular level. Since every microorganism 
has its own unique genome, PCR enables amplification of the genetic material, 
including DNA and RNA. The real-time PCR technique has many variants: FRET￾based assays, TaqMan assays, etc. SYBR Green is a cost-effective method avoiding 
the use of probes. PCR techniques are thus affordable and are put to use in light￾weight portable devices for on-site detection of infection. Use of novel isothermal 
amplification methods further facilitates the on-site diagnosis of infections in 
animals. For example, loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) runs at 
a single temperature level and gives results readable by the naked eye. Enzymes 
used in PCR include polymerases, reverse transcriptases, nucleases, etc. Use of 
thermostable polymerases allows amplification through thermocycling. The PCR 
product can be visualized through agarose gel electrophoresis using fluorescent 
dyes. Electrophoresis allows estimation of the amplicon length and maintains the 
specificity. But using gel-based PCR can sometimes be laborious and does not allow 
the quantification of the initial viral load. Due to lack of specificity, problems like 
false positive detection arise. This problem has been solved with real-time PCR,  
Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 197 
which allows a closed-tube assay with minimum risk of cross contamination. In this 
assay, the product is monitored during the reaction of the DNA-binding moieties that 
bind to the amplified DNA and emit fluorescence without the requirement of the gel 
formation step. 
The cycle number at which the fluorescence reaches its threshold level 
depends on the initial viral load. Communication of laboratory results with the health 
authorities in a rapid manner can lead to the successful eradication of infectious 
diseases from animals; rapid two-way communication between laboratories and 
practitioners would ensure the success of the control program. Three final PCR 
technologies aiding the detection of infectious agents include MAP, the Field 
Effective sensor, and Vantix. 
Johne’s disease (JD) is a major gastrointestinal disease of cattle; it is caused 
by Mycobacterium Avium subspecies Paratuberculosis (MAP). This cattle disease 
causes premature culling and reduced milk production. Nevertheless, it can be 
controlled using conductometric biosensors which combine immunomigration 
technology with electronic signal detection [97]⁠. 
9.   Sweat analyzers
Analyzing sweat can relay useful information about an individual animal’s 
health [98–103]. Wearable sweat analyzers have not yet been made commercial, 
mainly because of the size constraints of the equipment. However, low-cost robust 
designs have been developed in laboratories [104, 105]. Recent developments made 
in sweat analyzers aim to restrict the size of the system so it is wearable and easy 
to handle. Researchers have worked on real-time sweat monitoring of sodium by 
disposable potentiometric strips integrated with microfluidic chips; this system is 
connected to a mini wireless system to detect sodium levels in sweat [106]. Monitoring 
a number of electrolytes simultaneously is however more useful; hence, the system 
developed by Gao et al. detects the levels of sodium, potassium, lactose, glucose, and 
skin temperature simultaneously. Therein, integrated Bluetooth technology enables 
sharing and monitoring of the measured data [107]. Biomonitoring of sweat in 
animals has great potential for animal health because of its non-invasive nature. The 
amount of metals can also be detected by sweat analyzers [108]. If such a technology 
is introduced on farms, changes in animal health can be monitored in a novel fashion 
to significantly prevent health and economic loss. 
10. Farm monitoring 
Sensor systems for measuring fat and protein content in milk are frequently used 
on farms nowadays. The sensor system used differs according to the milking system 
used on each farm. These sensors provide health and fertility data on the cattle 
monitored. 
Reproductive performance in dairy herds can be analyzed through estrus 
detection. Sensor systems have been reported to detect roughly 80–85% of cows in 
estrus. It is not fully clear whether the use of sensor systems also benefits the health 
and production of milk in cows. In older studies, it was proved that higher estrus  
 
 
198 Nanosensors 
detection resulted in a shorter calving interval, consequently leading to increased 
milk production. Furthermore, high somatic cell count has been linked to lower milk 
production. Usage of automatic milking systems has also proved to increase milk 
production. Different statistical analyses can be used to study the role of sensors 
for mastitis and estrus detection in dairy cows. Apart from these, fat, protein, 
temperature and milk temperature sensors can also be used [109–111] to enhance 
the animal production systems. Studies have suggested that dogs can be trained, 
through positive reinforcement and an optimized training protocol, to differentiate 
between vaginal mucus samples from cows which are in estrus and those from cows 
in diestrus [112]. 
Better reproduction rates in cattle can be obtained if hormone levels are measured 
efficiently. Using Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) techniques, 
which can detect progesterone in purified water, is one option. Planar capacitive 
sensors use silicon substrate thin film microelectromechanical-based semiconductor 
device fabrication technology. This sensor can evaluate conductivity, permeability 
and dielectric properties of the reproductive hormone progesterone and quantify its 
concentration in purified water [113]. Integrated wireless sensors for online health 
monitoring systems have been designed and investigated as monitoring systems 
[114–118]. Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) control technique has also been 
applied to reduce labor and yield higher profits in poultry feeding management 
[119]. 
11.  Saliva analyzer
Biological fluids of living beings, like tears, sweat and saliva, can be used for 
monitoring health and detecting pathological conditions. Similarly, breath and 
interstitial fluids of the body can also be used for this purpose. Non-invasive 
monitoring of uric acid in saliva can be done using a mouth guard with an integrated 
screen-printed electrode system. The uricase enzyme is utilized in this system, which 
uses electronics (potentiostat, Bluetooth and microcontroller). Generally, biosensors 
require a lot of power. However, this platform is capable of transmitting information 
to laptops and smartphones, where the information can be processed and stored. This 
mouth guard biosensor is highly selective and stable for uric acid detection in saliva, 
since it covers a large range of concentrations. This real-time biosensor is a wearable 
monitor which can be used in different health applications [99]. Analyzing saliva can 
be done through non-invasive and readily available methods. It is extremely useful in 
analyzing the mouth conditions and Gastrophageal Reflux Diseases. 
12. Conclusion 
Animal health is a serious global issue that demands apt scientific techniques. 
For this purpose, innovative ap
health management have gained r
commercialization, but are maki
domain of animal health. 
proaches like the use of biosensors for animal 
ecognition. These sensors are at various steps of 
ng their way into practice and application in the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 199 
Some technologies for getting an accurate health status and for disease diagnosis 
are applicable only for humans. With modifications and testing in animal models, 
these innovative technologies are now being considered for their future use in 
livestock development and welfare as well. Precision livestock farming techniques, 
which include a wide span of technologies, are being applied, along with advanced 
technologies like microfluidics, sound analyzers, image detection techniques, sweat 
and saliva sensing, and serodiagnosis. 
However, there is a need to integrate all the available sensors and create an 
efficient online monitoring system, so that animal health can be monitored in real 
time, without delay. Looking at an optimistic future of different wearable technologies 
for animals, including nano biosensors and advanced molecular biology diagnostic 
techniques for the detection of various infectious diseases of cattle, a large-scale 
adoption of the modern techniques discussed here is likely. 
References
[1]	 Turner, Anthony, P.F. and G.S. Wilson. 1989 Biosensors Fundamentals and Applications. 
[2] Bănică, F.-G. 2012. Chemical Sensors and Biosensors. 
[3] Hierlemann, A., O. Brand, C. Hagleitner and H. Baltes. 2003. Microfabrication techniques for 
chemical/biosensors. Proc. IEEE 91: 839–863 . 
[4] Hierlemann, A. and H. Baltes. 2003. CMOS-based chemical microsensors. Analyst 128: 15–28. 
[5] Chandra, P. 2016. Nanobiosensors for personalized and onsite biomedical diagnosis. The 
Institution of Engineering and Technology. (1st ed). UK, Cryodon. 
[6] Mahato, K., A. Srivastava and P. Chandra. 2017. Paper based diagnostics for personalized health 
care: Emerging technologies and commercial aspects. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 96: 246–259. 
[7] Mahato, K., P.K. Maurya and P. Chandra. 2018. Fundamentals and commercial aspects of 
nanobiosnsors in point-of-care clinical diagnostics. 3 Biotech. 8: 149. 
[8] Chandra, P., T.Y. Nee and S.P. Singh. 2017. Next generation point-of-care biomedical sensors 
technologies for cancer diagnosis. Springer Singapore. 
[9] Baranwal, A., A. Srivastava, P. Kumar, V.K. Bajpai, P.K. Maurya and P. Chandra. 2018. Prospets 
of nanostructure materials and their composites as antimicrobial agents. Frontiers Microbiology 
9: 422. 
[10] Jianrong, C., M. Yuqing, H. Nongyue et al. 2004. Nanotechnology and biosensors. Biotechnol. 
Adv. 22: 505–518. 
[11] Glennon, T., C. O’Quigley, M. McCaul et al. 2016. SWEATCH: A wearable platform for harvesting 
and analysing sweat sodium content. Electroanalysis 28: 1283–1289. 
[12] Heikenfeld, J. 2016. Bioanalytical devices: Technological leap for sweat sensing. Nature 
529: 475–476. 
[13] Garcia, S.O., Y.V. Ulyanova, R. Figueroa-Teran et al. 2016. Wearable sensor system powered 
by a biofuel cell for detection of lactate levels in sweat. ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 
5: M3075–M3081. 
[14] Kim, J., T.N. Cho, G. Valdés-Ramírez and J. Wang. 2016. A wearable fingernail chemical sensing 
platform: PH sensing at your fingertips. Talanta 150: 622–628. 
[15] Mungroo, N.A. and S. Neethirajan. 2014. Biosensors for the detection of antibiotics in poultry 
industry—A Review. Biosensors 4: 472–493. 
[16] Vidic, J., M. Manzano, C.M. Chang and N. Jaffrezic-Renault. 2017. Advanced biosensors for 
detection of pathogens related to livestock and poultry. Vet. Res. 48: 11. 
[17] Mungroo, N.A., G. Oliveira and S. Neethirajan. 2016. SERS based point-of-care detection of food￾borne pathogens. Microchim. Acta 183: 697–707. 
[18] Posthuma-Trumpie, G.A., J. Korf and A. Van Amerongen. 2009. Lateral flow (immuno)assay: 
Its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats. A literature survey. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
393: 569–582.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200 Nanosensors 
[19] Li, Y., R. Vyas, A. Rida et al. 2008. Wearable RFID-enabled sensor nodes for biomedical applications. 
In: Proceedings—Electronic Components and Technology Conference, pp. 2156–2159. 
[20] Andersson, L.M., H. Okada, Y. Zhang et al. 2015. Wearable wireless sensor for estrus detection in 
cows by conductivity and temperature measurements. In: 2015 IEEE SENSORS—Proceedings. 
[21] Andersson, L.M., H. Okada, R. Miura et al. 2016. Wearable wireless estrus detection sensor for 
cows. Comput. Electron. Agric. 127: 101–108. 
[22]	 Ivanov, S., K. Bhargava and W. Donnelly. 2015. Precision farming: Sensor analytics. IEEE Intell. 
Syst. 30: 76–80. 
[23] http://www.dropsens.com/en/screen_printed_electrodes_pag.html. 
[24] Gerd-Uwe Flechsig, G.-U. 2018. New electrode materials and devices for thermoelectrochemical 
studies and applications. Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 10: 54–60. 
[25] Zhang, Y., G. Wang, L. Yang, F. Wang and A. Liu. 2018. Recent advances in gold nanostructures 
based biosensing and bioimaging. Coordination Chemistry Reviews 370: 1–21. 
[26] Kim, S.H. 2018. Nanoporous gold: Preparation and applications to catalysis and sensors. Curr. 
Appl. Phys. 18(7): 810–818. 
[27] Galal, A., N.F. Atta and E.H. El-Ads. 2012. Probing cysteine self-assembled monolayers over gold 
nanoparticles—towards selective electrochemical sensors. Talanta 93: 264–73. 
[28]	 Wang, J. and P.V. Pamidi. 1997. Sol-gel-derived gold composite electrodes. Anal. Chem. 
1, 69(21): 4490–4494. 
[29]	 Wang, J., P.V.A. Pamidi and K.R. Rogers. 1998. Sol-gel-derived thick-film amperometric 
immunosensors. Anal. Chem. 70(6): 1171–1175. 
[30] Ashley, J. and S.F.Y. Li. 2013. An aptamer based surface plasmon resonance biosensor for the 
detection of bovine catalase in milk. Biosens. {&} Bioelectron 48: 126–131. 
[31] Meng, K., W. Sun, P. Zhao et al. 2014. Development of colloidal gold-based immunochromatographic 
assay for rapid detection of Mycoplasma suis in porcine plasma. Biosens. Bioelectron 
55: 396–399. 
[32] Khansili, N., G. Rattu and P.M. Krishna. 2018. Label-free optical biosensors for food and biological 
sensor applications. Sens. Actuators (Chemical) 265: 35–49. 
[33]	 Vo-Dinh, T. 2014. Nanosensing at the single cell level, Spectrochim Acta Part B, At Spectrosc. 
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 15. Published in final edited form as: Spectrochim 
Acta Part B At Spectrosc. 2008 Feb; 63(2): 95–103. 
[34] Homola, J., S.S. Yee and G. Gauglitz. 1999. Surface plasmon resonance sensors: Review. Sensors 
Actuators B Chem. 54: 3–15. 
[35]	 Van Regenmortel, M.H., D. Altschuh, J. Chatellier et al. 1997. Uses of biosensors in the study of 
viral antigens. Immunol. Invest. 26: 67–82. 
[36]	 Liedberg, B., C. Nylander and I. Lunström. 1983. Surface plasmon resonance for gas detection and 
biosensing. Sensors and Actuators 4: 299–304. 
[37] Flanagan, M. and R. Pantell. 1984. Surface plasmon resonance and immunosensors. Electron Lett. 
20: 968–970. 
[38] Morton, T.a and D.G. Myszka. 1998. Kinetic analysis of macromolecular interactions using 
surface plasmon resonance biosensors. Methods Enzymol. 295: 268–94. 
[39] Luo, J., J. Zhou, W. Zou and P. Shen. 2001. Antibody—Antigen interactions measured by surface 
plasmon resonance: Global fitting of numerical integration algorithms. J. Biochem. 130: 553–559. 
[40] Gyurcsányi, R.E., Z. Vágföldi, K. Tóth and G. Nagy. 1999. Fast response potentiometric 
acetylcholine biosensor. Electroanalysis 11: 712–718. 
[41] Dobay, R., G. Harsanyi and C. Visy. 1999. Conducting polymer based electrochemical sensors on 
thick film substrate. Electroanalysis 11: 804–808. 
[42] Coche-Guérente, L., V. Desprez, J.-P. Diard and P. Labbé. 1999. Amplification of amperometric 
biosensor responses by electrochemical substrate recycling: Part I. Theoretical treatment of the 
catechol–polyphenol oxidase system. J. Electroanal. Chem. 470: 53–60. 
[43] Dall’Orto, V.C., C. Danilowicz, I. Rezzano et al. 1999. Comparison between three amperometric 
sensors for phenol determination in olive oil samples. Anal. Lett. 32: 1981–1990. 
[44] Karyakin, A.A., M. Vuki, L.V. Lukachova et al. 1999. Processible polyaniline as an advanced 
potentiometric pH transducer. Application to biosensors. Anal. Chem. 71: 2534–2540.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 201 
[45] Neethirajan, S., I. Kobayashi, M. Nakajima et al. 2011. Microfluidics for food, agriculture and 
biosystems industries. Lab Chip 11: 1574. 
[46] Andreou, V.G., D.P. Nikolelis and B. Tarus. 1997. Electrochemical investigation of transduction 
of interactions of aflatoxin M1 with bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs). Anal. Chim. Acta 
350(1-2): 121–127. 
[47] Andreou, V.G. and D.P. Nikolelis. 1998. Flow injection monitoring of aflatoxin M1 in milk and 
milk preparations using filter-supported bilayer lipid membranes. Anal. Chem. 70: 2366–2371. 
[48] Andreou, V.G. and D.P. Nikolelis. 1997. Electrochemical transduction of interactions of aflatoxin 
M1 with bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs) for the construction of one-shot sensors. Sensors and 
Actuators, B 41(1-3): 213–216. 
[49] Siontorou, C.G., D.P. Nikolelis, A. Miernik and U.J. Krull. 1998. Rapid methods for detection of 
Aflatoxin M1 based on electrochemical transduction by self-assembled metal-supported bilayer 
lipid membranes (s-BLMs) and on interferences with transduction of DNA hybridization. Electr. 
Acta 43(23): 3611–3617. 
[50] Siontorou, C.G., V.G. Andreou, D.P. Nikolelis and U.J. Krull. 2000. Flow injection monitoring 
of aflatoxin MI in cheese using filter-supported bilayer lipid membranes with incorporated DNA. 
Electroanalysis 12(10): 747–751. 
[51] Puu, G.
. 2001. An approach for analysis of protein toxins based on thin films of lipid mixtures in 
an optical biosensor. Anal. Chem. 73(1): 72–79. 
[52] Ding, J.L. and B. Ho. 2010. Endotoxin Detection—From Limulus Amebocyte Lysate to 
Recombinant Factor C. Volume 53 Springer; Berlin, Germany. 
[53] Thorne, P.S., S.S. Perry, R. Saito, P.T. O’Shaughnessy, J. Mehaffy, N. Metwali, T. Keefe, K.J. 
Donham and S.J. Reynolds. 2010. Evaluation of the limulus amebocyte lysate and recombinant 
factor c assays for assessment of airborne endotoxin. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76: 4988–4995. 
[54] Bang, F.B. and J.L. Frost. 1953. The toxic effect of a marine bacterium on limulus and the 
formation of blood clots. Mar. Biol. Lab. 105: 361–362. 
[55] Alhogail, S., G.A. Suaifan and M. Zourob. 2016. Rapid colorimetric sensing platform for the 
detection of listeria monocytogenes foodborne pathogen. Biosens. Bioelectron. 86: 1061–1066. 
[56] Kotanen, C.N., F.G. Moussy, S. Carrara and A. Guiseppi-Elie. 2012. Implantable enzyme 
amperometric biosensors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 35: 14–26. 
[57] Chemburu, S., E. Wilkins and I. Abdel-Hamid. 2005. Detection of pathogenic bacteria in food 
samples using highly-dispersed carbon particles. Biosens. Bioelectron. 21: 491–499. 
[58]	 Chen, L. and S. Neethirajan. 2015. A homogenous fluorescence quenching based assay for specific 
and sensitive detection of influenza virus A. Sensors (Basel) 15(4): 8852–8865. 
[59] Hung, H.C., C.L. Liu, J.T. Hsu, J.T. Horng, M.Y. Fang, S.Y. Wu, S.H. Ueng, M.Y. Wang, C.W. 
Yaw and M.H. Hou. 2012. Development of an anti-influenza drug screening assay targeting 
nucleoproteins with tryptophan fluorescence quenching. Anal. Chem. 7, 84(15): 6391–6399. 
[60] Jing, X., B. Bai, C. Zhang et al. 2015. Rapid and sensitive determination of clenbuterol in porcine 
muscle and swine urine using a fluorescent probe. Spectrochim. Acta—Part A Mol. Biomol. 
Spectrosc. 136: 714–718. 
[61] Zhang, W., X. He, P. Liu et al. 2016. Rapid Determination of ractopamine in porcine urine by a 
fluorescence immunochromatography assay. Anal. Lett. 49: 2165–2176. 
[62] Dovas, C.I., M. Papanastassopoulou, M.P. Georgiadis et al. 2010. Detection and quantification 
of infectious avian influenza a (H5N1) virus in environmental water by using real-time reverse 
transcription-PCR. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76: 2165–2174. 
[63] Zhao, H. and W. Su. 2010. Cooperative wireless multicast: Performance analysis and power/ 
location optimization. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 9: 2088–2100. 
[64]	 Velusamy, V., K. Arshak, O. Korostynska, K. Oliwa and C. Adley. 2010. An overview of foodborne 
pathogen detection: In the perspective of biosensors. Biotechnol. Adv. 28: 232–254. 
[65] Lazcka, O., F.J. Del Campo and F.X. Munoz. 2007. Pathogen detection: A perspective of traditional 
methods and biosensors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 22: 1205–1217. 
[66] Leonard, P., S. Hearty, J. Brennan, L. Dunne, J. Quinn, T. Chakraborty and R. O’Kennedy. 2003. 
Advances in biosensors for detection of pathogens in food and water. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 
32: 3–13.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202 Nanosensors 
[67] Lee, K.M., M. Runyon, T.J. Herrman et al. 2015. Review of Salmonella detection and identification 
methods: Aspects of rapid emergency response and food safety. Food Control 47: 264–276. 
[68] Leoni, E. and P.P. Legnani. 2001. Comparison of selective procedures for isolation and enumeration 
of Legionella species from hot water systems. J. Appl. Microbiol. 90: 27–33. 
[69] Ratnam, S., S.B. March, R. Ahmed et al. 1988. Characterization of Escherichia coli serotype 
O157:H7. J. Clin. Microbiol. 26: 2006–2012. 
[70] Fratamico, P.M. 2003. Comparison of culture, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), taqman 
salmonella, and transia card salmonella assays for detection of salmonella spp. in naturally￾contaminated ground chicken, ground turkey, and ground beef. Mol. Cell. Probes 17: 215–221. 
[71] Oh, S.J., B.H. Park, J.H. Jung, G. Choi, D.C. Lee and T.S. Seo. 2016. Centrifugal loop-mediated 
isothermal amplification microdevice for rapid, multiplex and colorimetric foodborne pathogen 
detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 75: 293–300. 
[72] Jensen, M.A., J.A. Webster and N. Straus. 1993. Rapid identification of bacteria on the basis 
of polymerase chain reaction-amplified ribosomal DNA spacer polymorphisms. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 59: 945–952. 
[73] Belgrader, P., W. Benett, D. Hadley, J. Richards, P. Stratton, R. Mariella and F. Milanovich. 1999. 
Infectious disease—PCR detection of bacteria in seven minutes. Science 284: 449–450. 
[74] Naravaneni, R. and K. Jamil. 2005. Rapid detection of food-borne pathogens by using molecular 
techniques. J. Med. Microbiol. 54: 51–54. 
[75] Russell, S., S. Frasca, I. Sunila and R.A. French. 2004. Application of a multiplex PCR for the 
detection of protozoan pathogens of the eastern oyster crassostrea virginica in field samples. Dis. 
Aquat. Org. 59: 85–91. 
[76] Lee, S.H., M. Joung, S. Yoon, K. Choi, W.Y. Park and J.R. Yu. 2010. Multiplex PCR detection 
of waterborne intestinal protozoa: Microsporidia, cyclospora, and cryptosporidium. Korean J. 
Parasitol. 48: 297–301. 
[77]	 Traore, O., C. Arnal, B. Mignotte, A. Maul, H. Laveran, S. Billaudel and L. Schwartzbrod. 
1998. Reverse transcriptase PCR detection of astrovirus, hepatitis a virus, and poliovirus in 
experimentally contaminated mussels: Comparison of several extraction and concentration 
methods. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64: 3118–3122. 
[78] Morales-Rayas, R., P.F.G. Wolffs and M.W. Griffiths. 2010. Simultaneous separation and detection 
of hepatitis a virus and norovirus in produce. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 139: 48–55. 
[79]	 Yaron, S. and K.R. Matthews. 2002. A reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay for 
detection of viable Escherichia coli O157: H7: Investigation of specific target genes. J. Appl. 
Microbiol. 92: 633–640. 
[80] Choi, S.H. and S.B. Lee. 2004. Development of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction of 
fima gene to detect viable salmonella in milk. J. Anim. Sci. Technol. 46: 841–848. 
[81] Mukhopadhyay, A.K. and U. Mukhopadhyay. 2006. Novel multiplex PCR approaches for 
the simultaneous detection of human pathogens: Escherichia coli 0157:H7 and Listeria 
monocytogenes. J. Microbiol. Methods. 68(1): 193–200. 
[82] Iqbal, S.S., M.W. Mayo, J.G. Bruno, B.V. Bronk, C.A. Batt and J.P. Chambers. 2000. A review of 
molecular recognition technologies for detection of biological threat agents. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
15: 549–578. 
[83] Gracias, K.S. and J.L. McKillip. 2004. A review of conventional detection and enumeration 
methods for pathogenic bacteria in food. Can. J. Microbiol. 50: 883–890. 
[84] Chen, C.-S. and R.A. Durst. 2006. Simultaneous detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7, 
Salmonella spp. and Listeria monocytogenes with an array-based immunosorbent assay using 
universal protein G-liposomal nanovesicles. Talanta 69: 232–238. 
[85] Magliulo, M., P. Simoni, M. Guardigli et al. 2007. A rapid multiplexed chemiluminescent 
immunoassay for the detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7, Yersinia enterocolitica, 
Salmonella typhimurium, and Listeria monocytogenes pathogen bacteria. J. Agric. Food Chem. 
55: 4933–4939. 
[86] Qadri, A., S. Ghosh, K. Prakash et al. 1990. Sandwich enzyme immunoassays for detection of 
Salmonella typhi. J. Immunoassay 11: 251–270.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications of Biosensors in Animal Biotechnology 203 
[87] Chapman, P.A., A.T. Cerdan Malo, C.A. Siddons and M. Harkin. 1997. Use of commercial enzyme 
immunoassays and immunomagnetic separation systems for detecting Escherichia coli O157 in 
bovine fecal samples. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63: 2549–2553. 
[88] Rozand, C. and P.C.H. Feng. 2009. Specificity analysis of a novel phage-derived ligand in an 
enzyme-linked fluorescent assay for the detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7. J. Food Prot. 
72: 1078–81. 
[89]		 Maria De Giusti, Daniela Tufl, Caterina Aurigemma, Angela Del Cimmuto, Federisa Trinti, Alice 
Mannocci et al. 2011. Italian of public detection of Escherichia coli O157 in raw and cooked 
meat: Comparison of conventional direct culture method and Enzyme Linked Fluorescent Assay 
(ELFA). Ital. J. Public Health 8: 28. 
[90] Vázquez, F., E.A. González, J.I. Garabal et al. 1996. Development and evaluation of an ELISA to 
detect Escherichia coli K88 (F4) fimbrial antibody levels. J. Med. Microbiol. 44: 453–463. 
[91] Song, C., C. Liu, S. Wu et al. 2016. Development of a lateral flow colloidal gold immunoassay 
strip for the simultaneous detection of Shigella boydii and Escherichia coli O157: H7 in bread, 
milk and jelly samples. Food Control. 59: 345–351. 
[92] Abdel-Hamid, I., D. Ivnitski, P. Atanasov and E. Wilkins. 1999. Highly sensitive flow-injection 
immunoassay system for rapid detection of bacteria. In: Anal. Chim. Acta 399: 99–108. 
[93]	 Valdivieso-Garcia, A., A. Desruisseau, E. Ricche et al. 2003. Evaluation of a 24-hour bioluminescent 
enzyme immunoassay for the rapid detection of Salmonella in chicken carcass rinses. J. Food Prot. 
66: 1996–2004. 
[94] Rasooly, A. and R.S. Rasooly. 1998. Detection and analysis of Staphylococcal enterotoxin A in 
food by Western immunoblotting. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 41: 205–212. 
[95] Meng, J.H. and M.P. Doyle. 2002. Introduction. Microbiological food safety. Microbes Infect. 
4: 395–397. 
[96]	 Veerapandian, M. and S. Neethirajan. 2015. Graphene oxide chemically decorated with Ag–Ru/ 
chitosan nanoparticles: Fabrication, electrode processing and immunosensing properties. RSC 
Adv. 5: 75015–75024. 
[97]	 Okafor, C., D. Grooms, E. Alocilja and S. Bolin. 2014. Comparison between a conductometric 
biosensor and ELISA in the evaluation of Johne???s disease. Sensors (Switzerland) 
14: 19128–19137. 
[98]	 Bandodkar, A.J. and J. Wang. 2014. Non-invasive wearable electrochemical sensors: A review. 
Trends Biotechnol. 32(7): 363–371. 
[99] Kim, J., S. Imani, W.R. de Araujo et al. 2015. Wearable salivary uric acid mouthguard biosensor 
with integrated wireless electronics. Biosens. Bioelectron. 74: 1061–1068. 
[100] Gao, W., S. Emaminejad, H.Y.Y. Nyein et al. 2016. Fully integrated wearable sensor arrays for 
multiplexed in situ perspiration analysis. Nature 529(7587): 509–514. 
[101]		 Sonner, Z., E. Wilder, J. Heikenfeld et al. 2015. The microfluidics of the eccrine sweat gland, 
including biomarker partitioning, transport, and biosensing implications. Biomicrofluidics 
9(3): 031301. 
[102] Kennedy, G.A. 2011. U. S. Patent, No. 7,964, 409, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Patent and Trademark 
Office. 
[103] Matzeu, G., L. Florea and D. Diamond. 2015. Advances in wearable chemical sensor design for 
monitoring biological fluids. Sensors Actuators, B Chem. 211: 403–418. 
[104] Modali, A., S.R.K. Vanjari and D. Dendukuri. 2016. Wearable woven electrochemical biosensor 
patch for non-invasive diagnostics. Electroanalysis 28(6): 1276–1282. 
[105]	 Bandodkar, A.J., W. Jia and J. Wang. 2015. Tattoo-based wearable electrochemical devices: 
Areview. Electroanalysis 27(3): 562–572. 
[106] Matzeu, G., C. O’Quigley, E. McNamara et al. 2016. An integrated sensing and wireless 
communications platform for sensing sodium in sweat. Anal. Methods 8(1): 64–71. 
[107] Gao, W., S. Emaminejad, H.Y.Y. Nyein et al. 2016. Fully integrated wearable sensor arrays for 
multiplexed in situ perspiration analysis. Nature 529(7587): 509–514. 
[108] Kim, J., W.R. De Araujo, I.A. Samek et al. 2015. Wearable temporary tattoo sensor for real-time 
trace metal monitoring in human sweat. Electrochem. Commun. 51: 41–45.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
204	 Nanosensors 
[109] Steeneveld, W., J.C.M. Vernooij and H. Hogeveen. 2015. Effect of sensor systems for 
cow management on milk production, somatic cell count, and reproduction. J. Dairy Sci. 
98(6): 3896–905. 
[110]	 Yunkwang, O.h., Youngmi Lee, J. Heath and Moonil Kim. 2015. Applications of animal biosensors: 
A review. IEEE Sens. J. 15: 637–645. 
[111] Staric, K.D., B. Cvetkovic, A.U. Levicnik and J. Staric. 2015. One health concept of measuring 
and monitoring wellbeing. ICT Innovations 2015 Web Proceedings, 303–312. 
[112] Johnen, D., W. Heuwieser and C. Fischer-Tenhagen. 2015. How to train a dog to detect cows in 
heat-Training and success. Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci. 171: 39–46. 
[113] Zia, A.I., A.R. Mohd Syaifudin, S.C. Mukhopadhyay et al. 2012. Sensor and instrumentation for 
progesterone detection. In: 2012 IEEE I2MTC—International Instrumentation and Measurement 
Technology Conference, Proceedings(I2MTC), 2012 IEEE International, IEEE (2012, May), 
pp. 1220–1225. 
[114] Nagl, L., R. Schmitz, S. Warren et al. 2003. Wearable sensor system for wireless state-of-health 
determination in cattle. In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
EMBS, Cancun, Mexico, Vol. 4(2003, September): 3012–3015. 
[115]	 Martínez-Avilés, M., E. Fernández-Carrión, J.M. López García-Baones and J.M. Sánchez￾Vizcaíno. 2015. Early detection of infection in pigs through an online monitoring system. 
Transbound Emerg. Dis. 10.1111/tbed. 1237. 
[116] Rutten, C.J., A.G.J. Velthuis, W. Steeneveld and H. Hogeveen. 2013. Invited review: Sensors to 
support health management on dairy farms. J. Dairy Sci. 96(4): 1928–1952. 
[117] Kashiha, M., A. Pluk, C. Bahr et al. 2013. Development of an early warning system for a broiler 
house using computer vision. Biosyst Eng. 116: 36–45. 
[118] Busse, M., W. Schwerdtner, R. Siebert et al. 2015. Analysis of animal monitoring technologies in 
Germany from an innovation system perspective. Agric. Syst. 138: 55–65. 
[119] Mikail, O.O., T.A. Folorunso, M.A. Akogbe and A. Adejumo. 2015. Design of a mobile 
poultry liquid, feed dispensing system using PID control technique. Conference: International 
Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary Conference on Science.  
 
10
 
Electrochemical 
Nano-aptamer-based Assays 
for the Detection of Mycotoxins
 
Sondes Ben Aissa,
1,2 Rupesh K. Mishra,
3,4
 
Noureddine Raouafi2
 and Jean Louis Marty1,*
 
1. Introduction 
The advent of nanoscience and recent strides in nanotechnology have enabled the 
extension of its application to biochemistry, aimed at developing powerful devices 
for environmental, industrial, and healthcare fields. Biosensors are an excellent 
example of such a combination that integrates a large part of fundamental and applied 
research. On the other hand, the mass industrial production of various eatables has 
rapidly become a part of everyday life. This was accompanied by various global 
health risks, including the increase of pollutants and toxins in the food industry. 
Consequently, food contamination has been getting more attention and, nowadays, it 
represents one of the most important worldwide issues. Food commodities are often 
exposed to a variety of mycotoxins which are generally produced in inconvenient 
storage conditions. Over 400 mycotoxins have been identified so far, displaying a 
wide range of toxic effects for animals as well as humans. According to the Global 
Health Program launched by non-governmental organizations (IARC, BMGF, 
1
 Laboratoire BAE-LBBM, Université de Perpignan Via Domitia, 52 Avenue Paul Alduy, CEDEX 9,66860 
Perpignan, France. 
2
 Sensors and Biosensors Group, Laboratoire de Chimie Analytique et Electrochimie (LR99ES15), Faculté 
des Sciences de Tunis, Université de Tunis El Manar, Tunis 2092, Tunisia. 
3
 Bindley Bio-Science Center, Lab 222, 1203 W. State St., Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, 
USA. 
4
 School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University, 701 West Stadium Avenue, West Lafayette, IN 
47907, USA. 
* Corresponding author: jlmarty@univ-perp.fr Fig. 1 Number of publications and citations quoting the terms ‘aptasensor’, ‘mycotoxin’,
‘nanomaterial’ or ‘aptamer’, per year, in Web of Science (Accessed in February 2020)
2
206 Nanosensors 
etc.), there is an urgent need to establish an effective translation of the vast body 
of science through to subsistence and smallholder farmers to tackle this neglected 
problem. Therefore, multidisciplinary scientists are pursuing research in this domain 
to push technological progress to develop innovative devices for the monitoring of 
mycotoxins in food. Biosensing tools are in the core of these scientific investigations, 
with the aim of detecting mycotoxins at trace levels that meet regulatory requirements, 
without the need for sophisticated instrumentation. Nonetheless, biosensors are not 
intended to replace conventional laboratory equipment like chromatographs or mass 
spectrometers, which are known for their higher sensitivity and accuracy for a broader 
list of food-borne analytes. The main merits of such tools rely on their compactness, 
amenability, rapid response, and easy transfer for on-site analysis. To some extent, 
the use of biosensors outside chemical laboratories favors the electrochemical 
instrumentation for an affordable and sensitive signal transduction. 
In the last few decades, the increased interest in electrochemical biosensors has 
been particularly assisted by both the invention of new bio-recognition molecules 
(antibodies, peptides, aptamers, etc.) as well as the recent boom in nanotechnology. 
The use of nanomaterials has made it possible to synthesize rather complex layered 
structures with an enhanced surface-to-volume ratio and sufficient permeability of 
low-molecular charge carriers required for biosensor operation. Additionally, the 
discovery of aptamers as biomimetic ligands has revolutionized the fabrication 
of biosensors, including those specific to mycotoxins. The significance of novel 
materials in the improvement of the state-of-the-art aptasensors for diverse range 
of applications, industrial or domestic, is well acknowledged by the field of sensing 
studies. 
Figure 1 shows a stark increase in the number of cited scientific research papers 
dealing with the design of electrochemical aptasensing assays specific to mycotoxins. 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5
 
0
 
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
 
800 
E-aptasensors for mycotoxins 
Nanomaterial-based E-aptasensors for mycotoxins 
600 
400 
200 
0 
Year 
Figure 1. Number of publications and citations quoting the terms ‘aptasensor’, ‘mycotoxin’, 
‘nanomaterial’ or ‘aptamer’, per year, in Web of Science (Accessed in February 2020). Number of citations Number of publications
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019  
 
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 207 
This research interest is supported by the recent boom in nanotechnology, which 
paved the way for countless nanomaterial/aptamer combinations aimed at enhancing 
the performance of the detection methods for mycotoxins. The reproducible and 
consistent sensing uniqueness are regulated by the sensing surface as well as the 
material. In this chapter, current trends, and figures of merit of electrochemical nano￾aptasensors, specific to the analysis of mycotoxins have been perused over. 
2. Mycotoxins 
Mycotoxins are a chemically diverse group of fungal metabolites that have a wide 
variety of toxic effects. This section provides an overview of food contamination 
with mycotoxins and the corresponding recent regulations for food safety control. 
A brief assessment of the most prominent mycotoxins studied to date, their harmful 
impacts and their conventional analysis methods have also been discussed alongside. 
This attempt is not at a complete review; however, at appropriate points, we refer to 
more extensive accounts. 
2.1 General description of mycotoxins 
The term mycotoxin originated from the Greek word mukos (meaning fungus), 
combined with the Latin word toxicum (referring to poison). It was coined for 
toxic secondary metabolites produced by certain fungi that can thrive on crops 
under favorable environmental conditions [1]. Contamination by mycotoxins has 
proven to be unavoidable and unpredictable. It depends mainly on a variety of 
weather factors (temperature, precipitation, humidity, and accompanying changes 
in insect damage and crop stress, etc.), either in the field over the harvesting period, 
or during shipping, due to mishandling and improper storage [2]. Occurrence of 
mycotoxins is widespread in agricultural products throughout the world, albeit 
with varying severity. Unfortunately, it is known that almost no treatment can be 
efficient to remove mycotoxins from food and feed once contaminated, since most 
mycotoxins are resistant to heat within the standard range of cooking temperatures 
[3]. The estimation usually given by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
is that at least one quarter of the world’s crops are contaminated to some extent with 
mycotoxins [4]. However, according to relevant data, Eskola et al. have recently 
criticized this widely cited 25% FAO estimate, showing that it underestimates the 
real occurrence of contamination of grains with mycotoxins [5]. 
Till date, over 300 mycotoxins have been identified and reported. However, 
only a few regularly contaminate food and animal feed [6]. These consist of 
aflatoxins, ochratoxins, fumonisins, patulin, zearalenone, and trichothecenes 
(including nivalenol, deoxynivalenol and T-2 toxin). According to the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), some mycotoxins have proved to be strong 
carcinogenic agents, such as aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), while others are suspected to have 
carcinogenic effects. For that purpose, IARC has adopted the following classification 
of mycotoxins, based on their effects on humans [7]: 
– Group 1: Carcinogenic to humans; 
– Group 2A: Probably carcinogenic to humans (sufficient evidence for animals);  
 
 
208 Nanosensors 
–	 Group 2B: Possibly carcinogenic to humans (insufficient evidence for animals); 
–	 Group 3: Not classifiable with respect to its carcinogenicity to humans; and 
–	 Group 4: Probably not carcinogenic to humans. 
Of the several hundred mycotoxins identified so far, about a dozen have gained 
the most attention due to their presence in food and their severe effects on human 
health. Many national and international public health and governmental authorities 
around the world, such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), World Health 
Organization (WHO), Food Agriculture Organization (FAO), the European Food 
Safety Authority (EFSA), and the Institute of Public Health in Japan (IANPHI), are 
paying serious attention to mycotoxin contamination in food and feed. Accordingly, 
they have established strict regulatory guidelines for safe doses of major mycotoxin 
classes in food and feed; there is still a need for worldwide harmonization of 
mycotoxin regulations [6]. 
The chemical structure of most widely occurring mycotoxins, along with their 
fungal origins, toxic effects and associated EU regulation(s) have been summarized 
in Table 1. The established maximum limits (MLs) differ depending on the mycotoxin 
and the targeted foodstuff. In particular, the strictest regulations have been set for 
aflatoxins and processed food products for infants. 
2.2 Risks associated with mycotoxin contamination 
Contamination by mycotoxins presents a serious challenge for food safety and poses 
an acute threat to human and animal health, while also contributing to huge economic 
losses to the agriculture industry and small-scale farmers. 
2.2.1 Health risks 
Ingestion of some feed and food-borne mycotoxins leads to a serious health threat 
called mycotoxicosis, which may eventually result in death. The adverse effects of 
mycotoxins on human health include acute poisoning, cancer, other chronic diseases, 
and biological effects, including growth impairment and immune deficiency 
[8]. Kuiper-Goodman [10], a leading figure in the risk assessment field, ranks 
mycotoxins as the most important chronic dietary risk factor, higher than even 
synthetic contaminants, plant toxins, food additives, or pesticide residues. However, 
except for aflatoxins, minimal evidence exists about the direct correlation between 
the widespread exposure to mycotoxins and their wide range of adverse effects on 
human health. Thus, more investigations into their entire range of impacts on human 
health remain to be conducted [8]. 
Regarding aflatoxicosis, advanced studies have linked the exposure to high 
dietary levels of aflatoxins to human liver cancer, with a particularly elevated risk 
in people chronically infected with hepatitis B virus [11]. Chronic consumption 
of aflatoxin-contaminated foods has been reported to cause immunosuppression 
in humans worldwide. Moreover, aflatoxins have been reported to be responsible 
for the malabsorption of various nutrients, thus leading to nutritional deficiencies, 
malnutrition, and stunted growth in children [12]. Nevertheless, more information 5
Table 1: An overview of major mycotoxins: properties, toxicity and EU limits on food and animal feed levels [1], [7]
–[9]
Mycotoxin Chemical Structurea Fungal Speciesb Toxicity Groupc Food Matrix Toxic Effects EU MLd (µg.kg-1)
Ochratoxins
OTAa, OTB, 
OTC
A. ochraceus
A. carbonarius
P. verrucosum
2B
Corn, barley, 
oats, rye, wheat, 
grapes, coffee
beans, wine, beer,
dried fruits
Nephrotoxic, teratogenic,
immunosuppressive, 
potent teratogen
0.5 
– 10.0
Aflatoxins
AFB1a, AFB2, 
AFG1, AFG2,
A. flavus
A. parasiticus 1
Nuts, cereals, 
maize, rice
oilseeds
Highly toxic,
carcinogenic, 
immunosuppressive,
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.1 
– 12.0
(AFB1)
4 
– 15 (Total 
sum)
Aflatoxin M
AFM1a, AFM2
Metabolites of
aflatoxin B 1 Milk and derivatives
Carcinogenic, stunting in 
children
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.025 
– 0.050
Fumonisins
FB1a, FB2, FB3
F. verticillioides
F. proliferatum 2B Soybeans, maize and sorghum
Hepatotoxic and 
carcinogenic, interferes 
with sphingolipid 
metabolism
200 - 4000
Patulin (PAT)
P. patulum
P. expansum
A. spp
3
Apple and 
derivatives, 
pears, cherries, 
and other
fruits
Genotoxic, immunotoxic,
neurotoxic, teratogenic 10 - 50
5
Table 1: An overview of major mycotoxins: properties, toxicity and EU limits on food and animal feed levels [1], [7]
–[9]
Mycotoxin Chemical Structurea Fungal Speciesb Toxicity Groupc Food Matrix Toxic Effects EU MLd (µg.kg-1)
Ochratoxins
OTAa, OTB, 
OTC
A. ochraceus
A. carbonarius
P. verrucosum
2B
Corn, barley, 
oats, rye, wheat, 
grapes, coffee
beans, wine, beer,
dried fruits
Nephrotoxic, teratogenic,
immunosuppressive, 
potent teratogen
0.5 
– 10.0
Aflatoxins
AFB1a, AFB2, 
AFG1, AFG2,
A. flavus
A. parasiticus 1
Nuts, cereals, 
maize, rice
oilseeds
Highly toxic,
carcinogenic, 
immunosuppressive,
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.1 
– 12.0
(AFB1)
4 – 15 (Total 
sum)
Aflatoxin M
AFM1a, AFM2
Metabolites of
aflatoxin B 1 Milk and derivatives
Carcinogenic, stunting in 
children
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.025 
– 0.050
Fumonisins
FB1a, FB2, FB3
F. verticillioides
F. proliferatum 2B Soybeans, maize and sorghum
Hepatotoxic and 
carcinogenic, interferes 
with sphingolipid 
metabolism
200 - 4000
Patulin (PAT)
P. patulum
P. expansum
A. spp
3
Apple and 
derivatives, 
pears, cherries, 
and other
fruits
Genotoxic, immunotoxic,
neurotoxic, teratogenic 10 - 50
5
Table 1: An overview of major mycotoxins: properties, toxicity and EU limits on food and animal feed levels [1], [7]–[9]
Mycotoxin Chemical Structurea Fungal Speciesb Toxicity Groupc Food Matrix Toxic Effects EU MLd (µg.kg-1)
Ochratoxins
OTAa, OTB, 
OTC
A. ochraceus
A. carbonarius
P. verrucosum
2B
Corn, barley, 
oats, rye, wheat, 
grapes, coffee
beans, wine, beer,
dried fruits
Nephrotoxic, teratogenic,
immunosuppressive, 
potent teratogen
0.5 – 10.0
Aflatoxins
AFB1a, AFB2, 
AFG1, AFG2,
A. flavus
A. parasiticus 1
Nuts, cereals, 
maize, rice
oilseeds
Highly toxic,
carcinogenic, 
immunosuppressive,
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.1 – 12.0
(AFB1)
4 – 15 (Total 
sum)
Aflatoxin M
AFM1a, AFM2
Metabolites of
aflatoxin B 1 Milk and derivatives
Carcinogenic, stunting in 
children
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.025 – 0.050
Fumonisins
FB1a, FB2, FB3
F. verticillioides
F. proliferatum 2B Soybeans, maize and sorghum
Hepatotoxic and 
carcinogenic, interferes 
with sphingolipid 
metabolism
200 - 4000
Patulin (PAT)
P. patulum
P. expansum
A. spp
3
Apple and 
derivatives, 
pears, cherries, 
and other
fruits
Genotoxic, immunotoxic,
neurotoxic, teratogenic 10 - 50
5
Table 1: An overview of major mycotoxins: properties, toxicity and EU limits on food and animal feed levels [1], [7]
–[9]
Mycotoxin Chemical Structurea Fungal Speciesb Toxicity Groupc Food Matrix Toxic Effects EU MLd (µg.kg-1)
Ochratoxins
OTAa, OTB, 
OTC
A. ochraceus
A. carbonarius
P. verrucosum
2B
Corn, barley, 
oats, rye, wheat, 
grapes, coffee
beans, wine, beer,
dried fruits
Nephrotoxic, teratogenic,
immunosuppressive, 
potent teratogen
0.5 
– 10.0
Aflatoxins
AFB1a, AFB2, 
AFG1, AFG2,
A. flavus
A. parasiticus 1
Nuts, cereals, 
maize, rice
oilseeds
Highly toxic,
carcinogenic, 
immunosuppressive,
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.1 
– 12.0
(AFB1)
4 
– 15 (Total 
sum)
Aflatoxin M
AFM1a, AFM2
Metabolites of
aflatoxin B 1 Milk and derivatives
Carcinogenic, stunting in 
children
mutagenic, genotoxic,
teratogenic
0.025 
– 0.05
0
Fumonisins
FB1a, FB2, FB3
F. verticillioides
F. proliferatum 2B Soybeans, maize and sorghum
Hepatotoxic and 
carcinogenic, interferes 
with sphingolipid 
metabolism
200 - 4000
Patulin (PAT)
P. patulum
P. expansum
A. spp
3
Apple and 
derivatives, 
pears, cherries, 
and other
fruits
Genotoxic, immunotoxic,
neurotoxic, teratogenic 10 - 50
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 209 
Table 1. An overview of major mycotoxins: properties, toxicity and EU limits on food and animal feed levels [1, 7–9]. 
Mycotoxin Chemical 
Structurea 
Fungal Speciesb Toxicity 
Groupc 
Food Matrix Toxic Effects EU MLd 
(µg.kg-1) 
Ochratoxins A. ochraceus 2B Corn, barley, oats, Nephrotoxic, teratogenic, 0.5–10.0 
OTAa, OTB, OTC A. carbonarius rye, wheat, grapes, immunosuppressive, potent 
P. verrucosum coffee beans, wine, teratogen 
beer, dried fruits 
Aflatoxins A. flavus 1 Nuts, cereals, maize, Highly toxic, carcinogenic, 0.1–12.0 
AFB1a, AFB2, A. parasiticus rice oilseeds immunosuppressive, (AFB1) 
AFG1, AFG2, mutagenic, genotoxic, 4–15 (Total 
teratogenic sum) 
Aflatoxin M Metabolites of 1 Milk and derivatives Carcinogenic, stunting 0.025–0.050 
AFM1a, AFM2 aflatoxin B in children mutagenic, 
genotoxic, teratogenic 
Fumonisins F. verticillioides 2B Soybeans, maize and Hepatotoxic and 200–4000 
FB1a, FB2, FB3 F. proliferatum sorghum carcinogenic, interferes 
with sphingolipid 
metabolism 
Patulin (PAT) P. patulum 3 Apple and derivatives, Genotoxic, immunotoxic, 10–50 
P. expansum pears, cherries, and neurotoxic, teratogenic 
A. spp other fruits 
Table 1 contd. ... 6
Zearalenone
(ZEA)
F. graminearum
F. culmorum 2A
Cereal crops such
as wheat, maize,
barley, and
sorghum
Estrogenic 20 - 350
Citrinin (CTN)
P. citrinum
P. camemberti
A. terreus
A. niveus
3 Wheat, oats, rye, corn, barley, rice Cytotoxic and nephrotoxic 2000 (Rice)
T-2 toxin (T-2)
F. 
sporotrichioides
F. poae
3 Wheat, barley, oats, maize
Cytotoxic, 
immunosuppressive, 
potent inhibitors of
eukaryotic protein 
synthesis
15 - 1000
Nivalenol F. graminearum F. culmorum 3
Oats, barley,
maize, wheat, 
bread, pasta,
cereals
Growth retardation,
Leukopenia,
Intrauterine growth delay
1.2
Deoxynivalenol F. graminearum F. culmorum 3
Grains such as 
wheat, barley,
oats, rye, maize,
rice, sorghum
Potent inhibitor of
eukaryotic protein 
synthesis
causes nausea, vomiting, 
and diarrhea
200 - 1750
a Only the main mycotoxin’s structure within the corresponding group has been presented. b A for Aspergillus, F for fusarium and P for Penicillium. c Last update [7].
d Maximum limits (MLs) vary according to the food matrix.
6
Zearalenone
(ZEA)
F. graminearum
F. culmorum 2A
Cereal crops such
as wheat, maize,
barley, and
sorghum
Estrogenic 20 - 350
Citrinin (CTN)
P. citrinum
P. camemberti
A. terreus
A. niveus
3 Wheat, oats, rye, corn, barley, rice Cytotoxic and nephrotoxic 2000 (Rice)
T-2 toxin (T-2)
F. 
sporotrichioides
F. poae
3 Wheat, barley, oats, maize
Cytotoxic, 
immunosuppressive, 
potent inhibitors of
eukaryotic protein 
synthesis
15 - 1000
Nivalenol F. graminearum F. culmorum 3
Oats, barley,
maize, wheat, 
bread, pasta,
cereals
Growth retardation,
Leukopenia,
Intrauterine growth delay
1.2
Deoxynivalenol F. graminearum F. culmorum 3
Grains such as 
wheat, barley,
oats, rye, maize,
rice, sorghum
Potent inhibitor of
eukaryotic protein 
synthesis
causes nausea, vomiting, 
and diarrhea
200 - 1750
a Only the main mycotoxin’s structure within the corresponding group has been presented. b A for Aspergillus, F for fusarium and P for Penicillium. c Last update [7].
d Maximum limits (MLs) vary according to the food matrix.
6
Zearalenone
(ZEA)
F. graminearum
F. culmorum 2A
Cereal crops such
as wheat, maize,
barley, and
sorghum
Estrogenic 20 - 350
Citrinin (CTN)
P. citrinum
P. camemberti
A. terreus
A. niveus
3 Wheat, oats, rye, corn, barley, rice Cytotoxic and nephrotoxic 2000 (Rice)
T-2 toxin (T-2)
F. 
sporotrichioides
F. poae
3 Wheat, barley, oats, maize
Cytotoxic, 
immunosuppressive, 
potent inhibitors of
eukaryotic protein 
synthesis
15 - 1000
Nivalenol F. graminearum F. culmorum 3
Oats, barley,
maize, wheat, 
bread, pasta,
cereals
Growth retardation,
Leukopenia,
Intrauterine growth delay
1.2
Deoxynivalenol F. graminearum F. culmorum 3
Grains such as 
wheat, barley,
oats, rye, maize,
rice, sorghum
Potent inhibitor of
eukaryotic protein 
synthesis
causes nausea, vomiting, 
and diarrhea
200 - 1750
a Only the main mycotoxin’s structure within the corresponding group has been presented. b A for Aspergillus, F for fusarium and P for Penicillium. c Last update [7].
d Maximum limits (MLs) vary according to the food matrix.
210 Nanosensors ...Table 1 contd. Mycotoxin Chemical Structurea Fungal Speciesb Toxicity Groupc Food Matrix Toxic Effects EU MLd (µg.kg-1) Zearalenone F. graminearum 2A Cereal crops such as Estrogenic 20–350 (ZEA) F. culmorum wheat, maize, barley, and sorghum 
Citrinin (CTN) P. citrinum 
P. camemberti 
A. terreus 
3 Wheat, oats, rye, 
corn, barley, rice 
Cytotoxic and nephrotoxic 2000 (Rice) 
A. niveus 
T-2 toxin (T-2) F. 
sporotrichioides 
F. poae 
3 Wheat, barley, oats, 
maize 
Cytotoxic, 
immunosuppressive, potent 
inhibitors of eukaryotic 
protein synthesis 
15–1000 
Nivalenol F. graminearum 3 Oats, barley, maize, Growth retardation, 1.2 
F. culmorum wheat, bread, pasta, Leukopenia, Intrauterine 
cereals growth delay 
Deoxynivalenol F. graminearum 
F. culmorum 
3 Grains such as wheat, 
barley, oats, rye, 
maize, rice, sorghum 
Potent inhibitor of 
eukaryotic protein synthesis 
causes nausea, vomiting, 
and diarrhea 
200–1750 
a Only the main mycotoxin’s structure within the corresponding group has been presented.
b A for Aspergillus, F for fusarium and P for Penicillium.
c Last update [7].
d Maximum limits (MLs) vary according to the food matrix.Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 211 
is required on the potential immune effects of aflatoxins, especially in vulnerable 
populations. 
For ochratoxins, IARC has concluded that there is sufficient evidence that OTA 
is carcinogenic in experimental animals, but there is inadequate evidence that OTA 
increases cancer risks in humans (Group 2B) [7]. OTA intake related to its residuals 
in food commodities causes nephrotoxicity and renal tumors in a variety of animal 
species. Although human health effects are less well-characterized, it is suspected to 
induce adverse effects on the fetus in the womb, given its ability to cross the placenta 
and cause central nervous system malformation and brain damage [13]. 
Studies on fumonisins indicate its possible role in esophagal cancer and neural 
tube defects, although no definitive conclusions can be drawn at present [8]. For 
deoxynivalenol and other trichothecenes, exposure has been linked to acute poisoning 
outbreaks in large numbers of subjects, where severe gastrointestinal toxicity is the 
primary symptom [8]. 
When it comes to zearalenone, its metabolites can bind to estrogen receptors, thus 
leading to infertility and abortion risks. This effect has been observed in lab animals, 
but not yet confirmed in humans; hence, ZEA is considered to be of relatively low 
acute toxicity for humans [14]. 
Overall, the limited tools available to accurately assess human exposure to 
mycotoxins and the relative paucity of epidemiological studies need to be addressed. 
These major limitations can be tackled through the development of validated 
biomarkers to assess exposure to mycotoxins. The availability of such biomarkers 
can greatly assist epidemiological studies on mycotoxins and allow a comprehensive 
evaluation of their effects on human health in order to take adequate public health 
measures [8]. 
2.2.2 Economic impacts 
Owing to the rejection of contaminated lots with high levels of mycotoxins, the 
economic impacts of mycotoxins are mostly related to the direct market costs 
associated with lost trade or reduced incomes. Various studies have attempted to 
quantify the potential market losses associated with mycotoxins in crops. For 
instance, in the USA, Vardon and coworkers estimated the total annual losses due 
to three mycotoxins – aflatoxin, fumonisin, and deoxynivalenol – to range from 
$0.5 million to over $1.5 billion [15]. Moreover, in the next decade, it is expected that 
the global climate change will deepen economic losses worldwide due to mycotoxin 
contamination induced by the warmer climate, particularly for aflatoxins [16]. 
On the other hand, it should be mentioned that the economic impacts of such 
wide-reaching contaminants also include the human health losses from adverse 
effects associated with the consumption of mycotoxins [8]. This includes the cost 
of the regulatory process designed to reduce risks to animal and human health, as 
well as enforced control of levels of mycotoxins. Consequently, losses related to 
health vary between developed and developing countries, where different standards 
for mycotoxins are set. 212 Nanosensors 
2.3 Conventional analytical methods 
In the past decades, various conventional analytical methods have been devised for 
the quantitative analysis of some mycotoxins in order to comply with regulations 
ensuring food safety. Chromatographic methods, including thin-layer chromatography 
(TLC), gas chromatography (GC) and high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC), coupled with diode array (DAD), mass spectrometry (MS) or fluorescence 
(FL) detectors, are the golden methods to strictly control the levels of mycotoxins 
in food samples. Therefore, these techniques are usually involved in accredited 
laboratories dedicated to the accurate analysis of mycotoxins. Particularly, the use 
of HPLC hyphenated to tandem MS (HPLC-MS/MS) has facilitated the multi￾analysis of structurally relevant mycotoxins [17]. Overall, typical detection limits of 
mycotoxins for the above-mentioned conventional methods are usually in the sub￾nanomolar concentration range. 
These sensitive methods inarguably offer reliable results; however, they involve 
tedious sample pre-treatment and highly skilled personnel. They generally consist 
of a lengthy multi-step process involving three basic stages: (a) sample preparation, 
(b) mycotoxin extraction from the matrix and extract clean-up (usually with mixtures 
of water and polar organic solvents), and (c) final detection and quantitative 
determination [18]. In addition to the above, expensive, and bulky instruments 
also restrict these chromatographic methods from use in in situ applications. As a 
consequence of their constraints, the development of more convenient novel methods 
is still highly desirable and sought after for rapid monitoring of major mycotoxins at 
trace concentrations in foodstuff. 
In this sense, tremendous progress has been made in the commercialization 
of various immunological assays, such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) and other rapid antibody-based strip test kits, as an alternative to the rapid 
screening of food contaminants. These tools are based on the specific interaction 
between antibodies and corresponding mycotoxins and are relatively fast and cost￾effective when compared to instrumental techniques, while also maintaining the 
required sensitivity and specificity [6]. Commonly, antibodies are labeled with 
enzymes to sensitively detect changes in optical properties or electrochemical 
reactions following the addition of special substrates. This “golden” concept enables 
the detection of ultra-low amounts of target analytes. However, ELISA is quite time￾consuming and needs multiple addition/washing steps. It also requires specialist 
plate readers, which renders it unsuitable for field testing [19]. 
Regarding the analysis of mycotoxins, immunoassaying is complicated by 
the small size of target analytes. Furthermore, the antibodies are produced by 
immunization of animals [20], which poses ethical problems and is fiercely advocated 
against by animal rights organizations [21]. Such small molecules in living cells, 
commonly known as haptens, cannot initiate immune response. Therefore, anti￾mycotoxin antibodies are necessarily obtained using conjugates with serum proteins 
[22]. Moreover, antibodies are costly because they are produced in living animals 
and involve optimum physiological conditions to avoid denaturation and to preserve 
their proper sensing ability. 3
Fig. 2 Schematic overview of the common SELEX procedure
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 213 
3. DNA aptamers as (bio)receptors for mycotoxin detection 
3.1 Generalities on aptamers 
Aptamers are artificial single-stranded oligonucleotides (DNA or RNA) selected in a 
specific way to recognize a target molecule – a small molecule, a protein, a virus, a 
bacterium or even a living cell. This recognition is established through the formation 
of stable sequence-dependent tertiary structures. They can be considered as artificial 
antibodies produced in non-living animals. The name aptamer is derived from the 
Latin word ‘aptus’ (meaning ‘to fit’) in combination with the Greek word ‘meros’ 
(meaning ‘part’) [23]. This type of affinity bioreceptors bind to the desired targets by 
a lock and key mechanism [24], with the advantage of being highly specific within 
a wide range of targets. 
Aptamer ligands usually containing up to 80 nucleotides are isolated from a 
large random library of synthetic nucleic acids (1014–1015 variants) by an iterative 
process of binding, separation, and amplification, commonly termed as Systematic 
Evolution of Ligands by EXponential enrichment (SELEX) as summarized in 
Figure 2. Through this iterative protocol (7 to 15 rounds), non-binding aptamers are 
discarded via elution, and aptamers binding to the proposed target are expanded and 
PCR amplified. Initial positive selection rounds are sometimes followed by negative 
selection. This improves the selectivity of the resulting aptamer candidates. Later, 
multiple rounds of SELEX are performed with increasing stringency to improve 
enrichment of the oligonucleotide pool. 
Figure 2. Schematic overview of the common SELEX procedure. 214 Nanosensors 
In the last 30 years, the protocol for SELEX has considerably evolved. SELEX 
takes weeks to months to obtain specific aptamer candidates, with generally low 
hit rates. Hence, obtaining high-quality aptamers against relevant targets remains a 
bottleneck for advancing research in this particular field [25]. To shorten the selection 
time and enhance yields, several customized in vitro selection methods derived 
from standard SELEX have been therefore set up; the relevant examples include 
Capture-SELEX, Capillary Electrophoresis-SELEX (CE-SELEX), and separation of 
free nucleotides from bound sequences based on their different affinities towards 
graphene oxide (GO-SELEX) [26]. 
Aptamers can be used in electrochemical, colorimetric, fluorometric and mass￾sensitive methods. These features make aptamers well suited to real-time screening 
and on-site analysis, as required for production management of industrial products, 
including food and beverages [27]. 
Over the last decade, aptamers, including those specific to mycotoxins, have 
shown great potential as alternative affinity receptors that can substitute antibodies 
in biosensors, thanks to their several attractive properties. Aptamers can provide high 
stability and affinity, along with simplicity, cost effectiveness and excellent batch-to￾batch reproducibility [9]. 
Compared to antibodies, aptamers are more stable towards hydrolysis, pH 
variations and high temperatures. These receptors meet the requirements of bioethics 
since their design and in vitro production do not require animal immunization. 
Moreover, once the sequence of aptamer is selected, it can be well reproduced by a 
routine synthesis method which is more cost-effective than isolation of antibodies. 
The use of aptamers as recognition elements can extend the storage period of 
appropriate stable biosensors, referred to as ‘aptasensors’ [23]. On the other hand, 
the interaction between a host aptamer and its guest molecule is reversible – it 
does not affect the chemical nature of the analyte. Therefore, these analytical tools 
can be regenerated by immersing them in chaotropic reagents (for example, high 
salt concentrations, urea, or glycine solution), through the disruption of the non￾covalent bonding network [28] and in organic solvents as well. This is impossible 
for antibodies as they lose their binding ability after such treatment, with glycine for 
example [29]. 
Furthermore, one of the major advantages of aptameric receptors is the ease 
of chemical functionalization. The modification of aptamers is mostly performed 
by terminal groups and is directed at introducing amino, thiol and carboxylic 
groups, or biotin residues. This enables their immobilization onto the transducing 
surface by one-point binding in order to achieve maximum steric accessibility of 
the immobilized receptor to the targeted analytes. As another option, aptamers can 
be functionalized by chemical groups to facilitate their covalent conjugation with 
dyes, redox probes, or nanomaterials as labels. For example, a thiol group can be 
linked to 3’ or 5’ aptamer’s end to prepare a gold nanoparticle-modified aptamer. 
In some cases, including electrochemical aptasensors, the aptamer molecule can 
contain a long linker consisting of a linear hydrocarbon chain (C12–C16) or a homo￾nucleic sequence (poly oligoT, for instance) with a terminal amino group. This 4
Fig. 3 Examples of possible aptamer shapes: (A) stem-loop/bulge, (B) hairpin, (C) pseudoknot, and (D) G-quartet
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 215 
length extension contributes towards minimizing the possible steric limitations of 
the recognition reaction with the target molecule, near the electrode surface [30]. 
3.2  Specific aptamers for mycotoxins
Various aptamers for the capture of mycotoxins have been designed since 2008. The 
first mycotoxin that was targeted by aptasensors was ochratoxin A (OTA) [31]—the 
most widespread mycotoxin in food. Since selection of aptamers for small molecules 
poses several challenges [9], the number of aptamers selected for mycotoxin analysis 
is rather limited, taking into account the variety of potential targets and their binding 
sites [19]. This is mostly due to the low molecular weight of such organic analytes, 
usually about few hundred Daltons, which makes the compilation of a primary 
library and the selection of specific aptamers more challenging than when targeting 
bigger analytes like proteins. Moreover, there are limited possibilities of interaction 
between nucleotides and small analytes due to the reduced number of functional 
groups available in small-sized molecules, especially after further blockage following 
their immobilization onto solid supports. 
Sequence alignments, secondary structure analysis and binding studies are 
required to identify the final sequence and the characteristics of the selected aptamer 
after performing SELEX[32]. The dissociation constant, KD, presents an important 
affinity metric of aptamers. It can be evaluated by various binding assays. Obviously, 
the lower the value of KD, the more stable is the aptamer-target complex formed [29]. 
Once the sequence affinity is validated, the use of aptamers as bioreceptors proves to 
be advantageous for the detection of mycotoxins as food contaminants. 
Aptamers can be folded into different well-defined 3D structures as shown in 
Figure 3. Single-stranded sequences can contain self-complementary fragments to 
form one or few loops that are unfolded – the so-called pinhole aptamers. Binding 
to their ligands is then achieved by complementary shape interactions; they can 
incorporate small molecules into their nucleic acid structure or integrate themselves 
into the structure of larger molecules [33]. Aptamers can assume a variety of shapes 
like stems, loops or helices, thanks to their nucleic acid backbone. This explains the 
versatility of aptamers to bind to very diverse targets. In particular, guanine(G)-rich 
nucleic acids are able to self-assemble into G-quadruplex four-stranded secondary 
structures due to the presence of long and contiguous G regions. Electrochemical 
methods have been successfully used for the rapid detection of the conformational 
Figure 3. Examples of possible aptamer shapes: (A) stem-loop/bulge, (B) hairpin, (C) pseudoknot, and 
(D) G-quartet. 216 Nanosensors 
changes from single-stranded DNA to G-quadruplex due to their outstanding 
stiffness [24]. 
Till date, aptamers directed against ochratoxin A (OTA), aflatoxin B1 
(AFB1), versicolorin (a precursor of AFB1), aflatoxin B2 (AFB2), aflatoxin M1 
(AFM1), patulin (PAT), fumonisin B1 (FB1), fumonisin B2 (FB2), citrinin (CTN), 
deoxynivalenol (DON), zearalenone (ZEN) and T-2 toxin have been described and 
characterized mostly using fluorescence spectroscopy and surface plasmon resonance 
(SPR) [9]. Aptamers so far synthetized for the capture of mycotoxins are exclusively 
based on ssDNA sequences, since DNA aptamers are more stable towards nuclease 
digestion, compared to their RNA analogs. Furthermore, the former shows excellent 
reproducibility with low-cost mass production. A non-exhaustive list of available 
aptamers as reported in literature is summarized in Table 2. 
More interestingly, the reported dissociation constants corresponding to 
aptamers of mycotoxins are in the nanomolar range, revealing their high specificity 
towards such small targets. The numerous advantages of aptamer-based assays open 
the avenues for the selection of new aptamers and detection kits for other mycotoxins 
threatening animal and human health [13]. 
Upon mycotoxin recognition, target binding involves a three-dimensional 
change of the aptamer structure. This conformational ordering is due to the formation 
of an analyte-ssDNA complex, resulting from shape-dependent interactions as well 
as hydrophobic interactions, base-stacking, and intercalations. Such molecular 
switches, often defined as aptamer folding, alter the steric and electronic density 
within the surface layer in the case of electrochemical aptasensors. It is thus exploited 
for the detection of the target. It would be rather interesting to investigate the exact 
binding site for respective analytes. Unfortunately, in the case of mycotoxin-binding 
aptamers, the recognizing sites and their detailed interactions are not yet well￾known [29]. This needs substantial efforts for structural characterization by Nuclear 
Magnetic Resonance (NMR), with the support of computational molecular modeling 
using bioinformatic tools [52]. 
3.3 Immobilization approaches 
The performance of a given biosensor is critically dependent on the functionalization 
step of the sensor platform. Accordingly, the immobilization protocol of aptamers 
on the transducer surface plays a pivotal role in the detection. The immobilization 
strategy should enable the maximum coverage of (bio)receptors without affecting 
their folding ability or the potential binding sites. For that purpose, various 
approaches have been explored to maintain both reactivity and stability of the 
aptameric layer. This includes modification of solid substrates as electrodes in the 
case of electrochemical aptasensors. The chemical modification of aptamers by thiol 
groups, biotin, azide or amino groups commonly allows their immobilization on 
various surfaces. Many research groups have made use of the strong affinity between 
biotinylated aptamers and streptavidin-, neutravidin- or avidin-modified transducers. 
Furthermore, physical adsorption methods by means of electrostatic forces offer 
simple strategies for designing E-aptasensors. However, covalent attachment via 
covalent linkage has been particularly preferred over physisorption and cross-linking.  
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 217 
Table 2. Updated list of aptamers for mycotoxins, their lengths and dissociation constants (the list 
summarizes data till 2019). 
Mycotoxin ssDNA aptamer (5’ to 3’) Length (mer) KD (nM) Reference 
OTA 
GAT CGG GTG TGG GTG GCG TAA 
AGG GAG CAT CGG ACA 36 200 [31] 
GGG AGG ACG AAG CGG AAC CGG 
GTG TGG GTG CCT TGA TCC AGG 
GAG TCT CAG AAG ACA CGC CCG 
ACA 
66 96 [34] 
AGC CTC GTC TGT TCT CCC GGC 
GCA TGA TCA TTC GGT GGG TAA 
GGT GGT GGT AAC GTT GGG GAA 
GAC AAG CAG ACG T 
76 110 ± 50 [35] 
AFB1 
TGG GGT TTT GGT GGC GGG TGG 
TGT ACG GGC GAG GG 35 NR1 [36] 
CTC GTC TCG TTC TGT CAG TGT 
TCT TCT GGC TTG GTG GTT GGT 
GTG GTG GCT TGA TTT GGT AGA 
CAC GAA GAA GAA GGA AGG A 
80 50.4 ± 11.06 [37] 
GTT GGG CAC GTG TTG TCT CTC 
TGT GTC TCG TGC CCT TCG CTA 
GGC CCA CA 
50 32 [38] 
AFB2 
AGC AGC ACA GAG GTC AGA TGC 
TGA CAC CCT GGA CCT TGG GAT 
TCC GGA AGT TTT CCG GTA CCT 
ATG CGT GCT ACC GTG AA 
80 9.83 ± 0.99 [39] 
AFM1 
ACT GCT AGA GAT TTT CCA CAT 21 0.02 [40] 
GTT GGG CAC GTG TTG TCT CTC 
TGT GTC TCG TGC CCT TCG CTA 
GGC CCA CA 
50 10 [41] 
ATC CGT CAC ACC TGC TCT GAC 
GCT GGG GTC GAC CCG GAG AAA 
TGC ATT CCC CTG TGG TGT TGG 
CTC CCG TAT 
72 35.6 [42] 
PAT GGC CCG CCA ACC CGC ATC ATC 
TAC ACT GAT ATT TTA CCT T 40 21.83 ± 5.02 [43] 
FB1 
AAT CGC ATT ACC TTA TAC CAG 
CTT ATT CAA TTA CGT CTG CAC ATA 
CCA GCT TAT TCA ATT 
60 100 ± 30 [44] 
CGA TCT GGA TAT TAT TTT TGA TAC 
CCC TTT GGG GAG ACA T 40 62 ± 5 [45] 
FB2 
GCA TCA CTA CAG TCA TTA CGC 
ATC GTG ACG AGG GTG ACT ATG 
GCG GTG GCG TCT GTG AGC ATC 
GTG TGA AGT GCT GTC CC 
80 NR1 [46] 
Table 2 contd. ...  
 
 
218 Nanosensors 
...Table 2 contd. 
Mycotoxin ssDNA aptamer (5’ to 3’) Length (mer) KD (nM) Reference 
CTN 
GGC CAG GCG GGG CCT GTT CGC 
TGG GGC CGT GTC TTC GGC TCG 
CTC GGT GTT GTT TGG CG 
59 60 [47] 
DON 
GCA TCA CTA CAG TCA TTA CGC 
ATC GTA GGG GGG ATC GTT AAG 
GAA GTG CCC GGA GGG GTA TCG 
TGT GAA GTG CTG TCC 
78 NR1 [48] 
ZEN 
AGC AGC ACA GAG GTC AGA TGT 
CAT CTA TCT ATG GTA CAT TAC TAT 
CTG TAA TGT GAT ATG CCT ATG 
CGT GCT ACC GTG AA 
80 41 ± 5 [49] 
CTT ATT CAA TTA TAC CAG CTT ATT 
CAA TTA TAC CAG CAC AAT CGT 
AAT CAG TTA G 
55 15.2 ± 3.4 [50] 
T-2 
CAG CTC AGA AGC TTG ATC CTG 
TAT ATC AAG CAT CGC GTG TTT 
ACA CAT GCG AGA GGT GAA GAC 
TCG AAG TCG TGC ATC TG 
80 20.8 ± 3.1 [51] 
1
NR: not reported. 
Despite their simplicity and time-saving attributes, the latter methods show lower 
reproducibility and sensitivity due to the elution of adsorbed species during washing 
steps, in addition to the non-specific adsorption of small molecules. Hence, covalent 
immobilization is frequently used to minimize these hurdles, taking advantage of the 
ease of chemical modification of aptamer sequences, via 3’ or 5’ tails. Generally, the 
3’ end is more suitable for immobilization as it simultaneously confers resistance to 
nuclease after its binding to the electrode surface [53]. For instance, some commonly 
used immobilization approaches are: covalent attachment of thiolated aptamer 
on gold substrates or gold-modified surface, immobilization of amine-terminated 
aptamer on carboxylic acid group functionalized surface (and vice versa) via amide 
coupling using carbodiimides chemistry, immobilization of azide-ended aptamer 
on alkyne-functionalized surface via click chemistry, and amine-amine coupling 
through glutaraldehyde. In some cases, molecular spacers are also used as scaffolds 
to provide sufficient conformational flexibility and freedom to the aptamer. To 
avoid non-specific adsorption, free sites of the golden or carbonaceous interface are 
blocked respectively with hydrophobic mercaptans (w-mercaptohexanol) or some 
proteins (bovine serum albumin). Surfactants and thin polymeric films can be also 
used for the same purpose [29]. 
In another approach, the immobilization of aptamers can be performed by 
hybridization with partially complementary oligonucleotide immobilized onto 
the transducer surface beforehand. However, the length of the hybridized portion 
should be carefully chosen to allow aptamer displacement by small targets such as 
mycotoxins [54]. 
Regarding the electrochemical detection formats, most development approaches 
of aptasensing rely on either redox labels or label-free schemes. In both the Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 219 
formats, the electrochemical signal should be recordable by employing one of the 
conventional electrochemical techniques. The following section therefore provides a 
brief overview of the prevailing electrochemical detection methods. 
4. Electrochemical detection: An overview 
Electrochemical biosensors have been considered as one of the most promising 
analytical tools for rapid detection of various biochemical species. Electrochemical 
transduction presents several advantages over optical, piezoelectric or thermal 
detection, given its high signal-to-noise ratio, relative simplicity, well-developed 
theory, ease of use, cost-effectiveness and fast response. In addition to these, 
miniaturization opportunities make it possible to deploy such biosensors in portable 
devices for on-site analysis. For instance, screen-printed electrodes (SPEs) that use 
mini-electrode systems with working, reference and auxiliary electrodes have gained 
popularity in electrochemical aptasensing due to their low cost and speed of mass 
production using thin film technology [55]. Electrochemical detection is essentially 
based on changes in the distribution of charged species (electrons or ions) within the 
working solution, and thus on the alteration of its electrical properties upon interaction 
between the recognition elements and specific targets [56]. It typically monitors redox 
reactions that generate a measurable current at a given applied voltage (amperometry), 
or produce a measurable charge accumulation or potential (potentiometry) or change 
the electrode’s capabilities to transport electrons (conductometry), or modify the 
electronic resistance and capacitance of the bio-functionalized surface (impedance) 
[55, 57]. In particular, electrochemical aptasensors (E-aptasensors) represent most of 
the sensitive techniques used for measuring target concentrations based on aptamer 
recognition [22]. Therefore, they cover over 60% of all the scientific research papers 
specifically devoted to the aptasensing of mycotoxins [29]. E-aptasensors track the 
electrochemical changes that occur when the aptamer captures the analyte of interest 
via 3D folding. The recorded signal is thereby generated by specific redox reactions 
that involve either electroactive labels or aptamer supports. 
Herein, we describe the principles of three main categories of electrochemical 
transduction techniques commonly used for the detection of food-borne toxins, using 
aptamers. 
4.1 Voltammetric/Amperometric detection 
Voltammetry and amperometry are characterized by applying a potential to a 
working electrode versus a reference electrode and measuring the current generated 
by the electrochemical oxidation or reduction of given species generated during 
the process or intentionally added to the electrolyte. It is the absence of a scanning 
potential that distinguishes amperometry from voltammetry. Basically, the term 
voltammetry is used for those techniques in which the potential is scanned over a set 
potential range. The current response is usually a faradaic peak that is proportional 
to the concentration of the analyte. However, in amperometry, changes in current 
are monitored directly with time, while a constant potential is maintained at the 
working electrode with respect to the reference electrode. Generally, amperometric 220 Nanosensors 
biosensors have additional selectivity in that the oxidation or reduction potential 
used for detection is a characteristic of the analyte species in the sample [55]. 
Different current readout methods have been used in mycotoxin aptasensing; 
relevant examples include chronoamperometry, cyclic voltammetry, linear sweep 
voltammetry, differential pulse voltammetry and square wave voltammetry. The 
latter two tend to be the most used techniques since they are sensitive only to the 
Faradaic processes of interest. 
Abundant literature covering the determination of small mycotoxins by these 
electrochemical processes is available [58–60]. Interestingly, the introduction of 
nanomaterials was a key turning point in this field. For instance, Abnous et al. [61] 
developed a voltammetric (DPV) aptasensor using anti-OTA aptamer assisted by two 
complementary oligo-strands onto a screen-printed gold electrode (Figure 4). In this 
study, the second DNA strands were conjugated to single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNTs) as electrochemical signal amplifiers. Based on methylene blue (MB) 
as the redox indicator, the described cage-shaped structure of the aptamer allowed 
the ON/OFF detection of OTA in grape juice and serum samples with LODs of 
58 and 134 pM respectively. Despite its good sensitivity, this assembly strategy 
seems pretty complicated. 
Another work reported by Tang et al. [62] suggested the detection of the same 
mycotoxin (OTA) using chronoamperometry (CA) as shown in Figure 5. This 
aptasensing strategy is based on the interesting properties of two-dimensional (2D) 
MoS2 nanosheets as an emerging nanomaterial. 2D MoS2 possesses a considerably 
larger affinity for ssDNA than for dsDNA. Also, it intrinsically exhibits a peroxidase￾like activity to catalyze the hydroquinone/benzoquinone redox reaction. Firstly, the 
platform design involves a self-assembly of a dsDNA probe (consisting of OTA￾aptamer/auxiliary DNA hybrid) on a gold electrode. Then, the introduction of the 
target OTA unwinds the dsDNA probe through aptamer release, leaving the single￾stranded auxiliary DNA on the electrode. Hence, MoS2 performs like a nano-binder 
to the electrode interface that amplifies efficiently the subsequent electrochemical 
signal obtained by the catalysis of hydroquinone. This amperometric nano-aptasensor 
Figure 4. Amperometric aptasensor for ochratoxin A, based on the use of a gold electrode modified with 
aptamer, complementary DNA and SWCNTs, with Methylene Blue as the redox marker [61]. Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 221 
Figure 5. Aptamer-based amperometric detection of Ochratoxin A, using 2D MoS2 as a nano-binder 
to catalyze the amplification of the electrochemical signal from the hydroquinone/benzoquinone system 
[62]. 
achieved an LOD of 0.57 pM and was used to analyze OTA in spiked red wine 
samples. 
4.2 Potentiometric detection 
Potentiometric sensors are based on measuring the potential of an electrochemical 
cell while drawing negligible current. Practically, potentiometric biosensors measure 
the changes in the voltage between the working electrode and the reference electrode 
due to the establishment of an electrostatic interaction. However, their use for the 
detection of small targets with high sensitivity and good selectivity is still elusive. In 
2017, Lv et al. [63] developed a potentiometric aptasensor for small molecules based 
on the changing of surface charge. As a proof-of-concept, this platform was useful 
to detect bisphenol A using aptamer-functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Meanwhile, not much work has been done on aptasensors based on potentiometric 
detection for the analysis of mycotoxins [64]. 
4.3 Impedimetric detection 
E-transduction using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has gained 
popularity among the biosensor community, thanks to their unique features over the 
widely used amperometric detection. At a given applied voltage, they are capable of 222 Nanosensors 
sampling electron transfer at a high frequency and mass transfer at a low frequency. 
Consequently, EIS has proved to be an excellent analytical technique to monitor 
both bulk and interfacial electrical properties of an electrochemical system. The 
impedance measurements can be observed irrespective of the presence or absence 
of a redox probe; these are known as faradaic and non-faradaic impedimetric 
measurements respectively. In mycotoxin aptasensing, faradaic EIS relying on 
ferrocyanide/ferricyanide [Fe(CN)6]3–/4– free redox probe is the most commonly used 
strategy. It requires theoretical assumptions that assign an equivalent circuit to the 
electrochemical cell [65]. In general, Randles circuit is the most widely used for 
aptasensor modeling. 
Contrary to antigen–antibody interactions with domination of steric factors in 
immunoassays, electrostatic interactions play a significant role in the case of aptamer– 
mycotoxin binding [29]. In such systems, the negative charge of the ferricyanide ions 
is sensitive to the negatively charged phosphate groups in the aptamer backbone. The 
aptamer-ligand complexation upon mycotoxin recognition induces changes in the 
electronic density within the surface layer. This restricts the transfer of ferricyanide 
ions to the electrode surface, hence increasing the resistance to charge transfer that 
can be monitored with EIS. Several works of research have been focused on the 
detection of ochratoxin A (OTA) using iridium oxide nanoparticles with a very low 
limit of detection (14 pM) [66]. In one study, the researchers used SPCE modified 
with polythionine and iridium oxide nanoparticles (IrO2 NPs) to detect OTA. The 
aminated anti-OTA aptamer was exchanged with the citrate ions surrounding IrO2 
NPs via electrostatic interactions with the same surface. 
However, affinity biosensors using impedance detection have to be carefully 
designed to avoid non-specific binding of the analyte. To minimize interferences, it 
is mandatory to block non-reactive surface areas with inert blockers. For instance, 
protein blockers such as BSA, casein, nonionic surfactant (Tween 20) and many 
proprietary blended commercial products have been successfully used to prevent 
non-specific binding [55]. Furthermore, the use of self-assembled monolayers for 
aptamer immobilization simultaneously enables the suppression of the non-specific 
binding phenomenon for more selective assays. 
It is worth mentioning that dual E-transduction systems, such as the investigation 
of voltammetric along with impedance response, are also feasible. On these lines, 
Castillo et al. [67] suggested an AFB1 aptasensor by immobilizing poly (amidoamine) 
dendrimers of fourth generation (PAMAM G4) on a gold electrode covered with 
cysteamine (Figure 6). This sensor was assembled in a multi-layer framework that 
used cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) 
for acquiring the signal response by means of [Fe(CN)6]−3/−4 as redox indicators. The 
response obtained was in the AFB1 concentration range of 0.1–10 nM, with an LOD 
of 0.04 nM. This aptasensor has made it possible to analyze AFB1 in certified peanut 
samples, without any interference from OTA and AFB2. 
On the other hand, the bio-recognition event at a modified surface causes 
variations in not only the resistive properties, but also the capacitive properties of the 
impedimetric transducer. 8
Fig. 7 Process of fabrication (schematic) of an AFM1 aptasensor for redox capacitance detection [73]
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 223 
Figure 6. Process of fabrication (schematic) of an aptamer-based biosensor for the detection of AFB1, 
using PAMAM G4 dendrimers as the linking nanomaterial [67]. 
In this context, electrochemical capacitance spectroscopy (ECS) is an emerging 
transduction approach, mainly based on EIS measurements in the non-faradaic regime 
[68]. Meanwhile, it is solely applicable when the redox probe is confined to the 
electrode surface, in the close vicinity of bio-receptors. This nano-scale engineering 
allows us to observe a new pseudo-capacitance called ‘redox capacitance (Cr)’, which 
depends on the density-of-states of the confined redox reporter. Overall, the alteration 
of electronic density through analyte recognition affects the redox fingerprint of 
the entire bio-film. The experimental data collected from conventional impedance 
Nyquist spectra can be mathematically converted into Nyquist capacitive spectra 
[69]. Hence, the treated capacitive signal enables one to derive the redox capacitance 
value ‘Cr’ (in µF), which varies in good agreement with target concentration, without 
the need of any theoretical modeling or equivalent circuit. 
Following the ECS approach, Ben Aissa et al. [70] recently designed an aptasensor 
for the quantification of aflatoxin M1 in milk (Figure 7). Their work consisted of 
the immobilization of ferrocene moieties as a redox probe, confined to the aptamer 
layer. Working in a buffer solution, the control of redox capacitance contribution by 
ferrocene charge/discharge at a fixed potential was found to be highly sensitive for 
the detection of AFM1. With the use of silicon nanoparticles as capacitive signal 
Figure 7. Process of fabrication (schematic) of an AFM1 aptasensor for redox capacitance detection [70]. 9
Fig. 8 Key roles of nanomaterials in the design of electrochemical aptasensors
224 Nanosensors 
amplifiers, detection was achieved in the femtomolar range (10–500 fM), with a very 
low LOD of 4.53 fM. 
In the succeeding sections, the application of aptamers in the development of 
electrochemical assays for mycotoxin detection, reported in the period of 2010–2019, 
has been reviewed, with special attention to recent nanomaterial-based platforms. 
5. Roles of nanomaterials in E-aptasensing 
Many types of nanostructures have attracted the interest of researchers for the 
design of electrochemical aptasensing platforms, including aptasensors dedicated 
to mycotoxin analysis. Their nanometric size (less than 100 nm) and unique 
physicochemical properties (in particular, their chemical and electronic peculiarities 
that differ from the corresponding bulk materials) have promoted their extensive 
use in the building of aptasensors. Accordingly, scientists handle each nanomaterial 
differently in order to adapt it for the desired function in a biosensor. For instance, 
five main roles are depicted in E-aptasensing as summarized in Figure 8. Firstly, 
nanomaterials such as nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes or nanosheets can be used as 
immobilization supports to extend the surface area and, consequently, for increasing 
the biomolecule loading. Also, it has been widely proven that nanostructured 
platforms allow the amplification of the electrochemical response through electron 
transfer enhancement, making the assay faster and more sensitive. Moreover, some 
electroactive nanoparticles can act as redox mediators for label-free analysis or 
even as electrochemical signal generators [71]. Finally, labelling aptamers with 
nanoparticles has also been successfully investigated to mimic the catalytic activities 
of enzymes. 
In this section, we explain the possible functions that can be achieved with the 
integration of nanomaterials in aptameric biosensors. It should be mentioned that 
Figure 8. Key roles of nanomaterials in the design of electrochemical aptasensors. Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 225 
more than one type of nanomaterials can be used in an aptasensor’s construction, 
based on the desired function of the platform. For instance, in 2015, Bulbul et al. 
[72] used redox active nanoceria particles as both the catalytic label and the redox 
mediator, and reduced graphene oxide as the immobilization platform in the same 
assay for sensitive and selective detection of Ochratoxin A. However, since some 
nano-sized materials can have overlapping intrinsic properties, it can yield certain 
problems in their particular applications. The reactive nature of nanomaterials 
(NMs) can be advantageous in one way, but, on the other hand, it may limit other 
applications of nanomaterials (as immobilization supports, for instance). Therefore, 
it is crucial to perform control experiments with these NMs and study their reactivity 
carefully before using them in aptasensors. 
5.1 Immobilization supports for aptamers 
In the last few years, several attempts at developing aptasensing assays using 
nanostructured surfaces have been reported. The premise of the use of nanomaterials 
for immobilization on a transducer surface is to reduce diffusion limits and enhance 
the surface-to-volume ratio to increase the loading of biomolecules. For instance, 
AuNPs have been widely used as a substrate in electrochemical sensors [73]. Also, 
scaffolding aptamers for the detection of mycotoxins is the most extensively reported 
role of NMs in electrochemical aptasensing designs [74, 75]. This function presents 
an appealing alternative to conventional polymeric supports such as polysaccharides 
and hydrophobic materials such as polyvinylchloride. 
The introduction of nanomaterials into the design of the transducing platform 
is generally achieved by their integration within conventional working electrodes in 
various forms. Contrary to bulk materials, nanomaterials have a strong tendency to 
uniformly adsorb biomolecules without the risk of bioactivity loss and thereby aid 
in the immobilization of biomolecules. Since DNA aptamers are negatively charged, 
the integration of oppositely charged nanomaterials in layer-by-layer biosensor 
construction facilitates the electrostatic adsorption of such biomolecules and increases 
the platform physiological stability. More robust immobilization approaches can 
also be envisaged; for example, covalent attachment using functionalization of both 
nanostructures’ and aptamers’ tails, or even by means of affinity-based reactions 
such as with (strept-, neutr-) avidin-biotin complexes. 
5.2 Electrochemical signal generating probes 
Various approaches have been explored to obtain the desired (enhanced) 
electrochemical output signal, in the construction of affinity biosensors. Among 
these, the use of nano-labels offers great opportunities to generate an amplified 
electrochemical response. Two main detection schemes can be considered using 
nanoparticles as labels for aptamers: (i) direct signal generation by the intrinsic 
electroactivity of nanotags [76], or (ii) indirect signal measurement via the electrolysis 
of redox substrates [77]. The latter approach refers to enzyme mimicking and has 
been detailed in Section 5.5. Still, biomolecules labeled with nanomaterials should 
retain their bioactivity to recognize their counterparts. 226 Nanosensors 
Among the many kinds of nanomaterials, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are the 
most frequently used labels in electrochemical aptasensors [78]. Since AuNPs are 
highly conductive nano-markers, they contribute towards enhancing the loading of 
electroactive species, resulting in higher signals than conventional redox labels [79]. 
Thousands of atoms can be released from one nanoparticle, pushing detection limits 
down to a few thousands of biomolecules. 
Quantum dots and semiconductor nanomaterials, such as ZnS, CdS, PbS and 
CdTe nanoparticles, are also available. In an inspiring piece of work, Wang et al. 
[80] designed a magneto-controlled aptasensor for the simultaneous electrochemical 
detection of dual mycotoxins in maize (OTA and FB1), using metal sulfide 
quantum-dots-coated silica as labels (Figure 9). Herein, CdTe or PbS QDs were 
partially released from specific aptamers under the action of target recognition, and 
subsequently from magnetic beads. After magnetic separation, the SWV signals of 
Cd2+ and Pb2+ dissolved from the reserved labels in the respective supernatant liquids 
showed a negative correlation with target quantities. This aptasensor provided a 
Figure 9. Aptasensor for the simultaneous detection of OTA and FB1, using QDs and SWV stripping 
measurements: (A) fabrication process (schematic), and (B) working principle [80].  
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 227 
detection range of 10 pg mL−1 to 10 ng mL−1 for OTA and 50 pg mL−1 to 50 ng mL−1 
for FB1, showing successful application in real maize samples. 
Modification with nanoparticles can be performed on not only biomolecules, 
but also target analytes. This option enables analyte determination after the 
biorecognition event via a sandwich assay scheme. Such nanomaterial-assisted 
detection can greatly enhance the output response [81]. Even though such labeling 
needs more preparative steps than label-free detection, the signal enhancement is 
higher by several orders of magnitude, which is a convincing argument for using 
such an approach. 
5.3 Redox mediators 
It is vital to create an electrical contact between redox-active biomolecules and the 
electrode surface while developing electrochemical aptasensors. For this purpose, 
nanomaterials such as conductive metallic, metal oxide and other semiconductor NPs 
are used as electron shuttles between electroactive species and the electrode surface. 
In the specific case of aptamer bioreceptors, their spatial 3D conformation can hinder 
the electron transfer between the mediators and the electrode surface by creating an 
insulating layer blocking electron-transfer (ET). Conductivity of nanoparticles and 
their well-defined arrangements can enable the development of nanomaterials-based 
methods for the construction of sensitive aptasensors with enhanced electron transfer 
properties. For example, Shi et al. [82] took advantage of the synergistic contribution 
of ionic liquids and Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles as the nanocomposite mediators 
to accelerate ET. The deposition of this nano-mixture onto a screen-printed carbon 
electrode improved the response speed and sensitivity as previously reported [83]. 
Unless labelling with a redox probe, most anti-mycotoxin aptamers cannot 
afford a direct measurable redox signal, except for guanine-rich oligonucleotide 
sequences such as the anti-OTA aptamer. The inherent electroactivity of these specific 
aptamers has not been extensively studied in recent literature as guanine oxidation 
occurs at a relatively high potential (around 1.0 V). In addition to that, it involves 
a two-step oxidation mechanism at the C8-H position, resulting in a loss of four 
electrons and four protons. Consequently, despite the potential of conductive NMs 
as electron shuttles, their use as mediators in aptasensing for mycotoxin detection is 
still immature. 
5.4  Signal amplification
Nanomaterials are frequently deployed as signal amplifiers in electrochemical 
aptasensing as they can afford ultrasensitive detection with miniaturized platforms. 
In fact, signal amplification assisted by nanomaterials is possible through three 
different mechanisms: (1) catalytic reaction, (2) their use as mediators, and 
(3) employing them as seeds to deposit electrochemically active species and 
electrocatalysts [77]. 
As an example of signal amplification through catalytic reaction, Jing et al. 
reported the use of palladium NPs as a catalyst for H2O2, enabling the construction of a 
sensitive electrochemical aptasensor[84]. More recently, carbon-based nanomaterials 228 Nanosensors 
have been frequently used as signal amplifiers in electrochemical aptasensing, for 
they promote and facilitate electron transfer between the biomolecules and the 
electrode surface [85]. For instance, Goud et al. [36] described an AFB1 aptasensor, 
using a methylene blue-tagged aptamer serving as a signal moiety, and functional 
graphene oxide (fGO) acting as a signal amplifier (Figure 10). The fGO was not only 
used as a platform for the attachment of the aptamer, but also employed to intensify 
the DPV signal, due to its catalytic property towards MB. The plot of current signal 
versus analyte concentration showed excellent linearity, ranging from 0.05 to 6.0 ng 
mL–1, with a very low limit of detection (0.05 ng mL–1). Moreover, the aptasensor 
was applied to detect AFB1 levels in alcoholic beverages. In this study, fGO 
exhibited three major merits: (1) better loading of aptamers on the screen-printed 
carbon electrode, (2) enhanced conductive properties of the electrode surface, and 
(3) improved electrocatalytic properties of the transducer platform [86]. 
Furthermore, carbon-based NMs interact with other nanomaterials such as 
Au NPs, SiO2, chitosan, etc., facilitating their widespread application in aptamer￾based electrochemical bioassays [22]. Hence, several hybrid nanomaterials, 
such as Au NPs-carboxylic porous carbon (Au NPs-cPC) and Au NPs covalently 
bound to reduced graphene oxide (Au NPs-rGO), have been employed mainly in 
impedimetric aptasensors for mycotoxin detection. For instance, Wei et al. [87] 
reported an ultrasensitive nano-aptasensing platform for OTA measurement, based 
on Au NPs-cPC nanocomposite, through EIS. The results proved it to be a significant 
impedimetric amplification strategy for OTA detection, with an extremely low LOD 
of 1 × 10–8 ng mL–1. 
Alternatively, nanomaterial-modified electrode surfaces can be used as 
seeds to initiate the deposition of metals through a seed-mediated nucleation or 
Figure 10. An electrochemical aptasensor based on functionalized-GO-assisted electrocatalytic signal 
amplification of methylene blue for aflatoxin B1 detection [36]. Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 229 
growth mechanism. The medium consists of metal salts and a reducing agent, and 
nanoparticles on the electrode surface serve as nucleation sites to facilitate metal 
deposition; this results in higher loading of electroactive species and subsequently 
improves the nanoparticle-transducer surface communication [88]. This improvement 
can be attributed to the fact that the deposited nanoparticles are closer to the 
electrode surface, compared to the nanoparticle labels [78]. So far, a large number 
of electrochemical immunosensors based on this method, with developer solutions, 
have been reported [77, 88]. However, it has not yet been noticeably extended to the 
design of aptasensors dedicated to mycotoxins. 
5.5 Enzyme mimicking: Nanozymes 
Most nanomaterials show intrinsic enzyme-like properties that can allow the 
development of enzyme-free biosensors to detect several target molecules. Compared 
to natural enzymes, these enzyme-like NMs, commonly called nanozymes, are stable 
against denaturing, low in cost and highly resistant to high concentrations of substrates 
[89]. Moreover, nanozymes exhibit environment-dependent properties such as 
changes in their activity at different pH conditions or with surface modifications. 
These tunable characteristics can result in changes in their affinities towards 
substrates, enabling the development of novel aptasensors for many targets [90]. 
Recently, a surge of nanozymes, including metallic, carbonaceous, and inorganic 
NPs, have been demonstrated to catalyze some typical enzymatic reactions, mainly 
mimicking oxidoreductase activities such as those of oxidase, peroxidase, and 
catalase [91]. 
It has been reported that peroxidase-like nanozymes, which are highly robust 
against environmental conditions, are widely used to replace horseradish peroxidase 
(HRP), providing a cost-effective method for the fabrication of biosensors. Taking 
advantage of the intrinsic peroxidase-like activity of Au NPs, Cao’s study reported 
that positively charged Au NPs can catalyze the oxidation of TMB by H2O2 to 
produce a blue colored solution [90]. 
On the other hand, enzyme mimicking applications pose some regeneration 
problems. In fact, it is difficult to regenerate the surface of NPs and control the 
reactivity of nanomaterials against certain interfering molecules. Therefore, studies 
on design and development of selective and specific NPs to overcome matrix 
interferences are needed to replace enzymes for aptasensing applications. 
6. Nanomaterial-based E-aptasensors for mycotoxin analysis 
In the last decade, various aptasensors have been proposed for the analysis of 
mycotoxins by integrating several nanomaterials. Due to excellent characteristics like 
high surface area-to-volume ratio, these smart nanomaterials acquire inimitable visual/ 
optical, mechanical, electronic, physical, magnetic, chemical and electrochemical 
properties. In recent times, researchers have synthesized nanomaterials of broad 
significance for diverse bioassays and bioanalysis. In particular, these materials have 
found growing applications in biosensor improvement and development, thanks to 
their exceptional electronic transportation properties. Along with different aptamers’ 230 Nanosensors 
selection, abundant nanomaterials have been synthesized for aptamer-related sensing 
applications, with the rapid expansion in nanotechnology. 
In this section, we lay emphasis on universally used nanomaterials, such as silver 
and gold nanoparticles, carbon-based nanomaterials, and metal oxide nanoparticles, 
for sensing applications using electrochemistry. Examples of their applications in 
recent literature (2010 onwards) have been discussed herein, along with examples 
of novel design strategies and relevant electroanalytical techniques to highlight the 
current opportunities, bottlenecks and challenges, and future development trends. 
6.1 Metal nanomaterials 
The main reason for using noble metal nanoparticles in electrochemical aptasensors 
is to obtain higher sensitivity by virtue of their electrocatalytic and surface properties. 
6.1.1 Silver nanoparticles 
Silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) have attracted growing attention of researchers for 
a variety of applications. Ag NPs have distinct chemical, physical and biological 
properties compared to their bulk paternal materials. Some Ag nanomaterials have 
been used for the detection of fungal toxins, using aptamer-based electrochemical 
sensors. OTA can be detected using electrochemical aptasensors, using a gold 
electrode coated with Ag NPs and neutral red by electro-polymerization [92]. In 
the referred study, aptamers were thiolated and coupled with Ag NPs. Based on 
their interaction with OTA, conformational adjustment occurred in the aptamer, 
which triggered an increase in the charge transfer resistance as analyzed by the 
impedimetric technique. The method was able to achieve a low LOD, down to 
0.05 nM. The method was further tested in beer samples [92]. 
In another approach, Ag nanoparticles were coupled with ssDNA functionalized 
probes for quantitation of biomolecular targets using chronoamperometric technique. 
The method showed the detection of the aptamer target OTA in a specific binding 
event based on induced collision frequency changes and reached a detection limit 
down to 0.05 nM [93]. 
6.1.2 Gold nanoparticles 
Gold nanoparticles have garnered significant recognition in the field of biosensor 
improvement over the past decade. This is primarily associated with the capability of 
Au NPs to offer a well-known coupling of biorecognition elements via their bonding 
to the metal surface by thiol groups. Additionally, Au NPs authorize direct electron 
transfer involving redox probes and electrodes, allowing electrochemical sensing 
without the addition of mediators. Several electrochemical aptasensors involving Au 
NPs for mycotoxin detection have been described in the literature. An impedimetric 
aptasensor for OTA has been developed on a gold electrode covered with Au NPs 
suspended in the dendritic polymer Boltorn H30® [94]. The aptamers were thiolated 
and covalently coupled to Au NPs through Au-S bonding. The mechanism relied on 
the conformational switch of the aptamer onto G-quadruplex form upon biosensing 
of OTA. This was followed by the consolidation of the surface layer and an increase Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 231 
in the charge transfer resistance. The LOD obtained was 0.02 nM. The practicality of 
the sensor was verified by testing beer samples [94]. 
In another work, a DPV-based aptasensor was developed for OTA detection. 
Therein, Au NPs were mixed with porous carbon and subsequnetly employed to 
modify an aminated Au electrode for the loading of cDNA and to improve electron 
transfer between the redox probe methylene blue and the sensor surface for sensitivity 
enhancement (Figure 11). The linear behavior in detection was found in the OTA 
concentration range of 5.0 × 10−6–5.0 × 10−4 ng mL−1, with good reproducibility and 
stability [95]. 
Researchers have also proposed another rapid and ultrasensitive electrochemical 
detection method for OTA. Therein, ssDNA with the aptamer was co-immobilized on 
the electrode and methylene blue was used as a redox probe for OTA detection. The 
electrochemical signal was improved upon the addition of Au NPs-coupled DNA. In 
this study, the aptamer changed its conformation, triggered by the interaction with 
OTA, and an LOD of 30 pg mL–1 was achieved [96]. 
Figure 11. Apt/cDNA/AuNPs/cPC/NH2-AuE sensor for OTA detection: fabrication process (schematic) 
and mechanism of detection [95]. 232 Nanosensors 
Novel practices for sensitive and convenient techniques are regularly 
needed to detect fungal toxins at lower concentration levels. In another strategy, 
a hairpin-shaped aptamer of AFM1 was deployed to detect AFM1, using Au NPs 
and a complementary aptamer strand. The detection relied on the conformational 
changes in the aptamers – the hairpin structure in the absence or presence of AFM1 
(Figure 12). The negatively charged Au NPs facilitated AFM1 quantitation, with 
added advantages of better selectivity and sensitivity. In the absence of AFM1, the 
hairpin structure was intact and hence less current was recorded; whereas, in the 
presence of AFM1, disintegration of the aptamers’ hairpin structure was suspected, 
which yielded a higher signal when methylene blue was added as a redox agent; an 
LOD of 0.9 ng/L was obtained. The method was extended to the detection of AFM1 
in milk and serum samples [79]. 
When it comes to other gold nanomaterials, an aptasensor has been developed 
for AFB1 detection using gold nanorods as well [97]. The sensing method uses 
gold nanorods as the transducer, and the aptamer as a biorecognition element. The 
sensing is done through DPV and the LOD obtained is 0.3 pM in the tested range of 
1.0 pM–0.25 nM. The applicability of this aptasensor has been verified through the 
detection of AFB1 in rice and blood serum [97]. 
An interesting double amplification strategy through layer-by-layer assembly 
of dual gold nanoparticle conjugates was suggested by Chen et al. [56]. The authors 
claimed that the sensing signal of the aptasensor was significantly enhanced by 
two-round AuNP conjugates immobilized on a gold electrode by consecutive DNA 
hybridizations (Figure 13). As a result, a signal-on DPV detection was enabled 
by the second ferrocene-tagged nanoprobe, reaching an LOD of 0.001 ppb and a 
wide dynamic range of 0.001–500 ppb over 6 orders of magnitude. For validation 
purposes, a real sample analysis for the detection of OTA in spiked wine samples was 
performed and found successful. 
Overall, gold nanoparticles have already been employed in the fabrication of 
electrochemical aptasensors based on all possible transduction techniques. Most of 
Figure 12. Electrochemical aptasensor for the detection of AFM1, based on the hairpin-shaped structure of
 
AFM1 aptamer, AuNPs, thiol-modified complementary strand of the aptamer (CS), and methylene blue [79].
 Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 233 
Figure 13. Electrochemical aptasensors for the amplified assay of OTA, based on: (A) dual AuNP 
conjugates, (B) single AuNP conjugates, and (C) traditional method (no AuNPs) [56]. 
the electrochemical aptasensors using Au NPs have been used for OTA detection 
(Table 3). 
6.1.3 Other metal nanoparticles 
Apart from Au and Ag, some attempts have been made to utilize other metallic 
nanoparticles in the aptameric analysis mycotoxins, For instance, porous platinum 
nanotubes have been used for the fabrication of zearalenone (ZEN) aptasensor, 
deploying the voltammetric technique; however, in the development of this sensor, 
Au NPs with thionine-coupled GO were also used (Figure 14). Aptamers were thiol￾modified and self-assembled on Au NPs previously electrodeposited on the electrode. 
The obtained LOD for ZEN was 0.17 pg mL–1 [98]. Furthermore, Gu et al. recently 
described an aptasensor assisted by copper nanoclusters for the detection of OTA, 
wherein metal nanoclusters showed peroxidase-like activity to catalyze hydrogen 
peroxide reduction [75]. 234 Nanosensors 
Figure 14. PtNTs-based aptasensor for the detection of OTA: (a) preparation of p-PtNTs, and (b) 
construction of the aptasensor [98]. 
Table 3 summarizes recent E-nano-aptasensors for mycotoxins, classified 
according to the metal nanomaterial used. It provides an overview of their main roles Table 3. Electrochemical nano-aptasensors for mycotoxin detection, based on metal nanomaterials (2010–2019). 
NM Aptasensor Assembly Target Detection 
Technique 
Role of NMs Conc. 
Range 
(ng mL–1) 
LOD 
(ng mL–1) 
Real Applications Ref. 
Gold 
nanoparticles 
(Au NPs) 
GCE/DNA1/Aptamer/DNA2 -
AuNPs/MB 
OTA CV cDNA labels for signal 
enhancement 
0.10–20 3.00E-02 Red wine [96] 
AuE/poly-NR/ Botlorn H30® 
polymer@AuNPs/Aptamer 
OTA EIS Thiolated aptamer carrier 0.04–40 8.10E-03 Light and dark beer 
samples 
[94] 
AuE/DNA1-MCH/Aptamer/DNA3 ­
AuNPs/DNA4/MB 
OTA DPV DNA label as first-level 
signal enhancer 
0.001–1 0.0003 (± 
0.00005) 
Red wine [99] 
GCE/in situ AuNPs/Aptamer FB1 EIS Aptamer loading 
increase 
0.03–32.8 1.40E-03 Maize [100] 
AuE/Aptamer-MCH/ TS-AuNPs￾cDNA/ telomerase amplification/ 
MB 
AFB1 SWV cDNA carrier for 
sensitivity enhancement 
1.0E-7–0.1 6.00E-11 Corn [101] 
AuE /cPC/AuNPs/cDNA/ Aptamer/ 
MB 
OTA DPV Aptamer immobilization 
and signal amplification 
5.0E-06– 
5.0E-04 
5.00E-06 Corn [87] 
AuE/cDNA1/MCH/AuNPs@ 
Aptamer/OTA/AuNPs@cDNA2-Fc 
OTA DPV Dual signal amplification 0.001–500 1.00E-03 Wine samples [56] 
SPGE/Aptamer/AuNPs-cDNA/MB AFM1 DPV Signal feasibility and 
enhancement 
0.002–0.6 9.00E-04 Human blood 
serum, milk 
[79] 
AuNPs@CuCoPBA/ Aptamer OTA EIS Aptamer immobilization 50–10 5.20E-06 Watermelon juice [75] 
AuE-Cys/AuNPs/Aptamer/BSA OTA EIS Impedimetric signal 
enhancement 
0.10–10 3.00E-02 Grape commodities 
(Grape, red wine, 
white wine, red and 
purple grape juice) 
[102] 
Table 3 contd. ... 
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 235 236 
NM Aptasensor Assembly Target Detection 
Nanosensors Technique 
Role of NMs Conc. 
Range 
(ng mL–1) 
LOD 
(ng mL–1) 
Real Applications Ref. 
Silver 
nanoparticles 
(Ag NPs) 
AuE/poly-Neutral Red/AgNPs@ 
Aptamer 
OTA EIS Aptamer carriers 0.12–12.11 2.00E-02 Beer [94] 
AgNPs/Aptamer coils OTA CA Signal generation 
through collision’s 
electrochemistry 
0.03–4 2.00E-02 – [93] 
Copper AuE-MCH-DNA1 (SAM)/Aptamer/ OTA CA Peroxidase mimicking – 1.10E-01 Red wine [103] 
nanoclusters CuNCs 
(Cu NCs) 
Platinum 
nanotubes 
(Pt NTs) 
AuE/porous-Pt NTs /Nafion/ 
AuNPs/Apt/MCH/GO/Thionine 
ZEA DPV Signal enhancement 5.0E-04–500 1.70E-04 Maize [98] 
...Table 3 contd. Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 237 
in the assembly of such mycotoxin platforms, the analytical performance obtained, 
and their potential applications in real sample analysis. 
6.2 Aptasensors based on metal-oxides 
A great number of nano-biosensors developed so far are based on nanostructured 
oxides of metals such as zinc, iron, cerium, iridium, titanium, etc. Metal oxide 
nanomaterials have been found to exhibit interesting electronic, functional, 
biocompatible, non-toxic and catalytic properties. Various morphologies of these 
NMs, including nanoparticles, nanorods and nanofibers with controlled shapes, have 
been obtained using a variety of methods [104]. 
Ferrimagnetic nanoparticles are particularly interesting and have been used 
in conjunction with different bioreceptors, thanks to their electron shuttler role 
and easy recycling by magnetic separation. Nguyen and co-workers fabricated 
an electrochemical Fe3O4/polyaniline-based aptasensor capable of detecting 
AFM1 in the 6–60 ng/L concentration range, with a detection limit of 1.98 ng/L 
[40]. This aptasensor was based on the polymerization of Fe3O4-incorporated 
polyaniline (Fe3O4/PANi) on an inter-digitized electrode (IDE) as a sensitive film 
on which the aptamer was immobilized. Magnetic nanoparticles were used as the 
signal amplification element. AFM1 was detected by following the changes in the 
electrochemical signal through cyclic and square wave voltammetry. 
Zinc oxide nanostructures seem to have gained increasing popularity in the field 
of biosensing of mycotoxins [105]. In one detection method for PAT, a composite 
material of ZnO nanorods and chitosan was used to modify a gold electrode. 
The PAT aptamer was modified by thiol, and self-assembled on the electrode by 
electrodeposition of Au NPs. The ZnO nanorods increased the stacking with Au NPs 
and aptamers. When PAT is available in the sample, it forms a complex with the 
aptamer on the electrode surface and may hamper the transfer of electrons from 
the electrode to the redox probe hexaferrocyanate, resulting in lower current values. 
The obtained signal from dosing of PAT can be calculated through the differences 
in the signal before and after incubation with PAT. The assay showed an LOD of 
0.27 pg mL–1. This method was successfully tested for the detection of PAT in juice 
samples [59]. 
In the same context, a novel and sensitive electrochemical aptasensor was 
developed for the same patulin detection through a hierarchical metal organic 
framework (MOF) and methylene blue as the redox mediator connected to the 
aptamer as a probe. The aptasensor was arranged through electrodeposited Au NPs 
on a ZnO-chitosan based electrode. Methylene blue was again used as a redox probe 
for signal generation. Au NPs coupled with ZnO are likely to load better signal tags 
and hence achieved signal amplification. The detection was based on structural 
changes in aptamers resulting from PAT association. The obtained LOD was 
1.46 × 10–8 μgmL–1. The developed sensor demonstrated good stability, satisfactory 
reproducibility and selectivity. It also showed consistent recovery of PAT in spiked 
apple juice [106]. 
Additional examples of aptasensing strategies for mycotoxins, based on metal 
oxides, have been presented in Table 4. It should be mentioned that despite their 238 Nanosensors Table 4. Electrochemical nano-aptasensors for mycotoxin detection, based on metal oxide nanomaterials (2010–2019). NM Aptasensor Assembly Target Detection Technique Role of NMs Conc. Range (ng mL–1) LOD (ng mL–1) Real Applications Ref. Fe3O4 NPs Pt (interdigitated electrode array IDA)/ Fe3O4 NPs-PANI/ glutaraldehyde/ Aptamer AFM1 CV & SWV Signal amplification 0.006–0.06 1.98E-03 Milk [40] 
SPCE/PDMS/Fe3O4@AuNPs-Apt/ 
MCH 
AFB1 EIS Aptamer carrier 0.020–50 1.50E-02 Peanut [108] 
IrO2 NPs SPCE/polythionine/IrO2NPs/Aptamer OTA EIS Aptamer carrier 0.01–100 nM 5.65E-03 White wine [66] 
ZnO 
(nanorods and 
nanoflowers) 
AuE/ZnONRs-Chitosan/in situ 
AuNPs/Aptamer/MCH 
PAT DPV loading increase 
of AuNPs and 
aptamers 
0.0005–50 2.70E-04 Apple juice [59] 
MB@MOF-Apt/MCH/cDNA/AuNPs/ 
CS-ZnO NFs/AuE 
PAT DPV Signal amplification 
through tags loading 
5.0E-05–500 1.46E-05 Apple juice [106] Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 239 
particular physicochemical properties suitable to small targets [107], manganese 
dioxide nanosheets (MnO2) have been surprisingly yet not explored in the 
electrochemical analysis of mycotoxins; optical detection schemes using the same 
nucleic bioreceptors are rather preferred. 
6.3 Carbon nanomaterials 
Carbon nanostructures, such as graphene and its derivatives, carbon nanotubes, 
carbon nanoparticles and carbon black are good candidates for constructing 
electrochemical sensors and biosensors – they possess high chemical stability, great 
mechanical strength and high surface-to-volume ratio, while exhibiting enhanced 
electron transfer and high resistance to fouling. Recent achievements with carbon 
nanomaterials used in electrochemical aptasensors for food analysis have been 
reviewed in detail in the following sections [85]. Furthermore, nano-aptasensors 
based on carbon NMs have been summarized in Table 5. 
6.3.1 Graphene and its derivatives 
The current progress with graphene (G) has revealed a capable material with 
greater sensing properties. Described as a carbonaceous honeycomb, graphene is 
an appropriate substrate for sensor applications due to its outstanding structural, 
biochemical and electrical properties. Graphene and its derivatives such as graphene 
oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are the most widely used carbon￾based nanomaterials in electrochemical biosensing. 
In one approach, GO was integrated with carbon-based printed electrodes 
with redox probe methylene blue and aptamers [36]. This sensor was used to 
detect AFB1 through conformational changes in the aptamer structure. Due to the 
catalytic behavior of GO towards the redox probe, the proposed sensor could detect 
AFB1 with an LOD 0.05 ng mL−1 [36]. A combined and hybrid nano-catalyst-based 
approach has also been tested using nanoceria and graphene oxide [72]. The aptamer 
was coupled with GO loaded onto the electrode, and the target toxin was trapped by 
the aptamer between the free and the ceria-tagged target, through specific aggressive 
means. The electrochemical response was obtained by analyzing the redox probe’s 
interaction with the ceria tag and the response was improved by GO, which amplified 
the electron transfer at the electrode (Figure 15). This novel approach offered an 
outstanding platform to detect mycotoxins in a wide spectrum, with an LOD of 
0.1 nM for OTA [72]. 
In another study, a graphene-sheltered aptamer with thionine label was used to 
develop an electrochemical aptasensor for OTA [109]. The aptamer was attached 
to the graphene nanosheet with strong non-covalent bonding of GO, with DNase￾I-based signal amplification as the recognition element. The developed aptasensor 
platform could detect OTA in concentration levels down to 5.6 pg mL–1 [109]. In 
yet another interesting approach, Au NPs were attached to 2-aminothiophenol￾functionalized reduced graphene oxide, and it was observed that the surface density 
of the Au particles played a major role in aptamer immobilization and sensitivity 
improvement [110]. Additionally, it helped in the development of a signal-enlarged 
platform for sensitive and specific screening of OTA using EIS. The developed 240 Nanosensors 
Figure 15. Non-enzymatic nanocatalyst-based electrochemical aptasensor using a nano-ceria tag and GO 
(schematic) [72]. 
sensor showed a dynamic detection range of 0.1–200 ng mL−1, with an LOD of 
0.03 ng mL−1 [110]. 
An aptasensor for AFB1 detection has also been proposed using anodized 
and porous alumina altered with graphene oxide [111]. Herein, the aptamers were 
covalently immobilized on alumina, and GO was coupled on the electrode surface 
through π-π stacking with the aptamer. The detection of the fungal toxin relied on 
the negative charge of GO and the aptamer. The achieved LOD was 0.13 ng mL–1 
for AFB1. Also, the developed sensor showed good selectivity towards AFB1, 
offering potential for a sensitive, simple and effective method for detecting 
mycotoxins [111]. 
Geleta and colleagues reported an aptasensor based on reduced graphene 
oxide/molybdenum disulfide/polyaniline nanocomposite for the detection of AFB1 
[112]. The rGO MoSe2-PANI nanohybrids were prepared and entrapped onto 
glassy carbon electrodes, using chitosan. AuNPs were also added to the system to 
scaffold the thiolated aptamers. The aptamer-AFB1 binding event was monitored by 
the peak current through DPV measurement in the presence of [Fe(CN)6]3–/4-. The 
nanoplatform exhibited a wide linear detection range and a remarkably low detection 
limit: 0.01 fg mL−1 to 1.0 fg mL−1, and 0.002 fg mL−1 respectively [112]. Overall, the 
synergistic interaction of AuNPs and the hybrid nanocomposite increased the active 
surface area and improved the electrochemical output signal of the aptasensor. 
In a more simplistic platform, an electrochemical aptasensor for OTA was 
proposed by utilizing inherently electroactive graphene oxide nanoplatelets (GONPls) 
as redox labels [113]. In this case, anti-OTA aptamers were physically adsorbed onto 
disposable electrically printed carbon electrodes before exposure to mycotoxin. Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 241 
Subsequently, incubation with GONPls served to quantify the remaining non-bound 
aptamers through π-π interactions (Figure 16). The proposed procedure exhibited a 
DPV detection range of 0.31–310 pM, and a good discrimination against ascorbic 
acid [113]. This was recommended as a valid signal-generating nanoprobe with all 
aptasensors. Nonetheless, it would require well-characterized and reproducible GO 
preparations. 
It is worth noting that graphene structures doped with p-block elements such 
as nitrogen, boron, sulfur, hydrogen, oxygen and/or fluorine are widely used in 
electrochemical sensors and biosensors. However, research targeting mycotoxins, 
using aptamers, has not reported their extensive use so far. 
6.3.2 Carbon nanotubes 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are allotropes of carbon that take the form of hollow 
seamless cylinders with a diameter of less than 1 nm and lengths of up to several 
micrometers. Researchers have shown tremendous interest in CNTs due to their 
unique and outstanding properties of large surface area, stability, biocompatible 
nature, and high electrical conductivity. Although CNTs were discovered over a 
decade before graphene, they are also considered as rolled-up graphene derivatives, 
as in single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes (MWCNTs). CNTs have shown various advantages when coupled with 
electrochemical aptasensors, such as rapid signal response, high level of sensitivity, 
ease of operation, cost-effectiveness, and simplicity. 
An amperometric aptamer-based biosensor has been described in the literature 
for OTA detection, using methylene redox probe. The developed aptasensor consisted 
of a gold electrode coupled with aptamers, and carbon nanotubes were used as the 
signal amplifier. The developed aptasensor was highly selective towards OTA and 
reached to an LOD of 52 pM. Subsequently, OTA detection was performed in serum 
and grape juice samples [61]. 
Figure 16. Application of GONPs as inherently electroactive labels for the aptasensing of OTA 
(schematic) [113].  
242 Nanosensors 
More recently, a label-free aptasensor based on polyethyleneimine (PEI) 
functionalized with MoS2-doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes was successfully 
fabricated for zearalenone detection [114]. The nanocomposite PEI-MoS2-MWCNTs 
was reported as a novel nanocarrier with enhanced adsorption ability to assemble a 
large amount of the signal probe toluidine blue (Tb). Furthermore, platinum/gold 
core-shell (Pt@Au) nanoparticles were dropped on the modified electrodes to load 
a large amount of ZEN-binding aptamers. This resulted in a stable variation of CV 
responses, realizing the quantitative determination of zearalenone in the range of 
0.5 pg mL−1–50 ng mL−1, with an LOD of 0.17 pg mL−1. 
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, only a few reported examples describe 
the integration of CNTs in electrochemical aptasensors towards the detection of 
mycotoxins (see Table 5). Recent references suggest that interests in CNTs for the 
E-aptasensing of mycotoxins are still modest, against the many more detection 
attempts using CNT-assisted immunosensors. This is mainly due to the more 
convenient production methods of 2D nanostructured electrodes based on graphene 
and its derivatives. 
6.3.3 Other carbon nanomaterials 
Although graphene and its derivatives are well known in the field of biosensors, other 
carbonaceous nanomaterials such as carbon nanospheres and carbon nanofibers have 
been recently introduced in the field of electrochemical biosensing [115]. However, 
such a variety of carbon NMs are rarely employed in electrochemical aptasensors; 
even when they are, the applications are targeted towards the biomedical field rather 
than food analysis. Still, it can be envisaged that the developed concepts will be 
translated soon to the analysis of mycotoxins. To cite their use, a brief description of 
some emerging carbonaceous nanomaterials showing distinctive properties has been 
provided hereunder. 
Carbon dots (CDs) are small-sized carbon NPs with a diameter of less than 
10 nm and some form of surface passivation. This class of carbon-based nanomaterials 
has attracted considerable attention for use in diagnostics. Graphene QDs (GQDs) 
are a sub-group of CDs with excellent properties such as high specific surface 
area, unique electrical and optical features, low production cost, low toxicity and 
considerable chemical biocompatibility [116]. Owing to their small size, GQDs 
exhibit several unique properties compared to micrometer-sized graphene materials. 
They are inspiring candidates for use in electrochemical sensors due to more efficient 
electron transfer. Given the electrocatalytic properties of GQDs, a voltammetric 
sensor was very recently developed for the detection of AFB1, with the assistance of 
AuNPs [117]. 
Carbon black (CB) is a carbon-based nanomaterial produced by the incomplete 
combustion of hydrocarbons. Of late, it has received considerable attention for use 
in the fabrication of electrochemical sensors due to advantages akin to other carbon 
nanostructures, while involving lower costs [118]. CB can be used in combination 
with metal NPs to enhance electrochemical signals. 
Carbon nanofibers (CNFs) are one-dimensional nanomaterials comparable to 
CNTs. Despite similarities in their cylindrical structures, CNTs are distinguished Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 243 
Table 5. Electrochemical nano-aptasensors for mycotoxin detection, based on carbon nanomaterials (2010–2019). 
NM Aptasensor Assembly Target Detection 
Technique 
Role of NMs Conc. Range 
(ng mL–1) 
LOD 
(ng mL–1) 
Real 
Applications 
Ref. 
Graphene Oxide 
(GO) 
SPCE/functionalized GO/ 
HMDA/Aptamer-MB 
AFB1 DPV MB signal amplification 
via electron transfer 
improvement 
0.05–6.0 5.00E-02 Beer, wine [36] 
Au film electrode/ 
porous anodized alumina 
nanochannels/Aptamer/GO 
stacking/AFB1 
AFB1 CA GO for steric and 
electronic hindrance 
E-detection feasibility 
1–20 1.30E-01 – [111]] 
Negatively charged SPCE/ 
GO@Thionine-modified 
aptamer/DNaseI 
OTA DPV Aptamer immobilization 
through stacking 
0.01–100 5.60E-03 Wheat 
samples 
[109] 
GO nanoplatelets 
(GONPs) 
SPCE/Aptamer/OTA/ 
GONPs 
OTA DPV Electroactive labels 0.00013– 
0.125 
1.30E-04 – [113] 
Reduced Graphene 
Oxide (rGO) 
GCE/aminocaproic acid/ 
Aptamer/rGO 
AFB1 DPV electron transfer 
enhancement 
0.16–1.25 2.19E-02 Pasteurized 
cow milk and 
human blood 
plasma 
[121] 
rGO and Au NPs AuE/DNA1-MCH/Aptamer/ 
AuNPs–rGO-DNA2 
OTA EIS Signal amplifier via 
sandwich competitive 
assay 
0.001–50 3.00E-04 Red wine [122] 
AuE-Cys/ rGO-ATP￾AuNPs/Aptamer OTA EIS Signal amplification via loading capacity 
enhancement 
0.1–200 3.00E-02 Red wine [110] 
Table 5 contd. ... 244 Nanosensors NM Aptasensor Assembly Target Detection Technique Role of NMs Conc. Range (ng mL–1) LOD (ng mL–1) Real Applications Ref. Graphene Oxide SPCE/GO/Aptamer/OTA­ OTA CV GO for covalent aptamer 0.06−72.7 4.00E-02 Corn samples [72] and nanoceria nCe immobilization (GO & nCe) nCe tag acts as nanocatalyst for enzyme 
mimicking 
Graphene & Au GCE/AuNPs/cDNA/ FB1 CV AuNPs for aptamer 0.001–0.1 1.00E-03 Wheat [123] 
NPs Aptamer/ Graphene@ immobilization and G@ 
thionine thionine nanocomposite 
as signal generator 
Single-Walled SPGE/DNA1/Aptamer/ OTA DPV Signal amplifier for an 0.07–18.2 2.10E-02 Serum and [61] 
Carbon Nanotubes ADN2-SWCNTs ON/Off response (Buffer) grape juice 
(SWCNTs) conjugate/ Methylene blue 0.054 
(MB) (serum) 
0.023 (grape) 
Multi-Walled PEI-MoS2-MWCNTs ZEA CV Sensitivity enhancement 0.0005–50 1.70E-04 Beer [114] 
Carbon Nanotubes 
(MWCNTs) 
...Table 5 contd. Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 245 
by a larger diameter and length, hollow cavities and diameter tunability. Lower 
diameters of CNFs enable the acceleration of electron transfer in only one direction. 
This can result in enhancing conductivity and decreasing the detection time [119]. 
Furthermore, mesoporous carbon (carbon materials with pore sizes between 
2 and 50 nm) has shown a great ability towards the detection of small molecules as 
reported in latest electrochemical investigations [120]. 
6.4 Other nano-aptasensing platforms 
Quantum dots have lately witnessed a rise as potential agents for assisting 
electrochemical aptasensing of small molecules. QDs consist of small semiconductor 
particles (with diameters in the range of 2–10 nm) of the elements from II–VI, 
III–V and IV–VI groups. They have unique optical and electronic characteristics. 
When incorporated into the design of a biosensor, they have three key functions: (1) 
act as aptamer labels, (2) be a part of the signal transducer, and (3) serve as the scaffold 
for bioreceptors. For example, Hao et al. described an ultrasensitive electrochemical 
OTA aptasensor based on the interaction of two fabricated nanocomposites: CdTe 
QDs-modified graphene/AuNPs and AuNP-functionalized silica-coated Fe3O4 NPs 
(Figure 17) [124]. Anti-OTA aptamers acted as linkers between the nanocomposites, 
previously decorated with two complementary ssDNA. Due to the high affinity 
between targets and aptamers, this structure would break into two parts in the 
Figure 17. Aptasensor fabrication and the principle for OTA detection, using CdTe-based nanocomposite 
[124].246 Nanosensors 
presence of OTA. Therefore, iron-based nanostructures were discarded through 
magnetic separation. Thereafter, CdTe QDs remaining in the supernatant liquid were 
dissolved in HNO3 and the concentration of Cd2+ ions was detected by SWV; the 
concentration of Cd2+ ions was directly proportional to the concentration of OTA. 
The aptasensor exhibited a wide linear detection range of 0.2 pg mL−1–4 ng mL−1, 
and a low detection limit of 0.07 pg mL− 1[124]. 
With a methodology akin to the above, a magneto-controlled detection approach 
was developed for OTAand fumonisin B1 (FB1), using an electrochemical aptasensor. 
Therein, silica coated with CdTe/PbS QDs was utilized as the label and c-DNA was 
coupled with magnetic beads like a capture probe. When the target mycotoxin was 
available, the aptamers created the analyte binding which triggered the partial release 
of preloaded tags from the magnetic beads. The developed aptasensor showed 
detection in a wide range of 10 pg mL−1 to 10 ng mL−1 for OTA and 50 pg mL−1 to 
50 ng mL−1 for FB1. Moreover, the sensor was tested in real maize samples. This 
method can be extended to the detection of other fungal toxins, using metal sulfide 
QDs, subject to the availability of specific aptamers [80]. 
7. Conclusion and prospects 
Widespread mycotoxin contamination of food and animal feed has led researchers to 
investigate rapid and reliable biosensing tools for food safety monitoring. Aptasensors 
are constantly playing a key role in this development, especially with the overwhelming 
progress in nanotechnology; electrochemical aptasensors with smart design and 
better performance have been successfully developed for the analysis of mycotoxins, 
with the aid of nanomaterials. Unlike antibodies, aptamers show great potential in 
binding capabilities towards small targets. Their switchable conformational changes 
upon target recognition are well adapted for the functionalization of nanostructured 
supports. This makes detection assays possible with both labelled and label-free 
aptamers, taking advantage of the intrinsic properties of nanomaterials. 
Indeed, the latest achievements reviewed in this chapter have proven that 
combining aptamers and nanomaterials offers excellent opportunities for highly 
sensitive detection of mycotoxins, on their regulatory admissible limits. Commonly, 
sub-nanomolar LODs are expected using electrochemical transducers, which is in 
accordance with the regulatory requirements. Moreover, electrochemical signaling 
methods make it possible to integrate nano-aptasensors into portable and equipment￾free devices for real-time control. The works presented in this chapter provide a scope 
for extending successful aptasensing strategies to the detection of other mycotoxins 
as well. 
Overall, the design of nanomaterial-enabled E-aptasensors is witnessing a 
promising trend and more robust platforms are highly expected to emerge from 
this field. However, this expansion is conditioned by resolving some experimental 
hurdles that hinder the commercialization of such innovative tools. The analysis of 
food toxins in real matrices is still challenging primarily because aptamer folding can 
be triggered by other responsive species within complex food samples. Accordingly, 
most of the successful applications are works of proof-of-concept, restricted to the  
 
 
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 247 
laboratory scale and yet to reach the end users. These nano-aptasensors are usually 
validated by testing pretreated and buffered samples, then spiked with analytical￾grade toxins. Therefore, we are still far from knowing as to when and where these 
novel tools will noticeably replace classic analytical tools in food analysis. 
Although aptamers are now well established for some major mycotoxins (OTA 
and AFB1), they are yet to be developed for the remaining panel of such pathogens. 
Most of the aptamers targeting other mycotoxins were duly noted only during the 
last five years or so. In all probability, their scarce applications are not only related 
to their short history, but also to the difficulties in KD determination for low-weight 
molecules. 
Additional efforts should be deployed to study the relevant binding sites of 
mycotoxins among DNA aptamer strands. Considering the small size of targets, a 
few nucleotides can be effectively responsible for molecular recognition. Therefore, 
truncation of long sequences, mostly exceeding 50 nucleic bases, would probably 
decrease cross-reactivity and further reduce costs. New concepts integrating other 
novel bioreceptors with aptamers can also be explored. This is even recommended 
to overcome the lack of specificity and to increase the precision and sensitivity of 
the assay. 
On the other hand, the current state-of-the-art of aptamer-conjugated 
nanomaterials is yet to overcome difficulties in bioconjugation chemistry, the 
effect of non-uniform nanostructures and the lack of functional moieties in some 
nanomaterials. To achieve this, researchers are rapidly improving synthesis 
protocols; new nanomaterials should be fully characterized before use in biosensing 
platforms in order to maximize their advantages. Furthermore, the toxicity of the 
concerned nanomaterials towards biomolecules should be also considered for 
preserving the assay’s performance and reproducibility. 
Moreover, the limited number of multiplexed aptasensors indicates that there is 
an urgent need to research and develop nanoplatforms for the simultaneous detection 
of a series of mycotoxins which can eventually occur in the same food commodity. 
Despite the available aptamers, multi-mycotoxin aptasensing is still immature 
compared to other targets. The development of microfluidic devices or lab-on￾chips for rapid, sensitive, and in-situ analysis of mycotoxins should be particularly 
accelerated. 
Finally, we believe that research in nanomaterial-enabled aptasensors for 
the detection of mycotoxins will still witness a promising trend and more robust 
nanosensors are highly likely and expected to result in breakthrough approaches, 
solving the above-mentioned limitations in this field. 
References 
[1] Chauhan, R., J. Singh, T. Sachdev, T. Basu and B.D. Malhotra. 2016, July. Recent advances in 
mycotoxins detection. Biosens. Bioelectron 81: 532–545. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2016.03.004. 
[2] Bennett, J.W. and M. Klich. 2003, July. Mycotoxins. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 16(3): 497–516. Doi: 
10.1128/CMR.16.3.497-516.2003. 
[3] Omotayo, O.P., A.O. Omotayo, M. Mwanza and O.O. Babalola. 2019, Jan. Prevalence of 
mycotoxins and their consequences on human health. Toxicol. Res. 35(1): 1–7. Doi: 10.5487/ 
TR.2019.35.1.001.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
248 Nanosensors 
[4] Park, D.L., H. Njapau and E. Boutrif. 1999. Minimizing risks posed by mycotoxins utilizing the 
HACCP concept. Food, Nutrition and Agriculture 23(23): 49–55 [Online]. Available: http://www. 
fao.org/docrep/X2100T/x2100t08.htm#TopOfPage. 
[5] Eskola, M., G. Kos, C.T. Elliott, J. Hajšlová, S. Mayar and R. Krska. 2020, Sep. Worldwide 
contamination of food-crops with mycotoxins: Validity of the widely cited ‘FAO estimate’ of 25%. 
Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 60(16): 2773–2789. Doi: 10.1080/10408398.2019.1658570. 
[6] Alshannaq, A. and J.-H. Yu. 2017, Jun. Occurrence, toxicity, and analysis of major mycotoxins in 
food. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 14(6): 632. Doi: 10.3390/ijerph14060632. 
[7] Ostry, V., F. Malir, J. Toman and Y. Grosse. 2017, Feb. Mycotoxins as human carcinogens—the 
IARC Monographs classification. Mycotoxin. Res. 33(1): 65–73. Doi: 10.1007/s12550-016-
0265-7. 
[8] Alshannaq, A. et al. 2012. Improving public health through mycotoxin control 51(1). WHO 
PRESS. Doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2012.09.032. 
[9] Peltomaa, R., E. Benito-Peña and M.C. Moreno-Bondi. 2018, Jan. Bioinspired recognition 
elements for mycotoxin sensors. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 410(3): 747–771. Doi: 10.1007/s00216­
017-0701-3. 
[10] Kuiper-Goodman, T. 2004. Risk assessment and risk management of mycotoxins in food. 
pp. 3–31. In: Magan, N. and E.M. Olsen (eds.). Mycotoxins in Food Elsevier. Doi: 
10.1533/9781855739086.1.3. 
[11] Hussain, S.P., J. Schwank, F. Staib, X.W. Wang and C.C. Harris. 2007, Apr. TP53 mutations and 
hepatocellular carcinoma: Insights into the etiology and pathogenesis of liver cancer. Oncogene 
26(15): 2166–2176. Doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210279. 
[12] Bbosa, G.S., D. Kitya, A. Lubega, J. Ogwal-Okeng, W.W. Anokbonggo and D.B. Kyegombe. 
2013. Review of the biological and health effects of aflatoxins on body organs and body systems. 
In: Razzaghi-Abyaneh, M. (ed.). Aflatoxins—Recent Advances and Future Prospects. Rijeka: 
InTech. Doi: 10.5772/51201. 
[13] Bui-Klimke, T.R. and F. Wu. 2015, Nov. Ochratoxin A and human health risk: A review of the 
evidence. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 55(13): 1860–1869. Doi: 10.1080/10408398.2012.724480. 
[14] Mbundi, L., H. Gallar-Ayala, M.R. Khan, J.L. Barber, S. Losada and R. Busquets. 2014. Advances 
in the analysis of challenging food contaminants. In Advances in Molecular Toxicology 8: 35–105. 
Doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63406-1.00002-7. 
[15]	 Vardon, P., C. McLaughlin and C. Nardinelli. 2003. Potential Economic Costs of Mycotoxins in 
the United States. 
[16]		 Wu, F. and N.J. Mitchell. 2016. How climate change and regulations can affect the economics of 
mycotoxins. World Mycotoxin. J. 9(5): 653–663. Doi: 10.3920/WMJ2015.2015. 
[17] Debegnach, F., E. Gregori, S. Russo, F. Marchegiani, G. Moracci and C. Brera. 2017, May. 
Development of a LC-MS/MS method for the multi-mycotoxin determination in composite cereal￾based samples. Toxins (Basel) 9(5): 169. Doi: 10.3390/toxins9050169. 
[18] Köppen, R., M. Koch, D. Siegel, S. Merkel, R. Maul and I. Nehls. 2010, May. Determination 
of mycotoxins in foods: Current state of analytical methods and limitations. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol. 86(6): 1595–1612. Doi: 10.1007/s00253-010-2535-1. 
[19] Evtugyn, G., V. Subjakova, S. Melikishvili and T. Hianik. 2018. Affinity biosensors for detection 
of mycotoxins in food. In Advances in Food and Nutrition Research 85: 263–310. Doi: 10.1016/ 
bs.afnr.2018.03.003. 
[20] Leenaars, M. and C.F.M. Hendriksen. 2005, Jan. Critical steps in the production of polyclonal and 
monoclonal antibodies: Evaluation and recommendations. ILAR J. 46(3): 269–279. Doi: 10.1093/ 
ilar.46.3.269. 
[21] Gray, A.C., S.S. Sidhu, P.C. Chandrasekera, C.F.M. Hendriksen and C.A.K. Borrebaeck. 2016, 
Dec. Animal-friendly affinity reagents: replacing the needless in the haystack. Trends Biotechnol. 
34(12): 960–969. Doi: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.05.017. 
[22] Rhouati, A., G. Bulbul, U. Latif, A. Hayat, Z.-H. Li and J. Marty. 2017, Oct. Nano-aptasensing 
in mycotoxin analysis: Recent updates and progress. Toxins (Basel) 9(11): 349. Doi: 10.3390/ 
toxins9110349. 
[23] Palchetti, I. and M. Mascini. 2012, Apr. Electrochemical nanomaterial-based nucleic acid 
aptasensors. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 402(10): 3103–3114. Doi: 10.1007/s00216-012-5769-1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 249 
[24] Chiorcea-Paquim, A.M. and A.M. Oliveira-Brett. 2016, Jul. Guanine quadruplex electrochemical 
aptasensors. Chemosensors 4(3): 13. Doi: 10.3390/chemosensors4030013. 
[25] Zhuo, Z. et al. 2017, Oct. Recent advances in SELEX technology and aptamer applications in 
biomedicine. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18(10): 2142. Doi: 10.3390/ijms18102142. 
[26]		 Pfeiffer, F. and G. Mayer. 2016, Jun. Selection and biosensor application of aptamers for small 
molecules. Front. Chem. 4. Doi: 10.3389/fchem.2016.00025. 
[27]	 Tomita, Y., Y. Morita, H. Suga and D. Fujiwara. 2016, Jun. DNA module platform for developing 
colorimetric aptamer sensors. Biotechniques 60(6): 285–292. Doi: 10.2144/000114425. 
[28] Goode, J.A., J.V.H. Rushworth and P.A. Millner. 2015, Jun. Biosensor regeneration: A review of 
common techniques and outcomes. Langmuir 31(23): 6267–6276. Doi: 10.1021/la503533g. 
[29] Evtugyn, G. and T. Hianik. 2020. Aptamer-based biosensors for mycotoxin detection. In 
Nanomycotoxicology, Elsevier, pp. 35–70. Doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-817998-7.00003-3. 
[30] Evtugyn, G. and T. Hianik. 2019. Electrochemical immuno- and aptasensors for mycotoxin 
determination. Chemosensors 7(1). Doi: 10.3390/CHEMOSENSORS7010010. 
[31] Cruz-Aguado, J.A. and G. Penner. 2008. Determination of ochratoxin A with a DNA aptamer. J. 
Agric. Food Chem. 56(22): 10456–10461. Doi: 10.1021/jf801957h. 
[32] Rhouati, A., C. Yang, A. Hayat and J.L. Marty. 2013, Nov. Aptamers: A promosing tool for 
ochratoxin a detection in food analysis. Toxins (Basel) 5(11): 1988–2008. Doi: 10.3390/ 
toxins5111988. 
[33] Hermann, T. and D.J. Patel. 2000, Feb. Adaptive recognition by nucleic acid aptamers. Science 
(1979) 287(5454): 820–825. Doi: 10.1126/science.287.5454.820. 
[34] Barthelmebs, L., J. Jonca, A. Hayat, B. Prieto-Simon and J.L. Marty. 2011. Enzyme-Linked 
Aptamer Assays (ELAAs), based on a competition format for a rapid and sensitive detection of 
Ochratoxin A in wine. Food Control 22(5): 737–743. Doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2010.11.005. 
[35] McKeague, M., R. Velu, K. Hill, V. Bardóczy, T. Mészáros and M.C. DeRosa. 2014. Selection and 
characterization of a novel DNA aptamer for label-free fluorescence biosensing of ochratoxin A. 
Toxins (Basel) 6(8): 2435–2452. Doi: 10.3390/toxins6082435. 
[36] Goud, K.Y., A. Hayat, G. Catanante, S.M. Satyanarayana, K.V. Gobi and J.L. Marty. 2017, Aug. 
An electrochemical aptasensor based on functionalized graphene oxide assisted electrocatalytic 
signal amplification of methylene blue for aflatoxin B1 detection. Electrochim. Acta 244: 96–103. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2017.05.089. 
[37] Setlem, K., B. Mondal, S. Ramlal and J. Kingston. 2016, Dec. Immuno affinity SELEX for 
simple, rapid, and cost-effective aptamer enrichment and identification against aflatoxin B1. Front. 
Microbiol., 7. Doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01909. 
[38] Chryseis Le, L., J. Cruz-Aguado and G. A. Penner. 2010. DNA ligands for aflatoxins and 
zearalenone. PCT/CA2010/001292. 
[39] Ma, X. et al. 2015, Jan. Selection, characterization and application of aptamers targeted to 
Aflatoxin B2. Food Control 47: 545–551. Doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2014.07.037. 
[40] Nguyen, B.H., L.D. Tran, Q.P. Do, H. le Nguyen, N.H. Tran and P.X. Nguyen. 2013, May. Label￾free detection of aflatoxin M1 with electrochemical Fe3O4/polyaniline-based aptasensor. Materials 
Science and Engineering C 33(4): 2229–2234. Doi: 10.1016/j.msec.2013.01.044. 
[41] Chalyan, T. et al. 2017. Aptamer-and Fab’-functionalized microring resonators for aflatoxin 
M1 detection. IEEE Journal on Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 23(2). Doi: 10.1109/ 
JSTQE.2016.2609100. 
[42] Malhotra, S., A.K. Pandey, Y.S. Rajput and R. Sharma. 2014. Selection of aptamers for aflatoxin 
M1 and their characterization. Journal of Molecular Recognition 27(8): 493–500. Doi: 10.1002/ 
jmr.2370. 
[43]	 Wu, S., N. Duan, W. Zhang, S. Zhao and Z. Wang. 2016. Screening and development of DNA 
aptamers as capture probes for colorimetric detection of patulin. Anal. Biochem. 508: 58–64. Doi: 
10.1016/j.ab.2016.05.024. 
[44] McKeague, M., C.R. Bradley, A. de Girolamo, A. Visconti, J. David Miller and M.C. de Rosa. 
2010. Screening and initial binding assessment of fumonisin B 1 aptamers. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
11(12): 4864–4881. Doi: 10.3390/ijms11124864.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
250 Nanosensors 
[45] Chen, X. et al. 2014. Selection and characterization of single stranded DNA aptamers recognizing 
fumonisin B1. Microchimica Acta 181(11-12): 1317–1324. Doi: 10.1007/s00604-014-1260-3. 
[46]	 Wu, S., L. Zhang and M. Yang. 2012. Fumonisins B2 nucleic acid adapter and application thereof. 
Art. no. CN 102517290 A. 
[47] Zhang, H.-Hui, Ya-Jun, JIN, Qing-Ri, SHAO, Chun-Yan, GUI, Hai-Luan, FANG, Wei-Huan, 
YANG and Meng-Hua, SONG. 2016. Development of an aptamer based technique for the detection 
of mycotoxin citrinin. Mycosystema 35(2): 209–216. Doi: 10.13346/j.mycosystema.140241. 
[48] Liu, H., Y. Liu and S. Wu. 2012. Deoxynivalenol nucleic acid aptamer and application thereof. 
CN102559686A. 
[49] Chen, X. et al. 2013. Selection and identification of ssDNA aptamers recognizing zearalenone. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 405(20): 6573–6581. Doi: 10.1007/s00216-013-7085-9. 
[50] Zhang, Y. et al. 2018. Selection of a DNA aptamer against zearalenone and docking analysis 
for highly sensitive rapid visual detection with label-free aptasensor. J. Agric. Food Chem. 
66(45): 12102–12110. Doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.8b03963. 
[51] Chen, X. et al. 2014. Screening and identification of DNA aptamers against T-2 toxin assisted by 
graphene oxide. J. Agric. Food Chem. 62(42): 10368–10374. Doi: 10.1021/jf5032058. 
[52] Krüger, A., F.M. Zimbres, T. Kronenberger and C. Wrenger. 2018. Molecular modeling applied to 
nucleic acid-based molecule development. Biomolecules 8(3). Doi: 10.3390/biom8030083. 
[53] Hayat, A. and J.L. Marty. 2014, Jun. Aptamer based electrochemical sensors for emerging 
environmental pollutants. Front. Chem. 2. Doi: 10.3389/fchem.2014.00041. 
[54] Raouafi, A., A. Sánchez, N. Raouafi and R. Villalonga. 2019. Electrochemical aptamer-based 
bioplatform for ultrasensitive detection of prostate specific antigen. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 297. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2019.126762. 
[55] Ronkainen, N.J., H.B. Halsall and W.R. Heineman. 2010. Electrochemical biosensors. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 39(5): 1747–1763. Doi: 10.1039/b714449k. 
[56] Chen, W., C. Yan, L. Cheng, L. Yao, F. Xue and J. Xu. 2018. An ultrasensitive signal-on 
electrochemical aptasensor for ochratoxin A determination based on DNA controlled layer-by￾layer assembly of dual gold nanoparticle conjugates. Biosens. Bioelectron 117: 845–851. Doi: 
10.1016/j.bios.2018.07.012. 
[57] Santos, A.O., A. Vaz, P. Rodrigues, A.C.A. Veloso, A. Venâncio and A.M. Peres. 2019, Jan. Thin 
films sensor devices for mycotoxins detection in foods: Applications and challenges. Chemosensors 
7(1): 3. Doi: 10.3390/chemosensors7010003. 
[58] Qing, Y. et al. 2017. Differential pulse voltammetric ochratoxin A assay based on the use of an 
aptamer and hybridization chain reaction. Microchimica Acta 184(3): 863–870. Doi: 10.1007/ 
s00604-017-2080-z. 
[59] He, B. and X. Dong. 2018. Aptamer based voltammetric patulin assay based on the use of ZnO 
nanorods. Microchimica Acta 185(10). Doi: 10.1007/s00604-018-3006-0. 
[60] Kulikova, T.N., A.v. Porfireva, G.A. Evtugyn and T. Hianik. 2019. Electrochemical aptasensor with 
layer-by-layer deposited polyaniline for aflatoxin M1 voltammetric determination. Electroanalysis 
31(10): 1913–1924. Doi: 10.1002/elan.201900274. 
[61] Abnous, K., N.M. Danesh, M. Alibolandi, M. Ramezani and S.M. Taghdisi. 2017, Apr. 
Amperometric aptasensor for ochratoxin A based on the use of a gold electrode modified with 
aptamer, complementary DNA, SWCNTs and the redox marker Methylene Blue. Microchimica 
Acta 184(4): 1151–1159. Doi: 10.1007/s00604-017-2113-7. 
[62]	 Tang, J., Y. Huang, Y. Cheng, L. Huang, J. Zhuang and D. Tang. 2018, Mar. Two-dimensional 
MoS2 as a nano-binder for ssDNA: Ultrasensitive aptamer based amperometric detection of 
Ochratoxin A. Microchimica Acta 185(3): 162. Doi: 10.1007/s00604-018-2706-9. 
[63]	 Lv, E., J. Ding and W. Qin. 2018, Apr. Potentiometric aptasensing of small molecules based on 
surface charge change. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 259: 463–466. Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2017.12.067. 
[64]	 Kumar, A., M. Malinee, A. Dhiman, A. Kumar and T.K. Sharma. 2019. Aptamer technology 
for the detection of foodborne pathogens and toxins. In Advanced Biosensors for Health Care 
Applications, pp. 45–69. Doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-815743-5.00002-0. 
[65] Ocaña, C. and M. del Valle. 2018. Impedimetric aptasensors using nanomaterials. In Nanotechnology 
and Biosensors, Elsevier, pp. 233–267. Doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-813855-7.00008-8.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 251 
[66] Rivas, L., C.C. Mayorga-Martinez, D. Quesada-González, A. Zamora-Gálvez, A. de La Escosura￾Muñiz and A. Merkoçi. 2015, May. Label-free impedimetric aptasensor for ochratoxin-A 
detection using iridium oxide nanoparticles. Anal. Chem. 87(10): 5167–5172. Doi: 10.1021/acs. 
analchem.5b00890. 
[67] Castillo, G., K. Spinella, A. Poturnayová, M. Šnejdárková, L. Mosiello and T. Hianik. 2015, 
Jun.Detection of aflatoxin B1 by aptamer-based biosensor using PAMAM dendrimers as 
immobilization platform. Food Control 52: 9–18. Doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2014.12.008. 
[68] Fernandes, F.C.B., M.S. Góes, J.J. Davis and P.R. Bueno. 2013, May. Label free redox capacitive 
biosensing. Biosens. Bioelectron 50: 437–440. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2013.06.043. 
[69] Santos, A., J.J. Davis and P.R. Bueno. 2014, Jun. Fundamentals and applications of impedimetric 
and redox capacitive biosensors. J. Anal. Bioanal. Tech. 0. Doi: 10.4172/2155-9872.S7-016. 
[70]		 Ben Aissa, S., A. Mars, G. Catanante, J.L. Marty and N. Raouafi. 2019. Design of a redox￾active surface for ultrasensitive redox capacitive aptasensing of aflatoxin M1 in milk. Talanta 
195(August 2018): 525–532. Doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2018.11.026. 
[71]		 Argoubi, W., A. Rabti, S. ben Aoun and N. Raouafi. 2019. Sensitive detection of ascorbic acid 
using screen-printed electrodes modified by electroactive melanin-like nanoparticles. RSC Adv. 
9(64): 37384–37390. Doi: 10.1039/C9RA07948C. 
[72] Bulbul, G., A. Hayat and S. Andreescu. 2015. A generic amplification strategy for electrochemical 
aptasensors using a non-enzymatic nanoceria tag. Nanoscale 7(31): 13230–13238. Doi: 10.1039/ 
c5nr02628h. 
[73] Zhang, J., B. Liu, H. Liu, X. Zhang and W. Tan. 2013, Jun. Aptamer-conjugated gold nanoparticles 
for bioanalysis. Nanomedicine 8(6): 983–993. Doi: 10.2217/nnm.13.80. 
[74] Azizah, N., U. Hashim, S.C.B. Gopinath and S. Nadzirah. 2016, Dec. Gold nanoparticle mediated 
method for spatially resolved deposition of DNA on nano-gapped interdigitated electrodes, and its 
application to the detection of the human Papillomavirus. Microchimica Acta 183(12): 3119–3126. 
Doi: 10.1007/s00604-016-1954-9. 
[75] Gu, C. et al. 2019, Jun. A bimetallic (Cu-Co) Prussian Blue analogue loaded with gold nanoparticles 
for impedimetric aptasensing of ochratoxin A. Microchimica Acta 186(6): 343. Doi: 10.1007/ 
s00604-019-3479-5. 
[76] Kang, D., F. Ricci, R.J. White and K.W. Plaxco. 2016, Nov. Survey of redox-active moieties for 
application in multiplexed electrochemical biosensors. Anal. Chem. 88(21): 10452–10458. Doi: 
10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02376. 
[77] Hayat, A., G. Catanante and J.L. Marty. 2014, Dec. Current trends in nanomaterial-based 
amperometric biosensors. Sensors (Switzerland) 14(12): 23439–23461. Doi: 10.3390/s141223439. 
[78] Ding, L., A.M. Bond, J. Zhai and J. Zhang. 2013, Oct. Utilization of nanoparticle labels for signal 
amplification in ultrasensitive electrochemical affinity biosensors: A review. Anal. Chim. Acta 
797: 1–12. Doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2013.07.035. 
[79] Jalalian, S.H., M. Ramezani, N.M. Danesh, M. Alibolandi, K. Abnous and S.M. Taghdisi. 
2018, Oct. A novel electrochemical aptasensor for detection of aflatoxin M1 based on target￾induced immobilization of gold nanoparticles on the surface of electrode. Biosens. Bioelectron 
117: 487–492. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2018.06.055. 
[80]	 Wang, C. et al. 2017, Mar. Magneto-controlled aptasensor for simultaneous electrochemical 
detection of dual mycotoxins in maize using metal sulfide quantum dots coated silica as labels. 
Biosens. Bioelectron 89: 802–809. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2016.10.010. 
[81]	 Ting, B.P., J. Zhang, Z. Gao and J.Y. Ying. 2009. A DNA biosensor based on the detection of 
doxorubicin-conjugated Ag nanoparticle labels using solid-state voltammetry. Biosens. Bioelectron 
25(2): 282–287. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2009.07.005. 
[82] Shi, Z. et al. 2017. Ultra-sensitive aptasensor based on IL and Fe3O4 nanoparticles for tetracycline 
detection. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 12(8): 7426–7434. Doi: 10.20964/2017.08.76. 
[83] Mars, A., C. Parolo, A. de la Escosura-Muñiz, N. Raouafi and A. Merkoçi. 2016, Aug. Control 
of electron-transfer in immunonanosensors by using polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies. 
Electroanalysis 28(8): 1795–1802. Doi: 10.1002/elan.201500646. 
[84] Jing, P., H. Yi, S. Xue, Y. Chai, R. Yuan and W. Xu. 2015, Jan. A sensitive electrochemical 
aptasensor based on palladium nanoparticles decorated graphene-molybdenum disulfide flower- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
252 Nanosensors 
like nanocomposites and enzymatic signal amplification. Anal. Chim. Acta 853(1): 234–241. Doi: 
10.1016/j.aca.2014.10.003. 
[85]	 Vasilescu, A., A. Hayat, S. Gáspár and J.L. Marty. 2018, Jan. Advantages of carbon nanomaterials 
in electrochemical aptasensors for food analysis. Electroanalysis 30(1): 2–19. Doi: 10.1002/ 
elan.201700578. 
[86] Goud, K.Y. et al. 2018, Dec. Progress on nanostructured electrochemical sensors and their 
recognition elements for detection of mycotoxins: A review. Biosens. Bioelectron 121: 205–222. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2018.08.029. 
[87]	 Wei, M. and W. Zhang. 2017. A novel impedimetric aptasensor based on AuNPs-carboxylic porous 
carbon for the ultrasensitive detection of ochratoxin A. RSC Adv. 7(46): 28655–28660. Doi: 
10.1039/c7ra04209d. 
[88]		 Argoubi, W., M. Saadaoui, S. ben Aoun and N. Raouafi. 2015. Optimized design of a nanostructured 
SPCE-based multipurpose biosensing platform formed by ferrocene-tethered electrochemically￾deposited cauliflower-shaped gold nanoparticles. Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 
6(1): 1840–1852. Doi: 10.3762/bjnano.6.187. 
[89] Xie, J., X. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Zheng, Y. Huang and J. Xie. 2012, Oct. Analytical and environmental 
applications of nanoparticles as enzyme mimetics. TrAC—Trends in Analytical Chemistry 
39: 114–129. Doi: 10.1016/j.trac.2012.03.021. 
[90] Shin, H.Y., T.J. Park and M.il Kim. 2015. Recent research trends and future prospects in nanozymes. 
J. Nanomater. 2015: 1–11. Doi: 10.1155/2015/756278. 
[91]	 Wang, Q., H. Wei, Z. Zhang, E. Wang and S. Dong. 2018, Aug. Nanozyme: An emerging alternative 
to natural enzyme for biosensing and immunoassay. TrAC—Trends in Analytical Chemistry 
105: 218–224. Doi: 10.1016/j.trac.2018.05.012. 
[92] Evtugyn, G. et al. 2013, Aug. Electrochemical aptasensor for the determination of ochratoxin 
A at the Au electrode modified with Ag nanoparticles decorated with macrocyclic ligand. 
Electroanalysis 25(8): 1847–1854. Doi: 10.1002/elan.201300164. 
[93] Karimi, A., A. Hayat and S. Andreescu. 2017, Jan. Biomolecular detection at ssDNA-conjugated 
nanoparticles by nano-impact electrochemistry. Biosens. Bioelectron 87: 501–507. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
bios.2016.08.108. 
[94] Evtugyn, G. et al. 2013. Impedimetric aptasensor for ochratoxin a determination based 
on Au nanoparticles stabilized with hyper-branched polymer. Sensors (Switzerland) 
13(12): 16129–16145. Doi: 10.3390/s131216129. 
[95]		 Wei, M. and S. Feng. 2017. A signal-off aptasensor for the determination of Ochratoxin A 
by differential pulse voltammetry at a modified Au electrode using methylene blue as an 
electrochemical probe. Analytical Methods 9(37): 5449–5454. Doi: 10.1039/c7ay01735a. 
[96] Kuang, H. et al. 2010. Fabricated aptamer-based electrochemical ‘signal-off’ sensor of ochratoxin 
A. Biosens. Bioelectron 26(2): 710–716. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2010.06.058. 
[97] Roushani, A., M. Zare Dizajdizi, B. Rahmati and Z. Azadbakht. 2019. Development of 
electrochemical aptasensor based on gold nanorod and its application for detection of aflatoxin 
B1 in rice and blood serum sample. Nanochemistry Research 4(1): 35–42. Doi: 10.22036/ 
ncr.2019.01.005. 
[98] He, B. and X. Yan. 2019. An amperometric zearalenone aptasensor based on signal amplification 
by using a composite prepared from porous platinum nanotubes, gold nanoparticles and thionine￾labelled graphene oxide. Microchimica Acta 186(6). Doi: 10.1007/s00604-019-3500-z. 
[99]	 Yang, X. et al. 2014. Ultrasensitive electrochemical aptasensor for ochratoxin A based on two￾level cascaded signal amplification strategy. Bioelectrochemistry 96: 7–13. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
bioelechem.2013.11.006. 
[100] Chen, X., Y. Huang, X. Ma, F. Jia, X. Guo and Z. Wang. 2015, Jul. Impedimetric aptamer-based 
determination of the mold toxin fumonisin B1. Microchimica Acta 182(9-10): 1709–1714. Doi: 
10.1007/s00604-015-1492-x. 
[101] Zheng, W. et al. 2016, Jun. Hetero-enzyme-based two-round signal amplification strategy for trace 
detection of aflatoxin B1 using an electrochemical aptasensor. Biosens. Bioelectron 80: 574–581. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2016.01.091.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical Nano-aptamer-based Assays for the Detection of Mycotoxins 253 
[102] Nan, M. et al. 2019, Jan. Rapid determination of ochratoxin a in grape and its commodities based 
on a label-free impedimetric aptasensor constructed by layer-by-layer self-assembly. Toxins 
(Basel) 11(2): 71. Doi: 10.3390/toxins11020071. 
[103] Gu, M. et al. 2019, Aug. Development of ochratoxin aptasensor based on DNA metal nanoclusters. 
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Letters 11(8): 1139–1144. Doi: 10.1166/nnl.2019.2981. 
[104] Solanki, P.R., A. Kaushik, V.V. Agrawal and B.D. Malhotra. 2011, Jan. Nanostructured metal 
oxide-based biosensors. NPG Asia Mater. 3(1): 17–24. Doi: 10.1038/asiamat.2010.137. 
[105] Ansari, A.A., A. Kaushik, P.R. Solanki and B.D. Malhotra. 2010, Feb. Nanostructured zinc 
oxide platform for mycotoxin detection. Bioelectrochemistry 77(2): 75–81. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
bioelechem.2009.06.014. 
[106] He, B. and X. Dong. 2019. Hierarchically porous Zr-MOFs labelled methylene blue as signal 
tags for electrochemical patulin aptasensor based on ZnO nano flower. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 
294: 192–198. Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2019.05.045. 
[107] Chen, Z. and M. Lu. 2016, Nov. Target-responsive aptamer release from manganese dioxide 
nanosheets for electrochemical sensing of cocaine with target recycling amplification. Talanta 
160: 444–448. Doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2016.07.052. 
[108] Wang, C. et al. 2018, Jun. Fabrication of magnetically assembled aptasensing device for label-free 
determination of aflatoxin B1 based on EIS. Biosens. Bioelectron 108: 69–75. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
bios.2018.02.043. 
[109] Sun, A.-L., Y.-F. Zhang, G.-P. Sun, X.-N. Wang and D. Tang. 2017, Mar. Homogeneous 
electrochemical detection of ochratoxin A in foodstuff using aptamer–graphene oxide nanosheets 
and DNase I-based target recycling reaction. Biosens. Bioelectron 89: 659–665. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
bios.2015.12.032. 
[110] Qian, J., L. Jiang, X. Yang, Y. Yan, H. Mao and K. Wang. 2014, Aug. Highly sensitive impedimetric 
aptasensor based on covalent binding of gold nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide with good 
dispersity and high density. Analyst 139(21): 5587–5593. Doi: 10.1039/C4AN01116C. 
[111] Mo, R. et al. 2018, Oct. A novel aflatoxin B1 biosensor based on a porous anodized alumina 
membrane modified with graphene oxide and an aflatoxin B1 aptamer. Electrochem. Commun. 
95: 9–13. Doi: 10.1016/j.elecom.2018.08.012. 
[112] Geleta, G.S., Z. Zhao and Z. Wang. 2018. A novel reduced graphene oxide/molybdenum disulfide/ 
polyaniline nanocomposite-based electrochemical aptasensor for detection of aflatoxin B1. 
Analyst 143(7): 1644–1649. Doi: 10.1039/c7an02050c. 
[113] Loo, A.H., A. Bonanni and M. Pumera. 2015, May. Mycotoxin aptasensing amplification by using 
inherently electroactive graphene-oxide nanoplatelet labels. ChemElectroChem 2(5): 743–747. 
Doi: 10.1002/celc.201402403. 
[114] Ma, L., L. Bai, M. Zhao, J. Zhou, Y. Chen and Z. Mu. 2019, Jul. An electrochemical aptasensor for 
highly sensitive detection of zearalenone based on PEI-MoS2-MWCNTs nanocomposite for signal 
enhancement. Anal. Chim. Acta 1060: 71–78. Doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2019.02.012. 
[115] Sanati, A. et al. 2019, Dec. A review on recent advancements in electrochemical biosensing using 
carbonaceous nanomaterials. Microchimica Acta 186(12): 773. Doi: 10.1007/s00604-019-3854-2. 
[116] Bacon, M., S.J. Bradley and T. Nann. 2014, Apr. Graphene quantum dots. Particle & Particle 
Systems Characterization 31(4): 415–428. Doi: 10.1002/ppsc.201300252. 
[117] Gevaerd, A., C.E. Banks, M.F. Bergamini and L.H. Marcolino-Junior. 2020, Mar. Nanomodified 
screen-printed electrode for direct determination of aflatoxin B1 in malted barley samples. Sens. 
Actuators B Chem. 307: 127547. Doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2019.127547. 
[118] Arduini, F., F. di Nardo, A. Amine, L. Micheli, G. Palleschi and D. Moscone. 2012, Apr. 
Carbon black-modified screen-printed electrodes as electroanalytical tools. Electroanalysis 
24(4): 743–751. Doi: 10.1002/elan.201100561. 
[119] Erdem, A., G. Congur and G. Mayer. 2015, Dec. Aptasensor platform based on carbon 
nanofibers enriched screen printed electrodes for impedimetric detection of thrombin. Journal of 
Electroanalytical Chemistry 758: 12–19. Doi: 10.1016/j.jelechem.2015.10.002. 
[120] Fang, L.-X., K.-J. Huang and Y. Liu. 2015, Sep. Novel electrochemical dual-aptamer-based 
sandwich biosensor using molybdenum disulfide/carbon aerogel composites and Au nanoparticles 
for signal amplification. Biosens. Bioelectron 71: 171–178. Doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2015.04.031.  
 
 
 
254 Nanosensors 
[121] Beheshti-Marnani, A., A. Hatefi-Mehrjardi and Z. Es’haghi. 2019. A sensitive biosensing method 
for detecting of ultra-trace amounts of AFB1 based on ‘Aptamer/reduced graphene oxide’ nano￾bio interaction. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 175: 98–105. Doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2018.11.087. 
[122] Jiang, L. et al. 2014, Jan. Amplified impedimetric aptasensor based on gold nanoparticles 
covalently bound graphene sheet for the picomolar detection of ochratoxin A. Anal. Chim. Acta 
806: 128–135. Doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2013.11.003. 
[123] Shi, Z.Y., Y.T. Zheng, H.B. Zhang, C.H. He, W. da Wu and H. bin Zhang. 2015, May. DNA 
electrochemical aptasensor for detecting fumonisins B1 based on graphene and thionine 
nanocomposite. Electroanalysis 27(5): 1097–1103. Doi: 10.1002/elan.201400504. 
[124] Hao, N., L. Jiang, J. Qian and K. Wang. 2016, Nov. Ultrasensitive electrochemical Ochratoxin 
A aptasensor based on CdTe quantum dots functionalized graphene/Au nanocomposites and 
magnetic separation. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 781: 332–338. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
jelechem.2016.09.053. Index
 
A
affinity biosensors 90
 
animal biotechnology 181, 183, 184
 
antibiotics 1, 2, 4–12, 14–16, 18, 20
 
aptamer 205–207, 213–233, 235–247
 
aptasensors 206, 207, 214–216, 219–246
 
Atomic Layer Deposition 166
 
autoimmune disease biomarkers 90
 
B
biosensors 181–192, 194, 195, 197–199
 
C
carbon nanomaterials 239, 242, 243
 
conservation 173–175, 179
 
D
detection methods 181, 185, 188, 192, 195, 196
 
determination 1–3, 10, 127, 131, 132, 138, 
146–149
 
diagnostics 173, 174, 179
 
diamond-like carbon 75, 76, 78
 
DNA sensor 23–25, 27, 28, 30–33, 35, 37–39, 
41–44, 46, 47, 51–58
 
drug determination 43, 44
 
E
electroanalysis 14
 
electrochemical 90–96, 98–105
 
electrochemical biosensors 206, 219
 
electrode 1–20, 127, 130–150 
electropolymerization 24, 33–38, 45
 
F
fiber-optic microresonator 159
 
fiber-optic microsphere 160, 162
 
fiber-optic sensors 159, 163, 166–169
 
food contaminants 212, 215
 
food safety 207, 208, 212, 246
 
G
genosensors 109, 117–119
 
gold nanostar 75, 76
 
H
hot electrons 75, 76, 79, 80, 82, 84, 85
 
hybrid material 75–78, 85
 
I
 
immunosensors 109, 112–114 
L
labels 110–113, 115–121 
M
metal nanoparticles 110
 
metal organic frameworks 29, 31
 
mycotoxins 205–222, 224–230, 233–235, 
237–243, 246, 247
 
N
nanomaterials 23, 25–27, 29, 38, 43, 44, 46, 47, 
57, 90, 91, 99–102, 105, 206, 207, 214, 220, 
223–230, 233–235, 237–239, 242, 243, 246, 
247
 
nanoparticles 214, 222–227, 229, 230, 232, 233, 
235, 236, 237, 239, 242
 
nanoprobes 109, 110, 112, 115, 117, 121
 
nanosensors 173–175
 
P
photoinduced electron emission 75
 256 Nanosensors
Q
quantum dots 110
 
S
stripping voltammetry 111, 114, 115, 117–120
 
T
transduction 182, 185, 187, 188, 190, 191
 
V
 
vitamins 127, 128, 130–133, 139–150
 
W
wavelength dependence 70, 71
 
work of arts 174, 175
 
X
 
X-ray source 72, 74
 
Z
zinc oxide 166
 
ZnO 162, 166–169
 
