NANOTECHNOLOGY 
IN ELECTRONICS, 
PHOTONICS, BIOSENSORS 
AND ENERGY SYSTEMSSELECTED TOPICS IN ELECTRONICS AND SYSTEMS
Editor-in-Chief: M. S. Shur ISSN: 1793-1274
Published*
Vol. 67: Nanotechnology in Electronics, Photonics, Biosensors and Energy Systems
eds. F. Jain, C. Broadbridge, M. Gherasimova and H. Tang
Vol. 66: Nanostructures for Electronics, Photonics, Biosensors and Emerging 
Systems Applications
eds. F. Jain, C. Broadbridge, M. Gherasimova and H. Tang
Vol. 65: Nanotechnology for Electronics, Biosensors, Additive Manufacturing and 
Emerging Systems Applications
eds. F. Jain, C. Broadbridge, M. Gherasimova and H. Tang
Vol. 64: Nanotechnology for Electronics, Photonics, Biosensors, and Emerging Technologies
eds. F. Jain, C. Broadbridge, M. Gherasimova and H. Tang
Vol. 63: Wide Bandgap Semiconductor Electronics and Devices
eds. Uttam Singisetti, Towhidur Razzak and Yuewei Zhang
Vol. 62: High Performance Logic and Circuits for High-Speed Electronic Systems
eds. F. Jain, C. Broadbridge, M. Gherasimova and H. Tang
Vol. 61: High Performance Materials and Devices for High-Speed Electronic Systems
eds. F. Jain, C. Broadbridge, H. Tang and M. Gherasimova
Vol. 60: Microelectronics and Optoelectronics
The 25th Annual Symposium of Connecticut Microelectronics and 
Optoelectronics Consortium (CMOC 2016)
eds. F. Jain, C. Broadbridge and H. Tang
Vol. 59: Scaling and Integration of High Speed Electronics and Optomechanical Systems
eds. Magnus Willander and Håkan Pettersson
Vol. 58: Fundamental and Applied Problems of Terahertz Devices and Technologies
Selected Papers from the Russia-Japan-USA-Europe Symposium
(RJUSE-TeraTech 2016)
by Maxim Ryzhii, Akira Satou and Taiichi Otsuji
Vol. 57: Frontiers in Electronics
Selected Papers from the Workshop on Frontiers in Electronics 2015 (WOFE-15)
eds. Sorin Cristoloveanu and Michael S. Shur
Vol. 56: Fundamental & Applied Problems of Terahertz Devices and Technologies
Selected Papers from the Russia–Japan–USA Symposium (RJUS TeraTech-2014)
ed. Michael S. Shur
Vol. 55: Frontiers in Electronics
Selected Papers from the Workshop on Frontiers in Electronics 2013 (WOFE-2013)
eds. Sorin Cristoloveanu and Michael S. Shur
*The complete list of the published volumes in the series can be found at
https://www.worldscientific.com/series/stesSelected Topics in Electronics and Systems – Vol. 67
F. Jain
University of Connecticut, USA
C. Broadbridge 
Southern Connecticut State University, USA
M. Gherasimova 
University of Bridgeport, USA
H. Tang 
Yale University, USA
Editors
NANOTECHNOLOGY 
IN ELECTRONICS, 
PHOTONICS, BIOSENSORS 
AND ENERGY SYSTEMS
NEW JERSEY • LONDON • SINGAPORE • BEIJING • SHANGHAI • HONG KONG • TAIPEI • CHENNAI • TOKYO
World ScientificPublished by
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA office: 27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601
UK office: 57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Selected Topics in Electronics and Systems — Vol. 67
NANOTECHNOLOGY IN ELECTRONICS, PHOTONICS, BIOSENSORS AND 
ENERGY SYSTEMS
Copyright © 2024 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. 
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to 
be invented, without written permission from the publisher.
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright Clearance Center, 
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to photocopy is not required from 
the publisher.
ISBN 978-981-128-375-8 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-981-128-376-5 (ebook for institutions)
ISBN 978-981-128-377-2 (ebook for individuals)
For any available supplementary material, please visit 
https://www.worldscientific.com/worldscibooks/10.1142/13607#t=suppl
Printed in Singapore 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_fmatter
v 
Preface 
This special issue on Nanotechnology in Electronics, Photonics, Biosensors, and Energy 
Systems is comprised of research papers selected from the 31st annual symposium of the 
Connecticut Microelectronics and Optoelectronics Consortium (CMOC), held virtually on 
March 1, 2023 and hosted by Information Technology Staff, University of Connecticut 
(Storrs Campus). 
Organized by a team of seven academic institutions and over thirteen companies across 
the United States, this symposium attracted authors from both academia and industry with 
topics representative of CMOC’s dynamic and relevant mission. 
The oral and poster papers presented span from use of graphene saturable absorbers in 
fiber ring laser systems, materials for supercapacitors, nanoelectronic and nanophotonic 
devices, electronic nose sensor array, bio-nano-systems, artificial intelligence/machine 
learning, and emerging technologies, to applications in each of these fields. 
Systems implementing additively manufactured RF devices for communication, 
packaging, remote sensing, compact multi-bit FETs and memories are also included in 
this special issue on high performance materials for implementing high-speed electronic 
systems. 
Plasmonic nanostructures with electrical connections have potential applications as 
new electro-optic devices. Quantum dot based devices are discussed with regard to optical 
logic gates, mid-infrared photodetectors, gain and index tailored external cavity high power 
lasers. 
In the area of material synthesis, nanostructured filters for plastic particle filtration are 
illustrated. Additive manufacturing techniques such as inkjet printing to sustainably 
accelerate the massive deployment of 5G/mm-Wave systems including multiple-input, 
multiple-output (MIMO) tile-based phased array are presented. 
Quantum dot random access nonvolatile memories, Gate all around (GAA) quantum 
dot channel (QDC), and spatial wavefunction switched (SWS) FETs for high-speed multi￾bit logic and compute in memory applications are additional topics included. 
In summary, the papers presented in this special issue broadly illustrate relevant aspects 
of high performance materials and emerging nanodevices for implementing high-speed 
electronic systems. We would like to take this opportunity to express our thanks to the 
authors, participants, and reviewers for their contributions and active participation, net￾working, and knowledge sharing on a variety of research areas. 
Guest Editors: 
F. Jain (University of Connecticut) 
C. Broadbridge (Southern Connecticut State University) 
M. Gherasimova (University of Bridgeport) 
H. Tang (Yale University) This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_fmatter 
vii 
Contents 
Preface v
Heating Effects on Nanofabricated Plasmonic Dimers with Interconnects 
R. Raman, J. Grasso and B. G. Willis 
1
Utilizing Machine Learning for Rapid Discrimination and Quantification of Volatile 
Organic Compounds in an Electronic Nose Sensor Array 
J. Grasso, J. Zhao and B. G. Willis 
11
Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization for High Power 
Applications 
Md. M. Hossain, Md. M. H. Shuvo, T. Titirsha and S. K. Islam 
21
Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence Based on Optical 
Logic Gate 
S. Fan, A. Rahman and N. K. Dutta 
35
Behavioral Modeling of the Pinched Hysteresis Loop of a Pt/TiO2/Pt Memristor 
A. A. Kausani and M. Anwar 
49
Design and Simulation of Multi-State D-Latch Circuit Using QDC-SWS FETs 
A. Almalki, B. Saman, R. H. Gudlavalleti, J. Chandy, E. Heller and F. C. Jain 
57
Hybrid Mode-Locked Fiber Ring Laser Using Graphene Saturable Absorbers to 
Generate 20 and 50-GHz Pulse Trains 
A. Rahman, S. Fan and N. K. Dutta 
67
Low Noise Gain and Index Tailored External Cavity Laser Operating at 1310 nm for 
Performance Enhancements of IMDD Photonic Links 
R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb and F. Jain 
79
Compute-in-Memory SRAM Cell Using Multistate Spatial Wavefunction Switched 
(SWS)-Quantum Dot Channel (QDC) FET 
R. H. Gudlavalleti, E. Heller, J. Chandy and F. Jain 
91viii Contents
High Speed 1550 nm Indium Gallium Arsenide-Indium Phosphide Photodetector 
E. Perez, R. LaComb and F. Jain 
101
1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using Hierarchical Reservoir Computing 
System 
Md. R. Hossain, A. Dhungel, M. Sadia, P. S. Paul, Md. S. Hasan 
109
PCB Security Modules for Reverse-Engineering Resistant Design 
S. Chen and L. Wang 
123
Next Generation RF Modules for 5G, IoT, AR/VR and RFID Applications 
M. Joshi, K. Hu, G. Soto-Valle, H. Al Jamal and M. Tentzeris 
141
Fabrication of Multi-Bit SRAMs Using Quantum Dot Channel (QDC)-Quantum Dot 
Gate (QDG) FET 
R. H. Gudlavalleti, J. Goosen, T. Liu, H. Bradley, E. Parent, A. Almalki, 
E. Perez and F. Jain 
151
Enhancing Number of Bits Via Mini-Energy Band Transitions Using Si Quantum Dot 
Channel (QDC) and Ge Quantum Dot Gate (QDG) FETs and NVRAMs 
F. Jain, R. H. Gudlavalleti, A. Almalki, B. Saman, P-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, 
F. Papadimitrakopoulos and E. Heller 
157
Filtration Methods for Microplastic Removal in Wastewater Streams — A Review 
U. Salahuddin, J. Sun, C. Zhu and P. Gao 
167
Numerical Investigation of the Electrothermal Properties of SOI FinFET Transistor
F. Nasri and H. Salama 
179
Memristor-Based Material Implication Logic: Prelude to In-Memory Computing 
A. Mazady and M. Anwar 
187
Magnetostrictive Fiber Sensors as Total Field Magnetometers 
R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb and F. Jain 
199
Propagation Delay and Power Dissipation Analysis for a 2-Bit SRAM Using 
Multi-State SWS Inverter 
A. Husawi, R. H. Gudlavalleti, B. Saman, A. Almalki, J. Chandy, E. Heller 
and F. C. Jain 
205
Ultra-Short Pulse-Train Generation of 30-GHz Repetition Rate Using Rational 
Harmonic Mode Locking and Nonlinear Polarization Rotation 
A. Rahman, S. Fan and N. K. Dutta 
217Contents ix
Threshold Inverter Quantizer (TIQ)-Based 2-Bit Comparator Using Spatial 
Wavefunction Switched (SWS) FET Inverters 
W. Alamoudi, B. Saman, R. H. Gudlavalleti, A. Almalki, J. Chandy, E. Heller 
and F. Jain 
227
Novel Multi-State QDC-QDG FETs and Gate All Around (GAA) FETs for Integrated 
Logic and QD-NVRAMs 
F. Jain, R. H. Gudlavalleti, J. Chandy and E. Heller 
237
Author Index 245This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0001
1 
Heating Effects on Nanofabricated Plasmonic Dimers with Interconnects 
Rahul Raman*
, John Grasso† and Brian G. Willis‡ 
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
191 Auditorium Road, Storrs, CT 06269, USA *Rahul.raman@uconn.edu †John.grasso@uconn.edu
‡brian.willis@uconn.edu 
Plasmonic nanostructures with electrical connections have potential applications as new electro-optic 
devices due to their strong light–matter interactions. Plasmonic dimers with nanogaps between 
adjacent nanostructures are especially good at enhancing local electromagnetic (EM) fields at 
resonance for improved performance. In this study, we use optical extinction measurements and high￾resolution electron microscopy imaging to investigate the thermal stability of electrically inter￾connected plasmonic dimers and their optical and morphological properties. Experimental measure￾ments and finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulations are combined to characterize temperature 
effects on the plasmonic properties of large arrays of Au nanostructures on glass substrates. 
Experiments show continuous blue shifts of extinction peaks for heating up to 210°C. Microscopy 
measurements reveal these peak shifts are due to morphological changes that shrink nanorods and 
increase nanogap distances. Simulations of the nanostructures before and after heating find good 
agreement with experiments. Results show that plasmonic properties are maintained after thermal 
processing, but peak shifts need to be considered for device design. 
Keywords: Plasmonic dimers; nanofabrication; thermal annealing; localized surface plasmon 
resonance. 
1. Introduction 
Nanostructures made of materials such as Cu, Ag and Au may exhibit localized surface 
plasmon resonances (LSPR) that enhance interactions of light with matter [1, 2]. The 
spectral position of the resonances can be tuned by the size and shape of nanostructures so 
that they may act as tiny antenna to collect and concentrate electromagnetic (EM) radiation 
from the ultraviolet to the infrared. At resonance, EM fields are strongly enhanced around 
plasmonic nanostructures, and these fields may enable new types of electro-optic devices 
that convert radiation into electrical signals for applications as sensors or for solar energy 
harvesting. For example, LSPR-generated EM fields may stimulate production of hot 
carriers that traverse Schottky barriers to create photocurrents for light sensors [3]. EM 
field enhancements are known to be especially strong at sharp tips and in nanogaps formed 
‡Corresponding author. 2 R. Raman, J. Grasso & B. G. Willis 
between closely spaced particles. When nanogaps are formed between sharp tips, EM field 
enhancements can exceed 103
 [4]. Achieving such strong field enhancements may be cri￾tical for creating efficient devices. 
The vast majority of studies related to plasmonics have investigated nanoparticles 
suspended in solution or randomly dispersed on solid supports. However, when ordered 
structures are created by nanofabrication techniques, it is possible to add electrical inter￾connections to plasmonic nanorods for electro-optic functions [5]. Nanofabrication, thin 
film deposition, and reactive processes provide opportunities for engineering plasmonic 
nanostructures to tune their optical properties and create nanogaps for enhanced EM fields. 
For example, atomic layer deposition (ALD) can be used to tune nanogap sizes and 
integrate plasmonic nanostructures with other materials [6]. 
In general, nanofabrication and thin film engineering to create functional devices will 
require thermal processes. In some cases, thermal processing may exceed temperatures of 
200°C. These thermal treatments may affect plasmonic properties and need to be factored 
into device design. Previous research on ALD-processed plasmonic nanostructures found 
significant blue shifts after thermal processing that were unexpected based on uniform and 
conformal growth [6]. In this study, we investigate optical and morphological changes of 
nanostructures after thermal treatments to determine how temperature affects plasmonic 
properties. As a model system, we investigate nanostructures made of Au on clear glass 
substrates. Optical extinction curves are measured before and after thermal treatments at 
temperatures up to 210°C to determine how heating affects plasmonic properties. We also 
investigate structural changes using high-resolution electron microscopy. 
2. Experiment 
Nanostructures were fabricated as large arrays of interconnected nanorod dimers using 
electron beam lithography with a F125 electron beam writer (Elionix, Japan), and using 
poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) photoresist (Kayak, USA). The design uses a 550 nm 
square unit cell repeated over an array 200  200 um2
 square. Substrates were 75 mm 
diameter fused silica wafers (GM Glass, USA). E-spacer was used for charge dissipation 
(Showa Denko, Japan). After development with methyl isobutyl ketone and isopropyl 
alcohol (MIBK/IPA), samples were rinsed with IPA, dried with N2 gas and processed with 
a 75 W O2 plasma in a barrel etcher before metal deposition. A thin film stack of 4 ± 1 nm 
Ti and 45 ± 5 nm Au was deposited in a high vacuum electron beam evaporator (Denton 
Vacuum, USA). Samples were further processed by liftoff using Remover PG (Kayak) to 
reveal the nanostructure arrays. A second layer of photolithographic processing was used 
to add electrical connections and guide marks for optical beam alignment. The second layer 
used a Shipley resist s1805 (Shipley, USA), and an MLA-150 lithography tool (Heidelberg, 
Germany). Metal deposition was done in the same electron beam evaporation tool using 
Ti/Au layers of 10/200 nm, respectively. Liftoff used the same procedures as the first level. 
After liftoff, samples were rinsed with IPA and dried with N2 gas before optical 
measurements. Heating Effects on Plasmonic Dimers with Interconnects 3 
Samples were heated in air on a hot plate at atmospheric pressure with a range of 
temperature setpoints for 20 minutes. A thermocouple was used to calibrate sample 
temperatures by attaching it to a blank substrate with similar properties as the samples with 
nanofabricated devices. Samples were cooled in air for 10 minutes before being mounted 
to an ellipsometer for optical measurements. 
Optical extinction measurements were taken with a JA Woollam M2000V spectro￾scopic ellipsometer operating in transmission mode. Reference transmission spectra 
were taken adjacent to feature arrays, and extinction was calculated as (1T/TR), where TR
is the reference transmission of clear glass. The optical beam is approximately 200 um in 
diameter and collects data from more than 105
 nanostructures in each array. Secondary 
electron microscopy (SEM) images of samples before and after heating were taken with a 
high-resolution Verios SEM (ThermoFisher Scientific). A thin (few nm) layer of AuPd was 
sputtered onto samples for charge dissipation. SEM images of before-heating samples were 
taken from an adjacent die, whereas post-SEM images are from the same die used for 
optical data before and after heating. SEM images were analyzed using PROSEM software 
(GeniSys, Germany) to calculate average nanostructure sizes and interparticle distances. 
The reported data are averages of 20 different feature measurements. 
Simulations of optical extinction spectra used finite difference time domain (FDTD) 
methods as implemented in Lumerical commercial software (Ansys, USA). Geometric 
structures were extracted from high-resolution images recorded with the Verios SEM. 
Representative structures were extracted from images and used in the FDTD simulations. 
Two-dimensional (2D) images were converted to 3D shapes by extruding the image 
outlines along the z-direction a distance corresponding to the thin film thickness. This 
procedure gives a flat profile for the tops of simulated features. The model nanostructures 
were placed on a SiO2 substrate and transmission spectra were calculated. Periodic 
boundary conditions were applied to the horizontal boundaries of the 3D simulation cell, 
and a plane wave polarized along the length direction of the nanorods was directed towards 
the nanostructures in the vertical direction. The same unit cell size of 550 nm square was 
used for experiments and simulations. Optical constants were taken from the Lumerical 
library using data from Palik for Ti and SiO2, and Johnson and Christy for Au [7, 8]. 
3. Results and Discussion 
Figure 1 shows a schematic of the design for interconnected plasmonic dimers, which con￾sist of nanorod dimers with interconnect lines running through the centers of the nanorods. 
The interconnect lines are 45–50 nm in width, which is close to the resolution limit of the 
nanolithography methods used. The center positions of the interconnect connections are 
chosen based on prior work that determined center contacts provide the least perturbation 
to nanorod plasmonic resonances [9, 10]. The configuration of nanorod dimer pairs with 
small nanogaps promotes strongly enhanced EM fields in the regions between the tips of 
the nanorods [11]. Electrical interconnects allow for future applications of voltages and 
measurements of photocurrents while exciting plasmon resonances with light. 4 R. Raman, J. Grasso & B. G. Willis 
Fig. 1. Nanorods are paired to form plasmonic dimers with interconnects. Dimensions are given in nm. (a) Side 
view of nanorods. (b) Top view of nanorods with interconnects. 
Fig. 2. Blue shifts of peak wavelengths relative to spectra taken before heating are shown vs. temperature. 
Optical extinction spectra were investigated using a series of thermal treatments up to 
210°C with incremental heating starting from 80°C. Heating causes blue shifts of the 
extinction peaks that increase with temperature, but no significant changes of extinction 
magnitudes were observed. A plot of blue shift vs. temperature is shown in Fig. 2. The data 
are scattered, but the trend shows a linear increase of blue shifts with temperatures that 
exceed 20 nm at the maximum temperature of 210°C. The maximum temperature of the 
experiments was limited by the hot plate specifications, but the effect does not saturate, 
and higher temperatures may lead to even larger blue shifts. The shifts of the extinction 
spectra indicate some changes in the optical or morphological properties of the nano￾structures. High-resolution electron microscopy and FDTD simulations were used to 
further investigate the blue shifts. 
High-resolution electron microscopy was used to investigate morphological changes of 
the nanostructures and to extract nanostructure shapes for FDTD modeling. Figure 3 shows 
(a) (b)Heating Effects on Plasmonic Dimers with Interconnects 5 
Fig. 3. SEM images from different stages of heating. (Left) Before heating. (Right) After heating to 210°C. Scale 
bar is 500 nm. 
example SEM images before and after heating for a sample heated to the maximum 
temperature of 210°C. The microscopy studies reveal significant heat-induced changes of 
the nanostructures, including shrinking along length directions and increases in width 
directions. Shrinking of dimer pairs in length also causes increases of nanogap distances 
between nanorods. The increased interparticle distances due to nanorod shrinking are a 
significant factor in the blue shifts. Previous studies of nanoparticle dimers have shown 
that resonance peak wavelengths are highly sensitive to interparticle distances with an 
exponential dependence for very small nanogaps [12]. 
Measurements of nanostructures before and after heating show significant morpholo￾gical changes. Before heating, average nanorod lengths and widths were 161.5 ± 5.5 nm 
and 50.5 ± 0.5 nm, respectively. Interparticle separation was 16 ± 5 nm. After heating to 
the maximum temperature of 210°C, the average length shrinks to 154.5 ± 7 nm, and the 
width increases to 55.5 ± 1 nm. The change of length is 7 nm, which is slightly larger than 
the width increase of +5 nm. The shrinking and broadening of the nanostructures cause 
nanogap distances to increase by 5.5 nm to 21.5 ± 4 nm. The magnitudes of the nanogap 
increases are roughly consistent with the magnitudes for length contractions. The morpho￾logical changes are consistent with thermodynamic driving forces to minimize surface area 
and round sharp corners toward more spheroidal shapes. Although temperatures are far 
below the melting point of Au (1064°C), the small sizes and large surface-to-volume ratios 
of the nanorods may promote rapid surface diffusion and mass transport driven by surface 
energy reduction. Other studies of Au nanorods have also reported the tendency for Au 
nanorods to spheroidize at temperatures higher than 80°C [13].
FDTD simulations were investigated to connect morphological features with optical 
properties. Optical extinction data taken before and after heating to the highest temperature 
of 210°C are shown in Fig. 4, along with FDTD simulations. The simulations use repre￾sentative geometric structures extracted from the experimental SEM images in Fig. 3. 
Experimental spectra for before-heating measurements have an extinction peak at 831 nm, 
while FDTD simulations peak at 840 nm. The thickness modeled is Ti/Au 4/50 nm, which 
is within the expected range for experimental thickness. The peak locations are very close, 6 R. Raman, J. Grasso & B. G. Willis 
Fig. 4. Experimental (solid) and FDTD (dashed) extinction spectra before and after heating to 210°C. The left 
axis is for experiments and the right is for FDTD simulations. 
but could be closer by using a thicker Au layer in the simulations, which would blue 
shift the resonance a small amount. A slightly larger nanogap would also blue shift the 
resonance. Deviations of experiments from a flat top surface could also account for some 
of the difference. 
Full-widths at half-maximum (FWHM) were extracted from experiment and simulation 
curves by fitting the peak maxima and high wavelength leading edges to Lorentzian line 
shapes. This partial peak fitting was used to avoid the influence of diffraction effects that 
distort the blue side of the extinction peaks. The diffraction effect occurs near 800 nm due 
to the coincidence of the SiO2 index of refraction (1.45) and the periodicity of the lattice at 
550 nm. Using this approach, before-heating experiments have FWHM of 100, while 
FDTD simulations are 90 nm. These values are larger than what is obtained for a full peak 
fit due to the diffraction effects. The larger peak width for experiments is expected due to 
inhomogeneous broadening from variations of the nanorod sizes across the large arrays. 
Electron-beam lithography proximity error may account for ± 5 nm peak wavelength 
variation across the 200  200 um2
 array. A Ti adhesion layer used in experiments was 
included in the FDTD model. Simulations show that Ti layer thickness strongly affects the 
FDTD curve FWHM, and a thicker layer would broaden the peaks and bring simulations 
closer to experiments. The FWHM of the before-heating experiments and FDTD simula￾tions are remarkably close considering that the experiments are sampling > 105
 structures, 
while simulations are only modeling a single representative structure extracted from SEM 
images. Considering the large number of nanostructures sampled by the optical bream, the 
overall agreement between experiment and theory is very good. 
After heating, nanorods shrink in length and expand in width, while nanogaps increase. 
These changes are expected to blue shift the resonances, and experiments bear this out. 
After heating, experimental spectra blue shift by 23 nm to 808 nm. FDTD simulations using 
structures extracted from post-heating SEM images in Fig. 3 show a similar blue shift of 
28 nm to 812 nm. The leading edges of the two plots overlap significantly, and the (partial Heating Effects on Plasmonic Dimers with Interconnects 7 
fit) FWHM are similar, with experiment at 81 and FDTD simulation at 86 nm. The smaller 
FWHM for experiment is an artefact of the peak fitting range, and a full fit to the FDTD 
curve gives FWHM close to 52 nm, but the peak shape is distorted by the diffraction effect. 
The diffraction effect is not as apparent in the experiments due to the irregular nature of 
the scatters and the finite size of the lattice. However, both pre- and post-heating exper￾imental curves show a shoulder on the blue side of the peak that may be due to a partial 
influence of the diffraction effect. This effect may also account for the broad tail between 
700 and 800 nm in the experimental spectra. Interestingly, the experimental post-heating 
spectra have a narrower FWHM than the before-heating spectra, which is predicted by the 
simulations. The narrowing of the experimental peak further indicates that a diffraction 
effect may be influencing the spectra. The close match of experiments and simulations is 
evidence that the optical properties (refractive index) of the Au nanorods are not changed 
by heating in air. This is unlikely to be the case for Cu or Ag materials where extensive 
oxidation may occur without an inert atmosphere. The good agreement also suggests that 
the Ti adhesion layer at the SiO2 interface is reasonably well modeled as a metallic layer. 
Besides the main LSPR peak, experiments and simulations show a second feature near 
530 nm that is assigned to the transversal resonance of the interconnect lines that run 
through the centers of the nanorods. This second peak is not seen for plasmonic dimers 
without interconnects. The experimental peaks are partly obscured by a rising background 
below 500 nm, but the features are clearer in spectra from different samples. The peak 
locations are similar for experiments and simulations. Baseline extinction levels away from 
the peaks are also similar for experiments and simulations, with an extinction level near 
0.1. In contrast, extinction peak maxima are more than a factor of two different exper￾iments. The discrepancy of extinction maxima is partly due to inhomogeneous broadening 
from size variation across the large arrays. Another factor is the difference between the 
optical properties of nanostructures vs. the bulk optical constants used for simulations. 
Both experiments and simulations show a slight reduction of maximum extinction levels 
after heating but the difference is small. 
We also investigated the effects of the Ti adhesion layer on the optical properties of 
plasmonic nanostructures using FDTD simulations. Experimentally, a thin layer of Ti is 
necessary to promote adhesion between Au nanostructures and SiO2 (quartz) substrates. 
The Ti layer is known to dampen plasmon resonances, but direct Au/SiO2 interfaces are 
unlikely to survive nanofabrication processes such as liftoff, where aggressive chemicals 
and ultrasonic agitation are used. Figure 5 shows a comparison of FDTD simulations with 
and without a 4 nm Ti layer between Au and SiO2. Peak wavelengths are similar for post￾heating extinction curves, but pre-heating data without Ti are slightly shifted to the blue at 
836 nm compared to 840 nm with Ti. As expected, FWHM are larger for simulations with 
Ti. For partial peak fitting in the region 700-1000 nm, FWHM calculated before heating 
increases from 55 to 80 nm when Ti is added. For post-heating simulations, the increase is 
from 33 to 52. These values are dependent on the peak fitting region, but qualitatively, 
they show that Ti layers significantly broaden extinction curves. Including a Ti layer also 
decreases peak heights. For pre-heating plots, the peak is 16% smaller than for pure Au. 8 R. Raman, J. Grasso & B. G. Willis 
Fig. 5. Comparison of FDTD simulations before heating (black) and after heating (blue) with and without a 4 nm 
Ti layer. 
After heating, simulations without Ti predict an increased extinction level, whereas peak 
extinction decreases when Ti is considered. Minimizing Ti layer thickness without losing 
device yield may enhance optical properties and device performance. 
4. Conclusion 
Heating nanofabricated Au plasmonic dimers with interconnects shows changes of optical 
extinction spectra that blue shift with increasing temperatures. High-resolution electron 
microscopy imaging shows that heating causes shape changes that reduce lengths and 
increase widths of nanorods, while increasing the distances between nanostructures. FDTD 
simulations using nanostructures extracted from images with and without heating show 
good agreement with experiments, which indicates that the morphological changes are the 
cause of the blue shifts. Peak widths are broader for experiments due to inhomogeneous 
broadening, but the differences are small when considering the large number of nano￾structures sampled in the optical beam. The arrays provide strong plasmonic resonances 
that can be improved further by optimizing uniformity and reducing the thickness of the Ti 
adhesion layer. Heating causes blue shifts, but peak intensity and width are not significantly 
affected. Thermal processing induces blue shifts that need to be accounted for in device 
design, but these studies show that plasmonic resonances are not degraded. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors acknowledge the National Science Foundation (NSF) (Grant No. 2150158) 
and the Office of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014-22-1-2567). This work was per￾formed in part at the Harvard University Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS); a member 
of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Network (NNCI), which is 
supported by the National Science Foundation under NSF award no. ECCS-2025158. 
Electron microscopy was performed at the UConn/Thermo Fisher Scientific Center for 
Advanced Microscopy and Materials Analysis (CAMMA). Heating Effects on Plasmonic Dimers with Interconnects 9 
References 
1. E. Ozbay, Science 311 (5758), 189-193 (2006). 
2. S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications (Springer, New York, 2007). 
3. M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science 332 (6030), 702-704 (2011). 
4. D. R. Ward, F. Huser, F. Pauly, J. C. Cuevas and D. Natelson, Nature Nanotechnology 5 (10), 
732-736 (2010). 
5. P. Pertsch, R. Kullock, V. Gabriel, L. Zurak, M. Emmerling and B. Hecht, Nano Letters 22 (17), 
6982-6987 (2022). 
6. C. Zhang, T. Gao, D. Sheets, J. N. Hancock, J. Tresback and B. Willis, Journal of Vacuum 
Science & Technology B 39 (5), 053203 (2021). 
7. E. D. Palik and G. Ghosh, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, ed. Edward D. Palik. 
(Academic Press, Orlando, 1985). 
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Physical Review B 6 (12), 4370-4379 (1972). 
8. J. C. Prangsma, J. Kern, A. G. Knapp, S. Grossmann, M. Emmerling, M. Kamp and B. Hecht, 
Nano Letters 12 (8), 3915-3919 (2012). 
9. D. T. Zimmerman, B. D. Borst, C. J. Carrick, J. M. Lent, R. A. Wambold, G. J. Weisel and B. 
G. Willis, Journal of Applied Physics 123, 063101 (2018). 
10. P. Nordlander, C. Oubre, E. Prodan, K. Li and M. I. Stockman, Nano Letters 4 (5), 899-903 
(2004). 
11. C. Tabor, R. Murali, M. Mahmoud and M. A. El-Sayed, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 
113 (10), 1946-1953 (2009). 
12. S. S. E. Collins, M. Cittadini, C. Pecharromán, A. Martucci and P. Mulvaney, ACS Nano 9 (8), 
7846-7856 (2015). This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0002
11 
Utilizing Machine Learning for Rapid Discrimination and Quantification of Volatile 
Organic Compounds in an Electronic Nose Sensor Array 
John Grasso*,‡, Jing Zhao†,§ and Brian G. Willis*,¶
*Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
191 Auditorium Road, Storrs, CT 06269, USA 
†Department of Chemistry, University of Connecticut, 
55 N. Eagleville Road, Storrs, CT 06269, USA 
‡John.grasso@uconn.edu
§Jing.zhao@uconn.edu 
¶brian.willis@uconn.edu
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are ubiquitous in the surroundings, originating from both 
industrial and natural sources. VOCs directly impact the quality of both indoor and outdoor air and 
play a significant role in processes such as fruit ripening and the body’s metabolism. VOC monitoring 
has seen significant growth recently, with an emphasis on developing low-cost, portable sensors 
capable of both vapor discrimination and concentration measurements. VOC sensing remains 
challenging, mainly because these compounds are nonreactive, appear in low concentrations and share 
similar chemical structures that results in poor sensor selectivity. Therefore, individual gas sensors 
struggle to selectively detect target VOCs in the presence of interferences. Electronic noses overcome 
these limitations by employing machine learning for pattern recognition from arrays of gas sensors. 
Here, an electronic nose fabricated with four types of functionalized gold nanoparticles demonstrates 
rapid detection and quantification of eight types of VOCs at four concentration levels. A robust two￾step machine learning pipeline is implemented for classification followed by regression analysis for 
concentration prediction. Random Forest and support vector machine classifiers show excellent results 
of 100% accuracy for VOC discrimination, independent of measured concentration levels. Each 
Random Forest regression analysis exhibits high R2
 and low RMSE with an average of 0.999 and 
0.002, respectively. These results demonstrate the ability of gold nanoparticle gas sensor arrays for 
rapid detection and quantification. 
Keywords: Electronic nose; chemiresistor; VOC; sensor array; nanoparticles. 
1. Introduction 
Development of chemical sensors targeting volatile organic compounds (VOCs) has gained 
increased attention in recent years, driven by useful applications in health management, 
environmental monitoring, public safety, agriculture and food production [1]. Potential for 
VOC monitoring has been demonstrated in several areas, such as the early detection of 
particular cancers via non-invasive breath analysis, the use of VOCs as markers for the 
detection of explosive compounds, and the development of reliable amine gas sensors for 
¶
Corresponding author. 12 J. Grasso, J. Zhao & B. G. Willis 
food quality monitoring [2–4]. Despite success in several sectors, poor selectivity and 
sensitivity exhibited by individual gas sensors hinder their widespread application. 
Complex analytical techniques, such as mass spectroscopy and gas chromatography, 
provide comprehensive analysis, detection and quantification; but they are limited in 
applications mainly on account of bulky equipment, high operating costs, and time￾consuming analysis [1]. Thus, there is a need for low-cost, portable gas sensors that can 
both distinguish and quantify VOC compounds for use in several applications. 
The pursuit of portable VOC sensors is ongoing, with significant effort focusing on 
improving sensitivity, selectivity, response kinetics, and stability [1]. Highly sensitive gas 
sensors based on metal oxides are commercially available; however, discrimination 
between analytes remains challenging [5]. Electronic nose (‘e-nose’) sensor arrays over￾come limitations of selectivity by utilizing machine learning algorithms to detect patterns 
and discriminate vapors [6]. E-nose systems exploit the overlapping cross-selectivity of 
individual gas sensors to form odor fingerprints. Both vapor identification and concen￾tration predication can be realized from e-nose sensors. Capman et al. developed a 
graphene-based variable capacitor sensor array functionalized with 36 chemical receptors 
capable of distinguishing five VOC analytes at four concentration levels using supervised 
machine learning classification [7]. Data classes were separated into analyte-concentration 
pairs, thus a single classifier performs both discrimination and concentration prediction. 
This approach restricts concentration output to discrete levels fixed during training and 
requires large data sets in each class to minimize under-fitting of the classification model. 
Alternatively, deep learning methods, such as convolutional neural networks and extreme 
learning machines, have demonstrated simultaneous VOC classification and concentration 
estimation [8, 9]. Wang et al. discriminated 12 VOCs at 10 concentration levels ranging 
from 10 to 100 ppm using eight commercially available metal oxide-based gas sensors. 
Additionally, a pipeline combining classification and regression was integrated into an 
electronic nose of three sensors with both high classification accuracy and near-unity R2
-
score of regression [6]. These e-noses are effective but limited in application due to high 
power consumption, high operating temperatures, limited chemical selectivity of metal 
oxide-based sensors, and the complex integration of specific deep learning algorithms into 
generalized electronic nose sensor arrays. 
Room temperature chemiresistive gas sensors show great potential and are attracting 
significant interest. Organo-functionalized gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) possess favorable 
sensing properties relying on vapor sorption and swelling of AuNP networks [5]. The 
characteristic structure of organic-AuNPs allows for flexible configurability through incor￾poration of a wide variety of organic ligands carrying different functional groups [5]. 
Tunability of ligand polarity and other chemical properties results in adjustable selectivity 
toward target analytes that enhances overall performance of e-nose sensors. 
In this study, simultaneous identification and concentration prediction of eight VOCs 
is successfully demonstrated with an electronic nose chemiresistor array fabricated with 
four types of organic-functionalized AuNPs as sensing elements. A large number of 
devices with fast, reversible responses are used as input for a machine learning pipeline Rapid Discrimination and Quantification of VOCs in Electronic Nose System 13 
that performs both vapor classification and concentration prediction. The approach can 
readily be implemented into any electronic nose sensor array. 
2. Experimental Methods 
2.1. Sensor Fabrication 
Chemiresistor arrays were fabricated on four-inch silicon wafers using standard photo￾lithography and liftoff processes following a procedure reported earlier [2]. Arrays of 
140 circular interdigitated electrodes, 256 µm in diameter with an electrode-to-electrode 
separation distance of 2 µm, were defined for each sensor chip. A 10 nm titanium adhesion 
layer and 200 nm gold electrode layer were deposited on the silicon surface via electron￾beam evaporation. The silicon wafer was diced into individual sensor chips 13 × 13 mm2
in size. Before depositing AuNPs, sensor chips were rinsed with acetone/isopropyl alcohol, 
dried in nitrogen, and subsequently treated with UV-ozone to reduce surface contamina￾tion. AuNPs were then deposited onto the electrodes using drop casting from a micro￾pipette. 
Organo-functionalized AuNPs were prepared via colloidal synthesis followed by 
ligand exchange reactions or purchased from Nanopartz. Four ligands with varied chemical 
structures were investigated including: 4-(dimethylamino) pyridine (DMAP), 3-mercapto￾propionic acid (MPA), 4-aminothiophenol (ATP), and 12-mercaptododecanoic acid NHS 
ester (MDN). Figure 1 illustrates a simplified representation of functionalized AuNPs and 
displays the chemical structure of the studied ligands. Diverse functional groups and alkyl 
chain lengths provide increased cross-reactivity within the sensor arrays by varying affinity 
for target molecules. Each sensor array is divided into four quadrants, one AuNP solution 
is drop-cast in each quadrant producing a sensor chip functionalized with up to 35 sensing 
elements of each AuNP chemiresistor. Figure 1 shows an SEM image of as-deposited 
AuNPs bridging microelectrodes to produce a functioning chemiresistor. 
2.2. Sensor Experiment 
Sensor arrays were mounted on ceramic PGA 144 chip carriers (Spectrum Semiconductor 
Materials, USA) whose leads were wire bonded (Model 747630E, WestBond, USA) to 
electrode contact pads. The PGA chip carriers were inserted into a breakout board con￾nected to a high-speed switch matrix (3706A, Keithley, USA) for DC resistance mea￾surements. A custom flow cell fabricated from aluminum with an internal volume of 
0.25 mL sealed the sensing chamber via an o-ring at the chip carrier surface. Figure 2 
displays a flow schematic of the sensing apparatus. 
The outlet of the sensing chamber is connected to a vacuum pump (Model MP 301Z, 
Welch) and flow is choked through a 250 µm orifice (Lenox Laser, USA) restricting the 
rate to approximately 500 ml/min. Upstream of the sensor chamber, a 3-way solenoid 
valve connects two Tedlar bags (SVC Inc., USA); one bag contains nitrogen (UHP300, 
Airgas, USA) for baseline measurements while the other bag contains prepared VOC 
samples. VOC vapors are delivered to the sensor for 15 seconds followed by a nitrogen 14 J. Grasso, J. Zhao & B. G. Willis 
Fig. 1. (Left) Simplified illustration of organo-functionalized gold nanoparticles. Chemical structures of the four 
studied ligands; (right) SEM image of 12-MDN-AuNP chemiresistor sensor. Scale bar is 1 µm. 
Fig. 2. Flow schematic of custom sensing apparatus. Flow is delivered to sensors from a downstream vacuum 
pump operating in choked flow regime. Upstream of sensing chamber, a three-way valve (normally open to N2) 
switches between two Tedlar bags containing nitrogen and VOC samples. Sensors are electrically connected to a 
DMM/switch matrix for DC resistance measurements. Inset: Optical image of sensor electrodes before AuNP 
deposition. 
purge of 15 seconds repeated 12 times for a series of vapor pulses. Real-time, near simul￾taneous resistance measurements for all sensor elements are recorded at a sampling rate of 
2.3 seconds. Savitzky–Golay filtering is used for baseline normalization. Sensor responses 
are extracted as change in resistance during vapor sorption, normalized by the baseline 
resistance (ΔR/R0). 
Eight VOC compounds at four dilute concentrations (p/p0 = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2) 
were studied: vapor concentration is expressed as a ratio of partial pressure to saturated 
vapor pressure at room temperature. Investigated VOCs include: acetone, acetonitrile, 
butyraldehyde, chloroform, ethanol, methylene chloride, propionaldehyde, and toluene. Rapid Discrimination and Quantification of VOCs in Electronic Nose System 15 
Saturated vapor standards were prepared by injecting 10 mL of liquid analyte through a 
septum into 5 L Tedlar bags and inflating to 80% capacity with nitrogen and equilibrating 
overnight. Glass syringes were used to extract saturated vapor for preparation of dilute 
samples. Saturated vapor was injected into a separate Tedlar bag filled with a known 
volume of nitrogen to prepare dilutions. Samples were tested from lowest to highest 
concentration. 
2.3. Machine Learning Methods 
The data set contains 384 observations for each device, made up of 48 observations for 
each of eight vapors. Observations include 12 repeats for each of four concentrations. 
Following feature extraction in MatLab, devices that did not respond to all target analytes 
were removed, reducing the number of working devices to 89, and the total number of data 
points to 34,176. Inactive sensor elements occur due to randomness of AuNP deposition 
from solvent evaporation during drop casting. Prior to data partitioning, z-score standardi￾zation is performed on all included features to maintain a consistent scale for sensor 
responses. Data are split into training and testing data sets at a ratio of 3:1. Training data 
are used with five-fold stratified cross-validation for hyperparameter tuning of methods. 
Testing data are withheld during training and inputted to final trained model to evaluate its 
performance to unknown data. 
A two-step data analysis pipeline is implemented for simultaneous classification and 
concentration prediction of target VOCs in Python. First, vapor identification is performed 
through several machine learning classification algorithms, including: random forests 
(RF), k-nearest neighbor (KNN), linear discriminant analysis (LDA), and support vector 
machines (SVM). Each analyte is equally represented in the data set with a 48 × 89 matrix 
of sensor response values per vapor. Following classification, separate random forest 
regression models are built for each vapor class and trained. Test data concentration predic￾tion is evaluated for each model and reported metrics include coefficient of determination 
(R2
) and root mean square error (RMSE). 
3. Results 
3.1. Chemiresistor Sensor Responses 
Figure 3 shows real-time sensor responses for one selected chemiresistor sensor to four 
VOCs at a concentration of p/p0 = 0.2. This sensor demonstrates the consistency, rapid 
responsivity, and recovery of AuNP sensors. Repeated exposure to VOCs did not affect 
the response magnitude or its tendency to return to the original baseline. The average sensor 
response for this sensor is 1.11 ± 0.00%, 1.75 ± 0.05%, 2.05 ± 0.03%, and 3.25 ± 0.05% 
toward acetonitrile, acetone, butyraldehyde, and chloroform at p/p0 = 0.2, respectively, as 
depicted in Fig. 3. Standard deviation is calculated from 12 repeated measurements of 
each VOC. DMAP-AuNPs exhibit the strongest responses to chloroform, followed by 
butyraldehyde, acetone, and acetonitrile. 16 J. Grasso, J. Zhao & B. G. Willis 
Fig. 3. Sensor response for individual AuNP-DMAP chemiresistor sensor to four VOCs at p/p0 = 0.2; acetone 
(red), chloroform (green), acetonitrile (blue), and butyraldehyde (black). 
Ligand diversity across the sensor array enables analyte patterns to be resolved. Fig￾ure 4 visualizes the pattern of sensor responses to acetone averaged over all devices for 
each AuNP functionalization, at each concentration level. General selectivity of each 
AuNP type toward acetone is shown; DMAP exhibits the lowest response, followed by 
MPA, ATP, and the highest response from 12-MDN. Additionally, sensor responses are 
proportional to vapor concentration, independent of AuNP functionalization. This property 
is exploited during classification where vapor identification is determined for all vapor 
observations, independent of concentration. 
Fig. 4. Average acetone sensor response for four types of functionalized gold nanoparticles at varied vapor 
concentrations. Number of devices for each AuNP type: 12-MDN, 26; ATP, 20; DMAP, 20; MPA, 23. Rapid Discrimination and Quantification of VOCs in Electronic Nose System 17 
3.2. Vapor Classification and Concentration Prediction 
Vapor type defines the data classes used during classification where all concentration levels 
are lumped into the same class. Compared to the approach by Capman et al. in which 
analyte-concentration classes are used, lumping concentration and vapor type into a single 
class increases the training data size from 9 to 36 observations per class. This increases 
model robustness and reduces the possibility of under fitting during training. Validation 
accuracy evaluates model performance and is reported as the average classification 
accuracy of repeated five-fold cross-validations for the best classifier found during 
hyperparameter turning on the training data. Testing accuracy reports the ability of the 
trained model to predict vapor type when unknown data from the testing data set are input 
to the model. Table 1 summarizes the results of several supervised machine learning 
methods. 
Table 1. Summary of classification accuracy for validation and testing data. 
Method Validation Accuracy (%) Testing Accuracy (%) 
LDA 97.4 ± 2.4 95.8 
SVM 99.7 ± 0.8 100 
KNN 98.1 ± 2.0 97.9 
RF 100.0 ± 0.0 100 
All classifiers reported validation accuracies greater than 97%; with RF achieving 
100% validation. Both SVM and RF reported testing accuracies of 100%, indicating both 
high accuracy and precision toward vapor discrimination, independent of analyte concen￾tration. Classification performance is unassociated with analyte concentration. Two VOC 
species, butyraldehyde and propionaldehyde, share similar chemical end groups but differ 
in alkyl chain length. These species are accurately distinguished despite chemical 
similarities, owing to the large number of gas sensors and varying organic ligand structure 
of the AuNP chemiresistors. 
Eight regression models were constructed from the training data for each VOC vapor 
with 9 observations used for each concentration level. Excellent agreement between actual 
and predicted concentration is obtained on the testing data for each vapor type. An average 
R2
 of 0.999 ± 0.001 and RMSE of 0.002 ± 0.001 was obtained for all regression models. 
Figure 5 illustrates the combined regression parity plot. Predictions are tightly confined 
near the parity line with most deviations occurring at the concentration level of 0.05 p/p0. 
Simultaneous training of classification and regression models for vapor identification 
and concentration prediction has demonstrated excellent performance when unknown 
data are analyzed. High classification accuracy and low regression error establishes this 
machine learning framework as a viable pipeline to produce gas sensor arrays capable of 
both vapor classification and quantification. 18 J. Grasso, J. Zhao & B. G. Willis 
Fig. 5. Random forest regressor parity plot for testing data. Each VOC was tested at all concentrations. 
4. Conclusions 
This work has shown the successful classification and concentration prediction of VOCs 
with a 140-device gold nanoparticle-based chemiresistor gas sensor array. Four types of 
organic-functionalized AuNPs were studied to improve selectivity and pattern recognition 
via supervised machine learning. The framework for a two-step machine learning pipeline 
for simultaneous discrimination and concentration prediction is presented and verified with 
an experiment using eight VOCs at four concentration levels. The results show 100% 
classification accuracy for both random forest and support vector machine methods. 
Varying concentration levels do not degrade the ability of the classifier to discriminate 
vapors. This supports a hypothesis that the analyte-concentration-dependent sensor 
response does not significantly affect the unique odor-prints produced by the sensor array. 
Regression analysis shows excellent agreement between actual and predicted concen￾trations with near-unity R2
 and an average RMSE of 0.002 ± 0.001. These results suggest 
that a small number of concentration levels can be used to train an e-nose sensor to 
dynamically predict concentration, unrestricted to discrete prediction levels. Further work 
is needed to expand dynamic range and evaluate long term stability, but results are 
encouraging. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors acknowledge the National Science Foundation (NSF) (Grant No. 2150158) 
and the Office of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014-22-1-2567). This work was 
performed in part at the Harvard University Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS); a Rapid Discrimination and Quantification of VOCs in Electronic Nose System 19 
member of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Network (NNCI), 
which is supported by the National Science Foundation under NSF Award no. ECCS￾2005158. Electron microscopy was performed at the UConn/Thermo Fisher Scientific 
Center for advanced Microscopy and Materials Analysis (CAMMA). 
References 
1. M. Khatib and H. Haick, “Sensors for Volatile Organic Compounds,” ACS Nano, vol. 16, pp. 
7080-7115, 2022. 
2. T. Gao, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. A. Diaz, J. Zhao and B. G. Willis, “Machine Learning Assisted 
Nanoparticle-Based Chemiresistor Array for Explosive Detection,” IEEE Sensors, vol. 20, no. 
23, pp. 14016-14023, 2020. 
3. R. S. Andre, L. A. Mercante, M. H. Facure, R. C. Sanfelice, L. Fugikawa-Santos, T. M. Swager 
and D. S. Correa, “Recent Progress in Amine Gas Sensors for Food Quality Monitoring: Novel 
Architectures for Sensing Materials and Systems,” ACS Sensors, vol. 7, pp. 2104-2131, 2022. 
4. Y. Jian, N. Zhang, T. Liu, Y. Zhu, D. Wang, H. Dong, L. Guo, D. Qu, X. Jiang, T. Du, Y. Zheng, 
M. Yuan, X. Fu, J. Liu, W. Dou, F. Niu, R. Ning, G. Zhang, J. Fan, H. Haick and W. Wu, 
“Artificially Intelligent Olfaction for Fast and Noninvasive Diagnosis of Bladder Cancer from 
Urine,” ACS Sensors, vol. 7, pp. 1720-1731, 2022. 
5. H. Schlicke, S. C. Bittinger, H. Noei and T. Vossmeyer, “Gold Nanoparticle-Based Chemi￾resistors: Recognition of Volatile Organic Compounds Using Tunable Response Kinetics,” ACS 
Applied Nano Materials, vol. 4, pp. 10399-10408, 2021. 
6. T. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Chen, X. Chen, M. Zeng, J. Yang, Y. Su, N. Hu and Z. Yang, 
“Classification and Concentration Prediction of VOCs With High Accuracy Based on an 
Electronic Nose Using an ELM-ELM Integrated Algorithm,” IEEE Sensors, vol. 22, no. 14, pp. 
14458-14469, 2022. 
7. N. S. Capman, X. V. Zhen, J. T. Nelson, V. R. S. K. Chaganti, R. C. Finc, M. J. Lyden, T. L. 
Williams, M. Freking, G. J. Sherwood, P. Buhlmann, C. J. Hogan and S. J. Koester, “Machine 
Learning-Based Rapid Detection of Volatile Organic Compounds in a Graphene Electronic 
Nose,” ACS Nano, vol. 16, pp. 19567-19583, 2022. 
8. T. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, W. Jiang, X. Chen, M. Zeng, J. Yang, Y. Su, N. Hu and Z. Yang, 
“Target Discrimination, Concentration Prediction, and Status Judgment of Electronic Nose 
System Based on Large-Scale Measurement and Multi-Task Deep Learning,” Sensors & 
Actuators, vol. 351, 2022. 
9. W. Tang, Z. Chen, Z. Song, C. Wang, Z. Wan, C. L. J. Chan, Z. Chen, W. Ye and Z. Fan, 
“Microheater Integrated Nanotube Array Gas Sensor for Parts-Per-Trillion Level Gas Detection 
and Single Sensor-Based Gas Discrimination,” ACS Nano, vol. 16, pp. 10968-10978, 202. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0003 
21 
Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization 
for High Power Applications 
Md. Maruf Hossain*, Md. Maruf Hossain Shuvo, Twisha Titirsha and Syed Kamrul Islam 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA *mh5md@umsystem.edu 
This paper presents technology computer-aided design (TCAD) modeling of an enhancement-mode 
aluminum gallium nitride (AlGaN)/gallium nitride (GaN) high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) 
with extensive π-gate optimization for high-power and radio frequency (RF) applications. Effects 
of the gate voltages on threshold (𝑉௧௛), transconductance (𝑔௠), breakdown voltage (𝑉஻ோ), cutoff 
frequency (𝑓்), maximum frequency of oscillation (𝑓௠௔௫) and minimum noise figure (NF௠௜௡) are 
systematically investigated with different gate structures (π–Shaped p-GaN MISHEMT, π–Shaped p￾GaN HEMT, π–Gate HEMT). A comparative study demonstrates that π–Gate with additional p-GaN 
and insulating layer makes the device effectively operate in the enhancement mode having a threshold 
voltage (𝑉௧௛) = 1.72 V with a breakdown voltage (𝑉஻ோ) = 341 V, exhibiting better gate control with 
maximum transconductance (𝑔௠,௠௔௫) of 0.321 S/mm. In addition, the proposed device architecture 
with an optimized gate structure maintains a balance between a positive device threshold and a high 
breakdown voltage and achieves a better noise immunity with the minimum noise figure of 0.64 dB 
while operating at 10 GHz with a cutoff frequency (𝑓்) of 33.4 GHz, and a maximum stable operating 
frequency (𝑓௠௔௫) of 82.3 GHz. Moreover, the device achieved an outstanding 𝑉௧௛, 𝑔௠,௠௔௫, 𝑉஻ோ, 𝑓், 
𝑓௠௔௫ and NF௠௜௡ making it suitable for high-power, high-speed electronics, and low-noise amplifiers. 
Keywords: High electron mobility transistor; π-gate optimization; two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), 
AlGaN/GaN. 
1. Introduction 
The inherent polarization properties of gallium nitride (GaN) result in the emergence of a 
two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) channel and ensure high current densities [1, 2]. 
Effectively exploiting the excellent material characteristics of GaN, the high electron 
mobility transistors (HEMTs) have gained prominence for potential applications for high￾power and high-frequency operations. Moreover, higher electron mobilities and saturation 
velocities allow GaN devices to operate in the radio frequency (RF) range and withstand 
high-power operations in microwave communications and low noise amplifier [3, 4]. The 
conventional Schottky gate aluminum gallium nitride (AlGaN)/GaN HEMTs exhibit high 
gate leakage current and low breakdown voltage with the shortened source-to-drain 
distance [5]. Extensive research has been conducted over the last few decades on various 
*Corresponding author. 22 Md. M. Hossain et al. 
types of GaN-based HEMT device architectures to obtain enhancement mode (E-mode) 
operation for high power applications requiring sufficiently high breakdown voltage and 
low leakage current [6–8]. Three frequently used techniques to develop E-mode HEMTs 
are fluorine ion implantation [9], recessed gate etching [10], and inclusion of a Schottky p￾type GaN (p-GaN) in gate [11, 12]. P-GaN HEMTs were one of the three approaches that 
worked well for E-mode operation because of their steady characteristics [13]. However, 
the limitations of Schottky p-GaN HEMT include low threshold voltage, high leakage 
current in gate during ON-state operations and poor noise performance. In contrast, the 
adoption of a metal-insulator-semiconductor HEMT (MISHEMT) has gained popularity as 
a method of reducing gate leakage currents [14–16]. MISHEMT is assembled by adding 
an insulating oxide layer between the metal gate and the semiconductor layer of a HEMT. 
As the triggering of the 2DEG is contingent upon proper gate arrangements, optimization 
of gate architecture is an important area to explore in p-GaN MISHEMTs [17, 18]. The π￾gate architecture has demonstrated several advantages over T-gate and rectangular gate 
structures in HEMT devices [19]. For instance, the trapping of electrons within π–structure 
limits the kinetic energy of electrons thereby minimizing the hot-electron effect [20]. In 
this work, a modified π-gate structure is proposed for p-GaN MISHEMT. 
The modified π–gate architecture is obtained by splitting up the T–gate architecture 
into pillar forms [21]. The insertion of a p-GaN cap layer underneath the gate ensures 
normally OFF operation. In addition, a 10 nm Al2O3 insulation layer is included between 
the gate metal and the p-GaN cap layer which demonstrates a reduction of the gate leakage 
current [22–24]. Furthermore, the insulation layer in the proposed model increases the 
oxide capacitance and boosts the channel charge density, transconductance, and drain 
current. The major contributions of this work are summarized in the following: 
• A novel MISHEMT semiconductor device is proposed by modification and optimization 
of the π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT. 
• Direct-current (DC) and small-signal analyses of the proposed device are performed with 
technology computer-aided design (TCAD) tools achieving promising results. 
• A comparative study with the T-gate HEMT has confirmed the effectiveness of the 
proposed device with superior noise immunity for RF and high-power applications. 
2. Proposed Device Architecture and Simulation Setup 
A cross-sectional view of π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT, modeled in this work, is presented 
in Fig. 1(a). The two variants of π-shaped p-GaN HEMT and π-gate HEMT are shown in 
Figs. 1(b) and 1(c), respectively. 
Figure 1(a) illustrates the 10 nm-thin insulation layer of Al2O3 in between the gate and 
the p-GaN layer. The other device parameters, such as device dimensions, material 
properties, layer thickness, and gate pillar footprints, are kept the same to examine the 
effect of different gate structures on device performance. Dimensions of every layer of the 
proposed device and the gate architectures of two existing devices are illustrated in Fig. 1. Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization 23
Fig. 1. Device architecture of (a) proposed π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT, (b) π-shaped p-GaN HEMT, and (c) 
conventional π-Gate HEMT. 
The proposed device is mounted on a silicon carbide (SiC) substrate to achieve a high 
breakdown voltage, better thermal stability, and high-frequency operations. To reduce the 
lattice mismatch, a 20 nm nucleation layer of aluminum nitride (AlN) is introduced 
between the buffer layer and the substrate. Typically, a nucleation layer improves the 
crystal quality and minimizes the electrical and the thermal influences of the substrate. The 
thickness of the undoped GaN buffer layer is 4.5 µm. Between the 4.5 µm undoped GaN 
buffer layer and the lightly n-type doped 15 nm AlGaN barrier, a 2DEG channel is formed, 
which ensures substantial carrier confinement at the hetero-interface of the quantum well. 
The drain-to-source distance is 20 µm, which remains to be the same in all four device 
architectures explored. The length and the thickness of each p-GaN cap layer underneath 
the gate legs are 90 nm and 80 nm, respectively. The Al2O3 insulating layer has a thickness 
of 10 nm. The extended flat plate above the gate legs is 0.5 µm extending 0.1 µm on each 
side. The gate structure of the π-shaped p-GaN HEMT is represented in Fig. 1(b), where 
the π-gate is directly deposited over the p-GaN cap layer [20]. In comparison to π-shaped 
p-GaN MISHEMT architecture presented in Fig. 1(a), there is no Al2O3 insulating layer 
between the gate and the p-GaN layer in π-shaped p-GaN HEMT. Figure 1(c) represents 
the gate architecture of a conventional π-gate HEMT without the p-GaN cap layer and the 
insulating layer underneath the gate [25]. The simulation employs a variety of physics￾based models, including FLDMOB for electric field-dependent carrier mobility, 
CONMOB for concentration-dependent carrier mobility, and Lombardi CVT. In addition, 
the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination model for capturing trap-assisted recom￾bination, and Fermi–Dirac statistics for particle distribution, were employed to match the 
simulation to the experimental behavior [26, 27]. For modeling of lower field electron 
mobility, the Albrecht model is used in GaN [28]. Furthermore, to replicate the sheet carrier 
densities in 2DEG, charges resulting from different polarizations (e.g., piezoelectric, and 
spontaneous) of AlGaN and GaN layers and at the AlGaN/GaN interface have been 
calibrated. The Schottky gate work function is adjusted to improve pinch-off voltage and 
achieve better performance. To match the electron concentration of the simulated device 24 Md. M. Hossain et al. 
to that of the experimental data, the charges confined in bulk GaN layer and at AlGaN/GaN 
interface were carefully considered. To achieve the optimized drain current characteristics 
two mobility models are exploited in TCAD simulation: GANSAT for high-field mobility 
and nitride-specific field-dependent Caughey–Thomas for low-field mobility [29]. 
2.1. Device energy-band diagram 
Figure 2 depicts the conduction and the valence bands of an E-mode GaN MISHEMT 
under the gate electrode. A band-bending process occurs at the interface due to a dis￾continuity in the bandgap between AlGaN and GaN. 
Fig. 2. Energy band diagram of proposed π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT at zero gate bias. 
3. Device Physics 
3.1. 2DEG charge density 
The barrier layer thickness is a significant factor to be considered because it influences the 
2DEG charge density of the HEMT in the absence of the gate bias. As the thickness of the 
barrier layer (AlGaN) increases, the 2DEG density/sheet-charge density (𝑁௦) increases. 
Function of 2DEG density (𝑁௦) can be expressed as in Eq. (1): 
Nሺୗሻሺxሻൌ ஢ሺ୶ሻ
ୣ - ቀ கబக౨ሺ୶ሻ
୲ఽౢృ౗ొ୯మቁ ൣq஦ౘ ሺxሻ൅E୊ ሺxሻ-ΔEେሺxሻ൧ , (1) 
where Δ𝐸஼ is the conduction band energy difference between AlGaN and GaN, qφb is the 
gate contact Schottky-barrier height, 𝐸ி is the Fermi energy level, ε௥ is the dielectric 
constant of AlGaN, 𝑡஺௟ீ௔ே is barrier layer (AlGaN) width, q is the charge of an electron, 
and σ(x) is sheet charge at the AlGaN/GaN interface. The electron mobility of the device 
changes with the thickness of the barrier layer (𝑡஺௟ீ௔ே). Initially, the electron mobility 
increases with barrier thickness which starts to decrease after barrier thickness exceeds a 
certain level. Therefore, proper selection of the barrier thickness plays a significant role in 
attaining high sheet-charge capacity and electron mobility. Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization 25
When gate voltage (𝑉ீ) is applied, the 2DEG carrier concentration (𝑛௦) can be cal￾culated using Eq. (2): 
nୱ ൌ க
୯௧ಲ೗ಸೌಿ
ቀVୋ െ V୲୦ െ ୉ూ
୯ ቁ , (2) 
where 𝑉ீ is the applied gate voltage, 𝑉௧௛ is the threshold voltage, ε is the dielectric constant 
of gate oxide and p-GaN cap layer, and 𝐸ி is the Fermi energy level. 
3.2. Threshold voltage 
The threshold voltage of the device also depends on the capacitance underneath the gate 
legs and is given by Eq. (3): 
V୲୦ ൌ ∅ୠ െ ୼୉ి
୯ െ ୯௧ಲ೗ಸೌಿమ
க Nୈ ൅ ୯௧ಲ೗ಸೌಿ
க σ ൅ Vୠ୧ , (3)
where 𝑁஽ is the doping concentration of barrier layer (AlGaN), and 𝑉௕௜ is the built-in 
potential of the p-GaN/AlGaN layer. It is evident from both equations that the materials 
with higher dielectric constant improve the threshold voltage of the device. The built-in 
potential barrier is the main factor that contributes to the positive threshold voltage that can 
be interpreted from Fig. 3. The higher the value of the built-in potential, the higher the 
threshold voltage of the HEMT. A higher value of threshold voltage can be achieved by 
increasing the doping concentration of the p-GaN layer. Built-in potential 𝑉௕௜ can be 
calculated using Eq. (4): 
Vୠ୧ ൌ ୉ౝሺୋୟ୒ሻ
୯ െ ୉ూି୼୉ి
୯ െ qn౩౦మ
ଶகሺ୒ఽା୒ీሻ , (4)
where 𝑛௦௣ is the 2DEG sheet carrier density and 𝑁஺ is the acceptor concentration at p-GaN 
cap layer. 
3.3. Transconductance and drain current model of HEMT 
The device transconductance can be calculated [30] as 
𝑔௠ ൌ డூವೄ
డ௏ಸ
ൌ ଶ.୯మ.୛.୚ీ౏.ఓ೚.஛.୐ృ
େృ ൭ ಓ.ైృ.౧
ిృ൫౒ృష౒౪౞൯
మ ା ౡሺైీ౏షైృሻ
ొ౩ ൱
మ
ሺ୚ృି୚౪౞ሻయ
. (5)
Device transconductance depends on the gate capacitance. Total gate capacitance ሺCG) can 
be calculated using the three series capacitances including the oxide capacitance ሺ𝐶௢௫ሻ, p￾GaN cap layer capacitance ሺ𝐶ீ௔ேሻ, and AlGaN barrier layer capacitance ሺ𝐶஺௟ீ௔ேሻ by using 
(6): 
ଵ
େృ
ൌ ଵ
େ౥౮
൅ ଵ
େృ౗ొ
൅ ଵ
େఽౢృ౗ొ
ൌ ୲౥౮
க౥க౥౮
൅ ୲ృ౗ొ
க౥கృ౗ొ
൅ ୲ఽౢృ౗ొ
க౥கఽౢృ౗ొ
(6)26 Md. M. Hossain et al. 
Functions are derived based on the total gate capacitance to determine the effect of the 
p-GaN cap layer and the dielectric constant of gate oxide on the drain current and the 
transconductance of the device. The drain current can be calculated using the following 
equations [30]: 
𝐼ௗ௦ ൌ 𝑞. 𝑊. ሺ𝜇. 𝐸ሻ. Nୱሺ𝑥ሻ
 ൌ 𝑞. 𝑊. 𝜇௢. ௏೏ೞ.ோ೏ೞ.୒౩ሺ௫ሻ
௅ಸವሺோಸವାோಸೄାோಸାଶோ಴ሻ
 ൌ 𝑞. 𝑊. 𝜇௢. ௏೏ೞ.
ಽಸವ
ಿೞഋ೚
.୒౩ሺ௫ሻ
௅ಸವ൬ ಽಸ
ಿಸഋಸ
ା௞ಽವೄషಽಸ
ొ౩ഋ೚ ൰
 
 ൌ ௤.ௐ.ఓ೚.௏೏ೞ
ಽಸ
ಿಸ
ഋ೚
ഋಸ ାೖሺಽವೄషಽಸሻ
ొ౩
 ൌ ௤.ௐ.ఓ೚.௏೏ೞ
ಓ.ಽಸ.೜
ిృ൫ೇಸషೇ೟೓൯ ାೖሺಽವೄషಽಸሻ
ొ౩
 (7) 
Here W is the gate width, q is the electron charge, Nୱ is the electron concentration in the 
channel, 𝜇௢ is the electron mobility through the channel and k is contact resistance 
coefficient. 
4. TCAD Modeling and Simulation Results 
DC analysis of the proposed devices is carried out in terms of threshold voltage (𝑉௧௛), 
breakdown voltage (𝑉஻ோ), maximum value of the transconductance (𝑔௠,௠௔௫), gate-induced 
gate leakage current (𝐼ீூ஽௅) and the output-conductance (𝑔ௗ). For small signal analysis, 
the unity current gain cut-off frequency (𝑓்), the maximum frequency of oscillation (𝑓௠௔௫) 
and the minimum noise figure (NF௠௜௡) are observed. Three different gate structures are 
compared to find the overall better-performing and more reliable enhancement-mode 
device. 
4.1. DC analysis 
Figure 3 depicts the 𝐼ௗ௦versus 𝑉௚௦ characteristics of all devices. The conventional π-gate 
HEMT has depletion-type threshold voltages of 0.7 V. After adding a p-GaN cap layer 
underneath the gate, the device operates in an enhancement mode by forming a p-n 
heterojunction diode comprising of the p-GaN gate and the n-type AlGaN barrier layer, 
resulting in a built-in potential. This potential barrier inside the heterojunction diode aids 
in the removal of any polarization charge in the channel, allowing normally OFF operation. 
The threshold voltage increases further if a thin Al2O3 oxide layer is added between the 
metal gate and the p-GaN cap layer. The threshold voltage of the proposed π-shaped p￾GaN MISHEMT and the π-shaped p-GaN HEMT are 1.74 V and 1.31 V, respectively. Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization 27
Fig. 3. Transfer characteristics of the proposed π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT, π-shaped p-GaN HEMT and π-gate 
HEMT with Vgs swipe from -3.0 to 7.0 V at fixed gate bias Vds = 12 V. 
Keeping all the devices in similar biasing conditions, transconductance is measured. Fig￾ure 3 also shows the changing behavior of the transconductance depending on the gate 
voltage. Transconductance with a higher value ensures better control of the gate voltage 
over the drain current and faster switching speed. The proposed π-shaped p-GaN 
MISHEMT shows a higher value of transconductance of 0.321 S/mm, while at the 
same bias condition, π-shaped p-GaN HEMT, and π-gate show transconductances of 
0.305 S/mm and 0.231 S/mm, respectively.
The characteristic curve in Fig. 4 is obtained by keeping the gate bias (Vgs) constant 
at 3 V and measuring the drain current (𝐼ௗ௦) by swiping the drain voltage (𝑉ௗ௦) from 0 to 
12 V. As the conventional π-gate has the lowest threshold voltage, its drain current curve 
shows a higher drain saturation current at a given gate voltage compared to the π-shaped 
p-GaN HEMT and π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT. The maximum drain current for simple 
π-gate HEMTs at 3 V gate voltage is 0.86 A/mm. On the other hand, both E-mode devices, 
π-shaped p-GaN HEMT and π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT, show 0.72 (A/mm) and 0.71 
(A/mm), respectively. 
Figure 4 represents the device output conductance, which is inversely related to the 
device on-resistance. The output conductance with a higher value ensures better control of 
the drain voltage over the drain current and lower on-resistance. Although all three devices 
have different peak drain current density levels, their output conductances (𝑔ௗ) are 
comparable to one another. 
At a closed-gate condition with a threshold bias of 𝑉௚ = 10 V for all devices, Fig. 5 
plots the sub-threshold drain leakage versus the drain voltage. At the breakdown voltage, 
the subthreshold drain leakage current increases linearly with the drain voltage. Adding a 
p-type doped GaN layer improves the breakdown voltage to 330 V. A further improvement 28 Md. M. Hossain et al. 
Fig. 4. Device drain-current characteristics with Vds swipe from 0 to 12 V at fixed gate bias Vgs = 3.0 V. 
Fig. 5. Device off-state breakdown behavior with Vds swipe from 0 to 500 V at gate biased Vds = 10 V. 
occurs after adding a thin Al2O3 insulating layer underneath the π-gate legs, which 
improves the breakdown voltage to 341 V by improving the gate Schottky barrier. 
From reverse and forward current measurements, the drain current (𝐼ௗ௦) is plotted as a 
function of the gate-to-source voltage (V୥ୱ) as shown in Fig. 6. These curves present the 
gate-induced drain leakage current (Iୋ୍ୈ୐) at the off-state gate bias. The drain leakage 
current of a π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT is several orders of magnitude lower than that of 
the π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT or conventional π-gate HEMT. Table 1 summarizes all 
the DC performance parameters discussed above for three different device structures. Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization 29
Fig. 6. Gate induced drain leakage behavior of the devices. 
Table 1. DC Performance Parameters of Three Different Device Structures 
Devices 𝑉୲୦
(V) 
𝑔୫,୫ୟ୶
(S/mm)
𝐼ୋ୍ୈ୐
(A) 
𝑉୆ୖ
(V) 
𝐼ୢୱሺ୫ୟ୶ሻ
(A) 
π-gate HEMT 0.7 0.231 2.6 ൈ 10ିଷ 295 0.856 
π-gate p-GaN HEMT 1.31 0.305 7.21 ൈ 10ିଷ 330 0.727 
π-gate p-GaN MISHEMT 1.74 0.321 𝟖. 𝟑 ൈ 𝟏𝟎ି𝟑 341 0.705
4.2. Small signal analysis 
For small signal analysis, cut-off frequency (ft), maximum operating frequency (fmax) and 
minimum noise figure of merit (NFmin) were studied in this work. The π-gate structure 
modifies the electric field profiles which effectively mitigates the hot carrier effects in 
HEMT and limits the thermal degradation which improves the device reliability. 
As the π-gate structure is obtained by modification of T-gate, it is more of a MOS 
structure than a metal-semiconductor contact. Therefore, the ability to control the gate is 
reduced to some extent leading to a decrease in 2DEG confinement which in turn reduces 
the peak transconductance (𝑔௠). In addition, the fringing fields produced in between the 
two legs of the π-gate increase the parasitic capacitance, which is an intentional trade-off 
for achieving an overall balanced device in terms of both DC and RF performance. Adding 
p-GaN and an Al2O3 insulating layer underneath the legs increases the parasitic capacitance 
further, which results in a lower f୲ and f୫ୟ୶. 
Device cut-off frequency is the operating frequency where device current gain becomes 
unity. This means that above the cut-off frequency HEMTs cannot be used as an amplifier. 
Equations (8) and (9) represent the expression of current gain and cut-off frequency [31]: 30 Md. M. Hossain et al. 
𝐴𝑖 ൌ 𝑔𝑚
𝑗𝜔൫𝑐𝑔𝑠൅𝑐𝑔𝑑൅𝑐𝑝൯
 , (8)
𝑓𝑇 ൌ 𝑔𝑚
2𝜋൫𝑐𝑔𝑠൅𝑐𝑔𝑑൅𝑐𝑝൯
 . (9)
where Cgs is the gate to source capacitance, Cgd is the capacitance between the gate and the 
drain, Cp is the parasitic capacitance. From the expression of cut-off frequency, it can be 
interpreted that summation of three capacitance is inversely related to the 𝑓். 
One of the key challenges in achieving high-gain millimeter-wave power amplification 
is increasing the frequency of oscillation (f୫ୟ୶). Although the proposed device structure 
has better transconductance and positive threshold voltage due to the addition of a p-GaN 
cap layer and an Al2O3 insulation layer, this modification increases the device gate 
capacitance and parasitic capacitance, resulting in a decrease in device f୫ୟ୶. At the 
maximum frequency of oscillation f୫ୟ୶, the unilateral power gain of the device becomes 
unity [31] which can be expressed as in Eq. (10): 
f୫ୟ୶ ൌ ୊౪
ଶට൫ୖ౟ାୖ౩ାୖౝ൯/ୖౝౚାଶ஠୤౐ୖౝେౝౚ
 , (10)
where 𝐶௚ௗ is the gate to drain capacitance, 𝑅௜, 𝑅௦, 𝑅௚ and 𝑅௚ௗ represent the gate-charging, 
source, gate, and output resistance, respectively. 
Figure 7 shows the change in the current gain of the mentioned devices in terms of 
operating frequency. Table 2 represents the extracted values of cut-off frequency from 
Fig. 7 for three different gate structures. The cutoff frequency for π-shaped p-GaN 
MISHEMT is 33.4 GHz. For π-shaped p-GaN HEMT and π-gate HEMT, these values 
Fig. 7. Device current gain as a function of the operating frequency. Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization 31
Table 2. RF Performance Parameters of Different Devices 
Devices 𝑓்
(GHz) 
𝑓௠௔௫
(GHz) 
𝐹௠௜௡
(dB) 
5 GHz 7 GHz 10 GHz 
π-gate HEMT 48.1 96.3 0.47 0.65 0.94 
π-gate p-GaN HEMT 39.2 91.4 0.40 0.55 0.78 
π-gate p-GaN MISHEMT 33.4 82.3 0.32 0.45 0.64
become 39.2 GHz and 48.1 GHz, respectively. Conventional π-gate HEMT shows a higher 
cut-off frequency as it has less gate capacitance because there is no p-GaN cap layer or 
Al2O3 insulating layer between the gate metal and the AlGaN barrier layer. 
Figure 8 represents the power gain of different devices as a function of operating 
frequency. The maximum frequencies for the proposed π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT is 
82.3 GHz. The value f୫ୟ୶ for simple π-gate architecture is 96.3 GHz, and that of a π-shaped 
p-GaN HEMT is 91.4 GHz. As the addition of the p-GaN cap layer and the oxide layer 
between the gate and barrier layers increases the gate capacitance and the parasitic 
capacitances, a decrease in the cut-off frequency occurs resulting in a lower fmax compared 
to the other two device structures. 
Figure 9 represent the NF୫୧୬ values for different device structures at different operating 
frequencies. At 10 GHz operating frequency, the minimum noise figure for a simple π￾structure and for a π-shaped p-GaN HEMT obtained as 0.94 dB and 0.78 dB, respectively. 
At the same operating condition, the minimum noise figure for the π-shaped p-GaN 
MISHEMT becomes 0.64 dB. The proposed device architecture has degraded NF୫୧୬ due 
to the split in fingering fields and additional oxide layer underneath the gate, contributing 
to the increased parasitic capacitance in the π-gate. 
Fig. 8. Device unilateral power gain as a function of the operating frequency. 32 Md. M. Hossain et al. 
Fig. 9. Minimum noise figure-of merit of the devices at different operating frequency.
5. Conclusion 
This work represents a π-gate p-GaN MISHEMT for reliable enhancement mode operation 
with improved gate control ability and stable small signal performance. TCAD-based 
intensive analysis was carried out to compare the performance of the proposed device 
architecture with conventional π-gate counterparts. The transformation of the gate 
electrode to a π-shaped structure with a p-type doped cap layer and an insulating oxide 
layer beneath the gate legs improves the threshold voltage to 1.72 V, the breakdown voltage 
to 341 V, and the transconductance to 0.321 S/mm. These properties outperform those of 
Schottky-gated p-GaN-gated HEMT. The RF performance of the device is characterized 
by the cut-off frequency, the maximum oscillation frequency, and the minimum noise 
figure, which are reported to be 33.4 GHz, 82.3 GHz, and 0.64 dB, respectively. With these 
remarkable properties, the proposed structure of π-shaped p-GaN MISHEMT demonstrates 
its potential for utilization in RF circuits, particularly in high-frequency integrated power 
amplifiers. 
References 
1. P. Gangwani, S. Pandey, S. Haldar, M. Gupta, and R. S. Gupta, “Polarization dependent analysis 
of AlGaN/GaN HEMT for high power applications,” Solid State Electronics, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 
130–135, Jan. 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.sse.2006.11.002.
2. J. P. Ibbetson, P. T. Fini, K. D. Ness, S. P. DenBaars, J. S. Speck, and U. K. Mishra, 
“Polarization effects, surface states, and the source of electrons in AlGaN/GaN heterostructure 
field effect transistors,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 250–252, Jul. 2000, doi: 
10.1063/1.126940. 
3. A. S. A. Fletcher and D. Nirmal, “A survey of Gallium Nitride HEMT for RF and high power 
applications,” Superlattices and Microstructures, vol. 109, pp. 519–537, Sep. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.spmi.2017.05.042. Modeling of Enhancement Mode HEMT with Π-Gate Optimization 33
4. K. J. Chen et al., “GaN-on-Si power technology: devices and applications,” IEEE Transactions 
on Electron Devices, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 779–795, Mar. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TED.2017.2657579. 
5. A. Mimouni, T. Fernández, J. Rodriguez-Tellez, A. Tazon, H. Baudrand, and M. Boussuis, 
“Gate leakage current in GaN HEMT’s: a degradation modeling approach,” Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 397–402, Jan. 2013, doi: 10.5923/j.eee.20120206.09. 
6. T. P. C. and R. J. G. K. Matocha, “High-voltage normally off GaN MOSFETs on sapphire 
substrates,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 6–10, Jan. 2005, doi: 
10.1109/TED.2004.841355. 
7. E. Bahat-Treidel, O. Hilt, F. Brunner, J. Wurfl, and Gü. Trankle, “Punchthrough-voltage 
enhancement of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs using AlGaN double-heterojunction confinement,” IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 3354–3359, Dec. 2008, doi: 10.1109/ 
TED.2008.2006891. 
8. Yong Cai, Yugang Zhou, K. J. Chen, and K. M. Lau, “High-performance enhancement-mode 
AlGaN/GaN HEMTs using fluoride-based plasma treatment,” IEEE Electron Device Letters, 
vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 435–437, Jul. 2005, doi: 10.1109/LED.2005.851122. 
9. Y. Cai, Y. Zhou, K. M. Lau, and K. J. Chen, “Control of threshold voltage of AlGaN/GaN 
HEMTs by fluoride-based plasma treatment: from depletion mode to enhancement mode,” IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 2207–2215, Sep. 2006, doi: 10.1109/ 
TED.2006.881054. 
10. W. B. Lanford, T. Tanaka, Y. Otoki, and I. Adesida, “Recessed-gate enhancement-mode GaN 
HEMT with high threshold voltage,” Electronics Letters, vol. 41, no. 7, p. 449, 2005, doi: 
10.1049/el:20050161. 
11. L.-Y. Su, F. Lee, and J. J. Huang, “Enhancement-mode GaN-based high-electron mobility 
transistors on the Si substrate with a p-type GaN cap layer,” IEEE Transactions on Electron 
Devices, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 460–465, Feb. 2014, doi: 10.1109/TED.2013.2294337. 
12. S. Shamsir, F. Garcia, and S. K. Islam, “Modeling of enhancement-mode GaN-GIT for high￾power and high-temperature application,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 
2, pp. 588–594, Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TED.2019.2961908. 
13. R. Hao et al., “Normally-off p-GaN/AlGaN/GaN high electron mobility transistors using 
hydrogen plasma treatment,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 109, no. 15, p. 152106, Oct. 2016, 
doi: 10.1063/1.4964518. 
14. C.-C. Hsu, P.-C. Shen, Y.-N. Zhong, and Y.-M. Hsin, “AlGaN/GaN MIS-HEMTs with a p-GaN 
cap layer,” MRS Advances, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 143–146, Jan. 2018, doi: 10.1557/adv.2017.626. 
15. G. Kurt et al., “Normally-off AlGaN/GaN MIS-HEMT with low gate leakage current using a 
hydrofluoric acid pre-treatment,” Solid State Electronics, vol. 158, pp. 22–27, Aug. 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.sse.2019.05.008. 
16. Y. C. Lin et al., “Optimization of gate insulator material for GaN MIS-HEMT,” in 2016 28th 
International Symposium on Power Semiconductor Devices and ICs (ISPSD), IEEE, Jun. 2016, 
pp. 115–118. doi: 10.1109/ISPSD.2016.7520791. 
17. C.-J. Yu, C.-W. Hsu, M.-C. Wu, W.-C. Hsu, C.-Y. Chuang, and J.-Z. Liu, “Improved DC 
and RF performance of novel MIS p-GaN-Gated HEMTs by gate-all-around structure,” 
IEEE Electron Device Letters, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 673–676, May 2020, doi: 10.1109/ 
LED.2020.2980584. 
18. T. Pu et al., “Normally-off AlGaN/GaN heterojunction metal-insulator-semiconductor field￾effect transistors with gate-first process,” IEEE Electron Device Letters, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 185–
188, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1109/LED.2018.2889291. 34 Md. M. Hossain et al. 
19. K. Sehra, V. Kumari, M. Gupta, M. Mishra, D. S. Rawal, and M. Saxena, “Optimization of π – 
gate AlGaN/AlN/GaN HEMTs for low noise and high gain applications,” Silicon, vol. 14, no. 
2, pp. 393–404, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1007/s12633-020-00805-7. 
20. K. Sehra, V. Kumari, M. Gupta, M. Mishra, D. S. Rawal, and M. Saxena, “A Π-shaped p-GaN 
HEMT for reliable enhancement mode operation,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 133, p. 
114544, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.microrel.2022.114544. 
21. A. D. Latorre-Rey, J. D. Albrecht, and M. Saraniti, “A Π-shaped gate design for reducing hot￾electron generation in GaN HEMTs,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 65, no. 10, 
pp. 4263–4270, Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TED.2018.2863746. 
22. Y.-Z. Yue, Y. Hao, and J.-C. Zhang, “AlGaN/GaN MOS-HEMT with stack gate HfO2/Al2O3
structure grown by atomic layer deposition,” in Compound Semiconductor Integrated Circuits 
Symposium, IEEE, Oct. 2008, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/CSICS.2008.59. 
23. H.-C. Chiu et al., “Normally-Off p-GaN gated AlGaN/GaN MIS-HEMTs with ALD-grown 
Al2O3/AlN composite gate insulator,” Membranes, vol. 11, no. 10, p. 727, Sep. 2021, doi: 
10.3390/membranes11100727. 
24. Zhiwei Bi, Yue Hao, Hongxia Liu, Linjie Liu, and Qian Feng, “Characteristics analysis 
of gate dielectrics in AlGaN/GaN MIS-HEMT,” in International Conference of Electron 
Devices and Solid-State Circuits (EDSSC), IEEE, Dec. 2009, pp. 419–422. doi: 10.1109/
EDSSC.2009.5394226. 
25. K. Sehra, V. Kumari, V. Nath, M. Gupta, D. S. Rawal, and M. Saxena, “Comparison of linearity 
and intermodulation distortion metrics for T - and Pi - gate HEMT,” in International Conference 
on Electrical, Electronics and Computer Engineering (UPCON), IEEE, Nov. 2019, pp. 1–6. 
doi: 10.1109/UPCON47278.2019.8980221. 
26. R. N. Hall, “Electron-hole recombination in germanium,” Physical Review, vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 
387–387, Jul. 1952, doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.87.387. 
27. W. Shockley and W. T. Read, “Statistics of the recombinations of holes and electrons,” Physical 
Review, vol. 87, no. 5, pp. 835–842, Sep. 1952, doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.87.835. 
28. J. D. Albrecht, R. P. Wang, P. P. Ruden, M. Farahmand, and K. F. Brennan, “Electron transport 
characteristics of GaN for high temperature device modeling,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 
83, no. 9, pp. 4777–4781, May 1998, doi: 10.1063/1.367269. 
29. M. Farahmand et al., “Monte Carlo simulation of electron transport in the III-nitride wurtzite 
phase materials system: binaries and ternaries,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 
48, no. 3, pp. 535–542, Mar. 2001, doi: 10.1109/16.906448. 
30. Y. Zhao et al., “Temperature-dependent characteristics for the p-type CuO gate HEMT and 
high-k HfO2 MIS-HEMT on the Si substrates,” AIP Advances, vol. 11, no. 10, p. 105204, Oct. 
2021, doi: 10.1063/5.0064695. 
31. K. Jena, R. Swain, and T. R. Lenka, “Effect of thin gate dielectrics on DC, radio frequency and 
linearity characteristics of lattice‐matched AlInN/AlN/GaN metal–oxide–semiconductor high 
electron mobility transistor,” IET Circuits, Devices & Systems, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 423–432, Sep. 
2016, doi: 10.1049/iet-cds.2015.0332.  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0004 
35 
Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence 
Based on Optical Logic Gate 
Shunyao Fan*, Ashiq Rahman and Niloy K. Dutta 
Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA *Shunyao.fan@uconn.edu 
In this paper, we propose a scheme for high-speed all-optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence 
(PRBS) generator and use it for generating keystream for encryption. This PRBS generator design is 
based on Linear Feedback Shift Registers (LFSR) and optical XOR and AND gates. The optical logical 
gates are based on quantum dot-semiconductor optical amplifier Mach-Zehnder interferometer 
(QD-SOA-MZI). With two photon absorption (TPA) in quantum dot-semiconductor optical amplifier 
(QD-SOA), this kind of optical logic gates performs well when processing data in an ultra-fast 
timescale and therefore able to function as high speed PRBS generator. Result shows that it’s possible 
for this scheme to realize all-optical encryption and decryption at high process rate up to 320 Gb/s. 
We simulated different ways of generating keystream with schemes such as cascaded generator, 
parallel generator and alternating step generator. These generators use more than one LFSR. Result 
shows that the schemes we use can function as stable and complex keystream generators. 
Keywords: Optical logic gates; quantum dot-semiconductor optical amplifier; pseudo-random binary 
sequence. 
1. Introduction 
High-speed communication systems require higher processing rate, and therefore all￾optical data processing is expected to play a significant role. Hence it is important that we 
replicate some useful tools in optical networks with all-optical logic gates. Pseudo-Random 
Binary Sequence (PRBS) is a sequence of binary digits (1’s and 0’s) that is generated with 
a deterministic algorithm yet difficult to predict and exhibits statistical behavior similar to 
a truly random sequence. Therefore, PRBS is widely used in electronics, including 
simulation of noise in signal transmission, data encryption/decryption, and in bit error rate 
testers (BERTs) [1]. PRBS generators can be achieved by Linear Feedback Shift Registers 
(LFSR) and logic gates [2, 3]. High-speed all-optical logic gates have been demonstrated. 
Hence, based on all-optical logic gates, we may build a PRBS generator that has a high 
process rate. 
*Corresponding author. 36 S. Fan, A. Rahman & N. K. Dutta 
 In this paper, we provide a model to simulate encryption and decryption using PRBS 
generator that is based on LFSR and quantum dot-semiconductor optical amplifier Mach–
Zehnder interferometer (QD-SOA-MZI). We also simulate different designs for encryption 
key-steam generator based on PRBS. 
2. Optical Logic Gate Based on QDSOA-MZI 
The principle of logic XOR operation utilizing cross-phase modulation (XPM) process in 
SOAs has been previously discussed and analyzed [3]. The logic XOR operation is 
achieved utilizing the cross-gain modulation (XGM) and cross phase modulation (XPM) 
processes in QD-SOAs. As shown in Fig. 1, Data streams A and B are carried by two 
optical pulse streams at wavelength λ1 are separately injected into the two arms of the MZI 
through port A and B. There is a clock stream at wavelength λ2 injected into port C and 
evenly split into the two arms of the MZI. Due to XGM and XPM, the phases and 
amplitudes of two clock streams are modulated as they travel with data streams in the QD￾SOAs. When they recombine at port D, their interference will produce different results 
based on initial conditions. 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of optical gates based on QDSOA-MZI. The truth table of XOR is also shown. The 
band pass filter is an optical filter which transmits the light at wavelength 2 and blocks light at wavelength 1. 
The Truth Table of XOR 
Data B Data A Output XOR 
0 0 0 
1 0 1 
0 1 1 
1 1 0 
To achieve XOR operation, we initially set the MZI unbalanced with a phase difference 
π between the two branches. Thus, when input data A and B are the same, the two clock 
streams are experiencing the same gain and phase shift in QD-SOAs and when they Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence Based on Optical Logic Gate 37
recombine at port D, considering the initial phase difference π, they will undergo 
destructive interference and the output result is “0”. Correspondingly, when input data A 
and B are not the same, the gain and phase modulation of the two clock streams are different 
and their interference will output “1” at wavelength λ2. The band pass filter is an optical 
filter which transmits the light at wavelength λ2 and blocks light at wavelength λ1. 
We can also use this same scheme to realize the logic AND operation. To achieve this, 
we input data stream A into port A, and inject a delayed version of data stream A into port 
B. MZI is initially set so that there is no output if there is no differential phase change in 
the two arms for an input signal propagating through both arms. Signal B (which also carry 
the result of the AND operation) is injected at port C of the SOA-MZI. When there is a 
signal (A) input “1”, in one of the arms there is a phase shift induced on to the control 
signal and a delayed phase shift appears at the other arm. Thus signal A (if it is 1) produces 
a phase gate for signal B which travels through both arms and interfere at the output. Thus 
if B=1 and A=1, the output is “1”. If A=0 there is no phase gate and hence the output is 
“0” for both B=0 and B=1, and if A=1 B=0, the output is “0”. This is the logic function 
AND. 
Then input data stream B into port C and we will get a pattern of A AND B out from 
port D. When data stream A input “1”, in one of the arms there is a phase shift induced on 
the control signal and a delayed phase shift appears at the other arm. Thus, for signal A is 
“1”, produces a phase gate for signal B which travels through both arms and interfere at 
the port D. With data stream A and data stream B both input “1”, the output is “1”. If data 
stream A input “0”, there will be no phase gate, and therefore no output. If data stream B 
input “0” the output will also be “0”. Thus, this scheme functions as an AND gate. 
3. Devices and Rate Equations 
The device we choose here to construct the all-optical logic gate is the InGaAs/InGaAsP/ 
InP QD-SOA, in which InAs quantum dots are embedded in InGaAsP layers. The gain of 
this type of device around 1.55 µm is typically ~15 dB and the noise figure is low at 
~7 dB [4].
Figure 2 illustrates the optical gain, the TPA process and carrier transitions between 
the wetting layer (WL), the QD excited state (ES) and the QD ground state (GS). The 
device gain is determined by the carrier density of the QD ground state. The TPA generates 
carriers in the bulk region. These carriers then relax to the WL, and eventually are captured 
into QDs on ultrafast timescale [5]. Generally, carriers in the barriers are free to move in 
3D and are captured very rapidly by the 2D wetting layer at a relaxation timescale of ~70 
fs [5]. Ju et al. have shown that the carrier dynamics in the bulk region due to TPA can 
also refill the WL and QDs on ultrafast timescales and thus significantly reduce pattern 
effects for optical signal-processing operating at Tbit/s [5]. They introduced a three coupled 
rate equations model including the barrier region, as well as the WL and QDs. In our 
model, we ignore the barrier dynamics and assume that carriers are injected directly from 
the contacts into the WL [5]. Since the only recipient of the pump current is the WL, and 
the QD excited state serves as a carrier reservoir for the ground state with ultra-fast carrier 38 S. Fan, A. Rahman & N. K. Dutta 
Fig. 2. Schematic of two-photon absorption (TPA) and a typical device structure. The InGaAs waveguide layer 
which has a bandgap intermediate between the cladding layers (InAlAs) and the quantum dots (InAs) and the 
layer (InGaAs) surrounding the quantum dots serve as the wetting layer. Similar layer structure is feasible using 
the InP/InGasAsP/InGaAs material system with InGaAs quantum dots. 
relaxation to the latter, the device gain dynamics is affected by their carrier densities and 
transition rates. 
The change in carrier densities of the three energy levels including the TPA process are 
described by the following coupled rate equations Eq. (1). See Refs. [6–8] for more details. 
2
wr w-e e-w
esr w-e e-w g-e e-g
gsr g-e e-g
1 ( ) (1 ) (1 ) [ ] ;
ττ τ 2
(1 ) (1 ) (1 ) (1 );
ττ τ τ τ
1 () (1 ) (1 ) (2 1) .
ττ τ
esm
wm wm wm
wm gsm
esm esm
esm d
gsm d gsm
dw w w h S t N h w
dt eVN N N A
dh h w h f h N N
hw hf dt N N
df f f h S t N h f af dt N A N



     
        

      


 (1) 
where w, h and f represent the occupation probability of the wetting layer, the QD excited 
state and ground state, respectively; Nwm, Nesm and Ngsm are the maximum densities of 
carriers in each state; the spontaneous radiation lifetime of each state is denoted by τar 
(“a” being “w”, “es” or “gs”); τa-b denotes the relaxation time between any state “a” and 
state “b”; d is the active layer confinement factor; I is the injected current; a is the 
differential gain; V is the volume of the active layer; Ad is the effective cross-sectional area 
of the active layer; k is the TPA coefficient; ℏ is the reduced Plank constant; A is the modal 
area and S(t) is the total input light power. The TPA generated carriers are considered by 
the last term in first equation. Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence Based on Optical Logic Gate 39
The gain of QD-SOA including nonlinear process such as carrier heating (CH) and 
spectral hole burning (SHB) effects is expressed as Eq. (2). See Refs. [9] and [10] for more 
details: 
( ) () , 1 ( ) ()
t
CH SHB
aN N
g t
  S t
     (2) 
where N and Nt are the GS carrier density, the transparency GS carrier density respectively; 
ε denotes the gain suppression factor. The refractive index of the active region is affected 
by the injected light and the change of temperature due to carrier heating. As a result, it 
will cause a phase change to any probe wave injected into the QD-SOA. This is shown in 
the following equation: (See Ref. [11] for more details) 
1 ( ) [ ( ) ( )] , 2 L CH CH   t Gt G t    (3) 
where GL(t) is the linear gain factor of the device given by g(t)L, L being the effective 
length of the active layer; α is the linewidth enhancement factor of the device 
corresponding to band-to-band transition and αCH is the linewidth enhancement factor of 
the device related to carrier heating process [12]. 
The output of MZI from the combination of two data streams can be expressed as 
1 2 12 1 2 0
( )[ ( ) ( ) 2 ( ) ( ) cos( (t) ( ) )] , 4
cb
out
P t P G t G t G tG t t      (4) 
where Pcb is the light power of the input clock signal; G1(t) and G2(t) are the calculated 
total linear gain factors. The parameters we use for simulation is shown in what follows. 
Table 1. The parameters used in the model. 
Parameter Description Value 
τwr Lifetime for WL recombination 0.2 nsa
τesr Lifetime for ES recombination 0.2 nsa
 
τgsr Lifetime for GS recombination 0.1 nsa
b TPA coefficient 70 cm/GWb
Gd Confinement factor for active QD region 0.1 
a Gain differential 8.6*10–15 cm2c
τw-e WL to ES relaxation lifetime 1 psd
τg-e GS to ES relaxation lifetime 10 psd
a Linewidth enhancement factor for gain dynamics 4 
aCH Linewidth enhancement factor for CH 1.2 
L Length of active region 1.0 mm 
eCH Gain suppression factor for CH 0.3*10–17 cm3e
eSHB Gain suppression factor for SHB 7.5*10–17 cm3e40 S. Fan, A. Rahman & N. K. Dutta 
4. PRBS Model 
Due to the compact and stable structure of the SOA-MZI based optical logic gate [see Ref. 
3], it can be used to build the PRBS generator. The PRBS generator used here is based on 
a linear feedback shift register (LFSR). As shown in Fig. 3, the LFSR has m data storing 
units (delay lines in optics), these storing units will store one binary data bit for one clock 
period. The system is synchronized with one clock. For each period, we let the bits in nth 
and the mth unit go through a XOR process, the output will be reshaped with an AND gate 
and band pass filter then feed back to the first unit of LFSR. The output PRBS signal can 
be tapped from the end of the LFSR [see Refs. 3, 13–16]. 
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of PRBS generator. (a) Block diagram of a LFSR; (b) functional unit, two SOA-MZIs 
operating as XOR and AND gates. BPF: bandpass filter. 
For a LFSR with m units, the PRBS repetition bit period is T=2m-1. We can use 
PRBS-m indicate the size of the sequence. Most used PRBS has a LFSR with 7 or more 
units. For the simulations in this paper, we choose PRBS-7 and it has a repetition period of 
127 bits. Figure 4 shows a Simulation result of PRBS based on QDSOA-MZI and LFSR. 
(a)
(b)Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence Based on Optical Logic Gate 41
 Fig. 4. (a) Simulation result of PRBS, operating at 320 Gb/s. The initial input of the LFSR is seven “1” s, and 
it’s using 4th and 7th unit. (b) Eye-diagram of the PRBS sequence at 1.0 ps pulse. 
The principle reason for fast gain and phase recovery for QD-SOA is the fast well to 
excited state of dot transition time. The calculated Q-factor as a function of this parameter 
is shown in Fig. 5. Q2 approximately equals the ratio of signal to noise (in power). 
Fig. 5. Calculated Q-factor for PRBS operation at 320 Gb/s as a function of well to dot transition time. Note that 
Q ~ 6 is feasible (Q = 6 corresponds to an error rate of 10-9 in a transmission system). 
5. Encryption/Decryption with Keystream 
Using XOR algorithm, we can encrypt a data by apply XOR operation to the data with a 
keystream and decrypt it by apply XOR operation to the encrypted data with the same key￾stream. The processes of encryption and decryption are shown in Fig. 6. A simulated result 
is shown in Fig. 7. 
For this encryption/decryption method, the regeneration of a reliable long period 
keystream with statistical behavior similar to a truly random sequence is essential. There 
for PRBS are suitable for the quest. Yet, PRBS based on one LFSR is a linear system and 
the generated key-stream is easily predictable. Large period, large linear complexity 
(a) (b)42 S. Fan, A. Rahman & N. K. Dutta 
Fig. 6. (a) Schematic diagram of encryption process. (b) Schematic diagram of decryption process. The key 
streams are the same. 
 Fig. 7. Input Data (Top-Left). Key (Top-Right). Encrypted Data (Bottom-Left). Decrypted Data (Bottom-Right). 
All these results are for 320 Gb/s data rate. 
and good statistical properties are three necessary conditions for a key-stream generator to 
be considered secure in cryptography [17]. One way to make better encryption is to 
combine several LFSRs or using the output of one (or more) LFSRs to control the clock of 
one (or more) other LFSRs. This method provide a better key-stream generators which 
(a)
(b)Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence Based on Optical Logic Gate 43
effectively increase the complexity of the key-stream. In Fig. 8, one design that can be used 
is cascaded designed generator. We use the output of previous PRBS (with single LSFR) 
as the input of next PRBS. This design use 3 LSFRs, therefore can generate longer period 
(larger m) keys, while provide us with more alternatives. 
Fig. 8. Block diagram of cascaded designed key-stream generator. 
A simulated result for cascaded step generator is shown in Fig. 9. 
Fig. 9. Simulated result for cascaded step generator at 320 Gb/s using the 15th and 21th unit. 
In Fig. 10, the schematic of an alternating step generator is shown. 
Fig. 10. Design of the alternating step generator (ASG). (a) Schematic diagram of ASG; (b) schematic of the 
functional unit in (a). 
(a)44 S. Fan, A. Rahman & N. K. Dutta 
Fig. 10. (Continued ). 
A simulated result for alternating step generator is shown in Fig. 11. We provide three 
different initial inputs and using 4th and 7th unit for the three PRBS in this design. 
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11. Simulation of the alternating step generator at 320 Gb/s. (a) Simulation results of PRBS A sequence with 
input “1111111”; (b) Simulation result of PRBS B with input “10100001”; (c) Simulation result of PRBS C with 
input “0010110”; (d) Simulation results of the output sequence of ASG. 
(b)Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence Based on Optical Logic Gate 45
(c)
(d)
Fig. 11. (Continued ). 
In Fig. 12, a parallel designed key-stream generator is shown and Fig. 13 shows the 
results. 
Fig. 12. Block diagram of parallel designed key-stream generator with its functional unit. 46 S. Fan, A. Rahman & N. K. Dutta 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 13. Simulation of parallel designed key-stream generator at 320 Gb/s. (a) Simulation result of first LFSR, 
initial input is “1111111”. (b) Simulation result of second LFSR in the design, input is “15th–21st” of the first 
LFSR. (c) Simulation result of third LFSR in the design, input is inverse of “15th–21st” of the first LFSR. (d) 
Simulation result of Output (XOR between second and third LFSR.). Encryption Using Optical Pseudo-Random Binary Sequence Based on Optical Logic Gate 47
6. Conclusion 
The optical logic XOR, AND gates based on quantum dot-semiconductor optical amplifier 
Mach–Zehnder interferometer (QD–SOA–MZI) can operate at 320 Gb/s and can be used 
in the design of encryption circuits. The designs we propose can function as stable and 
complex key-stream generators at a high data rate. 
References 
1. K. E. Zoiros, T. Houbavlis and M. Kalyvas, “Ultra-high speed all-optical shift registers and their 
applications in OTDM networks,” Invited paper, Optical and Quantum Electronics 36(11), 
1005–1053 (2004). 
2. G. P. Agrawal, Fiber-Optic Communication Systems, John Wiley, New York (2002). 
3. N. K. Dutta, “Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers,” Chapter 9, Second Edition, World Scientific 
(2012). 
4. T. Akiyama, M. Sugawara and Y. Arakawa, “Quantum-dot semiconductor optical amplifiers,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE 95, 1757–1766 (2007). 
5. A. A. Krylov, S. G. Sazonkin, V. A. Lazarev, D. A. Dvoretskiy, S. O. Leonov, A. B. Pnev, 
V. E. Karasik, V. V. Grebenyukov, A. S. Pozharov and E. D. Obraztsova, “Ultra-short pulse 
generation in the hybridly mode-locked erbium-doped all-fiber ring laser with a distributed 
polarizer,” Laser Physics Letters 12, 065001 (2015). 
6. H. Ju, A. Uskov, R. Nötzel, Z. Li, J. M. Vázquez, D. Lenstra, G. Khoe and H. Dorren, “Effects 
of two-photon absorption on carrier dynamics in quantum-dot optical amplifiers,” Applied 
Physics B 82, 615–620 (2006). 
7. T. W. Berg, S. Bischoff, I. Magnusdottir and J. Mork, “Ultrafast gain recovery and modulation 
limitations in self-assembled quantum-dot devices,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 13, 
541–543 (2001). 
8. X. Zhang and N. K. Dutta, “Effects of two-photon absorption on all optical logic operation based 
on quantum-dot semiconductor optical amplifiers,” Journal of Modern Optics 65, 166–173 
(2018). 
9. P. Borri, W. Langbein, J. M. Hvam, F. Heinrichsdorff, M. H. Mao and D. Bimberg, “Spectral 
Hole‐Burning and Carrier‐Heating Dynamics in Quantum‐Dot Amplifiers: Comparison with 
Bulk Amplifiers,” Physica Status Solidi (B) 224, 419–423 (2001). 
10. T. Akiyama, H. Kuwatsuka, T. Simoyama, Y. Nakata, K. Mukai, M. Sugawara, O. Wada and 
H. Ishikawa, “Application of spectral-hole burning in the inhomogeneously broadened gain of 
self-assembled quantum dots to a multiwavelength-channel nonlinear optical device,” IEEE 
Photonics Technology Letters 12, 1301–1303 (2000). 
11. W. Li, H. Hu, X. Zhang and N. K. Dutta, “High speed all optical logic gates using binary phase 
shift keyed signal based On QD-SOA,” International Journal of High Speed Electronics and 
Systems 24, 1550005 (2015). 
12. J. Vazquez, H. Nilsson, J.-Z. Zhang and I. Galbraith, “Linewidth enhancement factor of 
quantum-dot optical amplifiers,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 42, 986–993 (2006). 
13. K. E. Zoiros, T. Houbavlis and M. Kalyvas, “Ultra-high speed all-optical shift registers and their 
application in OTDM networks,” Optical and Quantum Electronics 36, 1005–1053 (2004). 48 S. Fan, A. Rahman & N. K. Dutta 
14. A. Kotb and K. E. Zoiros, “Performance of all-optical XOR gate based on two-photon 
absorption in semiconductor optical amplifier assisted Mach-Zehnder interferometer with effect 
of amplified spontaneous emission,” Optical and Quantum Electronics 46, 935–944 (2014). 
15. S. W. Golomb, Shift Register Sequence, Holden-Day, San Francisco (1967). 
16. M. Sugawara, H. Ebe, N. Hatori, M. Ishida, Y. Arakawa, T. Akiyama, K. Otsubo and Y. Nakata, 
“Theory of optical signal amplification and processing by quantum-dot semiconductor optical 
amplifiers,” Physical Review B 69, 235332 (2004).  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0005 
49 
Behavioral Modeling of the Pinched Hysteresis Loop 
of a Pt/TiO2/Pt Memristor 
Aalvee Asad Kausani* and Mehdi Anwar†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT 06269, USA *aalvee_asad.kausani@uconn.edu 
†a.anwar@uconn.edu 
The fourth fundamental circuit element, the memristor, has become a promising candidate to 
substantially improve the energy and area efficiencies of circuits as traditional complementary metal￾oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology is approaching its physical limit. However, a mathematical 
representation of the experimentally obtained current-voltage characteristic of the memristor is 
necessary to develop and test memristor-based circuitry in electrical design simulators. Here we have 
developed a behavioral model for the I-V trace of a Pt/TiO2/Pt memristor that can relate the fitting 
equations with the physical processes associated with the device in response to applied electrical 
excitation. Multiple conduction mechanisms are involved in memristor that depend upon its latest 
state. Therefore, the I-V has distinct segments that altogether form a hysteresis loop pinched at the 
center. In accordance with the predominant conduction mechanisms at each segment, our model 
defines the form of the equations. The behavioral model can adequately represent the experimental 
I-V retrieved from existing work. 
Keywords: Memristor; pinched hysteresis; behavioral modeling. 
1. Introduction 
The fourth fundamental circuit element, the memristor, was theoretically introduced in 
1971 by Leon L. Chua to define the relationship between two of the four fundamental 
circuit variables – the charge 𝑞 and flux-linkage 𝜑 [1]. Chua demonstrated active circuit 
realization of the memristor. However, the physical realization of a two terminal memristor 
without internal power supply could not be realized at that time. It was foreseen by Chua 
that the simple charge-flux relationship of the theoretical memristor could yield a hysteric 
current-voltage curve. Followed by the conceptual understanding of memristor properties, 
the theoretical possibilities of its novel applications were discussed. In 2008, Strukov et al. 
from the HP labs [2] experimentally demonstrated the memristive property of a Pt/TiO2/Pt 
assembly that showed hysteric I-V for the application of a sinusoidal voltage. The I-V 
graph is pinched at the center confirming no flow of current in the absence of external bias. 
Strukov et al. also presented an intuitive model for the device to capture the experimental 
†Corresponding author. 50 A. A. Kausani & M. Anwar
I-V behavior in an analytical expression. The analysis is based on the proposition that 
hysteresis needs an atomic rearrangement that can modify the electronic current. The 
mathematical expression models this behavior with the help of a state variable which is 
physically restricted by boundary function in compliance to the device geometry. The 
model developed by Strukov et al. could successfully feature characteristics found in other 
material systems such as organic films, chalcogenides, metal oxides, perovskites [3–6] etc. 
otherwise categorized as bipolar switching. After the physical realization of memristor and 
its mathematical modeling, research on memristive structures and their novel applications 
have been greatly expedited. The two distinct resistive regions in the hysteric I-V 
characteristic of memristors and their retention in absence of power make them suitable 
as non-volatile memory devices for digital applications. The revolutionary concept of 
organizing the two-terminal memristor devices at the cross points of horizontal (word line) 
and vertical (bit line) wires has resulted in highly dense memory storage. In combination 
with memristors’ non-volatility property, the crossbar structure has significantly facilitated 
in-memory processing of data especially required by artificial neuromorphic architectures 
for energy-efficient and fast computation [7, 8]. 
However, the understanding of the underlying physical mechanism of a memristor and 
developing a circuit model based on the device physics are equally significant for the exact 
representation of the devices in circuit simulators. In general, experimentally obtained 
I-V data along with the conduction mechanism are available although the analytical 
expressions are yet to be reported. Some PSpice models of memristor have been developed 
following the formulation by HP lab, the difference being the design of the window 
function to restrict the state variable in some physical limit [9–11]. These models need to 
solve the time-dependent coupled equations of charged dopant and electrons at the run time 
and therefore are complicated approaches. Moreover, the HP lab developed the model 
based on the assumption of the drifting charged dopants in response to applied electrical 
excitation which makes the device homogenously conduct current at the device’s cross￾sections. Later it was discovered that conduction in metal/oxide/metal-thin film memristors 
is dictated by native conductive channels [12]. The detailed physics of Pt/TiO2/Pt 
memristor was reported in [13] along with the analytical formulation of the growth of 
conductive paths known as high conductive filaments. The discovery of filamentary 
conduction requires a new model for the I-V trace of the device. Mazady et al. [14] 
developed a procedure to model any memristor device in circuit simulators such as PSpice. 
Instead of tracing the current for a complete cycle of applied voltage by solving coupled 
equations at each point, this method separately models each significant current segment 
and defines them as voltage dependent current sources. The switching between the currents 
is controlled by a series of SPST switches. The pinched hysteric I-V characteristic of a 
50nm long Pt/TiO2/Pt memristor having a 50nm ൈ 50nm cross-sectional area has been 
reproduced from the work of Mazady et al. and is illustrated in Fig. 1. Mazady’s method 
is an ingenious idea to model any memristor since it is able to separately capture each 
current region eliminating the need of window functions which are more mathematical than 
physical. However, Mazady et al. adapted polynomial fitting to the experimental device Behavioral Modeling of the Pinched Hysteresis Loop of a Pt/TiO2/Pt Memristor 51 
data to develop the voltage dependent current equations. The polynomial-based best-fit 
equations have the constant coefficients that physically resemble offset current without any 
voltage dependency violating the pinched hysteric behavior. Therefore, while it is a com￾prehensive algorithm for emulating the I-V trace of a memristor, it is also imperative to 
incorporate the physical behavior in determining the expressions of current to accurately 
emulate the processes observed during conduction. 
Fig. 1. The Current vs Voltage (I-V) trace obtained from the polynomial fitting equations reported in the DC 
circuit model of memristor [14]. 
Here we present a set of voltage dependent expressions of memristor currents inspired 
by the conduction mechanisms of the device. The conduction is dictated by gradually 
growing or dissolving filaments depending on the polarity of the applied electric field [13]. 
The partially developed filaments initiate the tunneling mechanism while the complete 
filamentary paths establish Schottky contact at the interfaces with the electrodes. A careful 
design of the parameters is important to prioritize a conduction mechanism over the others 
depending on the magnitude of applied voltage. 
2. Behavioral Model 
2.1. Formulation of Current 
The hysteric I-V trace in Fig. 1 comprises of five distinct sections denoted as 𝑜𝑎, 𝑎𝑏, 𝑏𝑜𝑐, 
𝑐𝑑, and 𝑑𝑜. Each segment is dictated by the physical mechanism of conduction described 
in detail by Mazady et al. [13]. The fundamental mechanism of this metal/oxide/metal 
structure involves the formation and dissolution of conductive filaments in the high 
resistance oxide layer in response to the applied electric field. The development and rupture 
of conductive channels are dependent upon the polarity of applied voltage. Besides the 
filamentary conduction, the resistive bulk oxide and low-conductive filaments formed 52 A. A. Kausani & M. Anwar
during the electroformation process modulate the conduction. The behavioral model 
approximates the expressions of the current based on the dominant conduction methods. 
The development of filaments for the application of a voltage to the memristor is 
depicted in Fig. 2(a). The applied electric field causes the oxidation of TiO2 to Ti4O5
+2 near 
the anode, makes it drift to the cathode and reduces it to Ti2O3 particles at the cathode. The 
filament tip gradually progresses from the cathode to the anode as the Ti2O3 aggregates. 
The incrementing filaments initiate a tunneling current the value of which is gradually 
increasing as the gap between the electrodes is diminishing. 
Fig. 2. The formation and rupture of high conductive filaments in Pt/TiO2/Pt memristor in relation to the applied 
voltage. (a) Growth of filament, (b) Bridging the gap between the electrodes by complete filament, and (c) 
Dissolution of filament for the reversal of voltage polarity. 
The tunneling current has exponential dependence on the applied voltage [15] and does 
not appear to be significant for smaller voltages since the tunneling distance is large. 
Therefore, the ohmic contribution of the low conductive filaments is dominant over the 
tunneling current for smaller applied voltage. The bulk TiO2 in between the electrodes can 
contribute to the conduction with a bulk tunneling current. However, the tunneling distance 
for the TiO2 remains unchanged for the application of electrical excitation and is large 
enough to safely discard it from the behavioral modeling. The 𝑜𝑎 region in the Fig. 1 
represents the combination of tunneling and ohmic currents during the applied voltage from 
0 volt to 1.2 volts. The mathematical behavior in this region is as follows. 
𝐼௢௔ ൌ 𝐼௢௔,௧௨௡ ி஺ ൅ 𝐼௢௔,௢௛௠
௅஼ ൅ 𝐼௢௔,௧௨௡ ௕௨௟௞
𝐼௢௔ሺ𝜇𝐴ሻ ൎ 𝐼௢௔,௧௨௡ ி஺ ൅ 𝐼௢௔,௢௛௠
௅஼ ൌ 𝐴ଵሺ𝑒஻భ௩ െ 1ሻ ൅ ሺ𝑣/𝑅௅஼ሻ ൈ 10଺ (1)
𝐼௢௔,௧௨௡ ி஺ and 𝐼௢௔,௢௛௠
௅஼ are the filament-assisted tunneling current and the ohmic current, 
respectively. The resistance of the low conductive filaments has been reported as 637KΩBehavioral Modeling of the Pinched Hysteresis Loop of a Pt/TiO2/Pt Memristor 53 
[13]. The parameter values suitable for the device in interest are found to be 𝐴ଵ ൌ 1, 𝐵ଵ ൌ
2.4537.
The 𝑎𝑏 region represents positive applied voltage with decreasing magnitude yielding 
an increasing current. This negative differential resistance behavior is attributed to the 
gradually growing filament length that decreases the tunneling distance. Therefore, the 
filament-assisted tunneling current will dominate the overall conduction and is expressed 
as follows: 
𝐼௔௕ሺ𝜇𝐴ሻ ൌ 𝐴ଶሺ1/𝑣ሻ𝑒ଵି஻మ௩, 𝐴ଶ ൌ 200.52 and 𝐵ଶ ൌ 2.6074 (2)
The filaments are completely developed by the time voltage reaches around 𝑉௕ and 
bridge the gap between the electrodes as depicted in Fig. 2(b). The difference between the 
work functions of Pt and Ti2O3 makes their junctions Schottky contacts. Therefore, the 
Pt/Ti2O3/Pt structure resembles two Schottky diodes connected back-to-back. Hence, the 
current along 𝑏𝑜𝑐 is dictated by an ohmic current through the high conductive filament 
modulated by the Schottky contacts and the ohmic current through the low conductive 
filaments. The conductivity of the low conductive filaments is smaller by a magnitude than 
that of the high conductive filaments. Therefore, while the high conductive filaments are 
bridging the gap, the contribution of the low conductive filaments has been ignored to keep 
the model simple. Combining these ideas, the 𝑏𝑜𝑐 region has been modelled as follows: 
𝐼௕௢ ൌ 𝐼௕௢
ு஼ ൅ 𝐼௕௢,௢௛௠
௅஼ ൌ ൫𝐼௕௢,௦௖௛
ு஼ ൅ 𝐼௕௢,௢௛௠
ு஼ ൯൅𝐼௕௢,௢௛௠
௅஼
𝐼௕௢ሺ𝜇𝐴ሻ ൎ 𝐼௕௢,௦௖௛
ு஼ ൅ 𝐼௕௢,௢௛௠
ு஼ ൌ 𝐴ଷሺ𝑒஻య௩ െ 1ሻ ൅ ሺ𝑣/𝑅ு஼ሻ ൈ 10଺ (3)
𝐼௢௖ሺ𝜇𝐴ሻ ൎ 𝐼௢௖,௦௖௛
ு஼ ൅ 𝐼௢௖,௢௛௠
ு஼ ൌ െ𝐴ଷ൫𝑒஻య|௩| െ 1൯െሺ|𝑣|/𝑅ு஼ሻ ൈ 10଺ (4)
The expressions for 𝑜𝑏 and 𝑜𝑐 conductions are similar except the sign adjustments 
along 𝑜𝑐 to replicate the negative current for negative voltage region in the graph. Here, 
𝐴ଷ ൌ 11.33, 𝐵ଷ ൌ 3.78 and 𝑅ு஼ is the resistance of the high conductive filaments reported 
as 63.7𝐾Ω [13]. 
With the reversed polarity and increasing magnitude of applied voltage, 𝑉௖ is the 
threshold voltage when filaments start to rupture. Disconnected filaments initiate tunneling 
current which would decrease with increasing magnitude of voltage in relation to the 
increasing tunneling distance. However, inspecting the behavior of the I-V along the 𝑐𝑑
segment, we assume that neither all of the filaments of a device with multiple conductive 
paths rupture at 𝑉௖ nor do any of them abruptly disconnect from an electrode. Therefore, 
the conduction along 𝑐𝑑 is a combination of tunneling current through the ruptured filament 
and ohmic current through the intact filaments. 
𝐼௖ௗ ൌ 𝐼௖ௗ,௧௨௡ ி஺ ൅ 𝐼௖ௗ,௢௛௠
ு஼
𝐼௖ௗሺ𝜇𝐴ሻ ൌ 𝐴ସሺ𝑒஻ర௩ െ 1ሻ ൅ ሺ𝑣/𝑅ு஼ሻ ൈ 10଺ (5)
Here, 𝐴ସ ൌ 110.4849,𝐵ସ ൌ 5.4575. A dominant tunneling current begins to flow past 
the location 𝑑, which is the maximum value of applied voltage with reversed polarity. The 54 A. A. Kausani & M. Anwar
decreasing exponential behavior along 𝑑𝑜 can be attributed to the complete separation of 
the filaments from the electrode at voltage 𝑉ௗ as illustrated in Fig. 2(c) and their gradual 
dissolution due to negative applied voltage that increases the tunneling distance. However, 
the length of the filaments is sufficiently small at 𝑑ᇱ
 and the conduction is only dictated by 
the low conductive filaments along 𝑑ᇱ
𝑜. The conductions along 𝑑𝑑ᇱ
 and 𝑑ᇱ
𝑜 are modelled 
as follows: 
𝐼ௗ௢ ൌ 𝐼ௗ௢,௧௨௡ ி஺ ൅ 𝐼ௗ௢,௢௛௠
௅஼
𝐼ௗௗᇲ ൎ 𝐼ௗௗᇲ,௧௨௡
ி஺ and 𝐼ௗᇲ௢ ൎ 𝐼ௗᇲ௢,௢௛௠
௅஼
𝐼ௗௗᇲ ሺ𝜇𝐴ሻ ൌ െ𝐴ହ൫𝑒஻ఱ|௩| െ 1൯, 𝐴ହ ൌ 8.3296 ൈ 10ିହ,𝐵ହ ൌ 9.5273 (6)
𝐼ௗᇲ௢ሺ𝜇𝐴ሻ ൌ 𝐴଺ሺ𝑣/𝑅௅஼ሻ ൈ 10଺, 𝐴଺ ൌ 0.730002 (7)
The I-V expressions in this model are developed observing the physical behavior of the 
device and based on the expected mathematical interpretation of the behavior. The 
parameter values have been estimated by solving consecutive equations of currents at their 
intersections to avoid any abrupt change in the I-V. The corresponding quantities of current 
and voltage at the intersections are extracted from the polynomial fitting-based model 
reported in [14]. Figure 3 illustrates the behavioral model along with the baseline model 
[14] to demonstrate the closeness of our model to the existing work. 
Fig. 3. Illustration of the behavioral model and the DC circuit model [14]. 
2.2. Formulation of Voltage 
The I-V modeling is associated with the generation of a pseudo-DC voltage that could 
traverse a complete cycle comprising of positive and negative regions to adequately 
represent the gradual changes in voltage along with the reversal of polarity. The voltage 
waveform is expected to have a positive and negative maximum magnitude that coincide 
with the voltage values at the locations 𝑎 and 𝑑 of Fig. 3, respectively. The 𝑏, 𝑜 and 𝑐Behavioral Modeling of the Pinched Hysteresis Loop of a Pt/TiO2/Pt Memristor 55 
points stay on the decreasing direction of the voltage while the 𝑑ᇱ
 point resides on the 
increasing direction after the negative maximum. Combining the conditions, the voltage 
waveform is designed similar to the 50 Hz triangular waveform in [14] and is illustrated in 
Fig. 4(a). The corresponding equations of the time dependent voltage waveform are as 
follows: 
𝑣ሺ𝑡ሻ ൌ
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎧ 1.2
𝑡ଵ
𝑡 𝑡௦ ൑𝑡൑𝑡ଵ
2.7𝑡 െ ሺ1.5𝑡ଵ ൅ 1.2𝑡ଶሻ
𝑡ଵ െ 𝑡ଶ
 𝑡ଵ ൏𝑡൑𝑡ଶ
1.5൫𝑡 െ 𝑡௙൯
𝑡௙ െ 𝑡ଶ
 𝑡ଶ ൏𝑡൑𝑡௙
 (8)
𝑡௦ ൌ 0 ms, 𝑡௙ ൌ 20 ms, 𝑡ଵ ൌ 5 ms and 𝑡ଶ ൌ 15 ms 
𝑣௠௔௫ ൌ 𝑣ሺ𝑡ଵሻ ൌ 1.2 volt, 𝑣௠௜௡ ൌ 𝑣ሺ𝑡ଶሻ ൌ െ1.5 volt 
Intermediate voltage points 𝑡௕,𝑡௢,𝑡௖ and 𝑡ௗᇱ partition the voltage waveform according to 
the distinct current regions. The corresponding values are: 𝑡௕ ൌ 6.96 ms, 𝑡௢ ൌ 9.44 ms, 
𝑡௖ ൌ 11.74 ms and 𝑡ௗ ൌ 16.67 ms. The behavioral modeling of the current in relation to 
the voltage waveshape is depicted in Fig. 4(b). 
Fig. 4. The complete illustration of the behavioral model presented in this work. (a) The voltage waveform, and 
(b) The I-V characteristics. 
3. Conclusion 
A set of behavioral expressions for the I-V trace of a Pt/TiO2/Pt memristor had been 
developed in relation to the conduction mechanisms of the device in response to electrical 
excitation. The model is in close proximity with the existing DC circuit model [14] derived 
0 5 6.96 9.44 11.74 15 16.67 20
Time (ms) -1.5
-1.0
-0.62
0
0.67
1.2
-1.5 -1 -0.62 0 0.67 1
Voltage (V) -150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
o
a
b
o
c
d
d'
o
b
a o
c
d'
d
Figure 4(b)
Figure 4(a) (a) 
(b) 56 A. A. Kausani & M. Anwar
from the experimental data. By exclusively calibrating the model parameters, the gener￾alized expressions of currents are expected to comply with any memristor of metal/oxide/ 
metal configuration that results in filamentary conduction. However, the contributions of 
the insignificant conduction mechanisms are eventually ignored in this model from the 
exact general expressions of different current segments. If a memristor structure demon￾strates significant contribution from such mechanisms, this model might not be able to 
accurately capture the experimental I-V trace. On that note, an important extension to this 
work would be to retain all conduction mechanisms irrespective of their contributions and 
calibrate the related parameters accordingly. 
Acknowledgments 
One of the authors (AAK) was supported by a Department of Education GAANN funding. 
References 
1. L. Chua, IEEE Transactions on Circuit Theory 18, 507–519 (1971). 
2. D. B. Strukov, G. S. Snider, D. R. Stewart and R. S. Williams, Nature 453, 80–83 (2008). 
3. J. C. Scott and L. D. Bozano, Advanced Materials 19, 1452–1463 (2007). 
4. M. N. Kozicki, Mira Park and M. Mitkova, IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology 4, 331–338 
(2005). 
5. R. Waser and M. Aono, Nature Mater 6, 833–840 (2007). 
6. R. Oligschlaeger, R. Waser, R. Meyer, S. Karthäuser and R. Dittmann, Applied Physics Letters 
88, 042901 (2006). 
7. T. Van Nguyen, J. An and K.-S. Min, Comparative study on quantization-aware training of 
memristor crossbars for reducing inference power of neural networks at the edge, in 2021 
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Shenzhen, China, 18–22 July 
2021. 
8. J. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Wen, K. Shi, A. Bermak and T. Huang, IEEE Transactions on 
Neural Networks and Learning Systems 33, 1779–1790 (2022). 
9. J. Zha, H. Huang and Y. Liu, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs 63, 
423–427 (2016). 
10. T. Prodromakis, B. P. Peh, C. Papavassiliou and C. Toumazou, IEEE Transactions on Electron 
Devices 58, 3099–3105 (2011). 
11. Z. Biolek, D. Biolek and V. Biolková, Radioengineering 18, 210–214 (2009). 
12. J. J. Yang, M. D. Pickett, X. Li, D. A. A. Ohlberg, D. R. Stewart and R. Stanley Williams, 
Nature Nanotechnology 3, 429–433 (2008). 
13. A. Mazady and M. Anwar, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 61, 1054–1061 (2014). 
14. A. Mazady and M. Anwar, DC circuit model of a memristor, in 2011 International Semi￾conductor Device Research Symposium (ISDRS), College Park, MD, USA, 07–09 December 
2011. 
15. S. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices (Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2007).  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0006
57 
Design and Simulation of Multi-State D-Latch Circuit Using QDC-SWS FETs 
A. Almalki*,†, B. Saman*,†, R. H. Gudlavalleti*, J. Chandy*, E. Heller‡ and F. C. Jain*,§
*Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Connecticut, CT, USA
†
Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, Taif University, Saudi Arabia 
‡Synopsys Inc., Ossining, NY 10562, USA 
§faquir.jain@uconn.edu 
This paper presents a novel D-latch circuit using multi-state quantum dot channel (QDC) spatial 
wavefunction-switched (SWS) field-effect transistors (FET). The SWS-FET has two or more 
vertically stacked quantum-well or quantum dot (QD) layers where the magnitude of the gate voltage 
determines the location of carriers in each channel. Spatial location is used to encode multiple logic 
states along with the carrier transport in mini-energy bands formed in GeOx-Ge/ SiOx-Si quantum dot 
superlattice (QDSL), and to obtain 8-states operation. The design is based on the 8-state inverter using 
QDC SWS-FETs in CMOS-X configuration. This could be a new paradigm for designing flip-flops 
and registering more complex sequential circuits. The proposed design leads to reduced propagation 
delay and a smaller Si footprint. 
Keywords: Multistate D-Latch; quantum dot channel (QDC) FET; SWS-FET; multi-state/multi-bit 
logic. 
1. Introduction 
Over the past few decades, integrated circuits (IC) have been able to achieve better speed, 
higher density, and lower power consumption due to the scaling down of MOSFETs. The 
requirement for greater information density and faster processing speed created motivation 
towards multi-bit logic architectures as device scaling reached its limits. Unlike conven￾tional FETs, spatial wavefunction switched (SWS)-FETs are composed of two or more 
vertically stacked coupled quantum well or quantum dot channels. Features of multi-state 
QDC-FETs using QDSL as a transport channel (7 nm  7 nm) for more than 8 dots per 
channel were reported by Jain et al. [1]. 
Figure 1 shows QDC-QDG FET structure and experimental I-V characteristics for Si 
quantum dot channel (QDC) FET [2] with quantum-dot gate. The steps are due to mini￾energy band transitions. Figure 2 shows the schematic of (SWS)-QDC FET device and 
experimental ID-VG characteristics at various drain voltage VD. The drain current ID is 
due to conduction in lower quantum-dot channel (QD2) as the gate is increased, the drain 
current decreases in QD2 and increases in QD1. This results from the spatial wavefunction 
§Corresponding author. 58 A. Almalki et al. 
switching (SWS) between the lower channel QD2 and upper channel QD1 [3]. The drain 
current is accessed through drain D1 for upper channel QD1 and deep drain D2 for lower 
channel QD2. 
The 3D schematic in Fig. 3 illustrates a Ge-OX cladded Ge quantum dot field-effect 
transistor (QDC FET) consisting of two Ge QD channels, namely QD2 (the lower channel) 
and QD1 (the upper channel), with each channel composed of two layers of self-assembled 
Ge quantum dots. The subsequent section details the QDC-SWS FET 8-states operation. 
2. 8-State QDC SWS-FET and Multi-Bit Logic 
Jain et al. reported [1] an 8-state QDC-SWS FET using two Ge quantum dot channels 
(QD2 and QD1) shown in Fig. 3. The 8-state operation, listed in Table 1 is based on the 
drain current, which depends on the number of mini-energy bands in transport quantum 
channel (QC) and transfer via tunneling between lower (QD2) and upper (QD1) channels. 
The 8-state operation is listed in Table 1. 
Fig. 1. QDC-QDG FET (a) Schematic (Top) (b) ID-VG at VD (black line at 0.5V, red line at 1.0V and green line 
at 1.5V). (Bottom). 
(a) 
(b) Design and Simulation of Multi-State D-Latch Circuit Using QDC-SWS FETs 59
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 2. SWS-QDC-FET (a) schematic (b) ID-VG characteristics for deep and shallow (shown in inset) drain 
voltage at different gate voltages, VG.
Fig. 3. 3D schematic view of Ge QDC-FET. 60 A. Almalki et al. 
Table 1. QDC SWS-FET 8-state operation. 
State Electrons position 
000 No electrons in any channel 
001 Electron in first mini-energy band of QD2 (0_B1) 
010 Electrons in first and second mini-energy bands of QD2 (0_B2B1) 
011 Electrons in three mini-bands (0_B3B2B1) 
100 Electrons in first mini-energy band of QD1 and two mini-energy bands of QD2 
(B1_B2B1) 
101 Electrons in first and second mini-energy bands of QD1 and first mini-energy 
band of QD2 (B2B1_B1) 
110 Electrons in three mini-energy bands of QD1 and first mini-energy band of QD2 
(B3B2B1_B1), 
111 Electrons in three mini-energy bands of QD1 and none in QD2 (B3B2B1-0) 
3. QDC-SWS-FET Analog Behavioral Model (ABM) 
In the ABM model, the SWS-FET drain currents for the wells behave very similarly to that 
of a conventional FET, with Well 1’s drain current matching that of its conventional 
equivalent. However, when charges are transferred from Well 2 to Well 1 after a certain 
threshold, the equation changes for Well 2, and the drain current is adjusted accordingly 
[1, 6–8]:
𝐼𝐷 ൌ
⎩
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎧ 0 𝑉𝐺𝑆 ൐ 𝑉𝑇𝐻
′
𝜇𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑥 ቀ
𝑊
𝐿 ቁ ൤ቀ𝑉𝐺𝑆 െ 𝑉𝑇𝐻
′ ቁ𝑉𝐷𝑆 െ 𝑉𝐷𝑆
2
2 ൨ 𝑉𝐺𝑆 ൑ 𝑉𝑇𝐻
′ & 𝑉𝐷𝑆 ൐ 𝑉𝐺𝑆 െ 𝑉𝑇𝐻
′
𝜇𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑥 ቀ
𝑊
𝐿 ቁ
ቀ𝑉𝐺𝑆െ𝑉𝑇𝐻
′ ቁ
2 𝑉𝐺𝑆 ൑ 𝑉𝑇𝐻
′ & 𝑉𝐷𝑆 ൑ 𝑉𝐺𝑆 െ 𝑉𝑇𝐻
′
 
 (1) 
where the adjusted 𝑉்ு
ᇱ is defined as 
𝑉்ு
ᇱ ൌ 𝑉்ுଶ ൅ 𝛼 (2)
The matching parameter α is determined by the transition voltage (VUL), the threshold 
voltage in well 1 (VTH1), and VGS: 
𝛼 ≡ 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 ൌ ቐሺ𝑉ீௌ െ 𝑉௎௅ሻଶ
ሺ𝑉்ுଵ െ 𝑉௎௅ሻ 𝑉ீௌ ൐ 𝑉௎௅
0 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒
(3)Design and Simulation of Multi-State D-Latch Circuit Using QDC-SWS FETs 61
In the QDC-SWS FET model, four additional ABM blocks are used to realize drain 
currents’ variations in each channel which depends on the number of mini-energy bands in 
transport quantum channel (QC). Figure 4 shows simulation of IDS-VGS characteristics for 
n- and p-channel QDC-SWS FETs. 
 (a) (b) 
Fig. 4. (a) Schematic (left) (b) IDS-VGS characteristics (right) for n- and p-channel QDC-SWS FETs. 
4. 8-State QDC-SWS FET-Based Inverter Model 
The model is based on an integration of the Berkeley Short-channel IGFET Model 
(BSIM4.6) and the Analog Behavioral Model (ABM) [8]. Each part of the Complementary 
QDC-SWS FET-based inverter is modeled by two transistors using 180 nm technology [7]. 
The transistors represent upper wells and lower wells of the device with different threshold 
voltages. Additional ABM blocks are also used to produce drain current step-like charac￾teristics in each channel caused by the mini-band transitions in the QDC [1]. To achieve 
the inverter logic, drains D2 and D1 are connected as the output and both gates are connected 
as the input. In addition, the source of the two QC1 and QC2 in the n-channel FET is 
connected to VSS1 = Ground and VSS2 = 0.6 V and the source of QC1 and QC2 in the 
p-channel FET is connected to VDD1 = 1.4 V and VDD2 = 0.8 V supplies, as shown in 
Fig. 5. 
Simulation of the inverter using 8-state QDC-SWS FETs in CMOS-X configuration is 
presented in Fig. 6. It also shows the device schematic in Cadence Simulator and the 
parameters used for the inverter input (top panel in green line) and output (dashed red line) 
as a function of time. 62 A. Almalki et al. 
VDD1 VDD2
S2
S1
S1
S2
D2
D1
VSS1 VSS2
D1
D2
Vout
Vin
Fig. 5. 8-state QDC-SWS FET-based inverter schematic. 
 
Fig. 6. Inverter schematic, parameters and simulation results showing the 8 states using n- and p-QDC-SWS 
FETs. 
5. D Latch Circuit Based on the 8-State Inverter Using QDC-SWS FETs 
The proposed D latch circuit shown in Fig. 7 is made up of two 8-state QDC-SWS FET￾based inverters and two transmission gates. Table 2 shows the transmission gate truth table. 
Figure 8 shows the operation of the D-latch circuit, when Clk is high, transmission gate 1 Design and Simulation of Multi-State D-Latch Circuit Using QDC-SWS FETs 63
(TG1) is ON and transmission gate 2 (TG2) is OFF, so output (Q) directly follows the input 
(D). When Clk is low (0) TG1 is OFF and TG2 is ON, now new data entering the latch are 
stopped and we get only previously stored data at the output. 
Fig. 7. Proposed D latch circuit schematic. 
Table 2. Transmission gate truth table. 
Control (Clk) TG-PMOS TG-NMOS IN OUT 
1 0 1 0 0 
1 0 1 1 1 
1 0 1 2 2 
1 0 1 3 3 
1 0 1 4 4 
1 0 1 5 5 
1 0 1 6 6 
1 0 1 7 7 
0 1 0 0 Z 
0 1 0 1 Z 
0 1 0 2 Z 
0 1 0 3 Z 
0 1 0 4 Z 
0 1 0 5 Z 64 A. Almalki et al. 
Fig. 8. Output (Q) when Clk is high (Top) and output (Q) when Clk is low (Bottom). 
6. D-Latch Circuit Simulation Results 
Figure 9 shows the simulated circuit schematic of the D-Latch using two QDC-SWS FET￾based inverters and two transmission gates TG1 and TG2. The 8-state D-latch transient 
analysis waveform has been depicted in Fig. 10. The top panel (green line) shows five 
cycles of 8-state data (state 0–7). If the enable signal (Clk) given in the middle panel (blue 
line) is high, the output follows the input, and if the enable signal is low, the latch retains 
one of eight states previously stored inside the latch. The red line in the bottom panel shows 
the latch’s output (Q) where each logic state of the latch is tested during the five cycles of 
DATA depending on the enable signal (Clk). Design and Simulation of Multi-State D-Latch Circuit Using QDC-SWS FETs 65
Fig. 9. Schematic of a D-Latch circuit based on 3-bit/8-state inverters. 
Fig. 10. Simulation results for proposed SWS-CMOS D-Latch based on the 8-state/3-bit SWS-CMOS inverter. 66 A. Almalki et al. 
7. Conclusion 
This paper presented a novel D-latch circuit using 8-state QDC SWS-FET inverters. The 
simulations were done in Cadence using ABM and BSIM4.6 models. The encoding of 
multiple logic states is achieved using spatial location of wavefunctions and carrier 
transport in different mini-energy bands formed in GeOx-Ge QDSL. The use of 8-state 
inverters in the implementation of D-latch allows advanced multibit sequential circuits. 
Additionally, the latch provides faster switching between states, resulting in reduced power 
consumption and delay. Overall, this work provides a new pathway towards compact 
multistate microprocessors. 
References 
1. F. Jain, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, B. Saman, P-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, M. Lingalugari and E. Heller, 
“Quantum Dot Channel FETs Harnessing Mini-Energy Band Transitions in GeOx-Ge and Si 
QDSL for Multi-Bit Computing,” International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 
31(01n04), 2240012 (2022). 
2. F. Jain, S. Karmakar, P.-Y. Chan, E. Suarez, M. Gogna, J. Chandy and E. Heller, “Quantum Dot 
Channel (QDC) Field-Effect Transistors (FETs) using II-VI Barrier Layers,” Journal of 
Electronic Materials, 41, 2775 (2012). 
3. F. Jain, M. Lingalugari, B. Saman, P.-Y. Chan, P. Gogna, E.-S. Hasaneen, J. Chandy and E. 
Heller, “Multi-State Sub-9 nm QDC-SWS FETs for Compact Memory Circuits,” 46th IEEE 
SISC, Dec 2–5 (2015). 
4. F. Jain, B. Saman, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, J. Chandy and E. Heller, “Low-Threshold II–VI 
Lattice-Matched SWS-FETs for Multivalued Low-Power Logic,” Journal of Electronic 
Materials, 50, 2618 (2021). 
5. P.-Y. Chan, M. Lingalugari, E. Heller and F. Jain, “An Investigation on Quantum Dot Super￾lattice (QDSL) Diode,” International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 23(01n02), 
1420004 (2014). 
6. F. Jain B. Saman, R. H. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, J. Chandy and E. Heller, “Multi-Bit SRAMs, 
Registers, and Logic Using Quantum Well Channel SWS-FETs for Low-Power,” High-Speed 
Computing International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 28, 03n04 (2019). 
7. B. Saman, P. Mirdha, M. Lingalugari, P. Gogna, F. C. Jain, E.-S. Hasaneen and E. Heller, “Logic 
Gates Design and Simulation Using Spatial Wave-function Switched (SWS) FETs,” Inter￾national Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 24, 03n04 (2015). 
8. F. Jain, B. Saman, R. H. Gudlavalleti, J. Chandy and E. Heller, International Journal of High 
Speed Electronics and Systems, 27(3 & 4), 1840020 (2018). 
9. S. K. Saw, M. Maiti, P. Meher and S. K. Chakraborty, “Design and Implementation of TG based 
D Flip Flop for Clock and Data Recovery Application,” International Conference on Recent 
Trends in Engineering, Science & Technology - (ICRTEST 2016), Hyderabad, 2016, pp. 1–3, 
doi:10.1049/cp.2016.1491.  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0007 
67 
Hybrid Mode-Locked Fiber Ring Laser Using Graphene Saturable 
Absorbers to Generate 20 and 50-GHz Pulse Trains 
A. Rahman*, S. Fan and N. K. Dutta
Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA *ashiq.rahman@uconn.edu 
Optical pulses at high repetition rates are generated using rational harmonic mode locking and 
saturable absorber made of graphene nanoparticles in a fiber laser. The pulse generation from the fiber 
laser is modeled by solving the Generalized Nonlinear Schrodinger Equation. The computation 
involved varying the various saturable absorption parameters, such as linear and nonlinear absorption 
coefficients. Experimentally stable pulse trains at 20 GHz and 50 GHz are generated with a pulse 
width of ~ 2.7 ps. This result agrees with the simulation. 
Keywords: Fiber optics; fiber lasers; mode locking; graphene saturable absorbers; RHML. 
1. Introduction 
The advancement of high-speed transmission fibers has greatly benefited global internet 
connectivity and long-distance fiber-optic communications. Recently, a new design of fiber 
optic technology has achieved data rates as high as 178-Tbps over a distance of 40-
kilometers, which is a significant achievement [1]. In order to achieve optical transmission 
of data at exceptionally high rates with minimal errors, it is necessary for the pulses to be 
extremely narrow and for the pulse trains to have very high frequencies [2–4]. Over the 
years, various techniques have been shown to produce narrow width pulses with high 
frequency. One such method, known as hybrid mode locking, which combines active and 
passive mode locking, was detailed in [5]. Many fiber laser designs have incorporated 
graphene as saturable absorbers, as demonstrated in various studies [6–14]. A Thulium- 
(Tm) doped mode-locked fiber laser was created using layers of graphene/PMMA (poly 
methyl methacrylate) saturable absorber, which was synthesized through chemical vapor 
deposition (CVD) [15]. Sheng et al. also exhibited a fiber laser that was mode-locked and 
had adjustable power output [16]. In addition to CVD, trituration is a feasible technique for 
obtaining graphene or charcoal that can be utilized for saturable absorption aims, as 
demonstrated in a study by Lin et al. [17]. Here, trituration was used on several carbon￾based materials to generate pulses for Erbium-Doped Fiber lasers. 
*Corresponding author. 68 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
This paper describes how Rational Harmonic Mode Locking (RHML) and carbon￾based saturable absorbers were jointly integrated into a fiber ring laser system, as depicted 
in Fig. 1. The incorporation of graphene nanoparticle layer into the laser cavity resulted in 
a stable output of 20-GHz pulse trains, with the pulse width reduced from 5.3-ps to 2.8-ps. 
When the cavity frequency was adjusted, a 50-GHz pulse train with a pulse width of 2.7-
ps was produced. The researchers also used numerical simulations to investigate the effects 
of altering saturable absorption parameters, such as saturation intensity and the saturable 
and non-saturable absorption components of the graphene layers. The simulation results 
for minimum pulse-widths were consistent with the experimental results obtained under 
the same parameters. 
2. Experimental Setup 
The technique of imprinting-exfoliation-wiping process is utilized to incorporate graphene 
saturable absorbers within the fiber ring laser cavity [18]. To start the process, the pencil 
nibs are finely ground, and the resulting powder is applied to one end face of a regular 
single mode fiber (SMF) cable using a brush. A patch-cord connector is utilized to 
sandwich graphene layers between the two fiber ends, which are then separated to imprint 
graphene on both faces. To achieve a more uniform distribution of graphene and decrease 
cluster size, the process is repeated multiple times, reducing the absorption loss from self￾aggregation of graphene nanoparticles [19]. Figure 2 illustrates the steps of this process. 
Figure 1 demonstrates the integration of the graphene nanoparticles sandwiched in the 
fiber laser circuit. The 980-nm diode laser powers the fiber ring laser setup, and the pump 
laser is connected to the circuit through a 980/1550-nm wavelength-division multiplexer 
(WDM). Gain is achieved in the ring laser by utilizing a homemade 23-m long Erbium 
doped fiber amplifier (EDFA). The output coupler (OC) allows only 10% of the light in 
the ring to be output and 90% to be fed back into the system. An optical isolator is also 
used in the circuit to prevent feedback and ensure unidirectional flow. Passive mode￾Fig. 1. Er-doped fiber ring laser setup, incorporating graphene saturable absorber in the cavity, pumped by a 
980 nm diode laser.Hybrid Mode-Locked Fiber Ring Laser Using Graphene Saturable Absorbers 69
Fig. 2. Schematic of the imprinting-exfoliation-wiping process step by step. 
locking is achieved using the patch-cord sandwiched graphene nanoparticle, while active 
mode-locking is accomplished through the use of a Mach-Zehnder Modulator (MZM). The 
MZM, a LiNbO3 modulator, is driven by a radio frequency of around 10-GHz, provided 
by a synthesizer. The MZM is polarization-sensitive, requiring a polarization controller 
(PC) to be connected before the input end of the modulator. Standard 1550-nm single mode 
fiber (SMF) wires are used to connect all equipment mentioned. 
3. Active and Passive Mode-Locking 
3.1. Active mode-locking 
The MZM is employed for active mode-locking, driven by a synthesizer’s RF frequency, 
and carefully adjusted by the polarization controllers. The conditions necessary to obtain 
this phenomenon involve the modulation frequency of the laser cavity, which when it 
satisfies the condition 𝑓௠ ൌ ሺ𝑛 ൅ 1/𝑝ሻ𝑓௖, the laser pulses that are output from the ring 
laser cavity is 𝑝 times the modulation frequency 𝑓௠. Here, 𝑛 and 𝑝 are integers and 𝑓௖ is 
the cavity mode separation (𝑓௖ ൌ 𝑐/𝑛௜𝐿, where 𝑐 is the speed of light in vacuum, 𝑛௜ is the 
average index of the fiber and 𝐿 is the length of fiber loop). In the experiment, 𝑛௜ ൌ
1.5, 𝑐 ൌ 2.997 ൈ 10଼ m/s, and 𝐿 ൌ 50 m, yielding 𝑓௖ ൌ 4.29 MHz. Therefore, for 𝑓௠ ~ 10 
GHz, 𝑛 ൌ 2329. By detuning 𝑓௖ to 𝑓௖/𝑝 from 𝑛𝑓௖, the laser travels around the ring cavity 
𝑝 times more before the pulses stabilize and the output coupler can emit them, resulting in 
the output pulses having a frequency that is a factor 𝑝 higher than 𝑓௠. This process is called 
Rational Harmonic Mode-locking (RHML), which is the active mode-locking scheme in 
the experiment. The output of the 20-GHz pulse train is obtained when 𝑝 ൌ 2. Similarly, 
to get the 50-GHz pulse train, 𝑓௖ ൌ 2.80 MHz and 𝑛 ൌ 3571, with the value of 𝑝 ൌ 5 for 
this experiment. 
3.2. Passive mode-locking 
The researchers achieved saturable absorption in the laser cavity by incorporating graphene 
nanoparticles, which were reduced in size from 500-nm to 300-nm through an imprinting￾exfoliation-wiping process. Graphene, which is the main component of graphite, exhibits 
optical absorption properties governed by the Pauli blocking effect [20]. When laser light 
passes through graphene layers, electronic transitions occur, but the absorption of incoming 70 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
photons ceases when the final states are filled. This saturation effect makes graphene-based 
materials effective as saturable absorbers. The absorption of saturable absorbers is 
described using the following equation: [21]. 
𝛼 ൌ 𝛼௟௜௡ ൅ 𝛼௡௢௡ ቀ1 ൅ ூ
ூೞೌ೟
ቁ
ିଵ
. (1) 
The given equation shows that the absorption has two components: a linear component that 
does not saturate (𝛼୪୧୬), and a nonlinear component that saturates (𝛼୬୭୬). The saturation of 
the nonlinear term is determined by both the intensity of the incoming laser (𝐼) and the 
saturation intensity of the material (𝐼ୱୟ୲). 
 
Fig. 3. (a) Transmittance of graphene saturable absorbers for the 20-GHz experiment, at a saturation intensity of 
~100 kW/cmଶ (b) Corresponding modulation depth of ~50% (c) Transmittance of graphene for 50-GHz 
experiment, saturation intensity ~150 kW/cmଶ (d) modulation depth ~60%. 
To prepare for the fiber laser experiment, the team first needed to determine the 
modulation depth of the saturable absorber, which measures the difference in absorption at 
high and low applied intensities for a particular wavelength. A high modulation depth is 
necessary for achieving strong pulse shaping, narrower pulse-widths and reliable self￾starting. To determine this quantity, the team passed the mode-locked laser signal through 
a graphene sample, followed by a variable optical attenuator (VOA). The team found that 
the modulation depth of the graphene nanoparticles used in this experiment was approx￾imately 50%, as shown in Fig. 3. Raising the input intensity from 20-kW/cm2 to 250-Hybrid Mode-Locked Fiber Ring Laser Using Graphene Saturable Absorbers 71
kW/cm2
, the saturable absorption was found to decrease, and the saturable transmission 
increased from 0 to 0.58. Curve fitting analysis indicated that the linear absorption (𝛼୪୧୬) 
was 0.6, the nonlinear absorption (𝛼୬୭୬) was 0.5, and the saturation intensity (𝐼ୱୟ୲) was 
approximately 100-kW/cm2
. After determining these values, the saturable absorber was 
used in the main fiber ring laser circuit. 
4. Numerical Simulation 
4.1. Laser pulse propagation mathematical model 
The electric field in an optical pulse can be written as 
       0 0 1 ,,, , , 2
it z E x y z t A z t x y e cc           ,
 where A(z,t) represents the slowly varying complex envelope of the pulse, ψ(x,y) 
represents the transverse electric field distribution of the mode, ω0 represents center 
frequency and β0 represents the center propagation constant at ω0. In the presence of optical 
loss or gain, second-order dispersion and third-order nonlinearity, (by using Maxwell’s 
electromagnetic wave equations) the complex envelope A(z,t) can be shown to satisfy the 
following equation [22]: 
ൌ ௚
ଶ 𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ൅ ௚
ଶஐౝ
మ
డమ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛమ ൅ 𝑖𝛾|𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ|
ଶ𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ.   (2)
Expanding and keeping up to the 𝑘 ൌ 3 term results in Eq. (3) which is used to model the 
pulse propagation in this paper. The loss term () is neglected here. 
డ஺ሺ௭,௧ሻ
డ௭ ൅ ௜
ଶ 𝛽ଶ
డమ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛమ െ ଵ
଺ 𝛽ଷ
డయ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛయ
ൌ ௚
ଶ 𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ൅ ௚
ଶஐౝ
మ
డమ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛమ ൅ 𝑖𝛾|𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ|
ଶ𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ. (3) 
When the Split Step Fourier Method (SSFM) is applied to solve this equation, the 
resulting pulse propagation can be described by several parameters, including the slowly 
varying pulse envelope’s amplitude 𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ in relation to both the propagation distance 𝑧
and time-delay parameter 𝜏, as well as the propagation constants 𝛽௞ and the nonlinear 
parameter 𝛾. The nonlinear parameter is proportional to the nonlinear susceptibility 𝜒ଷ. 
This nonlinear susceptibility arises from dependence of polarization on cube of the 
electric field. Equation (4) provides the relationship between the gain 𝑔 of the Erbium 
doped fiber and the gain bandwidth 𝛺௚, energy of the pulse envelope 𝐸, and the small 
signal gain 𝑔଴. As the energy of the pulse envelope 𝐸 approaches 𝐸௦௔௧, the gain becomes 
saturated. 
𝜕𝐴ሺ𝑧,𝑡ሻ
𝜕𝑧 ൅ 𝛼
2 𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ൅෍𝑖
𝑘െ1
𝑘! 𝛽𝑘
𝜕𝑘𝐴ሺ𝑧,𝜏ሻ
𝜕𝜏𝑘
𝑘 ൒272 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
𝑔ൌ𝑔଴ ቀ1 ൅ ா
ாೞೌ೟
ቁ
ିଵ
. (4) 
Simulating pulse propagation in the single mode fiber (SMF) is a simple process since in 
this case, the gain 𝑔 is set to zero. To simulate RHML, the transmission properties of the 
Mach–Zehnder Modulator are modeled. The output amplitude of the MZM is determined 
mathematically by [23]. 
𝐴୭୳୲ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ൌ 𝐴୧୬ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ⋅ cos ቀ
థሺ௧ሻ
ଶ ቁ with 𝜙ሺ𝑡ሻ ൌ గ௏ሺ௧ሻ
௏ഏ
. (5) 
The modulator imparts a sinusoidal shape onto the incoming laser. A phase shift of 𝜋 is 
attained when the voltage between the two arms of the modulator equals 𝑉గ. The modulator 
is activated by the applied voltage 𝑉ሺ𝑡ሻ, which is determined by the bias voltage 𝑉௕ and 
the amplitude of the sinusoidal RF signal 𝑉௠ sinሺ𝜔௠𝑡ሻ, i.e., 𝑉ሺ𝑡ሻ ൌ 𝑉௕ ൅ 𝑉௠ sinሺ𝜔௠𝑡ሻ. 
Equation (6) gives the output amplitude of the pulse envelope after it goes through the 
graphene saturable absorber, by subtracting Eq. (1) from 1 to find the percent transmitted. 
𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ୭୳୲ ൌ 𝐴୧୬ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ⋅ ቀ1 െ 𝛼௟௜௡ െ ఈ೙೚೙
ଵାூ/ூೞೌ೟
ቁ. (6) 
The output coupler is simulated by Eq. (7), which is the amplitude of the 10% stable output 
pulses. 
𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ௢௨௧ ൌ 𝐴௜௡ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ⋅ 𝑅, (7) 
where R is obtained by comparing Eqs. (6) and (7). As mentioned earlier, the laser pulse 
travels through different optical components within the laser cavity. To simulate this, the 
MATLAB program uses different parameters that represent these components. Table 1 
provides a summary of the values used for all the various parameters needed to solve the 
generalized nonlinear Schrödinger equation (GNLSE – Eq. (3)). 
4.2. Variation of pulse-width with absorption parameters 
In this section, the focus is on studying the impact of varying the saturable absorption, non￾saturable absorption and saturation intensity on pulse-width using the model described in 
the previous section. The goal was to determine the optimal parameter values that would 
result in strong pulse shaping and the narrowest possible pulse-width. Figure 4 illustrates 
the effect of changing the intensity at which absorption gets saturated on pulse-width. The 
simulation was performed for two values of non-saturable absorption. Both cases show that 
pulse-width can be halved in a range of 𝐼௦௔௧ ~ 30–40 kW/cm2
. Figures 5 and 6 demonstrate 
how pulse-width changes with linear and nonlinear absorption components of the saturable 
absorber, respectively. Both simulations were carried out for constant 𝐼௦௔௧ values of 
40 kW/cm2
 and 100 kW/cm2
. Without using a saturable absorber, the pulse-width of a 
rationally harmonic mode-locked pulse was found to be 5.3-ps. However, after incor￾porating the graphene nanoparticle saturable absorber, the pulse-width was compressed by 
up to approximately 50%. Figure 7 shows the impact of using graphene saturable absorbers Hybrid Mode-Locked Fiber Ring Laser Using Graphene Saturable Absorbers 73
on the roundtrip time required to stabilize the pulses. Besides a lower FWHM, the output 
requires less roundtrips to stabilize due to stronger pulse shaping. 
Table 1. Modulator parameters used for generating the two hybrid mode-locked pulse trains. 
Component Parameter Value
𝐸𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑢𝑚 𝛽ଶ െ0.13 ൈ 10ିଷ psଶmିଵ
𝐷𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑑 𝛽ଷ 0.135 ൈ 10ିଷ psଷmିଵ
𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝛾 3.69 Wିଵkmିଵ
𝑔଴ 10 dBmିଵ
𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 𝛽ଶ െ22.1 ൈ 10ିଷ psଶmିଵ
𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝛽ଷ 0.171 ൈ 10ିଷ psଷmିଵ
𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝛾 1.20 Wିଵkmିଵ
𝑔଴ 0 dBmିଵ
𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑛𝑒 𝛼௟௜௡ 0.4
𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝛼௡௢௡ 0.4
𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝐼௦௔௧ 30 kWcmିଶ
𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑟 𝑅 90 %
𝑉గ 6 V
𝑉௠ 6 V
𝑉௕ 0 V
𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑓௠ ~ 10 GHz
𝑓௖ 4.29 MHz ሺ20 GHzሻ
𝑓௖ 2.80 MHz ሺ50 GHzሻ
𝑛 2329 ሺ20 GHzሻ
𝑛 3571ሺ50 GHzሻ
𝑝 2 ሺ20 GHzሻ
𝑝 5 ሺ50 GHzሻ
Fig. 4. Keeping the saturable absorption 𝜶𝒏𝒐𝒏 = 0.5 for both cases, the pulse-width of the mode-locked fiber laser 
is graphed against the saturation intensity, with the calculation done for two different non-saturable absorption: 
(a) 𝜶𝒍𝒊𝒏 = 0.2 and (b) 𝜶𝒍𝒊𝒏 = 0.4. 74 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
Fig. 5. The pulse-width of the mode-locked fiber laser is graphed against the linear (non-saturable) absorption 
𝜶𝒍𝒊𝒏 for graphene-SA while keeping the saturable portion of the absorption constant. (a) For a saturation intensity 
of 40-kW/cm2
, and (b) for a saturation intensity of 100-kW/cm2
. 
Fig. 6. The pulse-width of the mode-locked fiber laser is graphed against the nonlinear (saturable) absorption 
𝜶𝒏𝒐𝒏 while keeping the non-saturable portion of the absorption constant. (a) For saturation intensity of 40 kW/cm2
(b) For saturation intensity of 100 kW/cm2
. 
Fig. 7. Intensity vs. time vs. number of roundtrips required to stabilize the pulses simulated plotted for (a) without 
the presence of a saturable absorber and (b) with a saturable absorber included. Saturable absorber yields a 
reduction of output pulse-width, and a decrease in the number of roundtrips required to stabilize the pulses. Hybrid Mode-Locked Fiber Ring Laser Using Graphene Saturable Absorbers 75
5. Experiment Results of Hybrid Mode-Locking 
In this section, the results of using graphene nanoparticles as saturable absorbers in the 
optical cavity are presented. The output of the optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) is dis￾played in Fig. 8. Incorporating the saturable absorber removes noise and results in a 
smoother output pulse. Furthermore, the 3-dB bandwidth is increased, expanding to 1.4 nm 
from 0.8-nm for the 20-GHz pulse train and to 0.68-nm from 0.36-nm for the 50-GHz pulse 
train, as shown in Fig. 9. The autocorrelator trace of the output pulses is shown in Fig.10, 
indicating that the FWHM pulse width is shortened from 5.3-ps to 2.8-ps and 2.7-ps, 
respectively, for the two output pulse trains, after introducing the graphene saturable 
absorber. There is a good agreement between the simulation and experiment outcomes. 
6. Conclusion 
In conclusion, this research paper demonstrates a technique to generate high frequency 
pulses using rational harmonic mode locking and a saturable absorber made of graphene 
nanoparticles. Two separate experiments resulted in pulse trains with frequencies of 
20-GHz and 50-GHz, with respective pulse widths of 2.8 ps and 2.7 ps. The study also 
simulated the effects of different absorbance properties, such as the linear and nonlinear 
absorbance components and the saturation intensity, on the pulse-width. The short pulses 
at high repetition rates are important for high data rate optical network studies. 
Fig. 8. OSA spectra for 20-GHz pulse train: (a) without graphene, bandwidth is 0.80-nm, (b) with graphene, 
1.38-nm, and for 50-GHz pulse train: (c) without graphene, bandwidth is 0.68-nm and (d) with graphene, 
0.36-nm. 76 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
Fig. 9. Oscillator traces for 20-GHz pulse train (a) without graphene and (b) with graphene. Autocorrelator traces 
of 50-GHz pulse train (c) without graphene and (d) with graphene. 
Fig. 10. FWHM pulse-widths of (a) 20-GHz and (b) 50-GHz pulse trains, decreased from 5.3-ps (RHML) to 
2.8-ps and 2.7-ps, respectively (using hybrid mode-locking). 
Disclosures
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
References 
1. L. Galdino et al., “Optical fibre capacity optimisation via continuous bandwidth amplification 
and geometric shaping,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 32, 1021–1024 (2020), doi:10.1109/ 
LPT.2020.3007591. 
2. Z. Ahmed, and N. Onodera, “High repetition rate optical pulse generation by frequency 
multiplication in actively mode locked fiber ring laser,” Electron. Lett. 32, 455–457 (1996). 
3. C. Wu, and N.K. Dutta, “High-repetition-rate optical pulse generation using a rational harmonic 
mode-locked fiber laser,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 36, 145–150 (2000). Hybrid Mode-Locked Fiber Ring Laser Using Graphene Saturable Absorbers 77
4. A.O. Wiberg, C.S. Bres, B.P. Kuo, J.X. Zhao, N. Alic and S. Radic, “Pedestal-free pulse source 
for high data rate optical time-division multiplexing based on fiber-optical parametric process,” 
IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 45, 1325–1330 (2009). 
5. W. Li, “Different methods to achieve hybrid mode locking,” Cogent Phys. 6, 1707624 (2019), 
doi:10.1080/23311940.2019.1707624. 
6. Q. Bao, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Ni, Y. Yan, Z.X. Shen, K.P. Loh and D.Y. Tang, “Atomic-layer 
graphene as saturable absorber for ultrafast pulsed lasers,” Adv. Funct. Mater. 19, 3077–3083 
(2009). 
7. Q. Bao, H. Hang, Z. Ni, Y. Wang, L. Polavarapu, Z. Shen, Q. Xu, D. Tang and K.P. Loh, 
“Monolayer graphene as a saturable absorber in a mode-locked laser,” Nano Res. 4, 297–307 
(2011). 
8. G. Sobon, J. Sotor and K.M. Abramski, “All-polarization maintain femtosecond Er-doped fiber 
laser mode-locked by graphene saturable absorber,” Laser Phys. Lett. 9, 581–586 (2012). 
9. W. Li, H. Hu, X. Zhang, S. Zhao, K. Fu and Niloy K. Dutta, “High-speed ultrashort pulse fiber 
ring laser using charcoal nanoparticles,” Appl. Opt. 55, 2149–2154 (2016). 
10. J.D. Zapata, D. Steinberg, L.A.M. Saito, R.E.P. de Oliveira, A.M. Cardenas and E.A. Thoroh 
de Souza, “Efficient graphene saturable absorbers on D-shaped optical fiber for ultrashort pulse 
generation,” Sci. Rep. 6, 20644 (2016). 
11. Y.W. Song, S.Y. Jang, W.S. Han and M.K. Bae, “Graphene mode-lockers for fiber lasers 
functioned with evanescent field interaction,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 051122-1–051122-3 (2010). 
12. S. Thapa, A. Rahman and N.K. Dutta, “Mode-locked fiber ring laser using graphene nano￾particles as saturable absorbers,” Int. J. High-Speed Electron. Syst. 31 (01n04), 2240002 (2022), 
https://doi.org/10.1142/s012915642240002x 
13. Y.H. Lin, C.Y. Yang, J.H. Liou, C.P. Yu and G.R. Lin, “Using graphene nano-particle 
embedded in photonic crystal fiber for evanescent wave mode locking of fiber laser,” Opt. Exp. 
21, 16763 (2013). 
14. H. Hu, X. Zhang, W. Li and N.K. Dutta, “Hybrid mode-locked fiber ring laser using graphene 
and charcoal nanoparticle as saturable absorbers,” Proc. SPIE 9836, 983630 (2016). 
15. G. Sobon, J. Sotor, I. Pasternak, A. Krajewska, W. Strupinski and K. Abramski, “Thulium￾doped all-fiber laser mode-locked by CVD-graphene/PMMA saturable absorber,” Opt. Exp. 21, 
12797–12802 (2013), doi:10.1364/OE.21.012797. 
16. Q. Sheng, M. Feng, W. Xin, H. Guo, T. Han, Y.-G. Li, Y.-G. Liu, F. Gao, F. Song, Z.-B. Liu 
and J. Tian, “Tunable graphene saturable absorber with cross absorption modulation for mode￾locking in fiber laser,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 041901 (2014), doi:10.1063/1.4891645. 
17. Y.-H. Lin, C.-Y. Yang, S.-F. Lin and G.-R. Lin, “Triturating versatile carbon materials as 
saturable absorptive nano powders for ultrafast pulsating of erbium-doped fiber lasers,” Opt. 
Mater. Exp. 5, 236 (2015), doi:10.1364/OME.5.000236. 
18. Y.H. Lin and G.-R. Lin, “Kelly sideband variation and self-four-wave-mixing in femtosecond 
fiber soliton laser mode-locked by multiple exfoliated graphite nano-particles,” Laser Phys. 
Lett. 10, 045109 (2013). 
19. Y.H. Lin, Y.C. Chi and G.-R. Lin, “Nanoscale charcoal powder induced saturable absorption 
and mode-locking of a low-gain erbium-doped fiber-ring laser,” Laser Phys. Lett. 10, 055105 
(2013). 
20. Z.Q. Li, C.J. Lu, Z.P. Xia, Y. Zhou and Z. Luo, “X-ray diffraction patterns of graphite and 
turbostratic carbon,” Carbon 45, 1686–1695 (2007). 78 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
21. U. Keller, K.J. Weingarten, F.X. Kartner, D. Kopf, B. Braun, I.D. Jung, R. Fluck, C. 
Honninger, N. Matuschek and J. Aus der Au, “Semiconductor saturable absorber mirrors 
(SESAM’s) for femtosecond to nanosecond pulse generation in solid-state lasers,” IEEE J. Sel. 
Top. Quantum Electron. 2, 435–453 (1996). 
22. G.P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, 4th edn. (Elsevier, 2007); N. K. Dutta and X. Zhang 
“Optoelectronic Devices” (World Scientific, 2018), Appendix 3. 
23. H.M. Chen, “A study of high repetition rate pulse generation and all-optical add/drop 
multiplexing,” Ph.D dissertation (University of Connecticut, 2002), Chap. 4, p. 68.  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0008
79 
Low Noise Gain and Index Tailored External Cavity Laser Operating at 1310 nm 
for Performance Enhancements of IMDD Photonic Links 
R. Dougenik*, R. Lacomb and F. Jain 
ECE, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-4157, USA *robert.dougenik@uconn.edu 
A novel gain and index tailored (GIT) external cavity laser (ECL) is presented. The single frequency 
laser demonstrates high power operation in excess of 250 mW and shot noise limited relative intensity 
noise (RIN) at 100 mW. This laser source is an ideal source for intensity-modulated direct detection 
(IMDD) photonic links. Link budget analysis is completed based on measured RIN and optical power. 
The analysis demonstrates that there are significant radio frequency performance advantages to 
operating at higher optical power while maintaining low RIN. 
Keywords: Gain and index tailored (GIT); external cavity laser (ECL); microwave photonic link; 
intensity-modulated direct detection (IMDD); photonic links; shot noise limited relative intensity noise 
(RIN). 
1. Background 
Microwave photonic systems involve the conversion and transmission of radio frequency 
(RF)/microwave and millimeter wave information optical signals characterized by ampli￾tude and phase. A typical intensity-modulated direct detection (IMDD) photonic link is 
illustrated in Fig. 1. 
The link includes a low noise single mode laser, a balanced Mach Zehnder modulator 
(MZM) and a high speed photo-detector. The advantages of photonic links over conven￾tional electronic transmission architectures (coaxial cable or waveguides) include reduced 
size and weight (1.7 kg/km vs 567 kg/km), reduced loss (0.5 dB/km vs 360 dB/km @ 
2 Ghz) [1], insusceptibility to electromagnetic interference and large instantaneous band￾widths. Short distance links are required for wide band signal processing and manipulation 
of RF signals for radar and electronic warfare applications. The applicability of RF-over￾Fiber links is directly related to system-level performance quantified by the sensitivity and 
dynamic range. Both of these system-level performance metrics are greatly dependent upon 
the performance of the laser source. 
*Corresponding author. 80 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
Fig. 1. Schematic of intensity-modulated direction detection (IMDD) photonic link. 
The IMDD photonic link, as illustrated in Fig. 1, utilizes a balanced Mach Zehnder 
modulator (MZM) to convert RF inputs to an optical signal provided by the laser source. 
The linearity of the response is directly related to the bias control (Vdc) of the MZM, which 
maintains the device in quadrature and the amplitude of the RF signal (Vrf) [2, 3]. The 
IMDD acts as an RF power amplifier, when Vrf<<Vdc linearity is maintained and the small 
signal gain is given by 
2
Laser
rf in out
P G ZZ
V
       
 , (1)
where R is the responsivity of the photodetector, α is the combined link and MZM loss, Vπ
is the dc bias control voltage for quadrature, Zin is the input link impedance, Zout is the 
output link impedance and PLaser is the optical power of the laser source. Maximizing the 
link gain requires optimization of the laser power, minimization of Vπ and insertion loss 
and optimization of photodetector responsibility and power handling. 
In addition to link gain, photonic links are quantified by noise via the RF noise figure 
and linearity-based metrics expressed by the compression dynamic range (CDR) and 
spurious-free dynamic range (SFDR). Three noise sources dominating the photonic link 
performance are the thermal noise Nth, detector shot noise Nsh and laser noise NLaser. Noise 
levels are often expressed in terms of relative intensity noise (RIN), relative to the dc 
electrical power at the link output (i.e. the photodiode terminals) Powerdc-out = Idc2 Zout. The 
dc photocurrent is directly related to the laser power Idc= 0.5RαPLaser. The RIN of the laser 
is expressed as follows: 
2 222
4 Laser Laser
Laser
dc out Laser
N N RIN
IZ P     . (2)Low Noise Gain and Index Tailored External Cavity Laser 81
The sources of laser noise are spontaneous emission, relaxation oscillations 
(interchange between electron/photon dynamics), mode suppression ratio, modal stability, 
thermal instability, pump instability and gain non-uniformities. Likewise, the output￾referenced relative intensity noise of the photonic link is given by 
RIN 2 2
total Laser th sh
Link
dc out dc out
N N NN
IZ IZ
    . (3)
The RIN of the link is thus ultimately limited by the laser source. When the laser 
performance is sufficient such that RINLink is shot noise limited by the noise figure (NF) is 
given in Eq. (8). The compression dynamic range (CDR) and the spurious-free dynamic 
range (SFDR) are both related to the total noise Ntotal and therefore are dependent upon the 
link Noise and ultimately the laser noise NLaser. The 1 dB CDR is defined as the range of 
input powers over which the output powers are out of the noise and compressed less than 
1 dB. The CDR is given by [2] 
.1 1
1
1 log
10
( ) 1 ( /)
dB
rf out dB
linear HzBW rf out total
total
P
CDR CDR dB Hz P N dBm Hz
N

        , (4)
and the SFDR is given by 
( 1)/
( 1)/ ( 1)/
1 log
1 ( ) ( /)
n n
nn nn
linear Hz BW total
total
OIPN n SFDR SFDR dB Hz OIPn N dBm Hz
N n

 
 
      . (5)
All of these performance metrics can be improved by optimization of the laser source, 
which is accomplished by increasing the laser power PLaser while maintaining shot noise 
limited performance provided the MZM and the photodetector can handle the increased 
power. The goal of this project is to optimize the laser source. 
2. Identification and Significance of the Innovation 
High performance laser sources for RF analog photonic applications require high power 
single frequency operation. The RIN of these laser sources is ultimately limited by cavity 
stability, Q of the cavity and output power. Continuous wave operation of a laser produces 
random fluctuations in carrier and photon distributions. Random carrier and photon 
recombination and generation events produce instantaneous time variations in the carrier 
and photon densities. This leads to instantaneous variations in the output power 
establishing a noise floor and a minimum linewidth. The coupling between the carrier 
density and photon density establishes a resonant oscillation peak associated with intensity 
noise, the RIN peak. The characteristics of the RIN spectrum are shown in Fig. 2 [3], the 
RIN spectrum is seen to be a function of laser output power. The RIN peak at resonance is 
demonstrated to decrease 9 dB with every doubling of output power. Beyond the resonant 
peak, the RIN noise levels out to the quantum limit. The quantum limit drops 3 dB for 
every doubling of the laser power, so even at powers at which the RIN peak has diminished; 82 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
further increases in power continue to reduce the laser noise. The dependency of the RIN 
on current density also necessitates the utilization of low noise injection sources. For shot 
noise limited current sources, the RIN noise floor reduces to a constant (2e/ILaser) at a given 
intensity level, where e is the electron charge. 
 
Fig. 2. Calculated RIN for different output power levels for a semiconductor in-plane laser source [3]. 
Conventional laser architectures (fiber lasers and solid state lasers) employed for 
microwave photonics utilize solid state gain media which exhibit superior noise perfor￾mance compared to conventional semiconductor laser architectures. Solid state gain media 
inherently express reduced gain-refractive index dependencies but suffer from poor 
thermal quality and inefficient optical pumping leading to low-power conversion effi￾ciencies. Solid state lasers are larger, typically more expensive and less robust than their 
semiconductor laser counterparts. 
We have recently developed a semiconductor external cavity laser (ECL) exhibiting 
both high power and low RIN. The laser architecture utilizes a custom Gain and Index 
Tailored (GIT) gain chip and a quantum dot active layer epitaxial design. The chip is 
designed to support wide spatial single-mode operation; when coupled to an ECL optical 
circuit single frequency operation is observed. Noise factors arise from photonic and 
electronic-induced effects inside the semiconductor media due to gain/refractive index 
coupling and temperature variations. The quantum dot active layer provides improved 
quantum efficiency, increased thermal stability and lower thresholds over conventional 
quantum well structures. ECLs act to reduce phase and RIN noise by decreasing the 
percentage of cavity round-trip time that a photon spends inside the semiconductor media 
(effectively reducing the strength of this coupling) and by elongating the overall cavity 
length (known to be inversely proportional to the linewidth). Low Noise Gain and Index Tailored External Cavity Laser 83
3. Gain & Index Tailored (GIT) Ridge Waveguide Laser 
The novel Gain and Index Tailored semiconductor gain chip design is based upon a novel 
GIT-Ridge Waveguide (RWG) laser diode structure shown in Fig. 3. 
Fig. 3. Schematic gain and Index RWG semiconductor laser with quantum dot epitaxial structure. 
The key design aspects of the GIT-RWG laser diode feature a quantum dot epitaxial 
structure and a multi-mode ridge waveguide with selective p-type doping channels to tailor 
the injected carrier distribution and thus the optical gain profile in the active layer to favor 
single mode operation. By selective p-type doping, the injected carrier profile is designed 
to overlap with the central portion of the fundamental mode where the intensity is greatest, 
thus favoring stimulated recombination (stimulated emission probability is directly related 
to the photon intensity) while simultaneously reducing the effects of spatial hole burning 
(where the gain regions overlapping with high modal intensity are depressed) thus 
improving noise performance. Single spatial mode widths 3–4 times wider than conven￾tional single mode structures are realizable using this approach. Semiconductor peak power 
is ultimately limited by catastrophic optical damage (COD) at the facet (defined by a 
critical power density at which the facet melts). Wide mode laser operation enables higher 
output powers before the onset of COD and improved thermal performance. High-power 
operation is required for low RIN performance. 
In conventional structures, the entire ridge is contacted and current spreading extends 
injected carriers to regions with low-modal intensity leading to higher probability of spon￾taneous photon generation along the outside edges of the ridge during lasing. Figure 4 
illustrates a comparison of the modal-gain overlap for the GIT structure compared to a 
conventional RWG structure. 84 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
Fig. 4. Gain (yellow) modal intensity (blue) overlap for (a) conventional RWG laser structure “left” and (b) for 
GIT lase structure “right”. 
4. Gain & Index Tailored (GIT) Gain Chip 
The GIT-RWG semiconductor laser provides an essential platform for the development of 
a low-noise semiconductor gain chip supporting both high-power operation and low noise 
essential to microwave photonic performance. The main difference between the diode laser 
device and a gain chip resides in the reflective nature of the output coupler “front facet.” 
For a diode laser, the chip requires sufficient feedback at the front facet to support lasing. 
A gain chip is formed by the reduction of the front facet reflectivity (with application of 
an anti-reflection (AR) coating in conjunction with a curved waveguide) to reduce the 
optical feedback such that the laser threshold is not achieved. In this configuration, the 
semiconductor chip acts as a photonic amplifier, thus providing gain. A schematic of a 
curved waveguide GIT gain chip is given in Fig. 5. As illustrated in the schematic, the p￾type dopant is offset from the center of the ridge toward the outside edge of the ridge 
structure. This design ensures that the carrier injection is centered at the peak of the mode 
which is pushed to the outside edge for a curved waveguide. The semiconductor epitaxial 
layers employ band gap engineering to confine carrier recombination (photon generation) 
to an active layer while providing a perpendicular waveguide for modal confinement. 
Fig. 5. Semiconductor curved ridge Gain & Index Tailored Gain Chip, HR (high reflection coating) and AR 
(antireflection coating). Low Noise Gain and Index Tailored External Cavity Laser 85
Quantum confinement is employed by the active layer to increase the density of states for 
higher dynamic gain and improved linewidth. 
5. Semiconductor Gain Chip External Cavity Laser 
An external cavity laser consists of a gain chip housed in an optical resonator. The optical 
resonator is formed between the HR coating of the semiconductor gain chip and a 
frequency selective external mirror (typically a Fiber Bragg grating or Volumetric Bragg 
grating) acting as the output coupler, the AR coating and curved facet of the gain chip is 
design to diminish any reflections between the HR and output coupler semi-reflective 
mirror. In Fig. 6, a schematic of a semiconductor ECL package is shown. The package 
features a semiconductor gain chip coupled to a lenticulated polarization maintain (PM) 
single-mode fiber housing a Bragg grating. The high-reflectivity (HR) back mirror of the 
gain chip and the Bragg grating within the optical fiber form the laser cavity. 
Fig. 6. External cavity laser architectures fiber Bragg grating configuration. 
6. GIT-Gain Chip External Cavity Laser Prototype Results 
A prototype GIT-ECL featuring a FBG, 14-pin butterfly package, PM fiber pig-tail was 
developed. The GIT gain chip used in this prototype featured a 5 µm wide ridge (with 
refractive index tailored to provide a lateral mode width > 5 μm 1/e2
 width) with a 3 mm 
cavity length. Performance data are provided in Fig. 7 (power vs current vs voltage, i.e. 
light-current-voltage (LIV)) and demonstrates the 1310 nm operation as well as power vs 
current profile. Figure 8 shows the turn-on time of the laser demonstrating very quick 
stabilization. 
7. Relative Intensity Noise Measurement 
The relative intensity noise of the GIT-ECL laser was measured at NRL. The measurement 
involves analyzing the spectrum produced at the photodetector with an electric spectrum 
analyzer. The setup must be calibrated for loss as a function of frequency. Measured results 
for the GIT-ECL laser are given in Fig. 9. This illustrates that the RIN data for the GIT￾ECL taken at 100 mW are shot noise limited. When the laser is shot noise limited, the NF 86 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
is inversely related to the laser power (i.e. drops by 3 dB for every doubling of laser power). 
Since the RIN data shown in Fig. 9 demonstrates shot noise limited RIN @ 100 mW of 
laser power, the RIN is expected to decrease as the laser power is increased provided it 
remains shot noise limited. The projected RIN is given in Fig. 9 for the GIT-ECL operating 
at max power. Actual data were not taken at this level for a low noise current source and a 
higher power detector was not available. Low noise current sources are required for RIN 
measurement for current source noise can add to the laser RIN. 
Fig. 7. GIT-ECL proto-type results, Left (Power (cw) vs Current & Voltage vs Current. Right) wavelength 
spectrum. 
Fig. 8. Output power vs time for GIT-ECL prototype (1 sample = 0.2 s). Low Noise Gain and Index Tailored External Cavity Laser 87
Fig. 9. Relative Intensity Noise Black measured for the GIT-ECL @ 1310 nm @ 100 mW (green). (Red) RIN 
projection for operation @ 250 mW, (green) RIN projected @ 400 mW. 
8. IMDD Link Analysis–Projection 
8.1. Link Gain 
Link projections for an intensity-modulated direct detection photonic link are made as a 
function of laser power. A link performance analysis is made for the GIT-ECL assuming a 
commercially available modulator slope efficiency sm and photodetector responsivity R in 
conjunction with measured laser performance data. Utilizing these terms, the link gain is 
given by [5, 6] 
2 2 ,
10log( ) .
link m
source
Link link
Pload
g s P
G g
 
 (6)
The link gain as a function of optical power is provided in Fig. 10. 
8.2. Noise Figure 
A standard quantitative metric describing the effect of noise on a circuit is the noise factor 
F, the noise figure is 10Log(F). Considering the IMDD link as a 2-port network, the noise 
factor is the ratio of the output noise power per unit bandwidth to the input noise generated 88 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
by the input source @ room temp [6]. The noise figure is given by 
/ 10log . in in
out out
SIG Noise NF
SIG Noise  (7)
For high input power, the IMDD link can be estimated to be shot noise limited, for the laser 
RIN has diminished below the shot noise of the detector (see Fig. 9). For a shot noise 
limited IMDD link, the noise figure can be estimated by [6] 
2
2 10 2 . D load
m
qI R NF Log s kT
 
       (8)
Looking at Eq. (8), it is apparent that the NF is related to the laser power and wavelength 
through the slope efficiency of the MZM. Projections of the NF for the GIT-ECL are 
provided in Fig. 10. 
Fig. 10. Link Gain and Noise Figure Projections for an ideal Shot Noise limited IMDD photonic link as a function 
of laser power for GIT-ECL prototype @ 1310 nm. 
9. Conclusion 
A novel gain and index tailored (GIT) structure was presented incorporating quantum dot 
epitaxy for low-noise continuous wave operation 1310 nm. The gain and index tailored 
structure optimizes stimulated emission by confining the optical gain to regions of high 
lateral modal intensity. The quantum dot epitaxy harnesses the one-dimensional density of 
states limiting the linewidth, increasing the characteristic temperature to and reducing the 
threshold compared to quantum-well structures. The combination of these two factors Low Noise Gain and Index Tailored External Cavity Laser 89
works together to reduce noise sources that contribute to relative intensity noise in semi￾conductor lasers. The 1310 nm operating wavelength is also advantageous over 1550 nm 
since the modulator efficiency is inversely proportional to the square of the laser 
wavelength (1/λ2) [6]. This relationship can be understood by considering the mode size 
as a function of wavelength. Considering a Mach-Zehnder modulator, the separation in 
modulation electrodes is related to the optical mode size, smaller modes allow for narrower 
electrode spacing and therefore increased electric field for a given voltage. Given that the 
radio frequency performance metrics of intensity-modulated direct detection links are 
related to laser power, the relative intensity noise projected performance improvements 
were presented based on prototype laser results and commercially available components 
with the exception of photodetector power handling. 
References 
1. A. Agarwal, T. Banwell, T. K. Woodward, “Optically Filtered Microwave Photonic Links for 
RF Signal Processing Applications,” J. Lightwave Technol. 29, 16, 2394–2401 (2011). 
2. V. Urick, P. Devgan, J. McKinney, J. Dexter, “Laser Noise and Its Impact on the Performance 
3. of Intensity-Modulation with Direct-Detection Analog Photonic Links,” NRL/MR/5652--07-
9065, 2007. 
4. L. A. Coldren, S. Corzine, M. Mashanovitch, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits, 
Second Edition, 1995. 
5. K. Kikuchi, T. Okoshi, “Estimation of linewidth enhancement factor of AlGaAs laser by correla￾tion measurement between FM and AM noises,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 21, 6, 669–673 
(1985). 
6. V. Urick Jr, J. McKinney, K. Williams, “Fundamental of Microwave Photonics,” ISBN978-1-
118-29320-1, 2015. 
7. C. Cox, “Analog Optical Links,” Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521621631. 
8. R. Neuhaus, Diode Laser Locking and Linewidth Narrowing Appl-1012, TOPTICA Photonics 
AG. 
9. Application Note: Introduction to Laser Frequency Stabilization, https://www.newport.com/n/
introduction-to-laser-frequency-stabilization. 
10. R. W. P. Drever, J. L. Hall, F. V. Kowalski, J. Hough, G. M. Ford, A. J. Munley, H. Ward, 
“Laser Phase and Frequency Stabilization Using an Optical Resonator,” Appl. Phys. B 31, 
97–105 (1983). 
11. Estimating Laser Diode Lifetimes and Activation Energy, https://assets.newport.com/
webDocumentsN/images/AN33_Laser_Diode_Activation_IX.pdf. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0009
91 
Compute-in-Memory SRAM Cell Using Multistate 
Spatial Wavefunction Switched (SWS)-Quantum Dot Channel (QDC) FET 
Raja Hari Gudlavalleti*
, Evan Heller†
, John Chandy* and Faquir Jain*,‡
*University of Connecticut, CT, USA 
†Synopysis Inc., Ossining, NY, USA 
‡faquir.jain@uconn.edu 
This paper presents multistate spatial wavefunction switched (SWS)-quantum dot channel (QDC) 
field-effect transistor (FET) static random access memory (SRAM)-based Compute-in-Memory 
(CIM) cell. The SWS-QDC FETs have two or more vertically stacked coupled quantum dot channels, 
and the spatial location of carriers within these channels is governed by the applied gate voltage. The 
location of the carriers can be utilized to encode multiple logic levels within a single device. The 
utilization of SWS-QDC FETs in CIM cell increases the data storage and energy-efficient computation 
in the memory. CIM reduces the data access time and improves performance for energy-efficient 
artificial intelligence (AI) edge devices. 
Keywords: Compute-in-memory (CIM); multistate SRAM; SWS-FET; quantum-dot channel (QDC); 
artificial intelligence (AI). 
1. Introduction 
Compute-in-memory (CIM) technology is one of the emerging solutions towards efficient 
data transfer between logic processor and memory by computing within the memory macro 
[1]. Static random access memory (SRAM)-based CIM has attracted the attention of 
researchers for its access speed, write energy and compatibility with CMOS technologies. 
Architectures and techniques for SRAM-based CIM were reported [2, 3] using conven￾tional MOSFETs in CMOS technology. The efficiency of the in-memory computation can 
be increased by handling multiple bits in the same clock cycle [4]. Earlier, in-memory 
computing using various NVRAMs has also been reported [5, 9]. Quantum dot (QD) 
NVRAMs have been suggested for multi-bit in-memory computing [6, 8]. In this work, we 
present spatial wavefuncion switched (SWS)-quantum dot channel (QDC) field effect 
transistor (FET) based memory structure for CIM applications. Jain et al. proposed SWS￾QDC-FET that can handle multibit for computation in logic circuits and multibit storage 
in volatile/non-volatile memory cells [5–8]. Our approach in this paper is to increase 
memory density and computation ability in SRAM-based CIM cell using SWS-QDC￾FETs. 
‡Corresponding author. 92 R. H. Gudlavalleti et al. 
(a) (b) 
Fig. 1. Four state 2-channel spatial wavefunction switched (SWS) QDC FET with (a) SiOx-Cladded Si QDs 
(b) in the channel region. 
SWS-QDC-FET has four layers of SiOx-cladded Si QDs and GeOx-cladded Ge 
quantum dots, as shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), respectively, self-assembled in the recessed 
channel region. The upper two QD layers act as the transport channel from S and shallow 
drain D1 and the lower two QD layers act as the transport channel from source, S and deep 
drain, D2. The gate voltage, VG, determines the spatial location of the charges in the upper 
or lower quantum-wells/-dots in the channel region. This property of the device allows 
encoding logic levels at each threshold level of the device for the multistate logic operation. 
The location of electrons in lower, upper, both and neither in the channels encodes the 
logic states <01>, <10>, <11> and <00>, respectively, which provides a 4-state/2-bit FET 
operation in logic circuits. In this paper, a conventional 8T CMOS SRAM cell [3] is 
modified to utilize the read-port as the dot-product multiplication cell. However, this 
implementation is done using SWS-QDC-FET which performs multibit storage and dot￾product computation. 
2. SRAM-Based CIM Circuit 
The block diagram representation of SRAM-based CIM unit cell is shown in Fig. 2, which 
consists of a 4-state/2-bit SRAM cell and analog dot-product computation unit. The 
circuit is implemented using 4-state/2-bit SWS-QDC-FET/SWSFET. The circuit model of 
SWSFET, implementation of 2-bit SRAM and dot-product computation unit cell are 
presented in the following sections. 
2.1. SWSFET-based complementary 2-bit/4-state SRAM 
2.1.1. 2-bit/4-state SWSFET-based inverter 
The SWS-CMOS-based inverter, as shown in Fig. 3(a), exhibits four logic states ‘0’, ‘1’, 
‘2’ and ‘3’ compared to a conventional CMOS-based inverter which exhibits two logic 
states ‘0’ and ‘1’. Figures 3(b) and 3(c) show the DC transfer and transient characteristics Compute-in-Memory SRAM Cell Using Multistate SWS-QDC FET 93
Fig. 2. Dot-product multiplier cell using four-state SRAM and two SWS-QDC transistors. 
 
Fig. 3. SWS-CMOS inverter (a) Schematic (b) DC transfer characteristics (c) Input-output waveforms for pulse 
inputs. 
(a) (a) 
(b) (c) 94 R. H. Gudlavalleti et al. 
of SWS-CMOS inverter, respectively. The characteristics indicate that an SWS-CMOS 
inverter can process multiple logic levels with the same number of devices, as compared 
to conventional CMOS-based inverter. Therefore, SWS-CMOS-based logic circuit design 
can perform multistate logic computation, and multistate storage in SRAM and DRAM 
memories. This would increase computation capability in processors and storage density 
in memories. 
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. (a) Circuit schematic of CMOS spatial wavefunction switching (SWS)-Static Random-Access Memory 
(SRAM) unit cell. (b) DATA (top panel), write pulse (middle panel) and stored DATA bar (bottom panel). Compute-in-Memory SRAM Cell Using Multistate SWS-QDC FET 95
2.1.2. 2-bit/4-state SWSFET-based SRAM unit cell 
The conventional six-transistor (6T) SRAM cell consists of two cross-coupled inverters 
and two word-line-enabled pass transistors to read/write data from memory cell. As shown 
in Fig. 4(a) [7], the SRAM cell consists of SWS-CMOS inverters as the cross-coupled pair 
that can store multiple supply levels encoded as logic bits. Here, quaternary logic states 
‘0’ - ‘3’ are stored in the memory cell corresponding to 0 V, 0.4 V, 0.8 V and 1.2 V voltage 
signals, respectively. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 4(b). When the wordline 
(WL) signal (green solid line) goes high, the corresponding bitline (BL) (pink solid line) 
and (bitline) (BL) (orange solid line) signals are transferred to the SRAM DATA (solid 
light red color) and (DATA) (solid dark red color), respectively. 
2.2. SWSFET-based SRAM compute-in-memory cell 
A circuit simulation model for n-SWSFET (p-SWSFET) has been implemented using two 
conventional n-MOS (p-MOS) transistors and a Verilog-A/analog behavior model (ABM) 
compact model. Each transistor represents the transport of charges from source (S2) to 
Deep drain (D2), represented as nmos1 and source (S1) to shallow drain (D1), represented 
as nmos2 governed by the gate voltage. The Verilog-A compact model accounts for the 
spatial location of the electron (hole) wavefunction which depends on the input gate 
voltage. The n-SWSFET symbol and circuit simulation model are shown in Figs. 5(a) and 
5(b) respectively. Figure 5(c) shows the Cadence ID-VG characteristics for shallow drain 
D1 (green solid line) and deep drain D2 (dotted pink line). Multiple thresholds associated 
within the single SWSFET can be utilized to encode each state at different thresholds as 
indicated with state ‘0’ to state ‘3’. 
 
Fig. 5. An n-SWSFET (a) symbol (b) two-transistor with ABM/Verilog model (c) SWSFET IDS-VGS 
characteristics.
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 96 R. H. Gudlavalleti et al. 
Fig. 6. SWS-QDC FET-based analog dot-product computation using two different configurations (a) and (b). 
SWS-QDC FET-based analog dot-product computation using two different configura￾tions is shown in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b). The output of the SRAM cell (VOUT) has four states 
and the carrier transport in nSWSFET2 is based on the applied gate voltage (G). Due to 
multiple thresholds associated with nSWSFET, the output current to the sensing circuitry 
can be weighted based on the dot-product multiplication of applied input voltage and 
conductance associated with each input voltage to nSWSFET1 and nSWSFET2 transistors. 
In Fig. 6(a), the output current to the sensing is a dot product based on the applied input 
voltage on the source of nSWSFET1 and equivalent conductance nSWSFET1 and 
nSWSFET2. In Fig. 6(b), dot-product output current is the multiplication of the applied 
input on the gate of nSWSFET2 and equivalent conductance nSWSFET1 and nSWSFET2. 
Figure 7 shows the current flow in each state for 4-state outputs (Vout) of CMOS SWS￾QDC SRAM and input voltage (G2) applied to the dot-product cell when the dot-product 
multiplication cell is configured, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Similarly, Fig. 4(b) can be dealt. 
2.3. Simulation results 
The DC simulation for the ID-Vin characteristics when VG = VL and VG = VU are shown in 
Figs. 8(a) and 8(b), respectively. The dotted region of the curves shows the linear output 
current variation with input voltage. The linearity can be improved by adding additional 
output analog circuitry which will be dealt with in future contributions. 
3. Conclusion 
This work shows compute-in-memory analog dot-product multiplication using 4-state/ 
2-bit SRAM cell and two SWSFET devices. In comparison to conventional MOS-based 
design, this approach increases the storage density of SRAM and multibit compute-in￾memory which increases the overall efficiency of the system. Other QDC-FET and QDC￾QDG-FET and QD-NVRAMs may be used for CIM and In-Memory computing [8]. 
(a) (b) Compute-in-Memory SRAM Cell Using Multistate SWS-QDC FET 97
Fig. 7. The current flow in each state for 4-state outputs (Vout) of CMOS SWS-QDC SRAM and input voltage 
(G2) applied to the dot-product cell. [a] When SRAM output is at ‘00’ state, the resistor output is 0V. [b-d] The 
schematic shows the current for SRAM output states ‘01’, ‘10’ and ‘11’ when input voltage G2 = VL, where the 
charge transport happens between S2 and D2. [e-f] The schematic shows the current for SRAM output states ‘01’, 
‘10’ and ‘11’ when input voltage G2 = VU, where the charge transport happens between S1 and D1. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 98 R. H. Gudlavalleti et al. 
 (a)
 
 (b)
 
 
Fig. 8. The output current ID flowing through the resistor (a) when VG = VL (b) when VG = Vu. The dotted region 
shows the linear region of the ID-Vin curve. 
References 
1. H. S. Stone, A Logic-in-Memory Computer, IEEE Trans. Comput., C-19, 73-78 (1970). 
2. C.-J. Jhang, C.-X. Xue, J.-M. Hung, F.-C. Chang and M.-F. Chang, Challenges and Trends of 
SRAM-Based Computing-In-Memory for AI Edge Devices, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. 
Papers, 68, 1773-1786 (2021). 
3. A. Jaiswal, I. Chakraborty, A. Agrawal and K. Roy, 8T SRAM Cell as a Multibit Dot-Product 
Engine for Beyond von Neumann Computing, IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst. 
27, 2556-2567 (2019). 
4. R. Khaddam-Aljameh, P.-A. Francese, L. Benini and E. Eleftheriou, An SRAM-Based Multibit 
In-Memory Matrix-Vector Multiplier with a Precision That Scales Linearly in Area, Time, and 
Power, IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst. 29, 372-385 (2021). Compute-in-Memory SRAM Cell Using Multistate SWS-QDC FET 99
5. F. Jain, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, B. Saman, P.-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, M. Lingalugari and E. Heller, 
Quantum Dot Channel FETs Harnessing Mini-Energy Band Transitions in GeOx-Ge and Si 
QDSL for Multi-Bit Computing, Int. J. of High Speed Electron. Syst. 31, 2240012 (2022). 
6. F Jain, R Gudlavalleti, R Mays, B Saman, J Chandy and E Heller, Integrating QD-NVRAMs and 
QDC-SWS FET-Based Logic for Multi-Bit Computing Int. J. of High Speed Electron. Syst. 31, 
2240020 (2022). 
7. R. H. Gudlavalleti, B. Saman, R. Mays, Evan Heller, J. Chandy and F. Jain, A Novel Peripheral 
Circuit for SWSFET Based Multivalued Static Random-Access Memory, Int. J. of High Speed 
Electron. Syst. 29, 2040010 (2020). 
8. F. Jain, B. Saman, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, J. Chandy and E. Heller, Low-Threshold II–VI 
Lattice-Matched SWS-FETs for Multivalued Low-Power Logic. J. Electron. Mater. 50, 2618-
2629 (2021). 
9. D. Lelmini and H.-S. P. Wong, In-memory computing with resistive switching devices, Nat. 
Electron. 1, 333-337 (2018). This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0010
101 
High Speed 1550 nm Indium Gallium Arsenide-Indium Phosphide Photodetector 
Erik Perez, Ronald LaComb* and Faquir Jain†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA *ronald.lacomb@uconn.edu 
†faquir.jain@uconn.edu 
This paper presents preliminary results of a high speed 1550 nm indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs)-
based mesa-type modified uni-traveling carrier photodiode (M-UTC-PD) structure. Conventional 
UTC-PD refers to P-I-N type photodiodes which selectively use electrons as active carriers. Photons 
absorbed in the relatively thin P-type absorber create minority carriers which are field accelerated 
toward a depleted collector thereby establishing high velocity ballistic transport, making these 
structures applicable for high speed applications. The M-UTC-PD structure presented uses spatially 
tailored P-type absorber regions to limit minority carrier generation both in the lateral and axial 
dimensions. Utilizing an otherwise conventional UTC-PD epitaxial structure where the top P-type 
layers are undoped, the spatially tailored P-type regions are defined by closed ampoule Zinc diffusion 
techniques. The M-UTC-PD structure presented utilizes a series of nested p-doped rings within a mesa 
structure to limit dark current and reduce overall capacitance to improve high speed operation. Two 
photodiode structures will be investigated for this research project, a conventional UTC-PD structure 
and a modified structure, utilizing similar device designs, epitaxial designs and fabrication processes. 
The conventional structure will be utilized for fabrication process development, verification of epi 
quality and development of rapid prototyping approach toward chip-based testing and subsequent high 
speed RF testing procedures. Conventional UTC-PD device results will be used as a comparison to 
quantify the performance of the M-UTC-PD structure utilizing Zn-doped defined p-type absorber 
regions. Results are given for chip tests of UTC-PD chips verifying epitaxial quality and fabrication 
process, subsequent testing of packaged devices and RF analysis remains. Process development of the 
Zn-doped devices is underway, once completed, these devices will be compared to the base design to 
quantify performance enhancement associated with the modified design. 
Keywords: Uni-traveling photodiode; modified uni-traveling photodiode; rapid prototyping. 
1. Introduction 
A photodiode’s main purpose is to accurately measure the intensity of incident light upon 
it [1, 3] converting optical signals to electrical signals enabling measuring of encoded 
information. Photodiodes are used in various applications including sensing, optical 
communications, fiber optic systems like radio frequency over fiber and high speed 
architectures and photonic wave generators, photomixers and receivers [2–4, 6, 7]. In 
*Corresponding author. 102 E. Perez et al. 
general, bandwidth and efficiency dictate the function capabilities of a high speed photo￾detector due to the tradeoff between the two characteristics [4, 5]. 
The efficiency and responsiveness of a diode are dependent on the characteristics it 
demonstrates based on the current and capacitance of the device [3]. The total current of a 
photodiode is dependent on the current generated by incident light on the device creating 
electron–hole pairs and the current that is generated in the absence of incident light, also 
known as dark current. 
2. Conventional Photodiode Structure and Operation 
The standard photodiode follows a P-I-N structure where there is a p-type material, an 
intrinsic material, and an n-type material [5]. Here, the p-type layer and the n-type layer 
are separated by the intrinsic layer where photogenerated carriers are generated, these 
carriers are immediately swept out of the layer by the depletion electric field, whereby 
the electrons are drawn to the cathode and holes move towards the anode creating a 
photocurrent [5]. High speed operation of conventional P-I-N photodiode structures is 
inherently limited by the hole mobility limiting the velocity upon which the carriers are 
swept out of the depleted region. 
3. Uni-traveling Carrier Photodiode Structure and Operation 
Uni-traveling photodiodes (UTC-PD) are P-I-N type photodiodes which selectively use 
electrons as active carriers [5]. This is due to the holes being the majority carriers in the 
absorption region that have a relatively small hole energy relaxation time [3]. This means 
the photoresponse is mainly dictated by the minority carriers, electrons. In the device 
fabrication during the epitaxial growth there is a physical separation of the absorber region 
and the collector region [3–5]. By separating these two regions the overall time it takes for 
the electron to travel is lessened because the electric field generated by absorption is very 
small so the electron current is mainly generated by diffusion. Once light is incident on the 
n-type material, photons are absorbed through the relatively thin P-type absorber to create 
minority carriers which are field accelerated toward a depleted collector establishing high 
velocity ballistic transport. This occurs due to the reverse biased voltage that is applied so 
it sweeps only the electrons out of the absorber region and into the collector region. 
Ballistic transport is needed for superior photoresponse performance due to having 
electrons travel at high speeds in any given medium without scattering or colliding with 
other electrons. 
3.1. Research Approach 
Two photodiode structures will be fabricated, a conventional UTC-PD featuring a p-mesa 
type device structure defining the absorber area and a modified structure utilizing tailored 
p-type absorbing regions within mesa-defined structures. Both device designs will utilize 
very similar epitaxial designs and device geometries to enable performance comparison. High Speed 1550 nm InGaAS-InP Photodetector 103
The conventional structure will be used to develop the fabrication process and establish a 
baseline performance metric upon which the modified structure will be compared. 
The conventional UTC-PD device structure is illustrated in the bottom left of Fig. 1. 
The device features a mesa structure to be formed extending into the epitaxial layers to 
expose the buried N-type layers. Several different designs were made varying the p-mesa 
area for comparison. The conventional UTC-photodiode epitaxial structure consists of 14 
layers as shown in Fig. 1 top left. The epitaxial structure is tailored for 1.55𝜇m operation 
by selecting appropriate mole fractions for In (x) and As (y) while maintaining the 
appropriate lattice constants for an InP substrate, as illustrated in Fig. 1 [8]. Selective 
dopants of the layers, p-type with Be and n-type with Si establish the PIN photodiode 
device structure. The device structure utilizes a mesa etch to isolate the current injection 
into the absorbing layers and to allow contacts to be made to the buried n-type layers, a 
schematic is also shown in Fig. 1. 
Fig. 1. Top Left: Epitaxial Layer Design for UTC-PD. Top Right: Band Gap as a function of lattice constants for
III-V Compounds [8]. Bottom Left: Schematic of the device structure. Bottom Right: Picture of a photodetector
prototype. 
Fabrication of the device began with definition of the anode ve p-type contacts by 
a liftoff process of sputtered metals consisting of sputtered Ti, Pt and Au. Then an 
overlapping mesa structure was established using reactive ion etching (RIE) as a dry etch 
down to the n-type with 6-7 layers in the epitaxial growth shown in Fig. 1 followed by a 
wet etch finish, exposing the buried etch stop layer number 8 used for contacting the buried 
n‐type material104 E. Perez et al. 
N-type layers. Cathode contacts were formed by patterning 300 nm of PECVD silicon 
oxide utilizing exposing contact windows by etching with a wet etch process (Buffered 
Oxide Etch (BOE)) as the etchant. A lift-off process was utilized to form the n-type contacts 
which consisted of a multi-layer stack of: Ge, Au, Ni and Au. An example of a prototype 
device is shown in the bottom right of Fig. 1. The device samples were then annealed for 
contact alloy formation at 420 degrees for 30 seconds utilizing a Rapid Thermal Anneal 
process, this was followed by substrate lapping and polishing to 200µm thickness to enable 
backside illumination of the devices. 
4. Experimental Testing and Setup 
For rapid prototyping, a chip-level test set was devised to verify chip functionality and 
select chips for subsequent packaging and testing. To accomplish chip-level testing, a 3D 
printed holder was designed to hold the sample on a glass slide as shown in Fig. 2. Below 
the glass slide was a mirror mounted to a 45° platform where a 1064 nm laser was used in 
lieu of a 1550 nm laser for chip testing for lack of availability of a collimated 1550 nm 
laser. 0 nm laser was aimed and reflected onto the backside of the diode in order to achieve 
a back-illuminated device. The two probes were placed on the p-type and n-type gold 
contacts, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2. Before illumination testing began, an I-V 
Characteristic was generated utilizing a LabView virtual interface. Here, a reverse voltage 
bias was also obtained by switching the leads on the probes touching the contacts. Once 
the IV characteristics verified diode operation, known good chips were rested for photo￾conduction. This was accomplished by connecting the device to a benchtop photodiode 
amplifier (Thorlabs PDA 200C) utilizing two probe connectors while illuminating the 
backside of the sample. Backside illumination was accomplished by directing a collimated 
1064 nm laser to reflect off a mirror positioned beneath the transparent device mount, 
photocurrent was measured as a function of laser current. The 1064 nm laser that was 
applied to the device was current-controlled and varied from 0 to 750 mA and the response 
current was measured to two decimal places. The data points were taken with brief breaks 
in between in order to ensure that the photodiode was not saturating from constant exposure 
to the laser. The chip test measurement was accomplished at zero bias to avoid damaging 
the chips. 
The testing apparatus was used to solely determine functionality of the devices for 
future packaging and RF testing. Figure 3 shows the I-V characteristics of a typical 
photodiode under zero illumination depicting the forward and reverse bias regions along 
with the breakdown region. The device shows the breakdown voltage occurring to the left 
of 2.5 V, the linear portion between 2.5 V and 0 V is the reverse biased and any voltages 
above 0 show the forward biased region. Once the device was back-illuminated, the 
response current could be measured based on the different intensities created by the varied 
current source for the laser with a zero biased voltage. In Fig. 3, as the light intensity 
increases so does the current response, meaning the device was detecting a change in light 
and responded appropriately as more power was applied. The device tested between 0 mA 
and 550 mA showed that no saturation had occurred as evidenced by no plateau in Fig. 3. High Speed 1550 nm InGaAS-InP Photodetector 105
 
Fig. 2. Top Left: Schematic of photodetector chip with p mesa and n contact with probes. Top Right: Picture of
probes shown touching the p mesa and n contact. Bottom Left: Schematic model of back-illumination test for
rapid prototyping. Bottom Right: Picture of 3D Printed back-illuminated model with mirror and probes. 
 
Fig. 3. Left: I-V Characteristics of a photodiode under no illumination depicting the forward and reverse bias
along with the breakdown region. Right: Current of photodiode vs. the current of the laser. 
5. Future Work 
A change from the conventional UTC-PD would be the rapid prototyping of a modified 
UTC-PD that has an inclusion of zinc guard bands that reduces capacitance. By being able 
to lower the capacitance, the tailored p-type regions are going to be doped into the intrinsic 
layer creating sectioned-off portions of p-type material that will be separated by intrinsic 
materials. [Refer Fig. 4 for epitaxial layers]. By looking at the equation for capacitance, 
C = A * d , (1)106 E. Perez et al. 
where C is capacitance, 𝜀 is permittivity of dielectric, A is area and d is the distance 
between parallel plates, we can determine that as the area decreases so will the overall 
capacitance. The spatially tailored p-type materials that were diffused into an intrinsic 
material reduce the area of the p-type material since it only exists in smaller regions as seen 
in Fig. 4. The smaller areas of Zn will appear as a series of concentric rings ranging in size 
so that different variations could be observed simultaneously. This design will still allow 
for the same number of photons to create electron–hole pairs in the depletion region as in 
a conventional UTC-PD that are then swept to the collector region. One way to measure 
the bandwidth and speed of the photodetector is to perform RF testing and use the cut-off 
frequency. Cut-off frequency is the measure of the photodiode response to incident light 
and is the frequency at which the output current decreases by 3 dB. The planned RF testing 
will test the conventional UTC-PDs that were already fabricated and compare them to Zinc 
guard band UTC-PDs. 
Fig. 4. Top: Epitaxial layer design for Zinc Diffused UTC-PD Structure. Bottom: Schematic of device structure
(left: cross section and right: top view). High Speed 1550 nm InGaAS-InP Photodetector 107
6. Conclusion 
A UTC-PD epitaxial design was grown to fabricate prototype devices. A fabrication 
process was developed verifying the applicability of the contact lithography mask set and 
all subsequent process steps required to make prototype devices. A novel chip-testbed was 
devised to verify the functionality of devices on a pre-packaged format enabling cherry￾picking of good devices for subsequent packaging and RF testing. Overall, the fabrication 
and testing of the UTC-PD using the process described, yielded samples housing an array 
of functioning devices exhibiting I-V diode characteristics and photoconductivity thereby 
verifying the quality of the epitaxial wafer and the fabrication process used to make the 
prototype devices. Future work includes RF testing of the UTC-PD devices to establish a 
performance baseline, fabrication of the M-UTC-PD devices, and completing a device 
performance analysis comparing the performance of two structures. 
References 
1. A. Beling, “Periodic Travelling wave photodetectors with serial and parallel optical feed based 
on InP”, (2006). 
2. J.-W. Shi, C. B. Huang and C. L. Pan “Millimeter-wave photonic wireless links for very high 
data rate communication”, NPG Asia Mater., Vol. 3, no. 4, 41–48 (2011). 
3. L. Guo, Y. Huang, X. Duan, X. Ren, Q. Wang and X. Zhang, “High-speed modified uni￾traveling-carrier photodiode with a new absorber design”, Chin. Opt. Lett. Vol. 10, no. S1, 
S12301–S12304 (2012). 
4. R. Zhang, B. Hraimel, X. Li, P. Zhang and X. Zhang, “Design of broadband and high-output 
power uni-traveling-carrier photodiodes”, Opt. Exp. Vol. 21, 6943–6954 (2013). 
5. S. Srivastava and K. P. Roenker, “Numerical modeling study of the InP/InGaAs uni-traveling 
carrier photodiode”, Solid-State Electron. Vol. 48, no. 3, 461–470 (2004). 
6. T. Ishibashi, N. Shimizu, S. Kodama, H. Ito, T. Nagatsuma and T. Furuta, UTC PD in 
Tech.Dig.Ultrafast electron, Optoelectron, Vol. 3 (1997). 
7. T. Yoshimatsu, Y. Muramoto, S. Kodama, T. Furuta, N. Shigekawa, H. Yokoyama and T. 
Ishibashi, Electron. Lett. Vol. 46 (2010). 
8. P. D. Dutta, H. L. Bhat and V. Kumar, The physics and technology of gallium antimonide: An 
emerging optoelectronic material. Available from: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Band￾gap-as-a-function-of-lattice-constant-for-III-V-compounds-and-their-ternary￾and_fig3_224488301. This page intentionally left blank© 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765 0011
1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using
Hierarchical Reservoir Computing System
Md. Razuan Hossain, Anurag Dhungel, Maisha Sadia, Partha Sarathi Paul and Md. Sakib Hasan∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA
∗mhasan5@olemiss.edu
Reservoir Computing (RC) is a type of machine learning inspired by neural processes,
which excels at handling complex and time-dependent data while maintaining low train￾ing costs. RC systems generate diverse reservoir states by extracting features from raw
input and projecting them into a high-dimensional space. One key advantage of RC net￾works is that only the readout layer needs training, reducing overall training expenses.
Memristors have gained popularity due to their similarities to biological synapses and
compatibility with hardware implementation using various devices and systems. Chaotic
events, which are highly sensitive to initial conditions, undergo drastic changes with mi￾nor adjustments. Cascade chaotic maps, in particular, possess greater chaotic properties,
making them difficult to predict with memoryless devices. This study aims to predict
1D and 2D cascade chaotic time series using a memristor-based hierarchical RC system.
Keywords: Reservoir computing; chaotic time series; cascade chaotic maps; biomolecular
memristor; logistic map; H´enon map.
1. Introduction
Neuromorphic Computing, a novel architecture that diverges from the traditional
Von Neumann system, has recently gained traction in numerous applications. First
proposed by Dr. Carver Mead in 1980, Neuromorphic Computing emulates biologi￾cal processes through highly parallel computing architectures [1]. An Artificial Neu￾ral Network (ANN) is a computational system designed to imitate the function of
biological neurons. Like the human nervous system, ANNs connect artificial neurons
to one another via synapses [2]. The most prevalent types of ANNs are Feedforward
Neural Networks (FNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). FNNs have no in￾ternal loops, with connections only directed from input to output layers, capturing
∗Corresponding author.
109110 Md. Razuan Hossain et al.
data at a specific moment [3]. Conversely, RNNs possess internal loops and recur￾rent connections, enabling data to remain in the network for a certain duration [4],
allowing them to process spatial and temporal data. Although RNN connections
can hold past and present data, the training algorithm’s complexity increases with
minor changes in recurrent connections. As a result, training such networks entails
intricate processes and is considerably slow [5].
Reservoir Computing, a burgeoning neural-inspired computing approach, em￾ploys RNNs as high-dimensional reservoirs for processing intricate training data [6].
This concept is rooted in the information processing principles of the human brain,
which are highly dimensional and complex [7]. A standard reservoir features sparse,
extensive, and either undirected or directed recurrent nodes. The current states of
the reservoir’s node, which serve as the output, are determined by the input and pre￾vious states. The output node is trained using straightforward linear regression [8].
Recent studies have demonstrated that memristor-based RC systems can effec￾tively address complex temporal problems with outstanding performance [8]. Gener￾ally, memristors are two-terminal resistive devices with memory effects. The device’s
current state relies on one or more internal state variables and can be altered based
on the history of its previous state [9–12]. Memristors also have widespread ap￾plications in Neuromorphic computing [13–15]. Neuromorphic computing systems,
which consist of artificial neurons and synapses, provide a more efficient platform
for implementing neural network algorithms. Neuromemristive systems, a subset
of neuromorphic computing systems, employ memristors to emulate the synaptic
plasticity found in biological neurons, where the memristor conductance or current
functions as synaptic weights [16, 17].
Various types of memristors are currently being incorporated into physical RC
systems [18–21]. For instance, Huaqiang Wu et al. developed a solid-state memris￾tor using a stacked cross-point structure of Ti/TiOx/TaOy/Pt [22]. Najem et al.
recently reported a biomolecular memristor with composition, structure, switching
mechanism, and ionic transport similar to bio-synapses [18]. This device exhibits
generic memristive properties and can perform complex computations while con￾suming significantly less power [8]. In this study, we utilize the solid state mem￾ristor model from Ref. 22 and the biomolecular memristor model from Ref. 18
to develop a physical RC system within a simulation platform.
Predicting chaotic nonlinear dynamics has garnered significant interest across
various research domains. Chaos refers to a phenomenon in which the temporal
development of a deterministic nonlinear dynamic system becomes aperiodic and
highly sensitive to its initial condition [23]. Chaotic maps exhibit ergodicity and
unpredictability, allowing them to generate diverse chaotic sequences with differ￾ent initial conditions. Cascade Chaotic Maps (CCM), which combine two chaotic
maps (seed maps), display enhanced chaotic performance and more complex chaotic
properties than traditional seed maps [24, 25].1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using Hierarchical Reservoir Computing System 111
In this study, our objective is to predict cascade chaotic time series sequences
using various memristor-based RC systems. We have selected the cascade 1D logistic
map and the cascade 2D H´enon map for our analysis. Additionally, we present
two different hierarchical RC systems as enhancements to the system. The paper
is structured as follows: Section 2 explores the two distinct dimensions of Cascade
chaotic time series maps; Sec. 3 outlines conventional RC architectures; Sec. 4 delves
into the Hierarchical RC system; Sec. 5 presents the simulation results and an
analysis of the output work; and finally, Sec. 6 concludes the paper with a summary.
2. Cascade Chaotic Maps
Cascade chaotic maps are formed by connecting two seed maps in a series, resulting
in more chaotic properties than individual seed maps. The chaotic performance of
CCM is assessed using bifurcation plots and the Lyapunov exponent (LE) [26]. A bi￾furcation diagram [27] generates and plots several steady-state sequences relative to
a controlled parameter, essentially depicting the chaotic region of the corresponding
map [28]. In a chaotic sequence, even slight changes in the initial condition cause
two neighboring trajectories to diverge exponentially fast. LE, represented by λ, is
a commonly employed metric to measure the sensitivity of a chaotic circuit to its
initial condition. Negative LE values signify a periodic region [29], while positive
values indicate a chaotic region [30].
Figure 1 illustrates the seed and cascaded maps. For 1D and 2D seed maps, each
seed map is connected to another to construct the cascaded map.
Fig. 1. Schematic of cascading scheme
2.1. Cascade 1D Logistic Map
The logistic map is a well-known 1D chaotic map with strong performance [31]. For
input values within the range [0,1], this map generates an output sequence within
the same bounds. The seed logistic map is mathematically defined as:112 Md. Razuan Hossain et al.
C1(xn) = 4axn(1 − xn). (1)
After series with another seed map, the cascaded equation becomes as follows:
C2(C1(xn)) = xn+1. (2)
Here, a represents the bifurcation parameter between the range of 0 and 1. Figure
2 displays the bifurcation, and LE diagram [32] for both the seed and cascaded
logistic maps. The LE value in the cascaded map is nearly double, indicating that
it is more chaotic than the seed map. In this study, we have chosen the bifurcation
parameter, a = 1.
Fig. 2. Seed and Cascaded Logistic map characteristics analysis. (a) LE plot of Logistic map (seed
map). (b) Bifurcation plot of Logistic map (seed map). (c) LE plot of cascaded Logistic map. (d)
Bifurcation plot of cascaded Logistic map.
2.2. Cascade 2D H´enon Map
The H´enon map is a 2D chaotic discrete-time map that demonstrates superior
chaotic behavior compared to 1D discrete maps [33, 34]. The mathematical formu￾lation of the H´enon map [35] is explained as follows:
xn = 1 − a(xn−1)
2 + byn−1, (3)
yn = xn−1, (4)
These two equations can be written as a two-step recurrence relation as follows:
C1(xn) = 1 − a(xn−1)
2 + bxn−2, (5)1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using Hierarchical Reservoir Computing System 113
C2(C1(xn)) = xn+1. (6)
Figure 3 shows bifurcation and LE diagram for X dimensions of seed and cas￾caded H´enon Map. In our work, we choose a = 1.4 and b = 0.3.
Fig. 3. Seed and Cascaded H´enon map characteristics analysis. (a) LE plot of H´enon map (seed
map). (b) Bifurcation plot of H´enon map (seed map). (c) LE plot of cascaded H´enon map. (d)
Bifurcation plot of cascaded H´enon map.
3. Conventional RC Architecture
In a traditional RC system (also referred to as a shallow RC system) [36], there are
essentially three distinct layers: the input layer, the reservoir layer, and the output
layer [8, 37]. Since our focus is on predicting 1D and 2D chaotic time series, our
architecture requires increased memory and nonlinearity to capture information.
To enhance the reservoir states within the network, we have employed the masking
technique in our system. A comprehensive schematic of the mask-based RC system
is depicted in Fig. 4.
3.1. Input Layer
In the pursuit of our investigation, we embarked on the generation of time series se￾quences encompassing 1,000 steps each. These sequences were derived from chaotic
map equations, serving as the input for our analysis. We employed an additional114 Md. Razuan Hossain et al.
Fig. 4. Schematic of masked memristor-based RC system.
1,000-step target signal for training purposes, incorporating a one-step delay. This
setup is intended to guide each data point in the time series to strive toward accu￾rately predicting the next data point. The objective underpinning this methodology
is developing a predictive model that could reliably anticipate future data points
based on the current state of information.
In the subsequent testing phase, we adhered to the use of an equivalent amount
of data; however, the dataset was distinct, again extracted from the chaotic map
equations. By adopting this approach, we could examine our model’s predictive
capability maintaining the essence of the chaotic system in the input while providing
new, unseen data.
3.2. Mask
In the pre-processing stage of input data, we utilized binary masks to introduce
variability in the reservoir states. The masking process within the network serves
two purposes: it renders input data sequential and maximizes dimensionality in the
network. The mask functions as a time-division multiplexing system in the architec￾ture [38]. In the masking technique, the input signal first passes through a nonlinear
node, where nonlinear conversion occurs, before being directed to the delay line of
the virtual nodes [3]. The resulting masked output consists of piecewise input data
with a constant interval [38]. In a previous study [22], the authors employed a binary
mask with a length of 4, resulting in a total of 16 fixed possible combinations. Con￾versely, we utilized a random mask, generating infinite combinations for the same
mask length and introducing greater nonlinearity to the system. The equation for
a random mask is provided below:
M ask = 2 ∗ rand(N, M) − 1, (7)
where random values are between 0 and 1, N is the number of memristors and M
is for mask length.1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using Hierarchical Reservoir Computing System 115
Fig. 5. Schematic of voltage encoding with respect to incoming data for biomolecular memristor.
Here A portion (5 steps) of the original signal has been taken to show the encoding.
3.3. Encoding Technique
In this study, we implemented a voltage encoding technique where the voltage is
encoded with changes in the input. Figure 5 illustrates the voltage encoding method
for biomolecular memristors. With this approach, the voltage varies from 120 mV
to 150 mV in relation to the data received from the mask.
3.4. Memristive Reservoir
A key feature distinguishing memristive elements from other elements is that their
resistance changes over time, depending on the charge flowing through them [9,
39]. In our analysis, both types of memristors are voltage functions, meaning their
responses vary with voltage changes. The solid-state memristors [22] operate at
2.5V , while the biomolecular memristors [40, 41] function between 100 mV and
170 mV. To construct the RC system, we utilized 32 memristors for logistic map
prediction and 50 memristors for the H´enon map.
3.5. Output Layer
Linear Regression is a supervised machine learning algorithm employed for predict￾ing unknown inputs [42]. In the RC network, linear regression is carried out in the
output or readout layer. The objective of the readout layer is to manage the non￾temporal task of mapping input data to target data. The subsequent linear equation
is utilized to obtain the output weights [43]
Wout = YT arget ∗ X−1
, (8)
where Wout is the trained weights used to predict the signal in the testing phase,
YT arget is the actual target signal, and XT
is the transposed output from the reser￾voir.116 Md. Razuan Hossain et al.
4. Hierarchical RC Architecture
In an effort to enhance prediction performance, we investigated hierarchical reservoir
architecture, drawing inspiration from a relevant article [36]. Numerous studies have
proposed methods to augment the reservoir’s richness [44–47]. In this study, we
employed wide reservoirs (parallel-connected independent sub-reservoirs) and deep
reservoirs (sub-reservoirs stacked in series). A schematic of the wide RC architecture
is presented in Fig. 6.
In this architecture, distinct voltage encoding is performed for the two parallel
connections while maintaining the same mask parameters. In the readout layer,
weights from both reservoirs are combined before executing linear regression.
Fig. 6. The schematic of the wide RC system, where two reservoirs are parallelly connected to the
readout layer.
Fig. 7. The schematic of the Deep RC system, where two reservoirs are series connected and
reservoir 2 depends on the output of reservoir 1.1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using Hierarchical Reservoir Computing System 117
A schematic of the deep RC architecture is displayed in Fig. 7. In this setup,
data passes through reservoir1 after the initial voltage encoding. The second voltage
encoding is carried out based on the output of the first reservoir, and both reservoirs
are connected to the readout layer. It is important to note that we used half the
number of memristors in each reservoir within the hierarchical reservoir to ensure
a fair comparison across all architectures.
5. Simulation Results and Analysis
We performed training and testing on the 1D seed and cascaded logistic map as
well as the 2D seed and cascaded H´enon map, utilizing three RC architectures with
two types of memristors.
To compare the results, we employed NRMSE (Normalized Root Mean Square
Error) in our analysis to assess the goodness of fit between the actual target signal
and the predicted output signal [48, 49]. NRMSE is expressed as follows:
NRMSE =
s
mean {(y(t)output − y(t)target)
2}
variance {y(t)target}
(9)
Here y(t)target and y(t)output are the original target and predicted output signals
of the chaotic map, respectively.
Fig. 8. The target vs. output signal results obtained by biomolecular memristive RC network for
cascaded 1D Logistic map. (a) Shallow Reservoir (b) Wide Reservoir (c) Deep Reservoir
Fig. 9. The target vs. output signal results obtained by biomolecular memristive RC network for
cascaded 2D H´enon map. (a) Shallow Reservoir (b) Wide Reservoir (c) Deep Reservoir118 Md. Razuan Hossain et al.
Fig. 10. The target vs. output signal results obtained by solid-state memristive RC network for
cascaded 1D Logistic map. (a) Shallow Reservoir (b) Wide Reservoir (c) Deep Reservoir
Fig. 11. The target vs. output signal results obtained by solid-state memristive RC network for
2D cascaded H´enon map. (a) Shallow Reservoir (b) Wide Reservoir (c) Deep Reservoir
Figures 8–11 display the predicted results acquired from three RC architectures
using two distinct memristor types. It is evident from these figures that the hi￾erarchical reservoir demonstrates superior performance compared to the shallow
reservoir architecture. This is attributed to the hierarchical reservoir’s ability to
capture a broader range of temporal dynamics than the conventional reservoir [36].
To examine the nonlinear transformation necessary for the task, we explored
our work with a linear network to assess the network’s capacity to predict chaotic
time series. In this case, we multiplied our original inputs with the following random
scaling factors:
Xlinear = rand(0, 1) (10)
In the case of a linear network, there is no nonlinear transformation provided by
the reservoir. Figure 12 illustrates the predictions for the 1D cascaded logistic map
and the 2D cascaded H´enon map using a linear network. From these figures, it is
evident that nonlinear transformation and memory properties, which are supplied
by the memristive RC network, are necessary for addressing the chaotic time series
problem. Additionally, we have conducted chaotic time series prediction using the
Echo State Network (ESN) [48, 50]. Here, we utilized the same number of reservoir
nodes as in the conventional physical reservoir. Figure 13 displays the predictions
for the 1D cascaded logistic map and the 2D cascaded H´enon map using a linear
network. A summary of the performances of different RC networks is provided in
Table 1.1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using Hierarchical Reservoir Computing System 119
Fig. 12. The target vs. output signal results obtained by the linear network for cascaded 1D Logistic
map and cascaded 2D H´enon map.
Fig. 13. The target vs. output signal results obtained by Echo State Network for cascaded 1D
Logistic map and cascaded 2D H´enon map.
Table 1. Performance comparison on the different architecture of networks for 1D and 2D chaotic
time series prediction.
Architecture Logistic H´enon Cascaded Cascaded
Map Map Logistic Map H´enon Map
(NRMSE) (NRMSE) (NRMSE) (NRMSE)
ESN 0.01192 0.01301 1.07151 0.88426
Linear Network 1.27071 1.04781 1.30311 0.99117
Biomolecular Memristor:
Conventional RC 7.42×10−5 2.33×10−5 0.00109 0.00238
Wide RC 4.87×10−6 1.19×10−6 5.77×10−5 0.00055
Deep RC 4.96×10−6 9.66×10−6 3.95×10−4 0.00092
Solid State Memristor:
Conventional RC 2.096×10−6 0.00192 0.00137 0.07548
Wide RC 1.076×10−6 0.00012 6.278×10−5 0.01843
Deep RC 6.891×10−7 3.421×10−5 8.087×10−5 0.00313
6. Conclusion and Future Work
Memristor-based RC networks have garnered significant attention recently due to
their promising potential for chaotic time series prediction. In the present study, we120 Md. Razuan Hossain et al.
focused on predicting both 1D seed and cascaded logistic maps as well as 2D seed
and cascaded H´enon maps, utilizing a memristor-based RC network. These tasks
were selected to showcase the versatility and capability of the proposed system to
handle complex and nonlinear time series data.
Our results indicate that the memristor-based RC network offers a robust and
efficient platform for predicting chaotic time series. The intrinsic properties of mem￾ristors, such as short-term memory and nonlinearity, contribute to the network’s
improved performance. The incorporation of memristors in the RC network allows
for more efficient processing and storage of information, ultimately leading to better
prediction results.
Moreover, we have demonstrated that employing a hierarchical RC system can
further enhance prediction performance. This hierarchical approach takes advantage
of the inherent properties of the memristor, enabling more accurate and reliable pre￾dictions of chaotic time series. This finding underscores the importance of nonlinear
transformation in chaotic time series prediction, as it allows the system to adapt to
the complex dynamics of the input data.
In addition to these findings, we have identified several areas for future work.
One such area is implementing the software-based approach in hardware, enabling
real-time applications of the memristor-based RC network. By transitioning from
a software-based model to a hardware implementation, we expect to see significant
improvements in processing speed and power consumption, thereby increasing the
practicality of the system for a wide range of applications.
Another area for future research is the enhancement of prediction performance,
particularly for 2D maps. While our current results are promising, there is still
room for improvement. Potential strategies for enhancing prediction performance
may include the development of novel memristor-based architectures, optimizing
memristor properties, and incorporating advanced machine learning techniques.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates the promising potential of memristor￾based RC networks for chaotic time series prediction. By predicting 1D seed and
cascaded logistic maps and 2D seed and cascaded H´enon maps, we have shown
the versatility and capability of this approach. Furthermore, we have highlighted
the importance of nonlinear transformation and the benefits of a hierarchical RC
system in enhancing prediction performance. As we continue exploring the potential
applications and improvements for this technology, we are confident that memristor￾based RC networks will become an essential tool in chaotic time series prediction.
References
1. Mead C., Neuromorphic electronic systems, Proc. IEEE. 78(10):1629–1636, 1990.
2. Han S. H., Kim K. W., Kim S., Youn Y. C., Artificial neural network: understanding
the basic concepts without mathematics, Dement. Neurocogn. Disord. 17(3):83–89,
2018.
3. Appeltant L., Soriano M.C. et al., Information processing using a single dynamical
node as complex system, Nat. Comm. 2(1):1–6, 2011.1D and 2D Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using Hierarchical Reservoir Computing System 121
4. Schmidhuber J., Deep learning in neural networks: An overview, Neural Netw. 61:85–
117, 2015.
5. Schrauwen B., Verstraeten D., Van Campenhout, J., An overview of reservoir com￾puting: theory, applications and implementations, Proceedings of the 15th European
Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 471–482, 1990.
6. Verstraeten D., Schrauwen B. et al., An experimental unification of reservoir comput￾ing methods, Neural Netw. 20(3):391–403, 2007.
7. Maass W., Natschl¨ager T., Markram H., A model for real-time computation in generic
neural microcircuits, Adv. Neu. Info. Process. Syst. 15, 2002.
8. Hossain M. R. et al., Reservoir Computing System using Biomolecular Memristor,
IEEE 21st Int. Conf. on Nanotechnology pp. 116–119, 2021.
9. Chua L., Memristor-the missing circuit element, IEEE Trans. Circuit Theory 18(5):
507–519, 1971.
10. Strukov D. B., Snider G. S. et al., The missing memristor found, Nature 453(7191):80–
83, 2008.
11. Pershin Y. V., Di Ventra M., Neuromorphic, digital, and quantum computation with
memory circuit elements, Proc. IEEE 100(6):2071–2080, 2011.
12. Waser R., Aono M., Nanoscience and technology: a collection of reviews from nature
journals, World Scientific, pp. 158–165, 2010.
13. Yang J. J., Strukov D. B., Stewart D. R., Memristive devices for computing, Nat.
Nanotech. 8(1):13–24, 2013.
14. Prezioso M. et al., Training and operation of an integrated neuromorphic network
based on metal-oxide memristors, Nature 521(7550):61–64, 2015.
15. Sheridan P. M. et al., Sparse coding with memristor networks, Nat. Nanotech. 12(8):
784–789, 2017.
16. Indiveri, G. et al., Integration of nanoscale memristor synapses in neuromorphic com￾puting architectures, Nanotechnology 24(38):384010, 2013.
17. Thomas A., Memristor-based neural networks, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 46(9):093001,
2013.
18. Najem J.S., Memristive ion channel-doped biomembranes as synaptic mimics, ACS
Nano 12(5):4702–4711, 2018.
19. Zhong Y. et al., Dynamic Memristor-based reservoir computing for high-efficiency
spatiotemporal signal processing, Resear. Squ. 1–17, 2020.
20. Moon J. et al., Temporal data classification and forecasting using a memristor-based
reservoir computing system, Nature Electron. 2(10):480–487, 2019.
21. Zhuo Y. et al., A dynamical compact model of diffusive and drift memristors for
neuromorphic computing, Adv. Elec. Mat. 8(8):2100696, 2022.
22. Zhong Y., Tang J. et al., Dynamic memristor-based reservoir computing for high￾efficiency temporal signal processing, Nat. Commun. 12(1):1–9, 2021.
23. Strogatz S. H., Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with applications to physics, biology,
chemistry, and engineering, CRC Press, 2018.
24. Zhou Y., Hua Z. et al., Cascade chaotic system with applications, IEEE Trans. Cyber.
45(9):2001–2012, 2014.
25. Tian Y., Lu Z., NS-box: LL cascade chaotic map and line map, Ima. Graph., Springer,
Cham pp. 297–309, 2015.
26. Paul P. S. et al., Design of a low-overhead random number generator using CMOS￾based cascaded chaotic maps, Proceedings of Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, pp.
109–114, 2021.
27. Hasan M. S. et al., Design of a weighted average chaotic system for robust chaotic
operation, IEEE International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 954–
957, 2021.122 Md. Razuan Hossain et al.
28. Sadia M. et al., Design and application of a novel 4-transistor chaotic map with
robust performance, International Conference on Electronic Circuits and System, pp.
1–5, 2021.
29. Sadia M. et al., Design and analysis of a multi-parameter discrete chaotic map using
only three SOI four-gate transistors, SoutheastCon. pp. 1–7, 2021.
30. Hasan M. S. et al., Integrated circuit design of an improved discrete chaotic map by
averaging multiple seed maps, SoutheastCon. pp. 1–6, 2021.
31. Zhou Y., Bao L., Chen, C. P., Image encryption using a new parametric switching
chaotic system, Signal Process. 93(11):3039–3052, 2013.
32. Paul P. S. et al., Cascading CMOS-based chaotic maps for improved performance and
its application in efficient RNG design, IEEE Access 10:33758–33770, 2022.
33. d’Alessandro G. et al., On the topology of the H´enon map, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.
23(22):5285, 1990.
34. Falcolini C., Tedeschini-Lalli L., Backbones in the parameter plane of the H´enon map,
Chaos 26(1):013104, 2016.
35. Wen, H., A review of the H´enon map and its physical interpretations, School of Phy.
Georgia Ins. of Tech. pp. 30332–0430, Atlanta, GA, 2014.
36. Moon J., Wu Y., Lu W. D., Hierarchical architectures in reservoir computing systems,
Neuro. Comput. Eng. 1(1):014006, 2021.
37. Gauthier D. J. et al., Next generation reservoir computing, Nat. Comm. 12(1):1–8,
2021.
38. Appeltant L. et al., Constructing optimized binary masks for reservoir computing with
delay systems, Sci. Rep. 4(1):1–5, 2014.
39. Williams R. S., How we found the missing memristor, IEEE Spec. 45(12):28–35, 2008.
40. Hasan, M. S. et al., Biomimetic, soft-material synapse for neuromorphic computing:
from device to network, DCAS Conf., pp. 1–6, 2018.
41. Hasan, M. S. et al., Response of a memristive biomembrane and demonstration of
potential use in online learning, Nanotechnology Materials and Device Conference,
pp. 1–4, 2018.
42. Roli A., Melandri L., Introduction to Reservoir Computing Methods, 2013-2014.
43. Lukoˇseviˇcius M., Jaeger H., Reservoir computing approaches to recurrent neural net￾work training, Comput. Sci. Rev. 3(3):127–149, 2009.
44. Gallicchio C., Micheli A., Pedrelli L., Deep reservoir computing: A critical experimen￾tal analysis., Neurocomp. 268:87–99, 2017.
45. Malik Z. K. et al., Multilayered echo state machine: A novel architecture and algo￾rithm, IEEE Trans. Cybern. 47(4):946–959, 2016.
46. Gallicchio, C. et al., Design of deep echo state networks, Neural Netw. 108:33–47,
2018.
47. Ma Q. et al., DeePr-ESN: A deep projection-encoding echo-state network, Info. Sci.
511:152–171, 2020.
48. Rodan A., Tino P., Minimum complexity echo state network, IEEE Trans. Neur.
Netw. 22(1):131–144, 2010.
49. Herzfeld D. J., Beardsley, S. A., Neuromorphic electronic systems, J. Neu. Eng.
7(4):046012, 2010.
50. Cui H., Liu X., Li L., The architecture of dynamic reservoir in the echo state network,
Chaos 22(3):033127, 2012. 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0012 
123 
PCB Security Modules for 
Reverse-Engineering Resistant Design
Shuai Chen* and Lei Wang 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA *shuai.chen@uconn.edu
As the crisis of confidence and trust in overseas foundries arises, the industry and academic community 
are paying increasing attention to Printed Circuit Board (PCB) security. PCB, the backbone of any 
electronic system hardware, always draws attackers’ attention as it carries system and design informa￾tion. Numerous ways of PCB tampering (e.g., adding/replacing a component, eavesdropping on a trace 
and bypassing a connection) can lead to more severe problems, such as Intellectual Property (IP) 
violation, password leaking, the Internet of Things (IoT) attacks or even more. This paper proposes a 
technique of active self-defense PCB modules with zero performance overhead. Those protection 
modules will only be activated when the boards are exposed to the attacks. A set of PCBs with 
proposed protection modules is fabricated and tested to prove the effectiveness and efficiency of the 
techniques. 
1. Introduction 
An article from Bloomberg Businessweek in 2018 stupendously claimed that overseas 
foundries had developed back doors to servers built for Amazon, Apple and others by 
inserting millimeter-size chips into circuit boards, as shown in Fig. 1. The companies 
involved and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security have run deep examinations and 
refuted the claims in the article. 
Although those claims are proven to be inaccurate, the anxiety about hardware supply 
chain security swept the industry and academic community. People started to focus on the 
uncertainty of overseas foundries and tried to introduce authorization mechanisms or 
protections to secure the board and chips fabricated overseas [3, 4, 5]. 
Among all the electronic components fabricated overseas, PCBs are the most 
vulnerable because their large feature size makes them easy to be probed, brute force 
copied, or even revised for Trojan implantations and back door insertions. As a result, PCB 
design has been a place of no law for a long time. Competitors usually brute force copy a 
PCB for a shorter turn-around time (TAT) and lower design cost. In industry, the turn￾around time of copying a six layers board can be as low as 24 hours; and the cost of the 
*Corresponding author. 124 S. Chen & L. Wang 
Fig. 1. Illustration of PCBs Trojan. 
reverse engineering is usually marked as less than one cent per soldering point. Attackers 
can apply reverse engineering to PCBs to acquire the internal structure for further Trojan 
implantations or hacking actions. Also, as the metal traces in PCBs sometimes carry 
important design information, sensitive data, or critical control signals on a running device, 
attackers can eavesdrop, control, or disable the device. 
Due to the lack and inefficiency of IP protection mechanisms and techniques, designers 
implicitly agreed that the design logic in PCBs is unprotected from attackers and rivals for 
design copying and revisions, although the design always carries important design and 
system information. Those PCB-based attacks and tampering are discussed in Section 2. 
To deal with PCB hardware IP infringements, some countermeasures have been 
proposed. In [6], Paley and his co-authors introduced an active monitoring and prevention 
design for PCBs to defend against physical tampering. Piliposyan, Khursheed and Rossi 
also proposed a new power analysis method to detect alien components on a PCB, which 
can be regarded as a potential Hardware Trojan [7]. Yu designed an authentication system 
for PCBs to prevent counterfeits created by cloning or recycling [9]. In [10], the authors 
proposed a security module to protect circuit components from unauthorized access. Zhang 
introduced an authentication methodology to form a unique signature for each PCB, which 
can reflect the process variations in PCB traces and overall impedance using a PCBs Trace￾Based Ring Oscillator [11]. The ROPA can provide both IC and PCBs authentication 
independently of external equipment and allows remote authentication for the user. 
To the best of our knowledge, little effort has been made to counter PCB-level reverse 
engineering because the large feature size of PCBs’ metal traces makes it extremely easy 
for attackers to apply reverse engineering. 
Thus, this paper proposes a technique of active self-defense PCB modules based on 
transformable vias against reverse engineering. Those modules are realized by adding vias 
material pairs (magnesium (Mg) and magnesium oxide (MgO)) to the fabrication process 
of PCBs. Magnesium defines conducting vias, and magnesium oxide is regarded as a part 
of insulator vias for different metal layers. The mechanism will act from delayering through Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 125
imaging, during which Mg will be oxidized into MgO, and all the vias material pairs will 
be identified as MgO [17, 18, 14]. Thus, attackers are unable to distinguish MgO from Mg, 
which will lead to a routing pattern with extra metal traces. A specific application is to 
place extra metal traces near a high-frequency bus line. When attackers reverse-engineer 
the board and mis-identify the MgO vias as conductive vias, the extra metal traces will act 
as the receptor of the high-frequency metal trace to generate noise in the new routing 
pattern (see details in Sections 3 and 4). Note that since these extra metal traces are 
connected to the real circuit nodes (by MgO vias), attackers will not be able to detect them 
as non-functional.
The remainder of this paper is briefly organized as follows: Section 2 identifies the 
attack models. Sections 3 and 4 explain the design of transformable-based PCBs design 
and its feasibility. Section 5 presents the noise-generating model. Section 7 shows the 
experimental result of a fabricated PCB. Section 8 draws the conclusion. 
2. Attack Models 
2.1. PCBs Brute Force Copying 
Generally, the layout drawings or Gerber files, the design files for reproducing, are 
extracted via PCBs-level reverse engineering. The framework is shown in Fig. 4 as follows: 
(1) Bare PCBs can provide some physical information, e.g., physical sizes, number of 
layers and accurate test points. 
(2) Different methods will be conducted to acquire the layers’ images. Attackers 
sometimes destructively remove the material of each layer to image the routing patterns 
underneath. Figure 2 illustrates an example of a destructive method of delayering [12]. 
Other approaches for material removal include wet/plasma etching, grinding and 
polishing. Also, X-ray scanning can serve as a non-destructive method for imaging. 
Figure 3 is an illustration of X-ray images of PCBs. 
(3) Identify metal traces, vias and dielectric materials in the images. 
(4) Translate the information identified from the images into a CAD file. 
(5) Run DRC (Design Rule Check) to cancel any violation in the design file. 
(6) Output the Gerber design file for PCBs reproduction. 
Note that attackers can repeat each step listed above for a desirable result before the next 
steps. 
2.2. PCBs Hacking 
Altered component replacement: The schematic usually reflects the designer’s intent and 
logic most accurately. However, the circuit on the PCBs is much more complicated. A 
minor component variation on the board can cause serious problems, such as performance 
drop, overheating, or even power failure. 
Attackers can use a maliciously altered version of the component in production to 
expect damage. This attack is hard to detect as the counterfeit components look similar to 126 S. Chen & L. Wang 
the real ones. Here’s an example in Fig. 5, this pair of FT232RL USB to serial UARTs 
seems quite similar. Still, the one on the right is a counterfeit based on a mask￾programmable microcontroller and only works with older drivers [15] — a desirable result 
before the next steps. 
Additional components/Trojan Insertion: Hardware hacks might need the inclusion of 
an extra, surreptitious component. The framework of Trojan insertion using non￾destructive Imaging method is shown in Fig. 7. In that case, a spot on the board with many 
small components is the place to hide it. Modern passive components can be mere 
 
Fig. 2. Example of Destructive Imaging method. 
Fig. 3. Example of Non-Destructive Imaging method. Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 127
Fig. 4. PCB-Level Reverse Engineering Framework. 
Fig. 5. Normal Chip and Counterfeit Chip. 
millimeters in size and invisible to the unaided eyes. Here, the motherboard in Fig. 6 [13] 
is used as an example. The massive passive components area in Fig. 8(a) [13] can be the 
camouflage for Trojan or additional components. The report that triggered the commu￾nity’s anxiety, as shown in the figure, is an excellent example of Additional components/ 
Trojan Insertion. 128 S. Chen & L. Wang 
Fig. 6. Illustration of a Motherboard. 
Fig. 7. Example of Trojan Insertion Using Non-destructive Imaging Method. Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 129
 (a) (b) 
 (c) (d) 
 (e) 
Fig. 8. Tempting Targets of the Board for Hacking: (a) Massive Passive Components Area. (b) Power Controller 
of the Board. (c) Low Pin Count Bus of the Board. (d) BIOS Flash Memory of the Board. (e) Super I/O Chip of 
the Board. 
Taking control of and eavesdropping on certain data buses: Data buses usually carry 
important design and system information at runtime. Taking control of or eavesdropping 
on certain data buses means taking control of the whole system. Here, we still use Fig. 6(a) 
[13] as the example: 
(1) The Power Controller in Fig. 8(b) [13] is a particularly fruitful target because it 
controls all of the DC voltages that power the CPU, the graphics card and more. It is 
under the control of the System Management Bus. So, if a hack enables people to seize 
control of the SMBus, they could reset voltages to damage a computer or limit its 
operation. 
(2) The connector is attached to the LPC bus in Fig. 8(c) [13], which can link the CPU to 
specific legacy devices and the fans and physical switches on the chassis. Perhaps just 130 S. Chen & L. Wang 
as important to hackers, the LPC bus can connect to a secure microcontroller called a 
Trusted Platform Module (TPM), which deals with encryption keys and various other 
security functions. 
(3) The Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) flash memory in Fig. 8(d) [13] holds the data 
needed to initialize hardware during boot-up. It sits on the Serial Peripheral Interface 
(SPI) bus. Seizing control of the SPI bus would enable a hacker to alter hardware 
configurations so that a path would be open to inserting malicious code into the 
computer. 
(4) The Super I/O chip in Fig. 8(e) [13] controls the inputs to various low-bandwidth 
devices, sometimes including keyboards, the mouse, specific sensors, fans and floppy 
disks. The chip sits on the Low Pin Count (LPC) bus. Seizing control of the LPC bus 
could let hackers reduce the fan speed so that a computer will overheat. 
3. PCB Attacks and Reverse Engineering 
To our best knowledge, reverse engineering serves as the footstone of all the PCB attack 
models discussed in Section 2. 
In PCBs brute force copying, reverse engineering provides the attacker with exact 
physical information of the board to retrieve the Gerber files. In PCBs hacking, reverse 
engineering gives attackers insight into the schematic’s design logic when attackers apply 
altered component replacement attacks and additional components/Trojan Insertion 
attacks. Furthermore, attackers can gain physical information on the metal traces using 
reverse engineering for Additional components/Trojan Insertion and Taking control of and 
eavesdropping on certain data buses; those spatial position relations are critical for busline 
probes setups [16]. 
Especially for those boards with more than four layers, the layouts of each layer are 
critical for the attacker. However, the top layer and bottom layers are the natural protections 
for the layers in between. Reverse engineering is the only way for the attackers to revive 
the contents of those sandwiched layers. 
Our proposed technique is to create protection mechanisms for PCBs against reverse 
engineering, which will protect PCBs from all attacks. Note that there’s no way to stop the 
attackers from applying reverse engineering to the board as the boards are to be distributed. 
However, our protection mechanisms (see Section 3) can significantly introduce problems/ 
errors and create cost overheads for the attackers. 
4. Transformable-Vias Structure in PCBs 
Figure 9 shows that PCBs with more than two layers typically have three kinds of vias: 
through vias, buried vias and blind vias. The proposed technique exploits the “trans￾formable” property of the Mg/MgO pair as a countermeasure to PCBs’ reverse engineering. 
Buried vias material is replaced by Mg. MgO vias are deliberately placed in some locations 
with Cu metal traces. Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 131
Fig. 9. Cross-Section of a PCB. 
Note that the resistivity of Mg is 44.7 nΩꞏm, which displays excellent electrical 
conductivity. And MgO is a dielectric material with a resistivity larger than 1000 Ωꞏcm. 
[18]. Thus, Mg Via can serve as normal via material, and Cu traces connected by MgO will 
be disconnected from the circuit regularly. 
The layer imaging process will trigger the defense mechanism itself. 
Suppose attackers apply a destructive imaging method to the board. Mg buried vias 
will oxidize into MgO and blend with the deliberately placed MgO vias. In the following 
imaging process, the oxide film formed on Mg has a dense morphology at the nanoscale 
resolution. This will conceal the original morphology of Mg material. 
If attackers scan the PCBs with an X-ray, the best way to identify the presence and 
absence of material is to distinguish the brightness difference of the dielectrics and via 
material [1]. As shown in Fig. 10, the vias surrounded by bright shadows are those 
connected to theinterconnects, and those without the shadows are unconnected to the 
circuit. However, according to [19], little brightness difference between Mg and MgO is 
expected when exposed to X-ray. 
Fig. 10. Vias Identification of a PCB. 132 S. Chen & L. Wang 
This means the original non-conductive MgO vias will blend with Mg buried Vias and 
mislead the attacks to another routing pattern [20, 8] as those MgO will be identified as 
conductive vias. 
5. PCB Security Modules Using Transformable-Vias Structure 
This section gives a specific application of the misleading routing pattern after reverse 
engineering: the “extra metal traces” will increase the crosstalk between high-frequency 
signals. 
Fig. 11. Diagram of Crosstalk between Metal Traces Created by Transformable-vias. 
In Fig. 11, the blue and green metal traces are in the original design. The orange trace 
is the green trace protection module connected with MgO vias, which disconnects it from 
the working circuit. The orange trace is deliberately placed near the blue high-frequency 
signal trace. Once exposed to reverse engineering, the circuit will include the orange trace 
in the design. The blue metal trace(generator) will generate noise in the orange 
trace(receptor); the near-end and far-end voltage can be expressed as Equations (1) and (2): 
 𝑽𝑵𝑬ሺ𝒕ሻ ൌ 𝑹𝑵𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑳𝑮𝑹
𝑫𝑰𝑮
𝒅𝒕 ൅ 𝑹𝑵𝑬𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑪𝑮𝑹
𝑫𝑽𝑮
𝒅𝒕 , (1)Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 133
𝑽𝑭𝑬ሺ𝒕ሻ ൌ 𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑳𝑮𝑹
𝑫𝑰𝑮
𝒅𝒕 ൅ 𝑹𝑵𝑬𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑪𝑮𝑹
𝑫𝑽𝑮
𝒅𝒕 . (2) 
The generator is driven by Vs with the impedance RS and connected with a load resistor 
Rl; the far-end and near-end load resistors are RFE and RNE, respectively; IG is the current 
in the generator; mutual inductance and capacitance are modeled as LGR and CGR, 
respectively. 
As generator is the high-frequency signal trace, VG(t) and IG(t) can be expressed in 
Equations (3) and (4): 
𝑽𝑮ሺ𝒕ሻ ൌ 𝑹𝑳
𝑹𝑺ା𝑹𝑳
𝑽𝒔ሺ𝒕ሻ, (3)
𝑰𝑮ሺ𝒕ሻ ൌ 𝟏
𝑹𝑺ା𝑹𝑳
𝑽𝒔ሺ𝒕ሻ. (4)
Therefore, VNE (t) and VFE (t) are given as in Equations (5) and (6): 
𝑽𝑵𝑬ሺ𝒕ሻ ൌ ቀ 𝑹𝑵𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑳𝑮𝑹
𝟏
𝑹𝑺ା𝑹𝑳
൅ 𝑹𝑵𝑬𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑪𝑮𝑹
𝑹𝑳
𝑹𝑺ା𝑹𝑳
ቁ 𝒅𝑽𝒔ሺ𝒕ሻ
𝒅𝒕 , (5)
𝑽𝑭𝑬ሺ𝒕ሻ ൌ ቀെ 𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑳𝑮𝑹
𝟏
𝑹𝑺ା𝑹𝑳
൅ 𝑹𝑵𝑬𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑹𝑵𝑬ା𝑹𝑭𝑬
𝑪𝑮𝑹
𝑹𝑳
𝑹𝑺ା𝑹𝑳
ቁ 𝒅𝑽𝒔ሺ𝒕ሻ
𝒅𝒕 . (6)
Thus, intuitively, the higher the frequency signal in the generator, the higher the inductive 
and capacitive couplings will perform better protection modules. 
6. Eye Diagram Analysis and Q Factor 
We use Eye Diagram Analysis and Q Factor to evaluate the noise disturbance over the 
system. 
The eye diagram provides a visual indication of how noise might impact system 
performance, as shown in Fig. 12, where μ1 and μ1 mean values of the signal levels for a 
“0” and a “1”, and σ0 and σ1 represent the sum of the noise values at those two signal 
levels assuming Gaussian noise and the probability of a “0” and “1” transmission being 
equal. 
The Q factor can be expressed as Equation (7), which measures the quality of a 
transmission signal in terms of its signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). It considers physical 
impairments to the signal, which can degrade it and cause bit errors. 
𝑸 ൌ |𝝁𝟏ି𝝁𝟎|
𝝈𝟏ା𝝈𝟎
 . (7)
Q-Factor represents the quality of the SNR in the “eye” of a digital signal, the “eye” being 
the human eye-shaped pattern on an oscilloscope that indicates transmission system 
performance. The best place for determining whether a given bit is a “1” or a “0” is the 134 S. Chen & L. Wang 
sampling phase with the most significant “eye-opening.” The larger the eye-opening is, the 
more significant the difference between the mean values of the signal levels for a “1” and 
a “0” is. The more significant that difference is, the higher the Q factor and the better the 
BER performance. 
In the industry or practical circuit design, a system’s maximum Q factor must be 
smaller than 6% (raw BER of 109
) [2]. We will use the Q factor to evaluate the 
effectiveness of implanted protection modules in Section 4. 
Fig. 12. Eye Diagram Example. 
7. Experimental Results 
We fabricated and tested the PCBs with the protection modules to prove the effectiveness 
and efficiency of the proposed protection modules. The fabricated board is shown in 
Fig. 15. 
The board’s parameters are as follows: the core thickness is 1.5 mm, the metal trace 
width is 0.1778 mm, the minimum PCB trace spacing is 0.1778 mm, and the metal layer 
thickness is 0.075 mm. 
Here, we define the unprotected metal trace as the control group and the protected metal 
trace in the same physical parameters with protection modules as the protection group. 
Thus, the noise introduced by the protection modules can be measured as the difference 
between the protection and control groups. 
As discussed in Section 5, to maximize the noise introduced by the protection modules, 
we used switchback routings to maximize the inductive and capacitive couplings for the 
test, illustrated in Fig. 15. Note that switchback routing is usually used for signal integrity 
and signal delay adjustment in PCBs, which makes protections legitimate from the 
attackers’ perspective. 
During the test, the frequency of the protected signal and generator signals in the test 
is set to 10MHz and 3MHz–15MHz, respectively. Testing results are shown in Figs. 14, 
17 and 19. Significant noise can be observed in the figure. To better evaluate the noise 
introduced, we generated square waves using the sine waves in the protection groups and 
compared them with those generated from the control groups. The threshold voltage is set 
as 0.73VDD. Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 135
Figure 13 shows the schematic of Group 1 in Fig. 15. The protection metal traces are 
wired parallel to the protected trace. The square waves are shown in Fig. 14, and the Q 
factors are listed in Table 1. As mentioned in Section 6, the design with dummy metal 
length of 5.08 mm will fail with a Q factor larger than 6%. The protections with lengths of 
11.43 mm and 60.96 mm can significantly protect the information carried in the metal trace. 
Figure 16 shows the schematic of Group 2 in Fig. 15. The protection metal traces are 
wired vertically to the protected trace. The square waves are shown in Fig. 17, and the Q 
factors are listed in Table 2. All four lengths of protection will fail the system if attackers 
copy the board design. 
Figure 18 shows the schematic of Group 3 in Fig. 15. The protection metal traces are 
spirally wired in nearby layers to the protected trace. The square waves are shown in Fig. 
19 and the Q factors are listed in Table 3. All three lengths of protection will fail the system 
if attackers copy the board design. 
Fig. 13. Schematic of Group 1. 
Fig. 14. Results of Module 1 with Different Length. 136 S. Chen & L. Wang 
Table 1. Q factors of Module 1 
Dummy Metal length 0 5.08 mm 11.43 mm 60.96 mm 
Q factor 40.32% 8.3% 4.2% 3.8% 
Fig. 15. The PCBs Fabricated for Protection Module Testing. 
Fig. 16. Schematic of Group 2. 
Table 2. Q factors of Module 2 
Dummy Metal length 0 10.16 mm 17.78 mm 25.40 mm 40.46 mm
Q factor 40.32% 4.48% 3.80% 1.70% 1.45%Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 137
Fig. 17. Results of Module 2 with Different Length. 
Fig. 18. Schematic of Group 3. 
Table 3. Q factors of Module 3 
Dummy Metal length 0 20.32 mm 30.48 mm 45.72 mm
Q factor 40.32% 3.92% 3.20% 1.35%138 S. Chen & L. Wang 
Fig. 19. Results of Module 3 with Different Length. 
8. Conclusion 
Transformable vias (MgO vias and Mg vias) based self-defense modules for PCBs design 
and their feasibility has been elucidated. Protection modules using the crosstalk model to 
protect sensitive data are proposed and analyzed. The experimental result of the fabricated 
PCBs is presented. Future work will focus on more protection module development to 
cause different failures for attackers, such as power failure, Electro Magnetic Interference 
(EMI) failure, and overheating. 
References 
1. N. Asadizanjani, M. Tehranipoor and D. Forte, “PCB Reverse Engineering Using 
Nondestructive X-ray Tomography and Advanced Image Processing,” in IEEE Transactions on 
Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 292–299, Feb. 2017, 
doi:10.1109/TCPMT.2016.2642824. 
2. https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-O.201/en 
3. N. Vashistha, M. L. Rahman, M. S. U. Haque, A. Uddin, M. S. U. I. Sami, A. M. Shuo, P. 
Calzada, F. Farahmandi, N. Asadizanjani, F. Rahman and M. Tehranipoor, ToSHI-Towards 
Secure Heterogeneous Integration: Security Risks, Threat Assessment, and Assurance. 
Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2017. 
4. F. Ganji, S. Tajik, J. P. Seifert and D. Forte, Blockchain- enabled cryptographically-secure 
hardware obfuscation. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2019. 
5. V. Gohil, H. Guo and S. Patnaik, ATTRITION: Attacking Static Hardware Trojan Detection 
Techniques using Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2208.12897, 2022. 
6. S. Paley, T. Hoque and S. Bhunia, Active protection against PCB physical tampering. 2016 17th 
International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design (ISQED), Santa Clara, CA, 2016, pp. 
356–361, doi:10.1109/ISQED.2016.7479227. Anti-Reverse-Engineering PCB Design 139
7. G. Piliposyan, S. Khursheed and D. Rossi, “Hardware Trojan Detection on a PCB Through 
Differential Power Monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, 
doi:10.1109/TETC.2020.3035521. 
8. S. Chen and L. Wang, Reverse engineering resistant ROM design using transformable via￾programming structure. 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 
IEEE, 2016, pp. 2627–2630. 
9. A. Hennessy, Y. Zheng and S. Bhunia, JTAG-based robust PCB authentication for protection 
against counterfeiting attacks. 2016 21st Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference 
(ASP-DAC), Macau, 2016, pp. 56–61, doi:10.1109/ASPDAC.2016.7427989. 
10. M. T. Enevoldsen et al., Security module for protection circuit components from unauthorized 
access. U.S. Patent No. 10,009,995. 26 June 2018. 
11. D. Zhang, Q. Ren and D. Su, “A Novel Authentication Methodology to Detect Counterfeit PCB 
Using PCB Trace-Based Ring Oscillator,” in IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 28525–28539, 2021, 
doi:10.1109/AC- CESS.2021.3059100. 
12. J. Grand, Printed circuit board deconstruction techniques. 8th USENIX Workshop on Offensive 
Technologies (WOOT 14). 2014. 
13. S. H. Russ and J. Gatlin, “Ways to hack a printed circuit board: PCB production is an 
underappreciated vulnerability in the global supply chain,” in IEEE Spectrum, vol. 57, no. 9, 
pp. 38–43, 2020, doi:10.1109/MSPEC.2020.9173902. 
14. S. Chen and L. Wang, “Transformable electronics implantation in ROM for anti-reverse 
engineering,” in International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, vol. 28, no. 
03n04, p. 1940021, 2019. 
15. https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2021/06/chip-shortages-lead-to-more-counterfeit-chips-and￾devices/ 
16. J. S. Götte and B. Scheuermann, “Can’t touch this: Inertial HSMs thwart advanced physical 
attacks,” in IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pp. 69–
93, 2022. 
17. S. Chen, J. Chen and L. Wang, “A chip-level anti-reverse engineering technique,” in ACM 
Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems (JETC), vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–20, 
2018. 
18. S. Chen et al., “Chip-level anti-reverse engineering using transformable interconnects.” 2015 
IEEE International Symposium on Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI and Nanotechnology 
Systems (DFTS), IEEE, 2015. 
19. S. Durdu, A. Aytac and M. Usta, “Characterization and corrosion behavior of ceramic coating 
on magnesium by micro-arc oxidation, in Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 509, no. 34, 
pp. 8601–8606, 2011. 
20. W. Stark, S. Chen and L. Wang, “Reverse engineering protection using obfuscation through 
electromagnetic interference,” in International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 
vol. 31, no. 01n04, p. 2240003, 2022. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0013
141 
Next Generation RF Modules for 5G, IoT, AR/VR and RFID Applications 
Marvin Joshi*, Kexin Hu, Genaro Soto-Valle, Hani Al Jamal and Manos Tentzeris 
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, 
85 5th St NW, Atlanta, Georgia, 30308, USA *mjoshi5@gatech.edu 
The rapid development and deployment of 5G/mm-Wave technologies for communication, sensing 
and energy harvesting applications have been on the rise. Consequently, the need for low-cost, 
scalable, agile and compact RF modules has become more prominent than ever. This paper presents a 
review of recent efforts in utilizing additive manufacturing techniques such as inkjet printing to 
sustainably accelerate the massive deployment of 5G/mm-Wave. First, a novel flexible and massively 
scalable multiple-input, multiple-output (MIMO) tile-based phased array enabled by additively 
manufactured microstrip-to-microstrip transitions is presented. Next, a novel Rotman-Based harmonic 
mmID tag for Ultra-Long-Range localization is presented. Finally, low-power, low-cost mm-Wave 
backscattering modules for localization and orientation sensing are demonstrated. 
Keywords: Additive manufacturing; inkjet printing; packaging; machine learning; RFID; radar. 
1. Introduction 
Over the past decade, millimeter-wave (mm-Wave) communication and sensing have 
emerged as key technologies for a wide range of applications, including 5G wireless 
communication, smart cities, and industrial sensing. The use of mm-Wave frequencies 
offers several advantages over traditional communication frequencies, including higher 
bandwidths, lower interference, and more directional communication. However, the 
adoption of mm-Wave frequencies for communication and sensing has been limited by the 
high cost and complexity of traditional fabrication techniques for mm-Wave RF modules. 
Recently, additive manufacturing techniques such as inkjet printing have emerged as 
promising solutions for scalable, low-cost, highly-customizable and on-demand fabrication 
of 5G-enabled wireless devices. 
This paper provides a review of the latest state-of-the-art efforts in 5G/mm-Wave RF 
modules. Section 2 discusses a tile-based approach to fabricating phased arrays, enabling 
the realization of on-demand very large antenna arrays capable of conforming to practically 
any platform. Section 3 presents the use of a fully-passive dual Rotman-lens-based har￾monic mmID tag for ultra-long range localization, being able to maintain a large wide 
*Corresponding author. 142 M. Joshi et al. 
angular coverage. Finally, Section 4 discusses low-power backscattering RFID modules 
operating at mm-Wave frequencies to alleviate the limitations in localization and orienta￾tion accuracy due to limited bandwidth and the large system size of UHF tags. The paper 
is summarized and an outlook on future developments is presented in Section 5. 
2. Highly-Scalable Additively Manufactured Tile-Based Phased Array 
In recent years, emerging technologies such as 5G and mm-Wave have enabled high data 
rates, wideband operation, and low latency, making them ideal for future Internet of Things 
(IoT) and massive MIMO systems. To support these applications, large antenna arrays are 
necessary to provide adequate link budgets. However, traditional antenna arrays are bulky 
and heavy, which makes integration with various platforms of different sizes and shapes a 
challenge. Previous research designs have integrated the entire array in a multilayer rigid 
board of fixed size, which leads to high complexity and cost. To overcome the limitations 
in scalability and manufacturability, an additively-manufactured tile-based antenna array 
structure has been proposed [1]. This structure consists of small and lightweight unit-cell 
antenna arrays assembled into a large arbitrary-sized array by a tiling layer, as shown in 
Fig. 1. By inkjet printing planar phased arrays onto flexible substrates, the array shape can 
be customized and a flexible and scalable array can be built at a low cost. 
Fig. 1. Scalability demonstration of the tile-based phased array [1]. 
The single tile phased array comprises eight microstrip patch antenna elements and an 
Anokiwave Beamformer IC AWS-0102, with a center frequency of 19 GHz. The amplitude 
and phase of each antenna element are controlled by the serial peripheral interface (SPI) 
signals from the IC. The 4-tile array is controlled by four ICs simultaneously through a 
MATLAB program. Each tile has soldering pads for DC signal connection that can be 
transferred to the tiling layer. The tiling layer has a feedline with corporate feeding Next Generation RF Modules for 5G, IoT, AR/VR and RFID Applications 143
Fig. 2. Microstrip-to-Microstrip transition [1]. 
structure and a microstrip-to-microstrip transition is used to connect the RF signals from 
RF input to individual tiles. Figure 2 shows the cross-sectional view of the microstrip-to￾microstrip transition, which uses a GSG transition with two vias placed aside the 
transmission line, connecting ground planes of tiles and tiling layer. Square pads are added 
at the top of vias for soldering and better reliability. This structure has demonstrated low￾loss and wide-band transmission [2]. The tiling layer was inkjet printed on Rogers 3003 
substrate with SU8 dielectric ink, which is a photoresist polymer that can be cured using a 
UV crosslinker. The vias were made through drilling holes with a diameter of 0.2 mm and 
filling with silver paste. The assembly of the large array was completed by aligning and 
soldering all the soldering pads on both single tiles and the tiling layer. Header pins were 
soldered onto the tiling layer to provide DC power and SPI signals. The assembled proto￾type shown in Fig. 1 is very stable and can be conformally wrapped over a curved surface 
without any detachment of the tiles. 
The measured radiation pattern and beam steering results of the fabricated prototype 
are shown in Fig. 3, which were conducted in an anechoic chamber. The measured steering 
angle for both single tile and 4-tile phased arrays can reach 50 to 50 degrees with a 10 
dB side lobe level. The maximum realized gain is 16 dBi when 0 degree phased shift is 
applied. This tiled phased array can be extended to a larger array by simply adding more 
single tiles and printing a larger tiling layer. This design of additively-manufactured tiles 
and tiling layer is ideal for space-limited and power efficient 5G and satellite communi￾cation applications and mm-Wave Rx systems for multi-streaming with high throughput 
that require a large number of antenna arrays. 
3. Fully-Passive Rotman-Based Harmonic mmID Tag for Ultra-Long Range 
Localization and Wide Angular Coverage 
As the recent advances in mm-Wave/5G technologies become increasingly available, the 
expectation for Internet of Things (IoT) devices for ubiquitous sensing is dramatically 
growing. Billions of IoT devices are expected to be operating by 2025, which implies that 
an equivalent number of batteries are needed to support their correct functioning. This 
generates a serious concern about the environmental impact that these technologies could 
cause, therefore, energy-autonomous solutions are required for a sustainable development 144 M. Joshi et al. 
Fig. 3. Simulation and measurement results for a single tile phased array (a) and for the 2×2 tiles (“unit cell”) 
phased array (b) [1]. 
of the next generation of these wireless sensor networks. RFIDs are a highly favorable 
solution for energy-autonomous systems as they utilize the received electromagnetic signal 
to encode its sensing information and reflect it back to the reader, so they do not need to 
produce their own signal. Multiple types of RFIDs are available, namely, chip-based, chip￾less and harmonic-based RFIDs; the latter one providing an excellent tradeoff between 
complexity, reading range and encoding information. Recent works have proposed the use 
of a harmonic-based millimeter-wave Identification (mmID) tag for ultra-long range 
localization and wide-angular coverage by combining a Rotman lens design and a 
frequency-doubler circuit [3–5]. 
The Rotman lens is a passive beamforming network (BFN) that allows focusing the 
received power from an interrogating signal into specific beam ports depending on the 
signal's direction of arrival. In comparison to active beamforming networks, passive BFN’s 
do not rely on any active circuitry. The proposed mmID tag combines two BFNs, one 
operating at the interrogating signal of 14 GHz (f0) and the other operating at 28 GHz (2f0) 
for the backscattered signal. The mmID tag was fabricated on a Rogers 4350B substrate 
(ε = 3.55, tan δ = 0.027). Each of the Rotman lenses contains eight array ports and six 
beam ports, as shown in the diagram in Fig. 4(a). Each array port is connected to a linear 
microstrip patch array that operates either at f0 or 2f0. The angular coverage characteri￾zation of each of the Rotman lenses is shown in Figs. 4(b) and 4(c), demonstrating peak Normalized Gain (dBi
) Normalized Gain (dBi
)
-50 -33 -16 0 15 33 50
-52 -33-16 0 16 33 52
-150 -100 -50 0 50 100 150
-150
-135° Sim.
-135° Meas.
-90° Sim.
-90° Meas.
-45° Sim.
-45° Meas.
0° Sim.
0° Meas.
45° Sim.
45° Meas.
90° Sim.
90° Meas.
135° Sim.
135° Meas.
-100 -50 0
Steering angle (degrees)
(b)
(a)
50 100 150Next Generation RF Modules for 5G, IoT, AR/VR and RFID Applications 145
gains of 17 dBi and 15 dBi for 14 GHz and 28 GHz, respectively, and a 3 dB bandwidth of 
േ50 degrees. It can be noted that each of the beaming ports corresponds to a different angle 
of incidence. The frequency doubling is achieved by using a SMS201, flip-chip, Schottky 
diode (Macom), which provides high sensitivity and, therefore, higher conversion loss and 
more efficient passive harmonic generation. Three radial stubs are also utilized for 
matching network and for suppressing the f0 components from the doubler output. The 
conversion loss (CL) characterization of the doubler circuit is presented in Fig. 4(d), which 
shows that it can be operated at power inputs as low as 45 dBm. 
Fig. 4. (a) Diagram of the Rotman-based harmonic mmID. Characterization of gain and angular coverage for the 
Rotman lens operating at 14 GHz (b) and 28 GHz (c). Conversion loss of the doubler circuit (d) [3, 4]. 
The performance of the fully-assembled harmonic mmID tag was evaluated by 
measuring the harmonic radar cross-section (RCS) and the maximum reading range. The 
harmonic RCS was calculated using the equation 𝜎ோ஼ௌ,ଶ௙బ ൌ 𝐺௙బ𝐺ଶ௙బ, 𝜆ଶ௙బ
ଶ 𝐶𝐸@ହ୫/
ሺ4𝜋ሻ, where 𝐺௙బ, 𝐺௡௙బ, 𝜆௡௙బ and 𝐶𝐸@ହ୫, are the fundamental antenna gain, harmonic 
antenna gain, wavelength of the harmonic frequency, and conversion efficiency assumed 
to be 1 െ 𝐶𝐿 for the input power at 5 m from the reader. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the mmID 
demonstrates 10 dB beamwidth of േ50 with a maximum harmonic RCS of 35.8 dBsm, 
which means that the Rotman-based harmonic mmID can provide high detectability even 
at wide angular ranges. The peaks and nulls can be modified by varying the number of 
antenna ports and beam ports at the Rotman lens, however, this would reduce the angular 
coverage at the harmonic frequency. Figure 5(b) shows the received power spectral density 
from the mmID from 5 m to 65 m, utilizing an equivalent isotropic radiated power (EIRP) 
level of 51 dBm, demonstrating the ultra-long range capability of the system. Overall, 
these works have demonstrated the significant benefits of utilizing a dual Rotman 146 M. Joshi et al. 
Fig. 5. (a) Estimated angle-dependent harmonic RCS at 28 GHz and range of 5 m. (b) Measured received power 
spectral density of the fully-passive harmonic mmID at EIRP = 51 dBm [3, 4]. 
lens-based harmonic mmID tag, which are fully-passive operation, high sensitivity due 
to the use of a harmonic frequency reducing clutter and self-interference on the reader — 
and being able to provide high gain and wide angular coverage at very long range. 
Theoretically, by utilizing the maximum allowed EIRP of 75 dBm for 5G communications, 
the presented system would be able to operate at ranges in the order of kilometers. 
4. Low-Power mm-Wave Backscattering Modules for Localization and 
Orientation Sensing 
In recent times, the integration of Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)-based tech￾nologies in the Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystem has increased considerably. As they 
allow for a low-cost, highly efficient solution, RFID tags have been used for various IoT 
applications involving wireless sensing and localization. However, these devices operate 
primarily operate in the Ultra High Frequency (UHF) band, which naturally has limitations 
in localization accuracy, due to available operational bandwidth, and large overall system 
size. Thus, to overcome these limitations, the shift up to millimeter-wave (mm-Wave) 
frequencies is presented in [6]. The proposed RFID, designed to operate in the 60 GHz 
band, was additively manufactured on Rogers 3003 (ϵr = 3.0, tan(δ) = 0.0010) with 
thickness of 0.127m and can be viewed in Fig. 6. By utilizing Frequency-Modulated 
Continuous Wave (FMCW) reader, the compact tag was able to achieve highly accurate 
ranging up to 0.5 m, as the average ranging error is displayed in Fig. 7. 
Fig. 6. Proposed 60 GHz RFID tag [6]. Next Generation RF Modules for 5G, IoT, AR/VR and RFID Applications 147
Fig. 7. Ranging accuracy of RFID system [6]. 
Along with IoT integration, millimeter-wave identification (mmID) tags are a low-cost 
solution for VR/AR applications. As accurate localization is important for these appli￾cations, the ability to track and detect the orientation of an object has equal importance. In 
[7], a low-power mm-Wave mmID system for rotational sensing is proposed. Operating at 
24.125 GHz, the mmID tag, which can be viewed in Fig. 8, has an overall size of 43 mm 
25 mm and was fabricated on RO4350B substrate (ϵr = 3.66, tan δ = 0.0037). The RF front 
end of the tag consists of four antennas, each of which is cross-polarized to improve self￾interference rejection, and a low noise FET for modulation. To control the modulation 
and power the tag, the baseband circuit consists of a 3 V coin cell battery, a low-power 
oscillator (LTC6906) and a 1.8 V voltage regulator. By integrating a polarization offset 
between successive antenna elements, as the tag is rotated about the z-axis, each channel 
will have a different backscattered response which allows for angular ambiguities to be 
resolved. To avoid harmonic interference, channels A to D had a modulation frequency of 
49 kHz, 69 kHz, 85 kHz and 110 kHz, respectively. By extracting the amplitude response 
from each channel as the tag rotates about the z-axis, a k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) machine 
learning algorithm is used to predict the orientation of the tag. Figure 9 shows the ultra￾high accuracy of the model when the tag is at a distance of 0.625 m, as a mean error of 
0.029° was achieved. 
Fig. 8. Schematic of the proposed 24 GHz mmID tag [7]. 148 M. Joshi et al. 
Fig. 9. Performance of orientation detection model at range = 0.625 m [7]. 
5. Conclusion 
This paper has reviewed state-of-the-art 5G/mm-Wave RF modules for 5G, IoT and 
AR/VR applications. The use of additive manufacturing was shown in the development of 
a tile-based phased array, as well as mmID tags for localization applications. Additionally, 
a novel mm-Wave harmonic mmID tag capable of ultra-long-range localization and wide￾angular coverage was presented. These advances in mm-Wave RF modules combined with 
the use of additive manufacturing technologies have allowed for a low-cost, highly scalable 
solution superior to existing technologies. 
References 
1. K. Hu, G. Soto-Valle, Y. Cui and M. M. Tentzeris, “Flexible and Scalable Additively 
Manufactured Tile-Based Phased Arrays for Satellite Communication and 50 mm Wave 
Applications,” 2022 IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave Symposium - IMS 2022, Denver, 
CO, USA, 2022, pp. 691-694, doi: 10.1109/IMS37962.2022.9865337. 
2. K. Hu, X. He and M. M. Tentzeris, “Flexible and Scalable Additively Manufactured 
Antenna Array Tiles for Satellite and 5G Applications Using A Novel Rugged Microstrip-to￾Microstrip Transition,” 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation 
and USNC-URSI Radio Science Meeting (APS/URSI), Singapore, Singapore, 2021, pp. 37-38, 
doi: 10.1109/APS/URSI47566.2021.9704748. 
3. C. A. Lynch, A. O. Adeyeye, A. Eid, J. Hester and M. M. Tentzeris, “Ultra-Long-Range Dual 
Rotman Lenses-based Harmonic mmlD’s for 5G/mm-Wave loT Applications,” 2022 IEEE/ 
MTT-S International Microwave Symposium - IMS 2022, Denver, CO, USA, 2022, pp. 32-35, 
doi: 10.1109/IMS37962.2022.9865357. 
4. C. Lynch, A. O. Adeyeye, A. Eid, J. G. D. Hester and M. M. Tentzeris, “5G/mm-Wave Fully￾Passive Dual Rotman Lens-Based Harmonic mmID for Long Range Microlocalization Over 
Wide Angular Ranges,” in IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 71, 
no. 1, pp. 330-338, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TMTT.2022.3227925. Next Generation RF Modules for 5G, IoT, AR/VR and RFID Applications 149
5. A. Eid, J. G. D. Hester and M. M. Tentzeris, “Rotman Lens-Based Wide Angular Coverage 
and High-Gain Semipassive Architecture for Ultralong Range mm-Wave RFIDs,” in IEEE 
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1943-1947, Nov. 2020, 
doi: 10.1109/LAWP.2020.3002924. 
6. C. A. Lynch, A. O. Adeyeye, J. G. D. Hester and M. M. Tentzeris, “When a Single Chip becomes 
the RFID Reader: An Ultra-low-cost 60 GHz Reader and mmID System for Ultra-accurate 2D 
Microlocalization,” 2021 IEEE International Conference on RFID (RFID), Atlanta, GA, USA, 
2021, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/RFID52461.2021.9444319. 
7. A. Adeyeye, C. Lynch, J. Hester and M. Tentzeris, “A Machine Learning Enabled mmWave 
RFID for Rotational Sensing in Human Gesture Recognition and Motion Capture Applica￾tions,” 2022 IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave Symposium - IMS 2022, Denver, CO, USA, 
2022, pp. 137-140, doi: 10.1109/IMS37962.2022.9865432. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0014 
151 
Fabrication of Multi-Bit SRAMs Using Quantum Dot Channel (QDC)- 
Quantum Dot Gate (QDG) FET 
Raja Hari Gudlavalleti, Jacques Goosen, Tao Liu, Hunter Bradley, Elisa Parent, 
Abdulmajeed Almalki, Erik Perez and Faquir Jain*
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
371 Fairfield Way, Unit 4157, Storrs, CT 06268, USA *faquir.jain@uconn.edu 
This paper presents fabrication of multi-state inverters incorporating SiOx-cladded Si quantum dot in 
the channel and gate region of driver, load, and access transistors. Experimental characteristics are 
presented exhibiting 3-state behavior in Quantum-dot Channel (QDC)-Quantum-dot Gate (QDG) 
FETs having Si quantum dots. It is shown that QDC-QDG-FETs-based enhancement mode inverter 
configurations are the building blocks of a multi-bit static random access memory (SRAM). QDC￾QDG-FETs exhibiting four states can also be used to implement compact 4-state logic and nonvolatile 
memories or random access nonvolatile memories. 
Keywords: Quantum dots; QDG; QDG-inverter; QDC-QDG FET fabrication. 
1. Introduction 
Quantum dots in the channel region, such as Quantum Dot Channel (QDC) FET, and on 
the gate dielectric, such as Quantum Dot Gate (QDG) FET, exhibited intermediate states, 
which have been reported in the literature [1, 2]. Unlike conventional MOSFET which 
exhibits two states (logic ‘0’ and logic ‘1’) in digital logic circuits, the QDG- and QDC￾FETs due to more intermediate states can increase the processing capability and allow us 
to create new logic architectures. The number of intermediate states in the device can be 
increased by having QDs in both channels and on the gate dielectric within the same device, 
called QDC-QDG FET. This paper, therefore, discusses the fabrication and further 
demonstrates the experimental results. 
2. QDC-QDG-FET Schematic and Theory 
2.1. Device Cross-section 
The schematic cross-section of QDC-QDG-FET is shown in Fig. 1. In comparison to 
conventional n-MOS devices, the channel region of the QDC-QDG-FET is recessed and 
SiOx-Cladded Si Quantum dots (QDs) are self-assembled. The upper layer of SiOx-Si 
*Corresponding author. 152 R. H. Gudlvalleti et al. 
Quantum-dots (QDs) is oxidized at 825°C which acts as a tunnel oxide layer. Then, the 
top two layers of quantum dots are self-assembled in the gate region. The metal layer is 
deposited that acts as the gate contact layer. Figure 2 shows the energy band diagram of 
the QDC-QDG-FET across the gate region of the device. EC, EV and EF represent the 
conduction, valency and fermi levels of the p-type silicon (from the left side of the figure). 
The SiOx-cladded Si quantum dot has cladded and core regions with 4 nm and 0.5 nm 
thickness, respectively. The SiOx-cladded region has energy band separation of 8.9 eV 
Fig. 1. Schematic cross-section of SiOx-Cladded Si Quantum-dot Channel (QDC)-SiOx-Cladded Si Quantum￾dot Gate (QDG) field-effect transistor (FET). 
Fig. 2. The energy band diagrams for SiOx-Cladded Si QDC-QDG-FET. Fabrication of Multi-Bit SRAM Using QDC-QDG FET 153
and core region has an energy band separation of 1.1 eV, as shown represented in Fig. 2. 
However, the top of the two layers of the SiOx-Si quantum dots in the channel region is 
oxidized, hence a thickness of ~1–2 nm is shown in Fig. 2. 
2.2. Theory 
The array of quantum dots in a QD layer, in the channel and gate regions, forms discrete 
mini-bands as the wavefunction in one quantum dot overlaps with another due to the thin 
cladding layer. The intermediate state in the QDC-QDG-FET is manifested due to 
tunneling of electrons from the inversion layer into the mini-energy sub-bands formed by 
the quantum dot layers, which forms a quantum dot superlattice (QDSL). The tunneling 
probability has been reported before [3]. 
. (1)
The electron transfer in the gate region increases the threshold voltage and results in an 
intermediate state. Finally, when the gate voltage is increased, electrons occupying the 
mini-energy sub-bands of QDSL are transferred to the gate and FET returns to the ON 
state. This formation of the intermediate state can also be observed via the characteristic 
equations of the drain current for the QDG-FET given in (3). 
, (2)
. (3)
where µn is the electron mobility, Cox is the gate capacitance, W is the width, L is the length 
of the device, respectively, VGS is the gate voltage, VDS is the drain voltage and VTeff is the 
effective threshold voltage. For a particular gate voltage range, charges begin to tunnel 
from the channel into the quantum dots via Fowler–Nordheim tunneling, which causes the 
drain current to become essentially invariant to the change in gate. The effective voltage 
that describes this occurrence is comprised of two parts, namely1
 
 (4) 
where VTH is the threshold voltage of a conventional n-MOS FET and ΔVTH is the modified 
threshold voltage as described below1
: 
 (5) 
where XQD refers to the distance between the core of the quantum dots and the gate contact, 
n refers to the number of quantum dots in the layer, xg is the distance between the interface 
𝑃𝑤→𝑑 ൌ 4𝜋
ℏ ෍|〈𝜓𝑑 |𝐻𝑡|𝜓𝑤 〉|
2ሺ𝑓𝑤 െ 𝑓𝑑 ሻ𝛿ሺ𝐸𝑑 െ 𝐸𝑤 ሻ
𝑤,𝑑
𝑉𝑇,𝑄𝐷 ൌ 𝑉𝑇 ൅ Δ𝑉𝑇
𝑉𝑇,𝑄𝐷 ൌ 𝑉𝑇 െ 𝑞
𝑐𝑜𝑥 ቈ෍𝑥𝑄𝐷1𝑛1𝑁𝑄𝐷1
𝑥𝑔
൅ ෍𝑥𝑄𝐷2𝑛2𝑁𝑄𝐷2
𝑥𝑔
቉
𝐼𝐷,𝑙𝑖𝑛 ൌ 𝜇𝐶𝑜𝑥
𝑊
𝐿 ൭൫𝑉𝐺𝑆 െ 𝑉𝑇,𝑄𝐷൯𝑉𝐷𝑆 െ 𝑉𝐷𝑆
2
2 ൱
𝑉𝑇𝑒𝑓𝑓 ൌ 𝑉𝑇𝐻 ൅ ∆𝑉𝑇𝐻
∆𝑉𝑇𝐻 ൌ െ 𝑞
𝐶𝑜𝑥 ቈ෍𝑥𝑄𝐷1𝑛1𝑁𝑄𝐷1
𝑥𝑔
൅෍𝑥𝑄𝐷2𝑛2𝑁𝑄𝐷2
𝑥𝑔
቉154 R. H. Gudlvalleti et al. 
of the gate dielectric and the substrate to the gate contact, and NQD is the charge in each 
dot, which involves the probabilistic tunneling of charges through the QDSL. 
3. Fabrication 
The fabricated FET array is shown in Fig. 3(a) and an inset in Fig. 3(b) shows the individual 
device. The device was fabricated on p-Si substrate. The p-Si samples had a field oxide of 
~1200Å grown on them utilizing a wet oxidation process. The process steps from growing 
the field oxide proceeded as follows: (1) diffusing n-type impurities to create the source 
and drain wells, (2) exposing the gate region and growing a ~40Å SiO2 layer via a dry 
thermal oxidation process, (3) creating a recess in the channel region, (4) depositing and 
annealing two layers of Si quantum dots in the channel region via the bottom-up self￾assembly method, (5) oxidizing the top layer of the Si quantum dots at 825°C, (6) 
depositing and annealing two layers of Si quantum dots on the gate via the bottom-up self￾assembly method, (7) opening the contact regions and depositing ~1000Å of gold and 
(8) etching the excess metal and annealing. The annealing of the Si quantum dots after the 
self-assembly is done at 750°C. 
4. Results and Discussion 
4.1. Experimental Results 
The experimental results, ID-VG for the fabricated device shown in Fig. 3(b), are shown in 
Fig. 4. The step-like characteristics in the figure show that intermediate states appear due 
to multiple thresholds in the device, which are formed due to mini-energy bands in SiOx￾Cladded Si QDs in the channel and gate region of the QDC-QDG-FET. 
Fig. 3(b). n-QDC-QDG FET. The cir￾cled device in the photograph is tested. 
The aspect ratio of the device is (26µm/
25µm). 
Fig. 3(a). Fabricated n-QDC-QDG-FET device array. Fabrication of Multi-Bit SRAM Using QDC-QDG FET 155
Fig. 4. The output characteristics of the SiOx-Cladded Si QDC-QDG-FET. The threshold values for the FET are 
~1V, 1.2V and 1.8V, with an intermediate state holding at ~1.2V, and ~2.3V. 
4.2. Discussion 
The QDC-QDG FET shown in Fig. 1 can be used to implement an nMOS enhancement 
type inverter. M1 and M2 shown in Fig. 5 form a multistate QDC-QDG-FET-based 
inverter. The inverter can further be utilized to an SRAM when inverters are connected in 
back-to-back configuration with access transistors M5 and M6, as shown in Fig. 5. A 
multibit SRAM would increase the storage density. 
Fig. 5. QDC-QDG-FET-based multibit SRAM. 156 R. H. Gudlvalleti et al. 
5. Conclusion 
In this work, the 4-state capabilities of the QDC-QDG-FET were demonstrated using 
SiOx-cladded Si QD layers with different core diameters in the recessed channel and on 
the gate oxide of the transistor. Unlike the conventional approach of gate dielectric 
deposition or device, the gate oxide layer is formed by oxidizing the top layer of the Si QD 
layers in the recessed channel region. The presence of four states demonstrated in the 
experimental characteristics can further be utilized in the development of logic and 
memory circuits with multistate processing and storage capability, respectively. The logic 
circuits with n-QDC-QDG-FET only would have static current during operation and hence, 
research towards the development of p-QDC-QDG-FET is under progress. 
In conclusion, these devices show potential in the development of advanced archi￾tectures for high-speed processing and multibit storage in volatile/non-volatile memory 
devices [4]. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
for the lab support. We would like to thank Dr. Ron LaComb for metal deposition on the 
device. 
References 
1. F. C. Jain, E. Heller, S. Karmakar, and J. Chandy, Device and circuit modeling using novel 3-
state quantum dot gate FETs, 2007 International Semiconductor Device Research Symposium, 
2007, pp. 1-2.
2. M. Lingalugari, K. Baskar, P.-Y. Chan, P. Dufilie, E. Suarez, J. Chandy, E. Heller, and F.C. Jain, 
Novel multi-state quantum dot gate FETs using SiO2 and lattice-matched ZnS-ZnMgSZnS as 
gate insulators, Journal of Electronic Materials, 42(11), 3156-3163 (2013).
3. P.-Y. Chan, M. Lingalugari, E. Heller, and F. Jain, An investigation on quantum dot superlattice 
(QDSL) diode, International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 23(01n02), 
1420004 (2014). 
4. F. Jain, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, B. Saman, P.-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, M. Lingalugari, and E. 
Heller, Quantum dot channel FETs harnessing mini-energy band transitions in GeOx-Ge and Si 
QDSL for multi-bit computing, International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 
31(01n04), 2240012 (2022).  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0015 
157 
Enhancing Number of Bits Via Mini-Energy Band Transitions Using Si Quantum 
Dot Channel (QDC) and Ge Quantum Dot Gate (QDG) FETs and NVRAMs 
F. Jain*,§, R. H. Gudlavalleti*, A. Almalki*
, B. Saman†, P-Y. Chan*, J. Chandy*
, 
F. Papadimitrakopoulos* and E. Heller‡
*University of Connecticut, CT, USA 
†Taif University, Saudi Arabia
‡Synopysis Inc., Ossining, NY, USA 
§faquir.jain@uconn.edu 
This paper presents multi-state QDC-QDG FET structures that has the potential to introduce additional 
states (8 or 16) by utilizing additional mini-energy sub-bands. Mini-energy bands are formed in Si 
quantum dot channel (QDC) comprising two silicon oxide cladded Si quantum dots (QDs). Quantum 
simulations are presented to show more states when additional two germanium oxide cladded Ge dots 
are added on top of two Si QD layers in the gate region. With the addition of a control gate oxide layer, 
we transform the QDC-QDG-FET into a quantum dot (QD) nonvolatile random access memory 
(NVRAM). Quantum simulations are presented. 
Keywords: Quantum dot FETs; multi-state FETs; QD-NVRAMs; 16-state FETs. 
1. Introduction 
Cladded Si Quantum dot channel (QDC) FETs incorporating Si Quantum dot gate layers 
have been reported to experimentally exhibit distinct 4-state ID-VD and ID-VG charac￾teristics [1]. In addition to ON and OFF, two intermediate states are attributed to carrier 
transfer in the inversion layer mini-energy sub-bands manifested in QDC due to the 
formation of quantum dot superlattice (QDSL) shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b). 
Figure 2(a) shows schematic of a spatial wavefunction switched (SWS) FET and Fig. 
2(b) shows the conduction in lower and upper channels for a fabricated device exhibiting 
4-states [2]. 
Unlike, SiOx-cladded Si quantum dots, the GeOx-cladded Ge dot form mini-energy 
bands are separated by smaller energies and hence have the potential of manifesting 
additional logic states in SWS-QDC-QDG-FETs and QDC-QDAC-NVRAMs. 
Figure 3(a) shows the computed mini-energy bands in quantum dot superlattice formed 
by 4nm Ge quantum dots with 0.5nm GeOx cladding. Figure 3(b) depicts the density of 
states (DOS). Figure 3(c) shows the carrier density as a function of Fermi level location for 
§Corresponding author. 158 F. Jain et al. 
direct gap mini-energy sub-bands for 4nm, 5nm, and 6nm GeOx-cladded Ge quantum dots. 
Carrier density for indirect and direct mini-energy gap sub-bands has also been reported 
[3]. 
Recently, we reported [3] an 8-state SWS-QDC-based sub-9nm FET using two Ge 
quantum dot channels (QD2 and QD1) shown in Fig. 4. The occupation of mini-energy 
bands is listed in terms of wavefunction location in lower or upper channel, and various 
sub-bands fully or partially occupied and enabling current conduction. 
This paper presents multi-state QDC-QDG and QD-NVRAM structures that have the 
potential to introduce more than 8 states by utilizing additional mini-energy sub-bands in 
the channel and gate regions. This is presented next in Section 2. 
    (a) (b) 
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of QDC-QDG FET. (b) ID-VD characteristics showing distinct characteristics as a function 
of gate voltage. 
 
 (a) (b) 
Fig. 2. (a) Schematic of 2-Si quantum dot channel SWS-NMOS. Deep drain D2 is connected to QC2 comprising 
of lower most two QD layers, and shallow drain D1 is connected to QC1, upper QD layers. (b) ID-VD charac￾teristics of 2-QD channel SWS-NMOS. 
‐0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3
ID [mA]
VD [V]
ID(VG=1.0V) I4(VG=1.0V)
ID(VG=1.5V) I4(VG=1.5V)
ID(VG=2.0V) I4(VG=2.0V) Deep Drain
Shallow Drain
‐0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
1 1.5 2 2.5 3
ID [mA]
VD [V]
I4(VG=1.0V)
I4(VG=1.5V)
I4(VG=2.0V)
Shallow Drain
Deep Drain Shallow DrainEnhancing Number of Bits Via QDSL Mini-Energy Band Transitions 159
 
(a) (b) 
(c) 
Fig. 3. (a) Energy band diagram of GeOx (barrier/cladding 0.5nm) – Ge quantum dot (4nm) QDSL. (b) Density 
of states (DOS) in sub-bands in Ge QDSL. (c) Simulated carrier density in direct mini-energy sub bands. 
 
Fig. 4. GeOx-Ge QDC-FET with two-quantum dot channels QD2 and QD1. The listing shows the mini-energy 
sub-band transport states enabling current flow and wavefunction switching from QD2 to QD1. 160 F. Jain et al. 
2. Integrating Additional Oxide Cladded Ge Quantum Dot Layers in the 
Gate Region 
In this section, schematic of a QDC-QDG-FET structure is shown in Fig. 5(a). QDC-QDG￾FET builds on experimentally reported QDC-QDG FET [Fig. 1(a)] with two Ge QD layers 
in the gate region. Figure 5(b) presents the quantum simulations. We envision 4 Ge QD 
layers on Si QD layers in the gate region, which will permit additional states (e.g. 16). 
 
(a) (b) 
Fig. 5. (a) Asymmetric SiOx-cladded Si quantum dot channel with Si and Ge QD layers in the gate region. 
(b) Simulation results indicate the wavefunction is bound to the top Ge QD layers. (RIGHT)
Figure 5(a) QDC-QDG structure could be modified by incorporating two quantum dot 
channels as shown in Fig. 2(a). Here, we have two symmetric and two asymmetric Si QD 
layers forming SWS-QDC-FET. In addition, it can be further expanded by having two 
symmetric Si QD layers, and two Ge QD layers forming quantum dot gate (QDG) is shown 
in Fig. 5(a). Variation of Ge QD and Si QD diameters as well as cladding oxide thickness 
will influence the location of wavefunction in QDG. 
Simulation of the energy bands, such as that in Fig. 5, was performed by solving the 
Poisson equation (1) and the Schrödinger equation (3), self-consistently [4, 5]. 
( )( ) QM D A   qn n N N p          (1) 
In equation (1), is the permittivity,  is the electrostatic potential, and nQM is the 2D 
electron gas in the quantum well layers. Also, n and p are the 3D electron and hole con￾centrations, respectively. Lastly, ND+ and NA
-
 are the ionized donor and acceptor concen￾trations, respectively. The 2D carrier concentration, nQM,, is expressed by equation (2), 
where EF is the Fermi level, En denotes the eigen energies of the bound states, and n
denotes the corresponding wavefunctions. Finally,  is the Heaviside Step function. 
2
2
* ( )ln 1 exp | | f n B QM F n n
n
m E E
n kT E E
kT 

                  (2) Enhancing Number of Bits Via QDSL Mini-Energy Band Transitions 161
The Schrödinger equation provides the En and n for a given potential energy profile V, 
which is a function of position along the heterostructure. V, is defined by the individual 
material properties of each layer, such as energy gap and electron affinity, plus the 
electrostatic potential, , from the Poisson equation. These equations are solved iteratively 
until a self-consistent solution is determined. 
2 1 ( )0 2 * nn n E V
m
 
          
 (3) 
The QDSL band structure and density of states (DOS), such as those in Fig. 3, were 
determined by approximating the quantum dots as 3D cuboids, and solving the Schrödinger 
equation (3), by applying Kronig Penny (K-P) model. In this case, V (eqn 4), is the potential 
profile due to differences between the QD core and cladding properties, and each, E(q) 
(eqn 5), is the energy solution of the K-P characteristic equation, for each direction, at 
wavevector q [6]. 
() () () () Vr V x V y V z  XY Z (4) 
() ( ) ( ) ( ) Eq E q E q E q   X X YY ZZ (5) 
Finally, the DOS was determined by integrating the band structure over the 1st Brillouin 
Zone. 
The simulation parameters are listed in Table 1. The yellow highlighted HfO2 and GeOx
cladding and Ge QD core layers are for QD-NVRAM structure shown in Fig. 6(a). 
3. QD-NVRAM with Asymmetric SiOx-Si QDC for Additional States 
Figure 6(a) QD-NVRAM with asymmetric SiOx-cladded Si quantum dot channel and Si 
QD floating gate and Ge quantum dot access channel (QDAC). 
p-Si
S
QD floating gate
G
Word Line
DE
High-Speed Erase Line
n+
 Drain DE
DW
Supply
n+
Source S
QDAC
GOL
Si QDC
n+
Drain DW
Bit Line
 
 (a) (b) 
Fig. 6. (a) QD-NVRAM with asymmetric SiOx-cladded Si quantum dot channel and Si QD floating gate and Ge 
quantum dot access channel (QDAC). (b) Wavefunction transfer to Ge QD floating gate layer adjacent to HfO2
gate. 162 F. Jain et al. 
The parameters used in quantum simulations of QD-NVRAM of Fig. 6(a) are shown 
in Fig. 6(b). Here, the gate region over the floating gate comprises germanium oxide 
cladding layer and HfO2 layers serving as control gate oxide. The QDAC part does not 
have HfO2 layer and thus permits fast erase via dedicated drain D2 similar to prior reporting 
[7]. Two-dimensional SiOx-cladded Si and GeOx-cladded Ge Quantum Dot Arrays 
vertically stacked for CMOS-X Logic, SRAMs, NVRAMs and IR imaging and multi-bit 
Computing have been recently reported [8]. 
Table 1. Parameters used in quantum simulations. 
Layer Thick 
(um) 
Chi 
(eV) 
Eg 
(eV) 
me mh er Nd 
(cm−3
) 
Na 
(cm−3
) 
HfO2 0.0050 2.05 5.7 0.16 0.50 13.7 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0010 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core 0.0040 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0020 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core 0.0040 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0010 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core 0.0040 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0020 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core 0.0040 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0010 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
SiOx clad 0.0005 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD 0.0045 4.15 
SiOx clad 0.001 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD 0.0050 4.15 
SiOx clad 0.0005 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
SiOx clad 0.0015 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD 0.0045 4.15 
SiOx clad 0.0010 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD 0.0050 4.15 
.SiOx clad 0.0005 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
 Si 0.5000 4.15 1.12 0.19 0.49 11.9 0.0e00 1.0e16 
4. QDC-FETs on Poly-Si Thin Film and Potential to Implement 
3D FETs and NVMs 
We reported [1] the experimental data of QDC-FET fabricated on poly-Si layer. The QDC￾FET cross-sectional schematic is shown in Fig. 7(a). The ID-VD and ID-VG characteristics 
are shown in Figs. 7(b) and 7(c). The computed electron mobility is about 80 cm2
/V-sec. Enhancing Number of Bits Via QDSL Mini-Energy Band Transitions 163
Si Substrate
Buried Oxide
n+ S n+ D
p‐poly Si
SiOx‐cladded Si
QDs
G
Aluminum
Tunnel Oxide
 (a) 
 
 (b) (c) 
Fig. 7. (a) Cross-sectional schematic. (b) ID-VD characteristics of a QDC-FET on p-poly-Si, (c) ID-VG plot. 
The electron mobility is two orders of magnitude higher than commonly exhibited in p￾poly-Si FETs. 
The high mobility in quantum dot channel QDC realized in p-poly Si thin films can be 
utilized to improve the performance of 3D QDC-NAND flash cells and QDC-QDG-FETs, 
which will be dealt with in Section 5. 
5. 3D Stack of QDC-FETs and QDC-NAND with Gate All Around (GAA) 
Figure 8(a) shows schematically a poly-Si device having a high-mobility Si Quantum dot 
Channel (QDC), which hosts the inversion channel in 3D NAND, and yields higher Write 
speeds. Figure 8(b) shows floating gate also comprising quantum dot layers, which will 
enable multi-bit storage due to quantum dot superlattice formation. We also envision, as 
shown in Fig. 8(c), a 3D stack of QDC-QDG FET in gate all around (GAA) configuration. 
The novel feature is hosting the inversion layer in the Si quantum dot channel (QDC) 
on poly-Si core in gate all around (GAA) configuration. GAA configuration has been 
reported for V-NANDs [9]. 164 F. Jain et al. 
n+ S
n+ D
n+ S
Control Gate Oxide
Tunnel Oxide
Metal Gate Layer
Si3N4
SiOx‐cladded Si QDs
n+ D
n+ S
n+
Si
p‐Si
n+ D
oxide
p‐Si
p‐Si
p‐Si
(a) 
Tunnel Oxide
n+
S
n+ D
Metal Gate Layer
SiOx‐cladded Si QDs
SiOx‐cladded Si QDs
n+ D
n+ S
n+
Si
p‐Si
n+ D
oxide
p‐Si
p‐Si
p‐Si
Control Gate Oxide
n+ S
(b) 
n+
S
n+ D
n+ S
Tunnel Oxide
Metal Gate Layer
SiOx‐cladded Si QDs
SiOx‐cladded Si QDs
n+ D
n+ S
n+
Si
p‐Si
n+ D
oxide
p‐Si
p‐Si
p‐Si
(c) 
Fig. 8. (a) 3D high-mobility QDC-NVM cells in gate-all-around (GAA) configuration. (b) 3D quantum dot 
floating gate QDC-QD-NVM cells in GAA configuration. (c) 3D QDC-QDG FETs in gate all around (GAA) 
configuration. Enhancing Number of Bits Via QDSL Mini-Energy Band Transitions 165
6. Conclusion 
Novel QD structures and quantum simulations show the potential of achieving 8-16 states 
in NanoFETs and QD-NVRAMs. Four-state and 8-states (3-bit) inverters and SRAMs have 
been reported [8, 10]. This work opens the way for 4-bit/16-state QD-based logic and 
memory circuits. 3-bit/4-bit QD-SRAM increases the memory density. 
Increasing the states is obtained in QDC, SWS and QDG configuration by methods 
including: (1) changing the thickness of upper cladding of upper QD of QD channel, (ii) 
changing the QDC SiOx-cladded Si QD layers, (iii) making two QD layers asymmetrical 
by controlled oxidation of upper SiO2 layer (see Fig. 1a), (iv) changing the Ge core 
diameter of two uppermost Ge QD layers. 
Additionally, by utilizing multistate QD-SRAM with spatial wavefunction switched 
(SWS)-QDC-FETs-based dot-product multiplier, increases data transfer efficiency in 
AI/ML data computation systems. Raja et al. [10] reported using QD-SRAMs for compute 
in memory (CIM) applications. The CMOS compatible QD structure forms a new paradigm 
to implement architecture based on multi-state/multi-bit logic, SRAMs, QD-NVRAMs, 
and CIM / In-Memory Computing [11]. 
The integration of high-mobility quantum dot channels in stacked p-poly Si cores with 
gate all around (GAA) configuration sets the stage for a new paradigm. Additionally, we 
have shown in Fig. 8, 3D stacks of multistate QDC-NVM, QDC-QD-NVM, and QDC￾QDG-FETs. This methodology will be an interim room temperature alternative to qubit 
realized on Si [12] and opens the pathway to QDSL-based quantum computing using 
more than 1-2 electrons per QD. In addition, multi-state FETs and CMOS-compatible 
QD-NVRAMs and SRAMs have the potential for applications in-memory computing, 
compute-in-memory (CIM), and artificial intelligence (AI) hardware platform with higher 
speeds and much smaller silicon footprint and power dissipation. 
References 
1. F. Jain, S. Karmakar, P.-Y. Chan, E. Suarez, M. Gogna, J. Chandy and E. Heller, Quantum dot 
channel (QDC) field-effect transistors (FETs) using II-VI barrier layers, J. Electron. Mater. 41,
2775 (2012). 
2. F. Jain, M. Lingalugari, B. Saman, P.-Y. Chan, P. Gogna, E.-S. Hasaneen1, J. Chandy and E. 
Heller, Multi-state sub-9 nm QDC-SWS FETs for compact memory circuits, 46th IEEE 
Semiconductor Interface Specialists Conference (SISC), 2–5 December, 2015. 
3. F. Jain, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, B. Saman, P-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, M. Lingalugari, and E. 
Heller, Multi-State Quantum Dot Channel (QDC) FETs for Multi-Bit Computing, 52nd IEEE 
Semiconductor Interface Specialists Conference (SISC), 8–11 December, 2021. 
4. F. Jain, M. Lingalugari, J. Kondo, P. Mirdha, E. Suarez, J. Chandy and E. Heller, Quantum dot 
channel (QDC) FETs with Wraparound II-VI gate insulators: Numerical simulations. J. 
Electron. Mater. 45, 5663 (2016). 
5. E. K. Heller, S. K. Islam, G. Zhao and F. C. Jain, Solid-State Electron. 42, 901–914 (1999). 
6. C.-W. Jiang and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys. 99, 114902 (2006). 166 F. Jain et al. 
7. M. Lingalugari, P.-Y. Chan, E. K. Heller, J. Chandy, and F. C. Jain, Quantum dot floating gate 
nonvolatile random access memory using quantum dot channel for faster erasing, Electron. Lett. 
54, 36 (2018). 
8. F. Jain, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, B. Saman, P-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, M. Lingalugari and E. 
Heller, Two-dimensional SiOx-cladded Si and GeOx-cladded Ge quantum dot arrays vertically 
stacked for CMOS-X Logic, SRAMs, NVRAMs and IR imaging and multi-bit computing, 
SISC, December 2022. 
9. R. Meyer, Y. Fukuzumi and Y. Dong, 3D NAND scaling in next decade, Proc. IEDM, 26.1.1-
26.1.4, pp. 599–602, December 2022. 
10. R. H. Gudlavalleti, E. Heller, J. Chandy and F. Jain, Computing-In-Memory SRAM Cell using 
multistate spatial wavefunction switching (SWS)-quantum dot channel (QDC) FET, Int. J. of 
High Speed Electron. Syst., 32, 2350012, 2023. 
11. D. Lelmini and H-S. P. Wong, In-memory computing with resistive switching devices, Nat. 
Electron. 1, 333–337 (2018). 
12. A. J. Sigillito, J. C. Loy, D. M. Zajac, M. J. Gullans, L. F. Edge and J. R. Petta, Site-selective 
quantum control in an isotopically enriched 28Si/Si0.7Ge0.3 quadruple quantum dot, Phys. Rev. 
Appl. 11, 061006 (2019).  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0016 
167 
Filtration Methods for Microplastic Removal in Wastewater Streams — A Review 
U. Salahuddin*, J. Sun*, C. Zhu*,† and P. Gao*,†,‡
*Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-3136, USA 
†Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-3136, USA 
‡puxian.gao@uconn.edu 
Microplastics are commonly recognized as environmental and biotic contaminants. The prevalent 
presence of microplastics in aquatic settings raises concerns about plastic pollution. Therefore, it is 
critical to develop methods that can eliminate these microplastics with low cost and high effectiveness. 
This review concisely provides an overview of various methods and technologies for removing 
microplastics from wastewater and marine environments. Dynamic membranes and membrane bio￾reactors are effective in removing microplastics from wastewater. Chemical methods such as coagu￾lation and sedimentation, electrocoagulation, and sol-gel reactions can also be used for microplastic 
removal. Biological methods such as the use of microorganisms and fungi are also effective for 
microplastic degradation. Advanced filtration technologies like a combination of membrane bioreactor 
and activated sludge method show high microplastic removal efficiency. 
Keywords: Microplastics; filtration; quantification; water treatment. 
1. Introduction 
Microplastics are plastics with a size of less than 5 mm, usually formed by degradation 
and exfoliation of large quantities of plastics released into the ecosystem [1]. A plethora 
of reports suggest accumulation of these microplastics in the marine environment and their 
harmful effects on the aquatic life [2, 3]. Microplastics in the ocean can be attributed from 
different resources, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In 2018, 35% of microplastics in the ocean come 
from synthetic textiles; 28% comes from car tires, and 24% is from city dust. It is estimated 
that microplastics account for 94% of the Great Pacific Garbage Patch in the ocean [4, 5]. 
Besides the challenge of a large quantity of microplastics accumulation, microplastics 
have a broad size distribution and are hard for accurate quantification which makes the 
microplastics study even more complicated. As indicated in Fig. 1(b), microplastics size 
distribution can range from 10 µm to 32000 µm. The particle size distribution is highly 
dependent on the quantification method and locations, as shown in a comparison of data 
between Cózar et al. (2014) [6] and Enders et al. (2015) [7]. What is more, waste plastics 
vary significantly in chemical composition, physical form, size, texture, and shape. These 
characteristics can even evolve while in use and after discard. Hence, the removal of these 
‡Corresponding author. 168 U. Salahuddin et al. 
Fig. 1. Global sources of ocean microplastics in 2018 and (b) Microplastic size distributions depend on sampling 
location (geographically and vertically in the water column) and analytical methods applied [4]. 
microplastics is a critical yet challenging topic that needs immediate attention of the 
research community. Currently, many novel technologies and approaches have been 
applied to achieve efficient microplastics removal from fresh and saltwater environments. 
This document entails the methods and technologies most widely reported in the literature 
for microplastics’ removal from wastewater or marine environments. 
Based on the source of plastics, the waste plastics can be characterized into primary 
and secondary microplastics. Primary microplastics are plastics directly released into the 
environment in their original form. They can be a voluntary addition to products such as 
scrubbing agents in toiletries and cosmetics or they can come from the abrasion of large 
plastic objects during manufacturing, use or maintenance, such as the erosion of tires when 
driving or of the abrasion of synthetic textiles during washing. Secondary microplastics are 
microplastics originating from the degradation of larger plastic items into smaller plastic 
fragments once exposed to marine environment. This happens through photodegradation 
and other weathering processes of mismanaged waste such as discarded plastic bags or 
from unintentional losses such as fishing nets [8, 9]. 
Microplastics can be toxic to marine life and the ecosystem. The potential toxicity of 
microplastics can be from unreacted monomers, oligomers and chemical additives that tend 
to leak out from the plastic in the long run or physical effect when absorbed and transferred 
to living bodies. The toxicity depends also physically on the size and shape of micro￾plastics. Biota and humans are affected by toxic effects of microplastics via mechanisms 
including sorption and aggregation in different organs, ingestion, and exertion of physical 
damages. Although a lot of research studies have been conducted on the microplastics 
toxicity, effort is still needed to clarify how microplastics induce tissue changes and 
pathological disorders [10–14]. 
As mentioned, accumulation of waste microplastics in the water system has been 
growing, resulting in significant environmental issues [15]. The use of plastics will only 
increase in the foreseeable future. Thus, it is vital to find an effective solution to the 
microplastic pollution and eventually solve the problem from the source. Recently, many Filtration Methods for Microplastic Removal 169 
efforts have been made and much progress has been achieved for waste microplastics 
removal in the water system. Projects organizations like the Ocean cleanup project and 
Planet Care and actively working to reduce and mitigate plastic waste from the 
environment [16, 17]. Moreover, research groups such as Hale et al. [18], Kvale et al. [19] 
and Wang et al. [20] have been actively working on understanding and developing novel 
solutions for microplastic removal from the oceans. Thus, in-time summary and 
understanding of the technologies involved are necessary to guide the future study. 
There are reviews that provide us with a wholesome view on microplastic concentration 
levels in the ocean, health issues related to microplastic contamination as well as future 
of microplastic pollution [21–24], however, reviews focusing on summarizing all the 
available technologies for microplastic filtration are lacking. Here, in this short review, we 
summarize the recent methods and technologies that are used for efficient microplastics 
removal from waste and marine water systems. 
2. Filtration Methods 
There are some conventional methods such as rapid sand filters, dissolved air flotation, 
disk filters as well as membrane filters. Some of these methods are already being used in 
the industry. Other emerging technologies are less prevalent and are only proven at a 
smaller scale in research laboratories. For ease of understanding, we have divided the 
methods into four categories, conventional, which includes the most commonly used 
methods at present, chemical, biological, and advanced technologies, as schemed in Fig. 2. 
Fig. 2. Classification of filtration method based on category. 
2.1. Conventional Methods 
Microplastics can be separated from wastewater using dynamic membranes. As shown in 
Fig. 3, Li et al. reported the effects of variables like particle concentration and influent flux 
on the removal efficiency of membranes formed on a diatomite platform with a 90 μm 
supporting mesh [25]. The membrane reduced the turbidity from 195 NTU to less than 1 
NTU in just under 20 minutes [26]. Higher influxes of influents and higher concentrations 
of microplastics facilitate the formation of dynamic membranes. 
Membrane bioreactor is another technique that offers higher capacities relative to 
dynamic membranes [27]. This technique has the advantage of handling a large variety of 
wastewater and high-strength contaminants. Talvitie et al. compared the removal 
efficiencies of various technologies such as disk filters, rapid sand filters, dissolved air 170 U. Salahuddin et al. 
Fig. 3. Dynamic membrane experimental setup and graph showing the decrease in turbidity with time when 
microplastics are removed. TMP transmembrane pressure, NTU nephelometric turbidity unit [10]. 
floating and membrane bioreactors [28]. They showed that membrane bioreactor out￾performed all other technologies by eliminating 99.9% of microplastics from the influent 
stream. The study also showed that membrane bioreactors can remove microplastic par￾ticles as small as 20 µm. The shape of the particles also did not seem to affect the efficacy 
of this method, as FTIR analysis on the effluent stream showed extremely low concentra￾tions of microplastics. This fact hints towards good sorption capabilities of membrane 
reactors towards microplastics possessing various chemical structures. 
2.2. Chemical Methods 
Since the size range for microplastics is very small ranging from a couple of microns up to 
several hundred microns, their separation is a big challenge. Many commercial-scale 
wastewater treatment plants use technologies like coagulation and sedimentation to 
circumvent this problem [29, 30]. Large contaminant particles that are formed after coagu￾lation and sedimentation processes are easier to separate. These processes usually involve 
Al- or Fe-based salts that bind tiny microplastic particles using a ligand exchange 
mechanism [31]. A recent study investigated the coagulation of polyvinyl chloride particles 
< 50 µm, using ferric and aluminum sulphate [32]. The use of ferric and aluminum sulphate 
as coagulants resulted in the removal of about 80% of MPs. Specifically, polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) MPs with a size less than 50 μm were successfully coagulated by ferric and 
aluminum sulfate, and MPs with a size of at least 15 μm were eliminated under optimized 
coagulation conditions (ferric sulphate at 20 mg L−1 and pH 7 or aluminum sulphate at 
40 mg L−1
 and pH 7). 
Electrocoagulation is another technique used for microplastic removal that shows 
higher efficiency, incurs lower cost, allows sludge minimization, etc. [33]. Zeng et al. Filtration Methods for Microplastic Removal 171 
Fig. 4. Effect of initial pH on removal of microplastics during electrocoagulation [34]. (Copyright © 2021 
Elsevier B.V.) 
reported the findings that aluminum anode was better than iron anode in the removal of 
microplastics, and the removal rate was above 80% in all experiments [34]. As shown in 
Fig. 4, the removal rate of four microplastics by electrocoagulation can reach more than 
82% in the range of pH 3–10, and the best removal rate was 93.2% for PE, 91.7% for 
PMMA, 98.2% for CA and 98.4% for PP at pH 7.2. 
Herbort et al. demonstrated an agglomeration method based on alkoxy-silyl bond 
formation via a sol-gel reaction [35]. The sol-gel formed in this method resembles a hybrid 
organic-inorganic silica gel that can be used in a wide variety of applications [36]. Photo￾catalytic degradation is a well-established method for the destruction of polymeric chains 
[37]. Li et al. suggested an aqueous phase photochemical method for the degradation of 
microplastics, in which the degradation reaction is promoted by hydroxyl radicals [38]. 
Moreover, heterogenous photocatalytic degradation of low-density polyethylene over 
rod-like ZnO nanoparticles in aquatic media has been recently investigated by Tofa et al.
[39]. Results showed that the nanorod surface area greatly affected the photocatalytic 
performance of the reaction. Another study showed the efficacy of titania-based nano￾devices for microplastic photocatalytic treatment [40]. A similar study shows the ability of 
protein-based TiO2 photocatalyst to degrade polyethylene microplastics in solid and 
aqueous media. The results showed a mass loss of 1.1% and 6.4% respectively for solid 
and aqueous phases. 
2.3. Biological Methods 
Microorganisms including eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea have excellent potential in 
degradation of microplastics in coastal sediments and marine environments. Dawson et al.
studied polyethylene fragmentation and size alteration by Antartic Krill, a planktonic 
crustacean [41]. The stock suspension contained beads with a mean diameter of 31.5 µm. 
When particles were isolated from krill, their mean size was 78% smaller than the original 
beads, with some fragments reduced by 94% of their original diameter, resulting in an 172 U. Salahuddin et al. 
average size of 7.1 µm. Fecal material also contained smaller particles with a mean size of 
6.0 µm. Moreover, the size distribution of particles within the krill and excreted particles 
was significantly different from the beads in the exposure stock. The smaller size of plastic 
particles found in krill and their fecal pellets suggests that the Antarctic krill are physically 
breaking down the beads after ingestion. Cocca et al. reported a four-month long study on 
the removal of high-density polyethylene microplastics in seawater using two types of 
indigenous marine communities, namely, Agios consortium and Souda consortium [42]. 
The study showed that microplastics acted as a rich carbon source for the microorganisms. 
Paco et al. demonstrated the use of fungus Zalerion maritimum for the biodegradation of 
polyethylene in a batch reactor [43]. The results showed that the fungus used microplastics 
as a nutrient source. Sangale et al. discovered the elite polythene deteriorating fungi 
(isolated from the rhizosphere soil of Avicennia marina) [44]. The degradation potential of 
polythene by fungi was evaluated at different pH levels (3.5, 7, and 9.5). The study was 
carried out by subjecting the polythene samples to continuous shaking at ambient tempera￾ture for 60 days and monitoring changes in weight and tensile strength. The BAYF5 isolate 
(pH 7) exhibited the highest reduction in weight (58.51 ± 8.14), while PNPF15 (pH 3.5) 
showed the greatest reduction in tensile strength (94.44 ± 2.40). The results of degradation 
of the polythene strips by the fungal isolates were confirmed by the formation of the 
cracks/holes/scions and were visualized in Scanning electron microscopic photographs as 
shown in Fig. 5(B). 
Fig. 5. (A) Size distribution of particles isolated from sample Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba), unhomo￾genized and enzyme digested Antarctic krill, stock suspension, and stock suspension enzyme digested. Particles 
between 25 and 50 µm indicate a whole bead; values below this range are fragments. [41] (Copyright ©, Springer 
Nature 2018), (B) Scanning Electron Microscopic image of the polythene strips: (a–d) SEM of the PE with most 
%weight gain (24.4%) by JAMNF at pH9.5; (e–h) SEM of PE strip with maximum (94) % loss in TS by PNPF￾15 at pH 3.5; (i–l) SEM of PE strips of maximum %WL (41%) by MANGF1 [45]. (Copyright © 2019, Springer 
Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019) 
3. Advanced Filtration Technologies 
A combination of membrane bioreactor and activated sludge method was recently studied 
by Lares et al. at a pilot scale [46]. They collected samples every 2 weeks for 3 months. 
(A) (B) Filtration Methods for Microplastic Removal 173 
The pilot scale setup included an aeration tank for microorganism activation, a sedimenta￾tion tank for sludge separation and a secondary purifier. A microplastic removal efficiency 
of 99.4% was reported. Similarly, a study in China showed a comparison of 11 different 
wastewater treatment plants for the efficiency to remove microplastics [47]. An efficiency 
of above 90% was witnessed by all the plants that used multiple filtration steps. 
Moreover, another study analyzed the removal methodology used by municipal sewage 
treatment plants for the removal of microplastics [48]. The study showed that the influents 
were treated initially using a series of processes, such as grit chamber, primary and sec￾ondary sedimentation tanks, anerobic, aerobic and anoxic treatments. Advanced treatment 
processes such as denitrification, ultrafiltration, ozonation, and ultraviolet treatment were 
later applied to remove the microplastics. The overall efficiency of plastic removal was 
reported to be 95.16% which was still lower than membrane bioreactors (99.9%). The study 
also reported that sewage treatment plants release a large quantity of microplastics into the 
aquatic ecosystem as these plants are not primarily designed for microplastic removal. 
4. Challenges and Limitations 
All these methods detailed above have their own limitations and challenges. Some of the 
key challenges are limitations are summarized in Table 1. 
Table 1. Comparison of available microplastic filtration methods [27, 28] 
Technology Conventional 
Filters 
Chemical/ 
Electrochemical 
Methods 
Biological 
Methods 
Other multistage 
filtration 
techniques 
Filtration size 
range (µm) 
> 90 2000-5000 1-30 > 90 
Efficiency 
(%) 
90-99 60-65 < 15 97-99 
Regeneration Highly energy 
intensive 
Not possible Easy Complicated 
Scalability Scalable but 
usually high cost 
Scalable but of chemical 
and or electrical current 
constraints 
Limited due to 
low plastic 
consumption rates 
of microorganisms 
Possible but costly 
due to multistage 
processes 
Limitations Expensive 
regeneration & 
costly membrane 
filters 
Water quality affected 
by chemical treatment, 
requiring post￾treatments 
Slow kinetics of 
biological 
digestion 
Multistep 
processes with 
high cost 
5. Conclusions and Outlook 
Microplastics are widely acknowledged as contaminants in both the environment and biota. 
Their omnipresence in aquatic environments has raised concerns about plastic pollution, 
highlighting the urgent need for effective and affordable removal methods. This paper 174 U. Salahuddin et al. 
presents an overview of the various techniques and technologies used to remove micro￾plastics from marine environments and wastewater. Dynamic membranes and membrane 
bioreactors are effective in removing microplastics from wastewater, while chemical 
methods such as coagulation and sedimentation, electrocoagulation, and sol-gel reactions 
can also be used. Biological methods, such as the use of microorganisms and fungi, have 
also proven effective for microplastic degradation. Advanced filtration technologies, such 
as a combination of membrane bioreactor and activated sludge method, demonstrate high 
microplastic removal efficiency. 
As the detrimental impacts of microplastics become more apparent, the demand for 
effective filtration methods continues to grow. In the future, it is likely that research will 
focus on developing more cost-effective and scalable technologies for removing micro￾plastics from wastewater. Additionally, there may be a shift towards more sustainable and 
eco-friendly filtration methods, such as biological methods. Advances in nanotechnology 
may also lead to the development of more efficient and precise filtration methods. This 
review clearly shows the need for a robust, cheap, and efficient method for microplastic 
removal from waste streams. Conventional wastewater treatment plants are not typically 
designed to filter microplastics and hence any supplementary microplastic filtration 
devices that can be retrofitted to the existing wastewater treatment plants could really solve 
this problem. However, the retrofitting needs to be modular and scalable in nature to 
accommodate the variable volumes of wastewater. 
As of now, there are no regulations or laws restricting the water treatment plants for 
assessing and minimizing the microplastics concentrations in their effluent water. If 
regulated, these treatment plants will be forced to retrofit their treatment plants with 
microplastic capturing filters. In addition to the methods reported in this paper, there has 
been an increasing interest in using ceramic-based filters for microplastics filtration. These 
ceramic filters have proven to be low cost and are an robust alternative to all other filters 
reported in this review. 
Another challenging problem in microplastic filtration is microplastic quantification in 
water-based samples. Since microplastic particles are neutral in charge, non-reactive and 
extremely resistant to any solvent or chemical, it is extremely difficult to quantify them. 
Available methods include microscopic counting and fluorescent tagging, but these 
methods only quantify in terms of number of particles per unit volume of water. What is 
needed is a scalable technique that can accurately provide a weight-based quantification of 
microplastics in water samples. The significance of microplastic quantification is two-fold. 
First, weight-based quantification is crucial to assessing water quality. Second, it also helps 
in assessing the efficacy of a given microplastic filtration device. Going forward, the 
exploration and development of new strategies would be very important toward achieving 
quantitative differentiation and measurement of microplastics in water stream, such as 
advanced remote sensing, optical imaging and spectroscopy tools, coupled with various 
data analytics and machine learning capabilities. Filtration Methods for Microplastic Removal 175 
Acknowledgment 
The authors acknowledge the financial support from UConn CARIC program and NSF. 
References 
1. Zhang, Kai et al. “Microplastic pollution in China’s inland water systems: A review of findings, 
methods, characteristics, effects, and management.” Science of the Total Environment 630
(2018) 1641–1653. 
2. Van Cauwenberghe, Lisbeth, et al., “Microplastic pollution in deep-sea sediments.” Environ￾mental Pollution 182 (2013) 495–499. 
3. Law, Kara Lavender, et al. “Distribution of surface plastic debris in the eastern Pacific Ocean 
from an 11-year data set.” Environmental Science & Technology 48(9) (2014) 4732–4738. 
4. Lebreton, Laurent, et al., “Evidence that the Great Pacific Garbage Patch is rapidly accumu￾lating plastic.” Scientific Reports 8(1) (2018) 1–15. 
5. Chong, Fiona, et al., “High concentrations of floating neustonic life in the plastic-rich North 
Pacific Garbage Patch.” Plos Biology 21(5) (2023) e3001646. 
6. González-Fernández, Daniel, et al., “Microplastics in estuarine waters: Surface layer vs. water 
column.” (2022). 
7. Čerkasova, Natalja, et al., “A public database for microplastics in the environment.” Micro￾plastics 2(1) (2023) 132–146. 
8. Boucher, Julien, and Damien Friot, Primary microplastics in the oceans: A global evaluation of 
sources. Vol. 10. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN, 2017. 
9. Kasmuri, Norhafezah, Nur Aliah Ahmad Tarmizi, and Amin Mojiri, “Occurrence, impact, 
toxicity, and degradation methods of microplastics in environment—a review.” Environmental 
Science and Pollution Research 29(21) (2022) 30820–30836. 
10. Padervand, Mohsen, et al., “Removal of microplastics from the environment. A review.” 
Environmental Chemistry Letters 18 (2020) 807–828. 
11. Parsai, Tanushree, et al. “Implication of microplastic toxicity on functioning of microalgae in 
aquatic system.” Environmental Pollution (2022) 119626. 
12. D'Costa, Avelyno H. “Microplastics in decapod crustaceans: Accumulation, toxicity and 
impacts, a review.” Science of The Total Environment (2022) 154963. 
13. Salimi, Ahmad et al., “Differences in sensitivity of human lymphocytes and fish lymphocytes 
to polyvinyl chloride microplastic toxicity.” Toxicology and Industrial Health 38(2) (2022) 
100–111. 
14. da Silva Brito, Walison Augusto et al. “Comprehensive in vitro polymer type, concentration, 
and size correlation analysis to microplastic toxicity and inflammation.” Science of The Total 
Environment 854 (2023) 158731. 
15. Zhou, Chongyu, et al. “The emerging issue of microplastics in marine environment: A 
bibliometric analysis from 2004 to 2020.” Marine Pollution Bulletin 179 (2022) 113712. 
16. Brodin, Malin, et al. “Filters for washing machines: Mitigation of microplastic pollution.” 
(2018). 
17. Holst, Rozemarijn Roland, “The Netherlands: The 2018 agreement between the ocean Cleanup 
and the Netherlands.” The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 34(2) (2019) 351–
371. 176 U. Salahuddin et al. 
18. Hale, Robert C., et al. “A global perspective on microplastics.” Journal of Geophysical 
Research: Oceans 125(1) (2020) e2018JC014719. 
19. Kvale, Karin F., A. E. Friederike Prowe and Andreas Oschlies, “A critical examination of the 
role of marine snow and zooplankton fecal pellets in removing ocean surface microplastic.” 
Frontiers in Marine Science (2020) 808. 
20. Wang, Ziheng, Majid Sedighi and Amanda Lea-Langton, “Filtration of microplastic spheres 
by biochar: Removal efficiency and immobilisation mechanisms.” Water Research 184 (2020) 
116165. 
21. Zhang, Kai, et al. “Understanding plastic degradation and microplastic formation in the 
environment: A review.” Environmental Pollution 274 (2021) 116554. 
22. Sharma, Shivika and Subhankar Chatterjee, “Microplastic pollution, a threat to marine 
ecosystem and human health: A short review.” Environmental Science and Pollution Research
24 (2017) 21530–21547. 
23. Danopoulos, Evangelos, Maureen Twiddy and Jeanette M. Rotchell, “Microplastic contami￾nation of drinking water: A systematic review.” PloS one 15(7) (2020) e0236838. 
24. do Sul, Juliana A. Ivar and Monica F. Costa. “The present and future of microplastic pollution 
in the marine environment.” Environmental Pollution 185 (2014) 352–364. 
25. Li, Lucheng, et al., “Dynamic membrane for micro-particle removal in wastewater treatment: 
Performance and influencing factors.” Science of the Total Environment 627 (2018) 332–340. 
26. Ersahin, Mustafa Evren, et al. “Impact of anaerobic dynamic membrane bioreactor configu￾ration on treatment and filterability performance.” Journal of Membrane Science 526 (2017) 
387–394. 
27. Lares, Mirka, et al. “Occurrence, identification and removal of microplastic particles and fibers 
in conventional activated sludge process and advanced MBR technology.” Water Research 133
(2018) 236–246. 
28. Talvitie, Julia, et al. “Solutions to microplastic pollution–Removal of microplastics from waste￾water effluent with advanced wastewater treatment technologies.” Water Research 123 (2017) 
401–407. 
29. Hu, Chengzhi et al. “Effect of aluminum speciation on arsenic removal during coagulation 
process.” Separation and Purification Technology 86 (2012) 35–40. 
30. Shirasaki, N., et al., “Effect of aluminum hydrolyte species on human enterovirus removal from 
water during the coagulation process.” Chemical Engineering Journal 284 (2016) 786–793. 
31. Chorghe, Darpan, Mutiara Ayu Sari, and Shankararaman Chellam. “Boron removal from 
hydraulic fracturing wastewater by aluminum and iron coagulation: Mechanisms and limita￾tions.” Water Research 126 (2017) 481–487. 
32. Prokopova, Michaela, et al. “Coagulation of polyvinyl chloride microplastics by ferric and 
aluminium sulphate: optimisation of reaction conditions and removal mechanisms.” Journal of 
Environmental Chemical Engineering 9(6) (2021) 106465. 
33. Perren, William, Arkadiusz Wojtasik, and Qiong Cai. “Removal of microbeads from wastewater 
using electrocoagulation.” ACS Omega 3(3) (2018) 3357–3364. 
34. Shen, Maocai, et al. “Efficient removal of microplastics from wastewater by an electro￾coagulation process.” Chemical Engineering Journal 428 (2022) 131161. 
35. Herbort, Adrian Frank, et al., “Alkoxy-silyl induced agglomeration: a new approach for the 
sustainable removal of microplastic from aquatic systems.” Journal of Polymers and the 
Environment 26(11) (2018) 4258–4270. Filtration Methods for Microplastic Removal 177 
36. Nicole, Lionel, et al. “Advanced selective optical sensors based on periodically organized 
mesoporous hybrid silica thin films.” Chemical Communications 20 (2004) 2312–2313. 
37. Yousif, Emad and Raghad Haddad, “Photodegradation and photostabilization of polymers, 
especially polystyrene.” SpringerPlus 2(1) (2013) 1–32. 
38. Li, Shengying et al., “Photocatalytic degradation of polyethylene plastic with polypyrrole/TiO2 
nanocomposite as photocatalyst.” Polymer-Plastics Technology and Engineering 49(4) (2010) 
400–406. 
39. Tofa, Tajkia Syeed, et al. “Visible light photocatalytic degradation of microplastic residues with 
zinc oxide nanorods.” Environmental Chemistry Letters 17(3) (2019) 1341–1346. 
40. Sekino, Takahiro, Satoru Takahashi and Kiyoshi Takamasu, “Fundamental study on nano￾removal processing method for microplastic structures using photocatalyzed oxidation.” Key 
Engineering Materials 523 (2012). 
41. Dawson, Amanda L., et al., “Turning microplastics into nanoplastics through digestive 
fragmentation by Antarctic krill.” Nat. Commun. 9(1) (2018) 1–8. 
42. Cocca, Mariacristina, et al., eds. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Micro￾plastic Pollution in the Mediterranean Sea, Springer Nature (2020). 
43. Paço, Ana et al. “Biodegradation of polyethylene microplastics by the marine fungus Zalerion 
maritimum.” Science of the Total Environment 586 (2017) 10–15. 
44. Shahnawaz, Mohd, Manisha K. Sangale, and Avinash B. Ade, “Bioremediation technology for 
plastic waste.” (2019) 978–981. 
45. Shahnawaz, Mohd, Manisha K. Sangale, and Avinash B. Ade, “Bioremediation technology for 
plastic waste.” (2019) 978–981. 
46. Lares, Mirka, et al., “Occurrence, identification and removal of microplastic particles and fibers 
in conventional activated sludge process and advanced MBR technology.” Water Research 133
(2018) 236–246. 
47. Ma, Baiwen, et al., “Removal characteristics of microplastics by Fe-based coagulants during 
drinking water treatment.” Journal of Environmental Sciences 78 (2019) 267–275. 
48. Yang, Libiao, et al., “Removal of microplastics in municipal sewage from China’s largest water 
reclamation plant.” Water Research 155 (2019) 175–181. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0017
179 
Numerical Investigation of the Electrothermal Properties of 
SOI FinFET Transistor 
Faouzi Nasri*
Center for Research in Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (CRMN), Sousse, Tunisia 
Laboratory of Thermal Processes, Research and Technology Centre of Energy, Hammam-Lif, Tunisia *Nasrifaouzi90@yahoo.fr 
Husien Salama 
Computer Systems Institute, Boston, USA 
husien.salama@uconn.edu 
This paper investigates the non-Fourier transient heat transfer in an SOI FinFET transistor. The 
calibrated drift-diffusion (D-D) model in conjunction with the ballistic diffusive (BDE) model is used 
as an electrothermal model to predict phonon and electron transports in the quasi-ballistic regime. The 
finite element method has been employed to generate the numerical results. The proposed math￾ematical formulation was found to capture the transfer characteristics and the temporal temperature as 
given by TCAD simulation and experimental data. On the other hand, we have demonstrated that after 
100 ns, the 14 nm Bulk FinFET supports better temperature distribution than the 14 nm SOI FinFET. 
Keywords: SOI FinFET; electrothermal modeling; phonon transport; effective mobility. 
1. Introduction 
The downscaling of Multigate FET structures has led to enormous problems concerning 
their thermal and electrical performances [1]. Among these types of transistors, the FinFET 
and the SOI FinFET have immunity against the short-channel effect. Many other problems 
attack these architectures, including the heat flux and the operating temperature inside 
the transistor channel region [2]. To overcome these defects, several experimental and 
numerical investigations have been done [3]. In this paper, to improve the electrical and 
thermal effects of an SOI FinFET device, we have used a highly nonlinear transient 
analysis model, which could be used to elucidate the phonon scattering and electron 
transports in a 20 nm SOI FinFET. We report the drain and gate-source voltages effect and 
high-k dielectric material role in increasing the operating temperature in the given 
structure. In the first step, we compared the transfer characteristics with experimental and 
numerical data. After validation of the electrical part of the proposed model, we compared 
*Corresponding author. 180 F. Nasri & H. Salama 
the temporal temperature evolution given by the proposed model with those available in 
the literature. On the other hand, we have compared the temperature given in the SOI 
FinFET structure with that obtained in Bulk FinFET. This paper is organized as follows. 
In Section 2, we provide an overview of the electrical approach as well as theoretical 
considerations relative to the thermal simulation. In Section 3, we present and discuss the 
obtained results. Concluding remarks are provided in Section 4. 
2. Electrothermal Formulation 
To enhance the D-D model and to make it valid in the nanoscale regime, we introduce in 
this work the effective mobility model given by [4] 
μୣ୤୤ ൌ μ଴
1 ൅ θଵሺVୋ െ V୘ୌሻ ൅ θଶሺVୋ െ V୘ୌሻ² (1)
where θଵ and θଶ are represented as fitting parameters, that describe respectively mobility 
degradation due to phonon scattering and degradation due to surface roughness scattering. 
Equations mentioned below represent the D-D model which is given by the poison equation 
coupled with the electron and hole continuity equations [5]: 
𝜺∆V = −qሺp െ n ൅ Nୈ െ N୅) (2)
where ε is the permittivity, V is the electrical potential. p, n, Nୈ, and N୅ are, respectively, 
the hole, electron, donor, and acceptor concentrations, and q is the elementary charge. 
Electron and hole equations (D-D model): 
∂n
∂t
= ∇ · (nμୣ୤୤ E + D୬∇n) + (R ‐ G) (3)
∂p
∂t
= ‐∇ · (pμ୮E + D୮∇p) + (R ‐ G) (4)
where μୣ୤୤ and μ୮ are the electron and hole mobilities used in this work. D୬ and D୮ are the 
electron and hole diffusion coefficient. 
The key parameter that could give us much information about the heat transfer inside 
a nanodevice is the volumetric heat generation rate Q due to Joule effect which represents 
the link between both electrical and thermal mathematical models. The source term Q is 
given by [6] 
Q ൌ ⃗J. Eሬ⃗ ൅ ሺR െ Gሻ. ሺ𝐸୥ ൅ 3K୆T) (5)
The heat transfer equation related to the BDE model is expressed as follows [20]: 
τୖ
∂ଶ𝑇ሺr, tሻ
∂tଶ ൅
∂Tሺr, tሻ
∂t ൌ 1
c
൫kΔTሺr, tሻ൯ െ 1
c
∇qୠሺr, tሻ ൅ Q
c
൅
τୖ
c
∂Q
∂t (6)Numerical Investigation of the Electrothermal Properties of SOI FinFET Transistor 181
where τୖ is the relaxation time due to resistive collision, K and C are, respectively, the 
thermal conductivity and the volumetric heat capacity and qୠ is the ballistic heat flux. 
In our simulation the ballistic heat flux and the relaxation time are calculated as follows 
[7]: 
2 b eff
Cw T q k Kn L
        (7)
In this work, we have analyzed the electrothermal properties of SOI FinFET with channel 
length of 20 nm, as given in Fig. 1. 
All needed parameters are given in Table 1 [8, 9]. 
Fig. 1. Schematic geometry of SOI FinFET transistor [10]. 
Table 1. Physical parameters of the studied device. 
Symbol FinFET transistor 
Gate length (nm) 20 
EOT (nm) 0.62 
Channel p type doping (cm3
) 1e15 
S/D n type doping (cm3
) 1e21 
3. Results and Discussions 
To validate the proposed electrothermal model, we present in Fig. 2 a comparison of the 
drain current versus gate bias with TCAD simulation [11] and with experimental data [12]. 
It is obvious that the proposed model can predict the transfer characteristics as given by 
TCAD simulation and experimental data. 
Figure 3 depicts a comparison of the volumetric heat generation inside a 20 nm FinFET 
and SOI FinFET transistors at Vds=Vgs=0.7 V, the Joule effect is maximal at the channel 
region-spacer oxide side interface and decreases at drain region. On the other hand, we can 182 F. Nasri & H. Salama 
Fig. 2. Comparison of the transfer character of the 20 nm SOI FinFET with experimental data and TCAD 
simulation at Vds=0.7 V. 
Fig. 3. Comparison of the Joule effect inside FinFET and SOI FinFET transistors at Vgs=Vds=0.7 V. 
see that the volumetric heat generation given in SOI FinFET transistor is almost twice as 
large as that given in FinFET device. The key to the temperature increase is the volumetric 
heat generation position and its higher value, as given in Fig. 4, which represents a 
comparison of the temporal temperature evolution in 20 nm FinFET and SOI FinFET 
devices at Vgs=Vds=0.7 V. From this figure, we show that the FinFET temperature 
achieved the saturation after 10 ns, however, it achieved the saturation in SOI FinFET case 
0,0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8
1E-8
1E-7
1E-6
1E-5
1E-4
0,001
 Experimental data
Present simulation 
 TCAD simulation
VGS (V)
IDS (A/

m)
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5 SOI-Fin FET
 Bulk-Fin FET
Heat source by Joule effect 1019 (W/m3)
Channel length (nm)Numerical Investigation of the Electrothermal Properties of SOI FinFET Transistor 183
Fig. 4. Comparison of the temporal temperature evolution of FinFET and SOI FinFET devices at Vds=Vgs=0.7 V. 
after 45 ns. The temperature variation in SOI FinFET case is due to the presence of the 
buried oxide which makes the temperature trapped in the channel region. 
Figure 5 shows the 2D temperature distribution in the studied SOI FinFET at t=100 ns 
and VDS=VGS=0.8 V. We show that the temperature is maximal in the channel region of 
the studied device, and the temperature is concentrated in the channel region drain zone 
interface. The weak point of this architecture appears when we use the buried oxide to 
eliminate the leakage currents. On the other hand, the SiO2 buried oxide is responsible for 
locking up the temperature in the channel region and the source/drain sides. 
Fig. 5. 2D temperature card in FinFET at t=100 ns and VDS=VGS=0.8 V. 
0 20 40 60 80 100
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Temperature (K)
Time (ns)
 Bulk FinFET
 SOI FinFET184 F. Nasri & H. Salama 
4. Conclusion 
 In this work, we have proposed an electrothermal model in conjunction with an effective 
electron mobility model to investigate the temperature evolution inside a 20 nm SOI 
FinFET transistor. We have found that our proposed model is able to predict the transfer 
characteristics as given by experimental data and TCAD simulation. On the other hand, we 
have found that the buried oxide makes the temperature trapped in the SOI FinFET channel 
region and the saturated temperature achieved 525 K after 100 ns, however, it achieved 
350 K in FinFET case. 
Otherwise, the nanotechnology promises significant advances in electronics, materials, 
biotechnology, alternative energy sources and other applications. Nanocrystals, nanotubes, 
nanowires, and nanofibers are all next-generation materials [13, 15]. The future direction 
of this research is to generalize the proposed method to be used in various important 
applications such as micro-stereolithography. 
References 
1. F. Nasri and M. Atri, Channel length effect on heat transfer process in nano MOSFETs, in 2017 
International Conference on Engineering & MIS (ICEMIS) (IEEE, 2017), pp. 1–4. 
2. F. Nasri and M. F. Ben Aissa, Thermal analysis of phonon temperature in nano transistor based 
on DPL model coupled with temporal temperature jump, in 2017 International Conference on 
Engineering & MIS (ICEMIS) (IEEE, 2017), pp. 1–4. 
3. F. Nasri, M. F. Ben Aissa and H. Belmabrouk, Nanoheat conduction performance of black 
phosphorus field-effect transistor, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 64 (2017) 2765–
2769. 
4. H. Rezgui et al., Analysis of the ultrafast transient heat transport in sub 7-nm SOI FinFETs 
technology nodes using phonon hydrodynamic equation, IEEE Transactions on Electron 
Devices 68(1) (2021) 10–16. 
5. H. Rezgui, F. Nasri, G. Nastasi, M. F. Ben Aissa, S. Rahmouni, V. Romano, H. Belmabrouk 
and A. A. Guizani, Design optimization of nanoscale electrothermal transport in 10 nm SOI 
FinFET technology node, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 53(49) (2020) 495103. 
6. J. W. Lee, Electrical characterization and modeling of low dimensional nanostructure FET, 
Universite de Grenoble; 239, Korea University, Français, NNT (2011), 2011GRENT070ff, 
tel00767413f , version 1. 
7. F. Nasri, H. Rezgui and M. F. Ben Aissa, Numerical investigation of nano heat transfer process 
in FET nano devices using ballistic-diffusive model, in 2018 IEEE International Conference on 
Smart Materials and Spectroscopy (SMS), Hammamet, Tunisia (IEEE, 2018), pp. 12–17, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/SMS44485.2018.9101397. 
8. H. Rezgui, F. Nasri, M. F. Ben Aissa, H. Belmabrouk and A. A. Guizani, Modeling thermal 
performance of nano-GNRFET transistors using ballistic-diffusive equation, IEEE Transactions 
on Electron Devices 65 (2018) 1611–1616, https://doi.org/10.1109/TED.2018.2805343. 
9. H. Belmabrouk, H. Rezgui, F. Nasri, M. F. Ben Aissa and A. A. Guizani, Interfacial heat 
transport across multilayer nanofilms in ballistic–diffusive regime, The European Physical 
Journal Plus 135 (2020) 109, https://doi.org/10.1140/epjp/s13360-020-00180-7. Numerical Investigation of the Electrothermal Properties of SOI FinFET Transistor 185
10. K. Schuegraf, M. C. Abraham, A. Brand, M. Naik and R. Thakur, Semiconductor logic 
technology innovation to achieve sub-10 nm manufacturing, IEEE Journal of the Electron 
Devices Society 1(3) (2013) 66–75, doi:10.1109/JEDS.2013.2271582. 
11. J. Sun, X. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Shi, Impact of geometry, doping, temperature, and boundary 
conductivity on thermal characteristics of 14-nm bulk and SOI FinFETs, IEEE Transactions 
on Device and Materials Reliability 20 (2020) 119–127, https://doi.org/10.1109/
TDMR.2020.2964734. 
12. C.-H. Lin et al., High performance 14nm SOI FinFET CMOS technology with 0.0174μm2
embedded DRAM and 15 levels of Cu metallization, in 2014 IEEE International Electron 
Devices Meeting (IEEE, 2014), pp. 3.8.1–3.8.3, https://doi.org/10.1109/IEDM.2014.7046977. 
13. H. Salama, B. Smaani, F. Nasri and A. Tshipamba, Nanotechnology and quantum dot lasers, 
Journal of Computer Science and Technology Studies 5(1) (2023) 45–51, https://doi.org/
10.32996/jcsts.2023.5.1.6. 
14. H. Salama, B. Saman, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, E. Heller, J. Chandy and F. Jain, Compact 
1-bit full adder and 2-bit SRAMs using n-SWS-FETs, International Journal of High Speed 
Electronics and Systems 29(1–4) (2020) 2040013, https://doi.org/10.1142/S0129156420400133. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0018 
187 
Memristor-Based Material Implication Logic: 
Prelude to In-Memory Computing 
Anas Mazady†
 and Mehdi Anwar*,‡
*Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA 
†Northrop Grumman Corporation, Baltimore, MD 212, USA 
†aalvee_asad.kausani@uconn.edu 
‡a.anwar@uconn.edu 
We report experimental demonstration of Material Implication (IMP) logic using ZnO nanowire￾based memristors. The logic is demonstrated with a high-to-low resistance ratio of only five. This 
imposes much less stringent requirements on memristor performance that can enable IMP logic 
operation with lower bit error rates. Process independence on memristor and memristor-based IMP 
logic performance is demonstrated, and a more practical implementation of logic is made by relaxing 
the restriction imposed on the ranges of the values of on and off state resistances. IMP logic is validated 
up to a clock frequency of 100 KHz.
Keywords: IMP logic; nanowire-based memristors; in-memory computing. 
1. Introduction 
Circuit designers are confronted with two distinct challenges, with one being evolutionary 
that has to do with scaling power consumption with shrinking device dimensions and the 
other one being revolutionary that seeks innovative concepts to take technology beyond 
Moore’s Law. At present, the technology of choice refers to the complementary metal 
oxide semiconductor (CMOS) field effect transistors with their small footprint, low power 
consumption, and small propagation delay. However, memristors with the promise to 
deliver a scalable and low power computation platform have the potential to replace the 
present digital logics as predicted by Di Ventra et al. [1]. Designing logics using mem￾ristors could allow the use of the same physical unit performing multiple functions, such 
as memory, logic, and interconnect [2]. This approach has the potential to redefine 
traditional computer architectures to realize a more advanced architecture that overcomes 
the “von Neumann bottleneck” of throughput [3]. Traditional von Neumann architectures 
require sequential processing of fetch, decode, and execution of instructions resulting in 
reduced data transfer rate. Moreover, this exchange of data between the processor and 
memory could be prone to side channel attacks leading to security breach. Performing logic 
‡Corresponding author. 188 A. Mazady & M. Anwar 
operations within the memory elements permits the central processing unit (CPU) to 
simultaneously access both the program memory and data memory utilizing the full 
potential of the CPU. 
Scaling down of power consumption with shrinking device dimensions is an ongoing 
effort in low power electronics, however, the ever-shrinking technology nodes are not 
followed by power supply voltage scaling due to restrictions imposed by MOSFET 
threshold voltage (VT). Any decrease in VT results in an exponential increase in leakage 
current, detrimentally affecting voltage scaling and increasing the static power consump￾tion of the CMOS logic family. For example, with the listed leakage current of 1 µA, the 
static power dissipation PS of a 2-input CMOS NAND gate (74HC00) equals 3 µW for a 
supply voltage VDD=3 V. The dynamic power, for example, for the same 2-input CMOS 
NAND gate, could be as high as 53.1 µW [PD=CPD×VCC2
×fi×N+CL×VCC2
×f0], where 
 CPD =22 pF is the dynamic power dissipation capacitance, fi =100 kHz is the input signal 
frequency, N =2 is the number of bits switching, CL=15 pF is the load capacitance including 
jig and probe capacitances, and fo =100 kHz is the output signal frequency. For a switching 
transition time of 19 ns, the switching energy equals 1 pJ that could have been reduced if 
we were able to scale voltage without increasing leakage current. The switching transition 
time is defined as the sum of rise and fall times of the output signal, where rise time is the 
time required for the signal to swing from 10% to 90% of the “logic 1” voltage and fall 
time is the time required for the signal to go from 90% to 10% of the same voltage 
amplitude. 
The total leakage current in MOSFETs, for technology nodes smaller than 65 nm, is 
primarily tunneling in nature and becomes more pronounced for thinner oxides [4]. In 
recent years, high-k dielectrics with the dielectric constants k ranging from 7.5 to 300 have 
been explored to reduce tunneling current. Ultra high-k materials, such as BST (Ba,Sr)TiO3
with k of 300 may provide the thinnest equivalent oxide thickness (EOT) but suffers from 
fringing-induced barrier lowering (FIBL) [5, 6], consequently lowering the threshold 
voltage with a concomitant increase in leakage current. High-k materials with moderately 
ranging dielectric constants, such as Si3N4 (k=7.5) and Al2O3 (k=10), contain random 
interface trap (RIT) states resulting in increased Coulomb scattering degrading career 
mobility. ZrO2 (k=22) and HfO2 (k=25) happen to be the materials of choice for gate oxide. 
However, incompatibility with poly-silicon gates has limited the use of ZrO2 in MOSFETs 
while issues such as boron penetration, low crystallization temperature, charge trapping, 
and low channel mobility still need to be resolved for HfO2 gate oxide. 
Improved electrostatic control of multi-gate devices makes them an optimized choice 
for sub-32 nm technology, with FinFETs being of particular interest due to their compati￾bility with the traditional planar CMOS fabrication processes [7], reduced short channel 
effects (SCE), and reduced junction leakage arising from band-to-band tunneling (BTBT) 
[8]. However, TCAD simulations of bulk FinFET technology suggest leakage current as 
high as 10 nA/µm for 65 nm technology node resulting in static power dissipation PS = 12 
nW/µm for VDD=1.2 V that for 22 nm node increases to 2 µA/µm (PS = 1.6 µW/µm) for 
VDD=0.8 V [9]. In 22 nm node silicon on insulator (SOI) FinFETs, the leakage current is Memristor-Based Material Implication Logic: Prelude to In-Memory Computing 189
reduced to 0.4 µA/µm (PS = 0.32 µW/µm for VDD=0.8 V) by isolating the device layer 
from the silicon substrate and similar results may also be obtained for bulk FinFETs by 
increasing body doping from 1016 cm3
 to 1018 cm3 [9]. Additional reduction in leakage 
current is obtained by optimizing the isolation oxide height (Tins) between the gate and 
substrate for bulk FinFETs. As an example, for 32 nm technology node, decreasing Tins
from 150 nm to 50 nm decreases the leakage current from 580 nA/µm (PS = 0.52 µW/µm 
for VDD=0.9 V) to 250 nA/µm (PS = 0.22 µW/µm for VDD=0.8 V), however, further 
decrease of Tins increases the leakage current [9]. 
A decrease in fin widths leads to a reduction in leakage current due to suppression of 
SCEs [8], while the use of a triangular fin as opposed to a rectangular fin leads to a 
reduction in leakage current with a concomitant decrease in static power dissipation by 
70% [10]. However controlled etching of fins to meet specific shape and dimension 
requirements is rather challenging. The best performing FinFETs, as has been published in 
recent years, have typical leakage current of 0.1 µA/µm [7, 11, 12], while their low power 
(LP) counterparts have leakage currents as low as 1 nA/µm [13], resulting in static/leakage 
power dissipation of 80 nW/µm and 0.8 nW/µm, respectively. Assuming a power 
dissipation capacitance CPD = 2.4×1015 F/µm, the dynamic power dissipation of a FinFET 
operating at 100 kHz with VDD = 0.8 V and load capacitance of 15 pF/µm is 308 µW/µm 
[11, 14]. 
Memristors, since their experimental demonstration in 2008, provide an alternative 
platform for low power and scalable electronics [15]. Unlike shorting the power supply 
and ground buses during switching of CMOS logic circuits, memristors offer a finite 
resistance during the ON state preventing any short circuit current. The dynamic power 
consumption of a 50 nm ZrOx memristor is only 67.5 nW, assuming a SET voltage of 0.15 
V, input signal frequency of 100 kHz, and a load capacitance of 15 pF [16]. For a total 
transition time of 14.3 ps, the switching energy of memristor logic is merely 9.65×1019 J. 
Assuming a computation cycle of 1ns, energy dissipation during computation is 
18.75×1015 W for a memristor ON resistance of 1.2 kΩ. Among other futuristic tech￾nologies, carbon nanotube (CNT) FET-based inverter logic has the potential to offer low 
switching energy. HSPICE simulations of these devices suggest switching energy of 
6.08×1017 J which still is two orders of magnitude higher than that of memristor-based 
logic gates. 
The proposed logic circuits employing memristors are based upon “Material Impli￾cation” as opposed to the traditional “Logical Implication”, however, from an electrical 
engineering perspective they have identical truth tables and imply similar functionalities. 
Material Implication (IMP) logic, x  y (“x implies y” or “if x then y”) is one of the 
fundamental building blocks, together with the FALSE logic, of all Boolean logic 
operations [17, 18]. The importance of IMP logic can be understood by the fact that IMP 
and FALSE logics together form a computationally complete logic basis and can compute 
any compound Boolean operation. Logicians use material implication, also known as 
“material consequence”, “implication”, “implies”, or “conditional”, as a binary connective 190 A. Mazady & M. Anwar 
to create new sentences in the form of “if…then” structure. The truth-value of the condi￾tional new sentence entirely depends on the truth-values of the component propositions. 
As an example, “if you own a dog, then you own an animal” is a material implication in 
the sense that the conditional statement is false only if someone claims that he owns a dog 
but does not own an animal. 
In its simplest form, material implication logic can be realized by using only a resistor 
and two memristors and with the physical states of memristors, namely — high resistance 
state (HRS) or low resistance state (LRS), implemented as the logic inputs for the IMP 
logic gate is reminiscent of Shannon’s formulation [19]. In that sense, memristor-based 
IMP logic is also a “stateful” logic with the memristors remembering their states and 
performing the logic operations at the same time. The fact that the same device could serve 
both as logic and memory in the IMP logic architecture, the demonstration of IMP logic 
using memristors also means demonstration of non-von Neumann architectures. 
Use of memristors as logic gates has mostly been reported using phenomenological 
models or simulations [3]. A simulation model of memristor-based IMP logic is reported 
by Kvatinsky et al. suggesting that the widely used linear ionic drift model is not practical 
for IMP logic gates [20]. The same group also proposed a possible architecture for 8-bit 
full adder using only IMP and FASLSE logics [3]. Klimo et al. proposed voltage-based 
fuzzy logic computations using memristors and could be considered as an extension of 
classical Boolean logic [21]. A hybrid CMOS-memristor logic, known as memristor 
ratioed logic (MRL), is modeled by performing OR and AND logic operations using 
memristors and signal sensing and restorations using CMOS inverters [22]. Chang et al. 
proposed a computer architecture implementing memristor-based latch and flip-flops in the 
arrangement of a 3D-IC [23]. Rajendran et al. designed programmable threshold gates, 
where memristors are used as weights at the inputs [24]. In contrast to memristors, Wang 
et al. reported the use of magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ) to demonstrate stateful logic 
operations where magnetic spins are employed as the physical state [25]. Two separate 
current biases switched the magnetization of the active layer and the operations of six logic 
gates were demonstrated. Kimura et al. combined a ferroelectric memory element in a 
configurable logic gate by implementing complementary ferro-electric capacitors [26]. It 
is worth noting that the fabrication of the devices involving Ta/NiFe/MnIr/CoFe/Al layers 
requires thickness in the range of 7Å that in turn demands very advanced and expensive 
fabrication processes. Moreover, the use of a Wheatstone bridge for the read circuitry adds 
to the power requirement of the circuit. However, compared to MTJs, memristors promise 
faster switching around 120 ps with power consumption in the range of pJs [17]. 
The only experimental demonstration of IMP logic using memristors to date is reported 
by Borghetti et al. using TiO2 thin film crossbars [17]. It is important to note that Borghetti 
et al. employed current amplifiers to distinguish between logic outputs that result in an 
increased power requirement for the demonstration. In addition, fabrication of the crossbar 
architecture reported by Borghetti et al. requires a two-step metallization process that 
complicates the fabrication process and results in sneak paths [27]. Memristor-Based Material Implication Logic: Prelude to In-Memory Computing 191
2. Fabrication and Characterization of Memristor 
ZnO NW memristors are fabricated using a three-step process. In the first step, ZnO 
epitaxial layer is grown using metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) that 
serves as the nucleation layer for subsequent growth. Following the growth of the epitaxial 
layer, a novel process developed to grow horizontal nanowires using controlled hydro￾thermal synthesis is performed as reported by Rivera et al. [28]. It is to be noted that unlike 
the standard practice of growing vertical NRs followed by pick-and-place technique to 
obtain horizontal nanostructures, the present technology allows the direct growth of 
horizontal nanowires on desired substrates. SEM measurements suggest the NWs to be 
2–5 µm long with the diameter varying from 400 nm to 600 nm as shown in the inset of 
Fig. 1. Microscopic image of the fabricated device is shown in Fig. 1, where electron beam 
lithography (EBL) is used to pattern the contact electrodes. Al contacts are deposited using 
physical vapor deposition (PVD) technique followed by lift-off and annealing at 300°C. 
SEM measurements suggest the NWs to be 2–5 µm long with the diameter varying from 
400 nm to 600 nm as shown in the inset of Fig. 1. 
Figure 1 shows the fabricated ZnO NW memristive device that has a length of 2 µm. 
The measured DC I-V characteristic is shown in Fig. 1(b). Depending on the variation of 
the device diameters, an electroforming voltage between 5V and 8V was usually required 
to prepare the devices with a predefined conductive path. A positive bias greater than 2 V 
applied for 10 ms toggles the device from high resistance state (HRS) to low resistance 
state (LRS). HRS and LRS of the device are defined as logic “0” and logic “1” inputs to 
Fig. 1. Measured DC I-V characteristics of an Al/ZnO NW/Al memristive device. Inset: Optical microscopic 
image of the device fabricated using EBL showing the electrodes. 
(b) 192 A. Mazady & M. Anwar 
the device, respectively. A negative voltage, with a magnitude larger than 2 V, resets the 
device to HRS. For a smaller or zero bias voltage, the device does not switch and remains 
in the same resistance state, confirming the fundamental property of ReRAM. It is worth 
mentioning that the measured HRS to LRS resistances in our fabricated memristive devices 
were 129 kΩ and 189 Ω, respectively. The HRS/LRS ratio of 684 is a significant improve￾ment over the ratio of 3 reported by Chang et al. for a Pt/ZnO (100 nm thin film)/Pt 
memristors and can be used to build large memory banks [29]. As a reference, Amsinck 
et al. reported that a minimum HRS/LRS ratio of 43 must be maintained for a 512×512 
array memory to operate [30]. Note that for a 1-bit logic gate, as has been demonstrated in 
this paper, a HRS/LRS ratio of ~5 was sufficient. This alludes to the fact that devices with 
HRS/LRS of 684 can support much larger logic arrays. 
3. Demonstration of IMP Logic 
A schematic of the implemented IMP logic employing memristors is shown in Fig. 2. In 
this configuration two memristors (M1 and M2) are connected to a common node and to a 
load resistor RL=1 kΩ. The input logic voltages (x and y) correspond to the initial states of 
M1 and M2 (HRS = logic “0” and LRS = logic “1”). Implementation of IMP logic requires 
stable resistance levels at LRS and that collapses only minimally in subsequent voltage 
sweeps [31, 32]. LRS of 1.1 kΩ–1.3 kΩ and HRS of 6.25 kΩ–7.15 kΩ at 1V-applied bias 
are chosen for stable and repeatable switching. Successful demonstration of the IMP logic 
using memristors of HRS/LRS ratio of only ~5 is a significant improvement over the 
requirement of HRS/LRS ratio of 100 reported by Borghetti et al. [17]. The ability of the 
logic gates to function with memristors of smaller HRS/LRS ratios indicates less stringent 
requirements on the memristor performance, resulting in lower bit error rates, improved 
endurance, and better retention characteristics. 
Fig. 2. Truth table and schematic diagram of the IMP logic employing two memristors. The figure also shows 
the wire-bonded memristors on a chip carrier used in the experimental demonstration. 
The memristors are SET to logic “1” by applying a positive bias voltage VSET for 10ms. 
It is important to note that positive bias is ubiquitously used for digital logic operation than 
the previously demonstrated IMP operation with negative bias [17]. The magnitude of VSETMemristor-Based Material Implication Logic: Prelude to In-Memory Computing 193
is selected as 3 V, higher than the threshold voltage required for switching, to ensure 
switching in the subsequent voltage pulses. The devices require a negative voltage of 5 V 
to RESET (logic “0”). Prior to each logic operation of the truth table, a read voltage of 1 V 
is applied across the device and the resistance is measured. An intermediate voltage VINT
= 1.3 V is defined such that VSET – VINT is smaller than the threshold voltage required for 
switching. VINT is considered as the higher limit of logic “0” throughout this experiment. 
The IMP operation is performed by applying a VINT pulse to M1 and a VSET pulse to 
M2 simultaneously. The circuit is configured as a synchronous logic that triggers at the 
rising edge of the clock pulse. For initial conditions x = 0 and y = 0, both memristors M1 
and M2 are in HRS and VOUT is in logic “0” (z = 0). With the triggering of the clock pulse, 
VINT and VSET are applied to M1 and M2, respectively. Pulse VINT is not enough for M1 to 
switch, however, VSET switches M2 to LRS and z becomes a logic “1” as shown in Fig. 3. 
For initial conditions x = 0 and y = 1, LRS of M2 results in a high VOUT. With the 
application of the next clock pulse, VINT does not switch the resistance of M1, and VSET 
Fig. 3. Experimental demonstration of IMP logic operation using memristors. The four different states as outlined 
in the truth table are implemented and centered. 194 A. Mazady & M. Anwar 
does not switch M2 as it already was in LRS. As a result, VOUT remains high and z = 1. For 
initial conditions x = 1 and y = 0, LRS of M1 brings VOUT close to VINT. In the succeeding 
clock trigger, the voltage across M2 is ~VSET – VINT, which is not enough to switch M2 to 
LRS due to such selection of VINT magnitude, and as a result z = 0. For initial conditions 
x = 1 and y = 1, both the memristors are in LRS and with the application of VINT and VSET, 
voltage magnitudes VINT – VOUT and VSET – VOUT are not sufficient to switch either M1 
or M2. 
In order to demonstrate the reproducibility and reliability of the logic switching 
measurements, a second set of memristors, fabricated using a similar process as mentioned 
above but carried out at a different time frame to account for the effect of process 
variability, is implemented. The Boolean logics of the truth table shown in Fig. 2 are 
demonstrated using the new set of memristors and the results are shown in Fig. 4. The LRS 
and HRS resistances are not regulated within a tight range, as the experiment mentioned 
earlier, to emulate a more practical scenario. RON and ROFF vary in the range between 54 Ω
and 237 Ω, and 25 kΩ and 308 kΩ, respectively. During the READ operation of the 
Fig. 4. Experimental demonstration of memristor-based IMP logic at 100 KHz frequency. The four different 
states outlined in the truth table are demonstrated. Memristor-Based Material Implication Logic: Prelude to In-Memory Computing 195
mentioned RON and ROFF resistances, the supply voltage is swept from 0V to 0.5 V and a 
current compliance of 5 mA is imposed by the semiconductor parameter analyzer to ensure 
that the devices do not break down due to excessive current flowing through them. The 
logic gate is demonstrated to be functional at a clock frequency of 100 kHz. The lone 
experimental demonstration of IMP logic [17] did not report the frequency of operation 
and to the best of our knowledge, this is the fastest IMP logic yet to be reported. 
It is to be noted that the bias voltage required for the memristor to switch can also be 
scaled by scaling the device length. It is well known that the role of the bias voltage in 
memristive systems is to drift the oxygen vacancies from anode to the cathode and thereby 
creating conductive filaments. This ionic drift process is dictated rather by the applied 
electric field than the bias voltage. As a result, the required bias voltage decreases linearly 
as the device scales, described by E=V/d, where E is the electric field, V is the applied 
bias, and d is the length of the memristors. As an example, scaling the ZnO NW memristor 
from 2 µm to 100 nm results in a VSET of 0.15 V, VINT of 65 mV, VRESET of 0.25 V, and 
VREAD of 50 mV. Such voltage scaling leads to reduced power consumption as shown in 
Fig. 5 where static power dissipation (PS), dynamic power dissipation (PD), as well as total 
power dissipation (PTotal) of memristors of different lengths are calculated. The total 
power consumption of a 2 μm memristor-based IMP logic is only 56.2 μW which is 
expected to reduce below 0.1 μW for 50 nm ZnO memristors. Shrinking the device lengths 
from 2 µm to 50 nm also results in 3–4 orders of reduction in the delay of a typical 
memristor, owing to increased electric field across the electrodes as discussed above. This 
suggests that replacing the 2 µm memristors in the logic gates with 50 nm memristors will 
result in approximately 98% reduction in the gate delay. It is worth mentioning that we 
purposefully limited our analyses here to the core technology of a 1-bit fundamental logic 
gate implemented using memristors. Integration-related performance metrics such as fan 
out, drive capability, and so forth are left to be addressed in a future work. 
Fig. 5. Calculated power dissipation of ZnO memristor-based implication logic as a function of device length. 
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Power Consumption (µW)
Memristor Length, L (µm)
PS
PD
PTotal
Calculated data196 A. Mazady & M. Anwar 
Fig. 6. Measured retention characteristics of fabricated ZnO memristor. 
Figure 6 shows the measured retention characteristics of ZnO memristors. RON and 
ROFF are measured at 0.4 V by sweeping the applied bias from 0V to 0.4V using HP4145B 
Semiconductor Parameter Analyzer. The value of RON fluctuates between 229 Ω and 281 Ω
for a duration up to 2.24×106
 seconds or 26 days. ROFF maintained its high value for a 
duration of over 23 days. A minimum ROFF/RON ratio of 23 is observed throughout the 
measurement period. Material implication coupled with FALSE logic provides the required 
functionality that, when coupled with the ability for memristors to remember or function 
as memory, paves the way to in-memory computing or non-von Neumann architectures. 
4. Conclusion 
ZnO NW memristors are fabricated using MOCVD followed by hydrothermal synthesis 
and EBL. Two memristors are used to implement IMP logic, where they serve as both the 
memory and logic elements. The IMP logic is successfully demonstrated with a ROFF/RON
ratio as low as 5, resulting in a smaller bit error rate of the logic function. Logic pulses of 
positive amplitudes are demonstrated demonstrating the viability to be integrated with 
existing binary logic systems. The capability to perform logic operations within the 
memory element shows the potential of designing a computer architecture different from 
the familiar paradigms of von Neumann systems. Power consumption of memristor-based 
logic gates is significantly lower than CMOS-based gates and even that can be reduced 
further by scaling down the memristors. 
References 
1. Di Ventra, M., Pershin, Y. V. & Chua, L. O. Circuit elements with memory: Memristors, 
memcapacitors, and meminductors. Proc. IEEE 97, 1717–1724 (2009). 
2. Borghetti, J. et al. A hybrid nanomemristor/transistor logic circuit capable of self-programming. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1699–1703 (2009). 
1E+01
1E+02
1E+03
1E+04
1E+05
1E+06
1E+00 1E+01 1E+02 1E+03 1E+04 1E+05 1E+06 1E+07
Resistance (Ohm)
Time (s)
Retention Characteristics
RON
ROFFMemristor-Based Material Implication Logic: Prelude to In-Memory Computing 197
3. Kvatinsky, S. et al. Memristor-based material implication (imply) logic: Design principles and 
methodologies (2013). 
4. Shauly, E. N. CMOS leakage and power reduction in transistors and circuits: Process and layout 
considerations. J. Low Power Electron. Appl. 2, 1–29 (2012). 
5. Houssa, M. High k gate dielectrics (2003). 
6. Yeap, G. C., Krishnan, S. & Lin, M. Fringing-induced barrier lowering (FIBL) in sub-100 nm 
MOSFETs with high-k gate dielectrics. Electron. Lett. 34, 1150–1152 (1998). 
7. Wu, C. et al. High performance 22/20nm FinFET CMOS devices with advanced high-K/metal 
gate scheme. In 2010 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) (IEEE, 2010). 
8. Collaert, N. et al. Multi-gate devices for the 32nm technology node and beyond. Solid-State 
Electron. 52, 1291–1296 (2008). 
9. Manoj, C., Nagpal, M., Varghese, D. & Ramgopal Rao, V. Device design and optimization 
considerations for bulk FinFETs. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 55, 609–615 (2008). 
10. Gaynor, B. D. & Hassoun, S. Fin shape impact on FinFET leakage with application to 
multithreshold and ultralow-leakage FinFET design. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 61, 2738–
2744 (2014). 
11. Maly, W. et al. Twin gate, vertical slit FET (VeSFET) for highly periodic layout and 3D 
integration. In 2011 Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Mixed Design of 
Integrated Circuits and Systems (MIXDES) (IEEE, 2011). 
12. Kavalieros, J. et al. Tri-gate transistor architecture with high-k gate dielectrics, metal gates 
and strain engineering. In 2006 Symposium on VLSI Technology, Digest of Technical Papers 
(IEEE, 2006). 
13. Yeh, C. et al. A low operating power FinFET transistor module featuring scaled gate stack and 
strain engineering for 32/28nm SoC technology. In 2010 IEEE International Electron Devices 
Meeting (IEDM) (IEEE, 2010). 
14. Shahidi, G. Device architecture: Ultimate planar CMOS limit and sub-32nm device options. In 
IEEE IEDM Short Course (2009). 
15. Strukov D. B., Snider G. S., Stewart D. R. & Williams R. S. The missing memristor found. 
Nature 453, 80–83 (2008). 
16. Mazady, A. & Anwar, M. Switching transients in memristors. Int. J. Hi. Spe. Ele. Syst. 28(3–
4), 1940023 (2019) 
17. Borghetti, J. et al. ‘Memristive’ switches enable ‘stateful’ logic operations via material 
implication. Nature 464, 873–876 (2010). 
18. Whitehead, A. & Russel, B. In Principia Mathematica (Cambridge University Press, 1910). 
19. Shannon, C. E. A symbolic analysis of relay and switching circuits. Trans. Amer. Inst. Electric. 
Eng. 57, 713–723 (1938). 
20. Kvatinsky, S., Kolodny, A., Weiser, U. C. & Friedman, E. G. Memristor-based IMPLY logic 
design procedure. In 2011 IEEE 29th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD)
(IEEE, 2011). 
21. Klimo, M. & Such, O. Memristors can implement fuzzy logic. arXiv:1110.2074. 
22. Kvatinsky, S. et al. MRL—memristor ratioed logic. In 2012 13th International Workshop on 
Cellular Nanoscale Networks and Their Applications (CNNA) (IEEE, 2012). 
23. Chang, M., Chiu, P., Wu, W., Chuang, C. & Sheu, S. Challenges and trends in low-power 3D 
die-stacked IC designs using RAM, memristor logic, and resistive memory (ReRAM). In 2011 
IEEE 9th International Conference on ASIC (IEEE, 2011). 198 A. Mazady & M. Anwar 
24. Rajendran, J., Manem, H., Karri, R. & Rose, G. S. Memristor based programmable threshold 
logic array. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Nanoscale 
Architectures (IEEE Press, 2010). 
25. Wang, J., Meng, H. & Wang, J. Programmable spintronics logic device based on a magnetic 
tunnel junction element. J. Appl. Phys. 97, 10D509 (2005). 
26. Kimura, H. et al. Complementary ferroelectric-capacitor logic for low-power logic-in-memory 
VLSI. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 39, 919–926 (2004). 
27. Zidan, M. A., Fahmy, H. A. H., Hussain, M. M. & Salama, K. N. Memristor-based memory: 
The sneak paths problem and solutions. Microelectron. J. 44, 176–183 (2013). 
28. Rivera, A., Mazady, A. & Anwar, M. Low temperature growth of horizontal ZnO nanorods. 
MRS Proc. 1707, uu03-33 (2014). 
29. Chang, W., Lai, Y., Wu, T., Wang, S., Chen, F. & Tsai, M. Unipolar resistive switching 
characteristics of ZnO thin films for nonvolatile memory applications. Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 
022110 (2008). 
30. Amsinck, C. J., Di Spigna, N. H., Nackashi, D. P. & Franzon, P. D. Scaling constraints in 
nanoelectronic random-access memories. Nanotechnology 16, 2251 (2005). 
31. Mazady, A. & Anwar, M. Memristor: Part I — The underlying physics and conduction 
mechanism. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 61, 1054–1061 (2014). 
32. Mazady, A. & Anwar, M. Memristor: Part II — DC, transient and RF analysis. IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices 61, 1062–1070 (2014).  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0019
199 
Magnetostrictive Fiber Sensors as Total Field Magnetometers 
R. Dougenik*,†,‡, R. Lacomb*,† and F. Jain†
*Electromagnetic Systems Department, Naval Undersea Warfare Center Division Newport, RI, USA 
†ECE, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA 
‡robert.dougenik@uconn.edu 
A novel magnetostrictive thin film fiber sensor is presented which can be utilized in an interferometric 
architecture. The magnetostrictive fiber sensor utilizes novel fiber and thin film technology to achieve 
high sensitivity in the sub-nanotesla regime. The base sensor architecture utilizes optical fiber wound 
in a novel low stress flat coil resembling a record, coated with a thin magnetostrictive film. Two 
prototype variants were fabricated, incorporating FeCo sputtered films of different thicknesses on 
4 µm polyimide jacket single mode fiber. The sensors were incorporated into a fiber optic interfero￾metric measurement apparatus to characterize time-varying magnetic field sensitivity. Device results 
are presented which demonstrate sensitivity is a function of film thickness. The experimental data 
exhibited a two-order magnitude sensitivity improvement as the thin film thickness was doubled. 
Sensitivity projections are made based on film thickness. 
Keywords: Magnetostrictive fiber sensor; sub-nanotesla magnetometer; sensitivity improvement. 
1. Background 
Magnetostriction is a property of ferromagnetic materials allowing a measurable change in 
size or shape in the presence of a magnetic field. FeCo is one example of a magnetostrictive 
film which exhibits large magnetostriction [1, 2]. It has been demonstrated that by tuning 
the presence of structural heterogeneity in textured CoxFe1-x thin films, effective mag￾netostriction as large as 1000 p.p.m. is feasible, which makes possible detection of fields 
in the nT-pT range [3]. The maximum magnetostrictive composition found near the 
(fcc+bcc)/bcc phase boundary is compositionally and process-wise dependent upon the 
synthesis technique and subsequent annealing [4]. Through co-sputtering, this thin metallic 
film can be deposited directly onto a fiber jacket. 
The basis of the expected sensitivity of this sensor lies in the inherent sensitivity of 
interferometry, the large effective magnetostriction of FeCo, and the well-known modula￾tion/demodulation scheme developed by Dandrich et al. [5]. The mechanism by which a 
magnetic field induces a phase shift in the fiber is known as the photoelastic effect. Stress 
induced on the fiber by the magnetostriction of the FeCo in the presence of a magnetic field 
‡Corresponding author. 200 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
results in a change in optical path length. It is therefore expected that the sensitivity of the 
device will scale proportionally with magnetostrictive (MS) coated fiber length. 
1.1. Magnetostrictive Fiber Sensor Architecture 
A schematic of a fiber optic interferometric measurement apparatus incorporating the 
magnetostrictive (MS) fiber sensor is shown in Fig. 1. 
Fig. 1. Michelson interferometric architecture incorporating the FeCo fiber sensor. 
Utilizing a mirrored end on both the magnetostrictive coated fiber and reference spool 
allows a single 2×2 coupler to act as an interferometer. The sensor and reference spool are 
of equal length such that the interferometer will be approximately matched when no 
magnetic field is present. The piezoelectric transducer (PZT) in the reference leg allows 
the signal of interest (i.e. a magnetic field incident on the sensor) to be modulated/ 
demodulated as described in [6]. Coupled light in the sensor arm experiences a net phase 
change delay with respect to coupled light traveling through the reference arm which 
provides a detectable signal. A phase-generated carrier demodulation scheme is utilized to 
characterize the signal-to-noise ratio, which has been used as a sensitivity metric. The 
device sensitivity can be tailored through the magnetostrictive film, fiber–film interface 
and the number of fiber turns N of the sensor (similar to that of a fiber-optic gyroscope). Magnetostrictive Fiber Sensors as Total Field Magnetometers 201
2. Sensor Fabrication 
The fabrication strategy was to deposit magnetostrictive thin films directly on or as close 
to the fiber cladding as possible. Additionally, the sensor architecture is configured to 
minimize geometric stresses. This strategy is intended to maximize the magnetostrictive 
stress induced on the glass to improve sensitivity and utilize a sensor geometry compatible 
with standard semiconductor wafer processing technology. 
A typical optical fiber has two jackets; an inner “hard jacket” which rests on the glass 
cladding of the fiber, and a softer external jacket. Typically, the inner jacket thickness is 
on the order of 100–200 µm. The custom fiber utilized in the fabrication of this sensor had 
only a polyimide inner jacket with a thickness of about 4 µm. The thin jacket allowed the 
magnetostrictive-induced stress to be better transferred to the glass resulting in a larger 
change in optical path length. In addition, the thin jacket enables a smaller form factor for 
a given length of fiber. 
Prototype sensors were fabricated by winding 50 meter lengths of custom fiber into 
low stress single layer coils resembling a record. The fiber coil was subsequently glued 
together. The custom fiber coil was then coated with a thin FeCo film in a six-pocket 
sputtering machine. The sputtering machine used is designed for semiconductor processing 
and can only accommodate a wafer less than four inches in diameter and of little height. 
This fabrication method limited both the configuration of the sensor as well as the 
maximum length. Figure 2 portrays a completed FeCo-coated fiber sensor. 
Fig. 2. Prototype FeCo-coated fiber sensor. 202 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
Two thin jacket fiber sensors were fabricated using the method described above. Critical 
prototype parameters are documented in Table 1. 
Table 1. Sensor designs. 
Parameter Prototype #1 Prototype #2 
Fiber jacket thickness (µm) 4 4 
FeCo coated Yes Yes 
FeCo thickness (µm) 0.5 1.5 
Length (m) 44.2 48.3 
Insertion loss (dB) 0.450 0.712 
3. Test Results 
The sensor characterized in the test setup is illustrated in Fig. 3. The sensors were placed 
in a Helmholtz coil, which produced a known uniform axial magnetic field proportional to 
drive current. The magnetic field incident on the sensor was verified with an off-the-shelf 
time-varying Gauss meter. The optical phase change due to the sensor was translated to an 
electrical signal by the demodulator and measured as signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in a 3 Hz 
bandwidth at a spectrum analyzer. 
Fig. 3. FeCo-coated fiber sensor test setup. Magnetostrictive Fiber Sensors as Total Field Magnetometers 203
All SNR measurements taken at the spectrum analyzer were measured in a 3 Hz 
bandwidth at 1.3 kHz. The lower limit of the magnetic field strengths tested was set by off￾the-shelf time-varying Gauss meter used to verify the field strength. Figure 4 shows the 
output SNR versus magnetic field strength. 
Fig. 4. Experimental data for two prototype sensors of different FeCo thickness (Prototype #1 film thickness: 
0.5 µm, Prototype #2 film thickness: 1.5 µm). Dotted line represents extrapolation for minimum detectable signals 
assuming uncorrelated noise. 
Prototype #1 produced a 14 dB SNR with a 400 nT incident magnetic field. By 
extrapolation, it is estimated that this sensor is capable of detecting magnetic fields on the 
order of 40 nT. 
Prototype #2 produced a 42 dB SNR with approximately 1.6 µT incident magnetic 
field. By extrapolation, it is estimated that this sensor is capable of detecting magnetic 
fields on the order of 200–300 pT. 
4. Discussion 
The initial FeCo coated fiber sensor (Prototype #1) showed promising results, yielding 
an approximate sensitivity on the order of 40 nT. Prototype #2 showed a significant 
improvement in sensitivity due to increased FeCo film thickness yielding a sensitivity of 
about 200–300 pT. This result was expected due to the volumetric increase in aligned 
domains of the magnetic film. We expect that the sensor sensitivity can be increased by 
increasing the overall fiber length for the total change in optical path length is cumulative. 
It is expected that doubling the fiber length will result in a 3 dB sensitivity improvement 204 R. Dougenik, R. Lacomb & F. Jain 
while the data demonstrates a more significant improvement through changing the film 
thickness. 
Fiber optic-based magnetic sensors are capable of detecting fields on the order of 10 pT 
with only superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) capable of detecting 
magnetic fields less than 1 pT. Figure 5 shows a performance comparison of several types 
of magnetic field sensors with Prototype #2 performance superimposed. 
Fig. 5. Comparison of FeCo fiber sensor data to other magnetic field sensor device technologies [7]. 
References 
1. N. Tiercelin, V. Preobrazhensky, P. Permod and A. Ostaschenko, “Enhanced magnetoelectric 
effect in nanostructured magnetostrictive thin film resonant actuator with field induced spin 
reorientation transition,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 96(6), 062904 (2008). 
2. Y. Fu, Z. Cheng and Z. Yang, “Magnetically soft and high-saturation-magnetization FeCo films 
fabricated by co-sputtering,” IPSS 202(6), 1150–1154 (2005). 
3. A. L. Herrera-May et al., “Resonant magnetic field sensors based on MEMS technology,” 
Sensors 9(10), 7785–7813 (2009). 
4. D. Hunter et al., “Giant magnetostriction in annealed Co1-xFex thin-films,” Nat. Commun. 2, 518 
(2011). 
5. A. Dandridge, A. B. Tveten and T. G. Giallorenzi, “Homodyne demodulation scheme for fiber 
optic sensors using phase generated carrier,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18(10) (1982). 
6. T. G. Giallorenzi, J. A. Bucaro, A. Dandridge, G. H. Sigel, Jr., J. H. Cole, S. C. Rashleigh and R. 
G. Priest, “Optical fiber sensor technology,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18(4) (1982). 
7. B. Bahreyni, “A resonant micromachined magnetic field sensor,” IEEE Sensor J. 7(9), 1326–
1334 (2007).  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0020
205 
Propagation Delay and Power Dissipation Analysis for a 
2-Bit SRAM Using Multi-State SWS Inverter 
A. Husawi1,2, R. H. Gudlavalleti1
, B. Saman3
, A. Almalki1,3, J. Chandy1, E. Heller4
 and F. C. Jain1,*
1ECE Department, University of Connecticut, CT, USA 2Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering Technology, Yanbu Industrial College, 
Yanbu Industrial City, Al-Medina 46452, KSA 3Electrical Engineering Department, Taif University, KSA 4Synopsys Inc., Ossining, NY, USA *fcj@engr.uconn.edu 
This paper presents a study on the propagation delay and power dissipation of a 2-bit static random￾access memory (SRAM) with two cross-coupled multi-state spatial wave function switching (SWS) 
CMOS inverters. The proposed SRAM design utilizes the advantages of the CMOS-SWS inverter, 
such as its small area, low power consumption, and high speed. The 2-bit SRAM circuit simulations 
were carried out in Cadence to analyze the power dissipation and propagation delay. An Analog 
Behavioral Model (ABM) and the Berkeley Short-channel IGFET Model (BSIM4.6) in 0.18-μm 
technology were combined to create this model. The analysis of the propagation delay shows that the 
multi-state CMOS-SWS SRAM significantly reduces the delay compared to other multi-state 6T 
SRAM memories. Additionally, the analysis of the power dissipation shows that the multi-state SWS￾SRAM is comparable to conventional SRAMs. These results demonstrate the potential of multi-state 
SWS-SRAM for improving the performance of memory circuits and provide valuable insights for 
future design optimization. 
Keywords: SWS FETs; power dissipation; multi-state circuit; 2-bit SWS-SRAM circuit; ABM 
simulations. 
1. Introduction 
The SWS-FET transistor incorporates vertically stacked quantum well/quantum dot 
channels to allow current to flow across multiple channels in a single transistor by varying 
the gate voltage [1, 2]. In addition, the SWS-FET was shown to perform multivalued logic 
computation, and storage in memories [3]. The multiple-quantum-well/quantum-dot struc￾ture encodes logic states (00), (01), (10), and (11) utilizing the spatial location of carriers 
[4–7]. Alternatively, these states could be written as (OFF, OFF), (OFF, ON), (ON, OFF), 
and (ON, ON) states. 
Multi-state operation of SWS-FETs makes it possible to process two bits in the design 
of logic circuits. Primary logic cells, full-adders, latches, and static random-access memory 
*Corresponding author. 206 A. Husawi et al. 
(SRAM) have been shown to have 50% area savings employing 4-state/2-bit SWS-FETs 
[1, 6, 7]. These circuits made use of several n-channel SWS-FET source/drain topologies 
to process two or more bits at once. A 2-bit SRAM is implemented using 4-state inverters 
having additional threshold voltages. 
This helps reduce the number of transistors and interconnects required in the SRAM 
circuit, resulting in low power consumption and smaller propagation delay. The propaga￾tion delay is calculated by measuring the time taken for the output of the circuit to reach a 
steady state after a change in the input. Power consumption is calculated by measuring the 
average energy consumed by the circuit. 
This paper aims to evaluate the propagation delay and power consumption for a 2-bit 
SRAM using a 4-state CMOS-SWS inverter in a 180 nm technology node. Simulations 
model the circuit and perform transient and power analysis. An Analog Behavioral Model 
(ABM) and the Berkeley Short-channel IGFET Model (BSIM4.6) were combined to create 
the SWS-FET model [8]. Overall, the analysis of propagation delay and power consump￾tion for the 2-bit SRAM cell using 4-state CMOS-SWS inverters provide insights into the 
efficiency and performance of this novel memory cell design in the 180 nm technology 
node. 
2. Four-state SWS Inverter 
The SWS-FET device is comprised of multiple Quantum Well/Quantum Dot channels that 
allow the electron wave functions to move from one channel to another in response to the 
gate voltage (VG). Jain et al. reported the fabrication process for SWS-FETs [1]. Figure 1 
shows the cross-sectional schematic of n-channel and p-channel SWS-FET in CMOS-X 
configuration. Figure 2 illustrates the energy band diagram, and Fig. 3 shows the circuit 
schematic. 
Fig. 1. Cross-sectional schematic of n- and p-channel SWS-FETs [8]. Propagation Delay and Power Dissipation Analysis for a 2-Bit SRAM 207
The left side shows n-SWS-FET with two Si Quantum Well (2-QW) channels. The 
device has an upper Si well (W1) and a lower Si well (W2) sandwiched between SiGe 
barriers. Carriers (electrons) flow in lower well W2 or upper well W1 in an n-SWS-FET 
depending on the gate voltage (VGS). The lower well W2 has a higher carrier density than 
the upper well at lower gate voltages. Carrier density in W1 increases as gate voltage 
increases. The p-SWS-FET (right side) is comprised of two SiGe quantum well sandwiched 
between Si barriers. The hole current flows in lower W2 or upper W1 well/channel 
depending on the applied gate voltage (VGS). When the gate voltage is low, the top well 
W1 has more holes than the lower well W2 [6]. 
Figure 2A shows the type I heterostructure energy band diagram, whereas the type II 
heterostructure energy band diagram is shown in Fig. 2B. 
Fig. 2(A). Type I heterostructure of n-SWS-FET 
energy band diagram [4]. 
 Fig. 2(B). Type II heterostructure of n-SWS-FET energy 
band diagram [4]. 
Fig. 3. The 4-state SWS-FET based inverter in CMOS-X configuration. 208 A. Husawi et al. 
The proposed 4-state SWS-FET circuit operates with four voltage levels, corre￾sponding to 0 V, 0.4 V, 0.8 V, and 1.2 V. One p-SWS-FET and n-SWS-FET make up the 
complementary 4-state inverter. Source, S2 of p-SWS-FET is maintained at 1.2 V and 
Source, S1 is kept at 0.8 V. In the case of n-SWS-FET Source, S2 is grounded and Source 
S1 is kept at 0.4 V. The (𝑉௧௛) values corresponding to the transistor source-bulk are shown 
in Table 1. The logic is shown in the truth Table 2. Model parameters of the SWS-FET 
based inverter are listed in Table 3. 
 Table 1. Threshold voltage values Table 2. Four-state SWS truth table 
Table 3. Model parameters of the n/p SWS-FET-based inverter 
N-Channel SWS-FET P-Channel SWS-FET 
𝑽𝑫𝑫 1.2 1.2 
Width (W1) 0.45 μm 2.14 μm
Width (W2) 0.9 μm 4.28 μm
Length (L) 0.18 μm 0.18 μm
𝑽𝒕𝒉𝟏 0.8 V 0.8 V 
𝑽𝒕𝒉𝟐 0.2 V 0.8 V 
VUL 0.28 V 0.28 V 
 
3. SWSFET based 6T 2-bit SRAM 
Figure 4 shows the circuit schematic of 6T SRAM with two cross-coupled (SWS) inverters 
and the two access transistors Nmos1 and Nmos2. The cross-coupled inverters consist of 
two pairs of nSWS and pSWS transistors, while the access transistors are two single nMOS 
transistors that control the read and write operations of the cell. The gate of these access 
transistors is controlled by word line inputs (Word_Line). Whenever the WL is made high, 
the Data and Data_Bar are connected to the cell; hence cell can be written in and read out 
the data through the bit lines. 
3.1. Read and Write operation of 6T SWSFET based 2-bit SRAM 
Figure 5 shows the simulation result for the write operation of 2-bit SRAM based on 6T 
SWSFET unit cell shown in Fig. 4. The top panel in Fig. 5 shows the word_line (blue line), 
𝑽𝒕𝒉𝟏 𝑽𝒕𝒉𝟐
p-SWS 0.8 V 0.2 V 
n-SWS 0.8 V 0.2 V 
IN OUT 
0 1.2 
0.4 0.8 
0.8 0.4 
1.2 0 Propagation Delay and Power Dissipation Analysis for a 2-Bit SRAM 209
the input data (green line) and data stored and datastored_bar in the memory cell (red line) 
when wordline input goes high are shown in bottom two of the plot. The change in each 
state for a given input state depicts the storage of each state in this multistate SRAM cell. 
Fig. 4. Circuit schematic of 2-bit SRAM with cross-coupled SWS-inverters. 
Fig. 5. Simulation result of Word line (blue line), Data (green line), Data stored (red line), and Data_stored_bar 
(bottom red line). 210 A. Husawi et al. 
During read operation, the data and databar lines are initially pre-charged. When 
wordline (WL) goes high, the stored data from the SRAM cell is retrieved from memory 
cell to the data lines. Here, the sensing circuitry (not shown in the Fig. 4) converts the 
signal to appropriate rail voltage so that further processing the memory data is performed. 
3.2. Propagation delay 
Propagation delay is the time required for the output response for the given input signal. 
The delay is measured between 50% of the output transition to 50% of the applied input 
transition signal. In 2-bit/4-state SWSFET, the propagation delay for the four voltage states 
is measured when the output state changes from ‘state 0’ to ‘state 3’ for a given input state 
change from ‘state 0’ to ‘state 3’ Fig. 6A. Similarly, propagation delays in other output 
state transitions when state changes from ‘state 1’ to ‘state 0’, ‘state 2’ to ‘state 1’ and ‘state 
3’ to ‘state 2’ are shown in Figs. 6B–6D, respectively. The propagation delay was cal￾culated between input V (Word line) and output V (Data stored_bar) can be clearly seen in 
Figs. 8A–8D respectively. Results are tabulated in Table 4. 
Table 4. Propagation delay in 4-state/2-bit SWS-SRAM 
Logic States State 0 (0) State 1 (0.4) State 2 (0.8) State 3 (1.2) 
Propagation Delay (ps) 5.7 18.5 13.5 5.8 
 (A)
Fig. 6. The output response for a given input signal transition when output changes from (A) state ‘0’ to ‘3’
(B) state ‘1’ to state’0’ (C) state ‘2’ to state ‘1’ and (D) state ‘3’ to state ‘2’.Propagation Delay and Power Dissipation Analysis for a 2-Bit SRAM 211
 (B)
 (C) 
Fig. 6. (Continued )212 A. Husawi et al. 
 (D)
Fig. 6. (Continued )
3.3. Power dissipation 
The power dissipation of the 6T 2-bit/4-state SRAM consists of static power and dynamic 
power. The average power dissipation for every state is calculated by adding the average 
dynamic power and the average static power for every state. However, for state 0, only 
average static power is considered which is equal to 26 nW. Figure 7 shows static and 
dynamic power dissipation as a function of time in SWS-SRAM cell. Dynamic power 
dissipation is the main factor that increases total power consumption [9]. The average 
power dissipation reported on Table 5 is obtained by calculating the average power on the 
four different states and was analyzed using the tools available in Cadence. The average 
power dissipation results in each state are given in Table 5. 
Table 5. Average power dissipation of 2-bit/4-state SWS-SRAM 
Input Volt Average Power (nw) 
0 26.3 
0.4 0.0073 
0.8 26.2 
1.2 1290 Propagation Delay and Power Dissipation Analysis for a 2-Bit SRAM 213
Fig. 7. Static and dynamic power dissipation as a function of time. 
3.4. Comparison of propagation delay and power dissipation 
The propagation delay and average power dissipation of this work on 2-bit/4-state SWS 
based SRAM unit is compared with the reported work conventional 6T SRAM cells in 
180 nm technology, as shown in Table 6. 
Table 6. Comparison of power dissipation and Propagation delay with reported work 
Parameters [10] [11] This work 
Technology 180 nm 180 nm 180 nm 
SRAM Configuration 6T CMOS 6T CMOS 6T SWSFET 
Logic states 2-states 2-states 4-states/2-bit 
Propagation delay ~42.5 ps 70 ps 18.5 ps 
Average power dissipation ~20 µW 1.18 μW 1.29 µW 
Supply voltage 1.8 V 1.2 V 1.2 V 
The 6T SRAM reported in [10] is based on 2-states CMOS using 180 nm technology. 
SRAMs reported in [11] also use 2-state CMOS transistors using 180 nm at 1.2 V. In 
SWSFET SRAM design, we are using 6T with 4-state SWSFETs in the core cell. SWSFET 
SRAM design has 4-state or 2-bit memory storage capability which is twice as compared 
to 6T CMOS SRAM [11] which has 2-states and 6T CMOS SRAM [10]. To compare 214 A. Husawi et al. 
SWSFET SRAMs with work reported in [10, 11], propagation delay and power dissipation 
should be multiplied by a factor of 2. Finally, SWSFET SRAMs are two-times faster and 
consume half the power which is not shown in Table 6. 
4. Conclusion 
The SWS-SRAM simulation combines an Analog Behavioral Model (ABM) and the 
Berkeley Short-channel IGFET Model (BSIM4.6). The simulations were carried out in 
Cadence. 
The propagation delay and power dissipation of a 2-bit SWS-SRAM have been cal￾culated. The 4-state logic is achieved using two threshold voltage levels for p-SWS-FET 
and n-SWS-FET. In conclusion, as compared to the conventional CMOS SRAMs reported 
in [10, 11], SWSFET SRAM is two-times faster and consumes half the power. 
References 
1. F. C. Jain, B. Miller, E. Suarez, P.-Y. Chan, S. Karmakar, F. Al-Amoody, M. Gogna, J. Chandy, 
and E. Heller. “Spatial wavefunction-switched (SWS) InGaAs FETs with II–VI gate insulators.” 
Journal of Electronic Materials 40, no. 8 (2011): 1717-1726. 
2. F. Jain, B. Saman, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, J. Chandy, and E. Heller. “Low-threshold II–VI 
lattice-matched SWS-FETs for multivalued low-power logic.” Journal of Electronic Materials
50, no. 5 (2021): 2618-2629. 
3. R. H. Gudlavalleti, B. Saman, R. Mays, E. Heller, J. Chandy, and F. Jain. “A novel peripheral 
circuit for SWSFET based multivalued static random-access memory.” International Journal of 
High Speed Electronics and Systems 29, no. 01n04 (2020): 2040010. 
4. B. Saman, P. Gogna, E.-S. Hasaneen, J. Chandy, E. Heller, and F. C. Jain. “Spatial wavefunction 
switched (SWS) FET SRAM circuits and simulation.” In Microelectronics and Optoelectronics: 
The 25th Annual Symposium of Connecticut Microelectronics and Optoelectronics Consortium 
(CMOC 2016), 2017, pp. 37-48. 
5. A. Almalki, B. Saman, J. Chandy, E. Heller and F. C. Jain. “Propagation delay evaluation for 
spatial wavefunction switched (SWS) FET-based inverter.” International Journal of High 
Speed Electronics and Systems 31, no. 01n04 (2022): 2240008. 
6. F. Jain, M. Lingalugari, B. Saman, P. Y. Chan, P. Gogna, E. S. Hasaneen, J. Chandy, and E. 
Heller. “Multi-state sub-9 nm QDC-SWS FETs for compact memory circuits.” In 46th IEEE 
Semiconductor Interface Specialists Conference (SISC), 2015, pp. 2-5. 
7. F. Jain, B. Saman, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, J. Chandy, and E. Heller. “Low-threshold II-VI 
lattice-matched SWS-FETs for multi-valued low-power logic.” Journal of Electronic Material
50 (2021): 2618-2629. 
8. A. Husawi, B. Saman, A. Almalki, R. Gudlavalleti, and F. C. Jain. “Power dissipation and cell 
area: Quaternary logic CMOS inverter vs. four-state SWS-FET inverter.” International Journal 
of High Speed Electronics and Systems 31, no. 01n04 (2022): 2240009. 
9. S. Kumar et al. “Impact of different technology nodes on the delay and power dissipation of 6T 
SRAM cell.” In 2021 7th International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication 
(ICSC). IEEE, 2021. Propagation Delay and Power Dissipation Analysis for a 2-Bit SRAM 215
10. S. Mutum and K. Mondal. “Comparative performance analysis of 6T SRAM cell in 180nm and 
90nm technologies.” In 2021 Asian Conference on Innovation in Technology (ASIANCON), 
Pune, India, 2021. 
11. D. Chaudhuri, K. Roy, A. Nag, Comparison of Different SRAM Cell Topologies Using 180 nm 
Technology. In: Biswas, U., Banerjee, A., Pal, S., Biswas, A., Sarkar, D., Haldar, S. (eds) 
Advances in Computer, Communication and Control. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, 
vol 41. Springer, Singapore. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0021
217 
Ultra-Short Pulse-Train Generation of 30-GHz Repetition Rate Using Rational 
Harmonic Mode Locking and Nonlinear Polarization Rotation 
A. Rahman*, S. Fan and N. K. Dutta
Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA *ashiq.rahman@uconn.edu 
A 30-GHz pulse-train is generated using the rational harmonic mode-locking technique, experi￾mentally, using a Mach–Zehnder Lithium Niobate modulator. The width of the pulses is then reduced 
from 5.8-ps to 1.9-ps by incorporating nonlinear polarization rotation. This phenomenon arises due to 
the very high nonlinear behavior of the photonic crystal fiber (PCF) added to the ring laser cavity. 
Numerically solving the Generalized Nonlinear Schrödinger Equation provided insights into the pulse 
evolution behavior. The relative polarization angle and length of the PCF were varied to study their 
effects on the pulse-width. 
Keywords: Fiber optics; fiber lasers; mode locking; nonlinear polarization rotation; RHML; PCF. 
1. Introduction 
Generating a stable pulse train with short pulse width and high speed is critical for high￾bit-rate fiber-optic telecommunication systems. Active harmonic mode locking has been 
extensively studied as a way to generate high-repetition-rate pulses [1–4] by using electro￾optical intensity modulators like LiNbO3 modulators or electric absorption modulators 
inside the laser cavity [1, 5]. Rational harmonic mode locking is a technique that detunes 
the cavity-loss modulation frequency away from the exact harmonics of the cavity’s 
fundamental frequency to further increase the repetition rate [6]. However, this technique 
has limitations in terms of temporal pulse duration and pulse train amplitude fluctuations. 
Several experiments have been conducted to improve laser stability and reduce fluctua￾tions, by means of pulse width compression and pulse amplitude equalization [6, 7]. 
On the other hand, passively mode-locked fiber lasers can generate pulse trains with 
ultrashort pulse width, and recently, compact passively mode-locked fiber lasers have been 
successfully constructed using saturable absorbers like semiconductor saturable absorber 
mirrors, graphene, and nonlinear fiber loop mirrors [8–12]. The nonlinear polarization 
rotation (NPR) technique combined with a polarizer has been used to achieve ultrashort 
pulses in fiber lasers by inducing an intensity-dependent loss in the cavity [13–16]. 
However, NPR-based passively mode-locked fiber lasers suffer from low repetition rates, 
*Corresponding author. 218 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
limiting their application in high-speed fiber-optic communications. To overcome this 
limitation, a hybrid mode-locking scheme that combines active and passive mode-locking 
methods has been proposed. 
This paper provides both numerical and experimental evidence of the decrease in 
pulse-width of a 30-GHz pulse train from 5.8-ps to 1.9-ps. This reduction was achieved 
through Rational Harmonic Mode-Locking, which involved using a Mach–Zehnder 
Lithium Niobate modulator and adjusting the cavity frequency. The pulses were signifi￾cantly shaped by a highly nonlinear PCF within the cavity. The paper also includes 
simulations of how changes in the polarization angles and length of the PCF would affect 
the output pulse-width. 
2. Fiber Ring Laser Experimental Setup and Mathematical Model 
2.1. Experiment Setup 
The rational harmonic mode locked laser (RHML) setup that was used to generate the 
rational harmonic mode-locked pulses is shown in Fig. 1. The input seed pulse is provided 
by the 980-nm diode laser pump. A 980/1550-nm Wavelength Division Multiplexer 
(WDM) coupler takes the 980-nm input and outputs 1550-nm CW laser so that the 
experiment yields output in the wavelength that is most useful for standard telecommuni￾cation practices. The input is amplified by a 23-m long Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifier 
(EDFA). The modulation of the CW laser to a pulsed laser of frequency 10-GHz is achieved 
by Lithium Niobate (LiNbO3) Mach Zehnder Modulator (MZM). The polarization 
controller (PC-1) just before the MZM input controls the polarization of the laser 
Fig. 1. Fiber ring laser setup incorporating RHML and NPR, powered by a 980-nm pump laser. Ultra-Short Pulse Train Generation of 30-GHz Repetition Rate 219
that goes into the MZM since the it is polarization sensitive. There are two more pola￾rization controllers, (PC-2 and PC-3) and a polarizer in-line with the highly non-linear 
photonic crystal fiber (PCF). This combination induces the nonlinear polarization rotation 
(NPR) effect in the laser cavity. The optical isolator ensures unidirectional flow, which is 
necessary for the pulse formation and output from the ring cavity. After stable pulses are 
formed in the cavity, 10% of them are ‘read-out’ using the 90:10 optical coupler, whereas 
90% of them are fed back into the cavity to ensure continuous operation. All the compo￾nents in the optical circuit are connected using the standard commercial single mode fibers 
(SMF). 
2.2. Mathematical Model of Pulse Propagation 
The electric field in an optical pulse can be written as 
       0 0 1 ,,, , , 2
it z E x y z t A z t x y e cc           
where A(z,t) represents the slowly varying complex envelope of the pulse, ψ(x,y) repre￾sents the transverse electric field distribution of the mode, ω0 represents center frequency, 
and β0 represents the center propagation constant at ω0. In the presence of optical loss or 
gain, second-order dispersion, and third-order nonlinearity, (by using Maxwell’s electro￾magnetic wave equations) the complex envelope A(z,t) can be shown to satisfy the 
following equation [17, 18]: 
ൌ ௚
ଶ 𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ൅ ௚
ଶஐౝ
మ
డమ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛమ ൅ 𝑖𝛾|𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ|
ଶ𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ. (1)
The fiber ring laser setup outlined above is simulated using MATLAB program by solving 
the Generalized Nonlinear Schrödinger Equation (GNLSE), eq. (1), using a pseudo￾spectral numerical procedure known as Split Step Fourier Method (SSFM) [17]. This 
equation is used to model the pulse propagation in various fiber optic components in the 
fiber laser. Here, 𝐴ሺ𝑧,𝑡ሻ is the envelope of the propagating pulse, that is varying slowly. It 
is a function of the propagating distance 𝑧 and the time-delay parameter 𝜏. The fiber loss 
is given by 𝛼, and the nonlinear parameter 𝛾 represents the strength of the nonlinearity of 
the optical component. 𝛽௞ are the various dispersion coefficients. The gain bandwidth of 
the EDFA is the spectrum over which the laser is amplified, which is written as Ω௚. 
Equation (2) is a simplification of eq. (1), assuming that all the dispersion parameters 
higher than 𝑘 ൌ 3, and the fiber loss, are negligible. 
డ஺ሺ௭,௧ሻ
డ௭ ൅ ௜
ଶ 𝛽ଶ
డమ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛమ െ ଵ
଺ 𝛽ଷ
డయ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛయ 
ൌ ௚
ଶ 𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ൅ ௚
ଶஐౝ
మ
డమ஺ሺ௭,ఛሻ
డఛమ ൅ 𝑖𝛾|𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ|
ଶ𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ . (2)
𝜕𝐴ሺ𝑧,𝑡ሻ
𝜕𝑧 ൅ 𝛼
2 𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ൅෍𝑖
𝑘െ1
𝑘! 𝛽𝑘
𝜕𝑘𝐴ሺ𝑧,𝜏ሻ
𝜕𝜏𝑘
𝑘൒2220 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
It is also important to consider that the gain 𝑔 of the EDFA is saturated when the input 
pulse energy 𝐸 is equal to the saturation energy 𝐸௦௔௧. When 𝐸 is small, 𝑔 is approximately 
equal to 𝑔଴, which is the small signal gain. This is mathematically written as in eq. (3). 
Single mode fibers provide no gain to the system, so 𝑔 ൌ 0 for that. 
𝑔ൌ𝑔଴ ቀ1 ൅ ா
ாೞೌ೟
ቁ
ିଵ
. (3)
When stable pulses are formed in the cavity, 10% of the pulses are coupled out as 
mentioned in the previous section, which is simulated by including eq. (4) in the code. 
𝐴ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ௢௨௧ ൌ 𝐴௜௡ሺ𝑧, 𝜏ሻ ⋅ 𝑅 . (4)
The mathematical models for the Mach Zehnder Modulator and the Nonlinear Polarization 
Rotation are explained in detail in sections 3 and 4, respectively. R = 0.1 (10 percent). The 
values for all the various optical parameters used in the MATLAB code are summarized in 
Table 1 for quick reference. 
3. Rational Harmonic Mode-Locking 
Rational Harmonic Mode-Locking (RHML) is a form of active mode-locking scheme to 
generate very high frequency laser pulse trains. This experiment involves a Lithium 
Niobate (LiNbO3) Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) to achieve mode-locking of the CW 
laser, and a deliberate detuning of the cavity frequency results in rational harmonic mode 
locking. The basic working principle is as follows [18]. Continuous wave laser is split and 
passed through the two arms of the device. The two arms are driven by two different 
electrical signals that cause the laser beams to change their optical path lengths, hence the 
phases, differently. They are then recombined, resulting in an intensity modulated output. 
Mathematically, the transmission through the MZM is modeled as in eq. (5) [19]. 
𝑇 ൌ cosଶሺ𝜋 ௏್ ା ௏೘ ୱ୧୬ሺଶగ௙೘தሻ
௏ഏ
ሻ , (5)
where the DC voltage bias, voltage required for 𝜋 phase shift, and the RF signal amplitude 
are given by 𝑉௕, 𝑉గ, 𝑉௠, respectively. 𝑓௠ is the frequency of the input RF signal from the 
synthesizer. Now, to achieve RHML, the cavity mode separation 𝑓௖ is deliberately detuned 
to a fraction of the modulation frequency 𝑓௠. Mathematically, when 𝑓௠ ൌ ሺ𝑛 ൅ 1/𝑝ሻ𝑓௖ is 
satisfied, where 𝑛 and 𝑝 are integers, the output frequency is 𝑝 times that of the modulation 
frequency. In this experiment 𝑝 = 3, hence the output pulse train frequency was 30-GHz. 
The cavity mode separation is defined as follows: 𝑓௖ ൌ 𝑐/𝑛௜𝐿, where 𝑐 is the speed of light 
in vacuum, 𝑛௜ is the average index of the fiber, and 𝐿 is the length of fiber loop. 
4. Nonlinear Polarization Rotation 
The nonlinear polarization rotation (NPR) effect is induced in the laser cavity using the 
setup shown in Fig. 2(a), where polarization controllers, PC2 and PC3, are connected 
in-line with the photonic crystal fiber (PCF) and a polarizer. The PCs are designed by Ultra-Short Pulse Train Generation of 30-GHz Repetition Rate 221
Fig. 2. (a) PCF placed in-line with polarization controllers to generate NPR (b) Output pulse behavior for three 
different transmission curves. Transmission vs. power is plotted. 
having short length of single-mode fibers going around spools. When the orientation is 
adjusted stress is applied on the fibers, resulting in birefringence property of the controllers, 
causing the transmitted light to have fractional waveplates. Controlling the polarization of 
the transmitted light using the PCs and the polarizer, which affects the transmitted light 
intensity, induces Kerr nonlinearity in the PCF. This causes the polarization states to rotate, 
hence, nonlinear polarization rotation in the laser cavity. Equations (6)–(7) relate the 
transmission to the polarizer angles and parameters of the PCF. 
𝑇 ൌ cosଶ 𝛼ଵ cosଶ 𝛼ଶ ൅ sinଶ 𝛼ଵ sinଶ 𝛼ଶ
ଵ
ଶ sin 2𝛼ଵ sin 2𝛼ଶ cos ሺΔ𝜙௅ ൅ Δ𝜙ே௅ሻ (6)
 Δ𝜙௅ ൌ ൫௡ೣି௡೤൯
ஒ୐     ,      Δ𝜙ே௅ ൌ െ ଵ
ଷ 𝛾𝑃𝐿 cos 𝛼ଶ (7)
Here, 𝐸 is the electric field vector of the input light, 𝛼ଵ is the angle between the input 
polarization and the fast axis of the PCF, and 𝛼ଶ is angle between the fast axis of the PCF 
and polarization of the inline polarizer, Δ𝜙௅ and Δ𝜙ே௅ are the linear and nonlinear changes 
in phase, respectively, 𝐿 is the PCF length, 𝛽 ൌ 2𝜋/𝐿 is the propagation constant, 𝑛௫, 𝑛௬, 
are the linear birefringence coefficients of the fast (𝑥) and slow (𝑦) axes of the PCF, Δ𝑛 ൌ
𝑛௫ െ 𝑛௬ used in the simulation, 𝛾 is the nonlinear coefficient of the PCF, and 𝑃 is the 
instantaneous power of the input signal. Values for the different PCF parameters used in 
the simulation are summarized in Table 1. 
Varying the angles 𝛼ଵ and 𝛼ଶ in eq. (6), done by carefully tuning the polarization 
controllers PC2 and PC3, yields different transmission curves, three sets of which are 
plotted in Fig. 2(b). The sets of values affect the amplitude, offset and period of the cosine 
curves of the transmittance. When the laser pulses pass through the setup which has the 
‘dotted’ transmission curve, it lets the low-power portion of a pulse (pulse wings) pass 
through, while throttling the pulse center, which has the highest power. This broadens the 
pulse-width and equalizes the pulse amplitude. The ‘dashed’ curve allows the high-power 
parts of the pulses to pass through with negligible loss, but the low-power pulse wings to 
undergo high loss, hence, shaping the pulse. This effect is similar to that obtained by using 
saturable absorbers in the cavity instead. Now, when the angles are further adjusted, the 
‘solid’ line transmission property can be achieved, where both pulse-shaping as well as 222 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
Table 1. Modulator parameters used for generating the hybrid mode-locked pulse train. 
Component Parameter Value
𝐸𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑢𝑚 𝛽ଶ െ0.13 ൈ 10ିଷ 𝑝𝑠ଶ𝑚ିଵ
𝐷𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑑
𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑒𝑟
𝛽ଷ 0.135 ൈ 10ିଷ 𝑝𝑠ଷ𝑚ିଵ
𝛾 3.69 𝑊ିଵ𝑘𝑚ିଵ
𝑔଴ 1.09 𝑑𝐵𝑚ିଵ
𝐿 23 𝑚
𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 𝛽ଶ െ22.1 ൈ 10ିଷ 𝑝𝑠ଶ𝑚ିଵ
𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝛽ଷ 0.171 ൈ 10ିଷ 𝑝𝑠ଷ𝑚ିଵ
𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝛾 1.20 𝑊ିଵ𝑘𝑚ିଵ
𝑔଴ 0 𝑑𝐵𝑚ିଵ
𝛽ଶ െ1.66 𝑝𝑠ଶ𝑘𝑚ିଵ
𝑃𝐶𝐹 𝛽ଷ െ0.03 𝑝𝑠ଷ𝑘𝑚ିଵ
𝛾 11 𝑊ିଵ𝑘𝑚ିଵ
Δ𝑛 3.5 ൈ 10ିହ
𝐿 0.6 𝑘𝑚
𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑟 𝑅 90 %
𝑉గ 6 𝑉
𝑉௠ 6 𝑉
𝑉௕ 0 𝑉
𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑓௠ ~ 10 𝐺𝐻𝑧
𝑓௖ 4.29 𝑀𝐻𝑧
𝑛 2329 
𝑝 3
peak equalization occurs. This is achieved by absorbing the pulse-edges and simulta￾neously increasing the transmission loss for the high pulse amplitudes that arise randomly. 
The effect of these cosine transmission curves on pulse-width is simulated in the next 
section. 
5. Simulation Results 
The fiber ring laser setup shown in Fig. 1 is simulated in MATLAB, by solving the GNLSE 
(eq. 1) using SSFM. The parameters mentioned in Table 1 were incorporated in the code. 
On the other hand, using only RHML in the laser cavity yields 5.3-ps pulse-width. The 
optimal length and angular settings were found by varying 𝛼ଶ and 𝐿, as shown in Fig. 3. 
When the length of the PCF and polarization angle 𝛼ଵ is kept constant and 𝛼ଶ is varied, 
the maximum pulse compression is achieved when 𝛼ଶ ൌ 30°. Figure 3(b) shows the range Ultra-Short Pulse Train Generation of 30-GHz Repetition Rate 223
Fig. 3. Keeping αଵ ൌ 45° constant, variation of pulse width with respect to (a) angle 𝜶𝟐 (PCF length fixed) and 
(b) PCF length (αଶ fixed). 
Fig. 4. Simulation of intensity vs pulse-width vs round-trips required (a) with RHML only (b) with both RHML 
and NPR in the cavity. 
of PCF lengths that would result in the most amounts of pulse-shaping for three different 
𝛼ଶ angles. As seen in both Figs. 3(a) and 3(b), the pulse-widths at angle 𝛼ଶ ൌ 120° are 
actually broadened instead of being compressed. The NPR only equalizes the pulse￾amplitudes in this scenario. For the given PCF length 𝐿 ൌ 0.6 km, setting the polarization 
angles 𝛼ଵ ൌ 45° and 𝛼ଶ ൌ 30°, the output pulse-width obtained was 1.9-ps. The pulse 
evolution process for this set of parameters is plotted in Fig. 4(b). Figure 4(a) is generated 
when the laser pulses are simulated using RHML only. It takes more roundtrips around the 
ring laser setup for stable output pulses to form. On the other hand, Fig. 4(b) is a simulation 
of the same laser setup but incorporating NPR in the cavity as well. In this case, stable 
pulses are formed much quicker due to the pulse-shaping action, resulting in a compressed 
output pulse. 
6. Experiment Results 
The fiber laser experiment yields a compressed output pulse when both RHML and NPR 
is incorporated. Throughout this experiment, the PCF length was kept constant at 0.6 km 224 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
and the two polarizer angles were 𝛼ଵ ൌ 45° and 𝛼ଶ ൌ 30°. Figure 5 shows the RF-spectra 
of the output pulses when RHML and Hybrid-ML is incorporated. Both cases show a peak 
frequency at around 30-GHz, at which the experiment is operated. It is seen that there are 
supermode noise for the RHML only experiment. No amount of adjustment of the modula￾tion frequency is able to get rid of the sidebands. This is because the RF-driving frequency 
and the fundamental cavity frequency are not equal, resulting in an overall amplitude with 
a periodic envelope function. However, when NPR is incorporated along with RHML 
supermode noise is suppressed and the output pulses are more stable, due to decreased 
pulse amplitude fluctuation, which is useful in RHML generation of higher orders [1]. This 
is desirable in optical telecommunication purposes. NPR in the cavity also increases the 
signal-to-noise ratio to over 25 dB. This strong pulse-shaping phenomenon brought about 
by the set transmission property of the NPR effect. Figure 6 shows the autocorrelator traces 
Fig. 5. RF spectra of the output pulses with (a) only RHML and (b) both RHML and NPR, showing a suppression 
of super-mode noise. 
Fig. 6. Autocorrelator trace of 30-GHz output pulse trains for (a) RHML only and (b) both RHML and NPR. 
Insets showing a reduction in FWHM from 5.8-ps to 1.9-ps. Ultra-Short Pulse Train Generation of 30-GHz Repetition Rate 225
for the RHML and Hybrid-ML experiments. The pulse-delay between successive peaks is 
~33.2-ps, indicating a pulse-train frequency of 30-GHz for both the experiments. The inset 
plots show a reduction of pulse-width from 5.8-ps to 1.9-ps when Hybrid-ML is incorpo￾rated, as compared to using only RHML in the laser cavity. 
7. Conclusion and Discussion 
This paper numerically and experimentally demonstrates the reduction of pulse-width of a 
30-GHz pulse train from 5.8-ps to 1.9-ps highly nonlinear photonic crystal fiber (PCF) in 
the optical cavity. Using Rational Harmonic Mode-Locking, facilitated by a Mach-Zehnder 
Lithium Niobate modulator and careful detuning of the cavity frequency, the pulse train 
was generated. This short pulse is important for optical time division transmission at very 
high data rates. 
Disclosures 
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
References 
1. C. Wu and N. K. Dutta, “High-repetition-rate optical pulse generation using a rational harmonic 
mode-locked fiber laser,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 36, 721–727 (2000). 
2. A. O. Wiberg, C.-S. Brès, B. P. Kuo, J. X. Zhao, N. Alic, and S. Radic, “Pedestal-free pulse 
source for high data rate optical time-division multiplexing based on fiber-optical parametric 
processes,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 45, 1325–1330 (2009). 
3. S. Ma, W. Li, H. Hu, and N. K. Dutta, “High speed ultra short pulse fiber ring laser using 
photonic crystal fiber nonlinear optical loop mirror,” Opt. Commun. 285, 2832–2835 (2012). 
4. S. Nolte, S. Döring, A. Ancona, J. Limpert, and A. Tünnermann, “High repetition rate ultrashort 
pulse micromachining with fiber lasers,” in Fiber Laser Applications (Optical Society of 
America, 2011), paper FThC1. 
5. Y. Fukuchi and J. Maeda, “Characteristics of rational harmonic mode-locked short-cavity fiber 
ring laser using a bismuth-oxide-based erbium-doped fiber and a bismuth-oxide-based highly 
nonlinear fiber,” Opt. Express 19, 22502–22509 (2011). 
6. G. R. Lin, J. J. Kang, and C.-K. Lee, “High-order rational harmonic mode-locking and pulse￾amplitude equalization of SOAFL via reshaped gain-switching FPLD pulse injection,” Opt. 
Express 18, 9570–9579 (2010). 
7. Z. Li, C. Lou, K. T. Chan, Y. Li, and Y. Gao, “Theoretical and experimental study of pulse￾amplitude-equalization in a rational harmonic mode-locked fiber ring laser,” IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 37, 33–37 (2001). 
8. W. Li, “Different methods to achieve hybrid mode locking,” Cogent Phys. 6, 1707624 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311940.2019.1707624. 
9. S. Thapa, A. Rahman, and N. K. Dutta, “Mode-locked fiber ring laser using graphene nano￾particles as saturable absorbers,” Int. J. High Speed Electron. Syst. 31 (01n04), 2240002 (2022). 
https://doi.org/10.1142/s012915642240002x. 
10. W. Li, H. Hu, X. Zhang, S. Zhao, K. Fu, and N. K. Dutta, “High-speed ultrashort pulse fiber 
ring laser using charcoal nanoparticles,” Appl. Opt. 55, 2149–2154 (2016). 226 A. Rahman, S. Fan & N. K. Dutta 
11. X. He, Z.-B. Liu, and D. Wang, “Wavelength-tunable, passively mode-locked fiber laser based 
on graphene and chirped fiber Bragg grating,” Opt. Lett. 37, 2394–2396 (2012). 
12. A. F. Runge, C. Aguergaray, R. Provo, M. Erkintalo, and N. G. Broderick, “All-normal 
dispersion fiber lasers mode-locked with a nonlinear amplifying loop mirror,” Opt. Fiber 
Technol. 20, 657–665 (2014). 
13. J. L. Luo, L. Li, Y. Q. Ge, X. X. Jin, D. Y. Tang, S. M. Zhang, and L. M. Zhao, “L-band 
femtosecond fiber laser mode locked by nonlinear polarization rotation,” IEEE Photon. Technol. 
Lett. 26, 2438–2441 (2014). 
14. X. Liu, T. Wang, C. Shu, L. Wang, A. Lin, K. Lu, T. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “Passively harmonic 
mode-locked erbium-doped fiber soliton laser with a nonlinear polarization rotation,” Laser 
Phys. 18, 1357–1361 (2008). 
15. X. Zhang, H. Hu, W. Li, and N. K. Dutta, “High-repetition-rate ultrashort pulsed fiber ring laser 
using hybrid mode locking,” Appl. Opt. 55, 7885–7891 (2016). 
16. X. Fang, P. Wai, C. Lu, and J. Chen, “Flattop pulse generation based on the combined action of 
active mode locking and nonlinear polarization rotation,” Appl. Opt. 53, 902–906 (2014). 
17. G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics (Academic, 2007). 
18. N. K. Dutta, X. Zhang, Optoelectronic Devices (World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., 
2018), Appendix 3. 
19. H. Dong, H. Sun, G. Zhu, Q. Wang, and N. Dutta, “Clock recovery using cascaded 
LiNbO3 modulator,” Opt. Express 12, 4751–4757 (2004).  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0022
227 
Threshold Inverter Quantizer (TIQ)-Based 2-Bit Comparator Using Spatial 
Wavefunction Switched (SWS) FET Inverters 
W. Alamoudi1, B. Saman2, R. H. Gudlavalleti1, A. Almalki1
, J. Chandy1, E. Heller3 and F. Jain1,*
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Connecticut, CT, USA 
2Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, Taif University, Saudi Arabia 
3Synopsys Corporation, Ossining, NY, USA *faquir.jain@uconn.edu 
A Threshold Inverter Quantizer (TIQ)-based voltage comparator is used to quantize analog input 
signal in flash ADC designs. This quantizer is based on the systematic sizing of CMOS inverter thus 
eliminating resistor array which is used for conventional comparator array. Such an implementation 
removes static power during quantization of analog input signal. This paper presents a simulation of 
TIQ 2-bit-based comparator using spatial wavefunction switched (SWS) field effect transistor (FET)-
based CMOS inverters. The inverters use 4-state SWSFETs. Unlike conventional FETs, SWSFETs 
consist of two or more vertical coupled arrays of either quantum dot or quantum well channels, where 
the spatial location of carriers within these channels is used to encode the logic states (00), (01), (10), 
and (11). The TIQ-based comparator circuit presented here is based on the 2-bit SWS-CMOS inverter. 
The schematic of the ADC comparator circuit is demonstrated as well as the 2-bit ADC configuration 
cascading two 2-bit SWSFET-based inverters in CMOS-X. The circuit simulation was done in 
Cadence and SWSFET was modeled by integrating Berkeley Short-Channel IGFET Model (BSIM) 
and the Analog Behavioral Model (ABM). The 2-bit comparator circuit provides a four-state logic 
output voltage for any given analog input signal. 
Keywords: Threshold Inverter Quantizer (TIQ); 2-bit SWS-CMOS inverter; SWSFETs. 
1. Introduction
The demand for high performance integrated circuits (ICs) has been met over the years by 
continuous scaling-down of metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS) devices. The digital logic 
circuits developed using MOSFET exhibit two logic states i.e., logic ‘0’ and ‘1’. Another 
approach towards improving the performance of the ICs is by utilizing multistate logic 
circuits. A spatial wavefunction switched field effect transistor (SWSFET) is one such 
device which can be utilized to develop multistate logic circuits. SWSFET was introduced 
first by Jain, et al. [1], which works based on the electron wavefunction switching between 
two channels depending on the voltage applied on its gate. A SWSFET has two or more 
vertical coupled arrays of quantum dot or quantum well channels, where the spatial location 
*Corresponding author. 228 W. Alamoudi et al. 
of carriers within these channels is used to encode the logic states (00), (01), (10), and (11) 
[1]. The application of two strained layers of Si/Si0.5Ge0.5 in SWSFET promotes improved 
performance and increased device integration [1, 2]. 
A flash analog-to-digital comparator (ADC), mainly known for its high speed conver￾sion as compared to other ADC architectures such as pipelined, successive-approximation 
register (SAR) ADCs. However, flash ADC consumes more power compared to other 
ADCs. A Threshold Inverter Quantizer (TIQ) flash ADC is one approach towards reducing 
power consumption in flash ADC while maintaining the conversion speed of the flash 
ADC. In this work, a Threshold Inverter Quantizer (TIQ)-based voltage comparator is used 
to quantize analog input signal in flash ADC designs. This paper presents a simulation of 
TIQ-based 2-bit/4-state comparator using SWSFET-based inverters. 
Section 2 describes SWSFET device structure and experimental characteristics re￾ported in the literature [1]. Section 3 introduces flash ADC and section 4 describes the 
implementation of TIQ-based flash ADC along with Cadence simulation results. The 
circuit simulation was done in Cadence and SWSFET was modeled by integrating Berkeley 
Short-Channel IGFET Model (BSIM) and the Analog Behavioral Model (ABM). 
2. SWSFET Device Structure 
A SWSFET device consists of four layers of SiOx-cladded Si quantum dots (QD) which 
serve as transporter channel [1–3]. The schematic cross-section is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). 
SWSFET has two drains, in which D1 represents shallow drain whereas D2 represents deep 
drain. The upper two QD layers are interfaced to the shallow drain D1 while the lower two 
QD layers are connected to the deep drain D2. The current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of 
the device were demonstrated in Fig. 1(b) [10]. The charge transport in QD layers occurs 
based on the level of gate voltage. When the gate voltage is in the range 1.8–2.0 V, the 
lower QD layers are conducting. When the gate voltage is in the range 2.2–2.4 V, the upper 
QD layers are conducting [3]. 
Fig. 1(a). Schematic cross-section of n-SWSFET structure [10]. TIQ-Based 2-Bit Comparator Using SWSFETs 229
Fig. 1(b). ID-VD plot of SWSFET demonstrating the conduction in lower and upper channels. 
The complementary structure of SWSFET is illustrated in Fig. 2. The n-MOS and p￾MOS devices are separated by an oxide/insulator layer. In the n-MOS side, the two Si 
quantum wells are inserted between SiGe barriers, while in the p-MOS side, Si layers serve 
as barriers [1-3]. Quantum simulations display the switching of wavefunctions from the 
upper SiGe quantum well to the lower well in the p-channel and from lower Si quantum 
well to the upper well in the n-channel as the gate voltage increased Fig. 3(a) and 3(b). As 
the gate voltage decreased, inversion charge moved toward accumulation. 
SiW1
SiW2
SiGe B1
SiGe B2
SiGe Buffer
Si B1
Si B2
SiGe W1
SiGe W2
SiGe Buffer
P-Si n-well
n+ n drain +
source p+
drain p+
source
NMOS PMOS
VSS1
VSS2
Vin
+VDD2
+VDD2
Vout
Field Oxide
Metal
CVD Oxide
ZnS/ZnMgS
 
Fig. 2. Schematic cross-section of a 4-State/2-bit SWS-CMOS Inverter.
3. Flash ADC 
A conventional 2-bit flash ADC comprises a resistive ladder that contains 2N = 4 resistors 
and 2N-1 = 3 comparators Fig. 4. 230 W. Alamoudi et al. 
Fig. 3. Different states of electron wavefunctions on W1 and W2. (a) Electron confinement to lower quantum 
well W2 at Vg=0.2V. (b) Electron transferred to upper well W1 at Vg=0.8V [10]. 
Analog 
Input
Digital 
Output
Vref
R1
R2
R3
R4
3
2
1
0
+
+
+
-
-
-
Fig. 4. Conventional 2-bit flash ADC comparators. TIQ-Based 2-Bit Comparator Using SWSFETs 231
The flash ADC architecture uses a resistor ladder circuit where each comparator has a 
reference voltage that is 1 least significant bit (LSB) higher than the one below it in the 
ladder. As a result, comparators below a certain point output a logic 1 since their input 
voltage is greater than the reference voltage. On the other hand, comparators above that 
point output a logic 0 since their input voltage is smaller than the reference voltage. The 
digital output is produced through a priority encoder that encodes the output of 2N-1 
comparators in thermometer encoding. This architecture is very fast because the analog 
input is applied to all the comparators at once. However, it requires many resistors, 
resulting in large area and high-power consumption. 
4. Threshold Inverter Quantizer using 4-state SWSFETs 
TIQ comparators compare the input voltage with internal threshold voltage (VT) of the 
inverter, which is determined by the transistor sizes in the inverters. Hence, we do not need 
the resistor ladder circuit used in a conventional flash ADC (Fig. 5) [9]. The comparator 
outputs a binary code in two steps through an encoder. Comparator’s role is to convert an 
input voltage (Vin) into a logic ‘1’ or ‘0’ by comparing a internal reference voltage (Vref) 
with the Vin. If Vin is greater than Vref, the output of the comparator is ‘1’, otherwise ‘0’. 
The TIQ comparator uses two cascading CMOS inverters as a comparator for high speed 
and low power consumption. 
TIQ2N-1
TIQ2N-2
TIQ2
TIQ1
Analog 
Input
Thermometer code output
p
n
VDD
p
n
VDD
Vout
Analog 
Input
Vss Vss
TIQ
Fig. 5. 2-bit threshold inverter quantizer (TIQ)-based CMOS. 
4.1. Device structure of 2-bit TIQ SWS CMOS-X-based inverter 
This work presents simulation of a 2-bit TIQ-based comparator using SWSFET-based 
CMOS-X inverters. The inverters use 4-state spatial wavefunction switched SWSFETs as 
shown in Fig. 6. For higher resolution ADC, an array of SWS-CMOS-based TIQ compa￾rators can be used with a fixed length of the P-SWSFET and N-SWSFET devices, and we 
can get desired threshold values by increasing only the width of the transistors. More 
research is required to encode the 2-bit output of each comparator in the ADC design. 232 W. Alamoudi et al. 
Drain 1
Drain 2
Drain 2
Drain 1
p‐SWSFET
n‐SWSFET
Wp/Lp
Wn/Ln
S2 Well 2
S1 Well 1
S1 Well 1
S2 Well 2
VDD1VDD2
Vss1Vss2
Vin Vout
 Fig. 6. 4-State/2-bit SWS-(CMOS) inverter. 
The schematic of the 2-bit TIQ comparator is illustrated in Figs. 7 and 8. The SWS￾CMOS-X inverter-based 2-bit TIQ has two internal reference voltages Vref1 and Verf2 
corresponding to Vth1 and Vth2 (Fig. 9). The 2-bit TIQ comparator uses two cascading 
SWS-CMOS inverters as a comparator for high speed and low power consumption. 
Fig. 7. Schematic of a 2-bit TIQ-based ADC comparator. TIQ-Based 2-Bit Comparator Using SWSFETs 233
Analog
S2 Channel 2
S1 Channel 1
S2 Channel 2
S1 Channel 1
Drain 1
Drain 2
Drain 2
Drain 1
p‐SWSFET
n‐SWSFET
Drain 1
Drain 2
Drain 2
Drain 1
p‐SWSFET
n‐SWSFET
Comparator
Wp/Lp Wp/Lp
Wn/Ln Wn/Ln
S2 Channel 2
S1 Channel 1
S1 Channel 1
S2 Channel 2
VDD1 VDD2
Vss1Vss2
VDD1VDD2
Vss1Vss2
Inverter
Fig. 8. Schematic of 2-bit TIQ-based ADC comparator using SWS-FET-based inverters in CMOS-X. 
Fig. 9. Design 2-bit TIQ-based ADC comparator using SWS-FET-based inverters in CMOS-X. 234 W. Alamoudi et al. 
4.2. SWSFET Model and Parameters 
The SWSFET model has been developed by integrating two conventional MOS transistors 
and an analog behavioral model (ABM). The two transistors use 0.18 µm technology 
Berkeley Short-Channel IGFET Model (BSIM) models. The ABM model uses equations 
which depict the spatial wavefunction switched behavior of the SWSFET. The model 
parameters of the SWSFET are presented in Table 1. 
Table 1. Parameter used for the SWSFET-based inverter. 
Parameter N Channel SWSFET P Channel SWSFET
VTH1 0.80 V 0.80 V
VTH2 0.2 V 0.2 V
Width (W1) 0.450 µm 2.14 µm
Width W2) 0.9 µm 4.28 µm
Lengh (L) 0.18 µm 0.18 µm
4.3. Simulation of TIQ-based Comparator 
Simulation results of the TIQ-based 2-bit comparator are shown in Fig. 10 which depict 4 
levels of quantization of an analog input using only one SWS-CMOS-X-based TIQ 
comparator. A 2-bit ADC requires four comparators to perform ADC conversion and the 
same can be performed using single SWSFET-based TIQ comparator. Future work 
involves simulation of the design and simulation of flash ADC for higher bits including 
multistate encoder and analyze various performance parameters such as resolution, 
conversion speed and area. 
Fig. 10. Simulation results of the TIQ-based 2-bit ADC comparator showing the analog input signal (green), and 
the 2-bit 4-state comparator output (blue). TIQ-Based 2-Bit Comparator Using SWSFETs 235
5. Conclusion 
Spatial Wavefunction Switched FETs (SWSFETs) are unique as they generate multistate 
logic, which means they can produce four output states rather than the two output states 
(i.e., 0 or 1) produced by traditional CMOS transistors. This work has presented a 2-bit 
TIQ comparator design using SWS-CMOS-X inverters. This design takes advantage of the 
two internal reference voltages corresponding to Vth1 and Vth2 of the SWS-FETs to 
achieve higher resolution. Cadence simulation of the proposed 2-bit ADC comparator was 
carried out to show the 4 levels of quantization using only one SWS-CMOS-X-based TIQ 
comparator. This design can be expanded by using an array of SWS-CMOS-based TIQ 
comparators with different SWSFET aspect ratios leading to high resolution, low power, 
and high-speed ADCs. 
References 
1. Jain, F.C., Chandy, J., Miller, B., Hasaneen, E.S. and Heller, E., 2011. Spatial wavefunction￾switched (SWS)-FET: A novel device to process multiple bits simultaneously with sub￾picosecond delays. International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 20(03), pp. 
641-652. 
2. Saman, B., Gogna, P., Hasaneen, E.S., Chandy, J., Heller, E. and Jain, F.C., 2017. Spatial 
wavefunction switched (SWS) FET SRAM circuits and simulation. International Journal of 
High Speed Electronics and Systems, 26(03), p. 1740009. 
3. Almalki, A., Saman, B., Chandy, J., Heller, E. and Jain, F., 2022. Propagation delay evaluation 
for spatial wavefunction switched (SWS) FET-based inverter. International Journal of High 
Speed Electronics and Systems, 31(01n04), p. 2240008. 
4. Jain, F., Lingalugari, M., Saman, B., Chan, P.Y., Gogna, P., Hasaneen, E.S., Chandy, J. and 
Heller, E., 2015. Multi-state sub-9 nm QDC-SWS FETs for compact memory circuits. In 46th 
IEEE Semiconductor Interface Specialists Conference (SISC) (pp. 2-5). 
5. Gudlavalleti, R.H., Saman, B., Mays, R., Heller, E., Chandy, J. and Jain, F., 2020. A novel 
peripheral circuit for SWSFET based multivalued static random-access memory. International 
Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 29(01n04), p. 2040010. 
6. Agrawal, N. and Paily, R., 2010. A threshold inverter quantization based folding and inter￾polation ADC in 0.18 μm CMOS. Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, 63, pp. 
273-281. 
7. Talukder, A.A. and Sarker, M.S., 2017, September. A three-bit threshold inverter quantization 
based CMOS flash ADC. In 2017 4th International Conference on Advances in Electrical 
Engineering (ICAEE) (pp. 352-356). IEEE. 
8. Husawi, A., Saman, B., Almalki, A., Gudlavalleti, R. and Jain, F.C., 2022. Power dissipation 
and cell area: Quaternary logic CMOS inverter vs. four-state SWS-FET inverter. International 
Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, 31(01n04), p. 2240009. 
9. Aytar, O., Tangel, A. and Dundar, G., 2008, June. A 9-bit 1GS/S CMOS folding ADC imple￾mentation using TIQ based flash ADC cores. In 2008 15th International Conference on Mixed 
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems (pp. 159-164). IEEE. 
10. Jain, F., Saman, B., Gudlavalleti, R. et al., 2021. Low-threshold II–VI lattice-matched SWS￾FETs for multivalued low-power logic. Journal of Electronic Materials, 50, pp. 2618-2629. This page intentionally left blank 2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_0023
237 
Novel Multi-State QDC-QDG FETs and Gate All Around (GAA) FETs 
for Integrated Logic and QD-NVRAMs 
F. Jain*,‡, R. H. Gudlavalleti*, J. Chandy* and E. Heller†
*University of Connecticut, CT, USA 
†Synopysis Inc., Ossining, NY, USA 
‡faquir.jain@uconn.edu 
This paper presents experimental I-V characteristics of a QDC-QDG FET that exhibited 5-states and 
has the potential to introduce additional states (e.g. 8) by utilizing Ge QDSL mini-energy sub-bands. 
Mini-energy bands are formed in an asymmetric Si quantum dot channel (QDC) comprising of two 
silicon oxide cladded Si quantum dots (QDs), where the upper layer has a smaller core diameter and 
thicker upper oxide cladding serving as tunnel oxide. Quantum simulations are presented to show more 
states when additional two germanium oxide cladded Ge dots are added on top of Si QD layers in the 
gate region. This paper also proposes Gate all around (GAA) FETs, when integrated with nonvolatile 
random access memories (NVRAMs) that have the potential for wafer scale integration, similar to 
vertical NANDs. Novel Si and Ge Quantum-dot-based device configurations discussed in this paper 
open the pathway forward to implement hardware platform for emerging applications using low power 
consumption and smaller footprint. 
Keywords: Quantum dot FETs; multi-state FETs; Si QDC-Ge QDG; wafer scale integration. 
1. Introduction 
Cladded Si Quantum dot channel (QDC) FETs incorporating Si Quantum dot gate layers 
have been reported to experimentally exhibit distinct 4-state ID-VD and ID-VG charac￾teristics [1]. In addition to ON and OFF, two intermediate states are attributed to carrier 
transfer in the inversion layer mini-energy sub-bands manifested in QDC due to the 
formation of quantum dot superlattice (QDSL) shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b). 
2. Experimental Si QDC and Ge QDG Exhibiting 5-6 States in 
I-V Characteristics 
Figure 2(a) shows the schematic of a FET replacing Si QDs in the gate region with Ge 
QDs. The experimental I-V characteristics are shown in Fig. 2(b). Unlike SiOx-cladded Si 
quantum dots in the gate region, the GeOx-cladded Ge dot forms additional mini-energy 
bands that are separated by smaller energies and hence have the potential of manifesting 
additional logic states. 
‡Corresponding author. 238 F. Jain et al. 
Fig. 1(a). Schematic of QDC-QDG FET. Fig. 1(b). ID-VD characteristics showing distinct characteristics 
as a function of gate voltage. 
The experimental 5-state ID-VG characteristics are shown in Fig. 2(b). The variation is in 
the use of HfO2 layer tunnel oxide over upper SiOx cladding on Si quantum dot layer, which 
improves sub-threshold slope. The schematic is shown in Fig. 2(c). We believe that the 
upper SiOx cladding has an effective dielectric constant (~8). This contrasts with I-V 
shown in Fig. 1(b). 
Fig. 2(a). QDC-QDG FET with asymmetric Si QD channel and Ge QDG. 
Fig. 2(b). 5-state experimental ID-VG as a function of VD. Novel Multi-State QDC-QDG and GAA FETs 239
Fig. 2(c). Cross-sectional schematic of QDC-QDG FET exhibiting 5-state experimental ID-VG.
2.1. Quantum simulations: QDC-QDG FETs 
Simulation of asymmetric Si QD channel with Ge QD gate layers, shown in Fig. 2(a), is 
presented in Fig. 3(a). Table 1 shows the parameters used. 
Fig. 3(a). Quantum simulations showing transfer of wavefunction in upper Ge QD. 
Table 1. List of parameters used in Fig. 3(a). 
Layer Thick (m) (eV) Eg (eV) me mh r Nd (cm3
) Na (cm3
) 
GeOx clad 0.0005 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core 0.0040 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.001 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core 0.0040 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0005 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
SiOx clad 0.002 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD 0.0045 4.15 
SiOx clad 0.0010 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD 0.0050 4.15 
SiOx clad 0.0005 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
 Si 0.5000 4.15 1.12 0.19 0.49 11.9 0.0e00 1.0e16 240 F. Jain et al. 
Figures 3(b1) and 3(b2) show the effect of changing the diameter of Ge QD layers to 
3 nm in the gate region and changing the oxide cladding over upper Si QD channel at two 
different gate voltages. 
Fig. 3(b1-top) and (b2). Wavefunction transfer in Ge QDs due to the effect of changing the diameter of Ge QDs
to 3nm. 
Table 2. Parameters used in quantum simulations for Figs. 3(b1) and 3(b2). 
Layer Thick (m)  (eV) Eg (eV) me mh er Nd (cm3
) Na (cm3
)
GeOx clad 0.0005 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core* 0.0030 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0010 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeQD core* 0.0030 4.55 0.67 0.08 0.28 16.0 0.0e00 0.0e00 
GeOx clad 0.0005 2.25 5.70 0.16 0.16 4.4 0.0e00 0.0e00 
SiOx clad 0.0030 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD core* 0.0040 4.15 1.12 0.19 0.49 11.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
SiOx clad 0.0010 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
Si QD core* 0.0050 4.15 1.12 0.19 0.49 11.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
.SiOx clad 0.0005 0.9 9.0 0.5 0.5 3.9 0.0e00 0.0e00 
 Si 0.1000 4.15 1.12 0.19 0.49 11.9 0.0e00 1.0e16 
* simulated as QWs Novel Multi-State QDC-QDG and GAA FETs 241
Fig. 3(c). Simulated carrier density in direct mini-energy sub-bands. 
Figure 3(c) shows charge density vs Fermi-level location when Ge QDs are incorporated 
in the gate region [13]. The effect of Ge core size is shown for direct energy gap density of 
states (DOS) due to QDSL in the gate region. 
3. Gate All Around (GAA) QDC-QDG FETs and NVRAMs 
FETs using p-poly Si have been demonstrated [13] using Si QDC. The inversion channel 
exhibited electron mobility exceeding 80 cm2
/V-s. 
A variation of Fig. 2(a) in GAA configuration using poly-Si core is shown in Fig. 4. 
The use of p-type poly-Si core has the potential for 3D stacking. The methodology is 
adapted from vertical nonvolatile memories (V-NAND) [14]. 
Fig. 4. QDC-QDG- FET in GAA configuration. 
This structure lends itself to NVRAMs with Ge quantum dot access channel (QDAC) [7]. 
This is shown in Fig. 5. 
Fig. 5. Recessed QDC channel with Si QD floating gate and Ge QDAC. 242 F. Jain et al. 
4. Multi-state QDC-SWS FET Configurations with Single Drain 
Figure 6(a) shows the schematic of a spatial wavefunction switched (SWS) FET and Fig. 
6(b) shows the conduction in lower and upper channels for a fabricated device exhibiting 
4-states [2]. 
Fig. 6(a). Schematic of 2-Si quantum dot
channel SWS-NMOS. Deep drain D2 is 
connected to QC2 comprising of lower
most two QD layers, and shallow drain D1
is connected to QC1, upper QD layers. Fig. 6(b). ID-VD characteristics of 2-QD channel SWS-NMOS. 
Fig. 7(a). QDC integrating Si QDs (4nm), Si QDs (3nm) and Ge QD (4nm) to implement 8-states. 
Fig. 7(b). Quantum dot channel integrating Si QDs (4nm), Si QDs (3nm) and Ge QD (4nm) along with using
HfO2 as tunnel oxide to implement two layers of Ge QDs in the gate region. 
‐0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3
ID [mA]
VD [V]
ID(VG=1.0V) I4(VG=1.0V)
ID(VG=1.5V) I4(VG=1.5V)
ID(VG=2.0V) I4(VG=2.0V) Deep Drain
Shallow Drain
‐0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
1 1.5 2 2.5 3
ID [mA]
VD [V]
I4(VG=1.0V)
I4(VG=1.5V)
I4(VG=2.0V)
Shallow Drain
Deep Drain Shallow DrainNovel Multi-State QDC-QDG and GAA FETs 243
Figure 7(a) shows the schematic cross-section of a QDC structure having SiOx-Si QDs 
near the source end with larger core diameter (d1), and GeOx-Ge QDs near the drain end. 
In between the Si QDs and Ge QDs, there is a set of Si QD layers with diameter (d2<d1). 
Figure 7(b) shows the quantum dot channel integrating Si QDs (4nm), Si QDs (3nm) 
and Ge QD (4nm) along with using HfO2 as tunnel oxide to implement two layers of Ge 
QDs in the gate region. 
5. Conclusion 
Novel QD structures, experimental data, and quantum simulations show the potential of 
achieving 5-8 states in NanoFETs. Circuit simulation of 4-state and 8-states (3-bit) 
inverters and SRAMs have been reported [8, 10]. This work opens the pathway for 3-bit/ 
8-state QD-based logic and memory circuits in QDC-QDG configuration. Multi-state 
SWS-FET structures are also presented with one drain. 
Increasing the states is obtained in QDC, SWS and QDG configuration by methods 
including (1) changing the thickness of upper cladding of upper QD of QD channel, (ii) 
changing the SiOx cladded thickness in Si QD layers, (iii) making two QD layers 
asymmetrical by controlled oxidation of upper SiO2 layer (see Fig. 1(a)), (iv) changing the 
Ge core diameter of two uppermost Ge QD layers. 
Wafer scale integration could be achieved using the methodology employed in vertical 
nonvolatile memories (V-NAND) [14]. Figure 5 schematically shows a QD-NVRAM 
implemented in GAA structure using poly-Si core and SiOx-Si cladded quantum dot 
channel. Si Quantum dot channel is self-assembled on p-poly Si core where the inversion 
layer is formed with higher mobility than in poly-Si. In addition, cladded Si or Ge QD 
layers serve as floating gate in gate all around (GAA) configuration. 
The QD structures discussed in this paper could provide advancement in multi-state 
FETs and NVRAMs and be transformative for future computing systems including the 
implementation of edge computing, artificial intelligence and machine learning platforms. 
References 
1. F. Jain, S. Karmakar, P.-Y. Chan, E. Suarez, M. Gogna, J. Chandy and E. Heller, “Quantum Dot 
Channel (QDC) Field-Effect Transistors (FETs) using II-VI Barrier Layers,” Journal of 
Electronic Materials, 41, 2775, 2012. 
2. F. Jain, M. Lingalugari, B. Saman, P.-Y. Chan, P. Gogna, E.-S. Hasaneen, J. Chandy and E. 
Heller, “Multi-State Sub-9 nm QDC-SWS FETs for Compact Memory Circuits,” 46th IEEE 
Semiconductor Interface Specialists Conference (SISC), December 2–5, 2015. 
3. F. Jain, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, B. Saman, P-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, M. Lingalugari, and E. 
Heller, Multi-State Quantum Dot Channel (QDC) FETs for Multi-Bit Computing, 52nd IEEE 
Semiconductor Interface Specialists Conference (SISC), December 8–11, 2021. 
4. F. Jain, M. Lingalugari, J. Kondo, P. Mirdha, E. Suarez, J. Chandy and E. Heller, “Quantum dot 
channel (QDC) FETs with Wraparound II-VI Gate Insulators: Numerical Simulations,” Journal 
of Electronic Materials, 45, 5663, 2016. 
5. E. K. Heller, S. K. Islam, G. Zhao and F. C. Jain, Solid-State Electronics, 42, 901–914, 1999. 244 F. Jain et al. 
6. C-W. Jiang and M. A. Green, Journal of Applied Physics, 99, 114902, 2006. 
7. M. Lingalugari, P.-Y. Chan, E.K. Heller, J. Chandy and F.C. Jain, “Quantum Dot Floating Gate 
Nonvolatile Random Access Memory Using Quantum Dot Channel for Faster Erasing,” 
Electronic Letters, 54, 36, 2018. 
8. F. Jain, R. Gudlavalleti, R. Mays, B. Saman, P-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, M. Lingalugari and E. 
Heller, “Two-dimensional SiOx-cladded Si and GeOx-cladded Ge Quantum Dot Arrays 
vertically stacked for CMOS-X Logic,” SRAMs, NVRAMs and IR imaging and multi-bit 
Computing, SISC, December 2022. 
9. R. Meyer, Y. Fukuzumi and Y. Dong, “3D NAND Scaling in Next Decade,” Proceedings of 
International Electron Devices Meeting, 26.1.1–26.1.4, 599–602, December 2022. 
10. R. H. Gudlavalleti, E. Heller, J. Chandy and F. Jain, “Computing-In-Memory SRAM Cell using 
Multistate Spatial Wavefunction Switching (SWS)-Quantum Dot Channel (QDC) FET,” Int. J. 
of High Speed Electron. Syst., 32, 2350012, 2023.. 
11. D. Lelmini and H.-S. P. Wong, “In-memory computing with resistive switching devices,” 
Nature Electronics, 1, 333–337, 2018. 
12. A. J. Sigillito, J. C. Loy, D. M. Zajac, M. J. Gullans, L. F. Edge and J. R. Petta, “Site-selective 
Quantum Control in an Isotopically Enriched 28Si/Si0.7Ge0.3 Quadruple Quantum Dot,” 
Physics Review Applied, 11, 061006, 2019. 
13. F. Jain, R. H. Gudlavalleti, A. Almalki, B. Saman, P-Y. Chan, J. Chandy, F. 
Papadimitrakopoulos and E. Heller, Int. J. of High Speed Electron. Syst., 32, 2350018, 2023. 
14. Chen et al., IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integrated Systems, 2018.  2024 World Scientific Publishing Company 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811283765_bmatter
245 
Author Index 
Alamoudi, W., 227 
Al Jamal, H., 141 
Almalki, A., 57, 151, 157, 205, 227 
Anwar, M., 57, 199 
Bradley, H., 151 
Chan, P-Y., 157 
Chandy, J., 57, 91, 157, 205, 227, 
237 
Chen, S., 123 
Dhungel, A., 109 
Dougenik, R., 79, 199 
Dutta, N. K., 49, 79, 227 
Fan, S., 35, 67, 217 
Gao, P., 179 
Goosen, J., 151 
Grasso, J., 1, 11 
Gudlavalleti, R. H., 57, 91, 151, 
157, 205, 227, 237 
Hasan, Md. S., 123 
Heller, E., 57, 91, 167, 205, 227, 
237 
Hossain, Md. M., 21 
Hossain, Md. R., 109 
Hu, K., 141 
Husawi, A., 205 
Islam, S. K., 35 
Jain, F., 91, 101, 109, 157, 157, 
205, 237 
Jain, F. C., 67, 217 
Joshi, M., 141 
Kausani, A. A., 49 
Lacomb, R., 79, 101, 199 
Liu, T., 151 
Mazady, A., 187 
Nasri, F., 179 
Papadimitrakopoulos, F., 157 
Parent, E., 151 
Paul, P. S., 109 
Perez, E., 101, 151 
Rahman, A., 35, 67, 217 
Raman, R., 1 
Sadia, M., 109 
Salahuddin, U., 167 
Salama, H., 187 
Saman, B., 57, 157, 205, 227 
Shuvo, Md. M. H., 21 
Soto-Valle, G., 141 
Sun, J., 167 
Tentzeris, M., 141 
Titirsha, T., 21 
Wang, L., 141 
Willis, B. G., 1, 11 
Zhao, J., 11 
Zhu, C., 167 
