Huayna Terraschke (Ed.)
Nanostructured MaterialsAlso of interest
Chemistry of Nanomaterials.
Vol.  Multifunctional Materials
S.S.R. Kumar Challa (Ed.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN (PDF) ----,
e-ISBN (EPUB) ----
Chemistry of Nanomaterials.
Vol.  A Metallic Nanomaterials (Part A)
S.S.R. Kumar Challa (Ed.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN (PDF) ----,
e-ISBN (EPUB) ----
Chemistry of Nanomaterials.
Vol.  B Metallic Nanomaterials (Part B)
S.S.R. Kumar Challa (Ed.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN (PDF) ----,
e-ISBN (EPUB) ----
Nanoparticles
Raz Jelinek, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN (PDF) ----,
e-ISBN (EPUB) ----
Structure Analysis of Advanced Nanomaterials.
Nanoworld by High-Resolution Electron Microscopy
Takeo Oku, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN (PDF) ----,
e-ISBN (EPUB) ----Nanostructured
Materials
Applications, Synthesis and In-Situ Characterization
Edited by
Huayna TerraschkeEditor
Jun.-Prof. Dr. Huayna Terraschke
Institut für Anorganische Chemie
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Str. 2
24118 Kiel
Germany
hterraschke@ac.uni-kiel.de
ISBN 978-3-11-045829-9
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-045909-8
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-045833-6
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023937882
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available on the internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image: Huayna Terraschke
Typesetting: Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
www.degruyter.comContents
List of abbreviations VII
List of contributors XIII
Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke
Chapter 1
Introduction 1
Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke
Chapter 2
Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 5
Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke
Chapter 3
Synthesis, functionalisation, and applications of iron oxide magnetic
nanoparticles 47
Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschke
Chapter 4
Nanostructured bioceramics 73
Huayna Terraschke, Markus Suta
Chapter 5
In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS): looking inside
chemical reactions 105
Huayna Terraschke
Chapter 6
In situ monitoring of the syntheses, phase transformations, and loading
processes of metal–organic frameworks 133
Huayna Terraschke, Katia Nchimi, Felix Hartmann, Wolfgang Bensch
Chapter 7
Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery
materials 171
Index 211List of abbreviations
AB 4-Aminobenzoate
acac Acetylacetone
acac Acetylacetone
ACP Amorphous calcium phosphate
ACP Amorphous calcium phosphate
ad Adeninate
AFM Atomic force microscopy
AMB 4-(Aminomethyl)benzoate
AOT Bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate
AP Unsintered apatite
APG Amine-polyglycidol
ASSB All-solid-state battery
ATR-FTIR Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared
BBA 2-Benzoylbenzoic acid
BBCDC 9,9ʹ-([1,1′-Biphenyl]-4,4ʹ-diyl)bis(9H-carbazole-3,6-dicarboxylate)
BCP Bi-phasic calcium phosphate
BDC 1,4-Benzenedicarboxylate
BDC Benzenedicarboxylate
BESSY Berliner Elektronenspeicherring
BG Bio-active glass
bipy 2,2′-Bipyridine
BIPY 2,2-Bipyridine
bipy 4,4′-Bipyridine
BME-BDC 2,5-Bis(2-methoxyethoxy)-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate
bpc Bipyridinecarboxylate
BPDC Biphenyldicarboxylate
BPEI Branched polyethylenimine
BPT Biphenyl-3,4′,5-tricarboxylate
BPTC 2,2′,5,5′-Biphenyltetracarboxylate
bpy Bipyridine
BTC 1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylate
BTC Benzenetricarboxylate
BTEC 1,2,4,5-Benzenetetracarboxylate
BYPDC Bipyridinedicarboxylate
BZAC Benzoylacetonate
CAM Cathode active material
CAU Christian-Albrechts-University
cba Carboxyvinyl benzoic acid
ccd Charge-coupled device
CDC trans-1,4-Cyclohexanedicarboxylate
CHESS Cornell high-energy synchrotron source
CP Coordination polymer
CP Coordination polymers
CPOC 5-(4-Carboxyphenoxy)nicotinic acid
CTAB Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CTAB Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
Cup N-Nitrosophenylhydroxylamine
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-203CUS Coordinatively unsaturated metal sites
DABCO 1,4-Diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane
DBA 3,4-Dihydroxybenzylamine
DB-BDC 2,5-Dibutoxy-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate
DCIM 4,5-Dichloroimidazolate
DCPD Dicalcium phosphate dihydrate
DESY Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron
DESY Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron
DFLM Dark-field light microscopy
DFT Density functional theory
DHBDC 2,5-Dihydroxybenzene-1,4-dicarboxylate
DHBDC 2,5-Dihydroxyterephthalic acid
dia Diamond topology
DMA Dimethylammonium
DMBIM 5,6-Dimethylbenzimidazole
DMF Dimethylformamide
DMF Dimethylformamide
DMF N,N-Dimethylformamide
DMNP Dimethyl 4-nitrophenylphosphate
DOBDC 2,5-Dioxidobenzene-1,4-dicarboxylate
DUT Dresden University of Technology
EDTA Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EDXRD Energy-dispersive X-ray diffraction
EPFL École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
EPR Electron paramagnetic resonance
ESRF European Synchrotron Radiation Facility
EXAFS Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FE-SEM Field emission scanning electron microscope image
FITC Fluorescein isothiocyanate
fu Formula unit
H2BPDC 4,4′-Benzophenonedicarboxylic acid
H2BPEB 1,4-Bis(1H-pyrazol-4-ylethynyl)benzene
H2FUM Fumaric acid
H2IDC 4,5-Imidazoledicarboxylic acid
H2PZDC Pyrazoledicarboxylic acid
H3PMBC 4-(Phosphonomethyl)benzoic acid
H4BPTC 2,2′,5,5′-Biphenyltetracarboxylic acid
H4DHTA 2,5-Dihydroxyterdihydroxyterephthalic acid
H6TATPT 2,4,6-Tris(2,5-dicarboxylphenylamino)-1,3,5-triazine
H6TCPP 4-Tetracarboxyphenylporphyrin
HAp Hydroxyapatite
HCAp Hydroxycarbonate apatite
HEV Hybrid electric vehicles
HMEIM 2-Methylimidazole
HPLC High-performance liquid chromatography
HRTEM High-resolution transmission electron microscope
IBUs Inorganic building units
ICP-OES Inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy
ILACS In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors
VIII List of abbreviationsint Intermediate
IPA Isophthalic acid
IR Infrared
IR Infrared
IRMOF Isoreticular metal-organic framework
kat Katsenite topology
KFSI Potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
kgm Kagome
LAG Liquid-assisted grinding
LAG Liquid-assisted grinding
LB Leucomethylene blue
LED Light-emitting diode
LFP LiFePO4
LIB Lithium-ion battery
Ln Lanthanide
lp Large pore
LPE Liquid-phase epitaxy
MB Methylene blue
MCPM Monocalcium phosphate monohydrate
MeIM 2-Methylimidazole
MES Mesaconate
MIB Magnesium-ion battery
MIL Material Institute Lavoisier
MIL Material Institute Lavoisier
MIL Materials of Institute Lavoisier
ML Metal–ligand
MLMCD Magnetic light-converting molecule device
MNPs Magnetic nanoparticles
MOF Metal-organic framework
MOF Metal-organic framework
MOF Metal-organic framework
MOF Metal-organic framework
MRI Magnetic resonance image
MS Mass spectroscopies
MVK Methyl vinyl ketone
NC Nanoparticle
NCA LiNixCoyAlzO2, where x + y + z = 1
NCM LiNixCoyMnz, where x + y + z = 1
NDC 2,6-Naphthalenedicarboxylate
NGA Negative gas adsorption
NIR Near infrared
NMCs Nickel manganese cobalt
NMR Nuclear magnetic resonance
NMR Nuclear magnetic resonance
NP Nanoparticle
np Narrow pore
OCV Open-circuit voltage
ODISC Oxford-Diamond In Situ Cell
OLEDs Organic light-emitting diodes
List of abbreviations IXPCDA 10,12-Pentacosadiynoic acid
PDA Calcium 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylate
PDF Pair distribution function
PDF Pair distribution function
PDF Pair distribution function
PDT Photodynamic therapy
PEEK Polyether ether ketone
PEG Polyethylene glycol
phen 1,10-Phenanthroline
PMMA Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PMOFs Porphyrin-based MOFs
PMOs Periodic mesoporous organosilicas
PMT Photomultiplier tube
PNC Pre-nucleation clusters
PPY Phenylpyridine
PQDs Perovskite quantum dots
PTFE Polytetrafluoroethylene
PTT Photothermal therapy
PVP Polyvinylpyrrolidone
pyTa Pyridylthioacetate
pytz Tridentate pyridine tetrazolate
QCM Quartz crystal microbalance
QD Quantum dot
SANS Small-angle neutron scattering
SBF Simulated body fluid
SDS Sodium dodecyl sulfate
SE Solid electrolyte
SEI Solid electrolyte interphase
SEM Scanning electron microscope
SEM Scanning electron microscopy
SERS Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
SHE Standard hydrogen electrode
SIB Sodium-ion battery
SNBL Swiss Norwegian Beamline
SOLEIL Source Optimisée de Lumière d’Energie Intermédiaire du-LURE
sql Square grid
SURMOF Surface-attached metal-organic framework
SURMOFs Surface-mounted MOFs
SynRAC Synchrotron-based reaction cell for the analysis of chemical reactions
TC Thioglycolate
TCP Tricalcium phosphate
TEM Transmission electron microscope
TEM Transmission electron microscopy
TEOS Tetraethyl orthosilicate
THF Tetrahydrofuran
TM Transition metal
TMB Trimethylbenzene
TPA Terephthalic acid
TPU Thermoplastic polyurethane
X List of abbreviationsTRLFS Time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy
tta 2-Thenoyltrifluoroacetylacetonate
TTA Thenoyltrifluoroacetonate
UiO University of Oslo
UiO University of Oslo
UiO University of Oslo
UTSA University of Texas at San Antonio
WLED White-light-emitting diode
XANES X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy
XAS X-ray absorption
XAS X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XRD X-ray diffraction
XRD X-ray diffraction
XRD X-ray diffraction
XRD X-ray diffraction
XRD X-ray diffraction
ZBFB Zinc-bromide redox-flow batteries
ZIF Zeolitic imidazolate framework
ZIF Zeolitic imidazolate framework
List of abbreviations XIList of contributors
Huayna Terraschke, Jun.-Prof. Dr.
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Straße 2, 24118 Kiel
Germany
E-Mail: hterraschke@ac.uni-kiel.de
Katia Nchimi Nono, Dr.
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Straße 2, 24118 Kiel
Germany
and
Department of Inorganic Chemistry
Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I
P.O. Box 812
Yaoundé
Cameroon
Moritz Bassen, B.Sc.
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Straße 2, 24118 Kiel
Germany
Patric Lindenberg
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Straße 2, 24118 Kiel
Germany
Niklas Ruser, M.Sc.
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Straße 2, 24118 Kiel
Germany
Markus Suta, Jun.-Prof. Dr.
Inorganic Photoactive Materials
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry and Structural
Chemistry
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Universitätsstraße 1, 40225 Düsseldorf
Germany
Felix Hartmann, Dr.
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Straße 2, 24118 Kiel
Germany
and
Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut &
Zentrum für Materialforschung (ZfM)
Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 17, 35392 Gießen
Germany
Wolfgang Bensch, Prof. Dr.
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Max-Eyth-Straße 2, 24118 Kiel
Germany
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-204Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke
Chapter 1
Introduction
In general, nanomaterials have been gaining great attention in the past few years
since they can be used in various technological and medical applications [1]. For ex￾ample, nanostructured materials are applied on the technological development of en￾ergy-saving devices (e.g. light-emitting diodes (LEDs)), renewable energy sources (e.g.
solar cells), energy storage (e.g. rechargeable batteries), and gas storage solutions (e.g.
hydrogen fuel cells), which are crucially important to reduce the impact of global
warming and overcome energy shortage issues. Furthermore, nanomaterials have
been widely used in medicine, particularly in the fields of optical imaging and drug
delivery. Nanostructured materials have at least one dimension that is smaller than
100 nm, and include various examples such as nanoparticles (NPs), thin films, or
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) with nanosized voids [2, 3]. NPs have a relatively
small number of constituent atoms and a high surface area. Consequently, any subtle
addition, removal, or modification of a few atoms, as for example, through size and
shape alteration can have significant effects on the interaction with e.g. electromag￾netic radiation and can lead to profound changes on the material’s properties [4].
Among the nanostructured materials, MOFs are extremely interesting because they
can also be functionalised and tailored e.g. via the adsorption of other chemical com￾pounds within their pores.
The nanomaterial structure-related properties can be regulated by, for instance,
controlling the synthesis conditions. Their precise syntheses require profound knowl￾edge and strict control over the respective crystallisation processes, which can be
achieved by developing techniques and reactors to in situ monitor the respective
chemical reactions [5]. The mechanism of chemical reactions could be studied by re￾moving samples during the process from the reactor and analysing them ex situ,
which is rather disadvantageous as it only offers snapshots of the process with very
limited time resolution and can influence the sample upon its preparation for the
analysis. These issues can be overcome by performing in situ measurements during
the reactions. In general, in situ characterisation techniques are essential for elucidat￾ing the different phenomena behind the product formation, such as nucleation, crystal
growth, the formation of (amorphous) intermediates, or polymorphic phase transfor￾mations, thus also allowing for the detection of new metastable compounds and for the
optimisation of the synthesis conditions [5].
This book is directed to undergraduate and graduate students, aiming to obtain
an overview on the research field of inorganic nanostructured materials. The book is
divided into two parts: Part I (Chapters 2–4) offers a summary of the synthesis, prop￾erties, and applications of various classes of nanostructured compounds, while Part II
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-001(Chapters 5–7) reviews the applications of in situ analysis elucidating, for example,
formation, transformation and operation of such substances.
In detail, Chapter 2 focuses on the guest-induced luminescence of MOFs, which is
typically used in lighting and chemical sensing applications. The introduction of lumi￾nescent materials, such as lanthanide ions or complexes, quantum dots, plasmonic
nanoparticles, and organic phosphors into the MOF pores increases the quantum effi￾ciency and chemical stability, and results in fine-tuning of the emission wavelength
[6]. The remaining chapters in Part I explore the scope of nanostructured materials
beyond their optical properties, focusing on their magnetism and biocompatibility.
Chapter 3 summarises for instance the strategies for the synthesis and functionalisa￾tion, as well as the applications of one of the most used types of magnetic nanomateri￾als, the iron oxide-based NPs. These NPs are of utmost importance in the biomedical
and technological fields, such as magnetic resonance imaging, cancer treatment, drug
delivery, bioimaging, and magnetic separation, in addition to their application as en￾ergy materials and nanocatalysts [7]. Chapter 4 describes the different aspects of the
synthesis, functionalisation, and applications of nanostructured bioceramics. These
particles comprise calcium phosphates and carbonates, glasses, or porous materials,
and their high biocompatibility allows for their application not only in bioimaging
and drug delivery but also in the production of bone cements and coatings for ortho￾paedic and dental implants [8].
In Part II, Chapter 5 presents the opportunity to apply in situ luminescence meas￾urements for monitoring of the formation of functional materials ranging from com￾plexes to bioceramics. One important approach in this field is the in situ luminescence
analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS), which explores the sensitivity of the optical
properties of lanthanide ions for implanting them as local crystallisation tracer during
the formation of solid matter. This approach is particularly advantageous because of its
high temporal resolution, sensitivity, simplicity, and high accessibility [9].
Chapter 6 reviews the available in situ techniques and applications for tracking the
crystallisation of MOFs, as well as their structural transformations upon the loading of
guest molecules. The main techniques discussed include in situ X-ray diffraction, X-ray
absorption, and total scattering, in which high-energy and high-flux synchrotron radia￾tion allows for the permeation of X-rays through the reactor walls and bulk solvents
[10].
Finally, Chapter 7 offers an overview of examples of in situ analytical tools applied
during battery operation, also known as the operando characterisation techniques. Per￾forming operando studies during the charge and discharge processes enables a deep
understanding of the working principle of batteries and the reason behind their failure.
Such measurements are important for promoting electromobility and storing power
from fluctuating renewable sources such as solar and wind energy [11].
2 Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeReferences
[1] Z. Wu, S. Yang, W. Wu, Shape control of inorganic nanoparticles from solution. Nanoscale 8,
1237–1259, 2016 and references therein.
[2] M. Auffan, J. Rose, J.-Y. Bottero, G. V. Lowry, J.-P. Jolivet, M. R. Wiesner, Towards a definition of
inorganic nanoparticles from an environmental, health and safety perspective. Nat. Nanotech. 4,
634–641, 2009.
[3] O. M. Yaghi, M. O’Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi, J. Kim, Reticular synthesis and the
design of new materials. Nature 423, 705–714, 2003.
[4] F. P. G. de Arquer, D. V. Talapin, V. I. Klimov, Y. Arakawa, M. Bayer, E. H. Sargent, Semiconductor
quantum dots: Technological progress and future challenges. Science 373, 640/1–15, 2021.
[5] N. Pienack, W. Bensch, In-Situ Monitoring of the Formation of Crystalline Solids. Angew Chem. Int. Ed.
50, 2014–2034, 2011.
[6] G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr, E. H. Sargent, Colloidal Quantum Dot
Solar Cells Chem. Rev. 115, 12732–12763, 2015.
[7] S. Wang, J. Xu, W. Li, S. Sun, S. Gao, Y. Hou, Magnetic nanostructures: rational design and
fabrication strategies toward diverse applications. Chem. Rev. 122, 5411–5475, 2022.
[8] G. L. Koons, M. Diba, A. G. Mikos, Materials design for bone-tissue engineering. Nat. Rev. Mater. 5,
584–603, 2020.
[9] H. Terraschke, M. Rothe, P. Lindenberg, In-Situ Monitoring Metal-Ligand Exchange Processes by
Optical Spectroscopy and X-Ray Diffraction Analysis: A Review. Rev. Anal. Chem. 37, 20170003/1-22,
2018.
[10] H. Reinsch, N. Stock, Synthesis of MOFs: a personal view on rationalisation, application and
exploration. Dalton Trans. 46, 8339–8349, 2017.
[11] E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui, Y. Gogotsi, Energy storage: The future enabled by
nanomaterials. Science 366, 969/1-12, 2019.
Chapter 1 Introduction 3Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke✶
Chapter 2
Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic
frameworks
The loading of guest molecules into the porous structures of metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs) permits the adjustment and improvement of their luminescence properties, in
particular, their quantum yield and precise tuning of the emission wavelength. Despite
the importance of this research field and its promising potential applications, to the
best of our knowledge, only few review articles have been published to date on guest￾induced MOF luminescence, partially limited to sensor-related applications. This chap￾ter offers therefore an extensive survey of the existing works in this research area,
discussing its current challenges, aiming to substantially contribute to its further
development.
2.1 Introduction
Over the past few decades, there has been a constant increasing interest in metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs). These materials are made of metal ions or clusters connected to
each other by organic linkers via coordinative bonds to create a defined open crystalline
framework with permanent porosity [1]. MOFs exhibit ultra-high porosity (up to 90% free
volume) and enormous internal surface areas, extending beyond 6,000 m2
/g [2], exceeding
those of traditional porous materials, such as carbon-based ones and zeolites. MOFs with
permanent porosity exhibit more variety and multiplicity than any other class of porous
materials because they can be composed of several different ligands containing different
types and amounts of functional groups [1]. MOF materials exhibiting a large variety of
sizes and 3D framework structures can be constructed based on the ligands and the cen￾tral metal ions used. This versatility makes them advantageous for many applications,
such as gas storage, separation, catalysis, chemical sensing, drug delivery, and other bio￾medical applications. Therefore, MOFs have been extensively studied and >20,000 differ￾ent structures have been reported to date [1].
In general, MOFs are interesting because of their intrinsic ability to emit light,
either ligand-based (light is emitted by conjugated π-systems within the organic li￾gands [3, 4]) or metal-based (light is emitted through the metal centres within the
MOF structure [5–7]). A third possible emission derived from the porous structure of
MOFs, which allows guests to be inserted, is the so-called guest-induced luminescence.
✶
Corresponding author: Huayna Terraschke, E-Mail: hterraschke@ac.uni-kiel.de
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-002The guest can show luminescence directly or can lead to complex energy transfer pro￾cesses inside the MOFs, thereby changing the optical properties of the host structure.
These features make MOFs excellent candidates for additional applications based on
luminescence, such as light-emitting devices [8].
Upon comparison, emission from single organic or single inorganic luminescent
materials often covers only a narrow part of the visible light spectrum, while MOFs
offer relatively high luminescence intensities and broad emission spectra through the
association of inorganic metals with organic linkers. The combination of well-defined
porosity and environmentally dependent optical properties reinforces the interest in
MOFs as versatile optically active materials [8].
Despite all of the above-mentioned advantages, so far there are, to the best of our
knowledge, only few review articles on guest-induced luminescence. One important
example was published by Allendorf et al. [9] and another was recently published by
Shu et al. [10]. However, they mainly focus on their chemical sensing applications.
Therefore, the objective of our present work is to offer a general overview of the re￾cent research on guest-induced luminescence in MOFs, focusing on lanthanide ions,
lanthanide complexes, quantum dots, plasmonic nanoparticles, and organic phos￾phors as guests inside the pores of MOFs. The synthesis and loading methods are first
presented before discussing the most commonly reported materials in this field. Fi￾nally, the recent applications and future research possibilities are discussed.
2.2 Synthesis and loading methods
2.2.1 MOF synthesis
As discussed in detail in Chapter 6, MOFs consist of two major components: metal ion
centres and bridging organic linkers. MOFs are prepared by combining metal ions with
organic linkers, mostly under mild reaction conditions. According to Soni et al. [11], the
main synthesis methods can be categorised into conventional (solvothermal) and uncon￾ventional methods (see Figure 2.1). In general, using conventional solvothermal synthe￾sis, a mixture of solvated metal ions and organic linkers is heated in a glass vial, Teflon￾lined autoclave, or pressure reactor [12]. If water is used as the solvent, this method is
known as hydrothermal synthesis. For a specific structure, controlling the synthesis pa￾rameters, such as pressure, temperature, and solvent composition, is important.
On the other hand, mechanochemical synthesis is an unconventional method. It
works by breaking the intramolecular bonds using mechanical forces, followed by
chemical transformation. A mixture of the metal salt and organic linker is ground in a
mortar and pestle or a ball milling device without the use of solvent. Next, the mixture
is gently heated to evaporate any water or other volatile molecules that are formed as
6 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkeby-products. If solvents are added during the grinding step, it is known as liquid￾assisted grinding [11].
Further synthetic routes have been developed, in addition to these two main meth￾ods. Four important examples are microwave-assisted, electrochemical synthesis, sono￾chemical, and layer-by-layer syntheses [11]. Microwave-assisted synthesis uses energy
provided in the form of microwave radiation, allowing fast crystallisation, narrow par￾ticle size distribution [13], and morphological control [14, 15]. The electrochemical ap￾proach uses metal ions, which are continuously supplied using anodic dissolution,
instead of metal salts [16]. These ions react with the dissolved linker molecules and the
conducting salt in the reaction medium.
Sonochemical synthesis is a rapid and environmentally friendly method in which
ultrasonic radiation is used. Using homogenous and accelerated nucleation, a reduc￾tion in the crystallisation time and significantly smaller particle sizes can be achieved
than those obtained using conventional solvothermal synthesis.
Figure 2.1: Overview of the synthesis methods, possible reaction temperatures, and the final reaction
products in the synthesis of MOF [17] (Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 7Finally, a layer-by-layer method has been used to form thin MOF films. It is based
on surface chemistry, in which a functionalised organic surface is immersed sequen￾tially into solutions of metal ions and organic linkers [11].
2.2.2 Encapsulation of guest species
There are three main approaches used to construct MOF composites containing guest
species in their pores. These are known as “ship in a bottle”, “bottle around ship”, and
“in situ one-step synthesis” (Figure 2.2). In addition, guest molecules and/or ions can
diffuse into MOFs from the solution or gaseous phase.
The “ship in a bottle” approach involves the encapsulation of guest species by
first loading the cavities of an existing host MOF with small molecule components or
nanoparticle precursors. Subsequently, further treatment is performed, leading to the
desired functional structure of the encapsulated guest species. Therefore, for NP–MOF
guest–host structures, the nanoparticles (ships) are assembled inside the MOF (bottle).
Various techniques, such as solution infiltration, solid grinding, and vapour deposition,
have been used to introduce the NP precursors into MOFs [18, 19]. This loading approach
is challenging because it is difficult to precisely control the location, composition, struc￾ture, and morphology of the incorporated guests. However, encapsulation in the MOF
pores, which limits the growth of the molecules and nanoparticles inside, can be advan￾tageous, especially during the synthesis of size-dependent guest species, such as quan￾tum dots [20].
The “bottle around ship” approach, which is also known as template-assisted syn￾thesis, involves two steps. First, functional molecules or nanoparticles are prepared
and often stabilised using capping agents or surfactants. In the second step, the pre￾synthesised guest species are added to a synthetic solution containing the MOF pre￾cursors used to assemble the MOF. The guest species do not occupy the cavities of the
MOF, but are rather surrounded by grown MOFs. The MOF (bottle) is built around the
guest species (ship). With this method, the problem of nanoparticle aggregation on
the external surface of the MOF is limited. Furthermore, the size, morphology and
structure of the entrapped nanoparticles can be easily controlled because they are
synthesised prior to the assembly of the MOF framework [19, 20].
On the other hand, the introduction of nanoparticles can result in difficulties dur￾ing the subsequent growth of the MOFs because of the interfacial energy barriers be￾tween the two types of materials. In addition, the presence of capping agents may be
unfavourable for the complete exposure of the active sites and may decrease the per￾formance of the nanoparticles [20].
The third synthesis method used is the in situ one-step approach. This involves
the direct mixing of the precursor solutions that comprise the guest species and
MOFs. The growth and assembly of the nanoparticles and MOF occur simultaneously.
When compared to the previously mentioned synthetic approaches, this strategy is
8 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkestraightforward and simple, but requires an appropriate balance between the particle
growth and self-nucleation of the nanoparticles and MOF. Therefore, the choice of the
functional group in the organic linkers or solvent is crucial for trapping the nanopar￾ticle/guest species precursors, stabilising the species formed in situ, and facilitating
the hetero-nucleation of the MOFs on the surface of the guest species [21, 20].
2.3 Materials used for guest-induced MOF
luminescence
2.3.1 MOF encapsulation of lanthanide ions
Lanthanides are a class of elements in the periodic table from atomic number 58 (ce￾rium) to 71 (lutetium). Complemented by scandium, yttrium, and lanthanum, they
form a group of rare-earth elements. Lanthanum shares the same line as the 14 lan￾thanides in the periodic table, but it does not belong to the same family because its 4f
orbital is empty, while from Ce to Lu, the 4f orbital is partially or fully filled. Through
ionisation to the most common oxidation state (+3), a uniform configuration [Xe]4f n−1
is achieved in this series. The partially filled valence orbitals of the trivalent ions
from Ce3+ to Yb3+ lead to the possibility of 4f → 4f or 4f → 5d electronic transitions,
resulting in luminescence in the UV to IR region. The luminescent properties of lan￾thanide ions that will be discussed in the remainder of this chapter are focused on the
Figure 2.2: The main approaches used for the fabrication of nanoparticle/MOF composites: (a) ship in a
bottle, (b) bottle around ship, and (c) in situ one-step synthesis (reprinted with permission from
reference [20]).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 94f–4f transitions. Each electronic configuration corresponds to an energy state, and
the Dieke diagram (Figure 2.3) shows the ground and excited states of the trivalent
lanthanide ions. For instance, it is used to assign the emission peak to its respective
electronic transition [22].
The 4f orbitals are the valence orbitals that are shielded by the filled 5s and 5p
outer orbitals. Therefore, lanthanides bind mostly through ionic interactions, and the
influence of the ligand field on the 4f orbitals is minimal. For this reason, a low variabil￾ity of the 4f–4f emission properties of trivalent lanthanides is expected, which allows
these metal ions to have unique luminescent properties, such as narrow emission
peaks, large Stokes shifts, strong emission intensities, and long lifetimes. These optical
properties have motivated an increasing amount of interest in luminescent lanthanide
compounds. Therefore, apart from the extensive research on MOFs constructed using
lanthanide ions as the metal centres within the building units, an increasing number of
reports have been published on the application of lanthanide ions as guest species
doped in the MOF structure.
The encapsulation of lanthanide ions is especially advantageous because the lumi￾nescence of pure lanthanide ions is severely quenched when exposed to an aqueous
environment. They are effectively shielded against such effects when they are encapsu￾lated inside the pores of the MOF [10]. In addition, pure lanthanide ions show relatively
low quantum yields because they suffer from a weak absorbance due to the parity￾forbidden electronic transitions. A common way to circumvent this problem is to couple
lanthanide ions with the strongly absorbing linkers of MOFs, allowing direct energy
transfer from the more readily accessible linker excited states to the appropriate lan￾thanide metal energy level. In this way, specific and narrow emission peaks with high
quantum yields can be achieved [24].
For example, europium and terbium trivalent ions are the most common lanthanide
ions reported in guest–MOF composites because of their strong emission in the visible
light region. MOFs derived from aromatic cores, such as benzene, biphenyl, or bipyridine,
and connected with other metal ions are generally efficient for the generation of guest￾induced luminescence with lanthanide ions. For example, an anionic microporous MOF
based on the association of 1,2,4,5-benzenetetracarboxylate (BTEC) with Zn2+ has been pre￾pared and loaded with various lanthanides by Luo and Batten [25], which demonstrated
the ability to sensitise the ligands on both Eu3+ and Tb3+. These lanthanide–MOF compo￾sites were obtained from the hydrothermal self-assembly of Zn(NO3)2 · 6H2O, pyromellitic
dianhydride, and (NH4)6Mo7O24 · 4H2O, followed by cation exchange of the NH4
+ in the
structure by lanthanide ions. The authors also underlined the tuneable properties of such
materials from the original blue emission to red or yellow emission, depending on the
choice and concentration of the dopant used (Eu3+ or Tb3+) [25].
The well-known Bpy-UiO MOF based on the polymerisation of a bipyridinecarboxylate
(bpc) linker with Zr4+ was reported by Zhou et al. [26]. It acts as a responsive luminescent
composite upon the incorporation of Eu3+ cations into its porous nanostructure. In this
guest–host assembly, strong coordination interactions formed between Eu3+ and the free
10 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkebipyridyl moieties construct a stable structure along with efficient sensitisation, and hence
good luminescence properties centred on europium either in the solution or solid state.
The loading of another metal ion simultaneously with the lanthanide in a given
MOF is also possible and, in general, permits the tuning of the emission of the material.
Hao et al. [27] prepared a UiO-66(Zr)-(COOH)2 MOF using the bpc ligand, loading it with
Ag+ and Eu3+ ions. The host MOF was prepared using a sol–gel process, upon heating a
mixture of bpc and ZrCl3 at reflux for 24 h in an air atmosphere. After centrifugal sepa￾ration, the materials were dried and co-doped with Ag+ and Eu3+ in various amounts,
upon immersion of the MOF in a solution of the nitrate salts of the 4d and 4f ions.
When Eu3+ ions were doped alone, the photoluminescence studies indicated that an effi￾cient ligand-to-Eu energy transfer occurred because the emission spectra exhibited the
extinction of the residual blue emission of the ligand along with the intense and charac￾teristic sharp emission peaks of the encapsulated Eu3+ ions. In contrast, the bimetallic
Ag+
/Eu3+-UiO-66(Zr)-(COOH)2 guest MOF exhibited the appearance of ligand fluores￾cence, while the emission of europium was drastically reduced [27].
Another interesting bimetallic ion guest has been described by An et al. [28], who
studied the encapsulation of trivalent lanthanide ions into the bio-MOF-1 structure to
achieve a tuneable MOF luminescence by combining different encapsulated Ln3+ ions. In
this work, they prepared a series of Ln3+@bio-MOF1 (Ln3+ = Tb3+, Sm3+, Eu3+, or Yb3+) ma￾terials using a cation exchange process. For this purpose, the dimethylammonium cations
in the one-dimensional channels of bio-MOF-1 ([Zn8(ad)4(BPDC)6O(2 Me2NH2) · 8DMF ·
11H2O]; ad, adeninate; BPDC, biphenyldicarboxylate) were exchanged with lanthanide
ions by soaking the as-synthesised bio-MOF-1 samples in a DMF solution of Ln(NO3)3. The
Figure 2.3: Dieke diagram of the energy levels of trivalent lanthanide ions (republished with permission of
Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [23]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc.). On the abscissa, the different trivalent lanthanide ions are entered. On the other hand, the ordinate
shows the energy, displayed as the wavenumber of the entered energy states of the ions. The red-marked
energy states are those from which a radiative emission to the ground state is most likely to be observed.
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 11doped MOFs showed characteristic sharp emissions, corresponding to their respective
encapsulated lanthanide cations, when excited at 340 nm. Tb3+ exhibited its typical
green emission at 545 nm, Sm3+ exhibited an orange-pink emission at 640 nm, Eu3+ a
red emission at 614 nm, and Yb3+ at 970 nm (NIR) (Figure 2.4). Their emission colour
could be observed by the naked eye during excitation under a standard laboratory UV
lamp (365 nm). The similarity of all four lanthanide-centred excitation spectra, with a
consistent maximum at 340 nm, suggested that the energy migrated through the same
electronic levels located in the MOF structure. These characteristic emission peaks were
also easily detected even in an aqueous environment with considerably high quantum
yield, even though water molecules normally exhibit a strong quenching effect on the
luminescence of non-encapsulated lanthanide ions. This work demonstrated that the
MOF, as explained above, does not only serve as an antenna for sensitising three dif￾ferent visible-emitting and one NIR-emitting lanthanide cations, but can also protect
lanthanide cations from solvent quenching. This proves that the encapsulation of lan￾thanide ions into the MOF pores is highly advantageous [29].
Additional examples of lanthanide ions, doped or encapsulated within the porous
MOF structure, which exhibit guest-induced luminescence properties are presented in
Table 2.1.
2.3.2 MOF encapsulation of metal ion complexes
In addition to free metal ions, coordination complexes of various metallic species, includ￾ing lanthanides, transition metals, and post-transition metals such as gallium or alumin￾ium, can be introduced or associated with ligands as guest compounds in MOFs to exhibit
guest-induced luminescence. In general, the selected complexes (Table 2.2) already
Figure 2.4: Colour-tuneable luminescence of lanthanide ions encapsulated by bio-MOF1 [30]
(Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society).
12 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkepossess emission properties, which contribute to modifying the emission features of a
given MOF.
For example, Yin et al. [45] worked on a composite comprised of Ru(bpy)3
2+ (tris
(2,2bipyridyl)ruthenium(II)), doped into the pores of MIL-101(Al)-NH2 and used for
the ratiometric fluorescence sensing of water in various organic solvents. While the
ruthenium complex emits red light at 615 nm, MIL-101(Al)-NH2 exhibits a light blue emis￾sion at 465 nm. In the synthesis, tris(2,2-bipyridyl)dichloride ruthenium(II)hexahydrate
[Ru(bpy)3Cl2 · 6H2O] was added to a solution of aluminium chloride hexahydrate (AlCl3 ·
6H2O) and 2-aminoterephthalic acid (BDC−NH2) in DMF. The mixture was transferred to
a Teflon-lined autoclave, sonicated for 5 min, and maintained at 130 °C for 72 h. Later,
the solvent was removed via centrifugation and washed with DMF and ethanol. The
Table 2.1: A summary of lanthanide ions doped in MOF compounds.
Lanthanide ion Host MOF Metal
centre
Linker References
Ln+ = Tb+
, Sm+
,
Eu+
, or Yb+
Bio-MOF- Zn+ Biphenyldicarboxylate (BPDC) []
Eu+ MIL--COOH(Al) Al+ Benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) []
Eu+ MIL- Ga+ Benzenetricarboxylate (BTC) []
Eu+ UiO- Zr+ ,-Pyridinedicarboxylate []
Eu+ Uio--(COOH) Zr+ ,,,-Benzenetetracarboxylate
(BTEC)
[]
Eu+ Bpy-UiO Zr+ Bipyridinedicarboxylate (BYPDC) []
Eu+ UiO-(Zr)-(COOH) Zr+ BYPDC []
Eu+ UiO-bpydc Zr+ BYPDC []
Eu+ UiO--bpydc Zr+ BYPDC []
Tb+ Al(OH)-(bpydc) Al+ BYPDC []
Tb+ Zn-MOF Zn+ ,′,′′-[(,,-Triazine-,,-triyl)tris-
(sulfanediyl)]tribenzoic acid
[]
Tb+ Zr-MOF Zr+ Terephthalic acid and isophthalic
acid
[]
Tb+ [Cu(HCPOC)]n Cu+ -(-Carboxyphenoxy)nicotinic acid)
(CPOC)
[]
Eu+
/Tb+ Ln(OH)(BYPDC) In+ BYPDC []
Eu+
/Tb+ Bio-MOF- Zn+ BYPDC []
Eu+
/Tb+ Zn(II)-MOF Zn+ Dimethyl--hydroxy-benzene-,-
dioate
[]
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 13MOF prepared via this one-step in situ method showed dual emission. However, the in￾tensity of the blue fluorescence was enhanced upon increasing the water content in the
organic solvents studied. This is due to the sensitivity of BDC−NH2, upon protonation in
the presence of water. On the other hand, the red fluorescence of Ru(bpy)3
2+ remained
Figure 2.5: A schematic illustration of the enhanced blue emission observed in the presence of water
using Ru@MIL-101(Al)-NH2 [45] (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).
Figure 2.6: A schematic representation of the formation of hierarchically structured hybrid MOF particles
encapsulating Tb complexes (Tb complex@ZIF-8@TIF-1Zn-PDA) (republished with permission of Royal
Society of Chemistry from reference [46]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
14 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkestable. In this way, turn-on sensing of the water content was achieved using the ratiomet￾ric fluorescence of the dual emission under a single excitation of 300 nm utilising
Ru@MIL−NH2 as the probe (Figure 2.5) [45].
Another interesting approach for the encapsulation of complexes by an MOF was re￾ported by Wang et al. They encapsulated [Tb(pytz)3] (pytz, tridentate pyridine-tetrazolate)
complexes into the framework of zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) nanoparticles.
Interestingly, the ZIF-8 nanoparticles were encapsulated into the TIF-1 Zn MOFs via com￾plexation. The [Tb(pytz)3] complex was encapsulated using an in situ method, utilising
Zn2+ and 2-methylimidazole (HMIM), to form the ZIF-8 MOF. Subsequently, the hydro￾phobic ligand, 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole (DMBIM), was used to induce the aggregation
of the ZIF-8 nanoparticles through the terbium complexes absorbed on their surfaces
and, in turn, the hybridisation of the TIF-1Zn (Zn(DMBIM)2) framework (Figure 2.6). While
the encapsulation of the Tb complex in ZIF-8 was not sufficient to protect the complex
from environmental species, such as water in biological media, a second encapsulation in
the TIF-1Zn framework shows sufficient protection because the bridging ligands in TIF￾1Zn are hydrophobic [46].
More examples of how the luminescence of guest–MOF compounds can be used
for chemical sensing applications will be described in the applications section of this
chapter.
2.3.3 MOF encapsulation of quantum dots
Semiconductor nanocrystals with sizes ranging from 2 to 10 nm are often referred to
as quantum dots (QDs). They have received significant attention due to their tuneable
and size-dependent electronic properties. They are often aggregates of hundreds and
thousands of atoms, mainly from groups II to VI of the periodic table, such as CdSe,
ZnSe, or ZnO, groups III to V (such as InP and InAs), or from groups IV to VI (such as
PbSe) [55].
The optical properties of QDs are strongly influenced by their size. While a CdSe
nanocrystal with a diameter of 2 nm shows blue fluorescence, a larger crystal of ~ 6 nm
emits red light. This effect is based on the fact that different particle sizes lead to a
change in the band gap energy. Smaller particles have relatively large band gaps and
therefore show high energetic luminescent emission in the blue/UV range. Larger par￾ticles show red/NIR emission because the band gap is smaller and less energetic
(Figure 2.7).
The number of atoms in the QD particles increases with the diameter of the parti￾cle, increasing the number of different energetic atomic orbitals in these materials.
The energy band increases and the band gap decreases, resulting in a red shift [56].
Due to the above-mentioned advantages, QDs are of significant interest as possi￾ble guests to fill the pores of MOFs in order to improve and adjust their luminescent
properties. Here, the most important examples of group II–VI semiconductors, Group
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 15Table 2.2: A summary of complexes encapsulated in MOFs.
Complex composition Host MOF Metal
centre
Linker References
[Eu(BZAC)BPY] HKUST- Cu+ Benzene-,,-tricarboxylic acid (HBTC) []
[Gallium(III) tris(-hydroxyquinolinato)] (Gaq) ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
[Ir(Hppy)(bpy)]+ (Hppy, -phenylpyridine;
bpy, ,′-bipyridine)
[(CH)NH][(CdCl)(TATPT)]
· DMF · HO
Cd+ ,,-Tris (,-
dicarboxylphenylamino)-,,-triazine
(HTATPT)
[]
Chloroacetic acid (Ln = Eu, Nd) IRMOF- → Ln-IRMOF--CA Zn+ -Aminoterephthalic acid []
Glyoxylic acid (Ln = Eu, Nd) Ln-IRMOF--GL (Ln = Eu, Nd) Zn+ -Aminoterephthalic acid []
Diethyl (ethoxymethylene)malonate (Ln = Eu, Nd) Ln-IRMOF--EM (Ln = Eu, Nd) Zn+ -Aminoterephthalic acid []
Methyl vinyl ketone (Ln = Eu, Nd) Ln-IRMOF--MVK (Ln = Eu, Nd) Zn+ -Aminoterephthalic acid []
Tb(pytz) (pytz, tridentate pyridine-tetrazolate) ZIF- Al+ ,,,-Benzenetetracarboxylic acid (BTEC) []
PDA-Eu-BBA-PEG-DBA-FeO (PDA, calcium-,-
pyridinedicarboxylate; BBA, -benzoylbenzoic acid; PEG,
polyethylene glycol; DBA, ,-dihydroxybenzylamine)
ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
[Ru(bpy)]+ (bpy, bipyridine) UiO- Zr+ , ′-Bipyridine-,-dicarboxylic
acid (BPDC)
[]
16 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke[Ru(bpy)]+ (bpy, bipyridine) MIL--(Al)-NH Al+ ,-Terephthalic acid (HBDC) []
[Ru(bpy)]+ (bpy, bipyridine) UiO- Zr+ HBDC []
[Ir(CF-PPY-F)(bpy)]+ (PPY, phenylpyridine; bpy,
bipyridine)
(MeNH) [Zn(L) (HO)] · DMA Zn+ ,-(-(-Carboxyphenylamino)-,,-
triazine-,-diyl-diimino) diterephthalic
acid (HL)
[]
Tetraamine platinum hydroxide HMIL- Al+ BTEC [] Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 17IV (carbon) QDs, and halide perovskite composites are explained in detail. Among the
different types of semiconductor nanocrystals, chalcogenide-based QDs, generally
with sulphur (S), selenium (Se), and tellurium (Te), are the most promising and stud￾ied materials, not only because of their potential applications in optoelectronics and
biomedicine, but also because of their well-known chemistry and established proto￾cols used for their preparation, which allow meticulous control of their shape, size,
and structure [55]. Moreover, the encapsulation of various QDs into the MOF matrix
can result not only in a tremendous increase in their photoluminescence, but also in
the alleviation of the aggregation-caused quenching of the luminescence that is ob￾served with free QDs [58].
One interesting example of a QD-loaded compound is QD@MOF, which was devel￾oped by Jin et al. [59] The aim of their work was to develop a QD@MOF suitable for
light harvesting, in which solar energy is converted into electrical or chemical energy.
A promising class of materials in this regard is metalloporphyrin MOFs, whose porphy￾rin-derived linkers are structurally similar to naturally occurring pigments, such as
chlorophyll and haemoglobin, and light harvesting moieties. The efficiency of these
components depends on the number of photons absorbed from the solar spectrum.
As metalloporphyrin provides only a limited coverage of this spectrum due to its nar￾row absorption band, their combination with semiconductor NPs with narrow band
gaps and significantly broader absorption spectra can offer several advantages.
Therefore, two Zn/porphyrin-based MOFs were functionalised with amine-capped
CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs. In this case, the QD emission band overlaps with the MOF
absorption band, indicating that resonant energy transfer from the QD donor to the
MOF acceptor is possible. In addition, it is important to note that the MOF component
of the QD@MOF composites emitted when excited at wavelengths where the MOF
composite alone does not absorb, confirming the light harvesting and energy transfer
effects. Energy transfer times between 1.7 and 10 ns were observed, with efficiencies
as high as 84% being reached. Finally, this work showed that the light harvesting effi￾ciency can be tuned by modulating the MOF composition or QD size, both of which
influence the spectral overlap [59].
Carbon QDs are small particles, typically with diameters of <10 nm, which offer
important advantages over traditional semiconductor QDs, including high aqueous
solubility and chemical inertness. In addition to their intrinsic luminescence, they
have the advantage of being less toxic and show better biocompatibility than their
semiconductor counterparts, making them especially attractive for biomedical appli￾cations and imaging.
Lin et al. [60] reported a CQD@ZIF-8 composite prepared via the encapsulation of
poly(ethylenimine)-capped CQDs (BPEI-CQDs) into a matrix of the MOF. To this end, 4–8
nm BPEI-capped C-dots were prepared using a one-step pyrolysis of citric acid in the
presence of BPEI and subsequently added to a solution containing 2-methylimidazole
and Zn(NO3)2 · 6H2O, which was stored for 24 h without stirring to yield the BPEI￾18 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeCQD@ZIF-8 composite. BPEI-CQD@ZIF-8 is highly water-dispersible with a strong blue
fluorescence emission [60].
Halide perovskite quantum dots (PQDs), with the general formula APbX3 (where
A represents CH3NH3
+ (MA), NH2CHNH2 (FA), or Cs+
, and X represents Cl–
, Br–
, or I–
),
have been a research hotspot, especially because of their enormous potential in appli￾cations, including solar cells, backlit displays, lasering, photodetectors, and light￾emitting diodes (LEDs). Because of their highly tuneable emission, they can cover the
entire visible light spectrum with narrow-band emission and high quantum yield effi￾ciency. Nevertheless, in addition to the fascinating optical properties of PQDs, their
stability has been a challenging task for industrial application, especially fast anion
exchange and poor thermal and photostability. Therefore, different encapsulation
methods have been developed to solve these problems [60].
Wang et al. [61] reported a strategy for enhancing the stability of all-inorganic
PQDs by dispersing them in mesoporous MOF-5. The particle size of all-inorganic CsPbX3
is usually larger than that of organic–inorganic hybrid PQDs, which may result in diffi￾culties in embedding them into the MOF matrix. For this reason, two surfactants, cetyl￾trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and trimethylbenzene (TMB), were utilised as
templating agents to acquire mesoporous MOF-5 crystals. Upon changing the composi￾tion of the halide ion, CsPbX3/MOF-5 with tuneable photoluminescence was obtained
[62]. During the synthesis, the Zn2+ ions were mixed with terephthalate and CTAB for
24 h at 135 °C to build the MOF structure with CTAB stabilising the structure by filling
the pores in the MOF. It was then washed with DMF to dissolve the CTAB from the MOF
and then mixed with the PQDs, which fill the vacant pores. Finally, it was washed with
hexane, resulting in the final CSPbX3/MOF-5 structure (Figure 2.8).
Figure 2.7: A schematic representation of the size dependence of the band gap and emission wavelength
using CdSe quantum dots as an example (republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry
from reference [57]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 192.3.4 MOF encapsulation of plasmonic nanoparticles
Plasmonic nanoparticles are driving significant advances in nanophotonics and photo￾chemistry for example because of their ability to concentrate and convert optical excita￾tions into heat, hot-electron, and light localisation. The encapsulation of plasmonic
nanoparticles into MOFs is advantageous because of the combination of the optical and
catalytic properties of the nanomaterials with the large internal surface area, tuneable
crystal porosity, and unique chemical properties of MOFs. Encapsulation of metal nano￾particles with well-defined shapes into porous MOFs in a core–shell-type configuration
can lead to enhanced stability and selectivity in applications, such as sensing and catal￾ysis. Most importantly, the size, shape, and composition of the encapsulated nanopar￾ticles are maintained during the encapsulation process, thereby maintaining their
intrinsic properties, while MOF formation further enhances the colloidal stability of the
composite. Therefore, nanoparticle–MOF hybrids combine the unique properties of the
individual nanoparticles with the molecular sieving behaviour of MOFs [63].
Zheng et al. [63] published interesting results on a ZIF-8 MOF in which Au NPs were
encapsulated. It is an example of a classic approach used to encapsulate plasmonic
nanoparticles inside the pores of an MOF. In general, a large number of MOF structures,
such as zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), show structural flexibility and dynamic
behaviour. Several reports indicate that the aperture of ZIF-8 (Zn(MeIM)2; MeIM, 2-
methylimidazole) is rather flexible at room temperature because of the rotation of the
MeIM ligands upon increasing the pressure or the introduction of guest molecules [64].
The encapsulation of preformed plasmonic nanoparticles with various compositions
and morphologies can be achieved without affecting the crystalline structure of ZIF-8
MOF (Figure 2.9).
Figure 2.8: Synthesis of mesoporous MOF-5 crystals and CsPbX3 composites (reprinted from publication
[62]. Copyright (2019) with permission from Elsevier).
20 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeInterestingly, ZIF-8 does not show sharp molecular sieving at 3.4 Å, which is the
nominal crystallographic aperture size for ZIF-8. Instead, a sieving effect in the molec￾ular size range of 4–6 Å was observed. In detail, the results of their work have shown
that ZIF-8, loaded with plasmonic gold nanoparticles, leads to enhanced surface￾enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) properties, allowing the study of the transport
of different guest molecules inside ZIF-8. In addition, it was shown that the incorpo￾ration of molecules that are moderately larger than the nominal aperture and pore
size is possible. According to the authors, this principle can be expected to be trans￾ferred to other types of MOFs [63].
Additional examples of plasmonic nanoparticles encapsulated within porous MOF
structures are presented in Table 2.3.
2.3.5 MOF encapsulation of organic phosphors
Luminescent organic dyes are characterised by intrinsically tuneable colours covering
the entire visible light region. However, they show the major disadvantage of a seri￾ous aggregation-induced quenching effect in the solid-state or in highly concentrated
solutions. Therefore, the encapsulation of these dye molecules (Table 2.4) has the po￾tential to be an efficient method to overcome this effect and increase their fluores￾cence properties.
Figure 2.9: Representative TEM images of the different nanoparticles encapsulated in ZIF-8 crystals:
(A) gold nanorods, (B) Au@Ag core–shell nanorods, (C) gold nanostars, and (D) gold nanospheres
(reprinted with permission from reference [63]).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 21Table 2.3: A summary of the plasmonic nanoparticles encapsulated in MOF composites reported
up until 2021.
Plasmonic
nanoparticle
MOF Metal centre Linker References
Au@Ag core–shell
nanorods
ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Gold nanostars ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Gold nanospheres ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Gold octahedra ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Au core–shell MOF- Zn+ Terephthalic acid []
Core–shell gold
nanorods
PCN- Zr+ ,,,-Tetrakis(-
carboxyphenyl)porphyrin
[]
Gold nanoparticles MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
Au ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Au UIO- Zr+ ,-Terephthalic acid (HBDC) []
Pt NH-MIL-(Al) Al+ Terephthalic acid []
Pt MIL-(Cr) Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
Pt N-UiO- Zr+ Biphenyl-,′-dicarboxylic
acid (BPDA)
[]
Ag Cu(BTC) Cu+ ,,-Benzenetricarboxylate []
Pd MIL-(Al) Al+ Terephthalic acid []
Pd MIL-(Cr) Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
Pd Ce-MOF Ce+ Benzene-,,-tricarboxylate []
Cu–xSe ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
AuPd MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
AgPd MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
AgPd ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
AuPdCo MIL--NH Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
AgPd NH-UIO- Zr+ HBDC []
Au@Pd NH-UIO-(ZrTi) Zr+/Ti+ HBDC []
Ni ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Ru MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
Ni MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
Pd@Co MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
AuNi MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
RuNi MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
AuCo MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
CuCo MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
CuCo MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
FeCo MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
NiCo MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
NiPt ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
NiRh ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
NiPt MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
NiRh MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
NiIr MIL- Cr+ Terephthalic acid []
22 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeThe functionalisation of the MIL-101(Cr) MOF using a perylene dye afforded a pho￾tostable guest@MOF composite with high fluorescent quantum yield, close to unity, and
high molar absorptivity, as reported by Wuttke et al. [98]. The incorporation of the dye,
which acts as a Lewis base (LB) in the MOF structure, was achieved by anchoring the
coordination unsaturated site (CUS) on the central metal ion, which is a Lewis acid (LA)
(Figure 2.10), and the anchoring of the dye within the MOF suppresses its fluorescence.
While the composite appeared to be chemically stable in the presence of most solvents,
including chloroform or water, the modified dye, namely pyridine, could be displaced
from the MOF host in the presence of other strong LBs, such as ammonia or THF, result￾ing in turn-on fluorescence behaviour. Figure 2.10 shows a very high increase in the
luminescence of the pyridine moiety in the supernatant when the composite was
soaked in THF (blue lines), a less important increase in the pyridine-based fluorescence
when the composite was in ammonia (red lines), and almost no change in the emission
features when the composite was soaked in chloroform.
Dual-emitting properties were also observed upon the encapsulation of pery￾lene and fluorescein dyes, without any modification of the dye, within an euro￾pium-based MOF bearing a urea-containing benzoic acid ligand, 4,4ʹ-(carbonylbis
(azanediyl)) bis(2-methoxybenzoic acid)) [99]. The Eu2L3 complex was polymerised
from the H-bond, promoted by urea, sitting at the middle of the ligand and termi￾nal carboxylate intermolecular interactions, and a 3D structural framework was
formed by stacking layers with diamond-shaped holes. In the absence of any addi￾tional guest, this material exhibits an intense red emission with a luminescence
lifetime of 586 μs due to its multifunctional ligands and the excellent luminescent
properties of Eu3+. The insertion of two different dyes into the MOF resulted in ma￾terials with well-differentiated colours and emission properties, depending on
their observation under a natural light or UV–Vis lamp (Figure 2.11). The dual re￾sponse of the corresponding material with red emission centred on Eu3+ and light￾yellow emission for perylene or orange yellow emission for fluorescein was
Figure 2.10: Left: Fluorescence spectra, indicating the release of dye in THF (red lines) and pure CHCl3
(black lines). Right: A schematic illustration of the turn-on fluorescence triggered by the replacement of
dye by an analyte (LB, Lewis base; CUS, coordinatively unsaturated metal sites) (republished with
permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [98]).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 23further investigated by varying the excitation wavelength, thereby adjusting their
luminescent colour, and confirming the tunability of the system.
When excited at 300 nm, the perylene⊂Eu2L3 dual emission exhibits a purple–pink
luminescence, but upon excitation at 415 nm, the material exhibits a blue emission. The
fluoroscein⊂Eu2L3 composite emission can also be tuned from yellow to green, depend￾ing on its excitation from 300 to 450 nm, which is also reflected in the CIE chromaticity
coordinates of the corresponding system (Figure 2.12) [99].
Depending on the external groups, size and volume of their pores, MOFs are unique
versatile materials, which can, in addition to their special features, accommodate various
guest compounds either when isolated or combined in order to give new original func￾tionalities and applications. Some of these are described with examples in the next sec￾tion of this chapter.
2.4 Applications of guest-induced luminescence
in MOFs
As shown in the previous section, MOFs encapsulating guest species in their pores
have a variety of possible applications. The main applications are the construction of
light-emitting devices, especially white light, chemical sensing of ions or neutral spe￾cies, and photocatalysis.
Figure 2.11: The colour and luminescence (under UV lamp 365 nm) of Eu2L3 and dye⊂Eu2L3 (reprinted
with permission from reference [99]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society).
24 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke2.4.1 White light emission
Solid-state light-emitting diodes, especially for white light, have attracted considerable
attention because illumination plays an indispensable role in residential, commercial,
and industrial applications. For example, 15% of Europe’s total electricity consump￾tion is for illumination, and the demand for lighting will continue to grow. Therefore,
more efficient and long-lasting light-emitting materials need to be developed [62].
High-quality white light illumination requires precise properties, such as CIE coordi￾nates of X = 1/3, Y = 1/3, and colour temperatures between 3,000 K (warm white),
5,000 K (neutral white), and >5,000 K (daylight) [62, 117].
Figure 2.12: The solid-state emission spectrum and CIE chromaticity coordinates of dye⊂Eu2L3:
(a) perylene⊂Eu2L3 and (b) fluorescein⊂Eu2L3 (ex = 393 nm) (reprinted with permission from reference
[99]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 25Table 2.4: A summary of the organic phosphors encapsulated in MOF composites reported up until 2021.
Organic phosphor Host MOF Metal
centre
Linker References
,-Bis(-methyl--
(-formylphenyl)-
thiophen-yl)
hexafluorocyclopentene
(OF-DAE)
ZJU- Eu+ ,′:′,″:″,‴-Quaterphenyl
-,‴,,‴-tetracarboxylicacid
(QPTCA)
[]
-(p￾Dimethylaminostyryl)
--methylpyridinium
(DSM) + acriflavin
ZJU- In+ ,′,″-Benzene-,,-triyl-tribenzoate
(HBTB)
[]
-[p-(Dimethylamino)
styryl]--ethylpyridinium
(DSM)
In-MOF In+ ,′,″-Nitrilotribenzoic acid (HTNB) []
-Aminonaphthalimide LnL Ln =
Eu+
,
Gd+
– []
-Aminofluorescein MOF- Zr+ Fumaric acid []
Calcein MOF- Zr+ Fumaric acid []
Coumarin  Ln-BPT Eu+ Biphenyl-,′,-tricarboxylate (BPT) []
Coumarin  Ln-BPT Tb+ BPT []
Coumarin  Ln-BPT EuxTby BPT []
Eosin Y DUT- Zr+ ,-Naphthalenedicarboxylic acid []
Fluorescein EuL Eu+ [,′-(Carbonylbis (azanediyl))bis(-
methoxybenzoic acid)]
[]
Fluorescein + rhodamine ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Methylene blue UiO--NH Zr+ -Aminoterephthalic acid
(NH-HBDC)
[]
Perylene EuL Eu+ [,′-(Carbonylbis (azanediyl))bis(-
methoxybenzoic acid)]
[]
Pyrromethene /
+ sulforhodamine 
ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazolate []
Rhodamine G MIL- Zn+ (NHMe)(tpt)(TZB)]
(DMF)
(tpt, ,,-tri(-pyridyl)-,,-
triazine; TZB, -(H-tetrazol--yl)
benzoic acid)
[]
26 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeSuch intense light can be obtained in two ways. The first consists of mixing red,
green, and blue colours originating from separate sources (RGB method). The main
drawback of this method is the difficulty in completely mixing these different colours.
The second method of producing white light overcomes this drawback as it consists of
one monochromatic source in which there is either the down-conversion of blue light or
a combination of blue light and a yellow light – yellow light can be emitted by a phos￾phor. The latter mechanism can easily be achieved using composite materials consisting
of yellow-emitting guests encapsulated in convenient blue-emitting MOFs to form a single
component enclosing different phosphors. An example of white-light-induced emission
within MOFs has been described by Mondal et al. [117] using CdTe quantum dots in [Cd
(PyTa)(cba)2(MeOH)(H2O)] (PyTa, pyridylthioacetate; cba, carboxyvinyl benzoic acid). The
encapsulation of CdTe was carried out using an ex situ method and the doped MOF ex￾hibited a broad emission between 350–700 nm with two peaks observed at 412 (MOF as￾signed) and 563 nm (CdTe QD assigned) under excitation at 330 nm. A visible intense
white light emission with CIE coordinates of (0.33, 0.32) was observed (Figure 2.13) [117].
Inspired by the RGB approach, Song et al. [105] designed a white LED (WLED), upon
doping ternary Eu0.05Tb0.95BPT MOF (H3BPT, biphenyl-3,4′,5-tricarboxylate) with an or￾ganic dye. Upon the in situ encapsulation of blue-emitting coumarin 460 as a guest within
the MOF comprised of Eu3+ (red emission) and Tb3+ (green emitting) ions, white emission
was obtained with an overall quantum yield of 43.42%, which may be further applied in
the lighting field.
Depending on the external groups, size, and volume of their pores, MOFs are unique
versatile materials that can accommodate several guest compounds, in addition to their
special features. This functionality has been exploited by Tang et al. [109], who developed
a promising approach to fabricate a highly stable WLED using a ZIF-8-like MOF, with Zn2+
as the metal centre and 2-methylimidazolate for the encapsulation of three organic dyes.
Table 2.4 (continued)
Organic phosphor Host MOF Metal
centre
Linker References
Rhodamine G ([Eu
(,-BDC).(phen)
(HO)]n)
Eu+ ,-BDC (BDC, terephthalic acid),
,-phenanthroline
[]
Rhodamine B ZIF- Zn+ Imidazole--carboxyaldehyde []
Rhodamine B MOF- Zr+ Fumaric acid []
Rhodamine B ZIF- Zn+ ,-Dichloroimidazole (DCIM) []
Rhodamine B Zr-MOF Zr+ ,,-Benzenetribenzoic acid (BTB) []
Rhodamine B DUT- Zr+ Naphthalene-,-dicarboxylic acid []
Rhodamine B ZIF- Zn+ -Methylimidazole []
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 27The organic dyes, pyrromethene 546 (green emission), pyrromethene 605 (yellow
emission), and sulforhodamine 101 (red emission), were encapsulated into the frame￾work via an in situ self-assembly process at room temperature to obtain a blue￾Figure 2.14: A schematic illustration of the design and synthesis of polyurethane-coated MOF phosphor
ZIF-8 pm546/pm605/SRh101 and the packaging of a remote-type WLED (republished with permission of
Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [109]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc.).
Figure 2.13: (a) Photoluminescence spectrum obtained for CdTe functionalised CP1 under excitation at
330 nm and a photographic image of the white light emission after illumination (inset). (b) The CIE
diagram (republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [117]; permission
conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
28 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkeexcitable broadband nanophosphor. To effectively prevent the phosphor from the dis￾turbance of ambient oxygen and moisture, the as-synthesised phosphor was coated
with optically transparent thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) as a protecting and sup￾porting matrix, and then moulded as a hemispherical phosphor layer in a remote con￾figuration (Figure 2.14). A significant improvement in the fluorescence of 52.54%
following the TPU coating was observed. With the high plasticity of TPU, a stable re￾mote-type white-lighting device was fabricated with a blue LED chip, which exhibited
similar-to-incandescent performance with CIE coordinates of (0.465, 0.413) and a low
CCT of 2,642 K. This indicated the considerable potential of the phosphor-MOF com￾posite for highly stable warm indoor illumination, and that it was a promising candi￾date for replacing remaining incandescent bulbs [109].
Another interesting example of a white-light emitting composite was prepared by Sun
et al. [49] using the combination of a blue-light-emitting MOF, encapsulating an Ir3+ com￾plex, which emits yellow light. The construction of the blue-emitting MOF was achieved
using a hexadentate carboxylate triazine ligand (2,4,6-tris(2,5-dicarboxylphenylamino)-1,3,5-
triazine), and cadmium ions as the metal centres. The resulting MOF, [(CH3)2NH2]15[(Cd2Cl)3
(TATPT)4] · 12DMF · 18H2O, emits light at 425 nm, which was attributed to the fluorescent
organic TATPT linker. [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ (ppy, 2-phenylpyridine; bpy, 2,2′-bipyridne) was
Figure 2.15: A schematic representation of the encapsulation of [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)] in the MOF host,
[(CH3)2NH2]15[(Cd2Cl)3(TATPT)4] · 12DMF · 18H2O, leading to white light emission (reprinted with
permission from Springer Nature: reference [49]. Copyright 2013).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 29then loaded into the pores of the MOF, leading to the emission of bright white light
when excited at 370 nm with a quantum yield of 20.4% (Figure 2.15) [49].
Aiming at the single-phase production of WLEDs, down-conversion can also be
supported by the guest@MOF luminescence. An efficient down-converter was de￾signed by Gutiérrez et al. [48] by coating Gaq3@ZIF-8 MOF onto the surface of a
405 nm LED. The LED lamp was dipped in a dispersion of the Gaq3 complex ([gallium
(III) tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)]) in a 10% w/w solution of transparent thermoplastic
polymer (PMMA) in dichloromethane. The ZIF-8 MOF was loaded with the gallium
complex, and the subsequent white luminescence originated from the combination of
the violet light (405 nm) of the LED and the green-yellow emission of the coating (Fig￾ure 2.16). Moreover, the encapsulation of the dye within the MOF enhanced the long￾term stability of the nanomaterial, which was found to be stable for at least 8 months.
2.4.2 Chemical sensing of ions
Chemical sensing consists of the selective and sensitive detection of chemical species
(ions, complexes, or organic molecules), upon the recording of an analytically useful
signal. The appearance, disappearance, or change in the luminescence properties of
MOFs induced by the investigated species in the guest–host interaction is a reliable
tool for assessing and monitoring the presence of analytes. Among species for which
guest@MOFs exhibit significant real potential application in sensing, anions (such as F–
)
or cations (such as Fe3+ or Cu2+) occupy a great place.
Figure 2.16: (A) Emission spectrum obtained for the
405 nm LED coated with Gaq3@ZIF-8 (0.5 mmol)
dispersed in a PMMA polymer matrix. The inset is a
representation of the CIE (1936) coordinates of the
device (0.27, 0.34). (B) Photograph of the turn-off
(left) and turn-on (right) down-converter MOF-LED
device (reproduced with permission from reference
[48]).
30 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeChemical sensing of fluoride ions
Fluoride is an essential trace element for the human body, but it can cause serious
health problems, including dental and skeletal fluorosis, when overdosed, and it is one
of the most serious pollutants in water because of its high toxicity. This makes sensing
techniques very important. Zheng et al. [40] reported that Tb3+-doped MOFs can be used
to sense fluoride ions. Zr-MOF was constructed using Zr4+ metal centres, terephthalic
acid, and isophthalic acid as linkers. Using post-synthetic modification, Tb3+ ions were
encapsulated inside the cavities of the host MOF. A strong and broad emission band
was observed, with peaks at 488, 544, 584, and 620 nm. The composite materials, loaded
with Tb3+ ions, were dispersed in aqueous solutions containing aliquots of different
anions, including Cl−
, Br−
,I−
, S2−
, NO3
−
, NO2
−
, CO3
2−
, HCO3
−
, SiO3
2−
, SO4
2−
, and PO4
3−
. In
the presence of F–
, a drastic increase in the MOF emission was observed, while the
other tested anions did not show any significant changes. Such modifications can even
be monitored using the naked eye, underlining the good selectivity towards the detec￾tion of fluoride ions (Figure 2.17). The authors have suggested that this selectivity to￾wards fluoride anions can be explained by the strong nucleophilic ability of F− and its
binding to Zr4+sites within the MOF [40].
Chemical sensing of iron(III) ions
Iron is one of the most abundant elements found on the earth, and in the form of
metals, ions, or oxides, a large amount of its compounds is used in various fields rang￾ing from metallurgy to medicine. In the human body, iron is mostly found in the form
of Fe(III) ions, and it is one of the trace elements that performs vital functions. How￾ever, Fe concentrations should remain within specific thresholds because Fe(III) defi￾ciency or excess can be harmful and may lead to pathologies, such as cell death or
Parkinson’s disease [118]. Iron-sensing can be supported by MOFs, as described in the
following two examples.
One of the examples we have selected consists of a lanthanide-doped MIL-53-COOH
(Al) MOF. Eu3+ ions were encapsulated inside the pores of the MIL-53-COOH(Al) nanocrys￾tals, affording an optically active composite. The MOF was solvothermally synthesised
from a mixture of aluminium chloride, trimellitic acid, and DMF. The Eu3+ ions were
then encapsulated into the MOF by soaking the as-prepared MOF in an ethanolic solution
of the Eu3+ chlorate salt for two days. Later, the MOFs were washed to remove any resid￾ual Eu3+ ions from their surface. Upon mixing Eu3+@ MIL-53-COOH(Al) with increasing
amounts of Fe3+, an intense quenching of the emission peaks centred on Eu3+ (Figure 2.18)
was observed, which is most likely due to cation exchange inside the framework of MIL￾53-COOH (Al) to form MIL-53-COOH (Fe). The emission of the Eu3+-doped Al-based MOF in
the presence of Fe3+ ions was compared with that of the same material in the presence of
competing metal ions, including abundant mineral salts (K+
, Na+
, Mg2+, Ca2+, and Cu2+),
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 31oligo-elements (Zn2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Fe2+, and Ag+
), and toxic metal ions (Hg2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, and
Cr3+). Among all the ions tested, Fe3+ showed the most significant quenching effect on lu￾minescence. The quenching was attributed to cation exchange of the Al3+ cation as the
central metal ion in the MOF with Fe3+ ions, which was able to transform MIL-53-COOH
(Al) into MIL-53–COOH (Fe). Within the newly formed MOF, a ligand-to-metal charge
transfer was observed by the suppression of the sensitisation of the Eu3+ cations via the
antenna effect. Good selectivity towards morphological and optical features makes such
an Eu3+-doped MOF applicable for the sensing of Fe3+ ions [31]
The second example is based on the work of Xu et al. [32], who showed a compa￾rable approach using Eu3+-doped MIL-24 MOF to sense different types of metal ions.
In addition to the quenching of the MOF luminescence due to Fe3+ ions, which results
in an extremely low emission intensity, Fe2+ ions were also detected. While the Fe3+
ions quenched the emission of the whole MOF by replacing the Ga3+ ions in the frame￾work, the Fe2+ ions quenched the red emission of the Eu3+ ions by substituting them
as host molecules within the MOF pores (Figure 2.18). Therefore, the emission colour
of the MOF was blue-shifted. In addition, the intensity is significantly lower than that
without the presence of Fe2+ ions but is still visible (Figure 2.19) [32].
Figure 2.17: Emission spectra obtained for Tb3+@Zr-MOF dispersed in different anion solutions (excited
at 302 nm). The inset is a photograph of the corresponding samples under UV-light irradiation
(reprinted with permission of American Chemical Society from reference [40]).1
 https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.8b02134 further permission related to the material ex￾cerpted should be directed to the ACS.
32 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeFigure 2.19: Luminescence intensity of Eu3+@MIL-124 when interacting with different metal ions in an
aqueous solution (reprinted with permission from reference [32]. Copyright 2015 American Chemical
Society).
Figure 2.18: Response of the fluorescence of Eu3+@MIL-53-COOH (Al) towards aqueous solutions of
various metal cations (republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [31];
permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 33Chemical sensing of copper(II) ions
Lin et al. [60] have reported a highly luminescent CQD@ZIF-8 composite that is op￾tically responsive in the presence of Cu2+ ions. For the preparation of the material,
branched polyethyleneimine (BPEI) was used as a capping agent during the one-step
synthesis of the CQDs to afford the BPEI-CQD@ZIF-8 composite, in order to ensure
good dispersion and an even distribution of the nanoparticles. Upon excitation at
365 nm, the obtained material showed a strong blue emission. However, upon the ad￾dition and adsorption of Cu2+cations into the ZIF-8 matrix, significant quenching of
the emission of the CQD-loaded MOF occurred (Figure 2.20) [60].
This quenching effect was higher for the composite than for BPEI-CQDs alone, indi￾cating the synergistic effect of accumulation and quenching. Moreover, the composite
shows high selectivity towards Cu2+ with no further effect on the quenching behaviour in
the presence of the other metal cations, anions, or organic components studied. The posi￾tive selectivity towards Cu2+ over the anions may be attributed to the electrostatic repul￾sion between the anions and the anionic ZIF-8 MOF in the composite. Moreover, the
authors suggested that the synergetic effect of the selective adsorption of heavy metal
ions by ZIF-8 MOF and the selective sensing of Cu2+ by the BPEI-CQDs makes the compos￾ite MOF very useful for sensing Cu2+ ions [60].
Another interesting material for Cu2+ ion sensing is lanthanide-doped MOF Zn-BETC
reported by Luo et al. [25], and previously described in Section 3.1. When the MOF was
doped with Eu3+, the authors observed that the infusion of the composite with vari￾able amounts of metal salts resulted in significant differences in the resulting emis￾sion spectra. Indeed, Na+
, K+
, and Zn2+ ions have a negligible effect on (Figure 2.21) the
Figure 2.20: Emission spectra (a, b), excitation spectra (c, d), and UV absorption spectra (e, f) of the BPEI￾CQD@ZIF-8 solutions in the absence (a, c, e) and presence (b, d, f) of Cu2+ ions. The inset shows the
dispersions of BPEI-CQD@ZIF-8 in the absence (left) and presence (right) of Cu2+ ions (reprinted with
permission from reference [60]. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).
34 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkeluminescence intensity, whereas Cu2+, Co2+, Mn2+, and Ni2+ showed different ranges of
quenching of the luminescence intensity of the Eu3+-loaded MOF. The quenching effect
was attributed to the replacement of NH4
+ counterions within the channels of the
MOF by transition metal ions. More specifically, the emission centred on Eu3+ in the
presence of a 10–6 M solution of CuCl2 was 16 times higher than that in the presence of
a 10–2 M solution of the same copper(II) chloride salt. This makes the described system
potentially interesting for low-detection applications [25].
Chemical detection of nicotine
Yan et al. [108] designed a MOF composite loaded with methylene blue (MB) for sens￾ing nicotine in urine and in living cells. This is interesting as nicotine is genotoxic and
tumour-promoting and is excreted via urine. The host MOF, UiO-66-NH2, was synthes￾ised using a hydrothermal reaction of ZrCl4 and 2-aminoterephthalic acid (NH2-H￾2BDC). The cyan colour complex was prepared by loading MB into the MOF using a
conventional impregnation method. MB@UiO-66-NH2 does not show any emission at ~
700 nm in aqueous systems, which is the typical emission of free MB. Upon excitation at
357 nm, MB@UiO-66-NH2 shows a distinct emission at 449 nm, which was assigned to the
ligand to metal charge the transfer process. As urine is an aqueous solution containing a
variety of components, mainly creatinine, urea, SO4
2–
, Na+
, K+
, NH4
+
, and glucose, the
optical response of the MB@UiO-66-NH2 with nicotine was compared to those of the
above-mentioned analytes. Only in the presence of nicotine did the luminescence inten￾sity of MB@UiO-66-NH2 exhibit a >20-fold enhancement in magnitude, while the intensity
was almost unchanged in the presence of the other analytes studied. This discrepancy
can be visualised using the naked eye, which paves a direct and simple method for
unique nicotine recognition. The mechanism of this selective recognition of nicotine in￾volves the transformation of MB into leucomethylene blue (LB) in the presence of a re￾ducing agent. Nicotine acts as a reducing agent, and serves as a hydrogen acceptor. The
LB formed can be reoxidised by oxygen in the air, in terms of light excitation, and serves
continuously as a hydrogen acceptor. The remarkable enhancement in the intensity and
obvious blue shift in the emission wavelength were attributed to the photoinduced elec￾tron transfer from LB to MOF UiO-66-NH2 [108].
Numerous other guest-encapsulated MOF composites have been synthesised for
sensing ions, organic molecules, and water by many, including Li et al. [119] (ClO– and
SCN–
), He et al. [66] (CO2), Gao et al. [82] (H2S), Takashima et al. [120] (aromatic VOCs),
Yang et al. [114] (Fe3+, Cr3+, Ga3+, pesticides, and nitro explosives), Zhang et al. [115] (Fe3+
and Cr2O72
–
), and Zhang et al. [121] (picric acid).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 352.4.3 Other applications
Photocatalytic oxidation
The oxidation of alcohols into carbonyl compounds (aldehydes, ketones, or carboxylic
acids) is an important reaction in organic synthesis. To mitigate the environmental
cost of such transformations, there is a revived interest in the development of selec￾tive and effective catalysts. A luminescent composite for this photocatalytic organic
transformation was engineered by Ke et al. [122], which was used for the selective oxi￾dation of aromatic alcohols. To this end, an MIL-100 (Fe)-like MOF was synthesised
from FeCl3 ·6H2O and benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid (H3BTC). Later, the MOF was dis￾persed in DMSO, and Cd(CH3COO)2 · H2O was added to form CdS quantum dots in a
Teflon-lined autoclave. The resulting CdS@MIL-100 (Fe) composite exhibited excellent
photostability and enhanced photocatalytic activity with respect to the selective oxida￾tion of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde under visible light irradiation. A series of sam￾ples were synthesised by adding different amounts of MIL-100 (Fe) to the toluene
reaction solution, which resulted in a different but overall significantly higher conver￾sion rate, under excitation at 420 nm (Figure 2.22) [122].
Phototherapy
In another interesting example, Zhou et al. [67] focused on the synthesis of porphyrinic
MOFs, encapsulating gold nanorods (AuNRs), used for the combinational phototherapy
of cancer. The potential of core–shell AuNR@MOF heterostructures containing individ￾ual AuNRs as the core and mesoporous porphyrinic MOFs as the shell in combinational
Figure 2.21: A schematic representation of the proposed mechanism of nicotine sensing in MB@UiO-66-
NH2 (reprinted with permission from reference [108]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).
36 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkephotodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT) against tumours was ex￾amined (Figure 2.23). Because of their outstanding photothermal conversion ability,
AuNRs have been widely used as photothermal agents. Porphyrinic MOFs, such as PCN￾222, were used to demonstrate that combining these MOFs with plasmonic AuNRs in a
single heterostructure enables efficient wavelength-dependent light harvesting for pho￾tothermal conversion, and singlet oxygen production for tumour therapy. AuNR@MOF
showed greater antitumor efficiency than PDT or PTT alone [67].
2.5 Concluding remarks
This chapter provides an overview of the guest species encapsulated in the pores of
MOFs to enhance their luminescent properties. Using lanthanide ions, coordination
complexes, quantum dots, plasmonic nanoparticles, or organic phosphors, a vast range
of guest-doped MOF composites have been described and examined, which show signif￾icant effects on their optical properties. For example, Zn-based bio-MOF1 was function￾alised into Ln3+@bio-MOF1, a material exhibiting new and tuneable emission features,
upon doping with various lanthanide ions, such as Sm3+, Eu3+, Tb3+, and Yb3+ [30]. In
other cases, the starting MOF is already emissive, but the introduction of guest mole￾cules enhances the luminescent properties, resulting in new functionalities within the
MOF. For instance, Sun et al. developed a white light-emitting material upon combina￾tion of a blue-emitting MOF with a yellow-emitting Ir3+ complex [49]. Indeed, it has
been shown that these materials are especially efficient for lighting, but they can also
0
Conversion (%)
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Photocatalyst
(e) (f) (g) (h)
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 2.22: Conversion rates for the photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde
in the presence of different photocatalysts under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) for 5 h: (a) MIL-100
(Fe), (b) CdS, (c–h) increasing concentration of CdS@MIL-100 (Fe) (republished with permission of the
Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [122]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc.).
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 37be used for sensing ions or small organic molecules via quenching or shift of emission
through different mechanisms. A Eu3+-doped MIL-53_COOH(Al) MOF was prepared by
Zhou et al. [31], which showed remarkable selectivity for the detection of Fe3+ ions via
the quenching of the luminescence of Eu3+. Lan et al. reported a CQD@ZIF-8 MOF with
blue luminescence, which was only quenched in the presence of Cu2+ ions [55]. Fluoride
anions are easily detected even with the naked eye using a Tb3+@Zr-MOF composite
through the tremendous increase in the Tb3+ emission intensity [40]. On the other hand,
the guest-induced luminescence of MOFs can also be utilised for photocatalytic applica￾tions. The functionalisation of MIL-100 (Fe)-like MOF with CdS quantum dots developed
by Ke et al. [122] showed improved conversion rates for the oxidation of benzyl alcohol
to benzaldehyde under visible light irradiation.
Although the encapsulation of guest species into MOFs overcomes some of the is￾sues observed in terms of the luminescence of single luminescence species, such as
quenching via the aggregation of the materials, the encapsulation process still entails
some important problems that need to be overcome. The main one is to ensure an even
distribution of the guest species over the entire MOF, which will significantly improve
Figure 2.23: (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis of AuNR@MOFs and (b) use of AuNR@MOFs for
dual-light-activated combinational phototherapy (republished with permission of Royal Society of
Chemistry from reference [67]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
38 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkethe efficiency of the MOF luminescence. In general, it should be the aim to achieve im￾proved efficiency to make these materials attractive for large-scale applications, such as
the lighting of residences or to fulfil the high standards of display technology. Many
highly promising approaches have already been developed, but progress is still required.
References
[1] H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe, O. M. Yaghi, The chemistry and applications of metal￾organic frameworks. Science 341, 1230444, 2013.
[2] H.-C. Zhou, J. R. Long, O. M. Yaghi, Introduction to metal–organic frameworks. Chem. Rev. 112,
673–674, 2012.
[3] S. Waitschat, D. Fröhlich, H. Reinsch, H. Terraschke, K. A. Lomachenko, C. Lamberti, H. Kummer, T.
Helling, M. Baumgartner, S. Henningerb, N. Stock, Synthesis of M-UiO-66 (M = Zr, Ce or Hf)
employing 2,5-pyridinedicarboxylic acid as a linker: Defect chemistry, framework hydrophilisation
and sorption properties. Dalt. Trans. 47, 1062–1070, 2018.
[4] P. Rönfeldt, H. Reinsch, E. Svensson Grape, A. K. Inge, H. Terraschke, N. Stock, Water-based
synthesis and properties of a scandium 1,4-naphthalenedicarboxylate. Z. anorg. allg. Chem. 646,
1373–1379, 2020.
[5] C. Momblona, C. D. Ertl, A. Pertegás, J. M. Junquera-Hernández, H. J. Bolink, E. C. Constable, M.
Sessolo, E. Ortí, C. E. Housecroft, Exploring the effect of the cyclometallating ligand in 2-(pyridine-2-
yl)benzo[d]thiazole-containing iridium(iii) complexes for stable light-emitting electrochemical cells.
J. Mater. Chem. C 6(46), 12679–12688, 2018.
[6] P. Rönfeldt, E. S. Grape, A. K. Inge, D. V. Novikov, A. Khadiev, M. Etter,T. Rabe, J. Benecke, H.
Terraschke, N. Stock, A scandium MOF with an unprecedented inorganic building unit, delimiting
the micropore windows. Inorg. Chem. 59, 8995–9004, 2020.
[7] C. S. Cunha, O. Malta, H. Terraschke, H. Brito, Photoluminescent investigation of the doping site of
Eu3+-doped [Zn3(BTC)2∙12H2O] metal-organic framework prepared by microwave-assisted
hydrothermal synthesis. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 31, 2409–2420, Nov. 2020.
[8] Y. Cui, Y. Yue, G. Qian, B. Chen, Luminescent functional metal–organic frameworks. Chem. Rev. 112,
1126–1162, 2012.
[9] M. D. Allendorf, M. E. Foster, F. Léonard, V. Stavila, P. L. Feng, F. P. Doty, K. Leong, E. Y. Ma, S. R.
Johnston, A. A. Talin, Guest-induced emergent properties in metal–organic frameworks. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 6(7), 1182–1195, 2015.
[10] Y. Shu, Q. Ye, T. Dai, Q. Xu, X. Hu, Encapsulation of luminescent guests to construct luminescent
metal–organic frameworks for chemical sensing. ACS Sensors 6, 641–658, 2021.
[11] S. Soni, P. K. Bajpai, C. Arora, A review on metal-organic framework: Synthesis, properties and
application. Characterization and Application of Nanomaterials, 3, 87–106, 2020.
[12] C.-C. Wang, J. Y. Ying, Sol−gel synthesis and hydrothermal processing of anatase and rutile titania
nanocrystals. Chem. Mater. 11, 3113–3120, 1999.
[13] K.-K. Kang, C.-H. Park, W.-S. Ahn, Microwave preparation of a titanium-substituted mesoporous
molecular sieve. Catal. Letters 59, 45–49, 1999.
[14] S. H. Jhung, J.-S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, S.-E. Park, Crystal morphology control of AFI type molecular
sieves with microwave irradiation. J. Mater. Chem. 14, 280–285, 2004.
[15] Y. K. Hwang, J.-S. Chang, S.-E. Park, D. S. Kim, Y.-U. Kwon, S. H. Jhung, J.-S. Hwang, M. S. Park,
Microwave fabrication of Mfi zeolite crystals with a fibrous morphology and their applications.
Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 44, 556–560, 2005.
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 39[16] U. Mueller, M. Schubert, F. Teich, H. Puetter, K. Schierle-Arndt, J. Pastré, Metal–organic
frameworks – Prospective industrial applications. J. Mater. Chem. 16, 626–636, 2006.
[17] N. Stock, S. Biswas, Synthesis of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs): Routes to various MOF
topologies, morphologies, and composites. Chem. Rev. 112, 933–969, 2012.
[18] J. Yu, C. Mu, B. Yan, X. Qin, C. Shen, H. Xue, H. Pang, Nanoparticle/MOF composites: Preparations
and applications. Mater. Horizons 4(4), 557–569, 2017.
[19] Q.-L. Zhu, Q. Xu, Metal–organic framework composites. Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 5468–5512, 2014.
[20] W. Xiang, Y. Zhang, H. Lin, C. Liu, Nanoparticle/metal–organic framework composites for catalytic
applications: Current status and perspective. Molecules 22, 12, 2017.
[21] L. Chen, R. Luque, Y. Li, Controllable design of tunable nanostructures inside metal–organic
frameworks. Chem. Soc. Rev. 46, 4614–4630, 2017.
[22] G. H. Dieke, Spectra and energy levels of rare earth ions in crystals. Phys. Bull. 20, 525, 1969.
[23] C. W. Tang, S. A. VanSlyke, Organic electroluminescent diodes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 51, 913–915, 1987.
[24] Y. Hasegawa, Y. Kitagawa, T. Nakanishi, Effective photosensitized, electrosensitized, and
mechanosensitized luminescence of lanthanide complexes. NPG Asia Mater. 10, 52–70, 2018.
[25] F. Luo, S. R. Batten, Metal–organic framework (MOF): Lanthanide(iii)-doped approach for
luminescence modulation and luminescent sensing. Dalt. Trans. 39, 4485–4488, 2010.
[26] Y. Zhou, B. Yan, A responsive MOF nanocomposite for decoding volatile organic compounds. Chem.
Commun. 52, 2265–2268, 2016.
[27] J.-N. Hao, B. Yan, A dual-emitting 4d–4f nanocrystalline metal–organic framework as a self￾calibrating luminescent sensor for indoor formaldehyde pollution. Nanoscale 8, 12047–12053, 2016.
[28] J. An, C. M. Shade, D. A. Chengelis-Czegan, S. Petoud, and N. L. Rosi, Zinc-Adeninate Metal–Organic
Framework for Aqueous Encapsulation and Sensitization of Near-infrared and Visible Emitting
Lanthanide Cations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 1220–1223, 2011.
[29] M.L. Free. Chemical fundamentals of hydrometallurgy. Hydrometallurgy 21–64, 2013.
[30] J. An, C. M. Shade, D. A. Chengelis-Czegan, S. Petoud, N. L. Rosi, Zinc-adeninate metal−organic
framework for aqueous encapsulation and sensitization of near-infrared and visible emitting
lanthanide cations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 1220–1223, 2011.
[31] Y. Zhou, -H.-H. Chen, B. Yan, An Eu3+ post-functionalized nanosized metal–organic framework for
cation exchange-based Fe3+-sensing in an aqueous environment. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 13691–13697,
2014.
[32] X.-Y. Xu, B. Yan, Eu(III)-functionalized MIL-124 as fluorescent probe for highly selectively sensing
ions and organic small molecules especially for Fe(III) and Fe(II). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7,
721–729, 2015.
[33] Z. Xiaoxiong, Z. Wenjun, L. Cuiliu, Q. Xiaohong, Z. Chengyu, Eu3+-postdoped UIO-66-type
metal–organic framework as a luminescent sensor for Hg2+ detection in aqueous media. Inorg.
Chem. 58, 3910–3915, 2019.
[34] X. Zhang, Q. Hu, T. Xia, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Cui, B. Chen, G. Qian, Turn-on and ratiometric
luminescent sensing of hydrogen sulfide based on metal–organic frameworks. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 8, 32259–32265, 2016.
[35] Y. Zhou, B. Yan, A responsive MOF nanocomposite for decoding volatile organic compounds. Chem.
Commun. 52, 2015.
[36] Y. Zhou, B. Yan, Ratiometric detection of temperature with responsive dual-emissive MOF hybrids.
J. Mater. Chem. C 3, 2015.
[37] J. Zhu, Y. Tang, Y. Yang, B. Li, Y. Cui, G. Qian, Post-modified metal-organic framework as a turn-on
fluorescent probe for potential diagnosis of neurological diseases. Microporous Mesoporous Mater.
288, 109610, 2019.
40 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke[38] S.-J. Qin, B. Yan, The point-of-care colorimetric detection of the biomarker of phenylamine in the
human urine based on Tb3+ functionalized metal-organic framework. Anal. Chim. Acta 1012, 82–89,
2018.
[39] G. Ji, X. Gao, T. Zheng, W. Guan, H. Liu, Z. Liu, Postsynthetic metalation metal–organic framework as
a fluorescent probe for the ultrasensitive and reversible detection of PO4
3– ions. Inorg. Chem. 57,
10525–10532, 2018.
[40] H.-Y. Zheng, X. Lian, S.-J. Qin, B. Yan, Novel ‘turn-on’ fluorescent probe for highly selectively sensing
fluoride in aqueous solution based on Tb3+-functionalized metal–organic frameworks. ACS Omega 3,
12513–12519, 2018.
[41] X. Zheng, R. Fan, Y. Song, A. Wang, K. Xing, X. Du, P. Wang, Y. Yang, A highly sensitive turn-on
ratiometric luminescent probe based on postsynthetic modification of Tb3+@Cu-MOF for H2S
detection. J. Mater. Chem. C 5, 9943–9951, 2017.
[42] Y. Zhou, B. Yan, F. Lei, Postsynthetic lanthanide functionalization of nanosized metal–organic
frameworks for highly sensitive ratiometric luminescent thermometry. Chem. Commun. 50(96),
15235–15238, 2014.
[43] Y. Zhang, B. Li, H. Ma, L. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Rapid and facile ratiometric detection of an anthrax
biomarker by regulating energy transfer process in bio-metal-organic framework. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 85, 287–293, 2016.
[44] M.-L. Ma, J.-H. Qin, C. Ji, H. Xu, R. Wang, B.-J. Li, S.-Q. Zang, H.-W. Hou, S. R. Batten, Anionic porous
metal–organic framework with novel 5-connected vbk topology for rapid adsorption of dyes and
tunable white light emission. J. Mater. Chem. C 2, 1085–1093, 2014.
[45] H.-Q. Yin, J.-C. Yang, X.-B. Yin, Ratiometric fluorescence sensing and real-time detection of water in
organic solvents with one-pot synthesis of Ru@MIL-101(Al)–NH2. Anal. Chem. 89, 13434–13440, 2017.
[46] Y. Wang, W. Zhou, F. Chen, K. Sun, J. Zhang, E. Özliseli, J. M. Rosenholm, Terbium complexes
encapsulated in hierarchically organized hybrid MOF particles toward stable luminescence in
aqueous media. CrystEngComm 20, 4225–4229, 2018.
[47] H. C. Streit, M. Adlung, O. Shekhah, X. Stammer, H. K. Arslan, O. Zybaylo, T. Ladnorg, H. Gliemann,
M. Franzreb, C. Wöll, C. Wickleder, Surface-anchored MOF-based photonic antennae. ChemPhysChem
13, 2699–2702, 2012.
[48] M. Gutiérrez, C. Martín, M. Van der Auweraer, J. Hofkens, J.-C. Tan, Electroluminescent guest@MOF
nanoparticles for thin film optoelectronics and solid-state lighting. Adv. Opt. Mater. 8, 2000670,
2020.
[49] C.-Y. Sun, X.-L. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Qin, P. Li, Z.-M. Su, D.-X. Zhu, G.-G. Shan, K.-Z. Shao, H. Wu, J. Li,
Efficient and tunable white-light emission of metal–organic frameworks by iridium-complex
encapsulation. Nat. Commun. 4, 2717, 2013.
[50] R. M. Abdelhameed, L. D. Carlos, A. M. S. Silva, J. Rocha, Engineering lanthanide-optical centres in
IRMOF-3 by post-synthetic modification. New J. Chem. 39, 4249–4258, 2015.
[51] R. Chen, J. Zhang, J. Chelora, Y. Xiong, S. V. Kershaw, K. F. Li, P.-K. Lo, K. W. Cheah, A. L. Rogach, J. A.
Zapien, C.-S. Lee, Ruthenium(II) complex incorporated UiO-67 metal–organic framework
nanoparticles for enhanced two-photon fluorescence imaging and photodynamic cancer therapy.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 5699–5708, 2017.
[52] S. Zhu, S. Wang, M. Xia, B. Wang, Y. Huang, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Wang, Intracellular imaging of
glutathione with MnO2 nanosheet@Ru(bpy)3
2+–UiO-66 nanocomposites. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
11, 31693–31699, 2019.
[53] H. Zhao, J. Ni, J.-J. Zhang, S.-Q. Liu, Y.-J. Sun, H. Zhou, Y.-Q. Li, C.-Y. Duan, A trichromatic MOF
composite for multidimensional ratiometric luminescent sensing. Chem. Sci. 9, 2918–2926, 2018.
[54] S. Chen, Z. Song, J. Lyu, Y. Guo, B. E. G. Lucier, W. Luo, M. S. Workentin, X. Sun, Y. Huang, Anhydride
post-synthetic modification in a hierarchical metal–organic framework. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142,
4419–4428, 2020.
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 41[55] J. Aguilera-Sigalat, D. Bradshaw, Synthesis and applications of metal-organic framework–quantum
dot (QD@MOF) composites. Coord. Chem. Rev. 307, 267–291, 2016.
[56] S. Kudera, L. Carbone, L. Manna, W. J. Parak, Growth mechanism, shape and composition control of
semiconductor nanocrystals. In Semiconductor Nanocrystal Quantum Dots: Synthesis, Assembly,
Spectroscopy and Applications, A. L. Rogach, Ed. Vienna: Springer Vienna, 2008, pp. 1–34.
[57] F. T. Rabouw, C. De Mello Donega, Excited-state dynamics in colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals.
Top. Curr. Chem. 374, 58, 2016.
[58] H. He, Y. Cui, B. Li, B. Wang, C. Jin, J. Yu, L. Yao, Y. Yang, B. Chen, G. Qian, Confinement of
perovskite-QDs within a single MOF crystal for significantly enhanced multiphoton excited
luminescence. Adv. Mater. 31, 1806897, 2019.
[59] S. Jin, H.-J. Son, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. T. Hupp, Energy transfer from quantum dots to
metal–organic frameworks for enhanced light harvesting. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 955–958, 2013.
[60] X. Lin, G. Gao, L. Zheng, Y. Chi, G. Chen, Encapsulation of strongly fluorescent carbon quantum dots
in metal–organic frameworks for enhancing chemical sensing. Anal. Chem. 86(2), 1223–1228, 2014.
[61] H.-C. Wang, Z. Bao, H.-Y. Tsai, A.-C. Tang, R.-S. Liu, Perovskite quantum dots and their application in
light-emitting diodes. Small 14, 1702433, 2018.
[62] a) Y. Tang, H. Wu, W. Cao, Y. Cui, G. Qian, Luminescent metal–organic frameworks for white LEDs.
Adv. Opt. Mater. 9, 2001817/1–14, 2020. b) J. Ren, T. Li, X. Zhou, X. Dong, A. V. Shorokhov, M. B.
Semenov, V. D. Krevchik, Y. Wang, Encapsulating all-inorganic perovskite quantum dots into
mesoporous metal organic frameworks with significantly enhanced stability for optoelectronic
applications, Chem. Eng. J. 358, 30–39, 2019.
[63] G. Zheng, S. de Marchi, V. López-Puente, K. Sentosun, L. Polavarapu, I. Pérez-Juste, E. H. Hill, S. Bals,
L. M. Liz-Marzán, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, Encapsulation of single plasmonic nanoparticles
within ZIF-8 and SERS analysis of the MOF flexibility. Small 12, 3935–3943, 2016.
[64] D. Fairen-Jimenez, S. A. Moggach, M. T. Wharmby, P. A. Wright, S. Parsons, T. Düren, Opening the
gate: Framework flexibility in ZIF-8 explored by experiments and simulations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133,
8900–8902, 2011.
[65] P. Hu, J. Zhuang, L.-Y. Chou, H. K. Lee, X. Y. Ling, Y.-C. Chuang, C.-K. Tsung, Surfactant-directed
atomic to mesoscale alignment: Metal nanocrystals encased individually in single-crystalline porous
nanostructures. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 10561–10564, 2014.
[66] L. He, Y. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Xiong, J. Zheng, Y. Liu, Z. Tang, Core–shell noble-metal@metal-organic￾framework nanoparticles with highly selective sensing property. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 52,
3741–3745, 2013.
[67] Z. Zhou, J. Zhao, Z. Di, B. Liu, Z. Li, X. Wu, L. Li, Core–shell gold nanorod@mesoporous-MOF
heterostructures for combinational phototherapy. Nanoscale 13, 131–137, 2021.
[68] Y. Hu, J. Liao, D. Wang, G. Li, Fabrication of gold nanoparticle-embedded metal-organic framework
for highly sensitive surface-enhanced Raman scattering detection. Anal. Chem. 86, 3955–3963, 2014.
[69] H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, T. Akita, M. Haruta, H. Sakurai, Q. Xu, Au@ZIF-8: CO oxidation over gold
nanoparticles deposited to metal−organic framework. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 11302–11303, 2009.
[70] R. Wu, X. Qian, K. Zhou, H. Liu, B. Yadian, J. Wei, H. Zhud, Y. Huang, Highly dispersed Au
nanoparticles immobilized on Zr-based metal–organic frameworks as heterostructured catalyst for
CO oxidation. J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 14294–14299, 2013.
[71] E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, C. Pieters, B. van der Linden, J. Juan-Alcañiz, P. Serra-Crespo, M.W.G.M.
Verhoeven, H. Niemantsverdriet, J. Gascon, F. Kapteijn, Highly dispersed platinum in metal organic
framework NH2-MIL-101(Al) containing phosphotungstic acid – Characterization and catalytic
performance. J. Catal. 289, 42–52, 2012.
[72] A. Aijaz, A. Karkamkar, Y. J. Choi, N. Tsumori, E. Rönnebro, T. Autrey, H. Shioyama, Q. Xu,
Immobilizing highly catalytically active Pt nanoparticles inside the pores of metal–organic
framework: A double solvents approach. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 13926–13929, 2012.
42 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke[73] G. Zhuang, J. Bai, X. Zhou, Y. Gao, H. Huang, H. Cui, X. Zhong, C.-L. Zhong, J. Wang, The effect of N￾containing supports on catalytic co oxidation activity over highly dispersed Pt/UiO-67. Eur. J. Inorg.
Chem. 2017, 172–178, 2017.
[74] Y. Zhao, C. Zhong, C.-J. Liu, Enhanced CO oxidation over thermal treated Ag/Cu-BTC. Catal. Commun.
38, 74–76, 2013.
[75] Q. Liang, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, Y.-C. Wei, G. Jiang, A. Duan, Pd nanoparticles deposited on metal-organic
framework of MIL-53(Al)an active catalyst for co oxidation. Acta Physico-Chimica Sin. 30, 2014.
[76] M. S. El-Shall, V. Abdelsayed, A. E. R. S. Khder, H. M. A. Hassan, H. M. El-Kaderi, T. E. Reich, Metallic
and bimetallic nanocatalysts incorporated into highly porous coordination polymer MIL-101.
J. Mater. Chem. 19, 7625–7631, 2009.
[77] A. Lin, A. A. Ibrahim, P. Arab, H. M. El-Kaderi, M. S. El-Shall, Palladium nanoparticles supported on
Ce-metal–organic framework for efficient co oxidation and low-temperature CO2 capture. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 9, 17961–17968, 2017.
[78] A. Wolf, L. Diestel, F. Lübkemann, T. Kodanek, T. Mohamed, J. Caro, D. Dorfs, Plasmonic
semiconductor nanoparticles in a metal–organic framework structure and their in situ cation
exchange. Chem. Mater. 28, 7511–7518, 2016.
[79] X. Gu, Z.-H. Lu, H.-L. Jiang, T. Akita, Q. Xu, Synergistic catalysis of metal–organic framework￾immobilized Au–Pd nanoparticles in dehydrogenation of formic acid for chemical hydrogen
storage. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 11822–11825, 2011.
[80] H. Dai, N. Cao, L. Yang, J. Su, W. Luo, G. Cheng, AgPd nanoparticles supported on MIL-101 as high
performance catalysts for catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 11060–11064,
2014.
[81] J. Cheng, X. Gu, P. Liu, T. Wang, H. Su, Controlling catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid over
low-cost transition metal-substituted AuPd nanoparticles immobilized by functionalized
metal–organic frameworks at room temperature. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 16645–16652, 2016.
[82] S.-T. Gao, W. Liu, C. Feng, N.-Z. Shang, C. Wang, A Ag–Pd alloy supported on an amine￾functionalized UiO-66 as an efficient synergetic catalyst for the dehydrogenation of formic acid at
room temperature. Catal. Sci. Technol. 6, 869–874, 2016.
[83] M. Wen, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, H. Yamashita, Plasmonic Au@Pd nanoparticles supported on a basic
metal–organic framework: Synergic boosting of H2 production from formic acid. ACS Energy Lett. 2,
1–7, 2017.
[84] P.-Z. Li, K. Aranishi, Q. Xu, ZIF-8 immobilized nickel nanoparticles: Highly effective catalysts for
hydrogen generation from hydrolysis of ammonia borane. Chem. Commun. 48, 3173–3175, 2012.
[85] N. Cao, T. Liu, J. Su, X. Wu, W. Luo, G. Cheng, Ruthenium supported on MIL-101 as an efficient
catalyst for hydrogen generation from hydrolysis of amine boranes. New J. Chem. 38, 4032–4035,
2014.
[86] M. Wen, Y. Cui, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Yamashita, Non-noble-metal nanoparticle supported on
metal–organic framework as an efficient and durable catalyst for promoting H2 production from
ammonia borane under visible light irradiation. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 21278–21284, 2016.
[87] Y.-Z. Chen, Q. Xu, S.-H. Yu, H.-L. Jiang, Tiny Pd@Co core–shell nanoparticles confined inside a
metal–organic framework for highly efficient catalysis. Small 11, 71–76, 2015.
[88] Q.-L. Zhu, J. Li, Q. Xu, Immobilizing metal nanoparticles to metal–organic frameworks with size and
location control for optimizing catalytic performance. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 10210–10213, 2013.
[89] S. Roy, P. Pachfule, Q. Xu, High catalytic performance of MIL-101-immobilized NiRu alloy
nanoparticles towards the hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane. Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 2016,
4353–4357, 2016.
[90] J. Li, Q.-L. Zhu, Q. Xu, Highly active AuCo alloy nanoparticles encapsulated in the pores of
metal–organic frameworks for hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane. Chem. Commun. 50,
5899–5901, 2014.
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 43[91] J. Li, Q.-L. Zhu, Q. Xu, Non-noble bimetallic CuCo nanoparticles encapsulated in the pores of
metal–organic frameworks: Synergetic catalysis in the hydrolysis of ammonia borane for hydrogen
generation. Catal. Sci. Technol. 5, 525–530, 2015.
[92] P. Liu, X. Gu, K. Kang, H. Zhang, J. Cheng, H. Su, Highly efficient catalytic hydrogen evolution from
ammonia borane using the synergistic effect of crystallinity and size of noble-metal-free
nanoparticles supported by porous metal–organic frameworks. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9,
10759–10767, 2017.
[93] A. K. Singh, Q. Xu, Metal–organic framework supported bimetallic Ni Pt nanoparticles as high￾performance catalysts for hydrogen generation from hydrazine in aqueous solution. ChemCatChem
5, 3000–3004, 2013.
[94] B. Xia, N. Cao, H. Dai, J. Su, X. Wu, W. Luo, G. Cheng, Bimetallic nickel–rhodium nanoparticles
supported on ZIF-8 as highly efficient catalysts for hydrogen generation from hydrazine in alkaline
solution. ChemCatChem 6, 2549–2552, 2014.
[95] N. Cao, L. Yang, H. Dai, T. Liu, J. Su, X. Wu, W. Luo, G. Cheng, Immobilization of ultrafine bimetallic
Ni–Pt nanoparticles inside the pores of metal–organic frameworks as efficient catalysts for
dehydrogenation of alkaline solution of hydrazine. Inorg. Chem. 53, 10122–10128, 2014.
[96] P. Zhao, N. Cao, W. Luo, G. Cheng, Nanoscale MIL-101 supported RhNi nanoparticles: An efficient
catalyst for hydrogen generation from hydrous hydrazine. J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 12468–12475, 2015.
[97] P. Zhao, N. Cao, J. Su, W. Luo, G. Cheng, NiIr nanoparticles immobilized on the pores of MIL-101 as
highly efficient catalyst toward hydrogen generation from hydrous hydrazine. ACS Sustain. Chem.
Eng. 3, 1086–1093, 2015.
[98] S. Wuttke, C. Dietl, F. M. Hinterholzinger, H. Hintz, H. Langhals, T. Bein, Turn-on fluorescence
triggered by selective internal dye replacement in MOFs. Chem. Commun. 50, 3599–3601, 2014.
[99] W. Liu, C. Chen, Z. Wu, Y. Pan, C. Ye, Z. Mu, X. Luo, W. Chen, W. Liu, Construction of multifunctional
luminescent lanthanide MOFs by hydrogen bond functionalization for picric acid detection and
fluorescent dyes encapsulation. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 8, 13497–13506, 2020.
[100] Z. Li, G. Wang, Y. Ye, B. Li, H. Li, B. Chen, Loading photochromic molecules into a luminescent
metal–organic framework for information anticounterfeiting. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 58,
18025–18031, 2019.
[101] Y. Cui, T. Song, J. Yu, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, G. Qian, Dye encapsulated metal-organic framework for
warm-white LED with high color-rendering index. Adv. Funct. Mater. 25, 4796–4802, 2015.
[102] H.-R. Fu, Y. Zhao, T. Xie, M.-L. Han, L.-F. Ma, S.-Q. Zang, Stable dye-encapsulated indium–organic
framework as dual-emitting sensor for the detection of Hg2+/Cr2O7
2− and a wide range of nitro￾compounds. J. Mater. Chem. C 6, 6440–6448, 2018.
[103] W. Liu, C. Chen, X. Huang, E. Xie, W. Liu, Functional construction of dual-emitting 4-
aminonaphthalimide encapsulated lanthanide MOFs composite for ratiometric temperature
sensing. Chem. – A Eur. J. 25, 10054–10058, 2019.
[104] Y. Ye, L. Zhao, S. Hu, A. Liang, Y. Li, Q. Zhuang, G. Tao, J. Gu, Specific detection of hypochlorite based
on the size-selective effect of luminophore integrated MOF-801 synthesized by a one-pot strategy.
Dalt. Trans. 48, 2617–2625, 2019.
[105] T. Song, G. Zhang, Y. Cui, Y. Yang, G. Qian, Encapsulation of coumarin dye within lanthanide MOFs
as highly efficient white-light-emitting phosphors for white LEDs. CrystEngComm 18, 8366–8371,
2016.
[106] Z. Wei, D. Chen, Z. Guo, P. Jia, H. Xing, Eosin Y-embedded zirconium-based metal–organic
framework as a dual-emitting built-in self-calibrating platform for pesticide detection. Inorg. Chem.
59, 5386–5393, 2020.
[107] A. K. Chaudhari, J.-C. Tan, Dual-guest functionalized zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 for 3D printing
white light-emitting composites. Adv. Opt. Mater. 8, 1901912, 2020.
44 Moritz Bassen, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke[108] D. Yan, Y. Lou, Y. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Cai, Z. Guo, H. Zhan, B. Chen, Dye-modified metal–organic
framework as a recyclable luminescent sensor for nicotine determination in urine solution and
living cell. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 47253–47258, 2019.
[109] Y. Tang, W. Cao, L. Yao, Y. Cui, Y. Yu, G. Qian, Polyurethane-coated luminescent dye@MOF
composites for highly-stable white LEDs. J. Mater. Chem. C 8, 12308–12313, 2020.
[110] D.-M. Chen, -N.-N. Zhang, C.-S. Liu, M. Du, Dual-emitting dye@MOF composite as a self-calibrating
sensor for 2,4,6-trinitrophenol. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 24671–24677, 2017.
[111] J. Li, P. Du, J. Chen, S. Huo, Z. Han, Y. Deng, Y. Chen, X. Lu, Dual-channel luminescent signal readout
strategy for classifying aprotic/protic polar organic medium and naked-eye monitoring of water in
organic solvents. Anal. Chem. 92, 8974–8982, 2020.
[112] J. Deng, K. Wang, M. Wang, P. Yu, L. Mao, Mitochondria targeted nanoscale zeolitic imidazole
framework-90 for atp imaging in live cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 5877–5882, 2017.
[113] Y. Zhang, M. Gutiérrez, A. K. Chaudhari, J.-C. Tan, Dye-encapsulated zeolitic imidazolate framework
(ZIF-71) for fluorochromic sensing of pressure, temperature, and volatile solvents. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 12, 37477–37488, 2020.
[114] L. Yang, Y.-L. Liu, C.-G. Liu, Y. Fu, F. Ye, A built-in self-calibrating luminescence sensor based on
RhB@Zr-MOF for detection of cations, nitro explosives and pesticides. RSC Adv. 10, 19149–19156,
2020.
[115] Z. Zhang, Z. Wei, F. Meng, J. Su, D. Chen, Z. Guo, H. Xing, RhB-embedded zirconium–naphthalene￾based metal–organic framework composite as a luminescent self-calibrating platform for the
selective detection of inorganic ions. Chem. – A Eur. J. 26, 1661–1667, 2020.
[116] T. Du, J. Wang, T. Zhang, L. Zhang, C. Yang, T. Yue, J. Sun, T. Li, M. Zhou, J. Wang, An integrating
platform of ratiometric fluorescent adsorbent for unconventional real-time removing and
monitoring of copper ions. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 13189–13199, 2020.
[117] T. Mondal, D. Haldar, A. Ghosh, U. K. Ghorai, S. K. Saha, A MOF functionalized with CdTe quantum
dots as an efficient white light emitting phosphor material for applications in displays. New J. Chem.
44, 55–63, 2020.
[118] P. Dusek, P. M. Roos, T. Litwin, S. A. Schneider, T. P. Flaten, J. Aaseth, The neurotoxicity of iron,
copper and manganese in Parkinson’s and Wilson’s diseases. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 31, 193–203,
2015.
[119] C. Li, J. Hai, S. Li, B. Wang, Z. Yang, Luminescent magnetic nanoparticles encapsulated in MOFs for
highly selective and sensitive detection of ClO−
/SCN− and anti-counterfeiting. Nanoscale 10,
8667–8676, 2018.
[120] Y. Takashima, V. M. Martínez, S. Furukawa, M. Kondo, S. shimomura, H. Uehara, M. Nakahama, K.
Sugimoto, S. Kitagawa, Molecular decoding using luminescence from an entangled porous
framework. Nat. Commun. 2, 168, 2011.
[121] Y. Zhang, B. Li, H. Ma, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, An RGH–MOF as a naked eye colorimetric fluorescent
sensor for picric acid recognition. J. Mater. Chem. C 5, 4661–4669, 2017.
[122] F. Ke, L. Wang, J. Zhu, Facile fabrication of CdS-metal-organic framework nanocomposites with
enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity for organic transformation. Nano Res. 8, 1834–1846,
2015.
Chapter 2 Guest-induced luminescence of metal-organic frameworks 45Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke✶
Chapter 3
Synthesis, functionalisation, and applications
of iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles
Magnetic nanomaterials are important for potential applications in several fields,
such as nanocatalysis, drug delivery, biosensing, and magnetic resonance imaging
contrast agents. This chapter not only offers an overview of the most important types
of magnetic nanoparticles and how they are typically synthesised and functionalised,
but also discusses the problems and the future of this exciting research field.
3.1 Introduction
The most applied materials for magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) synthesis are iron ox￾ides, which can exist as hematite (α-Fe2O3), maghemite (λ-Fe2O3), and magnetite (Fe3O4).
Blood-red hematite (Greek haima represents blood) is the oldest known iron oxide min￾eral, widely found in nature in rocks and soils, and an important pigment and valuable
ore [1–3]. In nature, red-brown maghemite (magnetite + hematite) is found in soils, typi￾cally as a product of heating other iron oxides or as a weathering product of magnetite
Figure 3.1: Natural magnetite crystal extracted in the Goiás State in Brazil (reproduced with permission
from Marvin Radke).
✶
Corresponding author: Huayna Terraschke, E-Mail: hterraschke@ac.uni-kiel.de
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-003[3]. Similarly, black magnetite (Figure 3.1) is also an important iron ore that is, in combi￾nation with titanomagnetite, responsible for the magnetic properties of rocks [3].
There are two main groups of chemical routes for the preparation of nanomaterials,
in general, and also of iron oxide MNPs, namely, bottom-up and top-down approaches [1].
Bottom-up processes are the most commonly applied, and include co-precipitation, thermal
decomposition, hydrothermal and solvothermal synthesis, sol–gel synthesis, the polyol
method, microemulsion, sonochemical synthesis, and microwave-assisted synthesis [4, 5].
These approaches are advantageous because of the well-controlled particle size and shape
of the products, which is enabled by flexible changes in the experimental parameters, such
as temperature or concentration, often resulting in the production of monodispersed nano￾particles [1]. Top-down methods, including various types of lithography, milling, or etching,
are less common and are therefore not contemplated in detail within this chapter [1].
In general, MNPs are important for applications in diverse medical and technological
fields such as nanocatalysis, biosensing, magnetic storage, electrochemical devices, and
electronic memory devices [1, 2, 6, 7]. In medicine, the use of MNPs as contrast agents for
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is particularly interesting, as is their use in new hy￾perthermia therapy, which use denaturation of cancer cells by heat treatment. Further￾more, MNPs can be used for drug delivery, owing to their thermosensitivity [8]. For
medical and biological applications, the functionalisation of the magnetic nanomaterial
surface plays a crucial role because of the hydrophobic properties of most MNPs, and the
consequent disadvantages for their use in aqueous environments, such as in the human
body. Moreover, the stability of these particles are of great interest for these types of ap￾plications. Therefore, these characteristics should be known and controlled, which can be
achieved by coating iron nanoparticles with different functionalising shells [7, 9].
This chapter offers a summary of the vast literature on the most applied materials for
the production of MNPs: iron oxides. In detail, Section 3.2 describes the types and crystal
structures of these raw materials, while Section 3.3 explains the most common synthesis
methods for MNPs, as well as their disadvantages, their advantages, and strategies for con￾trolling their particle size and morphology. Section 3.4 highlights recent studies on the for￾mation mechanism of iron oxides. Section 3.5 focuses on important applications of MNPs,
which are achieved by the advanced surface functionalisation techniques explained in
Section 3.6. For further reading, the books Magnetic Nanoparticles: From Fabrication to
Clinical Applications [10], Magnetic Nanoparticles: Particle Science, Imaging Technology,
and Clinical Applications [11], and Magnetic Nanoparticles [12] are highly recommended.
48 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke3.2 Types of iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles
Among the nine types of iron oxides, the most applied for the production of MNPs are
hematite (α-Fe2O3), maghemite (λ-Fe2O3), and magnetite (Fe3O4) (Figure 3.1) [13]; hema￾tite and maghemite are iron(III) oxides, and magnetite is a mixed valence iron(II,III)
oxide compound. Hematite is the most stable iron oxide, and it is broadly applied in
catalysts, pigments, and gas sensors, particularly because of its low cost. This compound
exhibits weak ferromagnetism at room temperature [13], and is an n-type semiconduc￾tor with a bandgap of 2.3 eV [13]. The crystal structure of α-Fe2O3 was originally re￾ported by Bragg and Bragg [14] and Pauling and Hendricks [15] at the beginning of the
twentieth century. It is isostructural with corundum, comprising a hexagonal unit cell
(a = 0.5034 nm, c = 1.375 nm) with hexagonal close-packed arrays of oxygen ions along
the [001] direction, in which the anion planes are parallel to the (001) plane. Two-third
of the sites are filled with Fe3+ ions, presenting a regular arrangement in the (001)
plane, in which two filled sites are followed by one vacant site, resulting in the forma￾tion of sixfold rings. In addition, pairs of FeO6 octahedra are formed. Each octahedron
shares edges with three other octahedrons and one face with a neighbouring octahe￾dron in an adjacent plane. The face-sharing feature occurs along the c-axis, resulting in
the distortion of the cation sublattice from ideal packing. Within the hematite structure,
the oxygen–oxygen distances along the shared face are shorter than those in the un￾shared faces and are therefore trigonal distorted. The resulting Fe–O–Fe triplet arrange￾ment around the shared face influences the magnetic properties of α-Fe2O3 [3].
Maghemite exhibits ferrimagnetism at room temperature [13]. Its crystal structure
is very similar to that of magnetite, resulting in similar X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns
(Figure 3.2). The difference between these structures is that, in maghemite, the iron ions
are in a trivalent oxidation state. Therefore, the cation vacancies in maghemite compen￾sate for the divalent iron ions present in the magnetite structure. λ-Fe2O3 has a cubic
unit cell, with a = 0.834 nm, where every unit cell comprises 32 O2– anions, 21⅓ Fe3+ cat￾ions, and 2⅓ vacancies. In this unit cell, eight cations occupy tetrahedral sites, while the
other cations are randomly dispersed over the octahedral sites, and the vacancies oc￾cupy the octahedral sites [3]. Figure 3.2 shows the simulated XRD patterns of hematite
[14], maghemite [16], and magnetite [17]. In comparison to magnetite, the Bragg reflec￾tions of maghemite are slightly shifted to higher angles, and additional reflections are
observed, for example, between 2θ of 10° and 30°.
Similar to hematite, the structure of magnetite was investigated by Bragg et al. [17] at
the beginning of the twentieth century. Magnetite was one of the first mineral structures
investigated by XRD and was originally reported in 1915 [3, 17]. This structure consists of
an inverse spinel (Figure 3.3), with a face-centred cubic unit cell (a = 0.839 nm) containing
32 O2– anions, which are regularly cubic close packed along the [111] direction, with eight
formula units per unit cell. The general frequently non-stoichiometric formula of magne￾tite is Y[XY]O4 (X = Fe2+, Y = Fe3+), in which the brackets represent the octahedral sites. In
Chapter 3 Iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 49total, Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions are distributed over eight tetrahedral sites, and octahedral and
mixed tetrahedral/octahedral layers are formed along the (111) direction [3].
As described by Shrivastava et al. [18], when the crystal size is reduced to the nano￾scale, magnetite presents a long-range ordering of the magnetic moment, high surface-to￾volume ratio, and lower toxicity in comparison to the bulk analogue material [18]. In addi￾tion, iron oxide nanoparticles are superparamagnetic at room temperature for dimensions
Figure 3.2: XRD patterns of hematite (α-Fe2O3) [14], maghemite (λ-Fe2O3) [16], and magnetite (Fe3O4) [17].
Figure 3.3: Structure of Fe3O4, [2, 17] important material for the fabrication of magnetic nanoparticles
(reproduced with permission from reference [13]).
50 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkebelow 15 nm, at which the thermal energy can overcome the anisotropic energy barrier
for single particles. In particular, one-dimensional iron oxide nanostructures exhibit
unique physicochemical properties, owing to their high intrinsic anisotropy and surface
activity [13]. However, the application of special synthesis and functionalisation techniques
is necessary to produce magnetic nanomaterials, with well-defined particle sizes and mor￾phologies, to control their magnetic properties [19].
3.3 Synthesis methods
Among the most important issues to be considered during the synthesis of MNPs are
achieving a monodispersed particle size distribution, and controlling the shape of the
nanostructure. In addition, it is desirable to achieve a satisfactory degree of crystallin￾ity, naturally, of the desired modification. Finally, the produced magnetic nanomateri￾als must be stable over a long period of time [1]. To achieve these objectives, the most
commonly applied synthesis methods for iron oxide nanomaterials are co-precipitation,
thermal decomposition, hydrothermal and solvothermal synthesis, sol–gel synthesis,
the polyol method, microemulsion, sonochemical synthesis, microwave-assisted synthe￾sis, and biosynthesis [13], which are briefly described below. Co-precipitation is the sim￾plest synthesis method. For example, for the preparation of magnetite nanoparticles,
the typical approach involves a mixture of stoichiometric amounts of divalent and tri￾valent iron salts under an inert atmosphere in a very basic solution. In this case, pH
values below 11 favour nucleation, while pH values above 11 favour crystal growth [13].
An additional relevant consideration is the application of mechanical and non-magnetic
agitation to avoid aggregation of the produced nanoparticles around the magnetic stir￾rer. This approach can yield gram-scale production, in which the simplified reaction
mechanism can be summarised as [13, 20]
Fe2+ + 2Fe3++ 8OH− ⇄ Fe OH ð Þ2 + 2Fe OH ð Þ3 ! Fe3O4 # + 4H2O (3:1)
There are different adaptations of co-precipitation synthesis, such as applying ultra￾sound to obtain ca. 15 nm particles and applying surfactants and biomolecules to im￾prove biocompatibility and avoid aggregation [13]. Examples of typically employed
organic compounds and biomolecules include octanoic acid and chitosan, which im￾prove the dispersibility in liquid media. Coating Fe3O4 nanoparticles with chitosan can
be achieved by substituting water during synthesis with a 2% chitosan solution in acetic
acid [13]. Despite the simplicity and mild conditions required by the co-precipitation ap￾proach, this strategy also presents a few disadvantages, such as fast crystallisation and
limited control over particle size and morphology, generally yielding a broad particle
size distribution. These factors depend on experimental parameters such as the applied
iron salts, Fe2+/Fe3+ ratio, pH value, and ionic strength of the solvent [13, 20].
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 51The thermal decomposition of precursors is one of the most applied non-aqueous
strategies for the synthesis of magnetic nanomaterials. This method can be divided
into two main approaches. In the first approach, the precursors are added to a hot
reaction mixture (hot injection), while in the second approach, the precursors are first
prepared at room temperature and then heated posteriorly [13]. The higher crystallinity
and narrower size distribution of the resulting nanomaterials are the most important
advantages of this strategy. A typical synthesis involves the decomposition of coordi￾nated iron precursors in organic solvents. Examples of frequently used iron precursors
include [Fe(CO)5] (Figure 3.4), [Fe(acac)3] (acac, acetylacetone), iron oleate, [Fe(Cup)3]
(Cup, N-nitrosophenylhydroxylamine), Prussian blue, iron urea complexes, ferrocene,
and [Fe3(CO)12]. In addition, oleic acid, 1-octadecene, 1-tetradecene, and oleylamine are
examples of organic molecules frequently used as stabilisers, which favour a slow nu￾cleation process and hinder the adsorption of additives on the crystal surface, thus
Figure 3.4: Schematic representation of the synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles by thermal
decomposition (reproduced with permission from reference [21]).
Figure 3.5: Schematics of hydrothermal and solvothermal procedures for the preparation of α-Fe2O3 and
Fe3O4 nanoparticles, respectively (reprinted from reference [22], with permission from Elsevier).
52 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkeinhibiting the growth of nanoparticles. In this method, the shape and size of the nano￾particles are tuned by the temperature, precursors, additives, and solvents [13].
Hydrothermal and solvothermal syntheses are wet-chemical synthesis techniques
in which aqueous and non-aqueous solutions, respectively, are heated above their boil￾ing point under a high vapour pressure in a sealed container [13]. For hydrothermal
synthesis, water is the applied reaction medium, while various organic solvents are
used as the reaction medium for the solvothermal approach [22]. In the classic solvo￾thermal reaction for the production of iron oxide nanoparticles, Fe3+ is applied as an
iron source, and acetate, urea, and sodium citrate are mixed in ethylene glycol and
sealed in a Teflon-lined autoclave at ca. 200 °C for 8–24 h. Hydrothermal and solvother￾mal strategies are widely applied to obtain highly crystalline hematite, maghemite, and
magnetite nanoparticles [13]. Using these strategies, the nature, size, morphology, and
crystallisation behaviour of the final products can be controlled by varying the polarity,
surface tension, viscosity, and coordination ability of the solvents [22]. For example, Su
et al. [22] prepared α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 nanocrystals at 200 °C under pressure (Fig. 3.5).
α-Fe2O3 was obtained via hydrothermal synthesis, and Fe3O4 was obtained under solvo￾thermal conditions in ethylene glycol, where urea was added to favour precursor for￾mation [22]. The urea concentration was varied to tune the size and morphology of the
obtained particles. Hence, the shape of the α-Fe2O3 particles changed from olive-like to
rhomb-like structures, and the shape of the Fe3O4 particles varied from hollow spheres
and pinecone-like structures to cracked nanostructures [22].
Many iron oxide nanoparticles have also been synthesised by the sol–gel approach,
in which “sol” refers to the formed stable dispersion of colloidal particles or polymers in
a solvent, and “gel” refers to the formed three-dimensional continuous network enclosing
the liquid phase, which is generally divided into colloidal or polymer gels [13]. Within col￾loidal gels, the network is formed by the aggregation of nanoparticles interacting through
van der Waals forces and hydrogen bonds. In polymer gels, the obtained particles present
a polymeric substructure formed by the aggregation of subcolloidal nanoparticles. In this
case, the gel is formed by linking of the polymer chains. Examples of typically applied
precursors include iron alkoxides and salts, such as chlorides, nitrates, and acetates,
which undergo hydrolysis and polycondensation reactions. This procedure is generally
performed at room temperature, with posterior heating, to obtain the final product [13].
In the so-called polyol method for the production of iron oxide particles, polyols are
used simultaneously as solvents, reducing agents, and stabilisers to control particle
growth and avoid particle aggregation [13]. In a typical synthesis procedure, an iron pre￾cursor, such as [Fe(acac)3], is suspended in a liquid polyol, where ethylene, diethylene, tri￾ethylene, or tetraethylene glycol are the most commonly used. Subsequently, the mixture
is stirred and heated close to the polyol boiling point. The advantages of this strategy in￾clude the following: (i) a high pressure is not required, (ii) the particle surface is coated
in situ with hydrophilic ligands and can, therefore, be easily suspended in aqueous solu￾tions or other polar solvents, and (iii) the high reaction temperature favours a high crys￾tallinity. One disadvantage of the polyol method is its high energy and material costs [13].
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 53Microemulsions are liquid mixtures of oil, water, and surfactants. The surfactants
are responsible for forming a monolayer at the interface between oil and water, in
which the hydrophobic tail is dissolved in the oil phase and the hydrophilic head
groups are dissolved in the aqueous phase [13, 24]. In general, the aqueous phase con￾tains metal salts and other reagents, while the oil phase consists of a complex mixture
of hydrocarbons and olefins [13, 24]. There are different types of microemulsions, for
example, direct and reverse microemulsions. In direct microemulsions, the oil is dis￾persed in the aqueous phase (o/w), while in reverse microemulsions, water is dis￾persed in the oil phase (w/o). The surfactants typically used in these methods are bis
(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate (AOT), sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), cetyltrimethylam￾monium bromide (CTAB), and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). The particle size can be
controlled by varying the droplet size, reactant concentration, and surfactant type
[13]. An additional advantage of this method is its good performance at room temper￾ature. However, the major disadvantages are the several washing steps required to
remove the surfactants and the strong agglomeration of the produced nanoparticles
[13, 24]. Li et al. [23] applied a combination of a reverse microemulsion and solvother￾mal approach to produce grass-like Fe3O4 nanostructures (Figure 3.6). The reverse mi￾croemulsions were prepared by mixing a solution of FeCl3 in ethylene glycol and a
microemulsion composed of a KOH aqueous solution in a mixture containing the sur￾factant Triton™ X-100, n-octanol, and cyclohexane. The resulting reverse microemul￾sion was then transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave and heated at
190 °C for 10 h. The grass-like Fe3O4 nanostructures were finally obtained after
centrifuging, washing, and drying [23].
Sonochemical methods are based on acoustic cavitation, caused by high-intensity ul￾trasound radiation, in which alternating expansive and compressive acoustic waves
cause the formation of oscillating bubbles (cavities) in a solution; they are often applied
for the production of Fe3O4 nanoparticles. These bubbles accumulate ultrasonic energy,
grow to a certain size, and collapse, releasing the accumulated energy within a very short
period of time, and reaching temperatures of 5,000 K and pressures of up to 1,000 bar [13,
26]. Some advantages of this method include uniform mixing, synthesis under ambient
conditions, and reduced crystal growth. The major disadvantage, however, is poor control
Figure 3.6: Field-emission scanning electron microscopic (FE-SEM) images of a grass-like Fe3O4
nanostructure produced by combined microemulsion and solvothermal synthesis (reprinted from
reference [23], with permission from Elsevier).
54 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkeof the shape and dispersity [13, 26]. For microwave-assisted strategies, molecules align their
dipoles according to the external field, upon excitation with microwave radiation, resulting
in strong agitation due to the reorientation of the molecules in phase with the electrical
field excitation [13]. The advantages of this method include intense and homogeneous inter￾nal heating, reduced synthesis time, and consequent low energy cost. This method has
been applied for the synthesis of magnetite, maghemite, and hematite nanoparticles, with
reaction times of as low as 25 min [13]. One of the many applications of this method was
reported by Rao et al. [25], who used a combination of solvothermal and microwave￾assisted synthesis (Figure 3.7) to prepare porous α-Fe2O3 nanostructures for application as a
negative electrode material in lithium and sodium batteries. In addition to these conven￾tional methods for the synthesis of iron oxide magnetic nanocrystals, alternative methods,
such as biomineralisation of these nanoparticles in living microorganisms (for example,
bacteria), have been reported in the literature [13, 27, 28]. This method is a bottom-up ap￾proach, based on reduction and oxidation reactions, which explores the antioxidant or re￾ducing properties of microbial enzymes or plant phytochemicals. Typical experiments are
conducted with magnetotactic or iron-reducing bacteria, such as Actinobacter sp. or Bacil￾lus sp., under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. The low environmental impact of the chem￾icals and process as well as the high biocompatibility of the produced MNPs are the major
advantages of this strategy [13, 28].
The large variety of synthesis methods discussed above offers enhanced freedom in
the morphology of the prepared nanocrystals. As summarised in Table 3.1, iron oxides
(for example, Fe3O4) can be obtained not only as monodispersed spherical particles but
also as octahedral particles, cubic particles, nanorods, nanowires, nanorings, and nano￾prisms, to name only a few. In this context, surfactants and templates play important
roles, as also temperature, ageing time, and reactant concentrations during solvothermal
Figure 3.7: Schematic of the growth mechanism of porous α-Fe2O3 nanostructures, prepared by a
combination of solvothermal and microwave-assisted synthesis (reproduced from reference [25] with
permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 55synthesis and thermal decomposition, deeply influencing the particle size and morphol￾ogy [2]. The most important factor for controlling the shape of the prepared nanocrystals
is tuning the growth rate of the specific facets. For instance, octahedral nanocrystals are
surrounded by eight {111} planes, which are generated when the growth rate along the
[100] direction is faster than that along the [111] direction [2, 37]. In contrast, nanocubes
are obtained when the growth rate along the [111] direction is faster than that along the
Table 3.1: Examples of synthesis strategies for Fe3O4 magnetic nanocrystals with different geometries [2].
Geometry Synthesis
method
Examples
Spherical Polyol approach Oleylamine applied as a reducing agent and stabiliser; tunable
monodispersed particle size achieved by varying the ratio between
benzyl ether and oleylamine []
Thermal
decomposition
Iron(III) oleate applied as a precursor, thermally decomposed in liquid
phase at  °C for  min; crystal size tuned between  and  nm by
changing the decomposition temperature and ageing time []
Octahedral Solvothermal
synthesis
Potassium ferrocene, sodium borohydride and hydroxide,
polyvinylpyrrolidone, and alcohol heated at  °C in an autoclave;
growth of the () facet is minimised, owing to the adsorption of
hydroxyl on the () facet, influencing the growth direction []
Cubic Polyol approach Comparison between different stabilisers (sodium oleate, potassium
oleate, dibutylammonium oleate, and oleic acid) [] indicates that the
growth rate anisotropy is related to the adhesion of the stabilising
agent on the growth surface. Sodium oleate shows better adhesion to
the () facet, leading to the growth of nanocubes
Nanorods
and wires
Plasma sputtering CH and N plasma sputtering of hematite () wafers; energetic
stability of the () faces promotes one-dimensional growth along
the [] direction []
Chemical vapour
deposition
[Fe(OBut)] precursor deposited layer by layer on alumina and MgO
substrates; gold applied as a catalyst at  °C, resulting in a
preferential growth along the 〈〉 direction []
Nanorings Hydrothermal
synthesis
Production of hematite nanorings by changing the ratio between
phosphate and sulphate stabilising ions; these ions present strong
adhesion to the () and () planes and weak affinity to the ()
plane, causing preferential growth along the 〈〉 direction []
Nanoprisms Hydrothermal
synthesis
Iron(III) chloride applied as a precursor, ethylene glycol as a solvent,
,-propanediamine as a surfactant, and sodium acetate as an
additive; –NH group in ,-propanediamine coordinates Fe+ ions,
changing the surface conditions of the FeO crystals. Nanoprism
morphology is controlled by changing the ratio between ethylene
glycol and ,-propanediamine []
56 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke[100] direction because the particles are bounded by the {100} planes [2, 37]. Zhou et al.
[38] succeeded in controlling the shape and surface structure of iron oxide nanocrystals
synthesised by the thermal decomposition of iron oleate in the presence of sodium oleate
(Figure 3.8). In this case, sodium oleate preferentially binds to the Fe3O4 {111} facets under
mild conditions with the application of 1-octadecene as a solvent. This procedure results
in the crystallisation of the {111} facet of the exposed iron oxide plates, yielding truncated
octahedrons and tetrahedrons (Figure 3.8). In contrast, cubic, concave, multibranch, and
assembled Fe3O4 structures with {100} facets are obtained by varying the molar ratio be￾tween iron and sodium oleates, applying high boiling temperatures, and using tri-n￾octylamine as a solvent [38].
3.4 Advanced studies on iron oxide formation
As discussed in detail in Part II of this book, studying the formation of the structure of
solid materials, such as iron oxide, is critical for understanding and optimising the
synthesis strategies, in addition to controlling the structure and structure-related
Figure 3.8: High-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) and TEM images of iron oxide (a)
and (b) plates, (c)–(f) truncated octahedrons, and (g)–(i) tetrahedrons (reprinted with permission from
reference [38], Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 57properties by influencing the reaction conditions. Examples of these properties rele￾vant to iron oxide particles include crystal size, size distribution, morphology, and
magnetism. Interestingly, the crystallisation process of iron oxides involves the forma￾tion of pre-nucleation clusters (PNC), deviating from the classical nucleation theories
[39]. During the formation of iron(III) oxide, solutions of iron(III) ions are prepared,
in which their hydrolysis initially leads to the formation of iron hydroxide species.
Low pH values favour the stabilisation of mono- and dinuclear species, which poly￾merise when the pH value increases above approximately 6, resulting in the forma￾tion of oxo-bridged poly-iron complexes [39]. These hydrolysed iron(III) solutions
comprise species with low sedimentation coefficients, identified as 2–4 nm spheres by
electron microscopy, posteriorly agglomerating to form rods upon ageing, which
transform into rafts and flocculate. Hydrated amorphous iron(III) hydroxide species
are then formed and consecutively converted into α-FeO(OH) and α-Fe2O3 through de￾hydration and crystallisation [39]. According to Sun et al. [40], the non-classical aggre￾gation-based pathway for crystallisation also explains the heat-induced crystallisation
of magnetite. Therefore, the domains of the pre-aligned clusters consist of a direct
precursor for the iron oxide crystals. The application of the amphiphilic ligand, 10,12-
pentacosadiynoic acid (PCDA), enhances the mobility of the clusters and, therefore,
their crystallisation [40].
3.5 Applications
Figure 3.9: Synthesis mechanism and applications of Fe3O4@SiO2@APG-F nanocomposites (republished
with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [41]; permission conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
58 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna TerraschkeOwing to their low production cost, high physical and chemical stabilities, biocom￾patibility, environmental safety, and large surface area [13], iron oxide nanoparticles
are widely used in diverse biomedical and technological fields, such as MRI, cancer
treatment, drug delivery, bioimaging, and magnetic separation, in addition to their ap￾plication as energy materials and nanocatalysts. MRI is a powerful, non-invasive diag￾nostic technique with elevated spatial resolution based on the detection of proton
relaxation in an external magnetic field. The signal contrast can be enhanced by the
application of contrast agents [42]. Using MNPs such as Fe3O4 as contrast agents, a mag￾netic moment is induced on these materials by applying a magnetic field B0, perturbing
the magnetic relaxation processes of the water protons around them. This process
causes a reduction in the spin–spin relaxation time and darkening of the corresponding
area in the magnetic resonance images [2].
For cancer treatment, MNPs are frequently used in hyperthermia therapy. In this
case, the MNPs absorb the alternating current energy and convert it into heat. Conse￾quently, the temperature increases to the range 41–46 °C and causes local overheating
of cancer tissue, prompting the cancer cells to undergo apoptosis [42]. Combining
magnetic and luminescent properties allows the biomedical applications of these com￾pounds to be extended from MRI and hyperthermia to fluorescence-based diagnostic
bioimaging [19]. Drug delivery is a pharmaceutic approach for transporting medica￾ments to a desired location in the body by means of intravenous delivery, which aims
to reduce the toxic dose for non-cancerous cells and increase the therapeutic effect at
the targeted locations. MNPs are ideal carriers for this application because they can
be coated with active tumour-targeting agents. Generally, drug release is triggered by
external stimuli, for example, a local temperature increase (hyperthermia) or low pH
value, which is typical for cancerous tissues [42]. The magnetic field is applied to accu￾mulate Fe3O4 particles around the target tissue [2]. Moorthy et al. [41] recently pro￾duced Fe3O4@SiO2@APG-F multifunctional nanostructured composites, prepared by
coating Fe3O4@SiO2 nanoparticles with amine-polyglycidol (APG) and fluorescein iso￾thiocyanate (FITC), for application as hyperthermia agents, fluorescent contrast agents
for bioimaging, and drug delivery carriers (Figure 3.9) [41].
Magnetic separation of ions, pollutants, cells, proteins, antibodies, and other bioac￾tive substances is advantageous, in comparison to conventional separation methods
such as chromatography, because it has high versatility, is fast and cost-effective, and
does not require pretreatment of the active material [42]. According to Franzreb et al.
[43], the requirements of magnetic sorbents are a large number of functional groups
per mass of magnetic material and saturation of the magnetisation value [43]. More￾over, the high binding proclivity for the target substances and fast magnetic response
of the composite should be considered [42]. MNPs such as Fe3O4 can additionally be
used as nanocatalysts [2] for the photocatalytic removal of organic pollutants from
aqueous solutions. In photocatalysis, light energy is used to conduct oxidation and re￾duction reactions. In such photocatalytic oxidation reactions, the photocatalyst absorbs
light, exciting electrons from the valence to the conduction band, in which the resulting
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 59electron–hole pair reacts further with oxygen and water to form peroxide anions and
hydroxyl radicals, which can oxidise the organic pollutants. The disadvantage of con￾ventional photocatalysts, such as TiO2 and ZnO, is the large band gap energy, which re￾quires high-energy photons (UV), yielding a rather low efficiency with visible light. Iron
oxide nanoparticles can offer a solution for this problem owing to their narrow bandgap
energy, which combined with their high surface area and magnetisation, enables easy
magnetic separation and recycling of the catalyst [42]. When applying MNPs for the pho￾tocatalytic degradation of pollutants, toxicity [44] is particularly important because the
particles might have direct contact with humans through skin contact, inhalation, or in￾gestion through drinking water. As a final example, iron oxide nanocrystals, such as
Fe3O4 [2] and α-Fe2O3 [25], are attractive materials for the production of negative electro￾des for lithium and sodium batteries, particularly because of their low cost, high stability,
non-toxicity, low environmental impact, and high corrosion resistance (α-Fe2O3) [25].
3.6 Surface functionalisation
For the application of magnetic nanocrystals in most of the fields mentioned in Sec￾tion 3.5, additional surface functionalisation is necessary. In particular, this process is
relevant for three main reasons: (i) to increase the chemical stability, (ii) to combine
multiple properties, and (iii) to improve water dispersibility. Owing to their high sur￾face area, magnetite nanoparticles can easily oxidise to iron(III) oxide in air [2]. Con￾sequently, after a short time, γ-Fe2O3 can become the major phase on small particles
(for example, diameter of 5 nm). Therefore, the particles become less sensitive to oxi￾dation with increasing crystal size [2]. In addition to avoiding the loss of magnetisa￾tion [13], increasing the chemical stability by surface functionalisation is essential for
biomedical applications to prevent the degradation of the nanoparticles in vivo, for
example, caused by lysosomal enzymes, and therefore prevents the release of iron
cations in the body, which could cause severe oxidative reactions in cells [42]. The
functionalisation of iron oxide nanocrystals allows the combination of their intrinsic
magnetism with supplementary properties, such as biocompatibility, luminescence,
or mesoporosity, by introducing interactive functions on the MNP surface through
coating, for example, with polymers, biomolecules, silica, metals, luminescent materi￾als, or even metal–organic frameworks [13, 42]. Improving the water dispersibility is
required for biomedical applications [13, 42]. Bare MNPs are typically prone to aggre￾gation, owing to their large surface-to-volume ratio and high magnetisation [45]. Func￾tionalisation influences the hydrodynamic diameter and surface charge, improving
the colloidal stability.
Coating the surface with silica by the so-called Störber method [47], in which tet￾raethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) or its derivatives are applied as precursors, is the most
common functionalisation procedure for iron oxide nanoparticles. In addition to
60 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkeincreasing the biocompatibility, this process enhances the chemical and mechanical sta￾bility against variations in pH and temperature, reducing the oxidation of Fe3O4 nano￾materials to Fe2O3 at high temperatures [45]. A silica coating is an excellent surface
modifier, owing to its non-toxicity and ability to conjugate additional functional groups
for coupling and labelling biotargets. For practical applications, every iron oxide nano￾crystal in a batch must be coated with a homogeneous SiO2 shell because an unequal
core number, the formation of core-free SiO2 particles, or an inhomogeneous thickness
of the SiO2 shell results in an irregular magnetic field and a broad particle size distribu￾tion. Ding et al. [46] systematically studied the coating process during the production of
Fe3O4 nanoparticles using a reverse microemulsion approach (Section 3.3). For this pur￾pose, the surfactant Igepal® CO-520 was dispersed in cyclohexane by sonication. An Fe3O4
suspension in cyclohexane was added to this solution, followed by an ammonium hydrox￾ide solution and different amounts of TEOS (Figure 3.10). The resulting core–shell nano￾particles were centrifuged, washed, and redispersed in ethanol. The coating procedure
occurred via a ligand-exchange process involving a surfactant, an oil phase, and hydro￾lysed TEOS. The thickness of the SiO2 shell could be adjusted by controlling the quantities
of Fe3O4 nanoparticles and TEOS [46].
As discussed by Hola et al. [42], three main coupling strategies are used to en￾hance the compatibility of MNPs to medical applications. These strategies are based
on the chemical modification of amino groups and bioactive substances on the nano￾particle surface and activation of carboxyl groups for enzyme immobilisation, includ￾ing covalent and non-covalent approaches. Some functionalisation examples include
(i) polymer-grafted nanoparticles, (ii) nanoparticles grafted with low-molecular￾weight compounds, (iii) nanoparticles coated with bifunctional polymers (PEG),
Figure 3.10: TEM images of Fe3O4@SiO2 nanoparticles produced with (a) 75 µL, (b) 150 µL, (c) 300 µL,
and (d) 600 µL TEOS, resulting in different SiO2 shell thicknesses (reproduced with permission from
reference [47]. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 61(iv) stimuli-responsive hydro/nanogels, (v) magnetic clusters, (vi) porous polymer beads,
(vii) micelles, (viii) inorganic shells, and inorganic nanohybrids with (ix) magnetic cores
or (x) magnetic shells (Figure 3.11). For MRI applications (Section 3.5), low-molecular￾weight compounds enhance water relaxivity, while functionalisation with hydrophilic
polymers, such as PEG and dextran, avoids fast opsonisation of nanoparticles because
they do not strongly interact with opsonin proteins, such as albumins or immunoglobu￾lins [42].
In contrast, surface engineering with polymeric materials containing functional
groups that are responsive to coupling allows the immobilisation of antibodies and
glycoproteins for passive targeting of cancer cells, improving early diagnostics. In ad￾dition, to attach drugs to MNPs, drug molecules can be loaded in the polymer inter￾spaces of magnetic clusters or encapsulated in stimuli-responsive hydrogel/polymer
frameworks [42]. MNPs, encapsulated by a porous polymer-bead matrix, are used in
chemical separation-related applications and core–shell approaches with polymeric or
inorganic shells, resulting in an increased surface area, enabling the incorporation of a
large number of functional groups for chemical separation. Inorganic shells, such as
Ag-coated MNPs, provide antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral properties, which can
be used in antimicrobial targeting [42]. Finally, the functionalisation of magnetic cores
with inorganic and hybrid shells is explained in more detail in the following sections.
The disadvantages of functionalisation are typically related to the increase in size due
to the addition of supplementary coating layers, resulting in composites above the
nanometre range and, often, also reducing the magnetisation.
Figure 3.11: Common strategies for functionalising magnetic nanoparticles (derived from reference [42]).
62 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke3.6.1 Coating with luminescent materials
Bifunctional materials, combining optical and magnetic properties into a single nano￾structured entity, are advantageous because of their easy manipulation via a mag￾netic field and diverse chemical functionalities. Bifunctional magnetic–luminescent
nanomaterials can potentially be applied in in vitro and in vivo labelling, multifunc￾tional biomarkers, photothermal destruction of tumour cells, and as reusable catalysts
that can be separated by a magnetic field, or in pre-concentration procedures for
quantitative DNA analysis [18, 45].
The general preparation strategies for these bifunctional materials include, for
example, (i) coating or layer-by-layer deposition of lanthanide ions or quantum dots
on magnetic-core nanoparticles, (ii) encapsulation of magnetic particles within lumi￾nophore-containing polymers, and (iii) functionalisation of MNPs with fluorescent
dyes or d-transition metal complexes [18]. Lanthanide (Ln) ions [48–51] are remark￾able candidates for supplying magnetic particles with additional luminescent proper￾ties. For example, trivalent lanthanide ions are characterised by their well-defined
narrow emission peaks in spectral ranges varying from visible to near infrared, with
long lifetimes and high quantum yields. Most trivalent lanthanide ions are paramag￾netic because of the unpaired electrons. Their magnetic properties are usually deter￾mined by the ground state configuration because the excited and the ground states
are well separated, owing to the spin–orbit coupling, and are thermally inaccessible.
The magnetic moments of trivalent lanthanide ions can contribute to the total mag￾netisation of these magnetic–luminescent nanomaterials [44]. However, iron oxide is
a strong luminescence quencher, owing to the killer effect [52] caused by the energy
transfer process that occurs when luminescent materials such as Ln ions are in direct
contact or close to the metal oxide surface. To overcome this problem, an intermedi￾ate layer or energy barrier must be introduced between the iron oxide surface and
the luminescent layer. Typically, applied protective materials include polymers, silica,
or semiconductors [18].
For the selective adsorption of transition metals and trivalent lanthanide ions, for
example, from aqueous solutions, the surface of the magnetic particles can be function￾alised with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-based groups. Additionally, attach￾ing lanthanide-based complexes to these composite EDTA-covered magnetic particles
qualify them for magnetic–luminescent applications, in which lanthanide complexes
with carboxylates, heteroaromatics, and β-diketonate ligands are particularly advanta￾geous, owing to the so-called antenna effect [53]. Owing to this effect, these lanthanide￾based complexes present strong energy absorption by the ligands and efficient energy
transfer to the light-emitting lanthanide ions. The ligands can also protect the lantha￾nide ions against high-energy oscillator groups such as OH and NH, decreasing their
quenching effects. The chelating effect of the hexadentate EDTA is advantageous for the
anchoring of metal complexes on the particle surface to avoid leaching of the metal
ions [45, 48]. For example, Pires et al. [45] functionalised magnetite particles with
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 63organosilanes containing EDTA derivatives attached to Eu3+ β-diketonate complexes to
decrease the quenching effect of Fe3O4 on the lanthanide luminescence. Khan et al. [48]
applied a similar core–shell approach using a Fe3O4 core coated with a SiO2 protective
shell, and further grafted with Eu3+ and Tb3+ complexes, resulting in Fe3O4@SiO2-(TTA￾Ln-L) materials, in which Ln is Eu3+ and Tb3+ and L represent different ligands, such as
thenoyltrifluoroacetonate (TTA), thioglycolate (TC), 4-aminobenzoate (AB), and 4-(ami￾nomethyl)benzoate (AMB). In addition to increasing the stability (as described above),
the SiO2 layer can be used to embed Ln3+ complexes [45].
Another example of magnetic–luminescent composites is triple-doped Fe3O4/
ZnS@LaF3:xCe3+,xGd3+,yTb3+ (x = 5; y = 5, 10, and 15 mol%) nanomaterials [18]. To pre￾pare these particles, Fe3O4 nanoparticles were functionalised with ZnS as an energy
barrier between the magnetic core and the luminescent shell, and coated with LaF3:
Ln3+ via a chitosan-assisted co-precipitation method. In this case, coating with ZnS
presents two main advantages. In addition to being luminescent and a classical scintil￾lating material, ZnS is a semiconductor and, in contrast to the isolating SiO2 protective
layers, might not severely interfere with the magnetic properties of the iron oxide
core. Regarding the luminescent properties, a broad blue emission (400–550 nm) was
observed under UV irradiation, which was assigned to the vacancies on the Fe3O4/ZnS
surface. Moreover, the respective emission spectra also presented narrow emission
lines due to the 5
D4 → 7
F6-0 Tb3+ transitions, resulting from the Ce3+ → Gd3+ → Tb3+ en￾ergy transfer. These composites have potential applications in the production of mag￾netic light-converting molecule devices (MLMCDs) and high-energy detection [18].
As exemplified above, most combinations of magnetic and optical properties in single
assemblies consist essentially of a magnetic core, coated with a protective middle
layer and a fluorescent shell, generally comprising small luminescent molecules, com￾plexes, or quantum dots [54]. The disadvantage of these materials for application as
Figure 3.12: Example of an inorganic functionalisation shell combining the properties of a magnetic
Fe3O4 core (in black) with an afterglow SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ shell (in green), separated by a SiO2
protective layer (in grey) (derived from reference [54] with permission from John Wiley and Sons).
64 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkebiomarkers is their ability to emit light only simultaneously with the excitation pro￾cess. Therefore, they are affected by the auto-fluorescence problem, in which the fluo￾rescent materials within living cells are excited simultaneously with the marker
during bioimaging [54]. A solution to this problem is the production of multifunctional
assays, which combine magnetic and afterglow properties. Hence, the marker can
emit light after the excitation source is blocked, achieving a higher contrast with the
target cells. Nevertheless, the afterglow process is achieved by more challenging
mechanisms than fluorescence and requires, for instance, the construction of an addi￾tional crystalline layer on the magnetic particle surface, profiting from the combina￾tion of lattice defects and energy transfer between mixed-valence lanthanide ions
such as SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+. Recently, the production of the first magnetic afterglow par￾ticles [54] was achieved by incorporating a combustion synthesis approach [50] into a
double core–shell strategy for the production of Fe3O4@SiO2@SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ nano￾particles (Figure 3.12). Example applications for these nanoparticles include the identi￾fication of cancer cells, detection of relevant biomolecules, and separation of cells
in vitro [54]. Figure 3.13 shows the high magnetisability of the magnetite core par￾ticles, which were easily separated from the liquid media. The resulting Fe3O4@SiO2-
@SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ nanoparticles presented a broad emission band in the green
spectral range with a maximum at 520 nm, assigned to the 4f6
5d1 → 4f7 (
8
S7/2) transi￾tion of Eu2+ in the SrAl2O4 host lattice [50], were able to emit light for a few seconds
after the excitation source was turned off, and could be attracted by a magnetic field
(Figure 3.13) [54].
Figure 3.13: Magnetic and afterglow properties of Fe3O4@SiO2@SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ nanoparticles (derived
from reference [54] with permission from John Wiley and Sons).
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 653.6.2 Coating with metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)
As explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 6, MOFs are a new class of highly ordered
porous materials that have emerged in the past two decades, and are composed of
inorganic units, for example, metal ions and clusters that are interconnected by func￾tional organic linkers, resulting in a porous framework [55]. These materials are ad￾vantageous because of their elevated surface area, tailorable pores, high porosity,
distinct host–guest interactions, typical intrinsic light-emitting properties, and good
thermal stability. Hence, these properties justify the wide application of MOFs in gas
adsorption and storage, drug delivery systems, luminescence, chromatography, and
sensing [53, 55]. Interestingly, MOFs can also be combined with MNPs to produce mul￾tifunctional core–shell composites, maintaining the functions of both constituents in a
single material.
Wehner et al. [55] joined several functionalisation approaches by combining
iron oxide particles with luminescent MOFs. In this work [55], Fe3O4/SiO2 composites
were coated with the 2
∞ Ln2Cl6ð Þ bipy 3
  · 2bipy (bipy, 4,4′-bipyridine) MOF, allowing
the magnetic collection of these bifunctional particles from fluids and their concen￾tration for better luminescence detection. Owing to their defined porosity, lumines￾cent MOFs can be applied as sensors for small molecules, as demonstrated by the
Fe3O4=SiO2= 2
∞ ln2Cl6ð Þ bipy 3
  · 2bipy composite, which influences the luminescence
properties of chemical compounds through interactions such as quenching. This en￾ables the use of these materials in sensing applications, for example, detecting
water traces in organic solvents [55].
Another example of combining MOFs with magnetic particles was demonstrated
by Quin et al. [56], who prepared carboxyl-functionalised magnetic cores, homo￾geneously coated with the zirconium-based UiO-67 (UiO = University of Oslo) MOF
through liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE). These core–shell particles were applied as the sta￾tionary phase in high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) columns with dif￾ferent phenol derivatives, with acetonitrile/water as the mobile phase. MOFs are
attractive materials for preparative chromatographic separation because of the ab￾sence of dead volume, good solvent stability, and high loading capacity [56]. However,
the heterogeneous particle size and morphology of MOFs are limiting factors for ob￾taining quantitative kinetic chromatography data. This problem is solved by coating
surface-attached MOFs (SURMOFs) on well-defined magnetic particles, combining LPE
with a core–shell approach. SURMOFs are also advantageous because of their control￾lable thickness. In this case, the magnetic properties are important for the frequent
solid–liquid separation steps performed during the synthesis of the MOF shell by LPE.
The uptake kinetics are dominated by intraparticle diffusion, and the pore diffusiv￾ities of the phenol derivatives are approximately 1.3 × 10–13 m2
/s [56]. Another MOF,
MIL-100(Fe) (MIL = Materials of Institute Lavoisier), has been applied to coat the sur￾face of magnetic particles via LPE and tested for chromatographic applications (Fig￾ure 3.14) [57]. The rigid 3D structure of MIL-100(Fe) is advantageous because of its
66 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschkehigh stability in aqueous media, large pores (2.5–2.9 nm), low toxicity, and easy acces￾sibility of the iron metal ions [57].
3.7 Conclusions and outlook
This chapter offers a quick overview on the vast literature on the synthesis, function￾alisation, and applications of magnetic nanoparticles, with a focus on iron oxide￾based materials. In addition to their high magnetisation, iron oxide-based nanopar￾ticles are advantageous, owing to their low cost, and can be produced by a variety of
methods, such as co-precipitation, thermal decomposition, hydrothermal and solvo￾thermal synthesis, sol–gel synthesis, the polyol method, microemulsion, sonochemical
synthesis, microwave-assisted synthesis, and biosynthesis. These different synthesis
approaches enable the flexible production of nanocrystals with several different mor￾phologies, such as cubic particles, octahedral particles, nanowires, and nanorods. The
production of these magnetic nanomaterials is particularly important for their appli￾cations in the biomedical and technological fields, such as MRI, cancer treatment,
drug delivery, bioimaging, and magnetic separation, in addition to their applications
as energy materials and nanocatalysts. To achieve this objective, iron oxide nanoma￾terials must be additionally functionalised by coating with polymers, biomolecules,
silica, metals, luminescent materials, or metal–organic frameworks to increase their
chemical stability, combine multiple properties with intrinsic magnetism, and im￾prove their water dispersibility.
Despite the immense advances in the development of magnetic nanomaterials in
the past few years, several challenges remain to be overcome. It is difficult to achieve
absolute control over the shape and size distribution [13] using many of the existing
synthetic and functionalisation approaches, and additional toxicological research is re￾quired [13]. Concerning toxicological issues, supplementary effort is required to define
standard criteria to evaluate toxicity to improve the comparability between different
Structure of MIL-100(Fe)
rc
rp
Figure 3.14: Schematic of magnetic cores coated with a MIL-100(Fe) shell (reprinted from reference [57],
with permission from Elsevier).
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 67studies [13]. The same problem of developing standard criteria for improving the com￾parability between experiments is faced for evaluating the photocatalytic properties
[44] of iron oxide nanoparticles, which must be addressed. Additional current chal￾lenges lie in the optimisation of the targeting efficiency and long-term stability in
in vitro and in vivo studies [13], as well as the preservation of the high magnetisation
and nanoscale dimensions, with the application of thick isolating functionalising coat￾ing layers.
Among the future trends in the functionalisation of magnetic nanomaterials is the
further development of multifunctional layers, such as applying fluorophores and ra￾diotracers [13], or biomolecules for the application of magnetic nanoparticles in thera￾nostic nanomedicine. To tailor structure-related properties such as magnetism, particle
size, and morphology, additional information about the formation mechanism of these
materials is required, which therefore requires further application of in situ characteri￾sation techniques [39, 40] during their synthesis. Finally, the development of methods
for the large-scale production of (functionalised) iron oxide nanoparticles, in addition
to the further development of MOF coatings for magnetic materials, should also be the
focus of future investigations within this exciting research field.
References
[1] S. Bedanta, A. Barman, W. Kleemann, O. Petracic, T. Seki, Magnetic nanoparticles: A subject for both
fundamental research and applications. J. Nanomater. 2013, 952540/1–22, 2013.
[2] C. Yang, J. Wu, Hou Y. Fe3O4 nanostructures: Synthesis, growth mechanism, properties and
applications. Chem. Commun. 47, 5130–5141, 2011 and references therein.
[3] U. Schwertmann, R. M. Cornell, The Iron Oxides: Structure, Properties, Reactions, Occurrences and
Uses. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH press, 2003 and references therein.
[4] M. R. Ghazanfari, M. Kashefi, M. R. Jaafari, Optimizing and modelling of effective parameters on the
structural and magnetic properties of Fe3O4 nanoparticles synthesized by coprecipitation technique
using response surface methodology. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 409, 134–142, 2016.
[5] S. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks, A. Moser, Monodisperse FePt nanoparticles and
ferromagnetic FePt nanocrystal superlattices. Science 287, 1989–1992, 2002.
[6] A. Moser, K. Takano, D. T. Margulies, M. Albrecht, Y. Sonobe, Y. Ikeda, S. Sun, E. E. Fullerton,
Magnetic recording: Advancing into the future. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 35, R157–R167, 2002.
[7] A. F. Thünemann, D. Schütt, L. Kaufner, U. Pison, H. Möhwald, Maghemite nanoparticles protectively
coated with poly(ethylene imine) and poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(glutamic acid). Langmuir 22,
2351–2357, 2006.
[8] Y. Lien, T. Wu, The application of thermosensitive magnetic nanoparticles in drug delivery. Adv.
Mater. Res. 47–50, 528–531, 2008.
[9] L. A. Harris, J. D. Goff, A. Y. Carmichael, J. S. Riffle, J. J. Harburn, T. G. St. Pierre, M. Saunders,
Magnetite nanoparticle dispersions stabilized with triblock copolymers. Chem. Mater. 15, 1367–1377,
2003.
[10] N. T. K. Thanh, Magnetic Nanoparticles: From Fabrication to Clinical Applications. Boca Raton, USA:
CRC Press, 2012.
68 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke[11] T. M. Buzug, J. Borgert, T. Knopp, S. Biederer, T. F. Sattel, M. Erbe, K. Lüdtke-Buzug, Magnetic
Nanoparticles: Particle Science, Imaging Technology, and Clinical Applications. Singapore, Republic
of Singapore: World Scientific, 2010.
[12] S. P. Gubin, Magnetic Nanoparticles. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Press, 2009.
[13] W. Wu, Z. Wu, T. Yu, C. Jiang, W. S. Kim, Recent progress on magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles:
Synthesis, surface functional strategies and biomedical applications. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 16,
023501/1–43, 2015, and references therein.
[14] W. H. Bragg, W. L. Bragg, X-Rays and Crystal Structures, 3rd edition. USA: G. Bell and Sons, 1918.
[15] L. Pauling, S. B. Hendricks, The structure of hematite. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 47, 781–790, 1925.
[16] E. Solano, C. Frontera, T. Puig, X. Obradors, S. Ricart, J. Ros, Neutron and X-ray diffraction study of
ferrite nanocrystals obtained by microwave-assisted growth. A structural comparison with the
thermal synthetic route. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 47, 414–420, 2014.
[17] W. H. Bragg, The structure of magnetite and the spinels. Nature 95, 561, 1915.
[18] N. Shrivastava, L. U. Khan, Z. U. Khan, J. M. Vargas, O. Moscoso-Londoño, C. Ospina, H. F. Brito,
Y. Javed, M. C. F. C. Felinto, A. S. Menezes, M. Knobelef, S. K. Sharma, Building block magneto￾luminescent nanomaterials of iron-oxide/ZnS@LaF3: Ce3+,Gd3+,Tb3+with green emission. J. Mater.
Chem. C 5, 2282–2290, 2017.
[19] D. Ling, N. Lee, T. Hyeon, Chemical synthesis and assembly of uniformly sized iron oxide
nanoparticles for medical applications. Acc. Chem. Res. 48, 1276–1285, 2015 and references therein.
[20] H. C. Roth, S. P. Schwaminger, M. Schindler, F. E. Wagner, S. Berensmeier, Influencing factors in the
co-precipitation process of superparamagnetic iron oxide nano particles: A model based study.
J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 377, 81–89, 2015.
[21] U. Khan, N. Adeela, M. Irfan, H. Ali, X. F. Han, Temperature mediated morphological and magnetic
phase transitions of iron/iron oxide core/shell nanostructures. J. Alloys Compd. 696, 362–368, 2017.
[22] M. Su, C. Hec, K. Shih, Facile synthesis of morphology and size-controlled α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 nano￾and microstructures by hydrothermal/solvothermal process: The roles of reaction medium and urea
dose. Ceram. Int. 42, 14793–14804, 2016 and references therein.
[23] Y. Li, R. Jiang, T. Liu, H. Lv, L. Zhou, X. Zhang, One-pot synthesis of grass-like Fe3O4 nanostructures
by a novel microemulsion-assisted solvothermal method. Ceram. Int. 40, 1059–1063, 2014.
[24] N. Jatupaiboon, Y. Wang, H. Wu, X. Song, Y. Song, J. Zhang, X. Ma, M. Tan, A facile microemulsion
template route for producing hollow silica nanospheres as imaging agents and drug nanocarriers.
J. Mater. Chem. B 3, 3130–3133, 2015.
[25] B. N. Rao, P. R. Kumar, O. Padmaraj, M. Venkateswarlu, N. Satyanarayana, Rapid microwave assisted
hydrothermal synthesis of porous α-Fe2O3 nanostructures as stable and high capacity negative
electrode for lithium and sodium ion batteries. RSC Adv. 5, 34761–34768, 2015.
[26] L. Wang, H. Ji, S. Wang, L. Kong, X. Jiang, G. Yang, Preparation of Fe3O4 with high specific surface
area and improved capacitance as a supercapacitor. Nanoscale 5, 3793–3799, 2013.
[27] S. Bagheri, N. M. Julkapli, Modified iron oxide nanomaterials: Functionalization and application.
J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 416, 117–133, 2016 and references therein.
[28] I. Kolinko, A. Lohße, S. Borg, O. Raschdorf, C. Jogler, Q. Tu, M. Pósfai, E. Tompa, J. M. Plitzko,
A. Brachmann, G. Wanner, R. Müller, Y. Zhang, D. Schüler, Biosynthesis of magnetic nanostructures
in a foreign organism by transfer of bacterial magnetosome gene clusters. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9,
193–197, 2014.
[29] Z. C. Xu, C. M. Shen, Y. L. Hou, H. J. Gao, S. S. Sun, Oleylamine as both reducing agent and stabilizer
in a facile synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles. Chem. Mater. 21, 1778–1780, 2009.
[30] J. Park, K. J. An, Y. S. Hwang, J. G. Park, H. J. Noh, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Park, N. M. Hwang, T. Hyeon, Ultra￾large-scale syntheses of monodisperse nanocrystals. Nat. Mater. 3, 891–895, 2004.
[31] H. P. Qi, Q. W. Chen, M. S. Wang, M. H. Wen, J. Xiong, Study of self-assembly of octahedral
magnetite under an external magnetic field. J. Phys. Chem. C 113, 17301–17305, 2009.
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 69[32] M. V. Kovalenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, R. T. Lechner, G. Hesser, F. Schaffler, W. Heiss, Fatty acid salts as
stabilizers in size- and shape-controlled nanocrystal synthesis: The case of inverse spinel iron oxide.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129, 6352–6353, 2007.
[33] F. Liu, P. J. Cao, H. R. Zhang, J. F. Tian, C. W. Xiao, C. M. Shen, J. Q. Li, H. J. Gao, Novel nanopyramid
arrays of magnetite. Adv. Mater. 17, 1893–1897, 2005.
[34] S. Mathur, S. Barth, U. Werner, F. Hernandez-Ramirez, A. Romano-Rodriguez, Chemical vapor
growth of one-dimensional magnetite nanostructures. Adv. Mater. 20, 1550–1554, 2008.
[35] C. J. Jia, L. D. Sun, F. Luo, X. D. Han, L. J. Heyderman, Z. G. Yan, C. H. Yan, K. Zheng, Z. Zhang,
M. Takano, N. Hayashi, M. Eltschka, M. Klaui, U. Rudiger, T. Kasama, L. Cervera-Gontard, R. E. Dunin￾Borkowski, G. Tzvetkov, J. Raabe, Large-scale synthesis of single-crystalline iron oxide magnetic
nanorings. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 16968–16977, 2008.
[36] D. Kim, N. Lee, M. Park, B. H. Kim, K. An, T. Hyeon, Synthesis of uniform ferrimagnetic magnetite
nanocubes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 454–455, 2009.
[37] Y. S. Dedkov, U. Rudiger, G. Guntherodt, Evidence for the half-metallic ferromagnetic state of Fe3O4
by spinresolved photoelectron spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Mater. 65, 064417/1–5, 2002.
[38] Z. Zhou, X. Zhu, D. Wu, Q. Chen, D. Huang, C. Sun, J. Xin, K. Ni, J. Gao, Anisotropic shaped iron oxide
nanostructures: Controlled synthesis and proton relaxation shortening effects. Chem. Mater. 27,
3505–3515, 2015.
[39] D. Gebauer, M. Kellermeier, J. D. Gale, L. Bergström, H. Cölfen, Pre-nucleation clusters as solute
precursors in crystallisation. Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 2348–2371, 2014 and references therein.
[40] S. Sun, D. Gebauer, H. Cölfen, Alignment of amorphous iron oxide clusters: A non-classical
mechanism for magnetite formation. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 56, 4042–4046, 2017.
[41] M. S. Moorthy, Y. Oh, S. Bharathiraja, P. Manivasagan, T. Rajarathinam, B. Jang, T. Tuong, V. Phan,
H. Jang, J. Oh, Synthesis of amine-polyglycidol functionalised Fe3O4@SiO2 nanocomposites for
magnetic hyperthermia, pH-responsive drug delivery, and bioimaging applications. RSC Adv. 6,
110444–110453, 2016.
[42] K. Hola, Z. Markova, G. Zoppellaro, J. Tucek, R. Zboril, Tailored functionalization of iron oxide
nanoparticles for MRI, drug delivery, magnetic separation and immobilization of biosubstances.
Biotechnol. Adv. 33, 1162–1176, 2015.
[43] M. Franzreb, M. Siemann-Herzberg, T. J. Hobley, O. R. T. Thomas, Protein purification using
magnetic adsorbent particles. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 70, 505–516, 2006.
[44] Y. L. Pang, S. Lim, H. C. Ong, W. T. Chong, Research progress on iron oxide-based magnetic
materials: Synthesis techniques and photocatalytic applications. Ceram. Int. 42, 9–34, 2016 and
references therein.
[45] G. P. Pires, I. F. Costa, H. F. Brito, W. M. Faustino, E. E. S. Teotonio. Luminescent and magnetic
materials with a high content of Eu3+-EDTA complexes. Dalton Trans., 45, 10960–10968, 2016.
[46] W. Stöber, A. Fink, E. J. Bohn, Controlled growth of monodisperse silica spheres in the micron size
range. Colloid Interface Sci. 26, 62–69, 1968.
[47] H. L. Ding, Y. X. Zhang, S. Wang, J. M. Xu, S. C. Xu, G. H. Li, Fe3O4@SiO2 core/shell nanoparticles: The
silica coating regulations with a single core for different core sizes and shell thicknesses. Chem.
Mater. 24, 4572–4580, 2012.
[48] L. U. Khan, D. Muraca, H. F. Brito, O. Moscoso-Londoño, M. C. F. C. Felinto, K. R. Pirota,
E. E. S. Teotonio, O. L. Malta, Optical and magnetic nanocomposites containing Fe3O4@SiO2 grafted
with Eu3+ and Tb3+ complexes. J. Alloys Compd. 686, 453–466, 2016.
[49] H. Terraschke, C. Wickleder, UV, blue, green, yellow, red and small: Newest developments on Eu2+-doped
nanophosphors. Chem. Rev. 115, 11352–11378, 2015.
[50] H. Terraschke, M. Suta, M. Adlung, S. Mammadova, N. Musayeva, R. Jabbarov, M. Nazarov,
C. Wickleder, SrAl2O4:Eu2+(,Dy3+) nanosized particles: Synthesis and interpretation of temperature￾dependent optical properties. J. Spectrosc. 2015, 541958/1–12, 2015.
70 Patric Lindenberg, Katia Nchimi, Huayna Terraschke[51] H. Terraschke, M. F. T. Meier, Y. Voss, H. Schönherr, C. Wickleder, Synthesis, functionalization and
toxicity of multicolour bifunctional nanophosphors. J. Cer. Proc. Res. 16, 59–63, 2015.
[52] W. M. Yen, H. Yamamoto, S. Shionoya, Phosphor Handbook. Boca Raton, USA: CRC Press Laser and
Optical Science and Technology, 2006.
[53] H. Terraschke, Less material, more energy: Synthesis of novel nanostructured phosphors. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Siegen, 2014.
[54] H. Terraschke, M. Franzreb, C. Wickleder, Magnetism and afterglow united: Synthesis of novel
double core–shell Eu2+-doped bifunctional nanoparticles. Chem. Eur. J. 26, 6833–6838, 2020.
[55] T. Wehner, K. Mandel, M. Schneider, G. Sextl, K. Müller-buschbaum, Superparamagnetic
luminescent MOF@Fe3O4/SiO2 composite particles for signal augmentation by magnetic harvesting
as potential water detectors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 5445–5452, 2016.
[56] W. Qin, M. E. Silvestre, G. Brenner-Weiss, Z. Wang, S. Schmitt, J. Huebner, M. Franzreb, Insights into
the separation performance of MOFs by high-performance liquid chromatography and in-depth
modelling. Sep. Purif. Technol. 156, 249–258, 2015.
[57] W. Qin, M. E. Silvestre, Y. Li, M. Franzreb, High performance liquid chromatography of substituted
aromatics with the metal-organic framework MIL-100(Fe): Mechanism analysis and model-based
prediction. J. Chromatogr. A 1432, 84–91, 2016.
Chapter 3 iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 71Niklas Ruser✶
, Huayna Terraschke
Chapter 4
Nanostructured bioceramics
Bioceramics are a very promising research field, especially for tissue engineering. Their
biocompatibility with the human body enables several applications, and their beneficial
properties can be additionally improved by scaling the micro- to the nanostructure.
This chapter presents an overview of different nanostructured bioceramics, how they
can be synthesised and functionalised, typical applications, and a brief outlook for this
research topic.
4.1 Introduction
Ceramics are crystalline inorganic solids generally manufactured at high temperature
and distinguished by their thermal and chemical stability. The exact properties of any
ceramic depend, besides on their composition, on its crystalline structure, which is
determined for instance by the synthesis method [1].
Historically, ceramics have been used for medical applications owing to their
chemical stability. Today, a more sophisticated understanding of ceramics has en￾abled bioceramics to be produced. Rather than being fully inert in the human body,
bioceramics undergo targeted, beneficial reactions with specific tissues to facilitate
medical procedures and/or healing [2].
Bioceramics can be sub-categorised as bioinert or bioactive, depending on their
biochemical and physical properties and whether they interact with the surrounding
tissue. In addition, each bioceramic can be classified as either “non-resorbable” or “re￾sorbable” according to its macrostructure (e.g. porous, dense, powdered, granulated,
or coated films) [2].
These materials are mostly prepared from, calcium phosphates, alumina, zir￾conia, silica-containing substances, and other compounds. Calcium-phosphate￾containing bioceramics perform well in medical applications because of their similarity
to inorganic bone scaffolds [2]. This chapter focuses on calcium-phosphate-, calcium￾carbonate-, and glass-based materials.
In the 1950s, the condition for tissue repair using inert ceramic compounds was
that ceramics should be biocompatible; they should not interact with living tissue but
should replace damaged ones. The intention was to use non-toxic and non-biodegradable
materials so that the organism was not harmed. Such materials are identified as foreign
substances by the immune system and elicit a simple encapsulation response. The
✶
Corresponding author: Niklas Ruser, E-Mail: nruser@ac.uni-kiel.de
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-004discovery of bioceramics in the 1980s, however, triggered a change in thinking about the
purpose and intention of ceramic bone treatments. The main reason for the application
of calcium-phosphate-based ceramics is that they exhibit mineral phases very similar to
those of bones and teeth. Therefore, these second-generation bioceramics do not replace
damaged tissue but repair it owing to their bioactivity and biodegradability. Recently,
research in this field has progressed towards third-generation bioceramics by adding
substances that can be continuously released from the applied materials into the host
tissue, enabling biologically active compounds such as hormones, growth factors, and
tailored drugs to react at a specific target zone to regenerate damaged tissue. Addition￾ally, hierarchical bone porosity has been mimicked to act as a cellular scaffold (Fig￾ure 4.1) [2].
In general, it is important to differentiate between nanobiomaterials and nanostruc￾tured biomaterials. Nanobiomaterials include single molecular compounds like proteins.
Other biomaterials consisting of multiple molecules forming clusters or crystallites
within the range 1–100 nm are the nanostructured ones. In particular, nanostructured
bioceramics exhibit many unique properties that make them better candidates than mi￾crostructured bioceramics for e.g. medical or dental applications [4].
For example, the surface area-to-volume ratio of nanoparticles results in new func￾tionalities, explained in detail in the following chapter [5].
Figure 4.1: Scheme showing evolution of bioceramics [3].
74 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschke4.2 Types of nanostructured bioceramics
4.2.1 Unique properties of medically relevant nanobioceramics
So far, various nanostructured bioceramics have been synthesised ranging from sim￾ple ceramics to porous materials [2], both of which exhibit several unique properties
that make them exceptionally well-suited for medical application in bone and tooth
repair. As defined by the European Commission, materials are “nanomaterials” when
at least one of their dimensions is smaller than 100 nm. Nanomaterials offer great ad￾vantages compared to their micromaterial counterparts, especially because nanoma￾terials exhibit a high surface area-to-volume ratio (Figure 4.2) and quantum effects.
Although quantum mechanical effects are not applicable to biomaterials, the surface
area-to-volume ratio strongly influences bioceramic properties [4]. For comparison,
the percentage of atoms on a microparticle surface accounts for approximately 1 % of
all the particle atoms. If the particle diameter is decreased to the nanometre range
(10 nm for example) the proportion of atoms on a microparticle surface increases to
approximately 10 %. For instance, a ⌀2 nm nanoparticle exhibits over half of its atoms
(~60 %) on the surface [4].
In summary, there are five main reasons for the improved applicability of nanobio￾ceramics compared to their microbioceramic counterparts. First, for the same particle
volume, nanobioceramics exhibit more surface atoms than microbioceramics, which
means that far more atoms are available for bonding to tissue surfaces such as bone
[5]. Second, because bioceramic nanoparticles are smaller than their bioceramic mi￾croparticle counterparts, the former can easier diffuse into organic tissue. Third,
nanobioceramics are highly sinterable, making them easier to process and handle
even though they self-aggregate. Fourth, the development of nanomaterials enables
chemical homogeneity and structural consistency, which is a great achievement for
producing biomaterials that imitate hard tissues [4]. Fifth, healthy bone matrix
Figure 4.2: Cutting particle without losing any mass: volume remains the same while surface area
increases. Cut surfaces (blue) are additionally created surface areas.
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 75consists of crystalline nanostructures. Therefore, using comparable structures in hard￾tissue repair eases the integration of bioceramics into healthy bone structures [5].
In addition, medically used nanobioceramics can exhibit high porosity [4] and
bone exchangeability [6]. Hard-tissue repair is then more effective when highly po￾rous bioceramics are used because porous surfaces exhibit exceptional adsorption
properties. This enables efficient protein adsorption, which is a key step in bone re￾pair [4]. Hence, the bone exchangeability of nanobioceramics enables implants to be
fully replaced by healthy, natural bone tissue. To accomplish this, the bioceramic
must be osteoconductive (i.e. support bone tissue growth in and around implant struc￾tures), bioresorbable (i.e. enable the host organism to break down implant structures)
[6], and biodegradable.
The following sections outline the most important nanobioceramics that best
meet these extensive criteria and are either already regularly applied or are currently
being developed for application to medical treatments.
4.2.2 Calcium-phosphate-based bioceramics
Calcium phosphates consist of a large family of different compounds varying by the
calcium-to-phosphorus ratio, additional anions (e.g. OH− and F−
), or hydration level
(Table 4.1).
By weight, natural bone consists of 69 % calcium phosphate crystals [8], providing
the tissue with the necessary stiffness and compression stability [2]. The other compo￾nents are collagen (20 wt.%), water (9 wt.%), and traces of various other organic com￾pounds, making calcium phosphate ideal for bone repair [8]. Calcium phosphate
bioceramics are also bioactive, non-toxic [2], lightweight, chemically stable, and resis￾tant to changes in the surrounding physiological fluid and microbes [8]. Calcium phos￾phate nanoparticles can exhibit various morphologies, as shown in Figure 4.3 [5].
Despite their numerous advantageous properties, conventional calcium-phosphate￾based microbioceramics still present some technical challenges. First, their relatively
small surface areas (2–5 m2
/g) result in poor sinterability and low mechanical strength
[8]. Additionally, clinical applications are limited because calcium-phosphate-based mi￾crobioceramics do not completely bond to intact hard tissue, resulting in poor durabil￾ity for long-term bone implants [10]. However, many of these issues can be overcome
by reducing bioceramic microparticles to nanoparticles [5] and increasing the specific
surface area to more than 100 m2
/g [4]. Commercially available calcium-phosphate￾based bioceramics for medical applications include hydroxyapatite (HAp), α/β-trical￾cium phosphate (α/β-TCP), bi-phasic calcium phosphate (BCP), monocalcium phosphate
monohydrate (MCPM), and non-sintered apatite (AP) [8].
76 Niklas Ruser, Huayna TerraschkeTable 4.1: Major calcium phosphate species exhibiting Ca/P ratios between 0.5 and 2.0 [4].
Compound Chemical formula Ca/P ionic
ratio
pH stability range in aqueous
solutions ( °C)
Representative size of synthesised
nanoparticles (nm)
Monocalcium phosphate
monohydrate (MCPM)
Ca Hð Þ 2PO4 2 · H2O . .–. d
Anhydrous monocalcium
phosphate (AMCP)
Ca Hð Þ 2PO4 2 . b d
Dicalcium phosphate dihydrate
(DCPD)
Ca HPO ð Þ4 · 2H2O . .–. d
Anhydrous dicalcium
phosphate (ADCP)
CaHPO4 . b –
Octacalcium phosphate (OCP) Ca8ð Þ HPO4 2ð Þ PO4 4 · 5H2O . .–. d
α/β-Tricalcium phosphate (α/β￾TCP) α =β−Ca3ð Þ PO4 2 . a ~– []/~
Amorphous calcium
phosphates (ACPs)
CaxHyð Þ PO4 z · nH2O
ðn = 3 − 4.5, 15 − 20 wt% H2OÞ
.–. ~– c 
Calcium-deficient
hydroxyapatite (CDHA)
Ca10 − x ð Þ HPO4 x ð Þ PO4 6 − x ð Þ OH 2 − x ð Þ 0 < x < 1 .–. .–. ~
Hydroxyapatite (HAp or HA) Ca10ð Þ PO4 6ð Þ OH 2 . .– – []
(continued)
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 77Table 4.1 (continued)
Compound Chemical formula Ca/P ionic
ratio
pH stability range in aqueous
solutions ( °C)
Representative size of synthesised
nanoparticles (nm)
Fluorapatite (FA) Ca10ð Þ PO4 6F2 . – – []
Oxyapatite (OA, OAp, or OXA) Ca10ð Þ PO4 6O . a d
Tetracalcium phosphate (TTCP) Ca4ð Þ PO4 2O . a d
a) Compounds that cannot be precipitated from aqueous solutions.
b) Only stable above 100 °C.
c) Always metastable.
d) No example was found in the available literature.
78 Niklas Ruser, Huayna TerraschkeHydroxyapatite (HAp)
Hydroxyapatite (HAp; Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2) [11] is a calcium-phosphate-based bioceramic
that forms plate-like or needle-shaped nanocrystals [8] and is the foundational min￾eral component of bone tissue, wherein HAp crystals can, for instance, range from
30–50 nm long × 15–30 nm wide × 2–10 nm thick [5] to 40–60 nm long × 20 nm wide ×
1.5–5 nm thick [8]. Tooth enamel is also primarily composed of HAp crystals, typically
100 µm long × 25 nm wide × 70 nm thick [11].
Despite their larger size, sintered HAp microparticles are decidedly well-suited
for application to both hard and soft tissues (e.g. bone, skin, and muscle) because HAp
microparticles exhibit slow biodegradability, osteoconductivity, osteoinductivity [12],
and moderate surface roughness (e.g. approximately 10 nm for crystals measuring ~
180 nm across). Nanocrystalline HAp further improves many of these properties. The
smaller crystals exhibit higher surface roughness (approximately 17 nm for crystals ~
67 nm across) making them more adept at molecular adsorption or surface adhesion (Fig￾ure 4.4) [4]. Additionally, nanocrystal bioactivity is higher than that of conventional
crystals [12].
Although neither micro- nor nanocrystalline HAp exhibits particularly high me￾chanical strength (which limits their overall application in load-bearing hard-tissue re￾pairs) [12], nanocrystalline HAp exhibits greater hardness and toughness [4]. The
improved adhesion provided by larger contact surfaces makes nanocrystalline HAp
more sinterable, thereby improving the ceramic density and (theoretically) fracture re￾sistance [8, 12]. Vertebrate bones are based on the biological apatite mineral phase. The
term “apatite” describes crystalline solids exhibiting the general formula M10(ZO4)6X2,
wherein ions in the crystal structure can be replaced by other ions (Table 4.2). Such
hybrid crystals more accurately reflect the composition of healthy bone tissue because
its hydroxyapatite (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2)-based structure exhibits many exchanged ions. In
bone apatite, the main ions replacing Ca2+ are Na+
, Mg2+, and K+ and replacing PO4
3−
and OH− are Cl−
, F−
, and mostly CO3
2− [11]. As the HAp-based bone crystal structure con￾tains a mixture of different ions, a more precise chemical formula for bone apatite
would be (Ca,Mg,Na)10(PO4,CO3)6(OH)2 [13].
Table 4.2: For apatite chemical formula M10(ZO4)6X2, components can be replaced by various ions [11].
Components Ions
M Ca2+, Na+, Mg2+, K+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Fe2+, Sr2+, Ba2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, H+, Al3+, etc.
ZO PO4
3 − , CO3
2 − , SiO4
4 − , SO4
2 − , VO4
3 − , AsO4
3 − , etc.
X OH− , CO3
2 − , F − , Cl − , Br − , O2 − , etc.
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 79Tricalcium phosphate (TCP)
Tricalcium phosphate (TCP) exists as α-, αʹ-, and β-TCP polymorphs. For medical appli￾cations, however, only the α- and β-isoforms are of interest because αʹ-TCP only exists
at excessively high temperatures (>~1,430 °C) below which the αʹ polymorph instantly
converts into the α one, which is stable at room temperature. The β polymorph is also
stable at room temperature. Although the β structural configuration is formed by
heating the α isoform to ~1,125 °C, such extreme temperatures are not required to re￾tain the β configuration. Due to their different structures, α- and β-TCP exhibit
Figure 4.3: Morphologies of calcium phosphate nanoparticles: (A) spherical; (B and C) rod-shaped; (D–F)
rod shaped/nanowires/tubes; (G–I) nanocrystalline; and (J–L) fibrous-, needle-, and plate-like structures
(republished from reference [5] with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry and conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
80 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschkedifferent physicochemical properties including density, solubility, and biodegradabil￾ity, making them well-suited for different medical applications (Table 4.3) [14].
The higher solubility and reactivity of α-TCP make it useful for producing bioceramic
calcium-phosphate-based cements. However, some α-TCP granules or blocks are commer￾cially available. Such α-TCP-based cements form solid HAp when exposed to a slightly
basic physiological pH (7.2–7.4) because HAp is the more chemically stable form of cal￾cium phosphate under these conditions. β-TCP, on the other hand, is well-suited for pro￾ducing mono- or biphasic bioactive dense and macroporous granules and blocks [14].
4.2.3 Calcium-carbonate-based bioceramics
Calcium carbonate can also be applied to bioceramics and is widely used in industry.
Recently, calcium carbonate has also been used in medical applications owing to its
biocompatibility, bioresorption, osteoconduction, low cost, safety, and natural abun￾dance. Additionally, calcium carbonate is a candidate for producing controlled-drug￾release systems because of its pH sensitivity, protracted biodegradation, and drug
Figure 4.4: Higher surface roughness increases generated surface area. Thus, rough surfaces provide
more space for molecules, ions, or atoms to bond than equivalent area of perfectly flat 2D surface. The
top panel depicts a rough surface providing space to hold, as a very simplified example, 12 blue dots,
while the bottom panel shows that the equivalent distance across a flat surface can only hold 9.
Table 4.3: Densities and solubilities of α- and β-TCP [14].
Compound Density (mg/cm
) Solubility (mg/L)
 °C  °C
α-TCP . . .
β-TCP . . .
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 81loading capability, which enables drugs to be loaded into calcium carbonate particles
(either during synthesis or through surface adsorption on fully formed crystals) and
then released slowly over an extended period. Alternatively, calcium carbonate may
be added to biomedical cements to improve their resorption rates and facilitate ce￾ment replacement by bone tissue [6].
Calcium carbonate exists as calcite, aragonite, and vaterite anhydrous crystalline
polymorphs, which can be directly synthesised under appropriate reaction conditions,
and polymorph stability descends in the sequence calcite > aragonite > vaterite [6]. Trigo￾nal crystalline calcite is the most stable form of calcium carbonate and is one of the most
common naturally occurring biomineral phases. Moreover, because of its biocompatibil￾ity, biodegradability, and encapsulation and controlled-drug-release capabilities, trigonal
crystalline calcite is, among the calcium carbonate polymorphs, widely used in pharma￾ceutical and biomedical applications [15].
Aragonite exhibits an orthorhombic crystal structure and biocompatibility like
that of calcite and is used due to its dissolution, integration, and replacement by bone
tissue. Previously, aragonite has been applied to anti-cancer drug carriers and bone
repair implants. For example, an aragonite-based macroporous drug carrier devel￾oped for application to osteomyelitis treatment exhibited faster resorption than a
common HAp/TCP bioceramic [6].
Hexagonal crystalline vaterite is an excellent candidate for drug-release applica￾tions. It exhibits favourably high porosity, a large surface area, and dissolution under
relatively mild conditions [6].
4.2.4 Glass-based bioceramics
Glass-based bioceramics or bioactive glasses (BGs) comprise a unique category of pre￾dominantly silica-based biomaterials [16]. Silica-based BG networks are frequently
modified by adding Na, Ca, and/or P bonded through non-bridging oxygen atoms to
the network [2].
The first silicate-based BG was designed in 1969 by Hench et al. [17] This glass, the
renowned 45S5 Bioglass® (SiO2, Na2O, CaO, and P2O5 = 45, 24.5, 24.5, and 6 wt.%, respec￾tively) provides a foundational formula for preparing many currently used BGs. Many
modern bioglasses have been synthesised using a modified 45S5 Bioglass® formula to
improve the ability of the bioglass to bond to bone tissue. Studies have identified that
substituting 5–15 wt.% B2O3 or 12.5 wt.% CaF2 for SiO2 and CaO, respectively, markedly
improves tissue bonding. However, BGs prepared using P2O5 contents considerably
above 6 wt.% do not bond to bone as well as BGs prepared using 3 wt.% Al2O3 [18].
Although these formulations are the most well-established and widely used, many
other formulations incorporate several elements such as fluorine, magnesium, stron￾tium, iron, silver, boron, potassium, and zinc [17]. Even though bioglasses are not like
82 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschkebone tissue, they perform well in biomedical applications because of their unique in￾direct interactions with bone [2].
In detail, upon contact with bodily fluids, bioglasses initiate the formation of a
hydroxycarbonate apatite (or carbonated hydroxyapatite) (HCAp) layer, which exhib￾its exceptionally high surface affinity for living bone tissue. Therefore, BGs that do
not exhibit a pronounced capability to bond to living bone tissue are the starting ma￾terials for forming the HCAp layer, and network modifiers in the amorphous silica
scaffold help form HCAp in physiological fluids [19]. The formation of biocompatible
HCAp layers requires several steps (Figure 4.5) as follows.
First, sodium (calcium [18] or potassium) cations docked within the silica scaffold
are rapidly exchanged for protons in bodily fluids. These protons covalently bond
with silica groups on the glass surface to form SiOH moieties. The proton pool deple￾tion in the surrounding fluid raises the pH. Second, the elevated OH− ion concentra￾tion causes the scaffold to be nucleophilically attacked and silica to dissolve as silicic
acid (Si(OH)4) and additional SiOH groups. Third, depleted in alkaline and alkaline￾earth ions, the SiOH groups condense to form Si–O–Si bonds, resulting in a 1–2 μm￾thick amorphous SiO2-rich layer [19]. Fourth, calcium and phosphate ions diffuse
from inside the glass scaffold and reach the interface between the silica-rich layer
and the calcium- and phosphate-rich bodily fluids to form an amorphous calcium
phosphate (ACP) layer. Fifth, the ACP layer crystallises, supported by the migration of
dissolved hydroxyl and carbonate (and to a lesser extent, fluoride [18] ions) in the sur￾rounding fluid to form a carbonated hydroxyapatite (HCAp) layer [18, 19].
Once formed, the HCAp layer strongly bonds with the bone mineral phase, secur￾ing the implant to the bone tissue [19]. The HCAp layer is then penetrated by newly
formed bone tissue while the implant is slowly resorbed [2]. Accepted by the sur￾rounding tissue, the developed HCAp crystals are incorporated into and strengthened
by collagen fibres [20]. This gradual replacement of implant structures with healthy
bone tissue enables tissue healing, without provoking an inflammatory response in
the surrounding tissues or initiating the formation of a fibrous capsule around the
implant and damaged tissue [2].
Figure 4.6 shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of HCAp formed on
the surface of a glass ceramic submerged in simulated body fluids (SBFs) for 24 h [21].
As their name suggests, SBFs enable the simulation of physiological fluids outside the
body (in vitro) so that BG reactivity to actual bodily fluids can be tested prior to intro￾ducing BGs into a living organism (in vivo) [20]. Typically, SBFs mimic both the com￾position and concentration of the inorganic portion of human plasma [20, 22] and
may be by prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of NaCl, KCl, K2HPO4∙3 H2O,
MgCl2∙6H2O, CaCl2, and Na2SO4 in distilled water and buffering them to pH 7.4 using
tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane and HCl [20].
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 83Figure 4.5: Step 1: Formation of SiOH groups; step 2: dissolution of Si(OH)4; step 3: condensation of
SiOH + SiOH; step 4: formation of ACP layer; step 5: crystallisation of HCAp layer.
84 Niklas Ruser, Huayna TerraschkePrevious studies have shown that for other nanostructured particles such as tita￾nia, alumina, and HAp, the high bioactivity, osteoconductivity, and bacterial toxicity
of BGs are likely to be enhanced by scaling micro- to nanoparticles [17], because the
building blocks of human tissue are nanostructures (e.g. in bones) and because cells
and surfaces interact in nanodimensions [17].
Changes into the nanodimension, the biomaterial surface-to-volume ratio (i.e. spe￾cific surface area), defect concentration, surface roughness, hydrophilicity, and wetta￾bility all influence cellular interactions. Wettability influences the ability of cells to
adhere to the biomaterial, which affects long-term functionality. A low defect concen￾tration and a high surface-to-volume ratio both increase nanoparticle surface energy
and bioreactivity. The higher specific surface area compared to microparticles accel￾erates ion release into the surrounding physiological fluids (solubility) and increases
protein adsorption, leading to higher bioactivity. Additionally, nanocrystal surface to￾pographical attributes such as roughness, shape, and size and the ordered or random
distribution of the attributes influence cellular behaviour more than the microcrystal
counterparts. Evidences of cellular reactions altered by different nanodimensional
topographies have been preciously experimentally shown [17].
Another major influencing factor is surface energy. This way, nanoparticles surfa￾ces can be additionally used to manipulate cellular responses to biomaterials. More￾over, the higher surface energy of nanocomposites stimulates protein adsorption,
which influences cellular adhesion, spreading, and proliferation, resulting in im￾proved interaction between the implant and the surrounding tissue. Material rough￾ness and surface energy are connected; in fact, the surface energy polar component
increases remarkably with surface roughness. Therefore, surface roughness plays
also a role in cellular adhesion and proliferation, and the degree of hydrophilicity is
also an important factor because it influences biomaterial wettability [17].
Figure 4.6: Formation of HCAp (HCA) on surface of bioactive glass incubated for 24 h in simulated body
fluids (SBFs) (republished from references [21, 23] with permission from Wiley, Inc. and conveyed
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 854.2.5 Porous materials
Porous materials, which are typically produced from glasses or phosphates [24], can
be broadly categorised depending on the average pore diameter. Micro-, meso-, and
macroporous materials exhibit pore diameters below 2 nm, ranging from 2 to 50 nm,
and above 50 nm, respectively [25].
Furthermore, the pores themselves can be sub-categorised as either ordered or
unordered depending on whether they form an organised interconnected pattern ad￾vantageous to the adsorption and desorption of specific molecules [24].
Ordered mesoporous materials require the use of templates and surfactants to
build a scaffold in which inorganic precursors gather and condense to form a mesopo￾rous structure. Subsequently removing the template generates highly complex and
ordered two- or three-dimensional networks of interconnected pores, which can gen￾erate a surface area of approximately 1,000 m2
/g and pore volumes of up to 1 cm3
/g
[2]. Mesoporous materials are of special interest because drugs used in drug-delivery
applications exhibit an average diameter of one nanometre (Figure 4.7); therefore,
they fit well inside pores which exhibit also a large surface area and a narrow diame￾ter distribution [24].
Although mesoporous structures have been shown to improve both in vitro bioac￾tivity and drug delivery capability, bone regeneration is mainly driven by cells. There￾fore, mesoporous materials exhibiting pore diameters in the range 2–50 nm are
unsuitable for bone cells, which require cavities exhibiting diameters in the micro￾metre range. For instance, because bone pores exhibit pore diameters in the range
1–3,500 µm, an implant is more appropriate when it exhibits similar macroporosity
because bone pores are necessary for physiological functions such as cellular adhe￾sion, penetration, growth, and proliferation leading to bone tissue growth in the im￾plant and subsequent vascularisation (or vasculo-genesis) [26], which is the formation
of new blood vessels [27]. Therefore, it is necessary to produce materials exhibiting
both mesoporosity to enable drug adsorption and desorption for treating bone pathol￾ogies and macroporous structures to sustain the oxygenation, nutrient supply, and
vascularisation of bone tissue. This hierarchical porosity has already been manufac￾tured in bioactive glasses. The obtained materials exhibited 3.7 nm-diameter meso￾structures, either 200–400- or 500–700 µm-diameter macrostructures, and a bioactive
response as the formation of an apatite layer when the material was immersed in
SBFs for 4 h [26].
In general, silica-based ordered mesoporous materials have attracted considerable
interest for biomedical applications because of their potential in tissue engineering and
drug-delivery systems. Such materials exhibit a silica network and a surface composed
of silanol groups. As the composition of such materials, especially their surface, is very
similar to that of bioglass, their interactions with the human body should be compara￾ble. Like bioglasses, silica-based mesoporous materials should develop a nanostructured
apatite layer on the material surface when it comes in contact with physiological fluids,
86 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschkeand the apatite layer should be comparable to biological apatite and support bonding
between implants and bone tissue [2].
The formation of such an apatite layer is also related to silanol groups (Si–OH),
which act as nucleation sites. In addition to silanol groups, porosity influences apatite
layer formation. The nucleation rate is affected by both pore size and connectivity; that
is, the larger and more accessible the pores, the higher the ion diffusion and (conse￾quently) the faster the apatite layer formation. Therefore, mesoporous silica is advanta￾geous because of its adjustable pore diameters and volumes, high surface area, high
silanol concentration, and possible bioactivity owing to these properties [22].
Silanol groups are formed because of the lack of bonding partners for Si–O− groups,
which are the result of SiO4
4− tetrahedrons bonded by shared oxygen atoms to fewer
than four surrounding tetrahedrons. Therefore, the concentration of these connectivity
defects determines the silanol group concentration. Owing to structurally disarrayed tet￾rahedral building blocks, the number of connectivity defects is very high. Therefore, this
parameter plays a major role in the material behaviour because the material hydrophilic￾ity increases with increasing silanol group concentration. Additionally, silanol moieties
can be functionalised with organic groups (e.g. Si–O–R) to enable interactions with
other compounds such as drugs. The number of connectivity-defect-induced silanol
groups is especially influenced by the surfactant removal. For example, heat treat￾ment (calcination) condenses silanol groups, which decreases the number of defects.
In contrast, surfactant solvent extraction does not affect the defect concentration
[24].
Figure 4.7: Molecular sizes of common medications that may be good candidates for drug delivery
(republished from reference [24] with permission from Wiley, Inc. and conveyed through Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc.).
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 87The initial practical tests of silica-based mesoporous material bioactivity indicated
that parameters such as pore size, structure, texture, and material composition all influ￾enced the apatite formation rate, as determined by studying the bioactivity of SBA-15,
MCM48, and MCM-41 (SBA = Santa Barbara Amorphous; MCM = Mobil Composition of
Matter) mesoporous silica materials, which exhibit unique pore diameters and volumes,
silanol concentrations, and surface areas (Table 4.4) in SBF solutions. These silicas were
dipped in SBFs to investigate apatite layer formation. An HCAp layer formed on the
MCM-48 surface after 60 d, SBA-15 required only half that time, and no apatite layer
formed on the MCM-41 surface (Figure 4.8) [22]. To determine the different biological be￾haviours of these silicas, their respective properties must be examined in more detail.
SBA-15, which exhibited the largest pore diameter, also exhibited the fastest HCAp forma￾tion compared to MCM-48 and MCM-41. SBA-15 also exhibited additional micropores (e.g.
porosity = 0.061 cm3
/g), which positively affected apatite layer formation. Therefore,
MCM-48 and MCM-41 should exhibit similar behaviours because they exhibit the same
pore diameter of 3.6 nm. However, the large difference in bioactivity after 60 d (especially
no bioactivity for MCM-41 in this time range) could be explained by their unequal silanol
concentrations. As previously mentioned, silanol moieties can act as nucleation sites;
therefore, the much higher MCM-48 silanol concentration compared to six times lower
concentration for MCM-41 explains their different bioactivities for the same pore size.
Furthermore, the MCM-41 pore volume is slightly lower than the MCM-48 one, which
probably negatively affects bioactivity [28]. Therefore, pore volume and reachability both
play a role in ion diffusion, which is higher for larger and well-connected pores and leads
to a higher nucleation rate. In addition, the lower MCM-41 bioactivity can be explained by
the two-dimensional hexagonal structure, whereas MCM-48 exhibits a three-dimensional
cubic scaffold and channel connections, thereby resulting in higher ion diffusion [22].
Introducing a porous structure to HAp theoretically overcomes some of the technical
difficulties of non-porous HAp; that is, relatively low bonding surface areas, high ma￾terial density [29], and slow replacement of implant structures with natural bone tis￾sue [12]. Thus, implants can act as templates that can be filled with new bone tissue.
Pore size influences bone regeneration by offering space for cells to attach and bone
tissue to grow into the implant. Another important factor is pore interconnectivity be￾cause more interconnected pores ensure cellular distribution and vasculo-genesis and
Table 4.4: Physical properties of SBA-15, MCM-48, and MCM-41 [22, 28].
Material Surface area (m
/g) Pore size
(nm)
Pore volume
(cm
/g)
Silanol concentration
(− mmol/m
)
SBA-  . . .
MCM-  . . .
MCM-  . . .
88 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschkeimprove bone in-growth. For good bone in-growth and vascularisation, pores must be
at least 100 µm in diameter. However, mechanical strength decreases with increasing
porosity [29].
Therefore, conventional porous HAp (which exhibits low pore interconnectivity
and non-uniform pore geometry) hinders bone tissue in-growth, whereas HAp with
highly interconnected pores enables osteoconduction into the centre of implants. For
complete tissue regeneration, pore size, density, interconnections, and shapes are cru￾cial factors [12].
4.3 Synthesis methods for nanostructured
bioceramics
Methods used to synthesise nanostructured bioceramics vary depending on the ceramic
composition, desired crystal morphology (e.g. needles, rods, spheres, plates, flowers,
bowknots, fibres, strap-like, or mesoporous structures (Figure 4.9)), technological
Figure 4.8: Influence of SBFs on SBA-15, MCM-48, and MCM-41 surfaces over two months. For each
compound, left and right images are SEM micrographs and corresponding EDS spectra, respectively
(republished from reference [22] with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry and conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 89Figure 4.9: Different morphologies of calcium-phosphate-based nanoparticles synthesised using (A, B)
sol–gel processing, (C) co-precipitation, (D) emulsion technique, (E) hydrothermal processing,
(F) ultrasonication, (G) mechanochemical method, (H–L) templating, (M) microwave processing,
(N) combined emulsion and hydrothermal synthesis, and (O) combined microwave and hydrothermal
synthesis (reprinted from reference [30] with permission from Elsevier).
90 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschkedifficulty, equipment requirements, reaction time and conditions, cost, and product
yield [30].
Bioceramic syntheses like that of calcium phosphates can be categorised as solid￾and wet-state methods. Solid-state reactions involve heating pure reactant powders to
high temperatures (usually >700 °C) for long periods of time, are expensive to conduct,
and the products they generate tend to be highly stoichiometric and exhibit well￾crystallised structures. Furthermore, because HAp particles sinter at high tempera￾tures, the product mostly consists of sintered bulk. Thus, the product must be crushed
into smaller particles (usually by ball milling) to obtain nanocrystals [11].
Wet-state methods are conducted in solvent solutions at relatively low tempera￾tures. Products obtained from wet-state reactions are frequently naturally nanopar￾ticles but exhibit poor stoichiometry and crystallinity [11]. The different methods are
distinguished by the required effort, sample treatment, reaction times, conditions,
yield, etc. The sol–gel process uses simple devices to provide high-purity homogenous
crystals but requires a considerable amount of time and high sintering tempera￾tures. In contrast, co-precipitation is low-cost and although yields crystals exhibiting
bone-like structures, the crystals only exhibit poor crystallinity. Therefore, method
advantages and disadvantages should be considered before preparing the required
product. Despite ultrasonication usually produces low yields and requires special
devices, it provides low particle aggregation, narrow diameter distribution, and fast
crystallisation at low temperatures. Even when reaction conditions are easily achiev￾able using simple devices and the product exhibits excellent properties, product yield
determines whether the synthesis method is worthwhile [30].
To emphasise the complexity of selecting the most appropriate synthesis method
to obtain the desired product, Table 4.5 compares and contrasts the characteristics of
various synthesis methods available for producing calcium phosphate-based nano￾bioceramics; namely, sol-gel processing, co-precipitation, emulsion technique, hy￾drothermal processing, mechanochemical method, ultrasonication, templating,
microwave processing, combined emulsion–hydrothermal synthesis, and com￾bined microwave–hydrothermal synthesis [30].
Based on the advantages and disadvantages of the available synthesis methods, co￾precipitation and sol–gel processing were considered particularly well-suited for pro￾ducing medical-grade calcium-phosphate-based nanocrystals and will be explained in
detail.
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 91Table 4.5: Synthesis methods, advantages, disadvantages, and morphologies of obtained calcium￾phosphate-based nanoparticles (reprinted from reference [30] with permission from Elsevier).
Synthesis
method
Nanocrystal morphology Advantages Disadvantages
Sol-gel
processing
– Aggregated – High purity
– Homogenous
components
– Simple devices
required
– High sintering
temperatures
– Time consuming
Co-precipitation – Needle-like
– Spherical
– Rod-like
– Crystals exhibiting
bone-like structures
and components
– Low cost
– Particle aggregation
can be controlled
using
biomacromolecules
– Low crystallinity
– Particles aggregate
easily
Emulsion
technique
– Needle-like
– Spherical
– Nanorods
– Nanoplates
– Low aggregation
– Narrow diameter
distribution
– Particle size and
morphology can be
easily adjusted
– High sintering
temperatures
– Time consuming
– Complex reaction
system
Hydrothermal
processing
– Needle-like
– Spherical
– Fibrous
– Nanorods
– High crystallinity
– High purity
– Good dispersibility
– Good control of
particle size and
morphology
– Special devices are
required
– Time consuming
– Very low yield
Mechanochemical
method
– Fibrous
– Spherical
– Simplicity
– Low cost
– No high-temperature
sintering required
– Particle aggregation
– Special devices are
required
Ultrasonication – Needle-like
– Spherical
– Low particle
aggregation
– Narrow diameter
distribution
– Rapid crystallisation
– Low temperatures
– Special devices are
required
– Low yield
92 Niklas Ruser, Huayna TerraschkeCo-precipitation
This wet-state method is cost-effective [30], easy to perform, and requires mild reaction
conditions. Typically, the co-precipitation synthesis of calcium-phosphate-based nanobio￾ceramics (like HAp) begins with a mixture of two simple aqueous solutions, one contain￾ing calcium ions; the other, ortho-phosphate ions. Either each solution has a pH > 7 or
the pH was increased for the mixture to produce a supersaturated HAp solution and co￾precipitate HAp nanoparticles using calcium hydroxide and phosphoric acid (eq. (4.1)) or
calcium nitrate, diammonium hydrogen phosphate, and ammonium hydroxide (eq.
(4.2)), as follows [11]:
10Ca OH ð Þ2 + 6H3PO4 ! Ca10ð Þ PO4 6ð Þ OH 2 # + 18 H2O (4:1)
Table 4.5 (continued)
Synthesis
method
Nanocrystal morphology Advantages Disadvantages
Templating – Nanorods
– Nanoplates
– Mesoporous and
fibrous
nanostructures
– Flower and layered
structures
– Good control of
particle morphology,
size, structure,
tropism, and array
– Requires templating
agents
– High sintering
temperatures
required
– Time consuming
– Low yield
Microwave
processing
– Bowknot
– Rod
– Needle-like
– Flower structures
– High crystallinity
– Narrow diameter
distribution
– Good control of
particle size and
morphology
– Rapid synthesis
– Special devices are
required
– No large-scale
synthesis
Emulsion–
hydrothermal
combination
– Spherical
– Rod
– Fibrous
– Strap-like structures
– Low particle
aggregation
– Narrow diameter
distribution
– Good control of
particle size and
shape
– Low temperatures
– Special devices are
required
– Time consuming
– Complex reaction
– Very low yield
Microwave–
hydrothermal
combination
– Needle-like
– Spherical
– High crystallinity
– Rapid synthesis
– Low temperatures
– Special devices are
required
– Very low yield
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 9310Ca NO ð Þ3 2 + 6 NH ð Þ4 2HPO4 + 8NH4OH ! Ca10ð Þ PO4 6ð Þ OH 2 # + 20NH4NO3 + 6H2O
(4:2)
Although this method is highly efficient, it is not without disadvantages. HAp crystals
obtained by co-precipitation are prone to aggregation, which can be counteracted by
adding polymers and surfactants as dispersants to the reaction mixture. However,
these organic additives then become integrated into the compound structure. Apply￾ing high sintering temperature improves crystallinity and removes remaining addi￾tives. [30].
Moreover, the influences of synthesis conditions such as temperature, reaction
time, calcium ion concentration, calcination, and the reactants employed during co￾precipitation have been extensively discussed in the literature [4]. Special attention
has been dedicated to study the parameters affecting apatite nanoparticle morphol￾ogy, which depend on reactant concentration, ionic strength, temperature and solu￾tion pH [11]. Strictly controlling synthesis parameters is important for achieving the
desired particle size, which reportedly increases linearly with increasing reaction
Figure 4.10: SEM images of calcium-phosphate-based nanoparticles co-precipitated at initial pH values
(a–c) 10 and (d–f) 6 and at (a, d) 25 °C, (b, e) 50 °C, and (c, f) 80 °C (reprinted from reference [31]).
94 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschketemperature, and for guaranteeing high dispersibility by applying an appropriate sol￾vent, dispersant, and product drying method [4].
Figure 4.10 shows the morphology of calcium phosphate particles co-precipitated at
different pHs and temperatures. For example, the morphology of HAp particles co￾precipitated under alkaline conditions changed from spherical (17 nm; Figure 4.10a) to
rod-shaped (154 × 13 nm; Figure 4.10b) to elongated rod-shaped (585 × 43 nm; Figure 4.10c)
with increasing reaction temperature. Under initially acidic conditions, OCP and
DCPD microparticles co-precipitated exhibiting a blade-shaped morphology at
lower temperatures (Figure 4.10d and e, respectively), whereas HAp particles co￾precipitated at a higher temperature and exhibited an elongated fibre morphology
(3,550 × 48 nm; Figure 4.10f) [31].
Sol-gel processing
A gel is a compound exhibiting low mechanical strength and is composed of at least
an extended solid network filled with either a liquid or a gaseous phase. The network
filler determines the type of gel. For example, hydrogels contain water as a liquid
phase, and alcogels and xerogels are filled with an alcohol and a gaseous phase, re￾spectively [32].
Colloidal solutions are sols wherein particles are dispersed in liquids so that par￾ticle interactions are reduced. However, small particles aggregate into larger ones
and decrease the particle surface area-to-volume ratio. Therefore, to prevent particle
aggregation and subsequent precipitation, colloidal solutions must be stabilised by
changing particle surface charges, which can be adjusted by increasing or decreasing
pH. Hence, sols are gel precursors. In particle-charge-stabilised sols, changing the pH
in the opposite direction can collapse the sol, and particle agglomeration (e.g. conden￾sation between particles and hydrogen bonds) forms an irregular gel network [32].
Calcium and phosphorus alkoxides can be used to synthesise calcium phosphates.
The solid product obtained using sol–gel synthesis then contains ACP intermediates
and unreacted precursors and is subsequently sintered at 400–500 °C, which is suffi￾cient to produce well-crystallised HAp because HAp powder is usually sintered in the
range 800–1,000 °C. As the reaction produces a wide-network gel that is subsequently
sintered, the obtained product is polycrystalline. To produce nanoparticles, the raw
product must be often ground or milled [11].
4.4 Functionalisation of bioceramics
In general, one important objective of functionalising bioceramics is to improve
their biocompatibility and bioactivity. In this context, porous materials offer unique
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 95functionalisation opportunities due to their high inner surface areas. For this rea￾son, the functionalisation of mesoporous silica is discussed in this section in details.
For instance, the bioactivity of the mesoporous silica MCM-41 is reported to be
improved by either doping the scaffold with phosphorous or functionalising it with
bioglass. This way, phosphorus-containing MCM-41 exhibits an ordered mesoporous
scaffold in which Si–O–P bonds are in the outer particle parts rather than at the inner
core. Hence, MCM-41 textural and mesostructural properties are preserved even at
low phosphorus contents of approximately 1%. When exposed to simulated body flu￾ids, MCM-41 develops an apatite-like layer after two weeks. Using bioglass (SiO2–CaO–
P2O5) instead of phosphorous, the in vitro bioactive response of the biphasic mixture
is that an apatite layer forms after only few hours and finishes forming after one day.
The bioglass acts as a nucleation site to accelerate apatite layer formation and pre￾serve both textural and mesostructural properties [22].
In addition, bioceramic surfaces are suitable for not only adsorbing advantageous
cells and proteins but also providing a bacterial habitat. Surfaces that prevent ran￾dom protein adsorption and the formation of bacteria-loaded biofilms are called
“anti-fouling surfaces”. Such surfaces can prevent implant infections, which would
hinder healing. Anti-fouling surfaces can be produced by attaching zwitterionic poly￾mers to surfaces [2]. As zwitterionic polymer moieties are charged while the overall
polymer is electrically neutral, a hydration layer is formed through electrostatic inter￾actions and hydrogen bonding and strongly repels proteins that approach the surface
[32]. To achieve this anti-fouling property, mesoporous glasses could be modified with
carboxyl and amino groups. Figure 4.11 shows one example in which bacteria colon￾ised the unmodified glass surface (SBA-15), and even more bacteria colonised the car￾boxyl-modified glass (SBA15CES). Amino-group modification (SBA15NH2), on the other
hand, slightly decreased bacterial adhesion, and a mixture of carboxyl and amino
groups (SBA15APTES/CES) prevented nearly all bacterial colonisation (Figure 4.12) [2].
Mesoporous silica surfaces can be additionally functionalised to control drug￾release rates. For example, silanol groups can replace H atoms with organic radical
groups (R) to functionalise silica scaffolds and can be further modified if R contains
reactive groups to generate a large family of hybrid materials. In silanol functionalisa￾tion, the silanol group and R-containing precursor condense to form a new functional
group according to the following reaction [24]:
Si−OH+ X3Si−R−Y ! Si−O−SiX3−n−R−Y + nHX. (4:3)
The chemical species usually used in this reaction are X = Cl, OMe, OEt; R = alkyl
chain; and Y = OH, SH, NH2, SO3H, Cl, F, CH3, Ph, etc. [24] This process can be applied
post-synthetic to produce highly functionalised pore walls. After porous silica is syn￾thesised, the functionalising precursor is added and reacts with pore wall silanol
groups. Silica scaffolds can also be functionalised using a one-pot method in which a
silica scaffold precursor and silicon alkoxy functional groups react simultaneously,
wherein the alkoxy groups are hydrolysed and condensed with the silica precursor.
96 Niklas Ruser, Huayna TerraschkeFigure 4.11: SEM images of mesoporous silica surfaces (SBA-15) exhibiting different functional-group￾dependent anti-fouling properties. Rod-shaped bodies surrounded by fibres are E. coli bacteria attached
to surfaces (republished from reference [2] with permission from Wiley, Inc. and conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
Figure 4.12: Concentrations of adsorbed proteins and corresponding colony-forming units of bacteria
attached to different functionalised surfaces (republished from reference [2] with permission from Wiley,
Inc. and conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 97After the reaction, the functional groups are located outside and inside the walls, result￾ing in less functionalisation than post-synthetic functionalisation [24]. Consequently, the
mesoporous structural order decreased with increasing organo-silica precursor content
in one-pot synthesis. Therefore, it is important to notice that the organic functional
group content must be ≤ 40 mol% to preserve the mesoporous structural order [26].
An additional practical example of how functionalised silica scaffolds influence
drug delivery rates is shown by aminopropyl-moiety-functionalised MCM-41 scaffolds
[24]. When the scaffolds were loaded with ibuprofen, the uncontrolled drug-release rate
decreased by approximately five times compared to the drug-release rate of unmodified
MCM-41 scaffolds because the interaction between the scaffold amino and ibuprofen
acid groups decreased drug mobility. Hence, the scaffold functionalised with more polar
groups exhibited higher ibuprofen adsorption than the scaffold exhibiting non-polar
groups. In contrast, ibuprofen exhibits very high mobility in unmodified materials.
Therefore, functional groups can be chosen to control delivery rates for specific drugs
[24]. Moreover, non-polar moiety functionalisation can not only improve scaffold–drug
interactions but also decrease wettability, which hinders water molecules from pene￾trating pores and reduces drug release [26].
On the other hand, the use of calcium phosphates in load-bearing applications is
limited because mechanical properties of calcium phosphate deteriorate with increas￾ing porosity [29]. However, by functionalising this calcium phosphate with zirconia
(ZrO2), the bending and compressive strength, fracture toughness, and elasticity mod￾ulus can be improved. Zirconia-toughened via coating HAp particles exhibits mechan￾ical strength equal or superior to that of human compact bone [33]. In vitro and
in vivo tests both showed that although these compounds are biocompatible, dissolu￾tion is slower than conventional HAp in SBFs [29].
Similar to the functionalisation of silica surfaces to obtain antibacterial properties
[2], HAp can be modified to acquire these properties and can be implemented by add￾ing zinc oxide (ZnO) to the HAp scaffold. Here, zinc is responsible for the antibacterial
properties and is also important for controlling cell proliferation. In addition, zinc
may be relevant for accelerating bone repair, thereby improving the scaffold in differ￾ent ways. Such a scaffold can be obtained by soaking porous HAp in a solution con￾taining dispersed ZnO particles, drying the compounds, and then slowly heating the
material to the sintering temperature. Reportedly, the obtained material contains
zinc-substituted HAp in which the substitution yields a non-stoichiometric product ac￾cording to the formula CaxZnxCa5ð Þ PO4 3ð Þ OH and exhibits good biocompatibility and
solubility in bodily fluids, while preserving three-dimensional porosity [34].
98 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschke4.5 Applications of bioceramics
Current research is trending away from bioinert bioceramics towards bioactive ones.
As bioinert bioceramics do not bond directly to bone or stimulate bone growth, many
implants produced using these materials persist for only approximately 15 years.
Using bioactive materials can extend implant lifetimes and enable implants to be bet￾ter accepted by the human body, while interacting with the organism [30] and open￾ing the doors to various applications.
One of the most intuitive bioceramic applications is bone tissue engineering.
These materials can replace damaged bone to temporarily preserve mechanical stabil￾ity while new bone tissue is being formed. For such applications, these materials must
fulfil several requirements to be appropriate for implant production. For example, for
materials to be used as a template for new bone tissue growth, they must exhibit me￾chanical properties comparable to those of the replaced tissue, and the materials
must be resorbed by the host tissue at a similar rate as the new bone is forming while
supporting bonding with the host bone, not causing scar tissue, and being biocompati￾ble. Finally, they must be processable into any shape to match bone defects, promote
cellular adhesion and activity, and match international standard clinical application
requirements [2].
In addition to bioceramics, metal implants produced using stainless steel and tita￾nium and its alloys are usually used to replace damaged or lost bone. Due to their in￾ertness, corrosion resistance, load-bearing mechanical properties, and biomaterial
compatibility, titanium-based compounds have been extensively applied to bone re￾placements, which opens the door to combining titanium-based alloys and bioceramics
such as HAp-coated titanium implants. Biocompatible and bioactive coatings (com￾monly applied using plasma or arc plasma spraying) improve metal implants. For ex￾ample, biocompatible and bioactive coatings protect implants from corrosion and
contact with bodily fluids and support surface cellular adhesion, prosthetic fixation,
and damaged tissue healing. However, because such coatings are brittle, the coating
thickness cannot be arbitrary and is limited to < 70 µm [35].
In tissue engineering, macroporous HAp foams synthesised using sol–gel processing
reportedly have been applied to bone-growth scaffolds exhibiting porosities of 10–15 nm
and 1–400 µm, which is very similar to the hierarchical porosity of meso- and macropores
in natural bone tissue. Dip-coating these foams with biopolymers such as glutaraldehyde￾cross-linked gelatine and polycaprolactone improved the foam mechanical properties
(e.g. flexibility and resistance) through water contact and foam swelling while retaining
the original foam porosity.
Notably, in bioceramic medical applications, heavy metal ions can be captured by
macroporous HAp foams, which are suitable for treating ingestion-induced heavy￾metal intoxication through intestinal tract absorption. Heavy metals are absorbed by
ionically substituting Ca2+ ions in the HAp scaffold, thereby trapping heavy metal ions
such as Ba2+, Sr2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, Zn2+, and Cu2+ within the foam. Under very acidic
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 99conditions, such as those in the stomach (pH 1.2), the HAp must be coated with biopol￾ymers because of its high solubility under these conditions. HAp modified like this
scaffolds rapidly and effectively captured heavy metal ions and did not release them
under basic conditions. Metal ion capture depends on the biopolymer hydrophilicity. In
in vitro tests, captured Pb2+, Cd2+, and Cu2+ concentrations increased to 405, 316, and
378 µmol/g, respectively, suggesting that these low-cost, easily handled bioceramic mate￾rials could also be used to purify heavy-metal-contaminated water [2].
Bioceramics have also been prepared by combining ferromagnetic bioactive glass
with a magnetic glass ceramic for application to hyperthermia-induced cancer treatment
[17]. In an external alternating magnetic field, such materials absorb magnetic energy
and release it as heat. The required temperature range is 43–47 °C, at which cancer cells
are almost irreversibly and selectively destroyed. Moreover, such materials could re￾place cancerous bone tissue and prevent any remaining cancerous cells from metastasis￾ing. Additionally, bioceramics can be loaded with drugs to further improve cancer
treatment. Hence, this effective localised treatment is advantageous compared to cancer
treatment with chemotherapy, which is usually accompanied by low tolerance levels,
toxicity, and low efficacy [2].
One important drawback of this approach is that, at hyperthermia temperatures,
not only cancerous tissue can be targeted and therefore also overheating of the sur￾rounding healthy tissue may occur. Although hyperthermia is not an ideal stand-alone
cancer treatment, it has shown high efficiency in combination with conventional radio￾therapy and chemotherapy. In an experiment to treat murine mammary breast carci￾noma, a lithium-ferrite-containing haematite (Fe2O3) matrix embedded in glassy SiO2–
P2O5 was implanted, and the implant reduced tumour re-growth by ~ 50 % [2].
Because bioceramics can be loaded with pharmaceutical compounds, they can be
used to release drugs inside the human body. Potential materials for application to
drug-delivery systems include calcium carbonate [6], mesoporous silica [26], and cal￾cium phosphate wherein drugs can be directly incorporated into particles, adsorbed
on particle surfaces, or both. Particle surface area plays a major role in drug adsorp￾tion, which favours porous materials exhibiting very high surface areas per gram
[36]. The slow degradation of some bioceramics, on the other hand, is beneficial for
continuously releasing drugs over certain extended periods [6].
A common problem in systemically treating diseases or infections is the frequent
requirement of high drug doses to ensure that the necessary dose reaches the target.
As such treatments can cause harmful side effects owing to the overdose risk, drugs
must be selectively locally released [6, 36]. Such drugs can support, for instance, osteo￾genic healing, prevent infections with the help of antibiotics, or directly treat tissue￾impairing diseases. Hence, low bone tissue blood flow makes localised treatment
more advantageous than systemic treatment because effective drug concentrations
cannot otherwise be reached. Additionally, fewer drugs are required at lower concen￾trations to ensure effective drug doses reach the target area [36].
100 Niklas Ruser, Huayna TerraschkeTo prevent bone tissue infections, bioceramics can be also loaded with and continu￾ously release antibiotics. Therefore, bacterial adhesion can be reduced at implantation
sites, thereby decreasing the risk of infection. Bioceramics can also be loaded with drugs
to treat diseases such as osteoporosis, wherein bone density and mass both decrease
causing bone fractures or osteosarcoma, which is a type of bone tumour. Furthermore,
bone cancer patients often suffer from high chemotherapy-induced toxicity, tissue re￾moval, or additional radiotherapy-induced bodily stress. Therefore, localised cancer
treatment is more beneficial because anti-cancer agents such as cisplatin can be easily
adsorbed by HAp nanoparticles and administered at low concentrations, because they
can be very toxic at high doses [36].
4.6 Conclusions and outlook
Since the beginning of their development, bioceramics have massively evolved in the
ensuing decades starting with first-generation bioceramics, which were bioinert and
were used to replace damaged tissue, thereby preventing any interaction with sur￾rounding tissues. In contrast, second-generation bioceramic materials were developed
to exhibit bioactive behaviours to repair damaged tissue [2]. With the development of
third-generation bioceramics, materials support bodily self-repair [3]. Therefore, be￾cause bioceramics are biocompatible, they are extensively used in medical applications
[2]. Bioceramic properties can be improved by scaling micro- to nanodimensions [13]
especially because bioceramic nanoparticles exhibit higher surface area-to-volume ratios
and consequently enhanced reactivity compared to their bioceramic microparticle coun￾terparts [4]. Porous materials such as bioglasses [26], HAp [2] and silicas [28] exhibit high
surface areas [24], which favours bone in-growth [12].
Bioceramics can be prepared using different chemical compositions such as cal￾cium phosphates (e.g. bone-like HAp) [12], calcium carbonates [6], and silica-based ma￾terials [28].
Calcium phosphates exhibit good biocompatibility and bioactivity especially be￾cause of their similarity to the bone inorganic phase. However, calcium phosphate is
not restricted to hard-tissue-based medical applications and can be applied to soft tis￾sues such as blood vessels, nerve tissues, and cartilage [5]. In addition to being low-cost
and readily abundant, calcium carbonates exhibit good bioresorptivity in which pH
sensitivity and slow degradation under physiological conditions open the doors to pos￾sible drug-delivery applications [6]. In bioglasses, additives such as Na2O, CaO, and
P2O5 can induce the formation of an apatite-like surface layer, which can bond to bone
structures [18]. Thus, BG implants are resorbed and replaced by new bone tissue [2].
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 101Several synthesis methods ranging from co-precipitation to microwave processing
have been used to prepare nanostructured bioceramics, depending mainly on the re￾quired crystallinity or morphology [30]. Synthesised bioceramics can be functional￾ised to improve their properties by adding dopants to form hydroxycarbonate apatite
layers on mesoporous silica surfaces [22], to improve mechanical properties with coat￾ings [33], or decreasing bacterial adhesion on functionalised bioceramic surfaces [32].
As bioceramics positively interact with the human body, most research has fo￾cused on medical applications [36]. For instance, bioceramics act as scaffolds for re￾generating bone in tissue engineering [2] or as coatings to increase bodily acceptance
of metallic implants [35]. In cancer treatment, hyperthermia-based therapy can be
performed using ferromagnetic bioactive glasses [17]. Bioceramics are also suitable
for developing drug-delivery systems in which drugs can be trapped inside biocer￾amic particles [6] or adsorbed on bioceramic particle surfaces [26]. Inside the body,
drug-containing bioceramic-based implants can constantly deliver drug loads and
support bone regeneration [36] or cancer treatment [2].
Currently, although research on bioceramics mainly focuses on bone and tooth
applications, additional investigations are required for bioceramics to interact with
soft tissues and for healing wounds. Another important research topic is elucidating
the mechanisms through which bioceramics interact with body tissues. Understand￾ing how different cells respond to bioceramic compositions and how multiple cell gen￾erations synchronise with the stimuli of bioceramic materials would greatly expand
the application potential of these materials [37].
References
[1] A. F. Holleman, E. Wiberg, N. Wiberg, Lehrbuch der Anorganischen Chemie. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter & Co, 2007.
[2] M. Vallet-Regí, R.-H. E. Bioceramics:, From bone regeneration to cancer nanomedicine. Adv. Mat. 23,
5177–5218, 2011, (and references therein).
[3] M. Vallet-Regí, Evolution of bioceramics within the field of biomaterials. C. R. Chim. 13, 174–185, 2010,
(and references therein).
[4] S. V. Dorozhkin, Nanodimensional and nanocrystalline calcium orthophosphates. Am. J. Biomed. Eng.
2(3), 48–97, 2012, (and references therein).
[5] C. Zhou, Y. Hong, X. Zhang, Applications of nanostructured calcium phosphate in tissue engineering.
Biomater. Sci. 1, 1012–1028, 2013, (and references therein).
[6] S. M. Dizaj, M. Barzegar-Jalali, M. H. Zarrintan, K. Adibkia, F. Loftipour, Calcium carbonate
nanoparticles; potential in bone and tooth disorders. Pharm. Sci. 20, 175–182, 2015, (and references
therein).
[7] J. S. Cho, D. S. Jung, J. M. Han, Y. C. Kang, Nano-sized α and β-TCP powders prepared by high
temperature flame spray pyrolysis. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 29, 1288–1292, 2009, (and references therein).
[8] S. J. Kalita, A. Bhardwaj, H. A. Bhatt, Nanocrystalline calcium phosphate ceramics in biomedical
engineering. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 27, 441–449, 2007, (and references therein).
102 Niklas Ruser, Huayna Terraschke[9] M. Karimi, M. R. Ramsheh, S. M. Ahmadi, et al., Reline-assisted green and facile synthesis of
fluorapatite nanoparticles. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 77, 121–128, 2017, (and references therein).
[10] X. Liu, P. K. Chu, C. Ding, Surface nano-functionalization of biomaterials. Mater. Sci. Eng. R. 70,
275–302, 2010, (and references therein).
[11] M. Okada, T. Matsumoto, Synthesis and modification of apatite nanoparticles for use in dental and
medical applications. Jap. Dent. Sci. Rev. 51, 85–95, 2015, (and references therein).
[12] H. Zhou, J. Lee, Nanoscale hydroxyapatite particles for bone tissue engineering. Acta Biomater. 7,
2769–2781, 2011, (and references therein).
[13] B. Ben-Nissan, Nanoceramics in biomedical applications. MRS. Bull. 29, 28–32, 2004, (and references
therein).
[14] R. G. Carrodeguas, S. De Aza, α-Tricalcium phosphate: Synthesis, properties and biomedical
applications. Acta Biomater. 7, 3536–3546, 2011, (and references therein).
[15] A. Neira-Carrillo, R. Gentsch, H. G. Börner, D. F. Acevedo, C. A. Barbero, H. Cölfen, Templated CaCO3
crystallization by submicrometer and nanosized fibers. Langmuir. 32, 8951–8959, 2016, (and
references therein).
[16] X. Liu, H. Pan, H. Fu, Q. Fu, M. N. Rahaman, W. Huang, Conversion of borate-based glass scaffold to
hydroxyapatite in a dilute phosphate solution. Biomed. Mater. 5, 1–6, 2010, (and references therein).
[17] M. Erol, A. R. Boccaccini, Nanoscaled bioactive glass particles and nanofibres. In Bioactive Glasses,
1st ed., H. O. Ylänen, Ed. Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2011, pp. 129–161, (and
references therein).
[18] L. L. Hench, Bioceramics. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 81, 1705–1728, 1998 (and references therein).
[19] M. N. Rahaman, D. E. Day, B. S. Bal, et al., Bioactive glass in tissue engineering. Acta Biomater. 7,
2355–2373, 2011, (and references therein).
[20] X. Yan, X. Huang, C. Yu, et al., The in-vitro bioactivity of mesoporous bioactive glasses. Biomaterials
27, 3396–3403, 2006, (and references therein).
[21] M. Montazerian, E. D. Zanotto, History and trends of bioactive glass-ceramics. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
Part A. 104A, 1231–1249, 2016, (and references therein).
[22] M. Vallet-Regí, L. Ruiz-González, I. Izquierdo-Barba, J. M. González-Calbet, Revisiting silica based
ordered mesoporous materials: Medical applications. J. Mater. Chem. 16, 26–31, 2006, (and
references therein).
[23] M. Montazerian, Effect of ZrO2 addition on properties of gel-derived bioactive SiO2-CaO-P2O5 glass
ceramics. PhD dissertation, Tehran, Iran: Iran University of Science and Technology, 2015, (and
references therein).
[24] M. Vallet-Regí, Ordered mesoporous materials in the context of drug delivery systems and bone
tissue engineering. Chem. Eur. J. 12, 5934–5943, 2006, (and references therein).
[25] J. Rouquerol, D. Avnir, C. W. Fairbridge, D. H. Everett, J. M. Haynes, N. Pernicone, J. D. F. Ramsay, K.
S. W. Sing, K. K. Unger, Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids. Pure Appl. Chem.
66, 1739–1758, 1994, (and references therein).
[26] M. Vallet-Regí, I. Izquierdo-Barba, M. Colilla, Structure and functionalization of mesoporous
bioceramics for bone tissue regeneration and local drug delivery. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A. 370,
1400–1421, 2012, (and references therein).
[27] G. A. Grant, D. Janigro, Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. In the cell cycle in the central nervous
system, D. Janigro, Ed. Totowa, NJ, USA: Humana Press Inc, 2006, pp. 31–41, (and references
therein).
[28] I. Izquierdo-Barba, L. Ruiz-González, J. C. Doadrio, J. M. González-Calbet, M. Vallet-Regí, Tissue
regeneration: A new property of mesoporous materials. Solid State Sci. 7, 983–989, 2005, (and
references therein).
Chapter 4 Nanostructured bioceramics 103[29] R. Shao, R. Quan, L. Zhang, X. Wei, D. Yang, S. Xie, Porous hydroxyapatite bioceramics in bone tissue
engineering: Current uses and perspectives. J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn. 123, 17–20, 2015, (and references
therein).
[30] Y. Hong, H. Fan, B. Li, B. Guo, M. Liu, X. Zhang, Fabrication, biological effects, and medical
applications of calcium phosphate nanoceramics. Mat. Sci. Eng. R. 70, 225–242, 2010, (and references
therein).
[31] M. Okada, D. Hiramatsu, T. Okihara, T. Matsumoto, Adsorption and desorption behaviors of
cetylpyridinium chloride on hydroxyapatite nanoparticles with different morphologies. Dent. Mater.
J. 35, 651–658, 2016, (and references therein).
[32] a) M. Colilla, I. Izquierdo-Barba, S. Sánchez-Salcedo, J. L. G. Fierro, J. L. Hueso, M. Vallet-Regí,
Synthesis and characterization of Zwitterionic SBA-15 nanostructured materials. Chem. Mater. 22,
6459–6466, 2010, (and references therein). b) H.K. Schmidt, Das Sol-Gel-Verfahren: Anorganische
Synthesemethoden. Chem. unserer Zeit 35, 176–184, 2001.
[33] T. Matsuno, K. Watanabe, K. Ono, M. Koishi, Microstructure and mechanical properties of sintered
body of zirconia coated hydroxyapatite particles. J. Mater. Sci. Lett. 19, 573–576, 2000, (and
references therein).
[34] C. A. Martínez, U. Gilabert, L. Garrido, M. Rosenbusch, A. Ozols, Functionalization of hydroxyapatite
scaffolds with ZnO. Procedia Mater. Sci. 9, 484–490, 2015, (and references therein).
[35] M. Prakasam, J. Locs, K. Salma-Ancane, D. Loca, A. Largeteau, L. Berzina-Cimdina, Fabrication,
properties and applications of dense hydroxyapatite: A review. J. Funct. Biomater. 6, 1099–1140, 2015,
(and references therein).
[36] D. Arcos, M. Vallet-Regí, Bioceramics for drug delivery. Acta Mater. 61, 890–911, 2013. (and
references therein).
[37] L. L. Hench, The future of bioactive ceramics. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 26, 86, 2015, (and references
therein).
104 Niklas Ruser, Huayna TerraschkeHuayna Terraschke✶
, Markus Suta
Chapter 5
In situ luminescence analysis of coordination
sensors (ILACS): looking inside chemical
reactions
Monitoring the formation of solid materials independent of their crystallinity and of
synchrotron radiation at common university laboratories is a challenge. A solution to
this issue can be offered by the new in situ luminescence analysis of coordination sen￾sors. With this approach, lanthanide ions are incorporated as local sensors to the
structure of the monitored compounds. As the optical properties of lanthanide ions
are strongly influenced by the coordination environment, the structural evolution of
the monitored compounds can be tracked during synthesis by measuring real-time
luminescence spectra under real reaction conditions.
5.1 Introduction
The synthesis of new functional materials with desired physical properties or a well￾defined chemical reactivity is still a major field in solid-state chemistry. Many technolo￾gies largely depend on the development of new materials with improved properties. In
this context, solid-state compounds represent a significant part of it and, therefore, form
the basis for many industrial areas. Indeed, there are chemical rules and laws at hand
but the outcome of a reaction cannot be predicted with certainty. Typically, reactants
are mixed and reacted using different synthesis methods, the products are isolated, and
routinely characterised. In most cases, very little is known about the mechanisms of
such reactions beginning with the nucleation up to the formation of long-range crystal￾line structures. Due to this lack of knowledge the development of rational synthetic strat￾egies or the discovery of new compounds is difficult to achieve. However, this problem
might be solved by analysing not only the readily prepared product but also investigat￾ing the different stages of product formation, for example, nucleation and crystal growth
in view of structural changes or the formation of possible reaction intermediates that
might be of interest. Such intermediates can be stable or metastable and they can trans￾form into each other very fast, and therefore, can easily be overlooked using conven￾tional ex situ techniques. In this context, in situ monitoring of chemical reactions has
become of increasing interest [1–3].
✶
Corresponding author: Huayna Terraschke, E-Mail: hterraschke@ac.uni-kiel.de
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-005For the in situ monitoring of chemical reactions or phase transitions, several
characterisation techniques have been applied, which include, for example, X-ray dif￾fraction (XRD) [4–8], pair distribution function (PDF) analyses [9, 10], X-ray absorption
spectroscopy (XAS) [11, 12], Raman spectroscopy [13], infrared (IR) spectroscopy [14],
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy [15], and mass spectrometry (MS)
[16]. Although powerful methods, they cannot be applied to any problem. XRD-based
methods, for example, are not appropriate for analysing very light atoms with low
electron density, amorphous materials, or crystalline phases in low concentration.
While in situ XAS delivers information about the short-range order and electronic state
of the absorber, synchrotron radiation is required, limiting accessibility of such experi￾ments. IR and Raman spectroscopy allow monitoring changes in chemical bonding situa￾tions, but are more suitable for organic compounds. NMR, on the other hand, probes the
local environment of NMR active atoms, thus being restricted to such atoms and being
more appropriate for reactions in liquids, which do not require a high time resolution.
In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) is a new analysis
technique developed at the Kiel University to monitor and elucidate the mechanisms
of chemical reactions. Within this technique, lanthanide (Ln) ions [17–19] are em￾ployed as local coordination sensors, because of their spectral sensitivity to their coor￾dination environment. Changes in the surroundings of the coordination sensors are
detected by submerging an optical fibre into the reactor content, transporting the
emitted light to a fast charge-coupled device (CCD)-based detector and recording lumi￾nescence spectra with very high time resolution.
Previously reported studies on time-dependent or in situ luminescence measure￾ments are mostly limited to luminescence titration, temperature-dependent lumines￾cence measurements, or quantification of luminescence lifetime. Luminescence titration
is generally used to quantify the compounds present in a solution with unknown concen￾tration by detecting the reactions of these compounds with emitting markers, generating
a concentration-dependent luminescence signal. Temperature-dependent measurements
are typically used to investigate quenching effects during heating processes or during the
improvement of the spectral resolution by cooling and decreasing the energy loss caused
by thermally induced non-radiative electronic transitions. Time-resolved luminescence
measurements are used to determine the decay kinetics from the excited states. Never￾theless, these techniques provide no mechanistic information about the formation of
solid materials. Most in situ analysis of optical properties previously available for track￾ing chemical reactions were primarily based on the time-dependent measurements of
UV/Vis absorption properties, which afford valuable information on the formation of
solid materials, such as changes in the bandgap energy. However, local changes in the
coordination environments of ions are not accessed by these techniques, and they do not
provide information about the short-range atomic arrangements of the formed com￾pounds. To date, information about the changes in the first coordination spheres of lan￾thanide and actinide ions is also acquired via time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence
spectroscopy (TRLFS) [20, 21].
106 Huayna Terraschke, Markus SutaSection 5.2 explains the working principle of ILACS in detail, also differentiating it
from TRLFS. In Section 5.3, the theory behind the optical properties of lanthanide
coordination sensors is shortly reviewed. Section 5.4 describes the state-of-the art
instrumentation available for conducting ILACS experiments, while examples of the
study cases using these instruments are mentioned in Section 5.5. Subsequently in Sec￾tion 5.6, applications of the ILACS experimental instrumentation for monitoring
chemical reactions without coordination sensors are discussed. Finally, Section 5.7
summarises the chapter and offers an outlook on the future of this technique. For addi￾tional information on this subject, our previous review article can be referred [3].
5.2 Working principle
Basic ILACS involves the introduction of a suitable local coordination sensor into the
structure of the material to be investigated. This can be performed by either producing
an Ln-based compound itself or incorporating extremely small amounts of Ln ions into
the studied host compound of interest (Figure 5.1). Coordination-sensitive spectroscopic
changes of the coordination sensors are detected during the reaction. For this purpose,
an optical fibre is submerged into the reaction vessel, transporting the emitted light to a
fast CCD-based detector. This approach is advantageous for complementing techniques
such as XRD, especially because it is able to characterise not only highly crystalline com￾pounds, but also amorphous materials and small crystallites. In addition, ILACS is able to
characterise ions in solution and monitor desolvation processes. Compared to general
synchrotron radiation-dependent in situ methods, ILACS can be also usefully complemen￾tary, because it can be conducted in conventional university laboratories, increasing its
availability (Figure 5.2). The high frame rate, which reaches several spectra per second
depending on the measured emission intensity of the synthesised compound and re￾quired integration time, makes ILACS significantly advantageous in comparison to, for
instance, in situ NMR spectroscopy. High time resolution is important for examining fast
processes such as nucleation and detection of short-lived intermediates. Intermediates
may present interesting properties for the development of new materials and can remain
undetected when only ex situ methods or methods with low time resolutions are applied.
As comprehensively explained in Section 5.4, ILACS is performed in an external
reactor system, which enables the reproduction of real reaction conditions, including
stirring, heating, cooling, dosing, as well as the potential application of ultrasound or
generation of high pressure within the reaction vessel. External reactor systems also
allow the modification of used setups for both stationary and mobile use. Mobile ex￾perimental setups enable multimodality experiments, combining ILACS with synchro￾tron-based in situ X-ray powder diffraction, besides with measurements of pH, ion
conductivity, redox potential, or IR spectroscopy for confirming and complementing
the in situ luminescence results.
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 107This is an important difference between ILACS and TRLFS, which is generally con￾ducted in cuvettes under stationary conditions. In addition, ILACS uses mostly a com￾bination of an Xe lamp and a monochromator instead of a laser as the excitation
source, which thereby increases the flexibility of the applied excitation wavelength
and facilitates the investigation of a larger range of electronic transitions and selec￾tive excitation of different doping sites.
Figure 5.2: Overview of the features offered by ILACS.
Figure 5.1: Working principle of ILACS. Lanthanide ions are incorporated into the material to be analysed,
providing an emission spectrum. Changes in the crystal structure during reaction result on the
modification of the optical properties, which can be monitored by in situ luminescence measurements
(reproduced from reference [49] with permission from the Chinese Chemical Society (CCS), Peking
University (PKU), and the Royal Society of Chemistry).
108 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Suta5.3 Spectroscopic background of coordination sensors
This section outlines the spectroscopic foundations of the electronic transitions used
by the lanthanide coordination sensors as well as the types of structural information
that can be obtained by critically examining the spectral emissions of these ions.
Luminescence resulting from 4fn ↔ 4fn−1
5d1 or 4fn ↔ 4fn electronic transitions is
caused by the partially filled 4f orbitals of elements ranging from Ce to Yb. Classical
examples of these electronic transitions are observed for divalent and trivalent Eu ions.
Neutral Eu contains 63 electrons and has an electron configuration of [Xe]4f7
6s2
. For Eu2+,
the electron configuration is [Xe]4f7
. Due to the divalent oxidation state, the lowest excited
levels originate from the 4f 6
5d1 configuration, and thus, energy absorption leads to the
promotion of one 4f electron to the 5d orbital. However, in the trivalent oxidation state,
only six electrons remain in the 4f shell, leaving one 4f orbital unoccupied in terms of
Hund’s rules. As the nuclear charges of trivalent Ln ions are less screened than those of
divalent Ln ions, the energies of the 5d orbitals of trivalent Ln ions are typically higher in
the vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) range [22–26]. Thus, these ions dominantly show narrow￾line 4fn ↔ 4fn transitions in the UV-Vis range [27].
Emission spectra related to transitions between the 5d and 4f orbitals of Ln ions,
such as for Eu2+ and Ce3+, are characterised by broad bands, whose properties are
highly dependent on the coordination environment of the ions. The 4fn−1
5d1 → 4fn
-
related emission bands can vary between the near-UV and the near-IR [28] spectral
ranges depending on the covalence and crystal field conditions around the electrons
in the Ln 5d orbitals. For instance, the emission peak maximum shifts to higher wave￾lengths when Eu2+ is doped into a highly covalent host lattice with soft anions, in￾cluding sulfides [29] or nitrides [30], due to the so-called nephelauxetic effect. The
nephelauxetic effect is a ligand field effect that stabilises the energies of 5d orbitals by
the delocalisation of the electrons over the contributing orbitals of the ligands.
Metal–ligand (ML) distance also influences the emission energy. A short ML distance
causes a large splitting of the 5d orbital and consequently a shift to longer wave￾lengths. Electric dipole (ED)-allowed 4fn−1
5d1 → 4fn transitions, observed for divalent
and trivalent Ln ions, result in up to six orders of magnitude higher emission intensities
than those in the cases of electric-dipole-forbidden transitions. Owing to the half-filled
4f7 shell, Eu2+ is substantially stable, as indicated by its low standard potential in
aqueous solution (E0
(Eu3+/Eu2+) = −0.35 V) and is thus suitable for technological and
industrial applications. In contrast, other divalent Ln ions are not very stable and
are difficult to handle under ambient conditions.
For Ln ions such as Sm3+, Eu3+, Tb3+, and Dy3+, whose photoluminescence typically
occurs in the visible spectral range, radiative relaxation from excited 4fn levels are ob￾served. These transitions are spin- and parity-forbidden and are specific for each ion.
For example, orange, red, and green lights are characteristics of the emissions of the 4f
orbitals of Sm3+, Eu3+, and Tb3+, respectively. As the 4f electrons are shielded by the
outer 5s and 5p electrons, the positions of the spectral peaks associated with these
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 109electronic orbitals are not influenced by the environment of the ions and remain nearly
unchanged for various host lattices [27, 31].
Owing to the low variation in the emission properties of trivalent Ln ions because of
the shielding of the 4f electrons, Dieke et al. [32] and Carnall et al. systematically investi￾gated the energy levels involved in the luminescence of La ions in LaCl3 [22] and LaF3,
respectively [33]. By doping LaCl3 with different trivalent Ln ions and using a parameter￾ised crystal field model, semi-empirical determination of the energy levels involved for
each unique ion was conducted, and the acquired values are summarised in the Dieke
diagram. Emission spectra of trivalent Ln ions are characterised by sharp peaks covering
the energy ranges typical for each ion. The main emission peaks of Eu3+ and Tb3+ are
located in the red (5
D0 →7 FJ, J ≤ 3) and green spectral ranges (5
D4 →7
FJ, J ≤ 6), respec￾tively. With the Dieke diagram, the electronic transitions for an observed emission peak
can be assigned. Extension of the energy levels to the VUV range was reported by Wegh
et al. [23]
Among the ions that undergo the 4fn → 4fn electronic transitions, Eu3+ has the high￾est potential for use as a coordination sensor for monitoring structural changes and the
mechanisms of chemical reactions. Effects of the symmetry of the coordination environ￾ment on the photoluminescence spectra are comprehensively discussed in this section.
Eu3+ is often applied ex situ as a spectroscopic probe to obtain information about the
surrounding coordination sphere [31, 34]. A primary reason for this is the lack of degen￾eracy of both the ground 7
F0 and lowest emitting 5
D0 levels, which considerably facili￾tates the interpretation of the luminescence spectra. Elucidation of the spectra is also
promoted by the low total angular momentum number (J) values of the most dominant
emissive 5
D0 → 7
FJ transitions (J = 0–2) and the differences between the energies of the
different 7
FJ levels that allow clean separation, and thus, assignment of the respective
luminescence peaks [31].
Moreover, the crystal field potential exhibited by the locally surrounding ligands
of Ln ions further removes the degeneracy of the 2S+1LJ levels depending on the local
symmetry. The lack of degeneracy of the 5
D0 and 7
F0 levels and the correspondingly
low number of arising spectral lines facilitate the application of Eu3+ as an ex situ
probe for crystal field symmetry analysis [31].
The total number of microstates in the electronic configuration [Xe]4f6 of Eu3+ is
calculated to be 3,003 using the following equation:
14
n
 ! = 14!
n!ð Þ 14 − n !
. (5:1)
Interelectronic repulsion, spin–orbit coupling, crystal field splitting, and Zeeman effect
are the key parameters determining the energetic position and are responsible for lift￾ing the degeneracy of Eu3+ microstates. Spin–orbit coupling is a relativistic effect and
may be best considered as a result of the interactions between the spin magnetic mo￾ments of electrons and the orbital magnetic moments arising from the movement of
110 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Sutaelectrons around the nucleus, thereby mixing the orbital and spin angular momenta,
respectively. Crystal field splitting is a special case of the Stark effect that additionally
removes the MJ degeneracy of the levels owing to the presence of an electric field. How￾ever, the Zeeman effect leads to the same consequence in the presence of a magnetic
field. Both external fields explicitly break the symmetry of the observed system, thereby
further splitting the different spin–orbit levels. Nevertheless, in the case of an odd num￾ber of electrons, time-reversal symmetry must be considered, which requires the pres￾ence of Kramers doublets even in a crystal field. In contrast, the Zeeman effect destroys
the time-reversal symmetry [27].
Generally, the electronic levels of Ln ions originating upon the inclusion of the
mutual electron repulsion and spin–orbit coupling are determined in the limit of the
Russell–Saunders coupling scheme that enables the designation of the electronic lev￾els by the 2S+1LJ term symbols. In 2S+1LJ, S is the total spin quantum number leading to
2S + 1 degenerate MS states. The number 2S + 1 is referred to as spin multiplicity and is
denoted as singlet (1), doublet (2), triplet (3), and so on. L is the total orbital angular
momentum quantum number and is designated by the letters S, P, D, F, G, H, I, K, L,
M . . . for L = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 . . ., respectively. J is presented by the different
couplings between L and S in the vector model, that is:
J = L + S, L + S − 1, L + S − 2, ..., j j L − S (5:2)
The previously described Russell–Saunders coupling scheme is applicable in the case
of stronger mutual electron repulsion than spin–orbit coupling. Nevertheless, for Ln
ions, spin–orbit coupling is already non-negligible because of their high atomic num￾bers, and an intermediate coupling scheme would be more appropriate. Consequently,
the designation of the electronic levels by term symbols loses its meaning because
strong spin–orbit coupling mixes L with S. However, the Russell–Saunders scheme still
offers a reasonable starting point for a qualitative description of the energy levels of
Ln, as presented in the Dieke diagram; nevertheless, this description should only be re￾garded as a crude approximation [27].
As a representative example, we consider the ground levels of Eu3+. Eu3+ has a 4f6
ground configuration. The term with the highest spin multiplicity is a septet as S =6×
1/2 = 3, and consequently, 2S + 1 = 7. According to Hund’s rules, L may be determined
by the sum of all ml values of the occupied orbitals, which affords:
L = +½  ð Þ3 + +ð Þ2 + +ð Þ1 + 0 + ð Þ −1 + ð Þ −2 = 3 (5:3)
and thus leads to an F term based on the designation rules. The separation between
different 2S+1L terms is approximately 10,000 cm−1 for the lower terms of the 4f 6 con￾figuration of Eu3+ (Figure 5.3, right panel) [31]. These terms further split into 295 2S+1LJ
levels due to spin–orbit interaction in the case of Eu3+ [27].
For the 7
F Eu3+ term, when S = 3 and L = 3, the possible values for J are 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1,
and 0, resulting in the well-known 7
FJ (J = 0–6) ground levels of Eu3+. The respective de￾generacy in MJ of each spin–orbit level is 2 J + 1. The abovementioned shielding effects
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 111of the 5s and 5p electrons from the coordinative environment on the 4f electrons lead
to approximately fixed energy positions of the 7
FJ and higher excited 5
DJ’ (J’ = 0, 1, 2) lev￾els, irrespective of the host compound. However, the crystal field splitting of the 2J + 1
degenerate spin–orbit levels is of the order of ≤102 cm−1 (Figure 5.3) [31].
Crystal field perturbation destroys the spherical symmetries of free ions, and the 2S+1LJ levels split into several crystal field levels depending on the site symmetry of Ln3+.
In the case of Eu3+, the lack of degeneracy of both the lowest excited 5
D0 and 7
F0 ground
levels simplifies the situation such that the corresponding splitting pattern of the other J
levels may directly provide information about the local symmetry of the Ln ion in a sur￾rounding ligand field (Table 5.1 and Figure 5.4).
Table 7.1 shows the splitting of the different J levels into the corresponding Stark
states based on the local point symmetry of Eu3+. For example, in Oh symmetry, only one
peak was noticed for the 5
D0 →7
F1 transition, and no peaks were observed for the other
transitions. This is primarily because of transition selection rules. According to the La￾porte selection rule, intraconfigurational ED transitions (including s–s, p–p, d–d, and f–f
electronic transitions) are forbidden as they result in vanishing transition matrix ele￾ments. However, this rule is only strictly applicable to Ln ions in the gas phase [31].
To understand the different numbers of possible emission peaks for the 5
D0 → 7
FJ
(J = 0, . . ., 6) transition in a certain point group, it is necessary to initially elucidate the
mechanisms of Laporte-forbidden 4fn ↔ 4fn transitions in detail followed by the ef￾fects of symmetry reduction on these transitions. A majority of the Eu3+ transitions
are induced by ED transitions. This means that the Eu3+ transitions occur due to the
interaction between the time-averaged ED moment in an Ln ion caused by the 4f elec￾trons and the electric field vector of the external light field. As the ED moment is pro￾portional to the position vector, its sign changes under an inversion operation, that is,
it has an odd parity. Thus, any transition matrix elements between 4f orbitals should
also have overall odd parities in a centrosymmetric environment and will accordingly
vanish. Nevertheless, these selection rules can be avoided by admixing the 4f orbitals
with other orbitals of different parities or coupling to vibrations. The first mechanism
is the basis of the Judd–Ofelt mechanism, which is briefly described below [31].
In addition to ED transitions, orbital and spin angular momenta induce magnetic
moments that may couple to the magnetic field component of light, thereby leading to
magnetic dipole (MD) transitions. Unlike ED transitions, MD transitions are allowed by
the Laporte selection rule because of the even parity of the magnetic moment; however,
their intensities are weaker by a factor of approximately α2 ~ 10–4 as compared to those
of the ED transitions, where α is the fine structure constant. Therefore, MD transitions
become relevant if the ED transitions are suppressed. In the case of Eu3+, the 5
D0 → 7
F1
transition is an important example of an MD transition, which is dominant in centrosym￾metric site symmetries. Note that the 4f electrons in Ln may even induce quadrupole mo￾ments that can couple to the electric field gradient of light. The line strengths of ED
transitions are of the same order of magnitude as those of the MD transitions [31].
112 Huayna Terraschke, Markus SutaA breakthrough in the understanding of the occurrence of ED-type 4fn ↔ 4fn transi￾tions was independently achieved by Judd and Ofelt in the 1960s, respectively [35, 36].
Their key assumption was the admixture of energetically higher lying 5d orbitals in the
4fn configuration and the fact that the energy difference was substantially larger than
that between different J levels of the original 4fn configuration. Under these conditions,
an effective ED moment operator with even parity (including the odd part of the crystal
field potential) could be derived with perturbation theory. This framework readily ex￾plains the induced ED transitions in Ln. However, note that the Judd–Ofelt theory only
enables intensity modelling of the absorption and luminescence spectra by a least￾squares fitting procedure to the experimental spectrum and does not predict the entire
spectrum. Nevertheless, to date, it is the only theoretical model that completely de￾scribes the emergence of ED-type 4fn ↔ 4fn transitions. Moreover, it explains the gener￾ally observed trend in the Eu3+ spectra that the 5
D0 → 7
FJ transitions with J = 2, 4, and 6
are typically stronger than those with odd J values, owing to new selection rules that
can be derived from group theory in the theoretical frameworks of these transitions.
An exception is centrosymmetric crystal fields that only contain even components in
the multipole expansion, for which the Judd–Ofelt theory is not appropriate because of
the failure of one of its assumptions [31].
The 5
D0 → 7
F0 transition of Eu3+ is strictly forbidden in terms of both common and
Judd–Ofelt selection rules. However, its occurrence provides extremely valuable infor￾mation because both levels with J = 0 do not split in the crystal field. Thus, the splitting
of this transition directly indicates the occupancy of more than one crystallographically
independent site in a specific host, revealing, for instance, the presence of side products
Figure 5.3: Emission spectrum of [Eu(tta)3(phen)] (tta = 2-thenoyltrifluoroacetylacetonate, phen =
1,10-phenanthroline, T = 77 K, λex = 396 nm) showing transitions from the 5
D0 state (left) (reproduced with
permission from reference [31]). Energy diagram of Eu3+ (4f6
) with relative magnitude of the
interelectronic repulsion (terms), spin–orbit coupling (levels), and the crystal field potential (sublevels)
(reprinted with permission from reference [58]. Copyright 1987 Elsevier).
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 113or reaction intermediates. If the structural difference between these sites is small, the
presence of two or more different species can be indicated by an asymmetric shape, a
shoulder, or broadening of the emission peak assigned to the 5
D0→7
F0 transitions. Lumi￾nescence spectra of single sites can be acquired by site-selective excitation experiments.
There are two main reasons for the emergence of the peak of this transition in the lumi￾nescence spectra. On the one hand, odd crystal fields facilitate the mixing of other
terms with higher J values (which is termed as J mixing) [37, 38]. Therefore, the ap￾pearance of the 5
D0 ↔ 7
F0 emission peak at approximately 577–581 nm implies that
Eu3+ typically occupies a low-symmetric site, such as Cnv, Cn, or Cs symmetry site.
Another mechanistic explanation for the emergence of this peak was suggested by
Wybourne and Downer et al. [39–41] They considered the effects of configuration
interaction on a third-order ED moment mediated by 4f–5d spin–orbit mixing,
which significantly contributes to this transition. However, for Eu3+, J mixing is
probably the most dominant contribution due to the large energy difference be￾tween the 4f6 and 4f5
5d1 configuration levels [42, 43].
As abovementioned, the intensity of the emission peak at 585–600 nm, attributed to
the 5
D0 → 7
F1 transition, is substantially independent of the coordination environment
of Eu3+. Nevertheless, it can be also employed to acquire structural information. For in￾stance, for comparison of different emission spectra, the intensities can be scaled such
that the 5
D0 → 7
F1 peaks have the same intensity in both spectra. In addition, the num￾ber of emission peaks observed for this emissive transition provides information about
the crystal field symmetry: cubic and icosahedral crystal fields lead to no splitting; hex￾agonal, trigonal, and tetragonal crystal fields cause a splitting into two lines; and ortho￾rhombic and lower symmetry crystal fields result in a splitting into three lines. As
abovementioned, this is related to the successive loss of the J degeneracy [31].
Emission peaks of the 5
D0 → 7
F2 transition are located between 610 and 625 nm.
This hypersensitive transition is strictly forbidden if an inversion centre is present at
the site occupied by Eu3+. According to the Judd–Ofelt mechanism, this transition should
have a very low intensity when Oh symmetry sites are occupied. SrTiO3 with a cubic
perovskite structure is an illustrative example of this case. When SrTiO3 is doped with
Eu3+, a negligibly small emission peak of the 5
D0 → 7
F2 transition is achieved due to the
centrosymmetric 12-fold-coordinated Sr2+ site with Oh symmetry. Owing to this prop￾erty, the ratio between the intensities of the peaks of 5
D0 → 7
F2 and 5
D0 → 7
F1 transitions
can be used to measure the order of symmetry of the Eu3+ site [31].
The 5
D0 → 7
F3 transition is a Judd–Ofelt-forbidden transition, and the intensities
of the emission peaks at 640–655 nm corresponding to this transition are very weak.
Intensities of the emission peaks of 5
D0 → 7
F4 electronic transition at 680–710 nm must
be carefully evaluated, because the spectra must be appropriately corrected owing to
the low sensitivities of photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) in this spectral range. As the
emission peaks of the 5
D0 → 7
F5 (740–770 nm) and 5
D0 → 7
F6 (810–840 nm) transitions
are located beyond the detection limits of most UV-Vis PMT detectors, these transi￾tions are not comprehensively discussed in many articles [31].
114 Huayna Terraschke, Markus SutaIn addition to the analyses of the splitting behaviours and intensity ratios of the
peaks of Eu3+ transitions, further information about structural changes in the coordina￾tion environments of cation sites can be obtained by investigating additional features,
including “solvent quenching” and “antenna effect”, of the 4fn → 4fn transitions [27].
Solvent quenching refers to the strong quenching of the emission intensities of Ln
ions, such as Eu3+, induced by energy transfer to OH valence vibrations when these ions
are submerged in protic solvents including water and ethanol, both of which are regu￾larly used in solution-based syntheses of solid compounds [44]. As Ln ions exhibit intense
quenching effects in solution, significant enhancements in their emission intensities are
expected during the precipitation of Ln-containing compounds as the solvent molecules
in the coordination sphere around the Ln ions are gradually exchanged by ligands.
If these ligands are organic, precipitation often results in the formation of complexes,
coordination polymers, or metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), which often boost the
emission intensities of Ln3+ via the antenna effect. Although trivalent Ln ions have very
attractive emission properties, their absorption cross sections are significantly low. The
combination of Ln centres with organic ligands facilitates the transfer of the excitation
energy absorbed by, for example extended conjugated π-systems of the organic ligands
to Ln ions, thereby enhancing the electronic excitations and improving the lumines￾cence intensities of these ions [45].
Figure 5.4: Flowchart indicating the number of emission peaks observed for the 5
D0 → 7
FJ (J = 1, 2, 4, 6)
transitions of Eu3+ depending on the site symmetry of Eu3+. σ denotes polarisation of the emitted light
parallel to the incident electric field, and π represents polarisation of the emitted light perpendicular to
the incident electric field (reprinted with permission from reference [59]).
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 1155.4 Examples of multimodal in situ experimental
instrumentation
As mentioned earlier in Section 5.2, an important feature of ILACS is the application
of an external reactor in it, which enables data acquisition under real reaction condi￾tions. Due to its flexible stationary and mobile setups, this approach can be combined
with different commercial synthesis workstations [2, 17]. These reactor systems enable
Table 5.1: Number of emission peaks observed for the 5
D0 → 7
F0-4 transitions of
Eu3+ for different point group symmetries [30].
Point group 
D, 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F
C 
Cs 
C 
Cv 
Ci 
Ch 
D 
Dh 
Dd 
D 
C 
Cv 
Ch 
Ci 
Dd 
Dh 
C 
Ch 
Cv 
Dh 
Dd 
S 
D 
C 
Cv 
D 
Ch 
Dh 
T 
Td 
Th 
O 
Oh 
Ih 
116 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Sutathe control of synthesis parameters, such as stirring, dosing, and temperature, during
the monitoring of reaction parameters, including pH, ion conductivity, redox poten￾tial, and concentrations of ions (e.g. Ca2+, Cu2+, Na+
, K+
, Cl–
, and NO3
–
).
Figure 5.5 shows the examples of experimental setups for measuring in situ lumi￾nescence using an excitation source in reflection (Figure 5.5, top) and transmission
(Figure 5.5, bottom left) modes. A Y-shaped optical fibre is employed to simultaneously
transmit excitation light from the spectrometer to the reactor solution and the emitted
light from the reactor to the detector. The transmission excitation mode is generally
used for a mobile in situ setup comprising a transportable luminescence spectrome￾ter, equipped with a CCD detector and an optical fibre. Excitation energy is provided
by external UV light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and luminescence is evaluated in the
transmission mode using an optical fibre submerged in the reactor. This example of
Figure 5.5: Examples of the experimental setups for multimodal in situ measurements. Top: A Fluorolog 3
spectrometer equipped with a Y-shaped optical fibre for excitation in the reflection mode. Bottom left: UV
LED excitation, allowing simultaneous monitoring of in situ pH and ion conductivity. Bottom right:
Integrated in situ luminescence, IR spectroscopy, and XRD setup at the DESY PETRA III facility (adapted
from references [2, 48] with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 117mobile setups can be transported to other laboratories such as synchrotron facilities,
which is advantageous, because it facilitates the use of simultaneous complementary
analyses, for example, in situ luminescence and XRD.
In situ luminescence measurements in the transmission mode are also useful be￾cause the detection of the extinction of excitation light can afford additional information
about the turbidity of a solution. However, the reactant concentration must be kept low
to prevent complete blockage of the excitation light. In contrast, in situ luminescence
measurements in the reflection mode are less sensitive to the reactant concentration.
In detail, to conduct simultaneous in situ luminescence and XRD experiments at
the synchrotron facilities, the reactor has to be slightly modified to decrease the path￾way by which the synchrotron radiation must transverse through the solvent volume.
One example of a modified reactor vessel possessing an indented glass tube through
the reaction vessel is shown in Figure 5.6. The reactor holder accordingly developed
for this vessel has been designed to quickly fit different beamlines and does not re￾quire realignment after each reaction. It contains two openings for the entrance and
exit of X-ray beams in addition to a larger opening arranged at 90° to the X-ray path
for UV-LED irradiation during luminescence measurements and is combined with in￾tegrated stirring and heating systems [46]. Generally, mobile spectrometer systems
are employed in synchrotron applications [2]. Alternatively, a few beamlines offer in￾tegrated luminescence measurements within their standard infrastructure.
5.5 Selected application examples
Due to their high emission intensities, high crystallinity, and simplified syntheses, lu￾minescent complexes are ideal model systems for demonstrating the proof-of-principle
Figure 5.6: Adapted glass reactor for simultaneous in situ luminescence and XRD measurements (left)
and the reactor holder (right) (reprinted with permission from reference [46]).
118 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Sutaof monitoring the formation of functional materials using in situ luminescence measure￾ments. Therefore, the first practical examples commented in this Section are based on
different 1,10-phenanthroline (phen) and 2,2ʹ-bipyridine (bipy)-containing luminescent Ln
complexes [2, 47, 48]. Luminescent complexes are in general relevant, for example, tech￾nological and biomedical applications such as for the production of organic LEDs (OLEDs)
and cell markers for bioimaging.
For instance, in situ luminescence measurements can be applied for monitoring
metal–ligand exchange processes during the complexation in ethanol and decomposi￾tion of the complex [Eu(phen)2(NO3)3] with the addition of Sn4+. In a simplified exem￾plary experiment [2], a solution of the phen ligand was introduced into the reactor
containing a solution of europium(III) nitrate. As expected, before the addition of the
phen molecules, the emission spectrum of Eu3+ in ethanol had very low intensity and
very low resolution for the 5
D0 → 7
F0-4 electronic transitions of Eu3+, owing to the strong
quenching effect of the OH vibrations of solvent molecules. Upon addition of phen, the
emission intensity significantly increased and its spectral resolution improved, indicat￾ing the gradual exchange of the solvent molecules in the coordination sphere of Eu3+
for the phen ligand and the initiation of an antenna effect. Nevertheless, this increase
in luminescence intensity occurred 3–5 min after the introduction of the phen mole￾cules, implying delayed nucleation of [Eu(phen)2(NO3)3]. These results were confirmed
by simultaneous synchrotron-based in situ XRD and in situ IR spectroscopy as well as
via complementary in situ measurements of pH and ion conductivity [2].
Formation of [Eu(phen)2(NO3)3] was also detected by the strong shift of the
peaks corresponding to the 5
D0 → 7
F4 transition of Eu3+ to higher energies. This blue
shift reveals a larger energy gap between the 5
D0 excited state and the 7
F4 ground
state, probably because of the stronger interaction between Eu3+ and the phen li￾gands than that between Eu3+ and the coordinating ethanol molecules of the solva￾tion shell. This stronger interaction is expected due to the slight nephelauxetic effect
observed in N-containing solid materials with high stability and short interatomic
distances. Upon the dissolution of SnCl2 in the ethanol solution and the oxidation of
Sn2+ to Sn4+, the phen ligands detached from Eu3+ and coordinated Sn4+, producing
[Sn(phen)Cl4]. [Sn(phen)Cl4] is non-luminescent in the whole regarded UV-Vis spec￾tral range at the applied excitation wavelength of 395 nm, and its formation is de￾tected by a considerable decrease in the emission intensity [2].
Polzin et al. [47] used in situ luminescence measurements to investigate the influen￾ces of temperature and reactant concentration on the induction time and crystallisation
rate, on the formation of reaction intermediates and their stability, as well as on the
ligand exchange process induced by the introduction of phen ligands to the [Eu(bipy)2
(NO3)3] complex. The results revealed that heating the reaction system from room tem￾perature to 50 °C reduced the induction time, indicated by an earlier increase in the
spectral signals of the 5
D0 → 7
F1 transition. These results were confirmed by the earlier
growth of the Bragg reflections of [Eu(bipy)2(NO3)3] during in situ XRD. A further in￾crease in temperature to 65 °C did not significantly influence the reaction kinetics [47].
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 119It was additionally demonstrated that when the reactant concentration was re￾duced by 50%, the onset of crystallisation increased from 7 to 13 min (Figure 5.7, left).
When the reactant concentration was further decreased to 40% of that used in the ini￾tial experiments, the crystallisation rate decreased; furthermore, when the reactant
concentration was decreased to 30%, the crystallisation onset was delayed to t = 28 min,
and the crystallisation rate further slowed down. These in situ luminescence results en￾abled the calculation of the function describing and predicting the relationship between
the crystallisation time and the reactant concentration. Analysis of the acquired func￾tion showed that the crystallisation time exponentially increased with a decrease in the
reactant concentration and enhanced towards infinite values when the reactant con￾centration was below 30%. These predictions were verified by decreasing the reactant
concentration to 10%, resulting in no product generation. Interestingly, although the
ion concentrations were low, spectral emissions of Eu3+ could still be detected, allowing
Polzin et al. to estimate the ILACS detection limit, which was 2 mM Eu3+ in solution [47].
Moreover, during the crystallisation of [Eu(bipy)2(NO3)3], an increase in the reac￾tant concentration to 300% did not only reduce the induction time to t ≈ 1.5 min, but
also altered the reaction mechanism inducing the formation of a reaction intermedi￾ate prior to product formation. The presence of intermediates could be deduced from
the changes in the rate of emission intensity in the spectral data. Compared to the
smooth exponential increase observed in the intensity of the 5
D0 → 7
F2 transition at
593 nm at lower reactant concentrations (Figure 5.7, left), the intensity of the 5
D0 → 7
F2
transition at 593 nm at higher reactant concentrations initially increased and then ex￾hibited a prolonged plateau period (approximately 9.5 min) before increasing again
until t ≈ 17 min and at the end of the reaction (λex = 365 nm; Figure 5.7, right) [47].
Analysis of the splitting pattern of the 5
D0 → 7
FJ emission peaks confirmed the for￾mation of the reaction intermediate as it demonstrated that at t = 0, 5 and 20 min, Eu3+
in the reaction solution was exposed to three distinct coordination environments. At
t = 0 min, Eu3+ was only coordinated by the solvent molecules, and the final product
was verified to be fully formed at t = 20 min. The definite splitting pattern at t =
5 min strongly suggested the generation of a reaction intermediate. Examination of
the emission spectrum at t = 5 min provided important insights into the nature of
this intermediate structure. For example, the single peak of the 5
D0 → 7
F0 transition
indicated that only one symmetry-equivalent site could be occupied by Eu3+ in this
compound. High intensity of the peak of the 5
D0 → 7
F2 transition implied that Eu3+
did not occupy centrosymmetric sites, whereas the two resolved peaks assigned to
the 5
D0 → 7
F1 transition indicated an intermediately high crystalline symmetry probably
with three-, four-, or six-fold local site symmetries in a tetragonal or hexagonal crystal
system. Interestingly, although the concomitant in situ XRD measurements confirmed
the formation of an intermediate via the increase of additional reflections at t = 5 min,
the high background and broad reflections in the XRD data prevented the elucidation
of any structural information. Even ex situ XRD failed to generate useful structural data
for this compound as the intermediate was highly unstable.
120 Huayna Terraschke, Markus SutaFigure 5.7: In situ emission spectra (λex = 365 nm) showing changes in the crystallisation rates of [Eu(bipy)2(NO3)3] in response to changes in
the reactant concentration (left). Detection of the formation of a reaction intermediate during the crystallisation of [Eu(bipy)2(NO3)3], confirmed
by concomitant synchrotron-based in situ XRD experiments (reproduced from reference [47] with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies).
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 121A final feature of this study was a set of experiments in which phen was added
after the production of [Eu(bipy)2(NO3)3] to monitor the incorporation of phen mole￾cules into the Eu3+ compound. This process can be easily detected by in situ lumines￾cence via a significant increase in emission intensity. The increase in emission intensity
was expected due to the presence of an additional aromatic ring in the phen ligand
structure, which offered an enhanced antenna effect. Similar to the previous examples,
this phase transition was also verified by in situ XRD [47].
Although the antenna effect on the 4f 6 → 4f 6 electronic transitions in Eu3+ is very
useful for examining the incorporation of organic ligands into the coordination
sphere of Eu3+, it still provides limited information about the uptake of Eu3+ in solu￾tion for the formation of a solid material during actual precipitation. This is because
the positions of the peaks assigned to the 4fn → 4fn transitions are not significantly
influenced by changes in the crystal field of Eu3+. In contrast, the 4fn−1
5d1 → 4fn elec￾tronic transitions in Eu2+ (n = 7) and Ce3+ (n = 1) exhibit a substantially stronger influ￾ence of the crystal field splitting owing to the interaction of the excited state 5d
electron with its local surrounding. The emission spectra of these electronic transi￾tions are strongly shifted by complexation, the covalencies of binding ligands (nephe￾lauxetic effect), lengths of newly formed bonds, and changes in the coordination
number. As Eu2+ easily oxidises to the more stable Eu3+ (which lacks 4f 5
5d → 4f 6 tran￾sitions in the visible range) under ambient conditions, Ce3+ is a more appropriate ion
for use as a coordination sensor [27].
Accordingly, Arana et al. [48] used Ce3+ as a coordination sensor to monitor the crys￾tallisation of the model system [Ce(phen)2(NO3)3]. The emission spectrum of Ce3+ in etha￾nol (λex = 400 nm) showed a broad 5d1 → 4f1 Ce3+-based transition band before the
addition of the ligand, with a maximum at approximately 545 nm and Commission Inter￾nationale d’Éclairage (CIE) 1931 colour coordinates of x = 0.4494, y = 0.4339 (Figure 5.8).
After product formation, the emission band (λex = 400 nm) shifted, with a maximum at
approximately 660 nm and the CIE 1931 colour coordinates of x = 0.6693, y = 0.3231. This
considerable difference between the optical properties of Ce3+ in the solvation shell and
those of Ce3+ in [Ce(phen)2(NO3)3] facilitated the tracking of the reaction progress by
in situ luminescence measurements. To enable simultaneous monitoring of both the reac￾tant and the product while minimising the band overlap, the low-energy emission band
of Ce3+ in the product was monitored at 700 nm, and the intensity of the high-energy
emission of Ce3+ as a reactant was examined at 500 nm. Figure 5.8 shows a comparison of
the emission intensities at 500 and 700 nm, the volume of the added phen solution, and
the in situ measurement results of pH and ion conductivity. To appropriately analyse the
mechanism of the formation of [Ce(phen)2(NO3)3] quantitatively, the process was divided
into three stages: A, B, and C (Figure 5.8). Reaction times of the stage A, B, and C were
0–3, 3–10, and >10 min, respectively [48].
Stage A consisted of the induction time. In that stage, the pH increased due to the
addition of the alkaline phen solution; nevertheless, the intensity of the luminescence
bands at 500 and 700 nm and the ion conductivity did not change significantly, indicating
122 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Sutathat the product was not yet formed. In contrast, in stage B, crystallisation began, as re￾vealed by the increase in the emission intensity of the luminescence band at 700 nm and
the simultaneous decrease in the emission intensity of the luminescence band at 500 nm.
These results were confirmed by the concomitant changes in the pH and ion conductiv￾ity of the reaction solution. At approximately t = 3 min, the pH started to decrease owing
to the uptake of the phen molecules from the solution followed by their incorporation
into the solid complex, confirming product formation. Thereafter, the pH increased again
until t = 10 min because of the additionally added ligand molecules. In this stage, ionic
conductivity also began to decrease at t = 3 min owing to the uptake of free ions from the
solution for the product formation, which further confirmed the onset of crystallisation.
In stage C, the addition of the ligand solution was discontinued, and therefore, the pH
stopped increasing. Instead, it decreased until approximately t ≈ 11 min and then stabi￾lised. The same behaviour was observed for the ion conductivity, which decreased
up to t ≈ 11 min and subsequently stabilised. Similarly, no further increase in the
emission intensity of the band at 700 nm or decrease in the emission intensity of the
band at 500 nm was detected during stage C, implying no considerable complex
Figure 5.8: Emission spectra (top left) and CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram (bottom left) of Ce3+ before and
after the formation [Ce(phen)2(NO3)3] in ethanol. Comparison of the in situ luminescence results with the
time dependence of the addition of phen to Ce3+-containing solutions, pH and ion conductivity during the
crystallisation of [Ce(phen)2(NO3)3] (reproduced from reference [48] with permission from the Royal
Society of Chemistry).
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 123formation after this period and the completion of the reaction. The increase in the
emission intensity of the band at 500 nm during the stages B and C was probably caused
by a slight overlap of this band with the low-energy emission band [48].
As explained in Section 5.1, in situ luminescence measurements can be employed to
examine the production of non-emissive materials when coordination sensors are intro￾duced into their structure. To demonstrate this principle, Eu3+ and Ce3+ substituted Ca2+
ions in selected calcium phosphates to monitor the formation of and transformations
between different calcium phosphate phases. Calcium phosphates are medically highly
relevant because it is the main inorganic constituent of mammals and is extensively
used in the production of implants and prostheses. Understanding the transformation
between different calcium phosphate phases can help deduce the conversions between
healthy and pathological tissues, prevent and treat diseases, and improve the stability of
implants. In the abovementioned example, in situ luminescence was used to detect the
production of amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) and Ca5(PO4)3OH (hydroxyapatite,
HAp), besides their phase transformations to CaHPO4 · 2H2O and Ca8H2(PO4)6 · 5H2O
under real reaction conditions [49].
Firstly, to investigate the influence of the concentration of coordination sensors
on the reaction pathway, preliminary experiments were performed to compare the
phase transformations of undoped calcium phosphates and the ones doped with 3, 5,
and 7 mol% Ce3+. Results of these preliminary experiments showed that, undoped, a
mixture of ACP and HAp was initially formed. After 7 min, these phases converted to
CaHPO4 · 2H2O, and upon heating to 80 °C, an additional transition to Ca8H2(PO4)6 · 5H2O
occurred (t = 50 min). Doping of 3 mol% Ce3+ into the Ca2+ sites did not affect phase transi￾tions in this system. However, when 5 mol% Ce3+ was doped into the Ca2+ sites, a trans￾formation of ACP to HAp occurred, followed by the conversion of HAp to CaHPO4 ·
2H2O after t ≈ 10 min. When 7 mol% Ce3+ was doped into the Ca2+ sites, CaHPO4
formed prior to the crystallisation of CaHPO4 · 2H2O. In addition, introduction of
7 mol% Ce3+ into the Ca2+ sites enhanced amorphisation, increasing the length of the
stable ACP phase, possibly due to the increase in disorder caused by the differences
between the charge and ionic radii of the two cations. To analyse the influence of
the type of coordination sensor (Ce3+ or Eu3+) on the phase transformations of cal￾cium phosphate, the investigated compounds were doped with both ions, and their
powder diffractograms were compared. Introduction of Ce3+ or Eu3+ into the host lattice
led to the same phase transformations at the same reaction times. In conclusion, 3 mol
% of Ln ions or the type of coordination sensor (namely, Ce3+ and Eu3+) did not affect
the phase transformations of calcium phosphates. Therefore, 3 mol% of both coordina￾tion sensors were employed to further examine the respective phase transformations
via in situ luminescence analysis [49].
For this purpose, a mixed aqueous solution of Ca(NO3)2 and Ce(NO3)3 was added
to a (NH4)2HPO4 solution. As expected, no luminescence was detected for the (NH4)2HPO4
solution; however, within 10 min of the addition of the cation solution, a broad emission
band between 310 and 440 nm with a maximum at 353 nm emerged, indicating product
124 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Sutaformation (Figure 5.9). This emission range is consistent with the electronic transitions
of Ce3+ from the lowest 5d1
-based states to the 2
F5/2 and 2
F7/2 ground state levels of Ce3+
in HAp [50]. The asymmetrical shape of the Ce3+-based emission band implied the pres￾ence of a secondary phase, which was confirmed by ex situ XRD. At t = 13 min, the emis￾sion intensity started to considerably decrease, suggesting the production of a new
phase with lower emission intensity. Ex situ XRD demonstrated the formation of
CaHPO4 · 2H2O during this stage of the reaction, which explained the decrease in emis￾sion intensity, because this structure introduced quenching H2O molecules into the co￾ordination sphere of Ce3+. Although the in situ emission spectra were recorded at a
constant excitation wavelength of 280 nm, the decrease in the emission intensity
could have alternatively been caused by a shift of the excitation bands during the
phase transformations of calcium phosphates. To verify this hypothesis, the excita￾tion spectra were additionally recorded for the abovementioned reaction. Time￾dependent intensity of the excitation spectra presented the same profile as the time￾dependent intensity of the emission spectra, and no substantial shift was observed
in the excitation bands. This indicated that the variation in the intensity of the exci￾tation spectra nearly exclusively correlated with the variation of the corresponding
emission properties [49].
CaHPO4 · 2H2O formation was also revealed by a slight redshift of the emission spec￾tra probably caused by the higher coordination number and shorter average bond
lengths of CaHPO4 · 2H2O as compared to those of HAp. As ACP lacks long-range order,
limited structural information is available about this phase [51–53]. At t = 20–40 min, the
luminescence intensity remained constant, indicating no significant structural changes
in this time range. After t = 40 min, the temperature started to increase and the emission
intensity started to decrease due to thermal quenching. At t ≈ 51 min, the emission in￾tensity slightly increased and then decreased again, implying an additional structural
change in the cation environment and a phase transformation at T ≈ 60 °C. In summary,
ex situ and synchrotron-based in situ XRD confirmed the conversion of CaHPO4 · 2H2O to
Ca8H2(PO4)6 · 5H2O during this reaction stage. The production of Ca8H2(PO4)6 · 5H2O was
also revealed by the in situ recorded emission spectrum via the emergence of an addi￾tional emission band, a slight redshift and intensity increase, expected owing to the in￾crease in the number of distinct crystallographic sites for the doping of Ce3+ and a
decrease in the number of coordinated water molecules in Ca8H2(PO4)6 · 5H2O. A similar
behaviour was also detected using Eu3+ as a coordination sensor for tracking the same
reaction pathway [49].
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 1255.6 Tracking the reaction pathways without
coordination sensors
In general, ILACS setups can be additionally used to track formation of solid materials
that do not involve coordination sensors. This goal is achieved by monitoring changes
of other emitting species such as organic molecules or monitoring the solution turbid￾ity by measuring the time-dependent intensity of the light transmitted through the
solvent during chemical reactions [46]. Measurements of light transmission are espe￾cially advantageous because the time for formation of solid materials can be esti￾mated irrespective of the luminescence properties and is nearly independent of the
wavelength of the light source; this increases the flexibility of its application. In the
subsequent example, a 395-nm LED was used as the light source. Thus, the light source
irradiated the reactor from the outside, whereas the CCD detector connected to an op￾tical fibre submerged in the reactor continuously measured the intensity of the light
transmitted through the reaction medium. A combination of in situ luminescence
analysis and light transmission was applied, for instance, to examine the formation
and phase transformations of [Al(acac)3] (acac = acetylacetone) [46], an important pre￾cursor for the synthesis of Al2O3 nanomaterials [54].
In summary, for the synthesis of [Al(acac)3], an aqueous solution of NH3 was
added to an aqueous solution containing Al(NO3)3 · 9H2O and acac. In situ measure￾ments helped determine the synthesis conditions resulting in proper crystallisation of
[Al(acac)3] and the influence of the concentration of NH3 in the reaction solution (that
is, pH) on the induction time. In daylight, although [Al(acac)3] is colourless, it emits
blue light under UV irradiation (320 nm, Figure 5.10). Ex situ luminescence studies
Figure 5.9: Transformations between different calcium phosphate phases studied by in situ luminescence
measurements (left). In situ emission spectra recorded during the crystallisation of calcium phosphate
using Ce3+ as a coordination sensor (reproduced from reference [49] with permission from the Chinese
Chemical Society (CCS), Peking University (PKU), and the Royal Society of Chemistry).
126 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Sutaindicate that the emission of [Al(acac)3] (λex = 320 nm) ranges from 400 to 700 nm and
consists of multiple bands peaking at 440, 460, and 509 nm. In contrast, pure acac
shows very weak luminescence with an emission band between approximately 417
and 833 nm (maximum, 550 nm) upon excitation at λex = 380 nm [46]. Crystallisation
can be examined, therefore, via in situ luminescence measurements because of the
large differences between the optical properties of uncoordinated acac molecules and
those of the acac molecules as ligands coordinating Al3+ in [Al(acac)3] [46].
Thus, the progress of the synthesis of [Al(acac)3] was characterised via in situ lumi￾nescence analysis by monitoring the intensity of the blue emission band at 450 nm
under excitation at 320 nm. Initially concentrated NH3 (25%) was added to an aqueous
solution of Al(NO3)3 · 9H2O and acac. After approximately 2.1 min, product formation was
detected by a substantial increase in the emission intensity upon the addition of 1.06 mL
or ~ 14 mmol of NH3, and the critical pH of ~ 2.4 was reached. At t = 3.2 min, the emission
intensity started to decrease, continuously decreasing until the end of the reaction, with
the exception of an oscillation at approximately t = 20–30 min. In situ light transmission
measurements and synchrotron-based in situ XRD confirmed the formation of [Al(acac)3],
its partial dissolution after t ≈ 3.2 min, and its conversion from α- and γ-phases at ap￾proximately t = 20–30 min, justifying the changes detected by the in situ luminescence
measurements in this time range. When the NH3 concentration was decreased to 12.5%,
an onset of the emission intensity occurred only after 3.7 min, which suggested a delay in
product formation to the reaction time when the amount of NH3 approached the critical
concentration and the pH reached ~ 2.5. When the NH3 concentration was decreased to
approximately 3.5%, the emission intensity increased only after 11.2 min and the pH
reached 2.5, verifying the successful control of product formation via the adjustment of
the NH3 concentration [46].
Figure 5.10: Blue emission of [Al(acac)3] under UV light (left). Time-dependent emission intensity of [Al
(acac)3] at 450 nm (λex = 320 nm) showing the influence of NH3 concentration on the crystallisation time of
[Al(acac)3] (right) (reproduced with permission from reference [46]).
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 1275.7 Conclusions and outlook
This chapter provides a brief introduction to the new ILACS technique, which was re￾cently developed at the Kiel University. It explores the theoretical background and ad￾vantages, experimental setup, and current applications.
Although in situ luminescence analysis shows high potential for monitoring and elu￾cidating the mechanisms of chemical reactions in many settings, this approach is still in
its infancy and needs to be further developed. To date, this strategy has mostly focused
on examining the formation of solid materials via simplified co-precipitation synthesis
techniques; nevertheless, in future, it can be also potentially used to investigate solvo￾thermal, ultrasound, microwave, ionic liquid, solid-state, or melting-based syntheses.
For example, to facilitate the application of in situ luminescence analysis for these
synthesis methods, practical and technological adaptations to physical equipment are nec￾essary. Solid-state or melting-based syntheses can, for instance, be easily monitored ex￾ploring a reflection geometry of emission and excitation radiation and by using an
observation window within the applied oven. Many new experimental studies can be
reached adapting the in situ luminescence approach to flow reactor cells, which is cur￾rently in development. In general, expansion of integrated experimental setups that en￾able concomitant monitoring of reactions by combining additional approaches such as
pair distribution function (PDF) analysis is also one additional goal to widen the scope
and practicality of ILACS.
In addition to new synthesis and analysis techniques monitoring the formation of
additional types of materials, including quantum dots and metal-organic frameworks,
can be combined with in situ luminescence measurements. Furthermore, manipulat￾ing the reaction conditions to allow the regular use of Eu2+ as a coordination sensor
owing to its intense and coordination-sensitive 4f 6
5d1 → 4f7 emission bands may open
many new areas of study for new types of materials. Finally, the spectroscopic
changes expected during the conversion between the different oxidation states of Ce
and Eu ions can be also used for in situ monitoring of redox processes.
References
[1] N. Pienack, W. Bensch, In situ monitoring of the formation of crystalline solids. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
50, 2014–2034, 2011.
[2] H. Terraschke, L. Ruiz Arana, P. Lindenberg, W. Bensch, Development of a new in-situ analysis
technique applying luminescence of local coordination sensors: principle and application for
monitoring metal-ligand exchange processes. Analyst 141, 2588–2594, 2016.
[3] H. Terraschke, M. Rothe, P. Lindenberg, In situ monitoring metal-ligand exchange processes by
optical spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction analysis: a review. Rev. Anal. Chem. 37, 20170003/1–22,
2018.
128 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Suta[4] W. Bensch, J. Ophey, H. Hain, H. Gesswein, D. Chen, R. Mönig, P. A. Gruberd, S. Indris, Chemical and
electrochemical insertion of Li into the spinel structure of CuCr2Se4: Ex situ and in situ observations
by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14, 7509–7516, 2012,
and references cited therein.
[5] R. I. Walton, D. O’Hare, Watching solids crystallise using in situ powder diffraction. Chem. Commun.
2283–2291, 2000.
[6] S. J. Sedlmaier, S. J. Cassidy, R. G. Morris, M. Drakopoulos, C. Reinhard, S. J. Moorhouse, D. O’Hare,
P. Manuel, D. Khalyavin, S. J. Clarke, Ammonia-rich high-temperature superconducting intercalates
of iron selenide revealed through time-resolved In situ X-Ray And neutron diffraction. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 136, 630–633, 2014.
[7] S. Mitchel, T. Biswick, W. Jones, G. Williams, D. O’Hare, A synchrotron radiation study of the
hydrothermal synthesis of layered double hydroxides from MgO and Al2O3 slurries. Green Chem. 9,
373–378, 2007.
[8] N. Heidenreich, U. Rütt, M. Köppen, A. Ken Inge, S. Beier, A.-C. Dippel, R. Suren, N. Stock, A multi￾purpose reaction cell for the investigation of reactions under solvothermal conditions. Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 88, 104102/1–12, 2017.
[9] D. Saha, E. D. Bøjesen, K. M. Ø. Jensen, A.-C. Dippel, B. B. Iversen, Formation mechanisms of Pt and
Pt3Gd nanoparticles under solvothermal conditions: An in situ total X-ray scattering study. J. Phys.
Chem. C. 119, 13364–13369, 2015.
[10] J.-L. Mi, K. M. Ø. Jensen, C. Tyrsted, M. Bremholm, B. B. Iversen, In situ total X-ray scattering study of
the formation mechanism and structural defects in anatase TiO2 nanoparticles under hydrothermal
conditions. Cryst. Eng. Comm. 17, 6868–6877, 2015.
[11] M. Bauer, H. Bertagnolli, Towards X-ray absorption spectroscopy in real time. Chem. Phys. Chem. 10,
2197–2200, 2009.
[12] J. Keating, G. Sankar, T. I. Hyde, S. Kohara, K. Ohara, Elucidation of structure and nature of the
PdO–Pd transformation using in situ PDF and XAS techniques. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 15,
8555–8565, 2013.
[13] J. Cornel, C. Lindenberg, M. Mazzotti, Quantitative application of in situ ATR-FTIR and Raman
spectroscopy in crystallization processes. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 47, 4870–4882, 2008.
[14] P. Kubanek, H.-W. Schmidt, B. Spliethoff, F. Schüth, Parallel IR spectroscopic characterization of CO
chemisorption on Pt loaded zeolites. Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 77, 89–96, 2005.
[15] G. Férey, M. Haouas, T. Loiseau, F. Taulelle, Nanoporous solids: How do they form? an in situ
approach. Chem. Mater. 26, 299–309, 2014.
[16] B. Bastian Schaack, W. Schrader, A. Corma, F. Schüth, Nucleation of ITQ-21 Studied by ESI-MS. Chem.
Mater. 21, 4448–4453, 2009.
[17] H. Terraschke, C. Wickleder, UV, Blue, Green, Yellow, Red and Small: Newest Developments on Eu2+-
doped Nanophosphors. Chem. Rev. 115, 11352–11378, 2015.
[18] H. Terraschke, M. Suta, M. Adlung, S. Mammadova, N. Musayeva, R. Jabbarov, M. Nazarov, C.
Wickleder, SrAl2O4:Eu2+(,Dy3+) Nanosized Particles: Synthesis and Interpretation of Temperature￾Dependent Optical Properties. J. Spectrosc. 2015, 541958/1–12, 2015.
[19] H. Terraschke, M. F. T. Meier, Y. Voss, H. Schönherr, C. Wickleder, Synthesis, functionalization and
toxicity of multicolour bifunctional nanophosphors. J. Ceramic. Proces. Res. 16, 59–63, 2015.
[20] G. R. Choppin, P. Thakur, J. N. Mathur, Complexation thermodynamics and structural aspects of
actinide-aminopolycarboxylates. Coord. Chem. Rev. 250, 936–947, 2006.
[21] X. Tan, M. Fang, X. Wang, Sorption speciation of lanthanides/actinides on minerals by TRLFS, EXAFS
and DFT studies: a review. Molecules 15, 8431–8468, 2010.
[22] R. T. Wegh, A. Meijerink, Spin-allowed and spin-forbidden 4fn
↔4fn-15d transitions for heavy
lanthanides in fluoride hosts. Phys. Rev. B 60, 10820–10830, 1999.
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 129[23] R. T. Wegh, A. Meijerink, R.-J. Lamminmäki, J. Hölsä, Extending Dieke's diagram. J. Lumin. 87–89,
1002–1004, 2000.
[24] L. Van Pieterson, R. T. Wegh, A. Meijerink, M. F. Reid, Emission spectra and trends for 4fn−1
5d ↔ 4fn
transitions of lanthanide ions: Experiment and theory. J. Chem. Phys. 115, 9382–9392, 2001.
[25] L. van Pieterson, M. F. Reid, R. T. Wegh, S. Soverna, A. Meijerink, 4fn
→4fn−1
5d transitions of the light
lanthanides: Experiment and theory. Phys. Rev. B 65, 045113/1–16, 2002.
[26] L. van Pieterson, M. F. Reid, G. Burdick, A. Meijerink, 4fn
→4fn−1
5d transitions of the heavy
lanthanides: Experiment and theory. Phys. Rev. B 65, 045114/1–13, 2002.
[27] W. M. Yen, H. Yamamoto, S. Shionoya, Phosphor Handbook. Boca Raton: CRC Press Laser and
Optical Science and Technology, 2006.
[28] N. Kunkel, H. Kohlmann, A. Sayed, M. Springborg, Alkaline-earth metal hydrides as novel host
lattices for Eu-II luminescence. Inorg. Chem. 50, 5873–5875, 2011.
[29] D. Jia, X. Wang, Alkali earth sulfide phosphors doped with Eu2+ and Ce3+ for LEDs. Opt. Mater. 30,
375–379, 2007.
[30] P. Pust, P. J. Schmidt, W. Schnick, A revolution in lighting. Nat. Mater. 14, 454–458, 2015.
[31] K. Binnemans, Interpretation of europium(III) spectra. Coord. Chem. Rev. 295, 1–45, 2015.
[32] G. H. Dieke, Spectra and Energy Levels of RE Ions in Crystals. New York: Wiley, 1968.
[33] W. T. Carnall, G. L. Goodman, K. Rajnak, R. S. Rana, A systematic analysis of the spectra of the
lanthanides doped into single-crystal LaF3. J. Chem. Phys. 90, 3443–3457, 1989.
[34] K. Binnemans, C. Görller-Walrand, Application of the Eu3+ ion for site symmetry determination.
J. Rare Earths 14, 173–180, 1996.
[35] B. Judd, Optical absorption intensities of rare-earth ions. Phys. Rev. 127, 750–761, 1962.
[36] G. Ofelt, Intensities of crystal spectra of rare‐earth ions. J. Chem. Phys. 37, 511–520, 1962.
[37] G. Nishimura, T. Kushida, Local field in glass probed by laser-induced fluorescence-line narrowing in
Ca(PO3)2:Eu3+. Phys. Rev. B 37, 9075–9078, 1988.
[38] M. Tanaka, G. Nishimura, T. Kushida, Contribution of J mixing to the 5
D0−7
F0 transition of Eu3+ ions
in several host matrices. Phys. Rev. B 49, 16917–16925, 1994.
[39] B. G. Wybourne, Effective operators and spectroscopic properties. J. Chem. Phys. 48, 2596–2611,
1968.
[40] M. C. Downer, G. W. Burdick, D. K. Sardar, A new contribution to spin‐forbidden rare earth optical
transition intensities: Gd3+ and Eu3+. J. Chem. Phys. 89, 1787–1797, 1988.
[41] G. W. Burdick, M. C. Downer, D. K. Sardar, A new contribution to spin‐forbidden rare earth optical
transition intensities: Analysis of all trivalent lanthanides. J. Chem. Phys. 91, 1511–1520, 1989.
[42] M. Tanaka, T. Kushida, Interference between Judd-Ofelt and Wybourne-Downer mechanisms in the 5
D0−7
FJ (J=2,4) transitions of Sm2+ in solids. Phys. Rev. B 53, 588–593, 1996.
[43] M. Tanaka, T. Kushida, Optical transition mechanisms of Sm2+ and Eu3+ in solids. J. Lumin. 72–74,
141–143, 1997.
[44] A. Beeby, I. M. Clarkson, R. S. Dickins, S. Faulkner, D. Parker, L. Royle, A. S. De Sousa, J. A. Gareth
Williams, M. Woods, Non-radiative deactivation of the excited states of europium, terbium and
ytterbium complexes by proximate energy-matched OH, NH and CH oscillators: an improved
luminescence method for establishing solution hydration states. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2,
493–504, 1999.
[45] K. Binnemans, Lanthanide-Based Luminescent Hybrid Materials. Chem. Rev. 109, 4283–4374, 2009.
[46] N. Pienack, L. Ruiz Arana, W. Bensch, H. Terraschke, In situ studies on phase transitions of
Tris(acetylacetonato)-aluminum(III) Al(acac)3. Crystals 6, 157/1–14, 2016.
[47] P. Polzin, I. V. Eliani, J. Ströh, M. Braun, N. Ruser, N. Heidenreich, P. Rönfeldt, F. Bertram, C. Näther,
S. Wöhlbrandt, M. Suta, H. Terraschke, From ligand exchange to reaction intermediates: What does
really happen during the synthesis of emissive complexes? Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20, 7428–7437,
2018.
130 Huayna Terraschke, Markus Suta[48] L. Ruiz Arana, P. Lindenberg, H. Said, M. Radke, N. Heidenreich, C. D. Santos Cunha, S. Leubner,
H. Terraschke, Monitoring the mechanism of formation of [Ce(1,10-phenanthroline)2(NO3)3] by in
situ luminescence analysis of 5d-4f electronic transitions. RSC. Adv. 7, 52794–52800, 2017.
[49] H. Terraschke, M. Rothe, A.-M. Tsirigoni, P. Lindenberg, L. Ruiz Arana, N. Heidenreich, F. Bertram, M.
Etter, In-situ luminescence analysis: A new light on monitoring calcium phosphate phase
transitions. Inorg. Chem. Front. 4, 1157–1165, 2017.
[50] I. V. Berezovskaya, N. P. Efryushina, E. V. Zubar, V. P. Dotsenko, “Distribution and Luminescent
Properties of Ce3+ Ions in Nanosized Calcium Hydroxyapatite,” Sumy State University, p. 01PCN24,1
2012.
[51] S. V. Dorozhkin, Calcium orthophosphates in nature, biology and medicine. Materials 2, 399–498,
2009, and references therein.
[52] A. S. Posner, F. Betts, N. C. Blumenthal, Formation and structure of synthetic and bone
hydroxyapatites. Progr. Cryst. Growth Char. 3, 49–64, 1980.
[53] J. E. Harries, D. W. L. Hukins, C. Holt, S. S. Hasnain, Conversion of amorphous calcium phosphate
into hydroxyapatite investigated by EXAFS spectroscopy. J. Cryst. Growth 84, 563–570, 1987.
[54] L. D. Hafshejani, S. Tangsir, H. Koponen, J. Riikonen, T. Karhunen, U. Tapper, V.-P. Lehto, H. Moazed,
A. A. Naseri, A. Hooshmand, Synthesis and characterization of Al2O3 nanoparticles by flame spray
pyrolysis (FSP) – Role of Fe ions in the precursor. Powder Technol. 298, 42–49, 2016.
Chapter 5 In situ luminescence analysis of coordination sensors (ILACS) 131Huayna Terraschke✶
Chapter 6
In situ monitoring of the syntheses, phase
transformations, and loading processes of
metal–organic frameworks
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are formed via the “LEGO”-like self-assembly of li￾gand and metal building blocks. However, in situ measurements during MOF forma￾tion have shown that the prediction of MOF crystal structures is not simple. In
practice, minor variations in the synthesis parameters can disturb the gradual organi￾sation of the building blocks into the desired ordered crystalline compounds, leading
to the formation of different polymorphs or even non-porous structures. This chapter
summarises important discoveries in this field and newly developed reactors for
probing the chain of events leading to MOF formation and the loading of guest mole￾cules within MOF pores.
6.1 Introduction
As explained in Chapter 2, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are compounds formed
by cationic inorganic building units (IBUs) interconnected by polydentate anionic or
neutral organic ligands. IBUs are typically isolated ions or metal oxo compounds,
whereas common organic ligands include amines, carboxylates, phosphonates, and
azolates [1]. This combination of inorganic and organic components yields highly crys￾talline materials with extended networks, unique porosity, and high specific surface
areas. Unlike other porous materials, such as periodic mesoporous organosilicas and
zeolites, MOFs exhibit highly tuneable architectures and chemical properties [2]. Even
minor changes in the structure, length, and functional groups of the organic ligands
or the composition of the metal salts can drastically alter the nature of the resulting
MOF. Nevertheless, various examples have been reported in which the chemical and
structural properties were deliberately varied, with the aim of obtaining MOFs that
are potentially useful for a wide range of applications, including the separation of gas￾eous fuels (e.g. H2), CO2 capture and storage, catalysis, drug delivery, light harvesting,
light production, and molecular sensing [3].
Although MOF formation occurs spontaneously via self-assembly, in most cases, the
complexity of the chemical reaction prevents detailed predictions about the structure
of the final MOF. The gradual reorganisation of disordered solution species into an
✶
Corresponding author: Huayna Terraschke, E-Mail: hterraschke@ac.uni-kiel.de
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-006ordered crystalline structure involves many individual physical and chemical interac￾tions, each of which depends on multiple synthesis parameters, such as temperature,
reactant concentration, and reaction time [4]. Due to the large number of reaction pa￾rameters and the cumulative nature of MOF formation, even small changes in the syn￾thesis conditions can result in the formation of very different MOF polymorphs or even
completely different compounds [5]. The lack of mechanistic understanding is a serious
obstacle [3] for the development of new pre-designed MOFs and the transfer of synthe￾sis procedures from the laboratory to large-scale production, which is necessary for
MOF commercialisation [6].
For these reasons, obtaining detailed information about the influence of synthesis
parameters on the crystallisation mechanism of MOFs is essential to control their
structure formation and structure-related properties, especially the porosity. To eluci￾date the pathway of MOF formation, analyses must be performed not only after syn￾thesis, or ex situ, but also during the synthesis process using so-called in situ analysis
techniques. In situ techniques can provide extremely detailed information about crys￾tallisation processes, phase transformations, synthesis kinetics, side products, and
MOF stability under real synthesis conditions.
This chapter is focused on two main topics: the in situ monitoring of MOF synthesis
and phase transformations and the in situ analysis of MOF loading processes. In particu￾lar, Section 6.2 reviews selected examples from the current literature on the characteri￾sation of MOF formation and phase transformations during solution and solvent-free
synthesis processes, especially using in situ techniques such as synchrotron-based X-ray
diffraction (XRD) analysis and in situ infrared (IR) spectroscopy. In situ pair distribution
function (PDF) measurements, which have only recently been applied as a promising
method for monitoring MOF formation, are also summarised in this chapter. In addition,
examples for the use of in situ characterisation methods for solution-based reactions in
both batch and flow reactors are also reviewed. Sections 6.3 and 6.4 focus on the analysis
of MOF loading processes with guest molecules in the bulk and in thin films, respec￾tively, in which the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) technique plays a key role. The
growing recognition of the usefulness of in situ techniques for analysing MOF formation
combined with the improved functionality provided by third-generation synchrotron
sources and resolution-enhanced detectors [7] has led to rapid growth in the number of
MOF analyses employing in situ monitoring, over the last several years. Hence, the total
volume of publications in this field cannot be reviewed in a single chapter. Therefore,
the following sections focus on selected examples of scientific articles (mostly published
between 2015 and 2020) that specifically address the analysis of MOF formation, phase
transformations, and loading processes.
For further information about studies on the in situ analysis of MOF synthesis
published prior to 2015, please see the reviews by Walton and Millange [8] and Férey
et al. [9]. For mechanistic insights into the construction of reactors for in situ studies,
the reader should refer to the work of O’Hare et al. [10], Walton and O’Hare [11], and
Terraschke et al. [12] For an overview on the quantitative kinetic modelling of MOF
134 Huayna Terraschkeformation, the review by Van Vleet et al. [13] is recommended. The reader may also
be interested in the article by Reinsch and Stock [14], which provides a personal view
on the rationalisation, application, and exploration of MOF synthesis, and the paper
by Heinke et al. [15], which summarises recent developments in the synthesis and
in situ characterisation of surface-mounted MOFs (SURMOFs).
6.2 In situ analysis of MOF synthesis and phase
transformations
6.2.1 In situ XRD analysis of solution-based processes
In situ XRD analysis employing batch reactors
As the most valuable tool for monitoring changes during the formation or transforma￾tion of crystalline MOFs, in situ XRD provides detailed and high-resolution data. How￾ever, this technique is not without challenges. For successful in situ XRD measurements,
the high background signal produced by the reactor walls and bulk solvent in solution￾based synthesis processes is a significant technological hurdle that must be overcome to
obtain acceptable signal-to-noise ratios and analysable data sets. This issue can be ad￾dressed by using high-energy, high-flux X-rays (white or monochromatic); such X-rays
are available at synchrotron facilities, such as the Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron
(DESY) in Germany, the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) in France, the
Source Optimisée de Lumière d’Energie Intermédiaire du LURE (SOLEIL) in France, the
Diamond Light Source in the UK, and MAX IV in Sweden, to name only a few. While
these facilities provide access to the necessary high-intensity X-rays, they are removed
from the normal laboratory setting and lack the equipment required to perform on-site
MOF synthesis. Standard beamline infrastructure generally does not include the equip￾ment required for MOF synthesis because of the extreme reaction parameters used, such
as high pressures, high temperatures, ultrasonic or microwave energy, and specific pH
levels, viscosity levels, reactant concentrations, and solvent compositions [12].
Several research groups have overcome these technological challenges, and this
section summarises successful experiments, the technological solutions employed,
and the obtained insights into MOF chemistry.
Since 2015, multiple in situ XRD studies on MOFs have been facilitated by the devel￾opment of a new, versatile, and easy-to-use remote-controlled reactor set-up by the Kiel
University and the DESY facility (Figure 6.1, left). This set-up, named SynRAC (synchro￾tron-based reaction cell for the analysis of chemical reactions), has several key features
that facilitate in situ XRD measurements. In addition to integrated openings for the X￾ray beam, the reactor cell includes a stirring unit, a heating mantle, and injection sys￾tems for liquids and solids. The heating mantle can control the temperature within the
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 135Figure 6.1: Schematic representation of the SynRAC set-up developed at the Kiel University in cooperation with DESY (left). Reaction progress (α) and
nucleation probability (Pn) as a function of time for the synthesis of Ce-UiO-66 at 70, 80, 90, and 100 °C (right) (reprinted from reference [7], with the
permission of AIP Publishing).
136 Huayna Terraschkereaction vessel in the range from ambient room temperature to 180 °C and is cooled
with compressed air. The injection systems are capable of accurately adding either two
liquid reactants or a single solid reactant to the reaction at pre-set intervals. To simplify
use, each SynRAC unit is designed to hold two sizes of commercially available dispos￾able borosilicate vessels (5 and 11 mL) [7]. Examples of studies that have employed Syn￾RAC cells to examine MOF formation include Heidenreich et al. [7, 16], Reinsch et al.
[17], Rhauderwiek et al. [18], and Bueken et al. [5], each of which is discussed below.
To verify the performance of the different features of the SynRAC reactor, various
test reactions were carried out at beamline P08 [19] at DESY [7]. First, the crystallisa￾tion kinetics of Ce-UiO-66 ([Ce6(OH)4(O)4(BDC)6], where UiO = University of Oslo and
BDC = benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate) were investigated by analysing the obtained in situ
XRD data using the Gualtieri approach [20]. The progress of reactions performed at
70, 80, 90, and 100 °C was fitted with a non-linear equation (eq. 6.1) based on the Gual￾tieri model [20] (Figure 6.1, right) [7]:
α = 1
1 + exp − t − a
b
  · 1 − exp kg ·t  n   (6:1)
where α is the reaction progress, t is the reaction time, kg is the rate constant of crystal
growth, n is the dimension of growth, b is the distribution of the probability of nucle￾ation with time, and a is inversely proportional to the nucleation rate constant, kn [7]:
a = 1
kn
. (6:2)
The probability of nucleation, Pn, can also be calculated using the following equation
(Figure 6.1, right) [7]:
Pn = exp −ð Þ t − a 2
b
 ! (6:3)
In addition, plotting ln(k) as a function of 1/T gave the activation energies for nucle￾ation (50(5) kJ/mol) and crystal growth (32(5) kJ/mol) [7].
Following these proof-of-concept studies, the SynRAC reactor was employed to syn￾thesise the coordination polymer (CP) [Bi(HIDC)(IDC)] (H2IDC = 4,5-imidazoledicarboxylic
acid). This CP evolved from a precursor phase composed of the highly disordered bis￾muth nitrate compound [Bi6O4(OH)4]0.54[Bi6O5(OH)3]0.46(NO3)5.54, which was formed as a
crystalline intermediate [7, 21]. Moreover, employing citraconic acid as a linker and a
green-chemistry-based approach with mild reaction conditions and water as the only
solvent, the in situ XRD study showed the formation of a novel MOF, CAU-15-Cit ([Al2
(OH)4(O2C-C3H4-CO2)] · nH2O, where CAU = Christian-Albrechts-Universität) [16].
In addition, SynRAC was used in studies examining the green synthesis of the
MOF Al-MIL-68-Mes ([Al(OH)(O2C-C3H4-CO2)] · nH2O), where MIL represents Matériaux
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 137de l’Institut Lavoisier), under mild reaction conditions [17]. AI-MIL-68-Mes consists of cat￾ionic aluminium centres interlinked by mesaconate (MES) and hydroxide ions. Al-MOFs
are of commercial interest because aluminium salts are inexpensive, abundant, and they
generate crystalline compounds with high structural stability, even at extreme tempera￾tures [17]. The efficient synthesis of Al-MIL-68-Mes, which would facilitate its widespread
industrial use, requires a detailed understanding of the crystallisation process. For this
reason, the formation of AI-MIL-68-Mes was analysed by in situ XRD at beamline P09 [22]
at DESY. These studies revealed the immediate formation of an amorphous phase upon
mixing of the reactants, followed by the formation of a highly crystalline phase. As the
Gualtieri approach was not appropriate for fitting the experimental curves, the reaction
kinetics were evaluated via a Sharp–Hancock plot based on the Avrami theory [23]. Spe￾cifically, ln(−ln(1 − α)) was plotted as a function of ln(t − t0) for the time period t0 to t, dur￾ing which a constant reaction mechanism dominated the crystallisation process. Although
this type of analysis is restricted to evaluating the experimental data obtained from ho￾mogenous systems such as solutions or gels, it can be effectively employed to provide gen￾eral information about the reaction dynamics of nearly uniform systems. The slope of the
linear regression model allowed for the determination of the Avrami exponent for the
reaction. This metric, which is related to the rate-limiting step for product formation, indi￾cated that nucleation was the rate-limiting step for the crystallisation process. Thus, the
crystallisation of Al-MIL-68-Mes consumed the reactants remaining in solution that were
not consumed by the precipitation of the intermediate amorphous phase. The plot inter￾cept, n·ln(k), could also be used to estimate a pseudo rate constant for the reaction [17].
Rhauderwiek et al. [18] reported four novel Ce3+-porphyrin-based MOFs (PMOFs)
named CAU-18, CAU-18a, CAU-19-X, and Ce-PMOF-4NO2. The crystallisation processes of
CAU-18 ([Ce4(H2TCPP)3(DMF)2(H2O)4]) and CAU-19-H ([Ce3(H2TCPP)2(BA-X)(HBA-X/H2O)2] ·
2HBAX · nH2O, where H6TCPP is 4-tetracarboxyphenylporphyrin, DMF is dimethylforma￾mide, X = H, 2Cl, 3Cl, 4Cl, 3CO2H, 4NH2, or 4NO2, and HBA = C7H4O2) were studied using
in situ XRD at beamlines P07B [24] and P09 [22] at DESY. Employing the analysis method
developed by Gualtieri [20], the obtained in situ XRD data were used to determine the
nucleation probability (Pn) and the Arrhenius activation energies of both nucleation
(kn) and crystal growth (kg). The sensitivity of the kinetic parameters, specifically, the
induction time, conversion time, and nucleation probability, to the synthesis tempera￾ture was also investigated, and an inverse relationship was revealed between the reac￾tion temperature and each kinetic parameter [18].
Detailed information about the stability and transformation kinetics of UTSA-74
([Zn2(DOBDC)], (where DOBDC is 2,5-dioxidobenzene-1,4-dicarboxylate and UTSA = Uni￾versity of Texas at San Antonio) into its polymorph Zn-MOF-74 in water was obtained
using the SynRAC reactor [5]. For these experiments, UTSA-74 crystals were suspended
in deionised water and heated to either 110 or 120 °C in the SynRAC reactor, and time￾resolved in situ XRD (Δt = 30 s) data were collected over 40 min at beamlines P08 [19]
(λ = 0.51662 Å) and P09 [22] (λ = 0.53905 Å) at DESY. In situ XRD analysis (Figure 6.2) re￾vealed the simultaneous appearance of reflections assigned to Zn-MOF-74 and the
138 Huayna Terraschkeprogressive loss of the UTSA-74 signal intensity, beginning at minute 6 for the reaction
at 110 °C and at minute 5 for the reaction at 120 °C. In contrast to previous reports, these
results demonstrated that USTA-74 is unstable in the presence of water at both temper￾atures [25] and transforms via a dissolution–recrystallisation process.
The crystallisation of two three-dimensional MOF polymorphs, SION-1 and SION-2 ([Tb2
(DHBDC)3DMF)4] · 2DMF, where DHBDC = 2,5-dihydroxybenzene-1,4-dicarboxylate, SION
refers to MOFs synthesized at the EPFL Valais in Sion, Switzerland) developed at the
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) Valais in Sion (Switzerland), was
studied using in situ XRD at the Swiss-Norwegian beamline (SNBL) at ESRF [4]. The reac￾tion of Tb(NO3)3 · 6H2O with H2DHDBC in a DMF:H2O solvent mixture at 120 °C for 24 h
yielded the golden SION-2 polymorph. Further reaction for an additional 48 h resulted
in the conversion of SION-2 into the bright red SION-1 polymorph. More detailed infor￾mation about the processes involved in the conversion of SION-2 into SION-1 was ob￾tained from a second set of XRD experiments in which pre-formed SION-2 immersed in
DMF:H2O was slowly heated (2 °C/min) to 120 °C and held at this high temperature for
6 h. Time-resolved measurements (Δt = 60 s) revealed that SION-2 was partially dis￾solved at high temperatures, which allowed conversion to the more thermodynamically
stable SION-1 polymorph.
Moorhouse et al. [26] employed in situ diffraction experiments to analyse the reac￾tion mechanism during the resin-assisted solvothermal synthesis of [Co(NDC)(DMF)]
(NDC is 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate). For this work, the Oxford-Diamond in situ cell
(ODISC) furnace, initially developed at beamline I12 at the Diamond Light Source [27],
was used at HASYLAB beamline F3 at DORIS (DESY) for energy-dispersive X-ray diffrac￾tion (EDXRD) measurements (white beam energy = 15 ≤ E/keV ≤ 65, detector angle (2θ) =
Figure 6.2: In situ XRD data (λ = 0.51662 Å) showing the conversion between UTSA-74 and Zn-MOF-74 at
(a) 110 °C and (b) 120 °C (republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, from reference [5];
permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 1391.4°). This analysis required the use of high-energy in situ XRD to penetrate the ODISC.
In the resin-assisted solvothermal synthesis, cation-impregnated macroporous resin
beads (typically commercially available sulfonated styrene-divinylbenzene pre-treated
to allow adsorption of the metal cation of interest) fused to an amorphous, cross-linked,
infinite network of interpenetrating polymer chains are used as both a template and an
ion source for the reaction. This approach provides enhanced control over cation re￾lease in solution. Heating the reaction solution containing metal-impregnated resin
beads to mild or moderate temperatures (<120 °C) allows ligand molecules from the sur￾rounding solution to react with metal ions on the surface of the resin beads, creating
layers of MOF products. In contrast, the resin denatures at high temperatures, resulting
in the controlled release of the metallic cations into the ligand solution. In situ EDXRD
measurements of [Co(NDC)(DMF)] formation via resin-assisted solvothermal synthesis
revealed a slow decrease in the reflection intensities of the free H2NDC ligand over the
first 11 min of the reaction (T = 200 °C), followed by the appearance of reflections corre￾sponding to the product, indicating that [Co(NDC)(DMF)] was directly produced without
the formation of crystalline intermediates [26].
The formation mechanism of (H2NMe2)2[Co3(BDC)4] · yDMF was studied by Wu
et al. [28] also using the ODISC reactor at beamline I12 at the Diamond Light Source,
which provides X-rays in the energy range of 53–150 keV and can be used in either
monochromatic or energy-dispersive modes [25]. The resin-assisted solvothermal
synthesis of (H2NMe2)2[Co3(BDC)4] · yDMF occurred via the formation of a metastable
precursor. During this precursor–product transformation, the layered structure was
preserved, while the interlayer ordering changed. In contrast to the usual mecha￾nism observed for MOF solvothermal synthesis, in which intermediate phases un￾dergo a dissolution–recrystallisation process to form a more thermodynamically
stable product, this study demonstrated the first direct solid–solid rearrangement of
an intermediate to a product during the formation of an MOF [28].
In another study at beamline I12 at the Diamond Light Source, the gradual topo￾chemical replacement of coordinating solvent molecules during the synthesis of the
new MOF [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2]·H2O was detected using in situ EDXRD measurements to
monitor the evolution of the lattice parameters and electron density during solvother￾mal synthesis [29]. The objective of this work was to verify the assumption that, after
nucleation, this MOF crystallises without undergoing any further structural changes,
for instance, through interactions with guest molecules, which are essential for MOF
functionality. The EDXRD results allowed the development of a model in which solvent
exchange occurred during MOF formation. According to this model, the material was
water-rich in the early stages of the reaction, and subsequent replacement of the water
molecules by DMF molecules caused the framework geometry to change. In general, the
formed materials had a chemical composition of [Yb2(BDC)3(solvent)2] · solvent (solvent =
H2O and/or DMF), and the final product was [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2]·H2O [29].
Breeze et al. [30] reported the synthesis of three different frameworks based on
Yb3+, BDC, and DMF: [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2]·H2O, Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2, and Yb(BDC)
140 Huayna Terraschke(HCO2). Initially, [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2]·H2O was crystallised from a DMF-rich solution at
80–120 °C, whereas [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2] was obtained by increasing the water
content of the solution, and [Yb(BDC)(HCO2)] resulted from extended reactions in a
water-rich environment. As shown in Figure 6.3, in situ XRD measurements at the Dia￾mond Light Source allowed monitoring of [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2] formation and the
quantification of kinetic parameters using the nucleation–growth model of Gualtieri.
The results revealed the initial consumption of the 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid (H2BDC)
precursor, which was only slightly soluble in the water-rich solvent mixture used for the
synthesis of [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2]. It is important to mention that the observed shift
in the Bragg reflections of the H2BDC ligand was caused by the heating process at the
beginning of the reaction [30].
Figure 6.3: (a) In situ XRD data during the crystallisation of [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2]. (b–d) Final profile fits
at t = 0.1, 29, and 125 min. The pink, green, and black ticks correspond to the Bragg peak positions for the
unit cells of PEEK (from the reactor set-up), [Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2], and the H2BDC precursor, respectively.
The initial shift in the Bragg reflections of H2BDC were attributed to the heating process at the beginning of
the reaction (reproduced from reference [30] with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 141The solvothermal formation of MOF-5 ([Zn4O(BDC)3]) was examined by Wu et al.
in 2017 [31], also at the beamline I12 at the Diamond Light Source (λ = 0.2333 Å,
53.14 keV) [32]. The applied IR furnace is advantageous because it provides fast heating,
but it restricts the choice of reactor vessel. The vessel must exhibit both high IR absorp￾tivity and high thermal conductivity to fulfil the operational requirements while also
showing high chemical stability [32]. The high-energy X-rays generated high-resolution
powder patterns, which facilitated the identification of time-dependent changes in the
lattice parameters and Bragg peak areas and simplified data interpretation. Here, crys￾tallisation in DMF containing melamine at 110 °C for 12 h resulted in the formation of
interpenetrated MOF-5. [Zn(BDC)(DMF)] was isolated at reaction times of 0.5–4 h by ex
situ quenching experiments, whereas [Zn3(BDC)3(H2O)2·4DMF] was identified by in situ
measurements using similar times and conditions [31].
Another interesting study by Wu et al. [33] was aimed at understanding why the
application of different metals during synthesis produces MOFs with the same or differ￾ent framework topologies. This key question is important for rationally tuning MOF
functionalities through metal substitution while maintaining the structural properties,
instead of using the current trial-and-error approach. This issue was investigated by
monitoring the solvothermal synthesis of isostructural [M2(BDC)2DABCO] (M = Zn, Co, Ni,
DABCO is 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane) pillared-paddlewheel MOFs in real time using
in situ powder XRD. The results showed that the applied metal ions strongly influenced
the reaction kinetics and the formation of different crystalline intermediates. Transfor￾mations between three different topologies (square grid (sql), kagome (kgm), and a pre￾viously unknown layered intermediate (int)) were observed during product formation
[33]. The sql and kgm topologies were based on the paddlewheel motif of the M2(COO)4
unit connected in the third dimension by DABCO molecules, whereas the int topology
was based on a trinuclear pinwheel connected by BDC ions to form a two-dimensional
layered network. For the Zn, Co, and Ni MOFs, the kgm phase formed first and then
decayed upon the formation of the sql phase. However, for the Co and Zn compounds,
the kgm phase formed at room temperature, whereas for the Ni MOF, the kgm phase
only began to form upon heating to 60 °C. The high-temperature synthesis of the Co
MOF was more complex and involved the formation of an int phase parallel to the sql
phase, with conversion to the pure sql phase only occurring towards the end of the reac￾tion [33].
As a final example of the in situ monitoring of MOF synthesis by conventional
solvothermal reactions in batch reactors, Krüger et al. [34] examined the influence of
reaction temperature (T = 140, 150, and 153 °C) on the formation of CAU-21-BPDC and
CAU-8-BPDC ([Al(OH)(BPDC)], where H2BPDC = 4,4-benzophenonedicarboxylic acid).
Phase transformations were monitored via in situ EDXRD analysis performed at HA￾SYLAB beamline F3 at DESY. The data revealed that the reaction temperature had a
strong influence on the reaction rate and the final product composition. At the lowest
temperature (140 °C), a crystalline intermediate formed within the first 46 min of the
142 Huayna Terraschkereaction and then fully transformed into the CAU-8-BPDC polymorph after 100 min.
Upon increasing the reaction temperature to 150 °C, the reaction rate increased, with
the same crystalline intermediate formed after just 12 min and complete product for￾mation after 75 min. At the highest temperature (153 °C), the same crystal intermedi￾ate formed after just 7 min, but subsequent conversion resulted in a mixture of CAU￾21-BPDC and CAU-8-BPDC (t = 45 min). This information helped improve the synthesis
conditions to produce phase-pure CAU-21-BPDC [34].
In situ XRD analysis employing flow reactors
Most in situ XRD analyses of MOF synthesis processes have employed batch reactor ves￾sels, whereas few have used flow reactors. One example of study with a flow reactor
set-up was conducted by Polyzoidis et al. [35] In addition to optimising MOF production
with respect to the reaction time, this study contributed to the understanding of the
phenomena leading to MOF formation in the first seconds of the reaction, which is im￾portant for overcoming the issues that limit the reproducibility of MOF synthesis. This
study, which was carried out at beamline P02.1 at DESY [36], examined the very early
stages of the nucleation of ZIF-8 (ZIF, zeolitic imidazolate framework). ZIF-8, a highly
porous and stable MOF formed by the reaction of a Zn2+ source and 2-methylimidazole
(HMEIM), is one of the few commercially available MOFs (brand name: Basolite Z1200)
[6]. In this study, ZIF-8 was synthesised by reacting an aqueous ammonia solution of
Zn(NO3)2 with a methanolic solution of HMEIM in a T-type micromixer installed at the
entrance of a tube reactor (Figure 6.4, left). A movable stage was employed to adjust the
synchrotron beam position along the length of the reactor [35]. In addition to measuring
the increase in the intensity of the reflections assigned to the ZIF-8 phase, Rietveld refine￾ment of the XRD patterns was performed to estimate the Lorentzian crystallite size at
different reaction times. This nucleation study revealed the rapid formation of ZIF-8.
Product reflections appeared within seconds of reaction initiation, indicating that crystal
growth occurred for 8 s. After this time, the powder diffraction patterns revealed no fur￾ther crystal growth, with individual crystal sizes reaching a maximum of 110 nm (Fig￾ure 6.4, right). These results were confirmed by ex situ scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) [35].
As a second example of in situ XRD measurements of MOF reactions using a flow
reactor, Taddei et al. examined the crystallisation process of UiO-66 ([Zr6O4(OH)4(BDC)6])
to elucidate key mechanistic details that could enable the development of a suitable syn￾thesis protocol for large-scale production [37]. In this study, which was carried out at the
Materials Science beamline at the Swiss Light Source (E = 16 keV), microwave radiation
was used to provide the necessary activation energy. This approach required the use of
a complex experimental set-up and a specialised reactor (Figure 6.5), aptly named the
continuous-flow microwave reactor. In this set-up, the microwave outlet was connected
using a 42 cm long, 4.35 mm ID polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tube to enable X-ray
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 143beam penetration. The influence of the reaction parameters on the product yield and
crystallite size was studied by adding different amounts of water and acetic acid to the
reaction mixture. XRD analysis revealed that UiO-66 crystallised in two steps, namely,
preliminary and steady-state crystallisation stages. During the preliminary stage, the
crystallite size increased, whereas the crystal size remained constant during the steady
state. A higher yield of larger crystallites was obtained by increasing the concentration
of additives such as water or acetic acid [37].
6.2.2 In situ XRD analysis of solvent-free processes
Although the solution-based synthesis of MOFs is widely applied in laboratory set￾tings, this approach is generally poorly suited to large-scale industrial production [38].
Solution-based processes are often expensive, frequently require the use of toxic, ex￾plosive (e.g. metal nitrates), or corrosive (e.g. metal chlorides) reactants, and tend to
decrease in efficiency as the reactant volume increases. Solvent-free processes, in
which only microlitres of liquids are applied as additives, provide an excellent alter￾native for MOF synthesis, avoiding most or all of the practical difficulties presented
by solvent-based techniques. Among the most common solvent-free techniques are
liquid-catalysed mechanochemistry-based methods such as liquid-assisted grinding
(LAG). These methods are simple, can be easily scaled up to industrial volumes, pro￾duce the desired products without heating, generally employ safer reactants (e.g. ox￾ides, carbonates, and hydroxides) [3], and generate less waste [38]. However, as the
Figure 6.4: Flow reactor set-up at beamline P02.1 (DESY) for the in situ XRD analysis of ZIF-8 (left). Time
dependence of ZIF-8 crystallite size (right) (reprinted with permission from reference [35]. Copyright 2017
American Chemical Society).
144 Huayna TerraschkeFigure 6.5: Experimental set-up for the microwave-assisted synthesis of UiO-66 in a flow reactor at the Materials Science beamline at the Swiss Light
Source. (a) Schematic representation, (b) photograph of the actual set-up, and (c) close-up of the outlet tube placed in the focus of the X-ray beam
(reprinted with permission from reference [35]. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 145product crystals produced by these methods, particularly LAG, are not large enough
for single-crystal XRD analysis, it is extremely difficult to elucidate the structure of
novel MOFs and to determine the influence of LAG synthesis parameters on product
structure and composition [38].
Julien et al. [3] elucidated the formation mechanism for Zn-MOF-74 (also known as
Zn-CPO-27), synthesised by LAG using solid 2,5-dihydroxyterdihydroxyterephthalic acid
(H4DHTA), also called 2,5-dihydroxybenzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid, and zinc oxide (ZnO)
using real-time in situ XRD. These experiments were carried out at beamline ID15B at
ESRF (λ = 0.142 Å) and beamline P02.1 at DESY (λ = 0.207 Å). The in situ XRD data col￾lected during the synthesis process in a modified ball mill (f = 30 Hz) containing a 3.5 g
stainless steel ball revealed a two-step reaction mechanism. The initial diffraction pat￾terns showed a marked decrease in the signal intensity of the H4DHTA ligand, suggest￾ing that rapid amorphisation of this reactant occurred at the beginning of the reaction.
The consumption of the organic linker was followed by the formation of non-porous
[Zn(H2O)2(H2DHTA)] with a simultaneous decrease in the ZnO reflections (Figure 6.6).
The intensities of the reflections corresponding to ZnO and [Zn(H2O)2(H2DHTA)] began to
decrease after 25 min, when the intensities of the Zn-MOF-74 reflections started to increase.
Under these conditions, Zn-MOF-74 was the only crystalline product after 70 min [3].
Figure 6.6: Time-resolved in situ XRD data of the mechanochemical synthesis of Zn-MOF-74 from ZnO and
H4DHTA (left) (the signal losses at 40 and 48 min may be measurement artefacts) and photographs of the
reaction mixture at different milling times (right) (reprinted with permission from reference [3]. Copyright
2017 American Chemical Society).
146 Huayna TerraschkeHKUST-1 is the most thoroughly studied MOF synthesised by solvent-free proce￾dures [38]. A recent study examined how the kinetics and mechanisms of HKUST-1 for￾mation are influenced by liquid additives during mechanochemical synthesis. For this
analysis, in situ XRD data obtained at beamline ID5B (ESRF) and the Berliner Elektro￾nenspeicherring (BESSY) II μSpot beamline were combined. The application of additives
was revealed to promote either the formation of specific intermediates or the immedi￾ate formation of HKUST-1, whereas dry synthesis or the application of aprotic and non￾polar liquids prevented HKUST-1 formation unless the reaction mixture was also ex￾posed to atmospheric air or water [38]. Interestingly, these experiments also identified
two novel intermediate mononuclear copper-containing phases that can form during
the mechanochemical synthesis of HKUST-1. The intermediate formed by the application
of additives (such as compounds with long aliphatic chains) could not be isolated, and
the corresponding structure could not be resolved. Interrupting the milling process
caused the formation of a second intermediate with the formula [Cu(H2BTC)2(H2O)2],
which crystallised in the monoclinic space group P21/c. One of the two Cu2+ crystallo￾graphic sites was coordinated by two H2BTC-ions (BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate)
and two water molecules, forming a complex supramolecular network due to the hy￾drogen bonding between the non-coordinating –COOH groups and water ligands.
The second Cu2+ site of this intermediate was octahedrally coordinated by two water
molecules and four carboxylic ligands in a square planar fashion [38].
Katsenis et al. [6] explored the the MOF synthesis applying continuous mechanical
stress during milling within the LAG approach. In situ XRD measurements at beam￾line ID15B (ESRF) revealed that the LAG mechanism was characterised by an unex￾pected amorphisation–recrystallisation process that proceeded via a new metastable
intermediate (Figure 6.7). This intermediate crystallised with a previously unreported
topology, named katsenite (kat). The intermediate was discovered by the application
of crystalline silicon as an internal scattering standard to overcome the issue of a
non-homogeneous sample distribution in the reaction vessel during milling. Milling
with silicon resulted in the in situ recrystallisation of the initial amorph-[Zn(MEIM)2]
into a new phase that differed from ZIF-8 or dia-[Zn(MEIM)2]. Although the new phase
was initially obtained by applying silicon as a heterogeneous nucleation agent, this ZIF￾8 polymorph could also be produced without silicon ex situ. The structure of kat-[Zn
(MEIM)2] was determined from powder XRD data. The compound crystallises in the te￾tragonal space group P42c with cell parameters a = b = 16.139(1) Å and c = 16.321(1) Å. As
observed in ZIF-8 and dia-[Zn(MEIM)2], the Zn2+ ions were tetragonally coordinated by
MEIM ions and a three-dimensional network was formed [6].
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 1476.2.3 In situ IR spectroscopy
Although the crystallisation of compounds can be best investigated using in situ XRD
experiments, local structural changes during synthesis and species in solution can be
monitored by in situ IR spectroscopy, which does not depend on synchrotron radiation
and hence is more widely available [39]. For example, in situ IR spectroscopy was used
to investigate the crystallisation of Zr-fumarate (Zr-FUM, [Zr6O4(OH)4(FUM)6], where
H2FUM = C4H4O4 = fumaric acid) in the presence of formic acid (HCOOH) as a modulator
and DMF as a solvent [40]. These experiments, conducted using a combined EasyMax
102 and ReactorIR™ 15 set-up, were carried out in five phases (Figure 6.8). In phase I,
the initial reaction solution was prepared by dissolving ZrCl4 in DMF. In phases II and
III, formic acid and fumaric acid were added to the reaction vessel. In phase IV, the
reaction was heated from room temperature to 120 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min. Finally, in
phase V, the reaction was cooled to room temperature (~25 °C) at a rate of 5 °C/min. The
reaction process was monitored primarily via the IR signal at 1,659 cm−1
, generated by
the formic acid modulator, and the two signals at 1,102 and 1,255 cm−1
, which were as￾signed to the DMF molecules. Careful examination of these three bands across all five
reaction phases indicated that the initial stages of formic-acid-modulated Zr-FUM forma￾tion involved the rapid formation of soluble discrete hexanuclear, modulator-capped
Zr6O4 clusters. These clusters could then undergo ligand exchange with the linker acid
to assemble the final three-dimensional structure [40]. One year later, the same authors
published a follow-up article [41] focused on comparing the formic-acid-modulated for￾mation of the Zr-FUM MOF using water and DMF as solvents. Interestingly, in situ IR
measurements showed that formic acid was only consumed during the DMF-based syn￾thesis of Zr-FUM. In DMF, formic acid actively participated in the structure formation
through the generation of MOF nuclei, whereas in water, formic acid acted only as a
deprotonation modulator, assisting the bonds between FUM ions and the IBUs. It was
suggested that these different reaction mechanisms could be explained by the different
Figure 6.7: Solid-state transformations during the mechanochemical reaction between ZnO and HMEIM
(reprinted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH, reference [6],
Copyright 2021).
148 Huayna Terraschkepolarities of water and DMF, which result in the preferential solvation of different spe￾cies, for instance, ionised species are better stabilised in water than in DMF [41].
Schilling and Stock [39] analysed the reaction kinetics of [Ni(H2O)4(H2PMBC)2] for￾mation from 4-(phosphonomethyl)benzoic acid (H3PMBC) and nickel salts when synthe￾sis was aided by ultrasonication. In situ IR spectroscopy was used to monitor the
reaction progression. Analysis of the IR data revealed that [Ni(H2O)4(H2PMBC)2] formed
more rapidly when ultrasonic energy was applied to the reaction than in conventional
heating. This enhancement was facilitated primarily by the increased dissolution and
dispersion of H3PMBC in the reaction solution, which was revealed to be the rate￾determining step [39].
Zhao et al. [42] examined the growth of thin-film HKUST-1 using in situ attenu￾ated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy (Figure 6.9).
This novel analysis set-up allowed for the real-time observation of bond formation and
ligand exchange on a surface during continuous-flow MOF synthesis. The IR spectra re￾vealed that the formation of HKUST-1 on thin ZnO films occurred in two pseudo-first￾Figure 6.8: Time-dependent Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra demonstrating the consumption of
reactants and the formation of Zr-FUM ([Zr6O4(OH)4(FUM)6]) over 60 min (reprinted from reference [40].
Copyright 2021, with permission from Elsevier).
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 149order steps. The surface of the ZnO films first reacted to form Zn-Cu hydroxy nitrate
((Zn,Cu)(OH)NO3), as previously reported [43]. The mixed metal hydroxy nitrate layer
was subsequently converted to HKUST-1 via anion exchange and remained strongly ad￾hered to the substrate surface through non-reacted ZnO [42]. Previous measurements
showed that the Zn2+ concentration in HKUST-1 prepared by this method was less than
0.70 wt%, and the transfer of Zn2+ into the solution was confirmed using inductively
coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) [44]. In 2018, Zhang et al. [45]
used a similar approach with ZnO in combination with surfactants as templates to syn￾thesise hierarchically porous HKUST-1 MOFs. The reaction was monitored using in situ
IR measurements (Figure 6.10), which confirmed the formation of HKUST-1 based on
the characteristic vibrations at 1,650, 1,450, 1,375, 1,112, 757, and 729 cm−1
. Furthermore,
no characteristic vibrations of the surfactant and ZnO templates were observed within
the Cu-MOF structure, confirming the purity of the final product [45].
Figure 6.9: (a) Liquid flow cell for in situ attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR)
spectroscopy, in which a silicon wafer acts as an internal reflection element. (b) Schematic representation
of the solid–liquid interface for the formation of MOF thin films (reprinted with permission from reference
[42]. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society).
150 Huayna Terraschke6.2.4 Other analysis techniques
In situ UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy
UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy is useful for monitoring the formation of heterometallic
MOFs (also called hybrid or multicomponent MOFs) [46]. The structures of heterometal￾lic MOFs can be extremely complex. Although they retain the topologies of related homo￾metallic compounds, heterometallic MOFs often contain sophisticated substructures,
including solid-solution-based nanostructures, heterogeneous core–shell nanostructures,
and Janus morphologies (Figure 6.11), which can be difficult to probe. Taking advantage
of the ability of in situ absorption spectroscopy to provide information about heterome￾tallic MOF formation kinetics, Guo et al. [46] compared the absorption spectra of 11 re￾lated homometallic and heterometallic MOFs (structural formula is [M(MEIM)2], where
M = Co100-xZnx, x = 0–100), and observed a solid solution between isostructural ZIF-67 and
ZIF-8 [47]. The time-dependent absorption intensity (Figure 6.11) showed a gradual shift
from two-step growth kinetics to one-step kinetics as the concentration of cobalt in the
reaction mixture increased. At metal ion ratios below Co50Zn50, a two-step curve was still
apparent, although it differed in shape from the time-dependent absorption profile.
Above this ratio, the curve immediately exhibited a nearly perfect one-step absorption
profile, and further increases in cobalt concentration had a negligible effect on the time￾dependent absorption profile. The timing of cation introduction into the reaction solu￾tion was also found to be important in determining the crystal formation kinetics and
metal ion distribution. For example, the addition of Zn2+ to the linker solution first led to
the formation of irregularly shaped agglomerates, presumably because of the higher la￾bility of Zn2+. In contrast, adding Co2+ first led to the formation of well-structured
Figure 6.10: Formation mechanism of hierarchically porous Zn,Cu-HKUST-1 (HDS = hydroxyl double salts), as
revealed by in situ IR measurements (reprinted with permission from reference [45]. Copyright 2018, American
Chemical Society).
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 151core–shell nanocrystals, the thickness and core-to-shell ratio of which reflected the
speed at which the cobalt ions were added [46]. Despite the effectiveness of in situ UV/
Vis absorption measurements for monitoring the formation of solid materials, this tech￾nique is limited to low-concentration reactions to avoid light blockage by high turbidity,
which hinders absorption measurements in transmission geometry.
In situ PDF measurements
In situ PDF measurements have only recently been used to monitor structural changes in
MOFs. The first study on this topic was published in 2016 by Platero-Prats et al. [48]. In
situ PDF analysis in combination with density functional theory (DFT) calculations was
used to probe the temperature-dependent local structural transitions of two MOFs, NU￾1000 and UiO-66, containing analogous IBUs, Zr6O8, and Hf6O8. This work showed that the
cluster geometries were remarkably sensitive to temperature changes, with significant
distortions at temperatures below 150 °C. These findings are especially important because
Figure 6.11: (a) Schematic representation of hybrid MOF nanostructures. Photographs taken during the
formation of (b) ZIF-67 and (c) ZIF-8 in methanol. (d) Time-dependent absorption results during the formation
of hybrid Co100−x Znx-ZIFs (reprinted with permission from reference [46]. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH).
152 Huayna TerraschkeZr MOFs and their analogues have very high thermal, mechanical, and chemical stabili￾ties, which preserve their long-range crystalline structure. However, local transitions
within metal oxide clusters are relevant for catalytic reactions, which occur at localised
crystal sites [48].
An interesting work from the Iversen group at Aarhus University provides one of
the first atomic-scale evolution mechanisms for pre-nucleation clusters in MOFs [49].
Zr-UiO-66 prepared by solvothermal synthesis was used, which is favourable for PDF
measurements due to the presence of Zr as a strong X-ray scatterer. As summarised in
Figure 6.12, the in situ PDF measurements revealed a four-step formation mechanism
for UiO-66, as follows. Step 1 involves the formation of a hexanuclear Zr cluster in the
ZrCl4 precursor solution. In step 2, multinuclear clusters containing the MOF second￾ary building units are detected at room temperature upon ligand addition, and in step
3, fast cluster aggregation is triggered by heating. Finally, step 4 comprises the long￾range ordering of the crystal structure and crystal growth [49].
In situ PDF experiments have also been performed to study the early formation
stages of ZIF-8 (Zn(MEIM)2) during co-precipitation synthesis at room temperature
using a water–methanol mixture as the solvent. Combined mass spectrometry, electron
microscopy, and DFT results revealed a very interesting formation pathway, with sev￾eral other species detected in solution during the fast crystallisation of the product. For
instance, the stable [Zn(MEIM)4]
2- cluster serving as the MOF primary building unit,
was still detected after a long reaction time of several hours. In addition, a higher-order
[Znx(MEIM)y]
2x−y cluster and an amorphous phase were also formed in solution. Inter￾estingly, a comparison between the interaction distances of Zn–Zn pairs within the
amorphous phase and those simulated for the ZIF-8 product revealed a short-order
structural similarity between these two compounds. Therefore, the authors suggested
that the amorphous phase could be an intermediate for the ZIF-8 structure [50].
Heat
Step 1:
Formation of SBU
Step 2:
Formation of multinuclear cluster Step 3: Cluster aggregation Step 4: Structure ordering
Reaction with
Ligand
ZrC14
Dissolution
Time
UiO-66
Figure 6.12: Mechanism of nucleation and growth for UiO-66 nanoparticles, as revealed by in situ PDF
measurements (reprinted with permission from reference [49]. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VHC).
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 153In situ light scattering
The kinetics and mechanism of formation for zinc imidazolate frameworks were stud￾ied using in situ time-resolved light scattering experiments by Hikov et al. [51] and Saha
et al. [52]. The first work focused on the crystallisation of a dense zinc imidazolate
framework with a zni topology, which was denoted as ZIF-zni by these authors [53, 54]
and as kat-[Zn(MEIM)2] by Katsenis et al. [6]. The light scattering data collected during
the synthesis of a series of MOFs using a variety of starting concentrations and ratios of
Zn(NO3) · 6H2O and imidazole revealed a two-stage formation mechanism. The first stage
corresponds to the formation of metastable particles with diameters of approximately
120 nm upon mixing of the reactant solutions. In contrast, the second stage involves the
agglomeration of these primary particles into secondary particles through an addition
mechanism. The primary particles were considered as monomers that can be replenished
in the solution during the first stage, whereas they were consumed during the second
stage. The formation of the final product was detected after approximately 240 min. Inter￾estingly, both the time interval between stages one and two and the morphology of the
intermediates depended on the applied metal-to-ligand ratio [51].
Saha et al. [52] investigated the formation mechanism of ZIF-71 ([Zn(DCIM)2],
where DCIM is 4,5-dichloroimidazolate) during co-precipitation in an alcoholic solu￾tion by combining in situ light and X-ray scattering measurements. These experiments
revealed a multistep formation mechanism very similar to that described above for
ZIF-zni. Initially, clusters of small amorphous particles were formed upon mixing of
the ligand and metal solutions. Subsequently, these clusters agglomerated into larger
amorphous particles via the addition of smaller monomers. Although the nature of
these monomers is unknown, the authors suggested they could be the initially formed
clusters, multinuclear complexes, metal ions, or linker molecules. In the next step, the
large amorphous particles were transformed into ZIF-71 nanocrystals via intraparticle
nucleation and particle reorganisation. Finally, the ZIF-71 nanocrystals agglomerated.
Higher linker concentrations resulted in faster reactions, smaller crystals, and shorter
lifetimes for the amorphous phases [52].
In situ atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies
Important examples of the application of in situ AFM measurements for monitoring
MOF formation include the synthesis of MOF-5 in solution [55] and, most recently, the
growth of a HKUST-1 coating via anodic dissolution [56]. For the synthesis of MOF-5, MOF
seed crystals were deposited on a glass slide in a fluid cell attached to the AFM, which
contained a solution of [Zn4O(O2CC6H5)6] as a precursor and 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate
as a linker. This work was based on the so-called controlled SBU approach [57], which
promotes faster MOF formation by applying pre-assembled metal sources that resem￾ble the IBU of the framework. The in situ AFM results revealed layered MOF growth
154 Huayna Terraschkevia a two-step process, in which the linker molecules attached to the MOF-5 surface first,
followed by the Zn species. Although the [Zn4O(O2CC6H5)6] cluster underwent partial dis￾sociation before attaching to the MOF, the reaction using this precursor had a faster nu￾cleation rate than those using simpler zinc salts, indicating that the derived Zn species
attached to the MOF surface had some association with the original precursor [55].
To monitor HKUST growth by anodic dissolution, measurements were also per￾formed in a fluid cell attached to an electrochemical AFM. This cell contained an
H3BTC solution, a copper sheet as the electrode being imaged by the AFM, and a plati￾num wire as the counter electrode [56]. To facilitate AFM imaging of the nucleation
and growth steps, the crystallisation process was slowed down by decreasing the an￾odic potential as much as possible. The first formation stage comprised the partial dis￾solution of the copper substrate, detected as a decrease in the electrode mass, and
MOF subsequent coating, which the increased the electrode mass. This first formation
stage suggested that a critical concentration of Cu2+ ions at the anode surface is neces￾sary to initiate coating growth. The copper dissolution period prior to substrate crys￾tallisation was divided into two sub-stages with very slow and faster dissolution rates.
During the second faster sub-stage, the solution became light blue and cloudy because
crystals were formed in the liquid medium before attaching to the surface. The first crys￾tals attached to the substrate nucleated at the defects on the rough electrode surface
and subsequently grew. In addition to the growth of the seed crystals, other crystals nu￾cleated around these existing crystals, following an island growth mechanism [58]. This
mechanism suggests that the current density around the crystals formed on the sub￾strate was locally increased relative to that of the pure electrode, causing an increased
Cu2+ concentration in this area and consequently an increased nucleation rate. Under
these conditions, the last reaction step after approximately 30 min was characterised by
the partial detachment of the MOF layer from the substrate, which was probably caused
by the fast cantilever movement and the agitation of the solution [56].
6.3 In situ structural analysis of MOF loading
processes
Owing to their high crystallinity, high specific surface areas, and intrinsic porosity in
the micro- to mesoporous range [59], MOFs are well suited for the adsorption of guest
molecules. Such loading capabilities make MOFs useful materials for industrial and
commercial applications, such as gas storage and separation, the adsorption and re￾moval of (hazardous) molecules, and catalysis. The adsorption of guests with useful
physical or chemical properties can also impart MOFs with properties such as lumines￾cence [60], catalytic activity [61], or electronic conductivity [62]. The in situ analysis of
adsorption processes can provide a greater understanding of the mechanisms leading
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 155to guest molecule loading and aid in determining the new properties of materials based
on specific MOF–guest combinations.
6.3.1 Gas storage
Hydrogen
Hydrogen-fuelled vehicles are considered one of the best options for environmentally
friendly and sustainable transportation. Unfortunately, storing hydrogen as a liquid or
under compression for use as a fuel source has a high energy cost as well as poses serious
technical and safety difficulties. The solid-state storage of hydrogen via adsorption in
MOFs could in theory offer a plausible, practical, and safer alternative. Suitable MOF for
solid-state hydrogen storage should be cheap to manufacture, adsorb large volumes of hy￾drogen, quickly and reliably release hydrogen for combustion when required, and exhibit
adsorption–release stability over multiple loading–use cycles [59]. CAU-1 ([Al4(OH)2(OCH3)4
(O2C-C6H3NH2-CO2)3]) has a large Langmuir surface area of ~ 1,700 m2
/g and two distinct
types of micropore cages (octahedral (pore size = 10 Å) and tetrahedral (pore size = 5 Å)),
which provide a large total micropore volume of 0.52 cm3
/g [59]. A detailed analysis of the
hydrogen loading process in CAU-1 was recently carried out by Schlegel et al. [59] using
in situ neutron powder diffraction (BER II neutron source, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin, λ =
2.8172 Å). Analysis of the XRD data for activated CAU-1 (12 h, 130 °C, 10−3 mbar) cooled (T =
10 K) and exposed to hydrogen in an inert atmosphere within an aluminium containment
chamber revealed that hydrogen adsorption was driven by guest–guest interactions. Hy￾drogen adsorption caused the MOF structure to contract, altering the electronic potential
on the surface of the pores and facilitating hydrogen uptake [59]. Determining the exact
hydrogen–MOF interactions responsible for this structural change may provide insights
that will allow for hydrogen storage at moderate temperatures.
Carbon dioxide
Decreasing atmospheric CO2 levels and the resulting greenhouse effect by CO2 sequestra￾tion and storage is a considered plausible approach to slow or reverse global warming.
Current CO2 sequestration and storage technologies employed at fossil fuel production
facilities require materials such as amine scrubbers [63] or ionic liquids [64], which have
high regeneration costs or are difficult to produce. Thus, currently available methods are
not ideal for widespread atmospheric CO2 sequestration, and the solid-state sequestration
of CO2 represents a promising alternative to overcome these limitations [65].
In the case of porous adsorbents, a high affinity for CO2 is required, with strong
host–guest interactions and selectivity. In comparison to adsorbents such as activated
carbon, zeolites, and modified porous silica, MOFs are advantageous because their higher
156 Huayna Terraschkepore volumes and specific surface areas can lead to increased CO2 uptake. For example,
the MOF Fe2(BPEB)3 (H2BPEB = 1,4-bis(1H-pyrazol-4-ylethynyl)benzene) has a CO2 uptake
of 40.5 wt% at 295 K and 10 bar. The CO2 adsorption mechanism of Fe2(BPEB)3 was stud￾ied using in situ synchrotron XRD and PDF analyses at 273 and 298 K with 0–9 and 0–21
bar CO2, respectively, in addition to molecular dynamics simulations [65]. XRD measure￾ments were carried out at beamline ID22 at ESRF. Molecular dynamics simulations sup￾ported the location of the guest molecules inside the MOF channels and allowed the
determination of host–guest and guest–guest interactions [65].
Another possible candidate for CO2 storage is Al-MIL-91, one of the few porous
phosphonate-based MOFs. In situ XRD and IR analyses indicated that Al-MIL-91 has use￾ful CO2 adsorption properties. A detailed structural analysis of activated but unloaded
Al-MIL-91 indicated that only small structural changes occurred upon CO2 adsorption,
with the organic linkers twisting by no more than a 20°. Additionally, in situ IR data sug￾gested that the CO2 molecules interacted with the hydrogen-bonded POH–N acid–base
pairs within the walls, making CO2 adsorption thermodynamically favourable. These find￾ings suggest that Al-MIL-91 may even be useful for adsorbing CO2 at low pressures [66].
Oxygen
Aerobic organisms use metalloenzymes to bind, activate, transport, and release oxy￾gen. MOFs can potentially be applied as substitutes for these enzymes in therapeutic
applications. For this reason, the interaction strengths and coordination geometries of
the isostructural MOF series M-MOF-74, also known as CPO-27 M (M = Co, Ni, Mn, and
Cu) with adsorbed O2 molecules were studied by combining gas adsorption with
in situ neutron powder diffraction measurements at the SINQ neutron source, PSI, Vil￾ligen, Switzerland and HZB, Berlin, Germany [67]. Initial studies indicated that these
MOFs likely have particularly useful properties for O2 adsorption and binding. Ther￾mally activated samples possessed cationic centres with unoccupied coordination
sites available for covalent interactions with adsorbates, which could allow them to
adsorb O2 [67]. However, the reported in situ study suggested that the adsorption in￾teractions were dominated by rather weak dispersive and electrostatic interactions.
6.3.2 Removal of harmful molecules
In situ 31P nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was used to monitor the ad￾sorption and decomposition of the nerve agent simulant dimethyl 4-nitrophenylphosphate
(DMNP) by Spirof-MOF, a new microporous Zr-MOF containing 4,4,4″,4‴-(9,9-spirobi[fluo￾rene]-2,2,7,7-tetrayl)tetrabenzoate ions. Spirof-MOFs with different particle sizes were syn￾thesised by applying reaction times of 1.5 h (Spirof-MOFa), 3 h (Spirof-MOFb), and 18 h
(bulk). Spirof-MOFa and b showed similar maximum particle sizes (0.8–1 μm), although
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 157Spirof-MOFb also contained 400–700 nm particles. Bulk Spirof-MOF was composed of
large crystals (14–16 µm). It is important to note that these particle sizes consist of equiva￾lent spherical diameters (Dsurface) estimated by analysing MOF suspensions using a laser
diffraction particle size analyser. Therefore, deviations are expected due to the non-spheri￾cal shape of Spirof-MOF particles. The efficiency of DMNP decomposition in this MOF was
explained by the Lewis acidic Zr(IV) nodes, which resemble the natural enzyme active site
of phosphotriesterase (Zn–OH–Zn) and is therefore of interest for the hydrolysis of phos￾phate esters. Bulk Spirof-MOF had a hydrolysis half-life (t1/2) of 7.5 min for DMNP, as con￾firmed by in situ 31P NMR spectroscopy. With Spirof-MOFb, the hydrolysis half-life
decreased to 1.8 min, enabling 99% of DMNP to be removed within 18 min. Based on these
results, Spirof-MOF is a useful new tool for removing nerve agent simulants by adsorption
and hydrolytic decomposition [68].
In a study by Tan et al. [69], in situ IR spectroscopy was combined with ab initio
DFT calculations to investigate the host–guest interactions involved in the adsorption
of the corrosive gases, NO2 and SO2, in M-MOF-74 polymorphs (M = Zn, Mg, Ni, Co). The
adsorption of NO2 led to a chemical transformation to NO and NO3-. The authors pro￾posed that charge transfer from the MOF to adsorbed NO2 weakened the N–O bonds,
thus enabling NO2 dissociation. For SO2, the host–guest interactions were found to be
much less significant. Although the gas was adsorbed into the MOF, no chemical reac￾tions were observed between the framework and SO2. Additionally, heating to 150 °C
released the SO2 from the MOF matrix, suggesting a practical method for restoring
MOF-74 after SO2 adsorption [69].
6.3.3 Breathing and gate-opening effects
Flexible or third-generation MOFs, whose molecular structures transform in response to
external stimuli, show distinct properties that cannot be achieved with rigid MOFs. Two
prominent dynamic structural changes observed in flexible MOFs are breathing and
gate-opening/closing behaviours, which have important implications for gas adsorption
[70]. Breathing behaviour refers to structural changes that result in the abrupt expan￾sion or compression of the unit cell in response to external stimuli. Gate-opening/closing
behaviour refers to a transition between a porous (gate-open) and non-porous (gate￾closed) phase in response to external stimuli [70].
Third-generation MOFs or CPs are sensitive to external stimuli such as electromag￾netic radiation, temperature, pressure, or ad-/desorption of guest molecules, resulting
in stepwise structural transformations [71]. These properties are essential for producing
switchable gas adsorbents or catalysts and stimuli-responsive drug delivery systems. In
situ characterisation methods can provide important information about the dynamic
properties of flexible MOFs, allowing them to be predicted and tailored [70, 71].
There are very few examples of MOFs that exhibit gate opening/closing behav￾iour. Of the more than 20,000 MOFs known today, less than 100 have been shown to
158 Huayna Terraschkeopen or close their pore structure in response to external stimuli, particularly during
loading processes. However, those that do are of extreme interest for applications in a
wide variety of commercial and industrial fields, including highly selective gas ad￾sorption, sensors, drug delivery, and catalysts. Several MOFs with such properties
have been studied in considerable detail, as discussed below [71].
Classical examples of MOFs that exhibit the breathing effect are MIL-53 ([M(OH)(BDC)],
M = Sc, Cr, Fe, Al, Ga, In) derivatives. In these compounds, rotation around the axis link￾ing the oxygen ions of the carboxylate groups enables the opening or closing of the
channels within their structures via a “knee-cap” mechanism [1]. In [Al(OH)(CDC)]
MOFs (CDC = trans-1,4-cyclohexanedicarboxylate), also called CAU-13, the breathing effect
is enabled by rotation around torsionally flexible C–C bonds within the ligand, which
causes a change in the conformation of the linker inside the MOF. In the narrow pore
(np) form, ligand molecules adopt either axial or equatorial conformations (Figure 6.13,
left), whereas in the large pore (lp) form, only the equatorial conformation is observed
[1]. Polar solvent molecules were adsorbed in the lp structure of [Zr6O4(OH)4(CDC)6],
which was highly ordered and contained only linker molecules in the equatorial confor￾mation. After solvent removal, an np phase of this structure was observed, which was
less crystalline and contained both linker conformations [1].
Reinsch et al. [1] investigated the structural changes that occurred during the
loading of CAU-13 with different pyrazine derivatives (pyrazine, methylpyrazine, 2,5-
dimethylpyrazine, 2,3-dimethylpyrazine, and trimethylpyrazine). In situ powder XRD
measurements were carried out during the adsorption of guest molecules using the Syn￾RAC reactor [7] (Section 6.2.1) at beamline P02.1 (λ = 0.207 Å, 60 keV) at PETRA III (DESY).
In these experiments, the CAU-13 samples were pre-heated in water to the desired tem￾perature, and the guest molecules were introduced as aqueous solutions or in liquid
form. In general, at the beginning of the reaction, the diffraction signals of the hydrated
form of CAU-13 were observed. CAU-13 began to transform upon the addition of guest
molecules, which interacted with the µ-OH groups of the host framework. The process
took approximately 16 min at 40 °C and was faster at higher temperatures (Figure 6.13,
right). Similar behaviour was observed for the adsorption of 2,3-dimethylpyrazine and
trimethylpyrazine at higher temperatures (80–90 °C), which caused a change in the li￾gand conformation from axial to equatorial. This change increased the kinetic barrier of
the system, thus explaining the required higher temperatures. In contrast, the adsorption
of pyrazine, methylpyrazine, and 2,5-dimethylpyrazine led to the formation of a semi￾open pore framework without a change in ligand conformation [1].
MOFs with the composition [Zn2(BME-BDC)x(DB-BDC)2−x(DABCO)]n (x = 2, 1.5, 1.0, 0.5, 0;
BME-BDC = 2,5-bis(2-methoxyethoxy)-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate, DB-BDC = 2,5-dibutoxy￾1,4-benzenedicarboxylate) were demonstrated to exhibit gate-opening behaviour
in response to gas adsorption. A detailed structural analysis of the gate-opening be￾haviour of [Zn2(BME-BDC)x(DB-BDC)2−x(DABCO)]n in response to CO2 adsorption was
carried out using in situ XRD. These experiments were performed at beamlines
MagS and KMC-2 (Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, E = 8,048 eV,
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 159λ = 1.5406 Å) [72]. After evacuating the samples for 3 h at 120 °C, CO2 adsorption experi￾ments were carried out at 195 K using a pressure range of p/p0 = 10−3
–1 (p0 = 101.3 kPa)
[72]. The in situ XRD measurements revealed an initial np phase in the pre-transition
region at p/p0 = 0.012 and 0.156 (Figure 6.14), followed by the formation of an interme￾diate pore structure at p/p0 = 0.254–0.260 before a final transition to an lp phase at
p/p0 > 0.292 (Figure 6.14). When the x-value was decreased (x = 0.5–2), the lower con￾centration of the BME-BDC ligand and higher concentration of the DB-BDC ligand
caused the transition pressure to shift to a higher value. In contrast, for x = 0, the
compound underwent a guest-independent heat-induced np–lp transition upon acti￾vation, which also influenced the adsorption behaviour [72].
Detailed studies combining single-crystal XRD and in situ XRD at the Pohang Acceler￾ator Laboratory in Korea were able to identify the nature of gate-opening processes in a
flexible (flex) MOF upon CO2 adsorption. In this study, the flex MOF contained a macrocy￾clic Ni2+ complex ([Ni(C14H34N6)]2+, ([NiLpropyl]2+) and a 2,2,5,5-biphenyltetracarboxylate
(BPTC) linker (Figure 6.15), resulting in a composition of {[(NiLpropyl)2(BPTC)] · 4DMF ·
4H2O}. When activated, the flex MOF exhibited a closed structure, with the three pendant
arms of its macrocycles blocking the pore apertures. However, in the presence of CO2,
the macrocycles rotated along the axis linking the carboxylate molecules to the Ni2+ coor￾dination centre, allowing CO2 molecules to access the pores (Figure 6.15) [70]. Interest￾ingly, this flex MOF was also found to exhibit breathing behaviour. CO2 adsorption in the
MOF pores expanded the rectangular dimensions of their openings from 9.19 × 20.78 Å2
to 12.00 × 29.79 Å2 (Figure 6.15). This expansion was primarily attributed to an increase in
the dihedral angle between the phenyl rings, carboxylate planes, and benzene rings of
the BPTC ligands upon CO2 adsorption [70].
An additional MOF example whose gate-opening mechanism has been well stud￾ied is Ni-DUT-8 ([Ni2(NDC)2(DABCO)], DUT = Dresden University of Technology). Single￾crystal XRD, in situ XRD, and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analy￾ses revealed that this compound exhibited an unprecedented 254% increase in pore
Figure 6.13: Axial and equatorial conformations of CDC ions (left). Time dependence of the intensity of the
010 reflection for pyrazine-loaded CAU-13 at different temperatures (republished with permission of Royal
Society of Chemistry, from reference [1]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
160 Huayna TerraschkeFigure 6.14: In situ adsorption of CO2 (195 K) (left) and corresponding in situ XRD patterns (right) for [Zn2(BME-BDC)x(DB-BDC)2−xDABCO]n (x = 2) (reprinted
from publication reference [72]. Copyright 2015, with permission from Elsevier).
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 161size upon the adsorption of gases, which was far larger than the volume change previ￾ously observed for any other gate-opening MOF. Interestingly, the extent of pore de￾formation depended on the adsorption enthalpy as well as the adsorbate shape and
kinetic diameter. In fact, Ni-DUT-8 was very sensitive to adsorbates because different
gaseous probe molecules generated very different absorption kinetics. For example, the
adsorption of nitrogen (77 K), carbon dioxide (195 K), and n-butane (272.5 K) induced
one-step structural transformations from closed to large pores, whereas the adsorption
of ethane (185 K) and ethylene (169 K) induced a two-step transformation [71].
Other MOFs, such as Al-MIL-53 doped with V4+ ions, exhibit structural breathing
behaviour in response to temperature, pressure, and air humidity. This breathing
phenomenon was monitored by in situ electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy
by Nevjestić et al. [73].
6.3.4 Negative gas adsorption (NGA) transitions
In conventional isothermal gas adsorption experiments, the gas uptake is expected to
increase with pressure, but the anomalous negative gas adsorption [74] effect can cause
the unexpected spontaneous desorption of gas upon increasing the pressure. One im￾portant example of an extensive study combining in situ XRD, gas adsorption, and
EXAFS experiments at the BESSY II light source (Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin) during
the adsorption of methane and n-butane by DUT-49 ([Cu2(BBCDC)], where BBCDC =
9,9′-([1,1′-biphenyl]-4,4′-diyl)bis(9H-carbazole-3,6-dicarboxylate) showed that this phenom￾enon was triggered by structural phase transformations of the framework. DUT-49 [75]
exhibited an open-pore structure (DUT-49op) consisting of an assembly of cuboctahedral
Figure 6.15: (a) Macrocyclic complex ([Ni(C14H34N6)]2+, ([NiLpropyl]2+) and H4BPTC linker components of
the flex MOF, (b) Gate-opening, and (c) breathing behaviour of the flex MOF upon CO2 adsorption
(reprinted with permission from reference [70]. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society).
162 Huayna Terraschkemetal–organic polyhedra, which were composed of copper paddlewheel units and BBCDC
ligands. This ordered arrangement resulted in the formation of large open pores (10, 17,
and 24 Å). During NGA, DUT-49op underwent contraction, with the unit cell volume de￾creasing considerably from 100,071.8(5) Å3 to 47,282.0(3) Å3 for the closed-pore structure
(DUT-49cp). This transition was reversible and DUT-49cp transformed back to DUT-49op
via an intermediate pore structure (DUT-49ip) once the pores were completely filled.
These structural changes were also reflected by the space group symmetry and lattice
parameters of the op, cp, and ip phases of DUT-49 [74].
6.4 Loading processes on MOF thin films
MOF thin films are potentially important for applications in membranes for separa￾tion or sensing. SURMOFs, an important example of thin-film MOFs, are often pro￾duced by a layer-by-layer technique employing liquid-phase epitaxy. In general, these
materials are synthesised by the alternating submersion of a functionalised substrate
in solutions of metal ions and organic linkers, with the number of cycles determining
the film thickness. The application of MOFs as sensors often depends on their func￾tionalisation by loading with guest molecules (e.g. luminescent molecules). To obtain
detailed information about the mass transfer and diffusion properties during the in￾corporation of guest molecules, the loading processes can be monitored in situ using
the QCM technique [15].
A QCM generates acoustic waves and measures the changes in the wave propaga￾tion properties during adsorption and desorption processes. QCMs are piezoelectric￾based devices that can detect small changes in electrode mass, with a sensitivity of up
to 10 μg/m2 [76]. The Sauerbrey equation establishes a linear relationship between the
resonant frequency and small mass increments, as follows [76]:
Δf0 = − 2
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
E · ρ p · f 2
0 ·
ΔM
A (6:4)
where f0 is the fundamental resonant frequency obtained when only odd overtones
are excited, Δf0 is the variation in the resonant frequency, E is the stiffness (Young’s
modulus), ρ is the density of the propagating material, ΔM is the mass increase, and A
is the area of the sensor surface. This equation is applied under the assumption that
the mass deposited at the surface follows the vibration of the crystal, and the sensor
becomes thicker [76].
This method has been applied to study interfacial processes on surfaces and thin
films, e.g. species transport, adsorption kinetics, and film growth. A QCM-based study
for analysing loading processes was performed during the adsorption of europium
β-diketonate compounds within the pores of HKUST-1, which can act as a photonic
antenna for Eu3+ excitation [60]. Luminescence spectroscopy after the loading procedure
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 163revealed successful doping. An increase in mass of only 160 ng/cm2 rather than the ex￾pected mass increase of 500 ng/cm2 was detected, which indicated that only approxi￾mately one in three super-cage pores housed a Eu3+ complex after the loading procedure
(Figure 6.16) [60]. The QCM results gave a diffusion constant of ~1 × 10–19 m2
/s, which is
reasonable, because the [Eu(BZAC)3BIPY] (BZAC = benzoylacetonate, BIPY = 2,2-bipyridine)
molecules have a large cross-section (0.97 nm) relative to the size of the entrance of the
channels connecting the MOF pores (1.2 nm). The low diffusion rate could also be caused
by the pore entrances being blocked by [Eu(BZAC)3BIPY] molecules crystallised on the
MOF surface. However, this hypothesis was ruled out because only reflections assigned to
the MOF thin film were detected in the XRD measurements (Figure 6.16) [60].
The QCM technique was also used to monitor the formation of Bi2O3 semiconductor
nanoparticles (NPs) within the pores of a HKUST-1 SURMOF. The high porosity, regular
pore size, and high loading capacity of this MOF provided a favourable platform for
producing monodispersed NPs. The resulting Bi2O3 NPs showed enhanced photoeffi￾ciency as compared to conventionally synthesised NPs for the photodegradation of a
dye (nuclear fast red). The diameters of the Bi2O3 particles (1–3 nm), as revealed by
transmission electron microscopy, were slightly larger than the inner diameter of the
HKUST-1 pores (1.9 nm), which was explained by the authors by the displacement of the
BTC ligand molecules defining the MOF pore walls during particle formation [77].
0
0
500 1000 1500
Time / s
2000 2500 3000 3500 6
(200)
(400)
10µm
8 10
2 theta / degree
Intensity / a.u.
12 14 16 18 20
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Figure 6.16: QCM results for the incorporation of [Eu(BZAC)3BIPY] guest molecules on a 40-layer HKUST-1
SURMOF (left). XRD patterns of the HKUST-1 SURMOF before (black curve) and after (grey curve) the
uptake of [Eu(BZAC)3BIPY]. Inset: laterally patterned HKUST-1 SURMOF sample under UV light, in which
the bright features correspond to SURMOF structures loaded with [Eu(BZAC)3BIPY] (republished with
permission of Wiley, from reference [60]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
164 Huayna Terraschke6.5 Concluding remarks
In summary, this chapter provided an overview of selected examples (published mostly
between 2015 and 2020) on the in situ monitoring of MOF formation and loading pro￾cesses, with the aim of enabling a better understanding of these phenomena. Due to the
large number of reported in situ diffraction experiments, this chapter focused on studies
that applied synchrotron X-ray radiation, which is necessary to penetrate the reactor
walls and liquid media commonly used for MOF synthesis. In recent years, formation
mechanisms have been most commonly studied using ZIF, HKUST-1, UiO, and CAU
MOFs. Interestingly, the crystallisation processes of ZIFs have been monitored using
in situ UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy [46], PDF measurements [50], light scattering
[53, 54], and XRD analysis in flow reactors [35] or during mechanosynthesis [6]. The for￾mation of HKUST-1 has been also studied by in situ diffraction experiments during me￾chanosynthesis [38], IR spectroscopy [42, 45], and AFM [56]. UiO MOFs have been
intensively investigated during synthesis using real-time PDF measurements [48, 49] and
XRD in batch [7] or flow [37] reactors. For a great variety of CAU MOFs (CAU-8 [34], CAU￾15 [16], CAU-18 [18], and CAU-19 [18]), XRD analysis has not only been performed during
solvothermal synthesis but also during the adsorption of guest molecules, such as hydro￾gen within CAU-1 [59]. Fascinating in situ diffraction experiments for monitoring the ad￾sorption of other gases, including carbon dioxide in [66] and oxygen [67], have revealed
remarkable structural changes such as the breathing effect in CAU-13 [1] and MIL-53 [73]
or NGA within DUT-49 [74]. Finally, this chapter also demonstrated the applicability of
time-dependent QCM measurements for monitoring the loading of guest molecules
within MOF thin films, such as luminescent materials within a HKUST-1 SURMOF [60].
References
[1] H. Reinsch, J. Benecke, M. Etter, N. Heidenreich, N. Stock, Combined in- and ex situ studies of
pyrazine adsorption into the aliphatic MOF Al-CAU-13: Structures, dynamics and correlations. Dalton
Trans. 46, 1397–1405, 2017.
[2] Z. Dong, Z. Mi, W. Shi, H. Jiang, Y. Zheng, K. Yang, High pressure effects on hydrate Cu-BTC investigated
by vibrational spectroscopy and synchrotron X-ray diffraction. RSC Adv. 7, 55504–55512, 2017.
[3] P. A. Julien, K. Užarević, A. D. Katsenis, S. A. J. Kimber, T. Wang, O. K. Farha, Y. Zhang, J. Casaban,
L. S. Germann, M. Etter, R. E. Dinnebier, S. L. James, I. Halasz, T. Friščić, In situ monitoring and
mechanism of the mechanochemical formation of a microporous MOF-74 framework. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 138, 2929–2932, 2016.
[4] S. L. Anderson, A. Gładysiak, P. G. Boyd, C. P. Ireland, P. Miéville, D. Tiana, B. Vlaisavljevich,
P. Schouwink, W. Van Beek, K. J. Gagnon, B. Smit, K. C. Stylianou, Formation pathways of
metal–organic frameworks proceeding through partial dissolution of the metastable phase.
CrystEngComm 19, 3407–3413, 2017.
[5] B. Bueken, H. Reinsch, N. Heidenreich, A. Vandekerkhove, F. Vermoortele, C. E. A. Kirschhock,
N. Stock, D. De Vos, R. Ameloot, An in situ investigation of the water-induced phase transformation
of UTSA-74 to MOF-74(Zn). CrystEngComm 19, 4152–4156, 2017.
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 165[6] A. D. Katsenis, A. Puskarić, V. Strukil, C. Mottillo, P. A. Julien, K. Užarević, M. H. Pham, T. O. Do,
S. A. J. Kimber, P. Lazić, O. Magdysyuk, R. E. Dinnebier, I. Halasz, T. Friščić, In situ X-ray diffraction
monitoring of a mechanochemical reaction reveals a unique topology metal-organic framework.
Nat. Commun. 6, 1–8, 2015.
[7] N. Heidenreich, U. Rütt, M. Köppen, A. Kentaro Inge, A.-C. Dippel, R. Suren, N. Stock, SynRAC – A
multi-purpose reaction cell for the investigation of reactions under solvothermal conditions. Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 88, 104102/1–12, 2017.
[8] R. I. Walton, F. Millange, In-situ studies of the crystallisation of metal-organic frameworks. In The
Chemistry of Metal-organic Frameworks: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications. Ed. Stefan
Kaskel Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH, 2016, pp. 729–764.
[9] G. Férey, M. Haouas, T. Loiseau, F. Taulelle, Nanoporous solids: How do they form? An in situ
approach. Chem. Mater 26, 299–309, 2014.
[10] D. O’Hare, J. S. Evans, R. Francis, S. Price, S. O’Brien, The use of in-situ powder diffraction in the
study of intercalation and hydrothermal reaction kinetics. Mater. Sci. Forum 278–2, 367–378, 1998,
Trans Tech Publications.
[11] R. I. Walton, D. O’Hare, Watching solids crystallise using in situ powder diffraction. Chem. Commun.
23, 2283–2291, 2000.
[12] H. Terraschke, M. Rothe, P. Lindenberg, Rev. Anal. Chem. 37, 20170003/1–22, 2018.
[13] M. J. Van Vleet, T. Weng, X. Li, J. R. Schmidt, In situ, time-resolved, and mechanistic studies of
metal–organic framework nucleation and growth. Chem. Rev. 118, 3681–3721, 2018.
[14] H. Reinsch, N. Stock, Synthesis of MOFs: A personal view on rationalisation, application and
exploration. Dalton Trans. 46, 8339–8349, 2017.
[15] L. Heinke, M. Tu, S. Wannapaiboon, R. A. Fischer, C. Wöll, Surface-mounted metal-organic
frameworks for applications in sensing and separation. Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 216, 200–215,
2015.
[16] N. Heidenreich, A. Lieb, N. Stock, H. Reinsch, Green synthesis of a new layered aluminium
citraconate: Crystal structures, intercalation behaviour towards H2O and in situ PXRD studies of its
crystallisation. Dalton Trans. 47, 215–223, 2018.
[17] H. Reinsch, T. Homburg, N. Heidenreich, D. Fröhlich, S. Hennninger, M. Wark, N. Stock, Green
synthesis of a new Al-MOF based on the aliphatic linker mesaconic acid: Structure, properties and
in situ crystallisation studies of Al-MIL-68-Mes. Chem. Eur. J. 24, 2018. doi: 10.1002/chem.201704771.
[18] T. Rhauderwiek, N. Heidenreich, H. Reinsch, S. Øien-Ødegaard, K. A. Lomachenko, U. Rütt,
A. V. Soldatov, K. P. Lillerud, N. Stock, Co-ligand dependent formation and phase transformation of
four porphyrin-based cerium metal−organic frameworks. Cryst. Growth Des. 17, 3462–3474, 2017.
[19] O. H. Seeck, C. Deiter, K. Pflaum, F. Bertam, A. Beerlink, H. Franz, J. Horbach, H. Schulte-Schrepping,
B. M. Murphy, M. Greve, O. Magnussen, The high-resolution diffraction beamline P08 at PETRA III.
J. Synchrotron Radiat. 19, 30–38, 2012.
[20] A. F. Gualtieri, Synthesis of sodium zeolites from a natural halloysite. Phys. Chem. Miner. 27, 719–728,
2001.
[21] A. N. Christensen, B. Lebech, Investigation of the crystal structure of a basic bismuth(III) nitrate with
the composition [Bi6O4(OH)4]0.54(1)[Bi6O5(OH)3]0.46(1)(NO3)5.54(1). Dalton. Trans. 41, 1971, 2012.
[22] J. Strempfer, S. Francoual, D. Reuther, D. K. Shukla, A. Skaugen, H. Schulte-Schrepping, T. Kracht,
H. Franz, Resonant scattering and diffraction beamline P09 at PETRA III. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 20,
541–549, 2013.
[23] M. Avrami, Kinetics of phase change. I General theory. J. Chem. Phys. 7, 1103–1112, 1939.
[24] N. Schell, A. King, F. Beckmann, T. Fischer, M. Müller, A. Schreyer, The high energy materials science
beamline (HEMS) at PETRA III. Mater. Sci. Forum 772, 57–61, 2013.
166 Huayna Terraschke[25] F. Luo, C. Yan, L. Dang, R. Krishna, W. Zhou, H. Wu, X. Dong, Y. Han, T.-L. Hu, M. O’Keeffe, L. Wang,
M. Luo, R.-B. Lin, B. Chen, UTSA-74: A MOF-74 isomer with two accessible binding sites per metal
center for highly selective gas separation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 5678–568, 2016.
[26] S. J. Moorhouse, Y. Wu, D. O’Hare, An in situ study of resin-assisted solvothermal metal-organic
framework synthesis. J. Solid State Chem. 236, 209–214, 2016.
[27] M. Drakopoulos, T. Connolley, C. Reinhard, R. Atwood, O. Magdysyuk, N. Vo, M. Hart, L. Connor,
B. Humphreys, G. Howell, S. Davies, T. Hill, G. Wilkin, U. Pedersen, A. Foster, N. De Maio, M. Basham,
F. Yuan, K. Wanelik I12: The joint engineering, environment and processing (JEEP) beamline at
diamond light source. J. Synchrotron Rad. 22, 828–838, 2015.
[28] Y. Wu, S. J. Moorhouse, D. O’Hare, Time-resolved in situ diffraction reveals a solid-state
rearrangement during solvothermal MOF synthesis. Chem. Mater 27, 7236–7239, 2015.
[29] Y. Wu, M. I. Breeze, G. J. Clarkson, F. Millange, D. O’Hare R. I. Walton, Exchange of coordinated
solvent during crystallization of a metal–organic framework observed by in situ high-energy X-ray
diffraction. Angew Chem. Int. Ed. 55, 4992–4996, 2016.
[30] M. I. Breeze, T. W. Chamberlain, G. J. Clarkson, R. Pires de Camargo, Y. Wu, J. Fonseca de Lima,
F. Millange, O. A. Serra, D. O’Hare, R. I. Walton, Structural variety in ytterbium dicarboxylate
frameworks and in situ study diffraction of their solvothermal crystallisation. CrystEngComm 19,
2424–2433, 2017.
[31] Y. Wu, M. I. Breeze, D. O’Hare, R. I. Walton, High energy X-rays for following metal-organic
framework formation: Identifying intermediates in interpenetrated MOF-5 crystallisation.
Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 254, 178–183, 2017.
[32] S. J. Moorhouse, N. Vranjes, A. Jupe, M. Drakopoulo, The Oxford-Diamond In Situ Cell for studying
chemical reactions using time-resolved X-ray diffraction. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 084101, 2012.
[33] Y. Wu, S. Henke, G. Kieslich, I. Schwedler, M. Yang, D. A. X. Fraser, D. O’Hare, Time-resolved in situ
X-ray diffraction reveals metal-dependent metal–organic framework formation. Angew. Chem. 128,
14287–14290, 2016.
[34] M. Krüger, A. K. Inge, H. Reinsch, Y.-H. Li, S.-L. Wang, G. Maurin, N. Stock, Polymorphous Al-MOFs
based on V-shaped linker molecules: Synthesis, properties, and in situ investigation of their
crystallization. Inorg. Chem. 56, 5851–5862, 2017.
[35] A. Polyzoidis, M. Etter, M. Herrmann, S. Loebbecke, R. E. Dinnebier, Revealing the initial reaction
behavior in the continuous synthesis of metal–organic frameworks using real-time synchrotron
X-ray analysis. Inorg. Chem. 56, 5489–5492, 2017.
[36] A.-C. Dippel, H.-P. Liermann, J. T. Delitz, P. Walter, H. Schulte-Schrepping, O. Seeck, H. Franz,
Beamline P02.1 at PETRA III for high-resolution and high-energy powder diffraction. J. Synchrotron
Radiat. 22, 675–687, 2015.
[37] M. Taddei, N. Casati, D. A. Steitz, K. C. Dümbgen, J. A. Van Bokhoven, M. Ranocchiari, In situ
high-resolution powder X-ray diffraction study of UiO-66 under synthesis conditions in a
continuous-flow microwave reactor. CrystEngComm 19, 3206–3214, 2017.
[38] T. Stolar, L. Batzdorf, S. Lukin, D. Žilić, C. Motillo, T. Friščić, F. Emmerling, I. Halasz, K. Užarević, In
situ monitoring of the mechanosynthesis of the archetypal metal–organic framework HKUST-1:
Effect of liquid additives on the milling reactivity. Inorg. Chem. 56, 6599–6608, 2017.
[39] L.-H. Schilling, N. Stock, High-throughput ultrasonic synthesis and in situ crystallisation investigation
of metal phosphonocarboxylates. Dalton Trans. 43, 414–422, 2014.
[40] J. Ren, N. M. Musyoka, H. W. Langmi, B. C. North, M. Mathe, W. Pang, M. Wang, J. Walker, In-situ IR
monitoring of the formation of Zr-fumarate MOF. Appl. Surf. Sci. 404, 263–267, 2017.
[41] J. Ren, N. M. Musyoka, H. W. Langmi, J. Walker, M. Mathe, S. Liao, In-situ IR monitoring to probe the
formation of structural defects in Zr-fumarate metal–organic framework (MOF). Polyhedron 153,
205–212, 2018.
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 167[42] J. Zhao, B. Kalanyan, H. F. Barton, B. A. Sperling, G. N. Parsons, In situ time-resolved attenuated total
reflectance infrared spectroscopy for probing metal−organic framework thin film growth. Chem.
Mater 29, 8804–8810, 2017.
[43] J. Zhao, W. T. Nunn, P. C. Lemaire, Y. Lin, M. D. Dickey, C. J. Oldham, H. J. Walls, G. W. Peterson,
M. D. Losego, G. N. Parsons, Facile conversion of hydroxy double salts to metal–organic frameworks
using metal oxide particles and atomic layer deposition thin-film templates. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137,
13756–13759, 2015.
[44] J. Zhao, W. T. Nunn, P. C. Lemaire, Y. Lin, M. D. Dickey, C. J. Oldham, H. J. Walls, G. W. Peterson,
M. D. Losego, G. N. Parsons, Facile conversion of hydroxy double salts to metal–organic frameworks
using metal oxide particles and atomic layer deposition thin-film templates. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137,
13756–13759, 2015.
[45] H. Zhang, J. Huo, F. Li, C. Duan, H. Xi, Rapid synthesis of hierarchical porous metal–organic
frameworks and the simulation of growth. Cryst. Growth Des. 18, 6661–6669, 2018.
[46] W. Guo, W. Xia, K. Cai, Y. Wu, B. Qiu, Z. Liang, C. Qu, R. Zou, Kinetic-controlled formation of
bimetallic metal–organic framework hybrid structures. Small 13, 1702049/1-8, 2017.
[47] K. Zhou, B. Mousavi, Z. Luo, S. Phatanasri, S. Chaemchuen, F. Verpoort, Characterization and
properties of Zn/Co zeolitic imidazolate frameworks vs. ZIF-8 and ZIF-67. J. Mater. Chem. A 5,
952–957, 2017.
[48] A. E. Platero-Prats, A. Mavrandonakis, L. C. Gallington, Y. Liu, J. T. Hupp, O. K. Farha, C. J. Cramer,
K. W. Chapman, Structural transitions of the metal-oxide nodes within metal–organic frameworks:
On the local structures of NU-1000 and UiO-66. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 4178–4185, 2016.
[49] H. Xu, S. Sommer, N. L. N. Broge, J. Gao, B. B. Iversen, The chemistry of nucleation: In situ pair
distribution function analysis of secondary building units during UiO-66 MOF formation. Chem. –
Eur. J. 25(8), 2051–2058, 2019.
[50] M. W. Terban, D. Banerjee, S. Ghose, B. Medasani, A. Shukla, B. A. Legg, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhu,
M. L. Sushko, J. J. De Yoreo, J. Liu, P. K. Thallapally, S. J. L. Billinge, Early stage structural
development of prototypical zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF) in solution. Nanoscale 10,
4291–4300, 2018.
[51] T. Hikov, C. A. Schröder, J. Cravillon, M. Wiebcke, K. Huber, In situ static and dynamic light scattering
and scanning electron microscopy study on the crystallization of the dense zinc imidazolate
framework ZIF-zni. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14, 511–521, 2012.
[52] S. Saha, S. Springer, M. E. Schweinefuß, D. Pontoni, M. Wiebcke, K. Huber, Insight into fast
nucleation and growth of zeolitic imidazolate framework-71 by in situ time-resolved light and X-ray
scattering experiments. Cryst. Growth Des. 16, 2002–2010, 2016.
[53] R. Lehnert, F. Seel, Darstellung und Kristallstruktur des Mangan(II)‐ und Zink(II)‐Derivates des
Imidazols. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 464, 187–194, 1980.
[54] R. Banerjee, A. Phan, B. Wang, C. Knobler, H. Furukawa, M. O’Keeffe, O. M. Yaghi, High-throughput
synthesis of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks and application to CO2 capture. Science 319, 939–943,
2008.
[55] P. Cubillas, K. Etherington, M. W. Anderson, M. P. Attfield, Crystal growth of MOF-5 using secondary
building units studied by in situ atomic force microscopy. CrystEngComm 16, 9834–9841, 2014.
[56] S. D. Worrall, M. A. Bissett, M. P. Attfield, R. A. W. Dryfe, Anodic dissolution growth of metal–organic
framework HKUST-1 monitored via in situ electrochemical atomic force microscopy. CrystEngComm
20, 4421–4427, 2018.
[57] C. Serre, F. Millange, S. Surblé, G. Férey, A route to the synthesis of trivalent transition‐metal porous
carboxylates with trimeric secondary building units. Angew Chem. Int. Ed. 43, 6286–6289, 2004.
[58] N. Campagnol, T. R. C. Van Assche, M. Li, L. Stappers, M. Dinca, J. F. M. Denayer, K. Binnemans,
D. E. De Vos, J. Fransaer, On the electrochemical deposition of metal–organic frameworks. J. Mater.
Chem. A 4, 3914–3925, 2016.
168 Huayna Terraschke[59] M. C. Schlegel, D. Többens, R. Svetogorov, M. Krüger, N. Stock, H. Reinsch, D. Wallacher, R. Stewart,
M. Russina, Conformation-controlled hydrogen storage in the CAU-1 metal–organic framework.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 18, 29258–29267, 2016.
[60] H. Cerqueira Streit, M. Adlung, O. Shekhah, X. Stammer, H. Kemal Arslan, O. Zybaylo, T. Ladnorg,
H. Gliemann, M. Franzreb, C. Wöll, C. Wickleder, Surface-anchored MOF-based photonic antennae.
ChemPhysChem 13, 2699–2702, 2012.
[61] T. Wang, L. Gao, J. Hou, S. J. A. Herou, J. T. Griffiths, W. Li, J. Dong, S. Gao, -M.-M. Titirici, R. V. Kumar,
A. K. Cheetham, X. Bao, Q. Fu, S. K. Smoukov, Rational approach to guest confinement inside MOF
cavities for low-temperature catalysis. Nat. Commun. 10, 1340/1–9, 2019.
[62] M. D. Allendorf, M. E. Foster, F. Léonard, V. Stavila, P. L. Feng, F. P. Doty, K. Leong, E. Y. Ma,
S. R. Johnston, A. A. Talin, Guest-induced emergent properties in metal−organic frameworks. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 6, 1182–1195, 2015.
[63] G. T. Rochelle, Amine scrubbing for CO2 capture. Science 325, 1652–1654, 2009.
[64] Z. Lei, C. Dai, B. Chen, Gas Solubility in Ionic Liquids. Chem. Rev. 114, 1289–1326, 2014.
[65] C. Giacobbe, E. Lavigna, A. Maspero, S. Galli, Elucidating the CO2 adsorption mechanisms in the
triangular channels of the bis(pyrazolate) MOF Fe2(BPEB)3 by in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction.
J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 16964–16975, 2017.
[66] P. L. Llewellyn, M. Garcia-Rates, L. Gaberová, S. R. Miller, T. Devic, J.-C. Lavalley, S. Bourrelly,
E. Bloch, Y. Filinchuk, P. A. Wright, C. Serre, A. Vimont, G. Maurin, Structural origin of unusual CO2
adsorption behavior of a small-pore aluminum bisphosphonate MOF. J. Phys. Chem. C 119,
4208–4216, 2015.
[67] M. H. Rosnes, D. Sheptyakov, A. Franz, M. Frontzek, P. D. C. Dietzel, P. A. Georgiev, On the elusive
nature of oxygen binding at coordinatively unsaturated 3d transition metal centers in
metal–organic frameworks. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19, 26346–26357, 2017.
[68] H. J. Park, J. K. Jang, S.-Y. Kim, J.-W. Ha, D. Moon, I.-N. Kang, Y.-S. Bae, S. Kim, D.-H. Hwang, Synthesis
of a Zr-based metal−organic framework with spirobifluorenetetrabenzoic acid for the effective
removal of nerve agent simulants. Inorg. Chem. 56, 12098–12101, 2017.
[69] K. Tan, S. Zuluaga, H. Wang, P. Canepa, K. Soliman, J. Cure, J. Li, T. Thonhauser, Y. J. Chabal,
Interaction of acid gases SO2 and NO2 with coordinatively unsaturated metal organic frameworks:
M-MOF-74 (M = Zn, Mg, Ni, Co). Chem. Mater 29, 4227–4235, 2017.
[70] S. Hyun, J. H. Lee, G. Y. Jung, Y. K. Kim, T. K. Kim, S. Jeoung, S. K. Kwak, D. Moon, H. R. Moon,
Exploration of gate-opening and breathing phenomena in a tailored flexible metal−organic
framework. Inorg. Chem. 55, 1920–1925, 2016.
[71] V. Bon, N. Klein, I. Senkovska, A. Heerwig, J. Getzschmann, D. Wallacher, I. Zizak, M. Brzhezinskaya,
U. Mueller, S. Kaskel, Exceptional adsorption-induced cluster and network deformation in the
flexible metal–organic framework DUT-8(Ni) observed by in situ X-ray diffraction and EXAFS. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 17, 17471–17479, 2015.
[72] V. Bon, P. Pallmann, E. Eisbein, H. C. Hoffmann, I. Senkovska, I. Schwedler, A. Schneemann,
S. Henke, D. Wallacher, R. A. Fischer, G. Seifert, E. Brunner, S. Kaskel, Characteristics of flexibility in
metal-organic framework solid solutions of composition [Zn2(BME-BDC)x(DB-BDC)2−xDABCO]n: In
situ powder X-ray diffraction, in situ NMR spectroscopy, and molecular dynamics simulations.
Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 216, 64–74, 2015.
[73] I. Nevjestić, H. Depauw, P. Gast, P. Tack, D. Deduytsche, K. Leus, M. Van Landeghem, E. Goovaerts,
L. Vincze, C. Detavernier, P. Van Der Voort, F. Callens, H. Vrielinck, Sensing the framework state and
guest molecules in MIL-53(Al) via the electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum of VIV dopant
ions. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 19, 24545–24554, 2017.
[74] S. Krause, V. Bon, I. Senkovska, U. Stoeck, D. Wallacher, D. M. Többens, S. Zander, R. S. Pillai,
G. Maurin, F.-X. Coudert, S. Kaskel, A pressure-amplifying framework material with negative gas
adsorption transitions. Nature 532, 348–352, 2016.
Chapter 6 In situ monitoring of the MOF syntheses and phase transformations 169[75] U. Stoeck, S. Krause, V. Bon, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel, A highly porous metal–organic framework,
constructed from a cuboctahedral super-molecular building block, with exceptionally high methane
uptake. Chem. Commun. 48, 10841–10843, 2012.
[76] G. N. M. Ferreira, A. C. Da Silva, B. Tomé, Acoustic wave biosensors: Physical models and biological
applications of quartz crystal microbalance. Trends Biotechnol. 27, 289–697, 2009.
[77] W. Guo, Z. Chen, C. Yang, T. Neumann, C. Kübel, W. Wenzel, A. Welle, W. Pfleging, O. Shekhah,
C. Wöll, E. Redel, Bi2O3 nanoparticles encapsulated in surface mounted metal–organic framework
thin films. Nanoscale 8, 6468–6472, 2016.
170 Huayna TerraschkeHuayna Terraschke✶
, Katia Nchimi, Felix Hartmann, Wolfgang Bensch
Chapter 7
Operando studies on the charge
and discharge processes of battery materials
To supply sustainable, renewable energy, the efficiency of its storage, such as within
batteries, is as decisive as the efficiency of its production. To produce powerful re￾chargeable batteries, the development of electrodes with low cost, long cycle and cal￾endar life, high current density, and improved safety is crucial. Operando studies
during the charge and discharge processes enable a profound understanding of how
electrode materials work and why they fail. This chapter offers a short overview of
the application of frequently used operando techniques for characterising the func￾tion of lithium-, sodium-, potassium-, zinc-, and magnesium-ion batteries with liquid
or solid electrolytes.
7.1 Introduction
In the recent decades, significant progress has been made in the generation of renew￾able energy using, for example, sunlight or wind as a power source. Compared to fos￾sil fuels such as gas, oil, or charcoal, these sources of energy offer distinct advantages
such as their potentially unlimited nature and the absence of produced greenhouse
gases. However, owing to the periodicity of their occurrence, these renewable ener￾gies are not permanently available, despite their relatively high abundance. More￾over, unlike fossil fuels, these sources usually cannot serve directly as primary energy
sources because they cannot be transported. Sustainable use requires their storage in
secondary devices that will supply energy even in the absence of a primary energy
source, leading to stable and reliable clean power grids [1]. In addition to the improve￾ment of existing electrical networks, the introduction of batteries for energy storage
is particularly important for the automotive industry. Electric vehicles offer the ad￾vantage of potentially maintaining a high level of mobility without releasing danger￾ous gases such as carbon and nitrogen oxides into the atmosphere [2]. Thus, the
utilisation of renewable energy depends not only on the ability to collect and trans￾form energy but also on the ability to store the transformed energy, for example, in
batteries. Thus, the availability and reliability of batteries are serious considerations
in popularising sustainable energy forms.
✶
Corresponding author: Huayna Terraschke, E-Mail: hterraschke@ac.uni-kiel.de
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-007To harness renewable energy, efforts are being made towards the development of
battery materials offering low cost, long-term cycling, high current density, and safety
for large-scale energy storage and mobile (e.g. vehicular) applications. In this context,
the performance of rechargeable batteries depends not only on their chemical composi￾tion but also on the stability of their components, especially the electrodes. Optimally,
the charge and discharge processes should be accompanied by only minor changes to
the initial and the optimal structures of electrode compounds. To this extent, well￾structured and porous or layered nanomaterials are particularly interesting because of
the shorter diffusion pathways they provide and the voids within the particles that are
advantageous for compensating volume changes during the charge and discharge pro￾cesses [3, 4].
Ion batteries, which are known for their reusability and cost-effectiveness, gener￾ally utilise cations as charge carriers. In this regard, the lithium-ion battery (LIB) is
the key technology, and has shown ubiquitous utility, similar to its widespread inte￾gration in clean energy grids, in cellular phones, and laptops. The use of lithium in
ion batteries is particularly interesting because it is the lightest metal with the largest
standard potential. In addition, its small ionic size confers high mobility and diffusion
rate. However, LIB expansion has been limited, owing to crucial drawbacks, including
rapid ageing with time or charge/discharge cycles and high manufacturing costs [5].
New candidate materials for cathodes and anodes have been extensively researched
in the past few years. The overall aim is to achieve high energy, high power densities,
and fast charging, as well as to enable more efficient applications of renewable en￾ergy sources [6].
However, a fundamental understanding of the intrinsic limitations of most elec￾trode materials remains scarce because of the complexity of monitoring the phenom￾ena occurring during battery operations over a wide temporal range using the so-called
operando characterisation techniques [7, 8]. While discharge and charge processes
occur in millisecond fractions on atomic level, degradation phenomena, contributing to
the capacity decay, span from fractions of seconds to months or years. On the other
hand, chemical reactions at the interfaces occur simultaneously in fractions of nano￾metres to the bulk range. Mechanical degradation, caused by volume changes in elec￾trode materials during redox reactions, poses a severe issue. With such variations in
surface area, the behaviour of electrode materials varies in relation to their reactivity
with electrolyte solutions. This illustrates the complexity associated with processes in
battery materials and the necessity to investigate transformations occurring at various
lengths and timescales [7, 8].
To monitor the impact of such operational structural changes, electrode materials
can be removed from the battery cell and characterised ex situ. However, this approach
can expose them to air and subsequent possible damages such as chemical alteration or
structural changes, which render observation of the internal processes difficult. In the
past few decades, different analytical techniques have emerged as highly promising
methods that allow the non-destructive characterisation of battery materials, including
172 Huayna Terraschke et al.chemical, electronic, and morphological parameters, under operando conditions [3]. For
this purpose, synchrotron X-ray sources are especially advantageous because of their
high power and flux, which allow X-rays to penetrate battery cells during their operation
[3, 7]. The importance of operando studies on rechargeable batteries is especially re￾flected by the increase in the number of scientific publications focusing on these studies
in the past several years (Figure 7.1).
Moreover, the challenge of optimising ion batteries has been addressed by the
search for alternatives to well-established LIBs. Such efforts have focused on the uti￾lisation of more abundant alkali metals such as sodium and potassium, or other multi￾valent metal ions such as magnesium or zinc as charge carriers. For example, sodium￾ion batteries (SIBs) require relatively low manufacturing costs, resulting from the
higher abundance and affordability of sodium, compared to lithium. However, the
use of SIBs instead of LIBs faces several drawbacks, especially high redox potential,
higher atomic mass, and larger ionic radius of sodium, compared to lithium, which
result in a decrease in the theoretical energy density. While these disadvantages
lessen the competitiveness of SIBs for most mobile applications, they remain of con￾siderable interest for stationary power grids [9].
In summary, this chapter offers an overview of the different techniques available
for studying the events that occur during the battery charge or discharge processes.
These include chemical reactions and phase transformations as well as their influence
on the electrochemical properties and performance of the main types of commercial
and most-promising ion batteries.
Figure 7.1: Number of publications reporting operando studies on battery materials up to 2021
(data source: https://scifinder.cas.org).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 1737.2 Theoretical background: intercalation
and conversion reaction batteries
7.2.1 Intercalation reaction mechanisms
Classic LIBs contain, among others, three main components, namely, a positive electrode
(cathode), a negative electrode (anode) in which the Li+ ions intercalate (Figure 7.2a),
and a lithium-containing electrolyte. In addition, microporous separators are generally
included between the electrodes and electrolyte to prevent short circuits and simulta￾neously allow the permeability of Li+ ions [3, 10]. Cathode materials are often composed,
for instance, of transition metal oxides, which can store lithium within a reversible
guest–host insertion in an ideally well-defined and stable crystal structure. The oxidation
of the transition metal ions results in the removal of Li atoms during charge. In general,
the existing applied cathode materials in LIBs are classified into two main classes:
i) anion close-packed or almost close-packed groups and ii) open-structure groups.
In the first group, the redox active metal ion occupies sites between the anion
sheets alternatively, offering the advantage of high energy stored by volume ratio
units. The second group of substances includes more open structures such as vana￾dium oxides or “tunnel-like” compounds such as manganese dioxides and lithium
iron phosphates [5].
Graphite is the most commonly used anode material in LIBs and operates via in￾tercalation mechanism. In addition to its high electrical conductivity, low cost, and
eco-friendly nature, this material offers an extremely high cycle life and exhibits im￾portant volumetric, specific, and practical capacities, in addition to the highest speed
of electron transfer among most carbonaceous compounds [11, 12].
In detail, during battery charge, Li+ ions are extracted from the cathode (e.g.
LiMO2) and transported into the anode (e.g. graphite C6) through the electrolyte:
LiMO2 sð Þ ⇄ Li1−xMO2 sð Þ+ xLi + + xe− (7:1)
xLi +
+ xe− + xC6 sð Þ ⇄ xLiC6 sð Þ (7:2)
The charge process is thermodynamically disfavoured, requiring the application of a
high potential. The discharge process is the reverse reaction, i.e. the deintercalation of
Li+ ions from the anode and intercalation in the cathode. Notably, electrons do not
pass through the electrolyte but are compensated by an external circuit, with electri￾cal current flowing for both reactions. Moreover, during the first charge and dis￾charge cycles, organic compounds within the electrolyte can be decomposed to form
insoluble materials at the interface between the anode and electrolyte, forming a pas￾sivating layer known as the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) [14].
For optimal performance, small amounts of conductive additives can be added to
protect the cathodes from dissolution and overcharge and to facilitate the formation
174 Huayna Terraschke et al.and stability of the SEI. In addition, an aluminium current collector usually backs the
cathode, whereas a copper current collector usually backs the anode to supplement
the electrodes, which possess moderate electrical conductivity, to supply electrons to
the external circuit [3].
However, improvement of both the cathode and anode materials is required for
building high-capacity batteries. Despite the complexity of the consequent electro￾chemical decomposition of organic salts in electrolytic solutions, high-potential catho￾des with voltages up to 5 V, such as layered and spinel-type polyanion oxides, have
been widely developed as insertion materials [15]. Significant efforts have also been
made to improve the anode performance, which is limited by self-discharge caused
by corrosion and by a comparably low specific capacity of graphite (372 mAh/g) [16].
Higher specific capacities can be obtained, exploiting alternative charge storage
mechanisms such as conversion reactions [17], as explained below.
7.2.2 Conversion reaction mechanism
During discharge of conversion-type cathode materials such as nanosized transition
metal chalcogenides, the transition metal cations are reduced to their elemental state
while the charge carriers such as Li+ ions form at least one inorganic compound with the
anions (Figure 7.2b). In an ideal conversion, this process is reversible, and the nanosized
parent compound as well as the initial transition metal oxidation states are reobtained:
nLi+ + ne− + Mn + Xm ⇄ M0 + nLiXm=n (7:3)
(X = O, S, Se, F, Cl, N, H, or others)
This phenomenon is usually associated with phase transformations and further
amorphisation of electrode materials. In a few compounds, an intercalation reaction
occurs before conversion [18]. In general, conversion-type electrodes possess high
theoretical gravimetric capacities of approximately 500–1,500 mAh/g [19]. The disad￾vantages of conversion materials include large volume expansion, sluggish kinetics,
which yield poorly-resolved voltage plateaus, and poor Coulombic energy efficien￾cies. If these difficulties can be overcome, several transition metal compounds are
attractive electrode materials [19]. For example, binary metal fluorides offer high
specific densities, and are electroactive above 3 V versus Li+
/Li; thus, these represent
good candidates as cathode materials. This far, most conversion-type electrodes
have been used as anode materials because of their rather low redox potentials [3].
To fully understand the large differences in performance among the various elec￾trode materials with similar compositions and the mechanisms by which these materials
function and fail, no matter if it is intercalation, conversion, or alloying, real-time moni￾toring of the structure of these compounds during several cycles of charge and discharge
processes with the aid of operando characterisation techniques is required [24].
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 1757.3 Operando X-ray diffraction
X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a powerful analysis tool that can be used for the investigation
of a wide range of materials; this tool is particularly suitable for crystalline compounds.
The information provided by X-ray techniques ranges from material identification over
quantification to structural elucidation, including determination of lattice parameters,
contents of different crystalline phases in a mixture, and microstructure information
(domain size, strain, and texture). A powerful source of X-rays, such as synchrotron
light, offers high brilliance and collimation, as well as wide tuneable energy. Penetra￾tion within the battery cell allows the acquisition of additional information on electrode
materials, with a high spatial and temporal resolution. These features allow the study
of a wide range of samples and suitable measures for commercial batteries, such as
coin cells, without modification [3]. Operando XRD experiments can also be performed
using high-intensity laboratory diffractometers equipped with a Mo- or Ag-Kα source, as
demonstrated by Bartsch et al. [25] and explained in detail below.
a)
b)
Figure 7.2: Schematic representation of the reaction mechanism occurring in the charge and discharge
process within (a) insertion-type and (b) conversion-type battery materials (reprinted from reference [13]
by permission of Springer Nature, Copyright 2008).
176 Huayna Terraschke et al.In general, operando XRD measurements are especially important because the
structural changes on promising materials for battery electrodes must be controlled
to avoid safety issues and to ensure a long cycle life. Under abusive real-world battery
conditions, electrode materials may undergo undesired phase transformations that
result in elevated operational temperatures, overcharging, or discharge. In particular,
high temperatures are critical for phase transformations involving loss of oxygen and
risks of catching fire or exploding. Reversible chemical processes can lead to capacity
loss, accompanying changes in lattice parameters or unit cell volumes, thereby creat￾ing elevated strain or particle fracture. Decomposition of composite electrodes can
also occur or risk-bearing metal plating during deep discharge, thus determining the
voltage limits particularly important for ion batteries [3].
7.3.1 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs)
Owing to their numerous advantages, LIBs are the most commercialised ion batteries
and have various applications, for example, in the electromobility sector. Fast charging,
high energy, and high power densities are enabled by LIB technology, which derives
from the fact that lithium is the most electropositive (E0
Li+=Li = −3.04 V vs. standard hy￾drogen electrode, SHE) and the lightest metal [6]. LiCoO2 (LCO) was the most commonly
encountered cathode material in LIBs, unchallenged for decades since its first commer￾cialisation by Sony in 1991, because it exhibits a decent theoretical specific capacity of
274 mAh/g, high operating voltage, and good cycling performance [26]. However, detri￾mental phase transformations after delithiation of more than ≈ 0.5 Li/LCO limit the
practical specific capacity to ≈ 140 mAh/g [26]. Besides, the main limitations of LCO are
the high cost, toxicity, and raw material criticality of the constituent cobalt, as well as
low thermal stability caused by the release of oxygen at high temperatures, heating,
and the resulting safety issues.
Alternatively, LiNiO2 exhibits the same crystal structure as LiCoO2, similar theoreti￾cal specific capacity, higher energy density, and lower cost, in comparison to those of
LCO. However, LiNiO2 is less stable upon oxidation. By contrast, LiMnO2 combines ther￾mal stability and cost-effectiveness, thus showing potential as a cathode material [27].
The problem with the latter is the very low cycle stability of Mn-combining electrodes
(Mn leaching) [28, 29]. Interestingly, Ni, Mn, and Co can be combined with lithium in
ternary metal oxides, with the formula LiNixCoyMnzO2 (x + y + z = 1, NCM). Depending on
the chemical composition, NCM cathodes offer high volumetric energy densities and
good thermal stability at a lower cost, compared to LCO [9, 20, 30]. However, charging
of conventional NCMs to higher voltages leads to accelerated capacity fading and poor
cycling abilities, depending on the chemical composition, thereby justifying the develop￾ment of other derivatives of NCM materials [30]. Lithium- and manganese-rich NCMs
(LMR-NCMs), which have been described either as solid solutions (i.e. Li1+xM1–xO2,
where M = Ni, Co, and Mn) [21] or as composites of Li2MnO3 (x(Li2MnO3) · 1 − x(LiMO2))
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 177[22]. LMR-NCMs exhibit high specific capacities, and its cycling stability depends on the
value x and the relative amounts of Mn, Ni, and Co in LiMO2 [23].
In addition to NCMs, various other intercalation-type materials have replaced the
LCO cathode, including LiNixCoyAlzO2 (x + y + z = 1, NCA), LiMn2O4 (LMO), and LiFePO4
(LFP). Particularly, the latter cathode material regained enormous interest for applica￾tions in the low-cost battery sector due to the long cycle life and raw material abun￾dance [31].
Operando XRD is an excellent tool to investigate the intercalation-type battery cells
because the structural integrity of the parent compound is mainly preserved during cy￾cling. One example is reported by Schweidler et al. [31] showcasing operando XRD mea￾surement during long-term cycling of a LIB cell, consisting of Li1+x(Ni0.85Co0.1Mn0.05)1 −xO2
(NCM851005) as the cathode and graphite as the anode material. Although this Ni-rich
NCM material enables enhanced specific capacities for the battery, the increased Ni frac￾tion leads to Ni oxidisation during charging, generating highly reactive Ni4+ ions. This
species, consequently, results in electrolyte decomposition on the NCM particle surface
and gas evolution, leading to increased cell pressure; hence, the cell performance deterio￾rates during cycling. In addition, particles with high Ni concentrations suffer more criti￾cal volume changes during de-/lithiation, resulting in interfacial fracture and mechanical
stress during cycling [31]. Operando XRD results (Figure 7.3) demonstrate that the inter￾layer distances reversibly increase and decrease along the c-axis (003 reflection) during
the first 100 charge and discharge processes, evidencing the successful de-/intercalation
of Li+ ions from/into NCM851005. After 150 cycles, the 003 reflection becomes broader,
indicating the formation of two different NCM phases, which were identified as the hex￾agonal phases, H2 and H3, by Rietveld analysis [32]. The mechanism fails with the ongo￾ing cycle number; thus, after 500 cycles, the initial reactions are no longer applicable.
Moreover, the 002 graphite reflection was monitored (Figure 7.3b); from this information,
the interlayer spacing of the anode material can be estimated, thereby providing infor￾mation on the degree of de-/lithiation [31].
Ongoing research on LIB electrode materials is also aimed towards lightweight
lithium–sulphur (Li–S) batteries, which are now renowned for their high specific energy
(≈ 2,600 Wh/kg), low operating temperatures (reaching − 50 °C), and cost-effectiveness,
owing to high sulphur abundance [3, 33]. In this type of battery, sulphur S8 or carbon/S8
composites are used as the cathode material, whereas Li metal is used as the anode ma￾terial, producing a lightweight and low-cost system. During the discharge process, Li
undergoes oxidation to form Li+ ions, which diffuse to the cathode for charge compensa￾tion, and a series of transformations occur until insoluble Li2S is formed as the final
product at the cathode. During charge, Li2S is dissolved and Li metal is re-deposited on
the anode. The overall reversible chemical reaction (Equation 4) corresponds to the for￾mation of Li2S from the reaction of lithium and sulphur during discharge and the re￾verse reaction during charge [34]:
178 Huayna Terraschke et al.16Li + S8 ⇆ 8Li2S (7:4)
However, the reactions occurring within the cells for both processes are considerably
more complex. They also involve the formation of polysulphide species, Li2Sx (8 ≤ x ≤ 4),
which is hardly detectable because of their solubility and mobility in electrolytes. The
aforementioned polysulphides are also responsible for anodic aging as they diffuse to￾wards the Li metal anode; they drive corrosion and account for the loss of the active
material. According to operando XRD analysis, Cui et al. [35] investigated the evolution
of crystalline phases within a Li–S battery cell designed as described above. Analysis of
the diffraction patterns shows the complete disappearance of characteristic reflections
for elemental sulphur during discharge, indicating the complete reduction of the anode
material and formation of lithium sulphide. Surprisingly, while previous findings in the
literature suggest that most of the lithium sulphides remain insoluble during the subse￾quent charge [36–38], the authors reported the reappearance of reflections, correspond￾ing to sulphur, indicating that the recrystallisation of sulphur was not altered by the
rate of the galvanostatic electrochemical cycle (Figure 7.4). These notable results were
compared to findings obtained using another synchrotron technique, operando trans￾mission X-ray microscopy, which displayed subtle changes in the morphology of the
150
75
0
150
75
0
150
75
0
150
75
0
150
75
0
150
75
0
150
75
0
150
75
0
8.2 8.4 8.6
2 Theta / °, Mo-Kα1,2 2 Theta / °, Mo-Kα1,2
Intensity / counts
Intensity / counts
8.8 9.0 9.2
500th
300th
250th
200th
150th
100th
1st
750th
500th
300th
250th
200th
150th
100th
1st
750th
10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0 12.5 13.0
20
40
60 LiC12 LiC6
20
40
60
20
40
60
20
40
60
20
40
60
20
40
60
20
40
60
20
40
60
C
a) b)
Figure 7.3: Changes of (a) the 003 reflection for NCM851005 cathode and (b) the 002 reflection for the
graphite anode during cycling. The blue colour represents the measurements recorded before starting
the charging process under OCV, while the light blue colour shows the measurements in the charged
state. The dark blue colour indicates measurements in the discharged state (reprinted with permission
from reference [31]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 179electrode particles. The noticeable increase in the porosity of the material indicated
that few polysulphides were formed. This potentially causes the deterioration of cell
performance over several discharge–charge cycles [35].
Despite the advantages inherent to Li–S batteries, they suffer from short cycle life, pre￾cipitation of electronically insulating Li2S, which prevents the electrical current from
passing through the electrodes, and high self-discharging rates, owing to the mobility of
soluble polysulphide intermediates. In general, operando XRD analysis offers a deep un￾derstanding of the formation and dissolution of crystalline side products, and provides
meaningful insights into the capacity fade of such Li–S batteries. Improvement efforts
can be additionally made to address certain issues: for example, the use of additives in
the electrolytic solution to suppress the mobility of polysulphides, and installation of
polymeric or ceramic membranes to protect the Li metal anode and prevent crossover
Figure 7.4: Operando XRD patterns of a Li–S cell, cycled at C/8 and with a sulphur/Super P composite
prepared as cathode: (a) XRD pattern at the start of discharge; (b) XRD patterns for the region of the
Q-space, marked by the red box in a) for points a–j labelled in (c) the corresponding electrochemical plot.
The XRD patterns show the reappearance of sulphur reflections at the end of the first full cycle. Sulphur
reflections in (b) are labelled with their Miller indices. Unlabelled reflections originate from the pouch cells
polyester and separator. XRD patterns in blue include sulphur reflections. The total discharge capacity is
755 mAh/g and the total charge capacity is 707 mAh/g (reprinted with permission from reference [35].
Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).
180 Huayna Terraschke et al.processes. The effectiveness of this strategy has been demonstrated by operando XRD
analysis of a Li–S battery cell with crystalline α-S8 as the cathode and a silica-made glass
fibre separator [39]. In this case, the results show that at the beginning of the experi￾ment, only sharp reflections of α-S8 can be observed (red curve in Figure 7.5a). However,
these reflections quickly disappear at the open-circuit voltage (OCV) as the battery is dis￾charged, and lithiation occurs. During the cycle, two broad reflections appear at 25.6°
and 28.3° 2θ (dashed lines in Figure 7.5c), which are attributed to silica-adsorbed polysul￾phides, referred to as PS1 and PS2. These reflections are still visible at t = 50 h, which
corresponds to the end of lithiation (discharge), in addition to one broad reflection
around 27° 2θ, accounting for Li2S (dashed-dotted line in Figure 7.5c). The cycle proceeds
Figure 7.5: Operando XRD measurements of a Li–S cell. (a) Waterfall representation of XRD patterns and
(b) the corresponding galvanostatic curve, which was recorded during the first cycle of the Li–S cell at
C/50 rate. The coloured patterns in (a) indicate major changes occurring during cycling of the Li–S cell
and correspond to the coloured dots in (b), representing the different states of charge. (c) XRD contour
plot of the data shown in (a), with the same galvanostatic curve as shown in (b). The intensity chart is
shown to the right of (c). The asterisk refers to a reflection arising from a cell component. α-S8 and β-S8
are represented by white horizontal lines with diamond and oval symbols, respectively. The positions of
the peaks, labelled PS1 and PS2, are indicated by vertical black dashed lines. Li2S refers to the solid end-of￾lithiation product, lithium sulphide, and is symbolised by a dashed-dotted black vertical line. Overall, the
horizontal dotted black lines are used as a guideline for recording the changes in peak intensity as a
function of potential/time (reprinted by permission from reference [39], Copyright 2017 Nature).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 181with charging from t = 50 h to 90 h, and reflections of Li2S decrease until they completely
vanish after t = 70 h. At the end of the charge, recrystallisation of another phase occurs,
which is assigned as β-S8 phase [39].
To explain the formation of PS1 and PS2, the adsorption of polysulphides onto the
silica surface of the glass fibre separator was suggested, and further confirmed by the
design of an electrochemical cell, where silica was used as an additive in the electro￾lyte solution. Moreover, the scavenging of lithium polysulphides could effectively in￾crease the specific charge density by up to 25%, compared to that of a similar Li–S cell,
without the addition of silica to the electrolyte. Although the use of silica as a scaveng￾ing agent for polysulphides does not completely prevent the loss of cathode active ma￾terials, this approach provides a simple solution to the corrosion of the lithium anode
and a promising pathway for further investigations in mitigating the drawbacks cur￾rently encountered for Li–S batteries [39].
7.3.2 Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs)
As mentioned above, LIBs dominate the market for portable electronics, including cell
phones, laptop computers, and electric vehicles, owing to their good performance for
moderate to high energy demands for lightweight devices with fast charging ability.
However, limitations of LIBs include safety issues, flammability of the organic elec￾trolytes, and the presence of toxic components, making their disposal after the end
of battery life a serious environmental concern [40]. Moreover, the market demand
for lithium is constantly growing, but its reserves are neither renewable nor abun￾dant. Given the scarcity of concentrated material sources, focusing the demand for
large-scale applications on LIBs is impractical [41]. Alongside efforts to improve the
properties of LIBs, research intensifies the focus on earth-abundant alternative com￾pounds for safe, inexpensive, and environmentally friendly battery materials [40].
For lightweight materials, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are a possible alternative to
LIBs. Importantly, there is an abundance of sodium in the Earth (2.38%) – more than
200 times higher than that of lithium (0.01%). Because sodium has also physical and
electrochemical properties comparable to those of lithium, SIBs provide a possible
solution for large-scale energy-storage systems [42]. For example, the redox potential
for sodium (E0
Na+=Na = −2.71 V vs. SHE) is only slightly higher than that of lithium
(E0
Li+=Li = −3.05 V vs. SHE). However, this difference results in a loss of power and en￾ergy density [43].
Moreover, the development of SIBs has been hampered by the larger atomic radius
of sodium compared to lithium, which crucially affects the electrochemical behaviour
of structural distortions within the electrode materials [8, 40]. In general, layered
NaxTMO2 (TM = transition metal or a combination of transition metals) are described in
the literature as promising high-performance cathode materials for SIBs used in ambi￾ent temperature applications [41]. These sodium metal oxides adapt several polytypes,
182 Huayna Terraschke et al.i.e. they differ in the stacking arrangement of the metal oxide layers, which depends on
the transition metal TM and the sodium insertion amount x. In the P-polytypes, the Na+
ions are prismatically coordinated, whereas in O-polytypes, the Na+ ions are octahe￾drally coordinated. Particularly, in P2 structures, for example, common for NaxMnO2,
the NaS6 prisms share rectangular faces, facilitating Na+ ion transport through wide
passages with low activation energy (Figure 7.6, left). This drives rapid diffusion of Na+
ions, which can be advantageous for high current rate capabilities. The introduction of
additional electrochemically active elements and the formation of bimetallic sodium
transition metal oxides have been reported to avoid or delay irreversible phase transi￾tions between P- and O-polytypes, thereby improving the cycle life of batteries [41].
To investigate the relationship between the current rate stability and the struc￾tural alterations, Goonetilleke et al. [41] performed operando XRD studies on Na2/3
Mn0.8Fe0.1Ti0.1O2 electrodes, which were cycled at different current densities vs. Na+
/
Na in a voltage window of 1.5–4.2 V. The results (Figure 7.6, right) reveal the forma￾tion of a second P2-type phase, with smaller lattice parameters, herein called P2✶
,
when the battery cell reaches the charged state; eventually, this phase disappeared
upon discharge. According to the authors, the presence of these two phases indicates
the inhomogeneity of the electrode material, in which a change in the sodium con￾centration causes phase separation. Particles closer to the electrolyte interface react
faster at high current densities than those closer to the current collector [41].
Operando XRD measurements during cycling of such layered NaxTMO2 com￾pounds were also reported by Maletti et al. [44], who investigated NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 as the
cathode material for SIBs. Similarly, Ti ions are expected to suppress the transforma￾tion between the P- and O-polytypes. The results of these operando XRD experiments
reveal reversible transformation between O- and P-type NaxNi0.5Ti0.5O2 during charge
and discharge vs. Na+
/Na. The structural changes during sodium extraction and inser￾tion are described in detail, and the respective evolution of lattice parameters of both
polytypes were tracked with respect to the variation of Na content x (Figure 7.7). The
pristine O-type phase is observed for x = 1–0.65 and the P-type phase appears simulta￾neously for x < 0.85, whereas solely P-type phase is found for x < 0.6. During the coexis￾tence of both polytypes, the lattice parameters of the P-type phase remain almost
constant during Na insertion and extraction, while further Na is simultaneously in￾serted or extracted, respectively, from the O-type phase, which is reflected by the
changes of lattice parameters along the a- and c-axes. The P-type phase starts to re￾lease or insert Na, only for x < 0.6 [44].
Lin et al. [8] performed operando XRD measurements during (de)sodiation pro￾cesses on a nitrogen‐doped porous carbon-coated nickel cobalt bimetallic sulphide
hollow nanocube (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC composite. As described above, many transition
metal sulphides undergo conversion reactions, which is interesting for SIBs because
of their enhanced reaction kinetics compared to oxides originating from relatively
weak metal–sulphur bonds. The electrochemical performance of these materials can
be enhanced by applying bimetallic transition metal sulphides instead of single-metal
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 183Figure 7.6: Structure of P2-type NaxTMO2 compounds, viewed along the a-axis (left), and formation of a new P2✶ phase, with smaller lattice parameter
(higher 2θ values), during operando XRD measurements (right) (republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [41];
permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
184 Huayna Terraschke et al.sulphides because of a richer redox chemistry and because more phases are formed
during the first Li or Na uptake, yielding a more finely distributed nanostructure,
with the conversion products being in close contact [44]. While reducing the transi￾tion metal sulphide particles to the nanoscale shortens the Na+ ion diffusion pathway,
embedding the particles in heteroatom-doped porous carbon shells offers multiple ad￾vantages. On the one hand, the carbon shells increase the overall electronic conductivity
of the composite and support the charge transfer to potentially insulating conversion in￾termediates and products, thus offering increased accessibility of active sites for charge
storage. On the other hand, the carbon shells can adsorb polysulphide intermediates and
prevent nanoparticle agglomeration. The reported (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC composite was pre￾pared via Na2S sulphidation of phenol formaldehyde-coated Ni3[Co(CN)6]2 metal–organic
framework precursors, followed by calcination [8].
Figure 7.8 shows the XRD patterns recorded in an operando measurement; the
characteristic reflections of the (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC material are visible and reflections
from the carbon cloth substrate are marked with asterisks. At the start of sodiation
(between ≈ 2.5–0.75 V), the (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC phase seems stable, as corresponding
reflections show no shift and show only a slight intensity decrease. During further
sodiation (0.75–0.30 V), the intensity of the reflections of (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC strongly
decreases and they finally disappear. Simultaneously, a new reflection at 39.0° 2θ
evolves, which is assigned to the (220) lattice plane of Na2S, followed by increasing
intensities for reflections at ≈ 45.5° and ≈ 54° 2θ, which indicate formation of Ni and
Co metals. A set of reflections at 31.3°, 53.5°, and 56.3° 2θ was attributed to Na2S5 [8].
This study also shows that the resulphidation of metals and the re-formation of the
Figure 7.7: Changes of lattice parameters a (top) and c (bottom) of NaxNi0.5Ti0.5O2 for the pristine
O- (circles, R−3m) and P-polytype (squares, R3m) during charge (full symbols) and discharge (hollow
symbols) of a SIB (reprinted with permission from reference [44]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical
Society).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 185(Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC composite are incomplete, resulting in the formation of an amor￾phous material fraction.
Additional investigations for SIBs should address the stability of the electrode ma￾terials during charge or discharge, and the improvement of the cell performance
could be further elucidated by complementary in situ/operando experiments to pro￾vide a better understanding of molecular and structural dynamics, and possible path￾ways for the optimisation of these highly promising alternative batteries [8].
7.3.3 Potassium-ion batteries (PIBs)
In the family of alkali metals, potassium-ion batteries (PIBs) have recently been ex￾plored as alternatives to LIBs as well. One important advantage of PIBs is the low re￾duction potential of potassium redox active species in non-aqueous electrolytes,
compared to that of Li (E0
K +=K = −2.93 V vs. SHE and E0
Li+=Li = −3.05 V vs. SHE). Addi￾tional PIB advantages include potentially low production costs, high abundance of po￾tassium in the Earth’s crust, and easy insertion of K+ ions in graphitic anode materials
[45]. The most commonly reported electrode materials for PIBs are layered metal oxides
because of their stability, ready availability at low cost, and high theoretical energy den￾sity [46–48]. However, layered metal oxides suffer from low operating voltage and
short cycle life [49]. Hexacyanometalates, AxMy[M(CN)6]z · nH2O (A = alkali cations, Zn2+,
Al3+; M, M = transition metal ions), also known as Prussian Blue analogues (PBA), have
shown promise for application in SIBs and PIBs because they combine long cycle life
and high energy efficiency, either in aqueous or non-aqueous electrolytes during bat￾tery operation [50, 51].
The structure of PBAs consists of a rigid three-dimensional network, formed by
an octahedron-based polyhedron around the metal cations. The voids formed within
this structure are filled with zeolitic water molecules or alkali ions, and K+ ions can
be electrochemically inserted into and extracted from the voids (Fig. 7.9a) [52]. These
compounds can be easily synthesised by co-precipitation without calcination. The syn￾thesis requires simple metal salts as precursors, and their variety allows tailoring of
the electrode performance by selecting a suitable type of metal ion or by controlling
stoichiometric ratios [53]. However, the viability of such PIBs depends on the choice
of the electrolyte to address the problem of low Coulombic efficiency, upon degrada￾tion of the electrolyte at high potentials [54].
To optimise the performance of a potassium manganese hexacyanoferrate K2Mn[Fe
(CN)6] as a cathode material in a PIB electrochemical cell, Pasta et al. [52] used an intrin￾sically stable electrolyte solution, obtained by dissolving potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)
imide (KFSI) in the ionic liquid N-butyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
(Pyr1,3FSI). The intercalation of K+ ions in the anodic graphite host structure was probed
by operando XRD during the first galvanostatic cycle. During discharge, the potential
rapidly decreases from 2 to 0.33 V, and subsequently two pronounced pseudo-plateaus
186 Huayna Terraschke et al.are observed during discharge to 0.0 V. As seen in Figure 7.9, these two pseudo-plateaus
can be attributed to, firstly, the formation of three intermediate phases (KC48, KC36, and
KC24), and secondly, the generation of the most K-rich fully phase KC8, as the reflections
of the pristine graphite evolve towards a diffraction angle of 33.5° 2θ. This transforma￾tion is fully reversible and the same intermediate phases appear during K removal, and
finally, the recovery of solely graphite [52].
Figure 7.8: (a) Schematic representation of the synthetic steps for the preparation of the
(Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC composite, including coating Ni3[Co(CN)6]2 with phenol formaldehyde (RF),
sulphidation with Na2S, and final calcination at 550 °C. (b) Operando XRD results during the first discharge
and charge cycle for (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC-based electrodes (reproduced with permission of Wiley from
reference [8], permission conveyed by the Copyright Clearance Center Inc.).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 1877.3.4 (Hybrid) zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs)
Zn-based electrode materials are interesting because of their relatively low potential
(E0
Zn2 +=Zn = − 0.76 V vs. SHE), high theoretical capacity (820 mA h/g for Zn metal), and
natural abundance of Zn [55]. One of the foremost advantages is the operation of Zn￾based batteries in aqueous electrolytes, drastically reducing safety concerns, compared
to the flammable organic electrolytes necessary for LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs. Moreover,
aqueous rechargeable batteries are attractive, owing to their low cost, environment￾friendly characteristics, and high conductivity of the electrolyte – crucial for large-scale
energy storage [40, 55].
Figure 7.9: (a) A schematic representation of the full-cell potassium-ion battery consisting of a graphite
anode, potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide in N-butyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
electrolyte, and K2Mn[Fe(CN)6] cathode. (b) Operando XRD patterns and (c) corresponding potential vs.
capacity profile for potassium intercalation and deintercalation into graphite at C/30. The major
reflections for the intermediates KC48, KC36, KC24 and KC8 are highlighted (adapted with permission from
reference [52]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society).
188 Huayna Terraschke et al.However, a major challenge in the development of Zn-based batteries is the slow
diffusion of Zn2+ ions, caused by its high charge density, thereby leading to strong
Coulomb interactions within the polar crystalline hosts. Also, the formation of Zn den￾drites is problematic, because they cause capacity loss and poor Coulombic efficiency,
and deterioration of cycle life. The lack of information on the working mechanism
behind the de-/intercalation of Zn2+ ions is another issue. Hybrid Zn-ion batteries
(ZIBs) aim to overcome this difficult shift from single-ion to double-ion charge and
discharge mechanisms [40, 55].
Guo et al. [40] investigated the working mechanism of an aqueous hybrid LFP/Zn￾battery by operando XRD, a schematic representation of the cell is shown in Figure 7.10a.
Synchrotron radiation helped for this operando experiment to reveal that only Li+ ions
participate in the de-/intercalation processes from/in the cathodic iron phosphate, while
Zn2+ ions are deposited in the Zn anode, resulting in the following proposed working
mechanism [56]:
Cathode: LiFePO4 ⇆ e − + Li ++ FePO4
Anode: Zn2 + + 2e − ⇆ Zn
Overall: 2LiFePO4 + Zn2 +⇆ 2Li + + 2FePO4 + Zn
(7:5)
In the operando XRD measurements (Figure 7.10b), the reflections assigned to LiFePO4
are detected in the pristine state, and disappear during charge. Simultaneously, reflec￾tions assigned to FePO4 start to appear, demonstrating full delithiation from LiFePO4 to
form FePO4. During discharge of the cell, LiFePO4 is reobtained, which confirmed the
successful uptake of only Li+ ions. Finally, sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonate was
added to improve the mobility of Li+ ions and inhibit the growth of Zn dendrites [40].
In an additional study on Zn-based aqueous rechargeable batteries, operando
XRD experiments were performed using K+ ion intercalated V2O5 (KVO) nanorods as
cathode materials. Here, alkali metals such as potassium function as pillars within the
structure of transition metal oxides to increase their interlayer spacing (Figure 7.11a).
This strategy enhances the diffusion of Zn2+ ions within the ZIB and prevents the col￾lapse of the layered cathode structure during guest insertion and extraction, thereby
improving the battery cycle life. Shifts of reflections detected during the operando XRD
measurements show that Zn2+ ions diffused along the a-axis of the KVO parent structure
(Figure 7.11b). Because the (002) and (004) planes of the KVO nanorods were exposed to
the electrolyte, they provided access for the intercalation of Zn2+ ions, enabling high dis￾charge capacity and high-rate capability. Because of the occupation by K+ ions, the in￾tercalation of Zn2+ ions along the b- and c-axes is improbable [55].
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 189Figure 7.10: (a) Schematic representation of the working principle of the hybrid LFP/Zn battery; (b)
operando XRD measurement of this battery, with respective charge-discharge curve; and (c) contour plots
(reproduced with permission of Wiley from reference [40], permission conveyed by the Copyright
Clearance Center Inc.).
Figure 7.11: (a) Schematic representation of the storage mechanism of the KVO in the aqueous
rechargeable ZIB and (b) detailed models of the KVO structure described for the (100) surface
(republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from reference [55]; permission conveyed
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
190 Huayna Terraschke et al.7.3.5 Magnesium-ion batteries (MIBs)
In addition to batteries with lithium, sodium, potassium, and zinc ions, magnesium-ion
batteries (MIBs) have been recently investigated in situ during operation. Advantages
such as high abundance, low cost, high theoretical capacity, and high safety justify a
possible LIB replacement for large-scale energy storage units, such as power grids [57].
Thus, Fu et al. [57] studied the structural evolution of orthorhombic (α-)V2O5 nanowires
during the electrochemical insertion and extraction of magnesium. The α-V2O5 sheet￾like structure is advantageous for intercalation reactions, and the reduction of the ma￾terial dimension to the nanoscale is expected to reduce the diffusion barrier for Mg2+
ions. Therefore, possible phase transitions of V2O5 between the α, ε, γ, and ω poly￾morphs during cycling were investigated in detail. Operando XRD results (Figure 7.12)
show that at the beginning of the first discharge vs. Mg2+/Mg up to a certain stoichiom￾etry of Mg0.14V2O5, Mg2+ ions are incorporated into the V2O5 lattice through a solid solu￾tion mechanism. In this reaction step, an increase in the lattice parameters a and c
and a decrease for b are observed. A two-phase mechanism follows, in which the frac￾tion of Mg0.14V2O5 decreases while the fraction of Mg0.6V2O5 increases. During this pe￾riod, the lattice parameters remain constant, yielding a phase ratio of Mg0.14V2O5:
Mg0.6V2O5 of 13:87 at the end of the first discharge. During the first charge, the lattice
parameters, a and c, decrease, while b increases because of a combined two-phase
transition and solid-solution mechanism. A comparable picture is observed in the
second cycle; however, a phase ratio of Mg0.14V2O5:Mg0.6V2O5 of 15:85 near the end of
the second charge is observed, and the initial V2O5 parent structure is reobtained at
the end of the second charge. In contrast to the results in previous reports, the ε- and
γ-phases were not observed during cycling [57].
7.3.6 All-solid-state batteries (ASSBs)
All-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) are highly interesting in the field of electric mobility,
owing to their potentially improved safety and wider operating temperature range
than those of conventional LIBs, as well as its potential to deliver very higher energy
and power densities by implementation of Li metal anodes or concepts based on
in situ Li metal deposition [25]. However, limitations such as instabilities at the cath￾ode active material (CAM) and SEI, chemo-mechanical degradation, and development
of scalable fabrication processes need to be overcome. One important example of this
approach was reported by Bartsch et al. [25], who explored the combination of lithium
thiophosphate solid electrolytes (SEs) and Ni-rich layered oxides as high-energy cath￾ode active materials. Here, the degree of de-/lithiation of Li1 +x(Ni0.6Co0.2Mn0.2)1 −xO2
(NCM622) CAM was studied via operando XRD during charge and discharge by corre￾lations between Li content and changes in the lattice parameters. Operando experi￾ments were completed by investigating the effect of a LiNbO3 protective coating to
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 191prevent direct contact between the CAM and the thiophosphate SE, which is expected
to partially decompose during electrochemical cycling. According to the results, the
domain length along the a-axis decreases during delithiation because of Ni oxidation
and the consequent decrease in the ionic radius, which causes a contraction of the ab￾plane. By contrast, the domain size along the c-axis (Figure 7.13) first increases and
subsequently decreases after approximately x(Li) ≈ 0.5. The authors attribute the
first increase to the electrostatic repulsion between the oxygen layers, while the sub￾sequent decrease is justified by the charge transfer between the oxygen and nickel
atoms at a high state of charge (SOC). Also, the LiNbO3-coated CAM in these ASSB cells
can de-/intercalate more Li+ ions (x(Li) ≈ 0.62), compared to uncoated CAM (x(Li) ≈
0.51), mainly because of the higher delithiation degree of the coated cells in the initial
charge cycle and enhanced lithiation during discharge [25].
Figure 7.12: Changes of MgxV2O5 lattice parameters (middle), Mg0.14V2O5:Mg0.6V2O5 phase ratios (bottom)
and galvanostatic discharge-charge curves (top) during cycling (reprinted with permission from reference
[57]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).
192 Huayna Terraschke et al.7.4 Operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy
X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is a powerful tool to study alterations of electronic
states and the local environments around specific elements. Operando XAS experiments
have been combined with operando XRD measurements to elucidate the lithium storage
mechanism in a conversion-type ZnCo2O4 (ZCO) electrode material [58]. Such transition
metal oxides are advantageous for increasing the specific capacity by two or three
1st charge
2nd charge
1st discharge
1st discharge
2nd charge
1st charge
1st charge
1st charge
2nd charge
2nd charge
LiNbO3-coated
NCM622
uncoated
NCM622
1.0
1.0
1st discharge
1st discharge
pristine cell pristine cell
14.2
14.2
14.3
14.3
14.4
14.4
14.5
14.5
0.8
0.8
x (Li)
x (Li)
c-axis / Å
c-axis / Å
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
Figure 7.13: Changes of lattice parameter c for uncoated (top) and LiNbO3-coated (bottom)
Li1+x(Ni0.6Co0.2Mn0.2)1–xO2 cathode active material during the first charge (empty circles), first discharge
(black cycles), and second charge cycles (grey circles) (reproduced from reference [25a] with permission
from the Royal Society of Chemistry).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 193times, in comparison to those of commercial graphite electrodes for LIBs. Operando
results reveal the formation of LiCo2O3, ZnO and CoO as intermediate phases during
the first lithiation process. Upon delithiation, these phases are converted to CoO and
ZnO, instead of the re-formation of the initial ZnCo2O4. Subsequently, alloying with
Zn occurs when the electrode metal ions are reduced to their elemental state [58]. A
composite anode, based on ZnCo2O4, loaded on a carbon cloth (ZCO/CC) is a flexible,
binder-free material. The composite anode delivers high specific capacities even
after several galvanostatic cycles (e.g. 701 mA h/g at the 60th cycle at a specific cur￾rent density of 0.25 A/g) [58].
Permien et al. [4] showed that, in contrast to earlier findings in literature based
on conventional XRD data, nanosized NiFeMnO4 consists of a mixture of NiO and a
strained cubic spinel phase [4]. This discovery was enabled by a combination of syn￾chrotron XRD and pair distribution function (PDF) that corrected inaccurate assump￾tions of stoichiometry and oxidation states of this important electrode material,
which possessed high reversible capacity of ca. 840 mAh/g up to the 50th cycle. Results
from operando XAS, in combination with operando XRD, reveals that an Li uptake
per formula unit (fu) of ca. 0.8 Li/fu is possible without changing the electronic struc￾ture. Mn3+ and Fe3+ ions were simultaneously reduced by increasing Li/fu, and move
from tetrahedral to empty octahedral sites, before they are finally converted to their
elemental state after further Li uptake [4].
Li et al. [59] used operando X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) to
study the interfacial performance between a commercial Ni-rich LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2
(NCM811) cathode and Li10GeP2S12 SE. Despite their high ionic conductivities (10–2
–10–4
S cm–1
), most promising ASSB with sulphidic SE still suffer from severe issues. Some
of these problems include limited cycle life and rapid performance degradation, re￾sulting from the unstable interface between the electrode and the electrolyte material,
and from chemo-mechanical degradation. Under these specific conditions, ex situ
mechanistic studies to understand and prevent these issues are disadvantageous.
Thus, a modified coin cell (Figure 7.14), with an open window to allow the penetration
of incident X-rays, was used in these operando XANES experiments. Within the Ni K￾edge spectra, the signal at 8353 eV, which was assigned to the 1s→4p transition, initially
shifted to a higher energy and then returned to a lower energy level. According to the
authors, these shifts occur because of Ni2+/Ni3+ and Ni3+/Ni4+ electrochemical redox
reactions in the NCM811 cathode material during the delithiation and lithiation pro￾cesses. Considering the S K-edge feature of the Li10GeP2S12 SE at 2470.7 eV, a gradual
shift to lower energies is observed during the first charge. In the high-voltage state
(> 3.5 V), the additional shift to 2470.4 eV indicates the instability of the electrolyte.
During discharge, the feature at 2470.4 eV returned to 2470.7 eV, and a new feature
at 2472.5 eV appeared. Interestingly, this new signal was assigned to the S 1s to Li2S
σ✶ transition, suggesting that the electrolyte material is first decomposed to Li2S in￾stead of to other metal sulphides or polysulphides [59].
194 Huayna Terraschke et al.Figure 7.14: (a) Schematic representation of the operando XANES battery cell. (b) Operando Ni and S K-edge spectra with the respective charge (red
arrows) and discharge (blue arrows) profiles of a LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2–Li10GeP2S12 ASSB (adapted with permission from reference [59]. Copyright 2019
American Chemical Society).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 1957.5 Operando imaging techniques
Yu et al. [60] performed operando X-ray imaging experiments at the Cornell High En￾ergy Synchrotron Source with 10 keV energy and a resolution of 2 µm to study the
plating and stripping of Li dendrites in Li metal electrodes. Li metal is an interesting
anode material for rechargeable batteries because of its high specific capacity (3,860
mAh/g) and low reaction voltage. However, one of its major disadvantages is the
growth of dendrites during plating, which cause inhomogeneities across the electrode
surface and the consequent failure of the material [60]. Also, the formation of den￾drites is an inherent safety issue because dendrite growth can lead to short circuits,
which eventually ignite the flammable organic electrolytes and risk explosion and
fire hazards of such batteries. This study aims to offer a systematic investigation of Li
electrodeposition under practical battery conditions. Figure 7.15 shows the influence
of the concentration of LiPF6-based electrolyte (0.5 and 0.1 M) on the morphology evo￾lution of plated Li. At lower concentrations, the amount of plated Li is less under the
same charge. By contrast, in 0.5 M electrolyte, the plated Li possesses a moss-like struc￾ture, while in the 0.1 M electrolyte, dense Li clusters are formed, turning into “cactus”-
shaped structures upon growth. Additional experiments have demonstrated the for￾mation of new Li plating morphologies, such as “volcanic Li”, which originates from
the use of CsPF6 in this study as an additive to the LiPF6 electrolyte, and pits on the
electrode surface during Li stripping [60].
Li dendrite growth in LIBs has also been studied recently under operando condi￾tions by Song et al. [61]; hence, neutron imaging techniques are particularly efficient,
owing to the high penetration depth of neutrons. Li deposition on the electrode surface
during long-term cycling is typically inhomogeneous, forming moss- or needle-like mi￾croscale dendrites. These dendrites penetrate the separator, forming a direct current
path between the positive and negative electrodes thus causing short circuits. The work
of Song et al. [61] particularly focuses on the consequence of internal short circuits, and
the authors developed a model based on operando neutron imaging studies, which is
summarised in Figure 7.16a. Stage 1 is characterised by the deintercalation of Li+ ions
from the LMO host during charge. Subsequently, these Li+ ions are transported through
the electrolyte to the Li metal anode, where they are reduced and deposited on the Li
metal substrate. In stage 2, inhomogeneous nucleation causes the formation of den￾drites, which grow further and penetrate the glass fibre used as separator. A bridge is
formed with the delithiated Li1−xMn2O4 area, causing a short circuit. Consequently, the
battery cannot be charged at higher voltages. This result explains the decrease in volt￾age shown in Figure 7.16b. Then, the internal resistance around the contact areas de￾creases, resulting in electron transport from the dendritic Li to the Li1−xMn2O4 area.
Interestingly, the Li+ ions intercalated into Li1−xMn2O4 are subsequently reduced by
these electrons, forming the LiMn2O4 phase again. Dendritic Li is further consumed by
the reaction with Li1−xMn2O4 to form LiMn2O4. In stage 3, the dendrites have shortened
considerably so that they lose contact with LiMn2O4. The electron transport pathway is
196 Huayna Terraschke et al.interrupted, self-discharge stops, and the battery can be charged again (back to stage 2).
However, the battery short circuit is reached shortly afterwards, and the charge–self￾discharge process becomes the dominant mechanism for battery cycling [61].
An interesting study on battery operando XRD computed tomography was reported
by Liu et al. [62] for quantification of non-uniformities, not only as a function of time
but also as a function of position. Such information is very helpful to optimise battery
performance because local limitations in ionic and electronic transport can lead to
non-uniform energy storage reactions, especially in composite battery electrode com￾positions. These composite architectures usually consist of a mixture of the active
phase, conductive carbon additives, binder, and electrolyte-accessible porous regions,
where heterogeneous performance causes non-uniform degradation and capacity
loss. In the work of Liu et al. [62], the topographical mapping of an LFP-based elec￾trode during charge and discharge reveals accelerated reactions at the electrode faces
in contact with the separator or current collector. Surprisingly, the maximum reac￾tion rate experienced by the individual cathode particles in these regions is two to
five times higher than the average control charge and discharge rates [62].
Wu et al. [63] used a transparent electrochemical cell to visualise the operation
of zinc–bromide batteries during cycling. These zinc-bromide redox-flow batteries
(ZBFBs), which possess a high theoretical energy density, offer an interesting solu￾tion for stationary energy storage technology, and are currently on path to commer￾cialisation [63]. Regarding the charge storage mechanism, the total ZBFB reaction
can be written as follows:
Figure 7.15: Images of the SEI layer evolution of plated Li in 0.5 and 0.1 M electrolytes under
practical battery conditions (adapted with permission from reference [60]. Copyright 2019 American
Chemical Society).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 197Zn2 +
ð Þ aq + 2Br − !
charge
discharge
 Znð Þs + Br2 aq ð Þ (7:6)
However, the generated Br2 product is soluble in aqueous electrolytes, resulting in cross￾contamination and diffusion to the Zn anode side. This contamination decreases the Cou￾lombic efficiency and causes health and environmental problems due to the high vapour
pressure of Br2. A possible solution to this problem is the sequestration of Br2 by com￾plexing agents such as N-methylethyl-pyrrolidinium bromide (MEPBr) to form polybro￾mides (MEP + Br2n +1
–
, n = 1–4). The operating principle of this solution has rarely been
studied because of practical challenges. For instance, similar to polysulphides, polybro￾mides can be modified by extraction from the reaction environment. In addition, poly￾bromides are highly sensitive to X-ray radiation and the vacuum environments in
electron microscopes, thereby limiting the available methods for characterisation under
real operando conditions. Here, dark-field light microscopy (DFLM) is advantageous
Figure 7.16: (a) Schematic representation of mechanistic pathway of Li+ ions during battery charge, short
circuit, and self-discharge. Stage 1: deintercalation of the Li+ ions from the LiMn2O4 host during charge.
Stage 2: inhomogeneous nucleation causes dendrite formation, and bridging with the delithiated
Li1-xMn2O4 area results in short circuit and self-discharge. Stage 3: dendritic Li is consumed in the battery
cycle. The dendrites become short and lose contact with LiMn2O4. The electron transport pathway is
interrupted, and self-discharge stops. (b) Charging curve during the operando experiment (adapted with
permission from reference [61]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).
198 Huayna Terraschke et al.because this technique offers high contrast and sensitivity, in addition to its accessibility
and non-disturbing characteristic. For the operando microscopy experiments, the battery
cell shown in Figure 7.17a was constructed using a 100 nm Pt layer on a glass substrate as
the working electrode, carbon paper as the counter electrode, and a solution containing
Figure 7.17: (a) Schematic representation and photographs of the cell and microscopic images for
operando visualisation of polybromide formation on zinc–bromine flow batteries. (b) Nucleation and (c)
merging of polybromide droplets. (d) Disappearance of polybromides during discharge. (e) Sketch of a
droplet immobilized on the Pt surface during discharge; and (f) voltage profile during the first cycle
(reproduced with permission from Wiley from reference [63]).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 199Br–
, MEP+ and Zn2+ ions as the electrolyte. Sporadically distributed polybromide products
is generated under a small oxidising current (Figure 7.17). After 5 min, spherical micro￾particles of 2–3 µm size are formed on the Pt surface, growing to ≈ 10 µm at the end of
the charge and merging into larger-sized microstructures in contact with other micropar￾ticles. During discharge, the reduction to Br– ions causes the reduction of liquid droplets,
decreasing only in thickness according to the assumption of an anisotropic pattern, and
become transparent before they disappear. In summary, operando microscopy results re￾veal that the Br2 charge products are dissolved in the aqueous medium. These droplets
are formed upon deposition at the same position on the electrode surface and are con￾sumed thereafter during discharge (see Figure 7.17b–d). Interestingly, polybromide for￾mation does not depend on the substrate, but is strongly influenced by side reactions
induced by overcharging [63].
7.6 Operando optical and vibrational spectroscopy
Chen et al. [64] studied the formation of Li dendrites on an unstable SEI and the result￾ing low Coulombic efficiency of Li plating and stripping. Here, a strategy was devel￾oped to deposit a multifunctional antimony-based interphase on a Li metal anode by
immersing it in an antimony triiodide–tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution (Fig. 7.18). The
resulting lithiophilic layer was composed of gradients of amorphous antimony (Li3Sb,
Sb, and SbOx) and lithium (LiI, LiOH, Li2CO3, and Li2O) compounds. This interphase ex￾hibits high ionic and low electronic conductivity, as well as good electrochemical sta￾bility. The homogeneous electronic insulation of lithium compounds on this interphase
prevents the formation of Li dendrites. Operando Raman measurements recorded
through a sealed quartz window in the applied Li–S battery cell confirms that the for￾mation of this antimony–lithium-based interphase reduces parasitic reactions with the
liquid electrolyte and relieves the transport of polysulphides [64].
Ren et al. [65] used an interesting new approach to detect generation of water
traces in LIBs under operando conditions. Water impurities are usually formed by side
reactions in liquid electrolytes during electrochemical cycling, resulting in poor cycling
performance and loss of active materials. This generation occurs due to several reasons.
For example, capacity fading can be triggered by the reaction of water with lithium-foil
electrodes or LiPF6 electrolytes. On the other hand, water can also destroy the SEI. This
reaction passivates the electrode surface and prevents electrolyte degradation, conse￾quently allowing the transport of Li+ ions and resisting electron transport. Finally, the
reaction between water and the anode materials can generate the inflammable hydro￾gen gas, thereby increasing the internal pressure of the battery [65]. In the work of Ren
et al., the [Tb2(DHBDC)3(DMF)4] (DHBDC = 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid, DMF = N,N￾dimethylformamide) coordination polymer’s turn-on fluorescence response towards
moisture was used for detecting water formation during battery discharge.
200 Huayna Terraschke et al.The authors proposed that the intrinsic emission of the DHBDC ligand is self￾quenched in the pristine coordination polymer structure because of the short interli￾gand distances, which are below the critical radius for Coulombic energy transfer. Upon
exposure to moisture, the water molecules preferentially coordinate the Tb3+ ions, caus￾ing structural decomposition and separation of the DHBDC molecules, and stopping the
quenching of their luminescent properties. However, the absence of the 4f→4f electronic
transitions of the Tb3+ ions within the fluorescence spectra was not explained. For oper￾ando measurements, the coordination polymer was used as an additive in the electrolyte
solution (Figure 7.19). In situ luminescence measurements reveal a gradual increase in
emission, attributed to the linker, indicating water formation during the first discharge
process. In total, approximately 0.18% of water is generated in 2 mL of the electrolyte
solution, corresponding to the formation of a SEI layer [65].
7.7 Other operando techniques
The performances of batteries during operation have also been investigated using
small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) or small-angle neutron scattering (SANS). For exam￾ple, Li–S cells were probed by Risse et al. [33]; the authors investigated the formation of
S8 and Li2S, which reportedly cause capacity fading [66], within the pores of the carbo￾naceous cathode composite. Here, SANS is an ideal method to tackle this question, deliv￾ering quantitative information regarding the internal surface, size, and shape of the
pores. In addition, the method is complemented by the high penetration depth of the
neutrons. The operando cell (Figure 7.20a) was constructed from chemically inert poly￾ether ether ketone (PEEK), stainless steel current collectors, and exchangeable alumin￾ium windows, which are transparent to neutrons. Figure 7.20b shows the expected
plating
Dendrite-free Li plating
plating
Growth of Li dendrites
Li dendrites
quartz window
sulfur cathode 
separator
Sb-Li or
Li anode
Li metal
Li metal
Sb-Li anode
a) b) c)
plated Li
Lithiophilic interphase
Figure 7.18: (a) Schematic representation of the formation of the lithiophilic antimony-based layer to
prevent Li dendrite formation. (b) Photograph and (c) schematic configuration of the Li–S cell constructed
for the operando Raman measurements (reprinted with permission from reference [64]. Copyright 2019
American Chemical Society).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 201SANS curves if the precipitation of Li2S and S8 is not correlated with micropore scatter￾ing. As demonstrated by the respective operando results, both products precipitated not
in the pores but on the outer surface of the carbon fibres [66].
In addition, a different approach using a combination of operando liquid secondary
ion mass spectrometry and molecular dynamics simulations has been explored to eluci￾date the mechanism behind the formation of SEIs on anode surfaces – one of the least
understood component in LIBs [67]. The work of Zhou et al. [67] showcases the initial
formation of an electric double layer, caused by self-assembly of the solvent molecules,
and directed by Li+ ions and the electrode surface potential (Figure 7.21). The negatively
charged electrode surface repels salt anions, resulting in the formation of a thin, dense,
and inorganic inner layer that conducts Li+ ions and insulates electrons; this inner layer
is accountable for the main functions of the SEI. After the formation of this inner layer,
the electrolyte-permeable and organic-rich outer layers increase [67].
Figure 7.19: (a) Schematic representation of the applied operando cell and (b) correlation of in situ
emission spectra with the simultaneously measured specific capacity (Royal Society of Chemistry from
reference [65]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).
202 Huayna Terraschke et al.Figure 7.20: (a) Schematic of the cell used for small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) operando measurements on Li/S batteries. (b) Expected SANS curves
for precipitation of Li2S and S8 outside the pores of the applied carbonaceous cathode material (left) and illustration of particle formation on the cathode
surface (right) (reproduced with permission from reference [33]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 2037.8 Conclusions and Outlook
At present, LIBs are the most widely used rechargeable batteries in the electromobility
market, and their applications range from low-power appliances such as cellular phones
or laptop computers to high-power systems such as (hybrid) electric vehicles [2]. Increas￾ing energy demand necessitates an increase in LIB performance, which is currently ac￾companied by high cost, security failures, and limited by too low energy densities. The
exhaustion of lithium, which represents only 0.01% of the Earth’s crust, is predicted to be
accelerated by the absence of complementary systems. A wide range of materials have
been developed as alternative candidates that can improve the applications of LIBs [68].
In the studies presented in this chapter, several electrode materials were investigated for
enabling the replacement of Li+ ions by more abundant metal ions such as Na+
, K+
, Zn2+,
and Mg2+ ions, which can function as charge carriers. However, when these promising
rechargeable battery candidates are applied to successfully overcome the disadvantages
of LIBs, the increased ionic sizes of the charge carriers and the reduced reactivity give
rise to issues concerning the stability of the electrode materials and the operating poten￾tial range. Therefore, it is important to gain detailed insights into the fundamental electro￾chemical reactions, structural, electronic, and morphological changes. The events during
battery operation are solely assignable if in situ conditions are applied. The operando
characterisation of electrode materials during charge and discharge provides a better un￾derstanding of their scope and limitations. For example, the operando techniques dis￾cussed in this chapter permit the application of bimetallic NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 as a cathode
a) b) c)
d) e) f)
Figure 7.21: A schematic illustration of the formation of an SEI layer on the Cu anode surface with 1.0 M
lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI) in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) as the electrolyte the SIMS depth
profiles from the reference are not shown in this Figure 7.21 (reprinted by permission from Nature of
reference [67]).
204 Huayna Terraschke et al.material in SIBs without detrimental irreversible phase transformations [44]. For SIBs
and PIBs, alkali metal hexacyanometalates have emerged as promising cathode materials,
owing to their high electrochemical stabilities and open structures; however, the opera￾tion of, for example, PBA requires a suitable electrolytic solution that is stable at high
operating voltages [52]. On the other hand, an example for the investigation of ASSBs is
given by an operando XRD study, where the coating of the CAM stabilises the interface
with a SE, and offers higher de-/lithitation degrees. Operando techniques other than XRD
have also been presented as complementary analysis tools to obtain a better understand￾ing of the ion battery function. Operando XAS, for example, in combination with oper￾ando XRD, offers the elucidation of more complex charge storage mechanisms such as
the conversion of nanosized NiMnFeO4 as anode material for LIBs [4]. Additional combi￾natorial approaches are presented, which open up avenues for deeper insights into the
mechanisms during charge carrier uptake and release. For example, initial XRD analysis
showed the recrystallisation of S8 after several galvanostatic cycles in Li–S batteries, but
SANS evidenced that Li2S precipitated on the outer surface of the carbon fibres in this
system. In summary, the operando techniques described in this chapter are powerful
tools to understand the fundamental electrochemical reactions and offer detailed insights
into charge storage mechanisms for battery materials. This is outlined by several exam￾ples given, which provide a bigger picture and showcase the strength of operando inves￾tigations. Hence, these tools open up avenues for further optimisation of LIBs and can
also provide valuable information to tackle more general challenges of ion batteries,
which need to be understood as a next step towards alternative energy storage devices
such as SIBs, PIBs, ZIBs, and MIBs.
References
[1] G. Kalcon, A. Abbas, Battery storage system for frequency stabilization of AC Networks with high
penetration of renewable power. J. Sci. Technol. – Eng. Comput. Sci. 14, 39–48, 2013.
[2] V. Rievaj, F. Synák, Does electric car produce emissions? Sci. J. Silesian Univ. Technol. Ser. Transp. 94,
187–197, 2017.
[3] F. Lin, Y. Liu, X. Yu, L. Cheng, A. Singer, O. G. Shpyrko, H. L. Xin, N. Tamura, C. Tian, T.-C. Weng, X.-Q.
Yang, Y. S. Meng, D. Nordlund, W. Yang, M. M. Doeff, Synchrotron X-ray analytical techniques for
studying materials electrochemistry in rechargeable batteries. Chem. Rev. 117, 13123–13186, 2017.
[4] S. Permien, A.-L. Hansen, J. van Dinter, S. Indris, G. Neubüser, L. Kienle, S. Doyle, S. Mangold, W.
Bensch, Unveiling the reaction mechanism during li uptake and release of nanosized ‘NiFeMnO4’:
Operando X-ray absorption, X-ray diffraction, and pair distribution function investigations. ACS
Omega 4, 2398–2409, 2019.
[5] M. S. Whittingham, Lithium batteries and cathode materials. Chem. Rev. 104, 4271–4302, 2004.
[6] J.-M. Tarascon, M. Armand, Issues and challenges facing rechargeable lithium batteries. Nature 414,
359–367, 2001.
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 205[7] X. Wei, X. Wang, Q. An, C. Han, L. Mai, Operando X-ray diffraction characterization for
understanding the intrinsic electrochemical mechanism in rechargeable battery materials. Small
Methods 1, 1700083/1–13, 2017.
[8] X.-M. Lin, J.-H. Chen, J.-J. Fan, Y. Ma, P. Radjenovic, Q.-C. Xu, L. Huang, S. Passerini, Z.-Q. Tian, J.-F. Li,
Synthesis and operando sodiation mechanistic study of nitrogen-doped porous carbon coated
bimetallic sulfide hollow nanocubes as advanced sodium ion battery anode. Adv. Energy Mater. 9,
1902312/1–10, 2019.
[9] N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi, S. Komaba, Research development on sodium-ion batteries.
Chem. Rev. 114, 11636–11682, 2014.
[10] B. Xu, D. Qian, Z. Wang, Y. S. Meng, Recent progress in cathode materials research for advanced
lithium ion batteries. Mater. Sci. Eng. R. Rep. 73, 51–65, 2012.
[11] R. Yazami, Surface chemistry and lithium storage capability of the graphite–lithium electrode.
Electrochim. Acta 45, 87–97, 1999.
[12] X.L. Yao, S. Xie, C.H. Chen, Q.S. Wang, J.H. Sun, Y.L. Li, S.X. Lu, Comparisons of graphite and spinel
Li1.33Ti1.67O4 as anode materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. Electrochim. Acta 50,
4076–4081, 2005.
[13] M. Zheng, H. Tang, L. Li, Q. Hu, L. Zhang, H. Xue, H. Pang, Hierarchically nanostructured transition
metal oxides for lithium-ion batteries. Adv. Sci 5, 1700592/1–24, 2018.
[14] S. K. Heiskanen, J. Kim, B. L. Lucht, Generation and evolution of the solid electrolyte interphase of
lithium-ion batteries. Joule 3, 2322–2333, 2019.
[15] A. Kraytsberg, Y. Ein-Eli, Higher, stronger, better . . . A review of 5 volt cathode materials for
advanced lithium-ion batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 2, 922–939, 2012.
[16] Y. Nishi, Lithium ion secondary batteries; past 10 years and the future. J. Power Sources 100, 101–106,
2001.
[17] P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont, J.-M. Tarascon, Nano-sized transition-metal oxides as
negative-electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Nature 407, 496–499, 2000.
[18] K. He, S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Yu, Q. Meng, Y. Zhu, E. Hu, K. Sun, H. Yun, X.-Q. Yang, Y. Zhu, H. Gan, Y. Mo,
E. A. Stach, C. B. Murray, D. Su, Visualizing non-equilibrium lithiation of spinel oxide via in situ
transmission electron microscopy. Nat. Commun. 7, 11441, 2016.
[19] a) S.-H. Yu, S. H. Lee, D. J. Lee, Y.-E. Sung, T. Hyeon, Conversion reaction-based oxide nanomaterials
for lithium ion battery anodes. Small 12, 2146–2172, 2016. b) J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher,
M. R. Palacín, Beyond intercalation-based Li-ion batteries: the state of the art and challenges of
electrode materials reacting through conversion reactions, Adv. Mater. 22, E170–E192, 2010.
[20] F. Lin, I. M. Markus, D. Nordlund, T.-C. Weng, M. D. Asta, H. L. Xin, M. M. Doeff, Surface
reconstruction and chemical evolution of stoichiometric layered cathode materials for lithium-ion
batteries. Nat. Commun. 5, 3529, 2014.
[21] T. Ohzuku, M. Nagayama, K. Tsuji, K. Ariyoshi, High-capacity lithium insertion materials of lithium
nickel manganese oxides for advanced lithium-ion batteries: Toward rechargeable capacity more
than 300 mA h g−1
. J. Mater. Chem. 21, 10179–10188, 2011.
[22] Z. Lu, D. D. MacNeil, J. R. Dahn, Layered cathode materials Li[NixLi(1/3−2x/3)Mn(2/3−x/3)O2 for lithium￾ion batteries. Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 4, A191, 2001.
[23] M. M. Thackeray, S.-H. Kang, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek, S. A. Hackney, Li2MnO3-
stabilized LiMO2 (M = Mn, Ni, Co) electrodes for lithium-ion batteries. J. Mater. Chem. 17, 3112–3125,
2007.
[24] M. K. Jangid, A. Mukhopadhyay, Real-time monitoring of stress development during electrochemical
cycling of electrode materials for Li-ion batteries: Overview and perspectives. J. Mater. Chem. A. 7,
23679–23726, 2019.
206 Huayna Terraschke et al.[25] a) T. Bartsch, A-Y. Kim, F. Strauss, L. de Biasi, J. H. Teo, J. Janek, P. Hartmannad, T. Brezesinski,
Indirect state-of-charge determination of all-solid-state battery cells by X-ray diffraction. Chem.
Commun. 55, 11223–11226, 2019. b) J. Janek, W. Zeier, A solid future for battery development. Nat.
Energy 1, 16141, 2016. c) A. M. Bates, Y. Preger, L. Torres-Castro, K. L. Harrison, S. J. Harris, J. Hewson,
Are solid-state batteries safer than lithium-ion batteries? Joule, 6, 742–755, 2022.
[26] a) A. D. Pasquier, I. Plitz, S. Menocal, G. Amatucci, A comparative study of Li-ion battery,
supercapacitor and nonaqueous asymmetric hybrid devices for automotive applications. J. Power
Sources 115, 171–178, 2003. b) K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman, J. B. Goodenough, LixCoO2
(0<x<-1): A new cathode material for batteries of high energy density. Mater. Res. Bull. 15, 783-789,
1980. c) B. Xu, D. Qian, Z. Wang, Y. S. Meng, Recent progress in cathode materials research for
advanced lithium ion batteries. Mater. Sci. Eng: R: Reports 73, 51–65, 2012.
[27] J. R. Dahn, E. W. Fuller, M. Obrovac, U. Von Sacken, Thermal stability of LixCoO2, LixNiO2 and λ-MnO2
and consequences for the safety of Li-ion cells. Solid State Ion 69, 265–270, 1994.
[28] J. Tu, X. B. Zhao, G. S. Cao, D. G. Zhuang, T. J. Zhu, J. P. Tu, Enhanced cycling stability of LiMn2O4 by
surface modification with melting impregnation method. Electrochim. Acta 51, 6456–6462, 2006.
[29] M. Gu, I. Belharouak, J. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Xiao, A. Genc, K. Amine, S. Thevuthasan, D. R. Baer, J.-G.
Zhang, N. D. Browning, J. Liu, C. Wang, Formation of the spinel phase in the layered composite
cathode used in Li-ion batteries. ACS Nano. 7, 760–767, 2013.
[30] a) K. M. Shaju, P. G. Bruce, Macroporous Li(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)O2: A high-power and high-energy
cathode for rechargeable lithium batteries. Adv Mater. 18, 2330–2334, 2006. b) L. de Biasi,
B. Schwarz, T. Brezesinski, P. Hartmann, J. Janek, H. Ehrenberg, Chemical, structural, and electronic
aspects of formation and degradation behavior on different length scales of Ni-rich NCM and Li-rich
HE-NCM cathode materials in Li-ion batteries. Adv. Mater. 31, 1900985/1–24, 2019.
[31] a) J. Li, Z.-F. Ma, Past and present of LiFePO4: From fundamental research to industrial applications.
Chem 5, 2019, 3–6. b) S. Schweidler, L. de Biasi, G. Garcia, A. Mazilkin, P. Hartmann, T. Brezesinski, J.
Janek, Investigation into mechanical degradation and fatigue of high-Ni NCM cathode material: a
long-term cycling study of full cells. ACS. Appl. Energy Mater. 2, 7375–7384, 2019.
[32] H.-H. Ryu, K.-J. Park, C. S. Yoon, Y.-K. Sun, Capacity fading of Ni-Rich Li[NixCoyMn1–x–y]O2 (0.6 ≤ x ≤
0.95) cathodes for high-energy-density lithium-ion batteries: Bulk or surface degradation? Chem.
Mater. 30, 1155–1163, 2018.
[33] S. Risse, E. Härk, B. Kent, M. Ballauff, Operando analysis of a lithium/sulphur battery by small-angle
neutron scattering. ACS Nano. 13, 10233–10241, 2019.
[34] J. Tan, D. Liu, X. Xu, L. Mai, In situ/operando characterization techniques for rechargeable
lithium–sulphur batteries: A review. Nanoscale 9, 19001–19016, 2017.
[35] J. Nelson, S. Misra, Y. Yang, A. Jackson, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Dai, J. C. Andrews, Y. Cui, M. F. Toney, In
operando X-ray diffraction and transmission X-ray microscopy of lithium sulphur batteries. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 134, 6337–6343, 2012.
[36] S.-E. Cheon, K.-S. Ko, J.-H. Cho, S.-W. Kim, E.-Y. Chin, H.-T. Kim, Rechargeable lithium sulphur battery.
J. Electrochem. Soc. 150, A796–A799, 2003.
[37] H.-S. Ryu, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee, Discharge process of Li/PVdF/S cells at room
temperature. J. Power Sources 153, 360–364, 2006.
[38] L. Yuan, X. Qiu, L. Chen, W. Zhu, New insight into the discharge process of sulphur cathode by
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. J. Power Sources 189, 127–132, 2009.
[39] J. Conder, R. Bouchet, S. Trabesinger, C. Marino, L. Gubler, C. Villevieille, Direct observation of
lithium polysulfides in lithium–sulphur batteries using operando X-ray diffraction. Nat. Energy 2,
17069, 2017.
[40] J. Hao, J. Long, B. Li, X. Li, S. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, W. K. Pang, Z. Guo, Toward high￾performance hybrid Zn-based batteries via deeply understanding their mechanism and using
electrolyte additive. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1903605/1–9, 2019.
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 207[41] D. Goonetilleke, S. Wang, E. Gonzalo, M. Galcerán, D. Saurel, S. J. Day, F. Fauth, T. Rojo, N. Sharma,
Exploring the rate dependence of phase evolution in P2-type Na2/3Mn0.8Fe0.1Ti0.1O2. J. Mater. Chem.
A. 7, 12115–12125, 2019.
[42] F. Li, Z. Wei, A. Manthiram, Y. Feng, J. Ma, L. Mai, Sodium-based batteries: From critical materials to
battery systems. J. Mater. Chem. A. 7, 9406–9431, 2019.
[43] V. Palomares, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez, M. H. Han, T. Rojo, Update on Na-based
battery materials. A growing research path. Energy Environ. Sci. 6, 2312–2337, 2013.
[44] a) S. Maletti, A. Sarapulova, A. Schökel, D. Mikhailova, Operando studies on the NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2
cathode for Na-ion batteries: elucidating titanium as a structure stabilizer. ACS. Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 11, 33923–33930, 2019 b) M. Krengel, A.-L. Hansen, M. Kaus, S. Indris, N. Wolff, L. Kienle,
D. Westfal, W. Bensch, CuV2S4: A high rate capacity and stable anode material for sodium ion
batteries. ACS. Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 21283–21291, 2017.
[45] V. Renman, D. O. Ojwang, C. P. Gómez, T. Gustafsson, K. Edström, G. Svensson, M. Valvo,
Manganese hexacyanomanganate as a positive electrode for nonaqueous Li-, Na-, and K-ion
batteries. J. Phys. Chem. C 123, 22040–22049, 2019.
[46] X. Zhang, Z. Wei, K. N. Dinh, N. Chen, G. Chen, F. Du, Q. Yan, Layered oxide cathode for potassium￾ion battery: Recent progress and prospective. Small 16, 2002700/1–17, 2020.
[47] J. Liao, Y. Han, Z. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Li, X. Zhou, Recent progress and prospects of layered cathode
materials for potassium-ion batteries. Energy Environ. Mater. 4, 178–200, 2021.
[48] W. Li, Z. Bi, W. Zhang, J. Wang, R. Rajagopalan, Q. Wang, D. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Wang, B. Wang,
Advanced cathodes for potassium-ion batteries with layered transition metal oxides: A review.
J. Mater. Chem. A 9, 8221–8247, 2021.
[49] T. Deng, X. Fan, J. Chen, L. Chen, C. Luo, X. Zhou, J. Yang, S. Zheng, C. Wang, Layered P2-Type
K0.65Fe0.5Mn0.5O2 microspheres as superior cathode for high-energy potassium-ion batteries. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 28, 1800219/1–9, 2018.
[50] C. D. Wessells, R. A. Huggins, Y. Cui, Copper hexacyanoferrate battery electrodes with long cycle life
and high power. Nat. Commun. 2, 550, 2011.
[51] R. A. Huggins, The ferrocyanide/stabilized carbon system, a new class of high rate, long cycle life,
aqueous electrolyte batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 160, A3020–A3025, 2013.
[52] M. Fiore, S. Wheeler, K. Hurlbutt, I. Capone, J. Fawdon, R. Ruffo, M. Pasta, Paving the way toward
highly efficient, high-energy potassium-ion batteries with ionic liquid electrolytes. Chem. Mater. 32,
7653–7661, 2020.
[53] X. Wu, Z. Jian, Z. Li, X. Ji, Prussian white analogues as promising cathode for non-aqueous
potassium-ion batteries. Electrochem. Commun. 77, 54–57, 2017.
[54] J. R. Dahn, J. C. Burns, D. A. Stevens, Importance of coulombic efficiency measurements in R&D
efforts to obtain long-lived li-ion batteries. Electrochem. Soc. Interface 25, 75–78, 2016.
[55] a) F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu, C. Wang, Highly
reversible zinc metal anode for aqueous batteries. Nat. Mater. 17, 543–549, 2018. b) S. Islam,
M. H. Alfaruqi, D. Y. Putro, V. Soundharrajan, B. Sambandam, J. Jo, S. Park, S. Lee, V. Mathewa,
J. Kim, K+ intercalated V2O5 nanorods with exposed facets as advanced cathodes for high energy
and high rate zinc-ion batteries. J. Mater. Chem. A, 7, 20335–20347, 2019.
[56] X. Gong, J. Chen, P. S. Lee, Zinc-ion hybrid supercapacitors: Progress and future perspective. Batter.
Supercaps 4, 1529–1546, 2021.
[57] Q. Fu, A. Sarapulova, V. Trouillet, L. Zhu, F. Fauth, S. Mangold, E. Welter, S. Indris, M. Knapp, S.
Dsoke, N. Bramnik, H. Ehrenberg, In operando synchrotron diffraction and in operando X-ray
absorption spectroscopy investigations of orthorhombic V2O5 nanowires as cathode materials for
Mg-Ion batteries. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 2305–2315, 2019.
208 Huayna Terraschke et al.[58] Z. Zhao, G. Tian, V. Trouillet, L. Zhu, J. Zhu, A. Missiul, E. Welter, S. Dsoke, In Operando analysis of
the charge storage mechanism in a conversion ZnCo2O4 anode and the application in flexible Li-ion
batteries. Inorg. Chem. Front. 6, 1861–1872, 2019.
[59] X. Li, Z. Ren, M. N. Banis, S. Deng, Y. Zhao, Q. Sun, C. Wang, X. Yang, W. Li, J. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, K.
Adair, R. Li, Y. Hu, T.-K. Sham, H. Huang, L. Zhang, S. Lu, J. Luo, X. Sun, Unravelling the chemistry and
microstructure evolution of a cathodic interface in sulfide-based all-solid-state li-ion batteries. ACS
Energy Lett. 4, 2480–2488, 2019.
[60] S.-H. Yu, X. Huang, J. D. Brock, H. D. Abruña, Regulating key variables and visualizing lithium
dendrite Growth: an operando X-ray study. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 8441–8449, 2019.
[61] B. Song, I. Dhiman, J. C. Carothers, G. M. Veith, J. Liu, H. Z. Bilheux, A. Huq, Dynamic lithium
distribution upon dendrite growth and shorting revealed by operando neutron imaging. ACS. Energy
Lett. 4, 2402–2408, 2019.
[62] H. Liu, S. Kazemiabnavi, A. Grenier, G. Vaughan, M. Di Michiel, B. J. Polzin, K. Thornton, K. W.
Chapman, P. J. Chupas, Quantifying reaction and rate heterogeneity in battery electrodes in 3D
through operando X-ray diffraction computed tomography. ACS. Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11,
18386–18394, 2019.
[63] Y. Wu, P.-W. Huang, J. D. Howe, Y. Yan, J. Martinez, A. Marianchuk, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, N. Liu, In
operando visualization of the electrochemical formation of liquid polybromide microdroplets.
Angew. Chemie. Int. Ed. 58, 15228–15234, 2019.
[64] T. Chen, W. Kong, P. Zhao, H. Lin, Y. Hu, R. Chen, W. Yan, Z. Jin, Dendrite-free and stable lithium
metal anodes enabled by an antimony-based lithiophilic interphase. Chem. Mater. 31, 7565–7573,
2019.
[65] X. Ren, J. Wang, Z. Peng, L. Lu, Direct monitoring of trace water in Li-ion batteries using operando
fluorescence spectroscopy. Chem. Sci. 9, 231–237, 2018.
[66] J. B. Leriche, S. Hamelet, J. Shu, M. Morcrette, C. Masquelier, G. Ouvrard, M. Zerrouki, P. Soudan, S.
Belin, E. Elkaïm, F. Baudelet, An electrochemical cell for operando study of lithium batteries using
synchrotron radiation. J. Electrochem. Soc. 157, 2010.
[67] Y. Zhou, M. Su, X. Yu, Y. Zhang, J.-G. Wang, X. Ren, R. Cao, W. Xu, D. R. Baer, Y. Du, O. Borodin, Y.
Wang, X.-L. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Xu, C. Wang, Z. Zhu, Real-time mass spectrometric characterization of
the solid–electrolyte interphase of a lithium-ion battery. Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 1–7, 2020.
[68] Y. Tian, G. Zeng, A. Rutt, T. Shi, H. Kim, J. Wang, J. Koettgen, Y. Sun, B. Ouyang, T. Chen, Z. Lun, Z.
Rong, K. Persson, G. Ceder, Promises and challenges of next-generation ‘Beyond Li-ion’ batteries for
electric vehicles and grid decarbonization. Chem. Rev. 121, 1623–1669, 2021.
Chapter 7 Operando studies on the charge and discharge processes of battery materials 209Index
4f orbitals 10
absorption spectra 18
abundance 188
acceptor 18, 35
acoustic cavitation 54
Actinobacter sp. 55
activation energy 143
additive 201
aggregation 53
all-solid-state batteries 191
amorphisation 175
amorphisation–recrystallisation process 147
amorphous calcium phosphate VII, 124
amorphous calcium phosphates 77
anion exchange 150
anode 178
anodic dissolution 154–155
antenna effect 32, 115, 119, 122
antibodies 59, 62
aragonite 82
Arrhenius activation energies 138
autoclave 6, 13, 36, 53
Avrami theory 138
Bacillus sp. 55
ball mill 146
band gap 15
bioactive 73, 76, 81–82, 85–86, 96, 99–102
bioceramics 73–76, 81–82, 89, 91, 95–96, 99–102
biocompatibility 18, 55, 73, 76, 79, 81–82, 98, 101
biodegradable 73, 76
Bioglass 82
bioimaging 59, 65, 67, 119
bioinert 73, 99, 101
biomarkers 63, 65
biomaterials 74–75, 82, 85, 99
bond formation 149
bond lengths 125
bone 73–76, 79, 82–83, 86–89, 91–92, 98–102
bottle around ship 8
Bragg reflections 141
breathing 158–160, 162, 165
calcite 82
calcium carbonate 73
calcium phosphate VII, 73, 76–81, 90–95, 100–101
calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite 77
cancer treatment 59, 67
capacity loss 177
capping agents 8
catalysis 133, 155
catalytic properties 20
cathode 174, 178
centrosymmetric site symmetries 112
ceramics 73
chalcogenide 18
charge density 182
chemical inertness 18
chemical stabilities 59
chromaticity coordinates 24
classical nucleation theories 58
cluster geometries 152
CO2 sequestration 133, 156
Commission Internationale d’Éclairage 122
complexes 6, 8, 12, 15–16, 30, 37
composite 197
composites 8, 10, 18, 22, 26, 35, 37
contamination 198
continuous-flow 143, 149
conversion 175
conversion time 138
coordination environment 105–106, 109–110, 114
coordination number 122, 125
coordination polymer 200
coordination polymers VII, 5, 115
coordination sensors VIII, 105–107, 109, 124,
126, 128
co-precipitation 51, 92–93, 153–154
core–shell 20, 151
corrosion 182
Coulombic efficiency 186
crystal field model 110
crystal structures 48
current collector 197
cycle life 189
dark-field light microscopy 198
degradation 186
delithiation 192
dendrite 189
deprotonation 148
desolvation processes 107
Dieke diagram 110–111
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110459098-008discharge–charge cycle 180
DNA analysis 63
domain 192
donor 18
double layer 202
down-conversion 27, 30
drug delivery 47–48, 59, 61, 66–67, 133, 158–159
dual emission 14, 24
electric dipole 109
electric field vector 112
electric mobility 191
electricity consumption 25
electrochemical AFM 155
electrode 176
electrolyte 179
emission energy 109
emission spectra 6, 11, 34
emulsion 92–93
encapsulation 8–12, 15, 18–21, 23, 27, 30, 38
energy transfer 6, 10–11, 18, 201
environmentally friendly 156
europium 10–11, 23
external stimuli 158–159
flow reactors 134, 143, 165
fluorapatite 78
fluorescent shell 64
fluorophores 68
fluoroscein 24
fossil fuel 171
framework topologies 142
functional groups 59, 61–62
functionalisation 23, 38
gas storage 155
gate-opening/closing 158
glasses 73, 75, 82, 96, 102
global warming 156
greenhouse effect 156
greenhouse gas 171
group theory 113
growth kinetics 151
Gualtieri model 137
guest molecules 5
guest-induced luminescence 5–6, 10, 12,
24, 38
guest–host interaction 30
halide perovskite 18
hematite 47
heterometallic MOFs 151
high-performance liquid chromatography 66
host lattice 109, 124
host–guest interactions 66, 156, 158
human body 48
Hund’s rules 109, 111
hydrogen storage 156
hydrophobic ligand 15
hydrothermal 53, 92
hydroxyapatite VIII, 77, 79, 124
hyperthermia 48, 59
imaging technique 196
implants 124
impregnation method 35
in situ luminescence 201
in situ luminescence analysis of coordination
sensors 105–106
in situ techniques 134
incandescent bulbs 29
induction time 119–120, 122, 126, 138
inorganic building units 133
insertion 174
intercalation 175
interelectronic repulsion 110
interfacial fracture 178
intermediate phase 187
intermediates 140, 142, 147, 154
internal resistance 196
inverse spinel 49
inversion centre 114
ionic conductivity 107, 117, 119, 122
ionic liquid 128
iron phosphate 189
J degeneracy 114
J mixing 114
Janus morphologies 151
Judd–Ofelt mechanism 112, 114
lanthanide IX, 105–107, 109
lanthanide ions 63, 65
lanthanides 9
large-scale production 134, 143
laser XI, 106, 108
lattice parameter 183
212 Indexligand exchange 148–149
ligand field 10
ligand-to-metal charge transfer 32
light harvesting 18, 37
light transmission 126–127
light-emitting diodes IX, 19, 25, 117
liquid-assisted grinding 144
liquid-phase epitaxy 66
lithiation 178
lithium-ion battery 172
living cells 35
loading processes 133–134, 155, 159, 163, 165
local structural transitions 152
long-term stability 30
Lorentzian crystallite size 143
luminescence lifetime 23
maghemite 47
magnesium-ion batteries 191
magnetic core 64
magnetic dipole 112
magnetic nanoparticles 47
magnetic separation 59–61, 67
magnetite 47
mass spectrometry 202
mechanical stress 147, 178
mechanochemical 92
metal-organic frameworks 5–6
metal–ligand exchange 119
metal–organic framework 185
metal–organic frameworks 60, 66–67, 115, 133
micelles 62
microemulsion 54
microwave 93, 128
microwave radiation 143
modulator 148
MOF nuclei 148
molecular sieving 20–21
monochromator 108
monodispersed 51
monomers 154
morphologies 20
morphology 48
nanobioceramics 75–76, 93
nanoparticles 6, 8, 15, 20–22, 34, 37
nanorod 189
nanostructure 185
nephelauxetic effect 109, 119, 122
neutron imaging 196
nucleation 105, 107, 119
nucleation–growth model 141
octacalcium phosphate 77
octahedrons 49, 57
operando 173
optical fibre 106–107, 117, 126
optoelectronics 18
organic dyes 21, 27–28
organic ligands 133
organic linkers 5–6, 8–9
particle size 48
performance 180
pH value 107, 117, 119, 122, 127
phase transformation 177
photocatalysis 24
photocatalytic oxidation 36
photodynamic therapy 37
photomultiplier tubes 114
photostability 19, 36
photothermal therapy 37
physiological functions 76, 86
pillared-paddlewheel 142
plasma 83, 99
plasmonic 6, 20–22, 37
plasticity 29
pollutants 31
polybromide 198
polymorph 138–139, 143, 147
polyol method 53
polysulphide 179
porosity 5–6, 20, 74, 76, 82, 86–87, 89, 98–99, 180
porous carbon 183
porous polymer 62
post-synthetic modification 31
potassium manganese hexacyanoferrate 186
potassium-ion batteries 186
pre-nucleation clusters 58, 153
probability of nucleation 137
prostheses 124
protein adsorption 76, 85, 96
pseudo-plateau 187
quadrupole moments 112
quantum dots X, 6, 8, 15, 19, 27, 36–37,
63–64, 128
quantum yield 5, 12, 19, 23, 27, 30
Index 213quartz crystal microbalance 134
quenching effect 12, 21, 32, 34–35
radiotracers 68
Raman 200
rare earth elements 9
reaction intermediate 120
reaction intermediates 105, 114, 119
reaction mechanisms 148
reactor 6
reactor set-up 135, 141, 143–144
rechargeable batteries 173
recrystallisation 182
redox reaction 194
renewable energy 171–172
Rietveld refinement 143
Russell–Saunders coupling scheme 111
safety 191
selection rules 112–113
selectivity 20, 31–32, 34, 38
self-assembly 10, 28
semiconductor 15
sensing 5–6, 13, 15, 20, 24, 30–32, 34–35, 38
Sharp–Hancock plot 138
ship in a bottle 8
short circuit 196
side products 113
simulation 202
small-angle X-ray scattering 201
sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonate 189
sodium extraction 183
sodium-ion batteries 182
solid electrolyte 191
solid–liquid separation 66
solvation shell 119, 122
solvent quenching 115
solvothermal 53
solvothermal synthesis 6–7, 139–140, 142,
153, 165
sol–gel 92, 95
sol–gel approach 53
sonochemical 54
spin multiplicity 111
spin–orbit coupling 110–111
Stark effect 111
stimuli-responsive 62
Störber method 60
structural information 109, 114, 120, 125
surface area 74–76, 79, 81–82, 85–87, 100
surface areas 5, 133, 155, 157
surface-to-volume ratio 50, 75, 101
surfactant 54, 56, 61
surfactants 8, 19, 150
synchrotron 173
synchrotron facilities 135
synergistic effect 34
tailorable pores 66
teeth 74, 102
term symbols 111
tetrahedrons 57
theranostic 68
therapeutic applications 157
thermal decomposition 48, 51–52, 56, 67
time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence
spectroscopy 106
tissue regeneration 73, 89
topologies 142, 151
total orbital angular momentum 111
total spin quantum number 111
toxicity 31, 50
trace elements 31
transition metal 35
transition metal sulphide 185
tricalcium phosphate X, 77, 80
tumour-targeting agents 59
turbidity 118, 126
turn-on fluorescence 200
ultrasonic 92
ultrasonication 149
ultrasound 107, 128
vaterite 82
vibrational spectroscopy 200
white emission 27
Xe lamp 108
X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy 194
X-ray absorption spectroscopy 193
X-ray beam 135, 144–145
X-ray diffraction 176
Zeeman effect 110
zinc-ion batteries 188
214 Index
