Judith Martín de León, Victoria Bernardo, Miguel Ángel Rodríguez-Pérez
Nanocellular PolymersAlso of interest
Physical Chemistry of Polymers.
A Conceptual Introduction
Sebastian Seiffert, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Superabsorbent Polymers.
Chemical Design, Processing and Applications
Sandra Van Vlierberghe, Arn Mignon (Eds.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Handbook of Biodegradable Polymers
Catia Bastioli (Ed.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Injection Moulding.
A Practical Guide
Vannessa Goodship, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----Judith Martín de León, Victoria Bernardo,
Miguel Ángel Rodríguez-Pérez
Nanocellular
Polymers
From Microscale to NanoscaleAuthors
Prof. Judith Martín de León
Condensed Matter Physics Department
University of Valladolid
Paseo de Belén 7
47011 Valladolid
Spain
jmadeleon@uva.es
Dr. Victoria Bernardo García
CellMat Technologies S.L.
CTTA Building
Paseo de Belen 9-A
47011 Valladolid
Spain
v.bernardo@cellmattechnologies.com
Prof. Miguel Ángel Rodríguez-Pérez
Condensed Matter Physics Department
University of Valladolid
Paseo de Belén 7
47011 Valladolid
Spain
marrod@fmc.uva.es
ISBN 978-3-11-075611-1
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-075613-5
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-075621-0
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023941446
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available on the internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image: Miguel Ángel Rodríguez-Pérez
Typesetting: Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
www.degruyter.comAcknowledgments
Financial support from the Science and Innovation Ministry of Spain (PID2021-
127108OB-I00, TED2021-130965B-I00, and PDC2022-133391-I00) is gratefully acknowl￾edged. Financial assistance from the Junta of Castile and Leon (VA202P20) is grate￾fully acknowledged. Activities have been funded by the EU NextGeneration and
Castile and Leon Complementary plans of research and development with the au￾tonomous regions in actions of R&D. Component 17. Investment 1. (C17. I1), of the
recovery, transformation, and resilience plan.
In addition, we would like to thank all the current and previous members of the
Cellular Materials Laboratory of the University of Valladolid (www.cellmat.es) and
from the spin-off company CellMat Technologies (www.cellmattechnologies.com) for
their continuous effort in developing new knowledge on the field of cellular materials
and nanocellular polymers.
We would also like to thank our families and friends for their support in all these
years in which we have been working hard in scientific activities related to cellular
and nanocellular polymers.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-202Contents
Acknowledgments V
Chapter 1
Introduction 1
References 7
Chapter 2
Fundamentals 8
2.1 Introduction 8
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 8
2.2.1 Relative density, porosity, and expansion ratio 8
2.2.2 Gas phase descriptors 11
2.2.3 Solid phase descriptors 18
2.3 Foaming mechanisms 26
2.3.1 Polymer/gas solution 26
2.3.2 Nucleation 27
2.3.3 Growth 30
2.3.4 Degeneration 30
2.3.5 Stabilization 32
2.4 Nanocellular polymers: Key features 32
2.4.1 Cellular structure in nanocellular polymers 33
2.4.2 Foaming mechanisms in the nanoscale 38
2.5 Conclusions 39
References 40
Chapter 3
From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production
process 45
3.1 Introduction 45
3.2 Production techniques of nanocellular polymers 49
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 51
3.3.1 Homogeneous nucleation 55
3.3.2 Heterogeneous nucleation 66
3.4 Limitations and challenges 72
3.4.1 Limitations 72
3.5 Conclusions 76
References 77Chapter 4
Optical properties 85
4.1 Introduction 85
4.2 Light interaction with porous structures 86
4.3 Transparent nanocellular polymers 90
4.3.1 Production of transparent nanocellular polymers 90
4.3.2 Factors affecting transmittance 93
4.4 Other transparent nanoporous structures 99
4.5 Current limitations and future perspectives 102
4.6 Conclusions 102
References 103
Chapter 5
Thermal conductivity 105
5.1 Introduction 105
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 109
5.2.1 Conduction through the solid phase 109
5.2.2 Conduction through the gas phase 113
5.2.3 Radiation 115
5.3 Models to predict the thermal conductivity in nanocellular
polymers 123
5.4 Experimental determination of the thermal conductivity 126
5.4.1 Experimental techniques 126
5.4.2 Results in the literature 131
5.5 Future perspectives 135
5.6 Conclusions 137
References 138
Chapter 6
Mechanical properties 143
6.1 Introduction 143
6.2 Mechanical properties in microcellular polymers 144
6.3 Mechanical properties in nanocellular polymers 152
6.3.1 Confinement of the solid phase 157
6.4 Conclusions 161
References 162
Chapter 7
Surface area 164
7.1 Introduction 164
7.2 Surface area in nanocellular polymers 164
7.3 Generation of open cell nanocellular polymers 166
VIII Contents7.3.1 Types of open cell structures 166
7.3.2 Gas dissolution foaming of films and fibers 170
7.3.3 Generation of a porous skin 172
7.4 Applications in filters, sensors, and others 175
7.5 Conclusions 178
References 178
Chapter 8
Other properties 181
8.1 Introduction 181
8.2 Acoustic properties 181
8.3 Dielectric properties 185
8.4 Electromagnetic shielding properties 188
8.5 Multifunctional materials 192
8.6 Conclusions 192
References 193
Chapter 9
Applications of nanocellular polymers and future trends 195
9.1 Two types of nanocellular polymers: Fabrication and structure 195
9.2 Properties of nanocellular polymers: Comparison with other
materials 196
9.3 Future trends 198
References 200
Index 203
Contents IXChapter 1
Introduction
It is well known that physicist Richard Feynman’s talk entitled “There Is Plenty of
Room at the Bottom,” [1] given at the annual American Physical Society meeting at
Caltech on December 29, 1959, in which he discussed the possibility of manipulating
individual atoms and molecules as a new path for the development of materials sci￾ence, is often regarded as the starting point of nanoscience and nanotechnology.
It took some time to transfer this theoretical discussion about nanoscience to the
laboratories due to the enormous difficulty of manipulating materials at the nanoscale.
One important discovery in this field was the Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) in
1981, by Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer [2]. The STM together with the later develop￾ment of Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) has allowed researchers to observe and ma￾nipulate atoms and molecules on surfaces with unprecedented resolution. They were
groundbreaking tools for studying materials at the nanoscale. In addition to this, the
development in the 1980s of devices based on the use of ultra-high vacuum has also
permitted manipulate materials, mainly semiconductors, in the nanoscale to create low
dimensional systems. From that time until now, the development of materials with very
special properties due to some “nanoscale effect” has been enormous. Here are some
very specific examples [3]: two-dimensional electronic systems with very special elec￾tronic properties and showing at low temperatures and high magnetic fields the quan￾tum hall effect, high temperature superconductors, quantum dots, one-dimensional
materials with extraordinary electrical, magnetic and mechanical properties, fullerenes,
graphene, nanoparticles of many different types, etc.
In the field of polymers there are also some important examples such as polymeric
nanocomposites [4–5] that can reach much better properties than the raw polymer,
with a small proportion of nanoparticles. These materials can also be much better
than conventional composites in which fillers with sizes in the microscale are used.
Polymer composites with improved stiffness and strength, with electrical and thermal
conductive properties, with excellent fire resistance have been developed by a clever
use of nanoparticles.
The theoretical and experimental understating of phenomena in the nanoscale is
today enormous and one concept that is typically used in this field is the size effect [6].
This concept establishes that the properties of a material can change when
the dimensions of the material are reduced to a size comparable to or smaller
than the wavelength associated with the excitations associated to the properties
under study. For instance, in two-dimensional electronic systems the properties of
the 2D system are totally different from that of the three-dimensional system (3D)
when the wavelength of electrons is of the order of magnitude or larger than the
thickness of the system under study [6]. When the thermal conductivity of solid insu￾lators is measured at very low temperatures the mean free path of phonons can be
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-001very large (in the range of a few mm) and then the properties of the sample can de￾pend on the size of the material under study [6]. So, one question that may arise for
scientists working on cellular polymers is if this kind of size effects, typical in nano￾science and nanotechnology, can take place in a cellular material and, in particular,
in a cellular polymer.
But, before going into this topic it is necessary to explain a few basic concepts
about cellular materials. A cellular material is a two-phase system formed by a contin￾uous solid phase and a continuous or discontinuous gas phase. Cellular materials are
quite often found in nature. Wood, cork, sponge, bones, and leaves are some of the
cellular materials found in nature for very different purposes (Figure 1.1).
Man has always been using these natural materials. Just to name two examples, the
Egyptians used wooded artefacts to build their pyramids 5000 years ago [7]. Wood is
still a very important cellular material for us in many industrial sectors, and cork was
already used in bungs in wine bottles in Roman times. In addition, around 100 years
ago man started to produce their own cellular materials using different technologies,
being cellular polymers, also named on many occasions, polymeric foams, materials
that very quickly become very important for many industries.
Indeed, cellular polymers can be found in almost in every industry. These materi￾als combine lightweight (with the associated cost and raw materials savings) with
good thermal and acoustic insulation, impact protection, high stiffness, and strength
to weight ratio, buoyancy properties, among other interesting features. Furthermore,
Figure 1.1: Different examples of cellular materials in nature, bone, leave, wood, butterfly wing, and cork
(from upper left to down right).
2 Chapter 1 Introductionit is possible to tailor the properties of these materials to meet the requirements of
many different applications.
These materials have continuously growth over the years, and in fact, the market
size for cellular polymers or polymer foams is today enormous and it is still growing
quickly. For instance, this market is projected to grow from USD 90.7 billion in 2020 to
USD 114.8 billion by 2025, at a CAGR of 4.3 [8]. This forecast growth is mainly due to
the interesting combination of properties of these materials, that allow their use in
multiple sectors, such as the furniture and bedding, transportation, packaging, the
construction and others such as aeronautic, naval, leisure, and sports. As it can be
observed in Figure 1.2. the main materials used to produce these cellular polymers
are polyurethane, polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride, polyolefins, phenolic and mela￾mine, with Asia Pacific, North America, and Europe being the areas of the world
where the use of these materials is more extended. We will name from now on these
materials in the market and with large cell sizes (over 100 microns) conventional cel￾lular polymers.
Just to give an idea of the incredible volume of cellular polymers produced
every year a simple calculation can be done. Let’s assume that the average density of
the cellular polymers produced world-wide is 50 kg/m3 and that we slice all the cellu￾lar polymers produced world-wide in sheets 10 mm thick. Then, the estimated surface
Figure 1.2: Cellular polymers market in 2020, divided by region, type of material and applications.
Chapter 1 Introduction 3of cellular polymers produced is around 50,000 km2 every year. This means that in
10 years we could cover all surface of a large country in Europe like Spain, France, or
Germany by using a cellular polymers carpet.
As mentioned before these materials have two phases, the gas phase and the solid
phase. If we want to analyze if a size effect is possible in these materials, we
need to analyze every phase considering the phenomena that could take place in
each one.
Regarding the gas phase, the relative proportion between the mean free path of
the gas molecules and the cell size is a key parameter in this analysis. For air at atmo￾spheric pressure this mean free path is 70 nm. In order to observe nanoscale effects,
the size of the cells should be very small, and comparable to this number. So, if we
apply the principles of nanoscience, a clear conclusion is that we will observe nano￾scale effects only for cellular materials with cells in the nanoscale. Most cellular poly￾mers in the market today based on polyurethane, polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride,
polyolefin, phenolic, and melamine have cells much larger than this level, the sizes
being typically higher than 100 micros; this is more than 1000 times the value of the
mean free path of air. Even for microcellular polymers, with cell sizes around 10 mi￾crons, nanoscale effects associated to the gas phase will not appear because the size
of the cell is around 100 times higher than the mean free path of air.
Regarding the solid phase, we need to consider three aspects: the typical dimen￾sion of the solid phase, the size of the macromolecules, and the mean free path of the
excitations. Regarding the typical dimensions of the solid phase, and in a first analy￾sis, we can consider the cell wall thickness as a key parameter because the cell walls
are the thinnest part in the solid phase. For the conventional foams found in the mar￾ket, with cell sizes larger than 100 microns, the minimum cell wall thickness found
for very low-density cellular polymers (relative densities below 0.03) are in the range
of 0.5 microns. A very thin cell wall that typically shows a clear orientation of the
polymer molecules due to the foaming process. Then, the question is: is this size low
enough to show nanoscale effects? From a topological point of view, the second pa￾rameter that needs to be considered is the size of the macromolecules used to produce
the cellular polymer. If the gyration radius of the polymer macromolecule is high
enough to be comparable to the cell wall thickness some confinement effect could be
found, but in most cases the gyration radius of polymer macromolecules is smaller
than 500 nm, so a confinement effect is not expected in conventional cellular poly￾mers. On the other hand, and from the excitations point of view, if, for instance, we
consider the propagation of heat, the mean free path of phonons at room temperature
in polymers is from 1.5 to 10 nm, so much smaller than the cell wall thickness and
therefore a size effect is no expected for conventional cellular polymers.
Then, the following natural question is: what would happen if the cell wall thick￾ness could be much smaller, for instance, below 100 nm? Then, the gyration radius
for some polymeric matrices could be larger than the cell wall thickness and even
than the cell size, and then a confinement of the polymer matrix could be expected.
4 Chapter 1 IntroductionIn addition, for some extreme cases of materials with very thin cell walls, the size of
the cell walls could be of the same order to magnitude as the excitations promoting a
size effect.
We can therefore conclude from this analysis based on the size effect con￾cept that nanoscale effects could take place in cellular polymers but only when
the cells are in the nanoscale. This means cell sizes lower than 1 micron are
needed to detect unexpected properties of the gas phase and cell wall thickness
much smaller than 1 micron is needed to observe unexpected properties of the
solid phase.
The idea of creating nanocellular polymers using foaming processes started to be
discussed at the beginning of this century. The concept behind this was clear. In these
materials, nanoscale effects should appear and due to this some properties will be
highly improved in comparison with microcellular and conventional cellular poly￾mers, and some unexpected properties could appear. In addition, another key aspect
was producing these materials using technologies that could be up-scaled and that
were environmentally friendly.
This research appeared as a natural continuation of the research on microcellular
polymers, with cell sizes lower than 10 microns that were developed in the 1980s ini￾tially by MIT and successfully commercialized years later in the injection molding of
high-density parts, in the extrusion foaming and more recently in extrusion blow
molding (see Chapter 3 for more details about these materials).
Most of the efforts in the last years have been focused on how to produce these
nanocellular polymers using the gas dissolution foaming technology that was also the
one initially used to produce microcellular polymers. As it will be discussed in detail
in Chapter 3, the challenge of producing these materials is huge because very high
cell densities (higher than 1013 cells/cm3
) are needed. However, the progress done in
the last 10 years has been enormous and further improvements are expected, but al￾ready today it is possible to produce nanocellular polymers by using foaming ap￾proaches with cells in the nanoscale in the range of 10 to 1000 nm, cell wall thickness
lower than 15 nm and relative densities in the range of 0.1 to 0.5 starting form many
different polymers (polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), polycarbonate (PC), polyetheri￾mide (PEI), polyphenylsulfone (PPSU), etc.).
In addition, the expected nanoscale effects have been proved for some physical
properties, such as the mechanical ones, the thermal conductivity, the optical proper￾ties, and the dielectric and the acoustic properties. Some of the results obtained were
unexpected and difficult to understand from a theoretical point of view, and although
we have learned a lot about these novel materials, there are still many aspects that
are not understood.
So, it is possible to say that nowadays nanocellular polymers produced by
foaming techniques are a reality. These are materials with an excellent combi￾nation of physical properties such as low weight, very low thermal conductivity,
excellent mechanical properties, possibility of showing transparency, huge sur￾Chapter 1 Introduction 5face area, and tunable dielectric and acoustic properties. This is a combination
of properties not reached for any other material produced nowadays as will be
discussed in Chapter 9 of this book.
The authors of this book have devoted around 10 years of their scientific careers
to the development of these promising materials, contributing to the current state of
the art. The topic is becoming wider and wider as more and more papers are pub￾lished, and due to this, we believed that it was necessary to write a book that could
compile in a single document all the knowledge developed on these materials. We
have tried not only to summarize the information, but also we have discussed the find￾ings from a theoretical perspective, so a more basic understanding could be reached,
suggesting also future research topics. We think that this manuscript will be very help￾ful for scientists working in academia or industry who are interested in cellular poly￾mers in general and in nanocellular polymers in particular. The manuscript can be
understood by young scientists that start their research, but it could be also helpful for
scientists with a higher experience in the topic that want to go into a deeper analysis.
The manuscript is divided into nine chapters, and it is organized in the following
way.
Chapter 1 introduces the topic of nanocellular polymers in the context of the evo￾lution of cellular polymers and using some of the current knowledge on nanoscience
and nanotechnology.
Chapter 2 aims to present an overview of the fundamental concepts needed to un￾derstand the structure of cellular polymers and their fabrication processes. The descrip￾tors usually employed to characterize cellular polymers are introduced and discussed
and the foaming mechanisms occurring during the generation of these materials are
presented. In addition, the development of a new generation of cellular polymers, the
so-called nanocellular polymers, is introduced.
Chapter 3 is devoted to the production process of nanocellular polymers and in
particular, describes in detail how the gas dissolution foaming technology has been
used in the last years to create a wide variety of nanocellular polymers. The foaming
mechanisms occurring during the production of these materials are described and
discussed, and the current state of the art is summarized.
Chapter 4 explains one of the most interesting properties of nanocellular polymers,
the possibility of producing transparent cellular polymers. This property is studied
from a theoretical and an experimental point of view, showing the last advances within
this topic, as well as a comparison with other transparent nanoporous materials such
as aerogels. In addition, the current limitations and challenges are also discussed.
Chapter 5 discusses in detail the thermal conductivity of these materials. When
the research on these materials started and due to the confinement of the gas phase
(Knudsen effect), very low thermal conductivities were expected, and this was one of
the key motivations to develop nanocellular polymers. This chapter describes the heat
conduction mechanisms, the theoretical models to predict this property, the current
6 Chapter 1 Introductionstate of the art, and the challenges to improve the thermal insulation of nanocellular
polymers.
Chapter 6 is focused on the mechanical properties. The current state of the art is
revised, and the mechanical properties of these materials are compared to those of
microcellular polymers and conventional cellular polymers showing under which cir￾cumstances nanocellular polymers present outstanding properties. The results are dis￾cussed considering the confinement of the solid phase.
Chapter 7 discusses the very high surface area of nanocellular polymers, and the
methods known to create open cell structures with different types of morphologies.
Then, strategies to eliminate the solid skin and foam thin films are presented. Last,
some preliminary results suggesting the potential of nanocellular polymers for filtra￾tion and sensors are presented together with some ideas for further research and de￾velopment. This is a very open and promising topic in which research has been still
limited.
Chapter 8 focuses on other physical properties not covered before in the book. In
particular, acoustic properties, dielectric properties, and the electromagnetic shield￾ing properties are covered. The investigation on these properties suggests very inter￾esting behaviors, but they are still very open topics.
Finally, Chapter 9 presents a more detailed description of some of the most promis￾ing nanocellular polymers produced so far and compares the properties of these mate￾rials with those of conventional foams and silica aerogels. The idea of this chapter is to
show, by comparing with other well-known and commercial materials, the huge poten￾tial of nanocellular polymers due to an amazing combination of physical properties.
This book finishes describing the challenges of the topic and possible direction of
future research.
References
[1] R.P. Feynman, There’s plenty of room at the bottom, Eng. Sci. 23(5) (1960) 22–36. ISSN 0013-7812
[2] G. Binnig, H. Rohrer, C. Gerber, E. Weibel, Tunneling through a controllable vacuum gap, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 40(2) (1982) 178–180.
[3] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th ed., John Wiley and Sons, (2005).
[4] C. Hussain (Eds.), Handbook of Polymer Nanocomposites for Industrial Applications, 1st ed., Elsevier,
(October 27, 2020).
[5] M.E. Hoque, R. Kumar, A. Sharif (Eds.), Advanced Polymer Nanocomposites Science, Technology and
Applications, 1st ed., Elsevier, (May 1, 2022).
[6] J.R. Hook, H.E. Hall, Solid State Physics, 2nd ed., John Wiley and Sons, (1974).
[7] L.J. Gibson, M. Ashby, Cellular Solids: Structure and Properties, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press,
(1997).
[8] https://mytrendingstories.com/sweety-anthony/polymer-foam-market-insight-forecast-to-hdzliv
References 7Chapter 2
Fundamentals
2.1 Introduction
This chapter aims to present an overview of the fundamental concepts needed to under￾stand the structure of these materials and their fabrication processes. The descriptors
usually employed to characterize cellular polymers are introduced and discussed and the
foaming mechanisms occurring during the generation of these structures are presented.
Finally, the development of a new generation of cellular polymers, the so-called nanocel￾lular polymers, is introduced, and the changes in the descriptors and foaming mecha￾nisms are commented on.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers
A cellular material is a two-phase system formed by a continuous solid phase and a
continuous or discontinuous gas phase. The gas phase is enclosed in pores or cells. In
the case of cellular polymers, also called polymer foams, the solid phase is a polymer
or a polymer-based formulation. Figure 2.1 shows some examples of cellular polymers
currently used in different applications.
Cellular polymers are characterized by several structural descriptors that can be
classified into two main groups: solid phase descriptors (those related to the polymer
matrix) and gas phase descriptors (those describing the gas phase). Figure 2.2 presents
a schematic representation of the morphology of a cellular polymer and the different
parameters that can be used to fully describe the structure. In the following sections,
the descriptors are explained in detail and the different techniques to measure and
quantified them are explained.
2.2.1 Relative density, porosity, and expansion ratio
The relative density is the most important parameter describing any cellular polymer
since its one of the main parameters determining the possible final applications of the
material. The relative density (ρr) is defined as the ratio between the density of the
foam (ρfoam) and the density of the solid material that composes the solid phase
(ρsolid):
ρr = ρfoam
ρsolid
(2:1)
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-002Figure 2.1: Cellular materials based on various polymers and some of their applications: (a) low-density
polyurethane (PU) for thermal insulation in buildings, (b) low-density ethyl(vinyl acetate) (EVA) in toys,
(c) medium-density polypropylene (PP) in car parts, and (d) low-density polystyrene (PS) in food
packaging.
Figure 2.2: Classification of the descriptors to characterize a cellular polymer.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 9Based on this definition, the relative density represents the volume fraction of the
cellular material that is solid. Then, it can vary in the range from values above 0
(highly porous material, low solid fraction) to 1 (totally solid material). Cellular poly￾mers can be classified according to their relative density into three main groups (ex￾amples in Figure 2.3): high-density materials (ρr > 0.7), medium-density (0.2 < ρr < 0.7),
and low-density cellular polymers (ρr < 0.2). As mentioned above, the relative density
greatly affects the properties and thus defines the range of applications of cellular
polymers. High-density materials are meant to be used in structural applications,
whereas low-density cellular polymers can be used in thermal and acoustic insula￾tion, among other types of applications.
The complementary descriptor to the relative density is the porosity, Vf (eq. (2.2)). The
porosity represents the volume fraction of material that is gaseous. Then, it can vary
between 0 (totally solid) and values near 1 (highly porous material with a very low
solid fraction). On occasions, a percentage of porosity (Vfð Þ % = 100Vf ) is also used in
the literature to talk about this descriptor. It is common to talk about cellular poly￾mers with porosities of 30% or 80%, for instance.
Vf = 1 − ρr = 1 − ρfoam
ρsolid
(2:2)
Yet another parameter to describe this idea is the expansion ratio, ER (eq. (2.3)). It is
defined as the volume of the foam divided by the volume of the solid, or, assuming
the mass is conserved in the foaming process, the inverse of the relative density, that
is, the density of the solid divided by the density of the foam. It accounts for the volu￾metric expansion from the initial solid material. For instance, an ER = 20 means that
the cellular polymer has expanded 20 times in volume with respect to the solid pre￾cursor material; that is, the density has been reduced 20 times.
ER = Vfoam
Vsolid
= ρsolid
ρfoam
= 1
ρr
(2:3)
Figure 2.3: Examples of cellular polymers with (a) high density, (b) medium density, and (c) low density.
10 Chapter 2 FundamentalsFor processes in which there is a directionality (for instance, foaming in a mold), it is
also common to talk about the expansion ratio in three axes (ERx, ERy and ERz, calcu￾lated as the linear expansion in each direction: the ratio between the length of the
foam and the length of the precursor in one direction), the total ER being the product
of the three linear expansions:
ER = ERxERyERz (2:4)
2.2.2 Gas phase descriptors
2.2.2.1 Cell size distribution and average cell size
Cell size is defined as the diameter of the cells. There are two main descriptors related
to the cell size: the average cell size (calculate as the average diameter of a representa￾tive number of cells) and the cell size distribution (the histogram presenting the relative
frequency of each cell size). Both parameters are key to understanding the properties of
cellular polymers. According to the literature, there is not a well-defined unique method
to determine these parameters. The only accepted method within the American Society
for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards is the intersections methods [2, 3]. However,
this approach offers inaccurate results in medium and high-density foams since it does
not consider the cell wall thickness. Moreover, it provides the average value and not the
cell size distribution. Several non-standard approaches have been followed to obtain a
more precise analysis of the cell size [4, 5]. Among them, recently Pinto and coworkers
developed a user-interactive analysis tool that allows obtaining all the representative
parameters in a quick and reproducible method [6].
The average cell size (ϕ3D) is calculated according to eq. (2.5), where ϕ3D,i are the
measured cell size values of each cell and n is the number of cells analyzed. The stan￾dard deviation, SD (eq. (2.6)), and the asymmetry coefficient AC (eq. (2.7)) are param￾eters that allow describing the cell size distribution. The smaller SD, the thinner the
cell size distribution is. Regarding AC, it measures the symmetry of the distribution
with respect to the average value. Finally, the ratio between the standard deviation
and the average cell size is defined as the normalized standard deviation coefficient,
NSD (eq. (2.8)).
ϕ3D =
Pn
i=1 ϕ3D,i
n
(2:5)
SD =
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Pn
i=1 ϕ3D,i − ϕ3D
 2
n − 1
s
(2:6)
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 11AC =
Pn
i=1 ðϕ3D,i − ϕ3DÞ
2
nSD3 (2:7)
NSD = SD
ϕ3D
(2:8)
Figure 2.4 shows examples of cell size distribution for different scenarios. Figure 2.4a
shows three distributions showing the same average cell size (100 µm) but different
standard deviation coefficients. The higher the NSD, the wider the cell size distribu￾tion, that is, the less homogeneous is the cellular structure. Figures 2.5a and 2.5b show
examples of cellular structures with low and high NSD. Figure 2.4b presents a particu￾lar case of heterogeneous cellular structure in which there are two well-distinguished
average cell sizes: these are bimodal cell size distributions (Figure 2.5c).
The average cell size can be also used as a parameter for classifying cellular poly￾mers. Conventional cellular polymers present cell sizes higher than 10 microns, typically
in the range of 100 to 700 microns. In the 1980s, a new class of cellular polymers was
developed: the so-called microcellular polymers, which showed cell sizes below 10 mi￾crons [7, 8]. Recently, technology allowed moving one step forward with the generation
of nanocellular polymers, characterized by cell sizes under the micron. Figure 2.6 shows
examples of these structures. More details about the historical evolution of cellular poly￾mers are presented in Chapter 3.
2.2.2.2 Cell density and cell nucleation density
Cell density (Nv) is defined as the number of cells per unit of volume in the cellular
material. This parameter is usually presented in cells/cm3
. Assuming that there is no
degeneration during the foaming process and that every single nucleus grows into
one cell, it is possible to calculate the cell nucleation density, N0 [9]:
N0 = Nv
ρr
(2:9)
The cell nucleation density can be calculated theoretically according to eq. (2.10). This
relation is a geometrical equation that states that the three parameters, cell size, cell
nucleation density, and relative density, are not independent. This equation assumes
spherical cells.
N0 = 6
πϕ3
1
ρr
− 1
  (2:10)
Figure 2.7a shows the theoretical predictions of eq. (2.10) for different cell nucleation
densities. It is observed that as the relative density decreases, it is mandatory to in￾crease the cell nucleation density for keeping a constant cell size. That is, the number
of cells needed to create a low-density foam is always higher than that required to
12 Chapter 2 Fundamentalsachieve a high-density foam. To reduce the cell size at constant density, it is also
needed to increase dramatically the cell nucleation density. As commented before,
there has been a historical trend of research in the decrease of cell size. Conventional
low-density cellular polymers, with cell sizes above 300 microns, are characterized by
cell nucleation densities below 106 nuclei/cm3
. To achieve microcellular polymers (cell
sizes below 10 microns, Figure 2.7b) with a significant expansion, cell nucleation den￾sity must be higher than 109 nuclei/cm3
, that is, 3 orders of magnitude higher than the
Figure 2.4: (a) Examples of cell size distributions with different normalized standard deviation
coefficients; (b) example of a bimodal cell size distribution.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 13values of conventional foam. This was a significant technological challenge, and it
was only in the 1980s that it was possible to accomplish it. The challenge became even
more exigent when nanocellular polymers were considered: in this case, nucleation
densities over 1013 nuclei/cm3 are required to reduce the cell size below the micron.
2.2.2.3 Anisotropy ratio
Anisotropic cellular structures are characterized by cells elongated in one direction
and are characterized by the anisotropy ratio. The anisotropy ratio is usually defined
as the ratio of cell sizes measured in two perpendicular directions [10]. However, the
cells are 3D objects that can have different orientations in the three axes of the space
(Figure 2.8). Then, it is possible to calculate anisotropy ratios in the three main axes,
as presented in eqs. (2.11), (2.12), and (2.13). Note that x, y, and z can be renamed to be
the thickness direction, machine direction, mold opening direction, etc. (depending on
the foaming process).
Rz = ϕz
ϕx + ϕy
 =2
(2:11)
Figure 2.5: (a) Monomodal cell size distribution with low NSD, (b) monomodal cell size distribution with
high NSD, and (c) bimodal cell size distribution.
Figure 2.6: Examples of conventional (a), microcellular (b), and nanocellular (c) polymers.
14 Chapter 2 FundamentalsRx = ϕx
ϕz + ϕy
 =2
(2:12)
Rz = ϕy
ϕx + ϕz ð Þ=2 (2:13)
This parameter is of great relevance in foaming processes in which there is a pre￾ferred growth direction. Figure 2.9 shows some examples of anisotropic cellular struc￾tures with cells elongated in the vertical direction.
Most foaming processes lead to some anisotropy of the cellular structure. For in￾stance, in reactive foaming for the production of polyisocyanurate (PIR) or polyure￾thane foams, cells tend to grow preferably in the expansion direction, that is, the
Figure 2.7: (a) Lines of constant cell nucleation density in a relative density–cell size map, according to
eq. (2.10). (b) Zoom to the region of low cell size (below 10 microns) and low relative density.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 15vertical direction [11]. In compression molding the anisotropy is also promoted in
the direction parallel to the compression direction. Extrusion foaming can also lead
to a particular orientation of the cellular structure in the three main planes of the
extruded foam (parallel to the thickness direction, the extrusion direction, and the
traverse direction). The addition of oriented fillers, such as fibers or needle-like par￾ticles, can also promote preferred cell growth in a given direction [12]. However, cel￾lular polymers usually present anisotropy ratios in the range from 1 to 1.3, and
creating higher anisotropies requires the design of specific production routes de￾signed for that purpose [13, 14].
The anisotropy of the cellular structure has a great impact on the physical proper￾ties of the cellular material. Mechanical properties, such as the elastic modulus, com￾pressive strength, and shear modulus, are known to increase in the direction parallel
to the elongation of the cells [15–17]. The thermal conduction through the solid struc￾ture of the cellular polymer also increases in the anisotropy direction [18, 19].
The analysis of the anisotropy ratio is calculated using cell size measurements, so it
can be experimentally determined in the same way as the cell size (see Section 2.2.2.2).
Figure 2.8: Schematic representation of a 3D cell
with different cell sizes in each direction
(anisotropic structure).
Figure 2.9: Examples of cellular structures showing anisotropic cells: (a) rigid PU with cells
elongated in the growth direction and (b) XPS with cells elongated in the thickness direction.
16 Chapter 2 Fundamentals2.2.2.4 Open cell content and tortuosity of the gas phase
Cellular polymers can be classified according to the interconnectivity of the gaseous
phase. We can distinguish between closed-cell foams, foams with an intermediate
open cell content, and open-cell foams. In closed-cell foams, the gas is enclosed inside
the cells, and it cannot move freely through the cellular structure. Open-cell foams
are characterized by a high level of interconnectivity between the cells, allowing the
movement of gas through the cellular structure. Meanwhile, foams with intermediate
open-cell contents can be considered hybrids between both, as their cellular structure
is partially interconnected. Figure 2.10 shows the cellular structures of closed-cell
foams, open-cell foams, and foams with intermediate open-cell contents. The open cell
content is key for understanding the physical properties of cellular polymers. Closed￾cell foams are known to present better compression modulus and lower thermal con￾ductivity, while open-cell foams are the best candidates for acoustic absorption and
for filtering or liquids absorption, among other applications.
The level of interconnectivity can be measured with gas pycnometry and character￾ized by the open cell content, OC (eq. (2.14)) according to the ASTM Standard D6226-10.
OC ð Þ % = Vg − Vp
Vg 1 − ρr ð Þ ·100 (2:14)
where Vg is the geometric volume of the sample, and Vp is the volume measured by
the pycnometer. The gas pycnometry technique allows measuring the accessible vol￾ume for the gas and this way the open cell content can be calculated. When the gas
cannot access the inner structure, Vp = Vg and then OC = 0% (totally closed-cell foam).
If the gas can fill all the structure, then Vp measures the volume of the solid phase,
and then OC = 100% (totally open-cell foam). However, this measurement can lead to in￾accurate results if small samples with large cell sizes exposed on the surface are mea￾sured. In those cases, a corrected open cell content can be calculated using eq. (2.15):
OC✶ð Þ % = Vg − Vp − Vs
Vg 1 − ρr ð Þ ·100 (2:15)
Figure 2.10: (a) Closed-cell foam, (b) open-cell foam, and (c) intermediate situation.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 17where Vs is the volume of the cells exposed in the surfaces of the sample that can be
calculated from the cell size.
Open-cell cellular polymers (OC = 100%) can show different properties depending
on the size of the holes in the cell walls. For instance, flexible PU foams, formed only by
struts, can show a fast recovery when stress is applied and removed, while open cell
materials with small holes in the cell walls will present a slower recovery. To quantify
these differences, an additional parameter is needed: the tortuosity of the gas phase.
The tortuosity of the gas phase (τg) is defined as the ratio between the distance
that a gas molecule must cover from one side to another side of the sample (L) and
the hypothetic shortest distance that it would cover following a straight path (L0) [36]
(eq. (2.16)).
τg = L
L0
(2:16)
Tortuosity does not depend on the type of fluid contained by the porous structure but
on the type of architecture: open-cell content and the number and size of the holes
present in the cell walls [20]. Tortuosity is a critical parameter for many applications,
playing a very important role in the response of open-cell foams. The tortuosity can
be estimated by using different methods such as ultrasonication or electrical conduc￾tivity measurements or theoretically using different models [21–24].
2.2.3 Solid phase descriptors
2.2.3.1 Struts, cell walls, and cell geometry
A medium-density and low-density cellular polymer is formed by pores or cells with a
given geometry that pack in three dimensions to get rise to the cellular structure.
Then, the morphology of the solid phase is formed by a polymer network of vertex
and edges (struts) and cell walls. Figure 2.11 shows some examples of struts and cell
walls in different cellular polymers. In Figure 2.12 we present a reconstruction of a
cell from an X-ray tomography of a cellular polymer. The analysis of the solid phase
allows separating the solid phase into two contributions: cell walls and struts.
On the other hand, the cell geometry should allow the filling of the space when the
cells are packed in the cellular structure. There are two possible scenarios. For high￾density materials, the cells can be spheres. Spheres are the most stable geometry during
cell growth. Figure 2.13a shows an example of a high-density material with spherical
cells. In this case, it is challenging to define cell walls and struts: all the solid material is
forming a continuous phase. As density reduces, the cell geometry must change too to
allow an efficient packaging of the cells. In low-density materials, the cells are forming
polyhedrons, such as dodecahedrons or tetrakaidecahedrons. Figure 2.13b shows an ex￾ample of a low-density foam with polyhedral cells. For low-density materials, the differ￾18 Chapter 2 Fundamentalsence between cell walls and struts becomes clear: the cell walls are the polymer phase
among two cells, whereas the struts are the edges and vertices of the polyhedrons.
The mass distribution between struts and walls is characterized by the fraction of
mass in the struts, fs. It can be calculated with the following equation [15]:
fs = t
2
s
t2
s +
Zf
n twl
(2:17)
Figure 2.11: Details of the struts and cell walls in different cellular polymers.
Figure 2.12: Reconstruction of a cell obtained using X-ray tomography: solid phase, and separation
of the structure into two main components: cell walls and struts.
Figure 2.13: Examples of extreme cell geometries: (a) high-density foam (spherical cells), (b) low-density
foam (polyhedral cells).
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 19where ts is the thickness of the struts, tw is the thickness of the cell walls, l is the
length of the edges of the cell walls, n is the average number of walls per cell, and Zf
is the number of walls merging in a strut.
This parameter, which ranges from 0 to 1, accounts for the distribution of the solid
phase within the cellular material. When fs is close to 0, the solid phase is mainly distrib￾uted in the cell walls. Oppositely, when fs is close to 1, most of the solid phase lies in the
struts. In the extreme scenario, when fs = 1, the cellular polymer does not have any cell
walls, then the structure is an interconnected network of pure struts. The production pro￾cess and the properties of the polymer matrix can significantly affect the distribution of
the solid phase along the cellular structure. Figure 2.14 presents examples of materials in
the three limit cases: low fs ⁓ 0.1−0.2 (extruded polystyrene foam (XPS)), high fs ⁓ 0.6−0.8
(rigid polyurethane foam (PU)) and fs ⁓ 1 (flexible polyurethane foam). Figure 2.15
shows X-ray tomographies of two materials with different mass fraction distribu￾tions: rigid PU with high fs (Figure 2.15a) and low-density polyethylene (LDPE) foam
with low fs (Figure 2.15b).
The cell walls are characterized by their thickness (ξ). Typical cell wall thicknesses for
low-density cellular polymers are in the range of some microns [25, 26]. Due to the
packaging of the cellular structure, one can establish a geometrical relationship be￾tween the cell wall thickness, the fraction of mass in the struts, and the relative den￾sity. These equations are valid for the range of low-density cellular polymers, i.e.
relative densities below 0.2. The equation must also consider the cell size, ϕ. There are
two possible scenarios: foams with fs ≠ 1 (eq. (2.18)) [27] and cellular polymers with
fs = 1 (totally open cell materials without cell walls) (eq. (2.19)) [15]. In eq. (2.5), C is a
constant depending on the cell geometry and that takes a value of 3.46 for pentagonal
dodecahedrons [27].
Cξ = ϕ 1 − f ð Þs ρr (2:18)
ρr = 1.06 ξ
2
ϕ2 (2:19)
Figure 2.14: Examples of materials with different fractions of mass in the struts: (a) fs = 0.2 (XPS);
(b) fs = 0.7 (rigid PU); and (c) fs = 1 (flexible PU).
20 Chapter 2 FundamentalsFigure 2.16 represents the cell size as a function of the relative density for differ￾ent cell wall thicknesses and the two equations commented on above. For the closed
cell model (Figure 2.16a), a fraction of mass in the struts of 0.2 was assumed, as this is
a typical value for low-density cellular materials based on PS or PE [15]. Note the dif￾ferent cell wall thickness range between closed cell and open cells. As seen in Fig￾ure 2.16, the cell wall thickness may impose some geometrical limitations on the
structures of cellular polymers. For instance, with the theoretical predictions of this
figure, a closed-cell material of relative density of 0.1 and cell size of 400 microns has
a well-determined cell wall thickness of 9 microns (Figure 2.16a). In the high-density
range, the thickness of the cell wall increases. Totally open cell structures show a very
different behavior, with much lower densities for similar cell wall thickness and cell
size (Figure 2.16b).
The above parameters (struts and cell wall thickness) are hard to characterize,
especially in low-density foams in which their dimensions are quite small. One tech￾nique used to measure these magnitudes is scanning electron microscopy (SEM), but
it provides limited results since it is challenging to get a fracture that allows proper
analysis of the solid architecture, and it is very challenging to separate the volume
occupied by the cell walls from the volume occupied by the struts. Another possibility,
used in the last few years to obtain accurate values of fs, is X-ray tomography, a tech￾Figure 2.15: Reconstruction of a cell obtained using X-ray tomography and projection showing the cellular
structure of the foam for two different cases: (a) rigid PU foam with high and fs (b) LDPE foam with low fs.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 21nique that allows a 3D visualization of the cellular structure and a good quantification
of the solid structure parameters [25, 28].
2.2.3.2 Solid skin
The solid skin is a solid layer covering the outer surface of the cellular polymer. The
presence of the solid skin is caused by the diffusion of the blowing agent (responsible
for creating the gas cells) out of the material in the region near the surface [29, 30].
The gas molecules in the polymer close to the surface are more likely to diffuse out
than to create cells. Therefore, a solid region without porosity appears in most cellular
polymers. The thickness of the solid skin depends on the production process and the
Figure 2.16: Lines of constant cell wall thickness in a relative density–cell size map: (a) eq. (2.18) for a
fraction of mass in the struts of 0.2 and C = 3.46, and (b) eq. (2.19).
22 Chapter 2 Fundamentalscharacteristics of the gas and the base polymer (mainly the diffusion coefficient or
diffusivity, which accounts for the rate at which the gas escapes the polymer [31]).
Figure 2.17 shows some examples of solid skins observed in different cellular poly￾mers. Solid skin has an impact on density because it is much denser than the foamed
core, but in some applications, it can have a beneficial impact on mechanical proper￾ties [32]. Also, a thick solid skin creates a uniform surface, whereas very thin skins in
combination with large cell sizes create a rough surface that might not be suitable for
some applications.
The solid skin thickness can be measured with microscopy analysis but also with X￾ray radioscopy thanks to the density difference between the foamed core and the
solid skin [33].
2.2.3.3 Structural gradients
Most foams present a structure such as that presented in Figure 2.18a: first, there is
solid skin (as already discussed in Section 2.2.3.2), then, there is a transition region
or structural gradient and finally there is the homogeneous cellular structure in the
core of the foam [34]. The structural gradient between the skin and core is a result
of the gas diffusion out of the sample near the skin, but can also be influenced by
other factors of the process: temperature gradients, mold geometry, limited expan￾sion in one direction, etc. The region between the solid skin (100% solid) and the
homogeneous core (100% foamed) is characterized by a different density, as shown
schematically in Figure 2.18b. Then, the structural gradient comprises two main fac￾tors: a variation of the cell size and a density gradient.
The formation of these structural gradients depends greatly on the foaming process
used, which can be even tuned to obtain these structures on purpose [34, 35]. Figure 2.19
shows some examples of foams with very different structural gradients (the thickness
of the structural gradient or transition region is shadowed in purple). Depending on the
ratio between the foam dimensions and the size of the transition region, and also the
Figure 2.17: Example of solid skin in different cellular polymers: (a) expanded polystyrene (EPS) produced
with bead foaming technology. The skin is very thin, with a size similar to the cell wall thickness,
(b) polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) produced with the gas dissolution foaming route with a significant
solid skin. (c) Polypropylene foam fabricated by injection molding in which there is very thick solid skin
useful to improve the mechanical performance and the surface quality.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 23final application, the presence of this type of gradient structure can influence the final
properties of the foam, so it must be taken into consideration when modeling the prop￾erties of the product. SEM images can be used to detect the structural gradients and
quantify the differences in cell size, but to account for the density gradient other tools
are needed, such as X-ray radiography or tomography.
2.2.3.4 Tortuosity of the solid phase
Tortuosity of the solid phase (τs) is a dimensionless parameter that expresses the ratio
of the real pathway distance (L) versus the straightest one (L0) when traveling along a
certain direction through the internal solid structure [36] (eq. (2.20)).
τs = L
L0
(2:20)
Figure 2.20 shows an example of how tortuosity can be calculated for two extreme
scenarios with low and high tortuosity of the solid phase for a high-density and low￾density cellular material. The tortuosity of the solid phase has a significant influence
on some transport properties of the material, such as thermal conductivity or electri￾cal conductivity. Note that tortuosity is a directional parameter that can depend
greatly on the direction of space.
The quantification of the tortuosity of the solid phase is again tricky and requires
a well-established definition to be able to get comparative results. To do the analysis,
good information about the solid structure, as that obtained in X-ray tomography, is
required [36].
Figure 2.18: (a) Schematic representation of the cellular structure of a foam near the solid skin
and (b) density profile near the solid skin.
24 Chapter 2 FundamentalsFigure 2.19: Examples of foamed materials near the solid skin with different structural gradients.
Colored boxes are used to illustrate the three regions: dark blue – solid skin; purple – transition
region; light blue – homogeneous core.
2.2 Descriptors to characterize cellular polymers 252.3 Foaming mechanisms
All foaming processes take place following the same stages (Figure 2.21). First, the poly￾mer and the blowing agent (gaseous phase) are dissolved. Then, a thermodynamic insta￾bility occurs (either a pressure and/or a temperature gradient) and nucleation occurs.
Later, the nucleation points grow into cells (cell growth). Finally, some degeneration of
the structure can take place during growth and before the stabilization of the cellular
polymer. In the next paragraphs, each of the foaming processes is described in detail.
2.3.1 Polymer/gas solution
The substance that creates the gas phase in a cellular polymer is called the blowing
agent. Blowing agents can be classified as physical blowing agents (such as gases that
expand when pressure is released or liquids that develop cells when they evaporate)
Figure 2.20: Examples of (a) low tortuosity and (b) high tortuosity of the solid phase.
Figure 2.21: Scheme of the foaming mechanisms taking place inside any foaming process and evolution
of the expansion ratio with time.
26 Chapter 2 Fundamentalsand chemical blowing agents (substances that decompose or react under the influence
of heat to form a gas) [37]. The first stage in every foaming process using physical
blowing agents or chemical blowing agents under pressure is to create a homoge￾neous polymer/gas solution. In this sense, the selection of an adequate blowing agent
is key to achieving good results. It is mandatory that the amount of blowing agent
required for the final characteristics of the foam can be dissolved in the polymer at
the conditions of pressure and temperature of the production process. This is what
we call solubility: the maximum amount of a certain blowing agent that a polymer
can absorb under certain conditions [38, 39]. Solubility depends on both the character￾istics of the blowing agent and those of the polymer matrix [40]. For this reason, dif￾ferent blowing agents are used for the manufacturing of different types of polymer
foams. Hydrocarbons can be used in many foaming processes. For instance, pentane
is used for the production of expanded polystyrene foams (EPS) [41] and PU foams
[42], while isobutane can be employed for the generation of extruded polyethylene
foams (XPE) [43]. Inert gases, such as carbon dioxide, can be also used as foaming
agents for the fabrication of expanded polypropylene foams (EPP) [41] or the produc￾tion of XPS in combination with ethanol [44]. Chemical blowing agents can be used in
rubbers and polyolefins or for the production of high-density cellular polymers [37].
2.3.2 Nucleation
The polymer/gas mixture is only stable at certain conditions of pressure and tempera￾ture. After a thermodynamic instability (such as a pressure change or a temperature
change), the polymer/gas mixture is in a supersaturated state. Subsequently, phase sepa￾ration takes place. The homogeneous polymer/gas mixture is now separated into two
components. Phase separation is known to happen via two primary mechanisms: spino￾dal decomposition and nucleation and growth, the latter being considered usually as the
main mechanism in most of the foaming processes [45]. Spinodal decomposition takes
place at high supersaturations, at which the mixture is unstable [46]. The polymer/gas
mixture undergoes spontaneous phase separation without the appearance of nucleation
points [47]. This phenomenon is characterized by the vanishing of the energy barrier of
nucleus formation [48], and so gas molecules immediately start to form clusters, which
rapidly grow and coalesce. The result of the spinodal decomposition is a single gas
phase, or in other words, an interconnected or co-continuous cellular structure [49–53].
However, the principal mechanism that is believed to control phase separation in
almost every foaming process is nucleation. Nucleation consists of the appearance of
small clusters or aggregates of gas (nuclei) in a polymer/gas mixture after a sudden
change in the thermodynamic conditions [46, 48]. Then, gas in the polymer/gas system
diffuses to the newly created nuclei. The nuclei grow because of the gas coming into
them, and the pores or cells appear. As opposed to spinodal decomposition, nucleation
implies an energy barrier that must be overcome to create a nucleus. Nucleation can
2.3 Foaming mechanisms 27occur via two main approaches: homogeneous nucleation (in systems with no active
nucleating agents) or heterogeneous (in systems containing a second phase which acts
as nucleating points). Figure 2.22 schematizes this idea:
The equations governing the nucleation process were stated in the Classical Nucle￾ation Theory (CNT). According to CNT, for homogeneous nucleation the Gibbs free en￾ergy barrier (ΔGhom) that a nucleus should overcome to grow into a bubble is given by
eq. (2.21), where γ is the surface tension between the gas and the polymer phase and
Δp is the pressure difference between gas and solid:
ΔGhom = 16πγ3
3Δp2 (2:21)
The critical value of the nuclei radius, rc (eq. (2.16)) can be computed from the previ￾ous equation [54–56]. The cluster of gas molecules should be larger than the critical
radius in order to survive and grow. Those clusters with a size smaller than rc will
not be stable.
rc = 2γ
Δp
(2:22)
The CNT also predicts the homogeneous nucleation rate N0, that is the number of nu￾clei formed per unit of volume and unit of time. It is given by eq. (2.23), where C0 is the
initial concentration of gas in the polymer, f0 is the frequency factor of gas molecules
joining the nucleus, kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature [54, 57]:
N0 = f0C0 exp − ΔGhom
kBT
  (2:23)
This theory provides useful insights into the parameters involved in the nucleation
process, and it correctly predicts some trends with the processing parameters [45].
For instance, according to eq. (2.23), the nucleation increases as the gas concentration
or solubility increases. Therefore, one strategy to achieve high nucleation ratios is to
Figure 2.22: (a) Homogeneous nucleation and (b) heterogeneous nucleation.
28 Chapter 2 Fundamentalsmaximize the solubility. On the other hand, temperature and pressure gradient also
play a role in the nucleation process according to CNT equations. Higher temperatures
will lead to higher nucleation ratios [58], whereas a higher pressure gradient will also
induce larger nucleation [59].
Regarding heterogeneous nucleation, the addition of a second component to the
polymer/gas mixture might affect the surface tension in comparison to that of the
pure polymer. In general terms, the addition of a second phase creates interfaces in
the polymer/gas mixture, and these surfaces induce wetting; that is, gas molecules
have a tendency to aggregate at the foreign surface [60]. Then, the nucleation process
tends to take place on these pre-existing surfaces. Also, nucleation can occur within
the second phase in specific systems where the second phase is organic. As in the case
of homogeneous nucleation, the heterogeneous nucleation rate is determined by an
energy barrier, ΔGhet. The energy for forming a critical nucleus in a heterogeneous
system, ΔGhet, is proportional to the energy barrier in a homogeneous system, ΔGhom,
by a factor SðθÞ depending on the wetting/contact angle of the polymer–additive–gas
interface [57]:
Δ Ghet = Δ GhomSð Þθ = 16πγ3
3Δp2 Sð Þθ (2:24)
This function Sð Þθ is always less than or equal to one [48]; that is, the Gibbs free energy
barrier for heterogeneous nucleation is lowered, so nucleation is enhanced compared
to the homogeneous situation. The nucleation rate for heterogeneous nucleation, Nhet,
is given by eq. (2.25), where C1 is the initial concentration of gas in the polymer and f1
is the frequency factor of gas molecules joining the nucleus.
Nhet = f1C1 exp − ΔGhet
kBT
  (2:25)
One important consideration about the heterogeneous nucleation mechanism is that
the critical radius is not affected by the presence of a second phase; that is, if we com￾pute the critical radius in this situation, we recover the result of eq. (2.22).
The addition of a second phase provides heterogeneous surfaces on which the nu￾cleation energy barrier is lowered, and heterogeneous nucleation starts to play an es￾sential role during the process. Two types of additives can be used as nucleating
species in a general foaming process: particles and nanostructured polymers. The use
of nucleating agents is highly common in the production of foams at an industrial
scale, especially for low-density foams [37, 61]. In addition, additives with another pri￾mary function, such as flame retardants or pigments can also act as nucleating agents
during foaming.
2.3 Foaming mechanisms 292.3.3 Growth
After nucleation, the gas diffuses from the polymer/gas mixture to the newly created
nuclei, causing cell growth and the resultant expansion of the structure. Equation
(2.26) provides a simplified equation governing cell growth, where R is the radius of
the cell, t is the time and η is the viscosity of the gas/polymer mixture [45, 55]. Note
that the solution of this equation is not trivial since the pressure gradient Δp, the vis￾cosity and the surface tension might vary with time as gas is diffusing to the cells and
out of the sample.
dR
dt = Δp
4η − γ
2η
(2:26)
The value of the viscosity is directly related to the cell growth process. A high viscosity
can slow down the speed of growth while a low viscosity yields a rapid and almost
explosive initial cell growth. However, constant viscosity cannot meet the require￾ments of controllable foaming: it is desirable that the viscosity changes during the
foaming process. The initial growth of the cells just after nucleation requires a low
viscosity. Subsequently, as the polymer is stretched during the cell growth, a high ex￾tensional viscosity is required, that is, a polymeric matrix showing strain hardening is
advantageous, so that the cell walls may withstand the deformation to which they are
subjected during the last stages of cell growth, without breaking [62, 63]. Cell growth
continues until it stops due to the stabilization of the cellular structure by cooling.
The above equations for nucleation and cell growth are valid in a certain cell size
range. As commented later and in Chapter 3, the reduction of the cell size to the nano￾scale imposes different equations to get accurate predictions of the nucleation and
growth processes.
2.3.4 Degeneration
As it was previously mentioned, during cell growth, when the cells are separated by
thin polymer membranes, the cellular structure may degenerate if the foamed mate￾rial is not stable enough (for instance, if the polymer does not show enough strain
hardening behavior). Cell degeneration can occur by the combination of three main
mechanisms: coalescence, coarsening, and drainage (Figure 2.23).
Cell coalescence is the mechanism by which two growing continuous cells in a
polymer melt are combined because of cell wall rupture (Figure 2.23a). This can occur
if the stretched thin cell wall separating the two cells is not strong enough to sustain
the extension developed during cell growth. Coalescence is thermodynamically fa￾vored because the total surface area of cells is reduced by coalescence. Cell coales￾cence can increase the cell size and the open cell content. To prevent coalescence,
30 Chapter 2 Fundamentalsfoaming temperature, and time, the rheological properties of the polymer and stabili￾zation process must be controlled.
On the other hand, coarsening consists of gas diffusion from the smallest cells to
the largest ones (Figure 2.23b). As the pressure in a small cell is higher than that in a
large cell, this pressure gradient induces gas diffusion. As a result, the size of the larg￾est cells increases, and the smallest cells tend to get even smaller and could eventually
disappear.
Finally, drainage takes place during foaming as the molten polymer drains, out of
equilibrium, in the fine walls separating the cells. It is caused by the action of capil￾lary forces, which produce the transport of the liquid material from the cell walls to￾ward the edges (Figure 2.23c). As a consequence, the cell wall thickness is reduced,
and the coarsening and coalescence mechanisms are favored. Drainage is favored in
systems with too low viscosity.
Figure 2.23: Schematic representation of the mechanisms of cell degeneration.
2.3 Foaming mechanisms 312.3.5 Stabilization
During foaming, the gas inside the new cells eventually tends to diffuse out to the at￾mosphere, because a complete separation of the two phases is thermodynamically
more favorable. As the gas escapes through the thin walls, the amount of gas available
for the growth of the cells decreases. As a result, if the solid matrix is not frozen (i.e. if
the viscosity of the solid polymer is not increased significantly), the cells tend to col￾lapse causing foam contraction. The stabilization in thermoplastic cellular materials
is most of the time performed by rapid cooling of the sample at a temperature below
the polymeric matrix crystallization temperature (semi-crystalline polymers) and/or
glass transition temperature (amorphous polymers). Another mechanism that allows
the stabilization in some foaming processes is associated with an increase of the glass
transition temperature (for amorphous polymers) or the melting temperature (for
semi-crystalline polymers) when the gas dissolved in the matrix diffused out of the
matrix. If the glass transition temperature or melting temperature evolves into values
higher than the current temperature of the system, the foam is stabilized without the
need of cooling down the material.
2.4 Nanocellular polymers: Key features
As commented in Section 2.2.2.1, the reduction of the cell size to the nanometric scale
was the natural step forward after the development of microcellular polymers. The
progress in the foaming technology together with the interesting properties of microcel￾lular polymers triggered the leap to the next generation of cellular materials in the
early 2000s [64]: the development of nanocellular polymers. As explained in Section
2.2.2.2, the production of nanocellular polymers implies a significantly harder challenge
from a technological point of view: the cell density should be increased from 109 cells/
cm3 to 1013 cells/cm3 to reach a nanometric cellular structure. Figure 2.24 shows exam￾ples of the cellular structure of various nanocellular polymers.
Figure 2.24: Examples of micrographs of three different nanocellular polymers.
32 Chapter 2 FundamentalsIn a nanocellular structure, the two phases (gas and solid) are confined: on the
one hand, the gas is confined in small cells, and on the other hand, the polymer is re￾stricted to be in very thin cell walls. As a consequence of these effects, new properties
never observed in conventional or microcellular polymers, are expected [65]. For in￾stance, it is known that when a gas is confined in a volume of similar size as the mean
free path of the gas molecules (around 70 nm for air in standard conditions), the Knud￾sen effect appears [66, 67] and the conduction through the gas is drastically reduced.
Simultaneously, the polymer is stretched in cell walls smaller than the size of the poly￾mer in the bulk state (20–30 nm versus 100 nm), leading to a confinement effect of the
solid phase that can produce, among other effects, an increase of the glass transition
temperature of the polymer [68] and an enhancement of the mechanical properties
[69–71]. Also, one of the most outstanding properties that have been recently proved is
that nanocellular polymers have the potential of being partially transparent due to
their nanometric cell size [72, 73]. Further, nanocellular polymers present different
acoustic and dielectric properties compared to microcellular polymers [74, 75]. More￾over, the nanometric cell size and the high surface area associated with it open the
possibility of using these materials in some applications such as the production of
membranes, filters, sensors, and supports for catalysis [76–78]. The combination of
these properties makes nanocellular polymers unique materials with great potential.
2.4.1 Cellular structure in nanocellular polymers
The criterion to determine when a cellular material can be considered as nanocellular
is still not overall established, but it should be related to the effects associated with
the change of scale to the nanometric range. Then, the criteria to speak about a nano￾cellular material should differ for the different properties of these materials. For in￾stance, thermal conduction through the gas phase starts to significantly decrease
from cell sizes of 500 nm [65, 79], whereas to obtain semi-transparent nanocellular
polymers cell sizes as low as 50 nm are required [58, 72]. Therefore, the cell size of
nanocellular polymers determines the final properties and applications in which
their use can lead to superior performance. For the purposes of this book, cellular
polymers with cell sizes below 1 micron would be considered nanocellular polymers.
However, other definitions are possible, for instance using the change in the proper￾ties as a threshold to define the limiting cell size. This kind of definition is common in
other aspects of Material Science, such as in the definition of 2D systems in solid-state
physics, which are considered 2D if the properties are different enough from those of
the bulk 3D system.
As stated previously, the cellular structure of nanocellular polymers is character￾ized by a double confinement effect. In the next sections, we will explain in detail the
descriptors used to describe nanocellular polymers and the specific characteristics of
these materials in comparison with conventional foams.
2.4 Nanocellular polymers: Key features 332.4.1.1 Gas phase
Figure 2.25 shows a relative density–cell size map for lines of constant cell nucleation
density in the region for cell sizes below 1 micron. As it has been commented several
times, the generation of nanocellular polymers implies a sharp increase in the cell nu￾cleation density in comparison with conventional cellular polymers. The challenge is
even more pronounced in the low-density region. To create a nanocellular polymer
with a cell size of 100 nm and a relative density of 0.1, a nucleation density higher
than 1015 nuclei/cm3 is needed. If the density was to be decreased even further (0.05),
the nucleation should increase to more than 1017 nuclei/cm3
; that is, the challenge gets
harder as density is reduced. Over the last few years, significant efforts were made to
reduce the density of nanocellular polymers. However, the reduction in relative den￾sity below 0.1 in combination with cell sizes below 100 nm is still unaccomplished.
One experimental issue is the determination of the cell size distribution when the cell
size is very small. Figure 2.26 shows two examples of nanocellular polymers with cell
sizes below 50 nm, in which the high magnification of the SEM is not good enough to
reach an adequate image for the analysis of the cell size.
In the case of nanocellular polymers, the cells can open because the cell wall has
reached the minimum possible thickness, then cell wall rupture might occur. Due to
the small size of the cell walls, this phenomenon can take place faster in nanocellular
polymers than in conventional foams. One consequence of the appearance of holes
and cracks in the cell walls is that gas might escape through the interconnected struc￾ture, preventing further expansion and limiting the density reduction in these materi￾als [58]. Figure 2.27 shows some examples of nanocellular polymers presenting closed
Figure 2.25: Lines of constant cell nucleation density in a relative density–cell size map for cell sizes
below 1 micron, according to equation (2.10).
34 Chapter 2 Fundamentals(Figure 2.27a) and open cells (Figure 2.27b). With these nanocellular polymers it is pos￾sible to obtain materials with open cell contents from 0% to 100% [58].
Regarding the anisotropy ratio, nanocellular polymers would show anisotropy de￾pending on the production process, as in any cellular polymer. In addition, it is possi￾ble to generate highly anisotropic structures in nanocellular polymers by designing
particular strategies [12, 83]. Figure 2.23c shows one example of a nanocellular poly￾mer with an anisotropic cellular structure.
More information about the typical cellular structures of nanocellular polymers and
the effects of the gas phase on the properties of nanocellular polymers can be found
in the next chapters.
2.4.1.2 Solid phase
Figure 2.28 represents lines of constant cell wall thickness in a relative density–cell
size map in the low-density range for the two eqs. (2.18) and (2.19) in the region for
cell sizes below 1 micron. As the cell size reduces, one can guess that the cell wall
thickness cannot be as thin as desired; that is, it should exist a minimum cell wall
thickness that can be achieved for every system, as already mentioned by Bernardo
Figure 2.26: Examples of nanocellular polymers with cell sizes below 50 nm. As the cell size reduces
(from a to c), measuring the cell size distribution and the average cell size becomes more complicated.
Figure 2.27: Examples of nanocellular polymers with (a) closed-cell structure, (b) open-cell structure,
and (c) anisotropic cells.
2.4 Nanocellular polymers: Key features 35and co-workers [80]. As seen in the theoretical predictions of Figure 2.28, the cell wall
thickness imposes some geometrical limitations in these structures. For instance, with
the theoretical predictions of this figure, a closed-cell material with a cell wall thick￾ness of 20 nm cannot present a density of 0.2 with a cell size of 100 nm. Open cell
structures allow obtaining materials with smaller densities at the same cell wall thick￾ness, but there are also some limitations. Up to date, there are no references about
the minimum cell wall thickness that could be achieved with a polymer matrix, and
this is a complicated topic since many factors, such as molecular weight or chain
structure, can play a role. However, this information would provide some under￾standing of the physical limitations associated with this technology.
Figure 2.28: Lines of constant cell wall thickness in a relative density–cell size map for cell sizes below
1 micron: (a) eq. (2.18) for a fraction of mass in the struts of 0.2 and C = 3.46, and (b) eq. (2.19).
36 Chapter 2 FundamentalsThe analysis of the solid phase descriptors in nanocellular polymers is more chal￾lenging due to the low dimensions of the walls and struts, which makes tomography not
a useful technique fs these materials. Up to now, there are few works dealing with the
detailed characterization of the solid phase distribution in this new class of materials.
The work of Martín-de León and coworkers [58] proposed a methodology to quantify the
fraction of mass in the struts using image analysis and SEM micrographs (Figure 2.29).
The cell walls of nanocellular polymers are formed by polymer macromolecules with
a different configuration of the bulk material, which leads to a confinement of the
solid phase. This confinement has been measured experimentally determining the in￾crement in the glass transition temperature and using Raman spectroscopy [58, 68].
While the cell walls can be as thin as 20–30 nm [58, 80], the size of the struts is neces￾sarily larger and it is still unclear whether the polymer is also confined in the struts.
Regarding the tortuosity of the solid phase, the high cell density in these structures
increases the tortuosity in comparison with conventional materials. However, the ef￾fect of this increase in tortuosity is still unclear. While it could lead to a reduction of
the heat conduction through the solid phase (since the phonons would have to travel
a larger distance) [68, 79], the confinement of the polymer macromolecules could lead
to the opposite effect [81]. More information about the effects of the solid structure on
the properties of nanocellular polymers can be found in the next chapters.
Figure 2.29: Description of the method to measure the fraction of mass in the struts as proposed in [58]:
(a) cell mask; (b) binarized cell mask; (c) local thickness cell image; (d) local thickness histogram (adapted
from [58]).
2.4 Nanocellular polymers: Key features 37Finally, nanocellular polymers also show solid skin [30]. In these materials, the
presence of solid skin can have a negative impact on the foam density and can also
limit the expansion of the material. Furthermore, the presence of structural gradients
is even more critical in this type of material, as illustrated in Figure 2.30. This region
with a structural gradient is typically named transition region in the scientific litera￾ture on nanocellular polymers. While the homogeneous core is nanocellular, the tran￾sition region can be microcellular, causing a gradient in the physical properties of the
material when they depend on the cell size. For instance, for the production of trans￾parent nanocellular polymers, the solid skin and the surrounding heterogeneity also
negatively impact the transparent behavior of the material [82]. This will be explained
in Chapter 4.
2.4.2 Foaming mechanisms in the nanoscale
The foaming mechanisms are also modified when the cell size moves to the nanoscale.
As aforementioned, extremely high cell densities must be created to produce a nano￾cellular polymer, and the cellular structure needs to be stabilized with pores in the
nanoscale. The equations presented for conventional cellular polymers are not good
enough to predict the behavior of nanocellular polymers and more refined models
are needed for these materials, as explained in Chapter 3.
Figure 2.30: Example of a nanocellular polymer near the solid skin presenting structural gradients.
Colored boxes are used to illustrate the three regions: dark blue – solid skin; purple – transition region;
light blue – homogeneous core.
38 Chapter 2 FundamentalsTo achieve high cell densities via homogeneous nucleation, extreme processing
conditions are required to maximize the gas absorbed and promote the creation of
enough nuclei [45, 49]. In the case of heterogeneous nucleation, the requirements for
the nucleating species are more demanding, since the number of nuclei needed to ob￾tain a nanocellular polymers is huge (~ 1013 nuclei/cm3
) compared to the nucleation in
conventional cellular materials (~ 106 nuclei/cm3
). Thus, a high volumetric density of
nano-sized domains is necessary to produce nanocellular polymers using a heteroge￾neous nucleation approach.
During cell growth, it is key to stabilize the structure while the cells are yet of
nanometric size. As stated previously, the thin cell walls would break easily, prevent￾ing further expansion, and also, cracks in the cell walls could also provoke or help in
the degeneration of the structure via different mechanisms (coalescence, drainage, or
coarsening) that will increase the cell size to a significant extent. In the case of hetero￾geneous nucleation, the presence of nanoparticles or nano-sized polymer domains
can cause an enhancement in the degeneration mechanisms, due to the size of the
particles and the possibility of having weak interactions in the interface [84].
The main conclusion from the previous paragraphs is that the generation of
nanocellular structures is a challenging process with enormous complexity, in which
many interrelated mechanisms play a key role, most of them still not fully under￾stood. In Chapter 3, a deep analysis of the foaming process in the fabrication of nano￾cellular is presented and all the concepts briefly introduced here will be developed.
2.5 Conclusions
In this chapter, we present a detailed description of the parameters needed to charac￾terize the cellular structure of cellular polymers. The parameters are divided into two
main groups: those related to the solid phase and those related to the gas phase. The
definitions and equations are presented, and examples are included too. Furthermore,
the foaming mechanisms taking place in any foaming system are explained.
Finally, nanocellular polymers are introduced, and the main differences between
them and conventional cellular polymers are established. These basic concepts presented
in this chapter will be used throughout the book to describe nanocellular polymers, the
foaming mechanisms taking place in the nanoscale, and the physical properties of these
novel materials.
2.5 Conclusions 39References
[1] https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/foams-market-1011.html, (n.d.).
[2] G. Sims, C. Khunniteekool, Cell size measurement of polymeric foams, Cell. Polym. 13 (1994) 137.
[3] ASTM D3576-04. Standard test method for cell size of rigid cellular plastics, ASTM International:
Plastics (II), 2010., (n.d.).
[4] K.M. Lewis, I. Kijak, B. Reuter, An image analysis method for cell size and cell size distribution
measurement in rigid foams, J. Cell. Plast. 32 (1996) 235–259.
[5] S.K. Goel, E.J. Beckman, Generation fo microcellular polymeric foams using supercritical carbon
dioxide, Polym. Eng. Sci. 34 (1994) 1148–1156.
[6] J. Pinto, E. Solorzano, M.A. Rodriguez-perez, J.A. De Saja, Characterization of the cellular structure
based on user-interactive image analysis procedures, J. Cell. Plast. 49 (2013) 555–575. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0021955X13503847
[7] J.J.E. Martini-Vvedensky, N.N.P. Suh, F.F.A. Waldman, Microcellular closed cell foams and their
method of manufacture, US Pat. 4,473,665. (1984).
[8] J.E. Martini, The Production and Analysis of Microcellular Foam, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, (1981).
[9] V. Kumar, Process Synthesis for Manufacturing Microcellular Thermoplastic Parts, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, (1988).
[10] A.T. Huber, L.J. Gibson, Anisotropy of foams, J. Mater. Sci. 23 (1988) 3031–3040. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00547486
[11] J. Andersons, M. Kirpluks, L. Stiebra, U. Cabulis, Anisotropy of the stiffness and strength of rigid low￾density closed-cell polyisocyanurate foams, Mater. Des. 92 (2016) 836–845. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matdes.2015.12.122
[12] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de León, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Anisotropy in nanocellular polymers
promoted by the addition of needle-like sepiolites, Polym. Int. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.
5813
[13] V. Bernardo, E. Laguna-gutierrez, A. Lopez-gil, M.A. Rodriguez-perez, Highly anisotropic crosslinked
HDPE foams with a controlled anisotropy ratio : Production and characterization of the cellular
structure and mechanical properties, Mater. Des. 114 (2016) 83–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.
2016.10.051
[14] K.A. Arora, A.J. Lesser, T.J. McCarthy, Preparation and characterization of microcellular polystyrene
foams processed in supercritical CO2, Macromolecules 38 (1997) 446–447. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ma971811z
[15] L.J. Gibson, M. Ashby, Cellular Solids: Structure and Properties, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press,
(1997).
[16] L. Oliveira-Salmazo, A. Lopez-Gil, F. Silva-Bellucci, A.E. Job, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Natural rubber
foams with anisotropic cellular structures : Mechanical properties and modeling, Ind. Crop. Prod.
80 (2016) 26–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2015.10.050
[17] A. Lopez-Gil, J. Escudero, E. Laguna-Gutierrez, C. Saiz-Arroyo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, A. Anicell, Low
density and non-crosslinked polypropylene foams as a promising option to produce structural
panels, Eurotec 2013 (2013) 374–379.
[18] B. Wicklein, A. Kocjan, G. Salazar-Alvarez, F. Carosio, G. Camino, M. Antonietti, L. Bergström,
Thermally insulating and fire-retardant lightweight anisotropic foams based on nanocellulose and
graphene oxide, Nat. Nanotechnol. 10 (2014) 277–283. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2014.248
[19] S. Faraji, K.L. Stano, O. Yildiz, A. Li, Y. Zhu, P.D. Bradford, Ultralight anisotropic foams from layered
aligned carbon nanotube sheets, Nanoscale 7 (2015) 17038–17047. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c5nr03899e
[20] D. Klempner, K.C. Frisch, Handbook of Polymeric Foams and Foam Technology, (n.d.).
40 Chapter 2 Fundamentals[21] B. Ghanbarian, A.G. Hunt, R.P. Ewing, M. Sahimi, Tortuosity in porous media: A critical review, Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. J. 77 (2013) 1461–1477. https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2012.0435
[22] H. Saomoto, J. Katagiri, Direct comparison of hydraulic tortuosity and electric tortuosity based on
finite element analysis, Theor. Appl. Mech. Lett. 5 (2015) 177–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taml.2015.
07.001
[23] A. Moussatov, C. Ayrault, B. Castagnède, Porous material characterization – ultrasonic method for
estimation of tortuosity and characteristic length using a barometric chamber, Ultrasonics 39 (2001)
195–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0041-624X(00)00062-7
[24] L. Jaouen, E. Gourdon, P. Glé, Estimation of all six parameters of Johnson-Champoux-Allard-Lafarge
model for acoustical porous materials from impedance tube measurements, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148
(2020) 1998–2005. https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0002162
[25] S. Pardo-Alonso, E. Solorzano, L. Branbant, P. Vanderniepen, M. Dierick, L. Van Hoorebeke,
M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, 3D Analysis of the progressive modification of the cellular architecture in
polyurethane nanocomposite foams vía X-ray microtomography, Eur. Polym. J. 149 (2013) 999–1006.
[26] R.A. Campo-Arnáiz, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, B. Calvo, J.A. De Saja, Extinction coefficient of polyolefin
foams, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 43 (2005) 1608–1617. https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.20435
[27] O.A. Almanza, J.A. de Saja, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Prediction of the radiation term in the thermal
conductivity of crosslinked closed cell polyolefin foams, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 38 (2000)
993–1004. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-0488(20000401)38:7<993::AID-POLB10>3.0.CO;2-J
[28] P. Cimavilla-Román, S. Perez-Tamarit, A. Vananroye, P. Moldenaers, M. Ángel Rodriguez-Pérez, The
effects of silica aerogel on the rheological behaviour and polymer matrix structure of Rigid
Polyurethane foams, Eur. Polym. J. 176 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2022.111398
[29] V. Kumar, J.E. Weller, A model for the unfoamed skin on microcellular foams, Polym. Eng. Sci. 34
(1994) 169–173. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.760340302
[30] J. Pinto, S. Pardo, E. Solórzano, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, M. Dumon, J.A. de Saja, Solid skin
characterization of PMMA/MAM foams fabricated by gas dissolution foaming over a range of
pressures, Defect Diffus. Forum. 326–328 (2012) 434–439. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.
net/DDF.326-328.434
[31] J. Crank, The Mathematics of Diffusion, Oxford University Press, (1975). https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-
4549(77)90072-X
[32] J.W.S. Lee, J. Wang, J.D. Yoon, C.B. Park, Strategies to achieve a uniform cell structure with a high
void fraction in advanced structural foam molding, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 47 (2008) 9457–9464.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0707016
[33] E. Solórzano, J. Pinto, S. Pardo, F. Garcia-Moreno, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Application of a microfocus
X-ray imaging apparatus to the study of cellular polymers, Polym. Test. 32 (2013) 321–329.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2012.11.016
[34] V. Bernardo, J.M. Leon, I. Sanchez-Calderon, E. Laguna-Gutierrez, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez,
Nanocellular polymers with a gradient cellular structure based on poly(methyl methacrylate)/
thermoplastic polyurethane blends produced by gas dissolution foaming, Macromol. Mater. Eng.
(2019) 1900428 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201900428
[35] M. Trofa, E. Di Maio, P.L. Maffettone, Multi-graded foams upon time-dependent exposition to
blowing agent, Chem. Eng. J. 362 (2019) 812–817. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.01.077
[36] S. Pardo-Alonso, E. Solórzano, J. Vicente, L. Brabant, M.L. Dierick, I. Manke, A. Hilger, E. Laguna,
M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, μCT-based analysis of the solid phase in foams: Cell wall corrugation and
other microscopic features, Microsc. Microanal. 21 (2015) 1361–1371. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1431927615014890
[37] D. Eaves, Handbook of Polymer Foams, Rapra Technology, United Kingdom, (n.d.).
References 41[38] Y. Sato, M. Wang, S. Takishima, H. Masuoka, T. Watanabe, Y. Fukasawa, Solubility of butane and
isobutane in molten polypropylene and polystyrene, Polym. Eng. Sci. 44 (2004) 2083–2089.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.20213
[39] K.F. Webb, A.S. Teja, Solubility and diffusion of carbon dioxide in polymers, Fluid Phase Equilib.
158–160 (1999) 1029–1034. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3812(99)00153-3
[40] M. O’neill, Q. Cao, M. Fang, Solubility of homopolymers and copolymers in carbon dioxide, Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 5885 (1998) 3067–3079. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie980010x
[41] D. Raps, N. Hossieny, C.B. Park, V. Altstädt, Past and present developments in polymer bead foams
and bead foaming technology, Polymer (Guildf) 56 (2015) 5–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.
2014.10.078
[42] X. Cao, L.J. Lee, T. Widya, C. Macosko, Polyurethane / clay nanocomposites foams : Processing,
structure and properties, Polymer (Guildf) 46 (2005) 775–783. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.
2004.11.028
[43] R.H.B. Bouma, W.J. Nauta, J.E.F. Arnauts, T. Van Den Boomgaard, J.M. Steuten, H. Strathmann,
Foam stability related to polymer permeability. I. Low molecular weight additives, J. Appl. Polym.
Sci. 65 (1997) 2679–2689. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4628(19970926)65:13<2679::AID￾APP9>3.0.CO;2-8
[44] R. Gendron, M.F. Champagne, Y. Delaviz, M.E. Polasky, Foaming polystyrene with a mixture of CO2
and ethanol, J. Cell. Plast. 42 (2006) 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021955X06060948
[45] S. Costeux, I. Khan, S.P. Bunker, H.K. Jeon, Experimental study and modeling of nanofoams
formation from single phase acrylic copolymers, J. Cell. Plast. 51 (2015) 197–221. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0021955X14531972
[46] J.B. Clark, J.W. Hastie, L.H.E. Kihlborg, R. Metselaar, M.M. Thackeray, Definitions of terms relating to
phase transitions of the solid state, Int. Pure Appl. Chem. 66 (1994) 577–594.
[47] J.H. Aubert, R.L. Clough, Low-density, microcellular polystyrene foams, Polymer (Guildf) 26 (1985)
2047–2054.
[48] V.I. Kalikmanov, Nucleation Theory, Springer, (2013).
[49] H. Guo, V. Kumar, Some thermodynamic and kinetic low-temperature properties of the PC-CO2
system and morphological characteristics of solid-state PC nanofoams produced with liquid CO2,
Polymer (Guildf) 56 (2015) 46–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.09.061
[50] M. Mokhtari Motameni Shirvan, M.H.N. Famili, A. Golbang, A review on the application of nucleation
theories in thermoplastic foams, Plast. Polym. Technol. 4 (2016) 10–32. https://doi.org/10.14355/
papt.2016.04.002
[51] H. Guo, V. Kumar, Solid-state poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) nanofoams. Part I: Low￾temperature CO2 sorption, diffusion, and the depression in PMMA glass transition, Polymer (Guildf)
57 (2015) 157–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.12.029
[52] H. Guo, A. Nicolae, V. Kumar, Solid-state microcellular and nanocellular polysulfone foams, J. Polym.
Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 53 (2015) 975–985. https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.23719
[53] D. Miller, P. Chatchaisucha, V. Kumar, Microcellular and nanocellular solid-state polyetherimide
( PEI) foams using sub-critical carbon dioxide I. Processing and structure, Polymer (Guildf) 50 (2009)
5576–5584. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2009.09.020
[54] S.K. Goel, E.J. Beckman, Generation of microcellular polymeric foams using supercritical carbon
dioxide. I: Effect of pressure and temperature on nucleation , Polym. Eng. Sci. 34 (1994) 1137–1147.
[55] I. Khan, D. Adrian, S. Costeux, A model to predict the cell density and cell size distribution in nano￾cellular foams, Chem. Eng. Sci. 138 (2015) 634–645. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2015.08.029
[56] M.A. Shafi, J.G. Lee, R.W. Flumerfelt, Prediction of cellular structure in free expansion polymer foam
processing, Polym. Eng. Sci. 36 (1996) 1950–1959. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.10591
[57] J.S. Colton, N.P. Suh, Nucleation of microcellular foam: Theory and practice, Polym. Eng. Sci. 27
(1987) 500–503.
42 Chapter 2 Fundamentals[58] J. Martin de-Leon, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Low density nanocellular polymers based on
PMMA produced by gas dissolution foaming : Fabrication and cellular structure characterization,
Polymers (Basel) 8 (2016) 1–16. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym8070265
[59] A.J. Ruiz-Reglero, C. Saiz-arroyo, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, L. Gonzalez, Production, cellular
structure and thermal conductivity of microcellular (methyl methacrylate)–(butyl acrylate)–(methyl
methacrylate) triblock copolymers, Polym. Int. 60 (2011) 146–152. https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.2931
[60] L. Chen, D. Rende, L.S. Schadler, R. Ozisik, Polymer nanocomposite foams, J. Mater. Chem. A. 1
(2013) 3837–3850. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2ta00086e
[61] S.T. Lee, Foam extrusion: Principles and practice, CRC Press, Florida, United States (2014), 100AD.
[62] R. Liao, W. Yu, C. Zhou, Rheological control in foaming polymeric materials: I. Amorphous polymers,
Polymer (Guildf) 51 (2010) 568–580. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2009.11.063
[63] E. Laguna-Gutierrez, R. Van Hooghten, P. Moldenaers, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Understanding the
foamability and mechanical properties of foamed polypropylene blends by using extensional
rheology, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 132 (2015) 42430(1)–42430(14). https://doi.org/10.1002/app.42430
[64] C. Okolieocha, D. Raps, K. Subramaniam, V. Altstädt, Microcellular to nanocellular polymer foams:
Progress (2004–2015) and future directions – A review, Eur. Polym. J 73 (2015) 500–519. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2015.11.001
[65] B. Notario, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanoporous polymeric materials : A new class of
materials with enhanced properties, Prog. Polym. Sci. 78–79 (2016) 93–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pmatsci.2016.02.002
[66] M. Knudsen, The Kinetic Theory of Gases, Methuen, London, (1934).
[67] S. Song, M.M. Yovanovich, F.O. Goodman, Thermal gap conductance of conforming surfaces in
contact, J. Heat. Transfer. 115 (1993) 533–540.
[68] J. Pinto, B. Notario, R. Verdejo, M. Dumon, S. Costeux, M.A. Rodriguez-perez, Molecular confinement
of solid and gaseous phases of self-standing bulk nanoporous polymers inducing enhanced and
unexpected physical properties, Polymer (Guildf) 113 (2017) 27–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.
2017.02.046
[69] B. Notario, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodríguez-Perez, Towards a new generation of polymeric foams: PMMA
nanocellular foams with enhanced physical properties, Polymer (Guildf) 63 (2015) 116–126.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2015.03.003
[70] J. Martín-de León, F. Van Loock, V. Bernardo, N.A. Fleck, M.A. Rodriguez-Pérez, The influence of cell
size on the mechanical properties of nanocellular PMMA, Polymer (Guildf) 181 (2019) 121805.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2019.121805
[71] D. Miller, V. Kumar, Microcellular and nanocellular solid-state polyetherimide (PEI) foams using sub￾critical carbon dioxide II. Tensile and impact properties, Polymer (Guildf) 52 (2011) 2910–2919.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2011.04.049
[72] S. Perez-Tamarit, B. Notario, E. Solorzano, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Light transmission in nanocellular
polymers: Are semi-transparent cellular polymers possible?, Mater. Lett. 210 (2017) 39–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2017.08.109
[73] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Key production parameters to obtain
transparent nanocellular PMMA, Macromol. Mater. Eng. (2017) 1700343(1)–1700343(5). https://doi.
org/10.1002/mame.201700343
[74] B. Notario, A. Ballesteros, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanoporous PMMA : A novel system with
different acoustic properties, Mater. Lett. 168 (2016) 76–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2016.01.037
[75] B. Notario, J. Pinto, R. Verdejo, M.A. Rodíguez-Pérez, Dielectric behavior of porous PMMA: From the
micrometer to the nanometer scale, Polymer (Guildf) 107 (2016) 302–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2016.11.030
[76] L. Li, L. Schulte, L.D. Clausen, K.M. Hansen, G.E. Jonsson, S. Ndoni, Gyroid nanoporous membranes
with tunable permeability, ACS Nano 5 (2011) 7754–7766. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn200610r
References 43[77] J. Pinto, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, R. Garcia, C. Dietz, Block copolymers self-assembly allows
obtaining tunable micro or nanoporous membranes or depth filters based on PMMA; fabrication
method and nanostructures, J. Phys. Chem. C. 118 (2014) 4656–4663. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp409803u
[78] G.Q. Lu, X.S. Zhao, Nanoporous materials – an overview, Nanoporous. Mater. Sci. Eng. (2004)
Imperial Collegue Press, London. https://doi.org/10.1142/9781860946561_0001
[79] B. Notario, J. Pinto, E. Solorzano, J.A. de Saja, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Experimental
validation of the Knudsen effect in nanocellular polymeric foams, Polymer (Guildf) 56 (2015) 57–67.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.10.006
[80] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de León, J. Pinto, T. Catelani, A. Athanassiou, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Low￾density PMMA/MAM nanocellular polymers using low MAM contents: Production and
characterization, Polymer (Guildf) 163 (2019) 115–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.12.057
[81] R.-C. Zhang, Z. Huang, D. Sun, D. Ji, M. Zhong, D. Zang, J.-Z. Xu, Y. Wan, A. Lu, New insights into
thermal conductivity of uniaxially stretched high density polyethylene films, Polymer (Guildf) 154
(2018) 42–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.08.078
[82] J. Martín-de León, M. Jiménez, J.L. Pura, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Pérez, Easy-way production of
highly transparent nanocellular polymers films, Polymer (Guildf) 236 (2021) 124298. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.polymer.2021.124298
[83] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de León, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Highly anisotropic nanocellular polymers
based on tri-phasic blends of PMMA with two nucleating agents, Mater. Lett. 255 (2019) 126587.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2019.126587
[84] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de León, E. Laguna-Gutierrez, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, PMMA-sepiolite
nanocomposites as new promising materials for the production of nanocellular polymers, Eur.
Polym. J. 96 (2017) 10–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2017.09.002
44 Chapter 2 FundamentalsChapter 3
From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular
materials production process
3.1 Introduction
As discussed in Chapter 1, cellular polymers have become very important materials in
our current society with a huge volume market and applications in almost all indus￾trial sectors. There has been a long path to reach the current technological develop￾ment. One of the initial inventions was done by Munters and Tandberg in 1931 [1].
They developed foamed polystyrene (PS). Later, in 1937 foamed polyurethane (PU)
was developed by Dr. Otto Bayer [2] and a few years later foamed polyethylene (PE)
was invented by Johnson in 1941 [3]. Another material currently in use for thermal
insulation is extruded polystyrene (XPS) that was developed by Dow Chemical in 1944
[4]. Expandable beads were also developed a long time ago by Stastney and Goeth in
1954 [5]. Later, other types of cellular polymers were developed, such as acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene (ABS) cellular polymers in 1967 [6], extruded polypropylene (PP)
foams in 1972 [7], polypropylene molded foam in 1984 [8], and polyethylene tere￾phthalate (PET) extruded foam in 1990 [9].
Nowadays, the main technologies to produce these materials at industrial scale
are extrusion foaming (PE, PS, PP, PET), reactive foaming (PU), bead foaming (PS, PP,
polylactic acid (PLA), thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) and other thermoplastics), in￾jection molding (all thermoplastics), compression molding (polyolefins, polyvinyl chlo￾ride (PVC) and rubbers), and free foaming (x-linked foams (polyolefins and rubbers)).
By using these technologies, it is possible to produce cellular polymers in a wide
range of relative densities (from 0.01 to 0.99) but with large cell sizes, typically higher
than 100 microns and only in very specific cases and for high-density foams with cells
sizes in the range of 10 to 100 microns.
One very specific foaming technique, not as common at industrial scale as the
ones mentioned in the previous paragraph, is gas dissolution foaming. This foaming
approach will be described in detail in the next paragraphs because is the one that
has been extensively used in the last 20 years to produce nanocellular polymers.
Briefly, gas dissolution foaming is physical foaming approach in which the polymer to
be foamed is introduced in a pressure vessel, saturated with the physical blowing
agent at a given pressure and temperature, and foamed after the release of the pres￾sure. It is batch process that allows foaming many materials and with many parame￾ters involved and that provides materials with any residues of the blowing agent. It is
interesting to briefly revise the history of this technology and how it has influenced
cellular polymers development.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-003Curiously, gas dissolution foaming is one the first technologies reported to produce
foamed products. In 1920 Charles Lancaster Marshall filed a patent entitled “Vulcaniz￾ing apparatus for the manufacture of high-pressure expanded vulcanized rubber and
substances” [10]. In his patent he described a process to expand rubber using a pressure
vessel. The company produced foamed rubbers for filling tires with a cellular material
rather than air. This idea was not a commercial success at that time. The company was
taken over in 1938 by St Helens Cable and Rubber Company, and by 1942 they started to
explore the possibility of producing thermoplastic materials such as polystyrene (PS),
low-density polyethylene (LDPE), and ethylene vinyl acetate copolymers (EVA) using
the gas dissolution foaming process. Although it took some time, this idea was a great
commercial success. In fact, this was the beginning of the development of commercial
products such as Plastazote (low-density LDPE foam produced by using gas dissolution
foaming with nitrogen as physical blowing agent) or Evazote (low-density EVA foam
produced by using gas dissolution foaming with nitrogen as physical blowing agent)
that have been in the market for more than 50 years and that are currently commercial￾ized by the British company Zotefoams Plc (previously British Petroleum and BX plastics
limited) [11]. This company has been using the gas dissolution foaming technology and in
particular the two-steps gas dissolution foaming process (see Section 3.3 for an explana￾tion of this specific process) for a long time to successfully produced different products.
In the last 20 years they have expanded the cellular materials produced by this technol￾ogy developing products based on polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), polyamide-6 (PA6), and
more recently polyether block amide (PEBA). Some of the general characteristics of the
materials produced by this company is that they can cover a wide range of densities,
even very low densities around 15 kg/m3 are possible, and a wide range of polymeric ma￾terials. The cell sizes are typically in the range of 100 to 300 microns.
Interestedly, very similar two steps for gas dissolution foaming process were devel￾oped at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), USA, in the early 1980s [12], in
response to a challenge by food and film packaging companies to reduce the amount of
polymers used in their industries. As most of these applications used solid, thin-walled
plastics, reducing their densities by traditional foaming processes that produced bub￾bles larger than 100 microns was not feasible due to excessive loss of mechanical prop￾erties. Thus, the idea of producing microcellular polymers was proposed, where we
could have, for example, 100 bubbles across one mm thickness, and expect to have a
reasonable strength for the intended applications. This was the beginning of microcellu￾lar polymers with cell sizes in the range of 10 microns. The concept of the process was
similar to that used by Zotefoams Plc but most of the polymers tested at the beginning
of the technology development were amorphous materials such as PS, ABS, and PET,
the saturation was typically done at low temperatures, and in most of the cases, cellular
polymers with medium to high relative densities were produced taking into account
the applications that were pursued (substitution of plastics parts by cellular parts that
keep mechanical properties as high as possible). These three key differences allowed
46 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processsignificantly reducing the cell size of the produced materials to the microcellular range
(in the range of 10 microns).
The development and study of these materials have been very intense in the last
40 years [13], and in fact they are still a very interesting topic in cellular polymer sci￾ence and technology (see below in this chapter). The main advantage of microcellular
polymers in comparison with conventional cellular polymers is that they present bet￾ter mechanical properties for the same relative density. This is a key aspect that will
be covered in Chapter 6 of this book (Section 6.2).
Interestingly, the production of microcellular foams has not been only an inter￾esting research area developed in academia, in fact, there have been several success￾ful developments at industrial scale.
The industrial production of microcellular foams has been developed so far by dif￾ferent technologies. A direct scaling up of the gas dissolution foaming process was done
by Kumar and Schirmer [14] by the so called “semi-continuous process” in which a roll
of polymer was saturated with the gas in a pressure vessel and later foamed in continu￾ous in a furnace. A company named Microgreen was formed in the USA and the process
was successfully scaled up in the early 2000s (more specifically in the year 2002) [15].
The technology was able to produce, for instance, PET foams from recycled PET with a
very high quality, medium densities, and very small cell sizes (in the range of 10 to 50
microns). Although technically the company was successful and the scaling up was com￾pleted, the business was not successful.
A second successful technology able to produce microcellular parts was injection
molding. The company Trexel [16], a spin-off of the MIT, developed and commercial￾ized a process to produce high-density cellular polymers with cell sizes in the range of
10 microns by using injection molding. This is a well-known technology in the plastic
industry named “Mucell” Technology [17, 18]. Briefly, it consists of dosing the physical
blowing agent in the barrel of the injection molding machine using a very specific
and precise dosing system and a specially designed screw to dissolve the gas in the
polymer in a short time. Once a single-phase polymer-gas has been created, the mate￾rial is injected into the mold cavity to create the microcellular part. This technology is
currently commercialized not only by Trexel but also by some of the main injection
molding producers such Krauss-Maffei or Engel. In addition, many companies are
using this technology to reduce the weight and cost of plastic parts keeping products
with enough mechanical performance.
The same concept of Mucell Technology has also been tested in extrusion foaming
to produce sheets of high-density microcellular cellular polymers. This technology is
currently commercialized by the company Zotefoams Plc [11], and it is being used
mainly to produce plastic containers by extrusion blow molding with the same idea, so
slightly reducing the density and cost, keeping the performance of high-density parts.
It is also interesting to mention that in the last few years gas dissolution foaming
has found a new market. Companies producing shoes for sports (for instance walking
or running shoes) have been using crosslinked polyolefin for the midsoles of their
3.1 Introduction 47products for many years. In particular, crosslinked EVA foams with densities in the
range 150 to 250 kg/m3 and cell sizes between 50 and 200 microns have been used for
this application. However, as these materials cannot be easily recycled due to the
crosslinking of the polymeric matrix, new and more sustainable alternatives are
being studied. One of them is the production of these midsoles by using the gas disso￾lution foaming process using thermoplastic elastomers as polymer matrix. The density
range is similar to that of crosslinked EVA foams, and cell sizes are in the conven￾tional range. The potential of this market is huge, and some commercial products are
already under production.
In summary, gas dissolution foaming has a long history, and it has been already
demonstrated that it is a versatile and environmentally friendly technology able to
produce many types of cellular polymers, starting from a wide variety of polymer ma￾trices, producing materials in a wide range of relative densities and with cell sizes in
the microcellular and in the conventional range. The technology has been scaled up
several times for specific products.
From an academic perspective, Figure 3.1 shows the evolution of microcellular
polymers research. At the early stages it was slow, and it was not until the year 2000
that the number of publications dealing with their study started to significantly grow.
As with any discovery, their evolution at both the laboratory and industrial scales
took several years, and even now the investigation about microcellular polymers is a
trending topic that continues to grow year after year, with almost 100 publications
and 5000 citations in the year 2021 [19–22].
Although nanocellular polymers were produced using already known techniques
to produce microcellular polymers, their fabrication implies a reduction by 100 times
in the cell size and an increase in the number of nucleation points by 4 orders of mag￾nitude (the definition of these parameters can be found in Chapter 2). Thus, the used
techniques needed to be fine-tuned and their production parameters again controlled
to produce these novel cellular polymers. Figure 3.1 shows how the evolution of the
research about nanocellular polymers is shifted around 20 years in comparison to
that of microcellular polymers, which explains that the number of publications is still
taking off, while some companies (Dow, BASF, Sabic, Sumteq, CellMat Technologies,
etc.) have been also carrying out research on these materials. However, their proper￾ties are more promising than those in microcellular polymers, so it is expected that in
some years from now nanocellular polymers could spread worldwide even more than
microcellular polymers do now.
Since their discovery, nanocellular polymers have already been produced from
different polymer matrices. Polycarbonate (PC) [23], thermoplastic polyurethane
(TPU) [24], polyetherimide (PEI) [25], polypropylene (PP) [26], or polymethylmethacry￾late (PMMA) [27, 28] have been some of the selected polymers for the production of
such materials. These polymers have been used to produce single-phase polymer sys￾tems, multiphase polymer systems, or immiscible blends [29–32].
48 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processHowever, there is still a long way to go to optimize the production of nanocellular
polymers. Some conventional polymers such as polystyrene or polyethylene have not
yet led to the production of cells in the nanometric region when producing the materi￾als using the homogeneous nucleation approach. Moreover, the properties of the al￾ready produced nanocellular polymers need to be improved, such as their density,
cell size, or methods for scaling up, and therefore the control of the production meth￾ods is essential.
The main production techniques to produce nanocellular polymers are studied in
depth in the following sections.
3.2 Production techniques of nanocellular polymers
Nanocellular polymers are defined to present cell sizes below the micron (see Chap￾ters 1 and 2 for a more in detail definition). Plenty of conventional techniques allow to
generate cells in a polymer, but the real challenge is how to generate such an enor￾mous number of cells in the nanometric range.
Production routes leading to nanocells are summarized in Figure 3.2 and can be
divided into three different groups: phase separation techniques, templating of im￾Figure 3.1: Evolution of publications and number of citations for microcellular and nanocellular polymers
(analyzed through the citation report of WoS with nanocellular and microcellular foams as topic consulted
in December 2022).
3.2 Production techniques of nanocellular polymers 49printing techniques, and the one in which we will mainly focus our attention on in
this chapter, gas dissolution foaming.
Phase separation techniques are based on inducing the separation between the
polymer and the gas phase through different methods. This separation can be trig￾gered by a chemical quench (chemical induction phase separation (CIPS)) [33, 34], by a
thermal quenching (thermal induction phase separation (TIPS)), or through immersion
techniques [35, 36]. This last one is the most promising one inside this group. The poly￾mer firstly precipitates from a solution, secondly, the solvent diffused out of the poly￾mer creating the phase separation.
As it is shown in Figure 3.3, nanocellular polymers created through this technique
lead to cell sizes above 100 nm while the sample thickness ranges hundreds of mi￾crons [37–39].
The second group of techniques consists of the generation of the nanocellular struc￾ture from a previous template. The initial monomer is mixed together with the template;
the monomer is therefore polymerized. Finally, the template is removed chemically, ther￾mally, or by some extraction method.
Figure 3.2: Nanocellular polymers production routes scheme.
50 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processThe different templates, that gave names to the techniques, can be a molecule
[40–42], a colloidal crystal [43–45], or self-organized templates such as micelles, micro￾emulsions, or block copolymers [46–52]. All those techniques cover a wide window of
cell sizes from smaller than 1 nm with microemulsion to the micron through immer￾sion techniques: however, the thickness of the final material is never thicker than 200
microns (Figure 3.3). The block copolymer technique is the exception, leading to sam￾ples of around 1 mm.
The remaining group is the gas dissolution foaming; this production method allows
the production of a wide range of cell sizes and sample thickness, as seen in Figure 3.3.
Due to this high range of sample thickness (final thickness of the sample can be as high
as 10 mm) this production route is the one allowing obtaining materials with a wider
range of applications, and due to this we will focus our attention on this approach.
This technique is in-deep studied in the following section.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming
Gas dissolution foaming was developed for the production first of conventional foams,
later microcellular foams (see introduction of this chapter) and in recent years, to pro￾duce nanocellular polymers.
The selected gas is usually carbon dioxide (CO2) [53]. This is due to the fact CO2
presents excellent diffusion properties when it is at a supercritical state, a state that is
also easily reached for this gas (critical temperature is 31 °C and critical pressure is 7.3
MPa). On the other hand, CO2 is a green solvent, meaning that the process is carried out
without producing any pollutant compound or leaving any residue in the material [54].
Figure 3.3: Range of sample thickness and cell sizes obtained with each production technique.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 51Although there exist different alternatives to this process, which will be com￾mented on lately, the original one consists of four steps as Figure 3.4 shows: satura￾tion, depressurization, desorption, foaming, and stabilization.
First of all, the polymer is introduced in a pressure vessel under certain condi￾tions of gas pressure and temperature, parameters known as saturation pressure
(psat) and saturation temperature (Tsat), respectively. During saturation, gas diffuses
into the polymer by following the Fick diffusion law and creating a homogeneous sin￾gle-phase gas-polymer mixture.
As schematized in Figure 3.5, gas molecules accommodate between polymeric
chains in the free volume of the polymer. For amorphous polymers the presence of gas
between polymer chains increases their inherent mobility; thus, the original glass tran￾sition temperature of the polymer (Tg) decreases due to the presence of CO2, to a lower
one known as effective glass transition temperature (Tgeff ). For semi-crystalline poly￾mers, when the saturation is carried out at a temperature below the melting tempera￾ture of the polymer (Tm), the glass transition temperature of the amorphous phase is
also reduced to an Tgeff . and a modification of the melting range could also occur.
The diffusion process continues during the so-called saturation time (tsat), mo￾ment at which the concentration of gas along the whole thickness of the polymer is
homogeneous and no more gas can be dissolved inside the polymer. This amount is
called solubility limit and defines the maximum amount of gas for which the single
phase of the gas-polymer system occurs. The solubility limit depends on both the gas￾polymer system and the used saturation conditions.
Solubility depends on both saturation pressure and temperature, a common
trend of solubility with saturation pressure is given by Henry’s law. In this model, sol￾ubility depends linearly on saturation pressure being kD the correlation parameter.
This linearity is useful for some pressure ranges and a wide variety of polymers, how￾ever, it is usually necessary to enhance this model being the Langmuir’s law and the
dual model more general equations [55–57]. Despite the used law, the increase of the
solubility with the saturation pressure is clear in all the models. On the other hand,
the saturation temperature is also affecting the solubility, as indicated before. This
dependence is given by Arrhenius eq. (3.1):
S = S0 exp − ΔHs
RTsat   (3:1)
where S0 is the preexponential factor, ΔHs is the heat of sorption, R is the gas con￾stant, and Tsat is the saturation temperature. The value of the heat of sorption de￾pends on the used gas/polymer system, and also on the range of pressures and
temperatures used due to the phase changes of gas. However, for CO2-philic materials,
that is, polymers with affinity for carbon dioxide, this value is negative. It means that
an increase in the solubility is promoted by decreasing the saturation temperature.
On the other hand, diffusivity determines saturation time through the second
Fick’s law (eq. (3.2)):
52 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processδC
δt = D δ2
C
δx2 (3:2)
The dependence of the diffusivity with those two parameters is similar to the ones
observed for the solubility. The pressure influence is given by eq. (3.3), although nor￾mally it is enough with the linear term in pressure meaning that an increase in the
saturation pressure leads to an increase in the absorption diffusivity of the gas in the
polymer.
D = a + bP + cP2 (3:3)
The influence of the saturation temperature is also described with an Arrhenius law,
as follows:
D = D0 exp − ΔHD
RT   (3:4)
where D0 is the pre-exponential factor and ΔHD is the activation energy for the diffu￾sion process. Although in some temperature range and for some gas/polymer systems,
this activation energy presents a negative value [27], the usual behavior is a positive
value of this constant for the absorption process. That means that a decrease in the
saturation temperature leads to a reduction of the diffusivity, which is reflected in an
increase in the saturation time.
After saturation time, gas is fast released in the second step of the process, depres￾surization. The pressure abruptly drops in this step from the used saturation pressure
to atmospheric pressure at a ratio given by the depressurization velocity (vdep).
This pressure drop leads to phase separation. At atmospheric pressure the saturation
limit strongly decreases; thus, the gas-polymer system is no longer in equilibrium,
triggering two effects: phase separation and the diffusion of gas outside the polymer.
Since depressurization gas starts to diffuse out through polymer surfaces, following
Figure 3.4: Gas dissolution foaming process scheme.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 53again Fick diffusion laws. This diffusion promotes that a solid non-foamed skin ap￾pears in the surface of these materials. This topic will be covered in more detail in
Chapter 7. On the other hand, there exist two options for phase separation: spinodal
decomposition or nucleation.
In spinodal decomposition, both phases, gas, and polymer abruptly separate, creat￾ing an interconnected gas phase and therefore a cocontinuous cellular structure. Spino￾dal decomposition occurs at specific conditions of high supersaturations, where the
polymer-gas mixture is highly unstable. Then, this is not the most common scenario.
Some examples of structures obtained via this route are presented in Chapter 7.
Commonly, the process through which phase separation takes place is nucleation.
As Figure 3.5 shows, gas is clustered in small regions known as nucleation points,
precursors of the final cells of the nanocellular polymer.
After desorption time, considered as the time between depressurization and foaming,
the polymer is heated at a temperature above the already defined Tgeff . This is usually
carried out in a thermal bath. At these conditions the polymer is in a plasticized state,
meaning that polymeric chains present enough mobility to allow nucleation points to
growing into cells. For amorphous polymers this growing takes place homogeneously in
all volume of the polymer, except near the surfaces of the sample, in which the amount
of gas is smaller due to the gas diffusion which results in the formation of a solid skin
(Chapter 7). For semi-crystalline polymers below its melting temperature, the situation is
more complex because the gas is mainly dissolved in the amorphous region so, the grow￾ing of the cells mainly takes place in this volume of the material. For these materials a
solid skin also appears for the same reason than in amorphous materials.
As long as the polymer is above the effective glass transition temperature, it con￾tinues growing. This could lead to degeneration mechanisms. Those degeneration
mechanisms are drainage coalescence, or coarsening, phenomena in which the cell
walls broke, and many cells join together reducing the final number of cells and in￾creasing their size. Thus, a final step, called stabilization, is necessary. The cellular
structure is stabilized simply by decreasing the temperature below the effective glass
transition to stop the growth of the material and freeze the cellular structure.
Figure 3.5: Evolution of a polymer sample under the gas dissolution foaming process.
54 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processAlthough the four steps have been herein clearly separated, boundaries are not
so clear, and some steps could co-occur. In fact, depressurization and foaming can
occur at the same time, simply by using a saturation temperature above the effective
glass transition temperature of the polymer for amorphous materials of the meting
temperature for semi-crystalline polymers. In the case of semi-crystalline polymers
the distribution of the gas in the polymer is more homogeneous in this particular case
because the crystalline phase has disappeared in these conditions. This is the so￾called one-step process. During depressurization, the polymer is already plasticized;
thus, phase separation and growth occur at the same time. As a counterpart, when
depressurization and foaming are separated the process is called two-step process.
As it can be seen, this apparently easy process depends on multiple parameters
and so does the final cellular structure. The ultimate objective is the generation of
cells in the nanometric scale. Considering the already defined relationship between
cell density (Nv), the porosity Vf = 1 − ρr, and the cell size ð Þ ϕ (eq. (2.13) in Chapter 2),
the production of cell sizes around 200 nm with a porosity higher than 0.5 implies a
cell nucleation density and number of nucleation points in the solid material (assum￾ing no coalescence) of the order of 1014 cells/cm3
.
The key point for the production of nanocellular polymers is therefore to achieve
such values for nucleation densities. Inside the nucleation process, two strategies
have been followed to achieve this purpose: homogeneous nucleation and heteroge￾neous nucleation. Although boundaries between them are usually not clear, heteroge￾neous materials can be defined as those in which a second phase is intentionally
added to act as preferential nucleation sites, while homogeneous materials are those
in which such second phase does not exist. Both strategies are extensively explained
in the following sections.
3.3.1 Homogeneous nucleation
As it was previously explained, nucleation is considered homogeneous when a second
phase or nanostructuration is not intentionally added to act as a nucleating agent.
Thus, in this context, homogeneous materials can be said to present a single phase in
which cells are created without any help but the gas itself. And if any additional
phase is present, it does not play a role during the nucleation stage.
As it was explained in the previous section, the production of a cellular material
through gas dissolution foaming implies different steps. As shown in Figure 3.5, the
material evolves during the process until the final stable cellular material is reached.
So as to understand and therefore control the final cellular structure as a function of
the production parameters it is essential to understand the foaming mechanisms tak￾ing place. Modeling the production of such materials comprises two essential steps:
the model of the nucleation and the model of the growth that, as previously said, are
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 55two processes that can coexist. In addition, both processes depend on many different
production parameters. This makes modeling a challenging task.
Homogeneous nucleation was first explained through the classical nucleation the￾ory (CNT) described in Chapter 2. This theory has been historically used to explain nu￾cleation phenomena in conventional and microcellular foams [58, 59]. However, and
although it is useful to qualitatively understand the process, predicted values were
proven not to be realistic for microcellular materials and much less for nanocellular
materials. According to Thompson et al. classical nucleation theory overestimates the
critical radius for nanocellular polymers over three times, and the nucleation barrier
over six times, therefore nucleation rate is underestimated by more than five orders of
magnitude [60].
The main weakness of CNT is, on the one hand, not considering viscoelastic ef￾fects and other mechanisms such as depressurization rate or surface tension, among
others, potentially contributing to the creation, stabilization, or destruction of nuclei.
On the other hand, CNT considers nucleation and growth as completely independent
processes.
Many works in the literature have dealt with this problem trying to correctly pre￾dict results obtained through homogeneous nucleation. The first work dates from
1968 when Street et al. investigated single bubble growth for Newtonian fluids [61].
This model was afterward improved including the study of non-Newtonian fluids, and
more complex dynamics [61–65]. However, these theories were not yet leading with
the coexistence of nucleation and growth among other essential factors. Shafi et al.
were the first to propose a model able to simulate nucleation and bubble growth si￾multaneously in their works published in 1996 and 1997 [66, 67]. The success of their
model relies on the introduction of a new concept, the Influence Volume Approach
(IVA). IVA model was able to relate the final characteristics of the foam such as nucle￾ation density, density, and cell size distribution to processing parameters such as satu￾ration pressure and temperature or depressurization rate, and also to materials
characteristics such as viscosity, surface tension, or gas solubility.
However, Shafi’s model assumes an instantaneous depressurization, the same ini￾tial conditions for all nucleated bubbles, and the non-existence of a limited growth
period. Some others have dealt with this challenge, with different models published
in the literature. Some of them propose similar models such as Feng and Bertelo [68],
or Leung et al. [69]. And others have modified the initial theory of Shafi et al. such as
the one from Taki or Mao et al. [70, 71]. It is worth mentioning that the theory pro￾posed by Mao et al. includes an essential idea; in addition to considering nucleation
and growth as simultaneous processes, they differentiated two different phases in the
growth step, the free expansion phase, and the limited expansion phase. This will be
later explained in more detail.
In 2015 Khan et al. published the most complete model up to now dealing with the
production of nanocellular materials through homogeneous nucleation [72]. This
model puts together all the improvements previously added in the literature eliminat￾56 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processing most of the previous assumptions, leading to very accurate results in comparison
with experimental data.
As previously said, CNT assumes the presence of a nucleation barrier, from which
a nucleus is stable when R > rc (recall that R is the radius of the cell and rc is the criti￾cal radius, as described in Chapter 2). The Influence Volume Approach considers that
when a stable nucleus is created the surrounding gas molecules start diffusing to this
nucleus. This leads to a gas concentration gradient around the already created nu￾cleus (Figure 3.6) that is minimum near the surface of the nascent cell and becomes
higher as moving away up to reach the maximum value again.
This concept changes the perspective of nucleation theory in two essential points.
First of all, due to the lower gas concentration in this area, this model introduces the
idea that no stable nucleus can grow inside the IV region; thus, new nuclei can only
appear in the non-influenced volume (UV). In addition, this region evolves during
growth, as more gas diffuses into the cell. Secondly, IVA allows introducing the con￾cept of nucleation time and separates it from the depressurization time unlike the
previous models in the literature. With this model, it is assumed that nucleation is not
instantaneous and is governed by the availability of supersaturated regions in the
polymer matrix.
On the other hand, during growth Khan’s model assumes that two different phases
can be distinguished within growing of cells. Firstly the “free expansion phase,” where
UV is available in the polymer and cells growth rate increases with increasing influence
volume. Nucleation carries on during this phase until no more UV is available, moment
at which the “limited expansion phase” starts. During this phase, the cell growth rate
decreases, and cell growth continues until the pressure inside the cells reaches ambient
Figure 3.6: (a) Scheme of the gas concentration profile near a nascent cell. (b) Scheme of the influence
volume inside a polymer while nucleation and growing.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 57pressure or the effective glass transition of the polymer matrix is above the foaming
temperature.
The assumptions made in this model are the following:
1. Cells present spherical symmetry during nucleation and growth. Interaction be￾tween cells occurs through IV but they cannot coalesce.
2. The pressure inside the cell Pcell is related to the gas concentration C Rð Þ , t at the
bubble surface through:
C Rð Þ , t = KHPcell (3:5)
where KH is Henry’s constant.
3. The whole process is isothermal.
4. The gas-polymer mixture is a viscous fluid with its viscosity being shear rate de￾pendent following the Cross model.
Taking all the previous information into account, this model defines the following
equations governing nucleation and growth.
3.3.1.1 Bubble growth
The growth rate of the bubble is governed by eq. (3.6):
dR
dt = Pcell − Pliq  R
4μ − σ
2μ
(3:6)
where Pcell − Pliq is given by considering a quasi-static momentum balance across the
melt phase together with the jump linear momentum across the cell–liquid interface;
σ is the interfacial tension between gas and liquid phases; and μ is the viscosity,
which is considered to change according to the Cross function, being a function of the
temperature, pressure, and strain rate.
Although eq. (3.6) is derived assuming a Newtonian fluid, the equation is evaluated
in each timestep based on the evolving viscosity considering the strain rate and solubility
at the cell interface.
On the other hand, the concentration of gas in the surrounding of the nascent cell
is given by:
∂C
dt + vr
∂D
dt = D
r2
∂
∂r
r2 ∂C
∂r
  (3:7)
where D is the diffusivity of the gas in the polymer and depends on the temperature and
the gas pressure. So as to solve this equation it is considered that initially C rð Þ , 0 = C0.
While the boundary conditions are defined as C Rð Þ , t = KHPcell and the one at R = ∞ de￾pends on the growth phase, either Free expansion or Limited expansion.
58 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processFinally, the mass balance on the surface of the cell is given by the following
relationship:
d
dt
4πR3
3
Pcell
RT
  = D4πR2 dC
dr (3:8)
With R the universal gas constant and T the gas temperature. Solving simultaneously
eqs. (3.6)–(3.8) leads to determining the pressure inside the cell, the radius of the cell,
and the gas concentration.
3.3.1.2 Nucleation
As previously described to generate a nucleus it is necessary to overcome the Gibbs
free energy barrier (eq. (3.9)), where σ is the surface tension between the gas and the
polymer phase and Δp is the pressure difference between gas and solid:
ΔGhom = 16πγσ3
3Δp2 (3:9)
With this consideration, the nucleation rate dN
dt  , is considered as follows [73]:
dN
dt = A1N 2σ
πm
	 
0.5
exp − 16A2πσ3
3kT Pcell − Pliq  2
 ! (3:10)
with N being the number of dissolved gas molecules per unit volume of the primary
phase, m is the mass of the gas molecules and σ is the interfacial tension between the
blowing agent and the saturated polymer, k is the Boltzman constant and A1 and A2,
are two fitting parameters that are obtained through fitting the theoretical model to
the experiments.
As described previously, new nuclei are only created in the UV; thus, the total
number of nuclei at a time t is defined by eq. (3.11):
Ntotð Þt =
ðt
0
dNð Þτ
dt UVð Þτ dτ (3:11)
where UV is the non-influenced volume defined as:
UV tð Þ = V0 −
ðt
0
dN
dt ð Þ t − τ UV tð Þ − τ Vcbð Þτ dτ (3:12)
Being V0 the total volume of the polymer-gas blend at t = 0 and Vcb is the influence
volume surrounding the bubble.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 593.3.1.3 Considerations to solve the equations
In this model eq. (3.7) is solved through the Galerkin finite element method (FEM),
used to discretize the equation.
On the other hand, as it was previously said, cell growth can be separated into
two different phases; thus, different boundary conditions are defined in each of them
to solve the previous equation.
During the free expansion phase, there is a large gap among cells, meaning that
they do not interact among them and the IV expands freely. Then the boundary con￾ditions are defined as described in eqs. (3.13) and (3.14)
C Rð Þ , t = KHPcell (3:13)
Cð Þ ∞, t = C0 (3:14)
And the influence volume is calculated as follows:
Vcb = 4π
3 R3
∞ − R3   (3:15)
R∞ being chosen so as to C Rð Þ ∞, t = 0.98C0.
When the influence volume occupies the whole volume of the polymer, nucle￾ation stops, and the IV of each cell interacts which the others, starting at this moment
the limited expansion phase. Now the concentration at R∞ is lower than kC0, assuming
that R∞ varies with time as:
Rt+Δt ∞ = Rt
∞ + Δt
RR_ 2
Rt
∞
 2 (3:16)
And also assuming that
∂C
∂r
ð Þ R∞, t = 0 (3:17)
3.3.1.4 Model predictions
The complexity of this model allows for solving the behavior of bubble nucleation
and growth very precisely. Figure 3.7 shows the difference between the FEM model
used by Khan et al. and previous models in the literature. It is shown how previous
models underpredict the gas concentration gradient leading to a wrong predicted
bubble growth and influence volume.
The evaluation of this model with a single bubble growth allows explaining the
growth dynamics in homogeneous nucleation as follows. By looking at Figure 3.8a it
can be seen how the growth of the nucleation point is relatively slow at the beginning
but later starts gaining momentum due to the increasing pressure difference. The in￾60 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processcrease of this pressure difference leads to an increase in the bubble growth rate. During
this initial period, the viscosity of the melt is the limiting criterion for bubble growth.
This regime continues until UV = 0, starting what was named the limited growth
phase. The bubble growth rate reaches the maximum and then decreases. The diffusion
of the gas leads to a decrease in the concentration gradient; thus, the bubble growth
rate decreases until Tg > Tamb.
On the other hand, regarding nucleation rate (Figure 3.8b), is driven by Psat − Pliq
that it is small at the beginning of the process and so is the nucleation rate. When
times evolves Psat does not strongly evolve, but Pliq becomes smaller leading to an in￾crease in the nucleation rate, which keeps increasing up to UV becomes unavailable.
The showed results lead to the correct predictions on the cell size and in the cell size
distribution as Figure 3.9 shows for nanocellular polymers produced from gas dissolution
(b) 1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Shafi et.al.
FEM
Han & Yoo
(a) 1
0.995
0.99
0.985
0.98
0.975
1 1.5 2 2.5 3
y
3.5 4
Shafi et.al.
FEM
Han & Yoo
4.5 5
Figure 3.7: Comparison of FEM with Shafi et al. and Han and Yoo polynomial functions to predict
(a) concentration profile and (b) concentration gradient. Adapted from [72].
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 61foaming of a copolymer of methyl-methacrylate (MMA) with 9 wt% of ethylacrylate (EA).
Such predictions are for the first time close to the experimental results for nanocellular
polymers thanks to the accuracy of the model.
Figure 3.8: (a) Variation of bubble growth rate with time. (b) Evolution of nucleation rate
with time as a function of A2 parameter. Adapted from [72].
62 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processFigure 3.9: (a) Comparison of the results of the model with experimental data for MMA-EA. Closed
symbols for 25 °C of foaming temperature and open symbols for 0 °C. (b) Comparison of cell size
distribution predicted by the model with experimental data of foams produced at 36 MPa and 35 °C for
the open symbols and 36 MPa, 55 °C for the closed symbols. Adapted from [72].
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 633.3.1.5 Nanocellular polymers through homogeneous nucleation
Since their discovery, the previously discussed models along with the experimental
data have allowed understanding the production process of nanocellular polymers
through homogeneous nucleation. Table 3.1 broadly summarizes the influence of dif￾ferent parameters on the final cellular characteristics such as cell nucleation density,
cell size, and relative density according to the experimental results in the literature
and to the previous models [74].
As it can be seen in Table 3.1, increasing saturation pressure and decreasing satura￾tion temperature lead to the maximization of the nucleation points and therefore the
minimization of the cell size. This is mainly due to a significant increase in the solubility
when pressure is increased and temperature is decreased [74]. The depressurization
rate reduces the cell size as it increases and leads to a broadened cell size distribution,
while the desorption time must be minimized to increase the cell nucleation density.
Regarding the foaming, an increase in both temperature and time leads to minimum
cell sizes through the increase of the cell nucleation density. Finally, the polymer matrix
is of vital importance in the final results; high viscosities are encouraged to minimize
cell size while low relative density is favored with small viscosities and low Tgs.
The knowledge on the production process and a proper control of all parameters that
have an influence has led to the production of a wide variety of polymers with a nano￾cellular structure. Thus, nanocellular polymers from homogeneous nucleation have been
produced by using polymers such as polyetherimide (PEI), polycarbonate (PC), polyphe￾nylsulfone (PPSU), and above all polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) [23, 25, 75–77].
Table 3.1: Scheme of the influence of the production parameters and polymer matrix
in a two-step gas dissolution foaming process to produce nanocellular materials with
low relative densities. The script indicates that there is not a direct influence between
the parameter and the expected result. Adapted from reference [74].
✶
Those parameters should be maximized up to a limit when degeneration of the
cellular structure takes place.
64 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processFigure 3.10: Main discoveries in nanocellular polymers produced through homogeneous nucleation.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 65Among all the literature results, Figure 3.10 shows some of the main milestones
reached using the homogeneous nucleation approach. As previously said, nanocellular
polymers were born around 2003. After their discovery, the first experimental validation
of their improved mechanical properties was published in 2011 by Kumar et al. publish￾ing an improvement in the modulus of toughness of nanocellular polyetherimide up to
350% in comparison to microcellular PEI and impact energies 600% higher [78]. In 2015
Notario et al. experimentally proved for the first time the evidence of the Knudsen effect
in nanocellular PMMA [79]. The theoretical model of Khan et al. was also published
this year [72]. Martín-de León et al. proved in 2016 the existence of solid confinement in
nanocellular polymers [80] and in 2017 they produced the first transparent nanocellular
polymer from PMMA [81]. It was not until 2019 when samples with large dimensions and
flat forms free of internal defects were published taking one more step toward the
industrialization of these structures [82]. This work was published by Martín-de León
et al., which also presented the first theoretical model explaining the interaction of light
with such structures [83]. In 2020, Bernardo et al. experimentally proved a higher radia￾tion term in nanocellular polymers in comparison with their microcellular counterparts
[84]. Finally, in 2022, Sanchez-Calderón et al. firstly measured the thermal conductivity
of nanocellular polymers by an steady-state approach [85].
All these topics will be explained in more detail in the following chapters.
3.3.2 Heterogeneous nucleation
Heterogeneous nucleation takes place in those materials in which a second phase is re￾sponsible for nucleation. As can be seen in Figure 3.11 the scheme has changed: the sec￾ond phase, well dispersed in the polymer matrix, is in the process since the beginning.
The addition of this second phase changes the surface tension in comparison with the
pure polymer one. The surface tension of a two-phase system can be defined by eq. (3.18)
where σsp, σp and σs are the surface tensions of the second phase and the polymer, the
gas-polymer and the gas-second phase, respectively, and θ is the wetting angle of the in￾terface [86]:
σsp = σp + σs cos θ (3:18)
This second phase induces gas molecules to aggregate at the foreign surface, which
is known as wetting [87]. Therefore, when the polymer is completely saturated (2 in
Figure 3.11) and the gas is released, the nucleation tends to take place in these pre￾existing surfaces (3 in Figure 3.11).
The nucleation is no longer controlled by the production parameters but mainly
by the characteristics of the second phase (chemical interaction with gas and/or poly￾mer matrix, size, geometry, dispersion, etc.). This is very interesting from the produc￾tion point of view because the materials can be produced with lower saturation
66 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processpressures and higher saturation temperatures (that reduces the saturation time) mak￾ing the process more feasible for the scaling-up.
Therefore, previously defined equations for homogeneous nucleation must be
modified. In this context, the presence of the second phase is the one controlling the
creation of new nucleation points; thus, the IV concept does not make sense, and
equations considered in the previous section can be simplified. Therefore, the nucle￾ation rate for heterogeneous nucleation (Nhet) can be defined from the original CNT
(Chapter 2) as follows:
Nhet = f1C1 exp − ΔGhet
kBT
  (3:19)
where C1 is the initial concentration of gas in the polymer and f1 is the frequency fac￾tor of gas molecules joining the nucleus. It is in the energy barrier for heterogeneous
nucleation (ΔGhetÞ where differences with homogeneous nucleation are introduced.
As it was previously said, in order to form a nucleus, it is necessary to overcome an
energy barrier. The presence of the second phase reduces this energy in comparison
with the one needed in homogeneous nucleation:
ΔGhet = ΔGhomSð Þθ = 16πγ3
3Δp2 Sð Þθ (3:20)
Thus the energy barrier is proportional to the energy barriers in a homogeneous system
by a factor Sð Þθ that depends on the wetting/contact angle of the polymer–additive–gas
interface [88], and that is always less than or equal to one:
Sð Þθ = 1
4
ð Þ 2 + cos θ ð Þ 1 − cos θ 2 (3:21)
The critical radius can be defined equal to that in homogeneous nucleation due to the
fact that the second phase does not modify this value. Equation (3.20) only takes into
account the contact angle, but the energy barrier can be defined taking into account
Figure 3.11: Scheme of a heterogeneous sample under the gas dissolution foaming process.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 67also the second phase curvature by the introduction of the Fletcher factor f mð Þ , n [89]
(eq. (3.22)):
ΔGhet = ΔGhomf mð Þ , n = 16πγ3
3Δp2 f mð Þ , n with (3:22)
f mð Þ , n = 1
2 +
1
2
1 − mn
g
 3
+
n3
2 2 − 3 n − m
g
  +
n − m
g
 3 " # +
3
2
mn2 n − m
g − 1
 
where the expressions of m, n, and g are given by eqs. (3.23)–(3.25) respectively:
m = cos θ (3:23)
n = R=rc (3:24)
g = 1 + n2 − 2mn  1=2 (3:25)
Being θ the contact angle, R the radius of the second phase, and g is a function of the
previous parameters. The Fletcher factor is minimized when the particle geometry is
a flat surface with n  1. For any other geometry the value increases; thus, the size of
the particle in comparison to the critical radius strongly affects the nucleating effect.
Equation (3.22) is only valid for the critical nuclei, however, it has been proved to cor￾rectly estimate the reduction of the free energy barrier when including a second
phase [30].
Production parameters control the nucleation when working with homogeneous
nucleation; however, in heterogeneous nucleation, the characteristics of the second
phase or nucleant rule the density of the generated nucleus. The ideal nucleant has
been defined to present the following four qualities [90]:
– Nucleation in the nucleant or at the interface should be energetically favorable in
comparison with homogeneous nucleation. Weak interactions between the sec￾ond phase and the polymer usually lead to low energy barriers. However, this
can depend on the used production parameters, homogeneous or heterogeneous
nucleation dominating the process as a function of them.
– Uniform size and surface properties so that all the particles act simultaneously as
nucleating points generating a homogeneous cellular structure.
– A good dispersion in the polymeric matrix. Aggregates will lead to less effective
nucleation sites and non-uniform cellular structures.
– The volumetric density of nucleants should be enough to achieve the required nu￾cleation density (around 1014 nuclei/cm3 for nanocellular polymers) and higher
than the estimated through homogeneous nucleation for the used production
parameters.
Taking into account these considerations two types of additives have been used as
the second phase for nucleation: nanoparticles and nanostructured polymers. Both
68 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processadditives need to present sufficiently small sizes and a high enough volumetric den￾sity (above 1013–1014 domains/cm3
) to create nanocellular polymers.
Regarding particles, the maximum nucleation density achievable for spherical
particles is given by eq. (3.26)
Nucleants
cm3 = ωp ρc
ρp Vp
(3:26)
Being ωp the particle content, ρc the density of the composite (material formed by the
polymer matrix and particles), ρp the density of the particles and Vp the volume of a
single particle. Taking eq. (3.26) into consideration, particles with a radius below
50 nm are needed to obtain the required nucleation density, with common concentra￾tions of 10% or smaller.
Additionally, to correctly promote cell growth, the particle should be larger than
the critical radius but smaller than the desired cell size [91]. In addition, particle size
is required to be smaller than the cell wall thickness (ranging 20–30 nm [80]) to pre￾vent the degeneration of the cellular structure such as cell wall rupture.
As aforementioned it is therefore mandatory the dimensions of the particles to be on
the nanometric scale. Inorganic particles are considered nanoparticles when at least one
dimension is in the nanometric scale [92]. Taking this into account three different geome￾tries are used: flakes with nanometric thickness and hundreds to thousands of nanometers
in extent (clay platelets [93], graphene [94]), needle-like particles with two nanometric di￾mensions and variable length (nanotubes [95], nanofibers [96] or sepiolites [97]) and
spheres with all dimensions within the nanometric scale such as silica particles [98].
When considering nanostructured polymers, two strategies can be followed as
well: the micelle nanostructuration or the blend of two immiscible polymers. In the
first one, the micelles can be obtained by using copolymers dispersed in a continuous
polymer matrix of the same composition than one of the blocks of the copolymer. The
simplest case is to use a copolymer with two blocks, A and B, in an A matrix. The co￾polymer molecules are self-assembled, usually in nano-spheres, leading to the so￾called micelles. In this case, the maximum nucleation density for micelles is given by
eq. (3.27) considering that all the copolymer blocks reside in the micelles:
nmax = wNav
MnNc
(3:27)
with w being the amount of added copolymer, Nav is Avogadro’s number, Mn is the mo￾lecular weight of the copolymer, and Nc is the aggregation number, defined as the num￾ber of copolymer molecules in one micelle. In addition, a minimum amount of copolymer
is needed to obtain micelles named as critical micelle concentration (cmc) [99].
When mixing two immiscible polymers, phase separation takes place due to the
incompatibility being the polymer in the lowest proportion dispersed in small do￾mains, that can be nanometric, within the second polymer. The control of the size of
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 69the domain is determined by different factors such as the different viscosities of the
polymer, and the processing mixing conditions. Wu et al. proposed that for an extru￾sion process the size of the domains is given by eq. (3.28) [100]:
d = 4σ
ηmγ_
ηd
ηm
 ±0.84 ( + if ηd=ηm > 1
− if ηd=ηm < 1 (3:28)
γd and ηm being the viscosity of the dispersed polymer and the matrix, respectively, σ the
surface tension and γ_ the shear velocity of the extruder screw. So as to minimize the do￾mains to obtain nanocellular polymers, the function can be minimized by using polymers
with the same viscosity or by maximizing the shear velocity of the extruder screw.
3.3.2.1 Nanocellular polymers through heterogeneous nucleation
A wide variety of polymers as well as second phases have been used to produce nano￾cellular polymers with this approach. For example, polymers such as PC, polyethylene
(PE), polylactic acid (PLA), polypropylene (PP) or PMMA have been combined with
montmorillonite (MMT), carbon nanotubes (CNT), sepiolites, polymethylmethacrylate￾polybutyl acrylate-polymethylmethacrylate (MAM) block copolymers, thermoplastic
polyurethane (TPU) and others. [97, 101–105]. Among all these publications it is worth
mentioning those highlighted in Figure 3.12.
In 2003 the first nanocellular polymer from an heterogeneous nucleation was pro￾duced with PLA nucleated with MMT obtaining cell sizes of 360 nm and relative densi￾ties of 0.57 [106]. In 2005 a semi-crystalline polymer was used for the first time to
produce nanocells; thus, 3% of nanoclays is added to HDPE to produce cells between 200
and 300 nm with a relative density of 0.7 [101]. In 2013 Costeux et al. published a nano￾cellular material based on a copolymer PMMA/EMA with 0.25% of polyhedral oligomeric
silsesquioxane (POSS) obtaining the combination of minimum cell size and relative den￾sity of the literature with 120 nm of cell size and 0.15 of relative density [91]. In 2016 the
use of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as nucleation points allowed Liu et al. to obtain the
first nanocellular polystyrene of the literature with a cell size of 400 nm [105]. In 2017
Wang et al. obtained low-density materials by using the system PMMA/TPU and decreas￾ing relative density below 0.15 with 200 nm of cell size [107]. This structure also allows
Wang to publish the lowest value for the thermal conductivity of these structures mea￾sured by the transient plane source method. In 2019 nanocellular materials with interest￾ing characteristics such as a controlled bimodality or anisotropy were presented by
Bernardo et al. by means of adding MAM and sepiolites to PMMA [97, 108]. The MAM and
sepiolites inclusion also led to the production of nanocellular polymers with the lowest
demanding conditions up to that moment. By using 6 MPa and 25 °C of saturation pres￾sure and temperature, Bernardo et al. achieved cells in the range of 872 to 122 nm by
changing the amount of and type of additive [109]. Finally, Figure 3.12 highlights the pro￾duction of nanocellular polymers with a gradient cellular structure. Bernardo et al.
achieved these results by including TPU as the nucleant agent in PMMA beads [110].
70 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processFigure 3.12: Main discoveries in nanocellular polymers produced through heterogeneous nucleation.
3.3 Gas dissolution foaming 713.4 Limitations and challenges
3.4.1 Limitations
3.4.1.1 Density reduction
Figure 3.13 shows the wide variety of cell sizes and relative densities that have been
obtained following both strategies (homogeneous ([23, 27, 29, 78, 82, 83, 111–117]) and
heterogeneous ([30, 91, 97, 101–103, 106, 107, 118–132])). The combination of both strate￾gies allows covering a high fraction of the cell size–relative density map.
Figure 3.13: (a) Map of nanocellular materials from homogeneous polymers produced through gas
dissolution foaming process. (b) Map of nanocellular materials from heterogeneous polymers produced
through gas dissolution foaming process. Dashed lines represent lines of constant cell nucleation density
according to eq. (2.13) (Chapter 2). Adapted from [133].
72 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processHowever, it is also clear that there is plenty room for improvement with some
empty regions in both maps. On the one hand, when working with heterogeneous nu￾cleation the size of the second phase limits the reduction of the cell size below 50 nm;
thus, such cell sizes have only been obtained through the homogeneous route. On the
other hand, regarding the relative density, both strategies do not lead to values smaller
than 0.1 specially when the cell size decreases below 100 nm.
First of all, the differences between homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation
can be attributed to this second phase. When talking about reducing cell size, this can￾not be reduced below the size of the second phase when using heterogeneous nucle￾ation. This makes difficult to lead to cells smaller than 50 nm. Regarding density, it
strongly depends on the stack of the cells. If considering spherical cells, the minimum
density is achievable by considering a hexagonal or fcc packaging; thus, that is the
minimum boundary. However, cells in these materials are commonly assumed to be
tetrakaidecahedra; thus, this minimum boundary would be removed, at least for ho￾mogeneous nucleation. For heterogeneous nucleation, the geometry of the second
phase can determine the geometry of the final cells leading to this real boundary. This
fact has been already proven for PMMA nucleated with MAM spherical micelles acting
as nucleating agent [132].
However, densities below 0.2 are hardly observed for small cell sizes even for ho￾mogeneous nucleation. It seems pretty obvious that to minimize the density it is man￾datory to growth each nucleation point up to the limit, that means up to touching
with their neighbors. Additionally, to completely growth these nuclei it is essential to
have enough gas inside the polymer. As it can be seen in Figure 3.14, it has been em￾pirically proven for different systems, both heterogeneous and homogeneous, that
when reducing the density below a certain value, the open cell content abruptly in￾creases [80, 134–136]. That means cells becomes open, and the structure intercon￾nected. This leads to a fast diffusion of the gas out of the material; thus, it is no longer
available for the growth process.
The cell wall failure leading to this open cell content has been attributed to two
main mechanisms according to Van Loock et al. [138].
The model and experiments of Van Loock and coworkers proved the existence of
a critical cell wall thickness that cannot be exceed. When this minimum cell wall
thickness is reached, cells broke and expansion stops, as commented before.
In addition to these mechanical constraints, the cell wall cannot be as thin as wanted,
i.e. there are also some geometrical constraints as commented in Chapter 2. This idea was
firstly suggested by Bernardo and coworkers (Figure 3.15). According to this idea, the re￾gion under the theoretical line of constant cell wall thickness of 5 nm (assuming that is
the theoretical minimum) is a forbidden region, because materials in that part of the
graph will require cell wall thicknesses smaller than 5 nm, so there are some combina￾tions of relative density and cell size that might be impossible.
The critical porosity value of the model of Van Loock et al. strongly depends on
the molecular weight of the polymer that is directly related to the viscosity of the ma￾3.4 Limitations and challenges 73terial. Thus, the challenge of further reducing the relative density of nanocellular pol￾ymers can be done through carefully tailoring the viscosity of the matrix. A reduced
viscosity leads to an increase in cells growth [76, 116, 132]; however, the viscosity
should be high enough to avoid coalescence; thus, the optimum value can be explored,
either by modifying the molecular weight of already existing polymers or by synthe￾sizing a new polymer with the desired rheology.
Figure 3.14: Open cell content as a function of the relative density for the different nanocellular polymers
produced in our laboratory. Arrows indicate the increase of the foaming temperature. From reference [137].
Figure 3.15: Cell size–relative density map of different nanocellular polymers. Gray curves indicate
regions of constant cell nucleation density according. The constant thick black line indicates the curve of
constant cell wall thickness of 5 nm, from reference [107].
74 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processFurther strategies can be done regarding the polymer morphology. Strey et al.
patented a method in which they created a polymer gel by mixing a polymer with a
solvent such acetone. The control of the solvent content as well as the crosslinking
degree of the polymer leads to materials with cell sizes within the nanometric range
and low relative densities [139].
Regarding the production method, it can also be optimized, and although the liter￾ature covers a wide window of production conditions, there is still plenty of combina￾tion of process parameters and polymeric matrix that have not been explored. The
method can also be modified as Martín-de León et al. did, by implementing a cyclic
gas dissolution foaming, leading to one of the best materials in the literature regard￾ing minimum cell size and density [140]. Nanocellular PMMA with 30 nm of cell size
and 0.3 of relative density was obtained by this method.
Finally, for heterogeneous nucleation, density reduction can be achieved through
the control of the second phase, with almost infinite combinations of second phase￾polymer systems.
3.4.1.2 Big dimension samples
In addition to density reduction, nanocellular samples of big dimensions are hard to
produce and rarely found in the literature. This is one of the factors explaining the
absence of nanocellular polymers in the industry.
The biggest samples reported in the literature were produced by Martín-de León
et al. with 100 × 100 × 6 mm3 by means of a controlled foaming in a hot press [82]. In
addition, Sanchez-Calderon et al. led to a final sample of 150 × 150 × 14 mm3 by means
of stacking 18 samples of smaller dimensions (50 × 50 × 7 mm3
) [141].
Additionally, Martín-de León et al. proposed a method not only to produce big
samples but also to minimize all the millimetric or micrometric defects these samples
could have, especially when using low molecular weigh polymers. The method simply
consists of performing a two-stage depressurization in the gas dissolution foaming
process instead of a single depressurization [111].
Gas dissolution foaming limits the size of the samples in two different ways. First
of all, this method is performed in a pressure vessel that should resist very demand￾ing pressure and temperature conditions, limiting the final dimensions of the equip￾ment. The final size of the samples will depend on the initial sample’s dimensions
limited at the same time by the vessel dimensions and the final expansion ratio. Sec￾ondly, the production of thick samples is limited by the production time. The produc￾tion of very thick samples leads to extremely high production times not suitable for
an industrial process. It is estimated that samples of around 10 to 15 mm thick could
be produced by this technology in reasonable saturation times.
It is worth mentioning that gas dissolution process has been scaled up for the pro￾duction of conventional foams, and for the production of microcellular polymers, as
3.4 Limitations and challenges 75explained in the introduction of this chapter and therefore it is feasible to think about
production large nanocellular foam sheets by this technology.
In addition, other technologies that could be used to produce large samples and
that has not been studied in detail yet are bead foaming and injection molding.
3.5 Conclusions
Up to date, gas dissolution foaming has been the main approach followed by scientists
all around the world to produce thick nanocellular polymers. Many different poly￾mers, nucleating agents and processing conditions have been used resulting in a wide
range of densities and cell sizes.
The homogeneous nucleation approach allows producing a wide variety of mate￾rials, and in fact it is possible to produce very small cell sizes (below 20 nm) by con￾trolling the processing parameters. In general, very demanding processing conditions
are needed (high pressures and/or low saturation pressures) together with pressure
drop rates when using this strategy. In addition, polymer–blowing agent combina￾tions with high solubility and a proper molecular structure, glass transition tempera￾ture, and an adequate viscosity of the polymer are needed. A significant number of
models have been developed, and the physics behind this approach is today well un￾derstood when the process follows a nucleation and growth path.
The heterogeneous nucleation approach depends more on the combination of ma￾terials used, and there is plenty of room to explore this approach in more detail due
to the wide variety of polymers, nucleating agents, and blowing agents that can be
used. With the current knowledge it is clear that the sizes of the nucleants, its disper￾sion in the polymeric matrix, its superficial characteristics and interaction with the
physical blowing agent are critical parameters to control the process. With this ap￾proach a wide variety of densities and cell sizes have been reached, although it seems
to be difficult to reduce the cell size below 50 nm with this approach. One very inter￾esting aspect of this way of producing the foams is that less demanding processing
conditions are needed, so lower saturation pressures (a slow as 6 MPa for PMMA) and
higher saturation temperatures are required, which could facilitate the production at
industrial scale using this approach.
Although a wide variety of materials have been produced, there are still some limi￾tations to overcome. The combination of very low cell sizes and very low densities is
difficult to reach. It seems that some limitations related to the mechanical behavior of
the very thin cell walls produced during foaming and some geometrical contains are
the cause of these limitations. However, although it has been difficult to progress in re￾ducing densities, some recent developments indicate that there is room for further im￾provements. In addition, the production of materials with very large dimensions free of
defects is still challenging. However, if applications are found for these materials, it is
clear that current technology in high-pressure vessels and the previous experience in
76 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processthe production at industrial scale of conventional foam and microcellular foams by this
technology would allow producing the material using the gas dissolution technology. In
addition, alternatives processes such as bead foaming or injection molding could con￾tribute to this topic.
References
[1] G. Munters, J.G. Tandberg, 2,023,204 U.S. Patent, (1935).
[2] K.C. Frisch, Historical Developments of Polyurethanes, 60 Years of Polyurethanes, Kresta and Eldred,
(Eds.), Technomic, Lancaster, PA, (1998).
[3] F.L. Johnson, U.S. Patent 2,256,483, (1941).
[4] R.N. Kennedy, Handbook of Foamed Plastics, Lake Publishing, Libertyville, (1965).
[5] F. Stastny, R. Gaeth, U.S. Patent 2,681,321, (1954).
[6] J.D. Moore, Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) – A review, Composites 4 (1973) 118–130. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0010-4361(73)90585-5.
[7] R.G. Parrish, U.S. Patent 3,637,458, (1972).
[8] K. Hirosawa, S. Shimada, U.S. Patent 4,379,859, (1983).
[9] S.-T. Lee, C.B. Park, Foam Extrusion: Principles and Practice, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, EEUU, (2014).
[10] C.L. Marshall, US Patent 1.551.110, (1920).
[11] Zotefoams, (n.d.). https://www.zotefoams.com/product/mucell/.
[12] J. Martini, F.A. Waldman, N.P. Suh, Proceedings of SPE Antec 82, San Francisco, CA, USA, (1982), 674.
[13] V. Kumar, V. Nadella, Microcellular foams, in: D. Eaves (Ed.), Handbook of Microcellular Foam, Rapra
Technology Ltd, Shrewsbury, UK, (2004) 243–275.
[14] V. Kumar, H.G. Schirmer, Proceedings of SPE Antec 95, Boston, MA, USA, (1995), 2189.
[15] Microgreen polymers Inc. Available online, (n.d.).
[16] https://trexel.com/, (n.d.).
[17] K.T. Okamoto, Microcellular Processing, Hanser Verlag, Munich, (2003).
[18] J. Xu, Microcellular Injection Molding, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA, (2011).
[19] Y. Pang, Y. Cao, W. Zheng, C.B. Park, A comprehensive review of cell structure variation and general
rules for polymer microcellular foams, Chem. Eng. J. 430 (2022) 132662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.
2021.132662.
[20] T. Jiang, H. Zhang, X. Zeng, C. Zhang, W. Gong, L. He, The effect of injection process for
microcellular foaming on the cell morphology and surface quality of Polyamide 6, Mater. Res.
Express 8 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/abf8e3.
[21] Y. Ding, M.H. Hassan, O. Bakker, S. Hinduja, P. Bártolo, A review on microcellular injection
moulding, Materials 14 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14154209.
[22] J. Chai, G. Wang, J. Zhao, A. Zhang, Z. Shi, C. Wei, G. Zhao, Microcellular PLA/PMMA foam fabricated
by CO2foaming with outstanding shape-memory performance, J. CO2 Util. 49 (2021) 101553. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2021.101553.
[23] H. Guo, V. Kumar, Some thermodynamic and kinetic low-temperature properties of the PC-CO2
system and morphological characteristics of solid-state PC nanofoams produced with liquid CO2,
Polymer (Guildf). 56 (2015) 46–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.09.061.
[24] S.K. Yeh, Y.C. Liu, C.C. Chu, K.C. Chang, S.F. Wang, Mechanical properties of microcellular and
nanocellular thermoplastic polyurethane nanocomposite foams created using supercritical carbon
dioxide, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 56 (2017) 8499–8507. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.7b00942.
References 77[25] D. Miller, P. Chatchaisucha, V. Kumar, Microcellular and nanocellular solid-state polyetherimide
(PEI) foams using sub-critical carbon dioxide I Processing and structure, Polymer (Guildf). 50 (2009)
5576–5584. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2009.09.020.
[26] J. Bao, T. Liu, L. Zhao, D. Barth, G. Hu, Supercritical carbon dioxide induced foaming of highly
oriented isotactic polypropylene, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 50 (2011) 13387–13395.
[27] H. Guo, V. Kumar, Solid-state poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) nanofoams. Part I: Low￾temperature CO2 sorption, diffusion, and the depression in PMMA glass transition, Polymer
(Guildf). 57 (2015) 157–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.12.029.
[28] J. Pinto, J.A. Reglero-Ruiz, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Temperature influence and CO2 transport
in foaming processes of poly(methyl methacrylate)–block copolymer nanocellular and microcellular
foams, J. Supercrit. Fluids 94 (2014) 198–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2014.07.021.
[29] S. Costeux, S.P. Bunker, H.K. Jeon, Homogeneous nanocellular foams from styrenic-acrylic polymer
blends, J. Mater. Res. 28 (2013) 2351–2365. https://doi.org/10.1557/jmr.2013.100.
[30] W. Zhai, J. Yu, L. Wu, W. Ma, J. He, Heterogeneous nucleation uniformizing cell size distribution in
microcellular nanocomposites foams, Polymer (Guildf). 47 (2006) 7580–7589. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.polymer.2006.08.034.
[31] T. Otsuka, K. Taki, M. Ohshima, Nanocellular foams of PS/PMMA polymer blends, Macromol. Mater.
Eng. 293 (2008) 78–82. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.200700257.
[32] B.H. Yokoyama, L. Li, T. Nemoto, K. Sugiyama, Tunable nanocellular polymeric monoliths using
fluorinated block copolymer templates and supercritical carbon dioxide, Adv. Mater. 16 (2004)
1542–1546. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200400072.
[33] J. Li, Z. Du, H. Li, C. Zhang, Porous epoxy monolith prepared via chemically induced phase
separation, Polymer (Guildf). 50 (2009) 1526–1532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2009.01.049.
[34] J. Kiefer, J.G. Hilborn, J.L. Hedrick, Chemically induced phase separation: A new technique for the
synthesis of macroporous epoxy networks, Polymer (Guildf). 37 (1996) 5715–5725. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0032-3861(96)00436-3.
[35] Y.S. Nam, T.G. Park, Biodegradable polymeric microcellular foams by modified thermally induced
phase separation method, Biomaterials 20 (1999) 1783–1790 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0142-9612(99)
00073-3.
[36] R.H. Mehta, D.A. Madsen, D.S. Kalika, Microporous membranes based on poly(ether ether ketone)
via thermally-induced phase separation, J. Memb. Sci. 107 (1995) 93–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0376-7388(95)00106-M.
[37] L. Chenc, A. Dwan, C.C. Cryte, Membrane formation by isothermal precipitation in of membrane
morphology I. Description of membrane morphology, J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 33 (1995) 211–
222.
[38] M. Di Luccio, R. Nobrega, C.P. Borges, Microporous anisotropic phase inversion membranes from
bisphenol-A polycarbonate: Study of a ternary system, Polymer (Guildf). 41 (2000) 4309–4315.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-3861(99)00653-9.
[39] S. Walheim, R.S. Bradley, P.D. Jones, E. Routledge, Nanophase-separated polymer films as high￾performance antireflection coatings, Science 520(2009) (1979) 520–523. https://doi.org/10.1126/sci
ence.283.5401.520.
[40] J.H.G. Steinke, I.R. Dunkin, D.C. Sherrington, Molecularly imprinted anisotropic polymer monoliths,
Macromolecules 29 (1996) 407–415. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma9505033.
[41] O. Ramström, R.J. Ansell, Molecular imprinting technology: Challenges and prospects for the future,
Chirality 10 (1998) 195–209. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-636X(1998)10:3<195::AID-CHIR1>3.0.
CO;2-9.
[42] J. Wackerlig, P.A. Lieberzeit, Molecularly imprinted polymer nanoparticles in chemical sensing –
Synthesis, characterisation and application, Sens. Actuators B Chem. 207 (2015) 144–157. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.SNB.2014.09.094.
78 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production process[43] S.H. Park, Y. Xia, Fabrication of three-dimensional macroporous membranes with assemblies of
microspheres as templates, Chem. Mater. 10 (1998) 1745–1747. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm9801993.
[44] B. Gates, Y. Yin, Y. Xia, Fabrication and characterization of porous membranes with highly ordered
three-dimensional periodic structures, Chem. Mater. 11 (1999) 2827–2836. https://doi.org/10.1021/
cm990195d.
[45] S.A. Johnson, P.J. Ollivier, T.E. Mallouk, Ordered mesoporous polymers of tunable pore size from
colloidal silica templates.pdf, Science 963 (2011) 10–13.
[46] X.X. Zhu, K. Banana, R. Yen, Pore size control in cross-linked polymer resins by reverse micellar
imprinting, Macromolecules 30 (1997) 3031–3035. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma961580g.
[47] F.M. Menger, T. Tsuno, G.S. Hammond, Cross-linked polystyrene incorporating water pools, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 112 (1990) 1263–1264. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00159a066.
[48] C. Du Fresne Von Hohenesche, D.F. Schmidt, V. Schädler, Nanoporous melamine – Formaldehyde
gels by microemulsion templating, Chem. Mater. 20 (2008) 6124–6129. https://doi.org/10.1021/
cm8015319.
[49] J. Liu, W.K. Teo, C.H. Chew, L.M. Gan, Nanofiltration membranes prepared by direct microemulsion
copolymerization using poly(ethylene oxide) macromonomer as a polymerizable surfactant, J Appl.
Polym. Sci. 77 (2000) 2785–2794. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-4628(20000919)77:12<2785::aid￾app270>3.0.CO;2-9.
[50] W. Volksen, D.Y. Yoon, C.J. Hawker, M. Trollsås, J.L. Hedrick, R.D. Miller, K.R. Carter, Templating
nanoporosity in thin-film dielectric insulators, Adv. Mater. 10 (2002) 1049–1053. https://doi.org/10.
1002/(sici)1521-4095(199809)10:13<1049::aid-adma1049>3.3.co;2-6.
[51] J.L. Hedrick, T.P. Russell, J. Labadie, M. Lucas, S. Swanson, High temperature nanofoams derived
from rigid and semi-rigid polyimides, Polymer (Guildf). 36 (1995) 2685–2697. https://doi.org/10.
1016/0032-3861(95)93645-3.
[52] A.S. Zalusky, R. Olayo-Valles, J.H. Wolf, M.A. Hillmyer, Ordered nanoporous polymers from
polystyrene-polylactide block copolymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124 (2002) 12761–12773. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ja0278584.
[53] V. Kumar, N.P. Suh, A process for making microcellular thermoplastic parts, Polym. Eng. Sci. 30
(1990) 1323–1329. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.760302010.
[54] L.J.M. Jacobs, M.F. Kemmere, J.T.F. Keurentjes, Sustainable polymer foaming using high pressure
carbon dioxide: A review on fundamentals, processes and applications, Green Chem. 10 (2008) 731.
https://doi.org/10.1039/b801895b.
[55] Y. Sato, K. Fujiwara, T. Takikawa, S.S. Takishima, H. Masuoka, Solubilities and diffusion coefficients
of carbon dioxide and nitrogen in polypropylene, high-density polyethylene, and polystyrene under
high pressures and temperatures, Fluid Phase Equilib. 162 (1999) 261–276. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-3812(99)00217-4.
[56] S. Doroudiani, C.E. Chaffey, M.T. Kortschot, Sorption and diffusion of carbon dioxide in wood-fiber/
polystyrene composites, J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 40 (2002) 723–735. https://doi.org/10.1002/
polb.10129.
[57] M.M.R. Williams, The mathematics of diffusion, Ann. Nucl. Energy 4 (1977) 205–206. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0306-4549(77)90072-X.
[58] S.K. Goel, E.J. Beckman, Generation of microcellular polymeric foams using supercritical carbon
dioxide. I: Effect of Pressure and Temperature on nucleation, Polym. Eng. Sci. 34 (1994), 1137–1147.
[59] B. Krause, R. Mettinkhof, N.F.A. Van Der Vegt, M. Wessling, Microcellular foaming of amorphous
high-Tg polymers using carbon dioxide, Macromolecules 34 (2001) 874–884. https://doi.org/10.
1021/ma001291z.
[60] Y. Kim, C.B. Park, P. Chen, R.B. Thompson, Origins of the failure of classical nucleation theory for
nanocellular polymer foams, Soft Matter. 7 (2011) 7351–7358. https://doi.org/10.1039/c1sm05575e.
References 79[61] J.R. Street, The rheology of phase growth in elastic liquids, J. Rheol. (N Y N Y). 12 (1968) 103. https://
doi.org/10.1122/1.549101.
[62] J.R. Street, A.L. Fricke, L.P. Reiss, A.L. Fricke, L.P. Reiss, Dynamics of phase growth in viscous, non￾newtonian liquids: Initial stages of growth, Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam. 10 (1971) 54–64. https://doi.
org/10.1021/i160037a011.
[63] M. Amon, C.D. Denson, A study of the dynamics of foam growth: Analysis of the growth of closely
spaced spherical bubbles, Polym. Eng. Sci. 24 (1984) 1026–1034. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.
760241306.
[64] D.C. Venerus, N. Yala, B. Bernstein, Analysis of diffusion-induced bubble growth in viscoelastic
liquids, J. Nonnewton Fluid Mech. 75 (1998) 55–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-0257(97)00076-1.
[65] A. Arefmanesh, S.G. Advani, E.E. Michaelides, An accurate numerical solution for mass diffusion￾induced bubble growth in viscous liquids containing limited dissolved gas, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf.
35 (1992) 1711–1722. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(92)90141-E.
[66] M.A. Shafi, K. Joshi, R.W. Flumerfelt, Bubble size distributions in freely expanded polymer foams,
Chem. Eng. Sci. 52 (1997) 635–644. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2509(96)00433-2.
[67] M.A. Shafi, J.G. Lee, R.W. Flumerfelt, Prediction of cellular structure in free expansion polymer foam
processing, Polym. Eng. Sci. 36 (1996) 1950–1959. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.10591.
[68] J.J. Feng, C.A. Bertelo, Prediction of bubble growth and size distribution in polymer foaming based
on a new heterogeneous nucleation model, J. Rheol. (N Y N Y). 48 (2004) 439. https://doi.org/10.
1122/1.1645518.
[69] S.N. Leung, C.B. Park, H. Li, Numerical simulation of polymeric foaming processes using modified
nucleation theory, Plast Rubber Compos. 35 (2006) 93–100. https://doi.org/10.1179/
174328906X103079.
[70] K. Taki, Experimental and numerical studies on the effects of pressure release rate on number
density of bubbles and bubble growth in a polymeric foaming process, Chem. Eng. Sci. 63 (2008)
3643–3653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2008.04.037.
[71] D. Mao, J.R. Edwards, A. Harvey, Prediction of foam growth and its nucleation in free and limited
expansion, Chem. Eng. Sci. 61 (2006) 1836–1845. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2005.07.026.
[72] I. Khan, D. Adrian, S. Costeux, A model to predict the cell density and cell size distribution in nano￾cellular foams, Chem. Eng. Sci. 138 (2015) 634–645. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2015.08.029.
[73] M. Blander, J.L. Katz, Bubble nucleation in liquids, AIChE J. 21 (1975) 833–848. https://doi.org/10.
1002/aic.690210502.
[74] J. Martín-de León, Understanding the production process of nanocellular polymers based on pmma
driven by a homogeneous nucleation, University of Valladolid, (2019).
[75] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-De León, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, Production and characterization of
nanocellular polyphenylsulfone foams, Mater. Lett. 178 (2016) 155–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mat
let.2016.05.002.
[76] J. Martín-de Leon, V. Bernardo, E. Laguna-gutiérrez, M.Á. Rodríguez-pérez, Influence of the viscosity
of PMMA on the cellular structure of nanocellular materials, Polym. Int. 69 (2020) 72–83.
[77] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Key production parameters to obtain
transparent nanocellular PMMA, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 302 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.
201700343.
[78] D. Miller, V. Kumar, Microcellular and nanocellular solid-state polyetherimide (PEI) foams using sub￾critical carbon dioxide II. Tensile and impact properties, Polymer (Guildf). 52 (2011) 2910–2919.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2011.04.049.
[79] B. Notario, J. Pinto, E. Solorzano, J.A. De Saja, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Experimental
validation of the Knudsen effect in nanocellular polymeric foams, Polymer (United Kingdom) 56
(2015) 57–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.10.006.
80 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production process[80] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Low density nanocellular polymers based on
PMMA produced by gas dissolution foaming: Fabrication and cellular structure characterization,
Polymers (Basel) 8 (2016) 265. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym8070265.
[81] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Key production parameters to obtain
transparent nanocellular PMMA, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 302 (2017) 3–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/
mame.201700343.
[82] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, P. Cimavilla-Román, S. Pérez-Tamarit, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez,
Overcoming the challenge of producing large and flat nanocellular polymers: A study with PMMA,
Adv. Eng. Mater. 21 (2019) 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.201900148.
[83] J. Martín-de León, J.L. Pura, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Transparent nanocellular PMMA:
Characterization and modeling of the optical properties, Polymer (Guildf). 170 (2019) 16–23. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2019.03.010.
[84] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, J. Pinto, U. Schade, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, On the interaction of
infrared radiation and nanocellular polymers: First experimental determination of the extinction
coefficient, Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 600 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.
2020.124937.
[85] I. Sánchez-Calderón, B. Merillas, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez‐Pérez, Methodology for measuring
the thermal conductivity of insulating samples with small dimensions by heat flow meter technique,
J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 147 (2022) 12523–12533.
[86] J.S. Colton, N.P. Suh, The nucleation of microcellular thermoplastic foam with additives: Part I:
Theoretical considerations, Polym. Eng. Sci. 27 (1987) 485–492.
[87] L. Chen, D. Rende, L.S. Schadler, R. Ozisik, Polymer nanocomposite foams, J. Mater. Chem. A Mater.
1 (2013) 3837–3850. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2ta00086e.
[88] J.S. Colton, N.P. Suh, Nucleation of microcellular foam: Theory and practice, Polym. Eng. Sci. 27
(1987) 500–503. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.760270704.
[89] N.H. Fletcher, Size effect in heterogeneous nucleation, J. Chem. Phys. 29 (1958) 572–576. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.1744540.
[90] P. Spitael, C.W. Macosko, R.B. McClurg, Block copolymer micelles for nucleation of microcellular
thermoplastic foams, Macromolecules 37 (2004) 6874–6882. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma049712q.
[91] S. Costeux, L. Zhu, Low density thermoplastic nanofoams nucleated by nanoparticles, Polymer
(Guildf). 54 (2013) 2785–2795. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2013.03.052.
[92] V. Mittal, Polymer Nanocomposite Foams, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, EEUU, (2014).
[93] J. Fu, H.E. Naguib, Effect of nanoclay on the mechanical properties of PMMA/clay nanocomposite
foams, J. Cell. Plast. 42 (2006) 325–342. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021955X06063517.
[94] G. Gedler, M. Antunes, T. Borca-Tasciuc, J.I. Velasco, R. Ozisik, Effects of graphene concentration,
relative density and cellular morphology on the thermal conductivity of polycarbonate-graphene
nanocomposite foams, Eur. Polym. J. 75 (2016) 190–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2015.12.
018.
[95] H. Varela-Rizo, M. Weisenberger, D.R. Bortz, I. Martin-Gullon, Fracture toughness and creep
performance of PMMA composites containing micro and nanosized carbon filaments, Compos. Sci.
Technol. 70 (2010) 1189–1195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2010.03.005.
[96] Y. Yang, M.C. Gupta, K.L. Dudley, R.W. Lawrence, Conductive carbon nanofiber-polymer foam
structures, Adv. Mater. 17 (2005) 1999–2003. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200500615.
[97] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de León, E. Laguna-Gutiérrez, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, PMMA-sepiolite
nanocomposites as new promising materials for the production of nanocellular polymers, Eur.
Polym. J. 96 (2017) 10–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EURPOLYMJ.2017.09.002.
[98] K. Goren, L. Chen, L.S. Schadler, R. Ozisik, Influence of nanoparticle surface chemistry and size on
supercritical carbon dioxide processed nanocomposite foam morphology, J. Supercrit. Fluids 51
(2010) 420–427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2009.09.007.
References 81[99] M.D. Whitmore, T.W. Smith, Swelling of copolymer micelles by added homopolymer,
Macromolecules 27 (1994) 4673–4683. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma00095a006.
[100] S. Wu, Formation of dispersed phase in incompatible polymer interfacial and rheological effects,
Polym. Eng. Sci. 27 (1987) 335–343. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.760270506.
[101] Y.H. Lee, C.B. Park, K.H. Wang, HDPE-clay nanocomposite foams blown with supercritical CO2, J. Cell
Plast. 41 (2005) 487–502. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021955X05056964.
[102] A. Ameli, M. Nofar, C.B. Park, P. Pötschke, G. Rizvi, Polypropylene/carbon nanotube nano/
microcellular structures with high dielectric permittivity, low dielectric loss, and low percolation
threshold, Carbon N Y. 71 (2014) 206–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CARBON.2014.01.031.
[103] Y. Ito, M. Yamashita, M. Okamoto, Foam processing and cellular structure of polycarbonate-based
nanocomposites, (2006), 773–783. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.200600075.
[104] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de leon, J. Pinto, T. Catelani, A. Athanassiou, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Low￾density PMMA/MAM nanocellular polymers using low MAM contents: Production and
characterization, Polymer (Guildf). 163 (2019) 115–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.POLYMER.2018.12.
057.
[105] S. Liu, B. Zoetebier, L. Hulsman, Y. Zhang, J. Duvigneau, G.J. Vancso, Nanocellular polymer foams
nucleated by core-shell nanoparticles, Polymer (Guildf). 104 (2016) 22–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2016.09.016.
[106] Y. Fujimoto, S.S. Ray, M. Okamoto, A. Ogami, K. Yamada, K. Ueda, Well-controlled biodegradable
nanocomposite foams : From microcellular to nanocellular, Macromol. Rapid Commun. 24 (2003)
457–461.
[107] G. Wang, J. Zhao, L.H. Mark, G. Wang, K. Yu, C. Wang, C.B. Park, G. Zhao, Ultra-tough and super
thermal-insulation nanocellular PMMA/TPU, Chem. Eng. J. 325 (2017) 632–646. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cej.2017.05.116.
[108] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Highly anisotropic nanocellular polymers
based on tri-phasic blends of PMMA with two nucleating agents, Mater. Lett. 255 (2019) 126587.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2019.126587.
[109] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de León, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Production of PMMA-based nanocellular
polymers using low demanding saturation conditions, Mater. Lett. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matlet.2019.126551.
[110] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, I. Sanchez-Calderon, E. Laguna-Gutierrez, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez,
Nanocellular polymers with a gradient cellular structure based on poly(methyl methacrylate)/
thermoplastic polyurethane blends produced by gas dissolution foaming, Macromol. Mater. Eng.
1900428 (2019) 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201900428.
[111] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Two-stage depressurization in gas dissolution
foaming: The production of nanocellular materials free of defects, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 305
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.202000283.
[112] J. Martín-de león, F. Van Loock, V. Bernardo, N.A. Fleck, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, The influence of cell
size on the mechanical properties of nanocellular PMMA, Polymer (Guildf). 181 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymer.2019.121805.
[113] H. Guo, A. Nicolae, V. Kumar, Solid-state poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) nanofoams. Part II:
Low-temperature solid-state process space using CO2 and the resulting morphologies, Polymer
(Guildf). 70 (2015) 231–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2015.06.031.
[114] H. Guo, A. Nicolae, V. Kumar, Fabrication of high temperature polyphenylsulfone nanofoams using
high pressure liquid carbon dioxide, Cell. Polym. 35 (2016) 119–142. https://doi.org/10.1177/
026248931603500302.
[115] H. Guo, A. Nicolae, V. Kumar, Solid-state microcellular and nanocellular polysulfone foams, J. Polym.
Sci. B Polym. Phys. 53 (2015) 975–985. https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.23719.
82 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production process[116] S. Costeux, I. Khan, S.P. Bunker, H.K. Jeon, Experimental study and modeling of nanofoams
formation from single phase acrylic copolymers, J. Cell Plast. 51 (2014) 197–221. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0021955X14531972.
[117] Y.P. Handa, Z. Zhan, B. Wong, Solubility, diffusivity, and retrograde vitrification in PMMA-CO2, and
development of sub-micron cellular structures, Cell. Polym. 20 (2001) 1–16. http://cat.inist.fr/?aMo
dele=afficheN&cpsidt=939682 (accessed July 10, 2015).
[118] Y. Ema, M. Ikeya, M. Okamoto, Foam processing and cellular structure of polylactide-based
nanocomposites, Polymer (Guildf). 47 (2006) 5350–5359. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.POLYMER.2006.
05.050.
[119] L. Urbanczyk, C. Calberg, C. Detrembleur, C. Jérôme, M. Alexandre, Batch foaming of SAN/clay
nanocomposites with scCO2: A very tunable way of controlling the cellular morphology, Polymer
(Guildf). 51 (2010) 3520–3531. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.POLYMER.2010.05.037.
[120] J. Pinto, D. Morselli, V. Bernardo, B. Notario, D. Fragouli, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, A. Athanassiou,
Nanoporous PMMA foams with templated pore size obtained by localized in situ synthesis of
nanoparticles and CO2 foaming, Polymer (Guildf). 124 (2017) 176–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poly
mer.2017.07.067.
[121] S. Liu, B. Zoetebier, L. Hulsman, Y. Zhang, J. Duvigneau, G.J. Vancso, Nanocellular polymer foams
nucleated by core-shell nanoparticles, Polymer (Guildf). 104 (2016) 22–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
POLYMER.2016.09.016.
[122] J. Yang, L. Huang, Y. Zhang, F. Chen, P. Fan, M. Zhong, S. Yeh, A new promising nucleating agent for
polymer foaming: Applications of ordered mesoporous silica particles in polymethyl methacrylate
supercritical carbon dioxide microcellular foaming, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 52 (2013) 14169–14178.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie4018447.
[123] H. Yu, Y. Lei, X. Yu, X. Wang, T. Liu, S. Luo, Solid-state polyetherimide (PEI) nanofoams: The influence
of the compatibility of nucleation agent on the cellular morphology, J. Polym. Res. 23 (2016) 121.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10965-016-1009-2.
[124] V. Realinho, M. Antunes, A.B. Martínez, J.I. Velasco, Influence of nanoclay concentration on the CO 2
diffusion and physical properties of PMMA montmorillonite microcellular foams, Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 50 (2011) 13819–13824. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie201532h.
[125] L. Monnereau, L. Urbanczyk, J.-M. Thomassin, M. Alexandre, C. Jérôme, I. Huynen, C. Bailly, C.
Detrembleur, Supercritical CO2 and polycarbonate based nanocomposites: A critical issue for
foaming, Polymer (Guildf). 55 (2014) 2422–2431. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.POLYMER.2014.03.035.
[126] J. Pinto, M. Dumon, M. Pedros, J. Reglero, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanocellular CO2 foaming of
PMMA assisted by block copolymer nanostructuration, Chem. Eng. J. 243 (2014) 428–435. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.01.021.
[127] J. Pinto, J.A. Reglero-ruiz, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Temperature influence and CO2
transport in foaming processes of poly (methyl methacrylate)–block copolymer nanocellular and
microcellular foams, J Supercrit Fluids. 94 (2014) 198–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2014.07.
02.
[128] M. Dumon, J.A. Reglero-Ruiz, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodriguez-Pérez, M. Tallon, M. Pedros, E. Cloutet, P. Viot,
Block copolymer-assisted microcellular supercritical CO2 foaming of polymers and blends, Cell.
Polym. 31 (2012) 207–222.
[129] C. Forest, P. Chaumont, P. Cassagnau, B. Swoboda, P. Sonntag, CO2 nano-foaming of
nanostructured PMMA, Polymer (Guildf). 58 (2015) 76–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.12.
048.
[130] C. Forest, P. Chaumont, P. Cassagnau, B. Swoboda, P. Sonntag, Nanofoaming of PMMA using a
batch CO2 process: Influence of the PMMA viscoelastic behaviour, Polymer (Guildf). 77 (2015) 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2015.09.011.
References 83[131] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, J. Pinto, T. Catelani, A. Athanassiou, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Low￾density PMMA/MAM nanocellular polymers using low MAM contents: Production and
characterization, Polymer (Guildf). 163 (2019) 115–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.12.057.
[132] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, E. Laguna-Gutierrez, T. Catelani, J. Pinto, A. Athanassiou, M.A.
Rodriguez-Perez, Understanding the role of MAM molecular weight in the production of PMMA/
MAM nanocellular polymers, Polymer (Guildf). 153 (2018) 262–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poly
mer.2018.08.022.
[133] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, M.A. Rodriguez‐Perez, Nanocellular polymers, in: S.T. Lee (Ed.).,
Polymeric Foams: Innovation in Technologies and Environmentally Friendly Materials, CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, (2022) 275.
[134] V. Kumar Thakur, M. Kumari Thakur, M.R. Kessler, Handbook of Composites from Renewable
Materials, Scrivener Publishing LLC, Beverly, MA, EEUU, (1985).
[135] J. Pinto, D. Morselli, V. Bernardo, B. Notario, D. Fragouli, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, A. Athanassiou,
Nanoporous PMMA foams with templated pore size obtained by localized in situ synthesis of
nanoparticles and CO 2 foaming, Polymer (Guildf). 124 (2017) 176–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poly
mer.2017.07.067.
[136] J. Pinto, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanoporous polymer foams from nanostructured
polymer blends: Preparation, characterization, and properties, in: P.M. Visakh, G. Markovic, D.
Pasquini (Eds.), Recent Developments in Polymer Macro, Micro and Nano Blends, Woodhead
Publishing in Materials, Sawston, Cambridge, (2016) 237–288.
[137] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M. Rodríguez-Pérez, Nanocellular polymers: The challenge of
creating cells in the nanoscale, Materials 12 (2019) 797. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma12050797.
[138] F. Van Loock, V. Bernardo, M. Angel, R. Pérez, N.A. Fleck, The mechanics of solid-state nanofoaming
Subject Areas : Author for correspondence , Proc. Royal Soc. A 475 (2019) 20190039.
[139] R. Oberhoffer, A. Müller, Production of porous materials by the expansion of polymer gels, 2 (2014)
WO2015071463A2.
[140] J. Martín-De León, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodriguez-Perez, Cyclic gas dissolution foaming as an
approach for simultaneously reducing cell size and relative density in nanocellular PMMA, Polymers
(Basel) 13 (2021) 2383. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13142383 (accessed July 20, 2021).
[141] I. Sánchez-Calderón, V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de-león, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Thermal conductivity of
low-density micro-and nanocellular poly(methyl-methacrylate) (PMMA): Experimental and
modeling, Mater. Des. 221 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.110938 (accessed
September 2022).
84 Chapter 3 From the microscale to the nanoscale in cellular materials production processChapter 4
Optical properties
4.1 Introduction
The optical properties of cellular polymers produced by foaming methods have gone un￾noticed for many years for not having any special interest. Cellular polymers are simply
opaque materials due to the strong scattering of light in the cells of the material. That
was actually true until 2004 when Yokoyama et al. published the first clues of a transpar￾ent nanocellular polymeric film. They produced thin films around 100 µm in thickness
with 10–30 nm of cell size by using polystyrene-block-poly (perfluorooctyl ethyl methacry￾late) (PS-PFMA) [1], and they claimed their transparency but without any experimental
measure proving transparency. It was not until 2017 that Martín-de León et al. published
the first experimental evidence of a thick (thickness higher than 0.5 mm) semitransparent
nanocellular polymer based on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) (Figure 4.1) [2].
In this paper, it was proved that when the cell size reduces below 50 nm the nanocel￾lular material preserves some of the transparency of the solid precursor. As discussed
before, this possibility was previously hypothesized from a theoretical perspective,
and some experimental results of light transmission and refractive index supported
this hypothesis [1, 3]. Yet, it was not until 2017 that it was proved that transparent
nanocellular polymers with significant sizes could be a real possibility.
Adding this feature to a foam’s properties can be revolutionary for many applica￾tions, in particular for the thermal insulation market. This new characteristic would
allow the development of low-weight, insulating, transparent material perfect for the
design of insulating windows. This property is also interesting for electronic devices,
the medical sector, or applications not still imagined.
Obtaining transparency in nanocellular materials requires a very specific structure
coming from a complex tuning of the production process of nanocellular polymers.
Figure 4.1: Transparency of samples produced at four different saturation pressures, with cell sizes of
225 nm, 39 nm, 24 nm, and 14 nm and the same relative density. From reference [2].
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-004In this chapter transparency in nanocellular polymers will be studied from a the￾oretical and an experimental point of view, showing the last advances within this
topic, as well as a comparison with other transparent nanoporous materials and cur￾rent limitations and challenges.
4.2 Light interaction with porous structures
The transmittance of light through a material ð Þ T is simply defined by the amount of
light that passes through the material ð ÞI in comparison with the initial intensity of
the source ð Þ I0 (eq. (4.1)).
T = I
I0
(4:1)
The light not transmitted across the materials is because it has been either absorbed
or scattered. Absorption of light consists of the capture of electromagnetic radiation
by the matter, converting the energy carried by the photons into internal energy [4],
while scattering is the process where the light is deviated from its initial trajectory
due to an interaction with an object similar in size to its wavelength [5]. Therefore, in
a porous media, the light can be transmitted, absorbed either by the matrix or the
pores, or scattered by the pores acting as scattering centers (Figure 4.2). In a conven￾tional cellular polymer, the size of the cells causes a great scattering of visible light in
all directions. As a result, conventional cellular polymers are opaque (and usually
white when the initial solid is transparent and there are no colored additives). How￾ever, in nanocellular polymers, these mechanisms change, as it will be explained in
the coming paragraphs.
Figure 4.2: Scheme of transmission, absorption, and scattering of light in a porous structure.
86 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesBy assuming a uniform attenuation through the media, the transmission of light
can be described through the Beer–Lambert law (eq. (4.2)):
T = e−μl (4:2)
where μ is the extinction coefficient that can be expressed as the sum of the absorp￾tion coefficient μabs ð Þ and the scattering coefficient ðμscatÞ (eq. (4.3)) [6].
μ = μabs + μscat (4:3)
In the particular case of cellular polymers, transmittance will be determined by the
absorption of light by the polymer phase and the light scattered by the gaseous phase.
For transparent amorphous polymers such as polycarbonate or polymethylmethacry￾late, the absorption coefficient can be considered negligible [7]. Thus, in this case, the
extinction coefficient will be only a function of the scattering of light by the pores of
the cellular material.
In order to understand the scattering of light by the pores, the simpler case can
be first studied, which means the scattering of light by a single spherical bubble
(same that the scattering by a single particle of size equal to the cell size and refrac￾tive index equal to that of air). The scattering mechanisms depend on the relationship
between the wavelength and the bubble size, which can be characterized by the di￾mensionless parameter x (eq. (4.4)).
x = 2πr
λ (4:4)
where r is the bubble radius and λ is the relative scattering wavelength, defined as
λ = λ0=m0, being λ0 the incident wavelength and m0 the refractive index of the sur￾rounding medium. For a polymer with a refractive index similar to that of air, it can
be assumed that λ = λ0. Visible light wavelength ranges from 380 to 780 nm, from pur￾ple to red.
When dealing with conventional or microcellular polymers with cell sizes higher
than a few microns or even in the range of the micron x is higher than one and Mie
scattering takes place. However, when cell sizes are very small (tens of nanometers)
x << 1, the governing scattering mechanism is the one known as Rayleigh scattering [5, 8].
The amount of scattered light as well as the direction will change as a function of the
scattering mechanism. This can be qualitatively observed through the cross-section of
light for different particle sizes, that is, the probability of light being scattered in a partic￾ular direction. Figure 4.3a schemes the scattering direction marked with the arrows as
well as the amount of scattered light, represented by the colored regions. When xe1 and
the scattering remains in Mie regime, most of the light is scattered in the forward direc￾tion with different angles, meaning that the light is reemitted forward after being scat￾tered by the particle (this radiation will trespass the sample contributing to the total
4.2 Light interaction with porous structures 87Figure 4.3: (a) Scheme of Rayleigh and Mie scattering. (b) Far-field diagram of a unique pore surrounded by PMMA illuminated with light with a wavelength of
532 nm. From reference [9].
88 Chapter 4 Optical propertiestransmittance, but conceptually is scattered light). We can say that there is a strong scat￾tering of light when this mechanism takes place.
When the bubble becomes smaller and the scattering mechanism changes into
Rayleigh, the light scatters equally in all directions and additionally, the amount of
total scattered light is much smaller (Figure 4.3b). According to the optical theorem,
the total amount of scattered light is proportional to the light scattered in the forward
direction [10]. This leads to affirming that with Mie scattering a higher proportion of
light will be scattered with an inhomogeneous distribution, situation that evolves into
a more homogeneous and much smaller scattering when the particle is small, this
transition can be observed in Figure 4.3b where the far field diagram has been calcu￾lated for a single spherical bubble of different diameter, d, between 20 and 200 nm. It
can be observed that reducing the bubble size clearly reduces the scattered light.
Both scattering mechanisms can be defined through their laws, when x ≥ 1 the
scattered intensity is described through Mie’s law (eq. (4.5)).
Ið Þλ = Ioð Þλ i1 + i ð Þ2
2k2r2 (4:5)
where I0 is the incident intensity, r is the distance to the center of the spherical parti￾cle, k = 2π=λ, and i1 and i2 are two functions depending on the radius of the bubble
ð Þa , λ, the refractive index m, and the scattering angle θ, referring to the intensity of
light vibrating in the perpendicular and parallel direction regarding the propagation
direction of the incident and scattered light [11]. Mie scattering is not strongly wave￾length-dependent [5, 12], and as a result, opaque cellular polymers are white (all col￾ors are scattered to the same extent).
On the other hand, Rayleigh’s law of scattering is much simpler, being the inten￾sity of the scattered light defined by eq. (4.6):
Ið Þλ = I0ð Þλ 8π4
r2λ4 α2 1 + cos2
θ   (4:6)
with α the polarizability for spherical particles is given by eq. (4.7).
α = a3 m2 − 1
m2 + 2 (4:7)
As it can be seen from the previous equation, the scattered light strongly raises with the
bubble size a6   and also presents a strong dependence on the wavelength 1=λ4  , mean￾ing that the short wavelengths (bluish colors in the case of the visible spectrum) will be
much more scattered than the larger ones (reddish colors for the visible spectrum).
When having not a single bubble but a distribution of them within a volume it is
necessary to consider the interaction of the different cross sections. Thus, the final
scattering can be calculated by integrating over the distribution of the particle sizes
[11]. When having absorption or Mie scattering this interaction can deviate the behav￾ior from the ideal described one. However, for systems free of absorption and in
4.2 Light interaction with porous structures 89which Rayleigh scattering is the only mechanisms the cross-section of each particle
can be considered not to interact with each other maintaining the previously de￾scribed dependences [6].
Thus, for a set of particles with a size smaller than a tenth of the wavelength the
transmittance can be described through the Rayleigh eq. (4.8) as follows [5, 13]:
I
I0
= Aexp − B
λ4
  (4:7)
where A and B are two constants being A < 1.
According to the previous theories, for the particular case of a porous media not
presenting absorption, transparency will only be possible for bubble sizes smaller than
a tenth of the visible wavelength when the amount of scattering becomes negligible.
Considering the mean value of the visible spectrum as the green color (532 nm), trans￾parency can only take place for bubbles approximately smaller than 50 nm, depending
at the same time on the cellular material characteristics such as relative density, cell
size distribution, or cell nucleation density, on the thickness and the wavelength attend￾ing to Rayleigh equation. In addition, taking into account eq. (4.7), a blueish color can
be expected in these materials.
4.3 Transparent nanocellular polymers
As previously said the first bulk transparent nanocellular polymer was reported in
2017 by Martín-de León et al. The paper proved that PMMA can present some trans￾parency when the cell size reduces below 39 nm. Since this moment the production
process as well as the characterization of experimental and theoretical transmittance
has been carefully analyzed, mainly by the same authors.
4.3.1 Production of transparent nanocellular polymers
As commented in Chapter 3, the size of the cells is determined by the number of nucle￾ation points: the higher the nucleation, the smallest the cell size. Considering eq. (2.13)
(Chapter 2), achieving cell sizes of 50 nm means nucleation densities around 1016 nuclei/
cm3
. In the case of the heterogeneous nucleation approach, as discussed in Chapter 3,
achieving these cell sizes would require nucleants much smaller than this size, and in
addition, the nucleants must not interact with light to allow transparency. For this rea￾son, and up to now, the research about transparent nanocellular polymers is focused
on the use of the homogeneous nucleation strategy to achieve the required structures.
For a homogeneous polymer, the number of nucleation points will be strongly deter￾mined by the solubility of gas being maximum for maximum solubilities.
90 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesSolubility can be maximized by maximizing the saturation pressure and/or mini￾mizing the saturation temperature as discussed in Chapter 3. In the literature, both
strategies have been followed to produce transparent nanocellular polymers. Apart
from PMMA, only polycarbonate (PC) and polystyrene-block-poly (perfluorooctyl ethyl
methacrylate) (PS-PFMA) have been reported by Guo [14] and Yokoyama respectively
[1] to present some light transmittance for some wavelengths in the visible region.
The authors claim a translucent nature of the produced materials; however, transpar￾ency is not proven or experimentally reported.
The reported PC (Figure 4.4) was produced through gas dissolution foaming at 5
MPa and −30 °C of saturation conditions during a saturation time of 72 h for 0.8 mm
of thickness (28 h for 0.5 mm of thickness), and 70 °C and 10 min for the foaming step.
The saturation led to a solubility of 20.4% allowing to produce a nanocellular PC with
28 nm of cell size (Figure 4.4) presenting a transmittance of around 20% for 650 nm of
wavelength (measured through a UV-Vis spectrometer).
On the other hand, transparent nanocellular PMMA has been reported in several
works since 2017, produced through two different routes. The first one is by using 6,
10, and 20 MPa of saturation pressures combined with −32 °C of saturation tempera￾ture. After 15 days of saturation time for a thickness of 4 mm (7 h of saturation time
(for the maximum pressure), for 0.5 mm), samples present a solubility of 39%, 41%,
and 48% for each pressure. Foaming parameters were selected to be 40 °C and 2 min.
The three different conditions allow obtaining transparencies of 50%, 54%, and 66%
for a wavelength of 532 nm (the middle of the visible spectrum) (Figure 4.4b) and a
thickness of 0.5 mm. It is worth noticing that the materials were produced from thick
samples that were, after the gas dissolution process, post-processing, by cutting them
into thin films from 0.05 to 1 mm in thickness [15].
Transparent nanocellular PMMA was later reported, produced at completely dif￾ferent conditions. 50 and 40 MPa of pressure were combined with 0 °C and after￾ward, samples were foamed at 25 °C for 1 min (the most promising conditions, 40
and 60 °C were also tested). PMMA of 0.5 mm was saturated for 2.5 h to obtain 42%
and 46% of absorbed gas for the two different pressures. Samples 0.5 mm in thick￾Figure 4.4: Nanocellular PC thin film (0.8 mm)
with an average cell size of 28 nm, from reference
[14].
4.3 Transparent nanocellular polymers 91ness present, as produced (without post-processing), with transparency as high as
61% for 50 MPa of psat (Figure 4.5).
Samples with almost the same transmittance as in the previous research are ob￾tained with a reduction in the production time of 63% and without the need for post￾Figure 4.5: (a) Example of the transparency of a sample saturated at 50 MPa and 0 °C, foamed at 40 °C
for 1 min, with a thickness of 0.65 mm as produced, compared with a 225 nm of cell size sample. (b)
Higher transmittance obtained for each saturation parameter for samples 0.5 mm in thickness and
532 nm of incident wavelength. Purple samples are post-processed, and blue samples are as produced.
Adapted from reference [16].
92 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesprocessing, thanks to the control of the foaming step as it is explained in the follow￾ing section.
It can be concluded that to produce cell sizes below 50 nm it is necessary to tres￾pass a certain solubility that is different for each gas-polymer system. For PMMA this
critical solubility seems to be around 40% while for polycarbonate this value is much
lower, around 20%.
In order to understand how to tailor transparency all the factors affecting should
be understood and controlled through the production process. The following section es￾tablishes a relationship between production process-cellular structure-transparency.
4.3.2 Factors affecting transmittance
Transmittance is affected by a lot of parameters. In this section, the influence of the
cellular, structure, thickness, and wavelength are analyzed.
Cellular structure
As previously explained, in Chapter 3 a solid skin appears in the external layers of
nanocellular polymers produced by the gas dissolution foaming technique. In addi￾tion, and due to a non-homogeneous concentration of the gas phase when foaming a
transition region can also appear as Figure 4.6 shows. Since the moment of depressur￾ization, apart from nucleation, gas starts diffusing out the cellular material creating a
gas concentration profile in the sample thickness (Figure 4.6a), with the maximum
amount of gas, corresponding to the solubility at the used saturation conditions, that
reduces as going near the material surfaces. This leads to a gradient cellular structure
when the material is foamed, with a central structure of cells corresponding to the
maximum concentration of gas C0, a solid skin at the outer region corresponding to
the thickness in which the concentration of gas is below the minimum that allows cre￾ating cells ð Þ Cmin , and a transition region between the nanocellular region and the
solid skin. This transition region presents a population of bigger cells with a lower
cell density than the central region. All three parts can be visualized through scanning
electron microscopy and therefore measured as Figure 4.6c shows.
Each of these regions will contribute differently to the final transmittance of the
cellular material, so each one is thoroughly analyzed in the next paragraphs.
Nanocellular region
First of all, the nanocellular region is studied. As previously commented, the first
transparent produced PMMA was postprocessing after production, and solid skin and
transition region were eliminated, having samples in which transmittance is only af￾fected by the internal nanocellular structure.
4.3 Transparent nanocellular polymers 93According to theory, the transmittance on this region will be reduced by the ab￾sorption of the polymeric matrix and the scattering of the gas phase. When working
with PMMA the absorption in the visible region is negligible; thus, transparency is
only hindered by the cell’s scattering [7]. Figure 4.7b shows the transmittance as a
function of the cell size for different thicknesses. As it can be seen, transmittance be￾comes higher as cell size reduces, becoming maximum when cells are below 50 nm,
that is, when the scattering mechanism changes from Mie to Rayleigh, and therefore
the amount of scattered light strongly reduces. As previously explained, the cell size is
reduced by increasing the solubility up to a critical value.
Additionally, to the cell size, the number of cells is also important as it can be
seen in Figure 4.7a For cells presenting the same cell size (produced at 50 MPa and 0 °C)
an increase in the number of nucleation points, caused by increasing the foaming tem￾perature, leads to a rise in the transmittance. To explain this result, it is needed to use
theoretical models since the initial intuition might lead to thinking that the higher the
number of cells, the higher the scattered radiation. The theoretical model developed by
Martín-de León et al. allows visualizing the spatial distribution of the electrical field in￾side nanocellular materials. This model was carried on with COMSOL Multiphysics by
modeling the nanocellular PMMA as a biphasic material with fcc packing of its pores.
Afterward, the Maxwell equations for the propagation of light for a given wavelength
and propagation direction are solved. This allows for obtaining images such as shown
in Figure 4.7c, as well as a numerical value for the final transmittance that can be
compared to the experimental ones (Figure 4.7b). The distribution of the electric field
shows that when the cell sizes reduce below 50 nm, the light prefers traveling inside
the pores, that means through the air. Thus, the higher the number of pores, the
higher the transmittance.
Figure 4.6: (a) Gas concentration profile in the sample thickness just before the foaming process. (b) Solid
skin and gradient cellular structure due to the gas concentration profile through the sample thickness. (c)
Scanning electron micrograph showing the solid skin and the transition region of a nanocellular PMMA
sample saturated at 40 MPa and 0 °C of saturation pressure and temperature and foamed at 60 °C for
1 min. Adapted from reference [16].
94 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesFigure 4.7: (a) Cell nucleation density and transmittance as a function of foaming temperature for samples produced at 50 MPa and 0 °C. a and b adapted from
reference [15]. (b) Theoretical and Experimental transmittance as a function of cell size (wavelength of 532 nm). (c) Spatial Distribution of electrical field modulus
for 39 nm and 225 nm samples (wavelength of 532 nm).
4.3 Transparent nanocellular polymers 95In summary, to produce a nanocellular region with maximum transmittance, it is
necessary to minimize the cell size, at least below 50 nm, by maximizing the solubility,
at least above the critical value. In addition, the number of nucleation points should
be maximized due to light preferably travels through the pores of the material. This
increase in the number of cells can be done by controlling the foaming step, by in￾creasing the foaming temperature or the foaming time.
Solid skin and transition region
Now the influence of the solid skin and the transition region will be studied. Regarding
the effect of the presence of the solid skin, it has not been experimentally reported yet
due to the complexity of only eliminating the solid skin (of a few microns in thickness)
without removing also the transition region and also because through removing the solid
skin superficial defects are introduced in the sample influencing the final transmittance.
Thus, its influence was studied through FEM modeling. As can be seen in Figure 4.8a,
nanocellular PMMA with 24 nm of cell size and a relative density of 0.5 was modeled
without and with solid skin (a and b). The simple presence of the solid skin while keeping
intact the cellular structure reduces the final transmittance from 0.99 to 0.89. The solid
skin is completely transparent, as the former PMMA; thus, its transparency does not re￾duce the total transparency of the material; however, some light coupling occurs in its
presence, reducing this way the transmission of visible light.
Regarding the transition region, the transmittance of samples with different transition
region thicknesses (produced at 40 and 50 MPa of saturation pressure and 0 °C of sat￾uration temperature and different foaming temperatures) was measured. The trans￾mittance of these samples as produced (with solid skin and transition region) has
been measured and represented as a function of the transition region thickness pro￾portion, which means the thickness of the transition region in comparison to the total
thickness of the material.
As it can be seen in Figure 4.9, for both saturation conditions the transmittance
strongly reduces as the thickness of the transition region increases. As previously said,
Figure 4.8: (a) Spatial distribution of electrical field modulus for 24 nm of cell size sample and 1.5 μm in
thickness without solid skin. b) Spatial distribution of electrical field modulus for 24 nm of cell size sample
and 1.5 μm in thickness with solid skin. Adapted from reference [16].
96 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesthe key factor to increase the transmittance is having cell sizes below 50 nm, and the
transition region presents a higher cell size than the nanocellular region. In the particular
case of the samples of this paper, these cells are around 57 nm, meaning that they are
above the optimum transparency threshold. Thus, increasing the thickness of this region
will reduce the final transparency of the sample.
On the other hand, the thickness of this region can be experimentally controlled
by means of the foaming temperature. In this paper it is shown how a reduction in
the foaming temperature leads to a reduction in the transition region proportion,
leading to an increase in the final transmittance.
It can be concluded that for non-processed samples the optimum transparency can be
achieved by eliminating the solid skin (still not achieved experimentally, see some
new developments in how to achieve it in Chapter 8) and by reducing the thickness of
the transition region using minimum foaming temperatures, high enough to generate
the cellular structure but to minimize this region.
Minimize the transition region by minimizing the foaming temperature compete
with the fact of maximizing the number of nucleation points by increasing the same
production parameter. Thus, an equilibrium should be found leading to the optimum
transparency. Paper [16] shows that it is possible to obtain the same transparency in
post-processed samples with the maximum number of nucleation points that in as￾produced samples with solid skin and a minimum transition region.
Figure 4.9: Transmittance as a function of the transition region proportion
for both saturation pressures. Adapted from reference [16].
4.3 Transparent nanocellular polymers 97Thickness
Figure 4.10a shows the behavior of transparent nanocellular PMMA as a function of
the thickness. As can be seen for all the represented cell sizes, the Ln Tð Þ is linear with
the thickness of the sample, which means that the produced materials follow the
Beer–Lambert law (eq. (4.2)).
The extinction coefficient can be therefore extracted from the slope of the curves
leading to the graph in Figure 4.10b. This coefficient increases with the cell size due to
an increase in the amount of scattered light, up to reach values very high for cells of
225 nm where the scattering mechanism has changed to Mie.
Figure 4.10: (a) Exponential fitting for the experimental transmittance of samples with 14, 24, and 39 nm
of cell size, measured for a wavelength of 532 nm. (b) Extinction coefficient as a function of cell size for a
wavelength of 532 nm. Adapted from reference [15].
98 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesWavelength
Finally, the dependence on the wavelength is studied. In the literature, this dependence
has been studied both experimentally and theoretically. As shown in Figures 4.11a and b,
the transmittance strongly depends on the used wavelength.
This is in accordance with the Rayleigh equation. The transmittance in transpar￾ent nanocellular PMMA has been proven to depend on λ4 (eq. (4.7)), meaning that red
light transmits much more through the sample than blue light, which will be much
more scattered. This is the reason for the blue color in the sky (sunlight is scattered
due to the small particles in the atmosphere) and for the beautiful effect observed if a
nanocellular sample is illuminated with natural light (Figure 4.11c). While the sample
acquires a bluish tone the light passing through becomes reddish.
In summary, it is possible to produce transparent nanocellular polymers by em￾ploying gas dissolution foaming with homogeneous polymers. However, this property
is still very new and unexplored with still plenty of room for improvement.
4.4 Other transparent nanoporous structures
There are not many examples of porous materials that can be transparent, the other
main example being aerogels.
Among them, the most known for their transparent character are aerogels. Aero￾gels are porous structures with a matrix and a porous phase. Unlike cellular polymers,
the aerogel matrix is not continuous but formed by a set of connected nanometric par￾ticles (2–5 nm in diameter) (Figure 4.12a). The most common ones are silica aerogels,
presenting a density of around 100 kg/m3 with pores around 20 nm in size and a typical
porosity of 95% [17].
These characteristics grant these materials with interesting properties such as
thermal conductivities between 10 and 20 mW/m K (see Chapter 6 to learn about the
effects leading to this performance), and optical transmittances up to 95% [17, 18].
This transparency has been used in applications in which it is combined with
their insulation performance such as solar collectors or in glazing systems for insulat￾ing windows or glass panels [17–19].
However, the widespread use of such materials has been limited due to their low
mechanical strength, sensitivity to moisture, extreme production cost, and, therefore
price, and their complex and non-environmentally friendly production process [20, 21].
The scientific community has been working on different alternatives to solve such
drawbacks such as the use of fillers, alternative production methods, or the substitution
of silica by an organic matrix presenting improved mechanical performance [24–26].
Several organic matrices have successfully led to transparent aerogels such as chitosan￾based aerogels[27], nanocellulose aerogels [28], or PUR-PIR aerogels (Figure 4.12b) [22, 23].
Although most of them remain at the laboratory scale, some aerogels have been already
4.4 Other transparent nanoporous structures 99Figure 4.11: (a) Transmittance as a function of the wavelength for three samples with cell sizes smaller than 50 nm. (b) Theoretical and experimental results of the
transmittance as a function of wavelength together with two images showing the electric field modulus. (c) Light passing through a nanocellular PMMA presenting
Rayleigh scattering. Adapted from reference [15].
100 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesused in buildings [29, 30] and few companies work at the big scale with them, for exam￾ple, in the format of blankets [31, 32].
There are clearly some similarities between the two porous structures, nanocellu￾lar polymers, and aerogels, and therefore they share some properties such as low
thermal conductivity through the gas phase (see Chapter 6) or transparency. However,
they present several main differences regarding their structures. First of all, as previ￾ously mentioned, the solid phase of aerogels is not continuous but formed by small
particles; and secondly, the porosity is much higher and the size of the cells in aero￾Figure 4.12: (a) SEM micrograph of the porous structure of a polyisocyanurate-polyurethane (PUR_PIR)
aerogel. (b) Photograph of PUR-PIR aerogels 1 mm in thickness with different transparency levels.
Adapted from references [22, 23] respectively.
Figure 4.13: Rayleigh scattering silica aerogel monolith, which presents a bluish haze. From
reference [33].
4.4 Other transparent nanoporous structures 101gels is typically smaller. When talking about transparency, the discontinuity of the
solid phase could hinder transmittance in comparison to nanocellular polymers due
to each solid particle could act as a scatterer of the light; nevertheless, the fraction of
air is so enormous that the transparency is very high. In addition, the very small size
of the cells and particles is also helpful to increase the transparency of these materi￾als. Transmittance in aerogels is also described through Rayleigh theory, presenting
this material the same bluish aspect (Figure 4.13), but herein the number of cells is
not a problem as it was for nanoporous polymers due to their low density.
4.5 Current limitations and future perspectives
As previously stated, the higher challenge in this area is to further improve the trans￾parency of nanocellular polymers. Considering the previous section, the structure of
the aerogels could be imitated, which means the relative density of nanocellular poly￾mers should be reduced.
In Chapter 4 a map showing the cell size and the density of these structures shows
an empty region for cell sizes below 50 nm and low densities (Figure 4.13). In fact, the
lowest relative density achieved for cell sizes below 50 nm was published by Martín-de
León et al., who produced a cellular material with 24 nm and 0.3 of relative density by
modifying the classical gas dissolution foaming process [34]. Thus, again a change in the
process or the viscosity of the polymer would be key to producing a structure similar to
that one of the aerogels and therefore with improved transparency.
Another area of research would be related to the reduction of the solid skin thick￾ness and controlling the structure of the transition region by tuning the production
process.
Furthermore, industrialization is again a challenge to be covered. The last paper
regarding this topic works in this direction with a reduction in the production time of
63% in comparison to the previous paper and also by obtaining transparent and
plane parallel samples right after the production process. This has been carried out
by optimizing the foaming step and changing the usual thermal bath with thermal
plates that allow the production of these thin, flat, and transparent sheets. However,
there is still a lot of work to be done to see these materials in the market.
4.6 Conclusions
Nanocellular polymers can be transparent if the cell size is below 50 nm. This trans￾parency would depend on the cell size, cell size distribution, cell density, solid skin
thickness, structure in the transition region, as well as on the thickness and the used
wavelength.
102 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesTransparency in these materials follows the Rayleigh law presenting a low scat￾tering that is also very dependent on the wavelength, which turns these materials
into bluish structures.
Transparent nanocellular polymers would be a perfect substitute for aerogels in
some applications that are currently using aerogels for their transparency as they
have much better mechanical performance and potentially a lower cost. However, at
the moment there are still some challenges such as density reduction and scalability
that must be solved. However, being very recent materials, the potentiality of such
structures is enormous.
References
[1] H. Yokoyama, L. Li, T. Nemoto, K. Sugiyama, Tunable nanocellular polymeric monoliths using
fluorinated block copolymer templates and supercritical carbon dioxide, Adv. Mater. 16 (2004)
1542–1546. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200400072
[2] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Key production parameters to obtain
transparent nanocellular PMMA, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 302 (2017) 3–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/
mame.201700343
[3] S. Pérez-Tamarit, B. Notario, E. Solórzano, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Light transmission in nanocellular
polymers: Are semi-transparent cellular polymers possible?, Mater. Lett. 210 (2018) 39–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2017.08.109
[4] B.K. Sharma, Instrumental Methods of Chemical Analysis, GOELPublishing House, (1981).
[5] D.J. Lockwood, Rayleigh and Mie scattering, in: R. Luo (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Color Science and
Technology, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, (2014) 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-27851-8_218-1
[6] T.G. Mayerhöfer, S. Pahlow, J. Popp, The Bouguer-Beer-Lambert law: Shining light on the obscure,
ChemPhysChem 21 (2020) 2029–2046. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.202000464
[7] R.M. Ahmed, Optical study on poly(methyl methacrylate)/poly(vinyl acetate) blends, Int.
J. Photoenergy 2009 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1155/2009/150389
[8] A.J. Cox, A.J. DeWeerd, J. Linden, An experiment to measure Mie and Rayleigh total scattering cross
sections, Am. J. Phys. 70 (2002) 620–625. https://doi.org/10.1119/1.1466815
[9] J. Martín-de León, J.L. Pura, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Transparent nanocellular PMMA:
Characterization and modeling of the optical properties, Polymer (Guildf) 170 (2019) 16–23.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2019.03.010
[10] J. David Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, Third, Wiley, (2021).
[11] D. Jackèl, B. Walter, Modeling and rendering of the atmosphere using mie-scattering, Comput.
Graph. Forum 16 (1997) 201–210. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8659.00180
[12] D.J. Lockwood, Encyclopedia of Color Science and Technology, Ottawa, Canada, (2016). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4419-8071-7
[13] G.M. Pajonk, Transparent silica aerogels, J. Non Cryst. Solids 225 (1998) 307–314. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0022-3093(98)00131-8
[14] H. Guo, Solid-state Polymer Nanofoams, Solid-State Polymer Nanofoams, Doctoral Thesis, University
of Washington. (2015). https://digital.lib.washington.edu:443/researchworks/handle/1773/35253.
[15] J. Martín-de León, J.L. Pura, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Transparent nanocellular PMMA:
Characterization and modeling of the optical properties, Polymer (Guildf) 170 (2019) 16–23.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2019.03.010
References 103[16] J. Martín-de León, M. Jiménez, J.L. Pura, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Pérez, Easy-way production of
highly transparent nanocellular polymers films, Polymer (Guildf) 236 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.polymer.2021.124298
[17] S.B. Riffat, G. Qiu, A review of state-of-the-art aerogel applications in buildings, Int. J. Low-Carbon
Technol. 8 (2013) 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijlct/cts001
[18] K. Duer, S. Svendsen, Monolithic silica aerogel in superinsulating glazings, Sol. Energy 63 (1998)
259–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(98)00063-2
[19] S. Svendsen, Solar collector with monolithic silica aerogel, J. Non Cryst. Solids 145 (1992) 240–243.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3093(05)80464-8
[20] A.A. Pisal, A. Venkateswara Rao, Development of hydrophobic and optically transparent monolithic
silica aerogels for window panel applications, J. Porous Mater. 24 (2017) 685–695. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10934-016-0305-x
[21] A. Angel, G. Suárez, J. Nino, Computational analysis of the thermal behavior on a silica (sio2) aerogel
coating for applications in the construction industry, IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 519 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/519/1/012008
[22] B. Merillas, J. Martín-de León, F. Villafañe, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Optical properties of
polyisocyanurate–polyurethane aerogels: Study of the scattering mechanisms, Nanomaterials
12 (2022) 1522. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano12091522
[23] B. Merillas, J. Martín-de León, F. Villafañe, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, Transparent polyisocyanurate￾polyurethane-based aerogels: Key aspects on the synthesis and their porous structures, ACS Appl.
Polym. Mater. (2021) 4607–4615. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsapm.1c00712
[24] S. Iswar, S. Galmarini, L. Bonanomi, J. Wernery, E. Roumeli, S. Nimalshantha, A.M. Ben Ishai,
M. Lattuada, M.M. Koebel, W.J. Malfait, Dense and strong, but superinsulating silica aerogel, Acta.
Mater. 213 (2021) 116959. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2021.116959
[25] R. Tannert, M. Schwan, A. Rege, M. Eggeler, J.C. da Silva, M. Bartsch, B. Milow, M. Itskov, L. Ratke,
The three-dimensional structure of flexible resorcinol-formaldehyde aerogels investigated by means
of holotomography, J. SoL-Gel Sci. Technol. 84 (2017) 391–399. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10971-017-
4363-6
[26] C. Tan, B.M. Fung, J.K. Newman, C. Vu, Organic aerogels with very high impact strength, Adv. Mater.
13 (2001) 644–646. https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-4095(200105)13:9<644::aid-adma644>3.0.co;2-%23
[27] S. Takeshita, S. Yoda, Chitosan aerogels: Transparent, flexible thermal insulators, Chem. Mater.
27 (2015) 7569–7572. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b03610
[28] Y. Kobayashi, T. Saito, A. Isogai, Aerogels with 3D ordered nanofiber skeletons of liquid-crystalline
nanocellulose derivatives as tough and transparent insulators, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 53 (2014)
10394–10397. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201405123
[29] C. Buratti, E. Moretti, Glazing systems with silica aerogel for energy savings in buildings, Appl.
Energy 98 (2012) 396–403. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.03.062
[30] R. Baetens, B.P. Jelle, A. Gustavsen, Aerogel insulation for building applications: A state-of-the-art
review, Energy Build. 43 (2011) 761–769. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2010.12.012
[31] A. Lamy-Mendes, A.D.R. Pontinha, P. Alves, P. Santos, L. Durães, Progress in silica aerogel￾containing materials for buildings’ thermal insulation, Constr. Build. Mater. 286 (2021) 122815.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2021.122815
[32] A. Stojanovic, S. Zhao, E. Angelica, W.J. Malfait, M.M. Koebel, Three routes to superinsulating silica
aerogel powder, J. Solgel. Sci. Technol. 90 (2019) 57–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10971-018-4879-4
[33] J. Wang, D. Petit, S. Ren, Transparent thermal insulation silica aerogels, Nanoscale Adv. 2 (2020)
5504–5515. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0na00655f
[34] J. Martín-de León, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodriguez-Perez, Cyclic gas dissolution foaming as an approach
for simultaneously reducing cell size and relative density in nanocellular PMMA, Polymers (Basel)
13 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13142383
104 Chapter 4 Optical propertiesChapter 5
Thermal conductivity
5.1 Introduction
Energy consumption is expected to sharply grow in the coming years as the global popu￾lation and economic development are increasing. Among the different sources of energy
use, buildings are responsible for around 40% of global energy consumption and 36% of
the emitted greenhouse gases [1]. With no improvements in energy efficiency, the energy
demand for buildings is expected to grow by 50% by 2050 [2]. Thus, reducing energy con￾sumption in the building sector is crucial to accomplishing a resource-efficient and low￾carbon economy [3]. The European Union is continuously establishing and upgrading its
legislative framework to boost its energy performance [4, 5].
More than 40% of the energy used in buildings is destined for climatization, that
is, heating and cooling indoor spaces. The best way to reduce energy consumption
and the CO2 emissions associated with energy production without compromising peo￾ple’s comfort is by improving thermal insulation [3, 6]. In this regard, the insulating
envelope of buildings is recognized by the EU under the Energy topic “Energy Effi￾ciency,” which includes targets to reach “Energy-efficient buildings,” in particular
nearly zero-energy buildings by 2030 [7].
The physical parameter used to quantify the thermal insulation performance of a
given material is the thermal conductivity (λ). It is an intensive physical property that
describes heat transport through a body due to a temperature gradient. It is defined
via Fourier’s law of thermal conduction (eq. (5.1)). This equation states that the time
rate of heat flux density through a material (~q) is proportional to the negative gradi￾ent of the temperature (~∇T), and λ is the parameter correlating both magnitudes.
~q = − λ~∇T (5:1)
Currently, the materials commonly used in the building sector are characterized by
thermal conductivities in the range from 4 to 60 mW/(m · K) [8–11]. Within the wide
spectrum of thermal insulators, Figure 5.1a shows a selection of the thermal conductiv￾ity ranges of the most frequently used materials in the building sector. The density of
these materials is summarized in Figure 5.1b [10]. In the graphs of Figure 5.1, the data
points correspond to the typical average value, while the bars show the whole range of
properties. Expanded perlite, derived from volcanic rock, is a natural, lightweight,
inert, and fireproof rock. It shows conductivities around 46 mW/(m · K), a density of
115 kg/m3 and it is commonly used in cryogenic systems, mortars, and refractory ele￾ments. Meanwhile, recycled textile and mineral wool (which includes rock or glass
wool) are made of fibers. They are characterized by thermal conductivities ranging
from 31 to 42 mW/(m · K) and they are usually employed in the insulation of walls,
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-005roofs, and floors, their density range between 15 and 200 kg/m3
. Regarding the thermal
insulators based on polymers, expanded polystyrene (EPS) and extruded polystyrene
(XPS) are thermoplastic thermal insulators (i.e., they can be recycled), whereas rigid
polyurethane (PUR), polyisocyanurate (PIR), and phenolic foams are thermosets (they
are obtained after a chemical reaction creating a highly crosslinked polymer and can￾not be recycled). These materials are conventional cellular polymers, presenting cell
sizes larger than 10 µm, typically above 100 µm. The thermal conductivities of EPS and
XPS are in the range of 31–38 mW/(m · K), whereas PUR, PIR, and phenolic foams can
exhibit lower thermal conductivities, starting from 21 mW/(m · K) the day the foam is
produced. Both XPS and EPS contain air inside their cells, while in the production of
PUR and PIR low thermal conductivity gases are used and they remain inside the cells.
However, these gases tend to escape from the cellular structure via diffusion which
leads to an aging process, increasing the thermal conductivity over time. For instance,
the thermal conductivity of PUR and PIR foams produced using pentanes as blowing
agents can increase up to 26–28 mW/mK two years after the production of the foam.
EPS, XPS, PUR, and PIR present a density of 15–30 kg/m3 whereas phenolic foams density
is usually higher (100 kg/m3
). Finally, aerogels and vacuum insulation panels (VIPs) are
advanced super-insulators (thermal conductivity much lower than that of air, which is
around 26 mW/(m · K) at 20 °C). These materials show conductivities of 10 mW/(m · K)
and lower. Aerogels present a density of approximately 110 kg/m3
, meanwhile, VIPs den￾sity is around 200 kg/m3
. They both are nanostructured materials usually silica based.
The excellent performance of these systems is based on their nanostructure. In aero￾gels, gas conduction is highly limited due to the Knudsen effect, while the nanostructure
of the solid phase also limits the conduction through the solid phase. For VIPs, the gas
conduction is totally suppressed after evacuating an open porous material (core) placed
inside a gas barrier envelope. Despite their good performance, the use of aerogels and
VIPs is yet not widespread due to their high price and other technical reasons (lack of
toughness for aerogels, thermal bridges for VIPs, etc.).
To compare different thermal insulators, a new magnitude called the heat trans￾fer coefficient (U − Value) is defined. The U − Value represents the heat transfer
through a material as a function of the temperature gradient through the sample
thickness. The unit of the U − Value is W/(m2 · K) and indicates the heat flow through
an area of one square meter with a temperature difference of one Kelvin (eq. (5.2)).
The lower the U − Value, the higher the insulation capability.
U − Value = λ
d (5:2)
The U − Value is commonly used in building and construction. For instance, achieving
a U − Value of 0.2 W/(m2 · K) is a typical requirement for building construction [12–16].
The required U − Value varies between roofs, walls, and floors, and depends on the
climate of the region. In cold climate regions, the required U − Value is lower than in
hot ones. A comparison of the necessary insulation thickness to achieve a U − Value of
106 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivity0.2 W/(m2 · K) for the different thermal insulators is presented in Figure 5.2. For in￾stance, to achieve a U − Value of 0.2 W/(m2 · K) the insulation thickness is 170 mm
when using XPS. Meanwhile, if using an advance thermal super-insulator, like a VIP
(thermal conductivity of 6 mW/(m · K)), the insulation thickness is reduced to 30 mm.
Figure 5.1: (a) Thermal conductivity range of different thermal insulators and (b) density range.
5.1 Introduction 107The new more stringent legislation could increase the demands for insulation, that
is, decrease the required U − Value. From this analysis is clear that to achieve a reduced
U − Value there are two possible routes. On the one hand, increasing the thickness of
the insulation layer using conventional insulation materials. However, this approach
requires acquiring larger amounts of material, with implications for the environment
and CO2 emissions and implies the reduction of the useful area in buildings. On the
other hand, a promising approach goes through developing new thermal insulators
with lower thermal conductivity. This alternative allows not only saving energy but
also extending the useful area in buildings by obtaining the same insulation with re￾duced thickness. The most promising solutions that can be found nowadays in the mar￾ket are based on nanostructured and nanoporous materials (aerogels and VIPs).
Nanocellular polymers are characterized by pore sizes in the range of these
super-insulators and can be produced with similar density. For these reasons, in the
early years of the development of nanocellular polymers, it was claimed several times
that they could be potentially used as advanced thermal insulators [17–19]. There are
even some experimental data of thermal conductivity using transient techniques that
seem to confirm this claim [20] However, recent theoretical and experimental studies
of the thermal conductivity using steady-state measurements seem to point out that
nanocellular polymers produced nowadays, have a low thermal conductivity, but
they do not reach the very low thermal conductivities of other super insulators such
as silica aerogels [21, 22]. In fact, there are key differences between the structure of
aerogels and that of nanocellular polymers, as seen in Figure 5.3, which can help to
explain their different thermal conductivity. While nanocellular polymers present a
Figure 5.2: Insulation thickness to achieve a U − Value of 0.2 W/(m2 · K) of different thermal insulators.
108 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivitycontinuous solid structure (Figure 5.3a), aerogels show a discontinuous solid phase
(Figure 5.3b) that is formed by nanometric highly porous particles. This will be one of
the key aspects explaining the differences between these materials. In order to under￾stand the behavior of these nanoporous materials, a detailed overview of the heat
transfer mechanisms taking place is needed. This study is presented in the following
sections. Also, a literature review of the most relevant data obtained so far is pre￾sented, together with some future perspectives and pending challenges.
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers
In a porous material, the total thermal conductivity (λt) can be described as a function
of conduction through the solid phase (λs), conduction through the gas phase (λg),
thermal radiation (λr), and convection within cells (λc), as shown in eq. (5.3) [23].
λt = λs + λg + λr + λc (5:3)
However, the contribution of convection can be neglected when the cell sizes are
lower than 4 mm [24–26]. Then, the other three mechanisms are responsible for heat
transfer in nanocellular polymers.
5.2.1 Conduction through the solid phase
Conduction through the solid phase depends on the solid volume fraction, that is the
relative density (ρr) (defined in Chapter 2), on the conductivity of the solid matrix
(λ′
s), and a structural factor g (eq. (5.4)) [26].
Figure 5.3: Example of the microstructure of (a) nanocellular polymers showing a continuous solid phase
and (b) aerogels showing a discontinuous solid phase.
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 109λs = gλ′
sρr (5:4)
Regarding the conductivity of the solid matrix λ′
s, it depends on the polymer’s nature
and the temperature. For instance, bulk PS has a thermal conductivity between
120 and 185 mW/(m · K), while polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) has a thermal conduc￾tivity between 170 and 215 mW/(m · K) at approximately 300 K [19, 27–33]. As tempera￾ture increases, the thermal conductivity of the polymer increases [27, 34]. Thermal
conductivity through the solid phase can be understood as the propagation of lattice
vibrations. For crystalline materials, phonons quantify those vibrations. The same
concept can be used for amorphous materials (the definition of phonons is unclear
for amorphous polymers however this concept is commonly used in polymer science).
Phonons are excited by temperature [35]. As these particles obey the Bose-Einstein
statistics, the thermal conductivity through the solid is given by eq. (5.5) [27]:
λ = 1
3
X
i
ð
Cið Þ ω vilið Þ ω dω (5:5)
Being Cið Þ ω dω the heat capacity contribution of phonons with a polarization i and
frequency ω, vi the phonon velocity and lið Þ ω the phonon mean free path. The mean
free path is the distance a phonon can travel before colliding, which means before
suffering scattering. Increasing the scattering events along the solid material will
therefore decrease the thermal conductivity through the solid phase.
In conventional cellular polymers, the cell walls are several microns in thickness,
so the polymer in the solid phase behaves like a bulk material and presents the same
thermal conductivity that it should have in the solid form (before foaming). However,
in nanocellular polymers, the cell walls can be as thin as 20 nm, so the polymer mac￾romolecules are confined within the cell walls [36, 37]. This will be discussed in more
detail in Chapter 6. Based on the increased tortuosity of the solid phase, one could
expect a reduction of thermal conduction [30]. However, as the polymer macromole￾cules get highly oriented in the thin cell walls, an increment could also occur. This
discrepancy is yet not resolved, as it will be commented on in the next paragraphs.
The first thing to consider is the size of the solid phase. According to the kinetic
theory, the effective thermal conductivity of a thin film, (a cell wall could be consid￾ered as a thin film), (λ´s_eff) can be calculated as stated in eq. (5.6), where l is the mean
free path of the phonons and δ is the characteristic size of the solid phase or skeleton
[38–40]. This reduction of the thermal conductivity is called the size effect. This kind
of Knudsen effect affecting the solid phase (phonons) is very well-known for the gas
phase (gas molecules) in nanoscale systems like nanocellular polymers and aerogels,
as commented extensively in this book [30, 41]. The solid skeleton of the nanocellular
foams is composed of nanoscale cell walls and nanoscale struts. Thus, when going to
the nanoscale, the characteristic size of the polymer skeleton decreases and can ap￾proximate the mean free path of the phonons. However, the mean free path in poly￾mers ranges from 1.5 to 10 nm, while the smallest cell wall thickness reported is
110 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivity20 nm [37]. Then, the size effect is not likely to occur in nanocellular polymers, while
in aerogels or fumed silica, which are formed by a smaller solid structure, in the
range of some nm (Figure 5.3b) with very thin connections (lower than 1 nm in size)
between the particles forming the solid skeleton, this helps to significantly reduce
conduction through the solid phase.
λ′
s eff = λ′
s
1 + 4l
3δ
(5:6)
Then, the experimental evidence about the thermal conductivity of thin polymer
films is yet confusing. For instance, Ma et al. [42] reported that thermal conductivity
reduces as the thickness of ultra-thin amorphous PS films decreases using molecular
dynamics simulations. However, Kim et al. [43] reported experimentally that the ther￾mal conductivity of ultra-thin amorphous PMMA films increases as the film thickness
decreases, although they attributed that effect to a substrate effect in the measure￾ment. Also, Zhang et al. [44] showed experimentally that the stretching of the polymer
chain could increase the thermal conductivity in semicrystalline high-density polyeth￾ylene (HDPE). However, there are no direct measurements of the thermal conductivity
of polymers that are forming a 3D nanoscale porous structure like in the case of nano￾cellular polymers. This is a complicated topic and further studies are needed to estab￾lish the real values of the thermal conductivity of the polymer when the nanocellular
material is produced.
Concerning the solid structure factor (g), it is an efficiency-structural factor pro￾posed by Glicksman [26]. For high-density foams, the g factor is 1, that is, the conduc￾tion through the solid is reduced to the same extent as the density after the foam is
produced. However, for low-density foams, it has been proved that g can be lower
than 1, that is, the conduction through the solid is lower than the expected value con￾sidering the density. For very low relative density conventional foams (ρr < 0.05) it is
well established that this factor is 2/3 when the cell walls are very thin and the cells
have a polyhedral shape [26]. In this case, the polymer mass is in the faces of the poly￾hedron, so if taking a hexahedron, four of the six faces (i.e., 2/3 of the cell walls) are
effective surfaces to heat transfer (parallel to its direction). Meanwhile, if the fraction
of mass in the struts is also considered, g can have a minimum value of 1/3 for materi￾als with a high fraction of the solid phase in the struts [26]. This is because, the mass
is localized on the edges of the hexahedron, so four of the twelve edges (1/3) are effec￾tive surfaces to the heat transfer.
For low-density nanocellular polymers, there could be three possible scenarios
from a theoretical perspective. First, g can behave as in conventional cellular poly￾mers, taking values between 1/3 and 2/3 in the low-density range. Another possibility
is that g is high (0.8–1). In this case, the confinement of the polymer would be increas￾ing the conduction through the solid phase, limiting the conduction reduction ex￾pected by the low density. Yet another option is to obtain very low g factors, as those
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 111measured in other nanoscale systems. For instance, this factor can take values as low
as 0.05 for aerogels [32, 45]. But we already discussed that aerogels present quite dif￾ferent solid structure connectivity, which determines the phonon diffusion through￾out the material [34, 46]: while cellular materials present a continuous structure,
aerogels present a backbone structure with multiple contact points of very small size,
which minimizes conduction through the solid phase. As thermal conductivity de￾pends on how the heat is transferred by the phonon diffusion through the material,
increasing the number of contact points is expected to difficult the phonon diffusion,
reducing the solid thermal conductivity. In addition, the size effect occurs in these sys￾tems since the mean free path of phonons is comparable to the small size of the po￾rous particles and necks between the particles. As a result, the estimated g factor is
quite small in these materials.
For microcellular and nanocellular polymers with medium/high relative densities
(0.3–0.65), this factor was estimated to be in the range of 0.8–1 [30, 47, 48] which can
be expectable for high-density materials. For low-density materials (relative density
0.13–0.18), Sanchez-Calderon and coworkers recently proved that g can be estimated
to be roughly 0.9 for cell sizes around 400 nm [22]. For such low densities, one could
already expect values approaching the 2/3 of conventional low-density foams. Then,
this new result seems to confirm that in nanocellular polymers the high orientation of
the polymer macromolecules increases conduction through the solid phase in compar￾ison with conventional cellular polymers. This is one of the key factors not allowing
these novel materials to behave as super–insulators as aerogels.
There are still open questions in this sense since there is a lack of data on the g
factor for relative densities below 0.1 and cell sizes below 400 nm. In that range, we
can only guess the expected behavior. Figure 5.4 shows the conduction through the
solid phase according to eq. (5.4) as a function of the relative density for materials
with different structure factors (0.9, 2/3, 1/3, and 0.05). The thermal conductivity of the
solid (λ's) is taken as 174 mW/(m · K) (in the range of values of PMMA) for the predic￾tions. The experimental results from [22] are also included for the sake of comparison.
If the trend measured so far is the same for lower densities (that is, g is still 0.9), we
could expect a minimum of around 8 mW/(m · K) of solid conduction at a relative den￾sity of 0.05. If in this range new mechanisms help to decrease g, then further reduc￾tions are predicted.
The solid structure factor is expressed in different ways in the literature. Assum￾ing that the phonon diffusion model is valid, the solid thermal conductivity can also
be obtained by eq. (5.7) [34, 49] where v is the porous material longitudinal sound
speed and vs the solid material longitudinal sound speed. The solid structure factor
can then be obtained by g=v / vs. Note that the sound speed is related to the mechani￾cal properties, so the solid thermal conductivity can be also estimated by measuring
the mechanical properties [50].
112 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityλs = gλ′
sρr = v
vs
λ′
sρr (5:7)
In other research works, a different approach is used to calculate the g factor taking
into account the dependence of the sound speed with the relative density (eq. (5.8))
[32]. This equation, also obtained by the percolating theory, is commonly used for
aerogels where α ranges between 1.2 and 2 and C depending on the interconnectivity
of the particles (i.e. on the sound speed) [34, 51]. For cellular materials α ≈ 1 [52].
λs = v
vs
λ′
sρr = Cρr
α (5:8)
5.2.2 Conduction through the gas phase
As shown in eq. (5.9) conduction through the gas phase depends on the gas volume
fraction (1 – ρr), and the thermal conductivity of the gas inside the cells λ'g [53].
λg = λ′
g 1 − ρr ð Þ (5:9)
In nanocellular polymers, the appearance of the Knudsen effect reduces the contribu￾tion of the thermal conductivity of the gas phase compared to the equation for conven￾Figure 5.4: Theoretical conduction through the solid phase as a function of the relative density for
materials with different solid structure factors and experimental results from [22]. The thermal
conductivity of the solid material is 174 mW/(m · K) (thermal conductivity of PMMA at 10 °C).
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 113tional materials, as experimentally proved by Notario et al. [30]. This effect implies that
when the cell size is comparable to or smaller than the mean free path of the gas mole￾cules (i.e. the average distance between collisions), they collide more often with the cell
walls than among them, reducing the energy transfer [54]. Therefore, the conductivity
of the gas inside the cells, λ'g is reduced (see eq. (5.10). It depends on the thermal con￾ductivity of the free gas, that is, without being encapsulated in a cell, (λ'g0) (which also
depends on the temperature), the cell size (ϕ), the intrinsic parameter β, and the mean
free path of the gas molecules (lg). According to the theory, the Knudsen effect starts
becoming relevant when the cell size is smaller than 100 times the mean free path,
ϕ ≤ 100 lg [55]. At standard ambient temperature and pressure (25 °C and 101325 Pa)
the mean free path of the air is 70 nm. Then, the Knusden effect takes place in nano￾cellular polymers filled with air at atmospheric pressure for ϕ ≤ 7 µm.
λ′
g = λ′
g0
1 +
2βlg
ϕ
(5:10)
β is a dimensionless intrinsic parameter that considers the transfer of energy between
the gas molecules and the solid structure. β value varies from 1.5 to 2 for argon and
nitrogen [54]. There are several definitions for β in the literature, depending on differ￾ent relations between the specific heat ratio (γ), the thermal accommodation coeffi￾cient (α), and the Prandtl number (Pr) [54, 56–58]. One possibility is the use of eq.
(5.11) to calculate this parameter [56]. The specific heat ratio is the relation between
specific heat at constant pressure and specific heat at constant volume (cp/cv) and is
1.40 for air. On the other hand, the Prandtl number is a dimensionless parameter de￾fined as the ratio of momentum diffusivity to thermal diffusivity (Pr = 0.713 for air).
Based on this equation, β is 1.64 for air [47, 56].
β = 2γ
γ + 1
1
Pr (5:11)
Meanwhile, the mean free path depends on the temperature (T), the pressure (p), and
the molecule diameter (dm) (3.6 Å for air [59]) as shown in eq. (5.12) [54], where R is
the ideal gas constant and NA the Avogadro’s number. As seen in eq. (5.12), the mean
free path rises as temperature increases and pressure decreases. While at standard
ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure, the mean free path is 70 nm for air,
it increases up to 7 mm when pressure decreases to 1 Pa (0.01 mbar). This means that
Knudsen effect can take place for cell sizes as large as 7 mm at vacuum.
lg = RT ffiffi
2
p πd2
mNAp
(5:12)
So, the conduction of the gas inside the cells can now be expressed in terms of the
average cell size, the gas characteristics, the pressure, and the temperature, as given
in eq. (5.13). Figure 5.5 shows the predictions of the conduction of the gas phase at
114 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityatmospheric pressure as a function of the cell size (Figure 5.5a) and as a function of
the pressure for different cell sizes (Figure 5.5b). The experimental results of the con￾duction through the gas phase measured in [30] are also included for the sake of com￾parison, as the first evidence that this effect takes place in nanocellular polymers. The
predicted reduction starts becoming significant for cell sizes below the micron and
there is a quite significant effect of the pressure too. As the cell size decreases, the
pressure required to suppress the thermal conduction of the gas is higher: this is the
main principle of vacuum insulation panels (VIPs) wherein a highly open porous ma￾terial is evacuated to low pressure (in the range of 0.01–10 mbar) [60]. If the cell size
of this material is very low (nanometric) then the pressure required to reach very low
thermal conductivity is not so low and the vacuum reached is easier to reach and eas￾ier to maintain for longer times.
λ′
g = λ′
g0
1 + 2β
ϕ
RT ffiffi
2
p πd2
mNAp
(5:13)
Unlike the solid phase contribution, the gas phase conduction can be well defined
with the Knudsen effect. Recently, Sanchez-Calderon et al. [22] have proved again the
validity of this model by measuring a PMMA-based open cell nanocellular polymer at
atmospheric pressure and under vacuum, proving that the model offers good accu￾racy and allows to determine the conduction through the gas phase even at different
pressures (Figure 5.6). In this sense, nanocellular polymers and other nanostructured
materials like aerogels show the same behavior.
Finally, note that eq. (5.13) considers the average cell size, that is, it assumes that
the nanocellular polymer presents a narrow and homogeneous cell size distribution.
However, this is not always the case. Bimodal structures, with micrometric and nano￾metric cells, cannot be described with the current model, because the average cell
size would neglect the contribution of the micrometric pores. Moreover, nanocellular
structures with a wide cell size distribution also require a model that considers the
variation of cell size, because every cell size would present a different contribution to
the Knudsen effect. To study these kinds of systems, Bernardo et al. [47] developed a
model based on the volume fraction (i.e., the porosity) that occupies each type of cell.
The model predicts that the thermal conductivity will have a slight increase as the
width of the cell size distribution increases (Figure 5.7).
5.2.3 Radiation
Due to the fact of being at a certain temperature, materials emit, reflect, and absorb
radiation. If we consider a black body (a hypothetical body that completely absorbs
all radiant energy falling upon it, reaches some equilibrium temperature, and then
reemits that energy as quickly as it absorbs it), the spectral-energy distribution of
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 115emitted radiation (Figure 5.8) is given by eq. (5.14) (Planck radiation law) [61], where I
is the spectral intensity, Λ is the wavelength, h is the Planck constant, c is the light
speed, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the black-body temperature. The area
under the curve corresponds to the emitted intensity in the wavelength range under
Figure 5.5: (a) Theoretical prediction at atmospheric pressure of the conduction of the gas inside the cells
as a function of the average cell size considering the Knudsen effect and results obtained in [30], and (b)
theoretical prediction as a function of the pressure for different cell sizes.
116 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityconsideration. Also, note that the spectral distribution has always a maximum, the de￾pendence of this wavelength maximum (Λmax) with the temperature is given by Equa￾tion (5.15) (Wien displacement law). At ambient temperature (around 300 K), the
maximum of emitted radiation is centered at approximately 10 µm (Figure 5.8), which
50
40
30
20
10
0
Experimental Thermal Conductivity (mW/(m.K))
Pressure (mbar)
Experimental Thermal Conductivity
Vacuum Prediction
0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000
Figure 5.6: Experimental thermal conductivity of a nanocellular polymer at 10 °C at different pressures
and prediction of the thermal conductivity as a function of pressure considering Knudsen effect, from
reference [22].
Figure 5.7: (a) Effect of the width of the cell size distribution in the thermal conductivity of a PMMA-based
nanocellular polymer with relative density 0.1 and examples of cell size distributions for different SD=ϕ
ratios and (b) and (c) cell size distributions, from [47].
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 117corresponds to infrared radiation. That is, all bodies emit radiation in the infrared
region of the electromagnetic spectrum, which corresponds to wavelengths from
about 700 nanometers to 1 millimeter. In practice, real objects do not radiate with the
intensity of a black body, having lower radiant power, but the range of emitted radia￾tion predicted by this ideal theory is still valid.
Ið Þ Λ, T = 2πhc2
Λ5
1
exp hc
ΛkBT
  − 1
(5:14)
Λmax = 2897.8 μm · K
T (5:15)
Then, the radiation contribution to the thermal conductivity (λr) is related to infrared
radiation. Within porous polymeric materials, radiation heat transfer is a diffusion￾like process via scattering and absorption of infrared radiation. The scattering is
caused by the cellular structure, while the solid fraction absorbs radiation. Polymers
emit/absorb radiation in the so-called mid-infrared region (where wavelengths range
from 2.5 to 25 µm). They absorb/emit at certain wavelengths that correspond to molec￾ular movement vibrations [62]. The contribution of infrared radiation to the total
thermal conductivity starts to become relevant when the relative density reaches val￾ues under 0.2 since at higher relative densities the high solid fraction absorbs a great
amount of infrared radiation [24, 32, 51, 63, 64].
1016
1014
1012
1010
108
106
104
0.1 1 10 100
100K
500K
1000K
3000K
10000K
Spectral Intensity (W/(m2.μm))
Visible
Radiation
Infrared
Radiation
Ultraviolet
Radiation
5777K
300K
Wavelength (μm)
Figure 5.8: Black body spectrum at different temperatures based on eq. (5.14)
(5777 K is the sun’s surface temperature and 300 K is roughly room temperature).
118 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityThe radiative part of the thermal conductivity in porous materials can be given by
eq. (5.16) (Rosseland approximation equation) [65], where σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann
constant, n is the refractive index (considered equal to 1 for low-density cellular materi￾als, and aerogels [32, 66]), and Ke is the extinction coefficient of the porous material.
Rosseland approximation is only valid for thick and homogeneous optical media (i.e.,
when the medium absorbs and scatters isotropically). The determination of the extinc￾tion coefficient of the porous material is essential to predict the radiation contribution.
λr = 16n2
σT3
3Ke
(5:16)
For very-low-density cellular materials with cell sizes of hundreds of microns, Glicks￾man et al. [26, 67, 68] proposed an equation to obtain Ke (eq. (5.17)) [66]. The extinction
coefficient is a sum of two contributions in this model. The first term depends on the
relative density, the fraction of mass in the struts (fs), and the cell size. The term 4.10
is a constant related to the cell geometry (taken as pentagonal dodecahedrons). This
term is related to the scattering of the cellular structure. The extinction coefficient
rises with the relative density and increases when the cell size decreases because
there are more cells per unit length in the same thickness (more scattering events).
Also, as the fraction of mass in the struts increases the extinction coefficient rises. For
cellular materials based on ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA), polyethylene (PE), PS, and
PMMA, fs takes values between 0.1 and 0.4 [66, 69] whereas for PUR it takes values
between 0.6 and 0.8 [70]. Meanwhile, the second term corresponds to the contribution
of the absorption of the cell walls, being Ks the extinction coefficient of the solid poly￾mer. This term depends on the fraction of mass in the cell walls (1 – fs) and the density
too. Note that for very-low relative densities, this contribution is almost negligible.
Ke = KG = 4.10 ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
fsρr
p
ϕ + 1 − f ð Þs ρrKs (5:17)
For conventional foams, there are plenty of works calculating the extinction coefficient,
both theoretically (using for instance Glicksman equations [26, 66, 67]) and experimen￾tally (measuring transmittance to infrared radiation by using infrared spectroscopy
[66]). However, these theoretical models are not valid when the cell size is in the nano￾scale since the cell size, cell struts, and cell walls (acting as scattering centers) are of the
same order of magnitude or even smaller than the infrared radiation wavelength. As
the ratio between the scattering center and the wavelength decreases the scattering
mechanisms change from optical to Mie and finally to Rayleigh [21, 71–73] (see Chapter 4
for the explanation of these mechanisms). For thermal infrared (average wavelength 10
microns), conventional foams are located in the optical region, while microcellular and
nanocellular polymers are within the Mie and Rayleigh scattering region. Therefore,
Mie or Rayleigh scattering mechanisms should be used to deal with the electromagnetic
interaction in nanocellular polymers because the cell sizes are smaller than the wave￾5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 119length of the infrared radiation and are close to the range in which the scattering cen￾ters are ten times lower than the wavelength of the radiation. For nanocellular poly￾mers, recent theoretical models proposed by Wang et al. [40] and Buahom et al. [21]
have shown that the contribution of radiation to the total thermal conductivity is more
significant in a nanocellular polymer than in conventional or microcellular polymers
due to the change in the scattering mechanism.
However, the first experimental evidence that the interaction with infrared radia￾tion changes in nanocellular polymers is found in the work of Bernardo et al. only in
2020 [74]. Figure 5.9 presents the transmittance of infrared radiation of a collection of
foams with different cell sizes with a constant density of around 500 kg/m3 for two
different wavelengths. As cell size reduces from the micro to the nanoscale, the trans￾mittance increases. In a nanocellular material the scattering mechanism for infrared
radiation changes at a specific cell size value, as occurs with visible light for cell sizes
smaller than 50 nm (go to Chapter 4 for more insights on the transparent behavior of
nanocellular polymers. When the cell size is smaller than the wavelength (in particu￾lar, 1/10 smaller), the amount of infrared radiation dispersed would be reduced and
the material would become somehow “transparent” to the infrared (in terms of the
dispersed radiation, of course, part of the infrared radiation would be still absorbed
by the solid polymer matrix). As the infrared region covers a wide range of wave￾lengths, this effect would depend on the cell size: as the cell size is reduced, more cells
would be small enough not to interact with the infrared radiation. This implies that
heat transfer via radiation is enhanced in nanocellular polymers, and there is a com￾promise between the Knudsen effect and the radiation contribution (i.e., an optimum
density and cell size) to achieve the minimum conductivity.
These measurements allow the determination of an extinction coefficient associ￾ated with the scattering mechanism (the absorption part could not be quantified due
to the high density of the samples). Figure 5.10 represents the scattering efficiency
and the scattering extinction coefficient for a sole pore as a function of the factor,
x = 2πnmr=λ, with nm the refractive index of the surrounding medium and r the ra￾dius of the scattering center. It can be seen how the extinction coefficient de￾creases for a small radius and how the behavior changes from the maximum Mie
limit to the Rayleigh trend.
Recently, Sanchez-Calderon et al. [22] determined the extinction coefficient of
low-density nanocellular polymers using an approach proposed by Almeida and cow￾orkers [52]. Using only thermal conductivity measurements as a function of the tem￾perature, it is possible to estimate the extinction coefficient (the complete one, with
the absorption and the scattering effects included). Figure 5.11 shows the relative ex￾tinction coefficient (that is, divided by the relative density) of a collection of micro￾and nanocellular samples. It is again proved that as the cell size decreases the extinc￾tion coefficient decreases too, that is, nanocellular polymers show higher radiation
contribution than nanocellular samples.
120 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityIn aerogels, it is also known that the nanometric structure hinders the scattering
of radiation. For instance, Heinemann et al. [75] did not observe differences between
aerogels with different densities and the bulk material extinction coefficient, meaning
that the scattering through the pores (characteristic pore size of 180 nm) is null. Mean￾100
80
60
40
Transmittance (%)
20
0
100 101
k = 2200 cm–1 (λ = 4545 nm)
k = 3300 cm–1 (λ = 3030 nm)
102 103 104 105
Ф (nm)
Figure 5.9: Transmittance as a function of the cell size for nanocellular samples
of thickness 50 microns, at two fixed wavelengths from reference [74].
Figure 5.10: Right axis: Scattering efficiency Q for a Rayleigh-like behavior and Mie limit
as a function of the size parameter x. Left axis: Scattering extinction coefficient normalized by
the 1D cell density as a function of the size parameter x, from reference [74].
5.2 Mechanisms of heat transfer in nanocellular polymers 121while, Hrubesh et al. [32] claimed that the radiation contribution in aerogels was only
associated with the absorption of the solid material, assuming that there is no scatter￾ing due to the reduced pore size. In those works, it is common to find eq. (5.18) to
describe the radiation, which depends on the relative density and the extinction coef￾ficient of the solid. Again, this kind of behavior is a common point between aerogels
and nanocellular polymers.
λr = 16n2
σT3
3ρrKs
(5:18)
One possibility to reduce the radiation contribution of nanocellular polymers is the ad￾dition of opacifiers or infrared radiation blockers (IR-blockers) to the polymer matrix
as it is done in conventional foams [52, 76]. An opacifier is a material that strongly ab￾sorbs or scatters infrared radiation, increasing the extinction coefficient and thus re￾ducing heat transfer by radiation. Some examples of IR-blockers are used in the
literature, such as carbon-based materials (multiwalled nanotubes, carbon black nano￾particles, graphite), titanium(IV) oxide (TiO2), or aluminum oxide (Al2O3) [31, 33, 52, 77, 78].
However, the addition of IR-blockers in nanocellular polymers can modify the foaming
process, affecting the cellular structure and even leading to higher densities [79]. The
IR-blockers need to be in the nanometric range if they are incorporated into the solid
formulation to prevent the appearance of large cells. In addition, the dispersion of
the opacifiers in the polymer matrix before foaming is also a challenge because high
shears are required during the extrusion process to avoid their agglomeration [79].
Furthermore, the process becomes more challenging as the percentage of IR-Blocker
35000
30000
20000
25000
15000
5000
0
0 1000
Relative Extinction Coefficient (m–1)
2000
y = 5.6712–106 x0.4264
r2=0.903
3000
Cell Size (×10–9 m)
4000
10000
Figure 5.11: Relative extinction coefficient as a function of the cell size and exponential fitting.
Determination of the theoretical extinction coefficient from reference [22].
122 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityon the polymer matrix increases. So far, there is no data about the use of infrared
blockers in nanocellular polymers, although it is an interesting approach for reducing
thermal conductivity.
5.3 Models to predict the thermal conductivity
in nanocellular polymers
In the early years of the development of nanocellular polymers, it was claimed sev￾eral times that they could be potentially used as advanced thermal insulators when
combining low-densities and nanometric cell sizes, but no experimental data sup￾ported these claims [17–19]. Nowadays, the production and proper characterization of
the thermal conductivity of these materials is still a challenge due to the difficulty of
combining nanometric cell sizes with very low densities [80], and because the produc￾tion of large dimensions samples is also complex since fabrication processes are
mainly limited to the lab-scale [81]. For these reasons, many authors have tried to the￾oretically predict the thermal properties of these materials. Table 5.1 summarizes the
hypothesis and predictions of the main theoretical models regarding the thermal con￾ductivity of nanocellular polymers.
For instance, Forest et al. [19] proposed an analytical model derived from aerogel
studies (Figure 5.12). Due to the similitude with the aerogel case, the model correctly
predicts the trend for the radiation and gas conduction parts, however, it underpredicts
the solid contribution because it assumes an aerogel-like structure. This model pre￾dicted thermal conductivities as low as 12 mW/(m · K) for nanocellular materials with
relative densities between 0.1 and 0.2 and cell sizes around 100 nm at 27 °C (300 K) [19].
Meanwhile, Wang et al. [40] mathematically modeled the thermal transport
through a nanocellular polymer. Their model proposed that the contribution of the
radiation terms starts to be quite significant in nanocellular polymers with low densi￾ties. They predicted that the minimum conductivity that can be reached with these
materials is not as low as expected (Table 5.1). Figure 5.13 shows the theoretical pre￾dictions of the model of Wang and co-workers [40] as a function of the cell size from
various densities. As seen in the graph, reductions of the cell size below a certain
limit (depending on the porosity) lead to an increase in the total thermal conductivity
due to an increase in the radiation contribution.
Buahom et al. [21] also developed a mathematical model to predict the thermal
conductivity of microcellular and nanocellular polymer foams. They predicted the
thermal conductivity of PS and PMMA foams with different relative densities and cell
sizes (Figure 5.14). They showed a huge effect of the cell size on the minimum conduc￾tivity that could be reached. In PS, the minimum conductivity is found in the micro￾metric range. For PMMA, they predicted a minimum of 37 mW/(m · K) for nanocellular
PMMA with 0.1 of relative density and 100 nm of cell size at 27 °C (300 K) [21].
5.3 Models to predict the thermal conductivity in nanocellular polymers 1230.025 Φ = 1000 nm
Φ = 250 nm
Φ = 100 nm 0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
λg (W.m–1 .K–1)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6
density (g.cm–3)
a)
0.06
Φ = 1000 nm
Φ = 250 nm
Φ = 100 nm
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0
0.01
λef (W.m–1 .K–1)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6
density (g.cm–3)
c)
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
λr (W.m–1 .K–1)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6
density (g.cm–3)
b)
Figure 5.12: Predictions of the model of Forest et al. adapted from reference [19]: (a) Conduction of the
gas phase, (b) radiation contribution, and (c) total thermal conductivity.
124 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityIn the work of Sanchez-Calderon and coworkers [22], a semi-empirical model was
built using experimental results for a collection of microcellular and nanocellular
PMMA. The model allows replicating the experimental results in the range of relative
densities from 0.09 to 0.18 and cell sizes in the range of 400 nm to 4 microns. They ex￾trapolated the results of the model to create a 2D map as that observed in Figure 5.15.
Predictions show two regions with a minimum of thermal conductivity around 34 mW/
(m · K). The first one, situated in the microcellular region, is related to the cell scattering
of the radiation (relative densities around 0.04 and cell sizes above 3000 nm) whereas
the second one, situated in the nanocellular region, is due to the Knudsen effect (relative
densities around 0.08 and cell sizes around 140 nm). However, for different structural
factors (g lower than 0.89), the predicted conductivity can be as low as 22–27 mW/(m · K).
The new theoretical models point out that there is a limitation in the reduction of
the thermal conductivity of nanocellular polymers. Current predictions establish the
limit of their performance in 34–37 mK/(m · K), quite high in comparison to the early
optimistic predictions of values under 15 mW/(m · K). However, this is a value close to
the thermal conductivity of conventional insulators, but that can be achieved with a
higher density in nanocellular polymers thanks to the Knudsen effect. Then, new poten￾tial opportunities might rise for these materials: they can show similar insulation per￾Figure 5.13: Dependence of the thermal transport on the foam’s cell size under various void fraction
levels. (a) Correlation between the cell size (δc) and the total effective thermal conductivity (λeff).
(b) Correlation between the cell size and the thermal conductivity contributed by thermal conduction
(λcon). (c) Correlation between the cell size and the radiative thermal conductivity (λrad). (d) Effect of the
cell size on the wavelength-averaged reflectance of the single cell wall (Rr) and the polymer slab numbers
(n) from reference [40].
5.3 Models to predict the thermal conductivity in nanocellular polymers 125formance to conventional materials but with a much better mechanical resistance
thanks to their higher density. Also, as discussed in Chapter 4, these materials could
combine low thermal conductivity with transparent behavior, arising a new generation
of unique materials with a wide range of potential uses. All the potential applications of
nanocellular polymers and their unique combination of properties are summarized in
Chapter 9.
5.4 Experimental determination of the thermal conductivity
5.4.1 Experimental techniques
When measuring the thermal conductivity, it is possible to distinguish between tran￾sient and steady-state techniques depending on how eq. (5.1) is solved. Both methods,
either transient or steady, have advantages and limitations, and they are suitable for
Figure 5.14: The total thermal conductivity of (a and b) PS and (c and d) PMMA foams at various cell sizes
and volume expansion ratios from reference [21].
126 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityonly a limited range of materials, depending on the thermal properties, sample config￾uration, and measuring temperature.
On the one hand, in transient or non-steady-state methods, the temperature dis￾tribution throughout the sample varies with time. In this case, solving the heat con￾duction equation is more complicated because it involves a time-dependent heat flow
equation [83]. Among transient techniques, transient plane source (TPS) is commonly
used [84]. The TPS method consists of a sensor with the shape of a double spiral. The
sensor acts as a heat source as well as a temperature sensor. Thermal diffusivity and
thermal conductivity are calculated by recording the sensor voltage and current vari￾ation after a pulse of certain power and time [85].
On the other hand, in steady-state methods, a temperature difference that does not
evolve with time is established; thus, the mathematics are simplified, turning the heat
transfer problem into a one-dimensional problem. A steady-state condition is attained
Figure 5.15: Predictions of thermal conductivity as a function of the cell size and the relative density
assuming 10 °C of temperature, ambient pressure and using g = 0.89: (a) full map, (b) zoom of the
microcellular minimum region, and (c) zoom of the nanocellular minimum region. (d) Evolution of the
contributions to the total thermal conductivity as a function of the cell size for a fixed density of
100 kg/m6
, from reference [22].
5.4 Experimental determination of the thermal conductivity 127Table 5.1: Theoretical models hypothesis and predictions regarding the thermal conductivity of nanocellular polymers up to 2022.
Author Conduction through the
solid phase
Conduction
through the gas
phase
Radiation Predictions at  K
Sundarram et al. []
()
Finite element analysis and
molecular dynamics simulation
methods.
Finite Element Model (FEM) for microcellular polymers.
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation for nanocellular polymers. Knudsen effect is
included in MD simulations.
 mW/(m · K) for nanocellular PEI with
relative density of . and  nm of cell
size.
Forest et al. []
()
Model derived from aerogels to
predict the thermal conductivity of
PS.
Empirical model used to
determine the speed of
sound in aerogel materials
λs = Cρr1.88
Knudsen effect
λg = λ′g0 1 − ρr ð Þ 1 + 2βϕ RT ffiffi2 p πd2mNAp
Rosseland equation applied to
aerogels
λr = 16n2σT3 3ρrKs
where KS is the extinction
coefficient of the solid
polymer
Minimum of  mW/(m · K) for nanocellular
PS with relative densities between .–.
and  nm of cell size, considering
KS =  cm–.
Wang et al. []
()
Association of resistances (solid in
walls and struts and gas) to
describe the conduction through
the solid and gas phases.
Effective thermal
conductivity of the solid that
constitutes the cell walls and
struts using the kinetic
theory
λ′s eff = λ′s 1 + lδ  −1
Knudsen effect
λg = λ′g0 1 − ρr ð Þ 1 + 2βϕ RT ffiffi2 p πd2mNAp
Williams and Aldo equation
using Mie theory to
determine TN
λr = 4σT3L
1 + Lϕ   1TN − 1  
Minimum of around – mW/(m · K) for
nanocellular polymers (– nm) with
relative densities between . and .,
without considering high radiation absorption
by the polymer.
128 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityBernardo et al. []
()
Association of cells depending on
their cell size to describe bimodal
cellular structures with medium/
high densities.
λs = gλ′sρr
With g = 1 obtained from
experimental results
For cells larger
than 7 μm:
λg = λ′g0 1 − ρr ð Þ
For cells smaller
than 7 μm:
Knudsen effect
λg = λ′g0 1 − ρr ð Þ 1 + 2βϕ RT ffiffi2 p πd2mNAp
Considered to be negligible
because of the medium/high
densities
 mW/(m · K) for nanocellular PMMA with
relative density of . and  nm of cell
size.
Bernardo et al. []
()
Model of the thermal conductivity
including the radiation
contribution using a semi￾empirical equation.
λs = gλ′sρr
With g = 2/3 assuming close￾cell low-density foams
Knudsen effect
λg = λ′g0 1 − ρr ð Þ 1 + 2βϕ RT ffiffi2 p πd2mNAp
Rosseland equation using a
semi-empirical Ke
λr = 16n2σT3 3Ke
Ke = KSρr + A 6πϕ3 1 − ρr ð Þ  1 3ϕB =
where KS is the extinction
coefficient of the solid
polymer, and A and B are
constants
Minimum of  mW/(m · K) for nanocellular
PMMA (. of relative density and  nm)
considering
KS =  cm–.
Minimum of  mW/(m · K) for nanocellular
PMMA with relative densities between
.–. and  nm of cell size, considering
KS =  cm-.
Buahom et al. []
()
Association of resistances (solid in
walls and struts and gas) to
describe the conduction
through the solid and gas
phases.
Effective thermal
conductivity of the solid that
constitutes the cell walls and
struts using the kinetic
theory
λ′s eff = λ′s 1 + lδ  −1
Knudsen effect
λg = λ′g0 1 − ρr ð Þ 1 + 2βϕ RT ffiffi2 p πd2mNAp
Rosseland equation using Mie
theory to determine Ke
λr = 16n2σT3 3Ke
Minimum of  mW/(m · K) for nanocellular
PMMA (. of relative density and  nm).
Minimum of  mW/(m · K) for nanocellular
PS (. of relative density and  nm).
(continued)
5.4 Experimental determination of the thermal conductivity 129Table 5.1 (continued)
Author Conduction through the
solid phase
Conduction
through the gas
phase
Radiation Predictions at  K
Sanchez-Calderon et al. []
()
Semi-empirical model based on
thermal conductivity
measurements
λs = gλ′sρr
With g = 0.89 as obtained
from the experimental
results
Knudsen effect
λg = λ′g0 1 − ρr ð Þ 1 + 2βϕ RT ffiffi2 p πd2mNAp
Rosseland equation using a
semi–empirical Ke
λr = 16n2σT3 3Ke
Ke th = A ϕB  ρr
where A and B are constants
Minimum of  mW/(m · K) for microcellular
PMMA (relative density . and cell sizes
 nm).
Minimum of  mW/(m · K) for nanocellular
PMMA (relative density . and cell sizes
 nm).
For lower g, minima of –
mW/(m · K) can be reached￾130 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivitywhen the heat flux through the sample thickness per unit of area is constant, i.e., the
temperature at each point of the sample does not vary over time [84]. Among steady￾state techniques, the guarded hot plate (GHP) and heat flow meter (HFM) methods are
commonly used [84]. The GHP method is considered an absolute method because the
heat flux is determined by measuring the power needed to keep the temperature of the
hot plate constant. On the contrary, the HFM is a comparative or relative method. In
this case, the heat flux is determined by measuring the voltage drop through an electri￾cal resistor, a so-called sensor or heat flux transducer, which is previously calibrated to
obtain representative and comparable values of the thermal conductivity of insulating
materials. Several international standards rely on steady-state measurements to calcu￾late thermal conductivity, such as ASTM C518 or ISO 8301. These standards require
large specimens for measurement.
Nanocellular polymers are still lab-scale materials that are not fabricated at a large
scale. Then, it is quite challenging to produce large samples and use steady-state meth￾ods to characterize their thermal conductivity. For this reason, several researchers
have used transient methods such as TPS to determine the thermal conductivity. In the
recent work of Sanchez-Calderon and coworkers [86], the validity of the TPS method for
microcellular and nanocellular polymers was tested (Figure 5.16). The results were com￾pared to those obtained with a conventional heat flow meter (HFM), a method based on
the use of masks (M), and a self-developed method based on the use of external sensors
(ES). Measurements revealed that the TPS method is not accurate for the characteriza￾tion of the thermal conductivity of small samples of nanocellular PMMA, even when
the values are corrected considering the sensor characteristics (data points labeled as
TPS✶ in Figure 5.16). The values measured by the TPS technique are always very high in
comparison with those obtained using the steady-state approach.
5.4.2 Results in the literature
The experimental thermal conductivity data of nanocellular polymers is still quite
scarce. This is because there is still a huge limitation in the production of large and
defect-free samples, especially in the low-density limit, as discussed in Chapter 3. All
the experimental results found in the literature for nanocellular polymers with cell
sizes below 1 micron are summarized in Table 5.2 and then plotted in Figure 5.17. It is
observed that there is a lack of data because only a few works measure thermal con￾ductivity [20, 22, 30, 47, 52, 87–89]. In addition, most of the experimental data found in
the literature were measured using the transient plane source method (TPS). As com￾mented before, the accuracy of these methods for thermal insulating materials is not
clear [90–92] and recent works proved that the TPS is not accurate for nanocellular
polymers [86]. As a counterpart, steady-state methods are the most accurate to charac￾terize insulating materials, but conventional equipment requires large samples. The
5.4 Experimental determination of the thermal conductivity 131use of tuned devices, like in the case of Zhou et al. [88], Almeida et al. [52] or Sanchez￾Calderon et al. [86], allows using steady-state methods for small specimens.
Figure 5.17 shows the dependence of the thermal conductivity data of the litera￾ture with the relative density (Figure 5.17a) and the cell size (Figure 5.17b). Closed sym￾bols are used for steady-state measurements and semi-open symbols for TPS results.
Figure 5.16: Results obtained through the commercial heat flow meter (HFM), the mask method (M), the
external sensors method (ES), the TPS method, and applying the TPS correction. (a) Thermal conductivity
and (b) deviation in % compared to reference measurements (HFM measurements), from reference [86].
132 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityThere is a clear dependency of the conductivity with the relative density, but the
trend with the cell size is not so clear due to the possible inaccuracy of some of these
results. For instance, Wang et al. [20] reported a super insulating nanocellular
poly(methyl methacrylate)/thermoplastic polyurethane (PMMA/TPU) foam (24.8 mW/
(m · K) of thermal conductivity) characterized by a relative density of 0.125 and 205 nm
of cell size. However, as already mentioned, the same authors theoretically predicted
that such a low thermal conductivity cannot be reached for nanocellular PMMA [21, 40]
and the recent results of Sanchez-Calderon et al. also seem to indicate the same [22].
The same research group also reported a polyether block amide/polyamide (PEBA/PA)
foam with 25.5 mW/(m · K) (relative density of 0.17 and 180 nm of cell size) [87], again
contradictory with the current theoretical predictions. Apart from these results, there
Table 5.2: Experimental results regarding the thermal conductivity of nanocellular polymers up to 2022.
Author Material Method Relative
density
Cell size
(nm)
Thermal
conductivity /mW/
(m · K))
Zhou et al. []

PEI Steady-state – Guarded
hot plate (GHP)
.–.  –
Wang et al. []

PMMA/
TPU
Transient – TPS .–. – –
Notario et al. []

PMMA Transient – TPS .  
Notario et al. []

PMMA/
MAM
Transient – TPS .–. – –
Martin–de Leon
et al. [] 
PMMA Transient – TPS .–. – –
Bernardo et al. []

PMMA Transient – TPS .–.  –
Bernardo et al. []

PMMA/
MAM
Transient – TPS .–. –
BIMODAL
–
Bernardo et al. []

PMMA/
Sepiolites
Transient – TPS .–. –
BIMODAL
–
Almeida et al. []

PS Steady-state – External
sensor (ES)
.–. – –
Zhao et al. []

PEBA/PA Transient – TPS . – –
Sanchez-Calderon
et al. [] 
PMMA Steady-state – Heat
flow meter (HFM)
.–. – –
5.4 Experimental determination of the thermal conductivity 133are no more data for low-density nanocellular samples measured by TPS, but there are
some data in the medium/high-density range. Notario et al. [30], Bernardo et al. [47],
and Martin-de–León [89] studied samples with relative densities over 0.20. They ob￾tained values of 60–100 mW/(m · K) for cell sizes between 20 and 1000 nm. Regarding
the more reliable data (measured by a steady-state technique), Almeida et al. [52] stud￾ied the thermal conductivity of nanocellular polystyrene PS (relative density of 0.1 and
630 nm of cell size) obtaining 40.2 mW/(m · K). To measure the thermal conductivity,
they employed a heat flow meter-based technique by using external sensors (ES) to
measure the heat flux. Meanwhile, Zhou et al. [88] used a homemade guarded hot plate
(GHP*) to study nanocellular polyetherimide (PEI). Lately, Sanchez-Calderon and co￾workers prepared samples large enough to be measured in a conventional heat flow
meter [22]. They obtained thermal conductivities of 39–44 for nanocellular polymers
with cell size around 400 nm and density 0.13–0.18.
From the analysis of the state of the art, both from a theoretical and experimental per￾spective, we can conclude that nanocellular polymers, in the range of densities and cell
sizes known, will not directly lead to a super-insulation performance. The gas conduc￾tion and the radiation heat transfer mechanisms are the same as those of super￾insulators, like aerogels, but there is a key difference in the behavior of the solid con￾duction. Due to the continuity of the solid phase, its size, and the confinement of the
polymer macromolecules, the conduction through the solid is much higher in nanocel￾lular polymers (see Figure 5.4). To boost their performance, new ideas must come up.
As seen in Figure 5.17, there is still uncertainty in the region of very low densities
(relative densities below 0.1) and also for cell sizes below 100 nm and relative densi￾ties below 0.2. To confirm the predictions of the theoretical models, it will be manda￾Figure 5.17: Experimental research on the thermal conductivity of nanocellular polymers: (a) thermal
conductivity–relative density, (b) thermal conductivity–cell size.
134 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivitytory to study the thermal conductivity of samples with those characteristics to have a
complete picture of the effect of the cell size on the thermal insulation performance
of these materials.
5.5 Future perspectives
As the main responsible for the high thermal conductivity of nanocellular polymers is
the solid contribution, new ways to reduce this contribution must be discovered. The
main difference between nanocellular polymers and aerogels is the connectivity of
the solid phase. Discontinuous nanocellular polymers can be created by means of mi￾cronization, as recently suggested by Sanchez-Calderon and co-workers [93]. The
nanocellular structure allows the micronization of the material without destroying
the inner structure. Micronization reduces thermal conductivity significantly in com￾parison to bulk nanocellular polymers (Figure 5.18). Then, this is a promising ap￾proach to boost the performance of nanocellular polymers.
Another possibility is the use of IR-blockers to reduce the thermal conductivity of nano￾cellular polymers, as suggested by Buahom et al. [76]. The effect of multi-walled carbon
nanotubes (MWCNT) on heat transfer in foams was mathematically modeled and experi￾mentally verified for cell sizes above 5 microns. They found that with MWCNT the radia￾tion blocking capability is significantly improved and nanocellular foams could achieve
superinsulation level through the Knudsen effect (Figure 5.19). How to incorporate these
45
Bulk
Powder
40
35
30
100
Thermal Conductivity (mW/(m.K))
150 200 250
Density (kg/m3)
Figure 5.18: Thermal conductivity measured at 10 °C as a function of the material apparent
density of the bulk and micronized nanocellular samples from reference [93].
5.5 Future perspectives 135Figure 5.19: Effect of the MWCNT content on the total thermal conductivity of PS and PS/MWCNT foams
and (e) 500 mm, from reference [76].
at various volume expansion ratios with cell sizes of (a) 5 microns, (b) 100 microns (c) 500 nm, (d) 1 mm
136 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityparticles into the nanocellular structure without compromising either the density or the
cell size is yet to be investigated.
5.6 Conclusions
The new legislation regarding energy consumption is more and more demanding to
face the challenges of our era. To reduce the carbon footprint of buildings, improving
their insulation to prevent heat losses is mandatory. In the early years of nanocellular
polymers, it was claimed several times that they could be a potential solution in this
sense, proving a new super–insulating material with characteristics like those of
other nanostructured materials (like aerogels or fumed silica) but with a lower cost
and produced with an environmentally friendly process. However, the challenge of
producing samples with the required characteristics to confirm this hypothesis was
not accomplished until recent years. The new theoretical models and experimental
results prove that there is a limitation in the reduction of the thermal conductivity of
nanocellular polymers for the densities and cell sizes reached. While they show the
Knudsen effect, presenting a low conduction through the gas phase, their solid struc￾ture provides a high solid conduction. Current predictions establish the limit of their
performance in 34–37 mK/(m · K). This is a value close to conventional insulators, but
that can be achieved with a higher density in nanocellular polymers thanks to the
Knudsen effect. Then, new potential opportunities might rise for these materials: they
can show similar insulation performance to conventional materials but with a much
better mechanical resistance. Also, as discussed in Chapter 4, these materials could
combine low thermal conductivity with transparent behavior, arising a new genera￾tion of unique materials.
As the main responsible for the high thermal conductivity of nanocellular polymers
is the solid contribution, new ways to reduce this contribution must be discovered. The
main difference between nanocellular polymers and aerogels is the connectivity of the
solid phase. Discontinuous nanocellular polymers can be created by means of micron￾ization. Another possibility is the use of IR-blockers to reduce the radiation contribu￾tion, which is quite high in nanocellular polymers due to the lack of scattering of the
cellular structure.
The main conclusion is that there is still room for improvement in the field of the
thermal insulation performance of nanocellular polymers.
5.6 Conclusions 137References
[1] European commission – department: Energy – in focus. energy efficiency in buildings, (2020).
[2] International Energy Agency. Transition to Sustainable Buildings. Strategies and Opportunities to
2050, (2013).
[3] M. Casini, Smart Buildings: Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology to Improve Energy-Efficiency
And Environmental Performance, Elsevier Ltd, (2016).
[4] DIRECTIVE, 2010/31/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 19 May 2010 on
the energy performance of buildings, Off. J. Eur. Union. (2010).
[5] ▼B DIRECTIVE 2012/27/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of
25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and
repealing directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC, (2012).
[6] J. Wernery, F. Mancebo, W.J. Malfait, M. O’Connor, B.P. Jelle, The economics of thermal
superinsulation in buildings, Energy Build. 253 (2021) 111506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.
111506
[7] European Commission, Energy efficient buildings, (n.d.).
[8] W. Villasmil, L.J. Fischer, J. Worlitschek, A review and evaluation of thermal insulation materials and
methods for thermal energy storage systems, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 103 (2019) 71–84.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.12.040
[9] M. Casini, Smart Buildings, 2016th ed., Elsevier, (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/C2015-0-00182-4
[10] S. Schiavoni, F. D’Alessandro, F. Bianchi, F. Asdrubali, Insulation materials for the building sector: A
review and comparative analysis, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 62 (2016) 988–1011. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2016.05.045
[11] M. Casini, Advanced construction materials, in: Constr. 4.0, Elsevier, (2022) 337–404. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-821797-9.00005-2
[12] C. Moore, S. Shrestha, S. Gokarakonda, Building energy standards and labelling in Europe, (2019).
[13] F. Garzia, R. Pernetti, T. Weiss, D. Venus, A. Knotzer, M. Thouvenot, B. Berggren, CRAVEzero – D2.1:
Report on EU implementation of nZEBs, (2018) 1–38.
[14] K. Ahmed, M. Carlier, C. Feldmann, J. Kurnitski, A new method for contrasting energy performance
and near-zero energy building requirements in different climates and countries, Energies 11 (2018)
1334. https://doi.org/10.3390/en11061334
[15] B. López-Mesa, M. Monzón-Chavarrías, A. Espinosa-Fernández, Energy retrofit of social housing with
cultural value in spain: Analysis of strategies conserving the original image vs. coordinating its
modification, Sustainability 12 (2020) 5579. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12145579
[16] European insulation manufacturers association (eurima): U-values for better energy performance of
buildings, (n.d.).
[17] S. Costeux, CO2-blown nanocellular foams, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 131 (2014) 41293(1)–41293(16).
https://doi.org/10.1002/app.41293
[18] S. Liu, J. Duvigneau, G.J. Vancso, Nanocellular polymer foams as promising high performance
thermal insulation materials, Eur. Polym. J. 65 (2015) 33–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.
2015.01.039
[19] C. Forest, P. Chaumont, P. Cassagnau, B. Swoboda, P. Sonntag, Polymer nano-foams for insulating
applications prepared from CO 2 foaming, Prog. Polym. Sci. 41 (2015) 122–145. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.progpolymsci.2014.07.001
[20] G. Wang, J. Zhao, L.H. Mark, G. Wang, K. Yu, C. Wang, C.B. Park, G. Zhao, Ultra-tough and super
thermal-insulation nanocellular PMMA/TPU, Chem. Eng. J. 325 (2017) 632–646. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cej.2017.05.116
138 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivity[21] P. Buahom, C. Wang, M. Alshrah, G. Wang, P. Gong, M.P. Tran, C.B. Park, Wrong expectation of
superinsulation behavior from largely-expanded nanocellular foams, Nanoscale 12 (2020)
13064–13085. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0nr01927e
[22] I. Sánchez-Calderón, V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de-león, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Thermal conductivity of
low-density micro-and nanocellular poly (methyl-methacrylate) (PMMA): Experimental and
modeling, Mater. Des. 221 (2022) 110938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.110938
[23] L.J. Gibson, M. Ashby, Cellular Solids: Structure and Properties, 2nd Editio, Cambridge University
Press, (1997).
[24] M. Alvarez-Lainez, M.A. Rodrıguez-Perez, J.A. de Saja, Thermal conductivity of open-cell polyolefin
foams, J. Polym. Sci. Part B: Polym. Phys. 46 (2008) 212–221. https://doi.org/10.1002/polb
[25] P.G. Collishaw, J.R.G. Evans, An assessment of expressions for the apparent thermal conductivity of
cellular materials, J. Mater. Sci. 29 (1994) 486–498. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01162512
[26] N.C. Hilyard, A. Cunningham, Low density cellular plastics physical basis of behaviour, 1994.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-1256-7.
[27] C.L. Choy, Thermal conductivity of polymers, Polymer (Guildf) 18 (1977) 984–1004.
[28] W.N. Dos Santos, J.A. De Sousa, R. Gregorio, Thermal conductivity behaviour of polymers around
glass transition and crystalline melting temperatures, Polym. Test. 32 (2013) 987–994. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2013.05.007
[29] N.R. Pradhan, G.S. Iannacchione, Thermal properties and glass transition in PMMA + SWCNT
composites, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 43 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1088/0022-3727/43/30/305403
[30] B. Notario, J. Pinto, E. Solorzano, J.A. de Saja, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Experimental
validation of the knudsen effect in nanocellular polymeric foams, Polymer (Guildf) 56 (2015) 57–67.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.10.006
[31] C.B. Park, M. Saniei, M.-P. Tran, P. Pötschke, P. Buahom, P. Gong, Heat transfer in microcellular
polystyrene/multi-walled carbon nanotube nanocomposite foams, Carbon N. Y. 93 (2015) 819–829.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2015.06.003
[32] L.W. Hrubesh, R.W. Pekala, Thermal properties of organic and inorganic aerogels, J. Mater. Res. 9
(1994) 731–738. https://doi.org/10.1557/JMR.1994.0731
[33] C.V. Vo, F. Bunge, J. Duffy, L. Hood, Advances in thermal insulation of extruded polystyrene foams,
Cell. Polym. 30 (2011) 137–156.
[34] H. Ebert, Thermal properties of aerogels, Aerogels Handb. (2011) 537–564. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4419-7589-8
[35] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York, (1976).
[36] B. Notario, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodríguez-Perez, Towards a new generation of polymeric foams: PMMA
nanocellular foams with enhanced physical properties, Polymer (Guildf) 63 (2015) 116–126.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2015.03.003
[37] J. Martin de-leon, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Low density nanocellular polymers based on
PMMA produced by gas dissolution foaming : Fabrication and cellular structure characterization,
Polymers (Basel) 8 (2016) 1–16. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym8070265
[38] Z.M. Zhang, Nano/Microscale Heat Transfer, Springer International Publishing, Cham, (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45039-7
[39] J. Lee, J. Lim, P. Yang, Ballistic phonon transport in holey silicon, Nano. Lett. 15 (2015) 3273–3279.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b00495
[40] G. Wang, C. Wang, J. Zhao, G. Wang, C.B. Park, G. Zhao, Modelling of thermal transport through a
nanocellular polymer foam: Toward the generation of a new superinsulating material, Nanoscale
9 (2017) 5996–6009. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7nr00327g
[41] X. Lu, M.C. Arduini-Schuster, J. Kuhn, O. Nilsson, J. Fricke, R.W. Pekala, Thermal conductivity of
monolithic organic aerogels, Science (80-.). 255 (1992) 971–972. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.255.
5047.971
References 139[42] H. Ma, Z. Tian, Effects of polymer chain confinement on thermal conductivity of ultrathin amorphous
polystyrene films, Appl. Phys. Lett. 107 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4929426
[43] I. Kim, M.G. Burzo, P.L. Komarov, P.E. Raad, Thermal conductivity measurements of ultra-thin
amorphous poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) films, ASME Int. Mech. Eng. Congr. Expo. Proc. 8 C
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1115/IMECE2013-66507
[44] R.-C. Zhang, Z. Huang, D. Sun, D. Ji, M. Zhong, D. Zang, J.-Z. Xu, Y. Wan, A. Lu, New insights into
thermal conductivity of uniaxially stretched high density polyethylene films, Polymer (Guildf)
154 (2018) 42–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.08.078
[45] P. Scheuerpflug, M. Hauck, J. Fricke, Thermal properties of silica aerogels between 1.4 and 330 k,
J. Non. Cryst. Solids 145 (1992) 196–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3093(05)80455-7
[46] B. Merillas, J.P. Vareda, J. Martín-de León, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, L. Durães, Thermal conductivity of
nanoporous materials: Where is the limit?, Polymers (Basel) 14 (2022) 2556. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym14132556
[47] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de leon, J. Pinto, R. Verdejo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Modeling the heat transfer
by conduction of nanocellular polymers with bimodal cellular structures, Polymer (Guildf) 160 (2019)
126–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.11.047
[48] M. Saadatfar, C.H. Arns, M.A. Knackstedt, T. Senden, Mechanical and transport properties of
polymeric foams derived from 3D images, colloids surfaces a physicochem, Eng. Asp 263 (2005)
284–289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2004.12.040
[49] J. Fricke, E. Hümmer, H.-J. Morper, P. Scheuerpflug, Thermal properties of silica aerogels, Le J. Phys.
Colloq. 24 (1989) C4-87–C4-97. https://doi.org/10.1051/jphyscol:1989414
[50] J. Fricke, Aerogels, Springer. Proc. Phys. 6 (1985).
[51] X. Lu, R. Caps, J. Fricke, C.T. Alviso, R.W. Pekala, Correlation between structure and thermal
conductivity of organic aerogels, J. Non. Cryst. Solids 188 (1995) 226–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0022-3093(95)00191-3
[52] F.A. Almeida, H. Beyrichen, N. Dodamani, R. Caps, A. Müller, R. Oberhoffer, Thermal conductivity
analysis of a new sub-micron sized polystyrene foam, J. Cell. Plast. 0 (2020) 1–23. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0021955X20943101
[53] J. Fricke, Thermal Transport in Porous Superinsulations, (1986) 94–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-93313-4_11
[54] Z. Li, C. Zhu, X. Zhao, A theoretical and numerical study on the gas-contributed thermal conductivity
in aerogel, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 108 (2017) 1982–1990.
[55] J. Nassios, Kinetic theory of rarefied gas flows with modern applications, Tech. Pap. (2006) 50–51.
[56] S. Song, M.M. Yovanovich, F.O. Goodman, Thermal gap conductance of conforming surfaces in
contact, J. Heat Transfer. 115 (1993) 533–540.
[57] Y.L. He, T. Xie, Advances of thermal conductivity models of nanoscale silica aerogel insulation
material, Appl. Therm. Eng. 81 (2015) 28–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.02.013
[58] S. Sonnick, L. Erlbeck, M. Meier, H. Nirschl, M. Rädle, Methodical selection of thermal conductivity
models for porous silica-based media with variation of gas type and pressure, Int. J. Heat Mass
Transf. 187 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2022.122519
[59] S.E. Kentish, C.A. Scholes, G.W. Stevens, Carbon dioxide separation through polymeric membrane
systems for flue gas applications, Recent Pat. Chem. Eng. 1 (2008) 52–66. https://doi.org/10.2174/
1874478810801010052
[60] R. Baetens, B.P. Jelle, J.V. Thue, M.J. Tenpierik, S. Grynning, S. Uvsløkk, A. Gustavsen, Vacuum
insulation panels for building applications: A review and beyond, Energy Build. 42 (2010) 147–172.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2009.09.005
[61] G. Barton, The quantum theory of light, Phys. Bull. 25 (1974) 103–104. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-
9112/25/3/025
140 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivity[62] A. Ramírez-Hernández, C. Aguilar-Flores, A. Aparicio-Saguilán, Fingerprint analysis of FTIR spectra of
polymers containing vinyl acetate, DYNA 86 (2019) 198–205. https://doi.org/10.15446/dyna.v86n209.
77513
[63] E. Solórzano, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. Lazaro, J.A. De Saja, Influence of solid phase conductivity and
cellular structure on the heat transfer mechanisms of cellular materials: Diverse case studies, Adv.
Eng. Mater. 11 (2009) 818–824. https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.200900138
[64] O.A. Almanza, J.A. de Saja, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Prediction of the radiation term in the thermal
conductivity of crosslinked closed cell polyolefin foams, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 38 (2000)
993–1004. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-0488(20000401)38:7<993::AID-POLB10>3.0.CO;2-J
[65] R. Siegel, J.R. Howell, Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer, Third Edition, (1992).
[66] R.A. Campo-Arnáiz, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, B. Calvo, J.A. De Saja, Extinction coefficient of polyolefin
foams, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 43 (2005) 1608–1617. https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.20435
[67] L. Glicksman, M. Schuetz, M. Sinofsky, Radiation heat transfer in foam insulation, Int. J. Heat Mass
Transf. 30 (1987) 187–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(87)90071-8
[68] L.R. Glicksman, M. Torpey, Factors governing heat transfer through closed cell foam insulation,
J. Therm. Insul. 12 (1989) 257–269. https://doi.org/10.1177/109719638901200403
[69] A. Kaemmerlen, C. Vo, F. Asllanaj, G. Jeandel, D. Baillis, Radiative properties of extruded polystyrene
foams: Predictive model and experimental results, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 111 (2010)
865–877. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jqsrt.2009.11.018
[70] S. Estravís, J. Tirado-Mediavilla, M. Santiago-Calvo, J.L. Ruiz-Herrero, F. Villafañe, M.Á. Rodríguez￾Pérez, Rigid polyurethane foams with infused nanoclays: Relationship between cellular structure and
thermal conductivity, Eur. Polym. J. 80 (2016) 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2016.04.026
[71] A.J. Cox, A.J. DeWeerd, J. Linden, An experiment to measure mie and rayleigh total scattering cross
sections, Am. J. Phys. 70 (2002) 620–625. https://doi.org/10.1119/1.1466815
[72] C.F. Bohren, D.R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles, Wiley, (1998).
https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527618156
[73] H.J. Li, Y.W. Kiang, Radar and Inverse Scattering, Elsevier Inc, (2005). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
012170960-0/50047-5
[74] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, J. Pinto, U. Schade, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, On the interaction of
infrared radiation and nanocellular polymers: First experimental determination of the extinction
coefficient, colloids surfaces a physicochem, Eng. Asp. 600 (2020) 124937. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
colsurfa.2020.124937
[75] U. Heinemann, R. Caps, J. Fricke, Radiation-conduction interaction : An investigation on silica
aerogels, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 39 (1996) 2115–2130. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(95)00313-4
[76] P. Buahom, P. Gong, C. Wang, H. Yu, J. Liu, C.B. Park, Carbon as a solution for nanocellular foam
superinsulation, Carbon N. Y 189 (2022) 319–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2021.11.041
[77] P. Gong, G. Wang, M.P. Tran, P. Buahom, S. Zhai, G. Li, C.B. Park, Advanced bimodal polystyrene/
multi-walled carbon nanotube nanocomposite foams for thermal insulation, Carbon N. Y 120 (2017)
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2017.05.029
[78] T. Li, G. Zhao, G. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Hou, Thermal-Insulation, Electrical, and mechanical properties of
highly-expanded PMMA/MWCNT nanocomposite foams fabricated by supercritical CO2 foaming,
Macromol. Mater. Eng. 1800789 (2019) 1800789. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201800789
[79] Y. Li, Z. Chen, C. Zeng, Poly(Methyl Methacrylate) (PMMA) Nanocomposite Foams, Polym.
Nanocomp. Foam. (2018).
[80] J. Martin-de Leon, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanocellular polymers: The challenge of
creating cells in the nanoscale, Materials (Basel) 12 (2019) 1–19. https://doi.org/10.3390/MA12050797
[81] J. Martin-de Leon, V. Bernardo, P. Cimavilla-Roman, S. Perez-Tamarit, M.A. Rodriguez‐Perez,
Overcoming the challenge of producing large and flat nanocellular polymers: A study with PMMA,
Adv. Eng. Mater. (2019) 1900148 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.201900148
References 141[82] S.S. Sundarram, W. Li, On thermal conductivity of micro- and nanocellular polymer foams, Polym.
Eng. Sci. 53 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1002/pen
[83] D. Kraemer, G. Chen, A simple differential steady-state method to measure the thermal conductivity
of solid bulk materials with high accuracy, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.
4865111
[84] N. Yüksel, The review of some commonly used methods and techniques to measure the thermal
conductivity of insulation materials, Insul. Mater. Context Sustain. (2016). https://doi.org/http://dx.
doi.org/10.5772/64157
[85] O. Almanza, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J.A. de Saja, Measurement of the thermal diffusivity and specific
heat capacity of polyethylene foams using the transient plane source technique, Polym. Int.
53 (2004) 2038–2044. https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.1624
[86] I. Sánchez-Calderón, Á. Sillero, F. Lizalde-Arroyo, V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de-león, M.Á. Rodríguez￾Pérez, Evaluation of methods to accurately characterize the thermal conductivity of micro-and
nanocellular polymers based on poly(methyl-methacrylate) (PMMA) produced at lab-scale, Polym.
Test. 117 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2022.107842
[87] J. Zhao, G. Wang, Z. Xu, A. Zhang, G. Dong, G. Zhao, C.B. Park, Ultra-elastic and super-insulating
biomass PEBA nanoporous foams achieved by combining in-situ fibrillation with microcellular
foaming, J. CO2 Util. 57 (2022) 101891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2022.101891
[88] C. Zhou, N. Vaccaro, S.S. Sundarram, W. Li, Fabrication and characterization of polyetherimide
nanofoams using supercritical CO2
, J. Cell. Plast. 48 (2012) 239–255. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0021955X12437984
[89] J. Martin-de Leon, Understanding the Production Process of Nanocellular Polymers Based on Pmma
Driven by a Homogeneous, University of Valladolid, (2019).
[90] O. Almanza, M. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. A. De Saja, Applicability of the transient plane source method
to measure the thermal conductivity of low-density polyethylene foams, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym.
Phys. 42 (2004) 1226–1234. https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.20005
[91] Q. Zheng, S. Kaur, C. Dames, R.S. Prasher, Analysis and improvement of the hot disk transient plane
source method for low thermal conductivity materials, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 151 (2020) 119331.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.119331
[92] R.C. Kerschbaumer, S. Stieger, M. Gschwandl, T. Hutterer, M. Fasching, B. Lechner, L. Meinhart,
J. Hildenbrandt, B. Schrittesser, P.F. Fuchs, G.R. Berger, W. Friesenbichler, Comparison of steady￾state and transient thermal conductivity testing methods using different industrial rubber
compounds, Polym. Test. 80 (2019) 106121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2019.106121
[93] I. Sanchez-Calderon, V. Bernardo, D. Cuadra-Rodríguez, J. Martin-de Leon, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez,
Micronization as a solution for enhancing the thermal insulation of nanocellular poly (methyl￾methacrylate) (PMMA), Polymer (Guildf) 261 (2022) 125397. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2022.
125397
142 Chapter 5 Thermal conductivityChapter 6
Mechanical properties
6.1 Introduction
One of the main drawbacks of conventional cellular polymers is the loss of their mechan￾ical properties in comparison to the former polymer, due to density reduction (eq. (6.1)).
For this reason, conventional cellular polymers are restricted for structural applications.
This problem was claimed to be solved with the discovery of microcellular poly￾mers at the MIT. Since 1980 the enhancement in the mechanical properties in compar￾ison to their conventional counterparts has been proved for different microcellular
systems, as explained in the following section. This improvement was attributed to
the cell size reduction and therefore it was hypothesized that the next change of scale
(the nanometric one) would produce materials with even better mechanical perfor￾mance. However, the dependence of the cell size on the mechanical properties of
micro and nanocellular polymers is a difficult topic to discuss even today. The sought￾after improvement for the nanometric cells seems to be dependent on the studied me￾chanical property and the idea of the existence of a cell size threshold that depends
on the used polymer has been also introduced, as discussed in Section 6.3.
Although the dependence on the cell size is still a topic of discussion, it is well
known that a given mechanical property of the formed solid, Ps, reduces with the rel￾ative density ρr as marked by Gibson and Ashby equation [1]:
Pf = CPsρn
r (6:1)
where Pf is the property of the foam, and C and n are two parameters that can be
experimentally determined. C is usually near 1 for almost all the mechanical proper￾ties, while n usually takes a value between 1.5 and 3, in the case of low-density foams.
The challenge over the years has consisted of reducing the value of n so as to obtain
materials with a reduced weight without compromising the mechanical performance.
This equation was in deep analyzed by Ashby et al. for each particular mechani￾cal property for elastic, plastic and brittle foams and for open and close cellular struc￾tures. In their analysis, by identifying the deformation mechanisms and using a cell
with cubic geometry they were able to establish the exponent n of eq. (6.1) for differ￾ent properties. Table 6.1 summarizes these equations for some of the most studied me￾chanical properties in micro and nanocellular polymers with a plastic matrix (the one
mainly analyzed along this book): the elastic modulus E, the yield strength σy and the
fracture toughness KIC. In Table 6.1, the properties of the original solid are denoted
with the subindex s and l is the thickness of the sample, while Ci and Bi are constants.
As can be seen in Table 6.1 constants in the equations for open-cell foam structures
are obtained by fitting the equation to the experimental data (Figure 6.1). According to
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-006the Figure, used experimental data for these fitting correspond to literature prior to
1980, meaning conventional cellular materials.
There also exists additional models that based on the Ashby equations relate the
intrinsic properties of the polymer with the mechanical properties of the foams, espe￾cially the Young Modulus. Naguib et al. summarize some of these equations that relate
parameters such as the relaxation time constant ð Þτ , the modulus of viscosity ð Þ η and
the Young’s Modulus of the material with the strain/stress tensile behavior [3].
With the development of micro and nanocellular polymers, it was soon recog￾nized that one of the key potential advantages of these materials was the improve￾ment of the mechanical performance for a given density. This should be translated in
the previous models in a reduction of the exponent n for the property under study.
This chapter tries to summarize the mechanical properties of micro and nanocellular
polymers, focusing on the discussion of whether cell size reduction is capable of im￾proving the mechanical performance of cellular polymers, and the suggested hypothe￾sis to explain the obtained results from a molecular point of view.
6.2 Mechanical properties in microcellular polymers
As it was previously mentioned, microcellular polymers have been claimed to present
enhanced mechanical properties in comparison to common cellular materials (see
Chapter 1 for further details). This idea has been experimentally proven for different
microcellular polymers with measured specific mechanical properties equal to the
specific mean properties of the former solid or, in some specific cases, even improving
the value of the property. However, the behavior cannot be generalized, which means
there not exist a specific cell size or density threshold defined for all polymers and all
properties leading to mechanical improvement.
Table 6.1: Ashby equations for the most common mechanical properties for plastic cellular materials [2].
Property Open-Cell Foams Closed-Cell Foams
Elastic Modulus (E) E
Es
= C2
ρ
ρs
 2
C2e1
(.) E
Es
= B2
ρ
ρs
 3 (.)
Yield Strength (σy) σy
σs
= C4
ρ
ρs
 3
2
C4 ≈ 0.3
(.) σy
σs
= B4
ρ
ρs
 2 (.)
Fracture Toughness (KIC)
KIC = C8
ρ
ρs
 3
2
σf
ffiffiffiffi
πl p
C8 ≈ 0.65
(.)
KIC = B8
ρ
ρs
 2
σf
ffiffiffiffi
πl p (.)
144 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiesFigure 6.1: Comparison of experimental data to the Ashby proposed models. (a) the relative Young’s
foams. Adapted from reference [2].
density (c) the normalized fracture toughness against the relative density for crack propagation in brittle
modulus plotted against relative density (b) the relative yield strength stress plotted against relative
6.2 Mechanical properties in microcellular polymers 145This idea is illustrated in Figure 6.2 where the tensile properties and the impact
properties of different microcellular polymers have been represented. In the maps
not a single property is represented but any magnitude measure through tensile or
impact properties (a more detailed explanation is in Table 6.2). In Figure 6.2 the ten￾sile or impact properties are represented at the right or the left part of the cell size/
density map depending on whether or not the expected behavior is improved.
Regarding tensile properties at the right part, microcellular materials with differ￾ent combinations of cell size and density represent materials with an enhanced be￾havior in comparison to conventional materials (this means the properties are higher
than those expected using eq. (6.1) with n = 1). That’s mean that a reduction in the cell
size leads to an improvement of the tensile behavior of such materials. In addition,
areas circled in green mean that these systems present better mechanical properties
than the solid material, even after the density reduction.
As it can be seen, microcellular materials such as polyethersulfone (PESF) or poly￾phenylsulfone (PPSF), presenting similar cell sizes and densities than high-density
polyethylene and isotactic polypropylene (HDPE/iPP) or Thermoplastic Polyolefin
(TPO), do not perform the same. While PESF and PPSF do not show enhanced tensile
behavior than their conventional counterparts, PE/iPP and TPO systems do.
Compression properties are less studied, but the discussion is similar to that al￾ready presented for tensile properties (Table 6.2).
Regarding impact properties, a much more general behavior has been observed.
As can be seen a wide range of microcellular materials with different cell sizes and
relative densities perform better not only than conventional polymers but also better
than the reference solid, being PVC the only exception.
In the next paragraphs we discuss in more detail the previous results, that are
summarized in Table 6.2.
Kumar et al. produced microcellular PVC presenting a mean cell size smaller than
3 microns, and relative density from 1 to 0.6. They proved that the impact strength
(measured through falling-weight impact test) of the studied samples depends linearly
on the relative density, which means a better behavior than the one predicted by
Ashby equations [4].
Microcellular polyethersulfone (PESF) and polyphenylsulfone (PPSF) were pro￾duced with a range of cell sizes from 2 to 13 microns and relative densities from 0.9 to
0.35. The behavior of the mechanical properties with the relative density was studied
proving that high-density materials present a Young’s modulus under compression
test and an elastic collapse stress higher than that predicted according to Gibson and
Ashby equations [5] (Figures 6.3a and b). However, the behavior for medium to low
densities adapted to the model and additionally, relative strength measured under the
tensile test was worse than predicted (Figure 6.3c) [6].
The Izod impact strength of microcellular polycarbonate (PC) was studied by Bar￾low et al. [7]. They analyze the dependence on the density and the cell size for two
sets of samples. On the one hand, for samples with cell sizes between 4 and 9 microns
146 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiesand relative densities between 0.9 and 0.33 they proved that the cellular materials
performed better than the solid when the density is in the range of 0.6 to 0.9. This
improvement was attributed to a transition from brittle to ductile behavior than the
Figure 6.2: Cell size vs. relative density maps for microcellular polymers representing (a) when the tensile
properties are better than predicted (right side) or worse (left side), materials circled in green present also
tensile properties better than the solid. (b) when the impact properties are better than the solid (right
side) or worse (left side).
6.2 Mechanical properties in microcellular polymers 147material experience due to the presence of microcells, that relieve the triaxial stress
in front of the crack tip in this experiment [8]. However, samples with a constant den￾sity of 0.7 and cell sizes from 8 to 18 microns were proved to reduce their perfor￾mance as cell size reduces. It was hypothesized that this is due to a thicker wall
providing a greater volume for plastic deformation and or higher moment of inertia
to the bending produced during the impact test. Thus, according to this work, there is
an optimum cell size leading to the optimum cell wall thickness. However, this contra￾dicts the idea of improved mechanical performance with decreasing cell size.
Doroudiani et al. worked with expanded polystyrene (EPS) with cell sizes from 3 to 341
microns and relative densities from 0.56 to 0.032. They reported an impact strength better
than the one of the solid. However, despite the wide range of cell sizes, no dependence
was found with this parameter. They attribute the enhancement to the plastic and visco￾elastic deformation in the cell walls dissipating the energy unlike in the solid [9].
The tensile properties and IZOD impact were studied for microcellular blends of
high-density polyethylene and isotactic polypropylene (HDPE/iPP) with cell sizes
smaller than 10 microns. Both studied properties seem to improve due to the presence
(c) 1
0.8 Eq.4
PPSF
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Relative strength at break
Relative density
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(b) 1
0.8
Eq.2
PPSF
PESF
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Relative collapse stress
Relative density
(B): Relative collapse stress
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
1
0.8
Eq.1
PPSF
PESF
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Relative Young’s modulus
Relative density
(A): Relative Young’s modulus
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(a)
Figure 6.3: Comparison of the compression values of the (a) relative Young’s modulus for PESF and PPSF
foams (b) relative collapse stress and (c) relative strength at break with those predicted by Gibson and
Ashby models. Adapted from [6].
148 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiesof the microcells. Cellular materials under tensile properties present similar proper￾ties than the solid, in addition, the IZOD impact strength was improved in comparison
to the solid [10]. However, neither the effects of the cell size nor the relative density
are studied, only the effect of the HDPE/iPP blend composition is analyzed.
Shimbo et al. went to 1–2 microns and densities higher than 0.5 with microcellu￾lar foaming of crystalline polyethylene terephthalate (CPET) and founded an improve￾ment of the fracture strength as cell size was reduced. They also tried PP with much
bigger cell size from 40 to 100 microns and they also found this improvement with
cell size reduction. However, the test of PC under tensile test with cell sizes between
4 and 10 microns does not lead to the same result obtaining the same tensile fracture
strength independently of the cell size. They justify this difference with the crystallin￾ity character of CPET and PC and the amorphous one of PP. The presence of CO2 dur￾ing foaming increases the crystallinity and this together with the apparition of cells
leads to a strong molecular orientation that increases with the surface area [11].
Table 6.2: Summary of the results obtained for several properties of different microcellular systems. Right
columns indicate if in any of the studied properties shows a better behavior than that predicted by Ashby
et al. models.
Polymer Cell
size
(µm)
Relative
density
Tensile
properties
Impact
properties
Compression
properties
Relative
density
dependence
Cell size
dependence
PVC []  .– − Worse than
the solid but
better than
conventional
− Better than
predicted by
Ashby
models
−
PESF
and
PPSF []
– .–. Worse
relative
strength
than
predicted
− High density
foams better
Young’s
modulus and
collapse
stress than
the predicted
− −
PC [] – .–. − Impact
strength
better than
the solid
– Better than
predicted
Worse as
cell size
reduces
EPS [] – .–. − Impact
strength
better than
the solid
− Better than
predicted
No influence
6.2 Mechanical properties in microcellular polymers 149Table 6.2 (continued)
Polymer Cell
size
(µm)
Relative
density
Tensile
properties
Impact
properties
Compression
properties
Relative
density
dependence
Cell size
dependence
PE/iPP
[]
<  high
density
Similar to
unfoamed
samples
Impact
strength
better than
solid
− Better than
predicted
−
CPET
[]
– > . Worse than
the solid.
Fracture
strength
increases
with cell
size
reduction
−− − Better as cell
size reduces
PP [] – .–. Worse than
the solid.
Fracture
strength
increases
with cell
size
reduction
− − – Better as cell
size reduces
PC [] – < . Not
improved
−− − No influence
PLA [] <  .–. Increased
specific
stress at
break and
modulus
than the
solid.
Higher
strain at
break and
toughness
than the
solid.
Higher than
solid. Better
as cell size
reduces (but
also density
increases)
− − Better as cell
size reduces
150 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiesPLA was produced with cell sizes smaller than 5 microns and a range of relative
densities from 0.9 to 0.6 by Matuana et al. [13]. They published increased specific
stress at break and modulus than the solid and a higher strain at break and toughness
than the solid PLA. The results imply that microcellular foaming enhances the ductil￾ity of PLA. It can be also seen that the impact strength raises with the reduction of cell
size. They attribute this enhancement to the presence of small bubbles that in the im￾pact test inhibit crack propagation as previously hypothesized by Waldman et al. [15].
It is also hypothesized that the struts and cell walls of the foam structure absorb the
energy during deformation increasing the impact strength.
Wong et al. worked with Thermoplastic Polyolefin (TPO) proving that under ten￾sile properties this material with cell sizes between 1 and 8 microns and relative den￾sity between 0.9 and 0.75, presents a reduction of the tensile modulus and tensile
strength with the density lower than predicted. In addition, these properties are simi￾lar to those of the solid material. Regarding the percentage of elongation, the cellular
TPO behaves better than the solid [14].
Finally, microcellular PMMA with cell sizes from 5 to 445 microns and relative
density from 0.15 to 0.033 was analyzed under compression by Wang et al. [3]. They
proved both that the compressive strength and modulus reduce with density less than
Table 6.2 (continued)
Polymer Cell
size
(µm)
Relative
density
Tensile
properties
Impact
properties
Compression
properties
Relative
density
dependence
Cell size
dependence
TPO [] – .–. Tensile
modulus
and
strength
worse than
the solid.
Strain at
break
higher
than the
solid
− − Better than
predicted
−
PMMA
[]
– .–. − − Strength and
modulus
slowly
decrease with
density and
increases with
reducing cell
size.
Better than
predicted
Better as cell
size reduces
6.2 Mechanical properties in microcellular polymers 151predicted by models and also proved an improvement as cell size reduces for all the
cell size range studied. Their hypothesis is that the improvement is due to molecular
orientation.
As it can be seen in the two right columns of Table 6.2, in general terms it can be
affirmed that microcellular polymers improve the mechanical performance of con￾ventional cellular materials at least in some of the properties, being the impact prop￾erties the ones in which better improvements has been found. However, the cell size
and density range are not the same for all the systems and the mechanisms under
this improvement are not well established. There are different hypothesis to explain
the observed behaviors such as the how the cells affect the fracture mechanisms, a
possible orientation of the polymer in the cell walls, an induce crystallization due to
foaming for some polymers, plastic and viscoelastic deformation of the cell walls, ect.
Although the mechanism are not fully understood and are probably different for
different materials and different properties, everything seems to indicate that if the
introduction of microcells improves the mechanical behavior, the reduction of the
cell size up to the nanometric scale should improve it even more. The next section
shows all data in the literature regarding this topic.
6.3 Mechanical properties in nanocellular polymers
Works in the literature dealing with the study of the mechanical properties of nano￾cellular polymers are scarce as can be seen in Figure 6.4 and Table 6.3 (in this case we
are comparing the properties of nanocellular materials in comparison to that of mi￾crocellular materials.). This is due to the novelty of these materials and the not easy
task of producing samples large enough to test the mechanical properties. The first
paper dealing with this topic dates from 2011 [16], when Miller et al. explored the me￾chanical properties of nanocellular polyetherimide (PEI). However, for polymers such
as PMMA, much more brittle than PEI, the production of large samples was not
achieved up to 2019 by Martín de León et al. [17]
However, as it can be seen in Figure 6.4, representing if the nanocellular polymers
present enhancement in comparison to their microcellular counterparts, the general be￾havior seems to indicate that once more the impact properties are the ones presenting
a higher enhancement when reducing the cell size up to the nanoscale. An improve￾ment of the tensile and compression properties seems harder to achieve, although
some systems present it in some of its properties.
The properties of microcellular PC with 5 to 8 microns were compared with the
ones of nanocellular PC presenting cell sizes from 17 to 25 nm and relative densities
from 0.6 to 0.9. Despite the huge difference in the cell size, this work proved that both
sets of structures present similar behavior regarding Young’s modulus, yield stress,
stress at break, strain at break, and toughness [18].
152 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiesIn the work of Bernardo et al. nanocellular PMMA with 300 to 500 nm of cell size
is produced through heterogeneous nucleation by using sepiolite as nucleating agent.
These structures are compared with microcellular PMMA with a cell size of 4 microns.
Figure 6.4: Cell size vs. relative density maps for nanocellular polymers representing (a) when the tensile
properties are better than predicted (right side) or worse (left side). (b) when the impact properties are
better than the solid (right side) or worse (left side). Materials circled in green present also tensile
properties better than the solid.
6.3 Mechanical properties in nanocellular polymers 153The impact and compression properties show no change of tendency between both
ranges of cells. However, in this case, the change in the cell size is not as huge, thus
for smaller nanocells a different behavior could be observed [19].
The first evidence of improvement was published by Kumar et al. with nanocellu￾lar PEI of 40 nm of cell size and relative density from 0.75 to 0.9 [16]. In this work, the
tensile and the impact properties of these cellular materials are compared with micro￾cellular PEI with cell size of 4 microns and the same range of relative density. Regard￾ing tensile properties, decreasing the cell size to the nanometric range does not affect
Table 6.3: Summary of the results obtained for the tensile impact and compression properties of different
nanocellular systems. Right columns indicate if in any of the studied properties the relative density
dependence or the cell size dependence is better than the one of microcellular polymers.
Polymer Cell size
(µm)
Relative
density
Tensile
properties
Impact
properties
Compression
properties
Relative
density
dependence
Cell size
dependence
PC [] – /
–
.–. Not
improved.
−− − No
influence.
PMMA +
Sepiolites
[]
 /
–
.–. − Not
improved.
Not improved. − No
influence.
PEI  /  .–. Same yield
strength and
Young’s
modulus.
Enhanced
strain at
break and
modulus of
toughness.
Enhanced
fracture
toughness.
− − Better as cell
size is
reduced.
PP <  .–. Yield
strength and
ultimate
stress higher
than the
solid. Failure
strain lower
than the
solid.
− − – Better as cell
sizes
reduces.
PMMA –/
–
.–. − Improved
fracture
toughness
below
 nm.
Same Young’s
modulus and
Yield strength
than
microcellular.
Better than
predicted
Better as cell
size reduces.
154 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiessome tensile parameters but improves others (Figure 6.4a). As it can be seen in Fig￾ure 6.5, the Young’s modulus and yield strength are invariant to the cell size. How￾ever, the strain at break and the modulus of toughness clearly improve the behavior
of microcellular PEI and even the nanocellular polymer is better than the solid PEI.
Regarding impact properties (Figure 6.5d), introducing nanometric cells in PEI leads
to improving the impact strength of microcellular PEI by 600% and the value of the
solid by 65%. These are very impressive results showing very clear differences.
Sharudin and Ohshima, worked with nanocellular PP with cell sizes smaller than
250 nm and a range of relative density between 0.5 and 0.8. Nanocellular materials
enhance the yield strength and the ultimate stress in comparison to the solid material,
however, the tensile failure strain is worse than the one of the solid. In this particular
case, these authors attribute the improved mechanical properties to an increase in
crystallinity induced in the PP by foaming and not the presence of nanocells [20].
Finally, nanocellular PMMA with cell size from 20 to 84 nm and relative density
between 0.37 and 0.5 was mechanically tested and compared to microcellular PMMA
with cell sizes in the micrometric range (from 1 to 10 microns). In this work, the com￾pression properties and the impact properties of both set of samples were studied.
Main results regarding compression test are shown in Figure 6.6. Regarding the
Young’s modulus, all the materials behave similarly and according to eq. (6.2) with a
constant near to one independently of the cell size. However, when studying the yield
strength, the behavior with the density is better than predicted, with a constant above
the given value. In any case, this improvement happens for all range of cell sizes stud￾ied, micro and nanocellular ones, thus it can be attributed to the presence of the cells,
but the change to the nanoscale does not improve the response. However, when ana￾lyzing the impact behavior, the fracture toughness reveals a great improvement when
reducing the cell size below 100 nm.
These data are illustrated in Figure 6.7. When reducing the cell size from materi￾als with cell sizes between 50 microns and 1 mm to cells between 500 nm and 10 mi￾crons the fracture toughness clearly increases. The next improvement is not observed
up to the cell size being below 100 nm seeming to indicate that there exists a cell size
threshold triggering the enhancement. The increase due to cell size reduction is more
clear in Figure 6.7b, where it can be seen that the normalized fracture toughness with
density increases from 0.4 for cell sizes near the micron to values up to 1.4 when the
cell size reduces up to 20 nm.
Although the results are scarce and more work is needed to obtain more general
conclusions, it seems that for some specific systems and properties, and when nano￾cells are small enough the mechanical properties can be strongly improved when the
cells are in the nanoscale. It is key trying to understand the underlying mechanisms.
This is discussed in the next section.
6.3 Mechanical properties in nanocellular polymers 155Figure 6.5: Results from tensile test at different foam densities for microcellular, nanocellular and solid
PEI: (a) strain at break, (b) modulus of elasticity, (c) modulus of toughness, (d) Impact strength of solid,
microcellular and nanocellular PEI as a function of relative density in Gardner impact. Adapted from
reference [16].
156 Chapter 6 Mechanical properties6.3.1 Confinement of the solid phase
The changes in the mechanical properties of amorphous nanocellular polymers have
been attributed in the literature to two main mechanisms, confinement of the solid
phase, and a different fracture mechanism. For semicrystalline polymers other mech￾anisms related to a higher crystallinity induced by the foaming could also play a role.
The confinement of the solid gas when reducing the cell size to the nanoscale is
generally accepted, leading to the presence of Knudsen effect, experimentally proven
years ago [22] and explained in detail in the previous chapter. However, when reduc￾Figure 6.6: Values for micro and nanocellular PMMA. (a) Measured relative Young’s modulus as a
function of the relative density, (b) measured yield strength as a function of relative density. The closed
symbols refer to cellular materials with cell size below 100 nm. Lines represent Ashby eqs. (6.2) and (6.4)
with different constants. Adapted from reference [21].
Figure 6.7: (a) The measured relative fracture toughness as a function of the relative density compared to
values in the literature. (b) Fracture toughness normalized by density as a function of cell size. Lines
represent Ashby eqs. (6.2) and (6.4) with different constants. Adapted from reference [21].
6.3 Mechanical properties in nanocellular polymers 157ing the cell into the nanoscale the size of solid phase is also reduced to the same ex￾tent. As cell size reduces the cell walls between cells become smaller, this value can
be theoretically estimated for closed and open cellular materials [1, 23]. When the cell
size reduces up to 200 nm cell walls range between 100 and 60 nm depending on the
type of structure and relative density. If the cell size is even more reduced up to val￾ues smaller than 50 nm, the cell wall thickness is calculated to be smaller than 20 nm.
Considering the chain lengths of polymers (around hundreds of nanometers), it
has been hypothesized that these chains should be confined within the small cell
walls with much smaller dimensions. This confinement within the solid phase was
claimed to lead to reduced mobility of polymeric molecules that can affect the me￾chanical properties.
Due to the difficulty of measuring molecular mobility within the cell walls, this idea
was proved over the years through an indirect measurement as is the glass transition
temperature. Figure 6.8 shows the glass transition temperature increment in comparison
with that of the solid polymers for different nanocellular polymers as a function of the
relative density. As density reduces cell wall thickness also does. It can be seen how incre￾ments as high as 11 degrees have been measured for some systems [24].
However, the direct relationship between this increase and molecular mobility has
not been confirmed up to 2022. Martin-de Leon et al. evaluate the molecular mobility
of nanocellular PMMA, with cell sizes from 200 to 14 nm, through Amplitude Modula￾tion Frequency Modulation (AM-FM) technique. This technique is able to measure the
Young modulus of the solid phase at a nanometric scale with a spatial resolution of at
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0.0 0.2 0.4
∆Tg (ᵒC)
0.6 0.8 1.0
PMMA - [2]
PMMA - [4]
PEI - [33]
PMMA + MAM - [4]
PC - [141]
Relative Density
Figure 6.8: Glass transition temperature increment as a function of relative density for different
nanocellular systems. (Adapted from ref [25]).
158 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiesleast 10 nm. This magnitude is obtained together with the loss tangent tan ð Þ δ . The
loss tangent is intimately related to molecular mobility, a higher mobility leads to a
higher tan δ.
Figure 6.9 shows both the measured relative Young’s modulus (the Young’s modu￾lus of the solid phase of the cellular material divided by the Young’s modulus of the
solid PMMA) of the solid phase of nanocellular polymers as a function of the cell size
and the loss tangent as a function of the cell size. The relative Young’s modulus raises
as cell size decreases, however it is not up to cell sizes smaller than 50 nm when the
relative modulus is higher than the unity, meaning that the values are higher than
the ones measured in solid PMMA. This graph proves the concept previously dis￾cussed of a threshold cell size to improve the mechanical performance of nanocellular
polymers. This enhancement of the mechanical properties of the solid phase would
affect the overall mechanical properties of the cellular structure.
Additionally, Figure 6.9b shows how the loss tangent strongly decreases when cell
size becomes smaller. Considering the definition of this magnitude, this is the first ex￾perimental validation of reduced molecular mobility when cell size becomes smaller.
This cell size threshold seems not to be the same for all polymers according to experi￾mental data. This recent work also discusses the potential source of this cell size
threshold. The size of a polymer chain in the bulk is defined through its gyration ra￾dius Rg
  (being the root-mean-square distance of the segments of the chain from its
center of mass), and end-to-end distance R = hR2
i
1
2 accounting for the separation be￾tween the beginning and the end of the polymer chain [26] (Figure 6.10a).
Cell walls can be considered as thin films of thickness ξ, if this thickness is higher
than the size of the polymeric chain, the same configuration and molecular interac￾tion than in the solid will be present. However, if ξ reduces then the chain would be
4
3
2
1
0
Er_mean
0 50 100 150 200 250
Ф (nm)
(a)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
tan δ
0 50 100 150 200 250
Ф (nm)
(b)
Figure 6.9: (a) Maximum specific Young’s modulus as a function of the cell size. Color scale indicating the
different cell sizes. (b) Loss tangent as a function of the cell size.
6.3 Mechanical properties in nanocellular polymers 159forced to be in a less folded configuration. This is what is called 2D confinement in
thin films. This 2D confinement has been widely proven to lead to higher molecular
mobility that has been also related to a decrease in the Tg and a loss in mechanical
performance.
Thus, the observed behavior in nanocellular polymers cannot be attributed to a
2D confinement, but a 3D one. When producing a cell on the nanometric scale the
polymer is not only forced to be confined in two dimensions but the three dimensions
of the space. According to Martín-de León et al. this leads to a more folded configura￾tion of the molecular chains (Figure 6.10d) that increases the molecular interaction in
comparison to the one in the bulk state.
This 3D confinement will therefore depend on the ratio between the cell size (not
the cell wall thickness) and polymer chain size. The chain size would be a function of
the used polymer and its molecular weight. In the case of the PMMA used in this
work, it is not up to cell sizes smaller than 50 nm when the dimension of the folded
chain becomes larger than the pore size, and therefore is lawful to talk about 3D con￾finement. In polymers with higher molecular weight, it could be expected that the
threshold detected could occur at higher cell sizes.
This idea of a more folded chain around cells with a higher molecular interaction was
hypothesized by Kumar et al. in the paper dealing with the mechanical properties of
PEI [16]. According to the same authors, the reduced molecular mobility cannot ex￾plain the higher elongation observed for nanocellular PEI in comparison with the
bulk, but the higher molecular mobility. Due to the similar size of pores and mole￾cules when the cell is too small, a single molecule could stretch from side to side of
the pore, loading the connection of primary bonds.
Figure 6.10: (a) Scheme of the radius of gyration and end-to-end distance of a polymer chain in its bulk
configuration. (b) Scheme of a polymer chain within a cell wall thicker than the gyration radius. (c)
Scheme of a polymer chain within a cell wall thinner than the gyration radius. (d) Scheme of a polymer
chain within a 3D nanopore with a size smaller than the gyration radius.
160 Chapter 6 Mechanical propertiesIn addition, Kumar et al. added two additional hypotheses that could contribute
to the measured enhancement which is a different fracture mechanism induced by
the presence of cells and densification. The idea of different fracture mechanisms was
already discussed for microcellular polymers, and it affirms that the presence of cells
leads to a reduction of stress concentration during crack propagation [7, 8, 27]. Re￾garding densification, the authors stated that during tensile deformation, the cells are
stretched, collapsing the cellular structure. As the cell size reduces densification is
easier and can result in a reduction of stress concentration in the material.
Although deeper studies are needed to clarify all the information is clear that
nanocellular polymers also behave differently regarding mechanical properties, prov￾ing that they are unique materials thanks to the reduction of their phases to the nano￾metric scale.
6.4 Conclusions
Mechanical properties of microcellular polymers and nanocellular polymers have
been experimentally determined to be different in comparison to conventional poly￾mers or even the performing solid. The number of papers dealing with this topic is
still low for nanocellular polymers, but there are sufficient to observe some interest￾ing trends and, in some cases, very impressive improvements in comparison with the
already excellent behavior of microcellular polymers.
This difference is clearer when studying the impact behavior of such structures.
However, tensile and compression properties also show some differences. The im￾provement for nanocellular polymers when reducing the cell size seems to be depen￾dent on a cell size threshold that is not the same for all polymers and probably is not
the same for all properties. We need to reach a low cell size to start detecting signifi￾cant improvements.
Several hypotheses have been discussed in the literature for mechanical enhance￾ment in nanocellular polymers. It has been experimentally proven that molecular mo￾bility is hindered when confining the polymer, not within 2 dimensions but within 3
dimensions of the space. This also leads to an increase in molecular interaction that
can be key for mechanical properties. In addition, it has been hypothesized that both
the presence of nanocells and the higher densification occurring in a nanocellular
polymer under tension can leads to a reduction in stress concentration with an im￾provement of the elongation and impact behavior of these materials.
There is still a lot to discover on this topic by analysis other polymeric systems, a
wider relative density range and more mechanical properties, but what is clear is that
the mechanical performance of these materials is excellent, and it could be combined
with other properties already analyzed as a good thermal insulation and even the
transparency for very small cell sizes.
6.4 Conclusions 161References
[1] L.J. Gibson, M.F. Ashby, Cellular Solids: Structure and Properties, 2nd ed., Cambridge University
Press., Cambridge, United States, (1996).
[2] M.F. Ashby, R.F.M. Medalist, The mechanical properties of cellular solids, Metall. Trans. A. 14 (2007)
1755–1769. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02645546
[3] G. Wang, J. Zhao, G. Wang, L.H. Mark, C.B. Park, G. Zhao, Low-density and structure-tunable
microcellular PMMA foams with improved thermal-insulation and compressive mechanical
properties, Eur. Polym. J. 95 (2017) 382–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2016.08.025
[4] R.P. Juntunen, V. Kumar, J.E. Weller, W.P. Bezubic, J. Mi, Impact strength of high density
microcellular poly(vinyl chloride) foams, J. Vinyl Additive Technol. 6 (2000) 93–99.
[5] S.K. Maiti, M.F. Ashby, L.J. Gibson, Fracture toughness of brittle cellular solids, Script. Metal. 18
(1984) 213–216.
[6] H. Sun, G. Sur, J. Mark, Microcellular foams from polyethersulfone and
polyphenylsulfonepreparation and mechanical properties, Eur. Polym. J. 38 (2002) 2373–2381.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0014-3057(02)00149-0
[7] C. Barlow, V. Kumar, B. Flinn, R.K. Bordia, J. Weller, Impact strength of high density solid-state
microcellular polycarbonate foams, J. Eng. Mater. Technol. 123 (2002) 229. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.
1339004
[8] D.I. Collias, D.G. Baird, R.J. Borggreve, Impact toughening of polycarbonate by microcellular
foaming, Polymer (Guildf) 35 (1994) 3978–3983. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(94)90283-6
[9] S. Doroudiani, M.T. Kortschot, Polystyrene foams: II. structure-impact properties relationships,
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 90 (2003) 1421–1426. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.12805
[10] S. Doroudiani, C.B. Park, M.T. Kortschot, Processing and characterization of microcellular foamed
high-density polyethylene/isotactic polypropylene blends, Polym. Eng. Sci. 38 (1998) 1205–1215.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.10289
[11] M. Shimbo, D.F. Baldwin, N.P. Suh, The viscoelastic behavior of microcellular plastics with varying
cell size, Polym. Eng. Sci. 35 (1995) 1387–1393. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.760351710
[12] V. Kumar, J.E. Weller, M. Ma, R. Montecillo, R.R. Kwapisz, The effect of additives on microcellular PVC
foams: Part II. tensile behaviour, Cell. Polym. 17 (1998) 350–361.
[13] L.M. Matuana, Solid state microcellular foamed poly(lactic acid): Morphology and property
characterization, Bioresour. Technol 99 (2008) 3643–3650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2006.
06.062
[14] S. Wong, H.E. Naguib, C.B. Park, Effect of processing parameters on the cellular morphology and
mechanical properties of thermoplastic polyolefin (TPO) microcellular foams, Adv. Polym. Technol.
26 (2007) 232–246. https://doi.org/10.1002/adv
[15] J.E. Martini-Vvedensky, N.P. Suh, F. Church, F.A. Waldman, United States Patent (19), Dig.Dig.
2644535017 (1984).
[16] D. Miller, V. Kumar, Microcellular and nanocellular solid-state polyetherimide (PEI) foams using sub￾critical carbon dioxide II. tensile and impact properties, Polymer (Guildf) 52 (2011) 2910–2919.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2011.04.049
[17] J. Martín-de león, V. Bernardo, P. Cimavilla-Román, S. Pérez-Tamarit, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez,
Overcoming the challenge of producing large and flat nanocellular polymers: A study with PMMA,
Adv. Eng. Mater. 21 (2019) 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.201900148
[18] H. Guo, V. Kumar, Some thermodynamic and kinetic low-temperature properties of the PC-CO2
system and morphological characteristics of solid-state PC nanofoams produced with liquid CO2,
Polymer (Guildf) 56 (2015) 46–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.09.061
162 Chapter 6 Mechanical properties[19] V. Bernardo, F. Van Loock, J. Martin-de leon, N.A. Fleck, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Mechanical properties
of pmma-sepiolite nanocellular materials with a bimodal cellular structure, Macromol. Mater. Eng.
304 (2019) 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201900041
[20] R.W.B. Sharudin, M. Ohshima, Co2-induced mechanical reinforcement of polyolefin-based
nanocellular foams, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 296 (2011) 1046–1054. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.
201100085
[21] J. Martín-de león, F. Van Loock, V. Bernardo, N.A. Fleck, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, The influence of cell
size on the mechanical properties of nanocellular PMMA, Polymer (Guildf) 181 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymer.2019.121805
[22] B. Notario, J. Pinto, E. Solorzano, J.A. De Saja, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Experimental
validation of the knudsen effect in nanocellular polymeric foams, Polym. United Kingdom 56 (2015)
57–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.10.006
[23] J.A.D.E. Saja, O.A. Almanza, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Prediction of the radiation term in the thermal
conductivity of crosslinked closed cell polyolefin foams, J. Polym. Sci. Part B: Polym. Phys. 38 (2000)
993–1004. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-0488(20000401)38:7<993::AID-POLB10>3.0.CO;2-J
[24] J. Martín-de león, V. Bernardo, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Low density nanocellular polymers based on
PMMA produced by gas dissolution foaming: Fabrication and cellular structure characterization,
Polymers (Basel) 8 (2016) 265. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym8070265
[25] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de leon, M.A. Rodriguez‐Perez, Nanocellular polymers, in: S.T. Lee (Eds.),
Polymers Foam Innovation Technology Environmental Friendly Materials, (2022).
[26] R.G. Kirste, W.A. Kruse, K. Ibel, Determination of the conformation of polymers in the amorphous
solid state and in concentrated solution by neutron diffraction, Polymer (Guildf) 16 (1975) 120–124.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(75)90140-8
[27] M.N. Bureau, Fracture toughness of high density polycarbonate microcellular foams, J. Cell. Plast.
42 (2006) 229–240. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021955X06063512
References 163Chapter 7
Surface area
7.1 Introduction
Due to the small dimensions of the cells, the surface area of nanocellular polymers is
much higher than that of microcellular or conventional cellular polymers. Thanks to
this feature, these new materials have the potential of being used in some specific ap￾plications in which traditional foams cannot be applied. Then, nanocellular polymers
can widen the range of properties and uses of cellular polymeric materials.
The typical applications requiring a high surface area are catalysis, templating,
water filtration, biomolecule separation, gas separation, and drug delivery applica￾tions, among others. For these applications, an open cell structure with intercon￾nected pores is as mandatory as the high surface area. While there is a huge potential
from a theoretical perspective and good results in other nanoporous polymers pro￾duced with non-foaming methods, this field of new applications of foamed nanocellu￾lar polymers is still unexplored. One of the reasons for the lack of research in these
applications is that it is challenging to produce nanocellular structures with intercon￾nected pores and without a solid skin via the gas dissolution foaming method. Also,
the foaming of thin films, usually required for these applications, is complicated with
this production route.
In this chapter, we review the expected surface area of nanocellular polymers and
the methods known to create open cell structures with different types of morphologies.
Then, strategies to eliminate the solid skin and foam thin films are presented. Last, some
preliminary results suggesting the potential of nanocellular polymers for filtration and
sensors are presented together with some ideas for further research and development.
7.2 Surface area in nanocellular polymers
The reduction of the cell size to the nanoscale causes the surface area associated with
nanocellular polymers to increase drastically. This opens the door to new applications
in which conventional or microcellular polymers would present poorer behavior. The
surface area S can be calculated using a simple model based on perfect spheres. The
surface area S exhibited by a collection of spheres of radius r is given by eq. (7.1) [1],
where ρ is the density.
S = 3
ρr
(7:1)
The predictions of this model for several densities as a function of the cell size are
shown in Figure 7.1. Note that the radius r is half the cell size (as described in Chap￾https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-007ter 2, the cell size is the diameter of the cell). Figure 7.1 shows that the surface area
increases dramatically when the cell size reduces. When moving from the micro to
the nanoscale (from 100 microns to 100 nm), the increase can be as high as three or￾ders of magnitude. As density reduces, the surface area increases, so both low densi￾ties and low cell sizes allow for maximizing the available surface area.
Nanoporous polymeric membranes, characterized by high surface areas, are quite in￾teresting for filtration, sensors, catalysis, and gas storage, among others [3]. These mem￾branes are produced with non-foaming methods (see an overview of the method to
create nanocellular polymers in Chapter 3), that typically use non-environmentally
friendly solvents and, in addition, complicate the control of the pore size and thus the
surface area [4]. The gas dissolution foaming route in combination with the homoge￾neous or the heterogeneous nucleation strategies allows for finely tuning the structure
of the nanocellular polymer and it is a more environmentally friendly process that can
be up scaled and therefore is a very interesting alternative to the process used nowa￾days to produce these membranes [5–8].
However, to take advantage of the high surface area of nanocellular polymers,
open cell structures are mandatory. Achieving controlled structures with intercon￾nected cells is still possible in these materials. In the next section, the different open
structures that can be obtained via gas dissolution foaming are presented. Nonethe￾less, it is also compulsory to connect the outside with the inner cellular structure. As
explained in Chapter 2 and Chapter 3, gas diffusion creates an outer solid skin in the
Figure 7.1: The surface area as a function of the cell size according to eq. (7.1) for various densities
(adapted from [2]).
7.2 Surface area in nanocellular polymers 165gas dissolution foaming process. In the coming section, the research on the reduction
of the thickness of solid skin and the way to make it porous is presented.
Then, a brief overview of the possible use of nanocellular polymers for filtration and
sensors is presented. There is a lack of knowledge regarding these two topics: while the
information for polymer membranes is high, the use of nanocellular polymers produced
by a foaming method is scarce. The information collected in this chapter is intended to
give some general ideas about the expected behavior of nanocellular polymers for these
specific applications.
7.3 Generation of open cell nanocellular polymers
7.3.1 Types of open cell structures
There are different ways of generating nanocellular structures with interconnected
pores or high open cell contents. First, the cells can break during foaming, resulting
in open cells. To break the cell walls the processing parameters can be tuned, as well
as the viscoelastic properties of the polymer matrix. Also, additives can favor these
structures. Secondly, the structure can be intrinsically open if the foaming mechanism
is not nucleation and cell growth, but spinodal decomposition. The result then is a co￾continuous structure, that can be also achieved using polymer blends. Examples of
these types of open cells are provided in the next paragraphs.
The first kind of open cells are those generated during the expansion because of
an excess of extension of the cell wall. The polymer is expanding continuously until it
reaches the maximum elongation the cell wall can withstand; then, it breaks, creating
holes in the solid cell wall. Figure 7.2 shows an example from the work of Martin de
Leon and coworkers [9] in which this idea is expressed. At high relative densities (low
expansion) the cells are closed and the open cell content increases as the expansion
ratio increases. But as seen in the SEM image, the structure is still formed by cell
walls and struts with small holes in the cell walls. So, the tortuosity of the gas phase is
expected to be high in these structures.
In the work of Yeh et al. [10], the use of polymers with different viscosities also allows
controlling the open cell content of the nanocellular polymers. Figure 7.3a shows the SEM
images of three nanocellular polymers produced with polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
blends, in which a low viscosity and a high viscosity material are used. As the content of
PMMA with high viscosity increases, the cells appear more open, and the open cell con￾tent increases (Figure 7.3b). The authors attribute the formation of the nanocellular struc￾ture and the open cell structure to the viscoelastic properties of the polymer blend, such
as the relaxation time.
The addition of nanofillers to promote heterogeneous nucleation can also favor
the appearance of cell coalescence during expansion, causing open cells. Inorganic
nanoparticles are stiff and can help to increase the number of holes in the cell walls.
166 Chapter 7 Surface areaBernardo and coworkers proved this principle by working with nanometric sepiolites
[11, 12]. These needle-like particles are longer than the typical cell wall thickness, so
they can help to perforate the cell wall when the polymer viscosity is low enough.
Figure 7.4 shows some examples in which PMMA/Sepiolite nanocellular polymers
with open cells were obtained. The increase of the nanometric sepiolites concentra￾tion allows to reduce cell size and also seems to create more holes in the cell walls.
The second type of open cell nanocellular polymers is co-continuous or bicontinu￾ous structures. In these cases, the structure is open, and the pores are highly intercon￾nected. Examples of these structures are presented in Figure 7.5.
The transition from a regular cellular structure to a bicontinuous one in nanocel￾lular polymers was reported for the first time by Krause and co-workers [13] in thin
films of polyetherimide (PEI) and polyether sulfone (PES). They found that there is a
Figure 7.2: Open cell content as a function of relative density, from reference [9].
Figure 7.3: a) SEM images of samples with different contents of PMMA with high viscosity: (a) 40%,
(b) 50%, and (c) 100%; (b) open cell content as a function of the content of PMMA with high viscosity
(blue curve), adapted from reference [10].
7.3 Generation of open cell nanocellular polymers 167critical CO2 concentration allowing the formation of these structures. These results
were later confirmed by Guo et al. for bulk nanocellular polymers based on polysul￾fone (PSU) [14], polycarbonate (PC) [15], and PMMA [16]. Figure 7.6a summarizes the
experimental results with PMMA [16] in a diagram that correlates foam structures
with the equilibrium mass absorbed of CO2 and foaming temperature. The different
regions in this plot correspond to different types of structures, including conventional
nanocellular structures, bicontinuous (see example in Figure 7.6b), and worm-like
structures (see example in Figure 7.6c). The worm-like structure is quite different to
the bicontinuous structure, showing solid “worms” packed with few spaces among
them, thus the porosity could be inside them and might be too small to be detected by
SEM. A combination of a sufficiently high amount of gas absorbed and a sufficiently
high foaming temperature is needed to generate bicontinuous nanocellular struc￾tures. The authors attribute the appearance of this structure to a change in the phase
separation phenomenon, from the conventional nucleation and cell growth (ex￾plained in detail for nanocellular polymers Chapter 3) to the spinodal decomposition.
Spinodal decomposition takes place at high supersaturations, at which the mixture is
unstable: the polymer/gas mixture undergoes spontaneous phase separation without
the appearance of nucleation points the energy barrier of nucleus formation vanishes,
and so gas molecules immediately start to form clusters, which rapidly grow and coa￾Figure 7.4: SEM images of PMMA/Sepiolite nanocomposites with open cells and different contents of
sepiolites: (a) 0.5 wt%, (b) 1 wt%, and (c) 1.5 wt%, adapted from reference [11].
Figure 7.5: Examples of nanocellular polymers with co-continuous structures in which there are no cell
walls and the gas phase is highly connected.
168 Chapter 7 Surface arealesce [17, 18]. The result of the spinodal decomposition is a single gas phase, or in
other words, an interconnected or co-continuous cellular structure.
Nanostructured polymer blends can also help to promote the formation of co-continuous
open structures. In this case, the mechanism is different than for nanometric inorganic
fillers. The secondary polymer phase is not rigid, so the mechanisms is not related to
breaking the cell walls during the expansion. However, when the amount of the second
polymer phase is high enough, co-continuous open cell nanocellular structures can be
created. Pinto et al. proved this concept using PMMA/MAM blends (MAM is a tri-block
copolymer of polymethylmethacrylate-polybutylacrylate-polymethylmethacrylate) [19].
When the MAM block copolymer load is as high as 75% in the formulation, the nanostruc￾turation in the solid material results in a co-continuous nanostructuration with lamella of
20−30 nm apparent thickness (Figure 7.7a). As a result, after foaming, the material also
shows a co-continuous cellular structure (Figure 7.7b). Later, the same authors proved the
same concept in films and evidenced the importance of the initial nanostructuration and
Figure 7.6: (a) Equilibrium mass% of CO2 – foaming temperature – cellular structure diagram, for
creating PMMA with solid (S) or non-cellular structure, microcellular structure (M), nanocellular structure
(N), bicontinuous nanoporous structure (B), and worm-like nanostructure (W). The effective glass
transition temperature line and estimated spinodal decomposition (SD) line are also included; (b) an
example of a bicontinuous structure, and (c) an example of a worm-like structure, from reference [16].
7.3 Generation of open cell nanocellular polymers 169the foaming parameters [20]. Figure 7.8 shows a comparison of the results obtained in
bulk and film samples. Note that for most applications taking advantage of the high sur￾face area, films are required.
7.3.2 Gas dissolution foaming of films and fibers
When talking about applications in which the surface area plays a role, thin films are
usually required. However, foaming films using gas dissolution foaming is quite chal￾lenging because the gas escapes very fast through the surfaces. First, this production
process leads to the formation of a solid skin, as discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, and the
skin thickness, of the other of several tens of microns, can be as thick as the whole film,
avoiding foaming or hindering the expansion. As gas escapes, one of the driving forces
of nucleation is reduced (gas concentration), so achieving nanocellular structures be￾comes even more challenging as the thickness of the solid precursor decreases. In addi￾tion to the solid skin, the presence of the heterogeneous gas concentration gradient
near the surface can lead to the formation of structural gradients, as already presented
in Chapter 2 [21]. There is a transition region between the homogeneous core and the
Figure 7.7: (a) Nanostructuration in the solid PMMA/MAM blend with 75% MAM, and
(b) resultant cellular structure, adapted from reference [19].
Figure 7.8: SEM micrographs of the cellular structure of the 25/75 PMMA/MAM foams
obtained from (a) bulk samples and (b) films, adapted from reference [20].
170 Chapter 7 Surface areasurface of the sample. In the case of the two-step foaming process (explained in Chap￾ter 3), the thickness of the solid skin and the transition region are dependent on the
desorption time as reported by Yeh et al. [22] and shown in Figure 7.9. Other parame￾ters, such as the foaming temperature, can also affect greatly to the structural gradient.
Note that these graded structures are several tens of microns in thickness. To foam thin
films and reach homogenous structures, the appearance of structural gradients caused
by gas diffusion must be prevented.
The first idea to allow proper foaming of thin films was proposed by Siripurapu et al. [23]
using metallic gas diffusion barriers. With this approach, they also allowed for maximiz￾ing the expansion in polymeric films. In non-constrained films the gas diffuses too
quickly, not allowing proper nucleation and cell growth (Figure 7.10a). With the appropri￾ate surface constrained, nucleation and expansion are maximized (Figure 7.10b). The ver￾satility of this approach was later used by Pinto et al. [24] designing a mold to fabricate
nanocellular thin films by this process.
As challenging as the foaming of films is that of fibers. In the work of Muanchan
and coworkers [25], nanocellular polymers confined in PS (polystyrene) microfibers
were produced using a CO2 one-step foaming process. Depending on the state of the
polymer, different types of fibers were obtained, as seen in Figure 7.11. At intermedi￾ate conditions between the glassy and the rubbery states, nanocellular structures
were obtained within the microfibers.
Another way to prevent gas escape and allow the foaming of small materials is
the use of polymeric gas diffusion barriers, as used by Orsi et al. to create hollow
particles [26].
Figure 7.9: Details of the solid skin and transition region as a function of the desorption time (increasing
desorption time to the right), from the supplementary material of reference [22].
7.3 Generation of open cell nanocellular polymers 1717.3.3 Generation of a porous skin
To take full advantage of the interconnected nanocellular structure, the generated
materials must have the structure accessible from the surface. However, the solid
Figure 7.10: SEM images of PMMA films foamed (a) without and (b) with surface confinement,
from reference [23].
Figure 7.11: Morphology of PS microfibers with different foaming states, adapted from reference [25].
172 Chapter 7 Surface areaskin characteristic of the gas dissolution foaming process isolates the inner structure
from the outside. The presence of the solid skin might difficult the use of open cell
nanocellular polymers for several applications in which is mandatory to have access
to the inner structure, such as filters or membranes, among others.
The first approach is machining the surface to remove the skin and expose the
cells, generating a porous surface. This idea was extensively investigated by Nicolae
et al. [27]. They tested different ways to remove the skin of nanocellular polyetheri￾mide (PEI) foams. They observed that during the cutting process, the fragile nanocel￾lular structure gets collapsed under shearing forces from the cutting tools, resulting
in a rough surface with closed cells as seen in Figure 7.12.
Based on these poor results of machining methods, the same authors developed a
method to connect the inner structure with the outside by just piercing the skin. They
designed a specific tool of needles (Figure 7.13a) that allowed the selective removal of
some parts of the skin, as seen in the example of Figure 7.13b. However, this method
does not allow to get a homogeneous skin-free surface.
Figure 7.12: Examples of the skin surface after the skin removal process. Left: Sanding with 1000-grit
paper. Middle: Cutting with a steel razor blade. Right: End milling, from reference [27].
Figure 7.13: (a) Skin piercing apparatus and zoomed image of the needle tips. (b) PEI nanocellular with
skin removed by drilling a square pattern of holes, adapted from reference [27].
7.3 Generation of open cell nanocellular polymers 173Then, there is a need to find ways to reduce the solid skin thickness and allow the
formation of pores on the surface in the gas dissolution foaming method. This was
explored recently by Cuadra-Rodriguez and coworkers [28]. They used an innovative
approach to reduce and eliminate the non-foamed solid skins by incorporating a flexi￾ble gas diffusion barrier (polyvinyl alcohol (PVOH)) on the polymer surfaces before
the foaming process. This strategy allowed a significant reduction of the non-foamed
solid skins while enabling higher expansions. Furthermore, the use of PVOH allowed
the formation of pores on the surface of bulk nanocellular polymers (Figure 7.14).
They also tested the use of polymeric diffusion barriers in thin films. They observed
that the diffusion barrier allowed to retain the gas inside the polymer after releasing
the pressure and increased nucleation and growth of the thin film. Then, this strategy
can be used not only to create porous skins but also to foam films. The thin films pro￾duced with this method also showed porous skin (Figure 7.15). This is a quite promis￾ing result that can help expand the current range of applications of nanocellular
polymers.
Figure 7.14: SEM micrographs of PMMA foam external surface (a) without using PVOH and (b) using
PVOH as a gas diffusion barrier, from reference [28].
Figure 7.15: SEM micrographs of PMMA foamed film surfaces (a) without using PVOH and (b) using PVOH
as a gas diffusion barrier, from reference [28].
174 Chapter 7 Surface area7.4 Applications in filters, sensors, and others
Thanks to their high surface area, nanoporous materials [29] are useful in catalysis,
templating, water filtration, biomolecule separation, gas separation, and drug delivery
applications. Inorganic materials (ceramics and metals) offer high chemical, thermal
and mechanical stability, but as a counterpart polymer-based nanoporous systems
show enhanced chemical tunability and mechanical flexibility [30]. For these reasons,
the fabrication of nanoscale structures based on polymers is a field of great interest.
Many works deal with the production and characterization of these materials for the
aforementioned applications: for instance, block copolymer membranes are suitable
for water purification, drug delivery, ultrafiltration, oil collection, or emulsion separa￾tion [30–32].
However, the suitability of nanocellular polymers produced by the gas dissolution
foaming method for these applications has not been fully explored yet [33]. There is a
lack of experimental work in which their potential is evaluated for these specific ap￾plications. Nonetheless, some preliminary results can help to estimate the possible ad￾vantages associated with the use of nanocellular polymers. In the next paragraphs,
these results are briefly described and ideas for future research are presented.
The open cell content is usually measured by gas pycnometry, as described in Chap￾ter 2. When the open cell content of nanocellular foams is measured by this method [9],
it is proved that the structure is interconnected and accessible for gas permeation. An￾other possibility is the use of a dye penetration test. In this case, a liquid solution is used
to verify if the cellular structure is accessible for liquid permeation. Then, the use of a
dye penetration test allows the identification of suitable materials to be used in applica￾tions requiring a liquid passing through the structure. This technique was used by
Figure 7.16: Dye penetration in nanofoams that were prepared at different temperatures (a) 130 °C,
(b) 150 °C, (c) 170 °C, (d) 190 °C. Dashed lines that indicate where the dye penetration stopped are drawn
to aid the eyes, from reference [14].
7.4 Applications in filters, sensors, and others 175Krause et al. [14] and then Guo et al. [15] to check the appearance of bicontinuous struc￾tures. Figure 7.16 shows the results of the dye test in nanocellular samples with different
levels of interconnectivity. At higher foaming temperatures, the dye penetrates a longer
distance, indicating a more open and accessible structure.
Some preliminary results of the permeability and diffusivity of nanocellular poly￾mers were obtained by Nicolae et al. for PEI [34]. As seen in Figure 7.17, both permeabil￾0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
0,12
0,14
0,16
Chalk Limestone Sandstone Soil Nanoporous PEI
Diffusivity
b)
–9
Sand Sandstone Clay Volcanic
rock
Limestone Granite Nanoporous
PEI
a)
–11
–13
–15
–17
log10 k, m2
–19
–21
–23
Figure 7.17: (a) Permeability ranges of various solids and the nanoporous PEI and (b) Diffusivity
of nanocellular PEI compared to other materials, from reference [27].
176 Chapter 7 Surface areaity and diffusivity are comparable to that of sandstone, showing that mass transport
through the structure is slow due to the small cell sizes.
Nonetheless, to prove the feasibility of using nanocellular polymers for filtration,
more studies dealing with their characterization are needed. First, an experimental
analysis of the surface area must be conducted using BET specific surface area must
be determined. Permeability analysis with different solvents could be performed to
test the efficiency of the nanocellular polymers as membranes for different substan￾ces. The effect of pore size and density must be determined for nanocellular polymers
in these applications, as well as the influence of the type of open cell structure.
Another interesting application for nanocellular polymers is their use in sensors.
The sensitivity and limits of detection of the electrodes can be improved by increasing
the number of active sites at the electrode surface, that is, increasing the surface area.
Some preliminary work in microcellular polymers supports that nanocellular poly￾mers can be quite promising candidates for this application. For instance, in the work
of Fernandez-Blanco et al. [35] porous electrodes based on polymethylmethacrylate
and graphite foams were developed. They proved that the presence of cells induces
important changes in comparison with the non-foamed composites. For instance, the
limits of detection observed in foamed electrodes are one order of magnitude lower
than those observed in the non-foamed electrodes and they show a remarkable in￾crease in the electrocatalytic properties.
Yet, there is still a lot of work to prove the real potential of nanocellular polymers
for sensors. First, it is well known that foaming helps to reduce the percolation thresh￾old to achieve conductive polymer composites [36, 37] (which can be helpful for elec￾tromagnetic shielding applications, as it will be commented on in Chapter 8), but it is
still to be explored if the presence of nanocells can boost even further this behavior
because of the small dimensions of the cell walls. Then, sensors with nanocellular pol￾ymers of different characteristics must be prepared and characterized to find the dif￾ferent behaviors that can appear when the cell size moves to the nanoscale.
Another possible application of nanocellular polymers is gas separation. Gas sepa￾ration membranes are considered useful devices in the industry for gas recovery and
gas storage to separate gas mixtures instead of releasing them into the environment.
Generally, they are composed of a porous structure, which is employed as a mechani￾cal support, and a dense layer, which acts a as selective layer [34, 38] The most de￾manded requirement is that the porous structure shows a negligible resistance to gas
flow while the dense layer would be able to separate one of the gases by solubility
difference or chemical affinity. Besides, the gas flow (i.e., the permeance) should be
maximized by keeping suitable selective properties [39]. Therefore, open-cell struc￾tures and a thin dense layer are the basic requirements to perform in gas separation
applications.
7.4 Applications in filters, sensors, and others 1777.5 Conclusions
From a theoretical point of view, nanocellular polymers have the potential of presenting
a surface area three orders of magnitude higher than that of microcellular polymers.
This feature makes nanocellular polymers interesting for some specific applications such
as catalysis, templating, water filtration, biomolecule separation, gas separation, and drug
delivery applications. However, there is a lack of systematic work showing the real per￾formance of nanocellular polymers produced by foaming methods in these applications.
The first challenge is the fabrication of nanocellular polymers with intercon￾nected structures. So far, several strategies have been already identified: promote cell
wall rupture via modification of the foaming parameters, use of nanofillers, or gener￾ation of a bicontinuous structure by means of the spinodal decomposition mechanism
or the use of polymer blends. The second challenge is connecting the inner porosity
with the surface of the material. To prevent the appearance of solid skin caused by
the gas dissolution foaming process, a new strategy based on the use of a flexible gas
barrier was developed. Then, the last challenge is the fabrication of films with nano￾metric cells, open pores, and interconnected structures. In films the gas escapes much
faster than in the bulk samples, hindering nucleation and expansion. Constraining
gas diffusion helps to create nanocells in thin films.
There are no works dealing with a detailed analysis of the surface area of nano￾cellular polymers and the possible permeability properties of such structures. Gas
and liquids are proven to pass through the structure, but more research is needed to
figure out the effects of density and cell size, among others. The same is observed for
other properties: while microcellular polymers enhance the properties for sensor ap￾plications in comparison to their non-foamed counterparts, there is a lack of knowl￾edge about the effects of the nanocellular structure on the electrical conductivity of
nanocomposite materials for sensor applications. Much research is still needed to
fully explore the potential of nanocellular polymers in this new field of applications,
never explored in conventional foams. The theories support their suitability, but ex￾perimental work is mandatory to confirm these ideas and quantify the benefits associ￾ated with the nanocellular structure.
References
[1] S. Lowell, J.E. Shields, M.A. Thomas, M. Thommes, Chapter 1. introduction, in: J.E. Shields,
M.A. Thomas, S. Lowell (Eds.), Characterization of Porous Solids and Powders: Surface Area, Pore
Size and Density, Springer, (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-8348-9955-2
[2] V. Bernardo, Production and Characterization of Nanocellular Polymers Based on Nanostructured
PMMA Blends and PMMA Nanocomposites, University of Valladolid, (2019).
[3] M. Ulbricht, Advanced functional polymer membranes, Polymer (Guildf) 47 (2006) 2217–2262.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2006.01.084
178 Chapter 7 Surface area[4] J.X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C.D. Wood, H. Niu, J.T.A. Jones, Y.Z. Khimyak, A.I. Cooper, Synthetic control
of the pore dimension and surface area in conjugated microporous polymer and copolymer
networks, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 (2008) 7710–7720.https://doi.org/10.1021/ja8010176
[5] J. Martin-de Leon, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Key production parameters to obtain
transparent nanocellular PMMA, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 302 (2017) 1700343(1)–1700343(5).
https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201700343
[6] S. Costeux, L. Zhu, Low density thermoplastic nanofoams nucleated by nanoparticles, Polymer
(Guildf) 54 (2013) 2785–2795.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2013.03.052
[7] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de leon, J. Pinto, T. Catelani, A. Athanassiou, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Low￾density PMMA/MAM nanocellular polymers using low MAM contents: Production and
characterization, Polymer (Guildf) 163 (2019) 115–124.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.12.057
[8] H. Guo, A. Nicolae, V. Kumar, Solid-state microcellular and nanocellular polysulfone foams, J. Polym.
Sci. Part B: Polym. Phys. 53 (2015) 975–985.https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.23719
[9] J. Martin de-leon, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Low density nanocellular polymers based on
PMMA produced by gas dissolution foaming : Fabrication and cellular structure characterization,
Polymers (Basel) 8 (2016) 1–16.https://doi.org/10.3390/polym8070265
[10] S. Yeh, N.M. Demewoz, V. Kurniawan, Controlling the structure and density of PMMA bimodal
nanocellular foam by blending different molecular weights, Polym. Test. 93 (2020) 107004.
[11] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de leon, E. Laguna-Gutierrez, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, PMMA-sepiolite
nanocomposites as new promising materials for the production of nanocellular polymers, Eur.
Polym. J. 96 (2017) 10–26.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2017.09.002
[12] V. Bernardo, J. Martin-de Leon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Anisotropy in nanocellular polymers
promoted by the addition of needle-like sepiolites, Polym. Int. 68 (2019) 1204–1214. https://doi.org/
10.1002/pi.5813
[13] B. Krause, H.J.P. Sijbesma, P. Mu, Bicontinuous nanoporous polymers by carbon dioxide foaming,
Macromolecules 34 (2001) 8792–8801.
[14] H. Guo, A. Nicolae, V. Kumar, Fabrication of high temperature polyphenylsulfone nanofoams using
high pressure liquid carbon dioxide, Cell. Polym. 35 (2015) 2016.
[15] H. Guo, V. Kumar, Some thermodynamic and kinetic low-temperature properties of the PC-CO2
system and morphological characteristics of solid-state PC nanofoams produced with liquid CO2,
Polymer (Guildf) 56 (2015) 46–56.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.09.061
[16] H. Guo, A. Nicolae, V. Kumar, Solid-state poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) nanofoams. part II:
Low-temperature solid-state process space using CO2 and the resulting morphologies, Polymer
(Guildf) 70 (2015) 231–241.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2015.06.031
[17] V.I. Kalikmanov, Nucleation Theory, Springer, (2013).
[18] J.B. Clark, J.W. Hastie, L.H.E. Kihlborg, R. Metselaar, M.M. Thackeray, Definitions of terms relating to
phase transitions of the solid state, Int. Pure. Appl. Chem. 66 (1994) 577–594.
[19] J. Pinto, M. Dumon, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, R. Garcia, C. Dietz, Block copolymers self-assembly allows
obtaining tunable micro or nanoporous membranes or depth filters based on PMMA; fabrication
method and nanostructures, J. Phys. Chem. C 118 (2014) 4656–4663.https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp409803u
[20] S. Barroso-Solares, V. Bernardo, D. Cuadra-Rodriguez, J. Pinto, Nanostructure of PMMA/MAM blends
prepared by out-of-equilibrium (extrusion) and near-equilibrium (casting) self-assembly and their
nanocellular or microcellular structure obtained from CO 2 foaming, Nanomaterials 11 (2021) 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11112834
[21] V. Bernardo, J.M. Leon, I. Sanchez-Calderon, E. Laguna-Gutierrez, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez,
Nanocellular polymers with a gradient cellular structure based on poly(methyl methacrylate)/
thermoplastic polyurethane blends produced by gas dissolution foaming, Macromol. Mater. Eng.
(2019) 1900428 1–9.https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201900428
References 179[22] S. Yeh, Z. Liao, K. Wang, Y. Ho, V. Kurniawan, P. Tseng, T. Tseng, Effect of molecular weight to the
structure of nanocellular foams : Phase separation approach, Polymer (Guildf) 191 (2020) 122275.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2020.122275
[23] S. Siripurapu, J.M. DeSimone, S. A. Khan, R.J. Spontak, Low-Temperature, surface-mediated foaming
of polymer films, Adv. Mater. 16 (2004) 989–994.https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200306068
[24] J. Pinto, D. Morselli, V. Bernardo, B. Notario, D. Fragouli, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, A. Athanassiou,
Nanoporous PMMA foams with templated pore size obtained by localized in situ synthesis of
nanoparticles and CO 2 foaming, Polymer (Guildf) 124 (2017) 176–185.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poly
mer.2017.07.067
[25] P. Muanchan, H. Ito, Nanocellular foams confined within PS microfibers obtained by CO2 batch
foaming process, Microsyst. Technol. 24 (2017) 655–662. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00542-017-3396-7
[26] S. Orsi, E. Di Maio, S. Iannace, P.A. Netti, Hollow micro- and nano-particles by gas foaming, Nano
Res. 7 (2014) 1018–1026.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-014-0465-4
[27] A. Nicolae, Advanced Methods to Produce and Characterize Transport Properties of Novel
Nanoporous Polymers, University ofWashington, (2018).
[28] D. Cuadra-Rodríguez, S. Barroso-Solares, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J. Pinto, Production of cellular
polymers without solid outer skins by gas dissolution foaming: A long-sought step towards new
applications, Mater. Des. 217 (2022) 110648.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.110648
[29] S. Polarz, B. Smarsly, Nanoporous materials, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2 (2002) 581–612.https://doi.
org/10.1166/jnn.2002.151
[30] E.A. Jackson, Y. Lee, M.A. Hillmyer, ABAC tetrablock terpolymers for tough nanoporous filtration
membranes, Macromolecules 46 (2013) 1484–1491.https://doi.org/10.1021/ma302414w
[31] E.A. Jackson, M.A. Hillmyer, Nanoporous membranes derived from block copolymers: From drug
delivery to water filtration, ACS Nano. 4 (2010) 3548–3553.https://doi.org/10.1021/nn1014006
[32] Y. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Wang, X. Men, Q. Xue, One-pot fabrication of nanoporous polymer decorated
materials: From oil-collecting devices to high-efficiency emulsion separation, J. Mater. Chem.
A 5 (2017) 5077–5087.https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta00297a
[33] B. Notario, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanoporous polymeric materials : A new class of
materials with enhanced properties, Prog. Polym. Sci. 78–79 (2016) 93–139.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pmatsci.2016.02.002
[34] M. Wang, J. Zhao, X. Wang, A. Liu, K.K. Gleason, Recent progress on submicron gas-selective
polymeric membranes, J. Mater. Chem. A 5 (2017) 8860–8886. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta01862b.
[35] C. Fernandez-Blanco, M. Mugica, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, C. Garcia-Cabezón, M.L. Rodriguez-Mendez,
Polymeric foams as the matrix of voltammetric sensors for the detection of catechol, hydroquinone,
and their mixtures, J. Sens. 2018 (2018) 23–26.https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/2714752
[36] M. Hamidinejad, B. Zhao, A. Zandieh, N. Moghimian, T. Filleter, C.B. Park, Enhanced electrical and
electromagnetic interference shielding properties of polymer-graphene nanoplatelet composites
fabricated via supercritical-fluid treatment and physical foaming, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
10 (2018) 30752–30761.https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b10745
[37] B. Zhao, M. Hamidinejad, S. Wang, P. Bai, R. Che, R. Zhang, C.B. Park, Advances in electromagnetic
shielding properties of composite foams, J. Mater. Chem. A 9 (2021) 8896–8949.https://doi.org/10.
1039/d1ta00417d
[38] C.Z. Liang, T.S. Chung, J.Y. Lai, A review of polymeric composite membranes for gas separation and
energy production, Prog. Polym. Sci. 97 (2019) 101141.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2019.06.001
[39] K. Xie, Q. Fu, G.G. Qiao, P.A. Webley, Recent progress on fabrication methods of polymeric thin film
gas separation membranes for CO2 capture, J. Memb. Sci. 572 (2019) 38–60.https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.MEMSCI.2018.10.049
180 Chapter 7 Surface areaChapter 8
Other properties
8.1 Introduction
This chapter aims at overviewing some other properties in which nanocellular poly￾mers can be of interest. In previous chapters, the properties that had aroused greater
interest up to now are commented on in detail. Chapter 5 contains extensive informa￾tion about the unique transparent behavior of nanocellular polymers. Then, Chap￾ters 6 and 7 collect the results concerning thermal conductivity and mechanical
properties, respectively, while Chapter 8 describes the surface area of these materials
and the possible applications related to the high surface area of nanocellular poly￾mers. In this chapter, we include some results concerning other interesting properties
not discussed so far, such as the acoustic properties, the dielectric properties, and the
electromagnetic shielding properties are covered.
However, the information regarding these properties for nanocellular polymers
is still quite scarce and only a few works in the literature are devoted to the investiga￾tion of these properties. In fact, in most cases, there is a lack of a deep understanding
of the mechanisms associated with the change of scale when moving to nanoscale
cells. Further research is needed to complete the picture and understand the potential
of nanocellular polymers for new applications. Furthermore, the unique combination
of properties of nanocellular polymers could lead to the development of new multi￾functional materials combining several of these properties.
8.2 Acoustic properties
Cellular polymers or polymer foams with open cells are good materials for sound ab￾sorption. Sound waves travel through the cellular structure and the sound energy is
dissipated to heat due to air friction inside cells and viscous friction between adjacent
polymer chains, reducing sound propagation [1]. This mechanism of sound absorption
explains why fibrous and open-cell cellular materials are ideal candidates for sound
absorption [2]. For conventional foams, the parameters determining the acoustic per￾formance are well established and there is a large collection of models (empirical and
theoretical) to predict the sound absorption properties [3]. The amount of air in the
porous material that can participate in sound propagation, that is, the porosity, and
the tortuosity of the gas phase (both described in Chapter 2) are two of the key param￾eters. The open cell content, the number of holes in the structure, and their size are
also determinant factors [4]. Regarding the effect of the cell size, theoretical models
have predicted that there should be a theoretical optimum cell diameter for every
thickness and foam density [5]. In the paper of Lee et al. [6], a reduction of the cell
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-008size in the range from 160 to 400 μm was proved to allow an increase in sound
absorption.
However, there are no systematic studies about the effects associated with the
change of scale when fabricating microcellular and nanocellular polymers. In these
systems, the size of the absorbent polymer cell walls is greatly reduced, and so is the
size of the open holes to allow gas movement inside the material. It is expectable that
the mechanisms of sound propagation of these materials could be significantly differ￾ent, as it occurs with heat propagation (explained in Chapter 5).
Regarding microcellular polymers, Wang et al. [7] studied the acoustic properties of
polyether block amide (PEBA) low-density materials with cell sizes ranging from 40 to
160 microns. An impedance and transmission tube was used to measure the sound ab￾sorption coefficient in a frequency range from 200 Hz to 4000 Hz: the results of three
foams with the same density but different cell sizes are summarized in Figure 8.1. The
absorption coefficient (Figure 8.1a) sharply rises to a high peak value, and then re￾duces gradually towards a plateau region at a higher frequency, the typical trend of
low-density foams. It is observed that the PEBA foam with smaller cell size exhibits
improved acoustic absorption performance in almost the whole frequency range. In
Figure 8.1b, the noise reduction coefficient (NRC) is plotted for the different cell
sizes, supporting this observation. The authors attribute this improvement to the fol￾lowing reasons. First, smaller cell sizes increase the rigidity of the foam, which leads
to more intensive vibration of both the air in the cells and the polymer solid phase.
Second, smaller cell sizes create a higher number of interfaces or cell walls, increas￾ing the dissipation of the sound wave and improving sound absorption efficiency.
Last, smaller cell sizes mean much thinner and more flexible cell walls, which in
turn could dissipate a larger energy fraction. These results for microcellular poly￾mers and the proposed mechanisms might suggest that going even lower in the cell
size can improve further the sound absorption capability.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
32 87 162
b
NRC
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
a
39 μm
87 μm
Absorption coefficient
162 μm
Figure 8.1: The acoustic performances of the PEBA foams with different cell sizes: (a) Absorption
coefficient, and (b) Noise reduction coefficient (NRC), from reference [7].
182 Chapter 8 Other propertiesHowever, the only characterization of the acoustic properties of nanocellular poly￾mers is found in the paper of Notario and coworkers [8]. In this work, the acoustic prop￾erties of microcellular and nanocellular PMMA with closed cells and relative density
0.4–0.5 are investigated. Figure 8.2 shows the average acoustic absorption response of
these materials. Both microcellular and nanocellular systems present main absorption
values of 0.21–0.25 around 4000 Hz. However, while the two microcellular materials ex￾hibit only one wide peak, the two nanocellular polymers show two narrower peaks at
different frequencies (2100 Hz and 5700 Hz). Furthermore, at high frequencies (6000 Hz)
microcellular materials still show some absorption, while the nanocellular polymers do
not absorb. The curves for the microcellular polymers (cell sizes 7–11 microns) are like
those reported by Wang et al. for larger cell sizes (Figure 8.1a), but for the nanocellular
polymers, the shape of the curve changes completely. These results prove that nanocellu￾lar materials present quite different behavior under sound propagation, which can be
expected taking into account the differences found in the mechanical properties (Chap￾ter 6) and the propagation of other waves, such as light (Chapter 4) or infrared radiation
(Chapter 5). However, the mechanisms allowing this different behavior are still unclear
and further experimental work is needed to clarify the acoustic performance of nanocel￾lular polymers. In the same paper, acoustic insulation in transmission was also consid￾ered. The averages of the transmission loss spectra are shown in Figure 8.3. While
nanocellular polymers present one peak around 5500 Hz, microcellular materials pres￾ent two: around 3450 and 4500 Hz. The change of scale in the cell size results in a differ￾ent acoustic behavior, although again further studies are needed to explain these
differences from a theoretical perspective.
As previously said, nanocellular polymers are, up to some extent, similar to aero￾gels, thus the acoustic behavior of such structures can be of great help to hypothesiz￾ing the possible behavior of nanocellular polymers, However, the lack of information
regarding sound propagation in nanoscale structures is also detected for aerogels.
There is a need for experimental and theoretical work on the physics of sound absorp￾tion in these materials, and more systematic and standardized evaluations of the
acoustic properties of aerogel and aerogel composites are needed [9]. However, their
behavior must be influenced by their unique structure. For instance, Cai et al. [10]
measured quite different acoustic properties in aerogels in comparison to conven￾tional insulators (Figure 8.4). Insulator A was an open cell PU foam with a non-woven
scrim, while Insulator B was a non-woven fiber material. Insulators A and B exhibit
improved acoustic absorption as frequency increases and low absorption at low fre￾quencies. However, the aerogel exhibits a substantially different profile, with very strong
absorption peaks in the low-frequency region and the high-frequency region. The behav￾ior is quite similar to that of nanocellular polymers, as observed in Figure 8.2b, indicating
similar sound absorption mechanisms in both materials. According to the authors
[10], the narrow absorption peaks found for aerogels suggest that the material acts as
a resonator, where the pores act as the resonating cavities (resonance frequency
8.2 Acoustic properties 183should be inversely proportional to the pore size, so the two peaks can be related to
two sizes in the porosity).
The main conclusion of this section is that for sure nanocellular polymers present
unique acoustic properties, but more experimental work is needed to create models
able to predict explain, and fine-tune their behavior.
Ф = 11 μm
Ф = 7 μm
Absorption Coefficient (α)
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Frequency (Hz)
0,00
0,05
0,10
0,15
0,20
0,25
0,30
Ф = 300 nm
Ф = 200 nm
Absorption Coefficient (α)
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Frequency (Hz)
0,00
0,05
0,10
0,15
0,20
0,25
0,30
Figure 8.2: Average absorption coefficient as a function of frequency. (Left) Microcellular PMMA (Right)
Nanocellular PMMA, from reference [8].
184 Chapter 8 Other properties8.3 Dielectric properties
The miniaturization of electronics has caused an increased interest in nanoporous
polymers to be used in these applications. Particularly, ultra-low-dielectric-constant
interlayers are required to reduce the resistance-capacitance (RC) time delay, cross
talk, and power dissipation in the new generation of high-density integrated circuits
[11]. Introducing nanometric cells in the polymers is a smart way of reducing the di￾Ф = 11 μm
Ф = 300 nm
TLn/SurfaceDensity (dB.g–1 .cm2)
Frequency (Hz)
250
200
150
100
50
0
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Figure 8.3: Average TL coefficient divided by the surface density for a microcellular and a nanocellular
polymer, from reference [8].
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Insulator A Aerogel Insulator B
Absorption Coefficient (α)
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 8.4: Acoustic property measurements, from reference [10].
8.3 Dielectric properties 185electric constant since air has a dielectric constant of 1. The total dielectric constant
(kt) of a two phase material, such as a nanocellular polymer, can be expressed based
on the rule of mixtures: the upper limit (series rule of mixture, eq. (8.1)) and the
lower one (parallel rule of mixture, eq. (8.2)) [12].
kt = ρrks + 1 − ρr ð Þkg (8:1)
1
kt
= ρr
ks
+
1 − ρr
kg
(8:2)
where ks and kg are the dielectric constants of the solid and gas phases, respectively, and
ρr is the relative density (as defined in Chapter 2). This expected reduction of the dielec￾tric constant has been proved in nanoporous polymer films, such as polyimide films as
seen in Figure 8.5 (data from [13], adapted in [12]). The measured results are in between
the two extreme cases of the rule of mixtures. Polyimide is quite an interesting candidate
for this application due to its excellent thermal resistance and mechanical properties.
Theoretical and experimental pieces of evidence prove that increasing porosity helps
to decrease the dielectric constant [14]. Furthermore, the effect of the pore size was
studied by Notario and coworkers using microcellular and nanocellular PMMA [15].
Direct current (DC) resistivity at room temperature did not show a simple trend as a
function of the relative density (Figure 8.6): the cell size was observed to play a signifi￾cant role. The resistivity increases by two orders of magnitude when the cell size is
3,0
2,7
2,4
2,1
1,8
1,5
1,2
0,9
0,0
Dielectric Constant (kt
)
0,2 0,4
Polyimide (Pl) Serial Mixture Rule
Polyimide (Pl) Parallel Mixture Rule
Polyimide (Pl) [120]
0,6
Porosity
0,8 1,0
Figure 8.5: Variation of the dielectric constant as a function of porosity according to the rules of mixture,
for the particular case of a nanoporous polyimide (ks = 2.79), together with some experimental results,
from reference [12].
186 Chapter 8 Other propertiesreduced from 1460 nm to 710 nm despite the smaller relative density. This behavior
was previously observed by J. Pinto et al. [16] who demonstrated the appearance of
an electrical conductivity component and interfacial polarization phenomena (or
MWS) in nanocellular polymers at low frequencies. They also reported an increase in
the electrical resistivity when reducing the cell size from the micro to the nanoscale
due to an increased tortuosity of the solid phase (tortuosity of the solid phase was
defined in Chapter 2). The appearance of both phenomena, MWS, and tortuosity, can
be observed in Figure 8.6. When cell size moves from 1460 nm to the nanometer
range (710 nm) the resistivity increases because of a higher tortuosity of the solid
phase. For cell sizes below 700 nm resistivity reduces as the cell size does because of a
conductive mechanism at low frequencies related to the MWS, which is due to the
accumulation of charges in opposing cell walls. When the dielectric constant was cal￾culated in [15], a reduction with the density was observed, but the effect of the cell
size was still unclear.
Finally, Notario et al. studied the thermal stability of the differences found in the elec￾tric behavior of microcellular and nanocellular materials [15]. A decrease in the nor￾malized dielectric strength was observed when cell size reduces (Figure 8.7), and the
differences are stable in a wide temperature range (from −20 to 110 °C). This differ￾ence was attributed by the authors to a progressive decrease in the number of free
dipoles able to rotate, that is, the confinement effect of the solid phase in the nano￾cellular sample.
Figure 8.6: (Left) Evolution of the DC electrical resistivity as a function of the relative density. (Right)
Scheme of the tortuosity (top) and MWS (bottom) phenomenon. The numbers in the figure of DC
resistivity vs relative density correspond to the cell size of each nanocellular polymer, from reference [15].
8.3 Dielectric properties 187Several phenomena seem to play a role in the dielectric behavior of nanocellular
polymers: tortuosity of the solid phase, confinement of the polymer, etc. However, the
available data is still scarce, and it is challenging to create a robust model to predict
the behavior of nanocellular polymers. Further work is needed to fully understand
the potential of these materials to be used in these applications.
8.4 Electromagnetic shielding properties
Electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding of radiofrequency radiation continues to
be a serious concern for modern society because of the wide use of commercial, mili￾tary, and scientific electronic devices and communication instruments. Compared to
conventional metal-based EMI materials, polymer composites containing carbon￾based nanofillers have several advantages, such as lightweight, resistance to corro￾sion, excellent processability, and broad absorption bandwidth [17].
Theoretically, the shielding of electromagnetic waves occurs via three mecha￾nisms: reflection, absorption, and multiple internal reflections. In the case of polymer
composites, the shielding effectiveness (SE) is related to the reflection mechanism,
which can cause secondary EMI pollution. In this sense, polymer composites with a
cellular structure, that is, polymer composite foams will increase the absorption prop￾erties. Foams will combine lightweight, while the porous structure can effectively har￾vest microwaves by prolonging the travel path [18]. Figure 8.8 shows a comparison of
SE divided by the density times the thickness, as a function of the thickness for some
0,7
0,6
90 nm
200 nm
3290 nm
0,5
0,4
0,3
0,2
0,0026 0,0028 0,0030 0,0032 0,0034 0,0036 0,0038 0,0040
1/T (K–1)
∆ε/∆εbuk
Figure 8.7: Evolution of the normalized dielectric strength as a function of the inverse of temperature
for materials with different cell sizes.
188 Chapter 8 Other propertiescompact materials and foams. Because of the higher values of the foams, composite
foams are considered to be promising as high-efficiency EMI shielding materials.
There are several works in the literature showing the interesting properties of poly￾mer foams for EMI applications. For instance, Hamidinejad et al. [19] proved that the
introduction of a microcellular structure can substantially increase the electrical con￾ductivity and can decrease the percolation threshold of high-density polyethylene
(HPDE)-graphene nanoplatelets composites. The foams had a significantly higher
electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding effectiveness (SE) and a lower perco￾lation threshold compared to their regular injection molded counterparts as seen
in Figure 8.9.
Nonetheless, the information regarding the effects associated with the change of scale
of the cell size when moving to the nanoscale is still not fully investigated. In fact, the
Figure 8.8: Comparison of the SSE/d as a function of thickness for some representative
compact and porous composites, from reference [18].
Figure 8.9: K-band EMI SE of (a) the solid; and (b) the foamed HDPE-GnP composites with various GnP
content, from reference [19].
8.4 Electromagnetic shielding properties 189number of papers dealing with even microcellular polymers is quite scarce. For in￾stance, Ling et al. [17] prepared lightweight microcellular polyetherimide (PEI)/gra￾phene nanocomposite foams with a density of about 0.3 g/cm3 and a cell size of
around 15 microns. They observed cell growth induced the orientation of graphene on
cell walls, allowing a decrease of the percolation threshold and also an improvement
of the EMI shielding effectiveness from 17 to 44 dB/(g/cm3
) (Figure 8.10).
The only paper dealing with the EMI properties of nanocellular polymers is that of
Wang et al. [20]. In this paper, sub-microcellular and nanocellular PEBA/MWCNT nano￾composite films were prepared. EMI shielding tests with a rectangular waveguide struc￾ture were conducted by measuring the total shielding effectiveness, SET, the reflected
shielding effectiveness, SER, and the absorbed shielding effectiveness, SEA (Figure 8.11).
Figure 8.10: EMI shielding efficiency of (A) PEI/graphene nanocomposite and (B) microcellular foams at a
different frequency. The specific EMI shielding efficiency of PEI/graphene nanocomposite and
microcellular foams at 8.6 GHz (C). The comparative of specific EMI shielding efficiency of our data with
other reported results (D), from reference [17].
190 Chapter 8 Other propertiesWhile the pure PEBA is almost completely transparent to the electromagnetic wave, the
nanocomposite film with 5 wt% MWCNTs shows a dramatic increase of the SET, demon￾strating the significantly enhanced EMI shielding performance. The foamed films show
further increased SET values compared with the solid film, which indicates that the po￾rous structure contributes to blocking electromagnetic waves. Furthermore, their EMI
shielding performance increases gradually with the reduction of the cell size. The au￾thors also report a different EMI shielding mechanism in both materials: while the
nanocellular film shows an absorption-dominated EMI shielding behavior, the solid
shows a reflection-dominated EMI shielding behavior.
As for the dielectric properties, there is a lack of systematic research that allows an
understanding of the behavior of nanocellular polymers for EMI applications. The
preliminary results are quite promising, but more experimental data is needed. Dif￾ferent densities and cell sizes should be evaluated to identify the mechanisms taking
place in these materials and explore their full potential.
Figure 8.11: EMI shielding performance and mechanism: (a) SET over in the X-band frequency range,
(b) the SET, SEA, and SER values averaged over the X-band frequency range, (c) relative intensity of EMI
dissipations contributed by absorption, reflection, and transmission, and (d) schematic diagram showing
the EMI shielding behavior of solid and porous PEBA/MWCNT nanocomposite films, from reference [20].
8.4 Electromagnetic shielding properties 1918.5 Multifunctional materials
Recently, microcellular polymers have been claimed to be suitable for a wide collec￾tion of functional applications, including mechanical, barrier, dielectric, biomedical,
and others [21]. Nanocellular polymers also present a unique combination of proper￾ties. Thanks to their nanoscale cells, they show quite different behavior in comparison
to conventional cellular polymers and microcellular polymers. As a result, they can
be used as multifunctional materials. For instance, the transparency behavior to￾gether with the low thermal conductivity and the acoustic absorption can result in
interesting materials for windows, combining thermal and acoustic insulation with
light transmission. The possible potential applications of nanocellular polymers are
still to be explored and will be discussed in Chapter 9.
8.6 Conclusions
This chapter summarizes the information regarding other properties of nanocellular
polymers not covered in the previous chapters. First, acoustic properties are dis￾cussed. There is a lack of understanding of the mechanisms of sound propagation in
nanocellular structures. However, the first results of nanocellular polymers and aero￾gels suggest a quite different behavior of these materials in comparison to conven￾tional sound insulators. They present a much higher absorption in the low-frequency
range. In addition, they present resonance-like peaks, that can be associated with the
cell size.
Dielectric properties are also considered. While it is well established that increas￾ing porosity helps to reduce the dielectric constant, the effect of the cell size is yet not
fully understood. The first results in this sense prove a change from the micro to the
nanoscale. Also, a decrease in the normalized dielectric strength was observed as cell
size reduces, caused by the confinement of the polymer phase.
Last, electromagnetic shielding was discussed. Cellular polymers containing con￾ductive particles are interesting for this application because they help to reach the
percolation threshold for conduction at lower filler loads, increasing EMI efficiency.
Regarding nanocellular polymers, the first results prove that the EMI shielding perfor￾mance increases gradually when the cell size reduces.
All these results support the great interest in nanocellular polymers and pave the
way for future studies and developments. In particular, more experimental and theo￾retical work to understand the properties of nanocellular polymers is mandatory to
achieve their full potential. Finally, the quite interesting and unique combination of
properties of these materials makes them suitable to be used in specific applications
requiring multifunctional cellular materials.
192 Chapter 8 Other propertiesReferences
[1] E. Lopez-Gonzalez, Phd: Analysis of the Composition-structure- Properties Relationship of Open-cell
Polyolefin-based Foams with Tailored Levels of Gas-phase Tortuosity, University of Valladolid, (2019).
[2] G. Sung, J.H. Kim, Influence of filler surface characteristics on morphological, physical, acoustic
properties of polyurethane composite foams filled with inorganic fillers Compos. Sci. Technol.
146 (2017) 147–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2017.04.029
[3] X. Tang, X. Yan, Acoustic energy absorption properties of fibrous materials: A review Compos.
A: Appl. Sci. Manuf. 101 (2017) 360–380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2017.07.002
[4] M. Álvarez-Láinez, M.A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J.A. De Saja, Acoustic absorption coefficient of open-cell
polyolefin-based foams Mater. Lett. 121 (2014) 26–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2014.01.061
[5] J.H. Park, S.H. Yang, H.R. Lee, C. Bin Yu, S.Y. Pak, C.S. Oh, Y.J. Kang, J.R. Youn, Optimization of low
frequency sound absorption by cell size control and multiscale poroacoustics modeling J. Sound Vib.
397 (2017) 17–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2017.03.004
[6] J. Lee, G.-H. Kim, C.-S. Ha, Sound absorption properties of polyurethane/nano-silica nanocomposite
foams J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 123 (2012) 2384–2390. https://doi.org/10.1002/app
[7] G. Wang, G. Zhao, G. Dong, Y. Mu, C.B. Park, G. Wang, Lightweight, super-elastic, and thermal￾sound insulation bio-based PEBA foams fabricated by high-pressure foam injection molding with
mold-opening Eur. Polym. J. 103 (2018) 68–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2018.04.002
[8] B. Notario, A. Ballesteros, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanoporous PMMA : A novel system with
different acoustic properties Mater. Lett. 168 (2016) 76–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2016.01.037
[9] Z. Mazrouei-Sebdani, H. Begum, S. Schoenwald, K.V. Horoshenkov, W.J. Malfait, A review on silica
aerogel-based materials for acoustic applications J. Non. Cryst. Solids. 562 (2021) 120770. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2021.120770
[10] J.Y. Cai, S. Lucas, L. Wang, Y. Cao, Insulation properties of the monolithic and flexible aerogels
prepared at ambient pressure Adv Mater. Res. 391–392 (2012) 116–120. https://doi.org/10.4028/
www.scientific.net/AMR.391-392.116
[11] G.D. Fu, Z. Yuan, E.T. Kang, K.G. Neoh, D.M. Lai, A.C.H. Huan, Nanoporous ultra-low-dielectric￾constant fluoropolymer films via selective UV decomposition of poly(pentafluorostyrene)-block-poly
(methyl methacrylate) copolymers prepared using atom transfer radical polymerization Adv. Funct.
Mater. 15 (2005) 315–322. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.200400138
[12] B. Notario, J. Pinto, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Nanoporous polymeric materials : A new class of
materials with enhanced properties Prog. Polym. Sci. 78–79 (2016) 93–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pmatsci.2016.02.002
[13] B. Krause, G.H. Koops, N.F.A. Van der vegt, M. Wessling, M. Wübbenhorst, J. Van turnhout, Ultralow￾k dielectrics made by supercritical foaming of thin polymer films Adv. Mater. 14 (2002) 1041–1046.
https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-4095(20020805)14:15<1041::AID-ADMA1041>3.0.CO;2-A
[14] L. Wang, X. Liu, C. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Liu, M. Cheng, R. Wei, X. Liu, Ultralow dielectric constant
polyarylene ether nitrile foam with excellent mechanical properties Chem Eng J. 384 (2020) 123231.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.123231
[15] B. Notario, J. Pinto, R. Verdejo, M.A. Rodíguez-Pérez, Dielectric behavior of porous PMMA: From the
micrometer to the nanometer scale Polymer (Guildf). 107 (2016) 302–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2016.11.030
[16] J. Pinto, B. Notario, R. Verdejo, M. Dumon, S. Costeux, M.A. Rodriguez-perez, Molecular confinement
of solid and gaseous phases of self-standing bulk nanoporous polymers inducing enhanced and
unexpected physical properties Polymer (Guildf). 113 (2017) 27–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.
2017.02.046
References 193[17] J. Ling, W. Zhai, W. Feng, B. Shen, J. Zhang, W.G. Zheng, Facile preparation of lightweight
microcellular polyetherimide/graphene composite foams for electromagnetic interference shielding
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 5 (2013) 2677–2684. https://doi.org/10.1021/am303289m
[18] B. Zhao, M. Hamidinejad, S. Wang, P. Bai, R. Che, R. Zhang, C.B. Park, Advances in electromagnetic
shielding properties of composite foams J. Mater. Chem. A. 9 (2021) 8896–8949. https://doi.org/10.
1039/d1ta00417d
[19] M. Hamidinejad, B. Zhao, A. Zandieh, N. Moghimian, T. Filleter, C.B. Park, Enhanced electrical and
electromagnetic interference shielding properties of polymer-graphene nanoplatelet composites
fabricated via supercritical-fluid treatment and physical foaming ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces.
10 (2018) 30752–30761. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b10745
[20] G. Wang, J. Zhao, C. Ge, G. Zhao, C.B. Park, Nanocellular poly(ether-block-amide)/mwcnt
nanocomposite films fabricated by stretching-assisted microcellular foaming for high-performance
EMI shielding applications J. Mater. Chem. C. 9 (2021) 1245–1258. https://doi.org/10.1039/
d0tc04099a
[21] G. Wu, P. Xie, H. Yang, K. Dang, Y. Xu, M. Sain, L.S. Turng, W. Yang, A review of thermoplastic
polymer foams for functional applications J. Mater. Sci. 56 (2021) 11579–11604. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10853-021-06034-6
194 Chapter 8 Other propertiesChapter 9
Applications of nanocellular polymers
and future trends
9.1 Two types of nanocellular polymers: Fabrication
and structure
Chapter 3 showed a summary of the nanocellular polymers that have been produced
so far in the literature. In general, the most promising materials were produced using
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). Taking into account the structure and properties of
such materials, we can distinguish between two types of nanocellular polymers. The
first type of material is a low-density nanocellular polymer with a cell size around
300–500 nm, density 150–250 kg/m3 and low thermal conductivity. The second type is
a medium density material (density 375 kg/m3
) that shows transparency thanks to its
cell size lower than 50 nm. Table 9.1 summarizes the structural characteristics of
these two type of materials and the processing conditions previously reported to ob￾tain specific examples of the two types of materials based on PMMA.
As seen in Table 9.1, the first type of material can be produced by achieving solubil￾ities higher than 30% of CO2.
When no nucleating agents are included (homogeneous nucleation), this solubility
value has been obtained in the literature by using high pressures (31 MPa) and room
Table 9.1: Typical processing conditions to generate the two types of nanocellular polymers.
TYPE I (THERMAL INSULATOR) TYPE II (TRANSPARENT)
Homogeneous
nucleation []
Heterogeneous
nucleation []
Homogeneous
nucleation []
Solubility (%) > ✶ > ✶ > ✶
Saturation pressure (MPa) ~   –
Saturation temperature (ºC) ~   −–
Foaming temperature (ºC) –  –
Foaming time (min) – –
Density (kg/m
) – – –
Relative density .–. .–. .–.
Cell size (nm) – – –
✶
For PMMA with Mw = 83 kg/mol, for different Mw solubility values can slightly change.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-009temperature. When nucleating agents are introduced in the formulation it is possible
to fabricate the same type of material using much lower pressures (6 MPa) thanks to
the appearance of the heterogeneous nucleation mechanism. With these saturation
conditions low-density nanocellular polymers can be produced (relative densities
around 0.13–0.2, porosities over 80%) with cell sizes of 300–500 nm. Examples of cellu￾lar structures are presented in Figure 9.1.
To produce the second type of nanocellular polymers solubilities above 39% of CO2
are needed. Such high values of gas absorbed have been obtained in the literature by
using different combinations of production parameters, using medium/low pressures
(6 to 20 MPa) and very low temperatures (−15 to −32 °C) or using high saturation pres￾sures (40 to 50 MPa) and a saturation temperature of 0 °C. Such saturation conditions
allow increasing significantly the amount of gas absorbed and thus the nucleation,
resulting in medium-density nanocellular polymers (relative densities around 0.40,
porosity of 60%) with cell sizes as low as 14 nm. The processing conditions and typical
structures are collected in Table 9.1 and example of the cellular structures is pre￾sented in Figure 9.2.
9.2 Properties of nanocellular polymers: Comparison
with other materials
The two types of nanocellular polymers present different properties. Nanocellular pol￾ymers of Type I are interesting to be used as thermal insulators. When the cell size is
reduced to values comparable to the mean free path of the gas molecules, Knudsen
effect appears and the thermal conduction through the gas phase is drastically re￾duced (see Chapter 5 for more details on the thermal conductivity). This effect starts
Figure 9.1: Examples of cellular structures of Type I materials with different cell sizes, from references
[1] (a) and [2] (b).
196 Chapter 9 Applications of nanocellular polymers and future trendsto be important when the cell size decreases under the micron, and has a significant
impact for cell sizes below 500 nm. For instance, the conductivity of air reduces from
25 to 17 mW/mK for cell sizes of 500 nm. As a consequence of this reduction, these
materials can present the same thermal conductivity of an XPS foam (conventional
thermal insulator) with a much higher density (see Figure 9.3). This means that we
can have the same thermal insulation performance with a much higher compressive
strength, 5 times higher. Then, nanocellular polymers of Type I can be used as effec￾tive thermal insulators when high mechanical properties are required.
For conventional foams and nanocellular polymers of Type I, the cell size is in the
range of the visible light wavelength or higher (450 to 750 nm), so the amount of scat￾tered light is so high that the material is opaque independently on the used polymer
matrix (see Chapter 4 for more details on the optical properties). Conversely, when
the cell size becomes smaller than a tenth of the visible light wavelength, the total
amount of scattered light becomes negligible. That means visible light can pass
through cells with minimum deviation, and the material becomes optically transpar￾ent if the polymer matrix does not absorb light (Type II). Type II materials show an
interesting combination of properties, because they can keep the transparent behav￾ior of solid PMMA with a significant density reduction and an improvement in the
thermal insulation performance, as shown in Figure 9.3. While the transmittance is
reduced roughly to half the value of the pure polymer, the thermal conductivity is
reduced in a factor of 3.5. When the properties are compared to those of glass, the
improvement in the thermal insulation is even more significant: in this case, the re￾duction is more than 11 times. Then, Type II materials can be used as a new transpar￾ent thermal insulator for advanced applications. In addition, the elastic modulus,
compressive strength and tensile properties are excellent in comparison with any
type of aerogel (the most common example of transparent insulating materials).
The main conclusion of Figure 9.3 is that nanocellular polymers have a very rare
combination of properties that make them different to conventional polymer foams (as
Figure 9.2: Example of cellular structure
of Type II materials, from references [3].
9.2 Properties of nanocellular polymers: Comparison with other materials 197extruded polystyrene included in Figure 9.3 as an example of conventional cellular
polymer) or aerogels (as silica aerogels included in Figure 9.3 as an example of aerogel).
9.3 Future trends
As already discussed in Chapter 8 and mentioned in the previous section, nanocellular
polymers present a unique combination of properties, as schematically presented in
Figure 9.4. It is not each of the isolated properties that makes nanocellular polymers
interesting, but rather the combination of all of them. Nanocellular polymers are not
the best thermal insulator, neither the most transparent material, but it is a material
that is at the same time transparent, thermal insulator, with a high surface area and
good mechanical performance among others. In other words, we have in our hands a
multifunctional material with a combination of unique properties that have already
been thought about taking advantage of, but that also has great potential for the future.
One of the applications that have been already mentioned in the literature is the
use of these materials in windows. Their transparent behavior together with their
low thermal conductivity, excellent mechanical properties and acoustic absorption
Figure 9.3: Comparison of the properties of nanocellular polymers (Type I and II) vs a conventional
thermal insulator (XPS) and an advanced transparent material (silica aerogel [4]).
198 Chapter 9 Applications of nanocellular polymers and future trendscan result in better performance windows than the current ones for their use in dif￾ferent sectors such as the building sector or the automotive sector.
In several applications there is a need of excellent thermal insulating materials
with high stiffness and strength (for instance the insulation of petrol pipes under see
water at high depths). Nanocellular polymer of Type I look like a very promising solu￾tion for these insulation challenges.
Ultrathin polymeric films, that means polymeric films with nanoscale thickness,
have lately found a wide niche of applications including advanced medical and
health-care applications, microelectronics, membranes or sensors. In medical applica￾tions polymeric nanosheets with a thickness of tens to hundreds of nanometers are
used for example for wound dressing, tissue engineering and bioelectronic devices
[5–9]. In the case of microelectronics polymeric films have been proposed as a possi￾bility to obtain low-k-dielectric materials, in which the introduction of small porosity
contributes to even lower dielectric constants. Membranes and sensors fields take ad￾vantage of the thin thickness of these structures also looking for high surface area
materials in which porosity plays a key role.
Figure 9.4: Schematic view of the properties of nanocellular polymers.
9.3 Future trends 199Drawbacks for using thin films are the same for all the mentioned applications,
the mechanical integrity of ultrathin polymeric films is low. In addition, their require
complex and expensive production methods (involving the use of organic solvents)
that are, in addition, very difficult to scale.
In this case the reinforcement in the mechanical properties of nanocellular poly￾mers can be used together with their high surface area, and their open structure po￾rosity to revolutionize the already mentioned fields.
On the other hand, polymers with pores of tens of nanometers have been claimed
to be a potential solution for global problems such as climate change. In this case these
materials have been proposed for more energy efficient separation process and already
proven successful for more effective selective absorption, low-energy transformations
through catalysis process such CO2 conversions into solar fuels or water splitting. Materi￾als for these applications are synthesized through phase separation approaches, bottom￾up molecular design, and techniques that as explained in Chapter 3 are characterized
for being complex, expensive, non-environmentally friendly and hard to scale up. Again,
combine the unique properties of nanocellular polymers makes them the perfect candi￾date for a better future [10–13].
Digging into the literature regarding new materials one realizes that nanocellular
polymers have the potential to be key to future advances in fields such as medicine,
construction, the automotive industry, logistics, aeronautics, energy, removable ener￾gies, and, after all, our progress as humanity.
References
[1] I. Sánchez-Calderón, V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de-León, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Thermal conductivity of
low-density micro-and nanocellular poly (methyl-methacrylate) (PMMA): Experimental and modeling
Mater. Des. 221 (2022) 110938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.110938
[2] V. Bernardo, J. Martín-de León, M.Á. Rodríguez-Pérez, Production of PMMA-based nanocellular
polymers using low demanding saturation conditions Mater. Lett. (2019) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matlet.2019.126551
[3] J. Martin-de Leon, V. Bernardo, M.A. Rodriguez-Perez, Key production parameters to obtain
transparent nanocellular PMMA Macromol. Mater. Eng. (2017) 1700343(1)–1700343(5). https://doi.
org/10.1002/mame.201700343
[4] J.C.H. Wong, H. Kaymak, S. Brunner, M.M. Koebel, Mechanical properties of monolithic silica
aerogels made from polyethoxydisiloxanes, Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 183 (2014) 23–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micromeso.2013.08.029
[5] T. Fujie, Development of free-standing polymer nanosheets for advanced medical and health-care
applications, Polym. J. 48 (2016) 773–780. https://doi.org/10.1038/pj.2016.38
[6] K. Maex, M.R. Baklanov, D. Shamiryan, F. Iacopi, S.H. Brongersma, Z.S. Yanovitskaya, Low dielectric
constant materials for microelectronics, J. Appl. Phys. 93 (2003) 8793–8841. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.1567460
[7] U. Okoroanyanwu, Thin film instabilities and implications for ultrathin resist processes, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol. B Microelectron. Nanom. Struct. 18 (2000) 3381. https://doi.org/10.1116/1.1321291
200 Chapter 9 Applications of nanocellular polymers and future trends[8] P.H. Pfromm, W.J. Koros, Accelerated physical ageing of thin glassy polymer films: Evidence from
gas transport measurements, Polymer (Guildf). 36 (1995) 2379–2387. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-
3861(95)97336-E
[9] C.J. Ellison, J.M. Torkelson, Sensing the glass transition in thin and ultrathin polymer films via
fluorescence probes and labels, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 40 (2002) 2745–2758. https://doi.
org/10.1002/polb.10343
[10] D.S. Sholl, R.P. Lively, Seven chemical separations to change the world, Nature, 532 (n.d.) 435–437.
[11] J. Wu, F. Xu, S. Li, P. Ma, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, R. Fu, D. Wu, Porous polymers as multifunctional material
platforms toward task-specific applications, Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.
201802922
[12] Y. Xiong, R.T. Woodward, D. Danaci, A. Evans, T. Tian, H. Azzan, M. Ardakani, C. Petit, Understanding
trade-offs in adsorption capacity, selectivity and kinetics for propylene/propane separation using
composites of activated carbon and hypercrosslinked polymer, Chem. Eng. J. 426 (2021) https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.131628
[13] Y. Chen, S. Yao, Y. Ling, W. Zhong, D. Hu, L. Zhao, Microcellular PETs with high expansion ratio
produced by supercritical CO2 molding compression foaming process and their mechanical
properties, Adv. Eng. Mater. 24 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.202101124
References 201Index
3D confinement 160
50 nm 90
absorption 118
absorption coefficient 182
aerogels 99, 106, 183
amorphous 157
Amplitude Modulation Frequency
Modulation 158
anisotropy ratio 14
average cell size 11
Beer–Lambert law 87
bicontinuous 167
bimodal 12, 115
brittle to ductile behavior 147
carbon dioxide 51
cell density 12, 55
cell growth 26
cell nucleation density 12
cell size 55, 114, 164, 181
cell size distribution 11, 115
cell wall thickness 20, 158, 167
cell walls 18, 119
cellular polymer 2
cellular polymers 45
classical nucleation theory 56
coalescence 30, 166
coarsening 31
co-continuous 167
compression molding 45
compression properties 146
compressive strength 151, 197
conduction through the gas phase 109
conduction through the solid phase 109
confinement 157
confinement effect 33
convection 109
conventional cellular polymers 3
critical radius 57
crystallization 152
degeneration 26
degeneration mechanisms 54
density 164
depressurization 52
desorption 52
dielectric constant 186
diffusivity 52
drainage 31
effective glass transition temperature 52
elastic collapse stress 146
elastic modulus 197
electromagnetic interference 188
EMI shielding 191
end-to-end distance 159
expandable beads 45
expansion ratio 10, 166
extinction coefficient 87, 98, 119
extruded polypropylene 45
extruded polystyrene 45
extrusion foaming 45
Fick diffusion law 52
foamed polyethylene 45
foamed polystyrene 45
foamed polyurethane 45
foaming 52
fraction of mass in the struts 19
free expansion phase 56
free foaming 45
gas dissolution foaming 45, 165
gas phase 4
Gibson and Ashby 143
glass transition temperature 52, 158
gyration radius 159
health-care applications 199
heat flow meter 131
heat transfer coefficient 106
Henry’s law 52
heterogeneous nucleation 28, 55, 165
homogeneous core 170
homogeneous nucleation 28, 55, 195
impact 146
impact strength 146
Influence Volume Approach 56
infrared radiation 118
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110756135-010injection molding 45
IR-blockers 122
Izod impact strength 146
Knudsen effect 33, 113, 196
limited expansion phase 56
loss tangent 159
low thermal conductivity 195
low–density nanocellular polymer 195
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 46
Maxwell equations 94
mean free path 110
mechanical performance 143
mechanical properties 16, 46, 112
mechanical property 143
medium density material 195
membranes 165, 199
microcellular polymers 4, 12
microelectronics 199
Microgreen 47
micronization 135
Mie scattering 87
molecular orientation 152
molecule diameter 114
Mucell 47
multifunctional material 198
multifunctional materials 192
nanofillers 166
nanoparticles 1
nanoscale 1
nanoscience 1
nanostructuration 169
nanotechnology 1
normalized standard deviation coefficient 11
nucleation 26, 54
one-step process 55
opacifiers 122
open cell 115, 164
open cell content 17, 73, 166, 181
phase separation 53
phase separation techniques 49
phonons 110
polymers 1
polypropylene molded foam 45
pore size 165, 186
porosity 10, 55, 115, 181
pressure 114
pressure vessel 45
radiation 109
Rayleigh scattering 90
reactive foaming 45
relative density 8, 109, 187
saturation 52
saturation pressure 52
saturation temperature 52
saturation time 52
scattering 87, 118
semi-continuous process 47
sensors 199
separation process 200
size effect 1
solid phase 4
solid skin 22, 54, 93, 165
solid structure factor 111
solubility 52, 195
solubility limit 52
sound absorption 181
sound speed 112
spinodal decomposition 54, 166
stabilization 26, 52
steady-state techniques 126
structural gradient 23
structural gradients 170
struts 18, 110
super-insulators 106
surface area 33, 164
templating of imprinting techniques 50
tensile 146
tensile properties 197
theoretical models 119
thermal conductivity 17
thermal insulation 9
thickness 98
thin films 167
tortuosity of the gas phase 18, 166, 181
tortuosity of the solid phase 24, 187
transient plane source 127
transient techniques 108
transition region 23, 93, 170
transmission loss 183
204 Indextransmittance 86, 119
transparency 195
transparent 33
transparent insulating materials 197
transparent nanocellular PMMA 91
transparent nanocellular polymers 85
Trexel 47
vacuum 114
VIPs 106
viscoelastic properties 166
wavelength 87
windows 198
Young’s modulus 144
Zotefoams Plc 46
Index 205
