Nanowire Energy Storage DevicesNanowire Energy Storage Devices
Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
Edited by Liqiang MaiThe Editor
Prof. Liqiang Mai
Wuhan University of Technology
122 Luoshi Road
Wuhan
China
430070
Cover Image: © MF3d/Getty Images
All books published by WILEY-VCH are carefully
produced. Nevertheless, authors, editors, and
publisher do not warrant the information
contained in these books, including this book,
to be free of errors. Readers are advised to keep
in mind that statements, data, illustrations,
procedural details or other items may
inadvertently be inaccurate.
Library of Congress Card No.: applied for
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library.
Bibliographic information published by
the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists
this publication in the Deutsche
Nationalbibliografie; detailed bibliographic
data are available on the Internet at
<http://dnb.d-nb.de>.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH, Boschstraße 12,
69469 Weinheim, Germany
All rights reserved (including those of
translation into other languages). No part of
this book may be reproduced in any form – by
photoprinting, microfilm, or any other
means – nor transmitted or translated into a
machine language without written permission
from the publishers. Registered names,
trademarks, etc. used in this book, even when
not specifically marked as such, are not to be
considered unprotected by law.
Print ISBN: 978-3-527-34917-3
ePDF ISBN: 978-3-527-83245-3
ePub ISBN: 978-3-527-83247-7
oBook ISBN: 978-3-527-83246-0
Typesetting Straive, Chennai, Indiav
Contents
Preface xi
1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis,
Characterization, and Applications 1
1.1 Introduction 1
1.1.1 One-Dimensional Nanomaterials 1
1.1.1.1 Nanorods 3
1.1.1.2 Carbon Nanofibers 3
1.1.1.3 Nanotubes 3
1.1.1.4 Nanobelts 5
1.1.1.5 Nanocables 6
1.1.2 Energy Storage Science and Technology 6
1.1.2.1 Mechanical Energy Storage 7
1.1.2.2 Electromagnetic Energy Storage 9
1.1.2.3 Electrochemical Energy Storage 9
1.1.3 Overview of Nanowire Energy Storage Materials and Devices 13
1.1.3.1 Si Nanowires 15
1.1.3.2 ZnO Nanowires 17
1.1.3.3 Single Nanowire Electrochemical Energy Storage Device 18
References 19
2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage 27
2.1 Physical and Chemical Properties of Nanowires 27
2.1.1 Electronic Structure 27
2.1.2 Thermal Properties 29
2.1.2.1 Melting Point 29
2.1.2.2 Thermal Conduction 30
2.1.3 Mechanical Properties 31
2.1.4 Adsorption and Surface Activity 32
2.1.4.1 Adsorption 33
2.1.4.2 Surface Activity 33
2.2 Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Nanowires Electrode Materials 34
2.2.1 Thermodynamics 34vi Contents
2.2.2 Kinetics 34
2.3 Basic Performance Parameters of Nanowires Electrochemical Energy
Storage Devices 35
2.3.1 Electromotive Force 36
2.3.2 Operating Voltage 36
2.3.3 Capacity and Specific Capacity 36
2.3.4 Energy and Specific Energy 37
2.3.5 Current Density and Charge–Discharge Rate 37
2.3.6 Power and Specific Power 38
2.3.7 Coulombic Efficiency 38
2.3.8 Cycle Life 38
2.4 Interfacial Properties of Nanowires Electrode Materials 38
2.4.1 Interface Between Nanowire Electrode Materials and Electrolytes 38
2.4.2 Heterogeneous Interfaces in Nanowire Electrode Materials 40
2.5 Optimization Mechanism of Electrochemical Properties of Nanowires
Electrode Materials 42
2.5.1 Mechanism of Electron/Ion Bicontinuous Transport 42
2.5.2 Self-Buffering Mechanism 44
2.6 Theoretical Calculation of Nanowires Electrode Materials 44
2.7 Summary and Outlook 48
References 49
3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires 51
3.1 Conventional Nanowires 51
3.1.1 Wet Chemical Methods 51
3.1.1.1 Hydrothermal/Solvothermal Method 52
3.1.1.2 Sol–Gel Method 53
3.1.1.3 Coprecipitation Method 54
3.1.1.4 Ultrasonic Spray Pyrolysis Method 55
3.1.1.5 Electrospinning Method 55
3.1.2 Dry Chemical Method 57
3.1.2.1 High-Temperature Solid-State Method 57
3.1.2.2 Chemical Vapor Deposition Method 58
3.1.3 Physical Method 59
3.2 Porous Nanowires 60
3.2.1 Template Method 60
3.2.1.1 Template by Nanoconfinement 60
3.2.1.2 Template by Orientation Induction 62
3.2.2 Self-Assembly Method 63
3.2.3 Chemical Etching Method 64
3.3 Hierarchical Nanowires 65
3.3.1 Self-Assembly Method 65
3.3.2 Secondary Nucleation Growth Method 68
3.4 Heterogeneous Nanowires 69
3.4.1 Heterogeneous Nucleation 69Contents vii
3.4.2 Secondary Modification 71
3.5 Hollow Nanowires 73
3.5.1 Wet Chemical Method 73
3.5.2 Template Method 73
3.5.3 Gradient Electrospinning 76
3.6 Nanowire Arrays 79
3.6.1 Template Method 79
3.6.2 Wet Chemical Method 81
3.6.3 Chemical Vapor Deposition 83
3.7 Summary and Outlook 86
References 88
4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization 95
4.1 In Situ Electron Microscopy Characterization 95
4.1.1 In Situ Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Characterization 95
4.1.2 In Situ Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) Characterization 97
4.2 In Situ Spectroscopy Characterization 101
4.2.1 In Situ X-ray Diffraction 101
4.2.2 In Situ Raman Spectroscopy 106
4.2.3 In Situ X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy 108
4.2.4 In Situ XAS Characterization 108
4.3 In Situ Characterization of Nanowire Devices 111
4.3.1 Nanowire Device 111
4.3.2 Nanowire Device Characterization Example 111
4.4 Other In Situ Characterization 115
4.4.1 In Situ Atomic Force Microscopy Characterization 115
4.4.2 In Situ Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 117
4.4.3 In Situ Neutron Diffraction 119
4.4.4 In Situ Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry 121
4.5 Summary and Outlook 123
References 124
5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries 131
5.1 Electrochemistry, Advantages, and Issues of LIBs Batteries 131
5.1.1 History of Lithium-ion Batteries 131
5.1.2 Electrochemistry of Lithium-ion Batteries 132
5.1.2.1 Theoretical Operation Potential 133
5.1.2.2 Theoretical Specific Capacity of Electrode Materials and Cells 133
5.1.2.3 Theoretical Specific Energy Density of an Electrochemical Cell 134
5.1.3 Key Materials for Lithium-ion Batteries 134
5.1.3.1 Cathode 134
5.1.3.2 Anode 135
5.1.3.3 Electrolyte 135
5.1.3.4 Separator 136
5.1.4 Advantages and Issues of Lithium-ion Batteries 137viii Contents
5.2 Unique Characteristic of Nanowires for LIBs 138
5.2.1 Enhancing the Diffusion Dynamics of Carriers 138
5.2.2 Enhancing Structural Stability of Materials 138
5.2.3 Befitting the In Situ Characterization of Electrochemical Process 139
5.2.4 Enabling the Construction of Flexible Devices 139
5.3 Nanowires as Anodes in LIBs 139
5.3.1 Alloy-Type Anode Materials (Si, Ge, and Sn) 139
5.3.1.1 Lithium Storage in Si Nanowires 139
5.3.1.2 Lithium Storage in Ge Nanowires 142
5.3.1.3 Lithium Storage in Sn Nanowires 145
5.3.2 Metal Oxide Nanowires 146
5.3.3 Carbonaceous Anode Materials 148
5.4 Nanowires as Cathodes in LIBs 151
5.4.1 Transition Metal Oxides 151
5.4.2 Vanadium Oxide Nanowires 153
5.4.3 Iron Compounds Including Oxides and Phosphates 157
5.5 Nanowires-Based Separators in LIBs 160
5.6 Nanowires-Based Solid-State Electrolytes in LIBs 163
5.7 Nanowires-Based Electrodes for Flexible LIBs 168
5.8 Summary and Outlook 174
References 175
6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries 185
6.1 Advantages and Challenges of Sodium-ion Batteries 185
6.1.1 Development of Sodium-ion Batteries 185
6.1.2 Characteristic of Sodium-ion Batteries 186
6.1.2.1 The Working Principle of Sodium-ion Battery 186
6.1.2.2 Advantages of Sodium-ion Batteries 186
6.1.3 Key Materials for Sodium-ion Batteries 187
6.1.3.1 Cathode 188
6.1.3.2 Anode 188
6.1.3.3 Electrolyte 189
6.1.3.4 Separator 189
6.1.4 Challenges for Sodium-ion Batteries 191
6.2 Nanowires as Cathodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 193
6.2.1 Layered Oxide Nanowires 193
6.2.2 Tunnel-type Oxide Nanowires 195
6.2.3 Polyanionic Compound Nanowires 196
6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 200
6.3.1 Carbonaceous Materials and Polyanionic Compounds 200
6.3.1.1 Graphitized Carbon Materials 200
6.3.1.2 Amorphous Carbon Materials 201
6.3.1.3 Carbon Nanomaterials 201
6.3.2 Polyanionic Compounds 203
6.3.3 Metals and Metal Oxides 206Contents ix
6.3.3.1 Metal Nanowires 206
6.3.3.2 Transition Metal Oxide Nanowires 207
6.3.4 Metal Sulfides 215
6.3.4.1 Molybdenum Sulfide and Its Composites 216
6.3.4.2 Tungsten Sulfide and Its Composites 216
6.3.4.3 Stannic Sulfide and Its Composites 218
6.3.4.4 Nickel Sulfide, Ferrous Sulfide and Their Composites 218
6.4 Summary 220
References 220
7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide
Battery 229
7.1 Lithium–Sulfur Battery 230
7.1.1 Sulfur–Carbon Nanowire Composite Cathode Materials 231
7.1.2 Conductive Polymer Nanowire/Sulfur Composite Cathode
Materials 236
7.1.3 Metal Compound Nanowires/Sulfur Composite Cathode Materials 237
7.2 Sodium–Sulfur Battery and Magnesium–Sulfur Battery 243
7.2.1 Sodium–Sulfur Battery 243
7.2.2 Magnesium–Sulfur Battery 247
7.3 Lithium–Selenium Battery 249
7.3.1 Reaction Mechanism of Lithium–Selenium Battery 250
7.3.2 Selenium-Based Cathode Materials 251
7.3.3 Existing Problems and Possible Solutions 256
7.4 Summary and Outlook 257
References 258
8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors 263
8.1 Nanowire Electrode Material for Electrochemical Double-Layer
Capacitor 265
8.1.1 The Application of Carbon Nanotubes in EDLCs 266
8.1.2 The Application of Carbon Nanofibers in EDLCs 267
8.2 Nanowire Electrode Materials for Pseudocapacitive
Supercapacitors 269
8.2.1 Metal Oxide Nanowire Electrode Materials 269
8.2.2 Conducting Polymer Nanowire Electrode Materials 271
8.3 Nanowire Electrode Materials of Hybrid Supercapacitors 272
8.3.1 Hybrid Supercapacitor Based on Aqueous Electrolyte 274
8.3.1.1 Carbon/Metal Oxide 274
8.3.1.2 Carbon/Conductive Nanowire Polymer 276
8.3.2 Other Electrolyte System Hybrid Supercapacitors 277
8.3.2.1 Organic Electrolyte System 277
8.3.2.2 Redox-Active Electrolyte System 278
8.3.3 Solid Electrolyte or Quasi-Solid-State Hybrid Supercapacitor 279x Contents
8.4 Summary and Outlook 279
References 280
9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries 285
9.1 Nanowires for Magnesium-Ion Battery 285
9.1.1 Vanadium-Based Nanowires for MIBs 286
9.1.2 Manganese-Based Nanowires for MIBs 289
9.1.3 Other Nanowires for MIBs 290
9.2 Nanowires for Calcium-Ion Batteries 292
9.3 Nanowires for Zinc-Ion Batteries 293
9.3.1 Vanadium-Based Nanowires for ZIBs 294
9.3.2 Manganese-Based Nanowires for ZIBs 295
9.4 Nanowires for Aluminum Ion Batteries 296
9.5 Summary and Outlook 298
References 299
10 Conclusion and Outlook 305
10.1 Structure Design and Performance Optimization of 1D
Nanomaterials 305
10.2 Advanced Characterization Methods for 1D Nanomaterials 308
10.3 Applications and Challenges of Nanowire Energy Storage Devices 314
10.3.1 Application of Nanowire Structures in Lithium-ion Batteries 314
10.3.2 Applications of Nanowire Structures in Na-ion Battery 315
10.3.3 Applications of Nanowire Structures in Other Monovalent-ion
Batteries 316
10.3.4 Application of Nanowires in Lithium–Sulfur Batteries 316
10.3.5 Application of 1D Nanomaterials in Supercapacitors 318
10.3.6 Nanowires for Other Energy Storage Devices 319
10.3.6.1 Metal Air Batteries 319
10.3.6.2 Multivalent-ion Battery 320
10.3.6.3 Metal Sulfur Batteries 320
References 322
Index 327xi
Preface
With the increasing prominence of worldwide energy crisis, materials science
and nanotechnologies have become the key to the fields of new energy storage
and utilization. With the in-depth study of nanotechnologies, nanoenergy storage
materials are in the rapid development stage. Especially, owing to their excellent
chemistry, electricity, thermal, mechanical, and other properties, nanowire mate￾rials exhibit unique electron and ion transport characterization, making them
distinctive among nanomaterials. From this perspective, nanowire energy storage
devices (ESDs) show outstanding electrochemical and energy storage characteris￾tics. And nanowire materials also have more unique advantages in the construction
of micro and nanoenergy storage devices and the assembly of flexible ESDs. To this
end, nanowire materials offer various opportunities to address the challenges of
advanced ESD, thus attracting the great attention and strong interest of the majority
of scientific researchers.
In this book, we present a comprehensive discourse on nanowire energy storage
devices (ESDs) from the perspective of synthesis, characterization, and applications.
This publication is structured into 10 chapters, each with coherent connections and
distinct focal points. Readers can read systematically or selectively, according to their
needs.
The Chapter 1 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Wen Luo. Chapter 1 intends to
offer an all-sided introduction to one-dimensional nanomaterials, energy storage sci￾ence and technology, and review the nanowire energy storage materials and devices.
The Chapter 2 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Chaojiang Niu. Chapter 2
summarizes the physicochemical characteristics of nanowire, the unique advan￾tages of nanowires as electrode materials, the basic performance parameters of
nanowire electrochemical ESDs, the optimization mechanism of electrochemical
performance, and briefly introduces the theoretical calculations related to nanowire
electrode materials.
The Chapter 3 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Lin Xu. Chapter 3 focuses
on the common synthesis methods and growth mechanisms of various types
of nanowire materials based on the classification of nanowires with different
morphologies.
The Chapter 4 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Xiaocong Tian. Chapter 4
briefly introduces various characterization methods and summarizes the progress
in the characterization of nanowires up to now. Chapter 4 will also discuss thexii Preface
future of characterization for nanowires and give perspectives on the opportunities
of nanowires in post-lithium energy storage systems.
The Chapter 5 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Ya You. Chapter 5 elaborates
the application of nanowires in lithium-ion batteries, discusses the unique charac￾teristic of nanowires for energy storage, and gives perspectives on the opportunities
of nanowires in post-lithium energy storage systems.
The Chapter 6 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Ting Zhu. Chapter 6 sum￾marizes the application of nanowire cathode and anode materials in sodium-ion
batteries. The synthesis, characterization, and reaction mechanism of the nanowires
are completely demonstrated. The perspectives on the development of nanowires in
sodium-ion batteries are also discussed in this chapter.
The Chapter 7 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Xu Xu. Chapter 7 expounds
the principles and applications of various new batteries from the perspective of
nanowire electrode materials and explains the characteristics and advantages of
nanowire electrode materials in new batteries.
The Chapter 8 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Liang Zhou. Chapter 8 focuses
on one-dimensional nanomaterials applied to three typical capacitors, including
Electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), pseudocapacitive supercapacitors, and
hybrid supercapacitors. The relationship between one-dimensional structure and
performance of capacitors is explored, which could provide theoretical guidance for
the deeper improvement of nanowire-based supercapacitors.
The Chapter 9 is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Qinyou An. Chapter 9 intro￾duces a broader application of nanowire ESDs in the various fields of multivalent-ion
batteries, such as magnesium-ion battery, calcium-ion battery, zinc-ion battery, and
aluminum-ion batteries. In the chapter, we also give a simple summary and outlook
on nanowires for multivalent-ion batteries.
The last chapter is written by Prof. Liqiang Mai and Wen Luo. Chapter 10 provides
a systematic conclusion and outlook on nanowire ESD and gives perspectives on
the structure design, performance optimization, and advanced characterization
methods of 1D nanomaterials. Moreover, in this chapter, we also intend to present a
broad picture of micro-nano device structure optimization and fabrication process
improvement for different applications.
This book is available for institutions of higher learning and scientific research
units engaged in the development of nanomaterials and ESDs research related
researchers and practitioners to use, also can be used as institutions of higher
learning materials, chemical energy, physical and related professional teachers,
graduate, and senior undergraduate professional reference book. Overall, despite
the best efforts of the author, due to the limitations of level and time, it is inevitable
that there will be some mistakes and omissions in the book. We sincerely hope that
the readers will contact us with valuable suggestions for its continued improvement.
Finally, I would like to thank all the contributors to this book. We thank
the support of the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(2020YFA0715000), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51832004,
52127816, 51802239, 52172233).
February 2023 Liqiang Mai
Wuhan, China1
1
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis,
Characterization, and Applications
1.1 Introduction
1.1.1 One-Dimensional Nanomaterials
As an important member of the large family of nanomaterials, one-dimensional
nanowire (NW) materials, including nanorods, nanotubes, nanobelts, and
nanocables, have gradually received attention from researchers (Figure 1.1). A NW
can be defined as a one-dimensional structure that is less than 100 nm in the lateral
direction (there is no limitation in the longitudinal direction). The aspect ratio of a
part of a NW is more than 1000 [1]. According to their different compositions, NWs
can be divided into different types, including metal NWs (such as Ni, Pt, and Au),
semiconductor NWs (such as InP, Si, and GaN), and insulator NWs (such as SiO2
and TiO2). NW materials have important implications for theoretical research and
technical applications. This kind of material has peculiar physical and chemical
properties, such as the transition from metal to insulator, super mechanical strength,
high luminous efficiency, lower laser threshold, and enhanced thermoelectric
coefficient [2].
The research on NWs can be traced to the early 1960s. In 1964, Wagner and
Ellis [3] used vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth to epitaxially grow Si single crys￾tal whiskers on a single crystal Si(111) substrate, creating a precedent for Si NW
research. In 1975, Givargizov [4] conducted a systematic study on the process of VLS
growth and gave a reasonable VLS growth mechanism for NWs. In 1998, Morales [5]
and Zhang et al. [6] used laser ablation deposition (LAD) to successfully grow Si
NWs. NW materials exhibit unique optical, electrical, and magnetic properties that
many bulk materials do not have. Therefore, they have an extremely important
position in the field of producing nanodevices, various sensors, microtools, micro￾electrodes, device-integrated connection lines, and next-generation EL display
devices. Current research results show that many one-dimensional nanomaterials
have demonstrated essential applications. For example, Huang et al. [7] grew ZnO
NW array with a diameter of 20–150 nm and a length of about 10 μm through
a vapor-phase transport process on a sapphire substrate, successfully preparing
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.2 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
Nanorods
Nanowires
Nanotubes Nanocables
Nanobelts
Nanowire arrays
Nanowire networks
Nanowire clusters
Nanowires
Figure 1.1 Schematic diagram of different types of nanowires and their secondary
structures.
nanolasers in 2001. In 2007, Prof. Lieber from Harvard University and his team
developed the first single NW solar cell [8]. They reported a solar cell prepared by
a single coaxial silicon nanowire (SiNW), which adopts a p–i–n coaxial structure.
The synthesis and application of NWs have become hot spots for scientists in recent
years because of their unique advantages. Prof. Mai from Wuhan University of
Technology and his team designed and assembled the first single NW electrochem￾ical energy storage device to reveal the intrinsic mechanism of electrochemical
performance degradation in 2010 [9]. In the same year, Huang et al. [10] used in
situ TEM to observe the lithiation phenomenon of a single NW of SnO2 for the
first time. In 2012, Kouwenhoven from Delft University of Technology and his
team verified the hypothesis that Majorana fermions in NWs are coupled with
superconductors [11]. In 2014, Prof. Cheng from Monash University and his team
built a wearable pressure sensor using gold nanowires [12]. In 2019, scientists
from Cambridge University, King’s College London, Peking University, Zhejiang
University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and other universities developed the
first single NW spectrometer in the world [13]. In 2020, researchers from Chinese
Academy of Sciences demonstrated a new flexible dual- NW structure consisting
of a GeSn layer with Sn content of 10% heteroepitaxially grown on the sidewall
of a Ge NW by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), which effectively suppressed
the formation of defects at the GeSn/Ge interface and greatly reduced the dark
current and static power consumption of the photodetector with GeSn/Ge dual-NW
structure [14]. NWs and devices with various structures have been continuously
developed, and their applications in scientific research and industrialization have
become increasingly extensive with the continuous progress of nanotechnology.1.1 Introduction 3
The important development process is shown in Figure 1.2. This book focuses on
the introduction of NW materials in electrochemical energy storage.
1.1.1.1 Nanorods
Nanorods and NWs are well-known one-dimensional nanostructures, which are
frequently used not only in nano-electromechanical systems but also in biomedical
treatments, dentistry, production of energy from solar cells, and humidity-sensitive
analysis [15]. Nanorods consist of rod-like nanoparticles. Its length is usually much
larger than its size in the two-dimensional direction and can achieve a macroscopic
magnitude. It should be noted that there is no strict distinction between NWs and
nanorods. Generally, those with a large slenderness ratio are called nanofibers,
and those with a small aspect ratio are called nanorods. The dividing line is located
at 1 μm. The preparation methods for nanorods mainly adopt VLS growth and
template-based synthesis. Nanorods can also be formed by using LAD. Pana￾sonic, the U.S. Bureau of Standards and Metrology, and the University of Florida
have done a large quantity of work in this area, using the pulsed laser method
to successfully prepare one-dimensional SiNWs and boron nitride nanotubes.
The one-dimensional nanomaterial synthesized by this method has the advantages
of high purity, large output, and uniform diameter. Researchers at the University of
Minnesota and Princeton University successfully prepared a quantum disk in 1998.
This disk is a nano-array system composed of magnetic nanorods with a density of
109 bit cm−2.
1.1.1.2 Carbon Nanofibers
Carbon nanofibers (CNFs) are sp2-based linear, noncontinuous filaments that are
different from carbon fibers, which are continuous with diameter of several microm￾eters [16]. They are a new type of quasi-one-dimensional carbon material that has
attracted more attention in recent years. Its diameter is generally 50–200 nm, the
length is 50–100 μm, and the aspect ratio is 100–500. Its structure and performance
are in the transition state between ordinary carbon fiber and carbon nanotubes, and
are formed by stacking nano-sized graphite sheets at different angles to the axial
direction of the fiber in space [17]. One-dimensional CNFs have many superior prop￾erties, so their application prospects are extensive. CNFs have pores on molecular
level over the surface and also have pores inside, as well as a large specific surface
area [18]. Therefore, it can absorb a large amount of gas and is a potential hydro￾gen storage material. It can also be used as a high-efficiency adsorbent, catalyst, and
catalyst carrier [19]. CNFs also have high electrical conductivity and can be used
as cathode materials for lithium-ion secondary batteries and electrodes for electric
double-layer capacitors [20].
1.1.1.3 Nanotubes
Carbon nanotubes, the one-dimensional allotropes of carbon, have attracted signif￾icant research interest ever since their discovery due to their outstanding material
properties. Carbon nanotubes are a typical representative of nanotubes. In the 1970s,4 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
Z. Di et al. demonstrate
a flexible GeSn/Ge dual￾nanowire structure
2020
2019
2014
2012
2010
2007
2005
2001
1996
1991
1978
1964
T. Hasan et al. developed
the first single nanowire
spectrometer in the world
Normalized PL
Wavelength (nm)
500 550 600 650 700
L. P. Kouwenhoven et al. verified the
hypothesis of coupling between
Majorana fermions and
superconductors of nanowires
L. Mai et al. developed a
single nanowire
electrochemical device
C. M. Lieber et al.
developed a single
silicon nanowire
solar cell
R. R. Llinás et al. have
developed a new method of
implanting platinum metal
nano-cables into human blood
vessels
P. Yang et al.
developed the first
nanowire laser
R. S. Wagner et al. proposed “solid￾liquid-gas growth mechanism”
W. Cheng et al. buil
a wearable pressure
sensor using gold
nanowires
J. Huang et al. observed the
lithiation of a single SnO2 nanowire for the first time
Z. Wang et al. developed the
first nanowire generator in the
world
Z. Wang et al. discovered and
synthesized semiconductor
oxide nanobelts
R. E. Smalley et al.
synthesized single￾walled carbon
nanotube bundles
arranged in lines
M. Endo developed carbon
fiber with a diameter of 7 nm
Year
Figure 1.2 Important development history of nanowire materials. Source: Refs. [3–14].1.1 Introduction 5
M. Endo from the University of Orléans in France successfully synthesized carbon
fibers with a diameter of 7 nm, but he did not carefully evaluate and characterize
the structure of these carbon fibers [21]. Until 1991, Iijima [22] of the Japanese NEC
company discovered carbon nanotubes for the first time with a high-resolution elec￾tron microscope. Since then, nanomaterials have attracted widespread attention in
the global scientific research field. In 1996, the famous American Nobel Prize win￾ner Smalley and others synthesized single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) bundles
arranged in rows, which signifies that scientists can prepare batches of NWs in a
controlled manner [23]. Xie and coworkers [24] from Institute of Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, have achieved the directional growth of carbon nanotubes and
successfully synthesized ultra-long (millimeter-level) carbon nanotubes, reported
the synthesis of strong, highly conducting, and transparent SWNT films in 2007.
Because carbon nanotubes have the advantages of large specific surface area,
good electrical conductivity, and high chemical stability, they have also been widely
used for electric double-layer supercapacitor electrodes or as conductive additives
in other electrochemical energy storage systems, such as pseudocapacitors and
metal ion batteries [25]. At the same time, the internal and surface bond states
of carbon nanotubes are different, and there is a phenomenon of incomplete
coordination of surface atoms, which leads to an increase in active sites on the
surface. These characteristics make carbon nanotubes one of the ideal catalyst
support materials [26]. In addition, carbon nanotubes are also expected to be used
for field emission tubes, field emission flat panel displays, microwave generators,
gas discharge tubes, and fluorescent lamps, and their nano-scale hollow pipes also
make them have great potential for hydrogen storage [27].
1.1.1.4 Nanobelts
It is difficult to maintain stability during large-scale industrial production of carbon
nanotubes, slowing the research of nanomaterials. In 2001, Prof. Zhonglin Wang and
his team used the high-temperature solid gas phase method to discover and synthe￾size semiconductor oxide nanobelt structures for the first time in the world [28].
Then, they successfully synthesized the ribbonlike structure of broadband semicon￾ductor systems such as zinc oxide, tin oxide, indium oxide, cadmium oxide, and
gallium oxide. The purity of these ribbonlike structure materials is as high as 95%,
and they have the advantages of large output, perfect structure, clean surface, no
internal defects, and no dislocations. In 2007, Zhonglin Wang and his team devel￾oped the first NW generator in the world [29].
The cross section of the nanobelt is a narrow rectangular structure with a band￾width of 30–300 nm, a thickness of 5–10 nm, and length of up to several millimeters.
Compared with carbon nanotubes, silicon, and compound semiconductor linear
structures, nanobelts are the only broadband semiconductor one-dimensional rib￾bon structures that have been found to have a controllable structure, be defect-free,
and have more unique and superior features of structure and physical properties
than carbon nanotubes. Although nanobelts lack the high structural strength of
cylindrical nanotubes, they can ensure the necessary stability of electronic equip￾ment and the uniformity of the material structure during mass production because6 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
of their superior performance, which is very important in nanophysics research
and nanodevice applications. This structure is an ideal system for researching the
transport processes of light, electricity, and heat in one-dimensional functional
and smart materials. It can enable scientists to use single oxide nanobelts to make
nanometer-sized gas and liquid sensors, nanofunctions, and smart optoelectronic
components, laying a solid foundation for nanooptoelectronics [30].
1.1.1.5 Nanocables
In 1997, French scientists C. Colliex and his team found a sandwich-geometry
C–BN–C tube in the product obtained by analyzing the arc discharge. Because its
geometry is similar to that of a coaxial cable and the diameter is at the nanometer
level, it is called a coaxial nanocable [31]. In 1998, Zhang et al. [32] used laser
ablation to synthesize a coaxial nanocable with a diameter of tens of nanometers
and a length of 50 μm. Their experiment shows that if the mixed powder of BN, C,
and SiO2 is used as the raw material, a single-core nanocable can be formed with
β-SiC core wire inside and amorphous SiO2 single wire outside. If Li3N is added to
the raw materials, a coaxial nanocable with another structure can be formed, that is,
the core is SiC, the middle layer is amorphous SiO2, and the outermost layer is BNC
with a graphite structure. At the same time, Meng et al. [33] developed a new coaxial
nanocable preparation method, which is sol–gel and carbothermal reduction with
evaporation–condensation, and successfully synthesized a coaxial nanocable with
SiC semiconductor core and SiO2 insulator on the outer layer. After 2000, people
have successfully prepared hundreds of coaxial nanocables using different synthesis
methods and different kinds of materials, such as SiGaN/SiOxNy [34], Fe/C [35],
Ag/polypyrrole [36], GaP/ZnS [37], CdSe/TiO2 [38], and three-layer structure of
Ag/SiO2/ppy [39] and Nd/FM (FM =Fe, Co, Ni)/PA66 [40].
Coaxial nanocables play a crucial role in the fields of biomedicine, nano-electronic
devices, nano-microprocessing, and testing technology. In terms of practical appli￾cations, the components in the ultrahigh-density-integrated circuit are mainly con￾nected by nanocable coupling; hence, the nanocable also plays an important role
in the connection line. Considering the research on solar cells, the US National
Renewable Energy Laboratory has developed a kind of solar cell with high-energy
conversion using coaxial nanocable. Respecting medical research, in 2005, scientists
in the Unites States and Japan successfully developed a new method of implant￾ing platinum metal nanocables with a diameter of 1% of human hair into human
blood vessels and hoped that one day it would help doctors treat certain human dis￾eases [41]. Nanocables can also be used as probes for miniature detectors on impor￾tant nano-resolution detectors such as field emission detectors, biological detectors,
and atomic force microscopes [42]. It is believed that with the continuous discovery
of new special properties of nanocables, coaxial nanocables will also become a new
force in the field of NW materials.
1.1.2 Energy Storage Science and Technology
The widespread application of fossil fuels (oil, coal, and natural gas) has greatly pro￾moted the rapid development of the world economy. Nowadays, the improvement1.1 Introduction 7
of the world economy is still largely based on the use of fossil fuels. However, with
the continuous consumption of nonrenewable energy, traditional fossil fuels such
as oil, coal, and natural gas will eventually face exhaustion. It is predicted that
the life span of coal, natural gas, and oil will be less than 100 years on average if
calculated at the current rate of fossil fuel consumption. The global demand for
energy will reach 28 TW by 2050 [43], which is equivalent to the energy produced
by consuming 1010 tons of oil each year. Obviously, one of the biggest issues of
the twenty-first century is the energy crisis. The deterioration of the energy crisis
will lead to a world economic crisis, which in turn leads to an intensification of
economic conflicts. At the same time, major problems such as environmental
pollution and global warming caused by the growing consumption of fossil fuels
pose a severe threat to the sustainable development of mankind. Therefore, energy
and environmental issues have become international issues that threaten human
survival and development. In summary, the development of renewable energy is the
key to solving energy and environmental problems and is the only choice for human
beings to achieve sustainable development. Renewable energy mainly includes
solar energy, biomass energy, wind energy, hydropower, geothermal energy, and
tidal energy. The most important way to solve energy and environmental problems
is to vigorously develop renewable energy. However, renewable energy sources
such as solar and wind energy are discontinuous and have large, unpredictable, and
variable characteristics. Their acquisition and output are unstable, and their energy
density is low, which has a great impact on the reliability of the power grid. It is
difficult to integrate into the grid. Hence, how to achieve effective conversion and
storage between various energy forms is particularly important. The development
of energy storage technology can effectively solve this problem enabling renewable
energy to be stored and applied in a stable form. In addition, with energy storage
technology as the development direction of the future power grid, smart grids
can adjust grid peak using energy storage devices, increasing the capacity of the
transmission and distribution system and optimizing efficiency. Energy storage
technology can be widely used for the generation, transmission, distribution, and
usage of the entire power industry. In this book, energy storage mainly refers to
electrical energy storage. It is a technology in which electrical energy is stored
in another form and released when needed, which can effectively solve the
above problems.
The existing energy storage methods are mainly divided into the following cate￾gories: electrochemical energy storage (lead-acid batteries, flow batteries, alkaline
metal secondary batteries, multivalent ion batteries, metal-chalcogenide batteries,
supercapacitors, etc.); mechanical energy storage (pumped hydro storage, flywheel
energy storage, compressed air energy storage, etc.); electromagnetic energy storage
(superconducting energy storage); and latent heat storage.
1.1.2.1 Mechanical Energy Storage
The essence of mechanical energy storage is that electrical energy is converted into
mechanical energy for storage. There are three main types of mechanical energy stor￾age technologies that have been applied in industry: pumped hydro storage, flywheel
energy storage, and compressed air energy storage.8 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
Pumped Hydro Storage
Pumped hydro storage is currently the most mature and widely used energy stor￾age technology in the world, which is mainly used for system backup and peak load
and frequency modulation. The energy storage system is equipped with two stor￾age reservoirs: the upper reservoir and the lower reservoir. Water is pumped from
the lower reservoir to the upper reservoir when storing electricity. Water flows from
the upper reservoir to the pump location when using electricity, and the potential
energy of the water flow is used to drive the turbine to generate electricity. Pumped
hydro energy storage has the longest life cycle (30–60 years), the largest number
of cycles (10 000–30 000 times) and the largest capacity (500–8000 MWh) compared
with other energy storage [44]. However, the disadvantage is that the site selection
is greatly affected by the geographical location and the construction period is long
as well as the investment cost is high.
Compressed Air Energy Storage
Compressed air energy storage system (CAES) uses gas turbine energy to generate
electricity. The air compression system consumes excess electricity to compress the
air and store it in underground salt mines, abandoned quarries, or large ground
storage tanks when storing electricity. The stored air is released from the air storage
chamber and burned with fuel when using electricity. The produced gas, with
its high temperature and pressure, drives the gas turbine to generate electricity.
The system construction investment and power generation cost are lower than
pumped hydro storage. Besides, it has the following advantages: long service life
(20–40 years), large capacity, and large quantities of charge–discharge cycles. It has
wide applications in the fields of power production, transportation, and consump￾tion, including peak shaving and valley filling, power load balancing, renewable
energy access, and backup power supplies [45]. It has broad application prospects
in conventional power systems, renewable energy, distributed function systems,
and smart grids. However, the negative aspects of CAES are obvious. To begin with,
its energy density is low. To make matters worse, it depends on large gas storage
chambers and causes fossil fuel consumption and environmental pollution.
Flywheel Energy Storage
Flywheel energy storage and power generation technology uses the conversion
between electrical and kinetic energy to store and generate energy. The flywheel
is connected to the power grid, and the electrical energy provided by the power
grid drives the flywheel to rotate at a high speed, converting the electrical energy
into kinetic energy and storing it when storing energy. The rotating flywheel drives
the motor to generate electricity, converting kinetic energy into electrical energy
when using energy. Compared with other energy storage technologies, flywheel
energy storage has the advantages of high energy conversion efficiency (85–95%),
non-polluting, simple maintenance, free from geographical environment restric￾tions, and continuous operation [46]. Mainly used for uninterruptible power supply
(UPS), grid peak shaving, and frequency control. However, short power generation
times and high equipment costs are important factors restricting its development.1.1 Introduction 9
1.1.2.2 Electromagnetic Energy Storage
Superconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES) is the most common energy
storage technology for electromagnetic energy storage. SMES system directly stores
electromagnetic energy in the superconducting coil. The stored electromagnetic
energy is sent back to the grid or other loads when electricity is needed. SMES
system has unique benefits that other energy storage technologies do not have.
SMES systems can store energy almost lossless for a long time (conversion efficiency
exceeds 90%) [47], release energy rapidly, have a small size, and are environmen￾tally friendly. The low-frequency power oscillation of the grid can be reduced or
eliminated, and the active and reactive power can be adjusted more easily with
the existence of SMES system. Therefore, SMES can improve the stability of the
power system and enhance the controllability of power generation with new energy.
However, its short board is high in cost, complicated in process, and operating
conditions.
1.1.2.3 Electrochemical Energy Storage
The principle of electrochemical energy storage is that electrical energy is converted
into chemical energy for storage. It includes various types of batteries (lead–acid bat￾teries, nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries, lithium-ion batteries, etc.) and super￾capacitors. Electrochemical energy storage is convenient and safe, is not restricted by
region, has less environmental pollution, is not restricted by Carnot cycle in energy
conversion, and has high conversion efficiency compared with other methods [48].
Electrochemical energy storage is the most important component in the field of
energy storage. Since Le Clancy invented lead-acid batteries in 1859, various chem￾ical batteries involving different energy storage systems have been developing in
the direction of high capacity, high power, low pollution, long service life, and high
safety to meet the needs of different fields. At present, lithium-ion battery has the
advantages of high energy density, high conversion efficiency (close to 100%), long
cycle life, and low self-discharge. They have been widely used in various electronics
and electric vehicles and are gradually being deployed in the field of large-scale
energy storage. Many large-scale lithium battery energy storage demonstration
systems and bases have been built in most countries. However, in 2018, the U.S. Geo￾logical Survey Mineral and Commodity Summaries showed that the global lithium
reserves could not meet the rapid development of global electric vehicles [49].
Thus, in order to meet the rapid development of electric vehicles and the increasing
demand for energy storage devices in other fields, other types of secondary batteries
and energy storage devices have also been significantly developed, such as new
alkaline metal secondary batteries (sodium ion battery, potassium ion battery),
multivalent ion batteries (magnesium ion battery, zinc ion battery, aluminum ion
battery, etc.), metal-chalcogenide batteries, metal-oxygen batteries, and supercapac￾itors. The common types of electrochemical energy storage involved and their main
characteristics are shown in Table 1.1. Electrode materials are the core component
of energy storage devices. Improving the performance of chemical energy storage
equipment by exploring and developing new energy storage materials has become
a global issue, which has received great attention and support from all countries.10 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
Table 1.1 Common types of electrochemical energy storage and their main advantages
and disadvantages.
Type of battery Mechanism of energy storage
Analysis of advantages
and disadvantages
Lead-acid
batteries
PbO2 +2H2SO4 +Pb ↔
2H2O +2PbSO4
Pros: mature technology and
low cost
Cons: short cycle life and
pollution problem
NiMH
batteries
Ni(OH)2 + M ↔ NiOOH + MH Pros: withstand overcharge and
over discharge, strong capability
of high rate discharge, safety and
high power density
Cons: low voltage and low energy
density
Monovalent
ion batteries
Embedding reaction, alloying
reaction, conversion reaction
Pros: mature technology for
lithium-ion batteries, small
self-discharge, light weight, small
size, high working voltage,
environmentally friendly, no
memory effect, charging rapidly
and high energy capacity
Cons: internal impedance is
high, the working voltage
changes greatly and the capacity
decays quickly
Multivalent
ion batteries
Embedding reaction, alloying
reaction, conversion reaction
Pros: the theoretical volume ratio
is high, and the anode has rich
metal resources
Cons: multivalent ions have a
large radius, the polarization
phenomenon is serious, and
configuring a suitable electrolyte
is difficult
Metal￾chalcogenide
batteries
The anode (M) is mainly the
deposition and dissolution reaction
of metal ions, and the
oxidation–reduction reaction of the
chalcogen element (X) occurs in the
cathode. The reaction of the entire
battery system can be summarized
as: M +X ↔ MX
Pros: high energy density
Cons: low power density, short
cycle life, immature system, and
difficult to achieve
commercialization
Metal-air
batteries
Catalytic materials are used to
catalyze the oxygen or pure oxygen
in the air as the cathode active
material, the metal is the anode, and
the ammonium chloride or caustic
solution is used as the electrolyte to
participate in the electrochemical
reaction.
Pros: relatively low cost and
stable output voltage
Cons: low power density, short
cycle life, and low output voltage
(Continued)1.1 Introduction 11
Table 1.1 (Continued)
Type of battery Mechanism of energy storage
Analysis of advantages
and disadvantages
Supercapacitors Electric double layer,
pseudocapacitance (underpotential
deposition, redox reaction, and
embedded pseudocapacitance)
Pros: high power density and
good cycle stability
Cons: low energy density and
low output voltage
Flow batteries A high-performance battery that
uses positive and negative
electrolytes is separated and
circulate, respectively
Pros: long cycle life
Cons: low energy storage density
Lead-Acid Batteries
The basic chemical composition of all types of lead-acid battery is the same. In the
charged state, the cathode is lead dioxide, the anode is metallic lead, and the elec￾trolyte is sulfuric acid solution. In the discharge state, the main components of the
positive and negative electrodes are lead sulfate. The global lead-acid battery indus￾try has always been larger than other batteries because of a series of advantages such
as low cost, high working voltage, safety, and reliability that other batteries cannot
replace [50]. Lead-acid batteries have a long history of development, and the tech￾nology is mature and is now widely used in many fields. In the automotive industry,
lead-acid batteries are used for the starting, ignition, and lighting of various cars,
motorcycles, and ships. In the electric vehicle industry, lead-acid batteries provide
power for electric cars and electric bicycles. In addition, the market demand for
lead-acid batteries in the communications industry is huge. In addition, when new
energy sources generate electricity, it also needs to be supplied with lead-acid bat￾teries [51]. Lead-acid batteries can replace expensive gas and oil turbine generators
to meet load balancing requirements as an alternative power supply method during
peak electricity consumption.
NiMH Batteries
NiMH batteries are a new generation of high-energy secondary batteries that replace
Ni–Cd batteries [52]. NiMH batteries are a kind of green battery compared with
lead-acid batteries. The cathode of NiMH battery is Ni(OH)2. The anode material is
metal hydride (MH). The electrolyte is an aqueous potassium hydroxide solution. In
the field of small batteries, although the energy density of NiMH batteries is higher
than Ni–Cd batteries, its energy density is lower than that of lithium-ion batteries.
Therefore, at present, the market utilization rate of NiMH batteries is lower than
that of lithium-ion batteries. There are also some electric tools that retain NiMH
batteries, like sweeping robots. In the automotive industry, NiMH batteries are
used as power batteries. NiMH batteries have outstanding advantages compared
with lithium-ion batteries and hydrogen fuel cells, which mainly show in their
fast charging and discharging speeds, high mass-specific power, and good stability.12 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
In addition, the energy storage batteries currently used in smart grids mainly include
lead-acid batteries, lithium-ion batteries, sodium–sulfur batteries, all-vanadium
flow batteries, and NiMH batteries. Among them, lead-acid batteries will produce
lead pollution, and many European countries have gradually banned lead-acid
batteries. Li-ion batteries are not yet mature in large-scale integration technology.
The technology of NiMH batteries as a smart grid energy storage system is relatively
mature, with good safety performance and long service life [53].
Monovalent Ion Batteries
Lithium-ion batteries are the most representative of monovalent ion batteries.
It mainly realizes charge and discharge through repeated insertion and extraction
of lithium ions between the positive and negative electrodes. Lithium ions are
extracted from the cathode material and inserted into the anode material through
the electrolyte, and the anode material is in a lithium-rich state when charging. The
situation is opposite when discharging. Before the advent of lithium-ion batteries,
NiMH batteries were widely used in the portable electronic equipment industry.
After the advent of lithium-ion batteries, they are superior to NiMH batteries in
terms of weight, capacity, and power. The energy density of lithium-ion batteries is
greater than that of NiMH batteries, the self-discharge phenomenon is weakened, as
well as the charging time is shorter. Lithium-ion battery energy storage technology
currently occupies a leading position in the energy storage industry and has been
widely used in electric vehicles, smart grids, cutting-edge defense equipment,
biomedicine, portable devices, artificial intelligence, etc., as shown in Figure 1.3.
However, large-scale applications of lithium-ion batteries are still limited, and
security and high cost are the main influencing factors. The current commercial
cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries are mainly LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, and
LiFePO4. The anode materials are mainly carbon materials and Li4Ti5O12 [54].
The electrolyte is a nonaqueous organic electrolyte. In recent years, LiFePO4
Artificial intelligence
Mobile terminal
Medical biology National defence
Smart grid
Electric vehicle
High￾performance
energy storage
devices
Figure 1.3 Main application areas of high-performance energy storage devices.1.1 Introduction 13
has received widespread attention around the world due to its better safety and
high-rate discharge performance, and its application in electric vehicles and grid
energy storage has been rapidly promoted [55].
Multivalent Ion Batteries
There is an increasing demand for lithium-ion batteries in various fields due to their
continuous development. The shortage of lithium resources is one of the important
factors hindering the development of lithium-ion batteries. In order to alleviate this
problem, multivalent ion batteries, including magnesium ion batteries, zinc ion bat￾teries, aluminum ion batteries, and calcium ion batteries, have been rapidly devel￾oped. Multivalent ion batteries have higher safety performance and lower cost than
lithium ion batteries. Moreover, multivalent ion batteries directly use metals as neg￾ative electrode materials, so they have the potential to greatly increase the energy
density of the batteries compared with lithium ion battery using carbon materials
as negative electrodes. Therefore, it has good application value and development
prospects in the fields of large-scale energy storage and civil batteries. Unfortunately,
multivalent ion batteries are still in the research stage, and the strong polarization
effect and high requirements for electrolyte are important factors that limit the devel￾opment of multivalent ion batteries [56].
Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are different from traditional batteries. The energy storage mech￾anism of supercapacitors was divided into physical energy storage and chemical
energy storage. The physical mechanism is that a double layer structure formed
by the interface of electrode/electrolyte with porous carbon material with high
specific surface area is used for energy storage [57]. The chemical mechanism is
that the rapid, reversible redox reactions between electrodes and electrolyte are
used for energy storage (pseudocapacitance) [58]. Therefore, according to different
energy storage mechanisms, supercapacitors can be divided into electric double
layer supercapacitors (EDLC), pseudocapacitors, and hybrid capacitors (both
physical energy storage and chemical energy storage). It combines the advantages
of traditional capacitors and batteries, not only has the advantages of high discharge
power of electrostatic capacitors, but also has a large charge storage capacity,
as same as batteries. Its capacity can reach the farad level or even thousands of
farad levels. At the same time, it has the advantages of high power density, good
cycle stability, strong temperature adaptability, and being environmentally friendly.
Supercapacitors are currently widely used in different market areas such as auxiliary
peak power, backup power, storage of renewable energy, and alternative power
supplies. More importantly, it also has very broad market prospects in industrial
control, wind and solar power generation, transportation, military industry, and
other directions [59].
1.1.3 Overview of Nanowire Energy Storage Materials and Devices
Nanomaterials have a high specific surface area and excellent activity. When used
as a battery electrode material, it has a large contact area with the electrolyte and14 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
a short ion diffusion distance, which can effectively improve the electrical activity
of the material. It also has significant advantages when used as a high-power bat￾tery electrode material. At the same time, a reasonable design of nanostructures is
beneficial to alleviate stress release during cycling, and is conducive to improving the
stability of the structure in order to obtain a longer cycle life. For this reason, research
on large-capacity, high-power, long-life, and low-cost electrochemical energy stor￾age technology based on new nano-electrode materials is one of the frontiers and
areas of focus in the low-carbon economy era. Lithium-ion batteries, supercapaci￾tors, and lithium-air batteries have been extensively studied due to their respective
advantages, but traditional electrode materials are still difficult to meet the needs of
high capacity and high power. Numerous researches have shown that the electro￾chemical properties of electrode materials are closely related to their scale, internal
crystal structure, and apparent morphology. NW electrode materials, due to their
unique anisotropy, rapid axial electron transmission, and radial ion diffusion char￾acteristics, are suitable for the design, integration, and performance control of alkali
metal ion batteries, supercapacitors, transparent flexible energy storage devices, and
hybrid devices.
In recent years, the development of nanowires has shown diversified character￾istics, including multilayer NWs, NW clusters, nanotube clusters, NW clusters, and
other one-dimensional NW materials with composite structures that have been
able to develop rapidly. It is used for the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope,
nanodevices, ultralarge integrated circuit wires, optical fibers, micro-drills in
microelectronics, electrode materials for energy hunting systems, active materials
for catalytic systems such as photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, and electrode
materials for energy storage systems (such as metal ion batteries and superca￾pacitors). This chapter focuses on the electrochemical energy storage system by
discussing the physical and chemical properties, synthetic chemistry, and practical
applications of NW electrode materials.
There are many ways to synthesize NW materials, such as hydrothermal meth￾ods [60], electrospinning methods [61], and template methods [62]. Various
directional control methods can synthesize NW materials with different morpholo￾gies. However, the physical and chemical properties of NWs will be different, and
the external properties will also be different. With the progress of technology, NW
materials have also developed, from conventional NWs to ultra-long NWs [63],
mesoporous NWs [64], dendritic NWs [65], etc. The uniformity, controllability, and
electrochemical properties of NW materials have been continuously improved with
the continuous optimization of the structure. The specific preparation methods for
different NW structures will be described in detail in Chapter 3.
One-dimensional NW materials have the following advantages for electrochem￾ical energy storage. Firstly, compared to granular nanomaterials, NW electrode
materials provide transmission paths with continuous axial electron and radial
ion transmission paths, which endow NW materials with better rate performance.
Secondly, NW materials can directly grow on the substrate of metal or carbon
material. It can be used as a framework to composite with other materials without
the addition of a binder, constructing a complex and multi-element electrode1.1 Introduction 15
structure. Thirdly, NW materials have geometric characteristics, which are tens of
microns in length and tens of nanometers in diameter, making it easy to make a
single NW electrochemical device for in situ electron microscopy and spectroscopy
characterization [66].
At the same time, the use of NW materials for electrochemical energy storage
also has the following challenges. Firstly, when semiconductor NWs are used for
electrochemical energy storage, their poor conductivity requires additional conduc￾tive agents or conductive material coatings like carbon coatings, which increases
the complexity of the electrode construction process. Besides, the continuous charg￾ing and discharging processes will cause the deterioration of the material structure,
which will affect the axial electron conduction of the NW material, thus affecting
the cycle stability of the battery. Additionally, the materials in the electrode network
created by overlapping NWs are largely in point contact with one another, which
reduces the conductivity of the entire electrode and raises the internal resistance of
the battery [66]. In view of the advantages and challenges of using NW materials for
energy storage, researchers have proposed a variety of optimization strategies and
designed and constructed NW electrode materials with various structures.
Energy storage materials and devices with high energy density, good power
density, and long service lives are major requirements for the development of new
energy vehicles, smart grids, and cutting-edge national defense equipment. How￾ever, rapid capacity decay and difficulty balancing energy and power density are
major bottlenecks, restricting the development of high-performance energy storage
materials and device technologies. In order to solve the above bottlenecks, the
author of this book has been committed to the research of NW energy storage mate￾rials and devices in combination with the advantages of NW materials described
above. The author and his team focused on basic research and application devel￾opment of NW electrode materials in basic theory, controlled growth, performance
regulation, device assembly, in situ characterization, and energy storage applica￾tions. They designed and assembled the first single NW solid-state energy storage
device for monitoring capacity decay in real-time and took the lead in realizing the
large-scale preparation and application of high-performance NW energy storage
devices and key materials, achieving many innovative research results. The main
research content of the NW energy storage devices involved in this book is shown
in Figure 1.4.
1.1.3.1 Si Nanowires
Silicon materials have the characteristics of high specific capacity (4200 mAh g−1)
that other materials cannot achieve as negative electrode materials. It has attracted
the attention of researchers and is the third-generation negative electrode material
that can replace graphite materials [67]. In addition, as silicon element is generally
nontoxic, abundant, and widely available, new systems may have cost and recy￾cling benefits. The application of silicon in lithium batteries originated in the 1970s.
Nelson et al. [68] and Sharma et al. [69] reported that the phenomenon of reversible
lithiation and delithiation of silicon at high temperature. Subsequently, researchers
such as Weydanz et al. [70], Gao et al. [71], Limthongkul et al. [72], Li et al. [73],16 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
Mg2+, Ca2+, Zn2+, Al3+
multivalent ion batteries
Synthetic chemistry
In situ characterization Property modulation
Supercapacitor
Double layer capacitors
Pseudocapacitors
High energy battery
e e – –
e– e–
Ion battery
Basic theory and
properties of nanowires
Hybrid capacitors
Chip type
Flexible electrodes and energy storage devices
Fibrous type Layered type
Li+, Na+, K+
monovalent ion batteries
Figure 1.4 Main research contents of nanowire energy storage devices.
and Obrovac et al. [74] conducted in-depth research and gradually improved the
reversible lithium storage mechanism of silicon materials.
Nanotechnology applied to silicon materials can resolve the volume expansion
of silicon-based anode materials during cycle. The volume expansion phenomenon
will cause structure collapse of the active materials and shedding of the current
collector to lose electrical contact when the lithium ions are released, thereby affect￾ing the cycle’s performance. Yue et al. [75] used nanosilicon powders with different
sizes (5, 10, and 20 nm) to prepare anode materials and found that silicon particles
with a particle size of 10 nm have the highest specific capacity after electrochem￾ical tests. One-dimensional NWs and nanotubes can also improve the problem of
volume expansion, except for zero-dimensional nanoparticles. SiNWs have many
excellent properties that are different from those of general silicon materials, such
as electron transport, field emission characteristics, surface activity, and quantum
confinement [76]. Therefore, it has a wide range of application prospects in the
manufacture of low-dimensional nanodevices [77]. At present, the preparation and
application of nanodevices such as SiNW transistors, sensors, and NW batteries have
been realized.
The battery made with SiNWs as the anode has better storage capacity than the bat￾tery made with traditional graphite as the anode. Traditional graphite anodes need
six carbon atoms to store one Li+, while one Si atom can store four Li+. However,
a large number of moving Li atoms with high speed will break the Si in a battery
made of Si thin layers or Si ions and will also destroy the bond between Si and the
substrate, weakening the power storage capacity. Cui et al. of Stanford University
prepared Si NWs on a stainless steel substrate and then made a lithium ion bat￾tery with SiNWs, which not only increased the anode capacity of the battery but
also ensured that the SiNWs never fell off the substrate after a series of expansion1.1 Introduction 17
and contraction experiments. This is because the shape of the SiNWs enables the Si
atomic lattice to expand and contract rapidly along the NW, thereby alleviating the
structural strain and making the NW firmly adhere to the metal substrate. In this
way, the stored electricity of Si anodes is 10 times higher than that of traditional
graphite anodes [78].
1.1.3.2 ZnO Nanowires
The band gap of ZnO nanowires at room temperature is 3.37 eV. ZnO hardly pro￾duces any light scattering under natural light. In addition, its thermal ionization
energy under room temperature is low (26 meV) [79] and much lower than the exci￾ton binding energy (60 meV), so the ZnO NWs have great exciton stability. The crys￾tal structure of ZnO NWs has intrinsic defects that can cause energy transitions to
emit light at various energy levels. ZnO NWs show unique properties in the fields of
thermodynamics, electricity, optics, and magnetism [80].
Bae et al. [81] reported that ZnO NWs have a larger electron concentration and
field-effect mobility than bulk ZnO. Choi et al. [82] developed a kind of composite
nanofiber containing insulating ZnGa2O4 nanocrystals as components for build￾ing field-effect transistors (FET). The composite NW material has excellent electri￾cal properties and high field effects. This is because the insulating spinel phase of
ZnGa2O4 effectively blocks the flow of electrons through In2O3 and ZnO nanocrys￾tals. Moreover, based on low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) technol￾ogy, a series of ZnO NWs have been grown on SiO2/Si and SiNWs/Si substrates. These
composite nanomaterials have quasi-lasting photoconductivity and enhanced ohmic
I–V characteristics [83]. Moon et al. [84] obtained ZnO–NiO mixed oxide nanostruc￾tures by electrospinning. After measuring their electrical conductivity, they found
that the value increased with increasing temperature, which can be attributed to the
thermal emission of the carrier from the grain boundary energy state. Park et al. [85]
showed that, compared with pure ZnO, the prepared ZnO/N-doped carbon nan￾otube nanocomposite has higher electron mobility. In addition, the work of Khurana
et al. [86] revealed that the electron transfer kinetics of ZnO graphene composites is
faster than those of pure ZnO NWs.
The application of ZnO NW materials in energy storage is generally used as the
window layer of solar cells or the photoanode of dye-sensitized solar cells. ZnO NWs
can be combined with certain polymers, graphene, or quantum dots to form hybrid
photovoltaic devices. In 2005, Lévy-Clément et al. [87] took the lead in using CdSe￾sensitized p-CuSCN layer and n-ZnO NWs to form a heterojunction solar cell and
achieved a conversion efficiency of 2.3%. Liu et al. [88] used ZnO NW/Sb2S3/P3HT
structure to fabricate an organic/inorganic hybrid solar cell and achieved a conver￾sion efficiency of 2.9%. Then, Park et al. [89] grew vertically arranged ZnO NWs on
graphene surfaces and constructed a hybrid solar cell with PEDOT:PEG as the inter￾face layer and PbS quantum dots as the hole transport layer, obtaining a conversion
efficiency of 4.2% under AM1.5 light conditions. In addition, Chen et al. [90] pro￾duced a dye-sensitized solar cell with vertical array of ZnO NWs and studied the
effect of NW length on the photovoltaic performance of solar cells. The results indi￾cate that the length of the ZnO NW increases with increasing conversion efficiency.18 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
1.1.3.3 Single Nanowire Electrochemical Energy Storage Device
Mai et al. [9] used the unique anisotropy of NWs to design and assemble an
all-solid-state electrochemical energy storage device with single NWs that can be
used for in situ diagnosis and micro-nanosystem support power supply. This device
can detect the electrical conductivity and law of structural changes of the NWs
during cycle test without adding conductive additives or binders. Using a single
vanadium oxide NW as a working electrode shows that after a shallow discharge
with a current of 100 pA, the conductance of the NW drops by 2 orders of magnitude.
After shallow charging, the conductance returns to the original level. This result
indicates that the structural change of the NWs caused by the insertion and
extraction of lithium ions is reversible in the case of shallow charge and discharge.
After 400 seconds of deep discharge at 100 pA, the conductivity of the NWs irre￾versibly decrease by 5 orders of magnitude, showing that the structure undergoes
permanent changes. The direct connection between the NW electrical transport
and charging and discharging states has been established through research on the
in situ characterization platform based on the all-solid-state single NW device. This
also inherently reveals the scientific law of the capacity attenuation of NW energy
storage devices. In other words, the capacity decay of NW electrode material and
rapid decline of conductivity are directly related to structural deterioration. Huang
et al. [10] designed and constructed a battery system with single-crystal SnO2 NWs
as anode and lithium cobalt oxide as cathode. Using TEM technology to observe
the morphological changes of the NWs during charging and discharging, it is found
that when lithium ions are inserted into the NWs, it will cause violent volume
expansion, elongation, and curling deformation. It is worth noting that no matter
how severe the deformation is, the nanowire always maintains structural integrity
during the cycle process, which further verifies the superior performance of the
nanomaterial as an electrode.
Based on the characterization of single NW materials, the increasingly limited
nature of their structure and morphology has been discovered. It needs to be modi￾fied to improve its electrochemical performance. Commonly used methods include
pre-embedding technology to modify one-dimensional NWs, surface modification
hierarchical nanowires, internal structure optimization NWs, and synergy optimiza￾tion NWs. Pre-embedding technology is an effective method to increase the carrier
concentration and improve the conductivity of the NW electrode without destroy￾ing the morphology [91]. Hierarchical structure NW materials include dendritic
structure NW materials and coaxial NW materials. When dendritic NW materials
are used as electrodes, they can provide more ion transmission paths, higher
electronic conductivity, more active sites, and effectively inhibit the self-aggregation
of nanomaterials [92]. The preparation of coaxial NW materials is relatively easy
to realize. This structure is usually used to improve the structural stability of the
material, enhance the electrical conductivity, and buffer the stress and strain of the
internal material [93]. In addition, the specific surface area of the NW, the contact
area between electrolyte and electrode material, and reactive sites can be improved
by effectively combining the advantages of one-dimensional nanostructures and
mesoporous structures to construct mesoporous NWs, providing free space forReferences 19
stress release in the reaction [94]. The synergistic effect of surfactants can change
the orientation of the nanowires and reduce their interface resistance [95].
Single NW devices have good applications in different energy conversion devices.
A single NW device used in a solar cell can increase the conversion efficiency of solar
energy by up to 40%. The thermal conductivity of one-dimensional NW materials
is completely different from that of bulk materials [96], as thermoelectric devices
can effectively improve thermal energy utilization. In addition, a single nanodevice
can be used as an efficient electrocatalyst in electrocatalytic hydrogen production
devices. It can effectively enhance the charge injection of the electrode material
and improve the catalytic activity of the catalyst by reducing the contact resistance
between the electrode and the material [97].
It is necessary to understand some basic theories of NW energy storage materi￾als when the composition of the material is determined, such as thermodynamic
and kinetic characteristics and important electrochemical performance parameters.
These will be introduced in detail in Chapter 2. After that, we will consider the
method used to synthesize the required NW materials, whether hierarchical NWs or
porous NWs, hydrothermal or electrospinning, which will be discussed in Chapter
3. In order to study the electrochemical mechanism of the synthesized NWs, in situ
characterization methods are needed to provide convincing evidence. Chapter 4 lists
some in situ characterization methods, including detailed descriptions of single NW
devices, in situ electron microscopy, and in situ spectroscopy. Chapters 5–9 of this
book show readers the application of NW electrode materials in a variety of elec￾trochemical systems, leading readers to the forefront of nanowire energy storage
materials and devices.
References
1 Schenning, A.P. and Meijer, E.W. (2005). Supramolecular electronics; nanowires
from self-assembled π-conjugated systems. Chemical Communications
26: 3245–3258.
2 Yang, P., Yan, H., Mao, S. et al. (2002). Controlled growth of ZnO nanowires and
their optical properties. Advanced Functional Materials 12 (5): 323–331.
3 Wagner, A.R. and Ellis, S.W. (1964). Vapor-liquid-solid mechanism of single
crystal growth. Applied Physics Letters 4 (5): 89–90.
4 Givargizov, E.I. (1975). Fundamental aspects of VLS growth. In: Vapour Growth
and Epitaxy, 20–30. Elsevier.
5 Morales, A.M. and Lieber, C.M. (1998). A laser ablation method for the synthesis
of crystalline semiconductor nanowires. Science 279 (5348): 208–211.
6 Zhang, Y.F., Tang, Y.H., Wang, N. et al. (1998). Silicon nanowires prepared by
laser ablation at high temperature. Applied Physics Letters 72 (15): 1835–1837.
7 Huang, M.H., Mao, S., Feick, H. et al. (2001). Room-temperature ultraviolet
nanowire nanolasers. Science 292 (5523): 1897–1899.
8 Tian, B., Zheng, X., Kempa, T.J. et al. (2007). Coaxial silicon nanowires as solar
cells and nanoelectronic power sources. Nature 449 (7164): 885–889.20 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
9 Mai, L., Dong, Y., Xu, L., and Han, C. (2010). Single nanowire electrochemical
devices. Nano Letters 10 (10): 4273–4278.
10 Huang, J.Y., Zhong, L., Wang, C.M. et al. (2010). In situ observation of
the electrochemical lithiation of a single SnO2 nanowire electrode. Science
330 (6010): 1515–1520.
11 Mourik, V., Zuo, K., Frolov, S.M. et al. (2012). Signatures of Majorana fermions
in hybrid superconductor-semiconductor nanowire devices. Science 336 (6084):
1003–1007.
12 Gong, S., Schwalb, W., Wang, Y. et al. (2014). A wearable and highly sensitive
pressure sensor with ultrathin gold nanowires. Nature Communications
5 (1): 1–8.
13 Yang, Z., Albrow-Owen, T., Cui, H. et al. (2019). Single-nanowire spectrometers.
Science 365 (6457): 1017–1020.
14 Yang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, C. et al. (2020). Ferroelectric enhanced performance of
a GeSn/Ge dual-nanowire photodetector. Nano Letters 20 (5): 3872–3879.
15 Numanoglu, H.M., Akgöz, B., and Civalek, Ö. (2018). On dynamic analysis of ˘
nanorods. International Journal of Engineering Science 130: 33–50.
16 Kim, Y.A., Hayashi, T., Endo, M., and Dresselhaus, M.S. (2013). Carbon
nanofibers. In: Springer Handbook of Nanomaterials (ed. Vajtal), 233–261. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer.
17 Hwang, J.Y., Lee, S.H., Sim, K.S., and Kim, J.W. (2002). Synthesis and hydrogen
storage of carbon nanofibers. Synthetic Metals 126 (1): 81–85.
18 De Jong, K.P. and Geus, J.W. (2000). Carbon nanofibers: catalytic synthesis and
applications. Catalysis Reviews 42 (4): 481–510.
19 Chinthaginjala, J.K., Seshan, K., and Lefferts, L. (2007). Preparation and
application of carbon-nanofiber based microstructured materials as catalyst
supports. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 46 (12): 3968–3978.
20 Ji, L. and Zhang, X. (2009). Fabrication of porous carbon nanofibers and
their application as anode materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries.
Nanotechnology 20 (15): 155705.
21 Ciselli, P. (2007). The potential of carbon nanotubes in polymer composites.
Doctor Philosophy. Eindhoven University of Technology, Germany. pp: 53–58.
22 Iijima, S. (1991). Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon. Nature 354 (6348):
56–58.
23 Thess, A., Lee, R., Nikolaev, P. et al. (1996). Crystalline ropes of metallic carbon
nanotubes. Science 273 (5274): 483–487.
24 Ma, W., Song, L., Yang, R. et al. (2007). Directly synthesized strong, highly
conducting, transparent single-walled carbon nanotube films. Nano Letters 7 (8):
2307–2311.
25 Ma, R.Z., Liang, J., Wei, B.Q. et al. (1999). Study of electrochemical capacitors
utilizing carbon nanotube electrodes. Journal of Power Sources 84 (1): 126–129.
26 Lv, R., Cui, T., Jun, M.S. et al. (2011). Open-ended, N-doped carbon nanotube–
graphene hybrid nanostructures as high-performance catalyst support. Advanced
Functional Materials 21 (5): 999–1006.References 21
27 Sharma, P. and Ahuja, P. (2008). Recent advances in carbon nanotube-based
electronics. Materials Research Bulletin 43 (10): 2517–2526.
28 Pan, Z.W. and Wang, Z.L. (2001). Nanobelts of semiconducting oxides. Science
291 (5510): 1947–1949.
29 Wang, X., Song, J., Liu, J., and Wang, Z.L. (2007). Direct-current nanogenerator
driven by ultrasonic waves. Science 316 (5821): 102–105.
30 Wang, Z.L., Gao, R.P., Pan, Z.W., and Dai, Z.R. (2001). Nano-scale mechanics
of nanotubes, nanowires, and nanobelts. Advanced Engineering Materials 3 (9):
657–661.
31 Suenaga, K., Colliex, C., Demoncy, N. et al. (1997). Synthesis of nanoparticles
and nanotubes with well-separated layers of boron nitride and carbon. Science
278 (5338): 653–655.
32 Zhang, Y., Suenaga, K., Colliex, C., and Iijima, S. (1998). Coaxial nanocable:
silicon carbide and silicon oxide sheathed with boron nitride and carbon. Science
281 (5379): 973–975.
33 Meng, G.W., Zhang, L.D., Mo, C.M. et al. (1998). Preparation of β-SiC nanorods
with and without amorphous SiO2 wrapping layers. Journal of Materials Research
13 (9): 2533–2538.
34 Xu, C., Kim, M., Chung, S. et al. (2004). The formation of SiGaN/SiOxNy
nanocables and SiOxNy-based nanostructures using GaN as a resource of Ga.
Chemical Physics Letters 398 (1–3): 264–269.
35 Luo, T., Chen, L., Bao, K. et al. (2006). Solvothermal preparation of amorphous
carbon nanotubes and Fe/C coaxial nanocables from sulfur, ferrocene, and
benzene. Carbon 44 (13): 2844–2848.
36 Qiu, T., Xie, H., Zhang, J. et al. (2011). The synthesis of Ag/polypyrrole
coaxial nanocables via ion adsorption method using different oxidants. Journal of
Nanoparticle Research 13 (3): 1175–1182.
37 Hu, L., Brewster, M.M., Xu, X. et al. (2013). Heteroepitaxial growth of GaP/ZnS
nanocable with superior optoelectronic response. Nano Letters 13 (5): 1941–1947.
38 Wang, H., Zhou, H., Lu, J. et al. (2018). Electrodeposition of CdSe/TiO2 coaxial
nanocables for enhanced photocatalytic performance and H2 evolution in visible
light. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 165 (3): D160.
39 Wang, W., Lu, L., Cai, W., and Chen, Z.R. (2013). Synthesis and characterization
of coaxial silver/silica/polypyrrole nanocables. Journal of Applied Polymer Science
129 (5): 2377–2382.
40 Li, X., Li, H., Song, G. et al. (2018). Preparation and magnetic properties of
Nd/FM (FM = Fe, Co, Ni)/PA66 three-layer coaxial nanocables. Nanoscale
Research Letters 13 (1): 1–5.
41 Llinas, R.R., Walton, K.D., Nakao, M. et al. (2005). Neuro-vascular central
nervous recording/stimulating system: using nanotechnology probes. Journal
of Nanoparticle Research 7 (2–3): 111–127.
42 Mishra, S., Song, K., Koza, J.A., and Nath, M. (2013). Synthesis of superconduct￾ing nanocables of FeSe encapsulated in carbonaceous shell. ACS Nano 7 (2):
1145–1154.22 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
43 Tao, C.S., Jiang, J., and Tao, M. (2011). Natural resource limitations to
terawatt-scale solar cells. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 95 (12):
3176–3180.
44 Benato, A. and Stoppato, A. (2018). Pumped thermal electricity storage: a tech￾nology overview. Thermal Science and Engineering Progress 6: 301–315.
45 Chen, L., Zheng, T., Mei, S. et al. (2016). Review and prospect of compressed air
energy storage system. Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy 4 (4):
529–541.
46 Amiryar, M. and Pullen, K. (2017). A review of flywheel energy storage system
technologies and their applications. Applied Sciences 7 (3): 286.
47 Tixador, P. (2008). Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage: status and
Perspective. IEEE/CSC&ESAS European Superconductivity News Forum (No. 3).
48 Haas, O. and Cairns, E.J. (1999). Electrochemical energy storage. Annual Reports
Section “C” (Physical Chemistry) 95: 163–198.
49 LITHIUM – U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries, January
2018. Retrieved from https://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/
lithiummcs-2018-lithi.pdf
50 Raza, S.S., Janajreh, I., and Ghenai, C. (2014). Sustainability index approach as a
selection criteria for energy storage system of an intermittent renewable energy
source. Applied Energy 136: 909–920.
51 Gong, H., Wang, M.Q., and Wang, H. (2013). New energy vehicles in China:
policies, demonstration, and progress. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for
Global Change 18 (2): 207–228.
52 Rodrigues, L.E.O.C. and Mansur, M.B. (2010). Hydrometallurgical separation of
rare earth elements, cobalt and nickel from spent nickel–metal–hydride batteries.
Journal of Power Sources 195 (11): 3735–3741.
53 Salkuti, S.R. (2020). Comparative analysis of electrochemical energy storage
technologies for smart grid. TELKOMNIKA 18 (4): 2118–2124.
54 Rao, M.C. (2013). LiMn2O4 cathodes for solid state lithium-ion batteries-energy
storage and conversion. Journal of Optoelectronics and Biomedical Materials 5 (1):
9–16.
55 Scipioni, R., Jørgensen, P.S., Ngo, D.T. et al. (2016). Electron microscopy
investigations of changes in morphology and conductivity of LiFePO4/C
electrodes. Journal of Power Sources 307: 259–269.
56 Cui, L., Zhou, L., Kang, Y.M., and An, Q. (2020). Recent advances on rational
design and synthesis of two-dimensional materials for multivalent ion batteries.
ChemSusChem .
57 Halper, M.S. and Ellenbogen, J.C. (2006). Supercapacitors: A Brief Overview, 1–34.
McLean, VA: The MITRE Corporation.
58 Liu, T.C., Pell, W.G., and Conway, B.E. (1999). Stages in the development
of thick cobalt oxide films exhibiting reversible redox behavior and
pseudocapacitance. Electrochimica Acta 44 (17): 2829–2842.
59 Poonam, Sharma, K., Arora, A., and Tripathi, S.K. (2019). Review of
supercapacitors: materials and devices. Journal of Energy Storage 21: 801–825.References 23
60 Ruffo, R., Hong, S.S., Chan, C.K. et al. (2009). Impedance analysis of silicon
nanowire lithium ion battery anodes. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C
113 (26): 11390–11398.
61 Tang, J., Huo, Z., Brittman, S. et al. (2011). Solution-processed core–shell
nanowires for efficient photovoltaic cells. Nature Nanotechnology 6 (9): 568–572.
62 Wu, M.C. and Lee, C.S. (2009). Field emission of vertically aligned V2O5
nanowires on an ITO surface prepared with gaseous transport. Journal of Solid
State Chemistry 182 (8): 2285–2289.
63 Hu, P., Dong, S., Gui, K. et al. (2015). Ultra-long SiC nanowires synthesized by a
simple method. RSC Advances 5 (81): 66403–66408.
64 Hochbaum, A.I., Gargas, D., Hwang, Y.J., and Yang, P. (2009). Single crystalline
mesoporous silicon nanowires. Nano Letters 9 (10): 3550–3554.
65 Song, Y.J., Kim, J.Y., and Park, K.W. (2009). Synthesis of Pd dendritic nanowires
by electrochemical deposition. Crystal Growth and Design 9 (1): 505–507.
66 Poizot, P.L.S.G., Laruelle, S., Grugeon, S. et al. (2000). Nano-sized
transition-metal oxides as negative-electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.
Nature 407 (6803): 496–499.
67 Zhou, G., Xu, L., Hu, G. et al. (2019). Nanowires for electrochemical energy
storage. Chemical Reviews 119 (20): 11042–11109.
68 Nelson, P.A. (1978). High-performance batteries for stationary energy storage and
electric-vehicle propulsion. Progress report (ANL-78-45). Argonne National Lab.
(ANL), Argonne, IL (United States).
69 Sharma, R.A. and Seefurth, R.N. (1976). Thermodynamic properties of the
lithium-silicon system. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 123 (12): 1763.
70 Weydanz, W.J., Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, M., and Huggins, R.A. (1999). A room
temperature study of the binary lithium–silicon and the ternary lithium–
chromium–silicon system for use in rechargeable lithium batteries. Journal of
Power Sources 81: 237–242.
71 Gao, B., Sinha, S., Fleming, L., and Zhou, O. (2001). Alloy formation in
nanostructured silicon. Advanced Materials 13 (11): 816–819.
72 Limthongkul, P., Jang, Y.I., Dudney, N.J., and Chiang, Y.M. (2003).
Electrochemically-driven solid-state amorphization in lithium-silicon alloys
and implications for lithium storage. Acta Materialia 51 (4): 1103–1113.
73 Li, J. and Dahn, J.R. (2007). An in situ X-ray diffraction study of the reaction of
Li with crystalline Si. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 154 (3): A156.
74 Obrovac, M.N. and Christensen, L. (2004). Structural changes in silicon anodes
during lithium insertion/extraction. Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters 7 (5):
A93.
75 Yue, L., Wang, S., Zhao, X., and Zhang, L. (2012). Nano-silicon composites using
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) as elastic polymer
matrix and carbon source for lithium-ion battery anode. Journal of Materials
Chemistry 22 (3): 1094–1099.
76 Wang, S., Han, J., and Yin, S. (2019). The effect of silver-plating time on
silicon nanowires arrays fabricated by wet chemical etching method. Optics
and Photonics Journal 9 (8): 1–10.24 1 Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications
77 Wang, D., Sheriff, B.A., McAlpine, M., and Heath, J.R. (2008). Development of
ultra-high density silicon nanowire arrays for electronics applications. Nano
Research 1 (1): 9–21.
78 Designing Nanowires for Energy Storage. (2009). Meeting Abstracts (Electro￾chemical Society).
79 Stiegler, J.M., Tena-Zaera, R., Idigoras, O. et al. (2012). Correlative infrared–
electron nanoscopy reveals the local structure–conductivity relationship in zinc
oxide nanowires. Nature Communications 3 (1): 1–7.
80 Özgür, Ü., Alivov, Y.I., Liu, C. et al. (2005). A comprehensive review of ZnO
materials and devices. Journal of Applied Physics 98 (4): 11.
81 Bae, S.Y., Seo, H.W., and Park, J. (2004). Vertically aligned sulfur-doped ZnO
nanowires synthesized via chemical vapor deposition. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry B 108 (17): 5206–5210.
82 Choi, S.H., Jang, B.H., Park, J.S. et al. (2014). Low voltage operating field effect
transistors with composite In2O3–ZnO–ZnGa2O4 nanofiber network as active
channel layer. ACS Nano 8 (3): 2318–2327.
83 Yu, Y., Zha, G.W., Shang, X.J. et al. (2017). Self-assembled semiconductor
quantum dots decorating the facets of GaAs nanowire for single-photon
emission. National Science Review 4 (2): 196–209.
84 Moon, J., Park, J.A., Lee, S.J. et al. (2009). Structure and electrical properties of
electrospun ZnO–NiO mixed oxide nanofibers. Current Applied Physics 9 (3):
S213–S216.
85 Park, J.S., Lee, J.M., Hwang, S.K. et al. (2012). A ZnO/N-doped carbon nanotube
nanocomposite charge transport layer for high performance optoelectronics.
Journal of Materials Chemistry 22 (25): 12695–12700.
86 Khurana, G., Sahoo, S., Barik, S.K., and Katiyar, R.S. (2013). Improved
photovoltaic performance of dye sensitized solar cell using ZnO–graphene
nano-composites. Journal of Alloys and Compounds 578: 257–260.
87 Lévy-Clément, C., Tena-Zaera, R., Ryan, M.A. et al. (2005). CdSe-sensitized
p-CuSCN/nanowire n-ZnO heterojunctions. Advanced Materials 17 (12):
1512–1515.
88 Liu, C.P., Wang, H.E., Ng, T.W. et al. (2012). Hybrid photovoltaic cells based on
ZnO/Sb2S3/P3HT heterojunctions. Physica Status Solidi B 249 (3): 627–633.
89 Park, H., Chang, S., Jean, J. et al. (2013). Graphene cathode-based ZnO nanowire
hybrid solar cells. Nano Letters 13 (1): 233–239.
90 Chen, W., Qiu, Y., Zhong, Y. et al. (2010). High-efficiency dye-sensitized
solar cells based on the composite photoanodes of SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO
nanotetrapods. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 114 (9): 3127–3138.
91 Xu, X., Luo, Y.Z., Mai, L.Q. et al. (2012). Topotactically synthesized ultralong
LiV3O8 nanowire cathode materials for high-rate and long-life rechargeable
lithium batteries. NPG Asia Materials 4 (6): e20–e20.
92 Mai, L.Q., Yang, F., Zhao, Y.L. et al. (2011). Hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4
heterostructured nanowires with enhanced supercapacitor performance. Nature
Communications 2 (1): 1–5.References 25
93 Mai, L., Xu, X., Han, C. et al. (2011). Rational synthesis of silver vanadium
oxides/polyaniline triaxial nanowires with enhanced electrochemical property.
Nano Letters 11 (11): 4992–4996.
94 Zhao, Y., Xu, L., Mai, L. et al. (2012). Hierarchical mesoporous perovskite
La0.5Sr0.5CoO2.91 nanowires with ultrahigh capacity for Li-air batteries.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (48): 19569–19574.
95 Wang, X., Peng, K.Q., Hu, Y. et al. (2014). Silicon/hematite core/shell nanowire
array decorated with gold nanoparticles for unbiased solar water oxidation. Nano
Letters 14 (1): 18–23.
96 Pop, E., Mann, D., Wang, Q. et al. (2006). Thermal conductance of an individual
single-wall carbon nanotube above room temperature. Nano Letters 6 (1): 96–100.
97 Lukowski, M.A., Daniel, A.S., Meng, F. et al. (2013). Enhanced hydrogen
evolution catalysis from chemically exfoliated metallic MoS2 nanosheets. Journal
of the American Chemical Society 135 (28): 10274–10277.27
2
Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
2.1 Physical and Chemical Properties of Nanowires
Nanomaterials with different dimensions often display different physical and
chemical characteristics such as the electronic state distribution. This section
focuses on the physicochemical properties of one-dimensional nanowire materials.
2.1.1 Electronic Structure
Physicochemical properties of a material are greatly influenced by its electronic
structure, and at the same time, its electronic structure can be affected by its size. For
nanowire, its axial direction is the macroscopic scale defined by solid-state physics,
while the other directions are the nanoscale. The lattice periodic potential field is
truncated, so it can be considered that there is an infinite potential barrier at the
boundary, i.e. inside the nanowire is an infinite square potential well. The potential
energy function is:
U(r) = {0 r inside the well
∞ r outside the well (2.1)
since the barrier is infinite, there is no electron outside the well, i.e. 𝜙(r) = 0.
The electron motion in the potential well satisfies the stationary Schrodinger
equation:
− h2
2m∗ ∇2
𝜙(r) = E𝜙(r) (2.2)
where m* is the effective mass of the electron, and it is assumed to be isotropic.
Let the nanowire be a rectangle with a cross-section of nanoscale, the length and
width of the rectangle are represented by a and b (along the x and y directions,
respectively), and the length of the nanowire is the macroscopic scale L (along the
z-direction). In this case, the nanowire can be regarded as a rectangular cross-section
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.28 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
infinite deep potential well, and the solution of Eq. (2.2) obtained under the standing
wave boundary condition is:
𝜙(x, y, z) = eikz z
√ 4
ab sin l𝜋x
a
sin l𝜋y
b (l, m = 1, 2, 3,…) (2.3)
The corresponding intrinsic energy is:
El,m,kz = h2𝜋2
2m∗
( l
2
a2 +
m2
b2
)
+
h2k2
z
2m∗ (2.4)
where
El,m = h2𝜋2
2m∗
( l
2
a2 +
m2
b2
)
, Ekz = h2k2
z
2m∗
Equation 2.4 can be further denoted as:
El,m,kz = El,m + Ekz (2.5)
Ekz represents the energy of the quasi-free movement of the electron in the z direc￾tion, and El,m represents the quantized energy level generated after the electron is
constrained in the (x, y) direction. At each sub-energy level, the number of allowed
electronic states is:
Z(E) = 2L
2𝜋 2k = 2Lk
𝜋
√2m∗Ez
h (2.6)
Then the density of states at each energy level is:
D1D = 1
𝜋
(2m∗
h2
)1
2 L
𝜋h
√
2m∗
Ez
(2.7)
i.e. in one dimension, the energy relationship between the density of states and elec￾trons in that direction is proportional to the reciprocal of √Ez.
For the entire nanowire, the total density of states is:
Dtot
1D = 1
𝜋
(2m∗
h2
)1
2∑
l,m
(E − El,m)
− 1
2 (2.8)
It means that there is a peak density of states corresponding to each sub-energy
level, as shown in Figure 2.1, which is quite different from the bulk material,
and the quasi-continuous band disappears. It should be emphasized that the
geometric shape and the confinement potential of the actual nanowire are related
to the formation conditions of the low-dimensional structure, rather than the
simple infinitely deep flat bottom potential well. Therefore, Poisson equation and
Schrodinger equation should be solved simultaneously to perform self-consistent
calculation when solving its electronic structure. Compared with bulk materials,
the electronic structure of nanowires is very different, which is also the origin of
many physical and chemical characteristics of nanowires.2.1 Physical and Chemical Properties of Nanowires 29
Bulk
3D 1D
Nanowire
Eg
N(E)
N(E)
Eg E E
Figure 2.1 Electron energy density of bulk materials and nanowires.
2.1.2 Thermal Properties
Due to the surface effect, small size effect, quantum size effect, and other special
effects, nanowires have many differences from bulk materials in their thermal prop￾erties. In the following, the differences between nanowires and bulk materials are
discussed in terms of two basic thermal properties, including melting point and
thermal conduction.
2.1.2.1 Melting Point
The melting point of a solid is directly proportional to its binding energy, i.e. the sum
of its bond energies. When the material contains only one atom, the binding energy
of the bulk material can be expressed as:
E0 = 1
2
n𝛽c𝜀 (2.9)
where E0 is the binding energy of the bulk material, n is the total number of atoms
in the material, 𝛽c is the coordination number of atoms in the crystal, and 𝜀 is
the energy of each bond. For nanowires, the surface atoms account for a large
proportion, and the difference between surface atoms and internal atoms cannot be
ignored. The binding energy is as follows:
E1D =
(1
2
ni
𝛽c +
1
2
ns𝛽s
)
𝜀 = 1
2
(
n𝛽c − ns(𝛽c − 𝛽s)
)
𝜀 (2.10)
where E1D is the binding energy of the nanowire material, ni and ns are the total
number of atoms inside and on the surface of the nanowire, and 𝛽s is the coordi￾nation number of surface atoms. Because the melting point is proportional to the
binding energy, therefore:
T1D
T0
= E1D
E0
= n𝛽c − ns(𝛽c − 𝛽s)
n𝛽c
= 1 − ns
n
(𝛽c − 𝛽s)
𝛽c
(2.11)30 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
where T1D and T0 are the melting points of nanowire material and bulk material,
respectively. Let q = 𝛽s/𝛽c, i.e. q is the ratio of coordination numbers between surface
and internal atoms, then:
T1D
T0
= 1 − (1 − q)
ns
n
(2.12)
Set the cross-section radius of the nanowires as r, length as L (r ≪ L), and atomic
radius as ra. Take the outer monolayer atom as the surface, i.e. q = 1/2, then:
T1D
T0
= 1 − ns
2n ≈ 1 − Vs
2V ≈ 1 − 𝜋
(
r2 − (r − ra)
2
)
L
2𝜋r2L = 1 − ra
r
+
r2
a
2r2 (2.13)
Inside the nanowire, r and ra differ by more than one order of magnitude, and the
quadratic term can be ignored. Thus, there are:
T1D
T0
≈ 1 − ra
r
(2.14)
ΔT = T0 − T1D ∝ 1
r
(2.15)
The smaller the radius of the nanowires, the lower the melting point. The actual
situation is far more complicated than the assumption, but the relation (2.15) still
holds. The decrease in the melting point is due to the surface atoms. The smaller the
radius of the nanowire, the larger the proportion of surface atoms, and the greater
the reduction in melting point.
In addition, the experimental results reported by many researchers are also consis￾tent with the relationship (2.15). For example, the melting point of Ge bulk material
is 1203 K, while the Ge nanowires with a radius of 55 nm begin to melt at about
923 K, and the melting starts from the two ends with a higher proportion of surface
atoms [1]. In like manner, the melting point of the Sn block material is 505 K, and
when the radius of the Sn nanowires decreases from 30 to 7 nm, the melting point
decreases from 502 to 486 K, and the relationship between the melting point and the
material radius also satisfies Eq. (2.15) [2].
2.1.2.2 Thermal Conduction
Because of the structural difference, the thermal conduction mechanism of differ￾ent substances is not the same, but the thermal conduction of all substances is the
result of the collision and transmission of the carrier of material heat. The carri￾ers that conduct heat in solids include electrons, phonons (lattice waves), photons
(high-frequency electromagnetic radiation), and magnetic excitations.
The thermal conductivity k of all solid materials can be expressed mathematically
as follows:
k = 1
3
∑
i
Cvivi
Λi (2.16)
where Cv is the heat capacity of thermal conduction carrier in unit volume, v is the
average velocity of thermal conduction carrier in unit volume, Λ is the average free
path of thermal conduction carrier in unit volume, and irepresents different thermal
conduction carriers.2.1 Physical and Chemical Properties of Nanowires 31
Temperature (K)
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
50 100 150 200
115 nm
56 nm
37 nm
22 nm
250 300 350
Figure 2.2 Thermal conductivity of Si nanowire with different diameters at different
temperatures. Source: Li et al. [3]/with permission of American Institute of Physics.
In conductive materials such as metals and alloys, electrons are the main heat car￾riers. In nonconductors, the conduction of heat energy is realized by lattice vibration,
i.e. the phonon conduction mechanism is the main mechanism. Whether electrons
or phonons are used as heat conduction carriers, the reduction of the nanowires’
diameter will enhance boundary scattering and reduce the mean free path of the
thermal conduction carriers, thus leading to the decrease in thermal conductivity.
Figure 2.2 shows the thermal conductivity of Si nanowire with the same orienta￾tion and different diameters as a function of temperature. The thermal conductivity
of Si nanowire decreases with decreasing diameter, which indicates that the
enhanced boundary scattering with decreasing size has a significant impact on
phonon motion in Si nanowire [3]. The heat conduction properties of nanowire
electrode materials have an important impact on the thermal control and safety
performance of batteries.
2.1.3 Mechanical Properties
Young’s modulus is a physical quantity describing the ability of solid materials to
resist deformation and is an important mechanical property of materials. At the
macroscopic scale, Young’s modulus is only related to the type of material and has
nothing to do with the size of the external force or the shape of the material. For
example, Young’s modulus of steel wire is independent of the thickness of the steel
wire. However, at the nanoscale, due to surface effects, Young’s modulus varies with
the size of the nanowires.
Young’s modulus is greatly affected by atomic spacing. Compared with the inside
of the nanowire, the atoms on the surface of the nanowire are loosely arranged, i.e.
there is a larger atomic spacing, so the inside of the nanowire and the surface have
different Young’s modulus. The smaller the diameter of the nanowire, the larger
the proportion of surface atoms and the greater the influence of surface atoms on
Young’s modulus.32 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
Based on the difference between the surface and the interior of the nanowires, the
nanowires can be regarded as core–shell structure for analysis. The atomic spacing
on the surface of the nanowire varies with depth, but to simplify the calculation,
the surface is approximated as a shell with uniform atomic spacing. Ignoring shear
deformation:
EI = EcIc + EsIs (2.17)
where, E, Ec, and Es are the effective Young’s modulus of the whole nanowire, the
inside of the nanowire, and the surface layer of the nanowire, respectively; I, Ic, and
Is are the moments of inertia of the section of the whole nanowire, the inside of the
nanowire, and the surface layer of the nanowire, respectively. If the diameter of the
nanowire is d and the surface layer thickness is ds, then:
E = Ec
[
1 + 8
(Es
Ec
− 1
) (ds
d − 3
d2
s
d2 + 4
d3
s
d3 − 2
d4
s
d4
)] (2.18)
Equation (2.18) reflects the relationship between Young’s modulus of nanowire
and its diameter. When the diameter of nanowire decreases, Young’s modulus
increases. As shown in Figure 2.3, Young’s modulus of ZnO nanowires with differ￾ent diameters measured by experiment can be well consistent with (2.18), which
proves the correctness of this relation [4]. Mechanical properties such as Young’s
modulus are important parameters to be considered when nanowire electrode
materials are applied to flexible energy storage devices.
2.1.4 Adsorption and Surface Activity
For nanowire, due to the large specific surface area (SSA), the number of surface
atoms accounts for a large proportion of the total number of atoms, and the
presence of abundant suspended and unsaturated bonds caused by unsaturated
coordination of surface atoms, therefore, nanowire has stronger absorbability and
higher chemical activity compared with bulk materials.
Diameter (nm)
Experimental moduli for NWs
Fitted results
Experimental modulus for bulk ZnO (E3)
Modulus (GPa)
0 100
120
140
160
180
200
220
200 300 400 500 600
Figure 2.3 Young’s modulus of ZnO nanowires with different diameters. Source: Chen
et al. [4]/with permission of American Physical Society.2.1 Physical and Chemical Properties of Nanowires 33
2.1.4.1 Adsorption
Adsorption includes two types: physical adsorption and chemical adsorption.
Physical adsorption refers to the bonding of adsorbent and solid surface atoms by
weak physical forces such as van der Waals force, while chemical adsorption is
strongly bonded by chemical bonds. Due to the large SSA and the lack of coordina￾tion of the surface atoms, the nanowires have stronger absorbability compared with
the same bulk materials. At the same time, the adsorption properties of nanowires
are affected by the material properties, adsorbent properties, solution properties,
and other factors.
When nanowires are applied to energy storage devices, they usually work in
electrolyte solution, so the adsorption phenomenon of nanowires in electrolyte
solution is mainly discussed here. Electrolytes exist in the form of ions in solution,
and the adsorption of ionized ions is mainly through electrostatic attraction, and the
adsorption capacity is determined by Coulomb force. There are many suspended
and unsaturated bonds on the surface of the nanowires, so the surface of the
nanowires is charged. Therefore, in electrolyte solution, nanowire often attracts
ions with opposite charges to the surface through Coulomb force to maintain the
electrical neutrality of the surface, so the adsorption of nanowire in electrolyte
solution is mostly physical adsorption. This physical adsorption tends to be hierar￾chical. Generally speaking, the layer close to the surface of the nanowire is a strong
adsorption layer, whose role is to balance the charge on the surface of the nanowire,
called the adsorption layer. The electrolyte ions farther away from the nanowires
form a weaker adsorption layer called the diffusion layer. The above two layers
constitute a double electric layer, and a potential descent gradient from the surface
of the nanowire is generated in the entire adsorption layer. Taking the nanowire
surface as the origin, the potential at any position d away from the nanowire
surface in the solution can be expressed as follows according to Debye–Huckel
theory:
Ψ=Ψ0e−𝜅d (2.19)
𝜅 =
(2e0
2NAcZ2
𝜀kBT
)1
2
(2.20)
when d → ∞, Ψ = 0, Ψ0 is the surface potential of the nanowire, 𝜅 is the spread
of the double electric layer, e0 is the amount of electron charge, NA is Avogadro’s
constant, c is the molar concentration of the strong electrolyte in solution, Z is the
valence, 𝜀 is the dielectric constant, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the absolute
temperature. 1/𝜅 is the thickness of the double electric layer. It can be seen from
Eq. (2.20) that 1/𝜅 is inversely proportional to Z and √c, i.e. the double electric layer
is very thin under the concentration of high ion and high strength electrolyte.
2.1.4.2 Surface Activity
The SSA of a nanowire is related to its size. For a nanowire with radiusr and length L,
its volume SSA is:
S
V = 2𝜋rL
𝜋r2L = 2
r
(2.21)34 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
That is, the smaller the radius of the nanowires, the larger the SSA, and the unsat￾uration of the surface atoms leads to a large number of suspended and unsaturated
bonds, thus leading to high surface activity. Therefore, ultrafine nanowires exhibit
high catalytic activity and are widely concerned in the field of catalysis.
2.2 Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Nanowires
Electrode Materials
Chemical reactions are influenced by both thermodynamics and kinetics. Ther￾modynamics determines whether a chemical reaction can proceed, and kinetics
determines the rate of a chemical reaction. The unique physicochemical properties
of nanowires compared to bulk materials were discussed in Section 2.1, and this
section will explore the thermodynamic and kinetic characteristics of nanowire
electrodes compared to bulk materials.
2.2.1 Thermodynamics
Gibbs free energy is a very important state function in thermodynamics. Compared
to the bulk, the nanowire composed of the same number of atoms has a higher Gibbs
free energy. With the bulk as the starting state and the nanowire as the final state,
the increment of the Gibbs free energy of the system comes from the increase of the
Gibbs free energy at the surface, and the expression is as follows:
ΔGNWs = GNWs − GBulk = 𝛾ΔA (2.22)
where ΔGNWs is Gibbs free energy increment of the system;GNWs is Gibbs free energy
of the nanowire; GBulk is Gibbs free energy of the block; 𝛾 is the specific surface
energy; ΔA is the SSA increment. According to Eq. (2.21), the smaller the radius of
nanowires, the larger the SSA, and the larger the incremental SSA, which means the
higher Gibbs free energy.
Compared with bulk materials, the high surface Gibbs free energy of nanowire
materials leads to changes in their physicochemical properties, such as lower
melting point and increased surface activity. The high surface activity of nanowires
has attracted much attention in the energy storage field. Take lithium-ion batteries
(LIBs) as an example, nanowire electrodes with high SSA can provide more surface
activity sites, which is conducive to the improvement of capacity. How to balance
the high surface activity and the agglomeration of nanowire electrode is one of the
key research directions in this field.
2.2.2 Kinetics
The power density of energy storage devices is closely related to the kinetics in
the electrode materials, and optimizing the electron conduction and ion diffusion
kinetics of the electrode materials is the focus of current research, such as LIBs.2.3 Basic Performance Parameters of Nanowires Electrochemical Energy Storage Devices 35
For solid-state diffusion of Li in electrode materials, the mean diffusion (or storage)
time is calculated according to the following formula:
t = L2
2D (2.23)
where t is the average diffusion time, D is the diffusion coefficient, and L is the dif￾fusion distance.
Therefore, it is clear from Eq. (2.23) that there are two ways to optimize the kinet￾ics of electrode materials, i.e. enhancing the diffusion coefficient D and shortening
the diffusion distance L, and the latter is more effective. For nanowire electrode
materials, if the ions diffuse radially along the nanowire, the diffusion process can
be completed just through the nanoscale diffusion path, which drastically reduces
the diffusion distance. For example, reducing L from 10 μm to 100 nm for materi￾als with D = 10−10 cm2 s−1 (typical diffusion coefficient of electrode materials), the
t reduces from 5000 to 0.5 seconds. Not only that, but the nanowire structure can
also significantly reduce the path length for electron conduction inside the electrode
material. Therefore, compared to bulk materials, nanowire electrodes have signif￾icantly enhanced kinetics and can achieve an increased power density of energy
storage devices.
In addition, the enhanced kinetics can enable the utilization of certain thermo￾dynamically permissible but kinetically limited energy storage reactions, i.e. certain
“inactive” electrode materials become “active” electrode materials after nanosizing.
For example, for rutile TiO2, Li+ ions embedding is thermodynamically permissi￾ble, but the diffusion coefficient of Li+ ions along its ab surface is extremely low
(Dab ∼10−15 cm2 s−1). For rutile TiO2 with a size of 10 μm, the distance Lab at which
lithium ions need to diffuse along the ab-plane is 5 μm, leading to a diffusion time
tab of about four years, which greatly limits the lithium storage reaction. Therefore,
micron-sized rutile TiO2 is considered to be “inactive.” However, the rutile TiO2
nanorods with a diameter of 10 nm exhibit significantly higher lithium storage activ￾ity due to a dramatic reduction in tab to about two minutes after reducing the Lab to
5 nm [5].
Not only that, the ion diffusion kinetics of nanowire electrode materials can be
further enhanced by crystal structure modification and nanowire structure design.
The significant advantages of nanowire electrode materials in ion transport kinet￾ics make them occupy an important position in the field of electrochemical energy
storage devices.
2.3 Basic Performance Parameters of Nanowires
Electrochemical Energy Storage Devices
The performance parameters of the nanowire electrochemical energy storage
devices are the focus of attention in practical applications. Taking battery as an
example, the basic performance parameters of nanowire electrochemical energy
storage devices are introduced below.36 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
2.3.1 Electromotive Force
The electromotive force of a battery is determined by the potential difference
between the positive and negative electrodes:
E = 𝜑+ − 𝜑− (2.24)
where E is the electromotive force, 𝜑+ is the electrode potential of the positive elec￾trode, 𝜑− is the electrode potential of the negative electrode. The electrode potential
of positive and negative electrodes has the following relationship with the Gibbs free
energy change of electrode reaction:
ΔG+ = −F𝜑+ (2.25)
ΔG− = −F𝜑− (2.26)
where ΔG+ and ΔG− are the Gibbs free energy changes of positive and negative reac￾tions, respectively. F is Faraday’s constant (F = 96 485 C mol−1). Gibbs free energy
change ΔG for the total reaction of the battery is:
ΔG = −FE (2.27)
2.3.2 Operating Voltage
Operating voltage is also known as discharge voltage or load voltage. Due to the
effect of battery internal resistance, the operating voltage of the battery is not equal
to the electromotive force and has the following relationship:
U = E − IRi (2.28)
U is the operating voltage; E is the electromotive force; I is the working current; Ri
is the internal resistance, including ohmic resistance and polarization resistance. In
practical applications, the operating voltage of a battery is affected by many factors,
including discharge current, discharge cut-off voltage, and ambient temperature.
2.3.3 Capacity and Specific Capacity
Capacity refers to the amount of electricity released by a battery under certain dis￾charge conditions. At constant current discharge, the capacity is:
C = It (2.29)
where C is battery capacity; I is the discharge current; t is the discharge time.
Specific capacity refers to the capacity of electrode or battery per unit mass,
volume, or area, which can be divided into mass-specific capacity, volume-specific
capacity, and area-specific capacity. There are:
Cm = C
m
(2.30)
CV = C
V (2.31)
CS = C
S (2.32)2.3 Basic Performance Parameters of Nanowires Electrochemical Energy Storage Devices 37
where Cm is mass-specific capacity; CV is volume-specific capacity; CS is
area-specific capacity; C is the capacity of electrode or battery; m is the mass;
V is the volume; S is the area. In the absence of special instructions, the electrode
material capacity mentioned later is the mass-specific capacity.
The theoretical mass-specific capacity of the electrode material is:
C0 = nF
3.6M (2.33)
where C0 is the theoretical capacity; n is the electron transfer number of reac￾tion; F is Faraday’s constant; M is the relative molecular mass of the active
substance. Taking LiCoO2 cathode material as an example, its theoretical reaction
is LiCoO2 ↔ CoO2 +Li+ +e−, so its theoretical specific capacity is:
1 × 96 485
3.6 × 97.87 = 273.8 mAh g−1
2.3.4 Energy and Specific Energy
The energy of a battery refers to the electric energy output under certain discharge
conditions, which is determined by the capacity and working voltage of the battery:
W = ∫ U(C)dC = C ⋅ Ua (2.34)
where W is battery energy; U(C) is the relationship between operating voltage and
discharge capacity; C is the battery capacity. Ua is the average operating voltage of
the battery.
Specific energy, also known as energy density, is divided into mass energy density
and volume energy density, respectively, referring to the amount of energy released
per unit mass and per unit volume of battery, that is:
Wm = W
m
(2.35)
WV = W
V (2.36)
where Wm is mass energy density; WV is volumetric energy density; W is battery
energy; m is battery quality; V is the battery volume.
For micro/nano batteries, two-dimensional flexible batteries, and other energy
storage devices, the area energy density is the energy released per unit area of the
battery, which is also one of its important performance parameters. The calculation
formula is as follows:
WS = W
S (2.37)
where WS is the area energy density; W is battery energy; S is the battery area.
2.3.5 Current Density and Charge–Discharge Rate
For batteries, current density is divided into area current density and mass current
density, which respectively refer to the ratio of charge and discharge current to the38 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
area or mass of the electrode or battery, namely:
Is = I
S (2.38)
Im = I
m
(2.39)
where Is is the area current density; Im is the mass current density; I is the cur￾rent through the electrode or battery; S is the area of battery or electrode; m is the
electrode or battery mass.
Charge and discharge ratio is a measure of the speed of charge and discharge. C/n
is the charge and discharge rate, which refers to the completion of a rated capacity
charge or discharge in n hours. For example, a discharge completed in two hours is
called C/2 (or 0.5C) charge/discharge rate.
2.3.6 Power and Specific Power
Power refers to the energy output per unit time of a battery under certain discharge
conditions. Specific power refers to the power output per unit mass or unit volume
of a battery. The actual power of the battery is related to the discharge current and
the operating voltage under the discharge current:
P = UI (2.40)
where P is the actual power of the battery; I is the discharge current; U is the oper￾ating voltage under the discharge current. Substituting Eq. (2.28) into Eq. (2.40), it
can be obtained:
P = IE − I
2
Ri (2.41)
2.3.7 Coulombic Efficiency
Coulombic efficiency refers to the percentage of battery discharge capacity and
charge capacity under certain discharge conditions, also known as charge and
discharge efficiency.
2.3.8 Cycle Life
Cycle life generally refers to the cycling number experienced by the battery before
the battery capacity decays to a specific value (generally 80% or 60% of the initial
capacity) under certain discharge conditions.
2.4 Interfacial Properties of Nanowires Electrode
Materials
2.4.1 Interface Between Nanowire Electrode Materials and Electrolytes
Nanowire electrode materials have become a hot spot in energy storage field, due
to their advantages of large SSA, short ion diffusion distance, and ability to adapt2.4 Interfacial Properties of Nanowires Electrode Materials 39
to volume expansion. The interface between electrode and electrolyte has a great
impact on the performance, so the research on the interface between nanowires and
electrolyte deserves people’s attention.
In general, in the system of organic electrolytes, the decomposition of the elec￾trolyte often occurs, and a passivation layer is formed on the electrode surface, also
known as the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). Take LIBs as an example: during
the first charge–discharge process, SEI will form on surface of electrode materials
when the Li+ ions embedding potential (∼0.1–0.4 V) is lower than the SEI gener￾ation potential (∼0.8 V). This interface layer acts like a solid electrolyte, insulating
electrons but allowing Li+ ions to pass through. In the process of battery cycle, the
volume expansion of electrode material will lead to the rupture of SEI on the surface,
and contact between the exposed new electrode material surface and electrolyte will
make SEI continue to grow, as shown in Figure 2.4a. This gradual thickening pro￾cess of SEI not only consumes electrolyte but also increases the diffusion distance of
Li+ ions, so the stability of SEI is extremely important to the improvement of battery
cycle performance [6].
Nanowire materials have a high SSA, which will aggravate the generation of
SEI, thus having a significant impact on their electrochemical performance. Some
researchers have used the method of surface modification to improve the over￾growth of SEI. Cui et al. reported a nanotube electrode structure with active silicon
as the inner layer and silicon oxide as the outer layer, as shown in Figure 2.4c. In the
process of Li+ ions embedding, ions diffuse through the silicon–oxygen-restricted
layer and react with the active silicon in the inner layer. The active silicon in the
Charge Charge Many cycles
Silicon Lithiated silicon SEI Mechanical clamping layer
Discharge
Li+ Li+ Li+
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.4 Schematic diagram of SEI growth changes in nanowire, nanotube, and
mechanical protective layer. (a) Volume expansion occurs during lithiation of silicon
nanowire in the charging process, and volume contraction leads to SEI breakage during
discharge, and new SEI continues to grow in the new charging process; (b) similar processes
occur in silicon nanotubes, and the solid–liquid interface remains unstable; (c) design
mechanical confinement layer coated silicon nanotubes to stabilize SEI. Source: Wu et al.
[6]/with permission of Springer Nature.40 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
inner layer expands to the inner hollow area, and the active part of the inner layer
will shrink back after the lithium ion is released. Compared with Figure 2.4b, the
structure of these confined nanotubes significantly alleviates the problem of SEI
overgrowth, and the capacity retention rate reaches 88% after 6000 cycles of testing.
In addition, some other modification methods such as pre-coated artificial SEI and
atomic layer deposition can be beneficial in minimizing the loss of irreversible
capacity.
On the other hand, in view of the reasons for the formation of SEI, the researchers
selectively designed the electrode materials. When the reaction potential of
the electrode material is within the stable potential window of the electrolyte, the
establishment of SEI will be greatly avoided, so that the advantages of the nanowire
electrode material can be better utilized. Taking Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) as an example,
the voltage plateau of LTO (1.5 V versus Li+/Li) is higher than the voltage of
graphite (0.05 V versus Li+/Li), which greatly avoids the formation of SEI. The LTO
nanotubes obtained a reversible capacity of ∼156 mAh g−1 at 0.1C [7]. Compared
with LTO, the one-dimensional structure of Li0.91TiO2 also has better performance.
Peter G. Bruce et al. reported that the Li0.91TiO2 nanowires have high capacity
(305 mAh g−1) and good cycling performance [8].
Outside the scope of the SEI discussion, the advantages of nanowire electrode
materials are also reflected in the enhancement of surface pseudocapacitive
response. Increasing the SSA of the material is of great help in improving the battery
capacity, which in turn contributes to the improvement of the rate performance.
Mai et al. used iron–manganese-based oxide porous nanowires to construct an
interlaced three-dimensional network framework [9]. In the test from 1000 mA g−1
back to 100 mA g−1, the capacity retention rate of this nanowire structure was
about 95%. In addition, based on the unique advantages of nanowires, modification
of nanowires can further enhance the surface capacitive reaction. In the work of
Lei et al., the surface reaction of carbon nanofibers with a nitrogen doping content of
13.8% (atomic percent) accounted for as high as 90% [10]. Among them, the surface
defects caused by nitrogen doping and the more exposed edges of the graphite layer
can provide more potassium ion adsorption sites and improve the electrochemical
reaction kinetics, thus achieving extremely excellent rate performance.
From the perspective of performance, the pursuit of long-cycle and high-rate per￾formance to meet the demand has always been a hot spot for researchers. It is an
effective idea to construct nanowire structure and optimize its solid–liquid interface.
However, the current understanding of the reaction mechanism of the nanowire sur￾face layer and the influence of the surface microstructure on SEI is not yet in-depth,
and novel and convenient interface design ideas need to be further explored.
2.4.2 Heterogeneous Interfaces in Nanowire Electrode Materials
Through designing heterointerface, a multiphase composite structure with high
grain boundary density can be created, which can promote the transport of electrons
and ions and is also beneficial to improve the rate and long-cycle performance.2.4 Interfacial Properties of Nanowires Electrode Materials 41
Therefore, the heterointerface design of nanowire electrode materials is of great
significance for optimizing their electrochemical performance.
The core–shell composite nanowire structure provides a simple and efficient way
to realize long-life, high-performance LIBs. Beng Kang Tay et al. developed a new
high-performance carbon nanotube–nickel–silicon (CNT–Ni–Si) one-dimensional
core–shell nanostructure. By introducing a Ni layer, the CNT core and Si shell can
be effectively improved. The interface between them plays a crucial role in stress
engineering [11]. Based on rational interface design, the CNT–Ni–Si core–shell
nanowires exhibit good capacity retention and rate performance. Besides, changing
the interface or introducing an interfacial layer is a significant method to enhance
the bonding strength of nanowire electrode materials with planar substrates.
Many researches have shown that LIBs anode materials with nanowire structures
have better performance and lifespan than micron-scale bulk materials. This
is attributed to the unique geometry of the nanowires as well as their strong
deformation-strain adaptability during cycling. Huang et al. found that the shape
change of SnO2 nanowires during charging and discharging is not only due to
lithiation but is a comprehensive result of electrochemical-mechanical interaction,
in which stress-induced plasticity plays an important role effect [12]. The study
found that the nanowires did not break despite the large strain and conforma￾tional changes after charge–discharge cycles. This further demonstrates the better
mechanical stability of nanowires relative to micron-scale electrode materials.
For the nanowire array composite structure grown on the substrate, the open space
between adjacent nanowires makes it easier for the electrolyte to diffuse into the
inner region of the electrode, thereby reducing the internal resistance and greatly
improving the rate capability. In addition, each nanowire is in contact with the bot￾tom substrate, which ensures that each nanowire participates in the electrochemical
reaction. At the same time, the use of nanowire arrays can save the tedious process of
mixing active materials with auxiliary materials such as carbon black and polymers.
Wu et al. used a mild template-free method to fabricate Co3O4 mesoporous nanowire
arrays in large areas [13]. The test results show that the mesoporous nanowire array
has good performance of cycling and high-rate capability, and the nanowire array
has only slight bending deformation after dozens of cycles. Due to their ease of
fabrication and good performance, nanowire arrays have promising applications in
secondary batteries.
In addition, the heterointerface of nanowires also plays a significant role in electro￾catalysis in metal-air batteries. Herein, we synthesized porous NiO/CoN nanowire
arrays with abundant oxygen vacancies and strongly coupled NiO/CoN heteroint￾erfaces by in situ nitridation. The nanowire array exhibited significantly improved
catalytic activity and stability when used as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for
oxygen evolution reaction and oxygen reduction reaction [14]. The strong coupling
nanoheterointerface between NiO/CoN units and the abundant oxygen vacancies at
the interface are the reasons for the good bifunctional electrocatalytic performance
of NiO/CoN nanowire arrays. Xi et al. reported a NiS2/CoS2 porous heteronanowire42 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
[15]. The nanowires have abundant NiS2/CoS2 heterointerfaces and provide abun￾dant active sites, thus exhibiting excellent catalytic activity for oxygen evolution
reaction.
In conclusion, the nanowire heterointerface plays a significant role in the appli￾cation of nanowire electrode materials. The nanowire heterointerface can reduce
the transport time of Li+ ions and electrons, resulting in structural stabilization
and improved lithium storage kinetics. Furthermore, the rich heterointerface of
the nanowires increases ion storage sites. In the nanowire array, the nanowires are
well dispersed and fixed on the substrate, which avoids using polymer binders and
conductive additives, greatly reduces the proportion of “inactive” components in the
electrode material, and can enhance structural stability and improve charge trans￾port dynamics of materials. Nanowire heterointerfaces are rich in oxygen vacancies
and pore structures, and the nanowire interface design for promoting catalysis
can be extended to other nanowire materials, which provides a promising way to
fabricate multifunctional materials for efficient renewable energy applications.
2.5 Optimization Mechanism of Electrochemical
Properties of Nanowires Electrode Materials
To boost the electrochemical performance of nanowire electrode materials,
researchers have explored many effective optimization strategies and proposed
corresponding optimization mechanisms. Among them, the mechanism of elec￾tron/ion bicontinuous transport and the self-buffering mechanism have shown
significant effects on enhancing the magnification performance and cycle stability
of nanowire electrode materials. This section will take these two mechanisms
as the representative, introducing the electrochemical performance optimization
mechanism of one-dimensional nanowire electrode materials.
2.5.1 Mechanism of Electron/Ion Bicontinuous Transport
One of the key objectives of electrochemical energy storage systems is to simulta￾neously achieve high energy density and high power density. However, the current
electrode materials are generally slow in electrical transport kinetics in the electro￾chemical process, which makes it difficult to keep high energy density at high power
density. The electric transport behavior of electrode materials is limited to the side
with slow electron/ion transport. The optimization of electrode materials usually
starts from the ion or electron side, but the improvement effect is limited and even
has a negative impact on the non-optimized side. Therefore, how to optimize the
electron/ion transport dynamics at the same time is of great significance for the
realization of electrochemical energy storage devices with high power and energy
densities.
Based on single nanowire electrochemical devices constructed by Mai et al., the
study found that the tightly coated conductive layer would impede the diffusion
rate of ions in the electrolyte to the nanowire electrode material, which could not2.5 Optimization Mechanism of Electrochemical Properties of Nanowires Electrode Materials 43
realize the coordinated optimization of electron/ion transport kinetics [15, 16]. As
a result, the group from the construction of electron/ion transport pathways opti￾mized the structure of conductive layer and the composite form of nanowire elec￾trode materials constructed various nanowire electrode materials with electron/ion
bicontinuous transport property, such as V3O7/graphene scrolls coaxial semihol￾low nanowires and manganese oxide/porous carbon coaxial semi-hollow nanorods
(one-dimensional “egg yolk-shell” structure) [17, 18]. The charge transport charac￾teristics of coaxial semihollow nanowire and tightly coated nanowire (Figure 2.5)
can be described by the following formula: where the ionic conductivity can be
expressed by formulas (2.42) (coaxial bihollow nanowire) and (2.43) (tightly coated
nanowire), respectively. The electronic conductivity of both is controlled by the sur￾face conductive layer; therefore, the electronic conductivity is the same. It is uni￾formly expressed by formula (2.44).
For example, Li+:
Gi = 2𝜋
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
𝜎il
ln rNW+dl
rNW
+ 𝜎iNW
ln rNW
r′
NW
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
(2.42)
G′
i = 2𝜋
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
𝜎iG
ln rNW+dG
rNW
+ 𝜎iNW
ln rNW
r′
NW
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
(2.43)
Ge = 𝜋
L
[
𝜎eGdG(dG + 2rNW + 2dl
) + 𝜎eNWrNW2
] (2.44)
where Gi and G′
i are the total ionic conductivity of coaxial semihollow nanowire
and tightly coated nanowire, respectively; Ge is the total electronic conductivity;
𝜎eG is the electronic conductivity of conductive layer, 𝜎eNW is the electronic con￾ductivity of nanowire, 𝜎iG is the ionic conductivity of graphene; 𝜎iNW is the ionic
conductivity of nanowire; and 𝜎il is the ionic conductivity of liquid electrolyte. L is
the length of the nanowire; rNW is the radius of the nanowire; r′
NW is the radius of
the ion-embedded part of the nanowire; dG is the thickness of graphene, and dl is the
thickness of the cavity filled with liquid electrolyte. Since 𝜎il ≫ 𝜎iG, Gi ≫ G′
i
, namely
coaxial semihollow nanowires, not only have high electron conductivity but also
high ion conductivity, which realizes the bicontinuous ion/electron transport effect.
Thanks to the bicontinuous electron/ion transport effect, these nanowire electrode
materials still maintain high energy density at high power density.
Li+
Li+
dl
e–
e–
The semihollow structure makes the
nanowires fully in contact with the 
electrolyte to promote ion transport
(a) (b)
Conductive layer provides the fast 
electron conduction path
Figure 2.5 Design of coaxial semihollow structure. (a) Schematic diagram of tightly coated
nanowires and their ion/electron transport; (b) schematic diagram of coaxial semi-hollow
nanowires and their ion/electron transport.44 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
Nanoscroll Nanobelt
Lithiation Delithiation
Facile
Effective
strain relaxation
contact area
Li+
Li+
Nanowire
Interconnected voids
Figure 2.6 Schematic diagram of the “self-buffering” mechanism of the
nanoribbon/nanoscroll composite structure. Source: Mai et al. [21]/with permission of
Wiley-VCH.
In addition, starting from the material structure, the pre-embedding method is
adopted to embed alkali metal and alkaline earth metal ions between the layers of the
electrode material in advance, which can introduce impurity energy levels, provide
traveling electrons, increase the layer spacing, lower the ions’ diffusion resistance,
and also realize the bicontinuous transmission of electrons/ions [19].
2.5.2 Self-Buffering Mechanism
Cycle stability, which is directly related to the structural stability of electrode
materials in the charge–discharge process, is a key performance indicator of
electrochemical energy storage systems. One of the main causes of structural
damage and capacity decay is the structural stress brought on by the electrode
material’s volume change during the charge–discharge operation. In order to
improve the cycling stability of electrode material, it is crucial to consider the buffer
expansion/contraction stress.
Mai et al. found various self-buffering optimization mechanisms. In graded
nanowires with nanorod orientation laps, where the lap space can accommo￾date lattice expansion and contraction [20]. Moreover, the slip at the interface
can significantly relieve the stress concentration in the nanoelectrode material,
which is an effective self-buffering structure. Compared with ordinary nanowire
electrode materials, the cycling stability of graded nanowire electrode materials
has been greatly improved. In the nanoribbon/nanoscroll composite structure, the
nanoscrolls and the interconnected voids between hybrid nanostructures as the
buffered section could be able to adjust the internal expansion stress distribution of
the material. Contributing to the stability of the structure, which in turn improves
the cyclic stability of the electrode material (Figure 2.6) [21]. After the alkaline
earth metal ions are pre-embedded in the conversion reaction type nanowires, the
“self-maintenance” effect can be produced to prevent the agglomeration of the
discharge products and ensure the reversible reaction in the subsequent charging
process. These results all prove that the self-buffering mechanism is critical to
improving the cycling stability of nanowire electrode materials.
2.6 Theoretical Calculation of Nanowires Electrode
Materials
The rise of nanotechnology has enabled a range of nanomaterials to be used in var￾ious fields. The urgent need for clean energy has created an urgent need for the2.6 Theoretical Calculation of Nanowires Electrode Materials 45
development of efficient and inexpensive energy storage devices. One-dimensional
nanowire electrode materials are an important component in the design and con￾struction of energy storage devices due to their unique electron transport properties.
First-principles calculations can theoretically provide a means to study the elec￾tronic structure of nanowires, ion diffusion paths, anomalous cross-sections, and
changes in electromagnetic properties caused by doping. Also, theoretical calcula￾tions give us a viable way of predicting the properties of some materials that cannot
be synthesized under current experimental conditions and explaining experimental
phenomena that cannot be observed under limited equipment conditions.
VASP is a software package for ab initio molecular dynamics calculations using
pseudopotentials and plane wave basis sets. VASP obtains the electronic states
and energies of the system by using efficient matrix diagonalization techniques to
approximate the Schrödinger equation, and a hybrid scheme of Broyden and Pulay
densities is used to accelerate the convergence of the self-consistent cycle during
the iterative solution. The simulations are performed for atoms, molecules, clusters,
nanowires, thin films, crystals, quasicrystals, uncharacteristic materials, surface
systems, and solids with periodic boundaries. The structural parameters (bond
lengths, bond angles, lattice constants, atomic positions, etc.) and configurations
of materials can be calculated; the equation of state and mechanical properties of
materials (bulk elastic modulus and elastic constants); the electronic structure of
materials (energy levels, charge density distribution, energy bands and electron
density of states, etc.); the optical, magnetic, and lattice dynamics properties of
materials: and the simulation of surface systems (reconstructions, surface states).
Gaussian is a very widely used quantum chemistry software for doing semi￾empirical and ab initio calculations to study molecular energies and structures,
transition state energies and structures, chemical bonding, reaction energies,
molecular orbitals, dipole and multipole moments, atomic charges and potentials,
vibrational frequencies, infrared and Raman spectra, polarizabilities and hyper￾polarizabilities, thermodynamic properties, and reaction paths. Computational
simulations can be performed on systems in the gas phase and the solution phase,
and in addition, Gaussian is a powerful tool for studying such things as substitution
effects, reaction mechanisms, potential energy surfaces, and excited state energies.
Quantum ATK is a complete atomic simulation toolkit, and a first-principles
electronic structure calculation program capable of simulating the electrical and
quantum transport properties of nanostructured systems and nanodevices. Quan￾tum ATK’s modeling ranges from classical force fields for large, complex material
systems to ab initio tools with high-accuracy results for small systems. On this basis,
it can deal with the electron transport properties of nanodevices under external bias
and the associated magnetic and spin transport problems in nanodevices.
QUICKSTEP is a density general function theory program using a mixture of
Gaussian and plane wave basis sets for the study of complex large systems (e.g.
liquids, crystals, proteins, and interfaces), which can simulate both static properties
(e.g. calculation of spectral and total energy derivative properties) and dynamic
properties (e.g. dispersion based on molecular dynamics).
QMD-FLAPW is suitable for studying metals, semiconductors, insulators, densely
stacked structures, and open structures. The self-consistent shielding exchange LDA
and model GW options provide engineering accuracy for predicting semiconductor46 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
1
0
–1
3 × 3
A1
B1
A6
A6
A3 A2
A5 A4
B6
B3 B2
A1
B1
B5 B4
A3
A1
A2
A5 A4
B3 B2
B1
A3 A2
B1
A1
A3 A2
B3 B2
B1
A1
5 × 5 7 × 7
(a) (b) 9 × 9 11 × 11
1
0
Energy (eV)
–1
1
0
–1
Γ ΓΓ Z ZZ
C Si Ge
N P As
Al
kz kz kz
Pt Te
Figure 2.7 Electronic structure changes of nanowires with different interface sizes and
elemental doping. (a) The positions of the atoms Ai and Bi on the representative A (circles)
and B (squares) (001) layers before (open symbols) and after (closed symbols) relaxation for
the 3 × 3, 5 × 5, 7 × 7, 9 × 9, and 11 × 11 Fe nanowires. Source: Wang et al. [22]/with
permission of Elsevier. (b) Energy band structures of adatom (impurity) adsorbed Si
nanowires. The dash-dotted line represents the Fermi level. Source: Durgun et al. [23]/with
permission of American Physical Society.
and insulator bandgaps and are based entirely on ab initio algorithms for computing
the optical spectra of the system.
Zhang et al. studied the relaxation structure and electronic properties of
Fe nanowires with different cross-sections based on the first-nature principle
(Figure 2.7a) and found that Fe nanowires with different cross-sectional sizes all
maintain C4 symmetry [22]. There is a tendency for the relaxation displacement
in the interior to increase with increasing size. The large displacement of the
edge atoms to the interior and the small displacement of the side atoms to the
interior lead to the “rounded corners” phenomenon. Batra et al. theoretically
investigated nanowires with various pentagonal structures [24]. The results show
that nanowires with different types of elements, such as alkali metals, simple
metals, transition metals, noble metals, and noble gas atoms, are structurally stable
due to the interlocking pentagons that form a linear structure perpendicular to
the plane of the pentagon and passing through its center in the structural model.
The bond angles of this structure are close to those of the icosahedral structure.
Among these structures, the one composed of silicon elements is more energet￾ically favorable. These quasi-nanowire structures have higher bonding energies
compared to other nanowire structures and are therefore easier to synthesize
experimentally.
Silicon is an attractive anode material for LIBs due to its high theoretical specific
capacity (4200 mAh g−1). However, the chalking and the detachment of the elec￾trode material from collector fluid are due to the volume expansion of the silicon
anode by about 400% during the Li+ ions inserting process, which in turn leads to2.6 Theoretical Calculation of Nanowires Electrode Materials 47
capacity decay. Si nanowires are used as electrode materials due to their efficient
charge transport, and their conductivity can be improved by doping the Si nanowires
during their growth. The doping of hydrogen-saturated nanowires with impurity ele￾ments such as Al, Ga, C, Si, Ge, N, P, As, Te, and Pt was investigated based on first
principles by Ciraci et al. [23]. For high concentrations of impurity element doping
in the IIIA and VA groups, the energy bands of the doped Si nanowires were shown
to be metallic. However, for IVA and VIA group element doping, the nanowires show
semiconductors. Usually, low doping concentrations result in Si nanowires exhibit￾ing n-type and p-type doping properties like bulk silicon. Therefore, the electronic
structure properties of Si nanowires can be tuned by surface impurity element dop￾ing, as shown in Figure 2.7b.
Vanadium-based materials have been widely studied due to their high theoretical
capacity, and low prices. VOPO4 material with a layer spacing of 1.42 nm was stud￾ied as the cathode material for Mg-ion batteries by Mai et al. [25]. It was found that
the expanded interlayer structure of the material provided a fast transport space for
MgCl+. The diffusion paths and energy barriers of ions in the interlayer were calcu￾lated by density flooding, as shown in Figure 2.8a,b. MgCl+ prefers the P1 path with
a diffusion potential barrier of only 0.42 eV. Meanwhile, the group designed a mul￾tidimensional nanocomposite structure (V2O3 ⊂ CNTs ⊂ rGO) of zero-dimensional
V2O3 nanoparticles-1D carbon nanotubes-2D reduced graphene oxide [26]. Thanks
Path 2
Path 1
V
O
P
Mg (path 1)
Mg (path 2)
1.5
(a)
(b) (c)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Reaction coordinate
Path1-MgCl+
Path2-MgCl+
Path1-Mg2+
Path2-Mg2+
Energy (eV)
0.8
(012) facet
Relaxation
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
Relaxation
Relaxation
Relaxation
Relaxation
Relaxation
Site 1-O1O2
Site 2-V1V2
Site 3-V1O1V2O2
Site 4-inner-O1O2
Site 5-inner-V1O1V2
Site 6-inner-V1O1V2O2
V Na O
1.0
Figure 2.8 Diffusion barrier profiles of Mg2+/MgCl+ transport in PA-VOPO4 nanosheets.
(a) Mg2+/MgCl+ diffusion routine. (b) Diffusion energy barrier profiles of Mg2+/MgCl+
transport in PA-VOPO4 nanosheets. Source: Zhou et al. [25]/with permission of Wiley-VCH.
(c) Density flooding calculation of a model for sodium ions embedded in different sites of
V2O3. Source: Tan et al. [26]/with permission of Wiley-VCH.48 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
to the synergistic effect between its multiple dimensional nanostructures, this mul￾tidimensional nanostructure exhibits significantly improved cyclic stability and fast
ion/electron transport kinetics. Calculation of the sodium ion embedding sites in
V2O3 by density flooding theory reveals that sodium ions embedded in (012) crys￾talline planes have small binding energy or volume expansion. However, the sodium
ions exhibit large volume expansion and severe structural disruption when embed￾ded in the (012) interlayer, as shown in Figure 2.8c. The results indicate that sodium
ions select their embedding sites according to the exposed crystallographic surfaces
of V2O3 nanoparticles.
Nanowire electrode materials play an extremely important role in energy storage.
Theoretical calculations give us a very efficient tool to give preliminary valida￾tion to some inferences that cannot be verified in experiments. These include
the calculation of the structural relaxation of nanowire materials with differ￾ent cross-sectional dimensions, the structural stability of nanowires with different
cross-sectional shapes, the changes in the electronic structure due to different
types and concentrations of impurity elements doping on the nanowire surface,
the selection of different embedding sites for ions in the electrode material, and
the calculation of different diffusion paths and diffusion potentials. Modeling
simulations to calculate the electronic structure and other properties provide a solid
foundation for the application of nanowire electrode materials.
2.7 Summary and Outlook
In this chapter, the physicochemical characteristics of one-dimensional nanowires
have been mainly introduced, including electronic structure, thermal properties,
mechanical properties, adsorption properties, and chemical activity, as well as
related basic theories. The unique advantages of nanowires as electrode materials
in thermodynamics, kinetics, and surface interface characteristics are discussed.
The basic performance parameters of nanowire electrochemical devices and
the optimization mechanism of their electrochemical performance are briefly
described. In addition, the application of theoretical calculation in nanowire
electrode materials is also summarized.
The unique advantages of nanowire electrode materials in thermodynamics and
kinetics and their surface interface characteristics are the main reasons for their
important position in the field of electrochemical energy storage. However, the
thermodynamics and heterogeneous interfaces of nanowire electrode materials
have not been thoroughly studied. How to make better use of these properties
to achieve further improvements in electrochemical performance is one of the
important development directions for nanowire electrode materials. In addition,
theoretical calculation are important for understanding the physicochemical
properties and electrochemical behavior of nanowire electrode materials, but in
order to make the calculation results more valuable, it is necessary to establish a
model closer to the real state of electrochemical energy storage devices.References 49
References
1 Wu, Y. and Yang, P. (2001). Melting and welding semiconductor nanowires in
nanotubes. Advanced Materials 13 (7): 520–523.
2 Shin, H.S., Yu, J., and Song, J.Y. (2007). Size-dependent thermal instability and
melting behavior of Sn nanowires. Applied Physics Letters 91 (17): 173106.
3 Li, D., Wu, Y., Kim, P. et al. (2003). Thermal conductivity of individual silicon
nanowires. Applied Physics Letters 83 (14): 2934–2936.
4 Chen, C., Shi, Y., Zhang, Y.S. et al. (2006). Size dependence of Young’s modulus
in ZnO nanowires. Physical Review Letters 96 (7): 075505.
5 Hu, Y.S., Kienle, L., Guo, Y.G. et al. (2006). High lithium electroactivity of
nanometer-sized rutile TiO2. Advanced Materials 18 (11): 1421–1426.
6 Wu, H., Chan, G., Choi, J.W. et al. (2012). Stable cycling of double-walled silicon
nanotube battery anodes through solid–electrolyte interphase control. Nature
Nanotechnology 7 (5): 310–315.
7 Lee, S.C., Lee, S.M., Lee, J.W. et al. (2009). Spinel Li4Ti5O12 nanotubes for energy
storage materials. Journal of Physical Chemistry C 113 (42): 18420–18423.
8 Armstrong, A.R., Armstrong, G., Canales, J. et al. (2005). Lithium-ion intercala￾tion into TiO2-B nanowires. Advanced Materials 17 (7): 862–865.
9 Wang, X., Xu, X., Niu, C. et al. (2017). Earth abundant Fe/Mn-based layered
oxide interconnected nanowires for advanced K-ion full batteries. Nano Letters
17 (1): 544–550.
10 Xu, Y., Zhang, C., Zhou, M. et al. (2018). Highly nitrogen doped carbon
nanofibers with superior rate capability and cyclability for potassium ion bat￾teries. Nature Communications 9 (1): 1720.
11 Lu, C., Fan, Y., Li, H. et al. (2013). Core–shell CNT–Ni–Si nanowires as a high
performance anode material for lithium ion batteries. Carbon 63: 54–60.
12 Huang, J.Y., Zhong, L., Wang, C.M. et al. (2010). In situ observation of the elec￾trochemical lithiation of a single SnO2 nanowire electrode. Science 330 (6010):
1515–1520.
13 Li, Y., Tan, B., and Wu, Y. (2008). Mesoporous Co3O4 nanowire arrays for
lithium ion batteries with high capacity and rate capability. Nano Letters 8 (1):
265–270.
14 Yin, J., Li, Y., Lv, F. et al. (2017). NiO/CoN porous nanowires as efficient bifunc￾tional catalysts for Zn–air batteries. ACS Nano 11 (2): 2275–2283.
15 Yin, J., Li, Y., Lv, F. et al. (2017). Oxygen vacancies dominated NiS2/CoS2
interface porous nanowires for portable Zn–air batteries driven water splitting
devices. Advanced Materials 29 (47): 1704681.
16 Hu, P., Yan, M., Wang, X. et al. (2016). Single-nanowire electrochemical probe
detection for internally optimized mechanism of porous graphene in electro￾chemical devices. Nano Letters 16 (3): 1523–1529.
17 Yan, M., Wang, F., Han, C. et al. (2013). Nanowire templated semihollow bicon￾tinuous graphene scrolls: designed construction, mechanism, and enhanced
energy storage performance. Journal of the American Chemical Society 135 (48):
18176–18182.50 2 Fundamentals of Nanowire Energy Storage
18 Cai, Z., Xu, L., Yan, M. et al. (2015). Manganese oxide/carbon yolk–shell
nanorod anodes for high capacity lithium batteries. Nano Letters 15 (1): 738–744.
19 Mai, L.Q., Hu, B., Chen, W. et al. (2007). Lithiated MoO3 nanobelts with
greatly improved performance for lithium batteries. Advanced Materials 19 (21):
3712–3716.
20 Mai, L.-Q., Yang, F., Zhao, Y.-L. et al. (2011). Hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4
heterostructured nanowires with enhanced supercapacitor performance. Nature
Communications 2 (1): 381.
21 Mai, L., Wei, Q., An, Q. et al. (2013). Nanoscroll buffered hybrid nanostructural
VO2 (B) cathodes for high-rate and long-life lithium storage. Advanced Materials
25 (21): 2969–2973.
22 Wang, S.-F., Zhang, Y., Zhang, J.-M. et al. (2010). First-principles study on the
relaxed structures and electronic properties of Fe nanowires. Physica B 405 (12):
2726–2732.
23 Durgun, E., Akman, N., Ataca, C. et al. (2007). Atomic and electronic structures
of doped silicon nanowires: a first-principles study. Physical Review B 76 (24):
245323.
24 Sen, P., Gülseren, O., Yildirim, T. et al. (2002). Pentagonal nanowires: a
first-principles study of the atomic and electronic structure. Physical Review B
65 (23): 235433.
25 Zhou, L., Liu, Q., Zhang, Z. et al. (2018). Interlayer-pacing-regulated VOPO4
nanosheets with fast kinetics for high-capacity and durable rechargeable magne￾sium batteries. Advanced Materials 30 (32): 1801984.
26 Tan, S., Jiang, Y., Wei, Q. et al. (2018). Multidimensional synergistic nanoar￾chitecture exhibiting highly stable and ultrafast sodium-ion storage. Advanced
Materials 30 (18): 1707122.51
3
Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
The morphology of nanomaterials depends on the preparation process, and the
preparation methods of nanomaterials have always been an important part of
the field of nanoscience. Generally speaking, the synthetic methods of nanoma￾terials include physical methods and chemical methods. Compared with other
morphologies of nanomaterials, it is unique to synthesize nanowires (NWs) in
that more attention is paid to the design and regulation in a single direction at the
atomic and molecular levels in order to form the dominant growth in one direction
(while inhibiting the growth in other directions). The directional regulation of
NWs can be divided into two types: one is to control the growth of the dominant
crystal face according to the anisotropy of crystal materials; the other is to force the
directional growth by artificially inducing. The external performances are displayed
differently because the physical and chemical properties of the NWs prepared by
the two types of regulation methods have a degree of difference. In this chapter, the
common synthesis methods and growth mechanisms of six different types of NWs
(conventional, porous, hierarchical, heterogeneous, hollow, and array) are briefly
introduced based on the classification of NWs with different morphologies.
3.1 Conventional Nanowires
Conventional NWs are a kind of common one-dimensional (1D) NWs that are
nanoscale in two dimensions in space. With this characteristic, the materials exhibit
nanoeffects that are different from macroscopic ones. The preparation process of
conventional NWs generally includes wet chemical, dry chemical, and physical
methods.
3.1.1 Wet Chemical Methods
Wet chemical methods are those that contain liquid-phase chemical processes while
synthesizing NWs. Some of the commonly used methods will be introduced in the
following.
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.52 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
3.1.1.1 Hydrothermal/Solvothermal Method
Due to its simple equipment, convenient operation, and good crystallization, the
hydrothermal/solvothermal method is a widely used liquid-phase chemical method.
Through the process of dissolution and recrystallization, the target product can be
obtained in a closed container with water or organic solvent as the reaction medium
under high temperature and pressure.
Many variables, such as the pH value, reaction temperature/pressure/time, sol￾vent species, and so on, are the important factors in the morphologies of products.
Therefore, many NWs are prepared by controlling the above variables during the
synthesis. Using TiCl4 as the titanium source and ammonia solution as the solvent,
Liu et al. from Sun Yat-Sen University obtained single-crystal anatase TiO2 NWs
through a one-step hydrothermal method for the first time (Figure 3.1a–c) [1].
In addition, Liu and coworkers from the Iberian International Nanotechnol￾ogy Laboratory first used selenium urea and foamed cobalt as raw materials to
prepare Co3Se4 NWs with a diameter of 10–20 nm by a simple hydrothermal
method (Figure 3.1d–f) [2]. Besides, Mai and coworkers from Wuhan University of
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f) (g)
(h) (i) (j) (k)
Figure 3.1 Morphology characterization of conventional NWs prepared by hydrothermal/
solvothermal method. (a) Transmission electron microscope (TEM), (b) Selected area
electron diffraction (SAED), and (c) High-resolution transmission electron microscope
(HRTEM) images of TiO2. (d, e) Scanning electron microscope (SEM), (f) TEM, and (g) HRTEM
images of Co3Se4, respectively. (h, i) SEM images of Na2V6O16⋅1.63H2O. (j, k) TEM images of
Na2V6O16⋅1.63H2O. Source: Refs. [1–3] / Royal Society of Chemistry / with permission of
JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC / American Chemical Society.3.1 Conventional Nanowires 53
Technology directly prepared Na2V6O16⋅1.63H2O NWs as shown in Figure 3.1h–k
by hydrothermal method [3].
The homogeneous conventional NWs can be prepared simply and quickly by
the hydrothermal/solvothermal method. Although there are problems such as the
choice of suitable solvent and whether the solvent is completely removed during
the product collection process after the reaction, the hydrothermal/solvothermal
method is still a common and reliable method for preparing conventional NWs.
3.1.1.2 Sol–Gel Method
The sol–gel method is to homogeneously mix compounds, including chemically
active components, under liquid-phase conditions, followed by hydrolysis and
polymerization reactions. As a result, a stable, transparent sol system will be formed
in solution. In the later aging process, the sol colloidal particles are gradually
polymerized to a gel, which is dried and calcined to obtain the target product.
The application technology of this method is gradually improving and has been
widely used.
Wang et al. from Xiangtan University prepared a sol–gel solution of citric acid and
Mn(CH3COO)2 to get MnO2 NWs with uniform length and diameter using porous
anodic alumina (AAO) as a template (Figure 3.2a,b). The diameter and length of the
NWs are determined by the size of the hole and the thickness of the template [4].
In addition, Zheng and coworkers from Nanjing University, using CdCl2 and Na2S
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 3.2 Morphology characterization of conventional NWs prepared by Sol–Gel
method. (a, b) SEM images of MnO2 NWs. (c, d) SEM images of CdS NWs. (e, f) TEM images of
VO2 NWs. Source: Refs. [4–6] / with permission of Elsevier / with permission of JOHN WILEY
& SONS, INC / Royal Society of Chemistry.54 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
as cadmium and sulfur sources, successfully made CdS NWs with a length of 60 μm
by adjusting the reaction time and calcination system based on the sol–gel method
(Figure 3.2c,d) [5]. In addition, Kim’s group obtained precursor samples by sol–gel
method and treated them with different calcination systems to adjust the tensile
stress needed in the process of nucleation growth. The obtained VO2 NWs is shown
in Figure 3.2e,f [6].
The advantage of this method is easy to control the nanostructure of the prepared
materials. Besides, it has the ability to obtain desirable materials with specific func￾tions and structures, which makes it popular in energy storage and catalysis.
3.1.1.3 Coprecipitation Method
The coprecipitation method is a common method for high-purity NWs. The suitable
precipitating agent is added to a mixed metal salt solution containing two or more
metal ions to form a uniform precipitate through a precipitation reaction, and the
precipitate is thermally decomposed to obtain a high-purity nanopowder material.
Among them, the influencing factors of the coprecipitation reaction are pH value,
temperature, the solubility of the reactants, and so on. Although the coprecipita￾tion process is relatively complicated, it is also often used to prepare incompatible
inorganic salt NWs due to its obvious advantages: low cost, simple process, short
synthesis cycle, and easy control of preparation conditions.
Yu et al. used the hydrothermal coprecipitation method to homogeneously coat
the ZIF-67 derivative Ni/Co oxide shell on the Co3O4 NW array (Figure 3.3) [7].
Figure 3.3c demonstrates that it is composed entirely of a Co3O4 NW (core) and a
ZIF-67 derivative Ni/Co oxide (shell). The inner nanopores can provide more surface
area while shortening the distance of ion diffusion, which improves performance.
Co-NA nanowire array
In Ni(NO3
)
2
 methano
solution
l
B
C
Co-NA@ZIF-67
Co-NA@NiCo-OH
Co-Co3O4@ZIF-NiCo2O4
core-shell nanowire array
core-shell nanowire array
core-shell nanowire array
In 2-methylimidazole
Annealing
at 300 °C
aqueous solution
A (a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3.3 (a) Synthetic diagram of Co-Co3O4@ZIF-NiCo2O4 core-shell NW array electrode
based on nickel foam. (b) SEM, (c) TEM, and (d) EDX mapping images of Co-Co3O4@ZIF￾NiCo2O4 (inset: corresponding high-magnification SEM image). Source: Yu et al. [7] / Royal
Society of Chemistry.3.1 Conventional Nanowires 55
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3.4 Morphology characterization of conventional NWs prepared by ultrasonic spray
pyrolysis. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of Zn NWs, respectively. (c) SEM image of Cd NWs;
(d) SEM image of Co NWs (inset image: the corresponding TEM image). Source: [8] / with
permission of JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.
3.1.1.4 Ultrasonic Spray Pyrolysis Method
Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis is a process in which the precursor solution is atomized
through the atomizer to form aerosols (solid or liquid droplets suspended in the
gas), and the aerosols are carried by the airflow for thermal reaction. The char￾acteristic of this method is that the submicron powders composed of nanometer
primary particles can be obtained directly, and the particle distribution is relatively
uniform.
Rao et al. used aqueous solutions of zinc acetate, chromium acetate, and cobalt
acetate as precursors to prepare Zn, Cd, and Co metal single-crystal NWs by ultra￾sonic spray pyrolysis. By morphological characterization of the obtained NWs, it can
be seen that the diameter of Zn single-crystal NWs is distributed in the range of
50–100 nm and several hundred microns in length (Figure 3.4a,b). The nanostruc￾tures of Cd and Co can be seen in Figure 3.4c,d, respectively [8].
3.1.1.5 Electrospinning Method
Electrospinningrefers to making a charged polymer melt or solution under the
action of a high-voltage electrostatic field and the mouth sprays out a stable stream,56 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
which is accelerated, stretched, split, solidified, or solvent volatilized, and finally
formed into a fibrous substance [9, 10]. Electrospinning can effectively realize the
preparation of NWs and composite NWs. The diameter of the obtained fibers is
generally at micron or nanolevel. The microscopic morphology of the product is
not restricted by the crystal growth orientation of the material itself. To a certain
extent, this method greatly enriches the types of NWs. At the same time, it has the
advantages of being a simple device, low cost, diversified raw material selection,
controllable process, etc. Therefore, the electrospinning method is also one of the
most important ways to prepare conventional NWs.
Cui et al. from Stanford University used 8% polyvinyl butyral (PVB) and 9% anhy￾drous tin chloride in n-butanol as precursors and obtained PVB/SnCl2 ultra-long
NWs by adjusting the electrospinning parameters (Figure 3.5a,b). The NW network
can provide a continuous path for metal electron transmission and provide a tem￾plate for the deposition of metal [11]. In addition, Mai et al. from Wuhan Univer￾sity of Technology dissolved a certain amount of ammonium metavanadate, lithium
acetate, PEO, and PVA in water and stirred it in a water bath at 80 ∘C for six hours.
After that, LiV3O8 NWs with smooth surface and uniform size were obtained by
electrospinning and calcination (Figure 3.5c,d) [12].
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3.5 Morphology characterization of conventional nanowires prepared by
electrospinning. Source: Refs. [11, 12] / American Chemical Society / Royal Society of
Chemistry. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of PVB/SnCl2 nanowires. (c) SEM image of
LiV3O8-PEO/PVA precursor (the inset image: the fiber diameter distribution diagram);
(d) SEM image of LiV3O8 after calcination.3.1 Conventional Nanowires 57
3.1.2 Dry Chemical Method
Dry chemical methods are those that do not use a liquid-phase chemical process
while synthesizing NWs. Some dry chemical methods will be introduced in the
following.
3.1.2.1 High-Temperature Solid-State Method
High-temperature solid-state method is to prepare target products through
solid-state reaction at high temperature, which has the advantages of low cost, large
yield, simple preparation technology, no agglomeration, good filling property, and
so on. However, due to the unique driving force required for the synthesis of NWs,
it is difficult to obtain NWs with uniform morphology by the general solid-state
method. And usually, reasonable regulation of calcination system and feeding ratio
is required.
Li et al. obtained LiCoO2 NWs by keeping the Co3O4 NW precursor at 500 ∘C
for three hours, thoroughly mixing it with Li(OH)⋅H2O, and heating it to 750 ∘C for
two hours. The SEM and TEM images show that the NWs were composed of many
nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 150 to 200 nm (Figure 3.6a,b) [13]. Jia
et al. from Zhengzhou University used silicon powder and phenolic resin as raw
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3.6 Morphology characterization of conventional LiCoO2 NWs prepared by
high-temperature solid-state method. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of LiCoO2 NWs,
respectively. (c, d) SEM images of SiC NWs. Source: Refs. [13, 14] / Springer Nature / with
permission of Elsevier.58 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
materials and added NaCl and NaF to the molten salt. When the temperature of the
molten salt rises to 1450 ∘C, SiC NWs with a length of about 10 μm and a diameter
of 100–150 nm can be obtained (Figure 3.6c,d) [14].
3.1.2.2 Chemical Vapor Deposition Method
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a method of chemically reacting gaseous sub￾stances and depositing them on a substrate in an atomic state to obtain a target
product. When using CVD to prepare conventional NWs, firstly, chemical means
must be used to form a certain active site on the surface of the substrate to induce
preferential nucleation of the NWs, followed by regulating the growth conditions
to induce the directional growth of the NWs. Among all the methods for preparing
NWs, substrate CVD is a common method, which has the advantages of low cost and
large scale.
Li and coworkers from Northwestern Polytechnical University obtained SiC NWs
as shown in Figure 3.7a,b by using CH3SiCl3 and H2 as precursors without adding a
metal catalyst [15]. Suzuki et al. from the National Institute of Materials Science in
Japan used gold as catalyst and adjusted the deposition temperature and deposition
rate to obtain Si NWs with a diameter of 10–100 nm and a length of tens to hundreds
of microns on silicon wafers (Figure 3.7c) [16]. In addition, Iriarte from Politec￾nico de Madrid have systematically studied the influence of different deposition
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3.7 Preparation of conventional NWs by chemical vapor deposition. (a, b) SEM
images of SiC NWs. (c) SEM images of Si NWs grown between gold quantum dots; (d) SEM
image of NiS2 NW. Source: Refs. [15–17] / with permission of Elsevier / The Japan Institute
of Metals and Materials.3.1 Conventional Nanowires 59
conditions on the growth of NiSi2 NWs, which were obtained by controlling the
reaction of SiH4 with nucleation site of Ni (Figure 3.7d) [17].
3.1.3 Physical Method
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) is a kind of physical method in which the material
source is vaporized through physical processes such as evaporation or sputtering
under vacuum conditions, and the target material is deposited on the surface of the
substrate. The PVD method has a higher deposition rate, is cleaner, and is more
repeatable than the solution-based method. With the continuous development of
technology, the PVD method also has certain applications in the synthesis of con￾ventional NWs.
Shen et al. used a vacuum DC arc as the evaporation heat source to directly
react metal aluminum and N2 and deposit aluminum nitride (AlN) NWs with a
diameter of about 45 nm and a length of about 5 μm on the molybdenum cathode
(Figure 3.8a,b) [18]. For the first time of preparing GaN NWs, Xue et al. from
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3.8 Morphology characterization of conventional NWs prepared by physical vapor
deposition method. (a) SEM image of AlN NWs. (b) TEM image of AlN NWs (inset: SAED
image). (c, d) SEM images of GaN NWs. Source: Refs. [18, 19] / EDP Sciences.60 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
Shenyang University of Science and Technology used magnetron sputtering to
deposit Ta and Ga2O3 films on Si substrates following with ammonifying process
(Figure 3.8c,d) [19].
3.2 Porous Nanowires
Porous NWs, as one of the NWs with many pore structures, have high specific sur￾face areas. Porous NWs can make the electrolyte and the active material contact
more adequately when applied to electrochemical energy storage. Common meth￾ods for synthesizing porous NWs include the template method and the self-assembly
method.
3.2.1 Template Method
The template method is a highly effective method for preparing 1D porous nanoma￾terials. Templates with nanostructures are easily controlled, inexpensive and readily
available. The material for the products is deposited into the pores or surface of the
template by physical or chemical methods. The method could effectively control the
size, morphology, and structure of the product materials through spatial confine￾ment or orientation induction effects. The material and structure of the template
can be designed by the corresponding synthesis method to meet actual needs. At the
same time, it can realize the integration of nanomaterial assembly and synthesis,
which helps to solve the dispersion stability problem of nanomaterials [20–23].
3.2.1.1 Template by Nanoconfinement
The nanoconfinement template method is used to prepare 1D nanostructured mate￾rials by depositing target materials in the nanopores of the template and based on
the spatial confinement effect of the template while realizing control of the size,
morphology, and structure of the synthetic material [24].
One of the most important kinds of nano-confinement is the anodic aluminum
oxide (AAO) template. As early as 1932, it was recognized by the porous layer and
the barrier layer. Wherein the porous layer is composed of nanopores arranged uni￾formly, and the dense oxide layer is a layer of an insulating barrier. With the rise
of research on self-assembled nanostructure systems, it should also be noted that
nanomaterials with highly ordered nanoscale array pores have attracted researchers’
attention.
As an electrochemical energy storage material, MnO2 has the advantages of high
energy density, lower cost, and environmental friendliness, but its conductivity is
low. It is noteworthy that Polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT) has the advantages
of high electrical conductivity, good stability, and excellent mechanical flexibility,
but it has low energy density. For these reasons, Liu et al. used AAO as a template
to synthesize the coaxial NWs of MnO2/PEDOT using the one-step electrophoretic
co-deposition method [24]. Figure 3.9 displays the synthesis’s schematic diagram.
The SEM and TEM images of MnO2/PEDOT coaxial NWs are shown in Figure 3.10.3.2 Porous Nanowires 61
Au-sputtered
ring-shape electrodes
Coelectro￾deposition
MnO2/PEDOT
coaxial
nanowires
MnO2/PEDOT
coaxial nanowire in template
MnO2/PEDOT nanowires
EDOT monomer Template Bottom gold
MnO2 core PEDOT shell
Template
removal
Mn2+ ions
Figure 3.9 The coaxial nanowires of MnO2/PEDOT by one-step synthesis. Source: Ran Liu
[24] / American Chemical Society.
(a) (b) (c)
(d)
Figure 3.10 The coaxial nanowires of MnO2/PEDOT. (a) SEM image (at 0.75 V). (b) TEM
image of a single nanowire (at 0.75 V). (c, d) EDS mappings of S and Mn elements.
Source: Ran Liu [24] / American Chemical Society.
It should also be noted that the PEDOT shell, with its high conductivity, porosity,
and flexibility, is conducive to electron transport and ion diffusion, whose benefits
can reduce the structural stress caused by charging and discharging processes, which
makes it less collapse, shrinkage, and fracture in the structure.
In addition, it can be well controlled by adjusting the diameter of the aperture and
the film of the sphere. Li et al. from University of New Orleans, who used porous
membranes and small spheres as templates, first stacked two sections of porous
membranes with different pore sizes (such as AOO) in parallel. Then the polymer
(such as polystyrene) sphere is filtered onto the upper membrane. After removing
the underlying porous film, the above polymer is used as the electrodeposition elec￾trode. In the electrodeposition process, porous NWs are obtained [25].62 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
3.2.1.2 Template by Orientation Induction
The orientation-induced template method uses a template with a specific morphol￾ogy to guide the synthesis of nanomaterials with similar morphology to the template.
It is also worth noting that carbon nanotubes (CNT) and carbon nanofibers (CNF)
are currently the most popular effective orientation templates for preparing porous
1D nanomaterials due to their original 1D nanostructure, adjustable diameter, large
yield, and easy removal.
Zhu et al. from Nanyang Technological University show a typical example of
using CNT as template [26]. By hydrolyzing tetraethyl orthosilicate, a silicon
coating was prepared on the CNT, and then in situ growth of nickel silicate
nanosheets on SiO2 layer formed the precursor CNT@SiO2@Ni3Si2O5(OH)4. Then
they convert Ni3Si2O5(OH)4 into Ni3S2 and remove the SiO2 coating. The multistep
transformation preparation route is shown in Figure 3.11.
Besides, inorganic orientation templates can also be used in composites of
porous NWs. Zhou et al. from Nanyang Technological University put forward that
single-crystal NWs of MnOx are used as templates to design and synthesize an SnO2
layer wrapped in a porous carbon layer [27]. The synthesis process of this nanotube
is shown in Figure 3.12.
Firstly, SnO2 nanocrystals are grown on MnOx NWs to form the core and shell
types of MnOx/SnO2 NWs with a higher aspect ratio. Subsequently, a dopamine layer
is coated on the surface of the MnOx/SnO2 nanomaterials, and after carbonization,
CNT
I II III
CNT@SiO2 CNT@SiO2@Nisilicate CNT@Ni3S2
Figure 3.11 The conversion route illustration of CNF to CNT@Ni3S2. Source: Zhu et al.
[26] / John Wiley & Sons.
I II III IV
MnOx NW MnOx/SnO2 MnOx/SnO2/PDA MnOx/SnO2/C SnO2/C-NTs
P123
Figure 3.12 The preparation route illustration for SnO2/CNTs. Source: Zhou et al. [27] /
The Royal Society of Chemistry.3.2 Porous Nanowires 63
the dense carbon coating is formed, which enhances the electronic conductivity and
stabilizes the morphology of the NWs. Finally, oxalic acid is used to selectively etch
away the MnOx NWs to obtain porous carbon-coated SnO2 nanotubes.
3.2.2 Self-Assembly Method
The self-assembly method is a kind of multifunctional method, which uses the affin￾ity group, for example, the electrostatic force, coordination bond, hydrogen bond,
and other functions to assemble the basic structural units into an ordered structure.
The synthesis method is easy to implement and has a wide range of universality; it
has been widely used in the preparation of porous NWs.
Co(OH)2 is a low-cost material substitute for the latest RuO2, which is attributable
to its excellent electronic conductivity, wide availability, and environmental friend￾liness. Yuan et al. from the Anhui University of Technology suggested that the
Co(OH)2 nanoparticles are self-assembled to synthesize porous NWs with a novel
lysine-assisted hydrothermal process [28].
Researchers constructed a novel hybrid metal oxide core and shell NWs array, in
which both the core and shell materials are good pseudocapacitance metal oxides
just like Co3O4 and MnO2 [29]. The porous NWs with hierarchical heterostructure
composed of Co3O4 NWs and MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets were synthesized by the
self-assembly method. The general electrode design process is shown in Figure 3.13a.
The SEM images of the Co3O4/MnO2 nanowire array are shown in Figure 3.13b,c.
(a)
(b) (c)
Mox(M=Co,Zn,Sn,etc.)
Carbon painting
(i) (ii)
Current collector
MOx@C MOx@MnO2
3D interfacial reaction
Figure 3.13 (a) The schematic diagram of the electrode design process. (b) SEM images of
the Co3O4/MnO2 nanowire arrays with one hour growth. (c) SEM images of the Co3O4/MnO2
nanowire arrays with 5-hours growth. Source: Liu et al. [29] / with permission of John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.64 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
Moreover, Yu et al. from Nanyang Technological University synthesized the
core-shell heterostructured porous NWs composed of NiCo2O4 and MnO2 by
self-assembly method [30].
3.2.3 Chemical Etching Method
Among the various fabrication techniques for synthesizing porous NWs, the
metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE) method is simple in process with
easily controllable parameters (such as diameter, length, crystal orientation,
cross-sectional shape, doping concentration, doping type) and good repeatability.
As a result, it can synthesize a highly ordered SiNWs array with a high aspect ratio,
which is expected to realize industrialized mass production [31–34].
Herein, Bang et al. used commercially available low-cost silicon powder to gener￾ate porous NWs and ultrafine-sized cores to form multidimensional silicon through
a combination of metal deposition and metal-assisted chemical etching [35]. This
multidimensional silicon can be applied to anode materials for LIBs. In the bulk sil￾icon particles, the length of the formed porous silicon NW is 5–8 μm and the pore
diameter is 10 nm.
Veerbeek et al. from the University of Twente noted that the porous NWs are
prepared by nanolithography technology and MACE synergistically. The synthesis
process of this NW array is shown in Figure 3.14 [36].
Since most samples are made using nanosphere lithography technology, a dense
array of polystyrene spheres is formed on the clean silicon substrate. The diameter
of the sphere was decreased from 447 nm to about 280 nm by oxygen-reactive ion
etching in the dry state. Subsequently, a 40-nm silver layer was sputtered on top of
it, and the polystyrene balls were peeled off in dichloromethane to obtain a silver
layer with gaps. The substrate was exposed to HF/H2O2, resulting in the silver layer
under a wet etching of the silicon substrate. After the line was etched to a desired
length, HNO3 in the silver layer was removed, and silicon NW arrays were cleaned.
It is also true that a simple method such as MACE has been used to successfully
fabricate high-density, large-area, vertical arrays of porous silicon NWs with differ￾ent morphologies (length, porosity, heterodimer, etc.) on both sides of the silicon
substrate [37]. The porosity of the NWs could be controlled by prolonging the etching
time, which can increase the surface area of the porous NWs.
Silicon
PS deposition
HF/H2O2 HNO3
O2 etching Ag sputtering
Polystyrene Silver
Lift-off
Figure 3.14 The preparation process for Si nanowires. Source: Veerbeek et al. [36] / The
Royal Society of Chemistry.3.3 Hierarchical Nanowires 65
3.3 Hierarchical Nanowires
The formation of nanostructures with controlled size and morphology has been
the focus of intensive research in recent years [38, 39]. Such nanostructures are
important in the development of nanoscale devices and the exploitation of various
properties of nanomaterials [40]. The controlled growth of hierarchical structures
has received particular attention recently because it can improve the properties of
materials and devices. Although the fabrication of complex structures observed
in natural materials or biominerals remains a significant challenge, substantial
progress has been made to achieve hierarchical crystals. For example, the synthesis
of branched tetrapod-shaped structures of controlled size and crystal structure has
been reported [12]. Branched Cu2O crystals exhibiting multiform geometries have
also been fabricated by a kinetically controlled growth method [41, 42]. Despite
progress in hierarchical fabrication, there are still relatively few works about the pre￾cise control of product size and branching degree. Synthesizing complex structures,
such as multilevel branched structures, will open the door to more complex 3D mate￾rials and devices and provide more opportunities to exploit the unique properties of
nanomaterials.
Different nanoelements combine to form hierarchical NWs. The NW structure
is in the microscale category of nanometer scale in the radial direction and the
macroscale category of micron or even centimeter scale in the axial direction.
Through the introduction of different hierarchical units, the obtained hierarchical
structure not only has the controllable size of NWs, radial electron transport, and
other characteristics, but also has the unique properties of hierarchical nano-units.
Compared with a single component, it shows higher specific surface area, more
surface-active sites, and better electrolyte wettability, which make it show great
potential in the field of energy storage.
Mai et al. created ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide NWs with diameters of
100–200 nm and lengths of several millimeters using a low-cost precursor (NH4VO3,
PVA), electrospinning, and annealing. Around 50 nm in diameter and 100 nm in
length, vanadium oxide nanorods made up the outer layer of the hierarchical NWs
[43] (Figure 3.15).
3.3.1 Self-Assembly Method
A popular technique for creating hierarchical NWs is the “self-assembly method”
which combines the “directed attachment” and “self-assembly” crystal growth
mechanisms. The “self-assembly” process refers to the formation of the product
morphology structure in the process of nanocrystalline growth, which is spon￾taneous under certain conditions and without artificial control; “Directional
attachment” mechanism is usually the self-assembly behavior of the adjacent
elementary particles in the process of material growth, and they possess the same
self-growth trigger mechanism, which makes it easy to get rid of the defects. In
the same environment, each particle on the interface forms a similar aggregation
state. Therefore, the final growth orientation of each unit crystal is the same,66 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
(a)
10 µm 200 nm
10 µm
30 µm 2 µm
200 nm
(b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
Figure 3.15 (a, b) FESEM images of electrospinning NH4VO3/PVA composite nanowires.
(c–f) FESEM images of the ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires after
annealing. Source: Mai et al. [43] / American Chemical Society.
forming a morphology structure with the same growth direction, thus achieving
the effect of “orientation overlap.” This method has the advantages of simple
process, high universality, low cost, and does not need a template or external force.
The self-assembled structure has higher order than independent components.
However, its disadvantages are also prominent, such as the strict requirements on
experimental conditions and material ratios, which make it difficult to control in
the assembly process. The influencing factors of this method are material ratio,
solvent type, component structure, etc.
Using MnMoO4 NWs as the substrate, CoMoO4 self-assembly growth in aqueous
solution without surfactant or stabilizer was directed by Mai et al. When the Co
source was added, a supersaturated solution containing a large amount of CoMoO4
crystals was formed. Due to nanoparticles’ high surface energy and thermodynamic
instability, they can be adsorbed on the surface of MnMoO4, resulting in the3.3 Hierarchical Nanowires 67
decrease in surface energy. The matrix MnMoO4 has similar lattice parameters,
which can control the self-assembly and directional attachment crystallization of
CoMoO4 nanoparticles and finally form MnMoO4/CoMoO4 hierarchical NWs. The
preparation process and morphology characterization of the MnMoO4/CoMoO4
hierarchical structure are shown in Figure 3.16a,b [44].
In addition to inorganic substrates, there are also some polymer substrates,
Schmidt et al. proposed a novel strategy to fabricate hierarchical MoS2/PANI NWs
in a mild condition (≤200 ∘C), as shown in Figure 3.17. Starting from the 1D
MnMoO4 +Na2MoO4
+CoCl2
MnMoO4
(a) (b)
Figure 3.16 Synthesis process and morphology characterization of hierarchical nanowires
synthesized by self-assembly orientation lapping method. (a) Synthesis diagram of
MnMoO4/CoMoO4 hierarchical nanowires and (b) corresponding SEM image. Source: Yang
et al. [44] / Springer Nature.
Mo3O10(C6H8N)2
.2H2O MoOx /PANI
APS, H+ (H2N)2CS
200 °C
Added Mo-source
r. t.
Hierachical MoS2/PANI
nanowires nanowires nanowires
Figure 3.17 Scheme for the fabrication of hierarchical MoS2/PANI nanowires through
facile polymerization and hydrothermal treatment of Mo3O10(C6H8N)2⋅H2O precursor.
Source: Yang et al. [45] / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.68 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
precursor of Mo3O10(C6H8N)2⋅H2O (anilinium trimolybdate [ATM]), MoOx/PANI
nanowires were synthesized after polymerization, which were then converted to
MoS2/PANI via hydrothermal process with thiourea. The as-obtained products
evenly integrate MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets with PANI into the primary 1D
architecture, resulting in novel hierarchical and polymer-hybrid NWs. Mean￾while, the contents of MoS2 and PANI in NWs could be easily tuned by adding a
varied amount of additional Mo7O24(NH4)6⋅4H2O (ammonium heptamolybdate
[AHM]), during polymerization. Such NWs of MoS2/PANI were expected to exhibit
enhanced conductivity, and fulfill the advantages of both nanocomposites and
hierarchical architectures. When evaluated as an anode material for LIBs, they
showed remarkably improved electrochemical performances compared with bare
MoS2 [45].
3.3.2 Secondary Nucleation Growth Method
Primary homogeneous nucleation, primary heterogeneous nucleation, and sec￾ondary nucleation are three forms of nucleation. Under high supersaturation,
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3.18 TEM images of branched Nb2O5 nanowires obtained at pH = 3.3–3.4.
(a) Low-magnification SEM image of the typical branched nanowire. (b) SEM image of the
adjunction part; (c, d) HRTEM images recorded from the white frames in (a). Source: Liu
et al. [46] / IOP Publishing.3.4 Heterogeneous Nanowires 69
the process of nucleation is called primary homogeneous nucleation. Primary
heterogeneous nucleation is the process of nucleation in solution induced by
foreign matter (such as dust in atmosphere). Nucleation in solutions containing
solute crystals is called secondary nucleation. Secondary nucleation is also a
heterogeneous nucleation process, which occurs when crystals collide with each
other or with other solid particles (wall, stirrer, etc.).
Xue et al. reported the synthesis of dendritic Nb2O5 NW arrays by treating niobium
foil in an aqueous solution of hydrofluoric acid using secondary nucleation growth
method under hydrothermal conditions (Figure 3.18). By controlling the dynamic
parameters of the system, the Nb2O5 structure with the required branching degree
could be obtained. This may have unique application potential in the development
of photon, electron, and sensing nanodevices [46].
3.4 Heterogeneous Nanowires
Heterogeneous NWs are NW materials composed of different materials in contact
with each other. It not only has the advantages of different components, but also
integrates the special physical and chemical properties at the heterogeneous inter￾face, which produces an enhanced effect or a synergistic effect that is better than
a single component. The synthesis of heterogeneous NWs includes heterogeneous
nucleation, secondary modification, and other methods.
3.4.1 Heterogeneous Nucleation
The preparation of heterogeneous NWs by the secondary hydrothermal method gen￾erally uses the NW materials synthesized in the previous step as crystal nucleus, and
the heterogeneous nucleation growth occurs during the hydrothermal reaction, that
is, the new assembly is carried out while maintaining the morphology of the NWs.
The growth of sub-crystals will finally result in heterogeneous NWs composed of
different components.
Zheng et al. synthesized the unique Co3O4/α-Fe2O3 NWs by a simple two-step
hydrothermal reaction. Firstly, they synthesized Co3O4 NWs on titanium foil
substrate by hydrothermal reaction. Then, they used Co3O4 NWs as crys￾tal nucleus, added substances containing iron sources and precipitants, and
finally, Co3O4/α-Fe2O3 NWs were obtained by secondary hydrothermal reaction
(Figure 3.19a,b) [47]. Fan et al. synthesized SnO2 NWs by CVD, and FeOOH/SnO2
NWs were synthesized by hydrothermal heterogeneous nucleation and crys￾tallization. And after being calcined in air, α-Fe2O3/SnO2 NWs were obtained
(Figure 3.19c,d). They also found that the length of α-Fe2O3 branches could be
adjusted with specific reactant concentrations and reaction times [48]. Fan and
coworkers synthesized SnO2/ZnO NWs by the same method (Figure 3.19e,f)
and added trisodium citrate to control the morphology of ZnO [49]. Shen from
Huazhong University of Science and Technology synthesized TiO2@VS2 NWs by
two-step hydrothermal method. TEM characterization shows that VS2 particles
grew uniformly on the surface of TiO2 NWs (Figure 3.19g,h) [50].70 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
(a)
(e) (f) (g) (h)
(b) (c) (d)
Figure 3.19 (a) TEM image of Co3O4/α-Fe2O3 heterogeneous nanowires. (b) HRTEM image
of Co3O4/α-Fe2O3. (c) SEM and (d) TEM images of α-Fe2O3/SnO2 nanowires. (e) TEM and
(f) HRTEM image of SnO2/ZnO heterogeneous nanowires. (g) TEM image of SnO2/ZnO
nanowires synthesized by adding trisodium citrate. (h) TEM image of TiO2-B@VS2
nanowires, with the inset showing its corresponding SEM image. Source: Refs. [47–50] /
Springer Nature / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc / American Chemical Society /
with permission of Elsevier.
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 3.20 SEM images of (a) Ag nanowire, (b, c) necklace-shaped Ag nanowires/Ag3PO4
cube heterogeneous nanowire, (d–f) Ag/Ag3PO4 heterogeneous nanowires obtained under
different concentrations of [Ag(NH3)
2]
+ complex. Source: Bi et al. [51] / Royal Society of
Chemistry.
In order to improve the charge separation efficiency of Ag3PO4 semiconductors,
Lv and coworkers coupled Ag3PO4 submicrocubes and high conductivity Ag NWs
into a new necklace-like coaxial heterogeneous NW [51]. They first produced
single-crystal Ag NWs with an average diameter of 50 nm through the polyol
process (Figure 3.20a), and used them as the initial template for the selective growth
and assembly of Ag3PO4 crystals. When the Ag NWs reacted with [Ag(NH3)2]
+ and
Na2HPO4 in aqueous solution at room temperature, homogeneous and ordered3.4 Heterogeneous Nanowires 71
Ag3PO4 submicron cube could be generated on the Ag NWs by a heterogeneous
nucleation process. As shown in Figure 3.20b,c, a series of adjacent Ag3PO4 submi￾crocubes were drilled through by one Ag NW, and they formed a 1D necklace-like
heterostructure. In addition, by changing the concentration of [Ag(NH3)2]
+ com￾plex, the position and quantity of Ag3PO4 cube on the Ag NW could be further
rationally controlled. The experimental results are shown in Figure 3.20d–f. When
the concentration of the [Ag(NH3)2]
+ complex substance is 0.2 mol L−1, the Ag NWs
are completely covered by Ag3PO4 cubes. As the amount of [Ag(NH3)2]
+ substance
decreased, the number of Ag3PO4 cubes formed on Ag NWs also decreased. When
the concentration dropped to 0.05 mol L−1, only a small amount of Ag3PO4 cubes
formed on the Ag NWs. This novel necklace-shaped Ag nanowire/Ag3PO4 cube
heterogeneous NWs showed higher activity than pure Ag3PO4 cube and Ag NW.
3.4.2 Secondary Modification
Using polyacrylonitrile (PAN) as spinning medium and carbon source, Zhang et al.
prepared the precursor of Si/PAN composite NWs (Figure 3.21a) by electrospinning,
which were carbonized to obtain Si/C NWs (Figure 3.21b). Then, Al2O3 was
coated on Si/C NWs by the atomic layer deposition (ALD). Al2O3-coated Si/C
heterostructure NWs were prepared and studied by controlling the deposition times
of atomic layer. Investigators looked into how the thickness of the Al2O3 coating
affected the electrochemical characteristics of the Si/C anode. Figure 3.21c–h are
SEM images of Si/C NWs with different coating thickness of Al2O3. It is discovered
that the mechanical integrity of the electrode material structure can be enhanced
and that it is possible to effectively prevent the side reaction between the electrode
and the electrolyte [52].
Zheng et al. successfully deposited Co3O4, TiO2, ZnO, and NiO nanoparticles on
CuO NWs using the sol-flame method and synthesized a “nanoparticle@nanowire”
hybrid heterogeneous NW structure material (Figure 3.22b–e). They firstly
immersed CuO NWs in the metal-ion sol to obtain the modified CuO NWs with a
(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g) (h)
Figure 3.21 SEM images of (a) Si/PAN composite nanowire precursors, (b) carbonized Si/C
nanowires. (c–g) 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35 times deposited Si/C nanowires, respectively. (h) SEM
image of Al2O3-coated Si/C-based heterogeneous nanowires. Source: Li et al. [52] / Royal
Society of Chemistry.72 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
thin shell of metal salt. Then, the thin shell layer was converted into nanoparticle
chains through rapid annealing, and finally the “nanoparticles@nanowires”
hybrid heterogeneous NWs were obtained. The preparation process is shown
in Figure 3.22a. The uniqueness of this synthetic method is that the high tem￾perature and the short annealing time can make the solvent evaporate quickly
and obtain a high nucleation rate, as well as inhibit grain growth and agglom￾eration to finally form a tight adhered nanoparticle chain around the NWs. This
method has also been extended to synthesize “ternary metal oxide/noble metal
nanoparticles@nanowires” and other hybrid heterogeneous NWs [53].
The necklace-like MgO/TiO2 heterostructures were synthesized by a simple and
economical precursor-calcination method. As shown in Figure 3.23a, researchers
obtained the necklace-like precursor using a handy solution method. After being cal￾cinated at a high temperature, the products still maintained a necklace-like structure
Wet coating, Annealin
CuO nanowires Metal salt shell @ CuO Nanoparticle @ CuO
(a)
(b) (c) (d) (e)
Figure 3.22 (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process. (b–e) SEM images of
Co3O4@CuO, TiO2@CuO, ZnO@CuO, NiO@CuO. Source: Feng et al. [53] / American
Chemical Society.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 3.23 (a) SEM image of necklace-like MgO/TiO2 nanowire precursors. (b) SEM image
of calcined necklace-like MgO/TiO2 nanowire. (c) TEM image of calcined necklace-like
MgO/TiO2 nanowire. Source: Jia et al. [54].3.5 Hollow Nanowires 73
(Figure 3.23b). The TEM image shows that in this unique structure, TiO2 spheres
with diameters of 100–200 nm were located on the side of MgO NWs or penetrated
by NWs (Figure 3.23c). At the same time, the effect of tetrabutyl titanate (TBT) on
the product morphology was studied by changing the amount of TBT in the reaction
system [54].
3.5 Hollow Nanowires
Hollow-structured NWs are often referred to as nanotubes with 1D hollow struc￾tures [55]. Compared with conventional NWs, hollow NWs are widely applied in
energy storage for their low mass density, high porosity, and large specific surface
area [56]. At present, researchers have synthesized hollow NWs through wet chem￾ical methods, template methods, gradient electrospinning, and so on. The methods
are briefly introduced below.
3.5.1 Wet Chemical Method
The hydrothermal/solvothermal method, based on liquid-phase reactions, is one of
the typical wet chemical methods [57]. By adjusting the reaction temperature and
the ratio of reactants, products with low, intermediate valence or other special prop￾erties can be synthesized. Hollow structures can also be formed through similar
reduction reactions.
As shown in Figure 3.24, using Co/Ni as catalyst, Qian and coworkers produced
multiwall hollow NWs by reducing hexachlorobenzene with potassium metaborate
at 350 ∘C [58]. Mai and coworkers mixed aniline, vanadium solution, and reduced
graphene oxide (rGO) in a certain proportion. The semi-hollow discontinuous
graphene scrolled V3O7 NWs (VGS) with a length of more than 30 μm were
finally obtained by regulating the hydrothermal conditions (Figure 3.25) [59].
Self-supported hollow Co3O4 NWs were made using a straightforward hydrother￾mal synthesis process, according to Xia et al. They could grow vertically onto the
substrates on vast surfaces to create aligned NW arrays [60].
Apart from the hydrothermal/solvothermal method, there are other ways
to produce hollow NWs. Mai et al. proposed a new method by combining the
self-assembly method with the rheological reaction method to synthesize vanadium
oxide nanotubes [61]. In this work, V2O5 and cetylamine were added to a mixed
solvent (ethanol and water), completely grinding and mixing. And then vanadium
oxide nanotubes were obtained through the hydrothermal reaction of rheological
products at 180 ∘C (Figure 3.26).
3.5.2 Template Method
Template synthesis is one of the most popular ways, for its simplicity and variability,
to control the chemical composition and morphology of 1D nanostructures in both
lateral and longitudinal dimensions [62]. In general, the template approach may be74 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
(a) (b)
(c)
100 nm 100 nm
25 nm
200 nm
(d)
Figure 3.24 TEM images of multiwall carbon nanotubes. Source: Jiang et al. [58] /
American Chemical Society.
broken down into three steps: the creation of the template, the stimulation of target
material development, and the removal of the template. In the synthesis of hollow
NWs, templates can be any material with nanostructure. The template methods can
be divided into physical ones which involve only physical reactions and chemical
ones, which involve both physical and chemical reactions, according to chemical
properties [62, 63]. The common methods of removing templates can also be divided
into physical methods such as direct dissolution and chemical methods including
high-temperature solid-phase sintering, chemical etching, ion exchange, and elec￾trochemical replacement.
As shown in Figure 3.27, Yu and coworkers used ultrathin Te NWs as tem￾plates to synthesize uniform and ultrathin Pt hollow NWs by electrochemical3.5 Hollow Nanowires 75
(a) (b)
(c)
(d) (e)
(f)
Figure 3.25 Morphological characterization of VGS. (a) SEM image of synthesized VGS at
low magnification, (b, c) SEM image of synthesized VGS at high magnification. TEM images
of (d) VGS; (e) the edge of VGS. (f) SEM image and corresponding EDS line scan of VGS.
Source: Yan et al. [59] / American Chemical Society.
Figure 3.26 SEM image of vanadium
oxide nanotubes. Source: Liqiang et al.
[61] / Wuhan University of Technology.
replacement [64]. Besides, Lee et al. reported a method to prepare hollow ZnO
NWs. In their experiments, ZnO layer was deposited on cyclopore polycarbonate
membranes with different pore sizes via ALD [65]. The templates were removed by
combustion at 450 ∘C over four hours. The structure of hollow ZnO NWs is shown
in Figure 3.28. Besides, Caruso et al. used polymer fibers, which were prepared
by electrospinning, as templates to prepare the hollow TiO2 NWs. During the
fabrication process, TiO2 was coated on the polymer fibers by sol–gel coating, and
hollow TiO2 NWs were obtained after heat treatment [66]. This work provided a76 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
200 nm 500 nm
100 nm 50 nm
Figure 3.27 (a) TEM image of Te nanowires. (b) SEM image, (c, d) TEM images of Pt hollow
nanowires. Source: Liang et al. [64] / American Chemical Society.
good reference for the regulation and preparation of secondary inorganic materials
with uniform wall thickness and structure.
3.5.3 Gradient Electrospinning
Electrospinning is a widely used and convenient method to synthesize hollow
NWs. Most gradient electrospinning methods include the following three processes:
preparing polymer precursor solutions, electrospinning, and sintering. Besides,
many advanced electrospinning technologies have been developed by adjusting
these processes [67].
The molecular weight of the polymer and temperature of heat treatment are fac￾tors that influence the properties and structures of products in gradient electrospin￾ning. Niu et al. synthesized various kinds of pea-like nanotubes and mesoporous3.5 Hollow Nanowires 77
(a) (b)
10.17 m2 g–1 9.33 m2 g–1
Figure 3.28 SEM images of hollow ZnO NWs with different surface areas: (a) 9.33 m2 g−1.
(b) 10.17 m2 g−1. Source: Lee et al. [65] / Springer Nature.
(a)
(b) 1
1 2 3
4
2
PVA and inorganic
materials moving
together
3
Argon
Argon
Air
4
Only PVA moving
Inorganic materials
Low-molecular-weight PVA
Nanoparticles
Carbon nanotube
Middle-molecular-weight PVA
High-molecular-weight PVA
Figure 3.29 Schematics of the gradient electrospinning and controlled pyrolysis methods.
Source: Niu et al. [68] / CC BY 4.0 / Public domain.
nanotubes by combining gradient electrospinning method with controlled pyrolysis
method (Figure 3.29) [68]. They used PVA aqueous solution with three molecular
weights as precursors and controlled the temperature of heat treatment to fabricate
different nanotubes, including pea-like nanotubes consisting of outer carbon nan￾otubes and inner nanoparticles and hollow nanotubes consisting of inner carbon
nanotubes and outer nanoparticles. During the electrospinning process, driven by
electrostatic force, the PVA of three molecular weights was distributed in a coax￾ial gradient in a single NW when reaching the receiving plate [69, 70]. This unique78 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
polymer distribution in NWs provided a new way to prepare complex nanostructures
by using differences in the physical and chemical properties of polymers with dif￾ferent molecular weights. This method makes it possible to fabricate a variety of
inorganic nanotube materials and structures. In addition, this method allowed the
batch preparation of various nanotubes serving as electrode materials by using con￾ventional single needle head.
Figure 3.30 shows the multiple inorganic nanotubes prepared by gradient
electrospinning, including simple hollow nanotubes of single-metal oxides (CuO,
Multi-element oxides
Mesoporous nanotubes
Single-metal oxides
Pea-like
Binary-metal oxides nanotubes
(a) (f) (k) (p)
(b) (g) (l) (q)
(c)
(d) (i) (n) (s)
(e) (j) (o) (t)
(h) (m) (r)
Figure 3.30 Expansion of the gradient electrospinning and controlled pyrolysis method.
(a–o) SEM and TEM images of multi-element oxides (Li3V2(PO4)
3, Na3V2(PO4)
3,
Na0.7Fe0.7Mn0.3O2 and LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2), binary-metal oxides (LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, NiCo2O4
and LiV3O8) and single-metal oxides (CuO, Co3O4, SnO2 and MnO2) mesoporous nanotubes,
respectively, scale bars, 100 nm. (p–t) SEM and TEM images of pea-like nanotubes (Co,
LiCoO2, Li3V2(PO4)
3 and Na0.7Fe0.7Mn0.3O2) from different species with scale bars at 200 nm.
The scale bars for the inset TEM images (e, j, o, t) are 100 nm. Source: Niu et al. [68] /
Springer Nature.3.6 Nanowire Arrays 79
Co3O4, SnO2, and MnO2), bimetallic phosphates (Li3V2(PO4)3, Na3V2(PO4)3),
bimetallic oxides (LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, NiCo2O4, and LiV3O8), polymetallic oxides
(Na0.7Fe0.7Mn0.3O2 and LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2), and pea-like nanotubes which are
internally modified by 0D particles. As could be seen, the mesoporous structure is
uniformly distributed on the tube wall and serves as both a conduit for material
transport during the chemical reaction and a stress-relieving buffer.
Based on these simple nanotubes, Mai and coworkers developed a universal prepa￾ration process for hierarchical nanotubes [70]. By regulating the calcination pro￾cess, they adjusted the structure of gradient electrospinning polymer fibers by taking
full advantage of the differences in thermal stability of three PVAs with different
molecular weights at 280 ∘C. Wire-in-tube nanotubes, tube-in-tube nanotubes, and
multi-walled nanotube structures were obtained. The results show that modifying
the sintering process is useful for the secondary structure of NWs. The molecular
type and molecular weight of polymers are the main factors in the formation of
mesoporous structures and the limitation of nanocrystalline size.
3.6 Nanowire Arrays
Many NWs have been made using a variety of techniques, including electrospinning,
the wet chemical method, template-assisted growth, sol–gel, laser-assisted catalytic
growth, CVD/PVD, and thermal evaporation. After modification, the performance
of NWs can be significantly improved, and their application areas will be broader by
controlling the structure of NW arrays accurately.
NW arrays have significant advantages in energy storage: (i) An increase in the
specific surface area of the electrode and electrolyte’s contact leads to better electro￾chemical performance. (ii) Continuous channels formed by NWs promote electron
transport and charge transfer, so that the conductivity and reaction rate of the elec￾trode can be improved.
3.6.1 Template Method
Li and coworkers first synthesized Ni NW arrays using the AAO template [71]. As
shown in Figure 3.31a, the average diameter of the prepared Ni NWs was 200 nm, and
the average spacing between each NW was 130 nm. To carry more active materials on
the Ni NWs, researchers used electrolytic polishing to increase the spacing distance
between NWs. The SEM image is shown in Figure 3.31b. The specific parameters
are as follows: before electropolishing, the average diameter of the NW was 100 nm;
after that, the spacing increased to 230 nm. Subsequently, a simple and low-cost elec￾troforming method was used to manufacture NW arrays with a 3D Ni–Si core-shell
structure. Figure 3.31c shows the SEM image of Ni NW array deposited by Si. Each
NW was wrapped in a Si shell with a thickness of 52±10 nm. Only the diffraction
signal peak of Ni was found in the XRD pattern, which indicates that the shell Si is in80 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
(a)
(c) (d) (e)
(f) Ni Si (g)
(b)
1 μm 1 μm
0.5 μm 200 μm
10 μm
20 30 40 50
2Theta60 70 80 90
Intensity (a.u.)
Ni Ni
Ni
Figure 3.31 The morphology and characterization of the Ni nanowire array and the Ni–Si
composite core-shell nanowire layout structure. SEM images of the Ni nanowire array
(a) after growth and (b) after electropolishing. (c) SEM image of Si electrodeposited on the
Ni nanowire array, the inset image: corresponding XPS spectrum. (d, e) TEM images of the
typical Ni–Si nanowires in the array. (f, g) EDS mapping of the sample. Source: Liu et al. [71]
/ Royal Society of Chemistry.
an amorphous state. The TEM results in Figure 3.31d,e show that a single Ni–Si NW
presents a core-shell structure with a contrast of light shell and dark core. It can be
seen from the element diagram of the EDS that Ni and Si are located in the core and
shell regions, respectively (Figure 3.31f,g). It was confirmed to be the amorphous
state in high-resolution TEM image in the area of the shell. Compared with thin
films of the same quality, the internal cavity of this composite core-shell NW array
could adapt to the volume changes caused by ion deintercalation, relieve the inter￾nal stress generated in the material, and exhibit an improvement in electrochemical
performance.
P. Forrer et al. [72] chose anodically grown porous alumina as template material,
whose structure can be adjusted by changing the experimental anodization con￾ditions. Then the electrochemical polishing technique was applied to prevent the
branching of the NW. By adjusting the parameters of experiments, the length of NW
arrays in the range of 100 nm to 5 nm could be produced.3.6 Nanowire Arrays 81
Other nano-restricted templates have also been successfully applied to the syn￾thesis of NW arrays [73]. Yang et al. fabricated a 3D Ni/TiO2 nanowire network
based on 3D acrylic resin (acrylic acid, PAA) template-assisted electrodeposition and
ALD process, and the schematic diagram is shown in Figure 3.32a. Side hole struc￾ture in the 3D PAA template can eliminate the agglomeration phenomenon in the
directionally grown NW arrays, and 3D Ni/TiO2 NW arrays with staggered struc￾tures were obtained as shown in Figure 3.32b–e, which show higher area discharge
capability.
3.6.2 Wet Chemical Method
The core-shell NW array design was created by Yu et al. using metal–organic
framework nanostructures and nanoporous NiCo2O4 nanoflakes that were flaw￾lessly painted on a Co3O4 NW array [7]. The Ni foam-supported cobalt carbonate
Anodization Electroplating of Ni nanowires
and removing PAA ALD deposition
Pure
(99.999%)
Aluminum foil
Impure
(1000 series)
3-D PAA template 3-D Ni nanowire network 3-D Ni/TiO2 nanowire
network
Conventional PAA
template
Clustered Ni nanowire
arrays
Current collector
Current collector
Current collector
Current collector
Straight Ni/TiO2 nanowire
arrays
(a)
(b)
10 μm 10 μm 400 nm 400 nm
(c) (d) (e)
Figure 3.32 Schematic diagram of the synthesis process and morphological
characterization of the three-dimensional nanowire array network structure synthesized by
the template method. (a, b) SEM image of vertical Ni/TiO2 nanowire array. (c) SEM image of
3D Ni/TiO2 nanowire array network. (d) Cross section SEM image of 3D PAA template
cross-section. (e) Cross section SEM image between adjacent vertical nanowires in the
three-dimensional Ni/TiO2 nanowire array network. Source: Wang et al. [73] / American
Chemical Society.82 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
hydroxide NW array was first prepared by a typical hydrothermal method as the
precursor, and then reacted with 2-methylimidazole to convert the surface of the
ZIF-67 shell. The shell thickness of the resultant Co-NA@ZIF-67 core-shell NWs
(Co@ZIF-67) may be easily regulated by changing the reaction time. The schematic
diagram is shown in Figure 3.33a.
The nanoflake structure of Co@ZIF-67 could be observed in SEM image, as shown
in Figure 3.33b. From Figure 3.33c, d, the core-shell structure can be distinguished.
The holes inside could not only increase the specific surface area but also shorten
the ion transport distance, thus providing a path for ion transmission and improving
energy storage performance.
Xia et al. fabricated the Co3O4/NiO core-shell NW array by a two-step solution
method (hydrothermal synthesis and chemical bath deposition) [74]. The synthesis
process is shown in Figure 3.34a. Co3O4 NWs were grown on a fluorine-doped tin
oxide conductive glass substrate through a hydrothermal reaction (Figure 3.34b),
then NiO nanosheets were coated on the surface of Co3O4 NWs by chemical bath
deposition to obtain Co3O4/NiO core-shell heterogeneous NW array (Figure 3.34c).
The Co3O4 NWs had an average diameter of 70 nm, as shown in the SEM images. NiO
nanosheets with a thickness of around 10 nm formed on the surface of the Co3O4
NWs following chemical bath deposition. Besides, if the FTO conductive substrate
was replaced by foamed nickel (Figure 3.34d) or nickel foil (Figure 3.34e), a similar
morphology of Co3O4/NiO core-shell NW arrays could also be obtained. This syn￾thesis method is general-applicable, and it also provides new ideas for the design
and fabrication of hierarchical nano-arrays of transition metal oxides or hydroxides.
Co-NA nanowire array
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
In Ni(NO3)2 methanol
solution
A
C
B
Co-Co3O4@ZIF-NiCo2O4
core-shell nanowire array
Co-NA@ZIF-67
core-shell nanowire array Co-NA@NiCo-OH
core-shell nanowire array
Annealing at 300°C
In 2-methylimidazole
aqueous solution
500 nm
100 nm
100 nm
100 nm
A
B Co
Ni O
Figure 3.33 Schematic diagram of the synthesis process and morphological
characterization of Co@ZIF-67. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of NW
array on Ni foam. (b) SEM image of Co@ZIF-67 core-shell NW array. (c) TEM image and
(d) EDX mapping images of Co@ZIF-67. Source: Yu et al. [7] / Royal Society of Chemistry.3.6 Nanowire Arrays 83
100 nm
Hydrothermal
synthesis
Substrate
(a)
(b) (c) (d) (e)
NiO nanoflakes
Chemical bath
deposition
Co3O4 or ZnO nanowire Core/shell nanowire arrays
100 nm
1 μm 5 μm 500 nm 1 μm
100 nm 200 nm 200 nm
Figure 3.34 Synthesis process and morphology characterization of Co3O4/NiO core-shell
nanowire arrays. (a) Process flow diagram for synthesis. SEM images of Co3O4 NWs on
(b) fluorine-doped tin oxide conductive glass, (c) FTO, (d) foamed nickel and (e) nickel foil
conductive substrates, with the insets showing their corresponding SEM images under high
magnification. Source: Xia et al. [74] / American Chemical Society.
Apart from that, Shen and coworkers successfully fabricated a 3D layered structure
of ZnCo2O4 NW arrays grown on carbon cloth by hydrothermal route and thermal
annealing treatment in air [75]. The diameter and length of typical ZnCo2O4 NWs
are in the range of 80–100 nm and 5 μm, respectively. The final sample enhances the
electrochemical performance as well as the flexibility of the electrode material [76].
Another Cu2S NW array on the copper substrate was prepared via the wet chemi￾cal route. Cu2S NWs have uniform diameters and lengths of about 40–120 nm and
700–1400 nm, respectively. And in this way, the regular copper sulfide NW arrays
provide compact and uniform coverage of the entire area of the copper substrate.
3.6.3 Chemical Vapor Deposition
CVD on substrates has become a transitional approach, which is inexpensive and
suitable for manufacturing [77]. Mai et al. used a simple and unique low-pressure
CVD method to synthesize carbon-confined NW arrays. Firstly, 2 methylimidazoles
(2 Methylimidazol, 2 MIM) vapor and CoO-NiO NW array reacted at 120 ∘C and
low pressure (about 100 Pa) to obtain a zeolite imidazole ester framework (ZIF)
shell-constrained CoO-NiO (CoO-NiO@ZIF) NW array in situ on the surface
of the carbon cloth. Then the metal–organic framework was converted into
nitrogen-doped carbon at 500 ∘C and the volume fraction ratio of Ar to H2 was
95 : 5. Finally, the CoNi@NC mesoporous NW array was obtained on the carbon
cloth. The synthesis process and corresponding morphological characterization are
shown in Figure 3.35.84 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
Ι ΙΙ
Low-pressure
vapor superassembly Controlled pyrolysis
2-MIM H2O
CoO-NiO CoO-NiO@ZIF CoNi@NC
(a)
(b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g)
10 μm 1 μm 1 μm
20 nm 20 nm 20 nm
Figure 3.35 (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of CoNi@NC mesoporous
nanowire arrays. SEM images of (b) CoO-NiO, (c) CoO-NiO@ZIF and (d) CoNi@NC nanowire
arrays. TEM images of (e) CoO-NiO, (f) CoO-NiO@ZIF and (g) CoNi@NC nanowire arrays.
Source: Meung et al. [77] / American Chemical Society.
Yang and coworkers used a CVD method with precisely fine-tuned growth
parameters to prepare indium phosphide (InP) NW arrays on Si substrates by
using trimethylindium (TMIn) and tributyl phosphate (TBP) as raw materials
(Figure 3.36a) [78]. Furthermore, the influence of growth time and TBP/TMIn
ratio on the morphology of NWs was also explored. The time-dependent growth
analysis based on constant TMIN and TBP flow was shown in Figure 3.36b,c. As
time increased, it grew linearly and continuously in the axial and radial directions,
and finally, multifaceted NWs with larger size generated from the initial needle-like
structure. When constant TBP flow rate and a changing TMIN flow rate were
applied, the base diameter of the InP NW remained unchanged (Figure 3.36d).
While the axial growth rate increased with the increase of the TMIN flow rate and
tended to be stable at the flow rate of 15 sccm (Figure 3.36e), this indicated that the
TMIN component was the key factor in axial growth. When fixed TMIN flow rate,
the growth of the radial sidewall started from the bottom of NW and was exceeded
by the axial growth as the TBP flow rate decreased, and finally an asymmetric
structure with a wide bottom and fine needle-like tip was obtained (Figure 3.36f).3.6 Nanowire Arrays 85
0
0
0
25 50 75 100
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
NW length (μm)
NW base diameter
Time (min)
200
nm/min−1
30
nm/min−1
10 20 30
TMIn flow (SCCM)
NW aspect ratio
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 3.36 Study on the growth state of InP nanowire arrays. (a) The SEM image
(top-down) and cross-sectional SEM image (top) of the InP nanowire array. The embedded
image is the SEM image of the tip of the nanowire and the corresponding Si chip; (b) and
(c) are the SEM diagrams of the nanowires obtained linearly increasing with the growth
time and the corresponding diagrams of the relationship between length and diameter, and
time; (d) and (e) are the InP nanowires obtained under different flow rates, SEM image, and
corresponding aspect ratio statistical graph; (f) InP nanowire SEM graph of TBP flow value
change. Source: Kornienko et al. [78] / American Chemical Society.
Here, they classified this growth mechanism as a dual growth mechanism in which
coexisting radial epitaxial sidewall development and autocatalytic axial growth
were both present.
Lu and coworkers fabricated UV photodetectors (UV PDs) on entangled ZnO NW
array grown on SiO2 substrate by catalyst-free CVD directly [79]. Mechanical and
chemical surface treatment of the dielectric is the most critical step in catalyst-free
CVD process. In this way, the ZnO NW array was not only impurity-free but also
intertwined with each other, which provided an uninterrupted pathway for charge
transfer and improved the response efficiency of ZnO NW-based UV PDs.
MOFs and templates with high surface areas were used to prepare orderly
layered nanoporous carbon electrodes [80]. The NWs were synthesized by
simple hydrothermal method and grown directly on each fiber of the cloth.
Then the sample was exposed to 2-MeIm vapor to generate ZnO@ZIF-8 and
Co(CO3)0.5(OH)⋅0.11H2O@ZIF-67 NWs. Finally, the samples were carbonized at
high temperatures to generate hybrid Co3O4/NC NW arrays. By coating raw mate￾rials with conformal films of MOF rather than using organic solvents, deposition
of continuous nanoporous carbon films could entirely cover the surface of the
Co3O4 NWs, ensuring less transmission resistance without the use of any polymer
binder.86 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
3.7 Summary and Outlook
In recent years, research on various nanomaterials has progressed toward obtaining
higher performance electrochemical energy storage devices. Wherein, compared
with other nanomaterials, nanowires have unique advantages due to their
anisotropy, large specific surface area, excellent tension adaptability, and rapid
axial/radial transport of ion and electron, which play an important role in shorten￾ing the ion transport path and suppressing the volume expansion of the electrode
materials. The research and applications of high-performance NW electrode
materials have become one of the hotspots in the field of electrochemical energy
storage devices. With the endless preparation methods of NW materials, such as
dry/wet chemical method, template method, secondary modification method, NW
materials have also developed from the initial simple conventional NWs to porous,
hollow, and heterogeneous NWs. This chapter summarizes the latest research
progress of nanowire materials, focusing on the structural differences caused by
different synthesis methods. Besides, we selectively list typical research work to
briefly describe the preparation method, morphology, and corresponding charac￾terization of NWs. Table 3.1 describes the common synthesis methods and growth
mechanisms of different types of NWs in detail (conventional, porous, hierarchical,
heterogeneous, hollow, and array), as well as their advantages, disadvantages, and
influencing factors, respectively.
It can be seen from Table 3.1 that each synthesis method has its own unique advan￾tages and limitations. In fact, in order to prepare ideal nanowire products for prac￾tical applications, a combination of multiple methods is usually used to synthesize
or modify nanowires with special structures. For example, it is common to calcinate
samples after hydrothermal reactions. Researchers should combine the knowledge
of chemistry, physics, and materials science to conduct in-depth research on micro￾scopic processes and internal synthesis mechanisms to achieve precise designs. At
the same time, in order to make a breakthrough in the synthesis method, it is recom￾mended that the researchers effectively combine the new ideas with the traditional
synthesis method, so that the synthesis of nanowires has higher feasibility, an appro￾priate cost, and good performance.
This chapter provides good theoretical support and guidance for selectively con￾trolling the structure and growth of nanowires to obtain the required performance.
However, there is still a long way to go in designing and synthesizing different types
of nanowires, as well as in the development of related theories and new preparation
technologies to achieve large-scale industrial applications.Table 3.1 Comparison of advantages, disadvantages, and influencing factors of typical synthesis methods for different types of nanowires.
Synthesis methods Related reaction Advantage Disadvantage Influencing factors Types of nanowires
Hydrothermal/
Solvothermal method
Dissolution and
recrystallization
Simple equipment,
convenient operation, and
good crystallization
Steps such as centrifugation
and sample washing are
required
Temperature, pressure,
solvent, and whether the
solvent is completely removed
Conventional nanowires, hollow
nanowires, and nanowire arrays
Sol–gel method Hydrolysis and
polymerization reactions.
Easy to control the
nanostructure
Complex reaction steps, and
long preparation cycle
Reaction time, pore size and
its distribution
Conventional nanowires
Coprecipitation
method
Precipitation reaction Low cost, simple process,
short synthesis cycle, and
easy control of preparation
conditions
Relatively complicated
process; easily affected by
external conditions
pH value, temperature, the
solubility of the reactants
Conventional nanowires
Ultrasonic spray
pyrolysis method
Solvent evaporation, particle
thermal decomposition,
calcination reaction
Relatively uniform
distribution, simple, and
low cost
The physical and chemical
properties of the reactants
are required
Solution concentration, pH
value, pyrolysis temperature
and time
Conventional nanowires and
nanowire arrays
Electrospinning
method
Electrostatic stretching,
solvent volatilization
Simple device, low cost,
diversified raw material
selection, and controllable
process
Not suitable for preparing
small-sized nanowires
Solution uniformity and
voltage
Conventional nanowires
High-temperature
solid-state method
Solid-state reaction Low cost, high yield, simple
preparation technology, no
agglomeration, and good
filling property
Difficult to obtain uniform
nanowires
Calcination system and
feeding ratio
Conventional nanowires
Chemical vapor
deposition
Chemically induced
nucleation-growth, surface
reactions
Low cost and large scale Strict requirements for
working temperature and
equipment
Deposition temperature,
deposition rate, pressure, gas
composition and flow rate
Conventional nanowires, and
nanowire arrays
Physical-vapor
deposition method
Evaporation, and
magnetron sputtering
Cleaner reproducible and
efficient method
Chemical impurities are
difficult to remove,
requiring high target purity
Vacuum conditions,
evaporation current,
deposition conditions, process
temperature, and the degree
of vacuum
Conventional nanowires
Template method Nanoconfinement or porous
nanowires
Easy to control shapes, low
cost, and easy to obtain
Certain restrictions on the
use of templates
Temperature, heating rate,
time
Porous nanowires, hollow
nanowires, and nanowire arrays
Self-assembly method Self-assemble Easy to implement, a wide
range of universality
Strict requirements for
experimental conditions,
material ratio
Material ratio, solvent type,
and the structure of
components
Porous nanowires, hierarchical
nanowires, porous nanowires88 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
References
1 Yu, X., Wang, H., Liu, Y. et al. (2013). One-step ammonia hydrothermal synthesis
of single crystal anatase TiO2 nanowires for highly efficient dye-sensitized solar
cells. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1 (6): 2110–2117.
2 Li, W., Gao, X., Xiong, D. et al. (2017). Hydrothermal synthesis of monolithic
Co3Se4 nanowire electrodes for oxygen evolution and overall water splitting with
high efficiency and extraordinary catalytic stability. Advanced Energy Materials 7
(17): 1602579.
3 Hu, P., Zhu, T., Wang, X. et al. (2018). Highly durable Na2V6O16⋅1.63H2O
nanowire cathode for aqueous zinc-ion battery. Nano Letters 18 (3): 1758–1763.
4 Wang, X., Wang, X., Huang, W. et al. (2005). Sol–gel template synthesis of highly
ordered MnO2 nanowire arrays. Journal of Power Sources 140 (1): 211–215.
5 Cao, H., Xu, Y., Hong, J. et al. (2001). Sol±gel template synthesis of an array of
single crystal CdS nanowires on a porous alumina template. Advanced Materials
18: 1393–1394.
6 Jo, Y.R., Myeong, S.H., and Kim, B.J. (2018). Role of annealing temperature on
the sol-gel synthesis of VO2 nanowires with in situ characterization of their
metal-insulator transition. RSC Advances 8 (10): 5158–5165.
7 Yu, D., Wu, B., Ge, L. et al. (2016). Decorating nanoporous ZIF-67-derived
NiCo2O4 shells on a Co3O4 nanowire array core for battery-type electrodes with
enhanced energy storage performance. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 4 (28):
10878–10884.
8 Vivekchand, S.R.C., Gundiah, G., Govindaraj, A. et al. (2004). A new method for
the preparation of metal nanowires by the nebulized spray pyrolysis of precur￾sors. Advanced Materials 16 (20): 1842–1845.
9 Greiner, A. and Wendorff, J.H. (2007). Electrospinning: a fascinating method for
the preparation of ultrathin fibers. Angewandte Chemie International Edition in
English 46 (30): 5670–5703.
10 Huang, Z.-M., Zhang, Y.Z., Kotaki, M. et al. (2003). A review on polymer
nanofibers by electrospinning and their applications in nanocomposites. Compos￾ites Science and Technology 63 (15): 2223–2253.
11 Hsu, P.C., Kong, D., Wang, S. et al. (2014). Electrolessly deposited electrospun
metal nanowire transparent electrodes. Journal of the American Chemical Society
136 (30): 10593–10596.
12 Ren, W., Zheng, Z., Luo, Y. et al. (2015). An electrospun hierarchical LiV3O8
nanowire-in-network for high-rate and long-life lithium batteries. Journal of
Materials Chemistry A 3 (39): 19850–19856.
13 Xiao, X., Yang, L., Zhao, H. et al. (2011). Facile synthesis of LiCoO2 nanowires
with high electrochemical performance. Nano Research 5 (1): 27–32.
14 Zhang, J., Li, W., Jia, Q. et al. (2015). Molten salt assisted synthesis of 3C–SiC
nanowire and its photoluminescence properties. Ceramics International 41 (10):
12614–12620.References 89
15 Fu, Q.-G., Li, H.-J., Shi, X.-H. et al. (2006). Synthesis of silicon carbide nanowires
by CVD without using a metallic catalyst. Materials Chemistry and Physics 100
(1): 108–111.
16 Suzuki, H., Araki, H., Tosa, M. et al. (2007). Formation of silicon nanowires by
CVD using gold catalysts at low temperatures. Materials Transactions 48 (8):
2202–2206.
17 Iriarte, G.F. (2010). Growth of nickel disilicide nanowires by CVD. Journal of
Non-Crystalline Solids 356 (23–24): 1135–1144.
18 Shen, L., Cui, Q., and Cheng, T. (2008). Preparation of monocrystal AlN
nanowires by direct nitridation method. Electronic Components and Materials
27 (10): 78–80.
19 Xue, C., Li, H., Zhuang, H. et al. (2009). Synthesis of GaN nanowires with tanta￾lum catalyst by magnetron sputtering. Rare Metal Materials and Engineering 38
(7): 1129–1131.
20 Teng, D., Wu, L., He, W. et al. (2014). High-density silicon nanowires prepared
via a two-step template method. Langmuir 30 (8): 2259–2265.
21 Ma, M., Pan, Z., Guo, L. et al. (2012). Porous cobalt oxide nanowires: notable
improved gas sensing performances. Chinese Science Bulletin 57 (31): 4019–4023.
22 Peraca, N.M., Haney, P.M., and Hamadani, B.H. (2019). The effect of lumines￾cent coupling on modulated photocurrent measurements in multijunction solar
cells. Applied Physics Letters 115 (8): 083506.
23 Bechelany, M., Abou Chaaya, A., Frances, F. et al. (2013). Nanowires with con￾trolled porosity for hydrogen production. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1 (6):
2133–2138.
24 Ran Liu, S.B.L. (2008). MnO2/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) coaxial
nanowires by one-step coelectrodeposition for electrochemical energy storage.
Journal of the American Chemical Society 130 (10): 2942–2943.
25 Li, F., He, J., Zhou, W.L., and Wiley, J.B. (2003). Synthesis of porous wires from
directed assemblies of nanospheres. Journal of the American Chemical Society 125
(52): 16166–16167.
26 Zhu, T., Wu, H.B., Wang, Y. et al. (2012). Formation of 1D hierarchical structures
composed of Ni3S2 nanosheets on CNTs backbone for supercapacitors and photo￾catalytic H2 production. Advanced Energy Materials 2 (12): 1497–1502.
27 Zhou, X., Yu, L., and Lou, X.W. (2016). Nanowire-templated formation of
SnO2/carbon nanotubes with enhanced lithium storage properties. Nanoscale
8 (15): 8384–8389.
28 Yuan, C., Zhang, X., Hou, L. et al. (2010). Lysine-assisted hydrothermal synthe￾sis of urchin-like ordered arrays of mesoporous Co(OH)2 nanowires and their
application in electrochemical capacitors. Journal of Materials Chemistry 20 (48):
10809–10816.
29 Liu, J., Jiang, J., Cheng, C. et al. (2011). Co3O4 nanowire@MnO2 ultrathin
nanosheet core/shell arrays: a new class of high-performance pseudocapacitive
materials. Advanced Materials 23 (18): 2076–2081.90 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
30 Yu, L., Zhang, G., Yuan, C. et al. (2013). Hierarchical NiCo2O4@MnO2 core-shell
heterostructured nanowire arrays on Ni foam as high-performance supercapaci￾tor electrodes. Chemical Communications (Cambridge) 49 (2): 137–139.
31 Vinzons, L.U., Shu, L., Yip, S. et al. (2017). Unraveling the morphological evo￾lution and etching kinetics of porous silicon nanowires during metal-assisted
chemical etching. Nanoscale Research Letters 12 (1): 385.
32 Hao Tang, L.-G.Z., Zhao, L., Zhang, X. et al. (2012). Carrier dynamics in Si
nanowires fabricated by metal-assisted chemical etching. ACS Nano 6 (9):
7814–7819.
33 Sandu, G., Avila Osses, J., Luciano, M. et al. (2019). Kinked silicon nanowires:
superstructures by metal-assisted chemical etching. Nano Letters 19 (11):
7681–7690.
34 Chen, Y., Liu, L., Xiong, J. et al. (2015). Porous Si nanowires from cheap met￾allurgical silicon stabilized by a surface oxide layer for lithium ion batteries.
Advanced Functional Materials 25 (43): 6701–6709.
35 Bang, B.M., Kim, H., Song, H.-K. et al. (2011). Scalable approach to
multi-dimensional bulk Si anodes via metal-assisted chemical etching. Energy
& Environmental Science 4 (12): 5013–5019.
36 Veerbeek, J., Ye, L., Vijselaar, W. et al. (2017). Highly doped silicon nanowires by
monolayer doping. Nanoscale 9 (8): 2836–2844.
37 Zhang, T., Wu, S., Xu, J. et al. (2015). High thermoelectric figure-of-merits from
large-area porous silicon nanowire arrays. Nano Energy 13: 433–441.
38 Liu, J. and Xue, D. (2008). Thermal oxidation strategy towards porous metal
oxide hollow architectures. Advanced Materials 20 (13): 2622–2627.
39 Guo, J., Wang, X., Geoyhegan, D.B. et al. (2008). Thermal characterization of
multi-wall carbon nanotube bundles based on pulsed laser-assisted thermal
relaxation. Functional Materials Letters 1 (1): 71–76.
40 Molenda, J. and Marzec, J. (2008). Functional cathode materials for Li-ion
batteries—part I: fundamentals. Functional Materials Letters 1 (2): 91–95.
41 Xu, J. and Xue, D. (2007). Five branching growth patterns in the cubic crystal
system: a direct observation of cuprous oxide microcrystals. Acta Materialia 55
(7): 2397–2406.
42 Maity, D., Ding, J., and Xue, J. (2008). Synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles
by thermal decomposition: time, temperature, surfactant and solvent effects.
Functional Materials Letters 1 (3): 189–193.
43 Mai, L., Xu, L., Han, C. et al. (2010). Electrospun ultralong hierarchical vana￾dium oxide nanowires with high performance for lithium ion batteries. Nano
Letters 10 (11): 4750–4755.
44 Mai, L.Q., Yang, F., Zhao, Y.L. et al. (2011). Hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4
heterostructured nanowires with enhanced supercapacitor performance. Nature
Communications 2: 381.
45 Yang, L., Wang, S., Mao, J. et al. (2013). Hierarchical MoS2/polyaniline
nanowires with excellent electrochemical performance for lithium-ion batteries.
Advanced Materials 25 (8): 1180–1184.References 91
46 Liu, F. and Xue, D. (2010). Fabrication of Nb2O5 nanotrees with controlled
branching degrees. Physica Scripta T139: 014074.
47 Wu, H., Xu, M., Wang, Y. et al. (2013). Branched Co3O4/Fe2O3 nanowires as high
capacity lithium-ion battery anodes. Nano Research 6 (3): 167–173.
48 Zhou, W., Cheng, C., Liu, J. et al. (2011). Epitaxial growth of branched
α-Fe2O3/SnO2 nano-heterostructures with improved lithium-ion battery per￾formance. Advanced Functional Materials 21 (13): 2439–2445.
49 Cheng, C., Liu, B., Yang, H. et al. (2009). Hierarchical assembly of ZnO
nanostructures on SnO2 backbone nanowires: low-temperature hydrothermal
preparation and optical properties. ACS Nano 3 (10): 3069–3076.
50 Cao, M., Gao, L., Lv, X. et al. (2017). TiO2-B@VS2 heterogeneous nanowire
arrays as superior anodes for lithium-ion batteries. Journal of Power Sources 350:
87–93.
51 Bi, Y., Hu, H., Ouyang, S. et al. (2012). Selective growth of Ag3PO4
submicro-cubes on Ag nanowires to fabricate necklace-like heterostructures for
photocatalytic applications. Journal of Materials Chemistry 22 (30): 14847–14850.
52 Li, Y., Sun, Y., Xu, G. et al. (2014). Tuning electrochemical performance of
Si-based anodes for lithium-ion batteries by employing atomic layer deposition
alumina coating. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2 (29): 11417–11425.
53 Feng, Y., Cho, I.S., Rao, P.M. et al. (2013). Sol-flame synthesis: a general strategy
to decorate nanowires with metal oxide/noble metal nanoparticles. Nano Letters
13 (3): 855–860.
54 Jia, Y., Yu, X.Y., Luo, T. et al. (2014). Necklace-like mesoporous MgO/TiO2
heterojunction structures with excellent capability for water treatment. Dalton
Transactions 43 (6): 2348–2351.
55 Yu, K., Pan, X., Zhang, G. et al. (2018). Nanowires in energy storage devices:
structures, synthesis, and applications. Advanced Energy Materials 8 (32):
1802369.
56 Lu, Q. and Gao, F. (2016). Synthesis and property studies of hollow nanostruc￾tures. CrystEngComm 18 (39): 7399–7409.
57 Mahdi, M.A., Hassan, J.J., Ng, S.S. et al. (2012). Growth of CdS nanosheets and
nanowires through the solvothermal method. Journal of Crystal Growth 359:
43–48.
58 Jiang, Y., Wu, Y., Zhang, S. et al. (2000). A catalytic-assembly solvothermal
route to multiwall carbon nanotubes at a moderate temperature. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 122 (49): 12383–12384.
59 Yan, M., Wang, F., Han, C. et al. (2013). Nanowire templated semihollow bicon￾tinuous graphene scrolls: designed construction, mechanism, and enhanced
energy storage performance. Journal of the American Chemical Society 135 (48):
18176–18182.
60 Xia, X., Tu, J., Mai, Y. et al. (2011). Self-supported hydrothermal synthesized
hollow Co3O4 nanowire arrays with high supercapacitor capacitance. Journal of
Materials Chemistry 21 (25): 9319–9325.92 3 Design and Synthesis of Nanowires
61 Liqiang, M. (2004). Study on preparation, structure, and properties of
low-dimensional vanadium oxide nanomaterials. Doctoral thesis. Wuhan Uni￾versity of Technology.
62 Liang, H.-W., Liu, J.-W., Qian, H.-S. et al. (2012). Multiplex templating process in
one-dimensional nanoscale: controllable, synthesis, macroscopic assemblies, and
applications. Accounts of Chemical Research 46 (7): 1450–1461.
63 Huczko, A. (2000). Template-based synthesis of nanomaterials. Applied Physics A
70 (4): 365–376.
64 Liang, H.-W., Liu, S., Gong, J.-Y. et al. (2009). Ultrathin Te nanowires: an excel￾lent platform for controlled synthesis of ultrathin platinum and palladium
nanowires/nanotubes with very high aspect ratio. Advanced Materials 21 (18):
1850–1854.
65 Lee, J.H., Kim, J.Y., Kim, J.H. et al. (2017). Synthesis and gas sensing proper￾ties of membrane template-grown hollow ZnO nanowires. Nano Convergence
4 (1): 27.
66 Caruso, R.A., Schattka, J.H., and Greiner, A. (2001). Titanium dioxide tubes
from sol–gel coating of electrospun polymer fibers. Advanced Materials 13 (20):
1577–1579.
67 Zhou, G., Xu, L., Hu, G. et al. (2019). Nanowires for electrochemical energy stor￾age. Chemical Reviews 119 (20): 11042–11109.
68 Niu, C., Meng, J., Wang, X. et al. (2015). General synthesis of complex nanotubes
by gradient electrospinning and controlled pyrolysis. Nature Communications 6
(1): 7402.
69 Liu, Z., Guo, R., Meng, J. et al. (2017). Facile electrospinning formation of
carbon-confined metal oxide cube-in-tube nanostructures for stable lithium
storage. Chemical Communications 53 (59): 8284–8287.
70 Meng, J., Niu, C., Liu, X. et al. (2016). Interface-modulated approach toward
multilevel metal oxide nanotubes for lithium-ion batteries and oxygen reduction
reaction. Nano Research 9 (8): 2445–2457.
71 Liu, H., Hu, L., Meng, Y.S. et al. (2013). Electrodeposited three-dimensional Ni-Si
nanocable arrays as high performance anodes for lithium ion batteries. Nanoscale
5 (21): 10376–10383.
72 Forrer, P., Schlottig, F., Siegenthaler, H. et al. (2000). Electrochemical prepa￾ration and surface properties of gold nanowire arrays formed by the template
technique. Journal of Applied Electrochemistry 30: 533–541.
73 Wang, W., Tian, M., Abdulagatov, A. et al. (2012). Three-dimensional Ni/TiO2
nanowire network for high areal capacity lithium ion microbattery applications.
Nano Letters 12 (2): 655–660.
74 Xia, X., Tu, J., Zhang, Y. et al. (2012). High-quality metal oxide core/shell
nanowire arrays on conductive substrates for electrochemical energy storage.
ACS Nano 6 (6): 5531–5538.
75 Lai, C., Huang, K., Cheng, J. et al. (2010). Direct growth of high-rate capabil￾ity and high capacity copper sulfide nanowire array cathodes for lithium-ion
batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry 20 (32): 6638–6645.References 93
76 Liu, B., Zhang, J., Wang, X. et al. (2012). Hierarchical three-dimensional
ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays/carbon cloth anodes for a novel class of
high-performance flexible lithium-ion batteries. Nano Letters 12 (6): 3005–3011.
77 Meng, J., Liu, X., Li, J. et al. (2017). General oriented synthesis of precise
carbon-confined nanostructures by low-pressure vapor superassembly and con￾trolled pyrolysis. Nano Letters 17 (12): 7773–7781.
78 Kornienko, N., Gibson, N.A., Zhang, H. et al. (2016). Growth and photoelectro￾chemical energy conversion of wurtzite indium phosphide nanowire arrays. ACS
Nano 10 (5): 5525–5535.
79 Zhan, Z., Xu, L., An, J. et al. (2017). Direct catalyst-free chemical vapor depo￾sition of ZnO nanowire array UV photodetectors with enhanced photoresponse
speed. Advanced Engineering Materials 19 (8): 1700101.
80 Young, C., Wang, J., Kim, J. et al. (2018). Controlled chemical vapor deposition
for synthesis of nanowire arrays of metal–organic frameworks and their thermal
conversion to carbon/metal oxide hybrid materials. Chemistry of Materials 30
(10): 3379–3386.95
4
Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
4.1 In Situ Electron Microscopy Characterization
4.1.1 In Situ Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Characterization
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a characterization method that involves
transferring electron signals from materials into digital images under the excitement
of electron beam. SEM images often use secondary electrons for image formation
and have the capability of observing the surface morphology of materials.
In research on lithium-ion batteries, since common ex situ SEM tests require
complicated sample treatments, they cannot reflect the true state of electrode
material. For example, the material should be collected from a full cell, and
electrolytes must be removed. The obtained image might lose the information that
researchers required after all the treatment; hence, it is necessary to develop in situ
SEM observation.
In situ SEM system is constructed by integrating electrochemical testing device
into SEM in order to leave out unnecessary troubles brought by sample treatment.
By applying in situ SEM to battery research, the understanding of reasons for failure,
structural changes, and reaction mechanisms could be pushed to a new level [1–5].
Strelcov et al. applied in situ SEM in studying the V2O5 nanowire during
cycles [3]. As schematically shown in Figure 4.1a, the experiment system was
constructed by V2O5 nanobelts (NBs) growing on palladium as the working
electrode and LiCoO2 particles fixed on gold tip as anode. Ionic liquid elec￾trolyte bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimidate of lithium (LiTFSI) in (1-butyl-1-
methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoro-methylsulfonyl)imide) was used to build a liquid
electrolyte environment in vacuum chamber of SEM. The SEM image of integrated
battery system is exhibited in Figure 4.1b. With the help of cyclic voltametric
tests, morphology of V2O5 in different potentials was observed. The relationship
between potential and micromorphology of V2O5 was deeply explored. The results
demonstrated that there was no obvious shape distortion of V2O5 nanowire during
cycles, indicating that V2O5 possessed a good potential in lithium battery.
Not only cathode, but anodes were also studied by in situ SEM. Si anodes, known
as high-capacity Li-ion anodes, suffer from bulky volume expansion throughout
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.96 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
Gold tip Palladium tip
with V2O5 NBs
Ionic liquid
electrolyte A
(a) (b)
(c) (d) (e)
100 μm
LiCoO2
Figure 4.1 (a) Schematic of the experimental setup; (b) backscattered electron detector
SEM micrograph of the assembled battery with one V2O5 whisker submerged in electrolyte.
Source: Strelcov et al. [3]/with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. In situ
observations: SEM images of a C@Si@C nanotube (c) as fabricated, (d) after discharge
(lithiation), and (e) after charge (delithiation). Source: Liu et al. [6]/with permission of the
American Chemical Society.
lithiation and delithiation (∼400%), which causes harmful internal stresses on
the electrode. Since in situ SEM could real-time monitor the morphology changes
during cycling, it is necessary to utilize in situ SEM to explore effective solutions
addressing the serious problem of Si anode. Liu et al. developed a nanotube
sandwich structure aimed at easing the mechanical issue [6]. First, ZnO nanorod
was deposited on nickel foam by hydrothermal method. Then carbon was coated
on ZnO nanorod by polymerization and carbonization of furfuryl alcohol. After
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of Si, the polymerization and carbonization
processes were performed again to deposit another carbon layer. In the end, ZnO
was etched by acetic acid, forming a C@Si@C sandwich structure. In situ SEM
images of C@Si@C nanotube at different states clearly revealed changes of a single
nanotube. The thickness and length of as-fabricated C@Si@C nanotube both
endure enlargement after Li-ions insert into Si crystal (Figure 4.1c,d). However, the
shape nearly reversed to its original state after delithiation (Figure 4.1e), illustrating
that the method successfully enhanced reversibility of Si crystal structure.
Shi et al. performed in situ SEM characterization of Si/C anode by placing the
battery parallel with electron beam [7]. In this case, captured picture includes4.1 In Situ Electron Microscopy Characterization 97
information on every layer of battery, including current collector, cathode, sep￾arator, and anode. Through a rational design of Si/C anode three-dimensional
(3D)-lined-structure, the influence of volume expansion was reduced to a mini￾mum. In situ SEM played a great role in revealing the cycling process of Si/C. SEM
images together with videos of unstructured anode and 3D-lined-structure anode
showed that 3D-lined-structure with gaps between Si bars could keep good contact
between anode and current collector while the volume expansion is induced by
lithiation. The unstructured anode not only suffers from interior stress but is also
detached from current collector due to volume expansion.
Overall, in situ SEM can instantaneously visually reveal the morphological devi￾ations of battery content during cycles. However, signal from SEM is not abundant
enough to further understand the electrochemical process of battery reaction. It is
essential to combine in situ SEM with other characterization methods.
4.1.2 In Situ Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) Characterization
Similar to SEM, TEM also uses an electron beam as excitement source to obtain
various signals from materials. TEM has higher accelerating voltage to ensure
that electrons have more power to transmit material. The electrons that penetrate
through materials could reflect some information about internal structure, which
makes TEM suitable for some in-depth research on batteries [8–11].
For in situ transmission electron microscopy, if the morphology of the nanowires
is to be demonstrated in situ, it is necessary to make appropriate adjustments to the
transmission electron microscopy sample table. In situ transmission in the field of
electrochemical energy storage requires secondary battery characterization, which
is mainly divided into five types [12]. As shown in Figure 4.2, Figure 4.2a is a solid in
situ open cell sample bar design to investigate the anode structure failure (volume
change, etc.), which enables the high spatial resolution image. However, its form of
electrochemical contact is different from the real environment, which is full of liquid
electrolyte. Figure 4.2b depicts a sealed liquid in situ battery sample bar, enabling
research on the evolution of SEI and Li dentrite at the interface between electrolyte
and electrode. Figure 4.2c describes the in situ heating sample bar, which allows the
stability of metal oxide cathode. Figure 4.2d is an in situ open cell based on ionic
liquid. Figure 4.2e represents a nanothin film that researches solid electrolyte, in
which low ionic conductivity and unstable interface are not major problems to be
solved.
In a common case, the traditional nanowire battery in situ testing platform is con￾structed with single nanowire as cathode, Li metal or LiCoO2 as lithium source, and
ionic liquid/Li2O as electrode. Ionic liquid has flaws in that some reactions of real
electrolytes might not happen in it. At the same time, Li2O solid electrolyte has
a great overpotential due to its large resistance. In order to solve these problems,
Gu et al. developed a testing system with the usage of 1.0 M LiClO4 in EC:DMC
(3 : 7, v/v) [13]. The schematic and microscopic views of the system are shown in98 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
(a)
(b) (c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.2 Classification of in situ TEM for secondary batteries. (a) solid-state open cell,
(b) liquid-cell, (c) in situ heating stage, (d) liquid-based open cell, and (e) nanoscale thin-film
battery. Source: Yuan et al. [12], Reproduced with permission from Springer Nature.
Figure 4.3. It indicated that Si NWs can be fully immersed by electrolyte in the
testing device, which prevents an uneven lithiation degree caused by longitudinal
Li-ion diffusion (Figure 4.3b). The “core-shell” lithiation behavior helped monitor
the interface between Li and the unlithiated part. Results illustrated that the total
diameter of the wire increased from 100 to 298 nm at 1658 seconds and to 391 nm at
2462 seconds. However, liquid electrolyte makes the difference between SEI layers
and LixSi hard to be discriminated, indicating room for improvement for design of
the whole system.
Luo et al. illustrated the relationship between morphology of Si NW and speed
of lithiation by analyzing in situ TEM results [14]. TEM images of lithiated and
unlithiated parts of Si NWs have a distinct contrast difference that guides researchers
monitoring the process of lithiation. During the lithiation process of alucone-coated
Si NW, the further from contact point in axial direction, the less lithiation depth of
Si NW. The phenomenon was called “V-shaped” lithiation front. On the contrary, Si
NW with ordinary Al2O3 coating was “H-shaped” due to the even lithiation in lon￾gitude direction. The speed of lithiation was measured by measuring the distance4.1 In Situ Electron Microscopy Characterization 99
Au rod
Au rod Au rod
e
beam
Si
SiNx
Li metal Si NW Pt contact
500
100
200
Cross section
<110> 300
400
1000 1500 2000
Time (s)
Width (nm)
2500 3000
Pt Pt 100 nm
500 nm
Pt 391
80 nm
80 nm
Cu
Cu
0 s
2462 s
1658 s
298
W rod
Li
Si
NWs
V V
(a) (b) (d) (e) (f)
(g)
(i) (j)
(h)
(c)
Conducting
epoxy
Si
nanowire
LiCoO2
Li2O
II.
Figure 4.3 (a) Schematic drawing showing the experimental setup of the open-cell
approach using ionic liquid as electrolyte; (b) schematic drawing showing the setup of the
open-cell approach using Li metal as lithium source and Li2O as solid electrolyte;
(c) schematic drawing showing the setup of the liquid cell battery. (d) SEM image of the
inner side of the biasing chip; (e) magnified view of the region labeled by the orange
rectangle; (f) SEM image showing the welded Si NW electrode onto the Pt contact. Note
that the Li location is labeled by the light blue object in panel (a). In situ liquid-cell TEM
observation of the lithiation of the Cu-coated Si (Cu–Si) NW. (g) TEM image showing the
pristine state of the Cu–Si NW at 0 seconds; (h) core–shell formation of the Cu–Si NW
during lithiation at 1658 seconds; (i) TEM image of the Cu–Si NW at 2462 seconds;
(j) plotted width changes of the NW as a function of time. Note that, in all images from
(a) to (c), the Pt contact region is labeled by the black lines on the left of the image. The
inset in panel (c) illustrates the cross-sectional image after anisotropic swelling of the Si
nanowire upon lithium insertion with maximum volume expansion along the ⟨110⟩
direction. Source: Gu et al. [13]/with the permission of American Chemical Society.
that the boundary between Si and LixSi moved from its initial state (Figure 4.4). It
turned out that Si NWs with alucone possess much faster lithiation kinetics com￾pared to Si NWs without alucone coating, demonstrating successful regulation of Si
NW anode. By in situ TEM, the mechanism of lithiation and relationship between
mechanical stress and lithiation were explained and comprehended, leading to a
new and effective direction of Si NWs modification.
Apart from widely reported Si NWs with poor conductivity, metal Ge attract atten￾tion from researchers who aimed at exploring NW for anode of Lithium-ion batter￾ies. Liu et al. studied the Ge NW anode with in situ TEM method [15]. The in situ
TEM images clearly showed the morphology changes of different states of lithia￾tion and delithiation process (Figure 4.5a). At initial state, the Ge NW was straight.
As time passed, Ge NW became bent due to the elongation of its total length. The
increased thickness of Ge NW was also observed at the same time. It can be con￾cluded that the lithiation of Ge NWs was more isotropic compared to the reported Si
NWs. In addition, nanopores would form during delithiation rather than lithiation,
which helped researchers track the progress of reaction. Figure 4.5b displays the100 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
(a)
(e)
(i) 5.6 nm
0 s 88 s 158 s
0 s 167 s 481 s 600 s
4 nm
E F 10 nm
50 nm
50 nm
215 s
0 s 24 s 64 s
0 s 23 s 52 s
8.1 nm
50 nm
200 nm
(j)
(m)
(l)
(k)
(f) (g) (h)
Alucone
Al2O3
Li diffusion
flux
Surface
coatings
Lithiated Si NW
- LixSi
Unlithiated
Si NW
0
0
8
16
24
10 20 30 40
Time (s)
Lithiated thickness (nm)
50 60 70
(b) (c) (d)
Figure 4.4 (a–c) Time-resolved TEM images of an alucone-coated Si NW under lithiation.
White dashed lines indicate the interface that separates lithiated and unlithiated regions.
(d) Magnified view of the close end of Si NW after 600 seconds lithiation; (e–h)
Time-resolved bright-field TEM images of an Al2O3-coated Si NW under lithiation, with
white dash lines indicating the interface between lithiated and unlithiated regions; TEM
images of the alucone coatings before (i) and after (j) lithiation. (k, l) Time-resolved TEM
images show the development of lithiation profiles of the alucone and Al2O3 coated Si NWs
and schematics of the Li diffusion paths through the Si NWs that dictate the lithiation
behavior; (m) average lithiation thickness versus time for the alucone (black square) and
Al2O3 (red dot) coated Si NWs. Source: Luo et al. [14]/with the permission of American
Chemical Society.
(a) c-Ge
39 nm
100 nm
200 nm
100 nm
60 s
40 s
Li2O
Nano-pore
0 s
120 s
0 s
11 s
12 s
18 s
100 s
80 s
Porous
region Lr
c-Li15Ge4
a-LixGe
67 nm
83 nm
0 s
137 s
147 s
168 s
1319 s
(b) (d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.5 (a) In situ TEM images reflecting different states of the Ge NW lithiation
process. (b) In situ TEM images of Ge NW delithiation process that analyzed by nanopores.
The blue arrows indicate the “delithiation fronts.” Source: Liu et al. [15]/with the permission
of the American Chemical Society.
.4.2 In Situ Spectroscopy Characterization 101
gradual morphological transformation of the delithiation process. Nanopores began
to form at right site of nanowire, and then formed a distinct “lithiation front,” indi￾cating the trend of lithiation. The lithiation front moved leftward, and nanopores
filled all the area of Ge NW, indicating an axial directional delithiation. Pore mem￾ory effect was also founded with in situ TEM. After repeating the cycle of lithiation
and delithiation, the nanopores on Ge NW always formed at the same spots. These
findings, gained with the assistance of in situ TEM, might give a new understanding
of damage mechanism of batteries consisting of Ge anode.
In summary, TEM has the advantage of revealing differences between various
materials, such as initial electrode, SEI, and products of lithiation or delithiation,
when compared to SEM. However, not every content could be discriminated by
difference in contrast. In other words, sometimes shape changes are not always
reliable to estimate the reaction of nanowires. Up until now, in situ TEM is mostly
applied to simple nanowires like Si NWs and Ge NWs, which involve simple
reactions and distinct volume expansions that simplify the analysis of reaction
processes. To further push forward the understanding of reaction mechanism, it is
crucial to utilize in situ TEM to investigate more kinds of material. In addition, it is
difficult to keep the original chemical reaction state in regular TEM devices due to
the fact that elements in battery might be sensitive to electron beam. Fortunately,
developing cryo-electron microscope technology can greatly enhance research
about chemical reactions inside electrode materials. It can be attributed to the
property of cryo-electron microscope that it can preserve intrinsic structure of
materials and more factually reflect the structural evolution of materials.
4.2 In Situ Spectroscopy Characterization
4.2.1 In Situ X-ray Diffraction
X-ray diffraction is one of the most commonly used characterization methods to ana￾lyze the phase or multiple phases of crystal materials. In the field of lithium-ion
battery, it can be easily predicted that the time spent on sample treatment might
severely affect the state we observed. Through in situ XRD, the phase of battery mate￾rial at every potential during cycling can be detected. Compared to ex situ XRD, in
situ XRD can assist researchers in grasping the process of electrochemical reaction
without influence of complicated sample treatment [16–18].
Constructing in situ XRD testing system is a critical matter that affects the reliabil￾ity of experiment results. The first step is assembling in situ cells. In situ cell models
have been proposed and developed in a short period of time. Their construction prin￾ciple is similar to that of ordinary button batteries, including battery shell, cathode
material, anode material, battery diaphragm, electrolyte, and current collector. The
biggest difference between normal cell and in situ cell lies in the fact that in situ cell
has an X-ray transmitting window and a cavity part with a certain height. In 2001,
McBreen et al. in Brookhaven National Laboratory designed a in situ cell accompa￾nying with Mylar film as a window material and two piece of open aluminum sheet102 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
Al blocks
Bolt holes
Bolt holes
X-ray window
Cathode
Mylar sheet
Gasket
Separator
Anode
Figure 4.6 The in situ
electrochemical cell for XRD.
Source: McBreen et al. [19],
Reproduced with permission
from Elsevier.
as container of battery (Figure 4.6) [19]. Based on this work, Mai’s group optimized
this in situ model by replacing Mylar film with Be sheet, resulting in integration of
three functions in one part – sealing battery, allowing transmission of X-rays, and
serving as a current collector.
The second step is collecting data synchronously. After a short standing time, the
assembled in situ cell is placed on the sample station with the Be sheet on top. At the
same time, the incident spot of X-ray is adjusted to the center of the window. Then
the cell connects with electrochemical testing device to conduct corresponding test￾ing program, finally achieving real-time capture of phase-changing and testing data.
Misra et al. studied Si NW by in situ XRD and obtained interesting results that
gave new recognition to the Si anode [20]. Through observation of the phase
transformation process at different rates, two new Li–Au phases were discovered,
and the temperature for CVD and rate for cycling are the key factors controlling the
existence of these two phases. In addition, the reason for formation of Li15Si4 phase
was discussed. During a complete cycle at 1C, peaks from Li15Si4 did not show
up (Figure 4.7a), while they appeared after enduring a C/2 discharging process.
Figure 4.7b) demonstrates the dependency between new phases and rate. In addi￾tion, a novel new strategy to improve cycling ability was proposed. After 37 cycles,
the cells with Si NWs grown at 500 ∘C retained 33% more than those batteries
with Si NWs fabricated at 485 ∘C (Figure 4.7c). It could be attributed to absence of
crystalline phases, resulting in the avoidance of repeated amorphous-crystalline
transformation, which is considered harmful to the stability of anode [21]. Inspired
by this phenomenon, lowering the cutting-off capacity can significantly prolong
the cycling life (Figure 4.7d). Similar in situ XRD analysis was also used in
research on Ge NW [22], which is considered a candidate for replacing Si NWs.
After rigorous discussion, the transition reaction process could be described as4.2 In Situ Spectroscopy Characterization 103
0
2.20 2.30 2.40 2.73 2.80 2.87 2.94 3.01 0 20 40 60
1000 mAh g−1
2000 mAh g−1
80 100 120
Cycle number
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
2000
1500
1000
500
(a) (c)
(b) (d)
0
0
0 5 10 15 20
500 °C
485 °C
Cycle number
25 30 35 40 123
Time (h)
Q (Å–1)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G H
J
K N
LM
I
1C
C/2
Potential versus Li/Li+ (V)
Intensity (a.u.)
A–N
Li15Si4
Specific capacity (mAh g−1) Specific capacity (mAh g−1)
4 5
Figure 4.7 In situ XRD results for a stainless sheet-mesh cell under electrochemical
cycling: (a) voltage profile for a cell cycled at 1C (black) and C/2 (blue); (b) XRD patterns
showing the appearance of Li15Si4 peaks for corresponding points A–N in (a). Unlabeled
peaks are associated with either the polyester pouch or polymer separator. (c) Cycling
performance of Si NW samples grown by CVD at 500 and 485 ∘C. Only lithiation capacities
are shown. The Si NWs grown at 500 ∘C show 33% better capacity retention after 37 cycles
compared to Si NWs grown at 485 ∘C. (d) Constant capacity cycling performance of Si NW
anodes cycled at constant capacities of 1000 mAh g−1 (blue) and 2000 mAh g−1 (dark red);
only lithiation capacities are shown. Source: Misra et al. [20]/with the permission of
American Chemical Society.
c-Ge → a-LixGe → c-LixGe (Li7Ge2) → c-LixGe (Li22Ge5 and Li15Ge4) → c-LixGe
(Li7Ge2) → a-LixGe → a-Ge, which is helpful for exploring modifying method.
Aside from graphite and Si anode, Nb-based anode for Li-ion battery has also
attracted attention from researchers. For a better understanding of charge storage
mechanism, Li et al. studied the process of lithiation and delithiation of ZrNb14O37
nanowire [23]. As depicted in Figure 4.8, XRD data was processed by visualization,
and a major peak shift was obviously observed by colors. While lithium ion was
inserted into ZrNb14O37, intermediate phase of LixZrNb14O37 formed, and the (−111)
peak slowly shifted to a lower angle after being gradually discharged to 1.61 V. Dur￾ing discharging between 1.55 and 1 V, the (−111) peak disappeared, and a peak at
22.4∘ was generated and moved to lower angles. The same phase transformation was
processed in a reversed direction, and the initial phase was recovered, indicating a
reversible lithiation-delithiation mechanism.
Tang et al. from the same group studied the more complicated reaction of BiNbO4
nanowire during charge–discharge with in situ XRD method [24]. The in situ XRD
pattern indicated that small numbers of lithium ions begin to embed and react with
BiNbO4 to form Bi nanocrystalline and Li3NbO4, and peaks of BiNbO4 diminish.104 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
Charge/discharge curves
Land CT2001A
(a) In-situ XRD curves
(b) (c)
(e) (d)
4 Stage VI
Stage V
Stage VI
Stage III
Stage II
Stage I
3
2
1
0
400
3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 1470 1540 1610
300
200
100
a b c V
0 1 2
Voltage (V) a (Å)
b (Å) V (Å3)
c (Å)
3 20.6 20.8 21.0 19.30 19.35
Time (min)
123 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 20 22
2 theta (degree)
Voltage (V) 2 theta (degree)
Time (h)
24 26
36 37
2 theta (degree)
38 39
(–111) (111)
(512) (513)
(–111) (111)
(114) (512) (513) BeO BeO
Bruker D8 focus X-ray diffraction
Lithium mental
Whatman glass fiber
ZrNb14O37 nanowires
Be
Figure 4.8 (a) Schematic construction of an in situ XRD system; (b) in situ XRD patterns of
ZrNb14O37 nanowires during the initial cycle; (c, d) change of the (−111), (111), (512), and
(513) reflections during cycling; and (e) evolution of lattice parameters during the initial
lithiation/delithiation process. Source: Li et al. [23]/with the permission of the American
Chemical Society.
Three new reflections finally appeared at 27.1∘, 38.6∘, and 39.6∘ referring to (012),
(104), and (110) peaks of Bi, respectively, demonstrating the formation of Bi. Due to
the prolonged discharging time, Bi nanocrystals grow into large, inactive Bi crystals
that have no storage ability for lithium ions. The changes in the intensity of the char￾acteristic diffraction reflections are displayed in detail in Figure 4.9d–f. And a new
reflection appears at 38.1∘, which can be indexed to (200) diffraction reflection of
Li3Bi, indicating that the Li3Bi alloy formed after lithium ions were combined with
active Bi nanocrystalline. As depicted in Figure 4.9i, peak at 38.1∘ becomes strong
during in situ discharge process while the intensity decreases in the subsequent
charging process, which indicates reversible transformation between Bi nanocrystal￾lites and Li3Bi alloy. Images of the phase transition for BiNbO4 (Figure 4.9g–i. From4.2 In Situ Spectroscopy Characterization 105
Base Stainless steel
BiNbO4
X-ray beam
Be
Filled with electrolyte
(1M LiPF6)
26.0
0
0.94
1.88
2.82
3.76
4.70
5.64
6.58
7.52
8.46
26.87 27.74
2-Theta (degree) 2-Theta (degree)
Charge
Charge
Discharge
Discharge
Charge
Charge
Discharge
Discharge
Charge
Charge
Discharge
Discharge
*
(a) (d) (g) Time (h)
28.61 26.5 27.0 27.5 28.0 28.5
2-Theta (degree)
30 31 32 34 35 33 36
2-Theta (degree)
37.5 38.0 38.5 39.5 39.0 40.0
30.0
0
0.94
1.88
2.82
3.76
4.70
5.64
6.58
7.52
8.46
32.13 34.26
2-Theta (degree) (e) (h) Time (h)
36.39
37.6
0
0.94
1.88
2.82
3.76
4.70
5.64
6.58
7.52
8.46
38.4 39.2
2-Theta (degree) (f) (i)
a
b
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
1st
Lithiation
BiNbO4 Bi + Li3NbO4 Li3Bi + Li4NbO4
Lithiation
Delithiation
e–
e–
e–
e–
*
:Bi
* *
Time (h)
0 40.0 1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1 2
Time (h)
Potential (V)
3 56789 4
22.0
0
0.94
1.88
2.82
3.76
4.70
5.64
6.58
7.52
8.46
26.22 30.44 34.66
2-Theta (degree) (b)
(c)
(j)
Time (h)
38.88 6580
6036
5492
4948
4404
3860
3316
2772
2228
1684
1140
Li
Figure 4.9 (a) The detailed structure of the in situ cell. (b) In situ XRD patterns of BiNbO4
nanowires and (c) corresponding discharge/charge curves. (d–i) Local in-situ reflection
images for XRD patterns selected from (d) 26.0∘ to 28.61∘, (e) 30.0∘ to 36.39∘, and (f) 37.6∘
to 40.0∘. (j) Schematic image of structural transformation of BiNbO4 during the first
discharge/charge process. Source: Tang et al. [24]/with the permission of Elsevier.
those results, Tang et al. illustrated the energy storage mechanism with schematic
image (Figure 4.9j). These results from in situ XRD analysis laid the foundation for
researching Bi inserted Nb oxides as anodes.
Despite these remarkable progresses of in situ XRD researches about
nanowire-based electrodes, there are still problems restricting further development:
(1) Design of an in situ cell device. There are severe problems with sealing in- situ
batteries nowadays, which further affect the reaction inside the electrode. This
phenomenon could be more obvious after ultralong testing time (ordinarily a
dozen hours). In addition, electrode material and electrolyte could easily react
with Be sheet when used as window material.106 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
(2) The accuracy and sensitivity of in situ test. While in situ XRD aims to capture
the intermediate products, the ultrashort time that these products may exist for,
resulting in the limited time for machines to detect.
(3) Combination with other in situ characterization methods. In a common case,
single in situ characterization method is qualitative analysis and reflects infor￾mation in certain aspects. However, understanding the whole chemical reaction
could be possible by rationally combining these means together. For instance,
relationship and evolution between phases, morphology, and chemical bonds
can be discovered by combining in situ XRD with in situ SEM, TEM, Raman, and
FTIR, further contributing to recognizing, designing, and controlling electrode
materials and secondary ion battery systems.
4.2.2 In Situ Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy can detect the information of molecular vibration and rota￾tion, so it can be used to characterize the valence bonds and functional groups of
molecules in samples. As for in situ Raman spectroscopy, it combines the concept
of in situ testing with Raman spectrometer, and through real-time monitoring of the
position of Raman absorption peak and the change of peak intensity of electrode
materials in the electrochemical process, the structure change of materials in the
electrochemical process can be understood [25–29]. During the test, there are usu￾ally two electrochemical configurations available to ensure that the laser can shine
on the electrode surface smoothly. The first is to pre-punch the top metal sheet dur￾ing the device packaging process or to use a grid-like fluid collector with a pore
size 1 order of magnitude smaller than the laser source diameter [30]. The second
is to compose an electrochemical device with a fluid collector, a diaphragm, and
a lithium sheet and punch a small hole at the bottom so that a Raman laser can
smoothly illuminate the surface of the electrode material [31]. Inspired by small
flow control research, Liqiang Mai use poly dimethyl siloxane, such as platform com￾bined with single nano device, design a micro reaction pool, can characterize single
nanowires in the electrochemical reaction of the structure evolution, and using the
in situ Raman spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy in combination to study
the electrochemical process of energy storage materials at atomic scale [32].
The typical transition metal layered oxide Na0.5Ni0.25Mn0.75O2, as a cathode
material for sodium ion batteries, exhibits obvious deintercalation reaction and is
a promising cathode material with high energy density. Zhou et al. from Nanjing
University proposed a novel reaction mechanism of co-embedding of cations and/or
anions for such layered materials through in situ Raman characterization [33].
Figure 4.10 shows the results of Na0.5Ni0.25Mn0.75O2 in situ Raman test.
Through in situ Raman test, the Raman representation diagram in the open cir￾cuit state is first obtained. Figure 4.10b shows the bending vibration peak of O–M–O
(about 500 cm−1) in the same plane and the stretching vibration peak of M—O bond
in space (about 600 cm−1). As the charging process progresses, the stretching vibra￾tion peak of O—O bond and the geometric vibration peak of ClO4
− appear in the
Raman spectrum peak of Figure 4.10c. When the chemical reaction continues and4.2 In Situ Spectroscopy Characterization 107
0
4.5
4.0
3.5
Voltage (V)
3.0
1000
900
800
Raman shift (cm–1)
700
600
500
ClO4(v4) ClO4(v1 O-O )
stretch
A
OCP
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
50
OCP
A
B F G H I
J
K L M N O
P
Q R
S
C–E
100 150 200
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Inserted/adsorbed perchlorate (v1)
Peroxide-related O–O stretch
Inserted perchlorate (v4)
M–O bands in MO6
(a)
(b)
(c)
550 700
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman intensity (a.u.)
850 1000
ClO4(v4) ClO4(v1 O-O )
stretch
K
J
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
(e)
550 700
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman intensity (a.u.)
850 1000
O-O
stretch
Adsorbed
Inserted
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
(d)
815 920
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman intensity (a.u.)
1020
Relative raman
peak area
peroxide
inserted ClO4
adsorbed ClO4
250 300 350 400
0
25
50
75
100
Figure 4.10 In situ Raman spectra study of anion (ClO4
−) uptake and release (a) charge
and discharge curves of the first and second cycles collected during in situ observations.
(b) Color intensities of several bands. (c) Capacity-dependent spectra were recorded during
the first cycle. (d) Magnified spectral profiles of the specific regions outlined in (c).
Peroxo-related (blue) and ClO4
− related (green) regions are respectively fitted for clarity.
(e) In situ spectra collected during the second cycle. Source: Zhou et al. [33], Reproduced
with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
the reaction discharges to point J, the geometric vibration peak of ClO4
− gradu￾ally decreases to disappear. This indicates that, along with the interaction between
ClO4
− and the material crystal, ClO4
− is also involved in ion embedding and removal
during the electrochemical reaction. Through in situ Raman characterization, they
successfully explained the high capacity of transition metal layered oxides, proved108 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
the electrochemical reaction model of cation-anion co-embedding, and opened up a
new idea for the electrochemical mechanism research of cathode materials.
Spectra collected at different charge/discharge stages can be distinguished by spe￾cific colors and letters marked in (A). Note that the pair of ClO4
− related peaks
(adsorbed and inserted) and peroxo-related peaks are fitted, and each of their capac￾ity dependence is demonstrated inside the voltage profiles.
4.2.3 In Situ X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface analysis method based on the principle
of the interaction between light and matter. It was developed by physicist Sigbarn
and his colleagues at Uppsala University in Sweden after two decades of research.
As a common characterization method, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy plays an
important role in the characterization of elements and contents of materials [34–38].
Atoms are composed of atoms and electrons outside the nucleus. The energy that
bound electrons overcome when they are transferred from the energy level to the
lowest energy state unbound by the nucleus is called the binding energy of electrons.
For real solid samples, the reference point for the calculation of binding energy is
chosen as the Fermi level, that is, the energy required for electron transition to the
Fermi level. X-rays are used to interact with the sample. X-ray energy is absorbed
by the solid, and through the photoelectron energy analyzer in photoelectron spec￾troscopy, it can be analyzed to obtain the kinetic energy of the photoelectron, that
is, to obtain the spectrum of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Photoelectron spec￾troscopy can be used for element composition analysis and quantitative analysis,
which has important research value in the field of electrochemistry.
Lithium-air batteries provide about five times as much energy as lithium-ion bat￾teries, making them a promising energy storage system. In practical application,
the safety research of lithium-air batteries is an important research direction, espe￾cially the thermal stability of Li2O2 and Li2O, the products of lithium-air battery,
which is very important for the battery itself. Shao-horn et al., Massachusetts Insti￾tute of Technology, explored the relationship between the change in lithium-air bat￾tery product and temperature through the characterization method of in situ X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (Figure 4.11) [39].
In situ XPS characterization results show that for Li2O, the 0.1s orbital changes
most obviously with the increase in temperature. That is, when Li2O2 is heated, there
will be an obvious growth of Li2CO3 in the product. However, with the increase in
temperature, the growth of Li2CO3 in the product was not obvious. In situ charac￾terization results show that Li2O and Li2CO3 will form and grow on the surface of
Li2O2 with increasing temperature. With the help of characterization, they found
that the decomposition temperature of Li2O2 is 250 ∘C.
4.2.4 In Situ XAS Characterization
Unlike XRD, X-ray Adsorption spectroscopy is a characterization method that gains
information from the intensity of X-ray beam that passes through sample. By ana￾lyzing the relationship between ratio of initial intensity and transmitted intensity.4.2 In Situ Spectroscopy Characterization 109
292 290 288 286
(a) Binding energy (eV)
284 282 280
RT
150 °C
250 °C
300 °C
350 °C
400 °C
500 °C
Li2CO3
536 534 532 530
Binding energy (eV)
528 526
RT
150 °C
250 °C
300 °C
350 °C
400 °C
500 °C
Li2CO3
58 54 57 53 52 56 55
Binding energy (eV)
51 50
RT
150 °C
250 °C
300 °C
350 °C
400 °C
500 °C
Li2CO3
C-C
CO3
2–
Li2CO3 Li2CO3
Li2O2 Li2O2/LiOH /LiOH
Li2O
Li2O
C 1s O 1s Li 1s
292 290 288 286
(b) Binding energy (eV)
284 282 280
RT
150 °C
250 °C
300 °C
350 °C
400 °C
450 °C
500 °C
Li2CO3
536 534 532 530
Binding energy (eV)
528 526
RT
150 °C
250 °C
300 °C
350 °C
400 °C
500 °C
450 °C
Li2CO3
58 54 57 53 52 56 55
Binding energy (eV)
51 50
RT
150 °C
250 °C
300 °C
350 °C
400 °C
450 °C
500 °C
Li2CO3
C-C
CO3
2– Li2CO3 Li2CO3
LiOH LiOH
Li2O
Li2O
C 1s O 1s Li 1s
Figure 4.11 Results of in situ XPS characterization of each orbital peak [39]. (a) Li2O2;
(b) Li2O. Source: Shao-horn et al. [39]/with the permission of Manchester IOP Publishing.
Following equation can describe the principle of XAS analysis:
It = I0
−𝜇(E)t (4.1)
where I0 is the intensity of incident X-ray, It is the intensity of transmitted X-ray, t is
the thickness of sample, and E is the absorption coefficient, which is dependent on
the photon energy.
Synchrotron radiation (SR) is the electromagnetic radiation emitted by charged
particles traveling in curved orbits under the action of electromagnetic fields. Since
the discovery of X-rays by Roentgen in 1895, XAS has achieved unprecedented110 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
Top electrode
“cap”
Plastic body
“cup”
Electrical contact
Electrical contact
(a)
(f)
(d)
(b)
(e)
46–65 °C Δt = 1000 s
65–84 °C
84–103 °C
103–123 °C
123–142 °C
142–160 °C
160 °C
13400
–0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
13410 13420 13430 13440
Energy (eV)
60
2e–3
2e–3
3e–3
3e–3
4e–3
8.0e–5
1.0e–4
1.2e–4
1.4e–4
80 100 120
Temperature (°C)
Edge jump @13420 eV (a.u.)
Bi concentration (M)
140 160
Absorption (a.u.)
13450 13460 13470
(c)
Window
Window
Bottom
electrode
X-rays
Lithium
Separator
Pellet
100°
Gasket
Battery
 cavity
Figure 4.12 (a) An exploded representation of the AMPIX cell, (b) the assembled AMPIX
cell, and (c) a typical battery stack. Photographs of (d) an assembled AMPIX cell and (e) a
six-cell multisample holder. Source: Borkiewicz et al. [45], Reproduced with permission
from JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC. (f) Bi-L3-edge XANES spectra were recorded in QEXAFS
mode (liquid phase). Inset: temperature-dependent Bi concentration. Source: Patzke et al.
[46], Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
development since the construction of SR light source, which analyzes material
element composition, electronic states, and microstructure by using the changes of
X-ray signals before and after radiation.
XAS has some discrete peaks or wave-like fluctuations near the absorption edge
and its high-energy end, which are called fine structures (XAFS). By adjusting
the energy of X-rays, SR XAFS technology is widely used to study the chemical
environment around the atoms of various elements in condensed matter and obtain
important information such as local structure, oxidation state, and neighboring4.3 In Situ Characterization of Nanowire Devices 111
coordination atoms of the constituent elements in the material. In addition, by
combining the in situ concept with SR technology, information about electrode
materials can be obtained in the process of electrochemical energy storage, such
as structure evolution, local structural change, and oxidation state of transition
metal ions, which has important guiding significance for understanding the precise
battery reaction mechanism, method for optimizing the material composition and
structure, and the development of new high-performance materials [17, 40–44].
Argonne National Laboratory has designed a multipurpose X-ray in situ battery
that can be used at multiple SR line stations to conduct wide-range in situ SR
electrochemical X-ray scattering and spectrum analysis [45].
Patzke et al. from the University of Zurich, Switzerland, used X-ray fine struc￾ture characterization to confirm that the bulky α-Bi2O3 precursor and sulfuric acid
nanowires overgrow and form solid–liquid interface continuously (Figure 4.12) [46].
Only 0.4% (in mole ratio) of Bi dissolved, confirming that it takes time to process.
4.3 In Situ Characterization of Nanowire Devices
4.3.1 Nanowire Device
In the research field of micro/nano energy storage devices, micro/nano devices
assembled based on single nanomaterials play an important role, such as single
nanowires and single nanosheet devices. Nano materials because of its reach
nanoscale on two dimensions, which presents the massive materials do not have
special properties (for example, the nanowire electrode has a unique anisotropy,
as for the single nano-device building provides great convenience, but at the same
time has a large specific surface area, continuous axial electron transmission, fast
radial ion diffusion, etc).
By assembling single nanowire micro/nano devices, researchers can extract mate￾rials from complex and mixed systems and intuitively present principles that are
difficult to explain by conventional means through clever device design, including
accurate measurement of basic physical property parameters (including electricity,
heat, and magnetism [47–49]). This provides an effective method to study the evo￾lution of material properties at nanometer scale. With the continuous maturity of
semiconductor-controlled precision machining technology, the research on single
nanodevices has gradually expanded from the basic frontiers of physics to the appli￾cation of electrochemical energy storage.
4.3.2 Nanowire Device Characterization Example
A lithium-ion battery is like a black box. The study of capacity attenuation usually
requires dismantling the device, which is easily disturbed by external water and oxy￾gen, leading to the inability to detect its real state in situ in real time. On the other
hand, active materials, conductive additives, binders, and fluid collectors in energy
storage devices are mixed together, and the interface is complex, which seriously
hinders the direct observation of active materials.112 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
Therefore, Wuhan university of science and technology Liqiang Mai in 2010 to
create a single nanowires device such as universal new model of in situ charac￾terization of electrochemical process, design and assembly of the international
the first single nanowires on solid-state electrochemical devices, the proposed
single nanowires electrochemical device for the first time micro-nano circuit
with precise integration of energy storage devices, high precision, strong signal
collection[49]; At the same time, a monochromatic laser was introduced to detect
the material structure information to realize multifield real-time monitoring of
electrical/electrochemical/spectroscopy (Figure 4.13). The device model takes the
lead in extracting the electrode material – fluid collector interface and electrode
material – electrolyte interface from the mixed interface, which overcomes the
problems of the interaction between complex interfaces and the difficulty of
resolving collected signals. The intrinsic relationship between electrode structure,
transport, charging and discharging states, and capacity decay was established.
With the charging and discharging processes, the Raman spectra show that the
nanowire structure deteriorates gradually, and the voltammetry curve shows that
the electrode–collector contact changes from ohmic contact to Schottky contact,
accompanied by a continuous decrease in electrical conductivity. It is found that
structural deterioration, the change of electrode – collector contact, and the decrease
of electrical conductivity are the intrinsic factors leading to the capacity decay.
Passivated current
collector
Passivated current
collector
High
460 480 500
Raman shift (cm–1)
Intensity (a.u.)
520 540
460 480 500
Raman shift (cm–1)
(a)
2 μm (c)
(b)
LiCoO2 film
Si2N4
Si/a-Si NW
Ni
V (V)
I (nA)
–1.0
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Intensity (a.u.)
520 540
Low
Solid electrolyte
Nanowire
Substrate
Counter electrode
Figure 4.13 In situ characterization of a single nanowire electrochemical device.
(a) Schematic diagram of a single nanowire lithium ion energy storage device, (b) Optical
micrograph of a single Si nanowire Li-ion energy storage device, (c) In situ Raman spectra
and I–V curves of a single silicon nanowire Li-ion energy storage device. Source: Mai et al.
[49]/with the permission of the American Chemical Society.4.3 In Situ Characterization of Nanowire Devices 113
Therefore, based on the solid-state single nanowires devices in situ study of this
credit platform, we can build the nanowires electric transport, structure, and state
of charge and discharge the direct link so as to reveal the intrinsic electrochem￾ical behavior of nanowires and capacity attenuation, the nature of performance
degradation, and to solve the energy storage material capacity attenuation problem
with fast, low conductivity. The key problem is of great significance. Based on the
research results, Mak and others wrote a paper titled “Track Autonomous in Real
Rime” at the invitation of Nature.
Subsequently, Mai et al. conducted a series of researches on the optimization
mechanism of composite nanolimited energy storage materials based on single
nanowire devices [50]. In order to explore the mechanism by which graphene opti￾mizes the performance of nanowire energy storage materials, three single nanowire
devices, namely pure MnO2, MnO2/rGO, and MnO2/porous graphene, were assem￾bled and electrochemical tests were performed (Figure 4.14). The results show that
the coating of rGO can significantly improve the conductivity of MnO2 and reduce
the ion diffusion rate. Porous graphene, on the other hand, provides a gap for ions to
enter while improving the conductivity, thus maintaining a high ion diffusion rate.
By studying the optimization mechanism of the midline structure of semi-hollow
double-continuous V3O7/graphene scrolls, the team pointed out that the specific
capacity, cyclic stability, and multiplier performance of VGS are better than those of
V3O7 nanowires, and the charge-transfer resistance (32 Ω) of VGS is much smaller
Au as the counter electrode
KOH electrolyte
SiO2
Si MnO2/reduced graphene
oxide wire-in-scroll
MnO2/porous graphene
oxide wire-in-scroll
e–
e–
ion
ion
ion
ion
Au
SU-8
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14 Schematic diagram of a single nanowire electrochemical device.
(a) Schematic representation of the MnO2/rGO single-wire nanowire device and rGO, where
ions are transported only through the gap between graphene and MnO2 nanowire,
(b) Schematic representation of MnO2/pGO single nanowire devices, where porous GO ions
are transported not only through the gap between graphene and MnO2 nanowire but also
through pores in graphene. Source: Hu et al. [50]/with the permission of the American
Chemical Society.114 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
0 –4 –0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
–2
0
2
4
10
20
30
40
50
60
0 20 40 60
VGS
VGS
1 μm
VG
PV
PV
80 100 120
Z′ (Ω) Voltage (V)
Z″ (Ω)
Current (μA)
140 –0.8 –0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8
(a) (b)
Figure 4.15 The midline conductivity characteristics of a semi-hollow double-continuous
V3O7/Graphene roll are illustrated. (a) Impedance test of VGS, VG, and PV in initial state,
(b) Transmission characteristics of single nanowire of VGS and PV (Check figure: SEM image
of single nanowire device of VGS). Source: Yan et al. [51]/with the permission of the
American Chemical Society.
than that of pure V3O7 nanowires (81 Ω) (Figure 4.15). Based on the electrochemical
performance test, a single device was further assembled, and current–voltage (I–V)
tests were carried out on pure V3O7 nanowire and VGS, respectively. The experimen￾tal results showed that the conductivity of VGS (1056 S m−1) was 27 times higher
than that of pure V3O7 nanowire, revealing the essence of its electrochemical per￾formance improvement [51].
The team and to study the nanowire electrode material of lithium/sodium ion
transport mechanism, design the assembly type multipoint contact nanowires
devices, the research state of two different exposure of single nanowires [2]: elec￾trochemical process to H2V3O8 nanowires as the anode materials, highly oriented
pyrolytic graphite flake material as a cathode, LiPF6 as electrolyte. As shown in
Figure 4.16a,b, device 1 is a nanowire material connected with four electrodes,
except that the electrode contact part is covered by SU-8 photoresist. The other
parts are in direct contact with the electrolyte. When electrodes were tested with
electrode No.1, it was found that the conductivity of sections 1–2 decreased by
96.5%, while the conductivity of sections 2–3 and 3–4 decreased by only 9.2% and
1.9%, respectively. The experimental results show that lithium ion will choose the
shortest path in the process of embedding, preferentially near the electrode. In
device 2, only the ends of the nanowires are in direct contact with the electrolyte,
and all other positions are covered by SU-8 photoresist (Figure 4.16c,d). When
electrode No 1 is used as the test electrode, lithium/sodium ions can only be
embedded at the end of the nanowires. After Li-ion embedding, the conductivity
of segments 1–2, 2–3, and 3–4 decreased by 3.5%, 5.6%, and 11.6%, respectively.
Due to the high migration rate of electrons along the nanowire’s axial direction,
it is the low axial migration rate of lithium ions that limits the electrochemical
reaction kinetics. The final results show that the farther away from the end, the less
structural damage and the less decrease in electrical conductivity. The exquisiteness
of the single nanowire micro-cell provides great convenience for studying the basic
reaction principle of electrode materials in electrochemical reactions and deepens
the understanding of the reaction mechanism.4.4 Other In Situ Characterization 115
Li or Na ion 10 μm
1 μm
10 μm
e–
e–
4
3
2
1
4
4
4
3
3
3
2
2
2
1
1
1
(a)
(c) (d)
(b)
Figure 4.16 A single nanowire electrochemical device with two different exposure states.
(a) Schematic diagram of a fully exposed H2V3O8 single nanowire device, (b) SEM diagram
of the device corresponding to the fully exposed state, (c) Schematic diagram of a single
H2V3O8 nanowire device with exposed end, (d) SEM diagram of the device corresponding to
the end-exposed state. Source: Xu et al. [2]/with the permission of the American Chemical
Society.
4.4 Other In Situ Characterization
4.4.1 In Situ Atomic Force Microscopy Characterization
When the material is characterized by AFM, the slight changes of the microcan￾tilever can be detected by the sensor, and then the surface information of the material
can be obtained. Therefore, in situ AFM can be used to detect the surface changes of
materials, which is of great significance for some difficult-to-detect material inter￾faces, such as the SEI changes of nanowire materials during electrochemical pro￾cesses [52–56].
Wan Lijun et al., Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, studied
the interfacial electrochemistry of the electrode through in situ AFM based on a sin￾gle silicon nanowire and observed the morphology of the silicon negative electrode
surface and the change of Young’s modulus during the growth of SEI [57]. They
monitored the samples in a specially designed AFM fluid cell under an argon atmo￾sphere. For in situ monitoring, they connect it to an external Autolab workstation,
which controls the voltage of the fluid battery. In addition, they removed the SEI
from the surface of the nanowire in contact mode, applying a scanning force slightly
greater than that of contact-mode imaging. Subsequently, quantitative nanomechan￾ical experiments were performed.
As shown in Figure 4.17, the formation process of SEI on the negative electrode
of silicon nanowires in 1 mol l−1 LiPF6/PC was characterized by various operating
modes of in situ AFM. Three distinct stages were observed in SEI formation at dif￾ferent potentials. The primary film formed on the negative electrode of the silicon
nanowire is above 0.4 V, and when the potential is reduced to 0.33 V, the surface is116 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
Distance (nm)
0.6 V
0.01 V 0.3 V 0.6 V
0.33 V 0.15 V 0.15 V 0.1 V
0.4 V
80.0 nm
–80.0 nm
0.6 V
0.01 V
1.1 V
1.5 V
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
(g) (h) (i)
(j)
(k) (l)
1.1 V
Height (nm)
0 200
0
30
60
90
400
22 nm
C0.8 V
C0.6 V
C0.3 V
D0.01 V
D0.15 V
D0.4 V
D0.6 V
D1.24 V
17 nm 24 nm
5 nm
600 800
Figure 4.17 Schematic diagram of in situ AFM characterization results of SEM on the Si
negative electrode. (a–j) The in situ AFM height images of a single Si NW anode during the
first cycle at different discharge/charge states. The scan direction is from bottom to top, and
the scan area is 1 × 0.5 μm2. (k) Cross-section analysis of the height of the location marked
by a white dashed line during the cycle. (l) The AFM image of the Si NW after the first cycle.
Source: Liu et al. [57]/with the permission of the American Chemical Society.
quickly covered by thick granular SEI. When the temperature is lower than 0.1 V,
SEI continues to grow during the evolution. After the first cycle, the SEI formed on
the Si nanowire was rough and heterogeneous, with a thickness of (28±10) mm.
The SEI film remained intact after the first cycle, showing the ability to withstand
large volume changes during the first lithium and delithium cycles.
As shown in Figure 4.18, the statistical values of Young’s modulus of intact SEI in
the range of 50–400 MPa are consistent with the compositional properties of SEI film.
In addition, with the decrease in voltage at both ends of the material, the SEI formed.
Based on the above analysis, the team proposed a mixed-filled structure model of
the SEI film on the negative electrode of silicon nanowire, indicating the in situ AFM
of the single-atom electrochemical process.4.4 Other In Situ Characterization 117
(a) (b)
(d) (e)
(c)
(f) (g)
Figure 4.18 In situ AFM characterization of the negative electrode of a single silicon
nanowire. (a–e) The AFM images of Young’s modulus mapping of a single Si NW anode in
the first discharge process. The scan direction is from bottom to top, and the scan area is
1 × 0.5 μm2. (f) The distribution of Young’s modulus along the location marked with a
dashed yellow line. (g) The statistic values of Young’s modulus of the area marked with a
dashed white box. Source: Liu et al. [57]/with the permission of American Chemical Society.
4.4.2 In Situ Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technology has a wide range of applications in
physics, medicine, chemistry, biology, food, and other fields. It can provide molec￾ular dynamics and molecular chemical structure information and has become a
conventional technical means to analyze the molecular structure and characterize
the physical and chemical properties of substances [58–61].
Based on in situ NMR technology [62], Grey et al., University of Cambridge, UK,
characterized silicon nanowire electrodes at the atomic level during battery cycle,
revealing the complex kinetic and thermodynamic processes involved in electro￾chemical reactions and material structure rearrangement [63]. When Si is used as
the anode material of lithium-ion battery, its capacity is 10 times that of commonly
used graphite material. However, the huge volume expansion of 300% will cause
the destruction of electrode structure and the attenuation of capacity. A practical
solution is to use a Si/graphite (with a small proportion of Si) composite material
that combines the cycling properties of graphite with the high capacity of Si, thus
exhibiting substantially increased capacity. In order to fully utilize the capacity of
graphite material, it is often discharged to a very low potential, but the amorphous118 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
LixSi will be converted to crystalline Li3.75Si at a very low potential, resulting in
a great overpotential in the process of negative electrode delithium. Researchers
have demonstrated that crystalline Si is converted to c-Li3.75Si or Li4.4Si/Li4.2Si
upon initial discharge below 70 mV. The study of the reaction mechanism in
the second and subsequent cycles is very important for the actual cycle process
of the battery, but it is still unclear. Grey’s team used the electrochemical vapor
deposition method to deposit and grow Si nanowires on the carbon fiber-based gas
diffusion layer, which has a high crystallinity and a length of more than 50 μm.
The diameter is about 60 nm. Based on this material model, further in the process
of constant current charge–discharge and constant potential charge–discharge,
through the accurate control of current and voltage, the reaction mechanism of
charge–discharge process was revealed by making full use of in situ NMR, and it
was confirmed that Li3.75Si with crystal orientation grew unevenly in amorphous
phase (Figure 4.19). Electrochemical and NMR signals show that the overlithiation
process of c-Li3.75Si in the reaction is released below the potential of 50 mV, and
small clusters will be formed in Li3.75Si phase under charging state (Figure 4.20).
Combining these results with density functional theory (DFT) calculations, it
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.19 Si nanowire - carbon fiber-based vapor diffusion matrix (Si NW-CFGDL).
(a) Acquired with a C/30 galvanostatic experiment with potential limits of 2–0 V for the first
and second cycles and 50 mV cutoff for the third discharge, (b) acquired with a
potentiostatic experiment with potential limits of 2–0 V for the first and second cycles and
30 mV cutoff for the third discharge. The corresponding contour and Li/Li+ voltage versus
accumulated specific capacity plots are shown for the galvanostatic and the potentiostatic
experiments in (c) and (d), respectively. The 7Li resonances at around 20–10, 10–0 and
−10 ppm are labeled as P1 (Li nearby small Si clusters), P2 (isolated Si anions, c-Li3.75Si and
extended Si networks), and P3 (the over-lithiated crystalline phase, c-Li3.75+𝛿Si),
respectively. Source: Key et al. [63]/with the permission of the American Chemical Society.4.4 Other In Situ Characterization 119
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 4.20 LiNMR spectra of Si NW-CFGDL complex in situ. The discharge was stopped at
0 V for the (a) first and (b) second cycles and (c) 30 mV for the third cycle. P1–3 are assigned
to the 7Li environments, as explained in the legend to Figure 4.19.
is shown that the phase formed by delithiation strongly depends on the rate of
lithiation, which can rationalize the large voltage lag phenomenon in these systems.
4.4.3 In Situ Neutron Diffraction
The principle of neutron diffraction is similar to that of X-ray diffraction, which
is mainly used to study the crystal structure of materials and is also applicable to
the Bragg formula. Its application is complementary to X-ray diffraction. When the
X-ray or electron current meets the material and scatters, the scattering center is
mainly the electron in the atom, and its scattering power increases with the increase
in the atomic number of the material and with the diffraction angle of 2𝜃 increase
and decrease. In neutron diffraction, the neutron flow is uncharged. When it inter￾acts with matter, it mainly interacts with the atomic nucleus to produce isotropic
scattering. This scattering power has no relationship with the atomic number of the
material, so the diffraction spectrum avoids the influence of the atomic number of
the element. Therefore, neutron diffraction is more reliable for the characterization
of some substances containing elements with large atomic numbers [64–68].
Sharma of the Prague Research Institute in Australia and others explored the reac￾tion mechanism of Li ion deinking and phase transition of Li4Ti5O12/TiO2 cathode
material during charging and discharging using in situ neutron diffraction technol￾ogy (Figure 4.21) [69]. In the 475–490 minutes time range of in-situ detection, the
diffraction signal of (112) crystal plane of LixTiO2 disappears, while the (112) crys￾tal plane of TiO2 displays. Therefore, it was proved by neutron diffraction that a
two-phase reaction occurred in this electrochemical process.120 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
Time (min)
2-Theta (degrees)
300
61.9
62.4
62.9
63.4
63.9
345 390
LixTiO2
TiO2
435 480 525
Figure 4.21 Selected region of in situ ND data highlighting the Li extraction process in
∽80 mg of LixTiO2 observed by the increase in 2𝜃 value of the (112) reflection indicated by
the arrow. Scaled peak intensities are shown. Source: Du et al. [69], Reproduced with
permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
Wang et al. reported an in situ neutron diffraction study of a large pocket cell
[70]. The continuity of the Li-graphite intercalated phase is completely captured
at 1C charging and discharging (that is, filling to full capacity within one hour).
However, the lithiation and dilithiation pathways are quite different, and unlike the
slow charging experiments where the Li-graphite phase diagram was established,
no LiC24 phase was found during charging at 1C rate. Approximately 75 mol. % of
the graphite is converted to LiC6 at full charge, and up to 4% lattice expansion is
observed during the charge–discharge cycle. Our work demonstrates the potential
for in situ, time-and space-resolved neutron diffraction studies of the dynamic chem￾istry and structural changes of “real-world” batteries under real cycling conditions,
which will provide microscopic insights into the important role of degradation and
diffusion dynamics in energy storage materials. For accurate phase analysis, neutron
diffraction patterns were measured at full charge (4.2 V) and discharge (2.7 V) for a
counting time of approximately one hour. The results are shown in Figure 4.22a,
along with the Rietveld improvements for each mode. Four phases are observed
under complete discharge conditions: NMC cathode and graphite anode, as well as
Al and Cu collectors. Under charged conditions, most of the graphite phase has been
converted to LiC6 and LiC12, and only a small amount of graphite phase remains.
An additional peak was found at ∼2.05 A that could not be identified with any of
the above but remained constant during charging and discharging. In situ neutron
diffraction patterns collected during the cycle are shown in Figure 4.22b. Neutron
diffraction data were collected continuously using an event-mode data acquisition
system for approximately 20 hours, during which time the cell went through seven
cycles of charge–discharge sequences. The data were divided into diffraction pat￾terns corresponding to a duration of 2.5 minutes and strobe averaged over seven
charging and discharging cycles. More details on event-based data acquisition and
strobe averaging are given in the Supplementary material. Despite averaging over
seven cycles (i.e. a total count time of 17.5 minutes), the statistical quality of each4.4 Other In Situ Characterization 121
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.22 (a) Neutron diffraction patterns obtained at charged (4.2 V) and discharged
(2.7 V) conditions along with the results of Rietveld refinement. (b) In situ neutron
diffraction pattern during a charge and discharge cycle. The in situ diffraction data,
averaged over seven cycles, are binned into 2.5-minutes histograms. The voltage (current) is
plotted in the side panel to the left (right) of the diffraction data. The acronyms used in the
figure are as follows: constant voltage discharge (CVD), constant current discharge (CCD),
open circuit voltage (OCV), constant voltage charge (CVC), and constant power charge (CPC).
Source: Wang et al. [70], Reproduced with permission from Springer Nature.
dataset is not sufficient for full Rietveld refinement of complex diffraction patterns.
One possible reason for the lack of data is that the data may not have been averaged
over the same seven periods.
4.4.4 In Situ Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry
The mass analyzer of the in situ time-of-flight mass spectrometer is an ion drift tube
in which the ions produced by the ion source are first collected, and all ions become
velocity zero in the collector. It is accelerated using a pulsed electric field into a122 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
field-free drift tube and flies to the ion receiver at a constant speed. The larger the
ion mass, the longer it takes to reach the receiver; The smaller the mass of ions, the
shorter the time it takes to reach the receiver. According to this principle, ions of dif￾ferent masses can be separated according to their m/z values. A time-of-flight mass
spectrometer has a wide range of molecular weights, fast scanning speed, and simple
instrument structure. The main disadvantage of traditional time-of-flight mass spec￾trometer is its low resolution because ions with the same mass-to-charge ratio have
a certain time distribution to reach the detector due to their different initial energies
when leaving the ion source, resulting in a decrease in resolution. Improvement is
one of the methods in linear detector in front of the mirror, plus a set of electrostatic
field will fly free ions, push back, big initial energy ions due to the initial speed, long
into the electrostatic field reflecting mirror, return journey is long, and small initial
energy ions return journey is short, and the return journey will focus on a certain
position. Thus, the resolution of the instrument is improved. This time-of-flight mass
spectrometer with an electrostatic field mirror is called a reflective time-of-flight
mass spectrometer.
As shown in Figure 4.23, the mass spectrometer needs to operate in a vacuum to
protect the detector and improve measurement accuracy. In the instrument shown,
gas samples are first sampled through microwells and then arrive at the ion source,
where pulsed electric fields are fed into the time-of-flight module. The ions are then
accelerated using a pulsed electric field perpendicular to the direction of delivery.
The main purpose of this is to determine that all ions have no initial velocity in the
horizontal direction. After the V or W flight, reach the sensor.
Turbo molecular pumps
Fil ament
Particle ToF measurement
T T
T
Aerosol inlet
(aerodynamic lens)
Aerosol
vaporizer
Orthogonal
extractor
Ion reflector MCP detector
Timing
controller
HV pulser
Averaging
ADC Preamp PC
Ionization
chamber
Chopper
Figure 4.23 Principles of an in situ time-of-flight mass spectrometer.4.5 Summary and Outlook 123
Electrolyte solution
Secondary
Ions
Primary ion
Beam
Pt reference
electrode
Si frame
Pt counter
electrode
Au working
electrode
100 nm SiN
Copper wires PDMS
Inlet Outlet
Epoxy
Figure 4.24 Schematic illustration of the microfluidic device for real-time and in situ
ToF-SIMS analysis of the EEI. Source: Liu et al. [71]/with the permission of the Royal Society
of Chemistry.
Different ions arrive at the sensor at different times, thus pushing out m/z. The
conventional assumption is that an ion has only one charge, so the resulting signal
corresponds directly to the relative atomic mass of the ion detected, so in most mass
spectrometric diagrams, the X-axis is in atomic mass units.
Time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOFMS) is also a commonly used method
to characterize elements. The collector first gathers the ions produced by the ion
source. The ions with zero initial velocity are accelerated by the pulsed electric
field, then enter the field-free drift tube and fly to the ion receiver at a constant
speed. The larger the ion mass is, the longer it takes to reach the receiver; The
smaller the ion mass, the shorter the time it takes to reach the receiver. According
to this principle, ions with different masses can be separated according to the ratio
of mass to charge. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS, Figure 4.24) is one of
the useful methods in high surface mass spectrometry (MSI) technology [72]. The
horizontal resolution of SIMS can be reduced to below 50 nm. It uses a focused
primary ion beam to bombard the sample surface and ionize it, and then generates
characteristic secondary ions to point to the mass spectrometer. Due to the high
sensitivity of the surface and the high resolution of the depth profile, ToF SIMS
can be used to study problems related to the electrode–electrolyte interface in the
battery system, such as the composition difference of the relevant interface before
and after the electrochemical reaction [71, 73–77].
4.5 Summary and Outlook
Modern scientific research is inseparable from the development of modern testing
technology, and the in situ characterization of the unique 1-D structure of nanowires124 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
is a hot topic in current research. The related research results have been reported
many times in Nature, Science, and other journals. Among the various characteri￾zation methods, the most common ones are in situ electron microscopy and in situ
XRD. These two characterization techniques are of great significance for studying
the morphology and phase changes of nanowires in electrochemical reactions and
can often provide convincing evidence to researchers. However, for some character￾ization methods with harsh test conditions, such as in situ SR and in situ neutron
diffraction, only Beijing, Shanghai, Hefei, and Taiwan have SR test sources in China
at present. There is still a lot of room for development in the characterization of
a single nanowire energy storage device. The optical field generated by femtosec￾ond laser also has a great influence on a single device, which can also provide some
information for the characterization of a single nanowire.
In the process of studying the electrochemical reaction mechanism of nanowire
materials, it is often necessary to explain a variety of test results, so that the con￾clusion can be more convincing. By using more in situ osmoelectrochemical tech￾nology in the characterization technology, real-time monitoring of the changes of
nanowire materials in the entire electrochemical reaction will undoubtedly enable
people to more accurately understand the electrochemical energy storage mecha￾nism of nanowire and explore new theories.
References
1 Wang, C.M., Xu, W., Liu, J. et al. (2010). In situ transmission electron
microscopy and spectroscopy studies of interfaces in Li ion batteries: challenges
and opportunities. Journal of Materials Research 25: 1541–1547.
2 Xu, X., Yan, M., Tian, X. et al. (2015). In situ investigation of Li and Na ion
transport with single nanowire electrochemical devices. Nano Letters 15:
3879–3884.
3 Strelcov, E., Cothren, J., Leonard, D. et al. (2015). In situ SEM study of lithium
intercalation in individual V2O5 nanowires. Nanoscale 7: 3022–3027.
4 Unocic, R.R., Sun, X.-G., Sacci, R.L. et al. (2014). Direct visualization of solid
electrolyte interphase formation in lithium-ion batteries with in situ electro￾chemical transmission electron microscopy. Microscopy and Microanalysis 20:
1029–1037.
5 Kennedy, T., Mullane, E., Geaney, H. et al. (2014). High-performance germanium
nanowire-based lithium-ion battery anodes extending over 1000 cycles through in
situ formation of a continuous porous network. Nano Letters 14: 716–723.
6 Liu, J., Li, N., Goodman, M.D. et al. (2015). Mechanically and chemically robust
sandwich-structured C@Si@C nanotube array Li-ion battery anodes. ACS Nano
9: 1985–1994.
7 Shi, H., Liu, X., Wu, R. et al. (2019). In situ SEM observation of structured Si/C
anodes reactions in an ionic-liquid-based lithium-ion battery. Applied Science
9: 956.References 125
8 Fan, Z., Zhang, L., Baumann, D. et al. (2019). In situ transmission electron
microscopy for energy materials and devices. Advanced Materials 31: 1900608.
9 Mukherjee, A., Ardakani, H.A., Yi, T. et al. (2017). Direct characterization of the
Li intercalation mechanism into α-V2O5 nanowires using in-situ transmission
electron microscopy. Applied Physics Letters 110: 213903.
10 Li, J., Johnson, G., Zhang, S. et al. (2019). In situ transmission electron
microscopy for energy applications. Joule 3: 4–8.
11 Gregorczyk, K.E., Liu, Y., Sullivan, J.P. et al. (2013). In situ transmission electron
microscopy study of electrochemical lithiation and delithiation cycling of the
conversion anode RuO2. ACS Nano 7: 6354–6360.
12 Yuan, Y., Amine, K., Lu, J. et al. (2017). Understanding materials challenges for
rechargeable ion batteries with in situ transmission electron microscopy. Nature
Communications 8: 15806.
13 Gu, M., Parent, L.R., Mehdi, B.L. et al. (2013). Demonstration of an electrochem￾ical liquid cell for operando transmission electron microscopy observation of the
lithiation/delithiation behavior of Si nanowire battery anodes. Nano Letters 13:
6106–6112.
14 Luo, L., Yang, H., Yan, P. et al. (2015). Surface-coating regulated lithiation kinet￾ics and degradation in silicon nanowires for lithium ion battery. ACS Nano 9:
5559–5566.
15 Liu, X.H., Huang, S., Picraux, S.T. et al. (2011). Reversible nanopore formation
in Ge nanowires during lithiation-delithiation cycling: an in situ transmission
electron microscopy study. Nano Letters 11: 3991–3997.
16 Kim, S.-W., Lee, H.-W., Muralidharan, P. et al. (2011). Electrochemical per￾formance and ex situ analysis of ZnMn2O4 nanowires as anode materials for
lithium rechargeable batteries. Nano Research 4: 505–510.
17 Silberstein, K.E., Lowe, M.A., Richards, B. et al. (2015). Operando X-ray scatter￾ing and spectroscopic analysis of germanium nanowire anodes in lithium ion
batteries. Langmuir 31: 2028–2035.
18 Li, A., Song, H., Wan, W. et al. (2014). Copper oxide nanowire arrays synthe￾sized by in-situ thermal oxidation as an anode material for lithium-ion batteries.
Electrochimica Acta 132: 42–48.
19 Balasubramanian, M., Sun, X., Yang, X.Q. et al. (2001). In situ X-ray diffraction
and X-ray absorption studies of high-rate lithium-ion batteries. Journal of Power
Sources 92: 1–8.
20 Misra, S., Liu, N., Nelson, J. et al. (2012). In situ X-ray diffraction studies of
(de)lithiation mechanism in silicon nanowire anodes. ACS Nano 6: 5465–5473.
21 Beaulieu, L.Y., Hatchard, T.D., Bonakdarpour, A. et al. (2003). Reaction of Li
with alloy thin films studied by in situ AFM. Journal of the Electrochemical
Society 150: A1457.
22 Liu, H., Wu, T., Zhang, L. et al. (2022). Germanium nanowires via molten-salt
electrolysis for lithium battery anode. ACS Nano 16: 14402–14411.
23 Li, Y., Zheng, R., Yu, H. et al. (2019). Observation of ZrNb14O37 nanowires as
a lithium container via in situ and ex situ techniques for high-performance
lithium-ion batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 11: 22429–22438.126 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
24 Tang, G., Zhu, H., Yu, H. et al. (2018). Ultra-long BiNbO4 nanowires with hierar￾chical architecture exhibiting reversible lithium storage. Journal of Electroanalyti￾cal Chemistry 823: 245–252.
25 Krause, A., Tkacheva, O., Omar, A. et al. (2019). In situ Raman spectroscopy
on silicon nanowire anodes integrated in lithium ion batteries. Journal of the
Electrochemical Society 166: A5378.
26 Li, J., Xie, W., Zhang, S. et al. (2021). Boosting the rate performance of Li–S bat￾teries under high mass-loading of sulfur based on a hierarchical NCNT@Co-CoP
nanowire integrated electrode. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 9: 11151–11159.
27 Stancovski, V. and Badilescu, S. (2014). In situ Raman
spectroscopic–electrochemical studies of lithium-ion battery materials: a his￾torical overview. Journal of Applied Electrochemistry 44: 23–43.
28 Shang, H., Zuo, Z., Li, L. et al. (2018). Ultrathin graphdiyne nanosheets grown in
situ on copper nanowires and their performance as lithium-ion battery anodes.
Angewandte Chemie, International Edition 57: 774–778.
29 Stokes, K., Flynn, G., Geaney, H. et al. (2018). Axial Si–Ge heterostructure
nanowires as lithium-ion battery anodes. Nano Letters 18: 5569–5575.
30 Lanz, P., Villevieille, C., and Novák, P. (2013). Electrochemical activation of
Li2MnO3 at elevated temperature investigated by in situ Raman microscopy.
Electrochimica Acta 109: 426–432.
31 Gross, T., Giebeler, L., and Hess, C. (2013). Novel in situ cell for Raman diagnos￾tics of lithium-ion batteries. The Review of Scientific Instruments 84: 073109.
32 Liu, Q., Hao, Z., Liao, X. et al. (2019). Langmuir-Blodgett nanowire devices for in
situ probing of zinc-ion batteries. Small 15: 1902141.
33 Li, Q., Qiao, Y., Guo, S. et al. (2018). Both cationic and anionic co-(de) intercala￾tion into a metal-oxide material. Joule 2: 1134–1145.
34 Lu, Y.-C., Crumlin, E.J., Veith, G.M. et al. (2012). In situ ambient pressure X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy studies of lithium-oxygen redox reactions. Scientific
Reports 2: 1–6.
35 Endo, R., Ohnishi, T., Takada, K. et al. (2020). In situ observation of lithia￾tion and delithiation reactions of a silicon thin film electrode for all-solid-state
lithium-ion batteries by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 11: 6649–6654.
36 Li, H., Shen, L., Ding, B. et al. (2015). Ultralong SrLi2Ti6O14 nanowires com￾posed of single-crystalline nanoparticles: promising candidates for high-power
lithium ions batteries. Nano Energy 13: 18–27.
37 Cai, X., Yan, H., Zheng, R. et al. (2021). Cu2Nb34O87 nanowires as a superior
lithium storage host in advanced rechargeable batteries. Inorganic Chemistry
Frontiers 8: 444–451.
38 Wang, Y., Cao, L., Li, J. et al. (2020). Cu/Cu2O@Ppy nanowires as a long-life and
high-capacity anode for lithium ion battery. Chemical Engineering Journal 391:
123597.
39 Yao, K.P., Kwabi, D.G., Quinlan, R.A. et al. (2013). Thermal stability of Li2O2
and Li2O for Li-air batteries: in situ XRD and XPS studies. Journal of the Electro￾chemical Society 160: A824.References 127
40 Liu, D., Shadike, Z., Lin, R. et al. (2019). Review of recent development of in
situ/operando characterization techniques for lithium battery research. Advanced
Materials 31: 1806620.
41 Lin, D., Li, K., and Zhou, L. (2021). Advanced in-situ characterizations of
nanocomposite electrodes for sodium-ion batteries – a short review. Composites
Communications 25: 100635.
42 Lu, J., Wu, T., and Amine, K. (2017). State-of-the-art characterization techniques
for advanced lithium-ion batteries. Nature Energy 2: 1–13.
43 Li, H., Guo, S., and Zhou, H. (2021). In-situ/operando characterization tech￾niques in lithium-ion batteries and beyond. Journal of Energy Chemistry 59:
191–211.
44 Liu, X., Tong, Y., Wu, Y. et al. (2021). In-depth mechanism understanding for
potassium-ion batteries by electroanalytical methods and advanced in situ char￾acterization techniques. Small Methods 5: 2101130.
45 Borkiewicz, O.J., Shyam, B., Wiaderek, K.M. et al. (2012). The AMPIX electro￾chemical cell: a versatile apparatus for in situ X-ray scattering and spectroscopic
measurements. Journal of Applied Crystallography 45: 1261–1269.
46 Zhou, Y., Grunwaldt, J.D., Krumeich, F. et al. (2010). Hydrothermal synthesis
of Bi6S2O15 nanowires: structural, in situ EXAFS, and humidity-sensing studies.
Small 6: 1173–1179.
47 Xu, S., Qin, Y., Xu, C. et al. (2010). Self-powered nanowire devices. Nature
Nanotechnology 5: 366–373.
48 Ghosh, S., Bao, W., Nika, D.L. et al. (2010). Dimensional crossover of thermal
transport in few-layer graphene. Nature Materials 9: 555–558.
49 Mai, L., Dong, Y., Xu, L. et al. (2010). Single nanowire electrochemical devices.
Nano Letters 10: 4273–4278.
50 Hu, P., Yan, M., Wang, X. et al. (2016). Single-nanowire electrochemical probe
detection for internally optimized mechanism of porous graphene in electro￾chemical devices. Nano Letters 16: 1523–1529.
51 Yan, M., Wang, F., Han, C. et al. (2013). Nanowire templated semihollow bicon￾tinuous graphene scrolls: designed construction, mechanism, and enhanced
energy storage performance. Journal of the American Chemical Society 135:
18176–18182.
52 Becker, C.R., Strawhecker, K.E., McAllister, Q.P. et al. (2013). In situ atomic
force microscopy of lithiation and delithiation of silicon nanostructures for
lithium ion batteries. ACS Nano 7: 9173–9182.
53 Huang, S., Cheong, L.-Z., Wang, S. et al. (2018). In-situ study of surface structure
evolution of silicon anodes by electrochemical atomic force microscopy. Applied
Surface Science 452: 67–74.
54 Tokranov, A., Sheldon, B.W., Li, C. et al. (2014). In situ atomic force microscopy
study of initial solid electrolyte interphase formation on silicon electrodes for
Li-ion batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 6: 6672–6686.
55 Zhang, L., Yang, T., Du, C. et al. (2020). Lithium whisker growth and stress
generation in an in situ atomic force microscope–environmental transmission
electron microscope set-up. Nature Nanotechnology 15: 94–98.128 4 Nanowires for In Situ Characterization
56 Liu, X., Wang, D., and Wan, L. (2015). Progress of electrode/electrolyte interfacial
investigation of Li-ion batteries via in situ scanning probe microscopy. Scientific
Bulletin 60: 839–849.
57 Liu, X.-R., Deng, X., Liu, R.-R. et al. (2014). Single nanowire electrode electro￾chemistry of silicon anode by in situ atomic force microscopy: solid electrolyte
interphase growth and mechanical properties. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
6: 20317–20323.
58 Harks, P.P.R.M.L., Mulder, F.M., and Notten, P.H.L. (2015). In situ methods
for Li-ion battery research: a review of recent developments. Journal of Power
Sources 288: 92–105.
59 Lee, H.-W., Li, Y., and Cui, Y. (2016). Perspectives in in situ transmission
electron microscopy studies on lithium battery electrodes. Current Opinion in
Chemical Engineering 12: 37–43.
60 Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Wang, Z. et al. (2014). Lithiation of SiO2 in Li-ion batteries: in
situ transmission electron microscopy experiments and theoretical studies. Nano
Letters 14: 7161–7170.
61 Krachkovskiy, S., Trudeau, M.L., and Zaghib, K. (2020). Application of magnetic
resonance techniques to the in situ characterization of Li-ion batteries: a review.
Materials 13: 1694.
62 Ogata, K., Salager, E., Kerr, C. et al. (2014). Revealing lithium–silicide phase
transformations in nano-structured silicon-based lithium ion batteries via in situ
NMR spectroscopy. Nature Communications 5: 1–11.
63 Key, B., Bhattacharyya, R., Morcrette, M. et al. (2009). Real-time NMR investiga￾tions of structural changes in silicon electrodes for lithium-ion batteries. Journal
of the American Chemical Society 131: 9239–9249.
64 Lai, S.Y., Knudsen, K.D., Sejersted, B.T. et al. (2019). Silicon nanoparticle ensem￾bles for lithium-ion batteries elucidated by small-angle neutron scattering. ACS
Applied Energy Materials 2: 3220–3227.
65 Qian, D., Ma, C., More, K.L. et al. (2015). Advanced analytical electron
microscopy for lithium-ion batteries. NPG Asia Materials 7: e193–e193.
66 Srinivasan, R.M., Chandran, K.R., Chen, Y. et al. (2022). In-operando neutron
diffraction investigation of structural transitions during lithiation of Si electrode
in Li-ion battery. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 169: 100545.
67 Zhou, H., An, K., Allu, S. et al. (2016). Probing multiscale transport and inhomo￾geneity in a lithium-ion pouch cell using in situ neutron methods. ACS Energy
Letters 1: 981–986.
68 Didier, C., Pang, W.K., Guo, Z. et al. (2020). Phase evolution and intermittent
disorder in electrochemically lithiated graphite determined using in operando
neutron diffraction. Chemistry of Materials 32: 2518–2531.
69 Du, G., Sharma, N., Peterson, V.K. et al. (2011). Br-doped Li4Ti5O12 and com￾posite TiO2 anodes for Li-ion batteries: synchrotron X-ray and in situ neutron
diffraction studies. Advanced Functional Materials 21: 3990–3997.
70 Wang, X.-L., An, K., Cai, L. et al. (2012). Visualizing the chemistry and structure
dynamics in lithium-ion batteries by in-situ neutron diffraction. Scientific Reports
2: 1–7.References 129
71 Liu, B., Yu, X.-Y., Zhu, Z. et al. (2014). In situ chemical probing of the
electrode–electrolyte interface by ToF-SIMS. Lab on a Chip 14: 855–859.
72 Lu, J., Hua, X., and Long, Y.-T. (2017). Recent advances in real-time and in situ
analysis of an electrode–electrolyte interface by mass spectrometry. The Analyst
142: 691–699.
73 Bordes, A., De Vito, E., Haon, C. et al. (2016). Multiscale investigation of silicon
anode Li insertion mechanisms by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrome￾ter imaging performed on an in situ focused ion beam cross section. Chemistry of
Materials 28: 1566–1573.
74 Liu, Z., Lu, P., Zhang, Q. et al. (2018). A bottom-up formation mechanism of
solid electrolyte interphase revealed by isotope-assisted time-of-flight secondary
ion mass spectrometry. Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 9: 5508–5514.
75 Yulaev, A., Oleshko, V., Haney, P. et al. (2018). From microparticles to nanowires
and back: radical transformations in plated Li metal morphology revealed via in
situ scanning electron microscopy. Nano Letters 18: 1644–1650.
76 Wu, S.-C., Ai, Y., Chen, Y.-Z. et al. (2020). High-performance rechargeable
aluminum–selenium battery with a new deep eutectic solvent electrolyte:
thiourea-AlCl3. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 12: 27064–27073.
77 Pereira-Nabais, C., Swiatowska, J., Chagnes, A. et al. (2013). Interphase chem- ´
istry of Si electrodes used as anodes in Li-ion batteries. Applied Surface Science
266: 5–16.131
5
Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
5.1 Electrochemistry, Advantages, and Issues of LIBs
Batteries
5.1.1 History of Lithium-ion Batteries
Rechargeable batteries (secondary batteries) have been widely used in many
applications, including consumer electronics, electric tools, and more recently,
rechargeable cells are being developed as a power source for electric and hybrid
electric vehicles and grid storage [1]. The basic components of each battery include
two electrodes, the anode and the cathode, and an electrolyte (separator) to sep￾arate them [2]. Electric power is stored in a battery as chemical energy between
two electrodes. Among batteries operated by various types of electrochemistry,
rechargeable batteries based on lithium intercalation chemistry are the most
promising candidate and lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have achieved great success in
the market [3]. The history of rechargeable lithium batteries began in 1960s, when
chemists in Europe explored the intercalation chemistry of lithium into layered
transition-metal sulfides. In 1976, Stanley Whittingham created a rechargeable
lithium battery composed of a layered titanium disulfide (TiS2) cathode, a lithium
metal anode, and organic electrolytes with an operation potential of 2.0 V and good
initial performance [4]. However, during repeated charging process, Li dendrites
forms on the anode surface, which grows across the electrolyte to the cathode to
create an internal short circuit. Consequently, the large amount of heat generated
during the short circuit would ignite the flammable electrolyte, raising serious
safety hazards [5]. In addition, the operation voltage of TiS2 cathode is rather
limited to <2.5 V due to the overlap of the Ti4+:3d band with the top of the S2−:3p
band. Such an overlap results in the introduction of holes or removal of electrons
from the S2−:3p band and the formation of molecular ions such as S2
2−, rather than
the accessibility of higher states of Mn+ ions, i.e. higher voltages.
Recognizing the instability of sulfides, John B. Goodenough’s group at Oxford
University focused on layered oxide cathodes during the 1980s. They demonstrated
reversible Li insertion and extraction in a layered lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO2) com￾pound [6]. Over half of the lithium could be extracted reversibly at a high voltage of
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.132 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
∼4 V versus Li+/Li, showing significantly improved energy density compared with
TiS2 cathode [7]. Based on this innovation, Akira Yoshino, then at the Asahi Kasei
Corporation, made the first rechargeable LIB by combining the LiCoO2 cathode with
a graphitic-carbon anode, which was commercialized by Sony Corporation in 1991
to power the first portable phone [8]. After more than two decades of development,
the commercial LIBs based on “intercalation chemistry” offer a gravimetric energy
density of >250 Wh kg−1 and a volumetric energy density of >700 Wh l−1, which is
almost five times higher than that of the Pb–acid batteries [9]. For now, the LIBs
have dominated the portable electronics market and are now actively expanding
their applications into emerging markets including electric vehicles and grid stor￾age. Given the huge success and great influence of LIBs, the 2019 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry was jointly given to John B. Goodenough, Stanley M. Whittingham, and
Akira Yoshino, recognizing their pioneering work on lithium intercalation materials
for LIBs.
5.1.2 Electrochemistry of Lithium-ion Batteries
The cell configuration and operation principle of a typical rechargeable LIB-based
LiCoO2 cathode and graphitic carbon anode are shown in Figure 5.1 [10]. During the
charge process, electrons leave the cathode via an external circuit accompanied with
Co3+ being oxidized to Co4+ and flows toward to anode, where carbon is reduced. To
retain charge neutrality in electrodes, Li ions (guests) are released from the layered
host (CoO6 octahedral layer) to electrolyte, and the working cation of the electrolyte
carries positive charge to the anode, finally inserting into the graphite host structure.
This process is reversed during discharge process. The cell electrochemical reactions
Current
Cathode
Co
LiCoO2 Surface films Surface films Carbon
Separator
Li Li+
Li+
Li+ Li+
Li+
e–
e–
Li+
O
Electron
Anode
Figure 5.1 Schematic illustration of the configuration and working principle of a typical Li
ion battery based on “rocking chair” chemistry, which employs carbon as anode and lithium
transition metal oxide as cathode. Source: Etacheri et al. [10].5.1 Electrochemistry, Advantages, and Issues of LIBs Batteries 133
during charge process are described as follows [2, 11].
Cathode: LiCoO2 → Li1−xCoO2 + xe− + xLi+
Anode: C + ye− + yLi+ → LixC
Overall reaction: LiCoO2 + (x∕y)C → x∕yLiyC + Li1−xCoO2
There are several important factors to evaluate the performance of a LIB, including
operation potential, theoretical/practical specific capacity of electrode materials and
cells, and theoretical/practical specific energy of the cell, since they determine the
theoretical energy stored in the cell upon one charge. We will discuss them in the
following section in detail.
5.1.2.1 Theoretical Operation Potential
The open-circuit voltage VOC of such a lithium cell is given by the difference in
the lithium chemical potential between the cathode (𝜇C) and the anode (𝜇A) in the
following equation, where EA and EC represent the theoretical electrode potential
for anode and cathode, respectively; F is the Faraday constant (F = 96 485 C mol−1)
[11, 12].
VOC = EC − EA = (𝜇A − 𝜇C)∕F (5.1)
For example, EC of a LiCoO2 cathode is ∼4.0 V versus Li+/Li and EA of a graphite
anode is ∼0.2 V versus Li+/Li, giving a full cell with operation voltage of 3.8 V [12].
5.1.2.2 Theoretical Specific Capacity of Electrode Materials and Cells
Faraday’s law could be employed to calculate the theoretical specific capacity (Q) of
a certain electrode material:
Q = (n × F)∕(3600 × MW) (unit ∶ Ah g−1
) (5.2)
where n is the number of charge carriers, F is the Faraday constant (96 485 C mol−1),
and MW is the molecular weight of active materials used in the electrode. The theo￾retical specific capacity of LiCoO2 could be calculated in case a complete extraction
of Li occurs during charge:
Qtheoretical = (1 × 96 485)∕(3600 × 97.87) = 0.274 Ah g−1
Nevertheless, in a practical cell, the specific capacity of electrode during operation
is usually different from the theoretical value, which can be calculated according to
the voltage-time profile from the galvanostatic cycling test:
Qpractical = (I × A × t)∕(3600 × Mw) (unit: Ah g−1) (5.3)
where I is the current density (A m−2), A is the electrode area (m2), and t is the time
to reach the cut-off potential. Taking Li1−xCoO2 as an example, it has a high theo￾retical specific capacity of 0.274 Ah g−1, but the cathode evolves oxygen release once
removing Li+ beyond x = 0.55 because of the pinned Co3+/Co4+ redox couple at the
top of the O:2p bands. As a result, the reversible delivered capacity of LiCoO2 cathode
is limited to ∼150 mAh g−1 [2].134 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
The theoretical specific capacity of an electrochemical cell (Qcell) is determined by
the theoretical specific capacities of both electrodes and can be calculated as follows:
Qcell = Qtheoretical−a × Qtheoretical−c∕(Qtheoretical−a + Qtheoretical−c) (5.4)
where Qtheoretical−a denotes the theoretical specific capacity of the anode while
Qtheoretical−c denotes the theoretical specific capacity of the cathode.
5.1.2.3 Theoretical Specific Energy Density of an Electrochemical Cell
To calculate the theoretical specific energy (unit: Wh kg−1) of an electrochemical
cell, we can multiply the theoretical specific capacity (Qcell) and theoretical voltage
output (Voc) of the cell. The energy stored in a practically fully charged cell may be
obtained by measuring the time Δt for its complete discharge at a constant current
Idis = dq/dt (where q represents the state of charge). The energy density of a prac￾tical cell can be calculated by the following equation, where wt is the weight of the
cell [11].
Energy density = ∫
Δt
0
IV(t)dt∕wt = ∫
Q
0
V(q)dq∕wt (5.5)
5.1.3 Key Materials for Lithium-ion Batteries
According to the above discussion, it is clear that the gravimetric specific energy
of a rechargeable battery could be improved by increasing the capacity, increasing
the operation voltage, or both. To achieve such a goal, it is essential to use battery
materials with properly designed structure and compositions. The key materials for
LIBs include cathode, anode, electrolyte, and separators, which are discussed in the
following section.
5.1.3.1 Cathode
To realize practical LIBs with high energy output and long lifespan, the cathode must
meet the following critical requirements:
(i) A high specific capacity and a high electrode potential (or low chemical poten￾tial 𝜇C).
(ii) Highly reversible lithium insertion/extraction reaction with minimal change in
structure.
(iii) Mixed conduction capability, i.e. good electronic and ionic conductivity.
(iv) Low-cost, environmentally benign, and thermally and chemically stable.
(v) High tap/press density to ensure high volumetric density.
In the search for advanced electrode materials for high-energy LIBs, cathode
materials based on intercalation chemistry are still promising candidates due to
their stable cycling performance, high tap density, and high working potential [13].
Insertion-type cathode materials are classified into two major categories: layered
oxides and polyanionic compounds [7]. The electrochemical-related features of
some typical insertion-type cathodes are summarized in Table 5.1.5.1 Electrochemistry, Advantages, and Issues of LIBs Batteries 135
Table 5.1 Electrochemical-related features of some typical insertion-type cathodes for
LIBs.
Material
Specific
capacity
(mAh g−1)
Average
potential
(V versus
Li + /Li) Pros. Cons.
LiCoO2 155 3.9a) High volumetric
energy density
Expensive
LiMn2O4 100–120 4.0a) Low price, safer
electrochemistry
Poor high
temperature
durability
LiFePO4 160 3.4a) Low price, high
thermal stability
Low volumetric
energy density,
poor electronic and
ionic conductivity
LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 200 3.8a) High energy
density, low price
Poor thermal
stability, high air
sensitivity
LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 200 3.73a)
Li3V2(PO4)3 197b) ∼3.8a) High structure
stability and
thermal stability
High price of V,
poor electronic and
ionic conductivity
a) Midpoint voltage.
b) Theoretical value.
Source: Data obtained from Refs. [14, 15].
5.1.3.2 Anode
As for the anode side, the intercalation chemistry has been dominated by graphite
and its derivatives, which enable very stable and reversible lithium intercala￾tion/extraction. Given the limited theoretical capacity of insertion-type graphite
anode (372 mAh g−1), new anode materials having higher energy densities are
desired. Opportunities have been found in advanced materials operated by new
storage mechanism, such as interfacial/nanopore-storage-type porous carbons,
alloy-type anodes and their derivatives, conversion-type oxides, and the plat￾ting/stripping type Li metal [16–19]. For instance, the Li metal anode has a large
theoretical capacity of 3860 mAh g−1. This value is about ten times greater than the
present graphite anode. The electrochemical-related features of some typical anode
materials are summarized in Table 5.2.
5.1.3.3 Electrolyte
The electrolyte in LIBs must satisfy several key requirements such as:
(i) A wide electrochemical stable voltage window Eg to ensure high energy density.
(ii) A high Li+ conductivity 𝜎Li of >10−4 S cm−1 and a low electronic conductivity
of 𝜎e <10−10 S cm−1 over the temperature range of battery operation.136 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
Table 5.2 Summary of some typical anode materials for LIBs.
Charge storage
mechanism Material
Specific
capacity
(mAh g−1) Comments
Insertion-type Graphite 372a Stable cycling, high Coulumbic
efficiency, low energy density
Li4Ti5O12 175a “Zero-strain” structure, high
safety, poor electronic/ionic
conductivity, low energy density
Interfacial/
nanopore￾storage-type
Nanostructured
carbonaceous
materials
<1750 High in capacity but poor in
Coulombic efficiency, severe side
reactions with electrolyte
Alloy-type Si 4200a Extremely high capacity. Low
operation potential. Huge
volume variations. Poor
electrochemical stability. Low
price
P 2596a
Sn 960a
Conversion-type Metal oxides 375–1170 High in capacity but large
potential polarizations. Poor
electrochemical stability
Metal sulfides 447–1230
Metal
phosphides
700–1800
Stripping/
plating-type
Li metal 3860a Extremely high energy density.
Extremely low electrode
potential. Poor Coulombic
efficiency and cycling stability,
safety hazards
a) Theoretical value.
Source: Data obtained from Refs [20–23].
(iii) A transference number 𝜎Li/𝜎total ≈1, where 𝜎total includes conductivities by
other ions in the electrolyte.
(iv) Good chemical and electrochemical compatibility with both positive and nega￾tive electrodes, e.g. the capability to form passivating solid/electrolyte-interface
(SEI) layer.
(v) High flash point, high boiling point, and preferably nonflammable and nonex￾plosive to ensure a safe battery.
(vi) Low toxicity and low cost.
5.1.3.4 Separator
A separator is located between the positive and negative electrodes to avoid short
circuit caused by physical contact between two electrodes and works as an elec￾trolyte reservoir [12]. To achieve such a goal, the separator needs to be mechanically5.1 Electrochemistry, Advantages, and Issues of LIBs Batteries 137
Table 5.3 General requirements for separators used in LIBs.
Parameter Requirement
Chemical and electrochemical stabilities Stable for a long period of time
Wettability Wet out quickly and completely
Mechanical property >1000 kg cm−1(98.06 MPa)
Thickness 20–25 μm
Pore size <1 μm
Porosity 40–60%
Permeability (Gurley) <0.025 s μm−1
Dimensional stability No curl up and lay flat
Thermal stability <5% shrinkage after 60 min at 90 ∘C
Shutdown Effectively shut down the battery at elevated
temperatures
Source: Wu et al. [24].
and chemically (electrochemically) stable, i.e. does not directly involve any elec￾trochemical reactions. In addition, an ideal separator should meet the following
requirement: (i) high wettability and good permeability toward electrolyte for
efficient ion transport; (ii) high thermal stability or thermal shutdown ability to
avoid short-circuiting at elevated temperatures. The property of separator, including
structure, morphology, porosity, and wettability toward electrolytes, has a great
influence on the cell kinetics (Table 5.3).
5.1.4 Advantages and Issues of Lithium-ion Batteries
The development of electrochemical energy storage (EES) systems can be traced
back to the year 1800. During the next two centuries, EES systems will penetrate
almost every aspect of modern civilization, having a great influence on people’s daily
lives. Throughout the history of EES development, from Pb-acid batteries (1850s),
Ni–Cd batteries (1890s), and Ni–MH cells (1960s) to, finally, LIBs at present [25],
LIBs outperform other EES systems in terms of high gravimetric/volumetric energy
density, high power density, and long cycle life. For now, the gravimetric energy
densities of commercial LIBs based on “intercalation chemistry” and non-aqueous
liquid electrolytes are almost five times higher than those of the Pb–acid batteries.
However, the desire to improve energy density is always the driving force behind
the progress of advanced technology. In the future, a target energy density of
>300 Wh kg−1 or even 500 Wh kg−1 is desired to power electric vehicles with a
300-mile driving range. Nevertheless, the energy density of state-of-the-art LIBs
is rather limited by traditional intercalation chemistry due to the relatively small
number of crystallographic sites for storing charge-carrier ions. For this reason,
materials that operate on new chemistry for Li+ storage, such as alloying and
conversion, are emerging as promising candidates because of the possibility that138 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
they will surpass the energy densities of intercalation-type electrodes [26]. Systems
governed by new electrochemistry are noted as “post-LIBs” hereafter [27].
The enhanced energy density of post-LIBs makes them promising next-generation
energy storage systems; nevertheless, irreversible phase transitions and unstable
electrode/electrolyte interfaces are still two major challenges to conquer [27]. In
addition, the rapidly developing electronic industry gives rise to diverse function
requirement for EES systems, such as flexible batteries and micro-batteries [25].
Careful materials structure optimization and electrode design are essential for
post-LIBs to take advantage of their material superiority and eventually fulfill their
mission of surpassing state-of-the-art LIBs. Nanowire (NW) materials, thanks to
their unique physical/chemical properties, offer new opportunities for addressing
the challenges of advanced EES systems [28]. In this section, we will discuss how
LIBs benefit from NW-structured materials in terms of cathode, anode, separator,
and electrolyte.
5.2 Unique Characteristic of Nanowires for LIBs
As mentioned in the previous section, the intrinsic characteristics of electrode mate￾rials directly affect the capacity and life of LIBs, so the present development bottle￾neck of LIBs is mainly limited by the development of high-performance electrode
materials. In recent years, the rapid development of nanotechnology and the wide
application of nanomaterials have made the choice of electrode materials of LIBs no
longer limited to the combination of different elements [29]. As a typical nanostruc￾ture, NW materials possess unique electrochemical characteristics for the applica￾tion of LIBs, which is not able to provide with traditional bulk materials. The unique
features of NW electrode materials include the following [30–33]:
5.2.1 Enhancing the Diffusion Dynamics of Carriers
LIBs are also known as “rocking-chair” batteries because lithium ions shuttle back
and forth between cathode and anode during the charge and discharge processes.
For conventional bulk electrodes, the slow diffusion kinetics of lithium ions within
them is the main reason limiting the rate capability of the battery. Compared with
bulk materials, NWs with diameter in the nanometer scale can greatly shorten the
diffusion distance of ions in the radial diffusion of ions along NWs, and the electrons
can be continuously transmitted along the axis, thus enhancing the diffusion kinetic
properties of carriers and improving the rate capability of LIBs.
5.2.2 Enhancing Structural Stability of Materials
The ionic batteries are based on the ion intercalation/extraction reactions in the elec￾trode material. The insertion of charged ions into electrode material will lead to the
internal stress of the lattice, resulting in the destruction of the material structure
and even the fracture or pulverization of the electrode, and then the rapid decay of5.3 Nanowires as Anodes in LIBs 139
the specific capacity. Because of their radial position at the nanometer scale, NW
materials have good stress release properties, which can effectively accommodate
the volume changes for electrodes during lithiation/delithiation, and improve the
structural stability of the materials compared with bulk materials.
5.2.3 Befitting the In Situ Characterization of Electrochemical Process
A deep understanding of the electrochemical reaction mechanism of electrode mate￾rials is of great significance to optimizing the electrochemical performance of the
battery. At present, although the practical application of LIBs is basically mature,
the details of electrochemical reaction of electrode materials are very little known,
which is precisely the key to solving the current capacity bottleneck of LIBs. The in
situ characterization of electrode materials during charge and discharge is an effec￾tive method to observe and understand their intrinsic electrochemical properties. In
virtue of their high aspect ratio and robust mechanical properties, NWs have unique
advantages over other materials in building in situ electrochemical devices for the
in site characterization of electrochemical.
5.2.4 Enabling the Construction of Flexible Devices
With the development of light and miniaturization of modern electronic devices,
wearable and flexible energy storage devices have become one of the most com￾petitive potential development directions in the future. The high aspect ratio of
NWs makes them possess good bending and robust mechanical properties, which
cannot only construct three-dimensional (3D) free-standing and metallic current
collector-free electrodes but also interweave with each other to form a flexible NW
network. This makes NW materials unique in the fabrication of flexible electrodes
to construct flexible devices.
5.3 Nanowires as Anodes in LIBs
5.3.1 Alloy-Type Anode Materials (Si, Ge, and Sn)
5.3.1.1 Lithium Storage in Si Nanowires
The capacity of the full battery depends on the capacities of matched cathode
and anode (only considering positive and negative materials), and nowadays, the
research on cathode materials has approached its theoretical capacity, while the
capacity of full batteries is mainly limited by the anode materials [34]. Thus, there
are also a lot of efforts devoted to finding other effective anodes with higher capacity
and lower price compared with commercial graphite systems.
Silicon, which possesses a surprising high theoretical capacity (4200 mAh g−1, ten
times over the theoretical capacity of Li metal), is one of the most promising anode
materials for next-generation LIBs [35, 36]. In addition to its satisfactory capacity, Si
is the second most abundant element in the earth’s crust resulting in low cost com￾pared to Li. Although its lithiation voltage (0.4 V versus Li/Li+) is higher than that of140 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
graphite (0.1 V versus Li/Li+), it is still a nice choice as anode compared with most
other alloys and metal oxides [37]. However, there are some bulk rocks lying on the
road to the commercial application of Si-based anodes. Besides the low electronic
conductivity, the huge volume expansion (over 300%) of Si-based electrodes during
lithiation/delithiation procedure is the most severe problem, which causes an unsta￾ble SEI layer, destruction, and electronic isolation of electrode, finally leading to poor
cycle stability and rate performance [38, 39].
Nanotechnology should be an effective way to solve the above problems, and there
is already evidence showing that the intrinsic physical and chemical properties
of Si can be significantly improved by nanocrystallization. Among nano-sized
materials, from 0D materials (Si nanoparticles) to 3D materials (nanosphere), the
one-dimensional Si-nanowires (SiNWs) have attracted researcher’s devotion due to
the following reasons: [40] (i) SiNWs can provide rapid electronic and ionic trans￾port pathways; (ii) SiNWs with small diameters can accommodate large volume
variation; (iii) void space constructed by adjacent NWs allows for fast penetration
and storage of electrolyte; and (iv) SiNWs can offer high material utilization due to
a high surface-to-volume ratio.
Of course, pure SiNWs used as anode materials are also not able to solve all the
problems. In fact, SiNWs still have to face the structural attenuation caused by the
volume change during the cycle and the continuous growth of SEI films, which are
obviously weaker than that of other morphological materials. Thus, incorporating
additives into the electrode is a necessary strategy for further improvement of elec￾trochemical performance.
A suitable doping material that will not change the crystalline structures of
substrate materials after doping procedures can effectively influence the intrinsic
chemical and physical properties of base materials. There are two common cate￾gories in which SiNWs are growing: (i) bottom-up methods, most of which are based
on vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) mechanism, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), laser ablation, and supercritical-fluid-liquid–solid
(SFLS) method; (ii) top-down methods, the most popular method of which is
metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE) [41].
As for doping elements applied in these methods, B and P have been extensively
investigated. As it is well-known, the doped B will get an electron from Si when
it forms a bond, and an excess hole will be generated accordingly, which is called
p-type doping; And P will provide an excess electron, which is called n-type doping.
These two doping methods can both greatly increase the carrier concentration in the
silicon material to improve its conductivity.
Ge et al. prepared a B-doped porous SiNWs by using MACE method (Figure 5.2a)
[42]. They directly etched the B-doped Si wafer with AgNO3, which is possible to
adjust the pore size of this porous NWs through concentration during synthesis
process. According to this work, the B element cannot only work on improving
the intrinsic properties of SiNWs, but also help form its surface structure. The
obtained sample possessed an average pore diameter of 8 nm, proving numbers
of sites for contacting with electrolyte. Besides, because of this kind of porous
structure, shorter diffusion paths of ions/electrons and enough space for volume
expansion during charge/discharge processes facilitate the chemical performance5.3 Nanowires as Anodes in LIBs 141
(a)
(d) (e) (f)
(b) (c)
Cycle number
Distance (um) ZR (ohm)
–ZI (ohm)
Q (Ah g–1)
m-SiNW
m-SiNW m-SiNW
h-SiNW
h-SiNW
h-SiNW
l-SiNW
l-SiNW
l-SiNW
Resistance (107 ohm)
5 10
1
2
100
200
300
100 nm
15 20 0 10 0 40 80 120
Cycle
0.2 C/0.2 C
160 200 0 0
1
2
3
4
5
10
20
30
40
50
20 30 40 50
8.7 GPa
l
r
27 GPaVon Mises stress
Discharge
Charge
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
0 20
0
1000
2000
3000
1
2
3 4 5
6
4000
5000
0
20
40
60
80
100
40 60 80 100 120
Figure 5.2 (a) One unit of the porous structure is used for theoretical simulation and
analysis. (b) TEM images of porous Si nanowires etched with 0.02 M AgNO3. (c) Charge/
discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency of porous silicon nanowire electrodes at
current rates of 0.6, 1.2, 2.4, 3.6, 4.8, and 9.6 A g−1. (d) Electric resistances of SiNWs
measured as a function of distance by a probe station. Inset: A SEM image of a single SiNW
contacting to four metal contacts with a gap between the nearest contacts = 7 μm.
(e) Impedance spectra of coin-type cells of SiNW | lithium metal at fully charged states by
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). (f) Capacity retention of SiNWs during
repeated cycles of lithiation and delithiation at 0.2 C.
of SiNWs-based anodes (Figure 5.2a). Under the synergistic effect between compo￾sition and structure, the discharge capacity of this anode is over 1900 mAh g−1 at
the current density of 3.6 A g−1 during the beginning several cycles (Figure 5.2c).
And the Coulombic efficiency (CE) of this cell reaches above 99.5% after 20 cycles
with a stable capacity of around 1600 mAh g−1 at current density of 4 A g−1 after
250 cycles. In addition to analyzing the influence of element B on SiNWs from a
qualitative perspective, other researchers have also studied it from a quantitative
perspective. Hwang et al. fabricated B-doped SiNWs with different orders of doping
concentration including 1.2 × 1012, 2.7 × 1015, 5.7 × 1019 cm−3, which are named as
I-, m-, h-Si NWs respectively [43]. The BET testing shows that the surface areas of
the l-, m- and h-SiNWs are 16, 16 and 260 m2 g−1, respectively. According to the
formula 𝜎 = ne𝜇, the electron transport ability should be proportional to the doping
level. However, the fact is that m-SiNWs has the highest conductivity among the
three samples. That’s because the h-SiNWs possesses too much excessive surface
areas, in which lots of metal oxides are generated, leading to reduction in the
electrical conductivity. It is noteworthy that the conductivity of h-SiNWs is slightly
lower than that of m-SiNWs and both of them are 100 times higher than that of
I-SiNWs (Figure 5.2d,e). Additionally, the property possessing superabundant pore
of h-SiNWs leads to the lowest specific capacity, though its stability is the best
compared with other two samples during full cell texts. As a consequence, the
m-SiNWs-based cathode, having appropriate electronic conductivity and porosity, is142 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
a more satisfactory anode for LIBs than other two types according to electrochemical
performance (Figure 5.2f).
Similar to B doping, P doping can also adjust the morphology and intrinsic prop￾erties of Si NWs with similar mechanisms, and it is also analyzed from a qualitative
and quantitative perspective [44, 45]. Other common methods of modifying SiNWs
are summarized in Table 5.4.
5.3.1.2 Lithium Storage in Ge Nanowires
Because the Li-ion storage properties are similar to those of Si, Germanium
(Ge), which has a faster Li diffusivity (400 times, 6.51 × 10−12 cm2 s−1 for Ge and
1.41 × 10−14 cm2 s−1 for Si) and better electrical conductivity than Si (104 times
higher than that of Si), is another candidate for anode materials for LIBs [57].
During charge process, each Ge atom can obtain 4.4 Li+, delivering a theoretical
capacity of 1624 mAh g−1, which is second only to that of Si [58]. Though Ge is
more expensive than Si, the isotropic lithium behavior of Ge makes it less fracture
failure of Ge-based anode, leading to possibility of better rate performance and
cycle stability. In addition to advantages above, the content of Ge is as rich as Si
in the crust; thus, this project of Ge-based anode in LIBs has also attracted some
attention. However, Ge-based anodes face same problem as Si-based anodes, which
suffer from dramatic volume variations during the lithiation/delithiation process.
Fortunately, the strategy of nanoization to alleviate the massive volume expansion
of Ge is also effective, while Ge nanowires (GeNWs) also show promising perfor￾mance among them because of the problem of particle pulverization. Cui’s group
firstly reported a Ge NWs-based anode for LIBs directly grown on stainless steel foil
covered with Au catalyst via CVD method [59]. Compared with previous studies,
this method is easier and faster. And direct contact between NWs and collectors
avoids reducing electronic contact due to pulverization and insufficient binding
power of the polymer (Figure 5.3a,b). This simple but effective operation brought
a great Ge-based anode with a stable cycling life and great rate performance; its
discharge capacity is 600 mAh g−1 at 2 C rate (Figure 5.3c). Yuan et al. use a one-step
dodecanethiol monolayer passivation process to obtain an alkanethiol-passivated
GeNW in a much lower temperature than that of many fabrication methods
of C-based Ge composites (Figure 5.3d) [60]. There is a 1 nm-thick passivation
layer on the surface of GeNWs. It is precisely because of the existence of the
passivation layer that this anode material exhibits higher initial CE and cycle
stability (Figure 5.3e). Moreover, the full cell with LiFeO4 as cathode and this
alkanethiol-passivated GeNWs as anode had a capacity retention of 90% after
30 cycles (Figure 5.3f).
Some researchers want to combine the advantages of silicon’s high capacity with
the advantages of germanium’s high electronic and ionic conductivity. Then, by
adjusting the ratio of Si to Ge in the NWs, the corresponding anode materials can
be obtained according to the demands. For example, Kennedy et al. fabricated
bind-free GeNWs composited with Si branches by a vapor–solid–solid (VSS) mech￾anism [61]. The authors have studied three anodes with different Si-to-Ge ratios
(1 : 2, 1 : 3, and 1 : 4). And results showed that heterostructured anodes with higherTable 5.4 Summary of some modifying methods of Si NWs-based LIB anode and their electrochemical performance.
Method Si NWs-based anodes Anode performance References
Performance of high current density Cycle performance
Doping materials B-doped Si NWs 18 A g−1 1100 mAh
g−1 >250 cycles
2Ag−1 2000 mAh
g−1 >250 cycles
[42]
P-doped Si NWs 16 A g−1 586.7 mAh
g−1 >5000 cycles
1.5 A g−1 2061.1 mAh g−1
>1000 cycles
[44]
Si NWs decorated
with carbon
materials
Amorphous carbon￾coated SiNWs
0.15 A g−1 1326 mAh g−1
40 cycles
[46]
Si NWs@G@RGO 8.4 A g−1
500 mAh g−1
2.1 A g−1
1600 mAh g−1
100 cycles
[47]
SiNWs/MWCNTs 1/15 C 1695 mAh
g−1 100 cycles
[48]
Si NWs decorated
with metallic
materials
Cu-coated Si NWs 0.5 C
1750 mAh g−1
50 cycles
0.05 C
2138 mAh g−1
30 cycles
[49]
Al-coated Si NWs 0.1 C
1300 mAh g−1 100 cycles
[50]
Sn-coated Si NWs 0.1 C
1865 mAh g−1
100 cycles
[51]
(Continued)Table 5.4 (Continued)
Method Si NWs-based anodes Anode performance References
Performance of high current density Cycle performance
Si NWs decorated
with metal oxides
Al2O3-coated Si NWs 2 C
965 mAh g−1
120 cycles
1/16 C
2760 mAh g−1
30 cycles
[52]
Si NWs/SnO2 0.1 C
1200 mAh g−1 100 cycles
[53]
Si NWs decorated
with polymers
PEDOT-coated Si NWs 0.2 C
2510 mAh g−1
100 cycles
[54]
SiNWs/PDMS 0.5 C 83.4% retention rate
350 cycles
[55]
Si NWs decorated
with Si oxide
SiOx -coated SiNWs 7.2 A g−1
282 mAh g−1
0.6 A g−1
1503 mAh g−1
560 cycles
[56]5.3 Nanowires as Anodes in LIBs 145
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c) Cycle Capacity (mAh g–1)
0
0
0 5 10
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
15 20 25
anode
cathode
30
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
20 40 60
Cycle number
Cycle number
Dodecanethiol-passivated Ge nanowires
Unpassivated Ge nanowires
Theoretical capacity of graphite
Commercial Ge powders
Capacity (mAh g–1) Capacity (mAh g–1)
80 100
10
C/5
C/2 C 2C
450
: Dodecanethiol
550
650
750
850 Li+ Li+
e– e–
e– e–
Li+
Li+ Li+
Li+
20 30 40 50
Charge
Discharge
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.3 (a) A traditional battery electrode consisting of a composite of active material
(blue rods). (b) NW electrode design consisting of NWs (blue rods) grown directly on the
current collector. (c) Cycling at different discharge rates. (d) Scheme of dodecanethiol￾passivated Ge nanowires as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. (e) Charge/discharge
cycle performance of three-type sample at a rate of 0.1 C. (f) Capacity versus cycle number
of a coin full cell between 2.0 and 3.8 V with dodecanethiol-passivated Ge nanowire as the
anode and LiFePO4 as the cathode.
Si ratio deliver higher capacity that the richest one is about 1800 mAh g−1, while
the richest Ge-based electrode exhibited the best rate capability (∼800 mAh g−1
at high rate of 10 C).
5.3.1.3 Lithium Storage in Sn Nanowires
As an element of the fourth main group, Sn can also be used for constructing the neg￾ative electrode of LIBs. The theoretical gravitational capacity of Sn is 990 mAh g−1,
which is lower than that of Si and Ge, but its volumetric capacity (2020 mAh cm−3)
can be comparable with that of Si (2400 mAh cm−3) [62, 63]. In addition, Sn pos￾sesses a higher conductivity and is less fragile than Si so that it’s regarded as another
promising anode material for LIBs. And a similar large volume expansion problem
(up to 259% during lithiation/deithiation) also occurs in Sn-based anodes, while
researchers adopted similar approaches.146 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
Generally speaking, carbonous materials are usually used in electrode fabrication
because of their abundant surface area, high electrical conductivity, and excellent
chemical stability. Zhong et al. encapsulated Sn nanowires with amorphous car￾bon nanotubes named as Sn@CNTs via in situ CVD growth, while the thickness
of carbon nanotubes are able to be accurately controlled by growth time [64]. A
large number of core–shell NWs with an average diameter of about 170 nm and a
length of 4 to 7 μm are grown together to form a wire-mounted morphology with a
larger diameter. And according to electrochemical results, it showed that the thick￾ness of the carbonous shells can obviously influence the electrochemical perfor￾mance of Sn@CNTs. As the thickness of the outer CNT shells increase, the specific
discharge capacity of Sn@CNTs gradually decrease while the retentions increase
accordingly. It may contribute to the stabilization properties of outer CNTs. This may
be attributed to the stabilization property of outer CNTs and their ability to cushion
volume expansion, while the capacity is mainly contributed by Sn ratio in electrodes.
5.3.2 Metal Oxide Nanowires
There are many well-known metal oxides that can react with Li+ via a conversion
mechanism, such as SnO2, Fe2O3, Fe3O4, Co3O4, and so on. These metal oxides that
can provide high specific capacity have been broadly investigated as candidates for
next-generation anodes in LIBs. Most of the metal oxides possess the advantages
of being nontoxic, easy to obtain, and stable at room temperature [65]. However,
these metal oxides have the same issues as alloy-based materials when they are
applied as anodes, which include poor electrical conductivity, slow ion diffusivity,
easy structure destruction, and similar severe volume expansion during Li+ inser￾tion/extraction, leading to unsatisfactory chemical performance. In the case of solv￾ing these issues, a number of different NWs-based structures have been applied to
accelerate reaction kinetics. Improve conductivity and release stress/strain.
Among metal oxides, SnO2 can be regarded as one of the most promising materi￾als because, after reducing SnO2 to Sn, it can continue the alloying process with Li+.
Thus, SnO2 delivers a relative higher capacity than other metal oxides. Kumar et al.
fabricated SnO2 NWs deposited with Sn nanoparticles on the surface via microwave
plasma method [66]. The SnO2 backbone provides efficient electron transport, and
the Sn nanoparticles with a specific spacing are believed to be key factors holding the
structure stable during cycles. This unique design provided a high reversible capac￾ity, which maintained 814 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles.
Inspired by the reported works on alloy-type anode materials, it is foreseeable
that building NWs with hollow or porous structures is an effective way to solve
the above problems because these kinds of structures show good adaptability to
volume expansion and avoid the rapid destruction of the structure after only a few
cycles. For instance, Li et al. grew mesoporous Co3O4 NW arrays on Ti foil through
a simple template-free method, as obtaining composite can be directly used as
anode [67]. This particular mesoporous NW array architecture effectively shorten
the transmission distance of electron/ion and provide enough volume to sustain
the stress caused by expansion during chemical reaction (Figure 5.4a). Finally,5.3 Nanowires as Anodes in LIBs 147
Cycles (a) (b)
(c) (d) Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
4 μm
0.5 μm
0
200
400
600
800
0 5 10 15 20
20 C
50 C
Cycle number
Capacity (mAh g–1)
50 nm 0 5 10
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400 500 °C
700 °C
15 20
Figure 5.4 (a) SEM images of Co3O4 NW arrays growing on Ti foil. (b) Specific capacity of
the NW arrays at 20 C (violet) and 50 C (orange) as a function of the cycle number. (c) TEM
image of ZnCo2O4 nanowire. (d) Discharge capacity versus cycle number for the electrodes
made from the porous ZnCo2O4 nanowires synthesized at 500 and 700 ∘C.
this anode exhibited high capacity and good rate capability, that it can maintain a
capacity of about 350 mAh g−1 even at 50 C (Figure 5.4b). A porous ZnCo2O4 NW
reported by Du et al. is another example that benefits from its porous structure [68].
It’s obvious that the high porosity and large surface area lead to an improvement
in the ability to deal with volume variation (Figure 5.4c). As a result, this ZnCo2O4
NW obtained by heating a sacrificial template showed a high reversible capacity
of 1331.5 mAh g−1 and maintained at 1197 mAh g−1 after 20 cycles, which is much
higher than that of ZnCo2O4 nanoparticle-based anode (Figure 5.4d).
Other promising anodes among metal oxides are iron-oxide-based anodes (Fe2O3
and Fe3O4), which have a promising theoretical capacity of about 1000 mAh g−1
[32]. Taking ferric oxide as an example, the conversion reaction process is as
follows: Fe2O3 +6Li+ +6e−↔3Li2O +2Fe [69]. From this equation, we can learn
that the formation of Fe0 from Fe3+ involves multiple electron transfer per metal
atom, leading to a high theoretical lithium storage capacity. In addition to their
high-capacity characteristics, other advantages, including rich content, low
synthesis cost, corrosion resistance, and environmental friendliness have attracted a
lot of attention in the large-scale application of iron-oxide-based anodes. Liu et al. a148 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
(a) (b) (c) Cycle number Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
10 20 30 40 50 60
TiO2
TiO2@C
TiO2@C@MnO2
TiO2@C@MnO2 NWs
(d) MnO2 loading
(c) C coating
MnO2
TiO2
TiO2 NWs
5 nm
TiO2
0.36 nm
Carbon
0.24 nm
MnO2 (a) 0.5 M HCl
(b) Calcination
1 M
NaOH
Ti
Carbon
70
0.1 C
0.5 2 5 10 20 30
0.1 C
1
80 90
Figure 5.5 (a) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of TiO2-C/MnO2 core−shell NW
arrays on Ti foil. (b) TEM image of the TiO2-C/MnO2 core−shell NW. (c) Rate performance of
TiO2, TiO2-C, and TiO2-C/MnO2 core−shell NW anodes at various current densities from 0.1
to 30 C.
α-Fe2O3-NW-based anode to LIBs through a facile hydrothermal synthesis, in which
the one-dimensional long-chain polymer precursor is formed after hydrolysis of
Fe3+ and the final product α-Fe2O3 is formed in the subsequent annealing process.
According to images of TEM, it shows the polycrystalline feature of an individual
NW, which may be caused by the α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles in it. And in the electro￾chemical testing, the α-Fe2O3-NW-based anode delivered a high initial discharge
capacity of 1303 mAh g−1. But it decreased to 456 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles, which
may due to the structural disintegration of the porous NWs.
Core–shell structures play an important role in alloy-type NW-based anodes, as
they do in metal-oxide-based anodes. The outer shell materials protect inner core
materials from agglomeration and excess side reactions, further release strain from
volume variation, and sustain structure of anodes in a stable state. For instance,
Liao et al. directly grew a TiO2–C/MnO2 core−shell NW array on a Ti current col￾lector through a layer-by-layer deposition process (Figure 5.5a,b) [70]. This design
integrates the advantages of these three materials: TiO2 possesses good stability,
MnO2 provides high capacity, and the graphitic carbon layer has excellent electrical
conductivity. Furthermore, this unique core–shell structure gives this TiO2–/MnO2
anode additive-free capability, which can improve energy density of the whole cell
system. And as an anode in half-cell tests, it showed a capacity of 865 mAh g−1 at
0.1 C and excellent rate performance of 130 mAh g−1 at 30 C, which is obviously more
excellent than that of absolute TiO2 or MnO2 NWs and TiO2-C NWs (Figure 5.5c).
In addition to preparing electrode materials with a core–shell structure, coating the
surface of transition metal oxide NWs with a layer of carbon material or highly con￾ductive metal is also a good way to solve these shortcomings, such as in reported
NGA-Co3O4 composite [71], MoO2/Mo2C/carbon hybrid NWs, [72] and so on.
5.3.3 Carbonaceous Anode Materials
As carbonaceous materials have the characteristics of good mechanical strength,
stable chemical properties, low price, abundant content, easy access, excellent
reversibility during the insertion and extraction of lithium ions, and most impor￾tantly, high electronic conductivity, they have been widely applied in electrode5.3 Nanowires as Anodes in LIBs 149
fabrication of LIBs. Although the most successful commercialized anode for LIBs at
this stage is carbon material, the low specific capacity of pure carbon materials can
no longer meet the growing needs of people. So now carbon materials are usually
used as modified materials in combination with other materials to show new effects
in anodes.
As mentioned above, the application of SiNWs/GeNWs in anodes of LIBs suffers
from their low conductivity and volume expansion problems, which makes their
commercialization progress slow. In addition to doping with elements of the third
and fifth main groups to improve conductivity, coating with a carbon layer is also a
good method. Bogart and co-workers used SFLS method, which is an easy method to
realize scalable synthesis, to construct SiNWs coated with a conductive carbon shell
(Figure 5.6a) [73]. This anode exhibited a really highly reversible capacity of over
2000 mAh g−1 for 100 cycles at current rate of 1/10 C, and when it cycled at 1 C, it
could still show a capacity of over 1200 mAh g−1, which is much higher than the per￾formance of bare SiNW-based anodes (Figure 5.6b). These inspiring results obtained
with low-cost are attributed to the conductive carbon coatings with increased electri￾cal conductivity, reduced construction and aggregation of NWs, stabilized SEI, and
sufficient space for volume variation during cycles. Another example is hierarchi￾cal carbon-sheathed GeNWs (C–Ge NWs) through a self-catalytic growth process,
which was reported by Choi et al. [74] They adopted chemical reduction reactions
involving GeO2 particles and subsequent self-catalytic growth, at the same time,
the carbon layer is uniformly coated on the surface of the GeNWs (Figure 5.6c,d).
Obtained C–Ge NW anode showed capacity retention of 40% at 5 C compared with
the capacity tested at 0.2 C, while the comparative pure GeNWs cannot even reach
5% under the same conditions (Figure 5.6e).
The method of using carbon materials for modification is also applicable to
anode materials constructed of metal oxide NWs, as the anodes consisting of metal
oxide NWs face similar problems with alloy types. Hu et al. reported ordered meso￾porous carbon/Fe2O3 NW composite electrodes through three kinds of template
approaches, including soft, hard, and soft−hard dual-template approaches, in order
to investigate the influence of templates on the structure and electrochemical
performance of electrodes (Figure 5.6f) [75]. This work revealed the synergetic
benefits triggered by the soft−hard dual-template, which optimizes the advantages
of other two single-template methods and results in more appropriate morphol￾ogy and much better electrochemical performance (Figure 5.6g). In this special
structural design, the in situ grown carbon shells sufficiently endured the stress
strain of self and external NWs, sustained the stability of NWs, and prevented them
from construction during continual insertion/extraction of Li+, leading to a highly
reversible capacity over 1200 cycles and rate capability of ∼400 mAh g−1 at a current
density of 2 A g−1 (Figure 5.6h).
On the other hand, carbonous materials with high specific surface area (SSA)
are often used as components of coaxial electrodes to promote the reaction of
more active materials because they can provide a large number of active sites for
lithium-ion transmission. Chen et al. achieved an additive-free ZGO@C/Cu hybrid
anode via simple single-step CVD method [76]. The novel coaxial Zn2GeO4@carbon150 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
(a)
(c)
(g) (h)
(f)
(d) (e)
OMC
growth AAO removal
AAO OMCNW
Dual template
Resol/surfactant
micelles
(b)
Cycle number
0
0
400
800
1200
1600
OMCNW/Fe2O3 CMK-8/Fe2O3
FDU-15/Fe2O3 DPCNW/Fe2O3
5 10 15
0.1 A g–1
0.2 A g–1
0.5 A g–1
1 A g–1
2 A g–1
0.1 A g–1
20 25 30
Cycle (n)
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
10
c-GeNW
0.2C 0.5C 1C
2C
5C
0.2C
GeNW
20 30 40 50
Cycle
0
0
500
0
20
40
60
80
100
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
SnHMDS2 SiH4
N2/H2
PhSiH3
Polyphenylsilane
Conductive C
Ph4Si Ph3SiH
Sn/Si
Sn/Si Sn/Si c-Si c-Si
Sn/Si c-Si
Ph2SiH2 PhSiH3
Sn0 Si0
490 °C
900 °C
10 20 30 40
Pyrolyzed
Pyrolyzed No Binder
Nonpyrolyzed
50 60 70 80 90 100
C
10
Normalized capacity (%)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Figure 5.6 (a) Synthesis of Si nanowires with conformal carbon coatings. (b) Batteries
were cycled at 1/10 C for 100 cycles. (c) Schematic illustration showing the synthetic route
of the C−Ge NW from reaction between decomposed C2H2 and GeO2. (d) TEM image of the
carbon-coated Ge NW. (e) Rate capabilities of C−Ge and Ge NW electrodes. (f) Schematic
illustration of the proposed dual-template method for the synthesis of porous carbon NW
frameworks. (g) TEM image of an ordered mesoporous carbon/Fe2O3 NW composite using
the soft−hard dual-template approach. (h) Rate capability of different carbon/Fe2O3
composites.
NWs were directly grown on the cheap Cu collector. This direct growth cannot
only make each individual NW contacts closely with the substrate, providing
favorable electron transfer; but also ensure that there is enough space between
adjacent NWs to accommodate volume expansion and rapid ion transport channels.
Therefore, this ZGO@C/Cu electrode, which is obviously capable of maintaining
structural stability and rapid ion transport characteristics during electrochemical
cycles, exhibits excellent cycling life, and rate performance. Specifically, at a5.4 Nanowires as Cathodes in LIBs 151
current density of 2 A g−1, the electrode maintains a discharge- specific capacity of
790 mAh g−1 with almost no noticeable decay after 100 cycles, while it can still have
a capacity of 465 mAh g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1.
5.4 Nanowires as Cathodes in LIBs
5.4.1 Transition Metal Oxides
The transition metal oxide cathode of traditional LIBs mainly include LiCoO2 with
layered structure, LiMn2O4 with spinel structure, and LiFePO4 with an olivine
structure. Layered LiCoO2 has a high theoretical specific capacity of 274 mAh g−1,
but the crystal structure will be unstable when more than 70% Li+ is extracted [77].
Furthermore, the Li1−xCoO2 under high cutoff voltage will promote the occurrence
of surficial side reaction, resulting from the continuous decomposition of electrolyte.
Therefore, improving the structure and interface stability of LiCoO2 (LCO) is critical
to improve its electrochemical performance. At present, the modification strategies
mainly include doping of metal ion and coating inert compounds, such as Al2O3,
ZrO2, and AlPO4 [78–80] Li et al. synthesized LCO NWs through hydrothermal
method and calcination at 500 ∘C. The obtained Co(CO3)0.35Cl0.2(OH)1.1 nanowire
bunches precursors are composed of radial NWs with a diameter of 150–200 nm and
a length of about 10 μm (Figure 5.7a). The micromorphology of the NWs remains
intact after annealing, which piles up with smaller nanoparticles. The LCO NWs
shows satisfactory rate performance and long-term cycling, where the specific
discharge capacity stabilized at 100 mAh g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 after
100 cycles (Figure 5.7b). The favorable electrochemical performance of the LCO
NWs may originate from fast Li+ transportation in their 1D nanostructure [81]. Xia
et al. carried out a new approach for fabrication of 3D LiCoO2 arrays as cathode for
LIBs. A two-step hydrothermal method was used to synthesize the low-temperature
LCO arrays and it was further converted into chain-like high-temperature LiCoO2
arrays through calcination (Figure 5.7c,d). The layered LiCoO2 NW arrays can
deliver high areal capacity up to 0.27 mAh cm−2, while maintaining good cycling
stability (90%, 50 cycles) and rate capability (103 mAh g−1, 10 C), which makes it
promising for application in micro-batteries (Figure 5.7e,f). Except for the wide
application of LCO in power batteries, consumer batteries and other end products,
its high cost, toxicity, and limitation in resources of cobalt drive the exploration of
other cathodes [82].
Spinel LiMn2O4 is one of representative materials with the advantages of low cost,
abundance, and reasonable capacity (theoretical capacity of 148 mAh g−1), which is
considered one of promising cathode candidate for LIBs. Although LiMn2O4 dis￾plays many advantages, it also shows fatal shortcomings in commercial applications,
mainly in the serious capacity decay during cycling. It can generally be summa￾rized as follows: (i) the dissolution of manganese leads to the collapse of the spinel
structure; (ii) When LiMn2O4 is in deep discharge, especially tetrahedral Li2Mn2O4
will be formed on the surface of spinel, undergoing Jahn–Teller effect and lattice(a)
(c)
(e) (f)
(j)
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
Potential (V (vs. Li/Li+))
Potential (V)
0 20 1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
40
Cycle number
Cycle number
Cycle number
Z′ (ohm)
–Z″ (ohm)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
0
0
30
60
90
120
150
5 10 15 20 25 0
0
30
60
90
120
150
10 20 30 40 50
0 200
0
200
400
600
800
400 600
HT
HT
LT
LT
Charge
Discharge
5 C
10 C
2 C
Charge
Discharge
1 C 0.2 C
0.5 C 0.1 C
800
30
0 0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
5 10
100 mA g–1
200 mA g–1
500 mA g–1
1000 mA g–1
100 mA g–1
15 20 25 30
35
5 nm
200 nm 100 nm
60 80 100
Our sample 0.1 A g–1
Our sample 5 A g–1
Our sample 10 A g–1
Our sample 20 A g–1
Aldrich 20 A g–1
Honjyo 20 A g–1
Mitsui 20 A g–1
120
0 20
1.6
2.4
3.2
4.0
4.8
40
10 C, (3.1/4.3 V) 60 C, (2.4/4.4 V)
100 C, (2.2/4.4 V) 150 C, (1.5/4.5 V)
60 80 100 120
(d) (i)
(a)
(a) (b) (g) (h)
Figure 5.7 (a) SEM image of LiCoO2 nanowires. (b) Rate capability of LiCoO2 nanowires at different rates. SEM images of (c) LT-LiCoO2 nanowires and
(d) HT-LiCoO2 nanowires. (e) Cycling performance and (f) Rate performance of LT-LiCoO2 and HT-LiCoO2 nanowire. (Inset is the Nyquist plot for the
LT-LiCoO2 and HT-LiCoO2 nanowire. (g) SEM image of LiMn2O4. (h) Discharge curves of LiMn2O4 at different rates. (i) TEM, HRTEM and ED patterns of the
single crystalline spinel LiMn2O4 nanowires. (j) Discharge curves of the single crystalline spinel LiMn2O4 nanowires and commercial LiMn2O4.5.4 Nanowires as Cathodes in LIBs 153
distortion; (iii) The organic electrolyte decomposes at high voltage, which destroys
the spinel structure. Generally, the common strategies used in modification were
doping to partially replace Mn or O, surface modification, control of the morphol￾ogy, particle size, or pore structure to stabilize the microstructure, and shorten the
ions transport path. Lee et al. obtained the ultrathin LiMn2O4 NWs by a solvothermal
reaction with α-MnO2 NW followed by solid-state lithiation. (Figure 5.7g) LiMn2O4
NWs deliver 100 and 78 mAh g−1 at 60 and 150 C (Figure 5.7h), respectively. It is
due to both the favorable morphologies and the high-crystal NWs [83]. Hosono et al.
synthesized high-quality crystalline cubic LiMn2O4 NWs based on a self-template
method with the precursors of Na0.44MnO2 NWs (Figure 5.7i). These single crys￾talline NWs possess high thermal stability after heating at 800 C and excellent spe￾cific capacity of 88 mAh g−1 at high rate 20 A g−1 (Figure 5.7j). It comes from the
microstructures of NWs and the high quality of the crystal, which decreased both
the Li+ and electron diffusion lengths [84].
Li-rich layered manganese oxides (LLMO) are foreground cathode material
in LIBs. Its general structural formula is x Li2MnO3 ⋅ (1−x) LiMO2 (0<x <1,
M = Ni, Co, Mn). The Li-rich cathode material can provide a specific capacity
of 250 mAh g−1 when charged to 4.5 V. There are several thermodynamic and
kinetic shortcomings that need to be tackled, including low initial coulombic
efficiency, poor rate performance, voltage attenuation, and surface structure
transformation. Fabricating lithium-rich oxide NWs are proposed to efficiently
overcome these issues. Lee et al. applied Co0.4Mn0.6O2 NWs and LiNO3 as precur￾sors to synthesize Li-rich layered Li0.88[Li0.18Co0.33Mn0.49]O2 NWs via a one-step
hydrothermal approach (Figure 5.8a). This NWs provided a high reversible capacity
of 230 mAh g−1 at 1 C between 2−4.8 V and a high-rate performance (220 mAh g−1
at 15 C) (Figure 5.8b) [85]. Yu et al. obtained the Li4Mn5O12 heterostructured NWs
composed of small nanoparticles, and the spinel phase is embedded into the layered
structure (Figure 5.8c,d), which prevents the voltage from fading under 2−4.6 V.
The heterostructured structure exhibited a high initial capacity of 290.1 mAh g−1 at
0.1 C and maintained 94.4% after 200 cycles at 0.5 C (Figure 5.8e,f) [86].
Besides, other transition metal oxides, such as LiV3O8, have been studied as cath￾ode candidate. Xu et al. adopted a general two-step method to fabricate by topotactic
lithiation of H2V3O8 NWs (Figure 5.8g). A specific capacity of 176 mAh g−1 was able
to achieve at 1.5 A g−1, and it maintains 160 mAh g−1 after 400 cycles (Figure 5.8h).
It has a low charge transfer resistance, stable structure, and high crystallinity, which
confirmed LiV3O8 NWs as cathode for high-rate and long-life LIBs [87]. Ren et al.
designed hierarchical LiV3O8 NWs by electrospinning through a PEO crosslinking
strategy. Its unique structure achieves an effective electrical contact area, low resis￾tance, and improved stability, which offer suitable energy storage in high-rate and
long-life LIBs [88].
5.4.2 Vanadium Oxide Nanowires
Vanadium oxides are considered an alternative material for high-energy cathodes
for LIBs owing to their high capacity, low-cost, rich natural resources, and simple(a)
(b) (e)
(f)
(c) (d) (g)
(h)
Cycle number Cycle number
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
0 5 10 15 20 200
210
220
230
240
250
200
220
240
260
200
210
220
230
240
250
200
220
240
260
25 30 35
C rate = 1 C
0.2 C 1 C
3 C
5 C
10 C
15 C
40 0 100
0 0
20
40
60
80
100
40
80
120
160
200
240
200 300 400 500
450 °C
1500 mA g–1
2000 mA g–1
45 50 600
2 μm
5 μm
Figure 5.8 (a) SEM image of the Li0.88[Li0.18Co0.33Mn0.49]O2 nanowires discharge capacity and cycle performance of the Li[Li0.08Co0.33Mn0.5]O2 nanowires
at 1C rate between 2–4.8 V. (b) Discharge capacity versus cycle number of the Li[Li0.08Co0.33Mn0.5]O2 nanowires in a coin-type half-cell at a 1C rate
between 2 and 4.8 V. SEM images of (c) SLN-LMNCO and (d) C-LMNCO. (e) Rate and (f) Cycling performance for Li/SLN-LMNCO and Li/C-LMNCO cells at
0.5 C (g) SEM image of LiV3O8 nanowires at 450 ∘C. (h) Cycling performance of LiV3O8 nanowires cathode at 1500 and 2000 mA g−1.5.4 Nanowires as Cathodes in LIBs 155
synthesis [89, 90]. However, it has suffered from agglomeration, low electronic
conductivity, poor structural stability, and sluggish kinetics, which blocks its
application in high energy-density LIBs. Vanadium oxides with nanostructure
are designed to ultimately improve its electrochemical performance due to the
superiorities of nanostructure, including short ion/electron transport path, large
SSA and improved conductivity. Mai et al. constructed hierarchical vanadium oxide
nanowires with diameter of 1–10 mm and diameter of 100–200 nm by electro￾spinning combined with annealing (Figure 5.9a,b) [91]. NWs are composed with
several small nanorods. This hierarchical structure is beneficial to greatly reduce
self-agglomeration of NWs during the cycle process, thus maintaining effective
contact between electrode materials, conductive agents, adhesives, and electrolyte.
The composite electrodes exhibit excellent initial capacity of 275 mAh g−1 at
2.0–4.0 V and a capacity of 187 mAh g−1 remained after 50 cycles at high current
density of 10 A g−1 (Figure 5.9c), implying a promising candidate for cathode of
LIBs. To prevent volume expansion of vanadium oxides-based materials, hollow
structure NWs are used to overcome this dilemma. Yan et al. designed NW-template
semihollow bicontinuous graphene scroll architecture through “oriented assem￾bly” and “self-scroll” strategies. V3O7 NW templated graphene scrolls (VGSs)
(Figure 5.9d). for LIBs exhibit an excellent performance with specific capacity of
321 mAh g−1 (100 mA g−1) and 87.3% capacity retention after 400 cycles (2 A g−1)
(Figure 5.9e). These outstanding electrochemical properties are attributed to the
unique structure, which provides continuous electron and ion transfer channels
and free space for enduring the volume expansion of NWs during cycling [92]. Niu
et al. reported VO2 hollow microspheres with empty spherical core and radial NWs
through an ion modulating approach. It shows higher SSA, and efficiently buffer
self-expansion and self-shrinkage during lithiation/delithiation process. As a result,
the original capacity of 163 mAh g−1 (1 A g−1) is achieved in hollow microspheres
and it maintains 80% of initial capacity after 1000 cycles (2 A g−1), showing a high
specific capacity and long cycle performance. Assembling the NWs into a functional
architecture or constructing compound materials will grant the materials with
new properties. In order to tackle the issue that vanadium oxides-based materials
have a disposition to agglomerate, Lee et al. embedded ultrathin NWs into the
2D graphene to well maintain the structure of V2O5 NWs in the electrochemical
process (Figure 5.9f), so the specific capacities of 94.4 mAh g−1 were preserved
over 100 000 cycles at 10 A g−1(Figure 5.9g) [93]. It mainly originates from the close
contact between V2O5 NWs and graphene, thus improving electron transport and
suppressing the structural degradation. Mai et al. fabricated self-buffered nanoroll
VO2(B) composites composed of nanobelts and NWs by hydrothermal method
using surfactants of polyvinyl pyrrolidone and polyethylene glycol (Figure 5.9h). At
the current density of 1 A g−1, the capacity retention rate of 82% is obtained after
1000 cycles, and the maximum rate can reach 2000 mA g−1 (20 C) (Figure 5.9i,j) [94].
It is mainly due to the nanostructures that it can effectively shorten the Li+ transfer
path, while it plays the roles as buffer intermediates in the cycle process to form
buffer voids between nanobelts and NWs. It realizes the buffer of volume swelling
stress in the electrochemical process, maintains the stability of the structure, and(a)
(c)
(d)
(g)
0 10000
Discharge (15 wt%)
Charge (15 wt%)
0
100
200
300
20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
Cycle
Capacity (mAh g–1)
70000 80000 90000 100000
(i)
(j) (k) (I)
(o)
0
0 0 50
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
100 150
95 mA g–1
190 mA g–1
380 mA g–1
760 mA g–1
1900 mA g–1
Vanedium
Nitrogen
200 20 40 60
Capacity (mAh g–1) Cycle number
Cycle
Potential (V vs Li/Li+)
Potential (V vs Li/Li+)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Specific discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
2–4 V 1.75–4 V
Electrode potential vs Li (volts)
Electrode potential vs Li (volts)
20,00 mA g–1
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Cycle number
Number of cycle
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
100 200 300
VGS
VG
PV
400 1 μm 200 nm
2–4 V
1.75–4 V 2–4 V
1.75–4 V
Cycle number
0
0 50 1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
100 150 200 250 300 0
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
10 20 30 40 50
50
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
100 150 200 250 300 350 400
HNS
10th 1st 10th 1st
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Discharge capacity (mAh/gV2O5
)
Coulombic efficiency
80 100
50
100
150
200 0.5C
1C
1C
VO2/CNTs nanocomposite
VO2 nanowires
0.5C
(m) (n) (e)
(b) (f) (h)
Cycle number
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
1,000 mA/g
HNS
0
0
50
100
150
200
0
20
40
60
80
100 250
200 400 600 800 1000
discharge
charge
Figure 5.9 (a) SEM and (b) TEM of the ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires after annealing. (c) Electrochemical performance of the ultralong
hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires after annealing at voltage profile of 2–4 V and 1.75–4 V. (d) TEM images of VGS (HRTEM image of V3O7 nanowire
in GSs was inserted). (e) Cycling performance of different samples. (f) HRTEM image of the V2O5 NW–graphene composite. (g) Cycling performance at
10 000 mA g−1. (h) SEM images of the (b) hybrid nanostructural VO2. (i) Cycling performance at 1000 mA g−1. (j) Charge/discharge curves at current density
of 20 to 2000 mA g−1. (k) TEM image of V2O5-PANI sample 4 with accompanying line scans indicating conformal coating of PANI on V2O5 wire bundles.
(l) Cycling performance of V2O5-PANI sample 4 and V2O5 wire at 440 mA g−1. (m) SEM image of VO2/CNTs nanocomposite film containing 40 wt% of CNTs.
(n) Discharge curves of VO2/CNTs nanocomposite at different current density. (o) Cycling performance of VO2/CNTs and VO2 nanowire.5.4 Nanowires as Cathodes in LIBs 157
thus finally improves the rate performance and cycle performance. Gittleson et al.
gained a core–shell structure, which was V2O5 nanowires coated with electroactive
polyaniline (PANI) (Figure 5.9k). After correlating the weight percent of PANI
polymer in active materials (51% PANI in composite), the actual capacity will
display a 57% increase compared with uncoated one at 1 C (Figure 5.9l), which
will be useful in the generation of microbattery [95]. Besides, intertwined VO2
NW/CNT composites and carbon quantum dot-decorated VO2 on carbon cloth, etc.,
have been proven to optimize the electrochemical performance. Yan et al. synthe￾sized the VO2(B) NWs/CNT compounds with stable lithium storage performance
(Figure 5.9m). It formed the interpenetrating porous network, and it improved the
Li+ storage capability. Consequently, this composite will stably cycle about 100
times with a capacity retention of 94% (Figure 5.9n,o), which mainly comes from
rapid transportation of Li+ and charge enrichment of carbon networks [96].
5.4.3 Iron Compounds Including Oxides and Phosphates
Iron compounds have been widely studied in the cathode of LIB due to their abun￾dant resources, environmental friendliness, and considerable capacity. Its represen￾tatives are oxides and polyanions, where polyanion-based cathodes include LiFePO4,
and Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP).
As for polyanion, it has stable microstructure, high voltage plateau, and satis￾factory theoretical capacity. However, its practical applications are impeded by the
intrinsic low electrical conductivity and sluggish kinetics. Lim et al. reported the
hard templates KIT-6 and SBA-15 to synthesize LiFePO4 NWs (Figure 5.10a,b) and
hollow LiFePO4 (Figure 5.10c,d) as cathode materials for LIBs. Electrochemical
performance of both the NW and hollow cathodes showed the excellent rate
capability even above 10 C rate, showing >89% capacity retention of the initial
capacity (Figure 5.10e). What’s more, the rate capability of the hollow LiFePO4
cathode at 15 C is about 10 mAh g−1 higher than that of the NW cathode, the
higher SSA leads to excellent electrochemical performance. However, the NaOH
used in this system will react with LiFePO4 to destroy the structure [97]. So, to
avoid side effects and improve the faster ion-transport capability, carbon coating
on the electrode material is the most effective and convenient method. Drummond
et al. reported a new hierarchically porous LiFePO4 electrode materials for LIBs,
this cathode forms a meso/macroporous carbon layer structure (Figure 5.10f,g) to
increase the electrode/electrolyte interface and improve the rate capability. This
macro-porous network structure allows efficient percolation of the electrolyte
through the electrode, improving electrolyte access to the mesopores while provid￾ing a conductive framework with intimate contact with the LiFePO4. The cathode
delivered a reversible capacity of 140 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C and 100 mAh g−1 at 5 C
(Figure 5.10h) [98]. Besides, a carbon-coated single-crystalline LiFePO4 NW with
less 100 nm diameter was produced by electrospinning method. This NW structure
with diameters less than 100 nm offers better percolation behavior than normal
NWs and particles, which creates an efficient conductive network with short Li+
diffusion pathway and significantly improved electrochemical performance. The(a)
(b)
(e)
(c) (f)
(h)
(k)
Cycle number
Nucleation
PMMA
Polymer restricts
the size Annealed
Without
PMMA
Precursor
Precursor
Core shell LFP@CNTs
Nano
Fe3+ LiH3PO4
Nuclei PMMA
H2O
Cycle number
LFP@CNTs-10 h
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Cycle number
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
0 5
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
10
0 5 10
SCNW-LFP-20%
SCNW-LFP-10%
Commercial-LFP-20%
Commercial-LFP-10%
0
40
80
120
160
2 nm
15 20 25 30
Cycle number
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
0 10
40
60
80
100
120
140
160 0.1 C 0.2 C
0.5 C
1 C
2 C
5 C
10 C
50 C
0.1 C
180
20 30 40 50 60 70
0 10 140
160
180
130
140
150
160
170
20 30 40 50
<Hollow>
<Nanowire>
Loading level = 20 mg/cm2
Rate = 1 C
0.5 C
1 C
3 C 6 C
10 C
0.2 C
<Hollow>
15 C
<Nanowire>
60 70 80
0.1 C 0.2 C 1 C 2 C 5 C
0.1 C
F127
F108
15 20
(j)
(l)
(g) (i)
(d)
Figure 5.10 (a) SEM image of LiFePO4 nanowires (b) TEM image of LiFePO4 nanowires. (c) SEM image of hollow LiFePO4. (d) TEM image of hollow
LiFePO4. (e) Electrochemical performance of both the nanowire and hollow LiFePO4 cathode. SEM images of LiFePO4/carbon monoliths prepared with
(f) F127 and (g) F108 triblock copolymer amphiphiles. (h) Rate capability of LiFePO4/carbon monoliths prepared with F127 and F108 triblock copolymer
amphiphiles. (i) HRTEM image of LiFePO4 nanowires with SAED pattern inset. (j) Rate capability of SCNW-LFP and commercial LiFePO4 with 10% and 20%
additional conductive carbon. (k) Schematics and SEM images of the LFP@CNT nanocomposites. (l) Rate capability of LFP@CNT nanocomposites.5.4 Nanowires as Cathodes in LIBs 159
presence of a carbon layer further protects the electrode from direct contact with
the electrolyte. The electrochemical performance of single-crystalline LiFePO4 NW
delivered a high capacity of 160 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C and excellent rate capability of
65 mAh g−1 at 50 C (Figure 5.10i,j) [99]. Smaller diameters of LiFePO4 NW were
constructed by Sun et al. In situ self-catalyzed core–shell LiFePO4@CNT NWs
with a diameter of 20–30 nm were encapsulated into CNTs (Figure 5.10k), and
3D conducting networks of CNTs were obtained from in situ carbonization of a
polymer. LiFePO4@CNT NWs deliver a capacity of 160 mAh g−1 at 17 mA g−1, and
65 mAh g−1 at 8500 mA g−1 (Figure 5.10l) [100].
Faster ion and electron transport was achieved in Li3V2(PO4)3 NW cathode.
Jing et al. reported a 3D mace-like Li3V2(PO4)3/C NW and nanofiber hybrid
membrane, which fabricated by using Ni nanoparticles as a catalyst and a modified
electrospinning method (Figure 5.11a,b,c). And this membrane possesses a highly
Electrospinning
(a) (d)
(b)
(e) (f)
(g) (h)
(c)
Calcination
HV
100 nm
Li+ Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+ Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
Bicontinuous Li+ and e– pathways
Larger contact area
Excellent structure stablility
Conductive mesoporous
carbon scaffold
Nanocrystals
Mesoporous nanowire
composites
LVP/C-M-NWs
e–
200 nm
2 µm
Li3V2(PO4)3/C hybrid membrane
LVP MWs
LVP Fiber
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Potential (V vs Li/Li+)
Cycle number
Cycle numbers
0
160
Discharge capacity (mAh/g) 140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
160
Discharge capacity (mAh/g) 140
120
100
80
60
160
180
Discharge capacity (mAh/g) 140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
Efficiency/%
40
20
0
100
80
60
Efficiency/%
40
20
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Cycle numbers
Cycle numbers
0 200
0 5
0.1 C 0.5 C 1 C
5 C
5 C
10 C
10 C
20 C
1 C
(a)
(b)
(c)
LVP
LVP-Ni-0.1%
10 15 20 25 30 35
400 600 800 1000
Rate: 5 C
0 0
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3.0 20 40 60
0.5 C
5 C
1 C 2 C
10 C
80 100 120 140 500
150
120
90
60
30
0
1000 1500 2000 3000 2500
LVP/C-Ps
LVP/C-M-NWs
80.0%
32.9%
Theoretical capacity of 133 mAh g–1
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Figure 5.11 (a) Schematic illustration of 3D mace-like structural Li3V2(PO4)
3/C hybrid
membrane (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of Li3V2(PO4)
3/C. (d) Rate performance and cycle
performance of Li3V2(PO4)
3/C nanowire and nanofiber hybrid membrane at 5 C and 10 C.
(e) Schematic illustration of the LVP/C-M-NWs composites with electron/ion transport
pathways, larger electrode-electrolyte contact area, and facile strain relaxation during Li+
extraction/insertion. (f) SEM image of LVP/C-M-NWs. (g) Charge and discharge profiles and
(h) Cycle performance of LVP/C-M-NWs.160 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
SSA, making material and electrolyte fully contact to accelerate electrochemi￾cal reaction, greatly improve ion and electron transport kinetics. 3D mace-like
Li3V2(PO4)3/C NW exhibits an excellent rate capability in the voltage range of
3.0–4.8 V with discharge capacity of 115.3 mAh g−1 and 108.6 mAh g−1 at 5 and
10 C, respectively, (Figure 5.11d). This material also exhibits good cyclic stability,
with capacity retention of 81.4% after 500 cycles and 78.8% after 1000 cycles.
Such superior electrochemical performance is attributed to unique 3D conductive
networks and mace-like fiber structure, which favorably improve the reaction
kinetics of Li3V2(PO4)3 [101]. Wei et al. discovered a new hierarchical mesoporous
NW with bicontinuous electron/ion pathways, which create a larger contact area
between electrode and electrolyte (Figure 5.11e,f). This fast ion transport pathway
along 1D NW has a low charge transfer resistance. What’s more, in the process
of Li+ de/intercalation, robust structure stability of Li3V2(PO4)3/C mesoporous
NW results in a slight volume change, which greatly improves cycling ability.
Li3V2(PO4)3/C mesoporous nanowire exhibits outstanding capacity retention of
80.0% after 3000 cycles at 5 C in the voltage range of 3–4.3 V (Figure 5.11g,h). At a
high rate of charge and discharge at 10 C, it can still have 88.0% theoretical capacity
retention. Consequently, high-rate capability of polyphosphate NW cathode mate￾rial makes it possible to apply it in the field of rapid charge and discharge in energy
storage applications [102].
5.5 Nanowires-Based Separators in LIBs
The separator is a critical component of the battery and acts as the electrolyte reser￾voir to isolate the anode and cathode. The separator should exhibit good wettability
and electrolyte and thermal stability. The NW-based separators are divided into two
types: pure inorganic NW separators and hybrid separators, which all exhibit high
safety and heat resistance compared with the commercial separators. Here, we will
discuss the NW-based separators in LIBs.
Nowadays, microporous polyolefin membrane is the widely used LIB separator,
such as polyethylene (PE) or polypropylene (PP) due to their excellent mechanical
strength, stability, processability, and proper pore size. However, these separators are
unstable over 120 C because of their low glass transformation temperature and melt￾ing temperature, which would cause large shrinkages of the separators and internal
short circuits. Meanwhile, the polyolefin separator is nonpolar, and its wettability
with polar liquid electrolyte is poor, which would generate high resistance. There￾fore, many strategies have been proposed to solve these problems, including inor￾ganic coating, electrospinning, and ceramic membrane preparation [103]. Shaohua
Jiang et al. designed hierarchical 3D micro/nano-architecture separator of polyani￾line NWs wrapped on polyimide nanofibers (PANI/PI) through electrospinning and
in situ polymerization [104]. The separator exhibited a hierarchical 3D structure, as
shown in Figure 5.12a. The PANI nanowires coated uniformly on the PI nanofibers,
as shown in Figure 5.12b. The separator shows excellent thermal stability of 180 C
as shown in Figure 5.12c, there was no obvious shrinkage for the PI and PANI/PI5.5 Nanowires-Based Separators in LIBs 161
25 °C 120 °C 150 °C 180 °C
0.1 C
0.2 C
0.5 C
1 C
2 C
4 C
6 C 8 C 10 C
0.2 C
Celgard
0.5 μm 0.5 μm
PI fiber
PANI
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
PI
PANI/PI-2
Celgard
PI
PANI/PI-2
0
0
40
80
Capacity (mAh g−1) 120
160
10 20 30
Cycle number
40 50 60
Figure 5.12 SEM images of PANI/PI-2 composite: (a) high magnification; (b) cross-section
view; (c) digital photographs of Celgard, PI nanofiber nonwoven, and PANI/PI-2 composite
membrane before and after thermal shrinkage at different temperatures (25, 120, 150, and
180 ∘C) for twohours; (d) rate capabilities of the cells with Celgard membrane, PI nanofiber
nonwoven, and PANI/PI composite membrane as cell separators at different C-rate.
Source: Ye et al. [104] / with permission of Elsevier.
separators at 180 C. The PANI/PI separator also showed high porosity of 84%, 61.9%
liquid electrolyte uptake, high ionic conductivity of 2.33 mS cm−1, which induced
enhanced capacity and rate capability (Figure 5.12d).
On the other hand, inorganic ceramic membranes have good wettability with
electrolyte and high temperature resistance compared with polyolefin separators.
Inorganic NWs are often used as pure inorganic separator or hybrid separator
due to their nonflammability and special structure. For example, Shaojin Jia et al.
reported an eco-friendly Xonotlite nanowires/Wood pulp (XWP) fiber hybrid
separator through low-cost papermaking process [105]. The hybrid separator shows
excellent heat resistance. When the separator was heated up to 600 C, there was
no obvious shrinkage. The cycle capability of XWP-20% separator was improved
because of its high porosity and good electrolyte wettability, and after 100 cycles, the
capacity reached 91% of the initial capacity. Therefore, the separator is a promising
candidate for low-cost and eco-friendly separator. Yingjie Zhu et al. also fabricated a
hybrid separator between hydroxyapatite nanowires and cellulose fibers (HAP/CF)
through hybridization, and the schematic illustration of the separator is shown
in Figure 5.13a–e [106]. The separator with hierarchical cross-linked network is
flexible and porous, shows near-zero contact angle with the liquid electrolyte, and
has 253% electrolyte uptake. And there was almost zero shrinkage for the pure162 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
5
200 100
Coulombic efficiency (%)
80
60
40
20
0
150
100
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
50
0
10 15
PP
HAP/CF
HAP/CF
HAP
PP HAP/CF
150 °C
RT 125 °C 150 °C 175 °C 200 °C
Li+
Li+
Li+ Li+
Li+
Li+ Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
Li+
RT
Cycle number
20 25
(a) HAP NW networks (b) Cellulose fiber
Nanofiber Macrofibril
(d) Membrane fabrication
(f) (g)
Filtrated Peeled off
(e)
Hydrogen
bonding
Van der Waals
force
HAP/CF separator for LIB
Hierarchical self-assembly (c)
Figure 5.13 Schematic illustration of the new kind of highly flexible and porous separator
based on HAP NW networks with excellent thermal stability, fire resistance, and superior
electrolyte wettability: (a) HAP NW networks; (b) CFs; (c) hierarchical assembly of HAP NW
networks and CFs; (d) suction filtration process for fabricating the layered and highly
porous HAP/CF separator; (e) the application of the HAP/CF separator in the LIB;
(f) illustration of thermal shrinkages of the separators at different temperatures (top panel:
PP separator; middle panel: pure HAP separator; bottom panel: HAP/CF separator);
(g) cycling performance of the battery with the HAP/CF separator and the PP separator at
2 C. Source: Li et al. [106] / John Wiley & Sons.
HAP and HAP/CF separators at different temperatures, as shown in Figure 5.13f.
The color turned light yellow because of CF’s oxidation at elevated temperature,
while the shape and diameter of the HAP/CF separator remained the same, which
was beneficial for the safety of the battery. The battery equipped with the HAP/CF
hybrid separator showed good cycling stability at 150 ∘C with 98% CE (Figure 5.13g),
which indicated good thermal stability of the hybrid separator.
Other strategy for improved separators is pure inorganic separators based
on nanowires. For example, Zhendong Huang et al. prepared silica nanowires,
extracted from asbestos fibers, for scalable bendable networks as stable separators
[107]. The silica nanowires with their 3D porous structure and polar surface
ensured good electrolyte wettability, excellent electrolyte uptake of 325% and
retention ratio of 63%. Meanwhile, the inorganic separators enhanced the chemical
and electrochemical stability at high temperatures and exhibited good thermal5.6 Nanowires-Based Solid-State Electrolytes in LIBs 163
stability as high as 700 C. Xinjie Zhang et al. also developed a pure inorganic
separator based on aluminum oxide nanowires without any polymer additives or
binders through hydrothermal treatment of aluminum-containing precursor [108].
The pore size of the separator was about 100 nm, and the separator was bendable.
The separator showed high electrolyte uptake of 190% because of the high porosity
and the structure. In addition, the separator shows excellent rate capability and life
cycle performance compared with the Celgard 2500. Above all, the inorganic NW
separator shows excellent non-flammability, high porosity, and thermal stability at
elevated temperatures. The NW-based hybrid separator has special 3D structure,
which is beneficial to electrolyte wettability and uptake and enhances battery
performance.
5.6 Nanowires-Based Solid-State Electrolytes in LIBs
The above section illustrated the NW-based separators with high safety and other
advantages. However, the liquid electrolyte is a must to infiltrate the separators,
which could cause safety issues. Liquid electrolyte, composed of salts and organic
solvents, is the traditional electrolyte in LIBs. However, the leakage and combustion
of the liquid electrolyte cause severe safety problems. Therefore, solid-state elec￾trolyte (SSE) as ions transport medium is proposed to solve the safety problems.
Here, we would focus on the NW-based SSEs in LIBs. The SSE is often divided into
two types: inorganic and polymer SSE. The inorganic electrolyte exhibited high ionic
conductivity and attracted much attention. For example, Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) is a
promising SSE and the Li+ ionic conductivity of high temperature cubic phase LLZO
(c-LLZO) is about 10−4 S cm−1 at RT. However, the c-LLZO is unstable at RT. And the
LLZO is tend to transform into tetragonal phase (t-LLZO) and the ionic conductiv￾ity would decrease 2–3 orders of magnitude. Some reports found that the tetragonal
structure LLZO could transform to the cubic phase after reducing the particle size
through ball milling. Candace K. Chan et al. reported that LLZO NWs via electro￾spinning synthesis could be stable with cubic structure at RT, and nanostructured
LLZO showed higher ionic conductivity, cycling performance, current density, and
fracture strength [109].
For the all-solid-state lithium batteries, there are some requirements: first, the
solid electrolyte ionic conductivity should be larger than 10−4 S cm−1; the interface
resistance between electrolyte and electrode should be small, and there should be
proper ionic transportation at the electrolyte/electrode interface; third, lithium den￾drites should be controlled during charging and discharging processes. Yan-bing He
et al. reported a composite electrolyte embedded with Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) NWs
[110]. LLZO NWs could further improve the electrolyte conductivity because of the
formation of the continuous path compared with the LLZO microparticles, and can
be favor to the Li ion transportation and form uniform Li metal deposition to sup￾press the Li dendrite growth. The LLZO NWs reduced the activation energy and
improved the mechanical property of PLLN, which improved the stability of Li sym￾metric cells to 1000 hours without short circuit at 60 C.164 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
Compared with inorganic electrolyte, polymer electrolyte is stable, flexible,
stretchable, low-cost, and have low interfacial resistance, which attracts more and
more attention. Unfortunately, the conductivity of the polymer electrolyte is only
10−6 S cm−1 at RT. So many methods were reported to enhance the conductivity of
the polymer electrolyte, such as the addition of inorganic nanomaterials, plasticizer,
cross-linking, and block copolymerization. The majority of the ceramic fillers are
0D particles. And there are junctions or interface between the nanofillers and
the polymer matrix, which could enhance the ionic conductivity. However, the
length of ionic transport pathway is really limited. Meanwhile, the tiny particles
are prone to agglomeration and could cause the opposite effect of conductivity or
mechanical strength. Shi Wang et al. fabricated a composite polymer electrolyte
(CPE) composed of polymer electrolyte, ceramic NWs, and nanoparticles [111].
As known from the reports, ceramic nanofillers could reduce the crystallinity
of polymers and facilitate the motion of segments. Meanwhile, the strong Lewis
acid–base interaction between the surface chemical groups of the nanofillers and
electrolyte ion species can increase the dissociation of lithium salts and also stabi￾lize the anions. And NWs have high length-diameter and could form much longer
continuous ionic transport layers compared with nanoparticle fillers. The polymer
electrolyte is PE oxide-polypropylene oxide-polyethylene oxide (PEO–PPO–PEO)
because the copolymer structure could reduce the crystallinity and glass transition
temperature of PEO. Meanwhile, the ceramic film could build long-range interfacial
ion channels and act as a mechanical support for the polymer electrolyte. The
combination of the nanowires and nanoparticles could induce more continuous
ion channels at the interface between the polymer and ceramic fillers and higher
ionic conductivity. On the other hand, the extra SiO2 nanoparticles could scavenge
trace impurities. Also, Candace K. Chan et al. reported Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO)
NWs and nanoparticles as the ceramic fillers and improved the ionic conductivity
of the polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-LiClO4-based electrolyte at room temperature to
1.31 × 10−4 S cm−1 by three orders of magnitude [112]. They found that LLZO NWs
changed the local condition of the PAN polymer and Li+ diffused preferentially
at the LLZO/polymer interface. In addition, Yi Zhang et al. fabricated different
shapes of BaTiO3 nanofillers (nanowires, nanocubes, and nanospheres) based on
PEO solid polymer electrolyte [113]. They found that there is interaction between
BaTiO3 nanofillers and PEO chains and lithium ions, and caused the weakness of
complexation between O atoms and lithium ions. And the electrochemical stable
window increased to 4.7 V versus Li/Li+ for BaTiO3 nanospheres and the SPE with
BaTiO3 spheres has the highest ionic conductivity of 1.8 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 25 ∘C
because of the highest SSA of BaTiO3 nanospheres.
The advantage of the polymer-based electrolytes is that they are flexible and
have an intact interface with the electrodes. However, their mechanical properties
and ionic conductivities at RT were poor. It is an effective way to disperse ceramic
particles into polymer matrix for enhancement of the ionic conductivity and
electrochemical stability, because the addition of the ceramic filler could hinder
the polymer crystallization and form highly conductive interface layers. Generally,
the ceramic fillers consist of inactive fillers (Al2O3 and SiO2) and active fillers5.6 Nanowires-Based Solid-State Electrolytes in LIBs 165
(Li3N and Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3) for lithium ion conduction. For example, Jianqi
Sun et al. prepared Li6.75La3Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 (LLZN) NWs with high crystallinity and
high aspect ratio through a electrospinning and calcination process, and fabricated
composite solid polymer electrolytes (CSPEs) with poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA) matrix, LLZN NWs fillers and LiClO4 salt [114]. The 3D network structure
interlaced by LLZN NWs creates more amorphous regions, and the interaction
between surface of NWs and polymer chains provide the unique conductive routes
for lithium ions. And the ionic conductivity is sharply increased from 5.98 × 10−7
of filler-free solid electrolyte to 2.20 × 10−5 S cm−1 of CPSE at RT. Wei Liu et al.
prepared Li0.33La0.557TiO3 NWs through electrospinning method and dispersed
the NWs into PAN-LiClO4 polymer, gained 2.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 ionic conductivity
at RT [115]. The synthesis procedure, morphologies, and ionic conductivity are
shown in Figure 5.14. They found that the NW fillers have high aspect ratio and
form continuous ionic transport pathways over longer distances, which could
reduce the junction cross significantly and enhance the lithium ionic conduc￾tivity. Lin Zhu et al. fabricated PEO, poly (propylene carbonate) (PPC), lithium
bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI), and Li0.33La0.557TiO3 NWs (LLTO-NWs) solid
polymer composite electrolyte (SPCE) [116]. The addition of PPC could reduce
the crystallinity of PEO. And the addition of LLTO-NWs could further reduce the
PEO crystallinity and form a lot of ion transport channels at the interface between
fillers and polymers. The LLTO-NWs were fabricated by electrospinning and have
a large SSA and wide electrochemical window. And the novel SPCE with 8 wt%
LLTO-NWs had the highest ionic conductivities of 5.66 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 25 ∘C and
4.72 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 ∘C, which could favor the SPCE’s development.
Except lithium ionic conductors, Al2O3, TiO2, oxygen ionic conductors are also
often used as ceramic fillers. The ionic conductivity based on PEO or PAN solid poly￾mer electrolytes is about 10−7 S cm−1 at RT. To improve the ionic conductivity of the
polymer electrolyte, ceramic fillers such as SiO2, Al2O3, and TiO2 on were added
to interact with the polymer matrix. For polymer electrolytes, Li+ transportation is
related to the polymer segmental motion. And the introduction of the ceramic fillers
could hinder the polymer crystallization and was beneficial to fast Li+ transporta￾tion. On the other hand, the Lewis-acid sites on the surfaces of the ceramic fillers
could attract the salt anions and set more positively charged Li+ free and enhanced
Li+ conductivity. Meanwhile, the NWs have more continuous ion-conducted path￾way across long distance and percolation network, while nanoparticles are isolated.
Therefore, Wei Liu et al. added oxide-ion-conducted NWs into polymer electrolyte
to improve the ionic conductivity [117]. They found that the more oxygen vacan￾cies on the surface, the more free Li+ was released and the higher the ionic con￾ductivity. And 7 mol% Y2O3 stabilized ZrO2 NWs had the highest conductivity of
1.07 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 ∘C. In addition, there are competitive interactions between
ceramic fillers and polymers, which could favor ionic conductivity, and improve the
electrochemical stability window and thermal stability. The addition of the ceramic
fillers could reduce the polymer reorganization tendency and the polymer crystal￾lization, which is beneficial to the enhancement of the lithium-ion conductivity.
Peiqi Lun et al. dispersed oxygen-ion conducting Sm-doped CeO2 (SDC) NWs into2.8
500 nm
10 Μm
10 nm
(002)
(002)
(001) (110)
100 80 60 40
T(°C)
20 0
–8
–6
log σ (Scm–1) –4
3.2 3.6
1000/T (K–1)
(a)
(b) (c) (d)
Syringe
As-spun fibers
DC power
Collector
PAN
LiCIO4
Li+ conduction
CH2
Li O O– +
O
O
Cl
CH
C N n
Nanowire-filled polymer Nanoparticle-filled polymer
Solid electrolyte
Stainless steel
Electrochemistry
workstation
vs.
PAN-LiClO4-10LLTO NWs
PAN-LiClO4-5LLTO NWs
PAN-LiClO4
PAN-LiClO4-15LLTO NWs
PAN-LiClO4-15LLTO NPs
PAN-LiClO4-20LLTO NWs
Figure 5.14 (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of ceramic nanowire-filled polymer-based composite electrolytes, together with the comparison
of possible lithium-ion conduction pathway in nanowire-filled and nanoparticle-filled composite electrolytes, and illustration of the electrode
configuration for the AC impedance spectroscope measurement; (b) TEM image of LLTO nanowires; (c) HRTEM image of an individual LLTO nanowire, with
inset FFT pattern; (d) Arrhenius plots of the composite electrolytes with carious LLTO nanowire concentrations, together with the date for LLTO
nanoparticle-filled PAN-LiClO4 electrolyte. Source: Liu et al. [115] / American Chemical Society.5.6 Nanowires-Based Solid-State Electrolytes in LIBs 167
the polyvinylidene fluoride matrix to form CPEs, and gained an ionic conductivity of
9.09 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 ∘C with a lithium-ion transfer number of ∼0.40 [118]. And
the enhancement of the lithium-ion conductivity is attributed to the Lewis acid-base
interaction resulting from the formation of positively charged oxygen vacancies. The
1D nanostructures of the SDC NWs could provide better pathways for lithium-ion
transfer and migration. Their results indicate that employing an oxygen-ion con￾ductor could be a facile and promising way to enhance the ionic conductivity of the
polymer electrolytes.
Al2O3, TiO2 are also proper ceramic fillers. For example, Ming-Chou Chen et al.
fabricated a new type organic–inorganic hybrid electrolytes based on the triblock
copolymer with lithium trifluoromethanesulfonate and Al2O3 NWs, and the
maximum ionic conductivity was 9.8 × 10−5 S cm−1 [119]. There were interactions
among salt, Al2O3 NWs, and polymer, which caused the formation of the hybrid
structure. Yu Wang et al. fabricated a core–shell protein@TiO2 NWs CPE via
protein-functionalization on electrospun TiO2 NWs [120]. The protein can consid￾erably adsorb anions, promote the dissociation of lithium salts, and enhance the
conduction of Li+ at the polymer-nanofiller interfaces. Compared with protein-TiO2
nanoparticles, protein-TiO2 NWs have more continuous networked structure than
the 1D NWs, resulting in enhanced ionic conductivity and mechanical properties of
the CPEs.
Some other inactive fillers are also reported. For example, Xinyong Tao el al. fabri￾cated Mg2B2O5 NWs and added them to the PEO-based SSEs [121]. The fabrication
of the Mg2B2O5 nanowires was low cost and facile. The nanowires were lightweight,
flame-retardant, and high-tenacity. They found that there was interaction between
Mg2B2O5 nanowires and –SO2– in the TFSI− anion, and the interaction could
enhance lithium ion release and transportation, which improved the ionic conduc￾tivity. And the addition of Mg2B2O5 improved the mechanical properties and the
flame-retardant properties of the polymer electrolyte. In addition, PEO electrolyte is
easy to oxidize above 4 V versus Li/Li+. Therefore, it is critical to develop electrolyte
paired with 4 V Li(Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3)O2 (NMC) cathodes and enhance the ionic
conductivity. Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) is nonflammability, easy processing,
and the ionic conductivity is about 10−4 S cm−1. To address this problem, Yuan
Yang et al. randomly dispersed palygorskite ((Mg, Al)2Si4O10(OH)) NWs into
PVDF electrolyte, and gained flexible PVDF/palygorskite composite electrolyte
with enhanced ionic conductivity and mechanical properties [122]. The synthesis
process and the photos of the membrane are shown in Figure 5.15a–d. Palygorskite
has an open structure and improve the PVDF membrane’s stiffness and toughness.
The lithium dendrite is suppressed due to the mechanical robustness, which is
beneficial to the cycling stability as shown in Figure 5.15e,f. The PVDF/palygorskite
composite membrane meets the requirements of high energy density and safety for
solid-state electrolyte.
In summary, NWs with high length anddiameter play an important role in the
SSEs. For example, LLZO nanowires could be stable with cubic structure. On the
other hand, lithium ionic conductors, Al2O3, SiO2, oxygen ionic conductors, and168 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
PVDF/LiCIO4 dissolved in DMF Palygorskite
Dry in
vaccum oven
Blade
Add
Palygorskite
(a) (e)
(f) (b) (c) (d)
Path 1
Stir for 6h
Ultrasonic
PVDF-CPE
0
160
Specific capacity (mAh/g) 120
80
40
0
50 100
Cycle number
150
0
4.0
Voltage (V) 3.6 2nd
50th
100th
150th
200th
3.2
2.8
40 80
Specific capacity (mAh/g)
120
Charge
Discharge
200
Path 2
Figure 5.15 (a) A schematic diagram of the synthesis of PVDF-based polymer electrolytes
and PVDF/palygorskite nanowires/CPE; (b) PVDF polymer electrolyte membrane and
(c) PVDF/palygorskite CPE membrane dried at 60 ∘C in vacuum chamber for 24 hours;
(d) bent PVDF/palygorskite CPE showing excellent flexibility; (e) voltage profile and
(f) cycling performance of NMC|PVDF/5 wt% palygorskite CPE|Li cell (1 C = 150 mA g−1).
Source: Yao et al. [122] / American Chemical Society.
inactive inorganic NWs with long distance and percolation network have been used
as ceramic fillers to improve the ionic conductivity of the polymer electrolyte.
5.7 Nanowires-Based Electrodes for Flexible LIBs
With the rapid development of flexible and wearable electronic products, such as
electronic paper, smart clothes, electronic skin, flexible display, bendable smart
phones, and implantable medical devices, there is an urgent need for bendable,
foldable, and stretchable electronic devices in the market. Correspondingly, the
power supply to these electronic devices should be flexible while maintaining
certain electrochemical performances. A LIB with high energy density, power
density, and cycle life is one of the most ideal power supply options for electronic
devices. However, because the fabrication process currently used is based on
the traditional mud manufacturing method, the traditional lithium ion battery
is usually rigid and bulky, the performance of which will decline sharply after
repeated folding and bending, and even lead to safety risks. Nanomaterials are
ideal materials for preparing flexible electrodes for energy storage devices, because
they have at least one dimension in the nanoscale range and often have better
mechanical and electrical properties than bulk materials. Cheng Huiming et al.
[30] have summarized the application of carbon nanotubes and graphene materials
in foldable, stretchable and compressible flexible electrodes, and discussed the
gain effect of various structures on electrode flexibility, as shown in Figure 5.16.
Although nanomaterials possess many advantages as flexible electrode materials,
the study of flexible, stretchable energy storage devices is still in the early stages5.7 Nanowires-Based Electrodes for Flexible LIBs 169
Bendable device
Graphene foam, CNTs foam, etc.
Stretchable device
Compressible device
Materials
stretchability
Fiber structure
Wave structure
 Structural
stretchability
Island-bridge design
Polymer electrode, etc.
N
N N
O
O
O
O
O O
n
n
Free standing composites, CNT or graphene films,
Composite films with non-conductive substrates
Figure 5.16 Classification of flexible electrodes and the applications of CNTs and
graphene. Source: Wen et al. [30] / John Wiley & Sons.
of laboratory research. They still face the following three key challenges in the
preparation of practical flexible lithium ion battery devices: (i) large-scale produc￾tion of flexible electrodes; (ii) stable electrochemical performance during dynamic
bending; (iii) high energy and power densities of devices. NWs materials tend to
exhibit fast charge transfer and excellent mechanical flexibility due to their radial
nanoscale size and ultrahigh aspect ratio. Additionally, the NW structure can make
the active material grow closely on the collector or cross-link each other to form
a network structure so that it does not fall off during the bending process of the
flexible device. Thus, the suitable NW-based electrode will provide a marvelous
opportunity for practical production of flexible wearable LIBs. In recent years, the170 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
unique advantages of NWs have also been well developed in flexible LIBs. The
following will focus on some representative examples and summaries of NW-based
electrodes for flexible LIBs.
The selection and assembly of NW materials are central issues in the develop￾ment of portable and flexible LIBs. Nam and co-workers [123] pioneered the com￾bination of biotechnology and energy storage technology, using viruses to synthe￾size Au-Co3O4 hybrid NWs at room temperature as anode materials for LIBs. They
designed a bifunctional virus template that simultaneously expressed both Au- and
Co3O4-specific peptides with the virus coat (Figure 5.17a). After incubating the virus
in the corresponding suspension, hybrid NWs of 5-nm Au nanoparticles spatially
interspersed within the Co3O4 wires were obtain (Figure 5.17b,c). The introduction
of gold nanoparticles cannot only improve the conductivity of the whole nanowire,
but also catalyze the electrochemical reaction, enabling a higher reversible lithium
storage capacity compared to the pure Co3O4 NWs. Moreover, by right of the princi￾ples of self-assembly and bio-template, the hybrid Au-Co3O4 NWs driven by viruses
can form very ordered two-dimension liquid crystalline layers on top of electrostat￾ically cohesive polymer films, constructing a transparent and free-standing flexible
film anode of LIBs (Figure 5.17d). The assembled monolayer of Au-CO3O4 NWs/Li
flexible cells exhibited a high reversible capacity (94% of its theoretical capacity) at
a rate of 1.12 C and maintained 65% at the rate of 5.19 C, demonstrating a high rate
capability (Figure 5.17e) [123].
Silicon with ultrahigh theoretical lithium storage capacity is one of the most
potential lithium anode materials, which has always been a hot topic material.
Vald et al. [124] reported a novel strategy to obtain lithium-ion battery components
from wasted silicon chips through tunable and repeatable chemical etching per￾meation cycles. Based on the predesigned parameters, a SiNW array embedded
in the polymer matrix was obtained from recycle silicon wafer by MACE, among
which the polymer matrix operates as both Li-ion gel-electrolyte and an electrode
separator (Figure 5.17f). Then, deposited uniformly around the SiNWs with porous
and electric- interconnected copper nanoshells, a free-standing electrode with
flexibility, mechanical stability, and high conductivity was fabricated to be used as
anode for LIBs (Figure 5.17g). After matching the composite Si NWs-polymer anode
with the LiCoO2 cathode, an operational 3.4 V lithium-polymer silicon nanowire
mechanically flexible battery was demonstrated, and the initial discharge capacity
of this battery achieved ∼3500 mAh g−1 at a C/20 cycling rate (Figure 5.17h) [124].
Besides using the above up-down method to prepare flexible SiNWs elec￾trodes, the down-up synthesis method is also a good choice to prepare excellent
nanowire electrodes. Chockla and co-workers [125] proposed a paper-like non￾woven fabric flexible film electrode, consisting of entangled silicon NWs. By the
supercritical-fluid-liquid–solid process, the SiNWs were obtained with diameter
of 10 to 50 nm and average length over 100 μm, coated with a thin chemisorbed
polymer nanoshell (Figure 5.18a,b). After annealing in a reducing atmosphere
at a proper temperature, the polymer coating was converted into an electrically
conductive carbon layer on the SiNW surface, which can significantly improve the
electrical conductivity and mechanical stability of the Si nanowires (Figure 5.18c).1200
Capacity (mAh g–1)
1000
800
600
400
200
0 12345
Cycle
0.0 –0.3
–0.2
–0.1 Current (mA) 0.1
0.0
0.5 1.0 1.5
Voltage (V)
2.0 3.0 0
0.5
0.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
1000 2000
Specific capacity (mAh g−1)
Voltage (V vs Li/Li+)
3000 4000
5th cycle
4th cycle
3rd cycle
1st cycle
2nd cycle
6 7 8 9 10 2.5
Charging rate:1.12 C
Charging rate:5.19 C
Charge
50 nm
Au particle
Co nucleating motif
Au binding motif
(EEEE)
(LKAHLPPSRLPS)
50 nm
50 nm 500 nm
Discharge
Polymer embedded Si nanowires
200 Μm
10 Μm
2 Μm
10 Μm
Substrate supported Si nanowires
Grow - Embed - Peel
Polymer - Si nanowires composite
1st layer peeled
1st + 2nd etch-infiltrate steps:
peeled after 2nd infiltration
3rd etch
anode
(a)
(f)
(b)
(d) (e) (h) (i)
(g)
(c)
25 20
15
10 5 1
Figure 5.17 (a) Visualization of the genetically engineered M13 bacteriophage viruses. P8 proteins containing a gold-binding motif (yellow) were doped
by the phagemid method in E4 clones, which can grow Co3O4. (b) TEM images of the assembled gold nanoparticles on the virus. (c) TEM image of hybrid
nanowires of Au nanoparticles/Co3O4. (d) Digital camera image of a flexible and transparent free-standing film of (LPEI/PAA)100.5 on which Co3O4 viral
nanowires are assembled into nanostructured monolayer with dimensions of 10 cm by 4 cm. (e) Specific capacity of hybrid Au-Co3O4 nanowires [6].
(f) Three consecutive etch-infiltrate-peeling processing loops have been performed on the same Si chip and using the same MACE mask. (g) Ensemble
view of the large-scale LIPOSIL processing flow. Commercial battery-scale fabrication is achieved. (h) Cyclic voltammetry curves of the polymer-wrapped
silicon nanowire anodes. (i) Galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of the Si – polymer composite cycled at a rate of C/20 between 1.5 and 0.02 V versus
Li/Li+. Source: Vlad et al. [124] / PNAS.172 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
(a)
(c)
(d)
(g)
100 μm
100 μm
500 nm
1100 °C
1100
700
900 °C
900 °C
700 °C
None
No
anneal 1000 °C
1000
800 °C
800
2000
1600
1200
800
Capacity (mAh g
400
–1)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
0
Coulombic efficiency (%)
0 5 10
Cycle number
15 20 0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
20
40
60
80
100
20 40
Cycle number
60 80 100
MnO2
MnO
0
0
500
1000
25 600 900
Anneal temperature (°C)
1200
(f)
(b) (e)
MnO/C
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Figure 5.18 (a) Photograph of mechanically flexible Si nanowire fabric. (b) SEM images of
the fabric. (c) Photographs of Si nanowire fabrics annealed at the indicated temperatures
under a reducing atmosphere [8]; (d) Galvanostatic cycling tests of Si nanowire fabric
before and after annealing at 700, 800, 900, 1000, and 1100 ∘C at a cycle rate of C/20
(C=3579 mAh g−1). The inset shows discharge capacities after 20 cycles for batteries with
nanowire fabric anodes annealed at various temperatures. (e, f) SEM images of MnO/C at
different magnifications. (g) Cycling performance of MnO2, MnO, and MnO/C anodes at a
current density of 100 mA g−1. Source: Wang et al. [126] / The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Additionally, the nonwoven fabric has 90% void volume, which cannot only boost
ion transport and withstand the volume expansion of silicon during the repeated
cycling processes but also accommodate repeated bending and folding as flexible
electrode. Finally, the self-supporting fabric electrode, without adding the con￾ductive carbon and binder matched, was used as a mechanically flexible, highly
electrically conductive anode material in a lithium ion battery anode of LIBs and
present high lithium storage capacity of more than 800 mA g−1 as well as excellent
cycling stability (Figure 5.18d) [125].
Similarly, the ultralong MnO/C coaxial NWs with diameters of ∼100 nm and
lengths up to hundreds of micrometers were synthesized, constructing the free￾standing flexible membrane anode for LIBs [126]. The MnO NWs were first
synthesized by a facile hydrothermal method. Then, the flexible membrane of
composite MnO/C coaxial NWs with carbon coated was fabricated through an in
situ novel interfacial polymerization technique and the following carbonization
process (Figure 5.18e,f). Benefiting from the ultralong NW structure and the
network framework with outstanding electric conduction provided by carbon
layer, the MnO/C membrane electrode not only has good mechanical flexibility
but also presents superior electrochemical performance. When acting as a flexible5.7 Nanowires-Based Electrodes for Flexible LIBs 173
freestanding anode for LIBs, the composite MnO/C NW electrode exhibits a decent
reversible lithium ion storage capacity of 832 mA g−1 at the current density of
100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles, as well as superior cycling stability with a specific
capacity of 480 mAh g−1 being retained after 600 cycles at a high current density of
1000 mA g−1(Figure 5.18g) [126].
Different from the aforementioned synthesis method of preparing raw materi￾als directly into NWs under certain conditions, Kawamori et al. [127] reported an
flexible metal sheet called metal nanowire nonwoven cloth (MNNC) as a kind of
universal substrate for loading proper LIB active material. Consisting of intertwined
metal NWs 100 nm in diameter with several dozen micrometers of length, the MNNC
possesses both a flexibility and mechanically robustness of the metal and a large SSA
of the NWs (Figure 5.19a). When an active material was deposited on the MNNC,
a flexible membrane electrode with any conductive additives, binders, and current
collectors was obtained for LIBs, which is significant for increasing the gravimetric
specific capacity (Figure 5.19b,c). Besides, there are many merits for this electrode
design, including high SSA for the efficient ion/electron transports, and abundant
(a) (e)
(g)
III
II
I
Ar
Copper loop
Induction heated
cylinder
Quartz tube
Carbon fiber
thermoinsulating
layer
Graphite
crucible
C/10 1 C 10 C
2500
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1) 2000
1500
1000
0 50 100
(C/5)
150
Cycle number
200 250
Theoretical
capacity
718 mAh g–1
523 K (NiO:14wt%)
543 K (NiO:18wt%)
573 K (NiO:45wt%)
NiO NPs36
300
500
0
1 C
100 μm
(f)
(b)
(d)
(c)
Direction of a magnetic field
Ni nanoparticle Ni nanowire NNNC
Reaction time
1 cm
5 cm
Figure 5.19 (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the NNNC synthesized
by electroless deposition under a magnetic field. (b) Photographic and (c) SEM images of
the sheet-like NNNC. (d) Cycle performance of the NNNCs annealed at various
temperatures. The charge–discharge experiments were conducted at room temperature
between 0.02 and 2.50 V at a rate of C/10, 1 C, and 10 C [128]. (e) Schematic diagrams of the
vertical high-frequency induction furnace. The direction of gas flow is marked by the yellow
dashed lines. The location where Si nanowires grow is marked by a red circle. (f) Growth
mechanism of Si nanowires and FTS-SiNWsP under the action of carrier gas flow. (g) SEM
image of the flexible, transparent, and self-standing Si nanowire paper. The inset shows a
digital image of originally synthesized FTS-SiNWsP with excellent transmission.
Source: Pang et al. [31] / American Chemical Society.174 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
interspaces between the neighboring nanowires accommodating the critical volume
change during lithiation/delithiation process. A nickel NW nonwoven cloth covered
with NiO active materials was prepared to demonstrate its operability as a proto￾type flexible anode for LIBs. The fabricated NiO-covered nickel nanowire nonwoven
cloth (NNNC) electrode present good mechanical flexibility for twisting and tying,
along with superior cycling stability, 500 mAh g−1 at 1 C after 300 cycles, compared
to that of a NiO nanoparticle-based electrode (Figure 5.19d) [127].
By virtue of the congenital advantage of being compatible with mature integrated
circuit technology for bulk silicon, a flexible electrode composed of nanosilicon
materials will be more suitable for advanced flexible energy storage devices than
one composed of other materials. Pang and co-workers [31] have studied paper-like
freestanding silicon nanowires with macroscopic brittleness and transparency
characteristics as anode for LIBs. They fabricated the transparent and freestanding
flexible paper-like silicon NW membrane by gas flow-directed assembly of a unique
interlocking alignment of the Si nanowires, among which the silicon nanowires
with an average diameter of about 10 nm interconnected together forming a
network structure (Figure 5.19e,f). The ultralarge straining ability provided by
the nanoscale silicon nanowires is the key to achieving flexible, transparent, and
self-standing silicon NW paper. After coating the grapheme layer on the silicon
NWs, a freestanding flexible Si NW film electrode was assembled without adding
conductive adders and binders as the anode for LIBs (Figure 5.19g). The composite
Si anode shows an ultrahigh initial charge/discharge specific capacity of 5336 and
2699 mA g−1, respectively at a current density of 1 A g−1, as well as an excellent
cycle life [31].
NW-based electrode is promising for building flexible LIBs due to its unique elec￾trochemical and physical properties. In the present reported works, those flexible
LIB devices assembled with NW-based membrane electrodes exhibited outstanding
energy density, power density, and cycling performance, which give full play to the
electrochemical and physical properties of nanowire materials. The integrated NW
membrane electrode is exempt from the use of conductive carbons, binders, and
current collectors, efficiently enhancing the gravimetric-specific capacity of devices.
However, there are still some challenges in the application of flexible NW-based
electrode. For example, most of the active materials that make up NWs are semi￾conductors or insulators, which require additional conductive coating or adders to
improve the electric conduction of whole electrode. Therefore, the development of
higher-level NW loading process, better electrochemical performance, and higher
mechanical stability of NW electrode materials are the future directions of NW-based
flexible electrode materials.
5.8 Summary and Outlook
In this chapter, we discussed NWs as anodes, cathodes, separators, and SSEs in LIBs.
NWs with nano-sized diameters are good for ion diffusion in the radical direction,
which is beneficial to enhance the diffusion dynamics of carriers and improve theReferences 175
rate capability. And NW-based electrodes could release the stress properly, and
adjust the volume changes during charging and discharging process, improving
the structural stability. In addition, nanowires exhibit good bending and robust
mechanical properties due to their high aspect ratio and are suitable to construct
flexible devices. In addition, NWs are also used as separators and ceramic fillers
for SSEs, they can interweave with other materials, which is beneficial to liquid
electrolyte retention and ionic conductivity. On the other hand, challenges still exist
for NWS in LIBs. For NW electrode-based intercalation reaction, the intercalation
leads to volume expansion and fracture of the NWs, which can be improved
by pre-intercalation and topological substitution. For NW electrodes based on
conversion reactions, the properties are improved by constructing core–shell NW
coatings and designing hierarchical heterogeneous nanowire structures. For an
alloy NW anode, the active materials are easy to destroy or even fall off, the SEI is
easy to form, and the alloy NWs are easy to aggregate. The effective solutions are to
combine the NWs with other materials, or reduce the size of the alloy nanowires.
Meanwhile, the mass loading of NW electrodes is relatively low, and the effective
strategies are to construct 3D structured electrodes, employ lightweight current
collectors, and so on.
References
1 Goodenough, J.B. (2012). Rechargeable batteries: challenges old and new.
Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry 16: 2019–2029.
2 Goodenough, J.B. and Park, K.-S. (2013). The Li-ion rechargeable battery: a per￾spective. Journal of the American Chemical Society 135: 1167–1176.
3 Tarascon, J.M. and Armand, M. (2001). Issues and challenges facing recharge￾able lithium batteries. Nature 414: 359–367.
4 Whittingham, M.S. (1976). Electrical energy storage and intercalation chemistry.
Science Advances 192: 1126–1127.
5 Goodenough, J.B. (2018). How we made the Li-ion rechargeable battery. Nature
Electronics 1: 204–204.
6 Mizushima, K., Jones, P.C., Wiseman, P.J. et al. (1980). LixCoO2 (0<x<−1): a
new cathode material for batteries of high energy density. Materials Research
Bulletin 15: 783–789.
7 Goodenough, J.B. (2007). Cathode materials: a personal perspective. Journal of
Power Sources 174: 996–1000.
8 Placke, T., Kloepsch, R., Dühnen, S. et al. (2017). Lithium ion, lithium metal,
and alternative rechargeable battery technologies: the odyssey for high energy
density. Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry 21: 1939–1964.
9 Manthiram, A. (2017). An outlook on lithium ion battery technology. ACS Cen￾tral Science 3: 1063–1069.
10 Etacheri, V., Marom, R., Elazari, R. et al. (2011). Challenges in the development
of advanced Li-ion batteries: a review. Energy & Environmental Science 4 (9):
3243–3250. https://doi.org/10.1039/c1ee01598b.176 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
11 Goodenough, J.B. (2013). Evolution of strategies for modern rechargeable batter￾ies. Accounts of Chemical Research 46: 1053–1061.
12 Goodenough, J.B. and Kim, Y. (2010). Challenges for rechargeable Li batteries.
Chemistry of Materials 22: 587–603.
13 You, Y., Celio, H., Li, J. et al. (2018). Modified high-nickel cathodes with stable
surface chemistry against ambient air for lithium-ion batteries. Angewandte
Chemie International Edition 57: 6480–6485.
14 Blomgren, G.E. (2016). The development and future of lithium ion batteries.
Journal of the Electrochemical Society 164: A5019–A5025.
15 Lim, C.H., Jung, Y.H., Yeom, S.J. et al. (2017). Encapsulation of lithium
vanadium phosphate in reduced graphene oxide for a lithium-ion battery cath￾ode with stable elevated temperature performance. Electrochimica Acta 253:
208–217.
16 Zhang, Y.-C., You, Y., Xin, S. et al. (2016). Rice husk-derived hierarchical
silicon/nitrogen-doped carbon/carbon nanotube spheres as low-cost and high￾capacity anodes for lithium-ion batteries. Nano Energy 25: 120–127.
17 Yu, Z.-L., Xin, S., You, Y. et al. (2016). Ion-catalyzed synthesis of microporous
hard carbon embedded with expanded nanographite for enhanced lithium/
sodium storage. Journal of the American Chemical Society 138: 14915–14922.
18 Shan, T.-T., Xin, S., You, Y. et al. (2016). Combining nitrogen-doped graphene
sheets and MoS2: a unique film–foam–film structure for enhanced lithium
storage. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 55: 12783–12788.
19 Zhou, W., Zhu, Y., Grundish, N. et al. (2018). Polymer lithium-garnet interphase
for an all-solid-state rechargeable battery. Nano Energy 53: 926–931.
20 Kamali-Heidari, E., Kamyabi-Gol, A., Heydarzadehsohi, M. et al. (2018). Elec￾trode materials for lithium ion batteries: a review. Journal of Ultrafine Grained
and Nanostructured Materials 51: 1–12.
21 Ji, L., Lin, Z., Alcoutlabi, M. et al. (2011). Recent developments in nanos￾tructured anode materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. Energy &
Environmental Science 4: 2682–2699.
22 Zhang, X.-Q., Chen, X., Cheng, X.-B. et al. Highly stable lithium metal batteries
enabled by regulating the Li+ solvation in nonaqueous electrolyte. Angewandte
Chemie International Edition .
23 Nitta, N. and Yushin, G. (2014). High-capacity anode materials for lithium-ion
batteries: choice of elements and structures for active particles. Particle &
Particle Systems Characterization 31: 317–336.
24 Wu, X.-L., Guo, J.-Z., and Guo, Y.-G. (2019). Traditional nanostructures and
nanomaterials in batteries. In: Nanostructures and Nanomaterials for Batter￾ies: Principles and Applications (ed. Y.-G. Guo), 313–357. Singapore: Springer
Singapore.
25 Liang, Y., Zhao, C.-Z., Yuan, H. et al. (2019). A review of rechargeable batteries
for portable electronic devices. InfoMat 1: 6–32.
26 Walter, M., Kovalenko, M.V., and Kravchyk, K.V. (2020). Challenges and bene￾fits of post-lithium-ion batteries. New Journal of Chemistry 44: 1677–1683.References 177
27 Choi, J.W. and Aurbach, D. (2016). Promise and reality of post-lithium-ion
batteries with high energy densities. Nature Reviews Materials 1: 16013.
28 Zhou, G., Xu, L., Hu, G. et al. (2019). Nanowires for electrochemical energy
storage. Chemical Reviews 119: 11042–11109.
29 Liu, C., Li, F., Ma, L.P., and Cheng, H.M. (2010). Advanced materials for energy
storage. Advanced Materials 22 (8): E28–E62.
30 Wen, L., Li, F., and Cheng, H.M. (2016). Carbon nanotubes and graphene for
flexible electrochemical energy storage: from materials to devices. Advanced
Materials 28 (22): 4306–4337.
31 Pang, C., Cui, H., Yang, G., and Wang, C. (2013). Flexible transparent and
free-standing silicon nanowires paper. Nano Letters 13 (10): 4708–4714.
32 Mai, L., Tian, X., Xu, X. et al. (2014). Nanowire electrodes for electrochemical
energy storage devices. Chemical Reviews 114 (23): 11828–11862.
33 Luo, W., Calas, A., Tang, C. et al. (2016). Ultralong Sb2Se3 nanowire-based
free-standing membrane anode for lithium/sodium ion batteries. ACS Applied
Materials & Interfaces 8 (51): 35219–35226.
34 Xu, J., Dou, Y., Wei, Z. et al. (2017). Recent progress in graphite intercala￾tion compounds for rechargeable metal (Li, Na, K, Al)-ion batteries. Advanced
Science (Weinh) 4: 1700146.
35 Teki, R., Datta, M.K., Krishnan, R. et al. (2009). Nanostructured silicon anodes
for lithium ion rechargeable batteries. Small 5: 2236–2242.
36 Chan, C.K., Ruffo, R., Hong, S.S. et al. (2009). Surface chemistry and morphol￾ogy of the solid electrolyte interphase on silicon nanowire lithium-ion battery
anodes. Journal of Power Sources 189: 1132–1140.
37 Yu, S., Hong Ng, V.M., Wang, F. et al. (2018). Synthesis and application of
iron-based nanomaterials as anodes of lithium-ion batteries and supercapaci￾tors. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 6: 9332–9367.
38 Su, X., Wu, Q., Li, J. et al. (2014). Silicon-based nanomaterials for lithium-ion
batteries: a review. Advanced Energy Materials 4: 1300882.
39 Namdari, P., Daraee, H., and Eatemadi, A. (2016). Recent advances in silicon
nanowire biosensors: synthesis methods, properties, and applications. Nanoscale
Research Letters 11: 406.
40 Peng, K.-Q., Wang, X., Li, L. et al. (2013). Silicon nanowires for advanced
energy conversion and storage. Nano Today 8: 75–97.
41 Schmidt, V., Wittemann, J.V., Senz, S. et al. (2009). Silicon nanowires: a review
on aspects of their growth and their electrical properties. Advanced Materials
21: 2681–2702.
42 Ge, M., Rong, J., Fang, X. et al. (2012). Porous doped silicon nanowires for
lithium ion battery anode with long cycle life. Nano Letters 12: 2318–2323.
43 Hwang, C., Lee, K., Um, H.-D. et al. (2017). Conductive and porous silicon
nanowire anodes for lithium ion batteries. Journal of the Electrochemical Society
164: A1564–A1568.
44 Chen, X., Bi, Q., Sajjad, M. et al. (2018). One-dimensional porous silicon
nanowires with large surface area for fast charge(−)discharge lithium-ion
batteries. Nanomaterials (Basel) 8: 285.178 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
45 Liu, X.H., Zhang, L.Q., Zhong, L. et al. (2011). Ultrafast electrochemical lithia￾tion of individual Si nanowire anodes. Nano Letters 11: 2251–2258.
46 Huang, R., Fan, X., Shen, W. et al. (2009). Carbon-coated silicon nanowire array
films for high-performance lithium-ion battery anodes. Applied Physics Letters
95: 133119.
47 Wang, B., Li, X., Zhang, X. et al. (2013). Adaptable silicon-carbon nanocables
sandwiched between reduced graphene oxide sheets as lithium ion battery
anodes. ACS Nano 7: 1437–1445.
48 Sandu, G., Coulombier, M., Kumar, V. et al. (2018). Kinked silicon nanowires￾enabled interweaving electrode configuration for lithium-ion batteries. Scientific
Reports 8: 9794.
49 Chen, H., Xiao, Y., Wang, L. et al. (2011). Silicon nanowires coated with copper
layer as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Journal of Power Sources 196:
6657–6662.
50 Memarzadeh, E.L., Kalisvaart, W.P., Kohandehghan, A. et al. (2012). Silicon
nanowire core aluminum shell coaxial nanocomposites for lithium ion battery
anodes grown with and without a TiN interlayer. Journal of Materials Chemistry
22: 6655.
51 Kohandehghan, A., Cui, K., Kupsta, M. et al. (2014). Nanometer-scale Sn
coatings improve the performance of silicon nanowire LIB anodes. Journal of
Materials Chemistry A 2: 11261.
52 Sadeghipari, M., Mashayekhi, A., and Mohajerzadeh, S. (2018). Novel approach
for improving the performance of Si-based anodes in lithium-ion batteries. Nan￾otechnology 29: 055403.
53 Song, H., Wang, H.X., Lin, Z. et al. (2016). Hierarchical nano-branched
c-Si/SnO2 nanowires for high areal capacity and stable lithium-ion battery.
Nano Energy 19: 511–521.
54 Yao, Y., Liu, N., McDowell, M.T. et al. (2012). Improving the cycling stabil￾ity of silicon nanowire anodes with conducting polymer coatings. Energy &
Environmental Science 5: 7927.
55 Wang, J., Wang, H., Zhang, B. et al. (2015). A stable flexible silicon nanowire
array as anode for high-performance lithium-ion batteries. Electrochimica Acta
176: 321–326.
56 Chen, Y., Liu, L., Xiong, J. et al. (2015). Porous Si nanowires from cheap met￾allurgical silicon stabilized by a surface oxide layer for lithium ion batteries.
Advanced Functional Materials 25: 6701–6709.
57 Liang, W., Yang, H., Fan, F. et al. (2013). Tough germanium nanoparticles
under electrochemical cycling. ACS Nano 7: 3427–3433.
58 Liu, X.H., Huang, S., Picraux, S.T. et al. (2011). Reversible nanopore formation
in Ge nanowires during lithiation-delithiation cycling: an in situ transmission
electron microscopy study. Nano Letters 11: 3991–3997.
59 Chan, C.K., Zhang, X.F., and Cui, Y. (2008). High capacity Li ion battery
anodes using Ge nanowires. Nano Letters 8: 307–309.References 179
60 Yuan, F.W., Yang, H.J., and Tuan, H.Y. (2012). Alkanethiol-passivated Ge
nanowires as high-performance anode materials for lithium-ion batteries: the
role of chemical surface functionalization. ACS Nano 6: 9932–9942.
61 Kennedy, T., Bezuidenhout, M., Palaniappan, K. et al. (2015). Nanowire het￾erostructures comprising germanium stems and silicon branches as high￾capacity Li-ion anodes with tunable rate capability. ACS Nano 9: 7456–7465.
62 Wang, J., Raistrick, I.D., and Huggins, R.A. (1984). Behavior of some binary
lithium alloys as negative electrodes in organic solvent based electrolytes.
Electrochemical Society Extended Abstracts 84: 184–185.
63 Guo, J., Yang, Z., and Archer, L.A. (2013). Aerosol assisted synthesis of hier￾archical tin–carbon composites and their application as lithium battery anode
materials. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1: 8710.
64 Zhong, Y., Li, X., Zhang, Y. et al. (2015). Nanostructued core-shell Sn
nanowires @ CNTs with controllable thickness of CNT shells for lithium ion
battery. Applied Surface Science 332: 192–197.
65 Yuan, C., Wu, H.B., Xie, Y. et al. (2014). Mixed transition-metal oxides: design,
synthesis, and energy-related applications. Angewandte Chemie (International
Ed. in English) 53: 1488–1504.
66 Kumar, V., Kim, J.H., and Sunkara, M.K. (2008). Gas phase production of metal
oxide nanowires and nanoparticles using a microwave plasma reactor. The Jour￾nal of Physical Chemistry C 112: 17750–17754.
67 Li, Y., Tan, B., and Wu, Y. (2008). Mesoporous Co3O4 nanowire arrays for
lithium ion batteries with high capacity and rate capability. Nano Letters 8:
265–270.
68 Du, N., Xu, Y., Zhang, H. et al. (2011). Porous ZnCo2O4 nanowires synthesis via
sacrificial templates: high-performance anode materials of Li-ion batteries. Inor￾ganic Chemistry 50: 3320–3324.
69 Cheng, F., Tao, Z., Liang, J. et al. (2008). Template-directed materials for
rechargeable lithium-ion. Chemistry of Materials 20: 667–681.
70 Liao, J.Y., Higgins, D., Lui, G. et al. (2013). Multifunctional TiO2-C/MnO2
core-double-shell nanowire arrays as high-performance 3D electrodes for
lithium ion batteries. Nano Letters 13: 5467–5473.
71 Yao, X., Guo, G., Zhao, Y. et al. (2016). Synergistic effect of mesoporous Co3O4
nanowires confined by N-doped graphene aerogel for enhanced lithium storage.
Small 12: 3849–3860.
72 Yang, L., Li, X., Ouyang, Y. et al. (2016). Hierarchical MoO2/Mo2C/C hybrid
nanowires as high-rate and long-life anodes for lithium-ion batteries. ACS
Applied Materials & Interfaces 8: 19987–19993.
73 Bogart, T.D., Oka, D., Lu, X. et al. (2014). Lithium ion battery peformance of
silicon nanowires with carbon skin. ACS Nano 8: 915–922.
74 Choi, S., Kim, J., Hwang, D.Y. et al. (2016). Generalized redox-responsive
assembly of carbon-sheathed metallic and semiconducting nanowire het￾erostructures. Nano Letters 16: 1179–1185.180 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
75 Hu, J., Sun, C.-F., Gillette, E. et al. (2016). Dual-template ordered meso￾porous carbon/Fe2O3 nanowires as lithium-ion battery anodes. Nanoscale 8:
12958–12969.
76 Chen, W., Lu, L., Maloney, S. et al. (2015). Coaxial Zn2GeO4@carbon
nanowires directly grown on cu foils as high-performance anodes for lithium
ion batteries. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 17: 5109–5114.
77 Lyu, Y., Wu, X., Wang, K. et al. (2021). An overview on the advances of LiCoO2
cathodes for lithium-ion batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 11: 2000982.
78 Qian, J., Liu, L., Yang, J. et al. (2018). Electrochemical surface passivation of
LiCoO2 particles at ultrahigh voltage and its applications in lithium-based
batteries. Nature Communications 9: 4918.
79 Liu, Q., Su, X., Lei, D. et al. (2018). Approaching the capacity limit of lithium
cobalt oxide in lithium ion batteries via lanthanum and aluminium doping.
Nature Energy 3: 936–943.
80 Yoon, M., Dong, Y., Yoo, Y. et al. (2020). Unveiling nickel chemistry in sta￾bilizing high-voltage cobalt-rich cathodes for lithium-ion batteries. Advanced
Functional Materials 30: 1907903.
81 Xiao, X., Yang, L., Zhao, H. et al. (2012). Facile synthesis of LiCoO2 nanowires
with high electrochemical performance. Nano Research 5: 27–32.
82 Xia, H., Wan, Y., Assenmacher, W. et al. (2014). Facile synthesis of chain-like
LiCoO2 nanowire arrays as three-dimensional cathode for microbatteries. NPG
Asia Materials 6: e126–e126.
83 Lee, H.-W., Muralidharan, P., Ruffo, R. et al. (2010). Ultrathin spinel LiMn2O4
nanowires as high power cathode materials for Li-ion batteries. Nano Letters 10:
3852–3856.
84 Hosono, E., Kudo, T., Honma, I. et al. (2009). Synthesis of single crystalline
spinel LiMn2O4 nanowires for a lithium ion battery with high power density.
Nano Letters 9: 1045–1051.
85 Lee, Y., Kim, M.G., and Cho, J. (2008). Layered Li0.88[Li0.18Co0.33Mn0.49]O2
nanowires for fast and high capacity Li-ion storage material. Nano Letters 8:
957–961.
86 Yu, R., Zhang, X., Liu, T. et al. (2017). Spinel/layered heterostructured lithium￾rich oxide nanowires as cathode material for high-energy lithium-ion batteries.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9: 41210–41223.
87 Xu, X., Luo, Y.-Z., Mai, L.-Q. et al. (2012). Topotactically synthesized ultralong
LiV3O8 nanowire cathode materials for high-rate and long-life rechargeable
lithium batteries. NPG Asia Materials 4: e20–e20.
88 Ren, W., Zheng, Z., Luo, Y. et al. (2015). An electrospun hierarchical LiV3O8
nanowire-in-network for high-rate and long-life lithium batteries. Journal of
Materials Chemistry A 3: 19850–19856.
89 Whittingham, M.S. (2004). Lithium batteries and cathode materials. Chemical
Reviews 104: 4271–4301.
90 Ellis, B.L., Lee, K.T., and Nazar, L.F. (2010). Positive electrode materials for
Li-ion and Li-batteries. Chemistry of Materials 22: 691–714.References 181
91 Mai, L., Xu, L., Han, C. et al. (2010). Electrospun ultralong hierarchical vana￾dium oxide nanowires with high performance for lithium ion batteries. Nano
Letters 10: 4750–4755.
92 Yan, M., Wang, F., Han, C. et al. (2013). Nanowire templated semihollow bicon￾tinuous graphene scrolls: designed construction, mechanism, and enhanced
energy storage performance. Journal of the American Chemical Society 135:
18176–18182.
93 Lee, J.W., Lim, S.Y., Jeong, H.M. et al. (2012). Extremely stable cycling of
ultra-thin V2O5 nanowire–graphene electrodes for lithium rechargeable battery
cathodes. Energy & Environmental Science 5: 9889–9894.
94 Mai, L., Wei, Q., An, Q. et al. (2013). Nanoscroll buffered hybrid nanostruc￾tural VO2 (B) cathodes for high-rate and long-life lithium storage. Advanced
Materials 25: 2969–2973.
95 Gittleson, F.S., Hwang, J., Sekol, R.C. et al. (2013). Polymer coating of vana￾dium oxide nanowires to improve cathodic capacity in lithium batteries. Journal
of Materials Chemistry A 1: 7979–7984.
96 Yan, C., Chen, Z., Peng, Y. et al. (2012). Stable lithium-ion cathodes from
nanocomposites of VO2 nanowires and CNTs. Nanotechnology 23: 475701.
97 Lim, S., Yoon, C.S., and Cho, J. (2008). Synthesis of nanowire and hollow
LiFePO4 cathodes for high-performance lithium batteries. Chemistry of Materi￾als 20: 4560–4564.
98 Doherty, C.M., Caruso, R.A., Smarsly, B.M. et al. (2009). Hierarchically porous
monolithic LiFePO4/carbon composite electrode materials for high power
lithium ion batteries. Chemistry of Materials 21: 5300–5306.
99 Zhu, C., Yu, Y., Gu, L. et al. (2011). Electrospinning of highly electroactive
carbon-coated single-crystalline LiFePO4 nanowires. Angewandte Chemie Inter￾national Edition 50: 6278–6282.
100 Yang, J., Wang, J., Tang, Y. et al. (2013). In situ self-catalyzed formation of
core–shell LiFePO4@CNT nanowires for high rate performance lithium-ion
batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1: 7306–7311.
101 Jing, M.-x., Pi, Z.-C., Zhai, H.-A. et al. (2016). Three-dimensional Li3V2(PO4)3/C
nanowire and nanofiber hybrid membrane as a self-standing, binder-free cath￾ode for lithium ion batteries. RSC Advances 6: 71574–71580.
102 Wei, Q., An, Q., Chen, D. et al. (2014). One-pot synthesized bicontinuous hier￾archical Li3V2(PO4)3/C mesoporous nanowires for high-rate and ultralong-life
lithium-ion batteries. Nano Letters 14: 1042–1048.
103 La Monaca, A., Paolella, A., Guerfi, A. et al. (2019). Electrospun ceramic
nanofibers as 1D solid electrolytes for lithium batteries. Electrochemistry Com￾munications 104: 106483.
104 Ye, W., Zhu, J., Liao, X. et al. (2015). Hierarchical three-dimensional micro/
nano-architecture of polyaniline nanowires wrapped-on polyimide nanofibers
for high performance lithium-ion battery separators. Journal of Power Sources
299: 417–424.182 5 Nanowires for Lithium-ion Batteries
105 Jia, S., Yang, S., Zhang, M. et al. (2020). Eco-friendly xonotlite nanowires/wood
pulp fibers ceramic hybrid separators through a simple papermaking process for
lithium ion battery. Journal of Membrane Science 597: 117725.
106 Li, H., Wu, D., Wu, J. et al. (2017). Flexible, high-wettability and fire-resistant
separators based on hydroxyapatite nanowires for advanced lithium-ion batter￾ies. Advanced Materials 29: 1703548.
107 Du, Q.C., Yang, M.T., Yang, J.K. et al. (2019). Bendable network built with
ultralong silica nanowires as a stable separator for high-safety and high-power
lithium-metal batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 11: 34895–34903.
108 He, M., Zhang, X., Jiang, K. et al. (2015). Pure inorganic separator for lithium
ion batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 7: 738–742.
109 Yang, T., Gordon, Z.D., Li, Y. et al. (2015). Nanostructured garnet-type solid
electrolytes for lithium batteries: electrospinning synthesis of Li7La3Zr2O12
nanowires and particle size-dependent phase transformation. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry C 119: 14947–14953.
110 Wan, Z., Lei, D., Yang, W. et al. (2019). Low resistance-integrated all-solid-state
battery achieved by Li7La3Zr2O12 nanowire upgrading polyethylene oxide (PEO)
composite electrolyte and PEO cathode binder. Advanced Functional Materials
29: 1805301.
111 Wang, S., Zhang, L., Li, J. et al. (2019). A nanowire-nanoparticle double com￾posite polymer electrolyte for high performance ambient temperature solid-state
lithium batteries. Electrochimica Acta 320: 134560.
112 Ting Yang, J.Z., Cheng, Q., Yan Yan, H., and Chan, C.K. (2017). Composite
polymer electrolytes with Li7La3Zr2O12 garnet type nanowires as ceramic fillers
mechanism of conductivity enhancement and role of doping and morphology.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9: 21773–21780.
113 Zhang, Y., Wang, X., Feng, W. et al. (2018). Effects of the shapes of BaTiO3
nanofillers on PEO-based electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries.
Ionics 25: 1471–1480.
114 Sun, J., Li, Y., Zhang, Q. et al. (2019). A highly ionic conductive poly(methyl
methacrylate) composite electrolyte with garnet-typed Li6.75La3Zr1.75Nb0.25O12
nanowires. Chemical Engineering Journal 375: 121922.
115 Liu, W., Liu, N., Sun, J. et al. (2015). Ionic conductivity enhancement of poly￾mer electrolytes with ceramic nanowire fillers. Nano Letters 15: 2740–2745.
116 Zhu, L., Zhu, P., Yao, S. et al. (2019). High-performance solid
PEO/PPC/LLTO-nanowires polymer composite electrolyte for solid-state lithium
battery. International Journal of Energy Research 43: 4854–4866.
117 Liu, W., Lin, D., Sun, J. et al. (2016). Improved lithium ionic conductivity in
composite polymer electrolytes with oxide-ion conducting nanowires. ACS Nano
10: 11407–11413.
118 Lun, P., Liu, P., Lin, H. et al. (2019). Ionic conductivity promotion of polymer
membranes with oxygen-ion conducting nanowires for rechargeable lithium
batteries. Journal of Membrane Science 580: 92–100.References 183
119 Chu, Y.-Y., Liu, Z.-Y., Saikia, D. et al. (2015). Effect of Al2O3 nanowires on
the electrochemical properties of di-ureasil-based organic–inorganic hybrid
electrolytes. Ionics 21: 2523–2534.
120 Fu, X., Wang, Y., Fan, X. et al. (2018). Core-shell hybrid nanowires with pro￾tein enabling fast ion conduction for high-performance composite polymer
electrolytes. Small 14: e1803564.
121 Sheng, O., Jin, C., Luo, J. et al. (2018). Mg2B2O5 nanowire enabled multifunc￾tional solid-state electrolytes with high ionic conductivity, excellent mechanical
properties, and flame-retardant performance. Nano Letters 18: 3104–3112.
122 Yao, P., Zhu, B., Zhai, H. et al. (2018). PVDF/Palygorskite nanowire compos￾ite electrolyte for 4 V rechargeable lithium batteries with high energy density.
Nano Letters 18: 6113–6120.
123 Nam, K.T., Kim, D.W., Yoo, P.J. et al. (2006). Virus-enabled synthesis and
assembly of nanowires for lithium ion battery electrodes. Science 312 (5775):
885–888.
124 Vlad, A., Reddy, A.L., Ajayan, A. et al. (2012). Roll up nanowire battery from
silicon chips. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 109 (38): 15168–15173.
125 Chockla, A.M., Harris, J.T., Akhavan, V.A. et al. (2011). Silicon nanowire fabric
as a lithium ion battery electrode material. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 133 (51): 20914–20921.
126 Wang, J.-G., Zhang, C., Jin, D. et al. (2015). Synthesis of ultralong MnO/C
coaxial nanowires as freestanding anodes for high-performance lithium ion
batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 3 (26): 13699–13705.
127 Kawamori, M., Asai, T., Shirai, Y. et al. (2014). Three-dimensional nanoelec￾trode by metal nanowire nonwoven clothes. Nano Letters 14 (4): 1932–1937.
128 Dunn, B., Kamath, H., and Tarascon, J.-M. (2011). Electrical energy storage for
the grid: a battery of choices. Science 334: 928–935.185
6
Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
6.1 Advantages and Challenges of Sodium-ion Batteries
6.1.1 Development of Sodium-ion Batteries
As early as the 1980s, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) and lithium-ion batteries (LIBs)
were proposed almost at the same time. Since the successful commercialization of
LIBs in the 1990s, they have dominated today’s markets for portable and large energy
storage devices. However, the research reports on SIBs are very limited, and only a
few papers and patents have been published in the 1990s. The main reasons can
be listed as follow: (i) The research on lithium-ion intercalation materials has just
started in this period, and a large number of researchers have locked in the research
direction on LIBs; (ii) Limited by the research conditions (such as the purity of the
electrolyte, the sealing of the glove box, and the purity of argon gas), it is difficult to
accurately evaluate the performance of the electrode material in the half-cell using
the active metal sodium as the anode; (iii) The graphite for commercial LIBs exhibits
no sodium storage ability in carbonate electrolytes, resulting in the lack of suitable
anode materials for the research of SIB [1–4]. In fact, before the successful commer￾cialization of LIBs, some companies in the United States and Japan carried out the
research and development of sodium-ion full batteries using P2-NaxCoO2 and Na-Pb
alloy as the cathode and anode materials, respectively. Although the cycle life of the
sodium-ion battery can reach 300 cycles, the average discharge voltage is lower than
3 V, which has no advantage compared with the C||LiCoO2 battery (3.7 V) reported
at that time and failed to attract the attention of researchers [5].
In 2000, Stevens and Dahn developed a hard carbon material by pyrolysis of
glucose, which delivered a high capacity of 300 mAh g−1 when applied as the
SIBs anode [6]. Until now, hard carbon materials were still considered the most
promising anode materials for SIBs. With further research on cathode materials
such as polyanionic compounds, layered oxides, and Prussian white, SIBs have
been greatly developed in recent years. Due to the low lithium resources in the
crust and increased prices of lithium raw materials, low-cost SIBs are considered
promising candidates for energy storage devices. Because of the larger radius of
Na+ (0.102 nm) than Li+ (0.076 nm), the research on SIBs can learn from LIBs, but
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.186 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
it cannot be completely transplanted. Especially the electrode materials for Na+
intercalation generally exhibit sluggish diffusion kinetics, which severely affects the
performance of SIBs. Therefore, developing high-performance electrode materials
through structural regulation and morphology design is a great challenge for further
practical application of SIBs [2].
6.1.2 Characteristic of Sodium-ion Batteries
6.1.2.1 The Working Principle of Sodium-ion Battery
The working principle of SIB is “rocking chair,” which means that Na+ ions shuttle
between cathode and anode materials to achieve reversible charging/discharging.
The cathode and anode are reservoirs of sodium and work for electron stor￾age/release. The separator, which is placed between two electrodes, is to avoid
short circuits in the SIBs. The electrolyte ensures the transport of Na+ ions in the
process of charging and discharging. While charging, Na+ ions are released from the
positive electrode and move to the negative electrode through the electrolyte. Due
to the potential difference, electrons flow from the positive electrode to the negative
electrode through the external circuit to maintain the electrical neutrality of the
electrode. This process is accompanied by an increase in the battery voltage, which
is used to store energy. While discharging, Na+ ions and electrons are released from
the negative electrode to the positive electrode by an opposite process. This process
is accompanied by a decrease in the battery voltage, which will release energy [7]
(Figure 6.1).
6.1.2.2 Advantages of Sodium-ion Batteries
(i) Abundant material resources, wide distribution, and lower price.
(ii) The battery structure of SIB is similar to that of LIB, so they can use the same
production equipment [9].
(iii) Sodium ions won’t form aluminum alloy, so aluminum foil can be used as a
negative current collector to further reduce the cost and weight.
(iv) Bipolar electrodes can be designed for solid batteries. Coating the positive and
negative electrode materials on the two sides of the aluminum foil and period￾ically stacking these electrodes together to achieve higher voltage in a single
battery, so that other inactive materials can be saved to improve the volume
energy density [10, 11];
(v) The half-cell potential of SIB is higher than that of LIB, which means that
SIBs can use electrolytes with lower decomposition potential and have more
choices of electrolytes.
(vi) The solvation energy of sodium-ion is lower than that of lithium-ion, and the
SIBs’ interfacial ion diffusion ability is better.
(vii) According to the current low and high temperature test results, SIBs have bet￾ter performance compared with LIBs.6.1 Advantages and Challenges of Sodium-ion Batteries 187
Charge
Charge
Discharge
Discharge
e– e–
Electron
Electrolyte
Positive electrode Negative electrode
Battery charger
or
Operating device
Na ion
+ –
Figure 6.1 The working principle of SIB. Source: Yabuuchi et al. [8] / with permission of
American Chemical Society.
(viii) Better safety performance. The internal resistance of SIBs is slightly higher
than that of LIBs, resulting in less heat and lower temperature rise in short
circuits and other safety tests [12].
However, compared with Li+ ions, the larger and heavier Na+ ions often lead to
sluggish reaction kinetics in SIBs. In the process of sodiation, the SIBs tend to cause
large volume change or even irreversible structure failure of electrode materials,
deteriorating the cyclic stability of batteries. Therefore, developing appropriate
materials that are capable of accommodating fast and stable Na+ ion (de)insertion
has become a research hotspot to push forward the industrial deployment of
SIBs [13].
6.1.3 Key Materials for Sodium-ion Batteries
SIB is mainly composed of four parts: positive electrode, negative electrode,
separator, and electrolyte. At present, Prussian blue analogue, layered oxides and
polyanionic compounds are widely studied as cathode materials for SIBs. The
electrolyte is a medium that is responsible for the transport of Na+ ions between
positive and negative electrodes. The electrolyte of SIBs is composed of electrolyte
and organic solvent at a certain concentration. The commonly used electrolyte
is sodium salt, and the solvents are classified into ether and ester electrolytes.
The separator works by separating the positive and negative electrodes, allowing
Na+ ions to pass through and blocking the transport electrons at the same time,
preventing the battery from short-circuiting [14].188 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
Table 6.1 Electrochemical-related features of some typical cathodes for SIBs.
Material
Specific
capacity
(mAh g−1)
Average
potential
(V versus
Na+/Na) Pros. Cons.
Na0.44MnO2 121b) 2.8a) High structure
stability, simple
synthesis
Low actual specific
capacity
NaFePO4 154b) 2.7a) Low price, high
structure stability
Poor rate performance
and low working
voltage
Na3V2(PO4)3 117.6b) 3.4a) good cycle stability,
high rate performance
Low theoretical
specific capacity
NaMnO2 243b) 3.7a) High theoretical
capacity, low price
Poor cyclic stability
Na3MnTi(PO4)3 110 3.8a) High structure stability
and thermal stability
Low specific capacity,
poor electronic
conductivity
Data obtained from Refs. [15–17].
a) Midpoint voltage.
b) Theoretical value.
6.1.3.1 Cathode
The cathode has appropriate channels and spaces for Na+ ions transport and stor￾age. It is the key factor affecting the voltage, energy density, power density, safety,
and cycle life of SIBs. Therefore, the research and development of cathode materials
have become essential issue in the research of SIBs. At present, the research mainly
focuses on layered oxides, polyanionic materials, polymer materials, Prussian blue
analogues, etc. These materials develop very well in the field of LIBs. Due to the
small Li+ ion radius, the effect of Li+ insertion/deinsertion on the material struc￾ture is small. But in SIBs, Na+ ions insertion/deinsertion will lead to larger mate￾rial structure distortion, and then the cycle of the battery’s performance is poorer.
Here we summarize the electrochemical-related features of some typical cathodes
in Table 6.1.
6.1.3.2 Anode
The anode materials mainly provide sites for ions storage and low-potential redox
pairs for SIBs. The available anode materials mainly include carbon-based materi￾als, alloy materials, and metal compounds. Here we summarize some typical anode
materials in Table 6.2.
SIBs, which are relatively low-cost compared to current mainstream LIBs, are
expected to be used on a large scale in the future. However, due to the influence of
the properties of positive and negative electrode materials suitable for Na+ ion inser￾tion/deinsertion, the SIBs development and application are relatively slow, espe￾cially for the anode materials with excellent performance and practical application.6.1 Advantages and Challenges of Sodium-ion Batteries 189
Table 6.2 Some typical anode materials.
Material Classification Pros. Cons.
Carbon-based Graphene, hard
carbon, soft
carbon, etc.
Low sodium embedded
platform, high capacity, long
cycle life, and simple
preparation
Low structure stability, poor
rate performance, forming
sodium dendrites, and
safety hazards
Alloy Multivariate
composite
Good conductivity, high
specific capacity, and high
safety
The large volume change
will easily lead to electrode
powder and poor cycle
performance
metallic
compound
Metal oxide High theoretical capacity,
good safety, stable voltage
platform, cheap, and easy to
get
Poor cycling stability, large
volume expansion, and poor
cycle performance
Metal sulfide High structural stability,
thermodynamic stability,
mechanical stability, and
good electrical conductivity
Metal
phosphide
High theoretical specific
capacity, stable cycle
reversibility, and high safety
Data obtained from Refs. [18–20].
As the core component of SIB, the sodium storage behavior of anode material is
different from that of LIB, so it needs to be modified according to the material type
and charging and discharging mechanism [21].
6.1.3.3 Electrolyte
The composition of SIB electrolyte is similar to that of LIB electrolyte, and the expe￾rience of LIB electrolyte is mainly used for reference. The performance requirements
are mainly focused on the following five aspects [22]:
(i) The conductivity of sodium electrolyte requires a high ionic conductivity within
the normal temperature range.
(ii) Water content: the water content of the electrolyte is required to be controlled
below 20 PPM.
(iii) Stability: the electrolyte does not react with the components inside the battery.
(iv) Safety: requiring the electrolyte to have strong thermal stability and not be easy
to burn.
(v) Low cost: it is hoped that the price of electrolytes will be low [23].
6.1.3.4 Separator
The separator plays an important role in isolating positive and negative electrodes,
preventing batteries from short-circuiting, storing electrolytes, and allowing sodium
ions to travel quickly. The function of the separator is to isolate the cathode and190 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
anode, store the electrolyte, and allow Na+ transport between positive and negative
electrodes. Therefore, the separator must be able to stably exist in the battery
electrolyte. At the same time, the separator and electrolyte should have good affinity
and porosity to ensure the liquid absorption rate, good mechanical performance,
and thermal stability are also needed. Other characteristics of the separator are
also important, such as aperture size, thickness, and cost. It must be pointed out
that, compared with the LIBs separator, due to the larger ion radius of sodium ions,
the aperture of the SIBs separator should be larger than that of the LIBs, which
can be conducive to the transport of Na+ ions. Here we summarize the separator
specifications for SIBs [24].
(i) Chemical and electrochemical stabilities: the separator must be able to main￾tain its chemical and structural integrity in the electrolyte, so it is required to
neither dissolve in the electrolyte nor react with the electrolyte [25, 26].
(ii) Wettability: wettability refers to the affinity between the electrolyte and the
separator, and the ability of the electrolyte to spread over the separator. Good
wettability is also the premise of the electrochemical performance of the bat￾tery, because the transport of Na+ relies on the electrolyte. The Na+ ions can’t
be freely transported if the separator isn’t wetted by the electrolyte. Therefore,
the ion conductivity of the battery will be very poor [27].
(iii) Pore size: Theoretically speaking, a large through-hole is conducive to the
transport of ions, but the pore size on the separator can’t be too large or it may
cause the shuttle of positive and negative material powders. The uniformity
of pore size is also important. In the process of battery charging and discharg￾ing, if the pore size is too different, the current density will be uneven, which
makes it easy to cause the growth of sodium dendrites [28].
(iv) Porosity: Porosity refers to the percentage of the volume of the hole in the sep￾arator to the volume of the whole separator. It is critical for ion transport and
electrolyte storage, and an appropriate increase in porosity is beneficial to the
power characteristics of the battery [29, 30].
(v) Mechanical property: The mechanical strength of the separator is related to its
composition, pore size, porosity, and thickness. It includes tensile strength and
puncture strength. The battery needs to be wound in the production process, so
a certain tensile strength is necessary. At the same time, a stronger puncture
can prevent the sodium dendrite from piercing the separator and causing a
battery short circuit.
(vi) Thermal stability: The thermal stability of the separator refers to its ability
to maintain its structure and morphology when affected by the heat source.
When extreme conditions occur, the battery temperature may rise sharply. If
the separator has poor heat resistance, it will shrink and cause short-circuiting,
which is hazardous.
(vii) Cost: Cost is an important consideration for the SIB separator. In LIBs, the sep￾arator accounts for 15–20% of the whole battery cost. It is believed that in the
future, the SIB separator’s proportion in commerce will not be low. Thus, the
development of low-cost, high-safety, large-scale production of SIB separators
is necessary [31].6.1 Advantages and Challenges of Sodium-ion Batteries 191
6.1.4 Challenges for Sodium-ion Batteries
In the late 1970s, the research on SIBs and LIBs was almost carried out simulta￾neously, but LIBs were commercialized as early as the 1990s, and SIBs are still in
the research stage [32]. Lithium and sodium are located in the same master and
have similar chemical properties in some aspects. However, due to the large gap
between ion radius, research on SIBs can learn from the research experience of
LIBs but cannot be completely copied [33]. Li has a low abundance in the crust,
and the price of Li raw materials has continued to rise, making it difficult to meet
the needs of large-scale energy storage devices in recent years. Sodium elements
are abundant in the crust, and sodium salt can be obtained directly from seawater
[34]. As a result, research on SIBs in recent years has also become more extensive
and deeper. Although sodium is the second light and the second small alkaline
metal that is second only to lithium in terms of atomic quality and atomic radius
in the element cycle table, the differences between the two in physical chemistry
will inevitably cause the corresponding electrode materials [35]. The ion radius of
Na+ (0.102 nm) is 34% larger than that of Li+ (0.076 nm), so sodium ions are slightly
difficult to embed/out of the same material. The comparison between the two is
shown in Table 6.3. The heavier sodium ion quality and a larger sodium ion radius
make the weight and volume energy density of SIBs comparable to LIBs. The large
ion radius of a large sodium ion will also cause differences in electrode materials in
ion transportation, structure evolution, and interface nature [36].
At present, the research on the positive electrode materials of SIBs is mainly
concentrated on layer-shaped transition metal oxides, polyanionic compounds, and
Prussian blue materials [38]. To get a large scale in energy storage in the future,
it is necessary to consider the cost of the pupae, cobalt, and the expensive metal
that they use. The Prussian blue object has the advantages of low cost and long
life, but it is still not satisfactory in terms of capacity and stability. The P2-type
transition metal oxide (TMO) shows high capacity and good cycle performance,
but its characteristics caused by sodium defects hinder the assembly of the entire
battery [39]. The O3-type has the advantages of high energy density due to its high
working voltage, which is easy to match and realize industrialized applications, but
the problem of moisture in materials still needs to be paid attention to. For negative
Table 6.3 Sodium versus lithium characteristics. Source: Zhang
et al. [37] / John Wiley & Sons / CC BY 4.0.
Category Lithium Sodium
Cation radius (Å) 0.76 1.06
Atomic weight 6.9 g mol−1 23 g mol−1
E (vs Li/Li+) 0 0.3 V
Cost, carbonates $5000/ton $150/ton
Capacity (mAh g−1), met 3829 1165192 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
materials, graphite with excellent lithium storage capacity in LIBs does not have
sodium storage capacity due to thermodynamic reasons [40].
Layer-shaped transition metal oxides are divided into single metal-shaped oxides
and multimetal layer oxides. Single metal oxides include NaNiO2, NaFeO2, NaCrO2,
NaCoO2, NaMnO2, etc. [41]. Among these materials, due to its high theoretical
capacity and lower synthetic costs, NaMnO2 is an excellent SIB positive electrode
material. Layer-shaped oxides have a periodic layer structure, simple preparation
method, high capacity, and high voltage, which is the main positive material of
SIBs. In addition, the oxidation reaction of the lattice oxygen can further improve
the energy density of such materials [42]. However, most of the layers of materials
are easily absorbed or react with air, affecting the stability and electrochemical
properties of the material, so it cannot be stored in the air for a long time. The crystal
structure of the tunnel-type oxide has a unique “S” channel with good multiplier
performance, and exhibits high stability in air and water [43]. However, its charging
ratio is lower in the first cycle, so the actual use of the ratio is smaller. During the
cycle, the unstable obstacles of the unstable changes in the cycle and the phase insta￾bility of the sodium dehydration structure are the biggest obstacle. The theoretical
capacity is far from the actual capacity of these layered electrode materials [44].
Most of the polyanionic compounds have an open three-dimensional (3D) skele￾ton, good rate performance, and better cycle performance. However, the conductiv￾ity of this type of compound is generally poor. To improve its electrons and ionic
conductivity, carbon coverage and doping are often needed, but they will also cause
its volume energy density to decrease [45]. The unique polyanion structural unit in
the polyanion cathode material is tightly connected by a strong covalent bond, iso￾lating the polyanion group from the valence electrons of the transition metal ions.
Although the isolated electronic structure of transition metal ions makes these mate￾rials have high operating voltage, it also leads to their low electronic conductivity,
which greatly limits their charge and discharge performance at high rates and brings
some difficulties to practical applications [46].
Therefore, the preparation and modification of such materials mainly focus on
improving their electronic conductivity of materials. The modification methods
mainly include nanocrystallization and carbon coating. Nanomaterials can increase
the solid (active particles)-liquid (electrolyte) contact area and shorten the sodium
ion diffusion path [47]. Carbon coating helps to improve the surface electronic
conductivity of the material and the electrical contact between particles. At the
same time, the presence of a carbon coating layer can also inhibit the growth of
particles, so the nanomaterial can improve the agglomeration of particles.
Prussian blue material is a new type of cathode material with great potential that
has developed in recent years. It has an open three-dimensional channel, and Na+
can migrate rapidly in the channel, so it has good structural stability and rate perfor￾mance [48]. However, Prussian blue compounds have the disadvantages of difficult
removal of crystal water, dissolution of transition metal ions, low capacity utiliza￾tion, poor rate capability, and cycle instability [49]. The main reason may be related
to the vacancies and lattice water molecules in the Prussian blue structure, which
will seriously affect the electrochemical sodium storage performance of Prussian6.2 Nanowires as Cathodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 193
blue and destroy the lattice integrity. Sodium ions are easy to cause lattice distor￾tion and even structural collapse when they are released and embedded, resulting
in a serious attenuation of cycle performance [50].
At present, SIBs are in a state of parallel development of a variety of material
systems, and the processing performance of some positive and negative material sys￾tems needs to be further improved. The negative amorphous carbon (AC) materials
also have the problems of low Coulombic efficiency in the first week and an unclear
sodium storage mechanism. In addition, the research and development of electrolyte
systems that match the positive and negative electrode materials are also insufficient
[37]. Although most of the nonactive substances (current collectors, binders, con￾ductive agents, separators, enclosures, etc.) of SIBs can be learned from the mature
industrial chain of LIBs, the core of the positive and negative materials and elec￾trolyte active materials, such as large-scale supply channels, are still missing, so
their source stability cannot be guaranteed, thus affecting the production process
and product quality stability.
Thus, to achieve continuous improvements in the power and energy densities of
sodium-ion storage devices, the key issues are the promotion of the performance
of electrode materials and the design of suitable electrode nanoarchitectures [51].
Among various nanostructures, 1D nanowire structures become promising candi￾dates for the SIB electrodes owing to the advantages of easy electrolyte access to the
active material, short ionic diffusion length, and the ability to accommodate volume
changes during the electrochemical reaction process [52].
6.2 Nanowires as Cathodes in Sodium-ion Batteries
6.2.1 Layered Oxide Nanowires
Layered oxides are one of the most extensively studied cathode materials for SIBs,
which exhibit high specific capacity and facile 2D Na+ diffusion path. The research
on layered oxides for sodium systems can be traced back to the 1980s and has
made great progress as the electrode materials for sodium insertion hosts in recent
years. The general formula of sodium-containing layered oxides can be written as
NaxMeO2, where Me refers to transition metals. Layered NaxMeO2 materials are
commonly composed of stacked MeO2 and NaO2 slabs along the c-axis direction.
The edge-sharing MeO6 octahedra build up the structural frame. According to the
sodium ions accommodated sites (octahedral or prismatic) and oxygen stacking
sequence (ABCABC, ABBA) Layered NaxMeO2 can be categorized into two main
groups: O3 type or P2 type (Figure 6.2).
Generally, Layered NaxMeO2 materials are synthesized by a solid-state reaction
or sol–gel reaction; the products are mainly composed of micrometer-sized particles
or flakes. For the common synthetic methods, the obtained precursors usually have
to be sintered at high temperature for more than ten hours, and many well-designed
morphologies are difficult to maintain. Compared to bulk particles, nanowires
generally exhibit better electrochemical performance due to their shortened ion194 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
A
A
MeO2
Layer
Na ions
O3 type
c
b a
Oxygen
Octahedral
site
Prismatic
site
P3 type
O2 type P2 type
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
B
C
A
C
C
A
A
B
A
A
B
C
C
A
B
B
B
A
B
A
A
B
C
(1/3, 2/3, 0)
(1/3, 2/3, 0)
Figure 6.2 Classification of Na–Me–O-layered materials with sheets of edge-sharing
MeO6 octahedra. Source: Yabuuchi et al. [8] / with permission of American Chemical Society.
diffusion distance and enhanced structural stability. In addition, the design of
nanowires enables electrochemical characterization and the construction of flexible
devices. Therefore, designing nanowire-structured Layered NaxMeO2 is a promising
direction to promote the development of SIBs.
In previous reports, most of the layered NaxMeO2 nanowires were constructed by
the electrospinning method. As displayed in Figure 6.3a,b, Liang et al. [53] fabri￾cated ultralong layered NaCrO2 nanowires by electrospinning synthetic methods.
The resultant 1D NaCrO2 nanoarchitecture is endowed with oriented and shortened
electronic/ionic transport and remarkable structural tolerance to stress change over
sodiation−de-sodiation processes. These structural superiorities enable the NaCrO2
nanowires cathode to exhibit prominent Na+ storage performance. Liu et al.
[54] reported novel porous P2- Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 nanowires (fibers) assembled
by nanoparticles through electrospinning for SIBs, the hierarchical engineering
structure can effectively boost the reaction kinetics and stabilize the structure
(Figure 6.3c,d). Additionally, Shen et al. [55] constructed a pearl necklace-like
hierarchical P2-Na0.76Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48O2 nanowires (fibers) material. Benefiting
from the nanostructured design, this cathode exhibited high Na+ coefficients6.2 Nanowires as Cathodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 195
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
20
30
20
10
0 40 60
NWs diameter (nm)
Frequence (%)
80
Figure 6.3 The research of layered oxide nanowires. (a,b) SEM images of NaCrO2. Source:
Liang et al. [53] / with permission of American Chemical Society. (c,d) the electrospun
precursor, and the resultant Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 nanowires. Source: Liu et al. [54] / with
permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e,f) the electrospun precursor and the resultant
Na0.76Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48O2 nanowires. Source: [55] /with permission of John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.
and a low ionic migration energy barrier (Figure 6.3e,f). He et al. [56] developed
NaV3O8 nanowires as the cathode for SIBs, which exhibited good cycling stability
and charge–discharge plateaus during the Na-ion insertion/extraction processes.
Therefore, nanowire-structured engineering for layered oxides will significantly
improve the electrochemical performance.
6.2.2 Tunnel-type Oxide Nanowires
Tunnel-type manganese oxide has also received extensive attention due to its inter￾nal, double ion channels and superior structural stability to tolerate some stress
during the Na+ extraction/insertion process. Na0.44MnO2 is a typical tunnel-type196 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
Mn
1 µm
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Na
O
a
b
Figure 6.4 The research of tunnel-type Na0.44MnO2 nanowires. (a) Schematic illustrations
of the crystal structures of Na0.44MnO2. (b,c) SEM and TEM images of the Na0.44MnO2
nanowires synthesized by a stress-induced splitting mechanism for the conversion of
birnessite nanosheets. Source: Li et al. [57] / with permission of Springer Nature. (d) SEM
image of the Na0.44MnO2 nanowires synthesized by a low-temperature hydrothermal
method. Source: Hosono et al. [58] / with permission of Elsevier. (e,f) TEM images of the
Na4Mn9O18 (Na0.44MnO2) nanowires synthesized by a polymer-pyrolysis method. Source:
Cao et al. [59] / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
manganese oxide for the cathode of SIBs. The framework structure of Na0.44MnO2
consists of four MnO6 octahedrals and one MnO5 square-pyramidal (Figure 6.4a),
which are arranged to form two types of tunnels: large S-shaped tunnels and
smaller pentagon tunnels. There are three Na sites in this structure, and the Na (2)
and Na (3) sites in the large S-shaped tunnels are considered to be mobile and can
potentially be reversibly extracted.
Different from the layered manganese oxides, tunnel-type Na0.44MnO2 can be syn￾thesized by many methods. For example, Li et al. [57] synthesized the Na0.44MnO2
nanowires by a stress-induced splitting mechanism that transforms birnessite
nanosheets, the nanowires feature an average length of over 10 μm and a diameter
smaller than 100 nm (Figure 6.4b,c). Hosono et al. [58] reported a Na0.44MnO2
nanowire synthesized by a low-temperature hydrothermal method that exhibits a
high electronic conductivity for good fast charge–discharge properties (Figure 6.4d).
Cao et al. [59] fabricated a single crystalline Na4Mn9O18 (Na0.44MnO2) nanowires by
a polymer-pyrolysis method. The Na4Mn9O18 nanowires delivered a high reversible
capacity with excellent capacity retention for sodium storage (Figure 6.4e,f).
6.2.3 Polyanionic Compound Nanowires
Polyanionic compounds are divided into phosphate, sulfate, pyrophosphate, mixed
phosphate, and so on. The structure of the polyanion cathode material with good
stability, high security, high theoretical capacity, and environmentally friendly6.2 Nanowires as Cathodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 197
performance, in the field of SIB cathode material, has been widely studied, but the
polyanion cathode material also has some problems, such as poor conductivity,
which can lead to high overpotential and poor rate performance. A common modi￾fication method is to change the material morphology and combine the nanowires
with the polyanionic cathode material, so as to improve the specific surface area of
the cathode material and shorten the transmission distance of ion transport [60].
Among polyanionic cathode materials, the most common one is sodium vanadium
phosphate (NVP), which has attracted much attention due to its stable structure,
high operating voltage, and good thermal stability. However, the low electronic
conductivity of this material limits its electrochemical performance.
Jiang et al. designed a carbon-coated NVP embedded in one-dimensional porous
carbon nanowires and synthesized it by hydrothermal method (NVP@C-CNW)
(Figure 6.5a–k). As a cathode material for SIB, NVP@C-CNW shows excellent
performance (Figure 6.5l–o). After 1000 cycles at 1 C, NVP@C-CNW still main￾tains a capacity of 96.6 mAh g−1, equivalent to 82.6% of the theoretical capacity
(Figure 6.5m). In the same case, NVP@C only has a capacity of 41.5 mAh g−1
after 200 cycles at 1 C. The capacity of pure NVP is reduced to 19.1 mAh g−1 after
50 cycles at 1 C. NVP@C-CNW has a good rate performance at 0.5–60 C current
(Figure 6.5n). The excellent properties of NVP@C-CNW thanks to a wiener rice
noodle structure material. First, the porous structure of a wiener rice noodle short￾ened the sodium ion diffusion path, and in the process of charging and discharging
cycles, it provided enough space for volume expansion of active material. Second,
the large surface area of the porous structure of a wiener rice noodle made it easier
for electrolyte materials, Increase the diffusion rate of sodium ions. Third, the
embedded structure can inhibit the growth of particles during heating and improve
the conductivity of the material [61]. In addition, Wang et al. synthesized a bundle
of carbon-coated potassium vanadium phosphate (K3V2(PO4)3/C) nanowires by
an organic acid-assisted method for application in SIBs and showed excellent
electrochemical performance [62]. K3V2(PO4)3/C exhibits an initial discharge
capacity of 119 mAh g−1 at a current density of 100 mAh g−1. After 100 cycles of this
current, the capacity retention rate is up to 99.4%.
Peng et al. prepared Ruthenium oxide (RuO2)-coated sodium vanadium
fluorophosphate nanowires (Na3V2O2(PO4)2F) via microemulsion mediated
hydrothermal synthesis [63]. RuO2-coated Na3V2O2(PO4)2F core–shell nanowires
have a diameter of about 50 nm. Their unique 1D morphology, efficient electro￾chemical coupling, and 3D conductive network provide excellent electrochemical
performance. The total mass of Na3V2O2(PO4)2F nanowires coated with RuO2
coating of 6 nm thickness and the initial discharge and charge-specific capaci￾ties are 134 and 126 mAh g−1, respectively. The initial Coulomb efficiency was
94.0%, with a capacity of 95 mAh g−1 remaining after 1000 cycles. Compared
with Na3V2O2(PO4)2F without Ruthenium oxide coating, the multiplication
performance of Na3V2O2(PO4)2F coated with RuO2 is significantly improved.
Because of its unique structure, mixed phosphate can also be used as an excellent
cathode material for SIBs. Chen et al. synthesized Na3Mn2−xFex (P2O7) (PO4)
nanowires (NMFP) [64]. When NMFP was applied to the positive electrode of SIB,C2H2O4·2H2O
70 °C for 3h
V2O5
powder
Na2CO3,
NH4H2PO4
CTAB
Na3V2(PO4)3
precursor
Na3V2(PO4)3@C
(NVP@C)
(a)
(h) (i)
(e) (f)
50 nm C Na
O P V
(g)
(b) (c) (d)
(j) (k)
(l)
500 nm
5 nm
500 nm
1 µm
1 µm
100 nm
Carbon
Na+
Calcination
PorousNVP@Cnanowires
0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
20 40 60
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
NVP
NVP/C
NVP@C-CNW
Voltage (V)
80 100 120
(m)
0
0
40
20
60
80
100
120
200 400
Cycle number
NVP
NVP/C
NVP@C-CNW
1C
Specific capacity (mAh g−1)
600 800 1000
(n)
0
0
40
20
60
80
100
120
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Cycle number
Charge capacity
0.5C 1C 2C 5C 10C 20C 30C 40C 50C 60C 0.5C
Discharge capacity
Charge capacity
Discharge capacity
CE of NVP@C-CNW
Specific capacity (mAh g−1)
80 90 100 110
(o)
0
0
40
20
60
80
100
120
0
40
20
60
80
100
120
200 400
Cycle number
20C
Specific capacity (mAh g−1)
Coulombic efficiency%
600 800 1000
Mesoporous carbon
matrix
Hydrothermal
VOC2O4 sols
e−
Figure 6.5 (a) NVP@C-CNW synthesis method. (b) Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image of NVP@C-CNW and (c–g) corresponding
element mapping, showing that C elements are evenly distributed on the surface of NVP@C-CNW. (h) SEM image of NVP@C-CNW. (i) TEM image of
NVP@C-CNW. (j) HRTEM image of NVP@C-CNW. (k) TEM image of carbon net after corrosion of some NVP particles NVP@C-CNW. The red arrow in (j)
indicates the spacing of 0.437 nm corresponding to the (110) plane. (l) Charge and discharge curves of NVP, NVP/C, and NVP@C-CNW in the first cycle at
1 C. (m) Cycling performance of all samples at 1C for 1000 cycles. (n) NVP@C-CNW Rate performance at different current densities (0.5 to 60 C). (o)
Specific capacity of NVP@C-CNW for 1000 cycles at 20 C and Coulomb efficiency of NVP@C-CNW for 1000 cycles at 20 C. Source: Jiang et.al. [61] / with
permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.6.2 Nanowires as Cathodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 199
0 1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
20 40 60
1st
2nd
3rd
80
Specific capacity (mAh g–1 (a) ) Voltage (V vs Na/Na+)
100 120 140
0 1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
20 40 60
0.1 C
0.2 C
0.5 C
1 C
2 C
80
Specific capacity (mAh g–1) (e)Voltage (V vs Na/Na+)
100 120 140
1.5
–0.02
–0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
2.0 2.5
1st
2nd
3rd
3.0
Voltage (V)
3.05 V
3.35 V
3.34 V
3.9 V
(b)Current (mA)
3.5 4.0 4.5
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
20
40
60
80
100
180
20 40 60
Efficiency
Charge
Discharge
80
(c) Cycle number Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
100 0
0
100
200
Rct = 321.4 Ω
Rs CPE1
300 Rct W1
400
500
100 200
Observed
Fitted
300
(d) Z′(Ω) –Z″(Ω)
0
0
30
60
0.1 C
0.2 C
0.5 C
1 C
2 C
0.1 C
90
120
150
0
20
40
60
80
100
180
5 10 20 15
Efficiency
Charge
Discharge
25 30 35
(f) Cycle number Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
40
400 500
Figure 6.6 (a) The charge–discharge plots of the first, second and third turns of NMFP-0.4.
(b) The CV plots of NMFP-0.4. (c) The long-cycle plots of NMFP-0.4. (d) The Nyquist plots of
NMFP-0.4 applied in SIB. (e) The multiplier curves and (f) rate performance of NMFP-0.4.
Source: Chen et al. [64] / with permission of Elsevier.
X =0.4, it showed the best electrochemical activity, and the initial charge–discharge
capacities were 143.8 and 126 mAh g−1 (Figure 6.6a,b). The NMFP-0.4 electrode
material still has 80.95 mAh g−1 capacity after 100 cycles at 0.1 C (Figure 6.6c). The
rate performance of NMFP-0.4 nanowire is shown in the figure, and the material
exhibits good rate performance. When the current density is restored to 0.1 C,
the discharge specific capacity is also restored to 97.1 mAh g−1, which is 93.4% of200 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
the initial capacity (Figure 6.6e–f). The synthesized nanowire structure increases
the surface area, which also makes the material more closely integrated with the
collecting flow and reduces the diffusion resistance of Na+. All these indicate that
polyanionic nanowire materials have a very high research potential in SIBs.
6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries
6.3.1 Carbonaceous Materials and Polyanionic Compounds
In recent years, more and more researchers are focusing on carbonaceous materi￾als due to their large interlayer distance and unordered structure, which facilitate
Na-ion insertion and extraction [36]. As the main body of sodium storage, the neg￾ative electrode of SIB realizes the insertion and extraction of sodium ions during
charging and discharging.
At present, the reported anode materials for SIBs mainly include carbon-based,
titanium-based, organic, alloy, and other anode materials. The research on carbon￾based materials mainly focuses on graphite carbon materials, AC materials, and
nanocarbon materials [65]. Graphite is the most commonly used anode material
in LIBs due to its low discharge platform and moderate capacity [32]. However,
due to the large radius of sodium ions and the small spacing of graphite layers, it
is not suitable to de-intercalate sodium ions. AC-based anode materials with high
disorder have high sodium storage capacity, low sodium storage potential, and
excellent cycle stability, which are the most promising anode materials for SIB [47].
Nanocarbon materials mainly include graphene and carbon nanotubes, which rely
on surface adsorption to store sodium and achieve rapid charge and discharge.
However, the problems of low Coulomb efficiency and poor cycle performance in
the first cycle make it difficult to obtain practical application [65].
6.3.1.1 Graphitized Carbon Materials
The 1D characteristics of carbon nanowires can increase the conductivity and
structural stability of the material. This nanowire structure has excellent structural
stability and high conductivity, which can improve the performance of electrode
materials.
Carbonaceous materials in the form of nanowires will be more conducive to
playing to their respective advantages. For example, the sodium storage perfor￾mance of hollow carbon nanowires (HCNWs) prepared through pyrolization of
the polyaniline precursor was studied by Cao et al. [66] (Figure 6.7a–e). When
serving as an anode for SIBs, this material demonstrated superior electrochemical
performance. At a current density of 500 mA g−1 (2 C), a high reversible capacity of
149 mAh g−1 could be obtained (Figure 6.7g). It also delivered a capacity retention
of 82.2% after 400 cycles at a current density of 50 mA g−1 (Figure 6.7f), showing
outstanding cycling stability. The authors attributed this excellent electrochemical
performance to the following two points: (i) the hollow structure endows this
material with a high specific surface, which provides much more active sites as well6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 201
as contact area between the electrode and electrolyte, and (ii) the large interlayer
spacing (0.37 nm, Figure 6.7d) between the graphitic sheets, leading to effective
insertion and transfer of Na ions during the charge–discharge process.
However, there are few reports on the synthesis of graphitized carbon materials
with nanowire morphology, but it is still very promising to synthesize graphitized
carbon materials with nanowire structure according to the existing nanowire syn￾thesis strategy [67]. It is still of great scientific value to further improve the perfor￾mance of graphitized carbon materials as cathode materials for new SIBs by using
the unique structural advantages of nanowires.
6.3.1.2 Amorphous Carbon Materials
In the field of carbon materials, AC materials are usually divided into easily graphi￾tized carbon and difficult graphitized carbon. Easily graphitized carbon, also known
as soft carbon, usually refers to the carbon material that can be graphitized above
2800 ∘C, and the disordered structure is easily eliminated. Hard carbon, also known
as hard carbon, usually refers to carbon that is difficult to completely graphitize
above 2800 ∘C, and its disordered structure is difficult to eliminate at high tempera￾tures. The main difference between the two AC materials is the arrangement of the
carbon layers that make them [68].
HCNWs are synthesized by the pyrolysis of hollow polyaniline nanowire
precursors. This nanowire structure has excellent structural stability and high
conductivity, which can improve the performance of electrode materials [69]. When
used as a negative electrode material for SIBs, it has a reversible specific capacity
of 251 mAh g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1, and excellent stability over
400 cycles. At a high current density of 500 mA g−1, it still has a reversible specific
capacity of 149 mAh g−1. As early in 1993, the sodium-ion storage performance of
hard carbon was studied, and a reversible specific capacity of nearly 85 mAh g−1
was obtained [70]. Subsequently, when glucose-derived hard carbon was used as the
anode material for SIBs, the first discharge specific capacity was about 300 mAh g−1.
A stable specific capacity of 176 mAh g−1 was obtained after 600 cycles at a
current density of 200 mA g−1 from cellulose-derived carbon nanofibers [71]
(Figure 6.8a,b).
Usually, the construction of open nanopores inside the material is an effective
method to improve the electrochemical performance of the material. However,
experiments have shown that increasing the specific surface area of hard carbon
leads to lower reversible capacity, while the porous carbon anode leads to lower
Coulombic efficiency, which may be due to the higher specific surface area. It is eas￾ier to form more solid-electrolyte-interface (SEI) films [72]. Therefore, reasonably
reducing the specific surface area of hard carbon materials becomes an effective
means to improve their initial Coulombic efficiency [73].
6.3.1.3 Carbon Nanomaterials
A novel 1D nanohybrid comprised of conductive graphitic carbon (GC)-coated
hollow FeSe2 nanospheres decorating reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanofiber
(hollow nanosphere FeSe2@GC–rGO) was designed as an efficient anode material2
1.5
1
0.5
1st
2nd
Voltage/V vs. Na+/Na
0
0 100 200 300
Capacity (mAh g–1 (e) )
(a) (b) (c) (d)
400 500
600
500
400
300
200
100
Discharge
Charge
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency / %
0
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 100 200 300
(f) Cycle number (n)
400
600
500
400
300
200
100
Discharge
Charge
Capacity (mAh g–1)
0
0 50 100
0.2 C
0.5 C
0.5 C 1 C
2 C
0.2 C
150
(g) Cycle number (n)
200
Figure 6.7 (a, b) SEM images of the HCNWs. (c) TEM image of the HCNWs. (d) High-resolution TEM image of the HCNWs. (e) First two charge–discharge
profiles of the HCNW electrode between 0 and 1.2 V at a current density of 50 mA g−1 (0.2 C). (f) Cycle performance of the HCNW electrode at a current
density of 50 mA g−1 (0.2 C). (g) Discharge capacity of the HCNW electrode as a function of charge–discharge cycles at different charge–discharge current
densities of 50 (0.2 C), 125 (0.5 C), 250 (1 C), and 500 (2 C) mAh g−1, respectively. Source: Cao et al. [66] / with permission of American Chemical Society.6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 203
0 0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
100 200 300
Cycle number
CNFs 200 mA g–1
(a) (b)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
400 500 600
Figure 6.8 SEM and cycle performance of cellulose-derived carbon nanofibers (a) SEM
images; (b) Cycle performance diagram. Source: Mai et al. [71] / with permission of
American Chemical Society.
for SIBs and synthesized by introducing the nanoscale Kirkendall effect into the
electrospinning method [74]. The discharge capacities of the bare FeSe2 nanofibers,
nanorod FeSe2-rGO AC hybrid nanofibers (Figure 6.9a,b), and hollow nanosphere
FeSe2@GC-rGO hybrid nanofibers at a current density of 1 A g−1 for the 150th
cycle are 63, 302, and 412 mAh g−1, respectively, and their corresponding capac￾ity retentions measured from the 2nd cycle were 11, 73, and 82%, respectively
(Figure 6.9c). The hollow nanosphere FeSe2@GC-rGO hybrid nanofibers delivered
a high discharge capacity of 352 mA h g−1 even at an extremely high current density
of 10 A g−1 (Figure 6.9d). The enhanced electrochemical properties of the hollow
nanosphere FeSe2@GC-rGO composite nanofibers arose from the synergetic effects
of the FeSe2 hollow morphology and highly conductive rGO matrix.
6.3.2 Polyanionic Compounds
Polyanionic compounds, described as NaxMyNz (among them, M represents metal￾lic elements, such as Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Ti, V, etc., and N represents (PO4)
3−, (SO4)
4−,
(SiO4)
4−, etc.), have more robust crystal structures and show relatively higher Na+
conductivity. As a typical example of polyanionic compounds, Na3V2(PO4)3 has
received extensive attention in both anodes and cathodes for SIBs owing to its large
interstitial spaces for quick diffusion of the Na ion and multiple valence states of the
V element. The Na3V2(PO4)3/C composite can display remarkable rate performance
when applied in SIBs. Zhu et al. [75] successfully prepared Na3V2(PO4)3/C com￾posite nanofibers via coaxial electrospinning followed by calcination (Figure 6.10a).
When applied as an anode for SIBs, the Na3V2(PO4)3/C nanofibers demonstrate a
high reversible capacity of 189.9 mAh g−1 at a current density of 23.6 mA g−1 during
0.01–3 V (vs Na+/Na). This anode still displays 105.1 and 80.4 mAh g−1 at the second
cycle, even at high rates of 590 and 1180 mA g−1 (Figure 6.10b). Meanwhile, capacity
retention is 83 and 77% after 200 and 500 cycles, respectively, showing outstanding
Na+ storage performance (Figure 6.10c). In addition, NASION-type NaTi2(PO4)3
is also studied as an anode material for SIBs. The specific capacity corresponding
to the reversible insertion/extraction of two sodium ions is 133 mAh g−1, the
voltage platform is about 2.1 V, and the cycle stability is good. However, due to the
high potential and the low voltage of the full battery matched with the positive204 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
Cycle number
Cycle number
5 μm 0.5 μm
Hollow nanosphere FeSe2@GC-rGO
Nanorod FeSe2-rGO-AC
Hollow nanosphere FeSe2@GC-rGO
Nanorod FeSe2-rGO-AC
Unit: A g–1
1 A g–1
Bare FeSe2
Bare FeSe2
Capacity (mAh g–1) Capacity (mAh g–1)
0
150
0
200
400
600
800
0
300
450
600
750
10
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
0.3 0.5 1.0 2.0 3.0 5.0 7.0
10.0
0.3
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
Figure 6.9 Morphologies, selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, and elemental
mapping images of the FeSe2@GC–rGO hybrid nanofibers: (a) SEM images, (b) TEM images,
(c) cycling performances at a current density of 1.0 A g−1, and (d) rate performances. Source:
Cho et al. [74] / with permission of Springer Nature.
electrode, it is less competitive in the organic electrolyte system. However, this
material has certain application potential in aqueous SIBs with low voltage [76].
Hu et al. designed and synthesized a free-standing Na4MnV(PO4)3@C (NMVP@C)
nanofiber, which can be directly used as a SIB cathode. The NMVP@C nanofiber
delivers a high capacity of 97.8 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C with a remarkable capacity reten￾tion of 80% after 800 cycles at 5 C. The in situ X-ray diffraction results demonstrate
that the V3+/4+ redox reaction occurs through a solid-solution reaction. In contrast,
a two-phase Mn2+/3+ redox reaction is identified, and both are highly reversible.
When coupled with pre-Na+ Sb@C anode, the NMVP@C//Sb@C full cell exhibits0
0
50
50
100
100
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
150
150
200
200
0
20
40
60
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Capacity (mAh/g)
80
100
250
Cycle number
0
0
50
1 μm
Charge
0.2 C 0.5 C 1 C
0.1 C 0.5 C 1 C
1 C
5 C
5 C
10 C
0.1 C
2 C 5 C
0.2 C
10 C
Discharge
100
150
1000
Time (min)
800
600
400
200
2.5 3.1
Potential (V)
2nd Charge
2nd Discharge
3rd Charge
3rd Discharge
3.7 19 21 23 25 27
2 Theta (°)
29 31 33 35 37
(104)
(113)
(20-4)
(211)
(116)
(030)
2000
1900
1800
1700
1600
1500
1400
1300
1200
1100
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Cycle number
300 350 0
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
5 10
0 30
40
50
70
80
90
100
110
60
20 40 60 80 100
15 20 25
Cycle number
Cycle number
30 35
Discharge
Charge
Coulombic efficiency
400 450 500
1st Charge
1st Discharge
Figure 6.10 (a) TEM images of NF-NVP/C. (b) Rate performance of NF-NVP/C (Inset shows the cycle performance at 1 and 5 C). (c) Cycle performance of
NF-NVP/C at 10 C. Source: Zhu et al. [75] / with permission of Springer Nature. (d) The SEM image, (e) rate performance, and (f) in situ XRD patterns of
NMVP@C nanofiber. Source: Hu et al. [77] / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.206 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
two reduction/oxidation peaks (3.35/2.95 and 3.05/2.56 V). The initial discharge
capacity of this full cell can reach up to 98.2 mAh g−1 with an impressive retention
of 87.5% after 100 cycles.
6.3.3 Metals and Metal Oxides
6.3.3.1 Metal Nanowires
Among pure elements, metals (Sn, Bi), metal-like metals (Si, Ge, As, and Sb),
and polyatomic nonmetallic compounds (P) have been extensively studied due
to their high theoretical capacities (Sn: 847 mAh g−1, P: 2596 mAh g−1) with alloy
mechanism. Benefiting from high capacity and appropriate Na+/Na potentials, the
alloy mechanism anodes are suitable for SIBs [78–83]. However, these materials
undergo significant volume changes during cycling that result in the loss of active
substances and sharp capacity decay due to the larger Na+ ionic radius compared
to Li+. For instance, Sn experiences a volume expansion of 420%, and Sb expands
by 393% during the full discharge sodiation phase (Na15Sn14 [79] and Na3Sb [80]).
Combining carefully designed electrode microstructures with buffering matrices
is a common strategy to accommodate volume expansion and improve the cycling
stability of alloy anodes.
Sn Nanowires
Among these alloy anodes, the Sn anode can undergo electrochemical reactions
with sodium to form Na0.6Sn, Na1.2Sn, Na5Sn2, and finally, Na15Sn4 as the fully
discharged alloy formula, corresponding to a theoretical capacity of 846 mAh g−1.
Meanwhile, the volume expansion of Na15Sn4 is 420% based on the in situ results
[79]. The Sn particles also tend to aggregate into large particles and then pul￾verize to isolate from the electrode during electrochemical alloying/dealloying.
In order to overcome the effect of this high volume change, Liu et al. [84] fab￾ricated a carbon-coated Sn/Ni nanorod anode with a 3D nanoforest structure
(Figure 6.11). This binder-free Sn/Ni anode, assembled on a stainless steel current
collector, exhibits supreme capacity utilization (722 mAh g−1) and cycling stability
(450 mAh g−1 after 450 cycles). This work develops a new strategy for inexpensive
and versatile synthesis techniques for SIBs anode.
Sb Nanowires
Among alloy-based anodes, though phosphorus anode possesses the highest
gravimetric energy density (2596 mAh g−1), phosphorus is nonconductive anode
with huge volume expansion (491%) and a final Na3P discharge product. This
severe volume change limits its electrochemical performance and widespread
practical application. Sb is another SIB anode with an alloying reaction, which can
show a high theoretical capacity of 660 mAh g−1 corresponding to the Na3Sb final
product when discharged. Monconduit et al. first investigated the electrochemical
performance of pure micrometric Sb particle anode in LIBs and SIBs [80]. Unlike
Sb in LIB, mostly amorphous of Na, the intermediate phases in SIB could not be
precisely identified. This might be partially due to decreased volume expansion
upon going from Sb (181.1 Å) to hexagonal Na3Sb (237 Å) compared to rock salt6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 207
Cycle number
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
0
200
400
TMV1cys
Ni
C
Sn 600
800
1000
0 100 150 50
0
20
40
60
80
100
(a) (b)
Figure 6.11 Structural diagram and cyclic performance diagram of carbon-coated Ni/Sn
nanorods. (a) Structural diagram and (b) cycle performance diagram. Source: Liu et al. [84] /
with permission of American Chemical Society.
Li3Sb (283.8 Å). Afterwards, Baggetto et al. first rationalized the amorphization of
NaxSb phases by the long-ranged strain propagation due to Na-vacancy compared
to Li-Sb [85]. Based on the above reports, Sb is one of the most attractive anode
materials for SIBs with the following equation [86].
Alloying reaction ∶ Sb + xNa+ + xe−1 → NaxSb (x = 1–3) (6.1)
The influence of size and electrode morphology on sodium ion storage perfor￾mance has been demonstrated. Liang et al. fabricated highly ordered arrays of Sb
nanorods using a large-scale method, which exhibited uniform spacing intervals
of 190 nm (Figure 6.12a) [87]. This Sb nanorod array exhibited a high capacity of
620 mAh g−1 at the 100th cycle, along with superior rate capability (557.7 mAh g−1 at
20 A g−1). When coupled with P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 (NNMO) cathode, NNMO//Sb
full cell delivered a superior capacity retention of ∼94% before 110 cycles, main￾taining a capacity of around 620 mAh g−1. Notably, a nanoporous pure Sb anode,
synthesized by a morphology-controlled chemical dealloying method, ensures high
accessibility to sodium ions and structural solid integrity even without conductive
modifications [90]. 1D nanomaterials facilitate electron transport along their long
axis but also maintain radial confinement effects, offering promising prospects for
SIB anodes in various applications [91]. Zhu et al. reported an Sb/C free-standing
electrode with ∼30 nm Sb nanoparticles uniformly encapsulated in interconnecting
1D 400 nm carbon fibers (SbNP@C) by electrospinning method (Figure 6.12b). This
SbNP@C delivered an initial capacity of 422 mAh g−1 and retained 350 mAh g−1 after
300 cycles at 100 mAh g−1. Similar work involving electrospun Sb/C as a SIB anode
was concurrently accomplished by Cao et al., followed by the establishment of vari￾ous other 1D composite anodes such as Sb/CNT composites and coaxial nanotubes
composed of Sb@C (Figure 6.12c) [89, 92, 93].
6.3.3.2 Transition Metal Oxide Nanowires
Compared to traditional intercalation reactions, transition metal oxides (TMOs)
based on conversion reactions exhibit excellent lithium storage properties and
are promising anode materials for SIBs. The concept of conversion reaction was208 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 6.12 Representative morphologies (SEM or TEM images) of several Sb-based
hybrid nanostructured electrodes: (a) Ordered Sb nanorod array. Source: Liang et al. [87] /
with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) Electrospun Sb/C Fibers. Source: Zhu
et al. [88] / with permission of American Chemical Society; (c) Sb@C coaxial nanotubes.
Source: Liu et al. [89] / with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.
first introduced by Tarascon and coworkers, who demonstrated the reversible
electrochemical lithiation of TMOs. TMO anodes can undergo a conversion reac￾tion with sodium to form transition metal nanoclusters and Na2O matrices, offering
low-cost and high gravimetric specific capacities. Unlike in LIBs, the conversion
reactions in SIBs may involve more intermediate phases, such as Na2O, Na2O2, and
NaO2, providing richer electrochemical reactivity and potentially different reaction
pathways. Among various TMO materials with conversion reactions investigated
so far, iron oxide (Fe2O3, Fe3O4), cobalt oxide (Co3O4, CoO), manganese oxide
(MnOx), copper oxide (CuO, Cu2O), ruthenium oxide (RuO2), chromium oxide
(Cr2O3), molybdenum oxide (MoOx), and nickel oxide (NiO) have attracted sig￾nificant attention due to their ease of handling and high capacities. However, the
large volume change and structural damage associated with the cycling-induced
expansion/contraction caused by the large radius of Na+ ions result in poor cycling
stability and rate performance for TMO-based conversion reactions. To address these
challenges, the LIB conversion reaction materials mainly focused on the following
aspects: (i) nanostructure engineering with favorable morphologies, (ii) hybridiza￾tion with conductive carbon (CNT, graphene, etc.), and (iii) heteroatoms doping.
Importantly, the morphology and particle size significantly influence the sodium
ion storage performance. In detail, the transport efficiency of e−/Na+ depends on
both the morphology and particle size of the electrode material. The reduction in
particle size not only shortens the e− path and enhances Na+ diffusion but also
increases the contact area between the electrode and electrolyte, thereby improving
the utilization rate of the active material. However, nanostructured materials with
high specific surface areas tend to induce side reactions on the electrode surface.
Additionally, hollow/porous structures can effectively mitigate volume expansion
during cycling, but their low tapping density sacrifices the volume-specific capacity
of these materials. Hybridization with conductive carbon can enhance the elec￾trical conductivity of the electrode, facilitating fast electrochemical kinetics and
effectively maintaining morphology while restraining the pulverization of electrode
materials during cycling. Although these strategies have improved sodium storage
performance in conversion reactions to some extent (Figure 6.13) [94], cyclic6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 209
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Voltage (V vs. Na+/Na)
0 500
0.5
0.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
1500 2000 2500
Intercalation materials
Conversion-alloy materials
Alloying materials
Conversion materials
CoS2
Co3O4
α-Fe2O3 FeS2
MoS2
NiO
SnS2
Sb2O3
Sb2S3
Sn4P3
RP
Sb2Se3
Sb2Te3
Li4Ti5O12
Na2Ti3O7
Hard carbon
Na2C8H4O4
Schiff based
polymer
Ge
Bi Sb
Sn
SnSb
Ordered carbon nanofibers
TiO2
SnO2
SnSe2
SnSe
SnO
SnTe
SnS
CuO
CoS Organic materials
1000
Figure 6.13 Theoretical specific capacity and operating voltage of anode materials for
SIBs. Source: Qiao et al. [94] / with permission of American Chemical Society.
stability and rate capacity remain unsatisfactory. In future research, emphasis
should be placed on developing high-capacity TMO anodes for long-term cycling.
MnO2 Nanowires
Manganese oxides (MnOx) have also been extensively investigated for their appli￾cations in LIBs, SIBs, KIBs, and supercapacitors due to their low cost and environ￾mental friendliness. However, similar to other conversion-based materials, MnOx
suffers from poor cycling stability and rate capability caused by its inherent low con￾ductivity and large volume effect despite its high theoretical capacity (756 mAh g−1)
(Eqs. (6.2)–(6.4)). Currently, efforts towards improving the sodium ion storage per￾formance of MnOx mainly focus on nanostructure design, hybrid conductive mate￾rials integration, and porous structure engineering.
First discharge process ∶ Na+ + MnO2 + e− → NaMnO2 (6.2)
NaMnO2 + Na + e− → Na2O + MnO (6.3)
Subsequent cycles ∶ Na2O + MnO → NaMnO2+ Na + e− (6.4)
Porous MnO@C nanorods fabricated by annealing Mn-based metal-organic
frameworks precursor. The unique porous structure of the MnO@C nanorods
(∼200 nm in diameter and 3–10 nm in length) contained embedded MnO
nanoparticles (3–5 nm) within a carbon matrix, which significantly enhanced
electrical conductivity and mitigated volume changes during charge/discharge
processes. After 100 cycles at 50 mA g−1, the obtained MnO@C nanorods exhib￾ited a high reversible specific capacity of 260 mAh g−1, demonstrating superior
long-term cycling performance with a capacity retention of 140 mAh g−1 at 2 A g−1
(Figure 6.14a–c) [95]. Wang et al. synthesized MnO2 nanowires coated with
reduced graphene oxide (MnO2@rGO) using a simple hydrothermal method.0
0
0 20
20
–20
Coulombic efficiency (%)
200
40
40 400
60
Cycle number
60
MnO
MnO@C
MnO2@rGO
1st
3rd
0
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.5 100 nm –0.4
200 nm
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
1.0
1.0
1.5
1.5
2.0
2.0
3.0
3.0
2.5
2.5
100 200 300 400 500
0.02 A g–1
2nd
1st
3rd
4th
2nd
600
80
80
800
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Voltage (V vs. Na+/Na)
Voltage (V)
(a)
(b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
KMnO4
MnSO4
H2SO4
MnO2 rGO
Stirring Stirring
Hydrothermal 12h
MnO Hydrothermal 6h 2 Current (mA)
100
100
Figure 6.14 (a) SEM image and (b) CV curves of MnO@C composites. (c) Cycling stability of MnO@C and MnO electrodes. Source: Zhang et al. [95] / with
permission of Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process, (e) SEM image, and (f) charge/discharge profiles of MnO2@rGO nanowires.
Source: Wang et al. [96] / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 211
The incorporation of rGO not only induced lattice distortion to facilitate faster Na+
transfer within highly crystalline MnO2 nanowires but also created an interfacial
structure between rGO and MnO2. As an anode material for SIBs, the resulting
MnO2@rGO nanowires exhibited a high capacity of 228 mAh g−1 at 50 mA g−1, with
excellent capacity retention of 75% after 500 cycles (Figure 6.14d–f) [96].
Among various manganese oxides commonly studied for SIB anodes is MnO2,
which exhibits a discharge capacity of up to 1233 mAh g−1 when fully reduced to
metallic Mn accompanied by Na+ intercalation. The crystal structures of MnO2 typ￾ically exist in α, β, γ, δ, and λ forms due to the different linkages of fundamental
MnO6 octahedra. Among these forms, α, β, and γ phases are usually characterized
by a 1D structure, while δ is a 2D layered compound and λ exhibits a 3D spinel struc￾ture. Various MnO2, α, β, and γ phases have been extensively studied for SIB anodes
due to their large size channels that can provide a host for Na+ insertion/extraction.
The α-MnO2 consists of (2 * 2) + (1 * 1) tunnel structures connected at the corners
through shared MnO6 octahedral double chains. While the β-MnO2 features a 1D
channel (1 * 1) structure composed of single chains of MnO6 octahedral elements. As
for γ-MnO2, it possesses both ramsdellite-type (2 * 1) channels and pyrolusite-type
(1 * 1) channels (Figure 6.15a) [97].
Furthermore, the properties of MnO2 are significantly influenced by its crystal
structure. By carefully controlling reaction conditions such as acidity and tempera￾ture during synthesis processes, specific polycrystals can be obtained. For instance,
Su et al. reported the successful synthesis of α-MnO2 and β-MnO2 nanorods
using hydrothermal methods. When utilized as anodes for SIBs, both α-MnO2
and β-MnO2 nanorods deliver high initial capacities of 278 and 298 mAh g−1 at
20 mA g−1, respectively. The cycling performance and rate performance of β-MnO2
is superior to α-MnO2, possibly due to the compact and dense (1 * 1) tunnel structure
in β-MnO2 crystals. The two-tunnel structure of α-MnO2 is not stable when Na+ (de)
intercalation, leading to a low capacity and poor cyclability than β-MnO2 (Figure
6.15b–d) [98]. In addition, Su et al. fabricated β-MnO2 nanorods with exposed tun￾nel structures by a hydrothermal method, leading to facile Na+ insertion/extraction
of the {111} crystal plane consisting of high-density (1 * 1) tunnels. The optimized
β-MnO2 nanorods deliver a high initial discharge capacity of 350 mAh g−1 and a
good high-rate performance. The ex situ XRD and TEM results demonstrate that
the gradual capacity decrease caused by the formation of NaMn2O4 inactive phase
for β-MnO2 nanorod electrodes (Figure 6.15e–g) [99].
CuO Nanowires
Cu2O and CuO are two classical cupric oxides that have attracted increasing
attention as anodes for SIBs due to their abundant resources, chemical stability,
and non-toxic nature. In recent years, numerous studies have been conducted to
investigate the electrochemical performance and sodium ion storage mechanism of
Cu2O and CuO. Wang et al. fabricated porous CuO nanowires by simply deleting a
Cu(OH)2 precursor. When used as a SIB anode, the porous CuO nanowires deliver
a high discharge capacity of 640 mAh g−1, which is very close to the theoretical
specific capacity (674 mAh g−1) (Figure 6.16a,b). Based on the CV, ex situ XRD,212 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
Cycle number
Capacity (mAh g–1) Capacity (mAh g–1)
0 20
0
0
100
200
300
400
50
100
150
200
250
300
40 60 80
50 mA g–1
100 mA g–1
200 mA g–1
400 mA g–1
800 mA g–1
1600 mA g–1
100
Cycle number
β-MnO2 nanorod
(α) (β) (γ)
α-MnO2 nanorod
0 20 40 60 80 100
(b)
(e) (f) (g)
(c) (d)
(a)
20 nm
200 nm
20 nm
100 nm
Figure 6.15 (a) Crystal structures of α-MnO2, β-MnO2, and γ-MnO2. Source: Devaraj et al.
[97] / with permission of American Chemical Society. SEM images of (b) α-MnO2 nanorods
and (c) β-MnO2 nanorods. (d) Cycling performances of α-MnO2 and β-MnO2 nanorod anodes
at a current density of 20 mA g−1. Source: Su et al. [98] / with permission of Royal Society of
Chemistry. (e) SEM image and (f) TEM image of β-MnO2. (d) Cycling performances of β-MnO2
nanorod at different current densities. Source: Su et al. [99] / with permission of Nature
Publishing Group.
Raman spectroscopy, and HRTEM test, the discharge/charge processes can be
explained by the following electrochemical conversion reactions (Eqs. (6.5)–(6.9),
Figure 6.16c).
During the discharge process:
CuO + Na+ + e− → CuII
1−xCu
xO1−x∕2 + Na2O (6.5)
2CuII
1−xCu
xO1−x∕2 + (2 − 2x) Na+ + (2 − 2x) e− → Cu2O + (1 − x) Na2O (6.6)
Cu2O + 2Na+ + 2e− → 2Cu + Na2O (6.7)
During the charge process [100]:
2Cu + Na2O → Cu2O + 2Na+ + 2e− (6.8)
Cu2O + Na2O → 2CuO + 2Na+ + 2e− (6.9)6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 213
(a)
(d)
Copper foil
Alkaline solution
0.0 0
0
20
40
60
80
100
200
400
600
800
1000
0 100
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
200 300 400
Cycle number Cycle number Capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
No. of electrons exchanged mol–1
Voltage (V vs. Na/Na+
)
500 600
Charge
Discharge
700 800 0 100 200 300 400
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Annealling
(e) (g) (f)
(b)
0.0
0 100 200 30 40
CuO Cu2O Cu
50 60 70 80 90 300
100 mA g–1
3.00 V
1.50 V
0.01 V
0.60 V
1.20 V
2.90 V
200 mA g–1
300 mA g–1
500 mA g–1
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Intensity (a.u.)
Discharge Charge
2θ (°)
Potential (V vs. Na+/Na)
400 500
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0 (c)
Figure 6.16 (a) The TEM image, (b) the charge/discharge profile, and (c) ex situ XRD
patterns of CuO nanowires. Source: Wang et al. [100] / with permission of Springer Nature.
(d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication for the in situ synthesis of CNAs on Cu foil.
(e) SEM image of a CuO nanorod array. (f) GITT profile of CNA. (g) Cycling performance of
binder-free CNA electrode at a high current density of 200 mA g−1. Source: Yuan et al.
[101] / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
The flexible and porous CuO nanorod arrays (CNAs) were fabricated by in situ
engraving commercial copper foils, as reported by Yuan et al. [101]. These CNAs can
be directly utilized as anodes for SIBs without needing conductive agents or polymer
binders. The binder-free porous CNA electrode delivers a stable discharge capacity
of 640 mAh g−1 corresponding to 1.9 Na+ intercalation per formula. Furthermore,
a remarkable specific capacity of 290.6 mAh g−1 is maintained after 450 cycles at a
current density of 200 mA g−1. This exceptional electrochemical performance can
be attributed to the unique array structure and absence of binders. Such strategies
involving conductive carbon materials are widely recognized as effective means to
enhance sodium-ion storage performance since they not only improve electrode con￾ductivity but also mitigate volume changes during (de)-intercalation processes.
The excessive carbon content in composite materials may compromise their
overall properties; therefore, future research should focus on reducing the carbon
content without sacrificing electrical conductivity. Wang et al. prepared CuO quan￾tum dots (∼2 nm) uniformly encapsulated in carbon nanofibers (2-CuO@C) using
a facile electrospinning method (Figure 6.17) [102]. This binder-free 2-CuO@C has
a CuO content of 54 wt%. When used as an anode for SIBs, it demonstrates an initial
capacity of 528 mAh g−1 with a high capacity retention of 83% after 100 cycles at
100 mA g−1 and high rate capability (even 250 mAh g−1 at 5000 mA g−1). However,Cycle number (n)
Cycle number
Capacity (mAh g–1) Capacity (mAh g–1)
0
0 20 40
0
0
100
200
300
400
500
50 100
R-CuO
1.2 A g–1
CuO
150 200
60 80
Charge
Discharge
Charge
Discharge
Charge
Discharge
2-CuO@C
20-CuO@C
bulk-CuO
100
200
400
600
800
(a)
15 KV
CuO@CNFs Cu@CNFs
(1) a: Anodization
(2) a: ALD TiO2
b: 200 °C Ar/H2
b: 200 °C Ar
270 °C for 4 h 270 °C for 1 h
650 °C for 1 h
air N2
CuCl2@PAN
V
(d)
(b) (c)
(e) (f)
CuO
Cu foam
R-CuO
Figure 6.17 (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process for CuO@C nanofibers. (b) SEM image of 2-CuO@C. (c) Cycling performance of 2-CuO@C,
20-CuO@C, and bulk CuO at 100 mA g−1. Source: Wang et al. [102] / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Schematic illustrating, (e) SEM image,
and (f) cycling performance of R-CuO and CuO. Source: Refs. Ni et al. [103] / with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.6.3 Nanowires as Anodes in Sodium-ion Batteries 215
the substantial volume change during Na intercalation and de-intercalation could
disrupt the structural integrity (∼170%) leading to poor electrochemical durability
and low coulombic efficiency. Ni et al. presented a structural strategy involving
atomic layer deposition to regulate the volume change in CuO nanoarray electrodes
during Na storage by depositing cohesive TiO2 thin films. The optimized CuO elec￾trode enables large capacity performance reaching 592 mAh g−1 at 60 mA g−1 with
stable cycling (82% after 1000 cycles), which may be due to the ductility of amor￾phous TiO2 acting as nano glue to prevent particle fracture during Na+ cycling [103].
6.3.4 Metal Sulfides
Metal sulfides (MSs) have attracted extensive attention due to their potential
applications in fuel cells, SIBs, supercapacitors, and other energy devices. There are
many kinds of MSs with relatively high theoretical specific capacity and energy den￾sity. They usually exist in nature in the form of molybdenite (MoS2), sulfotungsten
(WS2), hexagonal nickel sulfide (Ni3S2), chalcocite (Cu2S), pyrite (FeS2), and other
minerals [104], which also makes the sulfide cheaper. The sulfide used SIBs mainly
includes sulfur-containing organic compounds and inorganic compounds. Most
metal sulfides (MoS2, SnS2, WS2, etc.) have a unique layered structure, which is
unique in that the atoms in each layer exist stably through the action of covalent
bonds, while the interlayer is formed only by the action of intermolecular forces
such as van der Waals force. Due to the weak van der Waals force, under certain
conditions, some polar molecules can enter the interlayer of layered compounds
without destroying their layered structure by breaking the intermolecular force
through adsorption, insertion, suspension, etc., so this type of transition metal
sulfide can provide enough space for sodium-ion insertion. However, transition
MSs also have some disadvantages, such as poor self-conductivity and low first
Coulomb efficiency. During lithification, layered sulfides will be laminated and
agglomerated, which will reduce the specific surface area of the material and the
contact area with the electrolyte, limiting their application as electrode materials.
For example, the cathode material NiS2 has some problems during the battery
charging and discharging processes: (i) Huge volume expansion; (ii) Poor electronic
conductivity; (iii) Slow kinetics in the conversion reaction.
The commonly adopted methods to improve the electrochemical performance
of MS as electrode materials include: (i) regulation of nano structure of materials,
synthesis of 1D nanowires, hollow nanotubes, and 2D and 3D nano sheets [105].
Materials with nanostructures can shorten the transmission path of electrons and
reduce the mechanical stress caused by excessive volume fluctuation after repeated
natrification/sodium removal; Synthesis of hollow, core–shell, porous structural
materials can solve the agglomeration of nanoparticles. (ii) Material composite, two
or more materials can take advantage of multicomponent advantages to improve the
electrochemical performance of materials. So far, the research on metal sulfide as
lithium-ion electrode material has been relatively mature. Because lithium-ion and
sodium-ion have similar embedding mechanism in the charge–discharge process,
the development of new electrode materials for SIBs can be studied on the basis of216 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
LIBs. The MS anode materials can be divided into layered structure and nonlayered
structure according to the structural characteristics. The MS with layered structure
includes molybdenum sulfide, tin sulfide, tungsten sulfide, and other materials,
while the MS with nonlayered structure includes iron sulfide, nickel sulfide, and
other materials.
6.3.4.1 Molybdenum Sulfide and Its Composites
The common anode material of molybdenum sulfide is molybdenum disulfide
(MoS2), which is a 2D layered structure composed of two S layers and one Mo
layer (S–Mo–S) combined by van der Waals force. This configuration is con￾ducive to the insertion/removal of lithium/sodium ions, and also plays a positive
role in easing volume expansion and fixing polysulfides [106]. The theoretical
capacity of pure MoS2 can reach 670 mAh g−1, which is much better than that of
graphite anode (372 mAh g−1). However, MoS2 materials have the disadvantages
of poor conductivity and structural stability, especially in SIBs. Tang et al. [107]
took polystyrene nanospheres as templates, made chitosan and ammonium
tetrathiomolybdate into lyophilized gels, treated them at 350 ∘C for 2 hours, and
then annealed them at 800 ∘C for 2 hours. Using the electrostatic interaction
between amino functional groups and molybdate ions, a hierarchical porous
carbon framework embedded with MoS2 nanosheets with a diameter of less than
10 nm was prepared. When it is used as the negative pole of SIB, its specific
capacity reaches 330 mAh g−1 at 5 A g−1 current density, and its reversible specific
capacity is 340 mAh g−1 after 550 cycles at 1 A g−1 high current. Xiong et al. [108]
reported a flexible MoS2/carbon nanofiber membrane while MoS2 nanosheets were
uniformly encapsulated in interconnected carbon nanofibers through a simple
electrospinning method. The as-spun ammonium tetrathiomolybdate (ATTM)
assisted polyacrylonitrile (PAN) ATTM-PAN and MoS2-CNFs films exhibit excellent
membrane flexibility and can be used as free-standing anode electrodes for SIBs
(Figure 6.18a–c). The MoS2-CNFs exhibit three reduction peaks (1.7, 0.92, and 0.2 V)
in the first sodiation process. The reduction (1.7 V) and oxidation (1.75 V) peaks
are attributed to the Na1 ions insertion/deinsertion into MoS2. The MoS2-CNFs can
maintain a reversible specific capacity of 283.9 mAh g−1 after 600 cycles at a current
density of 100 mAh g−1 (Figure 6.18d–f).
6.3.4.2 Tungsten Sulfide and Its Composites
Tungsten disulfide (WS2) has a layered structure similar to molybdenum disulfide
(MoS2), and its theoretical capacity is 433 mAh g−1, which is considered to be a
promising electrochemical active material. Tungsten disulfide-based anode materi￾als mainly exist two problems: (i) its poor electronic/ionic conductivity, especially
for the SIB system, the conductive response of pure WS2 electrode materials is
relatively low; (ii) WS2 has poor crystallinity and unstable structure. These two fac￾tors together lead to poor cycle stability of WS2 cathode material [109]. At present,
the main way to solve these problems is to composite WS2 with carbon-based
materials, which can also adjust its structure to improve the conductivity and
structural stability of WS2. Liu et al. [110] obtained uniform WS2 nanowires with(d) (e) (f) 0.2
(a) (b) (c)
500
ATTM-PNFs film
MoS2-CNFs film
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
400
300
200
Efficiency (%)
100
0
0 100
Charge
100 mA g–1
0.05 A g–1
0.1 A g–1
0.2 A g–1
0.5 A g–1
1 A g–1
2 A g–1
3 A g–1
5 A g–1
Charge
Efficiency
Discharge
Discharge
200 300
Cycle
Current: 100 mA g–1
Cycle
400 500 600
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 20 40 60 80 100
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.0 0.5 1.0
Desodiation
Sodiation
1st 1.75 V
2nd
3rd
1.7 V
0.92 V 0.8 V
0.2 V
1.5
Potential (V) vs. Na/Na+
Current (mA)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
2.0 2.5 3.0
Figure 6.18 (a) Digital photo for the ATTM-PAN and MoS2-CNFs films; (b) Digital photo shows the flexible property, (c) FESEM images, (d) initial three
cycles of CV curves, (e) cycling performance, and (f) Rate capacity of the as-obtained MoS2-CNFs film. Source: Hu et al. [108] / with permission of American
Chemical Society.218 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
a diameter of 25 nm by solvothermal method. The layer spacing was 0.83 nm. The
layered structure of the material was protected by increasing the discharge cutoff
potential (0.5–3 V). The material showed excellent cycle stability. After 1400 cycles
at 1000 mA g−1 current density, the capacity remained at about 330 mAh g−1. Xu
et al. [111] prepared the DODA-WS2 by a simple electro-spinning method, and used
the obtained membrane woven as SIBs anode materials, as shown in Figure 6.19.
The as-prepared material delivers large specific capacity of 377 mAh g−1 at current
densities of 200 mA g−1. After 400 cycles, the capacity still maintained 363 mAh g−1
with retention rate of 96%. The reversible capacities of DODA-WS2 at 50, 100, 200,
500, 1000, 2000, 5000, and 10000 mA g−1 were 395, 365, 337, 305, 272, 230, 165, and
91 mAh g−1, respectively. The unique results can be ascribed to the well-dispersed
WS2 cross-linked nanofiber framework and its conductive network.
6.3.4.3 Stannic Sulfide and Its Composites
The most widely studied tin disulfide material (SnS2) has a higher theoretical
capacity (1137 mAh g−1) than 2D materials such as MoS2 and WS2. This can be
attributed to its unique conversion reaction and Li/Na Sn alloying/dealloying
mechanism [112]. In addition to these advantages, SnS2 is currently faced with the
main problems of poor material conductivity and large volume changes during
charging and discharging. Prikhodchenko et al. [113] prepared SnS2/graphene
nanocomposites by H2S vulcanizing SnO2/graphene composites, and the reversible
specific capacity can reach 650 mAh g−1. In addition, the hydrothermal method can
synthesize nanostructured SnS2 composites, effectively reducing the diffusion path
of Na+, thereby improving the magnification and cycling properties of the materials.
In addition, Zhang et al. [114] used the solvothermal method to obtain a thin layer
of SnS2/graphene material with remarkable high magnification performance,
which still shows a reversible specific capacity of 330 mAh g−1 at 12.8 A g−1 current
density. Guan et al. [115] prepared SnS2/MWNTs nanocomposites with microp￾orous structure, with the initial capacity of 910 mAh g−1 at the current density of
100 mA g−1, and the capacity retention rate can reach 78% after 100 cycles.
6.3.4.4 Nickel Sulfide, Ferrous Sulfide and Their Composites
Ferrous sulfide is the representative of nonlayered sulfide. As the negative electrode
material of SIB, FeS has the advantages of rich resources, low price and high
theoretical specific capacity on the one hand, but its volume change during the
electrochemical cycle reaches 200%, resulting in poor cycle performance. The
researchers improved their electrochemical performance by controlling particle
size and morphology. For example, Zhang et al. [116] prepared ultrathin car￾bon coated FeS microspheres in situ, which can effectively improve the volume
expansion in the electrochemical process and have good cycling performance;
The material also shows good low-temperature performance. At −25 ∘C, 0.05 A g−1
current density, the reversible capacity is 311 mAh g−1. Wu et al. [117] reported
that FeS/C nanocomposites can accelerate the electrochemical reaction kinetics.
Under the current densities of 0.05, 35and 80 A g−1, the reversible capacities of the
nanocomposites are 547.1, 206.2 and 60.4 mAh g−1, respectively, showing a good(a) (b)
(c)
3.0 1st
2nd
0.05 C
0.1 C
0.2 C
0.5 C
1 C 2 C
5 C 10 C
0.05 C
3rd
5th
10th
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Recycling numbers Recycling numbers
HPW-WS2
HPW-WS2
Ion-exchange
GO
Carbonization
Sulfidation
Electrospining
PAN-C
PAN-C
DODA-WS2
DODA-WS2
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0 100 200 300
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Potential (V vs.Na/Na+)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
400 500 600
(d) (e)
Figure 6.19 (a) The schematic illustration of the preparation process, (b) SEM image of DODA-WS2 nanofibers; (c) Galvanostatic charging/discharging
curves of DODA-WS2 electrode at a current density of 200 m Ag−1, (d) cycling performance comparison, and (e) rate performances of DODA-WS2, HPW-WS2
and PAN-C electrodes. Source: Li et al. [111] / with permission of Elsevier.220 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
rate sodium storage performance. Similar to FeS, nickel-based sulfide (NiSx) has also
been widely reported as a negative electrode material for SIBs. For example, Jiang
[118] and others prepared carbon coated NiSx composites doped with N/S, which
can effectively improve the electron and ion transport properties of the materials
by using thiourea as raw materials. The reversible capacity under 2 A g−1 current
density can reach 338.4 mAh g−1, which can still be maintained at 201 mAh g−1
after 300 cycles, and the capacity retention rate is 99.5%.
6.4 Summary
SIBs are widely considered a promising candidate for large-scale energy storage
devices because their low-cost and widely distributed sodium resources. However,
the lack of proper electrode materials due to poor electrochemical performance
hinders the practical application and development of SIBs. In this chapter,
the nanowire-structured strategy is elucidated as an effective approach to the
performance optimization of SIBs. We summarize the recently reported nanowires
as cathode and anode materials for SIBs, respectively. When compared to conven￾tional bulk electrodes, the nanowire structure exhibits improved electrochemical
performance due to the shortened ion diffusion distance and enhanced structural
stability. Additionally, the nanowire-based cathode and anode are beneficial for
constructing flexible SIBs, which could broaden the application of flexible SIB
devices. There are many typical synthesis methods for constructing nanowire-based
electrode materials, such as the hydrothermal method, electrospinning method, and
polymer-pyrolysis method. However, the synthesis difficulty of nanowires is related
to the synthesis conditions and crystal structure of specific materials. Despite these
advances, many challenges still remain in the design of nanowire-based electrode
materials for SIBs. For example, the constructed nanowire-based electrodes still face
structural damage during sodiation/desodiation processes due to the large volume
changes. The reaction mechanisms of nanowire-based electrode materials need to
be further systematically investigated. Additionally, the constructing methods for
current nanowire-based electrode materials are single and limited; new synthesized
methods are needed to be explored. To sum up, it is important to develop effective
and simple methods to construct high-performance nanowire-based cathode
and anode materials for SIBs; this will promote the development of SIBs toward
flexibility and large-scale practicality.
References
1 Slater, M.D., Kim, D., Lee, E. et al. (2013). Sodium-ion batteries. Advanced
Functional Materials 23: 947–958.
2 Hwang, J.Y., Myung, S.T., and Sun, Y.K. (2017). Sodium-ion batteries: present
and future. Chemical Society Reviews 46: 3529–3614.
3 Chen, L., Fiore, M., Wang, J.E. et al. (2018). Readiness level of sodium-ion bat￾tery technology: a materials review. Advanced Sustainable Systems 2: 1700153.References 221
4 Oshima, T., Kajita, M., and Okuno, A. (2004). Development of sodium-sulfur
batteries. International Journal of Applied Ceramic Technology 1: 269–276.
5 Komaba, S. and Kubota, K. (2021). Layered NaMO2 for the positive electrode.
Na-ion Batter 1–46.
6 Stevens, D.A. and Dahn, J.R. (2000). High capacity anode materials for
rechargeable sodium-ion batteries. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 147:
1271.
7 Jiang, M., Sun, N., Soomro, R.A. et al. (2021). The recent progress of
pitch-based carbon anodes in sodium-ion batteries. Journal of Energy Chemistry
55: 34–47.
8 Yabuuchi, N., Kubota, K., Dahbi, M. et al. (2014). Research development on
sodium-ion batteries. Chemical Reviews 114: 11636–11682.
9 Zhou, Y., Zhang, Z., Zhao, Y. et al. (2021). Cost-effective, long-term aque￾ous rechargeable hybrid sodium/zinc batteries based on Zn anode and
Na3MnTi(PO4)3 cathode. Chemical Engineering Journal 425: 130459.
10 Zhao, Y., Gao, X., Gao, H. et al. (2021). Elevating energy density for sodium-ion
batteries through multielectron reactions. Nano Letters 21: 2281–2287.
11 Zhang, J., Lin, C., Xia, Q. et al. (2021). Improved performance of
Na3TiMn(PO4)3 using a non-stoichiometric synthesis strategy. ACS Energy
Letters 6: 2081–2089.
12 Wu, C., Tong, J., Gao, J. et al. (2021). Studies on the sodium storage perfor￾mances of Na3AlxV2-x(PO4)3@C composites from calculations and experimental
analysis. ACS Applied Energy Materials 4: 1120–1129.
13 Wang, S., Wang, G., He, C. et al. (2021). Enabling superior hybrid capacitive
deionization performance in NASICON-structured Na3MnTi(PO4)3/C by incor￾porating a two-species redox reaction. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 9:
6898–6904.
14 Singh, B., Wang, Z., Park, S. et al. (2021). A chemical map of NaSICON elec￾trode materials for sodium-ion batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 9:
281–292.
15 Shen, X., Zhou, Q., Han, M. et al. (2021). Rapid mechanochemical synthesis
of polyanionic cathode with improved electrochemical performance for Na-ion
batteries.Nature. Communication 12: 2848.
16 Rajagopalan, R., Zhang, Z., Tang, Y. et al. (2021). Understanding crystal struc￾tures, ion diffusion mechanisms and sodium storage behaviors of NASICON
materials. Energy Storage Materials 34: 171–193.
17 Park, S., Chotard, J.-N., Carlier, D. et al. (2021). Crystal structures and local
environments of NASICON-type Na3FeV(PO4)3 and Na4FeV(PO4)3 positive
electrode materials for Na-ion batteries. Chemistry of Materials 33: 5355–5367.
18 Manna, S.C., Sandineni, P., and Choudhury, A. (2021). Low temperature
hydrothermal synthesis of Na3Fe2(PO4)2F3 and its cathode electrochemistry
in Na- and Li-ion batteries. Journal of Solid State Chemistry 295: 121922.
19 Ma, X., Wu, X., Liu, Y. et al. (2021). Toward a high-energy-density cathode
with enhanced temperature adaptability for sodium-ion batteries: a case study222 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
of Na3MnZr(PO4)3 microspheres with embedded dual-carbon networks. ACS
Applied Materials & Interfaces 13: 21390–21400.
20 Liu, J., Lin, K., Zhao, Y. et al. (2021). Exceeding three-electron reactions in
Na3+2xMn1+xTi1−x(PO4)3 NASICON cathodes with high energy density for
sodium-ion batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 9: 10437–10446.
21 Li, X., Jiang, S., Li, S. et al. (2021). Overcoming the rate-determining kinetics of
the Na3V2O2(PO4)2F cathode for ultrafast sodium storage by heterostructured
dual-carbon decoration. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 9: 11827–11838.
22 Lee, J., Park, S., Park, Y. et al. (2021). Chromium doping into
NASICON-structured Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode for high-power Na-ion batteries.
Chemical Engineering Journal 422: 130052.
23 Lavela, P., Klee, R., and Tirado, J.L. (2021). On the benefits of Cr substitution
on Na4MnV(PO4)3 to improve the high voltage performance as cathode for
sodium-ion batteries. Journal of Power Sources 495: 229811.
24 Klee, R., Lavela, P., and Tirado, J.L. (2021). Effect of the Mn/V ratio to opti￾mize the kinetic properties of Na3+xMnxV1-xCr(PO4)3 positive electrode for
sodium-ion batteries. Electrochimica Acta 375: 137982.
25 Hou, J., Hadouchi, M., Sui, L. et al. (2021). Unlocking fast and reversible
sodium intercalation in NASICON Na4MnV(PO4)3 by fluorine substitution.
Energy Storage Materials 42: 307–316.
26 Han, K., An, F., Yan, F. et al. (2021). High-performance aqueous Zn–MnO2 bat￾teries enabled by the coupling engineering of K+ pre-intercalation and oxygen
defects. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 9: 15637–15647.
27 Hadouchi, M., Yaqoob, N., Kaghazchi, P. et al. (2021). Fast sodium intercala￾tion in Na3.41£0.59FeV(PO4)3: a novel sodium-deficient NASICON cathode for
sodium-ion batteries. Energy Storage Materials 35: 192–202.
28 Gu, Z.-Y., Guo, J.-Z., Sun, Z.-H. et al. (2021). Air/water/temperature-stable cath￾ode for all-climate sodium-ion batteries. Cell Reports Physical Science 2: 100665.
29 Cui, G., Dong, Q., Wang, Z. et al. (2021). Achieving highly reversible and fast
sodium storage of Na4VMn(PO4)3/C-rGO composite with low-fraction rGO via
spray-drying technique. Nano Energy 89: 106462.
30 Chen, M., Zhang, Y., Xing, G. et al. (2021). Electrochemical energy storage
devices working in extreme conditions. Energy & Environmental Science 14:
3323–3351.
31 Chen, M., Hua, W., Xiao, J. et al. (2021). Activating a multielectron reaction
of NASICON-structured cathodes toward high energy density for sodium-ion
batteries. Journal of the American Chemical Society 143: 18091–18102.
32 Cao, Y., Yang, C., Liu, Y. et al. (2020). A new polyanion Na3Fe2(PO4)P2O7
cathode with high electrochemical performance for sodium-ion batteries. ACS
Energy Letters 5: 3788–3796.
33 Chen, M., Hua, W., Xiao, J. et al. (2019). NASICON-type air-stable and
all-climate cathode for sodium-ion batteries with low cost and high-power
density. Nature Communications 10: 1480.References 223
34 Guo, J.Z., Wang, P.F., Wu, X.L. et al. (2017). High-energy/power and
low-temperature cathode for sodium-ion batteries: in situ XRD study and
superior full-cell performance. Advanced Materials 29: 1701968.
35 Deng, C. and Zhang, S. (2014). 1D nanostructured Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4) as
high-potential and superior-performance cathode material for sodium-ion
batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 6: 9111–9117.
36 Kang, J., Park, H., Kim, H. et al. (2019). Development of a new
mixed-polyanion cathode with superior electrochemical performances for
Na-ion batteries. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 8: 163–171.
37 Zhang, W., Wu, Y., Xu, Z. et al. (2022). Rationally designed sodium chromium
vanadium phosphate cathodes with multi-electron reaction for fast-charging
sodium-ion batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 12: 2201065.
38 Meng, Q., Lu, Y., Ding, F. et al. (2019). Tuning the closed pore structure of hard
carbons with the highest Na storage capacity. ACS Energy Letters 4: 2608–2612.
39 Kim, H., Park, I., Lee, S. et al. (2013). Understanding the electrochemical mech￾anism of the new iron-based mixed-phosphate Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) in a Na
rechargeable battery. Chemistry of Materials 25: 3614–3622.
40 Li, H., Guan, C., Zhang, J. et al. (2022). Robust artificial interphases con￾structed by a versatile protein-based binder for high-voltage Na-ion battery
cathodes. Advanced Materials 34: e2202624.
41 Li, Y., Lu, Y., Meng, Q. et al. (2019). Regulating pore structure of hierarchi￾cal porous waste cork-derived hard carbon anode for enhanced na storage
performance. Advanced Energy Materials 9: 1902852.
42 Lu, Y., Zhao, C., Qi, X. et al. (2018). Pre-oxidation-tuned microstructures of
carbon anodes derived from pitch for enhancing Na storage performance.
Advanced Energy Materials 8: 1800108.
43 Wang, Y., Yu, X., Xu, S. et al. (2013). A zero-strain layered metal oxide as the
negative electrode for long-life sodium-ion batteries. Nature Communications 4:
2365.
44 Wu, F., Zhao, C., Chen, S. et al. (2018). Multi-electron reaction materials for
sodium-based batteries. Materials Today 21: 960–973.
45 Xu, C., Zhao, J., Wang, Y.A. et al. (2022). Reversible activation of V4+/V5+
redox couples in NASICON phosphate cathodes. Advanced Energy Materials 12:
2200966.
46 Yuan, Y., Wei, Q., Yang, S. et al. (2022). Towards high-performance
phosphate-based polyanion-type materials for sodium-ion batteries. Energy
Storage Materials 50: 760–782.
47 Zhao, A., Yuan, T., Li, P. et al. (2022). A novel Fe-defect induced pure-phase
Na4Fe2.91(PO4)2P2O7 cathode material with high capacity and ultra-long lifetime
for low-cost sodium-ion batteries. Nano Energy 91: 106680.
48 Zhu, T., Hu, P., Cai, C. et al. (2020). Dual carbon decorated Na3MnTi(PO4)3: a
high-energy-density cathode material for sodium-ion batteries. Nano Energy 70:
104548.224 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
49 Senthilkumar, B., Murugesan, C., Sada, K. et al. (2020). Electrochemical inser￾tion of potassium ions in Na4Fe3(PO4)2P2O7 mixed phosphate. Journal of Power
Sources 480: 228794.
50 Tang, L., Liu, X., Li, Z. et al. (2019). CNT-decorated Na4Mn2Co(PO4)2P2O7
microspheres as a novel high-voltage cathode material for sodium-ion batteries.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 11: 27813–27822.
51 Au, H., Alptekin, H., Jensen, A.C.S. et al. (2020). A revised mechanistic model
for sodium insertion in hard carbons. Energy & Environmental Science 13:
3469–3479.
52 Kim, H., Yoon, G., Park, I. et al. (2015). Anomalous Jahn–Teller behavior in a
manganese-based mixed-phosphate cathode for sodium ion batteries. Energy &
Environmental Science 8: 3325–3335.
53 Liang, L., Sun, X., Denis, D.K. et al. (2019). Ultralong layered NaCrO2
nanowires: a competitive wide-temperature-operating cathode for extraordi￾nary high-rate sodium-ion batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 11:
4037–4046.
54 Liu, Y., Shen, Q., Zhao, X. et al. (2019). Hierarchical engineering of porous
P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 nanofibers assembled by nanoparticles enables superior
sodium-ion storage cathodes. Advanced Functional Materials 30: 1907837.
55 Shen, Q., Zhao, X., Liu, Y. et al. (2020). Dual-strategy of cation-doping and
nanoengineering enables fast and stable sodium-ion storage in a novel
Fe/Mn-based layered oxide cathode. Advancement of Science 7: 2002199.
56 He, H., Jin, G., Wang, H. et al. (2014). Annealed NaV3O8 nanowires with good
cycling stability as a novel cathode for Na-ion batteries. Journal of Materials
Chemistry A 2: 3563.
57 Li, Y. and Wu, Y. (2010). Formation of Na0.44MnO2 nanowires via stress-induced
splitting of birnessite nanosheets. Nano Research 2: 54–60.
58 Hosono, E., Saito, T., Hoshino, J. et al. (2012). High power Na-ion rechargeable
battery with single-crystalline Na0.44MnO2 nanowire electrode. Journal of Power
Sources 217: 43–46.
59 Cao, Y., Xiao, L., Wang, W. et al. (2011). Reversible sodium ion insertion in sin￾gle crystalline manganese oxide nanowires with long cycle life. Advanced Mate￾rials 23: 3155–3160.
60 Jin, T., Han, Q., Wang, Y. et al. (2018). 1D Nanomaterials: design, synthesis,
and applications in sodium–ion batteries. Small 14: 1703086.
61 Jiang, Y., Yao, Y., Shi, J. et al. (2016). One-dimensional Na3V2(PO4)3/C
nanowires as cathode materials for long-life and high rate Na-ion batteries.
ChemNanoMat 2: 726–731.
62 Wang, X., Niu, C., Meng, J. et al. (2015). Novel K3V2(PO4)3/C bundled
nanowires as superior sodium-ion battery electrode with ultrahigh cycling
stability. Advanced Energy Materials 5: 1500716.
63 Peng, M., Li, B., Yan, H. et al. (2015). Ruthenium-oxide-coated sodium
vanadium fluorophosphate nanowires as high-power cathode materials for
sodium-ion batteries. Angewandte Chemie, International Edition 54: 6452–6456.References 225
64 Chen, Y., Fan, Q., Li, J. et al. (2022). Preparation and electrochemical per￾formance of nanowire-shaped Na3Mn2−xFex(P2O7)(PO4) for sodium-ion and
lithium-ion batteries. Dalton Transactions 51: 4173–4181.
65 Wu, C., Kopold, P., Ding, Y.L. et al. (2015). Synthesizing porous NaTi2(PO4)3
nanoparticles embedded in 3D graphene networks for high-rate and long
cycle-life sodium electrodes. ACS Nano 9: 6610–6618.
66 Cao, Y., Xiao, L., Sushko, M.L. et al. (2012). Sodium ion insertion in hollow
carbon nanowires for battery applications. Nano Letters 12: 3783–3787.
67 Anji Reddy, M., Helen, M., Groß, A. et al. (2018). Insight into sodium insertion
and the storage mechanism in hard carbon. ACS Energy Letters 3: 2851–2857.
68 Kim, H., Yoon, G., Park, I. et al. (2016). Highly stable iron- and
manganese-based cathodes for long-lasting sodium rechargeable batteries.
Chemistry of Materials 28: 7241–7249.
69 Li, Y., Hu, Y.-S., Titirici, M.-M. et al. (2016). Hard carbon microtubes made
from renewable cotton as high-performance anode material for sodium-ion
batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 6: 1600659.
70 Liu, J., Huang, Y., Zhao, Z. et al. (2021). Yeast template-derived multielectron
reaction NASICON structure Na3MnTi(PO4)3 for high-performance sodium-ion
batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 13: 58585–58595.
71 Luo, W., Schardt, J., Bommier, C. et al. (2013). Carbon nanofibers derived from
cellulose nanofibers as a long-life anode material for rechargeable sodium-ion
batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1: 10662.
72 Sheng, J., Peng, C., Xu, Y. et al. (2017). KTi2(PO4)3 with large ion diffusion
channel for high-efficiency sodium storage. Advanced Energy Materials 7.
73 Sun, N., Guan, Z., Liu, Y. et al. (2019). Extended “adsorption–insertion” model:
a new insight into the sodium storage mechanism of hard carbons. Advanced
Energy Materials 9: 1901351.
74 Cho, J.S., Lee, J.K., and Kang, Y.C. (2016). Graphitic carbon-coated FeSe2 hol￾low nanosphere-decorated reduced graphene oxide hybrid nanofibers as an
efficient anode material for sodium ion batteries. Scientific Reports 6: 23699.
75 Zhu, Q., Nan, B., Shi, Y. et al. (2017). Na3V2(PO4)3/C nanofiber bifunction as
anode and cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries. Journal of Solid State
Electrochemistry 21: 2985–2995.
76 Zhu, T., Hu, P., Wang, X. et al. (2019). Realizing three-electron redox reactions
in NASICON-structured Na3MnTi(PO4)3 for sodium-ion batteries. Advanced
Energy Materials 9: 1803436.
77 Hu, P., Zhu, T., Cai, C. et al. (2022). Sodium ion storage in Na4MnV(PO4)3@C
free-standing electrode. Advanced Functional Materials 32: 2208051.
78 Li, W.-J., Chou, S.-L., Wang, J.-Z. et al. (2013). Simply mixed commercial red
phosphorus and carbon nanotube composite with exceptionally reversible
sodium-ion storage. Nano Letters 13: 5480–5484.
79 Wang, J.W., Liu, X.H., Mao, S.X. et al. (2012). Microstructural evolution of tin
nanoparticles during in situ sodium insertion and extraction. Nano Letters 12:
5897–5902.226 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
80 Darwiche, A., Marino, C., Sougrati, M.T. et al. (2012). Better cycling per￾formances of bulk Sb in Na-ion batteries compared to Li-ion systems: an
unexpected electrochemical mechanism. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 134: 20805–20811.
81 Xu, Y., Zhu, Y., Liu, Y. et al. (2013). Electrochemical performance of porous car￾bon/tin composite anodes for sodium-ion and lithium-ion batteries. Advanced
Energy Materials 3: 128–133.
82 Ko, Y.N. and Kang, Y.C. (2014). Electrochemical properties of ultrafine Sb
nanocrystals embedded in carbon microspheres for use as Na-ion battery anode
materials. Chemical Communications 50: 12322–12324.
83 Zhang, C., Wang, X., Liang, Q. et al. (2016). Amorphous
phosphorus/nitrogen-doped graphene paper for ultrastable sodium-ion batteries.
Nano Letters 16: 2054–2060.
84 Liu, Y., Xu, Y., Zhu, Y. et al. (2013). Tin-coated viral nanoforests as sodium-ion
battery anodes. ACS Nano 7: 3627–3634.
85 Baggetto, L., Ganesh, P., Sun, C.-N. et al. (2013). Intrinsic thermodynamic and
kinetic properties of Sb electrodes for Li-ion and Na-ion batteries: experiment
and theory. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1: 7985–7994.
86 Luo, W., Ren, J., Feng, W. et al. (2021). Engineering nanostructured
antimony-based anode materials for sodium ion batteries. Coatings 11 (10).
87 Liang, L., Xu, Y., Wang, C. et al. (2015). Large-scale highly ordered Sb nanorod
array anodes with high capacity and rate capability for sodium-ion batteries.
Energy & Environmental Science 8: 2954–2962.
88 Zhu, Y., Han, X., Xu, Y. et al. (2013). Electrospun Sb/C fibers for a stable and
fast sodium-ion battery anode. ACS Nano 7: 6378–6386.
89 Liu, Z., Yu, X.-Y., Lou, X.W. et al. (2016). Sb@C coaxial nanotubes as a superior
long-life and high-rate anode for sodium ion batteries. Energy & Environmental
Science 9: 2314–2318.
90 Liu, S., Feng, J., Bian, X. et al. (2016). The morphology-controlled synthesis of a
nanoporous-antimony anode for high-performance sodium-ion batteries. Energy
& Environmental Science 9: 1229–1236.
91 Zhou, G., Xu, L., Hu, G. et al. (2019). Nanowires for electrochemical energy
storage. Chemical Reviews 119: 11042–11109.
92 Wu, L., Hu, X., Qian, J. et al. (2014). Sb–C nanofibers with long cycle life
as an anode material for high-performance sodium-ion batteries. Energy &
Environmental Science 7: 323–328.
93 Li, Q., Zhang, W., Peng, J. et al. (2021). Metal–organic framework derived
ultrafine Sb@Porous carbon octahedron via in situ substitution for
high-performance sodium-ion batteries. ACS Nano 15: 15104–15113.
94 Qiao, S., Zhou, Q., Ma, M. et al. (2023). Advanced anode materials for recharge￾able sodium-ion batteries. ACS Nano 17: 11220–11252.
95 Zhang, X., Zhu, G., Yan, D. et al. (2017). MnO@C nanorods derived from
metal-organic frameworks as anode for superiorly stable and long-life
sodium-ion batteries. Journal of Alloys and Compounds 710: 575–580.References 227
96 Wang, Z., Yan, X., Wang, F. et al. (2021) Reduced graphene oxide thin
layer induced lattice distortion in high crystalline MnO2 nanowires for
high-performance sodium-and potassium-ion batteries and capacitors. Carbon
174: 556–566.
97 Devaraj, S. and Munichandraiah, N. (2008). Effect of crystallographic struc￾ture of MnO2 on its electrochemical capacitance properties. Journal of Physical
Chemistry C 112: 4406–4417.
98 Su, D., Ahn, H.-J., and Wang, G. (2013). Hydrothermal synthesis of α-MnO2
and β-MnO2 nanorods as high capacity cathode materials for sodium ion batter￾ies. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1: 4845–4850.
99 Su, D., Ahn, H.-J., and Wang, G. (2013). β-MnO2 nanorods with exposed tunnel
structures as high-performance cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries. NPG
Asia Materials 5: 70.
100 Wang, L., Zhang, K., Hu, Z. et al. (2014). Porous CuO nanowires as the anode
of rechargeable Na-ion batteries. Nano Research 7: 199–208.
101 Yuan, S., Huang, X.-l., Ma, D.-l. et al. (2014). Engraving copper foil to give
large-scale binder-free porous CuO arrays for a high-performance sodium-ion
battery anode. Advanced Materials 26: 2273–2279.
102 Wang, X., Liu, Y., Wang, Y. et al. (2016). CuO quantum dots embedded in car￾bon nanofibers as binder-free anode for sodium ion batteries with enhanced
properties. Small 12: 4865–4872.
103 Ni, J., Jiang, Y., Wu, F. et al. (2018). Regulation of breathing CuO nanoarray
electrodes for enhanced electrochemical sodium storage. Advanced Functional
Materials 28: 1707179.
104 Zhao, W., Ci, S., Hu, X. et al. (2019). Highly dispersed ultrasmall NiS2 nanopar￾ticles in porous carbon nanofiber anodes for sodium ion batteries. Nanoscale
11: 4688–4695.
105 Zhu, T., Chen, J.S., and Lou, X.W. (2011). Glucose-assisted one-pot synthesis
of FeOOH nanorods and their transformation to Fe3O4@ carbon nanorods
for application in lithium ion batteries. Journal of Physical Chemistry C 115:
9814–9820.
106 Kang, W., Wang, Y., and Xu, J. (2017). Recent progress in layered metal
dichalcogenide nanostructures as electrodes for high-performance sodium-ion
batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 5: 7667–7690.
107 Tang, Y., Zhao, Z., Wang, Y. et al. (2017). Ultrasmall MoS, nanosheets mosaiced
into nitrogen-doped hierarchical porous carbon matrix for enhanced sodium
storage performance. Electrochimica Acta 225: 369–377.
108 Xiong, X., Luo, W., Hu, X. et al. (2015). Flexible membranes of MoS2/C
nanofibers by electrospinning as binder-free anodes for high-performance
sodium-ion batteries. Scientific Reports 5: 9254.
109 Zeng, X., Ding, Z., Ma, C. et al. (2016). Hierarchical nanocomposite of hol￾low N-doped carbon spheres decorated with ultrathin WS2 nanosheets for
high-performance lithium-ion battery anode. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
8: 18841–18848.228 6 Nanowires for Sodium-ion Batteries
110 Liu, Y., Zhang, N., Kang, H. et al. (2015). WS2 nanowires as a
high-performance anode for sodium-ion batteries. Chemistry: A European
Journal 21: 11878–11884.
111 Xu, X., Li, X., Zhang, J. et al. (2019). Surfactant assisted electrospinning of WS2
nanofibers and its promising performance as anode material of sodium-ion bat￾teries. Electrochimica Acta 302: 259–269.
112 Yu, X.Y., Yu, L., and Lou, X.W. (2016). Metal sulfide hollow nanostructures for
electrochemical energy storage. Advanced Energy Materials 6: 1501333.
113 Prikhodchenko, P.V., Denis, Y., Batabyal, S.K. et al. (2014). Nanocrystalline tin
disulfide coating of reduced graphene oxide produced by the peroxostannate
deposition route for sodium ion battery anodes. Journal of Materials Chemistry
A 2: 8431–8437.
114 Zhang, Y., Zhu, P., Huang, L. et al. (2015). Few-layered SnS2 on few-layered
reduced graphene oxide as Na-ion battery anode with ultralong cycle life and
superior rate capability. Advanced Functional Materials 25: 481–489.
115 Zhao, Y., Guo, B., Yao, Q. et al. (2018). A rational microstructure design of
SnS2–carbon composites for superior sodium storage performance. Nanoscale
10: 7999–8008.
116 Fan, H.-H., Li, H.-H., Guo, J.-Z. et al. (2018). Target construction of ultrathin
graphitic carbon encapsulated FeS hierarchical microspheres featuring supe￾rior low-temperature lithium/sodium storage properties. Journal of Materials
Chemistry A 6: 7997–8005.
117 Hou, B.-H., Wang, Y.-Y., Guo, J.-Z. et al. (2018). Pseudocapacitance-boosted
ultrafast Na storage in a pie-like FeS@ C nanohybrid as an advanced anode
material for sodium-ion full batteries. Nanoscale 10: 9218–9225.
118 Tao, H., Zhou, M., Wang, K. et al. (2018). N/S co-doped carbon coated nickel
sulfide as a cycle-stable anode for high performance sodium-ion batteries.
Journal of Alloys and Compounds 754: 199–206.229
7
Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide
Battery
Rechargeable batteries are of great significance for solving the current prominent
energy and environmental problems. At present, traditional lithium-ion batteries
occupy a large share of the portable electronic equipment market. However, due
to their high price, low energy density, and limited adaptability to the environment,
their applications in electric vehicles and smart grids are not as wide as imagined.
In order to achieve higher energy density, higher battery safety, and adapt to more
stringent use environments, various new energy storage systems are being developed
all over the world [1]. At present, research on new batteries is being carried out in
the laboratory. Although there is still a long way to go before large-scale applications,
the development of various new battery systems provides more imagination and pos￾sible space for exploration of new energy conversion and storage. This chapter will
introduce the principles and applications of various new batteries from the perspec￾tive of nanowire electrode materials, and explain the characteristics and advantages
of nanowire electrode materials in new batteries.
The idea of using sulfur as a cathode material for batteries was initially proposed by
Herbert and Ulam in 1962 [2]. In a typical lithium–sulfur (Li–S) battery, the electrode
reaction of the entire battery can be described as: S+2Li ↔ Li2S. The theoretical spe￾cific capacities corresponding to elemental sulfur and lithium metal are 1675 and
3861 mAh g−1, and the average voltage corresponding to the full battery is 2.15 V.
As a result, the energy density achieved by these advancements in Li–Se batteries is
approximately 2500 Wh kg−1 and 2800 Wh l−1, which is significantly higher than the
energy density of commercialized lithium-ion battery systems [3].
Of course, there are also many technical problems in the commercialization of
Li–S batteries. For example, sulfur and discharge product lithium sulfide’s electronic
conductivity is about 5 × 10−30 and 1 × 10−13 S cm−1, respectively, and lithium sulfide
is not easy to oxidize, which will lead to a low discharge rate. In addition, prob￾lems such as volume expansion and structural deterioration of discharge product
(lithium sulfide) are also prominent. In recent years, the elemental selenium (Se)
with the same main group as sulfur and the elemental sodium (Na) with the same
main group as lithium have gradually entered the field of vision. The development
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.230 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
trend of lithium–selenium (Li–S) batteries and sodium–sulfur (Na–S) batteries is
also gradually rising, and their respective performance and cost advantages also
make it expected to replace Li–S batteries in the future.
7.1 Lithium–Sulfur Battery
At present, the conventional Li–S battery under research is mainly composed of a
composite material prepared from sulfur, conductive additives, and a binder as the
cathode, and metallic lithium as the anode (Figure 7.1a). Elemental sulfur is gener￾ally composed of sulfur molecules composed of eight sulfur atoms. The discharge
process of the corresponding sulfur element undergoes the following multistep
reaction [5]:
S8 + 2e− → S2−
8 (7.1)
3S2−
8 + 2e− → 4S2−
6 (7.2)
2S2−
6 + 2e− → 3S2−
4 (7.3)
S2−
4 + 4Li+ + 2e− → 2Li2S2 (7.4)
Li2S2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2Li2S (7.5)
The first three reaction steps correspond to the higher voltage plateau (2.15–2.4 V)
in the charge–discharge curve in Figure 7.1b. The polysulfides obtained in these
three reactions are all soluble liquid-phase polysulfides. The latter two reactions
correspond to a lower and long voltage plateau (2.1 V), resulting in insoluble Li2S2
and Li2S solids deposited on the surface of the cathode. The whole process of sulfur
reduction is a “solid-liquid-solid” three-phase conversion process [4]. When the
Li2S is all over the electrode, the voltage will drop rapidly, leading to the termination
of the final reaction.
Discharge
(a) (b)
Sulfur particle
Address
3.0 polysulphide solubility
1.5
0
Li2S8 Li2S6 Li2S4 Li2S2
Li2S Discharge process
Charge process
Polymer binder 1,000 Potential (V vs. Li/Li+)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Li Carbon additive Organic
electrolyte
Li+
Li+
Charge
Charge
Discharge
Load/charger
e– e–
Figure 7.1 (a) Schematic diagram of lithium–sulfur battery structure; (b) Typical
lithium-sulfur battery charge and discharge curve. Source: Manthiram et al. [4]/with
permission of American Chemical Society.7.1 Lithium–Sulfur Battery 231
While batteries offer high energy density and attractive raw material prices, there
are still numerous challenges that must be addressed in order for them to meet
the requirements of commercialization [1]. One major challenge is the significant
volume change that occurs in sulfur during charging and discharging. The density
of elemental sulfur and Li2S is 2.03 and 1.66 g cm−3. As a result of the significant
volume change, the active material may become pulverized leading to a rapid
attenuation of the final capacity. Second, sulfur and Li2S are both electronic and
ionic insulators. The electronic impedance of Li2S is much higher than that of
1014 Ω cm. The diffusion rate of lithium ions in Li2S is as low as 10–15 cm2 S−1.
Once the thin layer of Li2S is deposited on the whole electrode surface, further
lithium intercalation will be seriously hindered, and the voltage will decrease
sharply. Therefore, it is very difficult for sulfur to be completely converted to lithium
sulfide, and the discharge capacity reported in most studies is less than 80% of the
theoretical capacity. A third challenge is that during discharge, the intermediate
discharge product, polysulfide, can migrate to the negative electrode where it may
react with the negative metal lithium. In this way, the passivation of the negative
electrode not only results in the loss of active material but also leads to an increase
in impedance. Moreover, sulfur will change the morphology of the cathode material
in the process of repeated dissolution and deposition, which will lead to stress in the
electrode and shorten the cycle life of the battery. The fourth is the safety problem
caused by the use of lithium metal in the negative electrode, and excessive use of
lithium metal will lead to a decrease in energy density.
In order to solve the above challenges, the reasonable construction of electrode
materials is particularly important. The construction of sulfur cathode materials
should have the following requirements [6–8]: (i) enough space to accommodate
the volume expansion of sulfur; (ii) fast ion and electron transfer rate and short
transmission path; (iii) enough conductive surfaces for depositing Li2S; (iv) effective
physical and chemical restrictions of polysulfides; and (v) higher sulfur loading and
utilization.
Sulfur presents in the form of irregular particles, which is difficult to make one￾dimensional (1D) nanostructures, but it can be effectively loaded on nanowires to
form 1D nanostructure composites. Up to now, the sulfur cathode materials based
on nanowires can be divided into the following types according to the types of
composites: (i) sulfur–carbon nanowire composites; (ii) sulfur/conductive polymer
nanowire composites; and (iii)sulfur/metal compound nanowire composites.
This chapter will introduce in detail the development of three kinds of nanowires
constructed sulfur cathode materials.
7.1.1 Sulfur–Carbon Nanowire Composite Cathode Materials
When applied to the cathode of lithium–sulfur battery, nanowires have more
continuous electron transport paths and structural advantages that can be braided
compared to structures such as nanoparticles and nanosheets. The traditional sulfur
cathode film is usually composed of active sulfur element, conductive carbon, and232 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
binder. Early research mainly used carbon fibers (CNFs), multi-walled carbon
nanotubes (MWCNTs) and other highly conductive nanowires as conductive
additives to be added to the sulfur cathode film to improve the rate performance of
the sulfur cathode and prolong the cycle life of electrode materials [9]. The results
show that using carbon nanowires to construct conductive network framework
is more effective than using traditional 0D materials (Super P, carbon black, and
acetylene black). However, it is difficult to obtain a uniformly dispersed MWCNT
electrode through this traditional paste mixing coating method, and it is difficult
to ensure good contact between the sulfur nanoparticles and CNFs or carbon
nanotubes. In subsequent studies, high-temperature melting or chemical synthesis
was often used to allow carbon nanotubes to cover the surface of the sulfur element
well, so that effective contact between sulfur and carbon nanotubes could be
obtained (Figure 7.2a) [10, 11]. High-temperature melting mainly refers to mixing
elemental sulfur and conductive carbon matrix uniformly, sealing it in a reactor or
crucible, heating up to 155–500 ∘C, and allowing elemental sulfur to melt or gasify
through diffusion and adsorption into the pores and cavities of the conductive
carbon matrix. In the process, a uniform sulfur–carbon composite is obtained. The
main method of chemical synthesis is to dissolve polysulfides or thiosulfate in the
dispersed aqueous solution of carbon matrix, and then add a certain concentration
of acid to form sulfur elements in situ attached to the surface or pores of carbon
matrix. The electron conduction capacity and magnification performance of the
sulfur–carbon composite electrodes synthesized by these two methods have been
effectively improved. However, their cycle life is always limited to 100 cycles of
charge and discharge. This is because simple sulfur–carbon compounding makes it
difficult to limit the shuttle effect and volume expansion. Cui et al. [12] synthesized
a hollow carbon fiber array using anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template and
then melted and infiltrated elemental sulfur into the cavity of the carbon fiber
array by capillary force at 155 ∘C to form a core-shell sulfur carbon nanowire
structure (Figure 7.2b). This structure can physically limit the loss and overflow
of liquid polysulfide to a certain extent, alleviate the shuttle effect and volume
expansion, and extend the cycle life [17]. After assembling the button cell, the
specific capacity remains at 730 mAh g−1 after 160 cycles at a current density of
0.2 C (1 C=1675 mA g−1).
Subsequent studies have focused on the inhibition of the dissolution and shut￾tling of polysulfides by surface modification or structural design of 1D carbon
nanostructures. In terms of surface modification, the surface of conventional CNFs
and CNTs is SP3 or SP2 hybrid C—C bond, which is difficult to chemically interact
with polysulfides, so the dissolution of polysulfides can only be alleviated by the
restriction of physical structure [18]. However, CNFs or CNTs doped with N, O,
and S have suspended C—N, C—O, and C—S bonds, and the positive and negative
charge centers of these valence bonds do not overlap, resulting in a dipole moment
and showing a certain polarity. The surface with polar bonds can form Li–N, O, S
bonds with the same polar polysulfide and play the effect of chemisorption. SomeSulfur
High PS
PAN
Canonization
LRC paper LRC/S electrode
Loading S
LRC/S@EFG electrode
LRC LRC/S
Dip-coating
Cutting
Drying
PAN/PS paper
voltage
Carbon Lithium sulfide
MWNTs
12 34
2011 ~ 2012
(b) (d) (f)
(a) (c) (e)
2012 ~ 2013 2013 2014 2015 2017
MWNTs@SiO2
@P-SiO2/C18TMS
MWNTs@SiO2
@P-SiO2/C
TTCN S-TTCN
Sulfur species
Carbon fibre e–
Li+
Hollow carbon nanofiber
~200 nm ~60 nm
Sulfur
Figure 7.2 Development route of nanowire sulfur–carbon composite cathode materials. (a) Composite structure of simple sulfur carbon nanowires and
nanotubes; Source: Refs. [10, 11]/with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry and Nature Publishing Group. (b) Sulfur carbon core–shell nanowires [12].
(c) The structure of sulfur carbon core–shell nanowires modified by organic matter; Source: Zheng et al. [13]/with permission of American Chemical
Society. (d) Tube-in-tube carbon nanostructures as sulfur-fixing substrates; Source: Zhao et al. [14]/with permission of Wiley-VCH. (e) Multichannel
ultralong carbon nanofibers/sulfur composite cathode films; Source: Li et al. [15]/with permission of Nature Publishing Group. (f) Unrestricted carbon fiber
networks as sulfur-fixing substrates; Source: Pan et al. [16]/with permission of Nature Publishing Group. MWNTs: multi-walled carbon nanotubes; TTCN:
Multilayer Carbon Nanotubes with Tube-in-Tube-Structure.234 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
organics also have abundant suspended polar bonds, which means they can be
used as modifiers to modify the surface of conducting carbon matrix. For example,
Zheng et al. [13] modified the inner and outer surfaces of hollow CNFs with PVP,
and then injected sulfur into them to obtain PVP modified sulfur carbon core–shell
nanowire structure (Figure 7.2c). This structure can be used for both physical
restriction and chemisorption of polysulfides, and the cycle life is greatly improved
compared to that of unmodified sulfur–carbon complexes. The capacity retention
rate is maintained above 80% after 300 cycles at 0.5 C. The binding energies between
S, Li2S2, Li2S, and graphitized carbon surface were calculated to be 0.79, 0.21, and
0.29 eV, respectively, indicating that it is difficult for elemental sulfur to chemisorb
with graphitized carbon surface during discharge. The binding energies of Li2S2,
Li2S, and PVP modified carbon surface were 1.29 and 1.01 eV, respectively, which
assisted to prove that the polar bonds on the surface of organic compounds pro￾moted the adsorption and redeposition of polysulfide, thus mitigating its dissolution
and transit effects. The delicate design of nanostructures is another way to limit
the dissolution of polysulfides. Uniquely structured carbon nanowires with more
pores or smaller confining channels can increase sulfur loading and better limit
polysulfide loss. Zhao et al. [14] constructed tube-in-tube carbon (TTC) nanos￾tructures as sulfur-fixing substrates through a multistep deposition, calcination,
and etching method (Figure 7.2d). Firstly, a uniform SiO2 layer was coated on the
surface of MWCNTs, and then a layer of silicone was deposited, which was calcined
to produce SiO2 and pyrolytic carbon layer under the protective atmosphere of
Argon. Then, sodium hydroxide solution was added to etched the SiO2 layer, and
the multilayer carbon nanotubes (TTCNs) with TTC structure were obtained.
Compared with the previously reported hollow carbon fibers, the structure has a
smaller 1D cavity (10–20 nm), which increases the capillary force and promotes
the physical confining effect of polysulfide. At the same time, sulfur elemental
and polysulfide contact with the conductor is more effective, improving the rate
performance.
After 2014, researchers of lithium-sulfur batteries began to pay more attention to
the loading capacity and area specific capacity of the entire sulfur electrode [19]. In
earlier studies, most of the sulfur electrodes had a low load (<2.0 mg cm−2), but the
area specific capacity was not high when the mass specific capacity and long cycle
life were obtained. It is difficult to meet the practical needs of commercialization.
Increasing the sulfur electrode load while ensuring high rate and long life perfor￾mance is a very important challenge. To achieve this, it is necessary to ensure that the
electron transport throughout the electrode is very continuous at high loads and that
the dissolution of polysulfides is more restricted. At this point, carbon nanowires
show unique structural advantages; they can build a 3D connected conductive net￾work and improve the electrode area-specific capacity [20]. Zhang et al. Flexible
thin film electrodes were prepared by mixing short-range MWCNTs (15 nm in diam￾eter, 10–50 μm in length)/S composite with long-range CNTs (50 nm in diameter,
1000–2000 μm in length) using vacuum filtration method, avoiding the use of binder
and conductive additives in traditional electrodes. It shows that the 3D conductive7.1 Lithium–Sulfur Battery 235
network constructed by the composite structure of short-range and long-range car￾bon nanotubes greatly promotes the rapid electron transport under high load. If the
ultralong hollow carbon fiber with physical limiting effect is applied to the construc￾tion of 3D high-load sulfur electrode, better cyclic stability can be obtained. Lou
et al. [15] synthesized an ultra-long nanofiber with multiple parallel hollow chan￾nels by electrospinning (Figure 7.2e). First, polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and polystyrene
(PS) spheres were mixed, and the PAN/PS were prepared into nanowires interwo￾ven organic films by electrospinning. Then, the PAN was annealed at high tem￾perature and pyrolyzed to form carbon fiber, while the PS spheres in the middle
were decomposed and escaped to form parallel 1D pores. Then the elemental sulfur
was injected into the pores by high-temperature melting method. Finally, the film
was immersed in the amine reduced graphene oxide (EFG) dispersion solution to
form the graphene coating layer. The sulfur–carbon composite film obtained by this
method has a sulfur content of 72.3%. Moreover, the loading capacity was gradually
increased to 7.2 and 10.8 mg cm−2, and the specific area capacity reached 7.2 and
10.7 mAh cm−2, respectively. The excellent high load performance shows that the
structure combines the domain-limiting effect of multichannel hollow nanofibers
and the braiding property, realizes the construction of 3D continuous conductive
framework, and well limits the dissolution and shuttle of polysulfide.
All the studies reviewed above pay more attention to the use of chemisorption or
physical structure. Liu et al. recently proposed a different strategy [16]. They found
that when the carbon fiber network was compounded with the high temperature
molten sulfur. Because this structure will generate continuous Li2S insulating
layer in the discharge process, subsequent Li+ is difficult to further diffuse into the
internal polysulfide, the capacity is greatly lost, and in the charging process, Li2S
insulating layer is difficult to have effective conductive contact with the carbon
fiber, so the formation of “dead sulfur,” cycle performance decline. However, if the
cathode electrolyte droplets formed by Li2S6 dissolved in ethylene glycol dimethyl
ether (DME)/1,3-dioxy-penyl ring (DOL) are placed in the carbon fiber network
and the discharge process is carried out, Li2S will gather at the intersection points of
several CNFs in the form of nano-flowers (Figure 7.2f). During the charging process,
solid Li2S can be effectively transferred into polysulfides and sulfur elementals. The
specific capacity of the structure is up to the theoretical specific capacity when tested
at the current density of 0.1 C, and the sulfur utilization rate is about 99%. This study
shows that the diffusion and deposition of sulfur discharge products in the reaction
process play an important role in the performance of lithium– sulfur batteries.
1D carbon nanostructures have unique advantages in the application of highly
loaded sulfur cathode. Their high conductivity can provide efficient electron trans￾port for insulating sulfur and lithium sulfide, and can greatly reduce the introduction
of conductive additives and significantly increase sulfur content. However, it could
not adsorb polysulfide well, which limits its further development. If the problem
of cycle life can be effectively solved by regulating the deposition form of lithium
sulfide, the commercial application of high-load carbon sulfur nanowire composite
electrode will be a big step forward. Therefore, further structural design and experi￾mental exploration are essential.236 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
7.1.2 Conductive Polymer Nanowire/Sulfur Composite Cathode
Materials
As mentioned in Section 7.1.1, organic materials have been widely studied as
sulfides due to their abundant polar bonds on the surface. These include dilute
hydrocarbons, thiols, nitriles, lipids, amines, thiophene, and other short- or long￾chain polymers. Short-chain organic matter is usually added to the sulfur-carbon
composite electrode sheet as additive, modifier, or binder to enhance the effect of
chemical sulfur fixation [21]. In addition to being used as additives, some long-chain
polymer materials are usually synthesized into nanoparticles, nanowires, nan￾otubes, and other structures as substrates for sulfur filling. However, because
most of the organic matter is an insulator, it cannot achieve smooth electron
transfer, so it is difficult to use as a sulfide substrate alone. Some conductive
polymers can be combined with sulfur elemental substance for physical sulfur
recombination and can also undergo chemical reactions to form sulfur-conductive
polymer copolymers. Liu et al. [22] synthesized S-PANI copolymer by reaction of
PANI nanotubes with elemental sulfur (Figure 7.3a). At 280 ∘C, PANI chain can
undergo dehydrogenation and hybridization reaction with elemental sulfur to form
800
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
600
400
200
Capacity (mAh g–1)
0 Polymer
In-situ
N
S S S S S
S S S
S
S S S
S
S S
S 1-y
S S
S
S
S
S S
S S y
N
H
S S
S
S S
S S
N N
N
N
H
H
N
H
H H
N H H
vulcanization Polymer + sulfur
Charge
Discharge
Polymer + Lithium sulfide 0 100 200
Cycle number (n)
± Li
± Li
CMK-3/S composite
CMK-3
Polysulfide dissolution
Conductive polymer wrapped
CMK-3/S composite Polysulfide containment
VGCF
Li+
e–
Sulfur
PEDOT:PSS Conductive network
Sulfur
Polysulfide Chemical deposition Coating
PEDOT
300 400 500
1C
100
80
60
40
20
0
Figure 7.3 (a) Schematic illustration of the construction and discharge/charge process of
the SPANI- NT/S composite. (b) Prolonged cycling performance of the electrode up to
500 cycles at 1 C rate; Source: Xiao et al. [22]/with permission of Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic
of PEDOT:PASS-coated CMK-3/sulfur composite for improving the cathode performance;
Source: Reproduced with permission Yang et al. [23]/with permission of American Chemical
Society. (d) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of CF/S/PEDOT composite; Source:
He et al. [24]/with permission of American Chemical Society. PEDOT:Poly, 3,4-ethylene
dioxythiophene; PEDOT-PASS:Poly, 3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene-Sodium Polystyrene
Sulfonate.7.1 Lithium–Sulfur Battery 237
heterocyclic polymers connected by disulfide bonds, restricting elemental sulfur
in polymer cavities and three-dimensional chain networks in both physical and
chemical ways. During the discharge process, on the one hand, the polysulfide
can form Li–N and Li–S bonds with N and S atoms, and on the other hand, the
3D polymer chain network slows down the loss of polysulfide, thus limiting the
dissolution of polysulfide well. The capacity retention rate is 76% after 500 cycles at
the current density of 1 C (Figure 7.3b), showing good cycling stability. However,
compared with inorganic carbon matrix, the conductive polymer matrix still cannot
compare with its higher conductivity. Another strategy is to combine the conductive
polymer with a 1D inorganic carbon material to form a sulfide fixer with both high
conductivity and chemical limitation. For example, Cui et al. at Stanford Univer￾sity [23] coated a layer of poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) -poly (sodium styrene
sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) on the surface of 1D mesoporous carbon/sulfur (CMK-3/S)
composite electrode. Compared with uncoated CMK-3/S, the composite exhibited
better cycle stability while maintaining good rate performance (Figure 7.3c)
Yang et al. [24] synthesized three layers of CNFS/S/PEDOT composite fiber cathode
material through multiple deposition (Figure 7.3d). The innermost CNFs provide a
1D continuous conductive path for the intermediate sulfur elements, while the out￾ermost PEDOT physically limits and chemically adsorbs the dissolution shuttle of
polysulfides. This multilayer fiber structure can also be used as a building block for
self-supporting sulfur film anode, providing support for highly loaded sulfur anode.
Although polymers are difficult to achieve fine nanostructure design, they have
good processability, flexibility, and stability, and subsequent studies mostly com￾pound them with conductive carbon. At the same time, a variety of copolymers were
formed by some high temperature sulfurization reactions with sulfur elementary
to achieve the construction of high-performance composite electrode. However, the
research on high loads still needs to be strengthened, and more research is needed
on how to build a better conductive network after increasing the load. If a composite
positive electrode with high load, long cycle, and high magnification performance
can be prepared, and the processing and synthesis of polymer and carbon materials
have the characteristics of low cost, simplicity, and low temperature, this kind of
composite electrode will have great potential on the road to commercialization.
7.1.3 Metal Compound Nanowires/Sulfur Composite Cathode Materials
With the application of carbon materials and conducting polymers in sulfur-fixing
substrates, the mass-specific capacity, rate performance and cycle stability of
lithium–sulfur batteries have been improved. The sulfur content of the positive
electrode is mostly between 40 and 65 wt% in this studies. At the current density of
0.1 C, the average level of the first discharge specific capacity reaches 900 mAh g−1,
and the capacity retention rate reaches more than 75% after 100 cycles. The number
of cycles can reach about 200 times and the capacity retention rate is about 80% at
1 C. The volume energy density is about 800 Wh l−1, the energy density is similar to
that of LiMO2-graphene (M is a transition metal) system [3]. To further improve the
energy density, more efficient sulfur-fixing substrates need to be developed, with
mass specific capacity approaching 1500 mAh g−1 and sulfur content increasing to
75%, while maintaining good cycling stability.238 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
In 2013, metal oxide TiO2 was developed into sulfur-fixing substrates, and a
series of TiO2 substrates with different structure and phases were reported, leading
to a series of research upsurge in metal compound/sulfur composite cathode
materials. This is because metallic compounds tend to form stronger absorption
with polysulfide. α-TiO2 and β-TiO2 in TiO2 can show better cycle stability. Later,
it was found that titanium oxide with lower price could show stronger absorption
abilities. This is mainly due to the fact that low-titanium ions are more likely to
bond with a polysulfide ion in a polysulfide. The developed low-price titanium
oxide matrix mainly includes TinO2n−1 (Ti4O7), and TiO, Ti6O13. At the same time,
these oxide substrates are usually compounded with carbon to ensure the elec￾trical conductivity of the entire electrode. Li et al. [25] designed a “grape cluster”
shaped TiO/C porous nanofibers as sulfur-fixing substrates by electrospinning
(Figure 7.4a–e). They first coated SiO2 nanospheres with a diameter of about
100 nm with a TiO2 layer of about 10 nm (SiO2@TiO2) and then SiO2@TiO2 was
SiO2
TiO2
SiO2@TiO2
SiO2@TiO2@PAN
(a) (b)
(d)
(c)
(e)
0.0
500 nm
100 nm 100 nm 100 nm
1 μm
1 μm 0.6 1.2
S
C
O
Ti
Position (μm)
Counts
1.8 2.4
(f)
(g)
(h)
(j) (i)
1,600
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
1,200
800
400
0
100
80
60
Coulombic efficiency (%)
40
20
0 0 30
S loading: 5 mg cm–2
MnO2@HCF/S
Discharge
Charge
GC-TiO@CHF/S
GC-CHF/S
60
S
O
O
O S S4
2–
Mn2+
δ-MnO2
S
O
O
O S
Cycle number 90 120 150
GC-TiO2@CHF GC-TiO@CHF GC-TiO@CHF/S
coating Electro- Annealing Annealing in
spinning & etching N2:H2 (95:5) S loading
Figure 7.4 Grape clusters of porous TiO/C nanofibers are used as sulfur-fixing substrates.
(a) Schematic of the grape-cluster-inspired design. (b) SEM images of sulfur host materials.
(c) SEM images of GC-TiO@CHF/S. (d) TEM images of GC-TiO@CHF/S. (e) EDX elemental
mappings. (f) Prolonged cycle performance of GC-TiO@CHF/S at 0.2 C; Source: Li et al.
[25] / Reproduced with permission of Cell Press. (g) MnO2@KCF SEM image of the synthesis
process; (h) Schematic of morphology evolution during discharge; Source: Li et al. [26]/with
permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (i) The schematic illustrates the surface-level
oxidation of polysulfide initially formed by δ-MnO2, leading to the formation of thiosulfate,
and the simultaneous reduction of Mn4+ to Mn2+; Source: Reproduced with permission
Liang et al. [27]/with permission of Nature Publishing Group. (j) The oxides with different
voltages form different media with the positive electrode of sulfur; Source: Reproduced
with permission Liang et al. [28]/with permission of Wiley-VCH. CG: Grape clusters; PAN:
Polypropylene cyanide; CHF: Hollow carbon fiber.7.1 Lithium–Sulfur Battery 239
dispersed in PAN solution for electrospinning to obtain composite fibers assembled
by the nanospheres. After carbonization and etching, the nanofibers assembled
by carbon-coated TiO2 hollow spheres were obtained. Finally, the “grape” string
GC-TiO@CHF matrix was obtained by calcination in reducing atmosphere. The
matrix of the nanowires is mainly composed of carbon coated TiO hollow spheres.
After filling with elemental sulfur, each hollow nanowire unit can play a physical
limiting effect. At the same time, the inner layer of TiO has a strong absorb ability
to polysulfide, and the outer layer of carbon can provide good electron conduction.
The load of TiO/C positive electrode is 5 mg cm−2 and the sulfur content is 73 wt%.
Compared with the porous carbon fiber without TiO, this structure shows excellent
cycling stability (Figure 7.4f). At a high specific capacity of 810 mAh g−1 and the
cycle retention rate was 79% after 400 cycles at 2 C. At the same time, the area specific
capacity of the electrode is more than 3 mAh cm−2 below the rate of 0.5 C, which is
very close to the level of the positive electrode of commercial lithium battery.
In addition to titanium oxide, other oxide sulfide substrates have also been
developed in large numbers, such as Co3O4, NiO, Fe2O3, Cu2O, CuO, MnO2,
and VO2. Among them, MnO2 is one of the popular sulfur-fixing substrates, which
shows good sulfur fix ability. For example, Li et al. synthesized a hollow MnO2
nanosheet filled carbon fiber sulfur-fixing substrate (MnO2@KCF) through a few
design, which was melted into sulfur elemental substance at high temperature
to form composite sulfur cathode material (Figure 7.4g,h) [26]. The organic
combination of MnO2 and hollow carbon nanofibers provides support for rate
performance of sulfur elemental substance. Moreover, the appearance of MnO2
initiates a new type of polysulfide interfacial reaction, So that different potential
oxides can be selected as sulfur fixers with certain regularity. This mechanism
was mainly proposed by Liang et al. [27]. They synthesized a water–sodium–
manganese mineral-type layered δ-MnO2 sulfur with a certain amount of oxygen
defects at the edges. At the same time, there are water molecules or alkali potassium
ions between the layers. The cathode material with sulfur composite showed very
good cyclic stability. Non-in-situ XPS studies have shown that the Mn4+ and Mn3+
on the surface of δ-MnO2 undergo a redox reaction with polysulfides during the
discharge process to form a thiosulfate medium (Figure 7.4i). Sulfate thiosulfate
reacts with polysulfide with high sulfur content (Li2Sx, 4≤x ≤8) are further redox
to form polysulfide with low sulfur content (Li2Sx, 1≤x ≤2). This reaction actually
promotes the gradual transformation of polysulfide, which improves the conversion
of polysulfide, enhances the rate performance and specific capacity, and reduces
the probability of polysulfide being dissolved and improves the cycling stability.
In order to further know the mechanism of δ-MnO2 generation of thiosulfate, Nazar
et al. studied the change of the valence state of various oxide matrix during sulfur
discharge and the change of the valence state of sulfur using non-in-situ XPS. They
found that the formation of thiosulfate was related to the reduction potential of
the oxide itself (Figure 7.4j) [28]. In the voltage range of 2.4–3.05 V (vs Li+/Li), the
oxide matrix undergoes redox reaction. at the same time, the polysulfide is oxidized
to thiosulfate as the medium. The typical materials are MnO2, VO2, and CuO.240 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
If the reduction potential of the oxide matrix is lower than 2.4 V, the formation of
thiosulfate is difficult, The polysulfide is adsorbed by the polar bonds on the surface
of the oxide matrix. The previously mentioned TiO2, Ti4O7, Co3O4, NiO, Fe2O3, and
so on are this kind of oxide sulfur-fixers. However, when the reduction voltage is
greater than 3.05 V, the polysulfide will be further oxidized to sulfate, sulfate ions
are difficult to further react with the polysulfide, but will cover the surface of the
oxide matrix, hindering the adsorption of polysulfide, which is not conducive to the
improvement of cyclic stability. High voltage materials such as V2O5 and NiOOH
are typical.
The mechanism mentioned above can also be regarded as a catalytic effect, which
promotes the conversion of lithium polysulfide through the mediating action of thio￾sulfate. Some sulfur fixers also exhibit similar catalytic effects, such as CoS2, Co3S4,
MoS2, WS2, and TiS2 [29]. However, the average potential of these sulfide substrates
is below 2.0 V, which makes it difficult to react with polysulfide to form thiosul￾fate. It is found that they can directly catalyze the transformation of multisulfide
lithium without the formation of the medium, and promote the reaction kinetics, so
can reduce the dissolution probability of polysulfide; At the same time, it can also
prevent the dissolution of polysulfides by strong polar adsorption of metal sulfur
bonds on the surface or edge. For example, Pu et al. at Tsinghua University synthe￾sized hollow Co3S4 nanotube matrix and applied it to the cathode of lithium-sulfur
batteries (Figure 7.5a,b) [31]. They used DFT to calculate the chemical binding ener￾gies between the (111) crystal planes of Co3S4 and Li2S4, Li2S6 and Li2S8, which
were 2.26, 1.61, and 1.68 eV, respectively (Figure 7.5c). This indicates that there is
strong adsorption between Co3S4 and lithium polysulfide. To further investigate the
catalytic effect of Co3S4, they assembled a symmetric cell with a Co3S4 composite
electrode containing Li2S6 and then tested the cyclic voltage curves (Figure 7.5d,e).
It was found that the Co3S4 symmetrical battery containing Li2S6 had a strong cur￾rent response, indicating the presence of charge transfer, but the acetylene black
symmetrical battery containing Li2S6 and the Co3S4 symmetrical battery without
Li2S6 had almost no current response, indicating that Co3S4 promoted the oxidation
reduction of Li2S6 and accelerated its reaction kinetics.
In addition, researchers also found that some sulfide can be used as a catalyst,
which can relieve the accumulation of bulk Li2S and the difficulty of oxidation [32].
In addition to sulfide, some traditional metal electrocatalysis have also been studied
as sulfide fixers, such as Pt, Co, and Ni. These metallic materials also exhibit similar
catalytic effects [30]. This strategy of introducing catalysts into electrode materials
to speed up the reaction is interesting and effective, and it may be further applied to
other transformational battery reaction systems. However, more research is needed
on how to further fabricate 1D nanostructures through synthesis techniques to
achieve high load performance.
With the gradual application of metal oxide and sulfide matrix to lithium–sulfur
cathode materials, research on improving the cycle life, load capacity, and specific
capacity of lithium–sulfur battery cathodes has reached a golden age. All kinds of
metal compound matrix have been developed successively. In 2016, Professor Good￾enough, the father of lithium electricity, reported the work of TiN hollow nanotube7.1 Lithium–Sulfur Battery 241
Co3S4@S
20
10
0
–10
–20
–0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0.0
Polarization (V)
Li2S6 symmetric cell
AB with Li2S6
AB without Li2S6
Co3S4 with Li2S6
Co3S4 without Li2S6
0.2 0.4 0.6
Current (mA)
Li2S4–Co3S4 (111)
Eb = 2.26 eV
Battery case
Battery case
Current collector
Current collector
AB or Co3S4
AB or Co3S4
Separator
Li2S6–Co3S4 (111)
Eb = 1.61 eV
Li2S8–Co3S4 (111)
Eb = 1.68 eV
(a)
(c)
(d) (e)
(b)
20 nm
S
Co
Li
S
Co
z
x
e–
Figure 7.5 (a) Schematic illustration of Co3S4@S nanotubes. (b) TEM and energy spectrum
analysis of Co3S4@S nanotubes. (c) Typical binding geometries and energies of three
polysulfide molecules (Li2S4, Li2S6, Li2S8) on Co3S4 (111) surface. (d) Schematic illustration
of a symmetric cell. (e) CV curves of the Li2S6 and AB symmetrical cells. Eb: binding energy.
Source: Al Salem et al. [30]/with permission of with permission of Elsevier.
arrays as sulfur-fixing substrate, which initiated the upsurge in the application of
materials such as nitride and even carbide to the positive electrode of lithium sul￾fur batteries [33]. After that, Vn, Co4N, WN, and other substrates were also studied
successively. Compared with sulfide and oxides, the main advantages of nitride and
carbide lie in their high electronic conductivity, which can reduce the use of con￾ductive carbon, promote the diffusion and transfer of polysulfide on the substrate,
and also have a certain chemisorption effect. Sun et al. [34] prepared a porous VN
nanowire and graphene composite gel matrix (Figure 7.6a). Then a certain amount
of Li2S6 cathode electrolyte was dropped into the gel to form a composite electrode
for testing (Figure 7.6b). The loading capacity was 3 mg cm−2. At the current density
of 0.2 C, its initial specific mass capacity is as high as 1471 mAh g−1 (Figure 7.6c).
At a high rate of 2 C, the first specific discharge capacity is 1128 mAh g−1, and the
capacity retention rate is 81% after 200 cycles. The excellent electrochemical per￾formance of the electrode is not only due to the high conductivity and adsorption
caused by VN but may also be related to the deposition behavior of cathode elec￾trolyte. Nitride and carbide in the cathode materials of lithium–sulfur batteries may
also act as catalysts, but the relevant reports have not yet appeared. At the same242 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
500 nm
500 nm
(a)
(d)
(b) (c)
20
0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
100
80
60
40
20
0
14
10 20 30 40 50 60
0
500
1000
1500
2000
40
Cycle number
Cycle number
Coulombic efficiency
Discharge capacity
7.2 mg cm–2
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Areal capacity (mAh cm–2)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
(e)
0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
100
80
60
40
20
0
16
14
10 20 30 40 50 60
Cycle number
Coulombic efficiency
Discharge capacity
9.6 mg cm–2
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Areal capacity (mAh cm–2)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Capacity (mAh g–1 sulfur)
VN/G
RGO
60 80
100
80
60
40
20
100
VN/G electrode
L2
S6
 catholyte
Separator
Lithium foil
Electrolyte
Figure 7.6 (a) TEM images of the as-prepared porous VN/G composite; (b) Schematic of the
assembly of button batteries; (c) Cycling performance of the VN/G and RGO cathodes at
0.2 C; Source: Sun et al. [34]/with permission of Nature Publishing Group. (d, e) Cycling
performance of the 3DNG/TiN cathode with 7.2 and 9.6 mg cm−2 sulfur loadings at 0.5 C.
Source: Li et al. [35]/with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
time, this kind of nitride and graphene composite three-dimensional framework
has a lot of pores, which is conducive to the realization of high load performance.
Li et al. designed TiN/N-doped graphene-based composite sulfates, which could
achieve high area-specific capacity of 9.94 and 12.0 mAh cm−2 at high loads of 7.2
and 9.6 mg cm−2, respectively (Figure 7.6d,e) [35].
From the development of various sulfur cathode materials, we can see that before
2014, the main line of research was to first solve the problem of conductivity and
then concentrate a lot of research on the topic of limiting the dissolution of poly￾sulfide shuttle. Although this has made great progress, the real commercialization
of lithium–sulfur batteries is still not mature. Some of these key issues remain
unresolved. Composites, for example, are complicated and expensive to synthesize
and are not conducive to mass production. In addition, the electrode studied in
the laboratory has a low sulfur content, which reduces the overall energy density
of the electrode. Therefore, the overall energy density will not significantly exceed
that of the lithium-ion battery when it is assembled into a commercial battery.
Therefore, the main direction of future research is to develop simple and effective
composite materials with high sulfur injection volume, high capacity, and long life
performance.
In this regard, nanowire material is a very potential sulfur cathode compos￾ite element. For example, the preparation of carbon fiber interwoven films for
high-load sulfur positive electrode reduces the use of adhesive and is suitable for
mass production. The 3D continuous conductive frame provides a very effective
conductive contact for elemental sulfur and lithium sulfide under high loads,7.2 Sodium–Sulfur Battery and Magnesium–Sulfur Battery 243
improving power density. At the same time, this structure is conducive to the
diffusion of polysulfide and deposition of lithium sulfide, improving the sulfur
utilization rate and making the specific capacity close to the theoretical capacity, so
as to improve the energy density. If we want to achieve a long cycle life, we must
carry out fine structure design and surface modification of nanowire monomers,
or introduce some metal compound units with chemical adsorption or catalytic
effect, to ensure the rapid transformation and slow dissolution of polysulfide. It
is expected that nanowires can solve more problems and play a greater role in the
future research and application of lithium–sulfur batteries.
7.2 Sodium–Sulfur Battery and Magnesium–Sulfur
Battery
7.2.1 Sodium–Sulfur Battery
Compared to lithium metal, sodium metal resources are widely available and
cost-effective, which has led to increased attention toward sodium batteries in
recent years. Compared with lead-acid batteries at that time, it has higher energy
density, and can discharge at high power, and the coulomb efficiency is close
to 100%. All of this is due to the fact that sodium–sulfur batteries were a high
temperature battery in the early days of their development. As shown in Figure 7.7,
the high-temperature sodium–sulfur battery employs molten metal sodium as the
negative electrode and molten sulfur as the positive electrode. These two compo￾nents are separated by an all-solid electrolyte, sodium β-Al2O3 (NaAl11O17) [36].
At 300–350 ∘C, sodium β-Al2O3 can realize the rapid conduction of sodium ions,
and at the same time, sodium ions, and sulfur elemental quickly sodium reaction,
to form liquid sodium polysulfide. The reaction equation is: xS+2Na → Na2Sx
(x = 3–5). Because sodium and sulfur are in the molten state in this state, the reac￾tion kinetics is faster, and there are not too many side reactions, and there will not be
sodium polysulfide solution problem. Therefore, high temperature sodium–sulfur
batteries have high Coulomb efficiency and cycle life. However, it has not been
applied on a large scale, mainly due to the following reasons: (i) High working tem￾perature limits its application range, and the use of heat source also makes its cost
higher; (ii) The strong activity of metal sodium is easy to lead to fire, and the safety
is low. However, early studies on high-temperature sodium sulfur batteries mainly
focused on improving the ionic conductivity of solid electrolyte NaAl11O17 thin film
and improving the battery configuration to improve safety. To enhance the energy
density, expand the application range, and ensure the safety of sodium–sulfur
batteries, reducing their operating temperature has become a primary concern.
At room temperature, the solid electrolyte NaAl11O17 cannot conduct sodium ions,
so the first problem to be solved is to develop an electrolyte (compatible with sulfur)
that can reversibly dissolve the deposited Na+. At the same time, the reaction kinetics
between sulfur elemental and metal sodium ions are slow, which leads to incomplete
reaction of sodium polysulfide and low capacity. The Yuguo Guo team synthesized244 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
Beta
alumina
tube
Beta alumina
Sulfur electrode
Sulfur
container
Protection
layer Charge
Discharge
Na Na + +
Discharge
Molten
Na
V
– +
Figure 7.7 Schematic of the high-temperature Na/S battery. Source: Dunn et al. [36]/with
permission of American Association for the Advancement of Science.
two to four sulfur atom connections in small molecules for sodium sulfur batteries,
greatly promoting the positive reaction between sodium ion and sulfur dynamics,
enabling the S reaction to form the final product Na2S, and getting an energy den￾sity of 955 Wh kg−1 [37]. First, carbon nanotubes coated with microporous carbon
(MPC) were immersed in the molten sulfur element. At this time, S8 molecules
would break into small molecular chains S2−4 and diffuse into the micropores
(∼0.5 nm). When the temperature was reduced to room temperature, the S2−4 dif￾fused into the micropores was restricted and did not revert to S8 molecules. To prove
this, the authors calculated the molecular sizes of S2−4, Na2S2, and Na2S, all of which
are only allowed to exist as monomolecules in micropores. This S/(CNT@MPC) is
used as the positive electrode of the sodium–sulfur battery (Figure 7.8a). Its initial
discharge capacity is as high as 1610 mAh g−1, and the average voltage is about
1.4 V, indicating that S2−4 is almost completely converted to Na2S. After the first
charge, the first Coulomb efficiency was 71.3%, and after 20 cycles, the capacity
remained at more than 1000 mAh g−1. Further analysis of the reaction mechanism
(Figure 7.8b,c) revealed that the first platform at 1.55 V was mainly generated by
the reaction of Na2S2, while the second platform at 1.2 V was derived from the for￾mation of Na2S. The application of small-molecule sulfur to the cathode of sodium
sulfur battery can achieve higher specific capacity and fast reaction kinetics, but
the voltage lag is a problem that needs to be further solved. The theoretical reaction
potential of room-temperature sodium–sulfur batteries is between 2.2 and 1.6 V,
while the reaction potential of small molecules of sulfur and sodium ions is rela￾tively low, and the platform is inclined. In addition, the deposition and oxidation of
sodium sulfide also need to be further optimized to improve the coulomb efficiency.
Yu et al. used the liquid intermediate Na2S6 cathode electrolyte to drop into
MWCNT film as the cathode material [38]. This method can provide uniformly7.2 Sodium–Sulfur Battery and Magnesium–Sulfur Battery 245
Battery case
C
Uptake of Na+
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1
X in Na1S
Voltage vs Na+ (V)
2
Na2S2 Na2S
Further uptake
of Na+
S
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1st
2nd
3rd
5th
10th
15th
20th
500 1000
Specific capacity (mA h g–1)
Voltage vs. Na*/Na (V)
Plateau I
Plateau II
1500 – +
(a)
(c)
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1
Plateau I
X in Na1S
Voltage vs Na+/ Na (V)
2 0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1
Plateau II
X in Na1S
Voltage vs Na+/ Na (V)
2
(b)
AI Foil
S/(CNT@MPC)
Separator
Na Foil
Electrolyte
Figure 7.8 (a) Schematic illustration of the RT Na—S battery with the S/(CNT@MPC)
cathode; (b) GDC voltage profiles of the S/(CNT@MPC) cathode at 0.1 C; (c) Study on the
structure change and mechanism of S/(CNT@MPC) cathode during the first discharge.
Source: Xin et al. [37]/with permission of Wiley-VCH.
dispersed active sulfur in the conductive carbon network (Figure 7.9a,b), and is
conducive to the diffusion and deposition of Na2S in the conductive matrix, thus
improving the first Coulomb efficiency. Its initial capacity is around 930 mAh g−1 in
the voltage range of 1.2–2.8 V, representing a typical 2.2 and 1.6 V voltage platforms
(Figure 7.9c). However, due to the solubility of sodium polysulfide, its cycling
performance is poor. The capacity decays to about 400 mAh g−1 after 20 cycles
(Figure 7.9d). The configuration of the battery can be further optimized. In terms of
the anode, activated carbon was introduced into the MWCNT film to make contacts
with conductive network Na2S6 better, while at the same time using the Nafion
membrane of sodium (tetrafluoroethylene perfluoroalkyl vinyl ether copolymer)
as a diaphragm to limit sodium polysulfide solution problem (Figure 7.9e) [39].
The main reason is that organic Nafion membrane has certain chemisorption effect
on sodium polysulfide, which slows down its dissolution shuttle.
They further optimized the battery’s configuration. On the positive electrode,
activated carbon was introduced into the MWCNT film to make the contact between246 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
Discharge Load Separator
Na2S6/MWCNT
Na2S6
300
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
400 500
Wavelength (nm)
Absorption
Na2S6 in TEGDME
Na2S6/MWCNT
Sulfur-carbon composite
600 700 800
(a) (b)
0
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
200 400
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Load/Charge
0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
20 40 60
Cycle number
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Sodiated nafion
Nafion 3rd cycle
Nafion 10th cycle
Nafion 50th cycle
Celgard 3rd cycle
Celgard 10th cycle
Celgard 50th cycle
Sodiated nafion
 /CNF interlayer
Celgard
Δ Celgard /CNF interlayer
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Voltage (V)
80 100
0 200 400 600 800 1000
– +
Voltage (V)
1st
2nd
5th
600 800 1000
(c)
(e) (f)
0
200
0
400
600
800
1000
10 20
Cycle number
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
30
(d)
Na
Na+
Na+
Sodiated
nafion
CNF/AC-Na2S6
Na anode
Na+
Na+
Na2Sn Na2Sn
– +
Charge
Figure 7.9 (a) Na2S6 dissolved in tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether as the catholyte
application and the structure of sodium–sulfur battery; (b) the Raman spectrum of the
catholyte; Na2S6/MWCNT charge–discharge curve; (c) and cycle life; (d) in the voltage range
of 1.2–2.8 V; Source: Yu and Manthiram [38]/with permission of American Chemical Society.
(e) Schematic diagram of room temperature sodium–sulfur battery with CNF/AC-Na2S6 as
the positive electrode and Nafion membrane as the separator; (f) Charging curve and cycle
performance at 0.5 C; Source: Yu and Manthiram [39]/with permission of Wiley-VCH.
MWCNT: multi-walled carbon nanotube; CNF: carbon nanofiber; AC: activated carbon.
conductive network with Na2S6 better. At the same time, the sodiumized Nafion
membrane was used as a separator to limit the dissolution of sodium polysulfide
(Figure 7.9f) [39]. This is mainly because the organic Nafion membrane has a
certain chemical adsorption effect on sodium polysulfide, which slows down its
dissolution and shuttle.
Currently, room temperature sodium–sulfur batteries are still in the nascent stage
of research and development. Although usable electrolyte and electrode materials
have been developed, it will take a long time to achieve high energy density and low
cost. How to better solve the problem of slow dynamics and dissolution of sodium7.2 Sodium–Sulfur Battery and Magnesium–Sulfur Battery 247
polysulfide is a topic that researchers should pay attention to. For instance, similar
to lithium–sulfur batteries, certain matrix materials with catalytic properties can be
incorporated into the cathode material of sodium–sulfur batteries to enhance their
kinetics and simultaneously adsorb sodium polysulfides; or small organic molecules
are added to the composite electrode to chemically connect the sodium polysulfide
molecules to prevent its dissolution. It is crucial to address the challenges of high
load and commercial-scale production for practical applicability. Meantime, sodium
metal is more active than lithium metal, and the guarantee of safety is also a major
problem for sodium–sulfur battery. It can be seen that the commercial production
is still difficult.
7.2.2 Magnesium–Sulfur Battery
Compared with the high activity of lithium and sodium metal negative electrodes,
magnesium metal negative electrodes show good stability. Incorporating mag￾nesium as the negative electrode in the metal chalcogenide battery system can
significantly enhance the safety of the battery. In addition, compared to lithium
and sodium metals, magnesium metal has a higher capacity energy density
(3833 mAh cm−3), no obvious dendritic behavior, and rich surface content. These
advantages make magnesium–sulfur batteries a promising high-energy-density bat￾tery system with potential applications in various fields. However, the development
of magnesium–sulfur batteries is relatively late, and there are still many unsolved or
even unknown problems. Among them, the slow reaction dynamics of magnesium
ions and sulfur elements will lead to extreme battery polarization; furthermore, non￾nucleophilic magnesium electrolyte compatible with element sulfur is also urgently
needed to develop. In 2011, Professor John Muldoon of Toyota North America
Research Institute developed an electrolyte system with bis(hexamethyldisilazide)
magnesium, magnesium chloride, and aluminum chloride salt (HMDSMgCl-AlCl3)
as the main components for the first time, which achieve the rechargeable normal￾temperature magnesium–sulfur battery. And it has a first discharge capacity of
1200 mAh g−1 and a stable voltage plateau of 0.89 V [40]. Nevertheless, the primary
challenge lies in the low Coulombic efficiency, substantial polarization, and high
cost, which hinder the practical implementation of magnesium–sulfur batteries in
commercial settings. Therefore, to develop no nucleophilic magnesium electrolytic
solution with high coulombic efficiency, high ionic conductivity and low cost is one
of the important problems in the development of magnesium–sulfur battery.
In addition, magnesium–sulfur batteries also suffer from the problem of easily
dissolving magnesium polysulfide in organic electrolyte. The nanofilm made of
nanowire materials can play a great role in fixing sulfur. Yu et al. [41] covered a
layer of carbon fiber interwoven film on the surface of ordinary glass fiber film
to prevent the dissolution and loss of magnesium polysulfide (Figure 7.10a–c).
It was discovered that the battery coated with carbon fiber exhibited higher
charge and discharge capacities, achieving a discharge capacity of approximately
1200 mAh g−1 at a current density of C/50 (1 C=1675 mA g−1). The discharge
capacity decreases with the increase of rate (Figure 7.10d,e). In addition, after248 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
(a)
(d)
(b) (c)
5 μm
500 nm
Mg
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
3.0
Voltage (V)
2.0
1.0
0.0
0 50 100
Time (h)
Uncoated
separator
Coated
separator
150 200 250
(e) 3.0
2.0
2.5
1.5
Voltage (V)
1.0
0.5
0
Capacity (mAh g–1)
C/50
C/20
C/10
500 1000 1500
0 50 100 150 200 250
(f)
1200
1000
800
600
400
Discharge capacity (mAh g–1)
200
0
0 5 10
Cycle number
Uncoated, C/50
Coated, C/50
Coated, C/20
Coated, C/10
Coated, C/50
Coated, C/20
Coated, C/10
Uncoated, C/50
15 20
(g)
100
60
80
40
Discharge/charge efficiency (%)
20
0
0
Cycle number
5 10 15 20
1400
S
Glass fiber
CNF coating
separator
Figure 7.10 (a) Schematic diagram of magnesium–sulfur battery assembled with carbon
fiber membrane covered with glass fiber membrane; (b) Schematic diagram of carbon fiber
covered with glass fiber membrane; (c) SEM image of carbon fiber; (d) constant current
charge and discharge test curve; (e) Charge and discharge curves at different rates; (f) Cycle
performance graph; (g) Coulomb efficiency graph; Source: Yu and Manthiram [41]/with
permission of the American Chemical Society.
20 cycles, the magnesium–sulfur battery coated with carbon fiber can still output
about 800 mAh g−1, which is much better than the magnesium–sulfur battery with￾out carbon fiber coating (Figure 7.10f). At the same time, it shows good coulombic
efficiency (Figure 7.10g). The outcomes suggest that the carbon fiber coating
effectively mitigates the dissolution of magnesium polysulfide and decreases the
polarization of the battery to a certain degree. But the existing performance is still
far from commercialization.
We can find that the Coulombic efficiency of the currently studied magnesium￾sulfur battery cannot reach 90%, which can be cycled 20 times under the condition7.3 Lithium–Selenium Battery 249
of excessive magnesium in the negative electrode, but in commercial batteries, such
a large irreversible reaction will cause rapid consumption of magnesium. The capac￾ity decays further rapidly. Therefore, the rapid development of magnesium–sulfur
battery has to rely on a lot of research and optimized design.
7.3 Lithium–Selenium Battery
Presently, conventional lithium-ion batteries are constrained by the theoretical
capacity of their positive and negative materials, hence the pursuit of new energy
storage devices/systems has become a prominent research focus [5, 42–47]. In the
previous chapters, we have introduced lithium–sulfur battery as promising new
generation of high-performance energy storage devices with significant potential.
Researchers have widely used carbon/sulfur composite, titanium dioxide-coated
sulfur, electrolyte modification, and separator modification to improve Li–S batteries
electrochemical performance. The development and research of a new type of sec￾ondary battery system with high conductivity electrode materials and higher energy
density is of irreplaceable value for solving people’s increasing energy demand.
Selenium (Se), an element of the same main group as sulfur, has gradually entered
people’s vision in recent years and is expected to become a strong competitor of
Li–S battery. According to Table 7.1, although selenium has a lower theoretical
mass specific capacity relative to sulfur (selenium: 675 mAh g−1), it has a relatively
high tap density (4.81 g cm−3), which means it have a volumetric capacity as high
as 3265 mAh cm−3, a higher volumetric capacity will be of great significance in the
future to solve space-constrained power battery. Based on the above-mentioned
excellent physical properties of selenium, to a certain extent, it has a better
development prospect and potential than sulfur as a high-energy battery in the
future, and has made major breakthroughs in the research in recent years, gradually
showing better performance and application prospects.
Table 7.1 Comparison of physical and chemical properties of sulfur and selenium.
Index Li-S Li–Se
Cell voltage (V) 2.2 2.0
Specific capacity of cathode (mA h g−1) 1675 675
Capacity density of cathode (mAh cm−3) 3467 3265
Theoretical specific energy (W h Kg−1) 2567 1155
Theoretical capacity energy density (Wh cm−3) 5314 5544
Price($ kg−1) 0.124 77
Density (g cm−3) 2.07 4.81
Conductivity (S cm−1) >10−30 >10−5
Source: Yang et al. [61]/American Chemical Society.250 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
7.3.1 Reaction Mechanism of Lithium–Selenium Battery
Abouimrane et al. group conducted the first study on the electrochemical reac￾tion mechanism of Li–Se batteries in carbonate electrolytes. The molecular
structure and charge–discharge curves of the final product of Li–Se battery
charge and discharge are shown in Figure 7.11a–c [48]. The lithiation process
of the first circle of Li–Se batteries follows different patterns. This is mainly
due to the electrochemical properties of chain-shaped Sen molecules, which
can interact with the electrolyte. The carbonyl group in it forms Se-C and Se-O
bonds and finally reacts completely with lithium ions to form Li2Se, thereby
providing a higher capacity. Figure 7.11d shows typical CV curves of Li–Se bat￾teries in carbonate electrolyte. From the first discharge curve, it can be seen
that there is an obvious discharge platform near 2 V, which indicates that a
single-phase transformation reaction has occurred in the cathode material, namely
Se+2Li+ +2e− ↔ Li2Se. During the charging process, Li2Se is involved in the
oxidation reaction to form more Selenide (Li2Sen [n≥4],) is finally oxidized
Se
(a)
(b)
(e) (f)
Se
Se Charge
Discharge
Li2Se
Li2Sen(n≥4)
Li2Sen(n≥4)
x in LixSe
Cycling time (min)
XANES number
Voltage (V) vs. Li/Li+
Se
0.0
1
1020
850
680
510
340
170
0
Time (min)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
1020
850
680
510
340
170
0
1683
1403
1122
842
561
281
0
4321
60 –0.005 –0.278
–0.188
–0.098
–0.008
0.082
0.172
0.262
0.328
0.265
0.535
0.805
1.075
1.345
1.610
50
40
30
20
10
0
12640 12650 12660
X-ray energy (eV) Voltage (V)
12670 12680
(g)Cycling time (mins) 1020
850
680
510
340
170
0
12652 12656 12660
X-ray energy (eV)
12664 12668
2
3
4
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Li Li2Se2 2Se
Li2Se
Li2Sen
(c) (d)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Potential (V) vs. Li
0 0.5
2.5
3.0
2.0
1.5
1.0
3.5
4.0
0.004
0.002
I (A cm 0.000 –2) –0.002
200 600 400
1st cycle
2nd cycle
3rd cycle
1st cycle
2nd cycle
3rd cycle
10th cycle
800
E (V)
1234
Li/Se-C
Li2Se
Figure 7.11 (a) Schematic diagram of the molecular structure of Li–Se battery charge and
discharge products; (b) Representation of cathode phase evolution during charge and
discharge of a Li/Se cell in an ether-based electrolyte; (c) Li–Se battery in the first, second,
third, and tenth charge and discharge curve; Source: Abouimrane et al. [48]/with permission
of American Chemical Society. (d) Li–Se battery first three cycles voltammetry curve.
(e) XANES pattern of Li–Se battery cycle. (f) voltage curve during cycle. (g) The derivative of
the standardized XANES spectrum of the battery cycling process; Source: Cui et al. [49]/with
permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.7.3 Lithium–Selenium Battery 251
into selenium. The atomic skeleton structure of the charge and discharge
products of the Li–Se battery is shown in Figure 7.11a. The elemental selenium
is transformed from the initial triangular selenium crystals to the inverse flu￾orite structure Li2Se during the discharge process. This reaction mechanism
was further confirmed by in situ X-ray diffraction and in situ X-ray absorption
spectroscopy [50].
At the same time, Cui et al. studied Li–Se batteries in ether electrolytes [49].
Analogous to the electrochemical reaction of Li–S batteries, the electrochemical
reaction corresponding to 2.02 V is that Se combines with lithium ions and is
reduced to polylithium selenide Li2Sen (n≥4). 1.83 V corresponds to Li2Sen as the
discharge deepens, and finally was reduced to Li2Se2 and Li2Se. In order to further
verify the above analysis results, the author performed the X-ray absorption near
edge structure (XANES) 2D contour map characterization of the circulating Li–Se
battery (Figure 7.11e), And get the corresponding voltage curve (Figure 7.11f) and
the first derivative diagram (Figure 7.11g) at the same time. The results found that
the Se diffraction peak intensity gradually weakened during the discharge process,
while the Li2Se peak gradually became stronger.
Li et al. observed the structural changes of selenium in the electrochemical
process in real time (Figure 7.12) [51]. According to the in situ TEM image and
the corresponding electron diffraction pattern, we can clearly observe that as
the lithium intercalation continues, the characteristic diffraction peaks of single
crystal selenium gradually disappear, and the corresponding Li2Se diffraction
peaks begin to appear and gradually increase, indicating that Li. In the electro￾chemical reaction of the Se battery, elemental selenium reacts with lithium ions
to gradually transform into Li2Se, and this result is also consistent with the above￾mentioned electrochemical reaction mechanism. In summary, it can be seen
that elemental selenium exhibits two electrochemical reaction mechanisms in
carbonate- and ether-based electrolytes. This may be because the intermediate
phase product lithium selenide is insoluble in carbonate-based electrolytes, and
soluble in ether electrolyte.
7.3.2 Selenium-Based Cathode Materials
It is evident that these materials still face the problem of Li2Sen dissolution in ether
electrolytes, leading to the formation of a shuttle effect in the battery. Materials have
similar life and efficiency issues; therefore, the use of low-cost carbonate-based
electrolytes based on the physics and electrochemical reaction characteristics of
selenium and the structural design and preparation of selenium cathode materials
have become hot spots in Li–Se battery research. In response to the above problems,
Yang et al. used ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) as the matrix and prepared
Se/CMK- by filling nano-selenium particles in the mesopores of CMK-3 through
high-speed ball milling and melt diffusion. The composite material shows a higher
discharge capacity and excellent cycle stability (Figure 7.13) [52]. At the same time,
it is proven that the Se/CMK-3 composite material has no polyselenide produced
during the electrochemical reaction. The initial amorphous Se8 molecular ring252 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
e– Li+
Au
Se Li2Se
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.12 (a) Schematic illustration of sodiation and lithiation of selenium nanotubes.
Three different phases appeared in sodiation due to the alloying reaction. In lithiation,
selenium transforms into polycrystalline Li2Se phase. (b) Evolution of morphology and
microstructure of a selenium nanotube in the lithiation process. Source: Li et al. [51]/with
permission of American Chemical Society.
is transformed into Sen molecular chain, and finally it is directly transformed
into Li2Se, followed by lithium insertion-delithiation. The occurrence of this
electrochemical reaction mechanism is mainly due to the fact that the nano-sized
Se in the Se/CMK-3 composite material is confined in the mesopores of CMK-3, the
large-sized Se is suppressed, and the chain-like Sen is relatively small compared with
the carbon matrix. This unique mesoporous composite structure exhibits excellent
rate and cycle performance. It is cycled 500 times at a current density of 1 C, and the
capacity is still 45% of the theoretical capacity. In view of the unique advantages of
nanowire 1D structures in electrochemistry, researchers also hope to solve a series
of problems with Li–Se batteries by constructing nanowire structures or introducing
other nanowire structures. Zhang et al. reported that using selenium nanowires
as the matrix is shown in Figure 7.14a–d [53]. The electrochemical performance7.3 Lithium–Selenium Battery 253
3500
CMK-3
(a)
(b)
Se Li
Discharge
discharge
1st
Electrode preparation
with SA binder
Charge
impregnation
Se
0.1 C
1 C
2 C
5 C
1 C
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 50 100 150 200 250
Cycle number
Capacity density (mA h cm–3) Se
300 350 400 450 500
Figure 7.13 (a) proposed lithiation/delithiation processes of Se/CMK-3. (b) Reversible
capability density of Se/CMK-3 at 0.1, 1, 2, and 5 C, and long cycling performance at 1 C.
Source: Yang et al. [52]/with permission of Wiley-VCH.
test G@Se/PANI shows good cycle stability and excellent rate performance. The
outstanding electrochemical performance of the material can be mainly attributed
to the presence of highly conductive graphene, a unique polyaniline shell, and
one-dimensional selenium nanowires.
Zeng et al. used electrospinning and subsequent heat treatment to prepare bend￾able, self-supporting selenium/porous carbon nanofiber composites (Se/PCNFs
refer to selenium embedded within 3D interconnected mesoporous carbon
nanofibers) [54]. The results of electrochemical lithium storage show that the Se/
PCNFs composite electrode undergoes 900 charge–discharge cycles at 0.5 Ag−1,
and the specific capacity value is almost not lost, remaining at 516 mAh g−1.
Han et al. reported on a 3D self-supporting composite film made of graphene,
selenium, and carbon nanotubes (G-Se@CNT) [55]. Compared with the
graphene–selenium composite material, the ternary G-Se@CNT composite800
600
400
200
800
200 nm 200 nm 200 nm 200 nm
600
400
200
0 50 100 150 200 0 20 40 60 80 100
100 100
80
60
40
20
0
80
60
40
20
0
Cycle number Cycle number
Se nanowires
Solid: discharge
Open: charge
Solid: discharge
Open: charge
Se/PANI
G@Se/PANI
Se nanowires
0.2 C
0.3 C0.4 C 0.5 C 0.6 C0.1 C0.2 C
0.2 C
Se/PANI
G@Se/PANI
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Capacity (mAh g–1)
Coulombic efficienty (%)
Coulombic efficienty (%)
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0 0 200 400 600
1st
2nd
3rd
800
Capacity (mA h g–1)
Potential (V vs. Li+/Li)
(a) (b) (c)
(d) C
(e) (f) (g)
N Se
Figure 7.14 (a) Schematic illustration for the formation of G@Se/PANI. (b) High magnification TEM image. (c) HRTEM image of G@Se/PANI.
(d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of G@Se/PANI electrode. (f) cycle performance at a current density of 0.2 C between 1.0 and 3.0 V and (g) rate
capability at various current densities between 1.0 and 3.0 V. Source: Zhang et al. [53]/with permission of Elsevier.7.3 Lithium–Selenium Battery 255
film electrode maintains a capacity of 315 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles of 0.1 C
(1 C=678 mA g−1). At the same time, Han et al. also prepared selenium￾mesoporous carbon nanoparticles-graphene (Se/MCN-RGO) [56]. The composite
material has the ability to accommodate up to 62% selenium, resulting in a remark￾able reversible specific capacity value of 655 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C (1 C = 678 mA g−1).
Even after undergoing 1300 cycles at 1 C, it experiences a mere 0.008% capacity
decay rate per cycle. This high capacity utilization rate is mainly attributed to this
unique 3D layered structure, in which the layered graphene structure increases the
conductivity of the composite material and facilitates the diffusion of lithium ions.
The mesoporous structure of mesoporous carbon nanoparticles limit the shuttle
effect of polyselenide.
Balakumar et al. used the hard template method to prepare porous carbon-coated
MWCNTs to form a TTC structure, which was used as a carrier to support selenium
and applied to Li–Se batteries (Figure 7.15) [57]. This 1D tube nanostructure has a
large number of voids and free volumes, with a pore volume as high as 2.167 cc g−1
(a) (b) (c)
(e) (f) (g)
(d)
(h)
(i) (j) C Se (k) (l) C + Se
600
(m) (n)
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0 100 200 300
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
400 500 600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0 100
C/5
C/5
C/5
C/2
1 C
1 C
1 C Rate 2 C Rate
C/5 rate C/2 rate
2 C Rate discharge
2 C Rate charge
C/5 1C 2 C Rate coulombic efficiency
C/5
200
(c)
(a)
300 400
Cycle number
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
Potential (V vs. Li+/Li)
500 600 700 800
100 Coulombic efficiency (in %)
80
60
40
700th 400th 800th300th 200th 100th 10th 2nd
20
0
500 nm 100 nm 200 nm
50 nm 20 nm
20 nm
200 nm 100 nm
Figure 7.15 HRTEM images of (a–d) TTC at different magnification, (e–h) TTC/Se-50 at
different magnification (inset of (c) and (g): SAED pattern of TTC and TTC/Se-50
respectively) and (i) STEM image, (j–k) individual and (l) cumulative elemental mapping of
TTC/Se-50 composite. (m) consolidated cycling performance with Coulombic efficiency of
TTC/Se-50 cathode under the influence of C/5, C/2, 1 C and 2 C rate. (n) profile of TTC/Se-50
cathode under the influence of C/5 rate. Source: Balakumar and Kalaiselvi [57]/with
permission of Elsevier.256 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
and an ultra-high specific surface area of 1131 m2 g−1. This unique structure is not
only conducive to buffer electrode materials. The volume expands and shrinks in the
process of deintercalating lithium, and it can load a large amount of active material,
selenium, so that the mass ratio of selenium in the composite material can reach 70%.
Secondly, the core MWCNT framework provides a gentle electron transfer path. In
addition, the TTC 1D nanostructure has a short lithium ion diffusion path. Even
when charging and discharging at ultra-high current density, it also ensures the
long-term cycle stability of the electrode material and has a close 100% excellent
Coulomb effect. Through electrochemical tests, the electrode material with a mass
ratio of 50% selenium still has a high capacity close to 400 mAh g−1 at a current den￾sity of 0.2 C after 800 cycles.
7.3.3 Existing Problems and Possible Solutions
Since the current research on Li–Se batteries is still in its early stages, some spec￾ulations and inferences are still based on Li–S batteries. Therefore, there may be
several shortcomings and problems in the development of Li–Se batteries. However,
addressing these issues is crucial for the advancement of Li–Se batteries. Finding
solutions to these problems will undoubtedly facilitate the development of Li–Se
batteries.
(1) The production of polyselenide will bring about a shuttle effect, which greatly
affects the cycle life of Li–Se batteries. How to suppress polyselenide has
become a current research hotspot and difficulty. The traditional, effective
method is to load Se on carbon materials to inhibit the dissolution of polyse￾lenide. Lee et al. changed the concentration of lithium bis(trifluoromethane￾sulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) (1, 3, 5, 7 mol l−1) to study the electrochemical lithium
storage performance of micro mesoporous carbide-derived carbon/sulfur
composite (selenium/carbide-derived carbon, Se-CDC) [58]. The research
results show that the Se-CDC composite electrode has the highest capacity
retention rate after 150 cycles at a LiTFSI concentration of 5 mol l−1. This is
mainly due to the effectiveness of carbon-based materials under appropriate
lithium salt conditions. Inhibit the dissolution of polyselenide. According to
Zhang et al., adding a layer of carbon paper to a typical lithium battery separator
can restrain the movement of polyselenide to the negative electrode [59]. Fang
et al. developed graphene-coated polymer separators and integrated them into
Li–Se batteries. Their research revealed that the composite separator is capable
of effectively curbing the diffusion of polyselenide, leading to a substantial
improvement in the electrochemical stability of the battery [60]. It can be
seen that through carbon coating, electrolyte modification, and membrane
modification, the shuttle effect of soluble polyselenide can be effectively
suppressed. Even so, there is currently no perfect strategy that can effectively
and completely solve the shuttle effect caused by polyselenide.
(2) The high cost of selenium is a significant constraint on the wide-scale appli￾cation of Li–Se batteries. It is essential to reduce their cost while retaining7.4 Summary and Outlook 257
Table 7.2 Selenium and sulfur cost and energy
density comparison table.
Material Price($ kg−1)
Theoretical
mass energy
(Wh kg−1)
S0.3Se0.7 53.9372 1578.6
S0.5Se0.5 38.562 1861
S0.7Se0.3 23.1868 2143.4
their excellent electrochemical performance. According to the current
development of Li–Se batteries, researchers have summarized the following
two effective improvement methods: (i) Changing the selenium cathode into a
sulfur–selenium mixture cathode can effectively reduce the cost of the entire
Li–Se battery and increase the battery (Table 7.2); (ii) Compared the ether
electrolyte used in Li–S batteries, low-cost carbonate electrolytes can be used in
Li–Se batteries.
Li–Se batteries have gained significant attention as a research hotspot due to
their remarkable advantages, particularly their high volumetric specific capacity.
Currently, research on Li–Se batteries is predominantly focused on enhancing and
innovating the concept of sulfur-based cathode materials in Li–S batteries, as well
as developing and modifying cathode materials based on selenium. Among them,
selenium nanowires and their composite materials have a unique one-dimensional
microstructure compared with other selenium cathodes, and they also exhibit
excellent electronic and ion conductivity. They are designed to achieve a new
type of energy storage with high capacity. The device provides a very promising
development direction.
7.4 Summary and Outlook
Here, we present a summary of recent research progress on cathode mate￾rials for lithium–sulfur batteries, room temperature sodium–sulfur battery,
magnesium–sulfur battery, and lithium–selenium battery. This chapter introduces
1D carbon nanostructures, conductive polymers as well as all kinds of metal
compounds in solid application in the lithium–sulfur battery. The introduction of
these materials increases the material conductivity, at the same time also limits
the volume expansion of electrodes. The application of nanowire materials in
room temperature sodium–sulfur battery and magnesium–sulfur battery are still
in the nascent stage of research and development. It is also necessary to develop
composite materials with catalytic properties to solve the problem of slow dynamics
and dissolution of polysulfides. As for the lithium–sulfur battery, due to the different
characteristics between selenium and sulfur, we also focused on introducing the258 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
different reaction mechanism, problems faced in large-scale applications, and
solutions. It is worth mentioning that, from a longer-term perspective, due to the
shortage of lithium resources and increasing prices, sodium–selenium (Na–Se)
batteries and magnesium–selenium (Mg–Se) batteries are also expected to become
future research directions.
References
1 Evers, S. and Nazar, L.F. (2013). New approaches for high energy density
lithium-sulfur battery cathodes. Accounts of Chemical Research 46 (5):
1135–1143.
2 Han, S.C., Song, M.S., Lee, H. et al. (2003). Effect of multiwalled carbon
nanotubes on electrochemical properties of lithium/sulfur rechargeable batteries.
Journal of the American Chemical Society 150 (7): A889.
3 Yang, Y., Zheng, G., and Cui, Y. (2013). Nanostructured sulfur cathodes.
Chemical Society Reviews 42 (7): 3018–3032.
4 Manthiram, A., Fu, Y., Chung, S.H. et al. (2014). Rechargeable lithium-sulfur
batteries. Chemical Reviews 114 (23): 11751–11787.
5 Bruce, P.G., Freunberger, S.A., Hardwick, L.J. et al. (2012). Li-O2 and Li-S
batteries with high energy storage. Nature Materials 11 (1): 19–29.
6 Li, W., Zheng, G., Yang, Y. et al. (2013). High-performance hollow sulfur
nanostructured battery cathode through a scalable, room temperature, one-step,
bottom-up approach. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (18):
7148–7153.
7 Zhou, G. (2017). Graphene-pure sulfur sandwich structure for ultrafast, long-life
lithium-sulfur batteries. In: Design, Fabrication and Electrochemical Performance
of Nanostructured Carbon Based Materials for High-Energy Lithium-Sulfur
Batteries, 75–94. Singapore: Springer.
8 Zhou, G., Paek, E., Hwang, G.S. et al. (2015). Long-life Li/polysulphide batteries
with high sulphur loading enabled by lightweight three-dimensional nitrogen/
sulphur-codoped graphene sponge. Nature Communications 6 (1): 1–11.
9 Rosenman, A., Elazari, R., Salitra, G. et al. (2014). Li-S cathodes with extended
cycle life by sulfur encapsulation in disordered micro-porous carbon powders.
Journal of Electrochemical Science and Technology 161 (5): A657.
10 Ji, L., Rao, M., Aloni, S. et al. (2011). Porous carbon nanofiber-sulfur
composite electrodes for lithium/sulfur cells. Energy & Environmental Science
4 (12): 5053–5059.
11 Ji, X. and Lee, K.T. (2009). A highly ordered nanostructured carbon-Sulphur
cathode for lithium-Sulphur batteries. Nature Materials 8 (6): 500–506.
12 Zheng, G., Yang, Y., Cha, J.J. et al. (2011). Hollow carbon
nanofiber-encapsulated sulfur cathodes for high specific capacity rechargeable
lithium batteries. Nano Letters 11 (10): 4462–4467.References 259
13 Zheng, G., Zhang, Q., Cha, J.J. et al. (2013). Amphiphilic surface modification
of hollow carbon nanofibers for improved cycle life of lithium sulfur batteries.
Nano Letters 13 (3): 1265–1270.
14 Zhao, Y., Wu, W., Li, J. et al. (2014). Encapsulating MWNTs into hollow porous
carbon nanotubes: a tube-in-tube carbon nanostructure for high-performance
lithium-sulfur batteries. Advanced Materials 26 (30): 5113–5118.
15 Li, Z., Zhang, J.T., Chen, Y.M. et al. (2015). Pie-like electrode design for
high-energy density lithium–sulfur batteries. Nature Communications 6 (1):
1–8.
16 Pan, H., Chen, J., Cao, R. et al. (2017). Non-encapsulation approach for
high-performance Li-S batteries through controlled nucleation and growth.
Nature Energy 2 (10): 813–820.
17 Moon, S., Jung, Y.H., Jung, W.K. et al. (2013). Encapsulated monoclinic sulfur
for stable cycling of Li-S rechargeable batteries. Advanced Materials 25 (45):
6547–6553.
18 Guo, J. and Xu, Y. (2011). Sulfur-impregnated disordered carbon nanotubes
cathode for lithium-sulfur batteries. Nano Letters 11 (10): 4288–4294.
19 Fang, R., Zhao, S., Hou, P. et al. (2016). 3D interconnected electrode materials
with ultrahigh areal sulfur loading for Li-S batteries. Advanced Materials 28 (17):
3374–3382.
20 Yuan, Z., Peng, H.J., Huang et al. (2014). Hierarchical free-standing carbon￾nanotube paper electrodes with ultrahigh sulfur-loading for lithium-sulfur
batteries. Advanced Functional Materials 24 (39): 6105–6112.
21 Liu, J., Wang, M., Xu, N. et al. (2018). Progress and perspective of
organosulfur polymers as cathode materials for advanced lithium-sulfur
batteries. Energy Storage Materials 15: 53–64.
22 Xiao, L., Cao, Y., Xiao, J. et al. (2012). A soft approach to encapsulate sulfur:
polyaniline nanotubes for lithium-sulfur batteries with long cycle life. Advanced
Materials 24 (9): 1176–1181.
23 Yang, Y., Yu, G., Cha, J.J. et al. (2011). Improving the performance of
lithium–sulfur batteries by conductive polymer coating. ACS Nano 5 (11):
9187–9193.
24 He, F., Ye, J., Cao, Y. et al. (2017). Coaxial three-layered carbon/Sulfur/polymer
nanofibers with high Sulfur content and high utilization for lithium-Sulfur
batteries. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9 (13): 11626–11633.
25 Li, Z., Guan, B.Y., Zhang, J. et al. (2017). A compact nanoconfined sulfur
cathode for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries. Joule 1 (3): 576–587.
26 Li, Z., Zhang, J., and Lou, X.W. (2015). Hollow carbon nanofibers filled
with MnO2 nanosheets as efficient sulfur hosts for lithium-sulfur batteries.
Angewandte 127 (44): 13078–13082.
27 Liang, X., Hart, C., Pang, Q. et al. (2015). A highly efficient polysulfide mediator
for lithium-sulfur batteries. Nature Communications 6 (1): 1–8.260 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
28 Liang, X., Kwok, C.Y., Lodi-Marzano, F. et al. (2016). Tuning transition metal
oxide-sulfur interactions for long life lithium sulfur batteries: the “goldilocks”
principle. Advanced Energy Materials 6 (6): 1501636.
29 Liu, D., Zhang, C., Zhou, G. et al. (2018). Catalytic effects in lithium-sulfur
batteries: promoted sulfur transformation and reduced shuttle effect.
Advancement of Science 5 (1): 1700270.
30 Al Salem, H., Babu, G., Rao, C. et al. (2015). Electrocatalytic polysulfide traps
for controlling redox shuttle process of Li-S batteries. Journal of the American
Chemical Society 137 (36): 11542–11545.
31 Pu, J., Shen, Z., Zheng, J. et al. (2017). Multifunctional Co3S4@ sulfur nanotubes
for enhanced lithium-sulfur battery performance. Nano Energy 37: 7–14.
32 Zhou, G., Tian, H., Jin, Y. et al. (2017). Catalytic oxidation of Li2S on the
surface of metal sulfides for Li-S batteries. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 114 (5): 840–845.
33 Cui, Z., Zu, C., Zhou, W. et al. (2016). Mesoporous titanium nitride-enabled
highly stable lithium-sulfur batteries. Advanced Materials 28 (32): 6926–6931.
34 Sun, Z., Zhang, J., Yin, L. et al. (2017). Conductive Porous Vanadium Nitride/
Graphene Composite as Chemical Anchor of Polysulfides for Lithium-Sulfur
Batteries, 14627. Commun: Nat.
35 Li, Z., He, Q., Xu, X. et al. (2018). A 3D nitrogen-doped graphene/TiN
nanowires composite as a strong polysulfide anchor for lithium-Sulfur
batteries with enhanced rate performance and high areal capacity. Advanced
Materials 30 (45): 1804089.
36 Dunn, B., Kamath, H., and Tarascon, J.M. (2011). Electrical energy storage for
the grid: a battery of choices. Science 334 (6058): 928–935.
37 Xin, S., Yin, Y.X., Guo, Y.G. et al. (2014). A high-energy room-temperature
sodium-sulfur battery. Advanced Materials 26 (8): 1261–1265.
38 Yu, X. and Manthiram, A. (2014). Room-temperature sodium-sulfur
batteries with liquid-phase sodium polysulfide catholytes and binder-free
multiwall carbon nanotube fabric electrodes. Journal of Physical Chemistry C
118 (40): 22952–22959.
39 Yu, X. and Manthiram, A. (2015). Ambient-temperature sodium-Sulfur batter￾ies with a Sodiated Nafion membrane and a carbon nanofiber-activated carbon
composite electrode. Advanced Energy Materials 5 (12): 1500350.
40 Kim, H.S., Arthur, T.S., Allred, G.D. et al. (2011). Structure and compatibility of
a magnesium electrolyte with a Sulphur cathode. Nature Communications 2 (1):
1–6.
41 Yu, X. and Manthiram, A. (2016). Performance enhancement and mechanistic
studies of magnesium-sulfur cells with an advanced cathode structure. ACS
Energy Letters 1 (2): 431–437.
42 Armand, M. and Tarascon, J.M. (2008). Building better batteries. Nature
451 (7179): 652–657.
43 Sun, Y.K., Myung, S.T., Park, B.C. et al. (2009). High-energy cathode material for
long-life and safe lithium batteries. Nature Materials 8 (4): 320–324.References 261
44 Poizot, P.L.S.G., Laruelle, S., Grugeon, S. et al. (2000). Nano-sized
transition-metal oxides as negative-electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.
Nature 407 (6803): 496–499.
45 Goodenough, J.B. and Kim, Y. (2010). Challenges for rechargeable Li batteries.
Chemistry of Materials 22 (3): 587–603.
46 Ji, X., Nazar, L.F., Hardwick, L.J. et al. (2010). Advances in Li-S batteries.
Journal of Materials Chemistry A 20 (44): 9821–9826.
47 Barghamadi, M., Kapoor, A., Wen, C. et al. (2013). A review on Li-S batteries as
a high efficiency rechargeable lithium battery. Journal of Electrochemical Science
and Technology 160 (8): A1256.
48 Abouimrane, A., Dambournet, D., Chapman, K.W. et al. (2012). A new
class of lithium and sodium rechargeable batteries based on selenium and
selenium–sulfur as a positive electrode. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 134 (10): 4505–4508.
49 Cui, Y., Abouimrane, A., Sun, C.J. et al. (2014). Li–Se battery: absence of lithium
polyselenides in carbonate based electrolyte. ChemComm 50 (42): 5576–5579.
50 Cui, Y., Abouimrane, A., Lu, J. et al. (2013). (De) Lithiation mechanism of
Li/SeSx (x = 0–7) batteries determined by in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction
and X-ray absorption spectroscopy. Journal of the American Chemical Society
135 (21): 8047–8056.
51 Li, Q., Liu, H., Yao, Z. et al. (2016). Electrochemistry of selenium with sodium
and lithium: kinetics and reaction mechanism. ACS Nano 10 (9): 8788–8795.
52 Yang, C.P., Xin, S., Yin, Y.X. et al. (2013). An advanced selenium–carbon
cathode for rechargeable lithium–selenium batteries. Angewandte Chemie,
International Edition 52 (32): 8363–8367.
53 Zhang, J., Xu, Y., Fan, L. et al. (2015). Graphene–encapsulated selenium/
polyaniline core–shell nanowires with enhanced electrochemical performance
for Li–Se batteries. Nano Energy 13: 592–600.
54 Zeng, L., Zeng, W., Jiang, Y. et al. (2015). A flexible porous carbon nanofibers￾selenium cathode with superior electrochemical performance for both Li-Se and
Na-Se batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 5 (4): 1401377.
55 Han, K., Liu, Z., Ye, H. et al. (2014). Flexible self-standing graphene–Se@ CNT
composite film as a binder-free cathode for rechargeable Li–Se batteries. Journal
of Power Sources 263: 85–89.
56 Han, K., Liu, Z., Shen, J. et al. (2015). A free-standing and ultralong-life
lithium-selenium battery cathode enabled by 3D mesoporous carbon/graphene
hierarchical architecture. Advanced Functional Materials 25 (3): 455–463.
57 Balakumar, K. and Kalaiselvi, N. (2017). Selenium containing tube-in-tube
carbon: a one dimensional carbon frame work for selenium cathode in Li-Se
battery. Carbon 112: 79–90.
58 Lee, J.T., Kim, H., Oschatz, M. et al. (2015). Micro-and mesoporous carbide￾derived carbon–selenium cathodes for high-performance lithium selenium
batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 5 (1): 1400981.262 7 Application of Nanowire Materials in Metal-Chalcogenide Battery
59 Zhang, Z., Zhang, Z., Zhang, K. et al. (2014). Improvement of electrochemical
performance of rechargeable lithium–selenium batteries by inserting a free￾standing carbon interlayer. RSC Advances 4 (30): 15489–15492.
60 Fang, R., Zhou, G., Pei, S. et al. (2015). Localized polyselenides in a graphene￾coated polymer separator for high rate and ultralong life lithium–selenium
batteries. ChemComm 51 (17): 3667–3670.
61 Yang, C.P., Yin, Y.X., and Guo, Y.G. (2015). Elemental selenium for electrochem￾ical energy storage. Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 6 (2): 256–266.263
8
Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
Among the electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices, secondary supercapaci￾tors and batteries are two crucial units that are deft at releasing the stored electric
energy with long discharge time and high-power output, respectively. In the previous
chapters of 5th, 6th, and 7th, the one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials developed for
various alkali metal ion-based batteries and high-energy batteries are discussed sys￾tematically. This unique structure provides a new idea for development of secondary
batteries with high power density. Similarly, the supercapacitor, first developed in
1957 [1], is another extensively used EES. The nanowire structure possesses huge
potential to promote the inferior energy density and maintain its native high cycle
life and fast charge–discharge capability.
Supercapacitors include pseudocapacitors, electric double-layer capacitors
(EDLC), and so on, all of which are interface or near-interface reaction between
electrode material and electrolyte. Although there are some differences in energy
storage mechanism between EDLC and pseudocapacitances, the interface state of
electrode material is closely related to the specific capacitance. When increasing
the specific surface area (SSA) of the material, there is a higher requirement for
the “ability” of the ions to diffuse from bulk phase to the energy storage electrolyte
interface. The transfer of electrons from the external circuit to the reaction interface
is also different between the two energy storage systems. The transformation of
the bulk phase structure leads to changes in the electrical conductivity of the
secondary battery materials, and more charge transfer also requires better electron
transport capacity of the electrode materials, which is also applicable to the
pseudocapacitors based on oxide semiconductors. Therefore, high power density
is derived from rapid surface reaction, ion transport, and electron conduction of
supercapacitor.
The surface state, ion diffusion, and electronic conductivity of supercapacitor
electrode materials are critical to their performance, and massive research is
also carried out around these three points. In 2005, Wang Xianyou et al. used
the anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template method to electrodeposit MnO2
nanowire arrays and applied them to supercapacitors, showing the possibility of
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.264 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
application of nanowire materials in EES devices [2]. On the whole, nanowire
materials assembled in electrochemical capacitors and secondary batteries are not
strictly distinguished. Compared with bulk materials, they have unique physical
and chemical properties: larger SSA can provide more adsorption sites, and linear
structure benefits a variety of structural design possibilities. The one-dimensional
cross-linked network is conducive to ion diffusion, which is still suitable in the
supercapacitor. The difference is that, due to the characteristics of surface energy
storage, there is few ion diffusion in the bulk phase.
In the EDLC and pseudocapacitors, there are some differences in designing
one-dimensional materials for practical applications. When EDLC charges, along
with the transfer of electrolyte ions, voltage between cathodes and anodes is gen￾erated. When the supercapacitor discharges, electrons travel through an appliance
from anode to cathode, generating a current, and the positive and negative ions are
released from electrodes and enter the electrolyte. 1D nanocarbon materials such as
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon nanofibers (CNFs), have unique advantages
in structural design. Obviously, the pore structure is the research core of electrode
materials for EDLC. 1D nanowire electrode materials are easy to construct porous
nanowire structure due to their large aspect ratio, which accelerates the diffusion
of ions in pore structure and increases the diversity of pore structure design in
carbon-based electrode material. In addition, the cross-linked network in nanowire
structure can realize the continuity of the macroporous structure and further
promote the slow transport process of electrolyte ions between the interface and
electrolyte during the charge and discharge.
Pseudocapacitive supercapacitors are energy storage devices with electrochemical
performance between EDLC and lithium-ion batteries. Whether they are underpo￾tential deposition, redox faradaic reaction, or intercalation reaction mechanism,
rapid electrochemical reaction steps require electrode materials to have correspond￾ing electron conductivity and ion diffusion ability (especially in porous electrode
materials). Similar to the 1D EDLC electrode material, the abundant pore structure
and cross-linked network facilitate the diffusion of ions. Pseudocapacitor electrode
materials based on transition metal oxides have semiconductor properties and are
often not conducive to electrons. Therefore, composite material has become a better
choice for application in pseudocapacitive supercapacitors. The one-dimensional
nanowire materials with pseudocapacitance can be in closer contact with the
conductive materials to further enhance their electrical conductivity. At the same
time, their unique 1D structure can alleviate the expansion of electrode material in
the charging/discharging processes, and effectively enhance the cycling stability of
supercapacitors.
This chapter will focus on 1D nanomaterials applied to three typical capacitors,
including EDLCs, pseudocapacitive supercapacitors, and hybrid supercapacitors.
The relationship between 1D structure and performance of capacitors is explored,
which could provide theoretical guidance for the development of nanowire-based
supercapacitors.8.1 Nanowire Electrode Material for Electrochemical Double-Layer Capacitor 265
8.1 Nanowire Electrode Material for Electrochemical
Double-Layer Capacitor
EDLCs play an irreplaceable role in energy storage owing to their unique merits,
such as high power density, short charging time, and long service life. The EDLCs
operate on ion adsorption/desorption at the electrode/electrolyte interface, which
is highly reversible owing to their physical charge storage mechanisms. Basically,
when an external voltage is applied between the EDLC electrodes, the electronic
charge that accumulates at electrode surface is balanced through the adsorption of
cations and anions from the electrolyte, and the electrolyte concentration remains
roughly constant.
Nanowires, CNTs, and CNFs as 1D porous carbon materials possess anisotropy
and large aspect ratio, benefiting rapid axial electron transmission and radial ion
diffusion in energy storage [3]. As a member of the carbon family, 1D porous
carbon materials have enriched the pore structure design of carbon-based elec￾trode materials, receiving extensive attention. In addition, the 1D porous carbon
materials are characterized by excellent thermochemical stability, and can avoid
the agglomeration problem of nanomaterials. The 1D carbon materials rely on
electrode/electrolyte interfaces to charge storage rather than interior parts of
electrode materials, the effective SSA of electrolyte infiltration that forming the
electrochemical double layer determines the capacitance. The SSA and pore
structure are two principal parameters that make a difference to the performance of
carbon materials. Engineering the pore volume, microstructure, crystallinity, and
surface functionality of one-dimensional porous carbon materials hold the key to
boosting their capacitive performance [4].
Generally, the larger the specific surface on the carbon material, the more charge
is stored at the interface. However, improving the SSA does not generate a linear
increase in capacitance because not all pores can be infiltrated by electrolyte ions
[5]. In addition, pores with different sizes also contribute quite different capacitance.
According to the formula C = 𝜀A/d, where C is capacitance created by this charge
separation at the interface between electrode and electrolyte, ε is dielectric constant
of electrolyte, d (m) is average approaching distance of ions to the electrode surface,
and A (m2) is the accessible SSA of electrode. Pores with similar size to ion diam￾eter can contribute the most capacitance, which decreases in the slightly largerer
pores and macropores 0.7 and 0.8 nm are the best-suited pore diameters in regular
aqueous and organic electrolytes, respectively [6]. Therefore, microporous carbon
materials are important in developing EDLSs with high specific capacitance. The
Gogotsi group found a relationship between the pore size of the carbon material and
the ion size of the electrolyte in the organic electrolyte, and believed that the mate￾rial’s specific capacitance can be maximized when the pores of the material and the
electrolyte ions are similar in size, which also applies to aqueous electrolytes. The
demonstration of charge storage in pores with smaller size than that of ion in elec￾trolyte will improve our understandings of ionic transport in porous media. These266 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
findings should also permit the design of application-specific supercapacitors: for
longer discharge times where energy density is at a premium, such as in hybrid
electric vehicles, extremely narrow pores should prove optimal, but for pulse power
applications, increasing the pore size might be beneficial. Further tuning the carbon
porosity and designing the carbon materials with a large volume of narrow but short
pores may allow both energy and power characteristics to be improved.
8.1.1 The Application of Carbon Nanotubes in EDLCs
CNTs are large cylindrical carbon materials consisting of a hexagonal arrangement
of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms, which are formed by rolling up a single sheet of
graphene (single-walled carbon nanotubes, SWCNTs) or by rolling up multiple
sheets of graphene (multiwalled carbon nanotubes, MWCNTs) (Figure 8.1) [7].
To date, the commonly used synthesis techniques for CNTs are arc discharge,
laser ablation, and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) [8]. The SSA of CNTs ranges
from 100 to 1000 m−2 g−1. CNTs can exhibit narrow pore diameter range, but the
internal pores are unlikely to contribute to EDL capacitance due to the ion diffusion
limitation inside the carbon walls and because of the absence of the inner electric
field in regular operating conditions. However, the outer surface of CNTs is convex,
exhibiting a strong affinity with electrolyte ions. Generally, convex surfaces with
higher curvature can significantly increase the specific capacitance [9]. CNTs
possess brilliant electrical conductivity and can maintain the dominant position
even under extreme climatic conditions, which makes them suitable candidates for
high-power devices.
When applied as electrode materials in EDLCs, the research point of CNTs
is generally not on the structural design of a single-carbon nanotube, but on the
integrated design of multiple carbon nanotubes. Hata et al. synthesized high-density
stacked SWCNTs by employing the zipper effect of the liquid [10]. When assembled
in EDLCs, the power density reached 43 kW kg−1. Pan et al. successfully synthesized
a MWCNT film through electrophoretic deposition technology with a power density
of 0.02 kW g−1 [11]. In view of their excellent conductivity, CNT-based EDLCs
demonstrate an ultrahigh frequency response. CNTs are generally employed as
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 8.1 Schematic diagram of different types of CNTs: (a) SWCNTs; (b) MWCNTs; (c) CNT
bundles. Source: Adapted from Baughman et al. [7].8.1 Nanowire Electrode Material for Electrochemical Double-Layer Capacitor 267
model materials to study the formation of electrochemical double layers inside
and outside the tubes in simulation experiments. Although CNT-based electrode
materials exhibit multiple merits, the expensive synthesis process limits their
application. Therefore, developing facile CNT synthesis technology is an extremely
important research direction.
8.1.2 The Application of Carbon Nanofibers in EDLCs
CNFs are 1D carbon nanomaterials composed of stable continuous carbon
molecules with high strength and high modulus. Commonly used CNFs prepara￾tion techniques include template method, sol–gel method, electrostatic spinning
method, and CVD method [12]. Although the conductivity of CNFs is inferior to
that of CNTs, CNFs possess abundant defect reactive sites, flexible designability, and
cost-effective production, which are more prospective for EDLCs. The 1D structure
of CNFs guarantees efficient mass transfer, and the abundant defective active sites
on the surface provide a sufficient electrode/electrolyte contact interface. Carbon
precursors tend to form 3D spherical structures with lower surface energy rather
than 1D structures during spontaneous polymerization. Therefore, 1D phenolic
resin-based porous carbon materials are mainly synthesized by template method
including soft template and hard template and electrospinning method.
Lu’s research group has made achievements in 1D phenolic resin-based carbon
fibers [13]. They fabricated the uniform polymer nanofibers (PNFs) via a controlled
hydrothermal approach by using resorcinol and hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA)
as carbon precursors and Pluronic F127 as morphology-directing agents. The
morphology of the end product is closely related to the adding amount of F127.
By controlling the amount of F127 from 0.0159 to 0.0636 mmol, the morphology
of the phenolic resin was transformed from nanospheres to nanofibers (Figure 8.2)
[14]. Subsequently, they obtained mesoporous phenolic resin-based CNFs with a
radius of 20 nm and micrometers long by introducing SiO2 in CNFs. After steam
activation, activated CNFs with a SSA of 1218 m−2 g−1 was obtained. CNFs-I-A/NF
displayed a capacitance of 276 F g−1 under 0.5 A g−1, and retained a capacitance of
206 F g−1 under 5 A g−1, indicating a good capacitance retention capability of such
an electrode [15].
Apart from template method, electrospinning technology is another common
mean for preparing 1D resin-based porous carbon materials [13]. Bai et al.
immersed resole-type phenolic resin and polyvinyl butyral (PVB) in ethanol or
ethanol/N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) to prepare microporous carbon ultra￾fine fibers with different diameters by electrospinning [16]. Average diameter of
as-spun fibers changed from 1.1 to 0.33 μm with increasing dimethylformamide
content in the spinning solution, caused by more fiber divisions. Li et al. prepared
mesoporous CNFs by a sol–gel/electrospinning process using phenolic resin
precursor as carbon source and triblock copolymer Pluronic F127 as template.
And the mesopore volumes depended on the amount of tetraethyl orthosilicate
(TEOS) in the spinnable sols [17]. Mai et al. proposed a low-cost, one-step synthesis
of magnesium hydroxide (Mg (OH)2) that was deposited into polyacrylonitrite
(PAN) nanofibers by electrospinning [18]. After removing the MgO template, the268 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
5
4
3
2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(f)
(d)
1
0
123456
(I) Confined nanospace pyrolysis
(II) Conventional pyrolysis
Eliminating SiO2
PNFs@mSiO2
PNFs CNFs-II
CNFs-I
Creating SiO2 shell
7 8
F127 amount (10–2 mmol)
100 nm
100 nm
200 nm
50 nm
Sphere Rod
Aspect ratio
9 10
Figure 8.2 Variation in morphology and aspect ratio of the as-synthesized carbon
materials along with F127 amount (a); SEM (b) and TEM (c) images of CRF-4. Source: Sun
et al. [14] / with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic illustration for the
formation process of mesoporous carbon nanofibers (CNFs-I) and microporous carbon
nanofibers (CNFs-II) (d); SEM (e) and TEM (f) images of CNFs-I-A in water. Source: Zhang
et al. [15] / with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.
mesopores were formed in the CNFs. The as-constructed supercapacitor based on
N-doped mesoporous CNFs can deliver excellent performance with an ultrahigh
capacitance of 327.3 F g−1 under 1.0 A g−1, and a remarkable stability, e.g. only about
7% loss after 10 k cycles under constant charging–discharging current of 20 A g−1 in
6 M KOH electrolyte.
Currently, the preparation of CNFs is more convenient than CNTs. How￾ever, the commercialization evolution is still hampered, not only because
most of the synthesis procedure requires templates but also the later template
removal is cumbersome and energy-consuming. In addition, the synthesis process8.2 Nanowire Electrode Materials for Pseudocapacitive Supercapacitors 269
employs considerable environmentally unfriendly organic solvents. Therefore, the
large-scale preparation of cheap 1D porous carbon materials in aqueous phase for
supercapacitors is the principal challenge for researchers.
8.2 Nanowire Electrode Materials for Pseudocapacitive
Supercapacitors
EES technology is very important for 3C electronic products, transportation, as well
as huge energy storage systems. Porous 1D nanomaterial combines the advantages
of 1D nanostructure and porous structure, and greatly promotes the development of
EES field.
The active materials of pseudocapacitive supercapacitors are mainly transition
metal compounds and conducting polymers [19–24]. Through the rapid surface
redox reaction of electrode material, it can maintain a high power density while
obtaining a high energy density. The key factors relating to the properties of pseu￾docapacitive supercapacitors mainly include SSA, electrical conductivity, structural
stability, and so on.
8.2.1 Metal Oxide Nanowire Electrode Materials
The most widely studied 1D transition metal oxide is RuO2, which possesses high
specific capacitance, good conductivity, relative stability in the electrolyte, and
is a kind of excellent pseudocapacitive material in supercapacitors. Buzzanca
et al., an Italian electrochemical laboratory, first proposed and used RuO2 as
electrode material for electrochemical capacitors [25]. Zhou et al. prepared RuO2
nanowires/SWCNTs composite membrane through a simple method [26]. After the
introduction of RuO2 nanowires, the charge transfer impedance of the composite
film decreased by 48%, the specific capacity increased to 138 F g−1, and the energy
density was 0.0188 Wh g−1.
However, the high price of precious metal Ru in RuO2 restricts its further develop￾ment. In other studies of cheap transition metal oxides, MnO2 is cheap, abundant in
nature, and has a variety of oxidation states. It shows good Shim capacitance charac￾teristics in neutral electrolyte, and its voltage window is wide, generally up to more
than 1 V. It is a kind of new capacitor material with a low price and good effect. How￾ever, its electrical conductivity is low, and the electrochemical reaction rate is also
slow. By compositing with carbon materials and conductive polymers, the electrical
conductivity of the composite material can be enhanced, and good electrochemi￾cal performance can be obtained at high rate. Nguyen et al. synthesized reduced
GO, Co3O4, and ultralong MnO2 nanowires (5–10 μm) ternary composites through
hydrothermal method [27], the specific capacity reached 1560 F g−1 under 2 A g−1,
and the specific capacity retention reached 96% at 1500th cycle. In addition, Lin
et al. synthesized a coaxial MnO2/PANI super-long nanowire structure [28], whose
cross-connected network structure could increase the electronic conductivity as well270 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
as specific capacity. When the mass fraction of MnO2 is 62.5%, the material presented
an area capacitance of 346 mF cm−2 at a scanning speed of 5 mV s−1.
Increasing SSA and reducing diffusion distance are other ways to get supe￾rior pseudocapacitive materials. Among these researches, Mai et al. realized
the heterotrophic nucleation growth of cobalt molybdate nanowires based on
manganese molybdate nanowires through “self-assembly orientation overlap￾ping” process by matching the crystal plane of cobalt molybdate and manganese
molybdate [29]. The electrochemical properties of composite isothioether￾structured nanomaterials are better than those of single-structured materials.
Under mild conditions, the hierarchical heterostructures were prepared on
MnMoO4 by simple reflux method. And the surface modification is realized.
Based on MnMoO4/CoMoO4 layered heterostructured nanowires, asymmetric
supercapacitors have been fabricated. The layered heterostructured nanowires can
accommodate lattice expansion and contraction, and the slip at the interface can sig￾nificantly alleviate the stress concentration in the nano-electrode material. The SSA
increased by 18 times compared with before construction, the energy density of the
energy storage device increased by one order of magnitude, and the specific capacity
retention rate increased from 78% to 98% after 1000 cycles, jointly improving the
electrical transport and structural stability of the material (Figure 8.3).
As shown in Figure 8.4, supersaturated solution, including massive CoMoO4
crystal seeds, were formed by inducing cobalt salt. Due to their high surface energy,
nanoparticles are prone to growing on the surface of MnMoO4. The substrate,
MnMoO4, has similar lattice parameters and can control CoMoO4 nanoparticle
self-assembly and oriented crystallization to form hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4
heterostructure nanowires.
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 8.3 Morphology characterization. (a) SEM image of the backbone MnMoO4
nanowires. (b, c) SEM images of MnMoO4/CoMoO4 nanowires. (d, e) TEM and HRTEM images
at the heterojunction of MnMoO4/CoMoO4 nanowires. (f) The EDS microanalysis of selected
areas. Scale bars, 1 μm (a–c); 20 nm (d); 5 nm (e). Source: Mai et al. [29], Republished with
permission from Springer Nature.8.2 Nanowire Electrode Materials for Pseudocapacitive Supercapacitors 271
+Na2MoO4
+CoCl2
Figure 8.4 The construction of hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4 nanowires. The green rod
represents the backbone MnMoO4 nanowire, and the orange rods are the CoMoO4
nanorods. Red and blue balls are different ions dispersed in the aqueous solution. Source:
Mai et al. [29], Republished with permission from Springer Nature.
8.2.2 Conducting Polymer Nanowire Electrode Materials
Conducting polymers are another kind of pseudocapacitive electrode materials.
The rapid and reversible redox reaction of N/P- type doping on polymer-conjugated
chains enables the storage of large amounts of charge. The P-type doping of
conducting polymer refers to the loss of electrons in the polymer skeleton so that
the anions in the electrolyte will adsorb and gather in the polymer chain to achieve
charge balance. N-type doping, on the other hand, means that the excess charge
in the polymer needs to be balanced by cations in the solution. Polymer used in
pseudocapacitive electrode materials mainly include polyaniline, polypyrrole, and
polythiophene.
Polyaniline is favored by people because of its low price, simple preparation
method, and excellent electrochemical performance. Using vanadium pentoxide
as the hard template, Bai et al. obtained polyaniline fiber hydrogel [30] by in situ
polymerization (Figure 8.5). Based on its ultrafine fiber structure, its mass specific
V2O5
.nH2O dispersion
V2O5
.nH2O nanowires
Aniline solution in
chloric acid
Diffusion
Free-standing PANI
hydrogel
PANI nanowire network
Figure 8.5 Illustrated diagram of synthesis procedure. Source: Zhou et al. [30], Reproduced
with permission from ACS.272 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
capacity reached 636 F g−1, as well as excellent rate performance and stability (the
specific capacity retention rate was 83% after 10 000 times).
Xie et al. synthesized polyaniline/carbon/titanium nitride composites with
ternary components [31]. Electrochemically active polyaniline shells provide
pseudocapacitance by performing rapid and reversible redox reactions, while
carbon shells avoid the destruction of titanium nitride in electrochemical reaction
and improve cycling stability. The electrochemical test showed that the specific
capacity of the polyaniline matrix composites reached 1093 F g−1 under 1 A g−1, and
the specific capacity remained 98% at 2000th cycle.
Polypyrrole has high conductivity and low synthesis cost. Through the construc￾tion of polypyrrole nanofiber structure. Moreover, the network is expected to exhibit
rapid ion diffusion in bulk materials. Biswas et al. prepared the polypyrrole fiber
and graphene nanoflake composites [32], benefited from the polypyrrole fiber net￾work and conductive graphene nanoflake coexisting, the nanostructured electrode
showed excellent ability of ions and electrons transfer at 1 A g−1 cycle after 1000
times and still has a capacitance of 165 F g−1.
Since Bjornholm et al. first obtained polythiophene nanowires [33], they have been
developed as electrode materials for supercapacitors. Polythiophene used as elec￾trode materials for supercapacitors is mainly prepared by modifying thiophene to
a certain degree. The monomers in the synthesis process of conducting polymers
are generally toxic. Although their supercapacitors have excellent performance, they
are difficult to commercially produce in large quantities, which greatly limits their
development.
8.3 Nanowire Electrode Materials of Hybrid
Supercapacitors
The low energy density of supercapacitors is urged to be improved for commercial
applications. Due to the low specific capacitance of EDLC and the low cycle life
of pseudocapacitors, conventional supercapacitors can no longer meet the public’s
demand for energy storage devices. Therefore, hybrid supercapacitors are gradually
entering the market. The two electrodes of the hybrid supercapacitor are the tradi￾tional battery or pseudocapacitive electrode material and the porous carbon material
of the supercapacitor. The electrochemical reaction of the surface/bulk phase of one
electrode and the EDL physical adsorption of the other electrode are used to store
energy (Figure 8.6) [36].
According to different electrolyte properties, hybrid supercapacitors include
aqueous, organic, ionic liquid-based and solid-state supercapacitors [37]. The
electrochemical performance of hybrid supercapacitors is mainly determined by the
electrode material and electrolyte [38]. In view of the excellent electron transmis￾sion rate of nanowire electrode materials, they can play their advantages in different
electrolytes. It is worth mentioning that although the energy density of hybrid8.3 Nanowire Electrode Materials of Hybrid Supercapacitors 273
(a)
(b) Battery-type
Cation Anion
Capacitive-type
Separator
V
100
10
1E–3 0.01 0.1 1 10
Power density (kW kg–1)
Energy density (Wh kg–1)
– +
Figure 8.6 (a) Ragone plots for various supercapacitors. Source: Dubal et al. [34],
Republished with permission from Elsevier. (b) The fundamental configuration of hybrid
supercapacitors. Source: Liu et al. [35], Republished with permission from Elsevier.
supercapacitors has been increased significantly, there is still a certain difference in
power density compared with ordinary supercapacitors. Based on the unique advan￾tages of 1D nanowire electrode materials in electric double-layer supercapacitors
and pseudocapacitive supercapacitors, their application in hybrid supercapacitors
will be more extensive. Appropriate matching of the two one-dimensional nanowire
electrode materials can effectively increase its working voltage and thereby increase
its energy density [39] (Figure 8.7).274 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
Hybrid
component
materials
Carbon
materials
Inorganic
materials
Conducting
polymers
PPY
PEDOT
PANI
LiFePO4
MnO2
Graphene
Carbon
nanotubes
Activated
carbon
Figure 8.7 Hybrid supercapacitor electrode component materials. Source: Muzaffar et al.
[40], Republished with permission from Elsevier.
8.3.1 Hybrid Supercapacitor Based on Aqueous Electrolyte
8.3.1.1 Carbon/Metal Oxide
MnO2 is a suitable cathode for hybrid supercapacitors, and new research has found
that it exhibits excellent pseudocapacitive performance in neutral aqueous solutions
[41–44]. As a positive electrode material, the research on assembling hybrid superca￾pacitors into hybrid supercapacitors has become a hot spot. Cheng et al. assembled
graphene anode and graphene/MnO2 nanowires cathode into an asymmetric
hybrid capacitor using neutral Na2SO4 electrolyte [41], whose working voltage
can reach 2 V and its energy density can reach 30.4 Wh kg−1. Graphene sheets and
nanowire composites improve substantially property of hybrid supercapacitors by
reducing the resistance of electrode material. Similar to MnO2, nanowires shorten
transportation distance of ions and effectively reduce charge transfer resistance.
Yu et al. designed a simple and cheap method to obtain asymmetric supercapacitors
without binders [43]. Bacterial cellulose-derived CNFs were used as the carrier
load, MnO2 was used as the positive electrode of the hybrid supercapacitor, and
CNFs were used as the negative electrode. In neutral 1 mol l−1 Na2SO4, the voltage
window can be extended to 2 V (Figure 8.8). Nitrogen-doped CNFs have excellentPolymerization Carbonization
Solution
co-deposition
BC nanofiber BC/PANI nanofiber CBC-N nanofiber CBC-N@LDH composite
e–
c a
b
Ni
CBC-N@LDH CBC-N
1.6 + Load – 40
30
20
10
0.8
0.0
0 100 1000
This work
100 200 300 400 500 10 000
Time (s) Power density (W kg–1)
Potential (V)
Energy density (Wh kg–1)
Separator Ni foil
O
Co
NCH/G/NF//AC [47]
1 A g–1
2 A g–1
3 A g–1
5 A g–1
10 A g–1
Ni0.32Co0.68(OH)2//graphene oxide [48]
NCOH//AC [17]
Nickel-ccbalt hydroxides//AC [49]
NixCo1–x LDH-ZTO//AC [50]
H2O
OH–
OH–
(b)
(a)
(c) (d) (e)
Figure 8.8 (a) Schematic illustration for the formation process of CBC-N@LDH composites; (b) Illustration of the electrochemical processes for
CBC-N@LDH composite; (c) Schematic of the assembled structure of an asymmetric supercapacitor based on CBC-N2@LDH-0.4 composite as cathode
material and CBC-N2 nanofibers as anode material; (d) Charge–discharge curves for the assembled asymmetric supercapacitor; (e) Ragone plots of the
as-assembled ASC device and recently reported values for comparison (Here, NCH, G, NF, AC, NCOH, and ZTO are denoted as Ni-Co hydroxide, graphene,
nickel foam, activated carbon, nickel cobalt hydroxide nanoflowers, and Zn2SnO4). Source: Lai et al. [45], Republished with permission from Wiley.276 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
structural stability. The nano-sized structure after coating MnO2 provides a highly
electrochemically active area. Its energy density can be as high as 0.033 Wh g−1,
its power density can be 0.285 kW g−1, and it has excellent structural cycle
stability.
The operating voltage range also affects the property of hybrid supercapacitors.
MnO2 with very low crystallinity is prepared by the sol–gel method. Hybrid capaci￾tor can be formed with activated carbon electrode in 0.65 mol l−1 K2SO4 electrolyte.
The energy density can reach 19 Wh kg−1 with working voltage of 2.2 V. However,
under such high working voltage, gas will precipitate, resulting in poor cycle per￾formance. By reducing the voltage to 1.5 V, gas precipitation can be avoided. After
23 000 cycles, the energy retention rate is still 76% [42]. In addition, for the same type
of hybrid capacitor, at voltage of 2 V, corrosion of the stainless-steel current collector
can be inhibited by removing the oxygen in the system, and the cycle performance
is significantly improved. After 5000 cycles, the specific capacity attenuation is only
12.5% [44].
In addition, other 1D metal oxides, such as TiO2, are used in hybrid capacitors.
Li et al. assembled a CNT cathode and TO2-B anode into hybrid capacitor with
working voltage of 2.8 V [46]. CNTs can effectively improve the diffusion rate of
ions/electrons, while TiO2 nanowires can improve cycle stability and reversibility,
also increase energy density of electrode material.
8.3.1.2 Carbon/Conductive Nanowire Polymer
The electrochemical properties of conductive polymers have received widespread
attention since they were discovered and have been used in electrochemical capac￾itors. In recent years, hybrid supercapacitors composed of conductive polymer as
cathode, activated carbon as anode, and water-based electrolyte have gained wide
attention.
Polyaniline is a widely researched electrode material in Faraday’s pseudoelectric
core device [47]. This material has excellent stability in aqueous solutions. Wang
et al. used porous graphene oxide/1D carbon nanotubes/polyaniline composite
materials as cathodes and porous graphene oxide as anodes. After assembling as
a device [48], its working voltage can reach 1.6 V in a 1 mol l−1 H2SO4 solution
with high energy density of 0.02 Wh g−1 and power density of 0.025 kW g−1, as well
as good stability with 91% retention through 5000 times. At present, there is also
research to improve hybrid capacitors by combining metal oxide nanomaterials
with polyaniline materials. For example, Li et al. have prepared Fe2O3@PAN
core-shell structured nanowire arrays, which show excellent cycle stability and
high energy density [49]. In addition, Liu et al. has grown CoO nanowires on nickel
foam and further deposited conductive polypyrrole to synergistically improve the
pseudocapacitive performance of the material (Figure 8.9) [50].
The larger SSA of ordered mesoporous nanofibers and the excellent electrical con￾ductivity of polypyrrole make the electrolyte ion transfer rate faster. When assembled
with activated carbon as a hybrid supercapacitor, its voltage window can reach 1.8 V
as well as high energy density of 0.044 Wh g−1. After 20 000 times, the specific capac￾ity remains at 91.5%. In addition to carbon materials, conductive polymers can also8.3 Nanowire Electrode Materials of Hybrid Supercapacitors 277
(a)
Nickel foam APS
1 μm
CoO@PPy NW
AC Cellulose paper Electrolyte
Ni foam 30
102
101
100
10–1
10–2
100 101 102 103 104
Power density (W kg–1)
CoO@PPy//AC Li-ion
EDLC
Energy density (Wh kg−1)
15
0
–15
–30
0.0 0.4 0.8
Potential (V)
Current (mA cm–2)
1.2 1.6
20 mV s−1
5 mV s−1
2 mV s−1
10 mV s−1
2.0
10 nm 10 nm
PPy PPy 100 nm 0.49 nm
CoO@PPy
Hydro￾Pyrrole
Mesopores for ion
diffusion
PPy
PPy
CoO
e–
p-TSA
thermal &
Annealing
CoO
(b)
(e) (f) (g)
(c) (d)
e–
Figure 8.9 (a) The representative synthetic procedure and structure details of the 3D
hybrid nanowire electrode. (b) high-magnification SEM image of the hybrid nanowire
electrode. (c, d) HRTEM images of surface of individual CoO@PPy hybrid nanowires. Inset
shows the general view of several nanowires. (e) Schematic illustration of the asymmetric
supercapacitor configuration. (f) CVs. (g) Volumetric energy and powder densities of our
supercapacitor compared with other data. Source: Zhou et al. [50], Republished with
permission from ACS.
be used as the negative electrode of hybrid supercapacitors. Mousavi used synthetic
polypyrrole nanofibers as anode and polyaniline nanofibers as cathode to obtain
high-performance hybrid supercapacitors [51], whose working voltage reaches 1.3 V
in the aqueous system, the energy density can reach 0.23 Wh g−1, and power density
of 0.045 kW g−1.
8.3.2 Other Electrolyte System Hybrid Supercapacitors
8.3.2.1 Organic Electrolyte System
Based on the higher electrochemical window of the organic electrolyte, the
assembled hybrid supercapacitor has a higher energy density and is the current
market leader. Moreover, mature production processes such as current collec￾tors, separators, and battery cases in batteries can be used in organic hybrid
supercapacitors. In addition, the active materials used in the battery can also be278 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
used in hybrid supercapacitors (the negative electrode is Li4Ti5O12, graphite, metal
oxide, metal sulfide, metal phosphide, etc.; the positive electrode is LiMn2O4,
LiCoO2, Na3V2(PO4)3, etc.). Such devices generally use electric double- layer
capacitor-type material as positive electrode, battery-type material as negative
electrode, or conversely. The organic hybrid supercapacitor has a relatively high
working voltage (generally Up to 3.8–4.0 V) with an ultrahigh energy density than
that of aqueous hybrid supercapacitors.
Although the operating voltage of organic electrolyte is high, current capacity of
these hybrid supercapacitors is still low. This is mainly due to the high viscosity of
the organic electrolyte, slow ion adsorption and diffusion rate, and high electrical
resistance. This characteristic poses a great challenge to electrode materials. It
is difficult for traditional bulk materials to make full use of internal active sites,
which greatly reduces their specific capacity. The agglomeration phenomenon of
nanomaterials is inevitable, which also increases the cost of the preparation of
electrode materials. The 1D nanowire electrode materials that are cross-linked with
each other can simultaneously solve the above-mentioned problems, and realize
the full immersion of the organic electrolyte and the high-efficiency absorption and
desorption of electrolyte ions.
Lu et al. have studied a hybrid supercapacitor electrode with a thickness of
100 μm composed of a carbon nanotube/V2O5 nanowire composite material [52].
After assembled with the positive active carbon material to form an organic hybrid
supercapacitor, its energy density can reach 0.04 Wh g−1, as well as high power
density of 0.02 kW g−1. Thanks to the high electron transfer rate of the 1D nanowire
structure, the electrode still has excellent capacitance performance under the dual
test of thicker size and a high-viscosity organic electrolyte. In addition, Gao et al.
has studied flexible electrode materials composed of niobium pentoxide nanowire
compounds [53]. The mass fraction of Nb2O5 nanowires in the flexible electrode
material reached 93.5%, and its energy density reached 106 Wh kg−1 after being
assembled with activated carbon cathode material to form a lithium-ion hybrid
capacitor. After 100 times under 0.5 A g−1, specific capacitance did not decrease sig￾nificantly. This fully demonstrates the advantages of nanowire electrode materials
in organic electrolyte systems.
8.3.2.2 Redox-Active Electrolyte System
Referring to flow battery reaction system, redox reactions can be carried out at
electrolyte/electrode interface to increase energy density of the supercapacitor. In
this type of supercapacitor, an electrolyte with redox activity is usually added to
the electrolyte, and a redox reaction is carried out at electrolyte/electrode interface
to provide a large amount of additional specific capacity, while the other electrode
has a rapid capacitance reaction to ensure high power density. Mai et al. used the
ultrasonic spray drying method to obtain a porous carbon material with plenty of
oxygen-containing functional groups [54]. By reacting with CuCl2 additives in the
electrolyte, a capacitance of 4700 F g−1 was obtained. Moreover, the energy density
of the assembled symmetrical porous carbon supercapacitor reached 73 Wh kg−1.
Such supercapacitors require a large number of interfaces for electrochemical
reactions, so 1D nanomaterials with high SSA, anti-agglomeration and continuous8.4 Summary and Outlook 279
axial electron conduction characteristics will have significant advantages. At the
same time, how to alleviate the problem of self-discharge in the process of using
this type of capacitor is a difficult point for research.
8.3.3 Solid Electrolyte or Quasi-Solid-State Hybrid Supercapacitor
In recent years, research on flexible, all-solid-state supercapacitors has received
widespread attention. Flexible electrode materials will have a huge advantage in
future wearable equipment. The gel electrolyte is mainly acidic PVA/H3PO4 and
alkaline PVA/KOH. Similar to the electrolyte system, the gel electrolyte is thicker,
and the ion transmission rate and the degree of infiltration at electrolyte/electrode
interface are reduced. Because nanowire structure is relatively dispersed, com￾bined with its excellent ion transmission path, it can also effectively solve the
shortcomings of the gel electrolyte.
In order to give full play to the advantages of the one-dimensional struc￾ture of nanowires, Wang et al. improved the electrochemical performance of
one-dimensional nano-pseudocapacitive materials [55], using carbon cloth loaded
with MnO2 nanowires as the positive electrode material, and carbon cloth loaded
with Fe2O3 nanotubes as the negative electrode materials (Figure 8.10). The large
interface area and short-ion diffusion path of 1D nanostructures can effectively
enhance the property of hybrid supercapacitors. The energy density is 0.55 Wh L−1
under a voltage of 1.6 V. Li et al. used carbon aerogel microspheres as the negative
electrode, Co3O4 nanowires grown on foamed nickel as the positive electrode and
PVA/KOH as the gel electrolyte, and assembled them into an all-solid asymmetric
hybrid supercapacitor [56]. The voltage window can reach 1.5 V, with a high energy
density of 0.18 Wh g−1.
8.4 Summary and Outlook
This chapter summarizes and discusses the functions of different kinds of nanowires
in supercapacitors. EDL Carbonaceous nanowires through physical adsorption
mechanism are the mainstream in commercial electrode materials due to poor
cycling stability of the pseudocapacitive materials. The relationship between SSA
as well as pore structure of porous nanowire electrodes and transport kinetics
of solvated ions in electrolyte would be studied further. Otherwise, the diffusion
process of cations and anions and the selection of the electrolyte window are urged
for research. Nanowire electrode materials possess distinct advantage for solving
the mentioned issues. Firstly, rate performance would be promised due to the
construction of conductivity network from nanowires. Secondly, the unique 1D
structure provides strong force endurance, which may be caused during charging
and discharging process. Finally, the high L/D ratio makes electrodes have a higher
SSA and abundant active sites for redox reaction to obtain good electrochemical
performance. Therefore, nanowire electrode materials have good competitiveness
and broad research potential in the supercapacitor field and are expected to be
applied commercially.280 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
Carbon fiber
Carbon fabric
10 100
10–1
10–2
5
0
100 mV s−1
0.8 V 1.6 V
–5
–10 Current (mA cm−2)
Energy density (mWh cm−3)
0.0 0.4 0.8
Potential (V vs. Ag/AgCl) Power density (mW cm−3)
1.2 1.6 101 102 103
MnO2 grown
ZnO grown
MnO2 NWs
MnO2 NWs
Electrolyte
Separator
Fe2O3 NTs
Asymmetric SC
Fe3+
Annealed
Fe2O3 NTs
200 nm 200 nm
2 μm 1 μm
ZnO NWs (a)
(b) (c)
(d) (e)
Figure 8.10 (a) Schematic illustration for the formation process of MnO2 NWs and Fe2O3
NTs on carbon cloth and schematic sketch illustrating the designed asymmetric
supercapacitor device. SEM image of (b) manganese dioxide nanowires and (c) Fe2O3 NTs.
(d) CV curves of the assembled solid-state ASC device collected in different scan voltage
windows. (e) Ragone plots of the solid-state ASC device. Inset shows a blue LED powered by
the tandem ASC devices. Source: Yang et al. [55], Republished with permission from ACS.
References
1 Becker H.I. (1957-7-23). Low voltage electrolytic capacitor. U.S. Patent
2,800,616[P].
2 Wang, X. et al. (2005). Sol–gel template synthesis of highly ordered MnO2
nanowire arrays. Journal of Power Sources 140 (1): 211–215.References 281
3 Wei, Q. et al. (2017). Porous one-dimensional nanomaterials: design, fabrication
and applications in electrochemical energy storage. Advanced Materials 29 (20):
1602300.
4 Yu, J., Ma, T., and Liu, S. (2011). Enhanced photocatalytic activity of meso￾porous TiO2 aggregates by embedding carbon nanotubes as electron-transfer
channel. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 13 (8): 3491–3501.
5 Yan, J. et al. (2014). Recent advances in design and fabrication of electrochemi￾cal supercapacitors with high energy densities. Advanced Energy Materials 4 (4):
1300816.
6 Poulin, P.R. (2006). Irreversible organic crystalline chemistry monitored in real
time. Science 313 (5794): 1756–1760.
7 Baughman, R.H. (2002). Carbon nanotubes–the route toward applications.
Science 297 (5582): 787–792.
8 Yang, Z. et al. (2019). Carbon nanotube- and graphene-based nanomaterials and
applications in high-voltage supercapacitor: a review. Carbon 141: 467–480.
9 Huang, J. et al. (2010). Curvature effects in carbon nanomaterials: Exohe￾dral versus endohedral supercapacitors. Journal of Materials Research 25 (8):
1525–1531.
10 Hata, K. et al. (2006). Shape-engineerable and highly densely packed
single-walled carbon nanotubes and their application as super-capacitor elec￾trodes. Nature Materials 5 (12): 987–994.
11 Du, C. and Pan, N. (2006). Supercapacitors using carbon nanotubes films by
electrophoretic deposition. Journal of Power Sources 160 (2): 1487–1494.
12 Tan, J. et al. (2017). In situ nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon nanofibers as
flexible freestanding electrodes for high-performance supercapacitors. Journal of
Materials Chemistry A 5 (45): 23620–23627.
13 Zhang, X. et al. (2018). Hollow carbon nanofibers with dynamic adjustable pore
sizes and closed ends as hosts for high-rate lithium-sulfur battery cathodes.
Nano Research 11 (3): 1238–1246.
14 Sun, Q. et al. (2012). Controlled hydrothermal synthesis of 1D nanocarbons by
surfactant-templated assembly for use as anodes for rechargeable lithium-ion
batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry 22 (33): 1749–1754.
15 Zhang, X. et al. (2013). Synthesis of superior carbon nanofibers with large
aspect ratio and tunable porosity for electrochemical energy storage. Journal of
Materials Chemistry A: Materials for Energy and Sustainability 1 (33): 9449.
16 Bai, Y., Huang, Z., and Kang, F. (2014). Electrospun preparation of microporous
carbon ultrafine fibers with tuned diameter, pore structure and hydrophobicity
from phenolic resin. Carbon 66: 705–712.
17 Teng, M. et al. (2012). Electrospun mesoporous carbon nanofibers produced
from phenolic resin and their use in the adsorption of large dye molecules.
Carbon 50 (8): 2877–2886.
18 Tan, J., Han, Y., He, L. et al. (2017). In aitu nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon
nanofibers as flexible freestanding electrodes for high-performance supercapaci￾tors. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 5 (45): 23620–23627.282 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
19 Veron, I., Patrice, S., and Bruce, D. (2014). Pseudocapacitive oxide materials for
high-rate electrochemical energy storage. Energy & Environmental Science 7 (5):
1597–1614.
20 Wang, G., Zhang, L. et al. (2012). A review of electrode materials for electro￾chemical supercapacitors. Chemical Society Reviews 41 (2): 797–828.
21 Aric, A.S., Bruce, P., Scrosati, B. et al. (2005). Nanostructured materials for
advanced energy conversion and storage devices. Nature Materials 4 (5):
366–377.
22 Simon, P. and Gogotsi, Y. (2008). Materials for electrochemical capacitors.
Nature Materials 7 (11): 845–854.
23 Toupin, M., Brousse, T. et al. (2004). Charge storage mechanism of MnO2 elec￾trode used in aqueous electrochemical capacitor. Chemistry of Materials 16 (16):
3184–3190.
24 Wang, D.W., Li, F., and Cheng, H.M. (2008). Hierarchical porous nickel oxide
and carbon as electrode materials for asymmetric supercapacitor. Journal of
Power Sources 185 (2): 1563–1568.
25 Trasatti, S. and Buzzanca, G. (1971). Ruthenium dioxide: a new interesting elec￾trode material. Solid state structure and electrochemical behaviour. Journal of
Electroanalytical Chemistry and Interfacial Electrochemistry 29 (2): A1–A5.
26 Chen, P., Chen, H., Qiu, J. et al. (2010). Inkjet printing of single-walled car￾bon nanotube/RuO2 nanowire supercapacitors on cloth fabrics and flexible
substrates. Nano Research 3 (8): 594–603.
27 Nguyen, V.H., Tran, V.C., Kharismadewi, D. et al. (2015). Ultralong MnO2
nanowires intercalated graphene/Co3O4 composites for asymmetric supercapaci￾tors. Materials Letters 147: 123–127.
28 Zhou, J., Yu, L., Liu, W. et al. (2015). High performance all-solid supercapaci￾tors based on the network of ultralong manganese dioxide/polyaniline coaxial
nanowires. Scientific Reports 5: 17858.
29 Mai, L.Q., Yang, F., Zhao, Y.L. et al. (2011). Hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4
heterostructured nanowires with enhanced supercapacitor performance. Nature
Communications 2: 381.
30 Zhou, K., He, Y., Xu, Q. et al. (2018). A hydrogel of ultrathin pure polyaniline
nanofibers: oxidant-templating preparation and supercapacitor application. ACS
Nano 12 (6): 5888–5894.
31 Xie, Y., Xia, C., Du, H. et al. (2015). Enhanced electrochemical performance of
polyaniline/carbon/titanium nitride nanowire array for flexible supercapacitor.
Journal of Power Sources 286 (20): 561–570.
32 Biswas, S. and Drzal, L.T. (2010). Multilayered nanoarchitecture of graphene
nanosheets and polypyrrole nanowires for high performance supercapacitor
electrodes. Chemistry of Materials 22 (20): 5667–5671.
33 Bjørnholm, T., Hassenkam, T., Greve, D.R. et al. (1999). Polythiophene
nanowires. Advanced Materials 11 (14): 1218–1221.
34 Dubal, D.P., Ayyad, O., Ruiz, V., and Gómez-Romero, P. (2015). Hybrid energy
storage: the merging of battery and supercapacitor chemistries. Chemical Society
Reviews 44: 1777–1790.References 283
35 Liu, H. et al. (2020). Transition metal-based battery-type electrodes in hybrid
supercapacitors: a review. Energy Storage Materials 28: 122–145.
36 Wang, Y., Song, Y., and Xia, Y. (2016). Electrochemical capacitors: mechanism,
materials, systems, characterization and applications. Chemical Society Reviews
45 (21): 5925–5950.
37 Conway, B.E. and Pell, W.G. (2002). Power limitations of supercapacitor opera￾tion associated with resistance and capacitance distribution in porous electrode
devices. Journal of Power Sources 105 (2): 169–181.
38 Gualous, H. et al. (2003). Experimental study of supercapacitor serial resistance
and capacitance variations with temperature. Journal of Power Sources 123 (1):
86–93.
39 Lu, M. (2013). Supercapacitors: Materials, Systems, and Applications. Wiley.
40 Muzaffar, A. et al. (2019). A review on recent advances in hybrid supercapac￾itors: Design, fabrication and applications. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 101: 123–145.
41 Wu, Z. et al. (2010). High-energy MnO2 nanowire/graphene and graphene asym￾metric electrochemical capacitors. ACS Nano 4 (10): 5835–5842.
42 Brousse, T., Toupin, M., and BeLanger, D. (2004). A hybrid activated
carbon-manganese dioxide capacitor using a mild aqueous electrolyte. Journal of
the Electrochemical Society 151 (4): A614–A622.
43 Chen, L. et al. (2013). Bacterial-cellulose-derived carbon nanofiber@MnO2 and
nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber electrode materials: an asymmetric super￾capacitor with high energy and power density. Advanced Materials 25 (34):
4746–4752.
44 Brousse, T. et al. (2007). Long-term cycling behavior of asymmetric activated
carbon/MnO2 aqueous electrochemical supercapacitor. Journal of Power Sources
173 (1): 633–641.
45 Lai, F. et al. (2016). Biomass-derived nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber network:
a facile template for decoration of ultrathin nickel-cobalt layered double hydrox￾ide nanosheets as high-performance asymmetric supercapacitor electrode. Small
12 (24): 3235–3244.
46 Wang, Q., Wen, Z.H., and Li, J.H. (2006). A hybrid supercapacitor fabricated
with a carbon nanotube cathode and a TiO2–B nanowire anode. Advanced
Functional Materials 16 (16): 2141–2146.
47 Park, J.H. and Park, O.O. (2002). Hybrid electrochemical capacitors based on
polyaniline and activated carbon electrodes. Journal of Power Sources 111 (1):
185–190.
48 Shen, J. et al. (2013). High-performance asymmetric supercapacitor based
on nanoarchitectured polyaniline/graphene/carbon nanotube and activated
graphene electrodes. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 5 (17): 8467–8476.
49 Lu, X. et al. (2015). α-Fe2O3 @PANI core–shell nanowire arrays as negative
electrodes for asymmetric supercapacitors. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 7
(27): 14843–14850.284 8 Application of Nanowires in Supercapacitors
50 Zhou, C. et al. (2013). Construction of high-capacitance 3D CoO@Polypyrrole
nanowire array electrode for aqueous asymmetric supercapacitor. Nano Letters
13 (5): 2078–2085.
51 Ghenaatian, H.R., Mousavi, M.F., and Rahmanifar, M.S. (2012). High perfor￾mance hybrid supercapacitor based on two nanostructured conducting polymers:
self-doped polyaniline and polypyrrole nanofibers. Electrochimica Acta 78:
212–222.
52 Chen, Z. et al. (2011). High-performance supercapacitors based on intertwined
CNT/V2O5 nanowire nanocomposites. Advanced Materials 23 (6): 791–795.
53 Song, H. et al. (2016). Flexible Nb2O5 nanowires/graphene film electrode for
high-performance hybrid Li-ion supercapacitors. Journal of Power Sources 328:
599–606.
54 Mai, L.Q., Minhas-Khan, A., Tian, X. et al. (2013). Synergistic interaction
between redox-active electrolyte and binder-free functionalized carbon for
ultrahigh supercapacitor performance. Nature Communications 4: 2923.
55 Yang, P. et al. (2014). Low-cost high-performance solid-state asymmetric super￾capacitors based on MnO2 nanowires and Fe2O3 nanotubes. Nano Letters 14 (2):
731–736.
56 Liu, W. et al. (2015). High-performance all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor
based on Co3O4 nanowires and carbon aerogel. Journal of Power Sources 282:
179–186.285
9
Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
Li-ion battery (LIB) technology has already achieved great success in the application
of commercial portable electronic devices, benefiting from its characteristics of
high energy density, high power density, and environmental friendliness [1–4].
However, the limited reserve of Li sources, safety issues, and high cost restrict
its further applications [5, 6]. Therefore, the exploration of other battery systems
based on earth-abundance elements with good safety to replace or complement
LIBs is necessary, especially in large-scale applications. Na, Mg, Zn, and Al as
anodes in rechargeable batteries have a similar operating mechanism as that of Li.
Potential candidates as alternatives to LIBs can be multivalent batteries, including
magnesium-ion batteries (MIBs), calcium-ion batteries (CIBs), zinc-ion batteries
(ZIBs), and aluminum-ion batteries (AIBs). In respect of multivalent batteries,
the Mg, Ca, Zn, and Al metals are abundant in the earth and deliver high specific
capacity as well as energy density when employed as the anode owing to the
multi-electron reactions [7–12]. In addition, they have many unique properties,
such as small ionic radius and reasonably low deposition potential. Certainly, they
also have special opportunities and challenges when used as an anode in coun￾terpart batteries. At the present stage, they are uncompetitive with LIBs in many
aspects, and methods are being explored to enhance the ions storage performance,
such as the optimization of cathode, anode, and electrolyte. There is no denying
that multivalent battery systems still require much time and effort before achieving
satisfactory results to narrow the gap with LIBs or even surpass them [13].
9.1 Nanowires for Magnesium-Ion Battery
Benefiting from the advantages of magnesium metal anode, i.e. abundant reserves
(one of the most abundant elements, ∼2% of Earth’s crust), high volumetric capacity
(3833 mAh cm−3) and low redox potential (−2.37 V versus SHE), rechargeable MIBs
were identified as a promising candidate for the next-generation energy storage
system with desired cost, safety, life, and energy density [14–18]. Despite these
advantages, the development of MIBs is impeded by several key technical issues,
such as the incompatibility of Mg metal anode with most of the conventional
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.286 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
electrolytes and the sluggish solid-state diffusion kinetics of divalent Mg2+ in host
structures [19–21]. Therefore, developing new cathodes for high-performance
Mg-based batteries is a challenging, but necessary research direction.
9.1.1 Vanadium-Based Nanowires for MIBs
Poor cycling stability is one of the problems with the application of V2O5 ⋅ xH2O in
MIBs. An et al. [22] reported graphene-decorated V2O5 ⋅ xH2O nanowires (VOG-1)
which exhibit excellent cycling stability for Mg2+ ion storage. The electrochemical
performance of VOG-1 was tested with Mg(TFSI)2/acetonitrile as the electrolyte
and activated carbon cloth (ACC) as quasi-reference electrode. A capacity as high
as 330 mAh g−1 is achieved in the galvanostatic intermittent titration technique
(GITT) measurement at 1.6–3.4 V. Besides, the calculated average Mg2+ diffusion
coefficient of VOG-1 during the intercalation process is about 3 × 10−11 cm−2 s−1,
which is higher than that of Cheveral Mo6S8 (2–6 × 10−12 cm−2 s−1). When cycled at
1000 mA g−1, capacity retention of 81% is obtained after 200 cycles. The enhanced
Mg2+ storage performance of VOG-1 is attributed to the charge shielding effect of
crystal water, the fast electronic conduction pathway of graphene, and the short
Mg2+ ion diffusion channel of nanowires.
Xu et al. [23] fabricated theMg-ion pre-intercalated bilayeredV2O5 (Mg0.3V2O5 ⋅ 1.1
H2O) nanowires (Figure 9.1a) and employed them as cathode materials for MIBs.
The pre-intercalated Mg-ions improve the electronic conductivity and stabilize
the layer structure (Figure 9.1b). The interlayered water molecules enlarge the
interlayer spacing and hold “charge shielding effect,” facilitating the diffusion
of magnesium-ions. Benefiting from the synergistic effects of interlayered water
molecules and pre-intercalated Mg-ions, the Mg0.3V2O5 ⋅ 1.1H2O nanowires display
improved cycling stability and rate performance (Figure 9.1c,d). Meanwhile,
Mg0.3V2O5 ⋅ 1.1H2O nanowires exhibit such an ultralong cycling life that a capacity
of about 90 mAh g−1 is achieved after 10 000 cycles at 2 A g−1, corresponding to 80%
of the maximum capacity (Figure 9.1e).
Luo et al. reported the investigation of nanostructured VO2(B) as a high-voltage
and high-capacity cathode material in MIBs [24]. The magnesium storage per￾formance of nanostructured VO2(B) was measured in a three-electrode system
in which carbon rod and Ag/AgCl electrode were used as counter and reference
electrode in 1 M Mg(ClO4)2/AN electrolyte. As a result, the electrochemical perfor￾mance of VO2(B) nanorods is much better than that of VO2 (B) nanosheets. In the
first cycle, VO2(B) nanorods deliver a high capacity of 391 mAh g−1 at 25 mA g−1
while VO2(B) nanosheets deliver a capacity of 356 mAh g−1. After 10 cycles, the
capacity of VO2(B) nanorods remains at 94.7%, but that of VO2(B) nanosheets only
remains at 42%. The main reason for the better electrochemical performance of
VO2(B) nanorods is that their special morphology results in a faster ion diffusion
rate and reduces the diffusion path [25].
Except for V2O5 and VO2, many non-stoichiometric vanadium oxides have also
attracted considerable interest as Mg2+ ions intercalation cathodes [26, 27]. Jiao(a) (b)
(d) (e)
(c)
Figure 9.1 (a) The structural illustration of Mg-ion pre-intercalated bilayered V2O5 (Mg0.3V2O5 ⋅ 1.1H2O); (b) I–V plots, (c) cycling stability and (d) rate
capability of Mg0.3V2O5 ⋅ 1.1H2O, V2O5 ⋅ 1.1H2O and Mg0.3V2O5; (e) Long-term cycling performance of Mg0.3V2O5 ⋅ 1.1H2O. Source: Xu et al. [23], Reproduced
with permission from Elsevier.288 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
et al. synthesized the open-ended VO2.37 nanotubes by sol–gel reaction followed
by hydrothermal treatment [26, 28]. In the 0.25 M Mg(AlBu2Cl2)2/THF solution
with Mg metal as counter and reference electrode, VO2.37 nanotubes exhibit an
oxidation peak at 1.16 V and a reduction peak at 0.92 V, which correspond to the
(de)intercalation of Mg2+ ions. At 1 mA g−1, VO2.37 nanotubes deliver a discharge
capacity of 76 mAh g−1 and Mg2+ ions diffuse much faster than polycrystalline V2O5
from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results. The open-ended
VO2.37 nanotubes with wide inner and outer diameter exhibit better electrochemical
performance compared with the polycrystalline V2O5, which might result from the
specific structure. First, in an open-ended structure, Mg2+ ions could diffuse faster
compared with the surface-to-bulk structure. Second, the diffusion path of cations
is shorter than the ordinary structure. Finally, the open-ended tubes will provide
large electrode-electrolyte contact area in electrolyte-filled channels. Similar works
were also reported by Ryoung-Hee and co-workers; they synthesized the highly
reduced VOx nanotubes via microwave-assisted hydrothermal method with amine
as reducing agent and organic template [27]. Open-ended structures and rolled-tube
shapes of VOx nanotubes are also exhibited in this work, and the roll-tube comes
from the octahedral VO6 (V3+) structure. Two different kinds of VOx (low and
high concentrations of the amine template in VOx differentiate the LT–VOx and
HT–VOx) were measured in 0.5 M Mg(ClO4)2/AN electrolyte with magnesium
alloy as counter electrode and Ag/AgNO3 as reference electrode. Although LT-VOx
nanotubes exhibit higher specific capacity (230 mAh g−1) than HT-VOx nanotubes
(218 mAh g−1), the capacity retention of HT-VOx nanotubes (70.8% after 20 cycles)
is much higher than that of LT-VOx nanotubes (24% after 20 cycles). In the EIS
analysis, HT-VOx nanotubes show lower charge transfer resistance than LT-VOx
nanotubes, whether in fresh state or after the first cycle. For explaining the excellent
electrochemical performance of HT-VOx nanotubes, the authors demonstrated
that V3+ only exists in the HT-VOx nanotubes and thought that the existence of
octahedral VO6 (V3+) in the HT-VOx nanotubes enhances the mobility of Mg2+ ions
in the crystal structure. Furthermore, VO6 octahedron might expand the interstitial
sites because of the higher coordination number and larger ionic size of V3+ ions
compared with V4+ and V5+. From this work, introducing the large V3+-O cluster to
active VO4 tetrahedron and VO5 square pyramid might be a feasible way to improve
the property of vanadium oxide materials in MIBs.
The water molecules act as “spacers” and bond water, which also stabilizes
the lattice of bronzes when divalent Mg2+ ions diffuse in the structure. To take
advantage of the shield effect of water molecules, NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O nanobelts were
synthesized [29]. The novel room-temperature synthetic method retains the water
in the structure. In addition, the NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O nanobelts exhibit high surface
area compared with commercial V2O5. In a coin-type cell with APC electrolyte,
NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O nanobelts exhibit high specific capacity of 110 mAh g−1 at
10 mA g−1. At high current density, 80% of capacity is remained after 100 cycles. To
increase the specific capacity, the authors increased the cutoff voltage. However,
with the cutoff voltage increasing, the coulombic efficiency will decrease due to
electrolyte decomposition. During cycling performance, no new phase is observed9.1 Nanowires for Magnesium-Ion Battery 289
in the materials. But some Mg2+ ions will be trapped in the NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O
nanobelts. Moreover, these trapped Mg2+ ions will affect the reversibility of battery
and result in low ion diffusion rate inside NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O nanobelts. In this
work, the lateral confinement and high conduction channels of NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O
nanobelts facilitate electron movements along the nano-length axis. The fast
insertion and extraction of Mg2+ ions is attributed to the shielding effect of water.
Reducing the internal resistance of trapped Mg2+ ions is the next problem to solve
in the NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O nanobelts.
9.1.2 Manganese-Based Nanowires for MIBs
The shielding effect of a much lower H2O content in electrolyte or crystal structure
based on V2O5 cathode has been experimentally and theoretically investigated, so it
provides an alternative strategy to another high performance cathode of MnO2. Lee
et al. firstly demonstrated that the reversible Mg2+ insertion into nanostructured
MnO2 can be enhanced in water containing an electrolyte [30]. The electro￾chemical performance was tested in three-electrode system with the synthesized
free-standing MnO2 nanowire as the working electrode, Ag/AgCl as the reference
electrode, and platinum as the counter electrode in Mg(ClO4)2/PC containing
water electrolyte. The authors determined the improved performance by CV curves
(a)
(d) (e) (f)
(b) (c)
Figure 9.2 (a) CV curves of MnO2 in various water-containing electrolytes (i) 0.1 M dry
Mg(ClO4)
2, (ii) 0.1 M Mg(ClO4)
2 ⋅ 6H2O with 0.4 M dry Mg(ClO4)
2, (iii) 0.1 M Mg(ClO4)
2 ⋅ 6H2O
with 0.1 M dry Mg(ClO4)
2, (iv) 0.1 M Mg(ClO4)
2 ⋅ 6H2O. (b) Mg 1 s XPS spectra for MnO2 at
different states. (c) STEM mapping of Mn, Mg, and Mg mapping image analyzed by EELS at a
fully discharged state. (d) Mg2+ insertion process in a dry electrolyte. (e) Mg2+ insertion
process in a wet electrolyte. (f) Mg2+ insertion process in dry electrolyte after cycling in a
wet electrolyte. Source: Song et al. [30], Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society
of Chemistry.290 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
(Figure 9.2a) in electrolytes with various water contents. Ex situ XPS (Figure 9.2b),
STEM mapping, and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) (Figure 9.2c) give
direct evidence about insertion of Mg2+ into MnO2 and the uniform distribution.
The amount of intercalated Mg2+ ions with the co-intercalated water molecules is
determined via the combination of inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission
spectroscopy (ICP-AES) and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM)
techniques. The molar ratio of co-inserted H2O and Mg2+ is in agreement with
that of V2O5 (about 3 : 1) [31]. The difference in MnO2 system is that the improved
Mg2+ insertion behavior can be maintained in the dry electrolyte after the initial
cycling in water containing electrolyte, while the enhanced capacity is no longer
observed in V2O5 system. The schematic of Mg2+ insertion mechanism into MnO2
is presented in Figure 9.2d–f. In terms of cycling performance, it displays a high
specific capacity of about 160 mAh g−1 in the first cycle, and the capacity retention
is 67% after 200 cycles at 1.6 C (1 C = 0.616 A g−1) in 0.1 M Mg(ClO4)2 ⋅ 6H2O/PC
electrolyte, much better than previously reported results.
9.1.3 Other Nanowires for MIBs
WSe2 has attracted much attention for its extraordinary properties of low thermal
conductivity, efficient p-type field effect performance, and high hydrophobic sticky
surface [32–34]. However, the application of WSe2 in energy storage systems is
rarely reported. Shen et al. synthesized a novel nanostructured WSe2 via chemical
vapor deposition and used it as the potential cathode material for MIBs [35]. The
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and
selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) measurements (Figure 9.3a,b) indicate
that the synthesized WSe2 nanowires have a diameter of about 100 nm with high
crystallinity. The electrochemical performance of WSe2 nanowire-assembled film
cathode was evaluated in Mg(AlCl2BuEt)2/THF electrolyte with Mg as the anode
in the voltage range of 0.3 and 3 V (Figure 9.3c–f). It exhibits a high platform at
about 1.6 V with a capacity of 220 mAh g−1 at 0.05 A g−1, and excellent cycling
performance of about 203 mAh g−1 after 160 cycles. However, the WSe2 bulk sample
shows poor cycling stability with a high capacity loss of 90% after 100 cycles.
Furthermore, the WSe2 nanowire cathode delivers enhanced rate performance
with a discharge capacity of 142 mAh g−1 at 0.8 A g−1. It also shows superior cycling
performance without obvious decay in capacity for 50 cycles at high rate (120
and 103 mAh g−1 at 1.5 and 3 A g−1). The authors conducted density functional
theory (DFT) to give the theoretical analysis, together with experimental results,
and extensively investigated the reason for excellent Mg-storage behavior of WSe2
nanowire. It should be pointed out that the employed voltage window (0.3–3 V) is
beyond the anodic limit of electrolyte (about 2.5 V), thus promoting the undesirable
side reactions of electrolyte.
Up to now, some cathode materials have demonstrated excellent Mg-storage
performance; however, most of the electrochemical performances are performed
in conventional electrolytes, which are not compatible with Mg anodes. In
order to make practical use of these cathodes, it is necessary to investigate other9.1 Nanowires for Magnesium-Ion Battery 291
Magnesuim foil
Separator
Electrolyte
WSe2 nanowire￾assembled film
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
Voltage (V) 1.0
0.5
0 40 80 120
Reversible capacity (mAh g–1)
160
1st
100th
2nd
200 240
120
100
80
40
60
Coulombic efficiency (%)
20
0
120
100
80
40
60
Coulombic efficiency (%)
20
0
0 40 20 80 60 100
Cycle number
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
WSe2 bulk
WSe2 nanowire-assembled film
0 40 20 80 60 100
Cycle number
120 140 160
280
240
160
200
80
40
120
Reversible capacity (mAh g–1)
0
0 40 20 80 60 100
Cycle number
WSe2 nanowire￾assembled film
WSe2 bulk
Discharge
Discharge
Charge
Charge
120 140 160
Figure 9.3 (a) SEM images of the synthesized WSe2 nanowires. (b) TEM image and SAED
pattern. (c) Schematic illustration of the assembled cell. (d) The discharge/charge profiles of
WSe2 nanowire-assembled film at the current density of 0.05 A g−1. (e) The cycling
performance and (f) corresponding Coulombic efficiency of WSe2 nanowire-assembled film
and WSe2 bulk. Source: Liu et al. [35], Reproduced with permission from the American
Chemical Society.
anode systems. Liu et al. developed the nanostructured Bi anode for MIBs [36].
The Bi nanotubes with the diameter of around 8 nm are synthesized through a
hydrothermal method. For comparison, Bi microparticles (about 100 μm) and
Bi nanoparticles (30–50 nm) were also prepared. The electrochemical perfor￾mance was tested in the Mg(BH4)2 + LiBH4/diglyme electrolytes against the
Mg cathode. As expected, the Bi nanotubes demonstrate much better cycling
performance of 92.3% capacity retention (303 mAh g−1) after 200 cycles and the
best rate performance of 350 and 216 mAh g−1 at 0.05 C and 5 C, respectively.292 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
The authors concluded that the Mg-storage performance is significantly influenced
by the morphology and size of Bi.
9.2 Nanowires for Calcium-Ion Batteries
Since each carrier can transfer multiple electrons, multivalent-ion batteries are
expected to achieve higher energy density and are considered potential candidates
for post-LIBs. Among multivalent-ion (Mg2+, Ca2+, Zn2+, and Al3+) batteries, CIBs
have received increasing attention in recent years due to the smallest polarization
force of Ca2+ and the lowest redox potential (−2.87 versus SHE) of Ca, which means
that CIBs may have better rate performance and higher working voltage [37, 38].
In addition, Ca is the fifth most abundant element in the earth’s crust, and Ca
metal tends to plating/stripping with dendrite-free morphology [39]. Therefore,
CIBs have the potential to become an energy storage device with safe, low-cost, and
high-energy-density [40, 41]. However, the cathode materials, as an important part
of CIBs, still show poor electrochemical performance, which severely impedes the
development of CIBs.
The reported cathode materials for CIBs mainly include Prussian blue analogs
[42, 43], polyanionic salts [38, 44–46], and layered transition metal oxygen or sul￾fides [47–49]. Among these cathode materials, the layered vanadium oxides exhibit
high Ca2+ storage capacity owing to their large interlayer spacing and the multi￾valent advantages of vanadium. However, due to the large radius and two charges
of Ca2+, the layered structure of vanadium oxides is easily destroyed during Ca2+
insertion and deinsertion, resulting in poor cycling performance. Thus, it is impor￾tant to find an effective strategy to stabilize the layered structure of vanadium oxides.
Wang et al. presented CaV6O16 ⋅ 2.8H2O nanoribbons as cathode materials for CIBs
(Figure 9.4a–c) [50]. Benefiting from the large interlayer spacing, pillar, and water
lubrication effect, CaV6O16 ⋅ 2.8H2O nanoribbons deliver a high discharge capacity
of 175.2 mAh g−1 at 50 ∘C and 131.7 mAh g−1 at room temperature, a long cycle life
of 1000 cycles (Figure 9.4d), and the highest rate performance (up to 1000 mA g−1) in
organic electrolyte. Furthermore, a single-phase Ca2+ insertion and extraction reac￾tion is revealed by in situ X-ray diffraction and in situ Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy. DFT computations indicate that Ca2+ tends to diffuse along the b direc￾tion with a low energy barrier of 0.36 eV.
Besides, Dong et al. investigated the electrochemical performance of K2V6O16
nanowires as cathode materials for CIBs [51]. The K2V6O16 nanowires exhibit a high
initial capacity of 113.9 mAh g−1 at 20 mA g−1 and high capacity retention of 78.30%
at 50 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. Adil et al. investigate zirconium-doped NH4V4O10
nanobelts as a cathode for CIBs at room temperature [52]. The zirconium-doped
NH4V4O10 nanobelts exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 78 mAh g−1 with
an average discharge voltage of ∼3.0 V versus Ca2+/Ca and presented a high rate
capability, excellent cycling stability for 500 cycles with ∼89% capacity retention.
Except for vanadium-based nanowires, manganese-based nanowires have also
been employed as cathode materials for CIBs. Zuo et al. investigated the calcium9.3 Nanowires for Zinc-Ion Batteries 293
Cycle number
Specific capacity (mAh g–1)
500 mA g–1
10 20 30 40
2θ (degree)
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
GOF = 2.66%
Rwp = 9.05%
Rp = 4.9%
Ca V O H2O α-V2O5
d = 4.37 Å
d = 8.10 Å
CaV6O16∙2.8H2O
H2O+Ca(OH)2
Reconstruction
Observed
Calculated
Difference
(004)
(300)
(002)
(206)
(006)
(115)
(008)
(117)
Intensity (a.u.)
50 60 70
CVO
CVO-340
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
200 400 600 800 1000
Figure 9.4 (a) Schematic diagram of the formation and crystal structure of CaV6O16 ⋅ 2.8
H2O. (b) XRD pattern and Rietveld refinement of CaV6O16 ⋅ 2.8H2O nanoribbons and (c) SEM
image of CaV6O16 ⋅ 2.8H2O nanoribbons. (d) Long cycling performance of CaV6O16 ⋅ 2.8H2O
(CVO) and CVO-340 at 500 mA g−1 and 50 ∘C. Source: Wang et al. [50], Reproduced with
permission from Wiley-VCH GmbH.
storage performance of four MnO2 nanowires or nanowire assemblies with
different crystal phases (α, β, γ, and δ-phase) [53]. Among these, the δ-MnO2
nanowire assemblies exhibit superior electrochemical performance in terms of rate
capability (capacities of 125, 118, 105, and 87 mA g–1 at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1 A g−1) and
a reversible capacity of 125 mAh g−1 at 100 mA g−1 because of high Ca-ion diffusion
coefficient and capacitive capacity contribution.
9.3 Nanowires for Zinc-Ion Batteries
The development and application of LIBs in large-scale energy storage are limited
by the inevitable challenges, such as increasingly scarce lithium resources, high294 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
cost, low safety, and especially the utilization of noxious and flammable organic
electrolytes [54, 55]. As a promising alternative candidate, aqueous ZIBs have
attracted wide attention from researchers owing to their high theoretical capacity
(5854 mAh cm−3 and 820 mAh g−1), low redox potential (−0.762 V versus SHE),
environmental acceptability, abundance, intrinsic nonflammability, and simplified
packaging technology in air [56–58]. However, the poor cycling stability and low
energy density of cathodes constrained the current application of ZIBs. Thus,
developing high performance cathodes with high capacity and cycle stability is
necessary.
9.3.1 Vanadium-Based Nanowires for ZIBs
Benefiting from the wide valence variation from V5+ to V3+, vanadium-based
cathodes usually have a high specific capacity. In particular, the layered vana￾dium oxides with a large interlayer spacing could accommodate cathodic ions’
insertion/extraction, conveniently. Bilayer V2O5 with larger interlayer spacing
is a promising material for Zn2+ ions intercalation/deintercalation. Recently,
Yan et al. explored V2O5 ⋅ nH2O/graphene as cathode material for ZIBs [59].
The reduced graphene oxide-supported V2O5 ⋅ nH2O nanowire framework could
significantly increase the conductivity of cathode and enhance contact between
electrolyte and active material, resulting in a higher ion diffusion coefficient. This
aqueous Zn/V2O5 system displays a capacity of 295 mAh g−1 at a power density
of 6.4 kW kg−1, and an initial capacity of 381 mAh g−1 is obtained. The cycling
performance test at 6 A g−1 shows that 71% of maximum capacity can be achieved
after 900 cycles. For the control experiment, VOG-350 (prepared by annealing
V2O5 ⋅ nH2O/graphene at 350 ∘C for 2 hours in vacuum to eliminate structural
water) displays a poorer cycling performance than that of VOG. This result reveals
the positive impact of structural H2O on Zn2+ ions intercalating into bilayer
V2O5 ⋅ nH2O. They further demonstrated it with an XRD study and NMR analysis
and proposed that the effective charge of Zn2+ could be reduced by water solvation,
leading to a reduction of electrostatic interactions between Zn2+ ions and V2O5
framework, which can effectively promote ion diffusion. He et al. [60] utilized
Na0.33V2O5 nanowires as cathode material for ZIBs, which display greatly enhanced
cycling stability compared to undoped V2O5 cathode. After 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1,
Na0.33V2O5 still delivers a capacity of 218.4 mAh g−1, which is over 93% of the
highest capacity in the 2–1000th cycles. Based on the ex situ XRD and TEM tech￾nologies, the improved structural stability of Na0.33V2O5 compared to V2O5 during
cycling was demonstrated, which benefit from the “pillar effect” of sodium ions in
interlayer.
Nazar et al. [61] reported the electrochemical performance of Zn0.25V2O5 ⋅ nH2O
nanobelts as cathode material for ZIBs. The pre-intercalated Zn-ions stabilize the
layered structure and thus ensure cycling stability. Consequently, the capacity
retention of Zn0.25V2O5 ⋅ nH2O cathode is over 80% after cycling at 2400 mA g−1
for 1000 cycles. After that, another two zinc vanadates for aqueous ZIBs were
reported: Zn3V2O7(OH)2
.
2H2O nanowires [62] and Zn2V2O7 nanowires [63],9.3 Nanowires for Zinc-Ion Batteries 295
respectively. Zn3V2O7(OH)2
.
2H2O nanowires were found to display a reversible
capacity of 213 mAh g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and cycling stability up to 300 cycles at
200 mA g−1. Zn2V2O7 nanowires exhibit a reversible capacity of ∼250 mAh g−1 at
50 mA g−1 and∼150 mAh g−1 at 4000 mA g−1. Good cycling stability for 1000 cycles
at 4000 mA g−1 is obtained. The Zn storge mechanism for these phases was all
demonstrated to be intercalation/deintercalation reaction. Considering the low cost
of zinc, vanadium, and aqueous electrolyte, combined with the superior reported
electrochemical performance, the aqueous Zn//Zn-V-O batteries are very promising
for large-scale energy storage.
Xia et al. [64] demonstrated that layered Ca0.25V2O5 ⋅ nH2O nanobelts are promis￾ing cathode materials for aqueous ZIB cathode. A high capacity of 340 mAh g−1
at 0.2 C and capacity retention of 96% after 3000 cycles at 80 C are achieved.
When compared with the reported Zn0.25V2O5 ⋅ nH2O nanobelts at earlier stage,
Ca0.25V2O5 ⋅ nH2O nanobelts show higher electrical conductivity (185 S m−1 com￾pared to 46 S m−1) and larger layer spacing (10.6 Å compared to 10.2 Å) due to the
larger CaO7 polyhedra than the ZnO6 octahedra in the layers. Besides, the lower
molecular weight can result in higher gravimetric capacity.
The zinc storage performance of H2V3O8 nanowires was investigated by He et al.
[65] and Pang et al. [66] with Zn(CF3SO3)2 aqueous electrolyte. The high capacity
of about 400 mAh g−1 is achieved with two slope plateaus at about 0.8 and 0.5 V,
respectively. Stable cycling over 1000 cycles is obtained at high rates. In addition,
Na1.1V3O7.9 nanoribbons [67], NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.5H2O nanobelts [68], Na2V6O16 ⋅ 1.63H2O
nanowires [69], and Na2V6O16 ⋅ 3H2O nanorods [70] have been demonstrated as
exciting high-performance ZIB cathodes with high capacity (over 300 mAh g−1),
excellent cycling stability and rate capability. For example, NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.5H2O
nanobelts were reported to realize a high reversible capacity of 380 mAh g−1 and
capacity retention of 82% after 1000 cycles, while Na2V6O16 ⋅ 1.63H2O nanowires
were found to exhibit a capacity retention of 90% over 6000 cycles at 5000 mA g−1.
These exciting results suggest that appropriate vanadate nanowires as cathodes are
one of the good choices for aqueous ZIBs in practical applications.
9.3.2 Manganese-Based Nanowires for ZIBs
The development of the Zn//α-MnO2 batteries is hindered by their restricted cycle
life and inferior rate capability in the primary period. The electrochemical perfor￾mance of α-MnO2 cathode can be significantly improved by adjusting the concen￾tration and component of electrolyte. Pan et al. realized the high reversible capacity
and excellent cycling stability of α-MnO2 nanowires by restraining the dissolution
of Mn2+ by pre-added Mn2+ ions (MnSO4) into the electrolyte [71]. Although the
MnSO4 addition has no impact on redox processes, it can considerably increase the
MnO2 cathodes’ cycling stability (Figure 9.4b). Subsequently, the capacity reten￾tion of α-MnO2 nanowires using electrolyte with the MnSO4 additive is 92% after
5000 cycles at a rate of 5 C. In addition, Wu et al. coated α-MnO2 nanowires with
graphene to solve the problems of rapid capacity decay and material dissolution [72].296 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
Graphene scroll-coated α-MnO2 nanowires exhibit higher capacity, increased con￾ductivity, and enhanced rate performance compared to bare α-MnO2 nanowires. The
graphene scroll-coated α-MnO2 nanowires deliver excellent long-term cycle stabil￾ity; their specific capacity reaches 145.3 mAh g−1 at 3 A g−1 with a capacity reten￾tion of 94% after 3000 cycles. This strategy provides new ideas for the development
of aqueous ZIBs and even other types of electrode material optimization. In addi￾tion, Wang et al. presented superfine α-MnO2 nanowires (∼10 nm) with rich crys￾tal defects (oxygen vacancies and cavities) as cathode materials for ZIBs [73]. The
defects facilitate the adsorption and diffusion of hydrogen/zinc for fast ion trans￾portation and the buildup of a local electric field for improved electron migration. In
addition, the superfine nanostructure could provide sufficient active sites and short
diffusion pathways for further promotion of capacity and reaction kinetics of MnO2.
Remarkably, the defect-enriched MnO2 nanowires manifest an energy density as
high as 406 Wh kg−1 and excellent durability over 1000 cycles without noticeable
capacity degradation.
Except for α-MnO2 nanowires, δ-MnO2 nanowires have also been employed as
cathode materials for ZIBs. For example, Liu et al. reported the δ-MnO2 nanowire
networks as ZIB cathode materials [74]. A distinctive three-dimensional (3D)
nanonetwork structure results in enhancement of electrolyte osmosis and a signifi￾cant increase in contact between electrode and electrolyte, and also provided more
active sites and convenient rapid ion transport routes. Moreover, the fine nanowire
structure and the optimum layer spacing resulted in easier insertion/deinsertion of
ions in the active material. Taking advantage of this feature, the δ-MnO2 cathode
provides high reversible capacity of 342 mAh g−1, fast rate capability of 150 mAh g−1
at 6.494 C (1 C = 308 mA g−1), and good cycling stability of 148 mAh g−1 retained
after 400 cycles at 1.623 C.
9.4 Nanowires for Aluminum Ion Batteries
Along with the increasing world energy consumption and exhaustion of fossil fuel,
exploring sustainable energy sources to meet drastic demand is urgently needed
[75–77]. Developing large-scale energy storage systems is crucial to transformation
of sustainable energy into electric energy infrastructure [78–82]. New types of mul￾tivalent ion batteries, such as MIBs [17, 83], ZIBs [60, 84], and AIBs [7, 10, 85], have
received considerable attention derived from the abundance and safety of corre￾sponding metal anodes. Aluminum is the cheapest metal (∼1.4 USD kg−1) due to the
largest reserve (82 000 ppm in earth’s crust) when compared with other multivalent
metal anodes [10]. Moreover, the trivalent charge carriers can provide high volumet￾ric capacity (8046 mAh cm−3) and gravimetric capacity (2980 mAh g−1) [86]. Despite
the above advantages, long-standing challenges still limit the development of AIBs.
The major obstacle comes from inherently strong polarization effect between Al3+
and framework lattice of cathode material, which increases the diffusion resistance
and limits the specific capacity [82, 87]. Thus, finding suitable cathode materials
becomes a formidable challenge for AIBs [88].9.4 Nanowires for Aluminum Ion Batteries 297
Sp. capacity (mAh g–1)
(a)
(b) (c)
Al-ion storage
mechanism
V O
Reversible
discharge
Reversible
charge
Al
Phase transition
interface
Amorphous
layer
First
discharge
Voltage (V)
0 40
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
80 120 160 200 240 280 320
500 nm
Figure 9.5 (a) TEM image of V2O5 nanowires, (b) charge/discharge curves of V2O5
nanowires in AIBs. Source: Jayaprakash et al. [86], Reproduced with permission from the
Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Illustration of the structural evolution of V2O5 nanowires
during Al-ion storage. Source: Gu et al. [89], Reproduced with permission from Elsevier.
The first stable AIB based on V2O5 with extended cycle life was reported by
Jayaprakash et al. [86] in 2011. In this AIB, the V2O5 nanowires are used as
the cathode material, with ionic liquid as electrolyte and aluminum metal as
anode (Figure 9.5a). The V2O5 nanowires exhibit high discharge capacities of
305 mAh g−1 in the 1st cycle and 273 mAh g−1 in the 20th cycle at 125 mA g−1
with a discharge plateau at about 0.55 V (Figure 9.5b). However, the cathode
reaction in this system is controversial. Reed et al. [90] reported that the V2O5
nanowires are electrochemically inactive in above AIB system, and the capacity is
attributed to the reactions of ionic liquid electrolyte with the iron and chromium
metal in the stainless steel current collector. Gu et al. [89] demonstrated the
reversible insertion/extraction of aluminum-ions into V2O5 nanowires. The surface
amorphization of V2O5 nanowires arises during the intercalation of Al3+ ions
(Figure 9.5c). However, V2O5 nanowires with Ni current collector display a lower
discharge capacity (53.4 mAh g−1 in 2nd cycle at 10 mA g−1) compared to V2O5
nanowires with stainless steel current collector. Therefore, it can be concluded that
both the reactions of ionic liquid electrolyte with stainless steel current collectors
and reversible insertion/extraction of aluminum-ion into V2O5 nanowires exist.
In addition, Yu et al. presented hexagonal NiS nanobelts as cathode materials for
AIBs [91]. The Al/NiS battery keeps a capacity of over 100 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles at
a current density of 200 mA g−1. Significantly, good cycle stability with a 90% capac￾ity retention over 100 cycles is also obtained. Zhang et al. reported unzipped carbon
nanotubes as cathode materials for AIBs [92]. A flexible unzipped multi-walled
carbon nanotube (UCNT) film consisting of graphene nanoribbons and a carbon
nanotube backbone is prepared via a simple, low-cost, and scalable method for
high-performance aluminum battery positive electrode. In the nanostructure, the298 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
neonatal graphene nanoribbons provide numerous active intercalation sites to
store AlCl4
− anions, while the internal core CNTs are responsible for the rapid
transportation of electrons to the active sites. Fast transportation of electrons and
anions in UCNT film is simultaneously achieved, promoting the kinetics in the
aluminum battery. Thus, the UCNT-Al battery exhibits a high storage performance
with a capacity as high as 100 mAh g−1 at 2000 mA g−1 and a long cycle life of
5600 cycles with a capacity of 75 mAh g−1 and a Coulombic efficiency of 98% at
5000 mA g−1. Furthermore, the excellent flexibility, fast charging, and variable
discharging performance are beneficial for the development of portable devices.
To obtain AIBs with higher energy density, Al–S, Al–Se and Al–Te batteries
were developed, and nanowires were also employed in these battery systems.
For example, Bian et al. reported that Al–S batteries with multiwalled carbon
nanotube (MWCNT)/S composites as the cathode materials [93]. This Al–S cell
delivers an initial specific capacity of ∼740 mAh gS
−1 and retains a specific capacity
of up to ∼520 mAh gS
−1 after 100 charge/discharge cycles. In addition, the Al–S
cell exhibits a high discharge voltage plateau (1.6–2.0 V). Lei et al. presented
graphene-encapsulated selenium@polyaniline nanowires as cathode materials for
Al–Se batteries [94]. Se nanowires are well sealed in a PANI layer with a thickness
of 15 nm, and then the constructed Se@PANI core–shell nanowires are uniformly
encapsulated in graphene nanosheets to form a 3D hierarchical architecture of
Se@PANI@G. As a result, the AIBs with the as-prepared Se@PANI@G composite
positive electrode can deliver a high specific capacity of ∼445.5 mAh g−1 during the
second cycle at a current density of 200 mA g−1, with a retained discharge specific
capacity of 164.0 mAh g−1 after 160 cycles. The improved cycling performance
can be associated with the high electrical conductivity of graphene sheets and the
unique PANI shell, together with the 3D hierarchical architecture of Se@PANI@G.
In addition, Zhang et al. proposed the Al–Te batteries with Te nanowires as
cathode materials [95]. The Te nanowires deliver an ultrahigh discharge capacity
∼1026 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 with an initial 1.4 V discharge voltage, which is
competitive with the record-setting energy density of the documented AIBs.
9.5 Summary and Outlook
Scientific breakthroughs about multivalent-ion batteries have been reported at an
increasing rate in the last ten years. Although many problems remain to be solved
and the large gap in electrochemical performance between multivalent batteries
and Li-ion batteries still exists, the unique advantage of multivalent metal and
the resource scarcity problem of lithium stimulate the researchers to constantly
lucubrate the new types of high-performance multivalent-ion batteries. A large
amount of effort is still needed to achieve the prospective target. Effective strategies
should be proposed to optimize the crystal structure and promote the electrochemi￾cal intercalated/deintercalated process in the future. The conventional optimization
strategies borrowed from Li-ion battery, such as nanocrystallization treatment
to improve active surface area, ion doping, carbon coatings, and preparation ofReferences 299
porous structures, have improved the performance of nanowires for multivalent-ion
batteries. Moreover, other specific optimized methods, such as co-intercalation of
water molecules or halogen, pre-intercalation stratagem, amorphization treatment,
and controlling the multivalent cation intercalation extent, are also important
to improve the electrochemical performance of nanowires. On the other hand,
advanced characterization methods are important for material development. With
the rapid progress of detection method, the intrinsic reason for many troublesome
issues in nanowires for multivalent-ion batteries will be revealed, which will
guide the development of optimizing approach. After continuous exploration and
innovation, we optimistically anticipate that nanowires for multivalent-ion batteries
will break through bottleneck in the near future.
References
1 Grey, C. and Tarascon, J. (2017). Sustainability and in situ monitoring in battery
development. Nature Materials 16 (1): 45–56.
2 Ohmer, N., Fenk, B., Samuelis, D. et al. (2015). Phase evolution in
single-crystalline LiFePO4 followed by in situ scanning X-ray microscopy of a
micrometre-sized battery. Nature Communications 6 (1): 1–7.
3 Bonnick, P. and Muldoon, J. (2020). A trip to oz and a peak behind the curtain
of magnesium batteries. Advanced Functional Materials 30 (21): 1910510.
4 Sun, R., Pei, C., Sheng, J. et al. (2018). High-rate and long-life VS2 cathodes for
hybrid magnesium-based battery. Energy Storage Materials 12: 61–68.
5 Mei, L., Xu, J., Wei, Z. et al. (2017). Chevrel phase Mo6T8 (T = S, Se) as elec￾trodes for advanced energy storage. Small 13 (34): 1701441.
6 Tang, H., Xu, N., Pei, C. et al. (2017). H2V3O8 nanowires as high-capacity cath￾ode materials for magnesium-based battery. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9
(34): 28667–28673.
7 Lin, M.-C., Gong, M., Lu, B. et al. (2015). An ultrafast rechargeable
aluminium-ion battery. Nature 520 (7547): 324–328.
8 Huang, J., Guo, Z., Ma, Y. et al. (2019). Recent progress of rechargeable batteries
using mild aqueous electrolytes. Small Methods 3 (1): 1800272.
9 Ponrouch, A., Bitenc, J., Dominko, R. et al. (2019). Multivalent rechargeable
batteries. Energy Storage Materials 20: 253–262.
10 Ambroz, F., Macdonald, T.J., and Nann, T. (2017). Trends in aluminium-based
intercalation batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 7 (15): 1602093.
11 Li, Z., Vinayan, B.P., Jankowski, P. et al. (2020). Multi-electron reactions enabled
by anion-based redox chemistry for high-energy multivalent rechargeable batter￾ies. Angewandte Chemie, International Edition 132 (28): 11580–11587.
12 Zhao, X., Zhao-Karger, Z., Fichtner, M. et al. (2020). Halide-based materials and
chemistry for rechargeable batteries. Angewandte Chemie, International Edition
59 (15): 5902–5949.300 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
13 Erickson, E.M., Markevich, E., Salitra, G. et al. (2015). Development of advanced
rechargeable batteries: a continuous challenge in the choice of suitable elec￾trolyte solutions. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 162 (14): A2424.
14 Mao, M., Gao, T., Hou, S. et al. (2018). A critical review of cathodes for
rechargeable Mg batteries. Chemical Society Reviews 47 (23): 8804–8841.
15 Muldoon, J., Bucur, C.B., and Gregory, T. (2014). Quest for nonaqueous multi￾valent secondary batteries: magnesium and beyond. Chemical Reviews 114 (23):
11683–11720.
16 Tan, S., Xiong, F., Wang, J. et al. (2020). Crystal regulation towards rechargeable
magnesium battery cathode materials. Materials Horizons 7 (8): 1971–1995.
17 Xiong, F., Fan, Y., Tan, S. et al. (2018). Magnesium storage performance and
mechanism of CuS cathode. Nano Energy 47: 210–216.
18 Pei, C., Xiong, F., Yin, Y. et al. (2021). Recent progress and challenges in the
optimization of electrode materials for rechargeable magnesium batteries. Small
17 (3): 2004108.
19 Li, B., Masse, R., Liu, C. et al. (2019). Kinetic surface control for improved
magnesium-electrolyte interfaces for magnesium ion batteries. Energy Storage
Materials 22: 96–104.
20 Zhang, Q., Takeuchi, E.S., Takeuchi, K.J. et al. (2015). High energy density elec￾trode materials for rechargeable magnesium batteries. ECS Transactions 66 (9):
171.
21 Cheng, X., Zhang, Z., Kong, Q. et al. (2020). Highly reversible cuprous mediated
cathode chemistry for magnesium batteries. Angewandte Chemie, International
Edition 132 (28): 11574–11579.
22 An, Q., Li, Y., Yoo, H.D. et al. (2015). Graphene decorated vanadium oxide
nanowire aerogel for long-cycle-life magnesium battery cathodes. Nano Energy
18: 265–272.
23 Xu, Y., Deng, X., Li, Q. et al. (2019). Vanadium oxide pillared by interlayer Mg2+
ions and water as ultralong-life cathodes for magnesium-ion batteries. Chem 5
(5): 1194–1209.
24 Luo, T., Liu, Y., Su, H. et al. (2018). Nanostructured-VO2(B): a high-capacity
magnesium-ion cathode and its electrochemical reaction mechanism. Elec￾trochimica Acta 260: 805–813.
25 Won, J.M., You, N.K., Lee, J.K. et al. (2015). Superior electrochemical properties
of rutile VO2 -carbon composite microspheres as a promising anode material for
lithium ion batteries. Electrochimica Acta 156: 179–187.
26 Jiao, L., Yuan, H., Si, Y. et al. (2006). Electrochemical insertion of magnesium
in open-ended vanadium oxide nanotubes. Journal of Power Sources 156 (2):
673–676.
27 Kim, R.-H., Kim, J.-S., Kim, H.-J. et al. (2014). Highly reduced VOx nanotube
cathode materials with ultra-high capacity for magnesium ion batteries. Journal
of Materials Chemistry A 2 (48): 20636–20641.
28 Jiao, L., Yuan, H., Wang, Y. et al. (2005). Mg intercalation properties into
open-ended vanadium oxide nanotubes. Electrochemistry Communications 7
(4): 431–436.References 301
29 Rashad, M., Zhang, H., Asif, M. et al. (2018). Low-cost room-temperature syn￾thesis of NaV3O8 ⋅ 1.69H2O nanobelts for Mg batteries. ACS Applied Materials &
Interfaces 10 (5): 4757–4766.
30 Song, J., Noked, M., Gillette, E. et al. (2015). Activation of a MnO2 cathode by
water-stimulated Mg2+ insertion for a magnesium ion battery. Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics 17 (7): 5256–5264.
31 Nam, K.W., Kim, S., Lee, S. et al. (2015). The high performance of crystal water
containing manganese birnessite cathodes for magnesium batteries. Nano Letters
15 (6): 4071–4079.
32 Chiritescu, C., Cahill, D.G., Nguyen, N. et al. (2007). Ultralow thermal conductiv￾ity in disordered, layered WSe2 crystals. Science 315 (5810): 351–353.
33 Fang, H., Chuang, S., Chang, T.C. et al. (2012). High-performance single layered
WSe2 p-FETs with chemically doped contacts. Nano Letters 12 (7): 3788–3792.
34 Boscher, N.D., Carmalt, C.J., and Parkin, I.P. (2006). Atmospheric pressure chem￾ical vapor deposition of WSe2 thin films on glass-highly hydrophobic sticky
surfaces. Journal of Materials Chemistry 16 (1): 122–127.
35 Liu, B., Luo, T., Mu, G. et al. (2013). Rechargeable Mg-ion batteries based on
WSe2 nanowire cathodes. ACS Nano 7 (9): 8051–8058.
36 Shao, Y., Gu, M., Li, X. et al. (2014). Highly reversible Mg insertion in nanos￾tructured Bi for Mg ion batteries. Nano Letters 14 (1): 255–260.
37 Arroyo-de Dompablo, M.E., Ponrouch, A., Johansson, P. et al. (2019). Achieve￾ments, challenges, and prospects of calcium batteries. Chemical Reviews 120 (14):
6331–6357.
38 Xu, Z.-L., Park, J., Wang, J. et al. (2021). A new high-voltage calcium intercala￾tion host for ultra-stable and high-power calcium rechargeable batteries. Nature
Communications 12 (1): 1–9.
39 Pu, S.D., Gong, C., Gao, X. et al. (2020). Current-density-dependent electro￾plating in Ca electrolytes: from globules to dendrites. ACS Energy Letters 5 (7):
2283–2290.
40 Hosein, I.D. (2021). The promise of calcium batteries: open perspectives and fair
comparisons. ACS Energy Letters 6 (4): 1560–1565.
41 Ji, B., He, H., Yao, W. et al. (2021). Recent advances and perspectives on
calcium-ion storage: key materials and devices. Advanced Materials 33 (2):
2005501.
42 Tojo, T., Sugiura, Y., Inada, R. et al. (2016). Reversible calcium ion batteries
using a dehydrated prussian blue analogue cathode. Electrochimica Acta 207:
22–27.
43 Shiga, T., Kondo, H., Kato, Y. et al. (2015). Insertion of calcium ion into prussian
blue analogue in nonaqueous solutions and its application to a rechargeable bat￾tery with dual carriers. Journal of Physical Chemistry C 119 (50): 27946–27953.
44 Kim, S., Yin, L., Lee, M.H. et al. (2020). High-voltage phosphate cathodes for
rechargeable Ca-ion batteries. ACS Energy Letters 5 (10): 3203–3211.
45 Wang, J., Tan, S., Xiong, F. et al. (2020). VOPO4 ⋅ 2H2O as a new cathode
material for rechargeable Ca-ion batteries. Chemical Communications 56 (26):
3805–3808.
46 Jeon, B., Heo, J.W., Hyoung, J. et al. (2020). Reversible calcium-ion insertion in
NASICON-type NaV2(PO4)3. Chemistry of Materials 32 (20): 8772–8780.302 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
47 Chae, M.S., Kwak, H.H., and Hong, S.-T. (2020). Calcium molybdenum bronze
as a stable high-capacity cathode material for calcium-ion batteries. ACS Applied
Energy Materials 3 (6): 5107–5112.
48 Ren, W., Xiong, F., Fan, Y. et al. (2020). Hierarchical copper sulfide porous
nanocages for rechargeable multivalent-ion batteries. ACS Applied Materials &
Interfaces 12 (9): 10471–10478.
49 Murata, Y., Takada, S., Obata, T. et al. (2019). Effect of water in electrolyte
on the Ca2+ insertion/extraction properties of V2O5. Electrochimica Acta 294:
210–216.
50 Wang, J., Wang, J., Jiang, Y. et al. (2022). CaV6O16 ⋅ 2.8H2O with Ca2+ pillar
and water lubrication as a high-rate and long-life cathode material for ca-ion
batteries. Advanced Functional Materials 32 (25): 2113030.
51 Dong, L.-W., Xu, R.-G., Wang, P.-P. et al. (2020). Layered potassium vanadate
K2V6O16 nanowires: a stable and high capacity cathode material for calcium-ion
batteries. Journal of Power Sources 479: 228793.
52 Adil, M., Sarkar, A., Sau, S. et al. (2022). Non-aqueous rechargeable calcium-ion
batteries based on high voltage zirconium-doped ammonium vanadium oxide
cathode. Journal of Power Sources 541: 231669.
53 Zuo, C., Xiong, F., Wang, J. et al. (2022). MnO2 polymorphs as cathode materials
for rechargeable ca-ion batteries. Advanced Functional Materials 2202975.
54 Liu, K., Liu, Y., Lin, D. et al. (2018). Materials for lithium-ion battery safety.
Science Advances 4 (6): eaas9820.
55 Tarascon, J.-M. and Armand, M. (2001). Issues and challenges facing recharge￾able lithium batteries. Nature 414 (6861): 359–367.
56 Liu, C., Xie, X., Lu, B. et al. (2021). Electrolyte strategies toward better zinc-ion
batteries. ACS Energy Letters 6 (3): 1015–1033.
57 Liang, Y., Tao, Z., and Chen, J. (2012). Organic electrode materials for recharge￾able lithium batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 2 (7): 742–769.
58 Liu, Y., Huang, M., Xiong, F. et al. (2022). Improved zinc-ion storage per￾formance of the metal-free organic anode by the effect of binder. Chemical
Engineering Journal 428: 131092.
59 Yan, M., He, P., Chen, Y. et al. (2018). Water-lubricated intercalation in
V2O5 ⋅ nH2O for high-capacity and high-rate aqueous rechargeable zinc batteries.
Advanced Materials 30 (1): 1703725.
60 He, P., Zhang, G., Liao, X. et al. (2018). Sodium ion stabilized vanadium oxide
nanowire cathode for high-performance zinc-ion batteries. Advanced Energy
Materials 8 (10): 1702463.
61 Kundu, D., Adams, B.D., Duffort, V. et al. (2016). A high-capacity and long-life
aqueous rechargeable zinc battery using a metal oxide intercalation cathode.
Nature Energy 1 (10): 1–8.
62 Xia, C., Guo, J., Lei, Y. et al. (2018). Rechargeable aqueous zinc-ion battery based
on porous framework zinc pyrovanadate intercalation cathode. Advanced Materi￾als 30 (5): 1705580.
63 Sambandam, B., Soundharrajan, V., Kim, S. et al. (2018). Aqueous recharge￾able Zn-ion batteries: an imperishable and high-energy Zn2V2O7 nanowire
cathode through intercalation regulation. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 6
(9): 3850–3856.References 303
64 Xia, C., Guo, J., Li, P. et al. (2018). Highly stable aqueous zinc-ion storage using
a layered calcium vanadium oxide bronze cathode. Angewandte Chemie, Interna￾tional Edition 57 (15): 3943–3948.
65 He, P., Quan, Y., Xu, X. et al. (2017). High-performance aqueous zinc–ion battery
based on layered H2V3O8 nanowire cathode. Small 13 (47): 1702551.
66 Pang, Q., Sun, C., Yu, Y. et al. (2018). H2V3O8 nanowire/graphene electrodes
for aqueous rechargeable zinc ion batteries with high rate capability and large
capacity. Advanced Energy Materials 8 (19): 1800144.
67 Cai, Y., Liu, F., Luo, Z. et al. (2018). Pilotaxitic Na1.1V3O7.9 nanorib￾bons/graphene as high-performance sodium ion battery and aqueous zinc ion
battery cathode. Energy Storage Materials 13: 168–174.
68 Wan, F., Zhang, L., Dai, X. et al. (2018). Aqueous rechargeable zinc/sodium
vanadate batteries with enhanced performance from simultaneous insertion of
dual carriers. Nature Communications 9 (1): 1–11.
69 Hu, P., Zhu, T., Wang, X. et al. (2018). Highly durable Na2V6O16 ⋅ 1.63 H2O
nanowire cathode for aqueous zinc-ion battery. Nano Letters 18 (3): 1758–1763.
70 Soundharrajan, V., Sambandam, B., Kim, S. et al. (2018). Na2V6O16 ⋅ 3H2O bar￾nesite nanorod: an open door to display a stable and high energy for aqueous
rechargeable Zn-ion batteries as cathodes. Nano Letters 18 (4): 2402–2410.
71 Pan, H., Shao, Y., Yan, P. et al. (2016). Reversible aqueous zinc/manganese oxide
energy storage from conversion reactions. Nature Energy 1 (5): 1–7.
72 Wu, B., Zhang, G., Yan, M. et al. (2018). Graphene scroll-coated α-MnO2
nanowires as high-performance cathode materials for aqueous Zn-ion battery.
Small 14 (13): 1703850.
73 Wang, J., Wang, J.-G., Qin, X. et al. (2020). Superfine MnO2 nanowires with rich
defects toward boosted zinc ion storage performance. ACS Applied Materials &
Interfaces 12 (31): 34949–34958.
74 Liu, D.-S., Mai, Y., Chen, S. et al. (2021). A 1D–3D interconnected δ-MnO2
nanowires network as high-performance and high energy efficiency cathode
material for aqueous zinc-ion batteries. Electrochimica Acta 370: 137740.
75 Chu, S. and Majumdar, A. (2012). Opportunities and challenges for a sustainable
energy future. Nature 488 (7411): 294–303.
76 Etacheri, V., Marom, R., Elazari, R. et al. (2011). Challenges in the development
of advanced Li-ion batteries: a review. Energy & Environmental Science 4 (9):
3243–3262.
77 Larcher, D. and Tarascon, J.-M. (2015). Towards greener and more sustainable
batteries for electrical energy storage. Nature Chemistry 7 (1): 19–29.
78 Bonaccorso, F., Colombo, L., Yu, G. et al. (2015). Graphene, related
two-dimensional crystals, and hybrid systems for energy conversion and storage.
Science 347 (6217): 1246501.
79 Tepavcevic, S., Xiong, H., Stamenkovic, V.R. et al. (2012). Nanostructured bilay￾ered vanadium oxide electrodes for rechargeable sodium-ion batteries. ACS Nano
6 (1): 530–538.
80 Sun, Y.-K., Chen, Z., Noh, H.-J. et al. (2012). Nanostructured high-energy cath￾ode materials for advanced lithium batteries. Nature Materials 11 (11): 942–947.304 9 Nanowires for Multivalent-ion Batteries
81 Kennedy, T., Brandon, M., and Ryan, K.M. (2016). Advances in the application
of silicon and germanium nanowires for high-performance lithium-ion batteries.
Advanced Materials 28 (27): 5696–5704.
82 Sathiya, M., Abakumov, A.M., Foix, D. et al. (2015). Origin of voltage decay in
high-capacity layered oxide electrodes. Nature Materials 14 (2): 230–238.
83 Levi, E., Gofer, Y., and Aurbach, D. (2010). On the way to rechargeable Mg bat￾teries: the challenge of new cathode materials. Chemistry of Materials 22 (3):
860–868.
84 Xu, C., Li, B., Du, H. et al. (2012). Energetic zinc ion chemistry: the rechargeable
zinc ion battery. Angewandte Chemie 124 (4): 957–959.
85 Elia, G.A., Marquardt, K., Hoeppner, K. et al. (2016). An overview and future
perspectives of aluminum batteries. Advanced Materials 28 (35): 7564–7579.
86 Jayaprakash, N., Das, S., and Archer, L. (2011). The rechargeable aluminum-ion
battery. Chemical Communications 47 (47): 12610–12612.
87 Ling, C. and Mizuno, F. (2013). Phase stability of post-spinel compound AMn2O4
(A= Li, Na, or Mg) and its application as a rechargeable battery cathode. Chem￾istry of Materials 25 (15): 3062–3071.
88 Zafar, Z.A., Imtiaz, S., Razaq, R. et al. (2017). Cathode materials for rechargeable
aluminum batteries: current status and progress. Journal of Materials Chemistry
A 5 (12): 5646–5660.
89 Gu, S., Wang, H., Wu, C. et al. (2017). Confirming reversible Al3+ storage mech￾anism through intercalation of Al3+ into V2O5 nanowires in a rechargeable
aluminum battery. Energy Storage Materials 6: 9–17.
90 Reed, L.D. and Menke, E. (2013). The roles of V2O5 and stainless steel in
rechargeable Al–ion batteries. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 160 (6):
A915.
91 Yu, Z., Kang, Z., Hu, Z. et al. (2016). Hexagonal NiS nanobelts as advanced cath￾ode materials for rechargeable Al-ion batteries. Chemical Communications 52
(68): 10427–10430.
92 Zhang, E., Wang, J., Wang, B. et al. (2019). Unzipped carbon nanotubes for
aluminum battery. Energy Storage Materials 23: 72–78.
93 Bian, Y., Li, Y., Yu, Z. et al. (2018). Using an AlCl3/urea ionic liquid analog
electrolyte for improving the lifetime of aluminum-sulfur batteries. ChemElec￾troChem 5 (23): 3607–3611.
94 Lei, H., Tu, J., Li, S. et al. (2022). Graphene-encapsulated selenium@polyaniline
nanowires with three-dimensional hierarchical architecture for high-capacity
aluminum–selenium batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 10 (28):
15146–15154.
95 Zhang, X., Jiao, S., Tu, J. et al. (2019). Rechargeable ultrahigh-capacity
tellurium–aluminum batteries. Energy & Environmental Science 12 (6):
1918–1927.305
10
Conclusion and Outlook
Electrochemical energy storage has the characteristics of good energy density, high
power density, and stable cycle life and has thus become a widely studied energy
storage form. Recently, in order to obtain higher-performance electrochemical
energy storage devices, various nanomaterials have been studied and explored.
Among them, nanowire materials have unique advantages compared with other
simple-structured nanomaterials. The unique anisotropy, large specific surface area,
excellent tension adaptability, fast axial electron transport, and radial-ion diffusion
of nanowire materials play a key role in shortening the ion transport path and
suppressing the volume expansion of electrode materials. Research and applications
of high-performance nanowire electrode materials have become hotspots in the
field of electrochemical energy storage devices.
10.1 Structure Design and Performance Optimization
of 1D Nanomaterials
In order to explore the application potential of nanowire materials, some nanowire
materials with new structures have been prepared one after another. For example,
the aforementioned porous nanowires [1–3], hierarchical nanowires [4], heteroge￾neous nanowires [5, 6], hollow nanowires [7], and nanowire arrays [8] all extend the
application of nanowire materials. These are actually breakthroughs in the synthe￾sis strategy of nanowires. Specifically, conventional nanowire preparation processes
generally include hydrothermal/solvothermal methods, sol–gel methods, electro￾spinning methods, and high-temperature solid-phase methods.
The hydrothermal/solvothermal method utilizing the dissolution-recrystallization
reaction mechanism is one of the most reliable nanowire preparation methods.
This method requires steps such as centrifugation and sample washing, and the
solvent is not easily removed. The product purity is general, which can be affected
by many factors such as solvent, temperature, or pressure. However, the equipment
used is simple, easy to operate, and it can also achieve a high yield with good crys￾tallinity. Homogeneous conventional nanowires can be prepared simply and quickly
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.306 10 Conclusion and Outlook
by this method. In addition, heterogenous nanowires can also be prepared through
the heterogeneous nucleation process of the secondary hydrothermal method [9].
Heterogeneous nanowire arrays can be prepared by a hydrothermal-chemical bath
deposition method [10]. The advantages of the hydrothermal/solvothermal method
in the preparation of nanowire materials provide the possibility for the large-scale
preparation of many nanowire materials.
The sol–gel method can effectively control the size and uniformity of nanowires
by using the properties of colloids combined with calcination methods, and the
obtained phase is purer, which is one of the fine synthesis methods of nanowires.
In this method, compounds with high chemical activity components are skillfully
mixed under liquid phase conditions to undergo hydrolysis and polymerization
reactions, and sol and gel are obtained in turn, and then fine nanowires are obtained
by drying and calcining. At present, the research on sol–gel technology has explored
the corresponding theoretical basis in the polymer discipline and many chemical
disciplines (such as physical chemistry, colloidal chemistry, coordination chemistry,
and metal organic chemistry). Its application technology has also been gradually
improved and matured and has been widely used [11–13]. However, the severe
requirements of this method on calcination conditions and reaction time, as well
as its cumbersome reaction steps, long preparation cycle, and other disadvantages
also need to be fully considered.
Electrospinning is a powerful method for preparing nanowire materials. The
microscopic morphology of the prepared nanowire materials is not limited by the
crystal growth orientation of the material itself and can effectively realize single￾component nanofibers such as polymers and inorganics, as well as polymer/
polymer, polymer/inorganic and inorganic/inorganic composite nanofibers. This
technology greatly enriches the variety of one-dimensional nanomaterials [14–17].
In addition, the equipment required by the electrospinning technology is simple,
the cost of raw materials is low, the selection of raw materials is easy, and the
process is controllable. Therefore, electrospinning is also one of the important ways
to efficiently prepare conventional nanowires.
The high-temperature solid-phase method prepares the target product by solid￾phase reaction at high temperature. This method has the advantages of low cost,
large output, simple preparation process, no agglomeration of the prepared powder
particles and good filling property [18]. Therefore, high-temperature solid-phase
method is also one of the potential methods to realize the industrialization of
nanowires.
In addition to the above conventional nanowire preparation methods, methods
such as co-precipitation method [19], ultrasonic spray pyrolysis method [20],
chemical vapor deposition method [21], physical vapor deposition method [22],
template method [23], self-assembly orientation overlap method [24], and coupled
plasma etching method [25] are getting more and more attention. These novel
methods have been widely used in the preparation of unconventional nanowire
materials such as graded nanowires, heterogeneous nanowires, hollow nanowires,
and nanowire arrays.10.1 Structure Design and Performance Optimization of 1D Nanomaterials 307
Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis can directly obtain submicron powder with uniform
distribution composed of nano-scale primary particles [26]. Co-precipitation
method is often used to prepare insoluble inorganic salt nanowires [19]. The chem￾ical vapor deposition method can induce the directional growth of nanowires to
obtain high-purity single nanowires [21]. The physical vapor deposition method
can deposit nanowires on the surface that there is the substrate with a small amount
of consumables under the premise of no pollution to the environment [22]. The
template method and self-assembly method can synthesize porous nanowires with
large specific surface area [23], and the material and structure of the template can
be designed according to the size, function, and structural requirements of the
desired material to meet the actual needs.
Generally speaking, with the endless emergence of nanowire materials, nanowire
materials have also developed from the initial simple conventional nanowires to
porous, hollow, heterogeneous, and other nanowires. Different synthesis methods
and growth mechanisms have their own advantages, disadvantages, and influencing
factors. Among them, the synthesis methods of conventional nanowires are mainly
hydrothermal/solvothermal method, sol–gel methods, electrospinning methods,
and solid-phase sintering method. With the in-depth research of nanowire mate￾rials, novel synthesis methods such as ultrasonic spray pyrolysis, co-precipitation,
and vapor deposition have also expanded the application scope of nanowires. They
are all synthesis methods of nanowires derived from the synthesis methods of
conventional nanomaterials based on the two basic ideas of controlling the growth
of crystal anisotropy by dominant crystal planes and artificially induced forced
directional growth.
Each synthetic method has its own unique advantages and limitations. In order
to prepare ideal nanowire products that can be practically applied, various methods
are usually combined to synthesize or modify nanowires with special structures.
Researchers should combine knowledge from chemistry, physics, and materials
science to delve into microscopic processes and internal synthesis mechanisms to
achieve precise designs. At the same time, in order to achieve breakthroughs in
synthetic methods, it is recommended that researchers effectively combine new
ideas with traditional synthetic methods so that synthetic nanowires have higher
feasibility, suitable cost, and good performance.
This book combines the latest research progress in nanowire materials, focuses
on the synthesis methods of nanowire electrode materials, starts with morphology
control, and focuses on the structural differences caused by different synthesis
methods. The typical research works are selectively listed to briefly describe
the preparation methods, morphologies, and corresponding characterizations of
nanowires. The common synthesis methods and growth mechanisms of different
types of nanowires (conventional, porous, hierarchical, heterogeneous, hollow, and
array) are introduced in detail, and their respective advantages, disadvantages, and
influencing factors are shown. The different structures of the nanowires determine
the specific properties of the nanowires. There are many typical nanomaterial
preparation methods that can also be used to prepare nanowire materials. The308 10 Conclusion and Outlook
advantages and disadvantages of different preparation methods can better realize
the combination of nanowire materials and production practice, and can be better
applied in various aspects.
10.2 Advanced Characterization Methods for
1D Nanomaterials
The unique properties of nanomaterials often require special detection methods
to observe. Common material characterization methods include X-ray diffrac￾tion, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, scanning electron
microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy. These characterization methods
have strong analytical and detection capabilities. However, these characterization
methods are usually interfered by factors such as changes in the material after it is
separated from the electrochemical environment, making it difficult to accurately
interpret the experimental results. In situ characterization technology can directly
observe the information changes of the electrochemical reaction of the materials
of nanowire electrode [27]. It can reveal the nature of the electrochemical reaction
of nanowire electrode materials through real-time monitoring of the change in
phase, morphology, and atomic valence bond connection state of the material.
It provides a direction to optimize the performance of nanowire electrode materials
and shows good scientific value and application potential in exploring the intrinsic
mechanism.
Special structures produce special properties, and one-dimensional nanowire
materials have special structures that reach the nanometer level in two dimensions,
thus exhibiting special properties that bulk materials do not possess. For example,
nanowire electrode materials possess unique anisotropy, which is combined
with continuous axial electron transport, large specific surface area, and fast ion
diffusion. In the research field of micro-nano energy storage devices’, micro-nano
devices assembled based on a single nanomaterial play an important role, such as
single nanowires and single nanosheet devices, the unique anisotropy of nanowire
materials provides great convenience for the construction of single nanodevices.
In order to achieve accurate characterization of nanowire electrode materials,
by constructing a single-nanowire energy storage device, the electrode/current
collector interface and electrode/electrolyte interface can be subtly extracted from
the mixed and complex electrochemical system for research. In turn, the connec￾tion between the structure of individual nanowires, electrical transport, electrode/
current collector contact, electrode charge–discharge state, and capacity fad￾ing can be investigated. Researchers can also intuitively present principles that
are difficult to reveal by conventional means through ingenious device design,
achieve accurate measurement of basic physical property parameters such as
electricity, heat, and magnetism, and provide an effective method to study the
evolution of material properties at the nanoscale. Like the first single nanowire
solid-state electrochemical device in the world, the material structure information10.2 Advanced Characterization Methods for 1D Nanomaterials 309
is detected by a monochromatic laser, and the multifield real-time monitoring of
electricity/electrochemistry/spectroscopy is realized [28]. At the same time, it also
realizes the precise integration of micro-nano circuits and energy storage devices,
and has high detection accuracy and strong collection signals, which provides
great convenience for studying the basic reaction principles of electrode materials
in electrochemical reactions. With the continuous maturity of semiconductor
controllable precision processing technology, research on single nanowire devices
has gradually expanded from the frontier of basic physics to the application of
electrochemical energy storage. And the combination of multifield real-time
monitoring will definitely help us understand the reaction mechanism.
In situ TEM has important applications in material synthesis, chemical catalysis,
life sciences, and energy storage materials. It can observe and control the progress
of gas-phase reactions and liquid-phase reactions in real time at the atomic scale,
so as to study scientific issues such as the essential mechanism of the reaction. The
fourth chapter of this book lists the application of in situ spectroscopy technology
in nanowire energy storage devices, which truly realizes the precise measurement
of the properties of nanowires. In situ electron microscopy technology for electrode
material morphology plays a key role in studying its electrochemical performance
and electrochemical reaction mechanism. The in situ characterization of the mate￾rial morphology can intuitively reflect the changes in the microscopic morphology
of the material during the electrochemical reaction. These microscopic changes can
often provide evidence for the hypothesis of the electrochemical mechanism, so that
the hypothesis can be confirmed accordingly.
In situ TEM characterization of secondary batteries is relatively mature, and there
are many specific sample rods that can achieve targeted in situ characterization
of the electrochemical electrodes and solid and liquid electrolytes of the battery.
For example, the solid-state open in situ battery sample holder can allow in situ
high spatial resolution imaging; the sealed liquid in situ battery sample holder can
simulate the real battery liquid environment to study the evolution of SEI and Li
dendrites. The in situ heating sample holder can analyze the thermal stability of
metal oxide-based cathodes by realizing the heating function. In situ sample rods
based on ionic liquid open cells enable the investigation of phase transitions in metal
oxide-based cathode materials. The nanofilm battery sample rod also enables in situ
observations of changes in solid-state electrolytes. These accessories have greatly
advanced the process of in situ characterization of nanowire materials.
In situ TEM can deeply explore the electrochemical reaction mechanism of nano￾materials by exploring the changes in morphology, organization, and structure of
nanomaterials during electrochemical processes. In addition, by adding accessories
such as energy dispersive spectrometers to the transmission electron microscope,
it is also possible to characterize the changes in element species and distributions
of nanowire materials during the electrochemical reaction process to assist in the
analysis of the electrochemical mechanism of materials. In Chapter 4 of this book,
the choice of nanowires and the choice of counter electrodes are very flexible, which
also proves that the observation of nanowires by in situ TEM is universal. In addition,310 10 Conclusion and Outlook
the citation of cryo-EM can also greatly enrich the application of electrode materials,
SEI, electrolyte observation, etc.
In addition to in situ TEM, in situ SEM also enables fine characterization of mate￾rial surfaces and material cross-sections. It also enables in situ characterization of
changes in element species and content in conjunction with energy spectrometers.
Electrochemical auxiliary information, such as reaction sites on the electrode sur￾face, can be obtained by observing the real-time changes of the sample surface or
cross section.
Through more than 100 years of human research in the field of spectroscopy, the
use of spectroscopy to detect the internal information of materials has become one
of the most routine testing methods for materials testing. Electrochemical reactions
involve multiple systems that are complex and changeable, and it is difficult to char￾acterize them clearly by ordinary testing methods. If the electrochemical reaction
process of the material cannot be accurately characterized, it is difficult to point out
the direction for structural optimization and performance improvement of the mate￾rial. Some ex situ tests can damage the external environment of the battery material,
thereby affecting the test results. The emergence of in situ X-ray diffraction tech￾nology has met people’s needs for basic scientific research. Compared to traditional
ex-situ testing techniques, in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) requires the test object
to be in a reactive state. It can closely combine the in-situ concept with the X-ray
diffractometer to track and react on microscopic dynamic information in real time
and detect intermediate products and phase changes in the reaction process. In the
existing in situ electrochemical testing technology, since this technology can directly
observe the change of the diffraction peak generated by the crystal plane of the mate￾rial, the change of the crystallographic parameter of the material can be obtained
through analysis. So it is also widely recognized and used.
As mentioned in Chapter 4, by introducing structures similar to ordinary button
batteries, such as battery shell, positive electrode material, negative electrode mate￾rial, battery separator, electrolyte, and current collector, in situ measurement of elec￾trode material XRD can be achieved under working conditions. In 2001, McBreen
et al. of Brookhaven National Laboratory in the United States first used organic films
as window materials for in-situ battery molds [29]. Later, the team of Mai Liqiang
of Wuhan University of Technology used beryllium sheet as the window material
for mold X-ray. The researchers proposed and optimized the in situ XRD cell mold
in a relatively short period of time. On this basis, the in situ mold has undergone
some improvements. For example, put the in situ battery in the matching box use
resistance wire heating and low-temperature alcohol circulation to create high- and
low-temperature environment of the mold, respectively. This method can complete
the test at a temperature of−20 to 60 ∘C, making up for the problem of in situ reaction
at a single temperature [30].
In situ electrochemical X-ray technique can be an effective technique to study the
electrochemical reaction mechanism. However, limited by the complex equipment
design and harsh test conditions, this technology still has a lot of room for develop￾ment. Its development direction mainly has the following three points: (i) Design of
the in-situ battery device. At present, there is a big problem with the packaging of in10.2 Advanced Characterization Methods for 1D Nanomaterials 311
situ batteries, and the sealing performance is not very good. As a result, components
such as water and oxygen in the air can easily enter the battery, thereby affecting
the reaction in the electrodes. This phenomenon is more obvious when the test time
is longer. In addition, when beryllium sheets are used as X-ray window materials,
some electrode materials or electrolytes are prone to react with beryllium sheets,
which will affect the test results and even fail the experiment. At the same time,
the high price of beryllium flakes and their toxicity and easy oxidation prompt
people to search for better window materials. In addition, expanding the test angle
range through a reasonable design of the device is also one of the directions for
device optimization. (ii) Accuracy and sensitivity of in situ testing. In situ XRD
is generally designed to capture the intermediate products of the reaction, and
these intermediate products may appear in a very short time, which requires the
diffraction equipment to have sufficient data acquisition speed. (iii) Combined
use of in situ characterization techniques. A single in situ test method is usually
qualitative and can generally only reflect information about a certain aspect of
the material, but a reasonable combination of these methods can give the whole
picture of the entire electrochemical reaction. For example, in situ XRD is used
in conjunction with in situ SEM, in situ TEM, in situ Raman spectroscopy, in
situ Fourier infrared spectroscopy, etc. The evolutionary links between phase,
morphology, and chemical bonds can be obtained simultaneously. The combined
use of these technologies will certainly contribute to the further understanding,
design, and control of secondary ion electrode materials and battery systems.
Raman spectroscopy can detect information about molecular vibrations and rota￾tions, so it can be used to characterize the valence bonds and functional groups
present in the molecules in the sample. In situ Raman spectroscopy combines the
in situ testing concept with a Raman spectrometer. By monitoring the position of
the Raman absorption peak and the peak intensity change of the electrode material
in real time during the electrochemical process, we can understand the structural
change of the material during the electrochemical process. Inspired by microfluidic
research, Liqiang Mai’s team successfully characterized the structural evolution of a
single nanowire in an electrochemical reaction by combining a micro-reaction cell
designed with a single nanodevice platform. The electrochemical processes of energy
storage materials were explored at the atomic scale by combining in situ Raman
spectroscopy with in situ atomic force microscopy. Through in situ Raman char￾acterization, they successfully explained the high capacity exhibited by transition
metal-layered oxides [31]. The electrochemical reaction model for co-intercalation
of anions and cations is demonstrated. It opens up new ideas for the study of the
electrochemical mechanism of cathode.
As a common characterization method, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy plays a
key role in the characterization of element types and contents of materials. The refer￾ence point for the binding energy of a solid sample is the Fermi level, which is used to
detect the energy required for the electron to transition to the Fermi level. The X-rays
interact with the sample, and the energy of the X-rays is absorbed by the solid. The
kinetic energy of the photoelectrons can be analyzed by the photoelectron energy
analyzer in the photoelectron spectrometer, and then the value of the binding energy312 10 Conclusion and Outlook
can be obtained. The number of detected photoelectrons is distributed according
to the correspondingly measured binding energy, and the spectrum of the X-ray
photoelectron spectrum can be obtained. Photoelectron spectroscopy can be used
for elemental composition analysis and quantitative analysis, which has important
research value in the field of electrochemistry.
Synchrotron radiation is electromagnetic radiation emitted when charged par￾ticles travel along curved orbits under the influence of an electromagnetic field.
With the construction of the synchrotron radiation source, information such as
elemental composition, electronic state, and microstructure of materials can be
analyzed by using the signal changes before and after X-ray incidence. Therefore,
X-ray absorption spectroscopy has been unprecedentedly developed. Synchrotron
radiation light source has been developed for three generations. There are currently
four synchrotron radiation facilities in China, located in Beijing, Hefei, Shanghai,
and Taiwan. XAS has some discrete peaks or undulations near the absorption
edge and its high-energy end, which are called fine structure. Synchrotron X-ray
absorption fine structure (XAFS) technology is widely used to study the chemical
environment around atoms of various elements in condensed matter by adjusting
the energy of X-rays. And obtain important information such as the local structure,
oxidation state, and neighboring coordination atoms of the constituent elements
in the material. In addition, through the in situ synchrotron radiation technology
that combines the in situ concept with the synchrotron radiation technology, infor￾mation such as the structural evolution, local structural changes, and transition
metal ion oxidation states of electrode materials during electrochemical energy
storage can be obtained. This has important guiding significance for accurately
revealing the battery reaction mechanism, optimizing the material composition
and structure, and developing high-performance new materials.
In the application of nanowire energy storage materials, the problem of electrode
attenuation is very serious. Researchers need to track the electrochemical process in
real time and study the mechanism of attenuation. In addition to the in situ char￾acterization of nanowire energy storage devices and the commonly used electron
microscopy and spectroscopic characterizations described above, researchers can
also take advantage of some unique advantages of other testing methods as an auxil￾iary or supplement. In situ characterization and research of materials, such as scan￾ning probe microscopy, including atomic force microscopy and scanning tunneling
microscopy. With very high resolution, atoms can be easily “see”, which is difficult to
achieve with ordinary electron microscopes. Different from some analytical instru￾ments that estimate the surface structure of the sample by indirect or computational
methods, scanning probe microscope (SPM) obtains a real-time, real high-resolution
image of the sample surface. In addition, a huge advantage of SPM scanning imaging
compared to other electron microscopes is that it enables 3D imaging of the sample
surface. Similar to SPM, in situ testing methods that have not been widely used in
the characterization of nanoscale energy storage materials but have great prospects
include electron paramagnetic resonance imaging, neutron diffraction, and nuclear
magnetic resonance. Combining these methods with single nanowire energy stor￾age devices, electron microscopy, and spectroscopy, it is possible to more accurately10.2 Advanced Characterization Methods for 1D Nanomaterials 313
detect the electrochemical process of electrode materials in situ, deeply study the
reaction mechanism and propose optimization strategies to improve their electro￾chemical performance.
When the material is characterized by AFM, the slight change of the microcan￾tilever can be detected by the sensor, and then the surface information of the material
can be obtained. Therefore, in situ AFM can be used to probe the surface changes
of materials. This has important implications for some hard-to-probe material
interfaces, such as the change of SEI of nanowire materials during electrochemical
processes. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technology has a wide range of
applications in physics, medicine, chemistry, biology, food and other fields, it can
provide information on molecular dynamics and molecular chemical structure. At
present, it has become a conventional technical means for analyzing the molecular
structure and characterizing the physical and chemical properties of substances.
The principle of neutron diffraction is similar to that of XRD. It was mainly used
to study the crystal structure of matter, and Bragg formula is also applicable. It is
complementary to X-ray diffraction in application. When X-rays or a stream of elec￾trons encounter matter and scatter, the scattering centers are mainly electrons in
atoms. The scattering power increases with the increase of the atomic number of
the substance, and decreases with the increase of the diffraction angle 2𝜃. In neu￾tron diffraction, the neutron stream is uncharged, and when interacting with matter,
it mainly interacts with atomic nuclei, resulting in isotropic scattering. This scatter￾ing power has no certain relationship with the atomic number of the substance, so
the diffraction spectrum avoids the influence of the atomic number of the element.
Therefore, neutron diffraction is more reliable for the characterization of some sub￾stances containing elements with relatively large atomic numbers.
Time-of-flight mass spectrometry is also a commonly used test method to char￾acterize elements. The ions generated by the ion source are first collected by the
collector. The ions with zero initial velocity are accelerated by a pulsed electric field,
then enter the field-free drift tube, and fly to the ion receiver at a constant speed. The
higher the ion mass, the longer it takes to reach the receiver; the lower the ion mass,
the shorter the time it takes to reach the receiver. According to this principle, ions of
different masses can be separated according to their mass-to-charge ratio (the ratio of
mass to charge). With lateral resolution down to below 50 nm, SIMS uses a focused
beam of primary ions to bombard and ionize the sample surface, and then gener￾ate characteristic secondary ions directed toward the mass spectrometer. Due to the
high sensitivity of the surface and the high resolution capability of the depth profile,
time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF SIMS) can be used to study the
related problems of the SEI in the battery system, such as the composition difference
of the related interface before and after the electrochemical reaction occurs.
The research of modern science is inseparable from the development of modern
testing technology, and the in situ characterization of the unique 1D structure of
nanowires is a hot issue in current research, and related research results have been
reported many times in journals such as Nature and Science. Among the many
characterization methods, the most common are in situ TEM and in situ XRD.
These two characterization techniques play a key role in studying the morphology314 10 Conclusion and Outlook
and phase changes of nanowires in electrochemical reactions, and can often give
researchers convincing evidence. However, for some characterization methods with
harsh test conditions, such as in situ synchrotron radiation and in situ neutron
diffraction, since the bombarded particles require enormous energy, a huge accel￾eration field or light source must be constructed. For synchrotron radiation, only
Beijing, Shanghai, Hefei, and Taiwan have light sources for synchrotron radiation
testing in China, and relevant testing resources are still lacking. There is still a lot
of room for development in the characterization of single nanowire energy storage
devices. The optical field generated by the femtosecond laser also has a relatively
large influence on a single device, and can also provide some information for the
characterization of a single nanowire.
In the process of studying the reaction mechanism of nanowire materials, it is
often necessary to explain various test results so that the conclusions drawn are more
convincing. By infiltrating more electrochemical in situ techniques into characteri￾zation techniques and monitoring the changes of nanowire materials in the entire
electrochemical reaction in real time, it will undoubtedly enable people to more
accurately understand the electrochemical energy storage mechanism of nanowires
and explore new theory.
10.3 Applications and Challenges of Nanowire Energy
Storage Devices
In the previous chapters, we discussed the application of nanowire materials in
the field of energy storage in detail. Here, we will summarize the applications and
challenges of nanowires in different energy storage systems. As an important energy
storage device, ion batteries have been widely studied and applied. Lithium-ion
batteries have gradually replaced lead-acid batteries and become mainstream
batteries due to their high specific energy, long cycle performance, low battery
self-discharge, and light weight. However, due to the scarcity of lithium resources,
research on other types of ion batteries is also making breakthroughs.
Other types of ion batteries can be divided into monovalent-ion battery,
multivalent-ion battery, and mixed-ion battery according to the amount of charge
carried by the carriers. The bottleneck in the development of ion batteries is mainly
limited by the development of high-performance electrode materials. Nanowire
materials can enhance the diffusion kinetics of carriers and improve the stability of
materials. The advantages of in-situ characterization of electrochemical processes
and the construction of flexible devices, which are beneficial to the construction
of in situ devices, have made nanowire electrode materials of interest not only in
lithium-ion batteries, but also in other types of ion batteries.
10.3.1 Application of Nanowire Structures in Lithium-ion Batteries
The rapid development of new electric vehicles and large-scale energy storage sys￾tems has put forward higher requirements for the energy density of lithium-ion bat￾tery. As for the anode, it is necessary to introduce higher-capacity anode materials by
solving the problem of volume expansion. In terms of positive electrode materials, it10.3 Applications and Challenges of Nanowire Energy Storage Devices 315
is necessary to design high-voltage positive electrode materials. The most important
advantage of nanowire electrode materials is that they can allow faster migration
and transport of lithium ions, and more efficient intercalation and deintercalation
reactions occur at the interface between electrode and electrolyte, which is beneficial
to the fast charge and discharge performance of the battery.
The cathode materials of traditional lithium-ion battery mainly include LiCoO2,
LiMn2O4 and LiFePO4. Chapter 5 introduces the modification of the cathode
by nanowires in detail. The rate performance of nanowire-structured LiCoO2
synthesized by hydrothermal method is significantly improved, and it has great
application potential in the consumer electronics market that pursues fast charg￾ing [32]. LiMn2O4 nanowires synthesized by low-pressure solid-phase reactions
also exhibited better kinetic performance, high reversibility, and cycling stabil￾ity [33]. In addition, both the high working-voltage Ni-doped LiNiMnO and Li-rich
manganese-based layered oxides have improved electrochemical performance after
obtaining the nanowire structure [34, 35]. Since the 1D nanostructure can effec￾tively relieve the internal stress and shorten the ion diffusion distance, transition
metal oxides, and polyanionic lithium-ion battery cathode materials have also been
significantly improved in rate and cycle performance.
According to the different reaction mechanisms, lithium battery anode mate￾rials can be divided into three categories: intercalation reaction type, alloying
reaction type, and conversion reaction type. Intercalation reaction-type lithium
battery anode materials are diverse, abundant, and environmentally friendly.
Intercalation-reactive lithium-ion nanowire anode materials can promote the
rapid migration of lithium ions and have broad application prospects. Alloying
reaction-type materials have high specific capacity and low operating voltage,
which can overcome the safety problems of traditional lithium-ion battery electrode
materials, but the violent expansion of the volume will generate huge stress and
cause the electrode to pulverize. The unique 1D structure can buffer volume
expansion both laterally and along the nanowire growth direction without causing
pulverization of the electrode material, providing the possibility for the large-scale
use of alloy-based anodes. Most of the anode materials in Li-ion batteries have
conversion reaction mechanisms, such as single metal oxides, sulfides, phosphides,
and nitrides, as well as their complexes. The nanowire structure can provide
shorter electron and ion transport paths, larger contact area, and space for effective
buffering of internal stress for electrochemical reactions.
10.3.2 Applications of Nanowire Structures in Na-ion Battery
Sodium and lithium have many similar chemical properties, and current research
on cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries mainly focuses on layered transition
metal oxides, Prussian blue analogs and polyanionic compounds. The electrochem￾ical performance of layered transition metal oxide nanowires and graded nanofibers
synthesized by electrospinning is significantly better than that of nanoparticles.
Moreover, the encapsulation of the nanowires by the conductive carbon layer is
more beneficial to improving the electronic conductivity. Among the polyanionic
compound nanowire materials, the low electrical conductivity of NASICON-type
sodium superionic conductors limits their application. The nanowire structure316 10 Conclusion and Outlook
formed by NASICON particles combined with mesoporous nanowires can sig￾nificantly increase its electrical conductivity and improve its electrochemical
performance [36]. There are few reports on the synthesis of Prussian blue analogs
with nanowire morphology; however, according to the existing nanowire synthesis
strategy, the Prussian blue nanowire structure is still very promising. Using the
unique structural advantages of nanowires to further improve the performance of
Prussian blue analogs as cathode materials for new sodium-ion battery still has
great scientific value.
According to the reaction mechanism, the anode materials of sodium-ion batteries
currently studied can be divided into three categories: intercalation type, alloying
type, and reactive type. As mentioned above, the hollow carbon nanowires obtained
by pyrolysis of hollow polyaniline nanowires have excellent structural stability and
electrical conductivity. The Na2Ti3O7 nanotube arrays grown on the metallic tita￾nium substrate in the titanium-based anode also showed excellent electrochemical
performance [37]. In the negative electrode of the alloying reaction, the electro￾chemical performance of the carbon-encapsulated Sn/Ni nanorod composites is also
significantly improved relative to the pure Sn material [38]. The carbon-wrapped
Ni0.85Se/C hollow nanowires exhibit excellent rate capability in switching reaction
electrode materials [39]. The unique advantages of the nanowire structure can
improve the electrochemical performance of these three types of anodes.
10.3.3 Applications of Nanowire Structures in Other Monovalent-ion
Batteries
Potassium ions can reversibly and stably intercalate into commercial graphite
anodes like lithium ions, which has the potential to be applied in large-scale energy
storage grids. However, the radius of potassium ions is significantly larger than that
lithium, and potassium ion batteries generally have the problems of slow diffusion
kinetics of ions in electrode materials and poor structural stability of electrode
materials. By constructing nanowire materials, it is expected to significantly
improve the performance of potassium-ion batteries by taking advantage of the
short radial diffusion distance and good stress release characteristics of nanowires.
The Fe/Mn-based layered oxide K0.7Fe0.5Mn0.5O2 nanowire cathode and the thorn
spherical K2Ti8O17 anode composed of nanorods have also been reported to have
good potassium storage properties [40].
In addition to the commonly studied alkali metal-ion batteries, nonmetal carrier
batteries such as ammonium ions and protons have also been reported. Although
the research on the non-metallic carrier battery system is still in the preliminary
stage, there are only a few reports on the application of nanowires uesd in it, but the
unique structure of nanowires makes it have great application potential in the field
of nonmetallic carrier batteries.
10.3.4 Application of Nanowires in Lithium–Sulfur Batteries
Lithium–sulfur batteries have higher energy density and better battery safety,
and they are expected to be adapt to more severe environments. Compared with10.3 Applications and Challenges of Nanowire Energy Storage Devices 317
nanoparticle, nanosheet, bulk, and other structure, the nanowire structure has the
advantages of more continuous electron transport path and a woven structure. It can
overcome the low electronic conductivity of sulfur and lithium sulfide, which leads
to the slow kinetics of the electrochemical process. Although sulfur itself is difficult
to form a nanowire structure, it can be effectively loaded on 1D nanomaterials to
form nanocomposites. 1D carbon nanostructures, conductive polymer nanowires
and metal compound nanowires have been reported and successfully applied to
lithium–sulfur batteries.
At present, providing sufficient space to buffer the volume expansion of sulfur by
using porous materials. Adding conductive agent to provide fast ion and electron
transfer rate and using special structure to short transfer path. Efficiently adsorb￾ing polysulfides. These three methods are used to solve the problems of volume
expansion, difficult oxidation of lithium sulfide, and shuttle effect caused by the
dissolution of polysulfides in the electrolyte.
Up to now, sulfur cathode materials based on nanowires can be divided into
the following types according to the type of composite materials: 1 carbon/sulfur
nanowire composite material; 2 conductive polymer/sulfur nanowire composite
material; and 3 metal compound/sulfur nanowire composite material.
1D carbon materials (carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, etc.) are ideal carri￾ers for lithium–sulfur batteries due to their high electrical conductivity and poros￾ity. In the research on the preparation of carbon/sulfur nanowire composite struc￾tures, high temperature melting, or chemical synthesis can be used to uniformly load
sulfur in the pores of carbon nanotubes. Effective contact between sulfur and car￾bon nanotubes can improve the specific capacity of lithium–sulfur batteries. Unique
carbon nanowire structures with more pores or smaller confinement channels can
simultaneously combine the confinement effect of multi-channel hollow nanofibers
and the weavable properties. The sulfur loading can be increased to build a 3D con￾tinuous conductive framework to better confine the dissolution shuttle of polysul￾fides. In addition, the surfaces of CNFs and CNTs doped with N, O, S, etc. will have
C—N, C—O, C—S bonds hanging on the surface. These polar bonds can form Li—N,
Li—O, Li—S bonds with polysulfides that have the same polarity and have the effect
of chemical adsorption.
Conductive polymer materials will form covalent bonds with polysulfides through
abundant polar bonds on the surface to achieve chemical sulfur fixation while taking
electrical conductivity into account. In addition, conductive polymers can also form
a variety of copolymers through high-temperature vulcanization reaction with sulfur
to construct high-performance composite electrodes. Although the cost of polymer
materials is low and the synthesis and processing process is simple, the research on
conductive polymer/sulfur composite nano-cathode materials at high loading still
needs to be strengthened.
Titanium oxide, manganese dioxide, and other metal oxides have stronger
chemical adsorption with polysulfides, which can increase the sulfur loading. The
sulfide-solid sulfur matrix can prevent the dissolution of polysulfides through
strong polar adsorption of polysulfides through metal sulfur bonds on the surface
or edges and can also promote the transformation of lithium polysulfides through318 10 Conclusion and Outlook
the mediation of thiosulfate. Promote kinetics and reduce the dissolution of
polysulfides. In addition, some traditional metal electrocatalysts such as Pt, Co, and
Ni have also been studied as solid sulfur substrates.
1D carbon nanostructures have unique advantages in the application of highly
loaded sulfur cathodes. Their high electrical conductivity can provide efficient elec￾tron transport for insulating sulfur and lithium sulfide, and can also greatly reduce
the introduction of conductive additives, thereby significantly increasing the sul￾fur content. However, it cannot perform good chemical adsorption on polysulfides,
which limits its further development. Nanowire materials still need more in-depth
structural design and experimental exploration in lithium–sulfur batteries.
10.3.5 Application of 1D Nanomaterials in Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors have the characteristics of high power density and good cycle life,
but their low energy density limits their development. The surface state, ionic dif￾fusion, and electronic conductivity of supercapacitor electrode materials are critical
to their performance. When increasing the materials’ specific surface area, attention
should also be paid to the ease of diffusion of ions in the electrode from the bulk elec￾trolyte to the energy storage interface. Taken together, the applications of nanowire
electrode materials in supercapacitors and secondary batteries are not strictly differ￾entiated. The 1D staggered network is still beneficial for ion diffusion and so on in
supercapacitors. The difference is that, due to the characteristics of surface energy
storage, there is no ion diffusion in the bulk phase.
The electrode material of the electric double-layer supercapacitor is mainly porous
carbon. The surface charge of porous carbon is mainly generated by the adsorption
of ions in the electrolyte. Therefore, no electrochemical reaction is involved in the
cycle process, and the energy storage is a real capacitive effect. Pore structure is the
core of research on electrode materials for electric double-layer supercapacitors.
The porous nanowire structure constructed by nanowire electrode materials can
accelerate the diffusion of ions in the pore structure and increase the diversity of
pore structure design of carbon-based electrode materials. In addition, the nanowire
cross-linked network can realize the continuity of the macroporous structure, which
further promotes the slow transport process of electrolyte ions between the interface
and the bulk electrolyte during the charging and discharging process.
Carbon nanotubes have high crystallinity and electrical conductivity, a unique 1D
hollow cavity structure, and the utilization rate of the interconnected pore struc￾ture. It can adsorb more electrolyte ions, accelerate the diffusion rate of ions, and
reduce their internal transmission resistance. It is very beneficial to the transport of
electrons and the formation of electric double layers, and it improves the rate per￾formance of supercapacitors. However, its high synthesis cost limits its widespread
use, and the development of a simple synthesis process for carbon nanotubes is an
important research direction.
Defects on the surface of carbon fiber can adsorb a large number of electrolyte
ions, and at the same time, its unique 1D structure can accelerate the transport of
ions. Moderate activation can further enhance the specific surface area of carbon
nanofibers and increase electrochemically active sites. At present, the synthesis10.3 Applications and Challenges of Nanowire Energy Storage Devices 319
method of carbon nanofibers is simpler than that of carbon nanotubes, but its com￾mercial application is still difficult. Finding a facile synthetic method for one-step
synthesis of carbon nanofibers and applying it to the field of supercapacitors is a
major challenge for researchers.
Pseudocapacitor electrode materials are mainly transition metal compounds,
conductive polymers, and so on. The key factors affecting its performance mainly
include specific surface area, conductivity, structural stability, etc. The most widely
studied 1D transition metal oxide is RuO2 [41]. In the research of other inexpensive
transition metal oxides, MnO2 is inexpensive, exhibits good pseudocapacitive
properties in neutral electrolytes, and has a wide voltage window, making it an
inexpensive and effective novel capacitor material [42, 43]. However, its conductiv￾ity is low and the electrochemical reaction rate is slow, so it needs to be combined
with a conductive agent.
Conductive polymers can achieve massive charge storage through fast and
reversible n/p-type doping redox reactions on conjugated chains. The polymers
used for pseudocapacitive electrode materials are mainly polyaniline, polypyrrole,
and polythiophene. Polypyrrole has higher conductivity and a lower synthesis cost.
It is also one of the most effective ways to improve pseudocapacitors by constructing
a conductive polymer fiber structure network.
The low energy density restricts the commercial application of supercapacitors.
Limited by the low specific capacity of electric double-layer supercapacitors and the
low cycle life of pseudocapacitors, hybrid supercapacitors with both high energy
density and good power density are gradually entering the market. Although the
energy density of hybrid supercapacitors has increased significantly, its power den￾sity is still different from that of ordinary supercapacitors. Nanowire is a potential
electrode materials for new hybrid supercapacitors with both high energy density
and good power density due to the unique properties. Whether in aqueous elec￾trolytes or organic electrolytes, the unique structure of nanowire electrode materials
significantly increases the charge transfer rate, showing cycling stability, high spe￾cific capacity, and good rate performance. Its uniform dispersion structure can effec￾tively solve the shortcomings of slow diffusion rate of organic electrolytes and high
viscosity, and it has great development potential and broad application prospects in
the current research on supercapacitor electrode materials.
10.3.6 Nanowires for Other Energy Storage Devices
10.3.6.1 Metal Air Batteries
Metal-air batteries are rich in raw materials, cost-effective, and completely pollution￾free, and are considered a good choice for next-generation new energy vehicle power
battery. At present, metal-air batteries that have made research progress mainly
include zinc-air batteries, aluminum-air batteries, lithium-air batteries, and
magnesium-air batteries. Zinc-air batteries have been successfully commercialized
and widely used in hearing aids and beacon lights, and aluminum-air batteries have
also entered the pilot stage. In terms of specific energy, lithium-air batteries have
the greatest development potential. However, the formation of metal dendrites, loss
of electrolyte, and clogging of air electrodes severely restrict the application of Li-air320 10 Conclusion and Outlook
batteries. The slow decomposition of peroxides and nondecomposable by-products
in the charging reaction lead to large charging polarization voltages, thus requiring
excellent oxygen reduction/oxidation catalysts. In addition, the air cathode hinders
the diffusion of oxygen due to the blockage of the deposition of discharge products.
Therefore, cathode materials must have porous structure and high specific surface
area to provide more deposition sites. Nanowire materials have a large number of
active sites and high specific surface area. Therefore, loading highly active nanowire
electrocatalysts on porous materials is a very effective strategy, which can improve
the energy density, specific capacity, efficiency, and lifetime of batteries.
10.3.6.2 Multivalent-ion Battery
Multivalent ions, such as magnesium ions, calcium ions, zinc ions, and aluminum
ions, have received more and more attention in recent years. In multivalent ion bat￾teries, related metals are usually used directly as negative electrodes. Due to the high
charge density of multivalent ions, polarization is easily generated during the inter￾calation process, and even strong bonding occurs with the host material, which is
difficult to be released. Therefore, the main research bottleneck of multivalent-ion
batteries lies in the electrolyte and cathode materials. Most cathode materials used
in monovalent ion battery systems are difficult to work in multivalent ion batteries.
Therefore, the research of cathode materials is a hot and difficult point. Nanoization
can shorten the ion diffusion path of the host material, which is conducive to the
reversible desorption of multivalent ions. In recent years, the advantageous proper￾ties of nanowires have also been well exploited in multivalent ion battery systems.
Tungsten diselenide nanowires, titanium dioxide nanowires, and manganese
dioxide nanowires can be used as cathodes for magnesium ion battery, and vana￾dium oxide nanowires can be used as cathodes for calcium-ion battery in addition
to being used as cathodes for magnesium ion battery. Electrode materials with
nanowire structures contribute to the reversible de-intercalation of zinc ions, so they
have been reported many times in zinc-ion battery systems. At present, the cathode
materials of zinc-ion battery are mainly manganese oxide, vanadium oxide, metal
ferricyanide, and so on. The anode of aluminum ion battery uses metal aluminum,
and the cathode is mainly divided into two types: intercalation/extraction reaction
and conversion reaction. Since the diffusion of trivalent aluminum ions in the cath￾ode material is affected by strong lattice repulsion, compared with the traditional
monovalent metal cathode materials, the anode materials of aluminum-ion battery
require more active sites and larger contact area of the electrolyte. Nanoscale mate￾rials are an effective way to improve the electrochemical performance of materials.
By reducing the particle size, the ion transport distance can be shortened and the
number of active sites near the surface of the material can be increased. Typical
nanomaterials such as TiO2 nanowires, graphene-supported SnO2 nanoparticles
and VS4 nanosheets, are used in aluminum-ion batteries for the first time. Among
them, nanowireization, as a typical way of nanometerization, has a relatively
common application in aluminum ion battery system.
10.3.6.3 Metal Sulfur Batteries
Room temperature sodium–sulfur battery is still in the early stages of research.
Although available electrolytes and electrode materials have been developed, it will10.3 Applications and Challenges of Nanowire Energy Storage Devices 321
take a long time to achieve high energy density at low cost. How to better solve
the problem of slow kinetics and dissolution of sodium polysulfide is a topic that
current researchers should pay attention to. Similar to lithium–sulfur batteries,
some matrix materials with catalytic effect are introduced into the cathode material
to improve the kinetics, while adsorbing sodium polysulfide. Or add organic small
molecules to the composite electrode to chemically connect with sodium polysulfide
molecules to prevent dissolution. These related studies can further improve the
energy density of sodium–sulfur batteries, and then the problems of high load and
commercial mass production still need to be solved. At the same time, sodium
metal is more active than lithium metal, and the guarantee of safety is also a major
problem for sodium–sulfur batteries. It can be seen that the commercial production
of room-temperature sodium–sulfur batteries is still difficult.
Compared the high activity of lithium and sodium metal negative electrodes,
magnesium metal negative electrodes show good stability. Using magnesium as the
negative electrode of metal chalcogenide battery system can greatly improve the
safety of the battery. In addition, compared lithium and sodium metals, magnesium
metal has become a promising high-energy-density battery system due to its higher
volumetric energy density, no obvious dendrite behavior, and abundant crustal con￾tent. However, the development of magnesium–sulfur batteries is relatively late, and
there are still many unsolved or even unknown problems. Among them, the slow
reaction kinetics of magnesium ions and sulfur element can lead to great battery
polarization. In addition, nonnucleophilic magnesium electrolytes compatible with
elemental sulfur also need to be developed. Magnesium–sulfur batteries also suffer
from the problem that magnesium polysulfides are easily dissolved in organic elec￾trolytes. Nano-films prepared from nanowire materials can play a good role in fixing
sulfur. Magnesium–sulfur batteries also suffer from the problem that magnesium
polysulfides are easily dissolved in organic electrolytes. The surface of ordinary
glass fiber film is covered with a layer of carbon fiber interwoven film, which is used
to prevent the dissolution and loss of magnesium polysulfide. The specific capacity
of the magnesium–sulfur batteries with carbon fiber coating is significantly better
than that of the magnesium–sulfur batteries without carbon fiber coating, and
it also exhibits better coulombic efficiency. Overall, the industrial application of
nanowire materials still faces enormous challenges. Current synthesis methods are
not suitable for industrial production due to low yield, the properties of nanowires
are directly affected by their structure and size, so the cost of synthesising nanowires
with special structures is still high, and there is still an urgent need for reliable
synthesis methods that are cost-effective and can accurately control the morphology
and size of nanowires. In addition to applications in electrode materials, nanowire
materials also have great application prospects in collectors and battery separators,
etc. The development of high-performance collectors and special functional separa￾tors can effectively improve the service life of energy storage devices. By providing
an excellent platform to investigate fundamental scientific questions, nanowires
can also greatly broaden the application of advanced characterisation techniques,
based on the development of in situ or ex situ characterisation techniques capable
of revealing the reaction mechanisms of materials at the atomic level on both spatial
and temporal scales. A combination of theoretical computational simulations and322 10 Conclusion and Outlook
experiments is a good choice in developing new nanowire materials. Currently
developed machine learning capability has pointed out a new direction for the dis￾covery of new nanowires materials as well as prediction of the possible properties.
Despite the aforementioned challenges, the unique physical and chemical proper￾ties of nanowire materials, as well as various synthesis methods for controlling the
morphology and size of nanowires, provide exciting opportunities for constructing
advanced electrochemical energy storage devices for practical applications.
References
1 Li, F., He, J., Zhou, W.L., and Wiley, J.B. (2003). Synthesis of porous wires from
directed assemblies of nanospheres. Journal of the American Chemical Society
125 (52): 16166–16167.
2 Bechelany, M., Abou Chaaya, A., Frances, F. et al. (2013). Nanowires with
controlled porosity for hydrogen production. Journal of Materials Chemistry A
1 (6): 2133–2138.
3 Yuan, C., Zhang, X., Hou, L. et al. (2010). Lysine-assisted hydrothermal synthesis
of urchin-like ordered arrays of mesoporous CO(OH)2 nanowires and their
application in electrochemical capacitors. Journal of Materials Chemistry 20 (48):
10809–10816.
4 Liu, J., Jiang, J., Cheng, C. et al. (2011). Co3O4 nanowire@MnO2 ultrathin
nanosheet core/shell arrays: a new class of high-performance pseudocapacitive
materials. Advanced Materials 23 (18): 2076–2081.
5 Yu, L., Zhang, G., Yuan, C., and Lou, X.W. (2013). Hierarchical NiCo2O4@MnO2
core–shell heterostructured nanowire arrays on Ni foam as high-performance
supercapacitor electrodes. Chemical Communications 49 (2): 137–139.
6 Mai, L.-Q., Yang, F., Zhao, Y.-L. et al. (2011). Hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4
heterostructured nanowires with enhanced supercapacitor performance. Nature
Communications 2 (1): 381.
7 Jiang, Y., Wu, Y., Zhang, S. et al. (2000). A catalytic-assembly solvothermal
route to multiwall carbon nanotubes at a moderate temperature. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 122 (49): 12383–12384.
8 Liu, H., Hu, L., Meng, Y.S., and Li, Q. (2013). Electrodeposited three-dimensional
Ni–Si nanocable arrays as high performance anodes for lithium ion batteries.
Nanoscale 5 (21): 10376–10383.
9 Wu, H., Xu, M., Wang, Y., and Zheng, G. (2013). Branched Co3O4/Fe2O3
nanowires as high capacity lithium-ion battery anodes. Nano Research 6 (3):
167–173.
10 Xia, X., Tu, J., Zhang, Y. et al. (2012). High-quality metal oxide core/shell
nanowire arrays on conductive substrates for electrochemical energy storage.
ACS Nano 6 (6): 5531–5538.References 323
11 Wang, X., Wang, X., Huang, W. et al. (2005). Sol–gel template synthesis of highly
ordered MnO2 nanowire arrays. Journal of Power Sources 140 (1): 211–215.
12 Cao, H.Q., Xu, Y., Hong, J.M. et al. (2001). Sol–gel template synthesis of an
array of single crystal CdS nanowires on a porous alumina template. Advanced
Materials 13 (18): 1393–1394.
13 Jo, Y.R., Myeong, S.H., and Kim, B.J. (2018). Role of annealing temperature on
the sol–gel synthesis of VO2 nanowires with in situ characterization of their
metal–insulator transition. RSC Advances 8 (10): 5158–5165.
14 Hsu, P.-C., Kong, D., Wang, S. et al. (2014). Electrolessly deposited electrospun
metal nanowire transparent electrodes. Journal of the American Chemical Society
136 (30): 10593–10596.
15 Ren, W., Zheng, Z., Luo, Y. et al. (2015). An electrospun hierarchical LiV3O8
nanowire-in-network for high-rate and long-life lithium batteries. Journal of
Materials Chemistry A 3 (39): 19850–19856.
16 Lim, J.-M., Moon, J.H., Yi, G.-R. et al. (2006). Fabrication of one-dimensional
colloidal assemblies from electrospun nanofibers. Langmuir 22 (8): 3445–3449.
17 Jin, Y., Yang, D., Kang, D., and Jiang, X. (2010). Fabrication of necklace-like
structures via electrospinning. Langmuir 26 (2): 1186–1190.
18 Zhang, J., Li, W., Jia, Q. et al. (2015). Molten salt assisted synthesis of 3C–SiC
nanowire and its photoluminescence properties. Ceramics International 41 (10,
Part A): 12614–12620.
19 Yan, A., Liu, Y., Liu, Y. et al. (2012). A NaAc-assisted large-scale coprecipitation
synthesis and microwave absorption efficiency of Fe3O4 nanowires. Materials
Letters 68: 402–405.
20 Vivekchand, S.R.C., Gundiah, G., Govindaraj, A., and Rao, C.N.R. (2004). A new
method for the preparation of metal nanowires by the nebulized spray pyrolysis
of precursors. Advanced Materials 16 (20): 1842–1845.
21 Fu, Q.-G., Li, H.-J., Shi, X.-H. et al. (2006). Synthesis of silicon carbide nanowires
by CVD without using a metallic catalyst. Materials Chemistry and Physics
100 (1): 108–111.
22 Chengshan, X., Hong, L., Huizhao, Z. et al. (2009). Synthesis of GaN nanowires
with tantalum catalyst by magnetron sputtering. Rare Metal Materials and
Engineering 38 (7): 1129–1131.
23 Liu, R. and Lee, S.B. (2008). MnO2/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) coaxial
nanowires by one-step coelectrodeposition for electrochemical energy storage.
Journal of the American Chemical Society 130 (10): 2942–2943.
24 Xu, L., Jiang, Z., Qing, Q. et al. (2013). Design and synthesis of diverse func￾tional kinked nanowire structures for nanoelectronic bioprobes. Nano Letters
13 (2): 746–751.
25 Morber, J.R., Wang, X., Liu, J. et al. (2009). Wafer-level patterned and aligned
polymer nanowire/micro- and nanotube arrays on any substrate. Advanced
Materials 21 (20): 2072–2076.324 10 Conclusion and Outlook
26 Htay, M.T. and Hashimoto, Y. (2015). Field emission property of ZnO nanowires
prepared by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis. Superlattices and Microstructures
84: 144–153.
27 Ma, X., Luo, W., Yan, M. et al. (2016). In situ characterization of electrochemical
processes in one dimensional nanomaterials for energy storages devices. Nano
Energy 24: 165–188.
28 Hu, P., Yan, M., Wang, X. et al. (2016). Single-nanowire electrochemical probe
detection for internally optimized mechanism of porous graphene in electro￾chemical devices. Nano Letters 16 (3): 1523–1529.
29 Balasubramanian, M., Sun, X., Yang, X.Q., and McBreen, J. (2001). In situ
X-ray diffraction and X-ray absorption studies of high-rate lithium-ion batteries.
Journal of Power Sources 92 (1): 1–8.
30 Yan, M., Zhang, G., Wei, Q. et al. (2016). In operando observation of
temperature-dependent phase evolution in lithium-incorporation olivine cathode.
Nano Energy 22: 406–413.
31 Liu, Q., Hao, Z., Liao, X. et al. (2019). Langmuir–Blodgett nanowire devices for
in situ probing of zinc-ion batteries. Small 15 (30): 1902141.
32 Xiao, X., Yang, L., Zhao, H. et al. (2012). Facile synthesis of LiCoO2 nanowires
with high electrochemical performance. Nano Research 5 (1): 27–32.
33 Lee, H.-W., Muralidharan, P., Ruffo, R. et al. (2010). Ultrathin spinel LiMn2O4
nanowires as high power cathode materials for Li-ion batteries. Nano Letters 10
(10): 3852–3856.
34 Badami, P.P. (2016). Performance Evaluation and Characterization of Lithium-Ion
Cells Under Simulated PHEVs Drive Cycles [M.S.]. Ann Arbor: Arizona State
University.
35 Zhang, X., Cheng, F., Yang, J., and Chen, J. (2013). LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 porous
nanorods as high-rate and long-life cathodes for Li-ion batteries. Nano Letters
13 (6): 2822–2825.
36 Jiang, Y., Yao, Y., Shi, J. et al. (2016). One-dimensional Na3V2(PO4)3/C nanowires
as cathode materials for long-life and high rate Na-ion batteries. ChemNanoMat
2 (7): 726–731.
37 Ni, J., Fu, S., Wu, C. et al. (2016). Superior sodium storage in Na2Ti3O7 nanotube
arrays through surface engineering. Advanced Energy Materials 6 (11): 1502568.
38 Liu, Y., Xu, Y., Zhu, Y. et al. (2013). Tin-coated viral nanoforests as sodium-ion
battery anodes. ACS Nano 7 (4): 3627–3634.
39 Yang, X., Zhang, J., Wang, Z. et al. (2018). Carbon-supported nickel selenide
hollow nanowires as advanced anode materials for sodium-ion batteries. Small
14 (7): 1702669.
40 Wang, X., Xu, X., Niu, C. et al. (2017). Earth abundant Fe/Mn-based layered
oxide interconnected nanowires for advanced K-ion full batteries. Nano Letters
17 (1): 544–550.References 325
41 Han, J., Xu, M., Niu, Y. et al. (2016). Exploration of K2Ti8O17 as an anode
material for potassium-ion batteries. Chemical Communications 52 (75):
11274–11276.
42 Kharismadewi, D. and Shim, J.-J. (2015). Ultralong MnO2 nanowires intercalated
graphene/Co3O4 composites for asymmetric supercapacitors. Materials Letters
147: 123–127.
43 Zhou, J., Yu, L., Liu, W. et al. (2015). High performance all-solid supercapaci￾tors based on the network of ultralong manganese dioxide/polyaniline coaxial
nanowires. Scientific Reports 5 (1): 17858.327
Index
a
alloy-type anode materials
in Ge nanowires 142–145
in Si nanowires 139–142
in Sn nanowires 145–146
aluminum-ion batteries (AIBs) 9, 13,
285, 296–298, 320
amorphous carbon materials 201
atomic force microscopy (AFM) 6, 106,
115, 312
c
calcium-ion batteries (CIBs) 285,
292–293, 320
capacity, electricity 36–37
carbonaceous anode materials 148–151,
200–203
carbon/conductive nanowire polymer
276–277
carbon/metal oxide 274–276
carbon nanofibers (CNFs) 3, 40, 62,
201, 203, 213, 216, 233, 239,
246, 253, 264, 267–269,
317–319
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) 3, 5, 17, 41,
47, 62, 74, 77, 146, 168, 200,
232–235, 244, 246, 253, 264,
266–267, 276, 278, 297, 298,
317–319
carbon/sulfur nanowire composite
material 317
charge–discharge rate 37–38
chemical adsorption 33, 243, 246, 317,
318
chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
conventional nanowires (NWs) 58–59
nanowire arrays 83–85
coaxial nanocable 6
compressed air energy storage system
(CAES) 8
conducting polymer nanowire electrode
materials 271–272
conductive polymer nanowire/sulfur
composite cathode material
236–237
conductive polymer/sulfur nanowire
composite material 317
conventional nanowires (NWs)
dry chemical method 57–59
physical vapor deposition (PVD)
59–60
wet chemical methods 51–56
coprecipitation method 54–55
current density 37–38, 133, 141, 149,
151, 155, 156, 163, 172–174, 190,
197, 199–204, 212, 213, 216,
218–220, 232, 235, 237, 241, 247,
252, 254, 256, 288, 291, 297, 298
d
dendritic Nb2O5 nanowire arrays 69
dry chemical methods
chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
58–59
Nanowire Energy Storage Devices: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Liqiang Mai.
© 2024 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2024 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.328 Index
dry chemical methods (contd.)
high-temperature solid-state method
57–58
physical vapor deposition (PVD)
59–60
e
electric double layer capacitors (EDLC)
carbon nanofibers (CNFs) 267–269
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) 266–267
electrochemical energy storage
lead-acid battery 11
monovalent ion batteries 12–13
multivalent ion batteries 13
NiMH batteries 11–12
supercapacitors 13
types of 10
electrolyte system hybrid supercapacitor
organic electrolyte system 277–278
redox-active electrolyte system
278–279
electromagnetic energy storage 7, 9
electromotive force 36
electron/ion bicontinuous transport
42–44
electrospinning method 14, 55–56, 76,
77, 157, 159, 165, 194, 203, 207,
213, 216, 220, 267, 305, 307
f
ferrous sulfide 218–220
flywheel energy storage 7, 8
g
gradient electrospinning 73, 76–79
graphitized carbon materials 200–201
h
heterogeneous interfaces 40–42, 48, 69
heterogeneous nanowires
heterogeneous nucleation 69–71
secondary modification 71–73
heterogeneous nucleation 68–71, 306
hierarchical nanowires
secondary nucleation growth method
68–69
self-assembly method 65–68
high-temperature solid-state method
57–58
hollow carbon nanowires 200, 316
hollow nanowires
gradient electrospinning 76–79
template method 73–76
wet chemical method 73
hybrid supercapacitor
on aqueous electrolyte
carbon/conductive nanowire
polymer 276–277
carbon/metal oxide 274–276
electrode component materials
274
hydrothermal/solvothermal method
52–53, 73, 305–307
i
in situ electron microscopic
characterization
scan electron microscopic (SEM)
95–97
transmission electron microscope
(TEM) 97–101
in situ spectroscopy characterization
Raman spectroscopy 106–108
X-ray adsorption spectroscopy
108–111
X-ray diffraction 101–106
X-ray photon spectroscopy 108
insulator NWs 1
iron compounds 157–160
k
kinetics, of nanowires 34–35
l
laser ablation deposition (LAD) 1
layered oxide nanowires 193–195
layer-shaped transition metal oxides
191, 192
lead-acid batteries 7, 9, 11Index 329
lithium-ion batteries (LIBs)
advantages and issues of 137–138
anode 135
cathode 134–135
electrochemistry of 132–133
electrolyte 135–136
history of 131–132
nanowires as anodes
alloy-type anode materials 139–146
carbonaceous anode materials
148–151
metal oxide nanowires 146–148
nanowires as cathodes
iron compounds 157–160
transition metal oxides 151–153
vanadium oxide nanowires 153–157
nanowires-based electrodes for flexible
168–174
nanowires-based solid-state electrolytes
163–168
separator 136–137, 160–163
unique characteristic of nanowires for
138–139
lithium–selenium battery
cathode materials 251–256
existing problems and possible
solutions 256–257
reaction mechanism of 250–251
sulfur vs. selenium 249
lithium storage
in Ge nanowires 142–145
in Si nanowires 139–142
in Sn nanowires 145–146
lithium-sulfur batteries 230, 316
conductive polymer nanowire/sulfur
composite cathode material
236–237
metal compound nanowires/sulfur
composite cathode materials
237–243
m
magnesium-ion batteries (MIBs)
manganese-based nanowires
289–290
other nanowires for 290–292
vanadium-based nanowires 286–289
magnesium–sulfur battery 243–249, 257,
321
manganese-based nanowires
magnesium-ion batteries 289–290
zinc-ion batteries 295–296
mechanical energy storage
compressed air energy storage system
(CAES) 8
flywheel energy storage 8
pumped hydro storage 8
metal-air batteries 41, 319–320
metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE)
64, 140
metal compound nanowires/sulfur
composite cathode materials
237–243
metal compound/sulfur nanowire
composite material 317
metal nanowire nonwoven cloth (MNNC)
173
metal nanowires 173, 206–207
metal oxide nanowires 146–148,
269–271
metal sulfur battery 320–322
metal sulfides (MS) 215–216
metal-chalcogenide battery
lithium–selenium battery
249–257
lithium–sulfur battery
conductive polymer nanowire/sulfur
composite cathode material
236–237
metal compound nanowires /sulfur
composite cathode materials
237–243
sulfur–carbon nanowire composite
cathode materials 231–235
magnesium–sulfur battery 247–249
sodium–sulfur battery 243–247
monovalent ion batteries 12–13, 314,
316, 320
multivalent ion batteries 7, 9, 13,
285–299, 314, 320330 Index
n
Na-ion batteries 315–316
Nanobelts 1, 5–6, 95, 155, 288, 289, 292,
294, 295, 297
nanocables 1, 6
nanorods 1, 3, 35, 43, 44, 65, 96, 155,
203, 204, 206–209, 211–213, 271,
286, 295, 316
nanowire arrays
chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
83–85
template method 79–81
wet chemical method 81–83
nanowire device characterization
111–115
nanowire electrode materials
conducting polymer 271–272
metal oxide 269–271
nanowire energy storage materials and
devices
overview 13–15
Si nanowires 15–17
single nanowire electrochemical energy
storage device 18–19
ZnO nanowires 17
nanowire materials, development history
of 4
nanowire structures
in lithium-ion battery 314–315
in lithium–sulfur batteries 316–318
in Na-ion battery 315–316
in other monovalent ion batteries 316
nanowires (NWs) 1
advantages 87
arrays 79–85
conventional 51–56
disadvantages 87
heterogeneous 69–73
hierarchical 65–69
hollow 73–79
influencing factors 87
porous 60–64
separators in LIBs 160–163
solid-state electrolytes 163–168
nanowires for other energy storage
devices
metal air batteries 319–320
metal sulfur batteries 320–322
multivalent-ion battery 320
neutron diffraction 119–121, 312, 313
nickel–metal–hydride (NiMH) batteries
9, 11
nickel sulfide 215, 216, 218–220
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
117–119, 312, 313
o
one-dimensional electrode materials
heterogeneous interfaces in nanowire
40–42
mechanism of electron/ion
bicontinuous transport 42–44
nanowire vs. electrolytes 38–40
self-buffering mechanism 44
theoretical calculation of 44–48
one-dimensional nanomaterials
carbon nanofibers (CNFs) 3
nanobelts 5–6
nanocables 6
nanorods 3
nanotubes 3–5
one-dimensional nanowire materials
adsorption 33
charge–discharge rate 37–38
Coulombic efficiency 38
current density 37–38
cycle life 38
electromotive force 36
electronic structure 27–29
kinetics 34–35
mechanical properties 31–32
operating voltage 36
power and specific power 38
specific capacity 36–37
specific energy 37
surface activity 33–34
thermal properties
melting point 29–30
thermal conduction 30–31Index 331
thermodynamics 34
1D nanomaterials
advanced characterization methods for
308–314
structure design and performance
optimization of 305–308
in supercapacitors 318–319
1D porous carbon materials 265
operating voltage 36–38, 192, 197, 209,
276, 278, 315
organic electrolyte system 204, 277–278
orientation-induced template method 62
p
physical adsorption 33, 272, 279
physical vapor deposition (PVD) 59–60,
306, 307
polyanionic compounds 134, 185, 187,
191, 192, 196–200, 203–206, 315
pore memory effect 101
Prussian blue material 191, 192
pseudocapacitive supercapacitors 264,
269–273
pumped hydro storage 7, 8
q
QMD-FLAPW 45
quantum ATK 45
QUICKSTEP 45
r
Raman spectroscopy 106–108, 212, 308,
311
redox-active electrolyte system 278–279
s
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 52,
95–97, 290, 308
secondary modification, heterogeneous
nanowires 71–73
secondary nucleation growth method
68–69
self-assembly method 60, 63–68, 73, 307
self-buffering mechanism 42, 44
semiconductor NWs 1, 15
silicon nanowires (SiNWs) 2, 15, 16, 39,
112, 115–117, 141, 170, 171, 174
single nanowire electrochemical energy
storage device 18–19
sodium-ion batteries
advantages of 186–187
carbonaceous materials 200–203
challenges for 191–193
development of 185–186
ferrous sulfide 218–220
materials for 187–190
metal sulfides 215–216
nickel sulfide 218–220
polyanionic compounds 196–203
transition metal oxide nanowires
207–215
working principle of 186
sodium–sulfur batteries 12, 243–247,
257, 320, 321
sol–gel method 53–54, 267, 276, 305–307
solid electrolyte/quasi-solid-state hybrid
supercapacitor 279
stannic sulfide 218
supercapacitors 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 209,
215, 263–280, 318–319
synchrotron radiation (SR) 109, 312, 314
t
template by nanoconfinement 60–61
template method
chemical etching method 64
hollow nanowires 73–79
metal-assisted chemical etching
(MACE) method 64
nanoconfinement 60–61
nanowire arrays 79–85
orientation-induced 62–63
self-assembly method 63–64
thermal conduction 29–31
thermodynamics, nanowires electrode
materials 34
time-of-flight mass spectrometry
121–123, 313
transition metal oxide nanowires
layered oxides nanowires 193–195332 Index
transition metal oxide nanowires (contd.)
tunnel-type oxides nanowires
195–196
transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
52, 97–101, 198, 290, 308, 309
tungsten sulfide 216–218
tunnel-type oxides nanowires 192,
195–196
u
ultrasonic spray pyrolysis 55, 306,
307
UV photodetectors (UV PDs) 85
v
vanadium-based nanowires
magnesium-ion batteries 286–289
zinc-ion batteries 294–295
vanadium oxide nanowires 66, 153–157
VASP 45
w
wet chemical methods
coprecipitation method 54–55
electrospinning method 55–56
hollow nanowires 73–79
hydrothermal/solvothermal method
52–53
nanowire arrays 81–83
sol–gel method 53–54
ultrasonic spray pyrolysis 55
x
X-ray adsorption spectroscopy (XAS)
108–111
X-ray diffraction 101–106, 119, 204, 251,
292, 308, 310, 313
X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) 108
z
zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs)
manganese-based nanowires
295–296
vanadium-based nanowires 294–295
ZnO nanowires 17, 32, 70
ZnO–NiO mixed oxide nanostructures
17
ZrNb14O37 nanowire 103, 104
