NANOTECHNOLOGY 
FOR ENVIRONMENTAL 
POLLUTION DECONTAMINATION
 
Tools, Methods, and Approaches 
for Detection and Remediation NANOTECHNOLOGY 
FOR ENVIRONMENTAL 
POLLUTION DECONTAMINATION
 
Tools, Methods, and Approaches 
for Detection and Remediation 
Edited by 
Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, PhD
 
Rouf Ahmad Bhat, PhD
 
Gowhar Hamid Dar, PhD
  
First edition published 2023 
Apple Academic Press Inc. 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA 
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA 
CRC Press 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, 
Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 USA 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2023 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: Nanotechnology for environmental pollution decontamination : tools, methods, and approaches for detection and 
remediation / edited by Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, PhD, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, PhD, Gowhar Hamid Dar, PhD. 
Names: Tonelli, Fernanda Maria Policarpo, editor. | Bhat, Rouf Ahmad, 1981- editor. | Dar, Gowhar Hamid, editor. 
Description: First edition. | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 20220249563 | Canadiana (ebook) 2022024975X | ISBN 9781774910405 (hardcover) | 
ISBN 9781774910412 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003279563 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Nanotechnology—Environmental aspects. | LCSH: Pollutants. | LCSH: Detectors. 
Classification: LCC T174.7 .N38 2023 | DDC 628.5—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-040-5 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-041-2 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00327-956-3 (ebk) About the Editors
 
Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, PhD 
Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, PhD, is currently 
working as associate professor at Federal University 
of São João del Rei, Divinópolis-MG, Brazil. She 
was previously with the Department of Morphology, 
Federal University of Minas Gerais, BH—Minas 
Gerais, Brazil. She specializes in molecular biology 
and has been studying biotechnological topics such 
as gene delivery approaches (using engineered viral particles and nanomate￾rials) aiming for transgenesis. She has taught topics related to biochemistry 
and molecular biology and has authored scientific articles and more than 30 
book chapters from international publishers. She has also reviewed various 
articles/book proposals. She has presented and participated in many national 
and international conferences and has helped organize various scientific 
events. Dr. Tonelli has also dedicated herself to the promotion of science and 
technology through cofunding with an oil and gas corporation. Dr. Tonelli is 
active in scientific advocation groups for women. Her efforts as a researcher 
have been recognized with various awards, including “For Women in 
Science Brazil-L’Oreal/UNESCO/ABC” and “Under30 Brazil–Forbes” and 
with certificates of merit. 
Rouf Ahmad Bhat, PhD 
Rouf Ahmad Bhat, PhD, presently working at the 
Department of School Education, Government 
of Jammu and Kashmir, India. He has been 
teaching graduate and postgraduate students of 
environmental sciences for the past three years. 
He is an author of more than 50 research articles 
(h-index 20; i-index 28; total citation >980) and 40 
book chapters. He has published more than 28 books 
with international publishers (Springer, Elsevier, CRC Press Taylor and 
Francis, Apple Academic Press, John Wiley and IGI Global). He specializes 
in limnology, toxicology, phytochemistry, and phytoremediation. Dr. Bhat vi About the Editors 
has presented and participated in numerous state, national, and international 
conferences, seminars, workshops, and symposium. In addition, he has 
worked as an associate environmental expert on the World Bank-funded 
Flood Recovery Project and also as environmental support staff for Asian 
Development Bank (ADB)-funded development projects. He has received 
many awards, appreciations, and recognition for his services to the science 
of water testing and air and noise analysis. He has served as an editorial 
board member and reviewer for reputed international journals. Dr. Bhat is 
still writing and experimenting with diverse capacities of plants for use in 
aquatic pollution remediation. 
He pursued his doctorate at Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural 
Sciences and Technology Kashmir (Division of Environmental Science), 
India. 
Gowhar Hamid Dar, PhD 
Gowhar Hamid Dar, PhD, is currently working as 
an Assistant Professor in Environmental Science, 
Sri Pratap College, Cluster University Srinagar, 
Department of Higher Education (J&K), India. 
He has a PhD in Environmental Science with 
specialization in Environmental Microbiology 
(Fish Microbiology, Fish Pathology, Industrial 
Microbiology, Taxonomy and Limnology). He has 
been teaching post graduate and graduate students for the past many years 
at Post graduate Department of Environmental Science, Sri Pratap College, 
Cluster University Srinagar. He has more than 50 papers (h-index 12; i-index 
14; total citation >360) in international and national journals of repute and 
a number of books with international publishers (Springer, Elsevier, CRC 
Press Taylor and Francis, Apple Academic Press, John Wiley, IGI Global) 
to his credit. Moreover, he is supervising a number of students for the 
completion of degrees. He has been working on the Isolation, Identification 
and Characterization of microbes, their pathogenic behavior and impact of 
pollution on development of diseases in fish fauna for the last several years. 
He has received many awards and appreciations for his services toward the 
science and development. Besides, he is also an acting member of various 
research and academic committees. 	 	 	 	
Contributors.............................................................................................................xi
 
Foreword by Mairaj Ud Din Sheikh ..................................................................... xxi
 
Preface .................................................................................................................. xxv
 
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................... xv
 
PART I: ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION ......................................................1
 
1.	 Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health..........................................3
 
Cássia Michelle Cabral, Kamila Cabral Mielke, Fábio Ribeiro Pires, and 
José Barbosa Dos Santos
 
2.	 The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans ....................39
 
Zia Ur Rahman Farooqi, Muhammad Moaz Khursheed, Nouman Gulzar, 
Muhammad Ahmad Akram, Muhammad Mahroz Hussain, Abdul Qadeer, 
Waqas Mohy-Ud-Din, and Sadia Younas
 
PART II: NANOTECHNOLOGY AND NANOSENSORS...............................59
 
3.	 Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric 
Nanosensors as Tools to Detect Environmental Pollution .........................61
 
Bambang Kuswandi and Muhammad Afthoni 
4.	 Nanotechnological Revolution: Carbon-Based 
Nanomaterials Detecting Pollutants..........................................................101
 
Vandana Singh and Shalvi Upadhyay 
5.	 Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials to 
Detect Environmental Contaminants........................................................135
 
Kannan Deepa, Ashish Kapoor, and Prabhakar Sivaraman 
PART III: NANOTECHNOLOGY AND NANOBIOSENSORS....................155
 
6.	 Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes........157
 
Manmeet Kaur, Inderpal Kaur, and Gautam Chhabra 
Contents
 7.	 Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 
Detection: Nanotechnology Combined with Enzymes, 
Antibodies, and Microorganisms...............................................................189 
Tamoghni Mitra, Saurav Kumar Sahoo, Arpita Banerjee, 
Anjani Kumar Upadhyay, and Kazi Nahid Hasan 
8.	 Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 
to Assess Environmental Pollution Levels ................................................219 
Vinars Dawane, Satish Piplode, Vishnu K. Manam, Prabodh Ranjan, and 
Abhishek Chandra 
9.	 Carbon-Based Nanomaterials: Nanobiosensors Detecting 
Environmental Pollution ............................................................................263 
Swapnali Jadhav, Ekta B. Jadhav, Swaroop S. Sonone, 
Mahipal Singh Sankhla, and Rajeev Kumar 
PART IV: NANOREMEDIATION....................................................................299
 
10.	 Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution..........................................301
 
Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Flávia Cristina Policarpo Tonelli, 
Moline Severino Lemos, and Danilo Roberto Carvalho Ferreira
 
11.	 Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation of 
Polluted and Nutrient-Depleted Soils 
Guilherme Max Dias Ferreira, Gabriel Max Dias Ferreira, 
José Romão Franca, and Jenaina Ribeiro-Soares 
12.	 Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials..........................................409
 
Yassine Slimani, Essia Hannachi, and Ghulam Yasin 
PART V: NANOBIOREMEDIATION..............................................................443
 
13.	 Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials to 
Environmental Pollution Remediation .....................................................445 
Ahmed Ali Romeh 
14.	 Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 
Inoculum and Its Use for Enhancing Biomass Yield of Crops 
for Food, for In Situ Nano-Phyto-Mycorrhizo Remediation of 
Contaminated Soils and Water, and for Sustainable 
Bioenergy Production .................................................................................469 
A. G. Khan and A. Mohammad 
viii	 Contents  
PART VI: NANOMATERIALS FEASIBILITY..............................................485
 
15.	 Hazardous and Safety and Management of Nanomaterials for
 
the Personal Health and Environment......................................................487
 
J. Immanuel Suresh and A. Judith 
16.	 Economic Impact of Appslied Nanotechnology: An Overview...............495
 
Mir Zahoor Gul and Beedu Sashidhar Rao 
17.	 Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation and 
Nano-Phytoremediation..............................................................................509
 
Misbah Naz, Muhammad Ammar Raza, Sarah Bouzroud, Essa Ali, 
Syed Asad Hussain Bukhari, Muhammad Tariq, and Xiaorong Fan
 
Index.....................................................................................................................527
 
Contents ix Contributors
 
Muhammad Afthoni 
Pharmacy Department, Faculty of Science and Technology, Ma Chung University, 
Villa Puncak Tidar N-01 65151, Malang, Indonesia 
Muhammad Ahmad Akram 
Environmental Protection Agency, Faisalabad 38000, Pakistan 
Essa Ali 
Institute of Plant Genetics and Developmental Biology, College of Chemistry and Life Sciences, 
Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321000, China 
Arpita Banerjee 
School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Syed Asad Hussain Bukhari 
Department of Agronomy, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan 60800, Pakistan 
Sarah Bouzroud 
Laboratoire de Biotechnologieet Physiologie Végétales, Centre de biotechnologievégétale et 
microbiennebiodiversité et environnement, Faculté des Sciences, Université Mohammed V de Rabat, 
Rabat 1014, Morocco 
Cássia Michelle Cabral 
Department of Agronomy, Federal University of Vales do Jequitinhonha e Mucuri, Diamantina, MG, Brazil 
Abhishek Chandra 
Department of Chemistry, HVHP Institute of Post Graduate Studies and Research, 
Kadi Sarva Vishwavidhyalaya, Kadi 382715, Gujarat, India 
Gautam Chhabra 
School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 141001, India 
Vinars Dawane 
School of Environment and Sustainable Development, Central University of Gujarat, 
Gandhinagar 382030, Gujarat, India; E-mail: vinars27dawane2009@gmail.com 
Kannan Deepa 
Department of Chemical Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur 603203, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
Waqas Mohy-Ud-Din 
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan 
Xiaorong Fan 
Key Laboratory of Plant Nutrition and Fertilization in Lower-Middle Reaches of the Yangtze River, 
Ministry of Agriculture, and Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China; 
E-mail: xiaorongfan@njau.edu.cn
 
State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing 210095, China
 xii Contributors 
Zia Ur Rahman Farooqi 
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan; 
E-mail: ziaa2600@gmail.com 
Danilo Roberto Carvalho Ferreira 
Department of Materials, CDTN/CNEN, Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
Gabriel Max Dias Ferreira 
Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Ouro Preto, Campus Morro do Cruzeiro, 35400-000, 
Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, Brazil 
Guilherme Max Dias Ferreira 
Department of Chemistry, Institute of Natural Science, Federal University of Lavras, 37200-900, 
Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil 
José Romão Franca 
Department of Physics, Institute of Natural Science, Federal University of Lavras, 37200-900, Lavras, 
Minas Gerais, Brazil 
Mir Zahoor Gul 
Department of Biochemistry, University College of Sciences, Osmania University, Hyderabad, 500007, 
Telangana, India; E-mail: ziahgul@gmail.com 
Nouman Gulzar 
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan 
Essia Hannachi 
Laboratory of Physics of Materials - Structures and Properties, Department of Physics, 
Faculty of Sciences of Bizerte, University of Carthage, Zarzouna 7021, Tunisia 
Kazi Nahid Hasan 
School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Moline Severino Lemos 
Department of Cell Biology, ICB/UFMG, Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
Muhammad Mahroz Hussain 
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan 
Ekta B. Jadhav 
MSc Forensic Science, Government Institute of Forensic Science, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India 
Swapnali Jadhav 
M.Sc. Forensic Science, Government Institute of Forensic Science, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India 
A. Judith 
PG Department of Microbiology, The American College, Madurai 625002, Tamil Nadu, India 
Ashish Kapoor 
Department of Chemical Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur 603203, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
Inderpal Kaur 
Department of Biochemistry, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana141001, India 
Manmeet Kaur 
Department of Microbiology, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 141001, India; 
E-mail: manmeet1-mb@ pau.edu Contributors xiii 
A. G. Khan 
Grad Life Member Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia; E-mail: lasara@gmail.com 
Muhammad Moaz Khursheed 
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan 
Rajeev Kumar 
Department of Forensic Science, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, Galgotias University, 
Greater Noida, India 
Bambang Kuswandi 
Chemo and Biosensors Group, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Jember, Jl, Kalimantan 37, 
Jember 68121, Indonesia; E-mail: b_kuswandi.farmasi@unej.ac.id 
Vishnu K. Manam 
Department of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, Unit of Algal Biotechnology and Nanobiotechnology, 
Pachaiyappa’s College, University of Madras, Chennai 600030, Tamil Nadu, India 
Kamila Cabral Mielke 
Department of Agronomy, Federal University of Viçosa, Viçosa, MG, Brazil 
Tamoghni Mitra 
School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
A. Mohammad 
W. Booth School of Engineering Practice and Technology, Engineering Technology Building, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada 
Misbah Naz 
State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing 210095, China; E-mail: raymisbah@ymail.com 
Satish Piplode 
Department of Chemistry, Sahid Bhagat Singh Govt. P. G. College Pipariya, Hoshangabad 461775, 
Madhya Pradesh, India 
Fábio Ribeiro Pires 
Department of Agricultural and Biological Sciences, Federal University of Espírito Santo, São Mateus, 
ES, Brazil; E-mail: pires.fr@gmail.com 
Abdul Qadeer 
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan 
Prabodh Ranjan 
Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
Beedu Sashidhar Rao 
Department of Biochemistry, University College of Sciences, Osmania University, Hyderabad, 500007, 
Telangana, India 
Muhammad Ammar Raza 
College of Food Science and Biotechnology, Key Laboratory of Fruits and Vegetables Postharvest and 
Processing Technology Research of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Gongshang University, 
Hangzhou 310018, China 
Ahmed Ali Romeh 
Plant Production Department, Faculty of Technology and Development, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 
Egypt; E-mail: ahmedromeh2006@yahoo.com xiv Contributors 
Saurav Kumar Sahoo 
MITS School of Biotechnology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Mahipal Singh Sankhla 
Department of Forensic Science, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, Galgotias University, 
Greater Noida, India; E-mail: mahipal4n6@gmail.com 
José Barbosa Dos Santos 
Department of Agronomy, Federal University of Vales do Jequitinhonha e Mucuri, Diamantina, 
MG, Brazil 
Yassine Slimani 
Department of Biophysics, Institute for Research and Medical Consultations (IRMC), 
Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia; 
E-mail: yaslimani@iau.edu.sa; slimaniyassine18@gmail.com
 
Vandana Singh 
Department of microbiology, School of Allied Health Science, Sharda University, 
Greater Noida, 201306, Uttar Pradesh, India; E-mail: vandana.singh@sharda.ac.in 
Prabhakar Sivaraman 
Department of Chemical Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, 
Kattankulathur 603203, Tamil Nadu, India; E-mail: prabhaks@srmist.edu.in 
Jenaina Ribeiro Soares 
Department of Physics, Institute of Natural Science, Federal University of Lavras, 37200-900, Lavras, 
Minas Gerais, Brazil; E-mail: jenaina.soares@ufla.br 
Swaroop S. Sonone 
MSc Forensic Science, Government Institute of Forensic Science, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India 
J. Immanuel Suresh 
PG Department of Microbiology, The American College, Madurai 625002, Tamil Nadu, India; 
E-mail: immanuelsuresh1978@gmail.com 
Muhammad Tariq 
Faculty of Pharmacy and Alternative Medicine, The Islamia University Bahawalpur 6300, Pakistan 
Flávia Cristina Policarpo Tonelli 
Department of Pharmacy, UFSJ/CCO, Divinópolis, Brazil; E-mail: flacristinaptonelli@gmail.com 
Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli 
Department of Cell Biology, ICB/UFMG, Belo Horizonte, Brazil; E-mail: tonellibioquimica@gmail.com 
Anjani Kumar Upadhyay 
School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India; 
E-mail: upadhyayanjanikumar6@gmail.com 
Shalvi Upadhyay 
Department of Forensic Sciences, School of Allied Health Science, Sharda University, 
Greater Noida, 201306, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Ghulam Yasin 
State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, College of Materials Science and Engineering, 
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China 
Sadia Younas 
Department of Chemistry, The Government Sadiq College Women University, Bahawalpur 63100, Pakistan Abbreviations
 
AAS absorption spectroscopy 
ACs activated carbons 
AChE acetylcholinesterase 
AdS-DPV adsorptive stripping-DPV 
AFM atomic force microscopy 
AFS fluorescence spectroscopy 
AMF arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus 
ANN artificial neural networks 
AOB antimony oxide bromide 
AOPs advanced oxidative processes 
APAP acetaminophen 
APIs active pharmaceutical ingredients 
APTES aminopropyltriethoxysilan 
APTS 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane 
AQ-SPEC Air Quality Sensor Performance Evaluation Center 
ASV anodic stripping voltammetry 
ATP adenosine-tri-phosphate 
BBF biochar-based fertilizer 
BC biochar 
BCF bioconcentration factor 
BDD boron-doped diamond 
BFR brominated compounds 
BOD biochemical oxygen demand 
BPA bisphenol-A 
BSI British Standard Institute 
CAP chloramphenicol 
CBM carbamate 
CBNs carbon black nanoparticles 
CBNs carbon-based nanomaterials 
CD circular dichroism 
CDOM colored dissolved organic matters 
CEC cation exchange capacity 
CFCs chlorofluorocarbons 
CNM carbon nanomaterials xvi Abbreviations 
CNTs carbon nanotubes 
CNT-FET carbon-based field-effect transistors 
COD chemical oxygen demand 
COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
CPX antimycotin cycloperoxolamine 
CQDs carbon quantum dots 
CSPE carbon screen-printed electrode 
CTC cation exchange capacity 
CV cyclic voltammetry 
CVD chemical vapor deposition 
CWA chemical warfare agents 
c-DecaBDE decabromodiphenyl ether 
DAP diammonium phosphate 
DDT dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
DFT density functional theory 
DLCs dioxin-like compounds 
DLS dynamic light scattering 
DNB dinitrobenzene 
DNT dinitrotoluene 
DO dissolved oxygen 
DPV differential pulse voltammetry 
ECN engineered carbonaceous nanomaterials 
EDA ethylene diamine 
EDCs endocrine disrupting compounds 
EDX energy-dispersive X-ray 
EELS electron energy loss spectroscopy 
EFSA European Food Protection Authority 
EIA US Energy Information Administration 
EIS electrochemical impedance spectroscopy 
ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
ENR enrofloxacin 
EPA environmental protection agency 
EPO European Patent Office 
ERMN extraradical mycelium network 
EWNS Engineered Water Nanostructures 
FAM fluorescein amidite 
FETs field-effect transistors 
FRET fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
FTIR fourier transform infrared spectroscopy Abbreviations xvii 
GC gas chromatography 
GCEs glassy carbon electrodes 
GC-MS gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
GCNTs graphene coated CNTs 
GLDH glutamate dehydrogenase 
GN graphene 
GO graphene oxide 
GOx glucoseoxidase 
GQDs graphene quantum dots 
GR graphene 
GST glutathione S-transferase 
HBCDD hexabromocyclododecane 
HCB hexachlorobenzene 
HCH hexachlorocyclohexane 
HOC hydrophobic organic compounds 
HPLC high-performance liquid chromatography 
HPNPP hydroxypropyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate 
HQ hydroquinone 
HRP horseradish peroxidase 
HTA high throughput analysis 
ICT intramolecular charge transfer 
IFE inner filter effect 
IgG immunoglobulin G 
IL ionic liquid 
IL-CCE ionic liquid-based carbon ceramic electrode 
IPA adsorption of Isopropyl alcohol 
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
ITO indium-tin-oxide 
LMCT ligand to metal charge transfer 
LOC lab-on-a-chip 
LOD limit of detection 
LR linear regression 
LRET luminescence resonance energy transfer 
LSPR localized surface plasmon resonance 
LSV linear sweep voltammetry 
MAP monoammonium phosphate 
MCP monocrotophos 
ME mechanical exfoliation 
MFC microbial fuel cell xviii Abbreviations 
MHB mycorrhiza-helping bacteria 
MIP molecularly imprinted polymer 
MLCT metal to ligand charge transfer 
MLR multivariate linear regression 
MMP magnetic microparticle 
MNPs magnetic nanoparticles 
MOFs metal–organic frameworks 
MOX metallic-oxide-semiconductor 
MP methyl parathion 
MRI magnetic resonance imaging 
MRSA methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
MSDS material safety data sheets 
MSOs mercury-specific-oligonucleotides 
MWCNT multiwall carbon nanotube 
NBs nanobelts 
ND nano-diamonds 
NEP evaluation of norepinephrine 
NFs nanofibers 
NMs nanomaterials 
NMBs nanomembranes 
NMPR nano-mycorrhizo-phytoremediation 
NOM natural organic matter 
NPs nanoparticles 
NPGF nanoporous gold film 
NRBs nanoribbons 
NRs nanorods 
NTs nanotubes 
NWS nanowires 
OCP organochlorinated pesticides 
OPs organophosphorus 
PAHs polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons 
PB Prussian blue 
PBDEs pentabromodiphenyl ether 
PCBs polychlorinated biphenyls 
PCDDs polychlorodibenzo-p-dioxins 
PCDFs polychlorodibenzofurans 
PCNs polychlorinated naphthalenes 
PCP pentachlorophenol 
PCR polymerase chain reaction Abbreviations xix 
PDMS polydimethylsiloxane 
PEC photo-electro-chemical 
PeCB pentachlorobenzene 
PECVD plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition 
PEI polyethyleneimine 
PET photo-induced electron transfer 
PFAS poly-fluoroalkyl substances 
PFCs perfluorinated compounds 
PGPR plant-growth promoting rhizobacteria 
P-HAP p-hydroxyamenophen 
PL photo luminance 
PNS per-oxy-nano-sensor 
POPs persistent organic pollutants 
PPA phenylpropanolamine 
PPCPs pharmaceuticals, personal care products 
PSi porous Si 
PTEs potentially toxic elements 
QCM quartz crystal microbalance 
QDs quantum dots 
RBH rhodamine b hydrazine 
rGO reduced graphene oxide 
RISC RNA-induced silencing complex 
ROS reactive oxygen species 
RRS Rayleigh scattering 
SAW surface acoustic wave 
SBS styrene-butadiene-styrene 
SDD Secchi disk depth 
SEM scanning electron microscope 
SERS surface-enhanced Raman scattering 
SPR surface plasmon resonance 
SSS sea surface salinity 
STEM scanning transmission electron microscopy 
STM scanning tunnel microscopy 
SWCNT single-wall carbon nanotube 
SWV square wave voltammetry 
TCDD tetrachlorodibenzodioxin 
TCE trichloroethylene 
TCh thiocholine 
TCPP tetrakis (4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin xx Abbreviations 
TEM transmission electron microscopy 
TEOS tetraethoxysilane 
TLC thin-layer chromatography 
TNB trinitrobenzene 
TNT trinitrotoluene 
TP total phosphorus 
TPI Terras Pretas de Índios 
TPRS two-photon Rayleigh scattering 
TSS total suspended sediments 
VOC volatile-organic compounds 
VOMs volatile organic materials 
WB wheat bran 
WT water temperature 
XPS x-ray fluorescence spectroscopy 
XPS x-ray photoelectron spectra Foreword
 
Knowledge is an ever-expanding domain, and scientific 
enquiry forms an important part of it. Production of 
scientific literature, even though at times repetitive, 
serves its purpose of outreaching to the stakeholders. 
An important task of science, besides the theoretical 
construct it builds up, is to give solutions to the 
problems and help humankind to live in harmony with 
the environment. The ever-increasing population and 
the fight for finite resources has built up a strained relationship between 
humans and the environment. Since resource exploitation cannot be halted, 
the next best thing to do is to explore the scientific methods of limiting 
or eliminating damage to the environment so as to provide the Earth with 
sustainable use of resources. This book is one such attempt to bring together 
techniques (using nanotechnology) to obtain the objective of reducing harm 
to the environment, particularly in Indian conditions. 
Rapid urbanization/industrialization, while not being given necessary 
attention to sustainability, has converted a large array of organic and inorganic 
substances into a serious risk to living beings. Environmental pollution has 
become a worldwide threat that severely affects ecosystems in a negative way. 
Air, soil, and water polluted by persistent contaminants such as pesticides and 
heavy metals require urgent attention, and efficient strategies to deal with 
pollutants aiming for remediation are extremely necessary. 
The nanotechnology field offers interesting tools to deal with pollution, 
and this book is dedicated to exploring approaches and methods involving 
nanomaterials, both to detect contaminants and also to clean and restore 
polluted spots. 
The book Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamina￾tion: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for Detection and Remediation 
includes 17 chapters and is divided into six parts to allow readers to have 
access to a comprehensive view on the theme. 
The introductory chapter, Nanoenzymes: Nouvelle Vague of Artificial 
Enzymes, is conceptualized by Indian authors to address a topic of nanopar￾ticles containing enzyme-like features capable of catalyzing reactions xxii Foreword 
efficiently to achieve a specific goal, such as nanoremediaton, which has 
been receiving increasing attention over recent years. 
The first part of the book, Environmental Pollution, contains two chapters 
dedicated to exploring threats to human beings arising out of organic 
and inorganic environmental pollution. The first one, Organic Pollutants 
Threatening Human Health, contributed by Brazilian authors, reviews organic 
pollutants’ negative impacts, and Chapter 2, which is written by authors from 
Pakistan, reviews the harmful consequences related to inorganic contaminants. 
The second part, Nanotechnology and Nanosensors, presents three chap￾ters and addresses the different types of nanosensors (nanomaterials used in 
devices to detect analytes) to detect environmental pollution. Chapter 3 has 
been written by authors from Indonesia and reviews these different types of 
nanosensors, emphasizing the technology advances on their performance for 
environmental pollutant detections. Chapter 4, produced by Indian authors 
is focused on nanosensors that contain nanomaterials from which chemical 
constitution is based on carbon atoms. Chapter 5, also by Indian authors, 
addresses nanosensors containing nanomaterials from which chemical 
constitution is not based on carbon atoms. 
The third part, containing Chapters 6, 7, and 8, drafted by Indian authors, 
explores nanosensors containing biological material (enzymes, antibodies, 
whole microorganisms): the nanobiosensors to monitor environmental 
contamination. Chapter 6 discusses nanomaterials as strategic tools to 
promote an extremely responsive, active, and high-frequency detection 
of environmental contaminants. Chapter 7 reviews the importance, recent 
advancements, and key future challenges associated with noncarbon-based 
nanobiosensors regarding detecting pollutants, and Chapter 8 has a similar 
approach regarding carbon-based nanobiosensors. 
The fourth part also presents three chapters and is dedicated to the use of 
nanomaterials to remediate polluted areas. Chapters 9 and 10 were produced 
by Brazilian authors, and Chapter 11 by authors from Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, 
and China. Chapter 9 is dedicated to discussing the use of materials in 
nanoscale to treat contaminated water, Chapter 10 addresses the use of these 
materials to remediate polluted soil, and Chapter 11 is focused on nanoreme￾diating air pollution. 
The fifth part contains Chapters 12 and 13 and discusses bioremediation 
using nanomaterials. Chapter 12, produced by an Egyptian author, focuses 
on the joint use of plants and nanomaterials, nanophytoremediation, to 
remediate environmental pollution. Chapter 13, written by an Australian 
author, addresses the use of microorganisms and nanomaterials to remediate 
pollution. Foreword xxiii 
The sixth part explores the feasibility of nanotechnologies and contains 
two chapters. Chapter 14, produced by an Indian author, is dedicated to 
briefly reviewing the main aspects regarding safety of the use of these 
nanoscale materials. Chapter 15, on its turns, written by Indian authors, 
is dedicated to discussing the impacts of nanotechnology on the world’s 
economy. Chapter 16, written by authors from China and Morocco, discusses 
strategies of remediation using nanomaterials that should be biocompatible 
and environment friendly to ecosystems. 
The structure adopted to present the book chapters was designed to 
cover the most important aspects regarding the nanotechnology field as a 
very relevant contributor to offer strategic and efficient tools to remediate 
environmental pollutants, taking important steps on the path toward sustain￾able development. Therefore, the book can act as a source of attraction to the 
global scientific community. The editors must be highly complimented for 
their sincere hard work in bringing this volume. 
—Prof. Mairaj Ud Din Sheikh 
Department of Geography 
Sri Pratap College 
Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India Preface
 
Human actions have been ignoring sustainability principles to promote rapid 
industrialization/urbanization, which has severely impacted ecosystems world￾wide in a negative way. 
Organic and inorganic environmental pollutants generated at high levels 
have caused contamination of water, soil, and air, and have been threatening 
the lives of living beings. Strategies to reduce and eliminate the deleterious 
effects of environmental pollutant are, therefore, necessary in an urgent 
basis. 
Diverse solutions are being developed in this regard; however, the 
nanotechnology field possesses enormous potential to provide materials in 
nanoscale that are designed specifically to perform efficiently a desirable 
task and at a low cost. 
When it comes to environmental pollution, nanomaterials are useful not 
only to remediate the polluted areas but also to detect pollutants by means of 
sensors and also monitor the quality of environmental restoration performed 
by nanotechnologies or nanobiotechnologies. 
This book is an attempt to offer undergraduate students and researchers 
an extensive and comprehensive knowledge on nanotechnology that can be 
applied to pollution detection and remediation, assisted or otherwise, by 
biological strategies from a biotechnological point of view. 
There are 17 chapters in this book that address themes such as nano￾zymes; organic and inorganic pollutants threatening human health; different 
types of carbon-based and noncarbon-based nanomaterials in nanosensors 
and nanobiosensors to detect environmental pollution; nanomaterials to 
specially deal with water, soil, or air pollution; and assisted nanoremediation 
promoted by plants (nanophytoremediation) or microorganism (e.g., mycor￾rhizal fungus promoting in situ nano-phyto-mycorrhizo-remediation; and 
also to address; aspects related to a macroperspective of nanoremediation 
highlighting economy aspects related to nanotechnology, safety aspects on 
the use of nanomaterials, and also sustainability aspects related to the use of 
nanomaterials for strategies of environmental restoration. xxvi Preface 
We are extremely grateful to all the authors who have contributed various 
chapters in this book and to AAP for their generous cooperation in publishing 
this book. 
—Dr. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli 
Dr. Rouf Ahmad Bhat 
Dr. Gowhar Hamid Dar PART I
 
Environmental Pollution
 CHAPTER 1
Organic Pollutants Threatening 
Human Health
CÁSSIA MICHELLE CABRAL1
, KAMILA CABRAL MIELKE2
, 
FÁBIO RIBEIRO PIRES3*, and JOSÉ BARBOSA DOS SANTOS1
1
Department of Agronomy, Federal University of Vales do Jequitinhonha e 
Mucuri, Diamantina, MG, Brazil
2
Department of Agronomy, Federal University of Viçosa, Viçosa, MG, Brazil
3
Department of Agricultural and Biological Sciences, 
Federal University of Espírito Santo, São Mateus, ES, Brazil
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: pires.fr@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are a worldwide concern due to their 
bioaccumulative nature and persistence for a long period of time, resulting 
in large-scale environmental contamination. These pollutants are extremely 
resistant to biodegradation and subject to transfer over long distances via 
the atmosphere. They may be present even in regions with no historical 
use. POPs can bioaccumulate in adipose tissue due to their lipophilicity 
and can seriously affect the nervous, hepatic, reproductive, and hormonal 
systems of the contaminated organisms, including plants, animals, and 
humans. Therefore, they are responsible for various lethal diseases and 
environmental problems. The diversity of diseases due to POPs includes 
diabetes, endocrine disorders, cancer, and cardiovascular, and reproductive 
problems. As to achieve sustainability and safety in relation to the integrity 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)4 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
of public and environmental health, monitoring the effects of POPs and 
taking measures to mitigate the negative consequences is imperative. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Technological and economic advances run parallel to the extraction of 
natural resources. The nature of the impacts from this relationship on the 
natural world and human health is not fully understood. Over time, natural 
resources are used indiscriminately for the success of economic activities. A 
primary consequence of this is environmental pollution, which is a serious 
concern that is discussed by researchers, government entities, and society in 
general (Alharbi et al., 2018; Rauert et al., 2018; Encarnação et al., 2019). 
In recent decades, there has been an increase in the concentration of 
hazardous substances released into the environment from human activities, 
such as from the agricultural and industrial sectors (Guo et al., 2019). It is 
estimated that approximately 394,000 chemical substances are commercially 
available, and since the last decade, it has been found that around 2000 new 
substances enter the market each year (CAS, 2020), with spending on such 
chemicals projected to reach 14 billion dollars by 2050 (OPAS, 2018). The 
chemical landscape is constantly changing with new products and substances 
replacing the old ones, and the quantities produced and used vary according 
to their effectiveness and demand. 
A diversity of pollutants can be found in the majority of environments. 
Among these, those resistant to degradation, whether through chemical, 
biological, or photolytic reactions are of the most important in the context 
of human and environmental health. These products are called persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) and are composed of industrial chemicals (PCBs, 
polychlorinated biphenyls, PBDEs, PFOS, etc.), pesticides, and residues 
from industrial processes (dioxin and furano) (Alharbi et al., 2018; Guo et 
al., 2019). POPs are a class of carbon-based organic chemicals that are highly 
stable, bioaccumulative, and with progressive accumulation capability along 
the food chain (Guo et al., 2019). 
Such molecules can be transported over long distances crossing over 
international borders, and their presence has been detected in places without 
any historical use (Alharbi et al., 2018). A large number of synthetic 
chemicals became commercially available in large quantities after the 
Second World War (Encarnação et al., 2019). Though synthetic chemical 
production rate is not directly causative of POP release into the environment 
and human exposure. Some chemicals are degradation products, such as Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 5 
hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), resulting from the degradation of lindane, and 
p, p′-DDE (dichlorodiphenyldichlorethylene), a DDT metabolite; however, it 
is an indicator of the potential impact on human health and the environment 
(Encarnação et al., 2019). 
An increasing number of reports on the impact of POPs on the endocrine 
system underline the concerns regarding POP exposure and human health 
(Encarnação et al., 2019). Such concerns are highlighted by the increasing 
number of studies that have reported environmental and ecological 
occurrences (Durante et al., 2016; Gaur et al., 2018; Fernandes et al., 2019). 
1.2 WHY ARE POPS DANGEROUS?
POPs are synthetic organic chemical substances, distinguished by their unique 
chemical and physical characteristics, such as semivolatility, persistence, 
bioaccumulation, and toxicity (CETESB, 2020). Such physicochemical 
properties determine the environmental fate of POPs (Torre et al., 2016). 
POPs are semivolatile and evaporate slowly (Durante et al., 2016). In 
this sense, they are carried by the air currents, reaching long distances in the 
atmosphere until they reach lower temperatures. When this occurs, POPs 
condense and precipitate to reach the earth’s surface and accumulate in the 
ecosystems in soil and water, including in regions where there is no historical 
use. (Alharbi et al., 2018). Therefore, polar regions are the most affected regions 
by POP contamination. Thus, although POPs can be produced and applied in 
tropical and temperate regions, high concentrations of these substances, such 
as PCBs used in transformers and pesticides (such as DDT and toxafene), have 
been identified in ecosystems and humans in the polar regions where POPs 
have never been used (CETESB, 2020). As POPs have different volatilization 
capacities, they migrate through environments at different speeds, and 
contaminate watercourses and migratory species, thereby increasing the global 
reach of these compounds (Durante et al., 2016). The propagation of POPs 
around the world by air and ocean currents symbolizes that they are not only a 
local toxic threat but also a global issue (Yilmaz et al., 2020). 
Some substances can remain in the environment for long periods without 
any change in their composition, demonstrating a resistance to biological 
and chemical degradation (Alharbi et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019). Persistence 
is based on the measure of half-life, that is, the time required for half of the 
substance to be degraded, whether in hours, days, months, or even years 
(CETESB, 2020). Thus, adopting an average half-life of 60 days as an 
example, we will have 50% of the initial value measured after that period, 6 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
falling by another 50% after another 60 days, and so on until the residue is 
no longer considered dangerous. So, persistence is defined from the time 
of emission to the point at which the contaminant is no longer dangerous. 
Furthermore, according to the Stockholm Convention, a contaminant is 
persistent if its half-life is greater than 2 months in water, more than 6 months 
in sediment and soil, and more than 2 days in the air. This persistence favors 
the dispersion of pollutants by volatilization, leaching or carryover, which 
contaminates air, water, and consequently soil and plants, and then animals 
and humans, which is the mechanism characterizing biomagnification or 
bioaccumulation (Li et al., 2021). 
The persistent nature of POPs combined with their lipophilic characteristics 
means they have a high degree of toxicity to humans (Yilmaz et al., 2020). 
These compounds can bioaccumulate along the food chain, through diet or 
through the airway and lodge in adipose tissue, allowing these compounds 
to persist in biota that have a low metabolism rate (Rolle-Kampczyk et al., 
2020). Consequently, the elimination of contaminants through excretion or 
biotransformation is also low. Consequently, they can reach concentrations 
that have harmful effects on human health and the environment. Evidence 
of bioaccumulation is given in some regions, where the presence of POPs is 
detected (regardless of whether there is local production or use), highlighting 
that these substances enter the food chains and accumulate in fish, birds, 
marine mammals, and humans (CETESB, 2020). 
Exposure to these pollutants causes multiple health problems, such as 
hormonal disorders, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, obesity, reproductive 
and neurological diseases, learning difficulties, immune system dysfunction, 
susceptibility to disease, and diabetes (Alharbi et al., 2018). In addition, these 
pollutants are teratogenic (Guo et al., 2019). Many studies have described 
the mechanisms of POPs that lead to the development of various diseases 
and health problems, thus establishing through laboratory studies that POPs 
are toxic agents and represent an evident danger to human health (Guo et al., 
2019; Kuang et al., 2020; Yilmaz et al., 2020) (Table 1.1). 
1.3 ORIGIN OF POPS
POPs are largely of an anthropogenic origin, such as from pesticides used 
in agriculture to industrial production of chemical compounds. Some 
compounds, such as dioxins and furans can have a natural origin, they can 
also be released into the environment through volcanic activities or forest 
fires (Jacob and Cherian, 2013) (Fig. 1.1). TABLE 1.1 Health Problems Resulting from Pollution Caused by Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs).
POPs Health problems References 
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
(DDT), hexachlorobenzene (HCB)
and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
DDT
DDT and chlordane 
Chlordane and PCBs
Pentabromodiphenyl ether (PBDEs)
HCB, HCHS, DDT, Mirex, and PCBs 
Dioxins
Endosulfan
Endosulfan
HCB
Mirex 
842 cases associated with type 2 Diabetes
Association between p, p' DDT level and body mass index and waist 
circumference.
May adversely affect survival after breast cancer diagnosis. 
Serum concentrations are associated with the risk of lung cancer in the
general population.
Risks associated with neurotoxicity. 
Low doses similar to current exposure levels can increase the risk of type 2
diabetes, possibly through endocrine disruption
Dioxin compounds can cause disruption and differentiation of tissue, 
cellular and biochemical processes
Can induce oxidative stress and mitochondrial injury, activate autophagy, 
induce inflammatory response, and lead to endothelial dysfunction.
This indicates that exposure to endosulfan is a potential risk factor for
cardiovascular disease
Reduces fertility levels in male animals, induces DNA damage leading to 
undesirable processing of broken DNA ends 
Exposure can contribute to the development of endometriosis, affecting the 
parameters of inflammation and invasion of human endometrial cells
Among women aged 45–55 years, serum mirex was positively associated
with menopause 
Wu et al. (2013) 
Elobeid et al. (2010)
Parada et al. (2016)
Park et al. (2020)
Martin et al. (2017)
Lee et al. (2010)
Haffner and Schecter 
(2014)
Zhang et al. (2017)
Sebastian and Raghavan
(2017)
Chiappini et al. (2016)
Grindler et al. (2015) 
7 Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health TABLE 1.1 (Continued) 
POPs Health problems References 
Chlordecone Risk of prostate cancer Multigner et al. (2010) 
Chlordane, heptachlor and mirex Potential to disrupt fertilization, blastocyst implantation or even the Wrobel and Mlynarczuk 
duration of pregnancy of animals. (2017) 
Furans Potentially carcinogenic to humans Kanan and Samara (2018)
Aldrin Potential to cause damage in the early stages of spermatogenesis in Wrobel et al. (2015); 
animals Das Neves et al. (2018) 
8 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination FIGURE 1.1 Classification of POPs according to origin. 
Source: Adapted from Curtean-Bănăduc (2016). 
Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 9 
POPs are introduced to ecosystems through direct pesticide applications, 
industrial waste, and as by-products of industrial processes of industries such 
as agriculture, forestry, horticulture, industries, and medicine, (Alharbi et 
al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019). Therefore, they are routinely detected in human 
systems and the environment (Yilmaz et al., 2020). 
The source of the most representative POPs can also be compiled into 
intentional and unintentional substances. Synthetic substances produced as 
by-products of the chemical manufacturing industry like HCB, HCH, or as 
flame-retardants (PCBs, hexabromobiphenyl) are classified as intentional. 
Substances classified as unintentional are the result of industrial processes or 
the combustion of materials (dioxins and furans) (Liu et al., 2008; Zhang et 
al., 2010; Ferreira, 2013). The main sources of anthropogenic POP pollution 
(Curtean-Bănăduc, 2016) are summarized in Figure 1.2. 
1.4 PRIORITY POLLUTANTS
POPs are toxic components that interact with the body. This contamination 
occurs by ingestion of food and drinking contaminated water (Liu et al., 2016), 
and can occur by inhalation or contact with the skin (Ye et al., 2015; Wrobel 10 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
and Mlynarczuk, 2017). Inside the organism, it is absorbed, distributed to 
tissues, stored, biotransformed, and excreted (Rolle-Kampczyk et al., 2020; 
Bhuvaneswari et al., 2021). 
FIGURE 1.2 Main sources of anthropogenic pollution of POPs. 
POPs include the following classes of substances: organochlorinated pesti￾cides (OCP), PCBs, perfluorinated compounds (PFCs), brominated compounds 
(BFR), dioxins and furans (Curtean-Bănăduc, 2016). Most of these components 
are limited and restricted globally based on the Recommendations of the Stock￾holm Convention on POPs, an international treaty aimed at deliberating on and/ 
or safe disposal of these pollutants as well as controlling their production and 
use, to which Brazil is a signatory. Thus, the Stockholm Convention implements 
measures to prevent the release of POPs into the environment in order to mitigate 
contamination. The main POPs are presented in Table 1.2. 
1.4.1 ALDRIN
Aldrin is a broad-spectrum insecticide belonging to the cyclodiene class of 
organochlorinated pesticides. Very toxic in nature, it is volatile, bioaccumu￾lative due to its high lipophilic properties and it persists in the environment TABLE 1.2 Main POPs Classified at the Stockholm Convention.
Chemical Annex Use Molecular Chemical 
formula structure 
Aldrin A Pesticide Persistent organochlorine insecticide (DT50 ̴ 365 C12H8Cl6 
days) that was mainly used to control
soil-dwelling insects 
Chlordane A Pesticide Organochlorine insecticide once commonly used to C10H6Cl8 
control a range of pests 
Chlordecone A Pesticide A banned insecticide that is effective against leaf- C10Cl10O 
cutting insects but less effective on sucking pests 
DDT B Pesticide A banned insecticide, highly persistent in soil (4–30 C12H9Cl5 
years), that was used to control insect vectors of
disease, especially malaria 
Decabromodiphenyl ether A By-product It is one of the commercial formulations of PBDEs. It C12Br10O 
(c-DecaBDE) is widely used as brominated
flame-retardants in furniture 
Dioxins C By-product Burning processes, such as commercial or municipal C12H4Cl4O2 
waste incineration produce dioxins. Chlorinated
dioxins have 75 different forms 
11 Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health TABLE 1.2 (Continued) 
Chemical Annex Use Molecular Chemical 
formula structure 
Furans C By-product Found in cigarette smoke, and is used in the C4H4O 
production of resins and lacquers, agrochemicals, and
pharmaceuticals. There are 135 different chlorinated 
furans 
Endosulfan A Pesticide An isomer mixture of alpha- and beta-endosulfan C9H6Cl6O3S 
which is an insecticide and acaricide, used to control
sucking, chewing and boring insects
Heptachlor A Pesticide Insecticide once used to kill termites, ants, and other C10H5Cl7 
insects in agricultural and domestic situations
Hexabromobiphenyl A Industrial An industrial chemical that has been used as a flame- C12H4Br6 
chemical retardant mainly in the 1970s 
Hexabromo- A Industrial Used as flame-retardant additive, providing fire C12H18Br6 
cyclododecane (HBCDD) chemical protection during the service life of vehicles, buildings
or articles, as well as protection while stored
HCB A and Pesticide/ A chlorinated hydrocarbon fungicide used to control C6Cl6 
C industrial bunt and a pesticide transformation product
chemical 
12 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination TABLE 1.2 (Continued) 
Chemical Annex Use Molecular Chemical 
formula structure 
HCH A Pesticide/ A broad-spectrum insecticide used mainly during seed C6H6Cl6 
by-product treatment to control phytophagous and
soil-inhabiting insects
Lindane A Pesticide Lindane has been used as a broad-spectrum insecticide C6H6Cl6 
for seed and soil treatment, foliar applications, tree
and wood treatment, and against ectoparasites in both
veterinary and human applications
Mirex A Pesticide This insecticide is used mainly to combat fire ants, C10Cl12 
and it has been used against other types of ants and
termites. It has also been used as a flame-retardant in
plastics, rubber, and electrical goods 
PBDEs A Industrial Additive flame-retardant. Commercial mixture of C12H5Br5O 
chemical pentaBDE is highly persistent in the environment,
bioaccumulative and has a high potential for long￾range environmental transport
Pentachlorobenzene A Pesticide/ PeCB was used in PCB products, in dyestuff carriers, C6HCl5 
(PeCB) industrial as a fungicide, a flame-retardant and as a chemical
chemical intermediate, for example, previously for the
production of quintozene
Pentachlorophenol (PCP) A Pesticide PCP has been used as herbicide, insecticide, fungicide, C6HCl5O 
and its salts and esters algaecide, disinfectant and as an ingredient in
antifouling paint 
13 Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health TABLE 1.2 (Continued) 
Chemical Annex Use Molecular Chemical 
formula structure 
PCB A and Industrial These compounds are used in industry as heat C12H10-nCln 
C chemical exchange fluids, in electric transformers and
capacitors, and as additives in paint, carbonless copy
paper, and plastics 
Polychlorinated A and Industrial PCNs make effective insulating coatings for electrical C10H8Cl4 
naphthalenes (PCNs) C chemical wires. Others have been used as wood preservatives,
as rubber and plastic additives, for capacitor
dielectrics and in lubricants
Source: Stockholm Convention (2020), PPDB (2020).
Annex A: measures are necessary to eliminate the production and use of these POP
Annex B: restriction measures are necessary in the production and use of these POP
Annex C: measures are needed to reduce the emission of such unintentional POP 
14 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 15 
for up to three decades after application (Jhamtani et al., 2018). Aldrin under￾goes biotransformation in the environment, turning into dieldrin (Najam and 
Alam, 2015). It is banned and restricted in several countries through the 
Stockholm Convention in the 1970s. It is still detected in the environment at 
high concentrations (Jhamtani et al., 2018). 
Aldrin acts as an endocrine disruptor, interfering with the release and 
synthesis of hormones (Yilmaz et al., 2020). Aldrin inhibits hormonal action 
throughout the chorion, increasing the risk of abortions or premature births 
in cattle, necessitating the use of chorionic villus hormones to support 
pregnancy in animals (Mlynarczuk et al., 2020). Studies conducted in Jordan 
in the Middle East have verified pesticide residues in the yolk and white 
of 95% of the eggs tested, with mean concentrations of 0.067 and 0.058 
mg/kg, respectively (0.02 mg/kg maximum egg residue limit according to 
the European Commission, 2016), demonstrating the inappropriate use of 
pesticides in home gardens, thus exposing the environment to pollution, 
representing a risk to human health (Alaboudi et al., 2019). Aldrin is highly 
toxic to humans and animals, causing seizures, instability, and excitation of 
the central nervous system (Jhamtani et al., 2017). 
1.4.2 CHLORDANE
Chlordane is an organochloric pesticide that is persistent in the environment 
and is volatile, bioaccumulative, and highly toxic (Xiong, 2017). Chlordane 
was used in agriculture for termite control and was banned in 1988 in the 
USA (Parada et al., 2016). 
Zebrafish larvae exposed to chlordane have low survival rates, delayed 
development and hatching times, reduced embryonic productivity, and abnormal 
heart rate and blood flow. These results suggest that exposure to chlordane in 
ecosystems causes direct morphological effects and phenotypic changes related 
to development and reproduction (Xiong, 2017). Chlordane has been associated 
with the incidence of breast cancer and subsequent mortality in women. 
Organochlorinated compounds are lipophilic, and in humans, breast tissue is rich 
in adipose tissue, causing bioaccumulation in this region (Parada et al., 2016). 
1.4.3 CHLORDECONE
Chlordecone is an organochloric and lipophilic insecticide and is highly 
persistent in soil (Fournier et al., 2017). It was widely applied in banana 16 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
plantations in the French Caribbean, Guadeloupe, and Martinique between 
1970s and 1990s. With extremely slow degradation, chlordecone is still 
detected in soils in these regions (Benoit et al., 2020). In addition to 
soil, this pollutant has been found in surface and groundwater, coastal 
ecosystems, terrestrial ecosystems, and aquatic food chains. (Benoit 
et al., 2020). This persistence in the soil can lead to contamination of 
animals, mainly ruminants, since during grazing, soil injection may occur 
(Fournier et al., 2017). 
It is classified as a carcinogenic and can interfere with the development of 
babies by affecting cognitive and motor development when exposed during 
pregnancy or breastfeeding (Fournier et al., 2017). Chlordecone is toxic to 
the reproductive system, neurotoxic, and disrupts the endocrine system due 
to its estrogenic properties in vitro and in vivo (Multigner et al., 2016). This 
pollutant was found in the umbilical cord blood of neonatal children and was 
associated with growth irregularities in boys up to 3 months and girls from 8 
to 18 months, mainly in relation to height (Costet et al., 2015). 
1.4.4 DICHLORODIPHENYLTRICHLOROETHANE
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) is an organochlorinated pesticide 
that is persistent in the environment, has high solubility in lipids and there￾fore has a bioaccumulation capacity, and can biomagnify in food chains 
(Mahugija et al., 2018). It was the first synthetic insecticide, and was used 
in agriculture and in the fight against insect-borne diseases, subsequently, 
negative impacts on the environment and human health have been verified 
(Thi Thuy, 2015). 
This pesticide gained negative notoriety with the book “Silent Spring” 
by Rachel Carson. Carson associates DDT with reduced eggshell thickness, 
resulting in reproductive problems and bird death. In this sense, recent studies 
have reported that exposure can result in neurotoxic, carcinogenic, and 
immunologic effects and negative effects on reproductive function in free￾ranging chickens in the northern area of KwaZulu-Natal (Thompson et al., 
2017). Even in past life exposures, DDT is still detectable among Canadians 
and has been associated with dysfunction of the respiratory system (Ye et al., 
2015). South Africa is one of the few countries that still actively sprays DDT 
to control the malaria vector (Gerber et al., 2016; Mahugija et al., 2018). 
Assessments in the muscle tissue of tiger fish, collected in the Kruger National 
Park region of South Africa, showed organochlorine bioaccumulation, and 
among them DDT was found at very high levels, surpassing those already Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 17 
registered in South Africa’s freshwater systems. This is of serious concern to 
local populations that consume and depend economically on fishing (Gerber 
et al., 2016). 
1.4.5 DECABROMODIPHENYL ETHER
Decabromodiphenyl ether (c-deca-BDE) is a commercial formulation of 
PBDEs. C-deca-BDE is mainly used in textiles and invariably in electrical 
and electronic products (Andrade et al., 2017). Due to its physicochemical 
properties, including hydrophobicity and lipophilicity, it has high persistence 
and sorption. C-deca-BDE is bioaccumulative in the environment, resulting 
in adverse effects on human health and the ecosystem (Kim et al., 2017). 
BDE-209 is the main analog of c-deca-BDE and is listed as a chemical of 
concern. C-deca-BDE has been under review in the USA since 2010, and 
some states have restricted its manufacture and use (Andrade et al., 2017). 
c-DecaBDE tends to accumulate in household dust, and thus, can 
pose serious health risks, as they find their way into the human body 
through possible emissions (Maddela et al., 2020). BDE-209 (analogous 
to c-deca-BDE) has thyroid toxicity, endocrine, reproductive, behavioral, 
and neurological disorders as well as pulmonary disorders (Maddela et 
al., 2020). In a recent study, a link between neurobehavioral toxicity and 
BDE-209-induced visual dysfunction was observed in zebrafish larvae 
(Zhang et al., 2020). 
1.4.6 DIOXIN
Dioxin-like compounds (DLCs) are composed of two benzene rings 
connected by two oxygen atoms and consist of four to eight chlorine atoms. 
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), one of the most toxic dioxins, 
is persistent and has wide dispersion and potential for bioaccumulation in the 
food chain (Tavakoly Sany et al., 2015). 
TCDD has serious toxicological effects, such as immune system disorders, 
teratogenesis, and induction of tumors (Tavakoly Sany et al., 2015). Evidence 
of reduced reproductive performance with adverse effects on subsequent 
generations in rodents and zebrafish exposed to TCDD was observed. Such 
changes are characterized by epigenetic changes in the placenta and/or sperm, 
suggesting that this effect can occur with human exposure (Viluksela and 
Pohjanvirta, 2019). 18 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
1.4.7 FURAN
Isomer 2,3,7,8 or tetrachlorodibenzo furan and dibenzofurans (PDCFs) are 
structurally similar to dioxins and share many of their toxic effects (Kanan 
and Samara, 2018). They are persistent and are the by-products of the 
synthesis or combustion of chlorine-based compounds (Rawn et al., 2017). 
The main route of exposure is ingestion. A study aimed at establishing 
the Canadian national estimates of maternal and child exposure to environ￾mental contaminants found that in 1017 human milk samples collected, 298 
had traces of PCDFs (average of 2.1 pg/g lipid) accompanied by other POPs 
(Rawn et al., 2017). PCDFs are classified as toxic and carcinogenic (Kanan 
and Samara, 2018). 
1.4.8 ENDOSULFAN
Endosulfan is a synthetic organochlorinated insecticide that is persistent in 
the environment, with a bioaccumulation capacity, volatility, and toxicity 
(Kumar et al., 2016). This insecticide has been widely used for crops in 
the last three decades. It degrades microbially and endosulfan sulfate is 
the primary metabolite, which presents toxicity analogous to the original 
compound and is harmful to several organisms (Supreeth and Raju, 2017). 
It is an acute neurotoxic compound for insects, mammals, and humans 
(Lakroun et al., 2015). In addition, there are reports of serious poisonings 
and fatal cases of human contamination by ingestion (provoked), for doses 
above 260 mL of endosulfan (Patočka et al., 2016). It has been associated 
with cases of environmental contamination, soil and water pollution, and 
metabolic dysfunctions in living organisms (Mudhoo et al., 2019). In a study 
that investigated the physiological and molecular aspects of endosulfan, it was 
found that in addition to reducing fertility levels in male animals, the endosulfan 
induced DNA damage (Sebastian and Raghavan, 2017). In addition, there is 
no antidote for endosulfan poisoning (Menezes et al., 2017). Furthermore, the 
potential neurotoxic effects of endosulfan were investigated in mice by Lee et al. 
(2015). After a single neonatal exposure (0.1 or 0.5 mg/kg body weight) during 
a critical period of brain development, the researchers found that the pesticide 
could induce changes in neuroprotein levels, which is important for normal 
brain development, in addition to causing neurobehavioral abnormalities that 
persist in adulthood (Lee et al., 2015). 
Cardiovascular problems may also be linked to endosulfan. This pesticide 
can induce oxidative stress and mitochondrial lesions, activating autophagy, Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 19 
leading to an inflammatory response that causes endothelial dysfunction 
via the AMPK/mTOR pathway. This indicates that exposure to endosulfan 
poses a potential risk for cardiovascular disease (Zhang et al., 2017). In the 
environment, it can cause an imbalance in food chains due to its toxicity 
to animals. Tests carried out on tilapia revealed that endosulfan negatively 
affected the liver function, including liver enzymes and plasma proteins, in 
addition to reducing the number of red blood cells and white blood cells. 
Endosulfan decreased the transcription levels of glutathione S-transferase 
(GST) mRNA and altered the normal histological structure of the liver, gills, 
and spleen of affected fish (Hussein et al., 2019). 
1.4.9 HEPTACHLOR
Heptachlor is a synthetic organochloric insecticide used against insects, ants, 
and termites (Bhuvaneswari et al., 2021). It is persistent in the environment, 
nonsoluble in water, bioaccumulative, volatile, and toxic (Martínez-Ibarra et 
al., 2017). 
Heptachlor residues or their biotransformation products have been found 
in environmental and biological matrices, such as breast milk, semen, serum, 
follicular fluids, liver, muscle tissue, adipose tissue, kidney, and human 
blood after exposure (Bhuvaneswari et al., 2021). Research with rats that 
were exposed to the compound through oral consumption during pregnancy 
and lactation indicated that heptachlor induced female reproductive changes, 
such as increased female anogenital distance, delayed vaginal opening, and 
reduction in progesterone production. Consequently, exposure to heptachlor 
may pose a risk to the reproductive health of humans (Martínez-Ibarra et 
al., 2017). This pesticide causes cellular oxidative damage, which interferes 
with the formation of the human proximal renal tubule. This oxidative stress 
may be responsible for the activation of growth factor signaling that leads to 
kidney damage through epithelial transition to the mesenchyme (Singh et al., 
2019). Researchers suggest that a biotransformation product of heptachlor, 
heptachlor epoxide, is linked to inducing Lewy pathology. This disease is 
characterized by the progressive loss of mental function by the develop￾ment of Lewy bodies, which culminates in Parkinson’s disease (Zhang et 
al., 2020a). Studies on human aging in Honolulu-Asia revealed that the 
prevalence of Lewy pathology almost doubled in the presence of heptachlor 
epoxide in the samples of occipital and temporal lobes from frozen human 
brains compared with samples where the pesticide was not applied (30.1% 
vs. 16.3%, P<0.001) (Ross et al., 2019). 20 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
1.4.10 HEXABROMOBIPHENYL
Hexabromobiphenyl is lipophilic, persistent, and highly stable and can travel 
long distances in the environment and can bioaccumulate, resulting in the 
potential risk of contamination of the environment and food chains (Liu et al., 
2016). It belongs to a class of additive type brominated flame-retardants. It is 
used in several products, including paints, plastics, textiles, and electronics 
to reduce its flammability (Rantakokko et al., 2019). 
Every day, we are exposed to this type of pollutant by means of fine 
particles in suspension (Rantakokko et al., 2019). Research conducted 
in Beijing, Tianjin-Hebei region, China, verified the presence of these 
pollutants in atmospheric particle samples, denoting that human exposure by 
inhalation can cause adverse reactions, and that children are more likely to 
be contaminated than adults (Zhang et al., 2019). Liu et al. (2016) measured 
hexabromobiphenyl in human milk in China and found a positive correlation 
between human milk and consumption of foods of animal origin (Liu et al., 
2016), highlighting the biomagnification capacity of these pollutants. 
1.4.11 HEXABROMOCYCLODODECANE
Hexabromocyclododecane (HBCDD) is a persistent compound that occurs 
in different environments, and therefore in various bioaccumulative matrices 
(Koch et al., 2015). It can leach or volatilize, enter the environment, and 
consequently contaminate humans (Drage et al., 2017). It is a brominated 
flame-retardants, highly efficient in reducing flammability, and is used in 
products, such as textile upholstery, rigidly shaped plastics, polystyrene 
foam, and polypropylene resin in household appliances, and as a textile 
coating additive (Drage et al., 2017). 
From an environmental point of view, it is a ubiquitous compound, 
the occurrence of which has been observed in fish and seafood species of 
the Mediterranean Sea (Chessa et al., 2019). Toxicity studies conducted 
with Caenorhabditis elegans revealed that chronic exposure to HBCDD 
at concentrations greater than 20 nM influenced growth, locomotion, lipo￾fuscin accumulation, and cellular apoptosis of nematodes, with increased 
levels of stress-related gene expression (Wang et al., 2018). A positive 
linear correlation was found between HBCDD (lipid weight concentra￾tions) and trophic levels based on hydrogen isotopes in aquatic organisms 
(Liu et al., 2020). Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 21 
1.4.12 HEXACHLOROBENZENE
Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) is an organochlorine pesticide that is similar to 
dioxins. it is stable and therefore persists in the environment. It accumulates 
in the food chain, and has been found in adipose tissue, breast milk, blood, 
and umbilical blood (Chiappini et al., 2016). For long, it has been used as a 
fungicide, it is still released into the environment as a waste by-product of 
various industrial processes (Miret et al., 2019). 
HCB is an endocrine disruptor that mainly induces toxic effects on the 
reproductive system (Specht et al., 2015). Experimental studies indicate 
that exposure to organochlorines can interfere with hormonal regulation 
and immune function, and therefore can cause endometriosis (Chiappini et 
al., 2019). HCB acts as an endocrine disruptor in the thyroid, uterus, and 
mammary gland, and has been classified as possibly carcinogenic to humans. 
It acts by stimulating the proliferation of preneoplastic cells, migration, inva￾sion, and metastasis, in addition to angiogenesis in breast cancer (Miret et 
al., 2019). Contaminant exposure can induce porphyria, nephrotoxicity, and 
oxidative stress hepatotoxicity both in laboratory animals (female Sprague￾Dawley rats and adult male Wistar rats) and in humans (Khan et al., 2017; 
Starek-świechowicz et al., 2017). 
1.4.13 HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE
Hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) isomers are organochlorinated compounds 
that pose potential risks to humans and the ecosystem. They are persistent in 
the environment, have a capacity for bioaccumulation and biomagnification, 
and can be transported over long distances (Di et al., 2018). HCHs were 
used between 1940s and 1980s in the production of insecticides (Kuang et 
al., 2020). 
Studies carried out with samples of human milk in the city of Jinhua in 
China revealed the presence of β-hexachlorocyclohexane (β-HCH) in 36.4% 
of the analyzed samples. A positive correlation was detected between the 
presence of HCB residues and the decrease in birth weight of children (Kuang 
et al., 2020). Assessments to determine the risk of food exposure for adults 
and children to pollutants were carried out in five cities in India (Bangalore, 
Bhubaneswar, Guwahati, Ludhiana, and Udaipur). HCBs were detected in 
some of the bovine milk samples, indicating contamination which is likely 
due to agricultural and animal husbandry practices (Gill et al., 2020). In 
this study, it was verified that children are comparatively more exposed to 22 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
pesticides than adults are, when body weight is taken into account, meaning 
that the risk of cancer was also higher for children. 
1.4.14 LINDANE
Lindane (γ-hexachlorocyclohexane, γ-HCH) is an isomer of HCH with 
insecticidal properties and is persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic (Zhang 
et al., 2020b). It is very stable in freshwater and saltwater environments 
(Yuksel et al., 2016). For each ton of lindane, 8–12 tons of HCH isomer 
residue is generated. A considerable amount of this compound is currently 
disposed of as waste in unmanaged landfills, constituting one of the most 
common and easily detectable pesticides in the environment (Wacławek et 
al., 2019). 
Lindane is highly toxic to fish, bees, and aquatic invertebrates. This 
pollutant acts as an endocrine disruptor, causing hormonal imbalance in 
exposed fish, causing the breakdown of steroidogenesis in ovaries and causing 
a reduction in egg production (Yuksel et al., 2016). Lindane is also a risk for 
the central, reproductive, and endocrine nervous system in the fish and human 
being (Yuksel et al., 2016; Wacławek et al., 2019). Research conducted in 
northeastern South Africa, investigating the presence of pesticides in the 
muscle tissue of catfish (Clarias gariepinus), found a variety of POPs, 
including γ-HCH, highlighting the risk to human health when consuming 
contaminated fish (Barnhoorn et al., 2015). 
1.4.15 MIREX
Mirex is a synthetic organochlorinated pesticide that is volatile, toxic, and is 
highly persistence in the environment, and it has a bioaccumulation capacity 
(Gandhi et al., 2015). Initially, it was used as an insecticide to control ants, 
termites, and other insects. It was later used as a flame-retardant for plastics, 
rubbers, and electrical materials (Wohlers et al., 2019). Mirex is absorbed 
by the skin of animals and because of its high lipophilicity, it has a tendency 
for biomagnification (Wrobel and Mlynarczuk, 2017). Photodegradation of 
Mirex results mainly in photomirex, which is equally stable in the environ￾ment (Gandhi et al., 2015). 
The most common adverse effect attributed to mirex is endocrine disrup￾tion. This xenobiotic can inhibit the secretion of testosterone, estradiol, and 
progesterone, and stimulates the production of oxytocin in cattle. In this Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 23 
sense, it unbalances the hormonal system by altering the secretory function 
of ovarian cells, indicating that there is potential for this insecticide to hinder 
fertilization, blastocyst implantation, or even gestation time (Wrobel and 
Mlynarczuk, 2017). Mirex is toxic to a variety of aquatic biota animals and 
is considered a carcinogen to humans (Gandhi et al., 2015). This pesticide is 
also associated with maternal and infant thyroid hormone disorders, which 
can alter child development (Yamazaki et al., 2020). 
1.4.16 PENTABROMODIPHENYL ETHER
Polybrominateddiphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are a large group that includes tetra-, 
penta-, hexa-, hepta-, and octa-bromodiphenyl ethers. PBDEs have high 
persistence in the environment, a bioaccumulation capacity, and toxicological 
potential (Chou et al., 2019). Brominated flame-retardants are used in house￾holds and electronic furniture (Parry et al., 2018). Studies reveal that these 
pollutants can leach and reach greater depths in the soil due to the persistence 
of these compounds. In addition, they can be absorbed by cultures that will 
later be consumed by humans (Chou et al., 2019). 
Exposure to PBDE during fetal development is associated with deficien￾cies in the performance of executive functions and attention deficits. therefore, 
they are considered neurotoxic. Prenatal and postnatal exposure to PBDE 
negatively affects externalization behavior (e.g., hyperactivity and conduct 
problems) (Vuong et al., 2018). Biomonitoring data indicate that in recent 
years, concentrations of PBDEs have increased in wild animals and humans. 
The body load of PBDEs is three to nine times higher in babies and children 
than in adults due to exposure via breast milk and household dust. Tetra-, 
penta-, and hexa-BDEs are the most commonly found isomers in humans 
(Linares et al., 2015). Studies show that PBDEs can cause changes in homeo￾stasis, delay in neurodevelopment, and can cause changes in the reproductive 
system, and cause cancer (Linares et al., 2015; Chou et al., 2019). 
1.4.17 PENTACHLOROBENZENE
Pentachlorobenzene (PeCB) is part of the chlorobenzene group and partici￾pates in the composition of the HCB of technical grade. It is persistent, has 
bioaccumulation potential, and is very toxic (Wiltschka et al., 2020). In 
synthetic dyes, PeCB is discharged into watercourses during the treatment of 
textile dyeing effluents (Yuan et al., 2020). 24 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
PeCB, among other organochlorines, was observed in the maternal serum 
collected during delivery and in the umbilical cord blood of newborns in 
Tarragona (Spain). In all these cases, the highest concentrations were 
observed for women with higher levels of schooling and social class (Junqué 
et al., 2020). This greater exposure may be linked to different eating habits, 
since these groups tend to have a higher proportion of fish and seafood 
in their diet (Junqué et al., 2018). PeCB and others are invariably present 
in textile dyeing effluents, and represent an ecological risk to the aquatic 
ecosystem and impacts human health and the environment (Wiltschka et al., 
2020; Yuan et al., 2020). 
1.4.18 PENTACHLOROPHENOL, ITS SALTS, AND ESTERS
Pentachlorophenol (PCP) (2,3,4,5,6-PCP) and its sodium salt (Na-PCP) are 
hydrocarbons of the chlorophenol family (Cheng et al., 2014; Lopez-Echartea 
et al., 2016). Volatile, persistent, stable metabolites, with a bioaccumulative, 
and biomagnification capacity (Verbrugge et al., 2018). They have been 
used as a preservative for wood, herbicide, insecticide, biocide, disinfectant, 
defoliant, anti-sap, and as antimicrobial agents since 1930 (Cheng et al., 2014; 
Lopez-Echartea et al., 2016). 
PCP alters oxidative phosphorylation, which interferes with cellular 
respiration and results in increased metabolism (Verbrugge et al., 2018). 
High levels of this pollutant have been found in free-range eggs. The source 
of contamination in the poultry farm was from wood treated with PCP, 
which was used as a structural component in the 1940s. This highlights the 
persistence, bioaccumulation, and biomagnification characteristics inherent 
to chlorophenenols (Piskorska-Pliszczynska et al., 2016). Widespread use 
of PeCP in areas endemic to schistosomes enabled occupational exposure 
to PeCP, which increased the incidence of cancer in the Chinese population 
targeted by biomonitoring (Cheng et al., 2014). 
1.4.19 POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYLS
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are artificial chlorinated aromatic hydro￾carbons that are persistent, lipophilic, can bioaccumulate, and therefore 
undergo biomagnification (Fu et al., 2018). The polychlorinated biphenyl 
family consists of 209 individual PCBs or “congeners,” although in reality, 
only 130 congeners have been found in commercial chemical formula￾tions (CETESB, 2020). They are used as dielectric fluids in transformers, Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 25 
condensers, hydraulic lubricants, paints, and adhesives, among others 
(Dhakal et al., 2018). PCBs can undergo biotransformation in animals and 
plants, resulting in hydroxylated PCBs (OH-PCBs), which are less persistent 
(Dhakal et al., 2018). In mammalian metabolism, PCBs are converted into 
hydroxyl, methylsulfonyl, and sulfated metabolites, which are persistent in 
human blood (Grimm et al., 2015). 
A study of the spatial distribution of PCBs was carried out in rivers in 
Northeast China through the evaluation of fishing products. PCBs, among 
others, were the main pollutants with detection rates of 100%. The health risk 
assessment showed that the consumption of fish from these areas would pose 
a carcinogenic risk to humans (Fu et al., 2018). Biomonitoring performed 
on serum samples from 46 individuals from rural (Columbus Junction area 
in East Iowa) and urban (East Chicago) communities to characterize the 
population’s exposure levels to PCBs, verified the presence of OH-PCBs in 
human serum. Such fact can lead to bioactivation of electrophilic metabo￾lites, interference in the hormone signaling process, inhibition and influence 
on hormone transport, classifying this PCB biotransformation product as an 
endocrine disruptor (Dhakal et al., 2018; Grimm et al., 2017). Underlining 
the risks to the ecological system caused by PCBs, research conducted in 
Iran found that at least five commercially important fish species are contami￾nated with this xenobiotic. From this perspective, there are human health 
risks attributed to the dietary incorporation of locally caught fish (Ranjbar 
Jafarabadi et al., 2019). Epidemiological evidence indicates that exposure to 
POPs, such as PCBs, increases the risk of developing diabetes, hypertension, 
and obesity. Furthermore, such comorbidities are important for the onset and 
progression of cardiovascular diseases (Perkins et al., 2016). 
1.4.20 POLYCHLORINATED NAPHTHALENES
Polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs) are classified as chlorinated polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (Fernandes et al., 2017). They are a global concern 
because of their persistence, toxicity, and tendency for bioaccumulation (Wu 
et al., 2018). PCNs are used as stabilizers, dosolants, and flame-retardants 
(Gu et al., 2019). Polychlorinated naphthalenes may be produced accidentally 
concomitantly with dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans during industrial 
processes and released in the form of gases, which can pose risks to human 
health and the environment (Yang et al., 2017). 
Cod liver oil is a very popular food supplement; however, researchers have 
found high levels of PCN contamination in samples from the North Atlantic. 26 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Although fish oils currently produced are subject to rigorous purification 
processes, in the Baltic region, cod liver oil harvested and consumed locally 
continues to contribute considerably to the food intake of these contaminants 
(Fernandes et al., 2017). In the analysis of soil samples collected from an 
industrial area and surrounding residential area in Shandong Province, 
China, extremely high concentrations of PCNs were observed in the two 
soil samples. This finding was related to the carcinogenic risk for workers 
and residents (Wu et al., 2018). Reports of serious or even fatal effects on 
humans and animals, according to the degree of exposure, are warnings of 
PCN intoxication manifestations of PC. Among the earliest records of PCN, 
poisoning is an incident that occurred at the end of the Second World War 
(1939–1945). A group of six individuals inadvertently consumed a technical 
product containing PCNs (referred to as “chlorinated paraffin”), which 
was mistakenly replaced for butter in a meal. Contamination can cause 
disruption of the gastrointestinal system with abdominal pain, neuropathy, 
and depression, followed by chloracne (Fernandes et al., 2017). 
1.5 EMERGING CONTAMINANTS AND ACTIVE PHARMACEUTICAL 
INGREDIENTS 
There are several emerging contaminants that have aroused global concern, 
including new brominated flame-retardants, organophosphate flame-retar￾dants, polar pesticides, triclosan, synthetic musks, bisphenol-A, perchlorate 
and polycyclic siloxanes, PFCs, and illicit drugs (Covaci et al., 2012). 
Pharmaceutical products or active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), 
such as antibiotics, are a group of emerging contaminants that have received 
remarkable attention in the last decade (Kar et al., 2018). Although in small 
concentrations, the increasing and widespread use of APIs in hospitals and 
as prescribed by doctors has resulted in the continuous introduction of APIs 
and their metabolites into the environment. This new scenario is due to the 
continuous development of advanced instruments and improved analytical 
methodologies that have enabled the detection of these compounds as micro￾contaminants, at low levels, in different environmental matrices. Traces of 
APIs have been found in groundwater and surface water that are used to 
supply drinking water. Therefore, there has been concern about the poten￾tial risk to human health due to exposure to pharmaceutical waste through 
drinking water (Kar et al., 2018). However, there is no evidence that any 
serious risk may arise from low concentrations of pharmaceuticals found in 
drinking water. Nonetheless, the impacts of long-term and low-level exposure Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health	 27 
to a blend of APIs and their metabolites on ecosystems and human health 
are not understood and requires considerable research attention (Jelić et al., 
2012). As a result, the environmental risk assessment of medicines should be 
carefully evaluated, especially in hospital effluents and urban sewage. 
1.6 INDEXES/OBTAINING FEES 
In order to adequately assess the risk of adverse effects that POPs may have 
on human health, it is necessary to obtain data in both acute and chronic toxic 
effects as well as the levels of exposure through diet studied with regards 
to the general population, those that consume considerable quantities, and 
sensitive subjects (Oancea, 2016). 
Humans can be exposed to POPs both directly and indirectly. Direct 
exposure can be obtained as follows (Oancea, 2016): 
•	 Inhalation: for volatile and semivolatile compounds. 
The exposure factor CE (mg/m3
) can be calculated according to the 
formula: 
CE = (CA × TE × FE × DE)/(TM × 365), 
where CA = air concentration (mg/m3
), TE = time of exposure (h/day), 
FE = frequency of exposure (days/year), DE = exposure duration of 
(years), TM = averaging time (years). 
•	 Ingestion from soil: considered to be the main POP exposure path. 
The exposure through ingestion can be calculated according to the 
following formula: 
Exping = (CS × 10−6 × FE × VIS)/(BW× 365), 
where CS = soil concentration (mg/kg), FE = frequency of exposure 
(days/year), VIS = rate of ingestion from soil (mg/day), GC = body￾weight (kg). 
•	 Skin absorption from soil 
Exposure through skin absorption can be calculated according to the 
formula: 
Expderm = (CS × 10−6 × FA × FAD × FE × AS)/(GC× 365), 
where CS = soil concentration (mg/kg), FA = soil adherence factor 
(mg/cm), FAD = skin absorption ratio (nonunit), AS = surface area 
(cm2
/day), GC = bodyweight (kg). 28 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Indirect exposure can be achieved as follows: 
•	 Diet 
The dietary exposure can be calculated with the following formula: 
Expdiet = VIA × CA/GC 
where VIA = rate of ingestion from food (kg/day), CA = concentration 
in food (mg/kg), GC = bodyweight (kg). 
•	 Contaminated drinking water 
The drinking water exposure can be calculated according to the 
following formula: 
Expwater = ∑VIAp × CAp/GC 
where VIAp = rate of ingestion from water (L/day), Cap = concentra
tion in water (mg/L), GC = bodyweight (kg). 
The acute or chronic toxic effects determined by humans upon exposure 
to POP depend on several factors, such as exposure dose, absorption and 
distribution mechanism, metabolism, excretion capacity, and health condi
tion of the body. 
Chronic exposure to chemicals in the diet occurs daily, for a long 
period, or throughout life. The estimation of chronic intake will depend 
on the availability and quality of the data involved in its calculation; the 
closer to reality of the data, the more significant the result will be (Jardim 
and Caldas, 2009). 
While chronic risk assessment estimates the average food intake over a long 
period, acute risk assessment assesses exposure through consumption of a single 
meal or for 24 h (Jardim and Caldas, 2009). The importance of acute exposure 
to pesticides was recognized in the early 1990s in California after reports of 
poisoning from the consumption of highly contaminated food due to inadequate 
application of POPs in the field (Goldman et al., 1990; Maff, 1993). More 
recently, human intoxication from organophosphate insecticides and carbamates 
present in the diet has been reported (Tsai et al., 2003; Mendes et al., 2005). 
1.7 FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
We have made great progress in the use of toxic molecules and have 
achieved effective applicability for products in terms of reducing the impact 
on nontarget organisms as well as recommendations for dwindler doses to 
achieve the proposed objectives. However, we have a wide variety of POPs 
that concern society due their environmental dispersal. 
­
­Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 29 
Factors such as climate change can alter the persistence rates of these 
compounds in nature, a phenomenon which should be carefully evaluated. 
Similarly, new eating habits direct society to consuming supplements 
beneficial to health, but which, even of “natural” sources, can be sources of 
contamination by POPs. 
Because POPs are synthetic chemicals that are semi-volatile/volatile, 
persistent, toxic and have a tendendy for bioaccumulation, they are found 
ubiquoutsly in the environment. Consequently, POPs pose a serious problem 
to human health through environmental exposure. 
With a global population of 8 billion people, that continues to increase, 
and current and future demands for water and energy growing, topics such 
as food security, public health risk, water scarcity, and mass migrations put 
pressure on the sustainability of all sectors of the society. It is essential that 
strategies are established to monitor the effects of POP on the health of the 
population and a safe policy for waste disposal is determined. It is evident 
that measures should be adopted in the short, medium, and long terms to 
decrease the use and coexistence with POPs residues to avoid the potential 
effects on society and the environment, both in abiotic environments as well 
as for microorganisms, fauna, and flora. 
KEYWORDS
• persistent organic pollutants 
• human health 
• atmospheric pollutants 
• human exposure 
REFERENCES 
Alaboudi, A. R.; Osaili, T. M.; Alrwashdeh, A. Pesticides (Hexachlorocyclohexane, Aldrin, 
and Malathion) Residues in Home-Grown Eggs: Prevalence, Distribution, and Effect of 
Storage and Heat Treatments. J. Food Sci. 2019, 84, 3383–3390. 
Alharbi, O. M. L.; Basheer, A. A.; Khattab, R. A.; Ali, I. Health and Environmental Effects of 
Persistent Organic Pollutants. J. Mol. Liq. 2018, 263, 442–453. 
Andrade, N. A.; McConnell, L. L.; Anderson, M. O.; Torrents, A.; Ramirez, M. Polybrominated 
Diphenyl Ethers: Residence Time in Soils Receiving Biosolids Application. Environ. 
Pollut. 2017, 222, 412–422.  
30 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Barnhoorn, I. E. J.; Van Dyk, J. C.; Genthe, B.; Harding, W. R.; Wagenaar, G. M.; Bornman, 
M. S. Chemosphere Organochlorine Pesticide Levels in Clarias gariepinus from Polluted 
Freshwater Impoundments in South Africa and Associated Human Health Risks. Chemosphere 
2015, 120, 391–397. 
Benoit, P.; Cravedi, J. P.; Desenclos, J. C.; Mouvet, C.; Rychen, G.; Samson, M. Environmental 
and Human Health Issues Related to Long-Term Contamination by Chlordecone in the 
French Caribbean. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 27, 40949–40952. 
Bhuvaneswari, R.; Nagarajan, V.; Chandiramouli, R. Chemisorption of Heptachlor and Mirex 
Molecules on Beta Arsenene Nanotubes—A First-Principles Analysis. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2021, 
537, 147835. 
CAS- Scientific Information, Designed For Your Needs | CAS. https://www.cas.org/pt-br/ 
products (accessed Nov 26, 2020). 
CETESB -Poluentes Orgânicos Persistentes (POPs) | Centro Regional. https://cetesb.sp.gov. 
br/centroregional/a-convencao/poluentes-organicos-persistentes-pops/ (accessed Nov 25, 
2020). 
Cheng, P.; Zhang, Q.; Shan, X.; Shen, D.; Wang, B.; Tang, Z.; Jin, Y.; Zhang, C.; Huang, F. Cancer 
Risks and Long-Term Community-Level Exposure to Pentachlorophenol in Contaminated 
Areas, China. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2014, 22, 1309–1317. 
Chessa, G.; Cossu, M.; Fiori, G.; Ledda, G.; Piras, P.; Sanna, A.; Brambilla, G. Occurrence of 
Hexabromocyclododecanes and Tetrabromobisphenol A in Fish and Seafood from the Sea 
of Sardinia—FAO 37.1.3 Area: Their Impact on Human Health within the European Union 
Marine Framework Strategy Directive. Chemosphere 2019, 228, 249–257. 
Chiappini, F.; Bastón, J. I.; Vaccarezza, A.; Singla, J. J.; Pontillo, C.; Miret, N.; Farina, M.; 
Meresman, G.; Randi, A. Enhanced Cyclooxygenase-2 Expression Levels and Metallopro￾teinase 2 and 9 Activation by Hexachlorobenzene in Human Endometrial Stromal Cells. 
Biochem. Pharmacol. 2016, 109, 91–104. 
Chiappini, F.; Sánchez, M.; Miret, N.; Cocca, C.; Zotta, E.; Ceballos, L.; Pontillo, C.; Bilotas, 
M.; Randi, A. Exposure to Environmental Concentrations of Hexachlorobenzene Induces 
Alterations Associated with Endometriosis Progression in a Rat Model. Food Chem. Toxicol. 
2019, 123, 151–161. 
Chou, T. H.; Ou, M. H.; Wu, T. Y.; Chen, D. Y.; Shih, Y. H. Temporal and Spatial Surveys of 
Polybromodiphenyl Ethers (PBDEs) Contamination of Soil Near a Factory Using PBDEs 
in Northern Taiwan. Chemosphere 2019, 236, 124117. 
Costet, N.; Pelé, F.; Comets, E.; Rouget, F.; Monfort, C.; Bodeau-Livinec, F.; Linganiza, E. 
M.; Bataille, H.; Kadhel, P.; Multigner, L. Perinatal Exposure to Chlordecone and Infant 
Growth. Environ. Res. 2015, 142, 123–134. 
Covaci, A.; Geens, T.; Roosens, L.; Ali, N.; Van Den Eede, N.; Ionas, A. C.; Malarvannan, 
G.; Dirtu, A. C. Human Exposure and Health Risks to Emerging Organic Contaminants. In 
Emerging Organic Contaminants and Human Health; Barceló, D., Ed.; Springer: Londres, 
2012; pp 243–305. 
Curtean-Bănăduc, A., Ed. The Impact of Persistent Organic Pollutants on Freshwater 
Ecosystems and Human Health; Editura Universităţii “Lucian Blaga” din Sibiu: Sibiu, 2016. 
Das Neves, J.; Barnhoorn, I. E. J.; Wagenaar, G. M. The Effects of Environmentally Relevant 
Concentrations of Aldrin and Methoxychlor on the Testes and Sperm of Male Clarias 
gariepinus (Burchell, 1822) after Short-Term Exposure. Fish Physiol. Biochem. 2018, 44, 
1421–1434.  
 
 
Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 31 
Dhakal, K.; Gadupudi, G. S.; Lehmler, H. J.; Ludewig, G.; Duffel, M. W.; Robertson, L. W. 
Sources and Toxicities of Phenolic Polychlorinated Biphenyls (OH-PCBs). Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. 2018, 25, 16277–16290. 
Di, S.; Liu, R.; Chen, L.; Diao, J.; Zhou, Z. Selective Bioaccumulation, Biomagnification, and 
Dissipation of Hexachlorocyclohexane Isomers in a Freshwater Food Chain. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. 2018 25, 18752–18761. 
Drage, D. S.; Mueller, J. F.; Hobson, P.; Harden, F. A.; Toms, L. M. L. Demographic and 
Temporal Trends of Hexabromocyclododecanes (HBCDD) in an Australian Population. 
Environ. Res. 2017, 152, 192–198. 
Durante, C. A.; Santos-Neto, E. B.; Azevedo, A.; Crespo, E. A.; Lailson-Brito, J. POPs in the 
South Latin America: Bioaccumulation of DDT, PCB, HCB, HCH and Mirex in Blubber 
of Common Dolphin (Delphinus delphis) and Fraser’s Dolphin (Lagenodelphis hosei) from 
Argentina. Sci. Total Environ. 2016, 572, 352–360. 
El-Shahawi, M. S.; Hamza, A.; Bashammakh, A. S.; Al-Saggaf, W. T. An Overview on the 
Accumulation, Distribution, Transformations, Toxicity and Analytical Methods for the 
Monitoring of Persistent Organic Pollutants. Talanta 2010, 80, 1587–1597. 
Elobeid, M. A.; Padilla, M. A.; Brock, D. W.; Ruden, D. M.; Allison, D. B. Endocrine 
Disruptors and Obesity: An Examination of Selected Persistent Organic Pollutants in the 
Nhanes 1999–2002 Data. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 2010, 7, 2988–3005. 
Encarnação, T.; Pais, A. A. C. C.; Campos, M. G.; Burrows, H. D. Endocrine Disrupting 
Chemicals: Impact on Human Health, Wildlife and the Environment. Sci. Prog. 2019, 102, 
3–42. 
Fernandes, A.; Rose, M.; Falandysz, J. Polychlorinated Naphthalenes (PCNs) in Food and 
Humans. Environ. Int. 2017,104, 1–13. 
Fernandes, A. R.; Mortimer, D.; Rose, M.; Smith, F.; Steel, Z.; Panton, S. Recently Listed 
Stockholm Convention POPs: Analytical Methodology, Occurrence in Food and Dietary 
Exposure. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 678, 793–800. 
Ferreira, A. P. Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) Congener Concentrations in Aquatic Birds. Case 
Study: Ilha Grande Bay, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. An Acad Bras Cienc. 2013, 85, 1379–1388. 
Fournier, A.; Feidt, C.; Lastel, M. L.; Archimede, H.; Thome, J. P.; Mahieu, M.; Rychen, G. 
Toxicokinetics of Chlordecone in Goats: Implications for Risk Management in French West 
Indies. Chemosphere 2017, 171, 564–570. 
Fu, L.; Lu, X.; Tan, J.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, S.; Chen, J. Bioaccumulation and Human 
Health Risks of OCPs and PCBs in Freshwater Products of Northeast China. Environ. 
Pollut. 2018, 242, 1527–1534. 
Gandhi, N.; Tang, R. W. K.; Bhavsar, S. P.; Reiner, E. J.; Morse, D.; Arhonditsis, G. B.; 
Drouillard, K.; Chen, T. Is Mirex Still a Contaminant of Concern for the North American 
Great Lakes? J. Great Lakes Res. 2015, 41, 1114–1122. 
Gaur, N.; Narasimhulu, K.; PydiSetty, Y. Recent Advances in the Bio-Remediation of Persistent 
Organic Pollutants and Its Effect on Environment. J. Clean. Prod. 2018, 198, 1602–1631. 
Gerber, R.; Smit, N. J.; Van Vuren, J. H. J.; Nakayama, S. M. M.; Yohannes, Y. B.; Ikenaka, 
Y.; Ishizuka, M.; Wepener, V. Bioaccumulation and Human Health Risk Assessment of 
DDT and Other Organochlorine Pesticides in an Apex Aquatic Predator from a Premier 
Conservation Area. Sci. Total Environ. 2016, 550, 522–533. 
Gill, J. P. S.; Bedi, J. S.; Singh, R.; Fairoze, M. N.; Hazarika, R. A.; Gaurav, A.; Satpathy, S. 
K.; Chauhan, A. S.; Lindahl, J.; Grace, D. Pesticide Residues in Peri-Urban Bovine Milk 
from India and Risk Assessment: A Multicenter Study. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10. 32 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Goldman, L. R.; Beller, M.; Jackson, R. J. Aldicarb Food Poisonings in California, 1985–1988: 
Toxicity Estimates for Humans. Arch. Environ. Health. 1990, 45, 141–147. 
Grimm, F. A.; Hu, D.; Kania-Korwel, I.; Lehmler, H. J.; Ludewig, G.; Hornbuckle, K. 
C.; Duffel, M. W.; Bergman, A.; Robertson, L. W. Metabolism and Metabolites of 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 2015, 45, 245–272. 
Grimm, F. A.; Lehmler, H. J.; Koh, W. X.; DeWall, J.; Teesch, L. M.; Hornbuckle, K. C.; 
Thorne, P. S.; Robertson, L. W.; Duffel, M. W. Identification of a Sulfate Metabolite of PCB 
11 in Human Serum. Environ Int. 2017, 98, 120–128. 
Grindler, N. M.; Allsworth, J. E.; Macones, G. A.; Kannan, K.; Roehl, K. A.; Cooper, A. R. 
Persistent Organic Pollutants and Early Menopause in U.S. Women. PLoS One. 2015, 10, 
e0116057. 
Gu, W.; Li, Q.; Li, Y. Fuzzy Risk Assessment of Modified Polychlorinated Naphthalenes for 
Enhanced Degradation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2019, 26, 25142–25153. 
Guo, W.; Pan, B.; Sakkiah, S.; Yavas, G.; Ge, W.; Zou, W.; Tong, W.; Hong, H. Persistent 
Organic Pollutants in Food: Contamination Sources, Health Effects and Detection Methods. 
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 2019, 16, 108828. 
Haffner, D.; Schecter, A. Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs): A Primer for Practicing 
Clinicians. Curr. Environ. Heal. Rep. 2014, 1, 123–131. 
Hussein, M. M. A.; Elsadaawy, H. A.; El-Murr, A.; Ahmed, M. M.; Bedawy, A. M.; Tukur, 
H.A.; Swelum, A. A. A.; Saadeldin, I. M. Endosulfan Toxicity in Nile tilapia (Oreochromis 
niloticus) and the Use of Lycopene as an Ameliorative Agent. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 
Part—C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2019, 224, 108573. 
Jacob, J.; Cherian, J. Review of environmental and human exposure to persistent organic 
pollutants. Asian Soc. Sci. 2013, 9, 107–120. 
Jardim, A. N. O.; Caldas, E. D. Chemical Dietary Exposure and the Risks to Human Health. 
Quim. Nova. 2009, 32, 1898–1909. 
Jelić, A.; Petrović, M.; Barceló, D. Pharmaceuticals in Drinking Water. In Emerging Organic 
Contaminants and Human Health; Barceló, D., Ed.; Springer: Londres, 2012; pp 47–70. 
Jhamtani, R. C.; Dahiya, M. S.; Agarwal, R. Forensic Toxicology Research to Investigate 
Environmental Hazard. J. Forensic Sci. Crim. Investig. 2017, 3, 1–4. 
Jhamtani, R. C.; Shukla, S.; Sivaperumal, P.; Dahiya, M. S.; Agarwal, R. Impact of Co-exposure 
of Aldrin and Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles at Biochemical and Molecular Levels in 
Zebrafish. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2018, 58, 141–155. 
Junqué, E.; Garí, M.; Llull, R. M.; Grimalt, J. O. Drivers of the Accumulation of Mercury and 
Organochlorine Pollutants in Mediterranean Lean Fish and Dietary Significance. Balear. 
Islands Sci. Total Environ. 2018, 634, 170–180. 
Junqué, E.; Garcia, S.; Martínez, M. Á.; Rovira, J.; Schuhmacher, M.; Grimalt, J. O. Changes 
of Organochlorine Compound Concentrations in Maternal Serum During Pregnancy and 
Comparison to Serum Cord Blood Composition. Environ. Res. 2020, 182, 108994. 
Kanan, S.; Samara, F. Dioxins and Furans: A Review from Chemical and Environmental 
Perspectives. Trends Environ. Anal. Chem. 2018, 17, 1–13. 
Kar, S.; Roy, K.; Leszczynski, J. Impact of Pharmaceuticals on the Environment: Risk 
Assessment Using QSAR Modeling Approach. In Methods in Molecular Biology; Humana 
Press Inc., 2018; pp 395–443. 
Khan, S.; Priyamvada, S.; Khan, S.A.; Khan, W.; Yusufi, A. Studies on Hexachlorobenzene 
(HCB) Induced Toxicity and Oxidative Damage in the Kidney and Other Rat Tissues. Int. 
J. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 2017, 1, 1–9.  
 
 
Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 33 
Kim, M.; Li, L. Y.; Gorgy, T.; Grace, J. R. Review of Contamination of Sewage Sludge and 
Amended Soils by Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers Based on Meta-Analysis. Environ. 
Pollut. 2017, 220, 753–765. 
Koch, C.; Schmidt-Kötters, T.; Rupp, R.; Sures, B. Review of Hexabromocyclododecane 
(HBCD) with a Focus on Legislation and Recent Publications Concerning Toxicokinetics 
and -Dynamics. Environ. Pollut. 2015, 199, 26–34. 
Kuang, L.; Hou, Y.; Huang, F.; Guo, A.; Deng, W.; Sun, H.; Shen, L.; Lin, H.; Hong, H. 
Pesticides in Human Milk Collected from Jinhua, China: Levels, Influencing Factors and 
Health Risk Assessment. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 205, 111331. 
Kumar, N.; Ambasankar, K.; Krishnani, K. K.; Gupta, S. K.; Bhushan, S.; Minhas, P. S. Acute 
Toxicity, Biochemical and Histopathological Responses of endosulfan in Chanos chanos. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2016, 131, 79–88. 
Lakroun, Z.; Kebieche, M.; Lahouel, A.; Zama, D.; Desor, F.; Soulimani, R. Oxidative Stress 
and Brain Mitochondria Swelling Induced by Endosulfan and Protective Role of Quercetin 
in Rat. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2015, 22, 7776–7781. 
Lee, D. H.; Steffes, M. W.; Sjödin, A.; Jones, R. S.; Needham, L. L.; Jacobs, D. R. Low Dose 
of Some Persistent Organic Pollutants Predicts Type 2 Diabetes: A Nested Case-Control 
Study. Environ. Health Perspect. 2010, 118, 1235–1242. 
Lee, I.; Eriksson, P.; Fredriksson, A.; Buratovic, S.; Viberg, H. Developmental Neurotoxic 
Effects of Two Pesticides: Behavior and Neuroprotein Studies on Endosulfan and 
Cypermethrin. Toxicology 2015, 335, 1–10. 
Li, H.; Zhang, Z.; Sun, Y.; Wang, W.; Xie, J.; Xie, C.; Hu, Y.; Gao, Y.; Xu, X.; Luo, X. 
Tetrabromobisphenol A and Hexabromocyclododecanes in Sediments and Biota from 
Two Typical Mangrove Wetlands of South China: Distribution, Bioaccumulation and 
Biomagnification. Sci. Total Environ. 2021, 750, 141695. 
Linares, V.; Bellés, M.; Domingo, J. L. Human exposure to PBDE and critical evaluation of 
health hazards. Arch. Toxicol. 2015, 89, 335–356. 
Liu, W. X.; Chen, J. L.; Hu, J.; Ling, X.; Tao, S. Multi-Residues of Organic Pollutants In 
Surface Sediments from Littoral Areas of the Yellow Sea, China. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2008, 
56, 1091–1103. 
Liu, X.; Wen, S.; Li, J.; Zhang, L.; Zhao, Y.; Wu, Y. A Study on the Levels of a Polybrominated 
Biphenyl in Chinese Human Milk Samples Collected in 2007 and 2011. Environ. Monit. 
Assess. 2016, 188. 
Liu, Y.; Luo, X.; Zeng, Y.; Deng, M.; Tu, W.; Wu, Y.; Mai, B. Bioaccumulation and 
Biomagnification of Hexabromocyclododecane (HBCDD) in Insect-Dominated Food Webs 
from a Former E-Waste Recycling Site in South China. Chemosphere 2020, 240, 124813. 
Lopez-Echartea, E.; Macek, T.; Demnerova, K.; Uhlik, O. Bacterial Biotransformation of 
Pentachlorophenol and Micropollutants Formed during Its Production Process. Int. J. Environ. 
Res. Public Health 2016, 13. 
Maddela, N. R.; Venkateswarlu, K.; Kakarla, D.; Megharaj, M. Inevitable Human Exposure 
to Emissions of Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers: A Perspective on Potential Health Risks. 
Environ. Pollut. 2020, 266, 115240. 
MAFF. Annual Report of the Working Party on Pesticide Residues: 1992, Supplement to the 
Pesticides Register 1993; HMSO: London, UK, 1993. 
Mahugija, J. A. M.; Nambela, L.; Mmochi, A. J. Determination of Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
(DDT) and Metabolites Residues in Fish Species from Eastern Lake Tanganyika. South 
African J. Chem. 2018, 71, 86–93.  
 
34 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Martin, O. V.; Evans, R. M.; Faust, M.; Kortenkamp, A. A Human Mixture Risk Assessment 
for Neurodevelopmental Toxicity Associated with Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers Used 
as Flame Retardants. Environ. Health Perspect. 2017, 125, 087016. 
Martínez-Ibarra, A.; Morimoto, S.; Cerbón, M.; Prado-Flores, G. Effects on the Reproductive 
Parameters of Two Generations of Rattus norvegicus Offspring from Dams Exposed to 
Heptachlor during Gestation and Lactation. Environ. Toxicol. 2017, 32, 856–868. 
Mendes, C. A.; Mendes, G. E.; Cipullo, J. P.; Burdmann, E. A. Acute Intoxication Due to 
Ingestion of Vegetables Contaminated with Aldicarb. Clin.Toxicol. (Phila) 2005, 43, 117–118. 
Menezes, R. G.; Qadir, T. F.; Moin, A.; Fatima, H.; Hussain, S. A.; Madadin, M.; Pasha, S. B.; 
Al Rubaish, F. A.; Senthilkumaran, S. Endosulfan Poisoning: An overview. J. Forensic Leg. 
Med. 2017, 51, 27–33. 
Miret, N. V.; Pontillo, C. A.; Zárate, L. V.; Kleiman, D.; Pisarev, D.; Cocca, C.; Randi, A. S. 
Impact of Endocrine Disruptor Hexachlorobenzene on the Mammary Gland and Breast 
Cancer: The Story Thus Far. Environ. Res. 2019, 173, 330–341. 
Mlynarczuk, J.; Górska, M.; Wrobel, M. H. Effects of DDT, DDE, Aldrin and Dieldrin on 
Prostaglandin, Oxytocin and Steroid Hormone Release from Smooth Chorion Explants of 
Cattle. Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2020, 223, 106623. 
Mudhoo, A.; Bhatnagar, A.; Rantalankila, M.; Srivastava, V.; Sillanpää, M. Endosulfan 
Removal through Bioremediation, Photocatalytic Degradation, Adsorption and Membrane 
Separation Processes: A Review. Chem. Eng. J. 2019, 360, 912–928. 
Multigner, L.; Ndong, J. R.; Giusti, A.; Romana, M.; Delacroix-Maillard, H.; Cordier, S.; 
Jégou, B.; Thome, J.P.; Blanchet, P. Chlordecone Exposure and Risk of Prostate Cancer. J. 
Clin. Oncol. 2010, 28, 3457–3462. 
Multigner, L.; Kadhel, P.; Rouget, F.; Blanchet, P.; Cordier, S. Chlordecone Exposure and 
Adverse Effects in French West Indies Populations. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2016, 23, 3–8. 
Najam, L.; Alam, T. Levels and distribution of OCPs, (specially HCH, Aldrin, Dieldrin, 
DDT, Endosulfan) in Karhera Drain and Surface Water of Hindon River and Their Adverse 
Effects. Orient. J. Chem. 2015, 31, 2025–2030. 
OPAS -Organização Pan-Americana da Saúde. O impacto de substâncias químicas sobre a 
saúde pública: Fatores conhecidos e desconhecidos; DF: Brasília, 2018. 
Oancea, S. The Impact of Persistent Organic Pollutants on Human Health. In The Impact 
of Persistent Organic Pollutants on Freshwater Ecosystems and Human Health; Curtean￾Bănăduc, A., Ed.; Editora Universităţii: Sibiu, 2016; pp 57–83. 
Parada, H.; Wolff, M. S.; Engel, L. S.; White, A. J.; Eng, S. M.; Cleveland, R. J.; Khankari, 
N. K.; Teitelbaum, S. L.; Neugut, A. I.; Gammon, M. D. Organochlorine Insecticides DDT 
and Chlordane in Relation to Survival Following Breast Cancer. Int. J. Cancer. 2016, 138, 
565–575. 
Park, E. Y.; Park, E.; Kim, J.; Oh, J. K.; Kim, B.; Hong, Y. C.; Lim, M. K. Impact of Environ￾mental Exposure to Persistent Organic Pollutants on Lung Cancer Risk. Environ. Int. 2020, 
143, 105925. 
Parry, E.; Zota, A. R.; Park, J. S.; Woodruff, T. J. Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers (PBDEs) 
and Hydroxylated PBDE Metabolites (OH-PBDEs): A Six-Year Temporal Trend in 
Northern California Pregnant Women. Chemosphere 2018, 195, 777–783. 
Patočka, J.; Wu, Q.; França, T. C. C.; Ramalho, T. C.; Pita, R.; Kuča, K. Clinical Aspects of 
the Poisoning by the Pesticide Endosulfan. Quim. Nov. 2016, 39, 987–994. 
Perkins, J. T.; Petriello, M. C.; Newsome, B. J.; Hennig, B. Polychlorinated Biphenyls and 
Links to Cardiovascular Disease. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2016, 23, 2160–2172.  
 
Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 35 
Piskorska-Pliszczynska, J.; Strucinski, P.; Mikolajczyk, S.; Maszewski, S.; Rachubik, J.; 
Pajurek, M. Pentachlorophenol from an Old Henhouse as a Dioxin Source in Eggs and 
Related Human Exposure. Environ. Pollut. 2016, 208, 404–412. 
PPDB–Pesticide Properties Database. Footprint: Creating Tools for Pesticide Risk Assessment 
and Management in Europe. Developed by the Agriculture & Environment Research Unit 
(AERU), University of Hertfordshire, Funded by UK National Sources and the EU-funded 
FOOTPRINT project (FP6-SSP-022704). https://sitem.herts.ac.uk/aeru/ppdb/en/index.htm 
(accessed Nov 24, 2020). 
Ranjbar Jafarabadi, A.; Riyahi Bakhtiari, A.; Mitra, S.; Maisano, M.; Cappello, T.; Jadot, C. 
First Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) Monitoring in Seawater, Surface Sediments and 
Marine Fish Communities of the Persian Gulf: Distribution, Levels, Congener Profile and 
Health Risk Assessment. Environ. Pollut. 2019, 253, 78–88. 
Rantakokko, P.; Kumar, E.; Braber, J.; Huang, T.; Kiviranta, H.; Cequier, E.; Thomsen, C. 
Concentrations of Brominated and Phosphorous Flame Retardants in Finnish House Dust 
and Insights Into Children’s Exposure. Chemosphere 2019, 223, 99–107. 
Rauert, C.; Harner, T.; Schuster, J. K.; Eng, A.; Fillmann, G.; Castillo, L. E.; Fentanes, O.; 
Ibarra, M. V.; Miglioranza, K. S. B.; Rivadeneira, I. M. Air Monitoring of New and Legacy 
POPs in the Group of Latin America and Caribbean (GRULAC) Region. Environ. Pollut. 
2018, 243, 1252–1262. 
Rawn, D. F. K.; Sadler, A. R.; Casey, V. A.; Breton, F.; Sun, W. F.; Arbuckle, T. E.; Fraser, 
W. D. Dioxins/Furans and PCBs in Canadian Human Milk: 2008–2011. Sci. Total Environ. 
2017, 595, 269–278. 
Rolle-Kampczyk, U.; Gebauer, S.; Haange, S.-B.; Schubert, K.; Kern, M.; Moulla, Y.; Dietrich, 
A.; Schön, M. R.; Klöting, N.; Von Bergen, M. Accumulation of Distinct Persistent Organic 
Pollutants Is Associated with Adipose Tissue Inflammation. Quim. Nova. 2020, 39, 987-994 
Ross, G. W.; Abbott, R. D.; Petrovitch, H.; Duda, J. E.; Tanner, C. M.; Zarow, C.; Uyehara-Lock, 
J. H.; Masaki, K. H.; Launer, L. J.; Studabaker, W. B. Association of Brain Heptachlor Epoxide 
and Other Organochlorine Compounds with Lewy Pathology. Mov. Disord. 2019, 34, 228–235. 
Sebastian, R.; Raghavan, S. C. Molecular Mechanism of Endosulfan Action in Mammals. J. 
Biosci. 2017, 42, 149–153. 
Singh, N.; Siddarth, M.; Ghosh, R.; Tripathi, A. K.; Banerjee, B. D. Heptachlor-Induced 
Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition in HK-2 Cells Mediated via TGF-β1/Smad Signalling. 
Hum. Exp. Toxicol. 2019, 38, 567–577. 
Specht, I. O.; Bonde, J. P. E.; Toft, G.; Giwercman, A.; Spanò, M.; Bizzaro, D.; Manicardi, 
G. C.; Jönsson, B. A. G.; Robbins, W. A. Environmental Hexachlorobenzene Exposure and 
Human Male Reproductive Function. Reprod. Toxicol. 2015, 58, 8–14. 
Starek-świechowicz, B.; Budziszewska, B.; Starek, A. Hexachlorobenzene as a Persistent 
Organic Pollutant: Toxicity and Molecular Mechanism of Action. Pharmacol. Rep. 2017, 
6, 1232–1239. 
Supreeth, M.; Raju, N. Biotransformation of Chlorpyrifos and Endosulfan by Bacteria and 
Fungi. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2017, 101, 5961–5971. 
Stockholm Convention. The Listing of POPs in the Stockholm Convention. http://chm.pops. 
int/TheConvention/ThePOPs/ListingofPOPs/tabid/2509/Default.aspx (accessed Nov 24, 
2020). 
Tang, B.; Zeng, Y. H.; Luo, X. J.; Zheng, X. B.; Mai, B. X. Bioaccumulative Characteristics of 
Tetrabromobisphenol A and Hexabromocyclododecanes in Multi-Tissues of Prey and Predator 
Fish from an E-Waste Site, South China. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2015, 22, 12011–12017.  
36 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Tavakoly Sany, S. B.; Hashim, R.; Salleh, A.; Rezayi, M.; Karlen, D. J.; Razavizadeh, B. 
B. M.; Abouzari-lotf, E. Dioxin Risk Assessment: Mechanisms of Action and Possible 
Toxicity in Human Health. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2015, 22, 19434–19450. 
Thi Thuy, T. Effects of DDT on Environment and Human Health. J. Educ. Soc. Sci. 2015, 2, 
108–114. 
Thompson, L. A.; Ikenaka, Y.; Yohannes, Y. B.; Van Vuren, J. J.; Wepener, V.; Smit, N. J.; 
Darwish, W. S.; Nakayama, S. M. M.; Mizukawa, H.; Ishizuka, M. Concentrations and 
Human Health Risk Assessment of DDT and Its Metabolites in Free-Range and Commercial 
Chicken Products from KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Food Addit. Contam.—Part A Chem. 
Anal. Control. Expo. Risk Assess. 2017, 34, 1959–1969. 
Torre, A. de L.; Sanz, P.; Navarro, I.; Martínez, M. A. Time Trends of Persistent Organic 
Pollutants in Spanish Air. Environ. Pollut. 2016, 217, 26–32. 
Tsai, M. J.; Wu, S. N.; Cheng, H. A.; Wang, S. H.; Chiang, H. T. An Outbreak of Food-Borne 
Illness Due to Methomyl Contamination. J. Toxicol. Clin. Toxicol. 2003, 41, 969–973. 
Verbrugge, L. A.; Kahn, L.; Morton, J. M. Pentachlorophenol, Polychlorinated Dibenzo-P￾Dioxins and Polychlorinated Dibenzo Furans in Surface Soil Surrounding Pentachlorophenol￾Treated Utility Poles on the Kenai National Wildlife Refuge, Alaska USA. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. 2018, 25, 19187–19195. 
Vijgen, J.; Borst, B. De.; Weber, R.; Stobiecki, T.; Forter, M. HCH and Lindane Contaminated 
Sites : European and Global Need for a Permanent Solution for a Long-Time Neglected 
Issue. Environ. Pollut. 2019, 248, 696–705. 
Viluksela, M.; Pohjanvirta R. Multigenerational and Transgenerational Effects of Dioxins. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 2947. 
Vuong, A. M.; Yolton, K.; Dietrich, K. N.; Braun, J. M.; Lanphear, B. P.; Chen, A. Exposure 
to Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers (PBDEs) and Child Behavior: Current Findings and 
Future Directions. Horm. Behav. 2018, 101, 94–104. 
Wacławek, S.; Silvestri, D.; Hrabák, P.; Padil, V. V. T.; Torres-Mendieta, R.; Wacławek, M.; 
Černík, M.; Dionysiou, D. D. Chemical Oxidation and Reduction of Hexachlorocyclohexanes: 
A Review. Water Res. 2019, 162, 302–319. 
Wang, X.; Yang, J.; Li, H.; Guo, S.; Tariq, M.; Chen, H.; Wang, C.; Liu, Y. Chronic Toxicity 
of Hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) Induced by Oxidative Stress and Cell Apoptosis on 
Nematode Caenorhabditis Elegans. Chemosphere 2018, 208, 31–39. 
Wiltschka, K.; Neumann, L.; Werheid, M.; Bunge, M.; Düring, R. A.; Mackenzie, K.; Böhm, 
L. Hydrodechlorination of Hexachlorobenzene in a Miniaturized Nano-Pd(0) Reaction 
System Combined with the Simultaneous Extraction of all Dechlorination Products. Appl. 
Catal. B Environ. 2020, 275, 119100. 
Wohlers, D. W.; Ingerman, L.; Mcllroy, L. Toxicological Profile for Mirex and Chlordecone— 
Draft for Public Comment; Atlanta, Georgia, 2019. 
Wrobel, M. H.; Grzeszczyk, M.; Mlynarczuk, J.; Kotwica, J. The Adverse Effects of Aldrin 
and Dieldrin on Both Myometrial Contractions and the Secretory Functions of Bovine 
Ovaries and Uterus In Vitro. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2015, 285, 23–31. 
Wrobel, M. H.; Mlynarczuk, J. Secretory Function of Ovarian Cells and Myometrial 
Contractions in Cow Are Affected by Chlorinated Insecticides (Chlordane, Heptachlor, 
Mirex) In Vitro. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2017, 314, 63–71. 
Wu, H.; Bertrand, K. A.; Choi, A. L.; Hu, F. B.; Laden, F.; Grandjean, P.; Sun, Q. Persistent 
Organic Pollutants and Type 2 Diabetes: A Prospective Analysis in the Nurses’ Health 
Study and Meta-Analysis. Environ. Health Perspect. 2013, 121, 153–161.  
 
Organic Pollutants Threatening Human Health 37 
Wu, J.; Hu, J. C.; Wang, S. J.; Jin, J. X.; Wang, R.; Wang, Y.; Jin, J. Levels, Sources, and 
Potential Human Health Risks of PCNs, PCDD/Fs, and PCBs in an Industrial Area of 
Shandong Province, China. Chemosphere 2018, 199, 382–389. 
Xiong, J. Toxicity of Chlordane At Early Developmental Stage of Zebrafish. BioRxiv 2017, 
119248. 
Yamazaki, K.; Itoh, S.; Araki, A.; Miyashita, C.; Minatoya, M.; Ikeno, T.; Kato, S.; Fujikura, 
K.; Mizutani, F.; Chisaki, Y. Associations between Prenatal Exposure to Organochlorine 
Pesticides and Thyroid Hormone Levels in Mothers and Infants: The Hokkaido Study on 
Environment and Children’s Health. Environ. Res. 2020, 189, 109840. 
Yang, L.; Liu, G.; Zheng, M.; Jin, R.; Zhu, Q.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, X.; Xu, Y. Atmospheric 
Occurrence and Health Risks of PCDD/Fs, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, and Polychlorinated 
Naphthalenes by Air Inhalation in Metallurgical Plants. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 580, 
1146–1154. 
Ye, M.; Beach, J.; Martin, J. W.; Senthilselvan, A. Association between Lung Function in 
Adults and Plasma DDT and DDE Levels: Results from the Canadian Health Measures 
Survey. Environ. Health Perspect. 2015, 123, 422–427. 
Yilmaz, B.; Terekeci, H.; Sandal, S.; Kelestimur, F. Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals: Exposure, 
Effects on Human Health, Mechanism of Action, Models for Testing and Strategies for 
Prevention. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord. 2020, 21, 127–147. 
Yuan, Y.; Ning, X. An.; Zhang, Y.; Lai, X.; Li, D.; He, Z.; Chen, X. Chlorobenzene Levels, 
Component Distribution, and Ambient Severity in Wastewater from Five Textile Dyeing 
Wastewater Treatment Plants. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 193, 110257. 
Yuksel, H.; Ispir, Ü.; Ulucan, A.; Turk, C.; Taysı, M. R. Effects of Hexachlorocyclohexane 
(HCH- γ -Isomer, Lindane) on the Reproductive System of Zebrafish (Danio rerio). Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 2016, 16, 917–921. 
Zhang, B.; Xu, T.; Yin, D.; Wei, S. The Potential Relationship between Neurobehavioral 
Toxicity and Visual Dysfunction of BDE-209 on Zebrafish Larvae: A Pilot Study. Environ. 
Sci. Eur. 2020, 32. 
Zhang, L.; Wei, J.; Ren, L.; Zhang, J.; Wang, J.; Jing, L.; Yang, M.; Yu, Y.; Sun, Z.; Zhou, 
X. Endosulfan Induces Autophagy and Endothelial Dysfunction via the AMPK/mTOR 
Signaling Pathway Triggered by Oxidative Stress. Environ. Pollut. 2017, 220, 843–852. 
Zhang, W.; Wang, P.; Zhu, Y.; Yang, R.; Li, Y.; Wang, D.; Matsiko, J.; Han, X.; Zhao, J.; 
Zhang, Q. Brominated Flame Retardants in Atmospheric Fine Particles in the Beijing￾Tianjin-Hebei Region, China: Spatial and Temporal Distribution and Human Exposure 
Assessment. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2019, 171, 181–189. 
Zhang, W.; Zhang, Q.; Yang, Q.; Liu, P.; Sun, T.; Xu, Y.; Qian, X.; Qiu, W.; Ma, C. Contribution 
of Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropathologic Change to the Cognitive Dysfunction in Human 
Brains with Lewy Body–Related Pathology. Neurobiol. Aging. 2020a, 91, 56–65. 
Zhang, W.; Lin, Z.; Pang, S.; Bhatt, P.; Chen, S. Insights into the Biodegradation of Lindane 
(γ -Hexachlorocyclohexane) Using a Microbial System. Front. Microbiol. 2020b, 11, 1–12. 
Zhang, Y.; Luo, X. J.; Wu, J. P.; Liu, J.; Wang, J.; Chen, S. J.; Mai, B. X. Contaminant Pattern 
and Bioaccumulation of Legacy and Emerging Organhalogen Pollutants in the Aquatic 
Biota from an E-Waste Recycling Region in South China. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2010, 
29, 852–859. ZIA UR RAHMAN FAROOQI1*, MUHAMMAD MOAZ KHURSHEED1
, 
NOUMAN GULZAR1
, MUHAMMAD AHMAD AKRAM2
, 
MUHAMMAD MAHROZ HUSSAIN1
, ABDUL QADEER1
, 
WAQAS MOHY-UD-DIN1
, and SADIA YOUNAS3
1
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, 
University of Agriculture Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan
2
Environemtnal Protection Agency, Faisalabad 38000, Pakistan
3
Department of Chemistry, The Government Sadiq College Women 
University, Bahawalpur 63100, Pakistan
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: ziaa2600@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
This chapter aims to convey the risk levels of major inorganic pollutants 
(heavy metals or potentially toxic elements) to human lives. The mobilization 
of these potentially toxic elements (PTEs) through numerous anthropogenic 
activities have badly contaminated the environment. Since these PTEs are 
nonbiodegradable, they are accumulated into the human food chain and 
results in negative effects on human health. This phenomenon exerts some 
serious environmental health implications with concerns on the agricultural 
produce and quality as well as health of organisms living in the environment. 
Some pollutants are mutagenic, endocrine disruptors, carcinogenic, and 
teratogenic, while some trigger neurological changes in organism’s behavior. 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 2
The Risk of Inorganic Environmental 
Pollution to Humans40 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Because of their negative effects, due consideration is also required for the 
remediation of PTE-contaminated sites. Many limitations such as higher 
initial costs, expensive labor, resource modification, and disturbance in 
native soil microflora are the negative points while using various available 
chemical and physical methods for this purpose. Phytoremediation (use of 
plants species for chemical removal from contaminated sites) is a cheaper, 
economical, and safe approach to be practiced in PTE-contaminated soils 
when compared with physical and chemical methods of remediation. This 
chapter allows readers to get cost-effective ideas about the remediation of 
PTEs removal. This chapter also discusses the occurrence of PTEs, their 
sources, and their removal techniques with future recommendations. 
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Unusual pollution is a natural phenomenon, but pollution levels due to human 
activities of goods production has emerged as a main cause of pollution in 
the environment. Heavy metals or potentially toxic substances currently 
contain high environmental toxic substances (PTEs). These exist naturally 
on the surface of the earth, with anthropogenic practices, such as smelting, 
refining, electrification, power processing, energy delivery, sewage disposal, 
melting efficiency, and intensive agriculture (Tepanosyan et al., 2017). Due 
to agricultural practices, farming, and environmental processes, PTEs are 
released in the environment. They could be found in lakes, ponds, and dams, 
which are actually the most likely to be the sources of PTEs in the world. 
Certain nutrients remain in the atmosphere for a long time, and due to their 
high availability in water, can concentrate on the entire food chain and have a 
detrimental effect on birds that feed on aquatic habitats (Kumar et al., 2019). 
The unrestricted use of inorganic fertilizers, sewage, animal waste, and fertilizer 
in agricultural systems also increases the number of PTEs in agricultural land. 
Studying the presence of PTEs on agricultural soil is important because of 
the mutation and accumulation in the human body through the use of plants, 
animals and the use of their products. The increase in natural threats and the 
effects of chemical pollution on water and soil have been identified over the 
past 100 years as a result of intensified crop production, as well as international 
conservation practices around the world. In addition, due to the excessive use 
of agrochemicals and PTE-loaded fertilizer and amendments such as sewage 
sludge, cultivated concentrations have contributed to the introduction of 
PTEs into the soil (Zhang et al., 2018). Therefore, it is important in policy 
formulation and could assist in developing strategies to reduce the imposition The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 41 
of PTEs on agricultural land. The agribusiness is a simple example of 
agriculture, and in its production phase, it is one of the industries that process 
agricultural products as raw materials. This was built based on intensive 
farming. Through the incorporation of large amounts of organic chemicals 
based fertilizer and pesticides, there has been increased soil contamination 
caused by PTEs, such as cadmium (Cd), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), nickel (Ni), 
chromium (Cr), lead (Pb), and arsenic (As) (Yuan et al., 2021). When PTEs 
join the human food chain, soil and water pollution by PTEs contributes to 
crop losses and adverse human health effects. High levels of PTEs in the soil 
can adversely affect plant growth. However, certain types of plants, without 
showing signs of stress, can accumulate PTEs and endanger human health. In 
addition to large quantities of plants, plants can have a combination of both 
PTEs and nutrients (El-Meihy et al., 2019). Their contamination could be the 
cause by irrigation with contaminated water, improper use of organic (natural 
and unconventional) pesticide-based pesticides. There are some research 
indicators for the assessment of the extent and intensity of soil and carcass 
contamination in environmental studies. These indicators are used to compare, 
measure, monitor, and control the effects of pathogens (He et al., 2019). 
Biological variants are used as bioindicators in many trophic phases to 
provide evidence of potential adverse effects of exposure to contaminants. 
Monitoring of metals in bird species is important in assessing their well￾being, and at the same time, in assessing how polluted their habitats are. 
Various psychological, metabolic, reproductive, growth, and behavioral 
disorders of various types are associated with exposure to high levels of iron 
(Fe). In addition, it is responsible for oxidative damage, as the most expensive 
dosage processes that contribute to oxidative stress are toxins from the body 
and excretion from the body. High levels of PTEs can lead to shrinkage of 
the egg shell, infertility and self-harm, adverse developmental outcomes, 
and embryonic malformations and bird deaths, both of which contribute to 
human loss. For example, by reducing their growth or body weight, exposure 
to Cd, mercury (Hg), and selenium (Se) negatively affects bird health and 
ultimately harms longevity and reproductive success. Mercury implanted in 
the body tissues will adversely affect reproduction, especially in species with 
a high trophic stage, such as fish-eating birds (Grúz et al., 2018; Bada and 
Omotoriogun, 2019). 
Of particular importance in Europe are the colonial herds; their conser￾vation status has been greatly improved over the past 30 years and now 
several herdsmen have been protected. However, a variety of species are at 
risk of conditions that overwhelm local and European authorities, such as 
drought and loss of habitat in winter migrants in Africa, improvements in 42 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
food supply and quality of water and food in Southern Europe, and pollution 
and deforestation of adequate breeding grounds in Italy. Since almost all 
animals feed on aquatic animals and are unable to count and classify toxic 
toxins, water pollution can be a significant risk factor for adults and chicks. 
Many bird tissues like feathers, liver, bones and eggs have been used to track 
and expose birds (Egwumah et al., 2017). Among these, feathers have many 
advantages because, without damaging their well-being, they can be easily 
and repeatedly collected from the same person, and their storage does not 
require refrigeration. In contrast, feathers represent local pollutants than 
other tissues in the case of wolves, because the chicks eat deer collected near 
the colony, and large amounts of material are deposited in the feathers during 
the breeding season (Liang et al., 2016). 
It is well known that people are exposed to PTEs through food (food and 
drinking water) and respiration (air pollution). For such chemicals, however, 
skin sensitivity should not be reduced. In terms of skin contamination, 
while most of the chemicals used during textile processing are washed, the 
remaining amounts of these compounds may and may not be released during 
consumer use. Nitrogen (N) is one of the most important biogeochemical 
elements, as well as trace elements (Co, Zn, Fe, Cu, etc.), and represents 
important inputs for agricultural sustainability. In trees, plants, wildlife, 
human waste, such as sewage sludge, ammonium nitrate fertilizers, and 
industrial-grade N-compounds, and car compounds released after rain, the 
N-nitrate form (NO −
3 ) is found. It usually exists in groundwater and surface 
water as a natural resource, but as N levels rise, the causes are primarily 
associated with anthropogenic influences. In fact, while there are many 
N-factors that can contribute to the fight against groundwater pollution, 
human actions are the cause of NO −
3 level rise to a dangerous level (Motevalli 
et al., 2019; Rahmati et al., 2019). The groundwater contamination is an 
environmental problem because it is a low-toxic compound, but it is harmful 
to human health as it is reduced to nitrite (NO −
2 ), which causes diseases, 
such as methemoglobinemia in children and adult stomach cancer. Nitrate 
in groundwater can be found in a variety of agricultural sectors. Due to 
the volume of this mineral fertilizer, which is greater than the needs of the 
crop, NO − 
3 leaching from cultivated fields to water occurs (groundwater 
and surface water). Therefore, the main source of global water pollution is 
the use of farmland. Therefore, to protect water from NO −
3 contamination 
from agricultural products, the European Union’s Directive 91/676/EEC 
defines the appropriate level of NO −
3 pollution in groundwater with a limit 
of 50 mg/L. Therefore, it has been established. ways to monitor and track 
groundwater and enforce measures to promote groundwater safety. The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 43 
2.2 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS
A common concern with the environment is air pollution from natural and 
uncommon pollution. Several of these pollutants are extremely persistent 
and replicate legal levels beyond the atmosphere. They are particularly toxic 
and can be obtained by contaminating food chains to the highest trophic 
areas. Pollution involves some development in the environment, but the 
use is limited to reflecting any degradation, chemicals and environmental 
degradation. Human lives are affected by these types of releases either by 
direct or indirect mechanisms. Pollution is a subset of xenobiotic chemicals 
released by anthropogenic processes entering the atmosphere and are present 
at a higher concentration of “natural levels.” Pollutants are often classified as 
perishable and nonperishable: decaying organic matter consists of compost 
and organic matter that are easily separated under normal conditions. Those 
that are not exposed to microorganisms, for example, PTEs, plastics, and 
soaps are nonperishable compounds. The exponential population growth, 
industrial expansion, and city sprawl has contributed to the massive release 
in the xenobiotic chemical atmosphere. A significant amount of toxic 
chemicals produced by factories that are widely used to improve agricultural 
production in developed countries (Hashemi et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019). 
2.2.1 ORGANIC POLLUTANTS
Excessive use of unconventional materials has led to widespread and long-term 
environmental issues over the past few decades. In fact, the widespread use of 
pesticides in the agricultural and public health sectors around the world has led 
to many cases of food poisoning, agricultural land, and water shortages. And 
several years after its introduction, fossils of pesticides known to be extinct 
still survive. Organic pollutants include some pesticides, aromatic compounds 
and phenyls based compounds (Alharbi et al., 2018). 
2.2.2 INORGANIC POLLUTANTS
A number of intentional or unintentional chemicals are released into the soil 
or bodies of water on a daily basis. Some of them are important for having 
a purpose while most of them are challenging because of their long-term 
persistence and resistance to corruption. This category of pollutants include 
PTEs including metal and metalloid and radionuclides. Unusual pollutants 44 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
are more likely to be present in the ground and in groundwater from the 
leakage of a polluted resource field, such as waste management and mining 
facilities. Pollutants from these sources will flow through the groundwater 
flow, resulting in a phase-polluted water farm. Among the rare toxins, heavy 
metals and metalloids are in close proximity to PTEs and PTEs are a major 
concern due to their high toxicity in low-concentration areas. They may be 
attached to solid soil layers or easily accessible by organic matter for extrac￾tion (Mishra and Maiti, 2017). 
2.3 INORGANIC POLLUTANTS: ORIGIN AND TYPES
Inorganic emissions from various sources of air, water, and soil. Standing 
stores include fossil fuel emissions, processing plants and factories, as well 
as sheds and other types of fuel-fired heating systems. Traditional biomass 
burning is a major cause of air pollution in developed and poor countries. 
Standard biomass includes wood, plant waste, and manure. Mobile services 
include cars, boats, and ships. Controlled agricultural fire helps in good 
forest management activities. Controlled or determined temperatures are 
a common practice used for forest conservation, planting, regeneration of 
plains, or removal of greenhouse gases. Fire is a common phenomenon of 
nature for both trees and grasslands, and a controlled fire can be a forest 
tool. Controlled temperatures encourage appropriate forest trees to sprout, 
thus rejuvenating the forest. Sources from nonfire processes occur. They are 
all available in oil-based oils, hair spray, varnish, aerosol sprays, and other 
solvent. Waste collection in landfills, which produce methane. Methane 
(CH4) is highly flammable and can cause air to explode. It also acts as an 
asphyxiant, and in a closed space, can remove oxygen. If oxygen concen￾tration is reduced by migration to less than 19.5%, asphyxia or congestion 
may occur. Atomic resources, such as nuclear bombs, toxic agents, rocket, 
and biological warfare result in radioactive pollutants. An important source 
of nitrogen oxides can be from agriculture due to inadequate agricultural 
management (Dubovina et al., 2018; Salvo et al., 2018). 
As water is important for health, it poses health risks due to its flow and 
improved access to health. The climate of natural rocks and soil primarily 
adds to the inanimate pollution of water. Disposal of industrial waste, 
construction and sewage containing minerals, PTEs, and trace elements (Cd, 
Pb, As, Cr etc.) have also reduced the water supply over the past few years 
and has adversely affected the human health. The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 45 
2.4 TYPES OF INORGANIC POLLUTANTS
2.4.1 POTENTIALLY TOXIC ELEMENTS AND ALIKE ELEMENTS 
(METALLOIDS)
Any chemical substance that has a relatively high density and toxicity in 
low concentrations is called PTEs. Hg, Cd, As, Cr, thallium (Tl), and Pb are 
examples of heavy metals. There are common parts on the surface of the 
earth. There is no need to weaken or kill them. PTEs reach our bodies only 
in limited amounts through food, drinking water, and air. Any PTE (e.g., 
Cu, Se, Zn) is important as criteria for maintaining the body’s metabolism. 
However, they can contribute to tackling toxicity at higher altitudes. For 
example, their toxicity can be caused by contamination of drinking water, 
high concentration of air near the outlets, or ingestion by food chain. As they 
appear to be compacted, PTEs are toxic. Compared with the concentration 
of atmospheric chemicals, the bioaccumulation shows an increase in the 
concentration of chemicals in the body of organisms over time. Whenever 
they are taken and processed faster than demolished (made into bodies) or 
extracted, compounds combine into living organisms (Rehman et al., 2018). 
Potentially hazardous substances can reach the water system through 
industrial and consumer waste, or by acid rain that breaks down the soil and 
deposits heavy metals in streams, wetlands, water, and groundwater. Another 
PTE types is the substance having properties in-between PTEs and semi-liquid 
PTEs (metalloids). Examples of these are boron (B), As, Hg, and Antimony 
(Sb). Table 2.1 describes the inorganic pollutants and their sources. 
2.4.1.1 HUMAN HEALTH RISKS 
There has long been concerns about the pollution of PTEs due to their 
toxicity to plants, animals, and humans as they lack biodegradability. They 
have a remarkable effect on the colors and texture of aquatic animals that 
through biomagnification enters the human food chain and eventually affect 
humans. Toxicity levels of the pollutant depends on the type of pollutant, its 
role in organism’s body, and the organ it affects or toxin it produces. PTEs 
in drinking water are often linked to human toxins by Pb, Fe, Cd, Cu, Zn, 
and Cr. They are needed in the body in small amounts but can also be toxic 
in large doses (Fig. 2.1). They form one important group of environmental 
hazards if any. Some PTEs like Cu are important in tracking devices, but they TABLE 2.1 Inorganic Pollutants and Their Sources.
Contaminants Sources References 
Inorganic fertilizers Used in agriculture Farmer (2018),
(e.g., nitrates and phosphates etc.) Garzon-Vidueira et al. (2020)
Sulfides Mined minerals produce and sulfides when combined with water Quevedo et al. (2020) 
and action of microorganism 
Heavy metals (PTEs) Motor vehicles, acid mine drainage Tepanosyan et al. (2017)
Arsenic Pesticides, chemical wastes, mining bi-products Zhang et al. (2017)
Cadmium Industrial discharge, metal plating, Ni–Cd batteries, mining waste Kubier et al. (2019)
Chromium Metal plating industries, tanning process Hausladen et al. (2018)
Lead Plumbing, mining, coal, gasoline Li et al. (2020) 
Mercury Mining, industrial waste, coal Sundseth et al. (2017)
Zinc Metal plating industries, industrial waste Olukosi et al. (2018)
Nickel Sewage, industrial waste or mine washing Meshram and Pandey (2018) 
46 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 47 
show toxicity when there are too many amounts in drinking water. Cr, Cu, 
and Zn can cause noncarcinogenic risks, such as neurologic involvement, 
headaches, and liver disease when they exceed their safety standards. There 
is also evidence that exposure to low-dose of toxins can cause cancer to 
different body organs. The scientist found an increased risk of dying from 
lung cancer due to exposure to dust and fog containing Cr. Cd in diets due 
to the consumption of contaminated rice and other foods results in kidney 
damage and different types of cancers which are serious and long-lasting, 
as exposure can also cause many health problems. These include skin, 
respiratory, cardiovascular, vascular, abdominal, hematological, hepatic, 
renal, neurological, growth, reproductive, immunological, genotoxic, 
mutagenetic, and carcinogenic effects (as liver cancer) (Ali and Khan, 2018; 
Liu et al., 2018; Amqam et al., 2020). 
FIGURE 2.1 Potentially toxic elements and their risks to human health. 
2.4.2 RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
Radioactive substances produce rays and known as physical pollution sources. 
They decrease the quality of living due to the release of radioactive material 
during the explosion and exploration of nuclear weapons, nuclear production, 
and termination of operations, radioactive mines, waste management and 
waste disposal, and risks at nuclear power plants. Naturally occurring 
radioactive materials and technologically advanced radioactive materials 48 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
contain materials which are usually industrial waste or products derived from 
organic matter, such as uranium, thorium, and plutonium and any of their 
decay products, such as radium and radon. Naturally occurring radioactive 
material is found in the lower concentrations in the earth’s crust and pollute 
the environment when humans do mining and some natural processes, such 
as radon gas leaks into the atmosphere or by groundwater depletion (Steffan 
et al., 2018; Fadlallah et al., 2019). 
2.4.2.1 HUMAN HEALTH RISKS 
Radioactive pollution is accompanied with the ionizing radiation emissions 
of high-energy particles or gamma radiation that has a high frequency and 
therefore high energy. Particles or high-energy electromagnetic radiation 
penetrates into the human body and causes ionization of molecules present 
in the body. This ionizing radiation is a serious threat to human health. 
These free radicals that are formed react with the components of the living 
organism, causing the destruction of proteins, membranes, and nucleic acids 
(Vieira et al., 2020). Depending on the intensity and duration of exposure to 
ionizing radiation, its effects on a living organism may be accompanied by 
mild, moderate, or even fatal consequences. Low-level exposure may induce 
only superficial effect and mild skin irritation. The short-range exposure 
which occurs for few days provokes the loss of hair or nails, subcutaneous 
bleeding, and impairment of cells. The long but low-intensity exposure leads 
to nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and bruises. The acute exposure to ionizing 
radiation is characterized by the damage of DNA cells that results in cancer, 
genetic defects, and even death (Li et al., 2018). 
2.4.3 NUTRIENT POLLUTION
Pollution is a common thread that connects many problems along the coast 
of nations, including eutrophication, harmful algal flowers, dead areas, fish 
stocks, certain shellfish toxins, loss of seaweed and kelp beds, the destruction 
of certain corals, and even other animals, marine mammals, and seabirds. 
More than 60% of our rivers and coastal areas in all the coastal states of 
the United States have been moderately polluted. This degradation is worse 
in the mid-Atlantic, southeast and in the Gulf of Mexico. Over the past 40 
years, pollution control laws have significantly reduced the release of toxic 
substances in our coastal waters. It is known that (1) benthic chlorophyll The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 49 
distribution is strongly associated with the total N and phosphorus (P) in 
water, (2) nutrient uptake in many rivers and streams, (3) bioassays typically 
show N alone or concert responses with P autotrophic (primary production 
and chlorophyll) and heterotrophic (respiratory) responses, (4) both hetero￾trophic and autotrophic processes are influenced by the presence of N and 
P, and (5) Transmission of cyanobacteria generally appears to be unable to 
fully satisfy the N limit in rivers and streams where P is present above the N 
level. This suggests that the control of N and P should be considered in the 
management of streams (Glibert et al., 2018; Sarma et al., 2020). 
The livestock from agriculture sector provide up to one-third human 
protein requirements and a major employment provider in developing 
countries. While it offers such great benefits to people, livestock mistreatment 
can have serious environmental consequences that have not been addressed 
adequately in many emerging economies. About 60% of the world’s 
biomass is harvested annually to support all human activities consumed by 
the livestock industry, making it impossible to distribute such large-scale 
resources to the industry. Nitrogen from animal waste that falls directly into 
the surface water or nitrogen is regenerated in the air as ammonia can be one 
major source of N from agricultural activity to coastal waters (Shortle and 
Horan, 2017). 
2.5 MANAGEMENT OF INORGANIC ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS
Air, land, and water pollution caused less than 9 million deaths in 2016, or 
16% of all deaths worldwide. About 92% of all deaths related to pollution are 
found in developing countries, with the poor, the marginalized, and the very 
young are affected by the health effects of pollution. The economic burden is 
enormous in 2016, air pollution occurring alone costing the global economy 
US$ 5.7 trillion or 4.8% of global GDP (Bennett et al., 2018). 
The deterioration of environmental health due to rapid industrializa￾tion, urbanization, and increasing human pressure, is a major concern for 
developing countries, including India. Environmental pollution (soil, water, 
and air) is a toxic waste from various natural and anthropogenic activities 
and its adverse effects on biodiversity require further research to reduce and 
solve these problems effectively. Compared with conventional remediation 
methods, modern methods are much higher and more effective in removing 
large amounts of natural and uncommon pollution from contaminated 
sources (Fig. 2.2). 50 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
FIGURE 2.2 Remediation approaches for contaminants. 
2.5.1 CHEMICAL MANAGEMENT
The identification and removal of hazardous environmental pollutants is 
indeed a major challenge in this age of industrial development. Changing 
the old way of managing progressively in the study of nanoparticles will go 
a long way in overcoming this problem. Because of the unique features of 
this process, such as surface area, size, photoelectronic, photocatalytic, and 
absorptivity properties, nanoparticles are considered to be the most useful and 
important source for the detection and repair of hazardous pollutants. 
The preparation of inorganic ions and metals of natural clay particles and 
metal oxides has been tested. PTEs such as Cu, Cd, Ni, and Pb are better 
absorbed by oxidized hydroxylated carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The best 
adsorber for organometallic elements has been developed in the form of various 
pure CNTs. CNTs act as adsorbent for a wide variety of organic compounds, 
such as dioxin and its metabolites, polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 
chlorophenols, chlorobenzenes, and bisphenol A (Xue et al., 2017). 
Advertising material will be of great help and comfort in use to solve 
this problem. While the adsorption capacity of any nanomaterial depends on 
the height of the structure and the surface characteristics. For this, the most 
advanced carbonaceous nanoparticles are graphene oxide and graphene. 
Theoretically, a certain area in graphene is high and it contains active 
groups, which show their potential in adsorption. In the past, air and water 
pollution controls have been based on graphene or composite compounds. 
The different active groups of graphene make it more acidic, making it more 
exposed to alkaline chemicals and cations. Graphene has a hydrophobic 
surface and due to its high oku-π interaction, it has a greater tendency to 
chemical reactions. Different nanocomposites can be made by converting The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 51 
graphene oxide or graphene with iron or natural oxides, which increases the 
adsorptive tendency and isolation efficiency (Ali et al., 2019). 
The use of different sorbents and adsorbents such as biochar for envi￾ronmental management has been the cause of the world’s recent interest in 
advancing biochar production technology and its management. The use of 
biochar in the soil has great potential for enhancing extended and long-lasting 
carbon stability due to the fact that biochar carbon is very restorative and has 
a fragrant structure. The recurring biochar condition persists in the soil from 
1000 to 10,000 years and helps to increase soil storage and pollution regula￾tion. Recently, biochar application to contaminated soil has been considered 
as a tool to rectify soil contaminated by PTEs. It has more surface and has a 
porous structure. Biochar, a carbon-rich natural substance, has been widely 
used in the formation of particles for carbon recovery, soil fertility, and 
environmental remediation. Synergistic methods of biochar in composite 
membranes have been proposed to determine the superior membrane 
efficacy in the treatment of pollutants. Multifunctional biochar composite 
membranes not only effectively prevent pollution problems caused by using 
the biochar particle as a sorbent but can also be produced on a large scale, 
demonstrating the great potential for practical use. The promising ability to 
extract biochars to eliminate pollution depends on its connected structures, 
surface chemistry, surface area, and porous structure, which differs signifi￾cantly from the immature material and the proposed conditions for pyrolysis 
(Wu et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019). 
2.5.2 BIOLOGICAL APPROACHES
The most harmful factors affecting aquatic and human lives are hazardous 
metals and organic color dyes. The biological technique can be used for their 
remediation is known as microbial fuel cell (MFC), the most hopeful, envi￾ronment friendly, and an emergent technology. In this biological remediation 
method, which involves microbial role, an electric current is generated 
along with treatment of aquatic pollutants. While discussing about the MFC 
technology, it is clear that this technique provides an alternative with high 
potency in the area of wastewater management. Long-term useable green 
energy sources have been introduced by this technology, and the researchers 
are actively focusing on this methodology as biodegradable matter and 
waste material are used in MFC devices as fuel to operate the device. Some 
important parts of MFC device include electrodes, variety of microbes, and 
MFC design. These parts have an important participation in the removal of 52 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
pollutants caused by dyes from water and reduction of heavy metals from 
highly toxic area making that less toxic. To check the working efficiency 
of the MFCs devices for water treatment different researches have been 
conducted (Yaqoob et al., 2020). 
Many living organisms could be used in the degradation and detoxification 
of major aquatic pollutants. The green algae (Chlorella) has been used for 
metal biosorption. Bioremediation of toxins through plant is also considered 
the most important way of bioremediation of the biosphere. Moreover, 
phytochelatins and metallothionein can detoxify the PTEs. It shows that 
plants have the ability in the reclamation of air, soil, and water (Shrestha et 
al., 2019). 
2.5.2.1 TYPES OF BIOREMEDIATION 
Plants and microbes use a variety of methods to repair contaminated areas. 
Bioremediation, specifically phytoremediation technology can be catego￾rized on the basis of the process and its functionality as follows: 
2.5.2.1.1 Mycoremediation
Recently, algae have become a material for the natural purification of polluted 
water and polluted areas. They are able to accumulate/remove toxins from 
the body nutrients, PTEs, pesticides, and other nontoxic substances and 
inorganic matter, and radioactive material. Wastewater treatment programs 
with low algae have become increasingly important over the past 50 years, 
and it is now widely accepted that wastewater treatment methods work as 
standard treatments. These specific factors have made algal wastewater treat￾ment systems less costly and inexpensive treatment systems, especially for 
municipal sanitation. In this way, 70% of oxygen demand, 66% of chemical 
requirements, 71% of total N, 67% of P, 54% of dry solids, and 51% of 
soluble solids are reduced (Prasad, 2017). 
2.5.2.1.2 Phytoextraction
Phytoextraction, a common phytoremediation process, involves the removal 
of pollutants by plant roots by subsequent accumulation in the airborne plant 
parts. Parts of the aerial plants are harvested and removed, thus ensuring The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 53 
permanent removal of metals, such as Pb, Cd, Ni, Cu, and Cr from sites 
they are unclean. However, it only applies to those sites that contain low to 
moderate levels of iron pollution because plant growth does not reside in 
highly polluted areas (Chin, 2020). 
2.5.2.1.3 Rhizofiltration
This approach relies on the ability of plant roots to absorb and destroy 
metals or excess nutrients from aqueous plants (wastewater streams, 
nutrient regeneration systems). Rhizofiltration fixes metals, such as Pb, 
Cd, Ni, Cu, and Cr radioactive material (U, Cs, Sr). Efficient plants should 
produce a large amount of biomass root or root zone, be able to collect and 
tolerate a significant amount of target metals, include easy handling and 
low maintenance costs, and should have secondary waste that needs to be 
disposed of. Earth plants are more suitable for rhizofiltration because they 
produce longer, larger, and more common root systems with larger metal 
spells (Benavides et al., 2018). 
2.5.2.1.4 Phytostabilization
In this way, plants are used to convert toxic soil compounds into less toxic 
species, which can be removed from the soil. Phytostabilization stops debris, 
prevents air and water erosion exposure, provides water control that reduces 
direct migration of contaminants into groundwater and disables physical and 
chemical pollution through root sorption and chemical rehabilitation through 
various soil amendments. Phytostabilization requires plants that can grow in 
contaminated soil and their roots must grow in a polluted environment, and 
to convert biological, chemical, or physical conditions in the soil that convert 
toxic metals into less toxic ones. Plant toxicity by plants can be improved by 
supplementing the soil with increasing soil organisms and pH (using lime), 
or by binding certain nutrients with phosphate or carbonate without the use 
of soil amendments (Visconti et al., 2020). 
2.5.2.1.5 Phytovolatization
The use of plants to absorb PTEs and to convert them into flexible, nontoxic 
chemical forms for respiration is called phytovolatization. Some PTEs, such 54 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
as As, Hg, and Se may exist as natural gas types. Other plants that are naturally 
occurring or genetically modified, such as Chara canescens (musk grass), 
Brassica juncea (Indian mustard), and Arabidopsis thaliana have reportedly 
been able to absorb heavy metals and convert them into oxygen-rich species 
inside the plant and release them into space. Phytovolatization is mainly used 
for the extraction of mercury when mercuric ions are converted to nontoxic 
mercury elemental gas. However, unlike other remedial techniques, once 
impurities are removed by volatilization, one cannot control their migration 
(Guarino et al., 2020). 
2.5.2.1.6 Phytodegradation
In phytodegradation, plants reduce pollution through metabolic processes 
and utilize rhizospheric associations between plants and soil insects. Plant 
enzymes that digest waste can be released into the rhizosphere, where they 
can play a major role in the conversion of pollutants. Enzymes, such as 
dehalogenase, nitroreductase, peroxidase, laccase, and nitrilase have been 
found in vessels and soil. In addition, natural compounds, such as blasting 
machines, chlorine-containing solvents, herbicides and insecticides and 
inorganic nutrients can also be undermined by this technology (Chlebek and 
Hupert-Kocurek, 2019). 
2.6 CONCLUSIONS
In the human body, inorganic compounds play a very significant function. 
Some metals, including zinc, copper, and iron are very important to human 
survival. But they are considered highly hazardous compounds like other 
metals as they reach their allowable levels in the human body. There is 
no doubt, though, that these potentially dangerous chemicals have given 
comfort to human life, even though this calmness has resulted in human 
destruction. They affect the human body from soil malfunction to malfunc￾tion. Both living organisms are changed by their detrimental consequences 
in every way. It is not enough for humanity to escape natural catastrophes, 
but man should somehow get rid of his own troubles. When we begin to 
stick to the ideals of sustainable development, we will prevent the impact 
of humanitarian crises on the environment. In order to avoid environmental 
contamination at the start, certain steps need to be taken. The degradation of 
potentially hazardous contaminants can be avoided by premature mitigation,  
 
 
 
 
The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 55 
but once they enter the atmosphere, they must be resolved by intelligent 
action, and such steps may be to rid the environment of metals in an afford￾able, simple, and permanent manner. Physical, chemical, and biological 
remediation steps are included. 
KEYWORDS
• heavy metals 
• nutrient pollution 
• human health risks 
REFERENCES 
Alharbi, O.M.; Khattab, R.A.; Ali, I. Health and Environmental Effects of Persistent Organic 
Pollutants. J. Mol. Liquids 2018, 263, 442–453. 
Ali, H.; Khan, E. Bioaccumulation of non-Essential Hazardous Heavy Metals and Metalloids 
in Freshwater Fish. Risk to Human Health. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2018, 16, 903–917. 
Ali, I.; Mbianda, X.; Burakov, A.; Galunin, E.; Burakova, I.; Mkrtchyan, E.; Tkachev, A.; 
Grachev, V. Graphene Based Adsorbents for Remediation of Noxious Pollutants from 
Wastewater. Environ. Int. 2019, 127, 160–180. 
Amqam, H.; Thalib, D.; Anwar, D.; Sirajuddin, D.; Mallongi, A. Human Health Risk Assess￾ment of Heavy Metals via Consumption of Fish from Kao Bay. Rev. Environ. Heal. 2020, 
1, 257–263. 
Bada, A. A..; Omotoriogun, T. C. Incidence of Heavy Metals in Feathers of Birds in a Human￾Impacted Forest, South-West Nigeria. 2019. 
Benavides, L. C. L.; Pinilla, L. A. C.; Serrezuela, R.; Serrezuela, W. F. R. Extraction in 
Laboratory of Heavy Metals through Rhizofiltration Using the Plant Zea Mays (Maize). 
Int. J. Appl. Environ. Sci. 2018, 13, 9–26. 
Bennett, J.E.; Stevens, G.A.; Mathers, C.D.; Bonita, R.; Rehm, J.; Kruk, M.E.; Riley, L.M.; 
Dain, K.; Kengne, A.P.; Chalkidou, K. Ncd Countdown 2030: Worldwide Trends in 
Non-Communicable Disease Mortality and Progress towards Sustainable Development 
Goal Target 3.4. Lancet 2018, 392, 1072–1088. 
Chin, M. 2020. Improving Metal Hyperaccumulator Wild Plants to Develop Commercial 
Phytoextraction Systems: Approaches and Progress. In Phytoremediation of Contaminated 
Soil and Water; CRC Press, 2020; pp 129–158. 
Chlebek, D.; Hupert-Kocurek, K. Endophytic Bacteria in the Phytodegradation of Persistent 
Organic Pollutants. Adv. Microbiol. 2019, 58, 70–79. 
Dubovina, M.; Krčmar, D.; Grba, N.; Watson, M.A.; Rađenović, D.; Tomašević-Pilipović, 
D.; Dalmacija, B. Distribution and Ecological Risk Assessment of Organic and Inorganic  
 
 
 
 
 
56 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Pollutants in the Sediments of the Transnational Begej Canal (Serbia-Romania). Environ. 
Poll. 2018, 236, 773–784. 
Egwumah, F.; Egwumah, P.; Edet, D. Paramount Roles of Wild Birds as Bioindicators of 
Contamination. Int. J. Avian Wildlife Biol. 2017, 2, 00041. 
El-Meihy, R.M.; Abou-Aly, H.E.; Youssef, A.M.; Tewfike, T.A.; El-Alkshar, E. A. Efficiency 
of Heavy Metals-Tolerant Plant Growth Promoting Bacteria for Alleviating Heavy Metals 
Toxicity on Sorghum. Environ. Exp. Bot. 2019, 162, 295–301. 
Fadlallah, H.; Taher, Y.; Haque, R.; Jaber, A. Oradiex: A Big Data Driven Smart Framework 
for Real-Time Surveillance and Analysis of Individual Exposure to Radioactive Pollution, 
2019. 
Farmer, A. Phosphate Pollution: A Global Overview of the Problem. Phosphorus: Polluter and 
Resource of the Future: Motivations, Technologies and Assessment of the Elimination and 
Recovery of Phosphorus from Wastewater. IWA Publishing, UK, 2018. 
Garzon-Vidueira, R.; Rial-Otero, R.; Garcia-Nocelo, M.L.; Rivas-Gonzalez, E.; Moure￾Gonzalez, D.; Fompedriña-Roca, D.; Vadillo-Santos, I.; Simal-Gandara, J. Identification 
of Nitrates Origin in Limia River Basin and Pollution-Determinant Factors. Agric. Ecosys. 
Environ. 2020, 290, 106775. 
Glibert, P.M.; Beusen, A.H.; Harrison, J.A.; Dürr, H.H.; Bouwman, A.F.; Laruelle, G. G. 
Changing Land-, Sea-, and Airscapes: Sources of Nutrient Pollution Affecting Habitat 
Suitability for Harmful Algae. In Global Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal 
Blooms; Springer, 2018; pp 53–76.
Grúz, A.; Déri, J.; Szemerédy, G.; Szabó, K.; Kormos, É.; Bartha, A.; Lehel, J.; Budai, P. 
Monitoring of Heavy Metal Burden in Wild Birds at Eastern/North-Eastern Part of Hungary. 
Environ. Sci. Pollu. Res. 2018, 25, 6378–6386. 
Guarino, F.; Miranda, A.; Castiglione, S. Cicatelli, A. Arsenic Phytovolatilization and 
Epigenetic Modifications in Arundo Donax l. Assisted by a PGPR Consortium. Chemosphere 
2020, 251, 126310. 
Hashemi, B.; Zohrabi, P.; Kim, K.-H.; Shamsipur, M.; Deep, A.; Hong. J. Recent Advances 
in Liquid-Phase Microextraction Techniques for the Analysis of Environmental Pollutants. 
TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2017, 97, 83–95. 
Hausladen, D.M.; Alexander-Ozinskas, A.; McClain, C.; Fendorf, S. Hexavalent Chromium 
Sources and Distribution in California Groundwater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018, 52, 
8242–8251. 
He, J.; Yang, Y.; Christakos, G.; Liu, Y.; Yang, X. Assessment of Soil Heavy Metal Pollution 
Using Stochastic Site Indicators. Geoderma. 2019, 337, 359–367. 
Kubier, A.; Wilkin, R.T.; Pichler, T. Cadmium in Soils and GROUNDWATEr: A Review. 
Appl. Geochem. 2019, 108, 104388. 
Kumar, S.; Prasad, S.; Yadav, K.K.; Shrivastava, M.; Gupta, N.; Nagar, S.; Bach, Q.-V.; 
Kamyab, H.; Khan, S.A.; Yadav, S. Hazardous Heavy Metals Contamination of Vegetables 
and Food Chain: Role of Sustainable Remediation Approaches-a Review. Environ. Res. 
2019, 179, 108792. 
Li, M.; Weis, D.; Smith, K.E.; Shiel, A.E.; Smith, W.D.; Hunt, B.P.; Torchinsky, A.; Pakhomov, 
E. A. Assessing Lead Sources in Fishes of the Northeast Pacific Ocean. Anthropocene 2020, 
29, 100234. 
Li, P.; Zhang, R.; Zheng, G. Genetic and Physiological Effects of the Natural Radioactive 
Gas Radon on the Epiphytic Plant Tillandsia Brachycaulos. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2018, 
132, 385–390.  
The Risk of Inorganic Environmental Pollution to Humans 57 
Liang, J.; Liu, J.; Yuan, X.; Zeng, G.; Yuan, Y.; Wu, H.; Li, F. A Method for Heavy Metal 
Exposure Risk Assessment to Migratory Herbivorous Birds and Identification of Priority 
Pollutants/Areas in Wetlands. Environ. Sci. Pollu. Res. 2016, 23, 11806–11813. 
Liu, J.; Liu, Y.J.; Liu, Y.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, A. N. Quantitative Contributions of the Major 
Sources of Heavy Metals in Soils to Ecosystem and Human Health Risks: A Case Study of 
Yulin, China. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2018, 164, 261–269. 
Meshram, P.; Pandey, B. D. Advanced Review on Extraction of Nickel from Primary and 
Secondary Sources. Mineral Proces. Extract. Metall. Rev. 2018. 
Mishra, S.; Maiti, A. The Efficiency of Eichhornia Crassipes in the Removal of Organic 
and Inorganic Pollutants from Wastewater: A Review. Environ. Sci. Pollu. Res. 2017, 24, 
7921–7937. 
Motevalli, A.; Naghibi, S.A.; Hashemi, H.; Berndtsson, R.; Pradhan, B.; Gholami, V. Inverse 
Method Using Boosted Regression Tree and k-Nearest Neighbor to Quantify Effects of 
Point and Non-Point Source Nitrate Pollution in Groundwater. J. Cleaner Prod. 2019, 228, 
1248–1263. 
Olukosi, O.A.; van Kuijk,S.; Han, Y. Copper and Zinc Sources and Levels of Zinc Inclusion 
Influence Growth Performance, Tissue Trace Mineral Content, and Carcass Yield of Broiler 
Chickens. Poultry Sci. 2018, 97, 3891–3898. 
Prasad, R. Mycoremediation and Environmental Sustainability; Springer, 2017. 
Quevedo, C.P.; Jiménez-Millán, J.; Cifuentes, G.R.; Jiménez-Espinosa, R. Electron Microscopy 
Evidence of Zn Bioauthigenic Sulfides Formation in Polluted Organic Matter-Rich Sediments 
from The Chicamocha River (Boyacá-Colombia). Minerals 2020, 10, 673. 
Rahmati, O.; Choubin, B.; Fathabadi, A.; Coulon, F.; Soltani, E.; Shahabi, H.; Mollaefar, E.; 
Tiefenbacher, J.; Cipullo, S.; Ahmad, B. B. Predicting Uncertainty of Machine Learning 
Models for Modelling Nitrate Pollution of Groundwater Using Quantile Regression and 
Uneec Methods. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 688, 855–866. 
Rehman, K.; Fatima, F.; Waheed, I.; Akash, M. S. H. Prevalence of Exposure of Heavy Metals 
and Their Impact on Health Consequences. J. Cell. Biochem. 2018, 119, 157–184. 
Salvo, A.; La Torre, G.L.; Mangano, V.; Casale, K.E.; Bartolomeo, G.; Santini, A.; Granata, 
T.; Dugo, A. Toxic Inorganic Pollutants in Foods from Agricultural Producing Areas of 
Southern Italy: Level and Risk Assessment. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2018, 148, 114–124. 
Sarma, V.; Krishna, M.; Srinivas, T. Sources of Organic Matter and Tracing of Nutrient 
Pollution in the Coastal Bay of Bengal. Marine Pollu. Bull. 2020, 159, 111477. 
Shortle, J.; Horan, R. D. Nutrient Pollution: A Wicked Challenge for Economic Instruments. 
Water Econ. Policy. 2017, 3, 1650033. 
Shrestha, P.; Bellitürk, K.; Görres, J. H. Phytoremediation of Heavy Metal-Contaminated 
Soil by Switchgrass: A Comparative Study Utilizing Different Composts and Coir Fiber 
on Pollution Remediation, Plant Productivity, and Nutrient Leaching. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Heal. 2019, 16, 1261. 
Steffan, J.; Brevik, E.; Burgess, L.; Cerdà, A. The Effect of Soil on Human Health: An 
Overview. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 2018, 69, 159–171. 
Sundseth, K.; Pacyna, J.M.; Pacyna, E.G.; Pirrone, N.; Thorne, R. J. Global Sources and 
Pathways of Mercury in the Context of Human Health. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Heal. 
2017, 14, 105. 
Tepanosyan, G.; Maghakyan, N.; Sahakyan, L.; Saghatelyan, A. Heavy Metals Pollution 
Levels and Children Health Risk Assessment of Yerevan Kindergartens Soils. Ecotoxicol. 
Environ. Saf. 2017, 142, 257–265.  
 
58 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Vieira, C.L.; Garshick, E.; Alvares, D.; Schwartz, J.; Huang, J.; Vokonas, P.; Gold, D.R.; 
Koutrakis, P. Association between Ambient Beta Particle Radioactivity and Lower 
Hemoglobin Concentrations in a Cohort of Elderly Men. Environ. Int. 2020, 139, 105735. 
Visconti, D.; Álvarez-Robles, M.J.; Fiorentino, N.; Fagnano, M.; Clemente, R. Use of Brassica 
Juncea and Dactylis Glomerata for the Phytostabilization of Mine Soils Amended with 
Compost or Biochar. Chemosphere 2020, 260, 127661. 
Wang, R.-Z.; Huang, D.-L.; Liu, Y.-G.; Zhang, C.; Lai, C.; Wang, X.; Zeng, G.-M.; Gong, X.-M.; 
Duan, A.; Zhang, Q. Recent Advances in Biochar-Based Catalysts: Properties, Applications 
and Mechanisms for Pollution Remediation. Chem. Engg. J. 2019, 371, 380–403. 
Wu, H.; Lai, C.; Zeng, G.; Liang, J.; Chen, J.; Xu, J.; Dai, J.; Li, X.; Liu, J.; Chen, M. The 
Interactions of Composting and Biochar and Their Implications for Soil Amendment and 
Pollution Remediation: A Review. Cri. Rev. Biotechnol. 2017, 37, 754–764. 
Xue, X.-Y.; Cheng, r.; Shi, l.; Ma, Z.; Zheng, X. Nanomaterials for Water Pollution Monitoring 
and Remediation. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2017, 15, 23–27. 
Yaqoob, A.A.; Khatoon, A.; Mohd Setapar, S.H.; Umar, K.; Parveen, T.; Mohamad Ibrahim, 
M.N.; Ahmad, A.; Rafatullah, M. Outlook on the Role of Microbial Fuel Cells in Remediation 
of Environmental Pollutants with Electricity Generation. Catalysts. 2020, 10, 819. 
Yuan, X.; Xue, N.; Han, Z. A Meta-Analysis of Heavy Metals Pollution in Farmland and 
Urban Soils in China over the Past 20 Years. J. Environ. Sci. 2021, 101, 217–226. 
Zhang, F.; Li, Y.-H.; Li, J.-Y.; Tang, Z.-R.; Xu, Y.-J. 3D Graphene-Based Gel Photocatalysts 
for Environmental Pollutants Degradation. Environ. Pollut. 2019, 253, 365–376. 
Zhang, L..; Qin, X..; Tang, J..; Liu, W..; Yang, W. Review of Arsenic Geochemical 
Characteristics and Its Significance on Arsenic Pollution Studies in Karst Groundwater, 
Southwest China. Appl. Geochem. 2017, 77, 80–88. 
Zhang, L..; Zhu, G..; Ge, X..; Xu, G..; Guan, Y. Novel Insights Into Heavy Metal Pollution of 
Farmland Based on Reactive Heavy Metals (RHMS): Pollution Characteristics, Predictive 
Models, and Quantitative Source Apportionment. J. Hazard. Mater. 2018, 360, 32–42. 
Zhu, X..; Chen, B..; Zhu, L..; Xing, B. Effects and Mechanisms of Biochar-Microbe Interactions 
in Soil Improvement and Pollution Remediation: A Review. Environ. Pollu. 2017, 227, 
98–115. PART II
 
Nanotechnology and Nanosensors
 BAMBANG KUSWANDI1* and MUHAMMAD AFTHONI2
1
Chemo and Biosensors Group, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Jember, 
Jl, Kalimantan 37, Jember 68121, Indonesia
2
Pharmacy Department, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Ma Chung University, Villa Puncak Tidar N-01 65151, Malang, Indonesia
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: b_kuswandi.farmasi@unej.ac.id
ABSTRACT
The integration between nanomaterials and sensor devices allows for a 
various number of nanosensor construction and applications, including 
monitoring of environmental pollutions. Nanosensor is a smart alternative 
to the classical analytical instrument that allows highly sensitive, selective, 
and online detection of environmental pollutants with simple or less prepara￾tion. This chapter describes technology advances in nanosensors that utilize 
electrochemical, optical, colorimetric, and magnetic properties to improve 
the sensor analytical performance for environmental pollutant detections. 
Gold nanoparticles, magnetic nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, quantum 
dots, etc., as nanomaterials have been actively investigated for nanosensor 
developments based on various transducer modes. The nanosensor tech￾nology will eventually create tiny sensing devices for rapid detection and 
screening of a wide range of environmental pollutants with high selectivity 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 3
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and 
Colorimetric Nanosensors as Tools to 
Detect Environmental Pollution62 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
and sensitivity at an affordable price that have become a smart analytical 
tool in environmental monitoring in the near future. 
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Environmental pollutions from human activities often cause a severe effect 
globally, and many pollutants are harmful to humans, animals, and plants 
(Appannagari, 2017). Especially for humans, pollution causes morbidity and 
mortality (Manisalidis et al., 2020). In 2015, it was predicted that 9 million 
premature deaths, and 16% of all deaths in the world were due to diseases 
associated with environmental pollutions (Landrigan et al., 2018). Pollution 
is classified as human-made pollution and natural pollution. Human-made 
pollution is caused by human activity, where human-made pollution can 
be a trigger for biological pollution, such as our flood, etc. On the other 
hand, environmental pollution can also be categorized as water pollution, 
air pollution, land pollution, food pollution, etc. While natural pollution is 
often caused by natural phenomena, such as flood, drought, earthquake, etc. 
(Appannagari, 2017). 
Air pollution is defined as the presence of chemical compounds in 
atmospheric air, with toxicity at a high concentration that may be hazardous 
to animal vegetation, human. Air pollution decreases the quality of air. 
Common gases causing air pollution include sulfur oxide (e.g., SO2), 
nitrogen oxide (e.g., NO, NO2), and carbon monoxide (CO). For human, SO2 
gase may damage skin. CO gas has higher affinity for hemoglobin compares 
with oxygen causing carboxyhemoglobin. In the case of environmental 
pollutants causing health problems, polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH), 
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) (Ukaogo et al., 2020), incomplete 
combustion of organic material, etc. had caused cancer (Zamora-León and 
Delgado-López, 2020). 
Water pollution is a critical global public policy issue. Sometimes, 
pollutants at levels that could harm human has caused drinking water 
pollution (Ewuzie et al., 2020). The parameter of quality water include 
turbidity, total suspended sediments (TSS), dissolved oxygen (DO), 
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), 
water temperature (WT), secchi disk depth (SDD), colored dissolved 
organic matters (CDOM), total phosphorus (TP), and sea surface salinity 
(SSS) (Gholizadeh et al., 2016). The effect of water pollutant can cause 
acute toxicity and genotoxicity for human (Bashar and Fung, 2020). Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 63 
Classically, the determination of environmental pollution was done 
using chromatography technique, such as gas chromatography (GC) for air 
pollution, thin-layer chromatography (TLC), and high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) for water pollution (Parihar et al., 2020). However, 
these analytical instruments required sample preparation, lengthy proce￾dures, relatively expensive, skilled personnel, and cannot be used in the field 
(Reis et al., 2009). Other approaches that have been developed currently 
are chemical sensors and biosensors employing nanomaterials that are often 
called nanosensors. 
A suitable nanosensor for analyzing the environmental pollution should 
be inexpensive, small, easy-to-operate, and portable that can be deployed 
in the field. During the last decades, nanosensors that can be employed in 
situ analysis have gained increasing concern in environmental pollution 
monitoring. In this chapter, we presented various nanosensors based on their 
transducers, such as electrochemical, optical, colorimetric, and magnetic/ 
acoustic, for the detection of environmental pollutants as target analytes. 
3.2 NANOSENSORS
Nanosensors measure physicochemical change and convert it to signals 
that proportional to the analyte detected. They are nanoscale sensors that 
are constructed to about 10 nm in dimension and can detect a few attogram 
scales of masses. Today, there are various approaches proposed to create 
nanosensors. These include bottom-up assembly, top-down lithography, 
and molecular self-assembly (Peng et al., 2009). They are created to imitate 
the natural nanomaterials, such as DNA, membranes, proteins, and other 
biomolecules that could detect physicochemical changes in a minute via 
various detection mechanisms (Kuswandi, 2019). 
Nanosensors are used in different nanomaterials that could enhance 
detection at a very low level of harmful contaminants in foods associated with 
environmental pollution that could occur during processing, distribution, or 
handling (Jianrong et al., 2004). Currently, nanosensors have widely been 
considered as analytical tools in various fields, such as medicine, agriculture, 
the food industry, and the environment (Akimov et al., 2008). Nanosensors 
share the same basic principle of sensor, that is, a selective reaction with 
an analyte, signal generation from the physicochemical reaction with the 
recognized element, and the signal processing into measurable quantities as 
shown in Figure 3.1. In pollutant detection, the recognized element contains 
a reagent or bioreagent that could detect the target analyte of pollutants from 64 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
environmental samples. In nanosensor development, nanomaterials are used 
in the recognition element reagent in order to enhance the sensor analytical 
performance, such as sensitivity, selectivity, etc. 
FIGURE 3.1 Mechanism principles of nanosensor. 
Nanosensors have advantages in terms of specificity and sensitivity 
compared with sensor-based bulk materials, since their nanoscale properties 
of nanomaterial are not present in classical materials (Sadik et al., 2009). 
Nanosensors could improve specificity because they work at a scale similar 
to biological processes, capable of functionalization with reagents and 
biomolecules, so that the recognition processes could be improved, which in 
turn, increasing detectable signal. Increasing in sensitivity due to nanomate￾rials have a high surface-to-volume ratio, as well as new physical features, 
such as nanophotonics or localized surface plasmon resonance. 
Nanosensors based on their applications can be classified into four 
classes, that is, chemical nanosensors, nanobiosensors, electrometers, and 
deployable nanosensors, as illustrated in Figure 3.2 (Agrawal and Prajapati, 
2012). Chemical nanosensor generally uses cantilevers and electronics 
with a capacitive signal to analyze the target analytes. This nanosensor 
is very sensitive to detect a target analyte as a single chemical species or 
biomolecule. Nanobiosensor is a biosensor based on nanomaterials which 
contains various types of biorecognition elements. Diverse kinds of nano￾biosensors are developed, such as enzyme biosensor, cell-based biosensor, 
immunosensors and DNA biosensors (Kuswandi, 2019). Electrometer is a Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 65 
mechanical electrometer in a nanometer scale that consists of a torsional 
resonator, a gate electrode, and a detection electrode that are employed 
to couple charge to the mechanical element. Deployable nanosensor is a 
chemical detection system that comprises a nanomaterial for sample collec￾tion and concentration with a microelectromechanical-based chemical lab￾on-a-chip detector. This nanodevice can be employed in homeland security 
that allows chemical agent detection in the air without human life risking 
by sending it up in the air. 
In the case of nanobiosensors, by using nanomaterials in the biosensor 
construction, some features, such as sensitivity, specificity, and rapid 
response are improved significantly (Jin et al., 2003). These features allow a 
wide range of the nanobiosensor applications in daily environmental moni￾toring activities, for example, raw materials inspection, on-line process 
control, storage conditions monitoring, etc. In addition, the nanobiosensors 
could allow cost-effective improvements in environmental detection and 
monitoring. 
FIGURE 3.2 The nanosensors classification based on their applications can be grouped into 
four classes of applications, that is, chemical nanosensors, nanobiosensors, electrometers, and 
deployable nanosensors. 
3.3 NANOSENSOR MATERIALS
Nanomaterials are important tools with physicochemical features that are 
specific because of their quantum-size phenomena when compared with 
traditional bulk materials (Willner and Vikesland, 2018). In addition, they 
also have very large surface area due to their nanosize (Buzea et al., 2007). 
For example, nanoporous carbon’s surface areas can reach up to 2000 sqm/g 66 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(Promphet et al., 2015). Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are content of unique 
variations of common graphite, with molecular tubes made up of hexago￾nally bonded sp2 carbon atoms structure, with dimensions in the range 
1–50 nm, that is, single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) or multiwalled 
carbon nanotube (MWCNT) (Mueller and Nowack, 2008). The surface area 
of SWCNT lies in the range of 400–900 sqm/g (Kurniawan et al., 2018). 
Zeolites, naturally occurring materials, have nanoscale pores, while anodic 
etching of monocrystalline silica using HF buffered with ethanol creates 
nanoporous silica. These nanomaterials have a high surface area-to-volume 
ratio (hundreds of sqm/cc) (Xiao and Li, 2008). 
The study of these different features allows the possibility to increase 
the sensitivity and selectivity of nanosensors. Interesting techniques have 
been developed on the improvement of electronic characteristics using 
metallic nanostructures (Agüí et al., 2008). These include the utilization 
of the nanostructured materials with specific shapes and dimensions, such 
as nanoparticles and quantum dots (0D), carbon nanotubes and nanowires 
(1D), and graphene sheets or metallic platelets (2D) orientations that show 
their features. Table 3.1 describes the different structure of nanomaterials 
based on their sizes, shapes, dimensions, and their applications. These 
nanomaterials provide increasing sensitivities in nanosensor, since their 
high surface-to-volume ratios that allow target analyte molecules to bond 
significantly that affect the bulk electrical characteristics of the structure. 
Because of their nanosize, they may be taken up by cells (Soares et al., 
2018), and thus these nanomaterials are promising candidates for in vivo 
sensing applications. In many cases, the nanosensors with inherent elec￾trical features such as CNTs are particularly excellent and allow to improve 
the sensitivity of detection by themselves. Several sensing platforms have 
been constructed with nanomaterials that extremely change in sensor signal 
output (Jain, 2003). 
In the nanobiosensor technology, one of the most important advances 
has led to the employment of various nanoparticles, such as metal nanopar￾ticles (He et al., 2008), carbon materials (Tortorich et al., 2018), quantum 
dots (Keçili and Hussain, 2018), oxide nanoparticles (Bhateria and Singh, 
2019), and magnetic nanomaterials (Haun et al., 2010). These are employed 
to improve the electrochemical signals of biocatalytic reactions that occur 
at the electrode/electrolyte interface. In addition, functional nanomaterials 
that are bound to biomolecules, such as proteins, nucleic acids, antibodies, 
aptamer etc., have been designed to detect and amplify transducer signals in 
nanobiosensor systems (Kuswandi, 2019). TABLE 3.1 Structure of Nanomaterials Based on Their Size, Shape, Dimensions, and Their 
Applications. 
Dimension Direction of Example Shape Application 
confinement
0D x, y, z Nanoparticles Photocatalytic activity 
1D x, y Rods, Wires, Tubes Wave guides 
2D x Nanofilms Components for PC, mobile 
Nanocoatings phone 
3D Nil Nanocomposite 
Bulk 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 67 
In the last decade, the use of nanomaterials, such as nanoparticles, 
nanowire, nanotube, nanoneedle, nanosheet, nanocomposites, nanorod, 
and nanobelt, for nanosensor constructions have seen increased growth 
and development. Nanoparticles with surface modifications, such as gold 
nanoparticles (AuNPs), silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), Quantum dots (QDs), 
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), and CNTs can have specific target-binding 
features that provide high selectivity and sensitivity toward pollutants as 
target analytes. Various types of nanoparticles show different optical, fluo￾rescence, and magnetic features, and interactions between these features 
allow nanoparticles as a great promising candidate for pollutants detection 
as given in Figure 3.3 (Peng et al., 2009). 
Table 3.2 describes the main types of nanomaterials that have been used 
for more improvement in the sensing mechanisms in nanosensor technology, 
either using a top-down or bottom-up approach (Kuswandi, 2019). Table 3.2 
highlights the advantage features of several nanomaterials used and some 
examples of applications (shown by corresponding references). The details 
of various nanobiosensors reported by the use of various nanomaterials, 
especially toward environmental pollutants, are discussed in the applications 
section, such as heavy metal ions, organic contaminants, and others. 
MNPs made up of iron and its oxides have been employed for specific 
and excellent magnetism detection events and interactions, such as magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and other magnetism detection techniques. These 
MNPs can be incorporated with fluorescent molecules or can be created 
to deliver specific responses by coupling with externally applied magnetic 
fields. Similarly, nanostructures-based zinc and zinc oxide have been exten￾sively employed for biochemical phenomenon detection to be a more precise 
and sensitive scheme. These magnetic nanosensors have been used in the FIGURE 3.3 A schematic features of AuNPs/GNPs, QDs, and MNPs for nanosensor 
applications toward environmental pollutants. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Peng et al., 2009. © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
68 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
optimized detection of organic pollutants and other target analytes (Koh and 
Josephson, 2009). Similarly, CNTs have also been employed and optimized 
to detect the biosensing processes that allow for rapid and sensitive detec￾tion, since much better interactions between the target analyte and the biore￾ceptor molecule have occurred. CNTs-based biosensors have been actively 
employed in body fluids, such as for glucose (Yogeswaran and Chen, 2008) 
and insulin detections (Qu et al., 2006). In addition, their application for 
pollutants detection have been reported in the literature (Badihi-Mossberg et 
al., 2007; Hussain and Keçili, 2020). 
3.4 SENSING TYPES
A nanosensor generally consists of recognition elements that can be referred 
to as chemical or biochemical recognition elements or receptors attached to 
the transducer. The receptor interaction toward the target analyte is designed 
to create physicochemical events that can be converted proportionally 
into a quantifiable and processable signal, such as an electrical, optical, or TABLE 3.2 Some Examples of Nanomaterials Used for Nanosensor Technology. 
No. Nanomaterial type Advantages References 
1 Nanoparticles	 Possess good catalytic properties, aid Luo et al. (2006) 
in immobilization, and better loading of 
biomolecule as target analyte, 
2 Nanowires	 Good electrical and sensing features Pal et al. (2007) 
for biochemical sensing, better charge 
conduction, and high versatility 
3 Nanorods	 Can be coupled with MEMS, good Sawant and 
plasmonic materials for coupling with Sawant (2020) 
sensing phenomenon and size-tunable energy 
regulation, and induce specific field responses 
4 Carbon nanotubes	 Higher aspect ratios, better electrical Pumera et al. 
transducer, ability to be functionalized, and (2007) 
improved enzyme loading 
5 Quantum dots	 Excellent in fluorescence, including Huang et al. 
size-tunable band energy and quantum (2005) 
confinement of charge carriers 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 69 
magnetic signal (Agrawal and Prajapati, 2012). In this regard, nanosensors 
are new generations of sensor types that allow sensing or detection of various 
target analytes, such as chemicals species, compounds, or microorganisms at 
absolute low levels with rapid response and high accuracy (Asmatulu and 
Khan, 2019). 
Nanosensors are classified on the basis of recognition element types or the 
mode of physicochemical transduction. Therefore, the type of nanosensors 
depend on the system of transducer mechanism, such as electrochemical, 
optical, colorimetric, and magnetic. Thus, nanosensor can be classified as 
electrochemical nanosensor, optical nanosensor, colorimetric nanosensor, 
and magnetic nanosensor (Agrawal and Prajapati, 2012) that are discussed 
in this chapter. 
3.4.1 ELECTROCHEMICAL TECHNIQUES
In classical interfacial electrochemical techniques, these techniques can 
be classified into different subtypes on the basis of signal types, such as 
potentiometry, amperometry, voltammetry, and colorimetry, as given in 
Figure 3.4. This electrochemical reaction occurs between electrode and 
target analyte that measures in terms of the transduced signal, for example, 70 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
a potential or current (Sabahudin Hrapovic et al., 2003). This signal is quan￾tified directly and is proportional to the concentration of the target analyte 
in the sample. Therefore, in electrochemical nanosensor, the integration 
of recognition elements employing nanomaterials with electrochemical 
transducer occurs, other developing technique such as electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy is also involved. Numerous electrochemical 
sensing devices, such as amperometric, voltammetric, conductometric, and 
electrochemical luminescence are employed in electrochemical nanosen￾sors (Zhu et al., 2015). 
FIGURE 3.4 Schematic diagram of classical interfacial electrochemical techniques. 
In the electrochemical sensing mechanism, the chemical reaction takes 
place in which electron moves between two electrodes in an electrochemical 
cell containing an analyte. This reaction is called oxidation–reduction reaction 
(redox). The electrons flow between the two atoms in the redox reaction 
produce an electrical signal. Here on one side, electrons keep moving into 
the electrode, and on the other side, it is moving out of the electrode. The Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 71 
electrochemical nanosensors utilized in the detection of pollutants as target 
analytes have been used for heavy metals, textile dye compounds, pesticides, 
and herbicides detections (Hussain and Keçili, 2020) 
Nanotechnology has great potential to increase selectivity and sensitivity 
in electrochemical sensor development as it synergies the catalytic activity 
effects among biocompatibility and conductivity to enhance the transducer 
amplification and read-out signal (Zhu et al., 2015). The voltammetric sensor 
is a versatile electroanalytical approach for the determination of pollutant 
substances. The mechanism of the voltammetric sensor measurement is 
based on a potential waveform function that was applied to the electrode. 
This method was successfully determined for various pollutants, such as 
herbicide, heavy metal, a pharmaceutical compound, etc. (Kuswandi, 2019). 
The amperometric sensor is a specific electrochemical technique involving 
oxidized or reduced reaction (redox reactions) of certain chemical species as 
target analytes are driven at a constant applied potential on the inert metal 
electrodes. The target analytes are called electroactive species. Generally, 
an amperometric cell consists of two or three electrodes, that is, a working 
electrode, a counter electrode, and a reference electrode. In this cell type, 
a metal, such as platinum or gold, is usually used as the working electrode, 
where it works as the recognition element in amperometric nanosensor 
(D’Orazio, 2003). 
A conductometric sensor measures the current produced through the two 
electrodes in a conductometric cell. This sensor detects and measures the 
resistance changes so that the target analyte is allowed to restrict the charge 
that flows through it. Generally, in an electrochemical setup, a target analyte 
allows the current to pass through between two electrodes, that is, working 
and reference electrodes. Since the target analyte has high conductance and 
low resistance, it will enable more current to flow through, and the other way 
around, due to the presence of two electrodes the analyte restricts the flow of 
charge differently (Riordan and Barry, 2016). 
Besides interfacial electrochemical techniques, solid-state electrochemical 
approaches are also employed in electrochemical nanosensors, such as field￾effect transistors (FETs), as the first developed nanosensor of this type. These 
FETs have tunable characteristics and can be associated with the simple and 
quantitative detection system. They are using rod-shaped nanomaterials, 
such as nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, nanoribbons, and nanotowers. In 
the case of pollutants as targeted analytes, the targeted analytes cling to the 
FET active area and this causes the impedance change and creates a signal 
(Kuila et al., 2011). Nanomaterial based on this shape provides enhanced 
sensitivity and current flow active area compared with the activities of other 72 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
nanoscale morphologies on the detector surface. In this case, the nanomaterial 
that is most commonly employed is silicon nanowires, since they have high 
sensitivity and are simple to be chemically modified or functionalized on 
their surface (Peng et al. 2009). 
Nanowires, for the first time, were used in the solid-state-based nanosensor 
system for sensitive and direct detection of chemical and the biochemical 
analyte in solution (Cui et al., 2001). This shows that electronic solid-state 
sensors using nanowire could detect 10 pM concentrations of a macromolecule, 
while further improvement to reach the detection limit of fM is also possible. In 
addition, nanosensors can be constructed and optimized for organic pollutant 
detection based on their conformational change. Here, the sensor sensitivity 
depends on the electrical resistance that originates from the silicon nanowire 
tips, producing quicker transfer of electron on the tip, compared with the 
sidewall. The nanosensor mechanism is based on permittivity and electrical 
resistance modification on the surface of the nanomaterials resulting from the 
attachment of the macromolecule as a target analyte. 
In addition, graphene and its derivatives are another popular nanomaterials 
for a solid-state electrical nanosensor. Graphene oxide was utilized for the low 
detection of hydrogen peroxide in a composite with horseradish peroxidase 
(HRP) and DNA (Zhang et al., 2010). Here, the composite was prepared on a 
glassy carbon electrode surface where the HRP reduces hydrogen peroxide, 
while the graphene oxide and DNA stabilize the HRP in order to allow trans￾port of electrons to the electrode. By using this construction, this nanosensor 
was able to detect a low concentration of hydrogen peroxide (below 1 mM). 
3.4.2 OPTICAL
Commonly, an optical nanosensor consists a recognition element where 
nanomaterials employed could react to the desired target pollutants, and 
a transducer element is used for signaling the interacting event with the 
target analyte. Here, the recognition elements, such as enzyme, antibody, 
DNA, aptamer, molecularly-imprinted polymers, and host-guest recognizer, 
attract more attention of many researchers to enhance the sensor’s analytical 
performance. The optical nanosensor produces a facile, rapid, and low-cost 
approach for sensitive and selective detection of pollutants. In direct 
optical nanosensors the analytes are detected directly via some intrinsic 
optical properties which include absorption or luminescence as applied in 
conventional optical sensors. Figure 3.5 shows various signaling for optical 
sensors (Yan et al., 2018) that are also employed in optical nanosensor. Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 73 
FIGURE 3.5 Classification of optical nanosensor. 
Source: Adapted from McDonagh et al. (2008). 
Fiber optic nanosensor contains an optoelectric component such as LED, 
LD, photovoltaic cell, etc. Optoelectronic components produce light that 
travels through optical fiber, after that the light passes through modulating 
element that is measurand, then the light enters in the detector for signal 
processing and finally produces read out. The optical fiber consists of the core 
and cladding which have a different refractive index (Yadav and Srivastava, 
2018). Some of the optical fiber nanosensor head probes consist a nanometer￾size Fizeau interferometer doped with the vapochromic material, created 
onto the cleaved end of a multimode fiber optic pigtail (Cabanillas-Galán et 
al., 2008). The optical fiber nanosensor function is working using the bright 
red powders of the vapochromic material [Au2Ag2(C6F5)4(C6H5N)2]. 
Here, the vapocromic material changes in its optical characteristics, for 
example, color or refractive index upon exposure to organic vapors, such as 
air pollutants. The original optical signal recovery is reached as the analyte 
vapors are disappeared. 
An inactive and bioacceptable matrix has been used as a sensing element 
and an optical reporter in the fluorescence nanosensor developments (Chen 
et al., 2013). The sensing element of these nanosensors is a fluorophore, a 
material that emits fluorescence, which is selective and sensitive to the target 74 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
analyte such as pollutant. Several fluorescence nanosensors employing a 
polyacrylamide matrix have been developed to target analytes such as zinc 
(Sumner et al., 2002). Here, microemulsion polymerization techniques are 
used to prepare uniform sized nanoparticles. 
The organic polymerase silica sol–gels have been used as another 
important matrix in optical nanosensors. They are optically transparent, 
photostable, porous, high purity, thermally stable, and chemically inert 
material. For example, an oxygen-sensitive ratiometric sol–gel nanosensor 
has been developed by employing the probes encapsulated using biologically 
localized embedding (Xu et al., 2001). Here, the quenching of luminescence 
byoxygen has been used as the sensing mechanism in the sol–gel nanosensor 
response, it is determined from the ratio of fluorescence intensities 
([Ru(dpp)3]2+/Oregon Green 488-dextran). This nanosensor approach was 
further developed as ion-selective optode based on fluorescent indicator dyes 
for adequate sensitivity or selectivity to detect ionic species concentrations of 
the target analyte (Chan et al., 2001; Kuswandi et al., 2007). Here, an optical 
ionophore with a flanking optically visible agent acted as a reporter dye was 
developed for a high degree of selectivity for the particular target analyte. 
As one of the most commonly used sensing candidates, fluorescence-based 
nanosensors have been widely used in a broad range of applications (Yan et 
al., 2018). In fluorescence-based nanosensors, a spectrofluorophotometer is 
used for the analyte detection or the analyte is detected by the naked eye. 
This sensor has been employed for the signal change collection via on-site in 
field applications (Paterson and De La Rica, 2015). 
The basic principle of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) nanosensor 
construction layers rely on a strong electromagnetic field oscillation 
resonance, where the resonance is created at the interface between nanometal 
film and p-polarized incident light of a dielectric medium. These phenomena 
are creating a dark band profile in the light reflectivity at an incident angle 
and a specific wavelength. Revolutionary research on the blue LED based on 
III-V compound semiconductor construction allows the LED devices to emit 
all primary colors (RGB, red, green, and blue) (Prabowo et al., 2018). 
In nanosensor type, besides normal SPR, many nanosensors are 
working based on localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) function via 
variations in transducing of local refractive index of the LSPR extinction 
band maximum by wavelength modifications. Here, the extinction band is 
a direct excitation effect of the LSPR. For instance, LSPR nanosensors for 
Concanavalin A, a carbohydrate-binding protein, where the LSPR spectrum 
of the mannose-functionalized Ag nanosensor had an λmax of 662.4 nm 
(Yonzon et al., 2005). Here, Concanavalin A (19.8 μM) was introduced into Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 75 
the flow cell and later followed by complete binding of the Ag nanosensor 
incubated at room temperature for 20 min. Then, the sample was rinsed in 
buffer solution and followed by a 6.7 nm red-shift of the LSPR λmax, where 
in this case, the LSPR λmax of silver nanotriangles was found at 669.1 nm. 
Besides LSPR, in optical nanosensors, Raman spectroscopy is often 
used. This type of optical nanosensor is based on a vibrational spectroscopic 
approach. This nanosensor allows discriminating between molecules with 
close resemblance, for example, glucose and fructose, as the structural isomers. 
Here, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) has been employed for 
rapid detection of Bacillus subtilis spores as a biological contaminant and as 
a harmless simulant for B. anthracis (Yonzon et al., 2005). 
3.4.3 COLORIMETRIC
Colorimetric nanosensor is another type of optical nanosensor that works 
via a colorimetric basis or color change. Here, a chemical reaction or 
physicochemical change in the presence of the target analyte causes a color 
change to occur that can be detected optically or via naked eye. In the case 
of colorimetric nanosensor applications, AuNPs are employed for the detec￾tion of environmental pollutants, for example, heavy metals (Willner and 
Vikesland, 2018; Ullah et al., 2018; Kuswandi, 2019), in this case, a color 
change indicates the presence of heavy metals. 
The development of colorimetric nanosensors have been increased in the 
last decades, these nanosensors are versatile, low cost, and can be printed 
on paper surfaces. In addition, the main advantages of these nanosensors 
include the color changes can be detected by naked eye or color changes 
could be measured easily using cameras, smartphones, scanner or other 
image capturing systems (Chen et al., 2014; Hidayat et al., 2019). Classically, 
the most common approaches to colorimetric nanosensors were proposed by 
(1) linking a chromophore with a receptor element based on nanomaterial by 
means of a covalent bond, (2) the use of competition assays between a dye 
bonded to a receptor and a certain analyte, and (3) the use of new molecular 
systems-based nanomaterials that undergo guest-induced chemical reactions 
coupled to a color change. Therefore, the integration of nanomaterials in the 
sensing systems has allowed to explore novel properties such as localized 
surface plasmon resonance. These colorimetric approaches include incor￾porating nanomaterials in the recognition moiety as hybrid supramolecular 
chemistry, in the signaling group, such as AuNPs and QDs, or as vehicles 
for more complex events, such as aggregation/agglomeration processes, etc. 76 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
The most common nanoparticles used in the colorimetric method is 
AuNPs, since AuNPs-based colorimetric approach is a powerful assay for the 
colorimetric detection using naked eye detection for various target analytes, 
including pollutants, since the molar extinction coefficient are high (Cao et 
al., 2011). The AuNPs–LSPR is highly susceptible to their particle size and 
aggregation degree. When the target analyte is present, the color change occurs 
due to a change in the wavelength of AuNPs surface plasmon resonance as a 
result of dispersion change to the aggregation of AuNPs or the disassembly of 
aggregated AuNPs, as depicted in Figure 3.6 (Chen et al., 2018). Based on the 
aggregation and anti-aggregation strategies as the sensing mechanism toward 
analyte, colorimetric nanosensors based on AuNPs have been developed for 
pollutants detection, such as pesticides, where these colorimetric nanosensors 
have advantages, such as simple, rapid, user-friendly, low cost, and easily 
detected by naked eyes (Tseng et al., 2020). 
Many harmful gases as air pollutants could be detected by a color change 
such as by using the commercially available Dräger Tube. This portable 
device provides an alternative to the bulky and lab-scale systems since the 
device can be miniaturized to be employed for point-of-sample devices in 
field applications. For instance, many chemical pollutants are regulated by 
the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), they need extensive monitoring 
to assay that the pollutant levels are within the allowed limits. In this case, 
the colorimetric nanosensors allow a tool for on-site and on-line monitoring 
of many environmental pollutants (El-Safty et al., 2008; Ullah et al., 2018; 
Kuswandi, 2019). 
3.4.4 MAGNETIC NANOSENSORS
Magnetic nanosensors are based on the binding of MNPs to a sensor surface, 
where the nanoparticle magnetic fields alter the magnetic fields of the 
sensor, resulting in electrical current changes within the sensor, as shown 
in Figure 3.7. The mechanisms of magnetic nanosensor, where magnetic 
nanoparticles attach to the sensor surface, can be classified as direct labeling 
and indirect labeling. Direct labeling means that magnetic probes bind 
functionality to the sensor surface directly, while indirect labeling uses 
the principle of the sandwich mode. Magnetic nanosensors are employed 
via applications of labeled supports to the nanosensors, inserted inside the 
transducers. The MNPs are distributed into the material by attracting them 
using an external magnetic field on the sensor active surface (Slimani and 
Hannachi, 2020). However, MNPs labeled with different sensing mechanisms FIGURE 3.6 Commonly used sensing strategies in the colorimetric nanosensor based on 
AuNPs. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Hai Chen et al. (2018). © 2018 Elsevier. 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 77 
and instrumentations can be categorized as magnetoresistive nanosensors 
and magnetic relaxation switches. 78 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
FIGURE 3.7 Schematic diagram of magnetic nanosensor. 
Magnetic relaxation switches made from iron oxide and polymeric 
coating as marker agents were proven to be magnetic resonance agents and 
are widely used for various target molecules as analytes. When used as a 
targeted marker, surface-modified nanoparticles bind specifically to the target 
molecules that produce local inhomogeneities in the applied magnetic field 
in tissues where molecular targets are present. Thus, these inhomogeneities 
were causing decreases or increases in the relaxation time, which in turn 
leads to changes in the contrast of magnetic resonance images in response to 
the target analyte. 
Magnetic nanosensors used magnetic nanoparticles, such as iron nanopar￾ticles, cobalt nanoparticles, and many other elemental nanoparticles that have 
ferromagnetic properties. Magnetic nanosensors were developed to detect 
molecular interactions in aqueous solution. Based on target binding. these 
nanosensors allow changes in their spin-spin relaxation times of neighboring 
water molecules, which can be detected by magnetic resonance techniques, 
such as magnetic resonance imaging or nuclear magnetic resonance (Perez 
et al., 2004; Koh and Josephson, 2009). Magnetic nanosensors have been 
applied to many target analytes, that is, (1) DNA detection, (2) specific 
protein detection in solution via antibody-mediated interactions, (3) many 
enzymatic activities detection, such as proteases, methylases, and restric￾tion endonucleases, And (4) a more complex target detection such as viral 
particles. (Perez et al., 2004). 
3.5 APPLICATIONS
3.5.1 HEAVY METAL POLLUTANTS
Heavy metal means any metallic element that possess high density, and 
even in trace concentration, it can be toxic for plants and animals (Rascio 
and Navari-Izzo, 2011). Furthermore, heavy metals, such as mercury (Hg), Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 79 
arsenic (As), copper (Cu), cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr), lead (Pb), nickel 
(Ni), and zinc (Zn) are mostly found as pollutant in the environmental 
samples (Li et al., 2019), the toxicity of heavy metals, such as mercury cause 
blindness, deafness, attention deficit, ataxia, and decrease the rate of fertility 
(Ayangbenro and Babalola, 2017). Minamata disease is one of the diseases 
caused by mercury, and also the mercury neurological syndrome is caused 
by methylmercury contamination. Clinical symptoms for Minamata disease 
include sensory disturbance in the distal extremities, ataxia, impairment of 
gait, loss of balance, speech and hearing, concentric constriction of the visual 
fields, muscle weakness, tremor, and nystagmus (Semionov, 2018). There￾fore, the determination of heavy metal as environmental pollutant is critical 
for investigating and preventive risk of heavy metal pollution, especially for 
a human. Tabel 3.3 shows some examples of nanosensor applications for the 
determination of heavy metal as environmental pollutant. 
Besides chemical nanosensors, as given in Table 3.1, various nanoma￾terials have been employed and integrated as nanosensors to improve their 
sensitivity and specificity to certain metal detection, for example, heavy 
metals. The nanomaterials that have been used are MWCNTs (Keçili and 
Hussain 2018; Jianrong et al., 2004), gold nanoparticles (Zhang et al. 2014; 
Vijitvarasan et al., 2015), silver nanoparticles (Roto et al., 2019; Chatterjee et 
al., 2009), silica mesoporous/nanospheres (Zhai et al., 2012), and graphene 
oxide (Promphet et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2015). Therefore, in this section, the 
nanosensors for heavy metal ions are presented. 
MWCNT, modified with 2-amino thiophenol has been developed to 
detect Pb(II) ion in water samples using a potentiometric approach (Guo et 
al., n.d.). The MWCNT nanosensor functionalized with aminothiophemol 
showed excellent analytical performance for Pb(I) due to their strong 
covalent bond between the carbonyl group of MWCNTs and the amino 
group of aminothiophenol to create the solid framework binding with 
Pb(II). In another study, an electrochemical nanosensor for the detection of 
Pb(II), Hg(II), and Cd(II) ions has been developed based on the MWCNT 
functionalized with triphenylphosphine (Bagheri et al., 2013). Here, the 
carbon screen-printed electrode (CSPE)-on the MWCNT modified with 
phosphorus group of triphenylphosphine monolayer binds to the heavy 
metal ions. In this case, the nanosensor was successfully employed to 
detect trace metals with a low detection limit at the sub-pM level. A glassy 
carbon electrode modified with bismuth film/carboxylic acid-functionalized 
MWCNT-β-cyclodextrin-Nafion nanocomposite (Bi/CMWCNTs-β-CD￾Nafion/GCE) has been developed for the low detection of Pb(II) and Cd(II) 
ions (Zhao et al., 2016). This nanosensor has been successful for detecting TABLE 3.3 Some Examples of Nanosensor Applications for Heavy Metal Ions Detection.
Analyte Nanomaterial Type of nanosensor Limit of detection References 
Cu2+ Carbon dots-based dual-emission silica nanoparticles Optical nanosensor 35.2 nM Liu et al. (2014) 
Hg2+ Dithizone nanoloaded membrane Optical nanoensor 0.057 ppb Danwittayakul et al. (2008)
Pd2+ Carbon nanoparticle probes (CNPs) Optical nanosensor 58 nM Sharma et al. (2016)
Hg2+ 100 nM 
Hg2+ Eu(III)-pyridine-2,4,6-tricarboxylic acid (PTA) on mobil Optical nanosensor 1×10−6 M Zhai et al. (2012)
composition of matter No. 41 (Eu(PTA)@MCM-41) 
Co2+ Mesoporous silica monoliths nanoparticle on Optical nanosensor 0.24 ppb Shahat et al. (2015)
N,N`di(3carboxysalicylidene)-3,4diamino￾5- hydroxypyrazole (MSNPs@DSDH)
Cu2+ β-cyclodextrin-modified Iron (II,III) oxide on silica oxide Magnetic nanosensor 5.99 × 10-6 M Zhang et al. (2015)
(Fe3O4@SiO2_ 
Mn2+ Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) modified with polyacrylic Magnetic nanosensor 0.06 µg/L Lee et al. (2009)
Co2+ acid (MNPs- PAA) 0.04 µg/L
Cu2+ 0.6 µg/L
Zn2+ 0.6 µg/L
Pb2+ 0.06 µg/L 
Fe3+ L-cysteine (L-Cys) capped Fe3O4@ZnO core-shell Magnetic nanosensor 3 nmol/L Li et al. (2016)
nanoparticles (Fe3O4@ ZnO@L-Cys) 
Hg2+ Carbon paste electrode modified with substituted thiourea- Electrochemical 7.0 × 10−8 M Javanbakht et al. (2009)
functionalized highly ordered nanoporous silica nanosensor 
As3+ Sodium 3-mercapto-1-propanesulfonate capped gold Electrochemical 0.48 µM Ottakam Thotiyl et al. 
nanoparticles with two different cationic polyelectrolytes, nanosensor (2012) 
the poly (diallyldimethylammonium chloride)
(Au/MPS-(PDDA- AuNPs) 
80 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination TABLE 3.3 (Continued) 
Analyte Nanomaterial Type of nanosensor Limit of detection References 
Hg2+ Carbon paste electrode modified with natural smectite- Electrochemical 60 nm Tonle et al. (2005) 
type clays grafted nanosensor 
Cd2+ Mesporous mangan cobalt spinel oxide nanoparticles Electrochemical 37.02 nmol/dm Antunović et al. (2019)
(MnCo2O4 NPs) nanosensor Pb2 8.063 nmol/dm 
81 Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 82 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
trace levels of Pb(II) and Cd(II) ions in soil samples with excellent recovery 
that gives a high potential for its use in environmental pollutants detection. 
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been widely used for Hg(II) ion detec￾tion in water sample via simple optical nanosensor based on colorimetry 
approach (Li et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2014; Hongming 
Chen et al., 2015) with the detection level from nM to sub-nM level. This 
detection limit was much lower compared with the WHO detection limit 
for Hg(II) in a real water sample (Ding et al., 2012). The nanosensor colo￾rimetric response was associated with the color change (commonly from 
ruby red to royal purple) of the AuNPs solution as a result of the AuNPs 
aggregation when Hg(II) was absent. When the Hg(II) ions present, the color 
of AuNPs solution could have appeared. In addition, AuNPs can also be used 
with electrochemical nanosensors for the determination of Pb(II) and Cu(II) 
ions (Wan et al., 2015). Here, AuNPs modified screen-printed electrode was 
developed for this purpose, where they have a good detection limit at ppb 
level for Pb(II) and Cu(II) ions. 
Another electrochemical nanosensor using graphene oxide–glassy carbon 
electrode with a monolayer of AuNPs functionalized with the chitosan was 
developed successfully for rapid and specific detection of Hg(II) (Gong et 
al., 2010). Here, the nanosensor employing square wave anodic stripping 
voltammetry with a very low detection limit for Hg(II) ions (<1 ppb). Further￾more, the urine sample has also been used as functional groups in AuNPs as 
recognition elements of nanosensing for Hg(II) ions. Here, in urine sample, 
the creatinine and uric acid can bind synergistically to AuNPs as well as can 
adsorb Hg(II) ions selectively. In this case, a low detection limit of Hg(II) 
ion (50 nM) was achieved with the low-cost nanosensor fabrication based 
on AuNPs (Du et al., 2013). It has been proved that by using agglomera￾tion of AuNPs (20 nm chitosan-capped AuNPs), metal ions, that is, Zn(II) 
and Cu(II) can also be detected based on the suspension color change in 
the presence of these metal ions (Sugunan et al., 2005). So far, chitosan is 
a commonly known heavy metal chelating agent. In the case of Zn(II) and 
Cu(II), their presence is detected by the resulting loose agglomeration and 
colloidal instability of AuNPs. These effects result in a rapid change in color 
which is directly associated with the heavy metal ion concentration. Pb(II) 
ions have also been detected based on an aggregation–dissociation procedure 
using the DNAzyme-directed assembly of AuNPs. Here DNAzyme-directed 
assembly of AuNPs cleaves in the presence of Pb(II). In this approach, the 
color change results in a blue to red color change (Fig. 3.8) with a tunable 
detection limit of 100 nM–200 μM (Liu and Lu, 2003). Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 83 
FIGURE 3.8 DNAzyme-directed assembly formation and cleavage of gold nanoparticles in 
a Pb+
 colorimetric nanosensor.
 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Liu and Lu (2003). © 2003 American Chemical Society.
 
Besides AuNPs, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have also been employed 
for optical nanosensor development for detecting Hg(II), Pb(II), and Cr(VI) 
metal ions in water samples (Vinod Kumar and Anthony, 2014; Farhadi et 
al., 2012; Ravindran et al., 2012). For example, citrate ion-coated AgNPs 
have been developed as an optical nanosensor for a low detection limit of 
Cr(VI) ion (nM) (Ravindran et al., 2012). The graphene oxide-modified 
carbon/gold screen-printed electrode has been developed for the detection 
of heavy metals, such as Pb(II) and Cu(II) (Promphet et al., 2015; Wei et 
al., 2012). In this case, the nanosensor is a simple and rapid analytical tool 
that demonstrated a wide linear response range with a low detection limit 
(<10 nM). In addition, the tin oxide (SnO2) modified with graphene–glassy 
carbon electrode has also been designed as an integrated heavy metal sensing 
platform (Wei et al., 2012). 
Other strategies have been proposed to develop on-field colorimetric 
devices for the detection of heavy metal ions based on functionalized AuNPs 
that can also be applied for field applications. Some works on colorimetric 
nanosensors developed the smart phone-coupled systems that make the 
devices very small, compact, and user-friendly as well as preventing the 
need of bulky UV-Vis spectrophotometers. For instance, a portable device 
has been constructed for Hg(II) ions detection in water samples employing 
a smartphone for direct colorimetric data collection and analysis (Wei et al., 
2014). The device inn this approach employs LEDs (green and red) to analyze 
the change in color of the solution. Then, the colorimetric nanosensor system 
automatically calculates Hg(II) ion concentration by a customized app. This 
nanosensor has been utilized for preparing contamination map of Hg(II) FIGURE 3.9 Schematic digram shows the heavy metal ion sensing based on the paper-based 
colorimetric nanosensor. 
Source: Adapted from Chen et al. (2014). 
84 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
ions by analyzing samples collected from over 50 locations in California. 
Furthermore, another work, a paper-based nanosensor, has been developed 
for contamination detection of Hg(II) ions in real water samples (Chen et 
al., 2014). They fabricated the sensor array based paper by using a printer, 
then read and analyze it by a smart phone with a customized app. (Fig. 3.9). 
They involved cloud computing, where the detection limit of Hg(II) ions was 
achieved at 50 nM. 
3.5.2 ORGANIC POLLUTANTS
The organic pollutants that are commonly found in the water environment 
are pesticides, detergents, organic solvents, hydrocarbons, etc. For example, 
pesticides. Many of the nanobiosensor approaches designed for pesticide 
detection are based on the biocatalytic action of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) 
(Kuswandi, 2019). Generally, pesticides (both organophosphates and 
carbamates) are attached to a serine moiety within the enzyme active site 
and thus avoide the deacetylation of acetylcholine (Kuswandi et al., 2008). 
The disadvantages with this method are that other compounds, that is, heavy 
metals, detergents, and other pollutants as inhibitors, could also inhibit the 
enzyme active site and they make the enzyme unstable outside its natural 
environment (Nagatani et al., 2007; Kuswandi and Mascini, 2005). FIGURE 3.10 The Au/MBT/PANI/AChE/PVAc biosensor sensing scheme shows reaction 
at the gold SAM modified electrode. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Somerset et al. (2009). © 2009 Taylor & Francis. 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 85 
An amperometric biosensor using AuNPs and MWCNTs have been 
developed in AChE-based nanobiosensor to promote electron transfer and 
catalyze the thiocholine electrooxidation for the detection of monocrotophos 
(LOD 10 nM) (Norouzi et al., 2010). In this amperometric method, the 
flow-system has used glassy carbon electrodes modified with AuNPs and 
MWCNTs. The CNTs impregnated chitosan to improve the immobilization 
level and to increase the AChE stability. In other work, the amperometric 
biosensor has been developed using polyaniline (PANI) film as a mediator. 
(Somerset et al., 2007; Somerset et al., 2009). Here, the amperometric nano￾biosensor was designed to employ its dual role as immobilization matrix 
for AChE and was allowed to utilize its electrocatalytic activity toward 
thiocholine (TCh). The biosensing mechanism for the Au/MBT/PANI/ 
AChE/PVAc nanobiosensor is given in Figure 3.10. Furthermore, it shows 
that as acetylthiocholine is catalyzed by AChE to form thiocholine and acetic 
acid. Then, the electroactive thiocholine is oxidized in the reaction, in turn, 
conducting PANI film reacts with thiocholine, accepts an electron from the 
oxidized mercaptobenzothiazole via interaction with the Au electrode. 
The nanobiosensors have also been developed for the detection of other 
pesticides, such as an antiseptic where 2,4-Dinitrophenol (DNP) was used as 
the active agent. For example, the chromogenic effect of latex microspheres 
hybridized with AuNPs has been used as a colorimetric nanobiosensor fro 
DNP detection as a toxin model (Ko et al., 2010). Here, DNP–bovine serum 86 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
albumin was bound with AuNPs that made the DNP hybridization with an 
anti-DNP antibody on latex microspheres, which in turn causes the pinkish￾red color formation. A DNP–glycine as a model toxin was determined via a 
competition approach that allows binding between the toxin molecules and 
the analog-conjugated-AuNPs in the anti-DNP antibody binding pocket. In 
the presence of the toxin molecules, the AuNPs were displaced from host 
latex microspheres, a pinkish-red to white color change occurred that is 
visible to the naked eye. 
Organochlorine pesticides are one of the most widely used pesticides in 
the world, for example, DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane). Chemically, 
it is also known as 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis (4-chlorophenyl) ethane. It has 
also been detected using nanobiosensors. For example, an immunosensor in 
dipstick format was designed for DDT detection at the nanogram level, In 
this case, the biosensing mechanism was based on AuNPs with competitive 
assay (Lisa et al., 2009). Herein, AuNPs with defined sizes were synthesized 
specifically and conjugated to anti-DDT antibodies which served as the 
detecting reagent in the dipstick immunosensor. In this case, the antigen used 
was DDA (1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(chlorophenyl)acetic acid)-BSA conjugate, 
it was immobilized on nitrocellulose of the strips. An immunocomplex was 
formed from AuNPs-conjugated anti-DDT antibodies when treated with free 
DDT. This immunocomplex was then bound to the DDA-BSA conjugate. 
Depending on the free DDT concentration in the sample, the AuNPs conju￾gated anti-DDT antibodies binding to the immobilized DDA-BSA varied, 
and that was detected by the red color change due to the AuNPs, and the color 
intensity change was inversely proportional to the concentration of DDT with 
maximum intensity was in the absence of DDT (i.e., zero concentration). 
The nanosensors were also developed for PAHs (polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons) detection, another well-known organic pollutant besides 
pesticides. These nanosensors for PAHs detection have been designed using 
AuNPs (Mailu et al., 2010), SWCNT (Carrillo-Carrión et al., 2009), graphene 
oxide (Shen et al., 2012), etc. The optical nanobiosensor based on SWCNT￾doped cadmium selenium quantum dots fluorescence has been developed 
for PAHs detection, such as pyrene, benzo(a)pyrene, perylene, and benzo(a) 
anthracene (Carrillo-Carrión et al., 2009). In this work, the fluorescence 
nanosensor showed excellent analytical characteristics to pyrenes, such as 
high sensitivity with a low detection limit (<1 nM), wide linear range, good 
recovery values, and rapid response time. Moreover, another fluorescence 
nanosensor was developed for PAHs detection in mineral water, such as 
anthracene, phenanthrene, and pyrene (Duong et al., 2011). Here, the sensing 
mechanism was based on CdSe/ZnS QDs functionalized with sol–gel. In Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 87 
this case, PAHs in trace level could increase the fluorescence intensity of the 
CdSe/ZnS QDs entrapped membranes and reached a low detection limit of 
PAHs (5 nM). 
3.5.3 OTHERS
Other organic pollutants to cause endocrine disruption are also increasing 
attention today. These substances could be a wide and varied range of 
organic chemical substances. These chemicals are well-known as endocrine￾disrupting compounds besides pesticides, such as diethylstilbestrol, dioxin, 
and dioxin-like compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). PCDDs 
(polychlorodibenzo-p-dioxins) and PCDFs (polychlorodibenzofurans) are 
dioxins and dioxin-like compounds that are very toxic environmental pollut￾ants and carcinogens because of their high stability and they are extremely 
resistance to degradation. A nanosensor for rapid and sensitive detection of 
dioxin has been developed based on oligopeptide–cysteine–quartz crystal 
microbalance (QCM) (Mascini et al., 2004, 2005). In this work, the synthe￾sized polypeptide was functionalized with two terminal cysteine residues 
and structured, including (1) [N]Asn-Phe–Gln–Gly–Ile[C], (2) [N]Asn– 
Phe-Gln–Gly–Gln[C], and (3) [N]Asn–Phe–Gln–Gly–Phe[C]. The QCM 
functionalized with polypeptide monolayer on the cysteine could allow 
directly electrostatic interactions between the amino acids and the dioxins, a 
low detection limit was reached (1 ppb). Another nanosensor based on QCM 
for dioxins detection was developed based on immunoassays, such as QCM 
employing monoclonal antibodies-modified bovine serum albumin (Park et 
al., 2006), surface plasmon resonance (SPR) using antibody functionalized 
polypeptide–gold thin layer (Soh et al., 2003), and SPR employing bovine 
serum albumin conjugated with CM5 sensor chip (Tsutsumi et al., 2008). 
Herein, the immunosensor has been used for the dioxin determination with 
good reproducibility and a low detection limit (<1 ppb). 
PCBs, as other endocrine disruptors, are generally used in industrial 
applications such as capacitors, transformers, and condensers. These 
hazardous synthetic substances are suspected of having a harmful effect on 
the endogenous hormone that could promote cell malignancies. Traditional 
techniques for the PCBs determination often used high-performance liquid 
chromatography and gas chromatography–mass spectrometers (Concejero et 
al., 2001). However, nanosensor could be an alternative method for simple and 
rapid PCBs detection. For example, nanosensors for rapid and direct detection 
of PCBs have been developed based on immunosensor using electrochemical Stimuli 
• PCB 
Cytochrome C 
glass 
An An 
glass 
incident 
light 
incident 
light 
reflected
light, R 
reflected
light, R’ 
FIGURE 3.11 Schematic of SPR for PCB detection, where the R to R' reflectance change 
was induced by the PCB solution injection and detected using the Au substrate saturated with 
Cytochrome c molecule. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Hong et al. (2008). © 2008 Elsevier. 
88 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(Laschi et al., 2003), fluorescence (Endo et al., 2005), piezoelectric (Přibyl et 
al., 2006), and SPR techniques (Tsutsumi et al., 2008). 
An SPR nanobiosensor has been constructed for the detection of PCBs 
based on gold film modified with cytochrome c as shown in Figure 3.11 
(Hong et al., 2008). Herein, the sensing principle is based on the conforma￾tional changesof the immobilized cytochrome, then detected by using SPR 
spectroscopy. The nanobiosensor exhibited a high sensitivity with a low 
detection limit (<1 ppb). A PCBs biosensor based on Pseudomonas fluores￾cence bacteria was also constructed using a spectrofluorimetric technique. 
This optical biosensor was immobilized in alginate beads for high sensitivity 
toward PCBs (Liu et al., 2007, 2010). The nanobiosensor was used success￾fully to detect the low detection limit of PCBs in samples (<1 ppb). In other 
work, a microflow immunosensor chip has been constructed based on the 
monoclonal antibody grafted on polystyrene beads to detect PCBs (Endo 
et al., 2005). The biosensing mechanism was based on antigen–antibody 
binding, where the antigen was conjugated to HRP. When hydrogen peroxide 
and a fluorogenic substrate are present, then fluorescence can be produced as 
a rapid response time and low detection limit (<1 ppt) toward PCBs. 
Other approaches using flexible substrates, such as paper-based SERS 
was also developed for simple and low-cost devices that can be employed for 
curvy surfaces (Lee et al., 2010). A paper-based SERS swab was constructed 
by simply immersing a filter paper in gold nanorods suspension. The gold 
nanorods were adsorbed efficiently onto the surface of filter paper since the Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 89 
electrostatic attraction between the positively charged CTAB-coated gold 
nanorods and the negatively charged cellulose occurred. The most important 
benefit of this paper-based SERS is that it allows for simple use for the trace 
samples collected from a solid surface. By swabbing a 140 pg 1,4-benzene￾dithiol (1,4-BDT) residue contaminated on a glass surface, the pollutants 
were adsorbed easily on the paper surface, and their Raman spectrum was 
easily produced (Lee et al., 2010). 
3.6 CONCLUSIONS
Currently, the integration of nanomaterials in the sensor technology has 
revolutionized sensor devices by creating the nanosensors in a tiny size, 
with high sensitivity and selectivity. Nanosensors used wide range of nano￾materials, which allow using of biological or chemical reagents to bind or 
react with a target analyte and transduce it into measurable signals for rapid 
response of environmental pollutants, ranging from heavy metals to organic 
pollutants, including other pollutants, such as PAHs, etc. These devices can 
play an important role in monitoring environmental pollutants rapidly so 
that preventive actions could be taken if needed. Nanosensor development 
focuses on creating innovative and novel technologies that allow creating 
significant change in our better life. These can be achieved by the creation of 
nanoengineered or active surface modifications, etc., to improve nanosensor 
performances. 
The impact of nanotechnology in nanosensor development has created 
new horizons for construction sensors with a tiny size suitable for intra￾cellular detections, which is also important in environmental pollution 
monitoring. New nanostructures and novel nanomaterials need to be more 
investigated to be employed as nanosensors, in particular, to be integrated 
within tiny chips size in the lab-on-a-chip that consisted of all required func￾tions, such as sample handling and analysis, including on-board electronics. 
This approach will greatly improve their performances and functionality by 
developing analytical tools that are very small, disposable, user-friendly, 
low cost, portable, and highly versatile. Today, a various range of nanosen￾sors have been designed. However, the smart goal of high throughput and 
inexpensive devices is yet to be really produced in our routine. Therefore, 
interdisciplinary research and well-structured work that involve chemist, 
engineers, bioscience, and physics have to be performed to creat reliable and 
low-cost nanosensors for our daily life in the near future.  
 
 
 
 
90 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author gratefully thank the DRPM, Ministry of Research and Technology 
(BRIN), the Republic of Indonesia for supporting this work via World-Class 
Research Grant 2021. 
KEYWORDS
• nanosensor 
• nanobiosensors 
• nanotechnology 
• nanomaterials 
• transducer 
• pollutant 
REFERENCES 
Ahloowalia, B. S.; Maluszynski, M.; Nichterlein, K. Global Impact of Mutation-Derived 
Varieties. Euphytica 2004, 135, 187–204. 
Agrawal, S. S.; Prajapati, R. Nanosensors and Their Pharmaceutical Applications: A Review. 
Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Nanotechnol. 2012, 4 (4), 1528–1535. 
Agüí, L.; Yáñez-Sedeño, P.; Pingarrón, J. M. Role of Carbon Nanotubes in Electroanalytical 
Chemistry. Analy. Chim. Acta 2008, 622 (1–2), 11–47. 
Akimov, V.; Alfinito, E.; Bausells, J.; Benilova, I.; Paramo, I. C.; Errachid, A.; Ferrari, G.; 
Fumagalli, L.; Gomila, G.; Grosclaude, J.; Hou, Y.; Jaffrezic-Renault, N.; Martelet, C.; 
Pajot-Augy, E.; Pennetta, C.; Persuy, M.A.; Pla-Roca, M.; Reggiani, L.; Rodriguez-Segui, 
S.; Ruiz, O.; Salesse, R.; Samitier, J.; Sampietro, M.; Soldatkin, A.P.; Vidic, J.; Villanueva, 
G. Nanobiosensors Based on Individual Olfactory Receptors. Analog Integr. Circ. Sign. 
Process. 2008, 57 (3), 197–203. 
Liu, J.; Lu, Y. A Colorimetric Lead Biosensor Using DNAzyme-Directed Assembly of Gold 
Nanoparticlesm 2993. https://doi.org/10.1021/JA034775U. 
Antunović, V.; Ilić, M.; Baošić, R.; Jelić, D.; Lolić, A. Synthesis of MnCo 2 O 4 Nanoparticles 
as Modifiers for Simultaneous Determination of Pb(II) and Cd(II). PLoS ONE 2019, 14 (2), 
1–19. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0210904. 
Appannagari, R. R. North Asian International Research Journal of Environmental Pollution Causes 
and Consequences: A Study. North Asian Int. Res. J. Soc. Sci. Human. Aug 2017, 3, 2454–9827. 
Asmatulu, R.; Khan, W. S. Electrospun Nanofibers for Nanosensor and Biosensor Applications. 
In Synthesis and Applications of Electrospun Nanofibers, 2019; pp 175–96. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/b978-0-12-813914-1.00009-2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 91 
Ayangbenro, A. S.; Babalola, O. O. A New Strategy for Heavy Metal Polluted Environments: 
A Review of Microbial Biosorbents. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2017, 14 (1). https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14010094. 
Badihi-Mossberg, M.; Buchner, V.; Rishpon, J. Electrochemical Biosensors for Pollutants in 
the Environment. Electroanalysis 2007, 19 (19–20), 2015–2028. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
elan.200703946. 
Bagheri, H.; Afkhami, A.; Khoshsafar, H.; Rezaei, M.; Shirzadmehr, A. Simultaneous 
Electrochemical Determination of Heavy Metals Using a Triphenylphosphine/MWCNTs 
Composite Carbon Ionic Liquid Electrode. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2013, 186 (September), 
451–460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2013.06.051. 
Bashar, T.; Fung, I. W. H. Water Pollution in a Densely Populated Megapolis, Dhaka. Water 
(Switzerland) 2020, 12 (8), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.3390/W12082124. 
Bhateria, R.; Singh, R. A Review on Nanotechnological Application of Magnetic Iron Oxides 
for Heavy Metal Removal. J. Water Process Eng. 2019, 31 (April), 100845. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2019.100845. 
Buzea, C.; Pacheco, I. I.; Robbie, K. Nanomaterials and Nanoparticles: Sources and Toxicity. 
Biointerphases 2007, 2 (4), MR17–MR71. https://doi.org/10.1116/1.2815690. 
Cabanillas-Galán, P.; Farmer, L.; Hagan, T.; Nieuwenhuyzen, M.; James, S. L.; Lagunas, 
M. C. A New Approach for the Detection of Ethylene Using Silica-Supported Palladium 
Complexes. Inorg. Chem. 2008, 47 (19), 9035–9041. https://doi.org/10.1021/ic800986t. 
Cao, X.; Ye, Y.; Liu, S. Gold Nanoparticle-Based Signal Amplification for Biosensing. Analy. 
Biochem. 2011, 417 (1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AB.2011.05.027. 
Carrillo-Carrión, C.; Simonet, B. M.; Valcárcel, M. Carbon Nanotube-Quantum Dot 
Nanocomposites as New Fluorescence Nanoparticles for the Determination of Trace Levels 
of PAHs in Water. Analy. Chim. Acta 2009, 652 (1–2), 278–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
aca.2009.08.015. 
Chan, W. H.; Yang, R. H.; Wang, K. W. Development of a Mercury Ion-Selective Optical 
Sensor Based on Fluorescence Quenching of 5,10,15,20-Tetraphenylporphyrin. Analy. 
Chim. Acta 2001, 444 (2), 261–269. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0003-2670(01)01106-0. 
Chatterjee, A.; Santra, M.; Won, N.; Kim, S.; Kim, J. K.; Kim, S. B.; Ahn, K. H. Selective Fluoro￾genic and Chromogenic Probe for Detection of Silver Ions and Silver Nanoparticles in Aqueous 
Media. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (6), 2040–2041. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja807230c. 
Chen, B.; Wang, Z.; Hu, D.; Ma, Q.; Huang, L.; Xv, C.; Guo, Z.; Jiang, X. Scanometric 
Nanomolar Lead (II) Detection Using DNA-Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles and Silver 
Stain Enhancement. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 200, 310–316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2014.04.066. 
Chen, G.; Song, F.; Xiong, X.; Peng, X. Fluorescent Nanosensors Based on Fluorescence 
Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET). Indust. Eng. Chem. Res. 2013, 52 (33), 11228–11245. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie303485n. 
Chen, G. H.; Chen, W. Y.; Yen, Y. C.; Wang, C. W.; Chang, H. T.; Chen, C. F. Detection 
of Mercury(II) Ions Using Colorimetric Gold Nanoparticles on Paper-Based Analytical 
Devices. Analy. Chem. 2014, 86 (14), 6843–6849. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac5008688. 
Chen, H.; Zhou, K.; Zhao, G. Gold Nanoparticles: From Synthesis, Properties to Their 
Potential Application as Colorimetric Sensors in Food Safety Screening. Trends Food Sci. 
Technol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2018.05.027. 
Chen, H.; Hu, W.; Li, C. M. Colorimetric Detection of Mercury(II) Based on 2,2′-Bipyridyl 
Induced Quasi-Linear Aggregation of Gold Nanoparticles. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. Aug 
2015, 215, 421–427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2015.03.083.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Concejero, M. A., Roger, G.; Herradón, B.; González, M. J.; De Frutos, M. Feasibility of 
High-Performance Immunochromatography as an Isolation Method for Pcbs and Other 
Dioxin. Like Compounds. Analy. Chem. 2001, 73 (13), 3119–3125. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ac001387r. 
Cui, Y., Wei, Q.; Park, H.; Lieber, C. M. Nanowire Nanosensors for Highly Sensitive and Selective 
Detection of Biological and Chemical Species. Science 2001, 293 (5533), 1289–1292. https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/science.1062711. 
D’Orazio, P. Biosensors in Clinical Chemistry. Clin. Chim. Acta 2003, 334 (1–2), 41–69. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-8981(03)00241-9. 
Danwittayakul, S.; Takahashi, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Thanaboonsombut, A. Simple Detection of 
Mercury Ion Using Dithizone Nanoloaded Membrane. J. Metals Mater. Miner. 2008, 18 (2), 
37–40. 
Ding, N.; Zhao, H.; Peng, W.; He, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Yuan, L.; Zhang, Y. A Simple Colorimetric 
Sensor Based on Anti-Aggregation of Gold Nanoparticles for Hg2+ Detection. Colloids 
Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Aspects Feb 2012, 395, 161–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfa.2011.12.024. 
Du, J.; Zhu, B.; Chen, X. Urine for Plasmonic Nanoparticle-Based Colorimetric Detection 
of Mercury Ion. Small 2013, 9 (24), 4104–4111. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201300593. 
El-Safty, S. A., Ismail, A. A.; Matsunaga, H.; Hanaoka, T.; Mizukami, F. Optical Nanoscale 
Pool-on-Surface Design for Control Sensing Recognition of Multiple Cations. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2008, 18 (10), 1485–1500. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.200701059. 
Endo, T.; Okuyama, A.; Matsubara, Y.; Nishi, K.; Kobayashi, M.; Yamamura, S.; Morita, 
Y.; Takamura, Y.; Mizukami, H.; Tamiya, E. Fluorescence-Based Assay with Enzyme 
Amplification on a Micro-Flow Immunosensor Chip for Monitoring Coplanar 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls. Analy. Chim. Acta 2005, 531 (1), 7–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
aca.2004.08.077. 
Ewuzie, U.; Nnorom, I. C.; Eze, S. O. Lithium in Drinking Water Sources in Rural and Urban 
Communities in Southeastern Nigeria. Chemosphere Apr 2020, 245, 125593. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125593. 
Farhadi, K.; Forough, M.; Molaei, R.; Hajizadeh, S.; Rafipour, A. Highly Selective Hg 2+ 
Colorimetric Sensor Using Green Synthesized and Unmodified Silver Nanoparticles. Sens. 
Actuat. B Chem. 2012, 161 (1), 880–885. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2011.11.052. 
Gholizadeh, M. H.; Melesse, A. M.; Reddi, L. A Comprehensive Review on Water Quality 
Parameters Estimation Using Remote Sensing Techniques. Sensors (Switzerland) 2016, 16 
(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/s16081298. 
Gong, J.; Zhou, T.; Song, D.; Zhang, L. Monodispersed Au Nanoparticles Decorated Graphene 
as an Enhanced Sensing Platform for Ultrasensitive Stripping Voltammetric Detection of 
Mercury(II). Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2010, 150 (2), 491–497. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2010.09.014. 
Guo, J.; Chai, Y.; Yuan, R.; Song, Z.; Zou, Z.;—Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, and 
Undefined 2011. Lead (II) Carbon Paste Electrode Based on Derivatized Multi-Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes: Application to Lead Content Determination in Environmental Samples 
(n.d.). Elsevier. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925400511000402 
(accessed Nov 25, 2018). 
Haun, J. B.; Yoon, T-J.; Lee, H.; Weissleder, R. Magnetic Nanoparticle Biosensors. Wiley 
Interdiscipl. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2010, 2 (3), 291–304. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
wnan.84.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 93 
He, B.; Morrow, T. J.; Keating, C. D. Nanowire Sensors for Multiplexed Detection of 
Biomolecules. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2008, 12 (5), 522–528. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
CBPA.2008.08.027. 
He, H.; Li, H.; Uray, G.; Wolfbeis, O. S. Non-Enzymatic Optical Sensor for Penicillins. 
Talanta 1993, 40 (3), 453–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/0039-9140(93)80258-S. 
Hidayat, M. A.; Illa, R.; Indah, C.; Ningsih, Y.; Yuwono, M. The CUPRAC—Paper Microzone 
Plates as a Simple and Rapid Method for Total Antioxidant Capacity Determination of 
Plant Extract. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2019, no. 0123456789. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00217-019-03312-1. 
Hong, S.; Kang, T.; Oh, S.; Moon, J.; Choi, I.; Choi, K.; Yi, J. Label-Free Sensitive Optical 
Detection of Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) in an Aqueous Solution Based on Surface 
Plasmon Resonance Measurements. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2008, 134 (1), 300–306. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.SNB.2008.05.006. 
Huang, Y.; Zhang, W.; Xiao, H.; Li, G. An Electrochemical Investigation of Glucose Oxidase 
at a CdS Nanoparticles Modified Electrode. Biosens. Bioelectr. 2005, 21 (5), 817–821. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOS.2005.01.012. 
Hussain, C. M.; Keçili, R. Electrochemical Techniques for Environmental Analysis. Modern 
Environ. Analy. Techniques Pollut. 2020, 199–222. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12­
816934-6.00008-4. 
Jain, K. K. Nanodiagnostics: Application of Nanotechnology in Molecular Diagnostics. 
Expert Rev. Mol. Diagnos. 2003, 3 (2), 153–161. https://doi.org/10.1586/14737159.3.2.153. 
Javanbakht, M.; Divsar, F.; Badiei, A.; Ganjali, M. R.; Norouzi, P.; Ziarani, G. M.; Chaloosi, 
M.; Jahangir, A. A. Potentiometric Detection of Mercury(II) Ions Using a Carbon Paste 
Electrode Modified with Substituted Thiourea-Functionalized Highly Ordered Nanoporous 
Silica. Analy. Sci. 2009, 25 (6), 789–794. https://doi.org/10.2116/analsci.25.789. 
Jianrong, C.; Yuqing, M.; Nongyue, H.; Xiaohua, W.; Sijiao, L. Nanotechnology and Biosensors. 
Biotechnol. Adv. 2004, 22 (7), 505–518. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOTECHADV.2004.03.004. 
Keçili, R.; Hussain, C. M. Recent Progress of Imprinted Nanomaterials in Analytical 
Chemistry. Int. J. Analy. Chem. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8503853. 
Ko, S.; Gunasekaran, S.; Yu, J. Self-Indicating Nanobiosensor for Detection of 2,4-Dinitrophenol. 
Food Control 2010, 21 (2), 155–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODCONT.2009.05.006. 
Koh, I.; Josephson, L. Magnetic Nanoparticle Sensors. Sensors 2009, 9 (10), 8130–8145. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s91008130. 
Kuila, T.; Bose, S.; Khanra, P.; Mishra, A. K.; Kim, N. H.; Lee, J. H. Recent Advances in Graphene￾Based Biosensors. Biosens Bioelectron 2011. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2011.05.039. 
Kurniawan, F.; Al Kiswiyah, N. S.; Madurani, K. A.; Tominaga, M. Electrochemical Sensor 
Based on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes-Modified Gold Electrode for Uric Acid Detection. 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 2018, 165 (11): B515–B522. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0991811jes. 
Kuswandi, B. Nanobiosensor Approaches for Pollutant Monitoring. Environ. Chem. Lett. 
2019, 17 (2). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-018-00853-x. 
Kuswandi, B.; Mascini, M. Enzyme Inhibition Based Biosensors for Environmental 
Monitoring. Curr. Enzyme Inhibit. 2005, 1 (1), 11–17. 
Kuswandi, B.; Nuriman; Dam, H. H.; Reinhoudt, D. N.; Verboom, W. Development of a 
Disposable Mercury Ion-Selective Optode Based on Trityl-Picolinamide as Ionophore. 
Analy. Chim. Acta 2007, 591 (2), 208–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2007.03.064. 
Kuswandi, B.; Fikriyah, C. I.; Gani, A. A. An Optical Fiber Biosensor for Chlorpyrifos Using 
a Single Sol–Gel Film Containing Acetylcholinesterase and Bromothymol Blue. Talanta 
2008, 74 (4), 613–618. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TALANTA.2007.06.042.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Landrigan, P. J.; Fuller, R.; Acosta, N. J. R.; Adeyi, O.; Arnold, R.; Basu, N. (N).; Baldé, 
A. B. et al. The Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health. Lancet 2018, 391 (10119), 
462–512. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32345-0. 
Lee, C. H.; Tian, L.; Singamaneni, S. Paper-Based SERS Swab for Rapid Trace Detection 
on Real-World Surfaces. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2010, 2 (12), 3429–3435. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/am1009875. 
Lee, P. L.; Sun, Y. S.; Ling, Y. C. Magnetic Nano-Adsorbent Integrated with Lab-on-Valve 
System for Trace Analysis of Multiple Heavy Metals. J. Analy. Atom. Spectr. 2009, 24 (3), 
320–327. https://doi.org/10.1039/b814164a. 
Li, C.;; Zhou, K.; Qin, W.; Tian, C.; Qi, M.; Yan, X.; Han, W. A Review on Heavy Metals 
Contamination in Soil: Effects, Sources, and Remediation Techniques. Soil Sediment 
Contam. 2019, 28 (4), 380–394. https://doi.org/10.1080/15320383.2019.1592108. 
Li, Y-L.; Leng, Y-M.; Zhang, Y-J.; Li, T-H.; Shen, Z-Y.; Wu, A-G. A New Simple and Reliable 
Hg2+ Detection System Based on Anti-Aggregation of Unmodified Gold Nanoparticles 
in the Presence of O-Phenylenediamine. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. Sept 2014, 200, 140–146. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SNB.2014.04.039. 
Lisa, M., Chouhan, R. S.; Vinayaka, A. C.; Manonmani, H. K.; Thakur, M. S. Gold Nanoparticles 
Based Dipstick Immunoassay for the Rapid Detection of Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane: An 
Organochlorine Pesticide. Biosens. Bioelectr. 2009, 25 (1), 224–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
J.BIOS.2009.05.006. 
Liu, X.; Zhang, N.; Bing, T.; Shangguan, D. Carbon Dots Based Dual-Emission Silica 
Nanoparticles as a Ratiometric Nanosensor for Cu2+. Analy. Chem. 2014, 86 (5), 2289– 
2296. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac404236y. 
Liu, X.; Germaine, K. J.; Ryan, D.; Dowling, D. N. Genetically Modified Pseudomonas 
Biosensing Biodegraders to Detect PCB and Chlorobenzoate Bioavailability and Biodegra￾dation in Contaminated Soils. Bioeng. Bugs 2010, 1 (3), 198–206. https://doi.org/10.4161/ 
bbug.1.3.12443. 
Liu, Y.; Chakrabartty, S.; Alocilja, E. C. Fundamental Building Blocks for Molecular Biowire 
Based Forward Error-Correcting Biosensors. Nanotechnology 2007, 18 (42), 424017. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-4484/18/42/424017. 
Luo, X.; Morrin, A.; Killard, A. J.; Smyth, M. R. Application of Nanoparticles in 
Electrochemical Sensors and Biosensors. Electroanalysis 2006, 18 (4), 319–326. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/elan.200503415. 
Mailu, S. N.; Waryo, T. T.; Ndangili, P. M.; Ngece, F. R.; Baleg, A. A.; Baker, P. G.; Iwuoha, 
E. I. et al. Determination of Anthracene on Ag-Au Alloy Nanoparticles/Overoxidized￾Polypyrrole Composite Modified Glassy Carbon Electrodes. Sensors 2010, 10 (10), 
9449–9465. https://doi.org/10.3390/s101009449. 
Manisalidis, I.; Stavropoulou, E.; Stavropoulos, A.; Bezirtzoglou, E. Environmental and 
Health Impacts of Air Pollution: A Review. Front. Public Health Feb 2020, 8, 1–13. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2020.00014. 
Mascini, M., Macagnano, A.; Monti, D.; Del Carlo, M.; Paolesse, R.; Chen, B.; Warner, 
P.; D’Amico, A.; Di Natale, C.; Compagnone, D. Piezoelectric Sensors for Dioxins: A 
Biomimetic Approach. Biosens. Bioelectr. 2004, 20 (6), 1203–1210. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
BIOS.2004.06.048. 
Mascini, M.; MacAgnano, A.; Scortichini, G.; Del Carlo, M.; Diletti, G.; D’Amico, A.; Di 
Natale, C.; Compagnone, D. Biomimetic Sensors for Dioxins Detection in Food Samples. 
Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2005, 111–112, 376–384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2005.03.054.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 95 
McDonagh, C.; Burke, C. S.; MacCraith, B. D. Optical Chemical Sensors. Chem. Rev. 2008, 
108 (2), 400–422. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr068102g. 
Mueller, N. C.; Nowack, B. 2008. Exposure Modeling of Engineered Nanoparticles in the 
Environment. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42 (12), 4447–4453. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
es7029637. 
Nagatani, N.; Takeuchi, A.; Hossain, M. A.; Yuhi, T.; Endo, T.; Kerman, K.; Takamura, Y.; 
Tamiya, E. Rapid and Sensitive Visual Detection of Residual Pesticides in Food Using 
Acetylcholinesterase-Based Disposable Membrane Chips. Food Control 2007, 18 (8), 
914–920. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODCONT.2006.05.011. 
Norouzi, P.; Pirali-Hamedani, M.; Ganjali, M. R.; Faridbod, F. Electrochemical Science a 
Novel Acetylcholinesterase Biosensor Based on Chitosan-Gold Nanoparticles Film for 
Determination of Monocrotophos Using FFT Continuous Cyclic Voltammetry. Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci. 2010, 5. www.electrochemsci.org. 
Ottakam Thotiyl, M. M.; Basit, H.; Sánchez, J. A.; Goyer, C.; Coche-Guerente, L.; Dumy, 
P.; Sampath, S.; Labbé, P.; Moutet, J. C. Multilayer Assemblies of Polyelectrolyte-Gold 
Nanoparticles for the Electrocatalytic Oxidation and Detection of Arsenic(III). J. Colloid 
Interf. Sci. 2012, 383 (1), 130–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2012.06.033. 
Pal, S.; Alocilja, E. C.; Downes, F. P. Nanowire Labeled Direct-Charge Transfer Biosensor 
for Detecting Bacillus Species. Biosens. Bioelectr. 2007, 22 (9–10), 2329–2336. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bios.2007.01.013. 
Parihar, S.; Manoj, K.; Pratap, S. Qualitative Estimation of Pesticides in Biological Matrices 
Using Thin Layer Chromatography Method of Analysis 2020, 1–5. 
Park, J-W.; Kurosawa, S.; Aizawa, H.; Hamano, H.; Harada, Y.; Asano, S.; Mizushima, Y.; 
Higaki, M. Dioxin Immunosensor Using Anti-2,3,7,8-TCDD Antibody Which Was Produced 
with Mono 6-(2,3,6,7-Tetrachloroxanthene-9-Ylidene) Hexyl Succinate as a Hapten. 
Biosens. Bioelectr. 2006, 22 (3), 409–414. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOS.2006.05.002. 
Paterson, S.; De La Rica, R. Solution-Based Nanosensors for in-Field Detection with the 
Naked Eye. Analyst 2015, 140 (10), 3308–3317. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4an02297a. 
Peng, C.; Li, Z.; Zhu, Y.; Chen, W.; Yuan, Y.; Liu, L.; Li, Q. et al. Simultaneous and Sensitive 
Determination of Multiplex Chemical Residues Based on Multicolor Quantum Dot Probes. 
Biosens. Bioelectr. 2009, 24, 3657–3662. 
Peng, Y.; Cullis, T.; Inkson, B. Bottom-up Nanoconstruction by the Welding of Lndividual 
Metallic Nanoobjects Using Nanoscale Solder. Nano Lett. 2009, 9 (1), 91–96. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/nl8025339. 
Perez, J. M.; Josephson, L.; Weissleder, R. Use of Magnetic Nanoparticles as Nanosensors 
to Probe for Molecular Interactions. ChemBioChem 2004. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
cbic.200300730. 
Prabowo, B. A.; Purwidyantri, A.; Liu, K. C. Surface Plasmon Resonance Optical Sensor: 
A Review on Light Source Technology. Biosensors 2018, 8 (3). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
bios8030080. 
Přibyl, J.; Hepel, M.; Skládal, P. Piezoelectric Immunosensors for Polychlorinated Biphenyls 
Operating in Aqueous and Organic Phases. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2006, 113 (2), 900–910. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SNB.2005.03.077. 
Promphet, N.; Rattanarat, P.; Rangkupan, R.; Chailapakul, O.; Rodthongkum, N. An 
Electrochemical Sensor Based on Graphene/Polyaniline/Polystyrene Nanoporous Fibers 
Modified Electrode for Simultaneous Determination of Lead and Cadmium. Sens. Actuat. 
B Chem. Feb 2015, 207, 526–534. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SNB.2014.10.126.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Pumera, M.; Sánchez, S.; Ichinose, I.; Tang, J. Electrochemical Nanobiosensors. Sens. Actuat. 
B Chem. 2007, 123 (2), 1195–1205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2006.11.016. 
Qu, F.; Yang, M.; Lu, Y.; Shen, G.; Yu, R. Amperometric Determination of Bovine Insulin 
Based on Synergic Action of Carbon Nanotubes and Cobalt Hexacyanoferrate Nanoparticles 
Stabilized by EDTA. Analy. Bioanaly. Chem. 2006, 386 (2), 228–234. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00216-006-0642-8. 
Rascio, N.; Navari-Izzo, F. Heavy Metal Hyperaccumulating Plants: How and Why Do They 
Do It? And What Makes Them so Interesting? Plant Sci. 2011, 180 (2), 169–181. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2010.08.016. 
Ravindran, A.; Elavarasi, M.; Prathna, T. C.; Raichur, A. M.; Chandrasekaran, N.; Mukherjee, 
A. Selective Colorimetric Detection of Nanomolar Cr (VI) in Aqueous Solutions Using 
Unmodified Silver Nanoparticles. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. May 2012, 166–167, 365–371. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2012.02.073. 
Reis, P. B.; Ramos, R. M.; Souza, L. F.; Cancado, S. de V.;. Validation of Spectrophotometric 
Method to Detect and Quantify Nitrite in Ham Pate. BPJS 2009, 45. 
O’Riordan, A.; Barry, S. Electrochemical Nanosensors: Advances and Applications. Rep. 
Electrochem. 2016, 2016, 1. https://doi.org/10.2147/rie.s80550. 
Jin, R.; Wu, G.; Li, Z.; Mirkin, C. A.; Schatz, G. C. What Controls the Melting Properties of 
DNA-Linked Gold Nanoparticle Assemblies? 2003. https://doi.org/10.1021/JA021096V. 
Roto, R.; Mellisani, B.; Kuncaka, A.; Mudasir, M.; Suratman, A. Colorimetric Sensing of 
Pb2+ Ion by Using Ag Nanoparticles in the Presence of Dithizone. Chemosensors 2019, 7 
(3). https://doi.org/10.3390/CHEMOSENSORS7030028. 
Hrapovic, S.; Liu, Y.; Male, K. B.; Luong, J. H. T. Electrochemical Biosensing Platforms Using
 
Platinum Nanoparticles and Carbon Nanotubes, 2003. https://doi.org/10.1021/AC035143T.
 
Sadik, O. a.; Zhou, a. L.; Kikandi, S.; Du, N.; Wang, Q.; Varner, K. Sensors as Tools for 
Quantitation, Nanotoxicity and Nanomonitoring Assessment of Engineered Nanomaterials. 
J. Environ. Monit JEM 2009, 11 (10), 1782–1800. https://doi.org/10.1039/b912860c. 
Sawant, Vijay J.; Sawant, V. J. Biogenic Capped Selenium Nano Rods as Naked Eye and 
Selective Hydrogen Peroxide Spectrometric Sensor. Sens. BioSens. Res. Feb 2020, 27. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbsr.2019.100314. 
Semionov, A. Minamata Disease—Review. World J. Neurosci. 2018, 08 (02), 178–184. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/wjns.2018.82016. 
Laschi, S.; Mascini, M.; Scortichini, G.; Fránek, M.; Mascini, M. Polychlorinated Biphenyls 
(PCBs) Detection in Food Samples Using an Electrochemical Immunosensor, 2003. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/JF0208637. 
Shahat, A.; Awual, Md. R.; Naushad, M. Functional Ligand Anchored Nanomaterial Based 
Facial Adsorbent for Cobalt(II) Detection and Removal from Water Samples. Chem. Eng. 
J. 2015, 271 (Ii), 155–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2015.02.097. 
Sharma, V.; Saini, A. K.; Mobin, S. M. Multicolour Fluorescent Carbon Nanoparticle Probes for 
Live Cell Imaging and Dual Palladium and Mercury Sensors. J. Mater. Chem. B 2016, 4 (14), 
2466–2476. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6tb00238b. 
Shen, X.; Cui, Y.; Pang, Y.; Qian, H. Graphene Oxide Nanoribbon and Polyhedral 
Oligomeric Silsesquioxane Assembled Composite Frameworks for Pre-Concentrating and 
Electrochemical Sensing of 1-Hydroxypyrene. Electrochim. Acta Jan 2012, 59, 91–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2011.10.037. 
Slimani, Y.; Hannachi, E. Magnetic Nanosensors and Their Potential Applications.Nanosensors 
for Smart Cities. INC, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-819870-4.00009-8. Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 97 
Soares, S.; Sousa, J.; Pais, A.; Vitorino, C. Nanomedicine: Principles, Properties, and Regulatory 
Issues. Front. Chem. Aug 2018, 6, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2018.00360. 
Soh, N.; Tokuda, T.; Watanabe, T.; Mishima, K.; Imato, T.; Masadome, T.; Asano, Y.; Okutani, 
S.; Niwa, O.; Brown, S. A Surface Plasmon Resonance Immunosensor for Detecting 
a Dioxin Precursor Using a Gold Binding Polypeptide. Talanta 2003, 60 (4), 733–745. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0039-9140(03)00139-5. 
Somerset, V.; Baker, P.; Iwuoha, E. Mercaptobenzothiazole-on-Gold Organic Phase 
Biosensor Systems: 1. Enhanced Organosphosphate Pesticide Determination. J. Environ. 
Sci. HealthB Pesticides Food Contam. Agric. Wastes 2009, 44 (2), 164–178. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/03601230802599092. 
Somerset, V. S.; Klink, M. J.; Baker, P. G. L.; Iwuoha, E. I. Acetylcholinesterase-Polyaniline 
Biosensor Investigation of Organophosphate Pesticides in Selected Organic Solvents. J. 
Environ. Sci. Health B Pesticides Food Contam. Agric. Wastes 2007, 42 (3), 297–304. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03601230701229288. 
Sugunan, A.; Thanachayanont, C.; Dutta, J.; Hilborn, J. G. Heavy-Metal Ion Sensors Using 
Chitosan-Capped Gold Nanoparticles. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 2005, 6, 335–340. No 
longer published by Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stam.2005.03.007. 
Sumner, J. P.; Aylott, J. W.; Monson, E.; Kopelman, R. A Fluorescent PEBBLE Nanosensor 
for Intracellular Free Zinc. Analyst 2002, 127 (1), 11–16. https://doi.org/10.1039/b108568a. 
Tonle, I. K.; Ngameni, E.; Walcarius, A. Preconcentration and Voltammetric Analysis of 
Mercury(II) at a Carbon Paste Electrode Modified with Natural Smectite-Type Clays 
Grafted with Organic Chelating Groups. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2005, 110 (2), 195–203. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2005.01.027. 
Tortorich, R.; Shamkhalichenar, H.; Choi, J-W. Inkjet-Printed and Paper-Based Electrochemical 
Sensors. Appl. Sci. 2018, 8 (2), 288. https://doi.org/10.3390/app8020288. 
Tseng, W-B.; Hsieh, M-M.; Chen, C-H.; Chiu, T-C.; Tseng, W-T. Functionalized Gold 
Nanoparticles for Sensing of Pesticides: A Review. J. Food Drug Analy. 2020, 28 (4), 
522–539. https://doi.org/10.38212/2224-6614.1092. 
Tsutsumi, T.; Miyoshi, N.; Sasaki, K.; Maitani, T. Biosensor Immunoassay for the Screening 
of Dioxin-like Polychlorinated Biphenyls in Retail Fish. Analy. Chim. Acta 2008, 617 (1–2), 
177–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2008.02.003. 
Ukaogo, P. O.; Ewuzie, U.; Onwuka, C. V. Environmental Pollution: Causes, Effects, and the 
Remedies. Microorganisms for Sustainable Environment and Health. INC, 2020. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-819001-2.00021-8. 
Ullah, N.; Mansha, M.; Khan, I.; Qurashi, A. Nanomaterial-Based Optical Chemical Sensors 
for the Detection of Heavy Metals in Water: Recent Advances and Challenges. TrAC— 
Trends Analy. Chem. 2018, 100, 155–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2018.01.002. 
Vijitvarasan, P.; Oaew, S.; Surareungchai, W. Paper-Based Scanometric Assay for Lead 
Ion Detection Using DNAzyme. Analy. Chim. Acta 2015, 896, 152–159. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.aca.2015.09.011. 
Vinod Kumar, V.; Anthony. S. P. Silver Nanoparticles Based Selective Colorimetric Sensor for 
Cd 2+, Hg2+ and Pb2+ Ions: Tuning Sensitivity and Selectivity Using Co-Stabilizing Agents. 
Sens. Actuat. B Chem. Feb 2014, 191, 31–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2013.09.089. 
Wan, H.; Sun, Q.; Li, H.; Sun, F.; Hu, N.; Wang, P. Screen-Printed Gold Electrode with Gold 
Nanoparticles Modification for Simultaneous Electrochemical Determination of Lead 
and Copper. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. Mar 2015, 209, 336–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2014.11.127.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Wei, Q.; Nagi, R.; Sadeghi, K.; Feng, S.; Yan, E.; Ki, S. J.; Caire, R.; Tseng, D.; Ozcan, 
A. Detection and Spatial Mapping of Mercury Contamination in Water Samples Using a 
Smart-Phone. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (2), 1121–1129. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn406571t. 
Wei, Y.; Gao, C.; Meng, F. L.; Li, H. H.; Wang, L.; Liu, J. H; Huang, X. J. SnO 2/Reduced 
Graphene Oxide Nanocomposite for the Simultaneous Electrochemical Detection of 
Cadmium(II), Lead(II), Copper(II), and Mercury(II): An Interesting Favorable Mutual 
Interference. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116 (1), 1034–1041. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp209805c. 
Willner, M. R.; Vikesland, P. J. Nanomaterial Enabled Sensors for Environmental 
Contaminants Prof Ueli Aebi, Prof Peter Gehr. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2018, 16 (1), 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-018-0419-1. 
Xiao, Y.; Li, C. M. Nanocomposites: From Fabrications to Electrochemical Bioapplications. 
Electroanalysis 2008, 20 (6), 648–662. https://doi.org/10.1002/elan.200704125. 
Xu, H.; Aylott, J. W.; Kopelman, R.; Miller, T. J.; Philbert, M. A. A Real-Time Ratiometric 
Method for the Determination of Molecular Oxygen inside Living Cells Using Sol-Gel￾Based Spherical Optical Nanosensors with Applications to Rat C6 Glioma. Analy. Chem. 
2001, 73 (17), 4124–4133. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11569801. 
Yadav, P. K.; Srivastava, R. Optical Fiber Sensor: Review and Applications Mar 2018, 0–5. 
Yan, X.; Li, H.; Su, X. Review of Optical Sensors for Pesticides. TrAC–Trends Analy. Chem. 
2018, 103, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2018.03.004. 
Yogeswaran, U.; Chen, S-M. A Review on the Electrochemical Sensors and Biosensors 
Composed of Nanowires as Sensing Material. Sensors 2008, 8 (1), 290–313. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/s8010290. 
Yonzon, C. R.; Stuart, D. A.; Zhang, X.; McFarland, A. D.; Haynes, C. L.; Van Duyne, R. P. 
Towards Advanced Chemical and Biological Nanosensors—An Overview. Talanta 2005, 
67 (3), 438–448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2005.06.039. 
Zamora-León, S. P.; Delgado-López, F. Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Their 
Association with Breast Cancer. Bangladesh J. Med. Sci. 2020, 19 (2), 194–199. https:// 
doi.org/10.3329/bjms.v19i2.44995. 
Zhai, D.; Zhang, K.; Zhang, Y.; Sun, H.; Fan, G. Mesoporous Silica Equipped with 
Europium-Based Chemosensor for Mercury Ion Detection: Synthesis, Characterization, 
and Sensing Performance. Inorg. Chim. Acta 2012, 387, 396–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ica.2012.02.035. 
Zhang, Q.; Qiao, Y.; Hao, F.; Zhang, L.; Wu, S.; Li, Y.; Li, J.; Song, X. M. Fabrication of 
a Biocompatible and Conductive Platform Based on a Singlestranded DNA/Graphene 
Nanocomposite for Direct Electrochemistry and Electrocatalysis. Chem. Eur. J. 2010, 16 
(27), 8133–8139. https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.201000684. 
Zhang, X.; Xu, L-P.; Zhou, S-F.; Liu, G.; Gao, X. Recent Advances in Nanoparticles-Based 
Lateral Flow Biosensors. Am. J. Biomed. Sci. 2014, 6 (1), 41–57. https://doi.org/10.5099/ 
aj140100041. 
Zhang, Y.; Wang, W.; Li, Q.; Yang, Q.; Li, Y.; Du, J. 2015. Colorimetric Magnetic 
Microspheres as Chemosensor for Cu2+ Prepared from Adamantane-Modified Rhodamine 
and β-Cyclodextrin-Modified Fe3O4@SiO2 via Host-Guest Interaction. Talanta 2015, 
141, 33–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2015.03.015. 
Zhao, G.; Wang, H.; Liu, G.; Wang, Z. Simultaneous Determination of Cd(II) and Pb(II) 
Based on Bismuth Film/Carboxylic Acid Functionalized Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes￾β-Cyclodextrin-Nafion Nanocomposite Modified Electrode. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 2016, 
11 (10), 8109–8122. https://doi.org/10.20964/2016.10.07.  
 
Electrochemical, Optical, Magnetic, and Colorimetric Nanosensors 99 
Zhou, C.; Zhang, X.; Huang, X.; Guo, X.; Cai, Q.; Zhu, S. Rapid Detection of Chloramphenicol 
Residues in Aquatic Products Using Colloidal Gold Immunochromatographic Assay. 
Sensors 2014, 14 (11), 21872–21888. https://doi.org/10.3390/s141121872. 
Zhu, C.; Yang, G.; Li, H.; Du, D.; Lin, Y. Electrochemical Sensors and Biosensors Based 
on Nanomaterials and Nanostructures. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87 (1), 230–249. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/ac5039863. VANDANA SINGH1* and SHALVI UPADHYAY2
1
Department of microbiology, School of Allied Health Science, 
Sharda University, Greater Noida, 201306, Uttar Pradesh, India
2
Depatment of Forensic Sciences, School of Allied Health Science, 
Sharda University, Greater Noida, 201306, Uttar Pradesh, India
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: vandana.singh@sharda.ac.in
ABSTRACT
Pollution of soil, water, and air are becoming serious issue worldwide 
due to all the produced toxic chemicals from the different industrial and 
personal activities. This comportment may give rise to several issues related 
to the health of humans and environment which increases the application 
challenges of conventional treatment methodologies. These noxious volatile 
compounds, inorganic gases, heavy metals, day-to-day personal hygiene and 
upkeep products, endocrine-disrupting compounds, chemical dyes, pharma 
products, etc. are disturbing the equilibrium of the globe and enhancing the 
ecological contamination at a high-alarming frequency. Consequently, their 
recognition, adsorption, and elimination are of great need. Therefore, this 
chapter mainly emphasizes on the novel evolutions of nanotechnology and 
its role in detection of the growing hazardous wastes with high efficiency, 
less energy along with lower cost.
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 4
Nanotechnological Revolution: 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials Detecting 
Pollutants102 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
This chapter briefly explains the application of carbon-based nanoma￾terial for the elimination of various volatile organic compounds (VOC), 
aerosols, greenhouse gases, photocatalytic, etc., soil pollutants (pesticide, 
insecticides, drugs, etc.), and water pollutants (biological impurities, 
microorganisms, heavy metals, pathogenic microbes by adsorption, photo￾catalysis membrane processes, photocatalysis, and fumigation as well as 
decontamination processes), all conventional methods used for detection 
(Zhang et al., 2019). 
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The constant development of urbanization and industrialization including 
transportation, production, manufacturing, refining, mining, etc., depletes 
naturally present resources and also produces huge amount of hazardous 
wastes which lead to the pollution of air, soil, and water and consequently are 
threatening to the human health as well as ecological safety (Kreyling et al., 
2010). All the waste generated by humans as well as by industries are released 
in the environment in various categories, such as toxic gases (nitrogen oxide, 
ozone, Sulfur oxide, carbon monooxide, etc.), volatile inorganic compounds, 
etc. in air, whereas water and soil pollutants may consist of pesticides, 
hydrocarbons, heavy metals (cadmium, mercury, lead, etc.) pathogenic 
microbial flora, insecticides Zhang et al. (2019), Fereidoun et al. (2007), these 
pollutants may cause damages to human either directly or indirectly by means 
of absorption, assimilation, or inhalation. Furthermore to this, few toxicants 
have the capacity to enter the foodchain which may be very dangerous for 
human and wild life. Some examples are bioaccumulation of heavy metals in 
fishes and in aquatic biota (Patil et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2011; Thamri et al., 
2016). So, to remove these pollutants, nanotechnology came in loop. 
Nanotechnology mainly deals with nanomaterials which range from 1 
to 100 ηm in size. Due to their extraordinary potential, their applications 
are explored in every field of research, such as in medicine (Ibrahim et al., 
2016), in food industry (Shanthilal and Bhattacharya, 2014; Duncan, 2011), 
in energy (Zang 2011), in bioremediation or pollution treatment (Brame et 
al., 2011; Ibrahim et al., 2016; Karn et al., 2009) in providing improved 
methodologies for the development and alteration of present remediation 
machineries. 
Environmentalist are aggressively evaluating nanomaterials as useful 
tools for contaminants of emerging concerns. The chemical, physical, and 
electrical properties of carbonaceous nanomaterials motivate pioneering Nanotechnological Revolution 103 
resolution to tenacious ecological problems (Loos, 2015). Recently, 
carbon-based nanomaterials and their derivatives are explored to enhance 
the transportation of medicines within compressed tissues, precisely in the 
case of tumorous cells or tissues and use specially designed carbon nano￾tubes as artificial trans-membrane apertures. Correspondingly, ecological 
significance also comprises known-targeted remediation, planned exclusion 
of harmful pollutants, membrane assemblies for water filtration, etc. (Balam￾urugan et al., 2011). These carbon-based-nanomaterials empower ecological 
importance with less consequences. 
4.2 CARBON-BASED NANOMATERIALS
The molecular level alterations at wide subclass of elements to endeavor 
precise characteristics on the nanoscale are very much in trends. The carbon￾based nanotubes, MoS2, chrysolite, boron, WS2, TiS2, NbS2, kaolinite, 
chrysotile, and other predecessors validate excellent chemical, mechanical, 
physical, and electrical characteristics in contrast to their bulk and 
counter variants. The carbon’s exceptional hybrid forming (hybridization) 
characteristic, also compassion of its morphology to agitations in formation 
conditions, permit it for engineered alterations to that extent that it is not so 
far matched by any other inorganic nanostructures (Mauter and Elimelech, 
2008). The electrical, chemical, and physical, properties of nanocarbon and 
its hybrid forms are same and steady as it was in the carbon’s structures. 
The arrangement of ground state orbital of its electrons is 1s2, 2s2, 2p2. The 
less energy gap amid 2s and 2p electron shells enables the raise of one “s” 
orbital electron to the higher energy “p” orbital that is unfilled in the ground 
state. The bonding relationships among the adjacent atoms, permits carbon’s 
hybridization to sp, sp2, or sp3 configuration. The energy released due to 
covalent bond formation with neighboring atoms provides higher energy state 
to its electronic configuration. This return remains almost equal for the sp2 
and sp3 hybridization states (Mauter and Elimelech, 2008; Hu et al., 2007). 
Due to the raise in pressure and temperature, carbon adopts the thermo￾dynamically stable trigonometric sp3 shape of diamond. On decreasing the 
temperature, carbon goes for planar sp2 configuration and forms monolayer 
sheets with one “π” bond three sigma covalent bonds. The bond configura￾tion of carbonaceous nanomaterials and macroscopic carbon are same, the 
difference lies only in their size and other properties. Nanocarbons are much 
stable than the crystalline forms (Hu et al., 2007; Falcao and Wudl, 2007; 
Mauter and Elimelech, 2008). 104 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
4.3 CLASSIFICATION OF CARBON AND CARBON-BASED 
NANOMATERIAL 
Due to its unique electronic construction, carbon has the property to form 
a polymer with large molecular weight compounds along with elongated 
chains. As its valency is four, it can readily undergo covalent bonding with 
both nonmetals and metals and because of this property, carbon-based 
compounds can occur in varied molecular forms. Carbon also exhibit the 
property of allotropy which means same kind of atoms can be re-organized 
in various shapes, and have changed properties (Falcao and Wudl, 2007). 
Diamond and graphite are the two known examples of naturally occurring 
allotropes of carbon that exist in the environment. On the basis of their shape 
and geometrical structures, the carbon nanomaterials are further classified 
(Fig. 4.1) as tube-shaped as carbon nanotube (CNT), horn-shaped as nano￾horns, the zero-dimensional carbon dots known asthe carbon quantum dots 
(CQDs), and ellipsoidal-shaped carbon nanospheres known as Fullerene. 
FIGURE 4.1 Types of carbon-based nanomaterial. Nanotechnological Revolution 105 
4.3.1 CARBON NANOTUBE
CNTs are carbon allotropes that have exceptional electrical and mechanical 
properties. CNTs are strong, lightweighted, possess high strength compared 
with other nanomaterials. Because of their decent graphical nature and high 
specific surface area, their applications are explored in numerous of areas, 
such as in engineering fieldfor the detection of pollutants, that is, in the 
field of remediation of pollution, battery formation, used as grout due to 
their electrochemical property for making nanocarbon–polymer composites 
etc. CNTs mainly occur in two shapes, that is, either cylindrical, which is 
designed by systematic rolling of graphene sheets or the other one is called 
controlled cap fullerene assembly which appeared in half-shape (Meagan 
et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2019). As carbon nanotube exist in different 
geometrical configurations, they can be visualized by using electron micro￾scope which provides their clear image.. Based on the arrangement, CNTs 
are further classified into two types (Fig. 4.2) 
1. Single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT). 
2. Multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT). 
FIGURE 4.2 Morphology of graphene sheet, SWNT, and MWNT. 
SWNTs and MWNTs are similar in nature with some prominent differences. 
SWNTs are made of one graphene layer in tubular form, whereas MWCNTs 
consist of multiple single-walled tubes nested together inside one another. It 
could be as few as two in number, or as many as 100 plus cylindrical walls. 
Carbon nanotubes are shaped by rolling graphene sheets (single layer of carbon 
atoms) and forming cylindrical molecules. The size of SWCNTs ranges 1–3 
ηm in diameter with the length of few micrometers, whereas in MWCNTs, 
the graphene sheets have the size 0.34 ηm in diameter (interspace distance) 
and are fixed in similar way as concentric layers in a tubular form and the 
MWCNTs are approximately 5–40 ηm in diameter. The properties of CNTs 106 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
are mainly based on their morphology, size, and diameter. When MWCNTs are 
used in composites, only the outer wall usually contributes to the mechanical 
and electrical properties. Among these two types of carbonaceous nanotubes, 
the SWCNTs are more eminent due to their numerous flexible characteristics. 
SWCNTs possess high electrical property due to their hexagonal alignment or 
chirality in tubular axis. Numerous approaches have been made by researchers 
for the preparation of CNTs, such as exfoliation of graphite, chemical vapor 
deposition (CVD), arc discharge, thermal decomposition of SiC, plasma 
CVD, and laser ablation. Among all the enumerated procedures discussed 
above, arc-discharge method was the first method to be used for preparing 
CNTs, whereas laser ablation was first method used for the preparation the 
SWCNTs. In contrast to the SWCNTs, the MWCNTs exhibit high thermal and 
mechanical satiability due to the occurrence of multiple layers. Further, on the 
basis of their distinct geometries, the SWCNTs are further classified into three 
subcategories: (1) zig-zag type (good semiconductor) (2) armchair type (high 
electrical conductivity), and (3) chiral type (semiconductive) (Meagan et al., 
2008; Zhang et al., 2019). 
4.3.2 FULLERENES
In 1985, the Kroto et al. introduced a new class of carbon family known as 
fullerene (Fig. 4.3) (represented as buckminsterfullerene (C60)). A fullerene 
is a carbon allotrope in which the molecules of carbon atoms are connected 
by single and double bonds in a manner to form a closed or partially closed 
net, with fused rings of 5–7 atoms. In defect-free form, fullerenes are net-like 
encircled assemblies composed of 12 (twelve), five-member rings, and an 
undetermined numeral of six-member rings. Morphological constructions 
with a smaller number of hexagons show better sp3 bonding property, more 
reactive sites, and higher straining energies. Isomers with adjacent penta￾gons show lesser stability than isomers with isolated pentagons due to the 
delocalized π bonds (Meagan et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2019). Fullerene is 
a carbon-based transitional allotrope of diamond and graphite, shaped from 
the cluster of reiterating units (n > 20) of atomic Cn, which are conjointly 
attached to make a hollow-cored sphere-shaped surface molecule. The 
carbon atoms are characteristically positioned on the sphere’s surface at the 
apexes of pentagons and hexagons form and allied together by the formation 
of sp2-hybridization covalent bonds. Usually, this C60 form, two bonding 
dimensions/lengths, but in the two lengths, the bonds of 6:5 ring are longer 
than the double bonds of 6:6 type. The main distinct characteristic of C60 Nanotechnological Revolution 107 
is its pentagonal rings which enhances its poor electron delocalization, and 
consequently, C60 acts like an electron lacking alkene, and therefore, tries 
to rapidly react with electron-rich classes. The C60 fullerene is odorless 
because of its tendency of not forming double bonds in the pentagonal ring 
forms. The C60 form is nonvolatile, odorless, black solid with boiling point 
of 800 K (Troshin and Lyubovskaya, 2008; Meagan et al., 2008; Rao et 
al., 1995). Due to all the above characteristics, fullerenes are very much 
explored in medical therapies, in fuel cell, solar cell, electronics arena, 
cosmetic products (low-odor fullerenes, such as, C26, C28, etc.), they act 
as catalyst in chemical reactions, and other relevant fields. C60 fullerenes 
have exceptional properties, such as superconductivity, extra durability, 
and they are radical scavengers which enables them to be easily altered as 
nanocomposites. 
FIGURE 4.3 Morphology of fullerene. 
4.3.3 GRAPHENE
Graphene (Fig. 4.4) is another allotrope of carbon, composed of one/single 
layer of carbon atoms organized in a two-dimensional honeycomb mesh. 
The name Graphene is a combination of two words, that is, graphite and 
ene, which clearly reflects the meaning that the graphite (an allotrope of 
carbon) is composed of stacked layers of graphene. Graphene is composed 
of carbon atoms with sp2 hybridization, secured in a firm hexagonal frame 
to look like a flat plane. Graphene was first introduced by Canadian physicist 
Wallace in 2004. Graphene is also a principal structural element of CNTs and 108 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
fullerenes. The bond length between adjoining atoms of graphene’s carbon 
is about 0.142 nm. The interplanar space between the layers of graphene 
is about 0.335 nm, which basically keeps them stacked together. Graphene 
has exceptionally good physical characteristics, such as thermal stability, 
mechanical rigidity, and electrical conductivity in comparison to their three￾dimensional materials (Meijiao et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2019). 
FIGURE 4.4 Morphology of graphene-based nanostructure. 
4.3.4 CARBON QUANTUM DOTS
Xu et al. (2004) accidentally discovered a novel class of carbon nanoparticle 
with unique fluorescent property during the purification of SWCNTs. Later 
on, Sun et al., in 2006, had renamed these glowing materials as CQDs, and 
the size of these particles was measured to be less than 10 nm (Fig. 4.5). Due 
to their diverse properties, such as gathering optical light and emitting multi￾color adjusted emission, CQDs were potentially explored in the fields of 
bioimaging, catalysis applications, photodegradation, etc. (Grobert, 2007). 
CQDs can be synthesized by using numerous chemical precursors, such as 
thiourea, ammonium citrate, citric acid, benzene, phytic acid phenylenedi￾amine, and ethylene glycol. Researchers reported many low-energy utilizing 
techniques for the preparation of CDQs, such as hydrothermal, solvo￾thermal, ultrasonication, electrochemical, microwave-assisted pyrolysis, and 
chemical oxidation. (Zuo et al., 2015; Georgakilas et al., 2015). The CDQs 
are often biocompatible also exhibit other valuable properties, such as high 
aqueous solubility, large surface area, affinity for biomaterial, low toxicity, Nanotechnological Revolution 109 
inexpensive. They contain abundant surface functional groups. CDQs are 
also explored as gas biosensors and find their application in the detection of 
heavy metals by using sensors (Niu et al., 2018; Bezzon et al., 2019). 
FIGURE 4.5 Structure of carbon quantum dots (CDQ). 
4.3.5 NANO HORNS
Nanohorns were first discovered in 1999 by Iijima while forming CNT. 
Nanohorns are tubule-like or cone-like structures composed of single￾layered graphene sheets. They generally occur in large globular shape, and 
their sizes range from 80 to 100 nm in diameter and very much resembe the 
dahlia flowers. The cone of single nanohorns is about 1−2 nm (dia) from tips 
and 4−5 nm (dia) from the base (Karousis et al., 2016) (Fig. 4.6). 
4.4 PROPERTIES OF CARBON-BASED NANOMATERIALS
The properties of carbon-based nanomaterials, such as chirality, length, 
size, and the number of layers of depend on the alterations in the synthesis 
method, pressure, temperature, catalyst used, and electron field. The 
diameter of carbon nanostructures is an important factor for exploring their 
applications and properties. The size of SWNT is strongly associated to its 
formation method (i.e., compound of σ and α bonds and electron orbital 
re-hybridization). Alteration in bonding structure may encourage some 
properties of the SWCNTs, such as chemical, electronic, mechanical, optical, 110 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
thermal, and elastic properties. All these properties depend on the size of 
nanotubes (diameter) and are complemented by their capillary behavior, in 
terms of ecological and agricultural applications. The thin diameter of the 
inner surface of nanotubes makes them unique to be explored in separation, 
novel molding, and size exclusion processes. The combination of long 
tubules and narrow diameters also indicate the extraordinary aspect ratios in 
nanotubular structures. The properties, such as large surface area and volume 
ratio differentiates these nanomaterials from their counter-microscale. The 
ratio of ΔG-surface/ΔG-volume accelerates, where ΔG signifies the change 
in free energy among the nanoscale structure and bulk materials (Jost et al., 
2004; Fornasiero et al., 2008). 
FIGURE 4.6 Structure of carbon-based nanohorns. 
The surface area, size, and shape of carbon nanomaterials are extremely 
dependent on the solvent aggregation and chemical state. The electron char￾acteristics, thermal characters, aggregation behavior, mechanical strength, 
and physical–chemical properties of the nanomaterials are altered by impuri￾ties adsorbed to the surface of nanomaterials (Jost et al., 2004; Fornasiero et 
al., 2008). The carbon-based nanomaterials’ bonding configuration confers 
exceptional optical, conductive, and thermal properties which are very much 
useful in electronic industries. These new electronic properties also play an 
important role in ecological sensing devices and in novel ecological reme￾diation practices for persistent organics. Highly tunable bonds gap, stability, 
low ionization capacity, high current-carrying potential, and efficient field Nanotechnological Revolution 111 
emission properties are extremely the cited properties of SWCNTs and are 
also associated with diameter, chirality, length, and the number of concentric 
tubules. Many hypothetical along with practical works state that bond gaps 
are reliant on diameter and chirality of the nanotubes. Armchair structures 
signified by (n,n) tubes are metallic and self-governed by tube arc and 
diameter. In nanotubes, the carbon atoms are patterned in zigzag or helical 
forms, which act as semiconductors. The ionization potential of SWCNTs is 
obligatory to stimulate an electron from the ground state to the excited state 
(Patel et al., 2018; Nasir et al., 2018). 
Molecular interaction and sorption: The carbon-based nanomaterials 
are usually steady with physicochemical properties and the sorption and 
molecular interaction are due to concepts, including hydrophobicity, adsorp￾tion, and electrostatics. The molecular theories can explain the chemical 
and physical processes at nanoscale. The potential energies produced by the 
interaction between carbon bonds (for both van der Waals attractive forces 
and Pauli repulsion) are initiated due to overlapping of electron orbitals at 
short separation distances. The hydrophobicity and capillarity contribute to 
the adsorption behavior and orientation of sorbates in microporous carbons. 
The adsorption studies of carbon nano also demonstrate the properties, such 
as high adsorption capacity, rapid equilibrium rates, minimal hysteresis in 
dispersion, and low sensitivity to pH. Hydrophobicity mainly states the 
strength between water–particle interaction and water–water interactions to 
particle–particle interaction. The hydrophobic properties of CNTs and C-60 
encourage drying and removal of interstitial water over low scale (length) 
and stimulate their accumulation state. 
The previous works states that the capillary forces present in nanotubes 
are extremely strong, and taking molecules from vapor and liquid phases 
into the molecular “tubes” by means of van-der-waals attractive forces and 
dipolar (persuaded dipole interactions with polar molecules) (Patel et al., 
2018; Nasir et al., 2018). 
In ecological studies, the adsorptive capacity of carbon nano has compre￾hensive inferences for the removal of contaminant or pollutants. Adsorption 
of environmental pollutants to sorbents, such as clay, NOM, and activated 
carbon plays a vital role in engineered and natural ecology. The sorption 
capacity of carbon nano as sorbents are restricted by activated energy of 
sorption bonds, thickness of surface-active sites, slow kinetics, and nonequi￾librium of sorption in heterogeneous systems. The huge sizes of traditional 
sorbents have some limitations such as low porosity which complicates the 
subsurface remediation. On the other hand, the carbonaceous nanosorbents 112 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
possess large surface area to volume ratio and precise and equal distributed 
porosity along with enlarge surface chemistry overcome most of these essen￾tial limitations. 
4.5 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS AND ITS DETECTIONS
Decontaminating soil, air, and water quality represents a crucial task of the 
century. Pollutants of environment (air, water, and soil) can be classified 
as inorganic (e.g., phosphates, nitrates, heavy metals, toxic gases, etc.) and 
synthetic organic compounds (e.g., VOC, endocrine disruptors, volatile 
gases, weedicides, pesticides, insecticides, herbicides and fertilizers, drugs, 
pharmaceutical, or forensic substances. Table 4.1 summarizes some typical 
environmental contaminants of air, water, and soil and all are influencing 
several injurious effects on human health, even if they are at very low level 
(Zhang et al, 2011). 
With regard to air pollution, two forms of toxic gases are of main concern: 
VOC (volatile organic compounds) and inorganic gases. The inorganic toxic 
gases mainly include nitrogen oxide, sulfur oxide, hydrogen sulfide and other 
sulfur base gases, whereas, VOCs are main contaminants of air, released 
from the exhaust emission of vehicle, evaporation techniques of oil–gas 
industries, industries release, oil refining, storage and transportation, pharma 
waste management, waste material disposal, etc. which can evaporate effort￾lessly and disperse at room temperature and pressure due to their low boiling 
point and high vapor pressure in the environment. The SO2 and NO2 in the 
environment are released from sulfur and nitrogen-based impurities from 
combustion of fossil fuels, respectively have distinct foul odor. The 50% 
lethal dose (LC50) of NO2 gas is stated to be 174 ppm for 60 min, whereas 
the maximum 50% lethal dose (LC50) of SO2 is 110 ppm on exposure for 
30 min. VOCs are mainly defined as any compound of carbon, excluding 
ammonium carbonate, carbon monoxide, carbonic acid, carbon dioxide, 
and metallic carbides and carbonates. The release of VOCs in air has led 
to hazardous ecological glitches, for example, mutagenic, pathogenic, and 
sometimes very fatal diseases (Zhang et al., 2011; Thamri et al., 2016; Patel 
et al., 2018; Nasir et al., 2018). In water pollution, numerous f heavy metal 
and inorganic ions enter the surface of water as well as ground/waste water 
along with several organic mixtures, such as, herbicides, pesticides, poly￾cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs), 
pharmaceuticals, personal care products (PPCPs), and dyes which work as 
contaminants are released into water source. TABLE 4.1 Examples of Some Pollutants of Environmental.
Pollutant Due to Affect 
Products of benzene Components of solvent, hand wash, industrial chemical, gasoline Water and air (indoor)
Cyclohexane Components industrial chemical Air, soil 
Toluene Disinfectant solvent and pharma industrial chemical Atmospheric air and water
Acetone Personal care products, solvent, pharma industrial chemical Air (outdoor/indoor)
Trichloroethylene Industrial chemical, solvent, household flush Air, water 
NO2 Fuel, fossil burning, metal casting, industrial exhaust Air and atmosphere
Sulfur dioxide Combustion procedures for sulfur-containing minerals and industry outlets Air 
Hydrogen sulfide Petrochemical and pharma industry, hospital waste. Atmosphere, water
CO Automobile exhaust, insufficient combustion of carbonaceous materials, petroleum Atmosphere and air
and pharma Industries
Ammonia Hospital/medical, gas and chemical effluents of industry, pharma industry outlets Air, soil, atmosphere
Cobalt Domestic waste, Industrial waste, pharma waste, nuclear power waste and mineral Soil, water, Atmosphere, 
mining, 
Cd (cadmium) Domestic waste, industrial effluent, Pharma- industries, mining of minerals Soil, water, atmosphere 
Mercury Medical/hospital waste, aquaculture, industrial effluent waste, pharma industries Atmosphere, water, soil
Pb (Lead) Petroleum industries waste, pharma industry effluent, vehicle exhaust, mineral mining, Air, water, soil, atmosphere
Nickel Pharma and other industrial effluent waste, mineral mining waster Water, soil 
Chromium Pharma, industrial waste, fossil fuel burning Air, atmosphere, water
Phenol Domestic cleaner, solvent, industrial chemical, medicinal waste Soil, water 
Bisphenol Pharma/hospital waste, industrial waste chemical Water, soil 
2,4-Dichlorophenol Disinfectant, insecticides, pesticide and pharmaceutical effluent and intermediate Soil, water 
waste, solvents 
113 Nanotechnological Revolution TABLE 4.1 (Continued) 
Pollutant Due to Affect 
Perfluorooctanoic acid Pharma waste, industrial emulsifier, surfactant, Water, atmosphere
Atrazine Insecticide, pesticide Water, atmosphere 
Phthalate Pharma waste, plasticizer waste Water, atmosphere
Methylene blue dye Hospital waste, dyeing, chemical analysis and detection, medical Atmosphere, water
Methyl orange dye Hospital waste, dyeing, chemical analysis and detection, medical Water, atmosphere
Rhodamine B dye Hospital waste, chemical analysis, dyeing, and detection, medical, cosmetics industry Water, atmosphere
Rhodamine 6G dye Hospital waste, dyeing, medical, chemical analysis and detection Water, atmosphere
Parathion Agricultural pesticides Soil, water 
Malathion Agricultural pesticides Soil, water 
Diazinon Agricultural pesticides Soil, water 
Azinphos-methyl Agricultural pesticides Soil, water 
Drugs for TB and Cancer Pharma industries, hospital waste Soil, water 
Crude oil Petroleum industries and vehicle waste Soil, water, atmosphere
Biomolecules Human waste, animal waste, microbial waste, agricultural waste Soil, water, air 
114 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination Nanotechnological Revolution 115 
Water pollution was further characterized into six types by The United 
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), that is, biodegradable 
waste, sediment, plant nutrients, heat, radioactive pollutants and hazardous 
and toxic chemicals. Thus, contaminated water has key components, such 
as organic toxins, industrial effluents or discharges, pathogens, pharma 
industrial waste containing different types anions, along with heavy metals, 
etc. cannot be naturally degraded in the environment and tend to alter the 
natural properties of water (Liu et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2011). The heavy 
metal ions, such as Zn2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Co2+, and Pb2+are extremely toxic even 
at traces to the humans, plants, aquatic-life, animals, birds, and the earth. 
The EPA and WHO have fixed the minimal/maximal acceptable contact or 
exposure limits of these toxicants in water (Xuan and Park, 2018; Philips 
et al., 2012). Another pollutant named as EDCs is very harmful and can 
interrupt the hormonal activities via interaction to hormonal receptors which 
mainly affects animals and mammals’ reproductive systems. Furthermore, 
consequently, even low-level exposure of EDCs may cause diseases like 
cancer and diabetes. 
In addition, PPCPs are another group of artificial organic compounds that 
have potential to disrupt the function of the endocrine system at trace level. 
Other than that, artificial dyes utilized in the bakery, textiles, food, paper, 
cosmetic industries, etc., can also cause hazardous effects on environment 
along with health hazard to humans when released into water source (Zhang 
et al., 2011). Pharmaceutical drugs and products, such as anti-spasm, antibi￾otics, antiseptics, personal care products, pain killers, disinfectants, toxoids, 
hormonal drugs, and muscle relaxants, etc., are often present in domestic 
wastewater, ponds, lakes, rivers, and other water bodies. They really cause 
adverse effects on humans as well as on the aquatic environment at very low 
rate or concentration, but lasting ingestion of these compounds may be very 
dangerous (Chen et al., 2018). 
The pollution of Soil is mainly triggered when harmful compounds are 
entering the natural soil environment from the waste. The main contaminants 
of soil are heavy metals which are existing naturally in soil but barely at toxic 
stages. The key sources of pollutants in soil are form landfilling, insecticides, 
mining, manufacturing industrial effluent sites, industrial wastes, such as 
batteries, paint residues, pesticides, electrical wastes, etc., agricultural and 
municipal waste. Heavy metals are one of the most stimulating pollutants 
of soil because of their nondegradability nature. They stay in this environ￾ment for long time except selenium and mercury (they can be transformed 
and volatilized by microorganisms). In the case of soil contamination, OPP 116 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(organophosphate pesticides) which includes parathion, methyl parathion, 
malathion, diazinon, phosmet, triazophos, azinphos-methyl, oxydemeton, 
tetrachlorvinphos, dichlorvos, chlorpyrifos have major contribution. The 
OPP acquire toxicity from their ability to inhibit cholinesterase which 
mainly causes neurotoxicity, and also has the capacity to cause interruption 
to the endocrine system of the organisms. This is the known fact that some￾times pesticides are transformed in harmful compounds in the environment 
through biological, physical, and chemical interaction procedures (Ibrahim 
et al., 2016). 
All these contaminants of soil, air, and water, such as pesticides, volatile 
organic compounds, toxic and noxious inorganic gases, personal care 
products, heavy metals, dyes, pharmaceutical products, endocrine-disrupting 
chemicals, etc. are enhancing environmental toxicants and also disturbing the 
equilibrium of the earth at alarming rate. Thus, their adsorption, detection, 
and elimination are required at great level, and for the same purpose, several 
carbon-based-nanomaterials are been explored and verified to be ideal, which 
includes graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon dots, mesoporous carbon, 
diamond, etc. (Zhang et al., 2011; Ibrahim et al., 2016). 
The detection and monitoring of environmental pollutants, needs devices 
that must be rapid in working, error-free, sensitive, stable, effective, effort￾less, and selective. The sensitive and rapid detection along with effective 
elimination of an alarming amount of persistent and developing pollutants 
of environment is a major task. Keeping the current scenario in loop, these 
problems can be better resolved by employing nanotechnology in addition to 
traditional approaches. Due to exceptional features of carbon nanomaterials, 
such as size, high surface area, photoelectronic, adsorption, and photocatalytic 
properties, they have developed to be significant resources in the analytical 
detection and remediation of pollutants of the environment. 
For the detection purpose of these contaminants, recently, numerous 
sensors and biosensors based on carbon nanoparticles have been explored and 
they are further categorized on the basis of their type of pollutant detection. 
4.5.1 TYPES OF SENSORS BASED ON CARBON NANOMATERIALS
The elimination of environmental contaminants is the primary need, the 
presence of these contaminants is to be determined. The vigorous and rapid 
sensors have been explored by various researchers to recognize contaminants 
at the molecular level, and they can improve the ecological safety. These 
sensors are coming in the loop when continuous monitoring devices are Nanotechnological Revolution 117 
required to detect these pollutants at the trace level. All sensors are based on 
deferent principle based on their operating system. Following are the sensors 
based on carbon nanomaterials (Bezzon et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2011) 
1.	 Biosensors 
2.	 Chemical sensors 
3.	 Pressor sensors 
4.	 Strain sensors 
5.	 Flow sensors 
6.	 Mass sensors 
7.	 Temperature sensors 
1.	 Biosensors: These sensors, also called nanobiosensors, are mainly 
used to monitor biological contaminants, that is, to recognize biomol
ecules. These sensors are mainly composed of biological constituents, 
such as oligo- or polynucleotide, proteins (e.g., enzymes, antibodies, 
cell receptors, etc.), microorganisms, or even entire tissues (Bezzon 
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2011).The combination of CNTs with 
biomolecules has given rise to hybridized systems, in which CNTs 
are working as nanolevel electronic elements (e.g., CNT-Field-effect 
transistors), as electrode elements (e.g., enzyme electrodes), and as 
attachment site or space, upon which biomolecules can be attached. 
Following are subtype of biosensor based on carbon nanomaterial 
(Yi et al., 2005; Bezzon et al., 2019). 
a.	 Amperometric biosensor 
b.	 Potentiometric transducers 
c.	 Chronoamperometric biosensor 
d.	 Conductimetric biosensor 
e.	 Optical biosensor 
f.	 Piezoelectric biosensor 
a.	 Amperometric biosensor: The principle of these biosensors 
is working on the measurement of current produced when a 
constant potential is applied. The current measured is corre
lated with the reduction/oxidation of an electrochemical 
species in terms of the percentage at which it is produced or 
consumed by a biological component which was attached at 
the surface of electrode. 
b.	 Potentiometric transducers: These sensors are mainly 
measuring the changes in potential, which is directly propor
tional to the concentration of the analyte present in the sample. 
­
­
­118 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
c.	 Chronoamperometric biosensors: In this type of sensors, 
enzymes are required. These enzymes do short-term reaction 
which is required to proceed before applying the potential 
step. In these types of biosensors, biocomponents are kept 
between two closely kept electrodes. The main principle 
of these type of biosensor is that the overall change occurs 
in reaction in the conductivity of solution induced by the 
production or consumption of ionic species. 
d.	 Optical biosensors: The principle of these biosensors is 
based on the change in the optical phenomena, for instance, 
fluorescence, absorption, scattering, luminescence, refrac
tive index, etc., which are formed when light is reflected on 
the surface of the sensor. 
e.	 Piezoelectric transducer: These sensors convert one form of 
energy to another form by taking the benefit of piezoelectric 
characteristics of certain crystals or materials, such as QCM 
(Quartz Crystal Microbalance). 
2.	 Chemical sensors: Chemical sensors mainly detect and screens the 
VOCs. Currently, the determination of gas samples (chemical compo
nents) is normally done with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
(GC-MS) (Jia et al., 2005), this technique, though extremely sensi
tive and selective, but at the same time, it has limitations too, such 
as highly costly, need skilled users and of limited portability. On the 
other hand, the CNTs, are useful constituents in chemical sensing due 
to their sensitiveness of their electrical conductance to the chemical 
analytes present in the sample of gas (Frazier et al., 2014). This is a 
prolific direction to enhancing the sensitivity and selectivity of these 
materials to a specific analyte. These sensors can work with metals, 
polymers, or small molecules in covalent or noncovalent manner. 
The application of these materials along with different substrates into 
devices can produce simple, rapid, potable, and low-power sensors, 
which may be capable of detecting wide range of contaminants or 
vapors at parts-per-million (ppm) concentrations. To prepare these 
types of sensors, solid composites of SWCNTs are mainly employed 
in combination with small molecules (PENCILs (Process Enhanced 
NanoCarbon for Integrated Logic) as the sensing material, and 
graphite as electrodes. The DRAFT (Deposition of Resistors with 
Abrasion Fabrication Technique) technique is used to deposit these 
materials on different type of substrates. It is already reported that 
­
­
­Nanotechnological Revolution 119 
the chemical reactivity of SWCNTs can be significantly improved 
by providing strain on SWCNTs (Lobez et al., 2014). Although, the 
deposition of solid-sensing materials on the electrode surface makes 
carbon nano-based sensors simple, solvent-free, and easily acces
sible, but along with application, some limitations also exist. The 
thickness, location, size, and distribution of these sensors may result 
in the formation of conductive carbon “film” which is difficult to 
control and is limited to the substrate (e.g., surface roughness and 
distribution of cellulose fibers on the surface of paper) (Frazier et 
al., 2014). The experiment-based studies mention that mechanical 
alteration can alter the electrical conductivity of semiconducting and 
metallic CNTs (Wang et al., 2008). This property shows that the use 
of CNTs can develop highly sensitive electromechanical sensors. 
3.	 Pressure sensors: The CNTs–and graphene are the most appropriate 
nanomaterials to be used in pressure-sensing technology. These 
pressure sensors are based on capacitive, inductive, and piezoresistive 
phenomena, and can be employed for regulation and screening of 
the pressure of different types practical applications (Karimov et 
al., 2011). Among all the three sensors (i.e., Piezoresistive pressure 
sensors, Inductive pressure sensors, and Capacitive pressure sensors), 
the piezoresistive pressure sensors demonstrate outstanding potential 
for the detection of real-time pollutants and are cost-effective, simple 
device structure, and easy signal gathering. Highly sensitive and 
flexible piezoresistive pressure sensors are based on micropatterned 
films with the coating of carbon nanotubes (Ali et al., 2018). 
4.	 Strain sensors: Generally, the applications of nanocarbons in 
mechanical sensors are associated with the measurement of strain. As 
CNTs gain special attention as they demonstrate both piezoelectric 
and piezoresistive behaviors under pressure. Because of the above 
properties, CNTs are explored to be used in sensors, and usually, they 
are determining the variation in electrical resistance or voltage when 
exposed to external action. The strain sensors are mainly focused on 
piezoresistive effects, and electromechanical effect which is shown 
by most of the composite matrices and CNT arrangements. Piezo
resistive strain behavior of CNTs has been thoroughly exploited 
in the form of sensors. The strain sensors are mainly explored in 
environmental pollutant detections. Thin film piezoresistive strain 
sensors in combination with single-walled and multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes serve as good substitutes for developing novel sensors 
and show promising potential. Carbon nanotube-based strain sensors 
­
­120 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
surrounded by structural materials can work as both multidirec
tional and multifunctional sensors with high strain resolution on 
nanoscale. The electromechanical properties of carbon nanotube 
as strain sensors display an exceptional application compared with 
the existing strain sensors due to a blend of outstanding electrical 
property and increased elastic moduli (Novoselov, 2004). 
5.	 Flow sensors: These sensors are used for the quantification of the 
flow rate of a mobile gas and liquid. A flow sensor based on CNT is 
based on the formation of voltage/current in a bundle of SWCNTs 
when it comes in contact with the moving gas or liquid. 
6.	 Mass sensing: The mechanism of these sensors is depending on the 
resonant frequency of a CNT–resonator when it is exposed to alteration 
in external loading or attached mass. Micromechanical resonators 
(microcantilevers) are based on the mechanism that the resonant 
frequency of the cantilever depends on the inverse square root of the 
cantilever mass. Hence, an alteration in the mass of the resonator is 
measured as peak in the frequency of the resonant. The small size and 
unique mechanism of the CNTs make these nanostructures capable 
candidate for substituting cantilever structures in a mass sensor. The 
limitations of these sensors are difficulty in measuring added variation 
in the resonant frequency, because of the added mass. 
7.	 Temperature sensors: These sensors are mainly sensitive to detection 
of type and temperature of the gas in the environment. These are triple 
electrode-based sensor, have one cathode along with two extracting 
and accumulating electrodes, where CNTs are vertically aligned and 
are disposed on top of the cathode, and then the power is applied 
in between the electrodes. In this system, CNTs play a vital role to 
introduce electrical breakdown, subsequently, this type of systems do 
not change adsorption or desorption of gas molecules. Temperature 
of the gas affects the grade of ionization and released current that 
stimulates the accumulating current. This sensor can sense tempera
ture range from 20°C to 110°C with a sensitivity of 22.72µA/°C (N2) 
and 4.74µA/°C (air) both at 110°C (Song et al., 2017). 
4.5.2 EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT CARBON-BASED SENSORS FOR THE 
DETECTION OF POLLUTANTS
The application of carbon-based nanostructures as a gas sensor increased 
because of their structure and morphology, which allow the detection 
­
­Nanotechnological Revolution 121 
and quantification of gas. The CNTs have hollow structure and enhanced 
surface/vol ratio. This makes them an ideal model for the adsorption of gas 
molecules. CNTs can be applied in many systems in the form of gas sensor, 
such as in capacitance, ionization, sorption, resonance frequency shift, etc. 
Generally, these systems sensors are based on change in applied voltage/ 
current concerning the quantity of adsorbed gas molecules onto the surface 
provided, and the observations are formed by electrical signals produced 
through the interaction between the sensor and gas molecules. As a gas 
sensor, the carbonaceous material play a very important role in the determi
nation and detection of polluting gases, especially carbon monoxide (CO), 
hydrogen sulfide (H2S), nitrogen oxide (NOx), methane (CH4), and ammonia 
(NH3). GPN, GO, CNTs, and fullerene are some key carbon allotropic forms 
used in this kind of sensor. 
Ricciardella et al. (2017) demonstrated that the mechanical exfoliation 
(ME) method can produce less-defective material of GOP, and a nominal 
level of defectiveness brings rapid interface during the contact time toward 
the gas. 
Among all gases, the NO2 gas is very harmful for human’s respiratory 
system, if the exposure concentration is above the threshold limit. This 
is also accountable for acid rain. According to UEPA (US Environmental 
Protection Agency), the recommended yearly exposure concentration of 
NO2 is about 53 ppb. Therefore, the detection of such low concentration 
of NO2 gas requires a very sensitive system (sensor). On comparison with 
different methods, Seekaew et al. (2017) proved that the performance of 
Graphene(bilayered) gas sensor by using CVD method has high selectivity 
toward the NO2 in contrast to ethanol (C2H5OH), CO2, NH3, H2, and CO. 
Other group of researchers (Wu et al., 2018) used hydrophobic rGO 
(reduced graphene oxide) for the analysis and detection of NO2. It is well 
known that graphene has tremendously hydrophilic functional groups, such 
as carboxylic, epoxide, and hydroxyl, which decrease their conductivity 
and make these GO-based gas sensors very sensitive to humidity. The rise 
in defect area and surface area may expand gas adsorption and sensibility. 
These NO2 sensor demonstrates high sensitivity at about 25.5ppm−1 and a 
prominent low limit of detection at about 9.1ppb. 
Furthermore, in gases, NH3 is required to be monitored due to its property 
of causing water (surface) pollution, acidification, and eutrophication of soil. 
NH3 can be detected by highly sensitive NH3 sensor by using laser ablation 
technique which is prepared by the combination of GPN and vanadium 
pentoxide (V2O5) (Kodu et al., 2017). Other than NO2, many more gases 
­ 
 
122 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
exist which may act as air pollutant and are injurious to health, such as H2S, 
which can be fatal due to loss of breathing. Graphene-based H2S gas sensor 
is showing highly sensitive response and fast (~1s) along with rapid recovery 
time (~20s), and it can detect CH4, CO2, N2, O2 below the recommended 
level (100 ppm). 
A constituent of natural gas, named as CH4 can also be very harmful, 
it may cause suffocation and explosions when present in the environment 
exceeding the permitted level. Chen et al. (2018), formed a sensor based on 
Li+
 incapacitated CNTs which produces a CNT-Li+ thin film, while exposure 
of CH4 gas to CNT-Li+
, the Li+
 strengthen up and induces dipole interaction. 
The alteration on hybridization state of CNT (from sp2 to sp3
) helps to link 
CH4 to its p-bonds, which affect the system’s resistance. With reference to 
above, this sensor demonstrates a high sensitivity to CH4 (14.5% at 500 ppm), 
which makes this device an excellent choice. 
Even though H2 is not a polluting agent, its properties, such as high 
flammability making worries about its storage, production, and transporta￾tion. A sensor formed by graphene-coated CNTs (GCNTs) and adorned with 
nanoparticles of Pt were used for the detection of H2. It is well known that 
Graphene–CNTs are used to promote a decent electrical conductivity along 
with high surface area, they are also good to be used in sensors. Though, 
these carbon nanomaterials are virtually insensitive while exposure to H2 
So, Pt nanos have been employed due to their high catalytic activity toward 
molecule of H2 gas. GCNTs-based sensors are prepared using single-furnace 
catalytic technique for the detection of H2 gas. Gas-sensing sensor displayed 
a steady and reproducible response to hydrogen and as a conclusion it is noted 
that the rise in temperature leads to reduced sensitivity (Jaidev et al., 2018). 
The carbonaceous-gas sensor was also used to detect C2H5OH, O2, and 
infrequent gases. The C60 FULLERENE–zinc oxide tetrapod materials were 
explored by some researchers for the detection of ethanol gas (Smazna et al., 
2018). 
Algadri et al. (2018) made sensor for sensing H2 gas by applying dielec￾trophoresis technique (sensor with glass substrate and Pd electrodes), they 
produced multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) by using a combination of graphite 
and ferrocene, which were microwaved (heated) and further treated at room 
temperature with nitric acid. As a result, MWCNTs were deposited onto a 
substrate (glass) between the electrodes of Pd. As a result, this device demon￾strated good sensitivity (max sensitivity about 239%) to the hydrogen gas 
when come in contact with the mixture of H2-N2 (20–1000ppm) at 0.05V. 
This technique also suggests that MWCNTs enhance the sensitivity of gas 
sensors by forming a passage for the current to move faster. Nanotechnological Revolution 123 
C20 fullerene are also being used as a gas sensor, specifically to detect 
rare and diatomic gas. Zhao et al. (2017) explored nonequilibrium Green’s 
function formalism combined with density functional theory (DFT) for the 
analysis of steadiest adsorption structure and energy along with transport 
characteristics on C20 molecular intersections with diatomic gas. Outcomes 
of this displayed that O2 and NO could be sensed selectively, whereas C20 
also has limitation for sensing CO. Their study proved that C20-fullerene 
demonstrate an excellent capacity to be explored as nanosensors for the 
detection of gas. 
In addition to the detection and quantification of the above-mentioned 
gases, nanocarbon sensors can be explored to evaluate the temperature of 
ionized gases. Song et al. (2018) reported that these sensors can sense or 
determine temperature ranges of 20°C–110°C with a sensitivity of 4.74 µA/°C 
(air) and 22.72 µA/°C (N2) (both at 110°C). 
Carbon-based sensors also show countless viability to be utilized as 
pollutant detector. The nitrogen cycle is an essential component of many 
living beings, and nitrogen is derived from nitrates as important nutrient 
source and enters in water cycle too. Besides screening of NO2 and other 
air gases, detection of nitrogen in water is a recent apprehension for human 
health. Water eutrophication is an ecological problem which reduces the 
oxygen rate, leading to death of fishes and other aquatic faunas. Alahi et 
al. (2018) reported about low-cost graphene–nitrate-sensor. In comparison 
to other sensor, this sensor is low cost, provides real-time response, and 
needs nominal time for sample preparation along with error value below 
5%. Results obtained was confirmed by using UV-spectrometry. Chen et 
al. (2018) also established a sensor for nitrate, using rGO in combination 
with benzyl-tri-ethyl-ammonium chloride. This sensor can sense a low limit 
of 1.1 µg/L in a short fraction of period (2–7s) and also shows selectivity 
against interfering ions (Cl−
). 
Phenolic compounds are other major environment contaminants that 
need to be monitored. The boron-doped nanodiamond electrochemical 
sensors are in use for the detection of monophenols and bi-phenols. In this 
sensor, nanodiamonds were released onto GCEs (glassy carbon electrodes) 
and used for the detection of phenolic compounds. Little alteration with this 
method also helped in the detection of aromatic phenolic compound called 
hydroquinone (HQ) (Chen et al., 2017). 
For the determination of organic and inorganic contaminants of water, 
fullerene-based nanocomposites were explored. Wei et al. (2018) proposed 
photocatalytic sensor, for the detection of organic compounds, which was 
made up of Au-TiO2 nanoparticles and C60 fullerene (Au-TiO2-C60). In this, 124 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
TiO2 was working as a regular catalyst material, Au–np (nanoparticles) was 
working as co-catalyst and plasmonic sensor, whereas C60 was explored as 
an accelerator for redox reaction. The Au nanoplasmonic peak (in redox 
reaction) was measured using surface plasmon spectroscopy. The frequency 
of plasmonic waves indicates the rate of reaction and was used to estimate 
the concentration of organic compounds in water. Due to its great accuracy 
and susceptibility, plasmonic sensor are observed to be good solution for the 
determination of water quality. 
When heavy metals accumulate in the environment by food chains may 
cause many health issues, such as kidney and liver malfunctioning or failure 
to humans. Liu et al. (2018) formed graphene-based sensor for sensing of ions, 
such as Pb2+, Cu2+, and Cd2+, using anodic stripping voltammetry technique. 
In this process, highly conductive electrodes coated with graphene films 
were employed for the analysis of heavy metals. Observations exhibited by 
this sensor are ranging from 5 to 400µg/L and detection limit of 1.0µg/L for 
Pd ion, 5.0µg/L for Cu ion, and 0.5µg/L for Cd ion. 
A sensor based on reduced graphene oxide–CNT was explored by Xuan 
and Park (2018) along with gold substrate for the detection of metallic ions. 
In this process, the electrode was made up of bismuth (Bi) (environmen
tally). The sensor was based on silicon-coated biscuits coated with a film of 
polyimide and a layer of reduced graphene–CNT. The sensor’s efficiency 
was measured by cyclic voltammetry technique for the detection of Pb ions 
and Cd ions. As an observation, this sensor showed its better significance in 
terms of sensitivity, surface area of working electrode, stability, and response 
time in comparison to other traditional sensors. 
The GPN–quantum dots (QDs) were also explored in the form of fluores
cence sensor for Pb2+. In this method, carbon nanoparticles were immobilized 
with the mixture of amine-modified and 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethyl-aminopropyl) 
carbodiimide. The combination of Graphene–QD and nanoparticles led to 
fluorescence reducing and retrieval. As a result, this sensor presented a good 
selectivity for Pb2+ than other metal ions, specifically Hg2+. 
Menacer et al. (2018) formed and reported about CNT-based sensor for 
the detection of acetone. In this SWCNT was explored as a sensor due to 
its extraordinary physical properties, such as length, diameter, chirality, and 
molecular arrangement onto the sensor surface. As a result, it was measured 
that the natural frequency of CNT resonator decreases with the increase in 
the number of acetone molecules and frequency increases with decrease of 
CNT dimension along with high chirality. This method is highly effective, 
sensitive, and inexpensive compared with other methods. 
­
­Nanotechnological Revolution 125 
Lezi (2017) explored Graphene-Nafion-based sensor for the detec￾tion of caffeine. They evaluated the results with a conventional HPLC 
(high-performance liquid chromatography) method. The limit of detection 
was 0.021 µmol, with standard deviation of 2%. Study was conducted for 
other samples also such as Citric acid, maltose, sucrose, Na+
, K+
, Ca2+ at 
0.1 µmol/L and found that these samples unaffected with the determination 
of 1.0 µmol/L of caffeine. 
The quantity of water vapor or moisture in a gas is known as humidity, 
which is a critical constituent of industrial and lab processes, pharma indus￾tries, agriculture, food storage along with production, chemistry, textile 
industry, semiconductors. Therefore, in these methods, humidity control 
system is essential to attain appropriate outcomes. Li et al. (2018), also 
projected an extremely sensitive sensor for humidity based on graphene 
oxide with consistently spread MWCNTs, where MWCNTs were working 
as detecting agents. As we know van-der-Waals interactions can hamper the 
competence of carbonaceous material, the grapheme oxide was used in the 
mixture to promote the dispersion of MWCNTs. The electrodes were made 
up of a Si-wafer coated with silicon dioxide (SiO2) and Au/Ti coats, and then 
the detecting film of MWCNT-GO was put onto the surface of the substrate. 
The researcher also reported that the sensor with the MWCNT/GO film has 
13% more sensibility compared with the sensor with graphene oxide alone. 
Graphene-based sensors are explored for the detection of humidity of 
the gases. Leng et al. (2018) constructed humidity sensor by using modified 
diamine–graphene oxide compounded with Nafion-polymer to form hybrid 
film. The result is observed as 10% lasting stability and linearity than the 
other counter methods. 
The other widely in use sensor for humidity is associated with QMC 
because of its high digital frequency yield, low cost, and high resolution. This 
sensing system comprises of QCM coated with nanodiamond–MWCNTs 
hybrid film which is highly sensitive to humidity and helps in the detection 
of humidity (Yu et al., 2018). 
Ding et al. (2018) applied QCM-based humidity sensor in association 
with C60/GO. Graphene oxide (GO) has hydrophilic functional groups 
which expand its sensibility. While coming in contact with molecules of 
water the viscosity of (GO films increases, which may damage the sensor. 
Therefore, in order to reduce GO’s aggregation, C60 was added which forms 
hydrophobic separation coatings between GO film sheets. Deposition of GO 
onto QCM electrode was achieved using drop-casting technique. After the 
comparative assessment, it was exposed that QCM humidity sensor coated 126 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
with C60/GO- was better than QMC coated with GO due to its stability, 
dynamic response, and recovery properties. 
For humidity in gaseous form, Saha and Das (2018) applied fullerene-C60 
along with nanopores of γ-alumina (Al2O3) thick films as a humidity sensor. 
AFM (atomic force microscopy) and SEM (scanning electron microscope) 
were used to check the porosity and surface area. The response, sensitivity, 
recovery, and hysteresis were performed as electrical characterization. 
Results revealed that the modified version of C60-γ-Al2O3 sensor was capable 
of determining the low range of humidity in a gaseous atmosphere with low 
pressure and was extremely sensitive too. 
Carbon nanostructures exhibit both piezoelectric and piezoresistive 
behaviors under strain. Because of these properties, CNTs were explored 
for developing strain sensors. Generally, a change in the electrical voltage 
of CNT composites are measured, subjected to peripheral action. The utmost 
substantial development in strain sensors are based on piezoresistive effects, 
and that is due to stronger electromechanical effect of most CNT and composite 
matrices. Yu et al. (2018) established a highly sensitive strain sensor. This 
sensor was mainly based on conductive–SBS (styrene–butadiene–styrene)– 
CNT fiber prepared by wet-spinning method. Ma et al. (2017) explored a 
method for the detection of real-time strain/stress of composites by evaluating 
piezoresistivity and electrochemical impedance changes in a CNT yarn grid 
of whole composite, without disturbing its mechanical properties. Arif et al. 
(2018) confirmed that the gauge factor has strong sensitivity to the strain rate 
while using CNTs–polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) composite sensors. It also 
confirms that the gauge factor changes (increases) under higher strain rate. 
CNTs also improve the poling proficiency of piezoelectric composite-based 
sensors when used as additives. Zhao et al. (2016), stated the efficiency of 
CNTs in cement–sand-based piezoelectric composites, and are ranging from 
0 to 0.9 vol.% of nanotubes. 
The pressure sensors are relying upon piezoelectric and piezoresistive 
behaviors of the CNT-based composites, defining resistance or voltage across 
the sensor and regulating the response for the purpose of external stimulus. The 
flexibility of sensors is generally accomplished by PDMS (elastomer) which 
is used as structural material. These sensors are mainly relying on results that 
results on the alteration in the conductivity of CNT when exposed to external 
pressure. Gao et al. (2018) prepared a cost-effective wearable CNT–PDMS 
sensors by utilizing a technique called sand paper molding. These sensors 
can detect pressure, ranging from 5 to 50 kPa with stimuli–response period 
of 0.2 s along with stability of over 5000 cycles. Similarly, Giffney et al. 
(2017) used sensor based on MWCNTs–silicone rubber composite as a strain Nanotechnological Revolution 127 
sensor, they demonstrated that the sensor is capable of stretching of strain 
up to 300% through absorbent of 11% hysteresis for the above said 300% 
maximum level of strain. Costa and Choi (2017) fabricated another strain 
sensor with inkjet printing followed by the 2D force sensors (made up of 
patterned CNTs on PDMS nanocomposite) for measuring the strain. 
Other than ecological monitoring, carbon nano-GPN are also explored for 
making piezoresistive equipment. For the same, Dong et al. (2018) projected 
an easy approach for constructing piezoresistive sensor, which was based on 
hierarchical structure of sea sponges and conductive property of compounds 
of polydopamine-reduced graphene oxide along with A-nanowires for the 
measurement of pressure. In this, Sea sponge was employed to maintain the 
sustainably of structure when the sensor was under strain–stress, whereas, 
silver was working for the improvement of conductivity and strain sensitivity. 
As a result, its was obtained that this sensor has good reproducibility (more 
than 7000 loading/unloading cycles), fast response time (less than 0.54 ms), 
and high sensibility (0.016kPa−1 at 0–40 kPa). 
Drugs are known as one of the important environment contaminants which 
need to be identified and quantified before elimination. Nanocomposites based 
on nanodiamond, CNTs, graphene, and fullerene can be employed to detect 
various drugs, such as drugs used as anticancer drugs (flutamide, chlorambucil, 
etc.), illicit or illegal drugs (amphetamine, phenylpropanolamine, etc.), 
drugs for the treatment of tuberculosis (R-cinex, combitol, tranquilizers, 
pyrazinamide, etc.). Prasad et al. (2017) used C60-based fullerene for 
improving sensitivity and conductivity of embossed polymeric-micelles and 
explored for the detection of these drugs. These electrochemical sensors were 
made by incorporating electroactive C60-monoadduct-micellar (molecularly 
engraved polymer) attached on ionic liquid-based carbon ceramic electrode 
(IL-CCE). This method revealed the capacity of fullerene–nanomediator in 
the signal transduction, and allows it to be used as a selective system for 
the detection of drugs in aqueous samples. Similarly, Simioni et al. (2017) 
prepared modified-nanodiamonds (ND) with glassy carbon electrode 
(ND-GCE) for the determination of pyrazinamide (PZA), one of the utmost 
important and acceptable drug (antibiotics) for the treatment of tuberculosis. 
Similarly, Farias et al. (2017) prepared MWCNT-based sensor for the 
detection or monitoring of flutamide (anticancer drug), in this, a noninvasive 
monitoring system for flutamide was prepared and functionalized for the 
detection of this drug. In this, MWCNT was working with-COOH, =O and 
-OH, on the glassy carbon electrodes and the reading was measured. MWCNT 
showed active catalytic capacity to reduce or oxidize the evaluating drug. 128 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Ahmadi et al.’s (2018) theory proved fullerene to be considered as prom￾ising carbon nanomaterial to be explored as electroactive sensor. Fullerene 
has solid interaction with drugs, such as methyldopa, tyramine, enalapril, 
dextroamphetamine, metoprolol, and tolazoline. Similarly, Parlak and Alver 
(2017) studied Ge, Al, B, Ga, and Si-doped C60-fullerene as sensor for 
detecting amantadine. Bashiri et al. (2017) used fullerene-based sensor for 
the detection of amphetamine (AA). Moradi et al. (2017) also used Si and 
Ai-doped C60-fullerenes for the detection of drug named phenylpropanol￾amine (PPA). Rahimi-Nasrabadi et al. (2017) developed a sensor based on 
CNT-C60 in combination with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluorobo￾rate ionic liquid (IL) for detecting the drug named diazepam. 
Ways to control health problems need to monitor biomedical contamina￾tion of the environment. For the same, different nanocarbon-based sensors 
have been employed, such as fullerene, graphene, and CNT–GPN hybrid, 
etc. For an instance, Sutradhar et al. (2017) also established a novel biosensor 
based on C60–Au nanocomposite using 3-amino-capto-1,2,4-triazole for 
nonenzymatic detection method for glucose. These hybrid sensors were also 
shown as promising substitute for achieving the desired sensing property. 
In concern, the Purdey et al. (2017) also developed sensor with organic 
fluorescent probe attached with nanodiamond and was used for the detection 
of hydrogen peroxide, labeled peroxy-nanosensor (PNS). Liu et al. (2018) 
made Quantum Dots-C60 fullerene sensor and used it for detecting nucleic 
acid or RNA–DNA from biomolecules. Li et al. (2017) established a fullerene￾based biosensor for sensing ultrasensitive ATP (adenosine tri-phosphate), an 
important biological molecule accountable in metabolic activities of cells. 
Many researches also designed carbon-based-sensors for the detection 
of prostate antigen, L-histidine, proteins, biomarkers, and numerous of 
other biomolecules. CNT-FET (carbon-based field-effect transistors) was 
effectively applied as DNA sensors. 
NDs along with CNTs could be easily and equally altered to be utilized 
in the form of nanocomposites and have numerous of biological applica￾tions. Properties of NDs, such as stability in biological fluids, optically 
transparent, increased physical adsorption, etc. make it as an ideal sensor 
for the detection of biological materials. NDs are also in use as intracellular 
magnetosensitive nanosensors. Kumar et al. (2017) developed a hybrid 
graphitized-ND-(GND)-based sensor for detecting urea and it was easy 
to measure, reproducible, and constant. Similarly, Tran et al. (2017) also 
stated about the CNT-FET-based DNA sensor for detecting virus named as 
influenza A virus. Nanotechnological Revolution 129 
4.6 CONCLUSION
Worldwide health is a concern, particularly in terms of air–water-borne diseases 
and causative organism (pathogens), and other possible toxic compounds or 
contaminants existing in the environment. Detection procedures with high 
sensitivity, selectivity, and rapidity are essential for screening and monitoring 
these pollutants in contest to safety guidelines of earth. By using diverse signal 
intensification and background reduction systems combined with carbon 
nanoparticles in different forms with sensors for detection offer selective and 
sensitive tools for screening numerous forms of air–soil–water pollutants. 
This chapter emphasized on the detection of environmental pollutants and 
steps of preprocessing along with CNTs. Combination of sensors and CNTs 
developed as miniaturizations, ecofriendly, multiple detection, and inexpen￾sive technique. The significant benefit comprises rapid consequences in terms 
of detection values, because these methods monitored changes (increase) 
in signal rather than targeting the analytes, which has greatly altered the 
paradigm of detection. These techniques conjugated with nanocarbon will 
accelerate the potential of existing technology and also offer robustness, 
specificity, sensitivity, self-cleaning and speediness, to accompaniment of 
required analysis, substitute the typical counter standards present, and also 
endorse the approachability of safe environment. 
Nanotechnology provided an ultrasensitive detection method for 
screening various environmental pollutants, in which carbon nanostructure￾based sensors are one of the pollutants detecting systems with extraordinary 
properties. Number of allotropic forms of carbon have been explored as 
sensors for sensing and eliminating environmental contaminants. Researches 
well proved the applications of different forms of carbon nanos, that is, 
fullerenes, ndiamonds, graphene, nanotubes, and hybrid assemblies due to 
their thermal, electric, chemical, and ano mechanical properties. They also 
proved that carbon nanostructures also have a high grade of specificity and 
selectivity when functionalized as detection sensors. Among all, nanodia￾mond is an excellent example of nanocarbon that has been functionalized 
as biosensor. On other hand, due to its cage-like morphology, fullerene is 
highly explored as biocompatible sensor and is useful in sensors which work 
on interactions (chemical and biological) between analysts and the device. 
Nanosensors also exhibit the capacity of sensing microbial pathogens 
or chemical contaminants at very minute or trace levels, in addition, are 
very convenient to handle as portable device for real-time monitoring along 
with on-site. It is inexpensive, requires less labor, rapid, and time saving  
 
 
 
 
 
130 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
along with multiple contaminant detecting efficiency. Besides, advancement 
in nanotechnology also boosts a noble way of designing new techniques, 
keeping environment and sustainability in mind. The benefits of nanotech￾nology thus have numerous important roles in maintaining the environmental 
health well. 
KEYWORDS
• nanocarbon material 
• carbon-based sensors 
• environmental pollutants 
• detection sensors 
• carbon allotropes 
REFERENCES 
Ahmadi, R.; Jalali Sarvestani, M. R.; Sadeghi, B. Computational Study of the Fullerene Effects 
on the Properties of 16 Different Drugs: A Review. Int. J. Nano Dimension 2018, 9 (4), 
325–335. 
Alahi, M. E. E.; Nag, A.; Mukhopadhyay, S. C.; Burkitt, L. A Temperature-Compensated 
Graphene Sensor for Nitrate Monitoring in Real-Time Application. Sens. Actuat. A Phys. 
2018, 269, 79–90. 
Algadri, N. A.; Hassan, Z.; Ibrahim, K.; AL-Diabat, A. M. A High-Sensitivity Hydrogen Gas 
Sensor Based on Carbon Nanotubes Fabricated on Glass Substrate. J. Electr. Mater. 2018, 
47 (11), 6671–6680. 
Ali, A.; Khan, A.; Karimov, K. S.; Ali, A.; Khan, A. D. Pressure Sensitive Sensors Based 
on Carbon Nanotubes, Graphene, and Its Composites. Hindawi J. Nanomater. 2018, 18, 
1–12. 
Arif, M. F.; Kumar, S.; Gupta, T. K.; Varadarajan, K. M. Strong Linear-Piezoresistive￾Response of Carbon Nanostructures Reinforced Hyperelastic Polymer Nanocomposites. 
Compos. A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 2018, 113, 141–149. 
Balamurugan, R.; Sundarrajan, S.; Ramakrishna, S. Recent Trends in Nanofibrous Membranes 
and Their Suitability for Air and Water Filtrations. Membranes 2011, 1, 232–248. 
Bashiri, S.; Vessally, E.; Bekhradnia, A.; Hosseinian, A.; Edjlali, L. Utility of Extrinsic [60] 
Fullerenes as Work Function Type Sensors for Amphetamine Drug Detection: DFT Studies. 
Vacuum 2017, 136, 156–162. 
Brame, J.; Li, Q.; Alvarez, P. J. J. Nanotechnology-Enabled Water Treatment and Reuse: 
Emerging Opportunities and Challenges for Developing Countries. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2011, 22, 618–624.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanotechnological Revolution 131 
Chen, X.; Huang, Z.; Li, J.; Wu, C.; Wang, Z.; Cui, Y. Methane Gas Sensing Behavior of 
Lithium Ion Doped Carbon Nanotubes Sensor. Vacuum, 2018a, 154, 120–128. 
Chen, X.; Pu, H.; Fu, Z. Real-Time and Selective Detection of Nitrates in Water Using Graphene￾Based Field-Effect Transistor Sensors. Environ. Sci. Nano 2018b, 5 (8), 1990–1999. 
Costa, T. H.; Choi, J. W. A Flexible Two Dimensional Force Sensor Using PDMS 
Nanocomposite. Microelectr. Eng. 2017, 174, 64–69. 
Ding, X.; Chen, X.; Chen, X.; Zhao, X.; Li, N. A QCM Humidity Sensor Based on Fullerene/ 
Graphene Oxide Nanocomposites with High Quality Factor. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 
266, 534–542. 
Dong, X.; Wei, Y.; Chen, S.; Lin, Y.; Liu, L.; Li, J. A Linear and Large-Range Pressure Sensor 
Based on a Graphene/Silver Nanowires Nanobiocomposites Network and a Hierarchical 
Structural Sponge. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2018, 155, 108–116. 
Duncan, T. V. Applications of Nanotechnology in Food Packaging and Food Safety: Barrier 
Materials, Antimicrobials and Sensors. J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 2011, 363,1–24. 
Eatemadi, A.; Daraee, H.; Karimkhanloo, H.; Kouhi, M.; Zarghami, N.; Akbarzadeh, A.; Abasi, 
M.; Hanifehpour, Y.; Joo, S. W. Carbon Nanotubes: Properties, Synthesis, Purification, and 
Medical Applications. Nanosc. Res. Lett. 2014, 9, 393. 
Falcao, E. H. L.; Wudl, F. Carbon Allotropes: Beyond Graphite and Diamond. J. Chem. 
Technol. Biotechnol. 2007, 82, 524–531. 
Farias, J. S.; Zanin, H.; Caldas, A. S.; Santos, C. C.; Damos, F. S.; de Cássia Silva Luz, R. 
Functionalized Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube Electrochemical Sensor for Determination 
of Anticancer Drug Flutamide. J. Electr. Mater. 2017, 46 (10), 5619–5628. 
Fereidoun, H.; Nourddin, M. S.; Rreza, N. A.; Mohsen, A.; Ahmad, R.; Pouria, H. The Effect 
of Long-Term Exposure to Particulate Pollution on the Lung Function of Teheranian and 
Zanjanian Students. Pak. J. Physiol. 2007, 3 (2), 1–5. 
Fornasiero, F.; Park, H. G.; Holt, J. K. Mechanism of Ion Exclusion by Sub-2nm Carbon 
Nanotube Membranes. MRS Online Proc. Lib. 2008, 1106, 303. 
Frazier, K. M.; Mirica, K. A.; Walish, J. J.; Swager, T. M. Fully-Drawn Carbon-Based 
Chemical Sensors on Organic and Inorganic Surfaces. Lab Chip 2014, 14 (20), 4059–4066. 
Gao, Y.; Yu, G.; Tan, J.; Xuan, F. Sandpaper-Molded Wearable Pressure Sensor for Electronic 
Skins. Sens. Actuat. A Phys. 2018, 280, 205–209. 
Georgakilas, V.; Perman, J. A.; Tucek, J.; Zboril, R. Broad Family of Carbon Nanoallotropes: 
Classification, Chemistry, and Applications of Fullerenes, Carbon Dots, Nanotubes, Graphene, 
Nanodiamonds, and Combined Superstructures. Chem. Rev. 2015, 115 (11), 4744–4822. 
Grobert, N.; Carbon Nanotubes—Becoming Clean. Mater. Today, 2007, 10 (1), 28–35. 
Hu, L.; Hecht, D. S.; Grüner, G. Carbon Nanotube Thin Films: Fabrication, Properties, And 
Applications. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 5790–5844. 
Hu, Y.; Shenderova, O.; Brenner, D. Carbon Nanostructures: Morphologies and Properties. J. 
Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 2007, 4, 199–221 
Ibrahim, R. K.; Hayyan, M.; AlSaadi, M. A.; Hayyan, A.; Ibrahim, S. Environmental 
Application of Nanotechnology: Air, Soil, and Water. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2016, 23, 
13754–13788. 
Jaidev, B. M.; Baro, M.; Ramaprabhu, S. Room Temperature Hydrogen Gas Sensing 
Properties of Mono Dispersed Platinum Nanoparticles on Graphene-Like Carbon-Wrapped 
Carbon Nanotubes. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2018, 43 (33), 16421–16429. 
Jeon, I. Y.; Chang, D. W.; Nanjundan, A. K.; Baek, J. B. Functionalization of Carbon Nanotubes, 
Carbon Nanotubes–Polymer Nanocomposites; Siva Yellampalli: IntechOpen, 2011.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Jia, L. W.; Shen, M. Q.; Wang, J.; Lin, M. Q. Influence of Ethanol-Gasoline Blended Fuel on 
Emission Characteristics from a Four-Stroke Motorcycle Engine. J. Hazard. Mater. 2005, 
123, 29–34. 
Jost, O.; Gorbunov, A.; Liu, X. J.; Pompe, W., Fink, J. Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube 
Diameter. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2004, 4, 433–440. 
Karimov, K. S.; Abid, M.; Mahroof, M.; Tahir V2O4-PEPC Composite Based Pressure Sensor. 
Microelectr. Eng. 2011, 88 (6), 1037–1041. 
Karn, B.; Kuiken, T.; Otto, M. Nanotechnology and in Situ Remediation: A Review of the 
Benefits and Potential Risks. Environ. Health Perspect 2009, 117, 1823–1831. 
Karousis, N.; Irene, S. M.; Christopher, P. E.; Nikos, T.; Structure, Properties, Functionalization, 
and Applications of Carbon Nanohorns. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116 (8), 4850–4883. 
Kim, J. Y.; Lee, J.; Hong, S.; Chung, T. D. Formaldehyde Gas Sensing Chip Based on Single￾Walled Carbon Nanotubes and Thin Water Layer. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47, 2892–2894. 
Kodu, M.; Berholts, A.; Kahro, T. Graphene Functionalised by Laser-Ablated V2O5 for a 
Highly Sensitive NH3 Sensor. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2017, 8, 571–578. 
Kreyling, W. G.; Behnke, M. S.; Chaudhry, Q. A Complementary Definition of Nanomaterial. 
Nano Today 2010, 5 (3), 165–168. 
Kumar, V.; Mahajan, R.; Kaur, I; Kim, K.-H.; Simple and Mediator-Free Urea Sensing Based 
on Engineered Nanodiamonds with Polyaniline Nanofibers Synthesized in Situ. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interf. 2017, 9 (20), 16813–16823. 
Leng; Luo, D.; Xu, Z.; Wang, F. Modified Graphene Oxide/Nafion Composite Humidity 
Sensor and Its Linear Response to the Relative Humidity. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 257, 
372–381. 
Lezi, N. Fabrication of a “Green” and Low-Cost Screen-Printed Graphene Sensor and Its 
Application to the Determination of Caffeine by Adsorptive Stripping Voltammetry. Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci. 2017, 12, 6054–6067. 
Li, M.-J.; Zheng, Y.-N.; Liang, W.-B.; Yuan, R.; Chai, Y.-Q. Using p-type PbS Quantum 
Dots to Quench Photocurrent of Fullerene-Au NP@MoS2 Composite Structure for Ultra￾sensitive Photoelectrochemical Detection of ATP. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2017, 9 (48), 
42111–42120. 
Li, X.; Chen, X.; Chen, X.; Ding, X.; Zhao, X. High-Sensitive Humidity Sensor Based on 
Graphene Oxide with Evenly Dispersed Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes. Mater. Chem. 
Phys. 2018, 207, 135–140. 
Liu, S.; Wu, T.; Li, F.; Zhang, Q.; Dong, X.; Niu, L. Disposable Graphene Sensor with an 
Internal Reference Electrode for Stripping Analysis of Heavy Metals. Analy. Methods 
2018a, 10 (17), 1986–1992. 
Liu, Y.; Kannegulla, A.; Wu, B.; Cheng, L.-J. Quantum Dot Fullerene-Based Molecular 
Beacon Nanosensors for Rapid, Highly Sensitive Nucleic Acid Detection. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interf. 2018b, 10 (22), 18524–18531. 
Lobez, J. M.; Han, S. J.; Afzali, A.; Hannon, J. B. Surface Selective One-Step Fabrication of 
Carbon Nanotube Thin Films with High Density. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (5), 4954–4960. 
Loos, M. Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. In Carbon Nanotube Reinforced Composites 
(Chapter); Loos, M., Ed.; William Andrew Publishing: Oxford, 2015; pp 1–36. 
Ma, X.; Dong, Y.; Li, R. Monitoring Technology in Composites Using Carbon Nanotube 
Yarns Based on Piezoresistivity. Mater. Lett. 2017, 188, 45–47. 
Mauter, M. S.; Elimelech, M. Environmental Applications of Carbon-Based Nanomaterials. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42 (16), 5843–5859.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanotechnological Revolution 133 
MeiJiao, L.; Jing, L.; Yang, X. Y.; Zhang, C. A.; Yang, J.; Hu, H.; WANG, X. B. Applications 
of Graphene-Based Materials in Environmental Protection and Detection. Chinese Sci. 
Bull. 2013, 58 (22). 
Menacer, F.; Dibi, Z.; Kadri, A. Modeling a New Acetone Sensor Based on Carbon Nanotubes 
Using Finite Elements and Neural Network. Eur. Phys. J. Plus 2018, 133 (6), 238. 
Nasir, S.; Hussein, M. J.; Zainal, Z.; Yusof, N. A. Carbon-Based Nanomaterials/Allotropes: A 
Glimpse of Their Synthesis, Properties and Some Applications. Material 2018. 
Niu, X.; Zhong, Y.; Chen, R.; Wang, F.; Liu, Y.; Luo, D. A “Turn-on” Fluorescence Sensor for 
Pb2+ Detection Based on Graphene Quantum Dots and Gold Nanoparticles. Sens. Actuat. B 
Chem. 2018, 255, 1577–1581. 
Novoselov, K. S. Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Science 2004, 306, 
666–669. 
Parlak, C.; Alver, Ö. A Density Functional Theory Investigation on Amantadine Drug 
Interaction with Pristine and B, Al, Si, Ga, Ge Doped C60 Fullerenes. Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2017, 678, 85–90. 
Patel, K.; Singh, R.; Kim, H. W. Carbon Based-Nanomaterials as an Emerging Platform for 
Theragnostic. Mater. Horiz. 2018. 
Philips, M. F.; Gopalan, A. I.; Lee, K.-P. Development of a Novel Cyano Group Containing 
Electrochemically Deposited Polymer Film for Ultrasensitive Simultaneous Detection of 
Trace Level Cadmium and Lead. J. Hazard. Mater. 2012, 237–238, 46–54. 
Prasad, B. B.; Singh, R.; Kumar, A. Synthesis of Fullerene (C60-Monoadduct)-Based Water￾Compatible Imprinted Micelles for Electrochemical Determination of Chlorambucil. 
Biosens. Bioelectr. 2017, 94, 115–123. 
Purdey, M. S.; Capon, P. K.; Pullen, B. J. An Organic Fluorophore-Nanodiamond Hybrid Sensor 
for Photostable Imaging and Orthogonal, on-Demand Biosensing. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7 (1), 15967. 
Rahimi-Nasrabadi, M.; Khoshroo, A.; Mazloum-Ardakani, M. Electrochemical Determination 
of Diazepam in Real Samples Based on Fullerene-Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes/Ionic 
Liquid Nanocomposite. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 240, 125–131. 
Rao, C. N. R.; Seshadri, R.; Govindaraj, A.; Sen, R. Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Onions and 
Related Carbon Structures. Mater. Sci. Eng. R Rep. 1995, 15 (6), 209–262. 
Ricciardella, F.; Vollebregt, S.; Polichetti, T. Effects of Graphene Defects on Gas Sensing 
Properties towards NO2 Detection. Nanoscale 2017, 9 (18), 6085–6093. 
Saha, D.; Das, S. Development of Fullerene Modified Metal Oxide Thick Films for Moisture 
Sensing Application. Mater. Today Proc. 2018, 5 (3), 9817–9825. 
Seekaew, Y.; Phokharatkul, D.; Wisitsoraat, A.; Wongchoosuk, C. Highly Sensitive and 
Selective Room-Temperature NO2 Gas Sensor Based on Bilayer Transferred Chemical 
Vapor Deposited Graphene. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2017, 404, 357–363. 
Shanthilal, J.; Bhattacharya, S. Nanoparticles and Nanotechnology in Food. In Conventional 
and Advanced Food Processing Technologies; Wiley, 2014; pp 567–594. 
Simioni, N. B.; Silva, T. A.; Oliveira, G. G.; Fatibello-Filho, O. A Nanodiamond-Based 
Electrochemical Sensor for the Determination of Pyrazinamide Antibiotic. Sens. Actuat. B 
Chem. 2017, 250, 315–323. 
Smazna, D.; Rodrigues, J.; Shree, S.; Buckminsterfullerene Hybridized Zinc Oxide Tetrapods: 
Defects and Charge Transfer Induced Optical and Electrical Response. Nanoscale 2018, 10 
(21), 10050–10062. 
Song, H.; Zhang, Y.; Cao, J. Sensing Mechanism of an Ionization Gas Temperature Sensor 
Based on a Carbon Nanotube Film. RSC Adv. 2017, 7 (84), 53265–53269.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Sun, Y. P.; Zhou, B.; Lin, Y. Quantum-sized Carbon Dots for Bright and Colorful Photolumines￾cence. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128 (24), 7756–7757. 
Sutradhar, S.; Jacob, G. V.; Patnaik, A. Structure and Dynamics of a dl-Homocysteine 
Functionalized Fullerene-C60-Gold Nanocomposite: A Femtomolar l-Histidine Sensor. J. 
Mater. Chem. B 2017, 5 (29), 5835–5844. 
Thamri, A.; Baccar, H.; Struzzi, C.; Bittencourt, C.; Abdelghani, A.; Llobet, E.; MHDA￾Functionalized Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes for Detecting Non-Aromatic VOCs. Sci. Rep. 
2016, 10 (6), 35130. 
Tran, T. L.; Nguyen, T. T.; Huyen Tran, T. T.; Chu, V. T.; Thinh Tran, Q.; Tuan Mai, A. 
Detection of Influenza A Virus Using Carbon Nanotubes Field Effect Transistor Based 
DNA Sensor. Phys. E Low-Dimension. Syst. Nanostruct. 2017, 93, 83–86. 
Troshin, P. A.; Lyubovskaya, R. N. Organic Chemistry of Fullerenes: The Major Reactions, 
Types of Fullerene Derivatives and Prospects for Practical Use. Russian Chem. Rev., 2008, 
77 (4), 323–369. 
Vinícius, D. N. B.; Montanheiro, T. L. A.; de Menezes, B. R. C.; Ribas, R. G.; Righetti, V. A. 
N.; Rodrigues, K. F.; Thim, G. P. Carbon Nanostructure-based Sensors: A Brief Review on 
Recent Advances. Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2019, 21. 
Wang, F.; Gu, H.; Swager, T. M.; Carbon Nanotube/Polythiophene Chemiresistive Sensors for 
Chemical Warfare Agents. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 5392–5393. 
Wei, Z. N.; Yang, X.-X.; Mo, Z.-H.; Leng, F. Photocatalytic Sensor of Organics in Water with 
Signal of Plasmonic Swing. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 255, 3458–3463. 
Wu, J.; Tao, K.; Miao, J.; Norford, L. K. Three-Dimensional Hierarchical and Superhydrophobic 
Graphene Gas Sensor with Good Immunity to Humidity. Proc. 2018 IEEE Micro Electro 
Mech. Syst. (MEMS) 2018, 901–904, Belfast, UK. 
Xu, X.; Ray, R.; Gu, Y. Electrophoretic Analysis and Purification of Fluorescent Single￾Walled Carbon Nanotube Fragments. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126 (40), 12736–12737. 
Xuan, X.; Park, J. Y. A Miniaturized and Flexible Cadmium and Lead Ion Detection Sensor 
Based on Micro-Patterned Reduced Graphene Oxide/Carbon Nanotube/Bismuth Composite 
Electrodes. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 255, 1220–1227. 
Yi, H.; Wu, L. Q.;Bentley, W. E.; Ghodssi, R.; Rubloff, G. W.; Culver, J. N.; Payne, G. F. 
Biofabrication with Chitosan. Biomacromolecules 2005, 6 (6), 2881–2894. 
Yu, S.; Wang, Y.; Xiang, H.; Zhu, L.; Tebyetekerwa, M.; Zhu, M. Superior Piezoresistive Strain 
Sensing Behaviors of Carbon Nanotubes in One-Dimensional Polymer Fiber Structure. 
Carbon 2018a, 140, 1–9. 
Yu, X.; Chen, X.; Li, H.; Ding, X. A High-Stability QCM Humidity Sensor Coated with 
Nanodiamond/Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes Nanocomposite. IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 
2018b, 17 (3), 506–512. 
Zhang, Y.; Niu, Q.; Gu, X.; Yang, N.; Zhao, G. Recent Progress of Carbon Nanomaterials for 
Electrochemical Detection and Removal of Environmental Pollutants. Nanoscale 2019, 11 
(25), 11979–12398. 
Zhao, W.; Yang, C.; Zou, D.; Sun, Z.; Ji, G. Possibility of Gas Sensor Based on C20 Molecular 
Devices. Phys. Lett. A 2017, 381 (21), 1825–1830. 
Zuo, J.; Jiang, T.; Zhao, X.; Xiong, X.; Xiao, S.; Zhu, Z. Preparation and Application of 
Fluorescent Carbon Dots. J. Nanomater. 2015, 1–13. KANNAN DEEPA, ASHISH KAPOOR, and PRABHAKAR SIVARAMAN*
Department of Chemical Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and 
Technology, Kattankulathur 603203, Tamil Nadu, India
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: prabhaks@srmist.edu.in
ABSTRACT
Nanomaterials possess remarkable optical, electrical, thermal, mechanical, 
and catalytic properties which can be efficiently used for sensing a wide 
variety of substances. It is necessary to periodically assess the contaminant 
levels in our environment both qualitatively and quantitatively using inex￾pensive, rapid, and sensitive techniques/tools. The high reactivity of the 
nanomaterials make them potential analytical tools for monitoring several 
types of environmental contaminants ranging from heavy metal ions, organic 
pollutants, toxic gases, to pathogenic microorganisms. In this regard, different 
varieties of carbon-based and noncarbon based nanomaterials have been 
investigated for their detection capabilities. Herein, the usage of noncarbon 
based metals, metal oxides, semiconductor nanoparticles/quantum dots, 
composite nanomaterials, etc., as sensing platforms are discussed with 
emphasis on the predominant mechanisms behind contaminant-nanomaterial 
interactions.
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 5
Applying Noncarbon-Based 
Nanomaterials to Detect Environmental 
Contaminants136 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The ecosystem is greatly impaired due to the effects of environmental pollution 
from industrial and agricultural activities. A wide range of contaminants 
ranging from heavy metal ions, pesticides pathogenic microorganisms, and 
gaseous pollutants cause severe damage to the environment and have adverse 
effects on human health. Most of these contaminants resist degradation and 
hence accumulate in the environment. This global crisis of environmental 
pollution necessitates the development of detection tools and techniques of 
utmost precision and efficacy. The tools and techniques used for detection 
have to be inexpensive, simple to operate, selective, and sensitive as well 
(Su et al., 2012). The techniques based on colorimetry, chromatography, 
fluorimetry, and voltammetry have been extensively used for monitoring 
these contaminants (Aragay et al., 2011; Su et al., 2012). However, most 
traditional analytical tools such as high performance liquid chromatography 
and inductively coupled plasma-based spectroscopy are expensive, highly 
sophisticated, and do not support in situ analysis. 
Different types of sensors have been developed to detect specific chemical 
or biological entities. Of these, nanomaterial-based sensors have garnered 
attention in the past decade owing to their high surface-area to volume ratio, 
reactivity, and enhanced catalytic and adsorptive abilities. It is also possible 
to fine tune the sensing configurations based on recognition phenomena at 
the nanoscale (Arduini et al., 2020). For brevity, this chapter is limited to 
noncarbon-based nanomaterials to exclude the large class of nanomaterials 
based on carbon and its allotropes such as carbon nanotubes, graphene, and 
graphene oxide, nanodiamonds, fullerenes, and carbon dots (Fig. 5.1). A wide 
variety of noncarbon-based nanomaterials including metal and metal oxide 
nanoparticles, bimetallic nanoparticles, quantum dots, nanocomposites, and 
organic nanoparticles, which are used for the detection of contaminants are 
discussed in this chapter. 
5.2 DIFFERENT TYPES OF NONCARBON-BASED NANOMATERIALS
The major classes of noncarbon-based nanomaterials dealt in this chapter 
(Fig. 5.1) are metals and metal oxide nanoparticles, bimetallic nanoparticles, 
quantum dots, nanocomposites, and organic nanoparticles (Sudha et al., 2018; 
Saleh, 2020). Besides, the applications of ceramic, zeolite, and silica-based 
nanomaterials for the detection of environmental contaminants are discussed 
briefly (Fig. 5.2). Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 137 
FIGURE 5.1 Classification of nanomaterials. 
Noble metal nanoparticles such as Ag, Au, and Pt have received maximum 
consideration due to their high conductivity, biocompatibility, provisions 
for surface functionalization, and their size- and shape-related optical, 
electronic, and catalytic properties (Buzea and Pacheco, 2017). Metal oxide 
nanoparticles such as TiO2, Fe2O3, Fe3O4, ZnO, etc. are excellent chemical 
sensors with interesting catalytic properties due to their surface properties 
influencing the bandgap energy of materials (Saleh and Fadillah, 2019). 
Bimetallic nanoparticles comprising of two different metals exhibit extraor￾dinary chemical stability and reactivity, which are further dictated by their 
composition, morphology, and size distribution (Saleh, 2020). The synthesis 
procedures for bimetallic nanoparticles are relatively complex depending on 
the type of nanoparticles, that is, core-shell, alloy, and contact aggregates 
(Sharma et al., 2019). 
Quantum dots are semiconductor nanomaterials with distinct photo￾physical and chemical characteristics (Alivisatos, 1996; Ahmad et al., 2012). 
Quantum dots (QDs)-based immunoassays have been used for the detection 138 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
of pathogenic microorganisms by tagging them with biomolecules such as 
nucleic acid sequences, proteins, antibodies, etc. (Alivisatos, 2000; Duber￾tret, 2005). When such QD-immobilized biomolecules interact with comple￾mentary nucleic acid sequences or antigens specific to the target pathogen, 
the bioconjugation or hybridization event is recorded by a transducer and 
converted to measurable signals (Jin et al., 2011; Ahmad et al., 2012). The 
QD probes display high sensitivity and are excellent fluorophores compared 
to organic dyes (Ferancová and Labuda, 2008; Sharma and Mehata, 2020). 
FIGURE 5.2 Noncarbon-based nanomaterial sensors. 
Nanocomposites are multiphase nanomaterials comprising of nano￾structures/nanoparticles as building blocks embedded in a supporting 
matrix. The common nanocomposite materials include polymer-based 
nanocomposites, nonpolymer-based nanocomposites, metal/metal nano￾composites, metal/ceramic nanocomposites, ceramic/ceramic nanocom￾posites, polymer/ceramic nanocomposites, carbon/metal nanocomposites, Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 139 
carbon/polymer nanocomposites, and carbon/ceramic nanocomposites 
(Sudha et al., 2018). Nanoscale metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are 
porous crystalline coordination networks assembled from inorganic nodes 
(metal ions or clusters) connected by organic linkers. Due to their high 
porosity, they are suitable candidates for sensing and capture of a number 
of pollutants (Wang et al., 2018a; Cai et al., 2020; Zhao, 2020). 
It is necessary to differentiate the carbon- and its allotrope-based nanoma￾terials such as single-and multiwalled carbon nanotubes, graphene, graphene 
oxides, etc., from the category of organic nanomaterials composed of lipids, 
carbohydrates and other polymers. Our discussion here will be restricted 
to the latter category of organic nanomaterials. Polymeric nanoparticles, 
liposomes, polymeric micelles, and dendrimers are the widely studied 
organic nanomaterials for the detection of notorious compounds. Polymeric 
nanomaterials are solid particles composed of either natural or synthetic 
polymers. They are generally biocompatible, biodegradable, and exhibit 
greater structural integrity, stability, and controlled release characteristics 
(Hadinoto et al., 2013; Sudha et al; 2018; Saleh, 2020). The other types 
of organic nanomaterials used specifically for detecting contaminants are 
discussed in upcoming sections. 
5.3 MECHANISMS OF DETECTION OF CONTAMINANTS
Analytical nanotechnology refers to the application of nanomaterials as 
sensors for the detection of chemical and biological entities. The mechanisms 
of detection of the contaminants are discussed later with a mention of micro￾fluidic platforms incorporating one of these mechanisms but on a miniature 
scale. The interactions between the sensor (nanomaterial) and the analyte 
(contaminants) could be based on colorimetric absorption, enhanced Raman 
scattering, electrochemical, or fluorescent signalling. 
5.3.1 COLORIMETRIC DETECTION
The use of colorimetric sensors for monitoring environmental contaminants 
is simple, economic, fast, and allow on-site detection without the need 
for large sophisticated equipment (Prosposito et al., 2020). Noble metal 
colloidal solutions, especially those of gold and silver have very high 
extinction coefficients and exhibit vibrant hues of colors in the visible 
region. The interaction between the target analyte and the nanoparticles 140 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
leads to visible changes in color of the colloids, depending on the state of 
aggregation (Vilela et al., 2012). The extent of aggregation of the nanopar￾ticles is found to be proportional to the amount of analyte, thus enabling 
quantitative detection of the contaminants (Fig. 5.3). The detection limit 
of such nanomaterial-based colorimetric assays is in the nanomolar range 
which is much better compared to conventional spectrophotometric assays 
without the nanoparticles (Tiwari and Prakash, 2018). The sensitivity of the 
nanoparticles to changes in the local environment surrounding the nanopar￾ticles are responsible for the success of the nanomaterial-based colorimetric 
estimation (Alzahrani, 2020). 
FIGURE 5.3 Colorimetric sensor based on Au and Ag nanoparticles. 
5.3.2 ENHANCEMENT OF SERS SIGNAL
Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is a spectroscopic technique 
that allows for highly sensitive structural detection of analytes at very low 
concentration by amplifying the electromagnetic fields generated by the 
excitation of localized surface plasmons (Sharma et al., 2012). The weaker 
Raman signals from molecules are amplified by orders of 1010–1015 facilitating 
detection of even single molecules (Kneipp et al., 1999; Pieczonka and Aroca, 
2008). Molecules that are adsorbed onto rough nanostructured surfaces exhibit 
enhanced Raman scattering (Fig. 5.4). One criteria for SERS is that the choice 
of laser wavelength has to correspond with that of the SERS metal used. 
Nanoscale gold, silver, and copper are the best enhancers of electromagnetic 
fields and hence the choice of material for SERS substrates. Also, metal 
nanoparticles allow tuning of sensitivity of the analysis through proper control Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 141 
of shape and size of nanoparticles (Tian et al., 2014). It is already established 
that noble metal nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes can be obtained 
by controlling the reaction parameters such as pH, temperature, precursor ion 
concentration, etc., (Sau and Rogach, 2010; Jamkhande et al., 2019). 
FIGURE 5.4 Raman scattering vs. surface-enhanced Raman scattering. 
When SERS was used for detecting heavy metals, organic and inorganic 
pollutants, some of the lowest limits of detection were reported. Hence, 
SERS is a promising tool for monitoring pollutants at environmentally valid 
concentrations. Though a number of benchtop Raman spectrometers have 
been successfully employed for detecting heavy metals such as mercury, 
pharmaceuticals, perfluorinated compounds, and pesticides, similar sensi￾tivity is yet to be achieved in portable Raman spectrometers for in field 
applications (Ong et al., 2020). 
5.3.3 ELECTROCHEMICAL DETECTION
Electrochemical techniques of detection allow on site and real time monitoring 
of the contaminants. The nanomaterials used to modify the electrodes 
determine the sensitivity and selectivity of the sensors depending on the size 
of the nanostructures and the electron transfer areas (Fig. 5.5). Variations 
in material of the electrodes/electrode surfaces have resulted in different 
rates of electron transfer and hence different strengths of electrochemical 142 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
signals (Khan et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2017). Metal nanoparticles 
modified electrodes act as arrays of microelectrodes, which offer better 
mass transport and signal-to-noise ratio, low limits of detection, and avoid 
solution resistance as much as possible in comparison with conventional 
macroelectrodes (Aragay et al., 2011). Nanomaterial-modified electrodes can 
bring together the features of catalysis, conductivity, and biocompatibility to 
enhance signal transduction. Also, they can amplify chemical or biological 
recognition events through distinct signal tags for selective and sensitive 
detection (Kumar et al., 2017). 
FIGURE 5.5 Electrochemical detection using nanomaterial-modified electrodes. 
5.3.4 FLUORESCENCE EMISSION
The fluorescence of nanomaterials is a size-dependent photophysical 
property manifested as a result of many inter- and intra-molecular charge 
transfer processes occurring between the fluorophore and the analyte. The 
interactions between the fluorophore and the analyte include fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer (FRET), intramolecular charge transfer (ICT), 
photoinduced electron transfer (PET), metal to ligand charge transfer 
(MLCT), and ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT). The fluorescence 
signal after the interaction process could either be enhanced or quenched. 
A Stern-Volmer plot represents these changes in fluorescence after interac￾tion with the analyte (Walekar et al., 2017). In general, the sensitivity of a 
fluorescent probe increases with the specific surface area or surface to mass 
(S/M) ratio of the sensing materials (Fig. 5.6). Owing to their high S/M ratio 
and adsorbability, nanomaterials have gained immense attention for use as 
fluorescent sensors (Borgå et al., 2005; Wang and Meng, 2017). Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 143 
FIGURE 5.6 Process of fluorescence quenching. 
5.3.5 MICROFLUIDIC LAB-ON-A-CHIP PLATFORMS
Lab-on-a-chip (LOC) devices are miniaturized sensing devices, which 
facilitate significant reduction in reagent volumes, easy operation, reduced 
cost, portability, and in situ analysis (Govindarajalu et al., 2019). Both elec￾trochemical and optical sensing devices have been reported in this regard. 
The electrochemical LOC platforms work on the principle of generating an 
electrical signal due to the interaction between the analyte and the electrode 
surface (Pol et al., 2017). Electrochemical sensing (voltammetric and poten￾tiometric) methods integrated with micro-electromechanical systems allow 
simultaneous detection of the contaminants along with other environmental 
quality parameters (Jang et al., 2011). Optical LOC platforms are based on 
colorimetric changes due to chemical reactions or interactions between the 
analyte and a reagent (Pol et al., 2017). 
5.4 DETECTION OF VARIOUS ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINANTS
Different types of nanomaterial-based sensors have been developed for 
monitoring a wide range of contaminant substances present in different 144 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
sources. Most of these sensors have a common design: Nanomaterial + 
Receptor + Transducer. The receptors bound to the nanomaterials (anti￾bodies, aptamers) are highly selective and sensitive to the target contaminant 
while the transducer signals the presence of the analyte in the form of an 
optical, colorimetric, or electrochemical response (Su et al., 2012; Willner 
and Vikesland, 2018; Rastogi et al., 2020). These sensors have been used to 
target pathogenic microorganisms, heavy metals, and a number of organic 
contaminants such as chlorinated compounds, organic solvents, pesticides 
and food contaminants. Table 1.1 presents some representative data for the 
different nanomaterials used to detect a plethora of contaminants along with 
the mechanisms and sensitivity of each case study. 
5.4.1 PATHOGENIC MICROORGANISMS
It is necessary to detect and identify the pathogenic microorganisms present in 
air, water, and food to avoid outbreaks of infectious diseases. In the past, such 
infectious diseases have resulted in high morbidity and mortality rates and 
require periodical monitoring and surveillance of air, water, and food samples 
(Baldursson and Karanis, 2011; Bhardwaj et al., 2019). Pathogenic microor￾ganisms of every type ranging from bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and fungi have 
been reported to cause infectious diseases. The conventional methods that have 
been used to detect microorganisms are culture-based analysis using physical 
identification and chemical assays, molecular techniques such as PCR and 
DNA microarrays, and lastly, immunological methods such as ELISA. The 
culture-based methods have low sensitivity and are time-consuming while the 
molecular and immunological methods are expensive and do not differentiate 
viable from nonviable microorganisms (Bhardwaj et al., 2019). 
Recently, nanobiosensors have been developed and successfully imple￾mented for detecting microorganisms with very high sensitivity due to effi￾cient biomolecular loading on the surfaces of the nanoparticles. The various 
optical properties of nanomaterials such as absorbance, reflectance, resonance, 
and luminescence have been utilized to develop optical biosensors to detect 
pathogens. Bui et al. (2015) have used gold nanoparticles conjugated with 
cysteine-loaded liposomes to detect even single cells of Salmonella, Listeria, 
and E. coli O157 cells in water and food samples. The nanoliposomes would 
burst in the presence of these microorganisms leading to aggregation of the 
gold nanoparticles manifested as visual change in color of the reaction mixture 
from red to dark blue (Bui et al., 2015). A receptor-free generic sensor was 
developed using polyaniline nanoparticles where the color changed from blue TABLE 1.1 Nanomaterials for the Detection of Various Environmental Contaminants.
S. Type of nanomaterial Target analyte Mechanism of detection Limit of detection References 
No. (chemical/biological)
1. Gold nanoparticles conjugated Salmonella, Listeria, and Colorimetry 6.7 aM (attomolar) Bui et al. (2015)
with cysteine-loaded liposomes E. coli O157 
2. Polyaniline nanoparticles E. coli Colorimetry 106 cells/ml for Thakur et al.
measurement time (2015) 
of 2 h 
3. Silver nanorod arrays Escherichia coli, E. coli O157:H7, SERS 108 CFU/mL Chu et al. (2008)
coliE. DH5α, Staphylococcus
aureus, S. epidermidis, Salmonella 
typhimurium, and bacteria mixtures
4. Gold nanoparticles conjugated Escherichia coli ATCC 8739 FRET 3 CFU/mL Jin et al. (2017)
with aptamers 
5. Quantum dot –streptavidin Human immunodeficiency virus Lab-on-a-chip – Kim et al. (2009)
conjugates 
6. Silica nanoparticles-Rubpy-IgG Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. Fluorescence quenching 103 CFU/mL Yao et al. (2009) 
vesicatoria 
7. Silica nanoparticles-dye- IgG S. pullorum and S. Gallinarum Agglutination test 4 × 103 to 4 × 109 Yu et al. (2015) 
CFU/mL 
8. Bismuth nanoparticles Cd2+, Pb2+ Stripping voltammetry 10 µg/L Yang et al. (2013) 
using modified electrodes
9. Bismuth nanopowder electrode Cd, Zn Anodic stripping Cd: 0.15 µg/L Zn: Lee et al. (2007)
voltammetry 0.07 µg/L 
10. Ag@CuS, Au@PtS2, Au@HgS, Hg2+ SERS 0.1 ppb Bao et al. (2019)
Ag@Ag2S NPs, and Ag@CuS 
core@shell nanorods 
145 Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials TABLE 1.1 (Continued) 
S. Type of nanomaterial Target analyte Mechanism of detection Limit of detection References 
No. (chemical/biological)
11. Gold nanoparticles and Hg2+, Ag+, Pb2+ Colorimetry (aggregation) Nanomolar range Hung et al. (2010)
alkanethiols 
12. Gold nanoparticles on carbon CN- Square wave voltammetry 0.09 µM Shamsipur et al.
ceramic electrodes (2017) 
13. Fe2O3 nanoparticles NO2 Electrical resistance 10–200 ppm Navale et al.
(2013) 
14. Glassy carbon electrodes Cd2+, Pb2+ Cyclic voltammetry 3.5–3.8 nM Nagaraju et al.
modified with zinc oxide (2017) 
nanoparticles and silver doped
zinc oxide nanoparticles
15. NiO/ZnO PN heterojunction Triethylamine gas Chemiresistive gas sensor 100 ppm Ju et al. (2014) 
146 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 147 
to green when protons were generated in its microenvironment as a result of 
metabolic activity of E. coli cells (Thakur et al., 2015). 
Nanomaterials conjugated with Raman reporter molecules such as 
organic dyes and bioreceptor molecules such as antibodies and nucleic acid 
are used as SERS tags to detect analytes of interest. Such label-based SERS 
tags are not suited for in situ, high throughput recognition of pathogens and 
the organic dye requires increased reactant volumes and preparation times. 
Another approach is a label-free one which involves direct electrostatic 
adhesion of the pathogen to the nanomaterials. The label-free method allows 
for differentiation of viable from nonviable bacteria as well (Chu et al., 2008; 
Zhou et al., 2015; Bhardwaj et al., 2019). 
Quantum dots, metal organic frameworks, and polymeric nanoparticles 
have been used as fluorescent tags to detect microorganisms using fluores￾cence measurements. These fluorescent nanomaterials functionalized with 
bioreceptor molecules specific to the pathogen can be analyzed by flow 
cytometry and/or a fluorescence spectrophotometer. A FRET-based sensor 
was developed using gold nanoparticles conjugated with aptamers as the 
“acceptor” and upconversion nanoparticles functionalized with comple￾mentary DNA as the “donor.” Due to spectral overlap between the donor 
and acceptor molecules, fluorescence quenching results. However, when the 
target pathogen was present, the aptamers preferentially bind to the micro￾organism, thus reclaiming the upconversion fluorescence (Jin et al., 2017). 
Silica nanoparticles have large surface areas, high stability, biocom￾patibility, and can be functionalized with a number of receptor molecules 
(Tang et al., 2007; Mokhtarzadeh et al., 2017). An organic dye, tris-2, 2' 
-bipyridyl dichlororuthenium (II) hexahydrate (Rubpy), incorporated into 
the core of silica nanoparticles were conjugated with the secondary antibody 
of goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) to detect the plant pathogen, 
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. vesicatoria that causes bacterial spot disease 
in Solanaceae (Yao et al., 2009). 
5.4.2 HEAVY METALS
Anthropogenic activities from chemical industry, mining and combustion 
of fossil fuels are some of the major contributing sources for heavy metal 
contamination. The harmful effects of heavy metals to the environment are 
mainly due to their high reactivity and high atomic densities. Contamination 
from heavy metal ions such As, Cu, Pb, Hg, Ni, Cd, and Zn have long-term 
detrimental effects on human health. The techniques currently employed  
148 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
for the detection of trace levels of heavy metals are atomic absorption 
spectroscopy (AAS), atomic fluorescence spectroscopy (AFS), inductively 
coupled plasma—optical emission spectroscopy, inductively coupled 
plasma—mass spectroscopy, and inductively coupled plasma—atomic 
emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, ICP-MS, and ICP-AES respectively) and 
X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XPS). However, these instruments require 
skilled technical personnel, sample preparation steps and are expensive 
and nonportable (Kumar et al., 2017). Nanomaterials-based sensing tools 
for toxic heavy metal ions work on optical, biological, and electrochemical 
sensing strategies. The chemical recognition of heavy metal ions through 
receptor molecules in the detection system is the basis for sensing. Besides 
the receptor (biological or heavy metal ionophores), there is an immobiliza￾tion/transducing platform that imparts stability and sensitivity to the device 
(Aragay et al., 2011). The additional feature of surface modification of the 
nanomaterials allows for better selectivity of the sensor. 
Bismuth nanoparticles were used to modify conventional glassy carbon 
electrodes to detect Pb2+ and Cd2+ by stripping analysis with detection 
limits as low as 10 µg/L (Yang et al., 2019). Bao et al. (2019) have created 
core-shell nanoparticles of Ag@CuS, Au@PtS2, Au@HgS, Ag@Ag2S, and 
Ag@CuS and achieved SERS signalling of Hg2+ ions (Bao et al., 2019). A 
selective colorimetric assay was developed by Hung et al. (2010) to detect 
aqueous Hg2+, Ag+
, and Pb2+ ions using label- free gold nanoparticles and 
alkanethiols. The degree of alkanethiol induced aggregation was monitored 
using absorbance data in a simple UV−visible spectrophotometer. Carbon 
ceramic electrodes modified with gold nanoparticles were used to detect 
cyanide concentrations as low as 0.09 µM by square wave voltammetry 
(Shamsipur et al., 2017). Glassy carbon electrodes modified with zinc 
oxide nanoparticles and silver doped zinc oxide nanoparticles were used to 
detect lead and cadmium ions (Nagaraju et al., 2017). Lu et al. (2018) have 
presented a comprehensive review of the detection of heavy metal ions in 
the environment by voltammetry. The effects of deposition potential, time, 
types of buffer solution, and pH on the stability, sensitivity, reproducibility, 
and anti-interference ability of the sensor during the simultaneous detection 
of several heavy metal ions are discussed. 
5.4.3 ORGANIC CONTAMINANTS AND GASES
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) infamously called as “forever 
chemicals” resist chemical and biological degradation and hence tend to Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 149 
bioaccumulate in humans and persist in the environment as well. POPs such 
as aldrin, endrin, toxaphene, heptachlor (DDT), and poly-chlorinated biphe￾nyls (PCBs) are released through the bulk use of pesticides, solvents, and 
other industry chemicals (Zhang and Fang, 2010). Fe2O3 nanoparticles were 
successfully utilized as NO2 sensor by electrical resistance measurements 
with a limit of detection of 10–200 ppm (Navale et al., 2013). MOFS-derived 
sensors have been used to detect a number of organic and inorganic gaseous 
contaminants such as acetone, ethanol, benzene, toluene, xylene, formalde￾hyde, and hydrogen sulphide (Wang et al., 2018b). 
5.5 FUTURE PROSPECTS
Nanomaterials have been widely used as sensors for a number of biological 
and chemical compounds with very low limits of detection than those possible 
with conventional spectrophotometric and chromatographic methods. Many 
reports have provided comparative analysis of nanomaterial-based sensors 
and found differences in orders of magnitude with respect to the sensitivity 
of the analysis. The biosensing approaches have incorporated receptors 
such as DNA, proteins, antibodies, etc. to enhance the selectivity of the 
process but these methods are tedious, require adequate sample preparation 
steps and are time-consuming. Existing challenges in nanomaterial-based 
sensing are interferences in real time applications, cost-effectiveness, pH￾and temperature-effects, improvement in response time, and widening the 
detection scope of the sensors. Also, the elimination of false positive results 
in an analysis is possible by arranging dual modes of signal transduction, 
say by generating both an optical and electrochemical response from the 
same sensor. 
KEYWORDS
• environmental contaminants 
• nanomaterials 
• metal oxides 
• bimetallic nanoparticles 
• electrochemical detection 150 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
REFERENCES 
Ahmad, F.; Pandey, A. K.; Herzog, A. B.; Rose, J. B.; Gerba, C. P.; Hashsham, S. A. Environ￾mental Applications and Potential Health Implications of Quantum Dots. J. Nanopart. Res. 
2012, 14 (8), 1038. 
Alivisatos, A. P. Semiconductor Clusters, Nanocrystals, and Quantum Dots. Science 1996, 
271 (5251), 933–937. 
Alivisatos, P. Colloidal Quantum Dots. From Scaling Laws to Biological Applications. Pure 
Appl. Chem. 2000, 72 (1–2), 3–9. 
Alzahrani, E. Colorimetric Detection Based on Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Optical 
Characteristics for Sensing Of Mercury Using Green-Synthesized Silver Nanoparticles. J. 
Analy. Methods Chem. 2020, 2020. 
Aragay, G.; Pons, J.; Merkoçi, A. Recent Trends in Macro-, Micro-, and Nanomaterial-Based 
Tools and Strategies for Heavy-Metal Detection. Chem. Rev. 2011, 111 (5), 3433–3458. 
Arduini, F.; Cinti,S.; Scognamiglio, V.; Moscone, D. Nanomaterial-Based Sensors. In Handbook 
of Nanomaterials in Analytical Chemistry; Hussain, C. M., Ed.; 2020; pp 329–359. 
Baldursson, S.; Karanis, P. Waterborne Transmission of Protozoan Parasites: Review of 
Worldwide Outbreaks–an Update 2004–2010. Water Res. 2011, 45 (20), 6603–6614. 
Bao, H.; Zhang, H.; Zhou, L.; Fu, H.; Liu, G.; Li, Y.; Cai, W. Ultrathin and Isotropic Metal Sulfide 
Wrapping on Plasmonic Metal Nanoparticles for Surface Enhanced Ram Scattering-Based 
Detection of Trace Heavy-Metal Ions. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2019, 11 (31), 28145–28153. 
Bhardwaj, N.; Bhardwaj, S. K.; Bhatt, D.; Lim, D. K.; Kim, K. H.; Deep, A. Optical Detection 
of Waterborne Pathogens Using Nanomaterials. TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2019, 113, 
280–300. 
Borgå, K.; Fisk, A. T.; Hargrave, B.; Hoekstra, P. F.; Swackhamer, D.; Muir, D. C. Bioac￾cumulation Factors for PCBs Revisited. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2005, 39 (12), 4523–4532. 
Bui, M. P. N.; Ahmed, S.; Abbas, A. (2015). Single-Digit Pathogen and Attomolar Detection 
with the Naked Eye Using Liposome-Amplified Plasmonic Immunoassay. Nano Lett. 2015, 
15 (9), 6239–6246. 
Buzea, C.; Pacheco, I. Nanomaterials and Their Classification. In EMR/ESR/EPR Spectroscopy 
for Characterization of Nanomaterials; Springer: New Delhi, 2017; pp 3–45. 
Cai, X.; Xie, Z.; Li, D.; Kassymova, M.; Zang, S. Q.; Jiang, H. L. Nano-Sized Metal-Organic 
Frameworks: Synthesis and Applications. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2020, 417, 213366. 
Chu, H.; Huang, Y.; Zhao, Y. Silver Nanorod Arrays as a Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering 
Substrate for Foodborne Pathogenic Bacteria Detection. Appl. Spectrosc. 2008, 62 (8), 
922–931. 
Dubertret, B. DNA Detectives. Nat. Mater. 2005, 4 (11), 797–798. 
Farbod, F.; Mazloum-Ardakani, M. Typically Used Nanomaterials-Based Noncarbon Materials 
in the Fabrication of Biosensors. In Electrochemical Biosensors; Elsevier, 2019; pp 99–133. 
Govindarajalu, A. K.; Ponnuchamy, M.; Sivasamy, B.; Prabhu, M. V.; Kapoor, A. A Cellulosic 
Paper-Based Sensor for Detection of Starch Contamination in Milk. Bull. Mater. Sci. 2019, 
42 (6), 255. 
Hadinoto, K.; Sundaresan, A.; Cheow, W. S. Lipid–Polymer Hybrid Nanoparticles as a New 
Generation Therapeutic Delivery Platform: A Review. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2013, 85 
(3), 427–443. 
Huang, X.; Liu, Q.; Yao, S.; Jiang, G. Recent Progress in the Application of Nanomaterials in 
the Analysis of Emerging Chemical Contaminants. Analy. Methods 2017, 9 (19), 2768–2783. Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 151 
Hung, Y. L.; Hsiung, T. M.; Chen, Y. Y.; Huang, Y. F.; Huang, C. C. Colorimetric Detection of 
Heavy Metal Ions Using Label-Free Gold Nanoparticles and Alkanethiols. J. Phys. Chem. 
C 2010, 114 (39), 16329–16334. 
Jamkhande, P. G.; Ghule, N. W.; Bamer, A. H.; Kalaskar, M. G. Metal Nanoparticles 
Synthesis: An Overview on Methods of Preparation, Advantages and Disadvantages, and 
Applications. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 2019, 53, 101174. 
Jang, A.; Zou, Z.; Lee, K. K.; Ahn, C. H.; Bishop, P. L. State-of-the-Art Lab Chip Sensors for 
Environmental Water Monitoring. Measure. Sci. Technol. 2011, 22 (3), 032001. 
Jin, B.; Wang, S.; Lin, M.; Jin, Y.; Zhang, S.; Cui, X.; Lu, T. J. Upconversion Nanoparticles 
Based FRET Aptasensor for Rapid and Ultrasenstive Bacteria Detection. Biosens. Bioelectr. 
2017, 90, 525–533. 
Ju, D.; Xu, H.; Qiu, Z.; Guo, J.; Zhang, J.; Cao, B. Highly Sensitive and Selective Triethylamine￾Sensing Properties of Nanosheets Directly Grown on Ceramic Tube by Forming NiO/ZnO 
PN Heterojunction. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 200, 288–296. 
Khan, S. B.; Asiri, A. M.; Akhtar, K.; Rub, M. A. Development of Electrochemical Sensor 
Based on Layered Double Hydroxide as a Marker of Environmental Toxin. J. Indust. Eng. 
Chem. 2015, 30, 234–238. 
Kim, Y. G.; Moon, S.; Kuritzkes, D. R.; Demirci, U. Quantum Dot-Based HIV Capture and 
Imaging in a Microfluidic Channel. Biosens. Bioelectr. 2009, 25 (1), 253–258. 
Kneipp, K.; Kneipp, H.; Itzkan, I.; Dasari, R. R.; Feld, M. S. Ultrasensitive Chemical Analysis 
by Raman Spectroscopy. Chem. Rev. 1999, 99 (10), 2957–2976. 
Kumar, P.; Kim, K. H.; Bansal, V.; Lazarides, T.; Kumar, N. Progress in the Sensing Techniques 
for Heavy Metal Ions Using Nanomaterials. J. Indust. Eng. Chem. 2017, 54, 30–43. 
Lee, G. J.; Lee, H. M.; Rhee, C. K. Bismuth Nano-Powder Electrode for Trace Analysis of 
Heavy Metals Using Anodic Stripping Voltammetry. Electrochem. Commun. 2007, 9 (10), 
2514–2518. 
Lu, Y.; Liang, X.; Niyungeko, C.; Zhou, J.; Xu, J.; Tian, G. A Review of the Identification 
and Detection of Heavy Metal Ions in the Environment by Voltammetry. Talanta 2018, 178, 
324–338. 
Mokhtarzadeh, A.; Eivazzadeh-Keihan, R.; Pashazadeh, P.; Hejazi, M.; Gharaatifar, N.; 
Hasanzadeh, M.; de la Guardia, M. Nanomaterial-Based Biosensors for Detection of 
Pathogenic Virus. TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2017, 97, 445–457. 
Nagaraju, G.; Prashanth, S. A.; Shastri, M.; Yathish, K. V.; Anupama, C.; Rangappa, D. 
Electrochemical Heavy Metal Detection, Photocatalytic, Photoluminescence, Biodiesel 
Production and Antibacterial Activities of Ag–ZnO Nanomaterial. Mater. Res. Bull. 2017, 
94, 54–63. 
Navale, S. T.; Bandgar, D. K.; Nalage, S. R.; Khuspe, G. D.; Chougule, M. A.; Kolekar, 
Y. D.; Patil, V. B. Synthesis of Fe2O3 Nanoparticles for Nitrogen Dioxide Gas Sensing 
Applications. Ceram. Int. 2013, 39 (6), 6453–6460. 
Ong, T. T.; Blanch, E. W.; Jones, O. A. Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy in 
Environmental Analysis, Monitoring and Assessment. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 137601. 
Pieczonka, N. P.; Aroca, R. F. Single Molecule Analysis by Surfaced-Enhanced Raman 
Scattering. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2008, 37 (5), 946–954. 
Pol, R.; Céspedes, F.; Gabriel, D.; Baeza, M. Microfluidic Lab-on-a-Chip Platforms for 
Environmental Monitoring. TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2017, 95, 62–68. 
Prosposito, P.; Burratti, L.; Venditti, I. Silver Nanoparticles as Colorimetric Sensors for Water 
Pollutants. Chemosensors 2020, 8 (2), 26. 152 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Saleh, T. A. Nanomaterials: Classification, Properties, and Environmental Toxicities. Environ. 
Technol. Innov. 2020, 101067. 
Saleh, T. A.; Fadillah, G. Recent Trends in the Design of Chemical Sensors Based on Graphene– 
Metal Oxide Nanocomposites for the Analysis of Toxic Species and Biomolecules. TrAC 
Trends Analy. Chem. 2019, 120, 115660. 
Sau, T. K.; Rogach, A. L. Nonspherical Noble Metal Nanoparticles: Colloid-Chemical 
Synthesis and Morphology Control. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (16), 1781–1804. 
Shamsipur, M.; Karimi, Z.; Tabrizi, M. A. A Novel Electrochemical Cyanide Sensor Using 
Gold Nanoparticles Decorated Carbon Ceramic Electrode. Microchem. J. 2017, 133, 
485–489. 
Sharma, B.; Frontiera, R. R.; Henry, A. I.; Ringe, E.; Van Duyne, R. P. SERS: Materials, 
Applications, and the Future. Mater. Today 2012, 15 (1–2), 16–25. 
Sharma, G.; Kumar, A.; Sharma, S.; Naushad, M.; Dwivedi, R. P.; ALOthman, Z. A.; Mola, G. 
T. Novel Development of Nanoparticles to Bimetallic Nanoparticles and Their Composites: 
A Review. J. King Saud Univ.-Sci. 2019, 31 (2), 257–269. 
Su, S.; Wu, W.; Gao, J.; Lu, J.; Fan, C. Nanomaterials-Based Sensors for Applications in 
Environmental Monitoring. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (35), 18101–18110. 
Sudha, P. N.; Sangeetha, K.; Vijayalakshmi, K.; Barhoum, A. Nanomaterials History, 
Classification, Unique Properties, Production and Market. In Emerging Applications of 
Nanoparticles and Architecture Nanostructures; Elsevier, 2018; pp 341–384. 
Tang, D.; Yuan, R.; Chai, Y. Magnetic Control of an Electrochemical Microfluidic Device with 
an Arrayed Immunosensor for Simultaneous Multiple Immunoassays. Clin. Chem. 2007, 53 
(7), 1323–1329. 
Thakur, B.; Amarnath, C. A.; Mangoli, S. H.; Sawant, S. N. Polyaniline Nanoparticle Based 
Colorimetric Sensor for Monitoring Bacterial Growth. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 207, 
262–268. 
Tian, F.; Bonnier, F.; Casey, A.; Shanahan, A. E.; Byrne, H. J. Surface Enhanced Raman 
Scattering with Gold Nanoparticles: Effect of Particle Shape. Analy. Methods 2014, 6 (22), 
9116–9123. 
Tiwari, M.; Prakash, R. Colorimetric Detection of Picric Acid Using Silver Nanoparticles 
Modified with 4-amino-3-hydrazino-5-mercapto-1, 2, 4-triazole. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2018, 449, 
174–180. 
Vilela, D.; González, M. C.; Escarpa, A. Sensing Colorimetric Approaches Based on Gold and 
Silver Nanoparticles Aggregation: Chemical Creativity Behind the Assay. A Review. Analy. 
Chim. Acta 2012, 751, 24–43. 
Walekar, L.; Dutta, T.; Kumar, P.; Ok, Y. S.; Pawar, S.; Deep, A.; Kim, K. H. Functionalized 
Fluorescent Nanomaterials for Sensing Pollutants in the Environment: A Critical Review. 
TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2017, 97, 458–467. 
Wang, H.; Lustig, W. P.; Li, J. Sensing and Capture of Toxic and Hazardous Gases and Vapors 
by Metal–Organic Frameworks. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018a, 47 (13), 4729–4756. 
Wang, X. F.; Song, X. Z.; Sun, K. M.; Cheng, L.; Ma, W. MOFs-Derived Porous Nanomaterials 
for Gas Sensing. Polyhedron 2018b, 152, 155–163. 
Willner, M. R.; Vikesland, P. J. Nanomaterial Enabled Sensors for Environmental 
Contaminants. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2018, 16 (1), 1–16. 
Yang, H.; Li, J.; Lu, X.; Xi, G.; Yan, Y. Reliable Synthesis of Bismuth Nanoparticles for 
Heavy Metal Detection. Mater. Res. Bull. 2013, 48 (11), 4718–4722. Applying Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 153 
Yao, K. S.; Li, S. J.; Tzeng, K. C.; Cheng, T. C.; Chang, C. Y.; Chiu, C. Y.; Lin, Z. P. 
Fluorescence Silica Nanoprobe as a Biomarker for Rapid Detection of Plant Pathogens. In 
Advanced Materials Research, Vol. 79; Trans Tech Publications Ltd., 2009; pp 513–516. 
Yu, H.; Zhao, G.; Dou, W. Simultaneous detection of Pathogenic Bacteria Using Agglutination 
Test Based on Colored Silica Nanoparticles. Cur. Pharm. Biotechnol. 2015, 16 (8), 716–723. 
Zhang, L.; Fang, M. Nanomaterials in Pollution Trace Detection and Environmental 
Improvement. Nano Today 2010, 5 (2), 128–142. 
Zhao, Y. A New Era of Metal–Organic Framework Nanomaterials and Applications, 2020. 
Zhou, H.; Yang, D.; Ivleva, N. P.; Mircescu, N. E.; Schubert, S.; Niessner, R.; Haisch, C. 
Label-Free in Situ Discrimination of Live and Dead Bacteria by Surface-Enhanced Raman 
Scattering. Analy. Chem. 2015, 87 (13), 6553–6561. PART III
 
Nanotechnology and Nanobiosensors
 MANMEET KAUR1*, INDERPAL KAUR2
, and GAUTAM CHHABRA3
1
Department of Microbiology, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana 141001, India
2
Department of Biochemistry, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana 141001, India
3
School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana 141001, India
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: manmeet1-mb@ pau.edu
ABSTRACT
In evolutionary processes, natural enzymes perform essential functions. 
Nanozymes which are “catalyzed nanoparticles containing enzyme-like 
features” have gained significant attention as a budding scientific area of 
“artificial enzymes.” They also incur through feasible drawbacks, such as 
“substantial rate”; “limited effectiveness,” and “reusing concerns” while 
they are spectacular. Scientists have long been accused to exploring synthetic 
zyme that emulates to address these limitations. In the next century, following 
the disclosure of “ferromagnetic nanomaterials by integrated peroxidase-like 
reaction,” a considerable number of nanozyme research have steadily grown. 
Nanozymes are such form of nanostructures with “enzymatic catalytic 
properties” and have the benefits of “minimal price”; “better resistance,” and 
“dimensional stability” over the “commercial” natural enzymes. A detailed 
evaluation of potential catalytic mechanisms will contribute to the production 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 6
Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle 
Vague of Artificial Enzymes158 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
of innovative and relatively inexpensive nanozymes, and the strategic issue 
is the intellectual effect of nanozyme activities. The “categorization”; 
“catalyzed pathway”; “activity monitoring,” and scientific reports for 
nanozyme processing in the fields such as environmental protection have 
also been prioritized over the past couple of decades. 
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Enzymes are primarily made up of proteins as potent biocatalysts, although 
some are catalytic RNA molecules (Bornscheuer et al., 2012). Although 
conventional chemical catalysts or industrial catalysts are frequently used 
to catalyze the modification of biomolecules under brutal conditions, 
such as “elevated temperatures”; “high pressure”; “organic solvents,” and 
“intense pH enzymes” under light irradiation, these reactions are specifically 
excluded (Behrens et al., 2012). Natural enzymes are widely used because 
of their high catalytic efficiency and substrate specificity in “manufacturing 
industries,” “pharmaceutical,” and “epigenetic fields.” Although desirable, 
intrinsic shortcomings such as “exorbitant prices of scheduling and purifica
tion,” “lower efficiency of processing”; “acuity of catalytic process to global 
threats,” and uncertainties of recovery are often apparent (Yan, 2018). These 
drawbacks all restrict their further applications in “food manufacturing,” 
“microbiology,” “bioimaging,” “sustainable development.” Researchers have 
long been committed to the conceptualization of artificial enzyme mimics 
in order to address these disadvantages. Research has consistently shown 
that a number of materials can serve as “artificial enzymes” with function 
and structure close to those of “fullerenes,” “cyclodextrins,” “polymers.” 
“dendrimers,” “porphyrins,” “metal complexes,” and certain “biomolecules” 
(Gong et al., 2015). 
A lot of researchers on nanostructured materials “artificial enzymes 
(nanozymes)” have indeed been gaining traction since the inventors of iron 
oxide nanoparticles as peroxidase exemplifies in 2007 (Wang et al., 2018). 
One type of nanocrystals with “nano-scale sizes upto 100 nm” and enzymatic 
catalyzed attributes is “nanozymes.” The attributes of chemically synthesized 
catalysts and biocatalysts are effectively incorporated with nanozymes. It is 
possible to classify them into two classes (Zhou et al., 2017): 
¾ Nanomaterials have intrinsic enzymatic catalytic properties that 
demonstrate a mechanism identical to enzymes that catalyze the 
identical biocatalytic reactions. 
­Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 159 
¾ Nanomaterials, called “nanomaterial hybrid enzymes,” “reorient 
enzymes,” or “enzymatic catalytic groups.” With the help of 
nanoparticles, modified enzymes or enzymatic catalytic groups can 
offer outstanding fortitude as well as strength. 
In 2004, Pasquato, Scrimin, and their colleagues coined the term 
“nanozymes” to characterize the imitates of “Au nanoparticle-based 
transphosphorylation” arising out of the actualization of “triazacyclonane￾functionalized thiols” on the exterior of “au nps.” Than, Wang, and Wei 
described “nanozymes” as “nanomaterials with enzyme-like features” 
in their comprehensive analysis published in 2013. The resurgence of 
interest in nanozymes might be attributed to “natural enzymes” because 
of their unique traits. Nanozymes are unique in many ways, such as their 
“size-tunable catalytic activities,” “large alteration,” and “bioconjugation 
surface area,” “multiple functions in addition to catalysis,” “smart reaction 
to external stimuli,” etc. (Table 6.1). Nanozymes are discussed because 
numerous “enzyme-mimicking behaviors” have been demonstrated by 
several nanomaterials (Wei and Wang, 2013). 
6.2 CLASSIFICATION OF NANOENZYMES
In metabolic pathways, a number of enzymes were found. They engage 
individually or together in complicated biosynthetic mechanisms and play 
a role in the emergence of life (Peters et al., 2014). It is of enormous effect 
to analyze their alternative methods, stressing the importance of metabolic 
pathways in the life system and their profoundly embedded disadvantages. 
Many nanomaterials have acted as possible enzymatic recruits for imple
mentations due to the continued endeavors of researchers (Liu et al., 2017). 
Nanozymes are graded according to two categories: 
¾ family of oxidoreductase, such as “oxidase,” “peroxidase,” “cata
lase,” “superoxide,” “dismutase,” and “nitrate reductase” 
¾ family of hydrolase, including “nuclease,” “esterase,” “phos
phatase,” “protease,” and “silicatein” (Table 6.2). Graphene and 
carbon nanotubes, for instance, have been shown to have exemplary 
peroxidase-like properties in the presence of H2O2 to catalyze the 
oxidation of several substrates, such as “3,3,”5,5”-tetramethylbenzi
dine (TMB)” and “2,2”-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic 
acid) (ABTS).” 
­
­
­
­TABLE 6.1 Nanozymes Properties with Artificial and Natural Enzymes (Wei and Wang, 2013).
S. Nanozymes Natural enzymes Conventional artificial enzymes
No.
1 Low cost High catalytic output Low cost 
2 Resilience to extreme conditions Elevated selectivity Resilience against harsh environments
3 Strong degree of stability Large specificity of substrate High stability 
4 Easy for mass manufacturing Three structures with proportions Simple for mass production
5 Long-term storage Excellent biocompatibility Long-term storage
6 Action tunable Action tunable Tunable intervention
7 Multifunctioning Reasonable design through the engineering of proteins Uniform dimensions
8 Convenient for alteration – Established molecular mimics structure
(such as bioconjugation)
9 Self-assembling – – 
10 Intelligent reaction to external stimuli – – 
160 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination TABLE 6.2 Nanomaterials as Enzyme Mimics with Applications. 
S. Enzymes Nanomaterial Applications References 
No. 
1 Oxidase	 N-CNMs Cancer therapy Fan et al. (2018) 
Ag Detection Wang et al. (2015) 
ZnO Detection Biparva et al. (2014) 
MnO2 Immuno-detection Liu et al. (2017) 
2 Glucose oxidase	 Au Detection Zhou et al. (2016) 
Au-MOF Detection Huang et al. (2017) 
3 Nitric oxide synthase Grapheme-hemein Antithrombosis Xue et al. (2014) 
4 Horseradish peroxidase Cu Detection Hu et al. (2013) 
Pt-Cu Phenol degradation Li et al. (2018) 
MnO2 Immuno-assays Liu et al. (2012) 
MoS2 Antibacteria Yin et al. (2016) 
5 Superoxide dismutase	 Pd Antioxidant Ge et al. (2016) 
Mn3O4 Antioxidant Singh et al. (2017) 
Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 161 
6.3 NANOENZYMES CATALYTIC PATHWAYS
While nanozymes have vital consideration attention in recent decades, 
there seems to be no qualitative interpretation of their “catalytic and kinetic 
mechanisms.” The “catalytic mechanisms” based on the enzyme groups can 
be evaluated. 
6.3.1 OXIDASE FAMILY
a)	 Glucose Oxidase: In 2004, Rossi and colleagues suggested that in the 
presence of O2 “naked Au nanoparticles” could catalyze C6H6O2 and 
produce “gluconic acid with H2O2.” Insulation panel have said that 
there is no superior catalytic capability of other metal nanoparticles 
to react with “glucose oxidation.” The mechanism of molecular 
formation for gold catalysis is still seen as a “bonding of moisturized 
carbohydrate moiety with Au particle surface” might form “electron￾rich gold species” based on the recruitment “essence of alkali as well 
as the iteration of H2O2” and “effectively triggering oxygen through 
nucleophilic assault” (Fig. 6.1) (Comotti et al., 2004). 162 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
FIGURE 6.1 Catalytic mechanism of gold nanoparticles (glucose oxidase mimics). 
b)	 Sulfite oxidase: A Mo-containing enzyme with “Cytochrome c” since 
an “acceptor of electrons” will catalyze toxic “sulfite sulphate oxida￾tion.” In intracellular detoxification procedures, sulfite oxidase is essen￾tial, although the depletion can lead to certain ailments (Hundallah and 
Jabari, 2016). Tremel et al. (2014) showed that “MoO3 nanoparticles” 
had an affirmative “sulfite oxidase-like behavior” that could function 
under defined circumstances as a potential therapist for above oxidase 
deficiency. The potential catalytic activity of “MoO3 nanoparticles” 
was described in such a way that {SO3 2−} has been coupled to MoO3 
nanoparticles and then, with a decrement from “MoVI to MoIV,” oxidized 
to [SO4 2−]. [MoIV] was reoxidized by the electron - accepting K3 by 
one-electron steps to the initial valence state “[Fe(CN)6].” 
6.3.2 PEROXIDASE FAMILY
a)	 Peroxidase: Many nanomaterials based on carbon have so far 
been discovered to disport acceptable “peroxidase-like properties.” Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 163 
However, their catalytic mechanism is seldom debated. Qu et al. 
finally took the exemplar of “graphene quantum dots (GQDs)” to 
unearth the rate equation (Sun et al., 2015). Individuals reported 
that perhaps the “-C=O and-O=CO” groups will sometimes accom￾plish as that of the “catalytic site” and “surface site,” consequently, 
through most of juxtaposition with evaluated facts and theoretical 
calculation. The reinterpretation of these categories would greatly 
enhance the thermal stability of GQDs. That exclusion, mostly on the 
opposite hand, for the “-C-OH groups” might restrict the enzyme - 
mediated properties. Unusually, Yang, Perrett, and colleagues found 
that “iron oxide nanoparticles” might comprise the oxidation of a 
sequence of substances as imitates of peroxidase to catalyze (Gao 
et al., 2007). In keeping with the “kinetic observations of an equi￾librium point,” the activation energy based on “Lineweaver-Burk 
plots” was identical. Such model implies that somehow a “ponging 
overall reaction” may follow the kinetic model of nanomaterials. To 
create intermediate “•OHO4,” iron oxide can interact with the very 
first hydrogen peroxide substratum. “Trimethyl benzoic,” “H+” from 
either the recipient of hydrogen will then absorb the “•OH” emitted. 
b)	 Glutathione peroxidase: Glutathione peroxidase is a type of 
enzymatic antioxidants whose cysteine-selenium is catalytic center 
(Wirth, 2015). Qu, Ren, and co-workers rationally developed an 
innovative nanozyme with a spectacular “glutathione peroxidase￾like antioxidant” potential for cytoprotection by assembling glucose 
oxidase and Se. A “ping-pong reaction” mechanism to catalyze H2O2 
decomposition, with respect to “glutathione peroxidase,” adopted 
by “glucose oxidase-selenium nanozyme,” a molecule of H2O2 
interacted to create intermediary “Se-oxide with nanoselenium.” 
The obtained intermediate then “oxidized GSH” further to form 
“ GSSG,” while the “Se” intermedi would retrograde to its initial 
state and another molecule of H2O2 then react with the portion of 
“nanoselenium” (Huang et al., 2017). 
c)	 Haloperoxidase: In 2012, the Tremel finding shows that “Vanadium 
oxide” nanowires would act as “vanadium haloperoxidase” in the 
underwater biome to resist biofilms (Natalio et al., 2012). “Vanadium 
oxide” nanowires can catalyze “halide ions” in the presence of hydrogen 
peroxidase, and generate “hypohalous acids.” The “hypohalous 
acids” produced, thus shielding ships against underwater microbial 
colonization, will induce oxidative stress to marine organisms. They 
found that the accessible simultaneous oscillator planes of vanadium 164 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
oxide nanowires seemed to have a localized vanadium coordination 
configuration similar with that of the active site of normal “vanadium 
haloperoxidase” by investigating the reaction. 
6.3.3 CATALASE
CeO2 nanostructures could act in a “redox-state-dependent manner” as cata￾lase photosensitizer; and elevated Ce4+ levels should contribute to catalyzed 
ability (Pirmohamed et al., 2010). Initiated by particles acceleration and 
oxygen, “Ce4+” had first been diminished by hydrogen peroxidase molecule 
to create “Ce3+” and then further combined with the oxygen vacancy site and 
oxidized “Ce3+ to Ce4+” with the release of water (Celardo et al., 2011). 
6.3.4 OTHERS
Gao and colleagues have carried out a number of experiments on the cata￾lytic function of metallic nanoparticles (Shen et al., 2015). It seemed that the 
“oxidase-like activity” of metals, such as “gold,” “silver,”; “Platinum,” and 
“Palladium” may depend on the dissociation of the high oxygen reactions 
assisted by the numerical simulation and descriptive statistical based on the 
surfaces of such nanoparticles. The catalyzed pathways were largely due to 
“high oxygen protonation” and “biosorption” and “OH radicals reconfiguration” 
for “super oxide dismutase-like abilities” on the interfaces. Furthermore, metal 
nanomaterials” “peroxidase methods” and “catalase-like activities” too were 
studied (Li et al., 2015). They indicated that the inherent properties of materials 
were enzymatic processes. This was primarily due to the normal “hydrogen 
peroxide decomposition” on the materials due to their “peroxidase-like action” 
demonstrated throughout the oxidizing atmosphere. Although on their inter￾faces, the “acid-like decomposition of hydrogen peroxidase” was attributable 
to the “catalase-like behavior” demonstrated under normal conditions. Under 
simple conditions can the preadsorbed “OH groups” be positively established, 
triggering the transformation of catalase and peroxidase interaction. 
6.4 TUNING OF THE “NANOENZYMES” CATALYTIC ACTIVITIES
The behaviors of nanozymes, analogous to natural enzymes, can be altered 
by many factors, such as “temperature,” “ambient atmosphere,” “pH,” and Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 165 
“metal ions.” The “steric effect” caused by light will disrupt the association 
between nanozymes and their corresponding substrates, leading to a decrease 
in reactants. Furthermore, the catalytic efficiency of nanozymes could also 
be affected by thermal influenced temperature along with pH varies. The 
consequences mostly on activities of nanozymes are intuited in the catalysis 
on “pH,” “size,” “structure,” “ions or molecules,” “surface modification 
classes,” “morphology,” “substrate selectivity,” and “temperature” in order 
to assess the effects of light irradiation (Puvvada et al., 2012). 
6.4.1 SIZE
It is excellently documented that the size of materials determines the “cata￾lytic efficiency of nanomaterials.” Yang, Perrett, and colleagues researched 
the catalytic activity of “Fe3O4 nanoparticles” of various sizes showed that 
smaller size nanoparticles had the highest peroxidase-like property, while 
the minimum catalytic activity was observed in the largest size nanopar￾ticles. Perhaps it is because it is possible to combine precarious nanopar￾ticles with a higher surface-to-volume ratio with specific substrates (Gao 
et al., 2007). The catalytic properties of nanozymes could be controlled 
mostly on basis of size. Fan et al. proposed that “size-dependent glucose 
oxidase” was equivalent to “catalytic properties of gold nanoparticles” 
(Luo et al., 2010). 
6.4.2 MORPHOLOGY
Nanozyme biocatalytic production can often be tuned by changing the struc￾ture and also the substrate. Two “Palladium nanomaterials” were developed 
by the Yin and Chen groups: nanocubes and octahedrons” (Ge et al., 2016). 
They showed that “Palladium octahedrons” with lower energy density had 
increased “catalase & superoxide dismutase-like properties” than that of 
“Palladium nanocubes” using the “Electron spin resonance spectroscopy.” 
Quite few sample experiments showed that under the same condition,” 
Palladium octahedrons” had a greater ability to extract “reactive oxygen 
species” compared favorably to “Palladium nanocubes.” The conceptual 
guesstimate was contrary to the results of analytics. In an attempt to reduce 
oxidative stress with excellent catalytic properties, research may increase the 
efficiency of nanozymes (Puvvada et al., 2012). 166 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
6.4.3 SURFACE MODIFICATION
Surface modification, ranging “coated layer,” “surface ion,” and 
“functional group” in order to comply with extant literature, indeed 
directly impact the catalyzed abilities of nanozymes (Wang et al., 2012). 
Different “functional groups” of modified “AuNPs may display various 
catalytic enzymatic activities.” “Citrate-modified AuNPs” have “glucose 
oxidase-like characteristics,” while “cysteine-modified AuNPs” can act as 
“peroxidase imitators” (Lin et al., 2013). In 2012, the Lin and Chen groups 
concentrated on the variations in the “peroxidase-like reliability of gold 
particles” with various coating changes. “Simple amino-modified” as well 
as “citrate-modified gold nanoparticles” have been identified for analysis 
in research work. They found that “uncoated gold nanoparticles” exhibited 
“promising properties” relative to the other gold particles through a 
separate analysis. 
The catalyzed cores of nanozymes and the corresponding substrates 
can be separated by implementing surface coatings, leading to decreased 
catalytic efficiency. The Perez group systematically analyzed the influence 
of “polymer thickness” and the “modification group” on the “oxidase-like 
property” on the existence of nanoceria. Control tests showed that the thin 
“poly (acrylic acid) coated” nanoceria had a comparatively high oxidase-like 
property compared to the considerably “thicker dextran wrapped” nanoceria. 
It might be because, especially in comparison to a “heavier dextran surface,” 
the “thinner poly (acrylic acid) surface” was permeable; that would allow 
the adsorbent surface to be transferred from the nanoplate’s core surface. 
The incredibly catalytic activity of natural enzymes, such as the “catalysts 
activity center” and the “substrate binding site” is due to the inherent cata￾lytic structure (Asati et al., 2009). 
6.4.4 COMPOSITION
The catalytic activity of nanozymes could also be monitored by altering 
the nanoparticle portion of the materials (Xu et al., 2015). Furthermore, 
the injecting of many aspects into nanozymes was shown to be an effective 
way of controlling the actions of nanozymes. A biocompatible method to 
optimizing the catalytic reactions of nanozymes was speculated by Qu, 
Ren, and co-workers, driven by the “configuration and mediated process 
of natural enzymes.” “The “iron porphyrin” is identified as the “catalytic 
nucleus,” while the “eroded heme tip” represents the “substrate binding site. Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 167 
“Fe3+doped polymeric nanospheres (Fe3+-MCNs)” have been engineered to 
imitate the structure. 
The “peroxidase-like behavior” might be controlled appropriately by 
altering the concentrations of nanostructures. Afterwards, “Palladium￾Platinum” alloy nanodots were synthesized and evaluated mainly mostly 
on substrate of “gold nanoparticles.” The “gold-Palladium Platinum” alloy 
nanowires formed in the presence of oxygen could act as an oxidase mimic 
for catalyzing the oxidation of tetramethyl benzidine. The presence of the 
amino-acid oxidation portion of Palladium in the “Platinum anoparticle” could 
promote the effectiveness of the process effectively. The catalytic potential 
of the gold−palladium−platinum alloy nanorode has greatly affected the 
elevation of the Palladium nanocomponent. As the “Palladium to Platinum” 
proportion for tetramethyl benzoic oxidation increased to five, the” Au-PdPt 
alloy “nanorod” oxidase-like activity increased significantly. The required 
alloying of palladium and platinum together sponsored a crucial factor to 
alter the oxidase-like behavior of “gold-Palladium-Platinum” nanoparticles 
(Sang et al., 2018). 
6.4.5 CONSTRUCTING HYBRID NANOPARTICLES
To present, the prominence of prototype nanomaterials has gained due to 
certain “well-defined processes,” “improved efficiency” (Lee et al., 2013). 
Catapulted by all this, when producing hybrid nanoparticles, nanozymes will 
obtain supervisory catalyzed abilities. Although “gold nanoparticles” can 
work as” peroxidase imitates” effective; their catalytic performance is often 
restricted by ambient pH (Li et al., 2015). 
Hybrid nanozymes from “GO-AuNCs” were produced by the Qu and Ren 
groups to achieve optimum catalytic efficiency over a broad pH range (Tao 
et al., 2013). In their operation, glucose oxidase was used as the regulator 
“peroxidase-like action” to amplify the “lysozyme-coated gold nanoclusters.” 
Under a weak base environment, “tetramethyl benzoic” had a remarkable 
similarity to “diamine” that resulted in low aqueous viscosity. Glucose oxidase 
may also be used for the effectively sorption surface tetramethyl benzoic, 
mainly with specific properties such as high “surface area to volume ratio” and 
“good affinity” for electrostatic repulsion. This could facilitate the tendency to 
function with relevant substrates with the active “gold nanocomposites” sites, 
causing an increase in “AuNCs peroxidase-like ability.” The accumulating 
hybrid nanozymes can thus serve as strong peroxide over a very wide pH 
range (Wang et al., 2009). 168 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
6.4.6 pH AND TEMPERATURE
The accompanying pH also may affect the nanozymes” catalytic activity; 
for example, under acidic conditions, gold nanoparticles may be considered 
candidates for peroxidase, while gold nanoparticles may demonstrate 
catalytic characteristics comparable to “catalase or superoxide dismutase” 
under neutral and alkaline conditions (Li et al., 2015). In addition, the groups 
of Gu and Zhang reported that iron oxide nanoparticles can act as peroxidase 
accentuates to catalyze iron oxide nanozymes, and will exhibit a catalase￾like capacity to generate detrimental hydrogen peroxidase in a favorable 
physiological conditions. Likewise, temperature may also have a significant 
impact on nanozymes” catalytic performance (Chen et al., 2012). 
6.4.7 MOLECULES OR IONS
Earlier studies have consistently shown that ions may represent as effectors, as 
well as some molecules, to regulate the catalytic performance of nanozymes. 
In order to activate or hinder the processes of nanozymes, certain ions or 
molecules may be used. For example, the catalytic ability of citrate-capped 
gold nanoparticles could be increased by “mercury,” “lead,” and “bismuth.” 
The citrate resistance on the layer of “gold nanoparticles” could limit these 
to the related material if these organic compounds endured. Due to the strong 
affinity between both the substrate of gold nanoparticles and metal0, the 
decreased metal could reabsorb on the particle surfaces, allowing the surface 
properties and the “peroxidase-like characteristics” of “gold nanoparticles” 
to alter. 
While nanozymes provide unprecedented thermostability, it is never￾theless hard to fathom biocatalytic processes under elevated temperature. 
Perhaps this is attributable to the fact that, under extreme temps, the heat 
dissipation resilience of oxidative products including “ABTS•+” can some￾times provoke the biocatalytic reaction to operate inadequately. In order to 
tackle this issue, Qu, Ren, and coworkers utilized organic solvent as the 
transmitter to instigate “EMSN-AuNPs” reactions over ambient humidity. 
Ionic liquid is an irresistible fluid, which can adequately sustain the material 
“ABTS•+.” In conjunction, with the assistance of adsorbent, the nanozyme 
may display enhanced electrochemical capacity. This phenomenon can 
depend on the coulomb interaction among “organic solvent and material,” 
“anions and cations” as well as the “higher solvation strength.” In addition, 
as an appropriate improving agent, “adenosine triphosphate (ATP)” may be Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 169 
used to perform biocatalysts processes throughout a broad temperature range. 
Especially in comparison with organic solvent, “ATP” has the leverage of 
being affordable and conveniently usable, highly transferable to other nano￾zymes, etc. These studies would encourage the creation of suitable operators 
to improve the catalytic performance of nanozymes (Lin et al., 2014). 
6.4.8 LIGHT
As lighting demonstrates multispectral precision, the design of light￾modulated devices could be used as a meaningful method to track the 
catalyzed energy consumption of nanozymes. For example, by manipulating 
the isomers “metallo-supramolecular molecules” ([Fe2L3]4+) mostly on 
surface of carboxyl-functioned nano graphene sheets (GO-COOH). Again, 
this dynamic system will carry out the intracellular perception of hydrogen 
peroxidase in PC-12 cells with the aid of an isomers component and the 
“peroxidase-like action” of the “graphene oxide” component (Li et al., 2012). 
6.5 NANOMATERIALS DEPENDENT ON CARBON FOR 
NANOENZYMES
In several areas, such as “carbon nanotubes (CNTs),” “fullerene,” “grapheme,” 
and their respective derivatives, large applications for carbon-based nanopar￾ticles have already been identified. They have been extensively studied in 
order to mimic different natural enzymes due to their fascinating catalytic 
activities. 
6.5.1 FULLERENE AND DERIVATIVES AS IMITATORS OF NUCLEASES
Nuclease induces the phosphodiester bond cleavage between two nucleotides 
in a nucleic acid. Immaculate fullerenes, like “C60,” really aren’t hydrophilic, 
rendering it difficult for them all to imitate the enzymes of the aqueous. By 
some of the implementation of hydrophilic moieties, fullerenes have indeed 
been assuaged. The Nakamura group developed and analyzed its photo￾induced biochemical activity with water-soluble C60−1 (Tokuyama et al., 
1993). Oddly, they found that “fullerene carboxylic acid (i.e., C60−1)” oxida￾tively divides DNA under light irradiation. As “C60−1” could never entangle 
to the genetic material to still be sliced, the cleavage was trivial (Boutorine 170 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
et al., 1994). The targeted cleavage was accomplished by building a triplex at 
guanine-rich regions. There are other ways of making preferential cleavage 
feasible. For example, by centralizing fullerenes with DNA intercalators, the 
modified fullerene derivatives can improve DNA cleavage activity, such as 
“acridine” compared to the regular fullerene. Previous research has already 
shown that water-soluble derivatives of carbon (fullerene) can mimic the 
nuclease. (Yamakoshi et al., 1996). 
6.5.1.1 FULLERENE AND DERIVATIVES AS IMITATED BY SUPEROXIDE 
DISMUTASE 
“Reactive oxygen species (ROS)” perform both positive as well as negative 
roles in life processes. Even if it wasn”t properly managed, “tissue damage” 
and “associated inflammation” may be caused by superoxide radicals. In 
existence, superoxide dismutase was created to catalyze the hydroxyl radical 
dispute into “hydrogen peroxidase” and “molecular oxygen” and thus 
protecting living systems from harm sustained by anion-induced superoxide. 
In order to overcome the limitations of natural superoxide dismutase, major 
attempts have been made to create superoxide dismutase imitates such as 
“reduced stability and high cost.” Clearly influenced by the initial detec￾tion that C60 could behave as a radical sponge, “two polyhydroxylated C60 
(i.e., C60(OH)12 and C60(OH)nOm, n = 18–20, m = 3–7 hemicetal groups)” 
evaluated the neuroprotective activities, the groundbreaking work of Choi 
and colleagues established the suoeroxide dismutase-mimicking activities 
of fullerenes and has been successfully implemented (Krusic et al., 1991). 
6.5.2 GRAPHENE AND DERIVATIVES
Oxidizing the substrates with hydrogen peroxidase into oxidized materials 
is catalyzed by peroxidase. The products usually have to be either fluores￾cent or illuminated, making it simpler to produce peroxidase for a wide 
range of molecular diagnostic and biological research. Yan and colleagues 
initially proposed the “peroxidase-mimicking behaviors” of nanomaterials 
with nanoparticles of iron oxide (Gao et al., 2007). A variety of intriguing 
nanomaterials to mimic peroxidase have been studied. Among them, when 
mimicking peroxidase, “grapheme” and its various derivatives displayed 
moments of magic. Graphene and its derivatives can be loosely divided 
into two classes of peroxidase-imitating activities. The activities of the first Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 171 
form are primarily derived from “graphene or derivatives” of that form. The 
activities for the second type are either focused on “graphene-assembled 
catalysts” or on “the decorated catalysts” synergistic action as well as the 
graphene-assembled catalysts. 
6.5.2.1 GRAPHENE AND ITS DERIVATIVES AS PEROXIDASE MIMICS 
While pure graphene with no alterations is not really highly soluble in water, 
the “peroxidase-mimicking” behavior has been thoroughly researched 
with graphene derivatives. The inherently peroxidase-mimicking behavior 
of carbonyl group modification graphene oxide was reported by Qu and 
coworkers (Song et al., 2010). The process was first illustrated by catalytic 
oxidation of tetramethyl benzoic with hydrogen peroxidase in the presence 
of “GO-COOH.” Kinetic research showed that “GO-COOH” has a “higher 
binding affinity” compared to normal peroxidase for tetramethyl benzoic. 
Interestingly, the reactions of “GO-catalyzed COOH” went through a 
“ponging phase,” it is around the same as natural peroxidase. 
No mechanism responsible for enzymatic performance was suggested, 
even though it was recommended that the transfer of electrons from 
carboxylated glucose oxidase to hydrogen peroxidase may be possible. These 
functional moieties such as “Hydroxyl; Ketone; Carboxyl; Epoxide may play 
a pivotal role in their enzyme-mimicking activities. To specifically disconnect 
certain functional moieties, multiple analytes were used to explore the fairly 
huge moieties liable for a graphene derivative”s “peroxidase mimicking” 
activity called “GQDs.” “Phenylhydrazine (PH),” “benzoic anhydride (BA)” 
and “2-bromo-1-phenylethanone (BrPE)” will react with above three groups 
selectively, respectively (Fig. 6.2) (Sun et al., 2015). 
6.5.2.2 CARBON NANOTUBES AS PEROXIDASE MIMICS 
The peroxidase-mimicking behavior of “single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWNTs)” was demonstrated by Qu and colleagues. Via “catalytic oxidation 
of tetramethyl benzoic” with hydrogen peroxidase, the behavior of “SWNTs” 
was prosecuted. Instead of just “SWNTs” themselves, the imitating sequence 
may be responsible for a minor mixture of solid catalyst particulates, since 
metal catalysts often appear to develop SWNTs. “Sonic-assisted processing 
with modified acids” (i.e., a mixture of concentrated sulfuric and nitric acids) 
was carried out to completely remove metal residues in order to solve these FIGURE 6.2 Deciphering peroxidase-mimicking activity of GQDs. (A) Phenylhydrazine 
(B) 2-bromo-1-phenylethanone (C) Benzoic anhydride. 
172 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
problems (i.e., Cobalt). Incredible “SWNTs” and treated “SWNTs” have just 
never demonstrated any major differences in respective catalyzed processes. 
This acknowledged that the peroxidase-mimicking activity of “SWNTs” was 
from the “SWNTs” themselves, but unlike metal residues. They developed a 
colorimetric method for DNA detection by exploring the various affinities of 
“ssDNA” and “dsDNA” with “SWNTs.” 
Zhu and colleagues claim that the efficacy of iron in helical carbon 
nanotubes has played a key role in experimental catalysts processes. The 
significantly larger the “helical carbon nanotube” iron content, the stronger 
the helical carbon nanotube “peroxidase-mimicking” activity. Its activity was 
already optimum for the “helical carbon nanotube” with the lowest possible 
iron number than that of “MWNTs (multiwalled CNTs)” (Cui et al., 2011). Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 173 
6.5.2.3 CERTAIN CARBON NANOMATERIALS AS IMITATORS OF 
PEROXIDASE 
The “peroxidase-mimicking activities” of “carbon nanohorns” and “carbon 
nanodots” were explored in several classes (Xu et al., 2015). Xu and colleagues 
have shown that “carboxyl-functionalized single-walled carbon nanohorns” 
have an operation similar to “peroxidase” (Zhu et al., 2015). A particular 
colorimetric method for glucose was developed when the nanozyme was 
then combined with glucose oxidase. “Carbon nanodots” with a mean range 
of 2.0 nm also exhibited “peroxidase-mimicking behavior” and were used 
for “glucose sensing.” The peroxidase-like activity of “selenium-doped 
graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets” was illustrated and further investigated 
when triggered with “xanthine oxidase” (Q) for “xanthine” prediction. 
6.6 NANOMATERIALS OF METAL WITH CATALYTIC MONOLAYERS 
(TYPE 1)
Metal nanomaterials (such as gold, silver, etc.) with self-assembled nanopar
ticles (particularly conjugated monolayers) are being thoroughly researched 
due to various potential vital importance to nanoscience (Love et al., 2005). 
One might assume that if catalyzed ligands get introduced into another 
nanosheets, the metallic nanoparticles shielded by the monolayers would be 
thermodynamically stable. These functionalized metal oxides, of course, can 
require enzyme-like catalysis and are therefore called nanozymes. 
Such nanozymes may be further split into three subgroups, as per the 
molecules used during the monolayers (Prins, 2015): 
¾ “Alkanethiol,” with catalytic moieties, ended 
¾ In addition, the catalytic moieties would be further integrated on the 
nanoparticles except “catalytic terminal alkanethiol.” 
¾ Catalyzed “thiolated” targeting ligands 
­
6.6.1 ALKANETHIOL-PROTECTED AUNPS WITH CATALYTIC 
TERMINAL MOIETIES
To reorient the gold nanoparticle structure, Scrimin and co-workers used 
“alkanethiol” re-instated with catalyzed ligands. The accessed gold nanopar￾ticles configurations are therefore taken as a serious “metallonuclease 174 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(i.e., RNase)” (Fig. 6.3) imitate to crystallize the “transphosphorylation of 
2-hydroxypropyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate (HPNPP)” (Fig. 6.4). The noncata￾lytic “transphosphorylation of HPNPP,” once “gold naparticle-1 nanozyme” 
was used, that process was aggravated by several over than four times 
higher. Special, that much objected “zinc-1 (i.e., the 1, 4,7-triazacyclonane 
(TACN) and zinc ion)” combined with both the decommissioned catalyzed 
molecule; “gold nanoparticle-1 nanozyme” evidenced more than 600 times 
the rate of momentum. The “gold nanoparticles” were altered whenever 
“alkanethiol reinstated by NH4+,” the constructed AuNP-based frameworks 
were practically uncooperative. This regulatory discovery shows that “gold 
nanoparticle-1 nanozyme” catalytic activity would be about the integrated 
nanoparticles instead of just the “gold nanoparticle core.” The cleavage of 
ribonucleic acid dinucleotides (such as “polyadenylation,” “guanine & uracil 
nucleotides”) may also be catalyzed by the “gold nanoparticle-1” nanozyme 
(Manea et al., 2004). 
Subsequently, the shaped catalyzed substitutions “TACN-Zn2+ 
complex” is semiotic. The cooperativity was suggested by the sigmoid 
function gradient for catalytic properties depending on zinc charge density. 
Researches and empirical evidence really have perpetuated the co-operative 
effect. Two adjacent catalyzed ligands were theorized to be selected to 
develop a catalyzed pocket for collaborative catalytic reactions. The ones 
in natural enzymes were emulated by such a catalytic pocket. Addition￾ally, due to the extreme proximity effect, a “0.4 unit dissociation constant” 
decrease throughout the catalogued “TACN-Zn2+” complexes also could 
contribute to higher absorbance. Lastly, the ferocious “Au-S interac￾tion” chose to make it quite convenient to carry out the self-assembly. 
In addition, it endowed the structured gold nanoparticle-based catalyzed 
substances with much more better durability particularly in relation with 
micelle-based systems. 
Apart from that, its activity could be regulated analytically. Although the 
catalytic activity of “gold nanoparticle-1” zyme has been in the complicated 
“Zn2+,” when using a “Zn2+ chelating reagent” the activity can be peripherally 
transitioned apart and can therefore be recovered by re-adding “Zn2+.” Their 
functional groups have quite a limited “dielectric constant (ε)” for natural 
metallonucleases. As illustrated in eq 6.1 underneath, at membrane proteins 
of low conductivity, the electrostatic interaction between both the enzyme 
and its substrate might be preferred. Modest conductivity should therefore be 
integrated into functional groups to imitate a very unique micro-environment 
(Pieters et al., 2012). Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 175 
(Q Q 1× 2) Electrostati c ∝ (6.1) (ε × r
1,2 ) 
To verify the research results, gold nanoparticle-based nanozymes with 
varying concentrations have been configured and their metallonuclease 
emulation tendencies were investigated. At reduced polarities, “gold 
nanoparticle-3” and “gold nanoparticle-5” increases more rapidly, whereas 
“gold nanoparticle-2” and “gold nanoparticle-4” contains fewer activity at 
higher polarities. Consequently, the catalytic activities were well connected 
with the polarities of the installed monolayers. The decreased polarities 
would significantly raise the electrostatic interaction between both the 
dianionic transfer state as well as the active sites of the nanozyme (i.e., Zn2+ 
complex), thus improving the catalytic properties. This research also showed 
that the catalytic properties of the nanozymes can be modified by attenuating 
the integrated monolayers (Diez et al., 2014). 
6.6.1.1 ALKANETHIOL-PROTECTED AUNPS AS OTHER ENZYME MIMICS 
Besides altering the terminal “TACN” ligand of the alkanethiol sequence to other 
functional ligands, establishing other enzyme imitates is comparatively easy. A 
“DNA topoisomerase” imitate has also been formed, by assembling “BAPA”­
terminated alkanethiol on gold nanoparticles. The cleavage of “BNP (bis-p￾nitrophenyl phosphate),” a deoxyribonucleic acid model substratum into “MNP 
(p-nitrophenyl phosphate)” and “p-nitrophenolate” with “gold nanoparticle-6 
zyme” was exacerbated by thousand folds in the acoustic cleavage mixture. 
Furthermore, DNA molecules (“pBR 322 plasmid DNA”) were appropriately 
ligated with gold nanoparticle-66 nanozyme (Bonomi et al., 2008). DNase 
might also be mimicked through the use of gold nanoparticles modified with 
“cerium (IV)” complex revoked alkanethiol monolayers. Through using “gold 
nanoparticles-Cerium (IV)-based nanozymes,” the frequency of acceleration 
for both the “BNP” cleavage was observed upto million times. The outstanding 
electrochemical activity too was due to the novelty of the nanozyme, like 
cooperative catalytic reactions (Bonomi et al., 2010). 
6.6.1.2 RNASE (DNASE) MIMICS USING OTHER SUPPORTING CORES 
As gold nanoparticles served mainly as that of the representing center, they 
could be replaced by certain materials. Numerous researches have already 176 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
shown that by implementing the catalyzed ligands (such as “TACN-Zn2+ 
complex” on polymer, “silica,” it is able to capture “RNase” and “DNase” 
mimics. The formation and purifying of such enzyme imitates is far more 
costly and time consuming relative to basic gold sulfide chemistry. Those 
certain noble metal nanoparticles may also be used as the enhancing base 
in hypothesis. Even so, no research was published, that may be due to the 
efficient oxidation of AgNPs (Savelli and Salvio 2015). 
6.6.2 THIOLATED BIOMOLECULES-PROTECTED AUNPS
Multiple gold nanoparticles-based nanozymes are being formed through 
incorporating “thiolated”-biological molecules on the “gold nanoparticle 
cores.” A zyme has also been formulated to imitate the “RNA-induced 
silencing complex (RISC)” process connectivity. A “RISC” may abide to 
the equivalent intention “ssRNA” and then shotgun it”s own activity by 
triggering target RNA cleavage with a nuclease integrated within the “RISC” 
in combination with the assistance of a regulatory “ssRNA,” Both “nucleases” 
and “regulatory ssRNA” were co-assembled with a gold nanoparticle core 
to emulate the attributes of a “RISC.” In the accessibility of a “targeted 
ssRNA” including “objective ssRNA” the “regulatory ssRNA” installed 
could generate a duplex and thus interact it to the configured nuclease. 
The nanozyme”s “anti-HCV” (“hepatitis C virus”) effectiveness has 
been evaluated to exemplify the proposition using the “HCV replicon tissue 
culture” method (“FL-Neo cell line”). The replication of the HCV was 
distorted with nanozyme treatment. The in vivo assessment of the nano￾zyme was then screened using a “pluripotent stem cells.” The therapy of 
nanozymes led, extraordinarily, to a decrease in “HCV- RNA” of even more 
than 99%. Considering the non-detectable cellular cell adhesion response, 
the engineered nanozyme might be used as an efficient biomedicine for 
infectious disorders and diseases. Those certain appropriate methodologies 
have been developed for “RNA interference-independent identification of 
transcription” (Rouge et al., 2015). 
6.6.3 AUNPS WITH NONCOVALENTLY ASSEMBLED CATALYTIC 
MOIETIES COVERED BY ALKANETHIOL
Just about few other experiments have already shown “catalytic ligands” 
may be generated noncovalently on (or in) the gold nanoparticles coated by Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 177 
alkanethiol. The peptide incision was enabled by electrochemically binding 
the two peptide molecules to the “trimethylammonium-functionalized gold 
nanoparticle.” So, both the substrate and the catalyzed peptide are non￾covalently designed to functionalize “trimethylammonium” and the non￾covalent configuration was mainly driven by electro - hydraulic correlations 
(Zaramella et al., 2012). 
FIGURE 6.3 Transphosphorylation catalyzed by RNase. 
6.7 NANOENZYMES APPLICATIONS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
With development of industry, the environmental quality concerns have 
arisen. Human factors, such as unwarranted stormwater drains waste water 
and waste gas, are mainly responsible for environmental contamination. It can 178 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
modify the essence of the entire environment, which can harm and destroy 
the environmentally friendly and life form holistic growth (For example, 
“Japan’s minamata disease” was caused by “Showa Denko Corporation’s” 
dumping of unregulated Hg-containing liquid waste into the shore (Takeuchi 
et al., 1962). Air degradation has been a systemic concern before now, but 
there has been a belief that attempts to protect and maintain the ecosystem 
ought to be strengthened. Since before the modern era, biotechnology 
has become more and more popular with people as a crossover between 
chemistry and biology. Thus far, biotechnology has also been widely used 
in agricultural processing, pharmacology, forest products, etc. Applications 
of IoT reveal potential the pollution crisis in the atmosphere. In general, 
enzymes and protein engineering seems to have a vital impact on environ￾mental pollution remediation (Karam and Nicell, 1997). 
FIGURE 6.4 Transphosphorylation of HPNPP catalyzed by AuNP-1 nanozyme. Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 179 
a)	 Wastewater depletion of chemical contaminants: Organic 
pollution has become one of the significant forms of emissions 
among diverse contaminants. Conventional physiochemical 
techniques also require complex procedures and costly equipment. 
Klibanov and co-workers used peroxidase for the first time since the 
early 1980s to catalyze the disintegration of phenols and aromatic 
compounds in waste water. Afterwards the, growing attention was 
paid with the use of natural enzymes for treating wastewater. “Horse 
radish peroxidase” is the most commonly applied enzyme of these 
enzymes. To produce highly reactive •OH, HRP will catalyze H2O2. 
The OH obtained will then oxidize several organic contaminants into 
aqueous coagulated products, such as esters and polyamines. While 
natural enzymes have many avails, their limitations all restrict their 
potential ecological treatment applications. Nanozymes have shown 
promise in the treatment of environmental pollutants, as mimics of 
natural enzymes. Fe3O4 zymes have virtues, such as “cheaper price,” 
“better governance,” and “cycling speed” compared to natural HRP. 
Fe3O4 nanoparticles could, therefore, be more appropriate for the 
removal of pollutants (Shahwan et al., 2011). Needless to mention, 
iron oxide nanoparticles are versatile for inevitably accumulating as 
a consequence of elevated thermal conductivity. Carbon nanotubes, 
just behind a comparatively small and stringent pH range, could 
have efficient electrochemical ability. All these curb their future 
uses in the removal of pollutants. Huang et al. used multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes carbon nanotubes to build “iron oxide” hybrid 
nanoparticles as the frameworks to achieve these objectives (Wang 
et al., 2014). 
Furthermore, in order to spur pollutants destruction, plenty 
other peroxidase-like nanomaterials have also been recorded 
(Huang et al., 2015). Promptly, the Qu and Ren groups revealed 
that “Fe3+-MCNs” nanozymes can theoretically forecast biological 
extraction efficiency for HRP itutes. Lacquers would also be used, 
analogous to HRP, in treating wastewater. The developed “Cu/GMP 
metal organic framework” will continue to accelerate polyphenol 
substrates” as a laccase mimic. These phenolic compounds, as 
substantial toxic substances, may trigger global pollution. The “Cu/ 
GMP MOF” structure including its inherent laccase-like operation 
will thus prove responsible for serious sustainability issues (Liang 
et al., 2017). 180 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
b)	 Chemical warfare agents degrading: “Chemical Warfare Agents 
(CWA)” are chemical phenomena that are aimed at preventing 
highly toxic and widespread devastation. Between them, biological 
devices, a type of phosphate bond like “CWA,” have some of the 
most toxic metals known to exist. They can reach the body via 
indirect techniques, namely mucous epithelial cells. These other 
nerves gases, when mixed with acetylcholine, can trigger tyrosine 
kinase function, resulting in autonomic nervous dysfunction. Recent 
western military developments, like the “Syrian military war” also 
led to targeted measures to seek efficient ways to tear down such 
dangerous materials rapidly. Alternatives to date have concentrated 
largely on personal security, massive destruction of chem weapons 
processing and prevention of “CWA” leakage (Mondloch et al., 
2015). The potential to destroy with above “CWA” is provided by 
certain strong stratified compounds, such as modified carbon black 
and metal atoms. Even so, such compounds often suffer with adverse 
effects, such as poor absorption potential and versatility of elimina￾tion. Thus it is critically necessary to investigate new technologies 
for the effective decomposition processes of nerve agents and prepa￾rations (Cannard, 2006). 
c)	 Inhibiting the formation of biofilm: On the surface of the “vessel,” 
“propeller,” “hold,” and other ship regions in the underwater 
atmosphere, microorganisms can reabsorb, stimulating the production 
of “marine biofouling.” Flow of water resilience could be impaired 
by the prevalence of microbes on ships, thus increasing fuel usage 
and greenhouse gases. “Marine biofouling” has earned considerable 
attention (Braithwaite and McEvoy, 2004). A workable alternative 
is the manufacture of anti-fouling coatings to avoid cell adherence. 
“Tributyltin-free antifouling coatings” have been used to virtually 
eliminate aquatic biofouling by “metal composite or biocide dependent 
paints” (Callow and Callow, 2011). Even so, such substances can 
also have complications such as “metal ions leakage” and “bacterial 
resistance” that can trigger certain ecological harm. Throughout the 
ocean setting, “vanadium haloperoxidase “ may be produced by 
other seaweeds to facilitate the oxidation of “halogens” to regenerate 
analogous “hypohalous acids” with the help of hydrogen peroxidase 
(Carter et al., 2003). 
Tremel and co-workers found, inspired by these unique properties, 
that “CeO2−x nanorods” had inherent haloperoxidase-like activity. Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 181 
In the presence of H2O2, the “bromination reaction” of signalling 
compounds could be catalyzed by “CeO2−x nanorods,” leading to 
bacterial quorum sensing inhibition. This control capacity of the 
quorum sensing bacteria was comparable to “haloperoxidases” and 
“halogenases of natural or artificial vanadium.” “CeO2−x nanorods” 
have the advantages such as “low toxicity” and “excellent catalytic 
efficiency” compared to the widely used “cuprous oxide” antifouling 
agent. They also maintained a high antifouling ability to effectively 
inhibit the adhesion of microorganisms while applying CeO2−x 
nanorods to paints. Taken together, while nanozymes have great 
advantages in catalyzing the “degradation of organic contaminants,” 
“chemical warfare agents,” etc., great efforts are still needed to 
achieve practical applications in environmental treatment, such as the 
enhancement of catalytic activities (Herget et al., 2017). 
6.8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE ASPECTS
Over the past decade, nanozyme investigations have been performed 
worldwide and nanozyme application has also been applied to “biotechnology,” 
“medications,” “agricultural production,” “pollution prevention,” and several 
other sectors. Nanozymes have multifunctional cloud components in the field 
of environmental nanotechnology, from toxin recognition to detection. In 
addition to driving the precision and strength of natural enzymes, nanozymes 
may independently operate on unfavorable climatic variables that can 
influence biotic processes, that is, “interpretations in pH and temperature.” 
There are also a few restrictions on nanozymes, and since nanozymes surpass 
innumerable static constraints that are efficient for natural enzymes, several 
nanozyme catalytic activities are indeed significantly cheaper than traditional 
natural enzymes. Currently, nanozyme research focuses mainly on redox 
enzyme mimics, such as “catalase,” “oxidase,” “superoxide dismutase,” 
“peroxidase” with much less emphasis on other metabolites that may be 
important for the degradation of many composite materials. In this respect, 
although the productivity of the extraction of particulates is immense, the 
expense of industrialized technology may be beneficial in increasing carbon￾emission treatment methods. 
It is common for nanozymes to demonstrate satisfactory accuracy in 
limited experiments, but their integration into environmental science is still 
restricted, mainly because catalyzed nanozyme technologies have a strong 
development of flexibility and an extended lifetime if these limitations can  
 
182 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
be brought to light, nanozyme technologies can gain tremendous benefits 
for the contaminant treatment industry. The progress of nanozyme tech￾nologies almost seems appealing, but subsequent research on nanozymes 
appears rare. Examination of nanoparticles is growing in the environmental 
biotechnology viewpoint, and recent nanozymes start popping up relevant 
theories encompassing how and when to effectively extract contaminants 
in unfavorable conditions, and then how to delegitimize rather obdurate 
polymeric materials. In multilevel incentives for industrialized technology 
and community health, execution of nanozyme technology in the disciplines 
of “atmosphere,” “genetics,” “farming,” and “pharmaceutics” may emerge. 
KEYWORDS
• nanozymes 
• enzyme mimics 
• carbon and metal oxidized based nanoparticles 
• catalytic nanomaterials 
• artificial enzymes
• catalytic mechanisms 
• environmental protection 
REFERENCES 
Asati, A.; Santra, S.; Kaittanis, C.; Nath, S.; Perez, J. M. Oxidase-like activity of Polymer￾Coated Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles. Angew. Chem.; Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 2308–2312. 
Behrens, M.; Studt, F.; Kasatkin, I.; Kühl, S.; Havecker, M.; Ӓbild-Pedersen, F.; Zander, S.; 
Girgsdies, F.; Kurr, P.; Kniep, B. L. et al. The Active Site of Methanol Synthesis over Cu/ 
ZnO/Al2O3 Industrial Catalysts. Sci. 2012, 336, 893–897. 
Biparva, P.; Abedirad, S. M.; Kazemi, S. Y. ZnO Nanoparticles as an Oxidase Mimic-Mediated 
Flow-Injection Chemiluminescence System for Sensitive Determination of Carvedilol. 
Talanta 2014, 130, 116–121. 
Bonomi, R.; Scrimin, P.; Mancin, F. Phosphate Diesters Cleavage Mediated by Ce (IV) 
Complexes Self-Assembled on Gold Nanoparticles. Org. Biomol. Chem 2010, 8, 2622–2626. 
Bonomi, R.; Selvestrel, F.; Lombardo, V.; Sissi, C.; Polizzi, S.; Mancin, F.; et al. Phosphate 
Diester and DNA Hydrolysis by a Multivalent, Nanoparticle-Based Catalyst. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2008, 130, 15744–15745.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 183 
Bornscheuer, U. T.; Huisman, G. W.; Kazlauskas, R. J.; Lutz, S.; Moore, J. C.; Robins, K. 
Engineering the Third Wave of Biocatalysis. Nature 2012, 485, 185––194. 
Boutorine, A. S.; Tokuyama, H.; Takasugi, M.; Isobe, H.; Nakamura, E.; Helene, C. Fullerene￾Oligonucleotide Conjugates: Photoinduced Sequence-Specific DNA Cleavage. Angew. 
Chem.Int. Ed. 1994, 33, 2462–2465. 
Braithwaite, R. A.; McEvoy, L. A. Marine Biofouling on Fish Farms and Its Remediation. 
Adv. Mar. Biol. 2004, 47, 215–252. 
Callow, J. A.; Callow, M. E. Trends in the Development of Environmentally Friendly Fouling￾Resistant Marine Coatings. Nat. Commun. 2011, 2, 244. 
Cannard, K. The Acute Treatment of Nerve Agent Exposure. J. Neurol. Sci. 2006, 249, 86–94. 
Carter-Franklin, J. N.; Parrish, J. D.; Tschirret-Guth, R. A.; Little, R. D.; Butler, A. Vanadium 
Haloperoxidase-Catalyzed Bromination and Cyclization of Terpenes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003, 125, 3688– 3689. 
Celardo, I.; Pedersen, J. Z.; Traversa, E.; Ghibelli, L. Pharmacological Potential of Cerium 
Oxide Nanoparticles. Nanoscale 2011, 3, 1411–1420. 
Chen, Z. W.; Yin, J. J.; Zhou, Y. T.; Zhang, Y.; Song, L. N.;Song, M. J.; Hu, S. L.; Gu, N. Dual 
Enzyme-Like Activities of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles and Their Implication for Diminishing 
Cytotoxicity. ACS Nano 2012, 6, 4001–4012. 
Cheng, H. J.; Zhang, L.; He, J.; Guo, W. J.; Zhou, Z. Y.; Zhang, X. J.; Nie, S. M.; Wei, H. 
Integrated Nanozymes with Nanoscale Proximity for in Vivo Neurochemical Monitoring in 
Living Brains. Anal. Chem. 2016, 88, 5489–5497. 
Comotti, M.; Della Pina, C.; Matarrese, R.; Rossi, M. The Catalytic Activity of “Naked” Gold 
Particles. Angew. Chem.; Int. Ed. 2004, 43, 5812–5815. 
Cui, R.; Han, Z.;Zhu, J.-J. Helical Carbon Nanotubes: Intrinsic Peroxidase Catalytic Activity 
and Its Application for Biocatalysis and Biosensing. Chem. Eur. J. 2011, 17, 9377–9384. 
Diez-Castellnou, M.; Mancin, F.; Scrimin, P. Efficient Phosphodiester Cleaving Nanozymes 
Resulting from Multivalency and Local Medium Polarity Control. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 
136, 1158–1161. 
Fan, K. L.; Xi, J. Q.; Fan, L.; Wang, P. X.; Zhu, C. H.; Tang, Y.; Xu, X. D.; Liang, M. M.; 
Jiang, B.; Yan, X. Y. et al. In Vivo Guiding Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanozyme for Tumor 
Catalytic Therapy. Nat.Commun. 2018, 9, 1440. 
Gao, L. Z.; Zhuang, J.; Nie, L.; Zhang, J. B.; Zhang, Y.; Gu, N., et al. 2007). Intrinsic Peroxidase￾Like Activity of Ferromagnetic Nanoparticles. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2007, 2, 577–583. 
Ge, C. C.; Fang, G.; Shen, X. M.; Chong, Y.; Wamer, W. G.; Gao, X. F.; Chai, Z. F.; Chen, C. 
Y.; Yin, J. J. Facet Energy Versus Enzyme-Like Activities: The Unexpected Protection of 
Palladium Nanocrystals against Oxidative Damage. ACS Nano 2016, 10, 10436––10445. 
Gong, L.; Zhao, Z. L.; Lv, Y. F.; Huan, S. Y.; Fu, T.; Zhang, X. B.; Shen, G. L.; Yu, R. Q. 
DNAzyme-Based Biosensors and Nanodevices. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 979–995. 
Herget, K.; Hubach, P.; Pusch, S.; Deglmann, P.; Götz, H.; Gorelik, T. E.; Gural”skiy, I. A.; 
Pfitzner, F.; Link, T.; Schenk, S. et al. Haloperoxidase Mimicry by CeO2-x Nanorods 
Combats Biofouling. Adv. Mater. 2017, 29, 1603823. 
Hu, L. Z.; Yuan, Y. L.; Zhang, L.; Zhao, J. M.; Majeed, S.; Xu, G. B. Copper Nanoclusters as 
Peroxidase Mimetics and Their Applications to H2O2 and Glucose Detection. Anal. Chim. 
Acta 2013, 762, 83–86. 
Huang, Y. Y.; Liu, C. Q.; Pu, F.; Liu, Z.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, X. G. A GO-Se Nanocomposite as an 
Antioxidant Nanozyme for Cytoprotection. Chem. Commun. 2017, 53, 3082–3085.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Huang, Y. Y.; Ran, X.; Lin, Y. H.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, X. G. Self Assembly of an Organic-Inorganic 
Hybrid Nanoflower as an Efficient Biomimetic Catalyst for Self-Activated Tandem 
Reactions. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 4386–4389. 
Huang, Y.; Zhao, M. T.; Han, S. K.; Lai, Z. C.; Yang, J.; Tan, C. L.; Ma, Q. L.; Lu, Q. P.; 
Chen, J. Z.; Zhang, X. et al. Growth of Au Nanoparticles on 2D Metalloporphyrinic Metal￾Organic Framework Nanosheets Used as Biomimetic Catalysts for Cascade Reactions. Adv. 
Mater. 2017, 29, 1700102. 
Hundallah, K.; Jabari, M. Sulfite Oxidase Deficiency. Neurosciences 2016, 24, 376–378. 
Karam, J.; Nicell, J. A. Potential Applications of Enzymes in Waste Treatment. J. Chem. Technol. 
Biotechnol. 1997, 69, 141–153. 
Krusic, P. J.; Wasserman, E.; Keizer, P. N.; Morton, J. R.; Preston, K. F. Radical Reactions of 
C60. Sciences 1991, 254, 1183–1185. 
Lee, M. S.; Lee, K.; Kin, S. Y.; Lee, H.; Park, J.; Choi, K. H.;Kim, H. K.; Kim, D.-G.; Lee, 
D.-Y.; Nam, S.-W. et al. High Performance, Transparent, and Stretchable Electrodes Using 
Graphememetal Nanowire Hybrid Structures. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 2814–2821. 
Li, J. H.; Li, X. N.; Feng, W. P.; Huang, L.; Zhao, Y.; Hu, Y.; Cai, K. Y. Octopus-like Pt Cu 
Nanoframe As Peroxidase Mimic for Phenol Removal. Mater. Lett. 2018, 229, 193–197. 
Li, J. N.; Liu, W. Q.; Wu, X. C.; Gao, X. F. Mechanism of pH-Switchable Peroxidase and 
Catalase-Like Activities of Gold, Silver, Platinum and Palladium. Biomaterials 2015, 48, 
37–44. 
Li, M.; Yang, X. J.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, K. G.; Qu, X. G. Using Graphene Oxide High Near-Infrared 
Absorbance for Photothermal Treatment of Alzheimer”s Disease. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, 
1722–1728. 
Liang, H.; Lin, F. F.; Zhang, Z. J.; Liu, B. W.; Jiang, S. H.; Yuan, Q. P.; Liu, J. W. Multicopper 
Laccase Mimicking Nanozymes with Nucleotides as Ligands. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2017, 
9, 1352–1360. 
Lin, Y. H.; Huang, Y. Y.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, X. G. Incorporating ATP into Biomimetic Catalysts 
for Realizing Exceptional Enzymatic Performance over a Broad Temperature Range. NPG 
Asia Mater. 2014, 6 (e114). 
Lin, Y. H.; Li, Z. H.; Chen, Z. W.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, X. G. Mesoporous Silica-Encapsulated Gold 
Nanoparticles as Artificial Enzymes for Self-Activated Cascade Catalysis. Biomaterials 
2013, 34, 2600–2610. 
Liu, B. W.; Liu, J. W. Surface Modification of Nanozymes. Nano Res. 2017, 10, 1125–1148. 
Liu, J.; Meng, L. J.; Fei, Z. F.; Dyson, P. J.; Jing, X. N.; Liu, X. MnO2 Nanosheets as an 
Artificial Enzyme to Mimic Oxidase for Rapid and Sensitive Detection of Glutathione. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 90, 69–74. 
Liu, X.; Wang, Q.; Zhao, H. H.; Zhang, L. C.; Su, Y. Y.; Lv, Y. BSA-Templated MnO2 
Nanoparticles As Both Peroxidase and Oxidase Mimics. Analyst 2012, 137, 4552–4558. 
Pesticides. Anal. Chem. 2012, 84, 9492–9497. 
Long, Y. J.; Li, Y. F.; Liu, Y.; Zheng, J. J.; Tang, J.; Huang, C.Z. Visual Observation of the 
Mercury-Stimulated Peroxidase Mimetic Activity of Gold Nanoparticles. Chem. Commun. 
2011, 47, 11939–11941. 
Love, J. C.; Estroff, L. A.; Kriebel, J. K.; Nuzzo, R. G.; Whitesides, G. M. Self-Assembled 
Monolayers of Thiolates on Metals as a form of nanotechnology. Chem. Rev. 2005, 105, 
1103–1169. 
Luo, W. J.; Zhu, C. F.; Su, S.; Li, D.; He, Y.; Huang, Q.; Fan, C.H. Self-Catalyzed, Self-Limiting 
Growth of Glucose Oxidase-Mimicking Gold Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 7451–7458.  
 
 
 
Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 185 
Manea, F.; Houillon, F. B.; Pasquato, L.; Scrimin, P. Nanozymes: Gold-Nanoparticle-Based 
Transphosphorylation Catalysts. Angew. Chem.-Int. Ed. 2004, 43, 6165–6169. 
Mondloch, J. E.; Katz, M. J.; III Isley, W. C.; Ghosh, P.; Liao, P. L.; Bury, W.; Wagner, G. W.; 
Hall, M. G.; DeCoste, J. B.; Peterson, G. W. et al. Destruction of Chemical Warfare Agents 
Using Metalorganic Frameworks. Nat. Mater. 2015, 14, 512–516. 
Natalio, F.; Andre, R.; Hartog, A. F.; Stoll, B.; Jochum, K. P.; ́ Wever, R.; Tremel, W. 
Vanadium Pentoxide Nanoparticles Mimic Vanadium Haloperoxidases and Thwart Biofilm 
Formation. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 530–535. 
Peters, R. J. R. W.; Marguet, M.; Marais, S.; Fraaije, M. W.; van Hest, J. C. M.; Lecommandoux, 
S. Cascade Reactions in Multicompartmentalized Polymersomes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
2014, 53, 146–150. 
Pieters, G.; Pezzato, C.; Prins, L. J. Reversible Control over the Valency of a Nanoparticle￾Based Supramolecular System. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 15289–15292. 
Pirmohamed, T.; Dowding, J. M.; Singh, S.; Wasserman, B.; Heckert, E.; Karakoti, A. S.; 
King, J. E. S.; Seal, S.; Self, W. T. Nanoceria Exhibit Redox State-Dependent Catalase 
Mimetic Activity. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46, 2736–2738. 
Prins, L. J. Emergence of Complex Chemistry on an Organic Monolayer. Acc. Chem. Res. 
2015, 48, 1920–1928. 
Puvvada, N.; Panigrahi, P. K.; Mandal, D.; Pathak, A. Shape Dependent Peroxidase Mimetic 
Activity towards Oxidation of Pyrogallol by H2O2. RSC Adv. 2012, 2, 3270–3273. 
Qian, F. M.;Wang, J. M.; Ai, S. Y.; Li, L. F. As a New Peroxidase Mimetics: The Synthesis of 
Selenium Doped Graphitic Carbon Nitride Nanosheets and Applications on Colorimetric 
Detection of H2O2 and Xanthine. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 216, 418–427. 
Ragg, R.; Tahir, M. N.; Tremel, W. Solids Go Bio: Inorganic Nanoparticles as Enzyme 
Mimics. Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 2016, 1906–1915. 
Rouge, J. L.; Sita, T. L.; Hao, L.; Kouri, F. M.; Briley, W. E.; Stegh, A. H. et al. Ribozyme￾Spherical Nucleic Acids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 10528–10531. 
Sang, Y. J.; Huang, Y. Y.; Li, W.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, X. G. Bioinspired Design of Fe3+-Doped 
Mesoporous Carbon Nanospheres for Enhanced Nanozyme Activity. Chem.—Eur. J. 2018, 
24, 7259–7263. 
Savelli, C.; Salvio, R. Guanidine-Based Polymer Brushes Grafted Onto Silica Nanoparticles 
as Efficient Artificial Phosphodiesterases. Chem. Eur. J. 2015, 21, 5856–5863. 
Shahwan, T.; Abu Sirriah, S.; Nairat, M.; Boyaci, E.; Eroğlu, A. E.; Scott, T. B.; Hallam, K. R. 
Green Synthesis of Iron Nanoparticles and Their Application as a Fenton-Like Catalyst for 
the Degradation of Aqueous Cationic and Anionic Dyes. Chem. Eng. J. 2011, 172, 258–266. 
Shen, X. M.; Liu, W. Q.; Gao, X. J.; Lu, Z. H.; Wu, X. C.; Gao, X. F. Mechanisms of Oxidase 
and Superoxide Dismutation-Like Activities of Gold, Silver, Platinum, and Palladium, and 
Their Alloys: A General Way to the Activation of Molecular Oxygen. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015, 137, 15882–15891. 
Singh, N.; Savanur, M. A.; Srivastava, S.; D”Silva, P.; Mugesh, G. A Redox Modulatory Mn3O4 
Nanozyme with Multi-Enzyme Activity Provides Efficient Cytoprotection to Human Cells 
in a Parkinson”s Disease Model. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 14267–14271. 
Song, Y.; Qu, K.; Zhao, C.; Ren, J.; Qu, X. Graphene Oxide: Intrinsic Peroxidase Catalytic 
Activity and Its Application to Glucose Detection. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 2206–2210. 
Sun, H. J.; Zhao, A. D.; Gao, N.; Li, K.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, X. G. Deciphering a Nanocarbon-Based 
Artificial Peroxidase: Chemical Identification of the Catalytically Active and Substrate￾Binding Sites on Graphene Quantum Dots. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015, 4, 7176–7180.  
 
 
 
 
 
186 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Takeuchi, T.; Morikawa, N.; Matsumoto, H.; Shiraishi, Y. A Pathological Study of Minamata 
Disease in Japan. Acta Neuropathol. 1962, 2, 40–57. 
Tao, Y.; Lin, Y. H.; Huang, Z. Z.; Ren, J. S.; Qu, X. G. Incorporating Graphene Oxide and 
Gold Nanoclusters: A Synergistic Catalyst with Surprisingly High Peroxidase-Like Activity 
Over a Broad pH Range and Its Application for Cancer Cell Detection. Adv. Mater. 2013, 
25, 2594–2599. 
Tokuyama, H.; Yamago, S.; Nakamura, E.; Shiraki, T.; Sugiura, Y. Photoinduced Biochemical￾Activity of Fullerene Carboxylic-Acid. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 7918–7919. 
Wang, C.; Xu, C. J.; Zeng, H.; Sun, S. H. Recent Progress in Syntheses and Applications of 
Dumbbell-Like Nanoparticles. Adv. Mater. 2009, 21, 3045–3052. 
Wang, G. L.; Jin, L. Y.; Wu, X. M.; Dong, Y. M.; Li, Z. J. Labelfree Colorimetric Sensor for 
Mercury(II) and DNA on the Basis of Mercury(II) Switched-On The Oxidase-Mimicking 
Activity of Silver Nanoclusters. Anal. Chim. Acta. 2015, 871, 1–8. 
Wang, H.; Jiang, H.; Wang, S.; Shi, W. B.; He, J. C.; Liu, H.; Huang, Y. M. Fe3O4-MWCNT 
Magnetic Nanocomposites as Efficient Peroxidase Mimic Catalysts in a Fenton-Like 
Reaction for Water Purification without pH Limitation. RSC Adv. 2014, 4, 45809–45815. 
Wang, H.; Wan, K. W.; Shi, X. H. Recent Advances in Nanozyme Research. Adv. Mater. 2018, 
1805368. 
Wang, N.; Zhu, L. H.; Wang, D. L.; Wang, M. Q.; Lin, Z. F.; Tang, H. Q. Sono-Assisted 
Preparation of Highly-Efficient Peroxidase Like Fe3O4 Magnetic Nanoparticles for 
Catalytic Removal of Organic Pollutants with H2O2. Ultrason. Sonochem. 2010, 17, 
526–533.Wang, S.; Chen, W.; Liu, A.-L.; Hong, L.; Deng, H. H.; Lin, X. H. Comparison 
of the Peroxidase-Like Activity of Unmodified, Aminomodified, and Citrate-Capped Gold 
Nanoparticles. Chem. Phys. Chem. 2012, 13, 1199–1204. 
Wei, H.; Wang, E. K. Nanomaterials with Enzyme-Like Characteristics (Nanozymes): Next￾Generation Artificial Enzymes. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013, 42, 6060–6093. 
Wirth, T. Small organoselenium compounds: more than just glutathione peroxidase mimics. 
Angew. Chem.; Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 10074–10076. 
Xu, X. J.; Hu, L. F.; Gao, N.; Liu, S. X.; Wageh, S.; Al-Ghamdi, A. A.; Alshahrie, A.; Fang, 
X. S. Controlled Growth from ZnS Nanoparticles to ZnS-CdS Nanoparticle Hybrids with 
Enhanced Photoactivity. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015a, 25, 445–454. 
Xu, Z.-Q.; Lan, J.-Y.; Jin, J.-C.; Dong, P.; Jiang, F.-L.; Liu, Y. (2015). Highly Photoluminescent 
Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanodots and Their Protective Effects Against Oxidative Stress on 
Cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2015a, 7, 28346–28352. 
Xue, T.; Peng, B.; Xue, M.; Zhong, X.; Chiu, C. Y.; Yang, S.; Qu, Y. Q.; Ruan, L. Y.; Jiang, 
S.; Dubin, S. et al. Integration of Molecular and Enzymatic Catalysts on Graphene for 
Biomimetic Generation of Antithrombotic Species. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3200. 
Yamakoshi, Y. N.; Yagami, T.; Sueyoshi, S.; Miyata, N. Acridine Adduct of 60 Fullerene with 
Enhanced DNA-Cleaving Activity. J. Org. Chem. 1996, 61, 7236–7237. 
Yan, X. Y. Nanozyme: a new type of artificial enzyme. Prog. Biochem. Biophys. 2018, 45, 
101–104. 
Yin, W. Y.; Yu, J.; Lv, F. T.; Yan, L.; Zheng, L. R.; Gu, Z. J.; Zhao, Y. L. Functionalized 
Nano-MoS2 with Peroxidase Catalytic and Near-Infrared Photothermal Activities for Safe 
and Synergetic Wound Antibacterial Applications. ACS Nano. 2016, 10, 11000–11011. 
Zaramella, D.; Scrimin, P.; Prins, L. J. Self-Assembly of a Catalytic Multivalent Peptide￾Nanoparticle Complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 8396–8399. Introduction: Nanozymes—Nouvelle Vague of Artificial Enzymes 187 
Zhou, H.; Han, T. Q.; Wei, Q.; Zhang, S. S. Efficient Enhancement of Electrochemiluminescence 
from Cadmium Sulfide Quantum Dots by Glucose Oxidase Mimicking Gold Nanoparticles 
for Highly Sensitive Assay of Methyltransferase Activity. Anal. Chem. 2016, 88, 2976–2983. 
Zhou, Y. B.; Liu, B. W.; Yang, R. H.; Liu, J. W. Filling in the Gaps between Nanozymes and 
Enzymes: Challenges and Opportunities. Bioconjugate Chem. 2017, 28, 2903–2909. 
Zhu, S. Y.; Zhao, X. E.; You, J. M.; Xu, G. B.; Wang, H. Carboxylic-Group-Functionalized 
Single-Walled Carbon Nanohorns as Peroxidase Mimetics and Their Application to Glucose 
Detection. Analyst, 2015, 140, 6398–6403. TAMOGHNI MITRA1
, SAURAV KUMAR SAHOO2
, ARPITA BANERJEE1
, 
ANJANI KUMAR UPADHYAY1*, and KAZI NAHID HASAN1
1
School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
2
MITS School of Biotechnology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: upadhyayanjanikumar6@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Environmental pollutants are hazardous to humans, and the challenges for 
environmental and analytical chemistry are detecting directly the pollutants, 
such as heavy metals, pesticides, and toxins from waste streams and the 
monitoring of soil and aquatic conditions. Due to the lack of tools with 
broad detection constraints and the lack of expensive facilities, the current 
approaches being implemented to perform real-time assay and monitor 
contaminated specimens were restricted. Strategies have been exerted in 
the development of awareness technology and therefore fast, low-cost, 
responsive sensors are required. The increasing focus on nanomaterials with 
advanced optoelectrical properties has contributed to the further introduction 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 7
Potential of Nanobiosensors for 
Environmental Pollution Detection: 
Nanotechnology Combined 
with Enzymes, Antibodies, and 
Microorganisms190 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
of biosensors with new applications. Nanobiosensors are used for monitoring 
pollution levels by analyzing the ultra-sensitivity of contaminants swiftly. For 
example, nano-biosensors have certain distinctive features of a small scale, 
compact, powerful, tangible, vulnerable, and relatively low cost. Therefore, 
nano-biosensors may seem a powerful response to traditional methods of 
analysis since these allow extremely responsive, active, and high-frequency 
detection of the presence of contaminants without detailed analysis. 
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Globally, there is a significant concern about the overregulated or unregulated 
release of environmental pollutants, for example, harmful heavy metals, 
antibiotics, and pesticides. New prototypes are therefore urgently needed to 
detect their presence in terrestrial and aquatic environments. Conventional 
methods like chromatography have some bottlenecks, that is, lack of 
selectivity and sensitivity, long and specialized pretreatment of samples that 
can theoretically lead to time-consuming procedures and detection at the low 
sample level. In this case, using the bioelements in conjunction with green 
nanomaterial functionality allows for the development of nano-biomaterials 
to track the environment. In contrast with conventional methodologies, 
these extraordinary characteristics of nano-biosensors make them extremely 
responsive and economic instruments for the environmental monitoring and 
the pollutant detection. These are generally categorized in two classes, that 
is, bioreceptors and transductors. The biosensors based on bioreceptors are 
often classified as enzymes, proteins, antibodies, bacteria, and DNA based. 
Biosensors based on the methods of transduction are grouped into three kinds, 
that is, optical, calorimetric, electrochemical, and mass-based biosensors. 
Electrochemical biosensors have proved useful for the identification of small 
sample volumes, low concentrations of biological components, and even 
miniature analytical instruments. 
A biosensor identifies any bioproduct by combinations of biological 
identifying features and a physical or chemical transducer. These biosensors 
majorly consist of three components: biological marker, transducer, and 
electronics for signal processing. For different applications, different 
biosensors are being developed, including environmental protection, food 
quality control, bioprocess control, agriculture, the medical and military, and 
pharmaceutical sectors specifically. These generally function at five different 
levels: (1) bioreceptors, binding the specific form to the sample, (2) an Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 191 
electrochemical interface where explicit biological processes happen inducing 
a sign, (3 a transducer that changes over the particular biochemical response 
in an electrical sign, (4) a sign processor for changing over the electronic 
sign into a significant physical parameter, lastly, and (5) a legitimate interface 
to show the outcomes to the operator (Luz et al., 2013). Biosensors can be 
classified by combining the fundamental concepts of signal transduction 
and biorecognition components. In the overall structure of a biosensor, the 
biorecognizing part responds to the objective compound, and the transducer 
changes the organic response to the discernible sign that can be quantifiable 
electrochemically, optically, acoustically, mechanically, calorimetrically, or 
electronically and afterward compared to the analyte concentration. Enzymes, 
antibodies, microorganisms, biological tissue, and organelles are classified in 
the biological components (Touhami, 2014). 
The production of nanoscale biosensors that are highly sensitive and 
flexible has been motivated by developments in nanotechnology. The 
ultimate aim of nano-biosensors, at the level of the molecule or cell, 
is used for the identification of a biochemical and biophysical signal 
correlated with a particular disorder. As such, a nano-biosensor is regularly 
an insightful analytical system that incorporates a biological recognition 
particle immobilized on the surface of a transducer (Jain et al., 2010; Verma 
et al., 2010). The nano-biosensors have diversified applications including 
molecular diagnostics that can be combined with developments like lab-on￾chip to make the process simpler. They include microorganism identification 
in multiple samples, metabolite tracking in the body fluids, and cancer tissue 
detection. Their portability gives them an advantage for the pathogenesis of 
cancer applications. 
There are various methodologies for making the next generations of 
nano-biosensor systems: (1) the utilization of a totally new class of nanoma￾terial for detecting purposes, (2) new immobilization techniques, and (3) the 
new nanotechnological approaches. The major benefits of nano-biosensors 
for environmental purposes are portability, miniaturization, and function 
compared with traditional analytical techniques. In biological/ecological 
quality assessment or chemical testing for inorganic and organic priority 
toxins, nano-biosensors may be utilized as environmental quality monitoring 
instruments (Salgado et al., 2011). Continued tracking, onsite activity, and 
capacity to measure contaminants in complex matrices with limited samples 
are major characteristics provided by nano-biosensors. A huge number of 
fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, insecticides, pathogens, temperature, soil, 
and pH can be sensed effectively and monitored to promote sustainable 192 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
agriculture to improve crop production that can be done with the help of 
nano-biosensors (Sekhon, 2014). Also, production is threatened regularly by 
rodents, weeds, and diseases impacting the relative agricultural economy; 
plants, therefore, must be covered by the proper intervention. By monitoring 
the conditions of land and plant growth in large areas, nanostructured biologic 
sensors may lead to smart farming as well as by detecting contagious diseases 
in crops before visible symptoms (Antonacci et al., 2018). 
7.2 ATTRIBUTES AND KEY ELEMENTS OF NANO-BIOSENSORS
With the emerging new scientific findings and discoveries in the 21st century, 
biosensors and nano-biosensors with the assistance of nanotechnology 
have gotten perhaps the best innovation that is effective in environmental 
contamination remediation. A crucial section of biosensing is the 
transduction instruments that are liable for changing over the reactions of 
bioanalyte communications in a recognizable and reproducible manner using 
the change of unequivocal biochemical reaction energy into an electrical 
structure. Nanomaterials are splendid occupants in this measurement as they 
have a high surface region to volume proportions that permit the surface 
to be used in a prevalent and indisputably more practical way. Also, their 
electromechanical properties are splendid assets for biosensor development 
(Malik et al., 2013). As of late, analysts have utilized an incorporated 
methodology by joining electronics, computers, nanoscience, and biological 
science to make biosensors with remarkable detecting capacities that show 
uncommon spatial and fleeting goals and unwavering quality. Nanosensors 
having inactive or immobilized bioreceptor probes those target the analyte 
molecules very selectively are named as the nano-biosensors. Molecular 
analysis is now getting easier for the nano-biosensors that are being used 
along with some other technologies like laboratory functions in a single 
integrated circuit (i.e., lab-on-a-chip). Detection of various microorganisms, 
pathogens, and chemicals such as urea, pesticides, glucose, and monitoring 
the metabolites, are the applications of nano-biosensors. For their ease in 
performance, few points should be kept in mind while designing nano￾biosensors that ultimately makes them characteristically efficient (Rai et al., 
2012; Bhattarai and Hameed, 2014); 
•	 Analytes are the chemicals of interest in an analytical procedure, and 
nano-biosensors should be profoundly explicit with the end goal of the 
analyses; for example, a sensor should have the option to recognize the Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 193 
analyte and any “other” material. The best example of this characteristic 
is the connection between an immobilized antibody and an antigen that 
is profoundly explicit. 
•	 Under normal storage conditions, the nano-biosensors ought to be 
stable for their best performance. 
•	 Reproducibility, then again, is the capacity of a biosensor to yield 
indistinguishable final results, no matter how many times the experi
ment is repeated. This is dictated by the exactness and precision of the 
transducer or electronic parts in a biosensor. 
•	 The reaction time ought to be negligible. 
•	 The physical parameters such as blending (stirring), pH, and tempera
ture shouldn’t affect specific interactions between analytes. 
•	 In a clinical setting, sensitivity and linearity are the essential attributes 
of biosensors that can’t be neglected and ought to be managed with the 
most extreme consideration. Sensitivity alludes to the most minimal 
identification breaking point of an analyte by a biosensor that may go 
from nanogram per milliliter to even femtogram per milliliter. Then 
again, linearity speaks to the precision of the obtained output inside a 
working range where the convergence of the analyte in the sample is 
directly proportional to the measured signal. 
•	 The reactions acquired should be exact, pinpoint, error-free, and 
linear over the valuable analytical range and be liberated from the 
electrical commotion. 
•	 The nano-biosensors ought to be modest, convenient, and fit for being 
utilized by semiskilled administrators. 
•	 “Being minuscule, biocompatible, non-poisonous, and non-antigenic” 
should be the characteristic of the nano-biosensors. 
A biosensor can be depicted as a detecting system or sensing device or an 
estimation framework planned explicitly for the assessment of a material that 
utilizes the interactions between biological agents and afterward surveying 
these interactions into a meaningful structure with the help of transduction 
and electromechanical interpretation. The major components that help in 
the smooth functioning of a nano-biosensor are bioreceptor, transducers, 
detectors, and most importantly, nanomaterials (Fig. 7.1). 
“Detecting a biologically specific material” (e.g., antibodies, proteins, 
enzymes, immunological molecules, etc.) is the primary purpose behind a 
biosensor. To recognize the target material, a template is required that is 
satisfied by a “biologically sensitive material” that helps in the making of 
a bioreceptor. Using the example of an antibody screened by antigens and 
­
­194 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
FIGURE 7.1 Schematic of nano-biosensor development for pollution detection application. 
vice versa, and proteins being screened using its correlated substrates, the 
phenomenon of bioreceptors can be well understood (Malik et al., 2013). 
The probes or the biologically sensitized elements including enzymes, 
nucleic acids, receptors, lectins, antibodies, molecular imprints, tissue, 
microbes, organelles, and so forth are either naturally inferred materials 
(biologically derived materials) or biomimic components that send signals 
from analytes of interest to transducers (Rai et al., 2012). Changing over 
the connection of bioanalyte and its comparing bioreceptor into an electrical 
structure is the fundamental capacity of the transducer. The name itself 
portrays the word “trans” that signifies change and “ducer” that signifies 
energy, and thus, a transducer changes over one sort of energy into another 
type. The principal structure is biochemical in nature as it is produced by 
the particular connection between the bioanalyte and bioreceptor while 
the subsequent structure is typically electrical. This change of biochemical 
reaction into an electrical sign is brought through the transducer. Then, 
the third part is the detector system that gets the electrical sign from the 
transducer part and amplifies it reasonably so the corresponding reaction can 
be read and studied appropriately. Nano-biosensors have nanomaterials as 
their major constituent that is defined as material at any rate one dimension 
more modest than 100 nm. Nanomaterials are classified into (1) nanofilms 
and coatings (<100 nm in one-dimension), (2) nanotubes and wire (<100 
nm in two-dimension), and (3) nanoparticles (<100 nm in three-dimension). Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 195 
Because of their unfathomably little size, nanomaterials show remarkable 
highlights, chemically and physically. The nanosensors are tiny devices, 
with measurements in the order of one billionth of a meter, equipped for 
identifying and reacting to chemical, physical, and biological stimuli. This 
capacity of nanosensors can be utilized usefully for ecological investigation 
by using them for the recognition of poisons, microorganisms, modern 
and natural toxins, pesticides, heavy metals, allergens, and so forth 
utilizing various components. Different nanomaterials have been explored 
to dissect their properties and ongoing applications as nano-biosensors. 
These nanomaterials are nanoparticles, quantum dots, nanotubes, or other 
organic nanomaterials. These nanomaterials can add either to the bioreceptor 
component or to the transducer or to both nanosensors; nanoprobes and other 
nanosystems have upset the fields of biological and chemical analysis in so 
many example frameworks (Kuswandi, 2019). 
7.3 DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO NANO-BIOSENSORS AND THEIR 
ROLES 
7.3.1 NANO-BIOSENSORS INTEGRATED WITH ENZYMES
Progression in the enzyme-based nano-biosensing framework is associated 
with the level of progress in affectability toward target atom recognition 
(Ghormade et al., 2011). Due to their unparalleled optical, electrochemical 
properties, nanomaterials are highly appreciated as inexorable candidates for 
nano-biosensor development (Sassolas et al., 2012). Also, their certain features 
like biocompatibility, larger surface area to volume ratio, ease of separation, 
etc., hold huge importance to get incorporated into a genetically modified 
enzyme (Verma et al., 2008). Thus, nanotechnology has given a critical effect 
on conventional enzyme immobilized innovation (da Silva et al., 2014). Enzy￾matic nano-biosensor was created by utilizing atomic modeling techniques. 
This nano-biosensor was created utilizing functionalization of atomic force 
microscopy tips with acetyl co-catalyst A carboxylase. The location was 
checked by estimating the forces between the immobilized enzyme and the 
herbicide analyte. The subatomic displaying procedure was utilized to advance 
the enzyme adsorption concentrates on the tips of atomic force microscopy 
and the degree of recognition (Franca et al., 2011). Apart from this, biorecogni￾tion is the salient feature of every biosensor. Enzymatic nano-biosensor has an 
enzyme bioreceptor that has a high level of substrate particularity. Choice of 
enzyme relies upon the basic boundaries, for example, thermal stability and 196 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
high turnover number (Verma et al., 2016). The minimal detection limit of 
contaminants in the food sample was properly evaluated by the enzymatic 
nano-biosensor. Along these lines, the enzymatic nano-biosensor opens up 
new trends in the estimation of the food quality in an ultrasensitive manner 
(Antiochia et al., 2004). This cutting-edge technology is also effective in the 
agricultural industry where the most common disadvantage is the excessive 
usage of pesticides (Ghormade et al., 2011). Nano-biosensors can detect 
small traces of pesticide residues that ultimately help maintaining the quality 
of the soil so that crop yield would not get hindered. This organophosphorus 
pesticide has a huge affinity for acetylcholinesterase enzymes that catalyze 
a hydrolytic reaction regulating the function of the neurotransmitter acetyl￾choline (Periasamy et al., 2009). Subsequently, nano-biosensors based on 
the recognition part of acetylcholinesterase have been exploited to locate the 
pesticide residues (Table 7.1). Another important sector is the food industry 
where detection of microorganisms in the food samples that are harmful to gut 
flora has become easier with the intervention of nanotechnology (Dasgupta 
et al., 2015). The incorporation of nanomaterials in the biosensor assembly 
for getting higher specificity for the analyte and also for faster transfer of 
electrons into the enzyme has shown a huge impact in the food industry to 
combat many difficult situations at ease (Perez-Lopez and Merkoci, 2011). 
Industrially, useful enzymes such as β-galactosidase, glucose oxidase, fructose 
dehydrogenase, and pyranose oxidase are used as molecules of biorecogni￾tion to check the carbohydrate molecules such as lactose/lactulose, glucose, 
and fructose in food samples (Ozdemir et al., 2010). After analyzing many 
factors, it has been concluded that enzymatic nano-biosensor can be utilized as 
a cost-effective platform for monitoring environmental pollution at the early 
stage. Performance of the enzymatic nano-biosensor can overcome any other 
expensive bioanalytical system. To sum up, enzymatic nano-biosensors hold 
great potential for those industries that are accountable in daily life. 
7.3.2 NANOMATERIAL-DEPENDENT FLUORESCENT BIOSENSORS 
FOR MONITORING ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS
Fluorescence is a phenomenon in which light is emitted by a substrate that 
has absorbed any electromagnetic radiation or light. This property of fluo￾rescence is exploited to develop nano-biosensors that can sense pollution 
in the environment. Fluorescence-based sensors use changes in anisotropic, 
intensity, emission lifetime alterations, absorption, or emission wavelength. 
Change of fluorescence intensity is mostly used, as they are generally quite TABLE 7.1 Enzymatic Nano-biosensors for Agricultural Industry.
Nano-bioconjugation system Role References 
Magnetic NPs, carbon nanotube, and zirconium nanoparticle
are immobilized covalently on transducer with the enzyme,
acetylcholinesterase
Carbon nanotube, electrostatically assembled with multienzyme
consortium on the superficial layer of transducer
Silica nanoparticle integrated with organophosphate hydrolase in 
silica
Acetylcholinesterase is entrapped in nanoliposome
Covalent immobilization of carbon nanotube-aflatoxin oxidase on
the surface of transducer
Nanocomposite of ZnO nanoparticle, chitosan, carbon nanotube,
and polyaniline integrated with xanthine oxidase
Gold nanoparticle along with β-galactosidase, physically
adsorbed on the surface of transducer 
Helps in the detection of pesticide, dimethoate at
ultrasensitive level
Detects organophosphorus pesticide paraoxon and 
non-organophosphorus pesticide at the limit of 
0.5–1 μM
Contributes in the detection for organophosphate 
paraoxon
Detects pesticides, paraoxon, and dichlorvos at
ultrasensitive level
Detection of aflatoxin
Detection of xanthine
Helps in the detection of E. coli 
Gan et al. (2010)
Zhang et al. (2015)
Ramanathan et al.
(2009)
Vamvakaki and 
Chaniotakis (2007)
Li et al. (2011)
Devi et al. (2012)
Miranda et al. (2011)
197 Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 198 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
sensitive, easy to use, and adaptable to various analytes and systems. The 
ecosystem is heavily damaged by the use of pesticides. Recently, there is 
a trend of detecting organophosphorus pesticides using the fluorescence 
DNA biosensors that are mainly based upon immunochemical traits such 
as recognition of DNA, or RNA aptamers, antigen–antibody reactions, and 
enzyme–substrate reactions. For the enzymatic detection of these pesticides, 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is generally used as a catalytic hydrolyzer of 
acetylcholine releases, thiocholine, which contains a thiol group and is reac￾tive toward nanomaterials and fluorophores. Hence in turn fluorescent or 
colorimetric signals can be received that can detect and quantify the presence 
of pesticide. Antibiotics are life-saving drugs that are used to treat different 
diseases but when these antibiotics are present in the environment it poses a 
threat as it can lead to mutation in bacteria and develop antibiotic resisting 
properties in them, so it is important to detect them even if present in trace 
amounts. These can effectively be detected with the aid of fluorescence￾based nanosensors. Enrofloxacin (ENR), an antibiotic of the fluoroquino￾lones group, is simply detected by the use of common fluorescence of ENR. 
Graphite oxide acts as a quencher dye for its detection. In the presence of 
aptamer, ENR goes under a conformational change that hinders the absorp￾tion of the aptamer–analyte pair. To detect the presence of chloramphenicol, 
hairpin aptamers are being used that comprises a specific chloramphenicol 
recognized sequence. Tetrakis (4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin (TCPP) 
combined with copper nanosheets help in the synthesis of MOF (metal 
organic frames). MOF acts as a quenching agent and has properties that are 
the same as organic 2D nanostructures (graphene). 
Phenolic compounds such as pentachlorophenol, 2,4 di-chlorophenol, 
bisphenol, and 2,4,6-trichlorophenol are most common in the environment 
and pose threat to human health. Detecting them in the ecosystem and 
removing them are the need of the hour, and the dual fluorescent-colorimetric 
system can be used to detect BPA (Bisphenol A), a type of harmful phenolic 
compound. The process of detection involves the use of a very high salt 
concentration that enhances the agitation of gold nanoparticles and produces 
a colorimetric signal that further gives rise to fluorescence (Gaviria-Arroyave 
et al., 2020). 
A life-threatening heavy metal that is very common in sewage is mercury. 
Detection of this metal and removal of it from the environment are necessary. 
So, fluorescence can be detected by using mercury-specific oligonucleotides 
(MSOs). Following the nature of mercury fluorescent sensors, it can be 
detected in six ways as follows: binary probes, “label-free” probes, molecular 
beacon, chain reaction probes, G-quadruplex probes, and nanoparticle-using Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 199 
probes. These types of sensors can detect even the slightest amount of Hg, if 
present (Hu et al., 2020). Arsenic, a highly toxic heavy metal generally found 
in water, is a hazardous compound that adversely affects human health. 
Sensitivity toward arsenic and its detection are improved by the use of nano￾materials. Arsenic that is present in As(III) cannot be identified directly as 
it is transformed to As (III), which is further identified by anodic stripping 
voltammetry (ASV) method. Arsenic can bind to some enzymes like other 
heavy metals which in turn influence the catalytic activity. This principle of 
inhibition of enzymes is being exploited to develop biosensors for arsenic 
detection. Zymolytic-modified nanomaterials as signal indicators are the 
most common arsenic sensing method. With the use of natural enzymes, the 
substrate gets decomposed which in turn changes the signal of the nano￾material indicator. As the level of arsenic increases again, it suppresses the 
catalytic activity of decomposition that leads to the recovery of the signal 
indicator. A fluorescent nanoprobe of arsenate was developed by the Qiu’s 
group by gathering guanosine monophosphate, Tb(III), and carboxylated 
CdSe/ ZnS QDs (Xu et al., 2020). 
7.3.3 FUNCTION OF NANO-BIOMATERIALS AS A DETECTION SIGNAL 
FOR ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
Synthesis of nanomaterials can be executed by a variety of techniques 
whether it be physical, chemical, or biological. Specifically, when the 
biological method is used, it makes use of varied microorganisms, plant 
extract, agricultural waste, and biomolecules. Biomolecules when combined 
with the features of nanomaterials give rise to the component known as nano￾biomaterials. And hence these biomaterials combined with nanosensors are 
widely being used nowadays in the detection of plant infection and other 
environmental contaminants. Moreover, nowadays the trend is to use green 
methods for the diagnosis of heavy metals as it is more environment-friendly 
and nontoxic in nature as well as they have a comparatively easy recovery 
rate and easy synthesis process (Rasheed et al., 2019; Iqbal and Bilal, 2020). 
The commonly used secondary metabolites for environmental monitoring 
purposes are proteins, alkaloids, carbohydrates, and phenolic compounds. 
Nano-biomaterials that are synthesized based on these secondary metabolites 
contain a metallic precursor (i.e., silver, Ag or gold, Au), which is indicated 
by the change in the color of the solution. The color change occurs, as the 
metallic atoms get nucleated (Shah et al., 2015). Gathering the targeted ions 
from the environment with the help of microorganisms and transforming it 200 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
into metal ions with the aid of different biomolecules like sugars, enzymes, 
and protein that are secreted from the microorganism is the basic pathway 
for the synthesis of nanoparticles through a biological process. The synthesis 
can be intracellular or extracellular depending upon where the nanoparticle 
is synthesized. The nature of the nanoparticles depends upon factors, such as 
pH, type of microorganism, and temperature (Arun et al., 2013). 
Being water is the most essential resource on the earth for any organism, it 
is quite necessary to inspect the quality of water regularly and distinguish the 
presence of any sort of harmful toxins, pharmaceutical waste, heavy metals, 
or any other kind of natural or anthropogenic waste. As a possible solution to 
this problem, newly designed nano-biosensors are formed that can efficiently 
control and detect the presence of toxic metals (e.g., Hg, Cd, Pb, Se). Au and 
Ag nanoparticles in combination with biomolecules have given rise to a new 
type of colorimetric sensor that is much more cost-effective, simple, and 
facilitates real-time detection of the target (Kulkarni and Muddapur, 2014; 
Parra-Arroyo et al., 2020). 
Heavy metals being another major concern nowadays; their detection and 
remediation are prioritized. Mercury (Hg), a heavy metal found in water bodies, 
causes extensive damage to the neurological system. Previously, it has been 
observed that microorganisms can convert ionic mercury to methylmercury 
when released into the sea. It was also concluded that the migration of Hg 
from contaminated soil landfills and sediments to water bodies, streams, 
lakes, and underground water occurs due to the strong binding action between 
Hg and the organic matter which in turn enters through the food chain. In a 
study by Hongwei Luo et al., photochemical methylation, photo-oxidation, 
photodegradation, and photo-reduction are some photochemical behavior 
exhibited by Hg. A colorimetric assay was used for the detection of Hg2+ ions 
that comprise an amalgam of nano-biomaterials based on Ag nanoparticles. In 
this process, the nanoparticles are inculcated slowly in the solution containing 
the ionic mercury at room temperature with pH ranging between (3.73 and 
11.18). A change in the coloration is observed that reveals the presence of 
ionic mercury (Luo et al., 2020). 
Peptide-based gold nanoparticle probes are used to detect other metal 
ions such as Co2+, Pt2+, Pb2+, and Pd2+. It is achieved with the help of Flg-A3 
fusion peptide (-Asp-Tyr-Lys-Asp-Asp-Asp-Asp-Lys-Pro-Ala-Tyr-Ser-Ser￾Gly-ProAla-Pro-Pro-Met-Pro-Pro-Phe-), which acts as a multifunctional 
group. To synthesize and stabilize the Au nanoparticles in an aqueous solu￾tion of tetrachloroauric (HAuCl4) generally, use A3 (AYSSGPAPPMPPF). 
The formation of the metal ion complex through non-covalent interaction Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 201 
takes place in the region of the N-terminal of the peptide (-Asp-Tyr-Lys￾AspAsp -Asp-Lys-) (Slocik et al.,2005; Alam et al., 2015). 
Genetic mutation and cancer are some common diseases related to the 
consumption of heavy metals in one or other ways. Chromium is one such 
metal, released in the environment through effluents and enters the water 
bodies and, in turn, enters the food chain. Xanthocerassorbifolia extract 
(XT-AuNP), a green agent, is used to stabilize gold nanoparticles that helps 
in the recognition of ionic chromium level. The only drawback of this 
method is that it can detect chromium ions at a concentration of not more 
than 3 μM. Although these nano-biosensors are highly effective in detecting 
Cr3+ in the environment (Fan et al., 2009). Anacardium occidentale leaf 
extract helped to develop another method to detect chromium. It was found 
that the nano-biosensor hence developed was highly selective and extremely 
sensitive toward Cr6+ ions with a limit of 1 μM. The test was carried out as 
the secondary metabolites of the extract helped in the conversion of Cr6+ ions 
to Cr3+. The change in the color of the sample confirms the presence of Cr3+ 
(Balavigneswaran et al., 2014). Alternatively, Ag-nanospheres (C-SNSs) 
that are generally synthesized at varied pH values (4.5 and 11.5) are used for 
colorimetric detection of Cr3+ and Mn2+. In this process, the C-SNSs solution 
is added to a solution that has a high concentration of Cr3+ ions at a pH 
of 4.5; later, a change in the coloration from yellow to white indicates the 
presence of Cr3+ ions. Although when the pH is maintained at 11.5, it was 
observed a change in color from yellow to brown that causes an alteration 
in the morphology from nanospheres to square pyrimity when Mn2+ ions are 
present (Joshi et al., 2016). 
Nano-biosensors are comparatively more sensitive, selective, rapid, and 
convenient to use. Hence, it can also be used for the detection of pesticides 
combined with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), liquid gas 
chromatography (GC), and mass spectroscopy. Several types of nano-biosensors 
are presently employed for detecting pesticides, whole-cell (bacterial, 
fungal, and algal cell-based) nano-biosensors, immuno (electrochemical and 
fluorescence detection technique), enzyme (electrochemical and fluorescence 
detection technique), and nucleic (electrochemical detection technique) nano￾biosensors (Kumar and Arora, 2020). 
A study conducted by Babolghani and Manesh based on the use of nucleic 
techniques brought forward the simulation and experimental analysis of a 
DNA/Cu2O-GS nanostructure. Particularly, this helps to detect polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and are categorized as DNA-based nano￾biosensors. PHAs (polyhydroxyalkanoates) are known to be carcinogenic, 202 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
toxic, and mutagenic agents and are generally represented as soil pollutants. 
DNA/Cu2O-GS nanostructure can be used as a field-effect transistor (FET) 
for the detection of PHAs (Babolghani and Mohammadi-Manesh, 2019). 
7.3.4 DEVELOPMENT OF NANO-BIOSENSORS FOR DETECTING 
PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS
In the past decades, there have been several kinds of research that were based 
upon the construction of nano-biosensors to detect phenolic compounds. The 
main point of benefit for constructing these biosensing platforms is that it can 
work in a microenvironment for stabilizing biorecognition elements at the 
electrode surface. With the use of several nanomaterials, nanoparticles assorted 
with polymers laccase sensors can be constructed. These nano-biosensors 
were found to be effective in the detection of hydroquinone and other phenolic 
compounds (Upan et al., 2016). The appearance of metal oxides in polymeric 
composite based on Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles increases the steadiness 
of the biosensor. An amalgam of Nafion and gold nanoparticles showed an 
increase in the stability of laccase biosensors for detecting hydroquinone. 
The stability of the laccase biosensor can also be enhanced by using several 
immobilization techniques, such as integration of laccase in ZnO sol-gel using 
chitosan is one of the techniques. Stabilizing the laccase enzyme with the use 
of laccase laser printing technology provides us with much more valid scien￾tific data in case of catechol determination than using any other techniques 
(Touloupakis et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016; Qu et al., 2015). 
Tyrosinase enzyme is often used as a biorecognition element for the 
detection of p-cresol or phenol. They have a high sensitivity and elevated 
range of affinity for these analytes; it is stabilized with the help of Nafion, 
a kind of polymer that shows an enhancement in the stability of the biosen￾sors, glutaraldehyde, or by the use of the sol-gel method. Gold nanoparticles 
(AuNPs) are commonly used for the development of these tyrosine biosen￾sors and they have a sensitivity of 15.7 μA/ppm as the transfer of electrons 
between the electrode surface and enzyme is very rapid. It was found that all 
p-cresol detecting tyrosine nano-biosensors can monitor the level of phenols. 
Quantum dots when mixed with chitosan or with the addition of copper 
oxide and mesoporous silica material give the lowest range for detection of 
p-cresol (Nurul Karim and Lee, 2013; Li et al., 2017; Han et al., 2015). 
The widespread use and continuous release of bisphenol-A (BPA) in the 
environment have become the new environmental pollutant that directly or 
indirectly affects the aquatic ecosystem. Hence, they are specially monitored TABLE 7.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of Using Nano-Biosensores for the Detection 
of Pollutants. 
Pros Cons 
Easy transportation Inefficient in case of numerous pollutants 
Thorough diagnosis of environment Reusability issue 
Small size Can be hindered by the chemical factors 
Ecofriendly Unclear strategies for its scalability 
Sensitivity is high toward the contaminants Detection limit is limited for transformed 
products 
Economical 
Detection of more than one pollutant at a time 
Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 203 
by using aptamer-based electrochemical biosensors. Generally, glassy carbon 
is used to construct the electrochemical transducers for these aptamers. The 
electrode surface is generally altered by gold nanoparticles embellished with 
carbon nanotubes or nanocomposite film of NH2 functionalized by Fe3O4 
or by gold nanoparticles and nanocomposites and immobilized graphene by 
the formation of thiol-gold (s-Au) bonds. BPA at a very low concentration 
(0.056 nM) can be detected by using nanoporous gold film (NPGF) that is 
attached to a glassy carbon electrode (Beiranvand and Azadbakht, 2017; 
Zhu et al., 2015). A recently introduced strategy to selectively detect BPA 
based on the enzyme deoxynucleotidyl transferase that creates a bridge on 
the surface of the electrode when there is no bisphenol A present, ultra-low 
levels of bisphenol A can be detected by electrochemical aptasensors that 
are developed by molecularly imprinted pyrrole, and electrodeposition of 
gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) with the thiolated DNA sequence (p-63) and 
free bisphenol A complex (Ensafi et al., 2018). 
The development of nano-biosensors for the detection of phenolic 
compounds with high sensitivity, rapid response, and long-term stability is 
presently an area of significant research activity. But at the same time, the 
process of detection still suffers from some disadvantages such as diffusion 
limitations, lack of affinity, and weak stability (Table 7.2). 
7.3.5 NANOWIRE SENSORS: A UNIT OF ELECTROCHEMICAL 
BIOSENSOR
Nanowire biosensors are a class of nano-biosensors of which the significant 
detecting segments are made of nanowires covered by natural particles or 204 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
biological molecules, for example, polypeptides, DNAmolecules, filamentous 
bacteriophages, and fibrin proteins. A bionanowire is a 1D (1-dimensional) 
nanostructure like a fibril, which measures some nanometers or less and do 
not have a restricted length (Touhami, 2014). Since the surface properties of 
bio-nanowires are effortlessly altered with the help of chemical or biological 
molecular ligands, nanowires can be enriched with practically any potential 
compound or biological subatomic acknowledgment unit, making the wires 
independent of analyte. This transduces the occasion of chemical binding on 
their surface into an adjustment in conductance of the nanowire with extraor￾dinary sensitivity, real-time, and quantitative fashion. Boron-doped silicon 
nanowires (SiNWs) are being utilized to make profoundly sensitive, real-time 
electrically based sensors for biological and synthetic species (Rai et al., 
2012). One-dimensional nanowire, nanobelts, nanosprings, and nanotubes 
have become the focal point of an escalated research in biosensing because of 
their extraordinary properties and potential of creating high-density nanoscale 
systems. The nanowires can be utilized for both effective vehicles of electrons 
and optical excitation, and these two components making them basic to the 
capacity and mix of nanoscale systems. Indeed, they are the littlest measure￾ment structures that can be utilized for the effective vehicle of electrons, and 
hence, they are basic to the capacity and joining of these nanoscale devices. 
Their electrical properties are unequivocally affected by minor perturbations 
in light of their high surface-to-volume proportion and tunable electron trans￾port properties because of the quantum confinement effect. One of the great 
possibilities for the improvement of enzyme/protein-based biosensors is the 
CNT because of its unique kind of mechanical, electrocatalytic, and elec￾tric properties. Researchers have utilized CNT/Nafion-based electrodes for 
immobilization glucoseoxidase (GOx) chemical for a sensitive recognition 
of glucose. This CNT/Nafion complex was set up by scattering solubilized 
CNTs in Nafion arrangement onto an electrode surface. CNT-based biosensor 
offers considerably more noteworthy signals, particularly at low potential, 
mirroring the electrocatalytic action of CNTs. Such a low potential activity of 
CNT-based biosensor brings about a wider linear range and a quick reaction 
time (Touhami, 2014; Hernandez-Vargas et al., 2018). 
7.3.6 MICROORGANISM-BASED NANO-BIOSENSORS
Agriculture networks have been broken to revolutionize them by pathogen 
identification, high productivity checkup and high agriculture produc￾tion monitoring services. The nano-biosensor is a particular sensor that Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 205 
manufactures a separate transducer package for different transmitters 
(physical, chemical, biological, electrochemical, etc.). They are classified, 
whether optically, piezoelectric, or mechanical because of their transduction 
theory. Biosensors were also characterized on the basis of their most sensi￾tive carrier/recognition substances and may include the immunosensors, the 
biosensors, and the enzyme biosensors. Biologically originated (especially 
bacterial) biosensors are now being produced by integrating different NPs 
(Ag, Au, Cu, Zn, etc.) into microbes (bacteria, virus, and fungus). They are 
specialists in characterization of diseases in plants and cactus environments; 
these NP bases (nanowires, nanoformulated compounds, and nanoencapsu￾lated beds) have a crucial role to play in clean strategies connected with 
pesticides and insecticides build-up in agriculture. Researchers identified in 
the diagnosis for several pathogenic bacteria the function of NPs. Further, 
it is important to explore various types of packages that allow us to design 
their introduction as point-of-care systems and complex devices. Recently 
(Bucur et al., 2018), the function of biosensors was reviewed on the basis 
of enzymatic inhibition (microbial origin). These biosensors could help 
to detect the quantitative toxicity of a variety of insecticides currently in 
use, such as organophosphorus compounds, carbamate compounds, etc.; 
these insecticides are almost forbidden or stated to have the highest risk 
as reported by the European Food Protection Authority (EFSA) for food 
(Justino et al., 2017; Mocan et al., 2017; Oliveira et al., 2018; Peiyan et 
al., 2018). Gui et al., 2017, revealed that Pseudomonas putida (BMM-PL) 
could be used as a whole cell-based biosensor. They concluded the role of 
these bacteria in the identification of phenanthrene in polluted soil. It is 
also necessary to choose the type of host cell. A biosensor’s accuracy and 
time-response can be highly influenced by the part of its host cells that serve 
as the expression module for detection. As metabolism, genome, and cell 
composition are of elevated resemblance between eukaryotic-based sensors 
and the host body, around 85% of the currently used metals identification 
of whole cell biosensors are eukaryotes (Magrisso et al., 2008). In multiple 
environmental study sample, Hernández-Sánchez and their associates 
developed different full cell biosensors utilizing multiple host cells but 
a similar recombinant control method for the discovery of monocyclic 
aromatic compounds (Hernández-Sánchez et al., 2016). The biosensor 
from Alcanivorax borkumensis SK2 was reported to have fewer particulate 
tolerances while greater to show the better efficiency for detecting the low 
concentrations of polluted substances of the seawater sample. As a result of 
their high resistance at high temperatures until it was saturated, the Pseudo￾monas putida DOT-T1E biosensor was considered to be the best choice for 206 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
environmentally highly polluted conditions (Espinosa-Urgel et al., 2015). 
A biosensor based on Alcanivorax borkumensis specialized in assimilating 
linear alkanes, and exhibited a four-fold lower detection sensitivity toward 
the fuel octane (0.5 μM) when compared to biosensors that used Escherichia 
coli as a vehicle. When measuring low concentrations of pure alkanes 
or petrol in samples, this performance improvement was clearly evident 
(Sevilla et al., 2015). Brutesco et al., 2016, prepared a functional biosensor 
based on Deinococcus deseri (an environmental bacterium that is tolerant 
to desiccation and radiation) and reported that after 7 days of storage, these 
sensors were able to detect arsenite. A series of whole cell biosensors have 
also been prepared from several E. coli strains to detect nickel in drinking 
water. 
7.4 DNA NANOSENSORS—AN IDEAL APPROACH FOR THE 
DETECTION OF POLLUTANTS 
Pathogen contamination in the environment has led to some serious contagious 
disease outbreaks that can cause epidemics or even pandemics. Through 
some studies to detect pathogens in the environment, some techniques have 
been introduced like traditional biosensor and nanosensor, out of which 
DNA-based nanosensor is being used particularly to identify pathogens 
like E. coli, Vibrio cholera, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA), Aspergillus Bacillus subtilis, and Candid. V. cholera, a waterborne 
microbe can be detected by employing selective binding of O1 OmpW (outer 
membrane protein W) gene with two DNA probes- Magnetic NP-probe1-O1 
OmpW-fluorescein amidite (FAM) probe2-AuNP complex. The association 
of DNA-pollutants is unique since specific pollutants contribute to a specific 
toxic reaction. The capacity of the DNA of changing specificity with the 
change in its structure and sequence is beneficial for the sensing of diverse 
analytes. The most widely used nanomaterials for the production of DNA 
nanosensor are AuNPs and AgNPs. As optical nanosensors, magnesium 
oxide, iron oxide, QDs, and manganese oxide NPs have been used and can 
also be investigated for vast numbers of unexplored analytes to design DNA 
nanosensors as an alternative to routine complex analytical assays (Alahi and 
Mukhopadhyay, 2017). The descent biocompatibility, extensive availability, 
water-soluble property, and fluorescence emission based on DNA sequence 
are all the major advantages of using DNA nanosensors (Song et al., 2019). 
Pesticides are virulent to living beings. The categorization of pesticides 
is difficult as it involves about 100 classes with a cumulative number of  
Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 207 
over 800. Organophosphorus, carbamates, neonicotinoids, and triazine are 
the major groups that are detected using DNA-based nanosensors. There 
is a certain number of approaches available for the detection of pesticides 
that includes both conventional and sensor-based methods. For example, 
HPLC, GC-MS, and other analytical methods are commonly used for a 
minute number of pesticides whereas DNA nanosensors have been used 
with huge amounts of pesticides to detect (Willner and Vikesland, 2018). 
The colorimetric DNA nanosensor is designed for the identification of 
acetamiprid in celery and green tea leaves. Salt-induced aggregation happens 
with the aptamer binding to ssDNA-AuNPs and the solution looks purple. 
Acetamiprid availability contributes to the solubilization of ssDNA-AuNPs 
due to the development of the red-colored aptamer-acetamiprid complex 
(Fei et al., 2015). Aggregation of ssDNA aptamer-AgNPs may be selectively 
caused by phorate, an organophosphate pesticide. Aggregation leads to a 
decrease in the rate of UV-visible absorption and a change of the color of 
NP solution from brown to colorless (Li et al., 2018). For the detection of 
triazophos in apple, water, rice, turnip, and cabbage samples with a sensitivity 
almost similar to the ELISA method, a bio-barcode amplification-based 
competitive immunoassay was developed. Thiolated ss-oligonucleotide as 
barcodes and mAb as recognition elements in AuNPs were subjected to a 
laboratory sample containing an ovalbumin-pesticide-hapten (hapten-OVA) 
functionalized pesticide and magnetic microparticle (MMP) probe. Detection 
is concluded by AuNPs catalyzed Ag staining. The graycolor intensity of Ag 
relies on the concentration of triazophos (Du et al., 2018). 
GMO has transgene-containing modified DNAand several other sequences 
such as selection markers and promoter. Similarly, mutant and resistant species 
contain sequences of DNA that are distinct from regular organisms. The 
sequences that are complementary to these particular sequences are being used 
as bioreceptors to have DNA nanosensor specificity. Fluorescence intensity 
recovery is used for quantifying Mycobacterium tuberculosis resistance to 
rifampicin. Specific FAM-labeled probe for a mutant DNA sequence with 
rifampicin resistance to M. tuberculosis is adsorbed on graphdiyne’s nanosheet 
surface. The nanosheet quenches the FAM probe’s fluorescence. The FAM 
probe is released from the nanosheet in the presence of target ssDNA to form a 
structure with target DNA (Chang et al., 2019). For the resistance of microbes 
such as MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) to antibiotics, 
the penicillin-binding protein-encoding gene is responsible. In the presence 
of intercalating fluorescent dye SYBR green I, MRSA containing mecA target 
ssDNA interacts with carboxyfluorescein (FAM)-ssDNA-GO and eliminates 
FAM ssDNA to form double-stranded mecA-ssDNA FAM-SYBR green 208 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
I-ssDNA complex. SYBR green is later integrated as the polymerase lies in 
the solution expands the target DNA utilizing FAM ssDNA as a template 
leading to a rise in the fluorescence intensity (Ning et al., 2016). 
The heavy metal pollutants most widely detected include mercury, 
arsenic, lead, chromium, and cadmium. Toxic metals like the above can cause 
damage multiple organs and disrupt the metabolomics in humans. Heavy 
metal ions’ precise binding to the molecules of bioreceptor DNA allows the 
properties of nanomaterials or DNA to change. Samples of hot spring and 
seawater have the fluorescence quenching technique, which was used for the 
identification of sulfide ions (S2−) (Chen et al., 2011). Cytosine-rich DNA 
has an Ag+ affinity that has been used for the visual identification of Ag+ 
in tap and river water samples to design the DNA-based lateral flow test. To 
prevent non-specific encounters with intervening iodide ions (I+
), the sensor 
includes the addition of sodium peroxydisulfate. In the test sample, the 
presence of arsenic [As (III)] eliminates aptamer shielding the pores of MSN 
filled with rhodamine B, contributing to a rise in fluorescence strength. As 
(III) is a carcinogenic pollutant. Aptamer-controlled crystal violet synthesis 
is used for designing luminescence resonance energy transfer (LRET)-based 
nanosensor in the research to detect As (III) (Chen et al., 2020). The rate of 
resonance Rayleigh scattering (RRS) increases immediately with the increase 
of nanomaterial size that depends on the concentration of As (III) (Wu et 
al., 2012). DNA-AuNP nanosensors have also been used to simultaneously 
detect multiple metal ions. In wastewater samples, the sensor will directly 
detect Ag+
, Cd2+, Cu2+, Hg2+, Pb2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, Cr3+, and Sn4+ (Tan et al., 2016). 
There have also been studies of a DNA nanosensor-based identification of 
contaminant dyes, explosives, and toxins. The broad ssDNA consists of two 
thin, complementary DNA strands, one side is made of a scaffolder that 
carries luminescence acceptors, and the other side is supported by a π-donor 
6-hydroxy-l-DOPA base that contains the pair. Dopamine, with CuNPs, can 
enable the fluorescence exemption of dsDNA-CuNPs via a photo-induced 
digital electron transfer mechanism. Optical and electrical-to chemical 
sensors with NP-base to detect mycotoxin have been used for mutagenic 
nitrosamines, namely N-nitrosodiethanolamine (Majumdar et al., 2020). 
7.5 IMMUNO-BASED NANO-BIOSENSOR
Conventional ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) assays utilize 
immunological reagents to identify bacteria (Swanink et al., 1997). Following 
similar principles, an assortment of detecting stages have been planned that  
Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 209 
fuse antibody (Ab) to improve compactness, decrease examination time, 
and disentangle recognition (Guner et al., 2017). Most nanosensing stages 
depend on AuNPs adjusted with Ab (antibody) and detection depends on 
estimations of the surface plasmon reverberation (SPR) or the color change 
related to aggregation/deaggregation upon target binding (Choi et al., 2020). 
Antibodies explicit for these microbes were immobilized over a gold layer 
or AuNPs stored on the gold layer utilizing 16-mercaptoundecanoic acid and 
carbodiimide coupling between the acid group on the Au surface and the 
amine buildup of the antibody. Estimations of the adjustment in resonance 
angle and refractive index with various bacteria concentrations gave a detec￾tion cutoff of 103 CFU/mL when AuNPs were utilized when contrasted with 
104 CFU/mL without NPs. Singh et al. (2009) have announced an immuno￾sensor for recognition of E. Coli utilizing Au nanorods functionalized with 
E. coli Ab and two-photon Rayleigh scattering (TPRS) spectroscopy as an 
identification method. In presence of E. coli O157:H7 bacterium, the adjusted 
nanorods tie to E. coli causing conglomeration or aggregation which brought 
about an expansion in the TPRS signal. The investigation took 15 min and 
the LOD was 50 CFU/mL. 
An electrochemical immunosensor with magnetic separation for identifi￾cation of Bacillus and E. coli O157:H7 utilizing trifunctional NPs of immuno￾attractive/polyaniline core/shell (c/sNP) was planned. The NP framework 
contains antibodies as a particular bioreceptor for microbes, a magnetic moiety 
to upgrade detachment and fixation, and polyaniline as an electrically conduc￾tive material to improve the conductivity for electrochemical estimations. For 
indicating a current reduction with expanding bacteria concentration, cyclic 
voltammetry and amperometry were utilized as recognition methods (Vu et 
al., 2020). 
Different works revealed a low-cost effort paper-based innovation in 
which nitrocellulose paper was changed with immunological reagents against 
microbes and AuNPs for discovery. It has been revealed that a multiplex 
paper-based immunosensor for the location of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
and Staphylococcus aureus in which microbial antibodies were joined to 
AuNPs on nitrocellulose paper. The measure was created as a portable strip 
reader and had the option to distinguish 500–5000 CFU/mL. In different 
models, electrochemical immunosensors for Salmonella were planned to 
utilize graphene quantum spots (GQDs) (Ye et al., 2017). In different works, 
Deisingh and Thompson misused the utilization of Raman spectroscopy on 
nano-designed surfaces for the detection of bacteria in food and ecological 
investigation (Deisingh and Thompson, 2004). Other platforms use silica 
NPs as immobilization platforms for the detection of Escherichia coli 210 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(Mathelié-Guinlet et al., 2016). Immobilization of the biosensing component 
on nanomaterials has appeared to improve sub-atomic acknowledgement and 
increase selectivity. 3D demonstration was utilized for nano-manipulations and 
anticipating the selectivity toward various analyses. The current advancement 
status exhibits that immunosensors and aptasensors can possibly improve the 
presentation of gadgets for pathogenic microorganism identification, and 
this methodology can resolve a conceivably huge number of difficulties in 
bioassays (Cho et al., 2020; Jeddi and Saiz, 2017). Nonetheless, during the 
immobilization cycle, the absence of direction of the antibodies or aptamers, 
which may bring about irregular conjugation with the objective of interest, 
is a basic issue that actually should be tended to. Extra difficulties are issues 
of explicitness, some because of the presence of vague adsorption that 
requires the advancement of appropriate materials and techniques to improve 
selectivity, empower site-explicit direction of bioreceptors on surfaces, and 
forestall vague adsorption (Mustafa et al., 2017). 
7.6 A GUIDE TO POLLUTION DETECTION: CURRENT TRENDS AND 
NOVEL APPLICATIONS 
Nanotechnology is a recent field of science that deals with nanomaterials. 
These nanoparticles, when integrated with sensors, can detect many types 
of contaminations whether it be in the soil, food, or the environment. Nano￾biosensors also play an important role in the field of medicine and therapeutics. 
In recent advancements, nano-biosensors have proved to be an effective 
tool to detect pesticides because of their nature, that is, its high sensitivity, 
selectivity, and fast response by reacting with the target to develop a signal. It 
is expected that very soon in the future, detection of pesticides will be carried 
out with the help of commercialized nanoparticles that are integrated with 
bioelements. The development of pesticide detecting nano-biosensors has 
shown a great advancement and is quite reliable (Christopher et al., 2020). 
Nowadays, agricultural products contain a much higher amount of pesticide 
than approved. These develop serious health disorders hence detecting them 
is important. Recently array type and unimolecular nanomaterial-based nano￾biosensors are designed for the detection of pesticides. Carbon nanotubes, 
iMono-based nano-biosensors, and nanoparticles are generally being used 
for the detection of smaller levels of organophosphorus pesticide. Quantum 
dot (QD) based fluorescent nano-biosensors also help to detect pesticides in 
soil. Acetamiprid binding DNA aptamers are currently being used to detect 
insecticides with the aid of QD. Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 211 
Very rapid and sensitive detecting systems with high molecular 
precision are used to detect contamination and pathogens present in the soil. 
Nanoparticle-based nano-biosensors are a boon for the detection of these 
contaminants at a very low scale because of their enormous surface area. 
Ralstonia solanacearum is a bacterium that harms potato cultivation and 
is a very serious issue from the agricultural point of view. Aurum-based 
nanoparticles are used to develop nano-biosensors that can detect even a 
very small amount (15 ng) of the genomic DNA of Ralstonia solanacearum 
if present in the soil. Au nanorods based nanosensors have been developed 
to detect the virus in orchid plantations. Heavy metals that are present in 
soil and water cause havoc damage to the human system and environment. 
Hence, it is important to identify them and eliminate them from nature. 
Integration of nanomaterials with electrochemical biosensors helps in the 
detection of these heavy metals in the soil like the presence of mercury 
can be detected with the aid of AuNP integrated amperometric biosensors. 
Recently, a carbon nanotube-based single-walled electrochemical biosensor 
has been developed that can effectively detect the presence of Hg in water 
(Salouti and Derakhshan, 2020). 
There is a rapid growth in the development of biosensors to detect 
environmental pollution, and it is aided by the new advancement in the 
field of nanotechnology. Cost-effective, highly sensitive, and portable DNA 
nano-biosensors are a good option for monitoring the quality of water. This 
serves as a solution to many new challenges arising from the detection of 
water pollution (Soukarié et al., 2020). The high concentration of chromium 
consumption leads to mutation and develops cancer. It is generally present in 
the effluents that go and mix with the water bodies. In a recent study, it was 
found that ionic chromium can be recognized with the aid of Au nanoparticles 
that have been secured by Xanthoceras sorbifolia extract (XT-AuNP). Ag 
nanospheres (C-SNSs) that are manufactured at distinct pH values are now 
helping to detect the presence of chromium in water (Aguilar-Pérez et al., 
2020). Lead is another heavy metal that is generally found in the industrial 
sewage and water bodies where this sewage is drained out. It is extremely 
important to detect them and eliminate them hence a recently developed 
cantilever nano-biosensor is used (Rigo et al., 2020). A newly designed 
alternative for the detection of heavy metals is the quantum dots and carbon 
nanodots based system that is based on Förster resonance energy transfer 
(FRET). It mainly consists of carbon nanodots as acceptor components 
and GQD as donors. The recent trend applies SPR nanosensor to detect 
the presence of zinc. The use of zinc ion imprinted poly (2-hydroxyethyl 
methacrylate-N-methacryloyl- (L)-histidine methyl ester) SPR nanosensor 212 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
to detect the presence of zinc in the water-based fluid is common nowadays. 
It is fast, cost-efficient, and much more effective. Even to detect temperature 
the newly developed temperature nano-biosensors made of carbon dots are 
being used. 
Currently, there is a trend to use nano-biosensors to detect environmental 
viruses. Detection of these viruses using a single-walled carbon nanotube 
field-effect-transistor (swCNT-FET) is common. This recent technique helps 
to deactivate the airborne viruses with the help of engineered water nano￾structures (EWNS). The presence of bacteriophage viruses in water bodies is 
detected by the use of a molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) nanoparticle￾based affinity system (Debnath and Das, 2020). 
7.7 CONCLUSION
Significant developments have been made in the biotechnology and nano￾technology sectors to get rid of harmful pollutants. Globally, air contamina￾tion in multiple media is a serious health issue. The need for rapid biosensor 
identification will grow due to ever growing public health issues about the 
damage that environmental emissions will cause. The pivotal part of the 
new biosensing method is nanomaterials. The future of nano-biosensors 
will depend on the performance of advanced technologies that are evolving. 
The nano-biosensors have a lot of characteristic features like, high surface 
area to volume proportions, good electrochemical properties, needs normal 
storage conditions, accuracy of the transducer, pH, temperature, sensitivity, 
and linearity. There are several approaches to nano-biosensors that include 
enzymatic nano-biosensors, nanomaterial-based fluorescent biosensors, 
nano-biomaterials as a detection signal for environmental pollution, nano￾biosensors specifically designed for detecting phenolic compounds, nanowire 
sensors, etc. The process of detection still suffers from some disadvantages 
such as diffusion limitations, lack of affinity, and weak stability, and it can be 
overcome with the significant research activity in the area of high sensitivity, 
rapid response, and long-term stability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Ms. Mousumi Megha￾mala Nayak for her valuable suggestions and helping us in formatting the 
manuscript.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 213 
KEYWORDS
 
• nano-biosensors 
• nanomaterials 
• environmental monitoring 
• pollutant detection 
• pesticide 
• integrated sensing platforms 
REFERENCES 
Aguilar-Pérez, K. M.; Heya, M. S.; Parra-Saldívar, R.; Iqbal, H. M. Nano-Biomaterials in-Focus 
as Sensing/Detection Cues for Environmental Pollutants. Case Studies Chem. Environ. Eng. 
2020, 2, 100055. 
Alahi, M. E.; Mukhopadhyay, S. C. Detection Methodologies for Pathogen and Toxins: A 
Review. Sensors 2017, 17 (8), 1885. 
Alam, M. N.; Chatterjee, A.; Das, S.; Batuta, S.; Mandal, D.; Begum, N. A. Burmese Grapefruit 
Juice Can Trigger the ‘Logic Gate’-Like Colorimetric Sensing Behavior of Ag Nanoparticles 
towards Toxic Metal Ions. RSC Adv. 2015, 5 (30), 23419–23430. 
Antiochia, R.; Lavagnini, I.; Magno, F. Amperometric Mediated Carbon Nanotube Paste 
Biosensor for Fructose Determination. Anal. Lett. 2004, 37 (8), 1657–1669. 
Antonacci, A.; Arduini, F.; Moscone, D.; Palleschi, G.; Scognamiglio, V. Nanostructured 
(Bio) Sensors for Smart Agriculture. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2018, 98, 95–103. 
Arun, P.; Shanmugaraju, V.; Ramanujam, J. R.; Prabhu, S. S.; Kumaran, E. Biosynthesis of 
Silver Nanoparticles from Corynebacterium sp. and Its Antimicrobial Activity. Int. J. Curr. 
Microbiol. App. Sci. 2013, 2 (3), 57–64. 
Babolghani, F. M.; Mohammadi-Manesh, E. Simulation and Experimental Study of FET 
Biosensor to Detect Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2019, 488, 662–670. 
Balavigneswaran, C. K.; Kumar, T. S. J.; Packiaraj, R. M.; Prakash, S. Rapid Detection of 
Cr(VI) by AgNPs Probe Produced by Anacardium Occidentale Fresh Leaf Extracts. Appl. 
Nanosci. 2014, 4 (3), 367–378. 
Beiranvand, S.; Azadbakht, A. Electrochemical Switching with a DNA Aptamer-Based 
Electrochemical Sensor. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 2017, 76, 925–933. 
Bhattarai, P.; Hameed, S. Basics of Biosensors and Nanobiosensors. Nanobiosensors: From 
Design to Applications. 2014, 374–403. 
Brutesco, C.; Prévéral, S.; Escoffier, C.; Descamps, E. C. T.; Prudent, E.; Cayron, J.; Dumas, 
L.; Ricquebourg, M.; Adryanczyk-Perrier, G.; Groot, A. D. Bacterial Host and Reporter 
Gene Optimization for Genetically Encoded Whole Cell Biosensors. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. Int. 2016, 24, 1–14. 
Bucur, B.; Munteanu, F. D.; Marty, J. L.; Vasilescu, A. Advances in Enzyme-Based Biosensors 
for Pesticide Detection. Biosensors 2018, 8, 128.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Chang, F.; Huang, L.; Guo, C.; Xie, G.; Li, J.; Diao, Q. Graphdiyne-Based One-Step DNA 
Fluorescent Sensing Platform for the Detection of Mycobacterium Tuberculosis and Its 
Drug-Resistant Genes. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2019, 11 (39), 35622–35629. 
Chen T, Wang, H.; Wang, Z.; Tan, M. Construction of Time-Resolved Luminescence 
Nanoprobe and Its Application in As (III) Detection. Nanomaterials 2020, 10 (3), 551. 
Chen, W. Y.; Lan, G. Y. Chang, H. T. Use of Fluorescent DNA-Templated Gold/Silver 
Nanoclusters for the Detection of Sulfide Ions. Anal Chem. 2011, 83 (24), 9450–9455. 
Cho, I. H.; Kim, D. H.; Park, S. Electrochemical Biosensors: Perspective on Functional 
Nanomaterials for on-Site Analysis. Biomater. Res. 2020, 24 (1), 1–12. 
Choi, J. H.; Lee, J. H.; Son, J.; Choi, J. W. Noble Metal-Assisted Surface Plasmon Resonance 
Immunosensors. Sensors 2020, 20 (4), 1003. 
Christopher, F. C.; Kumar, P. S.; Christopher, F. J.; Joshiba, G. J.; Madhesh, P. Recent 
Advancements in Rapid Analysis of Pesticides Using Nano Biosensors: A Present and 
Future Perspective. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 122356. 
da Silva, A. C.; Deda, D. K.; Bueno, C. C.; Moraes, A. S.; Da Roz, A. L.; Yamaji, F. M.; 
Prado, R. A.; Viviani, V.; Oliveira, O. N.; Leite, F. L. Nanobiosensors Exploiting Specific 
Interactions between an Enzyme and Herbicides in Atomic Force Spectroscopy. J. Nanosci. 
Nanotechnol. 2014, 14 (9), 6678–6684. 
Dasgupta, N.; Ranjan, S.; Mundekkad, D.; Ramalingam, C.; Shanker, R.; Kumar, A. 
Nanotechnology in Agro-Food: From Field to Plate. Food Res. Int. 2015, 69, 381–400. 
Debnath, N.; Das, S. Nanobiosensor: Current Trends and Applications. In NanoBioMedicine; 
Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp 389–409. 
Deisingh, A. K.; Thompson, M. Biosensors for the Detection of Bacteria. Can. J. Microbiol. 
2004, 50, 69–77. 
Devi, R.; Yadav, S.; Pundir, C. S. Amperometric Determination of Xanthine in Fish Meat by 
Zinc Oxide Nanoparticle/Chitosan/Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube/Polyaniline Composite 
Film Bound Xanthine Oxidase. Analyst 2012, 137, 754–759. 
Du, P.; Jin, M.; Zhang, C.; Chen, G.; Cui, X.; Zhang, Y. et al. Highly Sensitive Detection of 
Triazophos Pesticide Using a Novel Bio-Barcode Amplification Competitive Immunoassay 
in a Microwell Plate-Based Platform. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 256, 457–464. 
Ensafi, A. A.; Amini, M.; Rezaei, B. Molecularly Imprinted Electrochemical Aptasensor 
Forthe Attomolar Detection of Bisphenol A. Microchim. Acta. 2018, 185 (5), 265. 
Espinosa-Urgel, M.; Serrano, L.; Ramos, J. L.; Fernández-Escamilla, A. M. Engineering 
Biological Approaches for Detection of Toxic Compounds: A New Microbial Biosensor 
Based on the Pseudomonas Putida TtgR Repressor. Mol. Biotechnol. 2015, 57, 1–7. 
Fan, Y.; Liu, Z.; Zhan, J. Synthesis of starch-stabilized Ag nanoparticles and Hg 2þ Recognition 
in Aqueous Media. Nanosc. Res. Lett. 2009, 4 (10), 1230–1235. 
Fei, A.; Liu, Q.; Huan, J.; Qian, J.; Dong, X.; Qiu, B.; Mao, H.; Wang, K. Label-Free 
Impedimetric Aptasensor for Detection of Femtomole Level Acetamiprid Using Gold 
Nanoparticles Decorated Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube-Reduced Graphene Oxide 
Nanoribbon Composites. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 70, 122–129. 
Franca, E. F.; Leite, F. L.; Cunha, R. A.; Oliveira Jr, O. N.; Freitas, L. C. Designing an 
Enzyme-Based Nanobiosensor Using Molecular Modeling Techniques. Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys. 2011, 13 (19), 8894–8899. 
Gan, N.; Yang, X.; Xie, D.; Wu, Y.; Wen, W. A. Disposable Organophosphorus Pesticides 
Enzyme Biosensor Based on Magnetic Composite Nanoparticles Modified Screen Printed 
Carbon Electrode. Sensors 2010, 10, 625–638.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 215 
Gaviria-Arroyave, M. I.; Cano, J. B.; Peñuela, G. A. Nanomaterial-Based Fluorescent 
Biosensors for Monitoring Environmental Pollutants: A Critical Review. Talanta Open 2020, 
100006. 
Ghormade, V.; Deshpande, M. V.; Paknikar, K. M. Perspectives for Nano-Biotechnology 
Enabled Protection and Nutrition of Plants. Biotechnol Adv. 2011, 29, 792–803. 
Gui, Q.; Lawson, T.; Shan, S.; Yan, L.; Liu, Y. The Application of Whole Cell-Based Biosensors 
for Use in Environmental Analysis and in Medical Diagnostics. Sensors 2017, 17, 1623. 
Guner, A.; Çevik, E.; ¸Senel, M.; Alpsoy, L. An Electrochemical Immunosensor for Sensitive 
Detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7 by Using Chitosan. MWCNT, Polypyrrole with 
Gold Nanoparticles Hybrid Sensing Platform. Food Chem. 2017, 229, 358–365. 
Han, E.; Yang, Y.; He, Z.; Cai, J.; Zhang, X.; Dong, X. Development of Tyrosinase Biosensor 
Based on Quantum Dots/Chitosan Nanocomposite for Detection of Phenolic Compounds. 
Anal. Biochem. 2015, 486, 102–106. 
Hernández-Sánchez, V.; Molina, L.; Ramos, J. L.; Segura, A. New Family of Biosensors for 
Monitoring BTX in Aquatic and Edaphic Environments. Microb. Biotechnol. 2016, 9, 858–867. 
Hernandez-Vargas, G.; Sosa-Hernández, J. E.; Saldarriaga-Hernandez, S.; Villalba-Rodríguez, 
A. M.; Parra-Saldivar, R.; Iqbal, H. Electrochemical Biosensors: A Solution to Pollution 
Detection with Reference to Environmental Contaminants. Biosensors 2018, 8 (2), 29. 
Hu, J.; Wang, D.; Dai, L.; Shen, G.; Qiu, J. Application of Fluorescent Biosensors in the 
Detection of Hg (II) Based on T-Hg (II)-T Base Pairs. Microchem. J. 2020, 105562. 
Iqbal, H. M.; Bilal, M. Time to Automate the Microbial Detection and Identification: The 
Status Quo. J. Pure Appl. Microbiol. 2020, 14 (1), 01–03. 
Jain, Y.; Rana, C.; Goyal, A.; Sharma, N.; Verma, M. L.; Jana, A. K. Biosensors, Types and 
Applications. In Proceedings of International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and 
Assistive Technology; Jalandhar, India, 2010; pp 1–6. 
Jeddi, I.; Saiz, L. Three-Dimensional Modeling of Single Stranded DNA Hairpins for Aptamer￾Based Biosensors. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 1178. 
Joshi, P.; Nair, M.; Kumar, D. PH-Controlled Sensitive and Selective Detection of Cr(III) and 
Mn(II) by Using Clove (S. aromaticum) Reduced and Stabilized Silver Nanospheres. Anal. 
Methods 2016, 8 (6), 1359–1366. 
Justino, C.; Duarte, A.; Rocha-Santos, T. Recent Progress in Biosensors for Environmental 
Monitoring: A Review. Sensors 2017, 17, 2918. 
Kulkarni, N.; Muddapur, U. Biosynthesis of Metal Nanoparticles: A Review. J. Nanotechnol. 
2014. 
Kumar, V.; Arora, K. Trends in Nano-Inspired Biosensors for Plants. Mater. Sci. Energy 
Technol. 2020, 3, 255–273. 
Kuswandi, B. Nanobiosensor Approaches for Pollutant Monitoring. Environ. Chem. Lett. 
2019, 17, 975–990. 
Li, G.; Sun, K.; Li, D.; Lv, P.; Wang, Q.; Huang, F.; Wei, Q. Biosensor Based on Bacterial 
Cellulose-Au Nanoparticles Electrode Modified with Laccase for Hydroquinone Detection. 
Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 2016, 509, 408–414. 
Li, H.; Hu, X.; Zhu, H.; Zang, Y.; Xue, H. Amperometric Phenol Biosensor Based on a New 
Immobilization Matrix: Polypyrrole Nanotubes Derived from Methyl Orange as Dopant. 
Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 2017, 12, 6714–6728. 
Li, S. C.; Chen, J. H.; Cao, H.; Yao, D. S.; Liu, D. L. Amperometric Biosensor for Aflatoxin 
B1 Based on Aflatoxin Oxidase Immobilized on Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes. Food 
Control 2011, 22 (1), 43–49.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
216 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Li, X.; Shi, J.; Chen, C.; Li, W.; Han, L.; Lan, L. et al. One-Step, Visual and Sensitive 
Detection of Phorate in Blood-Based on a DNA– AgNC Aptasensor. New J Chem. 2018, 
42 (8), 6293–6298. 
Luo, H.; Cheng, Q.; Pan, X. Photochemical Behaviors of Mercury (Hg) Species in Aquatic 
Systems: A Systematic Review on Reaction Process, Mechanism, and Influencing Factor. 
Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 720, 137540. 
Luz, R. A.; Iost, R. M.; Crespilho, F. N. Nanomaterials for Biosensors and Implantable 
Biodevices. In Nano Bioelectrochemistry; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013; pp 27–48. 
Magrisso, S.; Erel, Y.; Belkin, S. Microbial Reporters of Metal Bioavailability. Microb. 
Biotechnol. 2008, 1, 320–330. 
Majumdar, S.; Thakur, D.; Chowdhury, D. DNA Carbon-Nanodots Based Electrochemical 
Biosensor for Detection of Mutagenic Nitrosamines. ACS Appl. BioMater. 2020, 3 (3), 
1796–803. 
Malik, P.; Katyal, V.; Malik, V.; Asatkar, A.; Inwati, G.; Mukherjee, T. K. Nanobiosensors: 
Concepts and Variations. Int. Sch. Res. Notices. 2013. 
Mathelié-Guinlet, M.; Gammoudi, I.; Beven, L.; Moroté, F.; Delville, M. H.; Grauby-Heywang, 
C.; Cohen-Bouhacina, T. Silica Nanoparticles Assisted Electrochemical Biosensor for 
the Detection and Degradation of Escherichia coli Bacteria. Procedia Eng. 2016, 168, 
1048–1051. 
Miranda, O. R.; Li, X.; Garcia-Gonzalez, L.; Zhu, Z. J.; Yan, B.; Bunz, U. H. F.; Rotello, V. M. 
Colorimetric Bacteria Sensing Using a Supramolecular Enzyme-Nanoparticle Biosensor. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 9650–9653. 
Mocan, T.; Matea, C. T.; Pop, T.; Mosteanu, O.; Buzoianu, A. D.; Puia, C.; et al. Development 
of Nanoparticle-Based Optical Sensors for Pathogenic Bacterial Detection. J. Nanobiotech. 
2017, 15, 114. 
Mustafa, F.; Hassan, R. Y. A.; Andreescu, S. Multifunctional Nanotechnology-Enabled 
Sensors for Rapid Capture and Detection of Pathogens. Sensors 2017, 17, 2121. 
Ning, Y.; Gao, Q.; Zhang, X.; Wei, K.; Chen, L. A Graphene Oxide-Based Sensing Platform 
for the Determination of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Based on Strand￾Displacement Polymerization Recycling and Synchronous Fluorescent Signal Amplification. 
J. Biomol. Screen. 2016, 21 (8), 851–857. 
Nurul Karim, M.; Lee, H. J. Amperometric Phenol Biosensor Based on Covalent Immobilization 
of Tyrosinase on Au Nanoparticle Modified Screen-Printed Carbon Electrodes. Talanta 
2013, 116, 991–996. 
Oliveira, J. L. D.; Campos, E. V. R.; Pereira, A. E. S.; Pasquoto, T.; Lima, R.; Grillo, R. et 
al. Zein Nanoparticles as Eco-Friendly Carrier Systems for Botanical Repellents Aiming 
Sustainable Agriculture. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2018, 66, 13301340. 
Ozdemir, C.; Yeni, F.; Odaci, D.; Timur, S. Electrochemical Glucose Biosensing by Pyranose 
Oxidase Immobilized in Gold Nanoparticle-Polyaniline/AgCl/Gelatin Nanocomposite 
Matrix. Food Chem. 2010, 119, 380–385. 
Parra-Arroyo, L.; Parra-Saldivar, R.; Ramirez-Mendoza, R. A.; Keshavarz, T.; Iqbal, 
H. M.; Laccase-Assisted Cues: State-of-the-Art Analytical Modalities for Detection, 
Quantification, and Redefining “Removal” of Environmentally Related Contaminants of 
High Concern. In Laccases in Bioremediation and Waste Valorisation; Springer: Cham, 
2020; pp 173–190. 
Peiyan, Y.; Xin, D.; Yan, Y. Y.; Qing-Hua, X. Metal Nanoparticles for Diagnosis and Therapy 
of Bacterial Infection. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2018, 7, 1701392.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Potential of Nanobiosensors for Environmental Pollution 217 
Perez-Lopez, B.; Merkoci, A. Nanomaterials Based Biosensors for Food Analysis Applications. 
Trends Food. Sci. Technol. 2011, 22, 625–639. 
Periasamy, A. P.; Umasankar, Y.; Chen, S. M. Nanomaterials-Acetylcholinesterase Enzyme 
Matrices for Organophosphorus Pesticides Electrochemical Sensors: A Review. Sensors 
2009, 9 (6), 4034–4055. 
Qu, J.; Lou, T.; Wang, Y.; Dong, Y.; Xing, H. Determination of Catechol by a Novel Laccase 
Bio-Sensor Based on Zinc-Oxide Sol-Gel. Anal. Lett. 2015, 48, 1842–1853. 
Ramanathan, M.; Luckarift, H. R.; Sarsenova, A.; Wild, J. R.; Ramanculov, E. R.; Olsen, E. 
V.; Simonian, A. L. Lysozyme-Mediated Formation of Protein-Silica Nano-Composites for 
Biosensing Applications. Colloids Surf B Biointerf. 2009, 73, 58–64. 
Rasheed, T.; Nabeel, F.; Adeel, M.; Rizwan, K.; Bilal, M.; Iqbal, H. M. Carbon Nanotubes￾Based Cues: A Pathway to Future Sensing and Detection of Hazardous Pollutants. J. Mol. 
Liq. 2019, 292, 111425. 
Rigo, A. A.; de Cezaro, A. M.; Martinazzo, J.; Ballen, S.; Hoehne, L.; Steffens, J.; Steffens, C. 
Detection of Lead in River Water Samples Applying Cantilever Nanobiosensor. Water Air 
Soil Pollut. 2020, 231, 1–11. 
Salgado, A. M.; Silva, L. M.; Melo, A. F. Biosensor for Environmental Applications. In 
Environmental Biosensors; Somerset, V., Ed.; IntechOpen: Rijeka, 2011; pp 3–16. 
Salouti, M.; Derakhshan, F. K. Biosensors and Nanobiosensors in Environmental Applications. 
In Biogenic Nano-Particles and Their Use in Agro-Ecosystems; Springer: Singapore, 2020; 
pp 515–591. 
Sassolas, A.; Blum, L. J.; Leca-Bouvier, B. D. Immobilization Strategies to Develop 
Enzymatic Biosensors. Biotechnol. Adv. 2012, 30, 489–511. 
Sekhon, B. S. Nanotechnology in Agri-Food Production: An Overview. Nanotechnol. Sci. 
Appl. 2014, 7, 31–53. 
Sevilla, E.; Yuste, L.; Rojo, F. Marine Hydrocarbonoclastic Bacteria as Whole-Cell Biosensors 
for n-Alkanes. Microb. Biotechnol. 2015, 8, 693–706. 
Shah, M.; Fawcett, D.; Sharma, S.; Tripathy, S. K.; Poinern, G. E. J. Green Synthesis of 
Metallic Nanoparticles via Biological Entities. Materials 2015, 8, 11. 
Singh, A. K.; Senapati, D.; Wang, S.; Griffin, J.; Neely, A.; Naylor, K. M.; Varisli, B.; 
Kalluri, J. R.; Ray, P. C. Gold Nanorod Based Selective Identification of Escherichia 
coli Bacteria Using Two-Photon Rayleigh Scattering Spectroscopy. ACS Nano 2009, 3, 
1906–1912. 
Slocik, J. M.; Stone, M. O.; Naik, R. R. Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles Using Multifunctional 
Peptides. Small 2005, 1 (11), 1048–1052. 
Song, C.; Xu, J.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, L.; Lu, Y.; Qing, Z. DNA-Templated Fluorescent 
Nanoclusters for Metal Ions Detection. Molecules 2019, 24 (22), 4189. 
Soukarié, D.; Ecochard, V.; Salomé, L. DNA-Based Nanobiosensors for Monitoring of Water 
Quality. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health. 2020, 226, 113485. 
Swanink, C. M.; Meis, J. F.; Rijs, A. J.; Donnelly, J. P.; Verweij, P. E. Specificity of a Sandwich 
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay for Detecting Aspergillus galactomannan. J. Clin. 
Microbiol. 1997, 35, 257–260. 
Tan, L.; Chen, Z.; Zhao, Y.; Wei, X.; Li, Y.; Zhang, C.; et al. Dual Channel Sensor for Detection 
and Discrimination of Heavy Metal Ions Based on Colorimetric and Fluorescence Response 
of the AuNPs-DNA Conjugates. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 85, 414–421. 
Touhami, A. Biosensors and Nanobiosensors: Design and Applications. Nanomedicine 2014, 
15, 374–403.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
218 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Touloupakis, E.; Chatzipetrou, M.; Boutopoulos, C.; Gkouzou, A.; Zergioti, I. A Polyphenol 
Bio-Sensor Realized by Laser Printing Technology. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 193, 
301–305. 
Upan, J.; Reanpang, P.; Chailapakul, O.; Jakmunee, J. Flow Injection Amperometric Sensor with 
a Carbon Nanotube Modified Screen-Printed Electrode for Determination of Hydroquinone. 
Talanta 2016, 146, 766–771. 
V. Rai.; S. Acharya.; N, Dey. Implications of Nanobiosensors in Agriculture. J. Biomater. 
Nanobiotechnol. 2012, 3 (2A), 315–324. 
Vamvakaki, V.; Chaniotakis, N. A. Pesticide Detection with a Liposome-Based Nano￾Biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2007, 22 (12), 2848–2853. 
Verma, M. L.; Kanwar, S. S.; Jana, A. K. Bacterial Biosensors for Measuring Availability 
of Environmental Pollutants. In Proceedings of International Conference on Biomedical 
Engineering and Assistive Technology; Jalandhar, India, 2010; pp 1–7. 
Verma, M. L.; Chauhan, G. S.; Kanwar, S. S. Enzymatic Synthesis of Isopropyl Myristate 
Using Immobilized Lipase from Bacillus cereus MTCC-8372. Acta Microbiol. Immunol. 
Hung. 2008, 55, 327–342. 
Verma, M. L.; Puri, M.; Barrow, C. J. Recent Trends in Nanomaterials Immobilised Enzymes 
for Biofuel Production. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 2016, 36, 108–119. 
Vu, Q. K.; Tran, Q. H.; Vu, N. P.; Anh, T. L.; Le Dang, T. T.; Matteo, T.; Nguyen, T. H. H. A 
Label-Free Electrochemical Biosensor Based on Screen-Printed Electrodes Modified with 
Gold Nanoparticles for Quick Detection of Bacterial Pathogens. Mater. Today Commun. 
2020, 101726. 
Willner, M. R.; Vikesland, P. J. Nanomaterial Enabled Sensors for Environmental 
Contaminants. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2018, 16 (1), 1–6. 
Wu, Y.; Zhan, S.; Xing, H.; He, L.; Xu, L.; Zhou, P. Nanoparticles Assembled by Aptamers 
and Crystal Violet for Arsenic (III) Detection in Aqueous Solution Based on a Resonance 
Rayleigh Scattering Spectral Assay. Nanoscale 2012, 4 (21), 6841–6849. 
Xu, X.; Niu, X.; Li, X.; Li, Z.; Du, D.; Lin, Y. Nanomaterial-Based Sensors and Biosensors for 
Enhanced Inorganic Arsenic Detection: A Functional Perspective. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 
2020, 128100. 
Ye, W.; Guo, J.; Bao, X.; Chen, T.; Weng, W.; Chen, S.; Yang, M. Rapid and Sensitive Detection 
of Bacteria Response to Antibiotics Using Nanoporous Membrane and Graphene Quantum 
Dot (GQDs)-Based Electrochemical Biosensors. Materials 2017, 10, 603. 
Zhang, Y.; Arugula, M. A.; Wales, M.; Wild, J.; Simonian, A. L. A Novel Layer-by-Layer 
Assembled Multi-Enzyme/CNT Biosensor for Discriminative Detection between Organo￾phosphorus and Non-Organophosphorus Pesticides. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 67, 287–295. 
Zhu, Y.; Zhou, C.; Yan, X.; Yan Y.; Wang, Q. Aptamer-Functionalized Nanoporous Gold Film 
for High-Performance Direct Electrochemical Detection of Bisphenol A in Human Serum. 
Anal. Chim. Acta. 2015, 883, 81–89. VINARS DAWANE1
, SATISH PIPLODE2
, VISHNU K. MANAM3
, 
PRABODH RANJAN4
, and ABHISHEK CHANDRA5
1
School of Environment and Sustainable Development, 
Central University of Gujarat, Gandhinagar 382030, Gujarat, India
2
Department of Chemistry, Sahid Bhagat Singh Govt. P. G. College, 
Pipariya, Hoshangabad 461775, Madhya Pradesh, India
3
Department of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, Unit of Algal 
Biotechnology and Nanobiotechnology, Pachaiyappa’s College, 
University of Madras, Chennai 600030, Tamil Nadu, India
4
Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Madras, Chennai 600036, Tamil Nadu, India
5
Department of Chemistry, HVHP Institute of Post Graduate Studies and 
Research, Kadi Sarva Vishwavidhyalaya, Kadi 382715, Gujarat, India
ABSTRACT
The world of sensing technology is expanding into new horizons owing to 
their exceptional selectivity and sensitivity based application. These remark￾able sensing progresses have been positively influenced by the conjugation 
of biology, material sciences, and nanotechnology into an advanced sensing 
technology. The combination of biology with nanotechnology has allowed 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon￾Based Nanomaterials to Assess 
Environmental Pollution Levels220 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
the sensing technology to enable faster, cheaper, as well as more reliable 
evaluations and applications in various scientific domains. Thus, a new era in 
sensing has been developed into nanobiosensing technology. Environmental 
monitoring, various processes assessment, detections of contaminates, and 
complex environmental forensics are among the most promising applica￾tions of nanobiosensors, and thus, a an important area of research. In this 
regard, the nanobiosensors containing noncarbon nanomaterials such as 
metals, metal oxides, their composites, nonmetals other than carbon, and 
their conjugations have been given significant attention due to their remark￾able potential in the area of environmental science and research. 
This chapter therefore highlights the role and importance of noncarbon￾based nanobiosensors, their recent advancements, and major factors which 
have made the noncarbon-based nanobiosensors a preferential and successful 
choice in nanobiosensing technology. This chapter intensively highlights the 
environmental applications of noncarbon-based nanobiosensors and key 
future challenges associated with it. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Increasing industrialization, urbanization, and usage of hazardous 
substances in chemical processing as well as their by-products have put 
our environment and life at high risk (Alharbi et al., 2018; Hill, 2020). 
Increasing pollution level in the soil, water, and air bodies pose peril to life 
as well as the environment (Shaheen et al., 2020). The increasing pollution 
level has triggered the need to develop cutting-edge technologies to miti￾gate pollution from the environment and ecosystem (Liu et al., 2020). In 
this regard, sensing technology has proved to be advantageous than others 
because it can check and control environmental pollution (Sugunan and 
Dutta, 2010; Li et al., 2015). Particularly, nanotechnology has become an 
exceptional choice in various filed of science and technologies (Baruah 
and Dutta, 2009; Li et al., 2015; Manam, 2015; Chandra, 2017; Chandra 
and Singh, 2018) including environmental science and pollution cleanup 
technology (Piplode, 2017; Piplode and Dawane, 2020; Chandra et al., 
2020) (refer to Figure 8.1). 
In the last few decades, biosensors have taken a center stage in sensing 
technologies and the use of nanotechnology along with various nanomate￾rials have made this field a more fascinating and hot topic (Abdel-Karim et 
al., 2020). These nanomaterials can be classified into two broad categories 
such as carbon containing and noncarbon containing (Li et al., 2015; Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 221 
Nandita et al., 2020). The noncarbon containing materials may be various 
metals, their oxides, composites, as well as elements that are nonmetals 
other than carbon. Their application in controlling environmental pollu￾tion is a very comprehensive subject as the changes and dynamism of 
environmental conditions are extremely rapid (Yaraki and Tan, 2020). In 
biosensing application of nanotechnology, selected nanomaterials incorpo￾rated with a biosensing mechanism is used to detect targeted compounds. 
This has created a remarkable enhancement in various scientifically 
burning domains such as analysis of pollutants and pesticides in the soil, 
presence of toxic materials and their intermediates, detection of parasitic 
pathogens and their toxins in the drinking water, contamination of dyes and 
heavy metals in water bodies, and the assessment of weather conditions or 
humidity/temperature monitoring (Li et al., 2015; Mehrotra, 2016) (refer 
Figure 8.2). 
FIGURE 8.1 The various applications of nanotechnology in field of science and technologies. 
A general sensor mechanism comprises receptor functions and trans￾ducer functions (refer Figure 8.3). In principle, the bioanalyte of interest 
binds on to bioreceptors which modulates the physiochemical activity of 
the binding process of a typical biosensor (Viswanathan, 2009; Malik et 
al., 2013) and nanomaterial it is involved in, thereby enhancing the whole 
process for better detection or signal enrichment. Nanobiosensors have 222 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
been developed using specific recognition molecules such as DNA, anti￾body, aptamer, enzymes, protein, etc. (Bisen et al., 2010), integrated on a 
surface to make it sensitive toward selective targets such as environmental 
pollutants and to generate a unique as well as enhanced signals. These 
enhanced signals may have various forms such as electrochemical, optical 
responses (Malik et al., 2013), colorimetric signals or fluorescent responses 
(Hoon et al., 2020). Some of the applications of nanobiosensors include 
biotoxin detection, carcinogen detection, GMO detection, gas detection, 
agrochemical residue detection, pathogen detection, sugar detection, and 
allergen detection (D’Souza et al., 2017). 
FIGURE 8.2 Various environmental applications of nanobiosensors. 
The environmental application of nanobiosensors includes detection of 
environmental pollution and toxicity, agricultural monitoring, groundwater 
screening, and ocean monitoring (Kumar and Guleria, 2020). Thus, this 
chapter highlights the nanobiosensing materials, especially the noncarbon￾based nanomaterials in biosensing technology and their various applications 
in environmental pollution assessment specifically since the last two decades. 
The chapter also includes the challenges in nanobiosensor technology as 
well as emphasizes the prospects of nanobiosensing technology under the 
lens of noncarbon-based nanomaterials. Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 223 
FIGURE 8.3 The general mechanistic approaches involved in a sensor/nanobiosensor. 
8.2 NONCARBON-BASED NANOBIOSENSORS AS ADVANTAGIOUS 
AND PREFERENTIAL CHOICE 
Factors such as sensitivity, wide-scale application flexibility, toxicities, 
biocompatibility, and cost effectiveness determine the quality of sensor and 
must be considered while designing a sensor. In this regard, use of noncarbon￾based sensor could prove to be a better alternative as it can overcome these 
issues. Such nanomaterials are acquiring immense consideration in the field 
of sensing due to their application in mitigating environmental pollution 
(Malik et al., 2013). 
Noncarbonbased nanobiosensors, such as metallic nanobiosensors, have 
been a very preferential choice for diverse types of principles-based sensor 
making such as colorimetric, fluorescence-based, and dynamic light scattering 
(DLS) based, as well as their various combinations (Kanan et al., 2009). Their 
remarkable surface functionality is useful in the colorimetric evaluation and 
are promising as signal enhancer in DLS processes to build various nano￾level DLS sensing applications. Even metal-based fluorescent nanobiosensors 
composed of <2 nm nanoclusters have been developed for making ultra-small 
biotemplate versions (Yaraki and Tan, 2020). The fluorescence emission of 
the nanobiosensors such as metal and semiconductor nanomaterials, quantum 
dots, silica, as well as polymer nanomaterials can give narrow peak spectra 
which in turn can be adjusted by varying their particle size distribution 
during production. This gives flexibility because multiple emission spectra 
can now be achieved for noncarbon nanomaterials by varying their particle 224 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
size distribution; which in turn makes it possible to build multi-colorimetric 
or multiplex assay using a single light source only (Goldman et al., 2004; 
Koedrith et al., 2015). It can be done along with additional benefits such as 
very high intensity, photostability, resistance toward photo bleaching as well 
as good biocompatibility (Koedrith et al., 2015). 
As a noncarbon material which is mostly metallic nanomaterials have 
good magnetic properties (Koedrith et al., 2015); thus recently the use of 
magnetic beads along with fluorescent nanomaterials have helped to manage 
the critical limitations of low fluorescence intensity problems by focusing 
the targeted samples during the process and is advantageous for fluorescent￾based materials in biosensing technology. They have been applicable as 
open-valent scaffolds for supramolecular gatherings as well as multipurpose 
artificial platforms for superficial coatings such as various chemical integra￾tions toward the aptamers, antibodies, and other sensitive bioreceptor targets 
to prepare biosensor (Koedrith et al., 2015). 
Various types of carbon-based nanomaterials in biosensing technology 
have used single/ multiwalled carbon nanotubes and graphene. They have 
various advantages which include huge surface–to-volume proportion, low 
charge-carried thickness, electrical conductivity enhancements (Shirsat et 
al., 2007; Fortunati, 2019; Norizan et al., 2020) excellent conducting and 
electrocatalytic properties, high thermal conductivity, better mechanical 
flexibility (Viswanathan, 2009; Li et al., 2017; Aziz, 2007) fast electron 
transfer, and good biocompatibility (Liang, 2017; Han, 2017; Trindade, 
2019). Despite these, the major limitations of carbon-based nanobiosensors 
include narrow surface to interface with biological constituents, nonspecific 
adsorption of other biomolecules, problematic management during sensor 
construction progression, challenging chemical functionalization, require￾ment to functionalize the surface for increasing biocompatibility, and hard to 
dissolve in water especially graphene (Scida et al., 2011). 
No doubt, the carbon-based nanomaterials have a varied array of moni￾toring applications such as gas sensing, heavy metals analysis, biomolecules, 
and toxic chemicals evaluations (Doria et al., 2012) but on the other hand, 
the noncarbon-based nanomaterials also have larger physicochemical, 
spectral, and optical features that help in enhancing the performance of a 
new class of biosensors (Rackauskas et al., 2017). For example, metal oxide 
nanowires are developed as a promising class of sensing nanomaterials due 
to their flexible manufacturing methods and chemical stability (Munawar et 
al., 2019; Abdel-Karim et al., 2020). Thus limitations of carbon-based nano￾biosensors have led the pathway for the noncarbon-based nanobiosensors in Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 225 
biosensing technology (Abdel-Karim et al., 2020). But the optimum use of 
biosensing technology has been obtained by the combination of both carbon￾and noncarbon-based nanomaterials in the biosensing technology (Wang et 
al., 2019; Abdel-Karim et al., 2020; Noah, 2020). The noncarbon-based 
nanomaterials have their advantages as well as limitations compared with 
carbon-based nanomaterials. Some of the advantages of noncarbon-based 
nanomaterials include effective electron transfer and increase in surface-to￾volume ratio, superior conductivity (Ma et al., 2016; Zhang, 2016), good 
biocompatibility, easy functionalization, high pore volume, and surface area, 
as in mesoporous silica nanoparticle, which remains a salient feature and 
a lacking parameter in carbon-based nanomaterials (Fan, 2016; Afsharan, 
2016; Yin, 2017; Munawar et al., 2019). Other compensations include decent 
electron transference and great loading capability (Cao, 2013), distinct 
surface properties, flexibility of size and shape (Wang et al., 2017; Wang 
et al., 2017), speedy response and extraordinary electrocatalytic ability 
(Bahadir et al., 2016; Fang, 2016), improved charge transfer and stability 
(El-Said and Choi, 2014), as well as other decencies (Rahman et al., 2005; 
Tertiș, 2017; Taylor, 2017). These above qualities have made noncarbon 
based nanomaterials a versatile choice in the applications of biosensing 
technology. Although the noncarbon-based nanomaterials have huge and 
enormous advantages and have limited drawbacks such as instability of 
their electrical properties under high salt concentration, stability shifts under 
signal amplification, tough to make disciplined scattered size dispersal, 
negative correlation of electrostatic potential with distance, time consuming 
when used with coated surfaces, thin-film morphological dissimilarity, and 
worries regarding material constancy and stable concentration (Díez, 2018; 
Lu et al., 2020). Therefore depending on the application, a combination of 
both carbon and noncarbon-based nanomaterials in biosensing technology 
can be developed into a robust and a versatile biosensor for the welfare of 
the environment and humans (Wang et al., 2019). 
In the case of environmental pollutants such as various gas detection and 
monitoring, both carbon-based materials (Sayago et al., 2008; Lee et al., 
2018; Han et al., 2019) and noncarbon-based materials (Afzal et al., 2012; 
Kwon et al., 2017) have been giving fascinating opportunities for their use 
in sensing technology (Sharma et al., 2018). The noncarbon-based nanoma￾terials have gained significant attention (Wang et al., 2017) and most of the 
times, is a preferential choice of material for specific environmental applica￾tions comparatively (Kanan et al., 2009). It has been receiving attention in 
the construction of gas sensor strategies (Ponzoni et al., 2005; Wang et al., 226 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
2014; Jaroenapibal et al., 2018) as well as for future potential in sensors/ 
biosensors/nanobiosensor technology. Pollutants that were previously 
promising targets for carbon-based sensor applications are providing better 
detections when the sensing carbon material has been doped with noncarbon 
materials (Penza et al., 2008; Ueda et al., 2008; Kanan et al., 2009). 
The use of various metals (Ag, Au, Pt, Pd, Cu, Co, etc.) in nanotechno￾logical applications (Maduraiveeran and Jin, 2017) have been preferred in 
biosensors because of their easy synthesis, attractive biological-based/green 
alternative fabrication (Manam and Murugesan, 2020A), and economically 
cheap and scalability (Manam and Murugesan, 2020B). The large surface 
area has been the most important property of metallic nanoparticles prefer￾ence, which helps in immobilization of the biomolecules efficacy followed 
by unique electron transfer quality, high catalytic activity, and enhanced 
biocompatibilities (Cai, 2016; Chang et al., 2016). The exceptional anti￾microbial activities of silver nanoparticles (Manam and Murugesan, 2014, 
2020A,B) paved a way for its applications in biosensing technology 
and portable water technology as well as the ease of fabrication by using 
different biological medium also gave an additional advantage over other 
type materials (Li et al., 2011; Manam and Murugesan, 2014; Aritonang et 
al., 2019; Manam and Murugesan, 2020A). In this regard, silver nanomate￾rials have been considered important among different noble metal nanopar￾ticles because they have been subjected to new manufacturing practices 
along with unusual subsequent morphologies and behaviors. These silver 
nanoparticles have various advantages such as to accommodate more active 
sites on their surface due to their large surface area which allows an easier 
passage for electrons to flow more effectively (Yu, 2011; Shahdost-fard and 
Roushani, 2017). The addition of silver nanoparticles to reduce graphene 
oxide dramatically enhances the electrical conductivity and the restoration 
of structural imperfections of the reduced graphene oxide (Cho, 2018). Thus, 
the addition of noncarbon-based nanomaterials, especially silver nanopar￾ticles, to carbon-based nanomaterials enhances the specificity and electrical 
conductivity during the biosensing process. 
The use of various metal oxides such as WO3, Bi2O3, ZnO, SnO2, and TeO2 
are remarkable choices for nitrogen oxide sensing applications. Likewise, 
WO3, TiO2, SnO2, as well as chromium, copper, and iron-based oxides have 
exceptional capabilities in sensing applications of various pollutants such as 
sulphur dioxide, H2S, ozone sensing, NH3 sensing, and other volatile organic 
compounds evaluation (Kannan et al., 2009). Various metal oxyhalides have 
been also found to be impressive candidate for assessment of hazardous and 
persistent pollutants (Piplode et al., 2020; Piplode and Dawane, 2020) and Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 227 
candidate for potential future environmental sensor applications (He et al., 
2020). Thus noncarbon-based materials are indispensable tools right now in 
the environmental sensing technology. 
8.3 SELECTED CASE STUDIES ON NANOBIOSENSORS AND THEIR 
VARIOUS ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATIONS 
Environmental monitoring and forensics have always been a critical task 
(Luo and Yang, 2019) due to their extremely complex and dynamic nature 
of environmental processes, interconnected cycles, and presence of different 
types of chemicals along with diverse toxicities (Lega and Teta, 2016; 
Erickson, 2020; Buckley et al., 2020). The following selected examples 
have been highlighting the use of noncarbon-based materials in the making 
of nanobiosensors and their potential environmental applications. The case 
studies have also been covering the use of specific nanomaterials along with 
the biosensor toward a targeted specific environmental pollutant assessment 
and a detailed evaluation of various performance attributes of prepared 
nanobiosensor such as linearity range of detection, the lower limit of detec￾tion as well as the sensitivity values. 
8.3.1 METAL-BASED NANOBIOSENSORS
Metal-based nanobiosensors are significant candidates for various environ￾mental applications and their recent advancements have made them potent 
for advanced sensing. Their great biocompatibility with other biological 
tissues (Wu et al., 2019), unique optical properties because of their localised 
surface plasmon responses (Ryu and Ha, 2020; Yaraki et al., 2020), and their 
remarkable photoluminescence properties due to the quantum confinement 
effect (Goswami et al., 2016; Badshah et al., 2020) make them useful for 
various applications (Rizwan et al., 2018). These significant qualities of 
metal nanomaterials help make colorimetric or dynamic light scattering as 
well as fluorescence sensing principle type of sensors fabrication (Yaraki 
and Tan, 2020). 
Metal nanomaterials, specifically the Silver nanomaterials, have been 
associated with various biomedical applications (Manam and Murugesan, 
2013, 2014, 2017), and recent bioinformatics (Manam and Murugesan, 2017) 
made them an exceptional nanomaterial tool in biosensing technology. Simi￾larly, gold nanoparticles are also considered as a remarkable electrochemical 228 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
biosensing platform due to their rare biocompatibility and biomolecular 
functionality (Lin, 2012). 
In one study, Lin et al. (2006) has developed a biosensor by using Au 
nanoparticles-acetylcholinesterase (AChE) for the paraoxon detection and 
evaluated the localized surface plasma response for investigation. They 
reported that 1–100 ppb paraoxon can be easily detected by using this method 
along with 0.234 ppb as the detection limit under optimum conditions. Valera 
et al. (2008) developed conductometric-based biosensor by using gold 
nanoparticles for the detection of atrazine. They reported linear ranges from 
0.1 to 1 µ/gL for atrazine in microenvironment along with all the necessary 
technical aspects detailing. In a very specific study on pesticide detection, 
Lisa et al. (2009) developed gold nanoparticles based biosensor for DDT 
detection. They reported a very simple method for the detection of DDT in 
nanogram level. The lowest detection limit has been found around 27 ng/mL 
by using this method. In a fiber optical sensor study, Lin and Chung (2009) 
used gold nanoparticles modified optical fiber based biosensor for Cd2+ 
detection. They reported detection linear range from 1 to 8 ppb for Cd2+ 
along with the 0.16 ppb lowest detection limit by this method. In a real water 
pollution evaluation study, Li et al. (2011) developed Ag-based biosensor for 
As3+ detection. They used surface-enhanced Raman scattering for detection 
purpose. They reported 4–300 ppb and 0.76 ppb linear detection range and 
lowest detection limit for As3+ ions, respectively. In another evaluation, Chen 
et al. (2011) used Au nanoparticles based biosensor for methyl parathion 
(MP) detection. They used a square-wave voltammetry technique for the 
detection of MP and reported 0.001–5.0 µg/mL and 0.3 ng/mL linearity 
range and detection limit respectively, under optimum experimental 
conditions. Wu et al. (2012) described a biosensor for the detection of As3+ 
by using aggregated gold nanoparticles along with the combination of 
colorimetric and scattering techniques for analysis. They reported 1–1500 
ppb and 40 ppb linear detection range and lowest detection limits, respectively, 
by naked eye visualization. They also detected 0.6 ppb and 0.77 ppb values 
for colorimetric assay and response scattering assay, respectively, for a real 
water sample. In a typical soil sample evaluation for acetamiprid pesticide 
detection, Shi et al. (2013) used Au-based biosensor and reported the linear 
range between 75 nM and 7.5 µM along with 5 nM lowest detection limit for 
acetamiprid pesticide. They highlighted the sensitivity of the method by 
explaining that pesticides, having a similar structure including imidacloprid 
and chlorpyrifos also coexist with acetamiprid, could not interfere with the 
detection process using this method. Liu et al. (2014) developed a gold-based 
biosensor for atrazine detection and reported 0.05–0.5 ng/mL linear detection Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 229 
range along with the low detection limit of 0.016 ng/mL, under optimum 
conditions. Guan et al. (2014) reported poly (gamma-glutamic acid) 
functionalized gold nanoparticles enhanced biosensor for Hg2+ detection in 
mineral water sample along with PGA and CTAB to build biosensor. They 
reported 0.01–10 µM and 50–300 µM two linear detection ranges along with 
1.9 nM lowest detection limit. Kumar et al. (2014) developed biofunctionalized 
Au nanoparticles for Hg2+, Pb2+, and Cd2+ detection. They used Hibiscus 
Sabdariffa (Gongura) leaves and stem extract for the synthesis of Au 
nanoparticles. This was reported for the first time as biofunctionalized Au 
NPs for toxic metal detection. Au nanoparticles were prepared by using the 
leave extract exhibited high sensitivity without selectivity, whereas Au 
nanoparticles that have been prepared by using stem extract exhibit 
selectively sensing for only Hg2+ ion. Wei and Wang (2015) used biosensor 
based on gold, fourth-generation poly (amidoamine) [PMAM-G4] and AChE 
for carbaryl detection by using Cyclic and Linear Voltammetry methods for 
pollutants detection. Effect of various operation parameters such as enzyme 
amount, the concentration of glutaraldehyde, and inhibition time has also 
been discussed in this study. They highlighted the biosensor’s linear range 
from 1.0 to 0.9 µmol/L along with 0.032 µmol/L lowest detection limit. In a 
study to detect organothiophosphate insecticide, Dou et al. (2015) developed 
a unique nanobeacon construction (gold nanoparticles functionalized with 
DNA aptamer and FAM as fluorophore) based biosensor for isocarbophos 
detection. With the use of this “turn off” strategy based biosensor they 
reported 10 µ/L lowest detection limit for isocarbophos. Mura et al. (2015) 
developed Au nanoparticles based biosensor for nitrate detection in water. 
They also used cysteamine and citrate for biosensor development to evaluate 
the nitrate profile in the water. They detected precisely 35 ppm of nitrate in 
the water by using this method along with very easy detection with the naked 
eyes. Deng et al. (2016) used colorimetric pH indicator gold biosensor for 
evaluation of urea, urease, and urease inhibitor. They highlighted the use of 
3, 3', 5, 5' tertamethylbenzinide-H2O2 to make the biosensor and gold 
nanoparticles as catalyst for sensing method. They reported 0.5 µM and 1.8 
U/L detection limit for urea and urease. They used urine and soil sample for 
urea and urease detection, respectively. In one attempt to make gold-based 
nanobiosensor for highly persistent and hazardous pesticide detection, Lang 
et al. (2016) developed Au nanorod based biosensor for paraoxon and 
dimethoate pesticide detection. Both pesticides belong to the organophosphate 
class of pesticides. The results indicated the 1–5 nM linear range and 0.7 and 
the lowest detection limit for paraoxon as well as 5 nM–1 µM detection 
linear range and 3.9 nM lowest detection limit for dimethoate. They further 230 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
enhanced this method by comparing the effect of Au−Ag hetero-structures 
nanorod based biosensor under the same experimental conditions and 
concluded that the Au nanorod based nanobiosensor exhibited higher 
electrocatalytic properties as compared with Au−Ag based nanobiosensor. In 
a typical application of biosensor to detect Cu2+ in water, Peng et al. (2016) 
developed Au-based biosensor and studied the rhodamine b hydrazine (RBH) 
ions used for biosensing application by utilizing the EIS method for detection 
of pollutant. The prepared AuNPs-RBH biosensor exhibited 0.1 pM to 1 nM 
linear range along with 12.5 fM lowest detection limit for Cu++ in water. In 
a promising work to develop a versatile biosensor for the detection of surface 
water pollutants, Tan et al. (2016) developed a biosensor by using Au 
nanoparticles for detecting all the nine heavy metals. It was a first report 
where all the nine heavy metals (Ag+
, Hg2+, Cr3+, Sn4+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Pb2+, Zn2+, 
and Mn2+) were detected with a very low detection limit in nano range with 
100% identification accuracy. In this study 30 nM detection limit was 
observed for Hg2+ ions. This sensor exhibited superior performance as 
compared with other previous sensors with the use of real water samples 
along with dynamic and static quenching processes. Li et al. (2017) reported 
using an Ag nanocluster based biosensor for Hg2+ detection along with the 
use of single-stranded DNA for the construction of the biosensor. They 
reported 0–150 nM linear detection range and 4.5 nM as the lowest detection 
limit. In an attempt to develop a fast, simple, selective, cost-effective, and 
reusable biosensor, Skotadis et al. (2017) reported a novel platinum-based 
biosensor for Pb2+ ion detection by using Pt- DNAzyme biosensor along with 
the 10 nM value of lowest detection limit of the sensor. In a colorimetric 
sensing based study for pesticides evaluation by using nanoparticles, 
aptamers, and cationic peptide, Bala et al. (2017) developed an Au 
nanoparticle based biosensor for malathion detection. They reported a very 
simple method to detect malathion. In the absence of malathion, Au 
nanoparticles remain red and in the presence of malathion, the Au 
nanoparticles turned into blue color. The linear range of 0.01–0.75 nM has 
been observed for malathion. A lowest detection limit of 1.94 pM has been 
reported in this work. In a recent work, Madianos et al. (2018) developed a 
sensor/biosensor for detecting acetamiprid and atrazine by using platinum 
nanoparticles. It was a first report on biosensor-based aptamers evaluation 
for atrazine detection. They reported linear detection ranges from 10 to 100 
and 1 pM lowest detection limit for acetamiprid as well as 100 pM–1 µM 
linear range and 10 pM lowest detection limits for atrazine in this study. In a 
recent attempt for making “turn on” strategy based biosensor by using 
fluorescent response energy transfer (FRET) phenomena for pesticides Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 231 
detection, Cheng et al. (2018) fabricated an Au-based biosensor for detection 
of chlorpyrifos with diazinon and malathion simultaneously. They also used 
QDs and aptamer to construct the biosensor. They reported a lowest detection 
of 0.73 mg/L for chlorpyrifos. 
8.3.2 METAL OXIDE BASED BIOSENSOR AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
APPLICATIONS
Metal oxide sensors have been widely studied and are among most sensitive 
sensor materials for specific environmental applications (Kayhomayun 
et al., 2020) such as specific reduction/oxidation gas sensors available for 
the commercial, industrial, as well as home sensing systems applications 
(Korotcenkov, 2007; Kanan et al., 2009; Miller et al., 2014; Dey, 2018). 
Eectrochemical performance, catalytic ignition, or resistance variation. based 
systems have been associated with making metal oxide-based biosensors 
(Kanan et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2017). Metal oxide-based biosensors exhibit 
unique benefits such as cost-effectiveness, portable size, measurement 
easiness, robustness, ease of creation, and very sensitive low detection limits 
up to ppm levels along with the exceptional durability and resistance toward 
poisoning (Kanan et al., 2009; Korotcenkov and Cho, 2017). Thus they have 
gained significant popularity in sensing technology and research domains 
(Kayhomayun et al., 2020). Various noncarbon containing or metal oxides 
such as TiO2, SnO2, ZnO, WO3 have been useful in the environmental sensing 
applications (Rim et al., 2017, Wu et al., 2019) as well as others such as In2O3, 
CuO, ZrO2, iron oxide, CeO2, MnO2, antimony oxide, IrO, and CoOx. The 
competitiveness of metal oxides is based on various characteristics such as 
chemical stability, light excitation/light conversion, and surface-to-volume 
proportion (Zhang and Gao, 2019; Erban and Enesca, 2020). Some selected 
examples are discussed here. 
8.3.2.1 TIO2-BASED BIOSENSOR AND ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATIONS 
TiO2 is a promising n-type semiconductor a candidate for numerous 
applications like photo catalysis, photovoltaic, or energy storing as well 
as biosensing due to their high chemical stability, biocompatibility, 
morphological resourcefulness, etc. With such understanding, in a very 
genuine study, Yu et al. (2003) invented a novel amperometric biosensor 
based on TiO2 for phenol detection. In this study, tyrosinase and TiO2 232 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
sol−gel matrix has been used for the sensing environmental application. 
They reported that a short time of less than 5 s is required to detect the phenol 
in the environment. The method can easily detect phenol with linear ranges 
from 1.2 × 10−7 to 2.6 × 10−4 M along with a low detection limit of 1.2 × 10−7 
M. The nanobiosensor exhibited 103 µA/mM sensitivity in a sol−gel matrix. 
In an industrially applicable study, Cheng et al. (2008) reported a biosensor 
based on TiO2 for the detection of lactic acid. In this method, nano-TiO2 
lactate dehydrogenase electrode is used for the detection of lactic acid by 
using the Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) technique. They reported that the lactic 
acid range from 1 to 20 µmol/L can be easily detected by using this method 
along with a 0.4 µmol/L lowest detection limit. In another study, Chen et al. 
(2009) developed a novel biosensor using TiO2 for sensing of urea by using 
potentiometric techniques for the investigation. They evaluated the effect of 
various processing/concentration parameters such as pH, the concentration 
of urea, and ionic strength and reported a highly sensitive and very quick 
detection of urea (25 s) in the study. This method showed a wide linear 
range from 8 to 3 and 5.0 µM linear ranges and a lowest detection limit, 
respectively. Wu et al. (2009) used TiO2 in an amperometric method for the 
detection of nicotine. They reported that this method has a sensitivity of 
31.35 µA/mM/cm2 within the range of 0–5 µM along with a value of 4.9 for 
the lowest detection limit for nicotine. In another study, Kafi et al. (2011) 
designed a biosensor on the glassy carbon electrode by using Hb, TiO2, and 
methylene blue dye to detect H2O2. They used amperometric method for 
detection purpose. In this biosensor study, the role of immobilized Hb has 
been recognized as an important role in H2O2 detection. Prepared biosensor 
showed linear ranges from 2 × 10−7 to 1.6 × 10−4 M and a very low detection 
limit of 8 × 10−8 M. Recent studies explored the use of TiO2 in improving 
the selection in electrochemical biosensing (Dai et al., 2020), better 
photocatalytic systems (Wang et al., 2020), and other applications (Nadzirah 
et al., 2020; Jafari et al., 2020). 
8.3.2.2 SNO2-BASED BIOSENSOR AND ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATIONS 
SnO2 is also a great candidate for diverse applications and plays a key role in 
biosensing technology due to its salient features such as a great surface area, 
worthy biocompatibility, less poisonousness, admirable chemical stability, 
and catalytic action along with easy and flexible synthesis approaches (Dong 
and Zheng, 2014; Zhou et al., 2013; Lavanya et al., 2012). In a very sensi￾tive sensor preparation work, Li et al. (2010) designed a mediator-free HRP/ Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 233 
Sb-doped SnO2 nanowire-based biosensor to detect H2O2 using thermal 
evaporation method for sample preparation along with electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) method for detection purposes. They reported 
that the HRP/Sb-doped SnO2 biosensor exhibits higher efficiency in compar￾ison with the undoped HRP/ SnO2 biosensor. Low detection limit for H2O2 
has been observed as 0.8 µM by this method. In another study for sample 
pollutant detection, Liu et al. (2010) used SnO2-based biosensor. In this 
study, SnO2 nanorods array was prepared by using hydrothermal synthesis 
method and grown directly on an alloy substrate. They reported that the 
prepared nanorod array based biosensor can detect H2O2 with a wide linear 
range from 0.8 to 35 µM along with a low detection limit of 0.2 µM. The 
method showed very good sensitivity (379 µA/mM/cm2
). Recently, Song et 
al. (2020) developed a very sensitive biosensor by using 13 nm mesoporous 
SnO2 hierarchical architectures to accurately assess H2S under a high-humid 
atmosphere at ppb level. 
8.3.2.3 ZnO-BASED BIOSENSOR AND ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATIONS 
ZnO is a wider platform for biosensing application. Its various forms such 
as ZnO nanorods (Zong and Zhu, 2018), nanoparticles (Lei et al., 2011), 
and ZnO nanocone arrays (Yuea et al., 2020) are remarkable candidates 
for various types of sensors in the biomedical and environmental domains. 
Zhao et al. (2009) developed a biosensor based on ZnO for the detection 
of p-cresol, 4-chlorophenol, and phenol. In that study, tyrosinase, boron￾doped nanocrystalline diamond, 3 aminopropyltriethoxysilan (APTES), and 
tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) was used to develop the biosensor. They reported 
a linear range from 1 to 175 µM with a detection limit of 0.1 µM for p-cresol, 
linear range from 1 to 150 µM with a detection limit of 0.25 µM for 4- 
chlorophenol, and linear range from 1 to 150 µM with a detection limit of 
0.20 µM for phenol under optimum conditions. Again in a remarkable study, 
Zhao et al. (2014) designed an electrochemical ZnO biosensor for to detect 
L-lactic acid. In this study, ZnO nanowires were prepared by using chemical 
vapor deposition method and prepared ZnO nanomaterial of 500 nm size. The 
results highlighted that the prepared ZnO nanowires successfully detected 
the L-lactic acid with a wide linear range of 12 µM to 1.2 mM along with the 
sensitivity of 25.6 µA/mM/cm2 sensitivity. In a typical biosensor experiment 
for the detection of urea, Rahmanian and Mozaffari (2015) designed a 
novel biosensor by using ZnO along with polyvinyl alcohol, F-doped SnO2, 
urease enzyme, and cyanuric chloride for designing and developing the 234 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
biosensor. The CV and EIS methods were used for evaluation purpose. They 
reported that using ZnO-based biosensor urea can be easily detected with 
linear ranges of 5.0 to 125 mg/dL along with a detection limit of 3.0 mg/ 
dL under experimental conditions. Sundarmurugasan et al. (2016) used ZnO 
nanosphere based biosensor for immediate recognition of monocrotophos 
(MCP) and dichlorvos (DDVP). They used orange samples for the study and 
reported 0.036–0.012 nM detection limit for MCP and DDVP, respectively. 
Ahmad et al. (2017A) reported a very sensitive ZnO based biosensor 
for phosphate detection. They prepared a Field Effect Transistor (FET) 
type biosensor and used pyruvate oxidase and ZnO nanorods on SiO2/Si 
substrate for the fabrication. They synthesized the ZnO nanorods by using 
a hydrothermal method and used the CV method to detect pollutants. They 
concluded the detection of phosphate with wide linear ranges from 0.1 to 7 
µM along with 0.05 µM and a lowest detection limit for phosphate under 
optimum conditions. The biosensor displayed high sensitivity (80.57 µA/ 
mM/cm2
) toward phosphate detection. Ahmad et al. (2017B) prepared the 
simple one-step low-temperature route-assisted ZnO biosensor for the 
detection of uric acid. They reported a sensitivity of 239.62 µA/mM/cm2 
for detecting uric acid and the detection time was only 2 s along with the 
linear range of 0.01 to 4.56 µM and 5 nM as the low detection limit. Pabbi 
and Mittal (2017) developed an electrochemical biosensor based on ZnO 
quantum dots (QDs) for the detection of acephate pesticide. In that study, 
chlorella sp. algae, surface-active alkaline phosphate, and SiO2 were used to 
prepare a sensitive biosensor with the help of amperometric method to detect 
pesticides in the concentration ranges from 10−11 to 10−3 M of acephate. 
Zhang et al. (2014) studied the detection of glucose and hydrazine using 
Zn−ZnO integrated electrode. In that study, ultrathin ZnO nanofilms were 
used as the biosensor. They reported a wide linear range of 0.5 µM to 14.2 
mM along with 0.5 µM as the lowest detection limit for hydrazine. Recently, 
Theerthagiri et al. (2019) reviewed various biological, environmental, and 
energy-related applications of ZnO. 
8.3.2.4 WO3-BASED BIOSENSOR AND ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATIONS 
WO3 is an n-type semiconductor based metal oxide with significant applica￾tions such as various bioelectronics, neural assemblies, and interfaces as 
well as clever biosensing devices exfoliation (Liu et al., 2015; Santos et al., 
2016; Li et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). Deng et al. (2009) developed a 
third-generation biosensor based on WO3/cytochrome c for H2O2 detection.  
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 235 
This unique system has been reported as free from anodic as well as cathodic 
interferences. Cyclic Voltammetry results revealed that the prepared biosensor 
exhibit activity with a wide linear detection range from 3 × 10−7 to 3 × 10−4 M 
for H2O2 within 5 s along with a low detection limit of 2.4 × 10−7 M. Harihran 
et al. (2011) developed a biosensor using nanocrystalline WO3 for L-DOPA 
or levodopa detection. In this method, WO3 was prepared by using a simple 
microwave-assisted synthesis method and CV method for sensing purpose. 
They reported that at pH 7.2, L-DOPA can be easily detected with linear 
ranges from 1 × 10−7 to 1 × 10−6 M along with 12 × 10−8 or 120 nM as the 
lowest detection limit for L-DOPA. In a very remarkable study for making a 
mediator-free biosensor, Liu et al. (2015) reported WO3 nanowires (NWS) 
based on direct electron transfer hemoglobin with high length diameter ratio 
for nitrate detection by the use of hydrothermal synthesis method along with 
amperiometric method for the detection of pollutant. The biosensor showed 
a wide linear range from 1 to 400 µM of nitrate in the sample along with 0.28 
µM as the lowest detection for nitrate in the study. In a doping study, Zhou 
et al. (2017) developed Na-doped WO3 biosensor for bisphenol A detection 
by the use of a hydrothermal method for synthesis. The prepared Na-doped 
WO3 had a rod-like morphology. They used the Differential Pulse Voltam￾metry (DPV) method for detection of pollutant. The biosensor showed a wide 
linear range from 0.08 to 22.5 µmol/L along with 0.028 µmol/L detection 
limit under optimum experimental conditions. In very recent work, Feng et 
al. (2018) utilized a flower-like WO3 hierarchical structure for the detection 
of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1). They prepared a WO3 material with large surface 
area and porous hierarchical structure which was able to detect AFB1 in 
the environment. This WO3 material was synthesized using hydrothermal 
method. They used the photoelectrochemical method for detection of the 
pollutant. They reported linear ranger from 1 to 120 pg/mL for AFB1 along 
with a lowest detection limit of 0.28 pg/mL under experimental conditions. 
8.3.2.5 OTHER METAL OXIDES BASED BIOSENSORS AND THEIR 
ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATIONS 
With the beneficial properties such as decent toxicity, compatibility with 
biological entities, unique super magnetism, catalytic advantages, synthetic 
mimetic applications, and wild electron transfer ability, the other metal 
oxides are also receiving significant attention in the field of biosensing 
technology (Wang and Tan, 2007; Yang, 2014). In a report on zirconium 
oxide-based nanomaterial for environmental applications, Liu et al. (2003) 236 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
used ZrO2-based biosensor for H2O2 detection. They used sol−gel method 
for ZrO2 synthesis. They concluded a highly sensitive nanobiosensor 
(sensitivity of 111 µA/mM/cm2
) with the detection linear ranges from 2.5 
× 10−7 to 1.5 × 10−4 mol/L in a short time (10 s). In a similar kind of work, 
Liu et al. (2004) made ZrO2-based material and used hemoglobin, ZrO2,and 
DMSO for making a sensor for H2O2 detection. They reported a fine linear 
range from 1.5 to 30.2 µM along with 0.14 µM as the lowest detection by 
the electrocatalytic response. In an attempt for making a versatile sensor for 
pesticide/insecticide detection in vegetables, Yang et al. (2005) fabricated 
ZrO2/chitosan-based biosensor and evaluated the sensor’s activity on various 
pesticides such as acetyl thiocholine, phoxim, malathion, and dimethoate. 
They reported linear ranges of 9.9 × 10−6 to 2.03 × 10−3 M, 6.6 × 10−6 to 4.4 × 
10−4 M, 1 × 10−8 to 5.9 × 10−7 M, and 8.6 × 10−6 to 5.2 × 10−4 M, respectively. 
In a study to make manganese oxide based biosensor, Yao et al. (2006) 
reported nano-MnO2 based biosensor for H2O2 detection. The amperometric 
technique has been applied to detect samples and reported a linear range 
from 1.2 × 10−7 to 2.0 × 10−3 M along with 8 × 10−8 M low detection limit 
for H2O2. The method showed a sensitivity of 2.66 × 10−5 µA/mM/cm2
. 
This MnO2-based method has been used in toothpaste and hair dyes for 
the detection of H2O2. Lu et al. (2006) developed antimony oxide bromide 
(AOB) biosensor for H2O2 detection. They used hydrothermal method for 
the preparation of rod-like structures of AOB nanomaterial in the range of 
50 nm. They used chitason and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) for biosensor 
making. In a very comprehensive work with iron oxide nanomaterials, Hrbac 
et al. (2007) used five types of ferric oxides (hematite, magnetite, amorphous 
Fe2O3, beta Fe2O3, and ferrihydrite) for H2O2 detection. Persian blue is used 
to increase the applicability of these ferric oxide materials. They reported 
lowest detection limit of 2 × 10−5 M for H2O2. Iron oxide showed detection 
up to 8.5 µM of H2O2 in a very short time (less than 3 s) under experimental 
conditions. Salimi et al. (2008) developed CoOx-based biosensor for nitrate 
detection. They used the amperometric method for analysis. They reported a 
linear range of 1–30 µM and 0.2 µM as the lowest detection limit along with 
10.5 nA/µM sensitivity for nitrate. Kaushik (2009) used chitosan and Fe3O4­
based biosensor for pyrethroid pesticides/insecticides, such as, cypermethrin 
and permethrin detection. In this biosensor, calf thymus deoxyribose nucleic 
acid (ssCT-DNA) and indium-tin-oxide (ITO) electrodes are used for 
biosensor deposition. DPV technique has been applied for investigating the 
biosensor. The results showed a linear range from 0.0025 to 2 ppm and 1 to 
300 ppm for CM and PM, respectively. The biosensor response times was 
found to be only 25 and 40 s for CM and PM, respectively. Ansari et al. Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 237 
(2009A) reported about the detection of H2O2 based on nanocrystalline CeO2 
biosensor. In that study, amperometric technique was used. They reported 
a linear range for H2O2 from 1.0 to 170 µM using HRP/nano CeO2/ITO 
electrode. Jindal et al. (2012) reported a sensing method for detecting uric 
acid using CuO thin film. In this method, p-type CuO was used without any 
reagent or external method to detect uric acid. They used Cu and photometric 
assay for the detection study. They reported the linear range around 0.05–1.0 
mM and response around 2.7 mA/mM for the method under experimental 
conditions. Dong et al. (2012) worked on LaF3-doped CeO2 biosensor 
fabrication for nitrite (NO2
-
) detection. They used myoglobin for detection 
using the amperometric technique. Their results show the linear range from 
5 to 4650 µM for nitrite detection in a short time (5 s) along with 0.2 µM 
as the lowest detection limit. Yagati et al. (2013) developed CeO2-based 
biosensor for amperometric detection of H2O2. They used CV and DPV for 
electrochemical behavior of porous CeO2 nanostructured film. They reported 
0.6 µM lower detection limit and up to 3 µM linear range for H2O2 in that 
study along with a short time (8 s) for detection of H2O2. In a typical study for 
phenols and pesticides detection, Mayorga-Martinez et al. (2014) described 
an IrO-based biosensor for catechol and chlorpyrifos detection. In this 
method, 0.08 and 0.003 µM detection limit has been observed for catechol 
and chlorpyrifos, respectively. They used electrochemical and amperometric 
methods for detection of pollutants. In another pesticide detection work, 
Jeyapragasam and Saraswathi (2014) developed Fe3O4−chitosan biosensor 
for carbofuran pesticide detection by using the CV technique to detect 
pesticide in a vegetable sample (cabbage). They observed 3.6 × 10−9 M low 
detection limit for carbofuran. The authors cross-checked whether the results 
are reproducible or not by using a comparative HPTLC method and found 
similar results. In another phenol detection work, Sarika et al. (2017) designed 
alfa Fe2O3 based biosensor for amperometric detection of catechol in the 
microenvironment. They used laccase enzyme to detect nanobiocomposite 
biosensor. They reported a biosensor that has linear detection range from 8 to 
800 µM along with the low detection limit of 4.28 µM for catechol. 
8.3.3 COMPOSITE NANOBIOSENSORS
8.3.3.1 METAL-METAL COMPOSITE BASED BIOSENSOR 
In an attempt to make a composite nanomaterial-based biosensor for 
organophosphate pesticide and carbamate pesticide as well as specific 238 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
nerve agent, Upadhyay et al. (2009) developed a gold−platinum bime￾tallic nanoparticles based biosensor for paraoxon ethyl, Aldicard, and 
Sarin (nerve agent) detection. They used CV and EIS techniques for the 
analysis. The results obtained indicated the linearity ranges of 150–200, 
40–60, 40–50 nM for paraoxon, aldicard, and sarin, respectively. Cu/Ag 
nanocluster-based biosensor was developed by Su et al. (2010) for the 
detection of Cu2+ ions in real environmental samples of pond water and 
soil. They reported 5–200 nM detection linear range along with 2.7 nM 
as the lowest detection limit by using this method. In a comparative study 
between laboratory as well as real lake water samples, Song et al. (2016) 
developed Au−Ag core-shell nanoparticles based biosensor for As3+ ions 
detection. They reported 0.5–10 ppb linear range and 0.1 ppb as the lowest 
detection limit for As3+ ions in water sample and concluded a lab-to-land 
transfer technology with satisfactory results. 
8.3.3.2 METAL−METAL OXIDE BASED BIOSENSOR 
In a genuine attempt to detect organophosphate pesticide sensing, Zhao et al. 
(2013) developed Au and Fe3O4 composite biosensor for methyl parathion 
detection. They highlighted the additional qualities of a fabricated biosensor 
Au nanoparticles have qualities such as high surface-area-to-volume ratio, 
greater loading capacity, spontaneous electron transfer, and enzyme stabi￾lizing ability. They reported linear range of 0.5 to 1000 ng/mL along with 0.1 
ng/mL detection limit. Li et al. (2015) developed Ag/ZnO based biosensor 
for Pb2+ ion detection. They used lake water and human serum as samples. 
They reported 5 × 10−12 to 4 × 10−6 M linear range for Pb2+ along with 9.6 × 
10−13 M as the lowest detection limit for Pb2+ ion. Ibrahim et al. (2018), in 
their recent work, reported the first-ever application of Au-In2O3-chitosan 
nanocomposites as biosensor for sensitively detecting (64.57 µAµmol/L/ 
cm2
) antimycotin cycloperoxolamine (CPX) using CV and Square Wave 
Voltammetry (SWV). The CPX detection followed a linear trend in the range 
of 0.199–16.22 µmol/L, with 6.64 × 10−9 mol/L as the limit of detection 
(LOD). For detecting H2O2, Wu et al. (2018) used mesoporous TiO2 as the 
biosensor. They used rose petal and P123 dual template for the synthesis of 
TiO2. In this method, Pt had introduced electrodeposition method on TiO2 
to develop Pt/TiO2 modified material for H2O2 detection. They used the CV 
method for detecting and reported the ranges from 5 µM to 8 mM along with 
very low detection limit (1.65 µM). Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 239 
8.3.3.3 METAL OXIDE-METAL OXIDE COMPOSITE BIOSENSOR 
Zhang et al. (2007) developed a hydroquinone (HQ) biosensor by using 
Fe3O4−SiO2 nanoparticles to make an oxide−oxide nanocomposite to detect 
HQ. They reported a linear trend in the range of 1 × 10−7 to 1.375 × 10−4 M, 
with 1.5 × 18−8 M as the LOD. They compared the obtained results of the 
biosensor with HPTLC results and concluded similar reproducibility. Njagi 
et al. (2008) reported biosensor based on the amperiometric method by using 
CeO2 and TiO2/CeO2 for sensitive phenol detection under the presence and 
absence of oxygen. They reported detection limit of 9 × 10−9 M and 5.6 × 
10−9 M in presence (LOD = 86 mA/M) and absence (LOD = 65 mA/M) of 
oxygen, respectively. They also tested this biosensor for dopamine detection. 
Ansari et al. (2009B) used TiO2−CeO2 based biosensor for urea detection. 
They constructed a nanocomposite film which was 23 nm in size. Urease and 
glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH) were used in that study. They reported 
that the prepared TiO2−CeO2 nanocomposite film exhibit linear response 
range of 10 to 700 mg/dL. They highlighted the detection of urea with very 
low detection limit (0.166 µm) within 10 s along with the sensitivity of 
0.9165 µA/M/cm2
/mM. Li et al. (2012) studied the multifunctional biosensor 
by making a WO3−TiO2 modified electrode for photoelectro catalytic 
evaluation of norepinephrine (NEP) and riboflavin (VB2) in the solutions. 
To selectively detect NEP and VB2 using a hybrid thin film of WO3−TiO2, 
prepared in ITO electrode; techniques like EIS, DPV, and CV were used. 
An NEP detection using the CV technique followed a linear trend in the 
range of 3.23 × 10−6 to 3.88 × 10−4 M, with 1.07 × 10−6 M as the LOD. A 
VB2 detection using CV technique also followed a linear trend in the range 
of 3.23 × 10−7 M to 4.0 × 10−5 M, with 1.87 × 10−7 M as the LOD. All the 
experiments were carried out at neutral pH by using Xe lamp. Srivastava et 
al. (2013) used a mediator-free microfluid biosensor for detection of urea. In 
this biosensor, urease, glutamate dehydrogenase, TiO2, and ZrO2 were used. 
They reported that this biosensor has linear ranges of 5 to 100 mg/dL for 
urea detection, with 0.07 mg/dL and 2.74 µA/[logmM]/cm as the LOD and 
sensitivity, respectively. Zhang et al. (2013) developed an immunobiosensor 
by using Fe3O4 and TiO2 for the detection of organophosphorus (OPs) agents 
by Surface Plasmon Response (SPR) and SWV methods for investigation. 
They reported a range of 0.02–10 nM along with 0.01 nM lowest detection 
limit for OPs. In another “turn on” strategy based biosensor study, Wu et 
al. (2016) developed AIE fluorogen-SiO2-MnO2 sandwich nanocomposite￾based biosensor for organophosphorus pesticide (paraoxon) detection. 240 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
They used fluorescence strip for a visual detection of paraoxon along with 
thiocholine as the turn on switch. They reported 1–100 mg/L as the linear 
range and 1 mg/L as the lowest detection limit. 
8.3.3.4 OTHER NONCARBON-BASED BIOSENSORS 
Ji et al. (2005) reported CdSe−ZnS-based biosensor for paraoxon detection 
for the first time by Circular Dichroism (CD) and Photo Luminance (PL) 
techniques. They reported 10−8 M as the detection limit under experimental 
conditions. Vinayak et al. (2009) worked on CdTe-based biosensor for 
the detection of herbicide (2,4 dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) using the 
fluoroimmunoassay technique. They used N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N￾ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC), N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), 
anti-2,4 D, IgG-antibody, and mercaptopropionic acid also for making the 
sensor and reported a promising detection limit of 250 pg/ML for 2,4 D in 
the solution. Wu et al. (2010) worked with a biosensor based on CdSe−ZnS 
quantum dots for Cu2+ and Pb2+ detection. They reported 0.2 and 0.05 nM 
as the lowest detection limit for Pb2+ and Cu2+, respectively, with a 25-min 
detection time. Fan et al. (2014) developed CdSe−TiO2 based biosensor for 
beta-Estradiol (E-2) in water sample. They reported a 0.05–12-pM wide linear 
range for E-2 along with 33 fM detection limit at optimum condition. These 
photoelectrochemical(PEC) method based biosensor’s results also show good 
reproducibility with HPLC results. Zhao et al. (2015) reported TiO2/CdS-based 
biosensor for Hg2+ detection by using PEC method. They used rhodamine 
123, probe DNA, and target DNA for constructing biosensors and reported 
10 fM–200 nM as the detection range, with 3.3 fM as the LOD. Shtenberg 
et al. (2015) used porous Si (PSi) nanostructure based biosensor for tracing 
heavy metals (Ag2+, Pb2+, Cu2+) in solution by enzymatic activity inhibition. 
They reported 60–120 ppb detection linear range for three metals along with 
the sensitivity order of Ag2+ > Pb2+ > Cu2+. They compared this biosensor with 
another gold nanoparticles based biosensor by using ICP-AES techniques and 
concluded good reproducibility of the results along with decent agreement. 
For arsenic evaluation in river and tap water samples, Ravikumar et al. (2018) 
developed MoS2 nanosheets based biosensor by using coprecipitation method 
for As3+ detection along with FRET phenomena. They reported 18 nM as the 
lowest detection limit for As3+ with excellent recovery in the environmental 
system. Hu et al. (2019A) developed Cd-Te QDs based biosensor for four 
different organophosphorus pesticides (paraoxon, parathion, dichlorvos, 
and deltamethrin) detection. They also used AchE for the construction of Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 241 
nanobiosensor. They reported a linear range from 10−5 to 10−12 M for all the 
pesticides (paraoxon, parathion, dichlorvos, and deltamethrin) and with LOD 
as 1.2, 0.94, 11.7 and 0.38 pM, respectively. Very recently, He et al. (2020) 
reported CdSe−CdS quantum dot based biosensor for Hg2+ ions detection. 
They reported a linear range from 1 × 10−2 to 1 × 10−6 M and 1 × 10−13 lowest 
detection limit for their nanobiosensor. 
8.3.3.5 NONCARBON/CARBON COMPOSITES 
In a typical pesticide detection study in vegetable samples, Jiao et al. (2017) 
reported GO/Fe3O4-based biosensor for chlorpyrifos detection. They also 
used chitosan and carbon black for constructing the nanobiosensor and 
reported a linear detection range of 0.1–105 ng/mL with 0.033 ng/mL as 
the LOD for chlorpyrifos. Again in the pesticides detection work, Yang et 
al. (2013) developed NiO/caboxylic-reduced grapheme-based biosensor for 
carbofuran, methyl parathion, and chlorpyrifos detection. AchE and Nafion 
carbon electrodes were used in this analysis. They reported a linear range 
of 1 × 10−13 to 10−10 and 10−10 to 10−8 for methyl parathion and chlorpyrifos, 
respectively, along with 5 × 10−14 as the lowest detection limit for both 
methyl parathion and chlorpyrifos pesticides. In the case of carbofuran, two 
linear ranges 10−12 to 10−10 M and 10−10 to 10−8 M along with 10−13 m as the 
lowest detection limit were observed. Hu et al. (2013) developed porphyrin 
decorated Au/graphene nanocomposite based biosensor for HQ detection. 
They used white light mediated PEC method for the study and reported 4.6 
nM as the lowest detection limit along with 20–240 nM linear detection range 
for HQ. Liu et al. (2013) reported Au-PTA-TiO2 nanotube based biosensor 
for H2O2 detection by using CV, SWV, and chronoamperometry methods for 
evaluation. They reported linear range of 65–2600 µM along with 5 µM and 
18.1 × 10−3 µA/µM as the lowest detection limit and sensitivity, respectively. 
Jiang et al. (2015) developed Ag/N-doped graphene (NG) based biosensor 
for acetamiprid detection by using one-step thermal treatment method for 
synthesis. They compared the activity of Ag/NG, Ag, and NG under the 
same experimental conditions and reported superior activity of Ag/NG over 
Ag and Ng. They reported a linear detection range of 1 × 10−13 to 5 × 10−9 
M, with 3.3 × 10−14 M as the LOD. In a versatile biosensor making study, 
Liu et al. (2015) developed Pd−Co alloy nanoparticles embedded carbon 
fiber (PdCo-CNF) based biosensor for H2O2 and nitrate detection by using 
EIS, CV, and DPV methods. They reported 0.2–23.5 µM and 0.1 µM linear 
detection range and lowest detection limit for H2O2 respectively. In the case  
242 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
of nitrate, they reported two linear ranges of 0.4–30 µM and 30–400 µM 
along with 0.2 µM as the lowest detection limit. In a study on detecting a 
broad spectrum neonicotinoid insecticide by making a “turn on” strategy, Lin 
et al. (2016) developed multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), ZnS−Mn 
QDs and aptamers based biosensor for acetamiprid pesticide detection. They 
reported visual detection of the pollutant along with 0–150 nM linear range 
and 0.7 nM lowest detection limit. In another pesticide (organophosphorus 
pesticide) detection study, Chun et al. (2016) developed a nitrogen-doped 
carbon dot and gold nanoparticle based biosensor for paraoxon detection 
along with the use of AchE for the construction of nanobiosensor and 
evaluated the activity by using the FRET phenomena. They reported a 
wider linear detection range of 10−4 to 10−9 g/L, with 10−9 g/L (3.6 × 10−12 
mol/L) as the LOD for paraoxon. Again with the pesticide detection work, 
Mogha et al. (2016) developed ZrO2/RGO-based biosensor for chlorpyrifos 
detection. They used hydrothermal method for ZrO2/RGO nanocomposite 
synthesis. Amperiometric method was used for electrochemical study, and 
the detection range was found to be linear in the concentration range: 10−13 
to 10−9 M and 10−9 to 10−4 M, with 10−13 M as the LOD. For H2O2 sensing, 
hollow TiO2- reduced graphene oxide microsphere of special morphology 
were synthesized by Liu et al. (2017) wherein they used amperiometric 
method for detection purpose. They reported a wider linear detection range of 
0.1–360 μM, with 10 nM as the LOD. In an organic thiophosphate fungicide 
detection study, Arvand and Mirroshandel (2017) developed a “turn on” 
strategy oriented L-cysteine capped ZnS QDs and GOs based biosensor 
for edifenphos detection by using the FRET phenomena. They also used 
environmental and agricultural samples and reported 5 × 10−4 to 6 × 10−3 mg/L 
linear detection range along with 1.3 × 10−4 mg/L lowest detection limit for 
edifenphos. Wang et al. (2018) developed CDs and AuNPs based biosensor 
for acetamiprid detection. They used FRET and inner filter effect (IFE) 
phenomena for detection and reported 1.08 µg/L lowest detection limit for 
acetamiprid. They reported checking thesensitivity of this biosensor toward 
dimethoate, chlorpyrifos, and dichlorvos pesticides. They used real vegetable 
(tomato, cucumber and cabbage) samples for this study. Chen et al. (2018) 
developed a CQDs-MoS2-based biosensor for bisphenol S detection. They 
developed a type of fluorescent aptamers by using the FRET phenomena, in 
which CQDs and MoS2 worked as emitter and absorber, respectively. They 
reported 0.05–2 µM linear detection range for Bisphenol S along with 2 
nM lowest detection limit under optimum conditions. In an experiment for 
antibiotic detection, Yang et al. (2018) developed a metal−organic framework 
(Cu-TCPP) based biosensor for chloramphenicol (CAP) analysis. They used Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 243 
a double-stranded DNA and hairpin probe aptamer for the construction of 
biosensor as a type for fluorescent aptamer by using the FRET phenomena. 
They reported 0.001–10 ngm/L linear detection range along with 0.3 pgm/L 
as the lowest detection limit under optimum experimental conditions. In a 
recent work on drug residue detection, Okoth et al. (2018) developed Au− 
graphene-doped CdS-based biosensor for diclofenac detection. This study 
was based on PEC method using a visible light source and they reported 
1–150 nM linear detection range and 0.78 nM lowest detection limit. Hu et 
al. (2019B) first time reported the simultaneous detection of acetaminophen 
(APAP) and p-hydroxyamenophen (P-HAP) by using SnO2 carbon nanofiber 
composite. They synthesized doped SnO2 carbon nanofiber composite by 
using electrospinning technology and used EIS and DPV techniques for 
detection purpose. They reported 0.50–700 µM and 0.20–50 µM linear 
detection range for APAP and P-HAP, respectively, along with 0.086 and 
0.033 µM detection limit for APAP and P-HAP, respectively. Both actual 
sample and serum environment samples have been used and significant 
results were obtained. Very recently, Li et al. (2020) developed a gold-doped 
carbon-dot based biosensor for Pb2+ ions detection by using microwave 
conditions for the synthesis. They reported 0.0005–0.46 µmol/L linear 
detection range and 0.25 nmol/L lowest detection limit. They also compared 
these results with the undoped carbon-dot material and concluded superior 
activities of Au-doped carbon-dot material. 
8.4 KEY CHALLENGES INVOLVED WITH NANOBIOSENSING 
TECHNOLOGY 
Recent advancements in nanobiosensing technology have resulted in a broad 
array of nanobiosensors, exhibiting diverse applications. Therefore in recent 
times, the sensing domain has widened and more nanobiosensors are being 
explored to handle some of the significant constraints in fabricating a trust￾worthy and cost-effective biosensor. Thus, the key challenges for advanced 
nanobiosensing technology is directly associated with its cost, linearity, sensi￾tivity, multifunctionality, response to selectivity, response time, detection 
mechanism, long lastingness, and toxicity issues (refer Figure 3). Another, 
daunting task is to deal with their ability to detect trace amount of analyte 
diverse samples of soil, water bodies, biofluids, and air (Hahn et al., 2012). 
Also, the detection limit and response or recovery time are highly fluctuating 
and can affect the sensor efficiency. Moreover for a specific analyte, the data 
achieved from a biosensor must have an acceptable precision so that it can 244 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
be reproduced within a certain range. A biosensor must avoid the systematic 
error to make sure that the accuracy of the results and its expected value are 
static. Therefore, adequate standard samples must be used for calibration. 
Since most of the biosensing applications are either clinical or nonclinical,it 
would be a good idea to evaluate their size dependent toxicity (Hahn et al., 
2012; Munawar et al., 2019; Martin-Gracia et al., 2020; Bhalla et al., 2020). 
On the other hand, as it is well known that the toxicity of the nanobiosensors/ 
or nanosensors highly depends on their size, their applications have been 
relatively critical. Therefore, various questions such as why these noncarbon 
materials are used, what fabrication mediums will be needed to obtain them, 
what characteristics do they have that can allow them to embody the intent, 
what level of engineering will be required to control and assess all the 
influencing parameters involved in the sensing technology, how we will be 
able to evaluate, design, and manipulate the processes involved, how long￾lasting materials or products will be, will they maintain the same quality or 
desired catalytic activities when shifted to another medium or isolated from 
their original mediums as well as an assessment of their further applicability 
and fate with the respect of toxicities have always been asked (Li et al., 2015). 
FIGURE 8.4 A brief illustrations of the vital challenges associated with nanobiosensor. Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 245 
Other challenging factors associated with the nanobiosensors are the 
components and the structure of the sensor mechanism because the key 
benefits of any sensor is also directly associated with them. The materials, 
structure of receptor, or bioreceptor depend on the kind of samples that are 
being analyzed, the mechanism of detection involved, the type of transducer 
for signal conversion, and the detector for the response capturing are points 
that influence any design (Li et al., 2015). Additionally, flexibility and sensi￾tivity are complementary qualities for the nanobiosensors and carbon as well 
as noncarbon nanomaterials, and both have shown great potential in resolving 
these issues. The excellent conductive properties of metallic nanomaterials 
have further allowed in improving the flexibility. Searching and making of 
multifunctional nanomaterials that can incorporate with biological sensing 
will surely enhance the results (Wen et al., 2020). Despite the simplicity and 
wider sensing application, majority of the sensing mechanisms have not yet 
been fully understood because of the complexity involved in the various 
parameters which can affect biosensors sensitivity (Kannan et al., 2009). 
Receptor and transducer are the two significant functions which are 
generally involved in the sensing mechanism. They along with the other 
factors such as adsorption−desorption kinetics, physicochemical properties, 
surface property, Gibbs free energy, thermodynamic, and kinetic stability 
(Korotcenkov, 2005; Kanan et al., 2009) are the most important domains 
involved in sensing mechanism. Since nanobiosensing is a very new 
technology and a high level of engineering has been involved in the formation 
of the compact as well as the sensitive sensors, the cost is still a very critical 
challenging step. But due to the advancements of material sciences and 
engineering as well as the availability of new cheap materials are creating a 
potential hope for the future with cost-saving options (Li et al., 2015). 
8.5 FUTURE ASPECTS FOR NONCARBON-BASED NANOBIOSENSING
TECHNOLOGY 
For a highly selective and sensitive onsite analysis of an analyte, the emergence 
of nanotechnology and its applications in different areas (refer Figure 
8.1) have provided several functional nanomaterials as a promising solid 
substrate platform (Holzinger et al., 2014). Applicability of nanomaterials 
to be used as biosensor provides a remarkable prospect of developing 
new-generation nanobiosensing techniques (Li et al., 2015). Applications 
of biosensor or noncarbon-based biosensor technologies for environmental 
applicability are still in their budding stage and are facing huge challenges 246 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
due to the inherent features of environmental analysis. Nanomaterials 
or noncarbon-based nanomaterials are evaluated in the development of 
biosensors for environmental usages (pollution mitigation). The engineered 
nanocomposite along with versatile nanostructures (particles, rods, wires, 
and tubes) makes the modified biosensor more sensitive and flexible for the 
analysis of analyte/pollutants. A paper-based device provides platform for a 
potential portable, miniaturized, economical, and user-friendly biosensor/or 
nanocomposite/or nanobiosensor. These types of biosensors are meeting the 
need of onsite detection of environmental samples or pollutants (i.e., soil, 
river water, seawater, air, etc.). Recently, incorporation of nanomaterial, 
nanocomposite inside these biosensors brings new tactics for improving 
their analytical performances. While many biosensors have been developed 
and tested till date against a wide range of environmental contaminants in 
laboratory, only a few biosensors are currently being used. Thus, it is clear 
that more advances and efforts are needed to bridge innovation that will 
play very crucial role in the development of efficient, automated, real-time 
biosensors with high throughput analysis (HTA) of environmental pollutants. 
Indeed, it is the need of the hour to make such an effort to adopt crucial 
technologies to mitigate environmental pollutants. There are several tools and 
techniques that are available or being developed to improve the nanomaterial￾based nanobiosensors by improving the selected dimensions such as their 
electrochemical dimension, optical dimension, and magnetic dimensions. 
These modulations allow developing a single-molecule biosensors along with 
high throughput biosensor arrays (Pandey et al., 2008). One more important 
future prospect has been associated with the modulation of the electrodes 
surface which is directly linked with their interfaces, their preparative materials, 
characterization, and constraints, control on mechanisms specifically for the 
presently noncarbon-based sensing technology (Malhotra and Ali, 2018). The 
improvement in the signal-to-noise proportion, augmentation in transduction 
processes, and strengthening of the signals have been directly linked with 
major future requirements. Biological molecules and nanomaterials exhibit 
special structures as well as unique functions, therefore their awareness is still 
a future task in the field of noncarbon-based sensing technology (Zhang et al., 
2009). A better scientific control on the mechanisms as well as the interaction 
sciences between the biomolecules present in the surface of the prepared 
biosensor and the nanomaterials are essential to explore the current utilities 
as well as to fabricate the new generation of biosensors/nanobiosensors that 
in turn advance the creation of future robust and variable noncarbon-based 
sensing technology (Malhotra and Ali, 2018). The combination of both carbon￾based and noncarbon-based nanobiosensors have found their applications in Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 247 
various domains such as biomedical, agricultural, and environmental sectors. 
Nanomaterial-based biosensors (both carbon and noncarbon-based) showed 
eye-catching prospects, which will be largely applied in various medical 
diagnosis (Srivastava et al., 2020), food analysis, and process control (Zhang 
et al., 2020) as well as environmental evaluations in the near future (Verma 
and Rani, 2020; Şensoy and Muti, 2020). 
8.6 CONCLUSION
Noncarbon nanobiosensor based nanobiosensing technology holds immense 
future potential in environmental-related technologies because they open a 
window of promising research domain, much needed for the betterment and 
welfare of humans and the environment. The noncarbon-based nanomaterials 
will be an ideal choice, with exceptional advantage in the enhancement 
of sensing technology along with precise sensitivity, broad flexibility, 
reduced toxicities, and costs as well as broader linear ranges and very low 
detection limits of pollutants in various environmental samples. The future of 
nanobiosensing will be in the hands of advanced materials such as composites 
and hybrids as well as the combination of carbon with noncarbon materials 
to make this technology a futile, robust, and versatile tool in the biosensor 
application at various fields. More research should be done and emphasis given 
to noncarbon-based nanobiosensors as there are limited studies done although 
they possess remarkable advantages in creating versatile nanobiosensors. 
KEYWORDS
• sensing technology 
• nanobiosensors 
• noncarbon-based nanobiosensors 
• environmental applications 
REFERENCES 
Abdel-Karim, R.; Reda, Y.; Abdel-Fattah, A. Nanostructured Materials-Based Nanosensors. 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 2020, 29, 167 (3), 037554.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
248 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Afsharan, H. Highly Sensitive Electro Chemiluminescence Detection of p53 Protein Using 
Functionalized Ru–Silica Nanoporous@Gold Nanocomposite. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 
80, 146–53. 
Afzal, A.; Cioffi, N.; Sabbatini, L.; Torsi, L. NOx Sensors Based on Semiconducting Metal 
Oxide Nanostructures: Progress and Perspectives. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2012, 171, 25–42. 
Ahmad, R.; Ahn, M. S.; Hahn, Y. B. ZnO Nanorods Array Based field-Effect Transistor 
Biosensor for Phosphate Detection. J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 2017A, 498, 292–297. 
Ahmad, R.; Tripathy, N.; Ahn, M. S.; Hahn, Y. B.. Solution Process Synthesis of High Aspect 
Ratio ZnO Nanorods on Electrode Surface for Sensitive Electrochemical Detection of Uric 
Acid. Sci. Rep. 2017B, 7, 46475. 
Alharbi, O. M.; Khattab, R. A.; Ali, I. Health and Environmental Effects of Persistent Organic 
Pollutants. J. Mol. Liquids 2018, 1, 263, 442–453. 
Ansari, A. A.; Solanki,P. R.; Malhotra, B. D. Hydrogen Peroxide Sensor Based on HRP 
Immobilized Nanostructured Cerium Oxide Film. J. Biotechnol. 2009A, 142, 179–184. 
Ansari, A. A.; Sumana, G.; Pandey, M. K.; Malhotra, B. D. Sol-Gel Derived Titanium Oxide￾Cerium Oxide Biocompatible Nanocomposite Film for Urea Sensor. J. Mater. Res. 2009B, 
24 (5), 1667–1673. 
Arvand, M.; Mirroshandel, A. A. Highly-Sensitive Aptasensor Based on Fluorescence 
Resonance Energy Transfer between L-Cysteine Capped ZnS Quantum Dots and Graphene 
Oxide Sheets for the Determination of Edifenphos Fungicide. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 
96, 324–331, 
Aziz, M. A. Amperometric Immuno Sensing Using an Indium Tin Oxide Electrode Modified 
with Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotube and Poly (Ethylene Glycol)–Silane Copolymer. Chem. 
Commun. 2007, 2610–2612. 
Badshah, M. A.; Koh, N. Y.; Zia, A. W.; Abbas, N.; Zahra, Z.; Saleem, M. W. Recent Develop￾ments in Plasmonic Nanostructures for Metal Enhanced Fluorescence-Based Biosensing. 
Nanomaterials 2020, 10 (9), 1749. 
Bahadir, E. B.; Sezgintürk, M. K. Label-Free, ITO-Based Immunosensor for the Detection of 
a Cancer Biomarker: Receptor for Activated C Kinase 1. Analyst 2016, 141, 5618–5626. 
Bala, R.; Dhingra, S.; Kumar, M.; Bansal, K.; Mittal, S.; Sharma, R. K.; Wangoo, N. Detection 
of Organophosphorus Pesticide: Malathion in Environmental Samples Using Peptide and 
Aptamer Based Nanoprobes. Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 311, 111–116. 
Baruah, S.; Dutta, J. Nanotechnology Applications in Pollution Sensing and Degradation in 
Agriculture: A Review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2009, 1, 7 (3), 191–204. 
Bhalla, N.; Pan, Y.; Yang, Z.; Payam, A. F. Opportunities and Challenges for Biosensors and 
Nanoscale Analytical Tools for Pandemics: COVID-19. ACS Nano 2020, 18, 14 (7), 7783–7807. 
Bisen, P. S.; Debnath, M.; Prasad, G. B. Molecular Diagnostics: Promises and Possibilities; 
Springer: The Netherlands, 2010. 
Buckley, D.; Black, N. C. G.; Castanon, E.; Melios, C.; Hardman, M.; Kazakova, O. Frontiers 
of Graphene and 2D Material-Based Gas Sensors for Environmental Monitoring. 2D 
Materials 2020, 7 (3), 032002. 
Burdușel, A. C.; Gherasim, O.; Grumezescu, A. M.; Mogoantă, L.; Ficai, A.; Andronescu, E. 
Biomedical Applications of Silver Nanoparticles: An Up-to-Date Overview. Nanomaterials. 
Basel: Switzerland, 2018, 8 (9), 681. 
Cai, X. Ratiometric Electrochemical Immunoassay Based on Internal Reference Value for 
Reproducible and Sensitive Detection of Tumor Marker. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 81, 
173–180. Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 249 
Cakiroglu, B.; Ozacar, M. A Self-Powered Photoelectrochemical Biosensor for H2O2, and 
Xanthine Oxidase Activity Based on Enhanced Chemiluminescence Resonance Energy 
Transfer through Slow Light Effect in Inverse Opal TiO2. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2019, 141, 
111385. 
Cao, X. Silver Nanowire-Based Electrochemical Immunoassay for Sensing Immunoglobulin 
G with Signal Amplification Using Strawberry-Like ZnO Nanostructures as Labels. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2013, 49, 256–262. 
Chandra, A. Synthesis and Physicochemical Profile of Transition and Lanthanide Nanoparticles 
and Their Transduced Molecular Interaction with Proteins, PhD thesis. Submitted to School 
of Chemical Sciences, Central University of Gujarat, Gandhinagar, India, 2017. 
Chandra, A.; Bhattarai, A.; Yadav, A. K.; Adhikari, J.; Singh, M.; Giri, B. Green Synthesis of 
Silver Nanoparticles Using Tea Leaves from Three Different Elevations. Chem. Select 2020, 
16, 5 (14), 4239–4246. 
Chandra, A.; Singh, M. Biosynthesis of Amino Acid Functionalized Silver Nanoparticles for 
Potential Catalytic and Oxygen Sensing Applications. Inorg. Chem. Front. 2018, 5 (1), 233–257. 
Chang, H. et al. Pt NPs and DNAzyme Functionalized Polymer Nanospheres as Triple Signal 
Amplification Strategy for Highly Sensitive Electrochemical Immunosensor of Tumor 
Marker. Biosens Bioelectron. 2016, 86, 156–163. 
Chen, K.; Zhang, W.; Zhang, Y.; Huang, L.; Wang, R.; Yue, X.; Zhu, W.; Zhang, D.; Zhang, 
X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, J. Label-Free Fluorescence Aptasensor for Sensitive Determination of 
Bisphenol S by the Salt-Adjusted FRET between CQDs and MoS2. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 
2018, 259, 717–724. 
Chen, Q.; Wu, X.; Wang, D.; Tang, W.; Li, N.; Liu, F. Oligonucleotide-Functionalized Gold 
Nanoparticles-Enhanced QCM-D Sensor for Mercury(ii) Ions with High Sensitivity and 
Tunable Dynamic Range. Analyst 2011, 136, 2572–2577. 
Chen, X.; Yang, Z.; Si, S. Potentiometric Urea Biosensor Based on Immobilization of Urease 
Onto Molecularly Imprinted TiO2 Film. J. Electroanaly. Chem. 2009, 635 (1), 1–6. 
Cheng, N.; Song, Y.; Fu, Q.; Du, D.; Luo, Y.; Wang, Y.; Lin, Y. Aptasensor Based on Fluorophore￾Quencher Nano-Pair and Smartphone Spectrum Reader for on-Site Quantification of Multi￾Pesticides. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2018, 117, 75–83. 
Cho, I. H. Current Technologies of Electrochemical Immunosensors: Perspective on Signal 
Amplification. Sensors. 2018, 18, 207. 
D’Souza, A. A.; Kumari, D.; Banerjee, R. Nanocomposite Biosensors for Point-of-Care— 
Evaluation of Food Quality and Safety. Nanobiosensors 2017, 629–676. 
Dai, Z.; Guo, J.; Xu, J.; Liu, C.; Gao, Z.; Song, Y. Y. Target-Driven Nanozyme Growth in TiO2 
Nano Channels for Improving Selectivity in Electrochemical Biosensing. Analy. Chem. 
2020, 92 (14), 10033–10041. 
Deng H-H.; Hong G-L.; Lin F-L.; Liu A-L.; Xia X-H.; Chen, W. Colorimetric Detection 
of Urea, Urease, and Urease Inhibitor Based on the Peroxidase-Like Activity of Gold 
Nanoparticles. Anal. Chim. Acta 2016, 915, 74–80. 
Deng, Z.; Gong, Y.; Luo, Y.; Tian, Y. WO3 Nanostructure Facilitate Electron Transfer of 
Enzyme: Application to Detection of H2O2 with High Sensitivity. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2009, 24, 2465–2469. 
Dey, A. Semiconductor Metal Oxide Gas Sensors: A Review. Mater. Sci. Eng. B 2018, 229, 
206–217. 
Díez, N. Highly Packed Graphene–CNT Films as Electrodes for Aqueous Super Capacitors 
with High Volumetric Performance. J. Mater. Chem. A 2018, 6, 3667–3673.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
250 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Dong, S.; Li, N.; Huang, T.; Tang, H.; Zheng, J. Myoglobin Immobilized on LaF3 Doped CeO2 
and Ionic Liquid Composite Film for Nitrite Biosensor. Sens. Actuat. B 2012, 173, 704–709. 
Dong, Y.; Zheng, J. A Nonenzymatic L-Cysteine Sensor Based on SnO2-MWCNTs 
Nanocomposites. J. Mol. Liq. 2014, 196, 280–284. 
Doria, G.; Conde, J.; Veigas, B.; Giestas, L.; Almeida, C.; Assunção, M.; Rosa, J.; Baptista, P. V. 
Noble Metal Nanoparticles for Biosensing Applications. Sensors. 2012, 12 (2), 1657–1687. 
Dou, X.; Chu, X.; Kong, W.; Luo, J.; Yang, M. A Gold-Based Nanobeacon Probe for Fluorescence 
Sensing of Organophosphorus Pesticides. Anal. Chim. Acta 2015, 891, 291–297. 
El-Said, W. A.; Choi, J. W. Electrochemical Biosensor Consisted of Conducting Polymer Layer 
on Gold Nano Dots Patterned Indium Tin Oxide Electrode for Rapid and Simultaneous 
Determination of Purine Bases. Electrochim. Acta 2014, 123, 51–57. 
Erban, S. I.; Enesca, A. Metal Oxides-Based Semiconductors for Biosensors Applications. 
Front. Chem. 2020, 8, 354. 
Erickson, M. D. Environmental PCB Forensics: Processes and Issues. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. 2020, 27 (9), 8926–8937. 
Fan, D. Electro Chemical Immunosensor for Detection of Prostate Specific Antigen Based 
on an Acid Cleavable Linker into MSN-Based Controlled Release System. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2016, 85, 580–586. 
Fan, L.; Zhao, G.; Shi, H.; Liu, M.; Wang, Y.; Ke, H. A Femtomolar Level and Highly 
Selective 17 β-Estradiol Photoelectrochemical Aptasensor Applied in Environmental Water 
Samples Analysis. Environ. Sci. Technol 2014, 48, 5754–5761. 
Fang, C. S. An Ultrasensitive and Incubation-Free Electrochemical Immunosensor Using 
a Gold-Nanocatalyst Label Mediating Outer-Spherereaction- Philic and Inner-Sphere￾Reaction-Philic Species. Chem. Commun. 2016, 52, 5884–5887. 
Feng, J.; Li, Y.; Gao, Z.; Lv, H.; Zhang, H.; Dong, Y.; Wang, P.; Fan, D.; Wei, Q. A Competitive 
Type Photoelectrochemical Immunosensor for Aflatox in B1 Detection Based on flower￾Like WO3 as Matrix and Ag2S-Enhanced BiVO4 for Signal Amplification. Sens. Actuat. B 
Chem. 2018, 270, 104–111. 
Fortunati, S. Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes as Enhancing Substrates for PNA-Based 
Amperometric Geno Sensors. Sensors 2019, 19, 588. 
Goldman, E. R.; Clapp, A. R.; Anderson, G. P.; Uyeda, H. T.; Mauro, J. M.; Medintz, I. 
L.; Mattoussi, H. Multiplexed Toxin Analysis Using Four Colors of Quantum Dot 
Fluororeagents. Analy. Chem. 2004, 76 (3), 684–688. 
Gong, N. C.; Le LI, Y.; Jiang, X.; Zheng, X. F.; Wang, Y. Y.; Huan, S. Y. Fluorescence 
Resonance Energy Transfer-Based Biosensor Composed of Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Dots 
and Gold Nanoparticles for the Highly Sensitive Detection of Organophosphorus Pesticides. 
Analy. Sci. 2016, 32 (9), 951–956. 
Goswami, N.; Yao, Q.; Luo, Z.; Li, J.; Chen, T.; Xie, J. Luminescent Metal Nanoclusters with 
Aggregation-Induced Emission. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7 (6), 962–975. 
Guan, H.; Liu, X.; Wang, W.; Liang, J. Direct Colorimetric Biosensing of Mercury (II) Ion 
Based on Aggregation of Poly-(γ-Glutamic Acid)-Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles. 
Spectrochim. Acta A 2014, 121, 527–532. 
Guo, H.; Li, J.; Li, Y.; Wu, D.; Ma, H.; Wei, Q.; Du, B. Exciton Energy Transfer-Based 
Fluorescent Sensor for the Detection of Hg2+ through Aptamer-Programmed Self-Assembly 
of QDs, Anal. Chim. Acta 2019, 1048, 161–167. 
Hahn, Y. B.; Ahmad, R.; Tripathy, N. Chemical and Biological Sensors Based on Metal Oxide 
Nanostructures. Chem. Commun. 2012, 48 (84), 10369–10385.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 251 
Han, L. Enhanced Conductivity of rGO/Ag NPs Composites for Electrochemical Immunoassay 
of Prostate-Specific Antigen. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 87, 466–472. 
Han, T.; Nag, A.; Mukhopadhyay, S. C.; Xu, Y. Carbon Nanotubes and Its Gas-Sensing 
Applications: A Review. Sens. Actuators A Phys. 2019, 291, 107–143. 
Harihran, V.; Radhakrishnan, S.; Parthibavarman, M.; Dilipkumar, R.; Sekar, C. Synthesis 
of Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) assisted Tungsten Oxide (WO3) Nanoparticles for l-Dopa 
Bio-Sensing Application, Talanta 2011, 85, 2166–2174. 
He, Y.; Ma, L.; Zhou, L.; Liu, G.; Jiang, Y.; Gao, J. Preparation and Application of Bismuth/ 
MXene Nano-Composite as Electrochemical Sensor for Heavy Metal Ions Detection. 
Nanomaterials, 2020, 10 (5), 866. 
He, Z. J.; Kang, T. F.; Lu, L. P.; Cheng, S. Y. An Electrochemiluminescence Sensor Based 
on CdSe@CdS-Functionalized MoS2 and a GOD-Labeled DNA Probe for the Sensitive 
Detection of Hg(ii). Anal. Methods 2020, 12, 491–498. 
Henry, F. A.; Koleangan, H.; Wuntu, A. D. Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Aqueous 
Extract of Medicinal Plants’ (Impatiens balsamina and Lantana camara) Fresh Leaves and 
Analysis of Antimicrobial Activity. Int. J. Microbiol. 2019, 8. 
Hill, M. K. Understanding Environmental Pollution; Cambridge University Press, 2020; pp 1–15. 
Holzinger, M.; Le Goff, A.; Cosnier, S. Nanomaterials for Biosensing Applications: A Review. 
Front. Chem. 2014, 27, 2–63. 
Hoon, C.; Dong, H. K.; Sangsoo, P. Electrochemical Biosensors: Perspective on Functional 
Nanomaterials for On-Site Analysis. Biomater. Res. 2020, 24, 1–12. 
Hrbac, J.; Halouzka, V.; Zboril, R.; Papadopoulos, K.; Triantis, T. Carbon Electrodes Modified 
by Nanoscopic Iron (III) Oxides to Assemble Chemical Sensors for the Hydrogen Peroxide 
Amperometric Detection. Electroanalysis 2007, 19 (17), 1850–1854. 
Hu, T.; Xu, J.; Ye, Y.; Han, Y.; Li, X.; Wang, Z.; Ni, Z. Visual Detection of Mixed Organophos￾phorous Pesticide Using QD-AChE Aerogel Based Microfluidic Arrays Sensor. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2019A, 136, 112–117. 
Hu, W.; Zhang, Z.; Li, L.; Ding, Y.; An, J. Preparation of Electrospun SnO2 Carbon Nanofiber 
Composite for Ultrasensitive Detection of APAP and p-Hydroxyacetophenone. Sens. 
Actuat. B 2019B, 299, 127003. 
Hu, Y.; Xue, Z.; He, H.; Ai, R.; Liu, X.; Lu, X. Photoelectrochemical Sensing for Hydroquinone 
Based on Porphyrin-Functionalized Au Nanoparticles on Graphene. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2013, 47, 45–49. 
Ibrahim, H.; Temerk, Y.; Farhan, N. A Novel Biosensor Based on Nanocomposite Au-In2O3­
Chitosan Modifide Acetyl Black Paste Electrode for Sensitive Detection of Antimycotic￾ciclopirox Olamine. Talanta 2018, 179, 75–85. 
Jafari, S.; Mahyad, B.; Hashemzadeh, H.; Janfaza, S.; Gholikhani, T.; Tayebi, L. Biomedical 
Applications of TiO2 Nanostructures: Recent Advances. Int. J. Nanomed. 2020, 15, 3447.
 
Jaroenapibal, P.; Boonma, P.; Saksilaporn, N.; Horprathum, M.; Amornkitbamrung, V.; Triroj,
 
N. Improved NO2 Sensing Performance of Electrospun WO3 Nanofibers with Silver Doping. 
Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 255, 1831–1840. 
Jeyapragasam, T.; Saraswathi, R. Electrochemical Biosensing of Carbofuran Based on 
Acetylcholinesterase Immobilized onto Iron Oxide—Chitosan Nanocomposite. Sens. 
Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 191, 681–687. 
Ji, X.; Zheng, J.; Xu, J.;Rastogi, V. K.; Cheng, T-C.; DeFrank, J. J.; Leblanc, R. M. (CdSe)ZnS 
Quantum Dots and Organophosphorus Hydrolase Bioconjugate as Biosensors for Detection 
of Paraoxon. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 3793–3799.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
252 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Jiang, D.; Du, X.; Liu, Q.; Zhou, L.; Dai, L.; Qian, J.; Wang, K. Silver Nanoparticles Anchored 
on Nitrogen-Doped Graphene as a Novel Electrochemical Biosensing Platform with 
Enhanced Sensitivity for Aptamer-Based Pesticide Assay. Analyst 2015, 140, 6404–6411. 
Jiao, Y.; Hou, W.; Fu, J.; Guo, Y.; Sun, X.; Wang, X.; Zhao, J. A Nanostructured Electrochemical 
Aptasensor for Highly Sensitive Detection of Chlorpyrifos. Sens. Actuat. B Chem 2017, 243, 
1164–1170. 
Jindal, K.; Tomar, M.; Gupta, V. CuO Thin Film Based Uric Acid Biosensor with Enhanced 
Response Characteristic. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2012, 38, 11–18. 
Kafi, A. K. M.; Wu, G.; Benvenuto, P.; Chen, A. Highly Sensitive Amperometric H2O2 Biosensor
 
Based on Hemoglobin Modified TiO2 Nanotubes. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2011, 662, 64–69.
 
Kanan, S. M.; El-Kadri, O. M.; Abu-Yousef, I. A.; Kanan, M. C. Semiconducting Metal Oxide 
Based Sensors for Selective Gas Pollutant Detection. Sensors, 2009, 9 (10), 8158–8196.
 
Kaushik, A.; Ahmad, S. Iron Oxide-Chotosan Hybrid Nanobiocomposite Based Nucleic Acid 
Sensor for Pyrethroid Detection. Biochem. Eng. J. 2009, 46 (2), 132–140. 
Kayhomayun, Z.; Ghani, K.; Zargoosh, K. Surfactant-Assisted Synthesis of Fluorescent 
SmCrO3 Nanopowder and Its Application for Fast Detection of Nitroaromatic and Nitramine 
Explosives in Solution. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2020, 122899. 
Koedrith, P.; Thasiphu, T.; Weon, J. I.; Boonprasert, R.; Tuitemwong, K.; Tuitemwong, P. 
Recent Trends in Rapid Environmental Monitoring of Pathogens and Toxicants: Potential 
of Nanoparticle-Based Biosensor and Applications. Sci. World J. 2015, 2015. 
Korotcenkov, G. Gas Response Control through Structural and Chemical Modification of 
Metal Oxide Films: State of the Art and Approaches. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2005, 107 (1), 
209–232. 
Korotcenkov, G. Metal Oxides for Solid-State Gas Sensors: What Determines Our Choice? 
Mater. Sci. Eng. B 2007, 139 (1), 1–23. 
Korotcenkov, G.; Cho, B. K. Metal Oxide Composites in Conductometric Gas Sensors: 
Achievements and Challenges. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 244, 182–210. 
Kumar, V. V.; Anbarasan, S.; Christina, L. R.; SaiSubramanian, N.; Anthony, S. P. 
Bio-Functionalized Silver Nanoparticles for Selective Colorimetric Sensing of Toxic Metal 
Ions and Antimicrobial Studies. Spectrochim. Acta A 2014, 129, 35–42. 
Kumar, V.; Guleria, P. Application of DNA-Nanosensor for Environmental Monitoring: 
Recent Advances and Perspectives. Curr. Pollution. Rep. 2020. 
Kwon, Y. J.; Kang, S. Y.; Mirzaei, A.; Choi, M. S.; Bang, J. H.; Kim, S. S.; Kim, H. W. 
Enhancement of Gas Sensing Properties by the Functionalization of ZnO-Branched SnO2 
Nanowires with Cr2O3 Nanoparticles. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 249, 656–666. 
Lai, G. Amplified Inhibition of the Electrochemical Signal of Ferrocene by Enzyme-Function￾alized Graphene Oxide Nanoprobe for Ultrasensitive Immunoassay. Anal. Chim. Acta. 2016, 
902, 189–195. 
Lang, Q.; Han, L.; Hou, C.; Wang, F.; Liu, A. A Sensitive Acetylcholinesterase Biosensor 
Based on Gold Nanorods Modified Electrode for Detection of Organophosphate Pesticide. 
Talanta 2016, 156–157, 34–41. 
Lavanya, N.; Radhakrishnan, S.; Sekar, C. 2012. Fabrication of Hydrogen Peroxide Biosensor 
Based on Ni Doped SnO2 Nanoparticles. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2012, 36, 41–47. 
Lee, S. W.; Lee, W.; Hong, Y.; Lee, G.; Yoon, D. S. Recent Advances in Carbon Material￾Based NO2 Gas Sensors. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 255, 1788–1804. 
Lega, M.; Teta, R. Environmental Forensics: Where Techniques and Technologies Enforce 
Safety and Security Programs. Int. J. Saf. Sec. Eng. 2016, 6 (4), 709–719.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 253 
Lei, Y.; Yan, X.; Zhao, J.; Liu, X.; Song, Y.; Luo, N. Improved Glucose Electrochemical 
Biosensor by Appropriate Immobilization of Nano-ZnO. Colloid. Surf. B 2011, 82, 
168–172. 
Li, C.; Wei, D.; DNA-Templated Silver Nanocluster as a Label-Free Fluorescent Probe for the 
Highly Sensitive and Selective Detection of Mercury Ions. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 242, 
563–568. 
Li, D.; Yuan, X.; Li, C.; Luo, Y.; Jiang, Z. A Novel Fluorescence Aptamer Biosensor for 
Trace Pb (II) Based on Gold-Doped Carbon Dots and DNAzyme Synergetic Catalytic 
Amplification. J. Luminescence 2020, 221, 117056. 
Li, J.; Chen, L.; Lou, T.; Wang, Y. Highly Sensitive SERS Detection of As3+ Ions in Aqueous 
Media Using Glutathione Functionalized Silver Nanoparticles. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 
2011, 3, 3936–3941. 
Li, J.; Zhao, T., Chen, T.; Liu, Y.; Ong, C. N.; Xie, J. Engineering Noble Metal Nanomaterials 
for Environmental Applications. Nanoscale 2015, 7 (17), 7502–7519. 
Li, L.; Huang, J.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Liu, Y.; Li, J. An Excellent Enzyme Biosensor Based 
on Sb-Doped SnO2 Nanowires. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2010, 25, 2436–2441. 
Li, M. An Ultrasensitive Sandwich-Type Electrochemical Immunosensor Based on the Signal 
Amplification Strategy of Mesoporous Core–Shell Pd@Pt Nanoparticles/Amino Group 
Functionalized Graphene Nanocomposite. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 87, 752–759. 
Li, M.; Kong, Q.; Bian, Z.; Ma, C.; Ge, S.; Zhang, Y.; Yu, J.; Yan, M. Ultrasensitive 
Detection of Lead Ion Sensor Based on Gold Nanodendrites Modified Electrode and 
Electrochemiluminescent Quenching of Quantum Dots by Electrocatalytic Silver/Zinc 
Oxide Coupled Structures. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 65, 176–182. 
Li, Y.; Hsu, P.; Chen, S. Multi-Functionalized Biosensor at WO3–TiO2 Modified Electrode 
for Photoelectrocatalysis of Norepinephrine and Riboflavin. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2012, 
174, 427. 
Li, Z.; Liu, X.; Liang, X. H.; Zhong, J.; Guo, L.; Fu, F. Colorimetric Determination of 
Xanthine in Urine Based on Peroxidase-Like Activity of WO3 Nanosheets. Talanta 2019, 
1, 204, 278–284. 
Li, Z.; Miao, X.; Xing, K.; Peng, X.; Zhu, A.; Ling, L. Ultrasensitive Electrochemical Sensor 
for Hg2+ by Using Hybridization Chain Reaction Coupled with Ag@Au Core—Shell 
Nanoparticles. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 80, 339–343. 
Liang, Y. R. A Highly Sensitive Signal-Amplified Gold Nanoparticle-Based Electrochemical 
Immunosensor for Di-Butyl Phthalate Detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 91, 199–202. 
Lim, D. J.; Sim, M.; Oh, L. Carbon-Based Drug Delivery Carriers for Cancer Therapy. Arch. 
Pharm. Res. 2014, 37, 43–52. 
Lin, B.; Yu, Y.; Li, R.; Cao, Y.; Guo, M. Turn-On Sensor for Quantification and Imaging of 
Acetamiprid Residues Based on Quantum Dots Functionalized with Aptamer. Sens. Actuat. 
B Chem. 2016, 229, 100–109. 
Lin, D. Triple Signal Amplification of Graphene Film, Polybead Carried Gold Nanoparticles 
as Tracing Tag and Silver Deposition for Ultrasensitive Electrochemical Immunosensing. 
Anal. Chem. 2012, 84, 3662–3668. 
Lin, H-Y.; Huang, C-H.; Lu, S-H.; Kuo, I. T.; Chau, L-K. Direct Detection of Orchid Viruses 
Using Nanorod-Based Fiber Optic Particle Plasmon Resonance Immunosensor. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2014, 51, 371–378. 
Lin, T-J.; Chung, M-F. Detection of Cadmium by a Fiber-Optic Biosensor Based on Localized 
Surface Plasmon Resonance. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 1213–1218.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
254 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Lin, T-J.; Huang, K-T.; Liu C-Y. Determination of Organophosphorous Pesticides by a Novel 
Biosensor Based on Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2006, 
22, 513–518. 
Lisa, M.; Chouhan, R. S.; Vinayaka, A. C.; Manonmani, H. K.; Thakur, M. S. Gold 
Nanoparticles Based Dipstick Immunoassay for the Rapid Detection of Dichlorodipheny 
ltrichloroethane: An Organochlorine Pesticide. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2009, 25, 224–227. 
Liu, B.; Cao, Y.; Chen, D.; Kong, J.; Deng, J. Amperometric Biosensor Based on a Nanoporous 
ZrO2 Matrix. Anal. Chim. Acta 2003, 478, 59–66. 
Liu, B.; Zhuang, J.; Wei, G. Recent Advances in the Design of Colorimetric Sensors for 
Environmental Monitoring. Environ. Sci. Nano 2020, 7 (8), 2195–2213. 
Liu, D.; Guo, Q.; Zhang, X.; Hou, H.; You, T. PdCo Alloy Nanoparticle-Embedded Carbon 
Nanofiber for Ultrasensitive Nonenzymatic Detection of Hydrogen Peroxide and Nitrite. J. 
Colloid Interf. Sci. 2015, 450, 168–173. 
Liu, H.; Duan, C.; Yang, C.; Chen, X.; Shen, W.; Zhu, Z. A Novel Nitrite Biosensor Based on 
the Direct Electron Transfer Hemoglobin Immobilized in the WO3 Nanowires with High 
Length–Diameter Ratio. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2015, 43–49. 
Liu, H.; Guo, K.; Duan, C.; Dong, X.; Gao, J. Hollow TiO2 Modified Reduced Graphene 
Oxide Microspheres Encapsulating Hemoglobin for a Mediator-Free Biosensor. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2017, 87, 473–479. 
Liu, J.; Li, Y.; Hung, X.; Zhu, Z. Tin Oxide Nanorod Array-Based Electrochemical Hydrogen 
Peroxide Biosensor. Nanosc. Res. Lett. 2017, 5, 1177. 
Liu, J.; Ren, S.; Cao, J.; Tsang, D. C.; Beiyuan, J.; Peng. Y.; Fang, F.; She, J.; Yin, M.; Shen, 
N.; Wang, J. Highly Efficient Removal of Thallium in Wastewater by MnFe2O4-Biochar 
Composite. J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 25, 401, 123311. 
Liu, S.; Dai, Z.; Chen, H.; Ju, H. Immobilization of hemoglobin on zirconium dioxide 
nanoparticles for preparation of a novel hydrogen peroxide biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2004, 19, 963–969. 
Liu, X.; Li, W-J.; Li, L.; Yang, Y.; Mao, L-G.; Peng, Z. A Label-Free Electrochemical 
Immunosensor Based on Gold Nanoparticles for Direct Detection of Atrazine. Sens. Actuat. 
B Chem. 2014, 191, 408–414. 
Liu, X.; Zhang, J.; Liu, S.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, X.; Wong, D. K. Gold Nanopar-Ticle Encapsulated￾Tubular TiO2 Nanocluster as a Scaffold for Development of Thiolated Enzyme Biosensors. 
Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 4350–4356. 
Lu, X.; Wen, Z.; Li, J. Hydroxyl-Containing Antimony Oxide Bromide Nanorods Combined 
with Chitosan for Biosensors. Biomaterials 2006, 27, 5740–5747. 
Luo, X.; Yang, J. A Survey on Pollution Monitoring Using Sensor Networks in Environment 
Protection. J. Sens. 2019, 2019. 
Ma, H.; Li, X.; Yan, T.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, D.; Du, B. Electro Chemi Luminescent 
Immunosensing of Prostate-Specific Antigen Based on Silver Nanoparticles-Doped Pb (II) 
Metal-Organic Framework. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 79, 379–385. 
Madianos, L.; Tsekenis, G.; Skotadis, E.; Patsiouras, L.; Tsoukalas, D. A Highly Sensitive 
Impedimetric Aptasensor for the Selective Detection of Acetamiprid and Atrazine Based on 
Microwires Formed by Platinum Nanoparticles. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2018, 101, 268–274. 
Maduraiveeran, G.; Jin, W. Nanomaterials Based Electrochemical Sensor and Biosensor 
Platforms for Environmental Applications. Trends Environ. Analy. Chem. 2017, 1 (13), 10–23. 
Malhotra, B. D.; Ali, M. A. Nanomaterials in Biosensors: Fundamentals and Applications. 
Nanomater. Biosens. 2018, 1.  
 
 
 
 
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 255 
Malik, P.; Katyal, V.; Malik, V.; Asatkar, A.; Inwati, G.; Mukherjee, T. K. Nanobiosensors: 
Concepts and Variations. Int. Sch. Res. Notices. 2013, 2013, 1–9. 
Manam, D. V. Pharmacological Potential of Silver Nano Particles Bio-Synthesized by the 
Marine Algae Colpomenia sinuosa (Mertens ex Roth) Derbes and Solier and Halymenia 
porphyroides Boergesen (Crypton) with Reference to Their Antimicrobial Efficacy, PhD 
Thesis. Submitted to University of Madras, India, 2015. 
Manam, D. V.; Murugesan, S. Biogenic Silver Nanoparticles by Halymenia poryphyroides 
and Its in Vitro Anti-Diabetic Efficacy. J. Chem. Pharm. Res. 2013, 5 (12), 1001–1008. 
Manam, D. V.; Murugesan, S. Biological Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles from Marine Alga 
Colpomenia sinuosa and Its in Vitro Anti-Diabetic Activity. Am. J. Bio-Pharmacol. Biochem. 
Lifesci. 2014, 3 (1), 1–7. 
Manam, D. V.; Murugesan, S. Biosynthesis and Characterization of Silver Nanoparticles 
from Marine Macroscopic Red Seaweed Halymenia porphyroides Boergesen (Crypton). J. 
Nanosci. Technol. 2020A, 6 (2), 886–890. 
Manam, D. V.; Murugesan, S. Biosynthesis and Characterization of Silver Nanoparticles from 
Marine Macroscopic Brown Seaweed Colpomenia sinuosa (Mertens ex Roth) Derbes and 
Solier. J. Adv. Chem. Sci. 2020B, 6 (1), 663–666. 
Manam, D. V.; Murugesan, S. Investigation of Biosynthesized Silver Nano Particles Interaction 
from Halymenia porphyroides with the E7 Protein Using Bioinformatics Tool. Biomed. J. 
Sci. Techn. Res. 2017, 1 (4), 1–4. 
Martin-Gracia, B.; Martin-Barreiro, A.; Cuestas-Ayllon, C.; Grazu, V.; Line, A.; Llorente, A.; 
de la Fuente, J. M.; Moros, M. Nanoparticle-Based Biosensors for Detection of Extracellular 
Vesicles in Liquid Biopsies. J. Mater. Chem. B 2020. 
Mayorga-Martinez, C. C.; Pino, F.; Kurbanoglu, S.; Rivas, L.; Ozkan, S. A.; Merkoçi, A. 
Iridium Oxide Nanoparticle Induced Dual Catalytic/Inhibition Based Detection of Phenol 
and Pesticide Compounds. J. Mater. Chem. B 2014, 2, 2233–2239. 
Mehrotra, P. Biosensors and Their Applications—A Review. J. Oral Biol. Craniofac. Res. 
2016, 6 (2), 153–159. 
Miller, D. R.; Akbar, S. A.; Morris, P. A. Nanoscale Metal Oxide-Based Heterojunctions for 
Gas Sensing: A Review. Sens. Actuat. B Chem 2014, 204, 250–272. 
Mogha, N. K.; Sahu, V.; Sharma, M.; Sharma, R. K.; Masram, D. T. Biocompatible ZrO2— 
Reduced Graphene Oxide Immobilized AChE Biosensor for Chlorpyrifos Detection. Mater. 
Des. 2016, 111, 312–320. 
Munawar, A.; Ong, Y.; Schirhagl, R.; Tahir, M. A.; Khan, W. S.; Bajwa, S. Z. Nanosensors 
for Diagnosis with Optical, Electric and Mechanical Transducers. RSC Adv. 2019, 9 (12), 
6793–6803. 
Mura, S.; Greppi, G.; Roggero, P. P.; Musu, E.; Pittalis, D.; Carletti, A.; Ghiglieri, G.; 
Irudayaraj, J. Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles for the Detection of Nitrates in Water. Int. 
J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2015, 12, 1021–1028. 
Nadzirah, S.; Gopinath, S. C.; Parmin, N. A.; Hamzah, A. A.; Mohamed, M. A.; Chang, E. 
Y.; Dee, C. F. State-of-the-Art on Functional Titanium Dioxide-Integrated Nano-Hybrids in 
Electrical Biosensors. Crit. Rev. Analy. Chem. 2020, 1–12. 
Nandita, D.; Shivendu, R.; Eric, L. Environmental Nanotechnology, Vol. 4; Springer Nature, 
Technology & Engineering, 2020; p 410. 
Njagi, J.; Ispas, C.; Andreescu, S. Mixed Ceria-Based Metal Oxides Biosensor for Operation 
in Oxygen Restrictive Environments. Anal. Chem. 2008, 80, 7266. 
Noah, N. M. Design and Synthesis of Nanostructured Materials for Sensor Applications. J. 
Nanomater. 2020, 2020.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
256 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Norizan, M. N.; Moklis, M. H.; Demon, S. Z.; Halim, N. A.; Samsuri, A.; Mohamad, I. S.; 
Knight, V. F.; Abdullah, N. Carbon Nanotubes: Functionalisation and Their Application in 
Chemical Sensors. RSC Adv. 2020, 10 (71), 43704–43732. 
Okoth, O. K.; Yan, K.; Feng, J.; Zhang, J. Label-Free Photoelectrochemical Aptasensing of 
Diclofenac Based on Gold Nanoparticles and Graphene-Doped CdS. Sens. Actuat. B 2018, 
256, 334–341. 
Pabbi, M.; Mittal, S. K. An Electrochemical Algal Biosensor Based on Silica Coated ZnO 
Quantum Dots for Selective Determination of Acephate. Anal. Methods 2017, 9, 1672–1680. 
Pandey, P.; Datta, M.; Malhotra, B. D. Prospects of Nanomaterials in Biosensors. Analy. Lett. 
2008, 1, 41 (2), 159–209. 
Parth, M.; Varun, K.; Vibhuti, M.; Archana, A.; Gajendra, I.; Tapan, K. M. Nanobiosensors: 
Concepts and Variations. Int. Sch. Res. Notices 2013, 9. 
Peng, D.; Hu, B.; Kang, M.; Wang, M.; He, L.; Zhang, Z.; Fang, S. Electrochemical Sensors 
Based on Gold Nanoparticles Modified with Rhodamine B Hydrazide to Sensitively Detect 
Cu (II). Appl. Surf. Sci. 2016, 390, 422–429. 
Penza, M.; Rossi, R.; Alvisi, M.; Cassano, G.; Signore, M. A.; Serra, E.; Giorgi, R. Pt-and 
Pd-Nanoclusters Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes Networked Films for Sub-ppm Gas 
Sensors. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2008, 135 (1), 289–297. 
Piplode, S. Solar Photocatalytic Degradation of Methomyl, Oxamyl, Carbofuran, Carbaryl 
and Propoxur Pesticides Using Flower Like Nano BiOCl, PhD thesis. Submitted to Vikram 
University, Ujjain, MP, India, 2017. 
Piplode, S.; Dawane, V. BiOX (X=F, Cl, Br, I) Promising Nanomaterial for Environmental 
Remediation. In Role of Chemical Sciences in Research and Development for Sustainability; 
Dr. Aruna, Ed.; Immortal Publications, 2020; pp 136–147. 
Piplode, S.; Dawane, V., Joshi, V.; Pare, B. BiOCl Nano Pallets Preparation and Their White/ 
Solar Light Mediated Photo Catalytic Activities Evaluation on Carbamate Pesticide Oxamyl 
and Synthetic Dye Azure B. Biosci. Biotech. Res. Comm. 2020, 13 (2), 676–782. 
Ponzoni, A.; Comini, E.; Ferroni, M.; Sberveglieri, G. Nanostructured WO3 Deposited by 
Modified Thermal Evaporation for Gas-Sensing Applications. Thin Solid Films 2005, 490 
(1), 81–85. 
Rackauskas. S.; Barbero, N.; Barolo, C.; Viscardi, G. ZnO Nanowire Application in 
Chemoresistive Sensing: A Review. Nanomaterials 2017, 7 (11), 381. 
Rahman, M. A. Functionalized Conducting Polymer as an Enzyme Immobilizing Substrate: 
An Amperometric Glutamate Micro Biosensor for in Vivo Measurements. Anal. Chem. 
2005, 77, 4854–4860. 
Rahmanian, R.; Mozaffari, S. A. Electrochemical Fabrication of ZnO-Polyvinyl Alcohol 
Nanostuctured Hybrid Film for Application to Urra Biosensor. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 
207, Part A, 772–781. 
Rajendran, S.; Manoj, D.; Raju, K.; Dionysiou, D. D.; Naushad, M.; Gracia, F. Influence 
of Mesoporous Defect Induced Mixed- Valent NiO (Ni2+/Ni3+)-TiO2 Nanocomposite for 
Non-Enzymatic Glucose Biosensors. Sens. Actuat. B 2018, 264, 27–37. 
Ravikumar, P.; Panneerselvam, K.; Radhakrishnan, A. A. B.; Christus, S.; Sivanesan, MoS2 
Nanosheets as an Effective Fluorescent Quencher for Successive Detection of Arsenic Ions 
in Aqueous System. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2018, 449, 31–38. 
Rim, Y. S.; Chen, H.; Zhu, B.; Bae, S. H.; Zhu, S.; Li, P. J.; Yang, Y. Interface Engineering of 
Metal Oxide Semiconductors for Biosensing Applications. Adv. Mater. Interf. 2017, 4 (10), 
1700020.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 257 
Rizwan, M.; Mohd-Naim, N. F.; Ahmed, M. U. Trends and Advances in Electrochemilumine￾scence Nanobiosensors. Sensors 2018, 18 (1), 166. 
Ryu, K. R.; Ha, J. W. Influence of Shell Thickness on the Refractive Index Sensitivity of 
Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Inflection Points in Silver-Coated Gold Nanorods. 
RSC Adv. 2020, 10 (29), 16827–16831. 
Salimi, A.; Hallaj, R.; Mamkhezri, H.; Mohamad, S.; Hosiani, T. Electrochemical Propretis 
and Electrocataltyic Activity of FAD Immobilized Onto Cobalt Oxide Nanoparricles: 
Application to Nitrate Detection. J. Electroanaly. Chem. 2008, 619, 31–38. 
Santos, L.; Silveira, C. M.; Elangovan, E.; Neto, J. P.; Nunes, D.; Pereira, L. Synthesis of WO3 
Nanoparticles for Biosensing Applications. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2016, 223, 186–194. 
Sarika, S.; Shivakumar, M. S.; Shivakumara, C.; Krishnamurthy, G.; Narsimha Murthy, 
B.; Lekshami, I. C. A Novel Amperometric Catechol Biosensor Based on Alpha-Fe2O3 
Nanocrystals-Modified Carbon Paste Electrode. Artif. Cells, Nanomed. Biotechnol. 2017, 
45 (3), 625–634. 
Sayago, I.; Santos, H.; Horrillo, M. C.; Aleixandre, M.; Fernández, M. J.; Terrado, E.; Martínez, 
M. T. Carbon Nanotube Networks as Gas Sensors for NO2 Detection. Talanta 2008, 77 (2), 
758–764. 
Scida, K.; Stege, P. W.; Haby, G.; Messina, G. A.; García, C. D. Recent Applications of 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials in Analytical Chemistry: Critical Review. Analy. Chim. Acta. 
2011, 8, 691 (1–2), 6–17. 
Şensoy, K. G.; Muti, M. The Novel Nanomaterials Based Biosensors and Their Applications. 
In Novel Nanomaterials; IntechOpen, 2020; p 7. 
Şerban, I.; Enesca, A. Metal Oxides-Based Semiconductors for Biosensors Applications. 
Front. Chem. 2020, 8. 
Shahdost-fard, F.; Roushani, M. Designing an ultra-sensitive aptasensor based on an 
AgNPs/thiol-GQD Nanocomposite for TNT Detection at Femtomolar Levels Using the 
Electrochemical Oxidation of Rutin as a Redox Probe. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 87, 
724–731. 
Shaheen, S. M.; Antoniadis, V.; Kwon, E.; Song, H.; Wang, S. L.; Hseu, Z. Y.; Rinklebe, J. 
Soil Contamination by Potentially Toxic Elements and the Associated Human Health Risk 
in Geo-and Anthropogenic Contaminated Soils: A Case Study from the Temperate Region 
(Germany) and the Arid Regions (Egypt). Environ. Pollut. 2020, 5, 114312. 
Sharma, A. K.; Mahajan, A.; Saini, R.; Bedi, R. K.; Kumar, S.; Debnath, A. K.; Aswal, D. K. 
Reversible and Fast Responding ppb Level Cl2 Sensor Based on Noncovalent Modified 
Carbon Nanotubes with Hexadecafluorinated Copper Phthalocyanine. Sens. Actuat. B 
Chem. 2018, 255, 87–99. 
Shi,H.;Zhao,G.; Liu,M.; Fan,L.; Cao,T. Aptamer-Based Colorimetric Sensing of Acetamiprid 
in Soil Samples: Sensitivity, Selectivity and Mechanism. J. Hazard. Mater. 2013, 260, 
754–761. 
Shirsat, M.; Too, C. O.; Wallace, G. Amperometric Glucose Biosensor on Layer by Layer 
Assembled Carbon Nanotube and Polypyrrole Multilayer Film. Electroanalysis. 2007, 20, 
150–156. 
Shtenberg, G.; Massad-Ivanir, N.; Segal, E. Detection of Trace Heavy Metal Ions in Water by 
Nanostructured Porous Si Biosensors. Analyst 2015, 140, 4507–4514. 
Skotadis, E.; Tsekenis, G.; Chatzipetrou, M.; Patsiouras, L.; Madianos, L.; Bousoulas, P.; 
Zergioti, I.; Tsoukalas, D. Heavy Metal Ion Detection Using DNAzyme-Modified Platinum 
Nanoparticle Networks. Sens. Actuat. B 2017, 239, 962–969.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
258 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Song, B. Y.; Zhang, M.; Teng, Y.; Zhang, X. F.; Deng, Z. P.; Huo, L. H.; Gao, S. Highly 
Selective ppb-Level H2S Sensor for Spendable Detection of Exhaled Biomarker and Pork 
Freshness at Low Temperature: Mesoporous SnO2 Hierarchical Architectures Derived from 
Waste Scallion Root. Sens. Actuat. B Chem., 2020, 307, 127662. 
Song, L.; Mao, K.; Zhou, X. Hu, J. A Novel Biosensor Based on Au@Ag Core—Shell 
Nanoparticles for SERS Detection of Arsenic (III). Talanta 2016, 146, 285–290. 
Srivastava, M.; Srivastava, N.; Mishra, P. K.; Malhotra, B. D. Prospects of Nanomaterials￾Enabled Biosensors for COVID-19 Detection. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 16, 754, 142363. 
Srivastava, S.; Ali, M. A.; Solanki, P. R.; Chavhan, P. M.; Pandey, M. K.; Mulchandani, A.; 
Srivastava, A.; Malhotra, B. D. Mediator-Free Microfluidics Biosensor Based on Titania– 
Zirconia Nanocomposite for Urea Detection. RSC Adv. 2013, 3, 228. 
Su, Y-T.; Lan, G-Y.; Chen, W-Y.; Chang, H-T. Detection of Copper Ions through Recovery 
of the Fluorescence of DNA-Templated Copper/Silver Nanoclusters in the Presence of 
Mercaptopropionic Acid. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 8566–8572. 
Sugunan, A.; Dutta, J. Pollution Treatment, Remediation and Sensing. Nanotechnol. Online 
2010, 15, 125–146. 
Sundarmurugasan, R.; Gumpu, M. B.; Ramachandra, B. L.; Nesakumar, N.; Sethuraman, 
S.; Krishnan, U. M.; Rayappan, J. B. B. Simultaneous Detection of Monocrotophos and 
Dichlorvos in Orange Samples Using Acetylcholinesterase-Zincoxide Modified Platinume 
Lectrode with Linear Regression Calibration. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2016, 230, 306–313. 
Tan, L.; Chen, Z.; Zhao, Y.; Wei, X.; Li, Y.; Zhang, C.; Wei, X.; Hu, X. Dual Channel Sensor for 
Detection and Discrimination of Heavy Metal Ions Based on Colorimetric and Fluorescence 
Response of the AuNPs-DNA Conjugates. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 85, 414–421. 
Taylor, I. M. Enhanced Dopamine Detection Sensitivity by PEDOT/Graphene Oxide Coating 
on in Vivo Carbon Fiber Electrodes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 89, 400–410. 
Tekaya, N.; Saiapina, O.; Ben Ouada, H.; Lagarde, F.; Namour, P.; Ben Ouada, H.; Jaffrezic￾Renault, N. Bi-Enzymatic Conductometric Biosensor for Detection of Heavy Metal Ions 
and Pesticides in Water Samples Based on Enzymatic Inhibition in Arthrospira Platensis. J. 
Environ. Prot. 2014, 5, 441–453. 
Tertiș, M. Highly Selective Electrochemical Detection of Serotonin on Polypyrrole and Gold 
Nanoparticles-Based 3D Architecture. Electrochem. Commun. 2017, 75, 43–47. 
Theerthagiri, J.; Salla, S.; Senthil, R. A.; Nithyadharseni, P.; Madankumar, A.; Arunachalam, 
P.; Kim, H. S. A Review on ZnO Nanostructured Materials: Energy, Environmental and 
Biological Applications. Nanotechnology 2019, 30 (39), 392001. 
Trindade, E. K. G. A Probe Less and Label-Free Electrochemical Immunosensor for Cystatin 
C detection Based on Ferrocene Functionalized Graphene Platform. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2019, 138, 111311. 
Tuitemwong, P.; Songvorawit, N.; Tuitemwong, K. Facile and Sensitive Epifluorescent Silica 
Nanoparticles for the Rapid Screening of EHEC. J. Nanomater. 2013, 2013. 
Ueda, T.; Katsuki, S.; Takahashi, K.; Narges, H. A.; Ikegami, T.; Mitsugi, F. Fabrication and 
Characterization of Carbon Nanotube Based High Sensitive Gas Sensors Operable at Room 
Temperature. Diamond Relat. Mater. 2008, 17 (7–10), 1586–1589. 
Upadhyay, S.; Rao, G. R.; Sharma, M. K.; Bhattacharya, B. K.; Rao, V. K.; Vijayaraghavan, 
R. Immobilization of Acetylcholineesterase—Choline Oxidase on a Gold—Platinum 
Bimetallic Nanoparticles Modified Glassy Carbon Electrode for the Sensitive Detection of 
Organophosphate Pesticides, Carbamates and Nerve Agents. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2009, 
25, 832–838.  
 
 
 
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 259 
Valera, E.; Ramón-Azcón, J.; Sanchez, F. J.; Marco, M. P.; Rodriguez, Á. Conductimetric 
Immunosensor for Atrazine Detection Based on Antibodies Labelled with Gold Nanoparticles. 
Sens. Actuat. B Chem 2008, 134, 95–103. 
Verma, M. L.; Rani, V. Biosensors for Toxic Metals, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Biological 
Oxygen Demand, Endocrine Disruptors, Hormones, Dioxin, Phenolic and Organophosphorus 
Compounds: A Review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2020, 19, 1–0. 
Vinayak, A. C.; Basheer, S.; Thakur, M. S. Bioconjugation of CdTe Quantum Dot for the 
Detection of 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid by Competitive Fluoroimmunoassay Based 
Biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 1615–1620. 
Viswanathan, S. Disposable Electrochemical Immunosensor for Arcino Embryonic Antigen 
Using Ferrocene Liposomes and MWCNT Screen Printed Electrode. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2009, 24, 1984–1989. 
Viswanathan, S.; Radecka, H.; Radecki, J. Electrochemical Biosensors for Food Analysis. 
Monatsh. Chem. 2009, 140, 891. 
Wang, C.; Sun, R.; Li, X.; Sun, Y.; Sun, P.; Liu, F.n Lu, G. Hierarchical flower-like WO3 
Nanostructures and Their Gas Sensing Properties. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 204, 224–230. 
Wang, D.; Saleh, N. B.; Sun, W.; Park, C. M.; Shen, C.; Aich, N.; Peijnenburg, W. J.; Zhang, 
W.; Jin, Y.; Su, C. Next-Generation Multifunctional Carbon–Metal Nanohybrids for Energy 
and Environmental Applications. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019, 14, 53 (13), 7265–7287. 
Wang, H. Facile Synthesis of Cuprous Oxide Nanowires Decorated Graphene Oxide Nanosheets 
Nanocomposites and Its Application in Label Free Electrochemical Immunosensor. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2017, 87, 745–751. 
Wang, J.; Wu, Y.; Zhou, P.; Yang, W.; Tao, H.; Qiu, S.; Feng, C. A Novel Fluorescent Aptasensor 
for Ultrasensitive and Selective Detection of Acetamiprid Pesticide Based on the Inner Filter 
Effect between Gold Nanoparticles and Carbon Dots, Analyst 2018,143, 5151–5160. 
Wang, M.; Yin, H.; Zhou, Y.; Sui, C.; Wang, Y.; Meng, X. Photo Electro Chemical Biosensor 
for microRNA Detection Based on a MoS2/g-C3N4/Black TiO2 Heterojunction with 
Histostar@AuNPs for Signal Amplification. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2019, 128, 137–143. 
Wang, P. An Ultrasensitive Sandwich-Type Electrochemical Immunosensor Based on the 
Signal Amplification System of Double-Deck Gold Film and Thionine Unite with Platinum 
Nanowire Inlaid Globular SBA-15 Microsphere. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 91, 424–430. 
Wang, P.; Zhao, L.; Shou, H.; Wang, J.; Zheng, P.; Jia, K.; Liu, X. Dual-Emitting Fluorescent 
Chemosensor Based on Resonance Energy Transfer from Poly(Arylene Ether Nitrile) to 
Gold Nanoclusters for Mercury Detection. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2016, 230, 337–344. 
Wang, S. F.; Tan, Y. M. A Novel Amperometric Immunosensor Based on Fe3O4 Magnetic 
Nanoparticles/Chitosan Composite Film for Determination of Ferritin. Anal. Bioanal. 
Chem. 2007, 387, 703–8. 
Wang, Y.; Liu, J.; Cui, X.; Gao, Y.; Ma, J.; Sun, Y.; Lu, G. NH3 Gas Sensing Performance 
Enhanced by Pt-Loaded on Mesoporous WO3. Sens. Actuat. B Chem., 2017, 238, 473–481. 
Wang, Y.; Zu, M.; Zhou, X.; Lin, H.; Peng, F.; Zhang, S. Designing Efficient TiO2-Based 
Photo Electro Catalysis Systems for Chemical Engineering and Sensing. Chem. Eng. J. 
2020, 381, 122605. 
Wei, M.; Wang, J. A Novel Acetylcholinesterase Biosensor Based on Ionic Liquids-AuNPs￾Porous Carbon Composite Matrix for Detection of Organophosphate Pesticides. Sens. 
Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 211, 290–296. 
Wei, M.; Zeng, G.; Lu, Q. Determination of Organophosphate Pesticides Using an 
Acetylcholinesterase- Based Biosensor Based on a Boron-Doped Diamond Electrode  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
260 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Modified with Gold Nanoparticles and Carbon Spheres. Microchim. Acta 2014, 181, 
121–127. 
Wen, N.; Zhang, L.; Jiang, D.; Li, B.; Sun, C.; Guo, Z. Emerging Flexible Sensors Based on 
Nanomaterials: Recent Status and Applications. J. Mater. Chem A 2020. 
Wu, C. M.; Naseem, S.; Chou, M. H.; Wang, J. H.; Jian, Y. Q. Recent Advances in Tungsten￾Oxide-Based Materials and Their Applications. Front. Mater. 2019, 6, 49. 
Wu, C-S.; Khaing Oo, M. K.; Fan, X. Highly Sensitive Multiplexed Heavy Metal Detection 
Using Quantum-Dot-Labeled DNAzymes. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 5897–5904. 
Wu, P.; Wang, S.; Hou, P.; Wu, J.; Fluorescence Sensor for Facile and Visual Detection 
of Organophosphorus Pesticides Using AIE Fluorogens-SiO2-MnO2 Sandwich 
Nanocomposites. Talanta 2019, 198, 8–14. 
Wu, X.; Zhang, H.; Huang, K.; Zeng, Y.; Zhu, Z. Rose Petal and P123 Dual-Templated 
Macro-Mesoporous TiO2 for a Hydrogen Peroxide Biosensor. Bioelectrochemistry 2018, 
120, 150–156. 
Wu, Y.; Liu, L.; Zhan, S.; Wang, F.; Zhou, P. Ultrasensitive Aptamer Biosensor for 
Arsenic(III) Detection in Aqueous Solution Based on Surfactant-Induced Aggregation of 
Gold Nanoparticles. Analyst 2012, 137, 4171–4178. 
Wu, Z.; Yao, Q.; Zang, S.; Xie, J. Directed Self-Assembly of Ultrasmall Metal Nanoclusters. 
ACS Mater. Lett. 2019, 1 (2), 237–248. 
Xiangqian, L.; Huizhong, X.; Zhe-Sheng, C.; Guofang, C. Biosynthesis of Nanoparticles by 
Microorganisms and Their Applications. J. Nanomater. 2011, 16. 
Yagati, A. K.; Lee, T.; Min, J.; Choi, J. An Enzymatic Biosensor for Hydrogen Peroxide Based 
on CeO2 Nanostructure Electrodeposited on ITO Surface. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2013, 47, 
385–390. 
Yang, L.; Wang, G.; Liu, Y.; Wang, M. Development of a Biosensor Based on Immobilization 
of Acetylcholinesterase on NiO Nanoparticles–Carboxylic Graphene–Nafion Modified 
Electrode for Detection of Pesticides. Talanta 2013 113, 135–141. 
Yang, Q.; Zhou, L.; Wu, Y. X.; Zhang, K.; Cao, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Wu, D.; Hu, F.; Gan, N. A 
Two Dimensional Metal–Organic Framework Nanosheets-Based Fluorescence Resonance 
Energy Transfer Aptasensor with Circular Strand-Replacement DNA Polymerization 
Target-Triggered Amplification Strategy for Homogenous Detection of Antibiotics, Anal. 
Chim. Acta 2018, 1020, 1–8. 
Yang, S.; Jiang, C.; Wei, S. H. Gas sensing in 2D materials. Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4 (2), 021304. 
Yang, Y.; Guo, M.; Yang, M.; Wang, Z.; Shen, G.; Yu, R. Determination of Pesticides in 
Vegetable Samples Using an Acetylcholinesterase Biosensor Based on Nanoparticles ZrO2/ 
Chitosan Composite Film. Int. J. Environ. Anal.Chem. 2005, 85 (3) 163–175. 
Yang, Z. Hollow Platinum Decorated Fe3O4 Nanoparticles as Peroxidase Mimetic Couple 
with Glucose Oxidase for Pseudobienzyme Electrochemical Immunosensor. Sens. Actuat. 
B Chem. 2014, 193, 461–466. 
Yao, S.; Xu, J.; Wang, Y.; Chen, X.; Xu, Y.; Hu, S. A Highly Sensitive Hydrogen Peroxide 
Amperometric Sensor Based on MnO2 Nanoparticles and Dihexadecyl Hydrogen Phosphate 
Composite Film. Anal. Chim. Acta 2006, 557, 78–84. 
Yaraki, M. T.; Rezaei, S. D.; Tan, Y. N. Simulation Guided Design of Silver Nanostructures 
for Plasmon-Enhanced Fluorescence, Singlet Oxygen Generation and SERS Applications. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 2020, 22 (10), 5673–5687. 
Yaraki, M. T.; Tan, Y. N. Recent Advances in Metallic Nanobiosensors Development: 
Colorimetric, Dynamic Light Scattering and Fluorescence Detection. Sens. Int. 2020, 2020, 
100049.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanobiosensors Containing Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterials 261 
Yin, H. Electrochemical Immunosensor for N6-Methyladenosine Detection in Human Cell 
Lines Based on Biotin-Streptavidin System and Silver-SiO2 Signal Amplification. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2017, 90, 494–500. 
Yu, J.; Liu, S.; Ju, H. Mediator-Free Phenol Sensor Based on Titania Sol–Gel Encapsulation 
Matrix for Immobilization of Tyrosinase by a Vapor Deposition Method. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2003, 19, 509. 
Yu, L. Ultrasmall Silver Nanoparticles Supported on Silica and Their Catalytic Performances 
for carbon Monoxide Oxidation. Catal. Commun. 2011, 12, 616–620. 
Yuea, H. Y.; Zhanga, H. J.; Huanga, S.; Lua, X. X; Gaoa, X.; Songa, S. S. Highly Sensitive and 
Selective Dopamine Biosensor Using Au Nanoparticles- ZnO Nanocone Arrays/Graphene 
Foam Electrode. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 2020, 108, 110490. 
Zhang, B.; Gao, P. X Metal Oxide Nanoarrays for Chemical Sensing: A Review of Fabrication 
Methods, Sensing Modes, and Their Inter-Correlations. Front. Mater. 2019, 6, 55. 
Zhang, B.; Wang, H.; Xi, J.; Zhao, F.; Zeng, B. In Situ Formation of Inorganic/Organic 
Heterojunction Photocatalyst of WO3/Au/ Polydopamine for Immunoassay of Human 
Epididymal Protein 4. Electrochim. Acta 2020, 331, 135350. 
Zhang, H. A Novel Electrochemical Immunosensor Based on Nonenzymatic Ag@Au-Fe3O4 
Nanoelectrocatalyst for Protein Biomarker Detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 85, 
343–350. 
Zhang, R.; Belwal, T.; Li, L.; Lin, X.; Xu, Y.; Luo, Z. Nanomaterial-Based Biosensors for 
Sensing Key Foodborne Pathogens: Advances from Recent Decades. Comprehen. Rev. 
Food Sci. Food Saf. 2020, 19 (4), 1465–1487. 
Zhang, X.; Guo, Q.; Cui, D. Recent Advances in Nanotechnology Applied to Biosensors. 
Sensors 2009, 9 (2), 1033–1053. 
Zhang, X.; MA, W.; Nan, H.; Wang, G. Ultrathin Zinc Oxide Nanofilm on Zinc Substrate for 
High Performance Electrochemical Sensors. Electrochim. Acta 2014, 144, 186–193. 
Zhang, X.; Wang, H.; Yang, C.; Du, D.; Lin, Y. Preparation, Characterization of Fe3O4 at TiO2 
Magnetic Nanoparticles and Their Application for Immunoassay of Biomarker of Exposure 
to Organophosphorus Pesticides. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2013, 41, 669. 
Zhang, Y.; Zeng, G. M.; Tang, L.; Huang, D. L.; Jiang, X. Y.; Chen, Y. N. A Hydroquinone 
Biosensor Using Modified Core—Shell Magneticnanoparticles Supported on Carbon Paste 
Electrode. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2007, 22, 2121–2126. 
Zhao, G.; Lei, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Li, H.; Liu, M. Growth and Favorable Bioelectrocatalysis of 
Multishaped Nanocrystal Au in Vertically Aligned TiO2 Nanotubes for Hemoprotein. J. 
Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 14786–14795. 
Zhao, J.; Wu, D.; Zhi, J. A Novel Tyrosinse Biosensor Based on Biofunctional ZnO 
Nanorod Microarray on the Nanocrystalline Diamind Electrode for Detection of Phenolic 
Compounds. Bioelectrochemistry 2009, 5 (1), 44–49. 
Zhao, M.; Fan, G. C.; Chen, J. J.; Shi, J. J.; Zhu, J. J. Highly Sensitive and Selective Photoelec￾trochemical Biosensor for Hg2+ Detection Based on Dual Signal Amplification by Exciton 
Energy Transfer Coupled with Sensitization Effect. Analy. Chem 2015, 87 (24), 12340–12347. 
Zhao, M.; Fan, G-C.; Chen, J-J.; Shi, J-J.; Zhu, J-J. Highly Sensitive and Selective Photo 
Electrochemical Biosensor for Hg2+ Detection Based on Dual Signal Amplification by Excite 
on Energy Transfer Coupled with Sensitization Effect. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87, 12340–12347. 
Zhao, Y.; Zhang, W.; Lin, Y.; Du, D. The Vital Function of Fe3O4@Au Nanocomposites 
for Hydrolase Biosensor Design and Its Application in Detection of Methyl Parathion. 
Nanoscale 2013, 5, 1121–1126.  
 
262 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Zhou, Q.; Yang, L.; Wang, G.; Yang, Y. Acetylcholinesterase Biosensor Based on SnO2 
Nanoparticles–Carboxylic Graphene–Nafion Modified Electrode for Detection of 
Pesticides. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2013, 49, 25–31. 
Zhou, S.; Wang, Y.; Zhu, J. J. Simultaneous Detection of Tumor Cell Apoptosis Regulators 
Bcl-2 and Bax through a Dual-Signal-Marked Electrochemical Immunosensor. ACS. Appl. 
Mater. Interf. 2016, 8, 7674–7682. 
Zhou, Y.; Yang, L.; Li, S.; Dang, Y. A Novel Electrochemical Sensor for Highly Sensitive 
Detection of Bisphenol A Based on the Hydrothermal Synthesized Na-Doped WO3 
Nanorods. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 245, 238–246. 
Zong, X.; Zhu, R. ZnO Nanorod-Based FET Biosensor for Continuous Glucose Monitoring. 
Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 255, 2448–2453. SWAPNALI JADHAV1
, EKTA B. JADHAV1
, SWAROOP S. SONONE1
, 
MAHIPAL SINGH SANKHLA2*, and RAJEEV KUMAR2
1
MSc Forensic Science, Government Institute of Forensic Science, 
Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
2
Department of Forensic Science, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, 
Galgotias University, Greater Noida, India
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: mahipal4n6@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Environmental pollution is one of the major threats across the globe due 
to the rapid growth of industries, technologies, and urbanization. Develop￾ment in the manufacturing and production sector has increased pollution 
momentously. Hazardous pollutant sources, such as heavy metals, pesticides, 
pathogens, and other contaminants released in the surroundings are primarily 
responsible for the pollution of the environment and can cause significant 
influences on the well-being of humans. Nanotech is the upcoming area 
which needs to be integrated with environmental pollution. The convergence 
of nanotechnology and biosensors is an effective alternative to the conven￾tional analytical technique to analyze minute details in the environment. 
Biosensors are considered as potential devices to recognize the analyte. In 
recent years, nanomaterials have been implied for biosensor applications due 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 9
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials: 
Nanobiosensors Detecting 
Environmental Pollution264 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
to their characteristic features. Integration of carbon-based nanomaterials 
(CBNs) such as carbon nanotubes, graphene, graphene oxide, and carbon 
nanowires can be used with biosensors for monitoring, sensing, and rapid 
detection of environmental pollutants. 
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In the last few decades, various environmental issues of concern, such as 
contamination of water, air, soil, and other ecosystems are continuously 
increasing due to globally growing anthropogenic activities, industrializa￾tion, and urbanization, especially in rapidly developing nations. Anthropo￾genic industrial and agricultural activities are highly contributing this issue 
of contamination to the environment by disposing hazardous solid and liquid 
waste into water, releasing noxious gases into atmosphere, and excessive 
use of pesticides, synthetic fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, which eventually 
bioaccumulated in the tissues of consuming organisms (Ramnani et al., 
2016). Environmental pollutants include inorganic pollutants (heavy metal 
ions, nitrite, etc.), gaseous analytes (SO2, CO, NH3, methanol vapor, etc.), 
organic pollutants (phenolic compound, aromatic amine, nitroaromatic 
explosives, and pesticides), endocrine-disrupting chemicals (estrogen, 
bisphenol, and nonylphenol), and biological substances, such as pathogens 
and antibiotics. The regular consumption of such hazardous water, food, 
and air contaminated with such toxic chemicals may affect human health by 
causing severe or even fatal effects. Therefore, it is important to develop a 
constantly environment monitoring tool, which is sensitive, well-grounded, 
cost-effective, user as well as eco-friendly for the detection of contaminants 
in different ecosystems (Wang and Hu, 2016). The most commonly used 
analytical techniques for environmental pollutant detection includes gas 
chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS), high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC), surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), 
and atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) (Auroux et al., 2002; Padrón￾Sanz et al., 2005; Van Loon et al., 2012; Li et al., 2013). Although these 
analytical methods are quick to detect, costly, time-consuming, not useful 
for on-site detection and require trained users or experts for operating such 
devices. Biosensors itself contain incorporated chemical sensors, which are 
able to analyze the analytes qualitatively or semiquantitatively by incorpo￾rating a bioreceptor that is indirectly connected with a transducer (Thévenot 
et al., 2001). A biosensor is a detection tool used specially for qualitative Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 265 
sensing of a chemical substance that interacts with some biorecognition 
component. This interaction ismeasured by a transducer which outputs in 
readable form which shows the presence of particular target analyte. Thus, 
the biosensor consists of three major components: the biological receptor, 
signal transducer, and the detector. The biosensors are applied for sensing 
materials, such as antibodies, hormones, gas and immunological molecules, 
pharmaceuticals, proteins, enzymes, etc. (Kissinger, 2005). An extensive 
range of biosensors detection tool with nanomaterials have been investigated 
in a number of studies all over the world. Several studies are conducted 
regarding the application of nanotechnology and nanomaterials for designing 
these biosensing tools, and such devices are known as nanobiosensors (Malik 
et al., 2013). The nanosize of such nanomaterials (1–100 nm) makes them 
highly effective because most of their atoms placed at or close to surface and 
having all physicochemical characteristics which are greatly different from 
the same material at the bulk range which enhanced signaling and transduc￾tion. The nanomaterials can be efficiently applied in the biosensors for the 
detection of analyte. The nanomaterials, majorly in use include nanorods, 
nanotubes, nanoparticles, and nanowires (Jianrong et al., 2004). The carbon￾based nanomaterials, such as CNT, graphene, graphene oxide (GO), have 
been widely used in biosensors for advanced detection of sample, and they 
have become a novel interdisciplinary frontier between biosensing and mate￾rial science (Prasad et al., 2017). Merging of nanotechnology with biosensors 
can be used to monitor the environmental contamination at high speed. In 
this chapter, we emphasize on the various carbon-based nanomaterials which 
are used for biosensing, their synthesis and application for the detection of 
environmental pollutants. 
9.2 NANOBIOSENSORS
The nanobiosensors are biosensors modified with nanomaterials. They 
can be actively employed for the identification of biomolecules, and these 
highly sensitive nanobiosensors can rapidly sense high levels of environ￾mental pollutants, and therefore, they can play a major role in potential 
environmental biomonitoring (Mohammadi Aloucheh et al., 2018). In 
the 21st century, along with the progress of science, miniature biosensors 
based on nanotechnology were developed for the detection of analyte (Rai 
et al., 2012). Due to their high sensitivity, cost-effectiveness, user-friend￾liness, reliability, and detection potential for specific molecules of these 266 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
nanobiosensors, their development has been quite interesting and fruitful 
with a wide range of applications, including determination of emerging 
pollutants without any isolation, concentration, or pre-sampling procedures 
(Steffens et al., 2017). 
9.2.1 COMPONENTS OF NANOBIOSENSORS
Nanobiosensor is an analytical device. It is the advanced version of a 
biosensor device containing a biological recognition element in contact with 
the sensor for measuring the biological or biochemical signal and its conver￾sion into electrical signal (Kanjana, 2017). The immobilized layer may 
consist of proteins, virus, cellular lipid bilayers, DNA/RNA, microbial cells, 
etc. The ideal nanobiosensor should possess special features such as potential 
of real-time monitoring of the molecule of interest, versatility specificity and 
selectivity toward particular target analyte, rapid, on-site detection, accuracy 
and repeatability over the useful analytical scale for monitoring the intended 
environment (Kwak et al., 2017; Thakur and Ragavan, 2013). 
Based on the mode of action, the nanobiosensors consist of (1) the biore￾ceptor, such as antibodies, immunological molecules, proteins, enzymes, 
etc., which act as a template for the target analyte; (b) the transducer, which 
converts bioreceptor–bioanalyte interaction into electronic signal; and (c) 
the detector system that detects the electrical signal and amplify it properly 
(Malik et al., 2013). 
FIGURE 9.1 Components of carbon-based nanomaterials nanobiosensors. Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 267 
9.2.2 TYPES OF NANOBIOSENSOR
Nanobiosensors are categorized either by nanomaterials used for enhancing 
the biosensor properties, or by biorecognition element utilized for molecular 
identification, or by the kind of transducer utilized for identification. 
FIGURE 9.2 Types of nanobiosensors. 
9.2.2.1 NANOBIOSENSORS BASED ON NANOMATERIALS USED 
9.2.2.1.1 Nanoparticles-Based Biosensors
Nanoparticle-based biosensors are more effective due to their nanoscale size 
and consequently, they exhibit high surface-to-volume ratio and are highly 
attractive and cost-effective due to easy and bulk synthesis using standard 
chemical methods. They need not be fabricated or modified with advanced 
approaches. Several metal nanoparticles are used to label different kinds 
of biomolecules by maintaining the integrity of their biological activities 
(Hrapovic et al., 2004). 268 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
FIGURE 9.3 Nanoparticles-based biosensors. 
a) Acoustic Wave Biosensors 
Acoustic wave biosensors were advanced to importantly progress the respon￾siveness and restrictions of recognition (Ward and Ebersole, 1996). There can 
be various stimuli-dependent impacts in such type of sensor. Mass-dependent 
types of such sensors comprise the coupling of antibody-altered sol elements 
that fix themselves on the exterior of the electrode which has been mixed 
with the particle of analytes combined in such a way that antibody particles 
are halted on the electrode. The great amount of mass of bound sol elements 
of the antibody outcomes in an alteration in the vibrational frequency of the 
quartz-dependent detecting platforms, and this alteration acts as the basis of 
identification. In common, the accepted diameter of sol-dependent antibody 
particle is in the range of 5–100 nm. Elements of platinum, gold, titanium 
dioxide, and cadmium sulfide are most commonly used (Su et al., 2000; Liu 
et al., 2004). 
b) Magnetic Biosensors 
Magnetic biosensor uses the particularly intended magnetic nanoparticle. 
Such magnetic nanoparticles are commonly ferrite-based material, whether 
used separately or in a shared system. The conventionally used biodetectors 
and diagnostic tools become more sensitive, powerful, and versatile due to the 
incorporation of magnetic nanomaterials (Richardson et al., 2001). Magnetic 
nanoparticle is a commanding and adaptable analytic instrument in ecology Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 269 
and medication. These nanoparticles can be frequently synthesized in the 
arrangement of either single domain or greigite (Fe3S4), superparamagnetic 
(Fe3O4), maghemite (g-Fe2O3), different kinds of ferrites like MeO_Fe2O3, 
where Me = Mn, Ni, Mg, Co, Zn, etc. Destined to biorecognitive particles, 
magnetic nanoparticles can be utilized to disperse or to improve the analytes 
to be recognized (Šafařı́
k and Šafařı́
ková, 1999). Distinct gadgets like 
SQUID (superconducting quantum interference devices) have been utilized 
for fast discovery of biotic targets utilizing the super paramagnetic nature 
of magnetic nanoparticles. Superconducting quantum interference devices 
are utilized to curtain the exact antigens from the combinations by using 
antibodies destined to the magnetic nanoparticle (Chemla et al., 2000). 
c) Electrochemical Biosensors 
Nanoparticles are utilized as labels in the electrochemical detection of 
analyte. Often, electrochemical sensors are used for potential environmental 
monitoring due to the formation of electrochemically detectable ions by the 
oxidation of metal nanoparticles (Koedrith et al., 2015). Electrochemical 
biosensors are popular because of their low-priced, comparatively quick 
response time, user-friendliness, and small dimensions. Such sensors 
fundamentally work to enhance or examine the biological responses with 
the help of enhanced electric means. These gadgets are frequently dependent 
on the metallic nanoparticles. Chemical reactions among the biomolecules 
can be effortlessly and professionally carried out with the assistance of 
metallic nanoparticles, which significantly help in attaining immobilization 
of one of the reactants. This capability makes these responses very precise 
and removes any chance of receiving unwanted by-products. In the present 
condition, colloidal gold-dependent nanoparticles have been utilized to 
increase the immobilization of DNA on gold electrode that has significantly 
amplified the efficacy of a complete biosensor by additionally letting down 
the recognition boundary (Cai et al., 2001). 
9.2.2.1.2 Nanotubes-Based Biosensors
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are nanosized materials with best electrochemical 
and electrical properties. Carbon nanotubes are suitable for transport of 
electrical indications produced upon identification of a subject, and thus, it 
plays a significant part in the current growth of enzyme-dependent biosensor 
(Balasubramanian and Burghard, 2006). CNTs are hopeful resources for 270 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
detection purposes because of their fascinating characteristics. Particularly, 
the greater length-to-diameter part proportions offer for larger surface-to￾volume proportions (Sotiropoulou et al., 2003). Furthermore, CNTs have 
an excellent capability to facilitate quick electron transfer kinetics for a 
diverse variety of electroactive types, such as H2O2 or hydrogen peroxide 
or NADH. Additionally, CNTs’ chemical utilization can be done to assign 
nearly every chosen chemical type to themselves, this permits us to improve 
the biocompatibility and solubility of the nanotubes (Wang et al., 2003). 
CNTs, along with its exciting electrical and electrochemical features, 
are perfect together as an electrode and as a transducer component into 
a biosensor. Separate SWCNTs (single-walled CNTs) are tremendously 
subtle to their neighboring situation. Both chemoresistors and chemically 
delicate field-effect transistors (FETs) integrating unspoiled or precisely 
working CNTs have been revealed to be capable of sensing biomolecule 
(Balasubramanian and Burghard, 2006). 
9.2.2.1.3 Nanowires-Based Biosensors
Nanowires are tube-shaped structures similar to that of CNTs, consisting 
of measurements in the order of a few microns to cm and widths in the 
nanoseries. Nanowires are the 1D structures with great electron-transport 
effects. Specifically, the movement of current transporters in the nanowire 
is dynamically enhanced and are dissimilar from those in majority of the 
supplies. The tiny dimensions and ability of nanowires make them suitable 
option to be utilized for biodetection of pathogen and numerous real-time 
monitoring of a widespread variety of biotic and biochemical classes, 
therefore, massively extemporizing the carriage precisions of currently used 
in vivo analytical methods (Cui and Lieber, 2001). Nanowire biosensor 
can be ornamented with practically any possible biochemical or biotic 
molecular detection units, by suitable superficial features. The nanomaterial 
transduces the biochemical binding action on its exterior into an alteration 
in the conductance of the nanowires in an tremendously subtle, realistic, and 
measurable manner (Wang et al., 2009; Wang, 2002). 
9.2.2.1.4 Bionanomaterial-Based Biosensors
The special features of nanomaterials additionally when combined with 
catalytic function of biomolecules form various efficient nanosensors. The Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 271 
self-organization of biological molecules within sensors are led to obtain 
a well-defined nanostructure with biomaterials (Abdel-Karim et al., 2020). 
Inside the biosensor, the bioreceptor is united with an appropriate transducer 
that creates an indication after collaboration with the particle of attention. 
The occurrence of the biotic component forms the system tremendously 
precise and very subtle, offering an advantage to the traditional techniques. 
Throughout the time, various naturally occurring and man-made biotic 
sources have been utilized in the biosensor. The utmost significant botic 
sources are the dendrimers, enzymes, tinny films, etc. In an enzyme-depen￾dent biosensor, the biotic material is an enzyme that reacts distinctively with 
its substratum (Guilbault et al., 2004). 
9.2.2.2 BASED ON BIORECOGNITION OR BIORECEPTOR 
Nanobiosensors can be categorized into the following: 
a. Enzyme-dependent nanobiosensors 
b. Immuno-nanobiosensors 
c. DNA-nanobiosensors (Fu et al., 2017) 
9.2.2.3 BASED ON STRUCTURE AND TRANSDUCTION 
a) Optical nanobiosensors 
Optical nanobiosensor works on fiber optic by means of absorbance, total 
internal reflection, or fluorescence, bioluminescence, chemiluminescence, 
evanescent wave, or SPR (surface plasmon resonance). Optical nanobiosen￾sors are usually handled for the recognition of pathogens depending on the 
fluorescence and SPR (surface plasmon resonance). Usually, this approach is 
depending on the tracking of the shift in an optical sign among the working 
pathogens and nanomaterials. The major advantage of this technique is that 
with tiny cell disturbance, the device can mix into the inner parts of the cells. 
Optical transducers are promising devices to design a potential, low cost, 
user-friendly and on-site nanobiosensing tool (Fu et al., 2017; Kabariya and 
Ramani., 2017). 
b) Electrochemical nanobiosensors 
Electrochemical transducer is potentiometric, amperometric, conductometric, 
and impedimetric systems. The structure of carbon nanomaterial includes two 272 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
types, which are 2-dimensional, that is, planar in the case of graphene and 
1-dimensional, that is, tubular in shape for CNTs. These form them perfect 
transduction constituents. Moreover, its electrochemical features like fast 
electron transfer kinetic, lesser residual charge, available reusable surfaces, 
widespread probable window and improved current with noteworthy 
decrease in excess potentials create carbon nanomaterial a suitable option 
for biosensing applications when compared with other carbon-dependent 
electrode material like glassy carbon (Wang et al., 2009). 
i) Carbon nanomaterials used for electrochemical Biosensors 
Nanomaterial are utilized for the manufacture of electrochemical biosensor 
and are established for the ecological examination. Electrochemical biosensor 
can be categorized based on the source of nanomaterials and transducer 
utilized for the electrode alterations (Mazzei et al., 2015). The carbon nano￾materials have been widely utilized for an electrochemical biosensor due to 
their larger external region, because of this, numerous recognition actions 
can occur concurrently on its external area and the binding of biomolecule 
is easily possible too. Carbon nanomaterials exhibit the electrical, physical, 
mechanical, and optical characteristics that make them ideal option to be 
utilized in the biosensor. Their charge storing and electron transfer property 
can be put together for the electrochemical uses The electrochemical perfor￾mances of the biosensors could be improved by adjusting the structure of their 
molecules to engineer their electrochemical activity. Carbon nanomaterials 
do own a greater surface-to-volume ratio, electrical conductance, and motor￾ized power which make thema suiable option for use in the electrochemical 
biosensor (Royea et al., 2006; Goyal et al., 2010; Revin and John, 2012). 
b) Mechanical nanobiosensors 
Usually, nanomaterial is used in the biorecognition of materials (1) as 
subsistence for the load of many pointers, for example, fluorescent dyes, 
biomolecules, or Raman reporters to intensify the detection action by its 
high surface-volume proportion or (2) as the pointer which is formed with 
the help of chemical reaction to attain numerous signal intensification (Fu 
et al., 2017). Biomolecular collaboration is calculated through motorized 
nanoscale biosensor. Depending upon the alterations in the external stress 
created by the interaction among the target and probe particles on its surface, 
chemical vapor at tiny level can be recognized. The extent of the shift in the 
surface stress depends on the type of contact which happened, consisting of Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 273 
the forces of electrostatic, van der Waals, hydrogen bonding, etc. There are 
three ways for transforming detection of the targeted analytes into the canti￾lever micromechanical bending’s: (1) bending in response to a surface stress, 
(b) bending in response to a mass loadings, and (c) bending as a consequence 
of a temperature alteration (Choudhary et al., 2015). 
9.3 CARBON-BASED NANOMATERIALS FOR BIOSENSING
Nanomaterial structures are commonly recognized as exciting gadgets with 
precise chemical and physical features because of their smaller dimension 
impacts and larger surface which provide the specific and varied character￾istic as compared with majority of the substances. The study of such varied 
features offers the chance to advance biosensor characteristics and enhance 
the strength of identification through dimension and structure regulation 
(Pandit et al., 2016). Presently, along with nanotechnology advancements, 
the investigations about the features of nanomaterials and nanobiosensors 
are too increasing. The curiosity and significance of nanomaterials in the 
manufacture of nanobiosensors lie in their unusual features which makes 
them an optimal choice for detection devices. (Malik et al., 2013). Materials 
containing carbon show superior characteristics like greater conductance, 
higher stability, lesser price, wider usable window, and easier surface 
working (Zhang et al., 2016). Thus, these have been widely considered 
and used for different electroanalytical usages, especially the upcoming 
nanoscale carbon material groups of CNTs, graphene, and nano/mesoporous 
carbon. This nanostructure enables promising revelation of surface groups 
for the association among analytes and transducing materials, forwarding 
to notable identification action for ecological contaminants (Ramnani et al., 
2016; Brett, 2001). Integration of nanotechnology with biosensors became 
faster, cleverer, cheap, and easy to use. The transducing mechanism has been 
notably enhanced with the use nanostructures and nanomaterials (Pandit et 
al., 2016). 
9.3.1 PROPERTIES OF CBNS
9.3.1.1 CARBON NANOTUBES 
CNTs initially defined in the year 1991 by Sumio Iijima (S. Iijima, 1991), 
In carbon nanotubes, each carbon atom having three electrons makes a 274 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
trigonal coordinated s bond to three carbon atoms by using sp2 hybridization 
(Iijima, 1991; Yang et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2017). Carbon nanotubes are 
fundamentally one sheet of graphene trundled in the manner of a hollow 
tube flawlessly. CNTs have the characteristic feature of rolled graphene 
sheets piled in the tubular/cylindrical structure with a diameter of several 
nanometers. The CNTs can have diverse lengths, diameters, layers and 
chirality vectors (Iijima, 2002; Iijima and Ichihashi, 1993). CNTs generally 
become the option for the manufacture of biosensor due to their greater 
power and their notable physicochemical features. CNTs are connected 
with superior conductance, higher sensitivity, great biocompatibility, and 
excellent chemical stability (Hu and Hu, 2009). Based upon its chirality, 
CNTs can have properties of metal, semiconductors, and have vigorous 
optical absorption in the near-infrared range. 1-D nature, charge transfers in 
CNTs were discovered to happen by quantum impacts and single blowout 
along with the tube axis, while causing no scattering. Such exclusive electric 
and physical features of CNTs make them suitable to be used in biosensors 
so that some alterations in the electron transfer can signify the incidence 
of a biotic marvel whose drive is to identify it. The surface of CNTs can 
be changed with varied chemical groups, or biomolecule can be controlled 
on the total area of surface, mechanical, uniform distribution in solution, 
optical absorption, ability of conduct electrical current, and strength 
abilities to attain enhanced functionality of the electrochemical biosensors. 
For such motives, CNTs are widely utilized as a surface transformer to 
plan the electrochemical biosensor (Heydari-Bafrooei and Ensafi, 2019). 
Furthermore, the end and sidewall of the CNT can be effortlessly altered by 
assigning any wanted chemical groups. CNTs can be outstanding transducer 
in the nanoscale sensor because of their noteworthy sensitivity. Through 
literature, it is described that CNTs can increase the electrochemical 
reactivity of significant biomolecule, and arbitrate quicker electron transfer 
kinetics for a wide variety of electroactive types (Wang, 2005). Generally, 
CNTs can be classified on the basis of structure as into two types: single￾walled carbon nanotubes SWCNTs and multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs). 
SWCNTs consist of only a sheet of graphene containing sp2 hybridized 
carbon structured into a hexagonal honeycomb networks with diameters 
around 0.4–3 nm and a length of up to several µm (Balasubramanian and 
Burghard, 2005). MWCNTs are made of concentrical cylinder of trundled 
graphene sheets, having variable diameters of several tens’ of nanometers 
relying on the number of graphene sheets, and the distance between sheets 
and interlayer spacing is nearly 0.34 nm (Ajayan, 1999). SWCNTs can be Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 275 
of semiconducting or metallic nature relying on their chirality and diameters 
of the tube (Wilder et al., 1998). There are three chiralities for SMCNTs: 
armchair, zigzag and chiral armchair. SWCNTs are metallic and remaining 
chirality are semiconducting in nature. MWCNTs consist of multilayers of 
graphene, and every layer can have a diverse chirality (Gao et al., 2012). 
SWCNTs show superior chemical stability, greater mechanical power, 
and a variety of electrical conductance characteristics. MWCNTs show 
metallic electric features which are parallel to metallic SWCNT (Hu et al., 
2010), which in few aspects make them an optimal for the electrochemical 
application. Optical characteristics shown by MWCNTs are lesser prominent 
than that of the SWCNTs, so they are utilized as a delivery system for greater 
biomolecule consisting of plasmid (DNA) into cell. Both these types of CNTs 
consist of 1-D arrangement and show superior features, such as conductance, 
adsorptive capability, and higher bioconsistency. Such features allow carbon 
nanotubes to transport high fluxes with slight heating (Wei et al., 2001). 
The less width and specific physical characteristics consisting of superior 
electrical conductivity, ampere density, modulus, and stability of SWCNTs 
make them suitable option for making electrochemical detecting gadgets 
(Sarkar and Srinives, 2018). 
9.3.1.2 GRAPHENE 
Graphene (GR) structure consists of 2-dimensional sheets of carbon atoms in 
a form of hexagonal structure like a honeycomb arrangement. In the structure 
of graphene, carbon atoms are sp2 hybridized, and one carbon is bonded with 
three other carbon atoms at a 120 degree bond angle, all of them are arranged 
in the same plane. For such reasons, a grid of hexagon is done. Various 
functional groups, along with hydrogen atoms can be arranged into the free 
space (Erol et al., 2018). Graphene, as the most popular 2-D nanomaterial, 
has widespread concern from its discovery in the year 2004. This astonishing 
nanostructure discloses excellent electric conductance, higher electron transfer 
rate, mechanical power, and larger surface area, which makes it capable 
for numerous potential usages in the area of tangible electronics, energy￾storing gadgets, detection gadgets, catalyst, membrane, and nanocomposite. 
Specifically, in detecting instruments, graphene has showcased huge hopes 
in the aspects of its outstanding conductance, larger surface region, wider 
electrochemical window, and electrochemical stability (Ping et al., 2011; Yao 
and Ping, 2018). Graphene is being utilized as a transducing nanomaterial in 276 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
conductometric, impedimetric, and amperometric detectors for sensing the 
pathogen and bacteria’s (Xu et al., 2017). Graphene can be exfoliated and 
reacted for the formation of GO to create stable spreading in water because of 
the existence of the epoxide, hydroxyl, and carboxyl functional group (Chang 
et al., 2014). After reducing, graphene is altered into rGO or reduced GO 
with low oxygen content and organizational defects giving higher thermal 
conductance. GO, rGO or reduced graphene oxide is utilized with superior 
outcomes in the electrochemical biosensors: graphene showcases certainly 
a greater surface region and thus it could be effortlessly immobilizing the 
enzyme by amidic bonds compared with rGO but rGO, being similar to pristine 
graphene, should showcase, in principles, much greater conducting property 
than GO (Carbone et al., 2015; Pumera, 2011). Generally, the derivative 
of graphene-dependent material consists of GO, graphene quantum dots, 
single and multilayer form of graphene, and rGO. GO has an oxygen reliant 
functional group, that makes it simple to spread in an aqueous and organic 
solvent. This is an extreme benefit of graphene that enables it to syndicate 
with remaining compounds, such as ceramics and polymers. Though, GO 
is cloistered concerning the electrical conductance. To restore the electrical 
conductance, it is necessary to recover the hexagonal honeycomb arrangement 
of graphene again by reducing GO into rGO. rGO will not be handily spread 
as it has a propensity of combination. Like CNTs, graphene could also be 
chemically working, refining its features for utilization in various applications 
(Heydari-Bafrooei and Ensafi, 2019). GO has a higher density of oxygen￾carrying functional group, and is not very conductive because of disrupted 
coupled π–π bonds. Its conductance can be restored by reducing, performing 
thermally, chemically, or electro chemically, and these materials are labeled 
as rGO. Though graphene sheets do not contain any oxygen, it can spread up 
to 30% in GO; yet, the quantity of oxygen can be reduced to about 5–10% 
in rGO through reduction (Filip et al., 2015). Graphene is being used in a 
variety of biosensors, and specifically for affinity-dependent biosensors like 
immunosensors or DNA sensors for detecting higher molecular mass analyte, 
like DNA or protein (Akhavan et al., 2012). Graphene reliant material 
with higher surface area and varied workings enables the immobilization 
of enzymes and antibodies that can intensely increase the electrochemical 
readout by signal enhancement. As GO or rGO is much less costly when 
compared with the remaining nanomaterials, then the strategy can result in 
the cheaper manufacture of ultrasensitive affinity-dependent electrochemical 
biosensor (Filip et al., 2015). Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 277 
9.3.1.3 CARBON NANOFIBERS 
CNFs or carbon nanofibers are the cylinder-shaped cable type nanostructure 
in which graphene panes are loaded in dissimilar structures, such as ribbon, 
herringbone, or platelet. The extent of CNFs differs in the direction of microns 
and can be up to 10 μm while its widths vary in the range 10–500 nm. Its 
machine-driven power and electronic features are similar to CNTs. CNFs also 
have properties like the virtuous electric conduction, great superficial region, 
biocompatibility, and effortless manufacturing procedure which are important 
for electrochemical detection application. Furthermore, CNFs can be effort￾lessly utilized to ensemble a specific sensing process (Endo et al., 2002). 
9.3.1.4 FULLERENE 
The allotropic alteration of carbon, commonly recognized as fullerene, was 
revealed in 1985 by H. W. Kroto, R. F. Curl, and R. F. Smalley (Kroto et 
al., 1985). It is considered as the first nanomaterial to be magnificently 
separated. The typical characteristic of fullerene is the creation of an amount 
of atomic Cn groups (n > 20) of carbon on a sphere-shaped exterior. Carbon 
atoms make the covalent bond among themselves in the sp2 hybridized state 
in fullerene. These carbon atoms are frequently existing on the superficial 
layer of the sphere shape at the vertexes of hexagons and pentagons. C60 
is fullerene which has been extensively researched and examined. It has 
extremely symmetrical sphere-shaped particles containing 60 C-atoms, 
existing at the apexes of 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons or 60 carbon atoms 
including 20-six member rings and 12-five member rings (Paredes et al., 
2008). Carbon atoms in fullerene are organized in a sphere-shaped arrange￾ment commonly known as buckyball structure, and hence they do not have 
any size. Fullerene can create unswervingly from graphene the formation of 
pentagons on the sides of graphene, that is trailed by the deforming of the 
graphene plane to a spherical shape, which is called wrapped-up graphene 
(Afreen et al., 2015). Fullerene has substantial electrical, chemical, and 
physical features and is thus considered to be a perfect solid for constructing 
nano assemblages for a number of applications. Fullerene has sphere-shaped 
assembly that makes it likely to quicken the transfer of control and electron 
in numerous tenders. Fullerene could be transformed into a multipurpose 
material that is completed by functionalization with noncovalent and cova￾lent communications. Fullerenes are automatically robust and can withstand 
great compressions (Heydari-Bafrooei and Ensafi, 2015). 278 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
9.3.1.5 CARBON NANO HORNS 
CNHs or carbon nanohorns are pointed crates that are alike SWCNTs. They 
are sp2 hybridized, semiconductive, extremely resilient to oxidation, and 
with equal response rates. Though, they consist of greater thickness of flaws 
that enable functionalization, they are typically broader, letting unrestricted 
drive of captured particles (Russell et al., 2016), and can be produced in 
higher amounts at room temperature in the nonappearance of possibly deadly 
metal substances. The application of CNHs has grown at a considerable 
sluggish rate than CNTs due to their combination into sphere-shaped group, 
which produces dispersal and superficial alteration problem. A novel method 
for unravelling groups into separate CNHs was described lately that could 
hasten its expansion (Karousis et al., 2016). 
FIGURE 9.4 Various ways of preparation of carbon-based nanomaterials. 
9.3.2 SYNTHESIS OF CARBON NANOMATERIALS FOR BIOSENSING
9.3.2.1 CARBON NANOTUBES 
The most widely used approaches to the synthesis of CNTs include arc 
discharge, laser ablation, and chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Primarily 
SWCNT and MWCNTs are fabricated with arc-discharge approach. SWCNT Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 279 
and MWCNT were obtained by Iijima of the NEC Corporation. Moreover, 
Since 1985, laser ablation method was used for synthesizing the fullerene as 
well as CNTs. High power laser beam radiation applied on the graphite sheet 
in the presence of an Ar or an N2, evaporated carbon transformed at 1200°C 
to MWCNT in an Ar or an N2 atmosphere. Impregnation method is used 
for the production of SWCNT bundles. Graphite can be impregnated with 
certain catalysts, such as nickel(Ni) and cobalt (Co) to enhance the property 
(Xu et al., 2016). 
MWCNT is produced with arc-discharge method. In this method, arc is 
placed between two carbon rods under some conditions whereas suitable 
metal catalysts, such as Co, Fe, Ni, Pt, and Rh are utilized for the fabrication 
of SWCNT. CVD is another adaptable and cost-effective approach for the 
production of CNTs on a diverse scale based on the morphology and crystal￾line structure. In this method, carbon sources (generally gaseous) are heated 
under high temperature in the temperature furnace. Carbon sources with high 
temperature are split into carbon atoms in the presence of transition metal 
catalysts, such as Co, Ni, or Fe which initiate the development of CNTs. 
CNT production is very high with the CVD approach and the nanotubes 
produced are structurally defectivecompared with other approaches. CNT 
produced with the processes mentioned above is purified through refluxing 
with some strong acid, sonication-assisted surfactants dispersion in aqueous 
solution, or by the process of air oxidation (Kroto et al., 1985). 
9.3.2.2 GRAPHENE 
Various methods were intended for graphene synthesis, such methods are 
mechanical exfoliation, pyrolysis, chemical reduction of GO, chemical 
exfoliation, epitaxial growth, CVD approach, and plasma synthesis (Xu et 
al., 2016). Peel-off or micromechanical exfoliation method depends on the 
separation p-stacked layers in graphite through repetitive exfoliation with 
scotch tape. Peel-off method of graphene synthesis is highly superior, though 
the sample size is very small or is in micron size (Hernandez et al., 2008). 
In the chemical reduction approach, graphene is produced with the reduc￾tion of GO. In this approach, Hummer’s method is used for the oxidation of 
graphite and to form graphite oxide, and then exfoliated through sonication 
for the generation of GO flakes (Paredes et al., 2008). Graphite is treated 
with potassium permanganate, sodium nitrate, and concentrated sulfuric acid 
for a short time to bring polar oxygen-containing functional groups, such as 
epoxide, carboxyl, carbonyl, and hydroxyl to introduce hydrophilic nature in 280 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
the layers (Hummers et al., 2007); To make stable dispersion of single layers 
and few layers of GO in a various organic solvent or the water, oxygen￾containing layers in GO can be mechanically exfoliated with the sonication 
process. An exfoliated solution of graphene is stabilized in the surface-active 
agent, then the flakes of GO can be applied on a suitable substrate with spray 
coating and drop-casting. 
Chemical defects and crystalline damages are in greater compromise in the 
electrical properties of exfoliated GO than pristine graphene. The chemical 
oxide group and sp3 defects must be reduced to remove such imperfection 
to restore the electrical properties (Stankovich et al., 2007). GO is reduced 
electrochemically with the application of reducing potential on GO layers or 
with reducing agents (e.g., hydrazine), or by using high temperature (Mao et 
al., 2011; Ramnani et al., 2016). To synthesize pure graphene at a manufac￾turing level, the frequent method which is used to produce graphene sheets 
is the method of decomposition of SiC at high temperature (De Heer et al., 
2007), or the graphene is epitaxially grown on transition metals, such as Ni, 
Pd, Ru, Ir, and Cu by CVD of only carbon and hydrogen (Hass et al., 2008; 
Kim et al., 2009). Graphene can be utilized for the electrode modification 
and sensing mechanism due to its distinctive characteristics that are rapid 
conductivity, elevated elasticity, mechanical strength, surface area, and fast 
heterogeneous transfer rate (Akhgari et al., 2015). 
9.3.2.3 CARBON NANOFIBERS 
The CNFs can be obtained by laser ablation (Guo et al., 1995) approach. 
Other methods, such as thermal chemical vapor deposition, plasma-enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), and electrospinning methods are also 
used for the production of CNFs (Sharma et al., 2011). In the thermal chemical 
vapor deposition method, an organic compound is decomposed with a metal 
catalyst at a stable temperature (Zahid et al., 2018). The CVD fabricates CNFs 
along with impurities which need an additional complex decontamination 
process whereas the electrospinning method produces CNFS through a very 
simple process with high purity (Liu et al., 2008; Tang et al., 2011). 
9.3.2.4 FULLERENE 
Fullerenes are synthesized simply with the primary laser ablation of graphite, 
followed by arc-discharge method, and thermal decomposition of an aromatic Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 281 
organic compound. Fullerene was first discovered by Kroto et al. (1985). It 
was obtained by sublimation of graphite through a pulsed laser beam (Kroto 
et al., 1985). 
9.4 APPLICATION OF CARBON NANOMATERIAL-BASED 
BIOSENSORS FOR MONITORING ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION 
The rapidly growing global urbanization and industrialization are directly 
impacting over environmental safety and eventually human health. The 
hazardous pollutants, which are challenging the environmental quality 
by imparting issues of concern related to water and soil pollution include 
various organic and inorganic toxicants, heavy metals, steroids, hormones, 
pesticides, industrial chemicals, and infectious microbes, etc. Even these 
toxicants are found in very small quantities, such as micrograms or 
nanograms per liter, they have strong potential to damage human health 
(Salouti et al., 2020). Since commonly found heavy metals contaminant 
are cadmium, lead, mercury, arsenic, and nickel are nonbiodegradable, 
carcinogenic, and have the ability of bioaccumulation within the organism. 
Their small dosage may also cause severe health hazards (Sankhla et al., 
2016; Sonone et al., 2020; Steffens et al., 2017). The natural and synthetic 
hormones toxicity may lead to testicular and prostate cancer, low sperm 
count, endometriosis, and breast enhancement (Moraes et al., 2015; Salouti 
et al., 2020). Moreover, pesticide pollutants are carcinogenic, teratogenic, 
and mutagenic and may cause hematopoietic cancers, immunologic 
abnormalities, and adverse reproductive, genotoxic, and neurotoxic effects
(Eskenazi et al., 1999; Ünal et al., 2011; Gulia et al., 2020; Sankhla et al., 
2018; Yadav et al., 2019). 
To overcome such severe environmental pollutants, it is important to 
develop a good environmental quality monitoring and biosensing tool. 
Carbon nanomaterial-based biosensors can be used for the assessment of the 
biological and chemical quality by monitoring major biological and chemical 
environmental pollutants (Salouti et al., 2020). These extremely sensitive, 
rapid, portable and low-cost biosensors target and detect the significant 
pollutants pathogens, pesticides, explosives, hormones, antibiotics, noxious 
gases, and heavy metal ions. The better utilization of these biosensors is 
beneficial and they are considered to be excellent tools to improve the 
environmental quality (Ramnani et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2019; Salouti et al., 
2020). To increase the sensitivity of the biosensing platform, it is modified 
with highly specific recognition elements, such as a molecularly imprinted 282 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
polymer (MIP), biological entities including different antibodies and aptamers 
(Torrinha et al., 2020). 
9.4.1 SENSING OF CHEMICAL CONTAMINANTS
9.4.1.1 SMALL ORGANIC MOLECULES 
The mostly occurring organic pollutants of concern include natural as well 
as synthetic organic matter as humus substances, nitroaromatic explosives, 
dyes, toxins, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, personal care, and domestic waste 
compounds and their sensing is very important for maintaining the environ￾mental quality (Smith and Rodrigues, 2015). Conventional detection methods 
are not able to accurately sense due to the minute size of such pollutants. But 
these compounds usually include some electroactive functional group which 
can be oxidized or reduced with the application of potential and this feature 
is broadly used to sense the pollutants using carbon-based electrochemical 
nanobiosensors (Ramnani et al., 2016). 
9.4.1.1.1 Nitro-Based Explosives
Advancement in the development of nanomaterials shows strong potential 
to create electrochemical sensors for detecting explosives due to very high 
surface area-to-volume ratio, convergent rather than linear diffusion, enhanced 
selectivity, catalytic activity, and distinctive electrical and optical properties 
that can be exploited for highly sensitive molecular adsorption detection 
(O’Mahony and Wang, 2013). Since 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) is a best 
known explosive material and is also used for the synthesis of various dyes, 
pesticides, and plasticizers. The occurrence of its residues in the soil as well as 
in water sources as persistent pollutants is a matter of environmental concern. 
The highly sensitive, selective, and rapid sensing of small molecules of TNT 
can be achieved by using portable SWCNTs-based chemiresistive affinity 
biosensor (Pennington and Brannon, 2002; Park et al., 2010). Graphene 
containing sensing device constructed by electrochemical reduction of GO 
onto a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) is employed for the detection of residues 
of TNT and other nitroaromatic explosives, such as dinitrotoluene (DNT), 
trinitrobenzene (TNB), and dinitrobenzene (DNB) (Chen et al., 2011). The 
CNTs and graphene nanoribbons are considered as potential biosensors for 
tracing of nitro-based explosives in seawater (O’Mahony and Wang, 2013). Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 283 
9.4.1.1.2 Pharmaceutical Pollutants
The growing medicinal needs and eventually increasing pharmaceutical 
production and consumption has become a global issue of environmental 
concern. The pharmaceutical pollutants may include various chemical products, 
such as antibiotics, hormones, β-blockers, anti-inflammatories, anticonvulsants, 
antacids, antidiabetics, analgesics, CNS agents, which are highly contaminating 
the ecosystems, especially water systems and causing severe impacts on 
human health. As antibiotics, hormones, and anti-inflammatories are highly 
consuming pharmaceuticals and consequently major occurring environmental 
pollutants, they were mostly studied for environmental biosensing (Torrinha 
et al., 2020). Here also, carbon nanoparticle-based biosensors are useful in 
the detection of these pollutants because of their extra properties such as high 
chemical toxicity, low cost, and commercial availability (Torrinha et al., 2020). 
9.4.1.1.2.1 Antibiotics 
Antibiotics are one of those types of pharmaceutical pollutants which are 
released not only from industrial or hospital waste but also through domestic 
waste and commercial livestock farming (Ramnani et al., 2015). Bueno et al. 
showed individual amperometric detection of six types of antibiotic residues 
belonging to a class of sulfonamide antibiotics or sulfa drugs using GCE/ 
MWCNT-Nafion® sensor (Bueno et al., 2013). While recently, Silva and 
Cesarino developed an advanced electrochemical biosensor, that is, GCE/ 
rGO–AuNPs electrode for selective detection of sulfamethazine antibiotic 
from polluted water, even in the occurrence of additional potential organic 
interferences. This nanocomposite was prepared by immobilizing gold 
nanoparticles (AuNPs) and rGO on GCE and then employed for biosensing 
under differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) optimized conditions (Silva and 
Cesarino, 2019). Tetracycline is also one of the most consumed classes of 
antibiotics. Lorenzetti et al. employed disposable and portable biosensor, that 
is, SPE/rGO with adsorptive stripping DPV (AdS-DPV) technique of in situ 
detection for sensing three types of natural tetracyclines (tetracycline, chlor￾tetracycline, and oxytetracycline) and one semisynthetic tetracycline, that 
is, doxycycline. But this method has limited applicability due to short linear 
range and relatively low interelectrode precision. The tetracycline antibiotic 
can be analyzed by basically graphene-based (GCE/graphene/L-cysteine, 
MWCNT-based (GCE/MWCNT-Nafion®), and CB-based (GCE/CB-PS) 
nanobiosensors (Vega et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2017; Delgado et al., 2018). 284 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
9.4.1.1.2.2 Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals 
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) are synthetic hormones, such as 
bisphenol-A(BPA), 17α-ethinylestradiol, and diethylstilbestrol, which causes 
adverse impacts over human as well as animal health mainly by affecting 
reproductive characteristics (Diamanti-Kandarakis et al., 2009; Vandenberg 
et al., 2012). Numerous studies have been conducted for sensitive detection 
of 17β-estradiol under DPV optimized conditions using graphene-based 
electrochemical sensors, such as GCE/rGO-MIP-Fe3O4, GCE/rGO-CuTthP, 
GCE/exfoliated graphene as well as with biochar-based nanobiosensors, 
such as GCE/biocharNPs (Li et al., 2015; Moraes et al., 2015; Hu et al., 
2015; Dong et al., 2018). Recently, in 2019, Duan et al. proposed potential 
17β-estradiol sensing mechanism GCE/MOF(Al)–CNT/PB/MIP(PPy) using 
CNT-based biosensor with the highest sensitivity (21,000 µA/µmolL). This 
advanced mechanism was modified as the double sensitization material 
with MIP for highly sensitive recognition and electrodeposition of a Prus￾sian blue layer and polypyrrole (PPy) for better imprinting effect and rapid 
sensing (Duan et al., 2019). Several studies have been carried out for the 
potential detection of another disrupting hormone, that is, diethylstilbestrol 
using graphene quantum dots (GQD) of modified screen-printed electrodes 
as a nanobiosensing platform, that is, SPE/GQD, GCE modified with 
MWCNT, gold nanoparticles, and cobalt phthalocyanine film electrode as a 
nanobiosensing platform, that is, GCE/AuNPs/MWCNT-CoPc, and carbon 
black paste electrode as nanobiosensing platform, that is, CPE(CB) (Qu et 
al., 2012; Aragão et al., 2017; Gevaerd et al., 2019). 
9.4.1.2 HEAVY METALS 
Heavy metal pollutants are mainly released from metallurgical industries 
and are hazardous to human health as they are highly persistent in nature and 
bioaccumulative in living organisms. These heavy metals are mercury (Hg), 
copper (Cu), lead (Pb), nickel (Ni), cadmium (Cd), and zinc (Zn). Thus, their 
potential, rapid, and on-site sensing and real-time monitoring is a vital need 
to maintain environmental quality as well as individual well-being (Yilmaz 
et al., 2007; Ramnani et al., 2015). The detection of these elements is also 
possible with regular spectroscopic techniques, such as AAS, inductively 
coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS), etc. But these techniques are 
not suitable for real-time and on-site detection, as well as that are expensive 
and relatively time-consuming also. Alternatively, enzyme-based detection Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 285 
methods can also be employed for sensitive sensing of metals, which is 
achieved by the inhibition of enzyme due to their binding with metal ions. 
But this method also has some limitations such as poor stability of enzymes 
at physiological pH and reduced selectivity due to other interference. There￾fore, for potential sensing of heavy metals, the sensing tool must overcome 
such limitations (Burlingame et al., 1996; Wanekaya et al., 2008). 
Several studies have been conducted to develop a suitable carbon-based 
nanobiosensing tool for highly sensitive, selectivity, real-time and anti￾interference detection of heavy metals (Ramnani et al., 2015). The label-free 
and sensitive detection of Hg (II) can be conducted by using a chemiresistor 
based on SWNTs within the linear range 100 nM–1 µM (Gong et al., 2013). 
Li et al. (2009) proposed an electrochemical sensor GCE modified with 
graphene for the detection of Cd (II). Morton et al. (2009) conducted another 
study to develop the sensor GCE modified with carboxylated CNT for the 
detection of Cu (II) with cyclic voltammetry (CV). The sensing of Arsenic 
(III) was also performed on GCE modified with DNA-functionalized, 
single-walled carbon nanotube (DNA–SWNT) hybrid using linear sweep 
voltammetry (LSV) as a detection technique (Liu and Wei, 2008). The 
electrochemical sensor with graphene-modified GCE, DNA-wrapped 
metallic SWNTs, carboxylated CNT-modified GCE as potential biosensors 
for Pb (II) (Li et al., 2009; Morton et al., 2009; Lian et al., 2014). 
9.4.1.3 PESTICIDES 
Pesticides used for agricultural purposes are increasingly polluting the 
surrounding ecosystems and the consumption may cause hazardous effects 
on human health. Carbon-nanoparticle-based biosensors can be successfully 
employed for their detection and simultaneously environmental monitoring, 
because conventional chromatographic or spectrometric methods are not 
suitable for rapid, low cost and real-time monitoring. Carbamate (CBMs) 
and organophosphorus (OPs) pesticides are extensively used due to their 
desired and extensive applications. But both these pesticides are highly 
neurotoxic and may cause cholinergic dysfunction, neurological, and motor 
level complications (da Silva et al., 2018; Gulia et al., 2020). 
Carbaryl is the widely used pesticides from the CBMs class. The graphite￾based nanobiosensor, poly-p phenylenediamine/ionic liquid/CPE having 
linear range within 0.5–200 µM and limit of detection (LOD) 0.09 µM is 
developed for the detection of carbaryl residues in water (Salih et al., 2018). 
Several phenyl-CBMs, such as carbaryl, carbofuran, and isoprocarb can be 286 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
detected in water ecosystems using single carbon black nanoparticles-based 
(CBNs) biosensing tools (Della Pelle et al., 2016). Another pesticide of the 
same class, carbendazim can be sensitively sensed in river water, rice field 
water, and soil using graphene-modified CPE having linear range 2.61–52.3 
µM and LOD of 0.58 µM (Noyrod et al., 2014). Moreover, many studies have 
been conducted to develop graphene-, CNT-, CB-, GCE- and boron-doped 
diamond (BDD)-based potential environmental biosensors for the detection 
of CBM residues present in freshwater, sea water, paddy water, field water, 
and soil (Oliveira et al., 2020). 
Both OPs and CBMs have neurotoxic action and they inhibit the catalytic 
activity of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) which prevents the breakdown of 
the transmitter choline and consequently blocks the nerve transmission. 
Therefore, the characteristics of AChE inhibition have been widely used 
in developing electrochemical-enzymatic biosensors for sensitive, more 
selective, and noninterference sensing of CBM and OP pesticides. An 
amperometric biosensor based on the modification of the graphene surface 
by epoxy resins and immobilized AChE (graphite epoxy composite/AChE) 
having range within 6–20 µM and LOD of 0.001 µM can be employed for 
the detection of CBMs and OPs in water environments (Montes et al., 2018). 
9.4.1.4 NOXIOUS GASES 
The increasing industrialization leads to a release of toxic gases, such as 
NOx, NH3 and CO in the air. As an electronic property of graphene is strongly 
influenced by the adsorption of such noxious gas molecules, graphene and 
grapheme-derivative-based biosensors are considered as most promising gas 
sensing tools for environmental biomonitoring. The hybrid structure formed 
by blending of nanoparticles of metal oxides with graphene or its derivatives 
have been investigated, which showed a more selectivity and sensitivity with 
high gas sensing potential (Chatterjee et al., 2015). 
9.4.2 SENSING OF BIOLOGICAL CONTAMINANTS
Various pathogenic bacteria and viruses are increasingly polluting the 
environment and these pathogenic microbes are causing major infectious 
diseases, which may lead to fatal effects on human health. Therefore, the 
need for the development of potential environmental monitoring tools for 
rapid and cost-effective sensing microbial pathogens is also increasing. The Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 287 
commonly used detection techniques, such as enzyme-linked immunosor￾bent assay (ELISA) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are not suitable 
for real-time and on-site detection because such techniques require sample 
pretreatment and long experimental procedures. Due to high sensitivity, 
rapidness and selectivity of carbon nanomaterial-based electrochemical 
biosensors can detect a broad spectrum of microbial outbreaks in drinking 
water ecosystems and surrounding environment with easy and cost-effective 
manner (Rodríguez-Lázaro et al., 2005; Ramnani et al., 2015). 
9.4.2.1 PATHOGENIC VIRUS 
Viruses are the smallest intracellular pathogens or infectious agents which 
affect the human body with various severe diseases. The carbon nanopar￾ticles, such as CNT, QD, and GO can be employed to detect these pathogenic 
viruses present in the environment. Carbon nanomaterial-based aptamer and 
DNA sensors are mostly applied for sensing viruses (Mokhtarzadeh et al., 
2017). Wang et al. (2013)developed a sensor, that is, ssDNA-SWCNTs/ 
AuNPs for sensing hepatitis B and papilloma virus, where the DNAs of these 
viruses were captured by probe ssDNA and immobilized on CNT-based 
platform coated with gold nanoparticles. A target-specific and sensitive 
rGO-based aptamer sensor developed to detect HIV (human immunodefi￾ciency virus) (Bi et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2014). Furthermore, various carbon 
nanomaterials have been developed to detect commonly found viruses in 
the environment, such as influenza virus, hepatitis B virus, rotavirus, etc. 
(Mokhtarzadeh et al., 2017). 
9.4.2.2 PATHOGENIC BACTERIA 
The potential and immediate biosensing of bacteria can be achieved with 
carbon-based nanomaterials-modified apt sensors. The selective and sensitive 
sensing of very commonly found bacteria, that is, Escherichia coli can be 
achieved with an aptamer-functionalized SWNT-based field-effect transistor 
(So et al., 2008). Graphene-containing biosensor can sense the metabolic 
activities of live bacterial cells in real-time, which has the potential to 
differentiate live and dead bacterial cells (Huang et al., 2011). Similarly, 
carbon nanotube-based potentiometric apt sensor can be used for immediate 
recognition of Salmonella typhi from an intricate sample (Zelada-Guillén et al., 
2009). Hernández et al. reported a simply constructed rGO and GO-modified 288 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
aptameric sensors for sensing challenging microbe Staphylococcus aureus 
with ultra-low detection limits (Hernández et al., 2014). 
9.5 CONCLUSION
Excess population, rapid urbanization, and wrongful usage of technologies 
have increased Environmental pollution. There is an urgent need to use 
methods that detect such pollutants which affect the environment, humans, 
and overcome the load of conventional analytical techniques. Biosensors 
development play a vital role in the recognition of contaminants with few 
techniques, while the inclusion of nanostructures with biosensor enhances 
their sensitivity, reproducibility, and speed of operation. Nanomaterial 
applications are being increasingly used to design the novel biosensors. 
Nanomaterials have excellent properties, which improve the signal 
conversion and mechanism of biosensors. Carbon nanomaterials, such as 
CNTs, graphene, GOs, rGOs, may improve the sensitivity and accuracy of 
biosensors. Excellent physical and electric properties of CNMs improves 
the functionality of biosensors. These carbon-based nanomaterials 
nanobiosensors are widely used because of their low cost, compact size, 
robustness, and portability. Integration of carbon-based nanomaterials in 
biosensors increased the functionality of sensing devices and can easily 
monitor and detect various environmental pollutants. Sustaining life on 
earth will be the responsibility of everyone. Carbon-based nanomaterials 
nanobiosensors will open up a whole new dimension for the detection of 
environmental pollution. 
KEYWORDS
• nanomaterials 
• biosensors 
• nanotechnology 
• pollutants 
• environment 
• pollution 
• carbon  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 289 
REFERENCES 
Abdel-Karim, R.; Reda, Y.; Abdel-Fattah, A. Nanostructured Materials-Based Nanosensors. 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 2020, 167 (3), 037554. 
Afreen, S.; Muthoosamy, K.; Manickam, S.; Hashim, U. Functionalized Fullerene (C60) 
as a Potential Nanomediator in the Fabrication of Highly Sensitive Biosensors. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2015, 63, 354–364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2014.07.044 
Ajayan, P. M. Nanotubes from Carbon. Chem. Rev. 1999, 99 (7), 1787–1800. 
Akhavan, O.; Ghaderi, E.; Rahighi, R. Toward Single-DNA Electrochemical Biosensing by 
Graphene Nanowalls. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (4), 2904–2916. 
Akhgari, F.; Fattahi, H.; Oskoei, Y. M. Recent Advances in Nanomaterial-Based Sensors for 
Detection of Trace Nitroaromatic Explosives. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 221, 867–878. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2015.06.146 
Aragão, J. S.; Ribeiro, F. W.; Portela, R. R.; Santos, V. N.; Sousa, C. P.; Becker, H.; de 
Lima-Neto, P. Electrochemical Determination Diethylstilbestrol by a Multi-Walled Carbon 
Nanotube/Cobalt Phthalocyanine Film Electrode. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 239, 933–942. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2016.08.097 
Auroux, P. A.; Iossifidis, D.; Reyes, D. R.; Manz, A. Micro Total Analysis Systems. 2. 
Analytical Standard Operations and Applications. Analy. Chem. 2002, 74 (12), 2637–2652. 
Balasubramanian, K.; Burghard, M. Biosensors Based on Carbon Nanotubes. Analy. Bioanaly. 
Chem. 2006, 385 (3), 452–468. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-006-0314-8 
Balasubramanian, K.; Burghard, M. Chemically Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes. Small 
2005, 1 (2), 180–192. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.200400118 
Bi, S.; Zhao, T.; Luo, B. A Graphene Oxide Platform for the Assay of Biomolecules Based on 
Chemiluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer. Chem. Commun. 2012, 48 (1), 106–108. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c1cc15443e 
Brett, C. M. Electrochemical Sensors for Environmental Monitoring. Strategy and Examples. 
Pure Appl. Chem. 2001, 73 (12), 1969–1977. https://doi.org/10.1351/pac200173121969
Bueno, A. M.; Contento, A. M.; Ríos, Á. Validation of a Screening Method for the Rapid 
Control of Sulfonamide Residues Based on Electrochemical Detection Using Multiwalled 
Carbon Nanotubes-Glassy Carbon Electrodes. Analy. Methods 2013, 5 (23), 6821–6829. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ay41437j 
Burlingame, A. L.; Boyd, R. K.; Gaskell, S. J. Mass Spectrometry. Analy. Chem. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 1996, 68 (12). https://doi.org/10.1021/a1960021u 
Cai, H.; Xu, C.; He, P.; Fang, Y. Colloid Au-enhanced DNA Immobilization for the 
Electrochemical Detection of Sequence-Specific DNA. J. Electroanaly. Chem. 2001, 510 
(1–2), 78–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0728(01)00548-4 
Carbone, M.; Gorton, L.; Antiochia, R. An Overview of the Latest Graphene-Based Sensors for 
Glucose Detection: The Effects of Graphene Defects. Electroanalysis 2015, 27 (1), 16–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/elan.201400409 
Chang, J.; Zhou, G.; Christensen, E. R.; Heideman, R.; Chen, J. Graphene-Based Sensors for 
Detection of Heavy Metals in Water: A Review. Analy. Bioanaly. Chem. 2014, 406 (16), 
3957–3975. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-014-7804-x 
Chatterjee, S. G.; Chatterjee, S.; Ray, A. K.; Chakraborty, A. K. Graphene–Metal Oxide 
Nanohybrids for Toxic Gas Sensor: A Review. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 221, 1170–1181. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2015.07.070  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
290 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Chemla, Y. R.; Grossman, H. L.; Poon, Y.; McDermott, R.; Stevens, R.; Alper, M. D.; Clarke, 
J. Ultrasensitive Magnetic Biosensor for Homogeneous Immunoassay. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 2000, 97 (26), 14268–14272. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.26.14268 
Chen, T. W.; Sheng, Z. H.; Wang, K.; Wang, F. B.; Xia, X. H. Determination of Explosives 
Using Electrochemically Reduced Graphene. Chem.–Asian J. 2011, 6 (5), 1210–1216. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/asia.201000836 
Choudhary, M. K.; Singh, M.; Saharan, V. Application of Nanobiosensors in Agriculture. 
Popular Kheti 2015, 3, 130–135. 
Cui, Y.; Lieber, C. M. Functional Nanoscale Electronic Devices Assembled Using Silicon 
Nanowire Building Blocks. Science 2001, 291 (5505), 851–853. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.291.5505.851 
da Silva, M. K.; Vanzela, H. C.; Defavari, L. M.; Cesarino, I. Determination of Carbamate 
Pesticide in Food Using a Biosensor Based on Reduced Graphene Oxide and Acetylcho￾linesterase Enzyme. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 277, 555–561. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2018.09.051 
Davis, J. J.; Coleman, K. S.; Azamian, B. R.; Bagshaw, C. B.; Green, M. L. Chemical and 
Biochemical Sensing with Modified Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes. Chem. Eur. J. 2003, 
9 (16), 3732–3739. https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.200304872 
De Heer, W. A.; Berger, C.; Wu, X.; First, P. N.; Conrad, E. H.; Li, X.; Potemski, M. Epitaxial 
Graphene. Solid State Commun. 2007, 143 (1–2), 92–100, 154. 
Delgado, K. P.; Raymundo-Pereira, P. A.; Campos, A. M.; Oliveira Jr, O. N.; Janegitz, B. C. 
Ultralow Cost Electrochemical Sensor Made of Potato Starch and Carbon Black Nanoballs 
to Detect Tetracycline in Waters and Milk. Electroanalysis 2018, 30 (9), 2153–2159. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/elan.201800294 
Della Pelle, F.; Del Carlo, M.; Sergi, M.; Compagnone, D.; Escarpa, A. Press-Transferred 
Carbon Black Nanoparticles on Board of Microfluidic Chips for Rapid and Sensitive 
Amperometric Determination of Phenyl Carbamate Pesticides in Environmental Samples. 
Microchim. Acta 2016, 183 (12), 3143–3149. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00604-016-1964-7 
Diamanti-Kandarakis, E.; Bourguignon, J. P.; Giudice, L. C.; Hauser, R.; Prins, G. S.; Soto, 
A. M.; Gore, A. C. Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals: an Endocrine Society Scientific 
Statement. Endocr. Rev. 2009, 30 (4), 293–342. https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2009-0002 
Dong, X.; He, L.; Liu, Y.; Piao, Y. Preparation of Highly Conductive Biochar Nanoparticles 
for Rapid and Sensitive Detection of 17β-Estradiol in Water. Electrochim. Acta 2018, 292, 
55–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.09.129 
Duan, D.; Si, X.; Ding, Y.; Li, L.; Ma, G.; Zhang, L.; Jian, B. A Novel Molecularly Imprinted 
Electrochemical Sensor Based on Double Sensitization by MOF/CNTs and Prussian Blue 
for Detection of 17β-Estradiol. Bioelectrochemistry 2019, 129, 211–217. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bioelechem.2019.04.014 
Endo, M.; Kim, Y. A.; Hayashi, T.; Fukai, Y.; Oshida, K.; Terrones, M.; Dresselhaus, M. 
S. Structural Characterization of Cup-Stacked-Type Nanofibers with an Entirely Hollow 
Core. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 80 (7), 1267–1269. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1450264 
Erol, O.; Uyan, I.; Hatip, M.; Yilmaz, C.; Tekinay, A. B.; Guler, M. O. Recent Advances in 
Bioactive 1D and 2D Carbon Nanomaterials for Biomedical Applications. Nanomed. 
Nanotechnol. Biol. Med.2018,14 (7), 2433–2454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2017.03.021 
Eskenazi, B.; Bradman, A.; Castorina, R. Exposures of Children to Organophosphate 
Pesticides and Their Potential Adverse Health Effects. Environ. Health Perspect. 1999, 107 
(Suppl 3), 409–419. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.99107s3409  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 291 
Filip, J.; Kasák, P.; Tkac, J. Graphene as Signal Amplifier for Preparation of Ultrasensitive 
Electrochemical Biosensors. Chem. Papers 2015, 69 (1), 112–133. https://doi.org/10.1515/ 
chempap-2015-0051 
Fu, X.; Chen, L.; Choo, J. Optical Nanoprobes for Ultrasensitive Immunoassay. Analy. Chem., 
2017, 89 (1), 124–137. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02251 
Gao, C.; Guo, Z.; Liu, J. H.; Huang, X. J. The New Age of Carbon Nanotubes: An Updated 
Review of Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes in Electrochemical Sensors. Nanoscale 2012, 
4 (6), 1948–1963. https://doi.org/10.1039/C2NR11757F 
Gevaerd, A.; Banks, C. E.; Bergamini, M. F.; Marcolino-Junior, L. H. Graphene Quantum 
Dots Modified Screen-printed Electrodes as Electroanalytical Sensing Platform for Diethyl￾stilbestrol. Electroanalysis 2019, 31 (5), 838–843. https://doi.org/10.1002/elan.201800838 
Gong, J. L.; Sarkar, T.; Badhulika, S.; Mulchandani, A. Label-Free Chemiresistive Biosensor 
for Mercury (II) Based on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes and Structure-Switching DNA. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102 (1), 013701. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4773569 
Goyal, R. N.; Chatterjee, S.; Rana, A. R. S. The Effect of Modifying an Edge-Plane Pyrolytic 
Graphite Electrode with Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes on Its Use for Sensing Diclofenac. 
Carbon, 2010, 48 (14), 4136–4144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2010.07.024 
Guilbault, G. G.; Pravda, M.; Kreuzer, M.; O’sullivan, C. K. Biosensors—42 Years and 
Counting. Analy. Lett. 2004, 37 (8), 1481–1496. https://doi.org/10.1081/AL-120037582 
Gulia, S.; Rohilla, R. K.; Sankhla, M. S.; Kumar, R.; Sonone, S. S.; Impact of Pesticide Toxicity 
in Aquatic Environment. Biointerf. Res. Appl. Chem. 2020, 11 (3), 10131–10140. https:// 
dx.doi.org/10.33263/BRIAC113.1013110140 
Guo, T.; Nikolaev, P.; Rinzler, A. G.; Tomanek, D.; Colbert, D. T.; Smalley, R. E. Self-Assembly 
of Tubular Fullerenes. J. Phys. Chem. 1995, 99 (27), 10694–10697. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
j100027a002 
Hass, J.; De Heer, W. A.; Conrad, E. H. The Growth and Morphology of Epitaxial Multilayer 
Graphene. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2008, 20 (32), 323202. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953­
8984/20/32/323202 
Hernández, R.; Vallés, C.; Benito, A. M.; Maser, W. K.; Rius, F. X.; Riu, J. Graphene-Based 
Potentiometric Biosensor for the Immediate Detection of Living Bacteria. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2014, 54, 553–557. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2013.11.053 
Hernandez, Y.; Nicolosi, V.; Lotya, M.; Blighe, F. M.; Sun, Z.; De, S.; Boland, J. J. High-Yield 
Production of Graphene by Liquid-Phase Exfoliation of Graphite. Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 
3 (9), 563–568. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2008.215 
Heydari-Bafrooei, E.; Ensafi, A. A. Typically Used Carbon-Based Nanomaterials in the 
Fabrication of Biosensors. In Electrochemical Biosensors; Elsevier, 2019; pp 77–98. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816491-4.00004-8 
Hrapovic, S.; Liu, Y.; Male, K. B.; Luong, J. H. Electrochemical Biosensing Platforms Using 
Platinum Nanoparticles and Carbon Nanotubes. Analy. Chem.2004,76(4), 1083–1088. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/ac035143t 
Hu, C.; Hu, S. Carbon Nanotube-Based Electrochemical Sensors: Principles and Applications 
in Biomedical Systems. J. Sens. 2009. https://doi.org/10.1155/2009/187615 
Hu, L.; Cheng, Q.; Chen, D.; Ma, M.; Wu, K. Liquid-Phase Exfoliated Graphene as Highly￾Sensitive Sensor for Simultaneous Determination of Endocrine Disruptors: Diethylstilbestrol 
and Estradiol. J. Hazardous Mater. 2015, 283, 157–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat. 
2014.08.067  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
292 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Hu, P.; Zhang, J.; Li, L. E.; Wang, Z.; O’Neill, W.; Estrela, P. Carbon Nanostructure-Based 
Field-Effect Transistors for Label-Free Chemical/Biological Sensors. Sensors 2010, 10 (5), 
5133–5159. https://doi.org/10.3390/s100505133 
Huang, Y.; Dong, X.; Liu, Y.; Li, L. J.; Chen, P. Graphene-Based Biosensors for Detection 
of Bacteria and Their Metabolic Activities. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21 (33), 12358–12362. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c1jm11436k 
Hummers Jr, W. S.; Offeman, R. E. Preparation of Graphitic Oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 
80 (6), 1339–1339. 
Iijima, S. Carbon Nanotubes: Past, Present, and Future. Phys. B Condens. Matter 2002, 323 
(1–4), 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-4526(02)00869-4 
Iijima, S. Helical Microtubules of Graphitic Carbon. Nature 1991, 354 (6348), 56–58. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/354056a0 
Iijima, S.; Ichihashi, T. Single-Shell Carbon Nanotubes of 1-nm Diameter. Nature 1993, 363 
(6430), 603–605. https://doi.org/10.1038/363603a0 
Jianrong, C.; Yuqing, M.; Nongyue, H.; Xiaohua, W.; Sijiao, L. Nanotechnology and Biosensors. 
Biotechnol. Adv. 2004, 22 (7), 505–518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2004.03.004 
Kabariya, J. H.; Ramani, V. M. Nanobiosensors, as a Next-Generation Diagnostic Device 
for Quality & Safety of Food and Dairy Product. In Nanotechnology; Springer: Singapore, 
2017; pp 115–129. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-4678-0_7 
Kanjana, D. Advancement of Nanotechnology Applications on Plant Nutrients Management 
and Soil Improvement. In Nanotechnology; Springer: Singapore, 2017; pp 209–234. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-4678-0_12 
Karousis, N.; Suarez-Martinez, I.; Ewels, C. P.; Tagmatarchis, N. Structure, Properties, 
Functionalization, and Applications of Carbon Nanohorns. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116 (8), 
4850–4883. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00611 
Kim, K. S.; Zhao, Y.; Jang, H.; Lee, S. Y.; Kim, J. M.; Kim, K. S.; Hong, B. H. Large-Scale 
Pattern Growth of Graphene Films for Stretchable Transparent Electrodes. Nature 2009, 
457 (7230), 706–710. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07719 
Kim, M. G.; Shon, Y.; Lee, J.; Byun, Y.; Choi, B. S.; Kim, Y. B.; Oh, Y. K. Double Stranded 
Aptamer-Anchored Reduced Graphene Oxide as Target-Specific Nano Detector. Biomaterials 
2014, 35 (9), 2999–3004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.12.058 
Kissinger, P. T. Biosensors—a Perspective. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2005, 20 (12), 2512–2516. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2004.10.004 
Koedrith, P.; Thasiphu, T.; Weon, J. I.; Boonprasert, R.; Tuitemwong, K.; Tuitemwong, P. 
Recent Trends in Rapid Environmental Monitoring of Pathogens and Toxicants: Potential of 
Nanoparticle-Based Biosensor and Applications. Sci. World J. 2015. https://doi.org/10.1155/ 
2015/510982 
Kroto, H. W.; Heath, J. R.; O’Brien, S. C.; Curl, R. F.; Smalley, R. E. C60: Buckminsterfullerene. 
Nature 1985, 318 (6042), 162–163. 
Kumar, S.; Rani, R.; Dilbaghi, N.; Tankeshwar, K.; Kim, K. H. Carbon Nanotubes: A Novel 
Material for Multifaceted Applications in Human Healthcare. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46 (1), 
158–196. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6CS00517A 
Kwak, S. Y.; Wong, M. H.; Lew, T. T. S.; Bisker, G.; Lee, M. A.; Kaplan, A.; Hamann, C. 
Nanosensor Technology Applied to Living Plant Systems. Annu. Rev. Analy. Chem. 2017, 
10, 113–140. 
Li, J.; Guo, S.; Zhai, Y.; Wang, E. High-Sensitivity Determination of Lead and Cadmium 
Based on the Nafion-Graphene Composite Film. Analy. Chim. Acta 2009, 649 (2), 196–201. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2009.07.030  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 293 
Li, Y. T.; Qu, L. L.; Li, D. W.; Song, Q. X.; Fathi, F.; Long, Y. T. Rapid and Sensitive in-Situ 
Detection of Polar Antibiotics in Water Using a Disposable Ag–Graphene Sensor Based 
on Electrophoretic Preconcentration and Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Biosens. 
Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 94–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2012.12.005 
Li, Y.; Zhao, X.; Li, P.; Huang, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhang, J. Highly Sensitive Fe3O4 Nanobeads/ 
Graphene-Based Molecularly Imprinted Electrochemical Sensor for 17β-Estradiol in Water. 
Analy. Chim. Acta 2015, 884, 106–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2015.05.022 
Lian, Y.; Yuan, M.; Zhao, H. DNA Wrapped Metallic Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Sensor 
for Pb (II) Detection. Fullerenes Nanotubes Carbon Nanostruct. 2014, 22 (5), 510–518. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1536383X.2012.690462 
Lin, Z.; Wu, G.; Zhao, L.; Lai, K. W. C. Carbon Nanomaterial-Based Biosensors: A Review 
of Design and Applications. IEEE Nanotechnol. Magaz. 2019, 13 (5), 4–14. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/MNANO.2019.2927774 
Liu, T.; Tang, J. A.; Jiang, L. The Enhancement Effect of Gold Nanoparticles as a Surface 
Modifier on DNA Sensor Sensitivity. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 313 (1), 3–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.11.098 
Liu, Y.; Hou, H.; You, T. Synthesis of Carbon Nanofibers for Mediatorless Sensitive Detection 
of NADH. Electroanaly. Int. J. Devoted Fundament. Pract. Aspects Electroanaly. 2008, 20 
(15), 1708–1713. https://doi.org/10.1002/elan.200804242 
Liu, Y; Wei, W. Layer-by-Layer Assembled DNA Functionalized Single-Walled Carbon 
Nanotube Hybrids for Arsenic (III) Detection. Electrochem. Commun. 2008, 10 (6), 872–875. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2008.03.013 
Malik, P.; Katyal, V.; Malik, V.; Asatkar, A.; Inwati, G.; Mukherjee, T. K. Nanobiosensors: 
Concepts and Variations. Int. Sch. Res. Notices 2013. 
Mao, S.; Yu, K.; Lu, G.; Chen, J. Highly Sensitive Protein Sensor Based on Thermally￾Reduced Graphene Oxide Field-Effect Transistor. Nano Res. 2011, 4 (10), 921. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s12274-011-0148-3 
Mazzei, F.; Favero, G.; Bollella, P.; Tortolini, C.; Mannina, L.; Conti, M. E.; Antiochia, R. 
Recent Trends in Electrochemical Nanobiosensors for Environmental Analysis. Int. J. 
Environ. Health 2015, 7 (3), 267–291. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJENVH.2015.073210 
Mohammadi Aloucheh, R.; Alaee Mollabashi, Y.; Asadi, A.; Baris, O.; Gholamzadeh, S. The 
Role of Nanobiosensors in Identifying Pathogens and Environmental Hazards. Anthropogenic 
Pollut. J. 2018, 2 (2), 16–25. https://dx.doi.org/10.22034/ap.2018.572812.1024 
Mokhtarzadeh, A.; Eivazzadeh-Keihan, R.; Pashazadeh, P.; Hejazi, M.; Gharaatifar, N.; 
Hasanzadeh, M.; de la Guardia, M. Nanomaterial-Based Biosensors for Detection of 
Pathogenic Virus. TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2017, 97, 445–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trac.2017.10.005 
Montes, R.; Céspedes, F.; Gabriel, D.; Baeza, M. Electrochemical Biosensor Based on 
Optimized Biocomposite for Organophosphorus and Carbamates Pesticides Detection. J. 
Nanomater. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/7093606 
Moraes, F. C.; Rossi, B.; Donatoni, M. C.; de Oliveira, K. T.; Pereira, E. C. Sensitive 
Determination of 17β-Estradiol in River Water Using a Graphene Based Electrochemical 
Sensor. Analy. Chim. Acta 2015, 881, 37–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2015.04.043 
Noyrod, P.; Chailapakul, O.; Wonsawat, W.; Chuanuwatanakul, S. The Simultaneous 
Determination of Isoproturon and Carbendazim Pesticides by Single Drop Analysis Using a 
Graphene-Based Electrochemical Sensor. J. Electroanaly. Chem. 2014, 719, 54–59. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2014.02.001  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
294 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Oliveira, T. M.; Ribeiro, F. W.; Sousa, C. P.; Salazar-Banda, G. R.; de Lima-Neto, P.; Correia, 
A. N.; Morais, S. Current Overview and Perspectives on Carbon-Based (Bio) Sensors 
for Carbamate Pesticides Electroanalysis. TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2020, 124, 115779. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2019.115779 
O’Mahony, A. M.; Wang, J. Nanomaterial-Based Electrochemical Detection of Explosives: 
A Review of Recent Developments. Analy. Methods 2013, 5 (17), 4296–4309. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c3ay40636a 
Padrón-Sanz, C.; Halko, R.; Sosa-Ferrera, Z.; Santana-Rodríguez, J. J. Combination of 
Microwave Assisted Micellar Extraction and Liquid Chromatography for the Determination 
of Organophosphorus Pesticides in Soil Samples. J. Chromatogr. A 2005, 1078 (1–2), 13–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2005.05.005 
Pandit, S.; Dasgupta, D.; Dewan, N.; Prince, A. Nanotechnology Based Biosensors and Its 
Application. Pharma Innov. 2016, 5 (6, Part A), 18. 
Paredes, J. I.; Villar-Rodil, S.; Martínez-Alonso, A.; Tascon, J. M. D. Graphene Oxide 
Dispersions in Organic Solvents. Langmuir 2008, 24 (19), 10560–10564. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/la801744a 
Park, M.; Cella, L. N.; Chen, W.; Myung, N. V.; Mulchandani, A. Carbon Nanotubes-Based 
Chemiresistive Immunosensor for Small Molecules: Detection of Nitroaromatic Explosives. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2010, 26 (4), 1297–1301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2010.07.017 
Pennington, J. C.; Brannon, J. M. Environmental Fate of Explosives. Thermochim. Acta 2002, 
384 (1–2), 163–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-6031(01)00801-2 
Ping, J.; Wang, Y.; Fan, K.; Wu, J.; Ying, Y. Direct Electrochemical Reduction of Graphene Oxide 
on Ionic Liquid Doped Screen-Printed Electrode and Its Electrochemical Biosensing Applica￾tion. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2011, 28 (1), 204–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2011.07.018 
Prasad, R.; Bhattacharyya, A.; Nguyen, Q. D. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: 
Recent Developments, Challenges, and Perspectives. Front. Microbiol., 2017, 8, 1014. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.01014 
Pumera, M. Graphene in Biosensing. Mater. Today, 2011, 14 (7–8), 308–315. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S1369-7021(11)70160-2 
Qu, K.; Zhang, X.; Lv, Z.; Li, M.; Cui, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Kong, Q. Simultaneous Detection of 
Diethylstilbestrol and Malachite Green Using Conductive Carbon Black Paste Electrode. 
Int. J. Electrochem. Sci, 2012, 7, 1827–1839. 
Rai, V.; Acharya, S.; Dey, N. Implications of Nanobiosensors in Agriculture. J. Biomater. 
Nanobiotechnol. 2012, 3, 315–324. 
Ramnani, P.; Saucedo, N. M.; Mulchandani, A. Carbon Nanomaterial-Based Electrochemical 
Biosensors for Label-Free Sensing Of Environmental Pollutants. Chemosphere 2016, 143, 
85–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.04.063 
Revin, S. B.; John, S. A. Electrochemical Sensor for Neurotransmitters at Physiological pH 
Using a Heterocyclic Conducting Polymer Modified Electrode. Analyst 2012, 137 (1), 
209–215. https://doi.org/10.1039/C1AN15746A 
Richardson, J.; Hawkins, P.; Luxton, R. The Use of Coated Paramagnetic Particles as a Physical 
Label in a Magneto-Immunoassay. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2001, 16 (9–12), 989–993. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0956-5663(01)00201-9 
Rodríguez-Lázaro, D.; D’Agostino, M.; Herrewegh, A.; Pla, M.; Cook, N.; Ikonomopoulos, 
J. Real-Time PCR-Based Methods for Detection of Mycobacterium avium Subsp. 
Paratuberculosis in Water and Milk. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2005, 101 (1), 93–104. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2004.09.005  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 295 
Royea, W. J.; Hamann, T. W.; Brunschwig, B. S.; Lewis, N. S. A Comparison between 
Interfacial Electron-Transfer Rate Constants at Metallic and Graphite Electrodes. J. Phys. 
Chem. B 2006, 110 (39), 19433–19442. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp062141e 
Russell, B. A.; Khanal, P.; Calbi, M. M.; Yudasaka, M.; Iijima, S.; Migone, A. D. Sorption 
Kinetics on Open Carbon Nanohorn Aggregates: The Effect of Molecular Diameter. 
Molecules 2016, 21 (4), 521. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules21040521 
Šafařı́
k, I.; Šafařı́
ková, M. Use of Magnetic Techniques for the Isolation of Cells. J.
Chromatogr. B Biomed. Sci. App. 1999, 722 (1–2), 33–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378­
4347 (98)00338-7 
Salih, F. E.; Oularbi, L.; Halim, E.; Elbasri, M.; Ouarzane, A.; El Rhazi, M. Conducting 
Polymer/Ionic Liquid Composite Modified Carbon Paste Electrode for the Determination of 
Carbaryl in Real Samples. Electroanalysis 2018, 30 (8), 1855–1864. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
elan.201800152 
Salouti, M.; Derakhshan, F. K. Biosensors and Nanobiosensors in Environmental Applications. 
In Biogenic Nano-Particles and Their Use in Agro-Ecosystems; Springer: Singapore, 2020; 
pp 515–591. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-2985-6_26 
Sankhla, M. S.; Kumari, M.; Nandan, M.; Kumar, R.; Agrawal, P. Heavy Metals Contamination 
in Water and Their Hazardous Effect on Human Health-A Review. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. 
App. Sci. 2016, 5 (10), 759–766. https://doi.org/10.20546/ijcmas.2016.510.082 
Sankhla, M. S.; Kumari, M.; Sharma, K.; Kushwah, R. S.; Kumar, R. Water Contamination 
through Pesticide & Their Toxic Effect on Human Health. Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. 
Technol. (IJRASET) 2018, 6 (1), 967–970. https://doi.org/10.22214/ijraset.2018.1146 
Sarkar, T.; Srinives, S. Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes-Calixarene Hybrid for Sub-ppm 
Detection of NO2. Microelectron. Eng. 2018, 197, 28–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee. 
2018.05.004 
Sharma, C. S.; Katepalli, H.; Sharma, A.; Madou, M. Fabrication and Electrical Conductivity 
of Suspended Carbon Nanofiber Arrays. Carbon 2011, 49 (5), 1727–1732. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.carbon.2010.12.058 
Silva, M.; Cesarino, I. Evaluation of a Nanocomposite Based on Reduced Graphene Oxide 
and Gold Nanoparticles as an Electrochemical Platform for Detection of Sulfamethazine. J. 
Compos. Sci. 2019, 3 (2), 59. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcs3020059 
Smith, S. C.; Rodrigues, D. F. Carbon-Based Nanomaterials for Removal of Chemical and 
Biological Contaminants from Water: A Review of Mechanisms and Applications. Carbon 
2015, 91, 122–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2015.04.043 
So, H. M.; Park, D. W.; Jeon, E. K.; Kim, Y. H.; Kim, B. S.; Lee, C. K.; Lee, J. O. Detection 
and Titer Estimation of Escherichia coli Using Aptamer-Functionalized Single-Walled 
Carbon-Nanotube Field-Effect Transistors. Small 2008, 4 (2), 197–201. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/smll.200700664 
Sonone, S. S.; Jadhav, S.; Sankhla, M. S.; Kumar, R. Water Contamination by Heavy Metals 
and Their Toxic Effect on Aquaculture and Human Health through Food Chain. Lett. Appl. 
NanoBioSci. 2020, 10 (2), 2148–2166. https://doi.org/10.33263/LIANBS102.21482166 
Sotiropoulou, S.; Gavalas, V.; Vamvakaki, V.; Chaniotakis, N. A. Novel Carbon Materials in 
Biosensor Systems. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2003, 18 (2–3), 211–215. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0956-5663(02)00183-5 
Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D. A.; Piner, R. D.; Kohlhaas, K. A.; Kleinhammes, A.; Jia, Y.; Ruoff, R. 
S. Synthesis of Graphene-Based Nanosheets via Chemical Reduction of Exfoliated Graphite 
Oxide. Carbon 2007, 45 (7), 1558–1565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2007.02.034  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
296 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Steffens, C.; Steffens, J.; Graboski, A. M.; Manzoli, A.; Leite, F. L. Nanosensors for Detection 
of Pesticides in Water. In New Pesticides and Soil Sensors; Academic Press, 2017; pp 
595–635. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804299-1.00017-5 
Su, X.; Chew, F. T.; Li, S. F. Design and Application of Piezoelectric Quartz Crystal-Based 
Immunoassay. Analy. Sci. 2000, 16 (2), 107–114. https://doi.org/10.2116/analsci.16.107 
Sun, X. M.; Ji, Z.; Xiong, M. X.; Chen, W. The Electrochemical Sensor for the Determination 
of Tetracycline Based on Graphene/L-Cysteine Composite Film. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 
164 (4), B107. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0831704jes 
Tang, X.; Liu, Y.; Hou, H.; You, T. A nonenzymatic sensor for Xanthine Based on Electrospun 
Carbon Nanofibers Modified Electrode. Talanta 83 (5), 1410–1414. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.talanta.2010.11.019 
Thakur, M. S.; Ragavan, K. V. Biosensors in Food Processing. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 50 
(4), 625–641. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-012-0783-z 
Thévenot, D. R.; Toth, K.; Durst, R. A.; Wilson, G. S. Electrochemical Biosensors: Recom￾mended Definitions and Classification. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2001, 16 (1–2), 121–131. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0956-5663(01)00115-4
Torrinha, Á.; Oliveira, T. M.; Ribeiro, F. W.; Correia, A. N.; Lima-Neto, P.; Morais, S. 
Application of Nanostructured Carbon-Based Electrochemical (Bio) Sensors for Screening 
of Emerging Pharmaceutical Pollutants in Waters and Aquatic Species: A Review. Nanomater. 
2020, 10 (7), 1268. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10071268
Ünal, F.; Yüzbaşıoğlu, D.; Yılmaz, S.; Akıncı, N.; Aksoy, H. Genotoxic Effects of 
Chlorophenoxy Herbicide Diclofop-Methyl in Mice in Vivo and in Human Lymphocytes 
in Vitro. Drug Chem. Toxicol. 2011, 34 (4), 390–395. https://doi.org/10.3109/01480545.2 
010.538695 
Vandenberg, L. N.; Colborn, T.; Hayes, T. B.; Heindel, J. J.; Jacobs Jr, D. R.; Lee, D. H.; Zoeller, 
R. T. Hormones and Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals: Low-Dose Effects and Nonmonotonic 
Dose Responses. Endocr. Rev. 2012, 33 (3), 378–455. https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2011-1050 
Vega, D.; Agüí, L.; González-Cortés, A.; Yáñez-Sedeño, P.; Pingarrón, J. M. Voltammetry 
and Amperometric Detection of Tetracyclines at Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotube Modified 
Electrodes. Analy. Bioanaly. Chem. 2007, 389 (3), 951–958. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00216-007-1505-7 
Wanekaya, A. K.; Chen, W.; Mulchandani, A. Recent Biosensing Developments in Environ￾mental Security. J. Environ. Monitor. 2008, 10 (6), 703–712. https://doi.org/10.1039/b806830p 
Wang, J. Carbon-Nanotube Based Electrochemical Biosensors: A Review. Electroanaly. Int. 
J. Devoted o Fundament. Pract. Aspects Electroanaly. 2005, 17 (1), 7–14. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/elan.200403113 
Wang, J. Electrochemical Nucleic Acid Biosensors. Analy. Chim.Acta 2002, 469 (1), 63–71. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0003-2670(01)01399-X 
Wang, J.; Musameh, M.; Lin, Y. Solubilization of Carbon Nanotubes by Nafion toward the 
Preparation of Amperometric Biosensors. J. Ame. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125 (9), 2408–2409. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja028951v 
Wang, J.; Yang, S.; Guo, D.; Yu, P.; Li, D.; Ye, J.; Mao, L. Comparative Studies on 
Electrochemical Activity of Graphene Nanosheets and Carbon Nanotubes. Electrochem. 
Commun. 2009a, 11 (10), 1892–1895. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2009.08.019 
Wang, L.; Chen, W.; Xu, D.; Shim, B. S.; Zhu, Y.; Sun, F.; Kotov, N. A. Simple, Rapid, Sensitive, 
and Versatile SWNT−Paper Sensor for Environmental Toxin Detection Competitive with 
ELISA. Nano Lett.2009b, 9 (12), 4147–4152. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl902368r  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials 297 
Wang, S.; Li, L.; Jin, H.; Yang, T.; Bao, W.; Huang, S.; Wang, J. Electrochemical Detection of 
Hepatitis B and Papilloma Virus DNAs Using SWCNTArray Coated with Gold Nanoparticles. 
Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 205–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2012.08.021 
Wang, Y.; Hu, S. Applications of Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene for Electrochemical 
Sensing of Environmental Pollutants. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2016, 16 (8), 7852–7872. 
https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.2016.12762 
Ward, M. D.; Ebersole, R. C. US Pat. 5,501,986 1996. 
Wei, B. Q.; Vajtai, R.; Ajayan, P. M. Reliability and Current Carrying Capacity of Carbon 
Nanotubes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2001, 79 (8), 1172–1174. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1396632 
Wilder, J. W.; Venema, L. C.; Rinzler, A. G.; Smalley, R. E.; Dekker, C. Electronic Structure 
of Atomically Resolved Carbon Nanotubes. Nature 1998, 391 (6662), 59–62. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/34139 
Xu, J.; Lu, X.; Li, B. Synthesis, Functionalization, and Characterization. In Biomedical 
Applications and Toxicology of Carbon Nanomaterials; Chen, C., Wang, H., Eds.; 
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA: Weinheim, Germany, 2016; pp 1e28. 
Xu, M.; Wang, R.; Li, Y. Electrochemical Biosensors for Rapid Detection of Escherichia coli 
O157: H7. Talanta, 2017, 162, 511–522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2016.10.050 
Yadav, H.; Sankhla, M. S.; Kumar, R. Pesticides-Induced Carcinogenic & Neurotoxic Effect 
on Human. Forensic Res. Criminol. Int. J. 2019, 7 (5), 243–245. https://doi.org/10.15406/ 
frcij.2019.07.00288 
Yang, N.; Yu, S.; Macpherson, J. V.; Einaga, Y.; Zhao, H.; Zhao, G.; Jiang, X. Conductive 
Diamond: Synthesis, Properties, and Electrochemical Applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 
48 (1), 157–204. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00757D 
Yao, Y.; Ping, J. Recent Advances in Graphene-Based Freestanding Paper-Like Materials for 
Sensing Applications. TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2018, 105, 75–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trac.2018.04.014 
Yılmaz, F.; Özdemir, N.; Demirak, A.; Tuna, A. L. Heavy Metal Levels in Two Fish Species 
Leuciscus cephalus and Lepomis gibbosus. Food Chem. 2007, 100 (2), 830–835. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2005.09.020 
Zahid, M. U.; Pervaiz, E.; Hussain, A.; Shahzad, M. I.; Niazi, M. B. K. Synthesis of Carbon 
Nanomaterials from Different Pyrolysis Techniques: A Review. Mater. Res. Express 2018, 
5 (5), 052002. https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/aac05b 
Zelada-Guillén, G. A.; Riu, J.; Düzgün, A.; Rius, F. X. Immediate Detection of Living Bacteria 
at Ultralow Concentrations Using a Carbon Nanotube Based Potentiometric Aptasensor. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48 (40), 7334–7337. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200902090 
Zhang, W.; Zhu, S.; Luque, R.; Han, S.; Hu, L.; Xu, G. Recent Development of Carbon 
Electrode Materials and Their Bioanalytical and Environmental Applications. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2016, 45 (3), 715–752. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CS00297D PART IV
 
Nanoremediation
 FERNANDA MARIA POLICARPO TONELLI1
, 
FLÁVIA CRISTINA POLICARPO TONELLI2*, MOLINE SEVERINO LEMOS1
, 
and DANILO ROBERTO CARVALHO FERREIRA3
1
Department of Cell Biology, ICB/UFMG, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
2
Department of Pharmacy, UFSJ/CCO, Divinópolis, Brazil
3
Department of Materials, CDTN/CNEN, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: flacristinaptonelli@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Environmental pollution is a concern worldwide as it may cause serious 
damage to living beings’ health, threatening the existence of live on Earth. 
Activities performed by humans such as industrial ones are important sources 
of pollution. Regarding water, the increasing world’s population needs to 
receive from water treatment plants, a product with considerable quality to 
survive in a healthy way. However, with the enormous array of organic and 
inorganic contaminants that can pollute groundwater and surface water is 
becoming even more difficult to regulatory agencies to set quality standards 
for each of them and to assure if a water sample is secure to be used. Strategies 
to deal with pollution in order to reduce the risk it represents to ecosystems 
are highly necessary. When it comes to water pollution, nanoscience offers 
interesting alternatives. This chapter will address nanomaterials in protocols 
aiming to remediate water pollution.
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 10
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water 
Pollution302 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
10.1 INTRODUCTION
Environmental pollution is an old problem that has become even more risky 
as human actions are increasingly performed ignoring sustainability polices 
(Peuke and Rennenberg, 2005). Since Bronze Age, for example, the heavy 
metal lead (Longman et al., 2018), from which poisoning can impair cogni￾tive ability and cause developmental disorders or at high levels may damage 
circulatory and nervous systems leading to death, is a harmful environmental 
contaminant (Yamada et al., 2020). However, the rapid industrialization and 
urbanization that happened and/or has been happening in several countries 
worldwide, increases the negative impacts over ecosystems threatening life 
on Earth (Chaoua et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020). 
Organic (e.g., pesticides and dyes (Tonelli and Tonelli, 2020)) and 
inorganic (e.g., heavy metals and radionuclides (Salt et al., 1995)) pollutants 
that can be accumulated by living forms passing through food chain increasing 
their harmful potential and/or persist on polluted environs for a long period 
of time are of special concern (Guerra et al., 2018; Varjani et al., 2019; 
Zhang et al., 2019). They, at low levels and without prolonged exposure, can 
cause acute intoxication and can damage DNA and as the dose and time of 
exposure increase, severe diseases, such as chronic kidney disease, cancer 
or even death may occur (Gavrilescu et al., 2015; Bagazgoïtia et al., 2018; 
Fatima et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2018; Ali et al., 2019; Farkhondeh et al., 
2020; Fulekar and Pathak, 2020). 
When it comes to water pollution, two important contaminant’s sources 
deserve to be highlighted: landfills and wastewaters. 
Landfills are highly dangerous waste disposal practice, they pollute not 
only water but also soil and air. Leachate production can end up contami￾nating the surface water and also groundwater (Kim and Owens, 2010). 
Domestic wastewater possesses large concentration of organic material 
(Boutin and Eme, 2016), which can disrupt the ecosystem where the discharge 
occurs, and also causes hazard to living being in contact with this water prior 
to treatment (Moretti et al., 2015; Newton et al., 2015), and in great urban 
centers also a high level of drugs and human estrogenic hormones that are 
dangerous to ecosystem’s balance (Manickum et al., 2011, Gimiliani et al., 
2016; Deng et al., 2020). Mixed pollutants are present in domestic wastewater 
and this composition changes as it reflects population’s lifestyle (Gray, 2004). 
Emerging contaminants such as estrogenic endocrine-disrupting chemicals 
(e.g., bisphenol A and polychlorinated biphenyls) (Roy et al., 2009) and 
pharmaceuticals are serious threats to living beings and that can even be Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 303 
found in treated wastewater (Klatte et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2019; Yeung et 
al, 2020). The presence of pharmaceuticals in wastewaters is a consequence 
of the increase in medicines availability to treat humans and animals and as 
bioactive compounds that can induce effects even at small amounts. They 
can damage not only the species directly in contact with them but also to 
species that will consume contaminated water or organisms (Bebianno and 
Gonzalez-Rey, 2015; Sangion and Gramatica, 2016; Mezzelani et al., 2018). 
Industrial wastewater presents an enormous nocive potential as it may 
contains toxic heavy metal, pharmaceuticals, veterinary products, personal 
care products, dyes, pesticides, food additives, industrial compounds/ 
by-products, among others dangerous substances, mainly persistent ones, 
to a greater or lesser extent depending on the type of industry from which 
it comes (Tayeb et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2017; Iloms et al., 2020). Textile 
industry’s residues are rich in synthetic dyes, such as azo dyes (El-Sikaily 
et al., 2012) that commonly present mutagenic and/or carcinogenic potential 
that can be enhanced depending on the water treatment employed to treat 
them. If aromatic amines are generated, the mutagenic/carcinogenic potential 
enhances (Bhaskar et al., 2003; Pinheiro et al., 2004; Khan and Malik, 2018). 
Some pollutants, such as phosphorus and organics are not eliminated 
by commonly applied treatments such as chemically enhanced primary 
sedimentation. Industries sometimes perform treatment before throwing 
the pollutants on rivers (where they modify chemical composition affecting 
biological equilibrium) (Kazlauskienė et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2020). And 
together with waters’ movement, the pollution may spread, thus contami￾nating a large area and also groundwater (Kim et al., 2017; Sposito et al., 
2018; Ziadi et al., 2019). 
Water is a vital resource for humans and animals and its pollution should 
receive attention. Remediation strategies are necessary once water resources 
present limited self-recovery capacity and groundwater resources are being 
depleted (Sharma et al., 2016; Kurwadkar, 2019). Scarcity threatens societies 
and conventional purification methods that are generally not sustainable 
procedures, receive an increasing demand to deal with the most different 
kinds of pollutant once most surface water before treatment presents low 
quality containing a large amount of pollutants (Schwarzenbach et al., 2006; 
Ying et al., 2017). 
Remediation strategies capable of dealing with water pollution in a cost￾effective, sustainable, and efficient way are urgently required as same as 
human’s adoption of practices to reduce pollution generation. Water treat￾ment technologies’ development alone proved to be unable to avoid reduction 304 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
in biodiversity and other negative effects of environmental contaminants 
(Melián, 2020). Wastewater treatment plants commonly require large energy 
input and the use of chemicals resulting in a relevant source of air pollution 
(Hao et al., 2019). 
10.2 THE NANOTECHNOLOGY FIELD AND THE NANOMATERIALS
Nanotechnology field has been offering materials in nanoscale since late 
1950s to a large variety of uses. The term was introduced by Norio Taniguchi 
in 1974 (Taniguchi, 1974) and different protocols to synthesize and chemically 
modify these materials to perform specific task have been proposed since then 
(Drexler, 2004; Weiss et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2008). 
The field has been in a continuous development process to advance to 
offer efficient and low-cost solutions to environmental science field (Lofrano 
et al., 2017). Green-fabricated nanomaterials have emerged as eco-friendly 
tools and green synthesis a strategic alternative to conventional physico￾chemical strategies (that commonly apply hazardous substances) to fabricate 
nanomaterials (Bolade et al., 2020; Nasrollahzadeh et al., 2021). 
Nanomaterials (NMs) can be classified as nanoparticles (NPs), nanotubes 
(NTs), nanofibers (NFs), nanowires (NWs), and nanomembranes (NMBs) 
according to shape or morphology. NMs can be simply divided into inorganic 
NMs and organic NMs (Lu and Astruc, 2020). 
Nanomaterials are versatile in function (such as delivery of drugs and genes, 
vaccine development, imaging/diagnosis, energy storage, tissue engineering 
(Tonelli et al., 2015, 2016, 2020)) due to unique properties. At least in one 
dimension, these materials present a size ranging from 1 to 100 nm, displaying 
as a consequence quantum confinement and high surface-to-volume ratio (Bethi 
and Sonawane, 2018; Werkneh et al., 2020). Other relevant physicochemical 
properties to nanomaterial’s different functions include chemical reactivity, 
high stability (thermal and physical/chemical), and catalytic activity (Pradhan 
et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2019). 
The majority of released nanoparticles aggregate as soon as hydrated, thus 
become the sediment in different rates. The extent of aggregation depends 
on the nanoparticle’s surface charge and charge magnitude. The coverage of 
the nanoparticle’s surface is likely made by mono- and divalent cations, by 
natural organic matter (NOM) or other organic molecules (Keller et al, 2010). 
It is also possible to improve some desirable characteristic and design 
a nanomaterial specifically to perform a task. Protocols to synthesize and 
functionalize (perform chemical modification on nanomaterial’s surface) Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 305 
nanomaterials can be developed to originate a material that will meet 
researchers’ necessities. Nanosensors efficient to water pollution (Priya￾darshni et al., 2018; Das et al., 2019; Rao et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019) as 
same as nanostructures to remediate water removing contaminants (Santhosh 
et al., 2016; Khan and Malik, 2019) can be produced. 
The main concern involving nanomaterials’ use to remediate polluted 
water is the safety of these materials to the living beings. It is necessary 
to keep the acceptable security level on guaranteeing that the final product 
of treatment will not threat the health of who is consuming the water or 
dealing with it in treatment plants. The risks are considered low by research 
community from nanoscience field. However, studies on nanomaterials 
biocompatibility and safety must continue to be carried out to ensure that 
they are safe to be used in large scale (Pulizzi and Sun, 2018). 
Regarding chemical constitution, nanomaterials can be divided into 
carbon-based (e.g., graphene, graphene oxide, fullerene, carbon nanotube, 
carbon quantum dots) or NOM-carbon-based (e.g., magnetic nanoparticles 
and silver quantum dots) (Drexler, 2004; Weiss et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 
2008; Wicki et al., 2015; Werkneh and Rene, 2019; Trivedi et al., 2020). 
Many nanoadsorbents and nanomembranes are now known to be in the 
development stage for the sake of large-scale production and industrializa￾tion. Given the fact that water recycling is considered an important aspect of 
sustainable development in human communities, particularly remembering 
the expansion of the water scarcity crisis around the world. Discovering 
new technologies that improve water quality are even more important in this 
scenario (Ghadimi et al., 2020). 
10.2.1 IMPORTANT NONCARBON-BASED NANOMATERIALS FOR 
WATER REMEDIATION
Noncarbon-based nanomaterial, different from the carbon-based ones does 
not possess their structure based on carbon atoms. There are noncarbon-based 
nanomaterials that are structurally based on metallic atoms, for example, that 
have proved to be able to outcompete activated carbon in the capacity to deal 
with metal’s pollution in water samples (Table 10.1) (Sharma et al., 2009). 
Recently, nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) has been receiving 
increasing attention as an efficient manner to reduce the availability of 
inorganic pollutants in water samples (Gil-Díaz et al., 2020). Uranium 
present in acid mine water could be remediated by nZVI as same as Al, 
sulfates, As, Be, Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, V, and Zn (Klimkova et al., 2011). High TABLE 10.1 Examples of Noncarbon-Based Nanomaterial to Remediate Polluted Water.
Nanomaterial Pollutant(s) References 
Nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) U, Al, sulfates, As, Be, Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, Klimkova et al. (2011) 
V, and Zn 
Cr6+ Gheju, 2011; Guan et al. (2015)
Cu2+ Li et al. (2013) 
Cu and Ni Gil-Díaz et al. (2020)
Phosphate, ammonia, Pb, nitrate, Shad et al. (2020)
chloride 
Nanoscale zero-valent iron nanoparticles coated with 4% Cr6+ Wang et al. (2018) 
bentonite
Sulfide-modified nZVI associated to graphene aerogel composite Trichloroethylene Bin et al. (2020) 
Nanoscale zero-valent iron conjugated to biochar Pb2+ Li, Wang et al. (2020)
Trichloroethylene Li, Z. et al. (2020)
Iron oxide nanoparticles Nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, ammonium Hesni et al. (2020)
Iron oxide nanoparticles associated to biochar Arsenite and arsenate Priyadarshni et al. (2020)
Coated magnetite nanoparticles Organic dyes and toxic metal ions Das et al. (2020) 
Iron magnetic nanoparticles As+5 Zeng et al. (2020)
TiO2 nanoparticles As Deliyanni et al. (2003; Mayo et al.
(2007) 
TiO2 decorated with gold nanoparticles Methylene blue Perera et al. (2020)
Hydrated Ti oxide nanoparticles on a support of agricultural Cu Chen, Y. et al. (2020) 
waste rice straw 
306 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination TABLE 10.1 (Continued) 
Nanomaterial Pollutant(s) References 
TiO2 nanoparticles decorated with SnO2 quantum dots Rhodamine B Lee et al. (2014)
ZnO quantum dots over SiO2 nanotubes Rhodamine B Zhang et al. (2012)
Cadmium telluride quantum dot associated to europium-metal Rhodamine 6G Kaur et al. (2016)
organic framework and 
Silver quantum dots Organic contaminants Kumar et al. (2019)
Silver nanoparticles coated with nanomagnetic biochar dots Dyes Zahedifar et al. (2020)
Polyvinylpyrrolidone-coated magnetite nanoparticles Oil Mirshahghassemi and Lead, 2015)
Cd, Cr, Ni, and Pb Hong et al. (2020) 
307 Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 308 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
level of Cu2+ could be remediated with efficiency greater than 96% by nZVI 
from wastewater in field experiment, and the nanomaterial could be easily 
separated and recycled enhancing cost-effectiveness and up-scalability 
(Li et al., 2013). When compared with the capacity to remediate soil 
samples, nZVI’s capacity to remediate water samples dealing with Cu and 
Ni pollution, by immobilizing them, is higher (Gil-Díaz et al., 2020). This 
nanomaterial presents high reactivity, low toxicity, low cost, the possibility 
of coated versions and bimetalic versions development and the capacity to 
also deal with organic pollutants in water samples (O’Carroll et al., 2013; 
Jiang et al., 2018). nZVI nanoparticles (nZVI-NPs) synthesized through a 
green method using the leaf extract of Mentha piperita as a reducing agent 
proved to be able to remove organic and inorganic contaminants from the 
canal at the University of Birmingham, UK (Shad et al., 2020). nZVI-NPs 
could efficiently remediate hexavalent chromium-contaminated wastewater 
(Gheju, 2011; Guan et al., 2015), but when coated with 4% bentonite, 
nZVI-NPs were even more efficient (Wang et al., 2018). When conjugated 
with biochar, the nZVI’s efficiency to deal with pollution increases. The 
hydrophilic biochar bound to nZVI presented increased binding force to deal 
with Pb2+’s pollution through reduction, complexation, and coprecipitation 
mechanisms (Li, Wang et al., 2020). Maize derived biochars bound to nZVIs 
could promote the total removal of trichloroethylene from groundwater 
condition in 20 min through reactive oxygen species (ROS) that promoted 
pollutant’s dechlorination (Li, Z. et al., 2020). nZVI’s functionalized version 
(sulfide-modified) associated with graphene aerogel composite proved to be 
an efficient option to remediate water contaminated by organic pollutants 
such as trichloroethylene (Bin et al., 2020). 
Magnetic nanoparticles constituted by iron oxide are biocompat￾ible and biodegradable, present electronic properties of interest, can be 
found as ferrimagnetic maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) or ferrimagnetic magnetite 
(Fe3O4≡FeO∙Fe2O3), and their functionalization allows their optimization 
to perform desirable tasks (Lesiak et al, 2019). Iron oxide nanoparticles 
reduced the discharge burden of the effluent generated in fish farms, with 
a capacity that increased in first 6 h. The treatment in reactor had reduced 
nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, ammonium, total suspend, and dissolved solid 
levels (Hesni et al., 2020). Oil could be removed from oil–water mixture due 
to the use of PVP (polyvinylpyrrolidone)-coated magnetite nanoparticles 
(Mirshahghassemi and Lead, 2015). However, these coated nanoparticles 
can also remediate metals. Synthetic soft water and sea water polluted by 
Cd, Cr, Ni, and Pb at 0.1 mg/L could be remediated (near to 100%) by 167  
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 309 
mg/L of PVP– magnetite nanoparticles (Hong et al., 2020). Iron magnetic 
nanoparticles prepared in a friendly way from iron-containing sludge could 
co-precipitate arsenate in contaminated water removing at 0.2 g/L 400μg/L 
of As+5 in 1 h (Zeng et al., 2020). Magnetite nanoparticles can also be gener￾ated in coated version through low-cost green synthesis protocol using crude 
latex of Jatropha curcas or leaf extract of Cinnamomum tamala offering a 
noncytotoxic material capable of remediating organic dyes and toxic metal 
ions’ pollution in water, and also presenting antibacterial agents’ action as 
same as antioxidant potential (Das et al., 2020). Iron oxide nanoparticles, as 
same as copper oxide nanoparticles were able to remediate arsenic pollution 
(arsenite and arsenate) and eliminate microbial contaminants from water 
samples, and to solve irreversible aggregation problem association to rice￾husk biochar helped to stabilize the structure (Priyadarshni et al., 2020). 
Not only nanosized magnetite but also TiO2 nanoparticles could deal with 
arsenic pollution through adsorption in a way more efficient than activated 
carbon (Deliyanni et al., 2003; Mayo et al., 2007; Zahra et al., 2020). In 
fact, the skeleton of activated carbon, as same as other porous matrix can 
be used with metal (hydr)oxide nanoparticles to deal with not only pollution 
promoted by arsenic but also by organic cocontaminants (Hristovski et al., 
2009a, 2009b). Clay immobilizing TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticles present the 
ability to remediate wastewater being suitable for the generation of filters to 
treat water (Mustapha et al., 2020). Hydrated titanium oxide nanoparticles on 
a support of rice straw, an agricultural waste could efficiently adsorb copper 
from contaminated wastewater (Chen, Y. et al., 2020). Nano-TiO2 proved 
to be phototoxic being an interesting option to remediate water especially 
through protocols involving solar energy or UV (Brunet et al., 2009). A low 
cost and eco-friendly protocol using green tea to generate a nanocomposite 
containing gold nanoparticles decorating TiO2 resulted in a material able to 
promote the adsorption of methylene blue in contaminated water samples at 
a rate of 8185cmg/g (Perera et al., 2020). 
Silver nanoparticles coated with nanomagnetic biochar dots generated 
through green synthesis using leaf extract of the plant Pistacia atlantica 
could remediate dyes from aqueous samples besides presenting the option 
of being reused and separated through magnetic process (Zahedifar et al., 
2020). 
When it comes to quantum dots, silver quantum dots are also efficient 
tools to deal with organic contaminants present in polluted water through 
photocatalysis (Kumar et al., 2019). SnO2 quantum dots attached to the 
surface of TiO2 nanoparticles contributed to charge separation and ROS 310 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
generation promoting more efficient Rhodamine B degradation (Lee et al., 
2014). Rhodamine B degradation was also efficiently promoted by ZnO 
quantum dots over SiO2 nanotubes (Zhang et al., 2012). Complete degrada￾tion of Rhodamine 6G could be achieved in less than an hour by the nano￾composite generated by europium−metal organic framework and cadmium 
telluride quantum dot (Kaur et al., 2016). 
10.2.2 IMPORTANT CARBON-BASED NANOMATERIALS FOR WATER 
REMEDIATION
The versatility of carbon atoms allows the use of this tetravalent element, 
capable of hybridizing in sp, sp2
 and sp3
 configurations to generate a large 
array of different substances by binding to other carbon atoms and/or to 
other elements. It presents not only the naturally occurring allotropes (e.g., 
diamond and graphite) but also the synthetic ones (e.g., the carbon-based 
nanomaterials) (Silva, 2008; Rauti et al., 2019). Carbon-based nanomaterials 
are also capable of remediating polluted water (Fig. 10.1; Table 10.2). 
FIGURE 10.1 Carbon-based nanomaterial useful to water remediation protocols. TABLE 10.2 Examples of Carbon-Based Nanomaterial to Remediate Polluted Water.
Nanomaterial Pollutant(s) References 
Amino-functionalized C60 immobilized on 3-(2-succinic
anhydride)propyl functionalized silica
Ag-embedded C60 
C60 modified by Ag3PO4
Fullerene coating nano-titanium dioxide
Polyhydroxy fullerene
C60-modified graphite phase carbonitride
Anatase-TiO2 nanoparticles modified by fullerene
Carbon dots impregnated in defect-rich g-C3N4
Carbon dots decorating hollow carbon nitride nanospheres
Nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots hybridized with g-C3N4 
Carbon dots attached to tungsten oxide
Graphene associated with iron oxide
Graphene oxide in magnetic aerogel
Reduced graphene oxide functionalized and associated to MnO2 
Graphene oxide platform containing nickel–benzene
dicarboxylate nanosized nickel metal organic framework 
Carbon nanotube platform containing nickel–benzene
dicarboxylate nanosized nickel metal organic framework
Carbon nanotubes grafted antifouling layer of polyacryloyl
hydrazide in poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane
Chitosan–carbon nanotube supporting palladium nanoparticles 
Cimetidine and ranitidine
4-Nitrophenol, orange G dye
Dye acid red 18
Mesotrione (herbicide)
Methylene blue and phenol
Methylene blue
Hexavalent chromium, ofloxacin, bisphenol A and 
ciprofloxacin
Naproxen
Methylene
Cd2+, crystal violet
Methylene blue, rhodamine B, acid orange 7, and
phenol
Congo red, methylene blue, Cu2+, Pb2+, Cd2+, Cr3+ 
Methylene blue, arsenite
Methylene blue
Micropollutants and heavy metals
2-Nitroaniline, 4-nitrophenol, 4-nitro-o-phenyl￾enediamine and 2,4-dinitrophenol, methyl orange,
Congo red, methyl red, and methylene blue dyes 
Lee et al. (2010)
Liu, R. et al. (2020)
Xu et al. (2016)
Djordjevic et al. (2018)
Bai et al. (2014)
Qi et al. (2016)
Liu H. et al. (2020)
Wu, Y. et al. (2020)
Seng et al. (2020)
Smrithi et al. (2020)
Hammad et al. (2020)
Xiong et al. (2020)
Tara et al. (2020)
Ahsan et al. (2020)
Chen, Z. et al. (2020)
Sargin et al. (2020) 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 311 312 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
The fullerene allotropic family’s most explored member is the C60: from 
which the discovery was recognized by the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1996 
(Biglova and Mustafina, 2019). It is generated by carbon atoms hybridized 
in sp2 disposed rings of five members (twelve) or six members (twenty) to 
form a hollow sphere. The bonds located on the borders of hexagons and 
pentagons present 1.45 Å in length and the bonds located on the borders of 
two hexagons present 1.38 Å in length (being considered as double bonds) 
(Hirsch, 1995). Functionalized versions of fullerene proved to be useful to 
treat polluted water samples. Amino-functionalized C60 (photoactive struc￾ture) could be immobilized on 3-(2-succinic anhydride) propyl functionalized 
silica to efficiently remediate the contamination caused by pharmaceuticals 
pollutants (e.g., Cimetidine and Ranitidine) (Lee et al., 2010). In a version 
encapsulated in poly (N-vinylpyrrolidone, C60 proved to be more efficient 
than its hydroxylated version to generate ROS to remediate pollutants and 
induce the death of microorganisms sensible to superoxide and singlet 
oxygen (Brunet et al., 2009). Ag-embedded C60 was able to enhance the 
catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol. Photodegradation of orange G dye was 
improved making it an interesting tool to wastewater remediation (Liu, R. et 
al., 2020). C60 modified by Ag3PO4 photodegraded with an efficiency of 90% 
the dye Acid Red 18 after 1 h presenting more than 3.0 times of degradation 
rate improvement when compared with unmodified version (Xu et al., 2016). 
Besides being modified by other structures, fullerene can also be used as a 
coat to other nanomaterials.Nano titanium dioxide coated by fullerene and 
polyhydroxy fullerene could remediate the herbicide mesotrione (Djordjevic 
et al., 2018). Graphite phase carbonitride modified by C60 showed the effi￾cient photocatalytic degradation of the dye methylene blue and phenol from 
contaminated samples (Bai et al., 2014). Anatase–TiO2 nanoparticles after 
being modified by fullerene exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity to 
degrade the dye methylene blue (Qi et al., 2016). 
Carbon dots are considered zero-dimensional nanomaterials due to 
their low size, and are highly useful in chemical sensor/bioimaging, it is 
a field capable of remediating polluted water (Rani et al., 2020). These 
quantum dots, besides presenting high catalytic activity and being easy 
to functionalize through different protocols, possess superconductivity, 
good dispersibility, strong fluorescence, and high crystallization (Seme￾niuk et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a). Defect-rich g-C3N4 impregnated by 
N-doped carbon quantum dots presented high performance to deal with 
mixed inorganic (hexavalent chromium) and organic (ofloxacin, bisphenol 
A and ciprofloxacin) water pollution (Liu, H. et al., 2020). Sustainable 
nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots derived from Bombyx mori silk  
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 313 
fibroin could improve photocatalytic capability of TiO2, thus converting it 
into a more suitable material to remediate water contamination (Wang et 
al., 2020). Hollow carbon nitride nanospheres decorated with carbon dots 
originated a metal-free photocatalytic nanoreactor that could efficiently 
degrade 10 mg/L of naproxen after 5 min of natural solar irradiation (Wu, 
Y. et al., 2020). Nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots were hybridized 
with g-C3N4 to offer an efficient pollution remediator of methylene blue 
presenting 2.6-fold increase in activity when compared with g-C3N4 alone 
(Seng et al., 2020). Carbon dots obtained through green synthesis protocol 
using the peels of Trichosanthes cucumerina were attached to tungsten 
oxide originating a nanosystem capable of Cd2+ removal and crystal violet 
degradation (Smrithi et al., 2020). 
Graphene is a bi-dimensional nanomaterial that consists of sp2
 carbon 
atoms organized in hexagonal rings with interesting mechanical and optical 
properties and a high thermal conductivity to be developed for different 
desirable roles (Novoselov et al, 2004). Graphene and the oxide generated 
from this nanomaterial can be used chemically designed/modified to 
be suitable for desirable roles, such as water remediation (Tiwari et al., 
2020; Wang et al., 2019b). Graphene-containing biochar, for example, is 
an interesting tool to water remediation (Fang et al., 2020). Iron oxide’s 
capacity to degrade organic pollutants (such as methylene blue, rhodamine 
B, acid orange 7, and phenol) could be enhanced by graphene that presented 
high photo-Fenton activity. The nanosystem was stable at pH from 3 to 9 
being suitable to serve as feasible water treatment material (Hammad et al., 
2020). By oxidizing graphene flakes and then exfoliating, graphene oxide 
can be generated (Aliyev et al., 2019). This nanomaterial does not depend 
upon the surfactant’s use to be dispersed in water and present lower toxicity 
and higher biocompatibility when compared with graphene (Pinto et al., 
2013; Kiew et al., 2016). An aerogel framework consisted on amphiprotic 
microcrystalline cellulose enabled self-gelation of Fe3O4 and graphene 
oxide to generate a magnetic aerogel that presented good adsorption capacity 
for dyes (Congo red and methylene blue) and metal ions (Cu2+, Pb2+, Cd2+, 
and Cr3+) (Xiong et al., 2020). Reduced graphene oxide functionalized 
with functional groups of black cumin seeds and associated with MnO2 
particles could remediate water samples contaminated by methylene blue 
and arsenide exhibiting Langmuir sorption capacity of 232.5 and 14.7 mg/g 
(Tara et al., 2020). Graphene oxide, as same as carbon nanotube, served as 
platforms to nickel–benzene dicarboxylate nanosized nickel metal organic 
framework. The system was able to perform the adsorption of the water 
pollutant methylene blue (Ahsan et al., 2020). 314 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Carbon atoms in hexagonal ring can also originate tube-like nanomaterials 
known as carbon nanotubes, product of graphite sheet rolled that presents 
high thermal conductivity and elasticity. The main methods used to generate 
these materials include chemical vapor deposition, electric arc, and laser 
deposition. The single-walled carbon nanotube possesses only one layer, 
the double-walled carbon nanotube possesses two and multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes present more layers of carbon atoms (Dresselhaus et al., 2000; 
Anzar et al., 2020). Carbon nanotubes are applied in different protocols of 
sensor’s development and can also as previously mentioned, be applied in 
water remediation procedures, especially after functionalization to optimize 
desirable characteristics such as capacity to promote efficient attachment 
to contaminants (Ahsan et al., 2020; Sousa-Moura et al., 2019; Verma and 
Balomajumder, 2020; Wang et al., 2019b). An antifouling layer of polyac￾ryloyl hydrazide (PAH)-grafted-carbon nanotubes in poly (vinylidene fluo￾ride) membrane revealed to be able to remediate trace micropollutants and 
heavy metals from water samples (Chen, Z. et al., 2020). Chitosan–carbon 
nanotube-supported palladium nanoparticles were efficient to deal with 
organic pollution promoting the reduction of 2-nitroaniline, 4-nitrophenol, 
4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine and 2,4-dinitrophenol, and the degradation 
methyl orange, Congo red, methyl red, and methylene blue dyes (Sargin et 
al., 2020). 
10.3 KEY MECHANISMS FOR WATER REMEDIATION THROUGH 
NANOMATERIALS 
The technologies of water remediation using nanomaterials are advantageous 
especially when compared with classic advantages, classic physicochemical 
protocols that are applied to perform this role. Physicochemical protocols 
present high costs when performing large-scale remediation as same as some 
bioremediation protocols based on enzymes, and may also negatively impact 
the environment generating harmful waste (Ye et al., 2017; Baldissarelli et 
al., 2019; Crini and Lichtfouse, 2019). Nanotechnologies, on their turn, can 
be performed at inexpensive manner (e.g., nano-TiO2 are stable to corrosion 
and inexpensive nanoparticles that present high photocatalytic activity are 
capable of efficiently degrading the pollutant dye methylene blue (Jain and 
Vaya, 2017)) and it is also possible to develop green synthesis protocols 
to generate eco-friendly nanomaterials to be used in water remediation 
in an ecologically sustainable way. There are nanotechnologies that are 
compatible to existing water treatment set-ups being easily integrated to Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 315 
make the process costs less. The enzyme Protocatechuate 3,4-dioxygenase 
from Rhizobium sp. LMB-1, for example, is capable of remediating water 
containing organic pollutants that could be immobilized to modified Fe3O4 
nanoparticles making reusability possible and increasing the stability of 
protein (Zhang, L. et al., 2017). 
Nanomaterials suitable for water remediation can be catalysts, nanoadsor￾bents or constituents of nanomembranes and the main mechanisms through 
which nanomaterials can remedy contaminated water include filtration, 
adsorption, and degradation. They will be addressed separately. 
10.3.1 FILTRATION TO DEAL WITH WATER POLLUTION: THE 
NANOMEMBRANES
Filtration (regular filtration, nanofiltration, ultrafiltration), as same as reverse 
osmosis, is performed when there is necessity to separate solid pollutants from 
water. At the end of filtration, treated water is obtained and the membrane 
retains pollutants that were eliminated from aqueous environment (Fig. 10.2) 
(Singh, R. et al., 2020). For example, membranes constituted by reduced 
GO (rGO)@MoO2 and rGO@WO3 presented a high separation efficiency to 
organic water pollutants rhodamine B, Evans blue, methylene blue (Thebo 
et al., 2018). 
Nanomembranes present nanofibers and nanopores among them, being 
able to retain solid contaminants present in aqueous samples (e.g., metallic 
ions) and possessing higher size than the one from nanopores. In membranes 
of molybdenum disulfide in nanosheets, hydration state severely impacts 
pore structure, reflecting on water permeability and filtration capacity. Fully 
hydrated membranes present moderate-to-high molecular and ionic rejection 
and high water permeability. Dry membranes are almost impermeable to 
water (Wang et al., 2017). 
Chemical modification and the addition of functional nanomaterials into 
nanomembranes also can allow improvements in thermal and mechanical 
stability, exhibition of multifunction (e.g., degradation capacity to be 
exhibited by the membrane) and synergism, adjustments in permeability (Han 
et al., 2013; Qu et al., 2013). Mechanical stability of thin film composites 
membranes could be enhanced by zirconia nanoparticles grown over 
polydopamine/polyetheylenimine that also provided high salt retention and 
water flux (Lv et al., 2016). Through chemical modification, protocols have 
been developed to allow nanomembranes to exhibit selective permeability 
to deal with specific pollutants of interest (Yin et al., 2013; Turchanin 316 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
and Gölzhäuser, 2016; Yaqoob et al., 2020). Functionalization can also be 
performed to prevent membrane fouling and membrane clogging. Fouling 
layers can be prevented to build up by adding titanium and silver-based 
nanomaterials to the surface of nanomembranes (where they can oxidize 
organic contaminants) avoiding clogging (Mollahosseini and Rahimpour, 
2014; Gehrke et al., 2015; Sumisha et al., 2015; Li, Liu et al., 2016). To 
solve the low water permeance problem from membranes of pure graphene 
oxide and total rGO, reduction degree was adjusted to a weak one, avoiding 
small interlayer spacing from total rGO and the lack of pristine graphitic 
sp2
 domains from pure graphene oxide. As a consequence, stability and 
separation performance were optimized (Zhang, Q. et al., 2018). 
Characteristics of materials used to generate nanomembrane directly 
impact membrane’s ability to filtrate different pollutants. Polyamide layer 
generated through embedding polysulfone support with zeolite nanoparticles 
offered a membrane with high rejection to small molecular weight negatively 
charged pharmaceuticals (Dong et al., 2016). ZnO nanospheres offered a 
similar effect by being added to inner-skinned hollow fiber composite nano￾filtration membrane (Li, Shi et al., 2016), as same as silica nanospheres added 
to trimesoyl chloride and piperazine distributed over polysulfone support (Li, 
Wang, Song et al., 2015). Superior separation performance was observed on 
nanostrand-channelled graphene oxide ultrafiltration membrane that could 
deal with water polluted by rhodamine B through a fast separation (Huang 
et al., 2013). Despite being able to efficiently deal with positively charged 
dyes (such as methyl viologen and methylene blue), neutral ones (such as 
rhodamine B) and negatively charges ones (such as methyl orange, orange G, 
brilliant blue, methyl blue, and rose bengal), the graphene-based membranes 
generated by shear-induced alignment of liquid crystals of GO presented 
higher retention to negatively charges molecules (Akbari et al., 2016). 
Polymeric membranes can receive nanomaterials to become able to 
degrade pollutants present in polluted water. Catalyst nanomaterials such 
as metallic ones are interesting examples. Nano zero-valent iron (nZVI), 
alone or supporting noble metals, can offer efficient reductive degradation 
of chlorinated organic pollutants (Wu et al., 2005; Wu and Ritchie, 2008). 
Nanomembranes containing TiO2 can also perform photocatalysis to degrade 
organic pollutants (Leong et al., 2014). Copper mining water could be 
efficiently treated by using a ceramic nanofiltration membrane that possess 
α-Al2O3 flat-sheet supporter containing Fe2O3, TiO2, or ZrO2 nanoparticles. 
This membrane also served to waste salt recycling and purification of 
seawater (Wang and Wang, 2020). Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 317 FIGURE 10.2 Nanomembranes to treat polluted water through filtration. 318 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
In order to prevent bacterial attachment to the membranes and biofilm 
formation, nanomaterials exhibiting antimicrobial properties, such as 
carbon nanotubes and silver nanoparticles can be used in association with 
filtration membranes (Andrade et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2018; Qing et al., 
2018). There are also nanomaterials functionalized to present antimicro￾bial properties that can serve as nanomembranes to treat contaminated 
water, such as graphene and graphene oxide (Li, Liu et al., 2016; Bodzek 
et al., 2020). 
10.3.2 ADSORPTION OF WATER POLLUTANTS PROMOTED BY 
NANOMATERIALS
Adsorption of water pollutants can be performed by regular nanoadsorbents 
or by nanomotors offering adsorption capacity. 
10.3.2.1 NANOADSORBENTS 
Nanoadsorbents or nanosorbents remediate water by interacting with 
pollutants through van der Walls interactions or polar ones, restraining 
pollutants mobility and attaching to them (the coagulation process). If the 
complex possess higher density when compared with water, it precipitates 
(sedimentation process) to the bottom of the recipient. If the complex is less 
dense than water, it floats (flotation process) to the surface. So, depending on 
the polluted being remediated, the nanosorbent–pollutant complex will suffer 
sedimentation or flotation (Fig. 10.3) (Boutilier et al., 2009; Medvedeva et 
al., 2015; Kyzas and Matis, 2018; Yaqoob et al., 2020). 
FIGURE 10.3 Nanoadsorbents remediating polluted water. Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 319 
Prussian blue-based nanoparticles immobilized in a platform can be used 
to remediate water polluted by Cs ions and this insoluble dye can also be 
useful to treat patients that were exposed to Cs radionuclides as in Brazil 
in 1987 (IAEA, 1988). The dye efficiently performs adsorption of heavy 
metals and on its crystal form, the face-centered cubic Bravais lattices have 
dimensions similar to Cs hydration radius (Kim et al., 2017). Polyacrylonitrile 
nanofibers with Prussian blue nanoparticles could promote the adsorption of 
137Cs from polluted water (Kim et al., 2018). Activated charcoal–Prussian 
blue nanoparticles could adsorb at pH 6.8 the elements Cs+
, Sr+2, and Co+2, 
only saturating at 67.9, 29.6 and 15.3 mg/g, respectively (Ali et al., 2020). 
Polyacrylonitrile nanofibers decorated with Prussian blue nanoparticles 
offered stable structure, able to remove Cs ions efficiently from contaminated 
samples (Gwon et al., 2020). Mesoporous silica gel doped by Prussian blue 
nanoparticles could rapidly promote the removal of rubidium and cesium, 
even at low concentration, from complex matrixes (Yuan et al., 2020). The 
Prussian blue-based nanoparticles also present magnetism, favoring the 
removal of the complex nanosorbent–pollutant from water by applying a 
magnetic field (Wang and Huang, 2011) and photocatalytic activity (Li, X. 
et al., 2015); γ-Al2O3 spheres with Prussian Blue nanoparticles could deal 
with orange G dye’s pollution though nanoadsorption and nanophotocalysis 
(Doumic et al., 2015). 
Pollution provoked by pharmaceuticals (such as fluoxetine hydrochlo￾ride) can be remediated by carbon nanotubes I association to activated 
carbon by adsorption (Sousa-Moura et al., 2019). Single-walled carbon 
nanotubes could efficiently show adsorption for benzoic acid offering a 
high adsorption rate to its water contaminant (Li, De Silva et al., 2020). 
Multiwalled carbon nanotube is a highly effective adsorbent to deal with 
water pollution caused by ciprofloxacin hydrochloride (Avcı et al., 2020). 
Ion-imprinted carbon paste electrodes developed based on multiwalled 
carbon nanotube composites presented excellent selective adsorption for 
Pb2+ being suitable to remediate water contaminated by the ion (Wang, H. et 
al., 2020). Batch adsorption of pollutants like trichloroethylene and Congo 
red was performed involving nanomaterials, including carbon nanotubes, by 
insoluble nanosponge β-cyclodextrin polyurethane modified with phosphor￾ylated multiwalled carbon nanotubes decorated with titanium dioxide and 
silver nanoparticles (Taka et al., 2020). Dyes removal from polluted water 
could also be remediated by carbon nanotube attached to laccase enzyme, 
with adsorption capacity being regenerated by enzymatic degradation of 
contaminants (Zhang et al., 2020). 320 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Organic pollutants and heavy metals can be remediated through the use 
of the tailored adsorbents known as dendrimers through adsorption based on 
electrostatic interactions, complexation, hydrogen bonding, or hydrophobic 
effect. Dendrimers can promote the adsorption of pollutants and also be 
designed to present catalytic activity (Crooks et al., 2001; Wazir et al., 2020). 
Its external branches can be terminated in functional groups, such as amine 
and hydroxyl, displaying affinity to heavy metals adsorption and the interior 
shells, by being hydrophobic environments, can deal with organic pollutants. 
Dendrimer-ultrafiltration system could be designed to recover Cu2+ ions from 
aqueous solutions (Diallo et al., 2005). Poly(propyleneimine) dendrimer was 
used to functionalize a magnetic zirconium-based metal–organic framework 
nanocomposite that presented good adsorption capacity for the dyes Direct 
red 31 and Acid blue 92, respectively 173.7 and 122.5 mg/g (Far et al., 2020). 
To promote the adsorption of Mn2+ and Co2+ present in polluted water, Schiff 
base functionalized polyamidoamine dendrimer/silica can be used (Qiao, W. 
et al., 2020). 
Graphene oxide can also promote the adsorption of pollutants, and presents 
a high water dispersion due to functional groups, such as phenol, hydroxyl, 
carbonyl, carboxyl, and epoxy (Aliyev et al., 2019). Organic dyes and Pb2+ 
and Cd2+’s remediation could be performed by a sustainable nanomaterial: 
date syrup-based graphene sand hybrid (Khan et al., 2019). The radionuclides 
U6+, Pu2+, and Th4+ could be adsorbed and coagulated by graphene oxide, 
being easily removed from polluted water after centrifugation (Li et al, 2012; 
Romanchuk et al., 2013; Laver, 2020). Cs+
 could be removed at a rate of 220 
mg/g by graphene oxide fibers functionalized with sodium. After a wash 
step using NaOH, the nanomaterial is ready to a new removal cycle (Lee et 
al., 2019). Adsorption followed by catalytic advanced oxidation processes 
of personal care products could be performed by nanohybrids of reduced 
graphene oxide and nZVI, remediating 82–99% of the pollutants (Masud et 
al., 2020). The nanocomposite composed of magnetic graphene oxide and 
ZnO was able not only to adsorb but also to degrade the pharmaceutical 
pollutant tetracycline (Qiao, D. et al., 2020). Graphene oxide, after being 
modified by bis(2-pyridylmethyl) amino groups could act as adsorbent to 
remediate the pollution caused by Cu2+, Ni2+, and Co2+ with desorption/ 
regeneration capacities higher than 10 cycles (Chaabane et al., 2020). The 
reusable chitosan-reinforced graphene oxide–hydroxyapatite composite 
matrix exhibited high adsorption to remediate water contamination promoted 
by the dyes Congo red, Acid red 1 and Reactive Red (Sirajudheen et al., 
2020). Graphene oxide nanoribbons are interesting options to remediate As5+  
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 321 
and Hg2+'s pollution (Sadeghi et al., 2020). Graphene oxide after suffering 
functionalization by carbon disulfide improved graphene oxide's capacity 
to adsorpt the pollutant Pb2+ in 83.2% (Lian et al., 2020). A network of 
nanomaterials containing graphene oxide (carbon nanotubes/graphene 
oxide/sodium alginate, triple-network nanocomposite hydrogel) could be 
successfully used to remediate antibiotics’ pollution (Ma, J. et al., 2020). 
Pb2+ ions’ pollution can be remediated through nanoadsorption up to 125 
mg/g by oval CuO nanostructures (Farghali et al., 2013), as same as methylene 
blue dye from which water pollution can be efficiently remediated by cupric 
oxide nanoparticles (Mustafa et al., 2013). Copper atoms can be converted into 
Cu nanoparticles by green synthesis protocols using Cynomorium coccineum 
extract, and the nanostructure was used to promote adsorption of methylene 
blue dye (Sebeia et al., 2020). Anion exchangers doped with binary Cu2+–Fe3+ 
oxide proved to be able to promote the adsorption of As3+ water remediating 
arsenate pollution (Jacukowicz-Sobala et al., 2020). 
The industrial dye Acidic dye 36 could be efficiently adsorbed by nZVI in 
90 s at an optimum environment at pH = 5.5, nZVI concentration of 0.5 and 
dye’s concentration of 30mg/L (Delnavaz and Kazemimofrad, 2020). The 
commercial nZVI Nanofer 25 could not only deal efficiently with organic 
and inorganic pollution but also eliminated pathogens from contaminated 
water (Oprčkal et al., 2017). Core-shell nanoscale zero-valent iron showed 
efficient adsorption of Cu2+ being suitable to remediate water polluted by 
this ion (Dada et al., 2020). Additional function can be conferred to nZVI 
depending on the type of chemical modification performed on the nanomate￾rial. For example, phosphate modification favors not only Cr6+ adsorption 
but also ion's reduction making remediation more efficient (Li, M. et al., 
2020). The same occurs with the composite composed by flax straw biochar 
and nanoscale zero-valent iron that presented higher capacity to promote 
Cr6+ adsorption and reduction than flax straw biochar alone (Ma, F. et al., 
2020). The system containing magnetic composite microbial extracellular 
polymeric substances in Fe3O4 could present enhanced Sb+5 reducibility/ 
adsorbability after association with nZVI (Yang et al., 2020). 
Magnetic nanoparticles of Fe3O4 can also adsorb pollutants from water. 
Hg2+ (at a maximum rate of 141.57 mg/g) could be remediated by this 
nanoparticle’s humic acid functionalized version attached to oyster shell (He 
et al., 2019). In a version coated with citric acid, magnetite nanoparticles 
could remediate Cd2+’s pollution (Singh et al., 2014). Hg2+ and Pb2+ from 
industrial wastewater could be remediated by reusable microspheres of silica 
and Fe3O4 (Hu et al., 2010). Metal oxide nanoadsorbents generally can be 322 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
regenerated by pH change and after various reuse cycles, they commonly 
maintain adsorption capacity, but in some cases, it may decrease (Deliyanni 
et al., 2003; Hu et al., 2006; Sharma et al., 2009). Green synthesis of these 
particles could be performed by using tea waste template to generate a nano￾material able to promote As3+ and As5+’s adsorption (Lunge et al., 2014). 
10.3.2.2 NANOMOTORS OFFERING ADSORBENT CAPACITY 
Nanomotors are synthetic nanomaterials that can promote pollutants 
adsorption and/or catalysis (Ying and Pumera, 2018) (Fig. 10.4). They are 
complex structures capable of converting different sources of energy into 
motion, moving by themselves, eliminating the need for the mixing step 
during remediation (Sánchez et al., 2015). Inorganic and biological/organic 
materials can be used to generate them (Gao and Wang, 2014). 
FIGURE 10.4 Nanomotors to remediate polluted water. 
When performing adsorption of pollutants, they work in a way similar to 
regular nanosorbents, forming a complex with pollutants and precipitating or 
floating depending on the density of the complex. 
Nonomotors with noncatalytic properties are not so common to treat water 
pollution. Generally, nanomotors are able to promote not only the adsorption 
but also contaminant’s degradation (Yaqoob et al., 2020). A popular application 
for noncatalytic nanomotors is to treat Pb intoxication. Nanomotors capable of 
promoting excessive blood level of Pb2+ ions’ adsorption inside red blood cells Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 323 
are useful to treat lead poisoning. A magnetic mesoporous silica/ε-polylysine 
nanomotor-based remover could perform this task presenting low cytotoxicity 
and blood compatibility (Liu, Z. et al., 2020). A magnetic nanomotor adsorbent 
containing Fe3O4 nanoparticle modified with meso-2, 3-dimercaptosuccinic 
acid proved to be also efficient to perform the Pb2+ adsorption in pig models 
(Wang et al., 2021). 
10.3.3 DEGRADATION OF WATER POLLUTANTS PROMOTED BY 
NANOMATERIALS
Degradation of water pollutants can be performed by regular nanophoto￾catalysts or by nanomotors offering catalysis capacity. 
10.3.3.1 NANOMOTORS OFFERING CATALYSIS CAPACITY 
Nanomotors can also promote pollutants’ degradation, converting them into 
nontoxic or less toxic subproducts by catalysis (Ying and Pumera, 2018). 
Fresh water and sea water, for example, contaminated by mixed pollution 
(organic per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and inorganic heavy metal 
ions), could be remediated by a metal–organic framework (MOF) nanomotor 
system (Guo, Z. et al., 2020). Azo dyes could be degraded by bubble￾propelled Fe0 Janus nanomotors, low-cost and biocompatible nanostructures 
stabilized by an ultrathin iron oxide shell (Teo et al., 2016). Green cellulose 
nanocrystals (obtained from renewable biomass) decorated with Fe2O3/Pd 
nanoparticles (magnetoresponsive and catalytically active structure), in a 
self-propelled way not requiring surfactants, could in situ degrade pollutants, 
such as dyes, being interesting tool for water remediation (Dhar et al., 2020). 
A rotating magnetic field and the presence of NaBH4 allowed mesoporous 
magnetic nanorods containing a core of CoNi and a Pt shell to be propelled 
and degrade methylene blue, 4-nitrophenol, and rhodamine B (organic 
pollutants) (García-Torres et al., 2017). Self-propelled multimotion modes 
helix carbon nanocoil/TiO2 nanomotors could degrade more than 50% of the 
pollutant phenol in 30 min (Li, X. et al., 2019). 
Nanomaterials can also be used to generate micromotors to be applied in 
water remediation (Yaqoob et al., 2020). Colloidal carbon WO3 nanoparticle 
composite spheres could be used to generate a light-driven Au-WO3-C Janus 
micromotor to degrade sodium-2,6-dichloroindophenol and rhodamine B 
even in low concentration (Zhang, Q. et al., 2017). MnO2 wrapped carbon 324 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
nanotubes could be used to generate a bubble-propelled micromotor which 
can degrade the organic pollutant dye Congo red (Wu, X. et al., 2020). 
10.3.3.2 NANOPHOTOCATALYSTS 
Nanophotocatalysts can convert light radiation (e.g., sun light) into chemical 
energy to promote pollutant’s degradation (Fig. 10.5) (Gómez-Pastora et al., 
2017). The photocatalysis can happen through advanced oxidative processes 
(AOPs) or by electron–hole pair formation. In the first scenario, ROS are 
generated in the surrounding (Werkneh and Rene, 2019), and in the second 
scenario, the electron–hole pair formation in a semiconductor produces 
two redox polos: that can catalyze the formation of ROS or act directly in 
contaminants’ degradation (Li, Yu et al., 2016). 
FIGURE 10.5 Nanophotocatalysts promoting water remediation. 
Metallic oxides, especially iron and zinc ones, generally perform AOP, 
being indirectly responsible for pollutants degradation (the direct responsible 
are ROS). The energy from a luminous photon is absorbed, hydroxyl ROS 
(OH- and OH •
) are generated through photo-Fenton reaction from water 
or hydrogen peroxide, and finally ROS can react with contaminants and 
degrade them (Singh and Pandey, 2020; Vaiano et al., 2020). 
Semiconductor nanomaterials generally perform electron–hole pair 
formation, being able to degrade pollutants through ROS or directly (Lam 
et al., 2016). These nanomaterials are capable of, after suffering stimula￾tion, performing electron jumping from the valence band to conduction Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 325 
band (Lam et al., 2016; Li, Yu et al., 2016). The energy from a luminous 
photon is absorbed stimulating band gap and a negative charge is arriving 
on conduction band. The valence band, from where the electron came from, 
suffers from an electron’s absence: a “hole” is generated creating a positive 
electric charge (Horikoshi and Serpone, 2020). As previously discussed, 
nanomaterials possess a high ratio superficial area/volume, and after the 
described process, the negative polo in surface (caused by the electron in the 
conductive band) will be able to reduce pollutants nearby, and the positive 
polo (due to “hole” in valence band) will be able to oxidize contaminants 
(Kuang et al., 2020). 
There are strategies that use only one nanomaterial to perform photo￾catalysis of pollutants (such as ZnO or TiO2 or iron oxide nanoparticles 
or Prussian blue nanoparticles) (El-Kemary et al., 2010; Das et al., 2014; 
Pastrana-Martinez et al., 2015; Singh and Pandey, 2020). However, 
association of two or more photocatalysts nanomaterials may offer better 
results benefiting from synergism (Bhanvase et al., 2017). 
Due to fast electrical conductivity and large surface area and other 
unique properties (thermal, electric and mechanical), graphene and its oxide 
are popular support to be used as photocatalyst for nanocomposites (And 
and Jimmy, 2011; Li, Yu et al, 2016). Associated with ZnO, for example, 
graphene could participate in rhodamine B’s photocatalytic degradation 
better than the substances separately (Li and Cao, 2011). 
Heavy metals and organic compounds could be remediated by carbon 
nanotubes containing TiO2/SiO2 in the hollow structure (Rasheed et al., 2019). 
Prussian blue nanoparticles can not only act as nanoadsorbent but also 
can act as nanophotocatalyst (Wang et al., 2011; Mai et al., 2017). The term 
“nanozyme” is used to refer to this nanomaterial once its ascorbic acid 
oxidase-like end peroxidase- activities can sometimes exceed the efficiency 
of the enzymes themselves (Zhang, W. et al., 2018; Komkova et al., 2018). 
Prussian blue nanoparticles can be generated in an eco-friendly way through 
green synthesis, for example, using β-cyclodextrin as surfactant and ethyl 
alcohol as a green solvent. The synthetized nanoparticle was stable and 
could degrade rhodamine B under visible exhibiting high catalytic efficiency 
(Yang et al., 2021). In the presence of light and in association with TiO2, 
Prussian blue (PB) can suffer reduction, induced by TiO2 photocatalysis, 
enhancing PB’s capacity to promote Cs+
 adsorption and water remediation 
(Park et al., 2020). The nanocomposite composed of zinc oxide and Prussian 
blue promoted the efficient photocatalytic degradation of pollutants phenol, 
phenol, 3-aminophenol, and 2,4-dinitrophenol (Rachna et al., 2020). 326 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Carbon dots can also act as photocatalysts (Cailotto et al., 2020). 
Methylene blue, for example, could be degraded by green-emissive version 
of the nanomaterial presenting photocatalytic activity (Das et al., 2019). They 
can also be used to modify other structures conferring them a high catalytic 
activity. ZnSnO3 cubes modified by carbon dots generated a composite that 
when compared with pure ZnSnO3, present 21 times higher photocatalytic 
degradation kinetic toward tetracycline under visible light (Guo, F. et al., 
2020). g-C3N4/SnO2 photocatalyst modified with carbon dots presented 
enhanced capacity to degrade indomethacin (Li et al., 2021). 
Silver-based nanomaterials can also be used to remediate polluted water. 
rhodamine B, for example, could be degraded by silver quantum dots with 
2D SnO2 nanoflakes through photocatalysis (Kumar et al., 2019). A BiOI 
nanocomposite co-doped with metal silver and carbon dots could efficiently 
show the photocatalytic degradation of the pollutant 4-Chlorophenol (Guo, 
Y. et al., 2020). The composite involving titanium dioxide–silver could be 
successfully applied to promote the photocatalytic degradation of methylene 
blue (Ibukun and Jeong, 2020). 
Fullerene-based nanomaterials are also interesting option to remediate 
contaminated water. Through photocatalytic activity, the pollutants phenol 
and methylene blue could be remediated by functionalized fullerene (using 
zinc porphyrin) associated with TiO2 (Regulska et al., 2019). Carboxyl￾ated zinc phthalocyanine–carboxylated C60-titanium dioxide nanosheets 
could promote photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline (Liu, L. 
et al., 2020). Metal-free P-doped g-C3N4 photocatalyst was decorated by 
fullerene and could degrade efficiently the pesticide imidacloprid through 
photocatalysis (Sudhaik et al., 2020). Ag(I)-fullerene (C60) composite 
could promote the visible light-driven photodegradation of organic pollut￾ants (Yi et al., 2020). 
ZnWO4 nanoparticles have proved to be able to convert into less toxic 
forms the pollutants V5+ and Cr6+ making it possible to recover V6+ and Cr3+ 
(Zhao et al., 2016). ZnWO4 (ethylene glycol 62.5) nanoparticles could 
promote methylene blue, rhodamine B, methyl orange, and Cr6+ photo￾catalytic removal (He et al., 2020). High stability of ZnWO4 nanoparticles 
also have been proved to efficiently degrade para-aminobenzoic acid 
(Faka et al., 2021). Fe3O4/ZnWO4/CeVO4 nanoparticles could promote 
the degradation of 90% of methyl violet and 70% of methylene blue, 
respectively. This degradation was observed after visible light irradiation 
(Marsooli et al., 2020). 
Dye-contaminated industrial wastewater could be successfully remedi￾ated by mixed-phase bismuth ferrite nanoparticles (Kalikeri and Kodialbail,  
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 327 
2018). Bi2WO6 exhibits the capacity to promote the photocatalytic degra￾dation of rhodamine B, however, after loading of Ag and graphene, the 
degradation efficiency enhanced considerably (Low et al., 2014). Bismuth 
ferrite nanoparticles promoted the photocatalysis of the dye Acid Yellow-17 
efficiently (Kalikeri and Kodialbail, 2020). Nitrogen-doped graphene oxide￾supported gadolinium-doped bismuth ferrite was efficient in remediating 
rhodamine B (Dixit et al., 2020). 
CuO nanoparticles can be generated through green synthesis using 
Citrofortunella microcarpa, and the nanomaterial proved to be useful to 
perform efficient rhodamine B's photocatalytic degradation under UV light 
(Rafique et al., 2020). In fact, green synthesis of different nanomaterials to 
perform water remediation have been proposed recently (Bessa et al., 2020; 
Bolade et al., 2020; Nasrollahzadeh et al., 2021). 
10.4 CONCLUSIONS
The environment has been suffering with human actions ignoring sustain￾ability principles, and environmental pollution has become a serious problem 
worldwide. Live on Earth is threaten and urgent actions need to be performed 
in order to try to attenuate or even solve the risks. As water is a vital resource, 
water remediation protocols possessing low-cost and being eco-friendly, and 
able to be performed at large scale are highly necessary. Nanotechnology field 
has been presenting different kinds of nanomaterials, chemically modified or 
not, to efficiently treat contaminated water and restore its quality. 
10.5 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Nanotechnology field has been advancing in a fast pace and is expected to 
continue to rapidly develop specially when it comes to protocols to generate 
biodegradable materials, preferentially through green synthesis, to perform 
desirable roles such as remediating polluted water. It is also expected that 
field experiments involving these materials to restore contaminated environs 
increase in number as same as research works on nanomaterials safety, 
biocompatibility and feasibility to be used in large scale. However, the 
success of implementing nanomaterials to remediate environmental pollution 
in aquatic environments is not sufficient to solve the problems generated by 
harmful anthropic actions. Environmental awareness and concern for sustain￾able development must be widely adopted worldwide.  
 
 
 
328 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
KEYWORDS
• nanomaterials 
• water pollution remediation 
• nanotechnology 
• environmental pollution 
REFERENCES 
Ahsan, M. A.; Jabbari, V.; Imam, M. A.; Castro, E.; Kim, H.; Curry, M. L.; Valles-Rosales, 
D. J.; Noveron, J. C. Nanoscale Nickel Metal Organic Framework Decorated Over 
Graphene Oxide and Carbon Nanotubes for Water Remediation. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 
698, 134214. 
Akbari, A.; Sheath, P.; Martin, S. T.; Shinde, D. B.; Shaibani, M.; Banerjee, P. C.; Tkacz, R.; 
Bhattacharyya, D.; Majumder, M. Large-Area Graphene-Based Nanofiltration Membranes 
by Shear Alignment of Discotic Nematic Liquid Crystals of Graphene Oxide. Nat. Commun. 
2016, 7, 10891. 
Ali, H.; Khan, E.; Ilahi, I. Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology of Hazardous Heavy 
Metals: Environmental Persistence, Toxicity, and Bioaccumulation. J. Chem. 2019, 1–14. 
Ali, M. M. S.; Sami, N. M.; El-Sayed, A. A. Removal of Cs+, Sr2+ and Co2+ by Activated 
Charcoal Modified with Prussian Blue Nanoparticle (PBNP) from Aqueous Media: Kinetics 
and Equilibrium Studies. J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 2020, 324, 189–201. 
Aliyev, E.; Filiz, V.; Khan, M. M.; Lee, Y. J.; Abetz, C.; Abetz, V. Structural Characterization 
of Graphene Oxide: Surface Functional Groups and Fractionated Oxidative Debris. Nano￾materials 2019, 9, 1180. 
And, X.; Jimmy, C. Y. Graphene-Based Photocatalytic Composites. Rsc. Adv. 2011, 1, 1426–1434. 
Andrade, P. F.; de Faria, A. F.; Oliveira, S. R.; Arruda, M. A. Z.; Gonçalves, M. C. Improved 
Antibacterial Activity of Nanofiltration Polysulfone Membranes Modified with Silver 
Nanoparticles. Water Res. 2015, 81, 333–342. 
Anzar, N.; Hasan, R.; Tyagi, M.; Yadav, N.; Narang, J. Carbon Nanotube—A Review on 
Synthesis, Properties and Plethora of Applications in the Field of Biomedical Science. 
Sensors. Int. 2020, 1, 100003. 
Avcı, A.; İnci, I.; Baylan, N. Adsorption of Ciprofloxacin Hydrochloride on Multiwall Carbon 
Nanotube. J. Mol. Struct. 2020, 1206, 127711. 
Bagazgoïtia, N. V. E.; Bailey, H. D.; Orsi, L.; Lacour, B.; Guerrini-Rousseau, L.; Bertozzi, 
A. I.; Leblond, P.; Faure-Conter, C.; Pellier, I.; Freycon, C.; Doz, F.; Puget, S.; Ducassou, 
S.; Clavel, J. Maternal Residential Pesticide use During Pregnancy and Risk of Malignant 
Childhood Brain Tumors: A Pooled Analysis of the ESCALE and ESTELLE Studies 
(SFCE). Int. J. Cancer 2018, 142, 489–497. 
Bai, X.; Wang, L.; Wang, Y.; Yao, W.; Zhu, Y. Enhanced Oxidation Ability of g-C3N4 
Photocatalyst via C60 Modification. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 2014, 152–153, 262–270.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 329 
Baldissarelli, D. P.; Vargas, G. D. L. P.; Korf, E. P.; Galon, L.; Kaufmann, C.; Santos, J. B. 
Remediation of Soils Contaminated by Pesticides Using Physicochemical Processes: A Brief 
Review. Planta Daninha 2019, 37, e019184975. 
Bebianno, M. J.; Gonzalez-Rey, M. Ecotoxicological Risk of Personal Care Products and 
Pharmaceuticals. In Aquatic Ecotoxicology: Advancing Tools for Dealing with Emerging 
Risks; Academic Press: Cambridge, USA, 2015; p 518. 
Bessa, A.; Gonçalves, G.; Henriques, B.; Domingues, E. M.; Pereira, E.; Marques, P. A. A. P. 
Green Graphene–Chitosan Sorbent Materials for Mercury Water Remediation. Nanomaterials 
2020, 10, 1474. 
Bethi, B.; Sonawane, S. H. Nanomaterials and Its Application for Clean Environment. In 
Nanomaterials for Green Energy, 2018; pp 385–409. 
Bhanvase, B. A.; Shende, T. P.; Sonawane, S. H. A Review on Graphene–TiO2 and Doped 
Graphene–TiO2 Nanocomposite Photocatalyst for Water and Wastewater Treatment. Environ. 
Technol. Rev. 2017, 6, 1–14. 
Bhaskar, M.; Gnanamani, A.; Ganeshjeevan, R. J.; Chandrasekar, R.; Sadulla, S.; Radhakrishnan, 
G. Analyses of Carcinogenic Aromatic Amines Released from Harmful Azo Colorants by 
Streptomyces sp. SS07. J. Chromatogr. A 2003, 1018, 117–123. 
Biglova, Y. N.; Mustafina, A. G. Nucleophilic Cyclopropanation of [60]Fullerene by the 
Addition–Elimination Mechanism. RSC Adv. 2019, 9, 22428–22498. 
Bin, Q.; Lin, B.; Zhu, K.; Shen, Y.; Man, Y.; Wang, B.; Lai, C.; Chen, W. Superior 
Trichloroethylene Removal from Water by Sulfide-Modified Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron/ 
Graphene Aerogel Composite. J. Environ. Sci. 2020, 88, 90–102. 
Bodzek, M.; Konieczny, K.; Kwiecińska-Mydlak, A. Nanotechnology in Water and Waste￾water Treatment. Graphene—The Nanomaterial for Next Generation of Semipermeable 
Membranes. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020, 50, 1515–1579. 
Bolade, O. P.; Williams, A. B.; Benson, N. U. Green Synthesis of Iron-Based Nanomaterials 
for Environmental Remediation: A Review. Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 2020, 13, 
100279. 
Boutilier, L.; Jamieson, R.; Gordon, R.; Lake, C.; Hart, W. Adsorption, Sedimentation, and 
Inactivation of E. coli within Wastewater Treatment Wetlands. Water Res. 2009, 43, 4370–4380. 
Boutin, C.; Eme, C. Domestic Wastewater Characterization by Emission Source; 13eme 
Congres Spécialisé IWA on Small Water and Wastewater Systems, Athènes, Greece, 2016; 
p 8 https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01469077/document 
Brunet, L.; Lyon, D. Y.; Hotze, E. M.; Alvarez, P. J. J.; Wiesner, M. R. Comparative Photoactivity 
and Antibacterial Properties of C60 Fullerenes and Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 2009, 43, 4355–4360. 
Cailotto, S.; Negrato, M.; Daniele, S.; Luque, R.; Selva, M.; Emanuele Amadio, E.; Perosa, 
A. Carbon Dots as Photocatalysts for Organic Synthesis: Metal-Free Methylene–Oxygen￾Bond Photocleavage. Green Chem. 2020, 22, 1145–1149. 
Chaabane, L.; Beyou, E.; El Ghali, A.; Baouab, M. H. V. Comparative Studies on the 
Adsorption of Metal Ions from Aqueous Solutions Using Various Functionalized Graphene 
Oxide Sheets as Supported Adsorbents. J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 389, 121839. 
Chaoua, S.; Boussaa, S.; El Gharmali, A.; Boumezzough, A. Impact of Irrigation with 
Wastewater on Accumulation of Heavy Metals in Soil and Crops in the Region of Marrakech 
in Morocco. J. Saudi Soc. Agric. Sci. 2019, 18, 429–436. 
Chen, Y.; Shi, H.; Guo, H.; Ling, C.; Yuan, X.; Li, P. Hydrated Titanium Oxide Nanoparticles 
Supported on Natural Rice Straw for Cu (II) Removal from Water. Environ. Technol. Inno. 
2020, 20, 101143.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
330 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Chen, Z.; Mahmud, S.; Cai, L.; He, Z.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, L. Zhao, S.; Xiong, Z. Hierarchical 
Poly(Vinylidene Fluoride)/Active Carbon Composite Membrane with Self-Confining 
Functional Carbon Nanotube Layer for Intractable Wastewater Remediation. J. Membr. Sci. 
2020, 603, 118041. 
Crini, G.; Lichtfouse, E. Advantages and Disadvantages of Techniques Used for Wastewater 
Treatment. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2019, 17, 145–155. 
Crooks, R. M.; Zhao, M.; Sun, L.; Chechik, V.; Yeung, L. K. Dendrimer-Encapsulated Metal 
Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications to Catalysis. Acc. Chem. Res. 
2001, 34, 181–190. 
Dada, A. O.; Adekola, F. A.; Odebunmi, E. O.; Dada, F. E.; Bello, O. S.; Ogunlaja, A. S. Bottom-up 
Approach Synthesis of Core-Shell Nanoscale Zerovalent Iron (CS-nZVI): Physicochemical 
and Spectroscopic Characterization with Cu(II) Ions Adsorption Application. MethodsX 
2020, 7, 100976. 
Das, C.; Sen, S.; Singh, T.; Ghosh, T.; Paul, S. S.; Kim, T. W.; Jeon, S.; Maiti, D. K.; Im, J.; 
Biswas, G. Green Synthesis, Characterization and Application of Natural Product Coated 
Magnetite Nanoparticles for Wastewater Treatment. Nanomaterials 2020, 10, 1615. 
Das, G. S.; Shim, J. P.; Bhatnagar, A.; Tripathi, K. M.; Kim, T. Biomass-Derived Carbon 
Quantum Dots for Visible-Light-Induced Photocatalysis and Label-Free Detection of 
Fe(III) and Ascorbic Acid. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 15084. 
Das, R.; Sarkar, S.; Chakraborty, S.; Choi, H.; Bhattacharjee, C. Remediation of Antiseptic 
Components in Wastewater by Photocatalysis Using TiO2 Nanoparticles. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
Res. 2014, 53, 3012–3020. 
Deliyanni, E. A.; Bakoyannakis, D. N.; Zouboulis, A. I.; Matis, K. A. Sorption of As(V) Ions 
by Akaganeite-Type Nanocrystals. Chemosphere 2003, 50, 155–163. 
Delnavaz, M.; Kazemimofrad, Z. Nano Zerovalent Iron (NZVI) Adsorption Performance on 
Acidic Dye 36 Removal: Optimization of Effective Factors, Isotherm and Kinetic Study. 
Environ. Prog. Sustain. Energy 2020, 39, e13349. 
Deng, Y.; Guo, C.; Zhang, H.; Yin, X.; Chen, L.; Wu, D.; Xu, J. Occurrence and Removal of 
Illicit Drugs in Different Wastewater Treatment Plants with Different Treatment Techniques. 
Environ. Sci. Eur. 2020, 32, 28. 
Dhar, P.; Narendren, S.; Gaur, S. S.; Sharma, S.; Kumar, A.; Katiyar, V. Self-Propelled 
Cellulose Nanocrystal Based Catalytic Nanomotors for Targeted Hyperthermia and Pollutant 
Remediation Applications. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 158, 1020–1036. 
Diallo, M. S.; Christie, S.; Swaminathan, P.; Johnson, J. H.; Goddard, W. A. Dendrimer 
Enhanced Ultrafiltration. 1. Recovery of Cu(II) from Aqueous Solutions Using PAMAM 
Dendrimers with Ethylene Diamine Core and Terminal NH2 Groups. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2005, 39 (5), 1366–1377. 
Dixit, T. K.; Sharma, S.; Sinha, A. K. Synergistic Effect of N-rGO Supported Gd Doped 
Bismuth Ferrite Heterojunction on Enhanced Photocatalytic Degradation of Rhodamine B. 
Mat. Sci. Semicon. Proc. 2020, In press. 
Djordjevic, A.; Merkulov, D. S.; Lazarevic, M.; Borisev, I.; Medic, I.; Pavlovic, V.; Miljevic, 
B.; Abramovic, B. Enhancement of Nano Titanium Dioxide Coatings by Fullerene and 
Polyhydroxy Fullerene in the Photocatalytic Degradation of the Herbicide Mesotrione. 
Chemosphere 2018, 196, 145–152. 
Dong, L. X.; Huang, X. C.; Wang, Z.; Yang, Z.; Wang, X. M.; Tang, C. Y. Separation and Purifica￾tion Technology AThin-Film Nanocomposite Nanofiltration Membrane Prepared on a Support 
with in Situ Embedded Zeolite Nanoparticles. Sep. Purif. Technol. 2016, 166, 230–239.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 331 
Doumic, L.; Salierno, G.; Cassanello, M.; Haure, P.; Ayude, M. Efficient Removal of Orange 
G Using Prussian Blue Nanoparticles Supported Over Alumina. Catal. Today 2015, 240, 
67–72. 
Dresselhaus, M. S.; Dresselhaus, G.; Eklund, P. C.; Rao, A. M. Carbon Nanotubes. In The 
Physics of Fullerene-Based and Fullerene-Related Materials; Springer: Dordrecht, 2000; 
pp 331–379. 
Drexler, K. E. Nanotechnology: From Feynman to Funding. B. Sci. Technol. Soc. 2004, 24, 
21–27. 
El-Kemary, M.; El-Shamy, H.; El-Mehasseb, I. Photocatalytic Degradation of Ciprofloxacin 
Drug in Water Using ZnO Nanoparticles. J. Lumin. 2010, 130, 2327–2331. 
El-Sikaily, A.; Khaled, A.; El-Nemr, A. Textile Dyes Xenobiotic and Their Harmful Effect. 
In Non-Conventional Textile Waste Water Treatment; Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 2012; 
pp 31–64. 
Faka, V.; Tsoumachidou, S.; Moschogiannaki, M.; Kiriakidis, G.; Poulios, I.; Binas, V. 
ZnWO4 Nanoparticles as Efficient Photocatalyst for Degradation of Para-Aminobenzoic 
Acid: Impact of Annealing Temperature on Photocatalytic Performance. J. Photochem. 
Photobiol. A: Chem. 2021, 406, 113002. 
Fang, Z.; Gao, Y.; Bolan, N.; Shaheen, S. M.; Xu, S.; Wu, X.; Xu, X.; Hu, H.; Lin, J.; Zhang, F.; 
Li, J.; Rinklebe, J.; Wang, H. Conversion of Biological Solid Waste to Graphene-Containing 
Biochar for Water Remediation: A Critical Review. Chem. Eng. J. 2020, 390, 124611. 
Far, H. S.; i Hasanzadeh, M.; Nashtaei, M. S.; Rabbani, M.; Haji, A.; Moghadam, B. H. 
PPI-Dendrimer-Functionalized Magnetic Metal–Organic Framework (Fe3O4@MOF@PPI) 
with High Adsorption Capacity for Sustainable Wastewater Treatment. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interf. 2020, 12, 25294–25303. 
Farghali, A. A.; Bahgat, M.; Allah, A. E.; Khedr, M. H. (2013) Adsorption of Pb (II) Ions 
from Aqueous Solutions Using Copper Oxide Nanostructures, Beni-Seuf Univ. J. Appl. Sci. 
2013, 2, 61–71. 
Farkhondeh, T.; Naseri, K.; Esform, A.; Aramjoo, H.; Naghizadeh, A. Drinking Water Heavy 
Metal Toxicity and Chronic Kidney Diseases: A Systematic Review. Rev. Environ. Health 
2020, 0110. 
Fatima, S. A.; Hamid, A.; Yaqub, G.; Javed, A.; Akram, H. Detection of Volatile Organic 
Compounds in Blood of Farmers and Their General Health and Safety Profile. Nat. Environ. 
Pollut. Technol. 2018, 17, 657–660. 
Fulekar, M. H.; Pathak, B. Bioremediation Technology: Hazardous Waste Management; CRC 
Press, 2020; p 366. 
Gao, W.; Wang, J. The Environmental Impact of Micro/Nanomachines: A Review. ACS Nano 
2014, 8, 3170–3180. 
García-Torres, J.; Serra, A.; Tierno, P.; Alcobe, X.; Valles, E. Magnetic Propulsion of 
Recyclable Catalytic Nanocleaners for Pollutant Degradation. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2017, 
9, 23859−23868. 
Gavrilescu, M.; Demnerová, K.; Aamand, J.; Agathos, S.; Fava, F. N. Emerging Pollutants in 
the Environment: Present and Future Challenges in Biomonitoring, Ecological Risks and 
Bioremediation. Biotechnol. 2015, 32, 147–156. 
Gehrke, I.; Geiser, A.; Somborn-Schulz, A. Innovations in Nanotechnology for Water 
Treatment. Nanotechnol. Sci. Appl. 2015, 8, 1–17. 
Ghadimi, M.; Zangenehtabar, S.; Homaeigohar, S. An Overview of the Water Remediation 
Potential of Nanomaterials and Their Ecotoxicological Impacts. Water, 2020, 12 (4), 1–23.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
332 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Gheju, M. Hexavalent Chromium Reduction with Zero-Valent Iron (ZVI) in Aquatic Systems. 
Water Air Soil Pollut. 2011, 222, 103–148. 
Gil-Díaz, M.; Álvarez, M. A.; Alonso, J.; Lobo, M. C. Effectiveness of Nanoscale Zero-Valent 
Iron for the Immobilization of Cu and/or Ni in Water and Soil Samples. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 
15927. 
Gimiliani, G. T.; Fontes, R. F. C.; Abessa, D. M. S. Modeling the Dispersion of Endocrine 
Disruptors in the Santos Estuarine System (Sao Paulo State, Brazil). Braz. J. Oceanogr. 
2016, 64, 1–8. 
Gómez-Pastora, J.; Dominguez, S.; Bringas, E.; Rivero, M. J.; Ortiz, I.; Dionysiou, D. D. 
Review and Perspectives on the Use of Magnetic Nanophotocatalysts (MNPCs) in Water 
Treatment. Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 310, 407–427. 
Gray, N. F. Biology of Wastewater Treatment; Imperial College: London, 2004; p 1444. 
Guan, X.; Sun, Y.; Qin, H.; Li, J.; Lo, I. M.; He, D.; Dong, H. The Limitations of Applying 
Zero-Valent Iron Technology in Contaminants Sequestration and the Corresponding 
Countermeasures: The Development in Zero-Valent Iron Technology in the Last Two 
Decades (1994–2014). Water Res. 2015, 75, 224–248. 
Guerra, F. D.; Attia, M. F.; Whitehead, D. C.; Alexis, F. Nanotechnology for Environmental 
Remediation: Materials and Applications. Molecules 2018, 23, 1760. 
Guo, F.; Huang, X.; Chen, Z.; Sun, H.; Shi, W. Investigation of Visible-Light-Driven 
Photocatalytic Tetracycline Degradation via Carbon Dots Modified Porous ZnSnO3 Cubes: 
Mechanism and Degradation Pathway. Sep. Purif. Technol. 2020, 253, 117518 
Guo, Y.; Lay, C. H.; Zhou, D.; Dong, S.; Zhang, J.; Ren, N. Enhanced Photocatalytic 
Performance of Metal Silver and Carbon Dots Co-Doped BiOI Photocatalysts and 
Mechanism Investigation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 27, 17516–17529. 
Guo, Z.; Liu, J.; Li, Y.; McDonald, J. A.; Zulkifli, M. Y. B.; Khan, S. J.; Xie, L.; Gu,Z.; 
Kong, B.; Liang, K. Chemical Communications Biocatalytic Metal–Organic Framework 
Nanomotors for Active Water Decontamination. Chem. Comm. 2020, 56, 14837–14840. 
Gwon, Y. J.; Lee, J. J.; Lee, K. W.; Ogden, M. D.; Harwood, L. W.; Lee, T. S. Prussian 
Blue Decoration on Polyacrylonitrile Nanofibers Using Polydopamine for Effective Cs Ion 
Removal. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2020, 59, 4872–4880. 
Hammad, M.; Fortugno, P.; Hardt, S.; Kim, C.; Salamon, S.; Schmidt, T. C.; Wende, H.; 
Schulz, C.; Wiggers, H. Large-Scale Synthesis of Iron Oxide/Graphene Hybrid Materials 
as Highly Efficient Photo-Fenton Catalyst for Water Remediation. Environ. Technol. Innov. 
2020, In Press. 
Han, Y.; Xu, Z.; Gao, C. Ultrathin Graphene Nanofiltration Membrane for Water Purification. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23, 3693–3700. 
Hao, X.; Wang, X.; Liu, R.; Li, S.; van Loosdrecht, M. C. M.; Jiang, H. Environmental Impacts 
of Resource Recovery from Wastewater Treatment Plants. Water Res. 2019, 160, 268–277. 
He, H.; Luo, Z.; Yu, C. Multifunctional ZnWO4 Nanoparticles for Photocatalytic Removal of 
Pollutants and Disinfection of Bacteria. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A Chem. 2020, 401, 112735. 
He, C.; Qu, J.; Yu, Z.; Chen, D.; Su, T.; He, L.; Zhao, Z.; Zhou, C.; Hong, P.; Li, Y.; Sun, S.; Li, 
C. Preparation of Micro-Nano Material Composed of Oyster Shell/Fe3O4 Nanoparticles/ 
Humic Acid and Its Application in Selective Removal of Hg(II). Nanomaterials 2019, 9, 
953. 
Hesni, M.A; Hedayati, S. A.; Qadermarzi, A.; Pouladi, M.; ZangiAbadi, S.; Naghshbandi, N. 
Application of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles in the Reactor for Treatment of Effluent from Fish 
Farms. Iran. J. Fish. Sci. 2020, 19, 1319–1328.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 333 
Hirsch, A. Addition Reactions of Buckminsterfullerene (C60). Synthesis 1995, 8, 895–913. 
Hong, J.; Xie, J.; Mirshahghassemi, S.; Lead, J. Metal (Cd, Cr, Ni, Pb) Removal from Environ￾mentally Relevant Waters Using Polyvinylpyrrolidone-Coated Magnetite Nanoparticles. RSC 
Adv. 2020, 10, 3266–3276. 
Horikoshi, S.; Serpone, N. Can the Photocatalyst TiO2 Be Incorporated Into a Wastewater 
Treatment Method? Background and Prospects. Catal. Today 2020, 340, 334–346. 
Hristovski, K. D.; Nguyen, H.; Westerhoff, P. K. Removal of Arsenate and 17-Ethinyl Estradiol 
(EE2) by Iron (Hydr)Oxide Modified Activated Carbon Fibers. J. Environ. Sci. Heal. A 
2009a, 44, 354–361. 
Hristovski, K. D.; Westerhoff, P. K.; Moller, T.; Sylvester, P. Effect of Synthesis Conditions on 
Nano-Iron (Hydr)Oxide Impregnated Granulated Activated Carbon. Chem. Eng. J. 2009b, 
146, 237–243. 
Hu, H.; Wang, Z.; Pan, L. Synthesis of Monodisperse Fe3O4@ Silica Core–Shell Microspheres 
and Their Application for Removal Of Heavy Metal Ions from Water. J. Alloys. Compd. 
2010, 492, 656–661. 
Hu, J.; Chen, G.; Lo, I. M. C. Selective Removal of Heavy Metals from Industrial Wastewater 
Using Maghemite Nanoparticle: Performance and Mechanisms. J. Environ. Eng. 2006, 132, 7. 
Huang, H.; Song, Z.; Wei,N.; Shi, L.; Mao, Y.; Ying, Y.; Sun, L.; Xu, Z.; Peng, X. Ultrafast 
Viscous Water Flow through Nanostrand-Channelled Graphene Oxide Membranes. Nat. 
Commun. 2013, 4, 2979. 
Ibukun, O.; Jeong, H. K. Tailoring Titanium Dioxide by Silver Particles for Photocatalysis. 
Curr. Appl. Phys. 2020, 20, 23–28. 
Iloms, E.; Ololade, O. O.; Ogola, H. J. O.; Selvarajan R. Investigating Industrial Effluent 
Impact on Municipal Wastewater Treatment Plant in Vaal, South Africa. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health 2020, 17, 1096. 
International Atomic Energy Agency. The Radiological Accident in Goiânia; IAEA: Vienna, 
1988. 
Jacukowicz-Sobala, I.; Ociński, D.; Mazur, P.; Stanisławska, E.; Kociołek-Balawejder, E. Cu(II)-
Fe(III) Oxide Doped Anion Exchangers—Multifunctional Composites for Arsenite Removal 
from Water via As(III) Adsorption and Oxidation. J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 394, 122527. 
Jain, A.; Vaya, D. Photocatalytic Activity of TiO2 Nanomaterial. J. Chil. Chem. Soc. 2017, 
62, 3683–3690. 
Jiang, D.; Zeng, G.; Huang, D.; Chen, M.; Zhang, C.; Huang, C.; Wan, J. Remediation of 
Contaminated Soils by Enhanced Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron. Environ. Res. 2018, 163, 
217–227. 
Kalikeri, S.; Kodialbail, V. S. Auto-Combustion Synthesis of Narrow Band-Gap Bismuth 
Ferrite Nanoparticles for Solar Photocatalysis to Remediate Azo Dye Containing Water. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 56, 2020. 
Kalikeri, S.; Shetty Kodialbail, V. Solar Light-Driven Photocatalysis Using Mixed-Phase Bismuth 
Ferrite (BiFeO(3)/Bi(25)FeO(40)) Nanoparticles for Remediation of Dye-Contaminated 
Water: Kinetics and Comparison with Artificial UV and Visible Light-Mediated Photocatalysis. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2018, 25, 13881–13893. 
Kaur, R.; Vellingiri, K.; Kim, K. H.; Paul, A. K.; Deep, A. Efficient Photocatalytic Degradation 
of Rhodamine 6G with a Quantum Dot-Metal Organic Framework Nanocomposite. 
Chemosphere 2016, 154, 620–627. 
Kazlauskienė, N.; Svecevičius, G.; Marčiulionienė, D.; Montvydienė, D.; Kesminas, V.; 
Staponkus, R.; Taujanskis, E.; Slučkaitė, A. The Effect of Persistent Pollutants on Aquatic 
Ecosystem: A Complex Study. IEEE/OES Baltic Int. Symp. 2012, 2012, 1–6.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
334 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Keller, A. A.; Wang, H.; Zhou, D.; Lenihan, H. S.; Cherr, G.; Cardinale, B. J.; Miller, R.; Ji, 
Z. Stability and Aggregation of Metal Oxide Nanoparticles in Natural Aqueous Matrices. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010, 44, 1962–1967. 
Khan, S.; Edathil, A. A.; Banat, F. Sustainable Synthesis of Graphene-Based Adsorbent Using 
Date Syrup. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 18106. 
Khan, S. T.; Malik, A. Engineered Nanomaterials for Water Decontamination and Purification: 
From Lab to Products. J. Hazard Mater. 2019, 363, 295–308. 
Khan, S.; Malik, A. Toxicity Evaluation of Textile Effluents and Role of Native Soil Bacterium 
in Biodegradation of a Textile Dye. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2018, 25, 4446–4458. 
Kiew, S. F.; Kiew, L. V.; Lee, H. B.; Imae, T.; Chung, L. Y. Assessing Biocompatibility of 
Graphene Oxide-Based Nanocarriers: A Review. J. Control Release 2016, 226, 217–228. 
Kim, K. H.; Kabir, E.; Jahan, S. A. Exposure to Pesticides and the Associated Human Health 
Effects. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 575, 525–529. 
Kim, H.; Kim, M.; Lee, W.; Kim, S. Rapid Removal of Radioactive Cesium by Polyacrylonitrile 
Nanofibers Containing Prussian Blue. J. Hazard. Mater. 2018, 347, 106–113. 
Kim, K. R.; Owens, G. Potential for Enhanced Phytoremediation of Landfills Using 
Biosolids—A Review. J. Environ. Manage. 2010, 91, 791–797. 
Klatte, S.; Schaefer, H. C.; Hempel, M. Pharmaceuticals in the Environment: A Short Review 
on Options to Minimize the Exposure of Humans, Animals and Ecosystems. Sustain. Chem. 
Pharm. 2017, 5, 61–66. 
Klimkova, S.; Cernik, M.; Lacinova, L.; Filip, J.; Jancik, D.; Zboril, R. Zero-Valent Iron 
Nanoparticles in Treatment of Acid Mine Water from in Situ Uranium Leaching. Chemosphere 
2011, 82, 1178–1184. 
Komkova, M. A.; Karyakina, E. E.; Karyakin, A. A. Catalytically Synthesized Prussian 
Blue Nanoparticles Defeating Natural Enzyme Peroxidase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 
11302–11307. 
Kuang, P.; Sayed, M.; Fan, J.; Cheng, B.; Yu, J. 3D Graphene-Based H2-Production 
Photocatalyst and Electrocatalyst. Adv. Energy Mater. 2020, 10, 1903802. 
Kumar, N. S.; Asif, M.; Reddy, T. R. K.; Shanmugam, G.; Ajbar, A. Silver Quantum Dot 
Decorated 2D-SnO2 Nanoflakes for Photocatalytic Degradation of the Water Pollutant 
Rhodamine B. Nanomaterials 2019, 9, 1536. 
Kurwadkar, S. Occurrence and Distribution of Organic and Inorganic Pollutants in Groundwater. 
Water Environ. Res. 2019, 91, 1001–1008. 
Kyzas, G. Z.; Matis, K. A. Flotation in Water and Wastewater Treatment. Processes 2018, 6, 
116. 
Lam, S. M.; Sin, J. C.; Mohamed, A. R. A Review on Photocatalytic Application of g-C3N4/ 
Semiconductor (CNS) Nanocomposites towards the Erasure of Dyeing Wastewater. Mater. 
Sci. Semicond. Process 2016, 47, 62–84. 
Laver, N. R. The Removal of Radionuclides from Contaminated Water Samples Using 
Graphene Oxide Nano-Flakes, Doctoral dissertation, UCL (University College London), 
2020. 
Lee, H.; Lee, K.; Kim, S. O.; Lee, J. S.; Oh, Y. Effective and Sustainable Cs+ Remediation 
via Exchangeable Sodium-Ion Sites in Graphene Oxide Fibers. J. Mater. Chem. A 2019, 7, 
17754–17760. 
Lee, J.; Mackeyev, Y.; Cho, M.; Wilson, L. J.; Kim, J. H.; Alvarez, P. J. J. C60 Aminofullerene 
Immobilized on Silica as a Visible-Light-Activated Photocatalyst. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2010, 44, 9488–9495.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 335 
Lee, K. T.; Lin, C. H.; Lu, S. Y. SnO2 Quantum Dots Synthesized with a Carrier Solvent 
Assisted Interfacial Reaction for Band-Structure Engineering of TiO2 Photocatalysts. J. 
Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 14457–14463. 
Leong, S.; Razmjou, A.; Wang, K.; Hapgood, K.; Zhang, X.; Wang, H. TiO2 Based Photocatalytic 
Membranes: A Review. J. Membr. Sci. 2014, 472, 167–184. 
Lesiak, B.; Rangam, N.; Jiricek, P.; Gordeev, I.; Tóth, J.; Kövér, L.; Mohai, M.; Borowicz, 
P. Surface Study of Fe3O4 Nanoparticles Functionalized with Biocompatible Adsorbed 
Molecules. Front. Chem. 2019, 7, 642. 
Li, B.; Cao, H. ZnO@ Graphene Composite with Enhanced Performance for the Removal of 
Dye from Water. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21, 3346–3349. 
Li, D.; Huang, J.; Li, R.; Chen, P.; Chen, D.; Cai, M.; Liu, H.; Feng, Y.; Lv, W.; Liu, G. 
Synthesis of a Carbon Dots Modified g-C3N4/SnO2 Z-Scheme Photocatalyst with Superior 
Photocatalytic Activity for PPCPs Degradation Under Visible Light Irradiation. J. Hazard. 
Mater. 2021, 401, 123257. 
Li, H.; Shi, W.; Zhu, H.; Zhang, Y.; Du, Q.; Qin, X. Effects of Zinc Oxide Nanospheres 
on the Separation Performance of Hollow Fiber Poly(Piperazine-Amide) Composite 
Nanofiltration Membranes. Fiber Polym. 2016, 17, 836–846. 
Li, J.; Liu, X.; Lu, J.; Wang, Y.; Li, G.; Zhao, F. Anti-Bacterial Properties of Ultrafiltration 
Membrane Modified by Graphene Oxide with Nano-Silver Particles. J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 
2016, 484, 107–115. 
Li, M.; Mu, Y.; Shang, H.; Mao, C.; Cao, S.; Ai, Z.; Zhang, L. Phosphate Modification Enables 
High Efficiency and Electron Selectivity of nZVI toward Cr(VI) Removal. Appl. Catal. B: 
Environ. 2020, 263, 118364. 
Li, Q.; Wang, Y.; Song, J.; Guan, Y.; Yu, H.; Pan, X.; Wu, F.; Zhang, M. Influence of Silica 
Nanospheres on the Separation Performance of Thinfilm Composite Poly(Piperazineamide) 
Nanofiltration Membranes. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2015, 324, 757–764. 
Li, S.; Wang, W.; Yanb, W.; Zhang, W. X. Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron (nZVI) for the Treatment 
of Concentrated Cu(ii) Wastewater: A Field Demonstration. Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts 
2014, 16, 524–533. 
Li, S.; De Silva, T.; Arsano, I.; Gallaba, D.; Karunanithy, R.; Wasala, M.; Zhang, X.; 
Sivakumar, P.; Migone, A.; Tsige, M.; Ma, X.; Talapatra, S. High Adsorption of Benzoic 
Acid on Single Walled Carbon Nanotube Bundles. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 10013. 
Li, S.; Yang, F.; Li, J.; Cheng, K. Porous Biochar-Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron Composites: 
Synthesis, Characterization and Application for Lead Ion Removal. Sci. Total Environ. 
2020, 746, 141037. 
Li, X.; Sun, Y. M.; Zhang, Z. Y.; Feng,N. X.; Song, H.; Liu, Y. L.; Hai, L.; Cao, J. M.; Wang, G. 
P. Visible Light-Driven Multi-Motion Modes CNC/TiO2 Nanomotors for Highly Efficient 
Degradation of Emerging Contaminants. Carbon 2019, 155, 195–203. 
Li, X.; Wang, J.; Rykov, A. I.; Sharma, V. K.; Wei, H.; Jin, C.; Dionysiou, D. D. Prussian 
Blue/TiO2 Nanocomposites as a Heterogeneous Photo-Fenton Catalyst for Degradation of 
Organic Pollutants in Water. Catal. Sci. Technol. 2015, 5, 504–514. 
Li, X.; Yu, J.; Wageh, S.; Al-Ghamdi, A. A.; Xie, J. Graphene in Photocatalysis: A Review. 
Small 2016, 12, 6640–6696. 
Li, Z.; Chen, F.; Yuan, L.; Liu, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Chai, Z.; Shi, W. Uranium (VI) Adsorption on 
Graphene Oxide Nanosheets from Aqueous Solutions. Chem. Eng. J. 2012, 210, 539–546.
 
Li, Z.; Sun, Y.; Yang, Y.; Han, Y.; Wang, T.; Chen, J.; Tsang, D. C. W. Biochar-Supported
 
Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron as an Efficient Catalyst for Organic Degradation in Groundwater. 
J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 383, 121240.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
336 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Lian, Q.; Ahmad, Z. U.; Gang, D. D.; Zappi, M. E.; Fortela, D. L. B.; Hernandez, R. The Effects 
of Carbon Disulfide Driven Functionalization on Graphene Oxide for Enhanced Pb(II) 
Adsorption: Investigation of Adsorption Mechanism. Chemosphere 2020, 248, 126078. 
Liu, D.; Mao, Y.; Ding, L. Carbon Nanotubes as Antimicrobial Agents for Water Disinfection 
and Pathogen Control. J. Water Health 2018, 16, 171–180. 
Liu, H.; Liang, J.; Fu, S.; Li, L.; Cui, J.; Gao, P.; Zhao, F.; Zhou, J. N Doped Carbon Quantum 
Dots Modified Defect-Rich g-C3N4 for Enhanced Photocatalytic Combined Pollutions 
Degradation and Hydrogen Evolution. Colloids Surf A: Physicochem Eng Asp 2020, 591, 
124552. 
Liu, L.; Liu, X.; Chai, Y.; Wu, B.; Wang, C. Surface Modification of TiO2 Nanosheets with 
Fullerene and Zinc-Phthalocyanine for Enhanced Photocatalytic Reduction Under Solar￾Light Irradiation. Sci. China Mater. 2020, 63, 2251–2260. 
Liu, R.; Hou, Y.; Jiang, S.; Nie, B. Ag(I)-Hived Fullerene Microcube as an Enhanced Catalytic 
Substrate for the Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol and the Photodegradation of Orange G Dye. 
Langmuir 2020, 36, 5236–5242. 
Liu, Z.; Xu,T.; Wang, M.; Mao, C.; Chi, B. Magnetic Mesoporous Silica/ε-Polylysine 
Nanomotor-Based Removers of Blood Pb2+. J. Mater. Chem. B 2020, In press. 
Longman, J.; Veres, D.; Finsinger, W.; Ersek, V. Exceptionally High Levels of Lead Pollution 
in the Balkans from the Early Bronze Age to the Industrial Revolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 2018, 115, E5661–E5668. 
Low, J.; Yu, J.; Li, Q.; Cheng, B. Enhanced Visible-Light Photocatalytic Activity of Plasmonic 
Ag and Graphene Co-Modified Bi2WO6 Nanosheets. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16, 
1111–1120. 
Lunge, S.; Singh, S.; Sinha, A. Magnetic Iron Oxide (Fe3O4) Nanoparticles from Tea Waste 
for Arsenic Removal. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 2014, 356, 21–31. 
Lu F, Astruc D, Nanocatalysts and Other Nanomaterials for Water Remediation from Organic 
Pollutants. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2020, 408. 
Lv, Y.; Yang, H. C.; Liang, H. Q.; Wan, L. S.; Xu, Z. K. Novel Nanofiltration Membrane R 
with Ultrathin Zirconia Film as Selective Layer. J. Membr. Sci. 2016, 500, 265–271. 
Ma, F.; Philippe, B.; Zhao, B.; Diao, J.; Li, J. Simultaneous Adsorption and Reduction of 
Hexavalent Chromium on Biochar-Supported Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron (nZVI) in 
Aqueous Solution. Water Sci. Technol. 2020, 82, 1339–1349. 
Ma, J.; Jiang, Z.; Cao, J.; Yu, F. Enhanced Adsorption for the Removal of Antibiotics by 
Carbon Nanotubes/Graphene Oxide/Sodium Alginate Triple-Network Nanocomposite 
Hydrogels in Aqueous Solutions. Chemosphere 2020, 242, 125188. 
Mai, N. X. D.; Yoon, J.; Kim, J. H.; Kim, I. T.; Son, H. B.; Bae, J.; Hur, J. Hybrid Hydrogel and 
Aerogel Membranes Based on Chitosan/Prussian Blue for Photo-Fenton-Based Wastewater 
Treatment Using Sunlight. Sci. Adv. Mater. 2017, 9, 1484–1487. 
Manickum, T.; John, W.; Terry, S. Determination of Selected Steroid Estrogens in Treated 
Sewage Effluent in the Umsunduzi (Duzi) River Water Catchment Area. Hydrol. Current 
Res. 2011, 2, 117. 
Marsooli, M. A.; Nasrabadi, M. R.; Fasihi-Ramandi, M.; Adib, K.; Pourmasoud, S.; Ahmadi, F.; 
Eghbali, M.; Sobhani, A.; Nasab, S.; Tomczykowa, M.; Plonska-Brzezinska, M. E. Synthesis 
of Magnetic Fe3O4/ZnWO4 and Fe3O4/ZnWO4/CeVO4 Nanoparticles: The Photocatalytic 
Effects on Organic Pollutants upon Irradiation with UV-Vis Light. Catalysts 2020, 10, 494. 
Masud, A.; Soria, N. G. C.; Aga, D. S.; Aich, N. Adsorption and Advanced Oxidation of 
Diverse Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products (PPCPs) from Water Using Highly 
Efficient rGO–nZVI Nanohybrids. Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol. 2020, 6, 2223–2238.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 337 
Mayo, J. T.; Yavuz, C.; Yean, S.; Cong, L.; Shipley, H.; Yu, W.; Falkner, J.; Kan, A.; Tomson, 
M.; Colvin, V. L. The Effect of Nanocrystalline Magnetite Size on Arsenic Removal. Sci. 
Technol. Adv. Mater. 2007, 8, 71–75. 
Medvedeva, I.; Bakhteeva, I.; Zhakov, S.; Revvo, A.; Uimin, M.; Yermakov, A.; Shchegoleva, 
N. Separation of Fe3O4 Nanoparticles from Water by Sedimentation in a Gradient Magnetic 
Field. JWARP 2015, 7, 111. 
Melián, J. A. H. Sustainable Wastewater Treatment Systems (2018–2019). Sustainability 2020, 
12, 1940. 
Mezzelani, M.; Gorbi, S.; Regoli, F. Pharmaceuticals in the Aquatic Environments: Evidence 
of Emerged Threat and Future Challenges for Marine Organisms. Mar. Environ. Res. 2018, 
140, 41–60. 
Mirshahghassemi, S.; Lead, J. R. Oil Recovery from Water under Environmentally Relevant 
Conditions Using Magnetic Nanoparticles. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2015, 49, 11729–11736. 
Mollahosseini, A.; Rahimpour, A. Interfacially Polymerized Thin Film Nanofiltration 
Membranes on TiO2 Coated Polysulfone Substrate. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 2014, 20, 1261–1268. 
Moretti, S. M. L.; Bertoncini, E. I.; Abreu-Junior, C. H. Composting Sewage Sludge with 
Green Waste from Tree Pruning. Sci. Agric. 2015, 72, 432–439. 
Mustafa, G.; Tahir. H.; Sultan, M.; Akhtar, N. Synthesis and Characterization of Cupric Oxide 
(CuO) Nanoparticles and Their Application for the Removal of Dyes. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 
2013, 12, 6650–6660. 
Mustapha, S.; Ndamitso, M. M.; Abdulkareem, A. S.; Tijani, J. O., Shuaib, D. T.; Ajala, A. 
O.; Mohammed, A. K. Application of TiO2 and ZnO Nanoparticles Immobilized on Clay in 
Wastewater Treatment: A Review. Appl. Water Sci. 2020, 10, 49. 
Nasrollahzadeh, M.; Sajjadi, M.; Iravani, S.; Varma, R. S. Green-Synthesized Nanocatalysts 
and Nanomaterials for Water Treatment: Current Challenges and Future Perspectives. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 2021, 401, 123401. 
Newton, R. J.; McLellan, S. L.; Dila, D. K.; Vineis, J. H.; Morrison, H. G.; Eren, A. M.; Sogin, 
M. L. Sewage Reflects the Microbiomes of Human Populations. mBio 2015, 6, e02574-14. 
Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K.; Morozov, S. V.; Jiang, D.; Zhang, Y.; Dubonos, S. V.; Firsov, 
A. A. Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Science 2004, 306, 666–669. 
O’Carroll, D.; Sleep, B.; Krol, M.; Boparai, H.; Kocur, C. Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron and 
Bimetallic Particles for Contaminated Site Remediation. Adv. Water Resour. 2013, 51, 104–122. 
Oprčkal, P.; Mladenovič, A.; Vidmar, J.; Pranjić, A. M.; Milačič, R.; Ščančar, J. Critical 
Evaluation of the Use of Different Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron Particles for the Treatment 
of Effluent Water from a Small Biological Wastewater Treatment Plant. Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 
321, 20–30. 
Park, J. H.; Kim, M.; Kim, H.; Kim, W.; Ryu, J.; Lim, J. M.; Kim, S. Enhancement of Cesium 
Adsorption on Prussian Blue by TiO2 Photocatalysis: Effect of the TiO2/PB Ratio. J. Water 
Process Eng. 2020, 38, 101571. 
Pastrana-Martinez, L. M.; Pereira, N.; Lima, R.; Faria, J. L.; Gomes, H. T.; Silva, A. M. 
Degradation of Diphenhydramine by Photo-Fenton Using Magnetically Recoverable Iron 
Oxide Nanoparticles as Catalyst. Chem. Eng. J. 2015, 261, 45–52. 
Perera, M.; Wijenayaka, L. A.; Siriwardana, K.; Dahanayake, D.; de Silva, K. M. N. Gold 
Nanoparticle Decorated Titania for Sustainable Environmental Remediation: Green 
Synthesis, Enhanced Surface Adsorption and Synergistic Photocatalysis. RSC Adv. 2020, 
10, 29594–29602. 
Peuke, A. D.; Rennenberg, H. Phytoremediation. EMBO Reports 2005, 6, 497–501.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
338 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Pinheiro, H. M.; Thomas, O.; Touraud, E. Aromatic Amines from Azo Dye Reduction: Status 
Review with Emphasis on Direct UV Spectrophotometric Detection in Textile Industry 
Wastewaters. Dyes Pigm. 2004, 61, 121–139. 
Pinto, A. M.; Gonçalves, I. C.; Magalhães, F. D. Graphene-Based Materials Biocompatibility: 
A Review. Colloid Surf. B 2013, 111, 188–202. 
Pradhan, N.; Pal, A.; Pal, T. Catalytic Reduction of Aromatic Nitro Compounds by Coinage 
Metal Nanoparticles. Langmuir 2001, 17, 1800–1802. 
Priyadarshni, N.; Nath, P.; Nagahanumaiah; Chanda, N. Sustainable Removal of Arsenate, 
Arsenite and Bacterial Contamination from Water Using Biochar Stabilized Iron and 
Copper Oxide Nanoparticles and Associated Mechanism of the Remediation Process. J. 
Water Process Eng. 2020, 37, 101495. 
Priyadarshni, N.; Nath, P.; Nagahanumaiah; Chanda, N. DMSA-Functionalized Gold Nanorod 
on Paper for Colorimetric Detection and Estimation of Arsenic (III and V) Contamination 
in Groundwater. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2018, 6, 6264–6272. 
Pulizzi, F.; Sun, W. Treating Water with Nano. Nature Nanotech. 2018, 13, 633. 
Qi, K.; Selvaraj, R.; Al Fahdi, T.; Al-Kindy, S.; Kim, Y.; Wang, G.; Tai, C. W.; Sillanpaa, 
M. Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Anatase-TiO2 Nanoparticles by Fullerene 
Modification: A Theoretical and Experimental Study. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2016, 387, 750–758. 
Qiao, D.; Li, Z.; Duan, J.; He, X. Adsorption and Photocatalytic Degradation Mechanism 
of Magnetic Graphene Oxide/ZnO Nanocomposites for Tetracycline Contaminants. Chem. 
Eng. J. 2020, 400, 125952. 
Qiao, W.; Zhang, P.; Sun, L.; Ma, S.; Xu, W.; Xu, S.; Niu, Y. Adsorption Performance and 
Mechanism of Schiff Base Functionalized Polyamidoamine Dendrimer/Silica for Aqueous 
Mn(II) and Co(II). Chin. Chem. Lett. 2020, 31, 2742–2746. 
Qing, Y.; Cheng, L.; Li, R.; Liu, G.; Zhang, Y.; Tang, X.; Wang, J.; Liu, H.; Qin, Y. Potential 
Antibacterial Mechanism of Silver Nanoparticles and the Optimization of Orthopedic 
Implants by Advanced Modification Technologies. Int. J. Nanomed. 2018, 13, 3311–3327. 
Qu, X.; Alvarez, P. J.; Li, Q. Applications of Nanotechnology in Water and Wastewater 
Treatment. Water Res. 2013, 47, 3931–3946. 
Rachna, Rani, M.; Shanker, U. Sunlight Assisted Degradation of Toxic Phenols by Zinc Oxide 
Doped Prussian Blue Nanocomposite. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 104040. 
Rafique, M.; Shafiq, F.; Gillani, S. S. A.; Shakil, M.; Tahir, M. B.; Sadaf, I. Eco-Friendly 
Green and Biosynthesis of Copper Oxide Nanoparticles Using Citrofortunella Microcarpa 
Leaves Extract for Efficient Photocatalytic Degradation of Rhodamin B Dye form Textile 
Wastewater. Optik 2020, 208, 164053. 
Rani, U. A.; Ng, L. Y.; Ng, C. Y.; Mahmoudi, E. A Review of Carbon Quantum Dots and Their 
Applications in Wastewater Treatment. Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. 2020, 278, 102124. 
Rao, H.; Xue, X.; Wang, H.; Xue, Z. Gold Nanorod Etching-Based Multicolorimetric Sensors: 
Strategies and Applications. J. Mater. Chem. C 2019, 7, 4610–4621. 
Rasheed, T.; Adeel, M.; Nabeel, F.; Bilal, M.; Iqbal, H. M. N. TiO2/SiO2 Decorated Carbon 
Nanostructured Materials as a Multifunctional Platform for Emerging Pollutants Removal. 
Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 688, 299–311. 
Rauti, R.; Musto, M.; Bosi, S.; Prato, M.; Ballerini, L. Carbon Review Article Properties and 
Behavior of Carbon Nanomaterials When Interfacing Neuronal Cells: How Far Have We 
Come? Carbon 2019, 143, 430–446. 
Regulska, E.; Rivera-Nazario, D. M.; Karpinska, J.; Plonska-Brzezinska, M. E.; 
Echegoyen, L. Zinc Porphyrin-Functionalized Fullerenes for the Sensitization of Titania  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 339 
as a Visible-Light Active Photocatalyst: River Waters and Wastewaters Remediation. 
Molecules 2019, 24, 1118. 
Romanchuk, A. Y.; Slesarev, A. S.; Kalmykov, S. N.; Kosynkin, D. V.; Tour, J. M. Graphene 
Oxide for Effective Radionuclide Removal. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013, 15, 2321–2327. 
Roy, J. R.; Chakraborty, S.; Chakraborty, T. R. Estrogen-like Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals 
Affecting Puberty in Humans—A Review. Med. Sci. Monit. 2009, 15, 137–145. 
Sadeghi, M. H.; Tofighy, M. A.; Mohammadi, T. One-Dimensional Graphene for Efficient 
Aqueous Heavy Metal Adsorption: Rapid Removal of Arsenic and Mercury Ions by 
Graphene Oxide Nanoribbons (GONRs). Chemosphere 2020, 253, 126647. 
Salt, D. E.; Blaylock, M.; Kumar, N. P. B. A.; Dushenkov, V.; Ensley, B. D.; Chet, I., Raskin, I. 
Phytoremediation: A Novel Strategy for the removal of Toxic Metals from the Environment 
Using Plants. Nat. Biotechnol. 1995, 13, 468–474. 
Sánchez, S.; Soler, L.; Katuri, J. Chemically Powered Micro-and Nanomotors. Angew. Chem. 
Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 1414–1444. 
Sangion, A.; Gramatica, P. PBT Assessment and Prioritization of Contaminants of Emerging 
Concern: Pharmaceuticals. Environ. Res. 2016, 147, 297–306. 
Santhosh, C.; Velmurugan, V.; Jacob, G.; Jeong, S. K.; Grace, A. N.; Bhatnagar, A. Role 
of Nanomaterials in Water Treatment Applications: A Review. Chem. Eng. J. 2016, 306, 
1116–1137. 
Sargin, I.; Baran, T.; Arslan, G. Environmental Remediation by Chitosan-Carbon Nanotube 
Supported Palladium Nanoparticles: Conversion of Toxic Nitroarenes Into Aromatic 
Amines, Degradation of Dye Pollutants and Green Synthesis of Biaryls. Sep. Purif. Technol. 
2020, 247, 116987. 
Schwarzenbach, R. P.; Escher, B. I.; Fenner, K.; Hofstetter, T. B.; Johnson, C. A.; von Gunten, 
U.; Wehrli, B. The Challenge of Micropollutants in Aquatic Systems. Science 2006, 313, 
1072–1077. 
Sebeia, N.; Jabli, M.; Ghith, A.; Saleh, T. A. Eco-friendly synthesis of Cynomorium Coccineum 
Extract for Controlled Production of Copper Nanoparticles for Sorption of Methylene Blue 
Dye. Arab. J. Chem. 2020, 13, 4263–4274. 
Semeniuk, M.; Yi, Z.; Poursorkhabi, V.; Tjong, J.; Jaffer, S.; Lu, Z. H.; Sain, M. Future 
Perspectives and Review on Organic Carbon Dots in Electronic Applications. ACS Nano 
2019, 13, 6224–6255. 
Seng, R. X.; Tan, L. L.; Lee, W. P. C.; Ong, W. J.; Chai, C. P. Nitrogen-Doped Carbon 
Quantum Dots-Decorated 2D Graphitic Carbon Nitride as a Promising Photocatalyst for 
Environmental Remediation: A Study on the Importance of Hybridization Approach. J. 
Environ. Manag. 2020, 255, 109936. 
Shad, S.; Belinga-Desaunay-Nault, M. F. A.; Sohail; Bashir, N.; Lynch, I. Removal 
of Contaminants from Canal Water Using Microwave Synthesized Zero Valent Iron 
Nanoparticles. Water Res. Technol. 2020, 6, 3057–3065. 
Sharma, A. K.; Tiwari, R. K.; Gaur, M. S. Nanophotocatalytic UV Degradation System for 
Organophosphorus Pesticides in Water Samples and Analysis by Kubista Model. Arab. J. 
Chem. 2016, 9, 1755–1764. 
Sharma, Y. C.; Srivastava, V.; Singh, V. K.; Kaul, S. N.; Weng, C. H. (2009). Nano-Adsorbents 
for the Removal of Metallic Pollutants from Water and Wastewater. Environ. Technol. 2009, 
30, 583–609. 
Silva, G. A. Nanotechnology Approaches to Crossing the Blood-Brain Barrier and Drug 
Delivery to the CNS. BMC Neurosci. 2008, 9, S4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
340 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Singh, D.; Gautam, R. K.; Kumar, R.; Shukla, B. K.; Shankar, V.; Krishna, V. Citric Acid 
Coated Magnetic Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization and Application in Removal 
of Cd (II) Ions from Aqueous Solution. J. Water Process Eng. 2014, 4, 233–241. 
Singh, N. S., Sharma, R., Parween, T., and Patanjali, P. K. Pesticide Contamination and Human 
Health Risk Factor. In Modern Age Environmental Problems and Their Remediation; Iqbal 
Cham: Springer, 2018; pp 49–68. 
Singh, R.; Bhadouria, R.; Singh, P.; Kumar, A.; Pandey, S.; Singh, V. K. Nanofiltration 
Technology for Removal of Pathogens Present in Drinking Water. Waterborne Pathogens 
2020, 2020, 463–489. 
Singh, S.; Pandey, P. C. Synthesis and Application of Functional Prussian Blue Nanoparticles 
for Toxic Dye Degradation. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 103753. 
Sirajudheen, P.; Karthikeyan, P.; Ramkumar, K.; Meenakshi, S. Effective Removal of Organic 
Pollutants by Adsorption Onto Chitosan Supported Graphene Oxide-Hydroxyapatite 
Composite: A Novel Reusable Adsorbent. J. Mol. Liq. 2020, 318, 114200. 
Smrithi, S. P.; Kottam, N.; Arpitha, V.; Narula, A.; Anilkumar, G. N.; Subramanian, K. R. V. 
Tungsten Oxide Modified with Carbon Nanodots: Integrating Adsorptive and Photocatalytic 
Functionalities for Water Remediation. J. Sci. Adv. Mater. Dev. 2020, 5, 73–83. 
Sousa-Moura, D.; Matsubara, E. Y.; Machado Ferraz, I. B.; Oliveira, R.; Szlachetka, Ĺ. O.; 
da Silva, S. W.; Camargo, N. S.; Rosolen, J. M.; Grisolia, C. K.; da Rocha, M. C. O. CNTs 
Coated Charcoal as a Hybrid Composite Material: Adsorption of Fluoxetine Probed by 
Zebrafish Embryos and Its Potential for Environmental Remediation. Chemosphere 2019, 
230, 369–376. 
Sposito, J. C. V.; Montagner, C. C.; Casado, M.; Navarro-Martín, L.; Jut Solórzano, J. C.; 
Piña, B.; Grisolia, A. B. Emerging Contaminants in Brazilian Rivers: Occurrence and 
Effects on Gene Expression in Zebrafish (Danio rerio) Embryos. Chemosphere 2018, 209, 
696–705. 
Sudhaik, A.; Raizada, P.; Singh, P.; Hosseini-Bandegharaei, A.; Thakur, V. K.; Nguyen, V. 
H. Highly Effective Degradation of Imidacloprid by H2O2/Fullerene Decorated P-Doped 
g-C3N4 Photocatalyst. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 104483. 
Sumisha, A.; Arthanareeswaran, G.; Ismail, A. F.; Kumar, D. P.; Shankar, M. V. Functionalized 
Titanate Nanotube–Polyetherimide Nanocomposite Membrane for Improved Salt Rejection 
under Low Pressure Nanofiltration. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 39464–39473. 
Taka, A. L.; Fosso-Kankeu, E.; Pillay, K.; Mbianda, X. Y. Metal Nanoparticles Decorated 
Phosphorylated Carbon Nanotube/Cyclodextrin Nanosponge for Trichloroethylene and 
Congo Red Dye Adsorption from Wastewater. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 103602. 
Tara, N.; Siddiquia, S. I.; Bach, Q. V.; Chaudhry, S. A. Reduce Graphene Oxide-Manganese 
Oxide-Black Cumin Based Hybrid Composite (rGO-MnO2/BC): A Novel Material for 
Water Remediation. Mater. Today Commun. 2020, 25, 101560. 
Tayeb, A.; Chellali, M. R.; Hamou, A.; Debbah, S. Impact of Urban and Industrial Effluents 
on the Coastal Marine Environment in Oran, Algeria. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2015, 98, 281–288. 
Teo, W. Z.; Zboril, R.; Medrik, I.; Pumera, M. Fe0
 Nanomotors in Ton Quantities (1020 Units) 
for Environmental Remediation. Chem. Eur. J. 2016, 22, 4789–4793. 
Thebo, K. H.; Qian, X.; Wei, Q.; Zhang, Q.; Cheng, H. M.; Ren, W. Reduced Graphene 
Oxide/Metal Oxide Nanoparticles Composite Membranes for Highly Efficient Molecular 
Separation. J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 2018, 34, 1481–1486. 
Tonelli, F. M. P.; Lacerda, S. M. S. N.; Paiva, N. C. O.; Lemos, M. S.; Jesus, A. C.; Pacheco, 
F. G.; Correa Junior, J. D.; Ladeira, L. O.; Furtado, C. A.; Franca, L. R.; Resende, R.  
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 341 
R. Efficiently and Safely in Gene Transfection in Fish Spermatonial Stem Cells Using 
Nanomaterials. RSC Adv. 2016, 58, 1058. 
Tonelli, F. M. P.; Lacerda, S. M. S. N.; Paiva, N. C. O.; Pacheco, F. G.; Scalzo Junior, S. R. A.; 
Macedo, F. H. P.; Cruz, J. S.; Pinto, M. C. X.; Correa Junior, J. D.; Ladeira, L. O.; França, L. 
R.; Guatimosim, S. C.; Resende, R. R. Functionalized Nanomaterials: Are They Effective 
to Perform Gene Delivery to Difficult-to-Transfect Cells with No Cytotoxicity? Nanoscale 
2015, 7, 18036–18043. 
Tonelli, F. C. P.; Tonelli, F. M. P. Concerns and Threats of Xenobiotics on Aquatic Ecosystems. 
In Bioremediation and Biotechnology Vol 3: Persistent and Recalcitrant Toxic Substances; 
Springer: New York, USA, 2020; p 360. 
Tonelli, F. M. P.; Tonelli, F. C. P.; Ferreira, D. R. C.; Silva, K. E.; Cordeiro, H. G.; Ouchida, A. 
T.; Nunes, N. A. M. Biocompatibility and Functionalization of Nanomaterials. Intelligent 
Nanomaterials for Drug Delivery Applications. In Intelligent Nanomaterials for Drug 
Delivery Applications; Elsevier: New York, 2020; p 212. 
Tiwari, S. K.; Sahoo, S.; Wang, N.; Huczko, A. Graphene Research and Their Outputs: Status 
and Prospect. J. Sci. Adv. Mat. Dev. 2020, 5, 10–29. 
Trivedi M, Johri P, Singh A, Singh R, Tiwari RK. Latest Tools in Fight Against Cancer: 
Nanomedicines. In NanoBioMedicine; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp 139–164. 
Turchanin, A.; Gölzhäuser, A. Carbon Nanomembranes. Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 6075–6103. 
Vaiano V, Sannino D, Sacco O. The Use of Nanocatalysts (and Nanoparticles) for Water and 
Wastewater Treatment by Means of Advanced Oxidation Processes. In Nanotechnology in 
the Beverage Industry; Elsevier, 2020; pp 241–264. 
Varjani, S.; Kumar, G.; Rene, E. R. Developments in Biochar Application for Pesticide 
Remediation: Current Knowledge and Future Research Directions. J. Environ. Manage. 
2019, 232, 505–513. 
Verma, B.; Balomajumder, C. Surface Modification of One-Dimensional Carbon Nanotubes: 
A Review for the Management of Heavy Metals in Wastewater. Environ. Technol. Inno. 
2020, 17, 100596. 
Wang, F.; Yang, W.; Zheng, F.; Sun, Y. Removal of Cr (VI) from Simulated and Leachate 
Wastewaters by Bentonite-Supported Zero-Valent Iron Nanoparticles. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health, 2018, 15, 2162. 
Wang, H.; Huang, Y. Prussian-Blue-Modified Iron Oxide Magnetic Nanoparticles as Effective 
Peroxidase-Like Catalysts to Degrade Methylene Blue with H2O2. J. Hazard Mater. 2011, 
191, 163–169. 
Wang, H.; Shang, H.; Sun, X.; Hou, L.; Wen, M.; Qiao, Y. Preparation of Thermo-Sensitive 
Surface Ion-Imprinted Polymers Based on Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotube Composites for 
Selective Adsorption of Lead(II) Ion. Colloids Surf. Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 2020, 585, 
124139. 
Wang, M.; Bao, T.; Yan, W.; Fang, D.; Yu, Y.; Liu, Z.; Yin, G.; Wan, M.; Mao, C.; Shi, D. 
Bioactive Materials Nanomotor-Based Adsorbent for Blood Lead(II) Removal in Vitro and 
in Pig Models. Bioact. Mater. 2021, 6, 1140–1149. 
Wang, Q.; Cai, J.; Biesold-McGee, G. V.; Huang, J.; Ng, Y. H.; Sun, H.; Wang, J.; Lai, Y.; 
Lin, Z. Silk Fibroin-Derived Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Quantum Dots Anchored on TiO2 
Nanotube Arrays for Heterogeneous Photocatalytic Degradation and Water Splitting. Nano 
Energy 2020, 78, 105313. 
Wang, X.; Feng, Y.; Dong, P.; Huang, J. A Mini Review on Carbon Quantum Dots: Preparation, 
Properties, and Electrocatalytic Application. Front. Chem. 2019a, 7, 671.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
342 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Wang, Y.; Pan, C.; Chu, W.; Vipin, A. K.; Sun, L. Environmental Remediation Applications of 
Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene Oxide: Adsorption and Catalysis. Nanomaterials 2019b, 
9, 439. 
Wang, Z.; Wang, T. C. Quantum Dots Ceramic Nano Membrane for Copper Mining Water 
Treatment, Turning Na2SO4 to NaOH and Pretreatment for Seawater Desalination. ChemRxiv 
2020, Pre-print. 
Wang, Z.; Tu, Q.; Zheng, S.; Urban, J. J.; Li, S.; Mi, B. Understanding the Aqueous Stability 
and Filtration Capability of MoS2 Membranes. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 7289–7298. 
Wazir, M. B.; Daud, M.; Ali, F.; Al-Harthi, M. A. Dendrimer Assisted Dye-Removal: A Critical 
Review of Adsorption and Catalytic Degradation for Wastewater Treatment. J. Mol. Liq. 
2020, 315, 113775. 
Weiss, J.; Takhistov, P.; McClements, D. J. Functional Materials in Food Nanotechnology. J. 
Food Sci. 2006, 71, R107–R116. 
Werkneh, A. A.; Rene, R. R.; Lens, P. N. L. Application of Nanomaterials in Food, Cosmetics 
and Other Process Industries. In Nanotoxicology: Toxicity Evaluation, Risk Assessment and 
Management; CRC Press Taylor and Francis Group, 2020; pp 63–79. 
Werkneh, A. A.; Rene, E. R. Applications of Nanotechnology and Biotechnology for 
Sustainable Water and Wastewater Treatment. In Water and Wastewater Treatment 
Technologies; Springer: Singapore, 2019; pp 405–430. 
Wicki, A.; Witzigmann, D.; Balasubramanian, V.; Huwyler, J. Nanomedicine in Cancer Therapy: 
Challenges, Opportunities, and Clinical Applications. J. Control Release 2015, 200, 138–157. 
Wu, X.; Chen, L.; Zheng, C.; Yan, X.; Dai, P.; Wang, Q.; Li, W.; Chen, W. Bubble-Propelled 
Micromotors Based on Hierarchical MnO2 Wrapped Carbon Nanotube Aggregates for 
Dynamic Removal of Pollutants. RSC Adv. 2020a, 10, 14846–14855. 
Wu, Y.; Wang, F.; Jin, X.; Zheng, X.; Wang, Y.; Wei, D.; Zhang, Q.; Feng, Y.; Xie, Z.; 
Chen, P.; Liu, H.; Liu, G. Highly Active Metal-Free Carbon Dots/g-C3N4 Hollow Porous 
Nanospheres for Solar-Light-Driven PPCPs Remediation: Mechanism Insights, Kinetics 
and Effects of Natural Water Matrices. Water Res. 2020b, 172, 115492. 
Xie, H.; Li, P.; Shao, J.; Huang, H.; Chen, Y.; Jiang, Z.; Chu, P. K.; Yu, X. F. Electrostatic 
Self-Assembly of Ti3C2Tx MXene and Gold Nanorods as an Efficient Surface-Enhanced 
Raman Scattering Platform for Reliable and High-Sensitivity Determination of Organic 
Pollutants. ACS Sens. 2019, 4, 2303–2310. 
Xiong, J.; Zhang, D.; Lin, H.; Chen, Y. Amphiprotic Cellulose Mediated Graphene Oxide 
Magnetic Aerogels for Water Remediation. Chem. Eng. J. 2020, 400, 125890. 
Xu, C.; Nasrollahzadeh, M.; Sajjadi, M.; Maham, M.; Luque, R.; Puente-Santiago, A. R. 
Benign-by-Design Nature-Inspired Nanosystems in Biofuels Production and Catalytic 
Applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2019, 112, 195–252. 
Xu, T. Y.; Zhu, R. L.; Zhu, J. X.; Liang, X. L.; Zhu, G. Q.; Liu, Y.; Xu, Y.; He, H. P. Fullerene 
Modification of Ag3PO4 for the Visible-Light-Driven Degradation of Acid Red 18. RSC 
Adv. 2016, 6, 85962–85969. 
Yamada, D.; Hiwatari, M.; Hangoma, P.; Narita, D.; Mphuka, C.; Chitah, B.; Yabe, J.; 
Nakayama, S. M. M.; Nakata, H.; Choongo, K.; Ishizuka, M. Assessing the Population￾Wide Exposure to Lead Pollution in Kabwe, Zambia: An Econometric Estimation Based on 
Survey Data. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 15092. 
Yang, J.; Huang, Z.; Yang, B.; Lin, H.; Qin, L.; Nie, M.; Li, Q. Green Route to Prussian Blue 
Nanoparticles with High Degradation Efficiency of RhB under Visible Light. J. Mater. Sci. 
2021, 56, 3268–3279.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanomaterials to Remediate Water Pollution 343 
Yang, J.; Zhou, L.; Ma, F.; Zhao, H.; Deng, F.; Pi, S.; Tang, A.; Li, A. Environmental 
Research Magnetic Nanocomposite Microbial Extracellular Polymeric Substances@ 
Fe3O4 Supported nZVI for Sb(V) Reduction and Adsorption under Aerobic and Anaerobic 
Conditions. Environ. Res. 2020, 189, 109950. 
Yang, Y.; Ok, Y. S.; Kim, K. H.; Kwon, E. E.; Tsang, Y. F. Occurrences and Removal of 
Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products (PPCPs) in Drinking Water and Water/ Sewage 
Treatment Plants: A Review. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 596, 303–320. 
Yaqoob, A. A.; Parveen, T.; Umar, K.; Nasir, M.; Ibrahim, M. N. Role of Nanomaterials in the 
Treatment of Wastewater: A Review. Water 2020, 12, 495. 
Ye, S.; Zeng, G.; Wu, H.; Zhang, C.; Dai, J.; Liang, J.; Yu, J.; Ren, X.; Yi, H.; Cheng, M.; 
Zhang, C. Biological Technologies for the Remediation of Co-Contaminated Soil. Crit. Rev. 
Biotechnol. 2017, 37, 1062–1076. 
Yeung, K. W. Y.; Zhou, G. J.; Hilscherová, K.; Giesy, J. P.; Leung, K. M. Y. Current 
Understanding of Potential Ecological Risks of Retinoic Acids and Their Metabolites in 
Aquatic Environments. Environ. Int. 2020, 136, 105464. 
Yi, H.; Liu, R.; Chen, Z.; Nie, B. Chemosphere Visible-Light Driven Photodegradation on 
Ag Nanoparticle-Embedded Fullerene (C60) Heterostructural Microcubes. Chemosphere 
2020, 258, 127355. 
Yin, J.; Yang, Y.; Hu, Z.; Deng, B. Attachment of Silver Nanoparticles (AgNPs) Onto Thin￾Film Composite (TFC) Membranes through Covalent Bonding to Reduce Membrane 
Biofouling. J. Membr. Sci. 2013, 441, 73–82. 
Ying, Y. L.; Ying, W.; Li, Q. C.; Meng, D. H.; Ren, G. H.; Yan, R. X.; Peng, X. S. Recent 
Advances of Nanomaterial-Based Membrane for Water Purification. Appl. Mater. Today 
2017, 7, 144–158. 
Ying, Y.; Pumera, M. Micro/Nanomotors for Water Purification. Chem. Eur. J. 2018, 25, 106–121. 
Yuan, T.; Chen, Q.; Shen, X. Chinese Chemical Letters Communication Adsorption of Cesium 
Using Mesoporous Silica Gel Evenly Doped by Prussian Blue Nanoparticles. Chin. Chem. 
Lett. 2020, 31, 2835–2838. 
Zahedifar, M.; Seyedi, N.; Salajeghe, M.; Shafiei, S. Nanomagnetic Biochar Dots Coated 
Silver NPs (BCDs-Ag/MNPs): A Highly Efficient Catalyst for Reduction of Organic Dyes. 
Mater. Chem. Phys. 2020, 246, 122789. 
Zahra, Z.; Habib, Z.; Chung, S.; Badshah, M. A. Exposure Route of TiO2 NPs from Industrial 
Applications to Wastewater Treatment and Their Impacts on the Agro-Environment. 
Nanomaterials 2020, 10, 1469. 
Zeng, H.; Zhai, L.; Qiao, T.; Yu, Y.; Zhang, J.; Li, D. Efficient Removal of As(V) from 
Aqueous Media by Magnetic Nanoparticles Prepared with Iron-Containing Water Treatment 
Residuals. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 9335. 
Zhang, L. S.; Fang, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Ye, B. C. Improvement of the Stabilization and Activity of 
Protocatechuate 3,4-Dioxygenase Isolated from Rhizobium sp. LMB-1 and Immobilized on 
Fe3O4 Nanoparticles. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2017, 183, 1035–1048. 
Zhang, Q.; Dong, R.; Wu, Y.; Gao, W.; He, Z.; Ren, B. Light-Driven Au-WO3@ C Janus 
Micromotors for Rapid Photodegradation of Dye Pollutants. ACS App. Mater. Interf. 2017, 
9, 4674–4683. 
Zhang, Q. Qian, X.; Thebo, K. H.; Cheng, H. M.; Ren, W. Controlling Reduction Degree of 
Graphene Oxide Membranes for Improved Water Permeance. Sci. Bull. 2018, 63, 788–794. 
Zhang, W.; Yang, Q.; Luo, Q.; Shi, L.; Meng, S. Laccase-Carbon Nanotube Nanocomposites 
for Enhancing Dyes Removal. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 242, 118425.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
344 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Zhang, W.; Wu, Y.; Dong, H. J.; Yin, J. J.; Zhang, H.; Wu, H. A.; Zhang, Y. Sparks fly between 
Ascorbic Acid and Iron-Based Nanozymes: A Study on Prussian Blue Nanoparticles. 
Colloid Surf. B 2018, 163, 379–384. 
Zhang, X.; Lin, M.; Lin, X.; Zhang, C.; Wei, H.; Zhang, H.; Yang, B. Polypyrrole-Enveloped 
Pd and Fe3O4 Nanoparticle Binary Hollow and Bowl-Like Superstructures as Recyclable 
Catalysts for Industrial Wastewater Treatment ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2014, 6, 450–458. 
Zhang, X.; Shao, C.; Zhang, Z.; Li, J.; Zhang, P.; Zhang, M.; Mu, J.; Guo, Z.; Liang, P.; Liu, Y. 
In Situ Generation of Well-Dispersed ZnO Quantum Dots on Electrospun Silica Nanotubes 
with High Photocatalytic Activity. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2012, 4, 785–790. 
Zhang, Y.; Yang, M.; Portney, N. G.; Cui, D.; Budak, G.; Ozbay, E.; Ozkan, M.; Ozkan, C. S. 
Zeta Potential: A Surface Electrical Characteristic to Probe the Interaction of Nanoparticles 
with Normal and Cancer Human Breast Epithelial Cells. Biomed. Microdevices 2008, 10, 
321–328. 
Zhang, Z.; Zhu, Z.; Shen, B.; Liu, L. Insights Into Biochar and Hydrochar Production and 
Applications: A Review. Energy 2019, 171, 581–598. 
Zhao, Z.; Zhang, B.; Chen, D.; Guo, Z.; Peng, Z. Simultaneous Reduction of Vanadium (V) 
and Chromium (VI) in Wastewater by Nanosized ZnWO4 Photocatalysis. J. Nanosci. 
Nanotechnol. 2016, 16, 2847–2852. 
Zheng H, Zhang C, Liu B, Liu G, Zhao M, Xu G, Luo X, Li F, Xing B. Biochar for Water and 
Soil Remediation: Production, Characterization, and Application. In A New Paradigm for 
Environmental Chemistry and Toxicology; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 153–196. 
Zhou, G. J.; Lin, L.; Li, X. Y.; Leung, K. M. Y. Removal of Emerging Contaminants from 
Wastewater during Chemically Enhanced Primary Sedimentation and Acidogenic Sludge 
Fermentation. Water Res. 2020, 175, 115646. 
Zhou, G. J.; Li, X. Y.; Leung, K. M. Y. Retinoids and Oestrogenic Endocrine Disrupting 
Chemicals in Saline Sewage Treatment Plants: Removal Efficiencies Cological Risks to 
Marine Organisms. Environ. Int. 2019, 127, 103–113. 
Ziadi, A.; Hariga, N. T.; Tarhouni, J. Mineralization and Pollution Sources in the Costal 
Aquifer of Lebna, Cap Bom, Tunisia. J. Afr. Earth Sci. 2019, 151, 391–402. GUILHERME MAX DIAS FERREIRA1
, GABRIEL MAX DIAS FERREIRA2
, 
JOSÉ ROMÃO FRANCA3
, and JENAINA RIBEIRO-SOARES3*
1
Department of Chemistry, Institute of Natural Science, 
Federal University of Lavras, 37200-900, Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil
2
Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Ouro Preto, 
Campus Morro do Cruzeiro, 35400-000, Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, Brazil
3
Department of Physics, Institute of Natural Science, 
Federal University of Lavras, 37200-900, Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: jenaina.soares@ufla.br
ABSTRACT
New strategies for remediation of polluted and nutrient-depleted soils are 
in high demand due to the increasing pressure of the growth of worldwide 
population and environmental issues generated by industrial activities. 
Approximately, three-fourth of the world population lives in tropical regions, 
where the heavy rains promote the fast lixiviation of soil nutrients and 
contaminants, and the high temperatures are related to the fast degradation 
of soil organic matter. Carbonaceous nanomaterials present novel properties 
arising from their reduced dimensionality that are valuable to elaborate new 
effective strategies to solve these problems. For example, these materials 
present high specific surface area, mechanical strength, versatility to be tuned 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 11
Carbonaceous Materials for 
Nanoremediation of Polluted and 
Nutrient-Depleted Soils346 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
from stable to reactive forms, and superior adsorption capacity for a large 
variety of contaminants. These properties are valuable to formulate solutions 
to immobilize contaminants, avoiding the contamination of groundwater, to 
promote carbon sequestration in soil, as well as to formulate bioinspired slow￾release fertilizers. In this chapter the structural, chemical, adsorption, and 
application properties of carbon nanotubes, graphene, graphene oxide, biochar 
(artificially synthesized or from anthropogenic soils), and nanomaterials￾based fertilizers are discussed. The adsorption aspects in soil are studied for 
the different materials, showing the benefits of their use in diverse scenarios. 
Scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, atomic 
force microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and energy-dispersive X-ray 
analysis are presented as tools for the comprehension of the structural and 
chemical properties of these materials and their use in soil. The consequence 
of their application is also discussed in different contexts. Structural disorder 
in nanoscale and the presence of surface functional groups are shown to be 
related to the superior performance of these materials in soil applications, 
being promising to the elaboration of sustainable soil use practices. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The scarcity of foodstuff products in some regions of the planet has been the 
focus of studies by world organizations regarding their availability. According 
to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 
one of the aspects that inspire this study theme is related to the population 
increase, which suggests the increase in the necessity of production of 
foodstuffs (FAO, 2017). Soil degradation, scarcity, and unavailability of 
some nutrients are the main challenges found for food production. According 
to Achari and Kowshik (2018), studies have shown that the soils available 
for agricultural production are increasingly deficient in macro (N, P, and 
K) and micronutrients (Zn, Cu, B, Mn, among others), due to biological 
transformations. Also, environmental concerns are being leveraged in recent 
years regarding soil contamination with toxic metals (As, Cd, Ni, Pb, Cr, etc.), 
pesticides, pharmaceuticals, among others (Gavrilescu et al., 2015; Gong et 
al., 2018; Iavicoli et al., 2017; Mattina et al., 2003) and their implication 
for food security. From these observations, new strategies aimed to treat 
polluted or nutrient-depleted soils are in high demand, and new materials 
presenting enhanced properties emerging from their reduced dimensionality, 
such as nanomaterials, are becoming valuable options. Among different Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 347 
nanomaterials used for that purpose, carbonaceous nanomaterials are on the 
rise and are the focus in this chapter. 
In the next sections, the structural, chemical, and adsorption properties of 
several carbonaceous nanomaterials are discussed in greater detail, as well as 
the results and perspectives of their use in soil remediation. 
11.1.1 CARBON NANOMATERIALS AS TOOLS FOR SOIL REMEDIATION
In an attempt to increase the fertility of agricultural soils, fertilizers have 
become essential agents of correction. However, conventional fertilizers 
are characterized by low absorption efficiency by plants and quick release, 
requiring several applications to obtain better results (Raliya et al., 2017). As 
a strategy to overcome such difficulties, the literature has suggested the use 
of nanoparticles as fertilizing agents, being called nanofertilizers (NF), or 
even intelligent fertilizers (Achari and Kowshik, 2018). NF are differentiated 
from conventional fertilizers because they have a nanostructured formulation, 
allowing nutrients to be delivered more efficiently, enabling better absorption 
by plants and even slow release of their active compounds, beneficial for 
crop development (Raliya et al., 2017). Due to their dimensions in the order 
of nanometers (1–100 nm), the NF have characteristics, such as high specific 
superficial area, porous structure, and crystallinity, which act as reservoirs 
of functional groups that are responsible for the properties of the nutrient 
release rate, reducing material waste when applied (Achari and Kowshik, 
2018; Dimkpa and Bindraban, 2017). In addition, their adsorption capacity 
is improved due to these properties, being widely used for the removal (or 
immobilization) of several contaminants. 
Carbon nanomaterials (CNM) are promising in the perspective of the 
development of several cultures (Mukherjee et al., 2016; Vithanage et al., 2017; 
Zaytseva and Neumann, 2016) and contaminated soil remediation (Baragano et 
al., 2020; Dai et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2019; Lei et al., 2019; Yan et al., 2017). 
According to Vithanage et al. (2017), carbon nanotubes have been studied 
due to the ease of being absorbed by plants, influencing their development, 
increasing root growth, and mainly stimulating the increase in plant biomass 
and seed germination. Carbon nanotubes are also effective in immobilizing 
contaminants, such as chlorinated hydrocarbons (Ma et al., 2010), antibi￾otics (Su et al., 2016), paracetamol (Yan et al., 2017), among several others. 
Graphene (GN) and graphene oxide (GO) present high mechanical resistance 
and functional groups on their surface, which allow their adaptation on several 
other surfaces (Alves, 2013; Mukherjee et al., 2016). These materials are being 348 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
used in the transport and slow release of micronutrients for plants (Kabiri et 
al., 2018), lead (Zhang et al., 2018b) and cadmium (Liu et al., 2016) adsorp￾tion, and mainly for improvements in the physical and chemical stability of 
biocarbons and fertilizers (Kabiri et al., 2017). 
An emerging important class of carbonaceous materials for soil remedia￾tion is the biochar (BC) and biochar-based fertilizer (BBF). These materials 
are obtained by the pyrolysis of different feedstocks and are mixed with 
conventional fertilizers, being bioinspired in the occurrence and proper￾ties of the “Terras Pretas de Índios” (TPI) or Indian Dark Earths. TPI are 
anthropogenic soils found in the Amazonian region with remarkable fertility 
and resilience (Glaser, 2007; Glaser et al., 2000; Neves et al., 2004). They 
are nanostructured with a mixture of nanographitic and amorphous carbon 
(Archanjo et al., 2014; Archanjo et al., 2015; Jório et al., 2012; Ribeiro￾Soares et al., 2013), with beneficial uses reported as carbon retention in soil, 
improvement of chemical and physical properties of soil, nutrient retention, 
improvement of crop yields according to the soil properties, and adsorption 
of a broad number of contaminants (Chew et al., 2020; Purakayastha et al., 
2019; Ye et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2013). 
The next sections will treat the general structural properties of these 
materials, and then their adsorption, structural, chemical, and application 
aspects will be related to their use for soil remediation from both polluted 
and nutrient-depleted soil remediation. 
11.1.2 CARBON NANOTUBES, GRAPHENE, AND GRAPHENE OXIDE: 
GENERAL STRUCTURAL MODELS
Carbon is a chemical element presenting three conventional hybridization 
states (sp3
, sp2
, or sp), which allows the formation of complex structures 
with different properties (Zarbin and Oliveira, 2013). Thinking only of three￾dimensional (or bulk) structures formed purely for carbon atoms, graphite 
and diamond are two representative materials. The graphite carbon atoms 
present sp2
 hybridization state, assuming the hexagonal structure, as shown 
in Figure 11.1a. The diamond is formed by carbon atoms in the sp3 state of 
hybridization, enabling the formation of a tetrahedral structure, as illustrated 
in Figure 11.1b. 
Although diamond and graphite are formed purely by carbon atoms, both 
have different properties. For example, diamond is a shiny, insulating, rare, 
hard, and expensive material. Graphite, on the other hand, is an abundant 
material in nature, opaque, electricity conductive, malleable, and cheap. Such FIGURE 11.1 Crystalline structure representation of carbon materials and nanomaterials. 
(a) Graphite, (b) Diamond, (c) Graphene, (d) Fullerene, (e) Single-walled carbon nanotube, 
and (f) Multiwalled carbon nanotube. 
Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 349 
characteristics allow the two materials to be used in several applications in 
the industry (Pan et al., 2015). In the 1940s, a versatile form involving only 
one sheet of carbon atoms in a “beehive” arrangement (Fig. 11.1c) with sp2 
hybridization was theoretically proposed (Wallace, 1947). However, experi￾mental success in its synthesis was not obtained in the following decades. 
The proposed structure would be a sheet of carbon atoms with covalent 
bonds with sp2 hybridization, the graphite being generated by the stacking of 
these sheets, weakly bonded together by van der Waals interactions (Wallace, 
1947). In 1986, the term “graphene” was used for the first time to describe 
this material of atomic thickness (Boehm et al., 1986). 
In 1985, Kroto, Smalley, and Curl synthesized the first artificial structure 
formed by carbon atoms, fullerenes (Dresselhaus et al., 1996). Fullerenes are 
hollow spheres formed by sp2 hybridized carbon atoms (Fig. 11.1d), being 
considered a zero-dimensional structure because the electrons confined 
within them have zero degrees of freedom (Birkett, 1998; Neto et al., 2009; 
Smalley, 1997). They can be understood as a sheet of graphene carefully 
shaped to form a spherical shell. 
In 1991, Sumio Iijima called the world’s attention to the result of his 
effective synthesis of carbon nanotubes (CNTs). CNTs are one-dimensional 
cylindrical nanostructures formed by the covalent bonds between C atoms 
(sp2
) with an average diameter of 1 nm and a length of the order of mm 350 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(Iijima, 1991) and they can be understood as rolled graphene sheets. CNTs 
are named single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) if only one layer 
of carbon atoms forms their structure (Fig. 11.1e) or multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes (MWCNTs) if concentric layers of carbon atoms are present (Fig. 
11.1f). It is worth mentioning that the characteristics of the CNTs depend 
on the chirality presented by the carbon atoms in these structures, as well 
as on the number of concentric nanotubes and the pattern established in 
their interior (Iijima, 1991). Applications in the industry involving CNTs 
have been increasingly studied due to their physical and chemical properties 
(Dresselhaus et al., 1998), such as the high electrical conductivity (Ebbesen 
et al., 1996), mechanical resistance, and hardness (Musso et al., 2009). 
Although fullerenes and nanotubes are formed by graphene sheets and 
graphite is formed by stacking graphene sheets, it was only in 2004 that the 
experimental isolation of graphene from a graphite sheet was carried out by 
André Geim and Konstantin Novoselov, being awarded in 2010 the Nobel 
Prize in Physics due to their contributions to the study of the physical and 
chemical properties of graphene (Novoselov et al., 2004). 
In the graphene two-dimensional crystal, composed of carbon atoms in 
the sp2
 hybridization state, the so-called sigma (s) orbitals are responsible 
for the planar hexagonal patterns of the carbon sheets (Guimaraes, 2010). 
Because planar binding between the carbon atoms are covalent (Neto et al., 
2009), this material has a high elastic constant. Figure 11.1a illustrates the 
structure of graphite with its interatomic distances between layers governed 
by van der Waals interactions, and the reduction of graphite to graphene at 
the limit of a single atomic layer is represented in Figure 11.1b. 
Since its experimental synthesis in 2004, graphene became a material 
of great interest and importance due to its optical, mechanical, thermal, and 
electronic properties (Novoselov et al., 2004). From a mechanical point of 
view, graphene corresponds to the known available material with the highest 
elastic constant (Novoselov et al., 2004), which allows the application in 
different systems, such as soils (Kabiri et al., 2017), mortars (Barbosa, 2015), 
and concrete (Chuah et al., 2014; Mohammed et al., 2015; Pan et al., 2015) 
through its oxide or even its reduced oxide (Guimaraes, 2010). 
GO is a derivative of graphene containing functional groups (hydroxyl, 
epoxy, carbonyl, and carboxyl) whose characteristics allow a broad range 
of applications (Maraschin, 2016). GO is usually obtained from a chemical 
process of graphite oxidation, in which only one graphite sheet incorporates 
heteroatoms, especially O and H. The graphene oxidation generates defects 
(such as holes, for example) in its structure, which allows the incorporation 
of functional groups, enabling its interaction with materials of organic or FIGURE 11.2 Representation of the basic structure of graphene oxide. 
Source: Reprinted from He, H.; Klinowski, J.; Forster, M.; Lerf, A. A New Structural Model for 
Graphite Oxide. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1998, 287, 53–56. Copyright (1998), with permission from 
Elsevier. 
Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 351 
inorganic nature (Alves, 2013). The insertion of some of those functional 
groups can alter the carbon atoms hybridization. Thus, GO has a structure 
that contains carbon atoms in both sp2
 and sp3
 hybridization states (Lerf et 
al., 1998), as shown in Figure 11.2. In this perspective, the GO presents 
distinct regions, some with unoxidized aromatic rings and others with 
functional groups containing O and H through its all structure, including the 
edges and the top and bottom of the layer plane. The amount of these regions 
is determined according to the level of oxidation presented by the material 
(Alves, 2013; Lerf et al., 1998). 
The level of oxidation present in the GO may vary according to the 
method used in the preparation of the material, as well as the purity of the 
precursor (Alves, 2013). The chemical properties of GO can be adjusted based 
on a possible variation in the amount of O through its chemical reduction 
(Dreyer et al., 2010). Such partial removal of O can enable improvements in 
semimetallic characteristics, making them close to those of graphene before 
oxidation, which increases its conductivity in comparison with the initial GO 
(Alves, 2013). 
The GO has attracted the interest of researchers from different areas due 
to its multifunctional properties (Andelkovic et al., 2019; Andelkovic et al., 
2018; Kabiri et al., 2017; Lerf et al., 1998; Zhang et al., 2014). Among the 
various possibilities of application of GO, it is worth highlighting its use in 
nanocomposites for performance in lithium batteries (Mussa et al., 2019), 
quantum dots (Li et al., 2019), and cement composites (Long et al., 2019). It 
has also been pointed as promising in the biomedical field as a drug transport 
agent in the body (Kazempour et al., 2019), especially in the fight against 
cancer (Ashjaran et al., 2019; Campbell et al., 2019). 352 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
11.1.3 ANTHROPOGENIC SOILS AND BIOCHAR STRUCTURAL 
MODEL: CONCEPT AND RELEVANCE FOR SUSTAINABLE SOIL 
REMEDIATION STRATEGIES
BC is the carbonaceous material produced by the heat treatment of different 
feedstocks, such as plant and animal residues, in the absence of oxygen, 
in a pyrolysis process (Lehmann, 2007). Their structures are irregularly 
shaped and contain several functional groups, having physical and chemical 
properties of great interest (Cho et al., 2015; Madari et al., 2010; Novotny et 
al., 2009). The study involving BC properties originates in the characteriza￾tion of the “TPI” or Indian Dark Earths, which have properties desired by 
the agricultural sector (Glaser et al., 2000). Found further north of Brazil, 
especially in the Amazon region (tropical region), the emergence of TPI is 
linked to the activities of Pre-Columbian civilizations, such as the accumula￾tion and burning of organic materials for many years (Glaser et al., 2000). 
According to Glaser et al. (2000), this region has tropical characteristics such 
as high temperature and frequent rainfall, which allows the rapid degradation 
of organic matter in the soil. Due to these conditions, nutrients are easily 
leached by the rains, characterizing poor soils. 
Results obtained through radiocarbon dating found TPI with more than 
7000 years, having a pre-Columbian origin (Glaser, 2007; Neves et al., 2004). 
These soils have about three times more organic matter, nearly 70 times more 
stable carbon, and higher nutrient retaining capacity than the surrounding 
soils (Glaser, 2007; Neves et al., 2004). This higher stable carbonaceous 
content favors the conditioning of their fertility. As it is a very fertile soil, TPI 
started to be the object of study in several research centers, especially due 
to its physical and chemical properties, such as thermal stability and high￾nutrient content (Glaser, 2007). For the agricultural activities, the potential 
presented by the TPI is associated with their capacity to retain minerals and 
nutrients as well as their high cation exchange capacity, allowing their use as 
a direct natural fertilizer (Glaser, 2007). For Neves et al. (2004), the stable 
C content present in the TPI structure is similar to the carbonaceous content 
arrangement presented by the BC, whose structure varies according to the 
final temperature during the pyrolysis process. 
BC properties have been studied for several applications, from amend￾ment of soils to pollution control. Such applications involving BC depend on 
the parameters associated with their structure, which can be understood as 
graphene planes containing defects and nonlinear bonds stacked in a random 
manner. Besides, heteroatoms, such as O, P, N, and S are generally present in Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 353 
different functional groups or aromatic rings (Bourke et al., 2007). Covalent 
bonds between carbon atoms in the BC structure are responsible for their 
stability, making them materials with lower degradation rate in soil, unlike 
other forms of organic matter (Bourke et al., 2007). 
Currently, studies have shown that BC can promote benefits to the soil, 
such as improvements in the use of nutrients by plants, greater productivity, 
and better quality of the harvested product, approaching the characteristics 
presented by the TPI (Speratti et al., 2018). In this context, they are being 
used in the recovery of depleted soils (Speratti et al., 2018) and as more 
stable slow-release fertilizers (Filho et al., 2020). The last is one of the main 
challenges encountered in relation to the availability of nutrients for longer 
periods in the soil. In addition, like other carbonaceous materials, BC has 
been proposed as adsorbent for removing or immobilizing pollutants in 
soils due to their adsorption properties. The fundamentals and use of those 
materials for soil remediation using adsorption are explored in the next 
section. 
11.2 SOIL REMEDIATION USING ADSORPTION ON CARBONACEOUS
NANOMATERIALS 
Several contaminants are not efficiently retained by soil particles, so some 
technologies of soil remediation consist in modulating the availability and 
mobility of contaminants in soil. Many of these technologies are based on 
the stabilization of contaminants in the soil matrix, avoiding their leaching 
to groundwater. Among the different available options for soil remediation 
which are based on the stabilization of the contaminant in the soil matrix, 
technologies involving adsorption has gained visibility in view of several 
advantages, such as versatility, sustainability, and cost-effective character 
(Shen et al., 2018). In this scenario, carbonaceous nanomaterials have emerged 
as efficient adsorbents for the removal of different types of contaminants in 
soils because of their surface properties, including high specific surface area, 
reactivity, and versatility. Understanding some fundamental questions about 
adsorption phenomenon will be needed to evaluate how these carbonaceous 
nanomaterials surface properties determine their nanoremediation ability in 
soils. However, prior to discuss the adsorption process as a technology of 
soil remediation, the natural adsorption phenomenon which can occur when 
a contaminant enters in the soil matrix should be understood, as presented in 
Section 10.2.1. 354 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
11.2.1 ADSORPTION: GENERAL ASPECTS IN THE CONTEXT OF SOIL
Regarding the adsorption process, two concepts are of great importance: 
phase and interface. A phase denotes the macroscopic region of the system 
in which the intensive thermodynamic properties that do not depend on the 
extension of that region, are independent of the position in space. Thus, a 
phase is a homogeneous portion of the system. The contact region between 
two phases is called interface. From a microscopic point of view, the 
interface is characterized as the region of the system wherein the chemical 
composition continuously changes in space between the two phases forming 
the interface. In the environment, particles of the soil, aqueous solutions, and 
air are phases and the contact among them forms interfaces. For example, 
the contact between minerals in soils and aqueous solutions or between two 
different types of particles in the soil, as the mineral and organic fraction, 
forms interfaces with quite different properties. 
An important property associated with the interface is the interfacial 
tension. Consider the interface formed in the contact between the soil 
particles and an aqueous solution, for instance. Due to aspects involving the 
different chemical nature of the species present in each phase, the interface 
has an excess of Gibbs free energy per unit of area compared with that of 
the phases in contact. Therefore, it must be recognized that increasing the 
interfacial area has an energetic cost. At constant temperature and pressure 
conditions, increasing the area of the interface by dA will lead to a variation 
of Gibbs free energy (dG) given by: 
dG = γdA (11.1) 
where γ, the interfacial tension, is a positive quantity. Equation 11.1 makes 
evident that the decrease in the interface area (dA <0) promotes a thermo￾dynamic stabilization (decrease in the Gibbs free-energy content, dG < 0) 
in a macroscopic system whose interfacial area is high. If this interface 
involves a phase comprising a porous solid material with a large specific 
surface area, as that involving the particles of soil, in contact with an aqueous 
solution, the surface area reduction is not possible to decrease the Gibbs free 
energy of the system due to the low mobility of chemical species in the solid 
structure. Then, the thermodynamic stabilization of the system will occur 
by a mechanism other than that of reduction of the interface area, that is, 
the interfacial tension will have to decrease, which can be achieved by the 
adsorption phenomenon. 
When an aqueous phase (or air) containing a contaminant is in contact with 
particles of soil (solid), the contaminant can concentrate in the solid–fluid Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 355 
interface, altering the intensive thermodynamic properties of the interface. 
If the average equilibrium concentration of the contaminant in the interface 
region spontaneously become higher than the contaminant concentration in 
the phases forming the interface, the contaminant is adsorbed on the interface 
and the process is called adsorption. Figure 11.3 schematizes the adsorption 
of a contaminant on the interface formed between the soil particles and an 
aqueous solution in the soil. 
FIGURE 11.3 Adsorption of a contaminant on the interface formed between the soil particles 
and an aqueous solution in the soil. Adsorption is characterized by the higher contaminant 
concentration in the interface region (Cc,i) than in the phases forming the interface (Cc,p). 
When a fluid phase is in contact with a solid phase, the solid phase is 
commonly named adsorbent and the adsorbed contaminant is called adsor￾bate. The functional groups or the group of atoms, located on the interface, 
with which the adsorbate interacts are the adsorption sites. Whether the 
immobilization process of the contaminant do not involve the interface, that 
is, the contaminant is transferred from one phase to another, then the process 
is called partition. Adsorption and partition are both referred as sorption 
processes, and depending on the adsorbent, both processes of immobiliza￾tion can simultaneously occur. 
The adsorption can be quantified by the amount of adsorbate present in 
the fluid-solid interface per mass unit of adsorbent, qe, generally express 
in milligrams of adsorbate per gram of adsorbent. At constant temperature 
and pressure, qe is a function of the adsorbate concentration that remains in 
the fluid phase at the thermodynamic equilibrium condition, Ce, and a plot 
of qe versus Ce, at a fixed temperature, is named an isotherm of adsorption 
(Limousin et al., 2007). The isotherm profile is related to the intensity of 356 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
the binding between the adsorbate and the adsorption sites, which can be 
modulated by changes in the conditions of the systems such as temperature, 
pH of the fluid phase, etc. 
Usually, for a given Ce value, adsorbates that interact less intensely with 
the sites of one adsorbent are adsorbed with lower qe values. Therefore, the 
less intense is the interaction between a contaminant and the chemical species 
forming the interface region, the greater will be the availability and mobility 
of this contaminant through the environmental compartments, determining 
the contaminant concentration in the dispersions of the soil. In other words, 
from an environmental perspective, weak adsorption of contaminants on soil 
particles will allow a contaminant to be easily transferred from the soil to air 
and water. 
11.2.1.1 MECHANISMS DETERMINING CONTAMINANT ADSORPTION 
ON SOIL PARTICLES 
As previously highlighted, the efficiency of the contaminant immobiliza￾tion in soil will depend on the intensity with which the contaminant binds 
to the adsorption sites on the surface of the soil particles. The type of this 
binding (chemical binding or intermolecular interactions) determining the 
adsorption of the contaminant on the adsorbent is generally referred as the 
adsorption mechanism, although the term mechanism is more appropriate 
to refer to the set of steps by which a process occurs. Understanding the 
adsorption mechanism of contaminants on soil is a fundamental aspect in 
the design of technologies of soil remediation. Under this aspect, adsorption 
can be classified as specific or nonspecific. The dividing line between these 
two processes is not always sharp. In the specific adsorption, also called 
chemisorption, the adsorbate is bonded to the adsorbent through covalent or 
ionic bonds with the functional groups in the interface. The modules of the 
adsorption enthalpy changes associated with the chemisorption are generally 
higher than 40 kJ/mol. On the other hand, in the nonspecific adsorption, or 
physisorption, weaker interactions, as van der Waals or electrostatic ones, are 
involved in the transfer of the adsorbate from the fluid phase to the interface. 
The values of enthalpy changes for physisorption are usually smaller, not 
exceeding, in modulus, 40 kJ/mol (Levine, 2009). Both chemisorption and 
physisorption can be endothermic or exothermic. 
Under certain conditions, chemisorption and physisorption of contami￾nants on the particles of the soil can occur simultaneously or alternatively, 
which will depend on the adsorbate molecular structure, the soil composition, Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 357 
and the nature of the functional groups on the surface of the soil particles. 
Moreover, changes in the nature of the adsorption process (physisorption or 
chemisorption) can also be caused by different geochemical condition, as the 
pH of the fluid phase, when an aqueous phase is involved, the presence of 
other contaminants in the soil or fluid phases, temperature, etc. For instance, 
artisanal and small-scale gold mining impacted soils contain particles with 
negatively charged surfaces of hydrous ferric oxides, kaolinite, and mont￾morillonite which could readily adsorb positively charged species, as metal 
cations, from aqueous solutions through nonspecific electrostatic interac￾tions (Tabelin et al., 2020). If the soil, however, has a high content of natural 
organic matter (NOM), which comprises fulvic, humic, and humin materials 
with a great variety of functional groups (carbonyl, carboxyl, amino, thio, 
etc.), then metallic ions can bind forming specific interactions. Therefore, 
considering the nature of the adsorption processes of metal ions in different 
soil particles, it is expected that NOM-poor soils will retain toxic metal less 
intensely, increasing the contaminant mobility in the environment. 
A combination of contaminants can also affect the adsorption process 
and it is needed to know the synergistic or nonsynergistic effect among those 
contaminants to enhance the effectiveness of remediation technologies in 
soils. For example, when metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) 
are together in soils with high concentration of NOM, a synergistic effect 
potentializes the adsorption of the PAH (Saeedi et al., 2020). Particularly 
in remediation technologies based on adsorption, comprehending these 
aspects makes assertive the choice of adsorbents to be used properly in 
soil remediation. The next section presents the fundamentals on the use of 
adsorption for soil remediation. 
11.2.2 ADSORPTION FOR NANOREMEDIATION OF SOILS
In the field of soil remediation technologies, there is an imperative need 
for the development of processes which can be employed for the treatment 
of soils contaminated with different classes of contaminants. Among these 
contaminants there are toxic metals (As, Cd, Ni, Pb, Cr, etc.) and organic 
compounds (chlorinated solvents, PAH, organophosphorus pesticides, 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), etc.) 
(Gong et al., 2018; Iavicoli et al., 2017; Mattina et al., 2003) as well as 
emergent contaminants (pharmaceuticals, personal care products, endocrine￾disrupting compounds, etc.) are among the prime), which have caused great 
environmental concern in recent years (Gavrilescu et al., 2015). This wide 358 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
range of chemical species, combined with the heterogeneity and complexity 
of the soil matrix, makes the development of remediation technologies for 
the treatment of contaminated soil a challenge. Several technologies have 
been proposed to solve soil clean up problem, including, for instance, 
chemical oxidation and reduction, soil flushing, leaching, thermal treatment, 
bioremediation, and adsorption, which can be applied ex situ and/or in situ 
(Koul and Taak, 2018a; Koul and Taak, 2018b). 
The remediation technology based on adsorption has been widely evaluated 
and extensively proposed as alternative to clean up soils contaminated with 
toxic metals (Garcıa-Sanchez et al., 1999; Gong et al., 2016; Lei et al., 
2020). However, its application in the treatment of soils contaminated with 
other classes of contaminants has been also highly explored (Gong et al., 
2016; Pernyeszi et al., 2006). The interest in this technology relies on several 
advantages, such as (1) the contaminant can be immobilized in the soil for 
dozens or even hundreds of years, avoiding groundwater or atmosphere 
contamination; (2) the immobilization of organic contaminants and toxic 
metals in soils can reduce their bioavailability, impacting long-term changes 
on soil microorganisms; (3) low mass ratio between adsorbent and soil can 
be used, decreasing the costs of application; (4) versatility in terms of site 
size and contaminant type; (5) ease of implementation and simplicity of 
design and operation; and (6) less secondary contamination (Jones et al., 
2012; Shen et al., 2018). 
Fundamentally, adsorption for soil remediation can be classified as a 
stabilization technology in which the contaminant in the soil is immobilized 
on the surface of a material designedly mixed with the soil matrix. Thus, 
adsorbent materials added in contaminated soils actuate as a sorption barrier. 
Because of the nature of the adsorption process, which is determined by the 
intensity of the interaction between the adsorbate and the adsorbent, this 
treatment technology has as premise the fact that the contaminants in the 
soil to be treated must interact more strongly with the adsorbent used for the 
remediation than with the soil particles. However, only this is not enough, 
especially when nanomaterials are employed as adsorbents. Figure 11.4 
illustrates other conditions that should be evaluated for the application of an 
adsorbent for soil nanoremediation, in which the term nanoremediation is 
used to design the remediation processes based on the use of nanomaterials. 
Considering those aspects, three steps are recommended to propose the 
use of adsorption as viable solution for remediation of a soil: (1) investigation 
of the physicochemical and adsorptive properties of the adsorbent; (2) bench 
studies to evaluate the potential of the adsorbent to treat the contaminated FIGURE 11.4 Different behaviors associated with the addition of an adsorbent in the soil 
matrix: if no adsorbent material is added, (a) the contaminant can adsorb in the soil–water 
interface or be leachate through the soil; when an adsorbent material with adsorption capacity 
higher than the soil particles is added, the adsorbent itself can (b) present high mobility through 
the soil matrix, being leached with the contaminant, or (c) remain immobilized in the soil 
particles, avoiding the leaching of both adsorbent and contaminant. Whether the interaction 
between the soil and the adsorbent is very favorable, (d) soil particles can disadvantage the 
contaminant adsorption on the adsorbent (Zhao et al., 2019b). 
Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 359 
soil of interest; and (3) field application followed by long-term monitoring. 
(Shen et al., 2018). The two first steps allow to determine if the adsorbent 
is stable and presents a high capacity to immobilize the contaminant, while 
the third one allows evaluating if environmental factors may affect the 
contaminant immobilization in the long-term. Figure 11.5 summarizes the 
main aspects regarding the use of adsorption in contaminated soil treatment, 
in which it is possible to understand how those steps contribute to develop a 
viable adsorption remediation process. 
In a simplistic point of view, stable designed materials that can strongly 
interact with the contaminant, immobilizing a great amount of them in 
their surface even under condition of interaction with the soil particles, are 
needed. Under these conditions, the use of nanomaterials has been proved as 
feasible and efficient, highlighting the possibilities of the nanoremediation 
for soil cleanup. Among a variety of nanomaterials that can be proposed 
for soil cleanup, including metal oxides and nanocomposites (Qian et al., 
2020), the carbonaceous nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes, graphene, 360 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
graphene oxides, and nanostructured biochar, have received attention due to 
their versatility and unique properties. Beyond their own surface chemical 
structure that can interact with different classes of molecules, carbonaceous 
nanomaterials may be manipulated at the atomic and molecular level by 
adding specific functionalities that can immobilize a particular contaminant 
within a complex soil mixture. 
FIGURE 11.5 Flowchart illustrating the fundamental aspects associated with the use of 
adsorption as treatment technology for contaminated soils (Shen et al., 2018). 
11.2.3 NANOREMEDIATION OF SOILS USING CARBONACEOUS 
NANOMATERIALS
Despite the common point in which carbon nanotubes, graphene, graphene 
oxides, and nanostructured biochar are essentially made up of carbon, their 
different structures and properties make them useful for distinct applications. 
However, some common properties of those carbonaceous nanomaterials, 
namely, their large specific superficial area, porous structure, and/or capacity 
to form composites with other materials to improve their adsorption capacity, 
make all of them widely used as adsorbents in the environmental application 
field for the removal of several contaminants. Thus, beyond their widespread 
application to remove contaminants from aqueous matrices, carbonaceous 
materials have been also used in soil remediation. In this section, the main Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 361 
advances in the field of soil remediation using different carbonaceous nano￾materials are presented. 
11.2.3.1 CARBON NANOTUBES 
After the discovery by Iijima (1991) and the elucidation of their proper￾ties, CNTs were extensively used as adsorbents for the removal of different 
contaminants from aqueous matrices. Although their use as adsorbent in soil 
remediation is still not fully explored, important advances have been made in 
this research field. In this section, firstly the fundamental aspects related with 
the use of CNTs for contaminant immobilization are discussed, and then the 
main applications of CNTs for soil remediation, including their application 
for sediment remediation, are presented. 
11.2.3.1.1 Fundamental Aspects of the CNT Application for Soil 
Remediation
The potential of CNT to actuate for the treatment of contaminated soils can be 
attributed to two main aspects: (1) the effective retention of CNT by the soil 
matrix and (2) the great efficiency of CNT to adsorb large amounts of different 
classes of contaminants, especially hydrophobic organic compounds (HOC). 
The first aspect ensures that CNT will have a limited transport through the 
soil, avoiding its own leaching to groundwater; the second one guarantees 
the versatility of CNT to treat contaminated soils. 
The high efficiency of soil to retain CNT has been attributed to morpho￾logical and surface properties of the CNT, such as irregular shape, large 
aspect ratio, and functionalization of the surface, as well as aspects of the 
soil, such as the high heterogeneity of particle size, high porosity and perme￾ability, pore interconnectivity, surface potential, and hydrophobicity (Jaisi 
and Elimelech, 2009; Tian et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2012). However, high 
CNT mobility can occur in some types of soil, favoring the co-transport of 
contaminants into deeper soil layers (Zhang et al., 2017b). 
Regarding the great capacity of CNT to adsorb different contaminants, 
the capacity has been specially related with the chemical features of CNT 
surface that allow multiple mechanisms to control the adsorption process, 
including hydrophobic interactions as well as electrostatic interaction, 
hydrogen bonding, and π-π interaction. 362 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Hydrophobic interaction is the main mechanism determining the adsorp￾tion of HOC on CNT, but it cannot completely explain the adsorption. 
Particularly for aromatic HOC, π-electron donor and acceptor interactions, 
formed between the aromatic structures of both CNT and adsorbate, can 
strongly contribute to the adsorption. In addition, if the functional groups 
are present in a large extension on the CNT surface and the HOC have polar 
or ionizable functional groups, the electrostatic interactions and hydrogen 
bonding can also influence the process of adsorption (Apul and Karanfil, 
2015). Functional groups containing oxygen, for instance, can be present 
on the CNT surface due to the presence of defects, generated during the 
synthesis, in its nanostructure or they can be incorporated by functional￾ization. The presence of these oxygen-rich groups plays an important role 
in the adsorption of metal ions on CNT through electrostatic interactions, 
complexation, and/or ion exchange (Ihsanullah et al., 2016). 
Summarily, adsorption on CNT is deeply dependent on the chemical 
nature of the functional groups presents in both CNT and adsorbate, making 
a challenge to the task of quantifying the individual contributions of the 
distinct mechanisms controlling the adsorption. 
11.2.3.1.2 Applications of CNT for Soil Remediation
Despite the great potential of CNT application for remediation of soil 
contaminated with HOC, there are few studies evaluating the use of CNT to 
treat soils contaminated with these contaminants, such as that showing the 
effective potential of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) for immobili￾zation of dichlorophenyl trichloroethane (DDT), an organochlorine pesticide 
(Taha and Mobasser, 2014). Majority of studies in this field are concerned to 
understand the effects of CNT on the soil properties, and consequently, on 
the mobility, toxicity, and bioavailability of HOC, such as naphthalene, fluo￾rene, phenanthrene, and pyrene (Li et al., 2013; Towell et al., 2011; Zhang 
et al., 2019). In general, the results from these studies have shown that the 
presence of CNT increases the retention of HOC, changing their adsorption 
and desorption processes in soils. These processes are influenced by the type 
and concentration of CNT, as well as the adsorbate and soil properties. For 
example, dissolved organic matter in soil and coexistence of clay inhibit 
pyrene adsorption on CNT, either by pore blockage of CNT aggregates or by 
occupying adsorption sites on the CNT surface (Zhang et al., 2019). 
For the purposes of remediation of soils contaminated with toxic 
metals, CNTs were only recently investigated as adsorbent for contaminant Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 363 
immobilization. Particularly, MWCNTs have been used to immobilize 
lead, copper, nickel, zinc, and antimony in contaminated soils (Matos 
et al., 2017; Vithanage et al., 2017). Despite the capacity that metal 
immobilization depends on the metal under investigation, in general, the 
presence of MWCNT increases the adsorption capacity of the soil, thus 
improving the immobilization of those toxic metals in the soil matrix. The 
potential of CNT to immobilize metals in soils has been also pointed in 
an interesting study from Gredilla et al. (2019) who, although have not 
applied CNT with soil remediation purpose, have evidenced the mercury 
sequestration by CNT present in agricultural soils from a coal-fired power 
plant exhaust. 
Beyond the use of CNT as adsorbent, they have also been proposed as 
coadjutants in other processes of remediation in contaminated soils. For 
instance, the adsorption of Cr(VI) by functionalized MWCNT was inves￾tigated together with their catalytic effect on the metal reduction by citric 
acid, in which the addition of the MWCNT to an oxisol enhanced the yield of 
Cr(VI) reduction in the remediation process (Zhang et al., 2018c). Similarly, 
the use of a CNT barrier was shown to improve the electrokinetic remedia￾tion of 1,2-dichlorobenzene in clay (Yuan et al., 2009). 
11.2.3.1.3 Applications of CNT for Sediment Remediation
The potential of CNT for remediation processes of solid matrices in the 
environment has been also demonstrated from their use for the remediation 
of sediments. Both MWCNT and SWCNT have been proposed to treat 
sediments containing residual contaminants, especially HOC, such as 
organochlorine pesticides, antibiotics, and drugs. However, as in studies 
involving soils, most of the studies in this field focus on understanding the 
effects of CNT on the physicochemical properties of sediments as well as 
the adsorption behavior of coexisting contaminants on the sediments them￾selves. In general, both SWCNT and MWCNT present a great potential to 
immobilize the contaminants in sediments. However, regarding the effect 
of CNT type on this process, SWCNT is more efficient than MWCNT 
to immobilize the contaminants, which is attributed to its larger surface 
area (Hua et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017a). Table 11.1 summarizes some 
studies, from the last decade, demonstrating the great potential of CNT 
to contaminant immobilization in sediments contaminated with organic or 
inorganic contaminants. TABLE 11.1 Studies, from the Last Decade, Demonstrating the Great Potential of CNT to Contaminant Immobilization in Sediments.
CNT type Contaminant Sediment Main result Refs. 
MWCNT Chlorinated
hydrocarbons 
SWCNT PCBa 
SWCNTs and Sulfamethoxazole,
MWCNTs sulfapyridine, and
sulfadiazine antibiotics
SWCNTs and DDT and HCHb
MWCNTs (Organochlorine 
pesticides) 
SWCNTs and Paracetamol and
MWCNTs diclofenac sodium 
MWCNT Sodium dodecyl
benzene sulfonate
(surfactant) 
MWCNT Cadmium 
Sand
New Bedford
Harbor sediment
Sediment from
Xiangjiang river, 
China
Sediment from
Dong-ting lake,
China
Sediment from
Xiangjiang river, 
China
Sediment from
Xiangjiang river, 
China
Sediment from
Xiangjiangriver, 
China 
Sand textured with CNT was effective to reduce the migration 
of contaminants from the sediment to overlying water
SWCNT reduced the PCB bioavailability, decreasing the 
bioaccumulation and toxicity of the contaminant to benthic
organisms 
CNTs strongly retained the antibiotics due to their high 
adsorption capacities and limited transport in the sediment
Both SWCNTs and MWCNTs were effective to prevent the 
residual DDT and HCH being released from the sediment 
CNTs showed capacity to impede the transport of 
paracetamol and diclofenac sodium in the sediment
MWCNT increased the adsorption capacity of the sediment 
for SDBS, affecting its transport in the sediment 
MWCNT increased the uptake of Cd, improving the 
phytoremediation efficiency in the restoration of the sediment 
Ma et al. (2010)
Parks et al.
(2014)
Su et al. (2016)
Hua et al. (2017),
Zhang et al.
(2017a)
Yan et al. (2017) 
Song et al.
(2018)
Gong et al.
(2019) 
aPCB, Polychlorinated biphenyls; bDDT, Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane; HCH, hexachlorocyclohexane. 
364 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 365 
The potential of CNT to be used in the development of technologies for 
the treatment of soils and sediments contaminated with different contaminants 
is an important issue that highlights the possibility of their use in different 
contexts of soils/sediments remediation, despite the challenges still associated 
with the use of these nanomaterials. For example, regarding the potential of 
CNT to immobilize toxic metals, specifically, a promising application could 
be associated with the development of technologies for the remediation of 
soils and sediments contaminated by toxic metals from mining tailings. 
11.2.3.1.4 Challenges of the Use of CNT for Soil Remediation
Although CNTs have proved being effective to reduce the mobility of different 
contaminants in soils (or sediments), uncertainties about their environmental 
risks in natural ecosystems have limited their application. Most of the efforts 
in this field have been directed to understand the impacts of CNT on the 
natural ecosystems properties as well as the role of the aging process on the 
properties of CNT (Fan et al., 2017). Therefore, beyond simply evaluating 
the potential of CNT to immobilize a specific contaminant, a global compre￾hension about the influence of CNT on the physicochemical properties of the 
solid matrix is needed, which includes evaluating the effect of the presence 
of CNT on the potential of own soil particles to adsorb other contaminants. 
So that the presence of CNT cannot affect in a large extension the natural 
capacity of the soil to immobilize a contaminant despite their capacity to 
efficiently immobilize other one (Fang et al., 2008). In summary, to evaluate 
the ecological risks of CNT in the soil matrix is indispensable for the 
assessment of remediation potential of that nanomaterial, and consequently, 
the development of secure applications of CNT for soil cleanup (Fitz and 
Wenzel, 2002; Song et al., 2019; Towell et al., 2011). 
11.2.3.2 NANOSTRUCTURED BIOCHARS 
As other carbonaceous nanomaterials, biochars have amazing adsorption 
properties for a wide range of organic and inorganic contaminants (Zhang 
et al., 2013). Because of this, biochars produced from different feedstock 
and pyrolysis conditions have been proposed as material for soil remediation 
through adsorption technology. Beyond the own biochar ability to 
immobilize contaminants in soils, other processes associated with its use 
for soil remediation can be involved. For instance, biochars have shown to 366 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
interact with microbes in soils, which would be probably associated with the 
degradation or transformation of contaminants (Ma et al., 2010). In addition, 
other aspects regarding mitigating sustainable practices on soil amendment 
are related to biochars usage, including carbon storage as well as fertility 
and quality increase of soil for agriculture. These aspects make biochars 
the most important carbonaceous material for soil remediation, although 
the benefits associate with the use of a specific biochar in soil, including 
their immobilization capacity of contaminants, are dependent on the biochar 
dosage in the soil matrix, remaining a challenge in this field to determine the 
optimized conditions for biochar applications (Gopinath et al., 2020). 
The versatility of biochars to adsorb different classes of molecules is 
associated with their morphology which is characterized by the presence 
of different active functional groups spread on a large specific surface area 
rich in micropores. These aspects provide to biochar simultaneous distinct 
mechanisms to interact with contaminants in soils. In the next subsections, 
these mechanisms are highlighted for toxic metals and organic contaminants. 
11.2.3.2.1 Soils Containing Toxic Metals
Interaction between toxic metals and biochars can occur through different types 
of mechanisms. The simplest involves the ion exchange between the metal 
cation and other cations associated with the biochar, such as Ca2+ and Mg2+. 
Theses exchangeable cations in the biochars come from the complexed humic 
matter and mineral oxides generally incorporated to the biochar and can be 
quantified by the cation exchange capacity (CTC). In another mechanism, the 
mineral elements in the biochar, such as carbonates, sulfates, and phosphates, 
may combine with the toxic metals, forming poorly soluble salts. 
Animal-derived biochars generally contain higher CTC than plant-derived 
ones due to their high Ca2+ contents, which makes ion exchange a dominant 
mechanism of animal-derived biochars in the immobilization of several metal 
cations. This can be observed, for instance, for immobilization of Cd2+ and 
Cu2+ on biochars derived from cattle and swine carcasses. However, the same 
biochars are effectives to immobilized Pb2+ via precipitation, showing that 
the mechanism for metal adsorption is not determined only by the biochar 
structure, but also depends on the metal adsorbed (Lei et al., 2019). 
The adsorption of toxic metals on biochars can also occur by physisorp￾tion that comprises electrostatic, cation–π, and van der Waals interactions. 
Regarding the first one, when biochars are added in the soil, they can Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 367 
increase the surface negative charge density of the soil matrix, attracting 
more intensely the positively charged toxic metals (Liang et al., 2006). The 
relative contribution of the electrostatic interactions for metal adsorption is 
determined by the pH of the soil, which modulates the surface charge of both 
biochar and soil particles, beyond the charge of the own metal species. When 
the pH of the soil increases above the zero-charge point of the biochar (pHpzc), 
the negative net charge on the surface of the biochar increases, favoring the 
electrostatic adsorption of positively charged metal ions. On the other hand, 
at high enough pH, some metals can form negative hydroxide complexes 
which interact through repulsive electrostatic interactions with the biochar 
surface, or insoluble neutral hydroxide complexes which precipitate may 
disadvantage the adsorption. In the first situation, leaching of the metals 
through the soil will increase, showing that the geochemical properties of 
the soil should be analyzed before biochar application for soil remediation. 
Another mechanism for adsorption of toxic metals is associated with 
the capacity of the oxygen-containing functional groups of the biochar 
(carboxyl and hydroxyl, for instance) forming complexes with the metals, 
characterizing a chemisorption. Generally, biochars produced at lower 
temperatures of pyrolysis (200°C–400°C) are richer in oxygen-containing 
functional groups, presenting more efficiency to adsorb metal ions due to 
complexation mechanism. This is the main mechanism described for the 
adsorption of Pb2+ on variable charge soils amended with rice straw-derived 
biochar (300°C during pyrolysis) (Jiang et al., 2012) and Al3+ on biochar 
obtained from cattle manure (400°C during pyrolysis) for the alleviation 
of aluminum phytotoxicity in soils (Qian et al., 2013). Higher capacities of 
metal adsorption can also occur at high temperature biochars (500°C–900°C 
during pyrolysis), as observed for adsorption of nickel on biochars produced 
from wheat straw pellets and rice husk (Shen et al., 2017). In this case, for 
the same feedstock, a higher pyrolysis temperature results in the formation 
of more content of alkaline minerals, favoring the metal immobilization by 
precipitation and cation exchange mechanisms. In addition, more active 
aromatic structure in the biochar, generated at the higher temperatures, also 
favors the adsorption via cation–π interactions. 
The mechanisms presented above generally act together. However, the 
relative importance of each one can depend on the properties of soil (pH, 
composition, etc.) and biochars, as well as all metal ions present in both 
soils and biochar. As a consequence, the success of the biochar usage for 
remediation of a contaminated soil should consider those mechanisms 
associated with the toxic metal immobilization on the biochar. 368 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Another important issue beyond the own biochar adsorption capacity to 
immobilize toxic metals is the biochar ability to changing the adsorption 
capacity of the particles of the soil itself. Modification in the soil proper￾ties, specially pH and CEC, has been considered one of the most important 
contributions for the decline in the content of Al, Zn, Cu, Mn, and Cd in 
soils of different agricultural sites in the Czech Republic (Hailegnaw et al., 
2020). Changes in the pH of soil induced by biochars can also reflect in 
undesirable process, as the increased As solubility with more alkaline pH 
already reported (Fitz and Wenzel, 2002). 
11.2.3.2.2 Soil Containing Organic Compounds
Many works have shown that biochars have good adsorption capacities to 
several organic compounds, including PAH, benzene derivatives, phenols, 
agrochemicals, plasticizers, and pharmaceuticals, such as antibiotics and 
endocrine-disrupting chemicals (Dai et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2016; Regk￾ouzas and Diamadopoulos, 2019; Zhang et al., 2016). Beyond other aspects 
referenced in previous sections, such as large specific surface area and 
high porosity, the great adsorption capacity of biochars for those organic 
contaminants has been mainly ascribed to their aromatic structure which 
can favorably interact with hydrophobic and aromatic organic compounds 
through hydrophobic, aromatic-π, and cation-π interactions (Jung et al., 
2013). Generally, biochars obtained at pyrolysis temperatures higher than 
500°C have a highly aromatic structure which favors those interactions. 
However, the mechanisms of adsorbing organic compounds also depend on 
the adsorbate structure and can involve other types of interactions, including 
electrostatic attraction, hydrogen bonding, and complexation. 
Hydrogen bonding and π–π-electron donor–acceptor interactions are 
the dominant mechanisms for the adsorption of estrone, 17β-estradiol, 
estriol, 17α-ethynylestradiol, and bisphenol A on biochar from Eucalyptus 
globulus wood activated with phosphoric acid at pyrolysis temperature equal 
to 600°C and at nitrogen atmosphere. That adsorption is dependent on the 
change of the pH which modulates the presence of π-electron donor and 
π-electron acceptor domains on the biochar surface, modifying the adsorp￾tive mechanism to guarantee an excellent removal efficiency of π-electron 
donors or π-electron acceptors hydrophobic organic contaminants (Ahmed 
et al., 2018). 
Despite the fact that some charged organic contaminants can be adsorbed 
by electrostatic attraction (Hassan et al., 2020), electrostatic repulsion between Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 369 
functional groups charged with charges of the same sign in both biochar and 
adsorbate can also limit the adsorption capacity of the biochars. This can be 
observed, for example, for the adsorption of imazamox, metazachlor oxalic 
acid, and metazachlor sulfonic acid, polar pesticides in soil amendment with 
biochar produced from beech wood at temperatures up to 550°C (Dechene et 
al., 2014). Due to its low value of pHPCZ, the biochar was negatively charged 
in the pH conditions investigated, promoting an electrostatic repulsion of 
the contaminants that were deprotonated and negatively charged at the same 
conditions. In this situation, the proposed biochar is not considered a viable 
strategy to reduce the leaching potential for those polar pesticides. However, 
if electrostatic interactions are not involved in the immobilization process, 
other interactions can take place in the adsorption of polar pesticides on 
biochars. For instance, adsorption of diuron, a nonionizable polar herbicide, 
was enhanced by the application of biochar from Eucalyptus in a Cerrado 
Haplic Plinthosol, in which hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonding 
formation were the main interactions governing the contaminant immobili￾zation (Petter et al., 2019). 
As observed, from a mechanistic point of view, biochars immobilize 
contaminants on their surface in a similar way of how CNTs do. However, 
higher porosity and more complex composition of the biochars determine 
extra mechanisms of sorption, such as partition and pore-filling. In the first, 
the contaminant is transferred from the fluid phase to the uncarbonized 
fraction of the carbonaceous material. In the last one, the contaminant fills 
entirely the pores of the biochar. 
Partition as sorption mechanism is reported, for instance, in the 
remotion of PAH in soils using biochars made from pine needle in pyrolysis 
temperature from 100°C to 700°C. Particularly, partition is dominant at low 
pyrolysis temperatures and favored at high concentrations of the contaminant. 
However, sorption mechanism is changed to adsorption-dominant at higher 
pyrolysis temperatures and favored at low concentrations of contaminant 
(Chen and Yuan, 2010). Because PAH present low solubility in the aqueous 
solution of the soil, uncarbonized fraction of the biochar can solubilize those 
contaminants, favoring their partition to that fraction of the material. Pore￾filling, on the other hand, is presented as one of the sorption mechanisms of 
thiacloprid, a neonicotinoid insecticide, on black soil amended by various 
biochars. Beyond pore-filling, the sorption mechanism on both biochars and 
biochar–soil mixtures are mainly through hydrophobic and π–π-electron 
donor–acceptor interactions (Zhang et al., 2018a). 
In summary, the different types of structures of both contaminants and 
biochars make the mechanisms associated with immobilization of organic 370 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
contaminants on biochar to be broad. In this context, evaluation of the surface 
properties of the biochars and knowledge on the molecular structure of the 
contaminant are indispensable to understand and predict the mechanisms of 
adsorption that will determine the efficiency of biochar to soil remediation. 
11.2.3.2.3 Soils Containing Multicontaminants
As discussed in section 10.2.1.1, combination of different contaminants can 
alter the adsorption capacity of the soil regarding some of those contaminants. 
In this point of view, the evaluation of the potential of the adsorption for 
remediation of multicontaminated soil is a relevant issue, in which biochars 
have been shown to be promising choice. For instance, the simultaneous 
monitoring of toxic metals (Cu, As, Cd, and Zn) and PAH in a contaminated 
soil amended with biochar over 60 days field exposure shows that biochars 
effectively decrease the concentration of Cd and Zn as well as PAH in pore 
water. Although in the same condition the Cu and As concentrations in the soil 
pore water increases more than 30-fold after adding the biochar associated 
with significant increases in both dissolved organic carbon and pH (Beesley 
et al., 2010), those results show the potential of biochars to simultaneously 
immobilize different contaminants in the soil. However, it is also evident 
that the remediation of multicontaminated soils is more complicated and can 
require the combination of different technologies for remediation. 
11.2.3.3 GRAPHENE AND GRAPHENE OXIDE 
As CNT, graphene and graphene oxide in a short period of time since their 
discovery showed a prominent potential for water and air remediation, and 
also are acting as adsorbent for sequestration of toxic metal ions, rare-earth 
metal ions, organic compounds, etc. (Wang et al., 2013). However, the use 
of graphene-based materials for soil remediation is uncommon compared 
with those applications involving adsorptive remediation in water and air 
matrices. 
The few works investigating the graphene-based materials usage for soil 
remediation are focused on graphene oxide (Baragano et al., 2020), which 
can be attributed to the surface properties of these materials. They have 
various oxygen-containing functional groups, such as hydroxyl, carbonyl, 
and carboxyl on their surface, which can directly interact with different 
contaminants or be covalently modified to interact with specific contaminants. Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 371 
The mechanisms involving the adsorption of contaminants on these materials 
are similar to those on CNT, that is, electrostatic interaction, complexation, 
hydrophobic interaction, π–π interaction, and hydrogen bonding (Zhao et 
al., 2019b). In addition, because graphene oxides are nonporous adsorbents, 
adsorption occurs only on their outside surface, thus diminishing the control 
of internal diffusion mechanisms. 
Regarding the application of graphene-based materials in soils, graphene 
oxide nanoparticles have been investigated for the remediation of soil 
contaminated with toxic metals and were compared with the performance 
of zero-valent iron nanoparticles (nZVI) (Baragano et al., 2020). While 
graphene nanoparticles have immobilized Cu, Pb, and Cd, and have 
mobilized As and P, the nZVI have promoted the immobilization of As and 
Pb, a less effective immobilization of Cd, and an increased availability of Cu 
in the soil. It is noteworthy that these opposite results for both nanoparticles 
indicate the possibility of applying hybrid approaches of phytoremediation 
and nanoremediation in a soil treated with both graphene oxide nanoparticles 
and nZVI. 
The transport of contaminants through the soil matrix can also be affected 
in different extensions by graphene oxide nanoparticles, depending on the 
molecular properties of the contaminant and the level of carbonaceous 
material aggregation. Low concentrations of graphene oxide nanoparticles in 
a saturated soil, for instance, significantly enhance the transport of 1-naphthol, 
a polar aromatic compound, but affect the transport of phenanthrene, a 
hydrophobic aromatic one, to a much smaller extent. In addition, when the 
soil solution is subjected to chemistry conditions that favor the aggregation 
of the nanoparticles, the transport enhancement effects of the contaminants 
are increased (Qi et al., 2014). 
One of the reasons that can explain the failure of graphene or graphene 
oxide for soil remediation is the blocking of adsorptive sites of graphene 
or graphene oxide due to intense interactions between these nanomaterials 
and the soil particles (Zhao et al., 2019b). To overcome this problem, 3D 
composites containing graphene oxide have been developed, in which their 
morphology allows the contaminant diffusion from the soil solution to 
the inner structure of the material, while the solid particles of soil would 
be retained at the exterior surface (Zhao et al., 2019a). This interesting 
approach has gained attention in the field of research about the application 
of carbonaceous materials for soil remediation, leading to the development 
of engineered carbonaceous nanomaterials, which are discussed in the next 
section. 372 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
11.2.4 ENGINEERED CARBONACEOUS NANOMATERIALS
Despite the great potential of conventional nanostructured carbonaceous 
materials (CNT, graphene, graphene oxide, and biochars) for contaminant 
immobilization in soils, further improvements in their remediation effi￾ciency and environmental benefits are still needed. In this context, recent 
attention has been focused on the modification of carbonaceous materials 
or combination of them with other nanomaterials to obtain new ones with 
novel morphologies and surface properties as well as greater potential to be 
used as adsorbent in soil remediation. This class of new materials has been 
named engineered carbonaceous nanomaterials (ECN) and can be achieved 
using different approaches, such as acid/base treatment, chemical oxidation 
process, modification of functional groups (carboxylation and amination), 
coating, treatment with organic solvents, modification with surfactants, 
impregnation with mineral oxides, and magnetic modification (Madhavi et 
al., 2021; Rajapaksha et al., 2016). 
ECN generally have increased specific surface area, reduced aggrega￾tion capacity, and greater density of active adsorption sites in their surface 
when compared with conventional carbonaceous nanomaterials, therefore, 
enhancing the adsorption capacity of those materials. These improved 
properties are compatible with a high performance of ECN application in 
environmental remediation. 
Regarding the use of ECN for the soil remediation, recent works have 
shown the improvement of the sorption capacity of contaminants by those 
materials compared with the nonmodified ones. For instance, coating of 
pistachio-shell residues biochars with nZVI leads to higher efficiencies in 
cadmium stabilization compared with pristine biochars (Saffari et al., 2019). 
Other biochar-based engineered materials for the remediation of soil contami￾nated with toxic metal/metalloid include chitosan-modified biochars, which 
has been shown an effective, low-cost, and environment-friendly adsorbent 
for the removal of cadmium, lead, and cadmium (Zhou et al., 2013), as well 
as manganese oxide-modified biochar, which has been efficient to increase 
the removal of arsenic in soil (Yu et al., 2015). 
Concerning the use of graphene-based materials, graphene oxide modi￾fied with sulfonate groups is a promising ECN for the nanoremediation of 
PAH-contaminated soils (Gan et al., 2017). Graphene and nZVI have been 
also integrated to a complex biochar-based engineered material for metal 
stabilization in soil using biochar from cornstalk. This new nanomaterial 
has a superior immobilization efficiency of Cu than pristine biochar, being a Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 373 
promising and effective amendment for immobilizing this metal in contami￾nated soils (Mandal et al., 2020). 
Compared with biochars and graphene materials, the development of 
ECN based on CNT for soil remediation is less explored. However, effective 
CNT-based engineered materials have been proposed for the remediation of 
soil contaminated with organic compounds. For example, a composite formed 
by magnetic MWCNT and metal–organic framework, a porous crystalline 
material formed by metal units and organic linkers, have been shown as 
promising adsorbent for the removal of organophosphorus pesticides is soil 
(Liu et al., 2018). 
The adsorption properties of the different carbonaceous materials explored 
in this section for contaminated soil remediation are also valuable for nutrient 
retention in poor soils. Also, their physical and chemical properties present 
fundamental information for the formulation of new strategies of their efficient 
use. In the next sections, characterization and performance aspects of these 
carbonaceous nanomaterials will be discussed in greater detail, broadening 
the understanding of their efficiency in nutrient retention. 
11.3 NUTRIENT-DEPLETED SOILS REMEDIATION WITH 
CARBONACEOUS NANOFERTILIZERS
The characterization and understanding of physical–chemical phenomena 
involving carbon nanotubes, graphene, graphene oxide, and biochar are of 
fundamental importance to engineer their use. This process allows the verifi￾cation of some properties of the material under analysis that corroborate the 
factors related to its applicability in the industry. The next sections of this 
chapter will be devoted to the exploitation of the main structural, chemical, 
and application properties of these materials and their relationship with soil 
remediation for both contaminated and nutrient-depleted soils. 
11.3.1 GRAPHENE, GRAPHENE OXIDE, AND CARBON NANOTUBE￾BASED FERTILIZERS
11.3.1.1 MORPHOLOGY AND STRUCTURE OF GRAPHENE, GRAPHENE 
OXIDE, AND CARBON NANOTUBE FERTILIZERS 
There are several techniques, alone or combined with each other, that can 
be used to access the morphology and structure of CNM in smart fertilizers. 
Each one provides specific information in a microscopic level, contributing 
to the elucidation or improvement of the mechanism of slow release. FIGURE 11.6 AFM of GO flakes on a mica substrate. (a) AFM image. (b) Profile of the 
image along the horizontal white line in (a). The two dots in (a) and the two dash vertical lines 
in (b) show the reference points for height measurement for the GO sheet. 
Source: Reprinted from Zhang, M.; Gao, B.; Chen, J.; Li, Y.; Creamer, A. E.; Chen, H. Slow￾Release Fertilizer Encapsulated by Graphene Oxide Films. Chem. Eng. J. 2020, 255, 107–113 
Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
374 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a valuable technique to characterize 
carbonaceous nanomaterials down to the atomic thickness, and it was used to 
characterize the commercially available GO dispersion for the encapsulation 
of KNO3 pellets (Zhang et al., 2014). Figure 11.6 displays the AFM image 
of GO sheets with micrometric lateral dimension on top of a mica substrate. 
The profile analysis indicates that single-layer graphene flakes with average 
0.7 ± 0.2 nm in thickness were found, confirming the nanometric scale aimed 
to be used in the fertilizer formulation.  
FIGURE 11.7 SEM-EDX analysis of (a) core and shell structure of a re-GO-coated KNO3 
pellet. (b) Higher resolution image of the surface exhibited in (a). (c) Higher resolution of 
the surface in (a), focusing on the shell structure. (d) EDX spectrum unveiling the chemical 
composition of the sample. 
Source: Reprinted from Zhang, M.; Gao, B.; Chen, J.; Li, Y.; Creamer, A. E.; Chen, H. Slow￾Release Fertilizer Encapsulated by Graphene Oxide Films. Chem. Eng. J. 2020, 255, 107–113 
Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 375 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is widely used to study the 
morphology of graphene-based fertilizers, as shown in Figure 11.7. Figure 11.7a 
is a representative cross-sectional image of a re-GO-coated KNO3 pellet, 
with a KNO3 core and re-GO shell (Zhang et al., 2014). It is worth noticing 
the smoothness of the exterior shell covering the fertilizer pellets fabricated. 
Figure 11.7b represents a higher resolution of the smooth shell, while (c) is a 
magnification showing the dense, smooth, and uniform shell with 20–30 µm 
thickness. Figure 11.7d shows the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis of 
the re-GO-coated KNO3 pellet, unveiling its chemical composition of mainly 
C, O, N, and K. FIGURE 11.8 (a, b, c) Optical images of monoammonium phosphate (MAP) (a), MAP– 
graphene (MAP–GN) (b), and MAP–graphene oxide (MAP–GO) (c) cogranulations. (d–f) 
SEM images for these samples, in the same order. (g–i) are their respective magnifications, with 
red lines indicating the presence GN and GO in the MAP–GN, and MAP–GO cogranulations. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Kabiri, S.; Baird, R.; Tran, D. N.; Andelkovic, I.; 
McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, D. Cogranulation of Low Rates of Graphene and Graphene Oxide 
with Macronutrient Fertilizers Remarkably Improves Their Physical Properties. ACS Sustain. 
Chem. Eng. 2018, 6 (1), 1299–1309. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
376 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Figures 11.8a–i show the optical (a–c) and SEM (d–i) images of cogranu￾lation of low rates of GN and GO with monoammonium phosphate (MAP) 
conventional fertilizer (Kabiri et al., 2018). While all samples granulated 
as round-shaped structures, the MAP control sample (Fig. 11.8d) presents a 
rough surface when compared with the MAP–graphene (MAP–GN, Figure 
11.8e) and MAP–graphene oxide (MAP–GO, Figure 11.8f) cogranulations. 
Higher magnification SEM images (Figs. 11.8g–i) show homogeneous GN 
and GO embedment in the MAP–GN and MAP–GO composite. Stacked GN 
sheets were also detected in SEM cross-sections of MAP–GN granules when 
studying their crushing strength (Kabiri et al., 2020). Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 377 
SEM was used to study the composite obtained when loading Fe(III) 
and then P onto GO sheets ultrasonicated in a concentration of 1 g GO/L 
(Andelkovic et al., 2019). The observed planar and filamentous macroporous 
networks were attributed to the twisting and rolling of GO sheets in a stress 
stabilization process during the growth of ice crystals in the freeze-drying 
synthesis. The increase in GO concentration resulted also in stacked layers, 
which can be dispersed by ultrasonication, forming the nanoscrolls observed 
by the authors. Rolled and wrinkled GO sheets loaded with Cu and Zn 
micronutrients were also observed in the literature for other high-load slow￾release fertilizer formulations (Kabiri et al., 2017). 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is routinely used to show the 
atomic structure of graphene and graphene oxide loaded with nutrients, as 
well as their electron diffraction representing their hexagonal arrangement 
at the nanoscale (for example, the reduced graphene oxide (re-GO) used 
to coat KNO3 fertilizers (re-GO-coated KNO3) (Zhang et al., 2014), or the 
pristine GO when exploring Cu- and Zn-loaded GO (Kabiri et al., 2017)). 
The morphology of urea-functionalized MWCNT for nitrogen delivery 
(Yatim et al., 2015) and its uptake into paddy roots was also examined with 
TEM (Yatim et al., 2019). The tubular structure of functionalized MWCNT 
was still clearly observed, but in a higher magnification TEM, the authors 
noticed the longitudinal rupture of these structures compared with pristine 
MWCNT. The functionalized MWCNTs were generally found separated 
as individual tubes and presenting ripped ends, with irregular appearance, 
and in some cases, their original lengths of the order of 0.5–1.0 µm were 
reduced to ~ 50 nm, and thinned in diameter to nearly 10 nm. Moreover, flat 
graphene-like structures with the width of ~ 80 nm were also found in the 
cells of these paddy root samples, probably from open tubular functionalized 
MWCNT structures. These observations confirmed the uptake of functional￾ized MWCNT resulted in increased defect density through the destruction of 
the graphitic structure, shedding light on how these materials modify when 
applied in fertilizer formulations. 
Spectroscopic techniques have been increasingly used as methods of 
physical and chemical characterization of CNM. Among those techniques, 
Raman spectroscopy has proven to be a useful and effective characteriza￾tion technique to obtain the structural information about CNM due to their 
simplicity (as it often does not require sample treatment), speed, high resolu￾tion, and because it is nondestructive, depending on the excitation energy 
and power used (Ferrari and Robertson, 2000). In the case of carbonaceous 
materials, the Raman spectrum presents broad peaks in two main regions 
(see Figure 11.9). The first region, known as the “D” band, near 1350 cm−1, FIGURE 11.9 Raman spectra of hydrothermally reduced graphene oxide (GNHT), graphene 
reduced by hydrazine (GNNH), graphene reduced by vitamin C (GNVC), and graphene 
decorated with αFeOOH nanoparticles (GNFeOOH). Diverse IG/ID ratios represent different 
relative amounts of sp2
-hybridized carbon atoms. 
Source: Reprinted (adapted) from Kabiri, S.; Tran, D. N.; Baird, R.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, 
D. Revealing the Dependence of Graphene Concentration and Physicochemical Properties 
on the Crushing Strength of Co-Granulated Fertilizers by Wet Granulation Process. Powder 
Technol. 2020, 360, 588–597. Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
378 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
arises due to the breathing movement of the carbon atoms arranged in a 
hexagonal structure (predominantly sp2
) (Jorio et al., 2011; Tuinstra and 
Koenig, 1970), and is assigned as a k-point phonon of A1g symmetry. This 
mode is activated by the presence of structural defects like vacancies or grain 
boundaries, providing information regarding the degree of disorder of the 
analyzed crystalline structure. The second region, called the “G” band, near 
1600 cm−1, corresponds to the stretch between planar C-C bonds (Tuinstra 
and Koenig, 1970), being assigned as a Γ-point E2g phonon. 
Figure 11.9 represents the Raman spectra of chemically reduced graphene 
oxide samples formulated according to diverse methodologies aiming their Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 379 
use to improve the crushing strength of MAP fertilizer formulations (Kabiri 
et al., 2020). The intensity ratio between D and G integrated band intensi￾ties can be related to the different relative amounts of sp2
-hybridized carbon 
atoms. Although the ID/IG ratio is more widely used, the authors in this work 
analyze the IG/ID ratio to classify the differences in graphene oxide reduction 
processes and respective fertilizer crushing strength enhancements. They 
observed that the reduction by hydrazine (GNNH) and by vitamin C (GNVC) 
resulted in higher crushing strength when compared with hydrothermally 
reduced graphene oxide (GNHT), indicating that they are more effective 
in restoring the graphene original and less defective structure. Zhang et al. 
(2014) used the ID/IG ratio to show that the heat treatment of KNO3 pellets 
encapsulated with graphene oxide is important to promote the metal cation 
reduction of graphene oxide to a much less defective structure. From another 
side, Kabiri et al. (2017) observed that the Raman spectra of both Zn- and 
Cu-functionalized graphene oxides (Zn–GO and Cu–GO) presented a blue 
shift of 9 cm−1 for the G band, while a red shift of 8 cm−1 for the D band was 
observed only for the Cu–GO composite, suggesting that these metal ions 
modified the structure of the original graphene oxide. 
Raman spectroscopy is also valuable in evaluating MWCNT-based 
fertilizers. Kumar et al. (2018) proposed that the high ID/IG value of 1.15 is 
related to the abundance of defects in the commercially available MWCNT, 
confirmed by TEM images, showing distorted structures. The technique was 
also used to identify the incorporation of ZnO nanoparticles in these tubes, as 
well as MWCNT and ZnO/MWCNT presence inside onion seedlings. 
11.3.1.2 GRAPHENE, GRAPHENE OXIDE, AND CARBON NANOTUBE￾BASED FERTILIZERS: CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
In a chemical point of view, the atoms and the functional groups that they 
constitute on the surface of the CNM determine, in a large extension, the 
ability of the nanofertilizer to interact with the active compound, modulating 
its rate of release in the soil. 
X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) is routinely used to inspect the chemical 
character of nanostructured fertilizers, being valuable to define the nature of 
the chemical binding in diverse fertilizer formulations. In the aforementioned 
work of Kabiri et al. (2017), the XPS spectra of GO samples were investigated 
before and after their loading with Cu and Zn metal ions in a micronutrient 
slow-release fertilizer, allowing to analyze the chemical binding between the 
metal ions and GO in the formed composites. In their supporting information, 380 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
the authors highlighted the appearance of Zn (Zn 3s/3p) and Cu (Cu 3s) peaks 
in their survey spectra, corresponding to the presence of 4.34% Zn and 6.2% 
Cu. Figures 11.10a and b represent the data obtained for the C1s and O1s 
spectra of those composites, respectively. The GO sp2
-hybridized main carbon 
peak is present at 285 eV (Fig. 11.10a), with an asymmetric character due to 
the presence of carbon–oxygen terminations, such as C-OOH, C-O-C, C=O, 
and C-OH, and also sp3
-aliphatic hydrocarbons. The deconvolution of the C1s 
spectra for the Zn–GO and Cu–GO samples show peaks related to O=C-O, 
C=C or C-C, C-O, and C=O. The presence of the metal ions in the GO matrix 
is observed due to the shift of the C=O and O=C-O peaks toward higher 
binding energies after their loading. In addition, the O1s spectra presented in 
Figure 11.10b were fitted according to the presence of C=O, O=C-OH and 
C-O, differing considerably in intensity, shape, and position before and after 
Zn and Cu ion incorporation. From this analysis, it was concluded that the 
functional groups containing O represent the fundamental involvement on the 
sorption of the metal ions. 
XPS was also used to explore the chemical changes induced by the heat 
treatment and consequent GO reduction of the KNO3–GO encapsulated 
fertilizers (Zhang et al., 2014), in which the C–O peak near 286.5 eV decreased 
in intensity after reduction when compared with the C-C sp2
-hybridized peak, 
showing a more graphitic structure after this procedure. This result was also 
corroborated by the Raman analysis, as described in the previous section. 
Li et al. (2019) found that the XPS analysis clearly shows an increase in 
the abundance of carboxyl groups when GO is included in chitosan + GO 
fertilizer coatings (from 8% to 31%), indicating that it plays an important 
role in controlling the surface chemistry of these coatings. 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is another technique used 
in the characterization of organic or inorganic materials, valuable to obtain 
information about the present functional groups (chemical composition), as 
well as the possible types of bonds according to normal modes of vibration 
(stretching or angular deformations) (Pavia et al., 2010; Smith, 2011). In 
fertilizer formulation characterization, FTIR is commonly used to corroborate 
the XPS results. Figure 11.11 corresponds to the FTIR spectra of a GO and a 
Graphene oxide–Fe(III) (GO–Fe) composite containing phosphate for a slow￾release fertilizer formulation (Andelkovic et al., 2018). Five spectral regions 
are of greater interest, specifically those close to 3350, 1730, 1618, 1220, and 
1030 cm−1. The broad band close to 3350 cm−1 corresponds to the vibrational 
stretching of hydroxyl groups (O-H) (Long et al., 2019). The peaks located at 
1730 and 1618 cm−1 are related to the vibrational stretching of carbonyl groups 
(C = O) and aromatic ring (C = C), respectively (Zhang et al., 2014). The FIGURE 11.10 XPS spectra of GO and Zn- and Cu-loaded GO (Zn–GO and Cu–GO, 
respectively), for the C1s (a), and O1s (b) regions.
 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Kabiri, S.; Degryse, F.; Tran, D. N.; da Silva, R. 
C.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, D. Graphene Oxide: A New Carrier for Slow Release of Plant 
Micronutrients. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2017, 9 (49), 43325–43335. Copyright (2017) 
American Chemical Society.
 
Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 381 
peaks at 1220 and 1030 represent C-O vibrations of epoxy and alkoxy groups 
(Mannan et al., 2018). These characteristic regions in the FTIR spectrum 
of the GO are also described in the works of Marcano et al. (2010), Zhang 
et al. (2014), and Mannan et al. (2018), although the single-layer isolation 
of the material was not carried out, and the measurements were made in its 
disordered bulk form. According to Zhang et al. (2014), when the domain of 
few layers approaches, the band corresponding to the vibrations of the epoxy 
groups tends to become more intense, which can be used as a strategy to detect 
the presence of GO of atomic thickness. 
The comparison of GO and GO–Fe spectra in Figure 11.11 unveils a 
decrease in the C=O intensity, and an increase in the O=C-O carboxyl stretch 
(1348 cm−1) intensity. Shifts in these peaks are attributed to the coordination 
of Fe(III) ions to the GO carboxylic group (Andelkovic et al., 2018; Park 
et al., 2008), while the shift of the C=C peak from 1618 to 1606 cm−1 and 
its intensity increase are related to the transformation from the π electron 
interaction in the GO aromatic structure to cation-π interaction in GO–Fe 
(Andelkovic et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2013). Andelkovic et al. (2019) tested 
these hypotheses by optimizing the GO content in GO–Fe fertilizers for 
phosphorus loading. They found that for higher GO concentrations (1 gGO/L 
vs. 10 gGO/L), GO aggregation into stacked layers is higher, with Fe(III) 
ions intercalating between layers of GO and being weakly bonded to GO FIGURE 11.11 FTIR spectra of GO and GO–Fe used in the graphene oxide-Fe(III) 
composite containing phosphate for a slow-release fertilizer formulation. 
Source: Reprinted from Andelkovic, I. B;, Kabiri, S.; Tavakkoli, E.; Kirby, J. K.; McLaughlin, 
M. J.; Losic, D. Graphene Oxide-Fe(III) Composite Containing Phosphate—A Novel Slow 
Release Fertilizer for Improved Agriculture Management. J. Clean. Prod. 2018, 185, 97–104 
Copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier. 
382 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
hydroxyl and alkoxy/alkoxide groups, which were much weaker in the 10 
gGO/L formulation. 
Chemical changes were described by using FTIR in the study of the use 
of nonfunctionalized and functionalized MWCNT interacting with urea on 
the growth of paddy (Yatim et al., 2019; Yatim et al., 2015; Yatim et al., 
2018). Reactions between urea and functionalized MWCNT (fMWCNT) 
were expected through covalent bonding between NH2 groups in urea and 
the carboxyl groups in fMWCNT in the urea-functionalized MWCNT 
(UF-MWCNT). Their FTIR spectra presented main features expressed by 
the O-H stretching vibration (3300–2500 cm−1), C=O stretching (1700–1725 
cm−1), and C-O stretching vibration from carboxylic acid groups (1210–1320 
cm−1). For the case of UF-MWCNT, bands assigned to the C=O stretching 
vibration (1640–1690 cm−1), N-H bending (1510–1600 cm−1), CH2 bending 
(1376–1388 cm−1), and C-N stretching (1120–1290 cm−1) were found. The 
disappearance of the band associated with the O-H stretching vibration at 
3018 cm−1 in the UF-MWCNT, previously present in the fMWCNT sample, 
indicated that O-H groups reacted with amino groups in urea. In addition, Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 383 
peaks with altered shapes arose, being attributed to N-H bending (1519 
cm−1) and C-N stretching (1219 cm−1) modes in the UF-MWCNT, with the 
consequent disappearance of the previously observed fMWCNT C=O (1739 
cm−1) and C-O (1219 cm−1) modes. The production of amide groups through 
the reaction of NH2 groups from urea and carboxyl groups (COOH) from the 
surface of fMWCNT were reported previously (Gao et al., 2005), and the 
FTIR results confirm the chemical reaction between them. 
SEM morphological characterizations of carbon nanomaterials-based 
fertilizers usually occur with the simultaneous chemical characterization by 
using EDX analysis. Pellet (core and encapsulated shell) or nanomaterials 
chemical composition can be checked for different atomic constituents or 
contamination by means, for instance, of punctual analysis (Andelkovic et 
al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2014) and surface images in the case of GO (Kabiri et 
al., 2020) or punctual studies of urea-functionalized MWCNT (Yatim et al., 
2018). The relative change in the proportion of chemical constituents after 
specific functionalization procedures in GN cogranulated fertilizers can also 
be studied (Kabiri et al., 2020). Due to the straightforward character of this 
technique, it will not be broadly discussed here. 
11.3.1.3 PERFORMANCE OF GRAPHENE, GRAPHENE OXIDE, AND 
CARBON NANOTUBE FERTILIZERS 
One of the most important improvement effects due to GN or GO incorporation 
in fertilizers is related to the crushing strength of these formulations. Kabiri 
et al. (2018) studied this improvement by cogranulating MAP fertilizer with 
GN and GO at different weight percentages (from 0.05% to 0.5%), observing 
that the carbonaceous materials improved the crushing strength of MAP 
(control) granules 3.0–18.2 times according to the different formulations. This 
improvement was explained by the high specific surface area and the pore￾filling or interlocking properties of GN and GO, which are associated with 
their 2D planar and wrinkled structure, as indicated by SEM analysis, and 
their superior mechanical properties like high Young’s modulus. Moreover, 
the GN cogranulated fertilizers presented superior crushing strength when 
compared with the GO formulations, with 10.8 kg force at 0.5 wt.%, 2.8 
times higher than for a formulation with the same content of GO. The type 
and higher defect content of GO compared with GN can be related to this 
observation, resulting in inferior mechanical properties for GO formulation. It 
is worth mentioning that the improvement of MAP due to the addition of low 
percentages of those CNM is promising when compared with commercial 384 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
strategies, like Norling A, in which 1% addition to MAP only doubles its 
crushing strength when compared with control samples. Other mechanical 
properties, such as abrasion resistance and impact resistance, important for 
fertilizer spread and storing, also presented substantial improvement. Kabiri 
et al. (2020) also expanded their study demonstrating the effects of GN 
concentration and physicochemical properties on the crushing strength of 
MAP and di-ammonium phosphate (DAP) fertilizers. 
The slow-release behavior of fertilizer formulations based on carbona￾ceous materials is of paramount importance because the use of conventional 
products is usually damaged by lixiviation in soil, for example. To study this 
property, KNO3 fertilizer pellets coated with re-GO were used in a soaking 
experiment monitoring the potassium release concentration over time (Zhang 
et al., 2014). It was shown that while the uncoated KNO3 pellet reached 
equilibrium after only 1 h of potassium fast release, the re-GO-coated KNO3 
presented two different release stages. In the first one, from 0 to 7 h, only 
34.5% of potassium ions were released, which was assigned to the estab￾lishment of “channels” through the shell and the diffusion of water into the 
core, in a slow process. In the second stage, from 7 to 8 h, corresponding 
to a burst release with the cracking of the re-GO shell, 93.8% of the initial 
potassium content is released. The visual inspection showed that the pellet 
was cracked after this stage. After this process, the release is again slow and 
stable, evidencing the promising slow-release character of this coating. 
The cogranulated formulations of MAP with GN or GO described 
previously in this section (Kabiri et al., 2018) were also studied by mean 
of P diffusion experiments in moist soil, in which the movement of P from 
the granules of the cogranulated formulations to the soil was smaller than 
that in the case of reference MAP samples (see in Figure 11.12 the dark 
green zones (a) and their radius (b) for different GN and GO percentages and 
number of days). In other study, Kabiri et al. (2017) conducted experiments 
to determine the water solubility, dissolution, and release rate of Zn–GO and 
Cu–GO pellets formulated as slow-release micronutrient fertilizers, showing 
that their formulations released only ~ 55% of Zn and Cu after 72 h when 
compared with the almost 100% release within 20 h from the conventional 
commercially available ZnSO4 and CuSO4 micronutrient precursors. 
Andelkovic et al. (2018) and Andelkovic et al. (2019) also conducted slow￾release experiments on GO–Fe composite loaded with P in three different 
soils, studying the kinetics by different models and engineering the material 
to a desired P release rate. A radius diffusion methodology similar to that of 
Kabiri et al. (2017) was performed and confirmed the slow-release properties 
for this formulation. FIGURE 11.12 P diffusion zones visualization for MAP, MAP with 0.05% or 0.5% graphene oxide (MAP–0.05GO and MAP–0.5GO), and 
MAP with 0.05% or 0.5% graphene (MAP–0.05GN and MAP–0.5GN). (b) Radius of strong P release areas at 1, 3, 14, and 28 days for these 
formulations.
Source: Reprinted with permission from (Kabiri, S.; Baird, R.; Tran, D. N.; Andelkovic, I.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, D. Cogranulation of Low 
Rates of Graphene and Graphene Oxide with Macronutrient Fertilizers Remarkably Improves Their Physical Properties. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.
2018, 6 (1), 1299–1309. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 385  
386 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Plant yield studies are increasingly being used as direct measurements 
of carbon nanofertilizers efficiency. Andelkovic et al. (2019) choose three 
different soils (Port Wakefield—PW, Monarto, and Black Point—BP) to test 
the efficiency of their best formulation of GO-Fe composite loaded with P, 
proposed as a slow-release fertilizer, in wheat growth in pot experiments. Soil 
samples with MAP or 10GO–Fe-15P (a 10 mg/L initial GO concentration with 
the addition of 15 mg/kg of P, or 10GO–Fe-15P from now on) addition were 
compared with control soil samples (without P fertilizer addition). The soils 
were classified as highly responsive to P application due to the expressive yield 
improvement obtained for the different P fertilizer sources. Both Monarto and 
PW soils presented similar yield improvement of dry matter when MAP and 
10GO–Fe-15P P sources were used, increasing from 0.2 to 0.8 g/pot and 0.3 to 
0.8 g/pot, respectively. In the BP soil, MAP outperformed the 10GO–Fe-15P 
fertilizer in nearly 1 g/pot, with 3.5 g/pot for 10GO–Fe-15P, and nearly 4.5 g/ 
pot for MAP. The wheat P uptake was also affected by the P source in some 
cases, being nearly 1.3 mg/pot for both MAP and 10GO–Fe-15P in PW soil, 
and with MAP outperforming 10GO–Fe-15P for both Monarto and BP soils 
(~ 1.6 mg/pot for 10GO–Fe-15P and 3.0 mg/pot for MAP in Monarto soil, 
and ~ 4.5 mg/pot for 10GO–Fe-15P and ~ 9.0 mg/pot for MAP in BP soil). 
The authors argue that lower dry yield is usually reported when slow-release 
P fertilizers are used in comparison to conventional soluble fertilizers in soils 
with high P-fixing capacity and deficiency in this nutrient, as in the BP soil. 
From this perspective, the use of these engineered fertilizers must be analyzed 
according to the specific crop and soil situation. In the best-case scenario, the 
performance of the slow-release 10GO–Fe-15P formulation was similar to 
that of the highly soluble MAP fertilizer. From this, it is speculated that their 
advantage can be in the case of applications in areas in which leaching of P is 
substantial, in which its slow-release character can maintain P available to the 
crops for a long period. 
The agronomic performance of Zn–GO and Cu–GO micronutrient 
fertilizers has been also evaluated for cultivation of wheat in the study of 
Kabiri et al. (2017), comparing it with that of the conventional CuSO4 and 
ZnSO4 precursor salts. Dry mass and nutrient uptakes were checked. The 
Zn–GO formulation resulted in improved dry mass when compared with 
the ZnSO4 salt, but for the Cu–GO and CuSO4, there was not a significant 
improvement. The latter result is related to the fact that the soil used in this 
experiment was not Cu-responsive, once the yield of the control soil without 
Cu addition was similar. Moreover, higher Zn uptake was also detected for 
the Zn–GO formulation. When the conventional ZnSO4 salt was used, the 
irreversible adsorption of Zn on carbonates and its precipitation as hydroxide Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 387 
or carbonate took place as Zn fixation mechanisms in the calcareous soil 
investigated by the authors. The Zn–GO formulation is expected to present 
smaller interaction with the soil components due to the strong bonding 
between the GO and the micronutrients, maintaining them in available forms 
for the plant uptake. Watts-Williams et al. (2020) also studied Zn-loaded GO 
fertilization in the growth of Barley and Medicago plants, with and without 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi inoculation. Greater amount of biomass and 
Zn uptake was detected for this formulation, substantially improved by the 
mycorrhizal inoculation, providing promising results for two distinct crops. 
Urea-functionalized MWCNT (UF-MWCNT) fertilizers from the study of 
Yatim et al. (2018) were studied as a strategy to improve the yield of paddy. 
The UF-MWCNT formulation showed improvements of 28.6% and 36% for 
the number of panicles and grain yield, respectively. These results indicate the 
efficient delivery of N through the application of UF-MWCNT formulations, 
mainly attributed to the translocation of the MWCNT into the plant roots, 
increasing the number of pores and soil water containing nutrients. 
11.3.2 BIOCHAR AND BIOCHAR-BASED FERTILIZERS
Two of the fundamental aspects widely discussed in the literature about the 
structure of BC are the influence of the pyrolysis temperature and feedstock 
kind used for their production, which will define the possible applications of 
the material (Lehmann and Joseph, 2015; Tomczyk et al., 2020). According 
to Song and Guo (2012), the rise in temperature gradually oxidizes aliphatic 
components contained in the original biomass, which in turn are converted 
into aromatic components. This increase in temperature also generates 
more organized structures in a graphitization process as well as promotes 
an increase in the ash content and pH. Different pyrolysis temperatures and 
atmosphere controls during the synthesis can guarantee the modulation of 
various characteristics of BC, such as the growth of pores in the material 
and increase in their specific surface area (Song and Guo, 2012). Shi et al. 
(2015) suggested a mechanism for this observation, stating that the rise in 
BC porosity is a consequence of the removal of volatile pores due to the 
temperature increase. Due to the large number of possibilities created by 
varying these parameters and the several mechanisms involved, the next 
sections will focus on the TPI characterization, as they represent structural 
models for BC and BBF. BC and BBF will also be discussed specially 
when synthesized at temperatures of 500°C–600°C, mimicking natural fires 
temperature range, and resulting in materials with better performance. 388 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
11.3.2.1 MORPHOLOGY AND STRUCTURE OF BIOCHAR 
SEM is one of the first approaches in BC characterization, allowing the 
analysis of the morphology presented by the microscopic structure of these 
materials. Patterns of materials degradation and pore growth tendency 
according to synthesis conditions can be studied with small or without 
sample treatment (Ma et al., 2016). The SEM/EDX and TEM techniques 
allow mapping the concentration of chemical elements and their association 
with possible macro and micronutrients or minerals aggregated on the BC 
surface (Chia et al., 2012; Ma et al., 2016) or TPI samples (Jório et al., 
2012). Cross-sectional studies can lead to the understanding of chemical 
composition distribution by using EDX, which is fundamentally influenced 
by structural aspects of these materials. 
TPI samples envisioned as models for nature-inspired BC engineering 
were studied by Jório et al. (2012), and the SEM, TEM, and EDX results 
are shown in Figures 11.13a–d. In (a), (b), and (c), shell and core structures 
can be observed, with major shell structural disorder. The cross-section in (d) 
indicates different distribution for chemical elements, including the concen￾tration of P, Fe, Al, and Si on the surface. The increase of the amorphous 
character on the surface of the structure was also shown and more dangling 
bonds as well as carboxyl and carbonyl terminations were present, suggesting 
that it can be a positive factor for nutrient aggregation. This is an important 
result indicating that improvements in BC efficiency can be engineered by 
mimicking this type of structure. 
Raman spectroscopy has been routinely used in the analysis of the amount 
of structural defects in BC based on the simplification proposed in the in-plane 
crystallite size (La) theory (Ribeiro-Soares et al., 2013). This nanocrystalline 
structure is used to compare carbonaceous materials, allowing to classify them 
as possessing a more organized graphitic layout (sp2
) or an amorphous profile. 
A higher La indicates a predominance of sp2
 domains and well-structured 
graphite in “islands,” while a lower La refers to a more amorphous pattern 
(Lucchese et al., 2010). The Raman spectra of TPI and BC are similar to 
those of GN and GO shown previously, being also dominated by the G and 
D bands. For TPI, the La size was modeled considering the full-width at half 
maximum of the G band of the Raman spectra (Ribeiro-Soares et al., 2013). 
The size of the crystallite La can be evaluated by the following equation: 
La (nm) = 496/(ΓG-15) (11.2) 
where ΓG corresponds to the full-width at half maximum of the G band, 
provided by a graphic adjustment of the G and D bands with two Lorentz Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 389 
peaks (Ribeiro-Soares et al., 2013). To obtain this equation, the authors used 
the analysis of Raman and X-ray crystallite size measurements of refer￾ence Diamond-like carbon samples with different structural organizations, 
being close to the results obtained by Cançado et al. (2007). La sizes in a 
broad range (3–8 nm) were found for TPI carbonaceous particles, while BC 
samples showed a more concentrated La distribution (8–12 nm). Addition￾ally, a cross-section Raman experiment was performed in a TPI carbonaceous 
particle, revealing the decrease of La from the better organized graphitic core 
to the more amorphous shell. This is an important finding because smaller La 
is related with higher disorder and dangling bonds, increasing the bonding 
with nutrients, likely corroborating the EDX results from Figure 11.13. 
The La approach has been used for other anthropogenic soils, BC, and 
BBF (Carneiro et al., 2018; Pagano et al., 2016; Pandey et al., 2020). For 
example, Carneiro et al. (2018) found that BBF presented a smaller La size 
when treated with MgO (~ 7 nm) when compared with the control samples 
(~ 10 nm), indicating that the O atoms can be responsible for the increase 
of nongraphitizing C. The increase in the CTC of these samples was also 
observed, probably due to the higher amount of defects for the smaller La, 
being a promising strategy for new fertilizer formulations. 
11.3.2.2 BIOCHARS: CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
The pyrolysis temperature for BC production was shown to influence the 
surface concentration of different functional groups, increasing the number 
of basic and decreasing the acids ones with increasing temperature. These 
changes affect other properties, such as CTC and adsorption capacities of 
the BC (Shi et al., 2015). With the rise in pyrolysis temperature, elements, 
such as O and H volatize, promoting an increase in concentration of C. The 
other elements that do not volatilize in the same temperature range of O and 
H are retained with C until they reach their specific volatilization tempera￾ture, generating differences in CTC according to the increase in temperature 
(Novak et al., 2009). In this perspective, developing a soil conditioning 
material with chemically engineered properties resembling those of TPI 
would enable significant improvements in the agricultural sector. 
Comparative XPS studies of charcoal from Amazonian native plant 
Embauba (Cecropiahololeuca Miq.), produced at 600°C, and TPI samples 
(Archanjo et al., 2014) show the presence of a broader range of elements 
on the last one. P, Al, Mg, Ca, and Na were detected in TPI carbonaceous 
particles, in addition to other elements, in quantities smaller than 1% FIGURE 11.13 TPI carbonaceous grain studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
(a), thin cross-section transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study exploring the core shell 
(grafitic-porous) structure (b), magnification showing the scanning transmission electron 
microscopy (STEM) image of a nanostructured carbon particle (c), and different elements 
studied by energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX), labeled accordingly to each image (d). 
Source: Reprinted from Jorio, A.; Ribeiro-Soares, J.; Cançado, L. G.; Falcão, N. P.; Dos Santos, 
H. F.; Baptista, D. L.; Martins Ferreira, E. H.; Archanjo, B. S.; Achete, C. A. Microscopy and 
Spectroscopy Analysis of Carbon Nanostructures in Highly Fertile Amazonian Anthrosoils. 
Soil Tillage Res. 2012, 122, 61–66 Copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier. 
390 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(small quantities of K, N, Ti, Cr, among others). The conventional charcoal 
presented mainly C and O in its composition. The analysis of C1s presented 
in chemical groups revealed that TPI carbonaceous particles are composed of 
C in sp2
 hybridization state, carbonyl, carboxylate, hydroxyl, and carbonate Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 391 
anions. These findings were also confirmed by using electron energy loss 
spectroscopy (EELS), with the different functional groups shown to be 
mainly located in the shell region (Archanjo et al., 2015). The XPS binding 
energies of O1s were less resolved than those of C1s, being associated with 
oxidized carbon and metal oxides. In the charcoal XPS spectra, the oxidized 
carbon species comprised only 27% in comparison with the 62% observed 
in TPI carbonaceous particles. From another side, the TPI carbons presented 
38% of sp2
 carbon, while in charcoal, it composed the major contribution, 
with 73%. These results indicate that the conventional BC needs to be further 
engineered to present a higher chemical heterogeneity, being impregnated 
with nutrients, and a higher proportion of carbon oxidized forms with relation 
to the sp2
 carbon. This later issue is especially necessary to maintain the 
reactivity and resilience balance, important for its application as fertilizer. 
The chemical composition of BC varies for different types of biomasses 
(Carneiro et al., 2018; Joseph, 2015; Kloss et al., 2012; Veiga et al., 2017). The 
synthesis of BC from agricultural (coffee husk) and forest (eucalyptus husk) 
production carried out by Veiga (2016) showed differences in BC properties, 
being directly related to the contents of cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin 
compounds present in the precursor biomasses. It was previously known 
that biomass from agricultural production presented higher levels of lignin, 
which may have contributed to an increase in fixed carbon and ash contents 
in the BC produced (Veiga et al., 2017), in which the difference among ash 
contents may be related to high concentrations of SiO2 in these biomasses 
(Kloss et al., 2012). Kloss et al. (2012) also report the different properties 
of BC for varied biomasses with distinct chemical compositions (different 
C/N, H/C ratios, lignin contents, etc.), highlighting variations of C and N in 
BC, whose C/N ratio can influence the immobilization of N by the plant after 
the BC soil application. However, there are remaining bottlenecks regarding 
the biomass chemical composition factors that undergo changes during and 
after synthesis, directly affecting the properties of BC, and consequently their 
application (Carneiro et al., 2018; Kloss et al., 2012; Novak et al., 2009). This 
fact makes it clear the necessity of the use of various techniques providing 
relevant information that can be associated with the composition of these 
materials, such as FTIR, for example (Liang et al., 2018). 
The FTIR biochar analysis is a powerful strategy to understand chemical 
variations according to precursor biomass, pyrolysis temperature, copy￾rolysis with other materials for biochar enrichment, or in the study of TPI 
composition (Nanda et al., 2013). The FTIR spectra of BC have bands 
associated with characteristic vibrations, which are already well described 
in the literature. They can present a broad band located in the 3100–3500 392 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
cm−1 region, corresponding to the stretching vibration of hydroxyl groups 
(-OH) linked to carboxylic groups and water molecules, especially for those 
cases presenting low thermal treatment level and original biomass content 
(Carneiro et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2011). The presence of this band can also 
correspond to the N-H elongation in amine compounds, which shows a 
weakening pattern after pyrolysis (Carneiro et al., 2018). Bands located 
around 2900 cm−1, with a more explicit character in the biomass spectra 
correspond to the symmetrical and asymmetric vibrational stretching of the 
CH2 groups, which tends to disappear as the temperature increases during 
pyrolysis, as well as the reduction of hydroxyl groups (Carneiro et al., 2018). 
Bands in the region around 2350 cm−1 can be related to stretching vibrations 
of CO2, which is produced and released during the cellulose, hemicellulose, 
and lignin cross-link polymerization and dehydrogenation oxidation in the 
pyrolysis process (Liang et al., 2018). 
In recent studies of BC from chicken litter, sewage sludge, and swine 
manure impregnated with MgCl2 for P adsorption and release, Nardis et 
al. (2020) report the emergence of specific FTIR spectra bands (Mg-OH: 
3743 cm−1; CaHPO4-2H2O: 528 cm−1, 871, 782, 522 and 576 cm−1; OPO: 
538 cm−1; P=O: 985 cm−1, among others) related to bonds containing P and 
Mg (combining these findings with Raman spectroscopy, XRD, SEM-EDX 
techniques, electrical conductivity, total nutrient content, among others). In 
this case, the appearance of bonds containing P occurred due to the increase 
of O during the impregnation and adsorption of P (Nardis et al., 2020), with 
the highest rates of P adsorption related to the swine manure BC (68 mg/g). 
Several research groups are focusing on the study of pre- and postprocessing 
of BC for nutrient adsorption (Cui et al., 2016; Nardis et al., 2020; Novais 
et al., 2018; Vikrant et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2020), or for example, BC 
containing MgO for P removal from aqueous solutions (Zhu et al., 2020), 
demonstrating the great interest in physical and chemical properties of the 
promising BC subjected to pre-or posttreatment, which can perform equiva￾lently to conventional fertilizers (Nardis et al., 2020; Vikrant et al., 2018; 
Zhu et al., 2020). 
11.3.2.3 PERFORMANCE OF BIOCHAR FERTILIZERS 
The BC addition to soils present changes in several of their chemical and 
physical properties, for example, nutrient and water retention, pH, and particle 
aggregation (Chew et al., 2020; Hagemann et al., 2017; Tomczyk et al., 2020). 
Different mechanisms take place and are viewed to have positive impacts on Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 393 
the reduction of N2O emissions, improvement in soil N availability, reduc￾tion of N leaching, carbon sequestration, and promotion of the activity of 
soil microbes (Chew et al., 2020; Hagemann et al., 2017; Liao et al., 2020; 
Tomczyk et al., 2020). These observations are also related to studies of TPI 
due to their long resilience in tropical conditions and the fertility detected in 
their sites (Glaser, 2007; Glaser et al., 2000; Neves et al., 2004). In general, 
plant yield is improved because of these different factors when BC are applied 
observing the specificities of different soils (Guilhen, 2018; Guimaraes, 2010; 
Lehmann and Joseph, 2009; Nardis et al., 2020). 
The structural properties of BC are generally related to their resilience 
in soil, which is also important for carbon sequestration, in addition to plant 
development (Archanjo et al., 2014; Archanjo et al., 2015; Jório et al., 2012; 
Tomczyk et al., 2020; Weng et al., 2017). The graphitized phase of these 
materials is considerably more inert and adapted to persist for long periods. 
As shown for the BC found in TPI, an efficient structure is composed by a 
graphitized core, guaranteeing the stability for millennia, and an amorphous 
shell with dangling bonds contributing to nutrient retention. The chemical 
properties of BC also confirmed the major C and O composition of pristine 
BC depending on the pyrolysis temperature, with a major chemical variety 
reported in the literature for TPI BC, especially in their surface, or BC gener￾ated from high-nutrient precursor biomasses (Carneiro et al., 2018; Kloss 
et al., 2012; Veiga et al., 2017). The presence of several functional groups, 
such as carboxyl, ketone, hydroxyl, and lactone results in the adsorption 
of several nutrient ions, for example, phosphate, nitrate, ammonium, and 
potassium (Tomczyk et al., 2020). BBF is invariably being inspired in these 
characteristics to design new strategies to improve plant yield and plant and 
soil health. 
The influence of BC and BBF application in soil biology and microbiology 
is an essential point to be explored, although fundamental information as the 
role of nitrogen availability on soil bacterial communities is still scarce (Liao 
et al., 2020). It was previously pointed out that some researchers sought to 
relate the high fertility of TPI with a kind of special microorganism, however, 
no experimental evidence was obtained for its existence (Glaser, 2007). The 
pores of BC are routinely recognized as habitat for soil microorganisms, 
such as actinomycetes bacteria, or mycorrhizal fungi, promoting high levels 
of these microbiological populations, which are also food for other soil biota 
(Compant et al., 2010; Tomczyk et al., 2020). Soil enzymatic activity was 
also reported to be ameliorated using BC, producing soils with higher quality 
(Mierzwa-Hersztek et al., 2016; Ouyang et al., 2014). Improvement in the 
activity of dehydrogenase and urease in soil was shown previously (Ameloot 394 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
et al., 2013; Mierzwa-Hersztek et al., 2016), with increases of 19.0% and 
44.0%, respectively (Mierzwa-Hersztek et al., 2016). Weyers and Spokas 
(2011) show that BC application can result in short-term negative effects 
in earthworm soil activity, but that this effect is null in the long term. The 
increase of soil pH due to the application of BC was related to this negative 
effect (Haefele et al., 2011), again making explicit the necessity to combine 
BC and soil properties. 
BC or BBF application can present different effects on plant yield, 
increasing, being neutral, or even decreasing it. Two fundamental aspects 
to be observed when crop yield improvement is aimed with BC and BBF 
addition are the pH and the cation exchange capacity (CEC) effects, which 
are reasonably known in literature (Rajkovich et al., 2012). The pH is usually 
negatively impacted by the application of typically acid BC, which are detri￾mental to crop development in soils which are already acidic. The CEC can 
be improved depending on the BC or BBF used (Liang et al., 2018), being 
valuable to nutrient retention by avoiding leaching (Lehmann et al., 2003). 
Other important factors under intense scrutiny recently present profound 
impacts in crop yield, such as feedstock, the pyrolysis temperature, and soil 
type (Purakayastha et al., 2019; Rajkovich et al., 2012; Tomczyk et al., 2020). 
The pyrolysis temperature and feedstock type are important parameters 
to define the plant yield, and a fundamental work was performed by 
Rajkovich et al. (2012) for corn growth in on example of tempered soil 
(Alfisol). They found that in general, crop growth is reduced when low 
pyrolysis temperatures of the order of 300°C–400°C were used in food 
waste and paper mill waste during thermal treatment, with no difference 
being observed in yield when higher temperatures were used. In general, BC 
produced at 500°C was the most efficient to promote plant growth. Different 
feedstock was also pyrolyzed in this work, with an even higher influence on 
crop growth, reaching eight times more variation than pyrolysis temperature. 
Corn, hazelnut, oak, pine, diary manure, food waste, paper waste, and poultry 
BC were analyzed, with the higher corn crop yield improvement obtained by 
nutrient-rich BC such as those synthesized from animal manures or corn. 
Plant residues, such as hazelnut, pine, and oak produced little improvement 
in the studied situation, with relevant results only obtained in the corn stover 
case, which improved crop growth by 16%. The results were obtained for 
the relatively fertile Alfisol, so the result of its use in other situations can be 
distinct, going from beneficial to detrimental. It is important to stress that due 
to the large variation in corn crop yield improvement, it is also fundamental 
to test the advantages from BC obtained from different feedstock before 
field-scale application. Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 395 
Several studies listing the crop yield improvement with the use of BC 
are being published recently, but the vast range of variables involved in each 
case prevented the conception of a definitive work. As an evolving field, the 
BC and BBF research provides several opportunities to explore the effects of 
temperature pyrolysis, soil type, feedstock, application rate, and test crop on 
crop yield, and also the engineering of physical and chemical properties of 
these BC to mimic the TPI natural case (Purakayastha et al., 2019; Rajkovich 
et al., 2012; Tomczyk et al., 2020). 
11.4 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVES
Remediation of polluted or nutrient-depleted soils is a strategic issue with 
increasing importance today, especially due to the rising of worldwide 
population in humid tropical regions and the necessity of sustainable 
agricultural practices and food security. Different nanomaterials are envisioned 
as promising for this task due to their special properties that emerge due to 
their reduced dimensionality. Carbon nanotubes, graphene, graphene oxide, 
biochar, and biochar-based fertilizers are the principal carbonaceous materials 
with a plethora of relevant properties valuable to attack these issues. These 
properties include, for example, their high specific surface area, surface 
reactivity, mechanical resistance, structural stability, superior adsorption, 
and flexibility to be engineered. The use of materials science, chemistry, 
and engineering methodologies conventionally applied to comprehend these 
carbonaceous nanomaterials is becoming increasingly more common in 
soil science issues depending on several variables like the adsorption and 
immobilization of several contaminants and nutrient depletion. 
The ability of all carbonaceous materials to adsorb a broad range of 
contaminants is a remarkable issue regarding the potentiality of these mate￾rials for use in soil remediation. While BC are generally rich in different 
functional groups, which can be modulated by the pyrolysis temperature 
involved in their production, CNT, GN, and OG can be functionalized to 
attain the desired surface properties. These possibilities of modulating the 
CNM properties open countless possibilities to increase the capacity of those 
materials to interact with a specific contaminant. Because of this, a variety of 
mechanisms can be involved in the capacity of CNM to retain some contami￾nants avoiding their leaching, such as hydrophobic, electrostatic, hydrogen 
bond, van der Waals, and π–π interaction. Despite all the amazing adsorption 
properties of CNM, current use of these materials in real ecosystems for in 
situ soil remediation, specialty pristine CNT and graphene-based materials, 396 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
is still a promise because their toxic effects on different organisms is still 
an emerging area of study. In this sense, new engineered materials based 
on CNM are already seen as a possibility to overcome the toxicological 
problem. CNT or GO composites, for instance, can limit the leaching of own 
CNM in soil, avoiding their spread in the environment. 
The stability of some carbonaceous materials is one of the valuable 
properties provided by their structural and chemical properties, and are 
especially useful as soil amendments. In addition to soil decontamination and 
nutrient retention, carbon sequestration is also expected for initiatives such 
as the use of biochar and biochar-based fertilizers with high stable C content. 
These artificial materials are bioinspired in the biochar particles extracted
from the anthropogenic Terras Pretas de Índios, with notorious tuning 
possibilities. The in-plane crystallite size La estimated by Raman spectroscopy
in biochars extracted from the Terras Pretas de Índios is a valuable and fast 
analysis to comparatively evaluate the structural organization level among 
different biochars. The 3–8 nm La found for TPI are lower and more broadly 
distributed than the typically 8–12 nm found for artificially synthesized 
biochars, indicating the necessity to further engineer their structure. Also, 
the core-shell structure studied by several techniques here indicates that new 
strategies aiming a more amorphous surface are needed in these materials for 
their efficient use in soils. 
The structural properties studied by AFM, SEM, and Raman spectros￾copy show that graphene and graphene oxide are valuable for fertilizer 
encapsulation and cogranulation, improving their mechanical resistance with 
the possibility to engineer their defect level by using different functional￾ization procedures. The chemical properties inspected by XPS, FTIR, and 
EDX show different compositions, including the core-shell structure with 
functional groups in the shell for TPI, for example. The functional groups are 
fundamental for carbonaceous nanomaterials interaction with conventional 
fertilizers, such as urea for carbon nanotubes, for MAP, and the loading of Zn 
and Cu micronutrients in graphene oxide composite slow-release fertilizers, 
and K for the encapsulation case. Although promising results in terms of crop 
yield, improvement of mechanical properties in fertilizers, and microbiology 
in soil were presented, it became obvious that they are dependent of soil 
properties like acidity or nutrient responsivity, for example, and a study prior 
to its use is necessary. 
The interaction of carbonaceous nanomaterials with soil systems is 
complex and the analysis proposed in this chapter is limited due to the broad 
range of factors. On the other hand, the benefits of the use of carbonaceous Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 397 
materials for soil remediation are clear, with perspective to generate valu￾able strategies to solve one of the most relevant issues related to sustainable 
soil use. The several cases discussed here make it clear that new initiatives 
focused in the engineering of carbonaceous structures are needed, for both 
new adsorption and fertilizer conceptions arising for the low dimensionality 
of these systems, and to mimic the nanostructured biochars found in anthro￾pogenic soils with notorious fertility. These certainly will be explored and 
concretized by multidisciplinary efforts form groups involving soil, mate￾rials science, and engineer professionals focusing on innovative approaches 
for this fundamental issue. 
KEYWORDS
• adsorption in carbon nanomaterials 
• biochar 
• graphene oxide fertilizer 
• bioinspired carbon-based fertilizers 
• Terras Pretas de Índios 
REFERENCES 
Achari, G. A.; Kowshik, M. Recent Developments on Nanotechnology in Agriculture: Plant 
Mineral Nutrition, Health, and Interactions with Soil Microflora. J. Agric. Food Chem. 
2018, 66 (33), 8647–8661. 
Ahmed, M. B.; Zhou, J. L.; Ngo, H. H.; Johir, M. A. H.; Sun, L.; Asadullah, M.; Belhaj, D. 
Sorption of Hydrophobic Organic Contaminants on Functionalized Biochar: Protagonist 
Role of Pi-Pi Electron-Donor-Acceptor Interactions and Hydrogen Bonds. J. Hazard. Mater. 
2018, 360, 270–278. 
Alves, D. C. B. Estudo E Aplicações De Nanomateriais Multifuncionais: Propriedades De 
Transporte De Nanotubos De Titanato E Novos Materiais Baseados Em Óxido De Grafeno; 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais: Belo Horizonte, 2013. 
Ameloot, N.; Neve, S. D.; Jegajeevagan, K.; Yildiz, G.; Buchan, D.; Funkuin, Y. N.; Prins, W.; 
Bouckaert, L.; Sleutel, S. Short-Term Co2 and N2o Emissions and Microbial Properties of 
Biochar Amended Sandy Loam Soils. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2013, 57, 401–410. 
Andelkovic, I. B.; Kabiri, S.; Silva, R. C.; Tavakkoli, E.; Kirby, J. K.; Losic, D.; McLaughlin, M. 
J. Optimisation of Phosphate Loading on Graphene Oxide–Fe (Iii) Composites–Possibilities 
for Engineering Slow Release Fertilisers. New J. Chem. 2019, 43 (22), 8580–8589. 398 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Andelkovic, I. B.; Kabiri, S.; Tavakkoli, E.; Kirby, J. K.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, D. 
Graphene Oxide-Fe (Iii) Composite Containing Phosphate–a Novel Slow Release Fertilizer 
for Improved Agriculture Management. J. Cleaner Prod. 2018, 185, 97–104. 
Apul, O. G.; Karanfil, T. Adsorption of Synthetic Organic Contaminants by Carbon Nanotubes: 
A Critical Review. Water Res. 2015, 68, 34–55. 
Archanjo, B. S.; Araujo, J. R.; Silva, A. M.; Capaz, R. B.; Falcão, N. P.; Jorio, A.; Achete, C. 
A. Chemical Analysis and Molecular Models for Calcium–Oxygen–Carbon Interactions in 
Black Carbon Found in Fertile Amazonian Anthrosoils. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48 (13), 
7445–7452. 
Archanjo, B. S.; Baptista, D. L.; Sena, L.; Cançado, L. G.; Falcão, N. P.; Jório, A.; Achete, 
C. A. Nanoscale Mapping of Carbon Oxidation in Pyrogenic Black Carbon from Ancient 
Amazonian Anthrosols. Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts 2015, 17 (4), 775–779. 
Ashjaran, M.; Babazadeh, M.; Akbarzadeh, A.; Davaran, S.; Salehi, R. Stimuli-Responsive 
Polyvinylpyrrolidone-Nippam-Lysine Graphene Oxide Nano-Hybrid as an Anticancer Drug 
Delivery on Mcf7 Cell Line. Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol. 2019, 47 (1), 443–454. 
Baragano, D.; Forjan, R.; Welte, L.; Gallego, J. L. R. Nanoremediation of as and Metals 
Polluted Soils by Means of Graphene Oxide Nanoparticles. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10 (1), 1896. 
Barbosa, D. F. Influência Do Óxido De Grafeno Em Argamassas De Cal Hidráulica Natural; 
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia da Universidade Nova de Lisboa: Nova Lisboa, 2015. 
Beesley, L.; Moreno-Jimenez, E.; Gomez-Eyles, J. L. Effects of Biochar and Greenwaste 
Compost Amendments on Mobility, Bioavailability and Toxicity of Inorganic and Organic 
Contaminants in a Multi-Element Polluted Soil. Environ. Pollut. 2010, 158 (6), 2282–2287. 
Birkett, P. R. Fullerene Chemistry. Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg. Chem. 1998, 94, 
55–84. 
Boehm, H.; Setton, R.; Stumpp, E. Nomenclature and Terminology of Graphite Intercalation 
Compounds; Pergamon, 1986. 
Bourke, J.; Manley-Harris, M.; Fushimi, C.; Dowaki, K.; Nunoura, T.; Antal, M. J. Do All 
Carbonized Charcoals Have the Same Chemical Structure? 2. A Model of the Chemical 
Structure of Carbonized Charcoal. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2007, 46 (18), 5954–5967. 
Campbell, E.; Hasan, M. T.; Pho, C.; Callaghan, K.; Akkaraju, G.; Naumov, A. Graphene Oxide 
as a Multifunctional Platform for Intracellular Delivery, Imaging, and Cancer Sensing. Sci. 
Rep. 2019, 9 (1), 1–9. 
Cançado, L.; Jorio, A.; Pimenta, M. Measuring the Absolute Raman Cross Section of 
Nanographites as a Function of Laser Energy and Crystallite Size. Phys. Rev. B 2007, 76 
(6), 064304. 
Carneiro, J. S. S.; Lustosa Filho, J. F.; Nardis, B. r. O.; Ribeiro-Soares, J.; Zinn, Y. L.; Melo, 
L. n. C. A. Carbon Stability of Engineered Biochar-Based Phosphate Fertilizers. ACS 
Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2018, 6 (11), 14203–14212. 
Chen, B.; Yuan, M. Enhanced Sorption of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons by Soil 
Amended with Biochar. J. Soils Sediments 2010, 11 (1), 62–71. 
Chew, J.; Zhu, L.; Nielsen, S.; Graber, E.; Mitchell, D. R.; Horvat, J.; Mohammed, M.; Liu, 
M.; van Zwieten, L.; Donne, S. Biochar-Based Fertilizer: Supercharging Root Membrane 
Potential and Biomass Yield of Rice. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 713, 136431. 
Chia, C. H.; Gong, B.; Joseph, S. D.; Marjo, C. E.; Munroe, P.; Rich, A. M. Imaging of 
Mineral-Enriched Biochar by Ftir, Raman and Sem–Edx. Vib. Spectrosc. 2012, 62, 248–257. 
Cho, D.-W.; Cho, S.-H.; Song, H.; Kwon, E. E. Carbon Dioxide Assisted Sustainability 
Enhancement of Pyrolysis of Waste Biomass: A Case Study with Spent Coffee Ground. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2015, 189, 1–6. Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 399 
Chuah, S.; Pan, Z.; Sanjayan, J. G.; Wang, C. M.; Duan, W. H. Nano Reinforced Cement and 
Concrete Composites and New Perspective from Graphene Oxide. Constr. Build. Mater. 
2014, 73, 113–124. 
Compant, S.; Clément, C.; Sessitsch, A. Plant Growth-Promoting Bacteria in the Rhizo-and 
Endosphere of Plants: Their Role, Colonization, Mechanisms Involved and Prospects for 
Utilization. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2010, 42 (5), 669–678. 
Cui, X.; Dai, X.; Khan, K. Y.; Li, T.; Yang, X.; He, Z. Removal of Phosphate from Aqueous 
Solution Using Magnesium-Alginate/Chitosan Modified Biochar Microspheres Derived 
from Thalia Dealbata. Bioresour. Technol. 2016, 218, 1123–1132. 
Dai, Y.; Zhang, N.; Xing, C.; Cui, Q.; Sun, Q. The Adsorption, Regeneration and Engineering 
Applications of Biochar for Removal Organic Pollutants: A Review. Chemosphere 2019, 
223, 12–27. 
Dechene, A.; Rosendahl, I.; Laabs, V.; Amelung, W. Sorption of Polar Herbicides and 
Herbicide Metabolites by Biochar-Amended Soil. Chemosphere 2014, 109, 180–186. 
Dimkpa, C. O.; Bindraban, P. S. Nanofertilizers: New Products for the Industry? J. Agric. 
Food Chem. 2017, 66 (26), 6462–6473. 
Dresselhaus, G.; Dresselhaus, M. S.; Saito, R. Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes; World 
Scientific, 1998. 
Dresselhaus, M. S.; Dresselhaus, G.; Eklund, P. C. Science of Fullerenes and Carbon 
Nanotubes: Their Properties and Applications; Elsevier, 1996. 
Dreyer, D. R.; Jia, H. P.; Bielawski, C. W. Graphene Oxide: A Convenient Carbocatalyst for 
Facilitating Oxidation and Hydration Reactions. Angew. Chem. 2010, 122 (38), 6965–6968. 
Ebbesen, T.; Lezec, H.; Hiura, H.; Bennett, J.; Ghaemi, H.; Thio, T. Electrical Conductivity of 
Individual Carbon Nanotubes. Nature 1996, 382 (6586), 54–56. 
Fan, X.; Wang, C.; Wang, P.; Hou, J.; Qian, J. Effects of Carbon Nanotubes on Physicochemical 
Properties and Sulfamethoxazole Adsorption of Sediments with or without Aging Processes. 
Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 310, 317–327. 
Fang, H.; Chen, M.; Chen, Z. Surface Pore Tension and Adsorption Characteristics of Polluted 
Sediment. Sci. China, Ser. G: Phys., Mech. Astron. 2008, 51 (8), 1022–1028. 
FAO, F. The Future of Food and Agriculture–Trends and Challenges. Annu. Rep. 2017. 
Ferrari, A. C.; Robertson, J. Interpretation of Raman Spectra of Disordered and Amorphous 
Carbon. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 61 (20), 14095. 
Filho, J. F. L.; Carneiro, J. S. S.; Barbosa, C. F.; Lima, K. P.; Leite, A. A.; Melo, L. C. A. 
Aging of Biochar-Based Fertilizers in Soil: Effects on Phosphorus Pools and Availability to 
Urochloa Brizantha Grass. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 709, 136028. 
Fitz, W. J.; Wenzel, W. W. Arsenic Transformations in the Soil-Rhizosphere-Plant System: 
Fundamentals and Potential Application to Phytoremediation. J. Biotechnol. 2002, 99, 
259–278. 
Fu, P.; Yi, W.; Bai, X.; Li, Z.; Hu, S.; Xiang, J. Effect of Temperature on Gas Composition 
and Char Structural Features of Pyrolyzed Agricultural Residues. Bioresour. Technol. 2011, 
102 (17), 8211–8219. 
Gan, X.; Teng, Y.; Ren, W.; Ma, J.; Christie, P.; Luo, Y. Optimization of Ex-Situ Washing 
Removal of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons from a Contaminated Soil Using Nano￾Sulfonated Graphene. Pedosphere 2017, 27 (3), 527–536. 
Gao, C.; Jin, Y. Z.; Kong, H.; Whitby, R. L.; Acquah, S. F.; Chen, G.; Qian, H.; Hartschuh, A.; 
Silva, S.; Henley, S. Polyurea-Functionalized Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes: Synthesis, 
Morphology, and Raman Spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109 (24), 11925–11932. 400 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Garcıa-Sanchez, A.; Alastuey, A.; Querol, X. Heavy Metal Adsorption by Different Minerals: 
Application to the Remediation of Polluted Soils. Sci. Total Environ. 1999, 242, 179–188. 
Gavrilescu, M.; Demnerova, K.; Aamand, J.; Agathos, S.; Fava, F. Emerging Pollutants in 
the Environment: Present and Future Challenges in Biomonitoring, Ecological Risks and 
Bioremediation. N. Biotechnol. 2015, 32 (1), 147–156. 
Glaser, B. Prehistorically Modified Soils of Central Amazonia: A Model for Sustainable 
Agriculture in the Twenty-First Century. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B 2007, 362 (1478), 187–196. 
Glaser, B.; Balashov, E.; Haumaier, L.; Guggenberger, G.; Zech, W. Black Carbon in Density 
Fractions of Anthropogenic Soils of the Brazilian Amazon Region. Org. Geochem. 2000, 
31 (7–8), 669–678. 
Gong, X.; Huang, D.; Liu, Y.; Peng, Z.; Zeng, G.; Xu, P.; Cheng, M.; Wang, R.; Wan, J. 
Remediation of Contaminated Soils by Biotechnology with Nanomaterials: Bio-Behavior, 
Applications, and Perspectives. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 2018, 38 (3), 455–468. 
Gong, X.; Huang, D.; Liu, Y.; Zeng, G.; Wang, R.; Xu, P.; Zhang, C.; Cheng, M.; Xue, W.; 
Chen, S. Roles of Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes in Phytoremediation: Cadmium Uptake and 
Oxidative Burst in Boehmeria Nivea (L.) Gaudich. Environ. Sci.: Nano 2019, 6 (3), 851–862. 
Gong, Y.; Tang, J.; Zhao, D. Application of Iron Sulfide Particles for Groundwater and Soil 
Remediation: A Review. Water Res. 2016, 89, 309–320. 
Gopinath, K. P.; Vo, D.-V. N.; Gnana Prakash, D.; Adithya Joseph, A.; Viswanathan, S.; Arun, J. 
Environmental Applications of Carbon-Based Materials: A Review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2020. 
Gredilla, A.; Fdez-Ortiz de Vallejuelo, S.; Rodriguez-Iruretagoiena, A.; Gomez, L.; Oliveira, 
M. L. S.; Arana, G.; de Diego, A.; Madariaga, J. M.; Silva, L. F. O. Evidence of Mercury 
Sequestration by Carbon Nanotubes and Nanominerals Present in Agricultural Soils from a 
Coal Fired Power Plant Exhaust. J. Hazard. Mater. 2019, 378, 120747. 
Gu, J.; Zhou, W.; Jiang, B.; Wang, L.; Ma, Y.; Guo, H.; Schulin, R.; Ji, R.; Evangelou, M. 
W. Effects of Biochar on the Transformation and Earthworm Bioaccumulation of Organic 
Pollutants in Soil. Chemosphere 2016, 145, 431–437. 
Guilhen, S. N. Síntese E Caracterização De Biocarvão Obtido a Partir Do Resíduo De Coco 
De Macaúba Para Remoção De Urânio De Soluções Aquosas; Universidade de São Paulo: 
São Paulo, 2018. 
Guimaraes, M. H. D. Aspectos Eletrônicos E Estruturais Do Grafeno E Derivados: Um 
Estudo Teórico-Experimental, 2010. 
Haefele, S.; Konboon, Y.; Wongboon, W.; Amarante, S.; Maarifat, A.; Pfeiffer, E.; Knoblauch, 
C. Effects and Fate of Biochar from Rice Residues in Rice-Based Systems. Field Crops 
Res. 2011, 121 (3), 430–440. 
Hagemann, N.; Joseph, S.; Schmidt, H.-P.; Kammann, C. I.; Harter, J.; Borch, T.; Young, R. 
B.; Varga, K.; Taherymoosavi, S.; Elliott, K. W. Organic Coating on Biochar Explains Its 
Nutrient Retention and Stimulation of Soil Fertility. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 1–11. 
Hailegnaw, N. S.; Mercl, F.; Pračke, K.; Praus, L.; Száková, J.; Tlustoš, P. The Role of Biochar 
and Soil Properties in Determining the Available Content of Al, Cu, Zn, Mn, and Cd in Soil. 
Agronomy 2020, 10 (6), 885. 
Hassan, M.; Liu, Y.; Naidu, R.; Parikh, S. J.; Du, J.; Qi, F.; Willett, I. R. Influences of Feedstock 
Sources and Pyrolysis Temperature on the Properties of Biochar and Functionality as 
Adsorbents: A Meta-Analysis. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 744, 140714. 
Hua, S.; Gong, J. L.; Zeng, G. M.; Yao, F. B.; Guo, M.; Ou, X. M. Remediation of Organochlorine 
Pesticides Contaminated Lake Sediment Using Activated Carbon and Carbon Nanotubes. 
Chemosphere 2017, 177, 65–76. Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 401 
Iavicoli, I.; Leso, V.; Beezhold, D. H.; Shvedova, A. A. Nanotechnology in Agriculture: 
Opportunities, Toxicological Implications, and Occupational Risks. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
2017, 329, 96–111. 
Ihsanullah; Abbas, A.; Al-Amer, A. M.; Laoui, T.; Al-Marri, M. J.; Nasser, M. S.; Khraisheh, 
M.; Atieh, M. A. Heavy Metal Removal from Aqueous Solution by Advanced Carbon 
Nanotubes: Critical Review of Adsorption Applications. Sep. Purif. Technol. 2016, 157, 
141–161. 
Iijima, S. Helical Microtubules of Graphitic Carbon. Nature 1991, 354 (56–58). 
Jaisi, P. D.; Elimelech, M. Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Exhibit Limited Transport in Soil 
Columns. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 43, 9161–9166. 
Jiang, T. Y.; Jiang, J.; Xu, R. K.; Li, Z. Adsorption of Pb(Ii) on Variable Charge Soils Amended 
with Rice-Straw Derived Biochar. Chemosphere 2012, 89 (3), 249–256. 
Jones, D. L.; Rousk, J.; Edwards-Jones, G.; DeLuca, T. H.; Murphy, D. V. Biochar-Mediated 
Changes in Soil Quality and Plant Growth in a Three Year Field Trial. Soil Biol. Biochem. 
2012, 45, 113–124. 
Jorio, A.; Dresselhaus, M. S.; Saito, R.; Dresselhaus, G. Raman Spectroscopy in Graphene 
Related Systems; John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
Jório, A.; Ribeiro-Soares, J.; Cançado, L. G.; Falcão, N. P.; Dos Santos, H. F.; Baptista, D. 
L.; Ferreira, E. M.; Archanjo, B. S.; Achete, C. A. Microscopy and Spectroscopy Analysis 
of Carbon Nanostructures in Highly Fertile Amazonian Anthrosoils. Soil Tillage Res. 2012, 
122, 61–66. 
Joseph, S; Lehman, J. Biochar for Environmental Management; 2015. 
Jung, C.; Park, J.; Lim, K. H.; Park, S.; Heo, J.; Her, N.; Oh, J.; Yun, S.; Yoon, Y. Adsorption 
of Selected Endocrine Disrupting Compounds and Pharmaceuticals on Activated Biochars. 
J. Hazard. Mater. 2013, 263 (Pt 2), 702–710. 
Kabiri, S.; Baird, R.; Tran, D. N.; Andelkovic, I.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, D. Cogranulation 
of Low Rates of Graphene and Graphene Oxide with Macronutrient Fertilizers Remarkably 
Improves Their Physical Properties. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2018, 6 (1), 1299–1309. 
Kabiri, S.; Degryse, F.; Tran, D. N.; da Silva, R. C.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, D. Graphene 
Oxide: A New Carrier for Slow Release of Plant Micronutrients. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017, 9 (49), 43325–43335. 
Kabiri, S.; Tran, D. N.; Baird, R.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Losic, D. Revealing the Dependence 
of Graphene Concentration and Physicochemical Properties on the Crushing Strength 
of Co-Granulated Fertilizers by Wet Granulation Process. Powder Technol. 2020, 360, 
588–597. 
Kazempour, M.; Namazi, H.; Akbarzadeh, A.; Kabiri, R. Synthesis and Characterization of 
Peg-Functionalized Graphene Oxide as an Effective Ph-Sensitive Drug Carrier. Artif. Cells 
Nanomed. Biotechnol. 2019, 47 (1), 90–94. 
Kloss, S.; Zehetner, F.; Dellantonio, A.; Hamid, R.; Ottner, F.; Liedtke, V.; Schwanninger, 
M.; Gerzabek, M. H.; Soja, G. Characterization of Slow Pyrolysis Biochars: Effects of 
Feedstocks and Pyrolysis Temperature on Biochar Properties. J. Environ. Qual. 2012, 41 
(4), 990–1000. 
Koul, B.; Taak, P. Ex Situ Soil Remediation Strategies. In Biotechnological Strategies for 
Effective Remediation of Polluted Soils; Springer: Singapore, 2018a; pp 39–57. 
Koul, B.; Taak, P. In Situ Soil Remediation Strategies. In Biotechnological Strategies for 
Effective Remediation of Polluted Soils; Springer: Singapore, 2018b; pp 59–75. 
Lehmann, J. Bio-Energy in the Black. Front. Ecol. Environ. 2007, 5 (7), 381–387. 402 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Lehmann, J.; da Silva, J. P.; Steiner, C.; Nehls, T.; Zech, W.; Glaser, B. Nutrient Availability 
and Leaching in an Archaeological Anthrosol and a Ferralsol of the Central Amazon Basin: 
Fertilizer, Manure and Charcoal Amendments. Plant Soil 2003, 249 (2), 343–357. 
Lehmann, J.; Joseph, S. Biochar for Environmental Management: An Introduction Biochar 
for Environmental Management: Science and Technology, 2nd ed.; Routledge, 2009. 
Lehmann, J.; Joseph, S. Biochar for Environmental Management: Science, Technology and 
Implementation; Routledge, 2015. 
Lei, C.; Chen, T.; Zhang, Q. Y.; Long, L. S.; Chen, Z.; Fu, Z. P. Remediation of Lead Polluted 
Soil by Active Silicate Material Prepared from Coal Fly Ash. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2020, 
206, 111409. 
Lei, S.; Shi, Y.; Qiu, Y.; Che, L.; Xue, C. Performance and Mechanisms of Emerging Animal￾Derived Biochars for Immobilization of Heavy Metals. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 646, 
1281–1289. 
Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J. Structure of Graphite Oxide Revisited. J. Phys. 
Chem. B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482. 
Levine, I. Physical Chemistry; McGraw-Hill Education, 2009. 
Li, S.; Turaga, U.; Shrestha, B.; Anderson, T. A.; Ramkumar, S. S.; Green, M. J.; Das, S.; 
Canas-Carrell, J. E. Mobility of Polyaromatic Hydrocarbons (Pahs) in Soil in the Presence 
of Carbon Nanotubes. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2013, 96, 168–174. 
Li, T.; Gao, B.; Tong, Z.; Yang, Y.; Li, Y. Chitosan and Graphene Oxide Nanocomposites as 
Coatings for Controlled-Release Fertilizer. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 2019, 230 (7), 146. 
Liang, B.; Lehmann, J.; Solomon, D.; Kinyangi, J.; Grossman, J.; O'Neill, B.; Skjemstad, 
J. O.; Thies, J.; Luizão, F. J.; Petersen, J.; Neves, E. G. Black Carbon Increases Cation 
Exchange Capacity in Soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 2006, 70 (5), 1719–1730. 
Liang, F.; Wang, R.; Hongzhong, X.; Yang, X.; Zhang, T.; Hu, W.; Mi, B.; Liu, Z. Investigating 
Pyrolysis Characteristics of Moso Bamboo through Tg-Ftir and Py-Gc/Ms. Bioresour. 
Technol. 2018, 256, 53–60. 
Liao, J.; Liu, X.; Hu, A.; Song, H.; Chen, X.; Zhang, Z. Effects of Biochar-Based Controlled 
Release Nitrogen Fertilizer on Nitrogen-Use Efficiency of Oilseed Rape (Brassica Napus 
L.). Sci. Rep. 2020, 10 (1), 1–14. 
Limousin, G.; Gaudet, J. P.; Charlet, L.; Szenknect, S.; Barthès, V.; Krimissa, M. Sorption 
Isotherms: A Review on Physical Bases, Modeling and Measurement. Appl. Geochem. 
2007, 22 (2), 249–275. 
Liu, G.; Li, L.; Huang, X.; Zheng, S.; Xu, X.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, J.; Lin, H.; Xu, D. 
Adsorption and Removal of Organophosphorus Pesticides from Environmental Water and 
Soil Samples by Using Magnetic Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes @ Organic Framework 
Zif-8. J. Mater. Sci. 2018, 53 (15), 10772–10783. 
Liu, T.; Gao, B.; Fang, J.; Wang, B.; Cao, X. Biochar-Supported Carbon Nanotube and Graphene 
Oxide Nanocomposites for Pb (II) and Cd (II) Removal. RSC Adv. 2016, 6 (29), 24314–24319. 
Long, W.-J.; Gu, Y.-c.; Ma, H.; Li, H.-d.; Xing, F. Mitigating the Electromagnetic Radiation 
by Coupling Use of Waste Cathode-Ray Tube Glass and Graphene Oxide on Cement 
Composites. Composites, Part B 2019, 168, 25–33. 
Lucchese, M. M.; Stavale, F.; Ferreira, E. M.; Vilani, C.; Moutinho, M. V. d. O.; Capaz, R. B.; 
Achete, C. A.; Jorio, A. Quantifying Ion-Induced Defects and Raman Relaxation Length in 
Graphene. Carbon 2010, 48 (5), 1592–1597. 
Ma, X.; Anand, D.; Zhang, X.; Tsige, M.; Talapatra, S. Carbon Nanotube-Textured Sand for 
Controlling Bioavailability of Contaminated Sediments. Nano Res. 2010, 3 (6), 412–422. Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 403 
Ma, X.; Zhou, B.; Budai, A.; Jeng, A.; Hao, X.; Wei, D.; Zhang, Y.; Rasse, D. Study of Biochar 
Properties by Scanning Electron Microscope–Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy 
(Sem-Edx). Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal. 2016, 47 (5), 593–601. 
Madari, B. E.; Petter, F. A.; Carvalho, M. d. M.; Machado, D. M.; Silva, O. M.; Freitas, F. 
C.; Otoni, R. d. F. Biomassa Carbonizada Como Condicionante De Solo Para a Cultura Do 
Arroz De Terras Altas, Em Solo Arenoso, No Cerrado: Efeito Imediato Para a Fertilidade 
Do Solo E Produtividade Das Plantas Embrapa Arroz e Feijão-Comunicado Técnico 
(INFOTECA-E), 2010. 
Madhavi, V.; Reddy, A. V. B.; Madhavi, G. Synthesis, Characterization, and Properties of 
Carbon Nanocomposites and Their Application in Wastewater Treatment. In Environmental 
Remediation through Carbon Based Nano Composites; Jawaid, M., Ahmad, A., Ismail, N., 
Rafatullah, M., Eds.; Singapore: Springer, 2021. 
Mandal, S.; Pu, S.; He, L.; Ma, H.; Hou, D. Biochar Induced Modification of Graphene Oxide 
& Nzvi and Its Impact on Immobilization of Toxic Copper in Soil. Environ. Pollut. 2020, 
259, 113851. 
Mannan, M.; Hirano, Y.; Quitain, A.; Koinuma, M.; Kida, T. Boron Doped Graphene Oxide: 
Synthesis and Application to Glucose Responsive Reactivity. J. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2018, 7, 1–6. 
Maraschin, T. G. Preparação De Óxido De Grafeno E Óxido De Grafeno Reduzido E 
Dispersão Em Matriz Polimérica Biodegradável; Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul, 2016. 
Marcano, D. C.; Kosynkin, D. V.; Berlin, J. M.; Sinitskii, A.; Sun, Z.; Slesarev, A.; Alemany, 
L. B.; Lu, W.; Tour, J. M. Improved Synthesis of Graphene Oxide. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (8), 
4806–4814. 
Matos, M. P. S. R.; Correia, A. A. S.; Rasteiro, M. G. Application of Carbon Nanotubes to 
Immobilize Heavy Metals in Contaminated Soils. J. Nanopart. Res. 2017, 19 (4). 
Mattina, M. I.; Lannucci-Berger, W.; Musante, C.; White, J. C. Concurrent Plant Uptake of Heavy 
Metals and Persistent Organic Pollutants from Soil. Environ. Pollut. 2003, 124 (3), 375–378. 
Mierzwa-Hersztek, M.; Gondek, K.; Baran, A. Effect of Poultry Litter Biochar on Soil 
Enzymatic Activity, Ecotoxicity and Plant Growth. Appl. Soil Ecol. 2016, 105, 144–150. 
Mohammed, A.; Sanjayan, J. G.; Duan, W.; Nazari, A. Incorporating Graphene Oxide in Cement 
Composites: A Study of Transport Properties. Constr. Build. Mater. 2015, 84, 341–347. 
Mukherjee, A.; Majumdar, S.; Servin, A. D.; Pagano, L.; Dhankher, O. P.; White, J. C. Carbon 
Nanomaterials in Agriculture: A Critical Review. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 172. 
Mussa, Y.; Ahmed, F.; Abuhimd, H.; Arsalan, M.; Alsharaeh, E. Enhanced Electrochemical 
Performance at High Temperature of Cobalt Oxide/Reduced Graphene Oxide Nanocom￾posites and Its Application in Lithium-Ion Batteries. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9 (1), 1–10. 
Musso, S.; Tulliani, J.-M.; Ferro, G.; Tagliaferro, A. Influence of Carbon Nanotubes Structure 
on the Mechanical Behavior of Cement Composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2009, 69 
(11–12), 1985–1990. 
Nanda, S.; Mohanty, P.; Pant, K. K.; Naik, S.; Kozinski, J. A.; Dalai, A. K. Characterization 
of North American Lignocellulosic Biomass and Biochars in Terms of Their Candidacy for 
Alternate Renewable Fuels. BioEnergy Res. 2013, 6 (2), 663–677. 
Nardis, B. O.; Carneiro, J. S. d. S.; Souza, I. M. G.; Barros, R. G.; Melo, L. C. A. Phosphorus 
Recovery Using Magnesium-Enriched Biochar and Its Potential Use as Fertilizer. Arch. 
Agron. Soil Sci. 2020. 
Neto, A. C.; Guinea, F.; Peres, N. M.; Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K. The Electronic Properties 
of Graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2009, 81 (1), 109. 404 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Neves, E. G.; Petersen, J. B.; Bartone, R. N.; Heckenberger, M. J. The Timing of Terra Preta 
Formation in the Central Amazon: Archaeological Data from Three Sites. In Amazonian 
Dark Earths: Explorations in Space and Time; Springer: Singapore, 2004; pp 125–134. 
Novais, S. V.; Zenero, M. D. O.; Tronto, J.; Conz, R. F.; Cerri, C. E. P. Poultry Manure and 
Sugarcane Straw Biochars Modified with Mgcl2 for Phosphorus Adsorption. J. Environ. 
Manage. 2018, 214, 36–44. 
Novak, J. M.; Lima, I.; Xing, B.; Gaskin, J. W.; Steiner, C.; Das, K.; Ahmedna, M.; Rehrah, D.; 
Watts, D. W.; Busscher, W. J. Characterization of Designer Biochar Produced at Different 
Temperatures and Their Effects on a Loamy Sand. Ann. Environ. Sci. 2009. 
Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K.; Morozov, S. V.; Jiang, D.; Zhang, Y.; Dubonos, S. V.; Grigorieva, 
I. V.; Firsov, A. A. Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Science 2004, 306 
(5696), 666–669. 
Novotny, E. H.; Hayes, M. H.; Madari, B. E.; Bonagamba, T. J.; Azevedo, E. R. d.; Souza, A. 
A. d.; Song, G.; Nogueira, C. M.; Mangrich, A. S. Lessons from the Terra Preta De Índios 
of the Amazon Region for the Utilisation of Charcoal for Soil Amendment. J. Braz. Chem. 
Soc. 2009, 20 (6), 1003–1010. 
Ouyang, L.; Tang, Q.; Yu, L.; Zhang, R. Effects of Amendment of Different Biochars on Soil 
Enzyme Activities Related to Carbon Mineralisation. Soil Res. 2014, 52 (7), 706–716. 
Pagano, M. C.; Ribeiro-Soares, J.; Cançado, L. G.; Falcão, N. P.; Gonçalves, V. N.; Rosa, L. 
H.; Takahashi, J. A.; Achete, C. A.; Jorio, A. Depth Dependence of Black Carbon Structure, 
Elemental and Microbiological Composition in Anthropic Amazonian Dark Soil. Soil 
Tillage Res. 2016, 155, 298–307. 
Pan, Z.; He, L.; Qiu, L.; Korayem, A. H.; Li, G.; Zhu, J. W.; Collins, F.; Li, D.; Duan, W. 
H.; Wang, M. C. Mechanical Properties and Microstructure of a Graphene Oxide–Cement 
Composite. Cem. Concr. Compos. 2015, 58, 140–147. 
Pandey, S. D.; Rocha, L. C.; Pereira, G.; Deschamps, C.; Campos, J. L. E.; Falcão, N.; 
Prous, A.; Jorio, A. Properties of Carbon Particles in Archeological and Natural Amazon 
Rainforest Soils. Catena 2020, 194, 104687. 
Park, S.; Lee, K.-S.; Bozoklu, G.; Cai, W.; Nguyen, S. T.; Ruoff, R. S. Graphene Oxide 
Papers Modified by Divalent Ions—Enhancing Mechanical Properties Via Chemical Cross￾Linking. ACS Nano 2008, 2 (3), 572–578. 
Parks, A. N.; Chandler, G. T.; Portis, L. M.; Sullivan, J. C.; Perron, M. M.; Cantwell, M. G.; 
Burgess, R. M.; Ho, K. T.; Ferguson, P. L. Effects of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes 
on the Bioavailability of Pcbs in Field-Contaminated Sediments. Nanotoxicology 2014, 8 
(Suppl 1), 111–117. 
Pavia, D. L.; Lampman, G. M.; Kriz, G. S.; Vyvyan, J. R. Introdução À Espectroscopia; 
Cengage Learning, 2010. 
Pernyeszi, T.; Kasteel, R.; Witthuhn, B.; Klahre, P.; Vereecken, H.; Klumpp, E. Organoclays 
for Soil Remediation: Adsorption of 2,4-Dichlorophenol on Organoclay/Aquifer Material 
Mixtures Studied under Static and Flow Conditions. Applied Clay Science 2006, 32 (3–4), 
179–189. 
Petter, F. A.; Ferreira, T. S.; Sinhorin, A. P.; Lima, L. B.; Almeida, F. A.; Pacheco, L. P.; 
Silva, A. F. Biochar Increases Diuron Sorption and Reduces the Potential Contamination of 
Subsurface Water with Diuron in a Sandy Soil. Pedosphere 2019, 29 (6), 801–809. 
Purakayastha, T.; Bera, T.; Bhaduri, D.; Sarkar, B.; Mandal, S.; Wade, P.; Kumari, S.; Biswas, 
S.; Menon, M.; Pathak, H. A Review on Biochar Modulated Soil Condition Improvements 
and Nutrient Dynamics Concerning Crop Yields: Pathways to Climate Change Mitigation 
and Global Food Security. Chemosphere 2019, 227, 345–365. Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 405 
Qi, Z.; Hou, L.; Zhu, D.; Ji, R.; Chen, W. Enhanced Transport of Phenanthrene and 1-Naphthol 
by Colloidal Graphene Oxide Nanoparticles in Saturated Soil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 
48 (17), 10136–10144. 
Qian, L.; Chen, B.; Hu, D. Effective Alleviation of Aluminum Phytotoxicity by Manure￾Derived Biochar. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47 (6), 2737–2745. 
Qian, Y.; Qin, C.; Chen, M.; Lin, S. Nanotechnology in Soil Remediation-Applications Vs. 
Implications. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 201, 110815. 
Rajapaksha, A. U.; Chen, S. S.; Tsang, D. C.; Zhang, M.; Vithanage, M.; Mandal, S.; Gao, 
B.; Bolan, N. S.; Ok, Y. S. Engineered/Designer Biochar for Contaminant Removal/ 
Immobilization from Soil and Water: Potential and Implication of Biochar Modification. 
Chemosphere 2016, 148, 276–291. 
Rajkovich, S.; Enders, A.; Hanley, K.; Hyland, C.; Zimmerman, A. R.; Lehmann, J. Corn 
Growth and Nitrogen Nutrition after Additions of Biochars with Varying Properties to a 
Temperate Soil. Biol. Fertil. Soils 2012, 48 (3), 271–284. 
Raliya, R.; Saharan, V.; Dimkpa, C.; Biswas, P. Nanofertilizer for Precision and Sustainable 
Agriculture: Current State and Future Perspectives. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2017, 66 (26), 
6487–6503. 
Regkouzas, P.; Diamadopoulos, E. Adsorption of Selected Organic Micro-Pollutants on 
Sewage Sludge Biochar. Chemosphere 2019, 224, 840–851. 
Ribeiro-Soares, J.; Cançado, L. G.; Falcão, N. P.; Martins Ferreira, E.; Achete, C. A.; Jório, A. 
The Use of Raman Spectroscopy to Characterize the Carbon Materials Found in Amazonian 
Anthrosoils. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2013, 44 (2), 283–289. 
Saeedi, M.; Li, L. Y.; Grace, J. R. Effect of Co-Existing Heavy Metals and Natural Organic 
Matter on Sorption/Desorption of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Soil: A Review. 
Pollution 2020, 6 (1), 1–24. 
Saffari, M.; Vahidi, H.; Moosavirad, S. M. Effects of Pristine and Engineered Biochars of 
Pistachio-Shell Residues on Cadmium Behavior in a Cadmium-Spiked Calcareous Soil. 
Arch. Agron. Soil Sci. 2019, 66 (7), 942–956. 
Shen, Z.; Li, Z.; Alessi, D. S. Stabilization-Based Soil Remediation Should Consider Long￾Term Challenges. Front. Environ. Sci. Eng. 2018, 12 (2). 
Shen, Z.; Zhang, Y.; McMillan, O.; Jin, F.; Al-Tabbaa, A. Characteristics and Mechanisms 
of Nickel Adsorption on Biochars Produced from Wheat Straw Pellets and Rice Husk. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2017, 24 (14), 12809–12819. 
Shi, K.; Xie, Y.; Qiu, Y. Natural Oxidation of a Temperature Series of Biochars: Opposite Effect 
on the Sorption of Aromatic Cationic Herbicides. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2015, 114, 102–108. 
Smalley, R. E. Discovering the Fullerenes. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1997, 69 (3), 723. 
Smith, B. C. Fundamentals of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy; CRC Press, 2011. 
Song, B.; Chen, M.; Ye, S.; Xu, P.; Zeng, G.; Gong, J.; Li, J.; Zhang, P.; Cao, W. Effects of 
Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Metabolic Function of the Microbial Community in 
Riverine Sediment Contaminated with Phenanthrene. Carbon 2019, 144, 1–7. 
Song, B.; Xu, P.; Zeng, G.; Gong, J.; Wang, X.; Yan, J.; Wang, S.; Zhang, P.; Cao, W.; Ye, S. 
Modeling the Transport of Sodium Dodecyl Benzene Sulfonate in Riverine Sediment in the 
Presence of Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. Water Res. 2018, 129, 20–28. 
Song, W.; Guo, M. Quality Variations of Poultry Litter Biochar Generated at Different 
Pyrolysis Temperatures. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 2012, 94, 138–145. 
Speratti, A. B.; Johnson, M. S.; Sousa, H. M.; Dalmagro, H. J.; Couto, E. G. Biochars from 
Local Agricultural Waste Residues Contribute to Soil Quality and Plant Growth in a Cerrado 
Region (Brazil) Arenosol. GCB Bioenergy 2018, 10 (4), 272–286. 406 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Su, C.; Zeng, G.-M.; Gong, J.-L.; Yang, C.-P.; Wan, J.; Hu, L.; Hua, S.-S.; Guo, Y.-Y. Impact 
of Carbon Nanotubes on the Mobility of Sulfonamide Antibiotics in Sediments in the 
Xiangjiang River. RSC Adv. 2016, 6 (21), 16941–16951. 
Tabelin, C. B.; Silwamba, M.; Paglinawan, F. C.; Mondejar, A. J. S.; Duc, H. G.; Resabal, V. 
J.; Opiso, E. M.; Igarashi, T.; Tomiyama, S.; Ito, M.; Hiroyoshi, N.; Villacorte-Tabelin, M. 
Solid-Phase Partitioning and Release-Retention Mechanisms of Copper, Lead, Zinc and 
Arsenic in Soils Impacted by Artisanal and Small-Scale Gold Mining (Asgm) Activities. 
Chemosphere 2020, 260, 127574. 
Taha, M. R.; Mobasser, S. Adsorption of Ddt from Contaminated Soil Using Carbon 
Nanotubes. Soil Sediment Contam. 2014, 23 (7), 703–714. 
Tian, Y.; Gao, B.; Wang, Y.; Morales, V. L.; Carpena, R. M.; Huang, Q.; Yang, L. Deposition 
and Transport of Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes in Water-Saturated Sand Columns. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 2012, 213–214, 265–272. 
Tomczyk, A.; Sokołowska, Z.; Boguta, P. Biochar Physicochemical Properties: Pyrolysis 
Temperature and Feedstock Kind Effects. Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol. 2020, 19, 
191–215. 
Towell, M. G.; Browne, L. A.; Paton, G. I.; Semple, K. T. Impact of Carbon Nanomaterials 
on the Behaviour of 14c-Phenanthrene and 14c-Benzo-[a] Pyrene in Soil. Environ. Pollut. 
2011, 159 (3), 706–715. 
Tuinstra, F.; Koenig, J. L. Raman Spectrum of Graphite. J. Chem. Phys. 1970, 53 (3), 1126–1130. 
Veiga, T. R. L. A.; Lima, J. T.; Dessimoni, A. L. d. A.; Pego, M. F. F.; Soares, J. R.; Trugilho, 
P. F. Different Plant Biomass Characterizations for Biochar Production. Cerne 2017, 23 (4), 
529–536. 
Vikrant, K.; Kim, K.-H.; Ok, Y. S.; Tsang, D. C.; Tsang, Y. F.; Giri, B. S.; Singh, R. S. 
Engineered/Designer Biochar for the Removal of Phosphate in Water and Wastewater. Sci. 
Total Environ. 2018, 616, 1242–1260. 
Vithanage, M.; Herath, I.; Almaroai, Y. A.; Rajapaksha, A. U.; Huang, L.; Sung, J. K.; Lee, 
S. S.; Ok, Y. S. Effects of Carbon Nanotube and Biochar on Bioavailability of Pb, Cu and 
Sb in Multi-Metal Contaminated Soil. Environ. Geochem. Health 2017, 39 (6), 1409–1420. 
Wallace, P. R. The Band Theory of Graphite. Phys. Rev. 1947, 71 (9), 622. 
Wang, S.; Sun, H.; Ang, H. M.; Tadé, M. O. Adsorptive Remediation of Environmental 
Pollutants Using Novel Graphene-Based Nanomaterials. Chem. Eng. J. 2013, 226, 336–347. 
Watts-Williams, S. J.; Nguyen, T. D.; Kabiri, S.; Losic, D.; McLaughlin, M. J. Potential of 
Zinc-Loaded Graphene Oxide and Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi to Improve the Growth 
and Zinc Nutrition of Hordeum Vulgare and Medicago Truncatula. Appl. Soil Ecol. 2020, 
150, 103464. 
Weng, Z. H.; Van Zwieten, L.; Singh, B. P.; Tavakkoli, E.; Joseph, S.; Macdonald, L. M.; 
Rose, T. J.; Rose, M. T.; Kimber, S. W.; Morris, S. Biochar Built Soil Carbon over a Decade 
by Stabilizing Rhizodeposits. Nat. Clim. Change 2017, 7 (5), 371–376. 
Weyers, S. L.; Spokas, K. A. Impact of Biochar on Earthworm Populations: A Review. Appl. 
Environ. Soil Sci. 2011, 2011. 
Yan, J.; Gong, J. L.; Zeng, G. M.; Song, B.; Zhang, P.; Liu, H. Y.; Huan, S. Y.; Li, X. D. Carbon 
Nanotube-Impeded Transport of Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs in Xiangjiang 
Sediments. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2017, 498, 229–238. 
Yatim, N. M.; Shaaban, A.; Dimin, M. F.; Mohamad, N.; Yusof, F. Urea Functionalized 
Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes as Efficient Nitrogen Delivery System for Rice. Adv. Nat. 
Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2019, 10 (1), 015011. Carbonaceous Materials for Nanoremediation 407 
Yatim, N. M.; Shaaban, A.; Dimin, M. F.; Yusof, F. Statistical Evaluation of the Production 
of Urea Fertilizer-Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes Using Plackett Burman Experimental 
Design. Procedia Soc Behav Sci 2015, 195, 315–323. 
Yatim, N. M.; Shaaban, A.; Dimin, M. F.; Yusof, F.; Abd Razak, J. Effect of Functionalised 
and Non-Functionalised Carbon Nanotubes-Urea Fertilizer on the Growth of Paddy. Trop. 
Life Sci. Res. 2018, 29 (1), 17. 
Ye, L.; Camps-Arbestain, M.; Shen, Q.; Lehmann, J.; Singh, B.; Sabir, M. Biochar Effects on 
Crop Yields with and without Fertilizer: A Meta-Analysis of Field Studies Using Separate 
Controls. Soil Use Manage. 2020, 36 (1), 2–18. 
Yu, Z.; Zhou, L.; Huang, Y.; Song, Z.; Qiu, W. Effects of a Manganese Oxide-Modified 
Biochar Composite on Adsorption of Arsenic in Red Soil. J. Environ. Manage. 2015, 163, 
155–162. 
Yuan, C.; Hung, C.-H.; Huang, W.-L. Enhancement with Carbon Nanotube Barrier on 
1,2-Dichlorobenzene Removal from Soil by Surfactant-Assisted Electrokinetic (Saek) 
Process–the Effect of Processing Fluid. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2009, 44 (10), 2284–2303. 
Zarbin, A. J.; Oliveira, M. M. Carbon Nanostructures (Nanotubes and Graphene): Quo Vadis? 
Quím. Nova 2013, 36 (10), 1533–1539. 
Zaytseva, O.; Neumann, G. Carbon Nanomaterials: Production, Impact on Plant Develop￾ment, Agricultural and Environmental Applications. Chem. Biol. Technol. Agric. 2016, 3 
(1), 17. 
Zhang, J.; Gong, J. L.; Zeng, G. M.; Yang, H. C.; Zhang, P. Carbon Nanotube Amendment for 
Treating Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane and Hexachlorocyclohexane Remaining in Dong￾Ting Lake Sediment-an Implication for in-Situ Remediation. Sci. Total Environ. 2017a, 579, 
283–291. 
Zhang, L.; Petersen, E. J.; Zhang, W.; Chen, Y.; Cabrera, M.; Huang, Q. Interactions of 
14c-Labeled Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with Soil Minerals in Water. Environ. Pollut. 
2012, 166, 75–81. 
Zhang, M.; Engelhardt, I.; Simunek, J.; Bradford, S. A.; Kasel, D.; Berns, A. E.; Vereecken, H.; 
Klumpp, E. Co-Transport of Chlordecone and Sulfadiazine in the Presence of Functionalized 
Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in Soils. Environ. Pollut. 2017b, 221, 470–479. 
Zhang, M.; Gao, B.; Chen, J.; Li, Y.; Creamer, A. E.; Chen, H. Slow-Release Fertilizer 
Encapsulated by Graphene Oxide Films. Chem. Eng. J. 2014, 255, 107–113. 
Zhang, P.; Sun, H.; Min, L.; Ren, C. Biochars Change the Sorption and Degradation of 
Thiacloprid in Soil: Insights into Chemical and Biological Mechanisms. Environ. Pollut. 
2018a, 236, 158–167. 
Zhang, W.; Lu, Y.; Sun, H.; Zhang, Y.; Zhou, M.; Song, Q.; Gao, Y. Effects of Multi-Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes on Pyrene Adsorption and Desorption in Soils: The Role of Soil 
Constituents. Chemosphere 2019, 221, 203–211. 
Zhang, X.; Sarmah, A. K.; Bolan, N. S.; He, L.; Lin, X.; Che, L.; Tang, C.; Wang, H. Effect of 
Aging Process on Adsorption of Diethyl Phthalate in Soils Amended with Bamboo Biochar. 
Chemosphere 2016, 142, 28–34. 
Zhang, X.; Wang, H.; He, L.; Lu, K.; Sarmah, A.; Li, J.; Bolan, N. S.; Pei, J.; Huang, H. Using 
Biochar for Remediation of Soils Contaminated with Heavy Metals and Organic Pollutants. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2013, 20 (12), 8472–8483. 
Zhang, Y.; Cao, B.; Zhao, L.; Sun, L.; Gao, Y.; Li, J.; Yang, F. Biochar-Supported Reduced 
Graphene Oxide Composite for Adsorption and Coadsorption of Atrazine and Lead Ions. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 2018b, 427, 147–155. 408 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Zhang, Y.; Yang, J.; Zhong, L.; Liu, L. Effect of Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotubes on Cr(Vi) 
Reduction by Citric Acid: Implications for Their Use in Soil Remediation. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. Int. 2018c, 25 (24), 23791–23798. 
Zhao, L.; Guan, X.; Yu, B.; Ding, N.; Liu, X.; Ma, Q.; Yang, S.; Yilihamu, A.; Yang, S. T. 
Carboxylated Graphene Oxide-Chitosan Spheres Immobilize Cu(2+) in Soil and Reduce Its 
Bioaccumulation in Wheat Plants. Environ. Int. 2019a, 133 (Pt B), 105208. 
Zhao, L.; Yang, S.-T.; Yilihamu, A.; Wu, D. Advances in the Applications of Graphene Adsor￾bents: From Water Treatment to Soil Remediation. Rev. Inorg. Chem. 2019b, 39 (1), 47–76. 
Zhou, Y.; Gao, B.; Zimmerman, A. R.; Fang, J.; Sun, Y.; Cao, X. Sorption of Heavy Metals on 
Chitosan-Modified Biochars and Its Biological Effects. Chem. Eng. J. 2013, 231, 512–518. 
Zhu, D.; Chen, Y.; Yang, H.; Wang, S.; Wang, X.; Zhang, S.; Chen, H. Synthesis and 
Characterization of Magnesium Oxide Nanoparticle-Containing Biochar Composites for 
Efficient Phosphorus Removal from Aqueous Solution. Chemosphere 2020, 247, 125847. CHAPTER 12 
Air Pollution Management by 
Nanomaterials 
YASSINE SLIMANI
1*, ESSIA HANNACHI
2
, and GHULAM YASIN3 
1
Department of Biophysics, Institute for Research and Medical 
Consultations (IRMC), Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, 
Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia 
2
Laboratory of Physics of Materials–Structures and Properties, 
Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences of Bizerte, 
University of Carthage, Zarzouna 7021, Tunisia 
3
State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, 
College of Materials Science and Engineering, 
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China
 
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: yaslimani@iau.edu.sa; 
slimaniyassine18@gmail.com
 
ABSTRACT 
Currently, air pollution is being one of the main concerns for the undesirable 
and harmful impacts on human health and environment. Nanomaterials and 
nanotechnology are broadly utilized for the management of air pollution. 
Reduced low-price nanostructured materials-based sensors could be hosted 
to monitor the levels of pollution of indoor and outdoor air. In this chapter, 
we present diverse nanostructured materials utilized as receptors in air/gas 
sensors. The preparation and the important characteristics of the nanostruc
tured materials to be involved in sensing air pollution applications are briefly 
described. Then, different nanostructured materials that could contribute to 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
­410 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
the adsorption of toxic gases are highlighted. Finally, some commercially 
available examples of sensors for air pollution are given. 
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, because of the development and modernization of industries in 
the world, our atmosphere became glutted with different kinds of pollutants 
released from manufacturing practices or activities of humans. Some of these 
kinds of contaminants are sulfur dioxide, organic compounds (dioxins and 
volatile organic compounds), nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons, heavy metals 
(As, Cr, Pb, Cd, Hg, and Zn), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and carbon 
monoxide (CO), etc. The activities made by humans, like the combustion of 
gas, coal and oil, displayed a great potential in altering the emissions from 
natural resources. Of course, besides the pollution of air, there exists also the 
pollution of water provoked by numerous causes, involving the extraction 
of fossil fuels, by-products of manufacturing processes and combustion, 
pesticides, herbicides, leakage of fertilizers, oil spills, and waste disposal. 
Pollutants are essentially found mixed in the soil, water, and air. Therefore, 
it is essential to establish a technology which can inspect, detect, and prefer￾ably it can clean the pollutants from the soil, water, and air. In this regard, 
nanotechnology provides a broad variety of skills and tools to enhance the 
quality and condition of the current environment. 
Nanotechnology provides the capability to manage the material at the 
nanoscale and develop compounds displaying particular characteristics with 
a specific role. A great enthusiasm concerning the chances and risk ratio 
related to the nanotechnology has been established, wherein the majority of 
the benefits have been attached to the outlook of improving the quality of 
life and health. Nanomaterials are very tiny, and display elevated surface-to￾volume ratio, leading them to be utilized in the detection of very sensitive 
pollutants (Yunus et al., 2012). The nanotechnology is additionally utilized to 
avoid and stop the development of contaminants or pollutants by employing 
the nanomaterials, advanced nanotechnologies, manufacturing processes, 
and others. Therefore, the applications of nanotechnology in the areas of 
environment in general and of air in particular can be categorized into three 
main applications: (1) remediation and purification of polluted materials, (2) 
sensing and detection of pollution, and (3) prevention of pollution. With the 
quick raise of pollutants varieties and their amount, developing of advanced 
instruments and innovative technologies that are capable of treating and 
preventing pollution became mandatory. Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 411 
12.2 AIR QUALITY
The quality of air could be identified as the measurements of the air condition 
respecting the requirements of humans (Santos et al., 2020). Frequently, the 
air quality is linked to the health, nevertheless, the smells could also affect 
the quality of air from a sensorial viewpoint, although both are frequently 
connected (SRF Consulting Group Inc., 2004; World Health Organization, 
2019). Pollution is frequently utilized to designate the substances that reduce 
the quality of air. 
Before industrialization, pollution has been a simple nuisance, then after 
the starting of the industrial development and industrial revolution, it is 
being a real trouble (Brimblecombe, 1976; Flick, 1980). The initial prob￾lems were principally sulfur and shoot arising from the initial manufactories 
positioned within cities. Rapidly, authorities constructed rules and protocols 
for protecting people. As industry processes transformed and developed, 
several new problems arose related to health and damages to ecosystems. 
As pollution costs do not affect the industries that produces them, new 
regulations are needed by the government. Lead (Pb) contamination is one 
of the earliest examples. Among several utilizations, Pb has been inserted in 
vehicle fuels in order to enhance their performances in combustion engines 
(Stroud, 2015). Lead (even for extremely low amounts) has shown to cause 
a long-term impact on kids which affects their cognitive progress (Grosse et 
al., 2002). This has been exposed to have an enormous effect on economy. 
Consequently, there have been rules prohibiting the utilization of Pb initially 
in the United States and in Europe and later all over the world (Grosse et al., 
2002; Von Storch et al., 2003). 
As stated by the World Health Organization (WHO), “the ambient pollu￾tion of air contributes to more than 7.5% of whole deaths and household 
pollution of air to more than 7.8% of all deaths” (World Health Organiza￾tion, 2019). It impacts more than 90% of the worldwide people, with a 
specific impact on low- and medium-income areas in which indoor pollution 
provoked by biomass and carbon cooking and heating display a particular 
effect. The mortalities by indoor and ambient pollution, in 2016, are assessed 
as 3.8cmillion and 4.2 million, respectively. Pollution health impacts are not 
found to affect only the lungs, but also impact cardiovascular health (World 
Health Organization, 2019). 
The consciousness of the harmful impact of pollution on health has 
driven policymakers and other organizations to minimize the chemical and 
gas emissions (Wettestad, 2018; Barrett and Therivel, 2020) as well as to 412 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
promote the production and commercialization of electric vehicles (Bjerkan 
et al., 2016). Knowing about air quality pollution could change individuals’ 
exposure. However, as the industries develop many novel chemical 
materials and/or release particulates into the environment, these pollutants 
and contaminants are enormous, and for several of them, their effects on 
health have not been completely assessed (Konduracka, 2019). Therefore, 
the difficulties and complications of air pollution will remain important. 
Pollution has many resources, some of them are natural, nevertheless, the 
largest common source of pollution at the present time is fossil fuels burned 
in industries, housing or transportation. Certain of the natural sources are 
geological, such as dust storms, lightning storms, or volcanoes, which could 
create enormous amounts of particulates, nitrogen oxides, or sulfur oxides, 
etc. Biomasses like oceans or forests could engender particles of pollen, 
volatile organic compounds, or liberate carbon in fires. Although these sources 
could display great effect, in most of times, sources generated by humans are 
invasive. The incineration of fossil fuels generates volatile organic materials, 
particulate matters, carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and 
sulfur dioxide (SO2) in general energy production, industry, cooking, housing 
heating, or transportation. The burning of wastes is also a significant source. 
Some of the contaminants are liberated directly from the pollutant activities, 
whereas others are produced during the reaction of these products. This is for 
example, the event of ground level ozone, which is generated by the reaction of 
volatile organic compounds with nitrogen dioxide with sunlight intervention 
or particles creation by isoprene forest emissions (Yu et al., 2014). 
To monitor the quality of air, numerous materials are typically designated 
based on numerous crucial points, such as the capability to measure them 
with precision, the pervasiveness of the gases in the indoor environments 
and cities, and also how they influence on the health. Some standard limits 
of pollutants utilized by diverse organizations are shown in Table 12.1. The 
majority of protocols involve permanent and nonstop monitors that average 
the amounts by the hour. The position of the fixed measuring points is moni￾tored by signs to ensure that the measurements are significant and covered. 
The quality of air is summed in many reports by an index, which involves 
the diverse monitored pollutants, but no standardized equation is available 
for computing it. EPA utilized a color-coded index for informing about the 
quality of air on the basis of the concentrations of SO2, CO, NO2, and parti￾cles matter. As stated, the developments of industries and the investigations 
of the effect of air pollution and released substances on the health push the 
national and multinational organizations to bring up to date their protocols. Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 413 
Although the majority of pollutants consist of gases, the particulates 
depress significantly the quality of air. Particulates are extremely hazardous 
pollutants which could be constituted by broad varieties of matters, such 
as nitrates, sulfates, black carbon, ClNa, mineral dust, etc. (Santos et al., 
2020). Because of this broad diversity, their measurements are frequently 
performed only based on the density of particles and/or the quantity of mass. 
Pb could be measured, for example, using atomic absorption spectrometry, 
X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. Particles with dimensions in the range of 
2.5–10 µm are more stacked in the upper part of the respiratory system, 
whereas particles with dimensions lower than 2.5 µm are probably stacked 
in the profounder parts of lungs (Williams et al., 2011). The tinier particles, 
if they are insoluble, could pass into the blood system or translocate in the 
body of human. To make measurements of PM, numerous instrumentations 
are utilized, such as laser particle counters, neutron activation or X-ray spec￾troscopy, microbalances, beta-attenuation by mass accumulation, and mass 
weight of filtered particles, etc. (Santos et al., 2020). 
The other released gases like volatile organic compounds, CO, NOx, 
and ozone cause diverse undesirable effects on the human health involving 
cardiopathologies, infections, bronchitis, inflammation in respiratory system, 
asthma increase, etc. They could be assessed using standard methods. UV 
fluorescence and absorbance can be used to measure SO2 and O3, respec￾tively, with a standard lower detection limit of about 0.5 ppbv (Santos et al., 
2020). The amounts of CO and NO2 could be measured by means of infrared 
photometry technique with a standard lower detection limit of about 50 and 
0.2 ppbv, respectively (Santos et al., 2020). 
There exist several alternative approaches that are not yet validated. For 
instance, differential absorption LIDAR has been employed for detecting 
the CO2 plume of the Etna with an assessed precision of tens of ppm or 
NO2 with precisions of 0.9 ppbv (Santoro et al., 2017; Mei et al., 2017). 
Other techniques involve tiny microsensors principally founded on elec￾trochemical reactions that produce currents or sensors based on metal 
oxides that vary their resistance (Aleixandre and Gerboles, 2012). These 
sensors showed elevated uncertainty mostly owing to the nonrelevance of 
their responses to gases, low sensitivity, and their drift resulted from the 
variations in their compositions. Although these techniques display some 
drawbacks, they showed some benefits, such as online measurement, ease 
of utilization, power consumption, size, and cost effective, which make 
them possible alternatives techniques to be further developed (Karagulian 
et al., 2019).  
TABLE 12.1 Typical Lower Limits of Pollutants Provided by Diverse Organizations. 
Pollutants Typical lower limits 
Japan (Ministry of 
the Environment 
Government of 
Japan, 2009) 
EU 
(Official Journal 
of the European 
Communities, 1999) 
USA 
(EPA United 
States, 2020) 
WHO 
(World Health 
Organization, 
2006) 
Benzene 3 µg/m3 2 µg/m3 – – 
SO2 0.04 ppm 125 µg/m3 75 ppb 20 µg/m3 
PM10 100 µg/m3 – 150 µg/m3 20 
PM2.5 15 µg/m3 25 µg/m3 12 µg/m3 10 
O3 60 ppb 120 µg/m3 0.07 ppm 100 µg/m3 
NO2 40 ppb 40 µg/m3 53 ppb 40 µg/m3 
Lead – 0.5 µg/m3 0.15 µg/m3 – 
CO 10 ppm – 9 ppm – 
414 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
12.3 SENSOR DEVICES FOR AIR POLLUTION
There exist diverse applications of nanomaterials and nanotechnology in the 
environment field. One of the environmental applications for nanotechnology 
is the water remediation. With similar importance, nanotechnology can be 
used for air remediation to detect the toxic gases existing in the ambient air. 
Sensors are devices that provide apparent signals via entering in interaction 
with the analyte, for example, biospecies, chemical, and physical. Therefore, 
the well-known types of sensors are: 
•	 Biosensors adopted for the analyses of the bioactivities or biomolecules. 
•	 Chemical sensors utilized for the analyses of chemicals. 
•	 Physical sensors adopted for the measurement of physical parameters 
such as pressure, distance, mass, and temperature. 
The chemical sensors can be classified into three main classes depending 
on their principle work: (1) mass sensors, (2) optical sensors, and (3) electro￾chemical sensors. The sensors provide the benefits to measure the physical 
quantity and transform it to signals that could be subsequently seen by 
human or by instruments. Sensors collect the radiations and convert them to 
some other forms adequate to get data/info into a control signal, a warning, 
such pattern (a profile, an image, etc.), or some other signals. Therefore, by 
means of reduced low-price sensor devices, a warning bell or visible signal 
can be produced to monitor the level of indoor and outdoor air pollution. The Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 415 
operation of sensor networks is highly complicated. Generally, most sensors 
consist of a detection element (called receptor), a transducer, and a signal 
process. Figure 12.1 shows the main constituents of sensor utilized for air 
pollution. 
FIGURE 12.1 Main elements of sensor utilized for air pollution. 
The gaseous contaminants existing in air enter in interaction with the 
receptor to engender a response. This response is received by the transducing 
element via various principles, which will be then amplified and converted 
into a signal, leading to interpret and quantify them in the microelectronic 
processor. In chemical sensors, diverse chemical detectors have been used, 
such as polymers, catalytic materials, insulators, solid electrolytes, metals, 
metal oxide semiconductors, and composites. The exploitation of different 
types and structures of nanomaterials employed in receptors is one of 
the main goals to develop innovative sensors for detecting air pollutants. 
Nowadays, several researchers seek to develop “nano”-sensors with high 
performances by optimizing different parameters: 
i.	 Processability: The manufacture of sensor layers (playing the role 
of analyte receptors) using nanostructured materials is a very delicate 
and important procedure because the sensitivity of nanosensors is 
dependent on transducer features, morphology, crystallinity, chemical 
compositions, thickness, etc. Several studies have been made to fabri￾cate sensing layers. The largest used techniques are self-assembly 
techniques, layer-by-layer deposition, printing, film casting, spin￾coating, dip-coating, pellet formation, electrochemical deposition. 
Generally, there exist two key approaches for the fabrication of sensor 
layer based on nanostructured materials including thermal process￾ability and solution processability. 416 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
ii.	 Mechanical Strength: The nanostructured materials to be employed 
in sensors should display satisfactory mechanical strength to resist 
the stresses and should be durable (Kar, 2020). 
iii. Operating Temperature: This is another vital parameter that should 
be controlled for air pollutant sensor. In the best case, operating room 
temperature is preferable to be achieved. 
iv.	 Stability: Thermal and environmental stability of the nanostructured 
materials in the sensor devices is another topic to be carefully taken 
into consideration before choosing them as air pollutant receptor. 
Mostly, nanostructured inorganic materials display an extremely 
high thermal stability. Contrarily, nanostructured organic materials 
display lower thermal stability than inorganic nanomaterials, but 
most of them can be considered as enough for the usage as sensing 
layers. This could explain the utilization of sensors based on polymers 
at ambient temperature and on ceramic semiconductors at elevated 
operating temperatures (Kar, 2020). 
v.	 Transducer Properties 
12.4 NANOMATERIALS USED FOR THE SENSORS OF AIR POLLUTION
Nanostructured materials are the greatest satisfactory approach to reduce the 
real difficulties of gas sensors: lack of stability, sensibility, and sensitivity. 
Currently, nanostructured materials and nanotechnology are the leading 
scientific research fields. Although nanoscience could be perceived as a 
trend to miniaturization with higher levels, it also involves new biological, 
chemical, and physical characteristics, all of them are still under investiga￾tions and developments. Through nanotechnology, the nanostructured mate￾rials could be designed and fabricated with characteristics that correspond 
to their corresponding applications (Brock, 2004). In this manner, owing to 
nanotechnologies, the chemical sensors have been revived during last years. 
The opportunity to create inexpensive miniscule tools capable of detecting 
lowest concentrations (ppm or ppb intervals) establishes the beginning of a 
novel sensors’ generation, generally known as nanosensors, which are still 
under progress. 
The characteristics of nanostructured materials are considerably different 
than those of present materials, mainly for the two following significant 
features: the quantum effects and the rise of the relative surface (Barth et 
al., 2010). These factors could alter and/or enhance certain characteristics 
of the nanostructured materials like their reactivity and electrical traits. Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 417 
Gas sensors were initially put into commercialization in the 70s and 80s by 
enterprises that utilized the diverse detection principles, gravimetric, resis￾tive, electrochemical, and optical. Electrochemical and optical sensors are 
perhaps the highly precise ones, but both gravimetric and resistive sensors 
provide a better sensitivity and a lower cost. Among these diverse kinds 
of gas sensors (Bhattacharyya et al., 2019), the resistive sensors based on 
metal oxide semiconductor (MOX) are the utmost fascinating ones because 
of their low construction and maintenance fee, ease portability and use, 
and simple electronic interface. Metal oxide semiconductor nanostructures 
have provided eminent prospects as sensitive layers because of their unique 
chemical, electronic, and optical features besides their feasible miniaturiza￾tion. These whole characteristics appear to be the main keys to develop 
innovative and outstanding gas nanosensors. 
Since the discovery of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), nanomaterials have 
fascinated broad interest because of their promising applications in a 
large diversity of fields as energy storage and conversion, optoelectronics, 
electronics, etc. (Slimani et al., 2019c; Nanda et al., 2020; Slimani and 
Hannachi, 2020; Hannachi et al., 2020; Yasin et al., 2020b; Yasin et al., 2020a; 
Ullah et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020; Gunasekaran et al., 2020; Slimani and 
Hannachi, 2021; Nadeem et al., 2021). Nanomaterials could be described as 
those that display at least one dimension in the range of 1–100 nm (Kreyling 
et al., 2010). Depending on their dimensional shapes, nanomaterials could 
be categorized into four classes: zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional 
(1D), two-dimensional (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures. 
They could be prepared via top-down and bottom-up approaches (Gates et 
al., 2005; Biswas et al., 2012). Top-down method permits the creation of 
nanomaterials from primary larger dimensions down to the wanted nanoscale 
level. Bottom-up method consists of the growth from atom/ion to atom/ion 
until achieving the anticipated dimensions and shape. The benefits of this 
method are the evolution of nanomaterials with a superior order because of the 
synthesis conditions near to the thermodynamic balance, a high homogeneity, 
and a minimized density of defects. The chief disadvantages of top-down 
process are associated with the pollution on their surface, defects, and the 
internal tension of the products. Though these benefits and disadvantages 
conditions, the choice of the synthesis technique and the quality of the 
nanomaterials are also controlled by the availability of the technology and 
the implementation costs. Top-down processes mostly involve lithography, 
laser, etching, mechanical milling, etc. However, the bottom-up processes 
largely consist of molecular self-assembly, electrospinning, solution phase 418 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(like solvothermal, hydrothermal, sol–gel, precipitation, etc.), vapor phase 
(like PVD and CVD), etc. (Seevakan et al., 2019; Almessiere et al., 2019a; 
Slimani et al., 2019d; Almessiere et al., 2019c, 2020a, 2020b; Manikandan et 
al., 2020; Ajeesha et al., 2020). 
During recent years, an immense progress has been done in the prepara￾tion techniques of nanostructured materials (Hamrita et al., 2014; Hannachi 
et al., 2018; Slimani et al., 2019a, 2019b; Almessiere et al., 2019b). To 
get nanostructures materials, advanced chemical and physical approaches 
have been established. To meet the requirements of commercialization, the 
method of preparation should be consistent, practicable, simple, and well￾matched with the incorporation within the sensors. Nanostructured materials 
could be developed indirectly or directly on sensor devices. Irrespective to 
the procedure, a particular interest should be given to how to integrate them 
on the transducer. For indirect approaches, nanostructured materials are 
dissolved in a solvent and then the solvent is removed by drying, allowing 
the sensors coating. Some of these approaches are blade-coating, spin￾coating, dip-coating, and drop-casting, etc. These techniques are time and 
cost-effective, and because they are versatile, they are greatly exploited in 
the development of nanosensors. Table 12.2 listed some examples of the 
nanosensors exploited for detecting gases pollution. 
12.4.1 0D NANOMATERIALS
This class of nanomaterials involves nanocluster materials and nanoparticles 
(NPs). The most significant and common methods to synthesize them are 
the bottom-up processes. Nanoparticles are prepared by the heterogeneous 
nucleation on substrates, or by homogeneous nucleation from liquid or 
vapor. They could be also synthesized by segregating a phase via annealing 
properly at higher temperatures conceived solid materials (Cao and Wang, 
2011). The agglomeration and the size of nanoparticles could be controlled 
to enhance the sensitivity (Gao et al., 2017). Generally, the performances 
of sensors can be improved by a uniform distribution of NPs. The size of 
nanoparticles controls the response of nanosensor. Indeed, if the size of 
nanoparticles is analogous to or lesser than the Debye length, the response 
of nanosensor enhances (Xu et al., 1991). Wang and Chen investigated and 
evaluated the better performances of semiconducting gas sensors based on 
V-SnO2 NPs, synthesized through coprecipitation process, for the detection 
of carbon monoxide at low temperatures (Wang and Chen, 2010). TABLE 12.2 Some Examples of the Nanosensors Exploited for Detecting Gases Pollution.
Sensors Materials Morphology Gases Refs. 
Gravimetrics ZnO Nanorods/nanotubes VOMs Kilinc et al. (2014)
Multiwalled CNTs Nanotubes C6H6, CO, NO2 Clément et al. (2016)
Graphene Nanosheets H2, CO Arsat et al. (2009)
ZnO–CuO/CNTs Nanocomposite VOMs Abraham et al. (2019)
ZnO Nanocrystalline NO2 Rana et al. (2017)
SnO2 Nanocrystalline H2S Luo et al. (2013)
Reduced graphene oxide/ZnO Nanosheets/nanofibers CO, VOMs Abideen et al. (2018)
SnO2/reduced graphene oxide Quantum wires/nanosheets H2S Song et al. (2016)
MoS2 Nanosheets NO2 Donarelli et al. (2015)
CuO/graphene Nanoflowers/nanosheets CO Zhang et al. (2017)
Reduced graphene oxide/ZnO 2D/nanoparticles NO2 Liu et al. (2014)
Resistive SnO2 3D hierarchical VOMs Li et al. (2017b)
SnO2@ZnO Hierarchical NO2 Zhang et al. (2018)
WO3/porous silicon Nanoparticles NO2 Yan et al. (2014)
ZnO Polygonal nanoflakes NO2 Chen et al. (2011a)
WO3 Flower-like NO2 Wang et al. (2015a)
In2O3 Nanorod-flowers NO2 Xu et al. (2016)
Graphene/Cu2O Nanosheet H2S Zhou et al. (2013)
SnO2 Nanofibers NO2 Cho et al. (2011)
SnO2 Nanofibers NO2 Santos et al. (2014)
Au-Carbon nanotubes Nanotubes CO, NO2 Zanolli et al. (2011)
Reduced graphene oxide/MoS2 2D-nanosheets NO2 Zhou et al. (2017)
TiO2/SnO2 core shell Nanofibers VOMs Li et al. (2017a)
SnO2/ZnO core shell Nanowires NO2 Park et al. (2013)
SnO2 Quantum dots CO, CH4 Mosadegh Sedghi et al. (2010) 
419 Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 420 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
12.4.2 1D NANOMATERIALS
One-dimensional nanostructured materials display various morphologies like 
nanotubes (NTs), nanoribbons (NRBs) or nanobelts (NBs), nanorods (NRs), 
nanowhiskers, nanofibers (NFs), and nanowires (NWs). One-dimensional 
nanomaterials exhibit a very high ratio of length-to-width and provide a 
greater density of integration (Comini et al., 2009). Consequently, these nano￾structured materials are appropriate applicants for gas sensors. The diameter 
of one-dimensional nanomaterials shows a crucial impact on the processes of 
detection, since a lesser diameter includes extra surface atoms that participate 
in the reactions of gas detection (Lu et al., 2006). One of the largest utilized 
approaches to synthesize one-dimensional nanomaterials (NBs, NWs, NFs, 
etc.) is the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique, which is classified as 
a bottom-up approach. 
Nowadays, the exploitation and construction of a single one-dimensional 
nanostructured material (NT, NF, NW, etc.) in a sensor is hard and costly. Thus, 
the majority of the investigated and examined nanosensors are a conglomera￾tion of one-dimensional nanomaterials in which the different joints between 
nanostructured materials offer electrical paths that improve the conductivity. 
In these arrangements, the nanostructured materials are interlinked and create 
porous networks, favoring the gas penetration and diffusion. 
Santos et al. (2020) reported in their chapter a study on nanowires of 
SnO2 performed using low pressure-CVD in Ar atmosphere with oxygen 
traces at 800°C. The nanowires were developed on substrates of Si–SiO2 
by gold as catalysts. The nanowires were grown vertically to the substrate, 
display tiny diameters in the range of 50–200 nm and lengths around 30 
µm. It was observed that the nanowires are branched and formed interlinked 
networks. Moreover, other morphology shapes, such as NRs or NBs could 
be noticed. The anisotropic growth is caused by the metal catalysts and the 
largest acceptable mechanism of growth is the vapor-liquid-solid one (Kola￾sinski, 2006). High-temperature superconductor of Bi-2212 nanowires, 
having a 250 nm in diameter and a 100 μm in length, have been fabricated 
by means of electrospinning technique (Koblischka et al., 2020). 
Among the different one-dimensional nanostructures, nanotubes and 
nanofibers are being the most interested topics for scientists because of their 
distinctive morphologies. Nanofibers display large specific surface area and 
higher porosity, which are required for ultrasensitive nanosensors. The lower 
cross-sectional areas and higher ratio of surface-to-volume provide more 
efficient executions of electrochemical detectors like the signal-to-noise 
current ratio, transport of electric charge, and mass transport (Ding et al., 2010). Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 421 
Electrospinning is one of the utmost cheap, versatile and simple techniques 
used to produce nanofibers of inorganic or organic compounds (Huang et al., 
2003; Kim and Rothschild, 2011; Alahmari et al., 2020c). Semiconducting 
nanofibers could be produced using metal precursors and polymer solutions 
and a following heat treatment. By utilizing the electrospinning technique 
and adjusting the procedure parameters or the precursor solutions, one can 
obtain ultrafine nanostructures of core sheath, hollow, and porous nanofibers. 
Therefore, porous nanofibers could be prepared in diverse approaches, viz., 
from polymer blends, or two-component (polymer/chloride or acetate) and 
subsequent heat treatment (Cho et al., 2011; Cheng et al., 2014; Santos et al., 
2014). Santos et al. reported in their chapter a study on nanofibers of SnO2 
having 40–60 nm in diameter, which were performed by heat treatment at 500 
°C (in air) of electrospun fibers of tin chloride pentahydrate and polyvinyl 
alcohol (Santos et al., 2020). It is obvious that the nanofibers are constructed 
of linked NPs that comprise smaller grains. The nanofibers were formed from 
a precursor solution flow. By adjusting the flow, distinctive morphologies 
could be achieved. Hence, nanorods having 500–700 in diameters were 
gotten at very small flows. NFs of TiO2 have been prepared through sol–gel 
and electrospinning processes under air–argon environments (Ansari et al., 
2020). Er substituted NiFe2O4 NFs were successfully produced through 
electrospinning procedure using metal nitrates and polyvinyl pyrrolidone 
polymer, followed a calcination stage (Albetran et al., 2020). Nanofibers 
Cd–Nd co-substituted CoNi spinel ferrites were similarly fabricated through 
electrospinning technique (Alahmari et al., 2020a, 2020b, 2020c). The diverse 
NFs showed a grain size dependence of the magnetic, optical, electrical, 
dielectric properties as well as the antibacterial and anticancer activities. 
Nanotubes and nanofibers are porous nanostructures, but they are also 
hollow ones. Thus, their morphologies have large surface area, leading 
them appropriate for the adsorption of gases. Different approaches could 
be used to produce nanotubes, such as electrospinning, sol–gel template 
processes, hydrothermal process, etc. Wang et al. prepared In2O3 nanotubes 
by a facile coaxial electrospinning process and a posterior calcination (Wang 
et al., 2016). The produced nanotube products comprise of indium oxide 
nanocrystals with primary 10–25 nm grain sizes of show rough surfaces. 
Furthermore, it was shown that the control of the size of grains and the 
calcination temperature could be controlled to enhance the performance of 
HCHO gas nanosensor. 
Kolmakov et al. (2003) reported the high performances of sensing CO 
and O2 by means of SnO2 NWs. The mechanism of sensing was described 422 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
based on the depletion of electrons by O2; however, the reduction of CO 
gas is resulted from the removal of electrons (Fig.12.2). Multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes-doped SnO2 materials revealed extremely high specific surface 
area in comparison to pristine SnO2 produced by simple in situ technique 
(Zhao et al., 2007). These showed excellent sensing performances of CO gas 
at ambient temperature. Wanna et al. explored the CO gas sensing proper￾ties of CNTs–polyaniline composites and they showed promising reversible 
responses to CO at concentrations interval of 100–500 ppm (Wanna et al., 
2006). Star et al. constructed sensor arrays of nanocomposites of single￾walled CNTs and Pt or Rh metals (Star et al., 2006). These sensors revealed 
their ability for detecting lower concentrations of CO gas. Chen et al. studied 
the sensing responses of ZnO nanomaterials with different shapes regarding 
the sensing of NO2 gas (Chen et al., 2011b). It was demonstrated that gas 
sensor of ZnO NTs present shorter response time and greater sensitivity 
compared with that of ZnO nanoflowers. 
FIGURE 12.2 Mechanism of sensing of SnO2 NWs for O2 and CO detection. Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 423 
12.4.3 2D NANOSTRUCTURED MATERIALS
Two-dimensional nanostructured materials display an extremely thin 
thickness and a wide lateral size, which offer them extremely high specific 
surface area, providing a very high amount of surface atoms. Particularly, 
few layers or single-layered two-dimensional nanostructured materials, in 
which the interactions between the layers are minimized or nonexistent, 
attain outstanding and promising performances for the applications in gases 
detection (Zhang, 2015; Neri, 2017). Graphene presents tremendously high 
chemical stability, optical transparency, mechanical flexibility, and carrier 
mobility, which delivers an excellent occasion to develop novel electronic 
materials, and hence innovative sensor technologies (Sun et al., 2014). 
Graphene and their derivatives (functionalized graphene, graphene oxide, and 
reduced graphene oxide) are among the largest investigated two-dimensional 
nanomaterials for the applications in chemical gas sensors. Nowadays, 
other ultrathin two-dimensional nanostructured materials displaying similar 
nanostructures, such as the case of transition metal dichalcogenides (WSe2, 
MoSe2, WS2, TiS2, MoS2, etc.) have been also of great importance (Duan 
et al., 2015; Joshi et al., 2018). Principally, there exist three methods to 
develop two-dimensional nanosheets: wet chemical self-assembly, CVD 
growth, and liquid/chemical exfoliation of layered host materials (Santos 
et al., 2020). Tai et al. studied the NH3 gas responses of thin films of PANI/ 
TiO2 nanocomposite coated on a Si substrate with Au electrodes (Tai et al., 
2008). The findings revealed that the prepared thin films fabricated at 10 
°C display better gas sensing responses in terms of stability, selectivity, and 
reproducibility. Bittencourt et al. prepared tungsten oxide films modified 
with multiwalled CNTs (Bittencourt et al., 2006). The nanocomposite films 
of tungsten films impregnated with CNT showed good sensing responses 
toward NH3, NO2, and CO gases. For instance, the sensitivity is about 500 
ppb for NO2 at room circumstances. 
12.4.4 3D NANOSTRUCTURES MATERIALS
Three-dimensional nanostructured materials involve powders, polycrys￾talline, multilayer, and fibrous materials wherein the zero-dimensional, 
one-dimensional, and two-dimensional structural elements are connected 
with each other and create interfaces. Commonly, nanoparticles have the 
tendency to create strong aggregations since the attraction of Van der Waals 
between the nanoparticles and the particles size are inversely proportional 424 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
(Gao et al., 2017). For dense and large aggregations, only the nanoparticles 
close to the superficial area participate in the detection of gases. Further￾more, the slow diffusion of gas via the aggregated nanostructured materials 
minimizes the velocity of nanosensor response (Korotcenkov, 2005). Hence, 
the aggregation of nanoparticles is not a suitable morphology for functional 
sensor layers. 
Nanomaterials with hierarchical structure are higher dimensional 
nanostructures, which are gathered from low dimensional nanostructure 
blocks, such as zero-dimensional nanoparticles, one-dimensional (NFs, 
NTs, NRs, and NWs), and two-dimensional nanosheets. Hollow and porous 
hierarchical nanostructured materials are very interesting to attain a great 
surface area and hence a quick and good responses for the detection of 
gases (Lee, 2009). Up-to-date, numerous hierarchical nanostructured 
materials (tower-like nanocolumns, flower-like nanocolumns, urchin-like 
spheres, mesoporous, nanohelixes, and NWs arrays) have been synthesized 
using diverse approaches (electrospinning, template-assisted growth, CVD, 
thermal evaporation, ...) and they appear to be encouraging for innovative 
gas sensors displaying excellent performances (Wang et al., 2015b; Liu et 
al., 2016). 
12.5 NANOTECHNOLOGY FOR THE ADSORPTION OF TOXIC GASES
12.5.1 ADSORPTION OF DIOXINS
Dioxin and related materials are a set of extremely poisonous chemical 
compounds that are dangerous to health. Dibenzo-p-dioxins are a class of 
materials containing two rings of benzene linked by two atoms of oxygen. 
It displays zero to eight atoms of chlorine linked to the ring. Dibenzofuran 
is an analogous but different material, in that only one of the bonds between 
two rings of benzene is bound by oxygen. The poisonousness of dioxins 
differs with the number of chlorine atoms. For example, dioxins with no 
or only one chlorine atom are not poisonous, while the dioxins displaying 
more than one chlorine atom are poisonous. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodi￾oxin (TCDD) is a carcinogen to humans. Dioxins also alter the endocrine 
system, immune system and embryo development. Dioxin materials are 
mostly engendered from the combustion of organic substances in burning 
waste. The concentration of dioxins engendered from the combustion is 
ranging from 10 to 500 ng/m3
. Regulations on the emissions of dioxin are 
complicated and differ from country to atoner. Yet, it is commonly essential Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 425 
to minimize the concentration of dioxin to less than 1 ng/m3
. The minimi￾zation and prevention of dioxins have been deeply discussed by previous 
reports (Kulkarni et al., 2008; Wielgosiński, 2010). To remove dioxins from 
burning waste, adsorption by means of activated carbons (ACs) has been 
broadly adopted in Europe and Japan. The removal of dioxins using AC 
adsorbents is more efficient than other adsorbents, such as zeolites and γ 
-Al2O3 due to the high bond energy between ACs and dioxins compared 
with the other adsorbents (Cudahy and Helsel, 2000). Many attempts have 
been made in order to find a more efficient adsorbent instead of ACs, so that 
the poisonousness of dioxin will further be reduced to the minimum level. 
In 2001, Long and Yang have used CNTs as adsorbent for the elimination 
of dioxins (Long and Yang, 2001). The authors have demonstrated that the 
interaction of dioxins with CNTs is approximately three times stronger than 
the interaction of dioxins with ACs. This enhancement is possibly due to 
the crooked surface of the nanotubes, which offer more robust interaction 
forces between the dioxins and the carbon nanotubes compared with the flat 
sheets (Bhushan, 2010). 
12.5.2 NOX ADSORPTION
NOx is a general term for the oxides of nitrogen that are most related to 
the air pollution, namely, nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). 
These gases participate the development of exhaust fumes and acid rains and 
altering the tropospheric ozone. Many attempts have been made to remove 
NOx emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels. Ion exchange zeolites, 
ACs, and FeOOH dispersed on ACs fibers are the known adsorbents utilized 
to eliminate NOx at lower temperatures. The nitrogen oxide can be effectually 
absorbed on ACs owing to the interaction of the surface functional groups, 
even though the quantity of the absorbed kinds is still not important. Long 
and Yang showed that CNTs can be utilized as an adsorbent for the elimina￾tion of NO at room temperature (Long and Yang, 2001). The authors demon￾strated that an adsorption amount of NOx of about 75 mg/g was obtained 
when the CNTs were subjected to 1000 ppm NO + 5% O2/He for 2 h. The 
adsorption of nitrogen oxides may be correlated to the exceptional structural, 
electronic properties, and surface functional groups of CNTs. When O2 and 
NO pass across CNTs, NO is oxidized to NO2 and then adsorbed onto the 
surface of nitrate kinds. This thought was proved by Mochida and coworkers 
(Mochida et al., 1997). The authors showed that NO is oxidized to NO2 at 
room temperature on ACs fiber. 426 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
12.5.3 CARBON DIOXIDE CAPTURE
Since the Kyoto Protocol was taken into consideration in 2005, the capture 
and the storage of CO2 generated from fossil fuels power plants have gained 
more interest. Diverse technologies based on the capture of CO2 such as 
adsorption, cryogenic, absorption, etc. have been studied (White et al., 
2003; Aaron and Tsouris, 2005). The adsorption technology is one of the 
most adopted processes. It consists of amine or ammonia-based adsorption 
process. Yet, other processes are presently being explored worldwide owing 
to the high energy requirement. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) assumed that the development of the adsorption process 
could be achievable and the introduction of an innovative generation of 
materials capable of effectively absorbing carbon dioxide would definitely 
improve the effectiveness of adsorption separation in the flue gases (Metz 
et al., 2005). The adsorbents involve ACs, silica, zeolite, SWNTs, etc. The 
chemical change of CNTs would have a good capacity for the capture of the 
greenhouse of CO2 gas. The efficiency of CO2 adsorption can be enhanced 
after the CNTs were modified with other solutions, including polyethylenei￾mine (PEI), 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTS), and ethylene diamine 
(EDA) (Long and Yang, 2001). The solution comprises groups of amines 
that can enter in reaction with CO2 to produce carbamate in the absence of 
H2O, consequently increasing the efficiency value of CO2. CNTs modified 
with APTS present the value of efficiency of CO2 of about 41 mg/g. This 
value is the highest compared with those obtained in the CNTs modified with 
EDA (38.8 mg/g) and CNTs modified with PEI 39.0 mg/g). Generally, some 
factors affect the efficiency of CO2 adsorption based on modified CNTs, 
such as humidity and temperature. For example, the performances rise with 
the rise in humidity, nevertheless, it shows an opposite tendency with the rise 
in temperature. 
12.5.4 ELIMINATION OF VOLATILE ORGANIC MATERIALS FROM AIR
Numerous chemicals can be produced by atmospheric reactions, including 
nitrous acid (Indarto, 2012), polyaromatic compounds (Natalia and Indarto, 
2008), soot (Indarto, 2009), and VOMs. The regulations of clean air are being 
more and more severe since these materials are possibly harmful to human 
health. Most current systems of air purification are founded on adsorbents 
or photocatalysts, like ACs or Ozonolysis. Nevertheless, traditional systems 
are not excellent for the removal of organic pollutant at ambient temperature. Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 427 
Sinha et al. proposed a novel material, which is extremely efficient for the 
elimination VOMs from air at ambient temperature (Sinha and Suzuki, 
2007). The material covers chromium classes with combined oxidation. 
While the three-dimensional mesoporous Cr2O3 presented around 0.1 times 
the surface area than that of mesoporous Si, the Cr2O3 displayed better 
ability to eliminate toluene. At ambient circumstances, the materials work 
as an eclectic sorbent for VOMs, whereas at high temperature, it can be an 
efficient and eclectic catalyst for the intense oxidation of VOMs. 
12.5.5 ADSORPTION OF ISOPROPYL ALCOHOL
In addition to its usage as a solvent, adsorption of isopropyl alcohol (IPA) is 
frequently utilized in the production of optoelectronic apparatuses. Due to 
the deficiency of air pollution monitoring, the vapor of IPA is liberated into 
the atmosphere without any remediation. The liberation of IPA is risky for 
the health of human and cause cancer and is irritating. For instance, Hsu and 
Lu performed an investigation on SWCNTs modified by HNO3 and NaClO 
solutions (Hsu and Lu, 2007). This material was then utilized to adsorb the 
vapor IPA. The oxidation of SWCNTs by NaClO, HNO3, and HCl solutions 
lead to the enhancement of the physical and chemical features of SWCNTs 
resulting in the minimization of pores size. Therefore, SWCNTs can act 
effectively as IPA vapor adsorbent from the air flow. Among the different 
proposed adsorbents, SWNTs oxidized by NaClO solution present the better 
performance for the adsorption of IPA vapor. 
Throughout the adsorption process, the chemical and physical interactions 
attract IPA. The chemical adsorption happens as a result of the chemical inter￾action among adsorbent molecules and adsorbent surface functional groups. 
The physical adsorption is arising from forces type van der Waals among 
adsorbates and adsorbent. The dissimilarity between these processes is very 
beneficial for comprehending the influences that modify the adsorption rate. 
By oxidizing SWCNTs by HNO3 and NaClO solutions, the physical 
adsorption capability value augmented from 29.5 mg/g (in raw adsorbent) 
to 42.7 (NaClO adsorbent) and 39.5 mg/g (in HNO3 adsorbent), while the 
chemical adsorption capability value increased from 10.8 mg/g (in raw adsor￾bent) to 26.8 and 43.5 mg/g, for HNO3 and NaClO solutions, respectively. 
The enhancement in physical adsorption capacity was possibly ascribed to 
the size of pores of SWCNTs that reduced to closely the size of IPA, thus 
strengthening the physical bonds among SWCNTs and vapor of IPA. Further, 
the enlarged surface area of micrometric pores may rise the bonds force. 428 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
The enhancement in chemical adsorption capacity might be attributable to 
a rise in the sites of basical surface. For a quite low inlet content of IPA, 
the adsorption mechanism of IPA vapor on SWCNTs and SWNTs oxidized 
with NaClO is principally engendered by physical strength, while for a quite 
elevated inlet content, adsorption mechanism of the IPA vapor on SWNTs/ 
NaClO can be engendered either by chemical or physical strengths. 
12.6 SOME COMMERCIALIZED NANOSENORS FOR AIR POLLUTION
Resistive sensors based on nanomaterials have been evidenced for the detec￾tion of atmospheric contaminants (like CO and NO2) in laboratory environ￾ments with a great specificity and sensitivity (Panda et al., 2016; Rickerby and 
Skouloudis, 2017). Nevertheless, the concentrations of gases are frequently in 
the range of ppm and above, thus, they are not appropriate for controlling the 
quality of air (sub-ppm). This task is still a challenge to be further investigated 
and validated. Yet, there are numerous commercialized gas nanosensors, prin￾cipally are founded on thin films, which have been exploited for controlling 
pollutants. Furthermore, numerous studies are focusing on nanomaterials￾based sensors to monitor the quality air are being rising. 
Commercially, the number of companies working on gas nanosensors 
are starting to boost. Several of these establishments are university spin-offs 
and remain under progress. Although there exist some nanomaterials-based 
sensors in the market, their selling has scarcely commenced. Companies 
are in continuous transformation, some vanish practically as quickly as they 
established, and others combined or changed their pathways. For instance, 
one of the companies that changed their directions is SGX SENSORTECH 
S.A. SGX is a recently established corporation that acquired over the activi￾ties of MicroChemical Systems SA (MiCS) in the construction and advance￾ment of gas sensors. MiCS was initiated in 98s by purchasing the business 
of Motorola’s gas sensors. Since 2001, the company based in Switzerland 
has founded its reputation in the market of automotive as supplier of semi￾conducting gas nanosensors. SGX possesses the MOX patented technology, 
which uses the latter MEMS technology generation that merges specialized 
nanoparticles sensing layers with a patented polysilicon heater. These nano￾sensors are able to detect and measure easily explosive and pollutant gases in 
parts per billions (ppb) and are adequate for numerous industrial, automotive, 
and environmental applications (Sensortech,). 
Dentoni and co-workers investigated the testing performances of a 
commercialized electronic nose with regard to three criteria (1) the limit Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 429 
of detection of the instrument, (2) the invariability response to changeable 
atmospheric conditions, and (3) the accuracy of classifying the odor 
(Dentoni et al., 2012). The measurements were performed in a zone of 
various industrial facilities. The electronic nose is constructed on six metal 
oxide sensors. Fan and co-workers carried out a classification of recorded 
information from numerous commercialized gas microsensors (TGS, MICS) 
in outside conditions (Fan et al., 2018). Their objective has been to assess the 
unverified algorithms of gas discrimination. 
Sensors based on MOX thin films made by SGX Sensotech (MiCS 2610 
(MiCS-2610,) and FIS SP-61 (A1320301-SP61 series,)) were exploited to 
measure the concentrations of low ozone (0–110 ppb) in existence of other 
interferents, such as humidity, ammonia, nitrogen oxides, carbon dioxide, 
and carbon monoxide (Sironi et al., 2016). MiCS-2610 sensor showed 
a lower response time compared with SP61 sensor. The detection limit is 
found to be of some ppb. Though short-term drifts were decided as satisfac￾tory, long-term drifts make the recalibration mandatory. 
Spinelle et al. have made a calibration of commercialized MOX sensors 
in country zones (Spinelle et al., 2015; Spinelle et al., 2017). SGX-Sensotech 
sensors, such as MiCS-4514 (MiCS-4514,) and MiCS-2710 (MiCS-2710,) 
were utilized in combination with diverse electrochemical sensors. By 
utilizing reference gas analyzers, these sensors were calibrated with 
respect to CO2, CO NO2, NO, and O3. The researchers adopted numerous 
calibration models, such as artificial neural networks (ANN), multivariate 
linear regression (MLR), and simple linear regression (LR) in order to 
estimate the uncertainty of measurements. ANN has shown the excellent 
performances. The problems of cross-sensitivity have been resolved and the 
humidity as well as the temperature impacts have been adjusted by means 
of electrochemical and MOX sensors. The researchers concluded that the 
usage of cluster of sensors could meet the data quality purposes made by the 
European Instruction for O3 at quasi-rural places. 
The evaluation of AQ microsensors for air quality with respect to reference 
approaches, known as the EuNetAir joint exercise, was performed for the 
first time in an urban zone (Aveiro, Portugal) (Borrego et al., 2016). Fifteen 
groups from diverse centers of research and companies, from 12 diverse 
nations have joined the movement. More than 100 sensors assembled with 
numerous platforms were installed to control diverse parameters (meteoro￾logical variables and atmospheric pollutants) by means of diverse principles 
of measurements (PID, NDIR, optical, electrochemical, MOX, etc.). It was 
concluded that the most appropriate microsensos, if they are endorsed by the 
appropriate post-treating and tools of data modeling, could be employed to 430 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
provide temporally and spatially valuable information related to the levels 
of air quality. The program made by the Air Quality Sensor Performance 
Evaluation Center (AQ-SPEC) has been established in order to perform a 
systematic investigation and evaluation of presently constructed low-cost 
sensors in ambient and controlled (laboratory) conditions (AQ-SPEC,). This 
center is focusing largely in complete systems like AQmesh, Air quality 
egg, and Aeroqual S500 among others that involve electrochemical and 
MOX sensors. CAIRSENSE (community air sensor network) project has 
been implemented to evaluate the performances of commercial and low-cost 
sensors in a suburban zone of about 2 km in the southeastern United States 
(Jiao et al., 2016). Rather than particle sensors, the scientists employed MOX 
and electrochemical-based sensors like the above-mentioned AQmesh, Air 
quality egg and Aeroqual S500. The association of diverse sensors that 
measure particles, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone, and nitrogen 
oxides demonstrated extremely high variable performances under real 
environments. The European COST Action TD1105 are developing a novel 
prototype for detecting gas pollutants founded on low-cost sensing technolo￾gies for monitoring the quality of air and are establishing interdisciplinary 
coordinated networks with highest level to perform novel processes in 
wireless sensor systems, sensing devices, gas sensors, sensor nanomaterials, 
distributed computing, models, approaches, standards, and protocols for the 
sustainability of environment in the European research region (Penza, 2015). 
Lately, EURAMET MACPoll research project has been initiated in order to 
construct gas sensors with low price and evaluate their performances for the 
monitoring of air quality (Publications Office of the EU). Nanosen-AQM 
project proposed to develop gas nanosensors-based electronic devices with 
low price for measuring the quality of air in the southwest Europe areas 
and providing data in a real-time. This project will permit, for example, 
costumers to have an idea about the quality of the air if it is good before 
exercising outside (NanoSen-AQM,). Additional examples of different types 
of commercialized low-cost nanosensors for monitoring air pollution can be 
found in a recent review made by Karagulian et al. (Karagulian et al., 2019). 
12.7 CONCLUSION
Nanostructured materials and nanotechnology are widely used for air 
pollution management through enormous efforts of researchers worldwide. 
Nanosensors of air pollutants should meet particular properties to be efficient 
for sensing, such as noncomplexity and reduced arrangement of sensor Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 431 
devices, reliability, reproducibility, reversibility, durability, low-cost, stability, 
the nanomaterials must interact with the analyte at the room conditions, the 
sensing circumstances including moisture, pressure, electrical current supply, 
temperature, etc. must be satisfactory. The availability of commercialized 
nanostructured material-based sensors is quite scarce. Furthermore, certain 
serious problems in utilizing nanostructured materials as sensing materials 
for air contaminants should be resolved. Scientists around the world are 
working hard to develop nanostructured materials as sensing materials with 
much better performances. Additionally, the obstacles for the utilization 
of nanostructured materials are mainly related with the difficulties faced 
in process, morphologies, size distribution, thermal and chemical stability, 
mechanical strength, processability problems, reproducibility problems, 
etc. Accordingly, researchers tend to employ more efficient and simple 
techniques. All these requirements remain a challenge to be achieved. 
KEYWORDS
• air pollution 
• sensors 
• nanomaterials nanotechnology 
• adsorption 
REFERENCES 
A1320301-SP61 series. New Ozone Sensor Modules. http://www.fisinc.co.jp/en/common/ 
pdf/A1320301-SP61 seriesE_P.pdf (accessed Jan 16, 2021). 
Aaron, D.; Tsouris, C. Separation of CO2 from Flue Gas: A Review. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2005, 
40, 321–348. https://doi.org/10.1081/SS-200042244 
Abideen, Z. U.; Kim, J. H.; Mirzaei, A.; Kim, H. W.; Kim, S. S. Sensing Behavior to ppm-Level 
Gases and Synergistic Sensing Mechanism in Metal-Functionalized rGO-Loaded ZnO 
Nanofibers. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 255, 1884–1896. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2017.08.210 
Abraham, N.; Reshma Krishnakumar, R.; Unni, C.; Philip, D. Simulation Studies on the 
Responses of ZnO-CuO/CNT Nanocomposite Based SAW Sensor to Various Volatile 
Organic Chemicals. J. Sci. Adv. Mater. Devices 2019, 4, 125–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jsamd.2018.12.006 
Ajeesha, T.; A, A.; George, M.; Manikandan, A.; Mary, J. A.; Slimani, Y.; Almessiere, M. 
A.; Baykal, A. Nickel Substituted MgFe2O4 Nanoparticles via Co-precipitation Method 432 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
for Photocatalytic Applications. Phys. B Condens. Matter. 2020, 412660. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.physb.2020.412660 
Alahmari, F.; Almessiere, M. A.; Slimani, Y.; Güngüneş, H.; Shirsath, S. E.; Akhtar, S.; 
Jaremko, M.; Baykal, A. Synthesis and Characterization of Electrospun Ni0.5Co0.5− 
xCdxNd0.02Fe1.78O4 Nanofibers. Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects 2020a, 24, 100542. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoso.2020.100542
Alahmari, F.; Almessiere, M. A.; Ünal, B.; Slimani, Y.; Baykal, A. Electrical and Optical 
Properties of Ni0·5Co0.5-xCdxNd0.02Fe1·78O4 (x ≤ 0.25) Spinel Ferrite Nanofibers. 
Ceram. Int. 2020b, 46, 24605–24614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.06.249 
Alahmari, F.; Rehman, S.; Almessiere, M.; Khan, F. A.; Slimani, Y.; Baykal, A. Synthesis 
of Ni0.5Co0.5-xCdxFe1.78Nd0.02O4 (x ≤ 0.25) Nanofibers by Using Electrospinning 
Technique Induce Anti-Cancer and Anti-Bacterial Activities. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 2020c, 
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/07391102.2020.1761880 
Albetran, H.; Slimani, Y.; Almessiere, M. A.; Alahmari, F.; Shirsath, S. E.; Akhtar, S.; Low, 
I. M.; Baykal, A.; Ercan, I. Synthesis, Characterization and Magnetic Investigation of 
Er-Substituted Electrospun NiFe2O4 Nanofibers. Phys. Scr. 2020, 95, 075801. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/1402-4896/ab8b7d 
Aleixandre, M.; Gerboles, M. Review of Small Commercial Sensors for Indicative Monitoring 
of Ambient Gas. Chem. Eng. Trans. 2012, 30, 169–174. https://doi.org/10.3303/CET1230029 
Almessiere, M. A.; Slimani, Y.; Güner, S.; Nawaz, M.; Baykal, A.; Aldakheel, F.; Akhtar, 
S.; Ercan, I.; Belenli.; Ozçelik, B. Magnetic and Structural Characterization of Nb 3+ 
-Substituted CoFe2O4 Nanoparticles. Ceram. Int. 2019a, 45, 8222–8232. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.01.125 
Almessiere, M. A.; Slimani, Y.; Guner, S.; Sertkol, M.; Demir Korkmaz, A.; Shirsath, S. E.; 
Baykal, A. Sonochemical Synthesis and Physical Properties of Co0.3Ni0.5Mn0.2EuxFe2− 
xO4 Nano-Spinel Ferrites. Ultrason. Sonochem. 2019b, 58, 104654. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.ultsonch.2019.104654 
Almessiere, M. A.; Slimani, Y.; Güngüneş, H.; Kostishyn, V. G.; Trukhanov, S. V.; Trukhanov, 
A. V.; Baykal, A. Impact of Eu3+ Ion Substitution on Structural, Magnetic and Microwave 
Traits of Ni–Cu–Zn Spinel Ferrites. Ceram. Int. 2020a, 46, 11124–11131. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.01.132 
Almessiere, M. A.; Trukhanov, A. V.; Khan, F. A.; Slimani, Y.; Tashkandi, N.; Turchenko, V. 
A.; Zubar, T. I.; Tishkevich, D. I.; Trukhanov, S. V.; Panina, L. V.; Baykal, A. Correlation 
between Microstructure Parameters and Anti-Cancer Activity of the [Mn0.5Zn0.5] 
(EuxNdxFe2-2x)O4 Nanoferrites Produced by Modified Sol-Gel and Ultrasonic Methods. 
Ceram. Int. 2020b, 46, 7346–7354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.11.230 
Almessiere, M. A. A.; Slimani, Y.; Korkmaz, A. D. D.; Taskhandi, N.; Sertkol, M.; Baykal, A.; 
Shirsath, S. E. S. E.; Ercan, İ.; Ozçelik, B.; Ercan.; Ozçelik, B. Sonochemical Synthesis of Eu3+ 
Substituted CoFe2O4 Nanoparticles and Their Structural, Optical and Magnetic Properties. 
Ultrason. Sonochem. 2019c, 58, 104621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2019.104621 
Ansari, M. A.; Albetran, H. M.; Alheshibri, M. H.; Timoumi, A.; Algarou, N. A.; Akhtar, 
S.; Slimani, Y.; Almessiere, M. A.; Alahmari, F. S.; Baykal, A.; Low, I.-M. Synthesis of 
Electrospun TiO2 Nanofibers and Characterization of Their Antibacterial and Antibiofilm 
Potential against Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative Bacteria. Antibiotics 2020, 9, 572. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics9090572 
AQ-SPEC. Air Quality Sensor Performance Evaluation Center. http://www.aqmd.gov/aq-spec 
(accessed Jan 16, 2021). Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 433 
Arsat, R.; Breedon, M.; Shafiei, M.; Spizziri, P. G.; Gilje, S.; Kaner, R. B.; Kalantar-zadeh, K.; 
Wlodarski, W. Graphene-Like Nano-Sheets for Surface Acoustic Wave Gas Sensor Appli￾cations. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2009, 467, 344–347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2008.11.039 
Barrett, B. F. D.; Therivel, R. Environmental Policy and Impact Assessment in Japan; 
Routledge, 2020. 
Barth, S.; Hernandez-Ramirez, F.; Holmes, J. D.; Romano-Rodriguez, A. Synthesis and 
Applications of One-Dimensional Semiconductors. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2010, 55, 563–627. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2010.02.001 
Bhattacharyya, P.; Acharyya, D.; Dutta, K. Resistive and Capacitive Measurement of Nano￾Structured Gas Sensors. In Environmental Nanotechnology; Dasgupta, N., Ranjan, S., 
Lichtfouse, E., Eds.; Springer: Cham, 2019; pp 25–62. 
Bhushan, B. Springer Handbook of Nanotechnology, 3rd ed.; Springer: New York, 2010. 
Biswas, A.; Bayer, I. S.; Biris, A. S.; Wang, T.; Dervishi, E.; Faupel, F. Advances in Top-Down 
and Bottom-Up Surface Nanofabrication: Techniques, Applications & Future Prospects. 
Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. 2012, 170, 2–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2011.11.001 
Bittencourt, C.; Felten, A.; Espinosa, E. H.; Ionescu, R.; Llobet, E.; Correig, X.; Pireaux, J. J. 
WO3 Films Modified with Functionalised Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotubes: Morphological, 
Compositional and Gas Response Studies. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2006, 115, 33–41. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2005.07.067 
Bjerkan, K. Y.; Nørbech, T. E.; Nordtømme, M. E. Incentives for Promoting Battery Electric 
Vehicle (BEV) Adoption in Norway. Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 2016, 43, 
169–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2015.12.002 
Borrego, C.; Costa, A. M.; Ginja, J.; Amorim, M.; Coutinho, M.; Karatzas, K.; Sioumis, T.; 
Katsifarakis, N.; Konstantinidis, K.; De Vito, S.; Esposito, E.; Smith, P.; André, N.; Gérard, 
P.; Francis, L. A.; Castell, N.; Schneider, P.; Viana, M.; Minguillón, M. C.; Reimringer, W.; 
Otjes, R. P.; von Sicard, O.; Pohle, R.; Elen, B.; Suriano, D.; Pfister, V.; Prato, M.; Dipinto, 
S.; Penza, M. Assessment of Air Quality Microsensors Versus Reference Methods: The 
EuNetAir Joint Exercise. Atmos. Environ. 2016, 147, 246–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
atmosenv.2016.09.050 
Brimblecombe, P. Attitudes and Responses Towards Air Pollution in Medieval England. J. Air 
Pollut. Control Assoc. 1976, 26, 941–945. https://doi.org/10.1080/00022470.1976.10470341 
Brock, S. L. Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 14679–14679. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja0409457 
Cao, G.; Wang, Y. Nanostructures and Nanomaterials; World Scientific, 2011. 
Chen, M.; Wang, Z.; Han, D.; Gu, F.; Guo, G. High-Sensitivity NO2 Gas Sensors Based 
on Flower-Like and Tube-Like ZnO Nanomaterials. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2011b, 157, 
565–574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2011.05.023 
Chen, M.; Wang, Z.; Han, D.; Gu, F.; Guo, G. Porous ZnO Polygonal Nanoflakes: Synthesis, 
Use in High-Sensitivity NO2 Gas Sensor, and Proposed Mechanism of Gas Sensing. J. 
Phys. Chem. C 2011a, 115, 12763–12773. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp201816d 
Cheng, L.; Ma, S. Y.; Li, X. B.; Luo, J.; Li, W. Q.; Li, F. M.; Mao, Y. Z.; Wang, T. T.; Li, Y. F. 
Highly Sensitive Acetone Sensors Based on Y-Doped SnO2 Prismatic Hollow Nanofibers 
Synthesized by Electrospinning. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 200, 181–190. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.04.063 
Cho, N. G.; Yang, D. J.; Jin, M. J.; Kim, H. G.; Tuller, H. L.; Kim, I. D. Highly Sensitive SnO2 
Hollow Nanofiber-Based NO2 Gas Sensors. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2011, 160, 1468–1472. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2011.07.035  
434 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Clément, P.; Del Castillo Perez, E.; Gonzalez, O.; Calavia, R.; Lucat, C.; Llobet, E.; Debéda, 
H. Gas Discrimination Using Screen-Printed Piezoelectric Cantilevers Coated with Carbon 
Nanotubes. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2016, 237, 1056–1065. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb. 
2016.07.163 
Comini, E.; Baratto, C.; Faglia, G.; Ferroni, M.; Vomiero, A.; Sberveglieri, G. Quasi-One 
Dimensional Metal Oxide Semiconductors: Preparation, Characterization and Application 
as Chemical Sensors. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2009, 54, 1–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci. 
2008.06.003 
Cudahy, J. J.; Helsel, R. W. Removal of Products of Incomplete Combustion with Carbon. In 
Waste Management; Elsevier Science Ltd, 2000; pp 339–345. 
Dentoni, L.; Capelli, L.; Sironi, S.; Rosso, R.; Zanetti, S.; Torre, M. Development of an 
Electronic Nose for Environmental Odour Monitoring. Sensors 2012, 12, 14363–14381. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s121114363 
Ding, B.; Wang, M.; Wang, X.; Yu, J.; Sun, G. Electrospun Nanomaterials for Ultrasensitive 
Sensors. Mater. Today 2010, 13, 16–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1369-7021(10)70200-5 
Donarelli, M.; Prezioso, S.; Perrozzi, F.; Bisti, F.; Nardone, M.; Giancaterini, L.; Cantalini, C.; 
Ottaviano, L. Response to NO2 and Other Gases of Resistive Chemically Exfoliated MoS2­
Based Gas Sensors. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 207, 602–613. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2014.10.099 
Duan, X.; Wang, C.; Pan, A.; Yu, R.; Duan, X. Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichal￾cogenides as Atomically Thin Semiconductors: Opportunities and Challenges. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2015, 44, 8859–8876. 
EPA United States. NAAQS Table | Criteria Air Pollutants | US EPA. In Epa, 2020. https:// 
www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants/naaqs-table (accessed Jan 16, 2021). 
Fan, H.; Bennetts, V. H.; Schaffernicht, E.; Lilienthal, A. J. A Cluster Analysis Approach Based 
on Exploiting Density Peaks for Gas Discrimination with Electronic Noses in Open Environ￾ments. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 259, 183–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2017.10.063 
Flick, C. The Movement for Smoke Abatement in 19th-Century Britain. Technol. Cult. 1980, 
21, 29–50. https://doi.org/10.2307/3103986 
Gao, H.; Jia, H.; Bierer, B.; Wöllenstein, J.; Lu, Y.; Palzer, S. Scalable Gas Sensors Fabrication 
to Integrate Metal Oxide Nanoparticles with Well-Defined Shape and Size. Sens. Actuat. B 
Chem. 2017, 249, 639–646. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2017.04.031 
Gates, B. D.; Xu, Q.; Stewart, M.; Ryan, D.; Willson, C. G.; Whitesides, G. M. New 
Approaches to Nanofabrication: Molding, Printing, and Other Techniques. Chem. Rev. 
2005, 105, 1171–1196. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr030076o 
Grosse, S. D.; Matte, T. D.; Schwartz, J.; Jackson, R. J. Economic Gains Resulting from the 
Reduction in Children’s Exposure to Lead in the United States. Environ. Health Perspect. 
2002, 110, 563–569. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.02110563 
Gunasekaran, S.; Thanrasu, K.; Manikandan, A.; Durka, M.; Dinesh, A.; Anand, S.; Shankar, 
S.; Slimani, Y.; Almessiere, M. A.; Baykal, A. Structural, fabrication and Enhanced 
Electromagnetic Wave Absorption Properties of Reduced Graphene Oxide (rGO)/Zirconium 
Substituted Cobalt Ferrite (Co0·5Zr0·5Fe2O4) Nanocomposites. Phys. B Condens. Matter 
2020, 412784. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physb.2020.412784 
Hamrita, A.; Slimani, Y.; Ben Salem, M. K.; Hannachi, E.; Bessais, L.; Ben Azzouz, F.; Ben 
Salem, M. Superconducting Properties of Polycrystalline YBa2Cu 3O7–D Prepared by 
Sintering of Ball-Milled Precursor Powder. Ceram. Int. 2014, 40, 1461–1470. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2013.07.030 Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 435 
Hannachi, E.; Almessiere, M. A. A.; Slimani, Y.; Baykal, A.; Ben Azzouz, F. AC Susceptibility 
Investigation of YBCO Superconductor Added by Carbon Nanotubes. J. Alloys Compd. 
2020, 812, 152150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2019.152150 
Hannachi, E.; Slimani, Y.; Ben Azzouz, F.; Ekicibil, A.; E Hannachi, Y. S. F. B. A. A. E. 
Higher Intra-Granular and Inter-Granular Performances of YBCO Superconductor with 
TiO2 Nano-Sized Particles Addition. Ceram. Int. 2018, 44, 18836–18843. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.07.118 
Hsu, S.; Lu, C. Modification of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes for Enhancing Isopropyl 
Alcohol Vapor Adsorption from Air Streams. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2007, 42, 2751–2766. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01496390701515060 
Huang, Z. M.; Zhang, Y. Z.; Kotaki, M.; Ramakrishna, S. A Review on Polymer Nanofibers 
by Electrospinning and Their Applications in Nanocomposites. Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2003, 63, 2223–2253. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0266-3538(03)00178-7 
Indarto, A. Heterogeneous Reactions of HONO Formation from NO2 and HNO3: A Review. 
Res. Chem. Intermed. 2012, 38, 1029–1041. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11164-011-0439-z 
Indarto, A. Soot Growth Mechanisms from Polyynes. Environ. Eng. Sci. 2009, 26, 1685–1691. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/ees.2007.0325 
Jiao, W.; Hagler, G.; Williams, R.; Sharpe, R.; Brown, R.; Garver, D.; Judge, R.; Caudill, M.; 
Rickard, J.; Davis, M.; Weinstock, L.; Zimmer-Dauphinee, S.; Buckley, K. Community Air 
Sensor Network (CAIRSENSE) Project: Evaluation of Low-Cost Sensor Performance in 
a Suburban Environment in the Southeastern United States. Atmos. Meas. Tech. 2016, 9, 
5281–5292. https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-9-5281-2016 
Joshi, N.; Hayasaka, T.; Liu, Y.; Liu, H.; Oliveira, O. N.; Lin, L. A Review on Chemiresistive 
Room Temperature Gas Sensors Based on Metal Oxide Nanostructures, Graphene and 2D 
Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Microchim. Acta 2018, 185, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00604-018-2750-5 
Kar, P. Nanomaterials Based Sensors for Air Pollution Control. In Environmental 
Nanotechnology; Dasgupta, N., Ranjan, S., Lichtfouse, E., Eds., Vol. 4; Springer: Cham, 
2020, pp 349–403. 
Karagulian, F.; Barbiere, M.; Kotsev, A.; Spinelle, L.; Gerboles, M.; Lagler, F.; Redon, N.; 
Crunaire, S.; Borowiak, A. Review of the Performance of Low-Cost Sensors for Air Quality 
Monitoring. Atmosphere (Basel). 2019, 10, 506. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos10090506 
Kilinc, N.; Cakmak, O.; Kosemen, A.; Ermek, E.; Ozturk, S.; Yerli, Y.; Ozturk, Z. Z.; Urey, H. 
Fabrication of 1D ZnO Nanostructures on MEMS Cantilever for VOC Sensor Application. 
Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 202, 357–364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.05.078 
Kim, I. D.; Rothschild, A. Nanostructured Metal Oxide Gas Sensors Prepared by 
Electrospinning. Polym. Adv. Technol. 2011, 22, 318–325. https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.1797 
Koblischka, M. R.; Koblischka-Veneva, A.; Zeng, X.; Hannachi, E.; Slimani, Y. Microstructure 
and Fluctuation-Induced Conductivity Analysis of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (Bi-2212) Nanowire 
Fabrics. Crystals 2020, 10, 986. https://doi.org/10.3390/cryst10110986 
Kolasinski, K. W. Catalytic Growth of Nanowires: Vapor-Liquid-Solid, Vapor-Solid-Solid, 
Solution-Liquid-Solid and Solid-Liquid-Solid Growth. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 
2006, 10, 182–191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cossms.2007.03.002 
Kolmakov, A.; Zhang, Y.; Cheng, G.; Moskovits, M. Detection of CO and O2 Using Tin Oxide 
Nanowire Sensors. Adv. Mater. 2003, 15, 997–1000. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200304889 
Konduracka, E. A Link between Environmental Pollution and Civilization Disorders: A Mini 
Review. Rev. Environ. Health 2019, 34, 227–233. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2018-0083 436 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Korotcenkov, G. Gas Response Control through Structural and Chemical Modification of 
Metal Oxide Films: State of the Art and Approaches. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2005, 107, 
209–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2004.10.006 
Kreyling, W. G.; Semmler-Behnke, M.; Chaudhry, Q. A Complementary Definition of 
Nanomaterial. Nano Today 2010, 5, 165–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2010.03.004 
Kulkarni, P. S.; Crespo, J. G.; Afonso, C. A. M. Dioxins Sources and Current Remediation 
Technologies—A Review. Environ. Int. 2008, 34, 139–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envint.2007.07.009 
Kumar, A.; Yasin, G.; Korai, R. M.; Slimani, Y.; Ali, M. F.; Tabish, M.; Tariq Nazir, M.; 
Nguyen, T. A. Boosting Oxygen Reduction Reaction Activity by Incorporating the Iron 
Phthalocyanine Nanoparticles on Carbon Nanotubes Network. Inorg. Chem. Commun. 
2020, 120, 108160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inoche.2020.108160 
Lee, J. H. Gas Sensors Using Hierarchical and Hollow Oxide Nanostructures: Overview. 
Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2009, 140, 319–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2009.04.026 
Li, F.; Gao, X.; Wang, R.; Zhang, T.; Lu, G. Study on TiO2-SnO2 Core-Shell Heterostructure 
Nanofibers with Different Work Function and Its Application in Gas Sensor. Sens. Actuat. 
B Chem. 2017a, 248, 812–819. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2016.12.009 
Li, Y. X.; Guo, Z.; Su, Y.; Jin, X. B.; Tang, X. H.; Huang, J. R.; Huang, X. J.; Li, M. Q.; Liu, J. H. 
Hierarchical Morphology-Dependent Gas-Sensing Performances of Three-Dimensional SnO2 
Nanostructures. ACS Sens. 2017b, 2, 102–110. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssensors.6b00597 
Liu, J.; Huang, H.; Zhao, H.; Yan, X.; Wu, S.; Li, Y.; Wu, M.; Chen, L.; Yang, X.; Su, B. 
L. Enhanced Gas Sensitivity and Selectivity on Aperture-Controllable 3D Interconnected 
Macro-Mesoporous ZnO Nanostructures. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 2016, 8, 8583–8590. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.5b12315 
Liu, S.; Yu, B.; Zhang, H.; Fei, T.; Zhang, T. Enhancing NO2 Gas Sensing Performances at 
Room Temperature Based on Reduced Graphene Oxide-ZnO Nanoparticles Hybrids. Sens. 
Actuat. B Chem. 2014, 202, 272–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.05.086 
Long, R. Q.; Yang, R. T. Carbon Nanotubes as a Superior Sorbent for Nitrogen Oxides. Ind. 
Eng. Chem. Res. 2001, 40, 4288–4291. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie000976k 
Lu, J. G.; Chang, P.; Fan, Z. Quasi-One-Dimensional Metal Oxide Materials-Synthesis, 
Properties and Applications. Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 2006, 52, 49–91. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.mser.2006.04.002 
Luo, W.; Fu, Q.; Zhou, D.; Deng, J.; Liu, H.; Yan, G. A Surface Acoustic Wave H2S Gas 
Sensor Employing Nanocrystalline SnO2 Thin Film. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2013, 176, 
746–752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2012.10.086 
Manikandan, A.; Yogasundari, M.; Thanrasu, K.; Dinesh, A.; Raja, K. K.; Slimani, Y.; 
Jaganathan, S. K.; Srinivasan, R.; Baykal, A. Structural, Morphological and Optical 
Properties of Multifunctional Magnetic-Luminescent ZnO@Fe3O4 Nanocomposite. 
Phys. E Low-Dimensional Syst. Nanostruct. 2020, 124, 114291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
physe.2020.114291 
Mei, L.; Guan, P.; Kong, Z. Remote Sensing of Atmospheric NO_2 by Employing the 
Continuous-Wave Differential Absorption Lidar Technique. Opt. Express 2017, 25, A953. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/oe.25.00a953 
Metz, B.; Davidson, O.; de Coninck, H.; Loos, M.; Meyer, L. Carbon Dioxide Capture and 
Storage: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change special Report; Cambridge University 
Press: Cambridge, 2005. Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 437 
MiCS-2610. MiCS-2610 O3 Sensor. https://www.cdiweb.com/datasheets/e2v/mics-2610.pdf 
(accessed Jan 16, 2021) 
MiCS-2710. MiCS-2710 NO2 Sensor. https://www.cdiweb.com/datasheets/e2v/mics-2710. 
pdf (accessed Jan 16, 2021) 
MiCS-4514. The MiCS-4514 Is a Compact MOS Sensor with Two Fully Independent Sensing 
Elements on One Package. Features Detectable Gases. https://www.sgxsensortech.com/ 
content/uploads/2014/08/0278_Datasheet-MiCS-4514-rev-16.pdf (accessed Jan 16,2021) 
Ministry of the Environment Government of Japan. Environmental Quality Standards in 
Japan—Air Quality [MOE], 2009. https://www.env.go.jp/en/air/aq/aq.html (accessed Jan 
16, 2021) 
Mochida, I.; Kawabuchi, Y.; Kawano, S.; Matsumura, Y.; Yoshikawa, M. High Catalytic 
Activity of Pitch-Based Activated Carbon Fibres of Moderate Surface Area for Oxidation 
of NO to NO2 at Room Temperature. Fuel 1997, 76, 543–548. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0016-2361(96)00223-2 
Mosadegh Sedghi, S.; Mortazavi, Y.; Khodadadi, A. Low temperature CO and CH4 dual 
selective gas sensor using SnO2 quantum dots prepared by sonochemical method. Sens. 
Actuat. B Chem. 2010, 145, 7–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2009.11.002 
Nadeem, M.; Yasin, G.; Arif, M.; Tabassum, H.; Bhatti, M. H.; Mehmood, M.; Yunus, U.; 
Iqbal, R.; Nguyen, T. A.; Slimani, Y.; Song, H.; Zhao, W. Highly Active Sites of Pt/Er 
Dispersed N-Doped Hierarchical Porous Carbon for Trifunctional Electrocatalyst. Chem. 
Eng. J. 2021, 409, 128205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.128205 
Nanda, A.; Nanda, S.; Nguyen, T. A.; Rajendran, S.; Slimani, Y. Nanocosmetics: Fundamentals, 
Applications and Toxicity; Elsevier, 2020. 
NanoSen-AQM. nanosenaqm.eu | Desarrollo y validación en campo de un sistema de nanosen￾sores de bajo consumo y bajo coste para la monitorización en tiempo real de la calidad del 
aire ambiente. https://www.nanosenaqm.eu/ (accessed Jan 16, 2021). 
Natalia, D.; Indarto, A. Aromatic Formation from Vinyl Radical and Acetylene. A Mechanistic 
Study. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc.2008,29, 319–322. https://doi.org/10.5012/bkcs.2008.29.2.319 
Neri, G. Thin 2D: The New Dimensionality in Gas Sensing. Chemosensors 2017, 5, 21. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/chemosensors5030021 
Official Journal of the European Communities. Council Directive 1999/30/EC, 1999. https:// 
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:31999L0030&from=EN 
(accessed Jan 16, 2021). 
Panda, D.; Nandi, A.; Datta, S. K.; Saha, H.; Majumdar, S. Selective Detection of Carbon 
Monoxide (CO) Gas by Reduced Graphene Oxide (rGO) at Room Temperature. RSC Adv. 
2016, 6, 47337–47348. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ra06058g 
Park, S.; An, S.; Mun, Y.; Lee, C. UV-Enhanced NO2 Gas Sensing Properties of SnO2­
Core/ZnO-Shell Nanowires at Room Temperature. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5, 
4285–4292. https://doi.org/10.1021/am400500a 
Penza, M. COST Action TD1105—European Network on New Sensing Technologies for 
Air Pollution Control and Environmental Sustainability. Overview and Plans. In Procedia 
Engineering; Elsevier Ltd, 2015; pp 476–479. 
Publications Office of the EU. Protocol of Evaluation and Calibration of Low-Cost Gas 
Sensors for the Monitoring of Air Pollution—Publications Office of the EU. https:// 
op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/bf86f3fe-c036-42cd-a347-f777230238a6/ 
language-en (accessed Jan 16, 2021). 438 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Rana, L.; Gupta, R.; Tomar, M.; Gupta, V. ZnO/ST-Quartz SAW Resonator: An Efficient 
NO2 Gas Sensor. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 252, 840–845. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2017.06.075 
Rickerby, D. G.; Skouloudis, A. N. Nanostructured Metal Oxides for Sensing Toxic Air 
Pollutants. In RSC Detect. Sci; Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017; pp 48–90. 
Santoro, S.; Parracino, S.; Fiorani, L.; D’Aleo, R.; Di Ferdinando, E.; Giudice, G.; Maio, 
G.; Nuvoli, M.; Aiuppa, A. Volcanic Plume CO2 Flux Measurements at Mount Etna by 
Mobile Differential Absorption Lidar. Geosciences 2017, 7, 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
geosciences7010009 
Santos, J.; Fernández, M.; Fontecha, J.; Matatagui, D.; Sayago, I.; Horrillo, M.; Gracia, I. 
Nanocrystalline Tin Oxide Nanofibers Deposited by a Novel Focused Electrospinning 
Method. Application to the Detection of TATP Precursors. Sensors 2014, 14, 24231–24243. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s141224231 
Santos, J. P.; Sayago, I.; Aleixandre, M. Air Quality Monitoring Using Nanosensors. In 
Nanomaterials for Air Remediation; Elsevier, 2020; pp 9–31. 
Seevakan, K.; Manikandan, A.; Devendran, P.; Slimani, Y.; Baykal, A.; Alagesan, T. 
Structural, Magnetic and Electrochemical Characterizations of Bi<inf>2</inf>Mo<inf>2</ 
inf>O<inf>9</inf> Nanoparticle for Supercapacitor Application. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2019, 486. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2019.165254 
Sensortech, S. Metal Oxide Sensors for Combustible Gases. https://www.sgxsensortech.com/ 
productsservices/industrial-safety/metal-oxide-sensors/ (accessed Jan 16, 2021). 
Sinha, A. K.; Suzuki, K. Novel Mesoporous Chromium Oxide for VOCs Elimination. Appl. 
Catal. B Environ. 2007, 70, 417–422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2005.10.035 
Sironi, S.; Capelli, L.; Spinelle, L.; Gerboles, M.; Aleixandre, M.; Bonavitacola, F. Evaluation 
of Metal Oxides Sensors for the Monitoring of O3 in Ambient Air at Ppb Level. Chem. Eng. 
Trans. 2016, 54, 319–324. https://doi.org/10.3303/CET1654054 
Slimani, Y.; Almessiere, M. A.; Güner, S.; Tashkandi, N. A.; Baykal, A.; Sarac, M. F.; Nawaz, 
M.; Ercan, I. Calcination Effect on the Magneto-Optical Properties of Vanadium Substituted 
NiFe2O4 Nanoferrites. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 2019a, 30, 9143–9154. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10854-019-01243-x 
Slimani, Y.; Almessiere, M. A.; Korkmaz, A. D.; Guner, S.; Güngüneş, H.; Sertkol, M.; Mani￾kandan, A.; Yildiz, A.; Akhtar, S.; Shirsath, S. E.; Baykal, A. Ni0.4Cu0.2Zn0.4TbxFe2-xO4 
Nanospinel Ferrites: Ultrasonic Synthesis and Physical Properties. Ultrason. Sonochem. 
2019b, 59, 104757. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2019.104757 
Slimani, Y.; Hannachi, E. Magnetic Nanosensors and Their Potential Applications. In 
Nanosensors for Smart Cities; Elsevier, 2020, pp 143–155. 
Slimani, Y.; Hannachi, E. Ru-Based Perovskites/RGO Composites for Applications in High 
Performance Supercapacitors. In Hybrid Perovskite Composite Materials; Elsevier, 2021, 
pp 335–354. 
Slimani, Y.; Hannachi, E.; Tombuloglu, H.; Güner, S.; Almessiere, M. A. A.; Baykal, A.; 
Aljafary, M. A. A.; Al-Suhaimi, E. A. A.; Nawaz, M.; Ercan, I. Magnetic Nanoparticles 
Based Nanocontainers for Biomedical Application; Elsevier, 2019c. 
Slimani, Y.; Unal, B.; Hannachi, E.; Selmi, A.; Almessiere, M. A.; Nawaz, M.; Baykal, A.; 
Ercan, I.; Yildiz, M. Frequency and dc Bias Voltage Dependent Dielectric Properties and 
Electrical Conductivity of BaTiO3-SrTiO3/(SiO2)x Nanocomposites. Ceram. Int. 2019d, 45, 
11989–12000. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.03.092 Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 439 
Song, Z.; Wei, Z.; Wang, B.; Luo, Z.; Xu, S.; Zhang, W.; Yu, H.; Li, M.; Huang, Z.; Zang, J.; 
Yi, F.; Liu, H. Sensitive Room-Temperature H2S Gas Sensors Employing SnO2 Quantum 
Wire/Reduced Graphene Oxide Nanocomposites. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 1205–1212. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b04850 
Spinelle, L.; Gerboles, M.; Villani, M. G.; Aleixandre, M.; Bonavitacola, F. Field Calibration 
of a Cluster of Low-Cost Available Sensors for Air Quality Monitoring. Part A: Ozone and 
Nitrogen Dioxide. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2015, 215, 249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2015.03.031 
Spinelle, L.; Gerboles, M.; Villani, M. G.; Aleixandre, M.; Bonavitacola, F. Field Calibration 
of a Cluster of Low-Cost Commercially Available Sensors for Air Quality Monitoring. Part 
B: NO, CO and CO2. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 238, 706–715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2016.07.036 
SRF Consulting Group Inc. A Review of National and International Odor Policy, Odor 
Measurement Technology and Public Administration, 2004. https://www.pca.state.mn.us/ 
sites/default/files/p-gen2-02.pdf (accessed Jan 16, 2021) 
Star, A.; Joshi, V.; Skarupo, S.; Thomas, D.; Gabriel, J. C. P. Gas Sensor Array Based on 
Metal-Decorated Carbon Nanotubes. J. Phys. Chem. B 2006, 110, 21014–21020. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jp064371z 
Stroud, D. A. Regulation of Some Sources of Lead Poisoning: A Brief Review. In Proceedings 
of the Oxford Lead Symposium; Edward Grey Institute: University of Oxford Oxford, UK, 
pp 8–26. 
Sun, Z.; Liao, T.; Dou, Y.; Hwang, S. M.; Park, M. S.; Jiang, L.; Kim, J. H.; Dou, S. X. 
Generalized Self-Assembly of Scalable Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Oxide 
Nanosheets. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4813 
Tai, H.; Jiang, Y.; Xie, G.; Yu, J.; Chen, X.; Ying, Z. Influence of Polymerization Temperature 
on NH3 Response of PANI/TiO2 Thin Film Gas Sensor. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2008, 129, 
319–326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2007.08.013 
Ullah, S.; Yasin, G.; Ahmad, A.; Qin, L.; Yuan, Q.; Khan, A. U.; Khan, U. A.; Rahman, A. U.; 
Slimani, Y. Construction of Well-Designed 1D Selenium-Tellurium Nanorods Anchored 
on Graphene Sheets as a High Storage Capacity Anode Material for Lithium-Ion Batteries. 
Inorg. Chem. Front. 2020, 7, 1750–1761. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9qi01701a 
Von Storch, H.; Costa-Cabral, M.; Hagner, C.; Feser, F.; Pacyna, J.; Pacyna, E.; Kolb, 
S. Four Decades of Gasoline Lead Emissions and Control Policies in Europe: A 
Retrospective Assessment. Sci. Total Environ. 2003, 311, 151–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0048-9697(03)00051-2 
Wang, C.; Li, X.; Feng, C.; Sun, Y.; Lu, G. Nanosheets Assembled Hierarchical Flower-Like 
WO3 Nanostructures: Synthesis, Characterization, and Their Gas Sensing Properties. Sens. 
Actuat. B Chem. 2015a, 210, 75–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.12.020 
Wang, C. T.; Chen, M. T. Vanadium-Promoted Tin Oxide Semiconductor Carbon Monoxide 
Gas Sensors. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2010, 150, 360–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2010.06.060 
Wang, L.; Cao, J.; Qian, X.; Zhang, H. Facile Synthesis and Enhanced Gas Sensing Properties 
of Grain Size-Adjustable In2O3 Micro/Nanotubes. Mater. Lett. 2016, 171, 30–33. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2016.02.053 
Wang, S.; Yang, J.; Zhang, H.; Wang, Y.; Gao, X.; Wang, L.; Zhu, Z. One-Pot Synthesis of 3D 
Hierarchical SnO2 Nanostructures and Their Application for Gas Sensor. Sens. Actuat. B 
Chem. 2015b, 207, 83–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.10.032 440 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Wanna, Y.; Srisukhumbowornchai, N.; Tuantranont, A.; Wisitsoraat, A.; Thavarungkul, N.; 
Singjai, P. The Effect of Carbon Nanotube Dispersion on CO Gas Sensing Characteristics 
of Polyaniline Gas Sensor. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2006, 6, 3893–3896. https://doi. 
org/10.1166/jnn.2006.675 
Wettestad, J. Clearing the Air: European Advances in Tackling Acid Rain and Atmospheric 
Pollution; Taylor and Francis, 2018. 
White, C. M.; Strazisar, B. R.; Granite, E. J.; Hoffman, J. S.; Pennline, H. W. Separation 
and Capture of CO2 from Large Stationary Sources and Sequestration in Geological 
Formations—Coalbeds and Deep Saline Aquifers. J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 2003, 53, 
645–715. https://doi.org/10.1080/10473289.2003.10466206 
Wielgosiński, G. The Possibilities of Reduction of Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-Dioxins and 
Polychlorinated Dibenzofurans Emission. Int. J. Chem. Eng. 2010, Article ID 392175. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/392175 
Williams, R. O.; Carvalho, T. C.; Peters, J. I. Influence of Particle Size on Regional Lung 
Deposition—What Evidence Is There? Int. J. Pharm.2011,406, 1–10.https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.ijpharm.2010.12.040 
World Health Organisation. Air Quality Guidelines Global Update 2005—World Health 
Organisation, 2006. https://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/outdoorair_aqg/en/ 
(accessed Jan 16, 2021). 
World Health Organization. Air Pollution, 2019. https://www.who.int/airpollution/en/ (accessed
 Jan 16, 2021). 
Xu, C.; Tamaki, J.; Miura, N.; Yamazoe, N. Grain Size Effects on Gas Sensitivity of 
Porous SnO2-Based Elements. Sens. Actuators B. Chem. 1991, 3, 147–155. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0925-4005(91)80207-Z 
Xu, X.; Zhang, H.; Hu, X.; Sun, P.; Zhu, Y.; He, C.; Hou, S.; Sun, Y.; Lu, G. Hierarchical 
Nanorod-Flowers Indium Oxide Microspheres and Their Gas Sensing Properties. Sens. 
Actuat. B Chem. 2016, 227, 547–553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2015.12.085 
Yan, W.; Hu, M.; Zeng, P.; Ma, S.; Li, M. Room Temperature NO2 -Sensing Properties of 
WO3 Nanoparticles/Porous Silicon. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2014, 292, 551–555. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2013.11.169 
Yasin, G.; Anjum, M. J.; Malik, M. U.; Khan, M. A.; Khan, W. Q.; Arif, M.; Mehtab, T.; 
Nguyen, T. A.; Slimani, Y.; Tabish, M.; Ali, D.; Zuo, Y. Revealing the Erosion-Corrosion 
Performance of Sphere-Shaped Morphology of Nickel Matrix Nanocomposite Strengthened 
with Reduced Graphene Oxide Nanoplatelets. Diam. Relat. Mater. 2020a, 104, 107763. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diamond.2020.107763 
Yasin, G.; Arif, M.; Mehtab, T.; Shakeel, M.; Mushtaq, M. A.; Kumar, A.; Nguyen, T. A.; 
Slimani, Y.; Nazir, M. T.; Song, H. A Novel Strategy for the Synthesis of Hard Carbon 
Spheres Encapsulated with Graphene Networks as a Low-Cost and Large-Scalable Anode 
Material for Fast Sodium Storage with an Ultralong Cycle Life. Inorg. Chem. Front. 2020b, 
7, 402–410. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9qi01105f 
Yu, H.; Ortega, J.; Smith, J. N.; Guenther, A. B.; Kanawade, V. P.; You, Y.; Liu, Y.; Hosman, 
K.; Karl, T.; Seco, R.; Geron, C.; Pallardy, S. G.; Gu, L.; Mikkilä, J.; Lee, S.-H. New 
Particle Formation and Growth in an Isoprene-Dominated Ozark Forest: From Sub-5 nm 
to CCN-Active Sizes. Aerosol Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 1285–1298. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02786826.2014.984801 Air Pollution Management by Nanomaterials 441 
Yunus, I. S.; Harwin.; Kurniawan, A.; Adityawarman, D.; Indarto, A. Nanotechnologies in 
Water and Air Pollution Treatment. Environ. Technol. Rev. 2012, 1, 136–148. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/21622515.2012.733966 
Zanolli, Z.; Leghrib, R.; Felten, A.; Pireaux, J. J.; Llobet, E.; Charlier, J. C. Gas Sensing with 
Au-Decorated Carbon Nanotubes. ACS Nano 2011, 5, 4592–4599. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
nn200294h 
Zhang, D.; Jiang, C.; Liu, J.; Cao, Y. Carbon Monoxide Gas Sensing at Room Temperature 
Using Copper Oxide-Decorated Graphene Hybrid Nanocomposite Prepared by Layer-by￾Layer Self-Assembly. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 247, 875–882. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2017.03.108 
Zhang, H. Ultrathin Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 9451–9469. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b05040 
Zhang, Z.; Xu, M.; Liu, L.; Ruan, X.; Yan, J.; Zhao, W.; Yun, J.; Wang, Y.; Qin, S.; Zhang, 
T. Novel SnO2@ZnO Hierarchical Nanostructures for Highly Sensitive and Selective 
NO2 Gas Sensing. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2018, 257, 714–727. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2017.10.190 
Zhao, L.; Choi, M.; Kim, H. S.; Hong, S. H. The Effect of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube 
Doping on the CO Gas Sensitivity of SnO2-Based Nanomaterials. Nanotechnology 2007, 
18, 445501. https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-4484/18/44/445501 
Zhou, L.; Shen, F.; Tian, X.; Wang, D.; Zhang, T.; Chen, W. Stable Cu2O Nanocrystals 
Grown on Functionalized Graphene Sheets and Room Temperature H2S Gas Sensing with 
Ultrahigh Sensitivity. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 1564–1569. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2nr33164k 
Zhou, Y.; Liu, G.; Zhu, X.; Guo, Y. Ultrasensitive NO2 Gas Sensing Based on rGO/MoS2 
Nanocomposite Film at Low Temperature. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2017, 251, 280–290. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2017.05.060 PART V
 
Nanobioremediation
 AHMED ALI ROMEH*
Plant Production Department, Faculty of Technology and Development, 
Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt
*
E-mail: ahmedromeh2006@yahoo.com
ABSTRACT
Among the most serious threats to soil and water supply are persistent organic 
compounds and heavy metals that pollute the soil, which accumulate in the soil 
of agricultural fields and reach the food chain, causing serious health effects. 
Recently, scientists have tried to search for advanced methods and continuity 
between them, such as treatment with nano-phytoremediation, in order to 
demonstrate real efficiency in removing persistent organic pollutants and heavy 
metals in soil and water. Phytoremediation is a mechanism that uses the green 
plants to decontaminate, uptake, stabilize, metabolize, or detoxify contaminants 
from soil, water, and waste. Plants with unusual metal-accumulating ability 
of metals in their above-ground parts are known as hyperaccumulator plants, 
such as Alyssum bertolonii, Thlaspi caerulescens, Calendula officinalis, and
Tagetes erecta. Significant surface areas, a high number of active surface sites 
and high adsorption capabilities make nanomaterials a favorable alternative 
for polluted soil remediation. The different physical and chemical properties 
of heavy metal ions and interactions with nano zerovalent iron (nZVI)-based 
materials play an important role in different adsorption processes, including 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 13
Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants 
and Nanomaterials to Environmental 
Pollution Remediation446 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
adsorption, redox, aggregation, ion exchange, hydroxylation, and subsequent 
precipitation. Unfortunately, the direct use of nZVI is restricted by powder 
state as a result of the small particle size and, and the intrinsic characteristics of 
nZVI to react with surrounding media or agglomerate during the preparation 
process decreases the reactivity of nanoparticles and also results in poor 
mobility and efficient transfer of nZVI to the contaminated area for continuous 
in situ remediation. To address this problem, integrating phytoremediation 
with nanotechnology provides a better solution for heavy metals and 
hydrophobic organic pollutants remediation, through various mechanisms. 
Nanomaterials can enhance phytoremediation by direct pollutant removal 
by nanomaterials through redox reactions, surface processes, adsorption, ion 
exchange, surface complexation, and electrostatic interaction, or by improving 
plant growth and development, such as plant-growth promoting rhizobacteria 
(PGPR), applying plant growth regulators and using transgenic plants, and 
increasing the phytoavailability. Several authors studied the combination 
between nanotechnology and phytotechnology for detoxification of organic 
pollutants and remediation of heavy metals in contaminated environments. 
Integration of organic acids (i.e., citric, malic, tartaric, and oxalic acids), 
organic amendments, and nZVI with phytoremediation are feasible practices 
for the repair of metal polluted soils, which can be because of the resulting 
increase in reactive surface locations, higher nZVI volume to surface area, 
which might bind to more metal ions and enhancing availability of heavy 
metals for phytoremediation. Moreover, recent studies have shown beneficial 
effects of microorganisms in the rhizosphere with nanotechnology on the 
performance of phytoremediation in removing heavy metals. The combination 
of bioamendments with nZVI remediation techniques maximizes the favorable 
effect of nZVI and minimizes its toxicity and improves growth parameters 
and gas exchange, leading to new insight into nZVI heavy metal remediation. 
Green nanotechnology can provide safe and environmentally friendly 
possibilities to clean and manage the ecosystem without harming the nature. 
The appropriate types of plants and nanomaterials must be selected to uptake 
the pollutants, along with improving the agricultural management of the 
high-precision cleaning process. For example, the combination of Ficus ZVI 
(F–Fe0
), ipomoea–silver (Ip–Ag0
), and brassica–silver nanoparticles (Br–Ag0
) 
as green nanotechnology, and Plantago major as phytoremediation has played 
a principal role in the clean-up of water and soil polluted with chlorfenapyr 
(Romeh and Saber, 2020). In addition, the contribution of adsorbents assisted 
by F–Fe0
, in particular, wheat bran (WB) and P. major would play an effective 
role in the complete removal of chlorpyrifos from the water with a significant Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 447 
reduction in the dangerous degradation product TCP (Rady et al., 2019). It can 
be concluded that the impact of Fe0
 on phytoremediation may be an important 
issue, and alternatives are required to mitigate its potential negative effects on 
phytoremediation or accelerate its positive effects. 
13.1 INTRODUCTION
The main source of pollution of organic compounds is accidental spills of 
petroleum-based products used in transportation (usually diesel fuel), while 
other activities such as mining, agriculture, and fossil fuel use lead to a large 
amount of metal pollutants being discharged into the soil (Barrutia et al., 
2011; Khan and Kathi, 2014). These pollutants in the soils need to search for 
new technologies for their decontamination (Agnello et al., 2016). 
Among the most serious threats to soil and water supply are persistent 
organic compounds and heavy metals that pollute the soil, which accumulate 
in the soil of agricultural fields and reach the food chain, causing serious 
health effects (Verma et al., 2021). The movement of these contaminants 
through the soil into noncontaminated areas as dust or leachates leads to 
ecosystem pollution (Tangahu et al., 2011). 
Heavy metal ions, such as Cr, Pb, Fe, Cu, Zn, Hg, and Ni, cannot be 
broken down into cleaning materials compared to conventional organic 
contaminants (Hu et al., 2012), which have accumulated in living organisms 
and are considered to be highly toxic or carcinogenic to most of them (Liu et 
al., 2013). In addition, reduced crop productivity and productivity can occur 
in heavily polluted soils due to changes in the morphological, physiological, 
and chemical processes vital to plant species (Fabbricino et al., 2018; 
Rehman et al., 2019; Feller et al., 2019). Also, with the rapid advancement 
in industrialization, the disposal of industrial effluents poses serious threats 
to the environment and becomes the greatest concern of the sustainable 
development of human society. Several conventional techniques are already 
being used to remediate the environment from these contaminants including 
soil washing, soil flushing, thermal desorption, incineration, chemical 
precipitation, electrochemical treatment, electrodialysis, evaporative 
recovery, ultrafiltration, ion-exchange, oxidation/reduction, reverse osmosis, 
filtration, adsorption, and membrane technologies (Román-Ross et al., 
2006; Bouhamed et al., 2012; Azarudeen et al., 2013; Ashraf et al., 2017, 
2019). Most of these methods, however, have several drawbacks, such as 
high costs, long response times, poor degradation efficiency, far from ideal 448 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
performance, and are not an effective method of removing dangerous heavy 
metals and other organic pollutants from agricultural land (Muszynska and 
Hanus-Fajerska, 2015; Kołaci ´nski et al., 2017; Bao et al., 2019). Therefore, 
it is important to research new cost-effective and safe treatment technologies 
to remove organic pollutants or detoxify water and soil. More recently, 
scientists have tried to look for many methods and continuity between them 
in order to show the excellent removal capacity of heavy metals and organic 
compounds in soil and water. Of these attempts, the use of nanotechnology, 
phytoremediation, and nano-phytoremediation with the assistance of other 
processes that enhance the performance of phytoremediation such as green 
nanotechnology helped by adsorbent materials to improve the process of 
adsorption and reduction of both organic and metals, oxidation process with 
strong oxidants such as H2O2, persulfate, and permanganate to improve the 
dissipation of organic pollutants. 
13.2 PHYTOREMEDIATION TECHNOLOGIES OF POLLUTANTS
Phytoremediation is a technique that uses plants to remove, uptake, stabilize, 
metabolize, and detoxify contaminants from soil, water, and waste (Kuo 
et al. 2014; Ali et al., 2020). Phytoremediation is an environmentally 
sustainable pollution reduction, control, and remediation technology. 
Phytoremediation for heavy metals is part of the new green technologies 
that uptake metals from the soil to store them in the upper parts of plants, 
which can then be harvested (Chaturvedi et al., 2016). The efficiency of this 
technique depends on the plants’ growth rates and their ability to absorb 
and uptake metals in their shoots (Romeh et al., 2016). This emerging 
technology is a promising remediation tool that is effective, inexpensive, 
fast, safe, economical, compatible, environmental friendly, and low cost. It 
is one of the main components of green technology, and it allows cheap 
decontamination of hazardous waste sites. It can be applied directly to 
polluted sites where other methods of treatment are too costly (Ashraf et 
al., 2019; Saleem et al., 2020; Ali et al., 2020). For agricultural land and 
water bodies, there are different forms of phytoremediation, such as 
phytotransformation, bioremediation of the rhizosphere, phytostabilization, 
phytoextraction (phytoaccumulation), rhizofiltration, phytovolatilization, 
phytodegradation, and hydraulic regulation. Plants with extraordinary 
metal-accumulating capacity in their above- ground portions are known as 
hyperaccumulator plants (Usman et al., 2018; Verma et al., 2021). These Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 449 
include Alyssum bertolonii, Thlaspi caerulescens, Calendula officinalis, 
and Tagetes erecta (Assunçao et al., 2003). Hyperaccumulating plants are 
recognized as containing more than 1000 mg/kg dry weight of Ni, Cu, and 
Pb, and 100 mg/kg dry weight of Cd (Hasan et al., 2019). Because plants 
take time to grow and thrive, it is regarded as a slow process. Remediation 
and heavy metal extraction by plants are typically limited by the availability 
of heavy metals in soils (Jiang et al., 2019). It is, therefore, necessary to 
increase the adequacy of phytoremediation through the technique of heavy 
metal phytoextraction. One common approach is the use of nanotechnology, 
which allows the uptake and translocation of heavy metals in the above￾ground parts of plants. However, phytoremediation takes characteristics of 
the specific and selective accumulation capabilities of plant root systems, 
with regard to organic contaminants, along with the translocation and 
contaminant dissipation capacities of the plant body (Tangahu et al., 2011). 
The efficiency of the remediation of organic contaminated soil is affected 
by the solubility and bioavailability of the contaminants. Phytoremediation 
is not an effective remedy for soils polluted with highly hydrophobic 
compounds, which are not easily transported within the plant. These 
chemicals include polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs), petroleum hydrocarbons, radio nucleosides, and 
explosives with log Kow higher than 3.0. They are bound (and are, therefore, 
unable to dissipate in the rhizosphere) so strongly to the surface of roots that 
they are not easily translocated to aerial tissues (Germida et al., 2002). In 
addition, its strong hydrophobic nature, which results from low solubility, is 
correlated with soil organic matter and minerals, making it less bioavailable 
and more recalcitrant (Megharaj et al., 2011). The low water solubility of 
highly hydrophobic organic contaminants is calculated by the rate of uptake 
and metabolism, restricts mobility, and bioavailability (Shekhar et al., 2015). 
For moderately hydrophobic compounds with a log Kow range of 0.5–3.0, 
plant roots tend to be picked up and join the xylem stream for eventual 
accumulation or degradation (Chakraborty and Das, 2016). Water soluble 
chemicals with log Kow lower than 0.5 are not sufficiently absorbed to roots 
or actively transported through plant membranes (Chirakkara et al., 2016). 
In order to resolve these issues, plants and other technologies such as the 
presence of nanotechnologies that enhance soil bioavailability are combined 
in phytoremediation to promote the removal of such organic contaminants 
in soils by enhancing their bioavailability, plant uptake, or microbial 
degradation, thus improving the efficacy of in situ phytoremediation. 450 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
13.3 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN THE REMEDIATION OF 
ENVIRONMENTAL SITES 
The nano zerovalent iron (nZVI) application will influence metal accumulator 
plants as an essential part of ecosystems and the phytoremediation process in 
heavy metal-contaminated sites. Due to its large surface areas, increased number 
of active surface sites and excellent absorption capabilities, nanomaterials 
are the promising alternative for polluted soil remediation. nZVI has shown 
tremendous potential for the reduction of heavy metal ion transformation, 
which is due to adequate mobility and excellent efficiency (Zhang, 2003; 
Kirschling et al., 2010). In addition, because of their smaller size and large 
surface area, nZVI has a good affinity with metals, so they easily penetrate 
into the contamination zone of metal-challenged ecosystems. Nanoscale nZVI, 
through its controllable particle size, high reactivity and abundant reactive 
surface sites, has been successfully used to treat various metal ions in aqueous 
solutions and stabilize biosolids (Yan et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2013; Zou et 
al., 2016; Li et al., 2017). Unfortunately, the direct use of nZVI is restricted 
by the small particle size and powder state, and the intrinsic characteristics of 
nZVI to react with surrounding media or agglomerate during the preparation 
process decreases the reactivity of nanoparticles and also results in poor 
mobility and efficient transfer of nZVI to the polluted area for continuous in 
situ remediation (Grieger et al., 2010; O’Carroll et al., 2013). Furthermore, the 
use of nZVI to actual polluted soil is too costly to be likely to be a beneficial 
remediation practice. There are so many questions regarding its use, including 
possible conflict with other phytotechnologies of remediation and potential 
risk to both human and environmental ecosystem (Patil et al., 2016). To 
address this problem, nZVI-based materials, including surface-modified nZVI 
(SM-nZVI), nZVI-supported porous material, activated carbon, and multi￾walled carbon nanotubes, CMC-nZVI, and nZVI-supported inorganic clay 
minerals (e.g., kaolinite, zeolite, clay, montmorillonite, rectorite, palygorskite, 
and bentonite) were successfully synthesized as effective adsorbents to isolate 
the contaminants from the environment (Shu et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2013; 
Wang et al., 2014; Zou et al., 2016). 
13.4 REMEDIATION OF HEAVY METAL CONTAMINATED SITES BY 
NANO-PHYTOREMEDIATION
Integrating phytoremediation with nanotechnology provides a better solution 
for heavy metal remediation. The integration strategy of phytoremediation Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 451 
and nZVI (nano-phytoremediation) is a new emerging technology for reme￾diation of pollutants (Gil-Diaz et al., 2016; Gong et al., 2017), where nZVI 
is able to reduce the bioavailability of heavy metals in the soil and improve 
the growth of plants (Tafazoli et al., 2017). The usage of nanoparticles can 
also enhance the stress tolerance of plants in different conditions due to 
improving phytoremediation potential (Pillai and Kottekottil, 2016; Souri et 
al., 2017). The amendment of phytoremediation with nanoparticles include 
an important step in the progress of soil decontamination. Several authors 
studied the combination between nanotechnology and phytotechnology for 
detoxification or remediation the organic, inorganic, and heavy metal pollut￾ants in contaminated environments. Harikumar et al., (2019) showed that 
both phytoremediation and nano-phytoremediation (nZVI) resulted in phyto￾stabilization of Pb in contaminated soil. Gil-Dıaz et al., (2016) found that the 
use of 10% nZVI significantly lowered the accumulate and uptake of As in 
roots and shoots plant, respectively. Also, the height and dry weight of barley 
plants under metal stress has increased, while Singh and Lee (2016) reported 
that a usage of nano-TiO2 can improve Cd uptake from 128.5 to 507.6 μg/ 
plant due to addition of 100–300 mg/kg TiO2 NPs to soil and minimize Cd 
stress in soybean plants. Since nano-TiO2 particles are small (<5 nm) in size 
and are able to form a covalent bond with most nonconjugated forms of 
normal living matter and translocations into the roots and shoot tissues of 
plants upon a specific distribution (Aslani et al., 2014). In addition, nano￾TiO2 application restricts Cd toxicity as a result of an increase in the rate of 
photosynthetic rate and growth rates of plants (Singh and Lee, 2016). The 
decrease concentrations of nZVI (100–500 mg/kg) could effectively provide 
high accumulation capacity for Pb with the increase of biomass, and also 
promoted the plant growth indicated by the lower oxidative stress in plants. 
Moreover, the application of nZVI-treated sediment reduced the toxicity of 
heavy metal, and this was due to the low acidity lower acid soluble fraction 
and higher residual fraction of Pb (Huang et al., 2018). Also, Huang et al. 
(2018) showed a stimulatory response of the nZVI in low doses in integration 
with phytoremediation in Pb-contaminated soil by ryegrass (Lolium perenne) 
plant. Using nano-hydroxyapatite (0.2% w/w) has been reported effective in 
promoting Pb phytoextraction efficiency by ryegrass. With the assistance of 
nano-hydroxyapatite, ryegrass removed over 30% of Pb in the soil after 1 
month and 44.39% after 3 months (Liang et al., 2017). Some nanomaterials 
have been demonstrated to enhance the phytoextraction of Cd in soil. Singh 
and Lee (2016) reported the favorable response of TiO2 nanoparticles on Cd 
accumulation in soybean plants. Studies showed that the phytoremediation 
of soil contaminated with cadmium, chromium, lead, nickel, and zinc could 452 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
be enhanced by applying nanomaterials (Tripathi et al., 2015; Singh and Lee, 
2016; Liang., et al., 2017; Vítková et al., 2018), for example, application 
of low to moderate concentrations of nZVI (100–500 mg/kg) enhanced Pb 
accumulation capacity in roots and shoots of Kochia scoparia (Daryabeigi., 
et al., 2020). The efficiency of Trifolium repens substantially improved using 
nZVI for Sb with the greatest accumulation capacity of 3896.4 μg per pot 
gained in the “PGPR+500 mg/kg nZVI” treatment (Zand et al., 2020). 
13.5 INTERACTION MECHANISM BETWEEN NZVI-BASED 
MATERIALS, POLLUTANTS, AND PLANTS IN PHYTOREMEDIATION 
The effect of nZVI on phytoremediation may be an important issue, and 
alternatives are required to either mitigate its potential negative effects on 
phytoremediation or accelerate its positive effects (Mokarram-Kashtiban et 
al., 2019). Nanoparticles suitable for phytoremediation should be nontoxic 
for plants; increase germination, growth of seedlings, root–shoot elongation, 
plant height, and biomass; increase plant development of phytoenzymes; 
improve plant growth hormones and contaminant binding capabilities; and 
increase bioavailability for plant and enhanced phytoremediation technology. 
In plants (Srivastav et al., 2018), the uptake of nanoparticles is principally 
due to their size, form, and chemical composition. Size is the nanoparticle’s 
key factor in entering the plants and moving from the roots to other areas 
of the plants (Ma et al., 2010; Cornelis et al., 2014). Plants can accumulate 
nanomaterials by mycorrhizal fungi (Whiteside et al., 2009) or by osmotic 
pressure (e.g., through pores in cell walls), by intercellular plasmodesmata, 
or by symplastic uptake, linked to their particular uptake (Lin et al., 2009). 
One hypothesis is that, by making holes and permeating into the cells through 
these holes, ZnO nanoparticles might be able to increase the permeability 
of plant cell walls and move them through plasmodesmata between cells 
(Lin and Xing, 2008). In addition, nanoparticles will be strongly adsorbed 
in the roots, thereby exerting effects—even without actually being 
taken up as particles (Navarro et al., 2012). The nano-phytoremediation 
technique for the remediation of polluted soil is based on the application 
of plant-based nanoparticles (NP type, dosage, and speciation) and 
methods of phytoremediation (e.g., phytostabilization, phytoextraction, and 
phytodegradation). The different plant species and varieties of nanoparticles 
are used in contaminant nano-phytoremediation experiments (Srivastav et 
al., 2018). The mechanism of interaction for pollutants with materials based Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 453 
on nZVI is debatable. Heavy metal ions express different physicochemical 
properties and interactions with nZVI-based materials in different adsorption 
processes by physical and chemical reactions, including adsorption, redox, 
aggregation, ion exchange, hydroxylation, and subsequent precipitation. The 
interaction mechanism could be considered the phase of adsorption, reduction, 
and oxidation (Zou et al., 2016). The smaller size of nanomaterials allows 
them to penetrate various barriers in the plant systems, helping them enter 
particular locations, while their additional surface area helps to increase their 
adsorption and deliver the desired substances in a targeted manner (Kashyap 
et al., 2015). The positive effect of a low nZVI dose may be due to iron 
entry into the soil, which is an important nutrient for the growth of plants 
and soil microorganisms (Souza et al., 2015). Nanomaterials can enhance 
phytoremediation by direct pollutant removal through adsorption or redox 
reactions, or by promoting plant growth—such as inoculating plant growth 
promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR), applying plant growth regulators and 
using transgenic plants, and increasing the phyto-availability (Mueller and 
Nowack, 2010; Yadu et al., 2018; Song et al., 2019) (Fig. 13.1). In addition, 
many studies apply nZVI for reductive dechlorination of chlorinated 
organic pollutants and nZVI can also act by adsorbing and co-precipitating 
inorganic ions (Li et al., 2018). By adsorption through carbon nanotubes, 
contaminants can be immobilized. This is similar to phytostabilization, as 
carbon nanotubes can stabilize organic contaminants through electrostatic 
attraction, hydrophobic interaction, and p–p bonding interactions, while 
complexation, electrostatic attraction, physical adsorption, and surface 
precipitation are involved in the interactions between carbon nanotubes 
and heavy metals (Song et al., 2018). Nanomaterials—such as graphene 
quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, Ag nanoparticles, ZnO nanoparticles, 
nZVI particles, and nanoparticle upconversion, could improve plant growth. 
The mechanisms of these nanomaterials in enhancing plant growth are 
different. Carbon nanotubes, for example, may enable the reproductive 
system of plants, contributing to improved tomato growth (Khodakovskaya 
et al., 2013), while graphene quantum dots might serve as nanofertilizers and 
pesticides to improve the growth rates of Coriandrum sativum and Allium 
sativum (Chakravarty et al., 2015). Furthermore, ZnO nanoparticles can 
increase the plant tolerance by regulating the gene expression of enzymes 
(Praveen et al., 2018). Applied nano-hydroxyapatite by Jin et al. (2016) led 
to an increase in phosphorus concentration in soil resulting in improved 
efficiency of lead phytoremediation by ryegrass. As Cd uptake increased 
with TIO2 nanoparticles, the authors suggested a potential mechanism for 454 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
TiO2 nanoparticles to join chloroplasts and speed up light adaptation and 
electron transfer (Singh and Lee, 2016). In addition, Timmusk et al. (2018) 
concluded that TiO2 nanoparticles could enhance the performance of PGPR 
phytoavailability of pollutants as a key factor affecting the efficiency of 
phytoremediation, especially for phytoextraction. For example, lead usually 
exists in insoluble forms in soil due to adsorption, complexation, and 
precipitation, which makes it difficult for phytoextraction (Zaier et al., 2014). 
Several techniques, including agronomic management (e.g., fertilization), 
treatment with chemical additives (e.g., a chelating agent), inoculation of 
rhizospheric microorganisms, and the use of genetic engineering—have also 
been suggested to improve the phytoavailability of contaminants (Glick, 
2010; Habiba et al., 2015; Jacobs, et al., 2018). Nanomaterials may serve 
as a carrier of pollutants when they penetrate the cell, thereby increasing the 
bioavailability (Su et al., 2013). On the one hand, adsorption of pollutants 
into nanomaterials outside organisms may reduce free pollutants, thereby 
decreasing the bioavailability (Glomstad et al., 2016). 
FIGURE 13.1 Nano-phytoremediation to environmental remediation of contaminants. Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 455 
13.6 INTEGRATION OF NANO ZEROVALENT IRON (NZVI OR FE0) 
AND OTHER TECHNOLOGIES FOR ENHANCING PHYTOREMEDIATION 
OF HEAVY METALS 
The addition of organic acids (i.e., citric, malic, tartaric, and oxalic acids), 
organic amendments, and nZVI with phytoremediation are suitable practices 
for the uptake of heavy metal in polluted soils, because of increasing reactive 
surface locations and higher nZVI volume to the ratio of surface area (Singh 
et al., 2012), which are associated with more metal ions and increasing avail￾ability of heavy metals for phytoremediation process (Lacalle et al., 2018). 
The efficiency of Brassica napus L. enhanced with an organic amendment and 
nZVI for the uptake of soils polluted with both organic (diesel) and inorganic 
pollutants (Zn, Cu, and Cd) were tested by Cao et al., 2018. Data showed 
that organic amendment contributed into diesel degradation and improved the 
health and biomass of B. napus. This nZVI was ineffectual in soil remedia￾tion without inducing any toxicity. The combination of nZVI nanoparticles 
with phytoremediation in improving the performance of sunflower plants 
reduced Cr uptake in the polluted soil, followed by increased activity of 
cell detoxification enzymes, SOD, CAT, POX, and APX (Mohammadi et 
al., 2020). Recent studies demonstrated the beneficial effects of nZVI and 
rhizosphere microorganisms on the efficiency of phytoremediation on heavy 
metal removal. The combination of bio-amendments with nZVI remediation 
techniques increased growth parameters, gas exchange, and useful effects of 
nZVI and minimized its toxicity. This led to new insight into Fe0
 heavy metal 
remediation (He and Yang 2007; Srivastav et al., 2018; Mokarram-Kashtiban 
et al., 2019). The inoculation by PGPR, especially Pseudomonas fluorescens 
and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus (AMF), especially Rhizophagus irregu￾laris in the combination with nZVI enhanced plant growth, physiological 
and biochemical parameters of white willow (Salix alba L.). This also 
increased the bioconcentration factor (BCF) of Pb, Cu, and Cd. To gain a 
better understanding of the possible mechanism of this phenomenon, further 
studies are needed (Mokarram-Kashtiban et al., 2019). The rhizosphere 
microorganisms decreased nZVI stress in plants under high dose conditions 
of nZVI, (Mokarram-Kashtiban et al., 2019). The phytoremediation potential 
of Sorghum bicolor’s for antimony (Sb) removal from the soils was decreased 
by co-application of TiO2 NPs and biochar (BC). Using TiO2, NPs signifi￾cantly improved the accumulation ability of S. bicolor for Sb with the highest 
accumulation efficiency of 1624.1 μg per pot achieved in “250 mg/kg TiO2 
NP + 2.5% BC” treatment (Song et al., 2019). The use of multi-walled carbon 456 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
mnanotubes (MWCNTs) at acceptable levels could increase the potential 
of phytoremediation in the restoration of heavy metal contaminated river 
sediments, and the inevitable release of MWCNTs at high contents would 
exacerbate metal-induced toxicity to plants (Gong et al., 2019). 
13.7 IMPROVING PHYTOREMEDIATION OF ORGANIC POLLUTANTS
IN SOIL AND WATER BY NANOTECHNOLOGY
One of the biggest solutions for hydrophobic organic pollutant remediation 
is provided by the integration of phytoremediation with nanotechnology 
(phytonanotechnology) (Table 13.1). Nanomaterials are involved in photocatalysis 
or oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, or organic contaminant elimination reactions 
(Tiwari et al., 2008; Jassal et al., 2016). Through various mechanisms such 
as redox reactions, surface processes, adsorption, ion exchange, surface 
complexation, and electrostatic interaction, the nanoparticles are able to adsorb 
and facilitate pollutant degradation (Trujillo-Reyes et al., 2014; Medina-Pérez et 
al., 2019). Organic pollutants such as chlorpyrifos, molinate, atrazine, lindane, 
pentachlorophenol, trichloroethylene (TCE), pyrene, PCBs, 2,4-dinitrotoluene, 
and ibuprofen in polluted soil environment were quickly degraded by nZVI, 
magnetite nanoparticles (nFe3O4), and bimetallic nanoparticles (Pd/Fe) (Zhang 
et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2012; Gomes et al., 2014; Srivastav et al., 2018; Verma 
et al., 2021). Excellent photocatalysts with advanced features (size, morphology, 
and high adsorption capacity) are found to be nanomaterials of TiO2, ZnO as well 
as several metal oxides and sulfides and appear as the most emerging destructive 
technology (Rani and Shanker, 2018). Nanomaterials make electron-hole pairs 
through the exposure of light sources, which move to the semiconductor surface 
and degrade organic pollutants via photo-oxidation into nontoxic products (Lavand 
and Malghe, 2015). However, these methods are usually expensive and require 
special, high-energy equipment and contain hazardous, corrosive and flammable 
chemical substances such as sodium borohydride and hydrazine hydrate or 
organic solvents as reducing agents that cause unwanted adverse environmental 
effects. In addition, nanoparticles appear to aggregate if not properly coated, 
leading to decreased reactivity and stability of these nanoparticles (Shahwan et 
al., 2011; O’Carroll et al., 2013). Environmental applications of nZVI (Fe0
) have 
been widely adopted by several users and government agencies, mainly because 
of the low costs and nontoxicity of iron (Rani and Shanker, 2018). Several 
consumers and government agencies have widely embraced environmental 
applications of nZVI (Fe0
), primarily due to the low cost and nontoxicity of iron 
(Rani and Shanker, 2018). Another catalyst most studied is nZVI, which reduced TABLE 13.1 Using Nano-Phytoremediation for Remediating Organic Pollutants in Water and Soil.
Pollutants Control (without Pytoremediation Nano material Nano-phytoremediation References 
any treatment) 
Organic pollutants (mg/kg)
Trinitrotoluene Panicum maximum Jacq. nZVI Zerovalent iron Jiamjitrpanich
(soil) 120 days nanoparticles enhanced the et al. (2012)
removal efficiency of TNT
from 85.7 to 100% after
120 days 
Endosulfan 7.61–20.13 Alpinia calcarata 51.74– 17.29–55.09 Alpinia calcarata 82.20– Pillai, and 
removal (%) (7–28 days) 81.20 (7–28 days) Ocimum 94.92(7–28 days) Ocimum Kottekottil 
sanctum 8.25–20.76 (7–28 sanctum 10.91–76.28 (7–28 (2016) 
days) Cymbopogon citratus days) Cymbopogon citratus
4.81–65.08 (7–28 days) 62.53–86.16 (7–28 days)
Fipronil (water) 39.71 Brassica-AgNps (98.21) Romeh (2018)
removal (%) Ipomoea-AgNps (95.93)
through 144 h Camellia-AgNps (82.44)
Plantago-AgNps (89.20)
Fipronil (flooded 3.6 13.76 Plantago major + Romeh (2018)
soil) removal (%) Brassica-AgNps (82.56)
through 144 h Ipomoea-AgNps (57.51)
Camellia-AgNps (44.75)
Plantago-AgNps (68.41)
Chlorpyrifos 17.88 43.76 F–Fe0 (81.69) F–Fe0 supported on (wheat Romeh (2020)
(water) removal bran, cement kiln dust, rice
(%) 24 h straw ash) +Plantago major
nearly 100% 
457 Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials TABLE 13.1 (Continued) 
Pollutants Control (without Pytoremediation Nano material Nano-phytoremediation References 
any treatment) 
Chlorfenapyr 6.17 
(water) removal
(%) 24 h
Chlorfenapyr (soil) 12.40 
removal (%) 24 h
Heavy metals (mg/Kg) dw
Cr
Cd
As
As 
69.27
25.83
Pisum sativum root 
(1472.6) P sativum shoot 
(62.5)
Glycine max (root and
shoot) at 100 cd (131.9)
Glycine max shoot (28.0)
Glycine max root (448.1)
Hordeum vulgare 
Lolium perenne 
F–Fe0 Ach (86.0) Ip–Ag0
Ach (79.70) Br–Ag0 Ach 
(79.70)
Silicon nanoparticles
(SiNp)
nano-TiO2 
nZVI
nZVI 
majorP. plus F–Fe0 
Ach(93.7) P. major plus Ip– 
Ag0 Ach(91.30) P. major 
plus Br–Ag0 Ach (92.92) 
majorP. plus F–Fe0 Ach 
(71.22) P. major plus Ip– 
Ag0 Ach (57.32) P. major 
plus Br–Ag0 Ach (73.10) 
SiNp + Pisum sativum root 
(516.6) SiNp + P sativum 
shoot (35.2)
At 100 cd + 300 TiO2 
(1534.7) Glycine max shoot 
300 TiO+ 2 (73.2) Glycine 
max root + 300 TiO2 
(1461.5)
Hordeum vulgare shoots +
1% nZVI (as reduced by
66%) Hordeum vulgare
roots + 10% nZVI
(as reduced by 97%)
Lolium perenne shoots +
nZVI (as reduced by 62%)
Lolium perenne roots +
nZVI (as reduced by 75%) 
Romeh and
Saber (2020)
Romeh and
Saber (2020)
Tripathi et al. 
(2015)
Singh and Lee
(2016)
Gil-Díaz et al.
(2016)
Vítková et al.
(2018) 
458 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination TABLE 13.1 (Continued) 
Pollutants Control (without Pytoremediation Nano material Nano-phytoremediation References 
any treatment) 
Pb Lolium perenne nZVI Lolium perenne (total) Huang et al.
+ nZVI 100 (assist the (2018)
phytoremediation of
Pb-polluted sediment)
Pb Alternanthera dentata nZVI Alternanthera dentata Harikumar et
35.00 Wedelia cheninsis + nZVI (38.80) Wedelia al. (2019) 
27.41 cheninsis (Total) + nZVI 
(39.13) 
Pb Kochia scoparia nZVI Kochia scoparia (total) + Daryabeigi et
(more than 350) nZVI 500 (857.18) al. (2020) 
Sb Trifolium repens nZVI +PGPR Trifolium repens+ PGPR + Zand et al. 
500 mg/kg nZVI (greatest (2020) 
accumulation capacity of
3896.4 µg per pot) 
459 Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 460 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
almost all halogenated hydrocarbons to benign hydrocarbons within 24 h by 
rapid and full dechlorination (Shih et al., 2011). The degree of dechlorination of 
lindane was greater (95%) for the nZVI (60 nm) (Elliott et al., 2009). A mixture 
of nanoparticles and plant species (nanophytoremediation) has removed essential 
contaminants from contaminated soil. Plant species have increased the removal 
of toxins from contaminated soil, which takes less time than normal. Different 
plant species and varieties of nanoparticles are used in nano-phytoremediation 
studies for water and soil remediation technologies (Srivastav et al., 2018). 
Nano-phytoremediation was more successful than either phytoremediation or 
nano-remediation for TNT-contaminated soil degradation (Jiamjitrpanich et al., 
2012; Verma et al., 2021). In the presence of nZVI, the phytoremediation of 
endosulfan-contaminated soil with three plant species, Alpinia calcarata, Ocimum 
sanctum, and Cymbopogon citratus increased from 81.2 to 100%, from 20.76 to 
76.28%, and from 65.08 to 86.16%, respectively. Small amounts of endosulfan 
have accumulated in the plants due to decrease endosulfan dichlorination (Pillai 
and Kottekottil, 2016). Silver nanoparticles (AgNps) and Plantago major also 
play an substantial role in the remediation of fipronil-contaminated water and 
flooded soil, while P. major played an significant role in the uptake of polar break 
product, fipronil-amide (Romeh, 2018). Silver nanoparticle significantly (>90%) 
increased the development of ABA and GA phytohormones in plants, whih allows 
plants to withstand stresses and increase the uptake of nutrients and water to 
enhance growth (Khan and Bano, 2016). Although nZVI has many benefits, but 
its efficiency decreases due to the formation of oxide layers that block its surface 
active sites, its efficiency decreases over time, expensive and requires special 
equipment, high energy and includes toxic, corrosive, and flammable chemical 
substances such as sodium borohydride and hydrazine hydrate or organic solvents 
as reducing agents that cause unnecessary adverse environmental impacts (Bardos 
et al., 2011; O’Carroll et al., 2013). Researchers are, therefore, continuing their 
efforts to develop simple, effective, and reliable green chemistry processes to 
solve this problem by developing nanomaterials. In order to make the synthesis 
process green, researchers worldwide are currently working on the synthesis of 
nanoparticles using sunlight, or plant-based surfactants or microorganisms, and 
water or a mixture of them. Nanomaterials generated through the green route 
were found to be cheap and efficient catalysts for environmental remediation 
(Rani and Shanker, 2018). In particular, little research focuses on water and 
soil remediation technologies with the combined application of green nano￾phytoremediation. Green nanotechnology can provide green and eco-friendly 
alternatives for environmental cleanup and management. Appropriate plant 
species and nanomaterials need to be selected for the absorption of pollutants, Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 461 
along with agronomic management optimization for the high-resolution 
cleanup process. The integration of green nanotechnology such as Ficus iron 
nanoparticles (F–Fe0
), ipomoea–silver (Ip–Ag0
) and brassica–silver nanoparticles 
(Br–Ag0
) and phytoremediation technology using P. major has played a major 
role in the remediation of soil and water polluted with chlorfenapyr (Romeh and 
Saber, 2020). Nanomaterials can improve phytoremediation by directly acting on 
the contaminants and plants, promoting plant growth by promoting enzymatic 
activity in plants, increasing chlorophyll content, regulating nutrient release in 
the soil system, and increasing the phytoavailability of pollutants (Varma and 
Khanuja, 2017; Subramanian et al., 2015; Song et al., 2019) or by indirectly 
influencing the final efficiency of the remediation (Zand et al., 2020). Adsorbents 
assisted b-y F–Fe0
 in particular wheat bran (WB) as a green nanotechnology 
and P. major as phytoremediation, would play a significant role in the complete 
removal of chlorpyrifos from water with a significant reduction in the toxic 
degradation product TCP (Romeh, 2020). Also, P. major plus marjoram-prepared 
nZVI (Mar-nZVI) and moringa-prepared nZVI (Mor-nZVI) aided by activated 
charcoal (Ach), and bentonite (Bent) play a principal role in the remediation of 
flonicamid-contaminated water (Rady et al., 2020). For nZVI-reduced graphene 
oxide (rGO), the removal rate and adsorption capability were found to be the 
maximum, which shows that this adsorbent could be used possible futuristic 
adsorbent for explosive removal (Khurana et al., 2018). 
13.8 CONCLUSION
Compared to conventional organic contaminants, heavy metal ions are difficult 
to degrade into cleaning materials. Several traditional and modern techniques 
are using to decontaminate the environment from these contaminants. Most 
of these methods, however, have several drawbacks, such as high costs, long 
response times, poor degradation efficiency, poor performance, and ineffective 
removal of toxic heavy metals and organic persistent from agricultural land. As 
discussed earlier, the technology of nano-phytoremediation is comparatively 
a new field for the remediation of ecosystems polluted with heavy metals and 
hydrophobic organic pollutants. The effect of nZVI on phytoremediation may 
be an important issue, and alternatives are required to mitigate its potential 
negative effects on phytoremediation and to accelerate its positive effects. 
Integration of organic acids (i.e., citric, malic, tartaric, and oxalic acids), 
organic amendments, and nZVI with phytoremediation are feasible practices 
for the repair of metal-polluted soils, which can be because of the resulting 
increase in reactive surface locations, higher nZVI volume to the surface area,  
 
462 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
which might bind to more metal ions and enhancing the availability of heavy 
metals for phytoremediation. It can be concluded that the selective interac￾tion of plants and nZVI has great application prospects in the context of soil 
remediation. 
KEYWORDS
• phytoremediation 
• nanomaterials 
• nano-phytoremediation 
• heavy metals 
• organic pollutants 
REFERENCES 
Agnello, A. C.; Bagard, M.; van Hullebusch, E. D.; Esposito, G.; Huguenot, D. Comparative 
Bioremediation of Heavy Metals and Petroleum Hydrocarbons Co-Contaminated Soil by 
Natural Attenuation, Phytoremediation, Bioaugmentation and Bioaugmentation- Assisted 
Phytoremediation. Sci. Total Environ. 2016, 563, 693–703. 
Ali, S., Abbas, Z., Rizwan, M., Zaheer, I. E., Yavaş, İ., Ünay, A., Kalderis, D. Application of 
Floating Aquatic Plants in Phytoremediation of Heavy Metals Polluted Water: A Review. 
Sustainability 2020, 12 (5), 1927. 
Ashraf, M. A.; Hussain, I.; Rasheed, R.; Iqbal, M.; Riaz, M.; Arif, M. S. Advances in Microbe￾Assisted Reclamation of Heavy Metal Contaminated Soils over the Last Decade: A Review. 
J. Environ. Manag. 2017, 198, 132–143. 
Ashraf, S.; Ali, Q.; Zahir, Z. A.; Ashraf, S.; Asghar, H. N. Phytoremediation: Environmentally 
Sustainable Way for Reclamation of Heavy Metal Polluted Soils. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 
2019, 174, 714–727. 
Aslani, F.; Bagheri, S.; Muhd Julkapli, N.; Juraimi, A. S.; Hashemi, F. S. G.; Baghdadi, 
A. Effects of Engineered Nanomaterials on Plants Growth: An Overview. Sci. World J. 
2014, 2014. 
Assunçao, A.; Schat, H.; Aarts, M. Thlaspi caerulescens, an Attractive Model Species to 
Study Heavy Metal Hyperaccumulation in Plants. New Phytol. 2003, 159, 351–360. 
Azarudeen, R. S.; Subha, R.; Jeyakumar, D.; Burkanudeen, A. R. Batch Separation 
Studies for the Removal of Heavy Metal Ions Using a Chelating Terpolymer: Synthesis, 
Characterization and Isotherm Models. Sep. Purif. Technol. 2013, 116, 366−377. 
Bao, T.; Jin, J.; Damtie, M. M.; Wu, K.; Yu, Z. M.; Wang, L.; Frost, R. L. Green Synthesis and 
Application of Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron/Rectorite Composite Material for P-Chlorophenol 
Degradation via Heterogeneous Fenton Reaction. J. Saudi Chem. Soc. 2019, 23 (7), 864–878.  
 
 
Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 463 
Bardos, P.; Bone, B.; Elliott, D.; Hartog, N.; Henstock, J.; Nathanail, P. A Risk/Benefit Approach 
to the Application of Iron Nanoparticles for the Remediation of Contaminated Sites in the 
Environment. Dep. Environ. Food Rural Aff. 2011. 
Barrutia, O.; Garbisu, C.; Epelde, L.; Sampedro, M. C.; Goicolea, M. A.; Becerril, J. M. 
Plant Tolerance to Diesel Minimizes Its Impact on Soil Microbial Characteristics during 
Rhizoremediation of Diesel-Contaminated Soils. Sci. Total Environ. 2011, 409, 4087–4093. 
Bouhamed, F.; Elouear, Z.; Bouzid, J. Adsorptive Removal of Copper(II) from Aqueous 
Solutions on Activated Carbon Prepared from Tunisian Date Stones: Equilibrium, Kinetics 
and Thermodynamics. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 2012, 43, 741−749. 
Cao, Y.; Zhang, S.; Zhong, Q.; Wang, G.; Xu, X.; Li, T.; Li, Y. Feasibility of Nanoscale Zero￾Valent Iron to Enhance The Removal Efficiencies of Heavy Metals from Polluted Soils by 
Organic Acids. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safety 2018, 162, 464–473. 
Chakraborty, J.; Das, S. Molecular Perspectives and Recent Advances in Microbial Remediation 
of Persistent Organic Pollutants. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2016, 23 (17), 16883–16903. 
Chaturvedi, R.; Varun, M.; Paul, M. S. Phytoremediation: Uptake and Role of Metal Transporters 
in Some Members of Brassicaceae. In Phytoremediation; Springer International Publishing: 
Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp 453–468. 
Chirakkara, R. A.; Cameselle, C.; Reddy, K. R. Assessing the Applicability of Phytoremediation 
of Soils with Mixed Organic and Heavy Metal Contaminants. Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol. 
2016, 15 (2), 299–326. 
Cornelis, G.; Hund-Rinke, K.; Kuhlbusch, T.; Van den Brink, N.; Nickel, C. Fate and Bioavail￾ability of Engineered Nanoparticles in Soils: A Review. Crit. Rev. Environm. Sci. Technol. 
2014, 44 (24), 2720–2764. 
Daryabeigi Zand, A.; Mikaeili Tabrizi, A.; Zand, A. D.; Tabrizi, A. M. Effect of Zero-Valent 
Iron Nanoparticles on the Phytoextraction Ability of Kochia Scoparia and Its Response in 
Pb Contaminated Soil. Environ. Eng. Res. 2020, 26 (4). 
Elliott D. W.; Lien, H. L.; Zhang, W. X. Degradation of Lindane by Zero-Valent Iron 
Nanoparticles. J. Environ. Eng. 2009, 135, 317–324. 
Fabbricino, M.; Ferraro, A.; Luongo, V.; Pontoni, L.; Race, M. Soil Washing Optimization, 
Recycling of the Solution, and Ecotoxicity Assessment for the Remediation of Pb-Contami￾nated Sites Using EDDS. Sustainability 2018, 10 (3), 636. 
Feller, U.; Anders, I.; Wei, S. Distribution and Redistribution of 109Cd and 65Zn in the 
Heavy Metal Hyperaccumulator Solanum nigrum L.: Influence of Cadmium and Zinc 
Concentrations in the Root Medium. Plants 2019, 8 (9), 340. 
Germida, J. J.; Frick, C. M.; Farrell, R. E. Phytoremediation of Oil-Contaminated Soils. Dev. 
Soil Sci. 2002, 28, 169–186. 
Gil-Díaz, M.; Diez-Pascual, S.; González, A., Alonso, J.; Rodríguez-Valdés, E.; Gallego, 
J. R.; Lobo, M. C. A Nanoremediation Strategy for the Recovery of an As-Polluted Soil. 
Chemosphere 2016, 149, 137–145. 
Glick, B. R. Using Soil Bacteria to Facilitate Phytoremediation. Biotechnol. Adv 2010, 28 
(3), 367–374. 
Glomstad, B.; Altin, D.; Sørensen, L.; Liu, J.; Jenssen, B. M.; Booth, A. M. Carbon Nanotube 
Properties Influence Adsorption of Phenanthrene and Subsequent Bioavailability and 
Toxicity to Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016, 50 (5), 2660–2668. 
Gomes, H. I.; Fan, G.; Mateus, E. P.; Dias-Ferreira, C. Ribeiro, A. B. Assessment of Combined 
Electro–Nanoremediation of Molinate Contaminated Soil. Sci. Total Environ. 2014, 493, 
178–184.  
 
 
464 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Gong, X.; Huang, D.; Liu, Y.; Zeng, G.; Wang, R.; Wan, J.; Xue, W. Stabilized Nanoscale 
Zerovalent Iron Mediated Cadmium Accumulation and Oxidative Damage of Boehmeria 
nivea (L.) Gaudich Cultivated in Cadmium Contaminated Sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2017, 51 (19), 11308–11316. 
Gong, X.; Huang, D.; Liu, Y.; Zeng, G.; Wang, R.; Xu, P.; Chen, S. Roles of Multiwall Carbon 
Nanotubes in Phytoremediation: Cadmium Uptake and Oxidative Burst in Boehmeria nivea 
(L.) Gaudich. Environ. Sci. Nano 2019, 6 (3), 851–862. 
Grieger, K. D.; Fjordboge, A.; Hartmann, N. B.; Eriksson, E.; Bjerg, P. L.; Baun, A. 
Environmental Benefits and Risks of Zero-Valent Iron Nanoparticles (nZVI) for in Situ 
Remediation: Risk Mitigation or Trade-Off? J. Contam. Hydrol. 2010, 118, 165−183. 
Habiba, U.; Ali, S.; Farid, M.; Shakoor, M. B.; Rizwan, M.; Ibrahim, M.; Ali, B. EDTA 
Enhanced Plant Growth, Antioxidant Defense System, and Phytoextraction of Copper by 
Brassica napus L. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2015, 22 (2), 1534–1544. 
Harikumar, P. S.; Lamya, T. V.; Shalna,T. Enhanced Phytoremediation Efficiency of Lead 
Contaminated Soil by Zero Valent Nano Iron. Int. J. Innov. Eng. Technol.2019, 12 (2), 
44–50. 
Hasan, M.; Uddin, M.; Ara-Sharmeen, I. F.; Alharby, H.; Alzahrani, Y.; Hakeem, K. R.; Zhang, 
L. Assisting Phytoremediation of Heavy Metals Using Chemical Amendments. Plants 2019, 
8 (9), 295. 
He, Z. L.; Yang, X. E. Role of Soil Rhizobacteria in Phytoremediation of Heavy Metal 
Contaminated Soils. J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B 2007, 8 (3), 192–207. 
Hu, J.; Yang, S. T.; Wang, X. K. Adsorption of Cu(II) on β- Cyclodextrin Modified Multiwall 
Carbon Nanotube/Iron Oxides in the Absence/Presence of Fulvic Acid. J. Chem. Technol. 
Biotechnol. 2012, 87, 673−681. 
Huang, D.; Qin, X., Peng, Z.; Liu, Y.; Gong, X.; Zeng, G.; Hu, Z. Nanoscale Zero-Valent 
Iron Assisted Phytoremediation of Pb in Sediment: Impacts on Metal Accumulation and 
Antioxidative System of Lolium Perenne. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2018, 153, 229–237. 
Huang, P. P.; Ye, Z. F.; Xie, W. M.; Chen, Q.; Li, J.; Xu, Z. C.; Yao, M. S. Rapid Magnetic 
Removal of Aqueous Heavy Metals and Their Relevant Mechanisms Using Nanoscale Zero 
Valent Iron (nZVI) Particles. Water Res. 2013, 47, 4050−4058. 
Jacobs, A.; De Brabandere, L.; Drouet, T.; Sterckeman, T.; Noret, N. Phytoextraction of Cd 
and Zn with Noccaea caerulescens for Urban Soil Remediation: Influence of Nitrogen 
Fertilization and Planting Density. Ecol. Eng. 2018, 116, 178–187. 
Jassal, V.; Shanker, U.; Kaith, B. S. Aegle Marmelos Mediated Green Synthesis of Different 
Nanostructured Metal Hexacyanoferrates: Activity Against Photodegradation of Harmful 
Organic Dyes. Scientifica 2016, 1–13. 
Jiamjitrpanich, W.; Parkpian, P.; Polprasert, C.; Kosanlavit, R. Enhanced Phytoremediation 
Efficiency of TNT-Contaminated Soil by Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron. 2nd Int. Conf. 
Environ. Industr. Innov. IPCBEE, 2012, 35, 82-86. 
Jiang, M.; Liu, S.; Li, Y.; Li, X.; Luo, Z.; Song, H.; Chen, Q. EDTA-Facilitated Toxic 
Tolerance, Absorption and Translocation and Phytoremediation of Lead by Dwarf Bamboos. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2019, 170, 502–512. 
Jin, Y.; Liu, W.; Li, X. L.; Shen, S. G.; Liang, S. X.; Liu, C.; Shan, L. Nano-Hydroxyapatite 
Immobilized Lead and Enhanced Plant Growth of Ryegrass in a Contaminated Soil. Ecol. 
Eng. 2016, 95, 25–29. 
Kashyap, P. L.; Xiang, X.; Heiden, P. Chitosan Nanoparticle Based Delivery Systems for 
Sustainable Agriculture. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2015, 77, 36–51.  
 
Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 465 
Khan, A. B.; Kathi, S. Evaluation of Heavy Metal and Total Petroleum Hydrocarbon 
Contamination of Roadside Surface Soil. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 11, 2259–2270. 
Khan, N., Bano, A. Modulation of Phytoremediation and Plant Growth by the Treatment with 
PGPR, Ag Nanoparticle and Untreated Municipal Wastewater. Int. J. Phytoremed. 2016, 18 
(12), 1258–1269. 
Khodakovskaya, M. V.; Kim, B. S.; Kim, J. N.; Alimohammadi, M.; Dervishi, E.; Mustafa, T., 
Cernigla, C. E. Carbon Nanotubes as Plant Growth Regulators: Effects on Tomato Growth, 
Reproductive System, and Soil Microbial Community. Small 2013, 9 (1), 115–123. 
Khurana, I.; Shaw, A. K.; Saxena, A.; Khurana, J. M.; Rai, P. K. Removal of Trinitrotoluene 
with Nano Zerovalent Iron Impregnated Graphene Oxide. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2018, 229 
(1), 17. 
Kim, S. A.; Kannan, S. K.; Lee, K. J.; Park, Y. J.; Shea, P. J.; Lee, W. H.; Kim, H. M.; Oh, 
B. T. Removal of Pb(II) from Aqueous Solution by a Zeolite-Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron 
Composite. Chem. Eng. J. 2013, 217, 54−60. 
Kirschling, T. L.; Gregory, K. B.; Minkley, J. E. G.; Lowry, G. V.; Tilton, R. D. Impact of 
Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron on Geochemistry and Microbial Populations in Trichloroethylene 
Contaminated Aquifer Materials. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010, 44, 3474−3480. 
Kołacínski, Z.; Rincón, J.; Szymánski, T.; Sobiecka, E. Thermal Plasma Vitrification 
Process as the effective Technology for Hospital Incineration Fly Ash Immobilization. In 
Vitrification and Geopolimerization of Wastes for Immobilization or Recycling, Vol. 51; 
Universidad Miguel Hernandez: Alicante, Spain, 2017. 
Kuo, H. C.; Juang, D. F.; Yang, L.; Kuo, W. C.; Wu, Y. M. Phytoremediation of Soil 
Contaminated by Heavy Oil With Plants Colonized by Mycorrhizal Fungi. Int. J. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 2014, 11 (6), 1661–1668. 
Lacalle, R. G.; Gómez-Sagasti, M. T.; Artetxe, U.; Garbisu, C.; Becerril, J. M. Brassica Napus 
Has a Key Role in the Recovery of the Health of Soils Contaminated with Metals and 
Diesel by Rhizoremediation. Sci. Total Environ. 2018, 618, 347–356. 
Li, S.; Wang, W.; Liang, F.; Zhang, W. X. Heavy Metal Removal Using Nanoscale Zero￾Valent Iron (nZVI): Theory and Application. J. Hazard. Mater. 2017, 322, 163–171. 
Li, Z.; Wang, L.; Meng, J.; Liu, X.; Xu, J.; Wang, F.; Brookes, P. Zeolite-Supported Nanoscale 
Zero-Valent Iron: New Findings on Simultaneous Adsorption of Cd (II), Pb (II), and As (III) 
in Aqueous Solution and Soil. J. Hazard. Mater. 2018, 344, 1–11. 
Liang, C.; Xiao, H.; Hu, Z.; Zhang, X.; Hu, J. Uptake, Transportation, and Accumulation 
of C60 Fullerene and Heavy Metal Ions (Cd, Cu, and Pb) in Rice Plants Grown in an 
Agricultural Soil. Environ. Pollut. 2018, 235, 330–338. 
Liang, J.; Yang, Z.; Tang, L.; Zeng, G.; Yu, M.; Li, X.; Luo, Y. Changes in Heavy Metal 
Mobility and Availability from Contaminated Wetland Soil Remediated with Combined 
Biochar-Compost. Chemosphere 2017, 181, 281–288. 
Lin, S.; Hu, Q.; Hudson, J. S.; Reid, M. L.;, Ratnikova, T. A.; Rao, A. M., Luo, H.; Ke, P. C. 
Uptake, Translocation, and Transmission of Carbon Nanomaterials in Rice Plants. Small 
2009, 5, 1128–1132. 
Liu, Z. J.; Chen, L.; Zhang, Z. C.; Li, Y. Y.; Dong, Y. H.; Sun, Y. B. Synthesis of Multi-Walled 
Carbon Nanotube-Hydroxyapatite Composites and Its Application in the Sorption of Co(II) 
from Aqueous Solutions. J. Mol. Liq. 2013, 179, 46–53. 
Ma, X. M.; Geiser-Lee, J.; Deng, Y.; Kolmakov, A. Interactions between Engineered 
Nanoparticles (ENPs) and Plants: Phytotoxicity, Uptake and Accumulation. Sci. Total 
Environ. 2010, 408, 3053–3061.  
 
 
 
466 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Medina-Pérez, G.; Fernández-Luqueño, F.; Vazquez-Nuñez, E.; López-Valdez, F.; Prieto￾Mendez, J.; Madariaga-Navarrete, A.; Miranda-Arámbula, M. Remediating Polluted Soils 
Using Nanotechnologies: Environmental Benefits and Risks. Polish J. Environ. Stud. 2019, 
28 (3). 
Megharaj, M.; Ramakrishnan, B.; Venkateswarlu, K.; Sethunathan, N.; Naidu, R. Bioreme￾diation Approaches for Organic Pollutants: A Critical Perspective. Environ. Int. 2011, 37, 
1362–1375. 
Mohammadi, H.; Amani-Ghadim, A. R.; Matin, A. A.; Ghorbanpour, M. Fe 0 Nanoparticles 
Improve Physiological and Antioxidative Attributes of Sunflower (Helianthus annuus) 
Plants Grown in Soil Spiked with Hexavalent Chromium. 3 Biotech. 2020, 10, (1), 19. 
Mokarram-Kashtiban, S.; Hosseini, S. M.; Kouchaksaraei, M. T.; Younesi, H. The Impact 
of Nanoparticles Zero-Valent Iron (nZVI) and Rhizosphere Microorganisms on the 
Phytoremediation Ability of White Willow and Its Response. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 
2019, 26 (11), 10776–10789. 
Mueller, N. C.; Nowack, B. Nanoparticles for Remediation: Solving Big Problems with Little 
Particles. Elements 2010, 6 (6), 395–400. 
Muszynska, E.; Hanus-Fajerska, E. Why Are Heavy Metal Hyperaccumulating Plants So 
Amazing? Biotechnol. J. Biotechnol. Comput. Biol. Bionanotechnol. 2015, 96, 265–271. 
Navarro, D. A.; Bisson, M. A.; Aga, D. S. Investigating Uptake of Waterdispersible CdSe/ 
ZnS Quantum Dot Nanoparticles by Arabidopsis thaliana Plants. J. Hazard. Mater. 2012, 
211, 427–435. 
O’Carroll, D.; Sleep, B.; Krol, M.; Boparai, H.; Kocur, C. Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron and 
Bimetallic Particles for Contaminated Site Remediation. Adv. Water Resour. 2013, 51, 104–122. 
Patil, S. S.; Shedbalkar, U. U.; Truskewycz, A.; Chopade, B. A.; Ball, A. S. Nanoparticles for 
Environmental Clean-Up: A Review of Potential Risks and Emerging Solutions. Environ. 
Technol. Innov. 2016, 5, 10–21. 
Pillai, H. P.; Kottekottil, J. Nano-Phytotechnological Remediation of Endosulfan Using Zero 
Valent Iron Nanoparticles. J. Environ. Protect 2016, 7, (05), 734. 
Praveen, A.; Khan, E.; Perwez, M.; Sardar, M.; Gupta, M. Iron Oxide Nanoparticles as Nano￾Adsorbents: A Possible Way to Reduce Arsenic Phytotoxicity in Indian Mustard Plant 
(Brassica juncea L.). J. Plant Growth Regulation 2018, 37 (2), 612–624. 
Rady, M.; Romeh, A.; Muhanna, A. E. H. Using Green Nano-Phytoremediation of Water 
Polluted with Flonicamid. J. Prod. Dev. 2019, 24 (3), 571–593. 
Rani, M.; Shanker, U. Degradation of Traditional and New Emerging Pesticides in Water by 
Nanomaterials: Recent Trends and Future Recommendations. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2018, 15 (6), 1347–1380. 
Rehman, M.; Liu, L.; Wang, Q.; Saleem, M. H.; Bashir, S.; Ullah, S.; Peng, D. Copper 
Environmental Toxicology, Recent Advances, and Future Outlook: A Review. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. 2019, 1–14. 
Román-Ross, G.; Cuello, G. J.; Turrillas, X.; Fernández-Martínez, A.; Charlet, L. Arsenite 
Sorption and Co-Precipitation with Calcite. Chem. Geol. 2006, 233, 328−336. 
Romeh, A. A. A. Green Silver Nanoparticles for Enhancing the Phytoremediation of Soil and 
Water Contaminated by Fipronil and Degradation Products. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2018, 
229 (5), 147. 
Romeh, A. A. Synergistic Effect of Ficus-Zero Valent Iron Supported on Adsorbents and Plantago 
Major for Chlorpyrifos Phytoremediation from Water. Int. J. Phytoremed. 2020, 1–11. 
Romeh, A. A.; Khamis, M. A.; Metwally, S. M. Potential of Plantago major L. for Phytore￾mediation of Lead-Contaminated Soil and Water. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2016, 227 (1), 9.  
Nano-Phytoremediation: Using Plants and Nanomaterials 467 
Romeh, A. A.; Saber, R. A. Green Nano-Phytoremediation and Solubility Improving Agents 
for the Remediation of Chlorfenapyr Contaminated Soil and Water. J. Environ. Manage 
2020, 260, 110104. 
Saleem, M.; Ali, S.; Rehman, M.; Rana, M.; Rizwan, M.; Kamran, M.; Imran, M.; Riaz, M.; 
Hussein, M.; Elkelish, A. et al. Influence of Phosphorus on Copper Phytoextraction via 
Modulating Cellular Organelles in Two Jute (Corchorus capsularis L.) Varieties Grown in 
a Copper Mining Soil of Hubei Province, China. Chemosphere 2020, 248, 126032. 
Shahwan, T., Sirriah, S. A., Nairat, M., Boyacı, E., Eroğlu, A. E., Scott, T. B., Hallam, K. R. 
Green Synthesis of Iron Nanoparticles and Their Application as a Fenton-Like Catalyst for the 
Degradation of Aqueous Cationic and Anionic Dyes. Chem. Eng. J. 2011, 172, (1), 258–266. 
Shekhar, S.; Sundaramanickam, A.; Balasubramanian, T. Biosurfactant Producing Microbes and 
Their Potential Applications: AReview. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2015, 45, 1522–1554. 
Shu, H. Y.; Chang, M. C.; Chen, C. C.; Chen, P. E. Using Resin Supported Nano Zero-Valent 
Iron Particles for Decoloration of Acid Blue 113 Azo Dye Solution. J. Hazard. Mater. 2010, 
184, 499−505. 
Singh, J.; Lee, B. K. Influence of Nano-TiO2 Particles on the Bioaccumulation of Cd in 
Soybean Plants (Glycine max): A Possible Mechanism for the Removal of Cd from the 
Contaminated Soil. J. Environ. Manage. 2016, 170, 88–96. 
Singh, R.; Misra, V.; Mudiam, M. K. R.; Chauhan, L. K. S.; Singh, R. P. Degradation of 
γ-HCH Spiked Soil Using Stabilized Pd/Fe0 Bimetallic Nanoparticles: Pathways, Kinetics 
and Effect of Reaction Conditions. J. Hazard. Mater. 2012, 237, 355–364. 
Song, B.; Xu, P.; Chen, M.; Tang, W.; Zeng, G.; Gong, J.; Ye, S. Using Nanomaterials to 
Facilitate the Phytoremediation of Contaminated Soil. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol 2019, 
49 (9), 791–824. 
Song, B.; Xu, P.; Zeng, G.; Gong, J.; Zhang, P.; Feng, H.; Ren, X. Carbon Nanotube-Based 
Environmental Technologies: The Adopted Properties, Primary Mechanisms, and Challenges. 
Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol. 2018, 17 (3), 571–590. 
Souri, Z.; Karimi, N.; Sarmadi, M.; Rostami, E. Salicylic Acid Nanoparticles (SANPs) 
Improve Growth and Phytoremediation Efficiency of Isatis cappadocica Desv., under as 
stress. IET Nanobiotechnolo. 2017, 1 (6), 650–655. 
Souza, R. D.; Ambrosini, A.; Passaglia, L. M. Plant Growth-Promoting Bacteria as Inoculants 
in Agricultural Soils. Genet. Mol. Biol. 2015, 38 (4), 401–419 
Srivastav, A.; Yadav, K. K.; Yadav, S.; Gupta, N.; Singh, J. K.; Katiyar, R.; Kumar, V.; Nano￾Phytoremediation of Pollutants from Contaminated Soil Environment: Current Scenario 
and Future Prospects. In Phytoremediation; Springer: Cham, 2018; pp 383–401‏ .
Su, Y.; Yan, X.; Pu, Y.; Xiao, F.; Wang, D.; Yang, M. Risks of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes 
Acting as Contaminants-Carriers: Potential Release of Phenanthrene in Japanese medaka 
(Oryzias latipes). Environ. Sci. Technol 2013, 47 (9), 4704–4710. 
Subramanian, K. S.; Manikandan, A.; Thirunavukkarasu, M.; Rahale, C. S. Nano-Fertilizers 
for Balanced Crop Nutrition. In Nanotechnology Food Agriculture; Rai, M., Ribeiro, C., 
Mattoso, L., Duran, N., Eds.; Springer: Cham, 2015; pp 69–80. 
Tafazoli, M.; Hojjati, S. M.; Biparva, P.; Kooch, Y.; Lamersdorf, N. Reduction of Soil Heavy 
Metal Bioavailability by Nanoparticles and Cellulosic Wastes Improved the Biomass of 
Tree Seedlings. J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci. 2017, 180, 683–693. 
Tangahu, B. V.; Sheikh Abdullah, S. R.; Basri, H.; Idris, M.; Anuar, N.; Mukhlisin, M. A Review 
on Heavy Metals (As, Pb, and Hg) Uptake by Plants through Phytoremediation. Int. J. Chem. 
Eng. 2011.  
 
468 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Timmusk, S.; Seisenbaeva, G.; Behers, L. Titania (TiO2) Nanoparticles Enhance the Performance 
of Growth-Promoting Rhizobacteria. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8 (1), 1–13. 
Tiwari, D. K.; Behari, J.; Sen, P. Application of Nanoparticles in Waste Water Treatment. 
World Appl. Sci. J. 2008, 3, 417–433. 
Tripathi, D. K.; Singh, V. P.,; Prasad, S. M.; Chauhan, D. K.; Dubey, N. K. Silicon Nanoparticles 
(SiNp) Alleviate Chromium (VI) Phytotoxicity in Pisum sativum (L.) Seedlings. Plant 
Physiol. Biochem. 2015, 96, 189–198. 
Trujillo-Reyes, J.; Peralta-Videa, J. R.; Gardea-Torresdey, J. L. Supported and Unsupported 
Nanomaterials for Water and Soil Remediation: Are They a Useful Solution for Worldwide 
Pollution? J. Hazard. Mater. 2014, 280, 487–503. 
Usman, K.; Al-Ghouti, M. A.; Abu-Dieyeh, M. H. Phytoremediation: Halophytes as Promising 
Heavy Metal Hyperaccumulators. Heavy Metal 2018. 
Varma, A.; Khanuja, M. Role of Nanoparticles on Plant Growth with Special Emphasis 
on Piriformospora indica: A Review. In Nanoscience and Plant–Soil Systems; Springer: 
Cham., 2017; pp 387–403. 
Verma, A.; Roy, A.; Bharadvaja, N. Remediation of Heavy Metals Using Nanophytoremediation. 
In Advanced Oxidation Processes for Effluent Treatment Plants; Elsevier, 2021; pp 273–296. 
Vítková, M.; Puschenreiter, M.; Komárek, M. Effect of Nano Zero-Valent Iron Application 
on As, Cd, Pb, and Zn Availability in the Rhizosphere of Metal (Loid) Contaminated Soils. 
Chemosphere 2018, 200, 217–226. 
Wang, Y.; Fang, Z.; Kang, Y.; Tsang, E. P. Immobilization and Phytotoxicity of Chromium 
in Contaminated Soil Remediated by CMC-Stabilized nZVI. J. Hazard. Mater. 2014, 275, 
230–237. 
Whiteside, M. D.; Treseder, K. K.; Atsatt, P. R. The Brighter Side of Soils: Quantum Dots 
Track Organic Nitrogen through Fungi and Plants. Ecology 2009, 90, 100–108. 
Yadu, B.; Chandrakar, V.; Korram, J.; Satnami, M. L.; Kumar, M.; Keshavkant, S. Silver 
Nanoparticle Modulates Gene Expressions, Glyoxalase System and Oxidative Stress 
Markers in Fluoride Stressed Cajanus cajan L. J. Hazard. Mater. 2018, 353, 44–52. 
Yan, W.; Herzing, A. A.; Kiely, C. J.; Zhang, W. X. Nanoscale Zerovalent Iron (nZVI): Aspects 
of the Core-Shell Structure and Reactions with Inorganic Species in Water. J. Contam. 
Hydrol. 2010, 118, 96−104. 
Zaier, H.; Ghnaya, T.; Ghabriche, R.; Chmingui, W.; Lakhdar, A., Lutts, S.; Abdelly, C. 
EDTA-Enhanced Phytoremediation of Lead-Contaminated Soil by the Halophyte Sesuvium 
portulacastrum. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2014, 21, 7607–7615. 
Zand, A. D.; Tabrizi, A. M.; Heir, A. V. The Influence of Association of Plant Growth￾Promoting Rhizobacteria and Zero-Valent Iron Nanoparticles on Removal of Antimony 
from Soil by Trifolium repens. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 1–15. 
Zhang, W. X. Nanoscale Iron Particles for Environmental Remediation: An Overview. J. 
Nanopart. Res. 2003, 5, 323−332. 
Zhang, Y.; Li, Y. M.; Zheng, X. M. Removal of Atrazine by Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron 
Supported on Organobentonite. Sci. Total Environ. 2011, 409, 625−630. 
Zou, Y.; Wang, X.; Khan, A.; Wang, P.; Liu, Y.; Alsaedi, A.; Wang, X. Environmental 
Remediation and Application of Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron and Its Composites for the 
Removal of Heavy Metal Ions: A Review. Environ. Sci. Technol.2016, 50 (14), 7290–7304. A. G. KHAN1* and A. MOHAMMAD2
1
Grad Life Member Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia
2
W. Booth School of Engineering Practice and Technology, Engineering 
Technology Building, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: lasara@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Food and energy resources are gradually becoming scarce due to ever￾increasing consumption and demand and the world faces crises. Resources 
like land, air, and water are increasingly becoming contaminated with heavy 
metal contaminants produced by wastages due to municipal, industrial, 
and mining activities by humans. There is an urgent need to address these 
problems by reclaiming the HM-contaminated soil and aquatic ecosystems for 
food and energy production. Various physicochemical remediation strategies 
are being developed and tested, but they are all expensive and applicable 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 14
Mass Production of Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizal Fungus Inoculum and 
Its Use for Enhancing Biomass Yield 
of Crops for Food, for In Situ Nano￾Phyto-Mycorrhizo Remediation of 
Contaminated Soils and Water, and for 
Sustainable Bioenergy Production470 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
to small areas. During the past couple of decades, eco-friendly plant-based 
strategy, phytoremediation, is gaining popularity due to its economic and 
aesthetic values. But, it is very time-consuming and often hampered by the 
plant involved being slow-growing, producing contaminant-laded biomass 
with the added cost of safely disposing, and requiring the use of costly 
fertilizers. To overcome all these drawbacks, the process can be hastened 
by using plant growth-promoting soil microbiota, especially universal and 
ubiquitous arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) and plant growth-promoting 
rhizobacteria (PGPR). However, AMF being obligate symbionts, and 
production of its mass-scale inoculum for field application is an obstacle. 
Various commercial AMF inoculants, mixed with PGPR, developed by in 
vitro and in vivo production methods using substrate-based and substrate-free 
(hydroponics and aeroponics) base systems, are available in the international 
market, but they were reported to produce mixed, variable, and inconsistent 
results. We developed in our laboratory using a substrate-free system, 
Ultrasonic Nebuliser Aeroponic System. Pre-inoculated with AMF propagule 
(isolated from the rhizospheres of plants grown in the HM-contaminated sites 
to be remediated) was grown in the aeroponic system to produce adequate 
adventitious roots with extensive extraradical mycelium network outside the 
root surface of the test plant used. The aeroponically grown mycorrhizal 
roots were then sheared, air-dried, and used as inoculum to test its infectivity 
and efficiency in the roots of the plants in the field, in competition with 
the indigenous and not efficient AMF propagules in the field soil, causing 
intensive mycorrhization of root cortices, uptaking contaminants into their 
aerial parts (phytoremediation) and producing high biomass for bioenergy 
production, that is, Nano-Mycorrhizo-PhytoRemediation. 
14.1 INTRODUCTION
Soil and its plant-root-associated microbiota population perform various 
functions such as nutrient (including heavy metals) sequestration and 
their biogeocycling, climate and water regulation, and are critical tools in 
ecosystem restoration and function, especially restoration of degraded 
ecosystems (Munoz-Rojas et al., 2018; Balser et al., 2002; Khan, 2002, 2008). 
These microorganisms, such as plant-growth-promoting rhizobia (PGPR), 
ubiquitous and universal root-associated symbiont, that is, arbuscular mycor￾rhizal fungi (AMF), constitute one of the major biodiversity reservoirs on 
earth (Kushwaha et al., 2020). These endophytes also play an integral and a 
unique and significant role in the functioning of ago-ecosystems, as noted by Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 471 
Sansanwal et al., (2017), by promoting plant growth by direct mechanisms 
(e.g., N-fixation, K- and P-solubilization, siderophore production, production 
of indolic-compounds, ACC utilization, ammonia excretion, etc.) as well 
as indirect mechanisms by acting as biocontrol agents (e.g., production of 
metabolites and antibiotic substances). 
The significance of the worldwide distributed soil fungi that form a 
symbiosis with roots of most land plants, that is, AMF, is now accepted 
that they improve plant growth and productivity, including bioenergy crops 
(Khan, 2020a), as well as increase plant resistance against abiotic and biotic 
stresses (Khan, 2005a, 2020b). Mycorrhiza-associated plants have been 
reported growing on contaminated soils (Chaudhary et al., 1999; Khan et 
al., 2000; Hayes et al., 2003). To improve bioenergy-crop-plant health and 
growth on contaminated sites, and to increase biomass production of non-food 
energy crops for bioenergy purposes, we need to consider the potential of 
nanomaterials secreted by bioenergy crop plants and these AMF, PGPR, and 
Mycorrhiza-Helping Bacteria (MHB), in our efforts toward achieving our 
goal of using them for the dual purpose of nano-mycorrhizo-phytoremediation 
(NMPR) of contaminated soils and producing greater biomass for bioenergy 
production. Many different techniques such as substrate (soil and sand)-based, 
substrate-free (hydroponic/aeroponic), and in vitro (excised or root-organ 
cultures) products, with advantages and disadvantages, have been developed 
during the last few years. Ijdo et al. (2011) reviewed these methods, probable 
sectors of their application and discussed their positive and negative aspects. 
Compared to the availability of P and trace metal fertilizers, AM fungal 
inoculants do not seem to encourage growers to them as they fail to appeal 
significant grower needs and broad-scale efficacy in cost-effective manners. 
Several researchers, including private companies, government industries, and 
technologists, have attempted to develop commercial AM inoculants. Various 
soil-less media, such as expanded clay aggregates (Dehne and Backhaus, 
1986), peat, perlite, or vermiculite (Sreeramulu and Bagyaraj, 1986), sand 
(Millner and Kitt, 1992). 
Being obligate symbionts, AMF cannot be grown in pure cultures and 
the techniques used for producing AMF inoculum are different from those 
usually employed for other biotechnologically interesting fungi. AMF cannot 
grow in the absence of a living root partner. However, culturing the fungi with 
living roots is hampered by contamination with other soil-borne pathogens 
that affect their viability and efficacy. This hampers the mass production 
of AMF inoculum (Hepper, 1984). Therefore, cost-effective and large-scale 
production methods of high-quality AMF inoculum production for their 472 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
commercial exploitation are still not commercially utilized due to their non￾consistent and unstable performances in field situations. There are several 
reports indicating that AMF are adaptive to different edaphic conditions and 
seem to possess unique properties based on their cell biology (Bethlenfalvay 
et al., 1990). The literature also reveals that fungal isolates from fertilized 
or heavy metal contaminated sites are better adapted to elevated levels of P 
(Jasper et al., 1979) plant growth by mitigating the negative effects of HMs 
and also to enhance the uptake and translocation of various minerals from 
HM-enriched soils (for reference see Khan, 2020a, 2020b). 
Due to inherent efficacy, fungal aggressiveness, the number of infec￾tions, or a combination of the three (Borges and Chaney, 1988), the intro￾duction of AM fungal isolates alien to particular soil conditions may not 
be effective in causing mycorrhization of roots, thereby, invalidating the 
beneficial effects of inoculation on plant growth. Therefore, it is important 
to the culture and exploits the use of AM isolates which may be well suited 
and efficient in the soils where they will be introduced, that is, AMF are 
site-specific and not plant-specific. Mohammad and Mittra (2013) assessed 
the efficacy of the AMF ecotype of stress-adapted AMF (Glomus deser￾ticola) isolated from the rhizospheres of grasses growing along with the 
industrial waste in India on the growth of eggplant (Solanum melongena 
L.) and sorghum (Sorghum Sudanese Staph. seedlings in soils amended 
with various stress levels of NaCl, Zn, and Cd. The authors reported that 
the AMF-ecotype responds best to these soils, as evident from the signifi￾cantly greater growth response and its aggressiveness in colonizing roots 
in all soil types tested. These results suggest that this AMF-ecotype can 
be used as an effective tool to alleviate the adverse effects of excessive 
salinity and HM toxicity on plant growth, that is, it has a potential in the 
NMPR of HM-polluted soils. 
Faye et al. (2020) assessed the potential of commercial mycorrhizal 
inoculants and a rhizobial inoculant to improve soybean yield in Kenya 
both in greenhouse and field conditions and reported variable results, that 
is, significant or insignificant effect on plant P uptake, biomass production, 
leaf–chlorophyll index, and grain yield. The authors concluded that not only 
the inoculant type, soil type, and P source in soil are critical factors to evaluate 
mycorrhizal inoculants, additional criteria such as inoculant type, soil type, 
and P source are needed to be predictive of the response, without which the 
economic value of commercial inoculants will remain elusive. Soil microbes 
that improve and enhance soil fertility (N-fixing symbiotic and free-living 
rhizobia) and nutrient uptake efficiency by universal symbiotic mycorrhizal Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 473 
fungi – AMF) offer valuable alternative technologies. These microbes play 
an important role in nutrient acquisition and cycling, in situ nanoremedia￾tion of contaminated soils and waters, increasing plant biomass, promoting 
plant growth including those of high biomass producing nonfood bioenergy 
crops, reducing the translocation of heavy metals from contaminated soils 
and water to aerial parts of plants growing in contaminated habitats, etc., by 
synthesizing nanomaterials for their NMPR (Khan, 2020a, 2022a). NMPR 
offers a new window for future research. 
A wide variety of commercial AMF inoculants, mixed with PGPR, are 
available in the international market, but their qualities are found to be sensi￾tive to subtle changes in processes and transportation (Faye et al., 2020). These 
authors recommend that commercial inoculants need to be pre-evaluated on 
selected crops and regional soils before undertaking large field-scale use. Ijdo 
et al. (2011) reviewed the methods for large-scale production of AM fungi– 
past, present, and future. The authors attempted to describe and compare 
the principal in vivo and in vitro production methods, critically discussed 
the parameters criteria for optimal production, advantages and disadvantages 
of the methods, and highlighted their most probable sectors of the applica￾tion of both substrate-based and substrate-free systems (hydroponics and 
aeroponics) and in vitro cultivation methods for large-scale developed AMF 
inoculum. As pointed out by Ijdo et al. (2011), there are almost as many tech￾niques as there are laboratories working with AMF, since it is a prerequisite 
to fundamental research as well as for application purposes. Furthermore, in 
the presence of universal and ubiquitous AMF propagules in the field soil, 
tracing and relating positive effects of inoculation to the introduced AMF 
strain are not possible, and interaction of the indigenous AMF population 
and the introduced exotic strain poses risks associated with the introduc￾tion of unwanted microbes associated with the inoculum (Pringle et al., 
2009). Voets et al. (2009) studied the role of extraradical mycelium network 
(ERMN) of AMF extending from mycorrhizal plants often not considered in 
vitro to inoculate young plantlets, as an important source of AMF inoculum 
in soils allowing fast colonization of plants under in vitro conditions. The 
authors grew young seedlings of Medicago truncatula in vitro in the ERMN 
extending from mycorrhizal plants, and after a few days of contact with 
ERMN seedlings were transplanted in vitro on a suitable growth medium for 
4 weeks. They found that the seedlings were readily colonized by AMF and 
reproduced 1000s spores within 4 weeks. This fast mycorrhization process 
developed by Voets et al. (2009) has an open door for the mass production of 
AMF inoculum required for field application. 474 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
14.2 PRODUCING LARGE-SCALE AMF-COLONIZED-ROOTS WITH 
EXTENSIVE EXTRA RADICAL MYCELIUM NETWORK INOCULUM
We, in our laboratory at Western Sydney University, in an attempt to large￾scale production of AMF inoculum for field studies, employed two tech￾niques, that is, pot culture and aeroponic culture techniques. The specific 
objectives were to (1) preinoculate test plant with native AMF spores 
collected by wet sieving and decanting technique, from the rhizospheres of 
mycorrhizal plants growing on the HM-contaminated sites in New South 
Wales, Australia, in pot culture using sand-based media (Fig. 14.1) trans￾ferring the 4-week-old healthy-looking infected test plants from the pot 
cultures randomly into the perforated lid of the Atomizing Disk Aeroponic 
System (Fig. 14.2) or the Ultrasonic Nebuliser Aeroponic System (Fig. 
14.2B), to produce adequate adventitious root systems with good AMF 
colonization levels of the root cortices harboring intra- and inter-cellular 
fungal hyphae, vesicles and arbuscules (Fig. 14.3C and D), and extensive 
ERMN outside the root surface of the grassroots from the atomizing disc 
aeroponic system as well as atomizing disc aeroponic system (Fig. 14.3A, 
B) (Khan, 2007). 
AMF-inoculum for field application was developed by harvesting and 
shearing the ERMN and the adventitious roots excised from the plants 
growing in aeroponic chambers and blending them in an electric blender to 
produce a slurry that is air-dried to be used as inoculum for field application 
(for details see Khan, 2007). Comparatively, the inoculum potentials of the 
inoculum developed by the aeroponic culture techniques were significantly 
greater than those developed by the pot culture in all the inoculation treat￾ments (Asif, 1997). 
14.3 FIELD TESTING INFECTIVITY AND EFFICIENCY OF SHEARED￾ROOT AMF-INOCULUM PRODUCED BY AEROPONIC TECHNIQUES TO
YIELD GREATER BIOMASS FOR 
(a) Food Crops for Enhancing Yield 
To date, very few field trials have been conducted to evaluate the ability of 
introduced AM isolates to enhance plant growth in competition with the indig￾enous AMF propagules. Sylvia and his associates (Jarstfer and Sylvia, 1992; 
Sylvia, 1998, Sylvia and Hubbell, 1986); Sylvia and Jarstfer, 1992, 1994, 
Sylvia et al., 1993) were the first who used aeroponically grown sheared root (a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 14.1 Establishing pot cultures (a) of surface sterilised vetiver grass ‘slips’ into 
sterilised sand inoculated with indigenous arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal spores (B), extracted 
by wet sieving and decanting technique from the indigenous contaminated soils, and producing 
mycorrhizal roots (C) used for producing large scale AMF inoculum in aeroponic culture systems. 
Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 475 (a) (b) 
FIGURE 14.2 Pre AMF-colonised rooted slipe from the pot culture are transferred to the 
lids of the Atomising-disk Aeroponic System (a) or Ultrasonic Aeroponic System (b), to mass 
produce AMF inoculum for Field application (Khan, 2007). 
476 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
AMF-inoculum (consisting of root fragments and AMF propagules including 
in a commercial nursery and in a field and reported enhanced growth of 
transplanted sea oats at Miami Beach). We assessed, under field conditions, 
the ability of introduced AM isolate in competition with the indigenous AM 
fungal propagules produced by the ultrasonic aeroponic system under field 
conditions (Asif et al., 1995; Asif, 1997; Mohammad et al., 2004). These 
studies reported improved growth of plants in a field containing low levels 
of P and a low population of indigenous AMF propagules, when inoculated 
with a commercially produced sheared-root inoculum of Glomus intrara￾dices consisting of root fragments and AMF propagules including ERMN, 
indicating that the introduced AMF can compete with its indigenous AMF 
and benefit plant growth. Khan (1975a, 1975b) may have been the first to 
demonstrate the potential of pre-inoculating plants with AMF propagules and 
transplanting them into nutrient-deficient field soil to compete with its indig￾enous AMF population, but it is not known how long such introduced strains 
persist. The composition of soil microbiota, including both indigenous and 
introduced AMF community, and their interactions clearly have relevance 
to mycorrhizoremediation of contaminated soils, but yet to be elucidated 
(Khan, 2005a, 2005b). Further research is needed to integrate in situ soil 
fertility enhancing technologies by using AMF and associated microbiota as 
plant biostimulants and the nano-phytoremediation technology, in order to (a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
FIGURE 14.3 Large scale AMF-colonized adventitious roots, produced by Atomizing Disk 
Aeroponic system (A), and by Ultrasonic Aeroponic System (B), with extensive Extraradical 
Mycelium Network (ERMN) outside the root surfaces. Root cortices of the Adventitious 
Roots produced by both aeroponic systems had good AMF-colonization levels harboring 
inter- and intra-cellular fungal hyphae, vesicles and arbuscules, and Extraradical Mycelium 
Network (ERMN) on the root surfaces (C and D). 
Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 477 478 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
globally decontaminate and reclaim derelict land and water ecosystems and 
to increase crop yield, especially in the underdeveloped world economies. 
There is a need to investigate the dynamics and persistence or decomposition 
of the efficient introduced AMF inoculum in the mycorrhizosphere of crops 
growing in P-deficient soils with indigenous non-efficient AMF propagules. 
This knowledge may enable us to understand and develop these aspects and 
their input into developing future strategies to be used to optimize AMF￾inoculum production for NPMR of contaminated soils and waters. 
(b) Nonfood Crops for In Situ Nano-Mycorrhizo-Phytoremediation 
of HM-Contaminated Soils and Waters and Increasing Biomass for 
Bioenergy Production 
Due to increasing energy demand for the rapidly growing human popula￾tion and due to climate change and limited fossil fuel resources, accelerated 
efforts to develop alternative sustainable energy resources have prompted 
scientists and governments to explore other options such as the use of green 
plants for bioethanol and biodiesel production. However, there are concerns 
about overusing agricultural land and food crops for biofuel production. 
This dilemma developed interests in the use of (1) nonfood bioenergy crops 
capable of producing large biomass under stressed conditions in a short period 
of time such as Vetiver grass, (2) plant growth-enhancing microbes such as 
AMF, and (3) land such as derelict contaminated wastelands for growing 
such non-food crops. Kumar et al. (2018) suggested that a solution to carbon 
emissions and energy crisis is the production of microbial biofuels and that 
microbial-biotechnology might substitute crop-based biofuel production. 
As stated above, most of the plants growing on disturbed, derelict, and 
HM-contaminated soils and water, have a strong dependency on AMF for 
optimal growth and biomass production. Both plant roots and their symbiont 
AMF synthesize nanoparticles (NPs) to protect themselves from the toxicity 
of contaminants by secreting HM-affinity transporter nanomolecules that 
immobilize or translocate HMs into root cells, that is, NMPR (Khan, 2020a). 
We propose that coupling sustainable NMPR with bioenergy by using non￾food crops and derelict land is an integral approach to address the issue 
of reclamation of HM-contaminated and derelict land and simultaneously 
producing greater biomass for bio-energy production. Vetiver grass is one of 
such plants, that is, it is a fast-growing, mycorrhizal, high biomass producing, 
with dense-root systems, secreting high levels of HM-degrading NPs, capable 
of growing as halophyte, hydrophyte or xerophyte and with a potential for Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 479 
NMPR as an ideal plant to be used in in situ phytoremediation purposes 
and ecological restoration of derelict land contaminated land (Khan, 2022, 
2007, 2009). Phytoremediation of HM-contaminated wastewater ecosystems 
and wetlands and to produce large biomass for bioenergy production is also 
proposed by using NMPR strategy and constructed-wetlands planted with 
vetiver grass plants with roots pre-occupied with water-logging tolerant AM 
fungi extracted from the rhizosphere of HM-adapted aquatic macrophytes 
growing at the land–water interface of the contaminated water ecosystem 
(Fig.14.4) (Khan, 2021b). 
FIGURE 14.4 Schematic view of the Constructed Wetlands (CWs) planted with water￾logging-tolerant and Pre-occupied with indigenous arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal (AMF) 
infected rooted slips of the Vetiver grass from the pot cultures (Fig. 14.1 a) transferred to the 
lids of the constructed wetlands (AM-CWs) for the Nano-Mycorrhizo-Phyto-Remediation 
(NMPR) of HM-Contaminated Wastewater Ecosystems and Wetlands. (Khan, 2021). 
14.4 CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Production of large-scale AMF inoculum for applying in situ nanophytore￾mediation strategy to mycorrhizoremediate HM-contaminated soils and 
water depends upon the AMF isolate, the physicochemical characteristic 
of the contaminated ecosystem, and concentration of the contaminating 480 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
HM (Khan, 2020b). The mycorrhizal technology needs to be commercially 
exploited, but more information is required to understand the role played by 
AMF in ecosystem management, sustainability, and restoration of degraded 
and contaminated ecosystems before adopting this strategy. Using non￾agricultural land and greater biomass producing mycorrhizal plants such as 
Vetiver grass seems to be the answer to achieve this goal. 
As the use of a commercially produced AMF inoculum available 
in the International markets produces mixed results, using stress￾tolerant and indigenous, site adaptive AMF/PGPR microbes from the 
rhizospheres of plants growing on the contaminated sites to be remediated 
is recommended. NMPR is an emerging strategy. Future of AMF/PGPR 
assisted nano-phytoremediation, using native site-adaptive microbes, and 
simultaneously producing greater biomass for bioenergy production, is the 
way to go. However, there are still many issues, such as the optimization of 
the processes and factors affecting NMPR, to be resolved before applying 
these plant–microbe interactions at field-scale using mass-produced 
AMF inoculum using various techniques discussed in this article. NPMR 
technology is a potential mechanism to improve survival. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
AGK thanks his grandson Rana Usman Khan for producing figures and for 
assisting with computer/printer-related troubleshooting. 
MA greatly appreciates the constructive and invaluable advice provided 
by various faculty members of WSU for retechnical and linguistic contents 
of his PhD thesis. 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS 
Both authors contributed equally to the manuscript and have read and agreed 
to the published version of the manuscript.  
Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 481 
KEYWORDS
• arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi 
• inoculum production 
• hydroponics and aeroponics 
• field applications
• sustainable bioenergy production 
• nano-phytoremediation 
• plant growth-promoting rhizobia 
• nano-mycorrhizo-phytoremediation 
REFERENCES 
Asif, M. Comparative Study of Production, Infectivity, and Effectiveness of Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizal Fungi Produced by Soil-Based and Soil-Less Techniques. PhD Thesis, 
University of Western Sydney Macarthur, Faculty of Business and Technology, Department 
of Biological Sciences. Sydney, July 1997. 
Asif, M.; Khan, A. G.; Khan, M. A.; Kueck, C. Growth Responses of Wheat to Sheared Root 
Vesicular Arbuscular Inoculum Under Field Condition. In Mycorrhiza: Biofertilizer for the 
Future. Proceedings 3rd International Conference on Mycorrhiza; Adholeya, A., Singh, S., 
Eds.; New Delhi, India, March 13–15, 1995. Tata Energy Research Institute, New Delhi, 
India; pp 432–437. 
Balser, T. C.; Kinzig, A. P.; Firestone, M. K. Linking Soil Microbial Communities and Ecosystem 
Functioning. In The Functioning Consequences of Biodiversity: Empirical Progress and 
Theoretical Extensions; Kinzig, A. P. et al., Eds.; Princeton University Press, 2002. 
Bethlenfalvay, G. J.; Brown, M. S.; Franson, R. L.; Mihara, K. L. The Glycin-Glomus￾Bradyrhizobium Symbiosis. X. Relationship between Leag Gas Exchange and Plant and 
Soil Water Status in Nodulated, Mycorrhizal Soybean under Drought Stress. Plant Physiol. 
1990, 94, 723–728. 
Borges, R. G.; Chaney, W. R. The Response of Acacia scleroxyla Tuss. To Mycorrhizal 
Inoculation. Int. Tree Crops J. 1988, 5, 191–201. 
Chaudhary, T. M.; Hill, K.; Khan, A. G.; Kuek, C. Colonization of Non- and Zn Contaminated 
Dumped Filter Cake Waste by Microbes, Plants and Associated Mycorrhizae. In Remediation 
and Management of Degraded Lands; Wong, M. H., Wong, J. W. C., Baker, A. J. M., Eds.; 
CRC Press LLC: Boca Raton, 1999; Chapter 27, pp 275–283. 
Dehne, H. W.; Backhaus, G. F. The Use of Vesicular-Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi in Plant 
Production. 1. Inoculum Production. J. Plant Dis. Plant Prot. 1986, 93 (4), 415–424. 
Faye, A.; Stewart, Z. I.; Ndung-u-Magioi, K.; Diouf, M.; Ndoye, I. Testing of Commercial 
Inoculants to Enhance P Uptake and Grain Yield of Promiscuous Soybean in Kenya. 
Sustainability 2020, 12, 3808. https://Doi:10.3390/su12093803 
Giovannini, L.; Palla, M.; Agnolucci, M.; Agnolucci, M.; Avio, L.; Sbrana, C.; Turrini, 
A.; Giovannetti, M. Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi and Associated Microbiota as Plant  
 
482 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Biostimulantss: Research Strategies for the Selection of the Best Performing Inocula. 
Agronomy 2020, 10, 106. https://doi.3390/agronong10010106 
Hayes, W. J.; Chaudhry, T. M.; Buckney, R. T.; Khan, A. G. Phytoaccumulation of Trace 
Metalsat the Sunny Corner Mine, New South Wales, with Suggestion for Apossible 
Remediation Strategy. Aust. J. Ecotoxicol. 2003, 9, 69–82. 
Hepper, C. M. Isolation and Culture of VA Mycorrhizal (VAM) Fungi. In VA Mycorrhiza; Li 
Powell, G., Bagyaraj, D. J., Eds.; CRC Press Inc.: Boca Raton, FL, 1984; pp 95–112. 
Ijdo, M.; Cranenbrouck, S.; Declerck, S. Methods for Large-Scale Production of AM Fungi: 
Past, Present, and Future. Mycorrhiza 2011, 21,1016. https://doi.10.1007/a00572.010,0337-z 
Jarstfer, A. G.; Sylvia, D. M. Aeroponic Culture of VAM Fungi. In Mycorrhiza–Structure, 
Function, Molecular Biology, and Biotechnology; Varma, A., Hock, B., Eds.; Springer: 
Heidelberg, 1995; pp 427–441. 
Jarstfer, A. G.; Sylvia, D. M. Inoculum Production and Inoculation Strategies for Vesicular￾Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi. In Soil Microbial Techniques Applications in Agriculture, 
Forestry and Environmental Management; Metting, B., Ed.; Marcel Dekker Inc.: New 
York, 1992; pp 349–377. 
Jasper, D. A.; Robson, A. D.; Abbott, L. K. Phosphorus and the Formation of Vesicular 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizas. Soil Biol. Biochem. 1979, 11, 501–505. 
Khan, A. G. The Significance of Microbes in Soil Rehabilitation. In The Restoration 
and Management of Derilict Land: Modren Approaches; World Scientific Publishing: 
Singapore, 2002; Chapter 8, pp 80–92. 
Khan, A. G. Vetiver Grass as an Ideal Phycosymbiont for Glomalian Fungi for Ecological 
Restoration of Derelict Land. In Proceedings 3rd International Conference on Vetiver and 
Exibition: Vetiver and Water; Troung, P.; Hanping, X., Eds.; Guangzhou, China, October 
2003. China Agricultural Press: Beijing, China; pp 466–474. 
Khan, A. G. Role of Soil Microbiota in the Rhizosphere of Plants Growing on Heavy Metal 
Contaminated Soils in Phytoremediation of Trace Metals. J. Trace Metal Elements Med. 
Biol. 2005a, 18, 355–364. 
Khan, A. G. Mycorrhizoremediation—An Enhanced Form of Phytoremediation. Int. Symp. 
Phytoremediation Ecosyst. Health. Hanghzhou, China, Sept 10–13, 2005b; p 42. 
Khan, A. G. Producing Mycorrhizal Inoculum for Phytoremediation. In Phytoremediation: 
Methods in Biotechnology; Willey, N., Ed., Vol. 23; Humana Press Inc.: Totowa, NJ, 2007. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-59745-00980_7 
Khan, A. G. Microbial Dynamics in the Mycorrhizosphere with Special Reference to Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizae. In Plant Bacteria Interactions—Strategies and Techniques to Promote Plant 
Growth; Ahmad, I., Pitchtel, J., Hayat, S., Eds.; Wiley-VCH/Verlag: Weinheim, 2008; Chapter 
13, pp 245–256. 
Khan, A. G. Role of Vetiver Grass and Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi in Improving Crops against 
Abiotic Stresses. In Salinity and Water Stress. Tasks for Vegetation Sciences; Ashraf, M., Athar, 
H., Eds., Vol. 44; Springer: Dordrecht, 2009. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-9065-3_12 
Khan, A. G. In Situ Nano-Phytoremediation Strategy to Mycorrhizo-Remediate Heavy Metal 
Contaminated Soils Using Bioenergy Crops. In Abstract 16th International Phytotechnology 
Conference: Phytotechnologies for Food Safety and Environmental Health; Changsha, 
China, Sept 23–27, 2019; p 170. 
Khan, A. G. In Situ Phytoremediation of Uranium Contaminated Soils. In Phytoremediation: 
Concepts and Strategies in Plant Sciences; Shmacfsky, B. R., Ed.; Springer Link, 2020a; 
Chapter 5, pp 123–151. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00099-8_5  
 
 
 
Mass Production of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus 483 
Khan, A. G. Promises and Potential of in Situ Nano-Phytoremediation Strategy to 
Mycorrhizoremediate Heavy Metal Contaminated Soils Using Non-Food Bioenergy Crops 
(Vetiver zizinoides & Cannabis sativa. Int. J. Phytoremediation 2020b. https://doi.org/10.1 
080/15226514.2020.1774504 
Khan, A. G. Potential Nano-Phytoremediation of Heavy-Metal Contaminated Aquatic 
Ecosystems via Planting of Vetiver Grass Pre-Colonized by Indigenous Water-Logging 
Resistant Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2022 (Submitted). 
Khan, A. G. Nano-Phytoremediation of Heavy Metal Contaminated Wastewater Ecosystems 
and Wetlands by Constructed-Wetlands Planted with Water-Logging-Tolerant Mycorrhizal 
Fungi and Vetiver Grass. 2nd International Electronic Conference on Mineral Science 
Section Environmental Mineralogy and Biomineralization, 2021b. http://sciforum.net/ 
paper/view/conference/9385 
Khan, A. G.; Chaudhary, T. M.; Khoo, C. S.; Hayes, W. J. The Role of Plants, Mycorrhizae, 
and Phytochelators in Heavy Metal Contaminated Land Remediation. Chemosphere, 
Special Issue: Environmental Contamination, Toxicology, and Health 2000, 41, 197–207. 
Kumar, M.; Sundaram, S.; Gnansounou, E.; Larroche, C.; Thakur, I. S. Carbon Dioxide Capture, 
Storage and Production of Biofuel and Biomaterials by Bacteria. Bioresour. Technol. 2018. 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2017.09.050 
Kushwaha M, Surabhi, Marwa N, Pandey V, Singh NA. 2020. Advanced tools to Assess 
Microbial Diversity and Their Functions in Restoration of Degraded Ecosystems. In 
Microbial Services in Restoration Ecology; Elesvier Inc., 2020; Chapter 6, pp 83–97. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-819978.7.00006-3 
Millner, P. D.; Kitt, D. G. The Beltsville Method for Soilless Production of Vesicular￾Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi. Mycorrhiza 1992, 2, 9–15. 
Mohammad, A.; Khan, A. G. Monoxenic in Vitro Production and Colonization Potential of 
AM Fungus Glomus intraradices. Indian J. Exp. Bot. 2002, 40, 1087–1091. 
Mohammad, A.; Khan, A. G.; Kuek, C. Improved Aeroponic Culture of Inocula of Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizal Fungi. Mycorrhiza 2000, 9, 337–339. https://doi: 10.1007/s0055720050278 
Mohammad, A.; Mitra, B.; Khan, A. G. Effects of Sheared-Root Inoculum of Glomus 
intraradices on Wheat Growth at Different Phosphorus Levels in the Field. Agric. Ecosyst. 
Environ. 2004, 103, 245–249. https://doi.10.1016/j.agec.2003.09.017 
Mohammad, A.; Mittra, B. Effects of Inoculation with Stress Adapted Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Fungus Glomus deserticola on Growth of Solanum melogena L. and Sorghum sudanese 
Staph. Seedlings under Salinity and Heavy Metal Stress Conditions. Arch. Agron. Soil Sci. 
2013, 59 (2), 173–183. https://doi.org/10.1080/03650340.2011.610029 
Munoz-Rojas, M.; Chilton, A.; Ooi, M. K. J. Effects of Indigenous Soil Cyanobacteria on 
Seed Germination and Seedling Growth of Arid Species Used in Restoration. Plant Soil 
2018, 429, 91–100. https://doi.org./10.1007/s11104-018-3607-8 
Pringle, A.; Bever, J. D.; Gardes, M.; Parrent, J. L.; Rillig, M. C.; Klironomos, J. N. Mycorrhizal 
Symbioses and Plant Invasions. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 2009. https://doi.10.1146/ 
annurev.ecolsys.39.110707.173454 
Sansanwal, R.; Ahlawat, U.; Wati, L. Role of Endophytes in Agriculture. Rev. Lett. 2017, 6 
(24), 2397–2407. 
Sreeramulu, K. R.; Bagyaraj, D. J. Field Responses of Chilli to VA Mycorrhiza in Black 
Clayey Soil. Plant Soil 1986, 92, 299–304. 
Sylvia, D. M. Mycorrhizal Symbiosis. In Principles and Applications of Soil Microbiology, 
Sylvia, D. M. et al., Eds.; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, 1998; pp 408–426.  
 
484 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Sylvia, D. M. Nursery Inoculation of Sea Oats with Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi 
and Out Planting Performance of Florida Beaches. J. Coastal Res. 1989, 5, 747–754. 
Sylvia, D. M.; Hubbell, D. H. Growth and Sporulation of Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Fungi. New Phytol. 1986, 95, 655–661. 
Sylvia, D. M.; Jarstfer, A. G. Sheared Root Inoculum of Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Fungi in Aeroponic and Membrane Systems. Symbiosis 1992, 1, 259–267. 
Sylvia, D. M.; Jarstfer, A. G.; Vosalka, M. Comparisons of Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Species and Iocula Formulations in a Commercial Nursery and on Diverse Florida Beaches. 
Biol. Fertil. Soil 1993, 16, 139–144. 
Voets, L.; de la Providencia, T. E.; Fernandez, K.; Ijdo, M.; Cranenbrou, S.; Declerch, S. 
Extraradical Mycelium Network of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Allows Fast Colonization 
of Seedlings under in Vitro Conditions. Mycorrhiza 2009, 19, 347–356. https://doi.10.1007/ 
s00572-009-0233-6 PART VI
 
Nanomaterials Feasibility
 J. IMMANUEL SURESH*
 and A. JUDITH
PG Department of Microbiology, The American College, 
Madurai 625002, Tamil Nadu, India
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: immanuelsuresh1978@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Nanoparticles have wide range of applications in various fields such as 
biomedical, environmental remediation, etc. High surface area and high 
reactivity properties of nanoparticles make it suitable for nanoremediation 
of environmental pollutants. Despite the magnificent properties of nanopar￾ticles and their wide range of applications, the process of engineering and 
handling of nanoparticles pose considerable risk to health and environment 
safety. The toxicity of nanoparticles proves that some of these products 
become toxic at the cellular level in the tissues and organs after entering into 
human body. Inhalation of nanoparticles leads to various pulmonary illness 
in mammals including asthma. Nanoparticles introduced in water could pose 
high risk to living beings upon consumption. The highly potential field of 
nanotechnology can be exploited with safety by facilitating the development 
of high-performance filter media, respirators, dust-repellants, self-cleaning 
garments, and frequent work place risk assessment.
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 15
Hazardous and Safety and Management 
of Nanomaterials for the Personal Health 
and Environment488 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
15.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology deals with the ultra small nanoparticles. The rapidly 
advancing field of nanotechnology has remarkable applications in various 
diverse fields. It has been widely studied for its potential to act as an efficient 
carrier for drug delivery, diagnostics, food pathogen detection, wearable 
sensors, and numerous other biomedical applications. Along with the above, 
nanomaterials also have shown positive results in environmental remediation. 
It can be used to clean up polluted media like soil, air, and water. Nanoreme￾diation is possible because of the unique properties of nanoparticles such as 
high surface area, high reactivity, etc. This enables them to eliminate a wide 
range of toxic environmental pollutants. Despite the magnificent properties 
of nanoparticles and its wide range applications, the process of engineering 
and handling of nanoparticles poses considerable risk to health and environ￾ment safety. This review deals with the possible health safety, environmental 
risk associated with nanoparticles and risk management (Karn et al., 2009; 
Vishwakarma et al., 2010). 
15.2 HEALTH HAZARDS
The excessive exposure of nanoparticles is considered to be unsafe for 
the biological system. Researches on the toxicity of nanoparticles indicate 
that some of these products become toxic at the cellular level in the tissues 
and organs after entering into human body (Rachel, 2006; Jin et al., 2005). 
Nanoparticles may enter into the body upon exposure via inhalation, dermal, 
oral, and parenteral in the case of biomedical applications (Stern and McNeil, 
2008). Their smaller dimensions and higher specific surface area enable them 
to easily bind and transport toxic contaminants. They can cause numerous 
pulmonary diseases in mammals. If the nanoparticles enter the body, they 
will circulate freely across the body in the blood and reach organs such as 
the liver or brain. It may move deeper into the lungs and the bloodstream and 
also may cross the blood–brain barrier. During the handling of the nanopar￾ticles, skin contact can easily occur. The possible toxicity of the materials 
of these particles could vary, but even inert nanoparticles are considered to 
be dangerous. They may get converted into toxic items on reaction with the 
body fluids. In order to produce highly reactive types of oxygen that can 
cause tissue damage, including inflammation and other toxic effects, certain 
nanoparticles can display improved catalytic properties. This damage will 
translate into asthma and atherosclerotic heart disorders in airborne particles. Hazardous and Safety and Management of Nanomaterials 489 
In terrestrial organisms, uptake of nanoparticles by inhalation or ingestion is 
likely to be the major route (U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health, 2006). Nanoparticle deposition in the lung rises with exercise 
due to increased breathing rate and transition from nasal to mouth breathing 
and among people with known lung diseases or conditions (British Standard 
Institute [BSI]). 
Threadlike nanotubes are structurally similar to asbestos fibers. According 
to a report by the Royal Society, the United Kingdom’s National Science 
Academy, upon inhalation in large amounts for longer periods they are capable 
of causing lung fibrosis. Lower sized nanoparticles function more like a gas 
and are capable of moving through skin and lung tissue thereby penetrating 
into cell membranes. Once they enter into the cell, they may become toxic 
and interfere with the normal cell chemistry (Vishwakarma et al., 2010). 
Particles with diameter of 1 nm or 0.001 µm do not penetrate the alveoli 
instead they get deposited in the nose and pharynx. In the tracheobronchial 
zone, the other 20% are deposited. The retention of inhaled nanoparticles 
at this size is nearly 100% (Claude, 2006a). Deposition is primarily in the 
alveolar zone of the lungs for particles larger than 5 nm. The deposition 
fraction of inhaled nanoparticles is higher in the alveolar and tracheo￾bronchial regions of human lungs leading to the development of airways 
diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma. 
In addition, studies support the direct role of inhaled nanoparticles in 
systemic diseases such as cardiovascular diseases. Study on CNTs show that 
they tend induce platelet aggregation and enhance thrombosis (Stern and 
McNeil, 2008). The toxicity and health risk of nanoparticles may also be due 
to its various physical and chemical factors (Claude, 2006a; British Standard 
Institute [BSI]). 
Dermal exposure to nanoparticles may lead to direct penetration of 
nanoparticles into the epidermis and lead it into the bloodstream; however, 
there is no remarkable evidence (U.S. National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, 2006; Aitken et al., 2004). Only mild irritation was 
reported as an adverse reaction to topical nanomaterial application in limited 
in vivo studies conducted to resolve the issue of cutaneous toxicity. For 
example, nanoscale metal oxides are currently used in commercially avail￾able sunscreens and have been extensively tested by animals and clinicians 
to satisfy regulatory requirements. These studies found minimal irritancy 
potential, and no evidence of photoirritation, sensitization etc. (Stern and Mc 
Neil, 2008). In contrast, some recent studies have revealed some cutaneous 
penetration by ultrafine beryllium particles and the formation of cutaneous 
nodules (Claude, 2006a). 490 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Ingestion is another route by which nanoparticles can penetrate the 
body. Ingested particles smaller than 20 µm (20,000 nm) can pass through 
the intestinal barrier and enter the bloodstream. Ingestion can occur from 
unintentional events and direct ingestion of contaminated drinking water or 
particles absorbed on vegetables, etc. (Claude, 2006a; U.S. National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health, 2006). 
15.3 ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
Nanoparticles in water sources that are either present or introduced can 
lead to secondary toxic effects and potentially endanger human health. This 
problem drags the awareness of the scientific community. Ensuring their 
protection, possible health and environmental effects, is a key challenge for 
emerging nanomaterials. Ecological researchers are facing a major challenge 
on determining the toxicity levels of nanomaterials; also, they have to 
investigate whether biomarkers of harmful effects currently used would 
also function in the study of environmental nanotoxicity. The practicality 
of using natural nanomaterials as sorbents is therefore investigated by many 
research groups. For instance, allophone is an excellent sorbents for copper 
and surface-modified smectite adsorbs naphthalene and 17β- estradiol (Yuan 
2004). Both of these nano-sized minerals are soil-based and are of geological 
and pedological origin. 
While there are insufficient data to predict the risk of fire and explosion 
associated with nanoparticles, the general trend is to increase the violence of 
the dust explosion and the ease of ignition as the particle size decreases or 
the specific area increases. Decreasing the particle size of fuel materials will 
reduce the minimum ignition energy and increase the potential for combus￾tion and the rate of combustion, contributing to the likelihood of highly 
combustible materials being relatively inert (Claude, 2006a; Pritchard, 2004). 
Nanoparticles exist in the atmosphere in large concentrations, still the release 
of manufactured nanoparticles into atmosphere and aquatic environment is 
yet unknown. Scientific community has raised concern that nanoparticles are 
potential of causing brain damage in aquatic environment (Rick, 2004). 
In addition, due to their high surface areas, nanomaterials released to the 
soil can be heavily absorbed into the soil and become immobile. Nanosized 
particles may be taken up by bacteria and living cells, providing the basis 
for possible bioaccumulation in the food chain. Certain nanomaterials are 
engineered to be released into the atmosphere as reactants and are therefore 
required to undergo chemical transformation. One instance of this is iron Hazardous and Safety and Management of Nanomaterials 491 
(FeO). Biodegradation of nanoparticles by some kinds of fungi leads to 
generation of toxic metabolites to microorganisms under various conditions 
(J et al, 2007). 
15.4 EXPOSURE AND HANDLING
Occupational environment pose high risk of continuous exposure to nanopar￾ticles. Followed by the removal of nanomaterials from a closed system, it can 
be dispersed in the gas phase. Nanomaterials can also be formulated and used 
as powders, suspensions, etc. Nanomaterials in gas phase and powdered state 
pose the greatest risk. Cleaning and handling of nanomaterials engineering 
system also paves way for the exposure to risk. The amount of release of 
nanoparticles and duration of exposure widely influences the level of risk. 
Handling nanomaterials in liquid media, in gas phase under non enclosed 
system, in powders and cleaning dust collection system without adequate 
protection are certain workplace factors that increase the exposure to risk 
(Vishwakarma et al., 2010). 
Some organizations have started an active program to research the safe 
handling of nanomaterials in the workplace, such as the National Institute of 
Occupational Safety and Health (Schulte and Salamanca-Buentello, 2007). 
There is only little information available on the risks of handling these 
products, so employees should apply strict control procedures and safety 
engineering features to minimize exposure when working with them and 
not allow them to eat or drink in the laboratory. During manufacture and 
handling of these materials, there are high chances of release and exposure 
of nanoparticles to workers which can get inside their body through various 
routes (Kevin, 2005). 
When workers handle the nanomaterials they should use laboratory safety 
practices such as Personnel Protective Equipment including gloves, lab coats, 
safety glasses, face shields, closed-toed shoes, etc. These safety precautions 
will help in avoiding the skin contact with nanoparticles or nanoparticles 
containing solutions. Workers should wear adequate respiratory protection, if 
it is required to treat nanoparticle powders with exhaust laminar flow hoods. 
It is very important to use fume exhaust hoods to evict fumes from tube 
furnaces or chemical reaction vessels. Laboratory workers should be educated 
on occupational danger risk, Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), marking, 
signage, etc., periodically. The disposal of nanoparticles also focuses on envi￾ronmental protection. It should be in accordance with recommendations for 
hazardous chemical waste (Vishwakarma et al., 2010) (Table 15.1). TABLE 15.1 Nanomaterial State, Potential Occupational Exposure, and Recommended 
Engineering Control. 
Nanomaterial Exposure	 Control 
Fixed Nanomaterials may be released during 
nanostructures grinding, drilling, and sanding. 
Liquid Process like sonication or spraying, 
suspension equipment cleaning and maintenance 
may result in aerosolization of 
nanoparticles. 
Dry dispersible Handling dry powder formulations 
nanoparticles 
Nanoaerosols Occurrence of leakage from the 
reactor, product recovery, processing, 
etc., results in exposure. 
• Local exhaust ventilation 
• Laboratory chemical hood 
(with HEPA filtered exhaust) 
• HEPA-filtered exhausted 
enclosure (glovebox) 
• Biological safety cabinet class II 
type A1, A2, vented via thimble 
connection, or B1 or B2 
• Appropriate equipment for 
monitoring toxic gas (e.g., CO) 
492 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
15.5 MANAGEMENT OF RISK
An efficient dust collection system with HEPA filter installed in it must be 
kept in the workplace where there is high risk of generation of nanoparticles 
in the air (gas phase). HEPA filters are known to effectively filter nanopar￾ticles, provided the HEPA filter should be fitted properly. Otherwise, the 
nanoparticles will bypass the filter and disperse in the air. Workers should 
be educated about the safe handling of nanoparticles. Workers should be 
encouraged to wash their hands thoroughly before eating or leaving the work 
site in order to avoid the ingestion of toxic nanoparticles. The unnecessary 
transport of nanoparticles outside the work area, through clothing and skin 
as a medium, can be avoided by providing showering and changing facility. 
Food should not be stored or consumed near the work place. Work place 
must be cleaned with HEPA filter based vacuum or damp cleaning method. 
Nanoparticles should not be handled as free particulate in open air. If the 
worker has the risk of being exposed to nanoparticles dispersed in air during 
handling or engineering, appropriate respirators can be used as safety precau￾tion. Frequent risk assessment tests should be carried out for continuous 
monitoring and control of the risk (British Standard Institute [BSI]). 
15.6 CONCLUSION
Recent research is showing that when harmless bulk materials are rendered into 
ultrafine particles, they appear to become harmful and toxic. These ultrafine Hazardous and Safety and Management of Nanomaterials 493 
particles could certainly enter into the human body via lungs, intestine, and 
less evidently through skin. The smaller the particles, the more reactive and 
harmful their effects are. Since ultrafine particles could pose a human health 
hazard, more research is required in this field (Hoet et al., 2004). Through 
the growing field of nanoscience if we get to understand the root cause of 
toxicity in these products, it will be possible to engineer better materials that 
will save human lives. Industry consortiums, actual environmental toxicity 
data for iterative groups and particular firms need to take strong steps before 
they enter the market to assess the quality and safety of goods and products. 
Nanomaterials established today also aid in dealing with emergencies. Sensors 
and communication systems based on nanotechnology may decrease their 
exposure to risk of injury and help in preventing diseases at the early stage. In 
conjunction with wireless technologies, nanosize will promote the production 
of wearable sensors and applications for workplace safety and health 
monitoring in real time. The highly potential field of nanotechnology can be 
exploited with safety by facilitating the development of high-performance 
filter media, respirators, dust-repellants, self-cleaning garments, etc. In order 
to minimize its effect on the environment, due consideration should be taken 
with respect to nanoparticles and nanotechnology safety concerns for the 
personal health and safety of staff engaged in nano-manufacturing processes 
and even customers. 
KEYWORDS
• nanoparticles 
• nanoremediation 
• environment safety 
REFERENCES 
Aitken, R. J.; Creely, K. S.; Tran, C. L. Nanoparticles: An Occupational Hygiene Review; 
HSE, UK, 2004. 
British Standard Institute (BSI). Nanotechnologies—Part 2: Guide to Safe Handling and 
Disposal of Manufactured Nanomaterials, PD 6699-2:2007, UK, 2007. 
Claude, O. Nanoparticles—Actual Knowledge about Occupational Health and Safety Risks 
and Prevention Measures, 2006a. 
Claude, O. Health Effects of Nanoparticles, 2006b.  
494 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
E 2535. Standard Guide for Handling Unbound Engineered Nanoscale Particles in Occupational 
Settings. ASTM, USA, 2007. 
Hoet, P. H.; Brüske-Hohlfeld, I.; Salata, O. V. Nanoparticles—Known and Unknown Health 
Risks. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2004, 2 (1), 12. 
J. M.; J. W. Nanotechnology White Paper. U S Environmental Protection Agency, 2007. 
Jin, Y.; Wu, M.; Zhao, X. Toxicity of Nanomaterials to Living Cells, University of North 
Dakota, US, 2005, 274–277. 
Karn, B.; Kuiken, T.; Otto, M. Nanotechnology and in Situ Remediation: A Review of the 
Benefits and Potential Risks. Environ. Health Perspect. 2009,117 (12), 1813–1831. 
Kevin, D. L. Health and Environmental Impact of Nanotechnology: Toxicological Assessment 
of Manufactured Nanoparticles. Toxicol. Sci. 2005, 77, 3–5. 
Pritchard, D. K. Literature Review—Explosion Hazards Associated with Nanopowders; 
Health & Safety Laboratory (HSL), UK, 2004. 
Rachel, C. Assessing Safety. Health Risks Nanomater. 2006, 15 (05). 
Rick, W. Nanoparticles Toxic in Aquatic Habitat. Study Finds, Washington Post Staff Writer, 
2004. 
Schulte, P. A.; Salamanca-Buentello, F. Ethical and Scientific Issues of Nanotechnology in the 
Workplace. Environ. Health Perspect. 2007, 115, 5–12. 
Stern, S. T.; McNeil, S. E. Nanotechnology Safety Concerns Revisited. Toxicol Sci. 2008, 101 
(1), 4–21. 
Texas A&M University. Interim Guideline for Working Safely with Nanotechnology; USA, 
2005. 
U S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Approaches to Safe Nanotechnology—An Information Exchange with NIOSH, 
2006. 
Vishwakarma, V.; Samal, S. S.; Manoharan, N. Safety and Risk Associated with Nanoparticles— 
A Review. J. Miner. Mater. Charact. Eng. 2010, 09 (05), 455–459. 
Yuan, G. Natural and Modified Nanomaterials as Sorbents of Environmental Contaminants. J. 
Environ. Sci. Health A Tox. Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng. 2004, 39 (10), 2661–2670. MIR ZAHOOR GUL*
 and BEEDU SASHIDHAR RAO
Department of Biochemistry, University College of Sciences, 
Osmania University, Hyderabad 500007, Telangana, India
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: ziahgul@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
As a result of the recent world industrial and technological revolution, 
scientists have reassessed the relationship between socioeconomic develop￾ment and environmental ethics. It has long been acknowledged that adapting 
to the sustainable use of natural resources is critical for the survival of the 
future generations of human society. Nanotechnology is one of the most 
prominent emerging technologies and it has revolutionized all fields of 
medicine, agriculture, environmental science, etc., by offering abilities that 
have never been imagined. Nanotechnology has ushered the world materials 
and devices that are already used in a multitude of platforms. One of the 
most intriguing features of nanotechnology is its incredible scope of real and 
potential applications for fostering long-term economic growth. As a result, 
the propagation effect of nanotechnology is immense and the commercial 
opportunities it creates are both numerous and diverse. A broad alliance of 
industry leaders, scientists, and politicians has recognized nanotechnology 
as a pivotal technology for the 21st century that will lead to economic 
growth and sustainable development. In recent years, nanotechnology has 
significantly contributed to benefiting society and transforming the nature 
of modern life, and at the same time boosting economic growth as well as 
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 16
Economic Impact of Applied 
Nanotechnology: An Overview496 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
improving the capacity and quality in industrial sectors. This chapter focuses 
on the economic impacts of nanotechnology by using market volumes as an 
accurate measure of its economic importance. 
16.1 INTRODUCTION
Science has taken great strides, enabling what is perhaps the most incredible 
transformation in human productivity in the entire history. The field of 
economics has also made significant progress in understanding the application 
of such scientific innovations, that is, technology, which transforms society at 
large and creates a continuous chain of wealth and advancement. Technology 
is critical for the sustainable growth of mankind (Ottman, 2005). On the 
one hand, the technology strongly influences the demand for energy and 
raw materials, infrastructure and transport needs, the mass flow of materials, 
emission composition, and volume of waste materials. Technology, on 
the other hand, is also a central determinant in the innovation process and 
directly impacts prosperity, consumption habits, ways of living, interpersonal 
interactions, and cultural changes. Consequently, the advancement, 
fabrication, usage, and disposal of technical products and systems have an 
impact on environmental, social, and economic dimensions of sustainability. 
Nanotechnology is among the most powerful and influential evolving 
technologies. It has been heralded as a vital twenty-first-century technology 
that will contribute to economic growth and sustainability by a diverse 
coalition of politicians, scientists, and industry groups. Nanotechnology has 
always been at the frontier between scientific reality and optimistic ambitions, 
between first milestones and promising aspirations, between progressive 
advances and innovative discoveries. Most assessments and evaluations of 
current and potential nanotechnology developments, directly or indirectly, 
identify this spectrum of opportunities. It is a revolutionary technology and 
has transformed all fields, like medicine, agricultural, and environment, etc., 
by rendering skill and knowledge that would never have dreamt of before. 
It is a distinctive platform for multidisciplinary approaches in the field of 
physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering. New areas of nanomedicine, 
cancer nanotechnology, and environmental nanotechnology have surfaced 
due to the impact of nanotechnology approaches and are thriving with the 
advances in this expanding field. This technology is rapidly changing the 
ways in which devices and materials will be developed in the future. 
Nanotechnology involves two major strategies for the synthesis of 
materials: (1) the “bottom up” approach that leads to the formation of Economic Impact of Applied Nanotechnology: An Overview 497 
nanostructured basic components and then assembles them into final 
material based on the molecular recognition principles, and (2) the “top￾down” process includes the development of nanostructures from the bigger 
entities without atomic level control. The letter is similar to the methods 
used by the semiconductor industry to fabricate electronic devices using 
pattern formation, like pattern transfer processes (reactive ion etching) and 
electron beam lithography, thus creating nanoscale constructs (Ahmed et 
al., 2010; Iqbal et al., 2012). Analytical science provides nanotechnology 
a boost by combining it with new-generation analytical tools like atomic 
force microscopy (AFM) and tunnel scanning microscopy (STM) with 
processes like molecular beam epitaxy and electron beam lithography, which 
enables nanostructure manipulation with unique phenomena (Ahmed et al., 
2010). The analytical chemistry is, therefore, crucial for the development 
of structures in the nano-systems and devices. The super interdisciplinary 
nature plays a vital role in the progression of nanotechnology. It helps to 
establish principles and methods for the application of nanotechnology with 
the unique characteristics of nanomaterials. The chemical composition, size, 
and morphology are characterized with the help of analytical tools (Ahmed 
et al., 2010). Moreover, the chemical synthesis leads to the fabrication of 
unique nanomaterials with new analytical possibilities. The engineering of 
molecular functional materials involves highly specialized concepts. It is an 
imagined capacity to generate materials using a bottom-up approach using 
existing technologies and techniques to synthesize complete high products. 
The ability to synthesize nanoscale blocks and then arrange them in a large 
structure with unique characteristics and functions, with precisely controlled 
size and structure, revolutionizes materials, their production, as well as their 
various applications. 
16.1.1 COMMERCIALIZATION OF NANOTECHNOLOGY
Since its advent, nanotechnology has opened up new areas for future 
research, and researchers expect that it will have a profound impact on 
industry and technology, human health, social and economic growth, and 
the climate. Furthermore, since nanotechnology is expected to have a 
significant impact on the global economic system, market figures are good 
indicators of its commercial significance. Many nanotechnology industry 
predictions derive from the early 2000s, with a period of up to 2015. As over 
2 million research articles related to nanotechnology have been published 
worldwide annually in recent years, and more than 3000 patents have been 498 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
filed, both the volume of research and the interest it has attracted has shown 
surprising progress (Science and Scoreboard, 2016). Over the past few 
years, reports have usually been euphoric about nanotechnology and all the 
advantages it will offer in the future. Due to its immense potential, public 
and private investments in nanotechnology are substantial and increasing. 
This is an area with highly promising prospects for transforming basic 
research into effective inventions, not only to improve the competitiveness 
of the real industry but also to develop new products that will bring about 
positive impact in our daily lives, especially in the fields of healthcare, the 
environment, electronics, or any other sector. Plenty of nanomaterials, both 
in their pure state and as composite materials, are currently in use or under 
production, and the number of applications for nanomaterials is increasing 
swiftly. A continuing rise in the number of patents is the consequence of 
the successful technological advancements in nanotechnology. According to 
StatNano, in 2016, a total of 19,563 nanotechnology patents were registered 
by the U. S. Patent and Trademarks Office (USPTO). The European Patent 
Office (EPO) issued 3589 nanotechnology patents in the year 2016 (Science 
and Scoreboard, 2016). Around half of these patents belong to the United 
States, while the next ranks are held by South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan. 
Interestingly, the number of international patents for nanoproducts and 
nanotechnologies attained 189,000 in 2017, a rise of 31,000 compared to 
the year 2016. China, with more than 88,000 patents in nanotechnology, 
is the market leader, followed by the USA (86,000), Japan (25,000), and 
South Korea (22,000). Over the last 20 years, there have been about 620,000 
patent applications submitted in the field of nanotechnology (Inshakova and 
Inshakova, 2020). 
Nanotechnology is one of the most influential examples of new 
technologies and it increases high standards in a wide variety of areas 
impacting everyday life. Although the marketing of nanotechnology products 
has been relatively modest so far, recent and ongoing research efforts have 
made it possible to forecast excellent outcomes for the benefit of humanity 
in the years ahead. Large-scale production possibilities for the application 
of nanotechnology predict the possibilities of its growth in market share. 
Nanotechnology continues to have a pervasive effect on almost all aspects of 
the world economy, with market volumes being an acceptable measure of its 
economic value. The global nanotechnology market is valued at nearly USD 
1165.90 million in 2019 and is projected to rise over the 2020–2027 forecast 
period with a healthy growth rate of more than 10.50% (Market Watch, 
2021). Nanomaterials, with an 85% share, had the highest share of the global Economic Impact of Applied Nanotechnology: An Overview 499 
nanotechnology industry by component. Nanotools had the second-largest 
share of the global nanotechnology industry, while nanodevices had the least. 
Electronics, energy, and biomedical are the top three areas of nanotechnology 
and, together, they represent more than 70% of the global nanotechnology 
market. Scientific innovations, increased government and private sector 
R&D investment, increased demand for equipment miniaturization, and 
strategic partnerships between economies are expected to propel global 
nanotechnology market development. 
16.1.2 GREEN ECONOMY AND NANOTECHNOLOGY
The word “green economy” was coined to discuss global concerns and 
challenges such as climate change, growing energy needs, and health issues 
(Gaurav et al., 2017; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop￾ment, 2015). It refers to a broad concept focused on sustainable development 
principles. It encompasses strategies built on the foundation of acknowledging 
social and ecological resources, continuity in environmental sustainability, 
preserving the socioecological harmony, which leadto improved human 
well-being through the development of green jobs, increased productivity, 
environmental accountability, eradicating poverty, and continued growth 
in important areas through sustainable approach (Loiseau et al., 2016; 
Dickel, and Petschow, 2013). This also involves socially comprehensive, 
source-competent, and carbon-conserving methods, actions, objectives, and 
values (Loiseau et al., 2016). Nanotechnology sets up modern and creative 
green methods for developing innovative devices and materials with unique 
physicochemical properties that are both economically and environmentally 
friendly (Barbier, 2011; Caprotti and Bailey, 2014; Hamdouch and Depret, 
2010). Green-economy theory is characterized by a significant increase 
in investments and new projects in emerging markets, either contributing 
to an enhancement and reinforcement of the Earth’s natural resources or 
contributions to reducing threats and shortcomings in environmental sectors. 
Sustainable agriculture and energy, clean technologies, minimal emission 
transportation methods, and waste management, are all being prioritized. 
Without a doubt, the energy sector is the one that plays a very important 
role as a source of energy. All economic trends hinge on consumption and 
management, and as a result, the idea of using renewable energy is strongly 
promoted. To provide a more comprehensive and integrated solution to the 
fit-in environment in economic theories, sustainable energy necessitates the 500 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
development, adoption, and marketing of a green economy model. Nanotech￾nology aims to find new ways to improve economic growth while keeping 
environmental and ecological considerations in mind, as well as leading 
to the mitigation of natural resource challenges, primarily through energy￾efficient technologies. Nanomaterials are anticipated to have a significant 
impact on industries and economic spheres. 
16.2 NANOTECHNOLOGY AS AN ENABLING TECHNOLOGY
Nanotechnology is fuelling the development of several established nano￾technology-specific industrial sectors and new ones as it advances from the 
concept of nanotechnology to application in generic markets. According to 
government and industry, nanotechnology has enormous economic poten￾tial by improving the life cycle of materials and components, improving 
efficiency, and breaking the link between the ecological consequences and 
sustainable development. Apart from the financial implications, nanotech￾nology offers a plethora of great possibilities for improving healthcare and 
overall quality of life. The scientists’ ability to envision and control the 
behavior of materials and nanoscales provides them with the tools for creating 
unique new products. Nanoscale materials with new and unexpected charac￾teristics offer a unique opportunity to build “intelligent” materials that create 
products with completely different characteristics. The production of these 
products is less energy and resource intensive. Through nanotechnology, the 
perception is that production will become progressively cleaner and greener 
and that products will be inexpensive and will have more functionalities and 
many applications have been already proposed for nanotechnology. Nano￾technology will also facilitate technological advancements that minimize 
the environmental footprints of current applications in the industrialized 
nations and allow emerging economies to utilize nanotechnology to address 
some of their most urgent requirements (El Naschie, 2006; Schulte, 2005). 
Nanotechnology’s market share growth prospects are determined by its huge 
production application possibilities. Nanotechnology is expected to have an 
impact in few areas. The following are some examples. 
16.2.1 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN HEALTHCARE
In recent years, the healthcare industry has seen an increase in demand, and 
innovations such as nanoscience/nanotechnology have opened new doors in Economic Impact of Applied Nanotechnology: An Overview 501 
the fields of drug discovery and delivery, cancer treatment, gene therapy, 
and diagnostics (Patel and Nanda, 2015). Nanotechnology will facilitate the 
development of personalized medicines that are delivered precisely at the site 
of infection or disease; new and improved surgical procedures, frequently 
involving robotics; retinal and cochlear implants, and the ability to re-join 
damaged nerves will all become prevalent. Nanotechnology in medicine 
has emerged as a promising area of research. Nanotechnology has a major 
pharmacological benefit in that it helps researchers to ensure that drugs are 
administered more accurately to particular areas of the body and that drugs 
can be rendered such that the active ingredient reduces the necessary dose 
by optimizing cell membranes. The implementation of nanotechnology 
in healthcare will revolutionize the way we identify and treat damaged 
human tissues and organs in the future, therefore innovative technologies 
that evolved a few years ago have made great strides in becoming a reality. 
Healthcare professionals can diagnose and treat patients with a broad range 
of ailments using nanomedicine. By 2028, configurable nanorobotic systems 
and nano-hormatics will be able to reverse the effects of atherosclerosis and 
heart disease, assist the immune system in combating diseases, eradicate 
cancer, and correct congenital abnormalities in cells and the next 15–20 years 
will demonstrate an outstanding leap in health infrastructure attributable to 
nanotechnology (Heath, 2015). A team of researchers who have mapped out 
the application of nanotechnology and the demands of global health argue 
that nanomedicine is significant for third-world countries. Studies showing 
the production of methods are being undertaken by major research institutes 
in collaboration with some private corporations. Scientists and researchers 
are experimenting with and studying these outstanding features, as well 
as their implementation in modern medicine. Nanoparticles and treatment 
methods, diagnostic methods, antimicrobial methods, and their applications 
in cellular repair are all actively being investigated. 
16.2.2 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN ENERGY
After more than a decade of global stability, several countries’ political and 
scientific interests have resurfaced in recent years. Global energy consump￾tion is growing, with emerging economies driving much of it. Between 2015 
and 2040, global energy demand is projected to grow by 28%, according to 
several estimates [US Energy Information Administration (EIA)], 2017). 
On the other hand, over 940 million people (13% of the global popula￾tion) lack access to stable energy sources (Ritchie and Roser, 2019). Since 502 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
coal and petroleum products will continue to influence the global energy 
system, this has direct implications on the global greenhouse gas emissions 
balance. This is especially true for global greenhouse gas emissions, which 
are expected to increase rapidly than energy consumption since the highest 
growth rates are seen in the regions where fossil fuels are extensively used. 
A breakthrough in nanotechnology could result in new technologies that 
help to ensure global energy protection and distribution (Hussein, 2015; 
Serrano et al., 2009). According to a Rice University study (Texas, 2005), 
certain areas have been established in which nanotechnology can facilitate 
low-cost, effective, and environmentally friendly technologies (Shafiei and 
Salim, 2014). Nanotechnology’s benefits are being recognized in several 
fields, including solar power, wind energy, clean coal, fusion and fission 
reactors, hydrogen production, storage, shipping and transportation, fuel 
cells, and batteries. One of the most promising and adaptable eco-friendly 
technologies is the direct conversion of solar energy into electrical energy 
(Abdin et al., 2013). Quantum dots-based-nanostructured photovoltaic 
devices have significant potential for cost reduction. Unlike traditional 
solar cells, they absorb visible light from a broader range of wavelengths 
in the sun’s spectrum. Hetero-structured absorption layers can boost cell 
efficiency even more or allow for the use of inferior quality materials in 
the cells. Hydrogen is another significant forthcoming energy alternative; 
however, it still faces some major technical challenges. Among them are 
strategies for producing and storing hydrogen, as well as converting it to 
electricity. A successful hydrogen production strategy requires technolo￾gies that exploit renewable resources. One of them is the direct catalytic 
transformation of water into oxygen and hydrogen through the use of a 
nanostructured semiconductor catalyst or nanoscale additives (Candelaria 
et al., 2012). Nanotechnology may also aid in the development of new tech￾nologies for capturing biogenic hydrogen (Paniagua-Michel et al., 2015). 
To develop a hydrogen energy infrastructure, new portable, reliable, and 
secure hydrogen storage systems are required, especially for transportation 
applications. Carbon nanotubes, and complex metal hydrides, like alanates, 
are among the materials being researched for hydrogen storage. Nanoscale 
constructs can be added to improve their properties even further (Fichtner, 
2005). Other energy technology opportunities include advanced catalysts 
for fuel cells, high-efficiency lighting, or appliance systems, modern 
technologies for low-loss power transmission, or high-strength lightweight 
materials for transportation, construction, or electric power applications 
(Seitz et al., 2013). Economic Impact of Applied Nanotechnology: An Overview 503 
16.2.3 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN ENVIRONMENT AND AGRICULTURE
The current human economy is highly dependent on a constant flow of natural 
resources, involving large quantities of non-renewable material, which, after 
a relatively brief period of use, return to the ecosphere in some form or 
another. The chemical industry is a major contributor to this approach, as it is 
often followed by unplanned contamination from processing, material use as 
well as disposal. As a result, “conventional” chemistry has become a popular 
priority for environmentalists as well as the focus of many regulations over 
the years. As a result, the principle of green chemistry was established. 
Green chemistry, in particular, is an environmentally sustainable design of 
synthetic products and procedures that minimize or eliminate the utilisation 
of toxic substances and pollutants. This concept, which began as a grassroots 
movement led by a few chemists, is now being adopted by the chemical 
and other industries. Among the 12 green chemistry principles, there are 
many aspects where nanotechnology could play a critical role (Anastas and 
Warner, 2000). Catalysts are one of the first nanotechnologies to be used in 
the industry. Nanoparticles and nanostructured materials open up new possi￾bilities for developing and regulating catalytic functions, such as increasing 
activity and selectivity for particular reactions. Since the behavior and 
selectivity of catalyst nanoparticles are strongly influenced by their surface 
structure, shape, size as well as their bulk and surface composition, the 
ability to synthesize particles with specified physical and chemical proper￾ties at the nanoscale is a critical step toward realizing the goal of catalysis by 
design. Nanotechnology is one of the many areas where green chemistry and 
green nanotechnology are plausible. Green nanotechnology is a prominent 
approach for the development of new, environmentally friendly products. 
This green synthesis transforms the fate of nanoparticles synthesizing and 
benefits future nanotechnology applications (Lu and Ozcan, 2015). There 
has been a slew of modern nanotechnology applications introduced to fix 
current sustainability issues. Nanoporous zeolites can allow for a slow 
release and efficient dosage of water and fertilizers for plants, allowing 
for improved agricultural production in countries where droughts last for 
extended periods. Food can be stored for longer periods in smart packaging 
using nanocomposites, particularly in areas where cooling is difficult to 
come by. Nanoparticles can increase the performance of catalytic converters 
in automobiles and reduce unique emissions. Nano-sensors can enhance the 
quality of ongoing environmental monitoring thereby lowering the cost. 
The use of iron nanoparticles in soil remediation at polluted sites should be 504 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
encouraged as a technique that outperforms traditional methods in terms of 
productivity and pace. 
16.2.4 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN WATER TREATMENT AND 
PURIFICATION
Water is vital to socioeconomic growth, energy and food production, safe 
ecosystems, and human survival. Water is also central to climate change 
adaptation, operating as a critical link between society and the environment. 
Water, on the other hand, is a global issue, mainly in developing nations. 
Bad water quality and unsustainable sources stymie overall economic 
development and can inflict damage on people’s health and livelihoods. The 
WHO/UNICEF statistics for 2019 indicate that more than half of the global 
population, or 4.2 billion people, have no access to safe and hygienic sanita￾tion facilities, and more than 2.2 billion people do not have proper access 
to safely regulated potable water services (WHO and Unicef, 2000). The 
reasons for such problems are numerous, mostly due to weak governance, 
poor infrastructure, and fiscal woes as well as the absence of political will. 
However, even if these nontechnical problems are equally or often even 
larger than technical challenges, the issues and challenges can be over￾come in certain regions by offering new and advanced water purification 
and remediation technologies. Recent developments strongly suggest that 
nanotechnology can be used to fix—and eventually overcome—many of 
today’s water quality issues. Nanotechnology is already having a significant 
effect on water quality studies. Nanomembranes, zeolites, or nanoporous 
polymers for water purification and desalination, nanoscale sensor compo￾nents for the detection of pollutants and infectious agents in water, filters 
and nanomembranes, and magnetic or catalytic nanoparticles for treating 
wastewater or water remediation are among some of the nanotechnology 
possibilities under exploration (Gehrke et al., 2015; Savage and Diallo, 
2005; Theron et al., 2008). 
16.3 CONCLUSION—A LOOKING AHEAD
Nanotechnology is no longer a theoretical concept; it is rapidly becoming 
a part of everyday life. Nanotechnology opens up a slew of new prospects 
for social and economic growth, both now and in the future. Enhanced 
environmental monitoring capabilities, increased energy usage, and reduced Economic Impact of Applied Nanotechnology: An Overview 505 
environmental effects of human activities are all significant positive 
outcomes of nanomaterial adaptation. The nanoproducts that are now on 
the market have ignited little public discussion and have gained little addi￾tional regulatory scrutiny aimed directly at their novel features. The world’s 
largest major economic powers’ dedication to nanoscale research reflects 
these potential applications. The applications of nanotechnology are rapidly 
expanding, and resources are still required, particularly to develop the essen￾tial infrastructure, which includes well-equipped research and prototyping 
facilities as well as a skilled workforce. Present scientific research aims 
to quickly leverage novel nanomaterial applications. Given the large-scale 
investments in product development, government authorities play a critical 
role in evaluating and resolving the dynamic consequences of widespread 
nanotechnology adoption, both short and long term. This is especially true in 
the case of nanoparticles that may be released into the atmosphere, whether 
deliberately or accidentally. Several complementary steps, ranging from 
meticulously performed laboratory studies and computer simulations to 
small-scale field trials, are mandated. It will also be important to establish 
specifications and instrumentation that will enable researchers to accurately 
characterize and track the effects of these new materials. Since several 
unintentional and unintended environmental impacts are long-term, current 
or new protocols for product traceability and life cycle analysis may be 
necessary. One important hurdle is that many nanotechnology products and 
processes are not commonly acknowledged. After several major obstacles 
are eliminated, real economic development through nanotechnology can be 
anticipated. The main underlying technology has been shown to function 
effectively, is remunerative, and is intended to last for longer period of time, 
viz., nanoprecision selective welding or glue technology, or a regulated 
surfaces procedure with a toolbox for incorporating functionalizations. 
Along with the advent of such vital technology, an additional big hurdle 
must be overcome: the absence of regulations and standards. 
Simple evaluations of the financial benefit of green nanotechnologies 
would take into consideration the net costs of technological development 
and market entry relative to the value of outputs and outputs achieved, 
considering time and outlook factors (or standing). Public research and 
development, knowledge creation and infrastructure investment, private 
sector R&D costs, prototyping, assessment, advertising, and start-up costs 
are all included in the net costs. Contributions to research and information, 
standardized or specific new technologies developed, the development of 
intellectual property (including patents and licences), the development of 
standards, and company’s new start-ups are all possible results of such 506 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
investments. These outcomes can contribute to many developmental and 
community advantages, such as enhanced regional and national GDP, higher 
efficiency, and trade balance and ecological and other economic gains. 
The economic growth implications of emerging technology, such as green 
nanotechnologies, are also of particular concern to policymakers, including 
the effects on employment and incomes. While it is difficult to predict new 
job opportunities, employment shall be created through research, production, 
distribution, utilization and maintenance of product and services, procedures, 
and associated industries and services of green nanotechnology. Govern￾ments and international organizations should partner with researchers and 
the private industry to develop scientifically and ethically sound risk-based 
criteria for emerging nanotechnology-based products, as well as encourage 
“industry standards” to avoid possible environmental and health problems. 
Standard nomenclature is also required to remove uncertainty when defining 
the distinctions between nanomaterials and bulk materials, as well as when 
disclosing regulatory processes. Today’s globalized environment provides a 
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to create, disseminate, and share the benefits 
of technological advancement with a greater number of people in a shorter 
time. As traditional products are phased out, existing employees can transi￾tion to green nanotechnology activities. 
Environmental systems are becoming more scientifically known, as is 
public understanding of environmental concerns. Policymakers, industry, 
non-governmental organizations, and researchers, on the other hand, must 
cooperate to raise public awareness of nanotechnology’s unique threats and 
challenges. They must also keep the public informed about the measures 
being taken to determine the possible effects of nanomaterials before they 
are published into the market. To maximize benefits while minimizing risks, 
a well-balanced approach is needed. 
KEYWORDS
• industrial boom 
• nanotechnology 
• technological advances 
• sustainability 
• economic growth  
 
 
 
 
 
Economic Impact of Applied Nanotechnology: An Overview 507 
REFERENCES 
Abdin, Z.; Alim, M. A.; Saidur, R.; Islam, M. R.; Rashmi, W.; Mekhilef, S.; Wadi, A. Solar 
Energy Harvesting with the Application of Nanotechnology. Renew Sust. Energ. Rev. 2013, 
26, 837–852. 
Ahmed, W.; Jackson, M. J.; Ul Hassan, I. Nanotechnology to Nanomanufacturing. In Emerging 
Nanotechnologies for Manufacturing, Micro and Nano Technologies; Ahmed,W., Jackson, 
M. J., Eds.; William Andrew Publishing, 2010; pp 1–15. 
Anastas, P. T.; Warner, J. C. Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice; Oxford University Press: 
New York, 2000. 
Market Watch. Global Nanotechnology Market Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends 
and Forecast 2021–2027 [Press release], January 9, 2021. 
Barbier, E. The Policy Challenges for Green Economy and Sustainable Economic 
Development. Nat. Resour. Forum 2011, 35 (3), 233–245. 
Candelaria, S. L.; Shao, Y.; Zhou, W.; Li, X.; Xiao, J.; Zhang, J. G.; Wang, Y.; Liu, J.; Li, J.; 
Cao, G. Nanostructured Carbon for Energy Storage and Conversion. Nano Energy 2021, 1 
(2), 195–220. 
Caprotti, F.; Bailey, I. Making Sense of the Green Economy. Geografiska Annaler: Series B 
Human Geog. 2014, 6 (3), 195–200. 
El Naschie, M. S. Nanotechnology for the Developing World. Chaos, Solitons Fractals 2006, 
30 (4), 769–773. 
Fichtner, M. Nanotechnological Aspects in Materials for Hydrogen Storage. Adv. Eng. Mater. 
2005, 7 (6), 443–455. https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.200500022 
Gaurav, N.; Sivasankari, S.; Kiran, G. S.; Ninawe, A.; Selvin, J. Utilization of Bioresources 
for Sustainable Biofuels: A Review. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 2017, 73, 205–214. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.070 
Gehrke I.; Geiser, A.; Somborn-Schulz A. Innovations in Nanotechnology for Water 
Treatment. Nanotechnol. Sci. Appl. 2015, 8, 1–17 https://doi.org/10.2147/NSA.S43773 
Hamdouch, A.; Depret, M. Policy Integration Strategy and the Development of the “Green 
Economy”: Foundations and Implementation Patterns. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 2010, 53 
(4), 473–490. https://doi.org/10.1080/09640561003703889 
Ritchie, H.; Roser, M. Access to Energy. Published online at OurWorldInData.org. 2019 
https://ourworldindata.org/energy-access 
Heath, J. R.; Nanotechnologies for Biomedical Science and Translational Medicine. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112 (47), 14436–14443. 
Hussein, A. K. Applications of Nanotechnology in Renewable Energies—A Comprehensive 
Overview and Understanding. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 2015, 42, 460–476. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.027 
Inshakova, E.; Inshakova, A. Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology: Prospects for Technological 
Re-Equipment in the Power Engineering Industry. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng 2020, 
709, 033020. 
Iqbal, P.; Preece, J. A.; Mendes, P. M. Nanotechnology: The “Top-Down” and “Bottom-Up” 
Approaches. In Supramolecular Chemistry; Gale, P. A., Steed, J. W., Ed.; John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd., 2012. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470661345.smc195 
Loiseau, E.; Saikku, L.; Antikainen, R.; Droste, N.; Hansjürgens, B.; Pitkänen, K.; Leskinen, 
P.; Kuikman, P.; Thomsen, M. Green Economy and Related Concepts: An Overview. J. 
Clean. Prod. 2016, 139, 361–371. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.08.024  
 
 
 
 
508 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Lu, Y.; Ozcan, S. Green Nanomaterials: On Track for a Sustainable Future. Nano Today 2015, 
10 (4), 417–420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2015.04.010 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Global and Local Environmental 
Sustainability, Development and Growth. Element 4, Paper 1. OECD and Post -2015 
Reflections. Published online at https://www.oecd.org/. 2015. FINAL POST-2015 global 
and local environmental sustainability.pdf (oecd.org) 
Ottman, J. A. New Technologies and Environmental Innovation. J. Prod. Innov. Manage. 2005, 
22 (5), 456–457. 
Paniagua-Michel, J. J.; Morales-Guerrero, E.; Olmos Soto J. Microalgal Biotechnology: 
Biofuels and Bioproducts. In Springer Handbook of Marine Biotechnology; Kim S. K., Ed.; 
Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-53971-8_62 
Patel, S.; Nanda, R. Nanotechnology in Healthcare: Applications and Challenges. Med. Chem. 
2015, 05 (12). https://doi.org/10.4172/2161-0444.1000312 
Dickel, S.; Petschow, U. Green Economy. Ecol. Econ. 2013, 28 (3), 14–16 https://doi. 
org/10.14512/oew.v29i3.1300 
Savage, N.; Diallo, M. S. Nanomaterials and Water Purification: Opportunities and Challenges. 
J. Nanopart. Res, 2005, 7 (4–5), 331–342. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-005-7523-5 
Schulte, J. Nanotechnology: Global Strategies, Industry Trends and Applications; John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd, 2005. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/0470021071 
Science, N.; Scoreboard, I. Leading Patenting Countries in Nanotechnology 2016. http:// 
statnano.com/news/57346 
Seitz, R.; Moller, B. P.; Thielmann, A.; Sauer, A.; Meister, M.; Pero, M.; Kleine, O.; Rohde, 
C.; Bierwisch, A.; de Vries, M.; Kayser, V. Nanotechnology in the Sectors of Solar Energy 
and Energy Storage. Technol. Rep. 2013, 1–102. http://www.iec.ch/about/brochures/pdf/ 
technology/IEC_TR_Nanotechnology_LR.pdf 
Serrano, E.; Rus, G.; García-Martínez, J. Nanotechnology for Sustainable Energy. Renew. 
Sust. Energ. Rev. 2009, 3 (9), 2373–2384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2009.06.003 
Shafiei, S.; Salim, R. A. Non-Renewable and Renewable Energy Consumption and CO2 
Emissions in OECD Countries: A Comparative Analysis. Energy Policy 2014, 66, 547–556. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.064 
Theron, J.; Walker, J. A.; Cloete, T. E. Nanotechnology and Water Treatment: Applications and 
Emerging Opportunities. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 2008, 34 (1), 43–69. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10408410701710442 
US Energy Information Administration (EIA). International Energy Outlook 2017 Overview, 
2017 
WHO, Unicef. Global Water Supply and Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report. Water Supply, 
2000 MISBAH NAZ1
, MUHAMMAD AMMAR RAZA2
, SARAH BOUZROUD3
, 
ESSA ALI4
, SYED ASAD HUSSAIN BUKHARI5
, MUHAMMAD TARIQ6
, and 
XIAORONG FAN1,7*
1
State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, 
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China
2
College of Food Science and Biotechnology, Key Laboratory of Fruits and 
Vegetables Postharvest and Processing Technology Research of Zhejiang 
Province, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou 310018, China
3
Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et Physiologie Végétales, 
Centre de biotechnologie végétale et microbienne biodiversité et 
environnement, Faculté des Sciences, Université Mohammed V de Rabat, 
Rabat 1014, Morocco
4
Institute of Plant Genetics and Developmental Biology, College of Chemistry 
and Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321000, China
5
Department of Agronomy, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan 60800, 
Pakistan
6
Faculty of Pharmacy and Alternative Medicine, 
The Islamia University Bahawalpur 6300, Pakistan
7
Key Laboratory of Plant Nutrition and Fertilization in Lower-Middle 
Reaches of the Yangtze River, Ministry of Agriculture, and Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China
*
Corresponding author. E-mail: xiaorongfan@njau.edu.cn
Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination: Tools, Methods, and Approaches for 
Detection and Remediation. Fernanda Maria Policarpo Tonelli, Rouf Ahmad Bhat, & 
Gowhar Hamid Dar (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 17
Sustainability Aspects of Nano￾Remediation and Nano-Phytoremediation510 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
ABSTRACT 
Environmental pollution has an impact on the quality of the soil, water, and 
atmosphere. Major attempts have recently been made to reduce pollution 
sources and fix or restore degraded soil and water supplies. Compared with 
chemical and physical methods, phytoremediation and nanoremediation are 
cost-effective and have less adverse effects. They have become more and 
more important in academia as well as this area. Nanoparticles have been 
shown to have soil and water remediation ability in a variety of plant species. 
It is also to be anticipated that the most recent biotechnology research will 
play a significant role in the creation of new environmental remediation tech￾nologies. This chapter attempts to briefly introduce the latest developments 
in phytoremediation study and experimentation and nanoremediation of soil 
and water resources. According to the phytoremediation properties of plants, 
they have excellent development potential. These plants absorb pollutants 
from natural resources such as soil and water. Pollutants target different 
mechanisms, such as dividing enzyme activity into plant organelles. Heavy 
metals are pollutants that have undergone epidemiological research, and 
most of the pollutants are covered by industrial waste. Another type of waste 
is pharmaceutical waste that has a broad variety of adverse effects on human 
health. They come from mishandled antibiotics, hormones, and drugs. To 
understand the fate of nanomaterials in environment and environmentally 
friendly approaches to remove them from environment, it is interesting to 
explore the hazards of these pollutants in order to develop remedial measures 
against these pollutants. 
17.1 INTRODUCTION
Green plants are used in phytoremediation to remove toxins from polluted 
sources such as soil, water, air, and sediment (Yan et al., 2021). In general, 
phytoremediation requires five purification processes, which are rhizofiltra￾tion, phytostabilization, phytoextraction, phytovolatilization phytodegra￾dation, and phytoremediation (Tangahu et al., 2011). Phytoremediation 
techniques are not new to science (Lone et al., 2008). It is reported that 
about 300 years ago, plants were used to treat wastewater. The remedy, 
which improves the advantages of minimal site disruption, reduced erosion, 
and the elimination of the need to dispose of contaminated plant materials, 
the release of mercury into the environment may pass through precipitation 
cycles, making this technique the most contentious of all phytoremediation Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 511 
techniques and then re-deposit back into the ecosystem (Singh et al., 2012). 
Phytoremediation, the use of green plants to manage and regulate pollu￾tion in water, soil, and air, is an integral aspect of new fields of ecological 
engineering (McCutcheon and Schnoor, 2003). Site soil and water charac￾teristics, as well as nutrient sustainability, control in situ and in-situ activi￾ties, meteorology, hydrology, pollutant attributes, and sustainable habitats 
(McCutcheon and Schnoor, 2003). Plant toxicity and large-scale transport 
restrictions or bioavailability are often critical in applications because of 
their dependence on sunlight and in-situ nutrient recovery, many applications 
are affordable. However, large treatment areas and longer treatment periods 
are typically restricted to root and shallow water areas wetlands, grasslands, 
crops, and tree plantations have been successfully linked to a number of 
wastes, often at low concentrations and without serious plant toxicity (Cruz 
et al., 2019). Metals and metal derivatives, certain heterogeneous contami￾nants and salt-soaked sources, sewage, sludge, and other typical wastes are 
examples of organic and inorganic wastes. Depending on the acute ness of 
toxicity, some redundancy or alternative treatment may be required to coun￾teract the variability of the biological system (McIntyre, 2003). However, 
few phytoremediation techniques use the basic principles of eco-engineering 
to optimize sustainability. The application of monoculture of hybrids and 
sometimes alien species and simple ecosystems of plants and microorgan￾isms is feasible, but in some cases difficult to apply. Self-engineering and 
self-design need to be explored and used to apply sustainable ecosystems to 
manage waste (Haq et al., 2020). This chapter provides valuable information 
about the consequences of nanomaterials released in the environment. Nano￾materials, especially AgNPs, can affect soil properties, microorganisms, 
and plants, and may be toxic to living organisms including humans. Plant 
extraction is considered to be a promising method for removing metal-based 
nanomaterials. However, there is still a lack of information in this regard. 
Further research is recommended to better understand the mechanism of 
plant uptake of AgNPs. Understanding the transporters and metabolites 
involved in removing AgNPs from the environment will help scientists to 
improve the success rate of phytoremediation of these materials by using 
plant biotechnology methods to change the expression of related genes. 
17.2 CERTAIN PLANTS FOR PHYTOREMEDIATION IN ASIA
Heavy metals are a type of pollutant found in water and soil. A modern 
plant solar-driven plant technology in which plants are grown, becomes 512 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
an eco-friendly and cost-calculating method to remove heavy metals from 
a variety of media to help hyper accumulating plant species (Sharma and 
Pandey, 2014). The purpose of this review paper is to give information on 
the mechanisms of compounding and metal removal of plants, with a special 
emphasis on cadmium (Cd) metals, and to highlight the role of various super￾stored plants in the reuse of Cd metals in soil and water. It is consistent with 
a number of field case reports that are critical in understanding Cd removal in 
different factories. In addition, which refers to a variety of sources and conse￾quences for Cd and other Cd-correction technology (DalCorso et al., 2008). 
This work is the latest advancement in Cd hyper accumulation mechanism 
for various plants to encourage further study in this area. Every year, new 
plants are identified, and known plants are used in experiments to observe 
the impact of pollution. Brassica juncea (Indian mustard) and Eichhornia 
crassipes (water hyacinth) have the highest trend of absorbing heavy metals 
from soil and water, respectively. Numerous studies have found that some 
plants improve the biodegradability of certain exogenous organic molecules 
in polluted soil. However, the information mechanisms, stages and the role 
of plants, directly or indirectly, in transforming these Compounds are scarce 
(Sarma, 2011). The purpose of this work is to put a plant one by one technology 
for cleaning contaminated soil is a useful alternative. General mechanism and 
plant use for specific stages, as well as complex interactions with plant native 
study of microorganisms-heteroclites in soil (Mejáre and Bülow, 2001). This 
knowledge will allow the proposed solve pollution problems and eventually 
recover. In recent decades, the annual increase in the pollution of synthetic 
organic compounds has become a significant human and environmental 
health problem. China, like other nations, has yet to find an effective solution 
to the issue of organic soil and water pollution (Schwarzenbach et al., 2010). 
Over the past few years, China has been exposed to inorganic pollutants 
by billions of degrees, but as international cooperation has shown, Chinese 
scientists are increasingly polluting the environment than their different 
organic compounds. They are, like their foreign counterparts, are attempting 
to investigate cost-effective technology to solve this issue, as they are 
conscientious that traditional techniques for dealing with contaminated soil 
are inadequate. We concentrate on soil and water polluted with organic matter 
in China, as well as research activities on various plants in China, including 
plant intake of pollutants to conduct research on contaminated sites (Liu and 
Raven, 2010). Heavy metals, radionuclides, and organic contaminants are 
the major pollutants that lead to soil depletion in China. This chapter is a new 
technology for heavy metal and other inorganic pollutant soil contamination 
in China. In this section, we concentrate on organic matter-contaminated Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 513 
soil and water in China as well as research programs on various plants in 
China, such as plant intake of pollutants to conduct research on contaminated 
sites. The application of this method on bench and on a scale was briefly 
discussed (Wen et al., 2020). In India, urbanization, overuse of water bodies, 
and population increase are causing air, water, and soil pollution, as well 
as pollution. India's main environment is soil degradation (deforestation, 
overgrazing, overfarming, and irrigation failures), destruction of animals, 
destruction, erosion of habitats and genetic resources (crops and plants, as 
well as aquatic animals and fish), as well as pollution (air, water and soil 
pollution, toxic waste and other substances). The most pressing environmental 
issue in India is soil preservation and degradation (wasteland/marginal 
land) (Rajkumar et al., 2010). Soil erosion is a major issue in India from 
130.5 million years old to 16.4 million stateless terrain deformations. Soil 
erosion was reported under different land-use options, with marginal loss 
noticed while planting trees, while in silicon field systems, trees, and grass 
coexist. For example, Shivaliks (one of the most vulnerable companies in 
the foothills of the Himalayas) includes a combination of poplar-baba grass; 
Acacia classification grass; Lukaena-Napier grass; teak-Lukaena-Babar; 
Yukaliptus-Lukaena-Turme; poplar-Lukana-Babar; and Sessamu-canola 
seeds. The soil of the Ganges alluvial plains in India has the characteristics 
of pH, poor permeability, higher exchangeable sodium and phosphorus, soil 
dispersion, a lack of organic matter as well as low fertility. Specific planting 
tools have been introduced for the cultivation of multipurpose tree species 
in Sodic and saline soils. A model of a silicon field consisting of Prosopijuli 
flora and Leputoclo Afosca has also been produced and the alkali soil seems 
to have been lyon. One major issue is land degradation; again, floods affect 
some 11.6 million hectares of land in India. 
Environmental pollution has an effect on soil and water quality as a result 
of urbanization and makeup trends. For many years, including in Pakistan, 
the situation has been even more threatening, since no precautions have 
been taken to avoid the resolution of this issue. Although at present, many 
of the current technologies in Taiwan are used to carry out the environment, 
including one of the plants (Anjum et al., 2020). Plants are used to remove 
toxins from the atmosphere through this most environmental-friendly tech￾nology. Pakistan does have a diverse range of plants that can be used to 
clean up pollution in the environment. As far as we know, research on the 
use of plants rarely comes from Pakistan. According to recent research, 50 
Pakistani plants have been studied. In this study, the ability of various plant 
species in Asian countries is addressed in the sections below (Garbisu and 
Alkorta, 2001) (Table 17.1). TABLE 17.1 Phytoremediation Basic Natural Resource Best Plants for Phytoremediation in Asia.
Plant local name Scientific name Origin Nature/function References 
Indian mustard/ Brassica juncea India, Water-loving plants are useful for accumulating some metals as well Qiu et al. (2021).
mustard L. Pakistan as beautifying landscapes.
Willow Salix species India, China The beneficial effect of poplar trees on soil and underwater has also Rockwood et al.
been extensively researched. (2004) 
Poplar tree Populus India The effect of the sunflower rhizosphere on the biodegradation of Rockwood et al.
deltoides PAHs in soil shows that sunflowers reduce various PAH levels in soil. (2004) 
Indian grass Sorghastrum India Skilled of cleaning up petroleum hydrocarbons. Sharma and Pandey
nutans (2014) 
Sunflower Helianthus Pakistan, Pb, Zn (heavy metals extraction potential of sunflower) (Helianthus Reza (2017)
Annuus L. China, India annuus) and Canola (Brassica napus)), N, P, K, Cd, Cu, or Mn are 
examples of heavy metals (capability of heavy metals absorption by
corn, alfalfa and sunflower intercropping date palm)
Castor plant Ricinus India, A plant of commercial importance, it has also been used as a biofuel Annapurna et al.
communis, Pakistan, crop. Commonly found growing in clusters, these plants can survive (2016) 
China in stress and environmentally polluted areas.
Jatropha Jatropha curcas India, China Applied during the dry season and infertile and heavily Agamuthu et al.
contaminated soils. Accumulation of chromium (Cr) and lead (Pb). (2010) 
514 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 515 
17.3 PHYTOREMEDIATION FOR SOIL AND WATER RESOURCES
Heavy metals are among the most severe environmental contaminants. 
Several approaches have been used to eliminate these chemicals from the 
atmosphere, but the majority are costly and difficult to produce the best 
results (Tangahu et al., 2011). Currently, plant phytoremediation is an 
efficient process and cost-effective technological solution for removing or 
reusing active metals and metal pollutants from polluted soil and water. The 
technology is environmentally friendly and possibly less expensive. The 
goal of this paper is to gather some information about the sources, effects 
as well as the treatment of heavy metals like arsenic, lead, and mercury 
(ass, lead, and mercury) (Burakov et al., 2018). It also provided an in-depth 
review of plant restoration techniques, along with heavy metal acquisition 
mechanisms and a number of studies on these topics. In addition, it explains 
several sources of As, as well as the environmental impact of As., Pb, and 
Hg, the benefits of this technique in lowering them, and the mechanisms for 
obtaining heavy metals in plant restoration techniques and factors that affect 
the acceptance mechanism (Chibuike and Obiora, 2014). Several recom￾mended plants that are frequently used in plant phytoremediation and their 
ability to reduce pollutants were also reported. Heavy metals are a type of 
environmental pollution. In addition to all those human activities, including 
natural activities, have the opportunity to enhance to heavy metal side 
effects (Jaishankar et al., 2014). Some of the case splendor severing events 
in ecosystems are the migration of these pollutants to uncontaminated areas 
like dust or seepage in soil, and heavy metals containing sewage sludge. 
To uphold the high quality of the soil and water from pollution, attempts 
are continually being made to build innovations that are simple to use and 
long-lasting and economically viable. To fix polluted soil and physical 
chemistry techniques have been commonly used and water, particularly on 
small levels (Keesstra et al., 2018). However, due to the high cost and side 
effects, they face greater large-scale remediation difficulties. Since the last 
decade, usage of plant species to mop up polluted soil and waters called plant 
phytoremediation (Mani and Kumar, 2014). It has attracted more and more 
attention as a new and cheap technology. Over the past two decades, many 
studies have been carried out in this area. A large number of plant species 
have been described and evaluated to detect and put their abilities to the test 
by ingesting and accumulating various heavy metals. The metal acquisition 
mechanism of the entire plant and cell level was studied. Progress in the 
mechanical and practical application of plant phytoremediation was studied 
by Morillo and Villaverde, 2017. 516 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
17.3.1 ROLE OF PHYTOREMEDIATION IN POLLUTED SOIL AND 
WATER
The importance of plants phytoremediation is that it is usually harmless, 
low cost, and uses plant materials or fixed elements. On the other hand, the 
process is long and allows some contaminants to escape (Sharma, 2012). In 
addition, it is not suitable for certain types of contamination, which is not 
possible if the toxicity level to plants is too high. Plant phytoremediation is a 
repair technique based on plants and their interactions with soil and microor￾ganisms (Glick, 2003). In particular, the technology includes water purifica￾tion and soil restoration. The efficiency of the technology in tackling air 
pollution is often controversial. Combining soil microorganisms, plants, and 
algae reduces the fluidity of some pollutants (plant stability), absorbs them 
(plant extraction), anchors them in tissues (plant stability), or metabolizes 
them, detoxifies, and eliminates them (plant degradation) (Liu et al., 2020). 
Heavy metals are a form of pollutant found in soil and water that is toxic. 
Plant restoration, a modern plant solar-powered technology, has become an 
eco-friendly and cost-effective way to extract heavy metals from different 
media, due to the super-accumulation of plant organisms (Chandra and 
Kumar, 2018; Shabbir et al., 2020). This chapter paper's aim is to give infor￾mation on plant regeneration and heavy metal removal processes, especially 
cadmium (Cd) metals, and to identify the role of various super-stored plants 
in soil and water Cd metal abatement. It is consistent with a number of field 
case studies that are helpful in determining Cd removal in different factories 
(Yang et al., 2016). In addition, it identifies many sources and their conse￾quences for Cd and other Cd-correction technology. The latest development 
of cd super-accumulation mechanism of different plants in order to promote 
further research in this field environmental pollution affects the quality of 
the biosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere, and biosphere. Huge 
efforts have been made over the last couple of decades to reduce pollution 
sources and regulate polluted soil and water supplies. It was observed that 
pb levels in roots and shoots after 12 weeks indicated that more bioavailable 
pools of pb were transferred from the roots to seeds, leaves, and stems in this 
order. The plant has the ability of plant extraction and can be used to restore 
the soil contaminated by Pb. Heavy metal pollution has been a concern over 
the past few decades because of its health hazards to humans as well as other 
species that reside in biological systems (Lu et al., 2015). Obviously, plant 
restoration is good for restoring balance in a tense environment, but care 
must be taken. The potential of glycine Max L. to repair lead-contaminated 
soil. After 12 weeks of restoration, the plant's seeds usually contain the Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 517 
highest Pb, which means that the plant is in the late stages of its growth 
in cleaning contaminated soil (Huang et al., 1997). Therefore, this plant, 
when used to repair metal contaminated soil, should be harvested after 12 
weeks and replanted seeds for another clean-up process. However, without 
thoroughly examining lead contamination in the soil, planting G.max L. in 
the soil poses a great risk to the population spending the harvested seeds, 
since the plant has been reported to be increased significant amounts of Pb in 
its seeds (Islam et al., 2007). 
17.4 PHYTOREMEDIATION AND RHIZOFILTRATION
Rhizofiltration is a type of plant phytoremediation restoration in which 
polluted groundwater and surface water are filtered and wastewater through 
a large number of roots to extract harmful contaminants or excess nutrients 
(Dhir et al., 2009) (Fig. 17.1). Rhizofiltration, a technique for absorbing or 
precipitating contaminants from surrounding solutions to plant roots. Rhizo￾filtration is exactly the same as plant mining, Plants, rather than soil, are used 
in the process to clean polluted groundwater (e.g., plant mining) (Gunarathne 
et al., 2019). In the process, used plants grow in greenhouses, with their roots 
in water. Contaminated water is then stored from the waste site or plants 
are planted in polluted areas. When pollutants saturate the roots of plants, 
they are removed from contaminated areas (Etim, 2012). Sunflowers, for 
example, are used to clear radioactive pollutants from pond water in Cher￾nobyl, Ukraine. Lead may be extracted from water by sunflowers, Indian 
mustard, tobacco, spinach, and corn. In particular, sunflowers decreased 
lead concentration dramatically, and an engineered rheumatic device (Akpor 
and Muchie, 2010). Plant phytoremediation is the use of plants to eliminate 
toxins from the atmosphere. The capacity to use terrestrial and marine plants 
for in situ or in-situ applications. Rhizo filtration is primarily used to elimi￾nate heavy metals such as Pb, Cd, Cu, Ni, Zn, and Cr (Jadia and Fulekar, 
2009). One important aspect of this procedure is that pollutants do not move 
to shoot buds (Jadia and Fulekar, 2009). Water filtration is an exciting tech￾nique to improve aquatic environments. Aside from being cost-effective, it is 
a more environmentally friendly choice. A few studies have shown that many 
macrophytes have an exceptional capacity to extract toxins from aquatic 
environments (Rai, 2009). These plants could be used to eliminate inorganic 
contaminants (heavy metals, ions, excess nutrients, and so on) as well as 
organic pollutants (dyes, pesticides, solvents, and so on) from surfaces and 
groundwater. E. crassipes (water hyacinth), P. stratiotes (water lettuce), L. 518 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
minor (duckweed), T. natans (water chestnut), and Azolla pinnata (water 
velvet) naturally grow in large animals living in aquatic environments and 
can effectively accumulate and pass pollutants to its airborne part (Bragato et 
al., 2006). It is needed to establish more appropriate and optimal conditions 
to further strengthen the rheumatic filtration process study and is also needed 
to develop a system for the proper disposal or actual use of harvested plants 
after removal. Flow pipes are the process of absorbing contaminants present 
in the nasal layer into the plant roots (Petrides et al., 2014). 
FIGURE 17.1 Role of phytoremediation and nanoparticle phytoremediation. 
Rhizofiltration usually treats contaminated groundwater, while plant extrac￾tion targets contaminated soil. As plants usually grow in greenhouses and are 
exposed to contaminated water once they grow roots (Awa and Hadibarata, 
2020) (Fig. 17.2). This adaptation allows the plant's endogenous process to 
adapt to chemicals in the water. After adaptation, plants are transplanted into 
contaminated aquifers or soil above the water level below the habitat, and 
when the plant's absorption is thought to have reached a threshold, they are 
harvested and biomass is treated in a similar way to the biomass extracted by 
the plant (Pivetz, 2001). Rhizofiltration is particularly effective in applica￾tions involving low concentrations and large amounts of water. Plants that 
are efficient in transferring metals to buds should not be used for soil filtra￾tion because more contaminated plant residues are produced. The depth of 
contamination, the type of heavy metals, and the level of contamination must Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 519 
be determined and monitored. Vegetation shall be aquatic, emergency, or 
water-affected (Nagajyoti et al., 2010). To design successfully, the hydraulic 
retention time and adsorption of the plant roots must be taken into account. 
Rhizofiltration is economical for large amounts of water with lower toxic 
elements and low (strict) standards. It is relatively cheap, but it's probably 
more effective than similar technologies (Toet et al., 2005). 
FIGURE 17.2 Phytoremediation of heavy metals rich soils by using plants that hyperac￾cumulate these metals in above-ground organs. The harvesting of the aerial part of the plants 
leads to the disposal of the huge amounts of toxic heavy metals removed from the soil or to 
the recovery of the valuable metals taken up. 
17.5 NANOPARTICLES PHYTOREMEDIATION
Nanoparticles are particles that exist on the nanoscale (i.e., a minimum of one 
dimension is below 100 nm. They have physical properties such as uniformity, 
conductivity, or special optical properties, making them popular in materials 
science and biology. As global industrialization and urbanization intensify, so 
does concerns about emerging environmental pollutants (Ebrahimbabaie et al., 
2020). Plant technologies are recommended as a viable option for maintaining 
environmental sustainability among the various options for repairing these 
pollutants. Current developments in phytoremediation, genetic/molecular/ 
economic/metabolic engineering, and nanotechnology have provided new 
possibilities for the successful management of emerging organic/inorganic 
pollutants (Srivastav et al., 2018). For this context, the clarification of molecular 
processes and genetic modification of super-accumulated plants are required 520 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
to improve environmental pollutant remediation. The aim of this analysis is to 
give useful information about the molecular mechanisms of plant regeneration 
and the prospects for genetically modified super-accumulators (Furukawa et 
al., 2020). 
Heavy metals and metals, heterogeneous, explosives, polyaromatic 
hydrocarbons, petroleum hydrocarbons, pesticides, and nanoparticles 
are examples of such substances that are more stress-resistant to different 
pollutants. The role of gene restoration and nanoparticles in enhancing plant 
restoration techniques is also described in frameworks related to biotech￾nology prospects, such as plant molecular nano-agriculture (Krivoruchko et 
al., 2019). Finally, nanotechnology is the study and manipulation of matter 
at the nanoscale and the characteristics of nanomaterials are mainly derived 
as a result of their high relative surface area as well as quantum impacts. Any 
material intended to produce at the nanoscale with a specific characteristic 
or specific component is termed a manufacturing/engineering nanomaterial. 
Compared with conventional nanomaterials, this engineering nanomaterial 
has different properties (Zhang and Webster, 2009). Nanotechnology offers 
new agrochemical formulations Nanotechnology provides new agrochem￾ical formulations and delivery pathways to improve crop yields, which is 
expected to minimize pesticide usage. Nanotechnology can promote agri￾cultural production by using: (1) nanoformulations for agrochemicals for the 
use of pesticides and fertilizers to boost crop; precision farming techniques 
can be used to further increase crop productivity without damaging soil and 
water, reducing nitrogen losses from seepage and emissions, and increasing 
nutrients that soil microbes for a long term (Sekhon, 2014). Nanoparticles are 
used in crop production to achieve long-term sustainability as these particles 
are linked to the manipulation of essential plant life circumstances and are 
used for a number of purposes in agriculture, such as minimizing nutritional 
loss, reducing various types of environmental stress, including heavy metal 
stress, and increasing crop yields. Several forms of contaminants are released 
into the atmosphere, either inadvertently or on purpose. These contaminants 
must be repaired in order to avoid entry to various terrestrial, marine, and 
atmospheric habitats (Sarwar et al., 2010). 
Various pollutants, including heavy metals, have been observed, character￾ized, and designed to enhance this capacity of these plants through the use of 
different types of formulations (e.g., plant hormones, nanoparticles, biochar, 
etc.). In fact, some plants that do not usually help remedy have been manipu￾lating their physiology and biochemistry to repair contaminants through the 
chemical’s exogenous applications (Margesin et al., 2011). However, in this 
regard, nanoparticles are remarkable because they can alleviate different Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 521 
forms of heavy metal stresses in plants, because they protect plants from 
induced oxidative stress and mimic the role of enzymes involved in oxida￾tive metabolism, such as catalytic enzymes, peroxidases, and superoxide 
dislocations (Etesami and Jeong, 2018). Since olden history, silver metal, 
silver nitrate, and silver sulfonamide have been used to treat burns, wounds, 
and various bacterial infections. Nevertheless, prior to the advancement of 
many antibiotics, use of such silver compounds has decreased significantly. 
Nanotechnology has gained a huge boost this century because it has been 
able to regulate metals to nanosizes, dramatically modifying the chemical, 
physical, and optical properties of metals (Knetsch and Koole, 2011). 
Metal silver, in the context of silver nanoparticles, has made a big come￾back as a possible antibacterial agent. The need for silver nanoparticles is 
also important since many pathogenic bacteria have gained resistance to 
various antibiotics. Silver nanoparticles have appeared in a variety of medical 
applications, ranging from silver-based dressings to silver-coated medicinal 
devices such as nanogels. The promise of nanotechnology has been fulfilled 
and the greatest scientific and technological progress has been achieved in a 
number of areas (Rai et al., 2009). 
The biological killing nature of metal nanoparticles in general and silver 
nanoparticles in particular (AgNPs) depends on the multiple morphology as 
well as the particles' chemical and physical properties. Many of the interac￾tions between AgNPs and the human body remain difficult to understand, 
therefore, the development of nanoparticles with good control morphology 
and physical chemistry characteristics, the application in the human body is 
still an active advanced research (Durán et al., 2016). The discovery of nano￾structure compounds appears to have a massive and all-encompassing effect 
on all scientific and technical fields. The security monitoring mechanism, on 
the other hand, is used and implemented. Nanotechnology has performed 
on its pledge to drive scientific and technological development in a range 
of fields. Nanostructure compounds have a wide range of engineering 
applications. The creation of biocompatible and environmentally friendly 
nanostructures will reduce ecosystem harm;, allow better use of resources in 
the synthesis of multiple processes, and save (Venugopal et al., 2008). 
17.6 CONCLUSION
Metal phytoremediation in soil, sludge, wastewater, and water, the various 
techniques used, the biological, physical, and chemical processes involved, 
and the benefits and disadvantages of each strategy are discussed in this  
 
 
 
 
 
522 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
chapter. Special attention is given to the use of genetically modified species 
and the phytoremediation of metal nanoparticles. This also demonstrates the 
ability of phytoremediation to extract heavy toxic metals from polluted soil. 
As a result of the given debate, it is possible to conclude that, like its applica￾tions in other scientific fields, it has extensive application in bioremediation. 
Because of their high potential, their applications are expected to skyrocket 
in the foreseeable future, and plants play an important role in stable growth. 
Various plants are essential for toxic metal remediation. 
KEYWORDS
• phytoremediation 
• polluted soil and water resources 
• environmental remediation 
• morphology 
• physical chemical characteristics 
REFERENCES 
Agamuthu, P.; Abioye, O. P.; Aziz, A. A. Phytoremediation of Soil Contaminated with Used 
Lubricating Oil Using Jatropha curcas. J. Hazard. Mater. 2010, 179, 891–894. 
Akpor, O. B.; Muchie, M. Remediation of Heavy Metals in Drinking Water and Wastewater 
Treatment Systems: Processes and Applications. Int. J. Phys. Sci. 2010, 5, 1807–1817. 
Anjum, M. S.; Ali, S. M.; Subhani, M. A.; Anwar, M. N.; Nizami, A.-S.; Ashraf, U. et al. An 
Emerged Challenge of Air Pollution and Ever-Increasing Particulate Matter in Pakistan; A 
Critical Review. J. Hazard. Mater.; 2020, 402, 123943. 
Annapurna, D.; Rajkumar, M.;Prasad, M. N. V. Potential of Castor Bean (Ricinus communis 
L.) for Phytoremediation of Metalliferous Waste Assisted by Plant Growth-Promoting 
Bacteria: Possible Cogeneration of Economic Products. In Bioremed. Bioecon.; Elsevier, 
2016; pp 149–175. 
Awa, S. H.;Hadibarata, T. Removal of Heavy Metals in Contaminated Soil by Phytoremediation 
Mechanism: A Review. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2020, 231, 1–15. 
Bragato, C.; Brix, H.; Malagoli, M. Accumulation of Nutrients and Heavy Metals in Phragmites 
australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steudel and Bolboschoenus maritimus (L.) Palla in a Constructed 
Wetland of the Venice Lagoon Watershed. Environ. Pollut. 2006, 144, 967–975. 
Burakov, A. E.; Galunin, E. V, Burakova, I. V, Kucherova, A. E.; Agarwal, S.; Tkachev, A. 
G. et al. Adsorption of Heavy Metals on Conventional and Nanostructured Materials for 
Wastewater Treatment Purposes: A Review. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2018, 148, 702–712.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 523 
Chandra, R.; Kumar, V. Phytoremediation: A Green Sustainable Technology for Industrial 
Waste Management; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, 2018; pp 1–42. 
Chibuike, G. U.; Obiora, S. C. Heavy Metal Polluted Soils: Effect on Plants and Bioremediation 
Methods. Appl. Environ. Soil Sci. 2014, 2014. 
Cruz, N. C.; Silva, F. C.; Tarelho, L. A. C.; Rodrigues, S. M. Critical Review of Key Variables 
Affecting Potential Recycling Applications of Ash Produced at Large-Scale Biomass 
Combustion Plants. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 2019, 150, 104427. 
DalCorso, G.; Farinati, S.; Maistri, S.; Furini, A. How Plants Cope with Cadmium: Staking 
All on Metabolism and Gene Expression. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 2008, 50, 1268–1280. 
Dhir, B.; Sharmila, P.; Saradhi, P. P. Potential of Aquatic Macrophytes for Removing 
Contaminants from the Environment. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 39, 754–781. 
Durán, N.; Durán, M.; De Jesus, M. B.; Seabra, A. B.; Fávaro, W. J.; Nakazato, G. Silver 
Nanoparticles: A New View on Mechanistic Aspects on Antimicrobial Activity. Nanomed. 
Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 2016, 12, 789–799. 
Ebrahimbabaie, P.; Meeinkuirt, W.; Pichtel, J. Phytoremediation of Engineered Nanoparticles 
Using Aquatic Plants: Mechanisms and Practical Feasibility. J. Environ. Sci. 2020, 93, 
151–163. 
Etesami, H.; Jeong, B. R. Silicon (Si): Review and Future Prospects on the Action Mechanisms in 
Alleviating Biotic and Abiotic Stresses in Plants. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2018, 147, 881–896. 
Etim, E. E. Phytoremediation and Its Mechanisms: A Review. Int. J. Environ. Bioenergy 2012, 
2, 120–136. 
Furukawa, K.; Ohmi, Y.; Yesmin, F.; Tajima, O.; Kondo, Y.; Zhang, P. et al. Novel Molecular 
Mechanisms of Gangliosides in the Nervous System Elucidated by Genetic Engineering. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 1906. 
Garbisu, C.; Alkorta, I. Phytoextraction: A Cost-Effective Plant-Based Technology for the 
Removal of Metals from the Environment. Bioresour. Technol. 2001, 77, 229–236. 
Glick, B. R. Phytoremediation: Synergistic Use of Plants and Bacteria to Clean up the 
Environment. Biotechnol. Adv. 2003, 21, 383–393. 
Gunarathne, V.; Mayakaduwa, S.; Ashiq, A.; Weerakoon, S. R.; Biswas, J. K.; Vithanage, 
M. Transgenic Plants: Benefits, Applications, and Potential Risks in Phytoremediation. In 
Transgenic Plant Technology for Remediation of Toxic Metals and Metalloids; Elsevier, 
2019; pp 89–102. 
Haq, S.; Bhatti, A. A.; Dar, Z. A.; Bhat, S. A. Phytoremediation of Heavy Metals: An 
Eco-Friendly and Sustainable Approach. In Bioremediation and Biotechnology; Springer, 
2020; pp 215–231. 
Huang, J. W.; Chen, J.; Berti, W. R.; Cunningham, S. D. Phytoremediation of Lead￾Contaminated Soils: Role of Synthetic Chelates in Lead Phytoextraction. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 1997, 31, 800–805. 
Islam, E.; Yang, X.; Li, T.; Liu, D.; Jin, X.; Meng, F. Effect of Pb Toxicity on Root Morphology, 
Physiology and Ultrastructure in the Two Ecotypes of Elsholtzia argyi. J. Hazard. Mater. 
2007, 147, 806–816. 
Jadia, C. D.; Fulekar, M. H. Phytoremediation of Heavy Metals: Recent Techniques. Afr. J. 
Biotechnol. 2009, 8, 6. 
Jaishankar, M.; Tseten, T.; Anbalagan, N.; Mathew, B. B.; Beeregowda, K. N. Toxicity, 
Mechanism and Health Effects of Some Heavy Metals. Interdiscip. Toxicol. 2014, 7, 60–72. 
Keesstra, S.; Mol, G.; De Leeuw, J.; Okx, J.; De Cleen, M.; Visser, S. Soil-Related Sustainable 
Development Goals: Four Concepts to Make Land Degradation Neutrality and Restoration 
Work. Land. 2018, 7, 133.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
524 Nanotechnology for Environmental Pollution Decontamination 
Knetsch, M. L. W.; Koole, L. H. New Strategies in the Development of Antimicrobial Coatings: 
The Example of Increasing Usage of Silver and Silver Nanoparticles. Polymers (Basel). 
2011, 3, 340–366. 
Krivoruchko, A.; Kuyukina, M.; Ivshina, I. Advanced Rhodococcus Biocatalysts for 
Environmental Biotechnologies. Catalysts 2019, 9, 236. 
Liu, J.; Raven, P. H. China’s Environmental Challenges and Implications for the World. Crit. 
Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010, 40, 823–851. 
Liu, S.; Yang, B.; Liang, Y.; Xiao, Y.; Fang, J. Prospect of Phytoremediation Combined with 
Other Approaches for Remediation of Heavy Metal-Polluted Soils. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. 2020, 27, 16069–16085. 
Lone, M. I.; He, Z.; Stoffella, P. J.; Yang, X. Phytoremediation of Heavy Metal Polluted Soils 
and Water: Progresses and Perspectives. J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B. 2008, 9, 210–220. 
Lu, Y.; Song, S.; Wang, R.; Liu, Z.; Meng, J.; Sweetman, A. J. et al. Impacts of Soil and Water 
Pollution on Food Safety and Health Risks in China. Environ. Int. 2015, 77, 5–15. 
Mani, D.; Kumar, C. Biotechnological Advances in Bioremediation of Heavy Metals 
Contaminated Ecosystems: An Overview with Special Reference to Phytoremediation. Int. 
J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 11, 843–872. 
Margesin, R.; Płaza, G. A.; Kasenbacher, S. Characterization of Bacterial Communities at 
Heavy-Metal-Contaminated Sites. Chemosphere. 2011, 82, 1583–1588. 
McCutcheon, S. C.; Schnoor, J. L. Overview of Phytotransformation and Control of Wastes. 
In Phytoremediation: Transformations and Control of Contaminants; Wiley: New York, 
2003; pp 1–58. 
McIntyre, T. Phytoremediation of Heavy Metals from Soils. Phytoremediation 2003, 97–123. 
Mejáre, M.; Bülow, L. Metal-Binding Proteins and Peptides in Bioremediation and 
Phytoremediation of Heavy Metals. Trends Biotechnol. 2001, 19, 67–73. 
Morillo, E.; Villaverde, J. Advanced Technologies for the Remediation of Pesticide￾Contaminated Soils. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 586, 576–597. 
Nagajyoti, P. C.; Lee, K. D.; Sreekanth, T. V. M. Heavy Metals, Occurrence and Toxicity for 
Plants: A Review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2010, 8, 199–216. 
Petrides, D.; Carmichael, D.; Siletti, C.; Koulouris, A. Biopharmaceutical Process Optimization 
with Simulation and Scheduling Tools. Bioengineering 2014, 1, 154–187. 
Pivetz, B. E. Phytoremediation of Contaminated Soil and Ground Water at Hazardous Waste 
Sites. US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, 2001. 
Qiu, Y.; Dixon, M.; Liu, G. Chinese Mustard Cultivation Guide for Florida. EDIS, 2021, 1. 
Rai, M.; Yadav, A.; Gade, A. Silver Nanoparticles as a New Generation of Antimicrobials. 
Biotechnol. Adv. 2009, 27, 76–83. 
Rai, P. K. Heavy Metal Phytoremediation from Aquatic Ecosystems with Special Reference 
to Macrophytes. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 39, 697–753. 
Rajkumar, M.; Ae, N.; Prasad, M. N. V.; Freitas, H. Potential of Siderophore-Producing Bacteria 
for Improving Heavy Metal Phytoextraction. Trends Biotechnol. 2010, 28, 142–149. 
Reza, M. Effects of Plant Growth-Promoting Bacteria on the Phytoremediation of Cadmium￾Contaminated Soil by Sunflower. Arch. fuÌ r Acker-und Pflanzenbau und Bodenkd. 2017, 
6, 807–816. 
Rockwood, D. L.; Naidu, C. V, Carter, D. R.; Rahmani, M.; Spriggs, T. A.; Lin, C. et al. 
Short-Rotation Woody Crops and Phytoremediation: Opportunities for Agroforestry? In 
New Vistas in Agroforestry; Springer, 2004; pp 51–63.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainability Aspects of Nano-Remediation 525 
Sarma, H. Metal hyperaccumulation in Plants: A Review Focusing on Phytoremediation 
Technology. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 4, 118–138. 
Sarwar, N.; Malhi, S. S.; Zia, M. H.; Naeem, A.; Bibi, S.; Farid, G. Role of Mineral Nutrition 
in Minimizing Cadmium Accumulation by Plants. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2010, 90, 925–937. 
Schwarzenbach, R. P.; Egli, T.; Hofstetter, T. B.; Von Gunten, U.; Wehrli, B. Global Water 
Pollution and Human Health. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 2010, 35, 109–136. 
Sekhon, B. S. Nanotechnology in Agri-Food Production: An Overview. Nanotechnol. Sci. 
Appl. 2014, 7, 31. 
Shabbir, Z.; Sardar, A.; Shabbir, A.; Abbas, G.; Shamshad, S.; Khalid, S. et al. Copper Uptake, 
Essentiality, Toxicity, Detoxification and Risk Assessment in Soil-Plant Environment. 
Chemosphere, 2020, 259, 127436. 
Sharma, P.; Pandey, S. Status of Phytoremediation in World Scenario. Int. J. Environ. 
Bioremed. Biodegrad. 2014, 2, 178–191. 
Sharma, S. Bioremediation: Features, Strategies and Applications. Asian J. Pharm. Life Sci. 
2012, 2231, 4423. 
Singh, D.; Tiwari, A.; Gupta, R. Phytoremediation of Lead from Wastewater Using Aquatic 
Plants. J. Agric. Technol. 2012, 8, 1–11. 
Srivastav, A.; Yadav, K. K.; Yadav, S.; Gupta, N.; Singh, J. K.; Katiyar, R. et al. Nano￾Phytoremediation of Pollutants from Contaminated Soil Environment: Current Scenario 
and Future Prospects. In Phytoremediation; Springer, 2018; pp 383–401. 
Tangahu, B. V.; Sheikh Abdullah, S. R.; Basri, H.; Idris, M.; Anuar, N.; Mukhlisin, M. A 
Review on Heavy Metals (As, Pb, and Hg) Uptake by Plants through Phytoremediation. 
Int. J. Chem. Eng. 2011, 2011. 
Toet, S.; Van Logtestijn, R. S. P.; Kampf, R.; Schreijer, M.; Verhoeven, J. T. A. The Effect 
of Hydraulic Retention Time on the Removal of Pollutants from Sewage Treatment Plant 
Effluent in a Surface-Flow Wetland System. Wetlands 2005, 25, 375–391. 
Venugopal, J.; Prabhakaran, M. P.; Low, S.; Choon, A. T.; Zhang, Y. Z.; Deepika, G. et al. 
Nanotechnology for Nanomedicine and Delivery of Drugs. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2008, 14, 
2184–2200. 
Wen, D.; Fu, R.; Li, Q. Removal of Inorganic Contaminants in Soil by Electrokinetic 
Remediation Technologies: A Review. J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 401, 123345. 
Yan, A.; Wang, Y.; Tan, S. N.; Yusof, M. L. M.; Ghosh, S.; Chen, Z. Phytoremediation: A 
Promising Approach for Revegetation of Heavy Metal-Polluted Land. Front. Plant Sci. 
2020, 11. 
Yan, L.; Van Le, Q.; Sonne, C.; Yang, Y.; Yang, H.; Gu, H. et al. Phytoremediation of 
Radionuclides in Soil, Sediments and Water. J. Hazard. Mater. 2021, 407, 124771. 
Yang, J.; Tang, C.; Wang, F.; Wu, Y. Co-Contamination of Cu and Cd in Paddy Fields: Using 
Periphyton to Entrap Heavy Metals. J. Hazard. Mater. 2016, 304, 150–158. 
Zhang, L.; Webster, T. J. Nanotechnology and Nanomaterials: Promises for Improved Tissue 
Regeneration. Nano Today 2009, 4, 66–80. Index
 
A 
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 198
 
Aeroponic techniques
 
yield greater biomass
 
food crops, 474–478
 
nonfood crops, 478–479
 
Air pollution management, 62, 409
 
commercialized nanosenors, 428–430
 
sensor devices, 414–416, 416–418
 
0D nanomaterials, 418
 
1D nanomaterials, 420–422
 
2D nanostructured materials, 423
 
3D nanostructures materials, 423–424
 
toxic gases, nanotechnology adsorption
 
adsorption of isopropyl alcohol, 427–428
 
carbon dioxide capture, 426
 
dioxins, 424–425
 
NOX, 425
 
volatile organic materials from air, 
elimination, 426–427
 
Alcanivorax borkumensis, 206
 
Applied nanotechnology, economic impact, 
495
 
commercialization of, 497–499
 
enabling technology, 500
 
in energy, 501–502 
in environment and agriculture, 
503–504
 
in healthcare, 500–501
 
in water treatment and purification, 504
 
green economy and nanotechnology, 
499–500 
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus (AMF) 
aeroponic techniques, yield greater 
biomass
 
food crops, 474–478
 
nonfood crops, 478–479
 
radical mycelium network inoculum, 474
 
Artificial enzymes
 
catalytic monolayers 
alkanethiol-protected AUNPS, 173–175 
moieties covered by alkanethiol, 176–177 
RNASE (DNASE), 175–176
 
RNase, transphosphorylation, 177
 
TACN ligand, 175
 
thiolated biomolecules-protected, 176
 
enzymatic catalytic properties, 158
 
nanoenzymes applications
 
air degradation, 178
 
biofilm, formation, 180–181
 
chemical contaminants, wastewater 
depletion, 178–179
 
Chemical Warfare Agents (CWA), 180
 
human factors, 177
 
transphosphorylation, 178
 
nanoenzymes catalytic pathways
 
catalase, 164
 
glucose oxidase, 161
 
glutathione peroxidase, 163
 
haloperoxidase, 163–164
 
peroxidase, 162–163
 
sulfite oxidase, 162
 
nanoenzymes, classification
 
enzyme mimics with applications, 161
 
metabolic pathways, 159
 
and natural enzymes, 160
 
nanomaterials
 
carbon nanotubes as, 171–172
 
fullerene and derivatives, 169–170
 
graphene and derivatives, 170–171
 
hybrid enzymes, 159
 
imitated by superoxide dismutase, 170
 
imitators of peroxidase, 173
 
peroxidase mimics, 171
 
tuning of, 164
 
composition, 166–168
 
constructing hybrid nanoparticles, 167
 
lighting, 169
 
molecules or ions, 168–169
 
morphology, 165
 
pH and temperature, 168
 
size, 165
 
steric effect, 165
 
surface modification, 166
 528 Index 
B 
Bioremediation 
types
 
mycoremediation, 52
 
phytodegradation, 54
 
phytoextraction, 52–53
 
phytostabilization, 53
 
phytovolatization, 53–54
 
rhizofiltration, 53
 
Biosensing
 
carbon nanofibers (CNFs), 277
 
carbon nanohorns, 278
 
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 273–275
 
fullerene, 277
 
Graphene (GR) structure, 275–276
 
synthesis of
 
carbon nanofibers (CNFs), 280
 
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 278–279
 
fullerenes, 280–281
 
graphene, 279–280
 
Bisphenol-A (BPA), 202–203 
C 
Carbon nanotube (CNTs)
 
carbon quantum dots (CQDs), 108–109
 
fullerenes, 107
 
graphene sheet, 107–108
 
nanohorns, 109
 
types, 105–106
 
Carbon quantum dots (CQDs), 104
 
Carbonaceous materials, nanoremediation, 
345
 
Carbon-based nanomaterials
 
biological contaminants, sensing, 286
 
pathogenic bacteria, 287–288
 
pathogenic virus, 287
 
biosensing
 
carbon nanofibers (CNFs), 277
 
carbon nanohorns, 278
 
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 273–275
 
fullerene, 277
 
Graphene (GR) structure, 275–276
 
carbon nanotube (CNTs)
 
carbon quantum dots (CQDs), 108–109
fullerenes, 107
 
graphene sheet, 107–108
 
nanohorns, 109
 
types, 105–106 
chemical contaminants, sensing
 
antibiotics, 283
 
endocrine-disrupting chemicals 
(EDCs), 284
 
heavy metal pollutants, 284–285
 
nitro-based explosives, 282
 
noxious gases, 286
 
pesticides, 285–286
 
pharmaceutical pollutants, 283
 
small organic molecules, 282
 
classification of 
carbon quantum dots (CQDs), 104
 
consumption, 264
 
molecular level alterations, 103
 
monitoring environmental pollution, 281
 
nanobiosensors, 265
 
components of, 266
 
nanoparticle-based biosensors, 267
 
acoustic wave biosensors, 268
 
bionanomaterial-based biosensors, 
270–271
 
biorecognition or bioreceptor, 271
 
electrochemical biosensors, 269, 272
 
electrochemical transducer, 271–272
 
magnetic biosensor, 268–269
 
mechanical nanobiosensors, 272–273
 
nanotubes-based biosensors, 269–270
 
nanowires-based biosensors, 270
 
optical nanobiosensors, 271
 
properties of, 109
 
bonding configuration, 110
 
molecular interaction and sorption, 
111–112
 
new electronic properties, 110
 
synthesis of biosensing
 
carbon nanofibers (CNFs), 280
 
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 278–279
 
fullerenes, 280–281
 
graphene, 279–280
 
Catalytic monolayers
 
alkanethiol-protected AUNPS, 173–175
 
moieties covered by alkanethiol, 176–177
 
RNASE (DNASE), 175–176
 
RNase, transphosphorylation, 177
 
TACN ligand, 175
 
thiolated biomolecules-protected, 176
 
Chemical Warfare Agents (CWA), 180
 Index 529 
D 
Decabromodiphenyl ether (c-Deca-BDE), 17
 
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT),
 
16–17
 
Dioxin-like compounds (DLCs), 17
 
E 
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay), 208
 
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs), 
284
 
Engineered water nanostructures (EWNS), 
212
 
Enrofloxacin (ENR), 198
 
Environmental pollutants
 
detection of, 120
 
C20 fullerene, 123
 
carbon nanostructures, 126
 
carbon-based sensors, 123
 
density functional theory (DFT), 123
 
drugs, 127
 
ecological monitoring, 127
 
electrochemical sensors, 127
 
fullerene-based nanocomposites, 123
 
GPN–quantum dots (QDs), 124
 
Graphene–CNTs, 122
 
Graphene-Nafion-based sensor, 125
 
heavy metals, 124
 
humidity, 125
 
mechanical exfoliation (ME) method, 
121
 
MWCNTs, 122
 
natural gas, 122
 
peroxy-nanosensor (PNS), 128
 
phenolic compounds, 123
 
pressure sensors, 126
 
QCM humidity sensor, 125
 
UEPA (US Environmental Protection 
Agency), 121
 
water eutrophication, 123
 
and detections
 
air pollution, 112
 
examples, 113–114
 
inorganic gases, 112
 
monitoring, 116
 
soil pollution, 115–116
 
VOC (volatile organic compounds), 112
 
water pollution, 115
 
sensors based carbon nanomaterials, types
 
biosensors, 117–118
 
chemical sensors, 118–119
 
experiment-based studies, 119
 
flow sensors, 120
 
mass sensing, 120
 
pressure sensors, 119
 
strain sensors, 119–120
 
temperature sensors, 120
 
Environmental pollutions 
applications
 
biosensing mechanism, 88
 
heavy metal pollutants, 78–79, 82–84
 
organic pollutants, 84–86
 
paper-based SERS swab, 88–89
 
PCBs determination, 87
 
SPR nanobiosensor, 88
 
chromatography technique, 63
 
nanosensor, 63
 
chemical nanosensor, 64
 
classification, 65
 
electrometer, 64–65
 
materials, 65–68
 
mechanism principles, 64
 
sensing types, 68
 
colorimetric nanosensor, 75–76
 
electrochemical techniques, 69–72
 
magnetic nanosensors, 76–78
 
optical nanosensor, 72–75
 
water pollution, 62
 
Environmentalist, 102
 
Enzymes, 158
 
European Food Protection Authority 
(EFSA), 205
 
F 
Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), 211
 
G 
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), 202
 
Graphene quantum spots (GQDs), 209
 
Green algae (Chlorella), 52
 
H 
Hexabromocyclododecane (HBCDD), 20
 
Hexachlorobenzene (HCB), 21
 
Hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), 21–22
 
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), 236
 530 Index 
I
 
Inorganic environmental pollutants, 49
 
biological approaches
 
green algae (Chlorella), 52
 
microbial fuel cell (MFC), 51–52
 
bioremediation, types
 
mycoremediation, 52
 
phytodegradation, 54
 
phytoextraction, 52–53
 
phytostabilization, 53
 
phytovolatization, 53–54
 
rhizofiltration, 53
 
chemical management
 
advertising material, 50
 
recurring biochar condition, 51
 
sorbents and adsorbents, use, 51
 
Inorganic pollutants
 
environmental pollutants
 
inorganic pollutants, 43–44
 
organic pollutants, 43
 
origin and types
 
human health risks, 48
 
Methane, 44
 
nutrient pollution, 48–49
 
radioactive substances, 47–48
 
waste collection, 44
 
water, 44
 
PTEs, 41–42
 
L 
Lab-on-a-chip (LOC) devices, 143
 
M 
Mercury-specific oligonucleotides (MSOs), 
198
 
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs), 139
 
Microbial fuel cell (MFC), 51–52
 
MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus), 207
 
N 
Nanobiosensors, 190
 
agricultural industry, 197
 
attributes and key elements
 
biologically sensitive material, 193
 
detection, 192
 
nanomaterials, 194
 
principal structure, 194
 
trans, 194
 
detection signal
 
colorimetric assay, 200
 
field-effect transistor (FET), 202
 
genetic mutation, 201
 
heavy metals, 200
 
nano-biomaterials, 199
 
peptide-based gold nanoparticle, 200
 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs), 201
 
water, 200
 
Xanthocerassorbifolia extract 
(XT-AuNP), 201
 
DNA nanosensors
 
ELISA method, 207
 
GMO, transgene-containing, 207
 
heavy metal pollutants, 208
 
MRSA (methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus), 207
 
pathogen contamination, 206
 
pesticides, 206–207
 
Rayleigh scattering (RRS), 208
 
immuno-based nano-biosensor
 
electrochemical immunosensor, 209
 
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay), 208
 
graphene quantum spots (GQDs), 209
 
immobilization, 210
 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 209
 
Staphylococcus aureus, 209
 
surface plasmon reverberation (SPR), 
209
 
two-photon Rayleigh scattering (TPRS) 
spectroscopy, 209
 
integrated with enzymes
 
minimal detection limit, 196
 
organophosphorus pesticide, 196
 
progression in, 195
 
microorganism-based
 
agriculture networks, 204
 
Alcanivorax borkumensis, 206
 
DOT-T1E biosensor, 205
 
European Food Protection Authority 
(EFSA), 205
 
monitoring environmental pollutants
 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 198
 
enrofloxacin (ENR), 198
 Index 531 
fluorescence, 196
 
life-threatening heavy metal, 198
 
mercury-specific oligonucleotides 
(MSOs), 198
 
zymolytic-modified nanomaterials, 199
 
nanowire biosensors, 203
 
Boron-doped silicon nanowires 
(SiNWs), 204
 
CNT/Nafion complex, 204
 
phenolic compounds
 
amalgam of Nafion, 202
 
bisphenol-A (BPA), 202–203
 
detection of pollutants, 203
 
gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), 202
 
nanoporous gold film (NPGF), 203
 
tyrosinase enzyme, 202
 
pollution detection
 
array type, 210
 
engineered water nanostructures 
(EWNS), 212
 
Förster resonance energy transfer 
(FRET), 211
 
lead, 211
 
Ralstonia solanacearum, 211
 
rapid and sensitive detecting systems, 
211
 
single-walled carbon nanotube field￾effect-transistor (swCNT-FET), 212
 
Nanoenzymes
 
applications
 
air degradation, 178
 
biofilm, formation, 180–181
 
chemical contaminants, wastewater 
depletion, 178–179
 
Chemical Warfare Agents (CWA), 180
 
human factors, 177
 
transphosphorylation, 178
 
catalytic pathways
 
catalase, 164
 
glucose oxidase, 161
 
glutathione peroxidase, 163
 
haloperoxidase, 163–164
 
peroxidase, 162–163
 
sulfite oxidase, 162
 
classification
 
enzyme mimics with applications, 161
 
metabolic pathways, 159
 
and natural enzymes, 160
 
Nanomaterials 
hazardous, safety, management, 487
 
environmental hazards, 490–491
 
exposure and handling, 491–492
 
health hazards, 488–490
 
management of risk, 492
 
Nano-phytoremediation, 445
 
nano zerovalent iron (NZVI OR FE0) 
heavy metals, technologies, 455–456 
materials, 452–454 
pollutants and plants, 452–454 
pollutants, technologies of, 448–449 
remediation of environmental sites, 450–452 
in soil and water 
nanotechnology and organic pollutants, 
456–461
 
Nanoporous gold film (NPGF), 203
 
Nano-remediation, 509
 
phytoremediation
 
in Asia, plants for, 511–514
 
nanoparticles, 519–521
 
polluted soil and water, role, 515
 
and rhizofiltration, 517–519
 
soil and water resources, 515
 
Nanozymes. See Artificial enzymes
 
Noncarbon-based nanomaterials, 136
 
advantagious and preferential choice
 
biosensing technology, 224
 
DLS processes, 223
 
factors, 223
 
metal oxides, 226
 
noncarbonbased, 223
 
pollutants, 226
 
challenges, 243–245 
composite nanobiosensors 
metal oxide-metal oxide composite 
biosensor, 239–240 
metal-metal composite based 
biosensor, 237–238
 
metal-metal oxide based biosensor, 238
 
noncarbon/carbon composites, 241–243
 
contaminants mechanisms, detection
 
colorimetric sensors, 139–140
 
electrochemical techniques, 141–142
 
fluorescence emission, 142–143
 
lab-on-a-chip (LOC) devices, 143
 
surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy 
(SERS), 140–141 532 Index 
environmental application, 221
 
environmental contaminants, detection 
of, 143
 
heavy metals, 147–148
 
nanomaterials for, 145–146
 
organic contaminants and gases, 148–149
 
pathogenic microorganisms, 144
 
persistent organic pollutants (POPs), 148
 
quantum dots, 147
 
Raman reporter molecules, 146
 
receptors, 144
 
environmental monitoring and forensics
 
chitason, 236
 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP), 236
 
metal oxide based biosensor, 231
 
metal-based nanobiosensors, 227–231
 
SNO2 based biosensor and 
environmental applications, 232–233
 
sol-gel method, 236
 
TIO2-based biosensor and 
environmental applications, 231–232 
WO3-based biosensor and 
environmental applications, 234–235 
ZNO-based biosensor and 
environmental applications, 233–234
 
metal organic frameworks (MOFs), 139
 
noble metal nanoparticles, 137
 
quantum dots, 137–138
 
P 
Pentachlorobenzene (PeCB), 23–24
 
Pentachlorophenol (PCP), 24
 
Peroxy-nanosensor (PNS), 128
 
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs), 148
 
active pharmaceutical ingredients, 26–27
 
anthropogenic origin, 6
 
synthetic substances, 9
 
classification, 9
 
diversity of, 4
 
emerging contaminants, 26–27
 
hazardous
 
biological and chemical degradation, 5
 
exposure, health problems, 6
 
semivolatile and evaporate, 5
 
Stockholm Convention, 5
 
health problems, 7–8
 
indexes/obtaining fees
 
contaminated drinking water, 28
 
dietary exposure, 28
 
ingestion from soil, 27
 
inhalation, 27
 
skin absorption from soil, 27–28
 
molecules, 4
 
priority pollutants
 
aldrin, 10, 15
 
chlordane, 15
 
chlordecone, 15–16
 
decabromodiphenyl ether 
(c-Deca-BDE), 17
 
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
(DDT), 16–17
 
dioxin-like compounds (DLCs), 17
 
endosulfan, 18–19
 
furan and dibenzofurans, 18
 
heptachlor, 19
 
hexabromobiphenyl, 20
 
hexabromocyclododecane (HBCDD), 20
 
hexachlorobenzene (HCB), 21
 
hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), 21–22
 
lindane, 22
 
mirex, 22–23
 
pentachlorobenzene (PeCB), 23–24
 
pentachlorophenol (PCP), 24
 
polybrominateddiphenyl ethers 
(PBDEs), 23
 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 24–25
 
polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs), 
25–26
 
Stockholm Convention, 10, 11–14
 
toxic components, 9
 
synthetic chemicals, 4
 
Polybrominateddiphenyl ethers (PBDEs), 23
 
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 24–25
 
Polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs), 25–26
 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 
201
 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 209
 
R 
Rayleigh scattering (RRS), 208
 
Remediate water pollution
 
degradation
 
nanomotors, 323–324
 
nanophotocatalysts, 324–327
 
domestic wastewater possesses, 302
 
industrial wastewater, 303
 Index 533 
landfills, 302 
nanomaterials (NMs), 304 
nanotechnology field, 304 
noncarbon-based nanomaterial, 305–307 
Mentha piperita, 308 
nZVI nanoparticles (nZVI-NPs), 308 
silver nanoparticles, 309 
water remediation, 310–314 
water remediation, technologies, 314 
filtration, 315–318 
nanoadsorbents, 318–322 
nanomotors, 322–323 
S 
Sensor devices, 414–416, 416–418 
0D nanomaterials, 418 
1D nanomaterials, 420–422 
2D nanostructured materials, 423 
3D nanostructures materials, 423–424 
Single-walled carbon nanotube field-effect￾transistor (swCNT-FET), 212 
Staphylococcus aureus, 209 
Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy 
(SERS), 140–141 
Surface plasmon reverberation (SPR), 209 
T 
Two-photon Rayleigh scattering (TPRS) 
spectroscopy, 209 
U 
UEPA (US Environmental Protection 
Agency), 121 
V 
VOC (volatile organic compounds), 112 
W 
Water pollution, 62 
X 
Xanthocerassorbifolia extract (XT-AuNP), 
201 
