Network Analysis
The size and availability of network information has exploded over the
last decade. Social scientists now share the stage of network analysis
with computer scientists, physicists, and statisticians. While a number
of introductions to network analysis are now available, most focus on
theory, methods, or application alone. This book integrates all three.
Network Analysis is an introduction to both the why and how of social
network analysis (SNA). It presents a broad theoretical overview rooted
in social scientific approaches and guides users in how network analysis
can answer core theoretical questions. It provides a comprehensive
overview of descriptive and analytical approaches, including practical
tutorials in R with sample data sets. Using an integrated approach, this
book aims to quickly bring novice network researchers up to speed
while avoiding common programming and analysis mistakes so that
they might gain insight into the fundamental theories, key concepts, and
methodological application of SNA.
 .  is Associate Professor of Sociology at Duke
University, where he is affiliated with the Duke Network Analysis
Center. His work focuses on the connections between social structures
and culture, including belief systems, knowledge, meaning-making pro￾cesses, and attitude change. His publications have appeared in the
American Journal of Sociology, American Sociological Review, Social
Forces, Sociological Science, and Poetics.
 .  is Senior Policy Analyst in Mental Health and
Addictions at the Nova Scotia Health Authority. He has done meth￾odological work on network sampling and missing data, as well as more
substantive work on network processes, drug use, and health outcomes.
His work has been published in the American Sociological Review,
Sociological Methodology, Social Networks, and other venues.
  is Professor of Sociology at Duke University and
focuses on the network foundations of social cohesion and diffusion,
using network analysis to help understand topics including racial segre￾gation, disease spread, and the development of scientific disciplines. He
has won the Freeman Award for contributions to network analysis and
a James S. McDonnel Foundation Complexity Scholars award.
Published online by Cambridge University Press .  is Professor of Education and (by courtesy)
Sociology and Organizational Behavior at Stanford University, where
he founded Stanford’s Center for Computational Social Science. His
past work studied social network dynamics of communication, relation￾ships, affiliations, and knowledge structures in educational contexts.
His current work integrates social network analysis and natural lan￾guage processing to study the development of scientific knowledge.
Published online by Cambridge University PressSTRUCTURAL ANALYSIS IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
Edited by Mark Granovetter
The series Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences presents studies that ana￾lyze social behavior and institutions by reference to relations among such
concrete social entities as persons, organizations, and nations. Relational analy￾sis contrasts on the one hand with reductionist methodological individualism
and on the other with macro-level determinism, whether based on technology,
material conditions, economic conflict, adaptive evolution, or functional
imperatives. In this more intellectually flexible, structural middle ground, ana￾lysts situate actors and their relations in a variety of contexts. Since the series
began in 1987, its authors have variously focused on small groups, history,
culture, politics, kinship, aesthetics, economics, and complex organizations,
creatively theorizing how these shape and in turn are shaped by social relations.
Their style and methods have ranged widely, from intense, long-term ethno￾graphic observation to highly abstract mathematical models. Their disciplinary
affiliations have included history, anthropology, sociology, political science,
business, economics, mathematics, and computer science. Some have made
explicit use of social network analysis, including many of the cutting-edge
and standard works of that approach, whereas others have kept formal analysis
in the background and used “networks” as a fruitful orienting metaphor. All
have in common a sophisticated and revealing approach that forcefully illumin￾ates our complex social world.
Recent Books in the Series
Mario L. Small, Brea L. Perry, Bernice A. Pescosolido, and Edward B. Smith,
Personal Networks: Classic Readings and New Directions in Egocentric
Analysis
David Knoke, Mario Diani, and Dimitris Christopolous, and James Holloway,
Multimodal Political Networks
Claire BIdart, Alain Degenne, and Michel Grossetti, Living in Networks: The
Dynamics of Social Relations
William Sims Bainbridge, The Social Structure of Online Communities
Michael Kenney, The Islamic State in Britain: Radicalization and Resilience in
an Activist Network
Wouter De Nooy, Andrej Mrvar, and Vladimir Batagelj, Exploratory Social
Network Analysis with Pajek: Revised and Expanded Edition for Updated
Software
Published online by Cambridge University PressSean F. Everton, Networks and Religion: Ties that Bind, Loose, Build-up and
Tear Down
Darius Mehri, Iran Auto
Navid Hassanpour, Leading from the Periphery and Network Collective
Action
Cheol-Sung Lee, When Solidarity Works
Benjamin Cornwell, Social Sequence Analysis
Mariela Szwarcberg, Mobilizing Poor Voters
Luke M. Gerdes, ed., Illuminating Dark Networks
Silvia Domínguez and Betina Hollstein, eds., Mixed Methods in Studying Social
Networks
Dean Lusher, Johan Koskinen, and Garry Robins, eds., Exponential Random
Graph Models for Social Networks: Theory, Methods, and Applications
Sean F. Everton, Disrupting Dark Networks
Wouter de Nooy, Andrej Mrvar, and Vladimir Batagelj, Exploratory Social
Network Analysis with Pajek
Noah E. Friedkin and Eugene C. Johnsen, Social Influence Network Theory
Zeev Maoz, The Networks of Nations: The Evolution and Structure of
International Networks, 1816–2001
Martin Kilduff and David Krackhardt, Interpersonal Networks in
Organizations
Ari Adut, On Scandal: Moral Disturbances in Society, Politics, and Art
Robert C. Feenstra and Gary G. Hamilton, Emergent Economies, Divergent
Paths
Eiko Ikegami, Bonds of Civility: Aesthetic Networks and the Political Origins
of Japanese Culture
Peter Carrington, John Scott, and Stanley Wasserman, Models and Methods in
Social Network Analysis
Patrick Doreian, Vladimir Batagelj, and Anujka Ferligoj, Generalized
Blockmodeling
James Lincoln and Michael Gerlach, Japan’s Network Economy
Robert Franzosi, From Words to Numbers
Sean O’Riain, The Politics of High-Tech Growth
Philippe Bourgois, In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio (Second
Edition)
Isabella Alcañiz, Environmental and Nuclear Networks in the Global South
Published online by Cambridge University PressNetwork Analysis
Integrating Social Network Theory, Method, and
Application with R
CRAIG M. RAWLINGS
Duke University
JEFFREY A. SMITH
Nova Scotia Health Authority
JAMES MOODY
Duke University
DANIEL A. MCFARLAND
Stanford University
Published online by Cambridge University PressShaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107037786
DOI: 10.1017/9781139794985
© Craig M. Rawlings, Jeffrey A. Smith, James Moody, and Daniel A. McFarland 2023
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
First published 2023
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: McFarland, Daniel A., 1971- author. | Smith, Jeffrey A., 1983- author.
Title: Network analysis : integrating social network theory, method, and application with R /
Daniel A. McFarland, Stanford University, Jeffrey A. Smith, University of Nebraska, Lincoln,
James Moody, Duke University, North Carolina, Craig M. Rawlings, Duke University, North
Carolina.
Description: 1 Edition. | New York : Cambridge University Press, [2023] | Series: Sass structural
analysis in the social sciences
Identifiers: LCCN 2023011794 (print) | LCCN 2023011795 (ebook) | ISBN 9781107037786
(hardback) | ISBN 9781107611900 (paperback) | ISBN 9781139794985 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Social sciences–Network analysis. | Social networks–Research–Methodology. |
Application software. | Web applications.
Classification: LCC HM741 .M3864 2023 (print) | LCC HM741 (ebook) | DDC 302.3072–dc23/
eng/20230410
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023011794
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023011795
ISBN 978-1-107-03778-6 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-107-61190-0 Paperback
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
Published online by Cambridge University PressContents
List of Figures page ix
List of Tables xv
Acknowledgments xvii
1 Introduction: Network Analysis Today 1
   
2 What Is Social Structure? 19
3 What Is a Social Network? 45
4 How Are Social Network Data Collected? 67
5 How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 88
   
6 Structuration and Egocentric Networks 117
7 Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 143
8 Cohesion and Groups 161
9 Hierarchy and Centrality 190
10 Positions and Roles 216
11 Affiliations and Dualities 246
12 Networks and Culture 269
    
13 Models for Networks 301
14 Models for Network Diffusion 340
vii
Published online by Cambridge University Press15 Models for Social Influence 364
16 Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 390
References 421
Index 447
viii Contents
Published online by Cambridge University PressFigures
1.1 Types of systems page 4
1.2 High school sexual relations network (Bearman, Moody,
& Stovel 2004) 10
1.3 Structural forces in international relations 11
2.1 Schematic of rendering reality into knowledge 20
2.2 Networks from slices of interactions using classroom
observation data (Bender-deMoll & McFarland 2006) 22
2.3 Schematic of social structure (adapted from Hinde 1976) 25
2.4 Social structure constructed in notes passed between two high
school students (McFarland & Wolff 2022) 30
2.5 Hypothetical romantic network 36
2.6 Role structure of a Western family unit 37
2.7 Role structure of the Trobriand Island Kula Ring
exchange network 39
3.1 The Königsberg bridge problem and its graph representation 46
3.2 A basic network structure 48
3.3 Four types of networks 52
3.4 Kinship/business relations among Florentine families in
the Renaissance 53
3.5 Southern women and their social event attendance 55
3.6 Example graph and basic network definitions 57
3.7 Walks of length 3 from Tim 57
4.1 The difference between complete and partial network data 68
4.2 The consequences of missing network data 80
4.3 Simple imputation options for missing network data 82
5.1 Scatterplots of three bivariate distributions shown in
Table 5.1 89
ix
Published online by Cambridge University Press5.2 “Circus Sideshow” by Georges Seurat, with detail 90
5.3 Girls’ cabin signed network from Moreno (1934) 91
5.4
(a–c)
Three visualizations of Zachary’s (1977) karate club data 94
5.5 Visualization of a dyadic distance matrix of select US cities 96
5.6 Spatial representation of Moreno’s (1934) data 98
5.7 Hospital exchange network using ZIP codes for coordinates 99
5.8 Tree diagram 101
5.9 Family tree diagram (Kaplanis et al. 2018) 102
5.10 Girls’ cabin network as positive, negative, and joint ties,
using positive ties for layout 104
5.11 Using colors and weights to modify the default image for
publication display 106
5.12 Modified image of Moreno data 107
5.13 Removing nodes to clarify relations 108
5.14
(a and b)
Suppressing nodes on a large, dense graph clarifies relations
between authors and topics in large-scale science network 109
5.15 Contour sociogram of natural science disciplines 109
5.16 Contour sociogram of Scholars@Duke data 110
5.17 Alluvial flow diagram of small STD simulation data
(Bender-deMoll 2016) 112
5.18 Dynamic senate co-voting blocks (Moody & Mucha 2013) 112
6.1 Ideal-typical self in Western society 120
6.2
(a and b)
Typified egocentric networks 128
6.3 A typical Facebook friend network 130
6.4 Racial homophily as a function of high school racial
heterogeneity (Moody 2001) 134
6.5 Racial mixing matrix in one high school 135
6.6 The density of an egocentric network 136
6.7 Egocentric networks and structural holes 136
6.8 Redundancy and constraint in an ego’s network structure 137
6.9 Five types of brokers (Gould & Fernandez 1989) 141
7.1 Three types of dyads in directed networks: mutual,
asymmetric, and null 146
7.2 Example calculation of reciprocity 147
7.3 The four types of triads for undirected networks 149
7.4 The sixteen types of triads for directed networks 150
7.5 Triad census 151
7.6 The bank wiring room friendship network (Roethlisberger,
Dickson, & Wright 1947 [1939]) 151
7.7 Forty triadic motifs in networks with two types of symmetric
ties (shown in red and blue) 153
7.8 Fritz Heider’s POX System 156
x List of Figures
Published online by Cambridge University Press8.1 Conceptualizing the social cohesiveness of networks 163
8.2 Network density versus connectivity 165
8.3 A simple ridge structure 166
8.4 Connectivity as robustness to node removal 169
8.5 Ideal-typical small-world network structure 171
8.6 Small network with many overlapping cliques 176
8.7 Network with two 3-cores 177
8.8 Comparing four approaches to deriving
cohesive subgroups 181
8.9 Resolution parameter sweep 182
8.10 Connectivity sets for Figure 8.3 185
9.1 The conundrum of network degree centrality 197
9.2 Poisson distribution of centrality in a random network 204
9.3 Degree centrality distribution, 10,000 node network with a
nearly scale-free degree distribution 206
9.4 Varieties of hierarchy 207
9.5 Two macrostructures with no violations of balance rules 209
9.6 Relaxing the A4 balance rule allows for multiple clusters 210
9.7
(a and b)
Relaxing the A4 and A3 rules (a) and relaxing the A4, A3,
and A2 rules (b) affords hierarchical macrostructures 210
9.8 Idealized image matrices of hierarchical structures depicted
in Figure 9.4 213
10.1 Stereotypical school role relations 219
10.2 Roles derived from compound relations 220
10.3 Structural equivalence in a formal hierarchy 222
10.4 Automorphic equivalence 223
10.5 Regular equivalence 224
10.6 A typical hierarchical structure 225
10.7 Reduced macrostructure of hierarchy in Figure 10.6 227
10.8 Reduced macrostructure of hierarchy in Figure 10.6 based
on regular equivalence 227
10.9 Illustrating stacking multiple relations within a family
exchange network 228
10.10 Illustration of the CONCOR algorithm 230
10.11 Illustrating hierarchical cluster analysis 232
10.12 Triad-position census for deriving role equivalence 236
10.13
(a–d)
Role positions in a classroom friendship network 238
10.14 Comparing role structures in two high schools 240
10.15
(a and b)
Generalized blockmodels with four or more positions 241
11.1
(a and b)
Two structures of overlapping social circles of
four individuals 247
List of Figures xi
Published online by Cambridge University Press11.2 Two-mode network of faculty and departments via
joint appointments 251
11.3
(a and b)
One-mode projections of southern women’s affiliations
through events 253
11.4 Academic careers in high school math course–taking
(McFarland 2006) 260
11.5 Correspondence analysis of southern women and
club events 263
11.6
(a and b)
Five organizational forms in a two-dimensional Blau
space, depicted as overlapping niches (a) and a network (b) 266
12.1 Journal co-citation network in the social sciences (Moody &
Light 2006) 273
12.2
(a and b)
Correspondence analyses of tastes in music and
undergraduate major (1993 GSS) 279
12.3 Three-dimensional factor analysis of music tastes with
undergraduate major centroids 282
12.4 Two-dimensional MDS of music tastes (1993 GSS) 284
12.5
(a–d)
Four correlational classes of music tastes (1993 GSS) 288
12.6 Attitude network of music tastes (1993 GSS) 292
12.7 Topic contour plots of core sociology journals, 1990–92 and
2009–11 294
12.8 A priori decision tree for choosing clustering methods
(Pimentel 2014) 296
13.1 QAP on “same race” in one Add Health school 315
13.2 Edgewise expected values from “p1” simple random
graph models 317
13.3 Exemplar data matrix for simple ERGM change statistics 320
13.4 Three latent space models of Sampson’s monastery data 328
13.5 3D plot of Sampson’s monastery data 329
13.6 Role structure mobility matrix 331
13.7 The STERGM framework jointly models tie formation and tie
dissolution (Statnet Development Team; see Morris et al.
2014) 335
14.1 Common SIR model representation 343
14.2 Example of SIR compartmental model dynamics 344
14.3 US COVID-19 infections over time 345
14.4 School 2 from the Add Health network, with edges weighted
by the number of activities students reported doing with
one another 350
14.5 Simulated SIR on network from Figure 14.4, with constant
transmission probability (0.1), proportional to
edge weights 352
14.6 Temporal constraints on diffusion exposure 354
xii List of Figures
Published online by Cambridge University Press14.7 Varying thresholds for adoption given a single source set
(yellow) 359
14.8 Distribution of the proportion of students joining the movement
by average threshold level – ensemble of 500 random
threshold distributions 360
15.1 Simulated peer influence on heterodox opinion 368
15.2 The structural alignment of friends and interests 381
16.1 GitHub network 395
16.2
(a and b)
Two details of GitHub network 396
16.3 Follower network of 300,000+ Twitter users 396
16.4 Block-image network for a PROSPER school, with lines
shaded by difference from expected value 399
16.5 Second-order clustering of triadic role positions 400
16.6 Example of a multiplex network as a multilayer network 414
16.7 Idealized adjacency matrices from multilayering of networks
of southern women’s clubs data 415
16.8 Newcomb’s fraternity data presented as a multilayer
(temporal) network 416
List of Figures xiii
Published online by Cambridge University PressPublished online by Cambridge University PressTables
2.1 Types of causal social-structural questions and social network
research agendas page 33
3.1 Adjacency matrix of Florentine family relations 60
3.2 Affiliation matrix of southern women data 61
3.3 Edgelist of Florentine family relations 63
3.4 Adjacency list of Florentine family relations 64
4.1 Sample network questionnaire 73
4.2 Comparison of realist and nominalist data collection strategies 79
5.1 Three bivariate distributions 89
5.2 Distance matrix of five US cities 95
6.1 Common ego network measures related to
structuration features 139
7.1 Uncertainty in relating 154
8.1 Odds ratios as a measure of group segregation 174
8.2 Blocking matrix 186
9.1 Typology of centrality scores (Borgatti & Everett 2006) 196
9.2 Triadic forms forbidden by one or more balance theory rules 211
10.1 Summarized positional relations 219
10.2 Permuted adjacency matrix based on the blockmodel of
hierarchy in Figure 10.6 225
10.3 Image matrix reduction of the blockmodel solution in
Table 10.2 226
12.1 Factor analysis of music tastes (1993 GSS) 282
13.1 Common structural and actor effects included in ERGMs 322
13.2 Statistical models for longitudinal networks 332
13.3 Inventory of p-shifts with examples (Gibson 2003) 337
15.1 SAOM of peer influence on smoking (see Schaefer, Haas, &
Bishop 2012) 384
xv
Published online by Cambridge University PressPublished online by Cambridge University PressAcknowledgments
This book is the product of an invisible college that spans hundreds of
campuses with thousands of faculty, students, and researchers in academia
and industry. Members belong to disciplines across the social and natural
sciences, engineering, and the humanities. But this college has no lecture halls
or gardens of its own. Some of its members meet regularly at conferences or
online, while many know each other only on paper. And yet, it is a college in the
sense that it exists as a network of scholars who share the same intellectual
goals and jointly add to a shared body of knowledge. We were educated in this
college when it was somewhat smaller and mainly consisted of social scientists.
We offer this book as an attempt to affirm and strengthen some of those social
scientific roots, and in the hope that doing so will help nourish and integrate the
many branches of this invisible college today.
Our primary thanks go to those who helped to build this college. And to be
clear, there are so many we are certain to have forgotten to cite and thank all
those who deserve it. We stand on the shoulders of generations of scholars who
pioneered network analysis. We have known many of these scholars personally,
and they continue to inspire us. We first acknowledge our direct teachers and
formal mentors in network analysis: Peter Bearman, Charles Bidwell, Peter
Blau, Noah Friedkin, Roger Gould, Maureen T. Hallinan, Edward Laumann,
J. Miller McPherson, John Mohr, John Padgett, and Doug White. We also
thank our teachers’ teachers: Harrison White, James Coleman, Paul DiMaggio,
Walter Powell, and Scott Boorman. We have learned a great deal through the
informal networks of friendship and advice that are also vital to the integration
of the invisible college, especially the following individuals: jimi adams, Chris
Bail, Ronald Breiger, Ronald Burt, Carter Butts, Karen Cook, Linus Dahlander,
David Diehl, Paul DiMaggio, Jan Fuhse, Amir Goldberg, Sharique Hasan,
Henning Hillman, Lisa A. Keister, John Levi Martin, Paul McLean, Ann
xvii
Published online by Cambridge University PressMische, Jonathan Morgan, Martina Morris, Andrej Mrvar, Peter J. Mucha,
Paolo Parigi, Sanne Smith, Lynn Smith-Lovin, Steve Vaisey, Alex Volfovsky,
and Stanley Wasserman. We would also never have gotten here without the
students we have taught over the years and the need to try to distill so much of
this knowledge into a course of learning. Special thanks to graduate students
Gabriel Varela, Tom Wolff, and Joe Quinn for sundry reviews of the R labs and
specific text details. We have each taught elements of this text in our courses
and thank the students who suffered through early and incomplete versions of
this manuscript for their feedback on the text and labs, as it was always
welcome and wonderful. You know who you are, and we thank you for
teaching us how to better teach this material through trial and much error.
Many of the R labs presented in this textbook were built from prior versions
developed at Stanford University by Daniel A. McFarland, Solomon Messing,
Michael Nowak, Sean J. Westwood, and Sanne Smith. Chapter 5’s lab for
NDTV drew on Skye Bender-deMoll’s materials; Chapter 12 on LDA/CA came
from Love Börjeson and Daniel A. McFarland; Chapter 13 concerning
“ERGM” and “relevant” drew on Carter Butts’ materials; and Chapter 15 on
SIENA/SAOM drew on ICS materials. Finally, a great many resources from the
Duke Network Analysis Center (DNAC) helped us in formulating elements in
many of the labs. For example, Chapter 4 on missing data imputation drew on
James Moody and Jeffrey A. Smith’s work in the DNAC, as did Chapter 14 on
diffusion. We are grateful to these institutions and individuals for sharing code
and helping us formulate applications for each chapter’s theories.
We have been fortunate to benefit from the time and research opportunities
provided by external funding throughout the lifetime of this project. This
includes the Social Networks and Health (SN&H) NICHD Workshop grant
(NICHD, 2 R25 HD079352–06), which supported the development of many of
the pedagogical ideas, and a James S. McDonnell Foundation Complexity
Scholars award to James Moody (220020397). Examples in the text draw on
data collected or analysis completed in whole or in part from numerous funded
projects, including NSF (0624134, 1633036, 1827477, SMA-1829240,
2022435; BCS-2024271-1; SES-2029790), NIH (R01 DA018225–05A1, R01
HD075712–01; R21HD104431), and DARPA (FA8650–18-C-7826).
This manuscript benefited from several individuals who read it in part or
whole. We are extremely grateful to Kevin Lewis for reading the entire manu￾script and providing detailed comments. We cannot overstate how helpful his
insights were in clarifying points large and small. Our deep thanks also go to
Tom Snijders for expert advice and detailed comments on Part III of the book.
These insights were invaluable. Others have supported this endeavor in import￾ant ways. We are very grateful for expert editorial assistance provided by Laura
Tesch. We also thank Colin Birkhead for additional editorial help. We are also
grateful to Robin Gauthier and Sela Harcey for their helpful comments and
suggestions on the R tutorials. Craig Rawlings thanks Moira Killoran and
xviii Acknowledgments
Published online by Cambridge University PressClayton Childress for their expert advice on many occasions. Finally, we thank
Mark Granovetter for believing in this endeavor and supporting it along its
long journey. It was a long, well-traveled road, crowded with assistance, and
that has made all the difference.
The authors would like to dedicate the book to:
CMR: JMR
JAS: GRG & EAAS
JWM: LAK
DAM: SMS
Acknowledgments xix
Published online by Cambridge University PressPublished online by Cambridge University Press1
Introduction
Network Analysis Today
1.1   
Stop. Take a moment to look around. What do you see? No matter where you
are, you are likely perceiving a world consisting of things. Maybe you are
reading this book in a coffee shop, and if so, you probably see people, cups,
books, chairs, and so on. You see a world of objects with properties, yourself
included: white cups are on wooden tables, people sitting in chairs are reading
books and talking with one another. At the same time, you are a subject,
responding to this world and actively bringing yourself and these objects into
interrelation. And yet, the world of objects with properties that you are per￾ceiving is but one slice of a complex reality.
What is less obvious and often taken for granted is all the relationships that
come together to make this world of things a sensible, navigable reality. In the
coffee shop you are unlikely to notice the complex patterns of exchanges in
resources that brought the coffee to your table, the hierarchy of relationships
that organizes the work roles in the coffee shop, or the stable pattern of
interactions among customers coming and going that make the coffee shop a
hub in the flows in so many people’s everyday lives. You take those exchanges
and relationships for granted; and yet, you are embedded within them. You and
the world of things you perceive are inextricably tied together through these
invisible webs of flows, exchanges, and more or less stable relationships. They
uphold and provide meaning for your subjectively experienced reality.
The natural and social worlds are filled with flows, exchanges, and relation￾ships like these. By studying these largely unseen patterns, or networks, we
come to understand myriad social phenomena – for example, how persons
assume distinct roles, like barista, and the role relations between employees and
patrons; the ways in which personal relationships form and evolve from that of
employee–patron or coworkers to something more intimate, like friends or
1
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressromantic partners; and how gossip spreads information across some of these
role relations more than others. Many of our dearest social institutions are
replete with persistent associations, such as peer groups, families, and schools.
Even our casual dinner conversations can be viewed as having recognizable
patterns that we interpret as either a positive bonding moment or an awkward
one. These all entail social networks – that is, flows, exchanges, and relation￾ships that exist only within human experience and behavior.
But take a moment to consider all the other phenomena that also have relational
properties. Molecules are structures formed by an assortment of atomic bonds.
Brains function through structures of neural connections. Ecosystems entail struc￾tures of food webs where various animals and plants consume one another,
thereby creating flows of carbon and energy. The Internet is organized by links
that connect web pages. Markets move in response to a system of patterned
transactions. Language creates meaning by assembling a complex set of relation￾ships between words, sentences, and grammar. These are also networks.
We cannot understand either the social or wider world without understanding
relationships and the networks they form. These structures define the environ￾ments in which core scientific phenomena take place. They are not just back￾ground connections in the understanding of life, but are integral to explaining and
modeling complex phenomena in accurate and meaningful ways. It is hard to
imagine a discussion of brain functioning without references to brain regions and
neural activity linking neurons and those regions. Likewise, it is hard to imagine
studying the social aspects of life without examining actions and relationships that
connect people. In short, the interconnectedness of objects is a fundamental
property of the world, and makes the world possible. Regardless of the social
actors or objects being connected (i.e., networked), the properties and dynamics of
being interconnected are something all phenomena share. And this is what net￾work analysis seeks to understand. Many disciplines and fields concern networks,
and the specific content of these disciplines vastly differs, but it is the focus on
structures and the interdependencies to which structures give rise that unites them.
1.2   ?
If we ever get to the point of charting a whole city or a whole nation, we would
have ... a picture of a vast solar system of intangible structures, powerfully
influencing conduct, as gravitation does in space. Such an invisible structure
underlies society and has its influence in determining the conduct of society as
a whole.
J. L. Moreno, New York Times, April 13, 1933
In the most general terms, a structure is an arrangement of related objects that
form a pattern. Patterns arise everywhere, but most remain largely unseen,
discernable only at a physical or conceptual distance. This is especially true of
social structures, which are patterns of interactions among people, such as
2 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthose envisioned in the preceding quote by Jacob Moreno, a founder of the
social network approach, or our envisioning of the coffee shop at the beginning
of this chapter. In trying to discern social structures, people are a bit like fish in
a school: each individual perhaps sees some fleeting aspects of structure, but
always from a partial, subjective viewpoint. A more objective structural under￾standing requires the aid of tools that allow us to see beyond our own senses
and cognitive limitations. As network researchers, we are in the business of
devising such tools for understanding the world. Unlike fish, people have
created schools of thought (forgive the pun) dedicated to the discovery, preser￾vation, and transmission of knowledge and tools for addressing these problems.
The network tradition is one such school of thought. It stands in contrast to
more traditional schools in the social and physical sciences that use tools focusing
on individual objects and their characteristics. Such individual-level approaches
have dominated entire disciplines in the social sciences, such as psychology and
economics. Even in the clearly less individual-centered discipline of sociology, the
primary tool for understanding behavior for decades was the survey. In seeking
generalizability, surveys draw random samples of individuals from populations,
thereby sacrificing most of the local structures of family, friends, coworkers,
neighborhoods, and communities (McPherson & Smith 2019). In random survey
designs, the connections among respondents violate statistical assumptions of
independent observations and must therefore be avoided. An independent,
random sample of persons is easy to collect and analyze, but this practice comes
at a cost: by divorcing the respondents from their social context, the concepts and
tools of traditional survey research treat each person as an isolated entity and
regard their characteristics as having reified meaning. Such data tend to yield
variable-based explanations for social phenomena in which individual character￾istics, like age and education, are treated as causal factors (Abbott 1988).
Network scholars see the interdependencies among actors (i.e., my behavior
is shaped by my relationships with others) not as a complication to avoid but
instead as the subject of inquiry. Within these networks – and by virtue of their
links and position – individual objects derive their meaning. A person is defined
by their unique position and trajectory across networks over time (Mead 1934).
By virtue of the network pattern, we also identify larger social constructs, like
groups and roles. A community’s internal process is in great part reflected by
the patterns of associations that define them. In effect, the network of relations
is a dualistic means of discerning what it means to be both individuals and
groups, and it regards their definition in a contextualized, situated light. The
exact objects of interest (e.g., people, animals, or airports) can vary widely
across substantive fields, as can the relations, or links, that connect them (e.g.,
friendship, kinship, advice, fighting, or grooming). The interconnectedness of
things makes them interdependent and reactive to one another. In short, when
observed over time, objects affecting one another through ties are systems.
In general, we can think of systems as falling under four main types, with
very different types of objects and links (Figure 1.1).
Introduction: Network Analysis Today 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.1 Types of systems. (a) Mechanical systems (machines): elements and their
interactions are designed, tightly coupled, and restricted to efficiently achieve a goal. The
electrical grid is a good example of a mechanical system. (b) Living systems (cells,
bodies, ecosystems): elements are subsystems with a degree of autonomy, with
communication and influence in multiple directions. These often include interactional
feedback loops and adaptive learning processes. (c) Social systems (groups or larger
collectivities): elements are often persons interrelated in patterns of exchange that reflect
group memberships and hierarchies. These systems can vary in their differentiation and
volatility. The Western European kinship system is a good example of a social system
that organizes gender roles, such as being an aunt to a focal individual. (d) Cultural
systems (interrelated meanings): elements are symbols that form semiotic systems
through cognitive and affective connections of similarity and difference. Networks of
semantic relations can be used to depict cultural systems, such as that organizing the
classification of animals as mammals.
4 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University PressTracing such systems can be conceptually and computationally challenging.
Researchers from an array of fields have formulated conceptual and analytic
tools to help us see structures and to understand their importance. In fact,
since the 1940s, the field of cybernetics has been an interdisciplinary attempt to
unite the sciences through the study of various systems. As with a variety of
other scientific endeavors, network analysis seeks to better understand the
underlying reality that our world is structured by overlapping and often
complex systems.
Sister
Ego
Aunt 1
Cousin 1
Cousin 4
Cousin 2 Cousin 3
Uncle 2 Male
Female
Aunt 2
Aunt 3
Mother Father
Uncle 1 Brother
(c)
Mammal Vertebrae
Cat
has
is a
Animal
is a
Fur
has
Whale
is a
Fish
is a
Water
lives in
lives in
(d)
FIGURE 1.1 (cont.)
Introduction: Network Analysis Today 5
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press1.3    
Contributions to the origins of network analysis have come from a variety of
other scientific domains with diverse analytical and theoretical orientations (see
Freeman 2004 for a detailed history). Involved fields included graph theory
(Euler 1736), sociology (Davis, Gardner, & Gardner 1941; Roethlisberger,
Dickson, & Wright 1947 [1939]; Simmel 1909), education (Almack 1922),
anthropology (Barnes 1954; Nadel 1957), and psychology (Heider 1946). In
the early period, most of the effort was placed on developing a set of concepts,
theories of tie formation (e.g., how individuals decide to become friends), and
exploratory research on small groups (N < 100). It is in this era that funda￾mental theories and concepts emerged. Many of these early concepts and
theories will be covered in this volume.
From the 1960s to the 1990s, the field witnessed a wide assortment of
concurrent interdisciplinary work on social networks (Scott 2002), mostly in
the disciplines of sociology, anthropology, and social psychology. Much of this
work focused on larger samples of persons and groups (N < 2,000), such as
clubs, schools, and organizations. This work used more complex methods to
analyze social systems than previous work. What became known as The Harvard
School is exemplary of this period and centered on the work and ideas of
Harrison White, a scholar with PhDs in physics and sociology. Academics
aligned with this school of thought created mathematical approaches to identify￾ing structurally equivalent persons in graphs (Lorrain & White 1971), techniques
for revealing network positions and their interrelations as role structures (White,
Boorman, & Breiger 1976), and approaches to the study of affiliation networks –
that is, ties that are based on belonging to the same groups or events (Breiger
1974). From this school emerged other scholars who established many of the
core concepts used in network analysis today; examples include Mark
Granovetter’s (1973) notions of weak ties and structural embeddedness (1985),
and Peter Blau’s (1977) notion of structural differentiation. Much of this work
extended the core ideas of the prior generation (e.g., Nadel 1957; Simmel 1909)
by exploring their mathematical elaboration and operationalization using math￾ematical models and statistical tools. What resulted was a fruitful period in social
network analysis that produced complex descriptive research on groups and their
relations and introduced hypothesis testing.
With the advance of computing and the popularization of the Internet in the
1990s, the size and availability of network information exploded, and scholars
from the fields of engineering and physics entered en masse. Social scientists now
share the stage in the development of network analysis with computer scientists
(e.g., Kleinberg 2000; Leskovec, Kleinberg, & Faloutsos 2005), physicists
(e.g., Barabási & Frangos 2002; Newman 2003; Watts & Strogatz 1998), and
statisticians (e.g., Handcock 2003; Snijders 2001). Network analysis now regu￾larly uses information on large, longitudinal graphs representative of entire
populations (N > 2,000) and entails information on multiple species and
6 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressphenomena – from humans to dolphins, from neurons to power grids. In
addition, network analyses now examine multiple types of relationships between
entities in the same network – from friendships to marriage, from advice-giving
to chain of command. Network analysis also continues to harness advances in
software, computational power, and analytical methods to encompass even more
expansive networks, such as social media interactions with even millions of
observations, and to look at different ways that people relate through texts,
shared activities or identities, or memberships in groups and organizations.
Network studies are also going deeper into individuals’ understandings of rela￾tionships through their perceptions of their own and others’ relations. Going
beyond descriptive accounts, today, a variety of structural hypotheses can be
tested, and issues of causation can be explored in the context of networks.
Moreover, decision processes (and algorithmic models thereof ) are becoming
central to our understanding of network formation (Jackson 2003, 2008). We
further discuss some of these frontiers in our concluding chapter (Chapter 16).
In sum, the history of network analysis has been marked by steady concep￾tual, empirical, and methodological expansion, and by a cross-disciplinary
focus on relational phenomena. However, in spite of the cross-disciplinary
focus, the field lacks clear integration of the many theories and analytical
methods now available to scholars. Network analysis is a pastiche of methods
that span different software implementations and different disciplinary views,
with no clear unifying perspective. Nearly every textbook on network analysis
has been written for field-specific audiences by methodologists or authors using
a field-specific set of tools and software packages. Moreover, there is a lack of
awareness across fields currently engaging in network research – exemplified in
particular by the tendency of hard scientists to overlook prior work in the social
sciences only to “rediscover” what social scientists learned long ago. Physicists
like Duncan Watts missed Granovetter’s notion of bridges and weak ties in his
concept of small worlds; the concept of Google’s PageRankTM rests on the same
metric as Bonacich’s notion of power centrality and the Friedkin–Johnsen
centrality measure (see Friedkin & Johnsen 2014); and even high-profile publi￾cations like Scientific American reproduce findings that social scientists identi￾fied decades prior (Paulos 2011; cf. Feld 1991).
We see the need for a more integrative approach to network analysis. The
potential for less redundant, more fruitful collaborations is possible if researchers
can integrate what increasingly appears to be a transdisciplinary perspective dis￾tinct from other scientific views. In our view, this integration requires recognition of
network analysis’s social scientific origins in theory and core empirical questions,
and how these remain relevant to present research agendas and methods.
1.4      - 
To clarify our motivations in writing this book, we begin with a clear statement
of how we see the aims of network analysis. In our view, network analysis aims
Introduction: Network Analysis Today 7
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressto characterize the pattern of transactions and relationships nested in the
natural and social world and to examine both their antecedents and conse￾quences. It entails understanding how associations form larger patterns and
arrangements and how those relationships shift over time. Network analysis is
grounded in systematic and purposeful data collection and analysis strategies,
relies heavily on the use of graphic visualizations, and employs a far-reaching
set of mathematical and computational models. Network analysis also encom￾passes efforts to understand how deeper structural principles shape relation￾ships and how the configurations of relationships influence phenomena of
interest, such as actor behaviors and attitudes.
The brief history we have related illustrates several clear divides in the
growth of a transdisciplinary perspective of network analysis. The earliest
period (from the 1930s to the 1950s) was denoted by mostly theoretical and
qualitative research exploring basic concepts and relating them to social theory.
The second period (from the 1960s to the 1980s) saw the emergence of a set of
metrics and methods further elaborating network properties and their vari￾ation. Most recently (since the 1990s), a period of massive increases in scale and
computing power has enabled network comparisons and hypothesis testing
about network formation to a degree not previously possible. Each age has
brought shifts in the type of scholar leading the charge – from theorist, to
exploratory social scientist, to hypothesis-testing physical scientists and engin￾eers – and a disconnect across what was learned in one era after the next.
In this text, we propose to integrate these views and to center the develop￾ment of network concepts and methods around core questions of network
structure and its formation. The key, we believe, is to tightly couple the
methodological treatment with substantive questions that a researcher may
hope to answer empirically. Such an approach is particularly important given
the increasing availability of network data. Social networks and network
thinking are more ubiquitous than ever because of the use of networking
platforms like LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter. Social networks
are present in the endless number of forums, conversational threads, and
streams of comments found on websites, online courses, and listservs.
Companies, too, are awash with digital records and transactional data repre￾sented in streaming relational databases that they are not sure how to use.
In short, today research is experiencing a new empirical watershed of digit￾ized communications, which has hastened the emergence of methodological
transactionalism – that is, the capacity to empirically capture and theoretically
explain interactions, which are frequently the traces of relations, observed at
various levels from face-to-face encounters to global flows of goods (Kitts &
Quintane 2020; McFarland, Diehl, & Rawlings 2011). For much of the mid- to
late twentieth century, the individual was a practical, reified source of infor￾mation collected through surveys. Today, that information comes from digit￾ized social transactions, and the streaming of relational information has made
the individual merely a point buffeted along within rivers of transactional data.
8 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University PressSo what is not to love for a social researcher? The trouble with much of the
contemporary research on networks is that novices learn a single method, acquire a
network data set (e.g., Twitter), and then without reflection apply the method to the
data. This approach, like using a hammer so ubiquitously that everything comes to
look like a nail, can often lead to poorly executed or inappropriate analyses given
the data and research questions. Most methods appeal to a particular question or
class of questions and therefore do not apply to every problem. In addition, the
problem that a method was meant to address can often have little relevance to the
focal phenomenon in question. For example, in studying who retweets whom, a
researcher may pick up a few network ideas of social influence that were based on
how individuals in small groups experience conformity pressures, using these to
“make sense” of thousands of tweets among total strangers for whom the original
network conformity pressures have almost no chance of actually operating. Thus,
there is often a gap between technical capabilities and more conceptual understand￾ings. And many treatments of current methods in network analysis have only
widened this gap by presenting methods with little conceptual context.
In contrast, this volume offers an integrative approach to network analysis
that will be useful for filling the gap between methodological sophistication and
theoretical and empirical purpose. For those scholars lacking technical capabil￾ities, this volume can fill the technical gap concerning how to do structural
analysis while helping to build and develop their theoretical agendas. For those
scholars with more advanced methodological skills, our approach can help to
bring these technical capabilities to bear on the broader theoretical landscape to
elucidate how, when, and why these methods are so vital. We will demonstrate
repeatedly that what students of network analysis often think is a methodo￾logical problem is really a theory problem in disguise.
Our main conviction is that social networks are the best possible bases for
illustrating intuitive examples that bring together theory and practice and thus
help integrate the transdisciplinary field of network analysis. All researchers,
regardless of their discipline, can relate to the social world – for example,
through the common experiences of attending schools and coming of age in
high school or its equivalent. Most people wanting to learn about networks
share a common set of understandings and experiences rooted in tangible, if not
often surprising, social network phenomena. The same cannot be said of the
many other types of networks – neural networks, gene networks, and so on –
that are the bases for other fields. These are vitally important areas of research,
but they cannot help unify the field of network scientists; only social networks
can. Social networks are historically the origins of the field, and we believe that
social scientists hold a key source of knowledge that can lead the field forward
into a more fully integrated transdisciplinary future.
1
1 And, as we discuss in Chapter 12, sociology in particular holds a unique position as source of
knowledge integration within the social sciences due to its central position and fairly weak
paradigm that allows it to assimilate findings from numerous fields and disciplines.
Introduction: Network Analysis Today 9
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press1.5   
All networks comprise interdependent parts. But how do we illustrate and
begin to analyze such interdependencies? A simple, yet powerful example of
interdependence is easy to find in most American high schools and adolescents’
onset to sexual encounters. Figure 1.2 shows a network of sexual encounters –
in this case, within a single high school in the Midwestern United States in the
1990s. Each dot is a student, and the connections represent one or more sexual
encounters over the year.
The structure matters. Individuals with the same number of partners vary in
important ways in their position in the larger structure. Some individuals are
indirectly connected to a large portion of the network, vulnerable to a sexually
transmitted disease (STD) spreading through the large branch-like structure
shown at the top of the image. Others are more isolated. Thus, individuals with
the same number of partners (i.e., exhibiting the same behavior) may have very
different risk profiles. If the researcher wants to understand how such a struc￾ture comes about (its etiology), how it affords students different opportunities
for sexual partners, and the implications for the transmission of (for example)
STDs, then the overall connectivity of the structure and each individual’s
position within that structure are of vital interest. The structure looks like a
spanning tree because these youths mainly limited themselves to one or two
Male
12 9
63
2
Female
FIGURE 1.2 High school sexual relations network (Bearman, Moody, & Stovel 2004)
10 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressromantic partners per year, mostly within the same school context. Some
students more central to the network have greater access to other partners
and are key players in the potential transmission of an STD within the school
sex network. Clearly, taking these individuals and relationships out of context
would lead to the omission of this vital information.
These structural principles can extend to other sorts of actors, such as
countries. Figure 1.3 offers an illustration using three countries instead of
people. The main question is whether Country C will attack Country B. From
a network perspective, the answer depends not simply on the characteristics of
Country C (e.g., its gross domestic product [GDP], military history, and party
in power) but also on its relationship with Country A and the relationship
between Country A and Country B. As shown in panel (b), Country C is in fact
embedded in a larger system of relations: Country C is in a coalition with
Country A, which in turn has attacked Country B. This means that Country
C is allied with a country (A) that has gone to war with Country B. This may
force Country C itself into a conflict with Country B (as an ally of Country A)
even if B and C have no direct dispute with each other. In short, an enemy of a
Country A
Country C
Country B
Will Country C attack Country B?
That depends on the relationship
between A and C
and A and B. 
Attack
Coalition
?
Country A
Country C
Country B
? Will Country C attack Country B?
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.3 Structural forces in international relations
Introduction: Network Analysis Today 11
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfriend is an enemy. The behavior of Country C would be difficult to explain if
one considers each country in isolation, as in panel (a).
Hopefully, these brief examples and our discussion leading up to them has
convinced you that structure matters and that social networks offer intuitive
ways to begin to think about structures more broadly. But how to actually
begin seeing and analyzing structures is no simple task and requires a set
of tools.
1.6       
How should a researcher go about answering network-based questions? While
there are many options, this book uses the R statistical programming language
and platform to practically walk through the application of network analysis
(R Core Team 2020).
2 We believe that R provides the best and most compre￾hensive set of tools, and becoming competent in this programming environment
presents the fewest barriers for those with less coding experience. R is ideal, in
part, because it avoids many of the drawbacks of other options, particularly
those based on drop-down menus (i.e., point-and-click logic). Although these
other packages often have a gently sloped learning curve, they make it difficult
to custom-tailor the analysis to the data and research question under consider￾ation. More importantly, they are not designed for replicability or extensibility.
Accomplishing desired data transformations and routines to replicate analysis
with these other packages often requires hacks involving a complicated give￾and-take between a spreadsheet editor and other graphical user interface tools.
This process is inefficient and error prone, and it can make diagnosing errors
difficult. Moreover, these software packages are mostly stand-alone, closed￾source applications, which means that building in additional functionality and
creating methodological innovations are difficult, if not impossible.
In contrast, R has a vast array of powerful scripting functionality, excep￾tional visualization capabilities, and thousands of libraries to facilitate data
management and statistical analysis. R excels in facilitating the development of
new methods and approaches relative to other programming languages, while
making it easy for an advanced R programmer to write interfaces to high￾performance tools available in compiled languages, such as C and Java. It also
interfaces with other environments (notably, Python), which is convenient for
scientists and engineers who have already invested in those programming
languages. Although no convention is a perfect solution, R has the added
advantage of being shareware, both free to the user and open to improvements
on existing techniques as well as the incorporation of techniques at the cutting
2 For an excellent introduction to exploratory network analysis with the stand-alone program
Pajek, we strongly recommend De Nooy, Mrvar, and Batagelj (2018).
12 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressedge. R also allows access to myriad other statistical methods that many
network researchers will likely want to draw on in their analyses.
Obviously, no single and perfect tool exists for performing network analysis.
The tutorials we offer as accompaniments to the following chapters are meant
to be adaptable to a number of research interests and to set the practical
foundation for the conceptual material we present in respective chapters. We
believe that having a common research tool such as R is also a basis for
integrating the field as researchers across disciplines and for building a shared
language and repository for generic structural analyses.
1.7      ’ 
This book is the result of a collaboration among four social network scholars
with distinct but overlapping areas of expertise. Rawlings has developed a
number of ways to interrelate social structures with mental structures (e.g.,
attitudes, beliefs, tastes) using social network theories and methods. Smith has
published work on social networks and health, methodological issues in net￾work sampling and missing data, and has extensive experience in developing
network methods in R. Both Moody and McFarland have published extensively
on social networks, with particular strengths in building tools for better under￾standing dynamic social networks. Moody has additional strengths in social
diffusion models and cohesion. McFarland has applied network methods
extensively in educational and organizational settings. Together, the four of
us have more than sixty combined years of experience teaching social network
analysis at the undergraduate and graduate levels. We have sought to distill that
collective experience into this volume.
The book can be many things for many different people. It is primarily
offered as a research tutorial, offering students the opportunity to develop
and answer questions that exemplary social network scholars ask when study￾ing social phenomena. The book’s orientation is to introduce methods of social
network analysis in a theoretically grounded fashion; it does not cover math￾ematical modeling and simulation except when necessary. We hope to take the
reader through every step necessary to answer core questions and to learn how
to evaluate and interpret empirical results. The material can be tailored for
more general or specific goals. For the network scholar who is already familiar
with network theory and methods but wants to become more proficient at R,
the research tutorials afford an opportunity to move firmly into this new
programming environment in a way that is more theoretically grounded than
many other texts. Instructors of graduate or undergraduate courses might rely
on the book in its entirety or instead choose portions that are appropriate to
cover conceptual and empirical applications or laboratory work as the
course requires.
Each chapter contains several elements: (1) identify core research questions; (2)
relate the influential texts and their concerns bearing on these questions;
Introduction: Network Analysis Today 13
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press(3) postulate an appropriate plan of analysis; (4) choose the appropriate methods
(and compare them); and (5) interpret the results, their quality, and how to present
them as findings. The text offers concrete examples – many from contexts most
readers have experienced firsthand (e.g., classrooms) – with real data. The tutorials
are available on the web at: https://inarwhal.github.io/NetworkAnalysisR-book/.
We divide the book into three main sections. Part I focuses on structural
thinking, introducing the main concepts of network analysis, identifying the
key visual and mathematical abstractions that form its core, and discussing issues
of data collection. Parts II and III cover two, often interrelated, analytic goals of
network analysis. The first, presented in Part II, concerns using a number of
exploratory techniques to see structures at various levels and degrees of abstrac￾tion. In particular, we help the reader develop connectionist and positional
perspectives on network structures. Part III concerns making structural predic￾tions using a variety of more dynamic, longitudinal, and explanatory models.
No textbook can cover every method, and we have made some painful but
necessary omissions. We therefore end each chapter, except for the conclusion,
with a short list of works that will expand on some of the core ideas developed
in the chapter, either by building depth or extending to detailed areas that are
beyond the scope of the chapter itself. The universe of works we could include
is vast, so any such lists are necessarily incomplete and idiosyncratic, but we
hope these serve as useful jumping-off points for readers. In addition, given the
rapid development of the field, it is likely that new techniques are currently
being developed that could surely join those presented in the final sections of
Part III. We hope to include such exciting new work in future editions.
  
Overviews and Introductions. The following works are recommended as general intro￾ductory works that cover history, theory, and applications.
Barabási, Albert-László. 2002. Linked: The New Science of Networks, Cambridge MA:
Perseus Press. (Provides an interesting systems-science foil for social science
approaches. Barabasi, Watts, and Newman are key figures in the late 1990s rise
of “network science” as distinct from social network analysis. See also Watts 2003;
Newman 2018.)
Butts, Carter T. 2009. “Revisiting the Foundations of Network Analysis.” Science 325:
414. (A critical summary of the idea that all connected systems are “a network,” and
highlights the need to tailor approaches to the complexities of empirical settings.)
Easly, David, and Jon Kleinberg. 2010. Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning
about a Highly Connected World. New York: Cambridge University Press. (An
overview introduction with a focus on network science approaches to economic and
financial questions.)
Freeman, Linton C. 2004. The Development of Social Network Analysis: A Study in the
Sociology of Science. Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: Empirical Press.
14 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press(Provides a rich history of the development of social network analysis as a substan￾tive discipline.)
Jackson, Matthew O. 2008. Social and Economic Networks. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press. (Brings economic modeling/theory to networks.)
Kadushin, Charles. 2011. Understanding Social Networks: Theories, Concepts and
Findings. New York: Oxford University Press. (A substantive introduction to
structural theories of social life, with clear applications. The “ten master ideas”
chapter, in particular, provides a succinct summary of why networks are funda￾mental to understanding social processes.)
Light, Ryan, and James Moody. 2020. The Oxford Handbook of Social Networks. New
York: Oxford University Press. (A broad overview covering multiple contemporary
topics by field experts.)
Lin, Nan. 2002. Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action. New York:
Cambridge University Press. (Lin’s work illustrates how social connections and
social relations can be a key resource.)
Watts, Duncan J. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. New York,
Norton. (A substantive introduction to the network science approach. See also
Barabási 2002; Newman 2018.)
Wellman, Barry. 1988. “Structural Analysis: From Method and Metaphor to Theory
and Substance.” In Social Structures: A Network Approach, edited by Barry
Wellman and S. D. Berkowitz. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (A nice
introduction to the what and why of networks.)
Key Historical Works. The field has evolved over the last 100 years with touchstone
works that are guideposts for much of what drives our contemporary understanding of
network theory. This list is far from complete and chosen mainly to represent the
substantive breadth of foundational approaches rather than completeness.
Baker, Wayne. 1984. “The Social Structure of a National Securities Market.” American
Journal of Sociology 89: 775–811. (An exemplar of how structural realities under￾mine pure market assumptions. A classic work linking networks to economic
sociology.)
Coleman, James S. 1961. The Adolescent Society. New York: Free Press. (Demonstrated
that adolescent networks and schools worked as largely self-contained social
systems characterized by social networks. See also Hollingshead 1949.)
Davis, James A. 1963. “Structural Balance, Mechanical Solidarity, and Interpersonal
Relations.” American Journal of Sociology 68: 444–62. (The set of papers by Davis,
Lienhardt, and Holland translated models for social balance to directed social
relations and set the stage for much of the statistical modeling and network testing
tradition to come. See also Davis 1970; Holland & Leinhardt 1970.)
1970. “Clustering and Hierarchy in Interpersonal Relations: Testing Two Graph
Theoretical Models on 742 Sociomatrices.” American Sociological Review 35:
843–51. (See the note for Davis 1963.)
Fischer, Claude. 1982. To Dwell among Friends. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(An early application of ego-network analysis providing detailed description of
social embeddedness across the urban–rural continuum.)
Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of
Sociology 78: 1360–80. (Classic paper showing that unique, nonredundant
Introduction: Network Analysis Today 15
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinformation travels through weak ties; in contrast to much prior work that focused
network research only on strong durable ties.)
1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. (A deep investigation into how people use their networks to obtain hard-to￾find resources; introduced the importance of weak ties in social capital. See also Lee
1969.)
Holland, Paul W., and Samuel Leinhardt. 1970. “A Method for Detecting Structure in
Sociometric Data.” American Journal of Sociology 76: 492–513. (See the note for
Davis 1963.)
Hollingshead, August. 1949. Elmtown’s Youth: The Impact of Social Classes on
Adolescents. New York: John Wiley. (See the note for Coleman 1961.)
Lee, Nancy Howell. 1969. The Search for an Abortionist. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. (See the note for Granovetter 1974.)
Moreno, Jacob L. 1953 [1934]. Who Shall Survive? A New Approach to the Problem of
Human Interrelations. New York: Beacon Press. (Arguably the foundation of
sociometric data collection, visualization, and analysis. Moreno was also instru￾mental in founding Sociometry, which published lovely early case studies on organ￾izational, community, and family networks.)
Roethlisberger, Fritz Jules, William John Dickson and Harold A. Wright. 1947 [1939].
Management and the Worker: An Account of a Research Program Conducted by
the Western Electric Company, Hawthorne Works, Chicago. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. (A classic study of workers engaged in different activities
and their relation to friendship and cliques.)
White, Harrison. 1963. Anatomy of Kinship. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. (This
work lays the foundation for using compound social relations as representations of
roles. This forms the roots of all the following work on blockmodeling.)
General Methods Texts
Borgatti, Stephen P., Martin G. Everett, and Jeffrey C. Johnson. 2018. Analyzing Social
Networks. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Press. (Clear and concise methods text for
applied network analysis; extended in 2022 in collaboration with Filip Agneessens
to include direct instruction in R.)
Knoke, David, and Song Yang. 2021. Social Network Analysis, 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage. (The third edition of Knoke’s text [the first was in 1982], each with
different collaborators. An excellent quick-start guide to applied network analysis.)
Newman, Mark E. J. 2018. Networks. New York: Oxford University Press. (Core
network science text, particularly good for mathematical details of network distri￾butions. See also Barabási 2002; Watts 2003.)
Scott, John. 2012. Social Network Analysis, 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. (This
has been the quick go-to reference text since its first edition in 1991.)
Wasserman, Stanley, and Katherine Faust. 1994. Social Network Analysis. New York:
Cambridge University Press. (The “Big Red Book” that sits on all our shelves;
provides an encyclopedic history of the field and foundational methods works.
Many of us keep copies in each of our offices.)
16 Introduction: Network Analysis Today
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press 
THINKING STRUCTURALLY
Network analysis formalizes the study of relationships, and social network
analysis pertains to relationships among individuals, groups, or other social
entities. While an assortment of social network approaches exists, greater
integration is needed to guide our efforts. In this section, we first outline our
theoretical integration based on (1) describing social structures and (2) pursu￾ing strategies for better understanding social structures within a causal frame￾work. We then cover in more detail how network analysis formalizes the
conceptualization, data collection, and visualization of relational data.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.002 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press2
What Is Social Structure?
The primary aim of social network analysis is building and evaluating theories
of social structure – that is, enduring patterns of human interaction and ways of
thinking about and organizing human groups. The sheer complexity of social
structure prevents encapsulation in any single model, and this complexity is
compounded as we incorporate cultural beliefs and social expectations in
addition to interactions. Networks link actors to one another in systems, raising
tricky questions about the locus of control and activity, particularly regarding
the extent to which people are active agents or passive puppets (to put it
bluntly) of social structure. While acknowledging deep and ultimately unsettled
issues in the field, we provide readers with an overarching though still evolving
theoretical account of social structure that can guide both inductive and
deductive social network research and allow plug-in points for different per￾spectives on agency, culture, and constraint.
2.1  :  
 
Research often begins with imagination. One might have an interesting idea
about how things work in the world that goes beyond current assumptions.
One is sometimes right, but one is often wrong. And realizing when and how
one is right or wrong often requires insights from others working on similar
problems. Research therefore builds on the wisdom and cumulative efforts of
countless individuals because reality is often hidden and far too complex for
any one of us to see on our own. In fact, left to our own mental devices, we are
likely to hold onto bad ideas in the hope that our cherished imagination of
something interesting will eventually prove true. Thus, research can be defined
as the collective process of rendering some aspect of reality into data and then
processing those data into useful information (i.e., knowledge).
19
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressTheory is present at all stages of the research process. When we observe
phenomena, we do so through the lens of established research traditions and
paradigms of thought. These traditions entail their own language and ontology
as well as distinct epistemology or means of sense-making and inference. These
theories act like frameworks of interpretation, leading researchers to observe
certain aspects of a phenomenon over others. Even highly inductive research is
guided by sensitizing concepts (i.e., theoretically informed ideas) that select on
certain social aspects of reality over others. Likewise, theoretical perspectives
guide the choice of certain data collection tools. For example, as we discussed in
the previous chapter, methodological individualism led researchers to collect
individual-level responses to survey questions and interviews, and these became
state-of-the-art tools for data collection in the 1940s. Social network theory,
however, shifts the focus to relations, and it is aided by a different set of data
collection tools that nudge researchers closer to the reality of the interdependen￾cies among objects. The focus on relationships guides the researcher to find data
in transactions, affiliations, links, and comparisons across objects. In this way,
theories lead us to discover and collect certain forms of data from social reality.
Data are merely traces and representations of social reality guided by theory.
Transforming these data into useful information is also guided by theory. For
example, in social psychology, transforming self-reported feelings into a meas￾ure of self-esteem presumes a theory of self-esteem and some latent mental
mechanism that enables those sentiments to work together. The same holds for
social network theory. It sensitizes researchers first to collecting data on the
interrelation of objects and then to identifying processes and patterns in those
relations. These processes and patterns become information that is interrelated
into larger, holistic understandings about social structures. For example, the
social network theory linking social proximity to feelings of intimacy
entails collecting reports on the strength of personal ties and measuring the
social distances between persons, and then ascertaining the incidence of
stronger interpersonal affect with social proximity. As depicted in Figure 2.1,
researchers use theories to identify the observations or data they collect, the
ideational constructs and measures derived from them, and how the
Reality Data
Unstructured
Data
Information
Methods and
Processing
Techniques
Knowledge
Theory and
Understanding
FIGURE 2.1 Schematic of rendering reality into knowledge
20 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrelationships contained in these pieces of information are useful for some
broader understanding.
Some social realities and phenomena are more tractable with certain kinds of
data and seem best suited to particular constructs and measures, which in turn
are best suited to certain methods and theories. Of course, the reverse can be
true: one’s preconceived knowledge and theories determine one’s choice of
methods, which can determine the constructs one builds and in turn shape the
data one collects and the social reality one observes. The point is to not be naïve
about this process of translation but instead to enter it with eyes wide open to
make the most reasonable decisions possible at each juncture. Consider
whether you are biased in perspective and weigh alternative data, measures,
methods, and explanations. Consider the phenomenon and whether you are
representing it fairly or whether your training guides what you see (Hollis
1994).
We argue that a social network approach often renders a more accurate
representation of social reality than other social scientific approaches because it
recognizes the fundamentally interdependent nature of social life: to be social
means to be connected to others (Blau 1977). This is not to say that one method
supplants all; rather, a reflexive, smart analyst must step back and ask, What
representation of this reality is most suited? What constructs and alternative
forms are best suited to these data? And what methods and explanations –
again, including alternatives – are most relevant? This approach also highlights
a core distinction between building understanding and mere prediction (see
Turco & Zuckerman 2017; Watts 2014). Prediction alone is insufficient for
most social science questions; the researcher simultaneously seeks description
and explanation – that is, understanding. Understanding centers on linking
theory, data, and prediction in a way that recognizes their mutual information.
The purpose of this chapter is therefore to begin to orient the reader’s imagin￾ation toward a view of social structure that will help guide these research
efforts.
2.2  :     
Social network scholars seek to identify and understand patterns in relations
between actors. This patterning is called social structure when it is stable
enough to be reproduced and recognized via some ostensive label, such as
“friendship,” “marriage,” or “trade.” Social structure is at once a pattern of
interactions in the world and a set of schemas (simplified mental abstractions)
for recognizing and enacting such interactions.
Imagine someone who has never seen a classroom. How would they make
sense of its complex set of interactions? A bell rings; individuals (generally
younger ones) scurry toward desks oriented in the same direction, and often
choose seats near the same people each time; and at last, a single individual
(generally an older one) enters and moves to the front of the class to speak, as
What Is Social Structure? 21
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthose who are seated start to settle. As Berger and Luckmann (1966) describe it,
the social construction of reality involves individuals seamlessly engaging in a
process of externalization (relating), objectification (naming), and internaliza￾tion (learning) of structures. The social structure of the classroom is therefore
one that exists in schematic form in the minds of the individuals via roles and
relations. But the performance of these roles and relations is contingent on how
individuals coordinate their interactions to more or less successfully cue and
enact those schemas. The result might be a loose performance of roles with
much humor in one class and a strict script with lots of private grumbling in
another. Both settings share a structural semblance of being classrooms in terms
of how people interact, but they vary in the specific instantiations.
But how can one begin to see and understand such a structure? Learning
how to do social network analysis is first and foremost about learning to have
theoretically guided hunches and the hunger to solve puzzles about social
structure – that is, an informed social-structural imagination. By the time of
data collection, the researcher has already engaged in some conceptualization
of social structure. Consider the networks in Figure 2.2, all taken from the same
single class in a high school (Bender-deMoll & McFarland 2006). Ties depicted
in black are task-related interactions, blue ties are sociable interactions, and red
ones are conflictual ones. Circles are girls, and squares are boys. Yellow squares
are male teachers, and the other nodes are students. Notably, the class has two
teachers: one lead teacher and a volunteer.
Structure begins to emerge as interactions aggregate over larger chunks of
time. At one-minute intervals, only sequences of dyads are observed.
FIGURE 2.2 Networks from slices of interactions using classroom observation data
(Bender-deMoll & McFarland 2006)
22 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressAggregating these interactions over a wider time span of five-minute intervals
reveals patterned relations reflective of activity structures and the speaker roles
adopted to accomplish them. For example, on the left side of the figure,
consistent star structures are reflective of a teacher repeatedly emitting broad￾casts, small blue dyads reflect side socializing, and black dyads reflect clarifica￾tion efforts. Moving left to right in the figure, some students grow closer to the
teacher. These are instances of recitation in which a teacher uses broadcasts to
demonstrate and explain things but then calls on particular students for
question–answer sequences. Moving further to the right, some students assume
a broadcasting position, reflecting their broadcasting information to the class,
such as when they report out or give a speech. And to the far right of the figure
are clustered social and task interactions reflective of free time and group work
activities. When interactions are aggregated to ten minutes, one begins to see
general activity structures, not just momentary ones and their instantiation. The
classroom is characterized by a contentious lecture (with a student challenger),
a “group work” instructional format, and then a collaborative group structure.
If one aggregates to a typical class period of thirty-five minutes, distinct activ￾ities are melded into one graph revealing the daily social structure, as an
abstraction, for a classroom: the teacher is in the center, most students and
another volunteer teacher are clustered around the teacher (some via social and
others via task interactions), and some peers are at the periphery.
Such an aggregated image of a micro-level social structure reflects what the
teacher might regard as an interactome, a term used in biology to refer to the
entire set of molecular interactions in a particular cell. Here, one can think of an
interactome as the manifest social structure and the typical associations among
setting members. Extending this notion further afield to many classrooms, one
can abstract out social roles and styles, such as central teachers, social and task￾oriented students, and isolates. These schemas can be cued in interaction,
framing expectations, and influence ensuing social interaction. They can also
fail to come about, reflecting the processual and contingent nature of social
structure. None of this structure would be visible from a random survey of
students and teachers.
Still, such snapshots of social structure leave open questions – for example,
what drives this structuring at each level? This question is much more theoretical
than methodological. A variety of factors can establish opportunities and models
for the observed interactions. It may be that persistent interactions follow expect￾ations of preexisting friendships and formal roles (teacher–student), differenti￾ated and developed styles of interaction (e.g., “nerds” in tasks, “jokers” in social
antics), or the opportunities afforded by proximate seating or shared histories
(other classes and clubs), attributes (boys vs. girls), and attitudes (liking of class).
In prior forms of structuralism, researchers relied on the logic of functionalism to
explain observed structures – that is, they argued that resultant social structure
served the deeply held social purposes of their members (generally some need for
social stability and group cohesion) and that the structure evolved to fulfill these
What Is Social Structure? 23
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Presspurposes in presumably optimal ways. Sociology as a discipline and social
network research as a subfield have largely rejected structural-functionalist
explanations as overly speculative and untestable, leaving us to account for
structures in more falsifiable ways involving both endogenous and exogenous
forces, which we will cover in detail in this book.
Network analysts are interested in studying the process of structuring and
how structural variation arises. But how does one gather and analyze suitable
data on such a complex and fluid reality? The answer is aptly illustrated by the
parable of the three blind men and the elephant: while each man feeling a
different part of the elephant believes it to be a different object (the trunk a
snake, the leg a tree, the ear a fan), the men are able to communicate and put
their stories together to form a more developed representation of social reality.
Knowing something about social structure entails thousands of partial truths
discovered by researchers making strategic trade-offs in targeting their efforts.
But, once again, when researchers studying the same reality communicate and
learn from one another, they get closer to a shared, replicable, and sustained
notion of reality.
This book is, in part, an attempt to help consolidate these efforts to better
guide the strategic directions researchers take. Any attempt to draw a picture of
the current understanding of the “elephant” of social structure is bound to be
both complicated and incomplete. Why would one need social network analysis
if social structures were so easily seen? In the following, we provide a heuristic
for seeing social structures and broad research agendas for making structural
predictions. In the remaining chapters of Part I, we outline the basic tools for
gathering and visualizing relational data. In Parts II and III, we outline in
greater detail the inductive and predictive methods that are frequently involved
in the rendering of these data into knowledge.
2.3   
The core motivation of social network analysis from its inception was addressing
the question, If one could see social structure, what would it look like? Although
no single image can capture social structure, we revisit a classic attempt by Hinde
(1976), reproduced and adapted in Figure 2.3, which shows several important
aspects of social structure and can help focus future efforts by shaping research
questions and research designs. Hinde was a primate ethologist (Jane Goodall’s
advisor, in fact). As such, he spent a lot of time observing primate interactions
and trying to identify generalizable patterns and potential mechanisms shaping
primate social structures. The figure is adapted from his effort to encapsulate the
reality of social structure as both interactions among individuals and schemas or
types of relations and mechanisms, which in turn compound into groups com￾prising different types of positions among individuals.
Although Hinde’s model concerned troops of chimpanzees, he was able to
abstract to more generalizable features of social structures. We adapt Hinde’s
24 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressview to apply to the social structure within a high school classroom rather than
among a troop of apes (although, technically speaking, a classroom is com￾posed of a group of apes). For our purposes, the figure captures two key aspects
of rendering any social structure into knowledge: (1) the conceptual degree of
abstraction and (2) the empirical level of abstraction. Moving from the left to
the right, one engages in a greater amount of conceptual abstraction – that is,
Middle School
Supporting
Friend Role
Socializing
Instructing
Opportunity
Structures
Institution of School
jk Friendship
Relation
ij Student-Teacher
Relation
High School
Classroom
Social Structure Classroom x’s
Social Structure
Classroom z’s
Social Structure Cultural
Meanings
Teacher￾Student
Role
j supports k
j socializes
with k
i instructs j
i advises j
j supporting k
j socializing with
k
i instructing j
i advising j
Sports Team q’s
Social Structure
i evaluating j
i evaluates j
Evaluating
Advising
Role Frame
Types of Ties
Relational Events
Relational Frame
FIGURE 2.3 Schematic of social structure (adapted from Hinde 1976)
What Is Social Structure? 25
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfrom concrete instances of individuals interacting in particular ways (relational
events) to abstract schemas of that interaction (types of social ties). Moving
from bottom to top, one compounds abstractions to higher-order levels of
structure – that is, from micro-interactions to role relations to groups to
macro-institutions.
We use Hinde’s image as the basis for depicting the social structure of a high
school. Here, one sees concrete relational events between individuals occurring
in the school as the base unit on the lower-left side of the figure. At the level of
concrete interactions, one sees relational events specific to moments where i
advises, instructs, and evaluates j. These relational events share a semblance
and point to the ways that i and j relate with each other – that is, more general
ways that i advises, instructs, and evaluates j. Moving to greater abstraction,
one can see that these relation-specific instantiations of tie types resemble one
another across pairs of individuals and reflect different types of ties (advising,
instructing, and evaluating). Each move to the right entails further generaliza￾tion and abstraction.
Moving upward in the figure, types of ij ties can come to reflect a general ij
relation – say, how Craig and Jim usually relate to one another. Relation￾specific types of ties combine in a patterned way to characterize other rela￾tions and their expectations – say, how Jim and Dan usually relate. These
built-up histories for specific relationships establish relational expectations
or relational frames. If we consider the similarities across these relationships,
we start to see more general social roles like that of friends or teacher–
student roles. Roles emerge from patterns of consistent social actions origin￾ating from and pointing toward actors (Nadel 1957). These patterns of
consistent role relations often stem from following and conforming to insti￾tutionalized role frames.
To this point, we have drawn on Hinde’s depiction of the most elemental
unit of relational events and, through recognition of events’ shared resem￾blance, identified types of ties. We have then aggregated these types of ties
across particular pairs of individuals to characterize their particular relation￾ships. And from there, a recognition of shared resemblance across particular
relationships, has emerged general role relations. From here, we can aggregate
again into larger configurations of social structure, such as the structure of a
particular group or type of group and a society and even a type of society. If we
observe and interrelate the set of relations within a context such as a specific
classroom (say, classroom x or z), we come to see the social structure of those
social networks. At an even higher level of abstraction – having observed many
different classrooms with varying ages, compositions, seating, and activities –
we may come to see classrooms sharing another family resemblance, mostly
entailing centralized teachers in task types of interactions with students and
students clustering in friendships and social types of interactions with one
another.
26 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressMoving out of the classroom, but remaining in the same building, one then
observes other individuals: in offices sorting papers, in kitchens making food, in
sterile rooms taking sick adolescents’ temperatures, and so on. Looking outside
the window, perhaps one sees a sports team wearing uniforms that bear the
name on the school building and engaging in activities involving an entirely
separate set of agonistic interactions. All of these could be appended to
Figure 2.3 as separate descending branches with their own relational events,
relationships, roles, and role structures, as well as their accompanying schemas
of expectation. Finally, one might then fly across the world, walk into a village
building, and see children and adults arranged and interacting in similar ways
to what one observed in the United States. At the highest level of abstraction,
one may begin to see an institution: the supra-level of organization that reflects
the deep cultural structure of school itself.
Rendering knowledge from snapshots of relating requires theory and a
developed understanding of social structuration processes. Social structures
are at once interactional, relational, and institutional requiring researchers to
make choices about when, where, how, and why they gather data and render
reality into knowledge. Otherwise, researchers may observe the same social
reality of a classroom but be attuned to very different processes shaping that
social structure. In what follows, we offer some of the many ways that social
network researchers begin to make sense of social realities and usefully
represent them.
2.3.1 Seeing Structure in Interactions
Once again, in contrast to much of sociology, which draws on reifications of
social structures in the form of self-reports or records of enduring patterns of
activity, social network analysis has been said to extend from an “anti-categorical
imperative” (Emirbayer & Goodwin 1994) – that is, it seeks to move beyond the
use of prescribed categories such as age, party membership, race, class, or gender
as sufficient explanations of what motivates thought and action. Instead, social
network analysis seeks to examine individuals’ attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors
through the lens of structures of interactions and relations (of which the afore￾mentioned categories are simplified proxies or relational schemas). Beginning at
the most fundamental level of individuals interacting and relating with one
another, some scholars are interested in how face-to-face and moment-by￾moment data can reveal structure, as well as how actors are motivated in some
way to use that structure as a resource for pursuing various interests. Micro￾sociology and scholars studying talk-in-interaction have repeatedly shown how
social reality is an ongoing accomplishment in the form and content of interaction
(e.g., Schegloff 2007). Thus, some network researchers train their eye on the
lower-left quadrant of Hinde’s image, rendering networks through actual
moments of talk and interaction.
What Is Social Structure? 27
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressAt the level of ongoing activity, social structure can be driven by interaction
moves – that is, how individuals refer to themselves and others, as well as to the
roles and rules within institutions. Interactions both form and reveal relation￾ships: piggybacking statements and reciprocal turns may form friendships,
changing topics and usurping turns may generate animosity, and commencing
sequences may generate status (Gibson 2012; Heritage & Raymond 2005;
McFarland, Jurafsky, & Rawlings 2013). For other researchers, preexisting
relationships guide interactions. A classroom, for example, is composed of
particular friendships, proximate seating, and specific activity structures that
bring persons into relation – all of which motivate certain forms of interaction
(e.g., reciprocation) and establish social expectations. These relational arrange￾ments can give a class its particular style and ethos. For yet other scholars,
institutionalized roles and norms define expectations, determining what rela￾tions and activities are salient, which in turn defines what types of interactions
individuals are likely to employ in a given setting. Of course, these levels of
concern and reference need not align in reality: individuals may adopt inter￾action moves that run counter to relations and institutional roles, such as when
observing classroom resistance. And such mismatches of preexisting norms and
ongoing behaviors can lead to gradual and long-term changes in social struc￾tures (McFarland 2001).
2.3.2 Seeing Structure in Relationships
Much of social network analysis is concerned with enduring relations rather
than surface-level moments, although (as we will discuss in several places
in this book) the techniques and approaches are amenable to modeling real￾time interaction data (Moody, McFarland, & Bender-deMoll 2005). The
interpolation from fluid to structural, however, is no small task. One knows
a relationship when one sees it, but how the researcher operationalizes a
relationship is already full of consequence. One generally has to infer a
relationship from interactions, but how much of an actor’s mental model of
what is going on in a given interaction is needed? What types of indicators
best capture the existence of a tie? A reflection on what relationships are and
what it means to relate (in common-sense terms) quickly reveals relationships
to be perceived, enacted, emotionally experienced, and socially confirmed;
relationships have cognitive, behavioral, affective, and interpersonal aspects
(see Bandelj 2012; Fuhse 2015).
 The cognitive aspect of a relationship is the relational framework that
one perceives the relationship to be in or wants to form. For example,
many relationships are perceived to be friendships, acquaintanceships,
or dating relations, and each entails different social expectations and
obligations.
28 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press The behavioral aspect of a relationship is observed in social signals, or the
actions and expressions we exhibit in interactions. It is seldom enough for
dyads to believe they are friends; they must also interact in ways that support
their partners and affirm the friendship.
 Relationships also have an affective aspect, which concerns feelings or
sentiments. In the case of strong ties like friendship or romance, participants
feel strong positive sentiments toward one another and value the relation￾ship. This ensures that relational obligations will be preserved even when the
alter is absent.
 Last, a relationship rests on interpersonal aspects of agreement across per￾sons as to what relational framings are believed, what enactments are
observed, and what interpersonal sentiments are held. When cognitive,
behavioral, and affective aspects of ties are reciprocated and socially consist￾ent across persons in a wider context, the relationship is no longer privately
held, but is socially confirmed.
Take, for example, relationships in a high school. Youth may believe
and report they are friends (as opposed to dating), affirm the relationship
by showing support and spending time together, actually like one another
and value their relationship, and come to have a mutual sense of these
relational beliefs, observations, and sentiments. However, adolescence
is rife with change, and all too often youth are uncertain about their
relationships. Consider the following interaction, taken from written notes
passed between students in a high school classroom (a relic of a pre–cell
phone era):
[Meg]
Do you know Steven Johanson? Alot of people think he’s a geek, I guess. But he likes me
and he’s so nice. We talk on the phone alot and I went over to his house last night.
Nothin’ happened but he is really nice and his family is nice, and he has a huge house
and a pool. (Asshole! J/K) His sister is pretty, she doesn’t look 12 ½. She looks like she
should be in 9th grade. A lot of people told me not to worry about what other people
think. I asked him to TWIRP [“The Woman Is Required to Pay”-Dance] (kind of). I
still have to figure out what’s happening. I don’t know what we’d do or where we’d go
or who with. You’re probably thinking I’m crazy to go out with Steven, I hope you
don’t think he’s a big nerd cuz I know he’s not super popular or anything, but not alot
of people really know him, and once you get to know him, he’s super nice. Anyway,
better go. W/B very soon.
[Laura]
I know Steven pretty well, he’s a great guy. I think it would be awesome if you 2 went to
TWIRP. He is just shy, not a big nerd, Sarah [his sister] is really pretty, we play tennis
together.
What Is Social Structure? 29
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe conversation is deeply concerned with social structure. Figure 2.4 depicts
the social structure and various relational uncertainties being negotiated through
this written exchange (see McFarland & Wolff 2022). Meg reports that Steven
likes her and that he is so nice – a reciprocal sentiment. She also reports that they
are going to a dance together – a behavioral signal of them dating. While she does
not frame the relationship as one of dating, it is evident that is the direction the
relationship is heading. What is mostly at issue in the exchange is Meg’s uncer￾tainty as to whether this relationship with Steven will create imbalance and
relational uncertainties for her friendships with Laura and others. Meg is mainly
seeking social affirmation of her interest in Steven and her decision to invite him
to a dance. She seeks Laura’s input on the state of several dyadic and triadic
relational uncertainties, particularly Meg’s feelings toward Steven (and his pos￾sible status as “a nerd”) and Laura’s feelings toward Meg (and her possible status
as “crazy”). Laura’s response quickly addresses these uncertainties and intro￾duces reciprocity and balance to the projected network of interpersonal
sentiments. Laura indicates that Steven is “a great guy” and that Meg is definitely
not crazy. Laura affirms both her positive feelings toward Meg and Meg’s
uncertain feelings toward Steven. Agreement is even had regarding Steven’s sister
when Laura notes her beauty and prior contact. Meg and Laura are engaged in
finding interpersonal agreement about the affective, behavioral, and cognitive
aspects of their social ties. This sort of communication about relationships can be
seen as relational work more broadly (McLean 2007).
As one moves from micro-level interactions of relations to more stable,
macrolevel relations, one looks to aggregated data on interactions: to individ￾uals’ enduring relational perceptions, feelings, and behaviors. Perhaps one loses
something in this shift upward in Hinde’s image if one does not account for
deeper cognitive and affective dimensions of relating. If one infers relations by
observing repeated interactions or simply asking individuals who they “like” or
who are their “friends” without greater understanding of what such terms
mean to the individuals and how these meanings may actually differ in system￾atic ways among subgroups (Gondal 2022), one may see a strange or even
Others
Steven 
Family
Steven 
Sister
Meg
Laura
Steven
Others
Steven 
Family
Steven 
Sister
Meg
Laura
Steven 
 
+ +
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
-
FIGURE 2.4 Social structure constructed in notes passed between two high school
students (McFarland & Wolff 2022)
30 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbiased social structure (Kitts & Leal 2021). It is therefore vital to account for
the right side of Hinde’s depiction, in which social structures exist as those
categories and meanings that shape (but do not determine) how actors interact
and relate to one another.
2.3.3 Seeing Structure in Schemas and Meanings
As Figure 2.3 illustrates, an inherent connection exists between social structure
and schemas – that is, how people understand who they are in relation to one
another in a given social situation. Take, for example, the game of baseball.
There, the players know their positions and the rules of the game. These
institutionalized roles and codes of conduct, in fact, are the game of baseball;
the individuals on the field, as Shakespeare would say, are “merely players.”
Thus, as we will discuss in Chapter 12, network research blends into cultural
sociology in its search to better understand how meanings and actions inter￾relate (McLean 2016). When and how such categories matter in shaping
networks and when networks shape those categories are unsettled questions
that represent an area of active inquiry.
Bracketing out the causal link between structure and culture for the moment,
we can draw attention to more inductive and interpretive work that attempts to
map meanings and schemas within various institutional contexts. If actors in
networks are merely players in any number of more or less institutionalized
games, then where does one find the “rule books” for these games? For some,
the answer is in the heads of participants, pointing to the importance of
questionnaire and interview data to supplement observations or reported rela￾tions (e.g., Crossley 2010). For others, the discourse and symbols surrounding
an institutional domain – from how the chairs are organized in the classroom to
the textbooks – offer insights into the schemas and meanings organizing and
making sense of actions. Thus, researchers may turn to the material and
nonmaterial culture that helps organize an interactional setting or (at a higher
level of aggregation) an organizational field of activity in order to better see
how underlying schemas, meanings, scripts, and so on provide the basis for
roles and thereby lend meaning to interactions.
How deep to go in looking for cultural codes is a matter of debate. Some
researchers have drawn on a long tradition of structuralism in social anthro￾pology that focused on the deep structures of culture that shape the human
mind. Consider the example of Bourdieu’s discussion of the Kabyle house as a
“structuring structure” (Bourdieu 1984: 170). Bourdieu depicts the layout and
orientation of the typical house of this North African ethnic group through a
series of cultural oppositions: wet/dry, male/female, human/animal, sun/moon,
and so on. How one enters and exits the house and how activities and mundane
goods are organized in this space are part of a social structure composed of
familial and gender role relations that are enacted and given meaning through
the homologies that exist within that space – that is, through differences in the
What Is Social Structure? 31
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Presssocial structure that are embedded within layers of symbolic differences in other
domains (physical space, cosmology, objects, and the animal world). Other
scholars link social structure with deeply ingrained notions of purity, danger,
the sacred, and the profane.
Cultural accounts of structure get into very murky waters when trying to
align with theories of evolutionary psychology or functionalism, which
explain culture as serving the purpose of social cohesion and which, as we
have already discussed, sociologists have largely rejected in favor of more
“middle range” theories.
1 Some approaches, such as that of Douglas (1970),
went very deep indeed and reduced the structure-culture connection to a two￾by-two table with social cohesion as the primary explanation. Rather than
seeing culture as a force for creating normative cohesion in society, sociolo￾gists have viewed culture as a type of resource for achieving various practical
goals and making sense of a flowing, often indeterminate reality. Other
scholars have demonstrated that shared meanings are not essential for social
structures to enable and constrain our actions. For example, Bearman (1997)
showed that an entire macro-level system of generalized exchange in brides
among Aboriginal Australians does not arise from any articulated rule and
shared cultural understanding so much as from each local group knowing
what feels right and which arrangements will not cause conflict for others in
their local community.
As network scholars have been theorizing for some time now, agency within
the context of structure and culture is difficult to discern (Emirbayer &
Goodwin 1994; Emirbayer & Mische 1998). We cannot possibly do justice
to this work here, but we believe it is important to emphasize that social
network approaches are nondeterminative with respect to how agents will
negotiate social structure and culture. As we will discuss in somewhat more
detail in the next section, the ability to violate cultural rules, innovate, and
improvise has the potential to transform existing structures. In other words,
social reality is complex, and the researcher needs to keep thinking structurally
if they are to use social network methods to realize this reality more fully. In the
next section, we describe four perspectives researchers can adopt when per￾forming structural analysis that make doing so more tractable by narrowing
the focus.
2.4    
Accurately observing and describing social structure is the first major contribu￾tion of social network analysis. The second, which has come more and more to
the fore as computational power has grown, is asking where networks come
1 A milder form of structural-functionalism is making a comeback of sorts using more evolutionary
perspectives to explain elementary forms of sociality (e.g., Christakis 2019; Haidt 2012; Henrich
2016; Ridgeway 2019).
32 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfrom and what they might be doing in the world. In the image by Hinde shown
earlier, such theorized large-scale causes of social structure are shown as arrows
outside the structure. These causes often reflect deeply held norms, orientations,
and latent constructs that are deeply ingrained (as well as more mundane
elements of the opportunity structure affording contact). Traditional social
network analysis often arrived at these constructs either post hoc or tautologic￾ally: the pattern reflects an institution that gave it shape. But today, a variety of
other means are available for discerning which mechanisms drive associations
to take the form they take. A number of theories, which we cover in greater
detail in coming chapters, posit some combination of exogenous and
endogenous social forces that give rise to social structures and move them in
predictable directions.
We divide these causal research questions in social network analysis into
four broad types that vary in terms of what they seek to explain and how they
approach social structure as part of that explanation. These types are summar￾ized in Table 2.1.
The main theoretical division in views of social structure is between connec￾tionist and positional approaches. As the names suggest, connectionist
approaches see networks primarily through the lens of how nodes are tied
through flows of important resources, objects, ideas, emotions, and so on.
Positional approaches, in contrast, see structure through the lens of the ways
specific parts of the structure tend to go together and interact through estab￾lished roles. We do not see these as incommensurate, but instead as approach￾ing social structures at somewhat different levels of abstraction in Hinde’s view.
Whereas connectionist views attend more to the lower levels of abstraction in
interactions, relations, and groups, positional researchers seek to probe the
higher-order abstractions of schemas and institutions that organize across
many different interactions, relations, and groups. The former view is more
bottom-up and locally emergent, and the latter is more top-down and globally
prescriptive in its formulations.
To better illustrate the difference between connectionist and positional
approaches, we offer a metaphor in which social structure is like the structure
 2.1 Types of causal social-structural questions and social network
research agendas
Perspective Networks as cause Networks as consequence
Connectionist
Networks as pipes
Diffusion
Peer influence
Social capital
Social integration
Peer selection
Segregation
Positional
Networks as roles
Popularity effects
Role behavior
Network constraint
Exchange pattern
Network stability
Career paths
What Is Social Structure? 33
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressof a watershed, a formation of land that separates flows of water into
different rivers, basins, and seas. For connectionists, the key issue is under￾standing the flows as causes and consequences of important outcomes due to
the transfer of important resources: the thriving of certain animal popula￾tions over others, the impact of climate change on these flows, and so on. For
positional researchers, the key issue is the different parts of the watershed –
estuaries, tributaries, floodplains, ridgelines, and so on – that come together
and interact as specific roles or positions in the larger structure. Positional
researchers therefore seek to understand the organizing principles and
forces – such as erosion, accretion, and avulsion – that structure these
positions in the process of creating these landscapes in generic ways and thus
to understand why one watershed forms in a manner similar to or different
from others.
As we will see throughout the chapters to follow, connectionist and pos￾itional approaches represent different but complementary endeavors in under￾standing social structure. These approaches become research projects when
they seek to explain specific outcomes. For this reason, we further divide
research into two typical approaches in terms of their dependent variable(s):
(1) projects that seek to explain some important outcome using a structural
explanation (networks as a cause), and (2) projects that seek to explain struc￾ture itself as the outcome of various structural and nonstructural explanations
(networks as a consequence).
Let’s walk through a few examples of these in somewhat more detail.
2.4.1 Networks as a Cause
What does it mean for a network to be a cause? Consider what is perhaps the
core sociological concern: social inequality. How can social network analysis
help explain an outcome like status attainment (i.e., having a more or less
prestigious and well-paying occupation), which has largely been viewed
through the lens of large-scale survey data? Social networks are clearly part
of a causal explanation of inequality – but how?
One answer might be that social structure shapes who gets to interact with
whom: individuals make connections with those around them and share
important information and resources with one another in order to maintain
power and authority in society. Connections matter. Karl Marx long ago
argued that elites are more connected and better able to organize than are
workers, who he saw as forming something more like a sack of potatoes,
pushed up against one another by the capitalist system but not cohesive as a
group “for itself.” In contrast, elites, by sitting on the same corporate boards,
attending the same country clubs, sending their kids to the same private
schools, and so on, generate stronger ties that are conduits for important
information and influence.
34 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressPersonal networks are therefore a key aspect of social capital – that is,
important new contacts or the information and resources contained within
their direct and indirect contacts (Lin 2002). Access to social capital differs
by race, class, and gender and has been shown to cause different rates of
social mobility within and between occupational structures. The connec￾tionist approach contends that a primary mechanism driving social life can
be found in the contacts, interactions, and exchanges that directly connect
one object to another, capturing important flows and influences across
objects.
Referring back to Table 2.1, this top-left quadrant also includes, most
notably, a rich research tradition on the diffusion of innovations, which we
cover in Chapter 14. Here, the researcher is interested in how the structure of
ties in a network facilitates or inhibits the transmission of ideas, information,
and practices, leading to variable diffusion rates and diffusion patterns.
A similarly large literature concerns the spread of infectious diseases through
risk networks – for example, based on sexual contact or needle-sharing. In a
world recently disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, such diffusion models
have taken on an even greater import.
2.4.2 Networks as a Consequence
The top-right quadrant of Table 2.1 refers to connectionist approaches in
which networks are outcomes of interest. The goal here is to explain the
formation of network ties and larger structures, uncovering the factors leading
to outcomes ranging from romantic bonds to corporate mergers, which we
cover in Chapter 13. Mechanisms for such connections are frequently exogen￾ous to the network structure and focus on not only physical proximity but also
social proximity and homophily, the tendency for actors to interact with similar
others in terms of shared cultural tastes, background characteristics, income
level, and so on (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Cook 2001). Homophily is as
close to a scientific law as sociology gets; although even homophily is highly
probabilistic. A researcher may therefore ask how strong homophily is for
important demographic dimensions, like age, gender, and race/ethnicity, or
how homophily has changed over time (Smith, McPherson, & Smith-Lovin
2014). For example, do individuals tend to interact with people of the same
race more than people of the same age?
Connectionist approaches also focus on endogenous factors, or those
aspects of the network structure itself that led the structure to evolve in
predictable ways. Here, for example, one might posit a “rule” in which “a
friend of a friend is a friend,” so that friendship ties elicit a type of transitive
property that leads to the elaboration and thickening of the network struc￾ture. Bearman, Moody, and Stovel (2004) discovered a decidedly less intuitive
“rule” of tie formation in the structure of the romantic network shown in
What Is Social Structure? 35
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressFigure 1.2 – namely, its long chains. These chains appear to derive from an
endogenous structural effect that largely lies outside of individuals’ aware￾ness: a tacit rule connected with the unpleasant feelings associated with dating
the ex-partner of one’s own ex-partner’s current partner. Why? The discovery
of this nonrandom element in the larger network structure is what inductively
suggested an underlying rule of partnering, which the researchers dubbed the
rule of “romantic leftovers”: dating the ex-partner of your ex-partner’s cur￾rent partner is a largely forbidden structure. Individuals certainly do not
articulate this as a rule. Nonetheless, the awkwardness of dating the ex of
your ex’s current partner clearly prevents such ties from forming in many
scenarios (Figure 2.5).
The basic logic for this sort of explanation is that actors use the information
embedded in their local ties to inform their likelihood of forming (or dropping)
new (or old) ties. The set of features that come to play is up to the theorist but
can include cognitive, emotional, and resource-based features.
2.4.3 Roles as Causes
Individuals fill multiple roles, generally defined by the institutions to which
they belong. The family assigns kinship roles, educational institutions pro￾vide new roles, and work life provides yet another set of roles through
which to relate. As depicted in Figure 2.6, the traditional family roles of
parents, siblings, spouses, and so on are intuitive for those raised in a
Western cultural context, although even here it is crucial to differentiate
between the actual set of relations (e.g., romantic love, providing food for)
from the named roles familiar to people (e.g., parent). A biological parent
Matt
???
Time 1 Time 1
Time 2
Jenn Joe
Maya
FIGURE 2.5 Hypothetical romantic network
36 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Presscould, but need not, play the role of parent in the household as someone
who provides for the child. As people shift from role to role, they become
different people; they have “exits and entrances,” as Shakespeare would
say, and the parts they play are part of a continued biography as they move
through social structure.
Moving to the bottom left quadrant in Table 2.1, the key question from this
type of network approach is, How do structural roles in a network affect the
thoughts, feelings, behaviors of specific individuals or groups? Seeing structural
roles in relational terms is consistent with a long line of social psychological
research using field experiments to introduce small differences into groups and
finding that these differences crystallize into distinct role structures. Zimbardo’s
prison experiments, for example, demonstrated that the random assignment of
students into the roles of “guards” and “prisoners” quickly induced thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors in participants that were consistent with those experi￾enced in a real prison. Rather than reflecting deeply held dispositions or
personality traits, behavior may be shaped by more situational factors provided
through roles.
The positional approach argues that the primary mechanisms driving social
life can be found in these underlying social roles and in the norms attached to
them. Together, these roles and norms guide patterns of interaction such that
participants assume distinct social positions and coordinate patterns of associ￾ation with occupants of other positions. An adult may be in a setting speaking
to adolescents using a particular pattern of communication to broadcast infor￾mation, and the youth may listen and receive it. The youth may perform work
and submit it to the adult in exchange for evaluation, and so on. What
they enact are teacher–student roles, and these place the adult and youth in
distinct positions with particular forms of exchange, rights, and obligations.
A positional approach examines the patterns of association and identifies
underlying identities and identity boundaries (role relations) that evoke them.
One can readily see this in other settings. As we described earlier, the game of
baseball consists of a set of interactional performances based on the positions
H W
C
C C
Romantic Love
Provides Food for
Bickers with
FIGURE 2.6 Role structure of a Western family unit
What Is Social Structure? 37
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Presson the field and the expectations concerning how these are coordinated. Indeed,
the early social psychologist George Herbert Mead (1934) thought of society as
akin to the countless games people have internalized through their interactions
and socialization.
How do such roles shape thoughts, feelings, or behaviors? Here, the
answer is not so much about the flows of ideas, influence, and so on, but
rather the expectations or norms that govern the behavior of individuals
occupying specific positions. For example, being assigned to a leadership role
comes with expectations and duties, which may give the role occupant more
status, greater rewards, higher expectations of performance, and a greater
belief in their competence. These may become internalized by the occupant
and, in a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy, lead to their behaviors confirming
expectations – or, following Lord Acton’s dictum, the ineluctable corruption
of a position with ultimate power. In an organizational structure, the person￾ality traits often attributed to being a leader may have as much to do with
having occupied leadership roles as they do with any inherent psychological
differences. Similarly, the behaviors of individuals in similar positions may be
expected to converge, even if those individuals are not directly socially con￾nected. Here, individuals copy their peers’ behaviors (e.g., dress, manner of
speech, and adoption of new products), and the key mechanism is mimicry (of
similarly positioned others) rather than direct influence and diffusion (Burt
1987).
2.4.4 Roles as Consequences
Finally, network scholars are interested in how specific roles and interconnected
role structures emerge and change over time. Role structures may be intuitive to
those who enact them, or social actors may find it difficult to know how their
position fits within that larger structure, as Bearman (1997) showed in the case
of bride exchanges among a set of Australian Aboriginal clans. Similarly,
anthropologists have long puzzled over the origins of the Kula Ring in
Melanesia, in which eighteen island communities exchange red and white shell
adornments in two oppositely directed circles of which the individual commu￾nities are largely unaware (see Figure 2.7). Larger role structures may therefore
emerge when local actors engage in local roles. Such forms of “generalized
exchange” emerge from each island community’s norms of gift exchange –
which are based on notions of honor that help reproduce local social cohesion –
combined with the island structure of adjacent communities with friendly
relations and the exchanging of goods (other than the ceremonial adornments)
through bartering.
Key questions for researchers operating in the bottom right quadrant of
Table 2.1 concern examining roles as outcomes. What factors outside the
observed network induce participants to construct and/or enact various role
38 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrelations and assume various social positions? And how are these roles and
positions sustained or altered over time?
Answering these questions presents unique challenges for the social network
researcher. Without resorting to a functionalist tautology or wildly speculative
evolutionary scenarios, in which the structure is seen to serve some purpose and
to have evolved for some reason (e.g., social cohesion), network scholars often
see structures as emerging from local patterns of interaction that become
institutionalized and reified in cultural schemas and meanings. But testing such
models can be daunting. It is difficult to perform the kind of field experiments
employed by early social psychologists with similar questions. For example, in
the Robbers Cave experiment, Sherif randomly assigned children in a summer
camp to two different groups, which spontaneously developed their own iden￾tities (the “Eagles” and “Rattlers”) and quickly became hostile toward each
other (see Sherif et al. 1961). While Sherif demonstrated how quickly local
social roles and intergroup conflict can emerge, finding data that can trace the
longue durée of the emergence of larger societal roles is no small task.
Bearman’s (1993) study of the transformation of elite social structure over
300 years in Norfolk, England, represents a remarkable attempt to use histor￾ical network data to map the exogenous and endogenous factors that helped
shift roles away from those rooted in local kinship toward those rooted in a
national patron–client role structure, which was also expressed in an embrace
of more abstract and universal ideologies for organizing more broadly.
Given the difficulties in gathering suitable data for examining the emergence
and transformation of role structures, researchers have increasingly turned to
agent-based simulations. As we will discuss in greater detail in subsequent
chapters, various theories rooted in social psychology posit the emergence of
role structures as routine outcomes of interaction and group dynamics. If these
Arm Bands
Necklaces
FIGURE 2.7 Role structure of the Trobriand Island Kula Ring exchange network
What Is Social Structure? 39
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Presstheories are correct, then small, even random, initial differences in attitudes
among individuals – say, a preference for nine-pin bowling over ten-pin
bowling – can generate a Robbers Cave–like scenario of two oppositional
subgroups (the “nines” vs. the “tens”). Other models suggest that even more
fragmented role structures or hierarchies of subgroups, like those frequently
seen in high schools based on popularity, are emergent role structures rooted in
self-organizing principles of individual agents and their interactions (Goldberg
& Stein 2018; Macy et al. 2003; Mäs & Flache 2013; Szell, Lambiotte, &
Thurner 2010). Although provocative, these models await more rigorous
empirical testing to probe their merits.
2.5  
Our goal in this chapter has been to orient the reader to a serviceable theory of
social structure that can help guide practical research efforts in social network
analysis. For more detailed accounts of social structure, we refer the reader to a
number of theoretical approaches that have informed social network research
and our overview (e.g., Blau 1977; Burt 1982, 2005; Crossley 2010; Emirbayer
& Mische 1998; Fuhse 2009; Martin 2009a, 2011; Sewell 1992; White 1992).
Throughout this volume, we will return to the layered description of social
structure, and we will fill in some more details as we go. Here, we conclude this
chapter by further noting two main caveats in rendering social structure
into knowledge.
2.5.1 An Evolving Heuristic
First, it is important to emphasize that the four quadrants in Table 2.1 should
be taken as a heuristic for orienting network research, not as a tidy summary of
any individual project or scholar’s research agenda. The connectionist and
positional approaches are commensurable and often work in tandem to offer
a fuller understanding of structural phenomena (Nadel 1957). Many research
projects are not isolated within one quadrant, but instead seek connections
among them. For example, researchers have drawn greater attention to the
endogenous mechanisms from role structures themselves that are self￾sustaining, connecting role-based approaches in the two lower quadrants. In
this light, being one of the popular students in a high school has a “sticky”
quality: they are treated differently, often in ways that enhance their visibility
and a belief in their specialness, which tends to reinforce the high school
pecking order over time. Likewise, a reciprocal causality exists across the top
two quadrants, which see networks primarily as pipes for important resources.
Clearly, one’s social capital can lead to opportunities to form new ties, which in
turn lead to even greater social capital. Many other possible projects could link
40 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe quadrants, and as we discuss in the concluding chapter of this book
(Chapter 16), this table could be expanded and altered in various ways as
social network analysis moves into its next phase.
2.5.2 Institutional Reproduction and Change
A second caveat concerns how social structure appears to overwhelm human
agency. Any view of social structure necessarily emphasizes institutions and the
reproduction of largely stable patterns of activity. What is less visible is how
social structures often contain considerable ambiguity and complexity that
render them less deterministic than one might think (Merton 1976).
For theorists like Sewell (1992) and Giddens (1986), social structures tend to
form by a process of structuration, or a combination of structure and agency,
which we cover in greater detail in Chapter 6. For Sewell, this process is
described as the co-evolution of schemas (like roles or identities) and manifest
relations and interactions (which are used as resources to cue schemas).
Interestingly, though, Sewell does not see this process as a static reproduction.
Social interaction patterns reproduce themselves, but they also change and
drift. Building on Sewell’s insights from a social network perspective, we see
two main aspects of social structure as affording a nondeterministic view of
social structure: (1) multilevel (or multimodal) networks and (2) multilayered
(or multiplex) networks.
2.5.2.1 Multilevel or Multimodal Networks
As we show in Figure 2.3, social structure exists at various levels, from events to
organizations. Networks also exist through affiliations, such as group
memberships, that are depicted as multimodal networks. We can (and will)
extend such levels to include various roles and even categories that organize
human thought and action. The embeddedness of social structure allows for a
certain nondeterminism because various levels of social structure are only
approximately nested. For example, in our view of the high school, levels of
structure are largely hierarchical; however, many informal interactions and
relations are likely to exist that defy an easy determinism. For example, differ￾ent social-structural positions in a school can draw on the same resource for
cross-purposes. Popular students and teachers both want to assume central
roles in classrooms and are often at cross-purposes. As such, in some classes,
the teacher may coopt popular students by giving them central roles in lessons
in exchange for their compliance and a degree of latitude. Social structure can
therefore encourage adaptive alliances rather than simply reproducing the
status quo. In short, different levels of social structure may have their own
cross-cutting pressures that render multiple social actions equally feasible,
rather than determining a single and clear-cut role behavior.
What Is Social Structure? 41
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press2.5.2.2 Multilayered or Multiplex Networks
Social structure emerges from many different types of ties. The multilayeredness
or multiplexity of ties affords nondeterministic action. Sometimes the same role
relations can be used as a resource in other situations: friendship, for example,
can be used for completing schoolwork and satisfying student role demands as
well as for developing dating relations. As such, the same resources can have
multiple meanings and uses, and audiences may read and interpret the same
resource differently. To know a rule or role is to be able to transpose and
extend its use to new situations (other classrooms), but matching existing
schemas to new situations can pose indeterminacies that require creativity
and social learning, intersubjective agreements, and coordination. Teachers
must adapt to teach students who are unlike the ones they have taught before.
Thus, individuals have unique biographies (distinct histories and locations)
within a multilayered network landscape, and this structural complexity leads
to opportunities for creative action.
2.6 
This chapter has oriented the reader’s imagination to an expansive view of
social structure, from interactions to institutions. Based on this structural
account, we have proposed a broad research agenda for how to coordinate
efforts of social network analysis in descriptive and predictive accounts.
Social structure is far too complex (at least for our brains) to see in its entirety,
let alone to know where social structure comes from and what it may be
doing. Social network analysis is a powerful approach in bringing together
these efforts and drawing on related theories. We will return to our view of
social structure (Figure 2.3), especially in Part II on “Seeing Structure,” and
the causal research agendas (Table 2.1), especially in Part III on “Making
Structural Predictions.” In many of the following chapters, we show how
social network analysis has filled in this picture and where work still remains
to be done.
  
General Theoretical Formulations. The theoretical foundations of social network analy￾sis are deep, and we cannot hope to cover all pieces here. Rather, we want to highlight a
handful of key pieces that have helped shape how we view the field.
Blau, Peter M. 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity: A Primitive Theory of Social
Structure. New York: Free Press. (Provides the foundation for work on homophily
and opportunity structure; linking social relations, interests, and the intersection
social characteristics. See also CATNETs by Harrison White.)
Bott, Elizabeth. 1957. Family and Social Network. New York: Taylor & Francis. (A lovely
examination of the effects of gender and network segregation on role performance.
Foundational work for the study of family and normative pressures in networks.)
42 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressCastells, Manuel. 2009. The Rise of Network Society. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
(Argues that modern social life is fundamentally changed by the advent of “infor￾mation and communication technologies,” which allows for the widespread glob￾alization of networks. See also the rich literature on World Systems Theory,
particularly the empirical work of Christopher Chase-Dunn and colleagues.)
Coleman, James S. 1994. The Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap of
Harvard University Press. (Attempts to build a social theory based on purposive action
constrained by relational opportunities. Exemplar case of mathematical theorizing.)
Emirbayer, Mustafa. 1997. “Manifesto for a Relational Sociology.” American Journal of
Sociology 103: 281–317. (Argues that the essence of any valid model for social structure
has to be relational; provides a deep foundation for network models of social life.)
Hinde, Robert A. 1976. “Interactions, Relationships and Social Structure.” Man 11(1):
1–17. (Describes primate social structures from concrete interactions up to specific
relations and types of relations and roles, groups, and types of groups. Basic frame￾work of abstraction/concreteness and units of analysis to social structure.)
Martin, John Levi. 2009. Social Structures. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
(Provides a theoretical explanation of how types of relations constrain/construct
types of aggregate social structures.)
McPherson, J. Miller. 1983. “An Ecology of Affiliation.” American Sociological Review
48(4): 519–32. (A key work summarizing the macrostructural homophily perspec￾tive on social organization. See also McPherson and Ranger-Moore 1991 and
anything by Bruce Mayhew.)
McPherson, J. Miller, and James Ranger-Moore. 1991. “Evolution on a Dancing
Landscape: Organizations and Networks in Dynamic Blau Space.” Social Forces
70: 19–42. (See the note to McPherson 1983.)
Nadel, Siegfried Frederick. 1957. The Theory of Social Structure. Glencoe, IL: Free
Press. (Presents roles as interrelated systems of social expectations and obligations.)
Sewell, William H. 1992. “A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and
Transformation.” American Journal of Sociology 98: 1–29. (Integrates agency as
a type of structure, drawing on insights from Giddens and Bourdieu.)
Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
(Overview of many elemental ideas of social networks concerning relations, dyads,
triads, and organizations, as well as issues of size, reciprocity, and tertius gaudens.)
2010 [1908]. Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliations. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
(Describes how overlapping social circles can be theorized and studied and how
they organize in society.)
Somers, Margaret R. 1994. “The Narrative Constitution of Identity: A Relational and
Network Approach.” Theory and Society 23: 605–49. (Offers a theoretically
informed account of relational sociology and how identities are more akin to
narratives and stories.)
Turner, Jonathan H. 1978. The Structure of Sociological Theory, 7th ed. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth. (A general theory reader with a rich discussion of the structural￾functional roots of early role-behavior models.)
White, Harrison C. 1992. Identity and Control: A Structural Theory of Social Action.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. (An effort to present a synthetic theory of
social structure that draws on cultural turn sociology [interactionist and socio￾linguistic] and social network theories concerning roles, but with extensions to
macrostructures and processes, like disciplines and network domains.)
What Is Social Structure? 43
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressIllustrative Empirical Works. Social network analysis is characterized by a tight linkage
between theory and method, as researchers develop tools to solve empirical questions.
As such, some of the best general network theory has been developed in the context of
empirical investigations.
Bainbridge, William Sims. 2020. The Social Structure of Online Communities. New
York: Cambridge University Press. (For obvious reasons, novices often conflate
social media and social networks; this work provides a clear example of how to
apply deep network thinking to online communities without falling prey to compu￾tational approaches that speak only to scale and not substance.)
Bearman, Peter. 1997. “Generalized Exchange.” American Journal of Sociology 102:
1383–415. (Using blockmodels of kinship exchange, this paper provides a clear
example of how people enact social structure, even if they cannot articulate why
they do so.)
Gibson, David R. 2003. “Participation Shifts: Order and Differentiation in Group
Conversation.” Social Forces 81: 1335–80. (Empirical example of how relational
events of different sequential turn-taking strategies inform the development of roles
and networks.)
Gould, Roger V. 1991. “Multiple Networks and Mobilization in the Paris Commune,
1871.” American Sociological Review 56(6): 716–29. (Uses data on deaths and
fighting across neighborhoods and blockmodel analysis to reveal the underlying
structural basis of conflict.)
Mizruchi, Mark S., and Michael Schwartz (eds.). 1988. Intercorporate Relations: The
Structural Analysis of Business. New York: Cambridge University Press. (A nice
early edited volume on network approaches to economic action.)
Padgett, John F., and Christopher K. Ansell. 1993. “Robust Action and the Rise of the
Medici, 1400–1434.” American Journal of Sociology 98(6): 1259–319. (A histor￾ical illustration of how a political system emerges out of the interactions and
alliance systems of Renaissance elite family politics.)
44 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press3
What Is a Social Network?
We outline the core concepts of network analysis, issues of research design, and
data collection for different structural questions.
3.1   
Poets and sages have long spoken of the interconnectedness of things. Although
most had structural imaginations, they were not network scholars because they
lacked the institutions and formalization necessary to channel this imagination
into an empirical research agenda they could share with others. In the absence
of scientific research tools, their imaginations were expressed through meta￾phor alone, and their ideas could not be built into a collective endeavor of
discovery and refinement. To move from simply thinking structurally to actu￾ally seeing and formalizing structural analysis, one needs a common language
and set of symbols to communicate with others working on similar problems
and to transmit these findings to others over successive generations of scholars.
Network analysis is one way researchers have operationalized thinking
structurally.
Moving from structural imaginations to network analysis begins with visual
and mathematical abstractions of relational phenomena that are otherwise
difficult, if not impossible, to capture verbally. Consider the following historical
example, a conundrum that remained unresolved until the advent of a network￾like approach in 1736. For centuries, the city of Königsberg in Prussia had
seven bridges connecting the mainland and two islands, as shown in Figure 3.1.
This unique geography led people with too much free time to ask whether it
was possible to traverse all seven bridges only one time each and yet touch
every land mass in the city. With thousands of possible “walks,” this debate
kept people busy for a while, until mathematician Leonhard Euler resolved
the issue by devising a network abstraction that removed the content of the
45
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Presspuzzle (bridges and landmasses), leaving only its formal properties (elements
and linkages).
In the second image, the landmasses become elements (or objects) repre￾sented as points A through D, and the bridges become lines (or links). Once
one is no longer puzzling about all the ways one could walk over all the
bridges and instead examines the formal aspects of a structure, it becomes
easier to see and resolve the problem. In fact, Euler demonstrated that no
solution exists, given the overall network structure: because each point has an
odd number of lines connecting it to other points, all the complete walks
eventually lead to being trapped at a point after having already traversed all
the other paths leading to or from that point. Euler’s solution helped initiate a
new branch of mathematics: graph theory. Network researchers would later
use and develop graph theory to understand more substantively important
and complex structures. As with the preceding example, the key network idea
rests on representing a structure as an interconnected set of points. Doing so
allows the researcher to draw an image in an intuitive way and to use that
visualization to communicate with others.
As Euler demonstrated, network analysis starts with concrete interactions
(here, the rather stable “interaction” of bridges connecting land masses) and
offers an abstracted picture of objects and links within a more or less integrated
whole – a structure. In this example, one might see an implicit connectionism at
the heart of network analysis: people move across the stable structure of the
interconnected system of bridges. Such a tendency for focusing on things
flowing through ties as the basis of the network persists today. Most social
network research focuses on interactions and relations, which are commonly
assumed to be built from important exchanges. But as we will see, moving to
greater levels of abstraction reveals higher-order structures that may not be well
represented as flows.
A
C
D
B
FIGURE 3.1 The Königsberg bridge problem and its graph representation
46 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University PressA shared set of abstractions is at the heart of any science. The abstractions
developed in the study of structures help make it possible to analyze systems
in tractable ways. The generalizable quality of these abstractions also means
that the same or similar methods can be used for very different substantive
problems, connecting scholars across fields with shared structural interests
but different theoretical and substantive applications. Of course, this does not
mean that network researchers can rely solely on methods and data; nor does
it mean that an explanation that works in one setting (adolescents in a
high school) will necessarily work for another (neural networks in a brain).
Across all fields, one must apply the relevant theories and background know￾ledge to the particular network(s) at hand. This is why we introduced social￾structural theory in the opening chapters: a network is an abstraction that
requires substantive and theoretical understanding to be rendered into useful
information.
With this caveat in mind, we proceed with a more detailed discussion of the
core aspects of network analysis while offering some substantive examples from
sociological studies. In Chapter 4, we will revisit many conceptual issues and
give more insight into the theoretical and practical trade-offs involved in the
operationalization and collection of network data.
3.2    
What are the objects and links forming a network structure? Network
researchers use the term nodes to refer to the objects in a structure but
sometimes refer to these using the graph-theoretic term vertices. Nodes are
generally represented as points in a figure. The relationships among the nodes
are most frequently called ties, although the more mathematical terms edges
or arcs are also used. For example, in Figure 3.2, the nodes are represented as
circles labeled A–F, and the edges are presented as lines between connected
nodes. Network scholars usually refer to such visualizations as graphs. Let’s
assume that these edges and nodes in a graph represent friendship ties between
children at camp. We see that A is friends with B, E, and D; B is friends with
A and E; and so on. When two nodes are connected, they are called adjacent.
Thus, a network can be formally defined as two linked sets (i.e., collections of
things): one of nodes and one of ties.
1 How one conceptualizes the nodes and
ties has consequences for every other aspect of the research that follows. At a
low level of abstraction, ties might be momentary interactions captured in
small slices of time. These interactions might be aggregated into higher levels
1 Technically, the edge set (a) must be a subset of all pairs of nodes and (b) could be empty.
Practically, though, a network without ties would rarely be interesting.
What Is a Social Network? 47
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Pressto infer relations. For example, the network might represent an aggregate of
playful interactions during recess over the period of a week, which would in
most cases be a reasonable operationalization of “playmate” or even
“friend.”
In most cases, identifying the nodes in a structure is the more straightforward
task because the nodes are more stable elements, whereas ties can be formed or
altered. In social network analysis, the nodes are social actors at various levels
of aggregation, from individuals to groups, organizations, or even nations.
However, determining where to define the boundaries around the node set –
the collection of nodes forming the network – is often a difficult task and may
even involve an understanding of when the nodes exist such that they can be
considered part of the same structure. Once again, this often entails a substan￾tive and theoretical understanding of the empirical domain of interest.
A researcher using ethnographic methods to study peer influence in a high
school may know that a group of adolescents regularly meets after school on
the playground. Thus, this may be a suitable space and time for determining the
nodes in a network, as these individuals interact and perhaps perceive them￾selves as a group. Obviously, this will be an incomplete structure of all the peer
influences for these individuals, but as we discuss in greater detail when outlin￾ing data collection strategies, nearly all network studies are partial slices of
much larger and more complex structures.
A
F
B E D
C
FIGURE 3.2 A basic network structure
48 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University PressDefining the ties among nodes can be tricky. In social network analysis, ties
most frequently represent positive social relations in which two nodes are tied
through interactions and role relations that entail positive feelings, intimacy,
and supportive interactions. These relations may be observed by the researcher
and/or perceived by the subjects. Thus, social networks are often ones of
kinship, friendship, and exchange. That said, there are negative social relations
that concern negative attitudes, directed feelings such as disliking, and conflict￾ual interactions such as bullying. Typically, people gravitate toward positive
ties and avoid negative ones. Negative social ties are traditionally understudied
and are an active area of current research (see Kitts 2014).
From a connectionist standpoint, ties often represent relations built from
flows and exchanges of real things in the world that might move between
individuals (e.g., money, diseases) or between higher-level social actors (e.g.,
people moving between jobs or countries). Flows may also be more abstract
things, such as the movement of ideas, beliefs, or even emotions. From a more
positional account of structure, ties may have less to do with actual flows
through connections than they do with occupying a similar location in a
structure (based on rights and responsibilities), and this may give rise to similar
pressures or awareness of others (Burt 1987). Social ties can be roughly con￾sidered as falling into four types (Borgatti et al. 2009):
 Memberships, in which nodes are located in the same regions in physical and
social space (e.g., same neighborhoods, same department, or same club).
 Relations, in which nodes operate within a system of roles (e.g., father of,
friend of, or teacher of ) and have cognitive or affective orientations toward
one another.
 Interactions, in which concrete interactions occur between nodes (e.g.,
advice, romance, or bullying).
 Flows, in which nodes transfer some material or cultural object, goods,
information, or influence (e.g., ideas, beliefs, or practices).
Importantly, a network study can include more than one type of tie. For
example, the researcher may have information on similarities, like shared clubs,
as well as more affective relations, like friendship (e.g., people could be part of
the same club but not be friends). This yields a network with multiple types of
ties, or a multiplex network. Also important is that the ties can be dynamic:
they may be made and unmade over time, often with some involvement of the
nodes themselves (e.g., two people may choose not to remain friends). To build
a more dynamic view, researchers often take many different snapshots of
structures over a period divided into years, months, weeks, or even minutes.
With streaming data from visual or online sources, it is also possible to gauge
networks in continuous time. Having such longitudinal network data
offers considerable advantages over a single cross section. Gathering a more
realistic view of the underlying reality of structure as dynamic and layered is the
What Is a Social Network? 49
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Pressgoal of most research, but of course no single project can accomplish this
completely.
Each individual who is connected within a network has a number of ties,
which is referred to as their degree. For example, in Figure 3.2, individual E has
a degree of four; individual A has a degree of three; individuals B and D degrees
of two; individual C a degree of one; and individual F a degree of zero. As we
will discuss more in the next section of this chapter, networks can also be
directed so that ties may not be symmetric. When network ties are asymmetric,
the number of ties directed at an individual is known as their in-degree, and the
number of ties directed outward is their out-degree.
Network ties can also vary in their overall strength. People have acquaint￾ances, friends, and close friends; corporate donations to political campaigns can
vary in amount; and countries exchange goods representing different amounts
of their GDP. Tie strength can also have a negative/positive valence: for
example, hatred, dislike, neutral, like, and love. Social connections are usually
thought of as positive relationships, but the social world also contains antagon￾istic ties, and recognizing them is important for understanding the full function￾ing of a social system. Such signed (i.e., positive and negative) data raise
questions of group stability, balance, conflict, and the maintenance of identities,
where group members have positive ties to fellow members and negative ties to
outsiders. With so many conceptual issues at stake, the validity of ties and how
they are measured are areas of particular concern. A valid network study will
need to clearly justify the inherent trade-offs involved in the measurement
of ties.
3.3   
Constructing a network of actors and ties, or nodes and edges, seems like the
result of an objective set of decisions. However, keep in mind that one is
already engaging in some theorizing when one defines the nodes and edges,
determining why certain nodes are important for the structure and what holds
the structure together. Sometimes the researcher is able to gather data that
directly address the underlying processes creating the structure one is seeking
to measure. At other times, one uses proxies with data that are less than ideal
for gauging those underlying processes. All data have some error, and no data
set will fully capture a social structure. As such, the first step in network
analysis is to have some sense of the core aspects of the social structure one
intends to study (which actors and types of ties). The next step is to make sure
the type of data collected matches one’s underlying research goals. In so
doing, one acquires data most reflective of the structure in question, and the
ensuing information and knowledge presented will offer important insights
into social reality.
Network data, as sets of nodes and ties, come together to form structures
of two main types: (1) direct ties in one-mode networks and (2) affiliations in
50 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Presstwo-mode networks.
2 For example, person i reports spending time with
person j, or the researcher directly observes this. Such relations are called
one-mode because they consist of only one type of node (people in this case)
with no a priori restriction on ties between subclasses of nodes. Ties can also
be created because nodes of one type share connections to nodes of a second
type. For example, if person i belongs to the same country club as person j,
then we can link them by a “shared country club” tie. In this case, the ij tie
goes through a mutual association with a club. Such relations are called two￾mode because they link nodes of one type (people in this case) through nodes
of a second type (clubs in this case). These networks admit to a special
“duality,” such that either type of node can be connected through the other
type. In our example, then, one could connect various country clubs to one
another via their shared memberships just as easily as connecting people
through their associations. As we will discuss in greater detail in
Chapter 11, the simultaneous connections existing among two orders of
nodes – such as people tied through country clubs and country clubs tied
through people – is a common structural duality that motivates much network
research. It is also possible, and increasingly common, to analyze networks
consisting of a mix of one-mode and two-mode relations; for example, one
may have interactions between students (one-mode), alliances between clubs
(e.g., co-sponsoring events; one-mode), and students linked to clubs through
membership (two-mode).
Networks can be either directed or undirected, depending on the nature of
the network. Ties are directed when they indicate an orientation or flow from i
to j, such as when i indicates that j is a friend or when a researcher observes
something being transmitted from i to j. In the case of directed ties, it is
possible for the tie to go from i to j but not necessarily from j to i. For
example, person i may loan money to person j, but j may never have loaned
i any money. More generally, one can define asymmetric ties as those in which
there is a tie from i to j but not from j to i. A symmetric tie is simply the case in
which an ij tie exists and a ji tie exists. Symmetric ties capture instances of
reciprocity, such that the relation from i to j implies the same relation between
j and i. For example, there may be expectations of reciprocity for gift giving: if
you give a gift to me, I may feel obligated to give a gift to you. But this is an
empirical question.
The network type thus depends on the logically possible distribution of
tie types. In an undirected network, all the ties are assumed to be symmetric
(ij = ji). A network based on consensual online friendships on Facebook, for
example, is undirected; if i accepts j’s friendship request, then both appear in
2 Multilevel or multimodal networks are also possible (e.g., Stofer 2008). Because these represent
more of a frontier in network science, we discuss these in our concluding chapter (Chapter 16).
What Is a Social Network? 51
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Presseach other’s “friends” list. A network based on joint activity, such as “neigh￾bors” is also undirected (i.e., if i is j’s neighbor then j must be i’s neighbor).
Alternatively, if the ties must be asymmetric, then the graph is antisymmetric.
The most common antisymmetric networks in social science reflect clear con￾straints in the setting, such as formal hierarchical orderings (“command” in the
military), or historical constraints, such as citations where it is impossible for a
past paper to cite a future paper because the future paper does not exist at the
time the first paper is written. A special case of an antisymmetric network is the
directed acyclic graph (DAG). A DAG is an antisymmetric network with no
directed cycles. The lack of cycles implies a (partial) ordering of nodes based on
their position in the sequence of relations (e.g., General ➔ Colonel ➔ Major
➔ Captain), which has proved important for many social science applications,
particularly in narrative networks (e.g., Bearman, Faris, & Moody 1999;
Bearman & Stovel 2000) and causal modeling (e.g., Textor et al. 2016). If the
setting allows for either symmetric or asymmetric relations, the network is
“directed,” and the extent of reciprocity is often an empirical question
of interest.
Combining directionality with notions of which ties are valued or unvalued
(capturing the strength or valence of the tie) creates a typology of four net￾works, which can be visualized as shown in Figure 3.3. Networks where ties
either do or do not exist are considered binary versus ties that have an inherent
strength, which are valued.
The directed networks have arrows indicating a tie from one node to
another, whereas the undirected networks do not (i.e., all ties are symmetric).
The valued networks extend the binary networks by placing weights or
strengths on the ties (e.g., strength of friendship, amount of loan), represented
Undirected, Binary Directed, Binary
Undirected, Valued Directed, Valued
A E
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
E
A E
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 3.3 Four types of networks
52 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Pressin Figure 3.3 by thinner or wider lines. One could also imagine an analogous
picture that includes more than one type of tie (e.g., friendship and loan
relations among the same nodes).
We can further illustrate a one-mode network with an example drawn from
archival research on the relations among prominent families in Florence, Italy,
during the Renaissance (Padgett & Ansell 1993). During this period in Italy,
family and business were very closely aligned; thus, as represented in Figure 3.4,
Acciaiuoli
Albizzi
Barbadori
Bischeri
Castellani
Gaudagni Ginori
Lamberteschi
Medici Pazzi
Peruzzi
Pucci
Ridolfi
Salviati
Strozzi
Tornabuoni
FIGURE 3.4 Kinship/business relations among Florentine families in the Renaissance
What Is a Social Network? 53
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe nodes are families, and the ties are relations based on intermarriages
between families. The researchers chose marriages because these ties represent
primary group affiliations, or strong ties, guiding other sorts of associations.
Because marriage ties represent a mutual tie across families, they are symmetric.
Here, the network image is binary, indicating that a tie is either present or
absent; that is, the value of the tie (e.g., the number of intermarriages) is not
taken into account. Taken as a whole, the set of families and their interdepend￾encies can be considered a family network of municipal elites.
Most people will recognize the Medici name because of the family’s promin￾ent associations with the patronage of great works of Renaissance art. The
network reveals the Medici’s interesting and important position within the
structure of Florentine families. Think of the families as landmasses and the
kinship/business ties as bridges in the Euler example presented earlier. If one
were to try to “walk” to each family, which ones would one likely have to
traverse more than once to reach everyone else? The formal property of being
between other entities is common and important to many structures.
Substantive knowledge about what is likely “flowing” through these ties is also
key. Because important resources, information, and the capacity to exert social
influence depend on a family’s structural location, an additional structural
property to note here is the extent to which each family is dependent on certain
families to access both other families and the information that flows between
them. In this regard, the Medici are likely to be most powerful not only because
they are between many families but also because many of those families are
dependent on the Medici family to reach others.
Next, let’s examine affiliation network data and their two-mode graph
visualization. The network shown in Figure 3.5 is based on data collected by
Davis in the 1930s (see Davis et al. 2009[1941]) as part of a community study in
the southern United States. The figure shows eighteen women (red nodes) and the
network of their having attended fourteen social events (green nodes). The women
are not directly connected to one another, nor are the social events directly
connected to one another. Instead, they are linked indirectly through the other
type of node (i.e., events). Women are affiliated with one another by attending the
same social events, and social events are connected by sharing one or more female
attendees. As with the Florentine families, the southern women’s network reveals
something about the structure of a community, and the relational positions of
actors that correspond with their social importance. We will formalize this
intuition in much greater detail in Chapter 9, when we discuss the concept and
measures of network centrality. Here, we note that visual inspection alone can be
a powerful tool. We can roughly conclude that there appear to be two different
groups of women: the “Evelyn” set on the left and the “Nora” set on the right.
Looking at the events, we can see that Events 1–5 correspond most exclusively
with the “Evelyn” set, and Events 10–14 correspond with the “Nora” set. Events
6–9, in the middle of the graph, are the most important in terms of integrating the
community because they are the events that women from both groups attended.
54 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe decision to employ either a one-mode or two-mode network is highly
dependent on the researcher’s theoretical approach and empirical questions.
For example, a researcher taking a connectionist-based view of networks, in
which nodes transmit or represent flows of information to one another, will
usually choose a one-mode network, such as the Florentine families. A one￾mode network captures the direct connections between actors and thus can be
used to infer the diffusion potential (or flows) across the network. In contrast, a
two-mode network, in which individuals are indirectly linked through their
affiliations, is less precise in gauging flows. For example, in Figure 3.5, without
any indication of a direct tie between Laura and Verne, the researcher may
EVELYN
LAURA
THERESA
BRENDA
CHARLOTTE
FRANCES
ELEANOR
RUTH
PERL
DORTHY
KATERINE
SYLVIA
NORA
VERNE
MYRA
HELEN
OLIVIA
FLORA
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
E6
E7
E8
E9
E10
E11
E12
E13
E14
FIGURE 3.5 Southern women and their social event attendance
What Is a Social Network? 55
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Pressincorrectly infer flow and contact between them, when the flow may actually be
coming from their joint association with the 8th social event (E8). Affiliation
networks are, however, very practical because of the relative ease of collection,
and they sometimes represent the only option available to a researcher. For
example, researchers often use two-mode networks to study intellectual or
creative influences in project-based teams, such as when actors appear in the
same film or film writers collaborate on the same script.
3.4     
Many network measures build on the notions of flow between actors, and it is
useful to have an intuitive idea of these measures before trying to apply them in
more complicated settings. Figure 3.6 presents a simple network of five people
in which the tie of interest is “seeks advice from.” For example, Sally frequently
seeks advice from Harry and Tim frequently seeks advice from Sally, Harry,
and Mary; and so on. We will use this toy network to demonstrate how
network ideas – such as walks, paths, and distance – can be measured from
the basic data describing the connections between each actor.
Walks capture the potential flows between actors when the item of interest
can visit an actor more than once. A little more formally, walks capture any
sequences of nodes connecting i to j, with no restrictions on the number of times
the walk moves over a given actor. For example, Figure 3.7 shows walks of
length 3 starting from Tim. Looking at the very first branch, one can see that
Tim seeks advice from Sally, who seeks advice from Harry, who seeks advice
from Sally. Overall, there are three different walks of length 3 connecting Harry
to Sally: (1) Tim ! Sally ! Harry ! Sally; (2) Tim ! Sally ! Tim ! Sally;
and (3) Tim ! Harry ! Tim ! Sally. Thus, information (e.g., rumors)
discussed by Tim could reach Sally in three different ways. One must follow
the direction of the tie in calculating the length of the walk.
Paths are similar to walks but add the restriction that the sequence of nodes
can go over each actor only once. This restriction would be appropriate if one
thought that little would be added by hearing the information from the same
person again. Substantively, walks capture something akin to echo chambers,
whereas paths are more like the game of telephone. In this case, there is one
path of length 1 and one path of length 2 connecting Tim to Sally (Tim ! Sally;
Tim ! Harry ! Sally). Note that all paths are walks, but not all walks
are paths.
Finally, distance is generally calculated as the shortest path connecting actori to
actor j. The length of the shortest distance between two actors in a network is
called a geodesic.
3 In the case of Tim to Sally, distance is 1 because a path of length
3 Other ways of measuring distance are possible, such as the expected number of ties a random
walker would have to traverse to connect two nodes, but these are less commonly used in social
network analysis.
56 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University PressJoe
Mary
Harry
Sally
Tim
FIGURE 3.6 Example graph and basic network definitions
Tim
Sally
Harry Tim
Mary Harry
Joe
Sally Joe Tim Sally Harry Mary
Sally Tim
Harry Tim Sally Harr Mary y
Joe
FIGURE 3.7 Walks of length 3 from Tim
What Is a Social Network? 57
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press1 connects the two actors (Tim! Sally). Distance may be a useful measure if one is
concerned with the quickest route for diffusion, as when, for example, determining
the worst-case scenario for an infectious disease to spread in a network.
Walk – any sequence of nodes and edges (can revisit the same node
more than once) – for example, Tim, Harry, Tim, Mary
Path – a sequence of nodes and edges starting with one node and
ending with another (one can never go back or revisit the same node
twice) – for example, Sally, Tim, Mary, Joe
Cycle – A path that starts and ends on the the same node (Harry, Tim,
Sally, Harry).
(Geodesic) Distance – number of edges on the shortest path between
points (Sally to Joe = 2)
Density – number of ties/total possible = 9/(5(5–1)) = .45. Total
possible ties is 1
2 ð Þ ð Þ n  n −n when ties are undirected.
3.5    
Our first impression of a network is often visual. Network diagrams offer
appealing, intuitive representations of the underlying network data. Diagrams
make it easy to get a sense of the groups, the regions of cohesion, and the
overall structure of a network. A network picture can thus go a long way in
telling the story of a social system. And yet, visualizations can be intentionally
or unintentionally misleading. Visualizations are also not amenable to numer￾ical manipulation. One cannot add, subtract, multiply, or directly summarize
the picture. It is difficult to compare two networks just by looking at pictures.
Thus, one needs an analytically tractable mathematical representation of the
network data, allowing for numerical summaries of the properties of our
network. Note, however, that the visual and mathematical formalizations of
network data are tightly connected.
Network data can be formally represented in a number of ways. We begin by
describing the adjacency matrix, given that it offers the most mathematically
direct connection to visual representations. An adjacency matrix represents
objects in rows and columns, and the cells are their relations. In the case of
one-mode networks, the rows and the columns represent the same set of nodes
(say, students) and are arranged in the same order. Formally, one defines a
matrix Xij as an n  n matrix, such that the elements of the matrix, ij, represent
whether a tie exists between i and j. Thus, Xij represents the value of the tie
from i to j. Information contained in the matrix represents the adjacent pairs of
all nodes. Row i of the matrix represents the ties sent by actor i, and column j
represents the ties received by actor j. The number of actors in the network are
58 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrepresented by n, and thus the number of rows and columns will be equal to n.
Note that the matrix will be square, and the order of the rows is the same as the
order of the columns.
Table 3.1 presents the adjacency matrix for the Florentine family network
plotted in Figure 3.4. The cell entries off the diagonal indicate whether a tie
exists between family i and family j: 1 represents the presence of the tie (in this
case, a marriage tie), and 0 represents its absence. For example, X9,14 = 1,
indicating that the Medici family and the Salviati family have marriage rela￾tions; and X9,6 = 0, indicating that there is no relation between the Medici
family and the Ginori family. Note that the matrix is binary and does not reflect
any indication of tie strength. The matrix is also symmetric: the upper triangle is
a mirror reflection of the lower triangle. Formally, all Xij = Xji because the
network is undirected. When ties are directed and asymmetric, the upper and
lower triangles of the matrix will differ unless there is perfect reciprocity in the
ties. In some cases, the diagonal is meaningful, such as in the case of reported
self-liking. In the present case, however, the diagonal is meaningless because it
represents self-looping ties of marriages within families. In this period, such ties
were a social taboo and did not occur, but the diagonal could potentially have
salience for a different era of elites, like Roman Caesars.
This matrix is based on a binary network, but it is possible to capture valued
relations within a matrix. Thus, rather than a matrix of 0s and 1s, the matrix
would be filled with values describing the relationship between person i and
person j. This could be a count (e.g., representing how many times a person
sought advice) or a numerical value (e.g., representing how much a person relies
on offered advice), but the key is that the data are no longer restricted to 0s and
1s, and this is reflected in the values of the matrix.
We now turn to the matrix representation of the bipartite network intro￾duced earlier (see the matrix in Table 3.2). The data there concern southern
women and the social events they attended (see the network in Figure 3.5). The
network therefore consists of two types of nodes. When the network is
expressed in matrix form, one mode is arranged as rows, and the other mode
is arranged as columns. Although the choice is largely arbitrary, it is often easier
to select the smaller set of nodes as the columns and the larger set as the rows. In
our case, this choice produces a matrix with eighteen rows (women) and
fourteen columns (events). Again, we are illustrating a case in which ties are
binary. Because the network’s nodes are not directly tied with one another but
instead are associated or affiliated with one another, the matrix is called an
affiliation matrix. More formally, the data are represented as an n  m matrix,
where n lists the different actors (i.e., southern women), and m lists the different
affiliations (i.e., social events). Element Xij in the matrix is equal to 1 if person i
is a member of affiliation j, and 0 otherwise. The affiliation matrix is presented
in Table 3.2. Women are shown as the rows; social events are shown as the
columns; and a cell entry of 1 indicates that a woman attended a specific event,
and 0 indicates that she did not.
What Is a Social Network? 59
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press 3.1 Adjacency matrix of Florentine family relations
Acci Albi Barb Bisc Cast Gino Guad Lamb Medi Pazzi Peru Pucci Rido Salv Stro Torn
Acci 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Albi 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Barb 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Bisc 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0
Cast 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0
Gino 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Guad 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
Lamb 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Medi 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1
Pazzi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
Peru 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
Pucci 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Rido 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1
Salv 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Stro 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0
Torn 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
60
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press 3.2 Affiliation matrix of southern women data
E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8 E9 E10 E11 E12 E13 E14
EVELYN 1 1 1111011 00000
LAURA 1 1 1011110 00000
THERESA 0 1 1111111 00000
BRENDA 1 0 1111110 00000
CHARLOTTE 0 0 1110100 00000
FRANCES 0 0 1011010 00000
ELEANOR 0 0 0011110 00000
PEARL 0 0 0001011 00000
RUTH 0 0 0010111 00000
VERNE 0 0 0000111 00100
MYRNA 0 0 0000011 10100
KATHERINE 0 0 0000011 10111
SYLVIA 0 0 0000111 10111
MORA 0 0 0001101 11111
HELEN 0 0 0000110 11100
DOROTHY 0 0 0000011 00000
OLIVIA 0 0 0000001 01000
FLORA 0 0 0000001 01000
61
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe drawback of a matrix approach is that the matrix is less intuitive than a
picture. It is difficult to see emergent social structure, the divisions in the
population, or the overall topology with a matrix, even though it can be used
to measure these things. Another practical disadvantage of a matrix is that it is
a rather expensive way to hold data. Matrices contain n2 pieces of information
(although the diagonal is generally not meaningful because a self-tie is not
possible in most cases), representing whether a tie exists between every pair
of actors in the network. Because a matrix holds information about non-ties (or
the 0s), the amount of information that needs to be held increases with the
square of the number of nodes: a network of 10 nodes implies a matrix of 100
elements, but a network of 1,000 nodes implies a matrix of 1 million elements.
This feature makes a matrix a poor way to analyze and hold data for very large
networks, which is especially noteworthy given the increasing availability of
large networks collected from the Internet and digital records.
Alternative means of representing and storing network data are useful. An
edgelist, for example, is more compact than a matrix but still maintains the
same basic information. Each row in an edgelist represents a tie from node i to
node j. If the graph is directed, one column (generally the first) captures the
sender of that tie, and the other column captures the receiver of that tie. If the
graph is undirected, there is no distinction between sender and receiver. The
nodes are identified by an ID or observation number. The edgelist contains all
the connectivity information of the figure or adjacency matrix, as every tie in
the figure has a corresponding entry in the adjacency matrix and row in the
edgelist. The key difference between the edgelist and the adjacency matrix is
that the matrix holds a spot for every possible tie in the network, whether it
exists or not, whereas an edgelist represents only the ties that are present. The
pairs of people not present in the edgelist do not have a tie. The total number of
rows in the edgelist is therefore equal to the number of ties in the network.
The edgelist for the Florentine families is shown in Table 3.3. Note that in
this formulation, the Pucci family is no longer present because they are an
isolate, or a node with no connections to other nodes. When using edgelists, one
needs to ensure that such isolates are not dropped from the analysis, usually by
linking explicitly to a data set that includes all of the nodes. One can also
include self-loops to retain cases (i.e., add a looping tie from node i to itself ) in
the edgelist.
Different network types can be represented using an edgelist. Extending an
edgelist to capture valued relationships is simple, requiring only an additional
column that contains the value or weights corresponding to that edge. Similarly,
we can extend to multi-relational networks by simply including a flag for each
relation (“business” or “marriage” in the Florentine example). Affiliation net￾works, like that shown in Figure 3.5, can also be represented as an edgelist. The
first column displays the actors in one mode (in our case, women), and the second
column displays the other mode (i.e., events). Each row corresponds to a distinct
actor–group tie (e.g., Ruth–Event 6; Ruth–Event 8, and so on).
62 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe second common alternative to adjacency matrices in organizing network
data is an adjacency list. In an adjacency list, each node is listed as a row and
each of its adjacent partners is listed as a separate column. This is the natural
way to organize data from a survey in which respondents are asked to name
friends, for example. One would then have a row for each respondent and a
column for each friend they named. To continue our Florentine example,
Table 3.4 includes the same data in an adjacency list format.
Notice here that “PUCCI” is included again, but with no relation named.
For an adjacency list, one needs as many columns as the maximum degree in
your network (or a limit on alters that a respondent is allowed to name in a
survey). If degree is highly skewed, this can lead to a fairly inefficient data
structure, as many people will have a lot of empty cells. This data format is
common in graph algorithms, as it greatly facilitates exploring paths, particu￾larly when you replace IDs with row numbers. For example, if you want to
get all people within two steps of “STROZZI,” one need only go to the rows of
“MEDICI” and “PAZZI” and see who those people are (ACCIAIUOLI,
ALBIZZI, BARBADORI, RIDOLFI, SALVIATI(2), TORNABUONI). For this
reason, one typically keeps both sides of an undirected graph in the adjacency
list. To capture weighted relations, one needs to construct a parallel data
structure with “Alter1weight,” “Alter2weight,” and so forth.
 3.3 Edgelist of Florentine family relations
NODE1 NODE2
ACCIAIUOLI MEDICI
ALBIZZI GINORI
ALBIZZI GUADAGNI
ALBIZZI MEDICI
BARBADORI CASTELLANI
BARBADORI MEDICI
BISCHERI GUADAGNI
BISCHERI PERUZZI
BISCHERI STROZZI
CASTELLANI PERUZZI
CASTELLANI STROZZI
GUADAGNI LAMBERTESCHI
GUADAGNI TORNABUONI
MEDICI RIDOLFI
MEDICI SALVIATI
MEDICI TORNABUONI
PAZZI SALVIATI
PERUZZI STROZZI
RIDOLFI STROZZI
RIDOLFI TORNABUONI
What Is a Social Network? 63
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press 3.4 Adjacency list of Florentine family relations
Respondent Alter1 Alter2 Alter3 Alter4 Alter5 Alter6
ACCIAIUOLI MEDICI
ALBIZZI GINORI GUADAGNI MEDICI
BARBADORI CASTELLANI MEDICI
BISCHERI GUADAGNI PERUZZI STROZZI
CASTELLANI BARBADORI PERUZZI STROZZI
GINORI ALBIZZI
GUADAGNI ALBIZZI BISCHERI LAMBERTESCHI TORNABUONI
LAMBERTESCHI GUADAGNI
MEDICI ACCIAIUOLI ALBIZZI BARBADORI RIDOLFI SALVIATI TORNABUONI
PAZZI SALVIATI
PERUZZI BISCHERI CASTELLANI STROZZI
PUCCI
RIDOLFI MEDICI STROZZI TORNABUONI
SALVIATI MEDICI PAZZI
STROZZI BISCHERI CASTELLANI PERUZZI RIDOLFI
TORNABUONI GUADAGNI MEDICI RIDOLFI
64
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University PressThese three data structures – adjacency matrices, edgelists, and adjacency
lists – are the most common ways to organize social network data, but we will
note that there is a class of network data formats that you may run into based
on different sorts of “markup” strategies, where the data are stored much like
an HTML file. These files include tags that tell a program what each element in
the file means, and the file is generally nested to describe different levels of data.
So, for example, you may have lines in the file that describe the graph as a
whole, then lines that describe nodes and all their associated data, and then
lines that describe relations and all their associated data. For example, here is a
brief snippet of an XML representation of the Florentine data:
<graph id="G" edgedefault="undirected" parse.nodes="16"
parse.edges="20">
<node id="v1"> <data key="a1">ACCIAIUOLI</data>
<data key="a2">0.1028396</data>
<data key="a3">0.6620292</data>
<data key="a4">0.5000000</data>
</node>
<node id="v2"> <data key="a1">ALBIZZI</data>
<data key="a2">0.5797447</data>
<data key="a3">0.5207278</data>
<data key="a4">0.5000000</data>
</node>
...lines cut...
<edge source="v1" target="v9"/>
<edge source="v2" target="v6"/>
<edge source="v2" target="v7"/>
Note that the version above used 153 lines of code to describe 20 marriages
among 16 people, so it is not a particularly efficient format! However, there are
many variants of this format that you will run into because it is an easy way for
machines to read and write such files while still being somewhat readable by
humans and avoiding many of the problems of proprietary binary formats (of
which there are also many) (see Tsvetovat, Reminga, & Carley 2004 for
discussion of attempts to unify such data representations). These are often the
default data formats for data produced by application programming interfaces
(APIs) for Twitter or GitHub network data.
Thankfully, most users rarely have reason to interact with most of these data
structures directly. The tools used in R – mainly, the statnet and igraph
packages – each have their own network data formats (different types of
network “objects”), each of which hold data just a little differently. Once one
has moved data out of a source file (Qualtrics survey result or Twitter API feed)
and pulled them into R, these issues of data structure become largely irrelevant.
What is important, however, is for users to know enough about the data
What Is a Social Network? 65
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Pressstructure to avoid making silly data management mistakes – by mismerging
data, for example. As such, we believe it is important to have a basic under￾standing of how data are held, organized, and managed.
3.6 
We have progressed from a general informed understanding of social structure
(Chapter 2) toward the empirical science that is social network analysis.
Networks are abstractions built around visual and mathematical representa￾tions. In this chapter, we have introduced the reader to the key building blocks
of network analysis: nodes, ties, and matrices. We are well on our way from
moving from the reality of social structure to knowledge (useful information).
And yet, to move forward, we must first have the sort of data that can be
represented through the kinds of abstractions presented in this chapter. And if
those data have not already been collected, we have to go out and get them.
  
In addition to the general methods texts listed for Chapter 1, useful deep dives into
methods discussed here include:
Gibbons, Alan. 1985. Algorithmic Graph Theory. New York: Cambridge University
Press. (A classic exposition of primary algorithmic approaches to manipulating,
searching, and performing search operations on network objects. While some of the
routines have been superseded by newer algorithms, this publication provides basics
to get anyone started in this line of work.)
Harary, Frank. 1969. Graph Theory. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. (The classic work
in the basics of graph theory.)
Kivelä, Mikko, Alex Arenas, Marc Barthelemy et al. 2014. “Multilayer Networks.”
Journal of Complex Networks 2: 203–71. (Multilayer networks are one of the most
general ways to bind multiple types of nodes and relations in a single analysis object;
the approach has proven useful for both cross-context studies and unique approaches
to dynamic modeling of networks.)
Richards, William, and Andrew Seary. 2000. “Eigen Analysis of Networks.” Journal of
Social Structure 1(2): 1–17. (Eigen structures are key to many network metrics,
although their use and mathematical foundations are often understudied in social
sciences. This work provides a gentle introduction to what they are and why they
matter.)
66 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press4
How Are Social Network Data Collected?
We outline key conceptual issues and strategies in social network data collec￾tion, focusing on the differences between realist and nominalist approaches.
Given that most networks are incomplete in some way, we discuss ways to
anticipate and assess problems with missing data.
4.1    
Now that you have a sense of what networks are and why to study them, the
next step is to consider how to collect and analyze network data. Network data
collection strategies take many forms, including small group questionnaires,
large-scale surveys, face-to-face observations, “scraping” many thousands of
websites, APIs, or digital archives. The choice of strategy is informed by the
research focus and the available data sources. Many studies use previously
collected network data, and the same caveat holds: it is crucial that the problem
at hand is suited to data. As we have already discussed, conceptualization and
theorization enter even as one begins to collect data.
The most empirically valid studies consider node sets that are clearly
bounded by space and time. One of the earliest network studies, of the
Hawthorne Plant’s telephone bank wiring room, examined the multiple rela￾tions among workers and supervisors in a single room (Roethlisberger,
Dickson, & Wright 1947 [1939]). Clearly, a single room in a plant is not a
complete network: these individuals likely had many friendships outside that
room, even at the same plant. However, because the outcome of interest for the
research team concerned work productivity, the flows of interpersonal influ￾ences that were most likely to bear on this outcome were those in the immediate
work environment. Many network studies will face a more difficult task in
defining the boundary of the network (i.e., defining the set of nodes that are
part of the study). For example, researchers interested in how intellectual
67
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinfluence flows through academic research communities must decide where to
draw reasonable boundaries among thousands of individuals. As always, this
process points to the necessity of a theoretical and substantive understanding of
the field. It is really only on these grounds that the researcher can justify the
choice of a node set.
While most networks necessarily are partial views of social structures, it is
useful to distinguish between local and global data collection strategies, as
illustrated in Figure 4.1. Local networks are also called egocentric or partial
networks because they capture a local structure of ties centered on a particular
node, an ego. Essentially, individuals create and are at the center of their own
local network. As we cover in Chapter 6, such networks yield potentially
insightful information about individuals and their social ties, but these are
not complete networks in the sense of being a globally interconnected system
among all the nodes in a study. In contrast, global networks are not centered on
a single individual but instead on a larger group. Global networks are therefore
referred to as sociocentric or complete networks because they capture a full
census of the nodes and relationships within a particular domain. Figure 4.1
shows how the partial network egos A and B do not correctly indicate the
boundary-spanning position of individual C, which would be found in a
complete network. Although global networks provide a more complete struc￾tural picture, one should not exaggerate the differences between local networks
and complete networks: both are subject to practical data collection problems.
Regardless of the type of data used, the researcher must be aware of issues of
missing data and potential biases, as well as the difficult task of defining the
boundary of the network.
Gathering local and global network data involves different sampling strat￾egies, and these strategies present both benefits and drawbacks. Indeed, local
network data have several strengths. Local network structures are generally
A
C
B
A
C
C
B
Complete Network Partial Networks
FIGURE 4.1 The difference between complete and partial network data
68 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbased on random probability samples; thus, ego network data are easy to
collect and offer a (potentially) wide coverage of the population. One could,
for example, collect egocentric network data on a random sample of the entire
United States, as the General Social Survey (GSS) has done (Burt 1984;
Marsden, Smith, & Hout 2020). Similarly, egocentric network data make it
easy to capture a wide range of network alters, defined as those people that an
ego names as a social tie. The named alters need not be limited to certain
geographic regions or to certain types of people (e.g., only those in a given
organization), reducing the problem of setting boundaries in the study.
Egocentric network data are sufficient to capture many personally relevant
network properties, such as access to social support and homogeneity of
personal networks (e.g., whether an ego generally knows people with similar
levels of education). Ego-level network data are also useful in measuring certain
global network properties. When the outcomes of interest concern population￾level indicators of, say, racial segregation in friendship ties, then local network
data are sufficient to draw unbiased inferences to the global structure.
Ego network data are, however, ultimately local in nature – that is, egocen￾tric data are embedded in sociocentric data, but the reverse does not hold. This
property makes it difficult to measure global network properties, such as walks
and paths, which are dependent on the pattern of interaction between all actors.
Additionally, ego network data often capture subjective understandings of
relationships and miss the relational perceptions of alters. As such, they are
perceived ties rather than externally confirmed ones, and they could reflect
wishful thinking in some cases. Because actors are almost always embedded
in a wider array of ties, it is important to move beyond the individual pieces
afforded by ego network data to say something about the features of the whole
network. Recent work has made great strides in solving this problem, using
statistical models to construct complete networks based on the sampled data
(e.g., Krivitsky & Morris 2017; Smith 2012; Smith & Burow 2020). Thus, a
researcher could use independently sampled network data and still infer the
features of the global network, combining the convenience of ego network data
with the holistic feel of sociocentric data. Network inference remains a difficult
problem, however, and is an open area of research.
Global network data that are not inferred through a large number of local
networks are gathered by painstakingly asking all the nodes within a specified
boundary to report their ties to all others within that boundary. Consequently,
global network data are costlier to collect. Researchers trying to decide on a
local versus global network study design should weigh the costs and benefits of
each. For example, the ease/difficulty of data collection (local network data are
easier) should be weighed against ease/difficulty of measuring network proper￾ties (global network data are easier). That said, when collecting complete
network data is possible, it is often the preferred route.
Whether local or global network data are collected, research design involves
making decisions concerning two definitional issues: (1) defining the boundary
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 69
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressof the group from which the node set is drawn and (2) defining what constitutes
a tie among group members. Researchers tend to resolve these issues using
either a more realist set of approaches in which participants are allowed to
more inductively generate the members of the group and ties among them, or
more nominalist approaches in which the researcher more deductively deter￾mines the members of the group and the existence of ties (Laumann, Marsden,
& Prensky 1983).
4.2     
 
Realist approaches are sometimes called emic, because they rely on internal
definitions and perceptions. Thus, a network realist lets subjects define bound￾aries. Using a name generator within a survey is one realist approach to
collecting local network data. A name generator approach allows the respond￾ents to produce a set of names that are included in their egocentric network, as
well as their perceptions of ties among these individuals. The respondents thus
define the boundary (or the inclusion of nodes) in their ego network.
Frequently, the researcher asks respondents to list all the individuals with
whom they have had a certain relation in the recent past. A common format
focuses on contacts with whom an ego has discussed important matters in the
last six months. Alternatively, a researcher may ask about friendship, social
support, or even about specific exchanges (e.g., identifying who the respondent
could ask for a small loan). A realist approach may also extend beyond defining
the boundary of network participants to include what types of ties are relevant
within that context. Do people regularly seek advice for getting work done
within a given firm? How important are formal collaborations in establishing
one’s status in this workplace? Knowledge of what ties matter in a given
context are key to a realist’s approach to validly establishing where a network
begins and ends.
In general, it is often beneficial to ask about multiple relationships within the
survey because the respondent’s friends may or may not be the same people
they seek advice from (using different “name generators”). Afterward, the
respondent is asked to work through that list of close contacts to supply infor￾mation – such as gender, education, and occupation – about each one (“name
interpreter” questions). Finally, the respondent may be asked to provide further
network information for each pair of listed contacts, such as whether person j is
close to person k. Obviously, this can be a time-consuming procedure, and
respondents may fatigue and provide progressively less reliable data as they
complete the task. To reduce this possibility, researchers will frequently limit
the number of names generated. For example, a respondent may be asked to list
up to five individuals. Of course, this comes with its own trade-off of under￾reporting the true number of close contacts for an unknown number of
70 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrespondents. On the other hand, placing no limits on the number of contacts
risks that some respondents will regard everyone as a close contact – an
impossibility given that actual close ties have costs and require time and effort
(Jackson 2008). The goal is to find an adequate range that reasonably applies to
most people and captures variation. If most respondents fill in five ties, the
number is probably not set high enough. If the number is set to ten, and
10 percent report that many, then the number is more reasonable. For other
types of ties, different issues will need to be considered, but the point remains:
be reflective and critical of your data collection strategy.
Realist approaches that seek more globally complete networks tend to use
one of several techniques to derive snowball samples of nodes. Here, the
researcher starts with a name generator, as with more local network
approaches, but then gathers contact information for the people named by
the first respondents, who are in turn contacted and asked to provide further
contact information. This continues until some cutoff criterion is met – for
example, when there is some indication that the global network is saturated,
and the listed actors and ties become redundant. It can be difficult to determine
when to stop a snowball sample, especially when the sample is dependent on
the starting seeds or the actual structure is quite segmented (Mouw & Verdery
2012). In practice, studies are often shaped by practical concerns and stop after
a certain number of respondents have been interviewed. Thus, although the
goal is to gather a network that is as complete as possible, networks gathered
based on snowball samples (and similar techniques) are often incomplete.
In contrast to realist approaches, researchers adopting nominalist techniques
define the group boundary before collecting data, based on shared social
positions or shared events. Because nominalists rely on external sources and
judgments, the approach is sometimes called etic. Based on shared position, the
researcher might define the network boundary as all teachers at a particular
school or all employees at a midsize company. Based on shared events, a
network could include the regulars at a country club or the active members of
a church.
For complete network data, researchers often have to adopt a nominalist
boundary on practical grounds. This is especially the case for digital and
company records, where information on external relationships is hard to
acquire. In those studies, the focus is on relationships internal to a website or
a firm, and the assumption is that external influences and unrecorded instances
of association are significantly less important for predicting firm and partici￾pant outcomes than those persisting within the nominal boundary as defined by
the researcher, website, or firm. However, these two boundaries – realist and
nominalist – are often more aligned than orthogonal, especially under certain
conditions. For example, in demanding institutions, such as American high
schools, youth direct their attention more inward toward their peers than
outward, say, to persons in their workplaces – that is, they favor selecting in￾school peers as their friends over out-of-school peers and adults (Coleman
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 71
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press1961). In this instance, a nominalist school boundary is often one that is also a
realist boundary as defined by the students themselves. However, this conver￾gence breaks down when students are asked whether they befriend adults at
school or, in some schools (e.g., commuter schools), whether they actually form
primary relations outside of school.
4.3     
 
Researchers can also use realist or nominalist approaches in establishing the
existence of a relation. The aforementioned name generator is a good example
of a realist approach that defines both the boundary and the ties using a respond￾ent’s subjective experience. A researcher may also take a more nominalist
approach in defining the boundary of the network but then allow respondents
to determine the ties that exist, thus engaging in a constrained realist approach to
determining relations. For example, the individuals deemed part of the group of
interest (e.g., school or neighborhood) would be contacted and given a question￾naire with a roster of all other individuals in that setting. The respondents would
then indicate which people on the roster they have relations with (advice,
friendship, mentorship, and so on). Of course, the researcher may not have such
a complete roster and may rely on respondents recalling their relations (with
sufficient identifiers to map out the network). This situation involves a trade-off:
a roster may elicit more false positives (e.g., wishful thinking), but the recall
method is likely to garner more false negatives (e.g., forgetful thinking).
Network data used to be gathered with written questionnaires, such as the
one in Table 4.1. Today, the same basic information is typically gathered with
online or tablet-based survey platforms that ease integration of data collection
and analysis (Birkett et al. 2021). Nonetheless, one will generally use a roster of
some kind or match responses post hoc to generate the network from such
data.
1
A special case of the realist approach is collecting cognitive network data in
which the researcher asks respondents to report on the relations they believe
each individual has to others in the group. Respondents report not only on their
own perceived ties but also on the ties they believe to exist between other actors
in the network. For example, each member of a high school classroom might be
asked to draw a network of all the friendship ties among their classmates,
providing a comprehensive view of the social structure from each participant’s
point of view. Such cognitive network information can be used for a variety of
1 This choice often represents a trade-off in researcher versus respondent effort. For example, it is
fast to ask students in a classroom to write down the names of their friends, which minimizes the
in-class time students have to spend on an assessment. However, this sort of open-ended naming
results in a significant name-matching effort on the part of the researcher needing to disambiguate
named peers (see Moody et al. 2010 for discussion).
72 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 4.1 Sample network questionnaire
Friends Nomination Form – Who are your close friends that you usually hang around with? Please list only as many people as you usually hang out with.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. In what settings do you usually see this friend? For each friend check as many as
apply
6. When do you see this friend?
Check as many as apply
7. 8.
What are
your
friends’
full
names?
Please
print
their
first
and last
names
About
how
old is
this
friend?
How long
have
you
been
friends?
Is this friend
male or
female?
Check Male
or Female
In my
school
classes
In a school
activity
(like a team
or extra￾curricular)
In a non￾school club
or activity
(like a
youth
group, or
church)
At work In my
neighborhood
In my
family
Other Less than
Once a
week
Weekdays Weekends Do you know
this friend’s
parents?
Check Yes or
No
Is this friend a
best friend?
Check Yes
or No
Example:
Jane
Doe
16 yr. 6 mos. _____ Male
X Female
XX X X X
X Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
X No
(a) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(b) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(d) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(e) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(f ) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(continued)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 4.1 (continued)
Friends Nomination Form – Who are your close friends that you usually hang around with? Please list only as many people as you usually hang out with.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. In what settings do you usually see this friend? For each friend check as many as
apply
6. When do you see this friend?
Check as many as apply
7. 8.
(g) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(h) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(i) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
(j) _____ Male
_____ Female
_____ Yes
_____ No
_____ Yes
_____ No
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Presspurposes, such as ascertaining which relations are most recognized by all
participants in the class. The basic argument is that the most recognized ties
are also the ones with the highest level of obligation (see Cairns & Cairns
1991). Another approach to cognitive networks is more laborious and asks
respondents to report the relationships they think each different member of the
network believes they hold (Krackhardt 1987). For a network of ten people,
each person would provide ten sociometric surveys reflecting their sense of how
each actor would report their ties! This sort of cognitive network information
can be combined to offer a more detailed depiction of a cognitive social
structure. From here, one can ascertain who has the most accurate sense of
the cognitive social structure, or whose reports on alters’ ties best reflect ego￾reported connections. When a respondent correctly surmises the ties that
others’ report, they are said to have an accurate perception of the social
structure. These individuals are often considered potential leaders of firms
and tend to be central to the network. Conversely, persons who are hard for
group members to place in the network are often regarded as enigmas and may
not benefit from their own perceived ties.
In contrast, nominalist approaches determine the presence or absence of ties
by drawing on interaction patterns observed either in person or through commu￾nications technologies; archival records demonstrating proximity or contact; and
recorded traces of exchanges of various kinds. In comparison to the more
subjective judgments of respondents, nominalist strategies are often able to
garner more objectively defensible networks from existing data sources.
Nominalist approaches are also likely to scale better than subjective approaches
(which require interviews of all actors), making it possible to collect complete
network data on large populations. A researcher may have the phone records of
an entire country or the email exchanges of a large university. One possible
drawback of nominalist approaches is that the data are often limited in terms of
the kinds of relationships that are collected. A researcher with email data may not
have any other information on the relations between actors, making it difficult to
discuss things like friendship and support (or bullying and dislike). Similarly,
because the data are automatically collected (or are archival data), information
on the nodes in the network may be limited; for example, demographic infor￾mation may be limited or nonexistent. With such limitations in mind, recent
work has begun pairing surveys with nominalist network data, offering a rich
data set but also limiting the size of the system that can be studied.
In addition to simply determining the existence of ties, collecting network data
often involves indicating the strength of ties: the value attributed to the relation in
terms of frequency, duration, emotional intensity, and so on (Granovetter 1973;
see also Marsden 1990). A realist approach might ask respondents about how
frequently they seek professional advice from each of their relations at work or
about the extent to which they would characterize a relation as “loving.” In an
ego network survey, respondents may provide information about the duration,
strength, or type of relationship for each alter named.
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 75
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressTie strength often has an inherently subjective quality because it frequently
involves individuals’ feelings. Therefore, nominalist approaches to ties may
have validity issues when attempting to discern the strength of a tie. Although
there are many valued objective indicators of ties – such as the number of emails
i sent to j, or the number of articles researchers i and j have coauthored – the
concept of tie strength often entails individuals’ feelings and perceptions. For
example, if the main mechanism thought to transmit a flow of influence is
awareness of another node, the researcher using more nominalist indicators of
tie strength may mistake propinquity (physical proximity) for subjective
importance. Having frequent contact is certainly one way of thinking about
tie strength, but it falls short of the richness inherent to the concept.
In short, both nominalist and realist approaches are susceptible to measure￾ment error when recording ties, but having both objective and subjective meas￾ures may be useful in exploring the substantive question of interest. Given this
situation, what can be done? As with all data collection, the researcher must
carefully consider issues of data quality and potential sources of bias.
4.4  
Bias and error are present in both attributed nominalist and reported realist
ties. Both approaches are prone to omitting ties and erroneously reporting
them. For nominalist cases, the records used may be loosely entered or partial.
The researcher therefore needs to show some reflexivity and openly report the
steps taken to address every kind of substantive error. Although one may never
achieve perfection, one may find that one gets closer to it over time.
4.4.1 Data Issues in Nominalist Approaches
Take, as a nominalist example, the effort to study researcher collaborations in
journals by using Web of Science or Scopus – common data sets from which to
derive networks. First, each corpus fails to capture an unbiased sample of
scholars. They are biased toward journals written in English and therefore
toward English-speaking academics. They also fail to include both “slow” sci￾ence (e.g., books) and “fast” science (e.g., conference proceedings). Researchers
taking a random sample of CVs would find that these corpora are systematically
biased against certain kinds of scholars and scholarship. Second, the notion of
ties via coauthoring may be erroneous in some cases. Not every collaboration is
the same: some collaborations among physicists entail 500+ scholars (e.g., CERN
particle accelerator research), and others, like ours, entail four. It would be
unrealistic to argue that all 500 physicists share ties like the four of us coauthor￾ing this text do. Supplemental analysis can be used to see, for example, which
collaborations are repeated or whether the persons involved adopt one another’s
citations, thereby discerning which team sizes actually are the most prone to these
substantive forms and outcomes of association (Rawlings et al. 2015). From
76 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthere, one can argue that collaborations of, say, eight or fewer scholars exemplify
relatively substantive and persistent bonds. Third, corpora like Scopus cover only
one type of tie or activity salient to participants in the academic domain. Scholars
also teach, advise students, marshal theses, consult for firms, apply for grants,
patent ideas, participate on committees, and work in departments. Presumptions
of the independence of one tie from all others introduces concern. Researchers
must consider whether they are forgetting a key confounder or other type of
association that can influence the understanding of tie effects or social
structure formation.
As another example, take Facebook friends. Many students think in terms of
such data today, but much can be said about error inherent in those data. First,
the representativeness of the sample is questionable. Many Facebook pages are
groups or fan pages. Some even are of deceased individuals. One way to build
validity into ties gathered online is to focus on a subset of known persons in an
organization – say, a single university and its students (see Wimmer & Lewis
2010). Using a roster, one can see how representative the Facebook network is of
that university’s students. Good coverage would suggest a reasonable sample of
those individuals. Without such grounding, it would be impossible to know who
these data represent – and 100 years of careful research showing the importance
of sampling would be ignored in the process! Second, it is difficult to know
whether one person’s 1,000 friends on Facebook are the same type as the
100 friends another person lists. Using supplemental information on who posts
on whose page, how often they correspond, how often they are tagged together,
and so on, one may be able to identify which of these listed friends are friends of
different types (Garton, Haythornthwaite, and Wellman 1997; Rainie &
Wellman 2012). Then our comparisons may be more aligned. Next, recorded
activity on Facebook over a particular period could vary widely across users: one
individual may use Facebook 100 times more than another individual, resulting
in 100 more observations of their ties than for the other individual. To offset such
activity bias, the researcher might cluster users by how recently and frequently
they access the platform in a given period and then compare users within those
sets, or researchers can use those activity rates as controls to offset sampling bias.
In the case of the millions of observations found on social media, these clustering
approaches become more and more feasible and recommended.
This sounds like a mountain to overcome, and it is. But the careful researcher
will think about it, chip away, and report openly and honestly. Scientific
progress depends on building on others, so contending with these issues should
be viewed as a matter of good practice to master rather than an outcome
(publication) to achieve.
4.4.2 Data Issues in Realist Approaches
Realist approaches to ties have similar concerns to those faced by nominalists.
When participants report ties, they may be delusional or report wished-for
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 77
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrelations. People routinely forget their interactions and relations. They may
even report what they think the researcher wants to hear (i.e., social desirability
bias). Furthermore, they can be primed to remember certain things or to frame
responses in certain ways. In fact, even the definition of a tie may be highly
contingent on the cultural background of the respondent: what you call a friend
may not be the same as what we call a friend! All this may create an unnatural
bias or fail to acquire information acted on in an emic fashion by participants
“in the wild.”
Various strategies offset bias in tie-reporting. First, a balance of open and
guided reporting helps. The goal is to avoid too few reports (false negatives) as
well as fatigue and inaccuracy from too many reports (false positives). Aids
such as more entries, rosters, and name autocompletion can help with the
former issue; limits on entries and options for “other” name versions (nick￾names) may help with the latter. Second, the framing of questions is essential
(see Bradburn, Sudman, & Wansink 2004; Krosnick 1999). When asking
persons to report who their friends are, it helps to define “friend” and establish
a time frame. For example, a staple question is, “List up to 10 friends you hung
around with this semester outside of class.” The words “hung around with this
semester outside of class” are key, helping to specify what is meant. Third,
attempting to assess the quality or strength of tie can also offset error. Surveys
can include a barrage of tie quality questions in checkboxes to specify what a
friendship entails. Examples include survey items asking which days of the
week they see each other, in what contexts they see each other (in class, school,
work, neighborhood), how close they are, how much they trust the friend, and
how long they have known each other. Notably, research has found that
persons are more consistent in reporting behaviors than sentiments. Using these
three strategies can help identify notions of friendship that are comparable and,
at the very least, identify ties that meet a certain minimum threshold
of reliability.
All this may sound glum. Not at all! The point is that the researcher needs to
be empirically vigilant. What is needed is not more and faster science, but
instead more thoughtful and careful science. Consider what you are studying,
and reflect on the sample and its boundary. Mull over the nature of that social
structure and the outcome of interest, consider confounding factors and alter￾natives, and identify and compare similar entities. Consider combining data
sources, if possible, to offset the weaknesses of one with the strengths of the
others. As a result of these efforts, the associations identified and inferences
performed will be more valid and generalizable. And where you see limitations
in your research, report them. This kind of reflexive, deliberate research will
produce published work with a longer shelf life, and all who follow will be able
to build from and improve on it.
Table 4.2 offers a summary of the trade-offs in realist and nominalist
approaches. The reader may find this useful as a quick reference guide to
consult when developing a network data collection strategy.
78 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press4.5    
Even when sample bias is low and measurement error is minimized, a
researcher is still likely to face one more key threat to validity: missing data.
Missing data are a common but often ignored problem in network studies,
although a growing literature addresses such issues (e.g., Borgatti, Carley, &
 4.2 Comparison of realist and nominalist data collection strategies
Realist Nominalist
General Network features based on
subjects’ internal definitions
and perceptions (emic).
Network features based on
researcher-defined boundaries
and definitions (etic).
Boundary Respondent free to define
relevant alters based on
perception of question
(e.g., the GSS “important
matters” question).
Researcher defines relevant
setting, as question frame
(name in-class friends) or
records boundary (all
company employees).
Ties Respondent interprets name
generator freely (e.g., no
specific anchor to interpret
“important matters”).
Values interpreted by
respondent (“close friend” vs.
“acquaintance”).
Archival, observed, or recorded
traces of interactions and
exchange (well-anchored
survey responses are middle￾ground cases between realist
and nominalist).
Values summed from
observations; linking
instances to meaning can
be problematic.
Special Features Cognitive social structure data
allow each respondent to
provide their own perception
of relations among all others.
Nominalist approaches make it
simpler to include
noncognitive actors via
multilayer networks (e.g.,
linking people, animals, and
parasites in a disease study).
Data Issues People may have widely varying
understandings of what
relations mean.
Common relations are internally
multiplex (e.g., “friend” can
mean admiration, trust, or
respect).
Cognitive and instrument biases
(recency, proximity, social
conformity).
Respondent fatigue.
Archival data on interaction
traces often provide limited
node-level information.
Archival/web data may have
systematic coverage biases
(i.e., politically active youth in
Twitter, English in Web of
Science).
Rosters can easily go out of date
in highly mobile settings.
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 79
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressKrackhardt 2006; Kossinets 2006; Smith & Moody 2013; Wang et al. 2012).
Missing data imply that a researcher has incomplete information about the
population of interest. With regard to network analysis measures, which by
assumption depend on connections among all actors, missing information
makes it difficult to map out the full pattern of connections, thereby leading
to potential biases in the measures of interest.
Missing data can take a number of forms. For example, a study may have
missing nodes: there is no information on a subset of actors in the network,
even though all actors in the population have had a chance to participate
(making it not a boundary problem per se). Nodes may be missing for a variety
of reasons, depending on the nature of the study. For example, in a traditional
survey in a school, some students may be absent the day of the survey.
Similarly, a study that uses cell phones to track interactions (either via calls
or proximity) may have missing nodes for participants who lose their phones or
opt out of the study (e.g., by turning off Bluetooth). Analogous examples can be
imagined for nearly any population of interest. The consequences of missing
nodes are shown in Figure 4.2. Panel (a) plots a simple, complete network with
C
B
D
E
F
A
(a) True Network with Missing Nodes and Edges
Highlighted
(b) Observed Network with Missing
Nodes Removed
C
B
D
A
Missing Edge
Observed Node
Missing Node
Observed Edge
FIGURE 4.2 The consequences of missing network data
80 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Presstwo example missing nodes highlighted in red. Panel (b) shows the same
network with the missing nodes removed. Clearly, the network with missing
data offers an incomplete picture of the true (unobserved) network in panel (a).
Past work documenting the deleterious effects of missing data on network
measurement (e.g., Costenbader & Valente 2003; Smith, Moody, & Morgan
2017; Wang et al. 2012) shows, of course, that the level of bias increases as the
level of missing data increases. But more important is the great variation in the
effect of missing data on network measures. A study with the same level of
missing data may end up with quite high or quite low amounts of bias,
depending on the confluence of a number of factors, including the type of
missing nodes, the measure of interest, and the features of the network in
question. For example, missing more central nodes generally leads to more
bias, but some measures and network types are particularly susceptible to
missing important nodes (e.g., certain centrality measures in a small network,
and almost any measures reliant on path distances). In general, missing data
will be particularly important in networks of a small to medium range, where
missing particular nodes has a greater chance of affecting the network
structure.
4.6     
   
Ultimately, all studies have limitations, and a researcher should take proper
care to identify, assess, and minimize any clear sources of bias. Two basic
strategies can be used to address threats to validity, and ideally these two would
be used together to form a robust strategy. First, a researcher may try to adjust
and/or impute the raw data in some way to account for biases. Second, a
researcher may examine the sensitivity of the estimates and substantive conclu￾sions to different validity threats.
4.6.1 Adjusting and Imputing
A researcher faced with measurement error and missing data can adjust the raw
data in a number of ways, depending on the problem at hand. For example,
sample bias can be corrected for if the actual population of each group is
known by other means. Then one can apply sampling weights (the inverse of
the likelihood of being sampled) to bring the observed data back in line with the
population of interest. This procedure can apply well to groups, but it is less
clear how to apply it to relationships.
For missing edges, traditional statistical solutions cannot be easily applied.
What should a network researcher do in the face of missing data? Listwise
deletion (where all nodes with missing information are removed from the
network) is always an option (and a common choice), but this is not
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 81
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressparticularly attractive, given the potential bias introduced in networks with
missing data. Alternatively, a researcher could attempt to impute the missing
ties. Imputation strategies range from quite simple to complex, and the relative
returns (in different research settings) of different imputation methods is still
very much an open question.
With “simple imputation,” a researcher uses the nomination information
from the observed nodes to the missing nodes to reconstruct the network. Such
an imputation process is based on the assumption that the researcher has
information about the ties going to the missing nodes, or nonrespondents.
For example, in an organization, a worker may be out sick on the day of the
survey but may still be on the roster such that other members of the organiza￾tion could nominate them. When respondents nominate someone who does not
complete a survey, that information can be used to impute missing replies and
tie affirmations. For example, as shown in panel (a) of Figure 4.3, nodes A and
C
B
D
E
F
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
E A
C
B
D
E A
C
B
D
E A
(a) True Network with Missing Nodes and
Edges Highlighted
Listwise Deletion
(b) Observed Network under Different
Imputation Types
Simple Imputation with Asymmetric Option
Simple Imputation with Symmetric Option
Simple Imputation with Probabilistic Option
Observed Edge
Missing Edge
Imputed Edge
Observed Node
Missing Node
Imputed Edge (with probability, p,
set to observed rate of reciprocity;
here, .25)
Imputed Node
FIGURE 4.3 Simple imputation options for missing network data
82 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressD nominate node E, who is missing from the network. As an imputation
strategy, one could put node E back into the network with edges from A to
E and D to E. We demonstrate this in the second network depicted in
panel (b) of Figure 4.3. Note that node F does not get put back into the network
because there are no ties from respondents to F, the missing node.
A researcher must then decide on how to handle ties from nonrespondents to
respondents who nominated them. In this case, one needs to impute whether
E sends ties back to A and D. One option is to simply assume that all ties from
nonrespondents to respondents who nominated them are reciprocated; thus E–
D and E–A would be imputed, as depicted in the third network in panel (b) of
Figure 4.3. Alternatively, one could impute the ties probabilistically, based on
the rate of reciprocity in the observed network (defined as the proportion of ties
that exist such that if i nominates j, then j also nominates i), as is depicted in the
fourth network in Figure 4.3. A researcher could also impute the data under
different assumptions, using the various imputation strategies as a way of
creating bounds on the estimates (see panel (b) for options).
Especially useful for imputation are reported tie qualities. For example,
when respondents report ties with an individual they see every day or with
someone they consider a best friend, the alter is likely to reciprocate the
relationship in surveys. Thus, that information on known ties could be used
to impute missing ties.
More complicated imputation strategies are also possible. In particular, it is
difficult to impute edges where nonrespondents are asymmetrically tied to
someone, like F to A in Figure 4.3 (panel (a)). Such imputation problems
require more model-based approaches. Here, the researcher uses as much other
information as possible on individual characteristics, such as race and gender,
and estimates dyadic similarities and differences to predict which missing edges
are likely to exist (the models can also include network features, like reciprocity
and triadic closure, which are covered in Chapter 7). This approach, however,
requires knowing quite a bit about the nonrespondents, such as a past record or
even all their attributes and memberships. Machine learning techniques and
complex statistical models are making this sort of imputation of ties more and
more feasible.
4.6.2 Posterior Tests of Robustness and Sensitivity
As a second strategy, a researcher can approach problems of measurement
error and missing data by conducting sensitivity and robustness tests. For
example, it is important to know if the estimates are sensitive to missing data,
throwing into doubt the substantive conclusions. One simple way of gauging
bias is to rely on the results of past work on missing data. Smith and Moody
(2013) offer easy-to-use lookup tables for different measures and network
types. Consulting these tables, researchers would find their measure of interest
and identify the network(s) closest to their own network in terms of size,
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 83
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdirection, and kind of relation. They could then determine the maximum level
of missing data they could have while keeping bias below the desired level.
Alternatively, regression-based models can be used to predict the level of bias
(see Smith, Moody, & Morgan 2017).
Sensitivity analysis can also be used to examine measurement error. Here, one
asks how much error there would need to be in the data to change the inferences
made. One can even estimate likely parameters on error and then test to see if
they overturn the results. Various packages can be used for this task (Frank
2000), such as KonFound-It! (https://jmichaelrosenberg.shinyapps.io/konfound￾it/). Again, reflection on these matters assists with careful research design. Careful
treatment and then honest reporting of “the best we can do” is all one can ask.
From there, scholars can build and improve on one another’s work.
4.7      
As with other research involving human subjects, social network analysis entails
careful attention to ethical and privacy concerns prior to the data collection. All
research must be conducted in consultation with Institutional Review Boards
(IRBs) to assure that subjects are protected from harm. In the case of social
network analysis, harm may arise from different sources than when collecting
other types of data, and having direct knowledge of a social network can, in
itself, create harm. Consider how one might feel in learning that one is an isolate
in a network structure, or that someone considered a friend does not reciprocate
that tie. Or consider how knowledge of network structure – for example, who is
popular, unpopular, or boundary-spanning in a school friendship network –
could be used to try to manipulate opinion or divide students. Obviously, such
network data should be collected in a manner that respects the privacy, honor,
and social standing of all participants. Usually, this will mean that data should be
collected in a confidentially or anonymously and kept confidential and in pro￾tected formats. At a minimum, respondents should be fully informed as to how
the data will be used and what disclosure risks are implied (which can be
particularly important in private consulting settings where management is using
network analysis to evaluate organizational performance).
When collecting network data from individuals, as with all data based on
information derived from respondents, informed consent is required. This
consent would extend to parents in the case of studying children’s networks.
Consent may even be required in networks derived from records or online
materials – that is, one must always follow the rules stated in the data use
agreement, such as an API agreement for use of Twitter feeds. One
complication in consent for network researchers comes from the difficulty in
individuals giving consent-to-be-named. For example, when deriving a network
from a snowball sampling technique, how does one go about consenting those
who are named by earlier respondents? This can be particularly problematic
when the data collection effort (as it often is with respondent-driven sampling
84 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press[RDS]) involves stigmatized activities, such as drug use. For roster-based data
collection, such as in schools or other organizations, one can ask for consent to
be placed on the roster before network data are collected. In dynamic chain￾recruitment styles, researchers typically have respondents directly recruit alters.
In such cases, the researcher may give out anonymous tickets for participation
in RDS, or people who are named are treated as tentative contacts until they
can be enrolled and informed (and data are anonymized or deleted if alter
refuses to participate). Ego network designs have advantages here: they allow
researchers to ask minimally identifying information (first names, initials) that
are held only to aid respondent recall and are deleted after the interview.
A second problem in granting confidentiality may arise from deductive
disclosure – that is, the capacity for informants to deduce who is who in a
network based on certain known structural or node-level features. A general
assumption of network boundaries is that we have identified all the relevant
people in the setting, giving us a population census. This means that if some￾body who obtains these data knows a person is in a sampled setting (a school or
company, for example), then they also know the person is (or should be) in the
data. This then could allow someone to figure out the identity of someone in the
data is by the mix of attributes or pattern of network ties. For example, if one is
surveying a school and knows that only one ninth-grader made the varsity
basketball team, then it would be easy to find that case in the survey. Once that
student is identified, a user would then have access to everything else that
student reported in the survey. The best defense against deductive disclosure
is masking the setting itself – never report the name of the school or company,
for example. And, obviously, deductive disclosure is more likely in smaller
networks; in these cases, more information will likely need to be withheld from
any written report. Moreover, these issues become particularly salient in non￾academic social network analysis, such as in consulting, where the data may be
shared with powerful interests.
As with all data collection efforts, the precise ethical issues that may arise are
highly context-dependent. When using online data, the researcher may have to
sign explicit conflict of interest (COI) agreements or allow one’s research
partners an opportunity to embargo the publication of sensitive results. When
using internal records from an organization, one may have to store data behind
a firewall. When collecting audiovisual data on children at play, one may need
to agree to destroy the data at some point (e.g., once the children become
adults). When combining data from multiple public records, one may need to
take more precautions around sensitivity as the number of sources increases
and the potential for identification therefore also increases.
Network data, like much social research, is often carried out in active-use
contexts for consulting or evaluation. After the 9/11 attacks, for example, the
US government developed a newfound interest in the structure of terrorist
networks with the goal of identifying, mapping, and “disrupting” these net￾works. Similarly, companies often want to know how well people work on
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 85
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Pressteams and which actors provide bridges across multiple divisions, which will
inform who gets promoted (or fired). As with any consulting activity, research￾ers will need to square the tools and technical expertise they bring to the project
with their professional ethical standards, both personally and as members of
professional organizations, which often have explicit codes of conduct that
prohibit some sorts of activity.
We recommend that the reader consult the articles published in a
2005 special issue of the journal Social Networks (Volume 27, Issue 2), which
was edited by Ronald Breiger. The issues we touch on here and others are
covered in greater detail in those excellent articles. One should also draw on the
advice and insights of one’s colleagues, and especially the IRB professionals, in
best practices for data collection, storage, and privacy.
4.8 
Thinking structurally leads to strategic data collection. No data are perfect, and
all projects involve trade-offs. In this chapter, we have introduced a set of
choices involved in gathering network data, using more realist and nominalist
frameworks. Given the inevitable limitations of any data set, we guided readers
to ways to assess the quality of their data and to engage in techniques for
handling missing data. Readers should now have a pretty good sense of what it
means to “think structurally” and feel ready to engage in more exploratory
visualizations that frequently guide network analyses.
  
adams, jimi. 2019. Gathering Social Network Data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. (An
outstanding recent overview of network data collection strategies.)
Bernard, H. Russell, Peter Killworth, David Kronenfeld, and Lee Sailer. 1984. “The
Problem of Informant Accuracy: The Validity of Retrospective Data.” Annual Review
of Anthropology 13: 495–517. (This is one of a series of works that raised important
questions on informant accuracy, leading to a focused research program on improving
data collection quality.)
Birkett, Michelle, Joshua Melville, Patrick Janulis et al. 2021. “Network Canvas: Key
Decisions in The Design of an Interviewer-Assisted Network Data Collection Software
Suite.” Social Networks 66: 114–24. (A significant boon to contemporary network
analysis is the ability to use graphical interface devices for data collection; Network
Canvas is one such tool.)
Burt, Ronald. 1984. “Network Items and the General Social Survey.” Social Networks 6
(4): 293–339. (This paper discusses the development of the “important matters” ego
network name generator and name interpreter frameworks.)
Butts, Carter. 2003. “Network Inference, Error and Informant (In)accuracy: A Bayesian
Approach.” Social Networks 25(2): 103–40. (An excellent formal treatment of the
implications of error and missing data on network measures and methods.)
86 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressDomínguez, Silvia, and Betina Hollstein (eds.). 2014. Mixed Methods Social Networks
Research: Design and Applications. New York: Cambridge University Press. (A nice
combination of guide and illustration in using data sources other than traditional
survey methods, including ethnographic and simulation approaches.)
Krackhardt, David. 1987. “Cognitive Social Structures.” Social Networks 9(2): 109–34.
(Cognitive social-structural data ask each member of a setting to report on the
relations amongst all others, yielding a perspective on the structure of the network
from each person. While time consuming, it represents a powerful way to characterize
perceptions and relations simultaneously.)
Marsden, Peter V. 1990. “Network Data and Measurement.” Annual Review of
Sociology 16: 435–63. (The classic work on best practices for data collection.)
Robins, Garry, David Bright, Laurin Weissinger, and Pat Stys. 2022. “Data Collection
for Social Network Research.” Social Networks 69: 1–2. (A collection of pieces on
data collection best practices.)
Tubaro, Paola, Louise Ryan, Antonio A. Casilli, and Alessio D’angelo. 2021. “Social
Network Analysis: New Ethical Approaches through Collective Reflexivity.
Introduction to the Special Issue of Social Networks.” Social Networks 67: 1–8.
(A nice collection of reflections on ethical issues in data collection.)
How Are Social Network Data Collected? 87
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press5
How Are Social Network Data Visualized?
Images can be powerful; and, as the saying goes, “with great power comes great
responsibility.” Today, the world is suffused with images through various
media, and people have come to expect pictures to tell them stories. With
increased computational power, images of quantitative data are increasingly
part of the “stories” one commonly sees and are powerful in communicating
research findings. Many of these images are informative and effective; others
are confusing, convey little actual information, or, sadly, are used to intention￾ally mislead for ideological reasons. Network science has always used compel￾ling images to tell stories about structures, and the field is therefore particularly
suited to make the most use of this era of data visualization. But given the vastly
expanded palette of visualization available today, how does the researcher
decide what is a good network image?
5.1    
Why visualize a network at all? Why not avoid the hassle of all the choices and
instead present network information in various tables? To answer these ques￾tions, consider Anscombe’s (1973) defense of data visualization in the
American Statistician (replicated in Tufte 2001; presented here in Table 5.1).
The three y variables in the table appear similar: they have the same mean (7.5)
and the same Pearson’s correlation with the x variable (r = 0.82), and ordinary
least squares (OLS) regression shows them to have the same slopes, intercepts,
and summary statistics (y = 3 + 0.5x). From simple summary statistics, one
might easily conclude that these series are effectively substitutable.
But a simple visualization in the form of a scatterplot (Figure 5.1) demon￾strates that the relations are fundamentally different in the overall relation
between x and y. The functional form of the relationship differs in each
sequence.
88
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressThis example clarifies the fundamental value of visualization: it allows us to
see the relations among elements “on the whole” in ways that summary statis￾tics simply cannot. Visualization allows us to see the relative positions of all the
points, so although our intuitions (based on the linear assumptions of OLS)
might lead us to expect the first sequence, in fact, all the others fit just as well.
The differences between the sequences are immediately apparent because our
eyes are drawn to the shape of the associations. The mismatch between assump￾tion and reality largely arises because a good summary statistic captures a single
dimension, whereas visualization captures multiple dimensions (and unequal
distributions in those dimensions) simultaneously.
Let’s consider a more artistic example. Perhaps you know about Pointillism,
the artistic movement in painting in which many dots are used to construct a
larger image. At the micro level, a Pointillist painting is just a bunch of colored
points. At the macro level, one can see an image with objects arrayed in relation
to one another (Figure 5.2). The fascination elicited by such paintings is in how
such micro-level organization comes together, as if by magic, to coerce our
brains into seeing something coherent, relatable, and even beautiful. Seeing
social structure has a similar flavor: no structure is visible at the micro level, but
as one extends from individuals to interactions, relations, and groups, the
structure emerges (Healy & Moody 2014).
 5.1 Three bivariate distributions
X y1 y2 y3
4 4.26 3.1 5.39
5 5.68 4.74 5.73
6 7.24 6.13 6.08
7 4.82 7.26 6.42
8 6.95 8.14 6.77
9 8.81 8.77 7.11
10 8.04 9.14 7.46
11 8.33 9.26 7.81
12 10.84 9.13 8.15
13 7.58 8.74 12.74
14 9.96 8.1 8.84
Source: From Anscombe (1973)
FIGURE 5.1 Scatterplots of three bivariate distributions shown in Table 5.1
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 89
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressSocial network analysis has always been a visual science (Freeman 2004),
rich with images aimed at illuminating our understanding of the world. Early
visualization efforts were led by Jacob Moreno, one of the most enigmatic
figures in the history of social network analysis. Moreno was personally
charming and held well-attended lectures that dazzled audiences with interest￾ing stories (Moreno went on to found the school of psychotherapy known as
“psychodrama”). Part of Moreno’s overall showmanship was presenting net￾work visualizations – and, indeed, his work made the front page of the New
York Times in 1933 with the headline “Emotions Mapped by New
Geography ... Colored Lines Show Likes and Dislikes of Individuals and
Groups.” Moreno used these network images, which he called sociograms, to
convey stories about human connection – or lack thereof – in order to explain
why a large number of girls ran away from home and ended up at the New
York Training School for Girls in Hudson, New York.
Much of the excitement around Moreno’s early work was the fascination it
elicited in being able to see social relations on the page (see Figure 5.3). Using a
simple visual syntax (circles for girls, triangles for boys, red for positive senti￾ment, and black for negative) and placing nodes on the page by feel and
intuition, Moreno was able to quickly illustrate how social relations were
organized. In the girls’ cabin excerpted for Figure 5.3, for example, “CM” in
the lower left of the figure is disliked by many others in the cabin, and her only
close friend (“BC”) reports no other friends. Although Moreno dreamed that
one day such detailed sociograms could be applied to entire cities, the lack of a
principled method for arranging nodes on the page made his attempts at much
larger sociograms fairly uninformative.
Network visualization remains captivating. Sometimes this is due to its
detailed views of small groups. Much like the conspiracy art of Mark
Lombardi (Hobbs & Lombardi 2003), which used network drawings to illus￾trate hidden connections among (for example) corporations and government
agents, the fascination with these smaller network diagrams is almost ethno￾graphic: it represents an attempt to look inside an otherwise hidden world, but
FIGURE 5.2 “Circus Sideshow” by Georges Seurat, with detail
90 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressone that depends on being able to hold and trace these relations in one’s head or
at least clearly illustrate them on a single page. Much of modern network
visualization retains this sort of follow-the-hidden-paths property, but it aims
to array points and lines in a way that imbues meaning to the macro arrange￾ment of points on the page. Other networks approach Moreno’s original dream
of visualizing entire cities of relations and dazzle with vastly large sets of nodes
and relations.
Why is visualization so important in network science? Unlike many fields
where descriptive and predictive statistics are sufficient for understanding a
process, network visualization is both (1) a tool for learning about structure
within one’s data set and (2) a rhetorical device for communicating findings to
FIGURE 5.3 Girls’ cabin signed network from Moreno (1934)
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 91
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressothers, in many cases – such as consulting and intervention work – to the very
people one is studying. In the former instance, a researcher seeks tools to help
build intuition and understanding about the research problem. Visualization
affords speed, simplicity, interactivity, and the ability to try many approaches
or layer attribute information, helping build intuition in ways that single￾dimensional statistical summaries simply cannot. In the latter, the researcher
must choose the core aspect(s) of the structure they are trying to render for an
audience that will best convey the research story. Presenting quality visualiza￾tions requires deliberation and editing to ensure that the right information is
conveyed in the most effective way.
Whether visualization is used as a tool or a rhetorical device, methodological
transparency and data fidelity are priorities. Each type of task requires trade￾offs, and we outline some of these in this chapter. A core theme of our approach
is that there is no best way to visualize a network: visualization is always in
service to a specific research task, and the fit to that task is paramount. But
there are many bad ways to visualize a network, ways that confuse more than
clarify or reflect a thoughtless analytic approach. Having effective guiding
principles for how best to marshal visualizations in service to questions can
help avoid the sorts of miserable “hairball” figures – that is, indecipherable
structures of nodes and ties clumped together – too often found in published
work. While no visualization is perfect, following some basic principles goes far
in enhancing the power of network visualization.
This chapter offers some techniques for exploratory network visualization,
which we hope also help in retaining the rhetorical power and the aesthetic beauty
of seeing social structure. For the analyst, the main use of network visualization is
first exploratory, allowing the opportunity to see what features underlie a given
data set. After such exploratory analysis, these features are then generally built into
a more explanatory model. A second reason to use network visualizations is to
communicate with nonexperts – to help audiences see the relevant features of the
social system under investigation. The core aims here echo good data visualization
generally: clarity, richness, and data fidelity in service of a clear story. These sorts of
presentation-style graphics usually require much more editing and forethought
than exploratory work, but they promise to help convey the richness and nuance
of a story in ways that are simply impossible with summary statistics.
Network visualization is really its own field of research, and we can only
scratch the surface here (see the Suggested Further Reading at the chapter’s
end). In the next section, we discuss the two main decisions involved in explora￾tory network visualization. Afterward, we briefly touch on the challenges of
visualizing very large networks, as well as the temporal dynamics of networks.
5.2   
The key to useful exploratory network visualization is twofold. First, the
researcher must determine the layout space (i.e., why nodes are placed nearer
92 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressor farther apart). Second, the researcher must decide how much to manipulate
the network attributes by layering on colors and shapes in order to create a
clear linkage between the observed structure and the attributes of interest to
the analyst.
5.2.1 Determining the Layout Space
Unlike two quantitative variables arrayed in a scatterplot, networks lack a deter￾minant coordinate system, having only “adjacent” or “not” distinguished by a
connecting line (with perhaps a consideration of the strength of the association).
Scatterplots work because they display the key features of an association visually,
taking the ordering of each to define a plane where each region has a particular
meaning. Because networks do not conform to this simple two-dimensional
comparison of ranked values, the placement of nodes in the space rests on other
features. For Moreno and like-minded early network analysts, the goal was to
represent relations in a way that would allow users to easily trace relations. This
goal usually entails minimizing edge crossing, placing adjacent nodes near each
other, and avoiding sharp angles. Modern automatic layout routines generally
favor some of these heuristic features over others. Thus, choice of layout routine,
consciously or not, builds an implicit analytic choice into the display. For example,
Figure 5.4 shows three different visualizations of Zachary’s (1977) karate club
data that have been the source of various analyses (e.g., White & Harary 2001;
Kolaczyk, Chua, & Barthélemy 2009). These images vary in their ability to imitate
the split of the club into two groups, one following the instructor Mr. Hi (nodes in
red) and one following the club president John (nodes in gray). Interestingly, the
least complex layout, which matches Zachary’s original circular one, appears to be
the best at intimating the split in the club.
How can the same network data yield such different images? Unlike a
scatterplot, these images have no taken-for-granted underlying space: points
can theoretically be placed anywhere in the x–y plane. Similarly, the nodes
themselves vary in how they are displayed, and (as is discussed in greater detail
later in this chapter) one will generally want to use shape, color, and size to
convey meaningful information about these features.
The next section reviews generic models for embedding networks in the x–y
plane, presents strategies for exploratory network visualization and
presentation-quality visualization, and discusses atypical network visualization
focusing on challenges of dynamics, multilayer networks, and scale.
1
1 The discussion here is deliberately general and not limited by the current state of the
R visualization options. The network visualization tools in R are generally useful for exploratory
analysis and do quite well for simple presentation-quality graphics. In our experience, however,
some of the fine-tuning we will discuss requires exporting either the network or the image to
alternative software packages to produce the best result. Machine learning approaches may
eventually automate some of these decisions (see Kwon & Ma 2019).
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 93
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressFIGURE 5.4 (a–c) Three visualizations of Zachary’s (1977) karate club data
94 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press5.2.2 Models for Graph Space
How can one become more objective in deciding where to place nodes in a
visualization? Although the meaning of the nodes and ties in a network is often
easy to explain, the meaning of the space in which these are arrayed is not a
given. At its most basic, a network visualization is a two-dimensional projec￾tion of a graph, although occasionally three-dimensional layouts can be used.
Having some explanation for the placement of nodes is key. There are three
common ways to project a graph: (1) distance- or spring-based embedding, (2)
using known fixed positions, and (3) hierarchical embedding.
5.2.2.1 Distance- or Spring-Based Embedding
Perhaps the most intuitive embedding of networks in a space is to convert the
relational distance in the network to spatial distance on the plane. The task then
is to find a set of x–y coordinates that puts nodes that are near each other in
social space near each other on the page. The most familiar example of this idea
comes from multidimensional scaling (MDS) – a procedure that arrays a matrix
of dyadic distances in a low-dimensional space. For example, consider the
geographic distance between pairs of cities in the United States, represented
as a simple distance matrix in Table 5.2.
This matrix could be expanded to include hundreds or even thousands of
dyadic distances. Using such a distance matrix as input for the MDS procedure,
one could reduce the complexity of all these distances by deriving a set of
coordinates that best fits the observed distances. If one were to do so for a
large number of US cities and array these in a two-dimensional coordinate
system, one would see something like what is shown in Figure 5.5.
The results look familiar, yes? Dimension 1 listed along the x-axis is clearly a
close analog to latitude, and Dimension 2 along the y-axis is a close analog to
longitude. Thus, a simple scatterplot of the two dimensions yields a recognizable
map of the United States. Note that the direction of the dimensions here is
arbitrary; the model would have fit just as well if the dimensions had been reversed,
leading Miami and Seattle to change places. TheMDS procedure we used to derive
these coordinates is covered in greater detail in Chapter 12. In short, because the
data on city distances are largely taken from a two-dimensional plane (with error
 5.2 Distance matrix of five US cities
Atlanta Austin Baltimore Boston Chicago
Atlanta 0.00 1,315.28 927.35 1,505.11 944.40
Austin 1,315.28 0.00 2,166.00 2,724.01 1,571.76
Baltimore 927.35 2,166.00 0.00 577.85 973.23
Boston 1,505.11 2,724.01 577.85 0.00 1,366.63
Chicago 944.40 1,571.76 973.23 1,366.63 0.00
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 95
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfor the curvature of the planet and differences in altitude), the two-dimensional
rendering comports with our experience of the relative positions of cities on maps
and globes. Obviously, when distances do not correspond with physical distances,
theMDS results may be more complex and not neatly reduce to a two-dimensional
rendering (i.e., there is greater distortion introduced).
For most networks, the researcher is interested in the social distances
between the nodes. One can therefore perform a similar operation of arraying
nodes with network data by simply substituting a social distance matrix for the
geographic distance matrix. This approach goes by many names – including
space-based, force directed, energy minimizing, or spring embedder –
depending on the particular algorithm used to achieve the result. The key to
reading such diagrams is to focus on spatial proximity: nodes near each other
on the page should be more likely to be tied to each other or have many ties in
common, and those far apart should be multiple hops away in the network as
well. This target correspondence between social and screen distance led two of
this book’s authors to propose the correlation between geodesic distance (the
length of the shortest path between nodes) and display distance as a measure of
visualization fit (Bender-deMoll & McFarland 2006; Moody, McFarland, &
Bender-deMoll 2005).
Atlanta
Ausn
Balmore
Boston
Chicago
Dallas
Denver
Houston
Indianapolis
Jacksonville
Las_Vegas
Los_Angeles
Memphis
Miami
New_Orleans
New_York
Newark
Oakland
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Portland
San_Antonio
San_Diego
San_Francisco
San_Jose
Seale
Tampa
Tucson
Washington_DC
–1.5 –1.0 –0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Dimension 1
1
0
–1
–2
Dimension 2
FIGURE 5.5 Visualization of a dyadic distance matrix of select US cities
96 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressAs an example, consider again the network of social relations from
Moreno’s data presented in Figure 5.2, reproduced in the far left panel of
Figure 5.6 (retaining his labeling and color scheme).
How well do these coordinates explain the original pairwise distances
derived from the adjacency matrix? Moreno’s original layout results in a fit
of .34. If one instead applies the same MDS routine used for the city distance
data (treating all ties as having equal weight and as undirected), one can achieve
a fit of .72 (shown in middle panel).
2 Although this representation nicely
captures the variance in pairwise distance with screen distance, some of the
edges run very close under each other (e.g., among CM, RA, and PP). MDS is
effective for this task, but it is not commonly used for network layouts because
it is generally insensitive to these sorts of stacking and occlusion issues. In
addition, MDS does not scale well, being intolerably slow for larger networks.
Rather than metric MDS, the family of algorithms most commonly used for
space-based layouts is energy minimizer functions. Based on a physical analogy
in which ties between nodes are springs or forces that pull nodes together and
non-ties are springs that push nodes apart (Tutte 1963), the system equilibrates at
something very similar to an MDS but is generally faster (for sparse graphs). One
common algorithm for this is the Fruchterman–Rheingold (FR) algorithm
(Fruchterman & Rheingold 1991). Applying the FR layout to a binary version
of the Moreno graph fits quite well (.68; right panel). The repulsion force
between disconnected nodes has the advantage of helping to flair out some of
those occluded edges. Variants on this layout style (and there are many) generally
affect the control over node or edge overlap, either explicitly with a so-called
jittering function or implicitly with the ways the underlying routines optimize the
layout. For example, because the FR layout does not have an explicit heuristic for
node overlap, two structurally equivalent nodes will be placed at the exact same
coordinates. The Kamada–Kawai (1989) layout algorithm, on the other hand,
includes a node-overlap penalty in the optimization routine, so structurally
equivalent nodes will be placed near each other but not on top of each other.
The fit of a network in space is necessarily limited by the dimensionality of
the space. Networks are high-dimensional objects, and any projection to two
dimensions will rarely fit perfectly. Consider a simple hub-and-spoke (or star)
network: every spoke must be two steps from every other spoke, but the
standard drawing of spoke nodes arranged in a circle will force some to be
right next to each other while others are farther away. This dimensional
incompatibility naturally leads to attempts to display networks in three dimen￾sions rather than two in order to gain an extra degree of freedom. Virtual 3D
displays improve fit (e.g., a 3D version of the Moreno data using the FR
algorithm fit at .82) and can be effective for interactive exploration. Such
displays generally do not work as well for print, however, for two reasons:
2 In all cases, the isolate, TS, is placed arbitrarily and does not contribute to fit.
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 97
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressFIGURE 5.6 Spatial representation of Moreno’s (1934) data
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press(1) nodes end up “behind” others, making them difficult to view; and (2) issues
related to the 3D perspective are often difficult to translate on the printed page.
5.2.2.2 Known Fixed Positions
The second approach to the layout space is to use a known fixed geography. The
early network studies of the Hawthorne Plant, for example, positioned nodes in a
two-dimensional space taken from a vantage point above the plant, looking down
on the workers. This choice is not surprising, given that the researchers were
purveyors of scientific management and sought to study the plant from a detached,
rational systems standpoint. In this sort of study, knowing which workers were
physically next to each other in the assembly processes helped inform the social
relations that were layered (Roethlisberger & Dickson 1939). Using known fixed
positions is a common practice for networks with a strong geographic component.
For example, in a study of hospital exchange networks, Iwashyna et al. (2009)
used the ZIP code coordinates of each hospital for the layout. Using data from
their study, we can produce a hospital exchange network for the entire United
States (see Figure 5.7).
FIGURE 5.7 Hospital exchange network using ZIP codes for coordinates
Note: Produced using data from Iwashyna et al. (2009)
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 99
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe main advantage of these sorts of layout spaces is that the audience is
already familiar with space, making it easier for viewers to see how unknown
features (relational exchanges) layer over a known feature (the map). The main
disadvantage is that map-based spaces carry with them a set of distortions
because of the physical constraints of the setting – perhaps a hallway in a
building like the Hawthorne Plant or the vast open spaces in the western
United States. These constraints have a visual impact that might interfere with
what one wants to present. For example, the hospital exchange map layout
shown has a fit to social distance of .52, whereas a spring-embedder layout (not
shown) affords a fit of .68.
The distorting effect of fixed-coordinate layouts is stronger when the coord￾inates are arbitrary. The most common fixed layout is a circular one (see the
first network depicted in Figure 5.4, for example). Historically, circular layouts
were used because they are simple to create by hand and allow a reader to trace
relations among all nodes without worrying about lines falling under each
other. These advantages are moot with modern computing. Surprisingly, we
still see a fair number of circular layout designs for networks in the form of
chord diagrams, which are popular in studies of migration, genetics, and
economics (e.g., Holten 2006). However, in almost all cases, we think chord
diagrams and similar layouts would be best replaced with a social distance–
based layout.
5.2.2.3 Hierarchical Embedding
The third model for network space is to incorporate some of what scatterplots
do best – that is, provide a dimensionality to at least one of the axes. The
method of hierarchical embedding within a layout style works best when the
social process underlying the network has a strong ordering. Organizational
charts where “higher-ups” are literally higher up and family trees where ances￾tors are placed higher are the archetypes of this sort of layout. DAG applica￾tions to narratives and causal orderings would also be well suited to this
approach (Bearman, Faris, & Moody 1999). This layout is also very effective
when the network is generated in a sequence or generally describes a spreading
process from a source point. For example, Figure 5.8 displays a tree diagram
from a simulation of STD in a population from ten different source nodes. STD
infection sequences are always trees – each person infects another, who might
infect multiple others, who then infect others, and so on. The researcher can
represent such infection chains with a hierarchical display where each “seed”
node is at the root and each newly infected person follows under them. In this
example, one sees that of the ten seeds, most are small infection breakouts that
do not go far, but one is much larger. Why? It turns out that all long-distance
chains required having a concurrent relation “upstream” (represented by the
edge being orange or red). This pattern suggests that much of the spread of
STDs might depend on concurrent relations.
100 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe main task in arranging nodes for tree diagrams is in ordering the
positions along the nonhierarchical axis to minimize edge crossing. Many of
the technical layout algorithms designed for plotting trees and organizational
charts specialize in this. Note that trees need not be linear: tree plots can be
increased dramatically through the use of polar coordinates. Consider, for
example, recent work on large kinship networks, such as that displayed in
Figure 5.9. The traditional strategy for hierarchy used in tree diagrams fails
for large trees, which can get very wide if one were to display each layer along a
vertical dimension, given that the single root might span out to tens of thou￾sands of nodes. One solution is to use polar coordinates so that the root is at the
center and then use a set of concentric rings at each layer out from that central
node, with points arranged within the circle to minimize edge crossing.
5.3    
The challenges of where to position nodes in space has given rise to the entire
subfield of graph visualization heuristics. The various algorithms created in this
line of research serve as guides, telling the computer where to best arrange
Concurrent, forward
Concurrent, backward
Monogamous
Path leading to node is:
FIGURE 5.8 Tree diagram
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 101
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Presspoints in space. These algorithms often try to maximize a number of criteria,
which may be at odds with one another. Such criteria include the following:
 Ensure even node distribution
 Use consistent edge lengths
 Avoid line crossing
 Emphasize symmetry
 Maximize edge-edge angles
 Avoid lines passing over nodes
 Avoid node overlaps
Cycling through all these decision criteria to find an optimal solution gives
rise to the conflicting goals of finding a good layout that satisfies the criteria and
finding the layout quickly. Because the algorithms are generally aimed at
explicitly maximizing one of these features more than the others, users have
the freedom to adjust which feature they are most interested in maximizing.
Because these features are sometimes in conflict, it is never obvious which
feature to maximize; thus, some level of judgment is necessary. And despite
current attempts to use machine learning techniques to create human-like
balancing of these features automatically (Kwan & Ma 2019), one must often
make judgment calls. Generally, it is not cheating to move nodes around by
hand if doing so helps to balance across these sorts of features.
FIGURE 5.9 Family tree diagram (Kaplanis et al. 2018)
102 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press5.4   
The second key issue in exploratory network visualization concerns how much
to employ shapes, colors, and other network attributes in order to help better
understand one’s data and communicate key features effectively.
Often, researchers begin with very little manipulation of attributes. It is
common to simply run the appropriate default layouts on the data, often
coloring by substantive attributes of interest or sizing nodes according to
graph-theoretic properties (see the R tutorial for examples). The goal in this
sort of visualization is usually to look for obvious patterns (say, gender segre￾gation in children’s networks) that help to check that the data are correct and
then to examine less obvious associations qualitatively. On small to medium￾size networks, this sort of exploratory work is also a good way to see whether
the network admits to clear clustering (clumps of individuals with certain
characteristics), unexpected patterns (such as hubs and spokes), or clear bridges
(links between two otherwise disconnected clusters). Generally, with these sorts
of exploratory visualizations, one is mainly interested in getting a quick feel for
the data; provided that the researcher understands the underlying spatial model
being used to lay out the network, visual chunkiness in things such as overlap￾ping nodes or heavy lines is irrelevant. For larger networks, as we discuss in the
final chapter of this book, it is oftentimes useful to pull out subsets of nodes and
examine each one in this sort of exploratory fashion rather than attempting to
visualize the entire network structure.
After an initial exploration, one frequently starts to develop hypotheses
about the data that can be further explored with a little manipulation of the
underlying network elements, adjusting the weights to privilege some infor￾mation over others. For example, in the replication of the Moreno data in
Figure 5.6, we treat positive and negative ties the same. If the researcher is
interested in how friendship networks influence who one dislikes, it might be
more informative to display the network using the information on positive ties
only and then layer the negative ties over that. To help emphasize friendships,
we sized nodes by the total number of positive in-directed ties (i.e., in-degree)
and colored nodes based on the friendship-only community membership
(retaining the original Moreno coloring for edges). This results in a network
with four substantive communities (and five people with no positive ties). An
FR layout applied to this positive network formed the backbone, and then we
layered negative ties over this space, applying some minor hand adjustments to
avoid edge overlap.
3 The three panels in Figure 5.10 explore the positive,
negative, and joint ties (respectively) using this layout strategy.
3 In fairness, we cheated a little here. The raw FR layout puts the two-member blue group to the far
left; but in light of the fact that CM is the most disliked person in the cabin, the layout made for a
lot of line crossing in the middle panel of Figure 5.10, so we adjusted there.
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 103
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressSY 
KA 
LT 
YA 
SC 
UT 
BN 
SM 
PP 
GL 
GM 
RA 
LY 
DG 
RC 
TS 
CF 
HF 
AC 
CT 
BC CM 
PC 
BA 
SY 
KA 
LT 
YA 
SC 
UT 
BN 
SM 
PP 
GL 
GM 
RA 
LY 
DG 
RC 
TS
CF 
HF 
AC 
CT 
BC CM 
PC 
BA 
SY 
KA 
LT 
YA 
SC 
UT 
BN 
SM 
PP 
GL 
GM 
RA 
LY 
DG 
RC 
TS 
CF 
HF 
AC 
CT 
BC CM 
PC 
BA 
Positive (layout foundation)
Negative (layer) Joint
FIGURE 5.10 Girls’ cabin network as positive, negative, and joint ties, using positive ties for layout
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressWhile using friendships as the basis for the layout does not produce the most
aesthetically pleasing graphs (note the many crossing lines and an empty hole in
the middle), it is quite useful as an exploratory tool. One element of social
structure that becomes clearer in this case is that the majority of negative ties
fall between friendship groups. Within the orange clique, only HF and RC
disagree; within the yellow clique, only SY and UT do so. In fact, most of the
enmity in this setting is aimed at people who are otherwise friendless (light blue)
or at CM, who has only one friend. It is sometimes useful to produce an
interactive version of a graph that allows for further exploration. For example,
the following links provide interactive graphs that can be flipped on/off edge or
node sets to see how positive and negative ties layer over groups:
 https://people.duke.edu/~jmoody77/INS/C5/Moreno_cabin1_svg.htm
 https://people.duke.edu/~jmoody77/INS/C5/Moreno_cabin1_groups.htm
Network researchers frequently spend considerable time adjusting their
figures to tell the structural stories they see in the data. Combinations of colors,
alternative weightings, and sizing by network metrics can be explored to build
intuition. For example, in testing a general balance theory model, one might not
want to ignore negative ties but rather determine whether there is a partition
that better sorts nodes into positive within and only negative between. In status
differences, a hierarchical layout in which the network is layered by popularity
might be informative. Many interactive tools for exploratory visualization
allow one to click, drag, and search the network image; this is particularly
useful for micro–macro explorations when identities of the nodes are substan￾tively salient, such as in historical case studies.
5.5    -

Any good visualization should follow the basic information-theoretic principles
that guide quantitative visualization more generally (see Healy 2018; Healy &
Moody 2014; Tufte 2001). Here, we will summarize some of the general
principles of communication and aesthetics of visualization while drawing
attention to how these apply specifically to the goals of network analysis.
As with most research presentations, network visualizations aim to commu￾nicate some aspect of the data to the audience in a way that serves a clear
purpose in an efficient and, ideally, aesthetically pleasing way. A good network
image involves considerable judgment and informed decisions. Learning to
produce good network visualizations is a bit like learning to play a specific
type of music: it is creative but within given constraints, largely defined by one’s
audience and its expectations. A creative piece of music will often violate these
audience expectations somewhat, but the ability to pull that off is a skill; bad
violations of harmony rules are amateurish, and good ones are the mark of
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 105
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressreasonable innovation. As with learning to play a type of music, network
visualization involves a lot of practice and trial and error. And, as with music,
the end results cannot be entirely automated because the product involves too
many subjective decisions.
The palette at the researcher’s disposal is actually fairly simple: shape, size,
color, dimensions, and labels. The constraint of the data themselves and what is
being communicated are what will dictate an image’s effectiveness. In Figure 5.11,
for example, the goal was to highlight heterogeneousness in node centrality in the
network and thereby highlight the importance of potentially missing data for this
type of network (those at high risk of HIV infection). By adding color and node
size to reinforce the level of closeness centrality and unstacking otherwise￾occluded nodes, the second image conveys the most relevant information. Subtle
differences (consonant color pallet, thin lines, and transparency) all aim to let
uninformative elements of the network fade to the background.
By adding a second layer of information emphasized by two visual indicators
(color and size), the second image is more immediately impactful. The challenge
in layering information is in knowing how much is too much, as with cartog￾raphy, in which a map can be an extremely useful abstraction of territory or
much too detailed. Each element in a visualization should be considered with
communication and parsimony in mind. And the researcher should be mindful of
what Tufte (2001) termed chartjunk: unnecessary visual elements (lines, colors,
labels, cartoons, and so on) that can distract from intended communication.
Finding the right balance of detail and parsimony is hard to do well and even
harder to automate, thus requiring an active crafting of graphic production.
As another example, consider again the Moreno graph (Figure 5.6). In this
case, the substantive interest is in presenting the interplay of positive and
negative ties relative to strong friendship groups identified in the exploratory
Before After
Colorado Springs
HIV Risk Network
FIGURE 5.11 Using colors and weights to modify the default image for publication display
106 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressstage. In Figure 5.12, we attempt to highlight these features by emphasizing the
friendship groups, adding a color-matched shading under the group, edge
color/thickness, and node size.
In deference to clarity and reader expectations, we changed the color of the
ties; for Western readers, red is generally viewed as negative, and green is
more positive. The layout here retains the node names in deference to the
ethnographic sensitivity of the original, although generally it is not necessary
and a figure would be less cluttered without them. The layout echoes
Figure 5.3, but here we minimized the long negative lines to CM by making
her central to the figure. Note that girls with no positive friendship ties are in
white and have no shaded peer group. This visualization makes large
improvements over the original in presenting social structure in an intuitive
and yet detailed manner.
SY 
KA 
LT 
YA 
SC 
UT 
BN 
SM 
PP 
GL 
RA GM 
LY 
DG 
RC 
TS 
CF 
HF 
AC 
CT 
BC 
CM 
PC 
BA 
Like
Dislike
Friendship 
community
Nodes sized proportional
to dislike in-degree
FIGURE 5.12 Modified image of Moreno data
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 107
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press5.6   
One of the main challenges with modern network analysis is moving from
small, nearly ethnographic scales to massive data sources. In the figures
shown above using Moreno’s data, being able to see the specific nodes is
substantively relevant. These sorts of point-and-line graphs tend to fail to
communicate much when the network is large because the sheer volume
creates too many occlusions that make the graphs largely unreadable.
Arguably the best general strategy here is to deny some of the data (i.e., hold
it in abeyance) (Leifer 1992) and abstract from the simple representation to a
more summarized visualization. The smallest step one might take in this
direction is to display only points or only lines rather than both at once.
For example, Figure 5.13 concerns a project aimed at explaining racial
differences in STD risk. In this case with thousands of nodes, one might
argue that the intensity of intergroup contact is easier to see without the
nodes because one can focus on the relations (with white–white in blue,
black–black in red, and cross-race ties in green). By denying the nodes and
highlighting different types of ties, we produce a much more enlightening
visualization.
Similarly, in a project aimed at identifying the topical convergence between
scientists’ work on dangerous pathogens and their likelihood of supporting a
ban on such research, Edelman and colleagues found that it was easier to see the
corresponding positions with lines than with points (Edelman, Light, & Moody
2017). In Figure 5.14, by removing the points and keeping all the lines trans￾parent, one can see natural clusters as darker areas in the graph. The lines can
FIGURE 5.13 Removing nodes to clarify relations
108 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressFIGURE 5.14 Suppressing nodes on a large, dense graph clarifies relations between
authors and topics in large-scale science network. (a) Basic egocentric network and (b)
more complex egocentric network
FIGURE 5.15 Contour sociogram of natural science disciplines
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 109
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbe colored by the community (in this case, topic), and between-community ties
can be dropped. This highlights the spaces in the topical space where each type
of work is commonly done. If one retains that exact same coordinate space and
colors by the groups that either support or oppose continued research into gain￾of-function, one acquires image (b).
Having abstracted away from points and lines to seeing regions of relational
activity, one can incorporate other visualization techniques. Because one gen￾erally does not care about the exact points but rather about the distribution of
social concentration (e.g., the blue, green, and red regions of Figure 5.13), one
can retain the two-dimensional spatial layout based on similarity in relational
distance but simply convert the lines to density surfaces in the same way that
topographic maps often depict varying elevations with different shadings or
colors (e.g., Moody & Light 2006). For example, consider co-citations among
natural science journals. In this sort of network, a community would be a set of
journals that commonly cite the same set of other journals, which is a reason￾able operationalization of disciplines. Figure 5.15 presents this sort of map. The
point of this example is to show how to abstract from a point-and-line image to
a field image. The space is defined by standard two-dimensional layout, but the
display is based on a kernel density estimate of the nodes’ locations in the space.
In short, one moves from seeing individual nodes to seeing regions with greater
or lesser density in nodes.
Once this sort of “landscape” is active, important information at the micro
level can be layered over the top of the generalized space. In examining relations
	
		

George
Newgard
Kemper
McCon ell
Armstrong
Granger
Fowler
Freedman
Moody
L yton
Dolor
Davis
Krystal
Lans rd Abernethy
Ariely
Palmer
ande
Mo l
D'Amico
Yoder
Ohman
Krishnan
McAdams
Woods
Kraus
Kraus
Leppert
Li
Johnson
Roe
Dodg
Blazer
Felke
Graham
Giulio
Muir
Lipkus
Koenig
Bejan
Keefe
Morse
Neto
Granger
Cohen
Cheifetz
Siegler
W e en
McEvoy
K tzberg
Velazquez
Blumenthal
Cullen
Rizzieri
Schild aut
Kishnani
Alexander
Keefe
Levin
Montefio i
Aldrich
Costello
Huber
Oh
Andolsek
Carin
Nunle
Tornow
Ango
Haberle
Sloan
Beckham
ao
Lipscomb
Sampson
Ghate
Enghild
Yang
Dement Khatib
Stevens
Herndon
McLendon
Toth
Caron
Tedder
Gereffi
Allingham
Perfect
Heitman
Nijhout
Newby
rtel
Lochma
Millington
Crumbliss
Dowell
Husain
Rittschof
Jaffe
Reed
Goshaw
Milano
Roggli
Hayn
Doraiswamy
Guilak
Warner
Dewhirst
Chilkoti
Katul
Nelson
Wagner
Agarwal
Lyerly
Steffens
Payne
Krucof
Hall
Bolognesi
Palmeri
Peterson
Clar
Wel by
IverseSnt
R o
O
Smith
Hurwitz
Benjamin
Knechtle
Gnd
a
ude
rbrel
Li
Stamer
A trom
Anderson
Bennett
Meyer
el
Krasuski
Mu g r
Alberts
oo
maras
Chakrabarty
Jarvis
Guy
Boswort
Mathew
Koch
Jackson
Polascik
d
C
C a ho
ll
un
Kotw
Grotegut
James
Dupre
Cotten
Liu
Zucker
Liu
E ley
Alam
Samei
e nandez
Gerardo
Swaminathan
He
Curtis
Habib
Reed
Brady
Larrick
Izatt
Dunson
Smith Shah
mMitche
u
ll
Swamy
G knar
Bernhardt
Matsunami
Akushevich
Doc erty
Segars
Benfey
Vo s
Rathmell
Fitzsimons
Chartrand
Cope
L
l
u n
n
d
s
ke
Porporato
Poss
Becker
Wang
a
Wt
Guan
aTnricoci
Diehl
O'Brien Adams
Wang
Douglas
Hornik
Patka
Olds
Ginsburg
Smith
Rogers
Yin
Vengosh
Goldstein
Hockenberry Piccini
Levinson
Warren
Patel
Shaw
Geradts
Shorte
Stapleton
Wu
Leong
Crawford
Schoenfisch
Wiesner
Cohen
Wolkowiez
Lee
Thomas
tMaciejewski
Hoover
Limkakeng
Sikkema
Lope
Moseley
Hoang
Pfaff
Mann
Lyman
Torquati
Thomas
rDubois
Wang
Zullig
Muzyk Shaw
Turner
Lee
Seaman
Hall
Hariri
Fiuz
Katsanis
Hill
Armstrong
Ubel
Butler
Kay
A
Cald rbank
Xian
Wu
Daubechies Lad
Vadde
Ji
Kohrt
Boyer
Sosa
eRoman
Alman
Levy
Pencina
Brownell
Januzzi
d
Ev e
Dawson
Wei
Hashimi
Abbruzzese
Gonzalez
D'Alessio
Pullum
Gray
Locasale
Amendo
Ela
Reha i
Duara
Maixne
Wischmeyer
mstr
N
k M
A
Kurtz
F
F
oils
s
M
ge
A
Sc
y
P
Wa
f
W n
M D
A Rao
W
K
K
L
Or
J
ng R
g
an
W
ge
Si
mMi
M
tka
y
ang
l
K
M
Lad
G
t
lsby
n
n
K
s
L
hen
R
H
ner
ut
K
azq
el
A
Liao
o
o
w G
Oh C
derb
y
y
ans
ng
ns
H
an
o
i
h
G
mb
S y
e
C
E
Y
J
ns
H
S
dd
T
J
C
hani
m
H
Wan
n
w O
W
n
y
s
M
ge
L
io
ma
G
Tiao
A
L
D
C
Ber
N
B er
y
ns
off
R
Lay
ll
ri
on
Ch by
dkra Snt
le
Oh o
l
O
A
o
O
e
G
H
B
z
eJa
HeJ
H
exa
m h
A
th
ett
wor
H e
P
V
op
A
kiW
ell
Mo sL
C
J
rth
w
n
oul
P
e
o Co
B
old
B
w G
O
G
h
wa
Oh
wal G
s
L
fo
r
L
y
le
ori
Ti
ri
LTi
ri
LT or
T
S
er H
o
n
is
B
k
att
Co
S
tc
M
e
y
kow
dt
nes
h
cC
rs
V
e
r
m
e
g
sf
o ns o ng
sfo
kso
to
er V
he
ho
he
t
an
Gn
a
G
m
xa
m
x
D
ey as O y
n
A e
ng
A e
Bol
D
ut H
ar M
G
S
R
Y
G
ini B
W
T
w
S
d
Wa
W
C
b
t
W
Cz
L
Anst as
ski G
g
he
ette
un e
Pate es
P te
y
g
Co
Z Bo
w
Lev
k
n
H
Mt
y
M
K
H
N
U
Ay
e
lke
e
lk
Mt
s L
K
sa
u
s
t
htleR
Kurt
A
tell
L
P
ll
J ntzH
J
H
J
r
ntzH
Wo
W
H
e
k
G
Wo
D
e
Easl la
a
ni
er
W
tes
g
t
ar baye
A s
gar
ia
w n
al
network
m oCdal
edel
quantum struc
Ya
t
n
u
g
re p
t
ro
Yt
a
e
ni
g
n m ode l
patie nt
he alth
adhe re nce
cmie
edjeicwati
sokn
eKay
vi
ri
d
ely
denc
Fit e
zs
re
Ar
sie e
y arSceha
mMt
mchuong e
u
ll
ngde Deulb
h
Ho
e
ov
a
er
lth
p
er
ma
r
g
os ta te c anc e r per h
g a s e mcsatrnocnegr;pa tient
bra in
aut
Hisu
mb
m em ory
disorde r
oatwl sadeGcotosrh
Odehte ctor
collision
atlas
olup
rnus
ik woman mpirtehgnancy p
t
a
h
tie nt
tum or e
b
nreast
cLei ll
cancer
nldmopnhoma
patie nt
transplantation
R
ce ll d
mo se r
Sa
amd i
e
ai tio n im ag e;ct
pla sm onic nanotube
polym e r
nanopa rtic le
atrwafnosrcdrip tio n
g en e dlis
nsa ;c e ll
m Poaulmsee
b
a
ra in;pa in
s
pl
t
ei
to
mnula tion
pain
dise ase
sickle
ce ll
v iv o;wav e microscopy
image
h
gn
e
er
e
e alth t
e
t
e
n
t
e r
A
e
ng
a
o
a
o
t
dC
t
dC
tm
os B
me Co
B
m
C e
te
ckhn
lo
hamt gco
sf
co
f
gc
s
c
f
h
or
hd
or
hldC
o
dCi
d
o
d
Ci
o
l
W
o
Cad
W
ste adlh Wh
alh d
La
uc
l
L
u
a
La
ni
n
k
n
n
d
ns
k
i
ns
d
s
s
s
er d
s
e
s
sfo
r
s
sf ord
W
h
or rW
a
rWa
d
att Wdh
t Wt
h
d
heetr
S
e
S
tissue Lseigonagl stem cell
trial re
An
s
do
e
sek
a
M
r
cC
c
o
h
nne
v
h
ereett al
D
lt
oc
h
he
care
p
Co
patie nt staph
By
e
lo
nc
ja
o
mcc
i
u
ns infe cBti
eonnj
;
ainmfainnt
cont
B
ro
lu
l
m w eig
B
t
hl
t
u
trial risk
o
r ldadult MdcuE disea
y
se
cell
lung
Kn
patient cancSeors
disease
emouse response c
hmeell
l
p atien t loaustcOomBe su rg
O
er
'
y
B
valve
heartfai
Ja
l
a
ure pa
Ma
MataentitzeJ
H
Jze
Hn
a
en
a
He
at
r
nt
r
t eflakeilru
i
r
He
K
t
heart
ager
Je
ala
f
t
f
e
ed
tomog
J
rap
f
hy
degen
T
e
o
ra
t
t
h
ion
coherence
radar;targe t
me tamate rials
image
injury
diffusion
brain
image
prim ate
imClar
pk act species evolution
tre aSmteenftf schKizo
epeh
S
f
r
S
e
eni
Pa
ff
patient f P
alzheimers alzhKryst disorLdiep
ce ll;mouse
moentabolism
insulin
associat
Iv
io
enrs
gen e
can cer;risk
flame
re ce ptor
rat
e xposure
v
M
s
Mi
L
r
o
u
os
o
r
ne
e
e
e s
sp
LoTiaonosme
fainotrib
Ai
Aod
la
y hiv
A1
patie nt
tre atme nt
e ndov asculaG ane urysm
tvmi ualennce prote in enyeeorformans cry
y
p
e
tococcus
reconstruction
aenn
dEk
o
kl
al
aesa ;lekynee
arthr
No
up
n l
e
a
y
a
ysAtdya d
h
ise ase
p
th
at
e
ie ew
n
wt surg
ti
e ry
t
kidneSy
i
f
Wi
f
Wna
f tnegrvReone tion oAuletxcaon
G
mde Gu er
b Rinao
Oahr
mc
G
mcat
G
T
Gi
n
u
Tno
ur
nric
n
be
co p
O
atie
T
n
T t
i
care
v e te ran
s
s
cre e
Kn
e
in
mg
cance r
outcome
patie nt
fracture
cance r
mal
arsia
influe nz a
v irus
infe cctioann
outcome cacriniailfiBreillctkoenr p
i
atie nt fibrillation bioma
D
rke r
kne e
oste oarthritis
pain
d evice lu n g ;p atien t tran sp lan
Lt
yamtioan
v irus
patiePt
e
he patitis
liv e r
laparSohscoorptiec su
S
rg
h
e ry
or
outcome
s
pa
ut
siek
nt
i
FIGURE 5.16 Contour sociogram of Scholars@Duke data
110 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressamong scholars in one university, for example, one can use all scientists in the
university to create the space but highlight the most productive scientists by
name, as shown in Figure 5.16.4 In other words, one can selectively reintroduce
specific nodes that illustrate something important about the topography. In this
case, the most central researchers tend to be within defined clusters of academic
research, and relatively few fall within interdisciplinary terrains.
5.7   
Modern network analysis is also often dynamic, representing relations that
evolve over time. The most common way to display these sorts of dynamic
networks is through a comparative statics approach, simply using whatever
static display one prefers for each observed period. This is a very reasonable
approach for exploratory purposes, but it generally suffers on two points (for
more details, see Bender-deMoll & McFarland 2006; Moody, McFarland, &
Bender-deMoll 2005). First, because the layout space is nonmetric, there is
often no explicit linking between positions in one panel and positions in
another; thus, much of the screen difference in two panels is often due simply
to algorithmic randomness (rotation, flipping). Second, particularly with
modern network data, relations are captured in real time, meaning that the
analyst must decide what constitutes a “panel” for the network. Consider, for
example, communication relations in children’s classrooms from Bender￾deMoll & McFarland (2006). Here, one can see a definite network structure
when aggregating the network up to comparatively long panels (ten or thirty￾five minutes), but the structure is lost at lower levels of temporal aggregation (as
demonstrated in Chapter 2; see Figure 2.2). Unfortunately, there is no prin￾cipled way to aggregate by time when the data do not have natural temporal
bounds. Authors have used some general rules of thumb (say, pick a time that
minimizes change in aggregate statistics), but doing so represents a choice
largely driven by substantive interest.
The alternative is to animate the network, allowing relations to emerge and
the structure to change, as relations naturally evolve in the data. One still needs
to choose a layout duration to provide an underlying social space to map, but
the relations themselves can then emerge in comparatively real time. One clear
advantage of animation is that change in the layout space can be linked directly
to changes in the network structure by aligning the visualization slices across
the observed temporal windows. These sorts of dynamic visualizations do an
excellent job of conveying the social tempo of a setting, allowing one to see the
rhythms of social interaction. Dynamic network movies are somewhat difficult
to compare visually, given that humans have relatively poor memory for
movement. When the purpose of a dynamic visualization is to compare across
4 For an interactive version with philosophy co-citations, see: https://homepage.univie.ac.at/
maximilian.noichl/full/zoom_final/index.html
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 111
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Presssettings, the researcher might prefer models that take snapshots from the movie,
providing an aligned layout across small multiples.
If one combines temporal scale with relational scale, the goal is to find a
visualization technique that can convey a clear abstraction of change over time.
One approach, incorporated in Skye Bender-deMoll’s ndtv package and
borrowing from Charles Joseph Minard’s (1861 [Tufte 2001]) famous model
of Napoleon’s march to and from Russia in 1812, is to use an alluvial flow
diagram. In Figure 5.17, nodes are arrayed along the y-axis by proximity (a
one-dimensional FR-style layout), with time on the x-axis. Blue nodes are not
infected, while red nodes have become infected. Although the initial infection
begins primarily among a few more peripheral individuals, one can see when
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time
Approx. distance among vertices
FIGURE 5.17 Alluvial flow diagram of small STD simulation data (Bender-deMoll 2016)
0
0.27
0.27
0.13
0.13
‘75-76 ‘79-’80 ‘83-’84 ‘87-’88 ‘91-’92 ‘95-’96 ‘99-’00 ‘03-’04 ‘07-’08
Democrats
US Senate Voting y Similarity Networks, 1975–2012
Dates
Republicans
Group
Size
Senators
crossing time
20
50
5
10
25
10
1
Ford Carter Reagan G.H.W. Bush Clinton G.W. Bush
D D D R R R D D D D R R R D R R D
62 56 56 62 Senate Balance
Within Group Vote Similarity
0.72 0.78 0.83 0.89
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 2010
Detail
Modularity
Vote similarity (> 0.6)
R
Obama
‘11-’12
 (June)
D D
FIGURE 5.18 Dynamic senate co-voting blocks (Moody & Mucha 2013)
112 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe disease takes over the dense center of the network around Time 12. Alluvial
flow diagrams effectively aggregate the hierarchical and ordering information
used in traditional hierarchical embedding and DAG representations.
Moody and Mucha (2013) used a somewhat similar idea to model senate co￾voting (see Figure 5.18). The dynamic co-voting network is challenging because it
represents a case of very dense social relations that do not lend themselves to classic
sociogram display. To help capture the extent of polarization in political practice in
the United States over time, Moody and Mucha chose to plot only structurally
equivalent positions (sized by the number of senators in each block) and used a
quantitative index of polarization (modularity by party) as the vertical display axis.
5.8 
Visualization is core to the intellectual DNA of network analysis. It provides a
bridge between the micro-interactionist elements and the global features of
social structure. There are moments of nearly voyeuristic interest in being able
to see how social entities are linked and to bring those otherwise hidden links
into view. Network researchers use visualization to help explore and better
understand their data, as well as to communicate such findings to a wide range
of audiences. Network visualization is its own rapidly growing area of research.
Here, we have introduced the reader to several best practices and techniques for
starting their journey and pursuing productive avenues.
The range of future work in both the exploratory and communicative tasks
for network visualization is vast. The most pressing feature in the near term is
likely to be the effective management of networks at massive scales, with
millions of nodes and better visualization of large-scale dynamic networks.
Scale questions will necessarily depend on some sort of data abstraction, as
discussed in this chapter, or finding some way to dynamically collapse large
networks into visually manageable aggregates. Particularly with the recent rise
in multilayer networks – in which nodes of fundamentally different sorts are
connected to one another, such as humans interacting with animals – scale
questions will continue to grow. The most common solutions for dynamic
networks, such as animations or trace-ribbon sorts of plots similar to
Figure 5.18, are currently the best available approaches for dynamic data.
Unfortunately, neither of these scale well to very large networks.
The tutorial for this chapter outlines the most common exploratory network
visualization tools in R. With sufficient care and script investment, these tools
can often be sufficient for presentation as well. For those who want to push the
visualizations a bit further, we recommend using a visualization-centric stand￾alone program (e.g., Gephi or Pajek) that allows for fine-tuning layouts by hand
and then exporting the graph to a graphics editor program (e.g., Illustrator) to
fine-tune graphics elements. We have focused here on basic strategies for using
visualizations to represent social networks. There is, of course, a very long
general literature on data visualization (for reviews, see Healy 2018; Healy &
Moody 2014). Within this literature, you will find deep and impassioned
How Are Social Network Data Visualized? 113
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdebates over issues related to color schemes, numbers of patterns, line styles,
and other graphical design elements. Proponents of minimalist simplicity com￾pete with champions of data-thick infographics. Some purists insist on a zero
anchor for all axes, and others fret over obfuscation implied by scrunching up
the data to fit the zero. These debates all present valuable and good questions
beyond the scope of this text. Our advice echoes the rest of this book: data
visualization generally, and network visualization in particular, is first and
foremost a tool in service of theory: if your choices enhance the theoretical
perspective you are aiming for, that’s a win. And, in the lucky situation where a
choice is theoretically agnostic, let aesthetics be your guide.
  
We encourage readers to explore early issues of the journal Sociometry, which includes
stunning work, all done by hand.
Bender-deMoll, Skye. 2016. “ndtv: Network Dynamic Temporal Visualizations.
R package version 0.10.” http://statnet.org. (Arguably the best dynamic network
movie visualization tool currently available, building on work from SoNIA [Bender￾deMoll & McFarland 2006]; provides a rigorous linkage between network change
and screen change that minimizes display artifacts.)
Borner, Katy. 2010. Atlas of Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (Scientometric models
of all of science; provides nice examples of visualization at scale.)
Casciaro, Tiziana. 1998. “Seeing Things Clearly: Social Structure, Personality and
Accuracy in Social Network Perception.” Social Networks 20: 331–51. (An empirical
examination of how people perceive network images.)
Chase, Ivan D. 2006. “Music Notation: A New Method for Visualizing Social
Interactions in Animals and Humans.” Frontiers in Zoology 3(1): 1–13. (Introduces
a method for documenting micro-interactions over time using musical notation as the
archetype; an elegant innovation allowing one to see the emergence of patterns over
time in complex settings.)
Freeman, Linton. 2000. “Visualizing Social Networks.” JOSS: Journal of Social
Structure 1(1). (A nice overview of the history of network visualization.)
Lima, Manuel. 2013. Visual Complexity: Mapping Patterns of Information. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton Architectural Press. (A nice book on visualizing text and meaning,
including many network approaches.)
Lombardi, Mark. “Narrative Structures.” (A series of network-visualization artworks that
explore contemporary political events. Stunning examples of art and investigation.)
McGrath, Cathleen, Jim Blythe, and David Krackhardt. 1997. “The Effect of Spatial
Arrangement on Judgment and Errors in Interpreting Graphs.” Social Networks 19:
223–42. (Experimental models on how network layout affects viewers’ understanding
of the underlying structure. Model paper for a problem still not settled that could use
much more contemporary work.)
Steele, Julie, and Noah Iliinsky. 2010. Beautiful Visualization. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media. (A survey of best practices in general data visualization.)
Tufte, Edward R. 2001. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, CT:
Graphics Press. (The classic source in the field of data visualization.)
114 Thinking Structurally
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press 
SEEING STRUCTURE
A ship’s sonar provides flash images of the seabed’s surface. Similarly, network
methods create momentary glimpses of more enduring social structures. In
creating these glimpses, researchers must make analytic choices about where
to gather data in order to build more stable images of structures and then decide
how to interpret the structures they see in the data. How did these structures
come about? Where might they be headed? Why? The forces shaping social
structures may not take as long to manifest as those shaping geological forma￾tions, but network researchers are a bit like geologists in attempting to infer
dynamics from one or a few images of structures. Social structures, like geo￾logical formations, can also have surface structures that may be in a state of
flux, appearing chaotic; underneath that surface are deeper structures that help
make sense of the active and noisy surface topology. Network research often
begins by describing and exploring both surface topologies and deeper struc￾tures and inferring their organizing principles.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.007 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press6
Structuration and Egocentric Networks
Social structure is enacted by individuals. At the same time, social structure
channels individuals into opportunities for action and provides schemas for
helping them make sense of these actions. Structure is therefore both the medium
through which individuals realize fundamental human drives as well as the
collective outcome of the actions that others take and have taken in the past.
This ongoing interplay of agency and structure is called structuration. While
predictive models outlined in Part III test specific structuration mechanisms, here
we cover more inductive approaches and present various micro-level ideas about
what drives people to form and break (certain types of ) ties. We then introduce
the reader to egocentric network analysis as an important technique that illumin￾ates many of these structuration processes with individual-level data.
6.1   
At this point, you may be feeling a bit overwhelmed by social structure. Indeed,
thinking structurally brings up some thorny issues about human agency – that is,
the capacity for individuals to act freely, creatively, and in a goal-directed manner
(Emirbayer & Goodwin 1994; Emirbayer & Mische 1998). Network analysis,
by the very nature of analyzing structures in the interconnectedness of individ￾uals, groups, societies, and the planet, often runs counter to our everyday experi￾ences as individuals, especially in Western cultures where we are taught to feel
extremely individualistic. Social network analysis often starts by bracketing out
such personal wants, feelings, and understandings, depicting individuals as
“black boxes” (often literally black boxes of nodes in network diagrams) in
order to see social structure. What do freedom and individuality mean when you
are surrounded by so much structure supposedly shaping your actions?
Such questions have deep philosophical roots, and this is not a book about
philosophy. However, this chapter seeks to accomplish two things. First, it
117
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbegins a foray into seeing structure by situating individuals and their motives
within the social-structural contexts in which these motives are more or less
realized. In short, we believe that network analysis can be used as an empirical
tool to simultaneously understand both structure and action by giving neither
one primacy and allowing for failures, innovations, and uncertainties to enter
into such processes so that they are not overdetermined (e.g., Kilduff &
Krackhardt 1994). Social scientists frequently refer to such an approach as
structuration because it does not neatly divide structure from action (Giddens
1984). Second, this chapter introduces the reader to the tools of egocentric
network analysis, which looks to the immediate social contexts of individuals
and thus is a useful way to introduce structure within the context of agency.
Following Emirbayer and Mische’s (1998) view, we see agency as having
three fundamentally temporal aspects: (1) habit informed by the past, (2)
imagination guided by future wants, and (3) judgment guided by the contin￾gencies of the moment and the situations individuals find themselves in. Social
structure does not determine habit, imagination, and judgment, but it is at play
in each one. Habits are ingrained through socialization, which gives rise to
automatic ways of navigating social life that may differ greatly depending on
our race, class, gender, and so on. Similarly, our imaginations take shape in
social contexts and are guided by what we perceive is possible and desirable for
people like ourselves. Finally, our ongoing situations are often radically differ￾ent based on who one is and what one has become in a given society; thus, one’s
immediate judgments about how best to handle such situations is often depend￾ent on whom one is interacting with and what the definition of the situation is.
Structure and agency are always intertwined. And social network analysis
need not privilege either, even though, analytically, the social network
researcher will always come down on the side that “structure matters.”
Rather than depriving individuals of agency, a structural approach often helps
us to see the creative, determined, and boundedly rational actions of individuals
given their social-structural contexts. For example, gang members are fre￾quently depicted as irrational and perhaps even mindless hoodlums. And yet,
if one can see how social-structural forces have shaped habit, imagination, and
judgment very differently for most gang members than more privileged and
mainstream members of society – including the very real consequences for gang
members’ status that come through violence – one can begin to see agency and
structure together (e.g., Papachristos 2009).
In what follows, we begin by discussing the fundamental human motivations
that individuals and corporate actors are frequently trying to realize through
their interactions with others. Afterward, we discuss how social structure enters
into these motives for action. We then move on to discuss the fundamentals of
egocentric network analysis – an approach to analyzing structure that takes the
individual’s position and builds out to their immediate social-structural envir￾onments. Egocentric approaches are the subject of considerable methodological
discussion, and we recommend the volume in the same Cambridge University
118 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressPress “Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences” series by Perry, Pescosolido,
and Borgatti (2018) for a fuller exposition. Here, we touch on some of these
methods as a way to begin to introduce the reader to how structure may be
brought into greater focus within the context of agency.
6.2   , 
As inherently social animals, human beings realize their drives for survival
and achievement primarily through their activities with other people. Such
social motivations seem to be evolutionarily adapted in order to cue social
learning – that is, reading others’ minds, imitating those who are more
respected, and quickly internalizing attitudes, beliefs, and practices (Henrich
2015; Higgins 2019; Tomasello 2019). In short, to be human is to want to
connect with others; to want relationships that provide stable sources of
meaning, status, and satisfaction; and to want to avoid interactions that are
unpleasant, diminishing, or just confusing. As Peter Blau (1964: 12) put it, “to
speak of social life is to speak of the association between people – their
associating in work and in play, in love and in war, to trade or to worship,
to help or to hinder. It is in the social relations men establish that their
interests find expression and their desires become realized.” Of course, how
such desires are channeled is deeply cultural and dependent on a set of insti￾tutions that have been mutually agreed on by past generations before we as
individuals showed up to the party. For example, in many Western societies,
as depicted in Figure 6.1, one can situate oneself within concentrically over￾lapping institutions that shape one’s identities and give form to one’s basic
drives for sociality.
Christakis (2019) recently called the pursuit of such drives the social suite
that gives rise to society. Like most sociologists, Christakis views the blueprint
for social life in a number of generic motives that are more or less successfully
realized in a variety of evolved norms. For example, although the drive to pair￾bond exists in all cultures, how this takes shape is conditioned by the socially
constructed meanings of romantic love and family duty – not to mention what
is considered attractive and desirable in a mate – all of which are tied to specific
cultural contexts. Thus, who is considered a good match has individual and
structural characteristics revealed in larger patterns of choices and avoidances.
Sometimes these wants can be clearly articulated, and patterns are tightly
connected with shared schemas of appropriateness and desirability. But as
Bearman (1997) showed in studies of bride exchange among Aboriginal
Australians, as well as romantic relations of American high school students
(Bearman, Moody, & Stovel 2004), such drives can be highly tacit, contingent
on cultural contexts, and capable of being violated (although generally not with
impunity).
But what, precisely, are these motives? Fortunately, for social network
researchers, social psychologists have long grappled with similar questions about
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 119
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Presscommon cognitive and affective processes, developing theories with rigorous
testing over generations of scholarship. Experiments have established consider￾able support for a number of these fundamental human processes, but the ways
these drives manifest in real-world situations remains more frequently the terrain
for social network scholars. In short, the drives uncovered in laboratory-based
social psychology require greater calibration and precision in real-world
examples. Social network analysis therefore can both draw on these theories in
helping make sense of observations and better test their existence and scope
conditions in more deductive ways (as we demonstrate in Part III).
These intraindividual forces can be organized and presented in many pos￾sible ways and can be grounded in cognitive, affective, and moral aspects of
human sociality. Here we draw on the work of W. I. Thomas, famous for his
dictum “if men define situations as real, they are real in their consequences”
(Thomas & Thomas 1928: 572). In Thomas’ view, society is largely the result
of individuals pursuing four “social wishes,” slightly reordered here as (1)
security, (2) new experience, (3) recognition, and (4) response (Thomas
1923). We find Thomas’ approach useful for thinking about how common
individual motives are mediated by the social environment, and we draw on this
typology to help explain structuration as a formal network process.
Thomas’ social wishes reflects a wider set of social motives than many
contemporary theorists assume and privilege. For example, some emphasize
competition for resources (symbolic or otherwise; Bourdieu 1984); the opti￾mization of rewards over punishments (Coleman 1990); the pursuit of
FIGURE 6.1 Ideal-typical self in Western society
120 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressenergizing encounters over draining ones (Collins 2014); the pursuit of identity
and control (White 1992); or the elevation of face and preservation of social
order (Goffman 1959, 1983). Each theory presumes certain social motives are
pursued and help account for the social structures that form.
While some theorists see social motives as all there is (Garfinkel 1967),
others contend that natural needs (i.e., food, shelter, self-preservation)
undergird these social motives (Goffman 1974). We tend to agree with the
latter, that social motives are contingent on basic human needs being met and
that social motives are usually layered on top of them. When the threat of
survival arises, “all games are off,” and social action parachutes down from
social motives to the needs of natural self-preservation (Diehl & McFarland
2010; Goffman 1974). We say “usually” because it is also true some social
roles socialize individuals to overlook their survival needs in certain circum￾stances, such as firefighters rushing into fires or military personnel dying in
the line of duty. So there are exceptions, but the general hierarchy of motives
tends to privilege biological survival and natural needs over and above
social motives.
6.2.1 Security
Motivations for security are a key driver of forming and sustaining relation￾ships. Interactions that are awkward, stressful, and perhaps even threatening
are avoided; interactions that are affirming and pleasant are sought out. Thus,
relationships tend to be formed and sustained among individuals who provide
this sense of security for one another. Of course, what provides feelings of
security is likely to vary somewhat at the individual level and to have larger
patterns of variation rooted in sociodemographic differences in socialization
and life experiences that shape habit, imagination, and judgment. Someone
raised in a highly sheltered and privileged environment may have a lower
tolerance for difference and ambiguity in their interactions than someone who
grew up being exposed to a variety of lifestyles. Individuals in middle-status
positions in a social group may feel less secure (i.e., “fear of falling”) and
therefore may be more likely to conform to norms consistent with their
station.
How does security manifest in social networks? Here, we address how
networks are frequently structured by, and simultaneously help structure,
agency through three drives for security: (a) homophily, (b) hierarchy, and (c)
congruency.
6.2.1.1 Homophily
Perhaps the most consistent rule of attraction in how individuals are drawn to
one another is homophily, which, you will recall, is the tendency for similar
individuals to form ties (McPherson et al. 2001). It is important to remember
that the set of possible relationships one may form is finite and strongly shaped
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 121
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressby the opportunities afforded by those one comes into contact with in a
meaningful way. Individuals tend to be sorted into various foci, such as work
settings and neighborhoods, where social ties are formed (McPherson 2004). If
organizations and neighborhoods are segregated by race and class, and people
form ties in these settings, then the emergent social network is also likely to be
segregated by race and class. In fact, such initial sorting explains a great deal of
the variation in network structure (McPherson & Smith 2019). However,
homophily also emerges when individuals actively seek out settings where they
are likely to encounter similar others and when they are attracted to others
precisely because of their shared characteristics. Thus, while opportunity may
form a baseline of homophily, a more active form of inbreeding homophily
often exists beyond the baseline expectation. For example, Moody (2001)
found that same-race friendship nominations in the Add Health data were, on
average, 1.8 times as likely as cross-race friendship nominations; this figure
dropped to 1.26 times when controlling for features likely segregating peers’
mixing opportunities.
Lazarsfeld and Merton’s (1954) initial formulation of homophily divided the
attraction to similar others into status homophily and value homophily. Status
homophily concerns individual characteristics made salient by fundamental
dimensions of social structure that are largely ascribed to individuals, such as
age, race, caste, and sex. Value homophily concerns aspects of individuals that
are more rooted in shared attitudes, such as political beliefs, cultural tastes, and
moral codes.
Homophily beyond the baseline can be seen in part as a drive for security –
the drive to be surrounded by others with whom one has common experiences
and shared frames of reference. The avoidance of others who call into ques￾tion the taken-for-grantedness of our status characteristics or challenge our
values can be seen as perhaps the most consequential of structuration
mechanisms. On its own, inbreeding homophily may explain much of the
persistent clustering of societies along various sociodemographic and cultural
dimensions. The selection of individuals into relationships based on common
backgrounds, identities, and shared cultural understandings suggests that
social structure largely reproduces itself once political, economic, and geo￾graphic forces ingrain differences in individuals by making enclaves or niches
in social structure.
6.2.1.2 Hierarchy
Another form of security comes from living within a stable hierarchy, a clearly
defined structure with agreements on who is in charge and the relative positions
of actors in terms of status, authority, resource allocation, and so on. As we
discuss in more detail in Chapter 9, networks often reflect many bases of
vertical differentiation in social groups – such as status, power, authority, and
influence – and these bases often coexist and can be sources of stability or
conflict. For example, tensions and even violence can erupt as the result of a
122 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Presslack of clarity in dominance relations, in which social actors are arrayed in
vertical positions of power or authority (Gould 2003). Whereas animals such as
chickens have ways to quickly determine such positions with some momentary
violence (i.e., establish pecking orders; Chase 1980), such processes are more
complex and open to ambiguity among humans (Martin 2009b). Some theor￾ists of social structure argue that occupying a position that is secure within an
established order is a key motivation (e.g., Leifer & White 1988). Rather than
engaging in competition or conflict, actors will tend to seek out stable and
secure – albeit unequal – positions. As the social philosopher Thomas Hobbes
long ago asserted, social order is rooted in the exchange of freedom for security
through hierarchies.
Of course the wish for security through a stable position in a hierarchy may
compete with the wish for recognition, which we discuss later in this chapter.
Frequently, individuals aspire for the position in a hierarchy that is just above
their own; thus, hierarchies tend to have an inherent dynamism as lower-status
individuals are able to “get ahead” as higher-status individuals retire, die, or are
perhaps demoted. The capacity for social systems to allow for such dynamism,
such as the proverbial “American Dream” of intra- and intergenerational
mobility, may be a vital source of stability and, indeed, security more broadly.
6.2.1.3 Congruency
Connected with hierarchy, but at a more general level, is the drive for
congruency. When individuals’ attitudes do not “add up” to a consistent view
of reality – that is, when an attitude violates a web of implications about how
a set of attitudes should go together – this is likely to produce unpleasant
feelings (e.g., cognitive dissonance), which could be described as a lack of
ontological security due to a lack of order and continuity in an individual’s
experiences (Giddens 1991). Congruency theories in social psychology were
first developed at the individual level and concerned intrapsychic drives.
Heider’s (1946) balance theory posited a system (covered in more detail in
the next chapter) in which individuals have a drive for triadic relations that
conform to certain underlying rules, such as “the friend of a friend is a
friend.” A violation of such rules – for example, an imbalanced triad in which
the friend of a friend is not a friend – produces tension, which demands
resolution either through altering an interpersonal sentiment or abandoning
a friendship. Subsequent generations of scholars have developed this balance￾seeking drive as a key endogenous mechanism of network evolution
(Cartwright & Harary 1956). Newcomb (1961) developed an elaboration
of the theory with somewhat different propositions for understanding which
relations individuals will attend to in their networks, and others built a more
fully developed set of links between the micro and macro level in mapping the
consequences of balance-seeking in interpersonal sentiment networks (Davis
1963; Davis & Leinhardt 1972; Johnsen 1985). For example, in some models
of structural balance, a hierarchy does not violate any of the rules of
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 123
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressconsistency and is therefore a stable and secure structural form, consistent
with our own discussion of hierarchy in the previous section.
The drive for security may help explain a lot of common social-structural
forms. Knowing the primary bases of social divisions and gauging hierarchy
and balance could provide insights into which underlying motives are involved
in structuration. However, if security were the only motive driving structura￾tion processes, one would expect a largely automatic reproduction of existing
structural forms, which is rarely the case. Thus, Thomas paired security with a
second competing motive.
6.2.2 New Experience
Individuals will often take risks, even when these risks are not necessary for
reestablishing security. To help explain this, Thomas posited a fundamental
drive for new experience and considered that most individuals have motives
that are characterized by some balance of these two drives.
Rather than seeking out relations that are completely predictable, stable,
and thus secure, individuals are driven in varying degrees to form ties with
others who provide some contrast. This drive can be seen in a variety of tie
formation processes in which individuals appear to seek out others who are
not identical but with whom they have complementarities. For example,
romantic partners are often different enough from each other to be interesting
and to feel as though they complete each other. Although these differences are
often exaggerated, as exemplified by the phrase “opposites attract,” individ￾uals do frequently seek out others who have some overlapping and some
nonoverlapping characteristics. Scientists are often drawn to collaborate with
those who have common substantive interests but complementary research
strengths and skills. Successful teams are clearly built from having the right
balance of differences and similarities such that the sum is greater than
its parts.
This balancing of security and new experience can also be seen in a tendency
toward optimal distinctiveness – that is, a drive to clearly belong to a group that
is different enough from other groups to be distinguished by its own identity
but not so different as to be strange or unrecognizable (for a review, see
Zuckerman 2016). Individuals who are seeking out and offering to others
new experiences may find themselves in market-like environments – such as
when applying to colleges, applying for jobs, or putting together a profile for
online dating – where many candidates are appealing to a shared audience.
Here, individuals will tend to seek to be chosen by others by presenting
identities that provide the security of having a clear type to which they belong
while seeking to stand out as distinctive and interesting within that type. Thus,
the drive for new experience may also be induced by structural situations in
which individuals seek to match with others and to signal that they are different
124 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressto the right degree – that is, that they have potential for the right amount of
new experience.
Individuals seek out relations that offer an advantageous amount of new
experience and may therefore form ties that are complementary or synergistic
in, for example, tastes, attitudes, and talents. Social structures may take shape
and evolve as individuals seek out others who offer some amount of new
experience. Therein lies a potential advantage (or strength) of weak ties of
acquaintances: they tend to lead people to neighboring social cliques with
complementary and optimally distinctive resources in terms of information,
tastes, and ideas.
The social wishes for security and new experience reflect seemingly opposite
motivations, but there are other important social wishes, like the fundamental
drives of being recognized, esteemed, and loved.
6.2.3 Recognition
All human groups have ways to accord status to their members. In capitalist
societies, status is heavily tied to material resources and the symbols of amassed
property; in more traditional small-scale groups, status is more often accorded
based on one’s contributions to the group and one’s ability to persuade others
to provide more for the rest of the group (i.e., the leader is frequently the one
who best nags others). Thus, individuals are socialized into groups in which
being recognized and having some standing matters.
How people seek status in their interactions and relations with others is of
great interest in social network analysis. Status has a “leaky” property: it
tends to spill out through connections and affiliations (Podolny 2001). Being
associated with important individuals or groups with higher levels of esteem,
privilege, prestige, and so on is in itself a mechanism through which social
actors may gain and maintain status. No wonder being invited to an exclusive
event and having one’s picture taken with a celebrity and then posting it on
social media is such a ubiquitous way of showing one’s own importance.
Thus, individuals tend to seek out ties to others who have garnered status and
likely tend to avoid those who may threaten their own standing. These ties
may be direct ties of advice, friendship, kinship, and so on; or they may be
symbolic ties made through various associations, such as belonging to the
same country club, going to the same vacation destination, or wearing the
same types of clothes.
Sociologists have, of course, long been attentive to such status-seeking
phenomena in the dynamics of cultural imitation and differentiation and to
how such phenomena produce large-scale dynamics and trends. Simmel (1904)
wrote about changes in fashion that result when lower-status groups imitate
those just above them in social ranking and those at the top abandon existing
fashions and adopt new ones, which eventually trickle down the status order
(see too Milner 2016). Bourdieu (1984) later outlined similar dynamics across a
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 125
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressnumber of competitive fields. Collins (1979) and others, for example, detailed
such dynamics in the ratcheting up of status competition for educational
credentials. Such dynamics have come to be known as “red queen effects” after
the scene in Alice in Wonderland in which the Red Queen tells Alice that in the
looking-glass world, one must run very hard just to stay in place.
Status-seeking may help explain a number of network phenomena, the
most obvious of which is preferential attachment: the tendency for individuals
who have many social ties to draw even more connections. Popularity, pres￾tige, and reputation – all forms of a general status ordering in a group – tend
to have a sticky quality. In other words, an endogenous mechanism exists in
which those social actors closer to the top of a status order draw an unequal
amount of attention, have greater visibility, and are more desired because of
their ability to confer status on others; hence, their positions are to some
extent self-reproducing. Such endogenous dynamics in which even small
initial differences in status can eventually become magnified and solidified
over time illustrate the Matthew effect (taken from the Bible’s Book of
Matthew passage, “to him who has, more will be given”) (Merton 1968).
We will return to these ideas in later chapters, both conceptually and in terms
of their use in network models.
6.2.4 Response
Thomas identified a final want: the desire to be loved and to share affection
with others. Individuals want to be around those who they like and care about,
but who also like and care about them in return – that is, those who respond to
and validate feelings of attachment. In network terms, this may be seen in the
universal tendency toward reciprocation in social ties and the transition of
various exchanges into stable partnerships. Affective relationships that are
asymmetric tend to become symmetric over time or are abandoned. This want
for response seems to layer on the desire for security, new experience, and
recognition: frequently people want all of them simultaneously. For example,
until relatively recently, marriage was not expected to help fulfill all these
wants, and response perhaps least of all. Security was tantamount, and status
was frequently an important issue as well. Today, in many developed countries,
life partners are generally looking for some magical combination that fulfills all
these wants.
Response may therefore help build network multiplexity, which is when
actors have more than one type of relation with one another. Business partners,
work colleagues, and neighbors may become friends over time as individuals
get to know one another and incline toward response. This multiplexity may be
facilitated by homophily or complementarity, but it may also happen despite a
lack of shared overlapping social features. The desire for response leads to the
deepening of relations and thus more tie strength and stability in network
structures. Indeed, both reciprocation and multiplexity are frequently used as
126 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressindicators of stronger ties. Ties that provide response may persist even when
they do not fulfill other wants. Without doubt, many families have deep divides
and imbalances in persistent disagreements, and other families do not provide
much in the way of security or new experience. And yet, family members know
us and respond to us. Response may therefore help explain the enduring
importance of social life in small groups and local communities in the face of
so many pressures to cut these ties in favor of other wants.
This last point suggests that various internal and external forces may
sometimes put these wants in competition and perhaps even in conflict with
one another. Clearly, the desire for response has led countless people to
abandon all focus on security – for example, when moving across the globe,
joining a cult, or charging into battle for their country. The desire for response
may also conflict with the desire for recognition, such as career success, which
is frequently the source of tensions in romantic relations as individuals are
given opportunities that help one person’s status but not the other’s. How
such conflicts arise in different ways in different contexts likely reveals how
the four wants are shaped and given meaning by culture and structural
contexts.
6.3   
To this point, we have discussed different theories of actors, their motives and
perspectives, and how they relate to different network formation endeavors.
Here, we describe the egocentric approach to networks that brings the actor
and some of their orientations into greater empirical relief. Afterward, we will
more closely integrate theory and method.
The egocentric approach regards each individual as the center of a personal
network universe. From the individual’s standpoint, social ties branch out first
to immediate friends, family members, and acquaintances. An ego’s immedi￾ate ties may also have ties with one another, as well as to other individuals
who likely reside beyond the focal ego’s horizon of awareness. The egocentric
approach aggregates data from each individual’s perspective in various ways
to derive tendencies and patterns of sociality. An advantage of egocentric
approaches is that the data can be drawn from a representative sample to
allow the researcher to generalize to a population. In addition, egocentric data
are relatively quick, easy, and inexpensive to collect. However, these
approaches remain largely anchored to the cognitive and affective aspects of
social structure, with limited inferences to actual behaviors and generally no
opportunity to gauge agreement or reciprocity in one’s ties. Nonetheless, their
advantages make egocentric methods a powerful tool for beginning to see
social structure.
Figure 6.2 illustrates the egocentric approach. Panel (a) is a simplified
rendering of what egocentric networks look like. Panel (b) is a more
complex depiction of an egocentric network that reflects the ego in the
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 127
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmiddle with different roles (kin [immediate vs. extended], and nonkin
[friend, neighbor, coworker]) at different levels of intimacy with respect
to ego (shown as concentric rings and lighter nodes as more emotionally
distant) (Müller, Wellman, & Marin 1999). The egocentric approach
therefore closely resembles the model of the ideal-typical self in Western
society (see Figure 6.1). From this egocentric perspective, one sees the
social world from a standpoint that reflects ego’s reports on their ties
and the ties that they believe their alters have with one another. This
perception may or may not be consistent with the perceptions of those
reported in one’s network.
An even more complex depiction of egocentric networks can be found in the
Facebook networks many hold today, as shown in Figure 6.3. There, the
network representation reflects the network of associations for an ego network
after having removed the ego. This is often done for larger networks, such as
Facebook pages. And there, one sees clusters of associates from different
periods of one’s life: family, high school friends, college friends, colleagues,
current friends, and even a spouse’s friends.
By centering social structure on focal individuals, the research can begin to
see structure by comparing individual environments. Obviously, the researcher
is lost without theories of why various individual and structural features are
important. Guided by the various understanding of fundamental human motiv￾ations, one can begin to explore social networks in several ways. What are the
Ego
Alter
(a)
FIGURE 6.2 (a and b) Typified egocentric networks
128 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Presskey differences in egocentric networks? How do network researchers explain
these differences? Egocentric networks are partial and largely subjective views
of social structure. Nonetheless, they provide key variation among individuals
that can be used to describe and help explain social structure. In what follows,
we begin by outlining actor-level differences in key network features. We then
look to egocentric variation in network features concerning (1) alters (or
partners), (2) ego–alter (actor–partner) dyads, and (3) alter–alter (partner–
partner) dyads.
Nonkin Relations
Friends
Immediate Family
Extended Family
Intimates
Confidants
Ego
Coworkers
and Neighbors
Kin Relations
(b)
FIGURE 6.2 (cont.)
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 129
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press6.3.1 Actor-Level Differences
People likely differ in their emphasis on the four wishes, born from biology or
socialization, that fundamentally shape their tendencies to pursue various motives
in general and in specific ways. Boys may be fundamentally more likely to engage
in dominance displays and seek security through higher-status positions. Habit,
imagination, and judgment are all conditioned by one’s past experiences and
incentives. This perspective has formed much of the variable-centered approaches
in social research in which the researcher uses relatively stable features of an
individual’s biography or biology to explain some outcome. Social network
analysis sees such patterns as snapshots of more dynamic underlying structuration
processes: individual dispositions are largely the product of an accumulated set of
experiences drawn from myriad social situations. And yet, because most network
analysis concerns these more immediate influences of social-structural situations
on attitudes and behaviors, the network researcher is largely concerned with
agency within more fluid interactional and relational settings. How does the
researcher incorporate the influence of the past in such a picture?
FIGURE 6.3 A typical Facebook friend network
Note: “2009 – October – NodeXL Facebook Network Marc Smith FR Layout” by
Marc_Smith is licensed with CC BY 2.0. To view a copy of this license, visit https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/
130 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressMuch of the influence of past can be accounted for by including nodal (i.e.,
actor-level) variables in our descriptive and predictive accounts. Relatively
stable individual characteristics – such as race, class, and gender – may influ￾ence people’s preferences for certain types of interactions and relations as well
as how others are drawn to these individuals. Personality characteristics – such
as introverted, extroverted, or even neurotic – may play a key role in how much
value individuals place on having certain connections with others.
Socially constructed but largely stable features of individuals may help
explain differences in preferences and opportunities for tie formation. For
example, actors vary in the extent to which their ties are expansive, a concept
referring to how many ties actors have. Some individuals send out ties to many
friends, acquaintances, mentors, and so on. Other people have just a few close
friends. One can see this variation in the size and overall heterogeneity of the
egocentric network images in this chapter. Such node-level differences in out￾degrees or some other measures of expansiveness may be of substantive interest
and predictable based on theories of individual-level variation, such as theories
about the effects of personality or even biology on tie formation. Determining
who has many ties in a given network setting is often a key substantive concern
about what attracts individuals to one another. Given longitudinal data, the
researcher may even be able to test theories of preferential attachment – that is,
the extent to which popular individuals become even more popular simply
because they were popular to begin with. Actors may also differ in the overall
strength of ties or in their multiplexity.
Whereas some researchers may be interested in using these characteristics as
key parts of explaining baseline individual-level differences in sociality, other
researchers may view these actor effects as a nuisance to be swept away
(controlled for) to isolate other effects. For others, the interest may be in
examining how node-level differences combine with structural differences in
one’s position within a network. In Part III, we revisit some of these issues from
the standpoint of more predictive models – approaches that seek to explain
network ties as the results of various factors, including individuals’ differential
tendencies to form and break ties.
6.3.2 Partner-Level Differences
Some egocentric approaches may largely focus on actor-level differences, such
as those discussed in the previous section, in the beginning to see social
structure. Who has more friends? Who has a wider variety of friends? Other
approaches may seek to go one step further by looking at systematic variation
in the alters (partners) named in an egocentric data set. Which alters have more
friends? Which alters have a wider variety of friends? The key feature of these
partner-level effects is that they are based on characteristics of the other
individuals in an egocentric data set, and this is gauged by parsing variation
in who is typically chosen for a certain type of tie.
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 131
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressBy looking at the characteristics of alters who are commonly listed as friends
in egocentric data, we can begin to see that popularity is about certain features
that attract ties. For example, in studying speed dating, researchers found that
gendered expectations of such characteristics as physical traits and occupa￾tional roles shape attraction across a number of interactions (Finkel &
Eastwick 2008; McFarland et al. 2014). Identifying the key features of alters
that are associated with popularity and attractiveness can offer important
insights about an underlying hierarchy that structures action. For example, a
high school where members of the chess club are the most popular would
certainly point to a different basis of stratification than the typical American
school (but perhaps would be more common in places like Russia, where chess
is highly valued). But if one were to ask high school students whom they seek
out for help on homework, one might see a different set of partner characteris￾tics than is typical of friendships.
Another important type of variation is the composition of alters along
various dimensions. Composition concerns the types of people in one’s network
and the implications for gaining access to important resources through one’s
ties. Thus, the researcher may be interested in the number of doctors or lawyers
in one’s immediate network. Having ties to such individuals is likely to afford a
greater degree of access to important information and material advantages,
especially in times of crisis. The composition of an individual’s network may
reveal a lot about their drive for security or seeking new experience: people
often draw on kin and close friends in crises and extended circles of relations
for new information. Comparing these composition measures across subpopu￾lations or over time may offer important insights into the unequal and changing
nature of social capital in society.
6.3.3 Actor–Partner Differences
Both actor- and partner-level differences entail individual variation. For
example, some actors report having many friends, and some of their alters
are nominated as friends by many others. And yet, many of the social wishes
Thomas identified are dyadic: a focal actor seeks out, more or less successfully,
partners with certain relational features. Some of these relational features create
nodal matching effects. For example, homophily predicts similarities in terms of
fundamental sociodemographic characteristics as well as underlying cultural
orientations. Thus, the typical friendship or marriage will be among those with
the same or very similar characteristics: same race, same educational back￾ground, same religion. Complementarity predicts more curvilinear effects – that
is, having similar characteristics – or having some mixture of the same and
different characteristics across a set of sociodemographics, values, tastes, and so
on. Status-seeking processes are also relational. This drive suggests that actors
will, on average, tend to send ties in an upward direction along some dimension
of stratification. Yet, status-seeking aspirations may be tempered such that
132 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressindividuals tend to look to those only somewhat higher in status rather than
seeking to form ties with those at the very top of the hierarchy. As we previ￾ously discussed in this chapter, such tempered aspiration in a hierarchy is
probably the result of balancing security and recognition wishes.
Of course, these effects are subject to exogenous and endogenous forces that
shape opportunities to interact, the distribution of material and symbolic
resources in a population, and cultural expectations about appropriate or ideal
matches. Homophily and status-seeking may be inherently linked by social
structure, as when the categorical dimensions of a society (e.g., race) are
strongly correlated with its ranking-based characteristics (e.g., income). Blau
(1977) called the underlying degree of correlation of dimensions the degree of
consolidation in the society. In a truly consolidated society, such as a rigid caste
system, knowing individuals’ identity categories is sufficient to accurately pre￾dict their position in the rank ordering of the stratification system. Because in
capitalist societies, much of one’s rank is tied to the socioeconomic status of the
occupational structure, consolidation can be gauged through correlations of
one’s occupation with one’s status characteristics. Once again, social network
researchers attempt to get underneath broad correlations, such as those drawn
from census data, to examine the level of individuals and their social ties.
In addition to large-scale societal factors that consolidate dimensions of
social structures, factors at lower levels of social structure may also shape
structuration. Meso-level structural factors, such as the formal or informal
structures within organizations, may also importantly shape the realization of
relational wants. For example, research suggests that some individuals are more
likely than others to have homophilous relations based on organizational
opportunities to contact and interact with dissimilar alters (Smith,
McPherson, & Smith-Lovin 2014; Wimmer & Lewis 2010). Another example
can be seen in Figure 6.4, which shows how the racial heterogeneity of high
schools shapes the likelihood of racial homophily in friendships. The sigmoidal
shape indicates that in the most racially balanced organizational contexts,
individuals are most likely to form cross-race friendships, but this effect levels
off at a certain threshold of racial heterogeneity.
The figure suggests a clear relationship between racial homophily and fun￾damental population demographics. However, schools vary a lot, as illustrated
by the sizable difference between “Mountain” Middle School and
“Countryside” High School. Other organizational features likely shape oppor￾tunities for heterogeneous contact and mixing. Consider that in more structur￾ally differentiated high schools – those with many extracurricular activities and
formal academic tracks – students may have more opportunities to self￾segregate into areas of ability and interest, thereby promoting the realization
of homophily along various lines. Even micro-level factors, such as the physical
layout of offices and shared spaces in a university building or the structured
ways that parents pick up their children from a preschool at the same time and
place, may shape opportunities to interact and form relations. McFarland et al.
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 133
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press(2014) discussed such organizational differences as forming part of the “net￾work ecology” in which social ties are formed.
Such differences might form the basis of various egocentric network
approaches to study – that is, the likelihood of contact and influence across
key sociodemographic lines. Many egocentric network models bear directly on
theories and approaches to social segregation. Whereas demographers tend to
gauge residential segregation as the probability of contact, network scholars
attempt to see segregated social structures through cognitive, behavioral, and
affective ties. Looking across each individual’s set of ties, it is possible to gauge
the overall heterogeneity or homogeneity in their composition. The researcher
with egocentric data could generate a simple mixing matrix like the one in
Figure 6.5. The overall proportion of ties is shown in each cell, and the diagonal
therefore provides some indication of racial homophily and tie segregation. In
much the same way as researchers analyze mobility tables of intra- and inter￾generational mobility between social strata, network researchers can look to
various environmental influences that may shape mixing matrices (Morris
1991).
Racial segregation in networks is an inherently relational property that
could be more or less pronounced in a given sample of individuals. At the level
of each ego, one may examine differences in the homogeneity/heterogeneity of
.1 .3 .6 .8
–.2
.2
.6
1
1.4
Racial Heterogeneity
Same-Race Friendship Preference (b1)
Countryside h.s.
Mountain m.s.
FIGURE 6.4 Racial homophily as a function of high school racial heterogeneity (Moody
2001)
134 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressties using dyadic similarity/diversity measures for categorical and continuous
characteristics (see Perry, Pescosolido, & Borgatti 2018: 169–70). The basic
idea is to look at each dyad as being similar or different and aggregate to an
individual-level summary measure. These measures may then be correlated
with other individual-level characteristics, along with other theoretically rele￾vant covariates, in order to provide an important window into segregation
processes at the network level. For example, the researcher might try to
predict political attitudes based on the racial diversity of an individual’s
personal network.
6.3.4 Partner–Partner Differences
A final level of variation in some egocentric network data is differences in the
connections among actors’ partners. If the researcher has asked respondents to
document the ties among their immediate alters, then comparing across
respondents can reveal differences in the number and form of partner–partner
connections. Some individuals’ friends are more interconnected. If individual
networks are driven by pushes for congruency (and for security more gener￾ally), then dense relations would be expected among the named alters.
Figure 6.6 illustrates how density in this context is a matter of respondent R’s
perceived ties among their alters. The figure on the right removes ego from the
picture, and the density of ego’s ties can be expressed as the total realized ties
divided by total number of possible ties (in this case, five of ten possible ties
equals a density of 0.5).
When an actor’s partners have more ties to one another, the actor is likely
more fully embedded within a clear peer group. Other individuals may oper￾ate in local structural contexts where their ties are not linked with one another
and thus where there are what Burt (1992) termed “structural holes.” As with
Granovetter’s notion of the strength of weak ties, the theory of structural
White
Black
Hispanic
Other
White Black Hispanic Other
630
0.038
27
0.002
30
0.021
46
0.002
25
0.002
365
0.042
21
0.020
5
0.004
24
0.017
27
0.026
1
0.009
3
0.021
44
0.026
10
0.008
2
0.014
4
0.026
First row in each cell is the count of nominations,
the second row is the cell density.
FIGURE 6.5 Racial mixing matrix in one high school
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 135
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressholes suggests that individuals who span groups are frequently in advanta￾geous positions. Structural holes exist when an individual has ties to others
who are themselves disconnected from one another. Figure 6.7 shows two
egocentric networks with the same overall density of ties, but the respondent
in the first network links two disconnected clusters, whereas the respondent in
the second is at the center of a single cluster. Thus, the first individual is rich in
structural holes in comparison with the second. The first individual can be
said to occupy a structural hole or to have structural holes in their
egocentric network.
An enormous body of research extends from the simple insight that
holding bridging positions offers individuals structural advantages in terms
of social capital. Individuals who occupy structural holes have opportunities
for brokerage – that is, moving resources and information from otherwise
disconnected social regions. Brokers often profit from their structural loca￾tion through arbitrage (excess material gain) or through greater access to
novel information. Much of the brokerage work is based on surveys and
egocentric approaches. Complete network data can offer a more detailed
R
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5 4
5
FIGURE 6.6 The density of an egocentric network
R R
FIGURE 6.7 Egocentric networks and structural holes
136 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressaccount of an individual’s location in social structure. Figure 6.8 demon￾strates that egocentric data cannot capture all structural features thought to
be important in an individual’s brokerage position. Two key dimensions of
structural holes are the redundancy and constraint in an ego’s network.
Redundancy concerns the extent to which a tie connects an actor to an
otherwise disconnected region of social structure. Constraint concerns the
extent to which an ego’s ties are concentrated within a single cluster. The
most efficient structural holes are those that are nonredundant and uncon￾strained, as exemplified by the third (“unconstrained”) network structure in
Figure 6.8. Clearly, egocentric data cannot gauge whether the ego in this
structure is connected to three isolates or three individuals in distinct clusters
because data are collected only on those individuals who are directly tied to
ego (e.g., in the unconstrained network, we would observe only the three
direct ties from ego, without any sense of how connected those alters are to
other actors not tied to ego). Still, egocentric measures of structural holes,
which we cover in greater detail in Chapter 9, are useful ways to begin to see
local structure and connect an individual’s structural position with
various outcomes.
6.4       
This chapter began with an overview of how social motivations and social
structures shape one another. It then discussed a number of measurement
strategies for beginning to see structure from the standpoint of a focal
individual. Can theory and measurement be joined? Obviously, there is no
R R R
Redundant and Constrained
High Low
Locally Redundant Unconstrained
Constraint
FIGURE 6.8 Redundancy and constraint in an ego’s network structure
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 137
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Presseasy one-to-one mapping of social wishes onto egocentric measures.
Moreover, a number of the social wishes we discussed can also be measured
using more global metrics on entire networks (in addition to the egocentric
measures covered here). Hierarchy, for example, will be discussed in
Chapter 9, where we will offer additional measures of entire networks that
gauge hierarchy in a network. Many of these global measures we cover in
subsequent chapters (e.g., connectivity and cohesion) can be applied to ego
networks, although care in interpretation and some reasonable adjustments
might be required.
With these caveats in mind, we offer Table 6.1 as a general outline for the
reader interested in how theory and method may come together. The table
shows the four wishes and several network features related to these fundamen￾tal human social drives. The table also indicates the level of measurement
(whether trained on ego-level features or the entire sample of egos), as well as
how such measures are calculated. As the table shows, the researcher can begin
to see much structure through the lens of individuals and the seeds of
structuration.
6.5     
Finally, the structural differences we have covered here may also at times be
usefully combined with differences in nodal characteristics. One useful
attempt in this regard is the approach to combining nodal characteristics
and structural position in brokerage discussed by Gould and Fernandez
(1989). In this view, one’s position as a local broker can be quite different
depending on whether the focal actor belongs to the same or different group
as one or both of the other individuals in the mediated relationship. Gould
and Fernandez outlined five ideal-typical mediating relationships in this
regard, as shown in Figure 6.9. Here, the same brokerage position can take
on quite different substantive meanings when one accounts for node-level
characteristics. For instance, it is one thing to be a broker when everyone
belongs to the same group and helps to coordinate actors; it is quite another to
be a broker when linking to an outside group as a gatekeeper to one’s
own group.
Once again, from the standpoint of a given ego, one can see how structure
matters. Structure is not limited to the configuration of ties alone, but also
involves how node-level differences combine with this structure.
6.6 
Social structure is an ongoing accomplishment of individuals pursuing funda￾mental social wants. At the same time, social structures provide direction and
meaning to these wants. Egocentric network approaches are a useful way to
begin exploring social structure. An advantage of egocentric network methods
138 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press 6.1 Common ego network measures related to structuration features
Wish Network
Feature
Level Operationalization Calculation Notes and Interpretation
Security Homophily Ego
network
Proportion
Homophilous
nc ¼ ec
N
Care needed when c is rare or
N is
small.
Ego
Network
EI Index ð Þ nc 6¼ ec −ð Þ nc ¼ ec
N
−1 indicates all are like ego;
0 means even split; +1 means all
are different.
Ego
Network
Blau Diversity
Index
1−
X
k
p2
k Random chance two alters are of
the same category.
Ego
Network
Average Deviation
P
Nj j ev−av
N Values close to zero imply homophily.
Sample Same-Category
Odds Ratio
Given:
Same Diff.
Tied A B
Not
Tied
C D
Odds Ratio = AD/BC
In R, Statnet (“ergm.ego”) makes
necessary population size
estimates.
Sample Same-Value
Correlation
Pearson correlation across
all observed dyads
Standard statistical tests are not
trustworthy here, use
permutation tests.
Hierarchy Ego
Network
Relative (In)degree
or Other
Observed Status
Differences
Generally difficult to measure from self-reported ego networks
because the status of alters is not independently measured.
Potentially addressed via name-interpreter questions.
Sample Ego network size
distribution/rank
Standard moments of the distribution provide a sense of the
spread, particularly variance and skew.
(continued)
139
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press 6.1 (continued)
Wish Network
Feature
Level Operationalization Calculation Notes and Interpretation
Congruency Ego
Network
Density t
N Nð Þ −1
New
Experiences
Bridging Ego
Network
Structural Holes,
Effective Size
Valued Networks:
P
j 1−
P
qpiq
mjq h i
Binary Networks:
N− 2t
N
Intuitively, this is the number of
nonredundant people in ego’s
network.
piq
mjq is the
redundancy.
Structural Holes,
Constraint
Dyadic:
cij ¼
pij þ
P
qpiq
pqj  
Individual:
P
j
cij
Ego
Network
Stability/Turnover Proportion of alters that
are new
Recognition Ego
Network
Ego’s rank in
observed degree
distribution
Generally, not meaningful if the ego network size is highly limited
by survey design. And note that out-degree is self-perception.
Response Ego
Network
Reciprocation Proportion of alters that
name ego
Self-reported versions will
generally overestimate.
Ego
Network
Multiplexity Proportion of alters with more than one type of relation; average
number of relational types per alter.
Notation: ex = ego value on x; N = total number of alters; nx = number of alters in local network of type x; m = number of directed ties in ego’s network; and
t = number of ties in ego network, excluding direct ego–alter ties. v = continuous attribute variable, and, c = categorical attribute variable. pij = proportion of
i’s time invested in j, and
mjq = proportion of j’s interaction with q, divided by j’s max.
140
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Pressis that these approaches can use random samples with claims to generalizabil￾ity and can therefore be particularly useful for examining homophily and
segregation in populations. However, egocentric network modules are often
complex to implement in surveys, although the facility of implementation has
improved over time. The evolution of online and tablet-based survey tech￾nologies will undoubtedly make further improvements in data collection. The
larger disadvantage is that ego network data are fully dependent on self￾reports from respondents, who are usually disconnected from one another
in the survey (or at least not identifiable as connected), limiting the research￾er’s ability to contextualize social structure beyond the horizon of each
individual’s perceptions.
  
Bidart, Clair, Alain Degenne, and Michel Grossetti. 2020. Living in Networks: The
Dynamics of Social Relations. New York: Cambridge University Press. (A recent English
translation of a French classic that provides insight into the origins of personal networks.)
Burt, Ronald. 2010. Neighbor Networks: Competitive Advantage Local and Personal.
New York: Oxford University Press. (An engaging follow-up to the earlier line of
work; makes the case that network advantage follows personal advantage.)
Fischer, Claude S. 1982. To Dwell among Friends: Personal Networks in Town and
City. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (An exemplar of what one can learn using
ego-network methods; arguably the best work available on general patterns in per￾sonal networks across the rural–urban gradient.)
Kilduff, Martin, and Wenpin Tsai. 2003. Social Networks and Organizations.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. (An excellent treatment of networks, including personal
networks, within an organizational context.)
Coordinator Gatekeeper Representative Cosmopolitan Liason
Coordinators: enhance interaction between members of the group they belong to
Gatekeepers: absorb knowledge from and pass it to the group they belong to
Representatives: diffuse knowledge of their own group to another group
Cosmopolitans (Itinerants): mediate as outsiders between members of the same group
Liasons: enhance as outsiders interact between different groups
FIGURE 6.9 Five types of brokers (Gould & Fernandez 1989)
Note: The clear node is the focal actor; ellipses show group memberships.
Structuration and Egocentric Networks 141
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressLin, Nan. 2002. Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action. New York:
Cambridge University Press. (A capstone theoretical treatment of structural
approaches to social capital.)
Perry, Brea L., Bernice A. Pescosolido, and Stephen P. Borgatti. 2018. Egocentric
Network Analysis: Foundations, Methods, and Models. New York: Cambridge
University Press. (A comprehensive reference for how and why to do ego-network
analysis, with extensive integration of prior work.)
Wellman, Barry, Renita Yuk-lin Wong, David Tindall, and Nancy Nazer. 1997.
“A Decade of Network Change: Turnover, Persistence and Stability in Personal
Communities.” Social Networks 19(1): 27–50. (A rare example of dynamic ego￾network data taken over thirty-three years.)
142 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press7
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure
By looking at networks as collections of smaller elementary structural forms –
mainly all combinations of two nodes (dyads) and three nodes (triads) among
whom ties may or may not exist – one can learn much about the larger structure.
This is especially useful when that structure is very large and therefore difficult to
see as a whole. And yet, these most elementary forms of social structure are not
simply mathematical constructs; they reflect the fundamental ways that social
actors relate with one another as individuals and as social units (i.e., sociality).
Thus, a network with many social elements of one type and fewer of another
suggests a certain way of relating involved in how the network has formed and
where it might be going. In this chapter, we introduce the reader to dyads and
triads as forms of interacting and relating. We cover techniques for decomposing
networks into these constituent elements and connecting variation at the micro
level as a way of seeing macro-level structures.
7.1   
The best way to solve a complex mathematical problem is to break it down into
smaller parts. Seeing social structures is a similarly complex problem with a
similar solution. Rather than trying to see every aspect of a social structure all
at once, researchers can examine more basic subunits to see the structures of the
simplest elements, building up from these to better understand the larger, more
complex system. Although the whole is often more than the sum of its parts,
taking the sum of the parts can still be quite informative, especially when the
whole is very large and complex.
But what elements should the researcher examine? As we showed in the last
chapter, one approach to networks is to look at each ego separately. This is
particularly useful when one has random survey designs where the respondents
are disconnected from one another. However, when one has more complete
143
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressnetworks, ego networks leave out a lot of important information. Egocentric
networks can gauge the dyadic and triadic structures in a local environment but
cannot see how a complete network is composed of such “molecules” of
sociality. At a fundamental level, a graph is a collection of pairs of nodes in
which ties do or do not exist, representable as a square matrix in which cell
values represent relational values. At a somewhat more complex level, a net￾work can also be seen as the aggregate of all its triads in which there are
patterns of relations: each ij relation in a network can be contextualized by
all other n − 2 relations with the remaining nodes in the setting. The number of
dyads and triads increases exponentially with network size. For the reader with
some knowledge of combinatorics, you may recall there are ð Þ nn −n
2
  dyads and
n
3
  triads in any graph.
How can one begin to see social structure from collections of these elements?
Usually the first step is simply to count all the dyads and triads and to sort them
into their possible structural forms. The resulting censuses of all of the dyadic
and triadic structural forms provide useful insights into the global structure and
perhaps the processes that helped to generate it. These censuses are also useful
for testing a researcher’s hunches or predictions about a structure (as we discuss
in greater detail in subsequent chapters).
Why stop with just groups of two and three? Although tetrads (all groups of
four nodes) and higher-order polyadic structures can be examined, researchers
most commonly use dyads and triads to reveal aspects of a network’s overall
structure because they are its most fundamental building blocks. Research also
suggests that individuals think relationally in terms of dyads and triads, with
higher-order structures becoming too cognitively complex and therefore
unlikely to shape our behaviors. Humans are, after all, “cognitive misers”
who look for good enough solutions to get through life. However, there are
times when researchers would be drawn to look at these more complex struc￾tural forms, especially when analyzing two-mode networks (see also the litera￾ture on “motifs” – e.g., Braines et al. 2018). In this chapter, we focus on one￾mode networks and these two elementary forms of structure.
Dyads and triads are mathematical elements in a data set, but they also
suggest something fundamental about relating in real-world situations. You
have probably heard the saying, “two is company; three is a crowd.” From a
structural point of view, this folk wisdom is grounded in a fundamental reality:
namely, group size matters. The shift from the most elemental group of two
actors (a dyad) to one composed of three (a triad) is not simply the addition of
one more actor who creates two additional dyads; it is a fundamental shift in
the social system and its dynamics. Georg Simmel (1950) detailed the structural
roles that a third entity may play with respect to a dyad: (a) a uniter, bringing
the dyad closer together; (b) a divider, driving them apart; or (c) a broker,
profiting from the lack of a direct connection in a dyad. Simmel suggested that
144 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe structure gives rise to these possible roles even as the content of the relations
varies from friends to business relations to international treaties.
Much of social psychology, as discussed in the previous chapters, hinges on
micro-level processes in which each individual seeks relations that make sense,
feel right, and exhibit consistency between behaviors and roles. When the third
person feels they are unwanted, they often leave. Of course, reality is often
messier, and realized relations do not necessarily reflect the individual’s desires
or expectations (or not immediately so). And yet, people do frequently act to alter
relations or enlist others to help in such processes. Consequently, much of the
reality of social structure happens through dyadic and triadic processes in which
people think, feel, and do things together in ways that support or erode social
structures (Martin 2009a). As collections of cognitive, affective, and behavioral
ties, social networks are therefore manifestations of ongoing ways of thinking,
feeling, and interacting among many dyads, triads, and small groups.
Our goal in this chapter is twofold. First, it is to introduce the reader to the
structural elements and their various forms and uses. Second, it is to touch on
the underlying social psychological processes thought to motivate how certain
forms come about and why some might be more stable and others are more
problematic in specific ways of human relating.
7.2   
Once again, the most basic network building block is the dyad consisting of two
nodes – say, i and j – in which relations may or may not exist. For undirected
networks, all relations are symmetric (i.e., ij = ji), and the number of dyads with
that relation divided by the number without is simply the overall density of the
network (total ties/total possible ties). Some special relational systems are, by
necessity, asymmetric. Known as antisymmetric, such networks imply that a tie
from i to j necessitates the lack of a tie from j to i. For example, if you are my
boss, then I cannot be your boss. However, in most directed social networks,
each dyad can take one of three forms: mutual (M), asymmetric (A), and null
(N) (see Figure 7.1). In such cases, it may be informative to perform a dyad
census by counting the total number of the network’s ð Þ nn −n
2
  dyads that fall
into each of the MAN categories. Such a simple procedure might reveal quite a
bit about a network!
For one, a network with many mutual ties suggests a high degree of reci￾procity – that is, the tendency for those who receive a cognitive, affective, or
behavioral tie to send a similar tie (usually to the node from whom they
received the tie). As anthropologists have long demonstrated, reciprocity is a
core norm in most cultures and serves as the basis for cementing and sustaining
many types of social relations. Reciprocity is therefore a fundamental aspect of
many relational schemas (e.g., friends, partners, lovers) and the institutions
undergirding social structures. If you give someone a gift for their birthday, the
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 145
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrecipient will probably feel a little obligated to reciprocate (with a similarly
priced gift) when it’s your birthday. When someone asks a favor of you, they
might say “I owe you one”; and if that person does not help out in kind when
called upon, you will likely develop negative feelings about that person. In
addition to exchanges of goods and social support, the tendency for reciprocity
is important in interpersonal sentiments. If you are drawn to someone and
consider them a friend, you are likely to treat them in such a way that they will
reciprocate that friendship over time. If someone is rude to you, it is often
difficult not to be rude to them in return.
Reciprocity is an endogenous explanation of network dynamics: the cause of
a ji tie is the presence an antecedent ij relation. In short, nothing outside the
dyadic relation of positive or negative sentiments, behaviors, and flows is
needed in order to predict how the dyad formed (i.e., i sent a tie to j; j recipro￾cated). According to this view of reciprocity, asymmetric dyads are unstable
and tend to move toward stable symmetric relations with greater mutuality. Of
course, as with all network dynamics, reciprocity is obviously contingent on the
type of tie relation in question. For example, teachers generally remain teachers
of their students, and bosses remain bosses, in spite of the asymmetry. But even
these asymmetric relations may eventually serve as the basis of more symmetric
relations, as when students and employees give gifts to their teachers and bosses
in order to level these relations. Reciprocity in a network may be normative,
culturally shared, and articulated; or it may be more rooted in automatic
cognitive processes based on what feels wrong or right. Either way, reciprocity
is a dynamic process that frequently shapes how specific ties form or dissolve
over time. A network infused with reciprocity is likely to be held together by a
stronger set of shared understandings and mutual obligations, feelings, and
behaviors.
As we discuss in greater detail in the next chapter, reciprocity is therefore a
rough local indicator of cohesion, the degree to which a social structure is
composed of stronger bonds and ties. But reciprocity provides just a first hint of
Null
Asymmetric
Mutual
FIGURE 7.1 Three types of dyads in directed networks: mutual, asymmetric, and null
146 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Presssuch structural features – that is, a dyad census of positive relations showing
many null and asymmetric ties is not very cohesive! A dyad census revealing
many asymmetric ties points to greater cohesion compared with an empty
network, but it suggests that flows may move in only one direction – an
indicator that the structure is not shaped by a reciprocity norm (at least not
expressed in the same type of tie). A network with high asymmetry is more
characteristic of centralized and hierarchical social structures. Of course, as we
continuously remind the reader, such structural features must be combined
with a substantive understanding of the network to determine whether we
would expect reciprocity to guide ties in a particular context. For example, in
generalized exchange systems, such as the Kula Ring (discussed in Chapter 2),
the norm is asymmetric ties (i.e., “pay it forward”). Asymmetries in one relation
(i gives order to j) may be moderated by other asymmetries (i buys lunch for j).
And locally asymmetric relations can give rise to symmetric global structures
when flows cycle through the population (as in generalized exchange).
Practically, there are multiple ways to calculate reciprocity. One can calcu￾late reciprocity from the standpoint of the network as a whole (global reci￾procity) using the dyad census, or one can calculate it from the point of view of
each actor (arc reciprocity) based on proportion of nominations made that are
reciprocated. Consider the small network in Figure 7.2 as an example.
Here, there are five nodes and thus ten total dyads (5  (5 – 1)/2); of these,
two are mutual (AC and BE), three are asymmetric (AD, AB, and BD), and the
remainder are null (AE, BC, CD, CE, and DE). From a global standpoint, then,
two of the five non-empty dyads are reciprocated. This is interpreted as saying
that if one were to randomly choose a pair in this setting and the pair is tied, the
pair would be tied symmetrically 40 percent of the time. From a local stand￾point, one can say that seven total nominations are made in this network, of
which four are reciprocated. So, approximately 57 percent of all nominations
made are returned. The difference in these indices comes from how symmetric
ties are treated: globally, this is one type of dyad; locally, it is two opportunities
for reciprocation.
How does one know if reciprocity is high or low? Just as theory and
substantive knowledge of a domain can help provide an interpretation of a
dyad census, so can computational techniques aimed at providing a type of
counterfactual – that is, a baseline or alternative prediction of how a structure
might have formed under different conditions. The most commonly used coun￾terfactual is a baseline random mixing model that considers networks in which
A B E
D
C
Dyad Census
Mutual Asymmetric Null
23 5
Global Reciprocity: + = 2
2+3 = 0.4
Arc Reciprocity: = 4
7 = 0.57
Rho2: 0.38
	


FIGURE 7.2 Example calculation of reciprocity
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 147
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressties are sent randomly. In essence, the researcher asks, Given a network of this
size and with this number of ties, how likely is this amount of isolation,
asymmetry, and reciprocity? The simple random distribution of dyads and
triads has closed-form solutions (Katz & Powell 1955; see Wasserman &
Faust 1994). One such index is Rho2, which captures the reciprocity relative
to what one would expect by chance given the observed degree distribution,
where 0 would be what one expects at random. One can also condition on
alternative features, such as homophily or category differences. By simulating a
large number of networks of the same size and density but where the ties are
sent at random, the researcher can produce a distribution of dyad censuses. The
bootstrapped random distributions can augment a theoretical and substantive
understanding of the context by showing how nonrandom the observed
ties are.
Additionally, the dyad census can be paired with other information to test
theories of tie formation. For example, in the previous chapter, we showed how
egocentric and basic visualization approaches can begin to reveal structures
that are more or less suggestive of homophily. Here, we can begin to explore
some of the mechanisms that create segregation in networks by using demo￾graphic characteristics to inform our analysis of the dyad census. Rather than
looking only at the MAN distribution for the entire network, the researcher
may look at these distributions between nodes with the same or different
characteristics; a node category, such as race, can be added to the picture.
The network researcher can ask, What are the number of mutual, asymmetric,
and null ties within nodes of the same race? How do these compare with those
between nodes of different races? How do these observed censuses compare
with random distributions? This sort of careful descriptive work might begin to
reveal important aspects of social structure. The extent to which reciprocity is
more common within races than between them, members of one racial category
receive more ties than they send, or nodes in different racial groupings tend to
have fewer ties at all might reveal underlying segregation mechanisms.
7.3    
Moving from the level of the dyad to the triad represents a large jump in the
total number of possible structural forms and their implications for
connectivity. As with dyads, triads will reappear in ensuing chapters, including
those concerned with more predictive models discussed in Part III, which
examine statistical and computational models that predict tie formation and
dissolution. Triads are incredibly useful for many network techniques! In this
chapter, we are concerned with accurate description of a network based on its
constituent elements. As we touched on already, any network of size n consists
of “n choose 3” triads n!
3!ð Þ n−3 !
  because each ij dyad in which a relation may or
may not exist can become a triad when any of the remaining k individuals in the
148 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressnetwork are added. Every group of three is counted only once: so the “a – b – c”
triad is the same as the “b – c – a” triad, which is the same as “c – b – a,” and
adds only one observation to the total count of triads. The pattern of ties
among three nodes will fall into one and only one of several forms (sometimes
called motifs or isomorphic classes). The number of possible motifs differs
when considering undirected versus directed networks. For undirected
networks, triads can take on only one of four types based on the number of
ties present; these four types are depicted in Figure 7.3.
When networks are directed, the number of possible triadic structural forms
increases to sixteen. Building on the classification presented in the dyad census,
these structural forms can be characterized by a similar MAN distribution in
each triad type. For example, a triad in which all possible directed ties exist is
designated 300, indicating three mutual, zero asymmetric, and zero null ties; a
triad in which only one dyad has a reciprocated tie and no other ties exist is
designated 102, indicating one mutual, zero asymmetric, and two null ties.
Some triadic forms are differentiated further as being transitive (T), upward
directed (U), downward directed (D), or cyclical (C). The sixteen isomorphic
classes of triads are often depicted as shown in Figure 7.4.
Just as the dyad census decomposes a network into its most basic elements,
the triad census identifies a set of underlying structural forms. Figure 7.5
provides an example of a small directed network with all possible triad motifs.
In taking the census, it is the form that counts, not the individual nodes
involved. Thus, the “a – b – c” triad (030T) is the same as the “c – d – g”
triad; both have no mutual dyads, three asymmetric dyads, and no null dyads;
and the linkage forms a transitive triple (a ! c, c ! b, a ! c). Although this is a
contrived example and thus carries no particular substantive meaning, it nicely
illustrates how to count the motifs.
For a real-world case, consider the classic example of the wiring room at the
Hawthorne Plant depicted in Figure 7.6. Here, the 14 nodes in the network set
up 14
3
  = 364 triads. In this case, all friendships are reciprocated. The census
shows that 230 are empty triads (MAN designation 003), 118 are reciprocated
dyads with no ties to a third (MAN designation 102), 10 are intransitive dyads
(MAN designation 201), and 6 are complete triads (MAN designation 300).
Such a triad census provides a snapshot of the overall shape of a network
structure. Networks with many triads that are nearly or fully connected are
FIGURE 7.3 The four types of triads for undirected networks
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 149
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdenser and clumpier structures. Networks with many triads in which only a
single tie exists are less connected, and those with many triads that are cyclic
will tend to have longer path lengths and stringier structures.
As with the dyad census, the triad census can be used to compare an
observed network to a distribution of networks that would be expected if the
forces generating that structure were simply randomly wiring ties to nodes.
Because triads are assemblages of three dyads, researchers generally attempt to
hold dyadic properties of a network constant when comparing the observed
network to random distributions. In other words, the researcher wants to know
how different the observed network’s triad census is from a hypothetical one
003 012 021C 021D
021U 030C 030T 102
111D 111U 120C 120D
120U 201 210 300
FIGURE 7.4 The sixteen types of triads for directed networks
150 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressTriad Count Example
003
012
102
021D
021C
021U
111D
111U
030T
030C
201
120D
120U
120C
210
300
21 a f h
26 c g f
11 a d e
1 a dg
5 a db
3 cgh
2 cd f
5 df g
3 a bc
1 a cd
1 bd f
1 bc d
1 bd g
1 a bd
1 bd e
1 de f
FIGURE 7.5 Triad census
I1
W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 W6
S1 S2
I3
W7 W8 W9
S4
FIGURE 7.6 The bank wiring room friendship network (Roethlisberger, Dickson, &
Wright 1947 [1939])
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 151
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Presswith the same number of nodes and ties and with the same overall distribution
of mutual, asymmetric, and null dyads. The variation that is left after condi￾tioning on these factors is how the triads are put together in a larger network
structure independent of the dyadic distribution. This distribution is designated
as the U|MAN distribution because it is uniform, conditional on the number of
mutual, asymmetric, and null ties in the network (Holland & Leinhardt 1976).
Closed-form solutions for calculating the expected number of triads under the
U|MAN distribution were developed in the 1970s and also allow one to test
configurations of triads that conform to particular models with the tau statistic
(see Wasserman & Faust 1994, 594). A closed-form solution is also available
for the uniform distribution conditional on the degree distribution. As a general
rule, the researcher usually wants to account for such lower-order, simple
features when explaining higher-order distributions. Doing so effectively asks
how many triads of each type would be expected given the number of dyads of
each type that are observed. If the random value is close to the observed, then
the researcher can say that the lower-level features (dyadic) are sufficient to
account for the higher-order features.
In the wiring room case, we observed 230 null triads (003), and a random
graph with the same dyadic distribution would have generated about 228, so
the difference is small. We find many more complete (300) triads and fewer
open (201) triads than we would expect by chance. For a symmetric graph, one
theory is that tie patterns would conform to a strict social balance rule,
effectively “forbidding” the open triad in favor of fully closed or null. One
can test the observed distribution via the tau statistic directly by asking how
close this structure is to a configuration with only fully open and fully closed
triads. This yields an index of 2.36 (which is roughly equivalent to a t-test
statistic), which suggests that the configuration is consistent with a strict
balance model.
One can play a similar trick with multiplex social relations, those occurring
when networks are held together by more than one type of tie. However, the
random bootstrap models used in these instances become increasingly complex
because the number of combinations grows dramatically. For example, in a
network composed of two types of symmetric relations (e.g., business and
intermarriage), one can imagine that each tie is of Type 1, Type 2, or both. In
the case where both types of ties are symmetric, there are forty possible triadic
motifs, as illustrated in Figure 7.7.
Despite the added complexity, such triadic accounts with more than one type
of tie can be very useful in practice. For example, adams et al. (2012) used this
distribution of forty triadic motifs with two types of symmetric relations to
assess the effectiveness of the Colorado Springs contact tracing sampling
method, which relied on reports of interpersonal networks to generate the at￾risk population for HIV transmission. In that case, one tie type was “using
drugs together,” and the other was “sexual contact.” Those who occupied a
unique combination of these relations, in the context of the patterns of co￾152 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressoccurrence among others, created a unique link to different portions of the
population.
Although dyads and triads are the most commonly examined micro-level
structures, censuses of higher-order structures may also be informative.
Consider again the example of the high school romantic partner network,
which we discussed in Chapters 1 and 2. The researchers (Bearman, Moody,
& Stovel 2004), somewhat perplexed by the long chains of relations, compared
the networks generated at random with the same lower-order distributions (in
this case, number of partners distribution). They discovered that the observed
networks had far fewer “four-cycles” – that is, structures of four nodes where
ties linked nodes in a circular pattern – than would be expected if romantic
partners were being chosen in a similar network based on random mixing. Go
back and consider the four individuals depicted in Figure 2.5. A four-cycle
would exist if a tie were to exist between Matt and Maya. However, this rarely
happens. This led the researchers to conclude that a largely unarticulated rule of
“romantic leftovers” and its unpleasant feelings was preventing the formation
of such four-cycles.
In other words, by breaking networks into their constituent elements, the
researcher can begin to see the underlying structure and make inferences
concerning the origins and implications of such structures. The researcher’s
purpose may be more inductive, as with the high school romantic partner
network, or it may be more theoretically guided.
FIGURE 7.7 Forty triadic motifs in networks with two types of symmetric ties (shown in
red and blue)
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 153
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press7.4     (  )
Micro-level accounts of interaction can examine how the building blocks of
sociality are interactional accomplishments. Moreover, they can also show
how different forms of uncertainty in relating may create problems in accom￾plishing these social ties. Table 7.1 outlines four simplified sources of uncer￾tainty in relating. The topic is ripe for deep thinking about how ambiguity in
relating can shape role uncertainty and even breakups (see Vaughan 1986 on
romantic uncoupling). Ambiguity occurs when actors offer vague or unclear
relational signals. They neither like nor dislike an individual, and it is unclear
from their action whether they have romantic interests. Ambivalence happens
when relational signals are inconsistent or contradict each other. An actor
might be nice to an individual one moment but not the next; or the actor
might say they are friends (cognitive frame) and then treat the individual
poorly (behavior). Ambage arises when actors obscure their relational signals,
distance themselves from these signals, or use circumlocution (indirectness).
These three sources of relational uncertainty are fundamental to coping with
uncertainty and thus are central to ethnomethodology and conversation
analysis; scholars who have closely studied talk-in-interaction have focused
frequently on how things can go wrong when relational uncertainty spins out
of control. As Whalen and Zimmerman (1998) demonstrated, a call to
911 can devolve into a protracted and confusing interaction stemming from
ambiguity or ambivalence presented by one or more of the interactants. In one
instance, the 911 dispatcher was clearly led to question a caller’s intentions
and perhaps sanity as his frustrations mounted at what he perceived to be
useless questions (e.g., when asked, “What is the problem, sir?,” he responds,
“I don’t know. If I knew I wouldn’t be calling you.”). In not correctly
following scripts, individuals introduce sources of relational uncertainty that
call for clarification before an interaction can proceed, let alone a relation
get established.
The final source of uncertainty points back to relational contingencies in
wider contexts of dyads and triads as potentially creating problems in relating.
 7.1 Uncertainty in relating
Type of Uncertainty Definition
1. Ambiguity Relational signal is unclear
2. Ambivalence Relational signals are inconsistent
3. Ambage Actor indirectly communicates or distances themselves from the
relational signal
4. Contingency Broader social context renders the relation uncertain
4a. Nonreciprocal Relational signal is not reciprocated
4c. Imbalance Relational signals are imbalanced or intransitive
154 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressHere, relations are seen as uncertain across actors, such that ij friendship
overtures may be called into question if the reciprocal ji overture is not made.
Similarly, a relationship may be called into question if third-party ties do not
align: a friend of a friend cannot be an enemy because that situation would
imply social inconsistency and potential betrayals.
This final point turns out to be extremely important in the history and
development of social network analysis. It forms the basis of an extensive
literature under the rubric of balance theory, which we introduced in previ￾ous chapters. In what follows, we outline this line of thought in greater
detail, and we will return to it several more times in coming chapters.
Triads are not only mathematical elements in a graph but also fundamental
ways that individuals organize their sentiments and attitudes, deeply
impacting how people relate and whether they form positive or negative
relations.
7.5   
You have undoubtedly heard the saying “a friend of a friend is a friend.” But
has anyone ever said to you “the enemy of an enemy is an enemy”? Although
the first saying makes intuitive sense, the second is bizarre. We are clearly
drawn to our friends’ friends, but we are not necessarily repelled by those
who repel the individuals who repel us. In fact, the opposite might be true:
the enemy of my enemy might be a good person to know! In technical terms,
friendships appear to be transitive (if AB and BC, then AC), but negative ties do
not seem to have this property. Why would that be? And are there other
underlying rules guiding how relations form or are likely to change over time?
If such rules exist, what are their implications for the structure and dynamics of
groups or society as a whole?
These are the questions motivating balance theory, which provides a set of
triadic propositions about what shapes the underlying structure of a network.
These propositions have their origins in the social psychology of Fritz Heider
(1946) and others interested in the intrapsychological processes that help to
produce congruence in attitudes toward objects (see Taylor 1970). Heider
posited that within each individual’s field of perception are any number of
triadic relations in which the individual is centered. This is sometimes called a
POX system, as in Figure 7.8.
Here, the person P has an attitude toward another individual X, and both
P and X have an attitude toward an object O. Heider asserted that in response
to imbalances in their triadic environments, individuals try to establish congru￾ent sentiments by altering attitudes toward others and/or objects. Although the
Xs and Os are often other acquainted individuals, the scope of the theory is not
limited to interpersonal relations, and the O in the triad can be any salient
object on which individuals take an evaluative position (an opinion, taste,
belief, and so on). Thus, balance theory is really at the heart of marketing
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 155
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Presscampaigns where a popular athlete endorses a product, generating a transitive
liking of the product from the athlete’s fans.
Heider posed four fundamental triadic rules of balance in which positive
attitudes may be simplified as “friends” and negative attitudes are referred to as
“enemies”:
 (A1) A friend of a friend is a friend.
 (A2) A friend of an enemy is an enemy.
 (A3) An enemy of a friend is an enemy.
 (A4) An enemy of an enemy is a friend.
Once the researcher begins to put “friends” and “enemies” in the same
network, they are dealing with a signed graph – that is, a sociomatrix that
can have values that are either positive or negative (and perhaps even
neutral). In practice, researchers often infer a negative relation where there
is no positive tie, although this assumption may not always be merited,
especially in larger groups where individuals may not know everyone and
can reasonably hold no sentiment or a neutral one toward strangers. For
Heider, the violation of any one of these rules creates cognitive dissonance
that is likely to provoke tense feelings for person P, which will motivate P to
alter attitudes or sentiments in order to avoid the imbalanced state. This
theory does not posit a balance optimization in which individuals seek to
achieve greater balance; instead, it suggests that each individual finds such
imbalances unpleasant and seeks to avoid them. Such “myopic” flights from
imbalance may not result in greater balance for an individual or the group as
a whole because relations may be “jammed,” such that changing one’s
sentiment relation will not produce a more balanced state (Montgomery
2009; van de Rijt 2011).
The sociologist will recognize in balance theory an affinity with Simmel’s
formal sociology (e.g., Simmel 1955), which also concerned triads as a
O X
P
+/- +/-
+/-
FIGURE 7.8 Fritz Heider’s POX System
156 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Pressstructural form. Similar to Simmel’s formulation of triads, balance theory is a
formal and generic understanding of relations and may apply to various
nodes, levels of social phenomena (individuals, organizations, or nation￾states), and types of relations (friends, business partners, or allies). While
balance theory’s origins are in understanding intrapsychic processes and the
avoidance of tensions arising from imbalances with one’s alters and objects of
various sorts, the theory moved in a more sociological direction with the work
of Cartwright and Harary (1956). In short, the theory moved from accounts
of cognitive balance to structural balance in groups. Here, the researchers
restrict the investigation of balance to groups of mutually acquainted individ￾uals in which each individual is variously a P, an O and an X in the group’s
constitutive triads in what has come to be known as structural balance theory
(Rawlings & Friedkin 2017).
Structural balance theory attends to triadic structures of individuals and the
endogenous logic of balance, proposing that an underlying set of rules guides
the evolution of social relations and thereby helps shape larger social structures.
Balance theory can be seen as an endogenous complement to exogenous
mechanisms, such as homophily, which is “outside” the immediate structure
of a relation because it relies on broad cultural categories. As with homophily,
underlying balance theory is a social-psychological mechanism. Whereas
homophily attends to how ties form based on factors outside the immediate
network context of relations in question (e.g., race, gender, school level, shared
tastes in music), balance theory provides another endogenous mechanism, in
addition to reciprocity and preferential attachment, that attends to factors
within the immediate structure of relations themselves. In short, balance
theory asserts that the structure of relations at one point in time is a snapshot
of a dynamic process in which more or less self-aware actors are trying to
achieve a set of relations that “feel right” and do not provoke interpersonal
tensions with others (although they may not be able to do so in an optimal
manner, or at all).
The first rule of balance is particularly useful in characterizing how clustered
a network is – that is, the extent to which ties form into dense communities.
A triad census analysis will therefore often begin by comparing the observed
number of triads falling into each of the four triad types (in undirected
networks) or sixteen triad types (in directed networks) to random distributions
with the same U|MAN distribution. The total amount of transitivity in the
network can be deduced by looking to the relative prevalence of transitive
triads versus intransitive ones. In Figure 7.4, the triads labeled 300, 120U,
120D, and 030T are all transitive (have no violations of the A1 rule); those
labeled 210, 120C, 030C, 201, 111U, 111D, and 021C are intransitive (violate
the A1 rule). Five of the sixteen triadic forms – the 003, 012, 102, 021D, and
021U triads – are neither transitive nor intransitive, and these are frequently
referred to as vacuously transitive triads. They do not satisfy the first part of the
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 157
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressA1 rule: because there are no “friends of friends,” there is no potential to
conform to or violate the rule.
Elaborations and tests of balance theory go well beyond the triad census.
Because balance theory suggests a common set of intrapsychic forces of
avoiding incongruence, it is possible to examine balance at the level of
triads, dyads, or individual nodes within the network. Brashears and
Brashears (2016) looked to individual cognitive structures in how people
remember networks, finding evidence that balance is a type of compression
heuristic that facilitates the encoding of social relations. Rawlings and
Friedkin (2017) examined dyads contextualized by relations that were either
balanced or unbalanced and explored how these shifted over time. Such
modeling strategies entail examining each node as a more or less strategic
actor implicated in many triadic relationships, some of which are balanced
and some of which may be imbalanced. How well individuals are able to
perceive imbalances and how well they are able to optimize strategies to
reduce these and possibly increase balance are areas of ongoing theoretical
and empirical research. Thus, balance dynamics are often simulated based on
various assumptions, and the ensuing network structures are modeled over
numerous iterations.
Much of the work in structural balance theory is inspired by the macro￾level consequences of agents avoiding imbalance in a system of relations.
Cartwright and Harary (1956) made a stunning discovery well beyond
Heider’s initial interests as they moved balance in a network direction: if
all four balance rules are true and people systematically move away from
triadic relations with one or more imbalances, then groups of mutually
acquainted individuals will eventually become a single group with all posi￾tive ties, or they will split into precisely two opposed subgroups with all
positive ties within and all negative ties between (i.e., complete sectarian￾ism). Thus, one of only two structures is possible: pure integration or two￾group (and only two-group) segmentation. Subsequent elaborations of bal￾ance theory relaxed its assumptions concerning which rules must be
followed. Most importantly, Davis and Leinhardt (1972) built on the
insights of earlier work by showing that if the rules of balance are relaxed
to allow for one or more of the four rules to be violated, then different
macrostructures become possible. For example, if it is possible that enemies
of enemies are enemies, then sectarianism can have any number of mutually
antagonistic subgroups.
Comparing the observed triad census to a random one can be quite revealing
in terms of the overall amount of balance in a network. However, a more
detailed analysis of precisely which of the sixteen triadic forms are under￾represented or overrepresented is particularly useful in trying to characterize
large networks’ structures in terms of how integrated, fragmented, and hier￾archical they are. We will therefore return to the triad census in Chapter 9 when
discussing ways to see hierarchy in large networks.
158 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press7.6 
One useful way to begin seeing social structures is by breaking them down into
constituent elementary forms, particularly dyadic and triadic configurations.
This decomposition is not simply mathematical; it is also theoretical. People do
not interact with some abstract form of structure; they interact with particular
others in particular settings. They have relations that are dyadic, and these
dyads are frequently contextualized by other people creating triadic systems
with their own dynamics. Social scientists can employ this decomposition
technique across any number of networks that prove theoretically or empiric￾ally useful, such as the two-relation systems in the Colorado Springs sampling
method or the avoidance of four-cycles in Jefferson High romantic relation￾ships. These relations become small groups and cliques, which have their own
properties, as we will discuss in more detail in the next chapter. This simplest of
network insights opens a door for deeper theorizing about how relations unfold
and how one makes sense of them. To the extent that the translation of
interactions to relationships requires that both actors engage in sense-making,
this process is fraught with ambiguity and uncertainty that often drives interact￾ants to push for new action in the (oftentimes futile) search to minimize
ambiguity.
  
Adams, Rebecca G., and Graham Allan (eds.). 1999. Placing Friendship in Context.
New York: Cambridge University Press. (An edited collection that combines social
psychological and social-structural research on friendship.)
Bearman, Peter S., and James Moody. 2004. “Suicide and Friendships among American
Adolescents.” American Journal of Public Health 94: 89–95. (An early Add Health
study finding that female students who are embedded in intransitive peer groups
have high rates of suicidal ideation.)
Chase, Ivan. 1980. “Social Process and Hierarchy Formation in Small Groups:
A Comparative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 45: 905–24.
(Develops an elegant model for how interactive sequences must cumulate to transi￾tive hierarchical dominance relations among chickens.)
Faust, Katherine. 2008. “Triadic Configurations in Limited Choice Sociometric
Networks: Empirical and Theoretical Results.” Social Networks 30: 273–82.
(Examines triadic patterns across a large body of empirical cases suggesting that
much of the variation in triadic patterns is due to lower-order features.)
Hallinan, Maureen T. 1974. “A Structural Model of Sentiment Relations.” American
Journal of Sociology 80(2): 364–78. (Hallinan provides one of the richest sequences
of papers examining how social balance and intransitivity play out in youth network
dynamics. A critical sequence of papers for understanding interdependence in inter￾personal network change. See also Hallinan 1978; Hallinan and Kubitschek 1990.)
1978. “The Process of Friendship Formation.” Social Networks 1: 193–210. (See note
for Hallinan 1974.)
Sociality and Elementary Forms of Structure 159
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressHallinan, Maureen T., and Warren N. Kubitschek. 1990. “The Formation of
Intransitive Friendships.” Social Forces 69(2): 505–19. (See note for Hallinan
1974.)
Taylor, Howard Francis. 1970. Balance in Small Groups. New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold Company. (An overview of early forms of balance theory from the 1940s
to 1970 exploring which aspects of triadic arrangements are altered before others
and which hold more stability: lowest edge weight, negative sign, or the type of
node in question [e.g., an actor or an object]. Considers balance mostly in cognitive
terms.)
160 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press8
Cohesion and Groups
When does a collection of individuals become a group or a community? What
holds groups, communities, and societies together, even as individuals come
and go? These questions concern social cohesion, the bonds through which
otherwise disconnected individuals become part of something larger and more
lasting than themselves. Social cohesion is perhaps the most central issue in the
founding of sociology as a discipline, and its relevance persists today. Social
network analysis has much to offer in making the study of social cohesion more
formal and precise. Whereas in the previous chapter we examined structures
from the standpoint of their constituent elements of dyads and triads, here we
step back to try to see more of the bigger structural picture through the overall
pattern of ties in a network.
8.1  
During periods of social unrest, people frequently begin asking big questions:
How fragmented are we? Do our differences outweigh our commonalities?
What are the possibilities for cooperation among groups who have very differ￾ent ideas or interests? Since its inception as a discipline, sociology has puzzled
over these questions of social integration in an attempt to identify the “glue”
that holds a society together. Questions of social integration are inherently
structural – that is, they concern the arrangements of ties in a group or
population, as well as what flows through these ties. Durkheim (1893) worried
that society could fall apart in the absence of social bonds. In his view, as
societies grow in size and complexity, they develop a more specialized
division of labor, which threatens the traditional social bonds based on
localized communities held together by commonly shared beliefs and under￾standings. Durkheim saw a new form of solidarity arising from the
161
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinterdependence among functionally differentiated roles – or, rather, that was
what he thought possible.
Network approaches have taken on such issues of social integration.
Connectionist and positional network approaches speak to fundamentally
different (albeit possibly complementary) ways that groups and larger social
collectivities become integrated. For connectionists, integration is found in the
transfer of important resources, including emotions and support, through a
population. In this connectionist view, to study what holds a social collectivity
together is to study the pathways through which resources flow. Of particular
interest to connectionists are the smaller groups in larger networks that are
more like tight-knit communities. In contrast, for positional approaches, inte￾gration occurs at a higher level of abstraction. For positional researchers,
integration is found in how nodes occupy positions that fit together in more
or less integrated and stable formations. In contrast to the connectionist view,
positional approaches might even consider nodes with no direct ties as occupy￾ing the same type of position with respect to the larger social structure – that is,
such nodes share similar roles and have similar patterns of ties to others.
Studies of social integration rest on notions of cohesion, examining the social
forces that create and sustain bonds among individuals. Cohesion can be
conceptualized and measured at various levels of analysis. At the individual
level, people experience cohesion as a feeling of connection – a “we feeling” –
with others. At the group level, such individual feelings are thought to arise
from interactions and exchanges that produce an awareness of and reliance on
others. Thus, cohesiveness as a personal feeling is afforded by social structures
and the roles they assign to people; when people coordinate well with others to
perform these roles, they experience feelings of belonging. Although both
connectionist and positional approaches inform our knowledge of cohesion,
connectionist approaches have been overwhelmingly dominant in this regard.
For this reason, we cover connectionist approaches in greater detail in this
chapter and reserve our discussion of positional approaches for Chapter 10.
8.2   
How are groups more or less cohesive? Here, we outline structural ways of
conceptualizing and measuring what holds groups together. We start with
Figure 8.1, which describes two dimensions that jointly determine how well
notions of cohesion generally affect our understanding of the group and com￾munity structure in a network.
We term the row dimension social connectivity because it captures the extent
to which ties in a network connect actors to each other. The relation between
cohesion and social connectivity is intuitive. When all nodes are directly con￾nected to one another (a complete clique), the network is clearly quite cohesive;
but when all nodes are disconnected, it is clearly fragmented and not much of a
“network” at all. As it turns out, most networks are somewhere in the middle in
162 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressterms of connectivity, and, as we will discuss later, the connectivity of most
networks is deeply dependent on the exact pattern of connectivity. Intuitively,
the social connectivity dimension captures how well network ties hold the
collective together. At a minimum, networks and subnetworks should be
largely connected to be considered cohesive. But are connections all that
matter?
The column dimension recognizes the likelihood of a nominal group bound￾ary – that is, collectivities often distinguish in-group from out-group via some
categorical membership criteria. This is depicted as different color nodes in the
figure. In White’s (1965) famous discussion of categories and networks, what
he termed CATNET systems are those where some nominal category is salient
and shapes the likelihood that interaction occurs. In fact, White argued that a
category is meaningful only to the extent that it shapes social relations. Base
categories – race, class, and gender – matter precisely because they shape how
people treat one another differentially within and between such categories. In
that sense, categories and networks are duals of each other – that is, one implies
the other, albeit seen through a slightly different lens. Salient categories define
groups by distinction and govern the likelihood of seeing a tie from one
category to another.
By combining these two dimensions, we are able to conceptualize different
types of network systems. When both dimensions are low, the social system is
probably a network in name only and can reasonably be thought of as inde￾pendent interactions, such as in a classical market or random contacts in places
like train stations. Situations such as these are useful for us mainly as null
models against which we compare real-world networks. When both dimensions
Nominal Group Boundary
Porous/weak Impermeable/strong
Social Connecvity
High
Low
Undifferenated, 
anomic social 
structure
Segmented 
society, highly 
modular
Nominal interest 
group structure
Socially cohesive, 
integrated
FIGURE 8.1 Conceptualizing the social cohesiveness of networks
Cohesion and Groups 163
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressare high, we have a classically segmented social system – that is, strongly
homophilous groups with minimal links between them. Pure cases of segmented
social systems are rare: traditional caste systems, cults, or perhaps strong
political alliances. And yet, informal social systems almost always have some
level of segmentation built around consolidated social categories, particularly
as social systems increase in scales. Very large networks, with millions if not
billions of nodes, are often weakly connected collections of distinct subgroups.
The recognition that such groups rest on both strong connectivity and a clear
distinction between “us” and “them” has driven most of the work discussed
here on the “community detection” problem.
We can also consider cases approximating the off-diagonal cells in
Figure 8.1. Situations where boundary salience is high but connectivity is low
(upper-right) likely describes low-investment interactions in settings with some
entrance selection criteria. Clear examples would be voluntary interactions on
topic-based social media or online discussion forums (like Reddit or YouTube)
in which people select their audience based on some joint interest and where
interactions happen within those specific settings about those specific topics.
Because such interactions tend to be localized on particular issues for each
audience, people tend not to have strongly redundantly linked relations and
often make posts that, while possibly seen by others in the forum, usually do
not cascade into deep interactions. When boundary salience is low but connect￾ivity is high, we have integrated social systems where the category is simply
irrelevant. This is a situation where the category is not organizing relations, but
the network as a whole is socially integrated. In such situations, the entire
setting is cohesive, and the setting admits to few divisions. These sorts of
settings tend to have high diffusion potential and are robust to disruption.
Sociologically, they mirror ideal-typical social integration, where individuals
might differ on a category but that category does not segregate the network.
Often, some higher-order identity has taken precedence over the nonsalient
ones, as in military recruit networks where the experience of going through
boot camp lessens the salience of ascribed attributes within the unit.
Of course, real-world settings are usually mixes of these ideal types. To the
extent that they approach the ideal type in the lower right cell, networks often
suggest the kind of fragmentation feared by Durkheim and others; to the extent
that they approach the lower left cell, networks indicate a kind of pluralistic
integration. Metrics aimed at capturing social cohesion often depend on one
dimension more than the other; thus, we will refer back to Figure 8.1 as an
organizing rubric for thinking through network cohesion measurement.
8.2.1 Measuring Connectivity
A number of empirical correlates are involved in determining whether a net￾work can be thought of as cohesive, including (1) the strength of the relation in
question, (2) the number of ties in the network (i.e., density), and (3) the
164 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressarrangement of those ties in a pattern. Considering (1) and (2), for example, a
dense network of strong friendship ties has considerable face validity as a
measure of cohesion at the dyad level. However, as demonstrated in
Figure 8.2, the arrangement of ties is key to understanding the cohesion of
the network. Both networks in the figure have the same number of nodes and
ties. Although the arrangement in the second network differs merely with
respect to a single tie (shown in red), this small change alters the overall pattern
such that the second structure becomes disconnected.
Many real-world networks have many ties, but these ties are not arranged in
ways that are strongly connected at the level of the entire network. They are
more like many high peaks with low valleys in a ridge structure. For example,
based strictly on the number of friendships, most high schools would appear
highly connected; however, most of the ties are highly concentrated within
groups. And consider again the high school romantic partner network, with
its long chains. This structure has a much narrower set of connections than is
typical of friendship networks and thus has very different implications for the
possible flow of STDs than what friendship clusters might predict.
Friedkin (1998) introduced the metaphor of ridge structures when thinking
about such differing patterns of connectivity in larger network structures. Ridge
structures are characterized by overlapping regions of greater and lesser con￾nectivity, in the same way that a topographical map of mountain ranges
provides a view from above that reveals higher and lower levels of connectivity.
Like a topographical map, network ridge structures are composed of peaks of
high connectivity and ridges at lower levels. The ridge structure concept pro￾vides a flexible way to think about even extremely large networks as connected
ramifying structures through which important resources are likely to flow.
Consider the image shown in Figure 8.3. Here, one can imagine that Node
7 is the peak of a mountain range, with two ridge lines having different levels of
connectivity. As we touched on in Chapter 5, larger networks with hundreds or
even thousands of nodes can be visualized using topological techniques that
FIGURE 8.2 Network density versus connectivity
Cohesion and Groups 165
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressshow varying levels of density and resemble actual mountain chains. Ridge
structures are therefore networks or parts of a larger network that have a
relatively high level of connectivity between their most densely interconnected
regions. The point here is that a structure that is more connected as a ridge
structure – that is, one with a higher ridge line of high density that acts as a
connective spine for the structure – has a greater capacity for social integration
through more rapid and complete flows of important resources.
No single measure sufficiently captures every aspect of connectivity. Instead,
measurement often requires a sustained effort, using various indicators and
likely various network images that present a valid understanding of the net￾work’s connectivity and implications for such sociological principles as
cohesion and solidarity. Measures summarizing properties at the level of the
entire network are called graph-level indicators. The most common indicator of
connectivity is network density, which again is simply the total number of ties
in a network divided by the total number of possible ties. For a network with
4
1
5 7
6
3
2
FIGURE 8.3 A simple ridge structure
166 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressundirected ties, density can be written as m/(1
2(N  N) − N), where m is the total
number of ties and N is the number of nodes in the network.
The two network images in Figure 8.3 have the same density value of 0.25,
indicating that 25 percent of all possible ties exist in each network (seven of
twenty-eight). Density clearly shows one facet of connectivity, but it is not a
very detailed one and on its own can be deceiving, as demonstrated in the
figure; again, the pattern of ties is just as important as their overall number. In
addition, density is almost always lower in large networks than in small ones
because the denominator grows with the square of the number of nodes, but the
sum of ties usually grows linearly. Moreover, density on its own fails to account
for the strength of the ties. In many instances, stronger ties (e.g., best friends)
may be more important for some types of cohesion but are less dense than
weaker ties (e.g., acquaintances). Thus, simply examining the density without
taking into account the value of the tie could lead to false impressions of
connectivity. Density is still an essential network property, but it generally
provides only a first glimpse into connectivity.
What are some other possible measures? One possibility is to gauge the
overall pattern of ties as a more or less jagged ridge structure, using the
clustering coefficient. This measure brings us back to the importance of triads,
discussed in the last chapter, and the notion of transitivity: the extent to which
triads are “closed,” or as balance theory more colloquially states, the extent to
which “friends of friends are friends.” In undirected networks, the clustering
coefficient becomes a simple ratio of the count of the number of closed triads to
the total number of triads (both open and closed). Networks composed of a
higher proportion of closed triads are generally clumpier because for a given
number of ties, having many triads turns the network in on itself, effectively
creating a boundary-salient cluster. Generalizations of the clustering coefficient
for directed networks and weighted networks also exist (e.g., Fagiolo 2007).
Combined with the overall density measure, clustering can provide insights into
whether the structure is globally dense but locally sparse, or perhaps globally
sparse but locally dense.
Another possibility is to look at nodes that are fully connected through at
least one path (where i can reach j by following the adjacent edges in the
network), which is called a network component. Counting the number of
components in a network therefore gives a better sense of the overall pattern
of connectivity. For example, although the density of the two networks in
Figure 8.2 is the same, the first network has one component, and the second
network has two components (so that a node in the top half of the network
cannot reach a node in the bottom half ). The number and size of components is
therefore another good indicator of connectivity because it shows the extent to
which each node is reachable – that is, directly or indirectly tied to the other
nodes. Components are easy to identify in undirected networks, as reachability
from i to j always implies reachability from j to i. Reachability becomes more
complicated to determine when ties are directed and the direction involves a
Cohesion and Groups 167
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressflow that is of interest to the researcher. In such cases, determining the reach￾ability of two nodes must account for directed paths.
In directed networks, we distinguish between strong and weak components.
A strong component takes the direction of ties into account, so that only
mutually reachable nodes are included in the component. To be included in
the strong component, a node must be able to directly or indirectly send to and
receive from all other nodes in that component. A weak component ignores the
direction of the tie and includes all connected nodes, as in the simpler case of
undirected networks. A simple summary measure of the component distribu￾tion is the pairwise reachability score, which is the sum of the number of pairs
who share a component divided by the number of pairs in the network. For
Figure 8.2, reachability is 1.0 for the network on the left but 0.46 for the one on
the right.
Although they provide a sense of the reachability of nodes, components do
not provide a sense of how far apart nodes are from one another with respect to
the structure and consequently how long something would have to travel to
connect two nodes. For example, a communication network may be fully
connected within a single component but may vary considerably in how long
a message from one node to another would have to travel through many
intervening nodes to reach its target. Structures with longer paths are likely to
suffer more frequent distortions as the message becomes slightly altered at each
step of transfer (as in the telephone game). In this case, a more cohesive
structure would be one in which the targets of a message have shorter paths.
This idea of path lengths has already been discussed, but here one can think of
how path lengths indicate something of an entire network’s cohesiveness.
Geodesics, which you will recall are the shortest paths between two nodes,
can be used to generate two graph-level indicators. First, the diameter of an
entire network can be assessed by examining all the geodesics between each
pair of nodes in a network and then taking the longest geodesic. This “longest
shortest” path reveals something about the overall connectivity of the net￾work structure by indicating the maximum number of intermediary nodes
that would need to be involved in any flow across the entire network.
A second geodesic graph-level indicator is the average path length of the
geodesics between all pairs of nodes in a network. The average geodesic length
is perhaps a more reliable graph-level indicator than diameter because it
aggregates more information into a single measure. Complications arise in
using geodesics in networks with two or more components, as there are no
shortest paths between entirely disconnected nodes (the distance is technically
infinite). This is why centrality scores (see Chapter 9) often use the inverse of
distance.
Other connectivity measures may be useful in many cases. Often a more
realistic comparison is via a random walk process, which builds from the
number of hops a node would have to make to connect two nodes if, at each
step of the hop, the node picked the next direction at random. The “hitting
168 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Presstime” is the expected number of hops needed for i to reach j. Because the
number of random hops from i to j need not equal the number from j to i
(intuitively, if i is less central than j, then it is easier for i to reach j than vice
versa), one usually calculates “commute distance” rather than hitting time –
that is, the expected number of hops needed to walk from i to j and back to i,
which is symmetric. The researcher may also look to the distribution of pair￾wise distances in a network to get a sense of how spread out it is. One may then
split the distances into, say, quintiles and examine the nodes within these levels
of cohesion or use distribution comparison methods to nicely summarize the
total structural difference between two networks (Handcock & Morris 2006).
Another way to approach cohesion from a connectivity perspective is to
consider how difficult it is to break a group apart. Groups that are harder to
break apart are more cohesive. This idea was at the core of Simmel’s (1950)
perspective of the triad as sociologically more meaningful than the dyad because
the triad is more robust to the removal of one of its members: with the removal of
one member, a triad will become a dyad, but a dyad will become a lone
individual. Extending this logic beyond the triad to larger structures, one can
think of robustness to removal – or connectivity – as the extent to which a
network will remain connected even as nodes are removed. Recall that a key
aspect of connectivity is that one is concerned with the arrangement of edges, not
necessarily the number. For example, consider the network shown in Figure 8.4.
Even though the network density increases from 0.25 to 0.39, which might
normally suggest a more cohesive structure, this increased connectivity is
entirely reliant on a single node establishing more ties. The removal of this
node would break the structure into three separate parts. From the viewpoint of
the group’s vulnerability to dissolution, then, the first two structures are
equivalent. This illustrates the important issue that networks will vary consider￾ably in how much they are connected by one or a few nodes that link otherwise
disconnected parts of the structure. Such individual nodes holding a structure
together are called cutpoints. Networks with fewer cutpoints are more con￾nected. Further, as in the example shown in the figure, meaningful cutpoints
tend to be more central to the overall structure.
Removal of 1 node
destroys the group.
D = 0.25 D = 0.39
FIGURE 8.4 Connectivity as robustness to node removal
Cohesion and Groups 169
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press8.2.2 Small-World Connectivity
So far, we have focused on the structure of ties as the basis of connectivity
without considering differences that may exist in the ties themselves.
Granovetter (1973) radically reshaped our understanding of connectivity by
drawing attention to the different dynamics among strong and weak ties.
Building on Heider’s first rule of balance theory, Granovetter showed that
transitivity applies only to strong ties, whereas weak ties are often intransitive
(i.e., the acquaintance of an acquaintance is not generally an acquaintance).
From this basic principle, Granovetter inferred a social-structural pattern in
which friendships tend to cluster in smaller groups of strong ties linked with
one another by weak ties. In Friedkin’s formulation of ridge structures, this is a
special case involving many high peaks connected by low ranges.
Such a structure has come to be known as a small world for its ability to
quickly connect actors who in many ways are socially or geographically distant.
This structure helps explain the so-called small-world phenomenon, as when
strangers meeting will sometimes exclaim, “What a small world!” when they
learn of a mutual contact. In a field experiment illustrating this concept,
Milgram (1967) attempted to have a stockbroker in Boston receive packets
given to randomly selected people at varying levels of geographic and social
distance. The results demonstrated the now famous notion of six degrees of
separation, with six being the average number of paths or hops necessary for
linking random individuals to the stockbroker (whether or not such paths were
geodesics is unknown; for a telling reanalysis, see White 1970b). The relatively
short path lengths connecting random nodes in a rather huge network tended to
pass through individuals who had high social visibility and held prominent
positions in their local communities. In more structural terms, these were
individuals with greater centrality. It is worth remembering, however, that the
packet failed to reach the target altogether in a high proportion of cases; thus,
six degrees separated those individuals who were willing to participate and
were reachable in the first place!
Watts and Strogatz (1998) formalized the small-world approach and ways
for detecting such structures. In their view, a small-world network structure is
large, sparsely connected at the global level, relatively decentralized, and
yet also highly clustered. Consequently, the small-world phenomenon operates
largely through people who are weakly connected, but these weak ties have
important consequences for diffusion processes. For example, diseases will
move slowly when networks are highly clustered and approach local maxima
but may then spike suddenly and grow as bridging ties lead to a new dense area
of the global social structure. This is a very different view of connectivity than
the one suggested by structures held together by a few highly central actors (i.e.,
“stars”). Small worlds form a robust structure for conveying flows, although
subsequent work has shown that diffusion is slowed considerably when the
item being passed is risky or when a behavior being influenced is perhaps more
170 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdeeply ingrained, in which cases the spread may require multiple partners to
adopt or change before an individual will also adopt or change (Centola 2010)
How can one measure the smallness of a world? Watts and Strogatz showed
that a small-world structure can be characterized using the ratio of the cluster￾ing coefficient to the average path length in the network. That is, small worlds
are both clustered and have short average path distances. This seems like a
paradox until one examines how random ties entering into an otherwise
clustered world can create global shortcuts. Consider the structure shown in
Figure 8.5.
Here, one sees that a relatively small number of random intransitive (and
presumably weak) ties between clusters is sufficient to dramatically lower the
overall average path length among all the nodes. Thus, the image of a small
world adds another layer of complexity to our original view of cohesion
depicted in Figure 8.1 by suggesting that the lower-right network may prevail
among strong ties and the lower-left network may prevail among weak ties.
Thus, being connected in a small world entails both dense local clusters and
sparse bridges across homogeneous subgroups.
Gauging the smallness of one’s world of nodes and ties requires some
additional leverage, either statistical or computational, because the small-world
measure is sensitive to size, degree, and type of network in question. For
FIGURE 8.5 Ideal-typical small-world network structure
Cohesion and Groups 171
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdirected one-mode networks, the expected value of the clustering coefficient in a
random network with arbitrary degree distribution is given by:
Cr ¼ 1
n
〈k2
〉−〈k〉
h i2
〈k〉3 , (8.1)
where n is the number of nodes in the network and 〈k〉 and 〈k2
〉 are the mean degree
and mean-square degree, respectively (see Newman 2018; Newman, Strogatz, &
Watts 1999). The expected value of the average path length is given by:
Lr ¼ logð Þ n=z1
logð Þ z2=z1
þ 1, (8.2)
where n is the number of nodes, z1 is the mean degree, and z2 is the mean number
of people two steps away. Intuitively, this equation tells us that the average
distance between people decreases as the number of people two steps away are
increasingly unique – that is, when z2 is much larger than z1. In such cases, the
denominator becomes larger, and the overall quantity becomes smaller. This
general insight is the root of much work on “biased network” models
(Skvoretz, Fararo, & Agneessens 2004), which characterize the probability of
reaching new nodes in a random graph as a function of the greater-than-chance
likelihood of closing a local triad (the meaning of “bias” in this literature).
A small-world network is one where the clustering is much higher than one
would expect by chance and the distance is closer than expected by chance. The
original work thus defined the small-world quotient as:
σ ¼ C=Cr
L=Lr
: (8.3)
However, this measure tends to be quite sensitive to the size of the network.
More recent measures “double normalize” to account for these sorts of size
differences. For example, Neal (2017) proposed the small-world index (SWI) as:
SWI ¼ L−Ll
Lr−Ll

C−Cr
Cl−Cr
, (8.4a)
where Ll and Cl are, respectively, the path length and clustering expected in a
lattice network of the same size and average degree k, given by:
Cl ¼ 3ð Þ k−2
4ð Þ k−1 (8.4b)
Ll ¼ n
2k : (8.4c)
These models assume a large sparse network; thus, they do not work par￾ticularly well on small graphs or networks produced by co-occurrences (which
we cover more in Chapter 11). For example, collaboration networks (authors
172 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Presslinked to each other) are actually the one-mode projection of a two-mode
authorship graph (authors linked to papers). Because each paper of size q has
to create a fully connected clique of size q, such networks are much more
clustered than one would expect by chance and, as such, appear to be more
“small world-ish” than they actually are. Formulas like those above for gauging
small worlds exist for bipartite projections (Newman, Strogatz, & Watts 1999),
but they have not been used often.
In practice, there are often many features driving the shape of a network
beyond simple degree distribution. In most cases, a better approach is to
simulate networks of the same size, density, and relevant constraints (such as
authorship distribution on papers) but to randomly rewire the ties (assign the
ties to randomly selected dyads). The small-world coefficient in one’s observed
network can then be compared to a distribution of small-world coefficients
from a large number of bootstrapped random networks. Because most real￾world networks will be smaller worlds than random networks, this procedure
may require further comparison of networks – for example, researchers might
compare multiple high schools or might compare the same high schools over
time – to have some analytic purchase on just how small a world it is, after all.
8.3    
So far, we have examined cohesion from the standpoint of an entire structure.
We have proposed ways of conceptualizing and measuring networks as having
continuously varying amounts of cohesion – that is, all the aforementioned
measures provide graph-level indicators of connectivity as a single measure.
While useful at comparing the cohesiveness of networks, these measures do not
provide a view into what parts of a structure are more or less cohesive and
where these parts do or do not overlap. To accomplish these goals, network
researchers have developed additional tools to better see subgroups, collections
of more or less cohesive nodes in a network. These subgroups may be induct￾ively generated from the structure of ties within a network or deductively
imposed on the nodes based on a theoretical or substantive interest.
One deductive way to think about cohesion is in terms of nominal boundary
conditions and network ties (see Figure 8.1). From this perspective, the researcher
asks how the structure of ties separates individuals into subgroups based on
node-level qualities. Similar to studying residential racial segregation as the
likelihood of contact, network research looks to the structures of interpersonal
ties to examine specific intra- and intergroup relations. This approach often
involves the use of social categories (e.g., race, class, gender) to define a division
of network nodes and then an examination of either how salient the boundary is
between groups or the connectivity within groups. For example, research on
racial segregation in friendships might begin by using racial categories to classify
nodes and then examining the likelihood of ties within and between these
subgroups in a high school friendship network. If the racial categories are not
Cohesion and Groups 173
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressimportant in shaping social relations, one would expect friendship ties to be
distributed randomly with respect to racial attributes. Freeman (1978a) intro￾duced the segregation index to capture this idea as the difference between the
number of cross-subgroup ties expected by chance and the number of ties
observed, written as E(X) and X, respectively, in the following:
Seg ¼ E Xð Þ−X
E Xð Þ : (8.5)
By comparing the racial segregation score of several high school friendship
networks, the researcher may gain insights into the contexts that facilitate
racial integration.
While it is intuitive and provides a simple link to residential segregation,
Freeman’s index has two important limitations. First, it is not margin free:
changing the distribution of the category of interest (say, race) by a constant but
not changing the core association between race and friendship choice yields a
different segregation score. One antidote to this problem is to use odds ratios.
In this case, an odds ratio calculates the relative likelihood that two people in
the same category will choose each other as friends. The odds ratio is calculated
based on the number of ties among a group and the group’s relative size; as
illustrated in Table 8.1, then, the odds ratio is calculated as AD
BC. Unlike the
segregation index, the odds ratio provides a summary measure of the likelihood
of intergroup ties that is consistent across networks with different numbers of
nodes and subgroups.
Second, the segregation index has no clear maximum. The value of the index
can be higher if all nodes are assigned to a single group than if each node is
assigned to the most empirically valid group. Because the measure tends to have
a monotonically changing score, it is difficult to use the measure as an objective
function when searching for informal groups.
A satisfying and contemporary alternative to the segregation index that
solves both of these problems is the modularity score, which reorganizes the
comparison to random in a way that can be maximized meaningfully.
Σ
ij
1
2m
Aij−γ
KiKj
2m
 δ CiCj
 : (8.6)
Here, m is the number of edges; K is the degree; Aij is the edge weight between
ij; δ(CiCj) indicates same group or not; and γ is the resolution parameter.
 8.1 Odds ratios as a measure of group segregation
Member of
Same Group Different Group
Friends A B
Not Friends C D
174 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressSubstantively, the formula has four parts. The first term (1/2m) is a normalization
for size of the network. Within the parentheses, the first part (Aij) captures the
observed connectivity, γ(KiKj/2m) captures the expected value under a particular
random mixing model (here, degree mixing), and δ(CiCj) indicates the sorting of
nodes into communities. The sum thus increases because there are more ties
within group (Aij and Ci = Cj) than would be expected by chance (KiKj/2m).
The score ranges from −1 to +1, with zero indicating random mixing and
1 indicating complete fragmentation (all ties within the community). Maximizing
the score provides a sensible approach to inducing subsets of nodes that have
very high within-group density and very low between-group density – a process
called community detection.
The two features of modularity that carry theoretical weight are the random
model and the resolution parameter. Different random mixing models (e.g.,
simple density, degree matching, two-mode) have been developed for different
types of network structures. The resolution parameter captures how different
from random mixing a weight needs to be before it contributes to the overall
modularity score. When γ is set to be small, the weight need not be too big, and
thus the researcher tends to find the maximum modularity in partitions with a
small number of big groups. On the other hand, setting γ to be large reveals
many smaller groups. The resolution parameter is thus a knob of sorts that
tunes modularity to find groups of different scales.
8.4   
From the connectionist standpoint, subgroups of interest are often considered
communities: these have both dense social bonds through which important
resources flow and clear boundaries segregating them from each other. As in
the ideal-typical lower-right network in Figure 8.1 at the outset of this chapter,
communities tend to be primary groups in which there are strong positive
bonds associated with shared identities, cultures, and emotional attachments
that give rise to strong ties. At a basic level, a primary group in a larger network
structure should have a tie density within the group that is higher than the tie
density outside the group. Such regions of varying density are, by definition,
more likely in larger networks in which the number of realized ties quickly
begins to outnumber the possible ties. Social forces exist that generate clusters
of ties, and theories of tie formation posit a number of plausible mechanisms,
which are covered in Chapter 13.
How does one identify and extract such subgroups? The key methodological
issue becomes the threshold for determining the density for qualifying a group
of nodes as a community. Researchers follow several approaches for detecting
the number of communities within networks. Several now-classic measures use
graph theory to operationalize group connectivity, boundary salience, or both.
We discuss these next. However, in practice, as we will go on to note, many of
Cohesion and Groups 175
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthese measures are now used more to describe communities found in other ways
than to operationalize subgroups.
8.4.1 Graph-Theoretic Approaches
A clique is a maximally connected subgroup (i.e., all nodes have ties with one
another) and therefore maximizes the connectivity dimension of groups. Many
of the features we intuitively think of as characteristic of social subgroups are
maximal in a clique. Within a clique, every triad is transitive (i.e., every friend
of a friend is also a friend). Consequently, cliques have a density of 1.0, and all
nodes are maximally proximate (all dyadic distances = 1). One has to remove
n − 1 other nodes in a clique to disconnect it, so cliques are also maximally
robust to disruption.
However, in most social networks, as a measure of subgroup membership,
cliques have two related problems. First, most networks have many small
cliques that heavily overlap with one another. Cliques can overlap by as many
as n − 1 nodes, which means that dense clusters often have many overlapping
cliques. Consider the small example in Figure 8.6, which has only six nodes but
three deeply overlapping cliques.
Second, because determining cliques does not take into account ties to nodes
outside of the clique, cliques can be embedded within much wider and denser
networks. We could, for example, add any number of ties to each of the nodes
 
 
 
 


FIGURE 8.6 Small network with many overlapping cliques
176 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressin Figure 8.6, reaching out to new nodes, and the clique memberships would
not change. Clique membership is thus a good indicator of close connectivity,
and the proportion of nodes within a subgroup that share a clique might be a
good descriptive measure of connectivity. However, clique memberships and
overlaps are rarely sufficient in defining subgroups.
These core limitations have led to generalizations of cliques that are, in
themselves, often good measures of the connectivity dimension of group
cohesion. For example, the k-core is a subgroup in which each node has ties
to at least k other nodes in the core group. The limitation to ties within the
group starts to capture the boundary feature, albeit only indirectly. A 3-core
would therefore be a subgroup in which each node has at least three ties within
that core group. An example is illustrated in Figure 8.7, which contains two 3-
cores, one shown in blue and the other in white. Again, as a measure of the
connectivity dimension, this is useful to indicate how much relational overlap
there is in the setting. One could, for example, use the average pairwise k-core
value to indicate social cohesion; (sub)graphs with higher k-cohesion have more
shared relations. Like all graph-theoretic models, the measures can be quite
sensitive to small changes in the graph. For example, if A and B were to become
A
B
FIGURE 8.7 Network with two 3-cores
Cohesion and Groups 177
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfriends, then the entire structure would become a single 3-core.
1 For this reason,
the researcher should employ additional techniques to validate results.
Other graph-theoretic approaches perform similar tasks. They begin by
identifying subgroups that are more cohesive and then modifying the criteria
for connectivity to see the various regions of cohesion within the structure. A k￾plex, for example, is like a k-core but is indexed to the size of the group: in a k￾plex, every node is connected to at least n–k other nodes. An n-clique is a
subgroup in which every node is connected by a path of distance n or less.
A clique in the strictest definition is therefore a 1-clique, and relaxing this to a 2-
clique would mean that all nodes are connected with one another directly or
through paths of no more than length 2. One may add more stipulations to
such definitions. For example, an n-clan is an n-clique with the added stipula￾tion that all the paths of length n must be within the same group of nodes – that
is, all nodes are within a subgroup with no more than n diameter.
8.4.2 Heuristic Approaches
Most contemporary approaches to community detection have moved away from
formal structural definitions. Instead, the trend has been to rely more on compu￾tational power to extract communities by optimizing the internal cohesion and
boundary salience simultaneously. These sorts of attempts have a long history,
dating back at least to the NEGOPY routine from the 1970s (see Richards &
Rice 1981), but the field has exploded in recent years (e.g., Moody & Mucha
2013; Mucha et al. 2010). The general challenge with all these approaches is
limited computational speed: in larger networks, it is impossible to try all possible
assignments of nodes to all possible numbers and sizes of groups.
2 Thus, a bit like
visualization layout strategies, each algorithm tries to find the best solution by
maximizing a feature that is highly correlated with the general notion of groups.
Although many algorithms are available, they generally fit into one of four
broad types of approaches, each turning on a somewhat different algorithmic
strategy: (1) spectral methods, (2) divisive methods, (3) diffusion-simulation
methods, and (4) direct modularity-maximization methods.
8.4.2.1 Spectral Methods
The earliest attempts at stepping past simple graph-theoretic methods adopted
tools from psychometrics and measurement theory used to create low￾dimensional representations of high-dimensional data objects. Factor analysis,
1 One key advantage of k-cores is that they are fast to compute. So, in very large networks, it is
often useful to identify what proportion of nodes are in the largest 3-core, the largest 4-core, and
so on, up to some high level of k-core connectivity. This core collapse sequence identifies roughly
when groups rapidly break apart. 2 iGraph does offer “cluster_optimal” as an option, which does this all-possibilities search. Even on
the fastest machines, graphs of more than dozens of nodes are prohibitively time consuming.
178 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfor example, is a well-known tool in survey research for combining information
on multiple questions into a single summary scale, which works by identifying
sets of questions that are highly correlated with one another. Early network
methodologists recognized that the inverse of the distance matrix can be treated
much like a correlation matrix and that the same factor-analytic tools can be
applied to the network. Sets of nodes that are very close to one another in the
network are akin to highly correlated questions in a survey and form a single
group. This approach, famously used by Cairns and Cairns (1991) to examine
peer groups of young adolescents, is among the most common approaches used
in developmental psychology. One key advantage of this approach is that
authors borrow decision rules from psychometrics, generally considering a factor
to be a group if it has an eigenvalue greater than 1. A second advantage is that, as
with factor analysis, cross-factor loadings can be used to identify the groups to
which a person is connected.
These approaches have been extended as a broad class of spectral methods
that use the underlying mathematical machinery of factor analysis (a singular
value decomposition of an adjacency matrix) to identify groups in networks.
Because the models tend to be fast and work well on large networks with clear
divisions, they can often be used to preprocess very large networks. However,
in our experience, they tend to underperform relative to methods designed
specifically in small to medium-sized networks.
8.4.2.2 Divisive Methods
An alternative approach rests on divisive methods to find the best spot to break a
network apart by deleting nodes or edges. The instinct here is that when a
network is split along natural fault lines, the remaining unsplit parts are cohesive
groups. The best known of these methods is Newman and Girvan’s (2004) edge
betweenness algorithm. Edge betweenness can be thought of as an extension of
node betweenness, which is defined as the number of shortest paths a node is part
of. Similarly, one can identify the number of shortest paths an edge is on to define
edge betweenness. If the researcher iteratively calculates edge betweenness and
then removes the edge with the highest score, eventually the network will break
into disconnected components; this would be the first split. The process is
repeated on the new components until all edges are removed, retaining the set
of splits that also maximizes the modularity score (see Equation 8.2). The slowest
step in this algorithm is recomputing edge betweenness after each edge removal,
but it is an essential step; one cannot simply sort edges in betweenness order
based on the full global structure. This algorithm generally performs quite well,
returning groups that have the highest modularity scores among the available
alternatives, although it is somewhat slower to run.
8.4.2.3 Diffusion-Simulation Methods
The third general approach stems from the idea of social diffusion. In this
clearly connectionist view, cohesive groups communicate a lot with each other
Cohesion and Groups 179
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressand share information accordingly. As such, they tend to develop their own
unique sets of ideas and shared worldviews that distinguish them from other
groups. By simulating a randomly seeded diffusion process many times over a
network, the researcher can directly look for sets of nodes that have much in
common (see Moody 2001). Recent developments in this area mimic a packet
transfer (label propagation) or agglomerating sequence of strings built on
random walks (known as a walktrap). One clear advantage of these methods
is that they tend to be quite fast and substantively often match some underlying
social diffusion process we are interested in capturing on the network (as we
will cover in Chapter 14).
8.4.2.4 Direct Modularity-Maximization Methods
The final approach attempts to maximize an objective function directly
related to the groupness of the network. The most common choices are cases
that maximize modularity (e.g., Louvain) or odds of an in-group tie (e.g.,
stochastic blockmodels, KliqueFinder [Frank 1995]). Although these choices
represent subtle differences in the approach taken to implement the search
over the implicit state space (i.e., the set of configurations or states that are
possible solutions), the basic idea is the same: slowly grow the partition based
on pairs of nodes that are most likely to be in the same cluster, add nodes to
clusters they are most strongly connected to, and then swap nodes in or out to
adjust and search for an alternative and possibly better fit. The Louvain
implementation (Blondel et al. 2008) is a well-known version of this
approach that works quickly and has proven largely robust to starting values
and data error, particularly implementations that include steps for checking
and revising early steps in the algorithmic process (Batagelj & Mrvar 1999;
the “Leiden” method [Traag, Waltman, & van Eck 2019]). Modularity￾maximization methods will also behave accurately when using valued as well
as binary data.
8.5    
At this point, you might be wondering which method is best. You might be
wanting a fairly straightforward way to compare the many techniques we have
introduced and objectively decide on one. We have bad news. The reason we
present you with so many options is that really there is no one best way to find
communities. In general, we would say that seeing cohesion at the network level
is a simpler goal than extracting cohesive subgroups. In fact, you may be able to
use the techniques aimed at seeing cohesion as a way to sidestep community
detection and extraction. For example, you might simply measure pairwise
connectivity instead of trying to see who is in “the same” group. Measuring
pairwise connectivity may be particularly useful when dealing with large net￾works where convergence time can be costly.
180 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressRecall that one of our primary goals in this book is to point out that many
method problems are really theory problems in disguise. Instead of wracking
your head about the multitude of ways you could possibly partition your
network into subgroups, step back and ask whether your theory requires it. If
you are simply interested in seeing how cohesive your network is, you may be
able to do just fine without agonizing over subgroup extraction and instead
look to measures of similarity, cohesion, and distance among your nodes.
When you really do need to partition your network, you will want to combine
your substantive knowledge of your data with results from a few different
approaches and those that align best with your theoretical approach (e.g.,
Smith et al. 2020).
Figure 8.8 provides a comparison of these four types of clustering applied to
the same network (the karate club data introduced in Chapter 5). Clearly, these
methods produce very similar results. However, differences do exist, and it is
not clear a priori which method is the most suitable for a given network. This
leads, once again, to the need to examine consistencies across models and
report any glaring problems.
There are two additional frustrations with modularity-maximization methods.
The first is determining the number of communities that naturally occur in the
network. Some algorithms automatically identify the number of clusters based on
the objective of modularity maximization (e.g., walktrap, Louvain). But even
with these approaches, users often have to choose a parameter, which indirectly
affects the number of clusters returned (the length of the random walks for
walktrap, or the resolution value for Louvain). Others ask the user to
prespecify the number of clusters directly. Unfortunately, there is rarely a prin￾cipled way to sidestep this problem that does not involve reversion to some other
(almost) arbitrary decision rule. As such, the best option for most applications is
to explore multiple solutions and look for consistency across solutions.
Spectral Clustering Edge Betweenness Walktrap Louvain
FIGURE 8.8 Comparing four approaches to deriving cohesive subgroups
Cohesion and Groups 181
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressFor modularity-maximization routines, one usually does a sweep across a
wide range of the resolution parameters to see how resolution changes. Weir
et al. (2018) showed that there is a fairly limited set of solutions that maximize
modularity for a given resolution parameter and provided a rubric for perform￾ing this sort of sweep with their CHAMP (Convex Hull of Admissible
Modularity Partitions) method. The main result of their work is that the
modularity-maximizing set of partitions fall along a convex hull in the space
defined by the resolution parameter and the modularity score. As such, any
solution that does not fall on that hull has not succeeded at maximizing the
modularity at that resolution and need not be examined. Moreover, there is an
identity defined by a simple line on this hull, such that each partition on the
same line is exactly equivalent – even if found under different resolution
searches. Thus, when searching for the best-fitting solutions, the researcher
can actually minimize the sets being compared because many will be equivalent.
Consider Figure 8.9, which layers over the number of groups identified and
placement on the optimal hull.
This plot summarizes the best-fitting partitions from a search set over
175 runs of the Louvain model at a resolution ranging from 0.3 to 2.0. The
green O signs indicate the number of communities identified at that resolution
parameter value; for example, at the default 1.0, we have 8 communities. We
0.3
0.45
0.6
0.85
0.95
1.051.1
1.45
1.8
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Resolution Parameter Gamma
200
250
300
350
Quality Score (nonnormalized)
5
6
7
8
9
10
N of Communities
FIGURE 8.9 Resolution parameter sweep
182 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Presssee that the number of communities levels off at 9 across a wide range of
resolution values – from approximately 1.1 to 1.8. A stable number of commu￾nities is usually a good sign that these are “real” communities. The colored
points along the hull indicate sets of points with the same slope in the reso￾lution-by-fit space. It turns out that all solutions with the same slope will be
equivalent. Interestingly, in this case, there are distinct solutions within the
same size sets. Looking at the line along the hull, we see that for the eight￾community solution we have three distinct solutions: one starting at resolution
0.85, one at 0.95, and one at 1.05. For the nine-community solution, we have
one solution that runs from 1.1 to 1.43 and another from 1.1 to 1.45. Each
color is a unique solution, so despite having produced 175 runs, we have only
nine unique maximizing solutions to examine by hand, making it tractable to
examine substantively how they differ.
The second common frustration with these approaches is replicability. Even
if the same number of communities is specified, different algorithms (and
sometimes different runs of the same algorithm) will produce different solutions
(as demonstrated in Figure 8.8). For very large networks for which users are
trying to simply reduce a too-cumbersome network into a manageable size,
these sorts of differences probably do not matter much: the difference between
1,000 communities and 1,100 communities in a network of millions of nodes is
probably trivial. But in moderate and small networks, these differences can
often matter. For example, in Figure 8.8, the spectral clustering solution differs
from all the others in how the top five nodes are treated. Substantive familiarity
with a case is usually the best solution to this problem. In the spirit of turning a
bug into a feature, one approach that is starting to gain traction is to combine
the information from multiple methods into a reweighted network (called
consensus clustering).
As with all data analysis, the researcher engaged in partitioning networks
into communities will need to be guided by theory, substance, and methodo￾logical practicality. Comparing results and checking their sensitivity to alter￾nate specifications is a best practice in network analysis.
8.6   
While community detection techniques allow the researcher to identify the
number of more or less cohesive subgroups, additional methods help examine
how subgroups interrelate within a larger structure. Subgroups may be loosely
tied to one another, as we saw with the example of small-world structures,
which are characterized by tightly knit subgroups connected through relatively
weak links. In contrast to small-world structures, subgroups may be tightly
coupled with one another through thick interfaces. Again, one can consider
these different types of ridge structures with varying peaks and more or less
connective ridgelines.
Cohesion and Groups 183
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressTo gauge such structures of communities, Moody and White (2003)
developed a technique called cohesive blocking in homage to role analysis
(discussed in the next chapter). Cohesive blocking examines a network in its
entirety and then divides it by removing the smallest subsets of nodes that will
disconnect the network (called cut sets). The minimum size of the cut set needed
to disconnect the graph defines its connectivity. The nodes in the cut set are then
added to each “side” of the cut, and the process repeats. Thus, at each stage of
the process, the graph is cut at its weakest points. Importantly, though, the
researcher also keeps track of how each new graph is related to the prior set,
yielding a tree that provides a history of differential embeddedness for all the
groups. Theoretically, there is a nice dualism to the identification of cut sets:
each (sub)network that can be disconnected by removing k-nodes must also
have k nonoverlapping paths linking every pair of nodes in that (sub)network.
This allows us to think about how easily various things can diffuse through a
network, given that we would expect easier flow in places with many non￾overlapping paths (think of traffic forced to ride across a single bridge com￾pared with places where there are alternative routes).
The cohesive blocking approach builds a nested view of connectivity as
structural cohesion – a view based on where networks may be more readily
split into subgroups. Recall that a component is a network or subnetwork in
which all members are reachable through at least a single path. A k-compon￾ent is a maximal subgraph where all members are connected by k node￾independent paths which, equivalently, means that at least k nodes would
have to be deleted to disconnect them.
3 For example, a 3-component is a
subnetwork in which all its nodes have at least three node-independent paths
linking each pair of nodes. We discuss procedures for extracting and examin￾ing various k-connected components in the R tutorial for this chapter. For
now, we can use this idea to characterize an entire network structure as
having greater connectivity to the extent that it is k-connected at a higher
level of k. A network in which three nodes would need to be removed for the
structure to be no longer connected (k = 3), also called a tricomponent, has a
higher level of connectivity than networks where k equals 2 (a bicomponent)
or 1 (a component).
The technique outlined by Moody and White (2003) operationalizes this
approach and gives views of various levels of connectivity in a network and
the nesting of subgroups. Beginning with a network component as a single
connected entity, the technique then iteratively searches for k-connected
subgroups at higher levels of k, producing a nested view of the subgroups as
connectivity sets. Figure 8.10 shows the connectivity sets for the network
3 Note that k-components are similar to k-cores but not the same: all k-components are k-cores, but
not all k-cores are k-components. There is no node-removal constraint on k-cores because they
are defined only by the number of ties shared.
184 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressgraph G (taken from the graph in Figure 8.3). Thus, we return to the notion
that networks have overlapping regions of connectivity – that is, a ridge
structure.
The relatedness of the network can also be seen by building a blocking
matrix. A blocking matrix rearranges nodes into connectivity sets by
permuting the rows and columns of a matrix. For illustration, we sorted the
matrix in Table 8.2 to correspond with Figure 8.10. Here, one sees Nodes 1–7
all belong to the same 5-component; Node 7 also belongs to Nodes 8, 11, and
14; that 3-component is embedded within a larger 2-component; and so on.
The entire network is connected and therefore is a 1-component. This
blocking matrix nicely illustrates the pairwise node connectivity and the
global “blocks” of the network. For total network models, summary statistics
on the blocking matrix (e.g., mean or median) can be used to summarize the
network cohesion overall and to rank networks by their path-based diffusion
risk. Moody and Benton (2016), for example, showed that networks with
high pairwise average connectivity are at greater risk of disease spread,
regardless of relational timing.
Structural cohesion takes us full circle to the roots of connectivity methods.
Networks with higher levels of k-connectivity have greater numbers of alternate
routes linking each node to every other node. The greater the number of
alternative paths, the more readily things flow through the network, improving
diffusion. For cultural items, such as beliefs or norms, those who are most
strongly and redundantly linked to each other would be expected to share the
most common information and thus hold the most similar views. For example,
G
{7,8,9,10,11,12,
 13,14,15,16}
{1,2,3,4,5,6,7,
 17,18,19,20,21,22,23}
{7,8,11,14} {1,2,3,4,5,6,7} {17,18,19,20,21,22,23}
FIGURE 8.10 Connectivity sets for Figure 8.3
Cohesion and Groups 185
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press 8.2 Blocking matrix
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 11 14 9 10 12 13 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
1 555555511 1 11 1 1 112222222
2 555555511 1 11 1 1 112222222
3 555555511 1 11 1 1 112222222
4 555555511 1 11 1 1 112222222
5 555555511 1 11 1 1 112222222
6 555555511 1 11 1 1 112222222
7 555555533 3 22 2 2 222222222
8 111111333 3 22 2 2 221111111
11 111111333 3 22 2 2 221111111
14 111111333 3 22 2 2 221111111
9 111111222 2 22 2 2 221111111
10 111111222 2 22 2 2 221111111
12 111111222 2 22 2 2 221111111
13 111111222 2 22 2 2 221111111
15 111111222 2 22 2 2 221111111
16 111111222 2 22 2 2 221111111
17 222222211 1 11 1 1 113333333
18 222222211 1 11 1 1 113333333
19 222222211 1 11 1 1 113333333
20 222222211 1 11 1 1 113333333
21 222222211 1 11 1 1 113333333
22 222222211 1 11 1 1 113333333
23 222222211 1 11 1 1 113333333
186
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressMoody and White (2003), reanalyzing data from Mizruchi (1982), showed that
firms that are more structurally cohesive tend to behave similarly with respect
to political activity.
8.7 
In this chapter, we discussed the core issue of cohesion and connectivity: what
holds a group, community, or society together. Although this is a much larger
philosophical and substantive problem than social networks can fully capture,
social network analysis provides a set of formal techniques for identifying
groups and subgroups and examining how they interrelate with one another.
These methods fit naturally with the vision set out by sociologists from the
inception of the discipline. However, cohesion and connectivity are variable
aspects of any system. The same methods we outlined here are currently being
applied in a wide number of settings to explore topics ranging from the inter￾connectedness of transportation systems to the consequences of removing
species in a networked ecology. Connectedness is, in many ways, the leitmotif
of our current era of rapid flows of communication, trade, and migration; but
paradoxically, so too is the constant sense of disconnection and fragmentation.
Network methods have much to offer in better understanding this tension
between growing connection and disconnection and seeing this tension’s
structural origins.
  
Abbe, Emmanuel. 2018. “Community Detection and Stochastic Block Models: Recent
Developments.” Journal of Machine Learning and Research 18: 1–86. (A nice
review of the stochastic blockmodel approach to community detection.)
Christakis, Nicholas. 2019. Blueprint: The Evolutionary Origins of a Good Society.
New York: Little, Brown Spark. (A sweeping evolutionary perspective that synthe￾sizes a great deal of research on networks and cohesion.)
Coleman, James. 1961. The Adolescent Society. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press. (An early
study of fully connected cliques within ten high schools, relating them to notions of
the leading crowd and other groups.)
Everton, Sean F. 2018. Networks and Religion: Ties That Bind, Loose, Build-Up, and
Tear Down. New York: Cambridge University Press. (Works through a series of
models in fruitfully combining the social scientific study of religion with network
modeling.)
Fortunato, Santo. 2010. “Community Detection in Graphs.” Physics Reports 486:
75–174. (A comprehensive 100-page review on the problem of community
detection in physics.)
Freeman, Linton C. 1972. “Segregation in Social Networks.” Sociological Methods and
Research 6: 411–30.
1992. “The Sociological Concept of ‘Group’: An Empirical Test of Two Models.”
American Journal of Sociology 98(1):152–66. (Freeman devoted much energy to
Cohesion and Groups 187
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe theoretical problem of cohesive groups, and these papers exemplify his
approach, which should help guide sociological approaches to identification of
communities.)
Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
Embeddedness.” American Journal of Sociology 91: 481–510. (Embeddedness is
the individual dual to collective cohesion. Here Granovetter powerfully demon￾strates how action models must include localized resources and constraints captured
by networks to avoid being either atomistic or overdetermined. The paper has
become the classic statement of networks and economic action. See also Uzzi 1997.)
Knoke, David. 1990. Political Networks: The Structural Perspective. New York:
Cambridge University Press. (Knoke has set the agenda for network analysis of
politics. This work provides a summary of network models for political action
across a broad set of empirical cases.)
Lee, Cheol-Sung. 2018. When Solidarity Works: Labor Civic Networks and the Welfare
States in the Market Reform Era. New York: Cambridge University Press. (Provides
a detailed analysis of worker solidarity and cohesion across four countries; an
excellent application of structural thinking and network analysis to substantive
questions of cohesion.)
Lin, Nan. 2002. Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action. New York:
Cambridge University Press. (See previous note in Chapter 1.)
Markovsky, Barry, and Edward J. Lawler. 1994. “A New Theory of Social Solidarity.”
Pp. 113–37 in Advances in Group Processes, vol. 11, edited by B. Markovsky, J.
O’Brien, and K. Heimer. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. (Provides a clear social psycho￾logical foundation for social cohesion, which can then inform network methods.)
Mucha, Peter J., Thomas Richardson, Kevin Macon, Mason A. Porter, and Jukka-Pekka
Onnela. 2010. “Community Structure in Time-Dependent, Multiscale, and
Multiplex Networks.” Science 328: 876–78. (Shows how one can leverage multi￾layer networks to find communities that bridge waves in dynamic data.)
Shai, Saray, Natalie Stanley, Clara Granell, Dane Taylor, and Peter J. Mucha. 2020.
“Case Studies in Network Community Detection.” Pp. 309–33 in The Oxford
Handbook of Social Networks, edited by Ryan Light and James Moody. New
York: Oxford University Press. (Provides a brief overview and then a set of clear
examples of how network communities are used in practice across disciplines.)
Uzzi, Brian. 1997. “Social Structure and Competition in Interfirm Networks: The
Paradox of Embeddedness.” Administrative Science Quarterly 42(1): 35–67. (Uzzi
develops a theory of embedded relations and their implications for economic action
based on deep ethnographic work. See also Granovetter 1985.)
Anthropological Perspectives on Cohesion
Bott, Elizabeth. 1957. Family and Social Network. New York: Taylor & Francis.
(A lovely examination of the effects of gender and network segregation on role
performance. Foundational work for the study of family and normative pressures in
networks.)
Hage, Per, and Frank Harary. 1996. Island Networks: Communication, Kinship &
Classification Structures in Oceania. New York: Cambridge University Press.
(Links structural kinship models, linguistic similarity models, and migration/travel
networks to show how seemingly isolated islands in Oceania actually form a
cohesive social system.)
188 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressSchweizer, Thomas, and Douglas R. White. 1998. Kinship, Networks and Exchange.
New York: Cambridge University Press. (A collection of works on kinship system
properties across numerous empirical settings.)
White, Douglas R., and Ulla Johansen. 2006. Network Analysis and Ethnographic
Problems: Process Models of a Turkish Nomad Clan. Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books. (Applies insights from structural cohesion and kinship structures to identify
how changes in network cohesion reflect broader social change.)
Cohesion and Groups 189
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press9
Hierarchy and Centrality
Some people take orders all day. Others give them. And most people are
somewhere in the middle. While relations of “who orders whom” are generally
established through formalized hierarchies of authority, informal relations such
as business partnerships and even friendships are also frequently hierarchical in
some way: some business partners have more control over important resources,
and some friends have more clout. Indeed, status and reputation structure
almost all areas of social life. To understand social structure, we must attend
to horizontal relations in which individuals are connected through frequently
mutual feelings of belonging, as well as vertical relations of power, authority,
deference, and status that are asymmetric. Ultimately, how community and
hierarchy combine is one of the most vexing concerns in the social sciences.
Building on the previous chapter’s focus on groups and cohesion, this chapter
focuses on aspects of social structures that are more asymmetric, centralized,
or hierarchical.
9.1    
If you have ever been in a preschool, you know that interactions among
children can sometimes take the form of acts in which one “wins” and another
“loses.” These are generally fairly ritualized physical encounters in which, for
example, toys are taken or building blocks are pushed over. What is going on?
One child is trying to dominate another, and frequently one child wants to be at
the top of a hierarchy. Now, if you have ever attended a university faculty
meeting, you likely observed hierarchies of another, subtler sort in the careful
ways that junior faculty defer to their senior colleagues and the tension that can
result when such rituals are not correctly observed. The ethology of primates
and other social animals suggests that hierarchies are ubiquitous and adaptive
in coordinating group behaviors (see Martin 2009a). As individuals, people
190
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmust come to understand multiple types of hierarchies and where they fit in
them throughout their lives. Most of the time, people manage to navigate these
hierarchies without friction; but Gould (2003) noted that tension and violence
are more likely when there is ambiguity about who is dominant in the relation.
For social network scholars, seeing social structure therefore entails observing
the unequal positions that individuals and groups frequently hold in their
formal and informal relations.
Many important research questions are connected with hierarchy. For soci￾ologists, one of the most important questions is how hierarchy affects social
cohesion, the topic of the previous chapter. In answering this question, the
social anthropologist Mary Douglas extended Durkheim’s key insights on the
nature of social solidarity within a two-dimensional model (Douglas 1970; see
also Kemper & Collins 1990; Fiske 1991). For Douglas, social collectivities are
characterized by varying degrees of horizontal connectedness and more or less
formalized vertical differences, which she termed group and grid, respectively.
The previous chapter focused on what Douglas would call the group dimen￾sion, in which ties tend to be of a primary-group nature and give rise to flows of
important resources and collective feelings of belonging. As societies become
more differentiated into complex divisions of labor, hierarchical aspects
become increasingly fundamental aspects of social structure. Hierarchy without
a sense of connection threatens group cohesion, leading to fatalistic and cynical
feelings that threaten societal stability. The persistent challenge of modern
industrial societies is how to foster group feelings in the context of an increasing
number of grid-like formalized hierarchies.
Social network analysis helps to identify and better illuminate how group
and grid go together, how they may be frequently in tension, and when they
may operate in more stable and perhaps even functional ways. Network
scholars are particularly interested in hierarchies that arise from the self￾organizing behaviors of individuals within groups. How do inequalities arise,
persist, and sometimes shift as a result of ongoing interactions, motives, and
strategies? For obvious reasons, this question is less interesting for the study of
formal hierarchies, such as those depicted in organizational charts; the roles in a
formal hierarchy hold no real mystery because they are predetermined by layers
of authority. Although such organizational charts can be analyzed as social
networks, most network scholars are more interested in understanding the
origins and dynamics of informal structures arising from friendships, advice￾seeking, partnerships, and coalitions, which are more fluid and not as readily
seen and institutionalized in named roles and positions. Informal hierarchies in
the workplace – who seeks advice from whom and who influences whom – may
be quite complex and remarkably different than what appears in positions
depicted in the formal organizational chart. Indeed, such informal networks
frequently reveal how work actually gets done and such informal structures
may have evolved because of the shortcomings of solutions provided in hand￾books and formal rules (Scott 1998).
Hierarchy and Centrality 191
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressWho stands in positions of power, authority, or status in a group? While
many academic fields, as well as the many and myriad books published in the
popular press, ponder successful people’s special individual qualities that can
account for who comes to occupy such privileged positions, network scholars
tend to downplay individual-level explanations that stress personality traits.
Social network scholars see the bases of power in social collectivities as being at
least partly structural, viewing the capacity to enact one’s will as derived from
one’s ties and the arrangement of ties in one’s network environment. This
notion was a key part of the development of social network analysis in the
Manchester School of social anthropology, an influential group of scholars at
the University of Manchester in the UK beginning in the 1940s, and is still
featured in various structural approaches to power and conflict. To better
observe the structural bases of power and influence, network research has
developed tools to accurately characterize individuals’ positions and entire
networks in vertical terms.
Both connectionists and positional researchers are interested in hierarchical
structures. Connectionists have once again predominated and are largely
responsible for the development of these just mentioned theories of power
and influence. Many of the opportunities that hierarchy affords are connection￾ist in nature: resources flow to top positions. Consequently, many of the
routines used to operationalize hierarchy and centrality aim to capture the
ability to intersect or otherwise influence flows of goods through a network.
But the study of hierarchy is arguably even more archetypical of positional
approaches. Hierarchical structures arise from similar forces in a variety of
social contexts, and individuals who hold similar positions in a hierarchy are
often affected in similar ways in their attitudes and behaviors. In the structure
of firms, vice-presidents and CEOs hold equivalent positions that are likely to
shape their attitudes in similar ways, even when they are in completely different
firms in different industries. Likewise, people who occupy similar positions
within the hierarchical structure of an informal network would be expected
to behave similarly because they are faced with similar social constraints
and opportunities.
In what follows, we discuss power and hierarchy from various network
perspectives. We discuss several ways of measuring structural differences in
power, status, and prestige among individuals and groups. We cover the core
issue of centrality in networks, which has been the basis of most network
research attempting to capture vertical differences among social actors. We
also review ways to characterize the hierarchy of entire networks that vary
widely in size and composition.
9.2   
While many social scientists study inequalities in aggregate-level distributions
of resources in entire populations (i.e., social stratification), network scholars
192 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressare interested in the relational bases of various inequalities, generally in small to
medium-sized groups. Thus, rather than looking at, say, a histogram of the
income distribution of a country, network scholars would look at the actors
within a structure of exchange and how that structure affords some actors more
power, prestige, and influence.
Consider again the Florentine family networks. Clearly, having marriage
and business ties to a greater number of families was advantageous during the
Renaissance because it afforded access to vital information, influence, and
business dealings that helped enrich these groups. However, it was not simply
the number of such ties that mattered; it was also the structure of these ties that
provided power. Having ties to families who themselves had fewer ties was
particularly advantageous. The Medici excelled at forming alliances with fam￾ilies who were then dependent on them for flows of resources, thereby enhan￾cing the Medici family’s power and influence. To do so, the Medici engaged in a
game of cunning, deceit, and so-called robust action (Padgett & Ansell 1993) –
that is, keeping others guessing and simply having to trust them. Robust action
involves retaining as many options as possible for forming alliances and break￾ing alliances when it suits one’s needs.
The structural bases of power and influence are therefore related to both
node-level positions and the overall arrangement of ties in the broader network.
Occupying a particular position within a particular structure is the basis of
power. Structures have very different implications for flows and consequently
for who has influence in the system. As with the Medici example, substantive
and theoretical knowledge of a domain is key to interpreting the implications of
structures for power and influence. Networks in which only a few individuals
have power can be seen as “star systems” in which influence is concentrated.
But being a star in a vertically differentiated system is very different than being
a star in a horizontally differentiated system. The old adage of being a big fish in
a small pond holds for the latter case.
Many types of vertical differentiation exist. Not all are relevant for all
groups, and those that are relevant may operate in complementary or compet￾ing ways. Clearly, for the Florentine elites, the key issues involved coercive
power based on exchange relations and how these interrelated with status –
that is, a form of prestige that others attribute to social actors based on
perceptions of some valued attribute (see Ridgeway 2019). More naked forms
of vertical differentiation in power – that is, the ability to impose one’s will –
may be seen in physical dominance, such as pecking orders with chickens,
which in human groups may or may not correlate with status, depending on
the context. Many power relations today are legitimated through legal and
organizational structures and thereby form hierarchies of authority relations.
However, individuals with more authority may or may not be the most influen￾tial actors in a given context if we actually look at relations of who influences
whom. Thus, vertical differentiation often involves multiple hierarchies that
may or may not be correlated with one another.
Hierarchy and Centrality 193
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressSuch empirical richness and layering is welcomed by most social scientists
who are eager to go deeper into the bases of vertical differentiation within a
given slice of the world. However, the bad news is that no single measure is
likely going to do this work for the researcher. The measurement of hierarchy
from a network standpoint is very blunt compared with the subtlety of many
actual bases of vertical differentiation. Thus, when considering the causes and
consequences of vertical differentiation, the researcher must be particularly
attentive to the substantive processes under consideration and the relevant
theories that can help to make sense out of relatively blunt measures.
Therefore, the measures we discuss in this chapter are important causes or
consequences in various theory-driven projects. Here, we note some of the more
influential theories that concern inequality in networks. These theories, some of
which we introduced in previous chapters, are often used to interpret explora￾tory results and various cross-sectional depictions of networks.
 Preferential Attachment Theory. People tend to be drawn to those who are
more popular, higher in status, and more visible in their groups. Thus,
individuals who have many friendship nominations at one point in time
are likely to draw even more over time. They also tend to reciprocate a
lower percentage of these ties: in-degree tends to be greater than out-degree.
 Matthew Effects. A large body of work extends Merton’s (1968) insights
that acknowledgment and recognition are often attributed to those with
greater visibility in a social system, and thus power, reputation, and prestige
tend to be “sticky” qualities. Matthew effects may be built on initially small,
and even random, differences in ability that get magnified over time through
reflected appraisals and self-fulfilling prophesies.
 Social Exchange Theory. If networks are built from exchanges of material,
social, or emotional goods, then individuals are likely to strategically seek
out advantageous positions in the structure of these exchanges. As with the
Medici example, individuals and groups tend to diminish their resource
dependencies on others while enhancing others’ dependence on them for
key resources. The ability to exclusively control others’ ability to access
resources is the key feature in such networks. Using laboratory experiments
in which the researcher manipulates the underlying opportunities for
exchange (without the knowledge of participants), researchers have found
that individuals make strategic choices in forming ties with those who offer a
better payoff and that those in specific positions (i.e., brokerage) accrue
greater rewards. Of course, the strength of a highly focused research pro￾gram tested largely in laboratory settings becomes a limitation when con￾sidering broader applications in more natural settings. Most real-life groups
are unlike the reality TV show Survivor, in which individuals win by forming
and breaking alliances and avoiding being voted off the island.
 Social Influence Network Theory. Friedkin and Johnsen (2011) built on
prior work by DeGroot (1974) and others to explore the dynamics of social
194 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinfluence networks in shaping opinions and consensus (or lack thereof ) in
small groups. They found that opinion leaders have greater effects on
opinion formation processes. We discuss this theory in detail in Chapter 15.
 Domination and Status Multiplication Models. Some local social processes
generate hierarchy as direct consequence of the relation, whereas others
generate hierarchy as an unintended emergent property. For example,
transitivity in dominance relations necessarily produces ordered hierarchies,
as when one’s boss’s boss takes control. Many animal networks, for example,
admit to these sorts of clear dominance hierarchies, where if i dominates j and
j dominates k, then i also dominates k (Chase 1980; Chase et al. 2002).
However, if people’s asymmetric relations are organized around local balance
or agreement rules, then friends will tend to agree on whom they like, so that if
i $ j and i ! k, then j ! k. This will result in sequences of “up” pointed triads
that will necessarily produce hierarchy (Johnsen 1985, 1986).
Each of these theories attends to some underlying process that can be
approached in network terms. To begin to see such vertical differences, net￾work scholars often rely on a set of measures gauging how central an actor is
within a network. But as Borgatti and Everett (2020) cautioned, measures of
centrality in network analysis are a bit like measures of demographics or
personality traits in social research – that is, centrality is a family of measures
requiring more specific theories (such as those just noted) and substantive
knowledge in order to formulate a worthy explanation.
9.3  
Centrality is one of the most important concepts in network science and is
perhaps the most studied aspect of networks. Centrality is important in part
because it allows the researcher to produce an individual-level variable that
captures an aspect of the social structure. An individual’s centrality is thus a
useful indication of power, influence, and prestige within a group. Those who are
at the center of the network are really at the top in some fashion. Because each
node has its own centrality score, it can easily be incorporated into individual￾level studies as an independent or dependent variable to provide a more struc￾tural explanation of various phenomena. Centrality therefore fits nicely with
existing individual-centric approaches and explanations but is also key for
researchers interested in the stability and robustness of groups. When discussing
group cohesion in the previous chapter, we also demonstrated that centrality can
be an important aspect of the overall connectivity of a group: structures that are
held together by a few central nodes are not as cohesive as those having the same
number of nodes with ties distributed more evenly in the group.
The goal of a centrality score is to characterize the position of a node within the
system of (potential) flows in the network or the ways that a position characterizes
a particular social process model. The beauty of the centrality concept is that any
Hierarchy and Centrality 195
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Presssocial process defined on a network that can be characterized theoretically can
then also be mapped to a score on the network. This flexibility has resulted in a
plethora of proposed measures as different researchers specify a social process or
flow that matters in their particular context. But the sheer volume of resulting
centrality scores available to researchers leaves us in need of a good organizing
framework to categorize centrality. David Schoch provides a somewhat tongue-in￾cheek version online (http://schochastics.net/sna/periodic.html), but others have
tried to provide a more theoretically grounded organization.
Borgatti and Everett (2006) provide a graph-theoretic account for centrality,
noting that centrality scores can always be reconceptualized as summary scores
about the involvement of each node in the walk structure of the network. The
two primary dimensions of involvement are based then on the quality of the
walk being measured and how a node is involved in that walk. On the first
dimension, most measures distinguish between the volume of the characteristic
walk(s) (e.g., counting the number of paths between two nodes) and the length
of the path(s) (e.g., the length of the shortest path connecting two nodes). On
the second dimension, one typically distinguishes between radial and medial
involvement. Radial is the extent to which a node is a point source for a flow
process on the walks, whereas medial captures the ability of a node to interrupt
a flow. Table 9.1 provides some common measures used in each case.
Intuitively, although centrality always denotes a measure of the importance
of a node, the various measures of centrality need not correlate. Consider the
structure depicted in Figure 9.1. The node at the center of the pinwheel seems
intuitively to be the most important to the structure because it is the only one
holding together three otherwise disconnected subgroups. But measuring what
our eyes tell us is true is not necessarily as straightforward as the image suggests
it should be. If the researcher uses degree, which is the number of nodes
adjacent to each node and is one of the most basic centrality measures, then
the visibly most central node with a degree of 3 would be one of the least central
nodes in the network. Degree captures the overall volume of activity, but the
researcher needs additional measures to be confident that they are capturing the
process of interest.
As with most measures, it is likely best to use multiple measures and examine
the degree to which they tell same story. If, like the three proverbial blind men
 9.1 Typology of centrality scores (Borgatti & Everett 2006)
Radial Medial
Volume Freeman Degree
Bonacich Eigenvector
Burt Prestige
Freeman Betweenness
Friedkin Mediative Effects
Length Freeman Closeness
Stephenson–Zelen Information
Friedkin Immediate Effects
Borgatti Distance Fragmentation
Current Flow Betweenness
196 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressseeing different parts of the elephant, network centrality measures suggest
radically different answers to who is important in a structure, such a large
discrepancy would suggest something of an odd or interesting structure, calling
for further explanation.
What could be generating and sustaining such an odd structure?
Numerous theories about how relationships should form and evolve would
suggest that the hub position in Figure 9.2 is tenuous and unstable, likely
reflecting a fleeting transition to a more stable structure. This instability
would be especially likely if the ties depicted in the network are stronger
friendships. How could an individual possibly manage time and energy in
ways that sustain a social life fragmented into three otherwise coherent
subgroups? From another standpoint, our hub’s position may be the result
of adopting a broker or liaison role (Burt 1992; Gould & Fernandez 1989),
and as such, continual positioning between groups could begin to make
4
4
3 5
5
4
4
4
3
5
3
5
4
3
5
4
4
3
4
5
4
3
3
FIGURE 9.1 The conundrum of network degree centrality
Note: Numbers indicate the node’s degree.
Hierarchy and Centrality 197
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Presssense. Once again, substantive knowledge of the domain will likely help
make sense of disagreements among a battery of centrality measures.
From a researcher’s standpoint, the ideal centrality measure is the one that
best captures the social process being examined. For example, theorizing that
people adopt the behaviors that are common among multiple friends implicitly
assumes a flow process that requires more than a single contact among nodes.
The researcher could therefore ask for a score that identifies all people to whom
an individual is multiply connected and sum such scores across dyads to obtain
a multiple connectivity degree score. If, instead, the theory turns on the ability
of actors to bridge otherwise disconnected nodes, then identifying and counting
all pairs that an individual bridges would be a good centrality score.
Once again, methods problems are often theory problems in disguise. Thus, we
recommend thinking carefully about the social process at play in the setting being
examined and using one’s substantive understanding to inform the choice (or
creation) of measures. To help build the theoretical intuition necessary to guide
such use, we start by outlining four of the most common measures: degree,
closeness, betweenness, and eigenvector/power centrality scores.
9.3.1 Degree Centrality
We have already discussed degree in reference to Figure 9.2. Degree is simply
the quantity of nodes to which each node is adjacent, which can be written as
follows:
Cdð Þ¼ ni
X
i
Aij, (9.1)
where Aij is the adjacency matrix. Degree comes in two forms. If the graph is
directed, then out-degree is distinguished from in-degree. Out-degree is the
number of nodes one sends to, whereas in-degree is the number of nodes one
receives from. In-degree is a common (if imperfect) measure of hierarchy in
informal systems: the number of times others nominate an individual is a
reasonable indicator of how popular and desired that individual is in the
network. If the network is valued, then one distinguishes between each node’s
weighted degree (the sum of all edges in which a node is involved) from the
number of distinct nodes to which an individual is connected. A key limitation
of degree is that it is purely local, offering no sense of the wider network
structure informing degree scores. This is why Figure 9.1 feels a bit off: looking
only at the local networks around each node, one cannot distinguish the hub
from one of the members within a cluster. Thus, degree is most useful for very
local social processes. For example, if diffusion is the core concern, then
knowing a node’s degree is less useful than knowing where it sits in the wider
distribution of longer connectivity in the network. On the other hand, if the
researcher wants to know who feels bad about themselves, then knowing the
number of people who nominate each person as an enemy would be useful.
198 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press9.3.2 Closeness Centrality
A common measure of centrality that takes into account the overall structure is
closeness centrality, which defines a node as more central if one can quickly
walk out from the node to all others. Classically, closeness is calculated as the
inverse of the sum of the number of steps between each node and all other
nodes in the network. This is written as follows:
Ccð Þ¼ ni
X
g
j¼1
d nð i, njÞ
" #−1
, (9.2)
where d is the length of the geodesic (shortest path) between nodes i and j. As an
inverse, d renders path distance, or farness, into a measure of closeness. An issue
with this classical formulation is that by convention, the distance between two
disconnected nodes is infinite. So, if the graph has more than one component, the
sum within brackets would include an infinite value and would reach infinity itself,
meaning that everyone in the network would have a closeness centrality score of 0
(because everyone in a disconnected graph would have at least one isolate in their
summed set). The common solution to this is to sum the inverse of the distances (so
that each person two steps away has a value of 1
2, each person three steps away has
a value of 1
3, and so on). In this formulation, disconnected nodes contribute a score
of 0, but the score is nonetheless calculable for each node. A normalized version of
this metric uses the average length of shortest paths instead of their sum.
Closeness centrality is commonly used to capture diffusion or influence
potential. In a study of gossip, for example, one would expect those with high
closeness centrality to know the most about the most people. Closeness central￾ity has been criticized for its reliance on the geodesic distance metric, and there
are two common alternatives. The first is to use a measure of closeness that
includes all paths rather than just the shortest path, and information centrality
provides such a score. Alternatively, one can use the distance of a random walk
on the network (“commute time”), which is the number of hops needed to go
from one node to another and back again. Whereas geodesic distances are
conceptually the fastest connection between two points, random walks are
what would be expected if the walker had absolutely no information on how
to best traverse a network. As with degree, closeness centrality can also be
defined on both directed graphs and valued graphs. With valued networks, it is
important to distinguish whether the value implies a closer or stronger relation￾ship (such as how often two nodes converse) or instead captures a distance
(such as the number of miles between two points).
9.3.3 Betweenness Centrality
Whereas both degree and closeness are radial measures, betweenness centrality
is a medial measure capturing the likelihood that a person will interrupt flow
Hierarchy and Centrality 199
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbetween other actors. Betweenness is calculated by considering the number of
shortest paths between nodes j and k that flow through focal node i. This can be
written as follows:
CBð Þ¼ ni
X
j<k
gjk ð Þ ni =gjk, (9.3)
where gjk equals the number of geodesics connecting jk, and gjk(ni) equals the
number of geodesics that actor i is on. Betweenness centrality is subject to the
same problems with using geodesics that plague closeness centrality, and one
can provide alternatives based on any process-relevant path measure. So, again,
the researcher can use random walk distance, directed distance, and weighted
distance rather than the geodesic distance. Once the researcher drops using the
shortest path, counting the number of shortest paths is less sensible than using a
function of their actual length, but the logic regarding the ability to interrupt
flow still holds (see the upcoming discussion of structural hole measures that
Burt proposed).
Betweenness centrality is best used when one is interested in identifying
nodes with the ability to disrupt flow within the network. Brokers and bridges
are common informal names for such actors, those who can bring together
people who are otherwise disconnected. This also makes these measures
attractive for designing interventions when one wants to slow or stop the
spread of diffusion through a network, although this is harder to implement in
real time (see Chapter 14 on network diffusion for a related discussion on
interventions).
9.3.4 Eigenvector/Power Centrality
Although having many ties, being able to reach many people quickly, or being
well positioned in the flow structure of a network are good indicators of
centrality, they miss a key aspect of status – namely, that important individuals
tend to draw their importance from the importance of their contacts.
Popularity, a form of social hierarchy, has a “leaky” quality in that it can spill
out through direct ties or affiliations. Belonging to the same country club,
attending the same church, or living in the same neighborhood as someone
who is famous can elevate one’s profile. The Internet and social media are
awash with individuals seeking to elevate their positions by affiliating with
those above them in various hierarchies.
This idea is captured via eigenvector centrality or Bonacich’s closely related
power centrality measure. To derive this score, imagine that each person’s
degree is weighted by the degree of each of their contacts. If a node has three
neighbors, each of whom has three neighbors, that node’s score is 9. If each of
an individual’s neighbors has a degree of 10, that node’s score is 30. Then one
normalizes this score and repeats the process, replacing the resulting weight
200 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Presseach time. When the process is repeated many times, the score will converge on
values that correlate perfectly with the eigenvector associated with the largest
eigenvalue.
1 The score rewards those with many ties to those who also have
many ties, building on the mutual reinforcement of power among the powerful.
Because ties tend to be transitive (a friend of a friend is a friend), this measure
tends to reward those who are redundantly linked with others. Practically,
eigenvector centrality scores are among the most influential in network history,
and you’ve probably used it yourself very recently: Google’s search algorithm,
PageRank™, is a common variant of eigenvector centrality.
Bonacich (1987) argued that eigenvector centrality can be generalized
beyond the case in which individuals are tightly linked to one another but that
there might be times when power comes from linking those who are not directly
linked to one another. His goal was to define a centrality score that could easily
interpolate between power derived from connections to powerful others and
power derived from uniquely connecting to those who are not already con￾nected. He created such a centrality score by adding a weight parameter to
eigenvector centrality that tunes the level and direction of mutual reinforce￾ment. Formally, the score is given as follows:
Cð Þ¼ α, β αð Þ I − βR −1
R1, (9.4)
where α is a scaling vector, which is set to normalize the score; β reflects the
extent to which the researcher weights the centrality of people to whom ego is
tied; R is the adjacency matrix (which can be valued); I is the identity matrix
(with 1s on the diagonal); and 1 is a matrix of all 1s. The β term is the tuning
parameter. A value of 0 indicates in-degree centrality, whereas a large positive
value indicates that the power-among-the-powerful recursion extends out to
the full diameter of the network. Negative values reward nodes that are linked
to disconnected alters, yielding higher scores in situations in which one has
power through exclusive ties to others, such as in network exchange theory.
Using this negative scoring assesses centrality based on dependency. Recall the
Florentine family network and the advantaged position of the Medici family
arising from the families who were dependent on them (i.e., had no connections
to other families). By using a negative beta in the power centrality formulation,
the researcher derives a formal measure of the notion of centrality (power) as
the dependency of others.
The conceptual advantage of this measure is that it provides a unified
approach to power that covers both positive recursion (power resulting from
connections to the powerful) and resource dependency/exchange relations
(power resulting from the ability to exclude others), which are otherwise seen
1 Formally, an eigenvector of a square matrix A is a vector, v, such that Av = γv, for some scalar γ;
γ is the eigenvalue for v. There will be many eigenvectors with their associated eigenvalues; for
most network research, the first eigenvector (associated with the largest eigenvalue) is the
most important.
Hierarchy and Centrality 201
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressas fundamentally distinct. Substantively, in most situations, one will have to
pick a β value that is useful, which is not obvious (see Rodan 2011). The
maximum value is 1
ð Þ largest eigenvector of R , which will (within a constant offset)
yield eigenvector centrality when beta is positive. Smaller values change the
radius of influence, or how much the centrality of others affects an individual’s
centrality. How much one wants to tune this radius is dependent on the
topology of the network. Substantively, exploring how C(α,β) varies with other
success/power indicators across a range of values between 0 and the maximum
value will provide some sense of the range of power within a network.
9.4     
In previous chapters, we discussed the issue of egocentric network data, in
which social networks are seen through the eyes of individuals rather than
entire groups. In Chapter 6, we outlined in general terms several approaches to
using egocentric networks to begin to see structure. Here, we deepen this
exploration a bit by discussing how egocentric data have been developed in a
particularly interesting direction for observing centrality in networks. Recall
that egocentric approaches take each individual’s local network structure as the
key object of analysis. The information contained in this local structure has a
lot to say about that individual and their likelihood of having bargaining
power, opportunities to access useful information, and ability to profit – all
of which are connected with a type of network centrality measure.
Consider the Medici family once again. Extracting the Medici’s local ego￾centric network from those of the other Florentine families would show a
family with ties to other families who themselves have few ties among one
another. As we discussed earlier, this arrangement is likely a basis of power.
Burt (1992) helped formalize this insight on what has come to be called
structural holes: broadly speaking, areas of social networks where one would
expect connections based on theories of balance and cohesion, but where
connections are missing. Individuals who are situated within these structural
holes are interesting and are potentially different from most individuals in the
network because of their unique position in the structure. Burt has built a
research agenda on testing how individuals who have such brokerage positions
also tend to have better ideas, more opportunities for profit, more influence,
and so on. Structural holes matter.
But how does one begin to measure structural holes? As with any attempt to
see structure, multiple measures exist, and seeing structural holes often entails
using more than one measure. Fortunately, relatively straightforward measures
can be implemented using egocentric data derived from name generators in
surveys. One measure of each individual’s structural holes is a constraint,
depicted visually in Chapter 6 (Figure 6.8). An individual’s constraint gauges
essentially the opposite of structural holes – that is, the extent to which an
202 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressindividual has few ties to others who have many ties among one another is a
good indicator that that individual’s position lacks structural holes. Constraint
can be measured with the following equation:
cij ¼ pij þX
q
piqpqj !2
, i 6¼ q 6¼ j, (9.5)
where constraint in a network is the sum of each connection’s constraints, cij.
The term pij is the proportion of time and energy i invests in the relation with j;
piq is the network time and energy i invests in the relation q; and pqj is the
amount of network time and energy q puts into j. The structural patterns that
give rise to high constraint – investing lots of one’s network time and energy in
people in whom one has already indirectly invested – reveal that constraint
occurs when one is in deep cliques or otherwise highly redundant relations. As
such, a very strong negative correlation is generally observed between between￾ness and constraint. Burt has shown repeatedly that actors with low constraint
fare better in most economic and business settings (see Burt 2005).
In the extreme case of constraint, one individual is completely dependent on
another individual for connection to a tightly connected group. Burt proposed a
second measure, which he termed hierarchy, to capture the extent to which an
ego is dependent on a specific alter in their network for connection to others.
Note that this measure of hierarchy is different from the more generic discus￾sion of hierarchy below. In the Florentine families, the Medici had little con￾straint, whereas the Acciaiuoli family was completely dependent on the Medici
for access to all other families. Thus, the Acciaiuoli have a maximal hierarchy
score. The measure of hierarchy can be written as follows:
Hi ¼
P
j
cij
C=N
  ln cij
C=N
 
N ln N (9.6)
where cij is defined as in Equation 9.5, N is the network size, and C is ego’s
overall constraint in the network (Σcij).
Of course, as with all social networks, the type of ties and the cultural and
organizational contexts in which these ties exist are important contingencies to
consider. The advantages of structural holes are not universal; they depend on
exogenous factors that provide brokerage positions with their power. Careful
consideration of contexts and nodal differences, such as age or gender, are an
important part of properly specifying when such measures actually mean
something important in the real world.
9.5  
So far, we have measured individual-level differences in centrality, with some
individuals having more advantageous or prominent positions in their local and
Hierarchy and Centrality 203
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressglobal networks. Although centrality is a property of individuals’ location
within a structure, centrality can also be measured at the network level in what
is called centralization: the more centralized a network, the more its structure is
one in which more central positions are dominated by a few powerful and
influential actors. As we have discussed, measures of centrality, such as
betweenness and closeness, capture how some networks are connected by ties
running through a few central individuals but other networks are connected by
ties that are more dispersed through many individuals. How can such
individual-level measures of centrality be transformed into more global metrics
of centrality at the network level?
Freeman (1978b) proposed a set of measures focusing on the inequality or
dispersion in centrality scores. He showed that these measures can be scored
such that settings with perfectly equal centrality scores are noncentralized (i.e.,
everyone is the same) whereas those with perfectly unequal scores have a single
node as the hub, on which everyone else is dependent. The simplest way to
capture this idea is to use the observed distribution of centrality scores by
plotting one or more of the centrality measures as histograms and calculating
the overall variance of the centrality measure in a given network. One might
then ask, How does this observed distribution compare with other distribu￾tions? For example, with randomly generated networks (i.e., networks formed
by randomly connecting nodes in the network), node centrality distributions
will have a Poisson shape, as in Figure 9.2.
       	 
       









FIGURE 9.2 Poisson distribution of centrality in a random network
204 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressFigure 9.3 demonstrates that in random distributions of ties among nodes,
individuals will, on average, tend to have a modest number of ties, and the
network will not be reliant on a few central actors for its connectivity.
However, in real-world networks, the distribution is often considerably more
skewed, with a few highly central nodes. In many large-scale networks, the
distribution of ties is highly centralized, as shown in Figure 9.3.
Distributions such as the one depicted in Figure 9.3 are often called scale-free,
because they are thought to follow the same functional form at any scale and
follow a power law distribution rather than the Poisson distribution of the
random networks. These distributions are highly skewed, presenting as (largely)
linear on a log-log scale and indicating a strongly nonrandom aspect to tie
formation. What drives such distributions is often thought to be some form of
preferential attachment in which some actors draw a considerably disproportion￾ate percentage of the overall connectivity. As we discussed in Chapter 8, net￾works in which degree is more evenly distributed tend to be more robust to the
removal of a single actor and are more cohesive in this sense. Thus, an important
connection links cohesion with hierarchy and centrality in many structural forms
in which networks tend to move toward more preferential attachment and
become more reliant on fewer actors for cohesion.
Freeman proposed an alternative score that ranges from 0 to 1; 0 means
that there are no dominant actors (no variance in centrality), and 1 is a star
network with maximal variance. This measure simply requires specifying
what the maximal difference in values would look like for each centrality
measure. A score of 0.3 would mean that the network is roughly one-third of
the way along the continuum from perfect equality to perfect inequality.
Although the concept is traditional within the social network analysis com￾munity, centralization is very difficult to compare across real-world networks
of any size for two reasons. First, all the normalizing constants used to scale
centralization scores depend on features of the graph that are not easily
compared across networks of different sizes. Thus, two networks with the
same centralization score can differ quite substantively if they differ greatly
in size. Second, the scaling between 0 and 1 assumes a single center in the
network – that is, a core–periphery structure. In most real-world networks
of any size, this is an untenable assumption: networks tend to be modular
with different communities. It is generally much simpler to use common
dispersion/inequality scores, such as the Gini coefficient or the coefficient
of variation.
9.6     
Measuring hierarchy in networks is complicated by the sheer variety of struc￾tures that scientists would think of as hierarchical. Consider Figure 9.4, which
displays a variety of archetypical hierarchical structures.
Hierarchy and Centrality 205
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Number of Neighbors (degree)
0
200
400
600
800
Number of Nodes
Number of Nodes
1 10 250 750 2,250
Number of Neighbors (degree)
1
10
100
200
300
400
600
900
FIGURE 9.3 Degree centrality distribution, 10,000 node network with a nearly scale-free degree distribution
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe top panel provides a set of pure hierarchies. Here, the relation might be
“commands,” “is dominant over,” or some similarly antisymmetric relation: if i
dominates j, then j cannot dominate i. There are many types of pure hierarch￾ies – from the sorts of branching structures typical of bureaucratic organiza￾tions (top-left network) to simple chains or purely linear orderings (top-right
networks). Formally, a pure hierarchy must always be (1) connected, (2) single￾rooted, and (3) noncyclical. A graph with no closed triads is a DAG (introduced
in Chapter 3). Several tools are available for testing whether a graph is a DAG
and, if so, for identifying each node’s level in the structure. The graph-theoretic
features of a DAG are at the heart of Krackhardt’s (2014) hierarchy indices,
available in R through the sna package and the “hierarchy” command (Butts
2008a). These sorts of very strong hierarchical structures are also common in
animal networks, for which a long literature addresses measuring the degree of
dominance structures and each animal’s position in the hierarchy, including
rich tools in R. Most of the general indices focus on the imbalance of ties
FIGURE 9.4 Varieties of hierarchy
Hierarchy and Centrality 207
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressto/from nodes or on the extent to which the network can be sorted such that all
ties fall in the upper triangle of the adjacency matrix.
Unfortunately, like many of the purely graph-theoretical notions of groups
used traditionally in community detection tools (covered in the previous chapter),
methods for detecting hierarchy do not work well for general social relations
where there is much clustering in the networks or where ties are reported in error.
In each of the bottom panels of Figure 9.4, for example, having clusters of people
with asymmetric ties within or between communities will largely undermine
traditional dominance indices. Consider, once again, a high school friendship
network. Centrality measures will help identify the popular students or those
whose ties span important subgroups. Centralization measures will help reveal
how unequally distributed popularity is among students – whether the school has
only a few stars or popularity is more evenly distributed. However, neither
centrality nor centralization will reveal whether the school’s subgroups are
hierarchically arranged, with the popular clique on top and deferential and
somewhat less popular groups of students beneath them. Perhaps, instead, the
high school is divided into many clusters with their own internal hierarchies.
How can one tell? In smaller networks, visualizations can offer more detail on the
extent to which a network is more or less hierarchical. In Chapter 10, we will
cover inductive techniques that can detect such structures in medium-sized
networks. Here, we discuss how a researcher can test for hierarchy in large
networks as compared with other structural forms that might better characterize
their underlying structure.
One approach recognizes that all hierarchical systems are characterized
fundamentally by a set of acyclic triads and tests for the predominance of
hierarchy-consistent triads over hierarchy-inconsistent triads. Intuitively, con￾sider a purely linear hierarchy. In such cases, the only triad is 030T. Other
DAGs allow other directed triads so long as there are no cycles, such as 021D,
021U, or chains of 021C. While allowing for clustering, however, the
researcher must also allow for some symmetric relations as well. The key is
that the symmetry should complement the hierarchy. So, for example, 120D
and 120U are classic elements in a structure in which social equals agree on the
lower or higher status of a third.
Theoretically, this approach builds on a rich history from structural balance
theory. Whereas our previous discussion of balance theory in Chapter 7 focused
on triadic forms among individuals at the micro level as elementary forms of
sociality, here we explore in greater detail the macro-level implications of triadic
forms. As previously discussed, the stunning implication of balance theory is that
if all actors in a network seek to avoid any violations of the four rules of triadic
balance (A1: A friend of a friend is a friend, A2: A friend of an enemy is an
enemy, A3: An enemy of a friend is an enemy, and A4: An enemy of an enemy is
a friend), then the macrostructure of the network will necessarily evolve toward
one of two equilibria: the group structure will be either a single clique of all
positive ties or precisely two cliques with all positive internal and all negative
external ties (a complete sectarian split). These two possible macrostructures are
208 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressshown in Figure 9.5. Ovals with positive signs depict subgroups with all “friend”
ties within, and red arrows indicate “enemy” ties between groups.
Neither of these structures can be considered a hierarchy, however. Given that
many hierarchies exist as rather stable structures of friends, perhaps Heider was
missing something.What if not all four rules of balance apply? Davis and Leinhardt
(1972) relaxed Heider’s assumptions about the rules of balance. Importantly, they
arranged the four rules of balance (which we label A1–A4) as a tuple – an ordered
set {A1,A2,A3,A4} – and then successively eliminated one of the rules to consider
the macro-level implications of a world in which individuals all seek to avoid
violations of the remaining rules. With each further relaxation of the rules of
balance in the sequences of reduced tuples {A1,A2,A3}, {A1,A2}, and {A1}, Davis
and Leinhardt derived a range of possible macrostructures. Consequently, this
work showed a micro–macro link that can be used to characterize networks by
examining how many of their triads violate subsets of Heider’s rules of balance.
When the A4 rule no longer applies (i.e., “an enemy of an enemy” is allowed
to be an enemy), more triadic forms are allowed. Consequently, the group
macrostructures may be what has come to be known as the clustering model:
a structure composed of multiple cohesive subgroups, each of which has
negative ties directed toward all others (see Figure 9.6). And yet, this is still
not a hierarchical structure.
It is only after one relaxes the A3 rule that the micro-level dynamics support
the possibility of stable hierarchies. In this case, when one no longer stipulates
A4 (enemies of enemies must be friends) or A3 (enemies of friends must be
enemies), macro-level hierarchies are revealed. When these rules are relaxed,
the structure can have asymmetric ties among cohesive subgroups, and these
subgroups will be ranked within a single structure in which groups of equal
levels will have negative ties. When the A2 rule is relaxed and only A1 must
hold (“a friend of a friend is a friend”), this is known as the transitivity model.
This final relaxation of balance rules affords the addition of multiple hierarch￾ies – ones in which groups of the same level need not have negative ties. The
ranked clustering and transitivity macrostructures are depicted in Figure 9.7.
Given that all models elaborating on balance theory contain the macrostruc￾tures implied in the other models as possible special cases, it is reasonable to ask
++++++ +++ +++
Integrated Bifurcated
FIGURE 9.5 Two macrostructures with no violations of balance rules
Hierarchy and Centrality 209
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Presshow the researcher determines which model is correct. In large networks, no
one model will likely fit the data perfectly, but one model will likely fit better
than the others. Consequently, the trick is to fit all four models to the data and
observe which most accurately describes the underlying structure. This is done
by specifying a micromodel in which some triads are allowed and all others
are forbidden.
Table 9.2 shows the sixteen classes of triads and which of the four balance
theory rules they do or do not violate. Some of the triads violate more than one
balance rule, and only the 300 and 102 triads violate none of the rules. The
researcher will generally begin with this most restrictive model of balance
theory (i.e., allowing only 300 and 102 triads) and then work toward the least
+++ +++
Clustering
+++ +++
FIGURE 9.6 Relaxing the A4 balance rule allows for multiple clusters
Transitivity
+++
(a) (b)
+++
+++
Ranked Clustering
+++
+++
+++
+++ +++
+++
+++
FIGURE 9.7 Relaxing the A4 and A3 rules (a) and relaxing the A4, A3, and A2 rules (b)
affords hierarchical macrostructures
210 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press 9.2 Triadic forms forbidden by one or more balance theory rules
Balance Rule Violation
Triad Type Triad Label A4 A3 A2 A1
300
102
003 X
120D X
120U X
030T X X X
021D X X
021U X X X
012 X
021C X X
111U X X
111D X X
030C X X
201 X X X
120C X X X
210 X X X
Note: Violated balance rule(s) are indicated with an X.
Hierarchy and Centrality 211
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrestrictive transitivity model. After specifying the micromodel, one can compare
the observed triad census from one or more observed networks to what would
be expected if the proposed micromodel were true. Ultimately, one can deter￾mine whether the network is hierarchical in either the ranked clustering or
transitivity models by using a statistical approach based on distributional
assumptions (i.e., the tau statistic) or by using bootstrapped Monte Carlo
simulations. In the latter strategy, the researcher might simulate, say, 1,000
random networks with the same degree distribution or other feature of interest
and then compare the number of forbidden triads. If the number of violations is
below a certain threshold (conventionally, below the violations expected in less
than 5 percent of the random networks), the observed network can be said to be
more hierarchical than clustered because both models are compared with what
would be expected by chance. Of course, this does not confirm the existence of
the proposed underlying balance mechanism of tension reduction, but it does
suggest that actors are somehow avoiding imbalanced triadic relations.
The second step away from classical balance theory was to focus explicitly
on directed binary ties rather than signed relations, opening the door for a
much wider array of macrostructures (see Johnsen 1986). Thus, “a friend of a
friend is a friend” becomes “if i is friends with j, and j is friends with k, then i
should be friends with k”: balance becomes transitivity. Importantly, one can
then define a whole host of alternative rules. For example, one would expect
close friends to agree on others’ status. If i and j share a reciprocal tie, then if i
nominates k, j should also nominate k; and if i does not nominate k, neither
should j. This shift to examining triples (directed sets of three relations) allows
the researcher to specify a very wide set of different social process models and
ask what sorts of macrostructures will emerge from them.
This comparative method allows one to characterize our hypothetical high
school friendship network as more hierarchical than not and to compare across
multiple high schools to see whether some appear to have more of certain types
of hierarchy – that is, whether some high schools are more ranked or more
transitive. Theories of adolescent societies suggest that high school friendship
networks are highly influenced by status-seeking behaviors and the formation
of groups around specific focused activities (e.g., sports, Advanced Placement
classes). In general, the prediction is that the macrostructure of the typical high
school involves one popular group that other groups aspire to join, and other
groups further down the popularity “food chain” also aspire to reach the
groups above them but not necessarily to the highest ranked (i.e., most popular)
group. Presumably, the structure will not often be a perfect hierarchy, but the
predominant structure, if we were to guess, might be more like the ranked
clustering model than the alternatives.
If the proposed high school network resembles a ranked cluster hierarchy,
it should have a distribution of triads that conforms to certain expectations –
namely, there should be far fewer triads that violate rules A1 and A2 than
would be expected by chance, but not fewer triads that violate rules
212 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressA3 and A4. The micromodel being tested in this case would forbid the eleven
structural forms precluded by violation of rule A1 or A2 (see Table 9.2) and
allow for the remaining five triad types. The researcher would then compare
the observed triad census with random network draws, likely random net￾works conditioned on the same U|MAN to control for overall levels of
reciprocity. The researcher would then compare the overall “fit” of this model
with other competing models, such as the classic balance model of Heider’s
original formulation, the clustering model, and the general transitivity model
in which only the A1 rule is forbidden. If any of these alternate models
presents a better fit with the observed network structure than the proposed
model, the researcher would be led to reject the structural hypothesis of a
ranked cluster hierarchy for a more specific model, or a more general one in
the case of transitivity.
One other common approach to identifying hierarchy in networks is based
on permutation searches in relation to an ideal-typical structure. Consider
again the hierarchies in Figure 9.4. If one were to treat these as idealized image
matrices, they would look something like Figure 9.8.
FIGURE 9.8 Idealized image matrices of hierarchical structures depicted in Figure 9.4
Hierarchy and Centrality 213
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe key feature to note about hierarchy is that when the adjacency matrix is
sorted in the proper order, an imbalance exists between the upper triangle and
the lower triangle. For all of the perfect hierarchies (top panel), the proportion
of ties in the upper triangle is 100 percent; the other two panels depict clustering
as well as hierarchy, but all asymmetric ties are above the diagonal. This feature
suggests a set of simple measures for hierarchy, such as the density above
compared with below the diagonal after hierarchical permutation. Features of
this ratio can be derived even without reordering the network, such as Landau’s
H (Landau 1951; see Shizuka and McDonald [2012] for a contemporary
review) or the related works of Krackhardt concerning DAGs and formal
hierarchies (Krackhardt 1994).
Researchers have exploited the ordering features of hierarchies to build
algorithms that automate the identification of hierarchy in networks. One of
the earliest such algorithms is Becker’s heuristic, which simply sorts the adja￾cency matrix networks by the ratio of out-degree to in-degree (Becker 1967).
This very simple idea works surprisingly well for networks where degree
centrality accurately represents status; but, of course, that is not always true.
Researchers since Becker have improved on this technique by starting with his
proposed sorting of hierarchy but then randomly swapping positions until
doing so improves the fit (i.e., the correlation with an upper triangular matrix).
A simple random annealing algorithm (pick a pair of cells at random; swap; if
fit is improved, keep; otherwise drop) is effective but exceedingly slow; conse￾quently, as with community detection, a wide array of “smart” heuristics have
been employed.
Importantly, one can optimize relative to a different reference structure in
order to capture any sort of hierarchy one is interested in identifying. So, for
example, a core periphery structure has a small block that sends to/receives
from everyone else who does not send much to one another. Or, we could
imagine a set of clusters that are ordered in strata and specify an ideal-type
matrix that is based on that structure. This, in essence, is the idea behind the
generalized blockmodel approach to finding role structures proposed by
Doreian, Batagelj, and Ferligoj (2005), which we discuss further in Chapter 10.
In examining signatures of different structural forms across school contexts,
one might be able to test some of the fundamental understandings of hierarchy.
For example, Gould (2020) outlined how clearer hierarchies often reduce
conflict because individuals understand their place and are less likely to contest
who is dominant. Martin (2002) found that the clarity of a group’s power
structure strongly predicts consensus in their beliefs. In contrast, social systems
with many fiefdoms and various actors who dominate more local clusters that
are not integrated at the macro level are rife with possibilities for feeling
slighted, resulting in contestation or even violence (see Chu 2020). Thus, when
researchers look at networks across settings and over time, these measures of
network-level properties can be key predictors or outcomes to better illuminate
fundamental social dynamics.
214 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press9.7 
This chapter explored a series of structural measures for power and status
differentiation in social systems. These tools rest on thinking carefully about
how the shape of the network allows actors to control resources or reach others
quickly. Because social scientists are interested in multiple ways that networks
carry resources and multiple ways that people can avail themselves of these
resources, a diverse set of such scores is available. When the researcher moves
from exploring nodes to exploring networks, centrality becomes centralization,
with position reflecting inequality. Inequality in the centrality score distribution
characterizes a system as more or less stratified. When such stratification is seen
in a directed network, hierarchy exists. Once again, these network properties
and individuals’ positions within such structures often remain tacit and par￾tially observed without the more refined tools presented here.
  
Borgatti, Stephen P. 2006. “Identifying Sets of Key Players in a Social Network.”
Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory 12: 21–34. (The “key
player” problem has become a paradigm for intervention and comprehensive
centrality, focused on identifying nodes that are critical to the functioning of a
given system.)
Borgatti, Stephen P., and Martin G. Everett. 2020. “Three Perspectives on Centrality.”
Pp. 334–51 in Oxford Handbook of Social Network Analysis, edited by Ryan Light
and James Moody. New York: Oxford University Press. (Borgatti and Everett are
arguably the leading voices on linking centrality metrics to social processes; this
piece updates and reviews that line of work.)
Everton, Sean F. 2013. Disrupting Dark Networks. New York: Cambridge University Press.
(Key work in applied network analysis that highlight difficulties and strategies for
working in contexts with highly uncertain data but high stakes. See also Gerdes 2012.)
Faris, Robert, and Diane Felmlee. 2011. “Status Struggles: Network Centrality and Gender
Segregation in Same-and Cross-Gender Aggression.” American Sociological Review
76: 48–73. (A model paper for using centrality to understand behavior; it finds that
central students use aggression to gain and maintain status over time.)
Gerdes, LukeM. 2012.Illuminating Dark Networks: The Study of Clandestine Groups and
Organizations. New York: Cambridge University Press. (See the note for Everton
2013.)
Gould, Rodger V. 2002. “The Origins of Status Hierarchies: A Formal Theory and Empirical
Test.” American Journal of Sociology 107: 1143–78. (See the note for Gould 2003.)
2003. Collision of Wills: How Ambiguity about Social Rank Breeds Conflict.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Lays out an argument about the origins of
violence stemming from status ambiguity – hierarchies are generally stable, and if all
know where they stand, disputes are rare. See also Gould 2002.)
Maoz, Zeev. 2010. Networks of Nations: The Evolution, Structure and Impact of
International Networks, 1816–2001. New York: Cambridge University Press.
(While broader than hierarchy per se, the exploration of world-spanning networks
invokes clear notions of core and periphery and the associated dynamics of power
and prestige.)
Hierarchy and Centrality 215
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press10
Positions and Roles
Whereas previous chapters focused on networks as conduits through which
important resources and influences flow, this chapter provides a more in-depth
account of the positional approach to networks. In doing so, we move away
from conceptualizing social structures as more or less cohesive and integrated
groups, cliques, and communities and toward a view of social structures as
composed of role structures. To use the baseball analogy, in moving toward a
more positional view of networks, we shift from seeing teams as interacting
individual players with relations with one another to seeing players as enacting
the game through an interrelated set of positions on the field that come with
role expectations. Thus, as depicted in our view of social structure in Figure 2.3,
we begin to move upward and to the right, toward higher levels of structure and
greater levels of conceptual abstraction. Doing so requires a different set of
methods, which we introduce in this chapter.
10.1    
Shakespeare famously said that individuals are “merely players” on the world’s
stage. His soliloquy focuses on how people perform different roles (schoolboy,
lover, soldier, and so on) during the unfolding acts of their lives as they age.
Similarly, sociologists often talk about stages of the life course (childhood,
adolescence, and adulthood), replete with the dual meaning of stages as both
periods of time and platforms on which individuals perform. Such dramatur￾gical metaphors are common, but they take on a special importance in pos￾itional approaches to social structure. Erving Goffman is the sociologist who
took this metaphor most seriously, showing how the interaction orders of
everyday life – going to the doctor, getting a haircut, or celebrating a birthday –
all live up to Shakespeare’s sociological imagination: individuals coordinate
roles and enact them in face-to-face performances, using various entrances and
216
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressexits, stages, masks, props, scripts, and so on, all afforded to them by the
schemas undergirding social structures. For Goffman, social structure is
enacted in face-to-face rituals that, when done correctly, produce the sense of
connection and belonging that is essential for social cohesion and the solidarity
of groups.
Although Goffman was not a network scholar, his work drew on the same
social-structural motivation and intellectual lineage behind the development of
social network analysis.
1 The role framework is rooted in Durkheimian social
anthropology and began to take shape in a more formal sense in a related line
of structural anthropological research: the study of kinship systems. Family as
an institution is an interrelated and interdependent set of positions. A position
becomes a role through a set of rights and obligations with respect to the other
role positions. These roles are social constructions that take on different forms.
For example, the Chinese extended family network includes seventy-four
unique kinship terms, compared with the twenty-eight commonly used in the
West. To accurately describe these roles and how they interrelate as role
structures is, in many ways, to abstract from Goffman’s face-to-face
interactions in a formal way – to move to the level of structures in our version
of Hinde’s image in Figure 2.3, a move Nadel (1957) proposed as the proper
level of social scientific analysis.
This notion that societies are best understood as structures composed of
interconnected sets of roles has extended to studies of institutions more
broadly. For example, the university is an institution in the same sense as a
family in having an interrelated set of roles (e.g., professors and students)
serving a social purpose (knowledge creation) in society through various
exchanges. As we touched on in Chapter 2, seeing society through the lens of
roles is powerful but also has the potential to fall into a type of functionalism
because the notion of roles connotes something of a larger purpose that a group
needs to be fulfilled. Indeed, structural-functionalism was a key aspect of
Durkheim’s thinking that Talcott Parsons took to great heights in American
sociology before it largely collapsed under its own weight. But one need not
assume some larger functional purpose for role structures. Today, role-based
approaches are largely divorced from grand theories of structural-functionalism
and their untestable propositions. Instead, researchers have taken the key
insight that actors practice consistent ways of acting vis-à-vis other actors in
order to formalize the study of roles and institutions through networks.
Whether such roles and institutions have evolved in order to optimize some
adaptive capacity, as some contemporary evolutionary approaches suggest
(e.g., Christakis 2019; Henrich 2015), is not a position one is required to take
in using positional concepts and methods.
1 In fact, Goffman’s dissertation advisor, the social anthropologist W. Lloyd Warner, was part of
the original research team studying the wiring room at the Hawthorne Plant.
Positions and Roles 217
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressIn what follows, we begin by better conceptualizing positions and roles in
social network terms. We then outline the steps involved in undertaking a
positional analysis of relational data.
10.2   
In structural terms, a role is a subset of nodes that share a common position. In
contrast to the concept of a community, which entails direct ties among
individuals, in a role-based conception of social structure, two individuals
may have the same role and yet have no direct connection to each other. For
example, two men may both be uncles in a kinship structure, but being uncles
does not make them more or less likely to know each other. Even within the
same family, uncles from different sides of a marriage may not be friends and
may not even know one another well. Yet, as uncles, they hold the same
position with respect to the kinship structure: their siblings have children.
Their relation to their siblings’ children carries with it a set of culturally
determined understandings about how uncles and nieces/nephews should inter￾act. In addition, because uncles have a common set of experiences and pressures
related to the role, they likely take on similar behaviors and characteristics,
which is why the word “avuncular” connotes a level of kindness and geniality.
The kinship example is familiar, and roles are formally defined relationally,
but the core insight of network analysis is that the relational consistency of the
kin-like variety carries over to all sorts of social interactions, exchanges, and
relations. A position implies a set of persons who are relationally “substitut￾able,” defined by the pattern of relations to other positions. That is, persons in a
position share all the same relationships (and lack the same relationships) with
others that extend across multiple types of ties. For example, teachers are in a
distinct position from students by virtue of the pattern of their social and
professional relations. The prototypical teacher sends academic interactions
to students but does not receive them in return. As isolated managers, teachers
also do not typically exchange academic interactions with colleagues.
Moreover, teachers are not included in social interactions among students,
and students are excluded from the social interactions among teachers in the
faculty lounge. Principals are not directly active in instruction but guide
teachers in how they should perform in the classroom; however, they are
generally excluded from the teachers’ and students’ social interactions.
When visualized, this pattern of interaction would look something like the
depiction in Figure 10.1. As a reduced matrix, our ideal-typical school would
look like Table 10.1.
The pattern of relations defines the position. A teacher is the sort of person
who instructs students, socializes with teachers, and takes orders from princi￾pals. If one knows the relations, then one knows the roles. Students take
instruction from teachers and exclude them from their social interactions.
Because positions are defined relationally, each role includes a role
218 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presscomplement: one cannot define a teacher without a student. This is a common
feature of structural positions, such as parent–child, husband–wife, cop–
robber, client–patron, boss–subordinate, and leader–follower. Social life is
characterized by roles in which the position is defined by the relational activity
between the positions. When taken together, these roles form a role system as a
set of interrelated and therefore interdependent positions. A role system is
therefore a type of meta-network structure: a higher-order set of social entities
(roles) that are dependent on one another, often as part of institutions.
The roles we have been discussing thus far have names; they are institution￾alized within a formal framework, and actors that share the setting will have a
shared understanding of the expectations and activities of each of these roles.
This shared understanding lets us populate the role tables, such as Table 10.1;
we understand what teachers, students, and principals do and how they should
interact with one another. The core insight from White, Boorman, and Breiger
(1976) is that the same tools that allow us to map and abstract formal kinship
or organizational relations can be flipped around to inductively discover roles,
even when we do not know the labels. That is, if one discovers in any given
Social
Academic
FIGURE 10.1 Stereotypical school role relations
 10.1 Summarized positional relations
Academic Principal Teacher Student
Principal 0 1 1
Teacher 0 0 1
Student 0 0 0
Social
Principal 0 0 0
Teacher 0 1 0
Student 0 0 1
Positions and Roles 219
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presssetting that one class of people always acts the same way toward another class
of people, then those individuals are enacting a structural role even if they do
not have a name for it. Roles may even be emergent within an unfolding
interaction and may shift with the actions of different actors. Such roles are
evident, for example, as people coordinate getting on and off the subway or
move through a crowded grocery store, adopting various roles and attempting
to coordinate them more or less successfully without friction and tensions – just
as Goffman described in anecdotal terms.
One of the more fascinating and useful features of role structures is that they
often involve a compound relation: a relation that is formed by combining two
relations. Again, kinship role structures provide the archetype. Consider the
compound relation from sibling and “child of” relations. By matrix-multiplying
these two relations, the researcher can derive the compound relation of nephew/
niece as depicted in Figure 10.2.
Of course, in other cultures, kinship relations might be more or less
complex. In the Chinese system, discussed in our introduction to this chap￾ter, relations are built from two primary relations (“parent of” and “married
to”) compounded by three partitioning attributes (gender, relative age, and
relational order). Relations compound differently in the Western systems
and are therefore named in one way, whereas Chinese kinship terms are
differentiated by parental gender lines (e.g., maternal uncle vs. paternal
uncle). Thus, role structures may reveal something of the underlying logic
on which social structures are built, although actors may be mostly unaware
of this logic.
2
Sibling
Child of
Sibling
0 1 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0
0 0 1 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
Child of
0 0 1 1 0
0 0 0 0 1
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
x =
Nephew/Niece
0 0 0 0 1
0 0 1 1 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
SoC = SC
FIGURE 10.2 Roles derived from compound relations
2 There is a theoretically rich, albeit somewhat specialized, literature on this approach falling
largely under the heading of “semigroup” models. See, in particular, the excellent work of
Pattison (1993), White and Reitz (1983), and Wasserman and Faust (1994: ch. 11). This work
formalizes the intuitive notions of role sets from Nadel (1957) and structural anthropology via
compound relational sets to explicate the logical implications of relational systems.
220 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press10.3   
The primary technique for inducing role structures is called blockmodeling. The
technique derives its name from the reordering (also called permuting) of the
rows and columns of a network adjacency matrix into subsets of nodes called
blocks, the members of which are based on nodes occupying equivalent pos￾itions in a network structure.
As with community detection, the goal of blockmodeling is to induce net￾work subgroups and how subgroups interrelate; however, the results from
these two exercises may be quite different. Although some blocks may be
communities (with internally cohesive densities of ties), this is not necessarily
the case, and it is not the goal of the approach to seek out such cohesive groups.
The results of a blockmodel may be surprising, even for those engaged in the
network of interactions and relations – as would certainly be the case for those
involved in generalized social exchange systems, such as the Kula Ring dis￾cussed in Chapter 2 (see Figure 2.7). In such cases, role structures emerge from
the combination of local cultural norms rather than an overarching shared
understanding. Such self-organizing systems, sometimes called emergent phe￾nomena, involve individual agents following similar heuristics forming macro￾structures of which they are largely unaware (e.g., schools of fish, flocks of
birds, or traffic patterns in Los Angeles). Thus, blockmodeling provides a
flexible framework for inducing macrostructures of various kinds from inter￾actional and relational data, the results of which may or may not match what
individuals hold to be the important bases of social structure.
To begin to see role systems, all positional approaches must (1) define some
measure of equivalence in networks (similarity metric), (2) use the measure to
identify subsets of actors that are equivalently positioned (cluster), (3) represent
these equivalences by reducing the network to positions and role relations
(reduced image), and (4) assess how well cluster solutions represent observed
realities (fit).
10.3.1 Defining Equivalence
What does it mean for two nodes to occupy an equivalent position in a
network? White, Boorman, and Breiger (1976) revolutionized social network
analysis by introducing the main techniques used in formalizing the role-based
approach to network structures. Rather than using an a priori role set, such as
kinship categories, they introduced an inductive method for searching through
relations and assigning nodes to equivalent positions (i.e., blocks) with respect
to the entire structure of relations in a network. The key insight from this work
is that roles can be induced through their structurally equivalent sets of ties
within a network structure: two actors in the same role will have identical ties
to every other actor in the network and therefore can be considered isomorphic
Positions and Roles 221
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press(i.e., having the same form). Consider again a formal hierarchy in an organiza￾tion, as depicted in a typical chart such as the one depicted in Figure 10.3.
Here, the notion of structural equivalence would lead us to detect seven role
positions based on nodes having identical relations. Clearly, this reduction is
not a very parsimonious or useful because it reduces the number of identified
positions only from nine to seven. Moreover, structural equivalence has not
really captured what most of us intuitively see as the three positions in the
hierarchy. Structural equivalence sets a high bar for determining positions,
requiring that actors have exactly the same profiles of ties to other actors to
be in the same position. Fortunately, more relaxed definitions of structural
equivalence also exist in which positions are based on similar profiles of ties,
allowing for gradations in determining structural equivalence.
Equivalence can be thought about in at least three alternate ways. One of
these is called automorphic equivalence. In this formulation, two nodes are
considered automorphically equivalent if their positions share all graph￾theoretic properties (degree, centrality, reachability, and so on). The positions
among one set of nodes map onto those in another set of nodes in the
network. This definition relaxes the requirement that nodes be connected with
the exact set of other nodes. Using this definition on the network, Figure 10.4
shows that we would induce five positions rather than seven – again, not
very useful.
An even more relaxed definition of equivalence is known as regular
equivalence. In this formulation, two nodes are equivalent and belong in the
FIGURE 10.3 Structural equivalence in a formal hierarchy
222 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presssame position by having similar profiles of ties to other equivalent actors (the
definition is deliberately recursive). In Figure 10.1, students are equivalent
because they are related to teachers and students, despite having slightly differ￾ent numbers of ties. Even though some of the actors in the network depicted in
Figures 10.3 and 10.4 may not be directly tied to one another and may have
different graph-theoretic properties, they share profiles of ties with respect to
the types of actors in the formal structure of the network – a clear hierarchy
with three levels. There may be multiple ways to partition a network using
regular equivalence, and researchers will often use the solution with the fewest
positions. Consequently, regular equivalence would provide the most parsimo￾nious role structure, in which actors occupy one of three positions, as shown in
Figure 10.5.
Finally, whereas the preceding definitions of equivalence focus on deriving
positions using information garnered from the full network structure, another
way to think of equivalence is more local and centered on each node and its
pattern of ties within its local “neighborhood” of nodes. If two nodes share a
similar structural position within their own distinct regions in a structure, this is
sometimes called role equivalence or local equivalence. Here, the researcher
considers only the direct ties for each node and compares these with respect to
how isomorphic the structural properties are with one another. As we will
discuss and demonstrate later in this chapter, triads once again play a vital role,
FIGURE 10.4 Automorphic equivalence
Positions and Roles 223
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressin this case using the sixteen isomorphism classes of triads to determine
role equivalence.
10.3.2 Identify Subsets of Structurally Equivalent Actors
Conceptualizing what one means by equivalence is a first step in deriving roles.
Subsequently, though, one must operationalize this conceptualization using
network data to produce a representation of a role structure. To better illustrate
this operationalization, we offer an example of structural equivalence using a
relatively simple hierarchy depicted in Figure 10.6.
Using the strictest definition of equivalence – structural equivalence – we
compare each pair of nodes with respect to their ties to every other node in the
network. In this definition, only pairs of nodes (dyads) that have exactly the
same profiles of ties are structurally equivalent. These are placed in the same
block. In the given network, each pair of nodes has 12 (= n − 2) possible ties to
other nodes in the network, each of which are either the same or different (i.e.,
matched or unmatched). These blocks are derived by comparing the row
profiles of nodes i and j in the adjacency matrix. In this example, we use only
row profiles because the network is symmetric. Afterward, the rows and
columns are rearranged (permuted) into blocks in which two nodes are equiva￾lent only if all twelve ties are matched. This procedure reduces the structure to
six blocks. The rows and columns in Table 10.2 reflect this reordering.
FIGURE 10.5 Regular equivalence
224 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press10.3.3 Representing Equivalences as Positions
Once nodes have been assigned to blocks, the next step is to represent the
positions as a set of more or less interrelated roles. To see roles and role
structures more clearly, one further reduces the permuted network in
Table 10.2 to a simplified network – in this case, a network with six nodes
(blocks) and relations. Here, we do so based on the existence of ties within and
between blocks to reveal the underlying role structure. A very simple way to
FIGURE 10.6 A typical hierarchical structure
 10.2 Permuted adjacency matrix based on the blockmodel of hierarchy in
Figure 10.6
123 4 5 6
1 . 1 11 00 0000 0000
2 1 . 00 11 0000 0000
3 1 0 . 1 00 1111 0000
1 0 1. 00 1111 0000
4 0 1 00 . 1 0000 1111
0 1 00 1. 0000 1111
5 0 0 11 00 . 000 0000
0 0 11 00 0. 00 0000
0 0 11 00 00. 0 0000
0 0 11 00 000. 0000
6 0 0 00 11 0000 . 000
0 0 00 11 0000 0. 00
0 0 00 11 0000 00. 0
0 0 00 11 0000 000.
Positions and Roles 225
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressgenerate a role structure is to assign a 1 to any cells in the reduced network
representing a block that has ties within that block or linking it with another
block, and a 0 otherwise. This produces what is called an image matrix of
within- and between-block relations, as shown in Table 10.3.
In practice, one rarely finds a perfect fit in which the data emerge as clearly as
in Table 10.3, having all 1s and all 0s in the blocks. In many cases, rather than a
binary image matrix, one would create a density table in which each cell is the
proportion of possible ties within and between blocks, typically requiring the
researcher to determine a cutoff for what is considered a “0 block” and a “1
block” in producing the image matrix. Therefore, reducing the permuted adja￾cency matrix into a macrostructure entails making a judgment call based on one
of two more relaxed rules: (1) the lean fit rule in which a block is given a 0 only if
all of its cells are 0 while all other blocks receive a 1, or (2) the density fit rule in
which a block is given a 1 if the density of ties within that block is above a
threshold (generally, the average density of the entire network) or a count that
exceeds random expectation. In our estimation of the literature, either the density
fit rule (+1 standard deviation above the network density when ties are valued) or
counts beyond statistical expectation appear to be the most defensible.
Blockmodeling culminates in the projection of a new network based on the
image matrix, which reveals the reduced macrostructure of the original adja￾cency matrix. In this new network, the blocks are nodes, and the ties exist
where relations within and among equivalent blocks meet a certain threshold.
Thus, the macrostructure of the original network in Figure 10.6 can be seen in
Figure 10.7. The original hierarchy is reduced to six role positions, two of
which (positions 3 and 4) are internally cohesive, having nodes tied to one
another within that block. In this case, the ties within and among blocks are
dichotomized. In a density table, however, the ties in the macrostructure may be
valued and given weight according to the degree of equivalence within and
between blocks.
But is the structure in Figure 10.7 the only possible macrostructure? As we
outlined earlier, the different definitions of equivalence often provide very
different block solutions, and structural equivalence frequently sets the bar
too high for providing helpful reductions in the complexity of a network. In
 10.3 Image matrix reduction of the blockmodel solution in Table 10.2
123456
1011000
2100100
3101010
4010101
5001000
6000100
226 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthis case, more relaxed definitions would produce results that are similar but
even more parsimonious. For example, using the more relaxed definition of
regular equivalence would further reduce the role structure’s complexity to only
three roles, as depicted in Figure 10.8. There, positions 1–2 of Figure 10.8 are
collapsed into 1; 3–4, into 2; and 5–6, into 3. Notably, positions 3 and 4 are
treated the same because they have the same pattern of ties even though the ties
are sent to different specific actors. The researcher must gauge which reduction
is more useful in addressing the research question or report on various solutions
to derive a more complete rendering of a role structure.
While our illustration used only a single form of relation, blockmodeling is
often at its most useful in examining multi-relational systems (e.g., friendship,
1
3
5
2
4
6
FIGURE 10.7 Reduced macrostructure of hierarchy in Figure 10.6
1 2
3
FIGURE 10.8 Reduced macrostructure of hierarchy in Figure 10.6 based on regular
equivalence
Positions and Roles 227
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressadvice-seeking, frequency of contact). In such cases, the researcher stacks the
various matrices prior to running the measure of equivalence. In the case of
directed ties, both directions of the ties (ij and ji) are included as separate
matrices in the stack, as shown in Figure 10.9.
Similarities among nodes are thereby calculated across all the relations
simultaneously. The blockmodeling technique is also appropriate for affili￾ation networks – that is, two-mode networks, such as the southern women’s
groups described in Chapter 3. As we cover in greater detail in the next
chapter, when the researcher is interested in two modes of structure, the goal
might be somewhat different than inducing a role structure per se; the
researcher may instead want to see how two modes (e.g., individuals and
groups) interrelate.
So far, we have covered three of the four steps in performing a positional
analysis. The final step is assessing how well such derived positions represent/fit
an observed reality. Before detailing this final step, we need to discuss several
issues regarding choices in how researchers derive structurally equivalent
positions.
10.4    
The distinct conceptualizations of equivalence discussed so far are, in reality,
nested: structurally equivalent actors are automorphically equivalent; automor￾phically equivalent actors are regularly equivalent; and structurally equivalent
and automorphically equivalent actors are regularly equivalent. Thus, issues
Romance
. 1 0 0 0
1 . 0 0 0
0 0 . 0 0
0 0 0 . 0
0 0 0 0 .
Feeds
. 0 1 1 1
0 . 1 1 1
0 0 . 0 0
0 0 0 . 0
0 0 0 0 .
Bicker
. 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0
0 0 . 1 1
0 0 1 . 0
0 0 1 1 .
. 1 0 0 0
1 . 0 0 0
0 0 . 0 0
0 0 0 . 0
0 0 0 0 .
. 0 1 1 1
0 . 1 1 1
0 0 . 0 0
0 0 0 . 0
0 0 0 0 .
. 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0
1 1 . 0 0
1 1 0 . 0
1 1 0 0 .
. 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0
0 0 . 1 1
0 0 1 . 1
0 0 1 1 .
Stacked
P P
C
C
Provides food for
Romantic love
Bickers with
C
Similarity
. 1 0 0 0
1 . 0 0 0
0 0 . 1 1
0 0 1 . 1
0 0 1 1 .
FIGURE 10.9 Illustrating stacking multiple relations within a family exchange network
228 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressarise when trying to operationalize a single equivalence definition.
Automorphic and regular equivalence are more difficult and computationally
intensive to measure than structural equivalence, and they require iteratively
searching over possible block assignments for sets that have the same graph￾theoretic patterns (White & Reitz 1983; see also White 2005). Further, because
true structural equivalence is rarely found in real-world networks, most studies
do not even try to adhere to the strict definition of structural equivalence.
Thus, the example depicted in Figure 10.6 is meant as a simple illustration of
blockmodeling using a clear hierarchy. In practice, blockmodeling is most
frequently used with network data on informal relations in which roles are less
institutionalized and not determined by authority relations. Such cases make
the task of deriving positions more difficult, requiring computational
approaches; that is, the positions cannot be derived intuitively through visual
inspection. We discuss some of the computational approaches next.
10.4.1 CONCOR
In their original algorithm for identifying blocks, White, Boorman, and Breiger
(1976) used the correlation across the columns of a stacked multi-relational
network as the operationalization of structural equivalence. The clustering
algorithm they used is called CONCOR because it created subgroups based
on the convergence (CON) of iterated correlations (COR) among the ties within
a network. CONCOR correlates each actor’s tie profile with every other actor’s
tie profile, then correlates actor’s correlation profiles, and so on over numerous
iterations (i.e., correlating the correlations) until the matrix consists of all
symmetric ij relations of −1s and 1s. When permuted, the resulting matrix will
neatly divide into two groups: all +1s within the block and all −1s between
blocks, splitting the network into two subgroups. The process is then repeated
within each of these two subgroups anew, separately further dividing each
cluster in two. Thus, the procedure would produce a kind of nested structure
of subgroups, as illustrated in Figure 10.10.
Despite compelling applications across a number of classic studies, the
CONCOR algorithm is less frequently used today. For one, the procedure tends
to operate on the number of splits, and it therefore produces an even number of
subgroups unless manually directed to split a particular cluster further, and
investigators are often reluctant to play such a subjective role in guiding the
clustering. Moreover, the overall mathematical properties of the procedure – that
is, what iterative correlations of correlations reflect – are not clearly understood.
From our vantage, CONCOR seems underutilized and has certain advantages.
First, the top-down perspective on divisions can be quite useful for coarser
understandings of social structures. Second, the procedure of convergence of
correlations appears to be akin to singular value decomposition in which the
network is split along poles of the first eigenvector; then, within those halves, it is
split on the most suited eigenvector again; and so on. In a way, CONCOR offers
Positions and Roles 229
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressan embedded series of eigenvector poles and has a fractal sort of quality to it. We
encourage further work on CONCOR and explorations of its intuitive appeal.
10.4.2 Hierarchical Cluster Analysis
One of the most useful tools in helping to place nodes in the same role or
position in a network is hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA).
3 HCA is a flexible
tool that first clusters the most similar cases in a data set and then proceeds in
stepwise fashion, assigning the next most similar cases, and so on. Depending
on how one determines similarity (or dissimilarity), the results of HCA can be
used to derive any number of conceptually important groupings of nodes.
When the determination of similarity is based on direct ties among nodes,
FIGURE 10.10 Illustration of the CONCOR algorithm
3 We explain HCA here as it has been traditionally used in many network applications. But any
reasonably robust contemporary clustering tool will also suffice, and new models based on
machine learning routines are likely promising. The key here it to understand the logic of
similarity across patterns, and HCA does a particularly nice job of illustrating that.
230 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressHCA is used to derive cohesive subgroups and to detect communities. When the
determination of similarity is based on tie profiles (correlation or inverse
Euclidean distance), then HCA is used to derive positions of structural similar￾ity and their interrelation as roles. Whereas CONCOR is a divisive method that
splits wholes into finer subgroups, many of the most popular clustering routines
are agglomerative, starting with individual nodes and lumping cases together if
they are similar.
Let’s walk through a simple example to illustrate how HCA works. The first
step in an HCA is to array nodes as more or less proximate in a social space.
How one determines this social space is key to determining what clusters
emerge. The dimensions of that space may be predefined in some way, or they
may be entirely relational (i.e., determined by the similarity of the network ties).
Using predefined dimensions can be a quick and “cheap” (i.e., requiring no true
network data collection) way to cluster individuals when relational data are
difficult to collect but node-level data are available. For example, a researcher
interested in adolescent subgroups might draw on node-level characteristics
known to be meaningful in some way to students – say, taste in music. Each
dimension of the music space could be a music genre or an artist, and individ￾uals would be points based on their degree of liking or disliking these musical
forms; adolescents with similar musical preferences would be relatively closer to
one another. Of course, this approach assumes that the researcher has a good
idea of which dimensions of social space are most important.
The next step in an HCA concerns the actual clustering routine. After
arraying individuals in social space and deriving pairwise distances among all
the points of actors in such a space (e.g., correlation or Euclidean distance),
HCA uses one of several algorithms to iteratively join the points at increasing
levels of distance – hence the “hierarchical” aspect of the cluster analysis
procedure. These dyadic distances are then used to identify clusters of actors
who are relatively close to one another in social space. In the process, this
technique also yields a view of how much the clusters overlap with one another
at various degrees of structural similarity.
Consider the following toy example as a general model of how hierarchical
clustering works.
4 Imagine again the example of the high school, with the
research goal of detecting subgroups in a high school. A simple cluster analysis
could array individual students within a two-dimensional social space, based
on their proximity/distance to one another according to two social qualities –
say, perceptions of intelligence and status – as a two-dimensional space illus￾trated in the first panel of Figure 10.11. Here, our intuition tells us that there are
at least two and perhaps four clusters. But can one formalize this intuition in a
way that generalizes to more complicated cases?
4 For more detailed accounts, see Aldenderfer and Blashfield (1984) and Wasserman and Faust
(1994).
Positions and Roles 231
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressHCA works by joining two or more points that are the closest to one
another. These two points are often treated as a single point, with the value
equal to the centroid of those initial points, although how points are agglomer￾ated depends on clustering algorithms we will soon discuss. Using one of these
several algorithms, HCA repeats this process of hierarchically joining (agglom￾erating) points until all of them are joined within a single cluster at a maximal
distance in the space. The information in this clustering schedule is contained
within a tree-like or roots-like structure called a dendrogram (shown in the
second panel of Figure 10.11): the points that are proximate are first joined
with one another at increasing distances (shown as the y-axis) until the max￾imum distance, at which time all points are joined in a single cluster. The
dendrogram reflects the order in which cases are joined together. The third
panel of Figure 10.11 layers this simple ordering as a topographical shading
under the original nodes up to the three-cut. Actors with similar combinations
of intelligence and status are grouped together, and the implied aggregation
offers a visual illustration that helps reveal the structure of subgroups and the
degree to which they overlap. At this school, at least, we see that the cluster of
students with the highest status is also, well, not the smartest, and vice versa. Of
course, it would be very interesting to see whether friendships tend to be
concentrated within these clusters or whether they bridge such groupings.
The most important issue in performing an HCA concerns why the
researcher is using this procedure: whether seeking to detect cohesive subgroups
(as discussed in Chapter 8) or trying to uncover structurally equivalent blocks
(as discussed in this chapter). The research goal determines the construction of
the similarity/distance matrix that is then clustered by the HCA. If the
researcher is using HCA in community detection, the similarities among nodes
should be based on their direct and indirect ties to one another through one or
more sets of relations. One might use the length of geodesics as the basis for
arraying nodes as proximate or distant in social space. If the researcher is more
interested in an alternative to CONCOR in finding structural equivalence, then
the ij similarities should be based on shared profiles of ties to all other actors in
Perceived Status 
Perceived Intelligence
Original Data Clustering Dendrogram Implied Aggregaon
3-cut
FIGURE 10.11 Illustrating hierarchical cluster analysis
232 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe network, whether or not i and j have a direct tie or indirect ties. Of course,
in practice, structurally equivalent actors in a network often do have direct ties,
and consequently, blocks may sometimes be communities.
Three more technical choices are necessary to perform an HCA: (1) meas￾urement, (2) the clustering algorithm, and (3) cluster cutoffs.
10.4.2.1 Measurement
To perform an HCA, one must first measure the distances between nodes with a
distance or similarity metric (generally one is just the inverse of the other).
Measuring ij distances based on ties or shared characteristics requires the
correct choice of a metric based on the levels of measurement (nominal, ordinal,
interval, or ratio). The toy example in Figure 10.11 translate node positions in a
two-dimensional space into ij Euclidean distances because we assume that
status and intelligence were at least ordinal measures. This metric may be
extended to multiple dimensions when using node-level characteristics, but it
does not generalize to binary data. Consequently, when determining ij distances
based on profiles of binary ties, one may need to use techniques specifically
tailored for dichotomous data (tetrachoric correlations or Jaccard matching
algorithm) to induce dyadic distances. Moreover, one may want to reflect on
whether metrics are sensitive to inflated 0s (reflecting many null ties). When ties
are valued at a higher level of measurement (e.g., the number of times ij have
lunch together in a month), the researcher may use a Pearson’s correlation to
derive similarities among nodes. Results are often robust to the choice of
distance metric, but it is important to select an appropriate measure for
one’s data.
10.4.2.2 Clustering Algorithm
The second methodological decision concerns the algorithm used to join nodes
into clusters. Typically, these clustering algorithms identify sets of nodes that
meet a distance threshold as defined in various ways. The single-link method
ascertains whether members’ lowest similarity score meets the threshold (so
that members have at least one such best value of similarity). The average-link
method uses the centroid, or the average distance among cluster members, as a
cutoff (used in the preceding example). The complete-link method uses the
farthest distance to all members of a cluster as the cutoff (so that all members
have at least that level of similarity). And Ward’s method identifies clusters so
as to minimize distance variance within clusters, which tends to produce highly
distinct clusters. As with all unsupervised clustering algorithms, users should
test alternatives for robustness.
Different methods tend to produce clusters with somewhat different struc￾tural characteristics. For example, the single-link (also called nearest-neighbor)
method tends to produce clusters that are long and stringy in the space as it
chains together nodes that are closest. Perhaps the most consistently used
method in social network analysis, complete-link hierarchical clustering is the
Positions and Roles 233
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmost conservative because it seems to afford the most sensible and conservative
estimation of structural positions. The important point is that the choice of a
clustering algorithm can greatly influence the derived clusters, and researchers
will often probe the sensitivity of results to alternate clustering routines.
10.4.2.3 Cluster Cutoffs
The third decision in HCA concerns the optimal number of clusters to represent
a social structure, which will depend on precisely where one decides to draw the
line across the clustering schedule dendrogram. Again, there is no one correct
choice for such an exploratory procedure, and presenting the dendrogram with
the research results will be useful in most cases. Statistical techniques can help
inform the choice of a cutoff point, but determining the appropriate number of
clusters will be heavily influenced by the researcher’s judgment, and this
decision-making process should be clear in the research report. This decision
can be facilitated with a statistic for variance explained, which can be derived
from how well the cluster assignments at a given cutoff help explain the original
dyadic distance matrix used as input for the cluster analysis. The more the
clusters account for the distances, the better the fit. This can also be done using
the modularity score for different numbers of clusters. The researcher can
produce what is called a scree plot or elbow plot of the number of clusters by
the variance explained or modularity score, looking for any sharp change or
elbow-like bend in the plot as a good indicator of the optimal cutoff point.
Alternatively, one can apply the same modularity scoring discussed in
Chapter 8 to the similarity matrix and choose the cutoff that maximizes
modularity. Moreover, while not commonly implemented in default settings
in statistical programs, with HCA one can manually cut deeper along one
branch than another if doing so makes substantive sense and is justified.
In determining the number of clusters/blocks, keep in mind that the general
goal of blockmodeling is to identify a simplified rendering of structural reality
that explains as much observed variance as possible. The challenge most
researchers face is determining how much complexity to introduce, balanced
against ensuring comprehensibility. For large social structures, more clusters
and positions will capture more variance. However, just as readers cannot
comprehend an endless regression table of variables and plots, they cannot
comprehend a social structure with a complex set of many interrelated pos￾itions. By contrast, explaining 10 percent of the variance of a large social system
based on, say, five positions is a valuable contribution. Thus, we have found
that it is best to examine cluster profiles – that is, patterns of the base relations/
variables – at each level and determine substantively what distinguishes the
parent cluster from the two that emerge from it. If the difference reflects a
similar pattern but different level, then it is probably not worth introducing yet
another category. But, if the split reveals a different type of pattern, then it is
probably worth keeping. In short, although it is true that everything matters,
234 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presssome things matter more, and, at any rate, the human mind can comprehend
and remember no more than a few of those things.
10.4.2.4 Caveats and Scaling Up HCA
As with any tool, HCA comes with caveats. When using cluster analysis, one
should remain aware that the procedure will find clusters in any data, even
completely randomly generated data. Consequently, the derived clusters should
be met with initial suspicion. Because cluster analysis is presented here as an
inductive and exploratory method, the researcher will likely decide on the
method based on substantive issues of the domain in question and will likely
use more than one approach to probe the sensitivity of results to alternatives.
For example, in their now famous paper on the Medici family’s ascent to
political power in Renaissance Florence, Padgett and Ansell (1993) derived
their informative block structure and account by first measuring structural
equivalence via correlation, then using complete-link hierarchical clustering,
and setting a correlation level cutoff at 0.50. One could argue that these choices
made sense because historical records are fuzzy and the authors were analyzing
a world that is potentially a sea of noise with islands of structural coherence. As
such, a high correlation threshold drops many of the noisy signals of associ￾ation out. Moreover, what remained were sets of families with the same name
and relational efforts (their clusters). Once again, their approach shows that
method problems are often theory problems in disguise.
As we discuss in greater detail in the final chapter, these clustering methods
have some challenges when being scaled up to very large networks. Some
clustering techniques can easily handle millions of cases, but they will not use
criteria based on all-pairs distances as outlined in the examples discussed in
this chapter. For such giant cases, we generally recommend modeling in two
stages: (1) use a fast and efficient, but likely imprecise, method to generate
many small clusters and then (2) apply a more nuanced method to the
resulting clusters.
10.4.3 Other Measurement Approaches
One technique that we believe is quite interpretable and applicable is blockmo￾deling based on role equivalence (Burt 1990) or local patterns of ties in an
individual’s personal network (Mandel 1983). As we promised in Chapter 7,
triads will make a few cameos throughout this book, and this is one of those
times. In this approach, profiles of similarities of actors are based on their
position in the sixteen isomorphic classes of triads (see Figure 7.4). The goal
is to derive blocks using information in each node’s local tie neighborhood.
From the standpoint of each node, one can see ð Þ n−1 ð Þ n−2
2 triads that characterize
its position, where n is the number of nodes in the network. Each of the triads
must be one of the sixteen types already outlined. However, we can go beyond
Positions and Roles 235
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthese sixteen types by taking the position of one node – that is, by looking at
each triad separately from the standpoint of each i, j, and k. When one centers
on each node and looks at the triad from that node’s standpoint, for many of
the sixteen types of triads, a node can occupy positions that are structurally
distinct. Consider the 012 triad, in which only a single directed tie exists. In this
situation, each node occupies a very distinct position: the receiver of the tie, the
sender of the tie, and the isolate. Overall, there are thirty-six unique positions a
node may occupy within its local triadic environment. These are shown in
Figure 10.12 as the variations on each of the original sixteen isomorphic
003
012_S
012_E
012_I
102_D
102_I
021D_S
021D_E
021U_S
021U_E
021C_S
021C_B
021C_E
111D_S
111D_B
111D_E
111U_S
111U_B
111U_E
030T_S
030T_B
030T_E
030C
201_S
201_B
120D_S
120D_E
120U_S
120U_E
120C_S
120C_B
120C_E
210_S
210_B
210_B
300
Indicates the position
FIGURE 10.12 Triad-position census for deriving role equivalence
236 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressclasses. Nodes depicted as shaded squares indicate the possible unique positions
in each isomorphic class.
Each node within a network therefore has its involvement profile across the
thirty-six types. A dyadic measure of role equivalence is derived by comparing
each pair of nodes with respect to how similar or different they are in their
triad profiles. This effectively compares each person with all other pairs of
people in the network, and thus we can compare two people by how similarly
they relate to all others. Nodes who have the same pattern of ties will have
similar scores. If, in addition, we add global location indicators (such as
closeness and betweenness centrality scores), then we get not only pattern
but also location and, as such, doing so becomes a very fast and effective
measure of automorphic equivalence. This similarity matrix can then be used
in CONCOR or HCA to derive blocks, which may then be shown to inter￾relate in some fashion reflective of a more general role structure. One can
accommodate multiple relational networks by either enumerating the multi￾relational triadic positions (i.e., all patterns of three actors and k relations
observed in the network, which is a nontrivial task) or simply repeating the
thirty-six elements described here for each of the k relations (which is much
faster and usually sufficient, particularly if one also adds some cross-relation
indictors, such as actor-level correlation across relations). If the set of rela￾tions is small, the former provides greater detail, but the latter is much simpler
to calculate.
As an example, consider friendship nomination data within a single small
elementary class as given in panel (a) of Figure 10.13. Here, thirty-four students
naturally divide into four communities (represented by the shaded area in the
sociogram). We first enumerated each person’s involvement in the 36-element
triad-position vector and then submitted it to a hierarchical (Ward’s variance)
cluster analysis. The optimal solution, as judged by the modularity score
applied to the underlying similarity matrix, was a seven-cluster solution. We
then examined these clusters in turn to see what sorts of triadic involvement
were most common in each position. Panel (b) of Figure 10.13 displays the
triadic involvement profiles for four of the seven positions. In Position 1
(orange) are the “outsiders,” who are characterized by having very low overall
involvement. Cluster 3 (red) generally represents “wannabes,” who send ties to
others with higher status than themselves but do not receive reciprocal ties.
Cluster 5 (pink) is characterized by involvement in the reciprocal relations of
otherwise hierarchical triads (such as the 120u_S position). Cluster 7, effect￾ively the structural opposite of Cluster 1, is the group that is generally much
more involved in the network and significantly more likely to be in the closed
triad (300) and on the receiving end of the hierarchical triads (030T_E,
120D_E).
A mixing matrix provides a better sense of the macrostructure implied by
these activities. Panel (c) of Figure 10.13 provides the relative interaction
(observed over expected) of each position with every other position, and
Positions and Roles 237
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presspanel (d) translates that into an image network. Here, it is clear that
Position 7 is a “leading crowd” sort of position (Coleman 1961), and
Position 6 is a set of close lieutenants. Positions 4 and 5 are both self￾recognized (4 more so than 5), and they are closely tied to each other.
Position 4 is effectively eschewing the status structure and focused intern￾ally, whereas Position 5 provides an (asymmetric, aspirational) bridge to
the leading crowd.
A seven-cluster solution to a 34-person network is perhaps not an overly
parsimonious reduction. Having reviewed the positions, we might reasonably
collapse 7 and 6 into one “leader” position (because 6 has only two people) and
perhaps combine 4 and 5, depending on how much the aspirational aspect
matters for the research question at hand. Again, the exploratory and descrip￾tive nature of these models is aimed at providing insight, so a five-position
solution might be sufficient. Of course, any derived role structure requires a
final step of analysis – namely, assessing its fit.
0 0.97 0.89 0 0 0 0
0.49 0.58 0.16 0.65 1.17 0 0.97
0.89 1.46 0.36 0 0.36 0 3.56
0 0.65 0 7.12 3.56 0 0
0 1.36 0 2.14 2.67 1.07 2.14
0 0 0 0 1.07 5.34 5.34
0 0.39 0 0 0 2.14 8.55
1234567
Role Position
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Role Position
Position Mixing Levels (Observed/Expected)
1
2
3
5 4
6 7
Block Image
Position = 1 Position = 3 Position = 5 Position = 7 
–1 0 1 2 –1 0 1 2 –1 0 1 2 –1 0 1 2
t32_300
t31_210E
t30_210B
t29_210S
t28_120CE
t27_120CB
t26_120CS
t25_120US
t24_120UE
t23_120DE
t22_120DS
t21_201B
t20_201S
t19_030C
t18_030TE
t17_030TB
t16_030TS
t15_111UE
t14_111UB
t13_111US
t12_111DE
t11_111DB
t10_111DS
t09_021CE
t08_021CB
t07_021CS
t06_021US
t05_021UE
t04_021DE
t03_021DS
t02_102I
t01_102D
torder
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
FIGURE 10.13 (a–d) Role positions in a classroom friendship network
238 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press10.5   
Finally, we can ask how well a role structure fits the data. In general, any role
analysis that helps make sense of the data and informs our substantive or
theoretical understanding is probably a good one. Often, assessing the useful￾ness of a blockmodel entails a comparative framework: by looking at networks
over time or across regions or institutional domains, the researcher begins to see
structural forces at work in shaping macrostructures. For example, consider the
issue of partisan politics and the extent to which parties have become more
divided, which was visualized in Chapter 5 (see Figure 5.18). The image was
derived from using CONCOR to blockmodel US senators based on their voting
behavior; senators voting in the same way on the same legislation have a
positive tie. By repeating the blockmodeling procedure on each Congress, a
growing fragmentation appears as two more internally cohesive voting pos￾itions align with the two political parties.
Or consider the two high school friendship networks depicted in
Figure 10.14. Jefferson High School provides students with a good boundary
for social relations. Students there are somewhat clustered along grade levels,
but the school appears mainly cohesive. Sunshine High School, on the other
hand, does not provide a good boundary for social relations. There, students
cluster heavily along racial lines. When macrostructures of these two schools
are induced, role equivalence and clustering create a reduced block image of
school social structures. We can see a clear difference between the schools. In
the reduced block images, the width of ties is proportional to the ratio of cell
density to mean cell density (similarity of role equivalence profiles). Jefferson
High School has a core region with three groups of popular and internally
cohesive students that constitute roughly 34 percent of the school; an additional
two groups of noncohesive outsiders make up 32 percent of the school; and two
equivalently peripheral groups represent roughly 33 percent of the school. In
contrast, Sunshine High School has an exceedingly small core of internally
cohesive popular students, while the remaining groups are noncohesive and
peripheral in some way.
Another way to assess a role structure is through a confirmatory approach.
In this case, the researcher has reason to believe that a role structure may
conform to a specific structural form – for example, a core–periphery structure.
By comparing the observed role structure to an idealized version of a core–
periphery block structure with the same number of blocks, a researcher can
assess the fit of the proposed structure to the actual role structure. Prior
research has identified a variety of these ideal forms, as shown in panel (a) of
Figure 10.15. Here, early work by White, Boorman, and Breiger (1976; also see
Bearman 1997) defined a series of pairwise patterns as ideal forms of exchange
and governance. Such patterns include a caucus model, polarization, passive–
active positions, patronage–clientage, center–periphery, pure deference, and
independent deference structures. As shown in panel (b), structural equivalence
Positions and Roles 239
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presshas also been extended to larger configurations of positions (Wasserman and
Faust 1994) that reflect structures composed of multiple cohesive subgroups,
pole positions (see matrix A1 in panel (b) of Figure 10.15), a center and
periphery, two cores, centralization, simple hierarchy, looping, and transitivity.
To ascertain whether these idealized structures pertain to each case, one can
examine how well the idealized block image corresponds to the observed
reduced macrostructure. One can do this cursorily by comparing idealized
and reduced block images with the same number of positions. Or one can
expand the idealized structure to token ties, assigning 1s and 0s to ties landing
in the appropriate positions, and then compare those hypothetical relations to
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other / Mix
9th grade
10th grade
11th grade
12thgrade
Missing
Jefferson High School Sunshine High School
5: Core
Aloof
3: Periphery
Outsiders
4: Periphery
Insiders
1: Receiving 
Periphery
2: Sending
Periphery
4: Lieutenants
3: Semi−
Periphery
5: Popular
Core
34%
32%
33%
4%
43%
52%
1: Semi-periphery
Outsiders 2: Semi-periphery
Insiders
6: Core 
Most Popular
7: Core 
2nd String
FIGURE 10.14 Comparing role structures in two high schools
240 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe observed ones. For example, the reduced image matrix can be used to
predict the presence or absence of a tie between all ij pairs in the network.
Thus, one would ask what a predicted network would look like if only the
image matrix were used as a basis for determining the probability of a tie
between i and j. For example, if i is in Block 1 and j is in Block 2, should one
expect a tie between i and j? One could then compare the predicted network to
the observed network, using that as a model fit statistic. This comparison could
be done using parametric procedures, such as quadratic assignment procedure
correlation or regression (outlined in Chapter 13). The generalized blockmo￾deling approach identified by Doreian, Batagelj, and Ferligoj (2005) takes this
idea as its starting point and expands on the multiple ways that nodes can be
related generally and methods for matching an observed network to the target.
Most of our examples in this chapter (and the R tutorial) concern static
block models with uniplex and multiplex ties. However, blockmodels can be
used to depict structural change and potentially test idealized forms of struc￾tural change. White, Boorman, and Breiger (1976) offered one such example:
they looked at the role structure of a network in its last observed period and
imposed prior networks on this reduced image to ascertain when the current
structure came into being. Arguably, one could reverse this and ask when the
initial role structure disappeared by using the reduced block matrix for the
starting network and seeing when the network reproduces or departs from this
initial form.
FIGURE 10.15 Generalized blockmodels with four or more positions. (a) Sixteen
possible two-by-two binary matrices (White, Boorman, & Breiger 1976) and (b) ideal
images for more than four positions (Wasserman & Faust 1994)
Positions and Roles 241
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressAnother means of blockmodeling social network change is more complex.
The researcher can take a series of network panels and stack them much like
when multiple types of ties are present. Then the researcher performs the
blockmodeling procedure on that series of matrices, identifying sets of nodes
with similar network careers – that is, individuals who have similar ties and
lack similar ties at each time period. This approach often results in more blocks
and can become quite complex because it is no longer merely identifying static
positions but rather subsets of the positions that have certain careers across
other positions. The payoff here is the revelation of longitudinal identities (e.g.,
careers, stories), akin to what social network theorists like Harrison White and
Charles Tilly posited. In sociology and studies of social structure, such
FIGURE 10.15 (cont.)
242 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presslongitudinal analyses can become quite interesting, as we will discuss in
Chapter 16 regarding multilayered networks.
Regardless, the more types of ties and the more network panels, the more
complex the clustering solutions become. Because of this added complexity, we
recommend using CONCOR or coarser block solutions that capture the most
variance in ties over time with the least number of positions. (As Chapter 8
clarifies, that is where cluster methods have the greatest consensus – not in the
minutia of fine-grained distinctions.) Bear in mind two things here. First,
explaining 5–10 percent of the variance in millions of associations is an
amazing accomplishment, so selecting more parsimonious clustering solutions
is acceptable. Second, showing four positions over time or with multiple types
of ties is already difficult to follow and comprehend, and extending that explor￾ation to twenty positions may be really hard to follow without substantial
simplification. Although social structure may prove complex in reality, network
scholars need to make sure their explanations are accessible and that readers
can use these explanations to develop their own understanding and further
their expertise.
Last, as with any data analysis, researchers should build confidence in their
results by engaging in robustness and sensitivity checks. For blockmodeling,
such checks would focus on what measure of equivalence was used, how the
cutoff for the number of derived blocks was determined, and whether the final
depiction is comprehensible and furthers the reader’s understanding of the
phenomenon. Using more than one measure of equivalence and clustering
method may be informative and should generally produce similar results. But
be mindful to select a depiction that others can comprehend!
10.6    
Role-based approaches may seem quite far afield of the community-based
approaches we covered in previous chapters. However, theoretically, the two
approaches to social integration born from these approaches (i.e., structural
equivalence and cohesion) are clearly connected, and Goffman’s dramaturgical
metaphors can help us think about their underlying unity. If you’ve ever been in a
play, you were given a role and a script and, through countless rehearsals,
learned to coordinate performances under a director’s vision. In doing so, you
probably came to like and feel more connected to your fellow performers;
perhaps you became close friends or even romantically involved. The theater is
awash in stories of actors who form lasting ties to those with whom they have
performed. At times, tensions arise and may even become acute, but professional
actors must continue to perform roles alongside others with whom they have
harsh feelings in real life. By enacting the underlying scripts (i.e., schemas)
associated with their roles, people produce a sense of connection in themselves
and to others, which leads to a flow of emotional energy when these perform￾ances are successful. Success in our everyday performances tends to breed future
Positions and Roles 243
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Presssuccesses, such that individuals who have greater facility at performing certain
roles will tend to receive the type of emotional charge that builds confidence,
confirms their identity, and eases integration into the social collectivity (Collins
2014). Those who are less successful (because of any number of endogenous and
exogenous factors) experience greater isolation and shame, which may lead them
to seek out other outsiders with whom they identify or even to seek revenge on
the group they feel has rejected them (Scheff 1988). Thus, roles and performances
can be deadly enactments in which even violence itself takes on a ritual and
performative character.
Methodologically, cohesion and structural equivalence are not as distinct as
one might think. The two core tasks for detecting positions are defining relational
similarity and clustering the population to reveal role positions. Methods for
both abound, and our goal here has been to illustrate the most common
approaches with an eye toward empowering researchers to employ the tech￾niques best suited to their problem. The technical similarities to community
detection are clear: just as there are myriad ways to cluster direct relations to
find communities, there are many ways to cluster profile similarity matrices to
reveal roles (and, in fact, one can apply some of the community detection tools
directly to similarity matrices). Once positions are identified, there are two
common ways to use the results. Most often, one uses positions to describe and
explain other activities, noting that people in one position behave differently than
people in another position. This provides rich insights into how positions shape
incentives and constraints for individual action. Somewhat less common, but
potentially much deeper, are models that play out the system-level results of
compound role relations. Just as one’s “brother’s daughter” is a “niece,”
sequences of relations form a system that can be explicated formally using role
algebras like the one in Figure 10.2 (Pattison 1993). We only hinted at this
strategy earlier, given that R tools are much less well developed. We encourage
readers to take up this challenge because it represents the full promise of White,
Boorman, and Breiger’s original operationalization of role systems.
10.7 
In this chapter, we shifted our attention away from connectionist approaches to
seeing social structures as interrelated sets of roles enacted through many
scripts and traced through relational exchanges. This approach once again
echoes Durkheim’s initial sociological dilemma about what holds a society
together. However, whereas the communities discussed in Chapter 8 operation￾alize mechanical solidarity, role systems and blockmodels operationalize
organic solidarity – that is, how differentiated positions may or may not form
a connected whole. This brings up theoretically and methodologically fascinat￾ing issues. Several of these issues are the bases for ongoing research and will
undoubtedly form important future directions, some of which we touch on in
Chapter 16.
244 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press  
Bearman, Peter. 1997. “Generalized Exchange.” American Journal of Sociology 102:
1383–415. (An exemplar use of blockmodeling to identify positions in a kinship
exchange structure, demonstrating that systemic social action occurs even when actors
are unaware of the reasons for their actions.)
Doreian, Patrick, Vladimir Batagelj, and Anuska Ferligoj. 2004. Generalized
Blockmodeling. New York: Cambridge University Press. (Provides a thorough over￾view of blockmodeling and role analysis starting with the conventional notions of
equivalence outlined in this chapter, but then extends to new equivalency frameworks
based on different types of flows across positions.)
Leifer, Eric M. 1988. “Interaction Preludes to Role Setting: Exploratory Local Action.”
American Sociological Review 53: 865–78. (Presents an elegant theory of ambiguity
that provides insights into how indeterminant action creates the conditions necessary
for role exchange in settings where roles are not prescribed.)
Pattison, Philippa. 1993. Algebraic Models for Social Networks. New York: Cambridge
University Press. (An exceptional text on using formal models for role relations for
both complete and incomplete networks; an approach that holds true promise for
identifying relational implications and systems-level regularities across settings.)
White, Harrison C., Scott A. Boorman, and Ronald L. Breiger. 1976. “Social Structure
from Multiple Networks. I. Blockmodels of Roles and Positions.” American Journal
of Sociology 81(4): 730–80. (Foundational work on using network methods to
identify informal role systems.)
Positions and Roles 245
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press11
Affiliations and Dualities
Whereas in one-mode data, individuals or groups are connected directly with one
another through interactions or relations, in two-mode data, individuals are
indirectly connected with one another through affiliations (events, organizations,
associations, alliances, and so on). Affiliation data are often used as a proxy for
detecting ties among social actors when direct evidence of ties is difficult to
obtain. For example, it is generally easier to know that two people belong to
the same club or work in the same department than to know that they have lunch
together every Thursday. But affiliation data can also be used to see aspects of
social structures not visible in one-mode networks. Duality is a kind of structural
relation that shows how levels of social structure intersect. We discuss the classic
approach to duality as well as two generalizations that extend the duality
approach in hierarchical, temporal, and spatial directions.
11.1     
Think about your typical day. Imagine it as a circular path, starting and ending
at home and marked with various points along the way indicating places and
activities where you come into meaningful contact with others: school, work,
the grocery store, the gym, a friend’s house, and so on. What are these points of
contact on your circle, and how many are there? Now imagine all other people
in your city having their own circles. Some people have fairly small circles with
few points of contact, and others have large circles marked with a variety of
social activities (e.g., working, socializing, volunteering). If you were to then
look at the overlap in some of these intersecting circles, you might see some￾thing like one of the panels in Figure 11.1. Panel (a) might be depicting kids
who go to the same urban high school – that is, each individual has a fairly
large social circle that overlaps just a little bit through this shared high school.
Panel (b) might depict friends in a small town having dinner together – that is,
246
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Presseach individual’s circle is fairly small, but these circles overlap a lot in terms of
the overall points of contact. Stepping back and seeing the world in this way,
we could think of modern society as emerging from a general historical move￾ment toward the first type of arrangement and away from the second
(Pescosolido & Rubin 2000; Simmel 1955).
In network terms, the points of contact are important because they are sites
of affiliation: contexts through which individuals associate with one another.
Social life is organized around such activity contexts – or what Feld (1981)
called “shared foci” – wherein individuals come to have more or less solidified
memberships and identities. To the extent that these foci become regular stops
in our daily, weekly, or even yearly (e.g., conferences) circles, they coordinate
contacts and increase the likelihood of having meaningful interactions and
relations. To link back to the previous chapter on roles, different sites of
affiliation are frequently stages for expressing our identities and performing
our different roles. Shared foci also involve rituals that are generally centered
on mutual objects of attention, such as individuals (e.g., bosses), coordinated
work tasks, and joint activities. Movement into and out of these settings is
frequently coordinated and restricted in various ways: knowing the right
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 11.1 (a and b) Two structures of overlapping social circles of four individuals
Affiliations and Dualities 247
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Presspeople, having the right academic degree, or being required to report some￾where. In coming together with others in ritualized settings with mutual foci,
people come to shared values, ways of relating, understanding, and talking – all
of which produce feelings of belonging together.
Affiliations therefore point back to core concerns with social cohesion
discussed in Chapter 8. Yet, affiliations vary widely in how powerfully they
generate and sustain social bonds. The power of affiliations to connect people
depends on the type of activity that is being coordinated within a social
context. Some points may have fairly stable memberships, whereas others
have rotating casts. Attending the same parties is qualitatively different than
attending the same lectures. Parties entail sociability and interaction, focused
on forming and sustaining social ties; lectures entail a shared attention and
exposure to the same information, which may be important in understanding
how information diffuses but may not be consequential for how friendship
ties form.
Affiliations therefore have important societal consequences. A ubiquitous
aspect of social life is that people become attached to one another through
groups and become attached to groups through one another (Homans 1951).
Indeed, the stability of societies can be seen through the lens of when individ￾uals become more attached to the interests of the group than to their own
personal interests (Lawler, Thye, & Yoon 2000). A population with many
intersecting social circles is likely to be more integrated, allowing information
to spread and identities to mesh. Small social circles that overlap with a
homogeneous set of others, however, indicate a lack of broader cross-cutting
social ties that are important in reducing sectarianism (Blau 1977; Simmel 2010
[1908]). Consider two otherwise identical high schools: one organized with
many highly specialized and exclusive foci (e.g., courses involving many pre￾requisites, clubs with competitive membership criteria), and one with more
general and open foci. These differences in the ecologies of foci will have
important consequences for how students will meet others, potentially become
friends, and learn from and influence one another.
In addition to contexts, affiliations also arise from social categories: the ways
that individuals are classified and associated with one another by organizations
and institutions. Each of us has memberships in a set of diffuse groups that are
largely not of our own choosing – age, geographical region, race, gender, and so
on – all of which are ways that individuals are associated with one another.
Other categorical memberships, such as political party membership, may be
somewhat more guided by choice. Unlike affiliations as contexts of activity,
affiliations as categories operate at a higher level of abstraction and scale.
Belonging to a political party, for example, does not really feel like belonging
to a club. Yet, such categories strongly dictate how one lives and often filter
down into more concrete contexts of activity – neighborhoods, schools, clubs,
and social gatherings – which reflect and reinforce these broader social categor￾ies. White (1965) famously saw categories as only “real” to the extent that they
shape social relations – either by facilitating in-group interactions or shaping
248 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe likelihood of out-group contacts. In short, collections of (relationally rele￾vant) categories effectively operationalize lived identity.
Whether seen as contexts or categories, or some combination thereof, affili￾ations convey a great deal of potentially useful information about social structure.
Affiliations help us make sense of the multiple layers of social structure that
intersect, as shown in our rendition of Hinde’s image in Figure 2.3. Whereas many
network approaches lead us to see social structure at one level (interactions,
relations, or role patterns), affiliations lead us to see social structure through
collective encounters, settings, social labels, and organizational structures. In
contrast to seeing social structure as communities or roles, which may lie outside
individuals’ awareness, affiliations allow us to see social structure through the lens
of named, externalized groups that have a “thing-like” quality. They also allow us
to see the dynamic ways that groups, contexts, and categories may coevolve. Peer
groups may become like clubs or gangs with regular meeting spaces, rituals, and
membership criteria; structural positions may become roles with shared expect￾ations and categories attached to them. Take one real-life example from the first
author’s high school experience: a group of kids who hang out every day at a
certain place (e.g., a dead-end street) may eventually become a named group (e.g.,
the “dead-enders”), which then exists as a category and becomes a way of
affiliating across a different set of contexts and categories (e.g., a high school).
The point is that, to the extent that categories shape social relations, Hinde’s
abstraction/concreteness can be extended up to larger and larger affiliations
(tracks in schools, majors in universities, tiers of universities, and so on) or drilled
down into local settings within them (e.g., Algebra I vs. Algebra II classrooms).
In this chapter, we focus on how affiliation data can answer important
structural questions and reveal aspects of structure beyond what is available
in one-mode networks. Before showing how network methods answer such
questions, we need to explain a key conceptual issue that helps us make sense of
many of the results and is indeed a concept worthy of its own chapter, if not its
own book: namely, duality.
11.2 
Can something be two things at once? According to the concept of duality, the
answer is yes. A coin, for example, is both “heads” and “tails,” depending on how
you look at it. Duality suggests that many phenomena simultaneously exist at two
levels, or have two facets or two registers, depending on how one looks at that
phenomenon. A duality can be said to exist when different aspects of a phenom￾enon co-constitute one another. Dualities are everywhere. Researchers study
dualities across empirical domains outside the social sciences to examine species
and niches, diseases and symptoms, genes and phenotypes, and many others.
In social science, affiliations often reveal dualities. As with our opening
consideration of overlapping circles, affiliations show an inherent duality of
individuals’ lives and larger societal arrangements of contexts and categories.
Mead (1934), for example, saw the self as constructed from more or less
Affiliations and Dualities 249
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressintersecting primary (e.g., family, friends) and secondary (e.g., hobbies) group
memberships and identities connected to these roles. Thus, selves are made of
group memberships, and group memberships are made of selves. As we alluded
to earlier in reference to Figure 11.1, in more traditional and homogeneous
societies, individuals belong to groups that greatly overlap; in differentiated
societies, individuals’ group memberships are narrower and less likely to over￾lap with those of others, as when, for example, a next-door neighbor belongs to
a different church. Modernity has effectively been a long march away from
consolidated social institutions – where people in the same neighborhood
worked in the same organization and attended the same church – to one where
individuality emerges as unique combinations that cross-cut multiple social
institutions (Durkheim 1893; Pescosolido & Rubin 2000).
As we have noted, Feld (1981) built on this notion through the concept of
shared foci: events, activities, and objects that provide a focus of joint attention
and constraint to behavior. A neighborhood association might be a more
loosely constraining focus that might give rise to a more tightly constraining
one, such as a monthly book club. Online foci are particularly weak because
they carry with them almost no necessary entanglement with other foci. For
example, being an active participant on one Reddit subgroup implies nothing
about the Facebook groups to which you belong. This allows people to curate
multiple identities in virtual worlds that is still largely impossible in physical
settings. The key point here is that social structure is composed of multiple
intersecting dualities of individuals, contexts, and categories. How these inter￾sect is in itself a highly relevant aspect of social structure.
Affiliation data suitable for seeing dualities are abundant. Network scholars
have availed themselves of the many secondary data sources recording affiliations,
from internal organizational records to online databases. Although collecting
global and complete network data is often onerous and expensive, affiliation data
are easy to “scrape” from various electronic archives. While affiliation data are
widely available, techniques capable of revealing dualities are more involved.
Seeing duality requires techniques that can simultaneously reveal the two sides
of the same coin – an accomplishment that would be difficult with a coin, let alone
with the complex relationships contained in social structures.
Consider the two-mode network in Figure 11.2, which shows faculty members
(circles) and academic departments (squares) in a single research university. Such
data are easily acquired from university websites. Because these faculty members
often have multiple departmental appointments (sometimes four or more!), the ties
are constituted by co-memberships in more than one department. By putting
individuals and departments in the same network, this figure reveals important
aspects of the university social structure – such as centrality, bridging, and cluster￾ing – that might be used to address research questions. For example, one might ask,
Where is the center of knowledge production in this university? Rather than
answering this question using measures of research output (e.g., number of grants,
journal articles), one might think of it in structural terms. In this case, computer
science and electrical engineering are at the center of knowledge production, with
250 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Presssocial sciences and then the humanities in one direction and medicine and engin￾eering in the other.
How does one interpret such dual structures? The answer, of course, depends
on the research goal. For connectionists, affiliations can be used to infer flows of
important resources. Consider the matter of interlocking corporate boards, in
which the same individuals sit on multiple boards of directors and thus are likely
to interact with others who sit on the boards of competing corporations. For a
connectionist, these two-mode data are most interesting for understanding the
corporate elite and how information and influence flow (Burris 2005). Sitting on
multiple boards with other individuals who themselves sit on boards of similar
and perhaps competing corporations is a proxy for the corporate class as a
cohesive subgroup. Affiliation data are therefore poised to reveal social structure
from these various intersections of actors. For example, theories of the corporate
class or the “inner circle” of capitalists posit that higher levels of the corporate
hierarchy are associated with greater cohesion of elites (Mizruchi 2013; Valeeva,
Heemskerk, & Takes 2020). Of course, gathering data on such elites presents a
number of challenges, primarily because such individuals do not want to be
FIGURE 11.2 Two-mode network of faculty and departments via joint appointments
Affiliations and Dualities 251
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressstudied and have the means to avoid being observed. Thus, public records of
affiliations may be the only real avenue for probing the merits of the thesis. Direct
evidence of a tie may not be available, but given a number of overlapping events,
one can reasonably impute an undirected relationship.
In contrast to the connectionist concern with flows, positional approaches
see affiliation networks as revealing underlying role structures in which indi￾viduals and groups occupy equivalent positions with respect to the entire
structure of ties. Regardless of whether two individuals or groups are embedded
in cohesive communities, they may have a shared position in the corporate
sector. For example, some board members might be “bridges” who sit on fewer
boards that are weakly connected. On the other side of the duality, some
corporations may occupy more central or peripheral positions with respect to
their profiles of board members. Perhaps one corporation serves as an import￾ant link between industrial sectors or between for-profit and nonprofit boards.
This overall structure may not be so different from a high school in which
certain extracurricular clubs are more exclusive than others, the cool kids can
be seen through their shared memberships in certain clubs, and thus the cool
clubs are those in which certain kids have co-memberships.
In what follows, we outline three main ways that network researchers use
many of these techniques in the service of uncovering and analyzing dualities.
We begin with the classic treatment and then turn to two extensions that
incorporate direction, time, and space into a duality perspective.
11.3      
In Breiger’s (1974) classic formulation, duality is examined through ties linking
nodes at lower levels of sociality (especially individuals) with collectivities at
higher levels of sociality (especially groups). These levels are broadly referred to
as actors and events, respectively. In the southern women’s club example, the
women are the actors and the club gatherings are the events. Actors and events
at one level may be displaced to higher levels of aggregation such that social
collectivities could be considered the actors connected through higher-level
events. For example, the researcher might look at corporations and their
memberships in trade and philanthropic associations, in which case corpor￾ations are the actors and associations are events.
Duality is a mathematical property of a matrix where rows are typically actors
and columns are events. In this formulation, actors can be positioned in social
structures vis-à-vis their shared row profiles of memberships in the same events, and
events may occupy a common social position with respect to their shared column
profiles of members. In matrix terms, two rows (usually individual actors) in the
affiliation matrix are seen as proximate or similar by comparing their profiles of ties
across all the columns (usually groups). The inverse relationship is also true: two
columns can be seen as similar based on their shared ties down the rows.
252 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressRather than trying to see both sides of a duality at once, it may be easier to
examine one side of a duality at a time. Although it can be informative to
visualize bipartite networks as we have done with the university and its depart￾ments in Figure 11.2, the classic treatment of such two-mode networks is to
transform a two-mode network into a one-mode network, creating either an
actor-to-actor or an event-to-event network. Using the southern women’s
groups again, one can derive either of the one-mode networks depicted in
Figure 11.3. Panel (a) shows events (purple nodes) connected by individual
actors (green edges); Panel (b) shows the other side of the duality, with individ￾ual actors (green nodes) connected by events (purple edges).
FIGURE 11.3 (a and b) One-mode projections of southern women’s affiliations through
events
Affiliations and Dualities 253
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressIn the actor-to-actor network, individuals are tied to one another by their
number of shared events; in the group-to-group network, events are tied to one
another by their number of shared people. In formal terms, where Pij is the actor
network connecting people, and Gij is the event network connecting groups:
Pij ¼ X
g
k¼1
AikAjk, (11.1)
and
Gij ¼ X
p
k¼1
AkiAkj: (11.2)
Theoretically, these two equations reflect Breiger’s understanding of duality:
“With respect to the membership network ... persons who are actors in one
FIGURE 11.3 (cont.)
254 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Presspicture (the P matrix) are with equal legitimacy viewed as connections in the
dual picture (the G matrix), and conversely for groups” (Breiger 1974: 87). In
smaller networks, such one-mode projections of the two-mode network can be
easily produced by multiplying the two-mode matrix (or A = m  n matrix of
persons (m) by affiliations (n)) by its transpose (A  AT = Pij; AT  A = Gij). In
very large networks, this calculation becomes computationally intensive, and
other techniques are more efficient. Such one-mode projections of two-mode
networks are always symmetric, and the diagonal vector indicates the number
of groups to which each person belongs (in Pij) or the number of people each
group has (in Gij).
1
Having transformed the two-mode network into one-mode networks, the
researcher may then draw on any number of the one-mode network techniques
outlined in previous chapters. However, some of the measures derived from
these techniques may need to be modified in order to accommodate the differ￾ent type of data expressed in the network (Borgatti & Everett 1997; Borgatti &
Halgin 2011; Faust 1997). Some of the properties of the one-mode transform￾ations to consider are the following:
 Density. The density of the co-membership graph (Pij) is the mean number of
events to which actors jointly belong. The density of the event-overlap graph
(Gij) is the mean number of actors belonging to common events. When
dichotomizing Pij or Gij (using a cutoff defined as at least k = 1, 2, 3, and
so on), the density of the binary co-membership graph is the proportion of
actor-pairs jointly involved in at least k shared events. The density of the
binary event-overlap graph is the proportion of event-pairs with at least one
actor in common.
 Reachability. In the bipartite graph, actors are tied via events, so there are
no direct one-step paths connecting actors to actors or events to events; all
1 Two-mode networks are useful for inferring Pij relations, and they are most valid when group
sizes are small and measures of individuals’ co-occurrences in these groups are unlikely to contain
errors. Occasionally, deriving these affiliations is based on inferences from data sets that are
noisy. For example, if the southern women’s club data were gathered by sampling events at
random weeks rather than through a record of all such events, this might entail another level of
measurement uncertainty that should be approximated. To build confidence in inferred affili￾ations, the researcher can use statistical techniques. Kolaczyk and Csárdi (2014: ch. 7) discussed
three of these techniques: correlations, partial correlations, and Gaussian graphical models. The
correlation approach transforms the two-mode projection into a one-mode network in which the
cell entries are Pearson’s correlation coefficients. One might then prune ties that are not below a
certain threshold of statistical significance. The partial correlation approach follows the same
logic but is instead based on partial correlations, which take into account confounding effects and
thus seek a measure of a more direct relationship among two actors or groups outside the
influences mediated through indirect ties. The Gaussian graphical model approach is a somewhat
more involved extension of the partial correlations approach.
Affiliations and Dualities 255
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Presssuch ties between events and between actors are two steps. In the one￾mode projection, one-step ties indicate common membership (P) or
common members (G). Connected components in P indicate sets of actors
who are reachable via sequences of shared memberships, whereas con￾nected components in G indicate sets of activities reachable by
overlapping members.
 Path Length. The one-mode projection of the two-mode data results in a
weighted graph. The length along a path in a weighted graph must respect
the weights at each step. Typically, one treats higher values as an indicator of
strength, and thus distance is calculated as the sum of the inverse along
the path, with the shortest path (geodesic) being the path with the smallest
sum of edge weights. This calculation technique can lead to unexpected
results. For example, a two-step path with one overlap will sum to 2,
whereas a three-step path with two memberships each will sum only to 1.5
(i.e., 3  0.5).
 Standardization/Normalization. Large events or highly active members will
generate large cliques in the one-mode projection, which can then quickly
reconnect many people indirectly and create a sense of very high connectivity
in the network overall. As such, caution should be used when thinking about
indirect connectivity, particularly if the large (active) events (actors) do not
admit to particularly heavy interaction (participation). For example, if all
members of a very large organization spend very little time with each other
in that organization, the meaning of a direct shared-organization tie might
be weak. One may want to normalize membership to account for this sort of
activity weighting. For example, one can make the contact due to any
organization sum to 1 so that large membership overlaps are weighted as
1/Ng.
 Clustering. Classic transitive closure – triples where i ! j, j ! k, and i !
k – are not possible in two-mode networks, where the smallest motif would
be a four-cycle (E1–A1–E2–A2–E1), and generalizations of the transitive
closure idea based on four-cycles have been proposed (Opsahl 2013).
Moreover, the notion of cliques and closure need to be broadened when
thinking about overlaps such as these. Building from the notion that simple
cliques of two are uninteresting in one-mode data, Borgatti and Everett
suggested that when identifying two-mode cliques (“bi-cliques”), the
researcher could limit the analysis to cliques involving at least three actors
and three events (see Borgatti & Everett 1997: 265). When transforming a
two-mode network to one-mode projection, many closed triads always
appear because each event generates a clique equal in size to the number
of members. This property of two-mode networks severely biases clustering
coefficients, for example, unless one corrects for the expected value given
the size distribution of events and memberships (Newman, Watts, &
Strogatz 2002).
256 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press Centrality. Most measures of centrality translate without difficulty to two￾mode networks and their one-mode network projections. The exception is
betweenness centrality, which poses difficulties because high-bridging actors
are those attending more events or large events, and high-bridging events are
those with most actors or actors who attend lots of events. As such, the
notion of bridging is heavily affected by event sizes rather than being unique
conduits across disparate domains (Faust 1997), which suggests that one
should employ a weighting scheme that downplays edges due solely to joint
occupancy of large groups (such as setting edge weight contributed by each
group to 1
Group Size).
 Roles and Positions. Using two-mode data as the bases of blockmodeling is
generally unproblematic. As we will discuss in more detail in this chapter, in
the context of duality, it sometimes makes more sense to think about
structural equivalence – to consider, for example, that two actors are more
or less equivalent with respect to their relations to groups or other social
entities. Thus, in many contexts dualities arising from affiliations are the
ideal setting within which to examine role structures.
Let’s consider another useful illustration of the actor–event approach to
duality, this time using the example of coauthorship networks, in which
researchers are the actors and published articles are the events. Researchers
are connected through joint publications, and publications are connected
through joint authors. From the connectionist standpoint, coauthorship net￾works can be a useful proxy for contact among researchers. Particularly when ij
coauthorships are repeated in smaller research teams with fewer members, it is
fair to infer an underlying collaborative ij relationship that may act as an
important conduit for social or intellectual influence. Comparing researcher
i’s intellectual output before and after collaborating with j over time offers an
important window into how j’s work might influence i’s, and vice versa (see
Rawlings & McFarland 2011). A more positional approach to coauthorship
networks might suggest that researchers who collaborate with otherwise dis￾connected regions of the broader social structure of knowledge production are
more likely to innovate (Burt 2004).
The key to this classic approach to duality is that both modes are social
actors of some sort. As demonstrated earlier in this chapter, another example of
the actor–event approach in academia is academic researchers who are affili￾ated through their work in the same academic units (departments or research
institutes). Other examples could include shared supervising of graduate stu￾dents (on dissertation committees), attendance at conferences, memberships in
professional associations, and participation in smaller topical sections within
those associations. The researcher might approach such data to infer contact
among academic researchers or to map the broader structure of knowledge
production. The point is that gauging multiple affiliations for actors can elicit
reliable images of social structures.
Affiliations and Dualities 257
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press11.4      :
    
The classic actor–event framework is still incredibly relevant. And yet,
dualities do not stop with actors and events. Two related ways of drawing
on duality, which have garnered less attention than they deserve in our view,
are also rooted in Breiger’s classic statement (1974: 189). The first adds
direction, and the second adds time to exploring dualities. Both methods are
very useful because they help reveal directionality and asymmetries
in affiliations.
The first method uses co-membership information to identify hierarchies
among members or memberships. Asymmetrical affiliations may reveal larger
structures of inequality, power, and more interesting role structures for the
structure of cross-cutting social circles. First, the technique can be used to
identify a leader or directional relations in these groups because group members
often have differing investments. For example, chairs of departments, managers
of firms, presidents of voluntary associations, and even first authors on aca￾demic papers invest more in the joint products and lead others. As such, merely
reporting symmetric affiliation is insufficient and may overlook important
directional information. In addition, foci themselves vary in how greedy/
demanding they are and how much actors invest in them. Simmel (1955: 138)
saw such variation in foci in terms of primary and secondary group affiliations
in modern societies (i.e., family relations and work) vying for time and atten￾tion. Thus, groups themselves may have hierarchical claims on attention
and allegiance.
These directional relations within foci are constructed by using matrix
algebra, identifying for each event (or group) a leader, or a person most
investing in the event. Beginning with p people and g groups in affiliation
matrix F, which contains a binary indicator of who leads each group (e.g.,
dissertation chair on a thesis committee), one then creates a second p  g
matrix A, which contains a binary indicator of who is affiliated with each
group (e.g., all dissertation committee members, including the chair). To iden￾tify directional ties to the leader across groups (e.g., leaders of theses), the
matrix F is multiplied by the transpose of matrix A (P0 = FAT), creating a
directed p  p matrix in which the leaders have directed ties toward their group
members. Should there be co-leaders, they will share a symmetric tie, whereas
ties to other members are asymmetric.
Some groups may have primary hold over our cognitive and emotional
energies, whereas others are secondary. For example, people may value their
family or friendship clique membership over work or hobby memberships. In
such cases, F can consist of persons (p) by groups (g), where the binary
indicator reflects each person’s primary affiliation of, say, their families. A,
by contrast, can have binary values for all affiliations (secondary and pri￾mary). One can then determine the influence of primary groups on secondary
258 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressgroups by multiplying the transpose of matrix A by matrix F (G0 = ATF). This
creates a directed g  g matrix in which primary affiliations have valued,
directed ties to secondary affiliations. These cells show the number of persons
from each primary group that is in each secondary group, and not vice versa.
Members who have multiple primary groups (e.g., family and friendship
groups) may have symmetric ties, whereas ties to secondary affiliations
are asymmetric.
A wide variety of interesting analyses could follow from such a directed
approach to affiliation. Given the absence of work adopting this approach, it
remains as a potential area for innovation in social network research. This
approach has the potential to reveal hierarchies of membership and the strati￾fied influence of social settings. In addition, such an approach could reveal the
foci effects on hierarchical social relations discussed in previous chapters – for
example, exploring the possibility that the rank ordering of our relations is due
to our membership positioning within more or less greedy foci and our leader￾ship roles.
The second extension of duality uses a technique similar to adding
direction but is in this case used to identify individuals’ movement through
affiliations over time – that is, their careers. In many regards, careers are
more accurate representations of identities, given that they entail notions of
past, present, and future. Roles and positions can be regarded in terms of
actors’ trajectories across them. From this perspective, the structure of
cross-cutting circles can be viewed more dynamically as people change their
memberships throughout their careers and life stages. Again, matrix alge￾bra can be used to reveal individuals’ changes in affiliations from Time 1 to
Time 2. One takes A (p  g) at Time 1 (A1), transposes it to reflect
affiliations by persons (g  p, A1
T), and then multiplies it by A (p  g) at
Time 2 (A2). Person movement across events is defined as G12 = A1
T  A2.
The cells in this matrix show the number of persons (P) who flow across
events or groups (G) from year 1 to 2. The inverse of A1  A2
T shows the
count of events moving across persons in Time 1 and Time 2, or P12. This
information could be useful for measuring the flow of goods, ideas, or even
illnesses across people.
In both instances, one can use the count of events for each p or g at time t1 as
a denominator to derive transition probabilities: the likelihood that a person
will transition from group i to group j over time is a function of the frequency
with which others make that move divided by the total number in the group
initially. This calculation then reveals career-like movements and flows of
people (or events) and their transition probabilities within a membership
system. By multiplying the probabilities across cells in a path, one can even
estimate the likelihood that an average person (or event) will take a particular
multistep career trajectory over time.
Seeing the overall structure of these transition probabilities can be powerful.
Figure 11.4 presents an example of the use of this technique to reveal a
Affiliations and Dualities 259
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressstructure of academic careers in high school math course–taking (McFarland
2006). The figure shows the overall transition probabilities of students flowing
through a system of courses offered in that high school. The movement of
students through these courses reveals a structure with five main trajectories
that have various straight paths as well as some key turning points for students
to enter a higher track. Structural turning points in careers are the dynamic
FIGURE 11.4 Academic careers in high school math course–taking (McFarland 2006)
260 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressversion of cutpoints in graphs, and they warrant far more inspection than they
have received to date.
This structure of careers also suggests mechanisms of flow that are distinct
from those of typical agentic models. When the number of available spots in
groups is finite, mobility often happens only when someone leaves the system
entirely (e.g., retires or dies), possibly instigating a vacancy chain: a cascading
set of movements as individuals in a system advance to a better spot, creating
vacancies. White (1970a) explored vacancy chains to great effect to show the
movement of ministers into new parishes (as a result of deaths of older minis￾ters. Others have used this perspective to show how introducing a new resource
into a system can lead agents to seek to “trade up,” as shown by the movements
of hermit crabs when a new shell is introduced to the system – a dynamic that is
surprisingly relevant for understanding the real estate market (Chase 1991). An
exploration of the other side of the duality can also reveal flows of events
through people. For example, Wang and Soule (2012) used this technique to
see how protest tactics moved through people and diffused among social
movement organizations.
Duality can be made visible with a number of techniques beyond the
initial ones proposed by Breiger and their clear extensions we have outlined
here (e.g., Freeman & White 1993). Several of these techniques build on
spatial metaphors and tools for positioning social actors within various
spaces.
11.5    
The key to the spatial approach to duality is expressing and visualizing the
affiliations among actors and events (broadly construed) as proximities
and distances along various dimensions. On one side of the duality, the
contexts and categories are dimensions of affiliation in a multidimensional
space in which actors are more or less proximate. For example, two
individuals who shop at the same grocery store could be considered to
occupy the same space on the grocery shopping dimension, and two
individuals who speak the same language could be positioned at the same
point on the linguistic dimension. On the flip side of the duality, the
contexts and categories themselves can be thought of as existing in spaces
constituted by the actors within them: grocery stores are proximate in a
customer space if they have the same customers or perhaps even the same
types of customers, and languages are proximate in a sociodemographic
space if the same individuals or the same types of individuals tend to
speak to them.
How does one begin to see such dualities in spatial terms? Two key spatial
approaches to duality are correspondences and niches.
Affiliations and Dualities 261
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press11.5.1 Correspondences
Approaching dualities as correspondences is both intuitive and helpful in terms
of modeling strategies. Dualities can be quickly visualized using categorical
data to examine correspondences between rows and columns. Correspondence
analysis (CA), also known as optimal scaling, can be thought of as a categorical
version of principal component analysis and factor analysis; it seeks to find
latent dimensions based on an inputted contingency table. CA is based on a
weighted single-value decomposition of a contingency table that places the
rows and columns of a data set within the same space, generally a two￾dimensional rendering. A chi-square distance is calculated to compare each
row and the average row profile. The goal is to place each row and column in
the best-fitting relational space that maximally preserves the chi-square dis￾tances (see Greenacre & Blasius 1994). Here, the network researcher may use
CA to visualize the dualities because it allows both sides of the coin, if you will,
to be positioned within the same relational space.
Figure 11.5, for example, displays the CA results using the data on southern
women’s clubs. The rows are the names of the women, and the columns are the
names of events. Women who share similar events are placed near one another,
as are the events that connect them. Thus, Helen and Dorothy along with Event
9 are the most dually central persons and event, and Flora and Olivia along
with Event 11 are the most structurally peripheral.
Here, the dimensions of the space have no inherent meaning. The space is
entirely relational, and the dimensions could be flipped so long as the relative
positions of actors and events remain stable. The point is to simultaneously see
(albeit with some error) how actors and events interrelate. The dimensions of CA,
much like those in principal component analysis and factor analysis, require
interpretation. In Figure 11.5, we represent the two dimensions that explain the
most variance in affiliations (57.3 percent). An interpretation of the dimensions
requires an examination of high- and low-loading nodes and inferences about
how the dimensions vary and therefore about what each dimension means.
Interpreting a CA therefore involves an exploration of which nodes are more
and less central, how nodes cluster within certain quadrants of the space, and
so on.
When reading CA plots such as that shown in Figure 11.5, a focus on two
factors is important: distance and angles. However, distances and angles can
be compared only within each mode (actors or events) because the distances
are identified within each mode separately, are normalized, and then are
superimposed on each other. Thus, the researcher should interpret the images
by comparing actors with actors and events th events and should treat the
positioning of persons and events relative to one another as ballpark estima￾tions. Distance from the origin reflects greater distinctiveness. In a way, the
distance from the origin reveals how much of an ideal type or identifiable
referent point the nodes are in this space. Flora, Olivia, and Event 11 would
262 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbe considered the most distinctive actors and event in the space depicted in
Figure 11.5 and ideal-typical of the lower right quadrant. Next, the researcher
can also compare nodes by their angle to one another through the origin. For
example, when comparing Flora and Eleanor, one sees an obtuse angle,
suggesting that they greatly differ on these dimensions. Parsing the actors in
this way is revealing because it allows us to see on the left side of the plot that
Eleanor, Frances, Brenda, and Charlotte are all similar and that Charlotte is
FIGURE 11.5 Correspondence analysis of southern women and club events
Affiliations and Dualities 263
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe most extreme and distinctive in her associations of this type. The
R tutorial for Chapter 12 will offer a concrete description of CA and how
to interpret those results.
11.5.2 Niches
Another spatial approach to duality draws on the concept of the niche from
ecology, the branch of biology that deals with systems of organisms. In
ecological systems, resource niches are physical–temporal spaces that con￾tain key sources of potential food in plants, animals, and minerals. From an
evolutionary perspective, the niche selects animals with certain adaptations
and thus gives rise to different species. This process (i.e., speciation) creates
ecologies in which within-species competition is much greater than
between-species competition, which is largely stable until broader changes
alter the underlying niche structure. Thus, species and niche have an inher￾ent duality.
Although a general ecological approach has long informed sociology
(Hawley 1950), it was only when sociologists sought to understand the
organizational dynamics of markets and industries that sociologists began
to use the specific metaphor of species and speciation in what came to be
known as organizational ecology (Hannan & Freeman 1977). For organiza￾tional ecologists, different organizational forms – broadly recognized and
accepted types of organizations in a given industry – arise because they are
selected by resource niches (see Popielarz & Neal 2007). For example, fast￾food and fine-dining restaurants exist in the same industry, but they rarely
compete with each other for customers (at a given meal). Or, take the market
structure of American universities, whose two primary organizational
forms – research universities and liberal arts colleges – have evolved over
time to occupy very different niches in terms of the key resources they use to
obtain legitimacy and a constituency. Such differences are reflected in differ￾ent mission statements, different types of students, and different sources of
funding. Largely nonoverlapping constituencies of people are the niches for
different types of organizational forms because people contain the material
and symbolic resources that are the basis of organizational survival. The
goal of arraying organizations or forms in such spaces is ultimately to
understand generic dynamics of competition – that is, when and how new
forms emerge, as well as the implications for the survival of groups, organ￾izations, and forms.
McPherson (1981) and colleagues built on this ecological approach by
extending it to help explain the dynamics of a wide variety of social forms
(i.e., ways of associating), from religious denominations and other voluntary
groups to genres of music and other types of culture (Mark 1998). This work
also operationalized the niche concept and connected it with theories of social
networks and social structure by conceptualizing and measuring social space.
264 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressMcPherson referred to this type of social space as “Blau space” in honor of the
pioneering work of Peter Blau. For Blau (1977), fundamental dimensions of
social structure shape how people come into contact with one another, as well
as their likelihood of forming ties and influencing one another. This approach is
also clearly built on a duality in that it sees social structure through the lens of
actors and groups co-constituting one another.
From the Blau space perspective, people can be considered resources for a
wide variety of more or less institutionalized ways of relating: people lend
their time, energy, and material resources in support of everything from
churches to sports franchises. For example, according to Mark (1998), music
genres occupy sociodemographic niches because music spreads through
homophily and influence that is structured by individuals’ positions in a
larger social space. Thus, the social structure has very important implica￾tions for how various types of associations emerge and spread. To the extent
that the dimensions of social structure are strongly correlated with one
another – for example, to the extent that it is possible to know someone’s
race by knowing their class, and vice versa – such consolidated social
structures have problematic implications for social cohesion and can more
readily give rise to conflict.
The methodological technique for constructing Blau space ecologies of
affiliations is straightforward. First, the researcher determines the dimensions
of the social structure that are likely to be most salient for the partitioning of
resources. As the Blau space concept would suggest, these dimensions will
most likely include the fundamentally salient social dimensions that shape
who comes into contact with whom and therefore the groups that are most
likely, in the aggregate, to form more ties among their categorical
memberships. After determining these dimensions, the researcher arrays indi￾viduals in this multidimensional space such that they occupy points and form
“clouds” in a latent n-dimensional space. Finally, the researcher carves out
social forms, each of which occupies a certain niche base in this multidimen￾sional arraying of individuals in social space. Panel (a) of Figure 11.6, based
on McPherson’s (1983) classic statement, shows niche overlaps in two dimen￾sions. Panel (b) shows how these overlaps can be presented as a social
network. In this case, Organizational Form C draws on a large niche base in
the center of the distribution, whereas the other forms have more specialized
niches. The network is asymmetric, reflecting that the same amount of over￾lapping area in Blau space constitutes more of one form’s niche base than the
other. For example, Organizational Form C’s large base renders areas of
overlap with B and D less consequential regarding competition for resources
than vice versa, just as small vendors compete more with Amazon.com than
the inverse.
In moving beyond two dimensions, the niche base for each social entity
creates what is sometimes referred to as a hypercube (an n-dimensional ana￾logue of a square in two-dimensional space extended to a multidimensional
Affiliations and Dualities 265
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Pressspace) for each organization or form. Thus, the niche can no longer be visual￾ized beyond three dimensions, and the niche is a theoretical construct.
Nonetheless, properties of niches and their overlap can still be computed.
This niche base can be calculated by using measures of dispersion, with the
convention being 1.5 times the standard deviation of the distribution of actors
on each dimension of the space. Once each niche base is determined, the
researcher can examine the extent to which social entities overlap (or not) with
one another in an n-dimensional social space. To the extent that a social entity
shares some proportion of its overall niche base with another social entity, these
entities can be thought to be in direct competition with each other over that
region of the social space.
From such overlaps, it is possible to reduce the structure of competition in a
social space to a network in which valued and directed ties indicate that one
organization or form competes with another. These ties may be asymmetric
because one organization or form may have a very large niche base that forces
the others to compete with it. For example, as we already alluded to in
discussing Figure 11.6, every retailer in America now competes with the online
giant Amazon, but Amazon does not directly compete with these local shops
and instead competes with only a few others in their generalist niche, such as
Walmart. The dynamics of such resource competition lead to testable predic￾tions and common patterns in the births and deaths of organizations and forms
and in the partitioning of resources.
A
B
D
C
E
Age
Years of Education
D
C
A
B
E
(a) (b)
FIGURE 11.6 Five organizational forms in a two-dimensional Blau space, depicted as
overlapping niches (a) and a network (b)
266 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressNiches are dual structures in which the researcher foregrounds the context
or category while relegating actors or actor characteristics to the dimensions of
a competitive resource space. The approach can also be extended to more
symbolic social spaces: rather than positioning actors in Blau space, the
researcher may consider other dimensions as forming the environment in which
similar dynamics unfold. For example, Mohr and Guerra-Pearson (2010)
examined the evolution of forms of charities in the Progressive Era as driven
by competition over more institutional niches in which organizations were
defining social problems and their solutions (see also Rawlings & Bourgeois
2004).
11.6 
This chapter has examined why affiliation data are both fascinating and
important to social network researchers. Data on affiliations are much easier
to obtain than one-mode network data. Affiliations can act as proxies for
interpersonal contact, especially when groups or events are small with reoccur￾ring foci. But affiliation data have strengths beyond acting as a substitute for
more fine-grained network data: affiliations can frequently show dualities in
social life. Numerous empirical phenomena are embedded in different levels or
aspects of social structure that are in some way mutually constitutive. In this
chapter, we outlined the sorts of questions that are typically connected with
seeing dualities and introduced strategies for addressing these questions.
Duality is an evolving framework for seeing self and society. For example,
Lee and Martin (2018) extended Breiger’s (1974) formulation of duality in
ways beyond the scope of this current chapter. We will also draw on the general
notion of affiliations and relational approaches to seeing various facets of social
structure in the next chapter, which attends to a burgeoning area of network
analysis: networks and culture.
  
Borgatti, Stephen P., and Martin G. Everett. 1997. “Network Analysis of 2-Mode
Data.” Social Networks, 19(3): 243–70. (Provides an overview of when and how
analyses must differ when respecting two-mode networks.)
Breiger, Ronald L. 1974. “The Duality of Persons and Groups.” Social Forces 53(2):
181–90. (The foundational work on linking bipartite networks to sociological theories
of duality.)
Feld, Scott L. 1981. “The Focused Organization of Social Ties.” American Journal of
Sociology 86(5): 1015–35. (A classic paper on how foci of activity establish oppor￾tunities for social network formation.)
Knoke, David, Mario Diani, James Hollway, and Dimitris Christopoulos. 2021.
Multimodal Political Networks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (A focused
exploration of using multimode networks – bipartite, tripartite, and so on – to help
understand political action across contexts.)
Affiliations and Dualities 267
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressMizruchi, Mark S. 1992. The Structure of Corporate Political Action: Interfirm
Relations and Their Consequences. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
(Corporate interlocks represent a key application of the duality principle and allow
one to see aspects of the economy and political structure that are usually hidden from
view.)
Simmel, Georg. 2010 [1908]. Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliations. New York:
Simon & Schuster. (Describes how overlapping social circles can be theorized and
studied and how they organize in society.)
268 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press12
Networks and Culture
Is culture the glue that holds the social structures of society together? Or are
there “culture wars” that fundamentally divide us? Clearly, the answer is
somewhere in the middle, and trying to understand precisely how culture and
social structure interrelate to unite or divide remains a core sociological
endeavor. Social network analysis alone cannot resolve such an enormous
puzzle, but its methods provide important tools for formalizing a jointly struc￾tural and cultural approach to studying society. In this chapter, we conclude
Part II on seeing structure by outlining efforts to see dualities in the connections
between structure and culture – that is, to study how enduring patterns of
interaction interrelate with shared understandings, tastes, meanings, and other
attitudinal measures. We also discuss the structural analysis of meanings them￾selves and the application of social network techniques to cultural phenomena.
12.1     
What is culture? Students of social science frequently ask this question but
seldom receive a precise answer. Given that entire subfields of anthropology,
psychology, and sociology are dedicated to pursuing an answer, maybe we
should not attempt one here. However, for our purposes in this chapter, we will
define culture most succinctly as shared understandings and practices (i.e.,
knowledge, beliefs, customs, and so on) that help individuals make sense of
their world. Cultural elements are largely symbolic (e.g., categories, classifica￾tions, identities) but are also frequently embodied in practices, spaces, and
objects. For example, a classroom is both a set of physical objects arranged in
a specific way and an understanding of these objects in terms of a ritualized
encounter centered on taken-for-granted notions about how to teach and learn.
A fish hook is both an object and a set of knowledge and practices for its
269
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Presscreation and use. Culture supports our actions and helps us assign meaning to
others’ actions.
Why should social network scholars care about culture? Clearly, it is pos￾sible to have a cogent social network analysis that is largely distinct from the
study of culture, as was the case for most of the burgeoning period of network
analysis from the 1970s to the 1990s. During that formative era, network
scholars focused their efforts almost exclusively on the manifest aspects of
social structure in interactions and on patterns of relating among individuals,
organizations, nations, and so on. Nodes were taken for granted as largely
distinct social entities engaged in more or less conscious and enduring inter￾actions and exchanges. Meanings and schemas were at best “soft” and epiphe￾nomenal to such “hard” social-structural factors.
However, beginning in the 1990s, sociology underwent a shift – a cultural
turn – in which scholars across the discipline began to focus more on shared
meanings and their implications for various social outcomes (see Mohr &
Rawlings 2012). Social network scholars began to view social life in a way that
did not favor structure as somehow more real than culture or use social
structure as the independent variable in models in which culture was an
outcome (Emirbayer 1997). Instead, researchers began to extend the dualities
of various levels of social structure, discussed in the previous chapter, to
dualities involving structure, action, and meanings (Sewell 1992). They began
to view network ties largely as shared stories told about one another in a world
divided into various institutional domains organizing social structure and
action (Friedland & Alford 1991; White 1992). These intellectual shifts helped
make the case for a social network analysis in which social and cultural
contexts together afford some actions and preclude others (Emirbayer &
Mische 1998). Today, most social network scholars see networks as cultural
and see culture as networked (Pachucki & Breiger 2010).
Because of this shift, social network analysis today increasingly draws from
and contributes to the study of shared meanings at various levels of analysis,
from face-to-face interactions to institutions. As anthropologists have long
shown, cultural practices are embedded in social structures, and cultural mean￾ings have their own internal structural forms as relational systems that uphold
social systems and orient action (Bateson 1936; Geertz 1973). Culture is far too
vast and complex to exist comprehensively in any individual’s head and is
instead stored in collectively understood objects and held in networked groups,
organizations, and institutions (Martin 2010; Swidler 2013). Culture can be
thought of as coming in various bits (i.e., transmittable elements) or memes that
flow in more or less contagion-like ways through populations that are more or
less susceptible to cultural “infection” (Boyd & Richerson 1988; Sperber
1985). Thus, many cultural elements are amenable to analysis using generic
dynamics of network diffusion, and the specific complications of social diffu￾sion that we cover in detail in Chapter 14 and social influence that we cover in
detail in Chapter 15. Although a complete discussion of the now myriad
270 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressapproaches interrelating networks and culture is beyond the scope of this book
(see McLean 2016), in what follows, we discuss two broadly defined
approaches to sociocultural network analysis, which combines the analysis of
structure and culture. The first concerns extending the duality approach
covered in the previous chapter to structure and culture through various studies
of the cultural spaces in which groups cluster and are more or less integrated or
fragmented. The second takes on culture more directly by examining cultural
structures by applying social network methods directly to cultural phenomena,
especially large textual corpora from the Internet and social media.
12.2  
One way of uniting structure and culture through a relational lens is to use
network methods to derive cultural spaces – spaces in which individuals and
groups are positioned – and to begin to see sociocultural terrains as resulting
from both unifying and divisive social forces. A focus on cultural spaces has
been especially important in two research domains: (1) work on cohesion and
clustering in intellectual communities, and (2) work on conflict and positions in
cultural fields.
12.2.1 Cohesion and Clustering in Intellectual Communities
Some approaches to cultural spaces tend to focus on explorations of cultural
cohesion and clustering. Here, the overall view of cohesion discussed in
Chapter 8 is applied in a sociocultural framework. Cultural cohesion exists
when the underlying structure of social interactions overlaps with and helps
support a set of ideas, beliefs, and worldviews and when these shared cultural
elements in turn support and facilitate networks of interaction and relations. As
Durkheim long ago demonstrated, such cohesion is not guaranteed, especially
as societies become more complexly differentiated with numerous roles, hier￾archies, and divisions of labor. Instead, advanced industrial societies are likely
held together with areas of sociocultural density linked through both narrower
channels of interaction (e.g., shared interests in niche culture) and widely held
but loosely bonding cultural elements (e.g., popular culture, such as TV and
sports).
Researchers in various sociological subfields – most prominently, in the
sociologies of knowledge (Crane 1972; Fuchs 1993), religion (Wuthnow
1993), and culture (DiMaggio 1987) – have elaborated this general view of a
duality of social structure and culture, often showing overlaps between com￾munities and ideas, beliefs, tastes, and so on. Whereas Breiger’s (1974) classic
approach to duality, discussed in the previous chapter, analyzes data sets in
which both sets of nodes are types of social actors (i.e., persons and groups), the
duality of structure and culture examines affiliations among social actors and
cultural elements, such as tastes, attitudes, beliefs, ideas, concepts, and
Networks and Culture 271
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Presspractices. The key idea is that commonalities among social actors can be
defined through their shared orientations toward cultural elements; conversely,
socially similar cultural elements can be defined through their joint presence
among the same sets of social actors. This type of duality approach fits nicely
with the core precepts of homophily, especially the notion of value homophily:
individuals who share an underlying set of cultural characteristics are more
likely to be attracted to one another and form social ties. The value homophily
concept suggests that important social divisions are visible through the lens of
where groups cluster in cultural spaces, a process that can also reveal those
elements of culture that are doing the uniting and dividing. Thus, as cultural
sociology has long detailed, group boundaries and cultural boundaries are
frequently co-constitutive (e.g., Lamont & Fournier 1992; Lamont & Molnár
2002).
One substantively and theoretically important window into the duality of
structure and culture is the analysis of science via citation and co-citation
networks – networks in which scientific publications are more or less linked
through citing the same previously published work and (on the other side of the
duality) published work is more or less linked through having been cited
together in the same publications or by the same people. Using such citation
data, the researcher can create an article-to-article network in which articles are
linked by the number of citations they share in common and a citation-to￾citation network in which citations are linked by the number of articles in
which they are co-cited. Using techniques already outlined in the previous
chapter, the researcher can then use these one-mode projections to see the
underlying “invisible colleges” that organize knowledge production (Crane
1972).
For example, Figure 12.1 provides a view of the intellectual landscape of the
social sciences (Moody & Light 2006). Here, the underlying data are a co￾citation network among academic journal articles. A link is created between
two journals by the number of articles citing work published in both journals.
From this network, it is possible to look at the position of disciplines in terms of
the production of knowledge. Rather than showing individual journals as
nodes, the authors show regions of greater and lesser density. The original
two-mode journal-citation network is transformed into a one-mode journal￾journal co-citation network, and then disciplines are mapped in this landscape
by looking to the disciplinary designations of the journals in which their articles
are published.
From a connectionist account, such landscapes are important because they
reveal something about how important resources flow (or do not flow) in a
population. In the sociology of science, the key resources are knowledge and
intellectual influence. As discussed in Chapter 8, Durkheim was concerned that
the sciences could fall into a state of fragmentation as disciplinary forces drew
people further into their own intellectual tribes and clans. Yet, he also saw that
knowledge itself and researchers’ need for one another would lead different
272 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdisciplines to meet around empirical topics of joint interest (e.g., Friedkin
1998). From a positional standpoint, some disciplines might play different roles
in large-scale knowledge production. Sociology, for example, appears to be
more of an integrator of fields: it is at the center of the knowledge space,
indicating that sociologists import knowledge from and export knowledge to
many cognate disciplines. Internally, however, sociology is not extremely cohe￾sive. As depicted in the figure, sociology can be seen as only a small mound
compared with the high peaks of economics and law. Sociology’s relatively
small peak suggests that the field of sociology is comparatively less internally
focused and may necessarily sacrifice a highly shared paradigm for its capacity
to integrate knowledge across other fields. In the duality of knowledge and
discipline, sociology holds a structural position that is distinct and perhaps
uniquely important as a knowledge integrator – and we hope this book is a
testament in this regard!
Although citations are an important empirical site, we suspect that multiple
dualities exist in academic production, each of which would produce different
insights. For example, although citations highlight how scholars draw on
research from outside disciplines, citations do not really show how much
scholars share departments, conferences, coauthorships, and other events with
the individuals they may cite. If one is interested in how a university’s intellec￾tual production, say, depends on the shared production of new scholars, then
the joint dissertation committee networks of faculty would be informative. (In
the tutorial for this chapter, we will walk through an example using dissertation
topics and fields of study.) The landscape of academic knowledge production
PolSci
Econ
Law
Lib
Soc
Mngmnt Psych
D
FIGURE 12.1 Journal co-citation network in the social sciences (Moody & Light 2006)
Networks and Culture 273
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmay be multilayered such that interactions and affiliations constitute more
surface levels than what is depicted in Figure 12.1, whereas the co-citations in
the figure reveal something of a deeper processing of knowledge. Thus, the
duality of conferences and researchers might be much more of a small-world
structure, compared with the more ramifying ridge structure revealed in cit￾ations. In short, academic research communities are a rich source for examining
the duality of structure (collaborations, interactions, affiliations, and so on) and
culture (knowledge creation and diffusion).
Other arenas of culture are also ripe for examining such dualities. One can,
for example, think about genres of music, television, or fiction as spaces in
which individuals and groups position themselves. The researcher might pursue
a purely inductive approach to exploring such cultural spaces, examining how
genres and groups co-occupy positions in such spaces. One might also engage
more directly in theories of culture and consumption using a more confirmatory
approach, testing any number of predictions that could be made based on
claims about the role that culture plays in maintaining social boundaries, such
as race, class, and gender (e.g., Erickson 1996). The relational tools we discuss
in this chapter are therefore flexible in arraying social actors in the same spaces
alongside cultural forms. Such modeling may be done in the service of trying to
induce areas of more or less cultural cohesion, or, as we discuss next, it may be
done in the pursuit of seeing broader struggles and conflicts that are expressed
through symbolic elements.
12.2.2 Conflict and Positions in Cultural Fields
One of the most important dimensions of social structure is class – that is, the
unequal distribution of material resources and opportunities for pursuing these
resources. The origins of much contemporary thinking on the duality of class and
culture emerged via the work of Pierre Bourdieu, a French sociologist who was
famously somewhat hostile toward social network approaches. Bourdieu pre￾ferred and helped to popularize correspondence analysis, which we covered in
the previous chapter, as the means for revealing the joint workings of structural
and cultural forces. Nonetheless, as de Nooy (2003: 315) outlined, “there are no
fundamental technical differences between correspondence analysis and social
network analysis.” Bourdieu’s main objections to network approaches were
theoretical and formed largely in opposition to the interactional focus of social
networks, which lacked a larger theory and narrative in which class-based origins
simultaneously shape structure and culture. Bourdieu believed that rather than
focus on the interactions and organizational structures, researchers should probe
for deeper “structuring structures,” such as the habitual ways of perceiving and
valuing objects (i.e., habitus) that form through early socialization and are then
used in various contests over symbolic and material resources (in various fields,
which we will soon discuss in greater detail).
274 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressSocial network analysis has clearly moved beyond most of the sources of
Bourdieu’s critique. As we have noted throughout this book, social network
approaches today encompass a broad range of theories that examine structure
at various levels and degrees of abstraction, often seeking to identify deep
structures as Bourdieu did. Bourdieu’s theory is largely in the conflict tradition
of stratification researchers. In our depiction of social structure in Figure 2.3, his
theory is largely focused on the large-scale opportunity structures and cultural
meanings that simultaneously shape social structure at various levels (i.e., the
large gray arrows that act from the outside on social structures). In short, social
life is a struggle over forms of capital, primarily in its economic, cultural, and
social forms. Access to these finite material and symbolic resources is fundamen￾tally shaped by social-structural opportunities, which are in turn fundamentally
shaped by the ongoing struggle for these resources (i.e., structuration).
Again, consider the example of friendship formation in a high school. The
primary environment creating such social structures is not only the physical
layout of the high school but also the social landscape. As we discussed in the
previous chapter, the structure of courses and extracurricular activities in the
school are foci shaping social ties. In fact, the physical–temporal structure of the
high school (when and where classes are held) commonly reflects these foci￾generating categories, leading the artsy kids to hang out by the theater and the
sporty kids to hang out close to the gym. Social life in high school is at once
determined by social relations and the pursuit of fungible forms of capital (e.g.,
in starring roles in performances or starting lineups in sports). Of course,
change is always possible: the kids, for example, could potentially organize a
social movement of sorts to restructure the high school (see Turner 2012).
However, because the sociocultural organization of high schools is tied up with
fairly stable features of the institution (e.g., the differentiation of activities and
spaces), the dominant tendency is toward reproducing the structure. Indeed,
many years after your graduation, you may return to your high school for a
reunion or to enroll your children and find that not much has changed – except
perhaps that some of your friends have become the teachers!
One way of characterizing struggles in cultural spaces is through the concept
of the field. Like several other spatial metaphors, the field concept is built on a
metaphor of competition. Here, the analogy is with sport: social actors are like
athletes who have developed competitive skills (often having been groomed to do
so) in order to compete in specific arenas, over specific goods, and with certain
underlying institutional structures. The field concept is inherently cultural. It sees
competition as institutionally governed, with formal and informal rules, norms,
and taken-for-granted cognitive understandings shaping how individuals and
corporate social actors behave. Moreover, these institutional forces often make
unfair and socially rigged games seem rational and meritocratic. Several distinct
approaches to fields exist (for reviews, see Fligstein & McAdam 2012; Martin
2003). Yet, all field approaches share the basic view that the social space is best
characterized as an ongoing competition over material and symbolic resources
Networks and Culture 275
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressand that this ongoing struggle generates and sustains a set of positions in which
social actors are like players trying to avoid being pushed back or trying to get
ahead by accumulating and deploying tools that are also part of the struggle.
These forms of capital are everything from money, to social ties, to ways of
talking that help maintain or advance one’s position in the game.
Bourdieu’s field theory is the most famous, most expansive, and most challen￾ging to distill. Although we can hardly do justice to the richness and, in some
ways, the vagueness of this theoretical approach in this volume, we believe it is
important to discuss at least briefly its contributions to network approaches to
social space. Despite some conceptual differences with earlier network
approaches, Bourdieu’s approach is built on fundamentally the same logic and
methodology used in examining dualities, discussed in detail in the previous
chapter. His preferred methodology – an extension of correspondence analysis,
appropriately called multiple correspondence analysis – attempts to summarize
the relations among three or more categorical variables. This approach moves
beyond exploring a single duality in a data set to attempt to reveal an entire
system of correspondences structuring a social space. Survey data are used to
map the relationships among individual characteristics in a low-dimensional
space – in Bourdieu’s case, almost always two dimensions. Most famously,
Bourdieu (1984) mapped the correspondences among tastes for different cultural
objects: artists and artistic works, types of cuisines, and so on. He demonstrated
how the relations among these tastes could be arrayed in a two-dimensional
social space defined by individuals’ economic capital and cultural capital.
For Bourdieu, fields overlap and feed into one another in largely deterministic
ways that reproduce social structures. The competition for more elite and exclu￾sive markers of cultural capital leads parents to “concertedly cultivate” (Laureau
2011) their children from an early age in socializing them into a more elite
habitus: a privileged disposition that is transposable across various fields in ways
that advantage them in the combat of social life. In turn, the field of early
socialization translates into advantages in the field of schooling for grades, test
scores, and other putatively objective performance measures, which then trans￾late into future successes, such as placement at elite universities, landing elite jobs,
and securing promotions. The point from a social network standpoint is that for
a number of structural processes, from how individuals form friendships and
romantic bonds (Streib 2015) to how individuals get hired at elite firms (Rivera
2016), the fields in which these processes unfold are important but latent envir￾onments. Regardless of whether Bordieu’s methodology is followed, his work
demonstrates the importance of considering the institutional factors that struc￾ture the social space in which interactions and relations unfold.
12.3   
How does the researcher begin to see cultural spaces and reasonably infer large￾scale forces at work in how these spaces are formed and change? In answering
276 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthis question, we cover several useful techniques. We illustrate these techniques
using data from the 1993 General Social Survey (GSS) – specifically, data from
its culture module, which asked a random sample of Americans about their
cultural tastes and background characteristics. Using the data on musical tastes,
we show that many of these techniques reveal similar patterns, albeit through
different avenues that often highlight somewhat different aspects of the data. As
we have consistently discussed, the choice of method should be guided by both
practical and theoretical considerations, and using multiple methods will often
help to yield a consistent picture.
12.3.1 Correspondence Analysis
In the previous chapter, we discussed the use of correspondence analysis (CA)
to reveal the duality of persons and groups, using the southern women’s data as
an example. We can now move on to show that CA is a flexible technique that
can also be used to uncover cultural spaces. Rather than looking at
correspondences among social actors, CA can be used to explore patterns
among categories, classifications, ideas, tastes, and so on, as these combine
(i.e., correspond with one another). Frequently, CA is used with survey data on
individuals, but the technique is also amenable to corporate actors. CA can
even be used with archival data on organizations. For example, Rawlings and
Bourgeois (2004) used multiple correspondence analysis to examine archival
data on the emergence of academic niches within a field of higher education.
They looked at how types of credentials corresponded with organizational
forms (types of schools) offering those credentials and thereby explored the
competition for prestige that structures the field.
For another example, consider the GSS data on tastes in music. A simple CA
might examine how tastes in music correspond with one’s undergraduate major
in college. For someone interested in examining cultural cohesion, a CA might
reveal what types of tastes and majors co-occupy the center of a cultural space,
thus indicating which tastes and majors are the least socially divided and which
are more peripheral and form more distinct cultural niches. From a connection￾ist standpoint, musical tastes are an important way that college students bond –
that is, cultural tastes help in forming ties, but they are also transferred through
those ties (Lewis, Gonzalez, & Kaufman 2012; Lizardo 2006). From a
Bourdieusian perspective, tastes in music and academic majors are both forms
of cultural capital (musical tastes are a form of objectified cultural capital, and
academic majors are a form of institutionalized cultural capital). It is therefore
plausible that these two levels of cultural categories (majors and musical tastes)
will correspond because if the field theory as we have outlined it is correct, the
same class-based differences that help to inculcate tastes in childhood also
shape academic paths.
While tastes in different types of music are likely revealing of social-structural
positions, distastes in music may also be important in determining the cultural
Networks and Culture 277
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressspace through cohesion and conflict. Figure 12.2 shows the results of two CAs.
Panel (a) shows how college major corresponds with tastes for music genres.
Dimension 1 carries the most explanatory weight in the opposition between
contemporary rock and business majors on one end and opera and English
majors on the other. Dimension 2 shows an opposition between foreign language
majors and new age music versus economics majors and country music.
Similarly, panel (b) considers distastes in music genres across college majors.
English and fine arts majors occupy a position with a shared opposition toward
contemporary rock and country music, whereas a dislike of heavy metal, new
age, and rap tends to bring together a number of social science majors. The figure
thus demonstrates that a simple set of correspondences can reveal something
about how social structure interacts with culture.
Correspondences show a relational cultural space, where dimensions have
no inherent meaning, and the interpretation of the space is derived from the
relationships among the categories vis-à-vis one another. Other approaches try
to derive cultural spaces in which the dimensions can be interpreted as a
combination of latent variables.
12.3.2 Scaling Approaches
Scaling approaches are used in a variety of disciplines to reduce the complexity
of multidimensional data to the most important dimension or a few of the most
important ones. Scaling offers numerous ways to operationalize the geographic
metaphor of “social space” and to position actors and cultural elements within
the same space. In many regards, this is similar to survey researchers’ develop￾ment of scales for a number of social psychological constructs. For example,
some questionnaires ask respondents twenty-one related questions about symp￾toms and feelings of depression to assess a latent level of depression on a single
scale. Although the construction and validation of such scales is a discipline in
its own right, social network researchers use such techniques in a somewhat
distinct way. Rather than trying to characterize individuals as having some
latent trait that can be better detected with a battery of questions, network
researchers use these techniques to position actors along a reduced number of
dimensions, which in combination define a tractable social space.
Scaling approaches can be performed with different types of data with
different research goals in mind. First, the researcher can array actors based
on their proximities in terms of attributes: individuals with the same back￾ground characteristics are placed closer. Here, the results position actors in
spaces that have substantive interpretations, and the social space is predeter￾mined by those variables of interest. Second, the researcher can perform scaling
on affiliation data (e.g., co-memberships), in which case the space becomes a
more relational one: the proximity of two actors depends on the extent to
which they belong to a similar set of groups. Finally, researchers can derive
fully relational spaces by scaling actors’ relations – that is, the ties among
278 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressFIGURE 12.2 (a and b) Correspondence analyses of tastes in music and undergraduate
major (1993 GSS)
Networks and Culture 279
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressactors. In this case, the input for the scaling procedure is usually the adjacency
or geodesic distance matrix. The derived social space is therefore based solely
on the structure of relations, and actors are positioned closer to the extent that
they have ties to similar alters.
We outline some of these approaches here. Such scaling procedures are
frequently used to explore sociocultural landscapes. At their simplest, scaling
approaches provide coordinates for positioning nodes in two- or three￾dimensional spaces where the dimensions are interpretable or where they
constitute the background for purely relational distances among actors and/or
cultural elements. However, keep in mind that numerous extensions and elab￾orations of these approaches exist for data with mixed levels of analysis and
more specialized purposes.
12.3.3 Factor Analysis
The most common scaling technique is called factor analysis because it seeks to
reduce a larger number of n variables to a set of k factors that more parsimoni￾ously explain the variance among observations in a data set. Here, the variables
are usually measured at an ordinal or higher level (i.e., they are not simply
categorical attributes, such as race). The factors derived from these variables
can be thought of in spatial terms. If each n variable in a data set is a dimension
and each observation is a point in that n-dimensional space, the goal of
factor analysis is to reduce the number of dimensions while preserving the
relative distances among the points. If, for example, the relative distances
between actors i, j, and k in a 21-dimension space based on their taste for
various forms of music, food, and leisure activities can be linearly reduced to
two dimensions with relatively little loss of information contained in their
original distances to one another, this would suggest that the twenty-one
dimensions are really a more complex rendering of distances in a latent two￾dimensional social space.
Once such a reduction has been performed, the researcher has a number of
options to further describe the resultant social structure. For example, if
Bourdieu is correct, by correlating each actor’s position on the two latent
factors with their education, exposure to the arts in childhood, income, and
so on, the researcher should be able to validate the proposed model of taste as
largely structured by a field of accumulated economic and cultural capital. Each
actor’s position in this space might even be used to predict relational outcomes,
such as friendships or marriages.
Factor analysis is also compatible with the construction and visualization of
Blau spaces, described in the previous chapter. When the dimensions of the
social space are fundamental sociodemographic properties of individuals, the
researcher may be able to reduce them to fewer underlying dimensions. Indeed,
this is precisely what Blau had in mind when considering that some social
structures are more consolidated than others. In a consolidated social structure,
280 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe manifest salient dimensions of social actors are strongly correlated with one
another. For example, skin tone as a social marker is strongly correlated with
income, which is strongly correlated with level of education, and so on. In this
case, a factor analysis would reveal the consolidation of sociodemographic
characteristics by reducing many manifest characteristics to a few underlying
factors with little loss of information. Once again, the dimensions of the space
are meaningful and interpretable as recipe-like combinations of variables, often
called factor loadings, which indicate how strongly each variable contributes to
a given dimension (e.g., two parts race to one-part income to one-part educa￾tion). The researcher may choose to allow these dimensions to be correlated
with one another or may choose to rotate the dimensions in order to make them
more distinct (i.e., orthogonal). The advantage of the latter is that dimensions
are often more interpretable. However, depending on one’s theory, forcing
dimensions to be distinct may not be appropriate.
Again, consider the musical taste data from the GSS. Results from factor
analysis on the Likert scale–assessed musical likes and dislikes show that a
three-factor solution explains 99 percent of the variance in tastes. Table 12.1
shows the factor loadings for the three factors. The first factor, which explains
the most variance in tastes, is simply a tendency to be open to many music
genres in what has been identified as a type of cultural omnivorousness
(Peterson & Kern 1996). The second factor can be interpreted as a taste for
more sonically forceful genres. The third dimension is clearly focused on two
genres that are characteristic of white and rural America. Therefore, the cul￾tural space of musical tastes in 1993 America appears to be perhaps a fairly
simple three-dimensional space in which individuals occupied positions.
Figure 12.3 arrays respondents in the GSS in the three-dimensional music
space derived from the factor analysis, showing the centroids for individuals by
college major. We also include a centroid for not having a college degree. Here,
individuals without a college degree are clearly the most set apart in terms of
their musical tastes, scoring low on both the omnivore and sonic dimensions
but high on the rural genres dimension. In contrast, English majors score very
low on the rural and sonic dimensions but high on the omnivore dimension – a
position they largely share in common with fine arts majors, who also have a
taste for the more sonically charged music genres. Again, this figure details a
cultural space in which college majors are differentiated from one another.
However, in this case, the dimensions are reduced to interpretable combin￾ations of categories.
Such an analysis could easily be combined with a more straightforward
study of value homophily in how individuals are likely to form ties, or perhaps
with a study of how such spaces evolve over time as individuals form ties and
influence one another. Clearly, theories will differ with respect to the precise
implications of such induced spaces and the relative positions of actors, objects,
categories, and so on within these spaces.
Networks and Culture 281
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press 12.1 Factor analysis of music tastes (1993 GSS)
Variable Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3
bigband 0.53
blugrass 0.49
country 0.53
Blues 0.54
musicals 0.59
Classicl 0.63
Folk 0.50
Gospel
Jazz 0.57
Latin 0.62
moodeasy 0.42
Newage 0.45
Opera 0.59
Rap 0.44
Reggae 0.51 0.46
conrock 0.56
Oldies 0.41
hvymetal 0.49
FIGURE 12.3 Three-dimensional factor analysis of music tastes with undergraduate
major centroids
282 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press12.3.4 Multidimensional Scaling
Factor analysis works best when the researcher has a strong theory about which
dimensions of a social space are likely to be most important in shaping relations
and flows of influence and when the researcher can interpret the dimensions is
an important research goal. As with correspondence analysis, the related
method of multidimensional scaling (MDS) is most useful when the researcher
is interested in generating a purely relational social space – that is, when the
goal is more inductive and the researcher hopes to discover some underlying
structuring of actors. Rather than beginning with interpretable dimensions of
social space in which actors are relatively proximate or distant from one
another (e.g., in race, class, and gender), the researcher begins with the rela￾tional distances among actors in a space. These relational distances may be
based on attributes, affiliations, or an adjacency matrix. In practice, MDS is
most frequently used on adjacency matrices, and the goal is to array actors
within a purely relational space determined by network relations themselves.
The key to such a relational approach is the transformation of a network
data set of relations (adjacencies or affiliations) into a pairwise distance matrix
among all of its nodes. Depending on the level of measurement of ties (i.e.,
whether the ties are binary or valued), various dyadic distance measures can be
employed. For example, the Jaccard measure is appropriate for binary data,
and Euclidean distance is commonly used with valued data. As discussed in
Chapter 10 regarding measuring structural equivalence (Section 10.4.2.1),
these distance measures compare each ordered ij dyad in the data set in terms
of their profiles of ties, with dyads having identical profiles of ties to other
actors being maximally proximate. These are, therefore, relational distances:
they have no inherent meaning outside the context of the network structure
itself. The researcher can then provide an interpretation of such distances using
individual-level attributes. For example, if the social space of relations is being
structured by broader social-structural factors contained in sociodemographic
differences, one would expect that dyads with different characteristics would be
farther apart than dyads with the same characteristics. Thus, consistent with
the previously discussed CATNET approach of White (see Chapter 8), the
relational approach to social space should hypothetically produce a rendering
of social structure that is very similar to what might have been produced using
an approach in which the dimensions of the social space were meaningful
sociodemographic characteristics of the nodes.
MDS reduces the complexity of the distance matrix to an m-dimensional
space in which each node is positioned via m coordinates. This is done through
one of several procedures, most commonly through what is called metric MDS,
which is the iterative placement of nodes in the space that minimizes a cost
function, in this case called stress. In general, the more dimensions, the less
stress in the resulting coordinates due to greater degrees of freedom in the
placement of nodes. The researcher will fit a number of models with higher
Networks and Culture 283
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressand lower values of m to the data and gauge a relative degree of fit with the
stress statistic: the more stress, the less well-fitting the spatial rendering of the
data. The choice of the number of m dimensions is largely based on inspecting
various solutions and choosing the most parsimonious one that explains the
most variance. As we showed in Chapter 5, MDS is often used with a two￾dimensional solution to provide a quick layout for nodes in network
visualization. Here, MDS can serve a purpose similar to that of other scaling
techniques, but it produces a somewhat different cultural space.
Figure 12.4 shows the results from an MDS approach to analyzing the
musical tastes data. Two music genres are closer in this space to the extent that
individuals tend to have similar tastes in those genres. Of course, trying to
reduce a complex set of dyadic distances within a two-dimensional plane is
bound to produce some error. However, MDS can be a relatively useful
visualization tool that can quickly find reasonable relational layouts offering
some insight into the data structure. Here, we have layered onto the MDS plot
clusters derived from a k-means routine and a three-cluster solution. Although
this approach produces somewhat different results than the other techniques,
similarities are also evident: Dimension 1 appears to be shaped by the sonic
force of the music (ranging from easy listening and gospel to rap and heavy
metal), whereas Dimension 2 appears to be shaped by an opposition between
more traditional highbrow genres (opera and classical) and more popular
genres (contemporary rock and oldies).
We have presented several ways to begin seeing dualities in structure and
culture to give you a feel for how to better formalize this core endeavor in social
science. In the next section, we will leave behind the social structure part of this
duality to focus more intently on culture itself as having its own structures and
internal organization.
FIGURE 12.4 Two-dimensional MDS of music tastes (1993 GSS)
284 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press12.4  
A second network-informed approach to culture examines elements within or
between individuals or cultural objects themselves – from attitudes and beliefs
to musical genres and texts – as forming relational structures that are, in a
sense, meaning structures amenable to investigation using network techniques
(Mohr 1998; Mohr et al. 2020). Such work often falls under the heading of
formal analysis of culture because it seeks to draw on formal mathematical
models to explore what many qualitative researchers seek to discover through
interviews, ethnographic observations, and thick description pioneered by
anthropologists to interpret everyday cultural practices (Geertz 1973). In the
formal approach, it is the underlying set of relations within and between
cultural phenomena that becomes the network-like object of analysis.
Network techniques are used to reveal the structure of culture itself and
perhaps interrelate such formal properties with social structures.
12.4.1 Meaning Structures
The question of meaning may seem more appropriate for philosophers than for
network researchers, but it is also of great interest to social scientists as they
seek to better understand human motivation and behavior. Structural and
symbolic anthropologists have long argued that society and its institutions
can be “read” as the layers of meanings in a novel might be unpacked.
Clifford Geertz’s famous interpretation of the Balinese cockfight used thick
description to uncover how a common practice had deeper meanings and
implications that derive from its dramatization and enactment of social struc￾ture (i.e., kinship, village, gender, and so on). Another well-known example,
discussed in Chapter 2, is Bourdieu’s (1973) reading of a typical Kabyle house
as a “structuring structure” built on homologies – that is, a structure in which
relations at one level reappear at another level. In the Kabyle house, Bourdieu
saw oppositions in social-structural relations (especially gender) reappear in
oppositions in nature and cosmology, mapping the correspondences of symbol
systems at different levels that are mapped onto one another (male/female ≙
east/west ≙ dry/wet ≙ sun/moon). In both cases, a prototypical set of relations –
such as a typical cockfight or a typical Kabyle house – are abstracted, and their
meanings are revealed as shared social meanings (i.e., culture) that are embed￾ded in the layers of other symbols and categories in a system.
Methods developed to examine relations among types of social actors (e.g.,
individuals, organizations, nations) can be used to examine relations among
categories and symbols, as well as how these categories and symbols are
encoded and decoded by social actors. For example, a researcher can apply
network techniques to various cultural objects – defined as “vehicles of mean￾ing” communicated through symbols (Griswold 1987; Swidler 1986) – by
looking at their meaning structures. This may entail a structural analysis of
Networks and Culture 285
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Presshow symbolic elements interrelate in a variety of visual, acoustic, textual, and
even olfactory data (Mohr 1998; see Cerulo 2018). These network techniques
can thereby connect the social sciences with the kind of inductive approaches
more often associated with the humanities and the interpretation of texts (i.e.,
hermeneutics). Indeed, various formal methods have given rise to the field of the
digital humanities (e.g., Underwood 2019). Used in this fashion, network
methods become ways to see meaning structures and perhaps even see social
structures that are “stored” in cultural objects.
Since the aforementioned cultural turn in American sociology in the 1990s,
sociologists have become more attentive to the analysis of texts. Sociologists
familiar with social network methods began to see the potential of using formal
approaches to analyze data sets that had traditionally been seen as amenable to
qualitative methods or descriptive content analytic techniques that apply
survey-like instruments to documents (e.g., counting and coding terms). In
short, network methods and, in particular, duality became a way to conduct
relational content analysis. Rather than surveying texts for predetermined
categories, the relational approach looks to texts to induce relations among
elements, thereby providing a structural interpretation.
An early and influential effort was Mohr’s (1994) analysis of discourse roles
in a turn-of-the-century charity directory. Mohr used blockmodeling methods
(i.e., CONCOR) to uncover an interrelated set of positions based on the
identities and problems that NYC charities identified as co-occurring. From
the standpoint of cultural meanings, the field of Progressive Era charities
emerged within a set of understandings about who deserves relief and what
kind of relief was appropriate for certain types of people. Thus, a duality exists
in linking the types of people needing aid (e.g., soldiers, mothers, tramps) and
the type of aid offered (e.g., money, job-seeking, asylum). The deep social
structure as a moral order can be seen in a bifurcation into identities and
practices that pertained to the deserving and those that pertained to the
undeserving in society. Friedland and Alford (1991) called such deep organiz￾ing principles “institutional logics,” defined as cultural and societal ways of
orienting action and giving meaning within certain domains.
Martin (2000) used a duality approach to interpret the underlying meaning
of a single book in a highly influential children’s book series – namely, Richard
Scarry’s Busytown. The key feature of stories, such as Aesop’s Fables and many
other tales and movies for the young (e.g., Zootopia), is that the world of
people is illustrated and explained through a world of animals; in this case, a
very human-like city called Busytown that is populated by various animals with
various types of jobs. In Martin’s view, the meaning of the book exists in the
homologous relation of the logic of the animal world, and especially the bodies
of animals, to the logic of the human occupational structure. In other words,
Martin found an underlying structure in the dual relationship between types of
animals and types of jobs. The affiliation matrix he constructs from the book is
a network of animal species by job type, such that one could count instances in
286 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe book in which an animal of type x is seen to have a job of type y. Thus, cats
tend to hold jobs in certain industries that are different from those held by dogs!
The underlying logic of the differences in one realm and their dual relationship
with the other realm helps the young reader make sense of Busytown and
inculcates such a logic for the next generation of young readers.
These approaches have been foundational to a burgeoning area of research
looking directly at cultural objects. We note some of these cultural objects in
what follows, but many more exist and are being innovated. In particular, in
the last few years, approaches to texts and meanings have expanded rapidly
with dimensionality reduction techniques from computer science, such as topic
model techniques (e.g., Mohr & Bogdanov 2013) and word embedding tech￾niques [e.g., Stoltz & Taylor 2019]) and with increasing references to socio￾logical theories (e.g., Jurafsky et al. 2016).
12.4.2 Schemas and Cultural Classes
Although scaling approaches array social actors in cultural spaces, they do not
necessarily show similarities and differences in actors’ perceptions and judg￾ments of the world. Two actors who cite the same research articles or tend to
have similar tastes in art and music do not necessarily share underlying world￾views. How one begins to see cultural schemas, which DiMaggio (1997: 269)
defined as a “sort of mental shortcut that is especially crucial when faced with
conditions of incomplete information,” is another active area of overlap in
networks and culture.
Two additional techniques – correlational class analysis (Boutyline 2017) and
relational class analysis (Goldberg 2011) – have been developed as ways to draw
on responses to survey data to reveal cultural schemas and groups who share these
schemas. The key insight used in these approaches is based on the duality concept:
in this case, groups of people can be determined from patterns of shared cultural
orientations revealed through shared profiles of preferences, tastes, beliefs, and so
on. In short, some groups of people (classes) share ways of thinking, believing, or
appreciation, which can be revealed from similar profiles of cultural elements and
the correlations/relations among these elements. For example, two individuals
might share a schema for musical preferences that views heavy metal music in
opposition to all other genres, which would include both the preference for
“anything but heavy metal” as well as the preference for “heavy metal but nothing
else” (see Bryson 1996).While sharing the sameway of tasting, the two individuals
may differ in their individual preferences, with one individual liking only heavy
metal and the other liking everything but heavy metal.
Figure 12.5 shows the results of a correlational class analysis on the
1993 GSS data on musical tastes. The results, which largely reproduce those
of Boutyline (2017), show four ways (classes) of liking and disliking genres. For
simplicity, we omit negative ties. One class of individuals (panel (a)) views
music as heavy metal and rap versus just about every other genre. Another
Networks and Culture 287
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressclass (panel (b)) has a more truly omnivorous disposition, more or less enjoying
all genres. The third class (panel (c)) shows what Boutyline (2017: 380) called a
“contemporary–traditional divide,” and the fourth class (panel (d)) shows an
opposition between country music (and, to a lesser extent, gospel and blue￾grass) and most of the other genres. What is distinct about these classes is that
they capture individuals who may have nearly opposite tastes but who, some￾what paradoxically, agree on the underlying logic or schema that organizes
tastes: liking one genre implies liking or disliking others.
12.4.3 Belief Networks
For more than fifty years, researchers have considered beliefs as forming more
or less interconnected systems (Converse 1964). Martin (2002) took this belief
FIGURE 12.5 (a–d) Four correlational classes of music tastes (1993 GSS)
Note. Music genres labeled using variable names from GSS.
288 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Presssystem approach in a more sociological direction by interrelating belief struc￾tures and social structures in groups. In analyzing a number of intentional
co-living households (i.e., communes), he found that groups with cognitive
authorities and those with social structures having clearer hierarchies also
had belief systems with a clearer patterning: the social structure of the
groups was reflected and reinforced in the structure of their beliefs. Boutyline
and Vaisey (2017) extended this basic insight that the structure of a belief
system has network-like properties by examining the more or less central
beliefs within subgroups of the US population. In these approaches, attitudes
become the nodes in a network held together by correlations within a more
or less defined group. Other approaches, notably in psychology, have
looked to networks of other intrapsychic phenomena, such as symptoms in
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (e.g., Borsboom 2017; Cramer et al.
2016).
FIGURE 12.5 (cont.)
Networks and Culture 289
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressFigure 12.6 applies the belief network approach to the GSS musical taste
data. The figure is simply a network visualization of the Pearson correlation
matrix, essentially the average of the correlational classes examined earlier (in
Figure 12.5). The figure shows that the average American in 1993 tended to like
some genres and dislike others in a patterned way. It assumes that everyone in
the sample belongs in the same correlational class; of course, this assumption
could be tested by subsetting the data into sociodemographic clusters and
comparing correlation matrices across these subgroups. The figure shows a
set of now-familiar relationships among music tastes. However, one additional
structural feature becomes clear in this figure: namely, that there is no real
center to American music tastes. The cultural structure is donut-like, with
traditional and highbrow tastes branching in one direction toward more
ethnically and sonically diverse genres and ending at heavy metal, and
branching in another direction toward more rural genres. The only strong
FIGURE 12.5 (cont.)
290 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressoppositional tastes are between gospel and both heavy metal and contemporary
rock, playing out the cultural antinomies of the sacred and profane. In some
ways, this simplest of formal techniques is the most compelling, emphasizing
that the most computationally advanced methods may not ultimately be the
best choice.
12.4.4 Text Networks
Meanings and logics can also be analyzed as more fine-grained relationships in
texts. One can start by thinking of texts as bundles of words. Here, the affiliation
matrix could be as simple as texts connected through shared words and words
connected through shared texts. Counting the number of shared words across
documents could roughly indicate that the documents have a similar meaning.
More refined approaches would take into account that some words are
FIGURE 12.5 (cont.)
Networks and Culture 291
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinherently more important and meaningful for a particular set of texts, and how
this weighting is done will vary according to the researcher’s interests. In add￾ition, weighting words based on their frequency of use in a corpus is a sensible
practice: two texts that use the same rarely used words will be given a stronger
connection than those using commonly used words. The commonly employed
term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF-IDF for short) formulation is a
standard practice in establishing such weights. From such weighted affiliations,
the researcher will likely correlate two documents to create a one-mode, symmet￾ric, and valued network of document–document similarity.
FIGURE 12.6 Attitude network of music tastes (1993 GSS)
Note: Correlations greater than |0.10| are shown. Line thickness corresponds with the
strength of the correlation. Blue lines indicate positive correlations, and red lines indicate
negative correlations.
292 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressOf course, the same process can be applied to the words themselves, and the
two-mode document–word network can be projected as a word–word co￾occurrence network. Words that occur in the same documents can be thought
to be part of the same underlying topic. Because there are far more words than
documents in such a matrix, the number of nodes is exponentially greater and
requires additional techniques for processing and visualizing the relations.
Figure 12.7 shows two topic contour plots for core sociology journals during
two periods, revealing a shifting topical landscape at the center of the discipline.
Given that important aspects of social structure are contained in discursive
documents, there is no shortage of data. With social media now ubiquitous,
people swim daily in a sea of recorded and stored textual data. Historical texts
and documents once available only in written, archival form are rapidly being
digitized and posted online. Advances in machine learning techniques have auto￾mated much of the mining of such text data. Data processing that was formerly a
painstaking process of hand coding and the development of project-specific
programs for reading and coding text are now much faster, although theoretical
and substantive knowledge are still required to make use of the results.
One technique increasingly being used to wrangle such large bodies of
textual data into some meaningful form is the latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) (Mohr & Bogdanov 2013). LDA is a topic modeling technique in that
it reduces the complexity of a corpus into a number of interpretable topics in a
document or set of documents. LDA is inherently a relational content analysis
approach because it approaches texts as “bags of words”: it puts words into
“bags” (i.e., topics) based on how they co-occur in relative proximity to one
another in the documents. The LDA procedure has automated earlier tech￾niques of deriving clusters of words from their affiliations with one another in
the same sentences, paragraphs, papers, and so on. LDA can be combined with
network techniques used to reduce the complexity of relations, such as block￾modeling, to reduce texts further into a set of more or less interrelated discur￾sive positions and ways of talking and thinking (Mohr et al. 2013).
12.5   
Before moving on to Part III and more predictive and causal approaches to
network analysis, it is worth pausing for a moment to appreciate the large and
varied techniques covered in Part II. Techniques for seeing structure have blos￾somed. Theories of social structure whose reach long exceeded their grasp have
begun to yield important insights by drawing on the power afforded by these
innovations. These are particularly exciting times for the formal analysis of
culture. However, one should exercise some caution: just because one can do
something methodologically powerful does not mean it is something one should
do, or that it should be done without reflection. As Bringmann et al. (2019)
noted, researchers should be more thoughtful in applying network methods –
which are devised in contexts where nodes are social actors and ties are
interactions and relations – to contexts where nodes are cultural or psychological
Networks and Culture 293
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressTopic Contour Sociogram: 1990–92
Core Sociology Journals n = 13,698
Critical
Sociology
Education
Schools
Classrooms Class
Research
Sport
Language
HIV/AIDS
Sexuality
Suicide
Religion
Patients
Drugs
Crime
Housing
Parents
Family
Health
Women
Fertility
Immigration Black
Labor
Market
Community
Theory
Groups
Development
Culture
Methods
Econ
Soc
Politics Movements
Networks
Science Critical
Theory
Total Papers: 13,698 
Largest Component: 10,810
 Bicomponent: 9,209
 Proportion Clustered: 84.9%
 Number of Clusters: 202 
 Cluster Size (std): 45 (61)
Language
Social Media (pol)
American Political
Urban
Environment
Labor Market
Migration
Migrant Work
Work Labor
Social
Capital
immigrants
Wages,Poverty
Fertility
Employment
Population
Social Networks
Gender & Sexuality
Race 
Domestic Violence
Crime
Health
Child,Family
Youth
Attitudes
Women
Marriage
Religion
Adolescent
muslim ident
Organizations
Feminism
Civil
War
Knowledge
Culture Law
Soc Of 
Science Sport
Topic Contour Sociogram: 2009–11
Sociology Only Journals n = 11,635
Total Papers: 10,223 
Largest Component: 10,006
 Bicomponent: 9,829
 Proportion Clustered: 79.8%
 Number of Clusters: 243
 Cluster Size (std): 32 (24)
Media
Adolescent
 Behavior
Class
Job Satisfaction
FIGURE 12.7 Topic contour plots of core sociology journals, 1990–92 and 2009–11
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressphenomena and ties are largely constituted through correlations. Measures such
as centrality may have an uneasy translation to such intrapsychic domains.
Caveats for other inductive methods abound. The inductive techniques of
deriving spaces, identifying subgroups, and recognizing dualities have great
promise, but one danger is that these techniques may make “much ado of
nothing” – that is, these techniques will always give results and show differences
in meanings. LDA will always find topics; blockmodels and other methods will
always find blocks; relational class analysis and correlational class analysis will
always find classes. Moreover, different parameters and methods can result in
different solutions, revealing different clusters and latent dimensions.
How does one assess these solutions? How real are their results? The
researcher should likely try to build greater validity in results, and methods exist
to interrogate topic solutions and the latent dimensions these methods produce,
particularly techniques to assess the internal validity of any particular approach
(for insights on topic model fitness, see Galvez, Heiberger, & McFarland 2019:
supplemental material). These techniques assess how much variance the solution
explains or how internally coherent the clusters/dimensions are. However, differ￾ent techniques may result in outcomes with a similar explained variance but
create different representations – that is, multiple results might fit the data equally
well. For example, an LDA applied to a corpus will often produce interpretable
topics, but these topics may not be the same as the (also interpretable) topics
derived by clustering the text-similarity network. What then?
One approach is a priori: before choosing a method, consider the substantive
differences between techniques and the questions that they address. Pimentel
(2014) presented such a decision tree, which is reproduced in Figure 12.8. Once
again, methods problems are frequently theory problems in disguise, and
focusing on your theory is likely the best way to avoid a quagmire of down￾stream methods problems.
A second approach is a posteriori: comparing cluster and dimensionality
solutions to each other (Grimmer & King 2011). Such comparisons are often
presented as cluster or topic solutions and their distances from one another are
represented by Sammon distances (an exploratory data reduction technique
akin to MDS). The different solutions are then viewed in this space (Pimentel
2014: 10) to determine which solutions are similar to one another and arrive at
similar conclusions. This method is a means of inductively interrogating results
and coming to some understanding of which solutions are similar and poten￾tially redundant (offering robust solutions) and which are distinctive. For
distinct solutions, the researcher may ask why a particular method results in
such a distinct outcome; it is possible that the technique was created for a
narrow class of phenomena or a broad class.
This same approach can be extended to viewing solutions for different
numbers of clusters and topics. In many cases, increasing the number of
solutions may afford only incremental improvements in fit with the data.
Moreover, increasing the number of clusters may only split clusters and
Networks and Culture 295
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressFIGURE 12.8 A priori decision tree for choosing clustering methods (Pimentel 2014)
296 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdifferentiate dimensions that are weak or poorly defined. Certain techniques
will compare different cluster and dimension solutions to each other, ascertain￾ing whether distinct solutions of k clusters or topics depict the same structural
pattern (again, see Galvez, Heiberger, & McFarland 2019: supplement).
A final approach is to acquire external validity on a structural solution.
Here, the usual approach is to find ground-truth cases or expert opinions.
The ground-truth approach uses a known solution – known factions or cultural
dimensions – and then finds an output that best fits the solution. This approach,
however, requires certainty about an a priori phenomenon or subset of phe￾nomena that one then trains the data to fit. The researcher seldom has such a
ground truth in social science. Instead, one usually has expert and lay intu￾itions, which can be biased and are often wrong. Therefore, one tends to
acquire samples of opinions and then optimize the solutions to the most reliable
and consistent opinions. Traditional methods – such as confusion matrices,
which summarize respondents’ correct and incorrect classifications (Langrebe
& Duin 2008) – reveal which opinions tend to be most accurate. These
opinions can be used to determine which cluster or topic solution is most
aligned (alignment). Weaker efforts at gauging generic opinion entail merely
asking experts whether they agree with and confirm observed solutions as real
patterns observed in reality (confirmatory). Notice, however, that this external
form of validation may not be perfect either. The assumption behind this
approach is that it reveals patterns that must be recognized and observed by
others, but in reality, these techniques may reveal latent structures beneath the
level of consciousness. The point of this discussion, however, is not to show the
one social reality as true. Rather we intend to encourage readers to consider
means of representing and understanding depictions of social patterns, interro￾gating what these depictions mean, and determining whether they are robust
representations across methods that are reasonable and applicable to the
research question at hand.
12.6 
In this chapter, we introduced ongoing efforts to extend network techniques,
including duality approaches, to examine structure and culture linkages. On the
one hand, network research has recognized that social structure is in some ways
inexorably cultural: patterns of interactions, relations, groups, and institutions
are steeped in meanings, and shared understandings undergird social structures
and orient action. On the other hand, relational and formal approaches to
studying actors have been applied to cultural phenomena. Culture itself has
structural and system-like properties. These approaches can complement
existing research strategies aimed at uncovering social structure or can serve
as the basis for a more formal cultural sociology.
Networks and Culture 297
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press  
Becker, Howard S. 1982. Art Worlds. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press. (A classic work that describes artistic enterprises as involving a
network of interrelated participants to bring them about.)
Bottero, Wendy, and Nick Crossley. 2011. “Worlds, Fields and Networks: Becker,
Bourdieu and the Structures of Social Relations.” Cultural Sociology 5(1): 99–119.
(Compares Becker, Bourdieu, and social network conceptualizations as applied to
British punk subculture in late 1970s.)
Carley, Kathleen. 1994. “Extracting Culture through Textual Analysis.” Poetics 22(4):
291–312. (Seminal work on semantic networks in texts and the methodology needed
to bring them about.)
De Nooy, Wouter. 2003. “Fields and Networks: Correspondence Analysis and Social
Network Analysis in the Framework of Field Theory.” Poetics 31(5–6): 305–27.
(A nice comparison of Bourdieu’s correspondence analysis approach to finding deep
structure with social network analysis’ approach to finding surface structures.)
Franzosi, Roberto. 2004. From Words to Numbers: Narrative, Data, and Social Science.
Vol. 22. New York: Cambridge University Press. (Provides a systematic approach to
representing narratives quantitatively.)
Fuhse, Jan A. 2009. “The Meaning Structure of Social Networks.” Sociological Theory
27: 51–73. (Describes how social opportunities of affiliations and connectivity collide
with identities and expectations from roles and relations in interaction and interpret￾ation to forge agreed-upon ties and have a feedback loop to those settings and types of
tie/roles as scripts.)
Grimmer, Justin, Margaret E. Roberts, and Brandon M. Stewart. 2022. Text as Data:
A New Framework for Machine Learning and the Social Sciences. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. (A recent overview textbook on quantitative analysis of
text and natural language processing from a social science perspective.)
Kilduff, Martin, and David Krackhardt. 2008. Interpersonal Networks in
Organizations: Cognition, Personality, Dynamics and Culture. New York:
Cambridge University Press. (Provides insights into within-organization network
effects on leadership, performance, and organizational culture.)
Martin, John Levi. 2003. “What Is Field Theory?” American Journal of Sociology 109
(1): 1–49. (A relatively short overview and discussion of different conceptions of fields
as latent forces.)
McLean, Paul. 2016. Culture in Networks. New York: John Wiley & Sons. (Summary
text that affords an overview of how networks and culture have been discussed in
previous works. Builds from separate approaches to an increasingly melded and
integrative perspective.)
Mohr, John W., Christopher A. Bail, Margaret Frye et al. 2020. Measuring Culture.
New York. Columbia University Press. (A useful theoretical overview of approaches
to measuring meaning with formal methods.)
Moretti, Franco. 2007. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History.
New York: Verso. (Offers a network perspective on literary texts and their internal
plot structures.)
298 Seeing Structure
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press 
MAKING STRUCTURAL PREDICTIONS
Social structures are frequently described with analogies to solid physical
artifacts, such as ridges, bridges, and clusters. Yet, as we have emphasized,
social structures are the ongoing accomplishments of individuals. Perhaps
better metaphors for social structure, then, would be more liquid, such as a
watershed: an area carved out by flows, in which ongoing activity creates
landscapes with deeper lakes and rivers (associated with dense areas of social
structure) as well as shallower streams and side channels that may eventually
form deeper rivers over time (the formation of institutions). This metaphor gets
closer to the ever-changing surface of interaction and influence that is both a
reflection and a cause of social structure. To get empirically closer to this
dynamic view requires longitudinal data and dynamic models, which can
illuminate where social structures came from and where they might be headed.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.015 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press13
Models for Networks
Where do networks come from? Numerous theories direct us to the causes of
networks (e.g., homophily, triadic closure, physical proximity), some empha￾sizing outside factors (exogenous causes) and others emphasizing point-in-time
network structure (endogenous causes) as shaping a network’s future trajec￾tory. So far, we have examined such causal theories using cross-sectional
snapshots in the form of metrics (centrality, density), partitions (clusters), and
maps or spaces (visualization). These approaches generally suffer from a lack of
stochastic features and observational overdetermination: for example, we
observe a pattern in a given school on a given day, but that pattern could result
from actor preferences and constraints in the setting. Disentangling such effects
requires an inferential approach to probabilistically examine various effects. To
the extent that we want to identify causal forces shaping the networks, under￾standing the unfolding of relations in time – how the individual ties in a
network (the dyads joined by one or more relations) and the entire structure
of these relations emerge and evolve – is crucial for testing network theories.
13.1  ,   
Are your friends and acquaintances today the same as they were ten years ago?
The likely answer is “sort of” when it comes to friends and “not really” when it
comes to acquaintances. Much can change for a person over a ten-year period.
Many people move away for college in young adulthood, later move to a new
city to start a job or attend graduate school, and relocate yet again because of a
new job or promotion. New parents tend to meet other new parents in birthing
classes, on playdates, and at preschools. During all these life changes, some ties
that were once strong will fade or disappear. People lose touch, often because of
physical distances but sometimes for the simple reason that people get on each
other’s nerves and go their separate ways. Network researchers must always
301
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressremember that the temporal and processual nature of social structures means
that observed networks are snapshots of underlying dynamic processes in
which nodes and ties are in some degree of flux at various time scales (days,
weeks, or years).
Networks are also interrelated systems: changes in one relationship may lead
to changes in other relationships, with unexpected consequences for entire
groups of people. For example, when a marriage ends in divorce, many of the
people connected to the former couple feel forced to “take sides,” maintaining
contact and emotionally supporting only one member of the couple. When
those two people from the dissolved marriage remarry (as they usually do), they
may have difficulty blending and integrating their previous ties, leading them to
more or less choose one person’s ties or build a new friendship network
together. Networks must often adapt to internal or external changes by
changing the relations among the parts in ways that move this system toward
a new equilibrium. When the network structure is a largely closed system (i.e.,
ties are largely internal to a group), underlying causal processes can have many
feedback loops through the network, and the dynamics of these changes can
become quite complex. In analyzing such networks with many feedback loops,
network scientists can learn a lot from control systems engineers (who try to
keep complex mechanical systems from exploding).
In this chapter, we return to our central two-by-two table presented in
Chapter 2 (Table 2.1). Our focus is on accounting for the structure of a
network as an outcome. What theories of tie formation explain that structure?
Given that nodes are interdependent, how does one take configurations of ties
into account as outcomes? In what follows, we begin by outlining several of the
conceptual issues involved in answering these questions with a focus on exogen￾ous and endogenous factors shaping networks. We then introduce readers to
modeling techniques that seriously consider stochastic variation in observa￾tional network data and seek to account for multiple causal factors (see also
Snijders 2011).
1
13.2      
Think of all the ways you are similar to your closest friends or colleagues. The
things you have in common might include tastes in music or food, prior
histories, common friends, or your neighborhood. As researchers who appreci￾ate the complexity of social life, we would never try to attribute the source of a
1 The literatures on causal identification effects in networks and statistical approaches to networks
are vast and rapidly growing. Our goal here is to introduce readers to the rich approaches
available for testing network theories and modeling networks generally with more of an emphasis
on pragmatic use than statistical theory. For greater detail on the statistical theory underlying
these methods, see the excellent reviews by Kuskova and Wasserman (2020), Lusher et al. (2020),
and Schaefer and Marcum (2020).
302 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressparticular relationship in a person’s history to a single dimension of social
similarity or a single structural norm, such as reciprocity or social balance. At
a theoretical level, though, research aims to do more than recapture the com￾plexity contained within the personal narratives of our relational histories.
Scientific investigators need to be able to disentangle the multiple overdeter￾mined causes of social relations in a given setting to assess the extent to which
attribute similarity guides relations relative to structural pressures, such as prior
history or common acquaintances.
The toolkit of visual, mathematical, and computational abstractions
developed in Parts I and II of this book can be used to describe various
dimensions of a social setting. Although these tools form the core of many
network analyses, they sometimes serve as the descriptive beginnings of an
inquiry, just as statistical models often begin with descriptive statistics and
move on to more inferential models. In addition to wanting to describe what
features correlate with regularities in a social network, one often wants to know
why a particular set of nodes forms a certain structure versus another. Asking
why questions entails theories – summaries of cause-effect patterns under scope
conditions – and theories of social structure abound.
To test specific hypotheses, researchers must use methods that take the
structure of ties among nodes as the outcome of some posited underlying
process: the network becomes a dependent variable, and the presence or
absence of ties is the puzzle to solve. For example, if high school friendship
networks are largely the results of status dynamics (see Milner 2016), one
would expect school-level networks to form hierarchical structures and indi￾viduals to form and break ties based on status-seeking. Or, if partisan politics
dominate Congress, one would expect alignments in voting behaviors among
politicians to create an increasingly bifurcated structure over time. Thus, theor￾ies point us in specific structural directions at the global level of the entire
network. Such directions are rooted in various proposed pathways (or
mechanisms) at lower levels of analysis and often posit self-organizing individ￾ual behaviors – that is, emergent structures arising without conscious
coordination.
The meaning of descriptive metrics is nuanced in a second way because of
the inherent randomness in social network data. In most social contexts (with
possible exceptions being networks derived from some electronic traces, such as
tweets and emails), the ties observed in a network are rarely perfectly observed
or fixed. Instead, random noise accrues in the data collection process: data
collected in one snapshot might not yield exactly the same network if the
sample were repeated, even if the underlying social structure had not truly
changed. In such cases, one might find some fundamentally meaningless vari￾ation in the assignment of nodes to clusters. Seeing through this fog of random￾ness and error requires inferential tools to assess the relative size of observed
effects. In the same way that regression models seek to examine the net effect of
a set of focal variables conditioned on an estimate of noise in the data, network
Models for Networks 303
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressresearchers want to explain ties and structures of ties as generated by some
combination of factors while taking into account some estimate of error.
In short, for network researchers, as with most scientists, to know something
is to know, at least roughly and with some understanding of error, its source
and its likely trajectory. However, applying this goal to social networks
requires a somewhat different view of causation than is generally presented in
inferential statistics courses, which teach students that interactions and depend￾encies among one’s observations constitute an endogeneity problem.
But is endogeneity really a problem? Social life is inherently endogenous.
Consequently, in network analysis, the researcher acknowledges that structures
are endogenous and reciprocally causal systems – indeed, that endogeneity is
often what is most interesting and important for network scholars. Causality
from a network perspective is trying to understand what factors come together
to shape an endogenous system.
This goal is very different from more individual-centered modeling
approaches, in which endogeneity is seen as a problem and the nonindepen￾dence of observations must be addressed for results to be considered valid and
generalizable. Typically, causal identification strategies seek to isolate a coeffi￾cient on a single variable that is hypothesized to be the cause of an outcome: for
example, higher educational attainment is predicted to cause higher income
later in life. The goal of such models is to isolate that cause from all the
alternate and perhaps confounding explanations (e.g., parental education,
parental income, race) and estimate a coefficient that is a decent approximation
of the magnitude of the effect in the general population not observed in one’s
sample. This type of causal research is well suited to its goals and provides
countless insights; again, though, it is not necessarily how network scholars
approach the issue of causality. We will return to these issues in greater detail in
the next two chapters.
This chapter focuses on networks as outcomes of some other set of factors.
The models developed handle both exogenous and endogenous factors to
explain network ties. Exogenous factors are traits of people (or their setting)
that make ties more likely. For example, if people differ fundamentally in the
amount of social energy they are willing to invest in friends, then that person￾ality trait is exogenous to the observed network and at least a partial explan￾ation for why such folks have more friends than others. Although exogenous
notions of association and cause are largely familiar to social scientists writ
large, a less familiar approach to causal explanation is built endogenously from
network structures. For example, friends of friends should be friends, independ￾ent of the effect of common setting or homophily. Importantly, these sorts of
features build on themselves: if i becomes friends with j because they are both
friends with k, then i is also likely to form relations with other friends of k later.
Analytic tools for estimating such effects have been developed for both cross￾sectional and longitudinal data. Clearly, longitudinal models offer greater
validity in making causal claims. After discussing exogenous and endogenous
304 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmechanisms in greater detail, we will outline modeling strategies to test for the
presence of both types of mechanisms in observed networks.
13.3     
A network does not exist in a vacuum. At the macro level, social environments
shape how networks form and change; in turn, networks often shape those
environments. The cliques that form in a typical US high school are both a
reflection of the broader American society and an incubator for growing that
society. At the meso level, networks are embedded in organizations, schools,
classrooms, websites, and other loci of activity. These contextual settings have
properties that may constrain or enable relations. At the micro level, networks
are embedded in prior interactional sequences and face-to-face dynamics that
shape turn-taking and relational events.
Networks form within an ecology of overlapping but distinct settings with
complementary or competing dynamics. For example, as demonstrated in
Coleman’s early network studies of young people, adolescent society is some￾what distinct and autonomous from the rest of society. And yet, high school is
also where most of us first learn what it means to be an adult – how to live with
others, compete, and find our place in the social order. Consequently, many of
the macro-level processes that are of greatest concern to social scientists –
inequality, segregation, cohesion, subcultures, and deviance – are seen in how
ties form at the micro level of high school friendships. As McFarland et al.
(2014) show, however, adolescent societies emerge within the features of
specific organizational environments of high schools with a variety of con￾straints and opportunities (e.g., clubs, sports, academic tracks), which moder￾ate how micro-level processes of tie formation unfold. In short, myriad theories
rooted in broader understandings of societal inequalities and boundaries can
serve as the basis for testing hypotheses about tie formation and, albeit less
often, tie dissolution.
For many researchers, the exogenous factors – those features that are inde￾pendent of the network under study – are key explanations to be tested.
Identifying clearly exogenous features thus requires finding factors that could
not be caused by the choices or relations of the study population. Prior insti￾tutional features (e.g., tracking in school, the presence of sidewalks in a neigh￾borhood) are often good candidates,
2 as are clearly individual traits that
precede relations or could not, for biological reasons, result from networks.
For example, similarity in height as a predictor of relations would be exogenous
2 These prior institutional features, however, are imperfect. For example, a friend of a friend might
rave about a particular neighborhood, thereby influencing a person’s decision to buy a house in
that neighborhood. Such a chain of unobserved priors can be an endless game in critiquing work,
although such an exercise often borders on silly when taken to extremes. See Shalizi and Thomas
(2011) for a formal statement about this problem.
Models for Networks 305
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbecause people’s peers could not cause them to grow (although the social value
of height is likely socially conditioned). Similarly, theories of gender in the
workplace suggest that exogenous factors, such as gender bias or women’s
“second shift” of childrearing duties, disadvantage women by preventing them
from forming the kinds of ties that are important for upward mobility; by
contrast, men of comparative skill and productivity are brought into networks
and are therefore more likely to get ahead (Hochschild 1989). Clearly, oppor￾tunity structures that are outside the professional network setting can drive
how ties form and therefore who is likely to influence whom.
The most important and frequently tested exogenous explanation of net￾works is one we have discussed several times – namely, homophily.
Anecdotally, the observation that people like others who are similar to them￾selves goes back thousands of years. As a testable hypothesis and key socio￾logical principle, however, homophily has developed over successive
generations. As outlined in Chapter 6, Lazarsfeld and Merton (1954) divided
homophily into status homophily, which is based on shared status characteris￾tics (e.g., race, gender), and value homophily, which is based on shared values,
attitudes, beliefs, and so on. Recall that McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook
(2001) also distinguished between baseline homophily, which would be
expected based on a random mixing of populations composed of groups of
different sizes, and inbreeding homophily, which is more indicative of struc￾tural forces and choices among individuals that direct interactions and relations
above and beyond the baseline. Although homophily has become a cornerstone
sociological concept, network scientists are generally concerned with dyadic
forces of attraction and repulsion among nodes that can help account for larger
structures. Thus, homophily has been perhaps the most widely adopted concept
to spread from sociology to the interdisciplinary field of network science
(McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Rawlings 2021).
Testing for homophily presents several challenges. In Chapter 8, we intro￾duced methods that enable the researcher to characterize networks as more
segregated than expected under conditions of random chance. For example,
using distributions of many random graphs of the same size and dyad census,
one could compare the observed network with a hypothetical baseline and
thereby infer homophily. Although this bootstrapping technique is clearly
useful for identifying binary associations in cross-sectional data and describing
homophily, it does not explain homophily or the mechanisms through which it
manifests in a given context. There are many competing explanations for what
brings nodes together that the technique cannot rule out. Compounding this
difficulty, research interested in a particular type of homophily – say, inbreed￾ing status homophily (e.g., same-race relations above baseline) – must try to
distinguish this type from other types, such as value homophily (e.g., interest in
the same sports). In short, finding that friends cluster in same-race groups does
not necessarily mean that same-race attraction alone brought them together.
For example, similar actors might be more likely to come into contact with one
306 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressanother because of larger social-structural segregation, ethnic identity, or
mutual interests that correlate with race (Wimmer & Lewis 2010).
In detecting value homophily, the researcher is presented with an even bigger
challenge: namely, that people who have different values become more similar
over time because they influence one another, making time order an even bigger
concern. In causal terms, researchers may wrongly attribute observed patterns
of ties to homophily. This apparent causal relationship might be a spurious
association caused by proximity in space and time (i.e., propinquity), which
affords more opportunities for interaction and tie formation because similar
people tend to be sorted into similar physical spaces (e.g., neighborhoods,
schools, jobs). In addition, the proposed direction of causation (i.e., shared
values lead to network ties) might actually be the reverse of the true direction
(i.e., ties lead to shared values). These causal effects can be quite complicated:
people might simultaneously cause both values and ties (e.g., religious social
events), or values might drive somewhat indiscriminately higher rates of tie
formation for some people (e.g., business networking) while shared values pull
others to form relations (e.g., niche interests). The real-world phenomena
driving homophily are often muddied, and our models of them are necessarily
simplifications. As such, observing an association between ties and shared
nodal characteristics is just a first step in establishing a more nuanced causal
explanation. The researcher must always consider the adage “correlation is not
causation” and address alternate explanations.
Such tests seem straightforward. For instance, why not just shift the data
structure away from a network matrix to make the dyad the unit of observation
and then predict the presence/absence of a tie using logistic regression? The
answer to this question once again illustrates how statistical models are largely
developed in the context of isolating causes among random samples rather than
making predictions among interconnected nodes. Using common linear and
nonlinear models on a network’s dyads without correction violates the inde￾pendence assumptions of these models. Indeed, the number of observations in
dyadic data sets is much larger than the number of individuals because each
individual appears n − 1 times as a possible outcome of every other individual’s
choice set and another n − 1 times as the chooser of every other individual.
Consequently, standard errors will be biased downward as the sample size is
artificially inflated, and correlated errors are introduced through repeated
observations of individuals as both senders and receivers of ties. Some dyadic
models seek to correct for these problems of repeated observations, and we will
touch on these later. More complicated, however, are interdependencies built
into the nature of network data – interdependencies that turn on relational
activity, such as closed cycles, transitivity, or diffusion. These features create
correlations in the underlying probability of a tie that are not mere functions of
the node pair and thus are much more difficult to correct for.
Homophily is by no means the only exogenous factor of interest to network
researchers. Other factors outside the network structure itself drive tie
Models for Networks 307
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressformation and dissolution. Small and Adler (2019) reviewed the importance of
physical space in tie formation. As we discussed in Chapter 11, Feld’s (1981)
work on shared foci points to additional factors, such as leisure activities, as
exogenous factors that can help account for the clustering and hierarchy often
found in networks. Lizardo (2006) examined how popular versus esoteric
cultural tastes can lead to network ties that are more far-reaching versus more
clustered. Other research has pointed to complementarity and optimal
distinctiveness as potentially driving network ties, suggesting a potentially
curvilinear effect in which nodes that are “just different enough” will be
attracted to one another (Dahlander & McFarland 2013). Some work has
pointed to the likelihood of “unfriending” those who differ from us or with
whom we disagree (Noel & Nyhan 2011; Schwartz & Shani 2016). We have
focused on homophily because of its prominence, but these other exogenous
factors bring up important avenues for future work.
13.4     
For many networks, one can posit a set of mechanisms derived from the
reactivity of the elements in the network to one another in forming and
breaking ties – that is, endogenous factors cause a network to take a certain
shape. Endogenous explanations, which are derived from the internal structure
of relations as the bases for how networks evolve, give rise to a set of factors
potentially complementing or competing with exogenous explanations.
Undoubtedly, most real-world networks form and evolve according to a com￾plex set of exogenous and endogenous factors (see also, Goodreau, Kitts, &
Morris 2009; Rivera, Soderstrom, & Uzzi 2010). However, the mix of these
factors and how they interact is often important in accounting for a
network’s etiology.
In what follows, we discuss some of the most widely recognized endogenous
effects at the node, dyad, and triad levels. Recall that in Chapter 6, we outlined
the fundamental drives that influence individuals to seek certain kinds of
relations and avoid others. We revisit some of these drives here with greater
attention to how they contribute to networks developing certain structural
features over time.
13.4.1 Node Level: Preferential Attachment and the Matthew Effect
Why are some people more popular than others? In network terms, where does
the commonly observed long-tailed degree distribution come from? Some nodes
are more prominent and take positions associated with greater prestige, status,
and power. But how do people acquire status and prominence in their group?
What leads group members to regard some people more esteem? Exogenous
theories would suggest that perhaps individuals who are more central in net￾works of positive group sentiments have performed some service for others or
308 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbrought positive attention to the group as a whole; or maybe they have
acquired symbols of success to which others aspire. Such explanations look
outside the network and suggest that the network structure reflects outside
influences and differences in nodes themselves. People are often led to believe
that popularity and other forms of success are driven by individual-level differ￾ences in personality or even biology. Children with a “good upbringing” are
more likely to have the kinds of attitudes and behaviors that draw positive
attention to them, which will translate into network outcomes. This individual￾centric type of exogenous explanation of network structure is in many ways
attached to models of human beings as individual rational actors and analytic
techniques that tend to foreground individuals.
Network scholars are more likely to see a complex interplay between indi￾vidual traits and network effects. Individual-level differences clearly help shape
network positions, but is that the end of the story? For researchers focused on
endogenous explanations of networks, network structure and an individual’s
position within it may strongly shape personal traits. Despite the factors that
may have combined to create some inequality in esteem, prestige, or other
advantages, the structural positions of individuals who are more central can
create their own dynamics and, indeed, magnify inequalities over time. Being a
central actor treated as someone important may engender certain personality
traits, whereas being more peripheral may engender less flattering and self￾reinforcing traits.
This dynamic is sometimes called the “Matthew effect,” after a Bible verse
that essentially says that those who begin with more tend to get more (Matthew
25:29, RSV). For example, Homans (1961) suggested that the rewards for a
given performance, or demonstration of quality, might be greater for those with
higher social status. In the case of network dynamics, people who are more
central tend to draw disproportionate attention and are assumed to have
positive qualities because they are so well-regarded. People talk about these
central individuals more, try to curry favor with them, and generally give them
the symbolic and material resources they need to retain or even increase their
status. By magnifying central individuals’ achievements and perceived compe￾tence, these positive reflected appraisals may build their sense of self-worth and
confidence in ways that may reinforce the perceived qualities that are thought
to have led to their prominence – that is, a self-fulfilling prophecy.
In modeling how ties form in groups, the researcher may want to directly test
for the Matthew effect, suspecting a purely structural cause of popularity or
status. Alternatively, the researcher may want to control for the potentially
confounding structural effects on a focal explanatory variable. In many model￾ing strategies, the preferential attachment of group members for actors who are
more central may be included as an additional endogenous factor alongside
reciprocity and balance (discussed later in the chapter). Practically, this would
be seen in the tendency of individuals who initially have more ties to acquire
new ties more quickly than those with fewer existing ties. Each actor’s centrality
Models for Networks 309
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressin the network at one point in time is used as a predictor of the number of new
ties the actor acquires at a later point. The researcher might even posit various
shapes – linear, curvilinear, or sigmoidal – to this popularity effect, depending
on the theory and substantive domain.
13.4.2 Dyad Level: Reciprocity
A fundamental endogenous explanation for network dynamics is the tendency
to reciprocate within dyads, as with exchanges of birthday gifts or favors
between friends. A violation of this reciprocity, such as when a friend declines
to help when called upon, is likely to threaten the relationship. The tendency
toward reciprocity is an important consideration for understanding flows in
networks, as discussed in more detail in the next chapter. But reciprocity is also
a common feature of tie formation. As we discussed in Chapter 7, when we are
drawn to someone and consider them a friend, we will likely treat that person
kindly, which will lead that person to see us as a friend; on the other hand, rude
behavior is often difficult not to reciprocate.
Reciprocity is an endogenous explanation of network dynamics suggesting
that the cause of a ji tie is the presence of an antecedent ij relation. In short,
nothing outside the dyadic relation of positive or negative sentiments, behav￾iors, flows, and so on is necessary to predict where a dyad is headed.
Asymmetric dyads are unstable and tend to move toward stable, symmetric
relations. The reasons for the prevalence of reciprocity may be normative and
culturally shared and articulated, or they may be more rooted in automatic
cognitive processes. Either way, reciprocity is a dynamic process that may shape
tie formation or dissolution over time.
In Chapter 7, we illustrated descriptive techniques for cross-sectional net￾work data. Those techniques compare the number of mutual ties in a graph
with bootstrapped random distributions, allowing the researcher to character￾ize a network as more or less reciprocal than would be expected by chance. The
models we outline in this chapter allow the researcher to shift focus to the micro
level and add factors or controls to the model. A simple but powerful question
could be, Is belonging to the same racial group a more powerful predictor of
friendships than reciprocity? Previous descriptive models can go only so far in
answering questions involving multiple predictors.
13.4.3 Triadic and Higher-Order Effects
As we have discussed at various points in this volume, indirect connections
among nodes are among the key drivers of new social ties. The first rule posited
in balance theory is “a friend of a friend is a friend.” Despite the exogenous
forces that may bring individuals into greater propinquity and thus increase the
likelihood of forming interpersonal attachments, once ties are formed, the rule
of transitive closure becomes a powerful force in the elaboration of the
310 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressnetwork. Granovetter (1973) famously demonstrated that this rule applies only
for strong ties: only when people spend considerable time with one another and
have deeper emotional investments in one another will they tend to meet and be
compelled to like their friends’ friends. In contrast, weak ties are not generally
transitive.
Heider’s balance theory, which we discussed in Chapters 6 and 7, looks to
signed graphs – networks consisting of both positive and negative ties – to
predict the self-organizing structural forces of sentiment relations. Again, bal￾ance theory as applied to social networks (frequently referred to as structural
balance theory) posits that triadic relations among actors are key drivers of
whether new positive and negative relations form and whether existing positive
and negative relations are converted. Each individual, in seeking a tension-free
local social structure free of imbalanced triads, will tend to shift positive and
negative sentiments away from imbalanced structural forms. Of course, the
theory has several potential complications, perhaps most clearly that individ￾uals may operate myopically in automatically converting sentiments in ways
that do not result in more global shifts toward balance (Montgomery 2009; van
de Rijt 2011).
Humans may have cognitive difficulties in processing network relations
beyond triads. Triadic forms may be good enough solutions to formulating
rules of sociality that operate as heuristics (Brashears & Brashears 2016).
However, endogenous rules of sociality may extend to higher-order structural
motifs in tetrads, pentads, and so on – particularly if there are structural
constraints on lower-order patterns, such as heterosexual romantic networks
having no closed triads (see also Felmlee, McMillan, & Whitaker 2021). For
example, Bearman, Moody, and Stovel (2004) discovered that four-cycles were
missing from adolescent romantic networks at a rate that was higher than
predicted, suggesting a tacit rule of avoiding feelings of being “romantic left￾overs.” Clearly, complex endogenous dynamics may guide tie formation and
dissolution, even beyond the grasp of the social actors engaged in such
processes.
13.5     
Statistical models were born out of a desire to move beyond description to parse
how various exogenous and endogenous processes combine to produce social
networks. If the researcher is examining a process operating strictly within
dyads, then a number of models will suffice to control for standard errors that
are biased downward due to nonindependent networked observations. For
example, gift-giving reciprocity or individuals’ search for romantic partners in
online dating platforms may reasonably be modeled as dyadic processes.
Kenny, Kashy, and Cook (2006) and Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011)
provided techniques suitable for predicting tie formation and dissolution
(Dahlander & McFarland 2013). The “p2” model provides another approach
Models for Networks 311
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressusing random effects (Van Duijn, Snijders, & Zijlstra 2004). Such dyadic
models are necessarily more limited in the structural effects (such as closure
or brokerage) that may be examined. Yet, dyadic approaches frequently pro￾duce results that are similar to those from approaches that model entire net￾works (Lindgren 2010; Ragan et al. 2019).
The primary reason to move beyond dyadic approaches is that the process
one is trying to capture or control for involves structural forces that operate
through triads or higher-order features. Given the complexity of models
accounting for such higher-order structural features, these models developed
in progressive stages of statistical and computational sophistication. The first of
these attempts were designed to be performed on cross-sectional networks and
were later extended to longitudinal networks. With over-time variation, com￾plexity grows, but so does the capacity to control for many exogenous factors
that might be conflated with the focal predictors of tie formation and change.
We review some of that history in the subsections that follow, beginning with
the simpler models to build intuition and then moving on to more complicated
cross-sectional and longitudinal approaches.
Statistical modeling raises a key theoretical question about inferences.
Standard statistical modeling involves two related inference questions: general￾izability and confounding. The generalizability question involves identifying a
population value from a sample statistic, such as predicting the winner of an
election based on a sample of voters. In network studies, a core assumption of
the method is that the relevant population of cases has been observed. In some
sense, then, the standard generalization question is moot, and a descriptive
statistic on the network (say, the level of centralization) will be accurate by that
assumption. The standard generalization question becomes more relevant when
samples of networks are involved, such as a collection of high school networks
from which observations will be generalized to all high schools in the nation.
A subtle variant on the generalizability question emerges when recognizing that
any observed network has a fundamental stochastic element, which raises
questions about what the underlying true parameters are once random vari￾ation is averaged out. In this frame, one wants to know the likelihood of
observing, on repeated samples of the same setting, the same level of centraliza￾tion or homophily observed in the sampled network. The second core inference
question is confounding, which is addressed by controlling for the multiple
causes of a single event. For example, two people may become friends for many
reasons, and understanding which features dominate and how policies or
histories constrain a network’s evolution is scientifically interesting. Standard
multivariate regression models (or good randomization in experimental
designs) aim to isolate the effect of one covariate over another.
3
3 An intuitive explanation for these effects is illustrated by a Venn diagram of Y, X, and a potential
confounder W. The three circles overlap, and each region captures a unique aspect of the
statistical task. Two points are relevant for this discussion. First, the portion in Y that is
312 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressTwo general approaches in network methods account for the ways that
networks violate common statistical independence assumptions. The first
approach is to sidestep the problem entirely by using computational tools to
compare an observed network sample with a simulated baseline that breaks
apart the known dependencies in the network, allowing a comparison of the
observed statistic(s) with what would be observed at random. For example, see
the earlier discussion in Chapter 7 of the U|MAN model of Holland and
Leinhardt (1976). The advantage of this approach is that it requires the
researcher to make fewer assumptions. The disadvantages are that it is quite
difficult to accurately simulate a truly random world for comparison, and the
researcher forgoes the mathematical and computational infrastructure
developed in the wider body of inferential statistical methods. The second
approach is to retain the core statistical modeling apparatus but carefully
construct the problem to identify where dependencies will affect inference,
adjusting accordingly. This identification problem is nontrivial and rests on
assumptions that, like all modeling assumptions, are likely never exactly right
but nonetheless may be useful.
4
13.6 -  
The first network models were cross-sectional and attempted to understand the
likelihood of ties forming an observed structure (Holland & Leinhardt 1981;
Wasserman & Pattison 1996). Some of the early attempts at turning networks
into outcomes to be explained used a simulation-based approach. With the
growth of computational power, models today have developed advanced stat￾istical techniques for inference.
13.6.1 Quadratic Assignment Procedure
A classic exemplar of the simulation-for-inference approach mainly used in
cross-sectional models was the quadratic assignment procedure (QAP)
(Krackhardt 1988; Mantel 1967). In the QAP approach, a binary network –
generally, an adjacency matrix – becomes the dependent variable, and other
matrices are used as its predictors. This can be written as follows:
accounted for (caused by) X is only the section that is nonoverlapping with W; in some cases, this
section can be quite small. Second, the section that overlaps on all three, the center of the diagram,
cannot be uniquely attributed to either explanatory variable; it is necessarily confounded. In
network effects, the portion necessarily confounded can be quite large because different features
necessitate similar structures, such as when homophily drives reciprocity or transitivity simply by
random chance (see Cohen & Cohen 1975; Kennedy 2002). 4 Modern Bayesian methods provide something of a blend of these two approaches, using simula￾tion and model-based stochasticity to examine the space of results that a model implies. A core
simplifying assumption of this work is that parameters guiding tie formation are constant across
the population under study – that is, everyone has the same propensity for transitivity.
Models for Networks 313
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressN ¼ βX þ E; (13.1)
where N, X, and E are n  n matrices. Typically, N is the network adjacency
matrix, X is a covariate, E is an error term, and β is a coefficient. For example,
consider the case of racial homophily in school friendship networks. Here, two
dyadic matrices exist: (1) a friendship adjacency network, and (2) an attribute
matrix set indicating when i and j belong to the “same race.” A hypothesis for
racial homophily would suggest a positive correlation between being the same
race and the level of friendship. QAP calculates the likelihood of the observed
correlation between race and friendship compared with a simulated random
baseline. The random baseline is created by permuting – randomly reordering
the rows and columns of the independent variable matrix in the same way – and
then correlating this new randomly ordered matrix with the observed friend￾ship matrix. This random permutation process maintains the dependency
within rows and columns of the adjacency matrix, breaking the association
with X, corresponding to a null hypothesis for a network of the same size,
density, and value distribution of ties, as well as degree sequence. Repeated
many times, the procedure will create a distribution against which to compare
the observed data. If the observed correlation is on the tail of the distribution,
the researcher can reject the null hypothesis that race and friendship are
unrelated.
Figure 13.1 provides an example of just this sort of a case, asking how “same
race” correlates with the friendship nominations in a small school from the
Adolescent Health (Add Health) study. Add Health is a multiyear study that
has followed a nationally representative sample of more than 20,000 individ￾uals who were in grades 7–12 during the 1994–95 school year (see Harris et al.
2009).
In this small school, the correlation between race similarity and being friends
is mildly positive (0.017). This value is much higher than would be expected if
the same friendships were distributed at random with respect to race.
QAP is appropriate when a researcher is interested in explaining a dyadic
outcome that is not directional – such as levels of trade between countries or
similarities between companies – using dyadic predictors among the same
nodes. Importantly, QAP allows the researcher to test for associations at dyadic
levels without the errors associated with nonindependent data, but it does not
provide any particular insight into the substantive nature of the network’s
structural features.
QAP can be extended in several ways. Substantively, the most useful
approaches are multiple regression and longitudinal models (see Martin
1999). Multiple regression QAP (MRQAP) addresses the issue of
interdependence and allows the researcher to estimate the relationship between
two networks, or dyadic variables, while controlling for other variables that
might be associated with the outcome matrix. One can also calculate other
statistics (e.g., odds ratios), depending on the types of variables being evaluated.
314 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press–0.02 –0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02
Correlation
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
12.5
10.0
Percent
Observed
FIGURE 13.1 QAP on “same race” in one Add Health school
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press(However, to the best of our knowledge, no explicit proof exists that MRQAP
works correctly in the case of binary outcomes.) Other advances in QAP-style
models have been in accelerating the randomization process and avoiding the
generation of overly optimistic significance tests, given that complicated sorting
systems to ensure genuine random comparisons are difficult to generate. Biases
in QAP have, however, been observed in cases with high collinearity or highly
skewed distributions, although modern residual-based methods are less prone
to such errors (see Dekker, Krackhardt, & Snijders 2007 for an in-depth
discussion of these issues; see Snijders 2016 for an extension to the multilevel
context).
13.6.2 Exponential Random Graph Models (ERGMs)
In contrast to the simulation-for-inference approach exemplified by QAP, other
network inference models focus on a particular functional form of a well￾known statistical model and tweak it to make it amenable to the sorts of
assumption violations that would normally follow from network data.
Among such models, the exponential random graph model (ERGM) has experi￾enced the largest growth.
5 The ERGM is part of a long historical series of p*
(pronounced “p-star”) models in statistics and random graph theory, which
developed parametric models of networks. These p* models are models of the
entire graph, although they are operationalized on the dyads (as we discuss
later). Substantively, the ERGM approach asks whether the graph in question is
an element of the class of all random graphs with the given known elements
(one instantiation of possible realizations) – for example, all graphs with five
nodes and three edges, or the probability of observing the current graph given
these conditions. This distribution of possible realizations is considered the
probability distribution for the observed network, and interdependencies across
network configurations (conditions) shape it. Much of the complication of
these models rests in the fact that the class of all graphs of a given set is often
very large. For example, there are precisely 12,005,168 unique isomorphic
graphs with 10 nodes, and the number with 20 nodes exceeds 6.45  1038,
making the enumeration of all graphs with particular constraints
computationally impossible.
The solution to the enumeration problem is to create a probability distribu￾tion over the set of relations in the network, but this is also a difficult construc￾tion. The idea is that for a network of a given size, one can determine the
probability that a given edge is present conditional on other features of the
5 There is some debate on the proper term for these models. Kuskova and Wasserman (2020)
discussed this matter and made a strong case for p* being a more historically and technically
accurate nomenclature. For better or worse, though, the field has largely taken ERGM (pro￾nounced as the word “ergum” rather than a set of initials) as given, and we follow that
convention here.
316 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressgraph (as we discussed in Chapter 7 regarding the likelihood of observing a
given number of triads of each type).
The “p1” model that Holland and Leinhardt (1981) outlined is the classic
foundation. This approach allows the researcher to generate a statistical
model of the network that includes an edges parameter (adjusting for the
volume of edges in the network), expansiveness parameters (capturing how
often ego nominates anyone, or their out-degree), attractiveness parameters
(capturing how often ego is nominated by anyone, or their in-degree), and a
reciprocity parameter (capturing the tendency for ego to nominate an alter
given that the alter nominates ego). In general, each of these parameters could
be set to vary. Thus, a different reciprocity probability might be generated for
each pair of people, for example. However, because formulating such a model
implies too many coefficients, leaving the model unidentified, Holland and
Leinhardt proposed fixing reciprocity as a network-wide constant. By con￾trast, Fienberg and Wasserman (1981) developed an edge-dependent
reciprocation version.
The example shown in Figure 13.2 helps to provide some intuition for
random graph models of this sort.
010000000
0 00000000
00 1100010
001 000001
1001 11100
00000 0000
001000 000
0010000 01
01100100 0
000011000
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21
.21 .21 .21
.21 .21
.21 .21 .21 .21 .21
.21
.21 .21
.21 .21 .21
.21 .21
0 0 .01 .01 0 0 0 0
0 00000000
.06 .61 0 0 0 .37
0 .13 0 .01 0 0 0
.2 .21 0 0
00000 0000
0 0 0 .02 .01 0 0 0
0 0 0 .4 0 0 0
.27 .17 .48 0 0 .02
.06 .01 .01 0 0 0 .01
.96
.84 .13 .99
.96 .9
.61 .99 1 .99 1
.97
.88 .71
.06 1 1
.96 .96
.11 .22 .22 .33 .11 .11 .11 .22
.11 .56 .22 .22 .33 .11 .11 .11 .22
.11 .11 .33 .11 .11 .22
.11 .11 .22 .33 .11 .11 .11
.11 .56 .11 .22
.11 .11 .56 .22 .22 .11 .11 .11 .22
.11 .11 .22 .22 .33 .11 .11 .22
.11 .11 .22 .22 .33 .11 .11
.11 .22 .22 .11 .11 .22
.11 .11 .56 .22 .11 .11 .11
.56
.22 .22 .11
.56 .22
.11 .22 .33 .11 .11
.56
.56 .22
.11 .56 .33
.22 .33
.03 .08 .11 .13 .03 .03 .03 .08
0 00000000
.2 .2 .57 .2 .21 .43
.08 .08 .28 .32 .08 .09 .1
.38 .95 .42 .65
00000 0000
.03 .03 .08 .11 .13 .03 .03 .08
.08 .07 .2 .26 .3 .08 .09
.14 .34 .42 .14 .15 .34
.08 .08 .75 .22 .08 .09 .1
.48
.43 .52 .23
.75 .22
.38 .65 .77 .38 0.4
.48
.73 .2
.14 .85 .47
.28 .32
.11 .11 .11 .11 .11 .11 .11 .11
0 00000000
.33 .33 .33 .33 .33 .33
.22 .22 .22 .22 .22 .22 .22
.56 .56 .56 .56
00000 0000
.11 .11 .11 .11 .11 .11 .11 .11
.22 .22 .22 .22 .22 .22 .22
.33 .33 .33 .33 .33 .33
.22 .22 .22 .22 .22 .22 .22
.11
.33 .33 .33
.22 .22
.56 .56 .56 .56 .56
.11
.22 .22
.33 .33 .33
.22 .22
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Estimated Probability
Observed Density +Out-degree
+In-degree +Out-degree
+In-degree
+Out-degree
+In-degree
+Homophily
FIGURE 13.2 Edgewise expected values from “p1” simple random graph models
Note: Numbers in black correspond to 1s in the observed adjacency matrix (i.e., realized
ties); numbers in white are not realized ties.
Models for Networks 317
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressHere, a simple ten-node adjacency matrix is given in the upper-left subfigure,
with present ties marked “1” and absent ties marked “0.” The present cells are
shaded based on the probability that they are observed; and because they
are the observed data, 0s are dark blue, and 1s are dark red. A series of more
constrained probability models for the network can then be imagined. In the
top-center graph, we assume a simple density model, which includes only the
number of edges in the network as a predictor. With 19 ties, density in
the network is 19/(10  9) = 0.21. The simple density model implies that the
probability of an edge is constant across all ninety possible dyadic relations;
thus, all cells are a lighter blue. Note that the density model is simply the well￾known Erdős–Rényi model. Additional panels consider other constraints
beyond density. The “+Out-degree” model includes a fixed effect for each
sender/row (i.e., expansiveness), whereas the “+In-degree” model includes a
fixed effect for each receiver/column (i.e., attractiveness). In these cases, nodes
that send or receive more ties have a comparatively higher probability of
observing an edge. For example, Node 5 sends the most ties, and the fifth
row is correspondingly higher than the others. Similarly, Nodes 3 and 6 receive
the most ties and therefore have the columns with the highest probabilities.
The core point in these additional subfigures is the introduction of a set of
constraints on the simple density model that allows for variation across rows or
columns, making the null model more realistic. One can then account for joint
effects. In the lower-center panel, the probability of a tie from Node 5 (the most
gregarious actor) to Nodes 3 and 6 (the most attractive actors) is quite high
(0.76), indicating that a tie between these actors is likely to be observed merely
because of the tie volume differences among them. These sorts of models can be
further enhanced with attribute similarity or reciprocity. In the lower-right
panel, adding a simple homophily parameter (unobserved in the figure) makes
some ties highly unlikely and others very likely. The models illustrated in the
figure are row, column, and dyad-independent, which is a deep simplification of
the observed social world. For many research questions, however, simply
knowing that the probability of a tie is high because of these sorts of simple
volume or similarity effects can be quite informative, and the models are easy to
fit with variants of logistic regression, although they do not generally identify
causal effects.
Of course, these types of random graph models rest on the assumption of
conditionally independent observations: net of the volume effects captured in
row, column, and attribute covariates, every tie is equally likely (as suggested
by all the equal values in the figure). But structural configurations, such as
connectivity or hierarchy, cannot be captured by simple dyad differences. The
ERGM emerged as a solution to this problem. The ERGM class of statistical
models is extremely flexible, allowing the researcher to model the network as a
function of all the dyadic independence features discussed earlier, as well as
higher-order features. Moreover, ERGMs serve as a stepping stone to new
developments in the statistical modeling of networks.
318 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe general form for an ERGM is written as follows:
P Yð Þ¼ ¼ yjX exp θTgð Þ y, X  
kð Þθ , (13.2)
where Y is the set of all networks of the class, y is a single observation from that
class, X is a matrix of attributes for the nodes, g(y,x) is a vector of network
statistics, θ is the vector of coefficients for those statistics, and k(θ) is a normal￾izing constant that ensures that the probability distribution properly sums to 1.
Thus, the numerator of the model represents a simple generalized linear model–
type association between coefficients and observed scores.
½  θ1θ2 ... θn
g1ð Þy
g2ð Þy
...
gnð Þy
2
4
3
5 ¼ Xn
i¼1
θ1  gi
ð Þy : (13.3)
The model in Equation 13.3 reflects the probability of observing a particular
network in a set of networks as a function of many g(y). The equation is
essentially a data-generating process (or a probability distribution function).
However, the model cannot be used to generate every possible network.
The main difficulty in estimating Equation 13.2 is k(θ): enumerating all the
graphs of a given class to ensure completeness is impossible. The solution to this
problem builds on a rich history in statistics that is outside the scope of this
book. This history began with Frank and Strauss (1986), who built on the
Hammersly–Clifford theorem for dependence graphs, which they used to create
what they called a Markov random graph. The dependency graph can be used
to specify which elements of Y are nonindependent and to model them by
considering each edge in the network as a random variable linked by shared
nodes. These elements are configurations of small subgraphs on the network,
representing edges, “stars,” paths of various lengths, triads, and so on. Some of
these dependencies are well known and can be written explicitly for simple
cases, such as the Bernoulli graph, in which each tie is simply a random coin flip
(in this case, each clique in the dependence graph is a single node) or dyadic
homophily variables (where dependence is assumed within dyads but not
between dyads). Note that the Bernoulli graph is equivalent to the simple
density, or Erdős–Rényi, model. Substantively, the ERGM approach assumes
that the full probability distribution for Y is captured by a random draw from
the probabilities in the specified summary statistics. In general regression terms,
this assumption is equivalent to the assumption that a model is correctly
specified. This assumption is a bit more substantively significant in the
ERGM case than researchers are often accustomed to with OLS or
related models.
A core insight from Frank and Strauss (1986) and Wasserman and Pattison
(1996) is that Equation 13.3 can be rewritten equivalently in terms of the log
odds of an edge (see also Frank 1991):
Models for Networks 319
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Presslogit Yij ¼ 1   ¼ θTδ½  g yð Þ , X ij, (13.4)
where Yij is the dyad, and δ[g(y,X)]ij is the change in g(y,X) when the value of
only the ij dyad is changed from 0 to 1. The δ here, known as “change
statistics,” allow the estimation of the probability model based on any configur￾ation of the network. Conceptually, to do so, one simply calculates the value of
g(y,X) with the edge set to 1, recalculates with the edge set to 0, and computes
the difference. (In practice, the two separate calculations are not necessarily
required; one can often know the effect of the change on the difference.) The
simple example shown in Figure 13.3 helps to build intuition.
Here, we reproduce the resulting data matrix for the first three nodes’
involvement. The first two columns are the dyad indicators for nodes i and j.
The third column is the dependent variable yij, which is 1 if node i nominates
node j. We list four change statistics, shown in the fourth through sixth
columns: a baseline “edges” parameter, a reciprocity parameter, a transitive
triples parameter, and a “same shape” parameter. Imagining the process of
calculating the change statistic, “edges” asks what toggling the yij dyad from on
to off would do to the count of ties in the network. If the tie is present, then that
count would be the sum of all other edges +1; if the tie is absent, then the count
would be the sum of all other edges, so the difference will always be 1. Adding a
constant vector of 1s to a linear model is the intercept, and the edges parameter
is generally interpreted as a model intercept: the parameter sets the floor for the
log odds of a tie when all else is 0. Reciprocity is the first structural parameter.
Again, imagine asking for each dyad what toggling yij does to the total count of
reciprocal ties in the network. If j nominates i, then toggling the edge will
i j Tied Edges Recip Trans Shape
121 1 1 2 1
131 1 0 3 1
140 1 0 1 0
150 1 0 0 0
160 1 0 2 0
211 1 1 1 1
231 1 1 2 1
240 1 0 2 0
250 1 0 0 0
260 1 0 3 0
310 1 1 3 1
321 1 1 1 1
341 1 0 3 0
350 1 0 2 0
361 1 1 2 0
FIGURE 13.3 Exemplar data matrix for simple ERGM change statistics
320 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressincrease the reciprocity in the network by 1; if j does not nominate i, then i
nominating j has no effect on reciprocity, and this change statistic, in practice,
becomes an indicator on the dyads for j nominating i. The number of transitive
triples is computed the same way. A transitive triple occurs if a ! b, b ! c, and
a ! c; the statistic can change if the focal yij is in any of those three links. Thus,
for example, the y12 dyad contributes to transitivity via the 1 ! 2 ! 3 ordered
triple and through the 1 ! 3 ! 2 ordered triple. The shape parameter will
equal 1 any time i and j are in the same group.
The ERGM class of models is quite flexible. These models allow researchers
to specify any number of structural effects in addition to all the attribute and
node-level features that characterized the early p1 models, given that all dyadic
independence models are a special case of the general class and permit the
identification of features that drive network formation while holding everything
else constant. This endeavor will usually be guided by theory and model fit, as
we discuss later in the chapter (see Robins et al. 2007 for an outline of model
trimming strategies). Thus, for example, if the norm of reciprocity is thought to
be active in a setting, the researcher can test for that possibility using the
“mutual” term. And within specification limits, the researcher can test for a
positive return to transitivity to test social balance–inspired hypotheses.
The added advantage of the ERGM framework is that the researcher can
incorporate alternate explanations (i.e., controls) into the explanatory model.
For example, in explaining the mechanisms of friendship ties using Facebook
data, Wimmer and Lewis (2010) used ERGMs to examine racial homophily
vis-à-vis several other exogenous and endogenous explanations. The fine granu￾larity of their data allows for a more precise test of the homophily thesis, which
suggests that attraction to similar others is what matters in friendships, above
and beyond factors that could be misconstrued as attraction (e.g., simply being
in the same places with repeated contact). This flexibility allows researchers to
identify the independent effect of a given covariate on the likelihood of gener￾ating the observed network. Rather than including all potentially confounding
factors, of course, parsimonious models are sought.
The full set of ERGM terms are theoretically without limits, and software
developers have included a wide selection (see the help(“ergm.terms”) function
in R). Most studies based on ERGMs include a table of the types of effects
included in the model (e.g., Kim et al. 2016: 31). Some of the most common are
shown in Table 13.1.
Unfortunately, this flexibility comes at a cost – namely, the ERGM approach
comes with a handful of assumptions and associated estimation difficulties.
Because the model as specified cannot be estimated via direct maximum likeli￾hood, Wasserman and Pattison (1996) suggested using a pseudo-likelihood
approach based on the simple logistic regression of the observed edges on the
change statistic. As already discussed, such approaches present difficulties with
estimation of the parameters and standard errors (which can be biased). Logit￾based pseudo-likelihood methods at the dyad level often produce estimates
Models for Networks 321
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press 13.1 Common structural and actor effects included in ERGMs
Effect Graphic Explanation
Purely Structural Effects
1 Edges A baseline propensity for
a tie to form in the
absence of other
effects
2 Reciprocity The propensity for a tie
from one actor to a
second when there is
already a tie from the
second to the first
3 Popularity
Spread
The propensity for
dispersion in the in￾degree distribution,
indicating that there
are a few highly
popular actors
4 Activity Spread The propensity for
dispersion in the out￾degree distribution,
indicating that there
are a few highly active
actors
5 Simple
Transitive
Closure
The propensity for
transitive triads to
form
6 Generalized
Transitive
Closure
The propensity for ties to
form as part of a
transitive triad or a
multiply transitive
configuration
7 Simple
Connectivity
The propensity for ties to
form as part of simple
path formations
322 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbased on degenerate (or nearly degenerate) models and can be sensitive to data
variation and model specification, often in ways not obvious to investigators
based on a single model evaluation. This occurs, in part, because pseudo￾likelihood estimation will typically misrepresent part of the dependence struc￾ture in the network being modeled (unless the model is dyad-independent).
The solution to the pseudo-likelihood estimation problem is to use a Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation approach. The MCMC approach
offers a class of algorithms for sampling from probability distributions by
simulating a stochastic process, and its state space (i.e., possible network
configurations) includes the structure of interest (i.e., the observed network).
In the ERGM case, the graph is initialized using the pseudo-likelihood esti￾mates; then the state space is defined by simulating a network based on these
parameters and changing edges in the set of simulated networks based on
probabilities assumed by the current state of the model. As thousands of these
Effect Graphic Explanation
8 Generalized
Connectivity
The propensity for ties to
form as part of
formations involving
multiple shortest paths
between actors
Actor–Relation Effects (Black Node Indicates Actor with Attribute)
9 Sender The propensity for a tie
to be directed from an
actor with a particular
attribute
10 Receiver The propensity for a tie
to be directed toward
an actor with a
particular attribute
11 Homophily The propensity for a tie
to form from one actor
to another actor with
the same attribute (or
similar levels of a
continuous attribute)
12 Mutual
Product
The propensity for a
mutual tie to form
between actors who
both have high levels
of a continuous
attribute
Models for Networks 323
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Presschanges accumulate and slightly different networks are simulated each time, the
model walks through the space of parameters to examine whether a given set
more closely approximates the observed network. Eventually, the Markov
chain converges on the desired distribution, such that the sample statistics on
the generated networks match those from the observed network. Importantly,
the MCMC approach is relevant only for model specifications that include
endogenous structural (i.e., not dyad-independent) effects. Simple dyad￾independent models are a special case of the general ERGM, but because of
the dyadic-independence assumption, the pseudo-likelihood estimates are
accurate (although they are not necessarily accurate if a reciprocity term is
included; Snijders 2002).
Although the MCMC approach is effective in minimizing errors associated
with the original pseudo-likelihood approach, the ERGM class of models, with
endogenous effects, is highly sensitive to model specification. A model that is
misspecified can produce degenerate results. A model is said to be near￾degenerate when the average of the simulated set matches the observed sample
statistics (as a result of the estimation) but no simulated network produced by
the model is remotely similar to the observed graph because all simulated
graphs are extremal (e.g., nearly complete network or nearly empty networks)
(Handcock 2002, 2003).
The classic case of degeneracy occurs when both an edges parameter and a
simple transitivity parameter are included in the model. Because transitive
triples (e.g., “a friend of a friend is a friend”) are common in social relations,
a positive parameter is likely to be found. Consider the graph in Figure 13.3,
which shows a fair number of closed triads, leading us to expect a positive
transitivity coefficient. In turn, one could imagine a model finding that adding a
tie between, say, Nodes 1 and 6 would add to the observed transitivity (as
expected with a positive tie), which would then be seeded into the next iteration
of the simulation. Once a tie exists between Nodes 1 and 6, Node 2 will have
increased return to transitivity by also making a tie with 6, and so on. That is, if
the MCMC simulation finds that a little transitivity is good, then the simulation
will often suggest that more is better, and the entire system will snowball into a
single complete clique. When examining the set of simulated networks gener￾ated by the MCMC, one will find that it produces a mix of complete cliques and
completely empty networks (snowballing away from making intransitive ties),
the average of which might yield a value very close to the observed network.
Degeneracy in ERGMs is not a problem of the model class; rather, it is a
problem with the model specification. In OLS regression, the researcher is
generally comfortable with somewhat misspecified functional forms in the
model. For example, the researcher might know that education is not linearly
associated with income, but it would not be terribly wrong to treat the associ￾ation as if it were linear, particularly if education is included in the model as a
control rather than a focal variable. The same cannot be said for MCMC￾ERGMs. Here, the algorithm will follow the specification entered into the
324 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmodel, and a positive transitivity term might lead to generated networks with
too many closed triads. In reality, as Martin (2009a) succinctly noted, human
networks are rarely extremal. We humans do not want increasingly more
closed triads; we want a few. After a certain point, the return to transitivity is
outweighed by the cost of maintaining more ties.
In ERGMs, capturing the changing marginal returns to individuals of struc￾tural features such as transitivity is aided by a series of geometrically weighted
parameters. These parameters are effective at operationalizing this sort of curve
across many otherwise known-to-be degenerate specifications. Rather than
producing a simple positive degree count (in which more friends are considered
better), MCMC-ERGMs may yield a geometrically weighted degree term that
dampens the extremes (Hunter 2007; Hunter & Handcock 2006; Snijders et al.
2006). Similar weighted parameters can be produced for triadic closure with
geometrically weighted edgewise shared partnerships. These weighted param￾eters are much less sensitive to misspecification and model degeneracy.
Although the simulation base of MCMC models creates difficulties because
it interprets the model specifications quite literally, it also opens new opportun￾ities for considering model fit. The standard MCMC-based model fit statistics
(e.g., Bayesian information criterion [BIC]) are valid. But because researchers
can so readily simulate networks from the model, they can ask whether the
parameters entered into the model are not only significant in the standard sense
but also sufficient to explain features of the network not otherwise seen. The
underlying idea of the ERGM framework is that a (hopefully parsimonious) set
of local actor-centric effects is responsible for the structure observed. If the
hypothesis is true, then the researcher should be able to conduct a type of out￾of-sample test, comparing features of the observed network that are not
included in the model with the simulated networks (Hunter, Goodreau, &
Handcock 2008). If the social process is modeled correctly, the observed and
simulated networks should match. For example, if researchers are trying to
understand the logics guiding friendship choices in high school and think that
sex and grade homophily combined with popularity status effects are the core
drivers, then they should see the same distribution of clustering, short paths,
and centralization observed in the sample as in the networks simulated from the
model. Of course, just as there are many two-number sets that sum to 10, there
may be many simple models that fit the same higher-order statistics, and thus a
good-fitting model in this sense does not necessarily imply that it is the only
“correct” model.
ERGMs have served as the root for many alternative statistical models of
networks. The original specification was fit with binary, cross-sectional, one￾mode networks. Although these relatively simple networks remain important,
the field of network analysis has extended the models in more complex direc￾tions. On the base specification side, extensions include generalized homophily
models based on unobserved features (latent space models), as well as models
aimed at identifying discrete groups (stochastic blockmodels). The models have
Models for Networks 325
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbeen extended to two-mode networks, multilayer networks, and networks with
valued ties. Network dynamics have been treated in multiple ways, ranging
from very simple panel models to data on quickly evolving interactional
sequences. A discussion of the full slate of such models is beyond the scope of
this chapter, but we introduce one type of model – latent space models – in
broad outlines next. Almost all these developments are found in R packages,
and we hope that our discussion in the remainder of the chapter and in the
tutorials will provide a sufficient jumping-off point (see also Lusher, Koskinen,
& Robins 2013 for a more detailed treatment of ERGMs).
13.6.3 Latent Space Models
ERGMs are particularly useful for testing specific hypotheses about generative
network effects, but a researcher may be unsure about the underlying features
driving a network. In addition, a researcher interested in testing a particular
dyadic feature (e.g., homophily) may be uninterested in the nondyadic struc￾tural effects but may still want to account for them to avoid biased estimation.
In such cases, an appealing option is the network latent space model (Hoff,
Raftery, & Handcock 2002). We briefly mentioned the logic of deriving latent
spaces in Chapter 12 as a vehicle for understanding cultural spaces. The same
approach can, of course, be used to model any relational setting. The general
form of the model, written in terms of logits to show similarity to models above,
is as follows:
P Yij ¼ 1jX, zi, zj
  ¼ α þ β0
Xij − zi − zj

 
, (13.5)
where Yij is the observed dyad, X is a matrix of covariates, and z is the
k-dimensional latent space. Thus, zi is node i’s position in the latent space, and
|zi − zj| is the distance between nodes i and j. The basic idea behind this model is
that the probability of a tie is higher the closer two actors are in the latent space.
The model identifies each node’s position in the latent space to optimize this
association, thus capturing much of the interdependence in the network that is
not directly associated with X. Note that this specification makes previously
endogenous features exogenous. Thus, features such as transitivity and
reciprocity, which are the graphical structure bringing people close in the space,
are treated as a latent variable. This is both a substantive and methodological
trade-off. Substantively, if one is interested in specific mechanisms, the latent
space approach masks those mechanisms with a latent variable.
Methodologically, the model sidesteps the question of data-generating features
(and thus nonindependence) in favor of variance-capturing latent variables. The
model works because one can embed a network in n(n − 1) dimensions without
error, although doing so uses all the model’s degrees of freedom. In most cases, a
pairwise distance can be summarized quite well with many fewer dimensions in
the latent space – often just two or three – to capture the majority of the
326 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinterdependence in the network not already captured by X. Intuitively, this
method is similar to the spring-embedder sorts of layouts discussed in
Chapter 5, in which the layout algorithm finds a placement of nodes that
minimizes the distance between connected nodes. For visualization, researchers
typically limit themselves to two dimensions; for modeling, though, one need not
be so limited.
The model class is flexible, with extensions that include embedding the Z
space within independent clusters, avoiding the assumption that distance oper￾ates the same in all cases. Rather, some number of communities can be speci￾fied, with community membership guiding the internal metric for z.
Alternatively, node-level random effects for differences in sending ties (social￾ity) or receiving ties (popularity) can be added, all estimated simultaneously (see
Krivitsky et al. 2009).
Latent space models generally fit well (arbitrarily well if the researcher is
willing to add many latent dimensions), and they control quite well for interde￾pendencies in the network that are not of focal interest (i.e., nuisance param￾eters). The main drawback of the models is that they are computationally
intensive, and the dimensions have no intuitive meaning. As a result, one either
has to treat the dimensions as purely control parameters without substantive
interpretation or attempt to name the factors that drive the dimensions. If
choosing the latter, one can often use these models in an exploratory fashion
to help identify the features that are driving the structure of the network. For
example, if it becomes clear upon plotting the dimensions of the latent space
that one dimension is highly correlated with the node’s age, then adding an
explicit node factor for age would be advisable. The latentnet package includes
several detailed plotting tools for just this sort of exploration.
An example is shown in Figure 13.4, which summarizes three latent space
models for Sampson’s classic data on a monastery undergoing a social schism
(Sampson 1969), fit with varying numbers of dimensions (d) and groups (g).
The routine provides a plot for each node in the dimensions specified (inter￾active and rotatable when d = 3) and plots a group centroid (+) and a circle
containing most of the cases for that cluster. The dimensions are meaningless
from a direction standpoint; as with other visualizations, then, one could rotate,
reverse, or transpose the space and have the exact same fit. What matters here is
that the dimensions maximize the probability of a tie given each node’s relative
distance in the space. Because these are MCMC with maximum likelihood
estimation, the BIC score can serve as a rough guide to model fit (with smaller
values indicating better fit). The models will almost always improve a little with
added dimensions. Further, given that results are based on an MCMC simula￾tion, any two runs might differ a tiny bit. Thus, researchers should take some
care to ensure that they are making substantive improvements in the fit by adding
dimensions. In Figure 13.4, a large improvement in fit is visible (with the BIC
reduced from 120 to 82) with the addition of three groups to the base 2D model,
reflecting the natural three clusters evident through the image. Substantively, it is
Models for Networks 327
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press−2 −1 0 1 2
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3samplike ~ euclidean(d = 2)
−2 −1 0 1 2
samplike ~ euclidean(d = 2, g = 2)
Z1
−2 −1 0 1 2
samplike ~ euclidean(d = 2, g = 3)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Z1
Model BIC: 129.48 Model BIC: 120.30 Model BIC: 81.78
Z1
Z2
FIGURE 13.4 Three latent space models of Sampson’s monastery data
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinteresting to note that Group 1 (red) differs from Groups 2 (green) and 3 (blue)
on z1, whereas z2 separates the monks in Group 2 from those in Group 3. To
make these data interpretable, one would want to know whether any attributes
(novitiate status, say) distinguish these actors. The network appears to fit fairly
well in two dimensions. If one moves from d = 2 to d = 3, model fit changes from
81.78 to 80 (not shown), which arguably is not an improvement that warrants
trying to interpret another latent dimension. Examination of the 3D plot suggests
that the three clusters still line up in largely a single plane, indicating that the
third dimension does not add much (see Figure 13.5).
1.5
MKL Latent Positions of Samp. fit 4
–2 –1 0 1 2
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
Z2
Z3
Z1
FIGURE 13.5 3D plot of Sampson’s monastery data
Models for Networks 329
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press13.7   
Testing when ties will form and dissolve is not easy. Without longitudinal data,
it is impossible to know whether the exogenous or endogenous factors the
researcher believes to be important are truly causal or, instead, the observed
pattern of ties is linked to related but unobserved factors in the environment.
For example, with regard to balance theory, Feld (1981) cautioned that a
researcher might easily mistake a high degree of clustering in a high school
friendship network as caused by endogenous mechanisms of triadic closure
when, in fact, it could be the result of exogenous factors of shared curricular
and extracurricular foci that bring students together around shared interests.
Without seeing new ties form, existing ties dissolve, and thus friends of friends
becoming friends – even when two people are not together, say, in the drama
club or on a sports team – it is hard to tease apart exogenous factors (e.g.,
shared foci that bring people together into tight-knit groups) from endogenous
effects (e.g., Goodreau, Kitts, & Morris 2009).
When moving toward longitudinal models, as with any complex analysis,
we recommend first conducting descriptive and exploratory analyses to
develop a reasonable empirical base from which to build more complicated
models. Further, as with cross-sectional analysis, the researcher should first
plot the data, examine distributions, and so forth. The most straightforward
longitudinal descriptive analyses are panel extensions of the cross-sectional
metrics we described earlier in the chapter. It is also useful to gain a very
rough sense of the overall change in relations. What proportion of relations
are new at each wave, and which types of relations are stable? Are commu￾nities in networks the same over time? Do popular people remain popular?
For example, examining the in-degree distributions over time in youth net￾works (Felmlee et al. 2018) might reveal that the global distribution is largely
constant over time and across settings. But examining individual mobility
might reveal that people have highly variable popularity trajectories, with
very few people occupying consistently popular or consistently unpopular
positions. Thus, whereas the global structure of the network is largely
consistent, the micro-structure is not, suggesting a normative form of rela￾tional structure that is not dependent on individual identity (Moody et al.
2011). Mobility matrices can be quite useful in identifying movement across
network categories over time. An example is shown in Figure 13.6, which
examines the occupancy of a role position in the school network at two
waves and is shaded according to differences from the expected value. We
define eight positions using the triad-based role identification routine dis￾cussed in Chapter 7, and these positions tend to be fairly stable: students
who occupy the “leading crowd” position tend to stay there or move within
one of the other more popular/central roles.
When the network data are collected in waves, the data structure largely
chooses the temporal resolution for the researcher. Otherwise, the researcher
330 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressneeds to choose the temporal scale to construct waves from the data to use these
mobility or panel-style descriptive statistics. Because the choice is rarely incon￾sequential, the researcher should have a solid theoretical justification based on
natural turning points in the setting (e.g., semesters at a university, terms for a
government office) or explore ranges of temporal windows.
6
Theoretically, most social settings are in continuous churn: even seemingly
stable relations are often negotiated continuously, refreshed, and maintained.
The ability to model these sorts of microdynamics is often complicated by the
available data, however. In most cases, although the real social process is known
to be continuous, the data occur as a series of cross-sectional waves. Thankfully,
both models and data collection are catching up with empirical reality in order to
12 9 41
5 12 19
4 40
15
5 6
34
9 20 35
44
8 2 13 8 7
20 10 2 13 19
7 13 3 15 6 12
3 6 26 3 20 7 20
7 23 14 18 7 21
1 5 14 12 3 5 26
0 13 6 3 15
1 4 11 10 2 16 11
1.LeadingCrd
2.Aloofs
3.Fed.Frnds
4.Segmented
5.Lieutenant
6.Hangers-on
7.Pop. Loner
8.Outsiders
8.Outsiders
7.Pop. Loner
6.Hangers-on
5.Lieutenant
4.Segmented
3.Fed.Frnds
2.Aloofs
1.Leading Crd
FIGURE 13.6 Role structure mobility matrix
6 The networkDynamic package includes several tools designed to simplify descriptive analysis.
The basic strategy is to use the package tools to create a stacked network, which will then
effectively repeat the cross-sectional analyses for each defined wave or interval.
Models for Networks 331
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press 13.2 Statistical models for longitudinal networks
Method Core Question Relational Unit Temporal Resolution Explanatory Advantage
Temporal
ERGM
(TERGM)
How do features of a
network at t affect the
network at t + 1?
Whole network probability
model, implemented and
interpretable on dyad.
Directed or symmetric.
Discrete panel, whole
network
Direct extension of ERGM
to time, allowing one to
control for relational
stability.
Separable
Temporal
ERGM
(STERGM)
Do tie formation processes
differ from tie dissolution
processes?
Whole network probability
model, implemented and
interpretable on dyad.
Directed or symmetric.
Discrete panel, whole
network
Really two ERG models,
one for tie formation
and one for tie
dissolution, with the
evolution being the joint
action of both.
Relational
Event Model
(REM)
Ho do past interactional
events shape the next
event to occur?
Directed dyad, conditional
on state of graph at t − 1
Continuous, rapid Analogous to event history
model for structurally
contingent events;
allows sequence and
structural pattern
features.
Stochastic
Actor￾Oriented
Model
(SAOM/
SIENA)
What processes predict
network change between
t and t + 1? How do
network ties and
behavior coevolve?
Two-part model: Network
ties and node states
Data observed in panels,
but simulated
microsteps assume
continuous change
Wide array of features, but
particularly useful for
modeling network
change as an
endogenous function of
network structural
features simultaneously
with behavior. Allows
for modeling of
multiplex relations.
332
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Presscapture network dynamics at a finer scale. Table 13.2 provides a brief overview
of the core statistical network models used to capture network dynamics (see also
Duxbury 2022; Schaefer & Marcum 2020 for a detailed review).
13.7.1 Temporal and Separable Temporal ERGMs (TERGMs and
STERGMs)
The simplest way to analyze network dynamics is to use ERGM in a panel
fashion, predicting the current network as a function of the past network and
temporal covariates. For example, McFarland et al. (2014) used transitivity or
reciprocity in lagged networks to predict the future network. These longitudinal
or temporal ERGMs (TERGMs) treat the past as a control, with untied people
expected to remain untied and present relations expected to be maintained.
Thus, the structural features are interpretable as effects on the formation of new
ties. Such longitudinal models also allow for more nuanced dynamics, such as
dropping an unreciprocated tie or reciprocating an asymmetric tie made earlier.
These more careful dynamics require specifying change statistics in the graph
on the joint intersection of current and past relations, which can be difficult to
do (see Schaefer & Marcum 2020). The drawback is that ERGMs and
TERGMs both estimate a tie’s occurrence in comparison with all possible
network formulations (of other ties), and not necessarily tie change over time
as compared with tie stability. Thus, TERGMs effectively imply that tie loss is
the inverse of tie formation, and it is unclear whether that assumption is valid.
Separable temporal ERGMs (STERGMs) are one solution to these issues.
First, the main focus of STERGMs is on network dynamics, and the models
account for the network at t + 1, conditional on t. Second, STERGMs separately
model the loss of a tie from the gain of one, based on the assumption that the two
processes are often distinct. In this way, the model assumes that tie loss and tie
gain processes are independent and do not influence one another. Good examples
of this independence of tie formation and dissolution can be found in romantic
relations (Vaughan 1986) or scientific collaborations (Dahlander & McFarland
2013). Prior research has shown that the process of dating and entering a
marriage or collaboration differs from the process of dissolving a relationship
or sustaining one. Entry may rely on shallow features of attribute homophily
(e.g., age) and proximity, whereas sustaining ties may entail reinforcing strong
bonds, layering shared experiences (multiplexity), or finding instrumental returns
on the relationship (for collaboration). STERGMs are statistical models for the
underlying process of tie formation and, separately, tie dissolution.
To gain an intuitive sense of how STERGMs work, it helps to remember the
change statistic in ERGMs (see Equation 13.4). This formula is for a single
network at a single time, and the plus and minus signs refer to a tie existing
versus not existing. Using the preceding notation, the two equations of a
STERGM are the formation equation and the dissolution (or persistence)
equation, respectively:
Models for Networks 333
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Presslogit Yij,tþ1 ¼ 1jyc
ij, Yij,t ¼ 0
  ¼ θþδð Þ g þ ð Þy ij, (13.6)
logit Yij,tþ1 ¼ 1jyc
ij, Yij,t ¼ 1
  ¼ θ−δð Þ g−ð Þy ij: (13.7)
These equations are parallel to the ERGM equation, but we added a time
index t to the tie values and conditioned on the prior state of the dyad. The
formation equation (Equation 13.6) is conditional on the tie not existing in the
prior step, and the persistence equation (Equation 13.7) is conditional on the tie
already existing in the prior step. Notice that the equations now have two θ and
δ vectors (the hypothesized network mechanisms) that are positive for the
formation model and negative for the dissolution model. In both cases, the
model predicts the probability that a tie equals 1, so the difference in interpret￾ation depends on the conditional – on the state of dyad in the prior wave.
Coefficients in the persistence equation are thus interpreted as affecting the
likelihood that a tie is maintained, whereas coefficients in the formation equa￾tion are interpreted as the likelihood that new relations form.
In the end, the model represents the evolution of a network from t to t + 1 as
a product of two processes: one for tie formation and another for tie dissol￾ution, as depicted in Figure 13.7. In effect, then, we are running two ERGMs:
one conditional on a tie existing (for dissolution) and another conditional on a
tie not existing (for formation). This estimation procedure changes how we
interpret the coefficients. For formation, the coefficients are the log odds of tie
formation given all null ties; for dissolution, the coefficients are the log odds of
a tie given all existing ties.
13.7.2 Stochastic Actor-Oriented Models and Relational Event Models
The statistical modeling of networks continues to advance. Shifting from panel
to continuous-time data requires a corresponding shift in statistical methods.
Rather than trying to predict what the entire structure at time t looks like (given
the structure at t − 1), continuous models ask what predicts the next tie,
conditional on the sequence of all prior relations (Brandes, Lerner, & Snijders
2009; Marcum & Butts 2015; Schaefer & Marcum 2020). The most widely
used class of these models are stochastic actor-oriented models (SAOMs). We
cover SAOMs in detail in Chapter 15 because they also allow the researcher to
incorporate a dynamic coevolution of networks and behaviors; thus, these
models are particularly adept at handling some of the endogeneity issues we
have touched on throughout this book.
In addition to SAOMs, the relational event model (REM) (Butts 2008b) was
developed with this same continuous-time framing to identify dominant pat￾terns of interaction in fine-grained temporal data (i.e., time-stamped or
streaming). REMs provide a new modeling perspective for social network
dynamics, in line with an early focus on social interactions (Hinde 1976). The
334 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressidea behind REMs is that social interactions change frequently, and many
forms of relating occur as events. For example, friendship and colleague rela￾tionships may result from a series of exchanges rather than merely a reported
trans-situational relation. Friendship can emerge from a series of micro￾behaviors (such as socializing, sharing, support, and consolation), directed
interactions, or even utterances across pairs of persons over time. Similarly,
differential status roles can unfold as enactments of certain exchanges and
exchange patterns over time (Blau 1964; Leifer 1988). Relational events are
therefore social interactions (of a type) sent from one person (sender) to another
(receiver), and these actions are ordered over time to constitute an event history
(with order and timestamp). In this manner, the history of interactions can
affect future relational events (given some decay function, such that the further
in the past, the less impactful on the present moment). Because events transpire
Yt
Yt+1
Y+ − (Yt − Y −)
Y− (Y+ − Y t
)
Tie Formation ERGM
Y +/ Yt
; θ +
Tie Dissolution ERGM
Y −/ Yt
; θ−
FIGURE 13.7 The STERGM framework jointly models tie formation and tie dissolution
(Statnet Development Team; see Morris et al. 2014)
Models for Networks 335
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressin a nonsimultaneous event history, they have an interevent wait that can be
estimated akin to a proportional hazard model.
Specification of these models can be complicated because of the specificity required
with respect to structure, timing, and order. Typically, the model is run to predict the
next relational event or interaction of a particular type. The number of events that
could possibly occur at any given time could be the number of senders  the number
of receivers  the number of action types (S  R  A). The model then can include
lagged sender, receiver, and event covariates on the grounds that the next turn is a
function of the preceding one (i.e., interactional inertia). Relational network charac￾teristics that are more static, such as friendship reports or seating proximity (or even
reciprocity, transitivity, and in-degree up to a particular time in those networks), can
also be included as dyadic predictors. For node-level effects, such as prior interaction
in-degree, the model counts the number of times an actor receives ties to time t (and
normalizes it); that count is then used to predict sending a tie at t + 1. As Schaefer and
Marcum (2020: 260) explained,
[D]uring estimation, each sufficient statistic is evaluated against what could possibly
happen next (i.e., each possible event) and modifies the hazard of the next event
according to whether that statistic increases or decreases its relative propensity to
transpire. In practice, the “relevant” package parameterizes these effects as log rate
multipliers on the hazard of the next event.
The variety of options for models here is wide. In addition to the tutorial for
this chapter, we recommend the dedicated tutorials for relevant and informR
packages on Statnet. See also the recently developed dynamic network actor
model (DyNAM), which can be used to estimate REMs from an actor￾orientated perspective; the goldfish package in R can be used to estimate these
models (Stadtfeld, Hollway, & Block 2017).
REMs open myriad new structural analyses, given research suggesting that
temporal patterns of interactions within networks, independent of exogenous
factors, are responsible for how structures emerge. For example, hierarchies
appear to evolve as a systematic function of the unfolding of relations (Chase
1981; Hallinan 1974; Martin 2003). Research bridges network analysis and
conversation analysis by looking at the participation shifts (p-shifts, for short)
that organize turn-taking in meetings and thereby stabilize hierarchies and role
structures in groups (see Table 13.3). These models depend on treating conver￾sations as fine-grained temporal networks.
These moment-to-moment interactional sequences are the most elemental
forms of social structure. Successful interaction rituals (Collins 2014) build
confidence and solidify one’s position in an interactional order. Thus, an
endogenous feedback loop seems to occur between one’s position in the hier￾archy and the types of interactions one is more likely to have.
REMs hold promise for examining such face-to-face and moment-to-moment
moves in conversations and other communications that characterize the surface
level of social structure. For example, REMs can be used to identify mechanisms
336 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdriving the incidence of certain types of relational events over time (akin to a
conditional logit), such as communication events between ij via email, tweets,
texts, and so on. Take, for example, the incidence of emails or phone calls from i
to j. Using the REM framework, the researcher can assess whether these ij
communicative events are associated with time (e.g., time of day, time of year);
the status of receiver j (preferential attachment); the sender’s gender (likelihood of
communicating for boys vs. girls); homophily of ij (whether same-gender persons
are more likely to communicate); friendship (whether reported ij friends are more
likely to communicate); and network mechanisms of friendship reciprocity,
hierarchy, and closure (e.g., social conditions encouraging a communicative
event between ij based on the recent structure of prior events). Even more
intriguing, though, is how the REM framework can also include interactional
or covarying parameters of ij, such as with Gibson’s p-shifts. For example, if we
were modeling texting events with multiple texters, then one ij turn may be
piggybacked via a kj turn, and so on. By discerning the most likely p-shifts,
one can begin to identify preceding interaction dynamics (within a certain
horizon of recency) that correspond with ensuing relational events. This linking
of events as a temporal structure is a hallmark of nearly all network dynamic
models: they assume a Markov-like process of preceding or recent moments
shaping ensuing events in the next round. REMs allow us to bring contextual,
 13.3 Inventory of p-shifts with examples (Gibson 2003)
p-shift Example
Turn-Claiming
A0-XA John talks to the group, then Frank talks to John.
A0-X0 John talks to the group, then Frank talks to the group.
A0-XY John talks to the group, then Frank talks to Mary.
Turn-Receiving
AB-BA John talks to Mary, then Mary replies.
AB-B0 John talks to Mary, then Mary talks to the group.
AB-BY John talks to Mary, then Mary talks to Irene.
Turn-Usurping
AB-XA John talks to Mary, then Frank talks to John.
AB-XB John talks to Mary, then Frank talks to Mary.
AB-X0 John talks to Mary, then Frank talks to the group.
AB-XY John talks to Mary, then Frank talks to Irene.
Note: The initial speaker is denoted A; the initial target is B, unless the group is addressed (or the
target was ambiguous), in which case the target is 0. Then the p-shift is summarized in the form
(speaker1)(target1)-(speaker2)(target2), with A or B appearing after the hyphen only if the initial
speaker or target serves in one of these two positions in the second turn. When the speaker in the
second turn is someone other than A or B, X is used; when the target in the second turn is someone
other than A, B, or the group 0, Y is used.
Models for Networks 337
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressindividual, network, and interactional factors to bear when predicting ensuing
interactional or relational events.
13.8 
In this chapter, we returned to a core question: where do social networks come
from? We presented a number of exogenous and endogenous factors that help
answer this question. We outlined several techniques for modeling networks to
better discern exogenous and endogenous factors that combine to explain the
network. In most cases, explaining networks amounts to explaining dyads.
Extensions to longitudinal data provide even greater leverage in discerning
how actors are brought together, selecting and being selected into interactions
and relationships that are the very building blocks of social structures.
  
The literature on statistical models for networks is vast and has grown dramatically in
the last fifteen years. Here, we list a handful of key contemporary references and classic
foundational pieces, which should help those interested to launch a deeper exploration.
Anderson, Carolyn J., Stanley Wasserman, and Bradley Crouch. 1999. “A p* Primer:
Logit Models for Social Networks.” Social Networks 21: 37–66. (An early paper on
the ERGM/p* approach that still provides a good intuitive understanding of how
effects are coded and modeled.)
Butts, Carter T. 2008. “A Relational Events Framework for Social Action.” Sociological
Methodology 38: 155–200. (Introduces a family of models for dynamic event data
and sparked much recent work on modeling dynamic networks generally.)
Cranmer, Skyler J., Bruce A. Desmarais, and Jason W. Morgan. 2020. Inferential
Network Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (An excellent overview
of ERGM and latent-space models, with detailed examinations of model fit and
degeneracy issues and multiple data-type extensions.)
Duxbury, Scott. 2022. Longitudinal Network Models. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
(Provides excellent background and instruction on the most common statistical
models for longitudinal network data.)
Frank, Ove, and David Strauss. 1986. “Markov Graphs.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 81: 832–42. (A classic reference that provides the statistical
foundations for graph dependencies necessary for parameter estimation on network
properties.)
Holland, Paul W., and Samuel Leinhardt. 1981. “An Exponential Family of Probability
Distributions for Directed Graphs.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
76: 33–50. (Classic work that sets the stage for the growth of network statistical
models in the 1990s.)
Kolaczyk, Eric D. 2009. Statistical Analysis of Network Data. New York: Springer
Press. (A comprehensive and rigorous overview of network models.)
Kuskova, Valentina, and Stanley Wasserman. 2020. “An Introduction to Statistical
Models for Networks.” Pp. 219–33 in The Oxford Handbook of Social Networks,
338 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Pressedited by Ryan Light and James Moody. New York: Oxford University Press.
(Provides an excellent history and general overview of statistical modeling for
networks.)
Lusher, Dean, Johan Koskinen, and Gary Robins (eds.). 2012. Exponential Random
Graph Models for Social Networks: Theory, Methods and Applications. New York:
Cambridge University Press. (This edited volume includes clear explanations and
mathematical foundations for ERGMs and extensions. Includes numerous applica￾tions that provide guidance on the practical use and interpretation of complicated
models. See also Lusher et al. 2020.)
Lusher, Dean, Peng Wang, Julia Brennecke et al. 2020. “Advances in Exponential
Random Graph Models.” Pp. 234–53 in The Oxford Handbook of Social
Networks, edited by Ryan Light and James Moody. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Statnet Development Team (Pavel N. Krivitsky, Mark S. Handcock, David R. Hunter
et al.). 2003–20. statnet: Software tools for the Statistical Modeling of Network Data.
http://statnet.org (This group of researchers has been pushing the development of
statistical models for networks for nearly twenty years. The website includes multiple
tutorials and further references.)
Wasserman, Stanley. 1977. “Random Directed Graph Distributions and the Triad
Census in Social Networks.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 5: 61–86. (An early
paper on random graph distributions, essential for testing triadic distributions against
underlying volume features.)
Models for Networks 339
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press14
Models for Network Diffusion
Having lived through a global pandemic, or more trivially, having seen online
memes “go viral,” we are all intuitively familiar with the spread of things
through network ties. Diseases, memes, used books, and cash are ready
examples of things passed from one person to another. Somewhat less familiar,
perhaps, is that a fundamentally similar mechanism underlies many of our
social behaviors. Understanding such processes is therefore related to under￾standing how anything – information, rumors, diseases, and so on – diffuses
through a system. Key questions include, How does a network structure as a
whole (its topology) affect the diffusion process? And how does a node’s
position in this structure affect the likelihood of transmitting and receiving
flows?
14.1  
What happens after a network forms? Presumably, many of your network ties
entail spending some time together, talking, and exchanging ideas – interactions
that can lead to changes in your health, thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, as
well as provide access to important information and resources. Networks are
frequently conduits that reflect and reinforce social structures through these
various flows. In the previous chapter, we examined networks as outcomes to
be explained. In this chapter, we return once again to Table 2.1, moving from
the second column to the first, in which networks are causes of other outcomes.
In many ways, these networks-as-causes approaches seek to fulfill the initial
promise of network analysis as a “psychological geography” in which individ￾uals are connected through “emotional currents, cross-currents and under￾currents of human relationships in a community” (Moreno 1933: 17).
Understanding the causes and consequences of flows is important for many
subfields. For example, researchers concerned with the diffusion of innovations
340
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press(e.g., a vaccine) have been particularly active in adjudicating the mechanisms
that promote or inhibit the adoption of important new technologies or ideas.
Many of the proposed mechanisms are connectionist, treating network ties like
pipes that carry information and influence. For example, regarding physicians’
adoption of the new antibiotic tetracycline in the 1950s, evidence suggested
that higher-status doctors led the process via their direct referral ties and that
others followed suit (Rogers 2003 [1962]). However, Burt’s (1987) subsequent
reanalysis of the data suggested that the diffusion was less a matter of cohesion
and direct referrals than one of position, with structurally equivalent competi￾tors imitating one another’s adoption of the new drug. Rather than flowing
through direct influences, innovation diffusion may sometimes be motivated by
monitoring one’s structurally equivalent competitors, a process that shapes
perceptions of one’s role and proper action given one’s position.
Although we have discussed network ties as conduits, we have not modeled
flows. Most network studies have similarly relied on descriptions of structures
that infer possible flows, rather than actually observing something flowing. For
example, from descriptive techniques presented in Part II, we have learned to
depict structures as more or less connected, to identify points of structural
cohesion or weakness, and to discuss implications of such structural forms.
But many of these implications are based on assumptions and theories about
how people affect one another: what makes a network a dynamic system is that
each node is engaged in a number of behaviors that, in turn, affect others
through their ties. In the previous chapter, we examined how the formation
and dissolution of ties can be predicted with theories of individual and collect￾ive behaviors largely rooted in social psychology. In this chapter, we draw on
related research on power, influence, and culture in predicting when and among
whom flows will occur within networks.
14.2    
For a number of theories, what flows through networks are important
resources for individuals: material, symbolic, and emotional goods (Lin
2002). The flows of such goods are also seen as vital for the overall perform￾ance of groups, communities, and indeed entire societies (Durkheim 1893).
A group with little flow of information and emotions – as in a family that does
not regularly communicate – is likely to experience individual and collective
strain. A hospital that cannot quickly and reliably share information about
patients through various ranks and roles, for example, will likely have stressed￾out workers and worse health outcomes for patients. Just as the early sociolo￾gists imagined society as a type of organism in which the lifeblood was flows of
key material resources and feelings, network scholars see at a less grand scale
many systems and subsystems as held together by transfers carried through
networks. For example, academic research communities are tied through flows
Models for Network Diffusion 341
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressof ideas shared via various networks, such as collaborations and annual
professional meetings.
Sometimes network flows are best avoided. Obviously, in the case of actual
biological contagions, research is dedicated to preventing outbreaks and trans￾mission. Social contagions – such as negative ideas, misinformation, and
destructive behaviors – may also spread through social ties. Christakis and
Fowler (2007) found evidence that obesity spread in a contagion-like fashion,
most likely as a result of close friends altering their standards of what is
considered overweight (although this work has generated many questions
concerning its veracity, some of which we will cover in this chapter).
Papachristos (2009) found that gang violence tends to have a structural basis
and spreads through networks. Collins (2014) posited that society can be seen
as a set of interactional ritual chains through which people spread emotions in
energy-generating or energy-depleting ways. We expect a wave of network
studies on the spread of political and vaccine misinformation through social
media to have been published by the time this book is in print.
Formal network properties matter in such processes. The overall density of a
network is likely to amplify the positive rewards of flows that are beneficial for
nodes and to enhance the negative consequences of harmful flows. An individ￾ual’s position in a more or less connected system of flows matters. At the
individual level, structural position matters. When flows are important
resources or information, a position through which many flows tend to pass
(say, a high betweenness centrality) is an optimal position in the network.
However, the same position can be a liability when flows are potentially
harmful to an individual’s life chances. For example, healthcare workers are
often at greater risk of contracting diseases because they are central in the
contact network of infected persons. How formal properties and positions
interact with various types of contagion is a burgeoning area of research
(Acerbi, Mesoudi, & Smolla 2022; Centola 2018).
We start our discussion of flows with mechanistic diffusion modeled on
disease systems, directly borrowing the language of infection and contagion.
This discussion provides the clearest example and allows us to build a language
for discussing spread over networks before we complicate the picture by
examining behavioral diffusion.
14.3     
The intuition behind network diffusion is simple: some people who are suscep￾tible (S) to a contagion come into contact with people who are infected (I), who
pass their infection on with some nonzero probability. Those who are infected
remain infected continuously or eventually pass into a noninfected state:
removed/recovered (R) or back to susceptible (S), depending on the disease.
In this SIR model, recovered actors are immune to future infection. (If an actor
can become susceptible again, then an SIS model is indicated.) In traditional
342 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressepidemiological contexts, these classes – S, I, and R – are treated as states that
people can move through, and the likelihood of moving is governed by the
virulence of the disease, contact rates, and recovery rates. Such configurations
of S, I, and R rates are known as compartmental models, whose core assump￾tion is that social contact is fundamentally evenly distributed in a population.
This assumption allows us to work sufficiently well with single transition rates
between states. The governing parameters of this system make up the force of
infection: (1) the observed rate at which people move from the susceptible state
to the infectious state (β); and (2) the recovery rate (γ), which governs how
quickly people move out of the infectious state to the recovered (immune) state.
The simplest versions of these models are generally represented as shown in
Figure 14.1.
Assuming no change in overall population size (N), this system can be
represented mathematically as a set of linked ordinary differential equations:
dS
dt ¼ − βSI
N , (14.1)
dI
dt ¼ βSI
N −γI, (14.2)
dR
dt ¼ γI, (14.3)
where N = S + I + R. This sum implies that if two of these values are known, the
third is known (e.g., I = N − S − R). The first equation says simply that the
change in the number of people in the susceptible state is a negative function of
the infectivity rate (β) times the number at risk (S) and the number infected (I),
expressed as a rate (i.e., divided by N). Similarly, the change in the number
infected is the change in infection minus the number who recovered (γI). A key
concept that emerges from this work is the notion of a reproductive number, R0
(pronounced “R-naught”), which is the number of secondary infections pro￾duced by a single typical infection in a generally susceptible population. An R0
greater than 1 implies that each infected person is passing the infection to more
than one other person, and thus the spread of infection increases exponentially.
When R0 is less than 1, the infection spread dies out. In the classic SIR, R0 is
estimated as β
γ; that is, the rate of spread will grow when the infectivity rate is
greater than the recovery rate.
Qualitatively, this epidemiological modeling approach leads to a system in
which the number of people who are infected at any given time rises
Infectious β Susceptible γ Recovered
FIGURE 14.1 Common SIR model representation
Models for Network Diffusion 343
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressexponentially when the fraction of susceptible people is very large. (Intuitively,
each neighbor of an infected person is at risk, with ample room for epidemic
growth.) After this initial growth, the infection will peak because recovery will
outpace infection, or the number of susceptible people will dwindle as a greater
fraction of the population passes into R. These changes will yield a set of curves
similar to that shown in Figure 14.2.
Estimating these parameters using real data usually involves searching the
relevant parameter space to find a set of values that minimizes error with
respect to the observed data, with estimates informed by knowledge of the
pathogen whenever possible. For example, knowing the average time that one
is infectious determines the time to recovery; if that information is known, then
one can fix that parameter and estimate the others via best fit to the observa￾tional data. The dynamics of compartmental models are well known (see
Anderson & May 1991 for an overview of traditional models; Jones 2007 for
a mathematical overview; Porter & Gleeson 2016 for a review of network￾specific models), and epidemiological compartmental models are generally
useful tools for examining the relative effectiveness of disease interventions that
might affect recovery or infection. The state of the art for such models includes
a much larger and varying set of compartments (different sets for contacts by
age, for example). However, these models often overlook details of observed
disease spread, either because the fundamental mixing assumptions are not met
or because the models do not include behavioral feedback processes. For
0 20 40 60 80 100
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Time
Prevalence
s.num
i.num
r.num
FIGURE 14.2 Example of SIR compartmental model dynamics
Note: Lines trace the fraction of the population in each state at each time step.
344 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressexample, Figure 14.3 shows the total number of COVID-19 cases in the United
States as of early November 2020. Aside from the obvious tragedy of disease
implied by the total growth, note how radically different this figure looks from
the sort of smooth infectious curve expected from Figure 14.2. The mismatch
between predicted and observed infectivity trends suggests that the models
oversimplify a core feature of the real-world diffusion process.
Following the tradition of compartmental models, we represent the force of
infection with a single parameter (β). Yet, from a network standpoint, this
single parameter is actually better thought of as a composite parameter equal
to the biological virulence (v) given contact multiplied by the likelihood of
contact: c(β = vc). Thus, distinguishing these two parameters will be important
for any diffusion problem when the likelihood of contact between people differs
sufficiently to make the homogeneous mixing assumption untenable (which,
network scholars argue, occurs quite often). The network elaboration leads to
an alternative expression for R0:
R0 ¼ vcd, (14.4)
where v is the probability of transmission between a susceptible person and an
infected person given contact, c is the average contact rate between S and I, and
d is the duration of infectiousness. Because β is a composite of contact and
Jan
2020
Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan
2021
Mar May Jul
Date
0
100000
200000
300000
Daily New Cases
Trends in Covid-19 cases
Total cases: 33,475,403
Data from https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data as of: 29JUN2021
FIGURE 14.3 US COVID-19 infections over time
Models for Network Diffusion 345
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressvirulence, diffusion can be affected by either a change in the likelihood that the
disease is transmitted (e.g., biological suppression of infectivity by wearing a
mask) or the likelihood that infected people interact with susceptible people
(e.g., through various forms of social distancing and quarantining). In addition,
with most dynamic social networks, feedback is likely between the structure of
the network and the status of the disease.
Network-specific models for transmission build on the same micro￾transmission model – that those with the disease transmit it to their contacts –
but they do not make the same homogeneous mixing assumption. Instead, the
features that shape network contact described in the previous chapter directly
shape the probability of infection exposure. Thus, for example, differential
rates of COVID-19 infection by race and geography likely reflect the overriding
effect of homophily in social contacts. In general, networks contribute to an
understanding of diffusion by governing c, the likelihood that people are
connected and the ease with which a pathogen could move from infected people
to the rest of the population. Generally, this network diffusion process is
governed by (1) the topology of the network structure (i.e., the global structure
that makes spread more or less efficient) and (2) the timing of relations of
infection (i.e., duration and sequence).
14.4     
Structure matters, especially for diffusion. To clarify the interactive nature of
diffusion over networks and to better link diffusion to wider work on network
matrices, it is useful to recast virulence as the probability that one person will
pass an infection to another given contact: v = Pij, where v > 0 when i is infected
and j is susceptible.
Empirically, the value of Pij likely varies substantially according to what is
spreading on the network. In the disease case, some infections (e.g., COVID-19)
are easier to spread than others (e.g., HIV) when a susceptible person has
relevant contact with an infected person. Given Pij, the probability of diffusion
over the entire network can be thought of intuitively as a joint probability
problem linking dyads in long chains. Assuming a stable contact network, the
probability that i will infect j, who will then infect k, would be PijPjk. Because Pij
is always less than 1, the likelihood of diffusion drops as the number of dyads in
the chain increases.
1 On the other hand, the probability of diffusion increases as
the number of potential routes increases: if i could also transmit to k through m,
then the probability of infecting j is the probability that the infection goes
through one path or the other (minus the probability that it goes through both).
Intuitively, these structural properties mean that the transmission probability
1 Pij = 1 can occur in electric transmission or river flows, for example. Even in these cases, though,
there is some flow loss.
346 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdecreases with network distance and increases with the number of
alternative routes.
Carefully considering network diffusion thus leads researchers to want to
identify network structural features that affect pairwise distances and the
number of routes in a network topology. We find it convenient to distinguish
three types of topology features that shape diffusion over static networks: (1)
connectivity, the system of paths linking people in the network; (2) efficiency,
the likelihood that one’s social contacts are also connected to one another; and
(3) volume, the amount of direct contact, such as the distribution of the number
of contacts.
14.4.1 Connectivity
Recall from Chapter 3 that a path in a network is any sequence of connected
nodes and edges in which every edge and node occurs only once (i ! j ! k ! l),
and a component is a maximal set of nodes that has at least one path connecting
every pair of actors in the component. If transmission were certain, then every
member of a component would eventually become infected when any member
becomes infected. As such, components form the maximum diffusion potential
in a network because diffusion cannot reach people in different components,
which is the intuition behind quarantines: disconnecting from everyone else and
maintaining contact only within a local “bubble” prevents contracting a dis￾ease. Practically, most human social networks are minimally connected, as
demonstrated by the famous small-world experiments (Milgram 1967) and
mathematical work on simple random graphs. The latter shows that a compon￾ent connecting most people in the population (a so-called giant component)
starts to emerge when average degree is greater than 1 and covers nearly the
entire population when average degree is greater than 2 (Molloy & Reed 1998).
Because most social networks have much higher degree and some level of
randomness, a giant connected component is generally observed.
2 A sharp
threshold exists based on average degree, such that the network component
structure quickly transitions into a giant component that includes the vast
majority of people. Component structure is thus of practical significance when
transmission requires a very specific type of contact (e.g., in sexual networks) in
which the average number of ties is quite small. In such cases, a given popula￾tion is likely to be composed of small components. In contrast, for simple-to￾spread infections, baseline connectivity is very likely.
Within components, the path length between any pair of nodes governs the
likelihood of a long string of diffusion. Traditionally, researchers have used
2 An interesting aside on this line of thinking, connecting small-world networks and random
graphs, can be found in Skvoretz and Fararo’s research on biased net theory (Skvoretz, Fararo,
& Agneessens 2004), which led directly to more recent work on network scale-up problems
(Feehan & Salganik 2016; McCormick 2021).
Models for Network Diffusion 347
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressgeodesic distance (i.e., the number of edges on the shortest path connecting the
pair) to assess diffusion potential because it is simple to calculate. Given
modern computational power, some have argued that the number of paths
connecting i and j or the speed with which a random walker on the network
edges would connect the pair is more important.
Network structural cohesion (discussed in Chapter 8) directly captures the
number of alternative routes that connect pairs of people in a population.
Recall that in any connected component, there is (by definition) at least one
way to get from one node to any other node. Structural cohesion indicates the
maximum number of completely unique ways that each pair of people can
reach each other. The restriction to “completely unique” refers to node inde￾pendence, and it helps us bound issues of immunity or node-level nontransmis￾sion. For example, an individual’s consistent use of condoms would make them
a block in the potential HIV transmission network, but this block would be less
effective in stopping the overall spread of the disease if many alternative routes
existed around that individual. Because each independent path represents a
unique diffusion route, diffusion rates are generally expected to increase with
the average number of node-independent paths connecting pairs in the net￾work. A somewhat weaker notion of connectivity is the maximum flow
between a pair of nodes (see Ahuja et al. 1993: ch. 6), capturing the ease of
passing bits (i.e., any transmissible object) over all possible paths between
people, even if some paths overlap.
The effects of distance and number of paths are interdependent because
every path must have a length. A network with many short paths (of two or
three steps, say) between pairs of nodes is substantively a close-knit cluster. As
such, diffusion should move quickly across these multiple short paths to diffuse
within the cluster, but diffusion may not spread quickly beyond this group. On
the other hand, networks with long-distance paths should display greater
diffusion over the entire network.
The potential for spread across widely dispersed populations often depends
on bridging nodes to connect them, which can often be largely random or
otherwise seemingly rare. As Watts (1999) demonstrated, only a small number
of random connections in a network are required to dramatically shorten the
average geodesic distance in a population, which facilitates spread to an other￾wise largely distant population. In modern cities, for example, people who cross
many social boundaries – such as bus drivers, waiters, and healthcare workers –
often act as bridges for easy-to-spread infections.
14.4.2 Efficiency
The second basic structural feature that shapes network diffusion can be
thought of as the efficiency of the network structure. Here, it is perhaps useful
to think of diffusion as a tracing procedure through a network. Starting from a
single infected node, one traces out to direct contacts, followed by contacts of
348 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Presscontacts, and so forth. The most efficient (although not necessarily robust)
diffusion structure would be a network tree in which each step in the trace
leads to new people in the population. Efficiency is reduced when potential
paths of diffusion loop back on themselves, as when a friend of a friend is a
friend. These closed loops mean that many of the edges in the network lead
back to nodes that the infection already reached. Local clustering is thus well
captured by transitivity, and global or meso-level clustering is well captured
through the distinctiveness of communities (see Chapter 8). When Pij is high,
clustering slows diffusion relative to nonclustered networks with the same total
volume of ties because much of each actor’s social contact energy is effectively
redundant (Burt 1995). Conversely, when Pij is low, clustering provides a
robustness safeguard for diffusion by increasing the redundancy of paths
through which diffusion can spread.
14.4.3 Volume
The third network topology feature concerns the volume (i.e., total amount) of
direct contact. While path length and clustering are the root features controlling
the efficiency and robustness of networks for diffusion, it is often useful to think
about how the local behavior of nodes creates more or less efficient and robust
networks. Two features of the degree distribution are of core concern here: (1)
assortative mixing and (2) skewness.
First, early work in network epidemiology highlighted the extent to which
people with similar numbers of partners had ties to one another – a type of
assortative mixing reflecting homophily based on the number of ties. However,
disassortative mixing is possible in some instances. For example, in sex net￾works, ties between commercial sex workers and their clients typically create
disassortative mixing: commercial sex workers tend to have many more part￾ners than their average clients. This disassortative mixing creates many star-like
local networks linked through clients – a structure that enables efficient
diffusion. The extent of assortative mixing can be measured simply as the
degree correlation across all dyads.
Second, work on large-scale networks has suggested that most social net￾works have highly skewed degree distributions (Barabási & Albert 1999).
These networks have degree distributions in which most nodes have few
contacts and a small number of nodes have many orders of magnitude more
contacts. As we demonstrated in Figure 9.3, when the degree distribution is
plotted on a log-log scale, the distribution forms a straight line and is often said
to have a power-law distribution (see Jones & Handcock 2003 for a critique of
this work). If the network is constructed through a preferential attachment
process, whereby the probability of a newly entering node connecting to a
current node is proportional to the degree of the current node, then scale-free
networks will also have star-like structures and thus short average geodesic
distances, making them efficient substrates for diffusion.
Models for Network Diffusion 349
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressFigure 14.4 provides a general example of how these features might matter.
The figure displays a network from one of the smaller schools in the Add Health
data set.
This network is connected (with sixty-nine of seventy-one nodes in the
largest connected component) and cohesive (with sixty-eight of the nodes in a
biconnected component): at least two unique routes connect 96 percent of
nodes in this network to one another. Thus, the underlying network substrate
for diffusion is quite strong, and things would likely spread through this
network fairly quickly. Some clear local clustering is evident in a small cluster
around Node 3 and the closed triads for strongest ties in the middle top.
Ignoring the two isolates (and edge values), the diameter of the network is 6.
51
3
67 49
36 9
FIGURE 14.4 School 2 from the Add Health network, with edges weighted by the
number of activities students reported doing with one another
350 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressSimulation models provide one way to test how network structure affects
diffusion. Network diffusion simulations posit an underlying structure and
transmission process by which nodes in the network become infected. By
positing different conditions under which this process may unfold and system￾atically altering these parameters, the researcher gains an understanding of how
these factors shape diffusion. For example, a type of baseline model might begin
with giving every node in the network an equal probability of contact with
every other node, with a probability of 0.5 that a random seed in the network (a
“person zero”) will infect a contact. By running this stepwise infection process
through numerous iterations, the researcher simulates the time required for the
entire network to become infected. Moreover, by altering the parameters of the
network structure – for example, by changing the clustering, distance, or
cohesion features of the network – the researcher can probe the merits of
assumptions regarding different structures’ capacities to facilitate diffusion.
Alternatively, the researcher can simulate diffusion over an observed net￾work to assess how the structure would respond to potential diffusion events.
For example, one can translate the SIR model specified for compartments to
networks by seeding a node with an infection, setting the probability of trans￾mission, and then observing the results. This exercise would be a stochastic
simulation because the probability that i will pass to j is proportional to the tie
strength but is not certain. Figure 14.5 displays the results of just such a
stochastic process applied to the network shown in Figure 14.4. Here, we
simulate diffusion fifty times, first using Node 3 as the start node then again
using Node 51. We present the full distribution of infectivity curves for both
scenarios (with Pij = 0.1 for a tie value of 1.0 and infectiousness lasting an
average of five days).
Two key points are noteworthy. First, the ultimate percentage reached caps
out at 69 (the size of the largest component) because the two isolates can never
be reached, although the infectivity is high enough in all cases to reach most
people in the network. That is, the susceptible and recovered curves approach
0 and 69, respectively. Second, the number of people reached in each simulation
varies considerably, which is perhaps masked by the average. For epidemics
seeded at the periphery of the network (Node 3), the range of people who
remain susceptible to infection by Day 10 spans nearly the entire range of the
population size, whereas the same set of runs that begin at the center of the
network (Node 51) are much more tightly bound.
Once a given network structure is known, it is fairly straightforward to play
“what-if” games with the network to explore how interventions might affect
potential spread. For example, what if one could ask people to restrict social
contact to those with whom they have very strong ties, or to ties within their
school grade, or to similar others? Such simulations can also be run to deter￾mine which individual nodes are most often implicated in the flow of infection;
these nodes would be clear targets for vaccination or similar interventions to
lessen their opportunities for spread. In addition, base parameters of the SIR
Models for Network Diffusion 351
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Date
0
60
40
20
Count
Susceptible
Infected
Recovered
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Date
0
60
40
20
Count
Susceptible
Infected
Recovered
Seed = Node 51 Seed = Node 3
FIGURE 14.5 Simulated SIR on network from Figure 14.4, with constant transmission probability (0.1), proportional to edge weights
Note: Bold lines give the average over all runs.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmodel can be changed to more closely resemble the social diffusion features
discussed in the next section.
14.5     
Our discussion of network diffusion thus far has focused on infection diffusion
over static networks – that is, we have assumed the network to be fixed (with
perhaps varying levels of contact) and the dynamics to be limited to time-to￾infection sorts of questions. In such static networks, the edge is effectively
present and available for transmission for the entire period over which the
spread of the disease is being investigated. This assumption is useful, if not fully
correct, for cases in which the infection diffusion over the network happens
much faster than the network itself changes. This assumption is often true for
the social diffusion of rumors, information, or highly transmissible diseases.
However, for many other activities, the timing of relations is crucial because
diffusion moves comparatively slowly over the network or spends significant
time latent within hosts. In these cases, individuals’ changing relations can
affect the diffusion capacity of the network. The spread of STDs, such as
HIV, is an archetypical case in point.
The first and primary constraint that edge timing makes on diffusion is fairly
intuitive: infection can transmit only forward in time. Past partners are not at
risk for a disease an individual might contract from a later partner, but the
individual is at risk from all the prior relations of any current partner. This
notion is simple but often ignored, mainly because fine-grained temporal data
on relations are rarely available (although that is changing). Figure 14.6 offers
an example. In this simple four-node example, the pairs of people who are
directly connected (the contact network) remain the same over time, but the
timing of the relations differs. Timing is given as a number above the relation.
For example, in the first row of the figure, Nodes A and B have a relation at
Time 2, whereas Nodes B and C have a relation at Time 1.
The graph to the right of each example is an exposure network, where a
directed arc from i to j indicates that the contact network timing is such that i
could pass an infection to j. An actual diffusion transmission network is always
a subset of the exposure network. For example, in the first row, if Node A has
an infection, they could pass it to Node B (at Time 2) but could not reach
C because the edge ended before the infection was passed. Node C, on the other
hand, could expose A to risk because of C’s earlier relation with B. Note that
timing alone changes the exposure risk significantly. Even in this very small
example, the temporal arrangement of edges can vary the exposure from
66 percent of pairs to 83 percent of pairs. In addition, the third row includes
an example of a concurrent relation: Node C has relations with Nodes B and
D at Time 2. Concurrent relations create symmetry in the exposure network,
which can radically increase the downstream risk of the exposure network.
Concurrency is not necessarily a node-level risk factor for diffusion, above and
Models for Network Diffusion 353
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressbeyond what would otherwise be implied by increased volume. Rather, con￾currency’s effect is at the population level, changing the system of paths
available for potential diffusion. An individual’s risk of exposure to a past
partner’s past partner is affected by the entire structure of paths in the network
that preceded the individual’s own activity, whereas the individual’s concur￾rency affects the population at risk in the future.
The second primary way that timing affects diffusion is as a feedback process
for relational activity. Such a feedback process exists when whatever is flowing
through the network changes the likelihood that people will connect. In a
disease context, the obvious feature here is that people tend to be less social
when they are ill, which limits the number of people exposed. COVID-19 has
been so pernicious partly because a very large fraction of people can carry the
disease and spread it to others before they feel ill themselves; thus, the feedback
process is lagged from disease onset. Although relevant for disease models, this
feedback process is particularly important for social and behavioral diffusion,
creating a clear source of endogeneity between peer influence on behavior and
the friendship structure. We discuss the feedback process in much greater detail
later in this section.
The most common approach for studying disease-like diffusion over net￾works is through simulation. Simulation tools are included in the R package
A B C D
2 1 3
Contacts: Exposure:
A B C D
A B C D
1 2 3
A B C D
A B C D
1 2 2
A B C D
83%
75%
66%
FIGURE 14.6 Temporal constraints on diffusion exposure
Note: Blue arrows indicate a direct possible transmission at time t; black arrows indicate
an indirect possible subsequent transmission; and red arrows indicate an indirect
possible transmission at time t. Percentages of total exposed dyads in the network are
indicated on the far right.
354 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressEpiModel, which provides a useful and flexible framework for performing such
simulations. One of the advantages of the general network framework, how￾ever, is that researchers can build in new assumptions about what people do,
how the disease behaves, or how interventions affect the network. In such
situations, off-the-shelf routines are rarely sufficient, and researchers will gen￾erally need to program specific functions. Yet, the general approach is fairly
straightforward to implement once researchers clearly identify the variant in
behavior they want to include. For example, the spread of giggling in a class￾room would be simulated based on an SIS model with a high infectivity rate and
quickly passing from active giggling to being susceptible again. Comparatively,
yawning is highly contagious but not as likely to be repeated, and it would thus
perhaps be better simulated using SIR.
An adequate test of diffusion simulation predictions requires the researcher
to compare these predictions with real-world processes, which is not always
straightforward. As discussed in the next section, experimental and quasi￾experimental research designs may offer ways forward. For example, manipu￾lating the structure of online communication networks allowed Centola (2010)
to test the effects of different network structures on the adoption of a health
behavior. Surprisingly, this work found that more densely clustered networks
are more conducive to the spread of influence than are random networks. This
finding runs counter to predictions derived from small-world networks that
bridging ties are important conduits for the rapid spread of a social contagion.
Instead, the finding supports the theory that some social contagions are more
complex and require multiple exposures through redundant network paths to
infect others.
14.6    
Although the preceding discussion has centered on biological diffusion of a
disease such as COVID-19 as an archetype of network diffusion, the formalism
for network diffusion holds for anything that can diffuse through a network
(i.e., a bit). However, social diffusion mechanisms are somewhat more compli￾cated than biological contagions in most cases. Rumors, for example, are a lot
like diseases: some bits of gossip are much more infectious (i.e., considered
“juicier”) than others, increasing the motivation to share the information, akin
to a disease with higher virulence. Diffusion of innovations, such as the decision
to get one of the COVID-19 vaccines, suggests that observing others doing
something new encourages other people to take it up. But, unlike contracting a
disease, actors must actively choose to become vaccinated, which complicates
the notion of susceptibility. Although susceptible people may acquire a disease
from any contact with an infected person, people may choose to ignore some
contacts (e.g., those from the opposing political party) when exposed to their
viewpoints. Moreover, individuals may have different thresholds of the number
of their peers engaging in an activity before they adopt the activity themselves,
Models for Network Diffusion 355
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Presswhich gives rise to complex contagion models (Centola & Macy 2007).
Another complication when applying contagion models to social things is, as
anyone who has ever played the children’s telephone game knows, spreading
something in a social network might change the thing itself in a recursive
fashion that is not relevant for diseases, which mutate relatively slowly (e.g.,
Hunzaker 2016; Kashima 2000).
While disease diffusion models are a good starting point for social diffusion,
we now further complicate things by introducing a handful of concepts to
adequately address the unique features of social and behavioral spread. In
short, what makes a social contagion “social” is that it is embedded in a
cultural context and has a meaning within that context. Such meanings cannot
be garnered from the formal structure of the network, although their evolution
and adoption might well be shaped by it. Rather, they must be drawn from a
careful substantive and theoretical understanding of the cultural, institutional,
and organizational bases of social diffusion.
14.6.1 Diffusion of What?
A conceptual advantage of the epidemiological context is that the thing diffus￾ing through the network is clear, and the process by which contagion between
individuals occurs is generally also clear. With social and behavioral diffusion,
the scope is much wider and often more ambiguous. For example, we speak of
contagion with regard to attitudes and beliefs, information (e.g., employment￾or healthcare-related information), motivations for collective action, or the
adoption of a new technology. With social diffusion, the contagion moment
is generally voluntary and depends on recall (I cannot tell you about a job
opportunity that I do not remember) and acceptance (you may not want to
believe what I tell you) (see Smith 2005). Some exchanges are costly to the
recipient (e.g., changing a cherished belief ), whereas others are costly to the
sender (e.g., information about a limited opportunity). The link responsible for
contagion might be observational rather than affective. For example, viral
marketers knew that making the headphones for the early iPod white would
increase the headphones’ visibility, making them seem more ubiquitous and
thus more attractive to adopt.
There are many types of flows through networks (for a review, see Borgatti
2005), but what matters for us is how the type of thing diffusing modifies the
base diffusion model described in this chapter. The archetypical SIR-style
diffusion model assumes the following:
(a) Individual contagion: that the infection passes from one node to another.
(b) Stability of the contagion: that the bit diffusing through the network does
not change appreciably by virtue of the act of passing it on.
(c) Irrelevance of contagion to the infector: that a person sending the bit is
not affected by sending it.
356 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press(d) Single-source adoption: that although the person receiving the bit can be
exposed to multiple people, the person contracts the bit from a
single source.
(e) Simple state change: that diffusion is a qualitative change in state that, at
least in the SIR version, does not allow repeated or joint occupation (a
person can be infected only once and cannot simultaneously be infected
and susceptible).
(f ) Dyadic independence: that contagion between an S-I dyad does not
depend on the number of other S-I members in the population.
However, for social and behavioral diffusion, each of these assumptions can
be violated. Information, for example, can easily be spread to groups of people
simultaneously. The content of the good can evolve over time: stories become
crisper, funnier, or exaggerated by the very act of telling them. Discussion can
lead to an exchange of ideas, but this exchange can create a multidirectional
effect. In another realm, the value of adopting a technology often depends on
the number of others who have already adopted it. People are often resistant to
change ideas with a single exposure; they may need a certain threshold of their
friends to adopt first. In each of these cases, at least one of the basic assump￾tions of biological diffusion must be relaxed to accommodate a core character￾istic of the diffusion process.
We next examine two of these cases in more detail. Our goal here is twofold:
(1) to illuminate how social diffusion can be captured in network models and is
often fundamentally a network process that depends on a contagion-like activ￾ity and (2) to show how changes in the base assumptions can lead to rich and
rewarding results that can be modeled.
14.6.2 Resource Exchange and Social Capital
The concept of social capital was developed precisely to help theorize and test
the link between networks and resource flows (Lin 2002). People have access to
valuable social resources – information, social influence, recommendations, and
so on – and one’s ties through the population tap into these sundry resources to
different extents. Social capital represents one’s ability to access and profit from
these resources. Social capital is generally thought to come in two forms:
bonding and bridging. Bonding capital accrues through dense networks that
promote trust, whereas bridging capital accrues through sparse ties that facili￾tate access to novel information and sources of influence.
Social capital importantly links various levels of analysis, given that individ￾uals, communities, and even societies can have different levels of social capital
(for a review, see Son 2020). The key idea is that an individual’s number and
structure of ties matters, especially for outcomes related to status attainment,
such as landing a good job, finding the right partner, and receiving recognition
for one’s efforts (DiMaggio & Garip 2012). Individuals and systems that are
Models for Network Diffusion 357
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrich in social capital tend to produce more feelings of individual motivation,
better social control, and greater access to important information and oppor￾tunities for getting ahead in life (Granovetter 1974). More recent elaborations
of the concept have drawn attention to negative social capital and the disadvan￾tages that can accrue from being connected to others with few resources and
more problems (for a review, see Portes 1998).
From a structure-of-diffusion standpoint, the main feature of social capital is
probably the distinction between stocks and flows. The stock of social capital
relates to the baseline amount of resources available. For example, if one is
concerned with understanding job-search activity, the number of people in the
network who know about new job openings represents the stock of job-related
social capital at play. The flow of social capital reflects the likelihood that
people disclose this information to their contacts. For something like a job
opening, flow is often a demand-side pull, with people needing work reaching
out to those in their networks in search of opportunities. In the simple job￾search case, people seek information that is largely not costly for others to share
(given that they are not directly competing for the job); therefore, weak ties lead
to many new sources of information and thus provide the most useful substrate
for flow (Granovetter 1974). However, the strength of weak ties may not hold
if the job requires a personal contact to vouch for the candidate once such an
opportunity is found. In this case, weak ties might not suffice because people
will not risk their own reputation for the benefit of people they do not know
well. In these sorts of high-cost exchanges, close personal ties based on trust are
more important (Uzzi 1999). Thus, the structure and the content of networks
matter. Knowing what ties matter requires an understanding of the formal and
generic properties of network structures, as well as a substantive understanding
of the nodes and the contexts in which diffusion and influence processes unfold.
14.6.3 Threshold Models: Public Goods, Collective Action, and
Complex Contagions
A second illustrative case of network flows is the diffusion of influence for the
provision of public goods. The classic public goods case represents activities for
which people must act collectively to produce a public good or benefit that
cannot be withheld from anyone after it is produced. This situation leads to a
paradox for classic rational-action models: if a person can benefit without
participating and participating has some sort of cost, then no rational person
should participate. Classic examples are voting (even in the tightest elections,
outcomes are rarely determined by a single vote) and political protests. One
solution to the public goods problem is offering an individual incentives for
participating, such as “I Voted” stickers handed out at elections and T-shirts or
caps available to those participating in marches. These sorts of trinkets can help
push people past a participation threshold when the cost is low, but such
358 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressincentives are unlikely to be sufficient when participation involves the invest￾ment of significant time, energy, or risk.
An alternative solution to the public goods problem is that people act based
on their close friends’ behaviors. Either for solidarity or protection, people are
more likely to participate in risky collective action when they have friends to
accompany them. Granovetter (1978) provided an alternative model in which
people will participate if a heterogeneous threshold of others’ participation is
reached: one person might participate as long as at least 10 percent of others
do, whereas another person might participate only if 80 percent of the popula￾tion also participates. This insight – that participation is interdependent but
with varying levels of acceptable cost – shifts the question of public goods
provision to one concerning the underlying distribution of individual
thresholds. This model was then extended and embedded in network structures
in a spate of well-cited works (Gould 1993; Macy 1991; Marsden 1981;
Marwell, Olliver, & Prahl 1988), each having a variant on the underlying idea.
The core notion remains that the interdependence of participation means that
collective action depends on each person adopting their neighbors’ behavior
(and trusting that they will follow through), shifting the original threshold idea
from the population as a whole to one’s local neighborhood. Thus, an activity
such as volunteering becomes fundamentally a diffusion process through a
positive feedback cycle, with more people volunteering as more others do
as well.
Consider again the high school case given in Figure 14.4. Assume that a
small clique of students want to implement a new community service program
and to recruit their peers. Here we have assigned a random participation
threshold, and we would expect students to participate if at least that many
of their friends participate. Subsequently, we lower that threshold by 10 percent
and try again. Figure 14.7 displays the results for selected threshold reductions.
In all cases, we start with the four core committed students (dark green
nodes). In the baseline run, two students join them immediately, three others
join next, and a fourth joins later. In total, ten of the seventy-one students
participate. For all other students, their peers’ participation level is too low to
prompt them to join, and widespread collective action fails. As we would
expect, if we uniformly lower people’s thresholds and try again, we see
Avg threshold = 0.53 Avg threshold = 0.37 Avg threshold = 0.32 Avg threshold = 0.26
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
NA
Adoption
Wave
FIGURE 14.7 Varying thresholds for adoption given a single source set (yellow)
Models for Network Diffusion 359
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressincreased participation. We start to see widespread participation (about half of
students) when thresholds average 32 percent and nearly complete eventual
participation when we lower it to approximately 26 percent. However, note the
large difference between average thresholds of 37 percent and 32 percent: there
is a tipping point in this case that depends crucially on the exact distribution of
thresholds. As assignment of thresholds is random, we can run this model many
times to examine the distribution of results. The full range of these runs is given
in Figure 14.8.
The sharp tipping point in participation rates is common for these sorts of
models, although the exact point will differ depending on the structure of the
network, the exact spread of thresholds, and where the initial seed volunteers
start. In general, these models are quite sensitive to these sorts of fine-grained
distributional features. Whether this is a feature or a bug in such models really
depends on one’s understanding of the substantive case.
The dynamics of the threshold model are mirrored more generally in the
larger literature on the wider adoption of binary choices (participation or not)
relevant to the diffusion of innovations. Rogers’ (2003 [1962]) original work
on the diffusion of innovations discussed types of adopters (e.g., innovators,
early adopters), with the underlying mechanism resting on people seeing those
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Average threshold level
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion of people participating
Average over 500 runs
Example of a single run
FIGURE 14.8 Distribution of the proportion of students joining the movement by
average threshold level – ensemble of 500 random threshold distributions
360 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Pressearlier in the adoption sequence taking up the product, and built substantive
insights into how the characteristics of the product shape diffusion. Empirical
work resting on Rogers’ framework has focused on fitting the thresholds and
the spread of characteristics in real populations. Valente (1995) spearheaded
one of the most extensive research programs in this direction, including his
R package netdiffuseR (Valente & Vega Yon 2020). When data on timing of
adoptions are available, Valente’s model allows the researcher to infer adoption
thresholds (“susceptibility”) from the data. By relating the timing of each
person’s adoption to that of their peers, the researcher can identify those who
adopt earlier as more susceptible than those who adopt late. For a good
exemplar of this work, see Valente (2015).
The second prominent piece stemming from this early work on threshold
models is Centola and Macy’s (2007) work on complex contagions, which (as
we already touched on in this chapter) suggests that a person will adopt a
behavior or participate when more than one of their partners does so. This
approach effectively puts a floor on Granovetter’s threshold model and high￾lights cases in which diffusion requires wide ties characterized by trust and
security rather than long, weak ties characterized by their embeddedness in
nonredundant communities. This requirement makes diffusion much more
difficult. For example, if thresholds are limited to 2 – the minimum required
for complex contagion – in the running example of the high school network,
everyone in the largest component will eventually adopt. Yet, the spread moves
in small waves starting with the four core participants, slowly moves through
the redundant community in the center, and reaches the periphery of the graph
only after six time steps.
These variants on the threshold model are interesting extensions of the
baseline diffusion model in three respects. First, rather than having something
pass through the network from one person to another, the behavior spreads
throughout the network due to differences in the observability of one’s peers’
behaviors. Second, because participation in a social event is repeatable, there
are often multiple iterations of the same sort, which helps people adjust to their
peers’ activities, and adoption thus unfolds in waves. Finally, one can easily
play with the notion of the threshold to include characteristics of the thing
being adopted, or one can adjust the effect of tie strength to fold in the social
character of behavior choice rather than examine simple biological diffusion.
Once again, knowing something substantively about the content of what is
diffusing and its context is essential.
14.7 
Networks are conduits for important flows. Network flows have been perhaps
the core motivation for social network analysis since its inception. The many
ways of seeing structures through descriptive techniques (covered in Part II)
point to important implications for flows. However, it is very different to ask
Models for Network Diffusion 361
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Presswhat would happen if a disease or a bit of important information were to flow
in a network than to observe and model such flows. For good reasons, epidemi￾ologists have taken up the work of simulating and modeling flows through
networks under varying assumptions. For sociologists, these contagion models
are useful but often must be modified to accommodate the differences between
biological contagions and social ones.
This chapter covered approaches to examining networks as causes of out￾comes by virtue of how things flow through the network. The range of out￾comes is wide, from contagious diseases to social movements and behavior. The
theoretical mechanisms that drive these outcomes turn on how individual
behavior embedded in networks intersects – that is, how one’s ties create
exposure opportunities that are then passed on to others. The ease with which
researchers can estimate these effects using data varies in proportion to the
clarity of the mechanism. The spread of a biological contaminant across clearly
defined contact networks (e.g., STDs, COVID-19) is simpler to model than
beliefs about vaccinations or intentions to have children. In the next chapter,
we continue this progression toward more social processes in the flow of ideas,
preferences, and behaviors through social ties by examining models that hone
in on social influence processes.
  
Acerbi, Alberto, Alex Mesoudi, and Marco Smolla. 2022. Individual-Based Models of
Cultural Evolution. A Step-by-Step Guide Using R. London: Routledge. (An interest￾ing and practical guide to using simulation to investigate cultural diffusion.)
Armbruster, Benjamin, Li Wang, and Martina Morris. 2017. “Forward Reachable Sets:
Analytically Derived Properties of Connected Components for Dynamic Networks.”
Network Science 5: 328–54. (See Moody 2000 for note.)
Barabási, Albert-László, and Réka Albert. 1999. “Emergence of Scaling in Random
Networks.” Science 286: 509–12. (An important early paper showing that long-tail or
“scale-free” degree distributions were common and can have dramatic effects on
ability to control spread of disease, although many of the more dramatic empirical
implications are tempered once actual empirical limits are taken into account. See also
Jones and Handcock 2003; Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani 2001.)
Burt, Ronald S. 1987. “Social Contagion and Innovation: Cohesion versus Structural
Equivalence.” American Journal of Sociology 92(6): 1287–335. (A classic work
distinguishing connectionist and positional mechanisms to network diffusion.)
Centola, Damon. 2018. How Behavior Spreads: The Science of Complex Contagions.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. (An engaging and readable fleshing-out of
the complex contagion ideas developed over multiple prior papers and contexts.)
Coleman, James S., Elihu Katz, and Herbert Menzel. 1957. “The Diffusion of an
Innovation among Physicians.” Sociometry 20: 253–70. (An excellent example of
thinking through how innovations move through closed populations. This paper has
become a classic reference work, although reanalysis has cast doubt on some of the
original conclusions.)
362 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressJones, James Holland, and Mark S. Handcock. 2003. “An Assessment of Preferential
Attachment as a Mechanism for Human Sexual Network Formation.” Proceedings of
the Royal Society B 270: 1123–28.
Klovdahl, A., J. Potterat, D. Woodhouse et al. 1994. “Social Networks and Infectious
Disease: The Colorado Springs Study.” Social Science & Medicine 38(1): 79–88. (The
Colorado Springs Study was a game-changer for understanding sexual networks and
disease risk. The team published numerous papers on different aspects of drug and sex
networks – a must-read body of work for anyone working in STD or slow-to-spread
disease diffusion.)
Liu, Ka-Yuet, Marissa King, and Peter S. Bearman. 2010. “Social Influence in the Autism
Epidemic.” American Journal of Sociology 115: 1387–434. (Exemplar use of adminis￾trative records to infer diffusion processes.)
Moody, James. 2000. “The Importance of Relationship Timing for Diffusion.” Social
Forces 81: 25–56. (Identifies the underlying path limits to diffusion potential in
dynamic networks. See also Armbruster, Wang, & Morris 2017.)
Morris, Martina, and Mirjam Kretzschmar. 1997. “Concurrent Partnerships and the
Spread of HIV.” AIDS 11: 641–48. (A touchstone citation for the effects of concur￾rency, which has generated a new set of ideas on how relational timing constrains
diffusion, sparked much debate in the applied HIV world over mechanisms and effect
sizes.)
Newman Mark. 2002. “Spread of Epidemic Disease on Networks.” Physical Review E
66: 016128. (Outlines some of the base in-the-limit sorts of models for diffusion
conditional on graph structure.)
Pastor-Satorras, Romualdo, and Alessandro Vespignani. 2001. “Epidemic Spreading in
Scale-Free Networks.” Physical Review Letters 86: 3200. (See the note to Barabási &
Albert 1999.)
Rogers, Everett M. 2003. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed. New York: Simon &
Schuster. (Arguably the most influential book on ideational diffusion.)
Valente, Thomas. 1995. Network Models of the Diffusion of Innovations. New York:
Hampton Press. (This is the network-based successor to Everett Rogers’ original
Diffusion of Innovations work and is necessary reading for anyone interested in
ideational diffusion.)
Models for Network Diffusion 363
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press15
Models for Social Influence
Connectionist approaches to social networks often speak of flows of ideas,
attitudes, and behaviors through ties as social influence and as peer influence in
the specific case of flows among friends and acquaintanceships. Modeling social
influence is no easy task. How do we determine where a particular idea came
from in a network and who influenced whom? In establishing the presence of
social influence, a researcher must theoretically and empirically address many
potentially confounding factors and alternate explanations. In the previous
chapter, we covered network approaches to generic flows at scale. In this
chapter, we more thoroughly cover some of the thorny issues involved in
tracing interpersonal influences and key modeling strategies in obtaining more
detailed views of what flows and to whom.
15.1      ?
If you have a housemate or a romantic partner, ask yourself whether you are
more alike now than when you first met. Have your tastes in food, music, and
recreational activities grown less or more similar over time? You have likely
become more similar. Indeed, many couples in long-term relationships become
so similar that they develop their own special language and even come to
resemble one another physically after decades of similar diet and lifestyle.
How much do such resemblances arise from individuals directly influencing
one another, and how much do they result from individuals experiencing
similar external conditions? Addressing such questions requires us to return
to modeling network flows as we did in the previous chapter.
Arguably, the most common behavioral application of modeling network
flows is with peer influence models. The core distinction between these models
and those discussed in the previous chapter lies in what diffuses through the
network. In diffusion models, what diffuses is generally a smaller bit of
364
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressinformation, or an actual contagion, that is relatively unchanged as it works its
way through a social system. In peer influence models, what diffuses is often
clearly more cultural – a belief, an attitude, a taste, a social practice, or perhaps
a whole set of these elements forming a lifestyle or worldview. In peer influence
processes, what spreads through social contact may also change as people
adjust their ideas through discussions with one another. Individuals may seek
to persuade others to change or resist the pressures to change themselves.
Diffusion models tend to sacrifice some of the detail in how flows operate to
obtain a more generalizable view. Obviously, no clear line can be drawn
between diffusion and influence because they are often interrelated, but net￾work researchers tend to specialize in a set of ideas and models that are more
tailored to large-scale flows (i.e., diffusion) or more micro-level interpersonal
change processes (i.e., influence).
The main influence model is a network autocorrelation model in which
people’s attitudes and behaviors mirror (or come to mirror) the attitudes and
behaviors of those with whom they meaningfully interact. However, many
approaches aim to test the core proposition that people routinely influence
(and are influenced by) those with whom they interact. In this chapter, we
build on the ideas of the last chapter and cover ways to ferret out peer effects in
a more causal framework.
15.2    
One way to understand social influence is to model it among a group of
individuals involved in face-to-face deliberations. In this vein, Friedkin and
Johnsen (2011) pioneered a highly influential peer influence model building
on ideas first proposed in the 1950s (e.g., Cartwright 1951; French & Raven
1959) to develop social influence network theory. This theory focuses on the
formation of interpersonal influence networks in small groups in task-oriented
environments. The ideal-typical real-world scenario in which such dynamics
unfold is a criminal jury’s consensus-building to decide whether the defendant
is guilty and, if so, the appropriate damages or penalty. However, the theory
applies more broadly to a range of contexts in which individuals seek consen￾sus. Regardless of the process that initially brought the group together, the
theory pertains to how people subsequently influence one another’s positions
on issues. As it turns out, the approach developed to study small groups has at
its core a clear network-diffusion mechanism that has been fruitfully applied in
settings as varied as individual health behavior and international political
policy.
We first review the core theory and its implications, along with a variety of
spin-off applications. We then turn our attention to debates over causal infer￾ence from observational data for this model, which sets us up for discussing the
computational and statistical tools used to test it.
Models for Social Influence 365
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press15.2.1 Social Influence Network Theory
Social influence network theory has been tested in both laboratory and real￾world settings. The model was developed historically from careful studies of
group consensus-seeking behavior (DeGroot 1974). In such controlled settings,
study participants in a laboratory receive vignettes that mimic important
decision-making scenarios of the type a jury would make. Participants first
privately offer their positions on the core issues and then deliberate with a
group to attempt to form consensus, although the group is not required to come
to an agreement (e.g., the outcome could be a hung jury). After the group
reaches its decision, participants weigh the perceived influence of each group
member, thus revealing the (perceived) interpersonal influence network. The
surprising finding from this line of work is that in seeking consensus, people
seem to follow a regular mathematical model: they take the weighted mean of
their peers, with the weights reflecting perceived interpersonal influences. As
individuals, they have separate and distinct weightings of one another. As a
group, though, they move toward consensus and often reach it through the
operation of this influence network on shifting attitudes and opinions.
The main equation summarizing this interpersonal influence process is as
follows:
Yt ¼ αWYt − 1 þ ð Þ 1 − α Y1, (15.1)
where Yt is an n  1 matrix of people’s opinions at time t; α is a scalar weight
representing the overall balance of endogenous peer influence, with (1 − α)
capturing exogenous features; and W is an n  n matrix of interpersonal influ￾ence weights. The network autocorrelation term (α) is assumed to be between
0 and 1, and the rows of W sum to 1, which keeps Yt
within the original range of
Yt − 1 (Friedkin & Johnsen 1990). The intuition of the model is straightforward.
At each conversation round (t), individuals update their beliefs with the mean of
their peers, which narrows the range of opinions: individuals regress toward the
overall mean, reducing the distance between each individual and their neighbors
at each round. Thus, if interpersonal influence is complete (α ! 1), the influence
network is connected, and all elements of W are nonnegative, then the model will
converge on consensus. When α is less than 1, there will always be a distribution
of values that is correlated with initial positions. As written, the model is
theoretical, describing a social process rather than an estimation model.
Estimating the model from data requires more assumptions, and estimation
strategies have been the basis of extensive elaborating and testing.
The flexibility built into this theoretical model is quite rich, providing a
baseline model that can be expanded. For example, assuming that exogenous
features are the result of some set of k covariates, replacing y(1) with a regression
effects matrix (Xβ) estimated with random disturbance would yield the canonical
network/spatial autocorrelation model (Doreian 1980). Variants of this model
have probably been the most common estimation strategy. Alternatively, one can
366 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressassume that each individual has a different weight of personal influences rather
than having a constant α, or one can add diagonals to W to capture varying self￾weight. For example, when individuals hold positions central to their role or
identity, then their susceptibility to influence will be low, and they will be more
likely to pull others toward their position than to compromise themselves. When
sets of individuals hold core beliefs that oppose one another, such conflicting
anchoring opinions can produce polarized belief spaces. One can also disaggre￾gate W to examine influence across relations: a family might have more or less
influence than peers. If W includes negative entries, representing pairs of individ￾uals whose opinions repel each other, the model can fit polarization and consen￾sus even without anchoring assumptions. Yet another option is to constrain
influence among a set of Y beliefs or attitudes with logical constraints (Friedkin
et al. 2016) or conformity to empirical truth (Friedkin & Bullo 2017).
As an illustration, consider our running example of the high school from the
previous chapter. Now, let’s assume rather than following a threshold model
for collective action, each member of our budding gang of four school activists
(yellow nodes in Figure 14.7) holds a particular opinion that is on the edge of
what all others in the school network believe, and the group engages in earnest
conversation about the topic.
Assuming a constant endogenous peer influence effect of 0.75, the evolution of
ideas over time might look something like the left panel Figure 15.1. Our activists
have a very high opinion of the policy, but as they discuss it with their peers, they
start to converge on a more moderate view. Everyone pulls toward the center here,
although they do not reach consensus (because of the initial weight individuals
give to their own opinion). Nodes 67 and 49 seem to be the most resilient to
change. We built W to be proportional to the weights in the friendship matrix, and
those two nodes have most of their friendship weight among the four activists.
Nodes 9 and 36, in contrast, have many friends outside the group and thus shift
their opinion more quickly toward the mean, later pulling in their peers.
The right panel of Figure 15.1 presents an alternative scenario in which the
interpersonal influence coefficient (α) is preset to 0.1 for our activists. In this
case, the activists are assumed to be largely unsusceptible to peer influences
because they have initiated the policy push, whereas the remaining students are
open to persuasion (0.75). When the same W and initial opinions are used, the
four activists retain a fairly strong positive opinion (although they shift slightly
more negative), whereas their direct peers shift their opinions closer to those of
the four activists.
The most commonly estimated model assumes that there is a single constant
influence parameter, the interpersonal influence matrix W is proportional to
observed interaction networks, and the influence process has reached equilib￾rium (or something close to it between waves when lagged observational data
are used). Under these three behavior assumptions (and appropriate model
specification assumptions concerning the observed covariates and confoun￾ders), the model becomes a network autocorrelation model in which each
Models for Social Influence 367
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press9
9
9 9 9
36
36
36
36
36
49
49
49
49
49
67
67 67
67
67
1 2 3 4 5
Time
2
1
0
-1
-2
Opinion
9 9 9 9 9
36 36 36 36 36
49 49 49 49 49 67 67 67 67 67
1 2 3 4 5
Time
2
1
0
-1
-2
Opinion
Constant influence () of 0.75  gang of four = 0.1; all else 0.75
FIGURE 15.1 Simulated peer in
fluence on heterodox opinion
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressindividual’s current opinion is the tie-weighted average of their social contacts’
opinions. The interpersonal influence coefficient, α, can be estimated as the
regression of peers’ average Y on the ego’s Y (although causal identification
claims are more difficult, as noted later in the chapter). A beneficial feature of
this general model is that it provides a formal foundation for the long-standing
practice of using peers’ behavior or attitudes as predictors of the respondent’s
behavior or attitudes in statistical studies: any such function is effectively a
variant on the αWY result in the baseline equation, even if one cannot know
exactly how W was specified.
Examples using variants of the peer effects or network autocorrelation model
are common, but we think it useful to review exemplars to highlight the range of
opportunities. Schools are a common site for peer influence model applications
because they are especially well-bounded populations of teachers and students,
making assessments of peer effects somewhat more tractable than in social
environments where network boundaries are more porous and difficult to
encompass. Consider Sun et al.’s (2013) model of teachers’ classroom practices,
which contrasts influence from formal versus informal leaders. In our language
here, this model would imply two W matrices: one for formal school leaders (e.g.,
principals, superintendents) and the other based on sociometric nominations. Sun
et al. found that formal leaders matter more for general teaching practices (e.g.,
setting grading standards) but that informal relations are more important for
specific classroom pedagogical practices. At the student level, Vitale, Porzio, and
Doreian (2016) used the network autocorrelation model to assess how social
relations affect student performance. They varied the baseline structural influence
model by including five sources of social influence based on nominations about
learning exchange, shared working groups, out-of-school activities, friendship,
and personal advice. They found that close personal ties (friendship and advice)
had the greatest effects.
Studies of adolescent delinquency, deviant behavior, and substance use are
prime targets for peer effects research because well-developed social theory and
a rich qualitative tradition elucidate how these settings reward peers for taking
risks and engaging in adult-like behaviors. In an early paper from the Add
Health study, which nicely tweaked the weighting of W, Haynie (2001) showed
that the peer effect on minor delinquency depends on the social closure of peers:
close-knit, dense peer groups have a stronger effect than the same number of
disconnected peers. In an incredible data collection effort, Papachristos (2009)
built networks of violent co-offenders in the Chicago area. With these networks
and using a peer effects model, Papachristos found that the odds of being shot
depended directly on exposure to gun violence through criminal peers
(Papachristos, Wildeman, & Roberto 2015). Smoking and substance use are
special cases of delinquency for adolescents and have been subject to extensive
work on peer effects. As with delinquency, the evidence appears to suggest that
peer effects are contingent on structure, with popular peers being more influen￾tial than unpopular peers (Robalino & Macy 2018).
Models for Social Influence 369
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe model has also been well used in political and historical cases. In a
classic paper, Gould (1991) examined enlistment in the Paris National Guard
during the Paris Commune in 1871. Rather than modeling simple contagion,
Gould contrasted organizational recruitment similarity, neighborhood back￾ground, and deaths of neighbors to show that recruitment depends on multi￾plex relations that crosscut geography and social organization. In
contemporary political discourse, despite the generally low level of suscepti￾bility to political influence, some evidence suggests that peers affect one
another’s behavior (Beck et al. 2002; Kenny 1992). At the national level,
joining treaties or other international conventions has been the subject of peer
influence models, echoing the threshold models discussed previously (Macy
1991; Macy & Evtushenko 2020; Valente 1996).
15.2.2 Debates over Causal Inference
Our brief review of peer influence models highlights their application breadth.
However, no discussion of peer effects on behavior would be complete without
a discussion of the work of Christakis and Fowler on the diffusion of obesity
(and many other characteristics). They built a more-than-thirty-year longitu￾dinal network using survey contact information embedded within the
Framingham Heart Study. Based on these data, they reported a strong correl￾ation between each respondent’s BMI and the BMI of their close social con￾tacts, which they interpreted as interpersonal influence on weight (Christakis &
Fowler 2007). They found similar correlations when they repeated the study for
other outcomes, including smoking, depression, happiness, and loneliness (see
Christakis & Fowler 2013 for a review and discussion). The explicit causal
claims implied by the notion of contagion in their 2007 paper’s title was quite
controversial, with researchers debating the difficulties of causal identification
in these sorts of observational studies (Cohen-Cole & Fletcher 2008; Lyons
2011; Shalizi & Thomas 2011).
The core issue raised in these debates is the inability to estimate unambigu￾ously causal effects of peer behavior on respondent behavior. Although people
can transmit behaviors to others, they choose friends and close contacts based
on (perhaps unobserved) characteristics. Thus, it is just as likely that the
resulting network is due to the behavior of interest as the other way around.
The strongest of these critiques concluded that without a perfectly specified
model, there is no way to ensure against causal confounding (Shalizi & Thomas
2011). Creative critiques of the work show that similar designs can be used to
find significant peer influence coefficients for acne and height, features that are
theoretically unlikely to be influenced.
1
1 See Fowler and Christakis (2008) for a discussion of the trade-offs inherent in their modeling
strategy for the spread of obesity.
370 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressThis so-called selection-or-influence debate is ubiquitous, having been rec￾ognized early in the field (e.g., Kandel 1975). It is a common critique of any
social or behavioral research because much of social life is, in fact, reciprocally
causal. It should not be surprising, then, that attempts to model an inherently
endogenous process are sometimes criticized for having endogeneity issues.
Practically, this has much the same flavor of old debates over nature versus
nurture, arguing about whether behavior is due to socialization or biology.
Most careful studies of these sorts of questions come to the obvious, if unsatis￾factory, conclusion that both features are active. In many situations, a clean
causal point estimate is unnecessary because one can draw on theory, qualita￾tive work, and generally held understandings of the situation to inform policy
or interventions based on mixed or muddled evidence. In many cases, the
hardline critique of the inability to estimate an unbiased effect is largely
academic and probably a bit disingenuous. (Rare is the econometrician who
would like to see their children hanging out with poorly behaved peers because
a proper estimate of the peer effect cannot be uniquely identified.) However,
researchers must still be aware of these challenges and the extent to which
threats to inference can be mitigated. In the next section, we spell out in more
detail the foundations of the general problem and the sorts of techniques that
can be applied to mitigate them.
15.3   
Research aiming to evaluate network influence is common for good reason.
Intuitively, we know that actors make decisions embedded in a wider social
milieu. As we discussed in the previous section, though, empirically testing for
causality in these systems presents unique challenges. Nodes that are directly
and indirectly tied together become reciprocally causal, affecting one another
endogenously, which raises three issues.
2
First, as with all causal research, time order must be established because
assuming equilibrium outcomes is generally not warranted, and disentangling
causes from effects is impossible without dynamics: cause implies that a change
in x induces a corresponding change in y. In inferring i to j network flows, how
are researchers to be sure that they have not missed an earlier snapshot of the
network in which the same bit was initially flowing instead from j to i? The
prevalence of reciprocity in networks suggests that bidirectional flows are a
very strong possibility. In diffusion studies, this problem is called left truncation
because on a conceptual timeline (moving left to right), a chunk of data to the
left is missing. In econometric research, this problem is frequently referred to as
the reflection problem (Manski 1993). Ideally, one would have longitudinal
2 For formal modeling statements on these issues, see Ogburn and VanderWeele (2014).
Models for Social Influence 371
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdata capturing the period before and directly after some event and perhaps even
the initial creation of the network; in reality, collecting such data is rarely
feasible. For some processes, truncation is not a problem: the initial flow is
no more important than subsequent flows. For example, it does not really
matter where the shells in the Kula Ring began their journey. What is important
is the dynamic system that is being revealed in such flows. However, researchers
inferring social influence on an issue or behavior should know which actors’
behaviors preceded others’.
Second, unobserved heterogeneity and measurement issues can further com￾plicate causal research. Direct examination of exchanges of goods and flows of
actual items may be possible, but many flows of research interest are difficult to
observe directly. Such unobservable flows are inferred in changes in attitudes,
beliefs, and behaviors. How the researcher measures what is expected to be
flowing through a set of ties is particularly important in the validity of the
inference. The researcher must be cautious in not systematically missing some
flows through errors in data collection or biased measurement strategies.
Finally, spuriousness is an issue, as it is with all causal research. How are
researchers to be sure that what they believe to be i influencing j is not actually
due to some unobserved influence in the environment that affects both i and j?
If networks are static views of ongoing dynamic processes, the researcher may
miss the initial source of influence. For example, a researcher interested in the
spread of smoking at a high school might see one teenager begin to smoke more
after one of the teenager’s most popular friends began to smoke more. The
researcher may seek to test a theory that status in adolescent friendship net￾works is a key cause of the spread of health-related behaviors. But was it really
the friend’s popularity that caused the spread of smoking? Perhaps popular
students tend to be older and more mature-looking and consequently can more
easily buy cigarettes than younger friends. Easier access to cigarettes may
lead the less popular teens to obtain cigarettes from the more popular ones,
and this process might mean that less popular students take longer to become
addicted to nicotine. The researcher infers that less popular students are imitat￾ing more popular ones, but the mechanism of diffusion is elsewhere or is
more complex.
Arguably, the biggest spuriousness threats are the sundry bases of network
homophily that cause relations to form in the first place. In this case, homophily
is not something we are interested in predicting (e.g., as it was in Chapter 6)
because we are now focusing on established ties and their consequences for
network flows. Rather, homophily can operate as a confounder of what we are
truly seeking to test in our model: namely, how nodes influence one another.
Consider the example of presumed social influence on smoking behaviors. If we
consider that people are drawn to similar others, the researcher may conflate
people being drawn to one another because of the smoking itself (as when
people gather to smoke together outside) with people having influenced one
another’s behaviors (as when teens see a popular crowd smoking and are
372 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressprompted to try it). Without careful analysis of longitudinal data that include
the timing of ties and flows, it is impossible to discern such a difference.
All network research on social and behavioral contagion must explicitly
contend with these issues. As in most problems, theory should be the primary
guide to understanding causal relations. Do you have a good substantive reason
to believe that peer effects are active in your setting? Can you specify a clear
causal mechanism (e.g., discussion, compromise, modeling)? Then, can you use
observational and statistical tools to help rule out alternative explanations?
Pragmatically, these sorts of careful model specification checks and reflective
attempts to assess model sensitivity are among the best options. Although they
may never be sufficient to eliminate the possibility of error, they can often
bound it. Thus, any single model is unlikely to nail down causality, and the
researcher will need to think through specifics to build confidence that the time
order and alternate explanations have been properly addressed.
We next discuss several approaches that address these issues through careful
research designs. Afterward, we discuss approaches that employ statistical and
computational techniques to address these issues. As with causal research in
general, it is often helpful to begin by thinking like an experimentalist, asking
(1) what the hypothesized mechanism is, (2) whether the mechanism comes
before the effect, and (3) how this mechanism might be conflated with
alternative explanations.
15.4  
We have argued that endogeneity in networks is not a problem per se but
instead poses a set of challenges that are well worth the modeling efforts.
Whereas many of the challenges are statistical and computational, others are
simply about properly conceptualizing the network and building confidence in
one’s theory about the network process. Such theorizing often includes a
dynamic process in which ties arise (the focus of Chapter 13) and influence
flows in an ongoing and reciprocally causal fashion. Thus, one researcher’s
hypothesis offering a causal explanation for why a network has taken a certain
shape may be another researcher’s control for why a network is an important
conduit. Adjudicating these complementary mechanisms forms the basis of the
models presented in a research report. Given the complexity of these processes,
though, it would be wise to give up on finding a single model that can adjudi￾cate all possible alternative hypotheses. No single test is likely to definitively
prove one’s argument that a network causes flows, but a series of tests can build
confidence that the alternatives are not as sound as one’s proposed explanation.
We examine several research strategies. We begin with those in which the
researcher seeks to introduce or take advantage of random assignment in a
social influence process. We discuss three strategies, each with a decreasing level
of control in the random assignment process: (1) laboratory experiments, (2)
field experiments, and (3) natural experiments.
Models for Social Influence 373
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press15.4.1 Laboratory Experiments
Sherif (1937) conducted experiments demonstrating the power of peer influence on
perceptions and judgments. Participantswere placed in a dark room with a projector
emitting a single dot of light on the wall, inducing in participants the autokinetic
effect – the perception that the light is moving when, in fact, it is not. Participants
then called out to one another how far they thought the light was moving (three
inches, two inches, and so on), and these guesses varied quite a bit. However, as
moments passed, participants came to intersubjective agreements about how much
the light had been moving. These agreements varied considerably across groups.
Weeks later, when brought back to the laboratory individually, participants were
again asked to estimate the movement of the light, and they most often perceived the
light as moving within a close range of the norm that the group set previously.
Notably, Sherif also found that when a confederate in the experiment insisted on a
particular position, this person could shift the group consensus and shape the
persistent norm. Sherif also found that authority relations matter: subordinates
moved toward the norms that their bosses established when both were in the room.
Sherif was not a network researcher, but his work demonstrates the under￾lying mechanism of peer influence and points to possible experimental elabor￾ations that examine how structures and systems might modify and mediate
influence processes. Although this is not a book on experimental design, it is
important to draw attention to the possibilities for experimental work in
network analysis to test contagion and influence theories. Indeed, the most
direct way to contend with the methodological challenges noted earlier is to
move network analysis into laboratory settings. Experimental studies allow the
researcher to control the introduction of what is thought to flow through the
network, the channels through which it can spread, and the adoption mechan￾ism. Of course, some of the inherent validity of more ethological approaches
“in the wild” is lost with the shift to more artificial settings.
Another related area of network research that frequently tests predictions
using experimental designs is social exchange theory (Homans 1961; Thibaut
& Kelly 1959), which we introduced in Chapter 9. The conceptual core of
social exchange theory is that relationships are built from various exchanges,
including goods and services as well as emotions and feelings of belonging
(Lawler 2001). In these exchange networks, individuals will act to optimize
their benefits and reduce their burdens; thus, exchange networks point toward
power and dependencies as relational and dynamic within a network of flows.
More or less rational actors will behave predictably given relational scenarios
in which they face gains or losses. Moreover, in this view, the creation of norms
and other cultural formations may help resolve collective problems in systems
of exchanges. For example, in various forms of exchange, reciprocity is a
common norm that fosters cooperation and builds social cohesion.
Power comes from dependencies in exchange networks. In any relation
involving exchanges of important resources, the party that is less structurally
374 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressreliant on others and on whom others are more reliant is the party with
leverage. That actor is likely to use these dependencies to extract some form
of profit. Consequently, actors will tend to seek positions of advantage and
strategically move away from disadvantageous positions. The Florentine fam￾ilies intermarried strategically, exchanging daughters/sisters for business and
economic alliances. The Medici were particularly adept at doing so, making
other families dependent on them. Social exchange theorists often test these
ideas using controlled experimental designs in which participants play payoff
games wherein the actors – unbeknownst to themselves and one another –
occupy different structural positions in a network topology.
Many network processes are difficult or impossible to test in a laboratory or
to manipulate into a study amenable for short-term examination through
online interactions. Interpersonal influences on creativity or intellectual prod￾uctivity, for example, involve projects and careers that may take years to
observe. The effects we want to mimic in the lab often pale in comparison with
the real-life stakes implicated in peer influence. When people change their
answer about the movement of a dot of light projected on a wall in a lab, does
that evidence for conformity to peers translate into taking drugs, working
harder in school, or changing the number of children one intends to have?
Building confidence that what holds in contrived laboratory encounters will
hold more or less under real-world conditions is thus an important endeavor.
The strongest causal inference comes from finding ways to identify a clear
causal effect in natural settings. The researcher may contrive these situations
through creative research designs, referred to as field experiments or natural
experiments.
15.4.2 Field Experiments
Rather than bringing networks into the laboratory, why not take the laboratory
out to the world? One approach to testing theories of network flows attempts
to do just that. We discussed in Chapter 8 the Milgram small-world field
experiments tracing the real-world flow of packages from randomly selected
households in two Midwestern cities to the target destination in Boston, and
found the now-famous concept of six degrees of separation. The idea of
introducing an object into the world and observing whether and where it flows
is another solution to the methodological challenges we outlined. Such objects
can be thought of as a kind of dye that, when dropped into the real world,
reveals part of the social structure as it moves through the network. By intro￾ducing such objects, the researcher can sidestep issues of post hoc analysis and
causality to demonstrate clearly that the network is causing the flow.
Such research designs are not always feasible, but researchers have found
creative solutions for modeling flows. Chase’s (1991) use of a pool of hermit
crabs (discussed in Chapter 11) was a field setting of sorts, and it demonstrated
the validity of the core idea of vacancy chains. While social influence network
Models for Social Influence 375
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Presstheory was largely developed through careful experimental work, Childress and
Friedkin (2012) and Rawlings and Childress (2019) took the logic of social
influence network theory to the field setting of real-world book groups. These
groups were all given the same previously unknown novel to read and discuss.
Measures of book group members’ positive or negative evaluations of the novel
and more in-depth understandings of its meaning were gauged before group
discussions. The subsequent discussions were recorded, and social influence
networks were derived from group members’ self-reports. By introducing a
previously unknown object into a set of existing networks, the researchers
could gauge the influence process as it unfolded and evaluations and meanings
flowed through groups and channels of influence within groups.
Other research seeks to manipulate the structure of the network with ran￾domization of the core causal agent. For example, individuals are sorted into
conditions in which they are likely to form ties with each other or use some
central actors as conduits for some form of social influence (see Valente 2012
for a summary of network intervention types). Using such experiments,
research on dominance hierarchies and social influence suggests that network
researchers may be able to design interventions that dampen the flows of
bullying. Paluck and Shepard (2012) used a field experiment design to test
social influence on norms of bullying in a high school. The research design
randomly selected individuals with greater centrality scores (derived from a
friendship network) to aid the intervention implementation. This intervention
involved high-profile symbols (anti-bullying posters, wristbands, and a student
assembly) featuring the popular kids. The authors found that students with
more contacts act as social referents for norms and can significantly alter
attitudes and behaviors. In another such study, Hasan and Koning (2019) used
random assignment to teams and random assignment to work stations in a
technology startup boot camp to test ideas about peer influence on innovation.
And Kim et al. (2015) performed a health intervention in thirty-two rural
Honduran villages, randomizing the initial targeting of individuals in the
villages so that in some randomly selected villages, the initial targets were more
central to the village social network. Clearly, such interventions in naturally
occurring network settings are exciting, albeit costly and time-consuming,
endeavors.
The rise of the Internet has afforded many new opportunities for performing
field experiments and quickly gathering observational trace data in the views,
clicks, and downloads of large samples (McFarland, Lewis, & Goldberg 2016).
Researchers can relatively easily establish online conditions that randomly
assign participants to control and experimental groups. For example,
Salganik, Dodds, and Watts (2006) created websites that allowed people to
download a song for free; however, they randomly assigned half of those
coming to the website to a condition in which they could see the number of
times each song had been downloaded by others (i.e., a social influence condi￾tion). Their key finding was that social influence was more powerful than the
376 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Presssong content; in repeated trials, individuals in the influence condition converged
more rapidly on a song, but the song on which they converged appears to be the
result of random variation (although the researchers may have found more
convergence in the long run; see Van de Rijt 2019). Restivo and Van de Rijt
(2012) examined the flow of social influence on productivity among Wikipedia
contributors by randomly giving “stars” to highly productive contributors.
They found that this small status signal increased contributor productivity
(see also van de Rijt et al. 2014). The big data era has led to many opportunities
to test structural theories by tracing flows through digital ties and records.
These approaches, however, often involve a trade-off of less depth of analysis
for a greater breadth of understanding large-scale flows. We will discuss some
of this work in greater detail in our closing chapter.
As a practical matter, one should give great consideration in assignments to
treatment and control groups to minimize contamination. Although one typic￾ally randomly assigns individuals to treatment or control groups, in the net￾work case one usually wants to ensure that treated nodes do not contaminate
the control node samples. Thus, one typically wants a procedure to randomize
seeds, identify peers, and assign them all to treatment or control groups (see
Ugander & Yin 2020). If the network is well connected, avoiding contamin￾ation may be impossible, which might require the use of statistical models to
adjust for potential cross-case exposure.
15.4.3 Natural Experiments
Sometimes real-world processes mimic experimental designs by introducing an
element of randomness in which one group involuntarily receives the equivalent of
an experimental treatment. For example, poverty research studying neighborhood
effects on life chances has looked at individuals randomly chosen to receive
vouchers for improved housing (e.g., Rosenbaum 1995). In the case of testing
predictions about networks as conduits of important flows, the treatment of
interest is usually the presence or absence of a network tie. Obviously, the key
problem is that people choose one another and do so nonrandomly, thereby
introducing selection bias into the process. Yet, opportunities for forming ties
are sometimes assigned to people through randomized organizational decision￾making processes. Seating arrangements in the Hawthorne Plant’s wiring room
(Roethlisberger, Dickson, &Wright 1947 [1939]), for example, appear to have
been exogenously decided, with fateful consequences for the networks that
formed. College dormmates are sometimes determined randomly, and although
being dormmates does not necessarily imply close friendship, sharing a dorm room
almost certainly implies contact and increased opportunity for social influence.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, economists, with their disciplinary focus on using
statistical identification strategies to predict differences in individual-level per￾formances, have often sought such natural experiments to evaluate how
strongly individuals influence one another’s productivity. For example,
Models for Social Influence 377
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressSacerdote (2001) found evidence for peer influence on college GPAs through
the random assignment of dormmates at Dartmouth College. Hasan and Bagde
(2013) found similar evidence of peer effects in an Indian college’s random
roommate assignments, especially among students with matching skills.
Azoulay, Graff Zivin, and Wang (2010) conducted a different sort of natural
experiment, examining the effects of premature and unexpected deaths among
academic researchers as an exogenous shock to research collaboration net￾works. They found evidence for productivity declines throughout the network
of collaborators who worked directly or indirectly with the focal node that was
“removed” from the collaborative network structure.
Although natural experiments offer interesting ways to gauge the existence
and strength of networks as conduits, they have some limitations. For one,
random assignment conditions are difficult to find, making natural experiments
infeasible for many substantive interests. In addition, using randomness as the
basis for gauging network effects may introduce other factors that could affect
flows. For example, a collaborator’s sudden and tragic death may be a particu￾larly disruptive event affecting one’s productivity for reasons unrelated to the
mere absence of the collaborator’s productive labor and professional influence.
Finally, even though assignment might be random, treatment uptake may not
be. For example, colleges can assign students to roommates at random, but
there is no guarantee that those roommates will spend quality time together.
Experimentalists understand this difference as the intention to treat versus
treatment among the treated. Nonetheless, natural experiments offer ways to
address key methodological issues through research design.
15.5     
 
Conceptual or empirical constraints can make laboratory settings, field experi￾ments, and natural experiments unviable options for exploring network conta￾gion. For example, in many networks of deviant subgroups (e.g., gang
members, drug users), manipulating ties or flows would be difficult and likely
unethical. Experimental conditions may also entail contrived or imagined
situations that are, at best, approximations of real-world processes. In such
cases, as in all non-experimental research concerning causality, we turn to
statistical and computational approaches. Although such approaches will never
be truly experimental, statistical and computational solutions are frequently
useful ways to mimic experimental designs. What key controls should be
included? What are alternate explanations that an experimental design would
mitigate against? Thinking like an experimentalist will strengthen the veracity
of the researcher’s causal argument when using non-experimental techniques.
The two most rigorous statistical options for disentangling selection and
influence effects, beyond what can be achieved with standard implementations
378 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressof the network autocorrelation model, are instrumental variable approaches
and stochastic actor-oriented models (SAOMs). When data and design allow,
these approaches enable obtaining clean causal estimates of the network social
influence. When the data or research design makes these models impossible,
there are often still opportunities to control for unobserved confounders using
somewhat more standard statistical tools or, at a minimum, building confidence
in estimation by conducting extensive sensitivity analyses.
15.5.1 Instrumental Variable and Structural Equation Approaches
Experiments are the gold standard for causal estimation because the treatment
is randomly assigned. Instrumental variable approaches extend the logic of
random assignment to observational studies by finding a feature in the study
data setting that has characteristics similar to random assignment. In a classic
experiment, random assignment (Z) is an instrument for the treatment (X) and
has three key characteristics:
1. Relevance: Z has a causal effect on X. Receiving the treatment or not
depends on random assignment.
2. Exclusion: Z affects Y (the outcome of interest) only through X. Random
assignment affects Y only through the treatment.
3. Exchangeability: no confounding is involved in the effect of Z on Y. No
feature causes both Z and Y.
Randomization is a perfect instrument, requiring complete control of the
treatment allocation process, but any variable Z that acts like randomization is
a potential instrument. For example, if the biggest cause of children’s friend￾ships is being in the same place at the same time and if assignment to desks is
essentially random, then one could use “desk neighbor” as an instrument for
the effect of being friends (assuming that being a desk neighbor does not
directly affect the dependent variable, Y, as when the neighbor is being loud
or disruptive in class). Because random roommate designs follow this instru￾mental variable logic, they are natural choices for peer effect models.
Instrumental variable approaches are common in econometric models of
peer effects. Such models are often estimated with multiple equations, one of
which predicts the treatment with the instrument (or some combination of
instruments) and then uses that clean estimate to predict the outcome. The
logic of a multiple-equation setup opens the door to the use of a more general￾ized structural equation model framework, in which one can build models
allowing the causal direction to be dual.
Although this framework is mathematically attractive, the conditions satis￾fying the exclusion and relevance criteria simultaneously are often difficult to
find: a natural, observed variable that affects Y only through X and does not
directly cause Y itself is rare. Of course, there are some clever examples of
instrumental variables. In a study of peers who use an exercise monitoring app
Models for Social Influence 379
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press(such as Fitbit), Aral and Nicolaides (2017) observed that individuals’ exercise
habits are correlated with their peers’ exercise habits. This result, however,
could be due to selection: lazy individuals choose lazy peers on the app, whereas
hard-working individuals prefer to friend those who are also hard-working. To
sidestep this confounding, the researchers used the weather in the peer’s city as
an instrument for the peer’s exercise. The logic is that bad weather depressed
exercise for the peer in one city but did not directly affect the exercise of the ego,
who experienced different weather in a different location. In this sense, weather
causes the peer’s behavior, which then causes the ego’s outcome. (Note that if
all individuals using the app were in the same city, the instrument could not
work.)
Because finding appropriate and defensible instruments is so difficult, weak
instruments abound. The use of weak instruments likely leads to underesti￾mates of peer effects – or at least underpowered estimates, which lead to
inconsistent results. For example, some researchers have used student height
as an instrument for being friends, based on the logic that similarly tall people
will be friends. Others have used common hobbies, based on the logic that
people are selected into relations without causing the behavior of interest.
Critics, of course, could argue the opposite: in a model of peer effects on grades,
hobbies would be a weak instrument if these preferred leisure activities also
directly affect grades, which seems plausible.
The debate over how best to specify these sorts of models is thus highly
fraught with competing assumptions. The naïve peer effects model shown in
Equation 15.1 assumes that the model is fully specified and not reflective – that
is, that peers cause behavior, but behavior does not cause friendships – an
untenable assumption in most cases. Adding effects that capture causes of
friendship can improve the naïve model but still requires a very strong assump￾tion. Instrumental variable models trade this specification assumption for the
three assumptions involved in choosing an appropriate instrument, which
themselves are unlikely to be perfectly met. Further, it is not clear that poorly
constructed instruments perform much better than no instrument at all.
Sociologists have tended to favor the first set of assumptions, with perhaps
some explicit controls for selection effects (e.g., respondent fixed effects in
dynamic models; see Section 15.5.3). Economists have favored using instru￾ments, even if instruments are imperfect. Our recommendation follows the “all
models are false, some are useful” dictum, which would favor using instrumen￾tal variables when there are clearly appropriate options available, but not at the
cost of truly poor power and performance.
15.5.2 Stochastic Actor-Oriented Models (SAOMs)
An alternative to the basic regression/econometric approach to the statistical
estimation of peer effects is to build a computational model that more accur￾ately mirrors the microdata-generating process. Building such a model has been
380 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe goal of SAOMs, affectionately known as “SIENA” modeling after the
software developed to estimate these models (Snijders, van de Bunt, &
Steglich 2010). We briefly touched on SAOMs in Chapter 13 because these
models afford dynamic modeling of tie formation and dissolution effects (i.e.,
networks as outcomes). The intuition behind these models is to build a data￾grounded simulation that mirrors what actors do when they simultaneously
decide how to behave and with whom to be friends. This intuition is similar to
that of Heider’s (1946) basic POX model of social balance (discussed in
Chapter 7), in which actors attempt to establish mental consonance between
activities and peers. Consider the example shown in Figure 15.2.
At Time 1, Persons 1 and 3 are close friends (green arcs) with Person 2, but
the three do not share all the same activities (black arrows). At Time 2, Person
1 has stopped smoking, Person 3 has started drinking, and 1 and 3 are now
friends. This shift can be conceptualized as an alignment of interests and
friendship. When Person 1 considered all their activities, they noticed a number
of imbalances with Person 2. Person 1 liked smoking, but their close drinking
buddy (Person 2) did not, and Person 2 liked hanging out with and playing
chess with Person 3. What should Person 1 do? Logically, two options are
available: Person 1 could stop hanging out with 2 or change behavior. In this
particular example, Person 1 chose to remain friends with Person 2, stop
smoking, and start a friendship with Person 3.
This situation can be thought of as a problem of balancing a set of payoffs
(utilities) associated with each activity and relation. By assuming that each person
can control what they do and who they hang out with and that each of these
activities and relations provides some value, one can translate each observed
change in activity or relation into an estimated average utility for that kind of
activity or relation. For example, Persons 1 and 2 resolved tension by changing
activities (by dropping smoking and taking up drinking, respectively) and closing
the imbalanced structural hole around Person 2. These actors prefer building
relations over continuing smoking and avoiding drinking; the weight on relations
for these actors appears higher than the weight on behavior (see Kandel 1978).
1
2
3 1
2
3
Time 1 Time 2
FIGURE 15.2 The structural alignment of friends and interests
Models for Social Influence 381
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressSAOMs apply this logic to real-world data by treating each activity as a
draw from a probability model (e.g., predicting the probability that Person
1 will drop the tie to smoking), showing the relative attractiveness of changing
behavior and/or network ties. Technically, this dynamic process is expressed as
two different evaluation functions: one for network ties and one for behavior.
For example, if most people facing an imbalance around smoking stop smoking
and retain the friendship, then the utility of smoking will be substantively lower
than the utility of a relationship, providing evidence for peer influence on
behavior (i.e., people changed behavior in response to their peers’ activities).
On the other hand, if people continued to smoke and changed relations, then
the evidence would suggest that selection trumps influence in the data. SAOMs
test this sort of logic for every relation and search over the available parameter
space to find a set of values that best fit the observed changes in behavior and
relations between time points in a given data set.
Intuitively, then, SAOMs encapsulate an agent-based model in which agents
attempt to maximize utility functions on network relations and behaviors,
based on researcher-specified models that best fit the changes in the observed
data.
3 The model thus simultaneously includes the relational formation model
discussed in the previous chapter with respect to ERGMs and the peer influence
models discussed in this chapter, which are fit appropriately using two equa￾tions: one for the tie formation model and one for the behavior model. The
equations specify the features to weigh in the model, such as similarity in
activities and friendship balance. In this sense, the model (like all models)
assumes that the researcher has properly specified the features that matter for
behavior and relational choice in the setting. The researcher conducts the
simulation by picking a starting parameter set, seeing how well a simulated
network with that parameter set matches the observed network changes,
making a small adjustment to the parameters and testing predictions against
the observed changes again, and taking the updated parameter if it improves
the fit. The model continues to randomly walk through the parameter space
until it converges on a set of parameters that best fits the observed changes in
the data.
SAOMs implement this simulation through several core functions that
govern each simulated actor’s activity. The model first assumes that there are
unobserved microsteps between the waves of data collection. In our earlier
example, perhaps Person 1 first established a relation with Person 3, then
stopped smoking, and so forth. The model also assumes that enough microsteps
occurred between the observed waves to account for the changes when a person
3 One need not be too worried about whether actors are actually maximizing some unobserved
utility function or are otherwise acting rationally in the construction of their social relations. The
etiology of choice is not important for the estimation problem the model solves; actors might
behave purely habitually or normatively rather than rationally, but the model provides an “as if”
set of tools for predicting network change.
382 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressmakes one change at a time. This overall change parameter (λ) is governed by
how different the network observations are from wave to wave.
Next, the researcher defines the evaluation (or objective) function for net￾work ties, reflecting the utility of different kinds of network ties for the focal
actor. The goal for each actor is to maximize this utility function, and they will
remove, add, or sustain a tie to do so. The general evaluation function for
network ties can be written as follows:
fi
ð Þ¼ β, x X
k
βkSkið Þþ x εð Þ x, z, t, j , (15.2)
where fi is the value of the utility for actor i given the state of the current
parameter estimates β and the current state of the network (x); Ski represents
each of k effects; and ε is a disturbance term based on the network (x),
individual attributes (z), time (t), or alter attributes (j). For example, if actors
want to form reciprocal ties with homophilous others, then the β for both
reciprocity and homophily will be positive.
This model is substantively analogous to the ERGMs discussed in the
previous chapter. Each simulated actor applies the current state of this equation
to each of their relations and toggles each relation if it will improve their overall
utility. Intuitively, Equation 15.2 represents a hypothesis about how actors
choose peers. If the weights are accurate, then the simulation should transform
the Time 1 network into the Time 2 network in a way that mimics the observed
Time 2 network. If not, then the parameters are incorrect and must be adjusted.
The researcher continues adjusting until the simulation achieves the best fit to
the observed changes in the data. Like the ERGMs discussed in the previous
chapter, the network tie model is estimated on a logit scale and is interpreted
similarly (see the R tutorial for a detailed example).
Unlike ERGMs, SAOMs can also include a second equation governing the
simultaneous change in a target behavior. A behavior in the SAOM framework
is any node attribute the researcher is trying to model: an attitude, belief, or an
actual behavior. The evaluation function for actor i changing behavior z to
value v can be written as follows:
f
z
ið Þ¼ β, x, z X
k
βz
kSz
kið Þþ x, z εð Þ x, z, t, v , (15.3)
Originally limited to binary outcomes, the SIENA model has since been gener￾alized to cover binary, ordinal, or continuous outcomes. The microsimulation
steps discussed above are then evaluated to see whether ego should adjust
behavior up or down, or remain the same. For example, the researcher can
include a term for similarity to friends to capture the peer effect.
The researcher estimates the model via simulation to find a set of parameters
that jointly fit the observed changes in behavior and networks, based on the
target statistics defined in the network and behavior utility functions. Thus, the
model fits the parameters the researcher designates. Whether those are the right
Models for Social Influence 383
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressparameters is a theoretical question, and whether the model converges is a
practical question. As an example, Schaefer, Haas, and Bishop (2012) estimated
an SAOM using Add Health data to examine whether smoking is subject to
peer influence. Their main findings are reproduced in Table 15.1. The first panel
provides results from the network dynamics equation. The rate parameter
approximates how often people made microstep changes between the two
observed waves. The out-degree parameter is an intercept term, and a negative
sign is common in sparse networks and simply indicates that people are tied, on
average, to less than half of the others in the network.
 15.1 SAOM of peer influence on smoking (see Schaefer, Haas, & Bishop
2012)
Network Function β SE Smoking
Function
β SE
Rate 10.26*** 0.49 Rate 2.06*** 0.26
Out-Degree −3.91*** 0.08 Linear Shape −0.11 0.22
Reciprocity 1.91*** 0.09 Quadratic
Shape
1.17*** 0.16
Transitive Triplets 0.52*** 0.04 Female 0.16 0.19
Popularity 0.29*** 0.04 Age −0.00 0.10
Extracurricular Activity
Overlap
0.28*** 0.06 Parent
Smoking
0.01 0.23
Smoke Similarity 0.68*** 0.12 Delinquency 0.44** 0.16
Smoke Alter 0.14** 0.05 Alcohol −0.10 0.14
Smoke Ego −0.04 0.05 GPA −0.09 0.13
Female Similarity 0.24*** 0.04 Average
Similarity
2.89*** 0.91
Female Alter −0.11* 0.05 In-Degree −0.04 0.11
Female Ego −0.04 0.05 In-Degree
Squared
0.00 0.01
Age Similarity 1.00*** 0.13
Age Alter −0.01 0.03
Age Ego −0.04 0.03
Delinquency Similarity 0.15 0.08
Delinquency Alter −0.04 0.04
Delinquency Ego 0.02 0.04
Alcohol Similarity 0.27** 0.10
Alcohol Alter −0.03 0.03
Alcohol Ego −0.03 0.04
GPA Similarity 0.70*** 0.13
GPA Alter −0.05 0.04
GPA Ego −0.02 0.04
Note: * < 0.05; ** < 0.01; *** < 0.001.
384 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe rest of this panel is organized around categories of effects. Reciprocity,
transitive triples, and popularity are endogenous network formation features
and act as one would expect: people tend to reciprocate nominations, be friends
with their friends’ friends, and nominate those who are already popular. The
overlap in extracurricular activity represents a dyad-level opportunity and
similar-interest effect. Then a set of behavior-related activities (smoking,
gender, age, delinquency, alcohol use, and GPA) are entered as similarity, alter
effects, and ego effects. The similarity effects capture homophily; those who are
similar with respect to everything but minor delinquency are more likely to be
friends with one another. The smoke similarity coefficient of 0.68 suggests that
people are more likely to become friends if they have a similar smoking status.
The specific interpretation requires incorporating the alter and ego smoking
effects (0.14 and −0.04) and then calculating the relative odds under different
scenarios, noting that smoking in this case can take three values (0 = nonsmo￾ker; 1 = intermittent smoker; 2 = smoker). For example, when all else is held
constant, the odds of a smoker forming a new tie with a fellow smoker (smoke
similarity = 1) is 2.612 times higher than with a nonsmoker (smoke similarity =
0): exp(0.68  1 + 0.14  2 − 0.040  2)/exp(0.68  0 + 0.14  0 − 0.040  2).
The alter effects capture the same features for in-degree; with all else being
equal, females are a little less popular than males, and smokers are a little more
popular than nonsmokers. The ego effects are factors driving out-degree, and
no major effects are evident (likely because of the fixed-nomination design in
Add Health).
Schaefer, Haas, and Bishop (2012) estimated these effects while accounting
for simultaneous changes in behavior, captured by Equation 15.3 and repre￾sented in the second panel of Table 15.1. Their core research question was
whether adolescents’ smoking behavior changed as a function of their peers’
smoking behavior. The strong positive coefficient on smoking similarity (β =
2.89) indicates that these individuals are more likely to take up smoking if their
peers smoke or to quit if their peers do not smoke, given the selection features
estimated in the first equation.
4
Behavior, of course, is not due solely to peers’ behavior. Indeed, delinquency
has a positive effect on smoking, likely indicating a generalized teen rebellion
aspect to smoking behavior. In these models, smoking was recorded as a three￾level ordinal variable, so the linear shape and quadratic shape coefficients capture
the expected trajectory of smoking over time. The significant quadratic term
indicates that people are unlikely to remain in the middle category: they either
transition to smoking or return to nonsmoking. (When one has a binary behav￾ior, the quadratic term is not necessary.) Thus, as is common in these sorts of
models, evidence exists for both a selection effect and an influence effect.
4 The effect is treated as symmetric, although new models allow one to estimate different effects for
peers starting a behavior versus peers stopping a behavior.
Models for Social Influence 385
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe SAOM framework is a powerful way to evaluate selection and influence
simultaneously, as long as the four core requirements of the model are met.
First, the researcher must have data collected at two or more points in time. In
fact, three to five time points work best. Second, small to moderately sized
networks are required. SAOMs work only for networks of approximately 20 to
2,000 nodes. The model is computationally intensive, and examining multiple
effects with a large network will involve very high runtimes (days) and likely
convergence issues. Third, SAOMs require change between time points, but not
too much change. Modeling mechanisms driving network change requires some
degree of observed change in the network to begin with. Typically, SAOMs
work on networks that have a Jaccard index of 0.3 to 0.6 across panels,
indicating a fairly stable set of ties.
5 Finally, although SAOMs can model
undirected networks, the approach is typically used and is far easier to interpret
when applied to directed networks.
Like all models, SAOMs make a fairly strong set of assumptions. The main
assumption is that actors have agency and decide which ties and behaviors to
change (which is why interpretation is simpler for directed networks). Actors
have agency over (1) their outgoing links by creating new ones, dissolving
existing links, or doing nothing; and (2) their behavior by increasing, decreas￾ing, or sustaining levels. Other assumptions for SAOMs, according to Snijders
(2001), include the following:
 Time is continuous (although data are collected as snapshots in time).
 Ties are not transient events but rather relatively stable states, tending to
endure over time.
6
 Network change is an outcome of a Markov process, where the current state
of the network predicts the probability of the next state; past network states
have no effects beyond the current state. However, the first observation is
not modeled and is considered the process starting value.
 Actors behave as if they are rational and have full knowledge of others’
relations and attributes/behaviors across the entire network. This assump￾tion is potentially unreasonable for larger networks.
5 The formula for the Jaccard index is as follows:
J ¼ N11
N01 þ N10 þ N11 ,
where N11 is the number of ties in both periods (stable ties), N01 is the number of ties that were
not in the first period but were in the second (ties added), and N10 is the number of ties that were
in the first period but not the second (ties dropped). 6 For more transient events, readers would do well to look into relational event models (Butts
2008b) or the actor-oriented version called dynamic network actor models (DyNAM; Stadtfeld,
Hollway, & Block 2017).
386 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press At any given moment, one probabilistically selected actor can change an
outgoing tie (add, drop, or do nothing). No more than one tie can change at
a time.
Typically, the biggest hurdle to using SAOMs is their implementation.
Wrangling the data to fit what the program expects can be difficult, particularly
if many network settings need to be fit simultaneously (see, e.g., Osgood,
Feinberg, & Ragan 2015). Although the SAOM framework is one of the few
dedicated solutions to the selection versus influence problem, the requirements
of the model and the difficult fitting process have led many to make use of
alternative statistical specifications. For example, Ragan et al. (2019) showed
that results from a fairly straightforward type of hierarchical linear model are
often largely consistent with the SAOM approach, and such models are easier
to fit (although the level of detailed analysis is not typically as great as with
SAOMs). As SAOMs and software continue to evolve, we expect these difficul￾ties to become less onerous.
15.5.3 Sensitivity Analyses
When a SAOM or instrumental variable approach is impossible, sensitivity
analyses can at least bound the risk of bias associated with a potentially
misspecified model (VanderWeele 2011). The goal of sensitivity analyses is to
take error potential seriously and try to estimate the size of the problem. How
huge would the omitted variable bias need to be for the finding to change? One
can even imagine identifying a highly influential variable (e.g., parent’s educa￾tion), considering how big an effect it has in other models, and assuming that
the missing variable is at least that influential. Would the existence of such a
variable change the results? Various off-the-shelf tools exist for performing a
sensitivity analysis on the results (Frank 2000). One merely inputs the coeffi￾cient, standard error, the number of observations, the number of covariates,
and (for nonlinear models, such as SAOMs) the number of treatment condition
cases. Doing so can reveal the bias needed to invalidate an inference, the impact
threshold for a confounding variable, or both (Frank et al. 2013).
15.6 
The notion of cause presented in many studies can be criticized as too simple –
as an if–then relation of two billiard balls. In cases of social and historical
change, there can be multiple simultaneous causes, sequences of causes in a
specific order, a building of congeries of factors, and so on. Specifying experi￾mental conditions for all these forms is beyond the experimental framework
currently employed in assessing cause in social phenomena. The enormity of the
task of pulling apart each of the aspects of how ties form and how influence
flows will often require a sustained effort rather than a single model. For
Models for Social Influence 387
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Pressexample, Christakis and Fowler (2007) used a suite of network models to probe
the hypothesis that obesity is, in a sense, contagious. By studying longitudinal
networks of family, friends, and neighbors and comparing changes in BMI
within and between dyads, they found evidence that being closer friends with
someone who is heavier is likely to lead to one’s own weight gain. The precise
mechanisms driving this process (e.g., friends affect baseline perceptions of
“overweight” versus directly influencing weight through specific health-related
behaviors) remain somewhat unclear. And because Christakis and Fowler used
models that do not directly account for selection, the research design is open to
the criticism that the authors mistook homophily for influence (Aral, Muchnik,
and Sundararajan 2009).
Our reading of the state of the literature on selection versus influence is that
the question is largely ill-posed. The vast majority of well-specified, careful
designs have found peer influence on malleable behaviors and beliefs; the same
studies have also found that people choose to hang out with people who make
them feel comfortable and safe, leading to clear selection. That is, these findings
are not a case of either/or but rather degrees of both/and. Thus, debates over the
existence of peer effects strike us as disingenuous. The potential for statistical bias
in an estimate should not blind us to the larger bodies of evidence across multiple
settings, designs, and domains that clarify how people influence one another.
Rather, time would probably be better spent on careful examinations of the
underlying mechanisms and formal processes that lead to disparate outcomes.
  
adams, jimi, and David R. Schaefer. 2016. “How Initial Prevalence Moderates Network￾Based Smoking Change: Estimating Contextual Effects with Stochastic Actor-Based
Models.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 57: 22–38. (An excellent model
paper for using SOAMs over multiple waves and multiple contexts.)
An, Weihua, Roberson Beauvile, and Benjamin Rosche. 2022. “Causal Network
Analysis.” Annual Review of Sociology 48: 23–41. (An excellent overview of the
identification problem of selection or influence in empirical work on peer influence.)
Aral, Sinan, Lev Muchnik, and Arun Sundararajan. 2009. “Distinguishing Influence￾Based Contagion from Homophily-Driven Diffusion in Dynamic Networks.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106: 21544–49. (An excellent
use of instrumental variables for identifying causal effect of peers.)
Christakis, Nicholas A., and James H. Fowler. 2007. “The Spread of Obesity in a Large
Social Network over 32 Years.” New England Journal of Medicine 357: 370–79.
(Arguably the most influential paper on peer influence in the last twenty years,
sparking numerous debates and wide methodological investigations into network
causal identification.)
Flache, Andreas, Michael Mäs, Thomas Feliciani et al. 2017. “Models of Social
Influence: Towards the Next Frontiers.” Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulation 20(4): 2. (A useful review of mainly simulation-based attempts to model
social influence processes based on various theoretical accounts.)
388 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressFriedkin, Noah E., and Eugene C. Johnsen. 1998. A Structural Theory of Social
Influence. New York: Cambridge University Press. (The foundational theoretical
work on peer influence in networks; most other subsequent works have been
elaborations on this base model.)
2011. Social Influence Network Theory: A Sociological Examination of Small Group
Dynamics. New York: Cambridge University Press. (An extension and application
of their earlier work on formal models for peer influence.)
Friedkin, Noah E., Anton V. Proskurnikov, Roberto Tempo, and Sergey E. Parsegov.
2016. “Network Science on Belief System Dynamics under Logic Constraints.”
Science 354: 321–26. (Extends the interpersonal peer influence model among
groups to include logical constraints on the beliefs themselves.)
Kandel, Denise B. 1978. “Homophily, Selection, and Socialization in Adolescent
Friendship Pairs.” American Journal of Sociology 48: 427–36. (One of the key
early papers to highlight issues related to selection and overestimation of peer
effects from respondents’ self-reports; nicely outlines the logic of influence
identification.)
Papachristos, Andrew. 2009. “Murder by Structure: Dominance Relations and the
Social Structure of Gang Homicide.” American Journal of Sociology 115:
74–128. (Uses unique data on arrests to map and then model the spread of violence
in Chicago.)
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 681–704. (An early
example of using randomization on networks to identify peer influence; sparked
numerous other similar assessments.)
Snijders, Tom A. B., Gerhard G. Van de Bunt, and Christian E. G. Steglich. 2020.
“Introduction to Stochastic Actor-Based Models for Network Dynamics.” Social
Networks 32(1): 44–60. (A clear and rigorous introduction to SAOMs by the team
that developed the approach.)
Models for Social Influence 389
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press16
Conclusion
Network Analysis Tomorrow
The frontiers of network analysis keep expanding with new data sources and
new ways to see structure and model relations. Traces of interactions and
relations are now constantly streaming and being recorded through social
network platforms. New technologies are affording new ways to visualize
and analyze massive online data sets, as well as flowing interactions using video
and sensor data. These new data sources are being met with new data mining
approaches, giving us a deeper and wider view of social structure. Moreover,
these new technologies are undoubtedly changing aspects of social structure
itself, as people form ties and influence one another in ways that were
unimaginable a generation ago. What is missing, we contend, is a systematic
way of linking these projects to a theory of social structure (as outlined in
Chapter 2). We conclude by proposing three strategies for addressing open
problems and moving forward in modeling social structure.
16.1   ,   
Life is full of trade-offs, and research is no different. Ideally, network scholars
would love to gather details on very large numbers of individuals, including
richly textured accounts of their network ties over time, how they perceive
other individuals’ ties, and a host of attitudinal and behavioral measures.
Perhaps then one could finally produce networks to match Moreno’s ambitions
of capturing the dynamic, flowing, interrelated nature of an entire society.
Today, with increased data availability and computational power, one might
be tempted to try something like a massive network analysis of an entire
society, and others have made relationally narrow attempts to do so (e.g.,
Park, Blumenstock, & Macy 2019). Yet, an unfiltered, unlimited, big data
390
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfirehose would probably produce a jumbled mess. In contrast, solid science
requires a focus on relevant data guided by theory (e.g., Leifer 1992).
So how does one best take advantage of the plethora of newly available
data? In taking network analysis to the next level, researchers are advancing
three main strategies, each of which makes a certain trade-off in terms of
seeking to capture social structure that informs social theory. These trade-offs
are fundamental to any research project and form logics of inquiry inherent in
many research designs (e.g., Ragin & Amoroso 2018). In the context of current
network analysis trends, we call these approaches (1) scaling up, (2) going deep,
and (3) comparing structures in the middle. Each strategy makes a choice in
sacrificing some degree of breadth or depth to capture valid and more or less
generalizable aspects of structure. The trick is matching one’s theoretical inter￾ests with a pragmatic and accomplishable research strategy that makes accept￾able trade-offs in pursuing those interests.
16.2  
As discussed throughout this book, social network analysis was originally
developed to work with small, closed groups – networks on the order of a
few dozen to a few hundred nodes. First, these structures were analyzed largely
by hand and with basic descriptive statistics. In fact, even for a period after the
development of computer software for social network analysis, analyses were
limited to 256 cases because of the inherent memory limits for holding an
adjacency matrix. Although research has moved far beyond those sorts of
limits, many of the procedures and ideas developed in social network analysis
remain constrained by computational efficiency. Part of this constraint is his￾torical: contemporary researchers always build from earlier work but often lift
techniques without thinking through the computational limitations and theor￾etical implications. Scaling up network analysis is therefore also a reimagining
process.
Without reimaging network analysis at scale, one might think that the
obvious, if inelegant, way to scale up is to simply ship the project off to a cloud
server with abundant memory and processors. Even then, though, practical
analyses will almost always encounter limits at some point. For example, many
network algorithms require polynomial computational time, implying that the
time required to calculate a metric increases geometrically by the number of
nodes or edges. For example, betweenness centrality was developed to under￾stand the ways that nodes could act as probable brokers between otherwise
disconnected alters, operationalized as the ability to disrupt shortest-path com￾munication. But calculating all shortest paths across all pairs is time￾consuming, even with the best and newest algorithms (e.g., Brandes 2001).
A researcher who loads a 1 million–node Twitter network into the R package
igraph and mindlessly asks for “betweenness(g)” will be in for a disappointing
wait. In such a situation, the researcher will never be able to buy their way out
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 391
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressof scale with additional computational power: even if they could hold the data,
they could not wait for the result. So why bother?
The clearest reasons to keep pushing into larger networks concern general￾izability and the capacity to see emergent phenomena at the scale that the data
are actually produced. By collecting more data on our settings or collecting data
on larger settings, researchers can often build greater certainty that findings are
not driven by random errors, missing data, odd cases, or other common small￾N issues. Of more substantive interest, some phenomena traverse real-world
networks of massive scales, such as international travel or the worldwide
spread of disease. Researchers would like to be able to assess the phenomena
by modeling data at the same scale they were produced. It must be the case, for
example, that heterogeneities in the worldwide social contact network drive
differences in disease spread, and those differences create much of the difference
in global pandemic spreading rates. It seems sensible that if a researcher is
interested in worldwide spread, then their model should be scaled to the
worldwide population. However, there are usually much more efficient ways
to understand the phenomenon of interest that exploit key features of the
structure of such massive scale networks without the headaches associated with
trying to store, move, and manipulate giant files.
In addition, effort invested in building scale comes with a cost: as the
network size increases, the detail that can be collected on each element almost
always decreases. One cannot know the meanings and emotions attributed
within each relation, how individuals tell stories about others, or the multiplex
relations present in very large-scale networks. There is almost always a sacrifice
of depth for breadth.
16.2.1 Scale the Theory, and the Methods Will Follow
At first glance, scale issues seem to be methods problems (and we discuss some
of these in detail in this chapter). Given our mantra in this book, though, you
may not be surprised to hear that they are actually more often theory problems
in disguise. Consequently, the first question any researcher must ask is, How
are the data at hand going to be used to test a core theory or to answer a key
descriptive question? Before running out and renting cloud computing space,
one should consider the research question and what one imagines is going on in
the world. Is the social process of interest interdependent at this scale? Is every
node in that network at risk from every other node in the network due to the
social process of interest? Or is the process compartmentalized in important
ways? Does the research question require the census, or can it be answered via
smart sampling?
For example, if the researcher is interested in descriptive homophily ques￾tions (examining the relative likelihood that nodes of one type will interact with
nodes of the same type), then they need only information on dyadic
connectivity, not a complete network at scale. There is no need to load or
392 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressprocess the full network or assess information on indirect ties unless the
researcher wants to include these as possible sources of homophily. As such,
homophily questions can be answered with sampled data, and the results will
always be unbiased. In massive, sparse networks – in which each node’s
number of ties is a tiny fraction of the nodes in the population of interest – it
is often more efficient to oversample ties relative to (the much more common)
non-ties and then reweight the analysis at the modeling stage. In contrast,
identifying how viral tweets flow through the Twitterverse, for example,
requires knowing the extent to which each node is at risk of exposure to every
other node. Even then, the full network of millions of Twitter users does not
need to be held in memory simultaneously; instead, the researcher can focus on
transmission trees and those at risk in the temporal window surrounding the
focal tweet. In other words, the researcher can a priori reduce the risk set based
on a substantive understanding of the process as a serial transmission flow
rather than as a parallel flow in which all connected nodes may be simultan￾eously exposed to a type of influence. The theory saved the researcher weeks of
unnecessary work.
Thus, our general strategy for scale problems is to focus on the question of
interest. Although exploratory analysis of data on small networks can reason￾ably run a host of centrality scores and plot the full network, that sort of
exploratory analysis is impossible for the full network in large-data cases. (As
we touched on in Chapter 5, if you’ve seen one indecipherable “hairball”
network, you’ve seen them all!) Our general advice for focusing theory ques￾tions is to return to the connectionist and positional frames summarized in
Table 2.1. In most cases, researchers can use those frames to narrow the scale of
the problem or to trim the analysis smartly to avoid otherwise impossible
computational demands.
16.2.2 Exploratory Data Analysis at Scale
Theories and substantive interests sometimes require many nodes or long
temporal sequences, which can quickly lead to very large data sets. Seeing
and exploring the structural features of such networks requires a specialized
set of strategies, some of which we discuss in this section. In Chapter 5, we
discussed general strategies for network visualization at scale. Here, we elabor￾ate on some of these ideas to the particular usefulness of visualization strategies
in parsing very large networks. In addition, we cover how descriptive and
statistical approaches can be scaled up based on both connectionist and
positional frameworks.
16.2.2.1 Divide and Conquer
If the researcher is interested in how networks are pipes for important flows,
connectionist approaches scale quite readily to massive networks because very
few networks at massive scales are homogeneously mixed. The larger the
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 393
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressnetwork, the more likely it will contain significant clusters or subgroups that
can become the focus for a divide-and-conquer strategy. For example, theoret￾ically, anyone on Facebook might connect to anyone else on Facebook. In
practice, though, online relations are inherently shaped by some pretty strong
off-line shared foci. These foci (and, to some degree, the Facebook friend
recommender system’s penchant for closing triangles) mean that the underlying
network is highly modular. For very large networks, the researcher can exploit
this modularity to identify subgroups that are socially relevant for actors, and
tools for clustering networks with billions of nodes are now readily available
(e.g., Pajek; see Batagelj & Mrvar 1999).
Consider a portion of the GitHub repository network, where edges are
activities users make with respect to posted projects and code (e.g., making a
“pull” request or “forking” a project). The largest connected component of the
baseline GitHub network has 4.3 million nodes, but a simple Louvain commu￾nity detection routine generates a partition of that network with a modularity
of 0.93, indicating nearly perfect separation across clusters. Moreover, looking
within the communities identified on the full graph reveals that most are also
highly fragmented, representing a nested communities-within-communities
structure. This modular structure then raises important questions about levels
of analysis. In these data, the structure of the community-level graph is in many
ways more interesting than the structure of the communities themselves.
Figure 16.1 displays the second-level communities within one primary com￾munity of roughly 54,000 nodes that was identified within the larger network
of 4.3 million nodes. The figure displays aggregated linkages among the clusters
within that community.
Further zooming in on the light green cluster at the far right and the dark
green cluster at the center top of Figure 16.1 allows us to examine the non￾aggregated network. These networks are presented in Figure 16.2.
What quickly becomes apparent in the exploration of these lowest-level
communities is that many have a very simple hub-and-spoke structure, such
as the plot on the right of Figure 16.2; a small minority of communities have a
more cohesive, interesting, or complex structure. Once this feature is recog￾nized, it is easy to write a filtering script based on within-community degree
distributions to distinguish these two types of networks. Thus, the divide-and￾conquer strategy allows us to focus our modeling efforts on the portion of the
network with (structurally) interesting phenomena. With no strong a priori way
to trim the data, one uses an inductive strategy to do so.
16.2.2.2 Look at the Forest before the Trees
Researchers exploring the structure of large-scale networks often find it useful
to get a general sense of the macrostructure of the network. If the researcher
first breaks the large network into communities, then they can build mixing
matrices (discussed in Chapter 5) and visualize the group-to-group structure of
the network. Heatmaps are often a simple way to get a sense of the global
394 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressstructure of giant networks that are too large for a two-dimensional layout. In a
heatmap, the cells are colored by some volume feature, such as the difference
from the expected value under a null mixing model; further, the rows and
columns of the matrix are sorted by some feature that helps illuminate the
structure, either endogenously or based on attributes.
Consider Figure 16.3, which maps follower networks of just over 300,000
Twitter users, all with content related to the Venezuelan protest movement.
Here, ties are colored by average degree; cell size is proportional to the size of
each cluster; and the rows and columns are permuted to maximize the volume
of ties along the diagonal, which would naturally reveal any meso-level struc￾ture in the network.
Three interesting features are evident in the structure. First, there is a very
strong diagonal, reflecting the modular structure of the overall network and
suggesting again that internally cohesive subgroups of mutual followers dom￾inate the macrostructure. Second, a large, dominant group (approximately
43,000 nodes) serves as a hub to which everyone else is connecting (indicated
by the darker shaded column at the left of the matrix). Finally, and perhaps a
FIGURE 16.1 GitHub network
Note: Each node in this figure represents a nested community within a larger GitHub
community of 53,000 nodes.
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 395
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Presslittle less obvious, a large cluster at the bottom right is disconnected from
everyone else; these are small sets of nodes that are not in the largest
component.
In addition to visualization strategies, descriptive statistics can be used to
explore large-scale networks. After dividing a network into smaller subregions,
a researcher might employ nodal and network motif-level descriptive tech￾niques (e.g., dyad and triad censuses discussed in Chapter 7) to characterize
these regions of social space. Node-level features, such as comparative degree
distributions, may also be useful. For most structural effect modeling exercises –
in which, say, centrality in one giant network is used to predict later success –
the researcher can calculate local statistics that scale well with network size.
FIGURE 16.2 (a and b) Two details of GitHub network
FIGURE 16.3 Follower network of 300,000+ Twitter users
396 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressSome metrics that do not scale well in their complete form (such as closeness or
betweenness) are amenable to small and easily performed variations in how
they are calculated that can work as effective proxies. For example, one can
measure proximity prestige out to k steps, where k is relevant to the social
problem of interest but is much less than the total number of nodes. Again,
researchers can more easily find appropriate measures when they have substan￾tive knowledge of the domain and a theory to orient their attention on some
facet of structure.
16.2.3 Statistical Models for Giant Networks
The same general scaling-up approach can be used to work with statistical
models for large networks. In general, the tools used for modeling endogenous
network structures, such as ERGMs or SAOMs, are limited to networks of a
few thousand nodes. (Even then, one may retire before model convergence!) For
larger networks, researchers instead typically need to build the model on parts
of the networks or make use of alternative and simpler modeling formats, such
as the dyadic models covered in Chapter 13. The ERGM/STERGM results can
be compared with the more easily estimated dyadic models on smaller subsets
of the data to see whether the effects are consistent (with clustered standard
errors or some combination of fixed and random effects for egos, alters, and
dyads). Researchers might include simple triadic effects within the dyadic
model, such as the number of indirect ties linking i and j, to test or control
for transitive closure. If results look consistent, then the dyadic model may be
preferred as being more easily interpretable and replicable.
Statistical models for networks are becoming more tractable for large net￾works, particularly when the dyadic regression approach is used when the
features of interest are conducive to dyadic sampling. But if the researcher
wants to examine endogenous parameters for which the pseudo-likelihood
estimated on dyads is likely to be biased, then using a multilevel modeling
strategy is likely the best practical route. The most intuitive way to break down
a large network for statistical modeling is to run the same model separately
across endogenously identified communities or naturally relevant boundaries
(e.g., nations in a social network, languages in a text network) identified via the
divide-and-conquer strategy. The advent of multilevel network models makes
this process fairly straightforward (e.g., McFarland et al. 2014). The researcher
simply runs the model separately (potentially with bounding constraints) for
each cluster, collects the parameters and their variance estimates, and then uses
meta-analytic approaches to summarize the results. The researcher can include
positional effects, such as the popularity of bridges or the number of cross-unit
ties, as either a Level 1 (node) or Level 2 (community, if aggregated) covariate.
Note that normal ERGM/SAOM parameters are assumed to be homogeneous;
the effect of, say, reciprocity is assumed to be as strong in one region of the
network as it is in another. In large, highly modular networks, though, this
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 397
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressassumption is unlikely to be true. Thus, the researcher would be likely to obtain
a more substantively accurate model by fitting it within each subregion of the
network than by identifying factors that covary with coefficient differences
across settings. In general, the multilevel approach will usually provide a
substantively better analysis than running a model over the entire network,
given that the multilevel approach allows for parameter heterogeneity
across communities.
For a network that has no strong community structure or has communities
that are so large that even running separate models is untenable, one can still use
a sampling approach to estimate multiple submodels and then recombine them.
1
Most parameters researchers want to estimate in an ERGM, for example, apply
only to local dependencies. Thus, generating a sample of k-step walks around
nodes in the network, estimating the same ERGM model for each subsample,
and then combining via maximum likelihood will produce estimates that are
substantively similar to those obtained from running the model over the full
network. The procedure is even simpler if the research interest involves estimat￾ing dyadic-independent features (e.g., homophily on attributes or behaviors). In
those cases, the researcher can randomly sample dyads (perhaps weighted by
whether it is tied) and estimate as a conditional logit model. This procedure also
extends to relational event models (see DuBois, Butts, & Smyth 2013).
16.2.4 Positional Analysis at Scale
These scaling-up approaches lend themselves well to more connectionist frame￾works in which the process of interest concerns flows within networks. But
what about more positional approaches? Can blockmodels be scaled up to
massive network contexts? We see two principled approaches to using block￾models for this purpose: (1) repeatedly implementing the same basic procedures
used to divide and conquer large networks but identifying roles rather than
metrics within communities, and (2) using local information to inform a rela￾tional clustering model.
16.2.4.1 Repeated Blockmodels
The most obvious blockmodeling equivalent to the divide-and-conquer strategy
is to repeat the same exploratory positional analysis on each induced subsection
of the network. One might also add a node-level indicator for volume or
pattern of out-of-setting contact to track each node’s more global position.
1 Of course, for a giant network that displays no clear modular structure, one should very carefully
consider the reasons for running separate models, given that doing so is highly unexpected. If the
network is effectively one large random graph with no clear structure or a regular grid with no
bottlenecks, then the data-generating process is likely not the sort of thing an ERGM is designed
to uncover in the first place.
398 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe only real difficulty with this approach is determining how to organize and
summarize perhaps hundreds of distinct role positions: Role 1 in one setting
may not have a substantive link to the pattern identified as Role 1 in the second
setting. The simplest approach is to create a summary score based on network
metrics for each within-setting role cluster and then cluster those summary
scores to identify sets of nodes with similar role profiles within their respective
settings.
For example, the PROSPER study (see Spoth et al. 2004) followed youth in
350 participating schools in 28 communities beginning in sixth grade and
included network data on friendship nominations. Using the first eight years
of these data, we can subdivide the friendship networks into approximately
350 unique network settings derived from combinations of school and grade.
Here, we begin with procedures outlined in Chapter 10 for applying the triadic
approximation to regular equivalence, as Burt (1990) described, to identify
equivalent roles in each setting. Employing a modularity-maximizing stopping
rule allows us to automate identifying the number of roles in each setting.
Figure 16.4 displays the resulting image network for one school.
2 1
3
5 4
6
7
FIGURE 16.4 Block-image network for a PROSPER school, with lines shaded by
difference from expected value
Note: Node size is proportional to cluster size.
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 399
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressOnce again, much of what one might expect in an adolescent network is
visible. Cluster 7 is an elite “leading crowd” sort of cluster, with high internal
recognition and strong followers (particularly from Cluster 6). Cluster 5 dis￾plays a classic “wannabe” sort of pattern, pining after 7 but being largely
ignored in return. However, Cluster 5 is also linked to an alternative group
(Cluster 4) that does not want any part of the standard elite structure. Positions
1 and 2 are isolated (and differ slightly when examined closely on the level of
reciprocity internally). Visual inspection of results is easy for one network
setting with only seven role positions. However, applying the clustering algo￾rithm across the full set of PROSPER networks yields 2,912 positions – far too
many to disentangle by hand. This is where we see the potential for future work
that expands the role analyses covered in Chapter 10. For example, to auto￾mate the process of repeated blockmodels further, we calculate, for each
position, the proportion of each triadic-position type in each within-setting role
cluster and then submit that proportion to a second-order cluster analysis. The
result is shown in the dendrogram in Figure 16.5.
The far right of the dendrogram includes all 2,912 positions treated as a
single role. Working our way left through the diagram and exploring what
feature(s) seemed to drive the splits helps us arrive at a final set of eight
characteristic positions that can be described consistently across all settings.
Although a fair amount of work is required to examine the patterns evident for
eight splits by hand, it is a much less daunting task than repeating the analysis
in Figure 16.5 for each of 350 schools.
Semi-Partial R-Squared
0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200 0.225 0.250
Popular
Loners 
Uninvolved
Outsiders 
Hangerson
Aloofs 
Leading 
Crowd 
Segmented
Peers 
Lieutenants 
Federated 
Friends 
Core
Peripheral
1,391
1,521
928
463
High(er) Out-degree
Low Out-degree
740
409
534
206
Asym
Transitivity
372
1149
Leading Crowd
Secondary Core
165
207
T300
Asym
165
763
Higher In-degree
Lower In-degree
2,912 within-school clusters
FIGURE 16.5 Second-order clustering of triadic role positions
400 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press16.2.4.2 Using Local Information
The second principled strategy with which we have had success turns on
recognizing that positions are defined by the similarity of summary scores on
node-level metrics. That is, two nodes that are perfectly automorphically
equivalent would have the same scores on any summary statistic. By calculating
a whole host of low-complexity (and thus quickly computed) metrics on the full
graph, perhaps by relational combination if the network is multiplex, the
researcher can then reduce the task of finding role-similar pairs to clustering
summary scores for actors. For example, consider again the large GitHub
network described in Figure 16.2. We calculate a simple set of within- and
between-community degree scores, limited-distance centrality scores, and local
triadic metrics across each of five relational types. We then submit those scores
as vectors to a fast clustering routine, thereby identifying six clear role positions
that split first along differences in a hub-and-pendant pattern and then within
each on the relation types within which they were active. Doing so allows us to
generate role positions on 4.3 million nodes in a reasonable time frame of a
few hours.
Given such strategies, the real bottleneck with large-scale network data
analysis often turns less on the difficulty of the network analysis per se than
on the pragmatic difficulties of moving, parsing, storing, and manipulating the
data. The igraph package in R will easily calculate low-complexity metrics on
networks with millions of nodes on a reasonably hefty desktop machine. The
main runtime disadvantage of base R is that because all the data are held in
memory, if the data set is larger than the free memory, the process grinds to a
crawl or fails altogether. As a general rule, manipulating a data set of size k will
require at least 2k RAM for storage and the manipulations. Completing the
necessary steps of cleaning, recoding, filtering, and merging the data – translat￾ing the raw data into the formats needed before running network metrics – is
generally much more time-consuming than anything else. Routinely working
on data sets with millions of nodes or edges (and text networks can easily reach
these bounds) requires R tools that work well with out-of-memory databases.
Alternatively, the researcher could split the analysis into data management in
non-R tools that work well with large data and ship nearly ready data objects
to R from there. This is an obvious issue for R users, and solutions are
available. A simple place to start is with open-source database computing tools
and the dbplyr package (see https://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/ for more details).
16.3  
The scaling-up strategy focuses on gathering a few key variables on many nodes
and ties, making the trade-off of gathering less information on each node and
tie. For many research projects, this is a fair trade-off because the researcher’s
goal is to capture inherently large-scale social processes and structures,
smoothing out errors in messy data, or building greater generalizability into
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 401
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe results. Other network projects have different goals and are willing to make
different trade-offs in efficiently pursuing them. If the scaling up strategy seeks
to “go wide” in collecting as many observations as possible, some projects seek
instead to “go deep” by capturing a more richly texturized social structure in
actors’ various thoughts, feelings, and perceptions. Of course, in doing so, this
research must sacrifice the number of nodes and ties that can be reasonably
analyzed. But if the research goal is to represent a detailed account of the
cognitive architecture of social structure, then going deep into how actors
perceive, evaluate, and respond to the network elements is an appropriate
strategy.
16.3.1 Networks Are in Our Heads, but Our Heads Are Networked
For some relational processes, social structures exist as objective realities out￾side any subjective understanding or agreement. For example, a pandemic will
spread through networks of interpersonal contact regardless of whether indi￾viduals have any understanding of their networks (or even believe the pandemic
is real). Further, the flow of goods in generalized exchange systems, such as the
Kula Ring, occurs despite individuals’ lack of awareness of this complex
structure. However, many other processes rely on more or less shared cogni￾tions and emotions: the individuals in the network have some understanding of
their relations with others and others’ relations with one another. Exchange
and friendship ties are built on trust; imbalance is a problem only when
one perceives that one’s sentiments are misaligned with those of their
“friends” and “enemies.” Consequently, one frontier of social network analysis
is to go deeper to better understand the cognitive and affective bases of social
structure.
16.3.1.1 Are We Living in the Same Network?
The most common approach to network analysis models relations between
nodes either as self-reported (“Jerry is my friend”) or as observed by third
parties or in other extant records. Two alternative approaches with a long
history examine the cognitive aspects of networks. First, from psychology,
social network researchers ask all respondents in a setting who they think are
paired relations or friends in that setting (Cairns & Cairns 1994). The more
reports of this perceived pairing, the more influential the tie is on the individ￾uals’ attitudes and behaviors. Second, from sociology, a more expansive
approach captures cognitions of social networks. Krackhardt (1987) sought
cognitive social structures, examining every individual’s perceptions of every
other individual’s ties as well as each individual’s self-reports of their own ties
to others. This led to groundbreaking work that better elucidated how and
when subjective judgments of ties match with objective measures of interaction
(Carley 1997; Krackhardt 1990; Krackhardt, Nohria, & Eccles 2003).
Moreover, by capturing everyone’s judgment of ties, researchers have
402 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdetermined who can most correctly judge the underlying social structure.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, actors who are central to the network tend to have
more accurate judgments (Ibarra 1993).
Although the cognitive social structures approach offers a more layered view
of social structure than individual reports on social relations, gathering data on
individuals’ cognitions is no easy task. The survey burden is heavy, given limits
on how many nodes one can reasonably query about relations among every
other node. Researchers must therefore be especially clear in specifying the
boundary of the network they are studying and the relevance of relational
contact. Once again, what might appear to be a data problem is often simply
a theory problem in disguise. The researcher must be clear about the nature of
the process under scrutiny. Where does this process occur: in the minds of
individual actors, or in some group setting? Does the process require others to
be activated?
Another avenue for future development concerns the construction of net￾work relations in communication forms. A parallel relational world exists in
the ways people discuss and jointly create their cognitions of networks (who
likes whom, who should one like, and so on). This communicative and distrib￾uted network cognition is one in which individual cognitive biases and errors
may be actively called into question. This perspective also views networks as
agentic projections and outcomes of interpersonal deliberations: we project
relational scenarios and communicate them to others in the hopes of persuading
them to change their perceptions and how they relate with us.
A focus on relational communication, such as in the high school notes
depicted as a network in Figure 2.4, shows that (1) communications often note
an alter’s perceptions of their ties, albeit locally and specific to what the actor
sees as problematic relations (as per Krackhardt’s work); and (2) communi￾cations also discuss ties that the actor believes many people in the setting regard
as a social tie. In general, though, these cognitive perspectives accumulate via
mostly latent or subconscious routes (i.e., via observations and reflection), and
they are worked out consciously in situations and moments with “problems” or
deviations from built expectation and routine experience (e.g., charged
interactions). Actors accrue a cognitive network view via observation and
communication, much like building a schema of knowledge. This cognitive
network is biased, piecemeal, and changing – never complete or perfect (e.g.,
Brashears & Quintane 2015). As actors interact, the inadequacy of cognitive
schemas or network understandings are revealed to the actors, who then
resolve some misaligned perceptions, confirm others, question some, and see
others fade from view and salience (Carley 1986). This flux and dynamism to
cognitive relational schemas is why social actors constantly think and talk
about their relationships, practicing and staging them in situations to receive
a resource (e.g., love, confirmation of status, and money). This process
reaffirms or changes the relational schema or expectation and value placed on
relationships (Fuhse 2015).
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 403
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressIn short, cognition and communication about relationships are far more
central to social structuration than simply interaction alone. Moreover, many
social network theories – such as reciprocation, balance, and homophily –
presume the existence of, and communication about, cognitive networks in
directions that social actors desire.
Finally, work on cultural schemas (discussed in Chapter 12) points to new
avenues of going deep into the bases of relations. How do shared meanings
interrelate with social networks? Do individuals influence only one another’s
separate attitudes, beliefs, and tastes, or do they also influence the ways these
cultural elements become interrelated in network-like schemas? For example,
heavy metal fans and those who like everything but heavy metal may share a
cultural schema organizing musical genre tastes even if their preferences differ
(Bryson 1996; Goldberg 2011). Martin (2002) showed that groups can vary in
their degree of consensus (agreement on specific issues) and tightness (the
patterning of issues through shared implications of how one’s positions on
different issues are correlated). Are such ways of organizing tastes important
in how networks form, and do such schemas become more clearly defined
through interactive processes? Considerable potential exists in going deeper
into the ways that group cohesiveness and polarization arise from more or less
shared schemas. As Simmel long ago discussed, the propensity for conflict
arising from even small disagreements increases the more two social actors
overlap in their worldviews.
The basic questions raised here turn on how relations are represented
cognitively and communicated with interlocutors, and more real-time data on
such features exist now than ever before. Social media activity often involves
enacting idealized senses of selves, selective responses to others, and engage￾ment with identity-affirming activities. For example, political speech online
often invokes archetypical images of friends and foes, revealing an actor’s
understanding of how others relate important features. These sorts of belief
networks emerge from discourse online and create a context for enacting future
relations. We expect that this is an area ripe for growth and activity.
16.3.1.2 Individual Processes
Not all social-structural research requires a social network. If the process of
interest is believed to have a universal and perhaps even neurological founda￾tion, then the researcher can simply query individuals, who need not even
constitute a random sample of the population. If individuals are predisposed
to thinking in certain ways about networks, then such dispositions can be
retrieved through any number of methods. In advancing social-structural
approaches, network scholars may seek to elaborate and test a number of
individual-level mechanisms. In the past, such work has been largely confined
to the laboratory. Today, with advances in analyzing how individuals process
and enact social structures, we see great promise in situating homophily,
balance, and influence in neurological, cognitive, and affective foundations.
404 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressBy incorporating more dynamic measures of emotions in network studies and
by probing individuals’ reactions to social structures, researchers may be better
able to test what drives social tie formation and abandonment.
Balance theory, for example, posits that neurological foundations exist for
its four structural rules. Therefore, psychologists’ early work was based on
studies of individuals’ reactions to vignettes in which relations were in either
balanced or unbalanced scenarios (Aderman 1969; Crano & Cooper 1973).
Sociologists use balance theory to explain patterns and dynamics in networks,
but they have largely abandoned the pursuit of the foundations of balance in
individuals’ heads. Recently, however, there has been a resurgence of interest in
anchoring balance in the brain. Some researchers have returned to vignettes to
see how well individuals can recall networks with different structural properties
(balanced vs. unbalanced), finding evidence that balance is a mental heuristic
that simplifies our ability to internalize a network structure quickly (Brashears
2013). Other work extends to the brain itself through neuroimaging tech￾niques. Using EEG and functional MRI equipment to monitor brain activity
while individuals are placed in different mental structural situations, research￾ers can see signatures of social structure in the brain (Bevilacqua et al. 2018;
Zerubavel et al. 2015). These approaches are useful in validating the micro￾foundations of many network approaches. If individuals self-organize based
on, for example, internalized drives and cognitive processes, then researchers
should probe the merits of these assumptions by going deeper into individuals’
heads.
16.3.1.3 Dyadic Processes
Networks are collections of dyads, and many of the dynamics thought to drive
how network ties form and dissolve are dyadic. If the network process of
interest operates between pairs of nodes, then the network researcher may be
able to go deeper into these processes by examining dyad-level interactions
and relations.
For example, what does it mean to have a tie with someone, and how do
ties form at the level of individuals’ thoughts and feelings? Since the cultural
turn in social networks, researchers have seen network ties as stories individ￾uals tell about others. Network ties are frequently constituted through
responses to rosters and name generators about friends, or friends may be
inferred from directed “liking” relations. But being a friend may not be a
story about liking someone as much as it is a multifaceted story of role
relations involving reciprocity. Kitts and Leal (2021) used focus groups
among sixth graders to go deeper into what is and is not a friend, finding
that friendship is more of a role than a directed tie and that role expectations
differ systematically by gender. Different environments may also shape the
meaning of relations. One of the most meaningful types of ties is love.
Qualitative researchers have long relied on interviews to assess the subjective
experiences and meanings shaping romantic bonds (Swidler 2001). Yeung
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 405
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press(2005) found different meanings of “loving” relations in different kinds of
communes. Thus, knowing more about what pairs of individuals think when
asking them questions about their relations is an important way to validate
measures and perhaps inductively understand which factors shape these
understandings. However, if these different definitions matter in practice,
they should tangibly alter manifest behaviors and relations; otherwise, they
are simple distinctions without differences. In general, we concur with
White’s CATNET approach, which sees categories that matter as organizing
realized social relationships.
Dyads are arguably the core locus of action in shaping connections.
Friendships, romantic bonds, business partnerships, and other relationships
are produced through rituals that occur among dyads. McFarland, Jurafsky,
and Rawlings (2013) went deep into the courtship rituals of romantic bonding
by recording and analyzing many speed dates. From the content of men’s and
women’s conversations, including the way this content was spoken (i.e.,
prosodic features), how these initial romantic encounters unfolded mattered
in who clicked with whom. Such work helps uncover tie formation as an
unfolding process in which individuals do and say things together in ways
guided by institutional and organizational contexts. The point of this work is
to get at the sense of connection that undergirds relations, groups, and – to the
extent that they contribute to larger institutionalization processes –
whole societies.
Homophily is at least partly driven by dyadic processes. Although individ￾uals who are similar are more likely to encounter and spend time together
because of larger contextual factors, similarity is also thought to breed a sense
of connection. But what are the contours of this connecting? Is status
homophily stronger than value homophily in generating such feelings? New
technologies, again perhaps with the aid of brain imaging, may allow us to pull
apart these effects and go deeper into the dyadic aspects of homophily that
operate above and beyond the baseline drawn from structural contexts alone
(McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Rawlings 2021). For example, Reich and
Bearman (2018) used functional MRI technology to assess the interpersonal
sense of connection among a group of volunteers for a summer program
devoted to the difficult task of organizing low-income workers. They showed
each volunteer photographs of every other volunteer before the beginning of the
program. Remarkably, these brain signatures of reactions to faces were signifi￾cant in predicting who ultimately became friends during the summer program.
Once again, if the researcher’s goal is to better understand the microfounda￾tions of networks, then going deeper into dyads offers an exciting frontier for
gauging interpersonal attraction and repulsion. Many of the mechanisms long
assumed to drive large-scale network formations – especially homophily and
reciprocity – entail cognitive and affective foundations that new data sources,
measurement instruments, and analytic techniques are poised to elaborate
and test.
406 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press16.3.1.4 Small Group Processes
As we have demonstrated throughout this volume, much of social life occurs
within small groups, which tend to have at least somewhat stable structures
shaped by exogenous and endogenous mechanisms. Thus, many of the processes
posited by network scholars as responsible for fatefully shaping individual
motives are group processes, such as social identity, in-group biases, and
status-seeking. Ethnographers have long detailed how individuals join groups
and learn through their interactions with more established and higher-status
members of any group x how to “become an x” (e.g., Becker 1953). Detailed
accounts of social movement mobilization, for example, show the coevolution of
social ties and the adoption of an increasingly radical worldview (e.g., Munson
2010). Thus, interactionists and social network scholars have frequently empha￾sized the local and situational nature of the evolution of culture through social
ties (Rawlings & Childress 2019). More ethnographic approaches to social
networks, such as Small’s (2009) exemplary work, have detailed how very local
situations (e.g., whether preschools have staggered pick-up and drop-off times)
have real and lasting impacts on social capital formation.
We see considerable potential for extending these efforts to combine net￾work methods and other formal approaches to facilitate ethnographic research.
For example, the going-deep strategy allows a closer examination of the
schemas, meanings, and interactional orders that operate in small to medium￾sized groups and may form an idioculture – that is, “a system of knowledge,
beliefs, behaviors, and customs shared by members of an interacting group to
which members can refer and employ as the basis of further interaction” (Fine
1979: 734). However, perhaps because the methodological skill sets required to
conduct high-quality ethnographic research and carry out formal modeling of
the sort we outline is quite daunting, we suspect that most research on this
frontier will likely draw from online communities, archival organizational data
sets, and other digitized sources. Given the rising importance of online groups
in the recruitment and socialization into radical, often right-wing and racist
groups, we see considerable potential in using the myriad tools outlined in this
volume – in terms of both network structures and meaning structures – to
examine the coevolution of relations and ideologies (see Bail 2021). Formal
theories, such as balance theory, may provide a bridge linking interpersonal
sentiments and attitude change more generally (e.g., Rawlings 2020).
Once again, a trade-off exists with respect to going wide and going deep.
Researchers could capture a quite detailed picture of a single group, thereby
returning with newer and more formal tools to conduct the type of analysis that
originally motivated social network analysis (think of the Hawthorne Plant’s
wiring room). However, the more groups a researcher examines, the more
difficult it will be to capture each group in detail. For example, Srivastava
and Banaji (2011) examined collaboration networks and cognitions at a mid￾size biotechnology firm. Their work elucidates actors’ conscious understand￾ings of their collaborative tendencies as well as implicit collaborative
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 407
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressorientations gauged with an implicit association test. Such detailed studies of
firms or departments within firms can be viewed as returning to the key
concerns of how ties form within concrete situational contexts, which have
real consequences on individuals’ identities, well-being, and productivity.
Thus, we would consider the main analytical reason to examine two or more
groups from the strategy of going deep to be revealing similarities across
groups, whereas the main reason to study multiple groups from a strategy of
comparison would be to find differences and group-level covariates that may
help explain these differences. As we discuss later in this chapter, more com￾parative approaches are often targeted in the groups they select and often utilize
a multilevel framework.
16.3.2 Going Deeper into Diffusion: Does the Trip Change the
Traveler? Do the Drivers Pave the Road?
As shown in detail in Chapter 14, diffusion has always been a core concern of
network modeling. Despite years of work, however, most models of network
diffusion provide a fundamentally passive treatment of the bit flowing through
the network, mimicking biological diffusion processes built up in disease mod￾eling or simple average-of-alters attitudinal models. Although many social bits
are amenable to such generic diffusion models, others are not.
Social diffusion is often quite different from many actual contagions in the
sense that the bits moving through a network can change by virtue of the
individuals accessing and spreading them. A trivial example of this is the
well-known telephone game, in which information is distorted in the retelling
of it. Despite the simplicity of this concept, the role of this sort of distortion is
often overlooked outside of lab settings (Hunzaker 2016). How individuals
process information and others’ attitudes may be fundamentally altered by
more or less shared schemas. Goldberg and Stein (2018) proposed and simu￾lated a model of associative diffusion in which individuals accept or reject
others’ attitudes based on a drive for constraint satisfaction – that is, a desire
to avoid cognitive dissonance arising from holding incompatible attitudes
(Kunda & Thagard 1996). In this view, individuals are unwilling to be influ￾enced by others when doing so will create more inconsistencies within an
internalized system of attitudes. In trying to maintain a coherent worldview,
individuals essentially ignore the influences of others that would create more
inconsistencies. Conversely, they accept influences that create greater consist￾encies. Such models point to the importance of opening up the “black box” of
cognitive mechanisms in how various social bits flow through network
structures.
As the field develops, we look forward to work on at least three theoretical
dimensions of interest. First, information flows might change the network itself
(i.e., “the drivers pave the road”). If, for example, the bit flowing through the
network is information concerning other nodes and ties, such as a rumor about
somebody’s character, then the information flow will affect the likelihood that
408 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressanother individual will choose that person as a friend later. Or contracting a
disease might influence an individual’s activity level in the network (and thus
the likelihood of transmission later). But there are much more nuanced ways in
which the cultural and relational content of the transmission shapes the relation
itself. Sharing a secret, for example, strengthens the relation between the sharer
and the listener. If the secret is revealed, though, it could damage the relation
between the teller and the object of the secret. That is, because the bit flowing
through the network reveals the character of the actors spreading it, its emer￾gence in public can change the actors’ reputations. Of course, many mechan￾isms besides norm-violation disclosure could allow the diffusing information to
shape the network by drawing some people closer, pushing some people out, or
making some simply irrelevant. Our intuition is that tie formation and dissol￾ution would turn on a temporal model of acceptable role behavior linked to the
information content or appropriateness of informational release and build on
notions of trust, risk, and balance. Similar ideas are possible in international
relations, trade, or organizations. What is needed is a generative theory of how
content affects relations in sequence. To our knowledge, no such model exists.
Second, actors’ identities might systematically distort information as it
spreads (i.e., “the trip changes the traveler”). For example, information about
a Democrat as spread by a Republican is likely to differ from the same infor￾mation spread by a Democrat. Or, as COVID-19 has shown us, the distortion
of information about the efficacy of public health behaviors can be radically
shaped by whether one identifies with the political figures and scientific author￾ities broadcasting information and misinformation. The potential for this sort
of distortion raises two related analytic questions. First, can distortion be
modeled as personal affect toward a flow? Perhaps certain classes of nodes
always change flows from certain sources in particular ways. Second, can one
reverse engineer this process and use the systematic distorting of the flow of bits
through a network to accurately identify classes of nodes? This second question
is perhaps the more challenging of the two.
Finally, we suspect that some sorts of information and misinformation need
to be refreshed to maintain saliency in a setting. Just as one loses the ability to
speak a language without practice, beliefs and ideas lose their saliency if they
are not refreshed and maintained as identity motivators for relations. As we
outlined in discussing schemas in Chapter 12, culture as shared meanings is far
too complex to exist comprehensively in any one individual’s head and there￾fore requires activation and reactivation to remain salient. We expect, for
example, that religious subgroups are particularly effective at signaling their
identity by reinterpreting ongoing events through a religious lens and thereby
reinforcing such schema among members. In addition, how fads or subversive
ideas move through a population is a wonderfully open question on this front.
These elaborations of diffusion suggest that adding greater depth to conta￾gion emergence and transmission requires going deeper into individuals’ cogni￾tions and emotions. Building out from individuals, one might examine the
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 409
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdifferent contexts in which individuals interact and influence one another.
Doing so may entail examining multiple groups and sacrificing some
individual-level detail to garner more cases and comparative contexts. If the
history of diffusion studies in networks has largely been about what moves
through networks, we expect that future research will turn more directly on the
microfoundations of how. The question of how diffusion occurs, in turn, boils
over into the dynamics of how the relational field is structured. Thus, the move
from what to how is nontrivial and implies fascinating challenges related to
complex dynamic modeling and analysis.
Practically speaking, what tools would be needed to begin to move diffusion
studies in this how direction? We believe that many of the techniques we have
outlined could be reasonably adjusted to model diffusion under these different
conditions. Agent-based models are undoubtedly one key place to begin to
generate theory and probe macro-level outcomes from micro-level models that
posit many of the constraints we have described in this section. In naturally
occurring settings, some combination of textual analysis facilitated by topic
models, word embeddings, machine learning technologies (e.g., BERT; Devlin
et al. 2018), and so on would lead to better ways of capturing how meanings
shape and are transformed by diffusion processes (e.g., Hamilton, Leskovec, &
Jurafsky 2016; Vicinanza, Goldberg, & Srivastava 2020). Going deeper into
the interpersonal contact could be facilitated by streaming sources measuring
contact among actors, such as through video capture of interactions or sensor
data on physical proximity (Salathé et al. 2010). In general, the tools for
moving deeper into diffusion processes already exist, although they have not
been preassembled for these purposes per se.
16.4     
As a final area of growth, we see the emergence of an exciting research strategy
that takes advantage of features of strategies for both scaling up and going
deep. Although network analysts have historically worked on small networks,
they have also tended to work on single cases with defined network boundary
specifications. Social network analysis in the 1970s and 1980s was largely a
discipline of case studies. In the years since, researchers have collected multiple
cases of similar types. For example, the Add Health study collected data in
more than 270 school contexts, and Christakis and colleagues (Isakov et al.
2019; Shakya et al. 2017) collected data on 80 communities. These data
provide key opportunities to compare network mechanisms and models across
settings. In fact, the key point of many of these approaches is precisely to model
how group-level covariates shape and are shaped by network processes among
these groups.
Approaches in this middle-ground territory tend to collect data on multiple
networks that range from small to somewhat large. Of course, the more nodes
in each of the networks, the more likely it is that the researcher will have to
410 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressscale back on the going-deep part of the strategy. Having data on more groups
allows the researcher to incorporate network-level variation to probe hierarch￾ical influences on network etiology and evolution. Gathering such data, how￾ever, may be the most onerous because the researcher must interact with
multiple groups, organizations, or databases, which may have different sources
of error and distinct methodological challenges. Online groups may yet again
be a useful source for investigating group dynamics from a comparative
approach (e.g., Kairam, Wang, & Leskovec 2012). One model data set on
face-to-face groups that has been fruitful for such middle-range and multilevel
models is the Urban Communes Data Set, which collected a rich set of measures
on sixty intentional communes beginning in the 1970s (see Martin, Yeung, &
Zablocki 2001). For example, using these data, Rawlings (2020) found that
social influence processes in small groups operate very differently when a
cognitive authority is present – that is, when the group operates under the
umbrella of influence from an individual who explicitly links attitudes across
disparate domains (from diet to cosmology) while fostering social structures
that help the group process these ideas and thereby produce strong feelings of
togetherness. However, such data sets with many networks combined with an
in-depth set of measures on individuals and their ties are rare. We believe the
benefits of such data will frequently be worth the trouble of gathering them.
16.4.1 Poverty of Riches? Finding Structural Patterns across
Multiple Networks
One obvious way to analyze multiple networks is to repeat the same analysis
for each setting, calculating a summary score on each network and comparing
scores across networks. For example, if interested in the relation between the
nominal level of school integration (the demographic heterogeneity of a school)
and its relational segregation, researchers would calculate them and plot them
against each other (see Figure 6.4). Such bivariate approaches work well when
the focus across networks is on no more than a few key dimensions. But what
about when researchers want a more multivariate approach to, say, test the net
effect of demographic heterogeneity controlling for other related factors (e.g.,
school size, urbanization)?
In this case, one can apply models that examine the same sorts of effects in a
hierarchical modeling framework. For example, one can ask how fundamental
relational formation processes (reciprocity, transitivity, and homophily) differ
systematically across settings. McFarland et al. (2014) posed this sort of ques￾tion and found that when largely unconstrained by rules, schools with different
tracks become more hierarchical and cliquish. This approach to modeling
multiple networks is a straightforward extension of the long literature on
meta-analysis and multilevel modeling (Osgood, Feinberg, & Ragan 2015;
Smith et al. 2016). The advantage of this approach is that it can be used to
leverage parameter variation to understand how social contexts shape
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 411
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrelational formation factors using cross-level interactions. The challenges of this
approach, however, are nontrivial. Heterogeneity in settings can lead to con￾vergence issues and questions about how to fit one model across multiple
contexts. If, for example, the researcher is interested in racial homophily effects
in schools, how does one treat schools with nearly homogeneous populations?
An open problem is determining how to compare results across settings that
typically require case-study sensitivities. For example, when conducting a role
analysis or community detection routine, one often has to exercise judgment on
how best to slice the network or characterize the social meaning of each found
group. This task is manageable for studying a small number of networks, but
examining and naming clusters across hundreds of separate networks is more
complex. We provided some suggestions for addressing this concern previously
in this chapter in our discussion of the divide-and-conquer strategy for large
networks. Substantively, though, the issue is whether one is depicting a network
of 100 people at the same level of granularity as a network of 10,000 people. If
the settings differ in size by multiple orders of magnitude, we highly recommend
examining thresholds for factors such as the number of communities or roles
within communities for representative samples first and then establishing a
general rule across the entire setting. For example, the same resolution param￾eter is unlikely to be optimal in two networks of very different sizes, but
developing a rule for how to pick a resolution parameter that is constant across
the settings might be simpler.
16.4.2 Links across Relations: From Multiplexity to
Multilayer Networks
A comparative approach can also be trained on examining different relations
among the same sets of nodes. Network analysis has always made deep theor￾etical use of multi-relational networks. Even Moreno’s original work included
multiplex relations on support, opposition, and socializing. The Hawthorne
Plant’s wiring room data included information on friendships, antagonisms,
and joking. Although theoretically relevant and arguably dominant in the
sociological tradition of the 1970s and 1980s, multiplexity has been largely
eclipsed by single-dimensional, “tied or not” sorts of models. Most of the
growth in statistical methods and large-scale diffusion studies, for example,
have focused on single relational contexts.
The unidimensional quality of many network studies to date, focusing solely
on one type of tie, misses much of the richness present in social life.
Reincorporating multiplexity provides yet another way to balance depth and
breadth to answer important comparative questions. What types of ties are
fundamental to other types of ties? Which types channel greater influence:
negative ties, familial ties, advice ties, friends, or resource exchanges? Is there
an order to the layering of ties? Do individuals use some types of ties to explore
412 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe formation of other new ties (e.g., friendship for dating)? Do compound
relations across types of ties act as a means for learning about jobs?
We anticipate that answering such questions for different age groups would
reveal a natural developmental order to relational life. Contexts and the life
course lead us to privilege distinct types of ties at different life stages. Dunphy
(1963) made this point early on, noting that preferences for same-sex friends
decrease with adolescence as many youth start to see cross-sex peers as poten￾tial romantic partners, although the relation between peers and romantic
partners is far from direct (Kreager et al. 2016). The field has focused on
adolescent relations as crucibles for identity formation and the transition to
adulthood, but the way that social media has simplified maintaining these ties
after high school may have also changed their salience for young adult identity.
As people move into adulthood, their patterns of friends, coworkers, neighbors,
and kin change.
So what are the constraints on pursuing comparative questions? Collecting
survey data on multiplex networks requires obvious increases in respondent
burden. However, multiplex relations are often implicit in surveys that consider
the overlap of direct relations with organizational activity (i.e., affiliation
networks). For example, school network surveys will almost always include
information on activities, homerooms, and neighborhoods, as well as direct
questions about social relations. Despite the temporal cost of collecting such
data, the knowledge return is likely to be high and greatly advance a general
understanding about network generation.
Methodological innovations will surely help advance the study of links
across relations. The traditional methodological approach for multiplex ties
has been to simply stack relations on the same set of nodes – conceptually, an
adjacency matrix for each of k relations, sorted the same way. Any analysis that
requires combining these stacked networks then needs a function (e.g., similar￾ity scores, sum, or compound relations to obtain indirect ties) applied
simultaneously over the entire set of relations. In traditional multiplex models,
two-mode data are converted to the same projection as direct relations and are
added to the stack. Recent work has generalized multiplexity and multiple￾mode models via multilayer networks. In a multilayer network, any sort of
relation can be combined with any sort of node into a single network. This is
done by specifying a set of layers for each relation, as well as indicators for
which types of nodes are part of each relation and how identities in one layer
are linked to identities in another layer. Consider Figure 16.6, which provides a
traditional and multilayer version of the same data.
In the standard multiplex framework, the system of admiration and distrust
is represented as two adjacency matrices on a single set of nodes, and the
linkage between them is implied by the similar ordering of rows and columns.
Graphically, lines of different colors are included to represent each relation,
with blue representing admiration and red representing distrust. In the multi￾layer network, the graph is rotated in 3D: the admiration network is now a
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 413
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Presslayer at the top, and distrust is below, with each node linked to itself via an
identity arc (dashed vertical line). We now represent the adjacency matrix as a
pooled matrix, with each layer as a block along the diagonal. The identity edges
are then represented as links on the diagonal of the off-diagonal blocks.
Although we represent these as adjacency matrices for clarity, data are not, of
course, typically stored as such. Rather, the edgelist is of the form of a triple:
Node 1, Node 2, Layer ID.
Moving from a data structure with 32 elements (two 4  4 matrices) to one
with 64 (8  8) might seem inefficient. If expanding the data this way was
intended merely to address multiplexity, that criticism would be well founded.
However, the change introduces a formalism that is much more flexible than
the traditional multiplex approach would lead one to suspect, given that the
types of nodes and linkages can be extremely diverse. For example, the two￾mode networks can now be directly folded into the same data structure as the
one-mode networks by simply treating each mode as a layer. Consider the now￾familiar southern women’s club data. The classic two-mode approach is typic￾ally used to examine networks of women going to lunches (Davis, Gardner, &
Admiration
Distrust
1 2 3 4
1 0 0 0 0
2 1 0 0 0
3 1 0 0 0
4 1 1 1 0
1 2 3 4
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 1 0
3 0 1 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
Admiration
Distrust
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
2 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
3 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
4 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0
3 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0
4 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
Multiplex Multilayer
FIGURE 16.6 Example of a multiplex network as a multilayer network
414 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressGardner 1941), rather than women talking to each other as well as going to
lunches, which requires a slightly different data structure. Consider the ideal￾ized adjacency matrices in Figure 16.7.
Here, the direct conversation matrix is added on the first block diagonal;
the “lunch to lunch” matrix is added on the lower block, which would be all
zeros because lunches do not directly connect to one another. The traditional
two-mode affiliation matrix (and its transpose), however, is composed of the
off-diagonal blocks. The yellow subregion differs from the orange regions in the
quality of the relation. “Conversation” characterizes the within-women layer;
nothing exists within the lunch layer; and “affiliation” exists between the
lunches and the women.
Multilayer networks are incredibly general. Any combination of modes and
relations can be represented in a single data structure. For example, one of the
first uses of multilayer networks was to examine person-to-person networks
over time. Figure 16.8 represents the first five waves of Newcomb’s (1961)
fraternity data. Friendship nominations are captured within layer, and identity
edges link the self at time t to the self at time t + 1 in subsequent layers. As an
adjacency matrix, this multilayer structure combining identity with friendship
would be represented as a block-diagonal matrix with five blocks in which any
tie was possible and with a single row of 1s linking the jth row in the t block to
the jth column in the t + 1 block.
This sort of representation is not limited to the same set of nodes. Although
cohort consistency is not required (i.e., new nodes could enter, and old nodes could
exit), node turnover would be represented by different patterns of off-diagonal
linkages. A researcher might even have different layers to represent different risk
subsets in a disease-spreading network. In these settings, people, farm animals, and
FIGURE 16.7 Idealized adjacency matrices from multilayering of networks of southern
women’s club data
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 415
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressparasites might be included as the three levels, with social relations connecting
people to one another, ownership connecting people to animals, and infection
linking parasites to people and animals. The researcher could then specify prob￾abilities for infection within and between the different classes of critters.
The formalism of a multilayer network encodes relational meaning into the
structure of within- and between-layer ties. For a multiplex but contemporaneous
network, all of the off-diagonal subblocks would include self-ties. For example, a
multiplex network containing coworker, friendship, and admiration could be
represented with a multilayer network having three N  N subblocks, with
identity edges linking each person to themselves. For a temporal network, the
researcher would expect asymmetry. In Figure 16.8, Markovian asymmetry is
assumed. The self at time t is aware of the behavior of the self at t − 1 but is not
directly connected to t − k. The theoretical assumption is that anything one
knows at t + 2 about oneself at t, one also knows at t + 1. If that assumption
is not reasonable, the researcher might add direct ties from one at t − 1 to one at
t + 1, filling out that upper triangle with two-period identity linkages.
A nice feature of this approach to networks is that all the tools researchers
use to analyze one-mode or affiliation networks can be applied to these new
data structures. For example, Mucha et al. (2010) showed that applying a
variant of the Louvain community detection tool to the temporal version of a
multilayer network is an easy way to identify dynamic communities. That is,
rather than trying to align multiple groups discovered separately in each wave
of a data set, the community detection algorithm can decipher which subsec￾tions of the layers fit together best. Similarly, researchers can use ERGM or
latent space models for networks so that rather than just fitting P(Xij|Z), they
can specify a separate function for each subregion of the relational space (e.g., a
3D Layout
FIGURE 16.8 Newcomb’s fraternity data presented as a multilayer (temporal) network
416 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressset of parameters describing parasite-to-animal connections that differ from
person to person) while considering the overall interaction volume or pattern of
connection across layers.
Although simple in theory, these sorts of models are fairly new, and the
intuition built around specifying such models is relatively underdeveloped. One
can imagine a whole host of structural parameters that describe interlayer
connectivity (other than “same person later”) that are theoretically interesting
(e.g., “a new friend of a past friend is ...”).
16.4.3 Field Experiments and Quasi-Experiments with
Multiple Networks
As discussed in Chapter 15, causality in network research is tricky, and
research designs are one way to handle some of this complexity. Comparative
approaches to networks are well suited to researchers’ manipulations that can
be used to examine key network dynamics. These approaches represent a
growing area for testing causal theories of network flows discussed in the
previous chapter. By selecting some networks to receive a treatment while
others serve as controls, one can observe the unfolding of hypothesized dynam￾ics that have long been thought to operate in networks but that have been
examined through secondary data–based inferences rather than direct observa￾tion. We are confident that field experiments and quasi-experimental designs in
social network analysis will continue to grow.
The Internet has become a powerful resource for running network field
experiments at a lower cost and time investment. Tools such as Christakis’s
“breadboard” (https://breadboard.yale.edu/) are making field experiments
much easier to conduct. Here, the researcher can manipulate the underlying
network by varying its size and constraining who can communicate with whom
(in a manner akin to the “breadboards” used to prototype electronic circuits).
Christakis and colleagues have used this platform to create artificial online
groups and test theories of how network topology interacts with individuals’
capacities to cooperate and influence one another (for a review, see Christakis
2019: ch. 4). By systematically manipulating the networks and incentives, the
researchers can more readily and simply test key ideas than would be possible
with data on a large number of naturally occurring groups.
If networks are pipes for flows of influence, then the topology will influence
how rapidly and effectively individuals influence one another or converge on
various agreements as a group. Centola (2018) showed how simple and com￾plex contagions spread in different network topologies by varying the number
of indirect ties that individuals have to one another in an online community
focused on promoting healthy behaviors. The results support the assertion that
some forms of behavior change require multiple and redundant paths to effect￾ively channel social influence. Guilbeault, Baronchelli, and Centola (2021)
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 417
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Pressshowed that individuals could jointly make sense of Rorschach-like inkblots by
developing a shared language for these ambiguous shapes. By varying the
number of individuals who could interact with one another, the authors
showed that larger networks could more rapidly converge on an agreed-upon
set of categories in describing the shapes – a finding they attributed to larger
networks being able to avoid idiosyncratic judgments of these shapes and hone
in on features of the shapes that are more broadly recognizable.
Other online approaches manipulate other aspects of human interaction that
are thought to drive network tie formation and dynamics. For example,
Melamed et al. (2020) used an online prisoner’s dilemma game to test the
effects of homophily on cooperation, using students at two universities as
participants. The authors manipulated whether participants could change the
individuals with whom they could interact, see others’ university affiliations,
and see information about past cooperation. This research design allowed the
researchers to examine the extent to which homophily drives cooperation
before and after repeated rounds of interaction.
16.5   
We should take a moment to appreciate the important methodological
advances that have led to the current blossoming of network research. Many
of the theoretical questions that are central to the development of social
network analysis are now more readily answerable because of new sources of
relational data, methodological innovations, and vastly increased computa￾tional power. Yet, our argument throughout this book has been that because
the study of networks has expanded and moved into new areas, it is in need of
greater theoretical and methodological integration. We argue that training in
basic principles of social network analysis, coupled with sound methods and
research practices, are the keys to integrating the field. This book has presented
a theoretical and methodological integration of social network analysis, which
has the potential to introduce readers from a wide variety of disciplines to the
core ideas motivating social network analysis. The R programming environ￾ment offers another level of research practice that we believe can bring greater
cohesion to the field. We offer this book as a catalyst for these processes that
are underway.
We encourage readers to take advantage of these advancements in data,
methods, and computational power but also to keep theoretical integration in
mind in taking this work forward. Take a step back to ask where you are trying
to take network research and why. Return to theory. Ask yourself how your
research speaks to the larger task of understanding structure in general – and
social structure, in particular, if you are a social scientist.
Ultimately, we hope that for social scientists, this book will contribute to a
resurgence of empirically grounded analyses of social structures that build on
theories of society, addressing what unites and what divides us. For far too
418 Making Structural Predictions
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Presslong, network scholars have focused on relations and networks without asking
how they relate back to our construction of society, norms, belief systems, and
so on, focusing on the study of networks qua networks. To what end or for
what ultimate social purposes remains unclear. How do connectionist and
positional analyses relate back to social structures writ large? More explanation
is needed as to which relations have a hold on us and which do not. Without the
underlying connective force that is essential for trust, what holds our complexly
differentiated society together? This question has motivated sociology and
social anthropology since the inception of these disciplines. Network analysis
was born of attempts to answer this core question, and it is worth exploring
again with greater empirical rigor and new data.
In our concluding chapter, we directed readers to some elements of the future
of structural analysis, identifying several areas that are brimming with research
activity and potential and proposing strategies for developing research agendas
in these areas. Progress will require strategic trade-offs, and our hope is that this
chapter will orient readers toward the trade-offs that make the most sense for a
given research question. We wrote this book with the aim of equipping the next
generation of network scholars with the conceptual and analytic tools to take
network analysis to the next level. You should now be well equipped to carry
forward the remarkable tradition of network analysis.
Conclusion: Network Analysis Tomorrow 419
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences
Abbott, Andrew. 1988. “Transcending General Linear Reality.” Sociological Theory 6
(2): 169–86.
Acerbi, Alberto, Alex Mesoudi, and Marco Smolla. 2022. Individual-Based Models of
Cultural Evolution: A Step-by-Step Guide Using R. London: Routledge.
adams, jimi, James Moody, Stephen Q. Muth, and Martina Morris. 2012. “Quantifying
the Benefits of Link-Tracing Designs for Partnership Network Studies.” Field
Methods 24: 175–93.
Aderman, David. 1969. “Effects of Anticipating Future Interaction on the Preference for
Balanced States.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 11: 214–19.
Ahuja, Ravindra K., Thomas L. Magnanti, and James B. Orlin. 1993. Network Flows:
Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Aldenderfer, Mark, and Roger K. Blashfield. 1984. Cluster Analysis. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Almack, John C. 1922. “The Influence of Intelligence on the Selection of Associates.”
School and Society 16: 529–30.
Anderson, Roy M., and Robert M. May. 1991. Infectious Diseases of Humans:
Dynamics and Control. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Anscombe, Francis J. 1973. “Graphs in Statistical Analysis.” The American Statistician
27: 17–21.
Aral, Sinan, Lev Muchnik, and Arun Sundararajan. 2009. “Distinguishing Influence￾Based Contagion from Homophily-Driven Diffusion in Dynamic Networks.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(51): 21544–49.
Aral, Sinan, and Christos Nicolaides. 2017. “Exercise Contagion in a Global Social
Network.” Nature Communications 8(1): 1–8.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 2010. “Superstar Extinction.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(2): 549–89.
Bail, Christopher. 2021. Breaking the Social Media Prism: How to Make Our Platforms
Less Polarizing. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bandelj, Nina. 2012. “Relational Work and Economic Sociology.” Politics & Society 40
(2): 175–201.
421
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressBarabási, Albert-László, and Réka Albert. 1999. “Emergence of Scaling in Random
Networks.” Science 286: 509–12.
Barabási, Albert-László, and Jennifer Frangos. 2002. Linked: The New Science of
Networks Science of Networks. New York: Basic Books.
Barnes, John Arundel. 1954. “Class and Committees in a Norwegian Island Parish.”
Human Relations 7(1): 39–58.
Batagelj, Vladimir, and Andrej Mrvar. 1999. “Pajek – Program for Large Network
Analysis.” Connections 21: 47–57.
Bateson, Gregory. 1936. Naven: A Survey of the Problems Suggested by a Composite
Picture of the Culture of a New Guinea Tribe from Three Points of View.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bearman, Peter S. 1993. Relations into Rhetorics: Local Elite Social Structure in
Norfolk, England, 1540–1640. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
1997. “Generalized Exchange.” American Journal of Sociology 102: 1383–415.
Bearman, Peter S., Robert Faris, and James Moody. 1999. “Blocking the Future: New
Solutions for Old Problems in Historical Social Science.” Social Science History 23
(4): 501–33.
Bearman, Peter S., James Moody, and Katherine Stovel. 2004. “Chains of Affection: The
Structure of Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Networks.” American Journal of
Sociology 110: 44–91.
Bearman, Peter S., and Katherine Stovel. 2000. “Becoming a Nazi: A Model for
Narrative Networks.” Poetics 27, (2–3): 69–90.
Beck, P. A., R. J. Dalton, S. Greene, and R. Huckfeldt. 2002. “The Social Calculus of
Voting: Interpersonal, Media, and Organizational Influences on Presidential
Choices.” The American Political Science Review 96(1): 57–73.
Becker, Howard S. 1953. “Becoming a Marihuana User.” American Journal of
Sociology 59(3): 235–42.
Becker, O. 1967. “Das Helmstädtersche Reihenfolgeproblem – die Effizienz verschied￾ener Näherungsverfahren.” In Computer Uses in the Social Sciences, Berichteiner
Working Conference.
Bender-deMoll, Skye. 2016. “Temporal Network Tools in Statnet: NetworkDynamic,
ndtv and tsna.” https://statnet.org/workshop-ndtv/ndtv_workshop.html. Accessed:
September 13, 2022.
Bender-deMoll, Skye, and Daniel A. McFarland. 2006. “The Art and Science of
Dynamic Network Visualization.” Journal of Social Structure 7(2): 1–38.
Berger, Peter, and Thomas Luckmann. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality:
A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Doubleday.
Bevilacqua, D., I. Davidesco, L. Wan et al. 2018. “Brain-to-Brain Synchrony and Learning
Outcomes Vary by Student-Teacher Dynamics: Evidence from a Real-World Classroom
Electroencephalography Study.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 31(3): 1–11.
Birkett, Michelle, Joshua Melville, Patrick Janulis, Gregory Phillips II, Noshir
Contractor, and Bernie Hogan. 2021. “Network Canvas: Key Decisions in the
Design of an Interviewer-Assisted Network Data Collection Software Suite.”
Social Networks 66: 114–24.
Blau, Peter. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons.
Blau, Peter M. 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity: A Primitive Theory of Social
Structure. Vol. 7. New York: Free Press.
422 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press2017 [1964]. Exchange and Power in Social Life. Milton Park: Routledge.
Blondel, Vincent D., Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre.
2008. “Fast Unfolding of Communities in Large Networks.” Journal of Statistical
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment (10): P10008.
Bonacich, Phillip. 1987. “Power and Centrality: A Family of Measures.” American
Journal of Sociology 92(5): 1170–82.
Borgatti, Stephen P. 2005. “Centrality and Network Flow.” Social Networks 27(1):
55–71.
Borgatti, Stephen P., Kathleen M. Carley, and David Krackhardt. 2006. “On the
Robustness of Centrality Measures under Conditions of Imperfect Data.” Social
Networks 28(2): 124–36.
Borgatti, Stephen P., and Martin G. Everett. 1997. “Network Analysis of 2-Mode
Data.” Social Networks 19: 243–69.
2006. “A Graph-Theoretic Perspective on Centrality.” Social Networks 28(4): 466–84.
2020. “Three Perspectives on Centrality.” Pp. 334–51 in The Oxford Handbook of
Social Networks, edited by Ryan Light and James Moody. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Borgatti, Stephen P., and Daniel S. Halgin. 2011. “Analyzing Affiliation Networks.”
Chapter 28 (pp. 417–34) in The Sage Handbook of Social Network Analysis, edited
by John Scott and Peter J. Carrington. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Borgatti, Stephen P., Ajay Mehra, Daniel J. Brass, and Giuseppe Labianca. 2009.
“Network Analysis in the Social Sciences.” Science 323(5916): 892–95.
Borsboom, D. 2017. “A Network Theory of Mental Disorders.” World Psychiatry 16:
5–13.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1973. “The Berber House.” Pp. 98–110 in Rules and Meanings, edited
by Mary Douglas. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Boutyline, Andrei. 2017. “Improving the Measurement of Shared Cultural Schemas with
Correlational Class Analysis: Theory and Method.” Sociological Science 4: 353–93.
Boutyline, Andrei, and Stephen Vaisey. 2017. “Belief Network Analysis: A Relational
Approach to Understanding the Structure of Attitudes.” American Journal of
Sociology 122(5):1371–447.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter Richerson. 1988. Culture and Evolutionary Process. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bradburn, Norman M., Seymour Sudman, and Brian Wansink. 2004. Asking Questions:
The Definitive Guide to Questionnaire Design: For Market Research, Political Polls,
and Social and Health Questionnaires. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons.
Braines, Dave, Diane Felmlee, Don Towsley, Kun Tu, Roger M. Whitaker, and Liam D.
Turner. 2018. “The Role of Motifs in Understanding Behavior in Social and
Engineered Networks.” In Proceedings of SPIE 10653, Next-Generation Analyst
VI, 106530W, April 27, 2018.
Brandes, Ulrik. 2001. “A Faster Algorithm for Betweenness Centrality.” Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 25(2): 163–77.
Brandes, Ulrik, Jürgen Lerner, and Tom A. B. Snijders. 2009. “Networks Evolving Step
by Step: Statistical Analysis of Dyadic Event Data." In 2009 International
Conference on Advances in Social Network Analysis and Mining, pp. 200–5. IEEE.
References 423
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressBrashears, Matthew E. 2013. “Humans Use Compression Heuristics to Improve the
Recall of Social Networks.” Scientific Reports 3: article 1513.
Brashears, Matthew E., and Laura Aufderheide Brashears. 2016. “The Enemy of My
Friend Is Easy to Remember: Balance as a Compression Heuristic.” Pp. 1–31 in
Advances in Group Processes. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Brashears, Matthew E., and Eric Quintane. 2015. “The Microstructures of Network
Recall: How Social Networks Are Encoded and Represented in Human Memory.”
Social Networks 41: 113–26.
Breiger, Ronald L. 1974. “The Duality of Persons and Groups.” Social Forces 53(2):
181–90.
Bringmann, Laura F., Timon Elmer, Sacha Epskamp et al. 2019. “What Do Centrality
Measures Measure in Psychological Networks?” Journal of Abnormal Psychology
128(8): 892–903.
Bryson, Bethany. 1996. “‘Anything But Heavy Metal’: Symbolic Exclusion and Musical
Dislikes.” American Sociological Review 61(5): 884–99.
Burris, Val. 2005. “Interlocking Directorates and Political Cohesion among Corporate
Elites.” American Journal of Sociology 111(1): 249–83.
Burt, Ronald S. 1984. “Network Items and the General Social Survey.” Social Networks
6(4): 293–339.
1987. “Social Contagion and Innovation: Cohesion versus Structural Equivalence.”
American Journal of Sociology 92(6): 1287–335.
1990. “Detecting Role Equivalence.” Social Networks 12(1): 83–97.
1992 [1982]. Toward a Structural Theory of Action. New York: Academic Press.
1995. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
2004. “Structural Holes and Good Ideas.” American Journal of Sociology 110(2):
349–99.
2005. Brokerage and Closure: An Introduction to Social Capital. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Butts, Carter T. 2008a. “Social Network Analysis with sna.” Journal of Statistical
Software 24: 1–51.
2008b. “A Relational Event Framework for Social Action.” Sociological
Methodology 38(1): 155–200.
Cairns, Robert B., and Beverley D. Cairns. 1991. “Social Cognition and Social
Networks: A Developmental Perspective.” Pp. 249–78 in The Development and
Treatment of Childhood Aggression, edited by Debra J. Pepler, Kirsten C. Madsen,
Christopher Webster, and Kathryn S. Levene. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
1994. Lifelines and Risks: Pathways of Youth in Our Time. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference
with Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(2): 238–49.
Carley, Kathleen M. 1986. “Knowledge Acquisition as a Social Phenomenon.”
Instructional Science 14: 381–438.
1997. “Extracting Team Mental Models through Textual Analysis.” Journal of
Organizational Behavior: The International Journal of Industrial, Occupational
and Organizational Psychology and Behavior 18(S1): 533–58.
424 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressCartwright, Dorwin. 1951. “Achieving Change in People: Some Applications of Group
Dynamics Theory.” Human Relations 4(4): 381–92.
Cartwright, Dorwin, and Frank Harary. 1956. “Structural Balance: A Generalization of
Heider’s Theory.” Psychological Review 63(5): 277–93.
Centola, Damon. 2010. “The Spread of Behavior in an Online Social Network
Experiment.” Science 329(5996): 1194–97.
2018. How Behavior Spreads: The Science of Complex Contagions. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Centola, Damon, and Michael Macy. 2007. “Complex Contagions and the Weakness of
Long Ties.” American Journal of Sociology 113(3): 702–34.
Cerulo, Karen A. 2018. “Scents and Sensibility: Olfaction, Sense-Making, and Meaning
Attribution.” American Sociological Review 83(2): 361–89.
Chase, Ivan D. 1980. “Social Process and Hierarchy Formation in Small Groups:
A Comparative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 45(6): 905–24.
1981. “Social Interaction: The Missing Link in Evolutionary Models.” Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 4(2): 237–38.
1991. “Vacancy Chains.” Annual Review of Sociology 17(1): 133–54.
Chase, Ivan D., Craig Tovey, Debra Spangle-Martin, and Michael Manfredonia. 2002.
“Individual Differences versus Social Dynamics in the Formation of Animal
Dominance Hierarchies.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 99:
5744–49.
Childress, C. Clayton, and Noah E. Friedkin. 2012. “Cultural Reception and
Production: The Social Construction of Meaning in Book Clubs.” American
Sociological Review 77(1): 45–68.
Christakis, Nicholas. 2019. Blueprint: The Evolutionary Origins of a Good Society.
New York: Little, Brown Spark.
Christakis, Nicholas A., and James H. Fowler. 2007. “The Spread of Obesity in a Large
Social Network over 32 Years.” New England Journal of Medicine 357(4): 370–79.
2013. “Social Contagion Theory: Examining Dynamic Social Networks and Human
Behavior.” Statistics in Medicine 32(4): 556–77.
Chu, James. 2020. “Organizations and the Contingent Consequences of Status
Competition.” PhD thesis, Stanford Department of Sociology.
Cohen, J., and P. Cohen. 1975. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for
the Behavioral Sciences. Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cohen-Cole, Ethan, and Jason M. Fletcher. 2008. “Is Obesity Contagious? Social
Networks vs. Environmental Factors in the Obesity Epidemic.” Journal of Health
Economics 27(5): 1382–87.
Coleman, James S. 1961. The Adolescent Society. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.
1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Collins, Randall. 1979. The Credential Society. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
2014. Interaction Ritual Chains. Vol. 62. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Converse, Philip E. 1964. “The Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics.” Pp. 206–61 in
Ideology and Discontent, edited by D. E. Apter. New York: Free Press.
Costenbader, Elizabeth, and Thomas W. Valente. 2003. “The Stability of Centrality
Measures When Networks Are Sampled.” Social Networks 25(4): 283–307.
Cramer, Angélique O. J., Claudia D. van Borkulo, Erik J. Giltay et al. 2016. “Major
Depression as a Complex Dynamical System.” PLoS ONE 11: e0167490.
References 425
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressCrane, Diana. 1972. Invisible Colleges: Diffusion of Knowledge in Scientific
Communities. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Crano, William D., and Ralph E. Cooper. 1973. “Examination of Newcomb’s
Extension of Structural Balance Theory.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 27: 344–53.
Crossley, Nick. 2010. “The Social World of the Network: Combining Qualitative and
Quantitative Elements in Social Network Analysis.” Sociologica 1: 1–33.
Dahlander, Linus, and Daniel A. McFarland. 2013. “Ties that Last: Tie Formation and
Persistence in Research Collaborations over Time.” Administrative Science
Quarterly 58(1): 69–110.
Davis, Allison, Burleigh Bradford Gardner, and Mary R. Gardner. 2009 [1941]. Deep
South: A Social Anthropological Study of Caste and Class. Columbia: University of
South Carolina Press.
Davis, James A. 1963. “Structural Balance, Mechanical Solidarity, and Interpersonal
Relations.” American Journal of Sociology 68: 444–62.
Davis, James A., and Samuel Leinhardt. 1972. “The Structure of Positive Interpersonal
Relations in Small Groups.” Pp. 218–51 in Sociological Theories in Progress, edited
by Joseph Berger, Morris Zeldich, and Bo Anderson. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.
De Nooy, Wouter, Andrej Mrvar, and Vladimir Batagelj. 2018. Exploratory Social
Network Analysis with Pajek, 3rd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press.
DeGroot, Morris H. 1974. “Reaching a Consensus.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 69(345): 118–21.
Dekker, David, David Krackhardt, and Tom A. B. Snijders. 2007 “Sensitivity of
MRQAP Tests to Collinearity and Autocorrelation Conditions.” Psychometrika
72: 563–581.
Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. “BERT:
Pre-Training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.”
Arxiv Preprint Arxiv:1810.04805.
Diehl, David, and Daniel McFarland. 2010. “Toward a Historical Sociology of Social
Situations.” American Journal of Sociology 115(6): 1713–52.
DiMaggio, Paul. 1987. “Classification in Art.” American Sociological Review 52: 440–55.
1997. “Culture and Cognition.” Annual Review of Sociology 23: 263–87.
DiMaggio, Paul, and Filiz Garip. 2012. “Network Effects and Social Inequality.”
Annual Review of Sociology 38: 93–118.
Doreian, Patrick. 1980. “Linear Models with Spatially Distributed Data: Spatial
Disturbances or Spatial Effects?” Sociological Methods & Research 9(1): 29–60.
Doreian, Patrick, Vladimir Batagelj, and Anuska Ferligoj. 2005. Generalized
Blockmodeling. Vol. 25. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Douglas, Mary. 1970. Natural Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology. New York:
Pantheon Books.
DuBois, Christopher, Carter Butts, and Padhraic Smyth. 2013. “Stochastic
Blockmodeling of Relational Event Dynamics.” Pp. 238–46 in Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, edited by Carlos M. Carvalho and Pradeep Ravikumar.
Scottsdale, AZ: PMLR.
Dunphy, Dexter C. 1963. “The Social Structure of Urban Adolescent Peer Groups.”
Sociometry 26(2): 230–46.
426 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressDurkheim, Emile. 2014 [1893]. The Division of Labor in Society. New York: Free Press.
Duxbury, Scott. 2022. Longitudinal Network Models. SAGE: Quantitative Applications
in the Social Sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Edelmann, Achim, James Moody, and Ryan Light. 2017. “When Scientists Take a Stand
on Contentious Issues: Disparate Foundations of Scientists’ Policy Positions on
Contentious Biomedical Research.” Proceedings of the National Academies of
Science 114(24): 6262–67.
Emirbayer, Mustafa. 1997. “Manifesto for a Relational Sociology.” American Journal
of Sociology 103: 281–317.
Emirbayer, Mustafa, and Jeff Goodwin. 1994. “Network Analysis, Culture, and the
Problem of Agency.” American Journal of Sociology 99(6): 1411–54.
Emirbayer, Mustafa, and Ann Mische. 1998. “What Is Agency?” American Journal of
Sociology 103: 962–1023.
Erickson, Bonnie H. 1996. “Culture, Class, and Connections.” American Journal of
Sociology 102(1): 217–51.
Euler, Leonhard. 1736. Mechanica Sive Motus Scienta Analytice Exposita... Instar
Supplementi Ad Commentar. Acad. Scient. Imper. St. Petersburg: ex typographia
Academiae scientarum.
Fagiolo, Giorgio. 2007. “Clustering in Complex Directed Networks.” Physical Review
E 76(2): 026107.
Faust, Katherine. 1997. “Centrality in Affiliation Networks.” Social Networks 19: 157–91.
Feehan, Dennis M., and Matthew J. Salganik. 2016. “Generalizing the Network Scale￾Up Method: A New Estimator for the Size of Hidden Populations.” Sociological
Methodology 46(1): 153–86.
Feld, Scott L. 1981. “The Focused Organization of Social Ties.” American Journal of
Sociology 86(5): 1015–35.
1991. “Why Your Friends Have More Friends than You Do.” American Journal of
Sociology 96(6): 1464–77.
Felmlee, Diane H., Cassie McMillan, Paulina Inara Rodis, and D. Wayne Osgood. 2018.
“The Evolution of Youth Friendship Networks from 6th to 12th Grade: School
Transitions, Popularity and Centrality.” Pp. 161–84 in Social Networks and the
Life Course, vol. 2, Frontiers in Sociology and Social Research, edited by D. F.
Alwin, D. H. Felmlee, and D. A. Kreager. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Felmlee, Diane, Cassie McMillan, and Roger Whitaker. 2021. “Dyads, Triads, and
Tetrads: A Multivariate Simulation Approach to Uncovering Network Motifs in
Social Graphs.” Applied Network Science 6: 63.
Fienberg, Stephen E., and Stanley S. Wasserman. 1981. “Categorical Data Analysis of
Single Sociometric Relations.” Sociological Methodology 12: 156–192.
Fine, Gary Alan. 1979. “Small Groups and Culture Creation: The Idioculture of Little
League Baseball Teams.” American Sociological Review 44: 733–45.
Finkel, Eli, and Paul W. Eastwick. 2008. “Speed-Dating.” Current Directions in
Psychological Science 17: 193–97.
Fiske, Alan Page. 1991. Structures of Social Life: The Four Elementary Forms of Human
Relations: Communal Sharing, Authority Ranking, Equality Matching, Market
Pricing. New York: Free Press.
Fligstein, Neil, and Doug McAdam. 2012. A Theory of Fields. New York: Oxford
University Press.
References 427
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressFowler, James H., and Nicholas A. Christakis. 2008. “Estimating Peer Effects on Health
in Social Networks: A Response to Cohen-Cole and Fletcher; Trogdon,
Nonnemaker, Pais.” Journal of Health Economics 27(5): 1400.
Frank, Kenneth A. 1995. “Identifying Cohesive Subgroups.” Social Networks 17(1):
27–56.
2000. “Impact of a Confounding Variable on a Regression Coefficient.” Sociological
Methods & Research 29(2): 147–94.
Frank, Kenneth A., Spiro J. Maroulis, Minh Q. Duong, and Benjamin M. Kelcey. 2013.
“What Would It Take to Change an Inference? Using Rubin’s Causal Model to
Interpret the Robustness of Causal Inferences.” Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 35(4): 437–60.
Frank, Ove. 1991. “Statistical Analysis of Change in Networks.” Statistica Neerlandica
45: 283–93.
Frank, Ove, and David Strauss. 1986. “Markov Graphs.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 81(395): 832–42.
Freeman, Linton C. 1978a. “Segregation in Social Networks.” Sociological Methods &
Research 6(4): 411–29.
1978b. “Centrality in Social Networks Conceptual Clarification.” Social Networks 1
(3): 215–39.
2004. The Development of Social Network Analysis: A Study in the Sociology of
Science. Vancouver, British Columbia: Empirical Press.
Freeman, Linton C., and David R. White. 1993. “Using Galois Lattices to Represent
Network Data.” Sociological Methodology 23: 127–46.
French Jr., John R. P., and Bertram Raven. 1959. “The Bases of Social Power.” Pp.
150–67 in Studies in Social Power, edited by Dorwin Cartwright. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan.
Friedkin, Noah E. 1998. A Structural Theory of Social Influence. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Friedkin, Noah E., and Francesco Bullo. 2017. “How Truth Wins in Opinion Dynamics
along Issue Sequences.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(43):
11380–85.
Friedkin, Noah E., and Eugene C. Johnsen. 1990. “Social Influence and Opinions.”
Journal of Mathematical Sociology 15(3–4): 193–206.
2011. Social Influence Network Theory: A Sociological Examination of Small Group
Dynamics. Vol. 33. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
2014. “Two Steps of Obfuscation.” Social Networks 39: 12–13.
Friedkin, Noah E., Anton V. Proskurnikov, Roberto Tempo, and Sergey E. Parsegov.
2016. “Network Science on Belief System Dynamics under Logic Constraints.”
Science 354: 321–26.
Friedland, Roger, and Richard R. Alford. 1991. “Bringing Society Back In: Symbols,
Practices and Institutional Contradictions.” Pp. 232–67 in The New
Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by W. W. Powell & P. J.
DiMaggio. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fruchterman, Thomas M. J., and Edward M. Reingold. 1991. “Graph Drawing by
Force-Directed Placement.” Software – Practice and Experience 21: 1129–64.
Fuchs, Stephan. 1993. “A Sociological Theory of Scientific Change.” Social Forces 71
(4): 933–53.
428 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressFuhse, Jan A. 2009. “The Meaning Structure of Social Networks.” Sociological Theory
27: 51–73.
2015. “Theorizing Social Networks: The Relational Sociology of and around
Harrison White.” International Review of Sociology 25(1): 15–44.
Galvez, Sebastian Munoz-Najar, Raphael Heiberger, and Daniel A. McFarland. 2019.
“Paradigm Wars Revisited: A Cartography of Graduate Research in the Field of
Education (1980–2010).” American Educational Research Journal 57(2): 612–52.
Garfinkel, Harold. 1967. Studies in Ethnomethodology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Garton, Laura, Caroline Haythornthwaite, and Barry Wellman, 1997. “Studying Online
Social Networks.” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 3(1): JCMC313
Geertz, Clifford. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Gibson, David R. 2003. “Participation Shifts: Order and Differentiation in Group
Conversation.” Social Forces 81(4): 1335–80.
2012. Talk at the Brink: Deliberation and Decision during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Giddens, Anthony. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of
Structuration. Cambridge: Polity Press.
1986. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
1991. Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age.
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York:
Doubleday.
1974. Frame Analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
1983. “The Interaction Order.” American Sociological Review 48: 1–17.
Goldberg, Amir. 2011. “Mapping Shared Understandings Using Relational Class
Analysis: The Case of the Cultural Omnivore Reexamined.” American Journal of
Sociology 116(5): 1397–436.
Goldberg, Amir, and Sarah K. Stein. 2018. “Beyond Social Contagion: Associative
Diffusion and the Emergence of Cultural Variation.” American Sociological
Review 83(5): 897–932.
Gondal, Neha. 2022. “Multiplexity as a Lens to Investigate the Cultural Meanings of
Interpersonal Ties.” Social Networks 68: 209–17.
Goodreau, Steven M., James A. Kitts, and Martina Morris. 2009. “Birds of a Feather, or
Friend of a Friend? Using Exponential Random Graph Models to Investigate
Adolescent Social Networks.” Demography 46(1): 103–25.
Gould, Roger V. 1991 [2020]. Collision of Wills: How Ambiguity about Social Rank
Breeds Conflict. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1993. “Collective Action and Network Structure.” American Sociological Review 58:
182–96.
2003. Collision of Wills: How Ambiguity about Social Rank Breeds Conflict.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gould, Roger V., and Roberto M. Fernandez. 1989. “Structures of Mediation: A Formal
Approach to Brokerage in Transaction Networks.” Sociological Methodology 19:
89–126.
Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of
Sociology 78: 1360–80.
References 429
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press1978. “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior.” American Journal of Sociology 83
(6): 1420–43.
1985. “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness.”
American Journal of Sociology 91(3): 481–510.
1995 [1974]. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Greenacre, Michael, and Jorg Blasius. 1994. Correspondence Analysis in the Social
Sciences. London: Academic Press.
Grimmer, Justin, and Gary King. 2011. “General Purpose Computer-Assisted Clustering
and Conceptualization.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108(7):
2643–50.
Griswold, Wendy. 1987. “A Methodological Framework for the Sociology of Culture.”
Sociological Methodology 17(1): 1–35.
Guilbeault, Douglas, Andrea Baronchelli, and Damon Centola. 2021. “Experimental
Evidence of Scale Induced Category Convergence across Populations.” Nature
Communications 12(1): 1–7
Haidt, Jonathan. 2012. The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics
and Religion. New York: Vintage Books.
Hallinan, Maureen T. 1974. “A Structural Model of Sentiment Relations.” American
Journal of Sociology 80(2): 364–78.
Hamilton, William L., Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky. 2016. “Diachronic Word
Embeddings Reveal Statistical Laws of Semantic Change.” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.09096.
Handcock, Mark S. 2002. “Degeneracy and Inference for Social Network Models.”
Paper presented at Sunbelt XXII International Social Network Conference, New
Orleans, LA.
2003. “Statistical Models for Social Networks: Inference and Degeneracy.” Pp.
229–40 in Dynamic Social Network Modelling and Analysis: Workshop
Summary and Papers, edited by R. Breiger, K. Carley, and P. E. Pattison.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Handcock, Mark S., and Martina Morris. 2006. Relative Distribution Methods in the
Social Sciences. New York: Springer Science & Business Media.
Hannan, Michael T., and John Freeman. 1977. “The Population Ecology of
Organizations.” American Journal of Sociology 82(5): 929–64.
Harris, K. M., C. T. Halpern, E. Whitsel, J. Hussey, J. Tabor, P. Entzel, and J. R. Udry. 2009.
The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health: Research Design.
WWW document. https://addhealth.cpc.unc.edu/documentation/study-design/
Hasan, Sharique, and Surendrakumar Bagde. 2013. “The Mechanics of Social Capital
and Academic Performance in an Indian College.” American Sociological Review
78(6): 1009–32.
Hasan, Sharique, and Rembrand Koning. 2019. “Prior Ties and the Limits of Peer
Effects on Startup Team Performance.” Strategic Management Journal 40(9):
1394–416.
Hawley, Amos H. 1950. Human Ecology: A Theory of Community Structure. New
York: The Ronald Press.
Haynie, Dana L. 2001. “Delinquent Peers Revisited: Does Network Structure Matter?”
American Journal of Sociology 106(4): 1013–57.
430 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressHealy, Kieran. 2018. Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Healy, Kieran, and James Moody. 2014. “Data Visualization in Sociology.” Annual
Review of Sociology 40: 105–28.
Heider, Fritz. 1946. “Attitudes and Cognitive Organization.” The Journal of
Psychology 21(1): 107–12.
Henrich, Joseph. 2015. The Secret of Our Success. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Heritage, John, and Geoffrey Raymond. 2005. “The Terms of Agreement: Indexing
Epistemic Authority and Subordination in Talk-in-Interaction.” Social Psychology
Quarterly 68: 15–38.
Higgins, E. Tory. 2019. Shared Reality: What Makes Us Strong and Tears Us Apart.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hinde, Robert A. 1976. “Interactions, Relationships and Social Structure.” Man 11(1): 1–17.
Hobbs, Robert, and Mark Lombardi. Mark Lombardi: Global Networks. New York:
Independent Curators International.
Hochschild, Arlie. 1989. The Second Shift: Working Families and the Revolution at
Home. New York: Penguin.
Hoff, Peter D., Adrian E. Raftery, and Mark S. Handcock. 2002. “Latent Space
Approaches to Social Network Analysis.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 97(460): 1090–98.
Holland, Paul W., and Samuel Leinhardt. 1981. “An Exponential Family of Probability
Distributions for Directed Graphs.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
76(373): 33–50.
1976. “Local Structure in Social Networks.” Sociological Methodology 7: 1–45.
Hollis, Martin. 1994. The Philosophy of Social Science. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Holton, D. 2006. “Hierarchical Edge Bundles: Visualization of Adjacency Relations in
Hierarchical Data.” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
12: 741–48.
Homans, George C. 1951. The Human Group. New York: Routledge.
1961. Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms. New York: Harcourt, Brace, & World.
Hunter, David R. 2007. “Curved Exponential Family Models for Social Networks.”
Social Networks 29(2): 216–30.
Hunter, David R., Steven M. Goodreau, and Mark S. Handcock. 2008. “Goodness of
Fit of Social Network Models.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 103
(481): 248–58.
Hunter, David R., and Mark S. Handcock. 2006. “Inference in Curved Exponential
Family Models for Networks.” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics
15(3): 565–83.
Hunzaker, M. B. Fallin. 2016. “Cultural Sentiments and Schema-Consistency Bias in
Information Transmission.” American Sociological Review 81(6):1223–50.
Ibarra, Herminia. 1993. “Network Centrality, Power, and Innovation Involvement:
Determinants of Technical and Administrative Roles.” Academy of Management
Journal 36(3): 471–501.
Isakov, Alexander, James H. Fowler, Edoardo M. Airoldi, and Nicholas A. Christakis.
2019. “The Structure of Negative Social Ties in Rural Village Networks.”
Sociological Science 6: 197–218.
References 431
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressIwashyna, Theodore J., Jason D. Christie, James Moody, Jeremy M. Kahn, and David A.
Asch. 2009. “The Structure of Critical Care Networks.” Medical Care 47: 787–93.
Jackson, Matthew O. 2003. “The Stability and Efficiency of Economic and Social
Networks.” Pp. 319–61 in Advances in Economic Design, edited by Murat R.
Sertel and S. Koray. New York: Springer.
2008. “Average Distance, Diameter, and Clustering in Social Networks with
Homophily.” Pp. 4–11 in Internet and Network Economics. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 5385, edited by Christos Papadimitriou and Shuzhong
Zhang. Berlin: Springer.
Johnsen, Eugene C. 1985. “Network Macrostructure Models for the Davis-Leinhardt
Set of Empirical Sociomatrices.” Social Networks 7: 203–24.
1986. “Structure and Process: Agreement Models for Friendship Formation.” Social
Networks 8: 257–306.
Jones, James Holland. 2007. “Notes on R0.” Working Paper, Department of
Anthropological Sciences, Stanford University.
Jones, James Holland, and Mark S. Handcock. 2003. “Social Networks
(Communication Arising): Sexual Contacts and Epidemic Thresholds.” Nature
423(6940): 605.
Jurafsky, Dan, Victor Chahuneau, Bryan Routledge, and Noah Smith. 2016. “Linguistic
Markers of Status in Food Culture: Bourdieu’s Distinction in a Menu Corpus.”
Journal of Cultural Analytics 1(1): 11064.
Kairam, Sanjay Ram, Dan J. Wang, and Jure Leskovec. 2012 “The Life and Death of
Online Groups: Predicting Group Growth and Longevity.” In Proceedings of the
Fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 673–82.
New York: ACM Press.
Kamada, T., & S. Kawai. 1989. “An Algorithm for Drawing General Undirected
Graphs.” Information Processing Letters 31: 7–15.
Kandel, Denise. 1975. “Stages in Adolescent Involvement in Drug Use.” Science 190
(4217): 912–14.
1978. “Homophily, Selection, and Socialization in Adolescent Friendship Pairs.”
American Journal of Sociology 48: 427–36.
Kaplanis, Joanna, Assaf Gordon, Tal Shor et al. 2018. “Quantitative Analysis of
Population-Scale Family Trees with Millions of Relatives.” Science 360(6385): 171–75.
Kashima, Yoshihisa. 2000. “Maintaining Cultural Stereotypes in the Serial Reproduction
of Narratives.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 26(5): 594–604.
Katz, Leo, and James H. Powell. 1955. “Measurement of the Tendency Toward
Reciprocation of Choice” Sociometry 18:659–665.
Kemper, Theodore D., and Randall Collins. 1990. “Dimensions of Microinteraction.”
American Journal of Sociology 96(1): 32–68.
Kennedy, Peter E. 2002. “More on Venn Diagrams for Regression.” Journal of Statistics
Education 10(1). https://doi.org/10.1080/10691898.2002.11910547.
Kenny, Christopher B. 1992. “Political Participation and Effects from the Social
Environment.” American Journal of Political Science 36(1): 259–67.
Kenny, David A., Deborah A. Kashy, and William L. Cook. 2006. Dyadic Data
Analysis. New York: Guilford Press.
Kilduff, Martin, and David Krackhardt. 1994. “Bringing the Individual Back in:
A Structural Analysis of the Internal Market for Reputation in Organizations.”
Academy of Management Journal 37(1): 87–108.
432 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressKim, David A., Alison R. Hwong, Derek Stafford et al. 2015. “Social Network
Targeting to Maximise Population Behaviour Change: A Cluster Randomised
Controlled Trial.” The Lancet 386(9989): 145–53.
Kim, Ji Youn, Michael Howard, Emily Cox Pahnke, and Warren Boeker. 2016.
“Understanding Network Formation in Strategy Research: Exponential Random
Graph Models.” Strategic Management Journal 37(1): 22–44.
Kitts, James. 2014. “Beyond Networks in Structural Theories of Exchange:
Promises from Computational Social Science.” Advances in Group Processes
31: 263–98.
Kitts, James, and Diego Leal. 2021. “What Is(n’t) a Friend? Dimensions of the
Friendship Concept among Adolescents.” Social Networks 66: 161–70.
Kitts, James, and Eric Quintane. 2020. “Rethinking Social Networks in the Era of
Computational Social Science.” Pp. 71–97 in The Oxford Handbook of Social
Networks, edited by Ryan Light and James Moody. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kleinberg, Jon M. 2000. “Navigation in a Small World.” Nature 406(6798): 845.
Kolaczyk, Eric D., David B. Chua, and Marc Barthélemy. 2009. “Group Betweenness
and Co-Betweenness: Inter-Related Notions of Coalition Centrality.” Social
Networks 31(3): 190–203.
Kolaczyk, Eric D., and Gábor Csárdi. 2014. Statistical Analysis of Network Data with
R. Vol. 65. New York: Springer.
Kossinets, Gueorgi. 2006. “Effects of Missing Data in Social Networks.” Social
Networks 28(3): 247–68.
Krackhardt, David. 1987. “Cognitive Social Structures.” Social Networks 9(2): 109–34.
1988. “Predicting with Networks: Nonparametric Multiple Regression Analysis of
Dyadic Data.” Social Networks 10(4): 359–81.
1990. “Assessing the Political Landscape: Structure, Cognition, and Power in
Organizations.” Administrative Science Quarterly 35(2): 342–69.
1994. “Graph Theoretical Dimensions of Informal Organizations.” Pp. 89–111 in
Computational Organization Theory, edited by K. Carley and M. Prietula.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
2014. “Graph Theoretical Dimensions of Informal Organizations.” Pp. 107–30 in
Computational Organization Theory, edited by Kathleen M. Carley and Michael J.
Prietula. New York: Psychology Press.
Krackhardt, David, N. Nohria, and B. Eccles. 2003. “The Strength of Strong Ties.” Pp.
82–108 in Networks in the Knowledge Economy, edited by Rob Cross, Andrew
Parker, and Lisa Sasson. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kreager, Derek A., Lauren E. Molloy, James Moody, and Mark E. Feinberg. 2016.
“Friends First? The Peer Network Origins of Adolescent Dating.” Journal of
Research on Adolescence 26: 257–69.
Krivitsky, Pavel N., Mark S. Handcock, Adrian E. Raftery, and Peter D. Hoff. 2009.
“Representing Degree Distributions, Clustering, and Homophily in Social
Networks with Latent Cluster Random Effects Models.” Social Networks 31(3):
204–13.
Krivitsky, Pavel N., and Martina Morris. 2017. “Inference for Social Network Models
from Egocentrically Sampled Data, with Application to Understanding Persistent
Racial Disparities in HIV Prevalence in the US.” The Annals of Applied Statistics 11
(1): 427.
References 433
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressKrosnick, Jon A. 1999. “Survey Research.” Annual Review of Psychology 50(1):
537–67.
Kunda, Ziva, and Paul Thagard. 1996. “Forming Impressions from Stereotypes, Traits,
and Behaviors: A Parallel-Constraint-Satisfaction Theory.” Psychological Review
103(2): 284–308.
Kuskova, Valentina, and Stanley Wasserman. 2020. “An Introduction to Statistical
Models for Networks.” Pp. 219–33 in The Oxford Handbook of Social
Networks, edited by Ryan Light and James Moody. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kwon, Oh-Hyun, and Kwan-Liu Ma. 2019. “A Deep Generative Model for Graph
Layout.” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 26(1): 665–75.
Lamont, Michele, and Marcel Fournier. 1992. Cultivating Differences: Symbolic
Boundaries and the Making of Inequality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lamont, Michèle, and Virág Molnár. 2002. “The Study of Boundaries in the Social
Sciences.” Annual Review of Sociology 28(1): 167–95.
Landau, H. G. 1951. “On Dominance Relations and the Structure of Animal Societies:
I. Effect of Inherent Characteristics.” Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 13: 1–19.
Langrebe, Thomas, and Robert P. W. Duin. 2008. “Efficient Multiclass ROC
Approximation by Decomposition via Confusion Matrix Perturbation Analysis.”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Mach Intelligence 30(5): 810–22.
Laumann, Edward O., Peter V. Marsden, and David Prensky. 1983. “The Boundary
Specification Problem in Network Analysis.” Pp. 18–34 in Applied Network
Analysis, edited by Ronald S. Burt and Michael J. Minor. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Laureau, Annette. 2011. Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life. Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Lawler, Edward J. 2001. “An Affect Theory of Social Exchange.” American Journal of
Sociology 107(2): 321–52.
Lawler, Edward J., Shane R. Thye, and Jeongkoo Yoon. 2000. “Emotion and Group
Cohesion in Productive Exchange.” American Journal of Sociology 106(3): 616–57.
Lazarsfeld, Paul F., and Robert K. Merton. 1954. “Friendship as a Social Process:
A Substantive and Methodological Analysis.” Freedom and Control in Modern
Society 18(1): 18–66.
Lee, Monica, and John Levi Martin. 2018. “Doorway to the Dharma of Duality.”
Poetics 68: 18–30.
Leifer, Eric M. 1988. “Interaction Preludes to Role Setting: Exploratory Local Action.”
American Sociological Review 53: 865–78.
1992. “Denying the Data: Learning from the Accomplished Sciences.” Sociological
Forum 7: 283–99.
Leifer, Eric, and Harrison C. White. 1988. “A Structural Approach to Markets.” Pp.
85–108 in Intercorporate Relations: The Structural Analysis of Business, edited by
Mark S. Mizruchi and Michael Schwartz. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Leskovec, Jure, Jon Kleinberg, and Christos Faloutsos. 2005. “Graphs over Time:
Densification Laws, Shrinking Diameters and Possible Explanations.” ACM,
pp. 177–87.
Lewis, Kevin, Marco Gonzalez, and Jason Kaufman. 2012. “Social Selection and Peer
Influence in an Online Social Network.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109(1): 68–72.
434 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressLin, Nan. 2002. Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lindgren, Karl-Oskar. 2010. “Dyadic Regression in the Presence of Heteroscedasticity –
An Assessment of Alternative Approaches.” Social Networks 32(4): 279–89.
Lizardo, Omar. 2006. “How Cultural Tastes Shape Personal Networks.” American
Sociological Review 71(5): 778–807.
Lorrain, Francois, and Harrison C. White. 1971. “Structural Equivalence of Individuals
in Social Networks.” The Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1(1): 49–80.
Lusher, Dean, Johan Koskinen, and Garry Robins. 2013. Exponential Random Graph
Models for Networks: Theory, Methods, and Applications. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Lusher, Dean, Peng Wang, Julia Brennecke, Julien Brailly, Malick Faye, and Colin
Gallagher. 2020. “Advances in Exponential Random Graph Models.” Pp.
234–53 in The Oxford Handbook of Social Networks, edited by Ryan Light and
James Moody. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lyons, Russell. 2011. “The Spread of Evidence-Poor Medicine via Flawed Social￾Network Analysis.” Statistics, Politics, and Policy 2(1). https://doi.org/10.2202/
2151–7509.1024.
Macy, Michael W. 1991. “Chains of Cooperation: Threshold Effects in Collective
Action.” American Sociological Review 56(6): 730–47.
Macy, Michael W., and Anna Evtushenko. 2020. “Threshold Models of Collective
Behavior II: The Predictability Paradox and Spontaneous Instigation.”
Sociological Science 7: 628–48.
Macy, Michael, James A. Kitts, Anreas Flache, and Steve Benard. 2003. “Polarization in
Dynamic Networks: A Hopfield Model of Emergent Structure.” Pp. 162–73 in
Dynamic Social Network Modelling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and
Papers, edited by Ronald Breiger, Kathleen Carley, and Phillipa Pattison.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Mandel, Michael J. 1983. “Local Roles and Social Networks.” American Sociological
Review 48(3): 376–86.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
Problem.” The Review of Economic Studies 60(3): 531–42.
Mantel, Nathan. 1967. “The Detection of Disease Clustering and a Generalized
Regression Approach.” Cancer Research 27(2): 209–20.
Marcum, Christopher Steven, and Carter T. Butts. 2015. “Constructing and Modifying
Sequence Statistics for Relevent Using informR in R.” Journal of Statistical
Software 64(5): 1.
Mark, Noah. 1998. “Birds of a Feather Sing Together.” Social Forces 77(2): 453–85.
Marsden, Peter V. 1981. “Introducing Influence Processes into a System of Collective
Decisions.” American Journal of Sociology 86(6): 1203–35.
1990. “Network Data and Measurement.” Annual Review of Sociology 16(1):
435–63.
Marsden, Peter V., Tom W. Smith, and Michael Hout. 2020. “Tracking US Social
Change over a Half-Century: The General Social Survey at Fifty.” Annual Review
of Sociology 46: 109–34.
Martin, John Levi. 1999. “A General Permutation-Based QAP Analysis Approach for
Dyadic Data from Multiple Groups.” Connections 22(2): 50–60.
References 435
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press2000. “What Do Animals Do All Day? The Division of Labor, Class Bodies, and
Totemic Thinking in the Popular Imagination.” Poetics 27(2): 195–231.
2002. “Power, Authority, and the Constraint of Belief Systems.” American Journal of
Sociology 107(4): 861–904.
2003. “What Is Field Theory?” American Journal of Sociology 109(1): 1–49.
2009a. Social Structures. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
2009b. “Formation and Stabilization of Vertical Hierarchies among Adolescents:
Towards a Quantitative Ethology of Dominance among Humans.” Social
Psychology Quarterly 72: 241–64.
2010. “Life’s a Beach but You’re an Ant, and Other Unwelcome News for the
Sociology of Culture.” Poetics 38(2): 229–44.
2011. The Explanation of Social Action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martin, John Levi, King-To Yeung, and Benjamin Zablocki. 2001. “The Urban
Communes Data Set: A Gold Mine for Secondary Analysis.” Connections 24: 54–58.
Marwell, Gerald, Pamela E. Oliver, and Ralph Prahl. 1988. “Social Networks and
Collective Action: A Theory of the Critical Mass. III.” American Journal of
Sociology 94(3): 502–34.
Mäs, Michael, and Andreas Flache. 2013. “Differentiation without Distancing.
Explaining Bi-Polarization of Opinions without Negative Influence.” PLOS ONE
8: 11.
McCormick, T1yler H. 2021. “The Network Scale-Up Method.” Pp. 153–79 in The
Oxford Handbook of Social Networks, edited by Ryan Light and James Moody.
New York: Oxford University Press.
McFarland, Daniel A. 2001. “Student Resistance: How the Formal and Informal
Organization of Classrooms Facilitate Everyday Forms of Student Defiance.”
American Journal of Sociology 107(3): 612–78.
2006. “Curricular Flows: Trajectories, Turning Points, and Assignment Criteria in
High School Math Careers.” Sociology of Education 79: 177–205.
McFarland, Daniel A., David Diehl, and Craig Rawlings. 2011. “Methodological
Transactionalism and the Sociology of Education.” Pp. 87–109 in Frontiers in
Sociology of Education, edited by Maureen T. Hallinan. New York: Springer.
McFarland, Daniel A., Dan Jurafsky, and Craig Rawlings. 2013. “Making the
Connection: Social Bonding in Courtship Situations.” American Journal of
Sociology 118(6): 1596–649.
McFarland, Daniel A., Kevin Lewis, and Amir Goldberg. 2016. “Sociology in the Era of
Big Data: The Ascent of Forensic Social Science.” The American Sociologist 47(1):
12–35.
McFarland, Daniel A., James Moody, David Diehl, Jeffrey A. Smith, and Reuben J.
Thomas. 2014. “Network Ecology and Adolescent Social Structure.” American
Sociological Review 79: 1088–121.
McFarland, Daniel A., and Tom Wolff. 2022. “Writing into Relationships.” Social
Networks 71: 96–114.
McLean, Paul. 2007. The Art of the Network: Strategic Interaction and Patronage in
Renaissance Florence. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
2016. Culture in Networks. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
McPherson, J. Miller. 1981. “A Dynamic Model of Voluntary Affiliation.” Social Forces
59(3): 705–28.
436 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press1983. “An Ecology of Affiliation.” American Sociological Review 48(4): 519–32.
2004. “A Blau Space Primer: Prolegomenon to an Ecology of Affiliation.” Industrial
and Corporate Change 13: 263–80.
McPherson, J. Miller, and Jeffrey Smith. 2019. “Network Effects in Blau Space:
Imputing Social Context from Survey Data” Socius 5: 1–21.
McPherson, J. Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook. 2001. “Birds of a Feather:
Homophily in Social Networks.” Annual Review of Sociology 27(1): 415–44.
McPherson, J. Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and Craig Rawlings. 2021. “The
Enormous Flock of Homophily Researchers: Assessing and Promoting a
Research Agenda.” Pp. 444–58 in Personal Networks: Classic Readings
and New Directions in Ego-Centric Analysis, edited by Mario Small, Brea
Perry, Bernice Pescosolido, and Ned Smith. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Mead, George Herbert. 1934. Mind, Self, and Society: From the Standpoint of a Social
Behaviorist. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Melamed, David, Matthew Sweitzer, Brent Simpson, Jered Z. Abernathy, Ashley
Harrell, and Christopher W. Munn. 2020. “Homophily and Segregation in
Cooperative Networks.” American Journal of Sociology 125(4): 1084–127.
Merton, Robert K. 1968. “The Matthew Effect in Science: The Reward and
Communication Systems of Science Are Considered.” Science 159(3810): 56–63.
1976. Sociological Ambivalence and Other Essays. New York: Free Press.
Milgram, Stanley. 1967. “The Small World Problem.” Psychology Today 2: 60–67.
Milner, Murray. 2016. Freeks, Geeks, and Cool Kids: Teenagers in an Era of
Consumerism, Standardized Tests, and Social Media, 2nd ed. New York:
Routledge.
Mizruchi, Mark. 1982. The American Corporate Network, 1904–1974. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
2013. The Fracturing of the American Corporate Elite. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Mohr, John W. 1994. “Soldiers, Mothers, Tramps and Others: Discourse Roles in the
1907 New York City Charity Directory.” Poetics 22(4): 327–57.
1998. “Measuring Meaning Structures.” Annual Review of Sociology 24(1): 345–70.
Mohr, John W., Christopher A. Bail, Margaret Frye et al. 2020. Measuring Culture.
New York. Columbia University Press.
Mohr, John W., and Petko Bogdanov. 2013. “Introduction – Topic Models: What They
Are and Why They Matter.” Poetics 41(6): 545–69.
Mohr, John W., and Francesca Guerra-Pearson. 2010. “The Duality of Niche and Form:
The Differentiation of Institutional Space in New York City, 1888–1917.” Pp.
321–68 in Categories in Markets: Origins and Evolution. Research in the
Sociology of Organizations no. 31, edited by Greta Hsu, Giacomo Negro, and
Özgecan Koçak. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Mohr, John W., and Craig Rawlings. 2012. “Four Ways to Measure Culture: Social
Science, Hermeneutics, and the Cultural Turn.” Pp. 70–113 in The Oxford
Handbook of Cultural Sociology, edited by Ryan Light and James Moody. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Mohr, John W., Robin Wagner-Pacifici, Ronald L. Breiger, and Petko Bogdanov. 2013.
“Graphing the Grammar of Motives in National Security Strategies: Cultural
References 437
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressInterpretation, Automated Text Analysis and the Drama of Global Politics.” Poetics
41(6): 670–700.
Molloy, Michael, and Bruce Reed. 1998. “The Size of the Giant Component of a
Random Graph with a Given Degree Sequence.” Combinatorics, Probability and
Computing 7(3): 295–305.
Montgomery, James D. 2009. “Balance Theory with Incomplete Awareness.” Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 33(2): 69–96.
Moody, James. 2001. “Race, School Integration, and Friendship Segregation in
America.” American Journal of Sociology 107(3): 679–716.
Moody, James, and Richard Benton. 2016. “Interdependent Effects of Cohesion and
Concurrency for Epidemic Potential.” Annals of Epidemiology 4: 241–48.
Moody, James, Wendy D. Brynildsen, D. Wayne Osgood, Mark E. Feinberg, and Scott
Gest. 2011. “Popularity Trajectories and Substance Use in Early Adolescence.”
Social Networks 33(2): 101–12.
Moody, James, Mark E. Feinberg, D. Wayne Osgood, and Scott D. Gest. 2010. “Mining
the Network: Peers and Adolescent Health.” Journal of Adolescent Health 47:
324–26.
Moody, James, and Ryan Light. 2006. “A View from Above: The Evolving Sociological
Landscape.” The American Sociologist 37(2): 67–86.
Moody, James, Daniel McFarland, and Skye Bender-deMoll. 2005. “Dynamic Network
Visualization.” American Journal of Sociology 110(4): 1206–41.
Moody, James, and Peter J. Mucha. 2013. “Portrait of Political Party Polarization.”
Network Science 1(1): 119–21.
Moody, James, and Douglas R. White. 2003. “Structural Cohesion and Embeddedness:
A Hierarchical Concept of Social Groups.” American Sociological Review 68:
103–27.
Moreno, Jacob Levi. 1933. “Emotions Mapped by New Geography.” The New York
Times. April 3, 1933, p. 17.
1953 [1934]. Who Shall Survive? A New Approach to the Problem of Human
Interrelations. New York: Beacon Press.
Morris, Martina. 1991. “A Log-Linear Modeling Framework for Selective Mixing.”
Mathematical Biosciences 107: 349–77.
Morris, Martina, Mark S. Handcock, Carter T. Butts et al. 2014. “Temporal Exponential
Random Graph Models (TERGMs) for Dynamic Network Modeling in Statnet.” http://
rstudio-pubs-static.s3.amazonaws.com/383759_9d63861d14ec45e1a0f410b8e22b95ee
.html (accessed September 13, 2022).
Mouw, Ted, and Ashton M. Verdery. 2012. “Network Sampling with Memory:
A Proposal for More Efficient Sampling from Social Networks.” Sociological
Methodology 42(1): 206–56.
Mucha, Peter, Thomas Richardson, Kevin Macon, Mason Porter, and Jukka-Pekka
Onnela. 2010. “Community Structure in Time-Dependent, Multiscale, and
Multiplex Networks.” Science 328: 876–78.
Müller, Christophe, Barry Wellman, and Alexandre Marin. 1999. “How to Use SPSS to
Study Ego-Centered Networks.” Bulletin of Sociological Methodology/Bulletin de
Méthodologie Sociologique 64(1):83–100.
Munson, Ziad W. 2010. The Making of Pro-life Activists: How Social Movement
Mobilization Works. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
438 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressNadel, Siegfried Frederick. 2013 [1957]. The Theory of Social Structure. London:
Routledge.
Neal, Zachary P. 2017. “How Small Is It? Comparing Indices of Small Worldliness.”
Network Science 5: 30–44.
Newcomb, Theodore. 1961. The Acquaintance Process. New York: Holt, Reinhard &
Winston.
Newman, Mark E. J. 2003. “Properties of Highly Clustered Networks.” Physical
Review E 68(2): 026121.
2018. Networks, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
Newman, Mark E. J., and Michelle Girvan. 2004. “Finding and Evaluating Community
Structure in Networks.” Physical Review E 69(2): 026113.
Newman, Mark E. J., S. H. Strogatz, and D. J. Watts. 1999. “Random Graphs with
Arbitrary Degree Distributions and Their Applications.” Physical Review E 64:
7332–42.
Newman, Mark E. J., Duncan J. Watts, and Steven H. Strogatz. 2002. “Random Graph
Models of Social Networks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99
(suppl. 1): 2566–72.
Noel, Hans, and Brendan Nyhan. 2011. “The ‘Unfriending’ Problem: The Consequences
of Homophily in Friendship Retention for Causal Estimates of Social Influence.”
Social Networks 33(3): 211–18.
Nooy, Wouter de. 2003. “Fields and Networks: Correspondence Analysis and Social
Network Analysis in the Framework of Field Theory.” Poetics 31(5): 305–27.
Ogburn, Elizabeth L., and Tyler J. VanderWeele. 2014. “Causal Diagrams for
Interference.” Statistical Science 29(4): 559–78.
Opsahl, Tore. 2013. “Triadic Closure in Two-Mode Networks: Redefining the Global
and Local Clustering Coefficients.” Social Networks 35(2): 159–67.
Osgood, D. Wayne, Mark E. Feinberg, and Daniel T. Ragan. 2015. “Social Networks
and the Diffusion of Adolescent Problem Behavior: Reliable Estimates of Selection
and Influence from 6th through 9th Grade.” Prevention Science 16(6): 832–43.
Pachucki, Mark A., and Ronald L. Breiger. 2010. “Cultural Holes: Beyond Relationality
in Social Networks and Culture.” Annual Review of Sociology 36: 205–24.
Padgett, John F., and Christopher K. Ansell. 1993. “Robust Action and the Rise of the
Medici, 1400–1434.” American Journal of Sociology 98(6): 1259–319.
Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, and Hana Shepherd. 2012. “The Salience of Social Referents:
A Field Experiment on Collective Norms and Harassment Behavior in a School
Social Network.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 103(6): 899–915.
Papachristos, Andrew V. 2009. “Murder by Structure: Dominance Relations and the
Social Structure of Gang Homicide.” American Journal of Sociology 115(1): 74–128.
Papachristos, Andrew V., Christopher Wildeman, and Elizabeth Roberto. 2015.
“Tragic, but Not Random: The Social Contagion of Nonfatal Gunshot Injuries.”
Social Science & Medicine 125: 139–50.
Park, Patrick, Joshua Blumenstock, and Michael Macy. 2019. “The Strength of Long￾Range Ties in Population Scale Social Networks.” Science 362: 1410–13.
Pattison, Philippa. 1993. Algebraic Models for Social Networks. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Paulos, John Allen. 2011. “Why You’re Probably Less Popular Than Your Friends.”
Scientific American 304(2): 33.
References 439
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressPerry, Brea L., Bernice A. Pescosolido, and Stephen P. Borgatti. 2018. Egocentric
Network Analysis: Foundations, Methods, and Models. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Pescosolido, Bernice, and Beth Rubin. 2000. “The Web of Group Affiliations Revisited:
Social Life, Postmodernism, and Sociology.” American Sociological Review 65:
52–76.
Peterson, Richard A., and Roger M. Kern. 1996. “Changing Highbrow Taste: From
Snob to Omnivore.” American Sociological Review 61(5): 900–7.
Pimentel, Samuel D. 2014. “Choosing a Clustering: An A Posteriori Method for Social
Networks.” Journal of Social Structure 15(1): 1–21.
Podolny, Joel M. 2001. “Networks as the Pipes and Prisms of the Market.” American
Journal of Sociology 107(1): 33–60.
Popielarz, Pamela A., and Zachary P. Neal. 2007. “The Niche as a Theoretical Tool.”
Annual Review of Sociology 33(1): 65–84.
Porter, Mason A., and James P. Gleeson. 2016. Dynamical Systems on Networks:
A Tutorial. New York: Springer.
Portes, Alejandro. 1998. “Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications in Modern
Sociology.” Annual Review of Sociology 24: 1–24.
R Core Team. 2020. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. www.R-project.org
Ragan, Daniel T., D. Wayne Osgood, Nayan G. Ramirez, James Moody, and Scott D.
Gest. 2019. “A Comparison of Peer Influence Estimates from SIENA Stochastic
Actor-Based Models and from Conventional Regression Approaches.” Sociological
Methods & Research 51(1): 357–95.
Ragin, Charles, and Lisa M. Amoroso. 2018. Constructing Social Research: The Unity
and Diversity of Method. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rainie, Lee, and Barry Wellman. 2012. Networked: The New Social Operating System.
Boston: MIT Press.
Rawlings, Craig M. 2020. “Cognitive Authority and the Constraint of Belief Change in
Groups.” American Sociological Review 85(6): 992–2021.
Rawlings, Craig M., and Michael D. Bourgeois. 2004. “The Complexity of Institutional
Niches: Credentials and Organizational Differentiation in a Field of U.S. Higher
Education.” Poetics 32(6): 411–46.
Rawlings, Craig M., and Clayton Childress. 2019. “Emergent Meanings: Reconciling
Dispositional and Situational Accounts of Meaning-Making from Cultural
Objects.” American Journal of Sociology 124(6): 1763–809.
Rawlings, Craig M., and Noah E. Friedkin. 2017. “The Structural Balance Theory of
Sentiment Networks: Elaboration and Test.” American Journal of Sociology 123
(2): 510–48.
Rawlings, Craig M., and Daniel A. McFarland. 2011. “Influence Flows in the Academy:
Using Affiliation Networks to Assess Peer Effects among Researchers.” Social
Science Research 40(3): 1001–17.
Rawlings, Craig M., Daniel McFarland, Linus Dahlander, and Dan Wang. 2015.
“Streams of Thought: Knowledge Flows and Intellectual Cohesion in a
Multidisciplinary Era.” Social Forces 93: 1687–722.
Reich, Adam, and Peter Bearman. 2018. Working for Respect: Community and Conflict
at Walmart. New York: Columbia University Press.
440 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressRestivo, Michael, and Arnout Van de Rijt. 2012. “Experimental Study of Informal
Rewards in Peer Production.” PloS One 7(3): e34358.
Richards, William D., and Ronald E. Rice. 1981. “The NEGOPY Network Analysis
Program.” Social Networks 3: 215–33.
Ridgeway, Cecelia L. 2019. Status: Why Is It Everywhere? Why Does It Matter? New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
van de Rijt, Arnout. 2011. “The Micro-Macro Link for the Theory of Structural
Balance.” The Journal of Mathematical Sociology 35(1–3): 94–113.
2019. “Self-Correcting Dynamics in Social Influence Processes.” American Journal of
Sociology 124(5): 1468–95.
van de Rijt, Arnout, Soong Moon Kang, Michael Restivo, and Akshay Patil. 2014 “Field
Experiments of Success-Breeds-Success Dynamics.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111(19): 6934–39.
Rivera, A. 2016. Pedigree: How Elite Students Get Elite Jobs. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Rivera, Mark T., Sara B. Soderstrom, and Brian Uzzi. 2010. “Dynamics of Dyads in
Social Networks: Assortative, Relational, and Proximity Mechanisms.” Annual
Review of Sociology 36: 91–115.
Robalino, Juan David, and Michael Macy. 2018. “Peer Effects on Adolescent Smoking:
Are Popular Teens More Influential?” PloS One 13(7): e0189360.
Robins, Garry, Pip Pattison, Yuval Kalish, and Dean Lusher. 2007. “An Introduction to
Exponential Random Graph (P*) Models for Social Networks.” Social Networks
29(2): 173–91.
Rodan, Simon. 2011. “Choosing the ‘β’ Parameter when Using the Bonacich Power
Measure.” Journal of Social Structure 12(1): 1–23.
Roethlisberger, Fritz Jules, William John Dickson, and Harold A. Wright. 1947 [1939].
Management and the Worker: An Account of a Research Program Conducted by
the Western Electric Company, Hawthorne Works, Chicago. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Rogers, Everett. 2003 [1962]. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Rosenbaum, James E. “Changing the Geography of Opportunity by Expanding
Residential Choice: Lessons from the Gautreaux Program.” Housing Policy
Debate 6(1): 231–69.
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 681–704.
Salathé, Marcel, Maria Kazandjieva, Jung Woo Lee, Philip Levis, Marcus W. Feldman,
and James H. Jones. 2010. “A High-Resolution Human Contact Network for
Infectious Disease Transmission.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 107(51): 22020–25.
Salganik, Matthew J., Peter Sheridan Dodds, and Duncan J. Watts. 2006. “Experimental
Study of Inequality and Unpredictability in an Artificial Cultural Market.” Science
311(5762): 854–56.
Sampson, Samuel. 1969. “Crisis in a Cloister.” Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Cornell University.
Schaefer, David R., Steven A. Haas, and Nicholas J. Bishop. 2012. “A Dynamic Model
of US Adolescents’ Smoking and Friendship Networks.” American Journal of
Public Health 102(6): e12–e18.
References 441
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressSchaefer, David R., and Christopher Steven Marcum. 2020. “Modeling Network
Dynamics.” Pp. 254–87 In The Oxford Handbook of Social Networks, edited by
Ryan Light and James Moody. New York: Oxford University Press.
Scheff, Thomas. 1988. “Shame and Conformity: The Deference-Emotion System.”
American Sociological Review 53: 395–406.
Schegloff, Emanuel A. 2007. Sequence Organization in Interaction: A Primer in
Conversation Analysis I. Vol. 1. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schwartz, Ori, and Guy Shani. 2016. “Culture in Mediated Interaction: Political
Defriending on Facebook and the Limits of Networked Individualism.” American
Journal of Cultural Sociology 4: 385–421.
Scott, John. 2002. Social Networks: Critical Concepts in Sociology. Milton Park: UK:
Taylor & Francis.
Scott, W. Richard. 1998. Organizations: Rational, Natural, and Open Systems, 4th ed.
Hoboken, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Sewell Jr., William H. 1992. “A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and
Transformation.” American Journal of Sociology 98: 1–29.
Shakya, Holly B., Derek Stafford, D. Alex Hughes et al. 2017. “Exploiting Social
Influence to Magnify Population-Level Behaviour Change in Maternal and Child
Health: Study Protocol for a Randomised Controlled Trial of Network Targeting
Algorithms in Rural Honduras.” BMJ Open 7: e012996. https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-012996
Shalizi, Cosma Rohilla, and Andrew C. Thomas. 2011. “Homophily and Contagion Are
Generically Confounded in Observational Social Network Studies.” Sociological
Methods & Research 40(2): 211–39.
Sherif, Muzafer. 1937. “An Experimental Approach to the Study of Attitudes.”
Sociometry 1(1/2): 90–98.
Sherif, Muzafer, O. J. Harvey, B. Jack White, William R. Hood, and Carolyn W. Sherif.
1961. Intergroup Conflict and Cooperation: The Robbers Cave Experiment.
Norman, OK: The University Book Exchange.
Shizuka, Daizaburo, and David B. McDonald. 2012. “A Social Network Perspective on
Measurements of Dominance Hierarchies.” Animal Behaviour 83: 925–34.
Simmel, Georg. 1909. “The Problem of Sociology.” American Journal of Sociology 15
(3): 289–320.
1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
1955. Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliations. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
1957 [1904]. “Fashion.” American Journal of Sociology 62(6): 130–55.
2010 [1908]. Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliations. New York: Simon &
Schuster.
Skvoretz, John, Thomas J. Fararo, and Filip Agneessens. 2004. “Advances in Biased Net
Theory: Definitions, Derivations, and Estimations.” Social Networks 26(2):
113–39.
Small, Mario Luis. 2009. Unanticipated Gains: Origins of Network Inequality in
Everyday Life. New York: Oxford University Press.
Small, Mario L., and Laura Adler. 2019. “The Role of Space in the Formation of Social
Ties.” Annual Review of Sociology 45: 111–32.
Smith, Jeffrey A. 2012. “Macrostructure from Microstructure: Generating Whole
Systems from Ego Networks.” Sociological Methodology 42(1):155–205.
442 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressSmith, Jeffrey A., and Jessica Burow. 2020. “Using Ego Network Data to Inform Agent￾Based Models of Diffusion.” Sociological Methods & Research 49(4): 1018–63.
Smith, Jeffrey A., Miller McPherson, and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 2014. “Social Distance in
the United States: Sex, Race, Religion, Age, and Education Homophily among
Confidants, 1985 to 2004.” American Sociological Review 79(3): 432–56.
Smith, Jeffrey A., and James Moody. 2013. “Structural Effects of Network Sampling
Coverage I: Nodes Missing at Random.” Social Networks 35(4): 652–68.
Smith, Jeffrey A., James Moody, and Jonathan H. Morgan. 2017. “Network Sampling
Coverage II: The Effect of Non-Random Missing Data on Network Measurement.”
Social Networks 48: 78–99.
Smith, Natalie R., Paul N. Zivich, Leah M. Frerichs, James Moody, and Allison E.
Aiello. 2020. “A Guide for Choosing Community Detection Algorithms in Social
Network Studies: The Question Alignment Approach.” American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 59(4): 597–605.
Smith, Sandra Susan. 2005.“‘Don’t Put My Name on It’: Social Capital Activation and
Job-Finding Assistance among the Black Urban Poor.” American Journal of
Sociology 111(1): 1–57.
Smith, Sanne, Frank Van Tubergen, Ineke Maas, and Daniel A. McFarland. 2016.
“Ethnic Composition and Friendship Segregation: Differential Effects for
Adolescent Natives and Immigrants.” American Journal of Sociology 121(4):
1223–72.
Snijders, Tom A. B. 2001. “The Statistical Evaluation of Social Network Dynamics.”
Sociological Methodology 31(1): 361–95.
2002. “Markov Chain Monte Carlo Estimation of Exponential Random Graph
Models.” Journal of Social Structure 3(2):1–40.
2011. “Statistical Models for Social Networks.” Annual Review of Sociology 37:
131–53.
2016. “The Multiple Flavors of Multilevel Issues for Networks.” Pp. 15–46 in
Multilevel Network Analysis in the Social Sciences: Theory, Methods, and
Applications, edited by Emmanuel Lazega and Tom A. B. Snijders. New York:
Springer.
Snijders, Tom A. B., Phillipa E. Pattison, Gary L. Robins, and Mark S. Handcock. 2006.
“New Specifications for Exponential Random Graph Models.” Sociological
Methodology 36(1): 99–153.
Snijders, Tom A. B., Gerhard G. Van de Bunt, and Christian E. G. Steglich. 2010.
“Introduction to Stochastic Actor-Based Models for Network Dynamics.” Social
Networks 32(1): 44–60.
Son, Joonmo. 2020. Social Capital. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Sperber, Dan. 1985. “Anthropology and Psychology: Towards an Epidemiology of
Representations.” Man 20: 73–89.
Spoth, R., M. Greenberg, K. Bierman, and C. Redmond. 2004. “PROSPER Community￾University Partnership Model for Public Education Systems: Capacity-Building for
Evidence-Based, Competence-Building Prevention.” Prevention Science 5(1):
31–39.
Srivastava, Sameer B., and Mahzarin R. Banaji. 2011. “Culture, Cognition, and
Collaborative Networks in Organizations.” American Sociological Review 76(2):
207–33.
References 443
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressStadtfeld, Christoph, James Hollway, and Per Block. 2017. “Dynamic Network Actor
Models: Investigating Coordination Ties through Time.” Sociological Methodology
47: 1–40.
Stofer, Rafaël. 2008. “Catching Up with Big Fish in the Big Pond? Multi-Level Network
Analysis through Linked Design.” Social Networks 30(2): 159–76.
Stoltz, Dustin S., and Marshall A. Taylor. 2019. “Concept Mover’s Distance: Measuring
Concept Engagement via Word Embeddings in Texts.” Journal of Computational
Social Science 1: 293–313.
Streib, Jessi. 2015. The Power of the Past: Understanding Cross-Class Marriages. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Sun, Min, Kenneth A. Frank, William R. Penuel, and Chong Min Kim. 2013. “How
External Institutions Penetrate Schools through Formal and Informal Leaders.”
Educational Administration Quarterly 49(4): 610–44.
Swidler, Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.” American Sociological
Review 51: 273–86.
2001. Talk of Love: How Culture Matters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
2013. Talk of Love: How Culture Matters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Szell, Michael, Renaud Lambiotte, and Stefan Thurner. 2010. “Multirelational
Organization of Large-Scale Social Networks in an Online World.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 107(31): 13636–41.
Taylor, Howard. 1970. Balance in Small Groups. New York: Von Nostrand Reinhold.
Textor, Johannes, Benito Van der Zander,Mark S. Gilthorpe,Maciej Liśkiewicz, and George
T. H. Ellison. 2016. “Robust Causal Inference Using Directed Acyclic Graphs: The
R Package ‘dagitty’.” International Journal of Epidemiology 45(6): 1887–94.
Thibaut, John W., and Harold H. Kelley. 1959. The Social Psychology of Groups.
London: Routledge.
Thomas, W. I. 1923. The Unadjusted Girl with Cases and Standpoint for Behavioral
Analysis. Boston: Little Brown.
Thomas, W. I., & D. S. Thomas. 1928. The Child in America: Behavior Problems and
Programs. New York: A. A. Knopf.
Tomasello, Michael. 2019. Becoming Human: A Theory of Ontogeny. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press.
Traag, V. A., L. Waltman, and N. J. van Eck. 2019. “From Louvain to Leiden:
Guaranteeing Well-Connected Communities.” Scientific Reports 9: 5233.
Tsvetovat, Maksim, Jeff Reminga, and Kathleen M. Carley. 2004. “DyNetML: Interchange
Format for Rich Social Network Data.” SSRN Electronic Journal. https://papers.ssrn
.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2729286 (accessed May 5, 2023).
Tufte, Edward R. 2001. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, CT:
Graphics Press [Minard, Charles Joseph. 1861. Tableaux Graphiques et Cartes
Figuratives de M. Minard, 1845–1869, Bibliotheque de l’Ecole Nationale des
Ponts et Chaussees, Paris, item 28.].
Turco, Catherine, and Ezra Zuckerman. 2017. “Verstehen for Sociology: Comment on
Watts.” American Journal of Sociology 122: 1272–91.
Turner, Jonathan H. 2012. Theoretical Principles of Sociology, Volume 3:
Mesodynamics. Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media.
Tutte, W. T. 1963. “How to Draw a Graph.” Proceedings of the London Mathematical
Society 13: 743–68.
444 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressUgander, Johan, and Hao Yin. 2020. “Randomized Graph Cluster Randomization.”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.02297.
Underwood, Ted. 2019. Distant Horizons: Digital Evidence and Literary Chance.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Uzzi, Brian. 1999. “Embeddedness in the Making of Financial Capital: How Social
Relations and Networks Benefit Firms Seeking Financing.” American Sociological
Review 64(4): 481–505.
Valeeva, Diliara, Eelke, M. Heemskerk, and Frank W. Takes. 2020. “The Duality of
Firms and Directors in Board Interlock Networks: A Relational Event Modeling
Approach.” Social Networks 62: 68–79.
Valente, Thomas. 1995. Network Models of the Diffusion of Innovations. New York:
Hampton Press.
1996. “Social Network Thresholds and the Diffusion of Innovations.” Social
Networks 18: 69–89.
2012. “Network Interventions.” Science 337(6090): 49–53.
2015. “Social Networks and Health Behavior.” Chapter 11 in Health Behavior:
Theory, Research, and Practice. 5th ed., edited by Karen Glanz, Barbara K.
Rimer, and K. Viswanath. Weinheim: Wiley.
Valente, Thomas W., and George G. Vega Yon. 2020. “Diffusion/Contagion Processes
on Social Networks.” Health Education & Behavior 47(2): 235–48.
Van Duijn, Marijtje A. J., Tom A. B. Snijders, and Bonne J. H. Zijlstra. 2004. “p2:
A Random Effects Model with Covariates for Directed Graphs.” Statistica
Neerlandica 58(2): 234–54.
VanderWeele, Tyler J. 2011. “Sensitivity Analysis for Contagion Effects in Social
Networks.” Sociological Methods & Research 40(2): 240–55.
Vaughan, Diane. 1986. Uncoupling: Turning Points in Intimate Relationships. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Vicinanza, Paul, Amir Goldberg, and Sameer Srivastava. 2020 “Who Sees the Future?
A Deep Learning Language Model Demonstrates the Vision Advantage of Being
Small.” Working Paper, Stanford Graduate School of Business.
Vitale, Maria Prosperina, Giovanni C. Porzio, and Patrick Doreian. 2016. “Examining
the Effect of Social Influence on Student Performance through Network
Autocorrelation Models.” Journal of Applied Statistics 43(1): 115–27.
Wang, Dan J., Xiaolin Shi, Daniel A. McFarland, and Jure Leskovec. 2012. “Measurement
Error in Network Data: A Re-Classification.” Social Networks 34(4): 396–409.
Wang, Dan J., and Sarah Soule. 2012. “Social Movement Organizational Collaboration:
Networks of Learning and the Diffusion of Protest Tactics, 1960–1995.” American
Journal of Sociology 117: 1674–722.
Wasserman, Stanley, and Katherine Faust. 1994. Social Network Analysis. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wasserman, Stanley, and Philippa Pattison. 1996. “Logit Models and Logistic
Regressions for Social Networks: I. An Introduction to Markov Graphs and p.”
Psychometrika 61(3): 401–25.
Watts, Duncan J. 1999. Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks between Order and
Randomness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
2014. “Common Sense and Sociological Explanations.” American Journal of
Sociology 120: 313–51.
References 445
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressWatts, Duncan J., and Steven H. Strogatz. 1998. “Collective Dynamics of ‘Small-World’
Networks.” Nature 393(6684): 440.
Weir, William H., Scott Emmons, Ryan Gibson, Dane Taylor, and Peter J. Mucha.
2018. “Post-Processing Partitions to Identify Domains of Modularity
Optimization.” Algorithms 10: 93.
Whalen, Jack, and Don H. Zimmerman. 1998. “Observations on the Display and
Management of Emotion in Naturally Occurring Activities: The Case of
‘Hysteria’ in Calls to 9-1-1.” Social Psychology Quarterly 61(2): 141–59.
White, Douglas R. 2005. REGGE. http://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/REGGE/ (accessed
December 5, 2005).
White, Douglas R., and Frank Harary. 2001. “The Cohesiveness of Blocks in Social
Networks: Node Connectivity and Conditional Density.” Sociological
Methodology 31(1): 305–59.
White, Douglas R., and Karl P. Reitz. 1983. “Graph and Semigroup Homomorphisms
on Networks of Relations.” Social Networks 5: 193–234.
White, Harrison C. [1965] 2008. “Notes on the Constituents of Social Structure (Memo
by Michael Schwartz).” Sociologica 1/2008.
1970a. “Matching, Vacancies, and Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy 78(1):
97–105.
1970b. “Search Parameters for the Small World Problem.” Social Forces 49(2):
259–64.
1992. Identity and Control: A Structural Theory of Social Action. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
White, Harrison C., Scott A. Boorman, and Ronald L. Breiger. 1976. “Social Structure
from Multiple Networks. I. Blockmodels of Roles and Positions.” American Journal
of Sociology 81(4): 730–80.
Wimmer, Andreas, and Kevin Lewis. 2010. “Beyond and Below Racial Homophily:
ERG Models of a Friendship Network Documented on Facebook.” American
Journal of Sociology 116(2): 583–642.
Wuthnow, Robert. 1993. Communities of Discourse: Ideology and Social Structure in
the Reformation, the Enlightenment, and European Socialism. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Yeung, King-To. 2005. “What Does Love Mean? Exploring Network Culture in Two
Network Settings.” Social Forces 84: 391–420.
Zachary, Wayne W. 1977. “An Information Flow Model for Conflict and Fission in
Small Groups.” Journal of Anthropological Research 33(4): 452–73.
Zerubavel, Noam, Peter S. Bearman, Jochen Weber, and Kevin N. Ochsner. 2015.
“Neural Mechanisms Tracking Popularity in Real-World Social Networks.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112: 15072–77.
Zuckerman, Ezra. 2016. “Optimal Distinctiveness Revisited: An Integrative Framework
for Understanding the Balance between Differentiation and Conformity in
Individual and Organizational Identities.” In The Oxford Handbook of
Organizational Identity, edited by Michael G. Pratt, Majken Schultz, Blake E.
Ashforth, and Davide Ravasi. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
446 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.020 Published online by Cambridge University PressIndex
Acerbi, Alberto., 342, 362
actor-level differences, 129
actors, 3, 21, 50, 56
adams, jimi., xvii, 86, 152, 388
Aderman, David., 405
adjacency matrix, 58, 62, 97, 179, 201, 208,
214, 221, 224, 226, 283, 313, 318, 391,
413, 415
Adler, Laura., 308
affective, 4, 28, 49, 120, 126–27, 145, 356, 402
affiliation data, 246, 249–51, 267
affiliation matrix, 59, 258, 286, 291, 415
agency, 19, 32, 41, 43, 117, 121, 130
Agneessens, Filip., 16
Ahuja, R.K., 348
Albert, Réka., 14, 349, 362–63
Alford, Richard, 270, 286
Almack, J.C., 6
ambage, 154
ambiguity, 41, 121, 154, 159, 191, 215, 245
ambivalence, 154
Anscombe, Francis J., xv, 88
Ansell, Christopher., 44, 53, 193, 235
antisymmetric, 52, 145, 207
Aral, Sinan., 380, 388
assortative mixing, 349
Azoulay, Pierre., 378
Bagde, Surendrakumar., 378
Bail, Christopher., xvii, 298, 407
balance theory
structural balance theory, 157–58, 208, 311
Bandelj, Nina., 28
Barabási, Albert-László., 14–16, 362
Barnes, John Arundel., 6
Baronchelli, Andrea., 417
Barthélemy, Marc., 93
Batagelj, Vladimir., 12, 180, 214, 241, 245, 394
Bearman, Peter S., ix, xvii, 32, 35, 38–39, 44,
52, 100, 119, 153, 159, 239, 245, 311,
363, 406
Beck, P. A., 370
Becker, Haward S., 298
Becker, Howard S., 407
Becker’s heuristic
Becker, O., 214
belief networks, 404
Bender-deMoll, Skye., 28, 114
Benton, Richard., 185
Berger, Peter., 22
Bevilacqua, D., 405
bicomponent, 184
Birkett, Michelle., 72, 86
Bishop, Nicholas., 384
Blasius, Jorg., 262
Blau, Peter M., xii, xvii, 6, 21, 40, 42–43, 119,
133, 248, 265, 335
Block, Per., xi, xiii, 187, 241, 336, 386,
399
blocking matrix, 185
blockmodel, xv, 44, 214, 221, 225, 239
automorphic equivalence, 222, 237
local equivalence, 223
regular equivalence, 222, 227, 399
structural equivalence, 222, 224, 226, 229,
232, 240, 243, 257, 283
447
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressblocks, 185, 221, 224, 226, 229, 234–35, 237,
239, 242–43
Blondel, Vincent D., 180
Blumenstock, Joshua., 390
Bogdanov, Petko., 287, 293
Boorman, Scott., xvii, 239, 241, 245
Borgatti, Stephen P., xv, 16, 49, 79, 142,
195–96, 215, 255, 267, 356
Borsboom, D., 289
Bourdieu, Pierre., 31, 43, 120, 125, 274, 276,
280, 285, 298
Bourgeois, Michael., 267, 277
Boutyline, Andrei., 287, 289
Boyd, Robert., 270
Brailly, Julien., 339
Braines, Dave., 144
Brandes, Ulrik., 334, 391
Brashears, Laura., 158, 311, 403, 405
Brashears, Matthew E., 158, 311, 403, 405
Breiger, Ronald L., xvii, 6, 86, 239, 241, 245,
252, 254, 258, 261, 267, 270–71
Brennecke, Julia., 339
brokerage, 136, 194, 202–3, 312
Bryson, Bethany., 287, 404
Bullo, Francesco., 367
Burris, Val., 251
Burt, Ronald S., xvii, 38, 40, 49, 69, 86, 135,
141, 197, 200, 202–3, 257, 341, 349, 362,
399
Butts, Carter T., xvii–xviii, 14, 86, 207, 334,
338–39, 386
Cairns, Beverley., 75, 179, 402
Cairns, Robert B., 75, 179, 402
Cameron, A Colin., 311
Carley, Kathleen M., 79, 298, 402–3
Cartwright, Dorwin., 123, 157–58, 365
CATNET, 163, 283, 406
Centola, Damon., 171, 342, 355–56, 361–62, 417
centrality
betweenness, 179, 198–99, 204, 237, 257,
342, 391, 397
closeness, 106, 168, 198–99, 204, 237, 397
degree, xi, 50, 63, 103, 139–40, 171, 173, 175,
194, 196, 198–201, 206, 214, 222, 317,
322, 349, 384–85, 394–95
eigenvector, 200–2
out-degree, 50, 140, 194, 198, 317–18, 322,
384–85
power, 7, 198, 200–1
centralization, 203, 205, 208, 215, 240, 312,
325
Cerulo, Karen A., 286
Chase, Ivan D., 43, 114, 123, 159, 195, 261,
336, 375
Childress, Clayton., 376, 407
Christakis, Nicholas A., 32, 119, 187, 217, 342,
370, 388, 410, 417
Chu, James., 214
Chua, David., 93
closed system, 302
clustering coefficient, 167, 171, 256
cognitive social structure, 72, 402, 404
Cohen, J., 313, 370
Cohen-Cole, Ethan., 370
cohesion, vii, 13, 23, 32, 38, 138, 146, 161–62,
164–66, 169, 171, 173, 177–78, 180,
184–85, 187–89, 191, 195, 202, 205, 217,
243, 248, 251, 265, 271, 274, 277, 305,
341, 348, 351, 362
Coleman, James Samuel., xvii, 15–16, 43, 71,
120, 187, 238, 305, 362
Collins, Randall., 121, 126, 191, 244, 336, 342
community detection, 164, 175, 178, 180, 183,
187, 208, 214, 221, 232, 244, 394, 412,
416
cliques, xi, 16, 125, 176–77, 187, 203, 208,
216, 256, 305, 324
cluster analysis, 232, 234, 400
hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA), 230
k-core, 177–78, 184
k-plex, 178
modularity, 113, 174–75, 178–82, 234, 237,
394, 399
modularity maximization, 178, 181
n-clan, 178
n-clique, 178
walktrap, 180–81
complementarities, 124
components, 58, 167–68, 184, 256, 362
composition, 132
CONCOR, xi, 229, 231–32, 237, 239, 243,
286
congruency, 121, 123, 135, 140
connectionist approach, 33, 35, 162, 244, 364,
393
connectivity, xi, 10, 62, 138, 148, 162, 164–70,
173, 175, 177, 180, 184–85, 195, 198,
205, 256, 298, 318, 322, 347–48, 392, 417
consolidated social structure, 265, 280
consolidation, 133
Contractor, N., 86
Cook, James, 35
Cook, Karen, xvii
448 Index
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressCook, William, 311
Cooper, Ralph., 405
correlational class analysis, 287, 295
correspondences, 262, 276–78
counterfactual, 147
Cramer, A. O., 289
Crane, Diana., 271–72
Crano, William D., 405
Crossley, Nick., 31, 40, 298
cross-sectional networks, 312
culture and networks, 4, 119, 270–71, 285,
287, 407
cutpoints, 169, 261
Dahlander, Linus., xvii, 308, 311, 333
data formats
adjacency matrix, 58–59, 62, 97, 179, 201,
208, 214, 221, 224, 226, 283, 313, 318,
391, 413, 415
affiliation, 59, 246, 249–51, 258, 267, 286,
291, 415
bipartite, 59, 173, 253, 255, 267
undirected, 52, 145, 149, 157, 167, 386
Davis, Allison., 6, 54, 414
Davis, James A., 15, 123, 158, 209
De Nooy, Wouter., 12, 298
DeGroot, Morris H., 194, 366
Dekker, David., 316
dendrogram, 232, 234, 400
density, x–xi, 58, 135–36, 140, 145, 148, 164,
166–67, 169, 173, 175–76, 214, 226, 272,
301, 314, 318, 342
Devlin, Jacob., 410
diameter, 168, 201, 350
Dickson, William., x, 16, 99, 151
Diehl, David., xvii, 8, 121
diffusion, vii, xii, xviii, 13, 33, 38, 55, 58, 164,
170, 179, 185, 198–200, 270, 307, 340,
342, 345–51, 353–58, 360–65, 370–72,
388, 408–9, 412
serial, 393
thresholds, xiii, 355, 359, 361
tipping points, 360
DiMaggio, Paul., xvii, 271, 287, 357
directed acyclic graph (DAG), 52
Dodds, Peter., 376
Doreian, Patrick., 241, 245, 366, 369
Douglas, Mary., 32, 191
duality, 51, 246, 249–50, 252, 257, 259, 261,
265, 267–68, 271–74, 276–77, 286–87,
297
Dunphy, Dexter C., 413
Durkheim, Emile., 161, 164, 191, 217, 244,
250, 271–72, 341
Duxbury, Scott., 333, 338
dyad census, 145, 147, 149, 306
dyadic processes, 311, 406
dyads, x, 22, 43, 143–46, 148, 153–54,
158–59, 161, 198, 224, 283, 301, 307,
310–11, 316, 338, 346, 398, 405–6
Eastwick, Paul., 132
edge betweenness, 179
edgelist, xv, 62–63, 414
edges, xii, 47, 50, 81, 83, 97, 103, 169, 198,
257, 317, 319–20, 322, 324, 347, 353, 391
egocentric network analysis, 68–70, 117–18,
127–28, 131–32, 134–36, 138, 142, 144,
148, 202
emic, 70, 78–79
Emirbayer, Mustafa., 27, 32, 40, 43, 117–18,
270
ergm
degeneracy, 324, 338
ethics, 84
etic, 71, 79
Euclidian distance, 231, 233, 283
Euler, Leonhard., 6, 45–46, 54
Everett, Martin., xv, 16, 195–96, 215, 255,
267, 363
exchange, 4, 32–33, 37, 39, 44, 49, 79, 99, 119,
147, 189, 193, 201, 218, 221, 228, 245,
335, 357, 369, 374, 402
exchange theory, 201, 374
expansive, 131
factor analysis, 179, 262, 280–81, 283
Fagiolo, Giorgio., 167
Faloutsos, Christos., 6
Fararo, Thomas., 172, 347
Faris, Robert., 52, 100, 215
Faust, Katherine., 16, 148, 152, 159, 220, 231,
240, 255, 257
Faye, Malick., 339
Feehan, Dennis M., 347
Feinberg, Mark., 72, 387, 411
Feld, Scott L., 7, 247, 250, 267, 308, 330
Felmlee, Diane H., 215, 311, 330
Fernandez, Roberto., 138, 197
field, 275–77
Fine, Gary Alan., 407
Finkel, Eli., 132
Fiske, Alan Page., 191
Flache, Andreas., 40, 388
Index 449
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressFligstein, Neil., 275
flows, 49, 55, 170, 299, 340–42, 356, 358, 361,
364, 372, 375, 398
Fournier, Marcel., 272
Fowler, James H., 342, 370, 388
Frank, Kenneth A., 84, 180, 387
Frank, Ove., 319
Freeman, John, 264
Freeman, Linton C., 6, 14, 90, 114, 174, 187,
196, 204–5, 261
Friedkin, Noah E., xvii, 7, 157–58, 165, 170,
194, 273, 365–67, 376, 389
Friedland, Roger., 270, 286
Fuhse, Jan A., xvii, 28, 40, 298, 403
functionalism, 23, 32, 217
Gallagher, Colin., 339
Galvez, Sebastian Munoz-Najar., 295, 297
Gardner, Burleigh., 6
Gardner, Mary., 6
Garfinkel, Harold., 121
Garip, Filiz., 357
Garton, L., 77
Geertz, Clifford., 270, 285
Gelbach, Jonah., 311
Gibson, David, 28, 337
Giddens, Anthony., 41, 43, 118, 123
Girvan, Michelle., 179
Goffman, Erving., 121, 216, 220, 243
Goldberg, Amir., xvii, 40, 287, 376, 404, 408, 410
Gondal, Neha., 30
Goodreau, Steven M., 308, 325, 330, 339
Goodwin, Jeff., 27, 32, 117
Gould, Roger V., x, xvii, 44, 123, 138, 191,
197, 214–15, 359, 370
Granovetter, Mark S., 6–7, 75, 135, 170, 188,
311, 358–59, 361
graph-level indicators, 166, 168, 173
graphs, 47, 316, 347
Greenacre, Michael., 262
group processes, 407
Guilbeault, Douglas., 417
Guillaume, Jean., 388
Haas, Steven., 384
habitus, 274, 276
Haidt, Jonathan., 32
Hallinan, Maureen T., xvii, 159–60, 336
Hamilton, William L., 410
Handcock, Mark S., 6, 169, 324–26, 339, 349,
362–63
Hannan, Michael T., 264
Harary, Frank., 93, 123, 157–58
Harris, K.M., 314
Hasan, Sharique., xvii, 376, 378
Hawley, Amos H., 264
Haynie, Dana L., 369
Healy, Kieran., 89, 105, 113
heatmaps, 394
Heemskerk, Eelke M., 251
Heider, Fritz., x, 6, 123, 155, 158, 170, 209,
213, 311, 381
Henrich, Joseph., 32, 119, 217
Heritage, John., 28
hierarchical embedding, 95, 100, 113
hierarchy, 101, 138, 158, 190, 194, 198, 203,
205, 212, 240, 318
Higgins, E. Tory., 119
Hinde, Robert A., ix, 24, 30, 33, 217, 249, 334
Hochschild, Arlie., 306
Hoff, Peter D., 326
Holland, Paul W., 152, 313
Hollis, Martin., 21
Hollway, James., 336, 386
Homans, George C., 248, 309, 374
homologies, 31, 285
homophily, 35, 121, 132, 138, 148, 157, 306,
325, 333, 337, 346, 349, 372, 383, 392,
398, 411, 418
Hunter, David R., 325
Hunzaker, M.B. Fallin., 356, 408
Ibarra, Herminia., 403
identification strategies, 304, 377
image matrix, 226, 241
imbalances, 127, 155, 381
inbreeding homophily, 122, 306
in-degree, 50, 103, 194, 198, 214, 317, 322,
336, 385
informal structures, 133, 191
information centrality, 199
interaction moves, 28
interactions, ix, 1, 8, 19, 21, 30, 33, 35, 38, 41,
46, 78, 89, 118, 125, 131, 159, 162, 190,
217, 246, 270, 274, 293, 304, 340, 375,
390, 403, 410
interactome, 23
interdependence, 10, 314, 326, 359
international relations, 409
invisible colleges, 272
Isakov, Alexander., 410
isolates, 23, 62, 137, 350
isomorphic, 149, 221, 236, 316
isomorphic classes, 149, 237
450 Index
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressJackson, Matthew O., 7, 71
Johnsen, Eugene C., 7, 123, 194, 212, 365
Jones, James Holland., 344, 349
Jurafsky, Dan., 287, 410
Kairam, Sanjay Ram., 411
Kandel, Denise B., 371, 381
Kaplanis, Joanna., x, 102
Kashima, Yoshihisa., 356
Kashy, Deborah., 311
k-connected, 184
k-core, 177
Kemper, Theodore D., 191
Kennedy, Peter E., 313
Kenny, David A., 311, 370
Kim, David A., 376
Kim, Ji Youn, 321
Kitts, James., 8, 31, 49, 308, 330, 405
Kleinberg, Jon M., 6
Koskinen, Johan., 326
Kossinets, Gueorgi., 80
k-plex, 178
Krackhardt, David., 75, 80, 118, 207, 214,
313, 402–3
Kreager, Derek A., 413
Krivitsky, Pavel N., 327
Krosnick, Jon A., 78
Kunda, Ziva., 408
Kuskova, Valentina., 302, 316
Kwon, Oh-Hyun., 93
Lambiotte, Renaud., 40
Lamont, Michele., 272
Landau, H. G., 214
Langrebe, Thomas., 297
Laumann, Edward O., xvii, 70
Lawler, Edward J., 248, 374
Lazarsfeld, Paul F., 122, 306
Leal, Diego., 31, 405
Lee, Cheol-Sung., 188
Lee, Nancy Howell., 16
left truncation, 371
Leifer, Eric M., 108, 123, 335, 391
Leinhardt, Samuel., 123, 152, 158, 209, 313, 317
Leskovec, Jure., 6, 81
Lewis, Kevin., 77, 133, 277, 307, 321, 376
Lin, Nan., 35, 341, 357
Lindgren, Karl-Oskar., 312
living systems, 4
Lizardo, Omar., 277, 308
Lorrain, Francois., 6
Lusher, Dean., 302, 326
Lyons, Russell., 370
Ma, Kwan., 93, 102
Macy, Michael W., 40, 171, 356, 359, 361,
369, 390
Mandel, Michael J., 235
Manski, Charles F., 371
Marcum, Christopher., 302, 333
Mark, Noah., 264
Marsden, Peter V., 69, 75, 359
Martin, John Levi., xvii, 40, 123, 145, 190,
214, 267, 270, 275, 286, 314, 325, 336,
404, 411
Marwell, Gerald., 359
Mäs, Michael., 40
Matthew effect, 126, 194, 309
McAdam, Doug., 275
McCormick, Tyler H., 347
McDonald, David., 214
McFarland, Daniel A., ix, xviii, 13, 22, 28, 81,
96, 111, 121, 132–33, 257, 305, 308, 311,
333, 376, 397, 406, 411
McLean, Paul., xvii, 271
McMillan, Cassie., 311
McPherson, J. Miller., xvii, 3, 35, 121, 264,
306, 406
Mead, George Herbert., 3, 38, 249
measurement issues, 372
mechanical systems, 4, 302
mechanisms, 24, 33, 37, 40, 117, 122, 148,
157, 175, 261, 303, 306, 321, 326, 334,
336, 341, 355, 362, 373, 386, 404, 408
Melamed, David., 418
memberships, 4, 41, 49, 83, 141, 177, 247, 256,
265, 278
Merton, Robert K., 41, 122, 126, 194, 306
Mesoudi, Alex., 342
methodological transactionalism, 8
methodological transparency, 92
Milgram, Stanley., 170, 347, 375
Miller, Douglas., xvii, 311
Milner, Murray., 125, 303
Mische, Ann., xviii, 32, 40, 117, 270
mixing matrix, 134, 237
Mizruchi, Mark., 187, 251
Mohr, John W., xvii, 267, 270, 285, 293
Molloy, Michael., 347
Montgomery, James D., 156, 311
Moody, James., ix, xii, xviii, 13, 28, 52, 72,
80, 83, 89, 96, 100, 105, 108, 113, 119,
122, 134, 178, 180, 184–85, 273, 311,
330
Index 451
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressMoreno, Jacob Levi., x, 2, 90, 97, 103, 106,
108, 340, 390, 412
Morgan, Jonathan., xviii, 81, 84
Morris, Martina., xii, xviii, 69, 134, 169, 308,
330, 335, 362
motifs, x, 144, 149, 311
Mrvar, Andrej., xviii, 12, 180, 394
Mucha, Peter J., x, xviii, 113, 178, 416
Müller, Christophe., 128
multidimensional scaling (MDS), 95, 283
multilayer networks, 79, 93, 113, 326, 413
multiple connectivity degree score, 198
multiplexity, 42, 126, 140, 333, 412
Munson, Ziad W., 407
Nadel, Siegfried Frederick., 6, 26, 40, 217, 220
Neal, Zachary P., 172
network density, 166, 226
network models
endogenous, 24, 33, 39, 123, 133, 146, 157,
244, 301, 304, 308, 311, 321, 326, 332,
336, 366, 371, 385, 397, 407
sensitivity, 83
new experience, 120, 124, 126, 132
Newman, Mark E.J., 6, 172, 179, 256
niche, 264–66, 271, 307
Nicolaides, Christos., 380
node, 22, 33, 47, 49
node set, 48, 67, 70, 105
nodes, 63, 69, 75, 79, 85, 128–29, 131–33,
135, 137, 139–40, 157, 165, 201, 280,
391, 397, 408
Noel, Hans., 308
Nohria, N., 402
nominalist approaches, 67, 70, 72, 75–76,
78–79
Nooy, Wouter de., 12, 274, 298
Nyhan, Brendan., 308
object, 2–3
Ogburn, Elizabeth L., 371
one-mode networks, 50, 58, 144, 172, 246,
249, 253, 255, 325, 414
Onnela, Jukka., 188
optimal distinctiveness, 124, 308
Osgood, D. Wayne., 72, 387, 411
out-degree, 50, 131, 140, 194, 198, 214,
317–18, 322, 384–85
Padgett, John F., xvii, 44, 53, 193, 235
palette, 88, 106
Paluck, Elizabeth Levy., 376
Papachristos, Andrew V., 118, 342, 369, 389
Park, Patrick., 390
participation shifts, 336
path distance, 81, 171, 199
patterns of interactions, 2, 297, 336
Pattison, Philippa., 220, 244–45, 313, 319, 321
Paulos, John Allen., 7
Pearson, Francesca., 88, 139, 233, 255, 267, 290
permuting, 185, 221, 314
Perry, Brea L., 119, 135, 142
Pescosolido, Bernice., 142, 247, 250
Podolny, Joel M., 125
Popielarz, Pamela A., 264
popularity, 40, 105, 126, 132, 200, 208, 212,
309, 325, 327, 330, 385, 397
Porter, Mason., 66, 188, 344
Portes, Alejandro., 358
Porzio, Giovanni., 369
positive social relations, 49
POX system, 155
Prahl, Ralph., 359
preferential attachment, 126, 131, 157, 205,
309, 337, 349
primary affiliation, 258
propinquity, 76, 307, 310
proxies, 27, 50, 267, 397
quadratic assignment procedure (QAP), 313
Quintane, Eric., 8, 403
Raftery, Adrian., 326
Ragan, Daniel T., 312, 387, 411
Rainie, Lee., 77
random mixing, 147, 153, 175, 306
random walk distance, 200
Rawlings, Craig M., 8, 13, 76, 157–58, 257,
267, 270, 277, 306, 376, 406–7, 411
Raymond, Geoffrey., 28
reachability, 167, 222, 255
realist, 67, 70–72, 75, 77–78, 86
reciprocity, 30, 43, 51–52, 59, 83, 127, 145–48,
157, 213, 303, 309–11, 313, 317–18,
320–22, 326, 333, 336–37, 371, 374,
383–85, 397, 400, 405–6, 411
recognition, 120, 123, 125, 127, 133, 140
reduced macrostructure, 226, 240
redundancy, x, 137, 140, 349
Reed, Bruce., 347
regular equivalence, 222, 227, 399
Reich, Adam., 406
Reitz, Karl., 220, 229
relational class analysis, 287, 295
452 Index
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressrelational event model, 334, 336, 386, 398
Restivo, Michael., 377
Rice, Ronald., 178
Richards, William D., 66, 178
Richardson, Thomas., 188
Richerson, Peter., 270
ridge structures, 165, 170, 183
Ridgeway, Cecelia L., 32, 193
Rivera, Mark T., 276, 308
Robalino, Juan David., 369
Roberto, Elizabeth., 298, 369, 389
Robins, Garry., 87, 321, 326, 339
Roethlisberger, Fritz Jules., 6, 16, 67, 99, 377
Rogers, Everett., 341, 360, 363
roles, 1, 3–4, 22–23, 26–28, 31, 33–34, 36–38,
41, 43–44, 49, 121, 128, 132, 144–45,
162, 191, 216–21, 224–25, 227, 229, 231,
243–45, 247, 249–50, 257, 259, 271, 286,
330, 335, 341, 398–99, 412
role equivalence, 223, 235, 237, 239
role set, 221
role system, 219, 221, 244–45
Routledge, Bryan., 362
Rubin, Beth., 247, 250
Sacerdote, Bruce., 378, 389
Salathé, Marcel., 410
Salganik, Matthew J., 347, 376
Sampson, Samuel., xii, 327, 329
scale-free, 205, 349, 362
Schaefer, David R., xv, 302, 333–34, 336,
384–85, 388
Scheff, Thomas., 244
Schegloff, Emanuel A., 27
schemas, 21, 23–24, 27, 31, 33, 39, 41–42,
117, 119, 145, 217, 243, 270, 287, 403,
407–9
Schwartz, Ori., 44, 308
Scott, John., 6
Scott,W. Richard., 191
security, 120–27, 130, 132–33, 135, 361
segregation index, 174
sentiments, 29–30, 78, 146, 155–56, 308,
310–11, 402, 407
Shakya, Holly B., 410
Shalizi, Cosma Rohilla., 305, 370
Shani, Guy., 308
shared foci, 247, 250, 308, 330, 394
Sherif, Muzafer., 39, 374
Shi, Xiaolin., 81
Shizuka, Daizaburo., 214
signed graphs, 311
similarity matrix, 234, 237
Simmel, Georg., 6, 43, 125, 144, 156, 169,
247–48, 258, 268, 404
Skvoretz, John., 172, 347
small worlds, 7, 170–71
Small, Mario Luis., x–xi, 112, 159–60, 170–71,
176, 248, 308, 389, 407
Smith, Jeffry A., xviii, 3, 13, 35, 69, 80–81, 83,
122, 132
Smith, Sandra S., 356
Smith, Sanne., 411
Smith-Lovin, Lynn., xviii, 35, 306, 406
Smolla, Marco., 342, 362
Smth, Natalie R., 181
Snijders, Tom A.B., 6, 302, 312, 316, 324–25,
386, 389
social capital, 16, 33, 35, 40, 132, 136, 142,
357–58, 407
social capital, negative, 357
social categories, 164, 173, 248
social exchange theory, 374
social integration, 33, 161–62, 164, 166, 243
social signals, 29
social suite, 119
social systems, 4, 6, 15, 123, 164, 214, 270
sociocentric, 68–69
sociograms, 90
Soderstrom, Sara., 308
Soule, Sarah., 261
spectral methods, 178–79
Sperber, Dan., 270
Spoth, R., 399
spuriousness, 372
Srivastava, Sameer., 407, 410
Stadtfeld, Christoph., 336, 386
statistical modeling
independence, 3, 318
statistical models
state space, 180, 323
stochastic actor-oriented models (SAOMs),
334, 379
status homophily, 122, 306, 406
stochastic actor-oriented models (SAOMs),
334, 379
Stofer, Rafaël., 51
Stoltz, Dustin S., 287
Stovel, Katherine., ix, 52, 119, 311
Strauss, David., 319
strength of ties, 75, 131
Strogatz, Steven., 6, 170–73, 256
structural cohesion, 184–85, 189, 341, 348
cohesive blocking, 184
Index 453
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressstructural cohesion (cont.)
cohesive subgroups, 180, 183, 209, 231–32,
240, 395
k-connected, 184
structural differentiation, 6
structural embeddedness, 6
structural hoels, 135, 202–3
structural holes
constraint, x, 19, 33, 106, 137, 140, 184,
202–3, 250, 353, 391, 408
structuration, vii, xv, 27, 41, 117–18, 120, 122,
124, 130, 133, 138–39, 275, 404
subgroup, 174, 176–78, 181, 250–51
Swidler, Ann., 270, 285, 405
Takes, Frank., 251
Taylor, Dane., 188
Taylor, Howard., 155, 160
Taylor, Marshall., 287
terrorist networks, 85
text networks, 401
Textor, Johannes., 52
Thagard, Paul., 408
theoretical approaches
positional, 33, 37, 40, 162, 192, 216, 221,
252, 257, 398
theoretical perspectives
emic, 70, 78–79
etic, 71, 79
Thibaut, John., 374
Thomas, Andrew., 370
Thomas, D.S., 120
Thomas, W. I., 120, 124, 126
Thomas, W.I., 120, 132
Thye, Shane., 248
tie strength, 50, 59, 76, 126, 351, 361
Tomasello, Michael., 119
topology, 62, 115, 202, 340, 346–47, 349, 375,
417
Traag, V.A., 180
transitive, 35, 149, 155–57, 159, 176, 201, 212,
256, 310, 320, 322, 324, 384–85, 397
transitivity, 157, 167, 170, 195, 209, 212–13,
240, 307, 313, 321, 324–26, 333, 336,
349, 411
triads, x, 43, 143–45, 148–50, 152–58, 161,
167, 195, 207–10, 212, 223, 235, 237,
256, 311–12, 317, 319, 322, 324–25, 350
tricomponent, 184
Tsvetovat, M., 65
Tufte, Edward R., 88, 105–6, 114
Turco, Catherine., 21
Turner, Jonathan H., 43, 275
turning points, 260, 331
two-mode networks, 51, 56, 144, 228, 253,
255, 257, 326, 414
U|MAN distribution, 152, 157
Ugander, Johan., 377
Underwood, Ted., 286
undirected networks, 52, 145, 149, 157, 167,
386
unobserved heterogeneity, 372
Uzzi, Brian., 188, 308, 358
vacancy chains, 261, 375
Valeeva, Diliara., 251
Valente, Thomas W., 81, 361, 363, 370, 376
value homophily, 122, 272, 281, 306, 406
van de Rijt, Arnout., 156, 311, 377
VanderWeele, Tyler J., 371, 387
variance, 204, 234, 237, 262, 280–81, 284,
295, 326, 397
Vaughan, Diane., 154, 333
Vicinanza, Paul., 410
virulence, 343, 345–46, 355
visualization, x, 12, 16–17, 46, 54, 88, 90–93,
96, 101, 103, 105–8, 110–14, 148, 178,
280, 284, 290, 301, 327, 393, 396
data fidelity, 92
Vitale, Maria Prosperina., 369
walks, ix, 45, 56–57, 69, 180–81, 196, 199,
324, 398
Wang, Dan., 261
Wang, Li., 362
Wang, Peng., 339
Ward, Michael D., 233, 237
Wasserman, Stanley., xviii, 16, 148, 152, 220,
231, 240, 302, 313, 316–17, 319, 321,
338–39
Watts, Duncan J., 6–7, 14–16, 21, 170–73,
256, 348, 376
weak ties, 6–7, 16, 125, 135, 170–71, 311, 358,
361
Weir, William H., 182
Wellman, Barry., 15, 77, 142
Whalen, Jack., 154
Whitaker, Roger., 311
White, Douglas R., xvii, 93, 184, 187, 189,
229, 261
White, Harrison C., xvii, 6, 40, 42–43, 121,
123, 163, 170, 219, 221, 229, 239,
241–42, 244–45, 248, 261, 270, 283, 406
454 Index
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressWildeman, Christopher., 369
Wimmer, Andreas., 77, 133, 307, 321
Wolff, Tom., ix, xviii, 30
Wright, Harold., x, 151
Yeung, King-To., 405, 411
Yin, Hao., 377
Yoon, Jeongkoo., 248
Zablocki, Benjamin., 411
Zerubavel, Noam., 405
Zijlstra, Bonne., 312
Zimmerman, Don., 154
Zuckerman, Ezra., 21, 124
Index 455
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781139794985.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press
